Lithium ion-conductive composites have been prepared by dispersing perovskite Li0.348La0.55TiO3 (LLTO) particles in a NASICON-type Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) matrix. Powder X-ray diffraction suggests that the matrix/particle reaction occurs during the sintering process, where LLTO decomposes into LaPO4 particles as well as substituting the Ge4+ in the LAGP matrix with Ti4+. An increase in electrical con-ductivity by the LaPO4 particle dispersion is observed at the introduction of 4 wt% LLTO to reach the highest conductivity of 4.04x10-4 Scm-1. Galvanostatic tests using asymmetric electrodes indicate that lithium ions are the predominant charge carrier in this type of composite electrolyte.
Solid electrolytes are being increasingly studied for their nonﬂammability, low-temperature stability and large electro-chemical windows. Among the wide variety of solid elec-trolytes, inorganic solid-state ion conductors are promising candidates as a key component for next generation all-solid-state batteries (ASSBs). However, their room temperature ionic conductivity is relatively inferior to that of commercially employed liquid counterparts. This problem heavily limits the rate capacity of batteries, and is the main reason hindering the commercialization of ASSBs. To address this issue, various strategies have been developed to improve the ionic conductivity of inorganic solid-state ionic conductors, such as increasing the concentration of va-cancies in the lattice through doping or bottom-up designs of new superionic skeletons.As a different type of modiﬁcation strategy for solid-state ionic conductors, Liang et al. reported an over ﬁfty-fold improvement in ionic conductivity through dispersing insulative Al2O3 particles in LiI electrolytes. This increase was attributed to the formation of a space charge layer at the LiI matrix/Al2O3 particle interface. According to this concept, the introduction of a nonsoluble second phase gives rise to new defect chemistry at the interfaces that redistribute charge carrier ions. This second phase breaks the local electrical neutrality and forms a space charge layer that favors the migration of lithium ions, as illustrated by the scheme in Fig. S1. When the amount of the second phase reaches the percolation limit of the mixture system, the space charge layer in the vicinity of the second phase can form a fast-conducting pathway, signiﬁcantly improving the ionic conductivity. This type of system, with insulative particles dispersed into an ionic conductive matrix, is herein called a composite elec-trolyte. Research on composite electrolytes originally focused on halide systems, while relatively few studies were conducted on oxide systems.In previous work by Onish et al., a lithium ion-conductive composite of Li0.348La0.55TiO3 (LLTO)-dispersed Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) was synthesized, in which the conductivity almost tripled vis-a-vis pristine LATP. It was also reported that LLTO decomposed into ﬁne LaPO4 particles during the sintering process. However, the direct dispersion of LaPO4 powder did not provide any increases in conductivity, which suggests that the decomposition of LLTO is important to the increase in conductivity of this type of composite electrolyte. To emphasize the origin of insulative particles, i.e., LaPO4, in the synthesis of this type of composite, the system has been referred to as the LATP-LLTO composite.Owing to the multiple valences of titanium, LATP can be easily reduced and thereby gives rise to electronic conductivity, which can be circumvented by employing Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) as a matrix instead of LATP. Both LATP and LAGP are solid-state lithium-ion conductors with NASICON structures (spacegroup R3c), constructed by corner-sharing MO6 (M=Ti, Ge, Al) octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra to form a 3-dimensional network that allows the rapid migration of lithium ions. The crystal structures of LATP and LAGP are presented in Fig. 1 (a) and (b).In this work, LAGP is selected as the matrix, while LLTO is used as the dispersing agent, which decomposes during sintering to form ﬁne LaPO4 particles. The decomposition of LLTO is thought to improve the electrical conductivity for LAGP-based electrolytes without introducing electronic conduction. The phase composition, microstructure, and change in electrical conductivity with respect to the LLTO content were investigated.
To prepare LLTO, stoichiometric amounts of Li2CO3 (99.0% Wako Pure Chem., Japan, with a 10% excess), La2O3 (99.99% Wako Pure Chem.) and TiO2 (99.9% Wako Pure Chem.) were mixed in an automatic grinder for 5 h with the aid of ethanol. The mixture was dried in vacuum at 120°C for over 24 h and then uniaxially pressed into a green body followed by ﬁring at 800°C for 10 h. The product was crushed into powder and then isostatically pressed to form cylindrical pellets at 100 MPa before sintering at 1300 C for 10 h. The sintered pellets were then crushed into a coarse powder for further use.
2.2. Synthesis of the LAGP precursor powderLAGP was prepared in a similar fashion as LLTO. After mixing stoichiometric amounts of Li2CO3 (with a 10% excess), g-Al2O3 (97.0% Stream Chemical, USA), GeO2 (99.99% Nacalai Tesque, Japan) and NH4H2PO4 (99.0% Wako Pure Chem.), the product was calcined at 450  °C for 20 h to form crystalline Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3, which is referred to as the LAGP precursor powder. To produce pristine LAGP pellets, the LAGP precursor powder was sintered at 800 °C for 10 h.The preparation of LAGP-LLTO composite solid electrolyte pel-lets also followed an ordinary solid-state reaction method. The LLTO powder and LAGP precursor powder were mixed by planetary ball milling (Pulverisette7 premium line, Fritsch, Germany) for 5 h at 400 RPM with zirconia balls and ethanol to achieve homoge-neous mixing and a small initial particle size. After drying in vac-uum for over 24 h at 120 °C, the mixed powder was isostatically pressed to form cylindrical pellets at 100 MPa and then sintered at 800 °C for 10 h.To investigate the obtained crystalline phases, powder X-ray diffraction experiments were carried out on an Ultima VI diffrac-tometer (Rigaku, Japan) using a CuKa radiation source (40 kV, 40 mA). To characterize the microstructure and particle distribu-tion, the sample pellets were polished and observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, SU6600, Hitachi, Japan). The sample pellet (approximately 6 mm in diameter and with various thick-nesses) was polished on both sides to form electrodes prior to sputtering with gold. The prepared pellet was clamped in a 4-electrode test cell, which was placed in a mufﬂe furnace. Impedance measurements were conducted by applying 0.5 V of AC potential using an LRC meter (3531 Z Hitester, Hioki, Japan) in a frequency range of 130 Hz- 1.3 MHz. The impedance data were collected in a temperature range of 25e200 °C. The consistency of the impedance spectroscopy results was assessed by Kramers-Kronig relationship tests with LIN-KK software (Karlsruhe Insti-tute of Technology, Germany)]. Furthermore, equivalent circuit ﬁtting was applied with ZView® software (Scribner, USA) to evaluate the conductivity of the samples. To identify the charge carrier in the composite sample, an asymmetric cell with Li foil and stainless steel as electrodes was assembled in a sealed cell (HS cell, HOHSEN, Japan) and subjected to galvanostatic testing using a potentiostat station (Solartron SI 1287, Ametek, USA) at a constant potential of 0.5 V.
Powder XRD patterns of pristine LAGP and LAGP-LLTO com-posites are shown in Fig. 1(c). The major peaks are associated with LAGP, as they are in good agreement with the JCPDS data of LiGe2(PO4)3. For the secondary phases, the peak of LLTO is completely absent in all the patterns, while those of LaPO4 and GeO2 increase with nominal LLTO content. This result is attributed to the reaction between LAGP and LLTO during the sintering pro-cess, where the Ti4+ from LLTO substitutes the Ge4+ in LAGP to produce LaPO4 as well as GeO2. The formation of LaPO4 from LLTO is similar to previous work on LATP-LLTO composites. Due to the similarity in crystal structures for LAGP and LATP, as presented in Fig. 1(a) and (b), the Ge4+/Ti4+ exchange can produce a Li1+xAlxGe2-x-yTiy(PO4)3-like solid solution (LAGTP). The larger ionic radius of Ti4+ (74.5 p.m. in a 6-coordination structure) gives rise t-o lattice expansion after substituting out the Ge4+ (67 p.m.), leading to the peak shifting toward a lower angle, as presented in Fig. 1(d). This result is evident with the 20 wt% sample, where an apparent peak shift toward LATP is observed.The SEM images are presented in Fig. 2. Due to the low resolu-tion of the EDX mapping in the SEM equipment, back-scattered electron imaging was employed to distinguish particles from the matrix. The lanthanum-containing LaPO4 particles scatter more electrons than the other light elements in the matrix and therefore these particles appear brighter in the back-scattered images. Most of the particles are isolated in the 4 wt% sample, while the agglomeration of particles is observed in the 8 wt% sample. Even-tually, particles were sintered into large clusters (in the 20 wt%sample), which divide the matrix into discontinuous areas.The results of the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) tests are shown in Fig. 3. The Kramers-Kronig (K-K) validity test shows that the measured data are consistent with the K-K rela-tionship (residuals are within ±2%); a typical K-K test result is shown in Fig. S2. It is evident from the Nyquist plots that only the low-frequency part of the semicircle is presented on the spectrum, while the high-frequency part falls out of the characterization range of the LRC meter. The spectra were therefore ﬁtted with the equivalent circuits shown in Fig. 3 to evaluate the total (bulk + grain boundary) resistance because this process only required the second intercept of the semicircle with the real axis. The c2 values of all ﬁttings are below 0.6 x 10-3. The room tem-perature conductivity as a function of nominal LLTO content is plotted in Fig. 4, with the highest conductivity obtained with the 4 wt% sample (4.04 x 10-4 Scm-1), which is due to the contribution of the space charge layer in the LAGP-LaPO4 composite. This non-monotonic change in conductivity with the LLTO addition re-sembles the observations in other composite electrolytes. GeO2 and LaPO4 are also dispersed in LAGP, the masses of which are calculated assuming that all LLTO (in a 4 wt% LLTO sample) de-composes into LaPO4 or substitutes Ge4+ to form GeO2 (details- are shown in Figs. S3 and S4). As demonstrated in Fig. 4, GeO2- and LaPO4-dispersed samples do not exhibit any increase in conduc-tivity, which leads to the following conclusions: i) the decomposi-tion of LLTO in LaPO4 is vital to the formation of a space charge layer at the matrix/LaPO4 interface and ii) GeO2, as a byproduct of LLTO decomposition, does not contribute to the increase in conductivity. This ﬁnding coincides with previous work. The formation of an LAGTP-like solid solution can be another possible explanation, as reported by Ling et al., where the LAGTP solid solution with the highest electrical conductivity is formed in the LAGP-20 wt% LATP binary system. However, the LAGTP solid solution with 4 wt%LLTO in this work is equivalent to that of the LAGP-5.2 wt% LATP system (assuming all the Ti4+ from LLTO substitutes the Ge4+). If the major reason for the increase in conductivity is due to the formation of LAGTP, the highest conductivity should occur at high LLTO contents. Thus, the increase in conductivity should be caused by the formation of a space charge layer around LaPO4. Neverthe-less, it should be noted that the extent of the increase in this work is relatively inferior to that of an LATP-LLTO system This result may be caused by the difference in chemical potentials of LATP and LAGP. The decrease in conductivity with samples above 4 wt%may be attributed to the aggregation of insulative particles, which act as large resistors connected in parallel with the matrix, as shown in Fig. 2(c). With the 20 wt% sample, the continuous insu-lative areas (Fig. 2(d)) act as large resistors connected in series with he matrix, which further decreases the conductivity.The temperature dependence of the electrical conductivities of pristine LAGP and the LAGP-LaPO4 composites is represented in Fig. 5(a). The data points can be ﬁtted linearly according to the Arrhenius equation sTT=s0 exp(-Ea/kT), where sT is the total conductivity (bulk and grain boundary), T is the absolute temper-ature, s0 is the pre-exponential term, Ea is the activation energy, and k is Boltzmann’s constant. The activation energy Ea obtained from the slope is represented in Fig. 5(b), where Ea slightly de-creases with the introduction of LLTO. A similar decrease in acti-vation energy after the introduction of a nonsoluble second phase has also been reported by other researchers. This slight decrease may be attributed to the formation of defects accompa-nying the introduction of the second phase, but further study is required to understand the actual mechanism of this decrease in activation energy. It is speculated that as the matrix/particle phase boundary forms, the particles act as an assembly of point defects; thus, the migration of Li+ is facilitated at these boundaries, and the overall activation energy decreases.To conﬁrm the charge carrier of the composite sample, the LAGP-4 wt% LLTO composite is assembled into an asymmetric cell (Li foil | LAGP-4 wt% LLTO composite | stainless steel); the DC cur-rent is monitored while applying DC 0.5 V. The result in Fig. 6 shows that the current is signiﬁcantly decreased with the Li+-blocking anode (i.e., stainless steel anode), conﬁrming the limited electronic conductivity and pointing out that Li+ ions are the major charge carrier in the composite sample. The current through the LAGP-LLTO composite with stainless steel as the anode is completely blocked, which indicates that the presented system exhibits better performance in terms of restricting electronic conduction compared to the previous LATP-LLTO system.In summary, dispersing LaPO4 particles in the LAGP matrix through LLTO decomposition can enhance conductivity. Although the enhancement of conductivity with the introduction of particles resembles the LATP-LLTO system, the extent of improvement is far below expectation. Nevertheless, the formation of a space charge layer is the main contributor to the improvement in conductivity, in which the decomposition of LLTO plays an important role. Param-eters such as the initial particle size and annealing conditions should be controlled to optimize the microstructure (grain size, second phase distribution, etc.) for improving the lithium-ion conductivity. To better understand the actual mechanism of the increase in conductivity from the dispersion of the insulative sec-ond phase, a further investigation, such as a dark-ﬁeld TEM in-spection on the point defects accumulating at the matrix/particle interface area ora7Li NMR experiment on the local migration of lithium ions, is necessary. These results also suggest a possibility for LAGP-based lithium ion-conductive composites employing other types of particles that effectively increase the conductivity.
In this work, LAGP-LLTO composites were prepared. The pres-ence of the second phase, e.g., LaPO4 and GeO2 in the XRD pattern, indicates a possible matrix/particle reaction during the sintering process, which involves the decomposition of LLTO particles and the subsequent formation of ﬁne LaPO4 particles. This reaction is also associated with the substitution of Ge4+ by Ti4+ and the for-mation of Li1+xAlxGe2-x-yTiy(PO4)3 (LAGTP) solid solution. With the introduction of LLTO particles, the highest electrical conductivity of 4.04 x 10-4 Scm-1 is achieved at a nominal LLTO content of 4 wt%. It is believed that the decomposition of LLTO and the subsequent generation of ﬁne LaPO4 particles gives rise to the formation of a space charge layer in the vicinity of the matrix/LaPO4 interface, leading to an improvement in conductivity. The activation energy of the composite electrolyte is slightly lower than that of the pristine LAGP. This result can be explained by the formation of point defects at the matrix/LaPO4 interface. The result of galvanostatic mea-surement indicates that the charge carriers are predominantly Li+.