Sodium super ionic conductor (NASICON) based electrode and electrolyte compounds oﬀer new prospect to achieve higher energy/power densities, improved safety, and longer cycle life in sodium ion batteries (SIBs). For many years NASICON compounds have not been regarded as a possible electrode material for SIBs, mainly because, the research was focusing on the electrolyte aspect. However, in recent years NASICON type materials have attracted a great deal of attention as an electrode as well due to their excellent properties, which include high ionic mobility, better safety and improved structural stability. This review for the ﬁrst time features and consolidates the ion diﬀusion mechanisms and crystal structures of diﬀerent explored NASICON materials. It also provides insight into the present challenges to commercialize these materials for developing functional SIBs. We believe that the thorough understanding of the ion diﬀusion mechanisms and crystal structures of NASICON based materials is necessary to design new electrodes and will be useful to improve the electrochemical performances of SIBs. The advantages/disadvantages of each category of materials are also discussed. Apart from the widely investigated NASICON type cathode and anode materials, the rarely explored electrolyte material is also included for the complete review of this potential material. We believe that our detailed analysis on crystal structure and ion diﬀusion mechanism presented in this review will provide insights into important progress that are made in NASICON materials and could open up new opportunities for devising battery formulations that would continue to evolve and will also appeal to broad research audience. 
Recently, sodium ion batteries (SIBs) have been investigated as potential energy storage devices for various sustainable and cost-eﬀective applications. However, for the practical applications, SIBs need to get rid of multiple kinetic drawbacks, such as rapid capacity fading, poor rate performance and inferior Coulombic eﬃciency. Hence, there is an urgent need to develop suitable materials to overcome these problems. Sodium super ion conductor (NASICON) structured materials have multiple advantages, such as good structural stability, superior ionic conductivity, higher safety, etc., which make these materials a potential candidate for SIBs.  The main components of a battery are electrodes (anode and cathode), electrolyte and separator. The NASICON structured materials can function as anode, cathode and electrolyte.  For instance, NASICON structured Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 has drawn signiﬁcant attention as electrode materials due to its excellent properties, which comprise a) superior ionic mobility, b) good theoretical capacity of ∼117.6 mAh g − 1 in the potential range of 2.4 to3.7 V, c) stable plateaus at voltages of 3.4 and 1.6 V, corresponding to the redox couples V 4 + /V 3 + and V 3 + /V 2 +, respectively, allowing it to be utilized as both cathode and anode, d) very small potential polarization of ∼0.1 V and 0.06 V for the redox couple V 4 + /V 3 + and V 3 + /V 2 +,  respectively, and e) good thermal stability up to ∼450 °C in the charged state, leading to promising safety.  NaTi 2 (PO 4 ) 3 has also gained considerable attention as a potential anode and cathode compound for SIBs, because of its superior properties such as the high theoretical speciﬁc capacity of 133 mAh g − 1,  zero-stress framework leading to improved cycling life, costeﬀectiveness, superior thermal stability, and environmental benignity.  There are many NASICON based compounds explored for electrolyte applications. For example,Na 3 Zr 2 Si 2 PO 12 could demonstrate a promising ionic conductivity of 1.5 × 10 −3  S cm − 1.  However, most of these explored NASICON materials suﬀer from poor rate performance, due to the low electronic conductivity and sluggish charge transfer kinetics.  Some of the common strategies to improve the ion/electron transport kinetics are compositing and coating with conducting secondary phases (like carbon), doping with cations, nanostructuring, etc.  However, these approaches need to be employed in an optimized way to enhance the performances of NASICON materials. Before adopting and implementing any approach, it is important to initially understand the molecular, structural and electrochemical properties of diﬀerent NASICON based materials explored for SIBs. This will strategically help to develop structurally stable and electrochemically active materials to assemble functional SIBs for practical applications. In general, the NASICON compounds can be represented as AMM′  X 3 O 12 (AMM′  (XO 4 ) 3 ). Where A can be any alkali metal ions (Li +,  Na +,  K +,  Rb +, and Cs + ), any alkaline earth metal ions (Mg 2 +,  Ca 2 +,  Sr 2 +,  and Ba 2 + ), or other ions, such as H +,  H 3 O +,  NH 4 +,  Cu +,  Cu 2 +,  Ag +,  Pb 2 +,  Cd 2 +, Mn 2 +,  Co 2 +,  Ni 2 +,  Zn 2 +,  Al 3 +,  Ln 3 +,  Ge 4 +,  Zr 4 +,  Hf 4 + and it can also be vacant.  Further, the M and M′  sites can be accommodated by divalent (Zn 2 +,  Cd 2 +,  Ni 2 +,  Mn 2 +,  Co 2 + ), tri-valent (Fe 3 +,  Sc 3 +,  Ti 3 +, V 3 +,  Cr 3 +,  Al 3 +,  In 3 +,  Ga 3 +,  Y 3 +,  Lu 3 + ), tetra-valent (Ti 4 +,  Zr 4 +,  Hf 4 +, Sn 4 +,  Si 4 +,  Ge 4 + ), and pentavalent (V 5 +,  Nb 5 +,  Ta 5 +,  Sb 5 +,  As 5 + ) transition metal ions for proper charge balance.  The X can be any of these elements, P, Si, S, and As Various structural arrangements, such as monoclinic, rhombohedral, triclinic, orthorhombic, Langbeinite, Garnet, SW (scandium wolframate) type, corundum-like are possible for this material.  Typically, the NASICON skeleton is built of tetrahedral XO 4,  in which the octahedral MO 6 and M’O 6 structures share their corners with tetrahedral XO 4.  In general, these units are built in a 3dimensional (3D) ﬂexible open framework way to generate MM’X 3 O 12 lantern units, which provide better phase stability during the redox reactions. Each lantern unit joins six other lanterns to form a huge interstitial space, which can lodge up to 5 alkali ions per structural formula.  The number of such accommodated alkali ions mainly depends on the oxidation states of the elements in the lantern units. The major drawback of this structural arrangement is the poor electronic conductivity because of the slightly distorted arrangement of octahedral units, leading to poor cycling life and rate performance. NASICON materials with the same elemental composition could exhibit various crystal structures and electrochemical properties. For instance, materials like Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 and Li 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 can exhibit both rhombohedral and monoclinic structures with diﬀerent electrochemical performances.  Historically speaking the research on ionic conductors started way back in the 1960s. Most of the explored ionic conductors demonstrated layered structure with two-dimensional (2D) conducting pathways for Na + migration.  Later in 1976, Hong and Good-enough revealed a 3D structural framework with appropriate tunnels for easy migration of Na +.  This material was a NASICON structured Na 1 + x Zr 2 P 3 − x Six  O 12 (0 ≤ x ≤ 3), which possessed high conductivity, and was comparable to the liquid electrolytes at high temperatures. The superior ionic conductivity feature made this material a promising candidate for fabricating many devices like fuel cells, membranes, gas sensors, etc.  Moreover, their other characteristics such as low thermal expansion properties (utilized as host for radio-active waste), promising surface area (utilized as catalyst supports), and ability to lodge ions in the lattice (utilized in batteries) put them in multiple applications.  Even before this, in 1968, a series of NaM 2 IV (PO 4 ) 3 (M = Ge, Ti, and Zr) have been explored using X-ray powder data, which was the ﬁrst reported NASICON family materials.  Later, diﬀerent kinds of NASICON type materials have been investigated across the world for electrode and electrolyte applications ( Fig. 1 ). The redox process of Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 was ﬁrst explored by Gopalakrishnan’s group. This study reported the possibility of getting mixed-valence composition (V 5 + /V 4 + (V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 )) in this material, revealing the chances of exchanging over one electron per transition metal.  In later years, many studies have shown the possible extraction of Na + from the Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 to form NaV 2 (PO 4 ) 3 (analogous to NaTi 2 (PO 4 ) 3 ) in a 2-phase process with a theoretical speciﬁc capacity of 117.6 mAh g − 1. 
Our literature evaluation on NASICON materials for SIBs has shown that most published articles are focused on the electrochemical performance analysis of electrode materials which is solemnly not enough to enhance the performance of the existing materials. The motivation behind this review article is to understand and amalgamate the crystal structures and ion diﬀusion mechanisms observed in various classes of NASICON materials reported to date. The review focuses on a detailed analysis of NASICON type electrode and electrolyte materials, especially in terms of its ionic diﬀusivity, crystal structure and associated electrochemical properties. Drawbacks and beneﬁts of each category of NASICON materials used in SIBs are discussed. Diﬀerent strategies to overcome the drawbacks of the materials are also included. Besides, views on the existing practical challenges and the prospects of diﬀerent NASICON based materials are also discussed. 
Vanadium based NASICON structures can oﬀer various redox couples, such as V 5 + /V 4 + ,V 4 + /V 3 +,  and V 3 + /V 2 +,  resulting in the multielectron transfer. Hence, these materials can deliver superior energy density. This category of materials can show amphoteric nature, that is, it can be utilized as both anode and cathode. For instance, V 5 + /V 4 + and V 4 + /V 3 + demonstrate superior working voltages and can be used as cathodes, while the V 3 + /V 2 + can be utilized as an anode candidate due to its low working potential. 
Among different vanadium-based NASICON structures,Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 (SVP) is the widely explored material for SIB applications. The redox activity of SVP for sodium storage was ﬁrst reported by Uebou’s group in 2002. The cycling stability of this material in the potential range of 3.40 and 1.60 V was reported to be poor, which was attributed to its slightly distorted arrangement of octahedral VO 6 in the crystal structure, leading to poor electronic conductivity and thus inferior cycling stability.  To address these issues diﬀerent solutions such as coating the active materials with conducting carbon, material nanostructuring, doping the active material with secondary ions, compositing approachhave been proposed.  The mechanisms investigated through the ﬁrst principle calculations reveal that the ion transport in the SVP crystal structure is similar to the well-established NASICON based electrolytes.  Fig. 2(a-c) demonstrates the occupation of ions in the Na 1 and Na 2 sites. For the pristine cell, the site 1 is occupied with 2 Na +,  while the site 2 can accommodate 6 Na + (Fig. 2 (a)) with an occupation of 0.75.  Fig. 2 (b) illustrates the structural rearrangement, whereone Na being extracted (i.e. Na 2 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 ) with 0.5 Na occupation for all Na +. Further Na + extraction can lead to the migrations of 6 Na + in the site 2, leaving 2 Na in the site 1 with 0.5 occupations. This arrangement leads to a crystal structure NaV 2 (PO 4 ) 3 which represents 2 Na extraction and 2 phase change, corresponding to a theoretical capacity of 117 mAh g − 1.  Fig. 2 (d-f) represents diﬀerent migration pathways of Na + in the SVP crystal structure. As seen in Fig. 2 (d), it demonstrates the ion migration channel along the x-axis between 2 polyhedral PO 4,  having migration energy of 0.0904 eV. The ion diﬀusion through the y-axis represents the migration of ions along the voids in the tetrahedral PO 4 and octahedral VO 6 (migration energy = 0.11774 eV) (Fig. 2 (e)). These are the two most favourable migration pathways in the SVP crystal structure. The diﬀusion along the Z direction between the octahedral units is not favourable due to the high migration energy of over 200 eV. However, there is another possible curved pathway along the Z direction in the voids or channel between the octahedral VO 6 and tetrahedral PO 4 with migration energy of 2.438 eV ( Fig. 2 (f)). Hence, there are three diﬀusion pathways in SVP crystal structure, 2 favourable (X and Y direction) and 1 possible (curved Z direction), leading to a 3D ion diﬀusion pathways (leading to a fast-ionic movement) during the intercalation/deintercalation processes. In a recent study, it has been proposed that among the various sodium diﬀusion paths, the concerted ion-exchange mechanism was more favourable.  During the ion migration, it is conﬁrmed that both the sites (i.e. site 1 and site 2) participated in the ion diﬀusion process. Further, this study also reveals that various dopants (e.g. Li, K, Ca, Mg and Al) couldbe introduced into the site 1 to facilitate the migration process.  Fig. 2 (g-i) represents the diﬀerent (initial (R), transitional (TS) and ﬁnal (P)) states of diﬀusion pathways (the corresponding energies are depicted in Fig. 2 (o)). In the R state, the sodium ions are lodged at the voids among the VO 6 octahedra (bond length (Na–O) = 2.378 Å). Consequently, the ions migrate along the triangle of 3 oxygen atoms to the site 2, leading to a reduced bond length of 2.327 Åin the TS state, later resulting in an enhanced bond length at P state (2.450 Å). The increased bond length at the P state demonstrates that the bond between Na and O atoms weakens considerably, leading to less stability. In fact, the ion diﬀusion from site 1 to site 2 is endothermic in nature (reaction energy = 23.8 kcal mol −1  ). Also, kinetically this migration is unfavourable due to the high activation energy (36.1 kcal mol −1  ). Thus, the ion diﬀusion from site 1 to site 2 is not favourable.  Fig. 2 (j&k) demonstrates the migration of ions across the neighbouring sites 2. Here, the ions can diﬀuse through 2 pathways (direct diﬀusion path (A) and stepwise ion-exchange path (B)). In route A, the ions at the site 2 directly travel through the space between the 2 octahedral VO 6 and 3 tetrahedral PO 4 units, whereas the ions at site 1 stay at the same position.  During the R stage, the site 2 ion gets stabilized by the neighbouring O (bond distance = 2.498 Å). While during the TS stage, the site 2 ion is conﬁned into a small space with a very low bond length of 2.106 Å, leading to immersive structural tension and high activation energy (63.22 kcal mol −1  ), which indicate kinetically unfavourable nature of route A.  The route B consists of two steps, in step 1 the nearby ion in the site 1 migrates to the P state of site 2, leaving a vacancy at site 1. This vacant site is then accommodated by the neighbouring ion from the R state at site 2 (step 2). In these cases, the bond length initially reduces from 2.390 Å(R state) to 2.344 Å (TS1), then increases to 2.462 Åat the intermediate state (IM). As compared to the direct migration process, step 1 and step 2 diﬀusion mechanism has demonstrated less activation energy (31.4 kcal mol − 1 ) and thus seems to be a possible route. Further, step 2 (activation energy = 14.0 kcal mol −1 ,  thermodynamic energy = − 16.7 kcal mol − 1 ) is energetically more favourable as compared to step 1. The corresponding energy proﬁles ( Fig. 2 (p&q)) of route B demonstrate that it is kinetically unfavourable; however, the thermodynamic energy can compensate with each other. Hence, it is possible to occur concertedly the two sequential migrations steps of route B (path C) .  Fig. 2 (l-m & r) represents the structure and energy proﬁles of R, TS and P states along the route C. During the migration, each of the 2 participating sodium atoms should pass through a triangle formed by the adjacent oxygen atoms. This is because, in route C, R and P states are exactly the same as route B. Hence, the main focus should be only at the TS state, where the Na atoms are occupied at the middle of the triangle with the same bond length (2.253 Å), resulting in high activation energy due to the enormous structural tension. The distance among 2 participating octahedral VO 6 is increased to 6.245 from 6.202 Åto compensate the structural tension, thus leading to lower kinetic energy (12.8 kcal mol − 1 ) than in route B. By taking diﬀerent possible routes for the ion migration in SVP, the concerted ion-exchange path (C) could be the favourable route for Na + migration during the intercalation/deintercalation processes.  The electrochemical performances of the explored SVP are analyzed and compiled in Table 1.  The electrochemical properties ( Table 1)  show that the SVP is a promising electrode material to fabricate half-cell SIBs. However, the full cell performance of this category of cell needs to be further improved to meet the practical requirements.
SVP and Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 2 F 3 (SVPF) are the two potential NASICON-type compoundswhich have shown excellent electrochemical properties in half-cell format. Normally, to maintain the charge neutrality in the crystal structure of SVPF, 1 (PO 4 ) 3 − in the SVP crystal structure is replaced by 3 F −.  Nevertheless, the SVPF forms a crystal with tetragonal symmetry having a space group of P42/mnm, while the SVP crystallizes in rhombohedral symmetry with a space group of R3c.  Further, SVPF crystal structure is formed by the bi-octahedral unit [V 2 O 8 F 3 ] alternatively bridged by tetrahedral [PO 4 ], resulting in an extended 3D structure with huge tunnels along the directions,  thus leading to better Na + transportation.  Because of the unique crystal structures, these SVPF present rich electrochemistry and potential Na insertion properties, leading to enhanced electrochemical performances.  In addition, the inductive eﬀect of the (PO 4 ) 3could be eﬀectively improved as compared to the SVP structure because of the strong ionicity of the F–V bond, resulting in higher working voltages and improved energy density.  Fig. 3 (a&b) demonstrates the crystal structure of SVPF along the bc and ab plane, respectively. The structural arrangement of SVPF, in general, leads to the development of Na occupied channels along the a and b axes. Na + occupies at triangular prismatic location enclosed by 2 F − and 4 O 2 − or at an augmented triangular prismatic location attached to the F apex-square pyramid.  Normally, these locations consecutively build a circular shape, where it repeats in the ab crystal plane ( Fig. 3 (c)). The preferential sites for the Na + could be identiﬁed by calculating the site energy of the Na. The energies, in general, obtained by incorporating (and then comparing the energies) single Na into each site of the desodiated phase (NaV 2 (PO 4 ) 4 F 3 ). In this study, the estimated energy of the augmented triangular prismatic site is proposed to be 56 meV, which is lower than the triangular prismatic site (desodiated state). This could be attributed to the larger size of the augmented triangular prismatic site (18.588 Å) by comparing with the triangular prismatic site (12.752 Å). The ground-state structure of SVPF is estimated by performing the structural relaxation of the compound with all probable conﬁgurations of Na. Among diﬀerent possible conﬁgurations, the most stable one is provided in Fig. 3 (d). In this structural conﬁguration, it is observed that the 3-augmented triangular prismatic locations are accommodated out of 8 available Na locations. Further, the short distance between the Na locates (2.92 Å), pushes the Na to the vacant Na locates from the center of the prismatic locates ( Fig. 3 (d)). Fig. 3 (e) shows the conﬁguration of the Na 2 V 2 (PO 4 ) 2 F 3 from the ﬁrst principle calculations. This was observed to be the stable crystal conﬁguration of Na 2 V 2 (PO 4 ) 2 F 3 as compared to the other structural conﬁgurations.  Many studies have revealed the possible Na diﬀusion pathways for pristine SVPF. Unlike other sodium ﬂuorophosphates, SVPF demonstrates low electronic conductivity, which restricts its electrochemical performance at high current densities.  One of the common strategies to address this issue is to coat SVPF with conducting carbon phase.  However, many of the carbon modiﬁed SVPF have not shown satisfactory electrochemical performances. This could be due to the fact that the electronic conductivity is an intrinsic property of the material, which is quite diﬃcult to modulate by just coating the surface with carbon.  Studies have shown that these intrinsic properties can be altered by metallic ion doping. For instance, a study demonstrated enhanced electrochemical properties for SVPF by doping with Yttrium (Y). In this study, the V in SVPF was partially substituted by Yusing a sol-gel method. The crystal structure of the compound in ac and ab plane isillustrated in Fig. 3 (f-i). The Na (1) sites are the fully occupied sites, while the Na (2) sites are half occupied. The Y atom has a larger radius than the V atom. Hence it is predicted to be capable of providing bigger spaces at the interstitial sites, leading to a better Na + diﬀusion. In addition to this, it is proposed that the weaker Y-O bonds as compared to the V-O could lead to a higher intrinsic electronic conductivity. Further, the Y 3 + could act as a pillar in the SVPF structure which could nullify the structural change of the material during the redox process, leading to improved structural stability.  Xu et al.  prepared hierarchical Na 3 V 1.95 Mn 0.05 (PO 4 ) 2 F 3 /C hollow microspheres for SIB application. These hollow microspheres demonstrated an improved electronic conductivity and ionic diﬀusion coeﬃcient as compared to the pristine SVPF.  Another potential electrode material explored in the category of SVPF is Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 2 F 3-2y O 2y (0 ≤ y ≤ 1) (SVPFO), which shows very high operating voltages in the range of 3.6–4.1 V, owing to the inductive eﬀects of F_  and (PO 4 ) 3.  Rojo et al had performed a structural comparative study of SVPF and SVPOF, where the two compounds showed an innate phase correlation.  As shown in Fig. 3 (j&k), both crystal structures have the same framework, where one of the F atoms in SVPF is replaced by O in SVPFO. Hence, these compounds belong to the same family with a general formula of Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 2 F 3-2y O 2y (0 ≤ y ≤ 1). In the extreme cases, that is, when Y = 0 (Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 2 F 3 ) and Y = 1 (Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 2 FO 2 ), the compound shows + 3 and + 4 oxidation states for V, respectively, while the intermediate states will have mixed oxidation states.  Cao’s group revealed the beneﬁt of using graphene sheets to enhance the electronic and ionic conductivity of SVPFO.  This study proposed that unlike the pristine SVPFO and SVPFO/Graphene, the SVPFO@porous carbon/graphene sandwich structure could act as 2 expressways to pass electrons and ions ( Fig. 3 (l)).  A study conducted by Hu et al. proposed the charge storage mechanism in SVPFO compounds using EPR study.  In this study, it is revealed that the charge storage mechanism is happening through 2 diﬀerent processes: 1) partial V 3 + gets converted to V 4 +,  and 2) most V 4 + gets converted into V 5 +.  These processes revealed the utilization of 2 electrons per formula unit of SVPFO ( Fig. 3 (m)).  It should be noted that the V 3 + can also be observed in the fully charged state due to the imperfect conversion process. So, the chargedstate would contain a mixed phase of V 3 + /V 4 + /V 5 +.  The 2-staged redox mechanism of the SVPFO is represented through the reactions given below. 
Recently, many studies have come up with the idea of reducing the V content through the substitution of earth-abundant elements such as Fe, Ti and Mn.  In this regard, many mixed cationic materials have been explored. Among various mixed cationic materials, Mn based materials such as Na 4 MnV(PO 4 ) 3 (SMVP) have attracted considerable attention due to its high voltage, fast charge/discharge property and cost-eﬀective nature.  The V in SMVP reduces Jahn − Teller distortion of Mn 3 + while charging and stabilizes the crystal structure during prolonged cycling. Hence, the combination of Mn and V take the advantages from each other and nulliﬁes limitations.  Initially, SMVP was expected to extract 3Na when charged to 4.3 V (vs Na + /Na).  Later it was proved that after the 3Na extraction in the ﬁrst cycle, only 2 Na could be inserted back to the crystal structure due to the irreversible structural change, leading to an inferior cycling life in subsequent cycles.  As demonstrated in crystal structure of SMVP ( Fig. 4 (a)), the octahedral (Mn,V)O 6 and tetrahedral PO 4 share common O to generate a 3D structure. Both Na(1) and Na(2) sites are fully occupied in the structure, forming a Na 4 −𝛿 MnV(PO 4 ) 3.  Fig. 4 (b) represents the bond valence energy landscape of the Na ion diﬀusion along the channel between Na(1) and Na(2) sites. The image also predicts the zigzag diﬀusion path along the Na(2) → Na(1) → Na (2), exhibiting fast ion diﬀusion.  A speciﬁc capacity of 101 mAh g − 1 (1 C) was reported for SMVP, which showed redox plateaus at 3.6 and 3.3 V, corresponding to Mn 3 + /Mn 2 + and V 4 + /V 3 + respectively.  A study exploited the high speciﬁc capacity of ∼156 mAh g − 1 for SMVP by extending the upper cut-oﬀ potential to 4.3V against Na metal anode. The new plateau located at 3.86 V corresponds to V 4 + /V 5 + redox couple. Nonetheless, this higher cut-oﬀ voltage leads to the structural instability during redox processes and thus causes poor cycling stability.  Other recently investigated Mn based NASICON materials are Na 3 MnZr(PO 4 ) 3 (SMZP), Na 3 MnTi(PO 4 ) 3 (SMTP) and Na 4 MnCr(PO 4 ) 3 (SMCP). Both SMZP and SMTP exhibit Mn 2 + / Mn 3 + and Mn 3 + / Mn 4 + redox couple with good cycling stability but show limited theoretical capacity. This low theoretical capacity is attributed to the electrochemical inactivity of Zr and Ti at cathodic potential range. It is reported that initial discharge to 1.5V could lead to the utilization of extra Na, hence 3 Na can take part in the cycling between Na 4 MnTi(PO 4 ) 3 and NaMnTi(PO 4 ) 3.  Nevertheless, the corresponding potential of Ti 3 + /Ti 4 + redox couple is 2.1V which is too low to achieve high energy density.  Goodenough’s group exploited the Mn 3 + /Mn 2 + and Mn 4 + /Mn 3 + redox couplewith potential plateaus at ∼3.6 and ∼4.1 V (against Na metal anode), respectively for SMTP.  The small potential gap (0.5 V) between the plateaus could keep this system in high-voltage cathode regime. However, prior to the practical implementation of this material low electronic conductivity should be addressed. The Na ion migration pathways and the corresponding energy barriers estimated using DFT analysis for SMTP are given in Fig. 4 (c-f). The most favourable migration path of Na ion is Na1-Na2-Na1, where the Na1 initially passes to Na2 through a void in the lantern unit (MnTi(PO 4 ) 3 ), and then it meets the neighbouring Na1 ( Fig. 4 (c) right). The corresponding energy barrier is 1.02 eV ( Fig. 4 (d) bottom). On the other hand, the Na1-Na1 pathway, the Na1 passes through the space between the Na2 and tetrahedral PO 4 unit before it reaches at adjacent Na1 ( Fig. 4 (c) left). This migration possesses a very high energy barrier of 28.41 eV ( Fig. 4 (d) top). Similarly, as compared to the Na2-Na1-Na2 path ( Fig. 4 (e) right) (energy barrier: 0.98 eV ( Fig. 4 (f) bottom), Na2-Na2 path is also not favourable due to the high energy barrier of 4.52 eV ( Fig. 4 (e) left and Fig. 4 (f) top).  A recent study exploited the higher potential of Cr 3 + /Cr 4 + redox couple in SMCP. The SMCP could deliver a capacity of 130 mAh g − 1 by utilizing Mn 2 + /Mn 3 +,  Mn 3 + /Mn 4 + and Cr 3 + /Cr 4 + redox couple at 3.5 V, 4.0 V, and 4.35 V, respectively with a reversible 2.35Na (de)intercalation at a high average potential of 3.59 V.  This material also exhibited good rate performance of 97 mAh g − 1 at 5 C. Another study reported the superior electrochemical performances of SMCP (capacity: 160.5 mA h g −1  ;energy density: 566.5 Wh kg − 1 ) by embedding the SMCP nanoparticles in a carbon matrix.  Along with the superior electrochemical performances (high capacity and voltage), it is also reported that the synergetic eﬀect of Mn and Cr can stabilize the crystal structure. The crystal structure of SMCP is depicted in Fig. 5 (a). SMCP comprises of corner-shared octahedral (Mn/Cr)O 6 and tetrahedral PO 4 to form a 3D structure of MnCr(PO 4 ) 3.  Because of the distinct environment of coordinated oxygen, the 6b (Na1-sixfold coordination) and 18e (Na2-eight-fold coordination) sites are situated in the interstitial structure. Due to the stronger nature of Na1 —O, the Na2 is easier to be extracted upon redox processes.  The DFT analysis carried out in recent studies revealed the Na ion diﬀusion paths and energy barriers.  There are four possible diﬀusion paths, namely Na1 →Na2 (P1), Na2 →Na1 (P2), Na1 →Na1 (P3), and Na2 →Na2 (P4). The corresponding energies for paths P1, P2, P3 and P4 are 0.38 eV, 0.38 eV, 3.65 eV, and 1.59 eV, respectively ( Fig. 5 (b&c)).  By considering the migration barrier energy, the most favourable path for Na ion diﬀusion is Na1–Na2–Na1 (blue isosurfaces in Fig. 5 (b)). As of now by considering diﬀerent Mn based NASICON materials, SMCP is shown to possess superior electrochemical properties. 
NASICON-type Nax  Fe 2 (SO 4 ) 3 has been explored as cathode material for SIB applications.  A study conducted by Barpanda’s research group has explored the superior performance of alluaudite-type (not NASICON structured) Na 2 Fe 2 (SO 4 ) 3 material. The NASICON based material could only demonstrate an operating potential of 3.3V. However, the alluaudite-type materialcould demonstrate a higher voltage of 3.8V forthe Fe 3 + /Fe 2 + redox couple.  Another study conducted by Yamada et al. also conﬁrmed the inferior performance of NASICON based Nax  Fe 2 (SO 4 ) 3 as compared to the alluaudite structured material.  The calculated voltage for NASICON Fe 2 (SO 4 ) 3 was proposed to be in the range of 3.0–3.2 V, which is much lower than the alluaudite structure ( ∼4V). This could be attributed to the poor stability of the sodiated and desodiated phases of NASICON structures. The migration activation energy barriers of Na in the NASICON and alluaudite structure are demonstrated in Fig.6 (a). As shown, the migration path between 3b and 3a in the NASICON structure leads to an activation energy of 0.89 eV, whereas, in the alluaudite structure, there are 2 diﬀusion channels with lower activation energies of 0.3 and 0.5 eV. The unfavourable electrochemical properties of the NASICON structured Fe 2 (SO 4 ) 3 compared with that of alluaudite structured one was because of the higher activation energy diﬀusion channels in the crystal structure for the former. In the NASICON structured Fe 2 (SO 4 ) 3 the transportation pathway between 3a and 3b is a sigmoid shaped one. It starts from 3a, rises to intermediate site18f, advancing roughly through the bc plane, and then turns to rise through the ac plane prior to reaching the 3b site ( Fig. 6 (a)). The highest activation energy for this ion transportation was observed to be 0.89 eV, which is the energy required for the transport from 3b to 18f. This 18f site is in fact metastable in nature, leading to an undesirable performance.Goodenough’s group explored the possibility of using NaFe 2 PO 4 (SO 4 ) 2 as cathode material for SIBs.  This material shows a single-phase reaction and an initial capacity of about > 80 mAhg −1  at 0.1C in the potential range of 2.0 to 4.0 V. The capacity of this material is increased to ∼100 mAhg − 1 after 50 cycles. The electrochemical performances of NaFe 2 PO 4 (SO 4 ) 2 revealed that this material would not be suitable for the preparation of full cell SIBs. Titanium-based materials are the other widely explored NASICON structured cathode materials for SIBs. Nadiri et al.  observed that, even though it showed inferior electronic conductivity. Further, the characteristic of this material displayed the topotactic behavior of the reaction process, rising from the strong bonding with the Ti 2 (PO 4 ) 3 structure.  A study on Na 2 TiV(PO 4 ) 3 proposed that the charge storage in such materials happenedmostly through a biphasic mechanism. The 2-phases coexist during the whole charge process, and the proportions change constantly until the formation of single ﬁnal phase NaTiV(PO 4 ) 3.  Du et al.  prepared a very promising sodium vanadium titanium phosphate (Na 2 VTi(PO 4 ) 3 ) material for SIBs.  This material could deliver a capacity of 147 mAh g − 1 at 0.1 C. The symmetric full-cell using this material exhibited a high rate capability (49 mAh g −1  at 20 C) and superior cycling stability (10,000 cycles). This study utilized in-situ synchrotron diﬀraction patterns to examine the structural changes during the redox process of the Na 2 VTi(PO 4 ) 3 ( Fig.6 (b) and Fig. 6 (c)). The contour map and the corresponding initial charge-discharge patterns are depicted in Fig.6 (b) and Fig. 6 (c), respectively. During the initial charge process, the reﬂection of the material can be assigned to rhombohedral symmetry. With the continual charging, all peaks shift to the higher angle, representing the shrinkage of the lattice structure.  Further, continuous charging leads to a phase transition from the pristine phase to the Na deprived phase (Na 2-x VTi(PO 4 ) 3 ). The new reﬂections also possess rhombohedral symmetry with contracted lattice parameters. The volume shrinkage of the material, when it is charged to 4.5V, is estimated to be about 4%, which is much less than those of SVP and SVPF materials.  Upon the initial discharge to 2.4V, the newly formed reﬂections during the initial charge get diminished. While the reﬂections correspond to the pristine phase start to reappear, suggesting a reversible phase transition. When discharged to 1.9 V, a clear phase transition can be observed. Further discharge to 1.5 V reveals that there are no obvious diﬀraction lines (or the disappearance of reﬂection), leading to a single-phase transition with rhombohedral symmetry. In the following charge from 1.5 to 4.5V, the material demonstrates a highly reversible phase change, involving a stepped solid-solution and 2 two-phase reactions.  By analysing these structural changes, it is evident that the superior electrochemical performance of Na 2 VTi(PO 4 ) 3 could be due to the stable crystal structure and the minimal reversible volume changes.  Another study used cross-linked Na 2 VTi(PO 4 ) 3 / porous carbon nanoﬁber electrode to prepare aqueous sodium batteries.  In this study, they have introduced a new cross-linked Na 2 VTi(PO 4 ) 3 /porous carbon nanoﬁber, which is employed as a self-supported bi-functional electrode in aqueous SIBs. It is also proposed that the porous structure and cross-linked arrangement of this Na 2 VTi(PO 4 ) 3 /C could lead to superior kinetics and mechanical properties. A study conducted by Mentre et al.  revealed the structure of a fully ordered 𝛼-Na 3 Ti 2 (PO 4 ) 3 material using a powder neutron diﬀraction analysis. The cation/vacancy distribution generates
a consistent 3D orientation and can denote the absolute cationic arrangements available in the full Na 3 Ti 2 (PO 4 ) 3 and Na 3 Fe 2 (PO 4 ) 3 states.  The crystal structure and the diﬀusion path of Na 3 Ti 2 (PO 4 ) 3 areprovided in Fig. 6 (d). As observed, this structure possesses a 3D diffusion pathway because of the presence of crossroads at every M(1) sites due to the pseudo threefold axis.  Another study examined the crystal structure of Na 2 TiCr(PO 4 ) 3 and Na 2 TiFe(PO 4 ) 3 using neutron diﬀraction spectra. By analysing the diﬀraction patterns, it is observed that Na 2 TiCr(PO 4 ) 3 and Na 2 TiFe(PO 4 ) 3 are isostructural in nature and crystallize in the space group R 3 c,  with Na + being positioned at M1 ( 𝜏 ∼ 1) and M2 sites ( 𝜏 ∼1/3).  A recent study explored Nb-doped sodium titanium phosphate for sodium ion storage application.  In this study, the inﬂuence of Nb 5 + doping on the structure and the redox process of sodium titanium phosphate was revealed. The density functional theory (DFT) results revealed that the Nb 5 + doping could lower the bandgap to 1.4eV from 2.8eV. Further, the utilization of pitch carbon coating enhanced the electronic conductivity, resulting in improved capacity and rate performances. The improved electrochemical performances of the NaNbx  Ti 2-x (PO 4 ) 3 (x = 0.05) could be ascribed to the eﬀective insertion/extraction of Na + through biphasic redox process (redox couple: Ti 4 + /Ti 3 + ).  Further in this study, the Na 2.9 Nb 0.05 Ti 1.95 (PO 4 ) 3 was employed as cathode and anode to fabricate symmetric full-cell, which could deliver a capacity of 105 mAh g − 1 at 0.2C, and could retain 83% of its initial capacity after 100 cycles.  NASICON structured Na 3 Co 0.5 Mn 0.5 Ti(PO 4 ) 3 was investigated as a bi-functional compound for SIB applications. It could demonstrate a capacity of 50 mAh g − 1 in two diﬀerent voltage ranges of 2.8–4.2 V and 1.6–2.8 V. The full cell using this electrode delivered an energy density of 30 Wh kg − 1.  Note that the performance of this material isnot promising, hence further research is required.
In general, NASICON based cathodes show stable crystal structure and 3D ionic conduction pathways. The 3D crystal structure could offer a long-lasting structural support during the prolonged Na + intercalation/deintercalation processes. The good thermal stability of these materials would be beneﬁcial to employ these compounds in multiple electrochemical systems. The NASICON cathode can be used to fabricate full-cell provided that the counter electrode also preferably has a NASICON based crystal structure. Among diﬀerent cathodes, SVP and SVPF are regarded as promising cathode materials for SIBs. When assembling a full-cell, the operating potential ( ∼3.4V) of SVP is low which compromises the energy density. While the SVPF materials possesses higher operating potential (~4.3V), hence better energy density in full-cell format. However, the selection of electrolyte is very crucial for this compound to avoid any electrode degradation. Another common challenge for these two compounds is poor electronic conductivity. Even with these limitations SVP and SVPF are considered to be potential compounds to fabricate full-cell because of their temperature/structural stability along with good power performance. Further, these V based materials could demonstrate good energy density because of the multi-electron redox processes (V 3 + /V 4 + and V 4 + /V 5 + ) and high potential. However, the presence of high-cost, toxic V element is a serious concern in practical applications. By considering these factors Mn based cathode could be a better candidate for SIB applications. The introduction of Mn in the place of the V can have multiple advantages over SVP and SVPF, such as 1) the presence of multi-electron reactions, leading to better capacity; 2) the Mn 3 + /Mn 4 + and Mn 2 + /Mn 3 + redox couple could be utilized to achieve high potential and thus superior energy density; 3) better durability due to the structural stability; 4) non-toxic nature of Mn could avoid any diﬃculty during the synthesis, fabrication and storage of materials; and 5) costeﬀective nature which could reduce the overall electrode fabrication cost, leading to practical applications. By considering all these advantages, we believe that the Mn based materials can have great potential as cathode materials for SIBs. The investigation on Mn based materials had recently started, and requires further understanding on its mechanism to ensure that this material is practically usable. 
The commonly explored titanium-based anode material for SIBs is sodium titanium phosphate (NaTi 2 (PO 4 ) 3 (STP)).  Crystal structure of this compound comprises of corner-shared tetrahedral PO 4 and octahedral TiO 6,  where the Na atoms located in tunnels ( Fig. 7 (a)).  The 2 TiO 6 and 3 PO 4 polyhedral units linked through corners to form the [Ti 2 (PO 4 ) 3 ] structure. Since the polyhedral TiO 6 and PO 4 are interlinked, the migration of electron caught by the Ti 4 + (forming Ti 3 + ) to the neighbouring Ti 4 + requires a Ti-O-P-O-Ti transfer ( Fig. 7 (b)).  Two diﬀerent interstitial sites, namely M1 (fully occupied) and M2 coexist in the rhombohedral structure, which are responsible for the smooth ion diﬀusion in the crystals. Like other NASICON compounds, STP also shows excellent 3D open crystal structure, leading to superior ion migration. The Na storage mechanism in STP is based on the insertion/extraction process of Na + ( Eq. 3 ). The exact diﬀusion mechanism in STP is not clear yet. However, the 3D open crystal structure seems to facilitate the Na + migration through the crystal network, leading to a superior ion diﬀusion. In general, the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of STP would be in the range of 10 − 12 -10 − 13 cm 2 s − 1.  Hence, these materials could be utilized as host for Na + insertion/extraction process after addressing its poor electronic conductivity. A common way to improve its electrochemical properties is to coat a uniform and thin carbon coating on the active material.  Another drawback of this material is the poor rate capability. This is because, during the fast charging/discharging process,the number of Na + available to receive the electrons at the reaction site is inadequate. Thus, it is important to enhance the rate performance and electron/ion transportation of this material. In this regard, Pan et al.  utilized the open holey architecture to improve the rate performance and enhance the cycle life of this material.  This open framework could provide open channels for the ion transportation, leading to enhanced electrochemical performance (cycling stability: 88.3% after 10000 cycles; rate performance: 103 mAhg − 1 at 50C). However, the operating voltage is high (2.1-2.2V), which would lead to a low energy density when fabricating the full cell. Considering the operating voltage and capacity, it seems a better option to use this material as a cathode. Porous carbon-coated STP showed a superior rate of 110.9 mAh g − 1 at 30C. Nonetheless, this material also possessed a high operating voltage of ∼2.1V.  A recent study revealed that the metal-organic framework derived rGO decorated STP could enhance the electron/sodium transport channels to aid superior conductivity.  Yassar et al.  utilized ethylene glycol (EG) along with the STP to improve its rate capability. The prepared STP-EG could demonstrate a capacity of 96.1 mAh g − 1 at 50C.  Another study utilized the double carbon coating technique to enhance the conductivity of STP. The double-coated carbon was obtained by embedding the carbon-coated STP nanoparticles into a porous carbon matrix. This material demonstrated superior cycling stability (103 mAh g − 1 at 5 C for over 5000 cycles), and good rate performance (64 mAh g − 1 at 50 C).  It was also reported that the core-shell nanostructure along with the nanoporous carbon matrix guaranteed the eﬃcient diﬀusion of Na + and e − into and out of the STP nanocrystals ( Fig. 8 (a)).  Wang’s group employed a controlled synthesis technique to address the low electronic conductivity of the STP. The porous uniformly distributed nanocube structured materials exhibited good cycling stability and a very high rate performance.  Many other studies have utilized the porous approach to enhance the electronic conductivity of STP. For instance, Deng’s group designed a frogspawn structured STP, where the structure comprises of spawn core and a transparent jelly shell arranged in a hierarchical porous manner ( Fig. 8 (b)).  This unique structure could exhibit superior mechanical strength and oxygen permeability. It also exhibited large surface area, rapid mass transportation and better durability. This novel architecture also permitted easy electrolyte penetration and fast electron/ion transportation .  Mesoporous nanohybrid structured STP/C was utilized as anode for SIBs, which exhibited good capacity, rate and cycling performances. This STP/C nanohybrid electrode could facilitate the electrolyte penetration into the mesoporous structures, thus enhancing the electrolyte/electrode contact area for superior Na-storage properties.  Eichel’s group utilized the carbon nanotube fabrics to enhance the electrochemical performances in STP.  The as-fabricated all-phosphate full cells (anode: STP and cathode: SVP) could exhibit more than half of their theoretical capacity even at a high rate of 100C. Further, 75.6% capacity could be retained after 4000 cycles at 20C.  This STP has also been investigated in aqueous sodium batteries. STP-graphene could deliver a high capacity of 110 mAh g − 1 at 2C.  Apart from carbon coating and nanostructuring, many studies have utilized doping approach to improving the electrochemical performance of the STP anodes. For instance, Masquelier et al.  prepared mixed Ti/V materials with various compositions, such as NaTiV(PO 4 ) 3,  Na 3 TiV(PO 4 ) 3.  However, Na 3 TiV(PO 4 ) 3 was observed to be unstable under longer exposure to air. The intermediate phase of this compound during the redox process was Na 2 TiV(PO 4 ) 3.  Further oxidation of this compound lead to the formation of NaTiV(PO 4 ) 3 at 3.33 V through a bi-phasic process.  Deng et al.  prepared a cross-linked Na 2 TiV(PO 4 ) 3 /C compound as anode/cathode for aqueous sodium batteries.  The redox processes at high voltage and low voltage can be represented using Eqs. 3 and 4,  respectively. 
These redox processes indicate that the redox couples, V 3 + /4 +and Ti 3 + /4 +,  are active in high and low potential ranges, respectively, thus can be used as both anode and cathode.  Na 2 Ti 3/2 Mn 1/2 (PO 4 ) 3 nanodot embedded in the carbon matrix was utilizedas anode material for aqueous SIBs.  This material demonstrates fast intercalation chemistry due to the unique NASICON framework and the small size of the active material ( ∼4 nm). It possesses a redox mechanism of Ti 4 + /Ti 3 + couples with capacities of 78.8 mAh g − 1 and 65.1 mAh g − 1 at 0.5 and 10C respectively and capacity retention of 93% over 200 cycles.  Na 3 Co 0.5 Mn 0.5 Ti(PO 4 ) 3 was also used as a bi-functional compound in SIBs. When tested as an anode material, it demonstrates good cycling stability of 94% capacity retention over 550 cycles at 0.2C. Further, the full symmetric cell shows a working voltage of 1.5 V and an energy density of 30 Wh kg − 1.  Apart from SIB applications, titanium-based materials have explored in many diﬀerent types of energy storage systems. For instance, STP cube on Ti 3 C 2 MXene was utilized as an electrode for dual-mode sodium storage. This STP-C/MXene demonstrates superior rate and cycling performances. The reason for the promising electrochemical performances is ascribed to the dual-mode lodging of Na into pseudocapacitance-type MXene and battery-type STP.  Other common applications of STP can be found in supercapacitors, electrochemical deionization system, and redox ﬂow batteries.  
SVP is considered as a potential compound for both the cathode and anode applications in SIBs.  Ji et al. estimated the Na + storage properties at low voltage using ﬁrst-principles calculations.  The calculations demonstrated diﬀerent voltage plateaus according to the crystal structure ( Fig. 9 (a)). For instance, plateaus at 3.32V and 1.95V show the desodiation of Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 to NaV 2 (PO 4 ) 3 and sodiation of Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 to Na 4 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3,  respectively. The plateau at 0.33V indicates further sodiation of Na 4 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 to Na 5 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 ( Fig.9 (a)). Fig. 9 (b) represents the crystal structure of Na 4 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 and Na 5 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3.  The coordination number of the unit cell at the 6b and 6a sites is 6 while 8 at the 18e sites. In comparison to 18e,  sodiation at the 6a site is energetically unfavourable because of the larger Coulombic repulsion, resulting in a low potential plateau.  Wang et al. prepared a binder-free SVP/rGO electrode by utilizing the beneﬁts of a large surface along with the nanocomposite like the structure of 2D rGO. In this study, the electrode demonstrated goodrate capability and cycling stability in both anode and cathode conﬁguration. The symmetric full cell using this material exhibited a capacity of 74.1 mAh g − 1 at 0.5C with an operating potential of 1.7V.  In fact, the microstructure could restrict the restacking of graphene sheets and help to have better ion diﬀusion between the electrode and the electrolyte. The cathode, anode and full-cell redox reactions of this material are given in Eqs. 5,  6 and 7,  respectively.
The evolution from Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 to Na 3-x V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 and Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 to Na 3 +x  V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 in charge/discharge process at the cathode and anode are anticipated to be accompanied by the redox process of V from V 3 + to V 4 + and V 2 +.  Chen et al.  prepared SVP/C core-shell nanocomposite to enhance the electrochemical properties by improving the electronic/ionic conductivity ( Fig. 9 (c)).  In pristine SVP, due to the limited diﬀusion length, interaction of the Na + can happen only on the outer part of the particles. Further, as shown in Fig. 9 (c) (left), electron transportation gets impeded by the poor conductivity. While, the SVP/C sample shows improved conductivity than pristine one, a part of the large particles is still in an inactive stage because of the long ion diﬀusion passage ( Fig. 9 (c) (middle)). Conversely, SVP/C core-shell nanocomposite with small particle size and conductive carbon coating exhibits ample electronic/ionic conduction ( Fig. 9 (right)), leading to the full utilization of the active material.Thus, good capacity, long cycling stability and superior rate capability are achieved for this core-shell structure.  Dou’s group employed NASICON type two-phase Na 2 LiV 2 (PO 4 ) 3 /C (SLVP) nanocomposite as both cathode and anode in SIBs.  This material demonstrates good electrochemical properties, especially superior cycling performance of 83% (cathode) and 100% (anode) capacity retention for over 3000 cycles at 10C. However, in anode conﬁguration, it possesses low initial Coulombic eﬃciency due to the irreversible capacity at 1.0 V (irreversible insertion of Na into Li 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 phase), SEI layer formation, and electrolyte decomposition.  Jiao et al.  prepared a NASICON type NaZr 2 (PO 4 ) 3 (SZP) anode for SIBs using solid-state technique.  The good reversible charge/discharge capacity at diﬀerent C-rates could be ascribed to the open and strongly bonded crystal structure of SZP, leading to superior mobility of the Na + tunnelling across the PO 4 –ZrO 6 polyhedral chain.  The formation energy of SZP with the incorporation of Na + is provided in Eq. 8. Where the E tot (Na 1 + n Zr 2 (PO 4 ) 3 ) is the total energy of SZP containing n Na atoms in the unit cell, E tot (NaZr 2 (PO 4 ) 3 ) is the total energy of SZP without any other Na atom and the E tot (Na) is the total energy of a Na atom in the reservoir.  The formation energy was estimated using the ﬁrst-principle theory with respect to the Na + in the primitive cell. With the increasing number of incorporated Na +,  the formation-energy reduces to a more negative value ( Fig. 9 (d)). The stability of the Na + in the lattice is enhanced with this reduction of formation energy. Hence, it is estimated that more Na + can be inserted into the SZP crystal lattice. Fig. 9 (e) represents the volume change per unit cell during the Na + incorporation into the SZP structure. With the increasing number (from 1.0 to 3.0) of Na + in the molecule, the unit cell volume rises only 10%, demonstrating superior structural stability.  
We can achieve high capacities with the use of metal Na as anode for SIBs, however, it possesses serious safety concern since Na metal is more active than Li metal and can form dendrites during charge-discharge. Further, Na has a low melting point of 97.7 °C which again makes it unsafe to use as an anode in SIBs. In this aspect, apart from the common properties, such as open 3D crystal structure, good ionic conductivity, and volume change during cycling, safety is an important attribute of NASICON based materials which makes it a potential SIB anode. However, the major challenge is its high operating potential (mostly > 1.5V), leading to a low energy density in the full-cell format. Generally, the operating voltage of V and Fe is higher than Ti. Thus, the V and Fe based materials are not very desirable to be used as anodes. Further, NASICON compounds with low electronegative polyanions are desirable because they show low operating voltage due to their weaker electronwithdrawing nature. By analysing the diﬀerent explored anode materials for SIBs, we believe that Ti based anode materials, especially STP, have got good diﬀusion coeﬃcient along with promising electrochemical properties. 
When comparing the electrochemical properties of anode materials with cathode materials, generally, it is observed that the rate and speciﬁc capacity are better for the former than the later. While the cycling stability, Coulombic eﬃciency along with the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of cathode materials seem to be better as compared to the anode ( Fig. 10 ). The poor electronic conductivity is a big challenge for this category of material, leading to poor power performance. However, the NASICON anode along with NASICON cathode and electrolyte possesses great potential and we believe that this combination would be very promising to meet the future energy demand. The invention of fast Na + transportationin the 𝛽and 𝛽II alumina led to the utilization of solid electrolytes in cells and thermoelectric generators.  In 1976, the pioneering studies conducted by Hong et al.  and Goodenough et al.  demonstrated the fast ion transportation in Na 1 +x  Zr 2 Six  P 3-x O 12 (0 ≤ x ≤ 3), which is named as NASICONs. This class of material has gotten wide applications due to their superior and three-dimensional conductivity and high thermal stability .  Thereafter, many NASICON type materials have been explored as an electrolyte for battery applications. 
Among diﬀerent Zr based electrolytes Na 1 +x  Zr 2 Six  P 3-x O 12 (0 ≤ x ≤ 3)), the best reported ionic conductor is Na 3 Zr 2 Si 2 PO 12 (NaZSP), i.e. when x = 2. The crystal structure of this material comprises of 3D linked octahedral ZrO 6 sharing corners with tetrahedral SiO 4 and PO 4.  Due to the similar size of Si and P, the positions of these elements in the crystal structure are indistinguishable.  Kumar et al.  revealed diﬀerent ordering of the Si and P in the crystal structure to interpret the Na + transportation.  The threepossible orders proposed in this study are: 1) every six basal planes locate perpendicular to the c -axis comprising 2 Si and 1 P in a unit cell (P1–P1–P1) ( Fig. 11 (a)); 2) repeating units of 2 Si-rich planes, parallel to the ab -plane, sandwiching 1 P rich layer (P0–P0–P3) ( Fig. 11 (b)), 2 such units per unit cell; 3) Si and P are arranged in a random way in the Si/P sites in the cell.  Fig. 11 (c&d) demonstrates the 3D distribution of Na + in the crystal structure for P1–P1–P1 and P0–P0–P3. In the P1–P1–P1 order a wellconstructed percolation path of Na + linking the Na(1)–Na(2) channel can be observed, revealing high conductivity. While in the P0–P0–P3 order, the islands of Na + is visible, indicating poor connectivity.  This could be one of the reasons (along with the opening of bottlenecks and Na + –Na + correlations) for the variation in conductivity/activation energy in the same NASICON type compounds when it was prepared under diﬀerent temperatures.  Kang et al.  utilized the experimental and computational studies to analyse the Na + transport in NASICON based NaZSP. In this study, it was revealed that the major Na + transportation at low and high temperatures are due to the grain boundaries and grain diﬀusion, respectively.  It was also proposed that an increasing Na content to 10 at% could enhance the conductivity of the electrolyte to 1.2 × 10 −1  S cm − 1 at elevated temperature (300 °C), due to the expansion of the bottleneck area in the Na diﬀusion channel.  For a monoclinic structured NaZSP material, there are three Na sites per formula unit in the crystal structure, namely Na 1,  Na 2 and Na 3.  As shown in Fig. 12 (a), the diﬀusion channels of Na +are created among Na 1 and Na 2 or Na 1 and Na 3,  resulting in 4 bottleneck areas (2 in Na 1 and Na 2 and the other 2 in Na 1 and Na 3 channels). It was revealed that the bottleneck “B ”in the Na 1 -Na 2 channel could be the limiting factor for Na + transport. It was also estimated that the bottleneck “B ”in the Na-excess compound is 2.68% larger (5.2007) than that in the pristine material (5.0648), resulting in faster Na + transportation along the channel in Na-excess materials.  Fig. 12 (b-d) demonstrates the DFT crystal structure of the possible pristine monoclinic samples ((b) 0Na 2 -8Na 3 (0% Na 2 site occupancy) (structure-1), (c) 2Na 2 -6Na 3 (50% Na 2 site occupancy)(structure-2), and (d) 4Na 2 -4Na 3 (100% Na 2 site occupancy) (structure-3) per 4 formula units).  The formation energies (Ef  ) of these structures are negative ( − 262.7 to -263.3 kJ mol −1  ), demonstrating their thermodynamic stability. The Ef of structure-1 is the lowest of all, indicating its highest conﬁguration stability. Na-excess compounds with 2 extra Na atoms in the Na 2 and Na 3 sites have 2 diﬀerent crystal structure models, namely 4Na 2 -6Na 3 (100% Na 2 site occupancy) (structure-4) and 2Na 2 -8Na 3 (50% Na 2 site occupancy) (structure-5) ( Fig. 12 (e&f)). Here, the Ef  is estimated to be slightly less than the pristine sample (from − 264.1 to − 264.3 kJ mol −1  ), revealing that adding extra Na will reduce or at least will not increase the thermodynamic stability of the material.  The computational analysis also revealed that the smallest bottleneck area is “B ”in the Na 1 -Na 2 channel of structure-2. By adding excess Na into this structure creates structure 5, leading to an enhancement in the “B ”from 4.9922 to 5.4086 Å2.  Hence, structure-2 is very important as it can oﬀer 2 diﬀusion pathways (Na 1 -Na 2 and Na 1 -Na 3 ). Also, it is ensuring that the limiting factor of the Na + diﬀusion is the smaller bottleneck “B ”size, which is close to the Na 2 site in the Na 1 -Na 2 channel. Further, this bottleneck area increases by adding extra Na when the crystal structure is changed from structure-2 to structure-5.  Seznec et al.  fabricated an allsolid-state NASICON battery by choosing NaZSP as electrolyte and SVP as electrodes.  This study revealed that these compositions showed an order/disorder phase transition and demonstrated good ionic conductivity of 1.5 × 10 −3  S cm − 1 (NaZSP) and 1.9 × 10 −4  S cm − 1 (SVP) at 200 °C. Among diﬀerent solid-state electrolytes for SIBs, the NaZSP electrolyte is a very promising candidate. However, one of the main drawbacks for most of the NASICON based electrolytes, including NaZSP, is the moderate-to-low overall (bulk and grain boundary) ionic conductivities at room temperature, which is mainly because of the poor conductivity of the formed ZrO 2 at the grain boundaries.  The tetragonal Na 3 PO 4 is another phase at grain boundaries, which causes poor conductivity in NASICON.  Luo et al.  investigated the effects of secondary phases precipitated at grain boundaries rather than focusing on the actual grain boundaries.  In this study, they analyzed the eﬀect of cation doping (Mg 2 + and Ni 2 + ) on ionic conductivity of NaZSP by using experimental and the ﬁrst principle study. As revealed, the NASICON structure has limited divalent dopants solubility, where the dopants are mainly dissolved into the secondary precipitation phases in the grain boundaries. The NaZSP material could achieve a conductivity of 2.7 ( ± 0.3) × 10 −3  S cm − 1 by doping the Mg with Si/P with a ratio of 2.2, which shows that the NaZSP could be used as a promising solid electrolyte candidate for room-temperature SIBs. The two possible Mg doping reactions are given below. 
The Eq. (9) is the doping reaction when the Zr is substituted by Mg. The Eq. (10) represents the doping reaction when Na is substituted with Mg in Na 3 PO 4.  Kang et al.  observed two times higher Na + conductivity (1.4 × 10 −2  S cm − 1 ) in Ge substituted NaZSP (Na 3 [Zr 2-𝛿 Ge𝛿 ]Si 2 PO 12,  𝛿 = 0.1, 0.2) at 150 °C as compared to the pristine sample. It was proposed that the reduction of phase transition temperature (T P ) of Na 3 [Zr 2-𝛿 Ge𝛿 ]Si 2 PO 12 could lead to an enhanced volume fraction of rhombohedral phase (which was stable at elevated temperatures and showed superior Na + conductivities).  With the increasing substitution of Ge, the T P gets lowered and the content of the rhombohedral phase compared to monoclinic one at T P range gets enhanced. The enhancement of ionic conductivity in this molecule could be attributed to the rise in the contents of the rhombohedral phase that could enhance Na + mobility.  A recent study proposed an integrated strategy to improve the ionic conductivity of NaZSP and reduce the interfacial resistance among the electrolyte and electrode.  In this study, the pristine NaZSP was prepared by ﬁnely tuning the Na and P component in the precursors. The sodiated Naﬁon was utilized to oﬀer the ionic contacts in the cathode and at the cathode/electrolyte interface, besides binding the particles.  Lu et al.investigated Na 3.1 Zr 1.95 Mg 0.05 Si 2 PO 12 electrolyte for Na-S batteries which showed high room-temperature ionic conductivity of 3.5 × 10 −3  S cm − 1.  This material could eﬀectively reduce the dissolution/shuttle of sodium polysulﬁdes, hence lead to a better cycling performance than the liquid electrolyte. A recent study explored the possibility of enhancing the ionic conductivity of NaZSP electrolyte from 4.5 × 10 −4  S cm − 1 to 1.7 × 10 −3  S cm − 1 by introducing the NaF into the precursor.  It was proved that the introduction of NaF into the precursor could lead a change in the monoclinic phase of NASICON grains to the rhombohedral phase, revealing the role of NaF in modifying the grain boundary and enhancing the ionic conductivity.  
Starting from 1980’s diﬀerent phosphates based NASICON structured and NASICON analogues materials have been explored for solid-state battery applications.  Al-based NASICON structured materials, e.g., Na 3 Al 2 P 3 O 12,  are observed to have better ionic conductivity in glass form rather than in crystalline form.  The crystalline form was obtained through a low-temperature annealing process and possesses a Sc 2 (WO 4 ) 3 -type structure. The solid-state technique is utilized to obtain the glass form. Sanz et al.  revealed that the grain boundary contribution to the total impedance is almost absent in the glass form.  Another study explored the inﬂuence on the structure and ionic conductivity by substitution of B (Na 2.8 Ca 0.1 Al 2 B 0.5 P 2.7 O 12 ) and Ga (Na 2.8 Ca 0.1 Al 2 Ga 0.5 P 2.7 O 12 ) for P in Na 2.8 Ca 0.1 Al 2 P 3 O 12 glass material.  The DC conductivity, obtained through impedance analysis of Ga substituted compound ( ∼2.27 × 10 −8  S cm − 1 ) showed a slight reduction in the value while the B substituted sample ( ∼1.46 × 10 −8  S cm − 1 ) showed a signiﬁcant reduction as compared to the pristine sample (~3.13 × 10 −8  S cm − 1 ).  Na 11 S 2 PS 12 comes under superionic conductor and crystalizes in a unique 3D structure having a Na + conductivity of 1.46 × 10 − 3 S cm − 1 with a minimal Na + mobility activation energy barrier of 0.25eV. The single-crystal XRD analyses and molecular dynamic simulations revealed the underlying isotropic 3D conduction in the compound.  The crystal structure of Na 11 S 2 PS 12 is given in Fig. 13 (a). The structure is related to the lithium equivalent Li 10 GeP 2 S 12 ( Fig. 13 (b)), which consists of 3D chessboard framework of tetrahedral SnS 4 and PS 4 that delimit wide Na + channels along the c -axis and within the ab planes.  Fig. 13 (c-e) shows the chains of Na + along the direction. The Na + lodge in 5 diﬀerent octahedral sites, where the 3 sites are almost occupied (Na (3): 0.96, Na (4): 0.97, Na (5): 0.95), while the two other sites are partially occupied (Na (1): 0.87, Na (2): 0.78). All these pathways in the crystal structure are made by octahedral NaS 6 which are linked by the sharing faces to create a framework in all directions. Here the partially occupied sites are situated across the intersection area as shown in Fig. 13 (c-e). The 2D blocks in the ab planes are created by joining Na(1)-Na(5) chains ( Fig. 13 (c)) (z = 0.125), while the other 2 2D blocks are generated by joining the Na(3)–Na(2) or Na(4)–Na(2) chains (z = 0.25) ( Fig. 13 (d)). These repeated blocks are linked in the c direction to create chains of Na + pathways along( Fig. 13 (e)).  The Na + diﬀusion in the Na 11 Sn 2 PS 12 material is revealed through the ab initio molecular dynamics simulations ( Fig. 13 (f-h)). As shown in Fig. 13 (f-h), the simulation data clearly demonstrate a 3D diﬀusion channel in the crystal structure and reveal the Na + hopping along the ab plane and c axis. Wherein all the Na atoms in the ﬁve crystal sites are involved in ion diﬀusion mechanism, due to the partial vacancies at the 2 Na sites, suggesting that creation of more vacancies through aliovalent doping could be beneﬁcial for improving the ionic conductivity. Na + migration along the c axis comprised –Na(4)–Na(1)–Na(3)–Na(1)– chains ( Fig. 13 (f)), while the transportation along Na(3)-Na(2)-Na(3), Na(4)-Na(2)-Na(4), or Na(5)-Na(1)-Na(5) sites happens along the a or b axis. Fig. 13 (g&h) demonstrates the Na + diﬀusion along the 2-distinct ab planes (z = 0.125 and z = 0.25).  The uniformly dispersed probability densities indicate that the Na + have a comparatively ﬂat landscape along these pathways, which describes the superior conductivity and the low activation energy in the material.  Jung et al.  prepared a novel, highly conducting (1.1 × 10 −3  S cm − 1 ) and stable tetragonal Na 3 SbS 4 superionic conductor. They found that this superconducting Na 3 SbS 4 coated on NaCrO 2 active material could exhibit a very promising electrochemical performance in all ‐solid ‐state batteries.  Na 3 SbS 4 explored by Liang et al.  was considered as a superior air-stable, good Na + conducting (1 × 10 −3  S cm − 1 at 25 °C) and excellent Na metal compatible electrolyte.  Another explored sodium superionic conductor is Na 3 SbSe 4.  This material could demonstrate a Na + conductivity of 0.85 × 10 −3  S cm − 1 at room temperature along with good compatibility with Na metal and high stability in a wide potential window.  By comparing with NaPS structure, the substitution of Se and Sb at S and P sites respectivelycould lead to an enlargement in the unit cell, hence provide larger intermediate sites size that connects the octahedral sites (which could be favourable for the Na + diﬀusion). Furthermore, larger ionic radius and superior polarizability of Se 2 − and Sb 5 + are also favourable attributes for Na + diﬀusion, which could be observed through Na 3 PSe 4 and Na 3 SbS 4 compounds.  The comparisons of the ionic conductivity of diﬀerent investigated electrolytes are given in Table 2. 
By analysing the literature, most of the studies on NASICON materials for SIBs are related to the development of electrode materials and their half-cell performance evaluation. However, in fact, the fullcell performance is the important factor to decide the practicality of a cell. In this regard, a suitable choice of electrolyte is as important as the appropriate selection of electrodes. This is primarily due to the effect of electrolyte on the formation of the protective layer, such as solid electrolyte interfaces, and surface layers. Hence, we believe that the development of SIB will strongly depend on the future of appropriate electrolyte. Among diﬀerent kinds of NASICON electrolytes, we believe that the NaZSP has a potential to become an appropriate electrolyte to make all-solid-state batteries. This is mainly due to the superior ionic conductivity. Studies even reported a conductivity in the order of 10 −1 ,  which is considered to be very high for the solid-state electrolyte systems. One of the major challenges of the NASICON based solid electrolyte, such as NaZSP, is its large grain boundary resistance. To reduce this resistance high sintering temperature of over 1000°C is necessary, which could cause material processing challenges. Nevertheless, the NASICON electrolyte, due to its high ionic conductivity, can be a potential system to fabricate all-solid-state NASICON battery with excellent safety. This solid-state system could generate an electrolyte buﬀer layer of a solidsolution or composite at the electrode-electrolyte interface, thus could lower the resistance at the interface through the building of eﬃcient ionic channels. 
The performance of a metal-ion battery fully depends on the selection of materials for the fabrication. The major issues for the current metal-ion batteries including SIB are the leakage, volatility and ﬂammability of liquid-state electrolyte, leading to safety concerns. Thermal runaway is the other major challenge in the current metal-ion batteries. These issues can be addressed through all-solid-state battery systems because it utilizes solid-state electrolytes and possesses excellent thermal, electrochemical and chemical stability along with inferior ﬂammability and better endurance. Further, separator and the additional control/casing systems to avoid any kind of electrolyte leakage are not required, thus the cost can be reduced and the design can be simpliﬁed. In addition, the volumetric energy density of all-solid-state battery will be higher than metal-ion batteries which make them more compact in size than metal-ion counterparts. Since, most of the usual solid-state electrolytes suﬀer from poor ionic conductivity and high resistance at the electrode/electrolyte interface, NASICON structured materials can be a better option, due to its high intrinsic ionic conductivity. Further, for the fabrication of an eﬀective solid-state battery, an electrolyte with an ionic conductivity in the order of 10 −3  S cm − 1 would be required. Other critical to quality parameters that solid-state electrolytes should possess are; a) negligible electronic conductivity (to avoid any short-circuit), b) compatible interfaces (to avoid delamination), c) chemical and electrochemical stability (to avoid redox reactions), d) mechanical stability (low dilatation with temperature) and e) high defect concentrations (to ensure better ionic mobility). The NASICON based electrolytes possess all the above-mentioned properties and hence can be an appropriatechoice for solid-state batteries. Another notable advantage of NASICONtype material is that, it can be used as cathode, anode, and electrolyte. Hence, all-NASICONsolid-state batteries can be eﬀectively assembled to get superior performances ( Fig. 14 ). By analysing the crystal structure, ionic conductivity and the electrochemical performances of the different explored electrodes and electrolytes reviewed in this article, we designed a potential all-solid-state battery system for the sodium storage applications ( Fig. 14 ). We believe that this approach can form an electrolyte buﬀer layer of a solid-solution or composite among the electrodes and electrolyte, which can lead to the low interfacial resistance and fast ion channel. Further, by utilizing the same kind of material as cathode and anode, the existing low initialCoulombic eﬃciency problem can be addressed. This can also help to improve cycling and power performanceswhile fabricating the full cell. However, it can compromise the full cell voltage and hence the energy density of the battery. The 3D ﬂexible nature of the NASICON based materials could accommodate larger ions easily than other common electrode materials. Thus, it is an ideal candidate to be used in sodium ion storage systems as compared to other electrode materials. 
NASICON structured compounds are a potential class of 3D materials, which demonstrate the stable structure and high ionic conductivity, thereby leading to a wide variety of applications, including energystorage systems, membranes, fuel cells and gas sensors. In general, NASICON materials show good electrode and electrolyte performances. However, the currently investigated materials demonstrate certain drawbacks ( Fig. 15 represents the challenges and advantages of NASICON based diﬀerent explored cathode, anode and electrolyte materials). For instance, the high operating voltage is a favourable attribute of NASICON structured material if it is used as a cathode, but the same feature compromises the energy density if used as an anodewhich restricts the practical applications. Another limitation is that due to its high ionic conductivity and low energy density, NASICON based compounds are more power-oriented than energy-oriented material, leading to an underdeveloped state while looking for the practical application. Despite the high ionic conductivity, NASICON structured materials suﬀer from low electronic conductivity, which compromises the overall performance of the battery system. The common strategies to mitigate this issue in NASICON structured materials are doping, nanostructuring and coating with conducting materials like carbon. Since the uniform morphology is a crucial factor to achieve stable and superior electrochemical performances in the battery system, the controlled way of material synthesis is always a challenge in the NASICON structured materials. Hence, the material preparation technique needs to be well organized to achieve desirable morphology and electrochemical performances. Further, while designing the preparation procedure, the feasibility of material scaling up needs to be considered for the practical application. 
In the present scenario, developing functional sodium ion full cell for practical application is inevitable. The sodium-based full cells can be categorized into two, namely asymmetric and symmetric cells by considering the active anode and cathode materials that are employed.  The asymmetric cells utilize various kinds of materials as anode and cathode. For instance, the common cathodes are metal oxides and polyanionic compounds, while hard carbon or alloying materials are common choices for anode materials, due to their relatively high Coulombic eﬃciency and better scaling up feasibility for practical applications.  However, the asymmetric cells experience challenges including the requirement of good cycling stability and high rate performances forpractical applications.  For instance, the huge volume expansion and low working potential of these anode materials (in asymmetric cells) can result in poor cycling stability and severe safety concerns. Further, for the grid application, the impulse current in peak period can signiﬁcantly damage the battery systems. On the other hand, the symmetric full cell can avoid the above-mentioned drawbacks, even if it possesses low energy performance.  Symmetric cells arefabricated using the same material and often exhibit an intercalation type system. This type of cell could suppress the large volume expansion and nullify the safety issues related to the dendrite formation at the anode side, resulting in improved cycling stability and safety. Furthermore,due to the low manufacturing cost, the symmetric cells are considered to be more economical, which is a favourable attribute from a commercial point of view. Moreover, these bipolar electrodes in symmetric cell could eliminate the unwanted side reactions between the electrode and electrolyte, leading to a superior cyclelife. In addition, because of the superior safety, it is expected that all-solid-statesodium-ion batteryresearch can make breakthroughs in the coming years. Fig. 16 demonstrates the number of articles published over these years in the ﬁeld of NASICON cathode, anode and electrolyte materials, which clearly shows an increasing trend.Although there are limitations to the current NASICON based symmetric full cells and all-solid-state, we believe that continuous investigation and designing of new NASICON structured materials could shape the future of SIBs by challenging their limits for charge transfer and storage. 
Since their invention NASICON, structured materials have been considered to be a promising system for both electrode and electrolyte applications. Over the last few years, thousands of articles have been published based on NASICON structured materials due to their superior ionic conductivity and open 3D structure. In this regard, sodium-based NASICON structures can be considered as a novel class of materials with similar/better properties to their LIB counterparts. In the present review, we have reported the crystallographic features of the NASICON materials used in sodium-ion storage applications. Phenomenal progression and state-of-the-art development in the area of the new generation of NASICON with their corresponding ion diﬀusion mechanisms in high energy density applications and their structural suitability are also discussed. A detailed review analysis also illustrates how surface redox reactions in these open structures aﬀect the electrochemical behaviour and charge storage mechanisms. From the investigation of diﬀerent studies, we have shown how the underlying morphologies of these NASICON materials aﬀect the ion diﬀusion process. This review also highlights various innovative approaches used in NASICON material development and analyse their electrochemical properties for using them as possible anode, cathode and electrolyte systems. Further, in this review, attractive electrochemical performance characteristics have been documented for diﬀerent types of NASICON materials and have been compared based on their ion diﬀusion mechanisms. We believe that with the rapid progress of renewable energy sources and the emerging markets for grid-scale battery applications, the commercial prospects of industrial SIB adaptations look promising and this challenging new technology is set to open up more prospects for designing new materials. Thus, understanding the ion diﬀusion mechanism and crystal structure will lay a solid foundation in designing SIBs, which will satisfy the requirements of large energy storage in the future. 























