NASICON-type Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) solid electrolyte thin films were fabricated without any heat treatment by aerosol deposition(AD).

Ball-milled LAGP powders with different particle sizes were used as raw material and deposited directly on a stainless steel substrate viaroom temperature impact consolidation.

X-ray diffraction patterns revealed that as-deposited LAGP film has a same crystal structure with rawLAGP powder and no secondary phases are formed during deposition.

SEM observation showed that film consists of fractured LAGPnanoparticles but the porosity is strongly influenced by an averaged particle size of raw LAGP powder.

Maximum total (bulkþgrain-boundary)ionic conductivity at room temperature in aerosol deposited (ADed) LAGP film was 0.5  105 S cm1, while the bulk conductivity of film wasapproximately 104 S cm1, which is comparable with the bulk property of LAGP as previously reported.

Therefore, lower total conductivity ofADed LAGP film is mainly attributed to large grain-boundary resistance between the LAGP nanoparticles in the film.

Improvement of filmdensity and the connectivity among the LAGP nanoparticles in the film should be needed to enhance the total conductivity.

All-solid-state lithium-ion batteries (LiBs) are expected as one ofthe next generation energy storage devices because of their highenergy density, high safety and excellent cycle stability [1–3].

Development of solid inorganic lithium-ion conducting materialsused as solid electrolyte is the most important issue for realizationof all solid-state LiBs.

The materials used for solid electrolyte musthave not only high lithium-ion conductivity σLi4103 S cm1 atroom temperature but also chemical stability against metalliclithium or lithiated negative electrode, air and moisture.

Althoughoxide based solid electrolytes have rather lower σLi than sulfidebased one, they have other advantages such as their chemicalstability and easiness for handling.

Among various oxide based solid electrolytes, Li1.5Al0.5-Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) [4–10] with NASICON-type frameworkhas several advantages over other electrolytes such asLi1þxAlxTi2x(PO4)3 (LATP) [11–13], Li2/33xLaxTiO3 (LLT)[14–17] and Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZ) [18–21].

Although LATP havealso NASICON-type structure and higher σLi than LAGP, LAGPhas a wider electrochemical potential window than LATP whichreacts with lithium at 2.4 V vs.

Li/Liþ due to the Ti4þ/Ti3þredox reaction [6,9].

Perovskite-type LLT has much higher bulkionic conductivity than LAGP, but very high temperature sinteringabove 1400 1C must be applied for densification and reduction ofgrain-boundary resistance [15].

In addition, LLT also reacts withlithium at 1.7 V vs.

Li/Liþ due to the Ti4þ/Ti3þ redox reaction[16,17].

Such narrow electrochemical stability window for LATPand LLT gives a difficulty to use them in a practical use for solidstate LiBs.

Compared to garnet-type LLZ solid electrolytes, LAGPcan be easily synthesized without any phase transition duringsynthesis condition such as heat-treatment temperature and elementary composition [18–21].

σLi of sintered LAGP is 104 Scm1 at room temperature and at least one digit lower thanorganic liquid electrolyte.

This property has not been regarded ashigh enough for practical use in all-solid-state batteries operating atroom temperature.

Solid electrolyte thin film provides low electrical resistance,small size of a device and increasing volumetric energy density forall-solid-state battery.

Several studies have been carried out forpreparing thin film solid electrolyte using RF magnetron sputtering[22–25], pulsed laser deposition [26,27] and sol–gel methods[28–30].

These methods are efficient for fabricating uniform filmand controlling the film thickness, but in some cases, it is difficultto control elementary composition.

Moreover, increasing substratetemperature during deposition and/or post-annealing should benecessary to obtain well-crystallized thin films.

Since hightemperature treatments may lead to undesired reactions at theinterface or uncontrolled diffusion between electrode and solidelectrolyte, these methods are not recommended in some cases andinadequate for fabricating all-solid-state batteries.

Aerosol deposition (AD) has many advantages compared toother conventional thin film deposition methods as mentionedabove, including deposition of a crystallized thin film without anyheat treatments and a fast deposition rate [31–33].

A film isdeposited through impact and adhesion of fine particles onsubstrate at room temperature.

This phenomenon is called as“room temperature impact consolidation (RTIC)” (Fig.

 1).

Consequently, as-deposited film has similar properties with raw powdermaterial, such as the crystal structure, composition and physicalproperty.

AD additionally provides a number of advantages,including room temperature deposition and high adhesion strengthwith a substrate [31–33].

By addressing these attractive features,numerous studies to form thin film by using AD have beenreported in various functional ceramic materials, including Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 (PZT) [32,33], (K0.5Na0.5)NbO3 [34], TiO2 [35], andCa3Co4O9 films [36].

Several papers have been also reported inthe battery field.

 Popovici et al.

reported the adoption of AD toprepare LATP solid electrolyte film and the as-deposited filmshowed total conductivity of 1.1 106 S cm1 at 22 1C [37].

Ahn et al.

also reported the properties of LLZ solid electrolyte filmfabricated by AD without any heat treatment, but the conductivityis 108 S cm1 even at 140 1C [38], which is much lower thansintered LLZ [18].

The electrochemical properties of Si alloy orcomposite [39–42], LiMnO2 [43], LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 [44,45],LiFePO4 [46], Li4Ti5O12 [47] and Fe2O3 [48] film electrodes werealso investigated to verify the feasibility of AD.

In this paper, we fabricated NASICON-type LAGP solidelectrolyte thin film by AD.

Although LAGP is not stable againstlithium metal [10], it has a much wider electrochemical potentialwindow than LATP and LLT.

For constituting all-solid-state LiBusing LAGP, several anode materials operating at high potentialfor lithium-ion storage such as Li4Ti5O12, TiO2 and Nb2O5 can bepotentially used.

LLZ is known to be stable against lithium metaland have better electrochemical stability than LAGP, but synthesisof LAGP is much easier than LLZ.

Furthermore, fabrication ofLATP film with NASICON-type crystal structure has beendemonstrated in [37], so that we selected LAGP as the materialsfor fabrication of solid-electrolyte thin film by AD.

LAGP powderswith different particle sizes were directly used as raw material forLAGP film formation via RTIC.

The crystallinity, microstructureand ionic conductivity of as-deposited LAGP film without any heattreatment were investigated.

NASICON-type LAGP solid electrolyte thin film wasfabricated on SUS316 substrate by aerosol deposition (AD).

LAGP powders were used as raw material and sprayed directlyonto a substrate to form LAGP film without applying any heattreatments.

XRD patterns revealed that aerosol deposited(ADed) LAGP film has a same crystal structure with rawLAGP powder and no secondary phases were formed duringthe film deposition.

Porosity of ADed LAGP films is stronglyinfluenced by the size of raw LAGP particles.

Dense LAGPfilms consisting of fractured LAGP nanoparticles can beobtained using LAGP powders with an averaged particle sizeof 0.5–1 μm.

Maximum total ionic conductivity at 27 1C inADed LAGP film was estimated to be 0.5  105 S cm1.Total conductivity is much lower than sintered LAGP, whichis mainly due to larger grain-boundary resistance betweenfractured LAGP particles in the film.

