Improving the ionic conductivity of NASICON through aliovalent cation substitution of Na3Zr2Si2PO12

Doping the zirconium site in NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) with lower valent cations enhanced the ionic transport of the material. 
Both Na3.2Zr1.8M0.2Si2PO12 (M=Al3+, Fe3+, Y3+) and Na3.4Zr1.8M0.2Si2PO12 (M=Co2+, Ni2+, Zn2+) exhibited a higher bulk conductivity than undoped Na3Zr2Si2PO12 at room temperature. 
A decrease in the low temperature activation energy for all doped NASICON was observed, which helped contribute to the higher room temperature conductivity. 
The lower activation energy and enhanced conductivity of doped materials were a result of alterations in the NASICON structure. 
The charge imbalance created by aliovalent substitution increased the sodium in the lattice resulting in more charge carriers with better mobility. 
Furthermore, the conductivity was optimized by the ionic radius of the species in the zirconium site. 

Ultimately, NASICON doped with a +2 oxidation state cation having an ionic radius of approximately 0.73 Å (Zn and Co) attained a maximum in conductivity. 
Zn-doped NASICON displayed the greatest room −3 S/cm, while temperature bulk conductivity of 3.75×10 Co-doped NASICON demonstrated the greatest total conductivity of 1.55×10-3 S/cm.

Inexpensive and reliable batteries for grid-scale storage are vital to facilitating the continued use of clean renewable energy. 
Alternative energy sources such as wind and solar require large energy storage devices to continue delivering electricity when the wind is not blowing, or the sun goes down. 
Sodium-ion batteries offer a viable, lower cost alternative to lithium-ion batteries for grid-level storage. 
In particular, all-solidstate sodium-ion batteries with a ceramic Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (NASICON) electrolyte were demonstrated to be a safe, inexpensive, and reliable alternative to other battery chemistries. 

Furthermore, sodium-air and sodium-sulfur batteries with a NASICON electrolyte have also shown promise as highdensity energy storage devices [5, 6]. 

While NASICON exhibits relatively high ionic conductivity for a solid electrolyte at elevated temperature, its Na+ conduction at room temperature is orders of magnitude lower than organic electrolyte counterparts [7]. 

Therefore, increasing the ionic conductivity of NASICON would both improve the power density of sodium batteries operating at elevated temperature and open up the possibility of room temperature Na+ batteries using this electrolyte.
Originally developed by Hong and Goodenough, Na3Zr2Si2PO12 exhibits fast sodium ion mobility through a three-dimensional solid network [8, 9]. 
The sodium mobility of undoped NASICON is affected by substitutional doping, and understanding this effect provides a meaningful route to enhance the sodium conductivity. 
Boilot et al. demonstrated that adjusting the silicon and phosphorus level markedly altered the conductivity of Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12 but was maximized at x=2 as a result of sodium interactions and sodium oxygen interatomic distance [10]. 
In contrast, doping the zirconium site in Na3Zr2Si2PO12 is not as readily understood in regard to how it modifies NASICON structure and conductivity. 
Fuentes et al. were able to improve the conductivity of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 by substituting Zr with 4 mol % yttrium, but the higher total conductivity was explained by enhanced microstructure and greater density rather than a structural or chemical change [11, 12]. 
Other investigations have tried to explain the dependence of conductivity on the dopant but show inherently lower conductivity than undoped NASI CON [13, 14].
This investigation explores the substitutional doping of the zirconium site in Na3Zr2Si2PO12. 
The dopants examined are + 3 (Al, Fe, Y) and +2 (Co, Ni, Zn) cations. 
From the impedance results, it is clear that aliovalent doping of NASICON significantly improves the bulk conductivity of the material. 
Furthermore, the mechanism driving the increase in conductivity of doped NASICON is explored.

The raw materials Na2CO3 (Sigma-Aldrich, ≥99.5 %), nanocrystalline ZrO2 (Inframat Advanced Materials, 99.9 %), amorphous SiO2 (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.80 %), and Na2HPO4·7H2O (Sigma-Aldrich, 98.0– 102.0 %) were mixed with 2 % excess phosphorus and sodium to compensate for volatility. 

The dopant raw materials were mixed stoichiometrically and included Al2O3 (Inframat Advanced Materials, 99.99 %), Fe2O3 (Sigma-Aldrich, ≥99 %), Y2O3 (Alfa Aesar, 99.9 %), Co(NO3)2·6H2O (Carolina, 98.0-102.0 %), NiO (J.T. Baker, ≥99 %), and ZnO (J.T. Baker, ≥99 %).

The raw materials were ball milled in isopropanol for 24 h, dried at 100 °C, and then calcined at 700 and 900 °C in air prior to sintering. The powders were ground with an agate mortar and pestle and ball milled between and after calcination steps. The calcined materials were pressed into pellets inside a 10-mm steel die with 2000 lbs of uniaxial force. The pellets were sintered for 12 h in alumina crucibles at the temperatures given in Table 1. The heating and cooling rates for calcining and sintering were 5 °C/min.
X-ray diffraction (XRD) was done on the ground powder of sintered pellets. The measurements were carried out on a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer with CuKα radiation and a LynxEye detector. The pattern was recorded from 10° to 140° (2θ) with a 0.02° step size and 1.1-s count time per step.

Elemental analysis was done on a JEOL 8900 electron probe microanalyzer using standard wavelength-dispersive spectroscopy (WDS). The microprobe accelerating voltage was set to 15 kV, the current was 1 nA, the beam diameter was 30 μm, and the absorbed current was monitored to detect sample degradation. At sample currents above 1 nA or a beam diameter below 30 μm, electron densities became high enough to stimulate sodium migration, which generated inaccurate elemental analyses. 
ZAF correction procedures were employed to correct raw X-ray counts and to determine composition. Oxygen content was not directly determined; however, it was assigned using the stoichiometry of the NASI CON and was included in the ZAF corrections.

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was used to characterize the ionic conductivity of the sintered pellets. The two faces of the sintered pellets were first polished with silicon carbide paper and then coated with platinum paste to form electrodes and sintered at 700 °C for 1 h in air. Four-wire EIS was measured in air with a Solartron 1260 using a 0-V DC bias and a 250-mV RMS.

The impedance sweep went from 5 MHz to 1 Hz, and measurements were taken every 25 °C between 300 and 25 °C. Bulk and total conductivity were determined from the fitting tools in the Scribner Z-Plot software, and the resistance was normalized by the pellet thickness and the electrode area. DC measurements were done on the platinum sintered pellets at 25 °C in air with a Keithley 2400 Broad Purpose SourceMeter. Measurements were run until the current stabilized, and the electronic conductivity was normalized by pellet thickness and area.

A nominal 10 % substitution for zirconium was implemented to sufficiently alter the NASICON structure and maintain relatively high-phase purity. The aliovalent doping of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 replaced Zr+4 with lower valent cations generating a charge imbalance in the material. To compensate for the charge inequality, more sodium was supplemented to fill vacant Na+ sites and reach charge neutrality in the NASICON compound. The zirconium site in NASICON is bonded to eight oxygen atoms, and thus, the Zr dopants must support a sixfold coordination. The dopants were selected based on ionic radius and valence state to ensure a spectrum of ionic radii and theoretical lattice sodium content. The dopant with the largest coordination six ionic radius was Y+3 (0.90 Å), and the smallest dopant was Al+3 (0.535 Å). The electron spin was taken to be high if both a high-spin and low-spin state exists for the octahedral complex.

The XRD pattern of all samples is illustrated in Fig. 1. The patterns were fit using the Reitveld method, which confirmed that all samples exhibited greater than 90 % purity, with Ydoped NASICON exhibiting almost 99 % purity. Monoclinic ZrO2 was a common impurity for all samples, which is generally observed in all types of NASICON synthesis [15–17]. The absence of dopant containing secondary phases is one the indication that the zirconium site was successfully doped. Furthermore, while most of the dopants are able to support tetrahedral coordination, all but aluminum are more than twice the size of silicon or phosphorus which demonstrates a preference toward octahedral coordination. The lattice parameters of all samples are presented elsewhere [18].

Elemental analysis demonstrated the chemical makeups of the sintered ceramic pellets were close to the nominal stoichiometry, except for the Y-doped sample that showed noticeably lower dopant levels than the intended stoichiometry. The elemental breakdown of all NASICON samples is presented in Table 1. Generally, Y2O3 is stable at elevated temperatures and thus volatilization is unlikely. It is possible that the lower yttrium level is an artifact of the phosphorus and yttrium peak overlap present in the WDS. There would also be an apparent loss of yttrium if it was not as prevalent on the examined surface. Ultimately, elemental analysis confirmed that the sodium content increased with aliovalent substitution, and doping with +2 oxidation state cations result in the greatest amount of sodium in the lattice. The density was also maximized for the samples by optimizing sintering temperature. Density of the samples was confirmed with a standard Archimedes test in ethanol and is indicated in Table 1 along with sintering temperature. The NASICON lattice parameters were used to construct the theoretical cell volume for density measurements, and impurities were ignored because of their small presence in the samples.

Although the bulk conductivity is the focus of this study, the microstructure and total conductivity of the samples were also examined. All the samples exhibited relatively low porosity, but deviations in the average grain size and particle to particle connectivity between samples were observed. SEM photographs of the sintered pellets are included in a separate structural investigation of all of the samples measured here [18]. While the microstructure can influence the total conductivity of the pellets, it should have minimal effect on the bulk conductivity of the material. Thus, the total conductivity reflects the processing of the samples, while bulk conductivity is a function of the inherent material property.

EIS was employed to obtain the conductivity of the samples and to achieve a deeper insight into the electrical properties. Like others, ionically blocking platinum electrodes and a frequency response analyzer were employed to measure the Na+ mobility in the NASICON samples [12, 19]. The Nyquist plots in Fig. 2a and b illustrate the room temperature impedance of each sample. For this study, the bulk conductivity of the samples was the primary interest. Bulk conductivity divulges the inherent electrochemical properties of the material and is independent from processing flaws, insulating secondary phases at grain boundaries, etc. Since the bulk ionic conductivity could be deconvoluted from the total conductivity, insight into the ionic mobility through the NASICON network was ascertained from impedance data.

The Nyquist plots contain both an unresolved and clearly defined semi-circle for all investigated compounds. The unrealized high-frequency semi-circle is attributed to ion transport in the grains, while the low-frequency semi-circle is caused by ion transport across the grain boundaries. These macroscopic processes of mass and charge transport can be described by an equivalent circuit (Fig. 2b insert). The equivalent circuit model consists of a resistor connected in series with an RQ element, corresponding to the contributions from the grain bulk and grain boundary, respectively. A CPE element is used to describe the non-ideal capacitance of the dispersed semi-circle element. Although the bulk resistance arc could not be directly resolved, Scribner Zview software was used to fit the grain boundary resistance arc. The bulk resistance was then identified as the origin of the grain boundary arc at the x-axis, while the total resistance is the end of grain boundary arc.

There is also an artifact from the EIS setup that is not included in the equivalent circuit model. The resistance of the wires and blocking electrodes contribute an additional 0.25Ω at room temperature (as measured by a null) that was subtracted from the fit bulk and grain boundary resistances. A null was measured at each temperature through the entire temperature range and subtracted from corresponding EIS measurement. Ultimately, the low-frequency data outside the grain boundary arc was not fit with Zview, since this region does not correspond to ion mobility in the electrolyte, but rather semiinfinite diffusion to the blocking electrodes consistent with a Warburg element [20]. There is also a depressed region after the grain boundary in the Zn-doped sample that was not fit with the RQ circuit but was still included in the total conductivity calculation. The raw fitting data collected from Zview is listed in Table 2. The conductivity was normalized by a circular pellet geometry of a roughly 8.5 mm in diameter and a 1– 2 mm in thickness for each sample. The calculated capacitance of the fitted grain boundary arcs all matched typical capacitance values attributed to ion transport in the grain boundaries of ceramics [21].

The shape of the EIS curve for each sample also began to diverge from the room temperature plot with increasing temperature. Figure 2c illustrates the impedance of the Al-doped sample obtained at different temperatures. Up to a temperature of 100○C, the grain boundary arc is clearly observed; however, with increasing temperatures, the arc disappears progressively from the spectra, indicating a thermally activated process with the addition of an inductive contributor. The inductive tail observed in the impedance at high temperature was also observed in the null measurement. In both cases, the inductive tail curved toward the origin which is indicative of natural inductance in the setup. The high temperature inductance was manually eliminated, and the intersection of the real impedance with the negative imaginary portion of the Nyquist plot was identified as the bulk resistance. Unfortunately, bulk resistance could not be separated from total resistance for all temperatures. The grain boundary arc dissolved into the Warburg tail above approximately 200 °C, seen in Fig. 2c, and thus, the intersection of the impedance with the x-axis is taken as the total resistance. However, since the grain boundary resistance is negligible at higher temperatures, the total resistance is effectively the grain resistance at high temperatures.

The frequency dependences of the impedance real and imaginary parts at 25○C for all NASICON samples are shown in Fig. 2d (Z’) and Fig. 2e (Z”), respectively. A step-like decreasing trend is observed for all the dopants in the real impedance spectra, while peak shape spectra were obtained from the imaginary part. The plot reveals that the Z” peak occurs in the frequency range from 2×105 to 106 Hz, depending on the sample. This peak corresponds to the middle of the step-like decreasing trend of the real portion, indicating a relaxation behavior of the ions. Figure 2f depicts how the real portion of the impedance varies as a function of temperature for a representative sample (Al-doped). The spectra is characterized by two dispersion regions, where the boundary between the two regions shifts towards higher frequencies as the temperature increases. This behavior is another indication for thermally activated processes and is typical in relaxation type dispersions. The relaxation frequencies, fR, obtained from the Z” vs. frequency graph (insert Fig. 2f) also exhibit a shift toward high frequency with increasing temperature.

Table 3 lists the bulk conductivity, total conductivity, and activation energy for each sample. Cobalt-doped NASICON exhibited the highest room temperature total conductivity of −3 S/cm. While Zn-doped NASICON all samples, 1.55×10 had superior bulk conductivity, the dense and uniform microstructure of Co NASICON lead to enhanced total conductivity. Finally, DC polarization was implemented to ensure the measured conductivity was ionic. The DC polarization plot of Co-doped NASICON is presented in Fig. 3. A transference number greater than 0.999 was calculated for all doped and undoped NASICON samples confirming the conductivity is a result of ionic mobility rather than electronic mobility. Ultimately, comparing the sodium ion mobility between samples is achieved by analyzing the bulk conductivity of the NASICONs.

The Arrhenius plots in Fig. 4a represent the bulk conductivity of the doped and undoped NASICON. The impedance results demonstrate that all aliovalent doping investigated improved the bulk conductivity of NASICON at room temperature. Overall the +2 oxidation state dopants resulted in a larger improvement to the bulk conductivity when compared to +3 oxidation state dopants. At 300 °C, Co-doped NASICON exhibited the largest bulk conductivity improvement over undoped NASICON with almost a threefold increase. At 25 °C, Zn-doped NASICON displayed a bulk conductivity over three times larger than undoped NASICON. The enhancement of +2 dopants on ionic conductivity at both high and low temperatures can be attributed to the change in activation energy. Figure 4b and c highlights the effect of the dopant oxidation state on activation energy and conductivity. Co-, Ni-, and Zn-doped NASICON have a distinct high temperature and low temperature activation energy as well as higher room temperature conductivity than all the +3 dopants. In contrast, undoped NASICON and Al-, Fe-, and Y-doped NASICON have a linear activation energy over the whole temperature range. The change in activation energy could be a result of the phase change that occurs in these materials above approximately 150 °C [18]. The conductivity pathways in the high temperature rhombohedral phase may be more severely affected by aliovalent substitution than in the low temperature monoclinic phase. Therefore, the activation energy would change in a more pronounced way in NASICON doped with +2 oxidation state cations.

Aliovalent substitution increases Na+ conductivity in NASI CON as result of structural changes and an optimization of the chemistry. By doping the +4 zirconium site with lower valent cations, the sodium in the lattice must be increased to compensate for the charge imbalance. The Na3Zr2Si2PO12 structure has a single vacant Na+ site per molecular formula; thus, the additional sodium added to the doped NASICON would be expected to fill the vacant sites. While charge balance in doped NASICON may be obtained by increasing the sodium occupancy, the defects associated with aliovalent zirconium substitution are also likely to be more complex than solely adjustments in sodium levels. For example, oxygen vacancies or cation interstitials could be forming to provide charge balance. Although oxygen was set to a stoichiometric 12 in the WDS analysis and therefore appears constant, both the P and Si levels vary slightly between samples. Furthermore, the lattice volume does not linearly depend on the apparent dopant radius supporting that there may be other interactions within the 80-atom large Na3Zr2Si2PO12 unit cell. Nevertheless, the aliovalent substituted NASICON has increased sodium in a sodium-deficient material with little secondary phase, emphasizing that more Na must be in the lattice.

Increased sodium in the lattice equates to an increase in charge carrier density. Thus, an influx of mobile sodium ions in the conducting pathways would result in higher conductivity. The WDS analysis confirmed that NASICON doped with +2 oxidation state cations contained the most sodium in the bulk and helps explain why Co-, Ni-, and Zn-doped NASI CON exhibited higher conductivity than all the other samples. Furthermore, aliovalent doping decreases the electrostatic interactions of the sodium ion with the zirconium site. A lower valent cation occupying the zirconium site would decrease the coulombic repulsion between the dopant ion and the sodium ion. With less electrostatic interactions on the sodium ion, it would take less energy for the ion to navigate the bottlenecks around the zirconium ions.

Although increased sodium in the lattice enhanced the conductivity, there was still variability in the bulk conductivity among the +3 and +2 valent-doped NASICON. Thus, the ionic radius of the dopant, another critical variable affecting the structure, had a large impact on the conductivity of NASI CON. Graphing the ionic radius of dopant vs. bulk conductivity revealed that the optimum value of dopant radii is approximately 0.73 Å. In Fig. 5, the relationship between bulk conductivity of the doped NASICON and dopant ionic radius can be seen at a range of temperatures. Therefore, while the ionic radius of zirconium (0.72 Å) is an ideal size for the site, undoped Na3Zr2Si2PO12 does not have the advantage of increased sodium and charge imbalance at the Zr site that aliovalent substitution offers.

It is clear that increasing the amount of sodium in the NASI CON structure through aliovalent doping the zirconium site enhances the bulk conductivity. Increased sodium charge carriers in the lattice and a charge imbalance of the zirconium site related directly to improved ionic mobility. As a result, the low temperature activation energy was decreased for doped samples while their room temperature conductivity was increased. The conductivity was impacted by the ionic radius of the dopant as well, illustrating another important factor that affects the mobility of sodium ions. Ultimately, aliovalent substation of NASICON maximizes the conductivity when the dopant is +2 oxidation state cations and has an ionic radius of ∼0.73 Å. As a result, Zn-doped NASICON displayed the highest bulk conductivity at room temperature with 3.75× −3 S/cm. Nonetheless, Co-doped NASICON exhibited the 10 −3 S/ highest total conductivity at room temperature, 1.55×10 cm, which is suitable for practical application even before it has been optimized.
