
Modifying the Catalytic and Adsorption Properties of Metals and Oxides

A new approach to interpreting the effect of promoters (inhibitors) of nonmetals and metals added to a host metal (catalyst) is considered. Theoretical calculations are based on a model of an actual two-dimensional electron gas and adsorbate particles. An equation is derived for the isotherm of induced adsorption on metals and semiconductors with respect to small fillings of θ ~ 0.1–0.15. The applicability of this equation is verified  experimentally  for  metals  (Ag,  Pd,  Cu,  Fe,  and  Ni),  graphitized  ash,  and  semiconductor  oxides Ta2O5, ZnO, and NiО. The applicability of the theoretical model of promotion is verified by the hydrogenation reaction of CO on ultradispersed nickel powder. The use of plasmachemical surface treatments of metals and oxides, accompanied by an increase in activity and variation in selectivity, are investigated based on the dehydrocyclization reactions of n-hexane and the dehydrogenation and dehydration of alcohols. It is established that such treatments for metals (Pt, Cu, Ni, and Cо) raise their activity due to the growth of the number of active centers upon an increase in the activation energy. Applying XPES and XRD methods to metallic catalysts, it is shown that the rise in activity is associated with a change in their surface states (variation in the structural characteristics of metal particles and localization of certain forms of carbon in catalytically active centers). It is shown that plasmachemical treatments also alter their surface composition, surface activity, and raise their activity when used with complex phosphate oxides of the NASICON type. It is shown by the example of conversion of butanol-2 that abrupt variations in selectivity (prevalence of dehydration over dehydrogenation and vice versa) occur, depending on the type of plasma. It is concluded that plasmachemical treatments of metals and ZnO and NiO alter the isosteric heats and entropies of adsorption of isopropanol.

Modification of the surface state of heterogeneous catalysts to increase their activity and vary their selectivity can be accomplished by a variety of means. The traditional  approach  includes  adding  a  promoter  (or inhibitor) to a catalyst. The second method developed in recent decades is surface treatment of catalysts using electron and neutron beams, gamma irradiation, UV irradiation, microwaves, and low-temperature plasma. Among  the  above  variants  of  plasma  treatment,  the use of glow discharge plasma and high-frequency electrodeless plasma in different gases (О2, Н2, and Ar) is of interest, since these types of plasma do not destroy a  catalyst’s  structure.  The  numerous  works  on  the problem of modifying catalysts are due to the considerable  importance  of  this  problem.  In  our  opinion, however, the mechanism behind the abovementioned procedures for modifying the state of a catalyst has yet to be investigated thoroughly, and it is therefore logical that investigations along these lines should continue. In  this  work,  we  present  a  new  interpretation  of  the mechanism behind the action of metal and nonmetal additives to a host metal varying its activity. We consider the induced surface nonuniformity that emerges during the adsorption of a small amount of adsorbate on metals and semiconductor oxides, expressed in a new equation of the adsorption isotherm that differs from the Henry equation. The variations in the surface state of metallic and oxide catalysts that occur under the effect of plasmachemical treatment are described and evaluated.

This model is based on the so-called jelly approximation  (Fig.  1),  according  to  which  the  positive charge  is  uniformly  distributed  over  the  metal  bulk, while electron density (ne) emerges from the surface (х0 is the position of the center of gravity of the surface electron  charge,  Fig.  1a) [3].  The  two-dimensional electron  gas  consists  of  adsorbed  particles  and  electrons  that  interact  with  them  (Fig.  1b).  We  use  the equation for the Gibbs adsorption isotherm, in which two-dimensional pressure is expressed through a virial equation of state in an approximation to the second virial  coefficient  B(T).  The  interaction  shown  in Fig. 1b is described by the formula.

The  third  term,  which  is  associated  with  electron– adsorbate particle interaction, is the most important: хе  and  ха  are  the  molar  fractions  of  electrons  and adsorbate  particles.  The  first  term  is  negligible,  and the second can be ignored if the coverage of the surface does not exceed 10–15%. For a two-dimensional gas, where N is the Avogadro number.

The first term in (3) describes the induction interaction; the second, the Coulomb interaction between an electron and an adsorbed particle. If the particle has no charge zeffe or is positively charged, Bea < 0; if the effective  charge  is  negative  and  |zeff|  >  α/2r,  Bea  >  0.

Here, α is the polarizability of the adsorbate particle. Using  these  expressions,  we  can  derive  the  dependence  of  surface  electron  density  ne  for  the  surface coverage by modifying adsorbate θМ, where Y = −(Bea/Bee)nat, nat is the surface density of metal atoms, Bee = const, and ne0 is the electron density  before  introducing  the  modifier.  Calculations show that depending on the combination of parameters α, r, and zeff at small θМ, the magnitude of ne can vary by several tens of percents [1, 2]. The schematic diagram in Fig. 1c shows the variation in ne, depending on the sign of the modifier’s charge; the range of variation in ne–L was studied by Hoffman in [4] via PMX and the Tomas–Fermi method. According to the theory developed in [5], the heat of physical adsorption should rise as the electron density increases. After the transition  to  two-dimensional  electron  density,  the corresponding formula has the form [2] Q = k1n3/4/(k2 + k1n3/4). 

As catalysts and adsorbents, the authors of [4, 7– 13]  used  Rh,  Ir,  Ni,  and  Ar;  island  metal  films; ultradispersed  powders  (UDPs),  and  bulk  metals deposited on Sibunit and silica gel. Ethylene pyrolysis products  (EPPs),  oxygen,  sulfur,  potassium,  silver, and REEs were used as modifiers. Their results coincided with the model described above. Let us consider some examples: Figure 2 shows adsorption isotherms of CO on an island film of rhodium Fig. 2, curve 1 and a rhodium film containing copper Fig. 2, curve 2 [7].

The  electron  work  function  after  the  deposition  of copper on rhodium fell by Δφ = φ0 – φ = 0.04 eV [8], demonstrating  the  positive  charge  of  Cu  clusters  in contact  with  Rh.  The  increase  in  the  amount  of adsorbed CO agrees with model variant 1c in Fig. 1. The authors of [9] studied the interaction between gaseous  CO  and  adsorbed  oxygen  on  a  silver  film;  the work function increased after 0.01% of the Ag surface was covered with pyrocarbon, and was accompanied by an abrupt drop in the reaction rate. This effect was due to reductions in the absorption potential and the amount of adsorbed oxygen Oads at the limiting stage of  reaction  COgas  +  Oads  →  [COOZ].  It  also  corresponds  to  the  theoretical  model.  The  authors  of  [4] investigated the methanation reaction of CO on nickel UDP.

Potassium (θМ = 0.1) and S2− ions (θM = 0.2) were used as modifiers. It can be seen from Fig. 3 that the reaction rate rises in the presence of K+ and falls in the case  of  S2−.  Analysis  of  the  reaction  mechanism showed  that  activation  energy  Еz  at  limiting  stage COZ + 2HZ → CZ + H2O + 2Z (k3) fell from 11.0 to 6.6 kJ/mol due to an increase in adsorbate–metal binding energies QCO and QH, since Еz = Е – QCO – QH, while constant k3 was reduced by approximately 60 times. The activation energy rose to 15.4 kJ/mol in the  presence  of  sulfur,  due  to  a  reduction  in  the adsorption heat of CO and H, while constant k3 fell by 65%. The effect sulfur and potassium had on the magnitude of k3 was confirmed by the results from calculating the adsorption of H and CO atoms on a nickel cluster by means of PMX, though the objects in these calculations were localized electrons rather than electron  gas.  In  this  reaction,  the  variation  in  kinetic parameters was also associated with the changes in the heat  of  adsorption  of  intermediate  products  due  to variations in the surface electron density in the presence of modifiers.

The  authors  of  [3,  6]  derived  a  formula  for chemisorption on metals using the density functional method  in  the  jelly  approximation. 

According to theory, х0 = f(ne) depends on the electron  density;  the  variation  in  ne  upon  introducing modifiers  (e.g.,  EPPs)  varies  the  magnitude  of  the center of gravity on the surface x0 and allows us to calculate the variations in energy E at specified positions of charge q – x1. Such calculations for the Kr/Pt system showed that the increase in E does not exceed 6%. The  experimental  values  of  the  activation  energy  of desorption, which virtually coincides with E, and its rise  for  systems  N2/Pd  and  O/Ag,  were  10–40%.  It seems likely that this difference was due to the presence of hydrogen in the modifier and the re-evaluation of the role of mobile electrons relative to localized ones [2, 14].

The variation in the electron state of the part of a metal surface free of adsorbate is usually not considered  in  the  Henry  region  at  low  coverages  when describing reversible adsorption. According to the theoretical model, however, the first adsorbed molecule changes  the  surface’s  electron  density  (Fig.  1).  The adsorption potential of the free part of the surface varies as the number of adsorbate molecules increases. If adsorbate particles are neutral, charged positively, or have a weak negative charge, the adsorption potential will rise; if the negative charge is considerable, it will fall. Quantity θ in this case denotes surface coverage with an adsorbate rather than with a modifier. Adsorption will therefore not be described by the Henry equation  but  will  occur  in  patches  induced  by  adsorbate particles. The authors of [15, 16] derived the equation of the adsorption isotherm for low coverage of a metal surface using formulas (4) and (5) and replacing θ with equilibrium adsorbate pressure p, where entropy term А ~ exp(ΔS0/RT) is independent of θ and coefficient.

Multiplier С1 > 0 includes constant parameters that characterize the properties of metal and adsorbate particles, so the shape of the adsorption isotherm is determined  by  the  sign  of  virial  coefficient  Bea,  which  in turn depends on the polarization and Coulomb contributions  to  the  interaction  potential  of  a  delocalized electron  and  adsorbate  particle  φ.  The  isotherm  is convex relative to axis θ when Веа > 0 and convex when Веа < 0. If D → 0 (i.e., we can ignore the above interaction), expression (7) becomes the Henry equation. In some cases, experimental isotherms are described by Eq. (7): Ar on Pd and Ag films (77 K) [16], Kr on the  Cu  powder  (77  K)  [17],  Kr  on  the  Fe  powder (77 K) [18] (Fig. 4).

Adsorption  isotherms  of  nitrogen  at  77  K  and helium at 169 K, which are also described by Eq. (7), were derived for graphitized ash, the surface of which contains mobile electrons [19].

The authors of [16] confirmed the occurrence of induced adsorption on the surface of semiconductors, since  they  also  have  mobile  surface  electrons.  The sense of virial coefficient Bea is retained in Eq. (7), so adsorption  isotherms  on  semiconductors  can  be described  by  Eq.  (7),  as  can  metals.  Figure  5  shows adsorption isotherms for semiconductor oxides, notably СО2 on Т2О5 [16], CO on ZnO [20], and isopropanol on NiO [21]. From the positive slopes in the coordinates of the linear form of Eq. (7), when D > 0, it follows from formulas (2), (3), and (8) that adsorbate particles have a positive charge; with a negative slope, the charge of adsorbed particles is negative.

The effect of promoters was verified by the example of widely-used cerium, added in the form of chloride to the salt of host metal at the stage of catalyst synthesis.  The  authors  of  [22]  observed  an  increase  in  the reaction rate constant of the dehydrogenation of isopropanol by a factor of ~4 (500 K) on (Ni 2 wt % + 0.2 wt % Ce)/SiO2 catalyst, compared to the same catalyst  containing  no  Ce.  The  activation  energy  grew from 28.6 to 59.2 kJ/mol in the presence of Ce, while the logarithm of preexponential factor lnk0 rose from 5.32 to 14.0. After introducing the cerium, the reaction thus proceeded on less active centers, the number of which  grew.  The  results  from  XPES  studies  showed that the Ni 2p3/2 content in the surface layer fell from 2.04 to 1.25 at %, while the content of C1s carbon rose from 4.08 to 8.0 at %. These data can be explained by the carbon being incorporated into numerous centers of low activity. A similar increase in activity due to the formation  of  numerous  low-active  centers  after  the introduction  of  cerium  was  observed  in  comparing catalysts Cu 5 wt %/SiO2 and (Cu 5 wt % + 0.2 wt % Ce)/SiO2 [23]. It was established via XRD that copper particles with diameters of 22 nm down to the X-ray amorphous state were dispersed after the introduction of cerium [24]. We may assume that cerium electrons are displaced to the host metal when forming active centers  during  contact  between  cerium  atoms  and atoms of host metal, since the ionization potential of Ce (5.47 eV) is lower than that of Co (7.87 eV) and Cu (7.72 eV) [47].

Data on the effect of the different types of plasma formed in gas discharges on the surfaces of solids were presented in [25]. The bombardment of a surface with ions, electrons, and excited neutral particles is accompanied by the desorption of impurities adsorbed on the surface, variation in surface composition, and the formation  of  structural  defects.  When  applied  to  the problems  of  catalysis,  low-temperature  glow-discharge plasma in hydrogen, oxygen, argon, and other gases is of special interest.

Preferential features of such plasma were discussed in [26]. These are low pressures and temperatures of plasma-forming gases and rather high concentrations of active particles. The effect of this type of plasma is apparent in the ability to synthesize catalysts, regenerate  and  raise  catalytic  activity,  and  vary  selectivity. High-frequency  plasma  is  based  on  electromagnetic induction, and its effect on the surface of solid is similar to that of glow-discharge plasma.

At  present,  numerous  investigations  of  catalytic processes have been performed in which plasmachemical treatments of metallic, oxide, and zeolite systems were  used.  Let  us  consider  the  results  from  some  of these  investigations.  The  authors  of  [27]  established that the faujasite catalyst of the alkylation of isobutane by butenes, regenerated and modified by oxygen glowdischarge plasma, had enhanced activity and stability relative to their initial and thermally treated samples. The authors of [28] observed an amorphous phase of iron oxide with conservation of the carrier structure in studying the effect O2 and Ar plasmas have on the catalyst of CO hydration with α-Fe2O3/TsVM (highly silica zeolite) composition. The authors of [29, 30] prepared the same catalyst in glow-discharge plasma in O2 and Ar; Fe(NO3)3 decomposed completely, and it was established that 80–90% of the iron oxide particles were in an amorphous ultradispersed state inside the zeolite channels while 10–20% were in a microcrystalline  state  on  the  surface.  The  activity  of  such catalysts in the Fischer–Tropsch synthesis was higher by  an  order  of  magnitude,  while  the  selectivity  with respect to C2-C4 was higher by a factor of 1.6 than for catalyst prepared by calcining in air. Treatment with oxygen plasma enhanced the catalyst’s activity, selectivity, and operational stability.

The authors of [12] investigated the dehydrogenation reaction of isopropanol on copper–rhenium catalysts  deposited  on  Sibunit;  the  Cu  content  was 2 wt %,  while  that  of  Re  varied  from  0.25  wt  %  to 2 wt %. Treatment with glow-discharge plasma in O2 was combined with thermal treatment and reduction in  hydrogen.  The  maximum  increase  in  activity  was attained using a combination of plasma treatment with subsequent treatment in hydrogen; this was explained by the formation of CuxRey clusters, and by H atoms being incorporated into active centers. Investigation of the  same  reaction  on  massive  nickel  (foam  nickel) showed that the reaction rate after sample treatment in high-frequency plasma in hydrogen (HF-H2) rose by an order of magnitude, and an even larger increase in the  reaction  rate  was  observed  after  glow-discharge oxygen plasma treatment [31].

The authors of [32, 33] established that using different types of glow-discharge plasma alters the number of the Brønsted and Lewis centers of oxides, disperses  metal,  and  promotes  coke  formation.  The effective  regeneration  of  the  Pd/TiO2  catalyst  with glow-discharge  oxygen  plasma  was  achieved  in  [34]. This catalyst is used in the dehydrochlorination reaction of chlorinated hydrocarbons.

It follows from the above examples of using plasma in heterogeneous catalysis that different surface treatments can considerably alter its state, so special investigations of these variations are of great interest.

These techniques were used in studying dehydrogenation  of  the  cyclohexane  of  platinum  1.0  wt  % Pt/SiO2  [35]  and  copper–platinum  (1  wt  %  Pt  + 0.15 wt % Cu)/SiO2 catalysts [36]. A counterclockwise temperature  hysteresis  caused  by  the  formation  of active carbon was observed on the platinum catalyst in a range of 300–600 K. After the catalyst was treated with HF-H2 plasma, its activity rose by a factor of 2– 3,  while  after  treatment  with  Ar  glow  discharge plasma, it fell abruptly. Figure 6 shows the decomposition of the photoelectron spectrum of Pt 4f into components, from which the presence of neutral particles 0Pt m  particles can be seen. The fraction of metal in the surface layer was reduced because of an increase in the fraction of carbon, some of  which  was  incorporated  into  active  centers.  The fraction  of  metal  in  the  surface  layer  fell,  due  to  an increase in the fraction of carbon in the composition of active centers. The increase in activity was associated with the reaction proceeding on numerous low  particles  (Eact  = activity  centers  localized  on  138.2 kJ/mol) and predominating after treatment with HF-Н2 plasma. These centers were blocked by more of the carbon after argon plasma treatment, and the reaction proceeded on innumerable highly active centers (Еact = 33.8 kJ/mol) associated with   particles. The kinetic parameters of the reaction and the composition of the surface layer of the copper–platinum catalyst  before  and  after  plasmachemical treatments are compared in Table 1. The fraction of neutral platinum is close to 0.5.

The activity of copper–platinum catalyst is higher than that of platinum catalyst; the variations in activity under the effect of treatments in O2 and Ar plasma are due to variations in the activation energy and preexponential factor. This can be explained by an increase in the fraction of active carbon in neutral and positively charged  platinum  particles,  and  by  the  formation  of centers with increased activity due to the adsorption of Сu+δ on   particles. The authors of [37] studied the properties  of  64  wt  %  Pt/SiO2  catalyst  by  means  of XRD.  It  turned  out  that  HF-H2  plasma  does  not change  the  average  diameter  of  platinum  particles (9.7 nm)  but  alters  their  shape  and  expands  the  size distribution,  while  glow-discharge  oxygen  plasma causes  partial  dispersion  and  reduces  the  average diameter  by  ~15%.  The  change  in  particle  shape apparently leads to its reconstruction with the formation of numerous low-activity centers, which abruptly raises the total activity. The reduction in activity in the case of oxygen plasma is associated with an increase in the number of active centers per area unit and a rise in the activation energy. Use of XPES to assess the role of cerium added to nickel catalyst was described in [22]. The authors of [23] found via XRD that an increase in the activity of 5 wt % Cu/SiO2 catalyst in the reaction of  isopropanol  dehydrogenation  after  treatments  in glow-discharge plasma in O2, H2, and Ar is accompanied by an increase in the diameter of copper particles by a factor of ~1.5 and by a doubling of microstresses in crystals when using argon plasma; this can result in the formation of structural defects that contribute to the catalytic activity. The authors of [38] investigated the  effect  of  treating  5  wt  %  Co/SiO2  catalyst  with glow-discharge  plasma  in  O2  and  Ar,  with  HF-H2 plasma, and the effect cerium and potassium additives have  on  its  activity  in  the  reaction  of  isopropanol dehydrogenation. An increase in activity was observed in  all  cases.  Figure 7  shows  the  temperature  dependence of the yield of acetone on the initial catalyst; the rise in activity was more abrupt after introducing Ce. 

According to the XPES data, the Co 2p content in the surface layer was 0.71 at % and it fell after all plasmachemical  treatments;  the  bonding  energy  of Со 2р3/2 of 782.5 eV corresponded to the Со2+ ion and remained unchanged after all treatments. After catalyst treatment with O2 plasma, the content of carbon C 1s grew by a factor of 2.2, and by a factor of 1.7 after treatment with Ar plasma. Figure 8 shows the decomposition of the spectrum of C1s into its components; it can be seen that the intensity of the peak at 282.2 eV more than doubles after treating the catalyst with O2 plasma,  and  the  intensity  of  this  peak  changes  in  a similar manner after argon plasma treatment. The correlation of this variation with the increase in catalytic activity indicates that this form of carbon (positively polarized graphite С–С, С–Нх) is incorporated into active centers. The introduction of Ce into the catalyst is  accompanied  by  the  emergence  of  a  new  form  of 279.7-eV carbon that is negatively polarized. It is possible that this form is incorporated into active centers as well. Such parameters of the Co crystal lattice as а, с, dhkl, and v0; average particle diameter D002 and D001; and microstresses ε were determined via XRD. After catalyst  treatment  with  HF-H2  plasma,  the  lattice parameters were virtually the same, while the magnitude of ε fell; diameter D002 grew by 26 Å and D101 by 32 Å, indicating variations in particle shape. A much greater  variation  in  the  shape  of  particles  occurred upon introducing cerium into the catalyst at its synthesis stage (ΔD = 706 Å), while microstresses were doubled and the number of particles per 1 g of metal rose by a factor of 2.6, indicating the dispersal of particles in the presence of cerium. These effects could lead to the emergence of new catalysis centers containing  the  form  of  carbon  with  a  bonding  energy  of 279.7 eV found via XPES.

nated,  while  dehydration  centers  were  deactivated. The  authors  of  [41]  investigated  the  effect  glow  discharge plasma in O2 has on the activity of ternary zirconium  composition Na3ZrM(PO4)3,  where  М  =  Zn,  Co,  and  Cu;  these join the anion part of the molecule in dehydrogenation  and  dehydration  reactions  of  butanol-2.  The XPES  data  showed  the  composition  of  the  surface layer of the catalysts differed from the stoichiometric composition  and  changed  after  plasma  treatment: copper  was  reduced  to  Cu+  and  its  oxides  formed, while  the  surface  of  the  cobalt  and  zinc  sample  was loosened.

This characteristic was investigated in [39]. Semiconductor oxides ZnO and NiO were used as catalysts in the reaction of isopropanol dehydrogenation performed in the range of 530 to 640 K. In both cases, activity  increased  under  the  effect  of  glow  discharge plasma in O2 and high-frequency plasma in argon. The acetone yield on ZnO depended linearly on the total acidity  of  the  surface,  indicating  that  acidic  centers were  catalysis  centers.  No  such  dependence  was observed  for  NiO.  The  authors  of  [40]  investigated complex phosphate Li3Fe2(PO4) of the LISICON type that was capable of ion conduction. The desorption of butanol-2 from the surface of this catalyst was accompanied by dehydration and dehydrogenation with the formation of butene and methyl ethyl ketone. A similar process  was  observed  when  the  vapor  alcohol  phase came  into  contact  with  the  lowered  butene  yield; according to the XPES data, the surface concentration of phosphate groups was more than double the stoichiometric  concentration  and  rose  after  treatment with glow discharge plasma in H2.

Plasma treatment increased the strength of butanol bonds with the catalyst and substantially affected its selectivity:  the  dehydrogenation  reaction  predominated,  while  dehydration  centers  were  deactivated. The  authors  of  [41]  investigated  the  effect  glow  discharge plasma in O2 has on the activity of ternary zirconium  composition Na3ZrM(PO4)3,  where  М  =  Zn,  Co,  and  Cu;  these join the anion part of the molecule in dehydrogenation  and  dehydration  reactions  of  butanol-2.  The XPES  data  showed  the  composition  of  the  surface layer of the catalysts differed from the stoichiometric composition  and  changed  after  plasma  treatment: copper  was  reduced  to  Cu+  and  its  oxides  formed, while  the  surface  of  the  cobalt  and  zinc  sample  was loosened.

Dehydration (olefin formation) and dehydrogenation  (methyl  ethyl  ketone  formation)  reactions occurred  on  initial  samples  of  all  catalysts.  After plasma treatment, the dehydration centers were deactivated, while the methyl ethyl ketone yield grew by 3– 8  times  and  the  energy  of  alcohol  bonding  with  the catalyst fell. The activity in the dehydrogenation reaction was due to the ability of modifier ions to reduce, as  was  shown  by  the  correlation  between  the  ketone yield and the standard reduction potential (Fig. 9). In contrast, thermal treatment enhanced the dehydrating ability  of  catalysts  and  preserved  their  weak  activity with respect to the alcohol dehydrogenation reaction. The  authors  of  [42]  investigated  the  effect  treating Ni05Zr2(PO4)3 catalyst with high-frequency discharge plasma at 40.68 MHz in hydrogen (HF-H2) and argon (HF-Ar) had on the dehydration and dehydrogenation reactions  of  isobutanol.  It  was  established  that  both reactions occurred on the initial catalyst before catalyst  plasma  treatments  in  the  temperature  range  of 473–673  K,  but  dehydration  was  the  predominant process.

Total conversion after catalyst treatments in both plasmas grew by a factor of ~2.5; the catalytic activity rose with respect to both reactions irrespective of the type of plasma. There was a rise in the activity of the dehydration reaction due to an increase in the preexponential factor (the number of active centers) when the activation energy was raised ~20 kJ/mol, while the increased activity of the dehydrogenation reaction was associated  with  a  reduction  in  the  activation  energy. High  selectivity  with  respect  to  olefin  was  retained after  plasmachemical  treatments.  The  adsorption  of CO2 on the initial sample and sample treated with HFH2 plasma grew with temperature in the range of 243– 273  K.  The  endotherm  for  the  initial  sample  was 12 kJ/mol; after treatment with HF-H2 plasma, it was 14  kJ/mol,  and  the  activated  adsorption  can  in  this case be explained by the contribution from the diffusion of CO2 molecules to the conduction channels of nickel–zirconium  phosphate.  Treatment  with  HFargon  plasma  was  accompanied  by  variation  in  the sample structure, which led to the regular rise in the amount of adsorbate with falling temperature due to the broadening of the conduction channels.

The authors of [43] investigated the effect of glow discharge plasma in O2 and H2 in the butanol dehydrogenation  type  of  oxide: Mn+/ZrO2, where Мn+ = Ag+, Cu2+, Au3+; these were fabricated by depositing oxides of the corresponding metals on zirconium oxide. The surface acidity rose in the order Au < Ag < Cu, which agreed with standard reduction  potentials  E0.  Oxygen  plasma  raised  the activity  of  all  samples,  and  the  partial  reduction  of modifier ions to single-charge values was observed. A linear relationship between the activation energy of the dehydrogenation  reaction  and  the  radii  of  singlecharged  ions,  and  associated  with  the  substrate adsorption  on  active  center  Мn+,  was  established. Hydrogen  plasma  had  no  appreciable  effect  on  the activity of the catalysts but improved the activity of the ZrO2 carrier severalfold due to a decrease in the activation  energy  and  an  increase  in  the  preexponential factor.

Adsorption is one stage of heterogeneous catalysis, so  the  effect  modifying  treatments  of  metallic  and oxide catalysts with plasma have on their adsorption characteristics is of separate interest. The authors of [44]  investigated  the  adsorption  of  isopropanol  on samples with a composition of 20 wt % Cu/SiO2. The amount of adsorbate in the range of 273–303 K was divided into strong (not removed by pumping at the experimental temperature) and reversible. Reversible adsorption grew regularly as the temperature fell; the isosteric heats and entropies of adsorption for samples subjected  to  preliminary  treatment  with  glow  discharge plasma in O2, H2, and Ar were calculated from an  analysis  of  isotherms  of  reversible  adsorption. These parameters are presented in Table 2.

All types of plasma raise the heat of adsorption substantially, while the rise in entropy reinforces the limits of adsorbate mobility. All isotherms were described by equation  of  induced  adsorption  (7);  diffusivities  D were  determined  using  its  linear  form.  D  >  0  before reaching equilibrium pressure р = 2 × 10−4 mm Hg and rose after plasmachemical treatments. However, D < 0 at higher pressures, meaning that the adsorbate had a positive charge at low pressures and a negative charge at  higher  ones.  The  authors  of  [45]  investigated  the effect plasmachemical treatments had on the adsorption of isopropanol on Ni 15 wt %/SiO2 catalyst, along with the effect of adding cerium to this catalyst. Oxygen and argon plasma had almost no effect on quantities Qst and ΔS0, while HF-Н2 plasma and Ce additive raised these parameters by a factor of ~1.5. As in the case  of  our  copper  catalyst,  the  isotherms  were described by the equation of induced adsorption, and adsorbed molecules were found in two charged forms, positive and negative.

The  effect  the  plasmachemical  treatment  of  NiO and ZnO oxides (which are capable of semiconductor conduction) have on the adsorption of CO and isopropanol  were  studied  in  [21]  and  [48],  respectively. Adsorption isotherms of CO on ZnO in the range of 233–313 K were described by the equation of induced adsorption  (Fig.  5b),  and  adsorbate  molecules  were found in two positively charged forms. Surface treatment with glow discharge plasma in O2 led to the formation of additional adsorption centers. Isotherms of isopropanol in the range of 243–303 K on NiO were described  by  the  equation  of  induced  adsorption (Fig. 5c); the isosteric heat and entropy of adsorption fell after treatment with O2 glow discharge plasma and HF-argon plasma; the number of acidic centers was also reduced, indicating that acidic centers can act as adsorption centers along with other types of centers.

Variations in the catalytic activity and adsorption abilities of metals and semiconductors are associated with variations in the surface electron density of part of a metal or semiconductor surface that is free of a modifier adsorbate; i.e., it can be of collective, rather than purely local origin. This helps in selecting a promoter (inhibitor)  for  such  catalysts.  Plasmachemical  treatments of the surface of metal and semiconductor oxide catalysts,  and  of  complex  oxides  with  ion  electrical conductivity,  are  very  effective.  Glow-discharge plasma and high-frequency plasma in different gases normally enhance catalytic activity considerably and enable  us  to  control  selectivity.  These  features  of plasma action are associated with variations in a catalyst’s  surface  state,  especially  the  formation  of  new active centers that differ in elemental composition and depend on the emergence of structural defects.
