The conductivity of sodium super ionic conductor (NASICON, Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12, 0<x<3) materials was evaluated through alternating current impedance spectroscopy measurement, and NASICON-based amperometric sensors were developed using sodium nitrite and molybdenum oxide-doped NaNO2 electrode materials. These sensors were then used to measure NO2 concentration in the parts per billion level (125 to 1000 ppb) in an atmosphere containing 16 % oxygen. The current response signal was studied by varying the applied voltage from −150 to −400 mV for a range of MoO3 concentrations at 110, 130, 150, and 170 °C. It was found that the sensitivity, response time, and degree of linearity of the NO2 sensor signal were influenced by the applied voltage, working temperature, and level of MoO3 doping. On the basis of the results obtained, it is concluded that an applied voltage of −300 mV, temperature of 150 °C, and a 1 mol% MoO3-doped NaNO2 electrode represent the optimal test parameters for ppb-level NO2 detection.

Over the past decade, nitrogen oxide, primarily consisting of nitric oxide and nitrogen dioxide [1] sensors have been widely studied to measure the concentration of NOx in air (21 vol%O2) [2], or in automobile exhaust gas with only 5 vol% O2 [3], because NOx gasses are the main atmospheric pollutants that generate acid rain and photochemical smog [4]. In order to monitor the exact amount of NOx and develop a compact sensor structure, semiconductor gas sensors [5], based on materials such as zinc oxide (ZnO) [6], ortin oxide (SnO2) [7], in addition to solid electrolyte sensors based on yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) [8] and sodium (Na) super ionic conductor (NASICON) [9, 10], have all been investigated in depth within laboratory settings. Some of these sensors have even been employed in our daily life, such as the YSZ-based NOx sensor produced by Bosch in Germany and by NGK in Japan. However, these two companies’ products mainly focus on monitoring parts per million (ppm) concentrations of NO2, while failing to measuring the parts per billion (ppb) levels. For monitoring the lower concentration of NO2, NASICONbased amperometric solid electrolyte sensors [11] have been shown as advantageous. The compact NASICON-based sensor structure was first proposed by N. Miura in 1997 [12]. The performance of such sensors can be further improved through doping them with appropriate oxides, such as Pr6O11 [13] or WO3 [14]. Given many advanced applications of molybdenum oxide (MoO3) as catalysts and sensor [15], its use as a counter electrode dopant should also improve sensor performance.

In the field of medicine, gas sensors can play an important role in diagnosing some diseases by detecting certain gasses exhaled from the body. For example, the exhaled breath of patients with heavy asthma or chronic obstructive pneumonia can be identified from NO levels in the order of several hundreds of ppb [16–18]. Moreover, as NO molecules are extremely unstable and short-lived [19], converting to NO2 within seconds on exposure to an oxygen atmosphere, a NO2 signal can also provide an indication of health. In this paper, the sensor structure proposed by N. Miura [12] is used as basis for expanding the use of NO2 sensors in the medical field by improving the regularity of their response at ppb levels in a 16 vol% O2 environment. For this, MoO3-doped NaNO2 is adopted as the counter electrode material, and the influence of applied voltage, working temperature, and MoO3 doping level on the NO2 response is herein discussed.

For the preparation of the NASICON powder, analyticalgrade sodium carbonate (Na2CO3), silicon dioxide (SiO2), zirconium oxide (ZrO2), and ammonium dihydrogen phosphate (NH4H2PO4) powders with a micron-scale particle size were commercially sourced from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Analytical-grade anhydrous ethanol was also purchased for use as a milling medium. After all powders were weighed according to the mole ratio of Na3Zr2Si2PO12, the raw materials were mixed together by ball milling for 24 h, dried at 80 °C for 12 h, and then calcined in air at 1125 °C for 12 h with a ramp rate of 2 °C/min. The resultant material was then ground in a mortar to identify the NASICON phase, which was then further milled for 24 h with zirconia balls in anhydrous ethanol to obtain a fine powder. Once dried, this powder was weighed and cold isostatic pressed at 160 MPa into 12-mm diameter uniaxial pellets. Through sintering these pellets at 1175 °C for 12 h with a heating rate of 1 °C/min, dense NASICON disks were finally obtained.

The calcined powder was first verified at room temperature using a DX-2700 X-ray diffractometer (Dandong Fangyuan Instrument Co., Ltd). Then, the NASICON disk was sintered to attain a dense ceramic after identifying the NASICON phase. For measuring the electrical properties of the prepared NASICON, we used an alternating current (AC) impedance spectroscopy measurement (LCR-8110G, Good Will Instrument Co., Ltd) to analyze conductivity with the parameters set as follows: the frequency range was 20 Hz to 6×105 Hz, and the applied voltage was 10 mV. Moreover, after finishing the sensor fabrication, the surface microstructure of the counter electrode materials needed to be observed by scanning electron microscopy (TM 3000, Hitachi High-Tech in Japan). Line scanning EDS technology (SwiftED 3000, Hitachi High-Tech in Japan) was also used to analyze any change in elemental composition.

According to Fig. 1, the NASICON pellets were screenprinted with a platinum paste (Pt 7850, Sino-platinum Metals Co., Ltd) to form three electrodes, including the working electrode, the counter electrode, and the reference electrode with platinum wire adhered to each electrode using the same platinum paste, followed by heating this new system at 800 °C for 2 h. Then inorganic binder (HR-8767, Huirui Electronic Co., Ltd) was used to seal the platinum on the reference electrode to avoid interference from the surrounding atmosphere during NO2 gas measurement. At the same time, different electrode materials (i.e., the NaNO2 and the 1 or 5 wt% MoO3-doped NaNO2) were spread on the counter electrode with 1-mm thickness by using a writing brush, covering the platinum, followed by drying the sensor at 80 °C for 0.5 h and calcining in air at 150 °C for 0.5 h. After this, the sensor sample was successfully fabricated, and would be used to detect NO2 concentrations at specific elevated temperatures. In this paper, we focused on studying the sensor response signal at 110, 130, 150, and 170 °C.

The NO2 sensors were tested at varying NO2 concentrations in the range of 125 to 1000 ppb using different electrode materials (NaNO2 and 1 or 5 wt% MoO3-doped NaNO2) as the counter electrode with an applied voltage. The measurements were performed in a gas-flow apparatus equipped with a heating furnace. The sensor measurement temperature was varied at 110, 130, 150, and 170 °C. The gas flow indicator (CS200, Beijing Sevenstar Electronics Co., Ltd) was used to control the gas flow rate at 100 mL/min level. The electrochemical workstation (CHI660D, Shanghai Chenghua Instrument Co., Ltd) shown in Fig. 1 was used to measure the current signal of the sensor when a voltage was applied between the reference electrode and working electrode. The three Pt wires of the sensor in Fig. 1a were used to connect it to the clamps of the electrochemical workstation instrument. The background gas was consistently maintained at 16 vol% O2 content, with the remaining gasses consisting of N2 and various NO2 concentrations in a dry atmosphere.

Figure 2 showed that a NASICON phase was successfully produced in this instance. Trace amounts of monoclinic ZrO2 existed in the sample, and these could be attributed to the volatilization of P and Na from the NASICON during calcining. This ZrO2 phase could reduce the sample’s conductivity, so we had to measure this parameter to determine whether the prepared NASICON disk could satisfy the solid electrolyte sensor’s requirements. The AC conductivity measurement was conducted at 100, 125, 150, and 175 °C, and their results were shown in Fig. 3. After fitting this data, the bulk resistance was initially attained, and then the AC electrical conductivity (σAC) was calculated using Eq. 1

Here, ρAC, R, L, and A represent the resistivity, resistance, thickness, and cross-sectional area of the test sample, respectively. In our experiment, the NASICON sample thickness was 2 mm with a 0.5-cm2 cross-sectional area.

Finally, the NASICON bulk conductivity was calcu−2 S/cm at lated as 1.43×10 −2 S/cm at 125 °C, 4.25×10 175 °C, respectively. It was clear that the conductivity of NASICON gradually rose with the temperature increase, because a higher temperature was propitious to the Na+ movement. As a result of this high conductivity value at elevated temperature, 110, 130, 150, and 170 °C were selected to determine the best working temperature for the NASICON solid electrolyte-based sensor.

According to Fig. 1, when an appropriate voltage is applied by the electrochemical workstation, the electrochemical reactions will occur on the electrodes as follows [12].

In a NO2 atmosphere, the NaNO2 on the counter electrode − decomposes to produce Na+, e , and NO2 when an appropriate voltage is applied between the reference electrode and working electrode; generated Na+ passes through the NASICON to arrive at the working electrode under the force of the applied electric field. The e generated, on the other hand, flows through the open circuit under the same electric field to reach the working electrode, with the electrochemical workstation recording the current from this movement. Finally, once both − the Na+ and e arrive at the working electrode, they interact with the surrounding NO2 to create electrochemical reactions. Thus, the recorded current provides a reflection of the degree of electrochemical reaction and therefore the concentration of NO2 in the atmosphere.


In section 3.1, the NASICON conductivity was found to reach −2 S/cm level within a temperature range of 100 to the 10 175 °C, making it necessary to study the effect of different working temperatures at different applied voltages. No steady signal was found at 170 °C, despite the increased conductivity of NASICON at this temperature, and the NaNO2 in the counter electrode was in such poor contact with the ceramic disk that it easily fell off. Working temperatures of 110, 130, and 150 °C were therefore compared to study the change in signal response. The applied voltage was varied from −150 to −400 mV to determine its effect on sensor performance; this range being selected on the basis that the transient signal could only reach a stable terraces within this applied voltage range, as demonstrated by the polarization curve in Fig. 4.

Figure 5 shows the transient response for NO2 at concentrations of 125 to 1000 ppb, as well as the response to a fixed concentration of 250 ppb to test reproducibility. The current response values for NO2 were attained by subtracting the baseline 16 vol% O2 response value, which remained constant despite the sensor also responding to O2. The value of the sensor’s response gradually increased with increasing NO2 concentration in Fig. 5a, while Fig. 5b showed evidence of good reproducibility in the way that the transient response current remained consistent at about 410 nA.

As shown in Fig. 6, the sensitivity (k) and the degree of linearity (R) of the sensor were both significantly influenced by the voltage applied at a given temperature. When the voltage was increased from −150 to −400 mV, the k value (the slope of the fitted straight line) gradually increased to a maximum sensitivity, but then decreased slightly. Figure 6c revealed that the highest sensitivity was obtained at 150 °C (S150°C=2.13), with other temperatures giving maximums of S130°C=1.77 (Fig. 6b) and S110°C=1.21 (Fig. 6a). At maximum sensitivity, the corresponding R values were also sufficiently large: R110°C = 98.8 % (Fig. 6a), R130°C = 96.5 % (Fig. 6b), and R150°C=99.3 % (Fig. 6c). It is evident from this that both the working temperature and applied voltage can influence the movement of Na+, gas diffusion, gas adsorption/desorption, and the consumption/production of NaNO2 that sensor performance can be affected by a range of factors. Generally speaking, a larger value of k and R means a better sensor. Given this, a working temperature of 150 °C and a −300 mVapplied voltage were selected as the ideal parameters for subsequent of NO2 concentration, as these gave the highest values of k (2.13) and R (99.3 %).

Based on the results presented in BEffects of working temperature and applied voltage on the sensor signal when using NaNO2 in the counter electrode,^ an applied voltage of −300 mV and temperature of 150 °C were used to explore the effect of MoO3 doping the NaNO2 electrode material on sensor performance. Of particular interest was the effect on response time and sensitivity, as MoO3 is a well-known catalyst.

The response time was acquired by taking the difference between the corresponding times at 10 and 90 % of the response value. In Fig. 7, we found that the response time was 130 s for NaNO2 at −300 mV. In contrast, the response times of the NaNO2 doped with 1 or 5 % MoO3 were 112 and 140 s, respectively. This indicated that the 1 % MoO3-doped NaNO2 reduced the response time, whereas excessive MoO3 doping was detrimental to the response time, because the response time could be influenced by the microstructure of the counter electrode materials. Figure 8 presents SEM images of the different counter electrode materials. It can be seen from this that although NaNO2 has very obvious grains and grain boundaries (Fig. 8a), these become less distinct with increasing MoO3 doping (Fig. 8b, c). Furthermore, MoO3 doping was found to reduce the size of the NaNO2 grains, with the NaNO2 + 1 % MoO3 material having the smallest grains. This reduction in grain size increases the three-phase interface area (i.e., the region containing NaNO2, Pt, and NASICON phases), thereby reducing the response time through increased movement of Na+ into the NASICON phase and collection of eby the Pt phase. In the case of NaNO2+5 % MoO3, although the grain size was reduced by doping, an intergrowth of NaNO2 and MoO3 grains reduced the three-phase interface area. These blurry clusters inhibited movement of Na+ into the NASICON phase, thereby slowing the rate of electrochemical reaction, and increasing the response time. Doping with MoO3 was also found to influence the k and R values of the sensor with Fig. 9 showing the gradual increase in sensitivity from 2.13 to 2.46 and 2.68 with increasing dopant concentration, while the degree of linearity decreased from 99.3 % to 98.3 % and 97.9 %. This change in the response time, sensitivity, and degree of linearity could be related to the microstructure of the counter electrode and/or the catalytic behavior of the MoO3. As a catalyst, MoO3 doping should improve sensitivity by accelerating NaNO2 decomposition, but as the degree of linearity could not be increased, this may be more affected by the material’s microstructure than its MoO3 dopant concentration.

In this study, we found that the microstructure of the counter electrode’s cross section showed some changes after 15 days of continuous measurement. The phenomenon was the appearance of a dark area between the Pt and NASICON phases. Figure 10 showed the change in elemental composition between NASICON and this dark area, as measured from an EDS line scan. We could find that there was a sudden increase in the Na and O content when moving from NASICON to the dark area, with an accompanying decrease in Zr, P, and Si. In our interpretation, when the sensor worked for a long time, Na+ ions from the decomposition of NaNO2 and O2− ions catalyzed by the Pt electrode from O2 in the atmosphere slowly moved into the NASICON’s skeleton structure, and the massive accumulation of Na and O elements caused a transformation of its structure, producing a new phase rich in Na and O that blocked the Na+ migration channels in NASICON and reduced the conductivity, and even prevented the movement of Na+ if the thickness of this new phase was sufficient. When the width of this dark area was larger, it was more detrimental to the sensor’s life. Preventing the formation of this new phase was therefore essential to improve sensor life, and could be achieved by preventing O2− getting into the NASICON structure. We tried to explore the effect of the MoO3-doped NaNO2 electrode material on the sensor life, and examined the width of this black area in the cross-section microstructure of the different counter electrode materials after NO2 testing for the same time (72 h), with the results shown in Fig. 11. In Fig. 11a, the thickness of the black region between the Pt and NASICON phases was approximately 2.5 μm for the NaNO2 electrode material, while the thickness of this decreased to about 800 nm after doping 1 % MoO3 into the NaNO2 (Fig. 11b). For the 5 % MoO3-doped NaNO2 electrode material, an approximate 2-μm-thick black area was attained (Fig. 11c). Therefore, the MoO3 doping reduced the size of this black area, improving the sensor life, in particular for the 1 % MoO3-doped NaNO2 sample, because the MoO3 altered the ability of Pt to transform O2 into O2-. With less O2− entering the NASICON, the inhibiting effect of the dark phase created from Na and O was greatly reduced.

NASICON materials were successfully obtained with conduc−2S/cm level within the temperature tivities reaching the 10 range of 100 to 175 °C. Using the NASICON obtained as the solid electrolyte in a sensor, a steady signal was attained from −150 to −400 mV, but different applied voltages influenced its sensitivity and degree of linearity. In light of this, −300 mV was deemed to be the optimal applied voltage, with an ideal working temperature being 150 °C. When using these parameters, MoO3 doping was found to change the microstructure of NaNO2, thereby affecting the sensor’s sensitivity, degree of linearity, and response time. The use of 1 % MoO3 doping was considered to give the best outcome, as it reduced the response time, raised the sensitivity with a sufficient degree of linearity, and improved the sensor life.
