The  all-solid-state  Li-air  battery  has  been  fabricated,  which  is  constructed  by  a 

lithium  foil  anode,  a  NASICON-type  solid  state  electrolyte  Li1+xAlyGe2-y(PO4)3  (LAGP)  and 

single-walled  carbon  nanotubes  (SWCNTs)/LAGP  nanoparticles  composite  as  air  electrode. Its 

electrochemical  performance  was  investigated  in  air  atmosphere.  Particularly,  this  battery 

exhibited a larger capacity about 2800 mAh g-1 for the first cycle while comparatively the battery 

with multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs)/LAGP as cathode had a capacity of only about 

1700  mAh  g-1.  Also,  the  battery  with  SWCNTs/LAGP  showed  improved  cycling  performance 

with  a  reversible  capacity  of  1000  mAh  g-1  at  a  current  density  of  200  mA  g-1.  Our  result 

demonstrated that the all-solid-state Li-air battery with SWCNTs/LAGP as cathode catalyst has a 

considerable potential for practical application. 

The Li-air battery has attracted worldwide attention due to its extremely high 

theoretical  energy  density,  according  to  the  reactions  of  lithium  peroxide’s  forming  and  de-

forming (2Li + O2 ↔ Li2O2). After the pioneering work of the Li-air battery  in 1996, intensive 

works are mainly focused on the research of non-aqueous Li-air batteries with a typical structure 

of  Li  anode|organic  electrolyte|air  electrode.1  However,  there  remain  many  problems  related to 

non-aqueous  Li-air  batteries,  among  which  some  arise  from  the  application  of  organic  liquid 

electrolytes.2-5 For example, the decomposition of alkyl carbonate electrolyte during discharging 

resulted  in  the  formation  of  undesirable  reactants,  which  accumulated  on  the  surface  of  the 

cathode  and  finally  resulted  in  the  deterioration  of  battery  performance.3  Besides,  this  kind  of 

battery  has  safety  hazards  owing  to  the  flammable  and  toxic  properties  of  liquid  organic 

electrolyte.  In order to  solve  this  problem,  inorganic  solid  state  electrolytes  are  introduced  into 

the structure of Li-air batteries.6-11 Substituting inorganic electrolyte for organic solid electrolytes 

can  avoid  side  reactions  caused  by  organic  electrolytes  during  electrochemical  process. 

Moreover, inorganic solid electrolytes can effectively protect Li metal anode from CO2 and H2O 

in  ambient  air,  and  non-volatile  solid  electrolytes  seems  more  applicable  to  long-term  use  than 

liquid electrolyte. 

Our previous work reported an all-solid-state Li-air battery with the structure of Li metal anode, 


a double-layer electrolyte containing a polymer electrolyte and an inorganic solid electrolyte, and 

an  air  electrode  composed  of  MWCNTs  and  solid  electrolyte  particles.10  In  this  work,  the 

polymer membrane was used to avoid LATP directly contacting with Li metal, in order to protect 

Ti4+  from  being  reduced  to  Ti2+  by  lithium.  However,  the  additional  polymer  electrolyte 

introduced  interfacial  resistances  between  Li/polymer  and  polymer/LATP  and  it  also  increased 

the  total  resistance  of  the  cell.  Thus,  further  optimized  designs  for  the  all-solid-state  Li-air 

battery  abandon  the  buffering  polymer  membrane,  and,  instead,  an  inorganic  solid  state 

electrolyte  is  directly  attached  to  Li  metal.11  Here,  the  inorganic  solid  state  electrolyte  is 

supposed  to  be  chemically  stable  against  the  reaction  with  Li  metal.  NASICON-type  material 

lithium  aluminium  germanium  phosphate 

(Li1+xAlyGe2-y(PO4)3,  LAGP)  has 

received 

considerable attention as  solid state electrolytes for secondary lithium batteries.12-14 In the LAGP 

ceramics, Al3+ substitution  for Ge4+ introduces additional  lithium  in the structure and  improves 

the  total  lithium  ion  conductivities.  In  addition,  the  LAGP  ceramics  exhibit  good  and  relative 

stability  in  air  atmosphere  and  in  contact  with  Li  metal,  respectively.  Moreover,  LAGP  has  an 

electrochemical window as high as 6 V (vs. Li/Li+).14 Based on the high lithium ion conductivity, 

wide  electrochemical  window,  good  chemical  stability  in  air  and  relative  chemical  stability 

against lithium, LAGP  ceramics are very applicable to  fabricating all-solid-state Li-air batteries 

with superior electrochemical performance. From this point of view, another all-solid-state Li-air 

battery  with  the  structure  of  Li  anode,  LAGP  solid  state  electrolyte  and  composite  cathode 

consisting  of  MWCNTs  and  LAGP  nanoparticles  was  fabricated.  This  battery  showed  relative 

small  resistance  and  much 

improved  electrochemical  performance  compared  with  the 

aforementioned  battery.  In  this  paper,  we  constructed  a  composite  air  electrode  composed  of 

single-walled  carbon  nanotubes  and  LAGP  nanoparticles.  SWCNTs  are  known  as  good 


electronic conductors with  large surface area (See Supporting Information  Figure S1) and have 

been  investigated  as  cathode  catalysts  in  non-aqueous  Li-air  batteries.15-19  Besides,  it  has  been 

reported that SWCNTs are prone to adsorb oxygen and hence have higher electrical conductance, 

which  may  improve the electrochemical performance of the cell.16 Moreover, SWCNTs  have  a 

better  crystallinity  and  less  defects  compared  with  MWCNTs,  which  can  reduce  side  reactions 

during electrochemical processes. As a result, SWCNTs are supposed to be properly mixed with 

LAGP nanoparticles, in order to provide mixing channels for electrons and lithium ions.7-11  



The  all-solid-state  Li-air  battery  was  assembled  by  following  procedures.  The  NASICON-type 

lithium  ion  conductor  Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3  was  synthesized  by  a  conventional  solid-state 

reaction.11  The  powder  of  LAGP  was  pressed  into  a  pellet  with  a  diameter  of  19  mm  and  a 

thickness of about 1.0 mm. This pellet was sintered at 900 ℃ for 6 h. The calculated total lithium 

ionic  conductivity  of  the  sintered  LAGP  ceramic  was  about  2×10-4  S/cm  (See  Supporting 

Information  Figure  S2).  The  air  electrode  was  constructed on one  side  of  the  pellet  as  follows. 

SWCNTs and LAGP nanoparticles with a weight ratio of 10 to 100 were high-energy ball milled 

at  a rate of  700  rpm  for  2  h,  and  then  dispersed  into  solution  composed  of  5%  polyvinylidene 

fluoride  and  95%  N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone.  The  solution  was  uniformly  painted  on  one  side  of 

LAGP  pellet  and  heated  at  700  ℃  for  10  min  in  Ar  atmosphere.  The  mass  of the  air  electrode 

was about  0.5 mg. An Al  mesh was used as the current  collector. The lithium  metal was  firstly 

melted  and  then  thermally  adhered  with  a  Cu  current  collector  to  the  other  side  of  the  LAGP 

ceramic  pellet  as  the  anode.  Scheme  1  presents  a  schematic  diagram  of  the  proposed  all-solid-

state  Li-air  battery.  In  the  battery,  the  composite  electrode  is  exposed  to  air  atmosphere,  while 

other parts of the battery are actually sealed by a plastic film to avoid the influence of air. In this 

work, the electrochemical performance of the all-solid-state Li-air battery was all investigated in air.


Figure 1 shows the TEM pattern of SWCNTs incorporated with LAGP nanoparticles in the range 

of  100   200  nm.  It  is  revealed  that  the  SWCNTs  are  distributed  closely  on  the  LAGP  particle 

surface. The solid electrolyte LAGP  was confirmed  by the Rietveld refinement of XRD pattern 

in  Figure  S3.  The  diffraction  peaks  corresponding  to  LiGe2(PO4)3  phase  were  observed,  which 

can be attributed to the similar ionic radii of Ge4+ and Al3+. The LAGP nanoparticles were used 

as lithium ion conduction paths incorporated with SWCNTs, which provide channels for electron 

Figure  2.  The 

first  discharge-charge  curves  of  all-solid-state  Li-air  batteries  with 

SWCNTs/LAGP  and  MWCNTs/LAGP  as  air  electrodes  at  a  current  density  of  200  mA  g-1 

according  to  weight  of  SWCNTs  or  MWCNTs,  and  the  cutoff  voltages  were  set  as  2  V  for 

discharging and 5 V for charging.  

As  shown  in  Figure  2,  it  can  be  clearly  seen  that  the  all-solid-state  Li-air  battery  with 

SWCNTs/LAGP  has  got  a  larger  specific  capacity  about  2800  mAh  g-1  compared  with  that 

containing MWCNTs/LAGP, which may be attributed to the good electronic properties and large 

surface  area  of  SWCNTs.  Moreover,  on  discharging,  the  battery  with  SWCNTs/LAGP  had  a 

plateau  about  2.7  V,  and  its  discharging  overpotential  was  obviously  smaller  than  that  with 

MWCNTs/LAGP, which seems to be related to the good ORR catalytic behaviour of SWCNTs. 

On charging, the curves can be cut into three parts. The  first part had a plateau at 3.45 V below 

500 mAh g-1, and then it slowly increased to 4.9 V when at the same time the capacity reached 

about 2000 mAh g-1. Correspondingly, the two parts were believed to be related to the oxidation 

of  the  LiOH  (hydration)  and  Li2O2.18,19  Since  the  air  electrode  was  exposed  to  ambient  air,  it 

cannot be avoided that the LiOH and Li2O2 reacted with CO2 to form Li2CO3. Therefore, for the 

third  part  with  a  platform  at  about  4.9  V,  it  was  considered  to  be  related  to  the  oxidation  of 

The  first  discharge  and  charge  curves  with  a  specific  capacity  of  1000  mAh  g-1  at  a  current 

density of 400 mA g-1 (according to the mass of SWCNTs) were presented in Figure 3(a), where 

the discharge curve had a plateau of about 2.65 V. The charge curve firstly increased from 3.2 V 

to  3.5  V,  and  then  slowly  charged  to  about  4.5  V.  On  contrast,  two  obvious  plateaus  were 

observed  when  LAGP  and  MWCNTs  were  used  as  components  of  the  air  electrode  in  our 

previous work.11 It is suggested that SWCNTs with better crystallinity and less defects may have 

less  side  reactions  compared  with  MWCNTs  and,  as  a  result,  no  obvious  two  plateaus  were 

noticed.  Besides,  the  electrochemical  impedance  spectra  (EIS)  were  investigated  when  the  cell 

was  discharged  to  two  depths  (B)  and  (C),  500  mAh  g-1  and  1000  mAh  g-1,  respectively.  In 

Figure  3(b),  the  impedance  spectra  showed  that  only  one  semicircle  was  observed  in  high 

frequency  and  by  fitting  the  data  with  an  equivalent  circuit,  where  Rct  represented  the  charge 

transfer resistance and  it slightly  increased the cell resistance during discharge.  The  fitting data 

of Rct was presented  in Table S1.  Then, the cell  was  recharged to two depths (D) and (E), 500 

mAh g-1 and 1000 mAh g-1, respectively. When charged to 500 mAh g-1, there was little change 

in  the  cell  resistance  and  only  one  semicircle  was  observed.  Similar  behaviour  was  also 

presented  in Point (E). This suggested that the air electrode was relatively stable, which can  be 

attributed to the better crystallinity and good catalytic property of SWCNTs.  


In order to investigate the cycling performance of the all-solid-state Li-air battery. The cell was 

discharged  and  charged  between  2.0  and  5.0  V  under  a  current  density  of  400  mA  g-1,  and  the 

capacity  was  limited  to  1000  mAh  g-1.  Figure  4(a)  depicts  the  cycle  profiles  of  the  cell,  which 

was recharged over 10 cycles.  The superior cycling performance of the cell may be related to the 

good electronic properties and large surface area of the SWNTs.15,16 Besides, the well-intergrated 

tunnels  for  both  electrons  and  ions  of  the  composite  air  electrode  were  also  important  for  the 

improved performance.7-11 Last but  not the least, the  presence of H2O  in air atmosphere, which 

enhanced  the  electronic  conductance  and  contributed  to  the  improved  electrochemical 

process.20,21  Moreover,  it  is  exhibited  in  figure  4(b)  that  the  discharge  curves  had  a  plateau  at 

about  2.65 V for the first cycle, which had an average charging voltage of about 3.97 V. Then, 

with  the  cell  cycling,  the  discharging  voltage  decreased  gradually  from  2.65  V  to  2.32  V.  

Interestingly,  the  terminal  of  charge  curves  firstly  increased  and  reached  a  maximum  value  of 

about 4.8 V at the fourth cycle. Later it decreased to only 4.65 V at the tenth cycle. However, the 

overpotentials of discharge and charge processes both slowly increased, which may be attributed 

to accumulation of Li2CO3 on the surface of the cathode due to the exposure to air.   

CONCLUSION:  In  summary,  we  proposed  an  all-solid-state  Li-air  battery  composed  of  a  Li 

metal foil anode, a NASICON-type solid electrolyte LAGP, and SWCNTs/LAGP as air electrode. 

The good electronic properties, large surface area and better crystallinity of SWNTs benefit the 

electrochemical process. This all-solid-state Li-air battery showed a larger capacity of 2800 mAh g-1 

for  the  first  cycle  discharge  than  that  with  MWCNTs/LAGP.  The  cell  exhibited  a  good  cycling 

performance  with  a  limited  capacity  of  1000  mAh  g-1  at  a  current  density  of  400  mA  g-1. 

However,  because  of  the  influence  of  CO2  and  H2O,  the  electrochemical  process  in  air 

atmosphere  may  be  largely  different  with  that  in  pure  oxygen  atmosphere.  Obviously,  the  air 

electrode  also  needs  to  be  further  optimized  in  order  to  construct  a  three  dimensional  network 

and more effective catalysts suitable for all-solid-state Li-air batteries are equally required.  

The nitrogen adsorption-desorption isotherm of SWCNTs 

and MWCNTs. Electrochemical impedance spectra of the LAGP pellet. Rietveld refinement of 

XRD pattern of LAGP. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at 

