ISSN 0020 2)1685, Inorganic Materials, 2015, Vol. 51, No. 8, pp. 793–798. © Pleiades Publishing, New phosphates with the general formula M0.5(1 + x)FexTi2 – x(PO4)3 (M = Co, Ni, Cu; 0 ≤ x ≤ 2) have been synthesized by a sol–gel process. We have studied phase relations in these systems and determined the composition stability limits of NASICON 2)type solid solutions. The catalytic properties of the phosphates for methanol dehydration and dehydrogenation reactions have been investigated in an inert atmosphere.


Framework  phosphates  that  are  structural  ana 2) logues  of  sodium  dizirconium  orthophosphate, NaZr2(PO4)3 (NZP/NASICON, trigonal crystal sys 2) tem,  sp.  gr.  ),  have  a  characteristic  tendency toward  wide  iso 2)  and  heterovalent  isomorphism  and the  formation  of  broad  solid 2)solution  series  [1,  2]. They  are  renowned  for  their  high  structural  stability and  high  cation  mobility,  the  latter  being  due  to  the presence of a three 2)dimensional system of channels in their  crystal  structure  [3–11].  Such  phosphates  have attracted researchers’ attention in studies of catalytic processes  of  acid–base  (isomerization  and  dehydra 2) tion) and redox (selective oxidation and dehydrogena 2) tion)  conversion  of  hydrocarbons  and  alcohols  [11– 19]. In particular, conversion reactions of С1–С4 ali 2) phatic  alcohols  have  been  investigated  not  only  for framework  zirconium  and  thorium  phosphates  of group I and II metals [12–16] but also for materials containing  transition  metals  (Cu,  Fe,  Mo,  or  Ni)  in the channels of the NASICON structure or in those of a given structure [17–19]. Changes in the qualitative and quantitative compositions of the framework phos 2) phates  led  to  changes  in  their  catalytic  activity  and selectivity  (relationship between dehydration and dehydrogenation products), primarily  because  of  changes  in  the  acidity,  specific surface area, and particle size of the catalysts.

Current  trends  in  the  development  of  chemistry, associated  with  the  production  of  environmentally friendly kinds of fuel and other organic synthesis prod 2) ucts, stimulate the study of industrial processes for the conversion  of  lower  aliphatic  alcohols  to  the  corre 2) sponding  ethers,  aldehydes,  and  ketones.  For  exam 2) ple, formaldehyde, one of the basic organic synthesis products, can be prepared by the oxidation of metha 2) nol [20]. Another valuable methanol conversion prod 2) uct is dimethyl ether (promising diesel fuel), which is produced commercially in small amounts from natu 2) ral gas, coal, or biomass [21].

It  is  of  interest  to  study  the  catalytic  activity  of mixed  phosphates  containing  d  transition  metals, which readily enter into redox reactions. The addition of  iron  to  the  composition  of  such  phosphates  may change  their  catalytic  activity.  Moreover,  since  iron has  a  smaller  charge  than  the  titanium  it  substitutes for, to ensure electroneutrality of the structure addi 2) tional  transition  metal  ions  are  incorporated  into  it, which are accommodated in the channels of the struc 2) ture and are thus more mobile.

In this paper, we report our findings on phase rela 2) tions in the M0.5(1 + x)FexTi2 – x(PO4)3 (M = Co, Ni, Cu; 0 ≤ х ≤  2) series and examine the feasibility of using these  materials  as  catalysts  for  methanol  conversion processes.

M0.5(1 + x)FexTi2 – x(PO4)3 (M = Co, Cu; x = 0, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 1) phosphates were synthesized by a sol–gel process  and Ni0.5(1 + x)FexTi2 – x(PO4)3 (x = 0, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 1) phos 2) phates were synthesized by the Pechini process [22]. The starting chemicals used were aqueous solutions of NH4H2PO4, FeCl3, and TiOCl2 (prepared by oxidizing Composition ranges of NASICON 2)type solid solutions in the M0.5(1 + x)FexTi2 – x(PO4)3 (M = Co, Ni, Cu) phosphate series TiCl3 with a mixture of hydrochloric and nitric acids in air);  a  CuO  solution  in  concentrated  hydrochloric acid;  Co(CH3COO)2  ⋅  4H2O;  and  Ni(CH3COO)2  ⋅ 4H2O. All of the chemicals were of reagent grade.

In the sol–gel process, a stoichiometric amount of an  ammonium  dihydrogen  phosphate  solution  was slowly added to a stirred mixture of aqueous solutions of the metal salts. After drying at 80°С, the reaction mixtures were dispersed and then fired in several steps at  temperatures  from  600  to  900°C  for  24  h  at  each step. The samples were reground after each firing step. In the Pechini process, citric acid and ethylene gly 2) col were used as organic reagents. The final firing tem 2) perature of the phosphates was 700°С.

X 2)ray diffraction patterns were obtained on a Shi 2) madzu  XRD 2)6000  diffractometer  (CuKα  radiation, λ = 1.54178 Å, 2θ = 10°–60°, scan step of 0.02°, scan rate  of  1°/min).  X 2)ray  diffraction  data  were  used  to determine the phase composition of the materials in the sample preparation process after each isothermal firing  step  and  to  ascertain  whether  the  synthesized compounds  were  phase 2)pure.  The  X 2)ray  diffraction patterns  of  the  synthesized  phosphates  were  indexed using data for known structural analogues [23, 24].

The chemical composition and homogeneity of the mixed phosphates obtained were assessed on a JEOL JSM 2)7600F  field  emission  (Schottky  cathode)  scan 2) ning  electron  microscope  (SEM).  The  microscope was equipped with an Oxford Instruments X 2)Max 80 (Premium) energy dispersive spectrometer system for X 2)ray microanalysis, equipped with a semiconductor silicon  drift  detector.  The  elemental  composition  of the  samples  was  determined  with  an  accuracy  of 2.5 mol %.

The specific surface area of the samples was deter 2) mined by nitrogen capillary adsorption measurements at a temperature of –196°С on a Micromeritics ASAP 2020  analyzer.  The  samples  were  first  degassed  at  a temperature of 350°С for 1 h. The specific surface area of the samples was calculated by the BET method.

The  catalytic  properties  of  the  phosphates  for methanol conversion reactions were studied in a flow reactor under flowing argon at atmospheric pressure in the temperature range 200–450°С. A weighed amount of a sample (0.300 g) was mixed with quartz (average particle size of 0.5 mm). Saturated alcohol vapor from a thermostated bubbler was delivered to the reactor by a  carrier  gas  (argon)  stream  at  a  total  flow  rate  of 1.2 L/h.  The  reaction  products  were  analyzed  using LKhM 2)8MD  (thermal  conductivity  detector,  col 2) umns  packed  with  Porapak  T  and  activated  carbon) and  Chrom 2)4  (thermal  conductivity  detector,  CaA TsEOSORB column) chromatographs. The analytical data were used to assess the degree of alcohol conver 2) sion (χ, %) and selectivity (S, %) by the formulas, where  ϕ0  and  ϕ1  are  the  initial  and  variable  volume fractions of the alcohol, and  ϕt is the fraction of the alcohol consumed for the target reaction. The target product  yield  (A)  was  expressed  in  mmol/(h  g)  (per gram of the catalyst). The calculated amounts of the consumed alcohol and reaction products in all cata 2) lytic  experiments  corresponded  to  the  material balance  within  the  uncertainty  in  our  measure 2) ments (3%).

The  X 2)ray  diffraction  patterns  of  the  samples annealed  at  600°С  contained  reflections  from  tita 2) nium pyrophosphate, which was a crystalline reaction intermediate.  At  higher  temperatures,  it  completely reacted  to  form  targeted  mixed  phosphates.  Single 2) phase  reaction  products  were  obtained  in  the  range 800–900°С.

The  systems  M0.5(1  +  x)FexTi2  –  x(PO4)3  (M  –  Co, Ni, Cu)  studied  here  were  shown  to  contain  limited NASICON 2)type  solid  solution  series.  The  composi 2) tion limits of the homogeneity ranges in the systems studied  are  indicated  in  the  table.  Electron  micros 2) copy results indicated that the samples were homoge 2) neous, and X 2)ray microanalysis data showed that their compositions  coincided  with  the  intended  ones  to within the error of determination. In the composition ranges beyond their homogeneity regions, the samples consisted of a mixture of the saturated solid solutions and simple phosphates of iron, cobalt, nickel, or cop 2) per in the oxidation state 2+.

The  X 2)ray  diffraction  patterns  of  all  the  single 2) phase samples were similar in the position and inten 2) sity  of  reflections.  In  each  phosphate  series,  the  dif 2) fraction peaks gradually shifted (and, accordingly, the interplanar spacings varied) with increasing х, which was accompanied by a gradual variation in their rela 2) tive  intensities  (Fig.  1a).  The  ionic  radii  of  Ti4+  and Fe3+ differ little, so the ratio of the concentrations of these  cations  has  little  effect  on  the  variation  in  the crystallographic characteristics of the solid solutions. In  each  phosphate  series,  the  а  cell  parameter increases slightly when the M2+ cations occupy vacant sites  (Fig.  1b).  This  is  accompanied  by  a  systematic decrease in с parameter due to correlated distortions of the framework polyhedra [1, 22]. Nevertheless, the extent of the homogeneity ranges of the solid solutions is  directly  dependent  on  the  ionic  radius  of  the  ele 2) ment in the oxidation state 2+ (table).

Our  results  demonstrate  that  the  specific  surface area of the samples depends on the phosphate synthe 2) sis  procedure.  The  specific  surface  area  of  the Ni0.5(1 + x)FexTi2 – x(PO4)3  materials,  prepared  by  the Pechini process, which enables a decrease in the crystalli 2) zation  temperature  of  the  target  phase,  was  30  m2/g. That  of  the  M0.5(1 + x)FexTi2 – x(PO4)3  (M  =  Co,  Cu) samples, prepared by the sol–gel process at relatively high temperatures, was not very large: about 1 m2/g. The average particle size of the materials prepared by the latter process increased from 2 (M = Ni) to 100 µm (M = Co, Cu).

It is worth pointing out that the smaller particle size of the nickel 2)containing materials correlates with their higher catalytic activity. In particular, methanol dehy 2) drogenation  on  nickel  phosphates  was  observed  at  a temperature  as  low  as  220°С,  and  the  degree  of  its conversion  at  450°С  approached  90%  (Fig.  2a).  On copper and cobalt phosphates, the onset temperature for  methanol  conversion  reactions  was  250–280°С, and  the  degree  of  conversion  at  high  temperatures ranged from 62 to 86% (Figs. 2b, 2c).

In the temperature range studied, methanol con 2) version reactions followed two main paths: dehydroge 2) nation and dehydration, as represented by the schemes.

The  selectivity  of  the  catalysts  for  both  reactions strongly depended on their composition and tempera 2) ture  (Fig.  3).  The  best  formaldehyde  selectivity  was obtained  using  the  nickel 2)containing  mixed  phos 2) phate catalysts, which were favorable for the dehydro 2) genation  reaction.  With  increasing  temperature,  the formaldehyde selectivity passed through a maximum (81–83% in the range 320–390°С for Ni0.5Ti2(PO4)3 (x  =  0))  and  decreased  above  400°С  because  of  the oxidation of the reactants, accompanied by the forma 2) tion of considerable amounts of СО2. Given that the degree of methanol conversion increases with temper 2) ature, the optimal conditions for formaldehyde prepa 2) ration are the temperature range 340–360°С and the use of Ni0.5Ti2(PO4)3 (x = 0) as a catalyst: the product yield then reaches 3.7 mmol per hour per gram of the catalyst.  The  reaction  on  the  nickel  phosphates yielded very small amounts of dimethyl ether.

In the case of conversion on the mixed copper and cobalt  phosphates  at  relatively  low  temperatures (below  320–350°С),  the  predominant  process  was dimethyl ether formation (Figs. 3b, 3c). The formal 2) dehyde selectivity first increased with increasing tem 2) perature  and  then  decreased  because  of  СО2  forma 2) tion  at  temperatures  above  400°С.  Note  that,  in  the temperature  range  studied,  the  х  =  0  phosphates offered high formaldehyde selectivity.

The  addition  of  iron  to  the  catalyst  (at  х  >  0) increased its dimethyl ether selectivity. Nevertheless, since in the conditions under consideration dimethyl ether forms only at relatively low temperatures, where the degree of methanol conversion is not very high, its yield  did  not  exceed  0.40–0.48  mmol/(h  g).  The formaldehyde  yield  reached  3.2  mmol/(h  g)  in  the range  400–450°С  in  the  case  of  reaction  on  copper phosphates  and  2.4  mmol/(h  g)  for  Co0.5Ti2(PO4)3 (x = 0) at 450°С (Fig. 4).

Shchelokov  et  al.  [25]  investigated  the  catalytic activity  of  Cu0.5(1 + х)FeхZr2 – х(PO4)3  for  methanol conversion  reactions  in  an  inert  atmosphere  and  air. Their results on phase relations indicate that the sys 2) tem contains solid solutions in the range 0 < х < 1.0 and  the  distinct  compound  Cu1.5Fe2(PO4)3  (х  =  2), which have a NASICON 2)related framework structure, but with other polyhedra or a different arrangement of structural units in the framework. The specific surface area of the zirconium phosphates studied was close to that  of  the  titanium 2)containing  phosphates  investi 2) gated  here.  Nevertheless,  they  differed  markedly  in catalytic activity from the titanium phosphates. In an inert  atmosphere,  the  predominant  reaction  on  the zirconium phosphates was dimethyl ether formation. Formaldehyde formation was only observed in an oxi 2) dizing  atmosphere  and  the  maximum  formaldehyde yield (1.7 mmol/(h g)) was obtained at a temperature of  350°С when Cu1.5Fe2(PO4)3 (х = 2) was used as a catalyst.

It is worth pointing out that the surface of the zir 2) conium 2)containing  phosphates  is  covered  with  Zr4+ Lewis acid centers [26, 27]. The probability of dehy 2) drogenation on the zirconium 2)containing phosphates is  rather  low,  which  can  be  accounted  for  by  oxygen adsorption on zirconium ions and subsequent reaction of the oxygen with methanol [17]. The formation of formaldehyde on the titanium 2)containing phosphates is due to both the higher stability of the lower oxidation states of titanium and the presence of transition metal (Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) ions, which are capable of being in  different  oxidation  states  and  are  possible  active centers for methanol dehydrogenation.

The incorporation of iron into the iron phosphates was  shown  to  be  favorable  for  a  competing  process, methanol  dehydration,  which  is  determined  by  the acid  properties  of  the  phosphates.  The  acid  activity observed upon partial substitution of iron, which has a smaller charge and a weaker polarizing effect, for tita 2) nium appears somewhat illogical. However, the acidity of silicon oxide can also be raised by partial Al3+ sub 2) stitution for Si4+ [28]. The same results from partial Fe3+ sub 2) stitution for Ti4+. In addition, incorporated transition metal ions can act as alcohol adsorption centers.

M0.5(1 + x)FexTi2 – x(PO4)3 (M = Co, Ni, Cu; 0 ≤ х ≤ 2) NASICON 2)type  mixed  phosphates  have  been  pre 2) pared by a sol–gel process and characterized by X 2)ray diffraction  and  electron  probe  X 2)ray  microanalysis. The catalytic properties of the phosphates for metha 2) nol dehydration and dehydrogenation reactions have been  studied  in  an  inert  atmosphere.  The  synthesis process has been shown to influence the specific sur 2) face area of the samples and their catalytic properties (percent  methanol  conversion).  The  selectivity  of reactions that occur on the mixed phosphates has been shown to depend on the chemical composition of the catalysts. We have found optimal conditions of formal 2) dehyde  preparation:  temperature  range  340–360°С, with Ni0.5Ti2(PO4)3 (x = 0) as a catalyst. The product yield then reaches 3.7 mmol per hour per gram of the catalyst.  This  reaction  is  safer  to  run  (requires  no methanol–air  explosive  mixtures),  and  the  process temperature is considerably lower than that needed for the  oxidative  methanol  conversion  reaction  used  in industry (650°C).
