We   have   synthesized   NASICON 2)type   mixed  phosphates  with   the  general   formula Li1 – xZr2P3 – xMoxO12, having different degrees of molybdenum substitution (x = 0, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0) and rang 2) ing in particle size from 50 to 300 nm. Their structure and morphology have been investigated using X 2)ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, and X 2)ray microanalysis. Analysis of the catalytic properties of the synthesized compounds in ethanol conversion reactions demonstrates that all of them exhibit catalytic activ 2) ity for ethanol dehydration and dehydrogenation reactions and that the relationship between them depends on molybdenum content. DOI: 10.1134/S0020168515070055

In the last decade, one priority issue has been the development  of  green  chemistry,  connected  with  a search  for  environmentally  clean  ways  of  producing practically  important  substances  and  materials.  A great  deal  of  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  use  of renewable sources of energy and raw materials [1]. In connection  with  this,  biomass,  whose  intermediate processing products are bioalcohols, is often regarded as a promising energy source. Bioalcohols can, how 2) ever, be regarded not only as promising fuels but also as raw materials for the chemical industry. For this rea 2) son,  there  is  currently  great  practical  interest  in  a search  for  and  development  of  catalysts  capable  of converting  alcohols  to  products  of  industrial  impor 2) tance, such as hydrogen, hydrocarbons, ethers, alde 2) hydes, and ketones [2].

NASICON  (acronym  for  Na  Super  Ionic  CON 2) ductor)  materials  received  their  name  owing  to  the discovery  by  Hong  that  zirconium  sodium  silicate phosphates  have  high  ionic  conductivity  [3–5].  This class  of  compounds  can  be  described  by  the  general formula  AxB2(ZO4)3,  where  A  is  usually  an  alkali  or alkaline 2)earth metal, B is a polyvalent element (Zr, Ti, In, or others), and Z is phosphorus or silicon. Their structure is made up of BO6 octahedra and ZO4 tetra 2) hedra, which are linked so that there are spacious voids forming  a  three 2)dimensional  network  of  channels. Some of these voids are occupied by the A cations [6]. Owing  to  this,  these  materials  possess  a  number  ofvaluable  properties,  such  as  high  ionic  conductivity and  variability  of  their  framework  structure,  which enable  iso 2)  or  heterovalent  substitutions  on  both  the cation  and  anion  sites,  without  significant  structural changes [7, 8].

Such  substitutions  may  also  be  useful  in  catalysis because they allow one to vary the concentration and strength of Lewis and Bronsted acid centers. The large fraction of covalent bonding in framework compounds contributes to their high thermal stability, stability to high  temperatures,  and  chemical  stability,  for  exam 2) ple, to water and sulfur oxides, which is of particular importance for catalysts. It has been shown in a num 2) ber  of  studies  []9–16]  that  NASICON 2)type  com 2) pounds are active in acid and redox catalysis processes. Owing to this, conversion of ethanol may follow a few alternative paths:

Also possible are the dehydrogenation of the reaction products and the catalytic cross 2)linking of the forming unsaturated hydrocarbons.

In this study, major attention is paid to the effect of heterovalent  doping  on  the  catalytic  activity  of LiZr2(PO4)3 2)based  NASICON 2)type  materials. According to Pylinina and Mikhalenko [17], the sur 2) face  of  such  compounds  is  formed  largely  by  phos 2) phate anions, and it is reasonable to expect that their catalytic activity in heterogeneous catalysis processes is most sensitive to partial substitutions on the phos 2) phorus  site.  As  a  dopant,  we  chose  molybdenum, which has a variable oxidation state and readily forms tetrahedral anions [18]. The main purpose of this work was to assess the catalytic activity of framework mate 2) rials with the compositions Li1 – xZr2P3 – xMoxO12 (x = 0, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0) for the conversion of alcohols, as exem 2) plified  by  ethanol.  Understanding  such  a  process allows one to assess the effects of the qualitative and quantitative  compositions  of  the  framework  phos 2) phates  on  the  relationship  between  acid–base  and redox centers on their surface.

The Li1–xZr2P3–xMoxO12 (x = 0, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0) frame 2) work phosphates were prepared by the Pechini process [19, 20]. In a mixture of ethylene glycol (2 mL) and deionized  water  (10  mL)  in  an  alumina  crucible  we sequentially  dissolved  ZrOCl2  ·  8H2O,  citric  acid, Li2CO3, and a stoichiometric mixture of NH4H2PO4 and (NH4)6Mo7O24 corresponding to the phosphorus : molybdenum ratio in the compound to be synthesized. After that, the pH of the solution was rapidly brought to  5.5  by  adding  concentrated  aqueous  ammonia  in order  to  prevent  zirconium  phosphate  precipitation. The  resultant  solution  was  held  in  a  drying  oven  at 95°С for 24 h, at 150°С for another 24 h, and then at 350°С for 4 h. After careful grinding, the material was annealed  at  750°С  for  10  h.  The  first  steps  led  to  a stepwise removal of water and other gaseous prod 2) ucts. The final anneal determined the structure of the material.

The particle (crystallite) size was assessed from the broadening of X 2)ray diffraction peaks using the Scher 2) rer formula:

where k = 0.89 is the Scherrer constant, λ = 1.5406 Å is the X 2)ray wavelength used, B is the half width at half maximum  of  the  peak  (2θ),  b  is  the  instrumental broadening (2θ), and θ is the angular peak position. As a standard for evaluating the instrumental broadening, we used lanthanum hexaboride, LaB6, powder (Stan 2) dard Reference Material 660a).

The specific surface area of the samples was deter 2) mined  by  BET  measurements  with  a  Micromeritics ASAP 2020 analyzer. The samples were degassed at a temperature of 350°C for 1 h. Analyses were carried out at relative pressures (p/p0) from 0.01 to 0.99.

The samples were examined by scanning electron microscopy  (SEM)  on  a  Carl  Zeiss  NVision  40 equipped  with  an  elemental  analysis  accessory.  The accelerating voltage was 1 kV.

Catalytic  properties  were  studied  in  a  flow 2)type quartz  reactor  under  saturated  ethanol  vapor.  The reaction  products  were  analyzed  on  a  Kristallyuks 4000M chromatograph equipped with a thermal con 2) ductivity detector and HayeSep T 60/80 mesh (2 m, 150°С,  30  mL/min,  He),  SKT 2)6  (2  m,  150°С, 30 mL/min, He), and Molecular sieve 5 A (2 m, 25°С, 30 mL/min,  Ar)  columns.  In  our  experiments,  a weighed amount (0.3 g) of a catalyst was mixed with ground quartz (d = 315–400 μm) and placed in a reac 2) tor 6 mm in inner diameter so that the catalyst layer was 17 cm in thickness. To ensure an appropriate eth 2) anol vapor concentration, the carrier gas was passed at a volumetric flow rate of 20 mL/min through a bubbler containing ethanol and thermostated at 11°С.

The catalytic activity of the samples was assessed as the amount of the corresponding reaction product (in millimoles)  forming  per  gram  of  the  catalyst  per hour. The selectivity of the samples was evaluated by the formula

where ϕprod/alcohol is the volume fraction of the reaction product  and  reacted  alcohol,  respectively,  and nprod/alcohol is the number of carbon atoms per molecule of the reaction product and alcohol, respectively.

According  to  electron  probe  microanalysis  data (table), the elemental composition of the synthesized materials corresponded to the intended stoichiometry. According to X 2)ray diffraction data, all of the samples were single 2)phase and had a monoclinic NASICON 2) related structure (Fig. 1). Calculations showed that the samples  ranged  in  crystallite  size  from  20  to  50  nm (table). According to SEM data, the samples consisted of particles 50 to 300 nm in size (Fig. 2).

The  materials  had  rather  small  specific  surface areas, from 6 to 20 m2/g (table). The average particle sizes estimated from these data are also presented in the table, together with the estimated crystallite sizes. Comparison of these data leads us to conclude that the larger  particles  observed  in  SEM  micrographs  are agglomerates of individual crystallites. The same is evidenced  by  estimates  from  the  specific  surface area data.

Our experiments showed that all of the synthesized samples had considerable catalytic activity for ethanol dehydration and dehydrogenation reactions (Fig. 3a). The negligible conversion of ethanol in blank experi 2) ments with the use of silicon oxide indicated that it was the phosphates under investigation that exhibited the catalytic  activity.  The  major  reaction  products  were C2 hydrocarbons  (ethane  and  ethylene),  C4  hydro 2) carbons,  acetaldehyde,  diethyl  ether,  and  hydrogen. We  also  observed  the  formation  of  trace  amounts  of C3 hydrocarbons, CO2, and CO.

catalyst  LiZr2(PO4)3 showed the highest selectivity for ethanol dehydration to  diethyl  ether  and  C2  hydrocarbons  (Figs.  3b,  3e) because  of  the  high  acidity  and  the  absence  of  well 2)

Specific surface area of the synthesized compounds and their characteristic particle size evaluated by different techniques

LiZr2(PO4)3 Li0.9Zr2P2.9Mo0.1O12 Li0.5Zr2P2.5Mo0.5O12 Zr2P2MoO12 dav is the average particle size evaluated from the specific surface area.

(Fig. 3c).  The  similarity  in  properties  between Li0.5Zr2P2.5Mo0.5O12 and Zr2P2MoO12 can be accounted for by the fact that these materials are close in specific surface area: 6.8 and 5.8 m2/g, respectively. The spe 2) cific surface area of Li0.9Zr2P2.9Mo0.1O12 is three times larger  and  almost  identical  to  that  of  LiZr2(PO4)3 (table).

Comparison  of  the  specific  surface  area  data  and catalysis results leads us to conclude that the amount and activity of centers responsible for the formation of acetaldehyde and diethyl ether in the doped samples are essentially independent of molybdenum content, whereas,  in  the  case  of  the  other  reaction  products, these parameters of the centers differ, which has a par 2) ticularly marked effect on the formation of C4 hydro 2) carbons and hydrogen.

It can be seen from Fig. 4 that the incorporation of molybdenum has a significant effect on the selectivity of  the  catalyst  and  the  composition  of  the  reaction products. Whereas the undoped material has the high 2) est  low 2)temperature  selectivity  for  diethyl  ether,  the major  reaction  product  in  the  case  of  the  molybde 2) num 2)doped samples is acetaldehyde. At high temper 2) atures, all of the samples are selective largely for the C2 and  C4  hydrocarbons.  Note  that  the  temperature dependences of selectivity are similar in shape for all of the  doped  samples.  The  most  drastic  distinction  is observed only for the C4 hydrocarbons: the selectivity of the  Li0.9Zr2P2.9Mo0.1O12  sample  for  these  hydrocarbons reaches  59%,  whereas  that  of  Li0.5Zr2P2.5Mo0.5O12  and Zr2P2MoO12 is slightly below 50%.

The  nearly  identical  shape  of  the  temperature dependences  of  selectivity  for  all  of  the  doped it samples,  containing  (Li0.9Zr2P2.9Mo0.1O12,  Li0.5Zr2P2.5Mo0.5O12,  and Zr2P2MoO12), suggests that they are close in the ratio between  the  amounts  of  acid  and  redox  centers  on their surface, which can be interpreted as indirect evi 2) dence  for  predominant  molybdenum  localization  on the  surface  of  the  materials.  This  leads  to  relaxation processes and a reduction in the excess energy neces 2) sary for heterovalent substitution [21].

The temperature variation of the selectivity of the synthesized samples for hydrogen, which is one of the most attractive ethanol conversion products, is diffi 2) cult  to  relate  to  any  particular  hydrogen  release  or absorption process. For this reason, these data are pre 2) sented  as  the  temperature  dependence  of  the  ratio between the amounts of released hydrogen and reacted ethanol (Fig. 5).

For all of the doped samples, this ratio has a mini 2) mum: at low degrees of conversion, all of the released hydrogen  results  from  ethanol  dehydrogenation  to acetaldehyde,  so  the  initial  ratio  should  be  close  to unity.  At  the  same  time,  the  hydrogen/ethanol  ratio does not exceed 0.6 even at the lowest process temper 2) atures, and decreases further at higher temperatures, dropping to a minimum at temperatures near 320°С.


defined  redox  centers.  The  ethanol  dehydrogenation product, acetaldehyde, forms on LiZr2(PO4)3 in trace amounts and only at temperatures above 300°С.

At the same time, as a result of the incorporation of molybdenum  into  the  structure  of  the  phosphate, degrees of ethanol conversion equivalent to those for the  undoped  material  were  observed  at  temperatures on  average  60°С  lower  in  comparison  with  undoped LiZr2(PO4)3  (Fig.  3a).  This  was  accompanied  by  an increase  in  the  rate  of  redox  processes,  including dehydrogenation  and  catalytic  cross 2)linking.  The addition  of  a  small  amount  of  molybdenum  enables lower temperature formation of C2 and C4 hydrocar 2) bons  in  amounts  that  can  only  be  reached  on  the LiZr2(PO4)3 sample at temperatures in the range 300– 350°С (Figs. 3b, 3c). Doping has the strongest effect on  the  acetaldehyde,  diethyl  ether,  and  hydrogen yields (Fig. 3). Note that the effects for the acetalde 2) hyde and diethyl ether yields are almost identical for all  of  the  doped  samples.  The  acetaldehyde  yield increases by approximately a factor of 8, whereas the diethyl ether yield, in contrast, drops by almost a fac 2) tor of 3. The formation of hydrogen passes through a maximum  for  the  sample  with  the  composition Li0.9Zr2P2.9Mo0.1O12, which ensures an increase in yield by  more  than  a  factor  of  5.  At  the  same  time,  this parameter decreases to 3 for  Li0.5Zr2P2.5Mo0.5O12 and Zr2P2MoO12.

One possible cause of the drop in the diethyl ether yield at even low molybdenum doping levels is that the process in question requires that there be two neigh 2) boring phosphorus groups necessary for the sorption of two alcohol molecules. This condition can be sub 2) stantially violated in the presence of even low molyb 2) denum  concentrations  because  of  the  predominant molybdenum localization on the sample surface.

It  seems  likely  that  some  of  the  hydrogen  resulting from the dehydrogenation does not enter the gas phase but  reduces  the  molybdenum.  A  similar  effect  was observed previously by Sukhanov et al. [22] for meth 2) anol  conversion  reactions  on  sodium  zirconium molybdate  phosphates  in  an  argon  atmosphere  [22]. At high temperatures, the ratio of hydrogen to reacted ethanol increases considerably. In this case, reaction

by 2)products (hydrocarbons) act as hydrogen sources. The most active hydrogen release was observed for the sample  with  the  composition  Li0.9Zr2P2.9Mo0.1O12 (Fig.  5).  On  the  undoped  sample,  which  offered  far higher selectivity for the dehydration process, hydro 2) gen was released starting at much higher temperatures, and the corresponding curve had no minimum (Fig. 5, curve 1).


We have synthesized single 2)phase nanoparticulate molybdenum 2)containing  NASICON 2)type  materials with the general formula Li1 – xZr2P3 – xMoxO12 (x = 0, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0).

Analysis of the catalytic properties of the synthe 2) sized compounds in ethanol conversion reactions has shown that all of them exhibit catalytic activity for eth 2) anol dehydration and dehydrogenation reactions. The major  reaction  products  are  C2  hydrocarbons, C4 hydrocarbons, acetaldehyde, diethyl ether, and hydro 2) gen.  On  the  doped  materials,  we  observed  predomi 2) nant  formation  of  diethyl  ether  at  low  temperatures and  C2  and  C4  hydrocarbons  at  elevated  tempera 2) tures. Doping with molybdenum reduces the reaction onset  temperature  on  average  by  60°С.  In  addition, the  present  results  demonstrate  that  molybdenum 2) containing centers play a key role in the formation of acetaldehyde  and  hydrogen,  because  molybdenum can change its oxidation state and, accordingly, partic 2)ipate in redox reactions. Increasing the molybdenum concentration  leads  to  a  decrease  in  the  yield  of  the major reaction products, which seems to be related to the smaller specific surface area of the Mo 2)rich samples.
