The effect of hydrogen and argon high 2)frequency (HF) plasma treatment on the catalytic activity of the nickel zirconium phosphate Ni0.5Zr2(PO4)3 in isobutanol dehydration and dehydrogenation has been investigated. The catalyst treated with H2 2)HF and Ar 2)HF plasmas shows a ~2 times higher activity in both reactions. This effect is due to surface restructuring changing the number and accessibility of catalytic sites on the phosphate surface.

NASICON 2)type framework zirconium phosphates with  an  NZP  structure,  whose  base  composition  is NaZr2(PO4)3, are attracting increasing attention from specialists in catalysis. The NZP structure is a frame 2) work consisting of РО4 tetrahedra and ZrO6 octahedra [1] and having a large number of holes varying in size and  geometry  (conduction  channels).  The  latter  can be occupied by various multivalent cations. Note that these  substitutions  have  no  significant  effect  on  the crystal  structure  [2,  3],  providing  means  to  tune  the strength of the surface acid sites and, accordingly, the selectivity  of  the  catalyst  toward  different  reactions. This  is  the  reason  why  NZP 2)type  framework  zirco 2) nium phosphates are considered to be promising cata 2) lysts for acid–base and redox reactions [4–7], includ 2) ing alcohol dehydration and dehydrogenation, respec 2) tively.  Some  authors  [8,  9]  believe  that  the  acidic properties of these materials are determined by coor 2) dinatively  unsaturated  zirconium  ions,  which  have  a high charge and a high polarizing power.

In earlier studies on NZP in which a modifier ion was  substituted  for  sodium  in  the  cationic  moiety [10–12], it was established that this ion does exert an effect on the acidic and redox properties of the surface. Plasma  treatment  of  catalysts  produces  a  signifi 2) cant effect on their activity [13]. Investigation of the plasma effect on solids provides a basis for developing new plasma chemical technologies aimed at obtaining ultrapure materials that possess unique properties and can operate at high temperatures and pressures and in corrosive  media.  In  addition,  plasma  treatment changes the structure and chemical composition of the surface through the action of reactive species forming in the plasma and through plasma radiation [14].

For this reason, in order to activate the surface of the phosphate catalyst and change its alcohol conver 2) sion selectivity, we used plasma treatments in two dif 2) ferent media, namely, hydrogen and argon.

In the conversion of butanols, particularly in isob 2) utanol  conversion,  the  most  desirable  product  is isobutene, a product of alcohol dehydration occurring on  acid  sites.  Its  subsequent  polymerization  affords valuable  products,  such  as  high 2)molecular 2)weight polyisobutylene, which is widely employed in various industries.

The purpose of this study was to elucidate the effect of  hydrogen  and  argon  high 2)frequency  (HF)  plasma treatments  of  the  NASICON 2)type  nickel  zirconium phosphate Ni0.5Zr2(PO4)3 on its СО2 adsorption char 2) acteristics  and  its  catalytic  activity  in  vapor 2)phase reactions of isobutanol. For this purpose, we investi 2) gated СО2 adsorption on, and the catalytic activity of, a Ni0.5Zr2(PO4)3 sample in which the sodium ion of the base  phosphate  had  been  entirely  replaced  with  the divalent nickel ion. This substitution generates, in the framework structure of NZP, new active acid sites for the dehydration reaction and sites for the redox stages of aliphatic alcohol dehydrogenation [15].


The Ni0.5Zr2(PO4)3 catalyst was prepared by sol–gel processing  [9]  using  the  following  reagent 2)grade chemicals: zirconium dioxide ZrO2,  phosphoric  acid H3PO4,  and  nickel  chloride  NiCl2  ⋅ 6H2O.  X 2)ray  dif 2) fraction data for the synthesized phosphate allowed us to assign it to the NASICON structure.


The  phosphate  was  treated  with  hydrogen  and argon  HF  plasmas  in  a  vacuum  unit.  The  sample, placed in a quartz cell, was treated with HF discharge at a hydrogen pressure of 0.1 Torr. The copper wire coil inside which the reactor was placed was energized with 40.68 2)MHz voltage pulses from a generator. The dis 2) charge duration was 20 min.

Catalytic tests were carried out in a flow reactor. the reaction products were analyzed on a Kristall 2000M gas chromatograph (Khromatek, Russia; helium car 2) rier  gas,  flame 2)ionization  detector,  column  packed with  Porapak  Q,  analytical  temperature  of  125°С). Alcohol  vapor,  entrained  by  flowing  helium  from  a temperature 2)controlled bubbler, was fed into the reac 2) tor at a rate of 1.2 L h–1. The reactor contained a thin layer of the catalyst powder (30 mg) placed on the sur 2) face  of  a  wide 2)pore  glass  frit.  Under  the  conditions considered,  the  reaction  is  kinetically  controlled. Chromatographic  data  were  used  to  determine  the alcohol conversion (Х, %), selectivity (S, %), and the mean  product  formation  rate  (N,  mol  g–1  h–1).  The latter  was  calculated  via  the  formula  N  =  wXSm–1, where w is the alcohol vapor feeding rate (mol h–1) and m is the catalyst weight (g). Before each run, the sam 2) ple was treated with helium at 673 K for 1 h. The cat 2) alytic tests were performed in the temperature range from 473 to 673 K while raising or lowering the tem 2) perature.

for Ni0.5Zr2(PO4)3 were obtained by Kavtaradze’s capil 2) lary inleakage method [16] at several temperatures in the  243–273  K  range.  Thermal  desorption  experi 2) ments were carried out at 373–673 K using an earlier described  procedure  [17].  The  activation  energy  of СО2  desorption  is  practically  equal  to  the  heat  of strong adsorption [17, 18]. The adsorption and des 2) orption experiments were carried out using a vacuum setup designed in our laboratory.

The following three states of the nickel 2)containing phosphate  were  examined:  initial  phosphate,  phos 2) phate treated with an HF hydrogen plasma, and phos 2) phate treated with an HF argon plasma.

The  adsorption  of  СО2  on  Ni0.5Zr2(PO4)3  was studied in the temperature range from 243 to 273 K before  and  after  the  plasma  treatments.  Figure  1 shows adsorption isobars for the initial sample and for the  samples  treated  with  HF  hydrogen  and  argon plasmas at Р = 4.5 × 10–3 Torr. Clearly, the amount of СО2 adsorbed on samples 1 and 2 (Fig. 1, curves 1, 2) increases with an increasing temperature. Therefore, there  is  an  activation  barrier  to  carbon  dioxide adsorption. The endothermic heat of adsorption Q is 12 and 14 kJ/mol, respectively. The existence of the activation barrier to СО2 adsorption can be explained

by a contribution made by the diffusion of adsorbate molecules into the conduction channels of the nickel zirconium  phosphate.  The  HF  argon  plasma  treat 2) ment  can  restructure  (loosen)  the  surface  layer  and “broaden”  the  conduction  channels  in  the  three 2) dimensional  phosphate  structure,  thus  facilitating СО2 adsorption and desorption, as is indicated by the number of adsorbed СО2 molecules   increasing ( )N CO2 by  a  factor  of  7–10.  The  amount  of  carbon  dioxide adsorbed  by  the  sample  treated  with  the  Ar  plasma decreases  with  an  increasing  temperature  (Fig.  1, curve 3). The isosteric heat of adsorption in this case is  14.6  kJ/mol,  and  the  change  in  entropy  (derived from  the  slope  of  the  lnP  versus  lnT  lines)  is 57.9 J/(mol K). The maximum amount of reversibly adsorbed СО2 was determined: at Р = 1.3 × 10–2 Torr and Т = 273 K, this amount is 1.5 × 1016 molecule/m2 for the initial sample, 1.6 × 1016 molecule/m2 for the sample  treated  with  the  Н2 2)HF  plasma,  and  10.3  × 1016  molecule/m2  for  the  sample  activated  with Ar 2)HF plasma, confirming the foregoing.

Thermal СО2 desorption data enabled us to calcu 2) late the activation energy of the desorption of strongly bound  СО2  molecules,  which  was  determined  to  be 49.7 kJ/mol for sample 1, 21.7 kJ/mol for sample 2, and 13.4 kJ/mol for sample 3.

It follows from the adsorption data that the propor 2) tion of strongly adsorbed СО2 molecules in the initial sample is larger than in the sample treated with hydro 2) gen plasma. In addition, the Н2 2)HF plasma treatment generates  adsorption  sites  characterized  by  a  much lower binding energy (Edes = 21.7 kJ/mol) and increases

the total quantity of strong and weak adsorption sites to 1.6 × 1016 molecule/m2.

Thus,  according  to  the  СО2  adsorption  data,  the strongest  effect  on  the  state  of  the  nickel  zirconium phosphate surface is exerted by the argon HF plasma: the argon plasma treatment restructures the phosphate surface, generates sites characterized by a low heat of adsorption,  and  changes  the  entropy  of  adsorption. This  indicates  an  increase  in  the  mobility  of  the adsorption  layer.  The  total  amount  of  adsorbed  СО2 increases markedly.

The catalytic activity of the samples was estimated for reactions of isobutanol in the temperature range from  473  to  673  K.  Isobutanol  dehydration  into isobutene  and  isobutanol  dehydrogenation  yielding isobutanal  occur  simultaneously  on  the  initial Ni0.5Zr2(PO4)3  surface  (Fig.  2).  The  main  alcohol conversion  pathway  is  dehydrogenation,  character 2) ized by an olefin formation selectivity of 85–95% at 550–670 K. The total isobutanol conversion at these temperatures does not exceed 30%.

The treatments of the catalyst with the HF hydro 2) gen and argon plasmas increase the total alcohol con 2) version  by  a  factor  of  ~2.5.  The  strongest  activating effect  on  both  reactions  is  produced  by  the  argon plasma. The plasma treatments change the isobutanol conversion selectivity as well: in the low 2)temperature range  of  the  reaction  (Т  <  593  K),  the  dehydration selectivity is no higher than 56%.

Thus,  the  plasma  treatments  generate  stable  acid sites for the dehydration reaction, The activity of these sites increases with an increasing reaction temperature, possibly under the action of the reaction medium, pri 2) marily under the action of water molecules.

From the temperature dependences of the forma 2) tion rates of the alcohol conversion products (Fig. 3), we  derived  the  experimental  activation  energies  of the dehydrogenation and dehydration reactions and the  preexponential  factor  lnN0  of  the  Arrhenius equation  (table).  On  the  initial  nickel  zirconium phosphate surface, the dehydration and dehydroge 2) nation  sites  differ  in  their  nature.  After  a  plasma treatment,  the  experimental  activation  energy  of dehydration  was  ~20  kJ/mol  higher.  The  preexpo 2) nential factor was also higher, indicating the forma 2) tion of an additional number of dehydration sites on which the alcohol–catalyst binding is stronger than in the case of the untreated sample.

The increase in the dehydrogenating power of the catalyst surface as a result of the HF plasma treatment is due to the decrease in the experimental activation energy  Еа,  which  is  most  pronounced  for  sample  3 (table). Possible dehydrogenation sites are nickel ions forming  stronger  bonds  with  alcohol  molecules,  and the number of these sites is decreased by the activating of the phosphate.

Thus, the dominant reaction on the nickel zirco 2) nium  phosphate  is  isobutanol  dehydration.  The hydrogen  or  argon  HF  plasma  treatment  of  the Ni0.5Zr2(PO4)3 catalyst considerably enhances its cata 2) lytic  activity  without  reducing  its  high  olefin  forma 2) tion  selectivity,  which  reaches  90%  at  643  K.  The nature  of  the  plasma 2)forming  gas  has  no  significant effect  on  the  isobutanol  conversion  selectivity.  The catalyst surface activation enhancing the acidity func 2) tion of the double phosphate is due to the change in

X643 and N643 are the alcohol conversion and reaction rate, respectively, at 643 K; S is selectivity at 583 and 643 K; Ea is the experimen 2) tal activation energy; lnN0 is the logarithm of the preexponential factor.

the morphology of the outer layers and, possibly, to the PO3 significant  increase  in  the  number  of  acidic  4 groups, whose interaction with the phosphate frame 2) work  weakens.  The  argon  plasma  exerts  a  stronger activating effect than the hydrogen plasma, apparently because it is capable of generating more defects on the surface.  This  assumption  is  confirmed  by  the  СО2 adsorption data.

The activity of the phosphate in isobutanol dehydro 2) genation, a side reaction, is also enhanced by the HF plasma treatments. This is due to the generation of sur 2) face sites characterized by an increased isobutanol–cat 2) alyst binding energy (which leads to a 2–3 low activa 2) tion energy).

Thus, we investigated the hydrogen and argon HF plasma treatment effects on the catalytic activity of the  nickel  zirconium  phosphate  Ni0.5Zr2(PO4)3  in isobutanol dehydration and dehydrogenation. It was established that the dominant reaction occurring on the  untreated  sample  is  alcohol  dehydration.  The catalyst  treated  with  the  Н2 2)HF  or  Ar 2)HF  plasma shows  a  ~2  time  higher  activity  in  both  reactions. These plasma treatment effects are due to the activa 2) tion of the phosphate surface through an increase in the  number  of  adsorption  and  catalysis  sites  and  in their accessibility to the alcohol molecules undergo 2) ing adsorption and chemical reaction.
