Solid electrolytes based on lithium titanium aluminum phosphate (LATP) with the composition Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 were prepared employing a modiﬁed sol–gel method. Amorphous LATP was converted to a ceramic by a heat treatment at 900 °C. Densiﬁcation was achieved by ﬁeld assisted sintering (FAST) in the temperature range of 850 to 1100 °C. The resulting phase composition, crystal structure and theoretical density were obtained from XRD analysis. Electrical properties of the samples, such as ionic conductivity, were calculated from impedance measurements in the frequency range from 20 Hz to 1 MHz. The ionic conductivities of the sintered pellets were calculated from impedance data and were correlated with the sample density. A maximum conductivity in the order of 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature is obtained for phase-pure compositions combined with a high relative density of 98%.

Ceramics with LiSICON structure are known as high ionic conductor materials and are therefore potential solid state electrolyte materials for applications in high energy density batteries ranging from portable devices to vehicle traction. Commercial lithium batteries use today mostly organic ﬂuids (e.g. LiClO4 dissolved in a propylene carbonate) as electrolyte. This can cause problems due to possible leakage of the organic electrolyte and of ignition at relatively high temperatures. For these reasons high lithium conducting solid electrolytes based on inorganic materials are strongly desired and have been intensively investigated. The highest Li-ionic conducting solids reported are single-crystal Li3N [1–3], glasses based on Li2S [4,5] and derivates of thio-LISICON. Conductivities above 10−4 S/cm can be obtained in the system Li4−xGe(Si,P)1−yMyS4, where M is a trivalent or pentavalent cation [6,7]. For example, the crystal Li10SiP2S12 displays a conductivity of 2.3 × 10−3 S cm−1, that is the highest reported conductivity for an unsintered silicon-based solid electrolyte [8–10].

The conduction mechanism for Li3N is similar as for β-alumina, in both cases Li1+ can easily migrate between two-dimensional layered structures. On the other hand, glasses based on LISICON have a comparably high conductivity (~1 × 10−3 Scm−1) to that of 0.01 N KCl aqueous solution (1.2 × 10−3 Scm−1). The transport mechanisms are supposed to be three dimensional in the lattice of the R-3c type

structure which offers conduction paths for Li+ when the tunnel size for Li+ is large enough. In the case of Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 it is known that the conductivity correlates with the composition [11,12]. Aono et al. [11] observed that the conductivity is appreciably enhanced with an increase of Al-substitution and the maximum conductivity is obtained for x = 0.3, which was attributed to an increasing instability of the desired R-3c structure for higher x-values. In addition, impurities are formed. Most studies on LATP have adopted solid state reaction and melting quenching methods for the LATP preparation [13–15]. These methods can be applied to mass production but disadvantages lay in the energy consumption and contamination or formation of secondary phases in the ﬁnal products. Actually, there are some sol–gel based preparation methods reported that overcome some of these problems, but a signiﬁcant weakness of the known synthesis methods consist in the use of toxic and ﬂammable solvents such as methanol, ethanol or acetylacetone, which complicates carrying out technological operations and decreases environmental safety [16,17]. To overcome this limitation, LATP with the composition Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 was synthesized via a modiﬁed sol–gel method using a phosphate route resulting in a material of high purity and high ionic conductivity.

The sol–gel syntheses enables the material to react uniformly at a molecular level producing small polycrystalline particles that can be sintered at comparable lower temperatures and shorter sintering times. In order to obtain dense samples, the pellets were densiﬁed by ﬁeld assisted sintering (FAST) at different temperatures under an applied uniaxial pressure of 50 MPa. By using FAST, high densities can be achieved within short sintering times [18]. So, the potential of nearly fully densiﬁed materials can be evaluated.

The heat-treated powders were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (D 500 Siemens) after both heat treatments to determine the phase formation and crystal structure of the reaction products. XRD patterns were taken in 0.05° steps with counting time of 10 s for each step in the 2θ angle range from 12 to 72°. These measurements were also performed on sintered samples in order to check whether sintering affects the developed phases. Structural data such as group symmetry, Miller indices, atom distances and cell volume were calculated employing FullProf Suite [19–22], allowing us the Rietveld reﬁnement of the XRD data.

The obtained powder was placed in a cylindrical graphite die with a diameter of 20 mm, pressurized to 15 MPa axial stress, and heated in argon atmosphere at temperatures of 850, 950, 1050 and 1100 °C by using a ﬁeld assisted sintering furnace (HPD-25/1, FCT Systeme GmbH, Rauenstein, Germany). A pulsed DC electric voltage was applied which caused an electric current to pass through the graphite die and the powder compact. Electrical resistance gave the high heating rates of 200 °C per minute. The applied pressure was raised to 50 MPa within one minute as soon as the sintering temperature was reached. After 15 min soaking time, the hot pressed samples were cooled with 50 °C per minute. Discs of 20 mm diameter and 2–3 mm thickness were produced. The density was measured by using Archimedes method and the porosity was calculated based on the theoretical density obtained by reﬁning the XRD data of the synthesized powder.

For ionic conductivity measurements, the sintered samples were ground on both sides and subsequently sputtered with gold. All the samples were disc-shaped with dimensions of about 1.5 mm to 2 mm in thickness and about 2 cm in diameter. A complex impedance measurement was carried out with an impedance analyzer (Versa Stat 4, Princeton Applied Research (PAR)) in the frequency range from 20 Hz to 1 MHz. The measurements were performed at temperatures between −40 °C and 150 °C in potentiostatic mode at open circuit potential (OCP) with an AC amplitude of 10 mV. The analysis of the impedance data was carried out using the software “Zview” (Scribner Associates, Inc., USA), which allows the determination of the resistances.

LATP prepared by solid-state reactions is usually accompanied by impurities or second phase products. To generate a homogeneous precursor mixture of the desired composition Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 (with x = 0.3) via a modiﬁed sol–gel route, a solution of an appropriate amount of cations and anions is necessary. For the synthesis reagentgrade chemicals in stoichiometric quantities were employed. Cation solution: Li(C2H3O)·2H2O (Alfa Aeser GmbH, Kandel, Germany) and Al(NO3)3 9·H2O (Merck) were dissolved in an appropriate amount of water until a clear solution was obtained. Ti(IV) isopropoxide (Alfa Aesar GmbH, Kandel, Germany) was subsequently added dropwise causing a precipitation of TiO2 when dropped into water. At the pH where this synthesis step is done, pH 5, the formed TiO2 particles show a surface potential of about 15 mV (ζ-potential was measured employing a DT1200 from Dispersion Technology, Bedford Hills, NY, USA) and therefore the particles are well electrostatically stabilized resulting in a homogeneous dispersion. Even if the concentration of ions increases (due to the evaporation of water) the particles may form a loose particle network still allowing all other reactants to reach the surfaces of all precipitated TiO2-particles. The anion source was NH4H2(PO4)3 (Merck). It is prepared with stoichiometric quantities dissolved in a minimal volume of water. The anionic solution was added to the cationic solution drop by drop under constant stirring conditions causing a white gel. All mixings were carried out at room temperature and under constant stirring. After leaving the gel for 48 h heat treatment was performed in two steps: ﬁrst 400 °C for 6 h to eliminate reaction gases, such as NO2, NH3, Cl2 and H2O, followed by calcination at 900 °C for 10 h to complete the formation of crystalline LATP.

Although the solid state reaction approach is quite simple, and the starting materials are inexpensive and easily available, the use of the sol–gel methods offers several advantages: under optimum conditions single phase compositions may be obtained more easily during calcination and sintering. They usually reveal a higher sintering activity which may lead to a higher ﬁnal density provided that an appropriate green density can be achieved. Since the highest ionic conductivities are expected for x = 0.3, the precursor solutions were adjusted and mixed

to obtain LATP with the composition Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3. After calcination at 400 °C, X-ray spectra show only a broad peak, indicating the presence of only an amorphous phase. By thermal treatment at 900 °C the reﬂections can be assigned to LATP (Fig. 1). The diffraction peaks show the pattern corresponding to the lithium-analogue of NASICON. The preparation of Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 was the subject of numerous papers [23–26], but the formation of AlPO4 as an impurity phase is usually described as inevitable. By using the phosphate assisted sol– gel method Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 powders could be prepared without the Al(PO4)-formation as indicated in Fig. 1.

The reaction product has a rhombohedral structure with the space group R-3c. The hexagonal lattice parameters were obtained by leastsquares ﬁt (see Table 1). It was found that aand c-axis for the samples are smaller than the corresponding a and c parameters for LiTi2(PO4)3 with a = 8511 Å and c = 20,843 Å [27], suggesting structural modiﬁcations due to the replacement of Ti4+ ions by Al3+ ions.

Disc-shaped samples were sintered by FAST at temperatures between 850 and 1100 °C. The sample density increased with temperature reaching values higher than 97% of the theoretical density at sintering temperatures of ≥1050 °C. As the density is one key factor in terms of ionic conductivity, this topic is discussed later on.

The microstructure of the sintered samples at 850, 950 1050 and 1100 °C was analyzed on polished surfaces using scanning electron microscopy (Fig. 3). By comparing the micrographs of the different samples it can be seen, that pores are more and more eliminated with increasing sintering temperature. Furthermore, the enhancement in density is accompanied by a pronounced grain growth. From 950 °C to 1050 °C the microstructure changes drastically. With increasing temperature (1050 °C) porosity almost disappears and beside areas where small grains are present, grain growth can be seen. For the highest sintering temperature, all grains grew and the microstructure appears more homogeneous. Therefore, the contact between the grains seems to be improved. But it cannot be denied that there are more and more cracks visible, which are probably a result of large stresses caused by the anisotropy in thermal expansion in LATP [28], as what is already

documented in the NZP materials family [29,30]. But overall, in comparison with the samples sintered at 850 °C to 1050 °C, there are more contiguous areas visible.

Compared to the SEM micrograph of the polished sample sintered at 1100 °C, no hints for pronounced cracks are visible on a fractured surface, see Fig. 4. Considering the grain morphology it can be observed that the originally cubic grains (see Fig. 2) already grew and those with spherical shape are not present any more. Apparently, they changed into cubic. This change to a faceted grain morphology was also reported in [31,32] for that material. This behavior is typical for grain growth that is rate controlled by interface reaction [33,34]. The resulting microstructure consists of cubic grains mostly in the range of 2 to 10 μm, giving a quite homogeneous microstructure with negligible porosity and densities close to 100% of theoretical density.

The electrical properties of the sintered pellets were characterized by using impedance spectroscopy. At high frequencies only one depressed loop can be observed, followed by Warburg type impedance in the low frequency range.

Nyquist plots of the different samples at room temperature are depicted in Fig. 5. At high frequencies only one distorted loop is observed, followed by a Warburg type tail at lower frequencies. At high frequencies the impedance spectra shift towards the origin as the

semi-circle decreases as the temperature increases until it almost disappears at 90 °C which indicates that the impedance is only diffusion controlled at higher temperatures. Also, the grain boundary arc disappears, indicating that its resistivity contribution is negligible, and therefore the Nyquist plots are governed by electrode polarization.

Fig. 8 shows an Arrhenius-type diagram for the relationship between conductivity and the inverse temperature for the total conductivity of all LATP samples. The activation energy for the Li-ion migration can be calculated from the Arrhenius equation,

sintering temperature increases. This behavior can probably be associated with the bulk resistance of the solid electrolyte. Looking at the loop, that is associated with the grain boundary resistance, the same trend is observed. The third element in the spectra, the diffusion tail, is caused by a polarization effect at the electrode interface. In order to verify if the grain boundaries are blocking, the dielectric constant was calculated to be εr = 16.5 at 250 kHz which means, that the grain boundaries appear as not blocking. This calculation follows the analyses of impedance spectra given by Fleig [35]. In general, the complete spectra not only shift towards the origin with increasing temperature, they also decrease. From the Nyquist plots, the total resistance RT, addition of bulk Rb and grain boundary resistances Rgb, of the electrolyte was calculated from the intercepts of the semicircles with the real axis in the spectra employing Zview [26,36,37].

Taking into account the geometry of the samples, the ionic conductivity σT can be calculated using Eq (3).

with l and A as the correspondent sample thickness and diameter. As described above, the total resistivity (RT) of the samples is obtained from the intercept of the low-frequency semicircle with the real axis. Fig. 6 depicts the dependence of the ionic conductivity on relative density of samples sintered at different temperatures. A change in ionic conductivity by about an order can be observed for samples sintered between 850 °C and 950 °C. The samples with densities higher than 90% of theoretical density exhibit higher conductivities. Probably this density is necessary to obtain enough lithium ion conduction paths through the polycrystalline structure providing a high ionic conductivity. This assumption is in good agreement with the development of the microstructure as the sintering temperature increases. Besides the density, the more homogeneous microstructure of the sample sintered at 1100 °C probably leads to shorter diffusion length and in consequence, the ionic conductivity increases.

Temperature dependent impedance measurements were performed to determine the activation energy from an Arrhenius plot for dense samples. Fig. 7 shows the corresponding plot of the imaginary Z(jω) versus the real Z (jω) parts for an LATP sample sintered at 1100 °C.

Temperature dependence of the complex impedance spectra of a typical LATP sample sintered at 1100 °C are shown in Fig. 7 for high (a) and for low (b) temperatures, respectively. In the Nyquist plot we ﬁnd only one suppressed semicircle related to the grain boundary. This behavior is observed over the range of temperatures measured, also at low temperatures where in the high frequency regions the grain contribution is expected. It is obvious that the high frequency

where Ea denotes the activation energy, kB is Boltzmann's constant, and the pre-exponential factor σ∞ is a material speciﬁc constant depending on the charge and concentration of the mobile ion, the mean jump distance and the mean jump frequency. All the samples follow the Arrhenius law in all temperature intervals.

The Arrhenius plot of the total conductivity σT displays the sensitivity of the conductivity on different ambient temperatures. From these data, Ea and σ∞ can be obtained by a simple linear regression, see Fig. 9. The activation energies are in the range of 0.16–0.19 eV, correlating very well with the values known for LATP [38]. The values show an almost linear dependence on sintering temperature. Furthermore, the values of the pre-exponential factor correlate with the sintering temperatures. Keeping in mind that each sample is based on the same powder, in the ﬁrst approximation the stoichiometry stays the same and therefore the amount of charge carriers remains unchanged. So, this dependence may be explained by a structural change in the sample indicating that the mobility of charge carriers is enhanced by sintering at higher temperatures.

An effective and inexpensive synthesis method of LATP is presented. The synthesis starts with a phosphate assisted sol–gel method and involves ﬁeld-assisted-sintering (FAST) for the densiﬁcation of LATP. The use of FAST provides a homogeneous microstructure due to the short sintering times and enhances the sample density. The samples were characterized in view of structural and electrical properties using SEM and EIS. Especially EIS is a useful tool for the assessment of the conductivity behavior. The total resistance decreases with increasing sintering temperatures, which is probably caused by an enhancement in density and moreover by a more homogeneous microstructure leading to an increase in ionic conductivity. This is in coincidence with the small activation energy of 0.18 eV calculated from Arrhenius plot.
