
The  demand  for  sustainable  energy  to  power  new  types  of  portable  electronic  has  made  the  research  for  next-generation  energy  storage  materials  and  devices  extremely  important.  To  overcome  this  crucial  issue,  supercapacitors  that  occupy  an  intermediate  place  between  the  traditional  electrostatic  capacitors and batteries in terms of power and energy density stand  as  a  great  opportunity.  Electronic  double-layer  based  supercapacitors  (EDLCs)  have  proved  high  power  density  but  at  the  expense  of  low  energy  density, [ 1–5 ]   while  the  other  category  known  as  pseudocapacitor  exhibits  fast  charging–discharging  and power density like EDLCs but displays a relative short lifetime.  The  pseudocapacitor  undergoes  the  following  accepted  charge  storage  mechanisms:  1)  electrolyte  ions  adsorption  as  a  monolayer  on  the  electrode  surface,  2)  fast  redox  reactions  at  the  electrode–electrolyte  interface,  and  3)  fast  reversible  intercalation/deintercalation of ions into the bulk of the material.  All  these  mechanisms  are  expressed  as  capacitive  charge  storage or faradaic process, [ 6–9 ]  resulting in high energy density  approaching that of batteries. 

However,  pseudocapacitive  materials  undergoing  only  ion  adsorption and fast redox reaction display a limited energy density compared to batteries. To achieve this high energy density,  bulk ion intercalation has attracted much attentions because it  contributes with an extra capacitance and at some extend with  enormously  high  capacitance. [ 9 ]   This  mechanism  needs  materials  with  an  appropriate  structure,  which  can  accommodate  ion insertion without material destruction. In other words, the  insertion  reaction  should  be  kinetically  facile  and  the  structural rearrangement does not occur during the electrochemical  charge storage. [ 10 ]  Among materials, which can allow ion intercalation,  layered  transition  metal  oxides  with  large  interlayer  distance  have  been  the  most  studied.  Recently,  Brezesinski  et al. [ 11 ]  reported an extra contribution arising from ion intercalation occurring on the same timescale as redox

demonstrated  a  spontaneous  intercalation  of  large  range  of  cations into 2D MXenes layers providing an excess capacitance.  Moreover, Mefford et al. [ 8 ]  reported an anion-based and oxygen  intercalation  charge  storage  mechanism  for  a  nanostructured  perovskite-type  material.  All  these  works  indicate  that  an  ion  intercalation charge storage can occur through cation or anion  intercalation in the bulk material. Besides, owing to the material  destruction  during  the  electrochemical  process,  low  rate  capability and cyclability remain a drawback to achieve practical  application  of  pseudocapacitive  materials.  Thus,  it  is  a  challenge  to  ﬁ nd  a  pseudocapacitive  material,  which  can  simultaneously  accommodate  fast  ion  intercalation  and  sustain  largecycle stability. 

 To overcome this challenge, materials with tunnel structure  such  as  NASICON  compound  represent  a  big  opportunity.  Indeed,  NASICON-type  material  with  a  typical  chemical  formula  Li x M 2 (XO 4 ) 3   with  X =  Mo,  W,  P,  S,  As  and  M =  Co,  Ni,  Zr, Cd, so forth is a large family of compounds, which consist  of  clusters  of  MO 6   octahedra  bridged  by  three-corner-sharing  (XO 4 )  tetrahedral  ( Figure     1  a).  The  octahedra  of  the  clusters  share  corners  with  the  tetrahedra  of  neighboring  clusters  to  create  an  open  3D  host  crystal  structure  that  allows  easy  diffusion  of  small-sized  alkali  cations. [ 13–17 ]   These  3D  framework  materials have been widely investigated for their high ion conductivity  and  present  the  advantage  of  accommodating  large  amount of ion to intercalate (until 5 per formula unit in Li case)  without structure destruction. [ 18 ]   

 To  date,  many  NASICON-type  compounds  have  been  synthesized  for  use  as  membrane,  fuel  cells,  and  gas  sensors. [ 17 ]   Although  these  materials  mostly  have  been  obtained  by  high  temperature and harsh reaction conditions such as a solid-state  reaction at 1000 °C, and widely investigated for energy storage  (electrode  for  lithium-ion  batteries). [ 19 ]   However,  few  reports  have been made on its synthesis in mild condition with a morphology control, its pseudocapacitive behavior, and the mechanism  supporting  the  high  capacitance.  In  this  work,  the  electrochemical  performances  of  nanostructured  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3   3D framework was investigated. Because NASICON-type compound is a large family, we believe that this work opens up to  the exploration of vast number of high-capacity materials. Here,  we report the synthesis of interconnected nanorods–nanoﬂ akes  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3  3D framework as pseudocapacitive material for  supercapacitors.  This  electroactive  material  displays  a  remarkable  capacitance  retention  of  67%  (1055  to  700  F  g −1   for  an  increase of current density from 1 to 50 A g −1 ) and high cyclability of 91% capacity retention after 10 000 cycles at 30 A g −1  

in 2 M LiOH aqueous solution. The interconnected nanorods– nanoﬂ akes morphology and the open 3D host crystal structure  lead to the signiﬁ cant enhanced electrochemical performances.   The  nanorods–nanoﬂ akes  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3   was  obtained  by  mild  condition  hydrothermal  method  and  the  microstructures  are  displayed  in  Figure   1 b.  The  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  patterns  of  the  samples  are  consistent  with  the  orthorhombic  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3   (JCPDS  card  No.  01-085-0059)  with  a  Pnma  space group and lattice parameters of  a  = 5.086 Å;  b  = 10.484 Å;  and   c   =  17.606  Å.  To  obtain  a  better  crystallinity,  the  as-prepared material was annealed at 350 °C, it can be seen that the  XRD  patterns  became  more  resolved  with  the  annealing  process,  which  indicate  an  increase  in  the  crystallinity  due  to  the  removal  of  water  molecules.  The  thermal  stability  and  dehydration processes are investigated by thermogravimetry–differential  thermal  analysis  (TG–DTA).  Figure   1 c  exhibits  a  typical  thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) curve for Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3 , the  total  weight  lost  during  the  whole  process  is  about  6.4%.  The  weight  loss  is  attributed  to  the  removal  of  reversible  bonded  water molecules and water molecules forming the integral part  of the crystal structure. [ 20 ]  

 The as-prepared materials have been grown on a conductive  substrate to avoid the use of a binder as it has a potential use  as  electrode  for  supercapacitor. [ 21,22 ]   The  substrate  also  served  as  a  current  collector  to  provide  fast  electron  transport.  The  schematic  growth  process  of  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3   interconnected  nanorods–nanoﬂ akes is described in  Figure    2  a. To conﬁ rm this  mechanism,  we  studied  the  morphology  evolution  versus  the  reaction  time  during  the  hydrothermal  synthesis  at  120  °C 

and  is  proposed  to  be  as  follows:  ﬁ rst  the  compound  forms  a  seeds  layer  on  the  substrate  to  decrease  the  surface  energy,  second  with  an  increase  in  time,  oriented  nanorods  start  to  grow  from  the  seeds,  which  served  as  the  “growth  spot,” [ 23 ]   third with a further increase of reaction time, nanoﬂ akes start  growing  on  previously  formed  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3   nanorods.  After  around 12–14 h reaction, interconnected nanorods–nanoﬂ akes  are uniformly distributed on the substrate. Exceeding this reaction  time,  the  nanorods–nanoﬂ akes  morphology  is  destroyed  (Figure S2, Supporting Information). The experiment has been  conducted on various substrates (3D nickel foam, carbon cloth,  and carbon ﬁ ber paper (CFP)) and shows the same morphology  for the ﬁ nal obtained product conﬁ rming that this material can  be grown on different substrates (Figure S2, Supporting Information). It is also interesting to reveal that the nanorods–nanoﬂ akes morphology grew on both sides of the substrate without  the  assistance  of  any  other  ion  such  as  ﬂ uorine, [ 24 ]   and  when  the  experiment  was  performed  without  a  substrate,  randomly  sized rods were obtained as the ﬁ nal morphology.  

 Field-emission scanning electron microscopic (FESEM) and  transmission  electron  microscopic  (TEM)  images  depicted  in  Figure   2 b–e  show  that  the  nanoﬂ akes  are  well  attached  to  the  nanorods and no special fractures are observed between the two  morphologies  suggesting  that  nanoﬂ akes  grew  onto  nanorods  and  they  are  constituted  of  the  same  material.  Furthermore,  the  high-resolution  TEM  images  (insets  Figure   2 e)  for  individual nanorod and nanoﬂ ake of the sample annealed at 350 °C  display  an  interplaner  spacing  of  ca  0.447  nm  indexed  to  the  XRD  peak  corresponding  to  19.8°  according  to  the  PDF  card 

of Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3  (JCPDS card No. 01-085-0059), which conﬁ rm  the similarity of the nanorods and nanoﬂ akes. The morphology  evolution  versus  annealing  temperature  has  been  studied  through top-view FESEM images (Figure S3, Supporting Information). The interconnected nanorods–nanoﬂ akes morphology  was  obtained  for  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3   after  hydrothermal  synthesis  and  this  morphology  was  kept  after  annealing  at  350  °C  with  a  decrease  of  the  nanoﬂ akes  thickness.  Moreover,  when  the  annealing  temperature  increases  from  450  °C  to  600  °C,  the  nanorods–nanoﬂ akes start to be destroyed, and then broken to  short nanorods and ﬁ nally agglomerate together. This phenomenon can be easily associated to the removal of water molecules  as demonstrated by the TGA. 

 The  electrochemical  performances  of  the  interconnected  nanorods–nanoﬂ akes Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3  were investigated through  cyclic  voltammetry  (CV)  and  galvanostatic  charge–discharge  tests  using  a  standard  three-electrode  electrochemical  cell  containing  aqueous  electrolytes.  The  CV  measurements  were  carried  out  at  various  scan  rates  in  the  potential  range  between  −0.1  and  0.5  V  versus  Ag/AgCl  saturated  calomel  electrode  (SCE).   Figure     3  a  depicts  CV  curves  of  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3   samples  before  and  after  annealing  at  350 °C  in  2  M  LiOH  electrolyte.  Both samples show two anodic peaks at 0.2 and 0.3 V and two  cathodic peaks at 0.05 and 0.18 V, respectively, constituting two  redox couples, which indicate that the process is fully reversible.  However, for both samples, the peaks positions did not change  with the increase of the current density for slow sweep rate (0.1  to 10 mV s −1 ) (Figure S4, Supporting Information) and the differences between anodic and cathodic peak voltage are 0.15 and  0.12 V, respectively, which indicate a pseudocapacitance behavior  of the as-prepared electrode materials. [ 25 ]  As it can be observed  from  Figure   3 a,  the  sample  annealed  at  350  °C  displays  an  obvious increase in the surface area of the CV curve and more  resolved redox peaks compared with its uncalcined counterpart.  This  phenomenon  can  be  ascribed  to  the  better  crystallization  and  open  tunnel  after  water  removal,  which  easily  allow  ion 

intercalation  in  the  bulk  material. [ 26 ]   When  the  CV  tests  were  performed at sweep rate comprise between 50 and 500 mV s −1 ,  the anodic and cathodic peaks merge to a single broad couple of  anodic and cathodic peaks, and shift noticeably with an increase  in  the  peak  separation,  notwithstanding  that,  the  capacity  still  reversible.  According  to  the  power-law  relationship  between  current and sweep rate ( i  =  a υ  b  ), where  a  and  b  are adjustable  values and a  b -value of 0.5 would indicate that the current is controlled by linear diffusion, while a value of 1 indicates that the  current is surface controlled. [ 27,28 ]  Plotting log( i ) versus log(υ) in  range  of  0.1  to  500  mV  s −1   (Figure   3 b),  the   b   factor  exhibits  a  value for both anodic and cathodic current of 0.82 and 0.85 in  0.1 to 20 mV s −1  and a value of 0.54 and 0.62 in 30 to 500 mV  s −1   sweep  rates  ranges,  respectively.  These  values  approaching  1  and  0.5  indicate  that  the  kinetics  are  surface  controlled  and  ion diffusion controlled in 0.1–20 and 30–500 mV s −1  sweep rate  intervals,  respectively.  Moreover,  the  CV  test  was  conducted  in  different  alkaline  electrolytes  (Figure  S4,  Supporting  Information) at the same sweep rate. The CV curve obtained in Li-based  electrolyte  displays  two  couples  of  redox  peaks,  large  surface  area for the CV curves, and large potential window than those  obtained in Naand K-based electrolytes, which implied that the  charge  delivered  by  the  intercalation/deintercalation  of  Li +   ion  is higher than those of Na +  and K +  ions. [ 29 ]  Overall, the shape of  the CV curves conﬁ rms that the as-synthesized material undergoes faradaic charge storage process in these electrolytes.  

The Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3  sample annealed at 350 °C shows  the  capacity  varying  from  1055  (1.03  F  cm −2 )  to  700  F  g −1   (0.68  F  cm −2 )  from  1  to  50  A  g −1 ,  (1  to  50  mA  cm −2 )  corresponding to 67% capacity retention with a coulombic efﬁ ciency  almost  stable  (98%–99.57%).  Compared  with  the  uncalcined  counterpart  (Figure   3 c)  that  exhibits  57%  capacity  retention  and  coulombic  efﬁ ciency  varying  from  90%  to  100%  with  the  current  density  increases.  This  relatively  high-rate  capability  and  almost  constant  coulombic  efﬁ ciency  once  again  conﬁ rm  that  the  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3   undergoes  pseudocapacitance  mechanism  through  redox  reaction  and  ion  intercalation  in  the  bulk  material  as  the  BET  surface  area  is  relatively  low  (17.65  m 2   g −1 ). [ 12,30,31 ]   However,  to  follow  the  inﬂ uence  of  ion  size  on  the  electrochemical  performances,  galvanostatic  charge–discharge test was also performed in NaOH and KOH  electrolytes.  In  all  electrolytes,  the  as-prepared  material  shows  a pseudocapacitive behavior. It is interesting to notice that the  capacity  obtained  in  lithium-based  electrolyte  is  higher  than  those  realized  in  Na and  K-based  electrolytes  (Figure   3 d),  which is in good agreement with the CV results. This is obviously  attributed  to  the  small  size  of  lithium  ion,  which  is  easier intercalated and also the presence of the Li in the crystal  structure. 

 Figure  3 e displays the cycling performance, which is another  key factor to achieve the requirement for supercapacitor applications.  The  annealed  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3   sample  exhibits  an  outstanding capacity retention of 99% and 91% at 30 A g −1  after 3000 

and  10  000  charge–discharge  cycles,  respectively,  much  better  than  the  uncalcined  counterpart,  which  displays  62%  capacity  lost  after  3000  cycles.  Furthermore,  to  understand  these  outstanding  properties,  electrochemical  impedance  spectroscopy  was performed in the frequency range from 0.01 Hz to 10 kHz  at open circuit. From the Nyquist plots shown in Figure  3 f, the  annealed  and  uncalcined  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3   possess  almost  the  same  charge  transfer  resistance  ( R  ct ),  which  is  represented  by  the diameter of the semicircle in the high-frequency region. [ 32 ]   The  most  remarkably  difference  comes  from  the  slope  in  the  Warburg region (low frequency), which is related to solid-state  ion diffusion in the bulk material. Indeed, the annealed sample  displays  a  high  ion  mobility  and  diffusion  characterized  by  a  steeper slope compared with the uncalcined counterpart, which  explains the improved electrochemical performance of the calcined Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3  over the uncalcined counterpart. 

 For further evidence of ion intercalation in the bulk material,  we performed an in situ XRD studies in LiOH and KOH electrolytes.  The  testing  cell  was  constituted  of  the  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3   annealed  at  350 °C  and  CFP  operating  as  cathode  and  anode,  respectively,  at  a  scan  rate  of  1  mV  s −1   in  the  potential  range  of  0  to  1.6  V.  The  in  situ  XRD  in  LiOH  electrolyte  reveals  an  increase  in  the  peak  intensity  at  21°  (Figure  S5,  Supporting  Information),  which  can  be  related  to  the  lithium  intercalation in the crystal structure. To the other side, the in situ XRD  conducted in KOH displays a shift in the peak position at 31°.  For both electrolytes, an increase in the peak intensity at 45° is  observed  but  more  remarkably  for  Li-based  electrolyte,  which 

can be attributed to the presence of Li in the crystal structure.  This  small  difference  in  the  behavior  of  Li  and  K  containing  electrolyte is related to the crystal channel in the host material,  which  allows  Li +   (small  size  ≈  0.73  Å)  to  intercalate  without  structure  deformation  while  it  is  contrary  for  K +   (large  size  ≈  1.51 Å). 

 The  above-obtained  high  electrochemical  performances  for  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3   annealed  at  350  °C  as  electrode  material  for  supercapacitor  applications  can  be  explained,  in  one  hand,  by  the  interconnected  nanorods–nanoﬂ akes  morphology,  which  enhances  the  kinetics  of  ion  transport  at  the  electrode–electrolyte  interface.  In  the  other  hand,  these  high  performances  are  related  to  the  crystallographic  structure  of  the  NASICONtype  material  possessing  channels,  which  easily  allow  smallsized  ions  to  intercalate  and  deintercalate  without  structural  destruction. 

 Considering  the  practical  application  of  the  as-synthesized  electrode  material,  an  asymmetric  supercapacitor  (ASC)  was  further assembled using a reduced graphene oxide (RGO) ﬁ lm  as  a  negative  electrode  and  the  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3   operating  as  a  positive  one.  The  details  of  the  synthesis  and  electrochemical  characterization of RGO ﬁ lms are described in the Supporting  Information. [ 33 ]   The  optimal  mass  ratio  between  the  positive  and negative electrodes ( m + /m− ) is 0.36 in the ASC calculated  based on the equation displayed in the Supporting Information.   The  electrochemical  performances  of  the  assembled  ASC  were  obtained  by  cyclic  voltammetric  and  galvanostatic  charge–discharge tests with a total mass of 2.47 and 7.4 mg for  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3  and RGO ﬁ lm, respectively.  Figure    4  a shows the  CV  curves  obtained  at  various  voltages  in  2  M  LiOH  electrolyte  at  10  mV  s −1 .  It  is  obviously  seen  that  the  curve  surface  area increases with the voltage increase. Also all the curves display  an  almost  rectangular  shape  on  which  a  couple  of  broad 

anodic  and  cathodic  peaks  can  be  clearly  observed  indicating  both contributions of double-layer capacitance from RGO ﬁ lm  and  faradaic  pseudocapacitance  from  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3 .  Furthermore,  increasing  the  potential  window  at  higher  value  of  1.8  V,  more  redox  peaks  occur  at  the  cathode  indicating  the  large contribution of pseudocapacitive charge transfer process.  Figure   4 b  displays  the  speciﬁ c  capacitance  of  the  asymmetric  capacitance as a function of voltage at 10 A g −1 . The capacitance  increases greatly from 65 to 130 F g −1  with the increase of the  operating  voltage  range  from  1.2  to  1.8  V,  which  leads  to  the  improved  electrochemical  performances.  From  Figure   4 c,  the  speciﬁ c  gravimetric  capacitance  calculated  for  the  as-assembled  ASC  in  the  1.8  V  voltage  window  decreases  from  160  to  116  F  g −1   corresponding  to  a  high-rate  capability  of  77%  with  the  increase  of  current  density  from  1  to  20  A  g −1   and  an  average coulombic efﬁ ciency around 99%. Moreover, the device  displays  outstanding  capacitance  retention  of  98%  after  being  tested  for  8000  cycles  at  20  A  g −1   at  1.8  V  voltage,  which  is  comparable with some previously reported ASCs. [ 34,35 ]   

 As it is well known that the large operating voltage is a critical  factor to increase the devices energy density and average power  density.  Notably,  as  displayed  in  the  Ragone  plot  (Figure   4 d),  our ASC delivers a maximum energy density of 71.63 W h kg −1   at power density of 0.91 kW kg −1  and remains 52.17 W h kg −1   at 18.23 kW kg −1 , calculated according to the equation depicted  in Supporting Information, which are considerably higher and  in the same order as the recently reported values. [ 36,37 ]  Additionally, this energy and average power density are very competitive  with Li-ion batteries and signiﬁ cantly higher than those of currently used electrochemical capacitors. 

 In  summary,  we  have  successfully  synthesized  interconnected  nanorods–nanoﬂ akes  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3   Nasicon-type  structure  by  a  reproducible  mild  hydrothermal  method.  The 

as-prepared  compound  serves  as  electroactive  material  for  supercapacitor and delivers a high rate capability of 67% (from  1055 to 700 F g −1 ) for a current density range from 1 to 50 A g −1   with  a  higher  capacity  retention  (91%)  after  tested  for  10 000 cycles at 30 A g −1 . These high performances are related  to the crystallographic structure of the NASICON material possessing channels that easily allow small-sized ions to intercalate  and  deintercalate  without  structure  destruction  and  the  interconnected  nanorod–nanoﬂ ake  morphology,  which  enhances  the  kinetics  of  ion  transport  at  electrode–electrolyte  interface.  Furthermore,  we  have  assembled  an  ASC  with  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3   and RGO ﬁ lm working as cathode and anode, respectively. The  device displays high energy density of 71.63 W h kg −1  at power  density  of  0.91  kW  kg −1 ,  which  approaches  that  of  Li-ion  batteries, in the extended operating voltage of 1.8 V. It also retains  98%  of  its  initial  capacitance  after  8000  cycles  at  a  current  density of 20 A g −1 . As the NASICON-type materials are large  family  of  many  compounds,  this  encouraging  result  opens  up  an  opportunity  to  consider  these  materials  for  advancing  the  electrochemical performances of supercapacitors.   

interconnected  nanorods–nanoﬂ akes  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3   were  uniformly  synthesized  on  conductive  substrate  (3  D  Ni  foam,  carbon  cloth,  and  CFP)  by  mild  condition  hydrothermal  method  (Method,  Supporting  Information).  For  further  crystallization,  the  obtained  material  was  annealed  at  350  °C  for  1  h  in  the  air  with  increase  temperature  rate  of  5  °C  min −1 .  The  mass  loading  of  the  Li 2 Co 2 (MoO 4 ) 3   was  about  1.04  mg  cm −2   calculated  based  on  the  mass  average of 10 samples. 

  Materials  Characterization :  The  chemical  composition  and  the  morphology  of  the  as-prepared  material  were  determined  by  powder  XRD  (Burker  D8  Advanced  X-ray  diffractometer),  TG,  and  DTA  on  a  STA449c/3/G  (NETZSCH),  BET  surface  area  with  Tristar  II  3020  instrument,  ﬁ eld-emission  SEM  (JEOL7100F),  and  high-resolution  TEM  respectively.  The  electrochemical  properties were carried out in a typical three-electrode cell using Autolab  Potentiostat  Galvanostat  (Autolab  PGSTAT  302N).  The  tests  were  conducted in alkaline electrolyte with as-synthesized materials on the 3D  nickel  foam  as  working  electrode,  Ag/KCl  SCE,  and  Pt  foil  as  reference  and counter electrode, respectively. To further characterize the  electrode  materials, the electrochemical tests were performed in different alkaline  electrolytes and the full cell was assembled with our synthesized material  as cathode and RGO as anode.  
