Effect of doping gallium is studied, and thereby, its consequence on the electrical properties of lithiumbased Li1.3Al0.3 − x GaxTi1.7(PO4)3 (LAGTP) system (where x=0.01, 0.03, 0.05, and 0.07) is reported. X-ray diffraction (XRD) data is used to interpret the microstructural properties. Electrical properties of Li+ ion are studied using impedance spectroscopy in the microwave frequency range of 32 MHz to 1 Hz. The effect on Li+ conductivity was studied in a temperature range 303 to 423 K. It was found that the gallium doping enhanced the conductivity of Li+ ions. The maximum Li+ conductivity −3 S/cm was observed for gallium-doped samof ∼4×10 ples at 413 K. The factors affecting the Li+ conductivity are discussed using the results from XRD patterns and impedance spectroscopy.

Electrochemical compact power sources like lithium-ion batteries can address the power requirement for evergrowing applications in the fields of communication, navigation, industry, transportation, and many others. Na-like superionic (NASICON) class of materials for their unique property to intercalate and decalate Li+ ions in a rigid framework has been studied since 1967 [1, 2]. These materials are synthesized by solid-state reaction route to form polycrystalline compounds [3–8], glasses [9], etc. For a compound like LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP), alkali cations like Li+ intercalate and decalate into cation vacancies in the rigid 3-D framework formed by sharing corner oxygen atoms from two TiO6 octahedra and six PO4 tetrahedra. There are cation vacancies produced between two adjacent TiO6 octahedra in a continuous chain of alternating TiO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra. These vacancy sites are called the M1 sites. The adjacent chains are linked with each other by corner sharing oxygen of PO4 tetrahedra and TiO6 octahedra. Another cation vacancy site (called the M2 site) is formed between the adjacent chains just above the PO4 tetrahedra [10]. Li+ ions intercalate and decalate into these vacancy sites while the skeletal backbone made up of phosphates remains intact. These NASICON compounds have rhombohedral structure (R3c). The doping of trivalent cations like Al3+ forms Li1 + xAlxTi2− x(PO4)3 (LATP) system. At low concentration of aluminum (x≤0.5), the system maintains a rhombohedral structure. But, at higher concentration (x≥0.7), the rhombohedral phase changes to monoclinic and triclinic phases [11, 12]. Many workers [3, 7] have studied the effect on Li+ conductivity by partial replacement of Ti4+ by other trivalent cations like Ga3+, Y3+, Cr3+, Fe3+, In3+, and Sc3+ in NASICON compounds in LTP system. In particular system, gallium-based systems LTP has been studied extensively [13–15].

In the present study, Li1.3Al0.3−xGaxTi1.7(PO4)3 (LAGTP) system (where x=0.01, 0.03, 0.05, and 0.07) Al3+ has been partially replaced by Ga3+, and its effect on the Li+ ionic conductivity is studied. The partial replacement is possible since the value of ionic radii of Ga3+ (0.62 Å) lies between that of Al3+ (0.53 Å) and Ti4+ (0.68 Å). Hence, Ga3+ can replace either of the two cations (Al or Ti) and yield interesting results in the LAGTP system.

Laboratory-grade lithium carbonate (Li2CO3), ammonium diphosphate (NH4H2(PO4)), gallium oxide (Ga2O3), titanium oxide (TiO2), and alumina (Al2O3) (Loba Chemie, Mumbai, India) were taken according to their weight percentages in a cool and dry atmosphere. Since gallium has a low melting point, the samples were treated in a cool atmosphere (18– 19 °C). The weighed powders were mixed and grinded using mortar and pestle for 30 min. This mixture was heated in ceramic ampoules in an electrical furnace up to 573 K for 15–20 min. This heating cycle allowed the water vapor content to escape. Later, it was allowed to slowly cool in the furnace itself. On cooling, the material was again handgrinded for 30 min and heated to 973 K for 30 min. It was left in furnace to cool slowly. The last cycle of hand grinding was done for 30 min per sample. Pellets of 2–3-mm thickness and approximately 10-mm diameter were prepared using a die set on a hydraulic pelletizer at a pressure of 70 MPa. These pellets were heated to 1,173 K for 4 h and cooled slowly. This step of longer heat treatment was used to enhance the density of the samples. We have enlisted the nomenclature for the four concentrations in Table 1.

Silver paint was applied on both surfaces of the pellet to form electrodes. To study the Li+ ion conductivity, impedance spectroscopy was performed using the impedance gain/phase analyzer (SOLARTRON 1260) interfaced to a computer in microwave frequency range of 32 MHz to 1 Hz and temperature range 303 to 433 K. Structural characterization of the material was done by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Rigaku MiniFlex Cu Kα line (λ=1.5405 Å)).

One sample each of parent systems LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) and Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3(LATP) was also prepared and characterized by the same method as the samples of the LAGTP system for a better comparative analysis and to ascertain clearly the difference of doping of gallium. The effect of densification is studied by measuring the density of the prepared samples using the Archimedes method. Methanol was used as a displacing liquid in the method. The density values are presented in Table 1 along with the nomenclature and composition details of the samples. Energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) (Oxford Instruments) was performed on a small region of 500 μm on the surface of the polished pellets to ascertain

X-ray diffraction (XRD) scans of the samples S9 to S12 of the LAGTP series are shown in Fig. 1. NASICON phase (LTP) peak corresponding to space group (R3c ) is prominently seen at 2θ≈24° [4–6, 16]. Other peaks corresponding to GaPO4 [14, 15], AlPO4 [17], and rutile phases TiO2/TiP2O7 are indicated in Fig. 1. In all the figures, the LTP peaks are at 2θ≈24°. The peak at 24° becomes more intense as Ga3+ concentration in the system is increased.

The XRD peaks corresponding to LTP phases at 2θ=24°, 30°, 36°, 47.5, and 50.5, which are indicated by arrows, shift toward lower values of 2θ as the gallium content in the system increases from S9 to S12. That is, as Ga3+ substitutes Al3+ in the LATP structure, the unit cell is likely to elongate along c direction due to larger ionic radii of Ga3+ (0.62 Å) compared to Al3+ (0.53 Å) [6, 7, 18]. Hence, the volume of unit cell increases. Therefore, the d-spacing increases and results in shifting of peak toward lower values of 2θ.

From the XRD patterns, the peaks corresponding to LTP phase become more intense with increasing gallium content. We also observe peaks corresponding to GaPO4 and AlPO4 phases in the XRD patterns especially for S11 and S12, which are indicated by appropriate symbols.

We observe that a slight broadening of the peaks corresponding to LTP phase at 2θ=24, 36, and 50.5 broadens as the gallium content increases in XRD patterns of samples S11 and S12. This indicates a presence of chemical heterogeneities which can be possibly TiO2 or GaPO4 phases near the LTP sites. We also observe small peaks of rutile phases (TiO2 and TiP2O7) in XRD patterns of S9 samples in Fig. 1.

Figure 2 shows a Nyquist plot for sample S9 (where gallium concentration is minimum) at 303 K (30 °C) for original and fitted data. On fitting of the impedance data using equivalent circuit [19–21] (that is a combination of resistance R, capacitance C), we infer that points of smaller depressed semicircle corresponding to higher frequency regime indicate grain region impedance while low frequency arc corresponds to Li+ impedance in grain boundary region. The depressed semicircles corresponding to grain and grain boundary are described using a combination of resistance (R) and constant phase element (CPE) instead of a capacitor (and not pure capacitive (reactive) element). The CPE in circuit fitting indicates presence of impurities in the system. Figure 3 shows the fitted values of gallium-rich (S12 where x=0.07) samples at 363 K (90 °C). Notice that impedance fitting for grain region is done by a parallel combination of R and CPE while the fitting for grain boundary region (at low frequencies) is possible using a combination of R, CPE, and a parallel combination of C1 (double-layer capacitor is an indicator of the electrode-electrolyte interface) and a small resistance R3 (∼102 Ω). These two circuit elements are indicated by blue circles in equivalent circuit in Fig. 4. The presence of small resistance indicates the presence of some (impurity) phases at grain boundary which either are insulating in nature or constrict the passage of Li+. The possible reasons for this point are discussed further in the text.

Figure 5 gives an idea of the (real) impedance behavior with frequency across the four samples under study. The curves do not merge into a single master in low-frequency regions, indicating that with differing concentration of Gallium, the Li+ ions experience different environments to relax. Figure 5 indicates the scaling of impedance values with respect to bulk resistance (Rb) for sample S12 at increasing temperatures. Here, although a uniform dispersive behavior is seen, the scaling into a single curve is not possible. Therefore, even within same concentration, the impedance behavior differs with temperature. This may be due temperature sensitive (low melting point) behavior within each sample due to gallium. As the gallium content in the LAGTP system increases, it gets aggregated at grain boundary as glassy phases. For both the Figs. 4 and 5, the right most side denotes the higher frequencies with lower impedance values corresponds to grain region while the left hand side corresponds to grain boundary regions with higher values of impedance.

The behavior of DC conductivity is shown in Figs. 6 and 7 for grain and grain boundary, respectively. The highest conductivity is seen for sample S10 in both the figures. The number of defects increases with temperature as expected for grain region. The highest value of DC conductivity is seen for sample S10 (contains 3 at.% gallium) of the order of 3.15× −6 S/cm at 303 K temperature compared to the highest DC 10 conductivity values for Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) of 1.78× −6 S/cm (at 323 K) for the samples which have also been 10 incorporated in the figures for comparison. A rather scattered behavior of DC conductivity values is observed for Arrhenius plots of grain boundary regions. The presence of glassy phases (possibly of gallium) is attributed for this uneven behavior of Li+ in grain boundary region. DC conductivity values of parent systems LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) and LATP samples (without gallium) are included for comparison.

Figures 8 and 9 represent conductivity isotherms of samples S9 and S12, respectively. A change in crossover from DC to AC conductivities (indicated by an arrow) is evident as temperatures increase. The crossover point corresponds to isotherm for 373 K (100 °C) at ∼103-Hz frequency. A similar change commences in conductivity isotherms of sample S12 (Fig. 9) at lower temperature of 343 K (70 °C). The crossover from DC to AC regime happens at a lower temperature as the content of gallium increases in the system. Thus, the starting of the changes in the microstructure and of relaxation of Li+ ions is due to increasing amount of gallium in the system. This is also indicated in the above discussion about impedance scaling. These changes are significant due to microstructural change in grain boundary. Table 1 contains the density measurement values while Table 2 gives an idea (from EDS study) of the chemical composition according to the chemical formula of the samples.

Ga3+ replacement of titanium The conductivity enhancement in terms of defects can be explained as follows: The Ga3+ and Al3+ are main group elements and better coordinate (compared to Ti4+) with six oxygen atoms at MO6 octahedral sites via their p-orbital valence electrons [18, 22]. Due to comparable ionic radii of Ga3+ (0.62 Å) with Ti4+ (0.68 Å), Ga3+ cations can go near to M1 and M2 sites in the LTP lattice. Thus, due to presence of Ga3+ and Ti4+ cations near the M1 and M2 vacancy sites, the mobility of Li+ ion at these sites might increase. Hence, there is an increase in the bulk conductivity. Due to the presence of Ga3+ near the LTP sites, the bottleneck size is likely to increase and is conducive for Li+ migration. Due to partial replacement of Ti4+ by Ga3+ at these sites, some Ti4+ is freed and likely forms rutile phase like TiO2 or TiP2O7. These rutile phases are present inside the grain and are insulating by nature. They are seen as small peaks in samples like S12 where gallium content is more compared to other samples. Hence, they act as impurities and block the Li+ ion motion in S11 and S12 samples. As seen in Fig. 4, the fitted values of gallium-rich sample (S12 that is, x=0.07) at 353 K, the insulating effect of such impurity phases is seen clearly wherein the resistance (circled red) is used in the fitting of the grain region.

Ga3+ replacement of aluminum In our series, LAGTP, Ga3+ cations also replace Al3+ in NASICON system LATP.

According to Wong et al. [23–25], there are two types of sites where Al is present in the above-mentioned LATP system. Al present at tetrahedral sites is denoted by AlT, and those at octahedral sites denoted by AlO. GaPO4 phases are segregated when the quantity of gallium in the system increases and when Ga3+ replaces AlT. These GaPO4 phases are seen in the XRD patterns [14, 15]. When Ga3+ replaces AlO, a phase likely formed is Li-Ga-Ti-P (LGTP) which also has a NASICON rhombohedral structure and contributes to the Li+ ion conductivity at M1 and M2 sites [13–15]. This increases Li+ mobility at M2 sites. The TiO6 octahedra are more flexible and allow adjusting the Ga3+ cations along with AlO. This also increases the electropositive influence at M1 sites. Thus, Ga3+ which replaces Al3+ results in increased mobility at these sites.

The accommodation of Ga3+ near the tetrahedral sites results in AlT moving out of the network. According to Wong et al. [23] (on basis of 27Al and 31P MAS NMR results), the AlPO4 (tridymite phases) peaks in a LATP system are formed at 21.7° and 35.8°, as a result of corner sharing of [PO4]3− and [AlO4]5− tetrahedra. The presence of small peaks indicates formation of other impurity phases. According to the work of Key et al. [26], the AlPO4 (tridymite) phases are impurities and formed in solid-state reaction. They have estimated that approximately 10 % of material is used in AlPO4-like phases while another 10 % in TiO2-like rutile phases. Accordingly [26], these phases do not contribute directly toward enhancing the Li+ conductivity in LATP-like systems. According to some workers [27], AlPO4 is situated at grain boundary. Therefore, AlPO4 thus formed contributes toward increasing the density of the network [3, 6, 7].

Also, due to presence of positive cations like Al–Ga near the LTP sites, there is a mutual electropositive repulsion between them. Hence, the structure of the bottlenecks and structure near the cation vacancy sites become slightly enlarged. Due to this repulsive influence from dopant cations (Al and Ga), the Li+, which diffuses into these (M1 and M2) cation vacancies, experiences more mobility compared to the original NASICON structure for LTP system.

Therefore, the Li–O bond is weaker (compared to LTP) at M1 and M2 sites which results in lesser residence time in these vacancies and thus a higher overall conductivity, compared to the LTP system. Due to mutually repulsive influence of doping cations, the distorted and broader structure (with increasing gallium content) can likely convert from rhombohedral to monoclinic phase. From the previous studies, it is known that with increase in the quantity of (positive) dopant content (like Ga3+, Hf3+, Sc3+) in the LTP NASICON system, the phase changes (deteriorates from rhombohedral to monoclinic) [11–13, 18, 22]. This explains the overall increased Li+ conductivity in the LAGTP system compared to the LTP and LATP systems.


Hence, in the current system Li1.3Ti1.7 Al0.3−xGax(PO4)3 (where x=0.01, 0.03, 0.05, and 0.07), the Ga3+ replaces Ti4+, AlO, and AlT sites, and phases likely formed are Li-AlGa-Ti-P (LAGTP) and Li-Ga-Ti-P (LGTP). The formation of secondary phases like LGTP has been studied extensively by Aono et al. [7]. At the sites where Ga3+ has not been able to replace either Al or Ti, the Li-Al-Ti-P (LATP) phases are likely to remain. Besides, it is evident that with increasing gallium concentration, GaPO4-like phases are formed which are likely to be near the grain boundary.

From the impedance scaling, it is known that microstructure of grain boundary changes due to the presence of GaPO4-like glassy phases at grain boundaries with increasing gallium content. Thus, a likely reason for lower Li+ ion conductivity of S11 and S12 samples compared to S9 and S10 could be the presence of phases like GaPO4 (when Ga3+ content is increased), the presence of rutile phases, and change of crystalline structure from rhombohedral to monoclinic. Other workers [28] have also concluded that the segregated glassy phases at grain boundaries do contribute to resistance of the ionic motion along with density. This is also evident from our study (Table 1) where the increasing concentration of gallium also enhances the density of the samples.

Gallium was doped in the concentration range x=0.01, 0.03, 0.05, and 0.07 to replace aluminum in the series Li1.3Al0.3− xGaxTi1.7(PO4)3 (LAGTP) to study the effect on electrical properties. From the XRD patterns and impedance spectroscopy, it was found that gallium replaces AlT, AlO, and Ti sites in the NASICON LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) phase. The formation of TiO2, AlPO4, and GaPO4 phases are explained on basis of XRD, and conductivity enhancement of Li+ due to presence of Ga3+ and Al3+ near the (M1 and M2) cation vacancy sites is explained. The Ga3+ is likely to replace Al and Ti—both cations. From the impedance scaling, it was determined that the presence of different phases near grain boundary also influenced the conductivity with increase in content of gallium. A maximum −3 S/cm Li+ conductivity at 413 K was obtained for of 4×10 sample S10 (contains 3 at.% gallium). The conductivity deteriorated at higher gallium content. This was attributed to the presence of impurities like GaPO4 and TiO2, at grain boundary and a slightly distorted rhombohedral structure with increased gallium content in the LAGTP polycrystalline ceramic system. A comparison with parent systems like LTP and LATP was done to understand the Li+ conductivity creation of defects in the LAGTP system and assess its benefits.
