Fast   ion   conductors   Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 (LATP)   and   Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3 (LAGP)   with   0     0.5   have   been   successfully   prepared   by   the solid   state   reaction   method   and   characterized   using   X-ray   diffraction   (XRD),   nuclear   magnetic   resonance   (NMR)   and   impedance   spectroscopy (IS)   techniques.   The   structural   analysis   showed   that   the   main   crystalline   phase   detected   in   the   XRD   patterns   of   prepared   samples   displays   the rhombohedral   NASICON-type   structure   (space   group   R-3c).   From   the   analysis   of   the 27Al   and 31P   MAS-NMR   spectra,   octahedra   occupation   and cation   distribution   have   been   investigated;  from 7Li   MAS-NMR   spectra,   structural   sites   and   local   mobility   of   Li   have   been   analyzed.   Information about   long-range   lithium   mobility   has   been   deduced   from   the   analysis   of   IS   data   recorded   in   the   frequency   20   Hz   to   3  GHz   and   temperature 100–500   K   intervals.   The   use   of   the   derivative   log     function   has   enabled   the   detection   of   two   high   frequency   responses   that   have been   associated,   according   to   the   core-shell   model,   to   the   heterogeneous   distribution   of   Al   at   surface   and   inside   LATP   and   LAGP   particles.   IS −1 at   RT)   and   lower   activation   energy   (0.28   and   0.38   eV)   in   LATP measurements   showed   a   higher   bulk   conductivity   (3.4   and   LAGP   samples,   respectively.

The   necessity   of   modern   society   to   develop   sustainable   transportation   systems,   reducing   our   dependence   on   fossil   fuel,   and the  demand   for   a  clean   and   secure   energy   source   has   stimulated a  global   resurgence   in   searching   for   advanced   electrical   energy storage  and   generation   systems.   A   new   generation   of   electric  energy   storage   systems   such   as   batteries,   supercapacitors and  fuel   cells   has   been   developed.   Batteries   remain   the   most promising  electrical   energy   storage   systems   for   many   applications,  from   portable   electronics   to   emerging   technologies   such as  electric   vehicles   and   smart   grids.   Among   batteries,   lithium ion   batteries   (LIBs)   have   attracted   attention   because   the   theoretical  energy   density   (both   gravimetric   and   volumetric)   of   lithium metal.

When  Titanium   is   partially   substituted   by   trivalent   N   cation (N  =   Al,   Ga,   In,   Fe,   Sc,   etc.)   the   “bulk”   ionic   conductivity is  enhanced11–16 reaching   values   comparables   those   of organic  electrolytes   currently   used   the   rechargeable   Li −1).16,17 In   rhombohedral   NASICON ion  battery   (10 LiM2(PO4)3 phases   (S.G.   R-3c),   Li   ions   occupy   mainly   six-fold coordinated   M1   sites,   but   in   Li1+xRxTi2−x(PO4)3 Li   occupy M1  and   M3   sites.18 Unfortunately,   the   multivalence   nature of  the   titanium   can   result   in   low   dielectric   stability   caused by  the   reduction   of   Ti4+ vs.   lithium   in   secondary   lithium   batteries.   The   investigation  on   alternative   Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3 (LAGP)   materials19–25 has   recently   gained  considerable interest   because   they   display   a   good   electrochemical   stability, a  wide   electrochemical   window   and   have   an   ionic   conductivity comparable  to   LATP   compounds.   LATP   and   LAGP   materials are  considered   promising   candidates   for   solid   electrolytes; displaying  good   electrochemical   performances   in   all-solid thin  ﬁlms   Li4Ti5O12/LATP/LiMn2O4 or   Li/LAGP/TiO2 LIBs devices  operating   at   room   temperature.

In   the   present   work   we   aim   to   investigate  long-range   mobility  of   lithium   in   Li1+xAlxM2−x(PO4)3 systems   (M   =   Ti,   Ge   and ≤   0.5)   by   impedance   spectroscopy   in   wide   temperature   and 0    x   frequency   ranges.   The   MAS-NMR   technique   has   been   used   to analyze  cation   location   and   Li   mobility.   This   study   will   offer   a better  understanding   of   factors   that   enhance   lithium   conductivity in  NASICON   type materials.

All   used   reagents   have ≥99%.   X-ray   diffraction   (XRD)   patterns   of   NASICON a  purity     =   1.5405981 ˚A) samples  were   recorded   with   Cu-K␣ in  a  PW   1050/25   Phillips   apparatus   to   identify   crystalline   phases. Unit  cell   parameters   of   NASICON   samples   were   determined with  the   Fullprof   program   (LeBail   procedure).27


P, Al and Li   MAS-NMR   spectra   were   recorded   at   room temperature  in   a   MSL-400   Bruker   spectrometer   (9.4   Tesla). The  frequencies   used   for 31P, 27Al   and 7Li   were   161.97,   100.4 and  155.50   MHz. 7Li, 31P   NMR   spectra   were   obtained   after ␮s,   respectively)   and 27Al   NMR π/2  pulse   irradiation   (3   and   4  ␮s)   single   pulse   irradiations,   with   a   recycling ones  after   time  of   10   s.  During   spectra   recording,   the   sample   was   spun at  2   kHz   (7Li   signal)   and   4   kHz   (31P   and 27Al   signals)   around an  axis   inclined   54 with   respect   to   the   external   magnetic ﬁeld  (MAS   technique).   The   number   of   scans   was   in   the   range   of 100–800. 7Li, 31P   and 27Al   NMR   chemical   shifts   were   referred to  1   M   LiCl,   85%   H3PO4 and   1   M   AlCl3 aqueous   solutions.   The ﬁtting  of   NMR   spectra   was   done   with   the   Bruker   WINFIT   software  package.28 This   program   allows   the   position,   linewidth   and intensity  of   components   to   be   determined   with   a  non-linear   leastsquare  iterative   method.   The   quadrupole   CQ and     parameters η have  to   be  deduced   with   a   trial   and   error   procedure.

To  achieve   the   proper   electrical   characterization   of   samples  two   experimental   set-ups   were   used:   (i)   an   automatically controlled  Agilent   Precision   LCR   E4980-A   analyzer   for 20Hz–2  MHz   and   77–550   K   ranges.   The   sample   was   placed in  a  JANIS   VPF   750   cryostat,   allowing   4L-conﬁguration   measurements,   (ii)   an   automatically   controlled   Agilent   E4991-A   RF Impedance/material   analyzer   for   1MHz–3   GHz   and   150–550   K intervals.   In   conductivity   determinations,   the   coaxial   line   was interrupted   by   inserting   the   sample   between   the   central   conductor   of   the   Wiltron   18A50   air-line   and   the   short   circuit   cap. Electrical   conductivity   measurements   were   carried   out   by   complex  Impedance   Spectroscopy   on   6  mm   diameter   and   0.5–1   mm thickness   pellets.   Samples   were   prepared   by   uniaxial   pressing and  sintered   at   1273   K   during   6   h.

The   larger   surfaces   of   the   pellets   were   polished   until   mirror ﬁnishing,  then   sputtered   Pt   electrodes   were   deposited.   Finally, Pt  Au   paste   electrodes   (Dupont   QG150)   were   painted   and   sintered  at   1123   K  during   1   h.   After   sintering,   paste   electrodes were  ﬁnally   polished.   All   the   measurements   were   performed in  vacuum   or   inert   atmosphere.   When   necessary,   non-linear least-square  ﬁttings   of   impedance   data   were   performed   with   the ZView2  program.


XRD   patterns   of   analyzed   samples   annealed   at   950C are  shown   in   Fig.   1.   The   intense   peaks   of   patterns   correspond  to   those   reported   for   LiTi2(PO4)3 (JCPDS   35-0754) or  LiGe2(PO4)3 (JCPDS   41-0034)   NASICON   phases.2,3 For x  >   0.2,   small   peaks   associated   with   aluminum   phosphate   were detected  in   both   analyzed   series.   In   LAGP   samples;   small amounts  of   GeO2,   Li2O   or   Li4P2O7 were   also   detected   in   Alrich  samples   (x   =   0.5).   In   LATP   samples,   XRD   peaks   shift   toward higher  2θ   positions   and   hexagonal   a  and   c  parameters   decrease (Table   1)   as   a   consequence   of   the   smaller   Al3+size   (0.535 ˚A) compared   to   Ti4+ cations   (0.605 ˚A).   In   LAGP   samples   peaks   do not  shift   appreciably   because   similar   radius   of   Ge4+ (0.530 ˚A) and  Al3+ (0.535 ˚A)29 cations.

Fig.   2  shows   the   fracture   surface   observed   by   scanning   electron  microscope   (SEM)   for   LAGP   ceramics.   It   can   be   observed that  prepared   ceramics   have   a  very   dense   structure.   The   relative density  of   the   pellets   (deduced   from   the   ratio   dexp/dthe of   experimental  and   theoretical   density   values)   was   better   than   90%. As  an   example,   for   x   =   0.2,   relative   density   values   of   LATP   and LAGP  are   92.8%   and   90.1%,   respectively.   In   some   regions   of SEM  micrographs,   porosity   seems   to   be   larger   than   10%.   This could  be   related   to   the   polishing   of   the   samples   producing   some pull-out  and   increasing   the   porosity   in   the   polished   surface   of the  analyzed   ceramic. 27Al   MAS-NMR   spectra   (I   =   5/2)   of   analyzed   samples   are → formed  by   ﬁve   (−5/2     1/2 → → 1/2    5/2)   transitions   modulated   by   equally spaced  sidebands   associated   to   the   sample   spinning.   The   analysis  of   the   central   (−1/2     1/2)   transition   in   LATP   and   LAGP −14   ppm   that   corseries  showed   one   intense   component   at   responds   to   aluminum   in   octahedral   coordination   (AlO)   and   one less  intense   at     41   ppm   ascribed   to   tetrahedral   coordination (AlT),   see   Fig.   3.   In   LATP   samples,   the   intensity   of   the   AlT signal  is   lower   than   that   of   AlO one;   however   in   LAGP   samples, the   intensity   of   the   AlT component   is   comparable   to   that   of   AlO aluminum,   Fig.   3b.   The   presence   of   tetrahedral   Al   has   been   associated  with   the   presence   of   the   secondary   AlPO4 phases.   The substitution   of   Ti4+ by   Al3+ in   octahedra   increases   the   amount of  lithium   in   analyzed   series.

31P   (I   =   1/2)   MAS-NMR   spectra   of   LATP   and   LAGP   samples  are   shown   in   Fig.   4.   Spectra   of   undoped   LiTi2(PO4)3 and   LiGe2(PO4)3 samples   display   a  single   narrow   line   at −43   ppm,   ascribed   to   P(OTi)4 and   P(OGe)4 −27.5  ppm   and   environments.   In   LATP   samples,   the   substitution   of   Ti4+ by Al3+ shifts   toward   more   positive   values   and   asymmetrically broadens  the   NMR   line,   indicating   the   presence   of   additional components.  In   the 31P   MAS   NMR   spectra   of   LAGP   samples, −40   ppm,   that   have   been additional  signals   were   detected   below   ascribed  to   P(OGe)3(OAl)1,   P(OGe)2(OAl)2,   P(OGe)1(OAl)3, environments   The   separation   between   components   increases with  relative   power   strength   of   Al   and   Ti/Ge   cations.

If  it   is   assumned   that   Ti,Al   and   Ge,Al   cation   distributions are  random   in   NASICON’s   compounds,   it   is   posible   to   deduced Al/Ti  y   Al/Ge   ratios   with   the   expression15: M4+ = 4I4 + Al3+ I3 +


Table  2 Experimental  Al  content  incorporated  in  NASICON  as  deduced  from  quantitative  analysis  of 27Al  and 31P  NMR   spectra. where   In stands   for   relative   intensities   of   P(OGe)4−n(OAl)n components  and   x   and   2     x  are   relative   occupancy   of   octahedral   sites by  Al3+ and   M4+ (Ti4+ or   Ge4+)  cations.

A   comparison   of   Al   contents   deduced   from 27Al   and 31P MAS-NMR  spectra   are   given   in   Table   2.   In   general   values deduced  from   two   NMR   signals   are   similar,   but   appreciably different  from   nominal   values,   indicating   that   samples   are   heterogeneous   and   some   segregation  of   Al   phosphates   is   favored for  high     values.   At   this   point,   it   is   important   to   deduce   true   Al values  that   optimize   transport   properties   in   NASICON   phases. 7Li   (I   =  3/2)   MAS-NMR   spectra   of   LATP   and   LAGP   samples  are   formed   by   three   possible   (-3/2  >   -1/2;   -1/2  >   1/2   and 1/2 >   3/2)   transitions   modulated   by   equally   spaced   sidebands associated  to   the   sample   spinning   (Fig.   5).   Spectra   of   these   samples  are   formed   by   two   non   resolved   components   centered   at ∼0  ppm,   ascribed   to   Li   ions   located   at   M1 and   M3 sites.   To

From   the   ﬁtting   of   experimental   proﬁles,   quadrupolar CQ ≈   0   parameters   were   deduced   for   Li   ions   at ternary  axes   (M1   sites).   In   the   case   of   Li   ions   at   M3   sites,   only the  central   transition   was   detected,   indicating   that   local   mobility cancels   Li-network   interactions.   The   study   of   two   signals   suggests  that   exchange   motion   between   two   sites   is   still   limited. From  this   fact,   the   quantitative   analysis   of   Li   MAS-NMR   spectra  based   on   simulation   of   experimental   proﬁles,   allowed   the estimation  of   the   relative   occupation   of   two   sites   by   lithium.

In  fast   ion   conductors,   the   enlargement   of   the   frequency   window  is   required.   The   frequency   range   was   extended   by   using   two experimental   set-ups   described   in   the   experimental   section.   The frequency  dependence   of   electrical   conductivity   of   LATP   and LAGP  series   is   depicted   in   Fig.   6.   The   analysis   of   conductivity plots  at   increasing   temperatures   allowed   the   resolution   of   “bulk” (B),  “grain-boundary”   (GB)   and   “electrode”   (E)   contributions. The  contributions   “B”   and   “GB”   were   better   resolved   applying the  derivative   criterion.30 The   LATP   displayed   a  higher   “bulk” −2.47   for   LATP conductivity  than   LAGP   series:   log   −4.1   for   LAGP   samples   (Fig.   7a).   The   activation   energy and  decreased  from   0.28   eV   to   0.24   eV   as   temperature   increases   in LTAP,  but   from   0.38   to   0.33   eV   in   LAGP   samples.

However,  small   reﬂections   associated   with   AlPO4 phosphates   were detected  in   both   series,   indicating   that   nominal   Al   values   were not  obtained.   In   LAGP   samples;   residual   amounts   of   GeO2, Li2O   or   Li4P2O7 were   also   detected.   The   deconvolution   of 27Al and 31P   MAS-NMR   spectra   allowed   a   quantitative   estimation   of Al/Ti  and   Al/Ge   ratios   (Table   2).   In   general,   it   is   observed   that Al/Ti  and   Al/Ge   are   smaller   than   nominal   values   in   NASICON compounds,  and   observed   differences   increase   with   the   Al   content.  Moreover,   the   amount   of   Al   incorporated   in   LAGP   is   lower than  that   of   LATP   series. The   substitution   of   trivalent   Al3+ cations  tetravalent   Ti4+ or   Ge4+ cations by  the   amount   of   Li in  Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 (LATP)   and   Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3 (LAGP)   series.   On   the   other   hand,   the   ﬁtting   of   experimental NMR  proﬁles   showed   the   presence   of   two   signals   ascribed   to M1  and   M3   sites.   In   this   analysis,   quadrupolar   CQ ≈   25   kHz   and ≈   0   constants   were   deduced   for   Li   ions   at   ternary   axes   (M1 sites)  and   CQ ≈   0   for   Li   ions   at   M3   sites.   In   the second  case,   local   mobility   of   lithium   cancels   Li-network   interactions  making   that   only   the   central   component   was   detected.

The  determination   of   Li1   and   Li3   concentrations   required   of mathematical   integration   of   satellite   bands   detected   in  MASNMR  spectra.   The   analysis   of   LATP   and   LAGP   series   showed that  the   increment   of   Al   content   in   NASICON   phases   favored   the occupation   of   M3   sites,   decreasing   that   located   at   M1   sites.   This observation   suggests   that   the   occupation   of   M3   sites   increases electrostatic  repulsions   between   Li1   and   Li3   ions,   making   Li1 ions  to   move   to   near   vacant   M3   sites   (dLi–Li ∼

The   temperature   dependence   of   Li   conductivity   in   two   analyzed  series   is   given   in   Fig.   7.   In   both   series,   conductivity plots  display   the   Arrhenius   behavior,   showing   some   deviation from  temperatures.   LATP   samples   presented  higher   “bulk”   conductivity   than   LAGP   samples   at   RT: −1 for   LAGP   samlog  ples.  In   the   temperature   range   explored,   the   activation   energy of  LTAP   samples   decreased   from   0.28   eV   to   0.24   eV,   and   from 0.38  to   0.33   eV   in   LAGP   samples,   when   temperature   increases. The  decrease   observed   in   activation   energy   has   been   previously ascribed  to   the   creation   of   vacancy   at   M1   sites.18 The   formation of  vacant   sites   at   the   intersection   of   conduction   pathways,   favors long-range   mobility,   in   LATP   and   LAGP   series.

A  deeper   analysis   of   conductivity   revealed   that   the   “bulk” response  displays   a  higher   degree   of   complexity.   In   this   context, the  “derivative   criterion”30 was   used   to   resolve   different   contributions.  In   Fig.   8,  plots   of   the   derivative   Dlog(Y (ω))/Dlog(ω)) function   are   depicted   at   different   temperatures   for   four   analyzed samples.  To   better   understand   the   expected   shape   of   derivative functions,  synthetic   plots   deduced   from   the   ﬁtting   of   admittance  LAGP   data   to  equivalent   circuits31 are   given   in   Fig.   9a. The  comparison   of   calculated   and   experimental   plots   showed that  classical   equivalent   circuits   did   not   reproduce   the   high   frequency  part   of   ceramic   responses,   suggesting   the   presence   of   an additional  contribution.

In   Fig.   8a,   the   derivative   plot   of   conductivity   is   presented   for the  LATP   02   sample.   At   low   temperature,   a  constant   slope   0.65 was  detected,   that   was   related   to   the   universal   dielectric   Jonscher response   (UDR).   The   minimum   detected   at   the   intermediate   frequencies,  near   the   grain   boundary   contribution,   is   related   to   the “bulk”   d.c.   plateau   (see   arrows   in   ﬁgure),   and   that   detected   at the  lowest   frequencies   and   higher   temperatures   to   the   blocking effect  at   the   grain   boundaries.   The   strong   unrealistic   increment detected  at   GHz   frequency   in   derivative   plots   was   ascribed   to the  inappropriated   compensation   of   the   air   line.

In  the   case   of   LAGP-02,   however,   an   extra   minimum   was detected  at   the   highest   frequencies   in   dispersive   region   of   the conductivity   (denoted   with   arrows),   Fig.   8c.   The   extra   minimum indicates   the   presence   of   an   extra   dc-like-response.   The   presence  of   two   “bulk”   contributions   has   been   reported   previously in  other   NASICON   phases,   but   this   was   not   discussed.17,32 The temperature  dependence   of   the   effective   conductivity   (Arrhenius  plot)   is   given   in   Fig.   7a.   In   the   case   of   the   LAGP-02   sample the  extra   “bulk”   high-frequency   contribution   displayed   an   activation  energy   of   0.28   eV   that   is   close   to   that   deduced   for   the main  “bulk”   response   of   LATP   samples.   The   LATP-04   sample displays   a   single   response   (Fig.   7b)   without   described   anomalies. The  presence   of   two   “bulk”   responses   depends   on   preparation conditions  of   samples.   To   illustrate   this   effect,   the   real   part   of conductivity   measured   at   175   K   for   different   batches   of   LATP-02 is  given   in   Fig.   9b.   The   conductivity   response   is   almost   linear, with  a  small   deviation   in   the   high   frequency   range;   however, derivative  plots   showed   two   contributions.   In   general,   one   single dc-“bulk”   contribution   is   dominant   in   samples   where   derivative values  at  minima   are   close   to   zero.   In   one   of   analyzed   batches, both  contributions   and   their   corresponding   activation   energies (0.28  eV)   are   similar.

In  LATP   samples   analyzed   in   this   work,   the   high-frequency “bulk”  contribution   dominates   the   “bulk”   response,   but   this   is reversed   in   LAGP   samples.   This   effect   can   be   related   to   compositional  heterogeneities   in  NASICON   particles,   producing   zones with  different   Al   content.   From 27Al   and 31P   MAS-NMR   spectra analysis,  the   amount   of   Al   incorporated   in   NASICON   compounds  is   smaller   than   expected.   In   LATP   and   LAGP   series, AlPO4 impurities   were   detected   for   x     0.2;   this   segregation  was better  detected   in   LAGP   than   in   LATP   samples   (see   Table   2). The  segregation  of   Al   at   the   surface   particles   depends   on   the composition   and   preparation   conditions   and   strongly   condition high-quality   of   ceramics.   The   Al   depletion   from   the   particles  surface   to   form   less   conducting   phases   should   have   a strong  inﬂuence   on   the   total   and   grain-boundary   resistances. In  LATP-02   samples   where   the   secondary   contribution   is   displaced  to   much   lower   frequencies   than   the   main   “bulk”   response, the  grain-boundary   blocking   is   much   larger   than   in   LATP-04, LAGP-02  and   LAGP-05   samples.

The  observed   separation   of   “bulk”   responses   in   LATP-02   and LAGP-02   samples   can   be   explained   with   the   core-shell   model. According   to   this   model,   the   relative   importance   of   shell   and core  contributions   should   be   different   in   LATP-02   and   LAGP-02 samples.  In   the   LAGP   series,   the   low   frequency   “bulk”   contribution  displays   a   lower   conductivity   than   the   core   contribution. In  the   case   of   the   LATP   sample   the   main   “bulk”   high   frequency contribution,  displaying   high   conductivity,   suggests   a   higher   volume  for   the   core   phase.   This   segregation  must   be   related   to   the deﬁcient  Al   incorporation   into   NASICON   compounds.   In   LAGP samples,  the   Al   incorporation   to   the   NASICON   phases   is   more difﬁcult  than   in   LATP   samples,   producing   a   thicker   low   Al/Li shell.  In   Fig.   10,   a   schematic   view   of   the   proposed   core-shell model  for   two   series   is   given.   When   Al   increases,   the   segregation  of   AlPO4 phase   is   favored   in   both   series.   This   segregation produces   the   partial   elimination   of   the   core-shell   structure, favoring  a  more   homogeneous   composition   in   grains.   This compositional   homogeneity   produces   better   grain   boundary responses  and   improved   ceramic   Li   conductivity.

It  should   be   noted   that   from   the   obtained   IS   results   it   is  possible  to   make   a  quantitative   estimation   of   the   relative   fraction of  the   less   Li   conducting   phase   by   using   suitable   composite models,  joined   to   an   in-deep   micro-structural   analysis   of   the ceramic  samples.   From   deduced   information   the   effective   coreshell  structure   can   be   deduced.   The   results   of   this   analysis   will be  the   aim   of   a   future   work.

The   analysis   of   LATP   and   LAGP   series   by   XRD,   NMR   and   IS has  permitted   to   show   that   the   increment   of   conductivity   detected in  Al-doped   samples   is   associated   with   the   Li   content   incorporation.   In   these   samples,   the   increment   of   Li   content   improves electrostatic  Li–Li   repulsions   between   Li   ions   located   at   M1   and M3  sites,   favoring   the   occupation   of   M3   sites   and   localization of  vacant   sites   at   M1   sites.   In   M3   sites,   quadrupole   interactions, measured  at   room   temperature,   are   much   lower   than   at   M1   sites, indicating   that   Li-network   interactions   are   reduced,   increasing local  Li   mobility   at   M3   sites.   Both   facts   favor   long   range   mobility of  lithium   in   conduction   pathways.

Taken  into   account   low   Al   concentrations   in   prepared   samples,  some   heterogeneity   has   been   detected   in   low   Al   contents, suggesting  the   existence   of   poor-Li   shells   structures,   with   an Al-rich  core.   On   increasing   the   Al   substitution   the   electrical  response   is   homogeneous   related   to  a  homogeneous   grain composition.   The   importance   of   compositional   heterogeneities depends  on   the   sample   preparation.   The   derivative   criterion   used in  conductivity   data   has   demonstrated   the   existence   of   two   wellresolved  contributions   in   heterogeneous   samples.   In   order   to increase   Li   conductivity,   the   improvement   of   Al   homogeneity in  particles   is   required.
