In a conventional Na-ion battery system using liquid electrolyte, there are critical safety issues due to the instability of the liquid electrolyte. Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (NASICON) solid electrolyte is a material that is suﬃcient to replace a liquid electrolyte as it has high ionic conductivity and thermal and electrochemical stability. However, as there is a large interfacial resistance in the NASICON solid electrolyte powder, even when used in combination with a polymer electrolyte, the advantageous eﬀects of ceramics are not easily exhibited. In this study, we propose a top-down method of combining a polymer with a ceramic in which an ion transport channel is previously formed. In this method, a NASICON solid electrolyte is partially sintered to form ion transport channels. Then the NASICON solid electrolyte pores are ﬁlled with an epoxy polymer to increase the strength of the epoxy-NASICON composite electrolyte. This method demonstrates the possibility of our composite electrolyte being used as a thin and strong ﬁlm. As a result of our methods, the ionic conductivity and thermal and electrochemical stability of NASICON were maintained, while the physical strength was enhanced by approximately 2 times. In addition, a capacity of 120 mA h g􀀁1 and stability of 20 cycles were conﬁrmed in a half cell with a Na3V2(PO4)3 cathode and Na metal. This method proposes a new direction for research regarding composite electrolytes created using an oxide-based solid electrolyte.
Rechargeable Na-ion batteries (NIBs) are rapidly emerging as a potential technology to replace lithium in the energy storage market.1 NIBs have significant advantages because of the low-cost and abundant resources of Na as compared to lithium.2 With the recent increase in renewable energy generation and large-scale energy storage system (ESS) demand, low-cost NIBs are promising systems.3 Currently researched NIBs have several issues regarding their organic liquid electrolytes, including ammability and potential safety hazards in large-scale appli-cations.4 In view of this safety issue, Na-ion solid-state battery systems that do not use organic liquid electrolytes are consid-ered to be a suitable solution, and making solid electrolytes is important for the future of batteries.5
In general, the solid electrolytes used to develop Na-ion solid state battery systems are based on inorganic solid materials;6,7 in particular, oxide-based materials that have high ionic conductivity and are electrochemically and thermally stable are being studied.8–10 Among oxide-based materials, Na-b-alumina materials have been mainly studied. Because of their high ionic conductivity, they have been used in all-solid-state batteries until recently.11 However, they have the disadvantage of being vulnerable to moisture. Another stable oxide-based material is Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (Na super-ionic conductor, NASICON). NASICON solid electrolytes are promising oxide-based Na-ion conducting materials, with a high ionic conductivity of over 10􀀁4 Scm􀀁1 at room temperature and stability to air and moisture.12 NASICON ceramics are electrochemically stable up to 7 V, making them suitable for use in high voltage batteries. Owing to its stability advantages, eﬀorts have been made to use NASICON in solid-state NIB systems. However, there remains a critical problem in the resistance between solid particle interfaces caused by the fragile and rigid nature of the oxide material itself, regardless of how high the pressure of the solid electrolyte powder is, making it diﬃcult to utilize it in a solid-state battery system.13–16
There have been numerous studies on composite electrolytes with polymer materials with the aim of counteracting the solid–solid interface resistance of these oxide-based solid particles. Polymer materials have exible physical properties and are thereforesuitableto compensatefor thedisadvantages of oxide-based solid ceramic electrolytes. Table 1 summarizes the previous studies and current trends of ceramic–polymer composite electrolytes for use in NIBs.17–24 In most of the studies that use Na-ion conducting ceramics, a composite electrolyte was prepared with the aim that the ceramic powder would perform ion transport in the polymer electrolyte. If ion transfer through the ceramic is conrmed, it is possible to increase the ceramic ratio and expect a thermally and electrochemically stable composite. However, if there is no ion transfer through the ceramic, the ionic conductivity decreases as the proportion of ceramics increases.17–25 According to a recent report, the ion conductivity in the above-mentioned composite electrolyte exists primarily through the polymer electrolyte, and the ceramics contribution is negligible.25 Therefore, the ceramic is used only as 
 of the polymer electrolyte, and as the ratio of the polymer electrolyte is still high, the thermal and electrochemical instability characteristics of the polymer remain. The above experiment is summarized in Fig. 1.
The inuence of the solid electrolyte is not readily seen when the oxide ceramic is in a powder state. Therefore, more research is required surrounding methods that aim to increase the ceramic proportion and enable ion transport through ceramics. In particular, for ion conduction through ceramics, the ion transport channel of the oxide-based solid electrolyte must be formed separately in the composite electrolyte.
In this study, we propose a top-down method of combining a polymer with a ceramic in which an ion transfer channel has been previously formed. This allows for the main ion transport channel to pass through the ceramic while the polymer material can be used to improve the physical properties of the solid electrolyte. Moreover, since the proportion of ceramic in the composite electrolyte is more than 50 wt%, a thermally and electrochemically stable solid electrolyte can be produced.
To conrm the possibility of a top-down composite electro-lyte, we used a method of partially sintering a high porosity ceramic solid electrolyte and 
its internal pores with a polymer material to increase the physical strength. A NASI-CON ceramic solid electrolyte11 was used as the oxide-based solid electrolyte, and epoxy-NASICON solid electrolyte pelle were prepared by  the internal pores with an epoxy-resin polymer material,26 thereby conrming the possibility of using the electrolyte in an NIB. Through this method, the physical properties are expected to increase in strength owing to the use of epoxy-resin polymer materials, while the ion conduction eﬀect can be transferred through the sintered NASICON solid ceramic to create a highly stable solid ceramic electrolyte. As a result, the ionic conductivity becomes 1.45 􀀂 10􀀁4 Scm􀀁1, the thermal and electrochemical stability of NASICON are main-tained, and the physical strength is enhanced by approximately 2 times compared to that of the bare NASICON pellet. In addi-tion, cell performance stability of 20 cycles was conrmed in a half-cell with a Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) cathode and Na metal. This method will give a new direction to the existing method for producing a composite electrolyte using an oxide-based solid electrolyte. It is expected that composite solid electrolytes may be applied to various battery systems by combining the oxide-based solid electrolyte and the polymer material.
Precursor materials required for NASICON solid electrolyte powder synthesis were used as follows. Na2HPO4 (sodium phosphate dibasic, ACS reagent, >99%, Sigma-Aldrich Korea), SiO2 (silicon dioxide, >99.5%, Sigma-Aldrich Korea), and ZrO2 (zirconium oxide, 99%, Sigma-Aldrich Korea) were purchased. They were dissolved in EtOH in accordance with NASICON stoichiometry, ball milled for 1 d, and then dried to obtain the precursor powder. Thereaer, the powder was cold pressed to form pellets and then sintered. The pellets were  sintered at 400 􀀄C for 4 h, then at 800 􀀄C for 4 h, and anally at 1100 􀀄C for 10 h. A synthesis, an X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) analysis verified that the NASICON crystal phases were formed (ESI Fig. S1†).
The epoxy-resin polymer was prepared as follows. Monomer bis(4-glycidyaloxyphenyl) propane and 1,3-phenylenediamine were dissolved in tetrahydrofuran (THF) at 1 M and stirred for 1 h until they dissolved completely. Each solution was then mixed at a volume ratio of 2 : 1 and stirred again for 1 h. The mixed solution was used as an epoxy-resin polymer solution.
Aer saturating the porous NASICON pellets with the epoxy-resin solution, they were maintained in a vacuum to allow for absorption into the internal pores. 
 repeating this process three times, the NASICON sample absorbing the epoxy polymer was heat-treated at 150 􀀄C for 24 h. Aer this thermal poly-merization of the sample, a brown epoxy-NASICON sample was obtained.
The bending strength was calculated by a KS L 1591 three-point strength measurement and was measured by the Korea Institute of Ceramic Technology. For the three-point strength measure-ment, the bending strength of the sample was obtained by measuring the force when the sample breaks by applying an opposite force to the center point of the sample supported at 2 points. The formula for the three-point strength measurement is as follows:
where s is the bending strength of the sample, F is the load (force) at the fracture point (N), L is the length of the support span, b is the sample width, and d is the thickness of the sample. In this strength measurement, all the pellet samples were tested in a 20 mm 􀀂 20 mm area, and the thickness was measured at 1.3 mm. The measurement speed was 0.5 mm min􀀁1. The breaking load at the time of measurement can be conrmed from ESI Table S1.†
A thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed by adjusting the rate of temperature increase by 1 􀀄C min􀀁1 from room temperature to 700 􀀄C in an air atmosphere. The instru-ment used was a Q500 model from TA Instruments.
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed on the surface of the solid electrolyte pellets by bringing into contact Na metal on one side and a Pt sputter on the other, followed by the SUS electrode. The scan rate was 0.05 V min􀀁1 from 􀀁1 V to 7 V. The measuring instrument used was a Biologic VSP-300 model.
The NASICON solid electrolyte material characterization was performed through an XRD analysis using a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diﬀractometer with a Cu Ka X-ray source. Measurements were performed with a 2q range of 10􀀄–80􀀄. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were taken and an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) analysis of the lms was performed using a Verios 460, FEI and XFlash 6130, Bruker, respectively, oper-ated at an accelerating voltage of 10 kV.
The porosity of the sintered NASICON pellet was measured using the Archimedes measurement method, where one calcu-lates the proportion of internal pores by measuring the weight of the sample in air and the weight of the sample aer immersing it in water. The porosity is calculated using the following expression:
where W1 is the pristine weight of the sample, W2 is the sample weight in water, and W3 is the sample weight containing water weight.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measure-ments were performed by Pt sputtering on both sides of the solid electrolyte pellets, and electrochemical characterization was done using SUS electrodes. Biologic VSP-300 models were electrochemically tested at a frequency range of 7 MHz to 100 MHz at 10 mV. Ionic conductivity was calculated using the following expression:
where s is the ionic conductivity (S cm􀀁1), l is the thickness of the sample (cm), A is the measurement area (cm), and R is total resistance (U).
For the cell test, the cathode material Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) was used. A cathode slurry mix of NVP active material, a Super-P conductive agent, an ionic liquid electrolyte, and a poly-vinylidene  (PVDF) binder in a weight ratio of 70 : 10 : 10 : 10 was prepared. The ionic liquid electrolyte was prepared by mixing sodium triuoromethanesulfonic (NaTFSI, Sigma-Aldrich) salt and 1-butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium bis(tri-uoromethylsulfonyl)imide (Py14TFSI, Sigma-Aldrich) ionic liquid at 1 M concentration. The prepared cathode slurry was coated on the surface of the solid electrolyte and then dried in a vacuum oven for 2 hours.
For the anode, a UV curing polymer electrolyte layer was made between the Na metal and solid electrolyte. The UV curing polymer electrolyte was prepared by mixing trimethylolpropane ethoxylate triacrylate (ETPTA, Sigma-Aldrich), NaTFSI, and tri-ethylene glycol dimethyl ether (TEGDME, Dae-jung) in a weight ratio of 45 : 15 : 40. Then, 2-hydroxy-2-methylpropiophenone was added and mixed as an initiator before use. The mixed solution was dropped on the surface of the solid electrolyte, and then covered with a release 
 made of polypropylene (PP) and cured by irradiating with UV light (365 nm) for 15 min.
Then, Na metal was placed on the surface of the UV curing polymer electrolyte, and the product of a cell test in which a Na metal/solid electrolyte/cathode was made was placed in a 2032-coin cell. All steps were processed in a glovebox with less than 10 ppm for both oxygen and moisture. When manufacturing the bipolar stacked cell, a coin cell was prepared by putting Al foil between the two solid electrolyte cells.
The electrochemical cell test was performed using an auto-matic galvanostatic charge–discharge unit (WonATech Co.) with a 2032-coin cell between 2.6 V and 3.8 V with 0.1C-rate. All cell tests were performed at room temperature.
Previously, composite electrolytes intended for use in NIBs only used ceramic material as a ceramic ller for existing polymer electrolytes.27–30 A ceramic
 having approximately 20 wt%to 30 wt% of the total electrolyte ratio, was used to enhance the physical properties of the polymer electrolyte and to improve the ion transfer eﬀect. Recently, research has been conducted to increase the ratio of ceramics in anticipation of the ion con-ducting eﬀect of solid electrolyte powders with NASICON powder. Regarding the ceramic solid electrolyte, we expected that the polymer electrolyte would reduce the interfacial resis-tance between the solid ceramic powders. However, the proportion of the ceramic solid electrolyte was yet to be increased to 50 wt% or more, allowing the ceramic solid elec-trolyte powder to continue to operate as a ceramic ller.31–33 Previous experiments were conducted to investigate why the ratio of ceramics could not be increased, and the results can be seen in Fig. 1. We measured the ionic conductivity by mixing a polymer electrolyte and NASICON powder from 0% to 100% by weight ratio. A UV curing polymer electrolyte in experiment part 4 was used as the polymer electrolyte. As a result of the experiment, when the ceramic ratio is under 40 wt%, the composite electrolyte generally showed a high ionic conduc-tivity, which is due to the polymer electrolyte. However, as the proportion of ceramics increased, the ionic conductivity grad-ually decreased. According to a recent study, the increase in the proportion of ceramics does not have much eﬀect on the ion transfer through the ceramic solid electrolyte, but rather, a phenomenon occurs in which conductivity is reduced owing to interference with ion conduction of the polymer electrolyte.25 In particular, when the ceramic ratio increases by 50 wt% or more, a sharp drop in ion conductivity is observed. This means that there is little ion conduction between both the polymer–ceramic and the ceramic–ceramic in the composite electrolyte. Consequently, even if a ceramic–polymer composite electrolyte is fabricated, the disadvantages of the polymer electrolyte remain, including low thermal stability and low ion conduc-tivity at room temperature.
Ultimately, a high temperature sintering process is required to ensure ion transfer through the oxide-based solid electrolyte. The high temperature sintering process is the simplest way to reduce the resistance between the ceramic powder interfaces. As seen in Fig. 1, aer high temperature sintering, the ceramic solid electrolyte forms a channel through which ions can transfer. The ionic conductivity, which was approximately (measured by simply compressing the ceramic powder), rose to almost  the sintering process. The ionic conductivity results measured by the EIS test can be conrmed in ESI Fig. S2.† In this regard, it was assumed that the ceramic ionic conductivity was 
 obtained during the sintering process. The study of such a composite electrolyte has been actively conducted in the eld of Li ion solid electrolyte and there are many studies.34–37 However, there is no research beyond the current level in the NIB , and further research and development is needed.
Porosity control during NASICON sintering, which is before the addition of epoxy polymer, can be adjusted by controlling the thereby creating a diﬀerence in porosity of the ceramic (ESI Fig. S3†). When the nal sintering temperature is 900 􀀄C, the sinterability of the NASICON powder starts to increase. However, the porosity was measured to be over 20%, and the ionic conductivity was under 10􀀁7 Scm􀀁1, demonstrating that the ion transfer channel formation has not been completely achieved. At a sintering temperature of 1000 􀀄C, the ionic conductivity of the NASICON pellets appears to increase rapidly. As shown in ESI Fig. S3,† an ionic conduc-tivity of 10􀀁4 Scm􀀁1 or greater appears at 1000 􀀄C. Therefore, it can be assumed that the ion transport channel was successfully formed through sintering. It can also be seen from the SEM cross-sectional image (ESI Fig. S4†) that suﬃcient bonding was achieved between the NASICON powders. s the temperature increases; however, when it exceeds 1100 􀀄C, the porosity decreases rapidly, making  unsuitable for composites with polymer materials. Therefore, our experiment was performed using NASICON pellets sintered at 1100 􀀄C, which was determined to be the optimum condition, with a porosity of approximately 10%.
A cross-sectional SEM image of the NASICON pellet sintered at 1100 􀀄C is shown in Fig. 3(b). Here, the solid electrolyte secures the ion transfer channel sintering, leaving pores to remain inside. When the epoxy polymer is added to the sample, the polymer material suﬃciently lls the internal pores (Fig. 3(e)). In the SEM image, it was conrmed that the empty space between the NASICON crystals was lled with a black material, which was identified as a polymer material containing C through the EDS analysis shown in Fig. 3(c) and (f). The detailed EDS analysis results for each component can be seen in ESI Fig. S4.† Comparing the components of Na, Si, Zr, and P, which are all contained in NASICON, with the components of C, which are only contained in the epoxy polymers, we can see that the epoxy polymer is completely contained in the inner pores. In the same sample, Na-ions only move through the connected ceramics, which means that adding epoxy polymers does not aﬀect the ion conduction. The ionic conductivity aer epoxy treatment of the NASICON pellet is determined to be 1.45 􀀂 10􀀁4 Scm􀀁1. Therefore, epoxy polymer is not involved in the ion transport mechanism, so it can increase the physical strength while maintaining the existing ion conductivity.
The physical strength of the ceramic samples increased  the epoxy polymer treatment. For physical strength measurement, a three-point bending strength measurement method was used, and each of the samples having a thickness of 1.3 mm in an area of 20 mm 􀀂 20 mm was measured. As seen in Fig. 4(a), the NASICON ceramics have an average bending strength of 15 MPa (􀀅2 MPa), even when sin-tered at a high temperature of 1260 􀀄C with a higher density.
Curing only the epoxy polymer creates an average bending strength of 150 MPa (􀀅15 MPa). Experimental measurements of each substance are provided in ESI Table S1.† 
.† The bending strengths of bare NASICON (15 MPa) and epoxy-NASICON pellets (35 MPa), shown in Fig. 4(b), are calculated as the forces that can withstand the actual pellet area. When both materials are poly-merized aer lling with ceramic, the epoxy polymer materials connected to each other through the open pores inside the ceramic support the inside, thereby preventing the ceramic from breaking inside. The epoxy-NASICON sample aer epoxy treat-ment has an average bending strength of 35 MPa (􀀅5MPa).
hile manufacturing a coin cell, the minimum strength that the solid electrolyte can withstand is required. In the case of the coin cell produced in this study, at least 0.8 kgf must be sustained. When bare NASICON pellets were used, they were mostly avail-able in thicknesses ranging from 800 mmto900 mm.
For calcu-lations with a thickness of less than 600 mm, epoxy-NASICON was used, and for real experiments, a 500 mm thick sample is required. Epoxy-NASICON is expected to be used more in the future because it can be used in a thinner state than that of existing solid electrolytes that have the same physical properties. Based on this, the thickness of epoxy-NASICON was reduced, and the actual resistance is measured. Fig. 4(c) shows that the resis-tance decreases in proportion to the thickness. 
Drawing a trend-line based on the measured results for a minimum thickness of 120 mm ensures that the solid electrolyte resists less than 100 U. In the actual solid electrolyte sample in Fig. 4(d), we see that the existing 800–900 mm thick NASICON sample can reduce its thickness up to 300 mm. If a solid electrolyte with a small thick-ness and the same strength and resistance value can be devel-oped, its applicability will undoubtedly increase. The possible enhancements of the epoxy-NASICON composite's physical properties can be predicted by the rule of mixture equation, which is used to calculate the properties of a mixture of diﬀerent
physical properties.51 ESI Fig. S4† shows the actual strength as determined by the rule of mixture equation. The maximum value that can be predicted by a general equation can be obtained using the following expression:
The expected values in eqn (5) can be estimated from the maximum and minimum values according to the direction of the force applied to the material when there are no internal pores in the composite material and when there is a seamless connection. Regarding our developed epoxy-NASICON sample, shown in ESI Fig. S4(a),† the ceramic electrolyte is sintered, which causes the ceramics to be seamlessly connected to each other. The inside of the ceramic is lled with epoxy polymer material without any remaining pores and polymerized without breaks, which allows the actual value to almost reach the ex-pected maximum value.
The properties of the resulting epoxy-NASICON sample can be seen in Fig. 5. Note that the NASICON ceramics are stable up to 700 􀀄C, and epoxy polymers are stable up to 400
, as conrmed by a TGA experiment (Fig. 5(a)). Since each material is stable at 400 􀀄C, the epoxy-NASICON sample is stable until 400 􀀄C. CV was conducted to conrm the electrochemical stability of the sample. In Fig. 5(b), epoxy-NASICON with Na metal showed no side reaction up to 7 V, except for the plating/stripping of Na metal near 0 V. Therefore, we believe that both the NASICON ceramic and epoxy polymers are electrochemically stable, and no other chemical reaction occurs in the composite preparation process.
To conrm the possibility of using an epoxy-NASICON elec-trolyte for a solid-state battery, a cell test was carried out by attaching positive and negative electrodes to our composite. As thepositiveand negativeelectrodematerialsarecurrentlyused as solid active materials, the use of an electrolyte as a solid material causes a contact resistance problem again. In addition, it is diﬃcult to conrmthecycleperformancebecauseit is diﬃcult to compensate for the volume change of the active material gener-ated during the charging and discharging of the solid electrolyte. In this experiment, the cell design was conducted as follows to conrm the applicability of epoxy-NASICON as a solid electrolyte. A cathode part was made by mixing 10 wt% of ionic liquid elec-trolyte into a total cathode part in order to reduce the interfacial resistance between the cathode active material and solid electro-lyte. Meanwhile, for the anode part, Na metal was added to the UV curing polymer electrolyte layer between the solid electrolyte and the Na metal to minimize contact resistance. As there is no liquid electrolyte leaked, ions are able to move through the solid elec-trolyte channel during the charge and discharge process. When the half-cell of the NVP cathode material and Na metal was manufactured and charged and discharged at a rate of 0.1C, a capacity of 120 mA h g􀀁1 and 20 cycles were stably completed. Reproducibility conrmation through repeated experiments can be obtained from ESI Fig. S6.† The charge/discharge graph is shown in Fig. 5(c). This capacity is suﬃcient even when using a conventional liquid electrolyte, and the Coulomb eﬃciency is also relatively stable at 98%. To date, it has been diﬃcult to manufacture a solid electrolyte up to approximately 25 mm, which is the separator thickness used for existing liquid electrolytes. Therefore, if the above cell performance can be reached with a solid electrolyte of the current thickness, it is expected to be applicable in a wide range of solid electrolytes. In addition, if a battery system using solid electrolyte is manufactured, we are able to make a bipolar stacking cell as there is no leakage inside the solid electrolyte cell. If a high voltage battery can be made through a bipolar stack in a single cell, then it is advantageous for use in high energy storage devices. In this study, a 7 V class coin cellwasfabricated bystackingdouble solid-state cells in a single coin cell. The epoxy-NASICON solid electrolyte can be applied to the bipolar stack cells because it is thin enough to put two or more solid electrolytes in a single coin cell. The bipolar stacked coin cell experiment results include 6.8 V charge and 6.6 V discharge graphs that show stable operation at a capacity of 120 mA h g􀀁1 for up to 10 cycles (ESI Fig. S7†). The charge/discharge graph of the bipolar stacked cell is shown in Fig. 5(d). Based on these results, we see that the cell performance is a result of the ion-transferring role of our epoxy-NASICON composite electrolyte
To manufacture a thin and strong solid electrolyte, high-strength polymers, such as epoxy-resin, were inserted into the pores of sintered NASICON ceramics, and the possibility of increasing the strength while maintaining the electrochemical properties was conrmed. From our data, we conrmed the possibility of using our composite in a solid-state battery cell. Nevertheless, current methods still have limitations regarding thickness, which should be below 20 mm, i.e., the thickness of the conventional NIB system. According to the reference of the paper, the basic physical characteristics that require the current conventional battery separator are >1000 kg cm􀀁1 tensile strength and >98.06 MPa bending strength.52 To achieve thisgure, our solid electrolyte system is still far below the bending strength. Therefore, further research is necessary to develop thinner, more exible solid electrolytes while maintaining the current approach. The direction for future studies of solid electrolytes using ceramics is shown in Fig. 6. Note that the sintering process is essential to secure ion transfer paths using ceramic solid electrolytes. Currently, the sintering process causes NASICON powders to connect randomly and appear only as a solid pellet. It would be ideal if the ceramic could be sin-tered in a specic pattern that is physically exible and opti-mized for ion transfer. The best pattern for ion transfer is the vertical ceramic in the composite electrolyte. Meanwhile, if the bond with the polymer material is good and sintering is possible with a regular area, a 
 composite electrolyte can be created (Fig. 6). Therefore, a new method of making a ceramic of a specic pattern using 3D printing or a 
emplate is being studied.53,54 In addition, the polymer material used to enhance the physical characteristics should have a high Na-ion conductivity, thereby maximizing the ion transfer eﬀect of the solid electrolyte in the future, making it possible to manufacture a thin and exible lm-type solid electrolyte capable of ion transfer by sintering the ceramic in this way. We expect that this  oxide-based solid electrolyte will be applied in the NIB  and used as a safe energy storage device.
In a ceramic–polymer composite electrolyte, because ion transfer is diﬃcult with ceramic powder, an ion transport channel through the ceramic must be previously formed to realize the ion conducting ceramic eﬀect. We proposed a top-down method composite, in which a polymer on a ceramic has a pre-formed ion transport channel. To conrm the possibility of a top-down composite electrolyte, we used a method of partial sintering on a NASICON ceramic with high porosity and lled its internal pores with an epoxy polymer to increase physical strength. By control-ling the porosity of the epoxy-NASICON pellet to approximately 10%, we accomplished more than twice the strength compared with that of the existing NASICON pellet. The electrochemical stability was observed up to 7 V, which was conrmed via CV analysis, and thermal stability was observed up to approximately 400 􀀄C. The ionic conductivity was measured to be 1.45 􀀂 10􀀁4 Scm􀀁1 at room temperature, and the thickness could be reduced to 300 mm. To see the possible applications of this epoxy-NASICON solid electrolyte, a half-cell was fabricated with Na metal and an NVP cathode. The cell was tested and stably operated for more than 20 cycles at a capacity of 120 mA h g􀀁1 at 0.1C rate. Based on this, we conrmed that a solid electrolyte can be suﬃ-ciently produced by pre-forming the ion transport channel of the ceramic and combining it with a polymer. Nevertheless, with the current sintering method, there are limitations in creating the ion transport channels and composite electrolyte. Further research is necessary to make ceramics with an intended pattern, rather than the formation of random ion transport channels. By creating a ceramic with a physically exible pattern and an easy form for ion transfer, it is expected that a composite electrolyte in the form of a exible lm-type polymer composite can be produced. This research will facilitate the study of composite electrolytes that utilize oxide-based solid electrolytes and further contribute to the development of Na-ion solid state batteries.