The glass-ceramic samples with the general formula: (100−x) [0.4Li2O-0.1GeO2-0.6P2O5]+x 40-h ball-milled Al2O3 (where x=0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12 mol%) were synthesized by high-energy ball milling technique. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis revealed that the phases such as LiGe2(PO4)3, Li4P2O7, GeO2, and AlPO4 were identified from major diffraction peaks of LGPA samples. The intensity and broadening of XRD peaks of LGPA glass-ceramic samples displayed that the LGPA10 glass-ceramic possesses major crystalline phases namely sodium super ionic conductor (NASICON)type phases of LiGe2(PO4)3 and Li4P2O7. Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) pictures further confirmed that the sample LGPA10 has the presence of particles of varied sizes (20– 30 nm) and also large clusters of less than 60 nm dispersed uniformly in a continuous glass matrix. The slight difference in the Z″ and M″ peaks for the LGPA samples suggests the presence of possibly more than one mechanism.

Solid state glass-ceramic electrolytes (SSGSE) precipitated with nanocrystalline particles have been paid much attention in recent years, owing to their potential applications in high energy density batteries, chemical sensors, smart windows, etc. [1–3]. Oxide-based SSGSE are chemically and mechanically stable over long duration even under high load and are highly preferred than sulfide-based counterparts, even though their ionic conductivity barely meets the required power densities of the cell [4–7]. Subsequently, the oxide-based glass-ceramics mixed with sodium super ionic conductor (NASICON)-type structure is best the choice, which controls the electrochemical properties of the batteries [8].

Several methods were attempted to boost the ionic conductivity of the oxide-based SSGSE, out of which implantation of nanocrystals was accepted to be a best choice in view of the fact that uniformly distributed fine grains of nanocrystalline phases in the glass and glassceramic structure can significantly produce fast diffusion pathways which play a vital role to meet the requirements of a highly efficient electrolyte [1–3]. It was also observed that the performance and characteristics of a glass-ceramic electrolyte are strongly dependent on grain size, composition, uniformity of dispersion, and concentration of nanocrystals as impurity phases, etc. [9–11]. Of several oxide-based glass materials, lithium phosphate glass (LPG) network is generally a preferred choice because of its high Li ion conductivity. Moreover, the inclusion of GeO2 in LPG matrix modifies the glass-forming region, physical properties significantly and also induce the phase immiscibility during the transformation of glass into the glass-ceramic network [12]. Al2O3 is a significant electroceramic material with low values of dielectric loss and dielectric constant. Incorporation of Al2O3 nanocrystals is expected to influence largely on LPG ceramic network to modify the electric properties especially for its application as a solid electrolyte in high energy storage devices. In this view, Al2O3 nanocrystals were opted to be dispersed in lithium germanium phosphate glass (LGPG) ceramic network to achieve high ionic conductivity and thermal stability via this investigation. The amount of Al2O3 nanoparticles doping will depend on the quantitative the mobility of the properties of modifiers, crystals, dispersibility, field strength, etc. Hence, the connection between crystallinity, the distribution, and respective uniformity of nanocrystals in the structural network and physical properties are expected to be interesting in terms of proliferatio n of ionic conductivity.

In our earlier studies, a homogenous mixture of materials was obtained by high-energy ball milling technique. Al2O3 material was ball milled to reduce the particle size, and we have reported that milling for 40 h would produce a mean particle size ∼24 nm, which is suitable for dispersion in a glass-ceramic matrix [13]. It is to be noted down that the role of the grain boundaries is essential to monitor the transport properties as a majority of atoms reside in the grain boundary region than in the interior region. We have employed impedance spectroscopy in the present investigation to characterize the electrical properties which report on the variation of electrical conduction paths with the grain size and also to calculate activation energies of nanocrystallites in view of the fact that the impedance spectroscopy is a powerful technique to analyze and correlate the electrical properties of nanomaterials and their interfaces [14, 15]. Also, we reported on the role of nanocrystalline phases on the microstructure and thermal properties of LGPA glass-ceramics doped with various concentrations of Al2O3 nanocrystals which were ball milled for 40 h. Analysis techniques like X-ray diffraction (XRD), differential thermal analysis (DTA), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were used to study physical properties [5, 6].

The glass-ceramics with the general formula: (100− x) [0.4Li2O-0.1GeO2-0.6P2O5]+x (where x=0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12 mol% of 40-h ball-milled Al2O3) have been synthesized by high-energy ball milling technique labeled as LGPAx (where x is the mol% of 40-h ball-milled Al2O3) from the mixtures of analytical reagent-grade chemicals of Li2CO3, P2O5, GeO2, and Al2O3. Firstly, the milling of Al2O3 powder was carried out in a Fritsch Pulverisette P5 high-energy planetary ball milling at room temperature for 40 h. Dry milling was carried out at approximately 200 rpm with a tungsten carbide vial. The mass ratio of chemicals and milling balls was 1:10. Secondly, the same procedure was performed on mixtures of Li2CO3, P2O5, and GeO2 powders along with prior ball-milled Al2O3 where milling time was limited to 40 h in a dry medium for about 5 h at room temperature. Powders thus obtained were annealed in a silica crucible at 600 °C for 2 h under static air to release volatile products from the mixture if any. Final powders were compacted to pellets of ϕ=10 mm by uniaxial pressing in a mold at 200 MPa. Green pellets thus obtained were sintered over their crystalline temperatures at 2 °C/min and then cooled down to room temperature in the furnace without any plateau stage. The glass transition temperature (Tg) and crystallization temperature (Tc) were record−1 in the ed simultaneously in DTA by heating at 20 K min temperature range of 300–1300 K using analytical grade Al2O3 as a reference material by using DT-30 Shimadzu thermal analyzer (error, ±2 K). One set of the pellets was grounded, while the other set was polished mechanically. On powders, the degree of nanocrystalline phases was studied by XRD method using PANalytical B.V. Diffractometer fitted a with Cu target (both Kα1+α2 wavelengths) and a Ni filter at 40 kVand 30 mA [2-theta range]. Microstructure analysis was performed using PHILIPS CM 20 transmission electron microscope. Electrical studies were conducted using a computercontrolled Solarton 1260 Impedance/Gain-phase Analyzer in the frequency range of 10–106 Hz at room temperature as well as temperatures from 303 to 423 K with a 10 K temperature step in dry Ar atmosphere. Ag coating was applied on either side of the pellets for about 1-mm thickness to serve as electrodes. The real (Z′) and imaginary (Z″) parts of impedance were collected for respective analysis.

Figure 1 shows the DTA curves for all the LGPA glassceramic samples. The first part of all the DTA curves indicates the glass transition region, and its second part represents the crystallization region. The glass transition temperature (Tg) decreases from 802K to 758K with the variation of nanocrystalline Al2O3 content from 0 mol% (LGPA0) to 10 mol% (LGPA10), however, beyond this concentration, the value of Tg is increases rapidly (Table 1). The correlation between glass thermal stability parameter ΔT (ΔT=Tc−Tg) and glassforming ability parameter Kgl (Kgl= ) with the concentration of Al2O3 nanocrystals. The highest degree of disorder for the glass-ceramic sample LGPA10 (Fig. 2) pointed out that it possesses fast diffusion pathways which lead to achieve good compatibility between electrodes. Hence, DTA curves explore the correlation between the mean bond strength and cross-link density of the glass-ceramic structure which paves the way to understand the conduction mechanism of LGPA glass-ceramic samples which will be discussed in the next section.

We have reported already in our earlier investigation that milling for 40 h would produce a mean particle size ∼24 nm, which is suitable for dispersion in a glass-ceramic matrix [13]. In this view, we have recorded the XRD patterns of all the LGPA glass-ceramic samples dispersed with 40 h of ballmilled Al2O3 crystallites at room temperature (Fig. 3). The results showed that the nanocrystalline phases such as LiGe2(PO4)3, Li4P2O7, GeO2, and AlPO4 were identified from major diffraction peaks of LGPA samples [16]; however, AlPO4 phase disappeared beyond 2 mol% of Al2O3 nanocrystals. The NASICON-type phase of LiGe2(PO4)3 is observed predominantly in all the samples of LGPA glassceramic system. It is to be noted down that the intensity of major phase LiGe2(PO4)3 is increasing with concentration of Al2O3 nanocrystals. The GeO2 phase is identified as the most insulating phase, whose intensity is almost constant for all the samples of LGPA system. The AlPO4 is identified as another insulating phase, which was not identified beyond 2 mol% and expected to be merged with LiGe2(PO4)3 phase. The important conducting phase Li4P2O7 was identified in all the LGPA glass-ceramic samples, which also contributes to modify the electrical properties effectively like NASICON-type phase. Additionally, we have identified some minor peaks corresponding to the phase which are not identified yet. However, these unidentified phases will not contribute on the overall electrical response of the material. The structure of the diffraction pattern becomes more complex and becomes gradually sharpened as we increase the nanocrystals of Al2O3 (40-h ball milled) in the LGPA glass-ceramic matrix from 0 mol% (LGPA0) to 10 mol% (LGPA10), indicating the gradual growth of almost all the phases [16]. The estimated mean sizes of nanocrystallites obtained by using the Scherrer’s formula for a half width of the diffraction peaks of all the LGPA glass-ceramic samples vary between 27 and 21 nm along with little larger clusters of less than 60 nm in size.

Microstructural analysis by SEM Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) is the most important tool to understand the structure of the glass-ceramic samples.

The typical image of all LGPA glass-ceramics crystallized around the crystallization temperature (Tc) is shown in Fig. 4. The SEM image of LGPA0 (0 mol% of nanocrystalline Al2O3 content) sample reflects the more content of glassy phase in the system which is free from crystals; however, resets of these LGPA samples were induced by the nanocrystallization with remnant glassy phase. In the case of a SEM picture recorded for the sample LGPA10 (Fig. 4c), particles of varied sizes (20–30 nm) and also large clusters of less than 60 nm dispersed in a continuous glass matrix were observed. Nevertheless, these microstructures indicate that optimum content of Al2O3 nanocrystals in the LGPA glass matrix promotes their homogeneous distribution during the transformation of glass into glass-ceramics, which is very essential to design a highly efficient glass-ceramic electrolyte.

The electrical properties of LGPA glass-ceramic samples were monitored by impedance spectroscopy [14, 15]. The complex impedance (Z″ vs. Z′) plots of all the LGPA glass-ceramic samples measured at 303 K were found to exhibit complete semicircles, as depicted in Fig. 5. The bulk resistance (R) for all the samples relative to each experimental temperature is deduced from the intercept of the imaginary impedance (Z″) with the real impedance (Z′). The resistance (R), obtained from the analyzed impedance data, and the pellet dimensions were used to calculate the bulk conductivity of all the glass samples.

Using this equation, one can deduce that the highest conductivity is achieved by the LGPA10 −4 S/cm, at 303 K), where the conductivsample (σ=8.29×10 ity of all samples measured at 303 K is plotted as a function of nanocrystalline Al2O3 content (Fig. 6). It is interesting an inverse correlation appears between the bulk conductivity (σ0) and the glass transition temperature (Tg) as a function of nanocrystalline Al2O3 content measured at 303 K (Fig. 6). From Fig. 6, it can be seen that the lowest Tg value for the sample containing 10 mol % of 40-h ball-milled Al2O3 (LGPA10) possesses the highest glass-forming ability. Figure 7 shows the complex impedance (Z″ vs. Z′) plots for the highest conducting sample (LGPA10) at different temperatures (303– 423 K), where it can be seen that an increase in temperature caused the impedance semicircles to be shifted to lower Z′ values. Once again, one can use the intersection points of the imaginary impedance onto the real axis of semicircles, using Eq. (1) to calculate the bulk conductivity as a function of temperature. The bulk conductivities calculated from the analyzed impedance data obtained at different temperatures for all the glass-ceramic samples are plotted in Fig. 8 (shown as log σT vs. 1000/T). The activation energy for conduction (Eaσ) was calculated from the slope of the straight lines obtained when the data is plotted against 1000/T of all the glass-ceramic samples containing different concentrations of nanocrystalline Al2O3 content (Fig. 8). The composition dependence of activation energy (Eaσ) at 403 K is shown in the inset of Fig. 9. It is observed that the activation energy is found to be the lowest for the highest conducting sample (LGPA10). Since the inset of Fig. 9 ((Eaσ) vs. nanocrystalline Al2O3 content) does not show the nonlinear behavior of conductivity, the nonlinearity between the conductivity and the activation energy suggests that the modification of mobile Li+ ion conductivity is directly related to the precipitation of crystalline phases with a moderate degree of nanocrystallization [3, 17, 18]. The intensity and broadening of XRD peaks of LGPA glass-ceramic samples displayed that the LGPA10 sample possesses major nanoconducting crystalline phases namely NASICON-type phase of LiGe2(PO4)3 and Li4P2O7 among all the samples under investigation with optimum crystallization. Hence, the enhancement of the conductivity in the LGPA samples is directly related to increasing mobility of Li+ ions as well as the degree of crystallization of nanocrystalline phases, which are precipitated during the transfer of glass into glass-ceramics [19–21]. The dependence of the electrical conductivity with the frequency can be analyzed by the power-law equation, where σ0 is the conductivity at zero frequency, which is normally termed the DC conductivity, A is a constant, and s is a characteristic parameter (0<s<1). The low-frequency part of the conductivity is normally frequency independent, and the frequency-independent conductivity (σ0) is obtained by extrapolation of the conductivity to ω=0. The high-frequency part of the conductivity exhibits the dispersion and increases in a power-law fashion [22]. Figure 9 shows the AC conductivity plots as a function of frequency at 303 K for all the LGPA samples, and for the highest conducting sample LGPA10 at different temperatures are shown in Fig. 10. The shift in the critical frequency (ωp=f0) is a little more obvious for the AC conductivity of LGPA10 at different temperatures (Fig. 10) than for all the LGPA samples measured at 303 K.

The characteristic parameter (s) has also been observed to be material dependent. Compositional dependence of the characteristic parameter (s) is shown in the inset of Fig. 9, and the value of s is observed to be the lowest for the highest conducting sample LGPA10. The frequency independent part of the conductivity may be attributed to the long-range transport of Li+ ions, and the frequency dependent part of the conductivity could be explained through diffusion-controlled relaxation model [23]. A summary of the electrical conductivity, activation energy, and characteristic parameters is given in Table 2. To demonstrate that the mechanism of ion transport in the LGPA glass-ceramic system is unaffected by composition and temperature, the inset of Fig. 11 is presented. In this figure, the AC conductivity data obtained at various temperatures for LGPA10 is scaled with critical frequency (f0) and the frequency independent conductivity σο of the frequency axis (x axis) and AC conductivity axis (y axis) [24, 25]. From Fig. 11, it is observed that all the curves obtained at different temperatures fit into a master curve; this master curve suggests that the present glass samples show evidence of the temperature-independent conduction transport mechanism while the frequency-dependent portion once again suggests some type of diffusion-controlled relaxation. Calculation of the activation energy for relaxation can then be determined that the critical frequency (f0) for relaxation is thermally activated with the same activation energy as that for the electrical conductivity σ0T [26, 27]. The contribution of highly conductive phases such as NASICON-type phase of LiGe2(PO4)3 and Li4P2O7 along with little large clusters less than 60 nm in the LGPA system paves the way for an increasing trend in the AC conductivity from LGPA0 to LGPA10 as suggested from XRD analysis [14]. On the other hand, LGPA10 glass-ceramics achieved the highest conductivity −04 S/cm) among all other LGPA samples which (σ=8.29×10 is expected due to the uniform distribution of the above mentioned; these nanoconducting crystalline phases precipitated with optimum nanocrystallization in this glass-ceramic network. However, the massive crystallization in nanocrystalline phases is the major reason for the decreasing trend in the conductivity from LGPA10 to LGPA12 [19].

The plot of real (ε′) part of the dielectric constant as a function of frequency for the highest conducting sample LGPA10 and constant at higher frequencies at all temperatures evaluated is shown in Fig. 12. Similarly, the real (ε′) part of dielectric constant decreased with increasing frequency for all the LGPA samples and reported that the increase of ε′ with temperature is associated with the decrease in bond energies [28]. The values of ε′ are observed to exhibit considerable frequency dispersion in the lower frequency range, and also increasing dielectric constant (ε′) in the lower frequency region is due to contribution of charge accumulation at grain boundary interfaces. However, real part of the dielectric constant (ε′) remains relatively constant which is due to minimum contribution of charge accumulation in the high-frequency region. In ε″ versus log f plots, the imaginary part ε″ is exceeded by the DC conductivity and will not be discussed further, and hence the modulus formalism was used for the further analysis. Electrical modulus formulation has been used to identify phenomena as electrode polarization and bulk phenomena such as average conductivity relaxation times τσ to probe the electrical response of materials containing some degree of ionic conductivity [29]. Figure 13 shows the imaginary part of electric modulus Μ″ dependence with frequency for the highest conducting glass sample LGPA10 at different temperatures. The Μ″ value is observed to be constant (Μ″ max) at a relaxation frequency (fmax), and the peak Μ″max symmetrically shifts toward higher frequencies with increasing temperatures. From Fig. 13, the relaxation frequency (fmax) corresponding to the maximum in M″ curves and the relaxation time τ, calculated using the relation τ=1/2πfmax at different temperatures, can be obtained. The experimental data are well described by the Arrhenius expression, given as below, where τ0 is the pre-exponential factor and Εaτ is the activation energy for conductivity relaxation (Table 2). The full width half maximum (β) and characteristic relaxation time (τ) of M″ peaks are shown in the inset of Fig. 13. The lowest value of β for the highest conducting sample LGPA10 obviously suggests the presence of crystalline phases with optimum crystallization, which modifies the conductivity in the neighborhood of conduction path. Figure 14 shows the variation of log τ with 1000/T for all the LGPA samples where the relaxation time (τ) symmetrically shifts to higher values with an increase in temperature. Nevertheless, the activation energy for the conductivity relaxation Eaτ (Table 2) for all the LGPA samples was calculated from the relaxation time plots (Fig. 14). The similarity between values of Εaτ and Εaσ (presented in Table 2) obviously indicates that the ionic-hopping mechanism responsible for the relaxation is the same as that for the conductivity [30]. The overlap of the Z″ and M″ peaks for the highest conducting sample LGPA10 at different temperatures (323, 363, and 423 K) has been demonstrated to be a result from the same mechanism, and this result has further confirmed that the two processes are closely correlated with each other (Fig. 15). As the temperature changes, the same corresponding peak shifts to a higher frequency but they present the same characteristic relaxation time at specific temperatures. On the other hand, it is to be noted that the peak in Z″ is slightly shifted to a higher frequency with respect to the M″ peak position in all LGPA samples. This difference suggests the presence of possibly more than one mechanism but this contribution does not influence the overall conductivity response that much as it was determined that the activation energies calculated from the conductivity curves and those of the relaxation were essentially the same. This is supported by super curves in the normalization of the electric modulus spectra (Fig. 16), which suggests that the frequencydependent relaxation process in the LGPA samples is temperature independent. The β values are observed to be almost constant with increasing temperature, suggesting the insensitivity of temperature (Table 2).

DTA results pointed out that the highest degree of disorder for the highest conducting sample LGPA10 which possesses fast diffusion pathways leads to achieve good compatibility between electrodes. The nanocrystalline phases such as LiGe2(PO4)3, Li4P2O7, GeO2, and AlPO4 were identified from major diffraction peaks of LGPA samples. The intensity and broadening of XRD peaks of LGPA10 glass-ceramics possess major phases namely NASICON-type phase of LiGe2(PO4)3 and Li4P2O7 among all the samples under investigation with optimum crystallization. SEM pictures further confirmed that the LGPA10 sample possesses the particles of varied sizes (20– 30 nm) and also large clusters of less than 60 nm dispersed uniformly in a continuous glass matrix. The bulk conductivity of LGPA glass-ceramic system is observed to be the highest −04 S/cm), which is expected for LGPA10 sample (8.29×10 due to the uniform distribution of crystalline phases precipitated with optimum nanocrystallization as confirmed by the SEM pictures.
