Structural features responsible for outstanding Li conductivity of Li1 + xRxTi2 − x(PO4)3 (LRTP) Nasicon samples (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.6 and R = Al, Sc, In) prepared by the ceramic route have been analyzed by XRD, ND, MAS-NMR and impedance spectroscopy. The structural analysis showed that all samples display the rhombohedral (S.G. R-3c) symmetry. The structural site occupancy has been investigated by 7Li, 27Al/45Sc and 31P MAS-NMR spectroscopy. The Fourier map differences deduced from high-resolution ND patterns of LAlTP samples revealed that Li ions occupy Li1 sites and to a lower extent Li3/Li3′ sites inside Li2 cavities. The location of Li at 3 sites minimizes electrostatic Li (Li1–Li3) repulsions, enhancing local mobility in LRTP samples. A maximum of conductivity was detected for 0.2 ≤ x ≤ 0.4, when a signiﬁcant amount of vacant Li1 sites was created at the intersection of conduction pathways. The increment of vacant Li1 sites explains the existence of two Li motion regimes detected by 7Li NMR and impedance spectroscopy. In the low temperature regime, activation energy and migration entropy of Li have been related by the Meyer–Neldel relationship. In the high-temperature regime, further investigation is required to assess the role of vacancy in lithium conductivity.

Lithium batteries (LIBs) remain the most promising electrical energy storage systems for many emerging technologies, from portable electronics to electric vehicles (EVs), hybrid vehicles (HEVs) and smart grids [1], by offering signiﬁcantly improved performances, energy efﬁciency, and reliability, permitting a drastic reduction of fuel consumption and emissions.

Among active materials for all-solid-state lithium ion batteries (ASS-LIBs), the solid electrolyte is one of the most important key components that could improve electric performances and security. These electrolytes must meet a series of requirements before they can be used, including high conductivity, large number of vacancies and charge carriers, wide potential window and low electronic conductivity [2]. Recently, lithium transition metal phosphates have found application in the ﬁeld of electrochemical energy storage, especially those with Nasicon [3] structure, because of their good electrochemical performances and capability to answer safety concerns surrounding oxide chemistry.

In the past decades, extensive investigations have been carried out on Nasicon-type lithium ion conductors with formula of LiM2(PO4)3, M = Ge, Ti, Sn, Zr, Hf [4–11]. Among them, LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) based materials present the best channel size for Li ion migration (Fig. 1a). When titanium is partially substituted by trivalent R cations (R = Al, Ga, In, Fe, Sc, etc.) lithium conductivity increases in a signiﬁcant way [12–19]. This increment has been ascribed to the creation of vacant Li1 sites at the intersection of conduction pathways. Among analyzed Li1 + xTi2 − xRx(PO4)3 series [12,14,16–18,20], the best conductivity was reported for x ≈ 0.3 in LAlTP samples, where Ti4 + is partially substituted by Al3+ (σ300K N 10−3 S cm−1).

In the present work, electric characteristics of LTP samples doped with trivalent Al3+, Sc3+ or In3+ cations will be analyzed, investigating the enhancement of Li conductivity in the Li1.3 + xAl0.3RxTi1.7(PO4)3 series. In this study, structural features deduced by 7Li, 27Al/45Sc and 31P MAS-NMR spectroscopy will be compared with those deduced by diffraction techniques. Finally, Li mobility deduced by impedance spectroscopy (IS) will be compared with that deduced by NMR results of different analyzed series.

Li1 + xRxTi2 − x(PO4) samples (denoted hereafter LRTP), with R = Al, Sc, In, were prepared by heating stoichiometric mixtures of Li2CO3, (NH4)2HPO4, R2O3 and TiO2 at increasing temperatures in the 573–1373 K interval, following the procedure described previously [14,16,17]. The composition of prepared samples covers x values between 0 and 0.3 in binary series and x values between 0 and 0.6 in ternary samples (Al = 0.3/structural formula), see Table 1.

The frequencies used for 7Li (6Li), 27Al, 45Sc and 31P and signals were 155.50 (58.88), 100.4, 97.2 and 161.97 MHz, respectively. 7Li (6Li) and 31P NMR signals were obtained after π/2 (3 and 4 μs) and 27Al/45Sc NMR signals after π/8 (1 μs) single pulse irradiations, with a recycling time of 10 s. During spectrum recording, sample was spun at 2 kHz (7Li and 6Li signals) and 4 kHz (31P and 27Al/45Sc signals) around an axis inclined at 54°44′ with respect to the external magnetic ﬁeld (MAS technique). The number of scans was in the range of 100–800. 7Li, 27Al, 45Sc and 31P NMR chemical shifts were referred to 1 M LiCl, 1 M AlCl3, 1 M Sc(NO3)3 and 85% H3PO4 aqueous solutions. The ﬁtting of NMR spectra was performed with the Bruker WINFIT software package [22]. This program allows the position, linewidth and intensity of components to be determined with a non-linear least-square iterative method. The quadrupole CQ and η parameters had to be deduced with a trial and error procedure.

Impedance measurements, recorded between 100 and 500 K in the wide frequency range (20 Hz to 3 GHz), were performed on cylindrical pellets of 6 mm diameter and approximately 1 mm thickness. Pellets were ﬁrst compacted by cold pressing at 0.5 MPa, and then sintered at 1273 K for 12 h. For electric measurements, gold electrodes were deposited by sputtering on two faces of pellets. The sample was placed in a JANIS VPF 750 cryostat, allowing 4L-conﬁguration measurements. For low frequency measurements (20 Hz–2 MHz), an automatically controlled Agilent Precision LCR E4980-A Analyzer was used. High frequency measurements (1 MHz–3 GHz) were carried out using an automatically controlled Agilent E4991-A RF Impedance/Material Analyzer.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded with the Cu-Kα radiation (λKα = 1.5418 Å) in a PW 1050/25 Phillips apparatus. Unit cell parameters of samples were determined with the FullProf program (Le Bail technique) [21]. In order to increase the sensitivity to oxygen and lithium positions, neutron diffraction (ND) patterns of LAlTP samples,

Table 1 Al contents incorporated in Nasicon samples, as deduced from the quantitative analysis of 27Al and 31P NMR spectra of LRTP series.

XRD patterns of analyzed samples (Fig. 1b) annealed at 950 °C were matched with those reported for the Nasicon R-3c LiTi2(PO4)3 sample (JCPDS 35-0754) [23]. For x N 0.3, small reﬂections associated with aluminum phosphate were detected in LAlTP samples. As the R content increases, hexagonal a and c parameters change according to octahedral compositions (see Table 1). In LAlTP samples, diffraction peaks shift towards lower angles as a consequence of smaller Al3+ radius (0.53 Å); but they shift towards higher angles in LScTP/LInTP, because of bigger radii of Sc3+/In3+ (0.74/0.80 Å) compared to Ti4+ ions (0.60 Å) [24]. In the LAl0.3InxTP system, a small amount of pyrophosphate secondary phase was also detected; similar results were also found for Sc doped samples [25].

To illustrate Li site occupation, ND patterns were analyzed with the Rietveld technique in LAlTP samples displaying the highest conductivity [16,19]. The amount of Al incorporated into the Nasicon's framework was lower than nominal ones. In the case of Li1.2Al0.2Ti1.8(PO4)3 the amount of Al was 0.17, but in the case of Li1.4Al0.4Ti1.6(PO4)3 the amount of Al was 0.27, indicating that the amount of segregated AlPO4 increases with Al concentration (see Table 1) [16,19]. In order to investigate Li sites, Fourier map differences between observed data calculated from structural models without Li and with Li occupying Li1 sites were calculated. In both cases, negative peaks for lithium at Li1 (0, 0, 0) and Li3 (0.06, 0.34, 0.08) positions were detected (Fig. 2). In this study, it was showed that Li occupation of Li1 sites decreases with the amount of Al/Li incorporated. The inclusion of Li at these two sites improved considerably structural reﬁnements [19].

The analysis of the 27Al MAS-NMR signal of LAlTP samples showed the presence of Al at octahedral sites of the Nasicon phase and that of tetrahedral Al in secondary AlPO4 phases (Fig. 3). The detection of the tetrahedral signal allowed the estimation of the relative amount of the secondary phase. In the case of 45Sc MAS-NMR spectra only a complex octahedral signal was detected, suggesting that the concentration of secondary phases was lower [26].

In 31P MAS NMR spectra, the shift produced by the substitution of Ti by R cations is additive, allowing the position of components associated with P(OR)4, P(OTi)3(OR)1, P(OTi)2(OR)2, P(OTi)1(OR)3 and P(OR)4 environments to be deduced (lines labeled 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4 in Fig. 4). The resolution of different components depends on differences on the polarization strength (charge/radius) of Ti and R cations. The quantitative analysis of 31P NMR spectra allowed the estimation of the sample composition. 

From R/Ti values, relative amounts of R(x) and Ti(2 − x) were deduced in binary Sc,Ti and In,Ti solid solutions (Table 1). In ternary Al–In–Ti and Al–Sc–Ti systems, concentrations of three cations were deduced using information deduced from 31P and 27Al signals. From 31P signal the relative amount of Ti + Al with respect to In/Sc was deduced; from 27Al spectra, the aluminum concentration was deduced (Table 1). The presence of Al is responsible for the asymmetry detected in 31P NMR components.

The analysis of the 7Li (I = 3/2) MAS-NMR spectra has been used to investigate location and mobility of Li ions. The 7Li MAS-NMR proﬁles show the presence of three expected transitions modulated by spinning sidebands associated with the sample rotation (Fig. 5). The deconvolution of spectra (not shown) has permitted to deduce the presence of two non-resolved signals. The most intense signal displays quadrupole constants (CQ ~ 40 kHz and η ~ 0) characteristic of axial distorted sites. The second signal does not display quadrupole patterns, indicating a higher degree of lithium mobility (detection of a single component). The absence of exchange processes between two sites at room temperature (restricted lithium mobility) allowed the assignment of two components to Li ions at Li1 and Li3 sites deduced by ND technique. In ternary systems, the amount of lithium at Li3 sites increases with respect to Li1 sites, favoring the increment of the central line with respect to lateral transitions (see horizontal line used to separates both contributions).

To further analyze lithium mobility, the temperature dependence of the quadrupole CQ constant has been investigated in LTP and LAlTP samples (Fig. 6). At low temperatures CQ values remain near 20 and 40 kHz, but above 300 K these values increase in a signiﬁcant way. This increment has been related to Li exchange processes between Li1 and Li3 sites that enhanced extended motions of lithium.

The activation energy in both cases decreases from 0.3 to 0.2 eV, indicating the existence of two regimes for the lithium motion in the analyzed temperature interval. For ternary LAl0.3InxTP systems, the highest ionic conductivity (3.5 × 10−3 S cm−1) was found for x = 0.2. This value is comparable to that found for LAlTP samples, which is one of the best values reported in the literature. For x = 0.1, the dc conductivity is slightly lower (1.4 × 10−3 S cm−1) but for x = 0.3 the conductivity decreases to 7 × 10− 4 S cm− 1. For all samples of ternary systems, the activation energy decreases from 0.29 to 0.23 eV at increasing temperatures indicating again the existence of two regimes for the lithium motion.

In Fig. 7, Li conductivity of samples has been analyzed as a function of frequency and temperature. In frequency plots, a differentiation of the bulk and the grain-boundary contributions was obtained. In the temperature plots, pre-exponential factors and activation energies were deduced. In analyzed samples of binary systems,

The analysis of unit cell parameters indicated that the substitution of Ti4+ by (R3+ + Li+) changes unit cell parameters according to the octahedral R cation size. The Rietveld analysis of LAlTP ND patterns showed that Al remains below nominal values because of the formation of secondary AlPO4 phases. In the case of LScTP and LInTP compounds, octahedral cation miscibility increases, making possible the formation of Li3Sc2(PO4)3 and Li3In2(PO4)3 monoclinic phases, reported previously [15,26]. From this fact, the amount of Li and trivalent cations increases with the amount of Sc and In in Nasicon phases (see Table 1). In ternary series, the amount of trivalent Sc and In cations can be increased without modiﬁcation of the tetrahedral aluminum content.

Structural information deduced from ND patterns has been compared with that deduced by NMR spectroscopy in LAlTP compounds. The analysis of Li1 and Li3 site occupations showed that the substitution of Ti by Al reduces slightly the amount of Li1, but increases considerably that at Li3 sites [19]. This result suggests that the increment of Li improves electrostatic repulsions between Li ions at Li1 and Li3 sites, destabilizing the occupation of Li1 sites. These observations agree with information deduced for Li–O distances in LAlTP samples: in Li1 sites, Li–O distances are near 2.1, but in Li3 sites, distances increase above 2.5 Å. The temperature dependence of BLi is considerably higher than that detected for other cations, underlining the contribution of the lithium mobility [19].

7Li MAS-NMR (I = 3/2) spectra showed the presence of three expected transitions, modulated by spinning sidebands associated with the sample rotation. 7Li MAS-NMR spectrum proﬁles showed the presence of two signals with different local mobilities. The spinning sideband patterns of the ﬁrst signal were assigned to Li ions located at ternary axes (Li1 sites). The mobility of Li ions at Li3 sites averaged quadrupole interactions, making the lithium signal only display a narrowed central component in Li MAS-NMR spectra. The increment of CQ values detected above 250 K suggests the existence of Li exchange processes between Li1 and Li3 sites (Fig. 6).

Lithium thermal factors, BLi, deduced from ND patterns of LTP and LAlTP samples, increase considerably above 250 K. The 7Li MAS-NMR spectra showed a decrease on the Li1 site occupation and the increment on the Li mobility above this temperature. According to this, quadrupole CQ values increase in a non-linear way: at low temperatures the value remains almost constant, but above 250 K this value increases in a signiﬁcant way. This increment has been related to Li exchange processes between Li1 and LI3 sites that required the formation of vacant sites at the intersection of conduction paths (Li1 sites). The hopping between Li1 and Li3 sites favors the delocalization of lithium in conduction Li1–Li3–Li3′–Li1 channels.

where A is the pre-exponential factor, EM is the activation energy, k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature. Values of A and EM were deduced from the ﬁtting of the temperature dependence of dc-conductivity.

The temperature dependence of conductivity showed the existence of two different activation energies in LiTi2 − xAlx(PO4)3 samples (Fig. 7). At low temperature, the activation energy, 0.28 eV, decreased with respect to 0.35 eV, deduced in the non-doped LiTi2(PO4)3 sample [16]. At increasing temperatures, an additional decrement was detected on the activation energy, from 0.35 to 0.27 eV for the Ti phase and from 0.27 to 0.18 for Al-doped samples [18,19]. This decrement has been ascribed to the onset of the high-temperature regime detected above 250 K in LAlTP samples.

where A = Kn · ωe is the pre-exponential factor, and EM is the activation energy for Li migration. In this expression, ωe stands for the crossover ωP frequency values extrapolated to the inﬁnite temperature. Kn is a factor proportional to the charge carrier concentration.

At this point, it is important to discuss the physical meaning of the effective frequency ωe term included in the pre-exponential factor. In particular, ωe can be expressed as [27,28].

where ω0 is the attempt frequency and ΔSM is the entropy for Li migration [28]. Taken into account that ω0 is assumed to be almost the same in most of materials, changes observed in ωe must be ascribed to changes in the migration entropy associated with the vacancy distribution [27,28]. The migration entropy has been related to the creation of vacancies at the intersection of conduction pathways (Li1 sites), produced by lithium incorporation in LRTP samples. From analysis performed on Al, Sc or In doped samples, it was deduced that the migration entropy decreases considerably from LTP to LRTP samples, but moderately in samples with Li/structural formula N1.3. According to this, the decrease of migration entropy observed in ternary Ti–Al–In and Ti–Al–Sc series was not important.

From conductivity data, the dependence of pre-exponential factor A on activation energy was investigated for the low-temperature regime. The plot of A as a function of the activation energy (Fig. 8) showed that LRTP samples display linear dependencies, with slopes changing in different series. This behavior, often observed in semiconductors and ion conductors, is called the “Meyer–Neldel rule” [29]. In LRTP plots, depicted points move along straight lines, indicating that activation energy and entropic terms decrease as trivalent cations increase. The analysis of ternary systems, where Sc or In partially substitutes Ti ions, showed that the additional incorporation of trivalent cations reinforces the trend observed in LAlTP samples but observed decrements were moderated, suggesting the existence of an optimum in conductivity that is difﬁcult to surpass.

Li1 + xTi2 − xRx(PO4)3 compounds with rhombohedral structure have been investigated by XRD, ND, MAS-NMR and impedance spectroscopy. A good ionic conductivity (close to 3.10−3 S cm−1) and a low activation energy (between 0.2 and 0.3 eV) were found at 300 K for x ~ 0.2 of Al3+, Sc3+ or In3+ in LTP doped samples. Electrostatic repulsions between Li ions are responsible for the formation of vacant Li1 sites that improves Li conductivity.

In the case of Li1 + xTi2 − xAlx(PO4) series, the incorporation of Al cations is limited by the formation of AlPO4 phases. The incorporation of additional Sc3+ or In3+ increases the amount of lithium in Nasicon compounds and delays the AlPO4 formation. However, the increment of lithium does not improve signiﬁcantly Li conductivity in Sc and In doped Li1.3Ti1.7Al0.3(PO4) samples.

In analyzed samples, the “Meyer–Neldel rule” was conﬁrmed, indicating that activation energy and entropic factors decrease in a parallel way with the Li content and temperature. The slope measured in different series decreases when the conductivity increases, suggesting the existence of an optimum that is difﬁcult to surpass in LRTP samples.
