NASICON-type LiTi2(PO4)3 and olivine-type LiFePO4 were prepared by a sol-gel method. The composites based on these phosphates with addition of amorphous SiO2 or Al2O3 were obtained by mechanical milling of preformed phosphates and oxides with further thermal treatment and by precipitation of oxide from the precursor on the surface of the preformed phosphate or its precursor with further thermal treatment. The ﬁnal products were characterized by XRD, SEM and impedance spectroscopy. The formation of the composites with oxides results in the conductivity decrease in the case of LiTi2(PO4)3 and in the conductivity 5-10 fold increase in the case of LiFePO4.

The study of the ion mobility in inorganic materials is one of the priority areas in modern material researches. Ionic conductors ﬁnd application in many areas of science and technology. Modern technologies typically employ lithium ion conductors to develop compact current sources and batteries (LIBs). Double phosphates with NASICON structure can be considered as one of the promising electrolytes for LIBs that may allow constructing solid state batteries [1,2]. However, it is desirable to increase ion conductivity of the NASICON type materials. One of the effective ways to increase conductivity for this class of materials is heterovalent doping [3–5].

LiFePO4 with the olivine structure is considered as one of the most promising cathode materials due to its high stability, speciﬁc capacity close to the theoretical value of 170 mA h/g, and relatively low cost [6–9]. However, LiFePO4 has signiﬁcant disadvantages, namely, low electron and ion conductivity [10,11]. Such methods as carbon coating [12] and doping by isoand heterovalent cations [13–15] are used to improve the LiFePO4 conductivity. Creation of the composite materials on the basis of ionic salt and oxide phase is also considered as one of the perspective ways to increase conductivity of the inorganic solid electrolytes. Increase in the conductivity of such composite materials is caused by the formation of a double electric (Debye) layer on the grain boundary between the salt and oxide. This effect is provided by the cations sorption on the oxide surface with simultaneous cation vacancies vacancy formation in the surface layer of the ionic salt. It can result in the sharp conductivity increase [16,17]. Heterogeneous doping with inert oxides (ﬁne-dispersed alumina, silica and others) is widely used for improving the conductivity of solid electrolytes, for example, based on silver halides [18–20] and hydrogen sulfates [21-23]. Maximum conductivity increase can usually be reached at relatively low oxide concentrations [23].

The purpose of this work was to study the effect of heterogeneous doping with ﬁnely dispersed silica or alumina on the ion conductivity of lithium–titanium phosphate with the NASICON structure and lithium–iron phosphate with the olivine structure.

A Pechini-type sol–gel process was used to synthesize the LiTi2(PO4)3 sample with NASICON structure [24]. LiFePO4 was obtained by a sol–gel method as described in [9].

The preparation of silica was performed by a procedure similar to the one reported in [25]. An appropriate amount of Si(OC2H5)4 in isopropanol solution (VТЕОS/ViPrOH = 1/60) was taken for this purpose. SiO2 was precipitated with excess of the NH4OH solution in isopropanol until reaching pH = 9. The mixture was left for stirring for 1 h. The obtained precipitates were washed with excess of water until reaching pH = 7 to remove ammonium ions. The precipitate was dried for 2 h at 200 °C. The preparation of alumina was performed by a procedure similar to the one described in [26]. Calculated amount of Al(NO3)3 ∗ 9H2O was dissolved in ethanol (0.6 M). After that the NH4OH solution in ethanol was added dropwise to the obtained Al(NO3)3 solution until reaching pH = 7. The mixture was stirred for 1 h. The Al(OH)3 precipitate was thoroughly washed with distilled water, dried for 2 h at 100 °C, then annealed for 4 h at 600 °C.

The phosphate/oxide composites were obtained by the following techniques. Technique I is the mechanical grinding of the previously synthesized phosphate and oxide in the ball milling followed by thermal treatment at 200 °C. Technique II is the oxide precipitation on the surface of the previously synthesized phosphate with subsequent thermal treatment at 200–600 °C. Technique III is the oxide precipitation on the surface of the phosphate precursor obtained after the ﬁrst stage of sol–gel synthesis followed by thermal treatment with formation of crystalline phosphate. Technique III was used for LiFePO4 only because of high temperature of the LiTi2(PO4)3 crystallization and possible dissolution of oxide in the NASICON structure during the long-term treatment at high temperature. The phosphate samples with the oxide content of 1–7 wt.% were obtained.

Microstructures of the obtained materials were examined with the help of a Carl Zeiss NVision 40 scanning electron microscope (micrographs were obtained at an accelerating voltage of 1 kV) provided with Oxford Instruments X-MAX energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analyzer operating at an accelerating voltage of 30 kV.

The X-ray phase analysis of the samples was performed on a Rigaku D/MAX 2200 diffractometer (CuKα1 radiation) equipped with a hightemperature camera. The Rigaku Application Data Processing software package was used for the spectra processing and data analysis.

Conductivity of the materials based on LiTi2(PO4)3 with the NASICON structure was measured at alternating current (ac) in the frequencies range from 10 Hz to 2 MHz by the two-probe method using an IPU-62 AC bridge and the Pt/sample/Pt symmetric cell. The ac conductivity was determined by extrapolating the semicircle representing the bulk component of the conductivity onto the real axis. The dc measurements with ion-blocking electrodes were carried out to determine the electronic conductivity value. The measurements were carried out using pressed cylindrical pellets (R = 5 mm, h = 2 mm) in the temperature range 25– 600 °C with a step of ~30 °C. The ionic conductivity was calculated as the difference of total and electronic conductivity. The conductivity of the materials based on LiFePO4 with the olivine structure was measured using the same device with Ag/sample/Ag symmetric cell in the temperature range 25–280 °C with a step of about 20 °C. An error of the impedance measurements was within 5%.

assumed that the agglomerated particles are observed on SEM micrographs of LiFePO4. Sintering processes occur during the second stage of sol–gel synthesis at high temperature (600 °C). The particle sizes of the composites obtained by techniques I and II are about 1 μm in the case of LiFePO4 according to SEM micrographs (Fig. 3). It is to be noted, that mechanical milling does not lead to signiﬁcant decrease in the particles size of the materials based on LiFePO4.

The use of technique III leads to essentially lower size (~200 nm) of the particles formed in the case of LiFePO4-based composites (Fig. 4). This indicates that an addition of oxide to the material before the ﬁnal annealing prevents the sintering of the particles and promotes obtaining of more ﬁne-dispersed material.

According to the literature data phosphates with the NASICON structure are characterized by high thermal stability [3]. The oxidation of ferrous iron can be expected while heating of LiFePO4 with the olivine structure during the study of conductivity in air. Therefore, thermal stability of LiFePO4 was previously investigated with the help of the hightemperature X-ray analysis.

According to the obtained data, the LiFePO4 heating does not lead to any changes in the composition right up to 280 °C. X-ray patterns recorded at temperatures higher than 280 °C contain reﬂections corresponding to the iron oxides (Fe2O3, Fe3O4), and phase mixture of lithium–iron phosphate with the olivine structure: LiFePO4 containing Fe2+ ions (triphylite, Card 81-1173 PDF-2) and partially oxidized Li(Fe2+,Fe3+)1 − δPO4 modiﬁcation (ferrisicklerite, Card No. 77-0179 PDF-2) (Fig. 5). The intensity of ﬁrst phase reﬂections of lithium–iron phosphate decreases and the intensity of reﬂections of the second phase increases with the temperature rise. This transition is most noticeable in the area of 2Θ = 29–30° of the X-ray pattern. The triphylite → ferrisicklerite transition is described in [27] for the LiFePO4 oxidation at the relatively low temperatures. In this case the electroneutrality can be reached by the exit of part of the iron from the unit cell and by the vacancy formation in the ion positions, as described in [28]. Decrease in the iron content and replacement of part of Fe2+ by Fe3+ with a smaller ionic radius lead to a decrease in the cell volume from 291,35 Å3 to 286,75 Å3. The triphylite → ferrisicklerite transition is almost completed at temperature of 370 °C. Reﬂections of Li3Fe2(PO4)3 with the NASICON structure (Card No. 78-1106) can also be noticed on the X-ray pattern at 370 °C (Fig. 5). Li3Fe2(PO4)3 content rises with the following increase in temperature.

Substantially complete oxidation of iron in the olivine structure with the formation of Li3Fe2(PO4)3 is observed at 600 °C. Conspicuous is the fact that in this material the phosphate/lithium ion ratio is equal to 1.

According to X-ray diffraction data, the obtained oxides are amorphous. Initial LiTi2(PO4)3 phosphate with the NASICON structure crystallizes in rhombohedral system (R3C sp. gr., Card 35-0754 PDF-2) (Fig. 1-1).

Initial LiFePO4 with the olivine structure crystallizes in orthorhombic system (triphylite, Pnma sp. gr., Card 81-1173 PDF-2) (Fig. 2-1). Composites obtained by techniques I–III consisted of the crystalline phosphate and amorphous oxide in most cases. X-ray diffraction patterns contain peaks of the corresponding crystalline phosphates only (Figs. 1-2, 3 and 2-2, 3). The oxide content in the composite materials was conﬁrmed by EDX analysis data. The use of technique III leads to formation of an additional crystalline phase FeSiO3 (Card 25-0147 PDF-2) in the case of LiFePO4 composites with silica.

The use of techniques I and II resulted in obtaining LiTi2(PO4)3 with the NASICON structure and composites on its basis with the particle size varying from 300 to 500 nm according to the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) data. The average size of unmodiﬁed LiFePO4 particles is 1 μm. At the same time, the coherence domain lengths are of the order of 80 nm according to the Scherrer formula. Therefore, it can be

The described transformations proceed by the exit of part of the iron from the matrix with the partial iron oxidation to the trivalent state. LiFe1 − δPO4 structure transformations occur twice during heating.

As LiFePO4 oxidizes at temperatures higher than 280 °C, conductivity was studied below this temperature. Conductivity of the obtained samples was investigated with the help of impedance spectroscopy.

It was shown that conductivity of the LiTi2(PO4)3 based materials is predominantly ionic, contribution of the electronic component in total temperature range does not exceed 2%. The obtained results are in good agreement with the literature data. Since double phosphates with the NASICON structure are well known as super ion conductors [3], it has been shown that LiTi2(PO4)3 heterogeneous doping with silica results in the conductivity decrease by 1–2 orders (Fig. 6) for all used techniques. The most probable reason is blocking of the ion transfer.

Conductivity of LiFePO4 is predominantly electronic which is in agreement with the results of Amin et al. [10]. The typical impedance spectrum and temperature dependences of total, electronic and ionic conductivities are presented in Fig. 7. According to our results the contribution of an electronic component to the total conductivity was around 70–90% in the total temperature range.

The typical impedance spectrum of LiFePO4/oxide composites, as well as total, electronic and ionic conductivities of LiFePO4/1 wt.% of Al2O3 composite are shown in Fig. 8. The appearance of the second semicircle on the impedance spectrum of composite (Fig. 8a) in contrast to initial LiFePO4 (Fig. 7a) comes under notice. The ﬁrst semicircle in Fig. 8a corresponds to the high frequency band and capacity values of pF order, while the second semicircle corresponds to the low frequency band and capacity values of nF order. The ﬁrst semicircle can be attributed to the bulk resistance of the material, whereas the second — to the resistance of the interfaces of the material particles [10]. Absence of the pronounced second semicircle on the impedance spectrum of initial LiFePO4 most probably indicates a good contact between the LiFePO4 particles. As the result of LiFePO4 heterogeneous doping, the contribution of ion conductivity increases up to 40–60% (Fig. 8b).

Conductivity of the materials based on LiFePO4 depends on the composite formation technique. The use of technique I does not lead to an increase in the conductivity of LiFePO4. Moreover, it decreases with the increase of oxide content.

The use of techniques II and III results in a 5–10 fold increase in the conductivity of LiFePO4. Temperature dependences of LiFePO4/xSiO2 (technique II) and LiFePO4/xAl2O3 (technique III) conductivity are presented in Figs. 9, 10. The maximum conductivity value was observed for LiFePO4/4 wt.% Al2O3 composite obtained by technique III. Conductivity of the composites with silica obtained by technique III is less than that of the initial LiFePO4. This fact is explained by the interaction between SiO2 and LiFePO4 with the formation of iron silicate and as a result the absence of desirable interface between LiFePO4 and SiO2.

For the ﬁne-dispersed composites based on LiFePO4 prepared by technique III conductivity is higher for the same dopant content. Most likely this fact can be explained by the highest interface area where the defect formation processes occurred.

So we can conclude that as the result of heterogeneous doping of double phosphates with oxides two effects can be observed: ion transport blocking and increase in conductivity due to the formation of the surface defects. The ﬁrst one (ion transport blocking by the nonconducting additive) dominates in the case of LiTi2(PO4)3 with the NASICON structure. This compound is characterized by sufﬁciently high self-disordering level [2]. Therefore, the effect of conductivity blocking on the interface is more pronounced than the effect of formation of additional point defects. In the case of LiFePO4 with the olivine structure, it is quite the reverse, the increase in conductivity is due to the defect formation dominates. This is owing to the fact that LiFePO4 is characterized by the lower self-disordering. It should also be mentioned that the ion transfer in LiFePO4 occurs by the one-dimensional channels system [29] as distinct from the NASICON-type phosphate that is characterized by the three-dimensional channels system [2]. The defect formation on the interface results in appearance of the three-dimensional highly conductive network exerting a noticeable inﬂuence on the LiFePO4 conductivity. For the ﬁne-dispersed composites based on LiFePO4 the effect of conductivity increase is more pronounced because of higher interface surface.
