Potentiometric CO2 sensors based on Nasicon (Na+ conductor, Na3Zr2Si2PO12) electrolyte, Bi8Nb2O17/Pt reference electrode and different sensing electrodes have been prepared. Besides the sensing electrode material, sensors differ from each other in the reference electrode preparation technique. The main aim of this study is to investigate sensor construction and electrode fabrication process inﬂuence on sensor properties. The optimal operating temperature of the studied sensors was 500 °C. At this temperature the electromotive force (EMF) responses of all sensors were linearly dependent on logarithm of CO2 partial pressure. It was found that the presence of Bi8Nb2O17 reference layer reduces interference of oxygen partial pressure on sensor response.

The demand for convenient and low-cost carbon dioxide detection methods is steeply growing. Recently, CO2 sensors based on solid state electrolytes attract a lot of attention. Solid-state sensors are inexpensive, compact, robust and can work in harsh environments [1,2]. As an electrolyte material in CO2 sensors different kinds of cationic conductors, such as lithium, magnesium and mainly sodium [3–9] containing conductors are used. Anionic conductors, like yttria[9] and magnesia[10] stabilised zirconia, were also used. Sensing electrodes are usually made of carbonates, for example Li2CO3, Na2CO3 and mixtures of these compounds with BaCO3, another carbonates or oxides. Another type of compounds, which can be used as a sensing electrode material are perovskite oxides [3].

The major challenge is to develop a potentiometric sensor working without the necessity of a reference gas and without a need of the reference electrode encapsulation. Important issue is a selection of reference electrode material, which should provide stable reference potential. For example as reference electrode material in sensor based on sodium conductive electrolytes Na2Ti6O12/TiO2 [11], Na2Ti6O13/Na2Ti3O7 [4,5,11], Na2SnO3/SnO2 [6], and Bi2Cu0.1V0.9O5.35 [7] were used. One of the newest approaches is usage of the oxide ion conductor Bi8Nb2O17/Pt reference electrode [8]. According to the authors of this work Bi8Nb2O17/Pt electrode provides no interference from oxygen partial pressure and smaller humidity interference.

The compound, which was used as a reference electrode is a binary oxide. The major component is Bi2O3 and the minor component is Nb2O5. Nb2O5 is added to Bi2O3 in order to preserve the hightemperature form of bismuth oxide, δ-Bi2O3 [12]. Bismuth oxide in this form has pseudo-face centred cubic structure and very high ion conductivity. For example, Ling et al. found that ionic conductivity of the cubic face of Bi2O3–Nb2O5 system is 0.033 S·cm−1 [13].

In this work, properties of several CO2 sensors based on Nasicon with Bi8Nb2O17/Pt are presented. The sensors differ from each other by methods of electrode application and have a different conﬁguration from the solution presented earlier in the literature [8].

Nasicon pellets were prepared using the sol–gel method [14] according to the procedure shown in Fig. 1. As substrates NH4H2PO4, Na2SiO3·9H2O and ZrO(NO3)2·xH2O (all from Sigma-Aldrich) were used. Zirconium (IV) oxynitrate had a form of a hydrate with unknown degree of hydration. This compound was dissolved in deionized water. Concentration of ZrO(NO3)2 in this solution was determined based on the weight of ZrO2 remaining after calcining the known volume of this solution. The solution of ZrO(NO3)2 was mixed with aqueous solutions (made of deionized water) of NH4H2PO4 and Na2SiO3·9H2O (molar ratio of components was 2:1:2) to form a sol. Sol was stirred for 2 h. After this time pH of sol adjusted to pH = 3 by addition of diluted nitric acid. Prepared gel was drying to evaporate water. After drying resultant powder was homogenized in mortar, pressed in pellets and sintered at temperature of 750 °C for 24 h. Sintered pellets were crushed in mortar, again pressed in pellets and sintered at 1000 °C for 12 h.

Sensors were exposed on synthetic air and 3% (30,000 ppm) of CO2 at a temperature range of 400–600 °C. Potentiometric sensor responses were measured with electrochemical interface SI 1287. More detailed studies, like measurements in different concentrations of CO2, crosssensitivity and inﬂuence of the concentration of oxygen were performed at 500 °C.

SEM measurements have been done in order to investigate structure and surface morphology of prepared sensors. The microstructure of the sensing layer surface was analysed with a scanning electron microscopy technique (SEM) using Phenom G2 Pro instrument.

In Fig. 4a and b XRD patterns of Nasicon and Bi8Nb2O17 powders are presented. In Fig. 4a it is visible that peaks present at experimental pattern are in a good agreement with literature data. In addition, reference pattern of the most common impurity of Nasicon which is ZrO2 is presented. In this ﬁgure it can be seen that investigated Nasicon powder is almost free from ZrO2. In Fig. 4b measured XRD pattern of Bi8Nb2O17 is presented. Peaks in this pattern are in good correlation with characteristic peaks from the reference pattern for the cubic phase of this compound (JCPDS 33-210). Measured Bi8Nb2O17 pattern is very similar to the pattern for the cubic phase of Bi3NbO7 obtained by Valant and Suvorov [15], which conﬁrms single phase cubic structure of the synthesized compound.

In Fig. 5 it can be seen that the surfaces of sensing layers differ a lot. In sensors 1, 2 and 3 as sensing layer Li2CO3 was used, while in sensor 4 we used a mixture of Li2CO3–BaCO3 (1:2 M ratio). In sensors 1 and 2 we can see that both sensing layer surfaces are relatively smooth but in sensor 1 the surface layer is more furrowed that might be related to different heating times, which for sensor 1 was longer than for sensor 2. Sensor 3's sensing layer is most rough and porous which conﬁrms that the morphology of sensing layer depends on the heating time and temperature. Based on SEM images we can state that longer time and temperature of heating cause formation of more furrowed and porous

Reference electrode material was prepared by solid state reaction similarly like in the work published by Dang [8]. The scheme of this process is presented in Fig. 2. Material was obtained from powders of Bi2O3 and Nb2O5 (both from Sigma-Aldrich) mixed at the molar ratio 4:1. Appropriate amounts of substrates were inserted to the ball mill and mixed for 14 h. After mixing the oxide mixture was pressed in pellets and initially sintered at 750 °C for 5 h, and then pellets were crushed in agate mortar pressed in to pellets again and sintered at 900 °C for 10 h. After sintering obtained Bi8Nb2O17 pellets were comminute to a powder.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis measurements of prepared Nasicon and Bi8Nb2O17 were carried out using Philips X'Pert diffractometer system. Based on Nasicon pellets 4 sensors were prepared. Different ways to fabricate such sensors were studied. Schematic drawings and short description of the sensors are in Fig. 3 and Table 1 respectively.

As a material for sensing electrode (SE) in sensors 1, 2 & 3, Li2CO3 was used. In sensor 4 Li2CO3 + BaCO3 was mixed in a molar ratio 1:2. Bi8Nb2O17 was used as a reference electrode (RE) material. In sensor 1 the powder of this material was mixed with Pt paste and in one step the RE was prepared from this mixture. In sensors 2, 3 and 4 RE was fabricated in two steps, layers Pt paste and Bi8Nb2O17 powder were applied separately according to Table 1.

Sensors were placed in a tube furnace connected to a temperature controller. High purity gases such as synthetic air, 100 ppm oxygen in nitrogen, carbon dioxide (3% in synthetic air), nitrogen dioxide (1000 ppm), ammonia (200 ppm), sulphur dioxide (1000 ppm) and chlorine (100 ppm) were used. Proper gas mixture and ﬂow rate (100 sccm) were obtained by using Tylan mass ﬂow controllers.

1st step: application of Pt paste and sintering at 900 °C. 2nd step: application of mixture Li2CO3 and organic solvent and annealing at 600 °C Application of Pt paste and Bi8Nb2O17 mixture and sintering at 900 °C

SE2: Li2CO3/Pt 1st step: application of Pt paste and sintering at 900 °C 2nd step: application of Li2CO3 powder and annealing at 760 °C in order to obtain molten layer. RE3: Pt/Bi8Nb2O17 1st step: application of Pt paste. 2nd step: application of Bi8Nb2O17 on the top of Pt and sintering at 900 °C

SE3: Li2CO3 + BaCO3/Pt 1st step: application of Pt paste and sintering at 900 °C. 2nd step: application of Li2CO3 and BaCO3 mixture (molar ratio 1:2) with organic solvent and annealing at 600 °C.

RE2: Bi8Nb2O17/Pt 1st step: application of Bi8Nb2O17 with organic solvent mixture and annealing at 600 °C. 2nd step: application of Pt paste and sintering at 900 °C.

sensing layer. Sensor 4 sensing surface is relatively solid with clear grains of mixed carbonates. On the higher magniﬁcation, formation of white crystals can be seen in form of the needles, scattered over the surface of the sensing layer. From the proportion of used carbonates we conclude that on the surface Li2CO3 is present. In order to conﬁrm that further studies are required.

The morphology of the layer affects the detection limit. As we will see later in Fig. 7 sensors with porous sensing layer (sensors 1, 3) detect about 40 ppm of CO2, while sensor 2 detects limit of about 60 ppm. Sensor 4 did not react until the 200 ppm of carbon dioxide concentration. These differences might be associated with hindered diffusion in deep of the sensing layer for solid structures.

First, responses of all sensors were tested in different temperatures. The response of each sensor was measured for the synthetic air and then composition of the ﬂowing gas was changed to 3% (30,000 ppm) of CO2 in synthetic air. This experiment proves that each sensor gives a response to the change of CO2 concentration. Temperatures for which a difference between EMF measured in the synthetic air and 3% CO2 is the highest have been determined. Theoretically, the slope of the calibration curve is proportional to the temperature. Unfortunately, because of the logarithmic character of this curve, determination of its slope is only possible when there are two different concentrations of CO2 measurement (each different from 0). Unfortunately, the relevant measurements have not been carried out. Practical data showed in Fig. 6 shows that the difference between EMF of sensors measured in the atmosphere of synthetic air and 3% CO2 depends on the temperature, but it is not the highest for the highest measured temperature. The maximum value of this difference is localised at the temperature about 500 or 550 °C. It suggested that in this temperature the best properties of sensor (lowest detection limit and theoretical slope of the calibration curve) can be obtained.

Based on literature and measurement results obtained at different temperatures, 500 °C was chosen as a temperature in which more detailed studies have been performed. First transient response of each sensor to the different concentrations of CO2 was measured. Measurements were performed in two steps. Sensor responses in the atmosphere containing below 1000 ppm CO2 were measured. To obtain this gas composition mass ﬂow controller, a maximum ﬂow capacity of 10 sccm was used to control the ﬂow rate of CO2. Next sensor responses in the atmosphere containing between 1000 and 30,000 ppm CO2 were measured. In this case of mass ﬂow controller, a maximum ﬂow capacity of 100 sccm was used to control the ﬂow rate of CO2 to obtain proper gas compositions. Usage of two different mass ﬂow controllers to measure responses was necessary because of the broad range of measured CO2 concentration. Responses of the sensors to the different concentrations of CO2 are presented in Fig. 7. As it is visible in this ﬁgure, EMFs of all sensors change with the change of concentration of CO2 in the sensor surrounding. Increase of the concentration of CO2 results in increase of the measured value of EMF. Response of the sensors to the step-change of concentration was measured in order to obtain calibration curves of all sensors and to calculate sensitivities as slopes of these curves.

In order to check stability of sensor response, another experiment was performed. Concentration of the CO2 was decreased and then increased as it is shown in Fig. 8. Obtained results prove that sensor response returns to the original value.

In order to investigate performance of the reference electrodes prepared in different ways, the inﬂuence of oxygen concentration on measured EMF was investigated. EMFs of the sensors were measured in conditions of constant CO2 concentration (300 ppm) and changing concentration of O2. Measurements were started from the highest concentration of O2 (20% in the synthetic air) and it was gradually reduced. Results of this experiment are presented in Fig. 9. As it is visible responses of sensors 2, 3 and 4 are very stable and almost uninﬂuenced by O2 concentration. Concentration of O2 has only an impact on the signal of the sensor 1. Measured EMF of this sensor is increasing while O2 concentration is decreasing.

Interference of additional gases, such as NO2, SO2 and NH3, on the sensor response was investigated. Sensors were placed in the atmosphere containing 3000 ppm of CO2. Values of measured EMF for sensors in this gas composition are shown in Fig. 10. Subsequently, in order to investigate the inﬂuence of other gases, speciﬁed concentration of interfering gases was added to the gas composition. This experiment was inspired by real working conditions of the sensor when it will be exposed to the CO2 and other gases can temporarily appear in the gas composition. Additions of NO2 and SO2 cause increase of the sensors EMF because these two compounds are involved in the reduction reactions on the surface of carbonate sensing electrode. The presence of the NH3 results in the decrease of the registered EMF. This gas in contrast to the previous ones is oxidizing on the sensing electrode surface. Based on results presented in Fig. 10 it can be seen that the response of sensor 1 is the least inﬂuenced by investigated interfering gases. Direct comparison between sensors 3 and 4 (with identical RE) suggest that usage of bicarbonate (Li2CO3–BaCO3) sensing layer can improve sensor selectivity to the CO2 in comparison with the sensor with sensing layer made of a pure Li2CO3.

Reaction (1) occurs, when SE is made of Li2CO3, but if SE electrode is made of Li2CO3 and BaCO3 mixture then on the sensing electrode reactions (1) and (2) occurs simultaneously. Reference electrode reaction occurs in the interface between Nasicon and reference layer.

Considering sensor as a cell, on the surface of the sensor electrodes the two types of reactions occur: reduction (Eqs. (1) and (2)) on SE (cathode) and oxidation (Eq. (3)) on RE (anode). Taking into account that the anode is RE, its potential should be constant. We assume that during CO2 measurement only the SE (cathode) potential can change. In Fig. 7 it is shown that an increase of CO2 concentration causes an increase of cell EMF. Consequently an increase of the EMF is related only to the rise of the cathode potential.

In Fig. 11 calibration curves for all presented sensors are shown. For each sensor two curves are presented: one for concentrations below 1000 ppm and second for higher concentrations. That approach was used due to measuring procedure in which two different mass ﬂow controllers were used. Unfortunately, it was observed that usage of different mass ﬂow controller can inﬂuenced the results. In Table 2 slopes of calibration curves from Fig. 11 are gathered.

Theoretical slope of the curve at 500 °C, when two electrons take part in the sensing reaction (Eqs. (1) and (2)) for a 10-fold concentration difference should have a value:

The best agreement with the theoretical value of slope was obtained for sensor 3. For sensor 1 slopes of the curves were slightly lower. High value of the slope obtained for sensor 4 for concentrations below 1000 ppm can be a result of long time sensor response stabilisation at low CO2 concentration. The slope of the calibration curve for concentrations higher than 1000 for sensor 4 is lower than the theoretical value. Determined value of n for sensor 4 is 2.17 and is close to the expected value. There is no clear explanation of such behaviour, however, later in the text we give some possible explanation. The value of the slopes for the sensor 1 is slightly lower than theoretical. Similar deviation from theoretical value is observed in other research as well [11].

In Fig. 12 exemplary characteristic obtained for sensor 3 for constant concentration of CO2 and stepwise change of O2 concentration. Concentration of the oxygen was decreasing hundredfold from 20% to 0.2% and the signal was fairly constant, each step resulted in a small peak directed towards smaller values of EMF. After decreasing the oxygen concentration to the 0.2%, concentration of O2 was increased to the initial value. This change resulted in the highest peak in the characteristic directed towards higher values of EMF.

After each change of the oxygen concentration there is a short disorder of the sensor response and slow return to the value before the disturbance. This behaviour can be explained by the disturbance of the equilibrium on the RE as a result of change in the oxygen concentration. On the RE there should be reaction (3) occurring. After each disturbance the equilibrium of this reaction is moving to the right side of the Eq. (3), accordingly to the Le Chatelier–Brown rule. As a result a decrease of the EMF is observed. However, results show that after some time the sensor response is returning to the value before disturbance. Reaction (3) occurs on the interface between Nasicon and reference layer, which is supposed to be a constant source of partial oxygen pressure. Its partial pressure should be constant, but as measurement result shows, it can be disturbed by the changed partial pressure of the oxygen in the surrounding atmosphere.

Proposed mechanism might be conﬁrmed when we increase the oxygen concentration back to the 20%. We can see high peak as a result of disturbance of this system balance. We move the equilibrium of the reaction to the left side, which results in increase of the EMF, but the system stabilises itself again and the signal returns to the initial value.

To consider thermodynamic properties of sensing layer we need to represent occurring reaction in a different way. We can rewrite reactions (1) and (2) as follows: Li2O þ CO2 ¼ Li2CO3

In the case of sensors 1, 2 and 3 reaction (6) occurs and in the case of sensor 4 reactions (6) and (7) occur. After summarising (6) and (7) we can obtain:

We assume that reactions above run towards the formation of carbonates in CO2 presence. All calculations below will be considered for 1 mol of carbon dioxide. Finally, calculations will proceed for Eqs. (6) and (7).

We performed calculations of Gibbs energy similar to the one presented by Ramírez-Salgado [16]. Calculations are performed to conﬁrm, if sensing layers are stable phases during the measurements at temperature 500 °C. All thermodynamic data used in calculations are presented in Table 3.

In [16] authors performed analysis of Gibbs energy of reaction of Na2CO3 decomposition layer similarly to reactions (6) and (7). They also took into consideration the relation of the Na2O activity in Nasicon. In this case, it was proven that in some conditions Gibbs function can be negative. Unfortunately, in the case of Li2O and BaO relation of activities of these compounds in Nasicon is unknown. We can only guess that in the case of sensing layer used by us similar phenomenon can be present. In that case no constant activity of Li2O and BaO can cause higher number of transferred electrons than Nernstian value. Another explanation of obtained value of transferred electrons can be, as Ramírez-Salgado and Fabry suggested [16], inﬂuence by grain boundaries. Similar values (higher than 2) at 500 °C, for Li2CO3 + BaCO3 sensing layer at 500 °C were also obtained by other authors [7,11].

Based on the present investigation, the following conclusions have been drawn:

(1) Nasicon and Bi8Nb2O17 were prepared and used to obtain carbon dioxide sensors.

(2) Four sensors based on Nasicon, carbonate sensing electrodes and Pt/Bi8Nb2O17 reference electrodes have been successfully tested in the laboratory environment.

(3) The present results show that Bi8Nb2O17 can be used as an open reference electrode in the carbon dioxide sensor.

(4) The method of preparation of Bi8Nb2O17 reference layer has an inﬂuence of properties of the sensor.

(5) Reference electrode in the form of two layers of Bi8Nb2O17 and Pt can provide independence of the sensor response from oxygen partial pressure.

(6) The EMF of all prepared sensors is linear to the logarithm of CO2 concentration. The slope of its characteristics is close to theoretical value arising from the Nernst equation.
