By an example of Eu0.33Zr2(PO4)3 phosphate, the possibility of predicting the luminescence in the  framework  of  the  time-dependent  density  functional  theory  (TD  DFT)  was  demonstrated.  The  theoretical  emission spectra of Eu3+ were computed on the basis of the cluster approach with the use of the sequential  growth  technique. The  optimal  cluster  [EuZr2P6O24H18]+11  and  optimal  basis  set  Eu[MWB52],  Zr[MWB28],       P[MWB10], O[6-31G(d,f)], H[6-31G] were determined. The deviation between the calculated and experimental  wavelengths was less than 1%.

The Eu3+ ion is known to be an active component of  phosphorescent  materials.  In  combination  with  other  emitters it is widely used as a phosphor in, e.g., plasma  displays, fluorescent lamps, and light-emitting diodes.  Also,  compounds  based  on  Eu3+  find  application  as  materials for luminescent labels. In recent years, there  has been an increased interest in europium derivatives  as candidates of biomedical markers.  experimental the  luminescence of europium-containing compounds have  been the subject of much research. At the same time,  preference  has  always  been  for  methods  of  investigation  which  the  predetermined  architecture of the material to be implemented in order  to  obtain  a  phosphor  with  the  desired  characteristics.  The  prediction  of  the  emission  properties  of  chromophores  leads  to  fewer  stages  in  exploratory  chemical  experiments  and  thereby  to  lower  costs  of  research  work.  In  the  growing  importance is attached to the theoretical prediction of  the excitation spectra of new materials. 

An  approach  widely  used  for  calculation  of  the  theoretical luminescence spectra is based on the crystal  field  theory.  Techniques  for  building  the  effective  Hamiltonian of the crystal field theory for Eu3+ doped  into  various  crystalline  matrices  were  described  for  oxide (Gd2O3 [12], In2O3 [13], Sr1–xMoO4 [14], ThO2  [15]), fluoride, and phosphate (LiYF4, YPO4) [16–17]  matrices.  The  theoretical  luminescence  spectra  are  calculated  using  empirical  parameters.  In  some  studies,  theoretical  ab  initio  calculations  are  combined with empirical calculations  of the energy levels, e.g., for Ba2LnMO6 (Ln = Y, Gd;  M = Nb, Ta) and (Cs,Rb)2(Na,Li)Eu(NO2)6 [18, 19]. 

A  similar  approach  was  applied  in  [20]  for  a  quantum-chemical  study  of  the  crystal  field  and  determination  of  transfer  energy  for  nanocrystalline Y2O3. Ab initio methods were used for  calculation  of  the  ground-state  (4f n)  energy  and  oneelectron  crystal-field  parameters  for  Eu3+  in  all  the  clusters  simulating  the  local  environment  of  Eu3+  in  cubic Y2O3. For some levels the energies significantly  differed  from  the  experimental  data.  The  best  results  were obtained for (EuY12O22)5– cluster with 35 atoms. 

Greater opportunities, compared to the crystal-field  theory,  are  offered  by  the  density  functional  theory  (DFT)  [21]  which  finds  application  in  theoretical  studies of the Eu3+ luminescence both in combination  with empirical approaches [18–19] and independently  [22–24].  In  [22]  the  crystal-structure  parameters  for  Y6WxMo(1–x)O12  were  calculated,  as  well  as  the  electronic structure and the orbital populations with the  convergence  of  1.0–1.6%.  The  calculations  were  performed for Y6WO12 and Y6MoO12 matrices, and this  was followed by calculation of the excitation spectrum  of  the  Eu3+  ion  in  the  matrix.  Local  environment  of  Eu3+ in clusters was not considered in that study. 

In  [23],  the  DFT  technique  with  the  use  of  the  supercell  approach  was  applied  to  the  calculation  of  the  DOS  diagram  for  Gd2O2S  crystals.  A  DFT  calculation  of  the  absorption  spectrum  of  Eu3+  for  ([EuAl12N4]26+  europium-doped  aluminum  nitride  cluster) in [24] gave the results that showed only qualitative  agreement with the experimental observations.  

Among relevant theoretical studies, the all-electron  calculation  by  the  Hartree-Fock  self-consistent  field  method of a system with an open shell configuration of  9– cluster in a Ba2GdNbO6 crystal [25] is worth  the EuO6 mentioning.  

One  of  the  most  promising  methods  that  is  currently used for estimating the excitation energies is  the time-dependent perturbation theory (TD DFT). To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  the  only  instance  of  application  of  this  theory  to  Eu3+  luminescence  calculations  was  in  the  case  organic  complexes  of  europium  [26].  As  to  inorganic  compounds,  the  TD  DFT  calculation  of  the  electronic  spectra  of  CoZr4· (PO4)6  with  application  of  a  cluster  approach  was  carried  out  in  [27].  Thus,  the  calculations  of  the  luminescence spectra are mostly performed by empirical  approaches,  crystal-field  theory,  while  quantumchemical  calculations  using  DFT,  in  particular,  TD  DFT,  methods  are  scarce.  The  extent  of  quantitative  agreement  between  the  theory  and  experiment  is  hardly discussed in those studies; the clusters selected  not always adequately represent the local environment  in the crystalline matrix. 

This  study  was  concerned  with  a  Nasiconstructured  europium-containing  zirconium  phosphate  Eu0.33Zr2(PO4)3. Compounds of this structural type are  well-known  for  their  high  cationic  conductivity,  radiation  resistance,  chemical  and  thermal  stability  [28].  Their  most  is  a  high isomorphic  capacity  and  the  respective  possibility  of  adjustment of properties [29]. Cationic substitutions in  certain  framework  sites  can  produce  changes  in  the  photoluminescence characteristics of these compounds  [30]. 

Here,  we  explored  the  possibility  of  theoretically  predicting  the  Eu3+  luminescence  in  a  Nasiconstructured  inorganic  crystalline  matrix  using  the  TD  DFT  method.  Our  purpose  was  to  determine  the  coordination  sphere  to  which  we  could  restrict  ourselves  when  selecting  the  cluster  model.  To  this  end,  we carried out calculations for clusters of different size  in which either the oxygen environment only (the first  coordination  sphere)  or  also  the  phosphate  tetrahedra  (the second and third coordination spheres) were taken  into account. 

When studying the emission properties of Eu0.33Zr2· (PO4)3 orthophosphate in which the Eu3+ ion is in the  singlet state we used several approximations. 

As the first approximation in the calculation of the  excitation  spectra  all  the  cluster  model  components  were  treated  as  ions  on  the  assumption  that  the  Eu3+  ion  will  give  a  certain  electrostatic  contribution  and  that  the  nearest  local  environment  corresponds  to  the  ionic crystal lattice structure [31]. 

The second approximation consisted in passivation  of  the  broken  bonds  by  hydrogen  atoms.  Otherwise  broken  bonds  will  lead  to  a  cluster  whose  properties  will  differ  in  multiplicity  from  the  real  system  and  thereby  introduce  distortion  of  the  desired  geometry  and  all  properties  of  interest.  However,  bond  passivation  by  hydrogen  atoms  also  may  affect  the  electronic  state  in  the  cluster  and  distort  its  wave  function.  Hence,  there  is  necessary  to  choose  such  cluster  model  that  the  distortion  will  be  minimized  [32].  The  optimal  cluster  is  that  having  the  smallest  size  though  most  accurately  describing  the  desired  properties.  There  exist  two  methods  to  construct  clusters. In the first method, a smaller crystal system is  cut out from a larger crystal system and then used in  quantum-chemical modeling of luminescence. However,  in  this  approach  the  choice  of  the  smaller  system  is  controversial. Therefore,  we used the  second  method,  in  which  the  cluster  is  generated  sequentially  by  building  up  the  nearest  environment  around  the  emission center (Alexandrowicz method) [33].  

The  excited  state  calculations  were  carried  out  in  the  framework  of  the  time-dependent  density  functional  theory.  The  suitable  functionals  and  potentials the  were  sought  calculated and experimental wavelengths. This procedure  is  possible  because  the  europium  ion  exhibits  bands  of  two  types,  where  the  first  type  bands  can  change under the influence of the ligand field, and the  second type bands always remain unchanged [34, 35].  Next,  we  proceeded  to  building  up  the  nearest  environment around the emission center. As new atoms  (O, P, Zr) were incorporated into the cluster, new basis  sets  were  added  for  each  type  of  atoms,  so  that  the  necessary  set  of  potentials  could  be  obtained.  The  results of each calculation run were compared with the  experimental  data,  and  the  calculation-comparisonadjustment  procedure  was  continued  until  the  calculated  data  agreed  with  the  experimental  results  within 1%. 

After the calculations using a number of functionals  and  basis  sets  were  performed,  we  selected  the  parameters  that  yielded  a  numerically  computed  best  fit  with  the  experiment.  Here,  we  did  not  perform  assignment  of  wavelengths  based  on  spectral  terms.  We selected B1LYP, B3LYP, and PBE0 functionals and  MWB52,  MWB53,  MHF52,  MHF53  pseudopotential  basis sets for each of them. 

The best agreement with the experimental data was  achieved  for  B1LYP  functional  with  MHF52  and  MWB52  basis  sets  and  for  PBE0  functional  with  MWB52  basis  set  (Table  1).  The  use  of  B1LYP  functional leads to fairly good results, but with PBE0  functional the computational time is 1.5 times smaller.  Therefore, we chose the PBE0/MWB52 pair. To make  the cluster geometry optimization faster we applied the  molecular mechanics approach with the universal force  field  (UFF)  potential  [42,  43]. The  figure  shows  how  successively  larger  clusters  were  generated  until  adequate description of the emission properties of the  crystalline compound under study was achieved. 

By gradual transition from the smallest to a larger  cluster  after  each  procedure  of  sequential  addition  of  atoms  and  optimization  of  the  cluster  model  we  performed calculations of the luminescent properties in  the  framework  of  the  TD  DFT  theory  using  a  combined basis set [44–46]. 

With  the  view  of  accelerating  the  calculation,  as  new types of atoms were incorporated into the system,  we  applied  for  each  element  a  new  basis  set  so  that  each  system  had  its  own  basis  set.  For  example,  for  lighter atoms we used simple basis sets, which allowed  faster  calculation  and  more  flexible  representation  of  the  features  of  the  structure  calculated.  It  should  be  noted that the system growth in size is accompanied by conjugation of the outer shells of atoms with those of  other  atoms,  and  the  electron  density  is  redistributed  on  the  atomic  orbitals,  in  particular,  on  the  emitting  center.  Therefore,  we  introduced  a  correction  to  the  pseudopotential, allowing the occurrence of interaction  of all molecular orbitals [47]. 

The  number  of  electrons  in  the  cluster  should  correspond  to  that  in  the  analogous  segment  of  Eu0.33Zr2(PO4)3  orthophosphate,  and  so  we  assigned  formal charges to the clusters using the ionic bonding  model. 

We calculated the excitation spectra of [EuZr2O6]–1  (B), [EuZr2P3O6H6]+11 (C), and [EuZr2P6O24H18]+11 (D)  clusters  the  experimental data (Table 2). As the cluster was built up  sequentially, the spectrum underwent significant changes.  The  optimal  cluster  51 atoms, providing the most adequate description of  the luminescent properties observed.  

The  reason  for  a  slight  deviation  of  the  calculated  from experimental data is most likely twofold: a wellchosen  pseudopotential  for  the  emitting  center  and  a well-chosen  force  field  such  that  the  global  or  nearglobal  energy  minimum  was  achieved.  This,  in  turn,  allowed obtaining the optimal geometry for the cluster  corresponding  to  the  Nasicon-type  crystal  structure  under study (Table 3). 

Unfortunately we did not have sufficient computing  power  for  calculating  the  optimal  geometry  in  the  framework  of  the  DFT  theory.  However,  considering  the emission features of the central atom as the focus  of our study, we proceeded from the fact that it is only  affected  by  the  field  of  the  neighbor  atoms.  A  good  agreement  between  the  experimental  and  theoretical  results  is  indicative  of  good  performance  of  the  truncated  model,  cluster  D,  which  takes  into  account  not  only  the  nearest-neighbor  oxygen  atoms  but  also  the  phosphate  groups  and  in  which  the  broken  Zr–O  bonds are passivated by hydrogen atoms. 

Thus,  we  demonstrated  the  real  possibility  of  a  quantum-chemical  calculation  of  luminescent  properties of Eu3+ in a Nasicon-type matrix using the  cluster model. The algorithm found can be applied to  other  compounds,  which  opens  prospects  for  predicting the luminescent properties of new materials  and allows determining the range of potential emitters.