The topicality of this work is related to the fact that some materials with rhombohedral crystalline frames of the NASICON family have properties important for practice, and they can be applied as structural materials in current sources [1–7]. In particular, researchershave been studying a possibility of increasing the energy parameters of accumulators, in which Na3Fe2(PO4)3 is used as an electrode material [2–5].At present Na3Fe2(PO4)3 single crystals and ceramic samples have been well studied. According to [8–10], Na3Fe2(PO4)3 has three polymorphic modifications (α, β, and γ phases). On heating, Na3Fe2(PO4)3 undergoes sequential phase transitions from the monoclinic superstructure α phase to the pseudorhombohedral superstructure β phase, and then, to the rhombohedral γ phase at temperatures 368 K and 418 K.Na3Fe2(PO4)3, as well as Na3Sc2(PO4)3, are characterized by the statistical occupation with sodium cations of crystallographic voids of the A and B types in the {[M2(PO4)3]3–}3 crystalline framework, where M = Sc, Fe [11, 12].The high ionic conductivity of a γ-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 single crystal observed in [10] is likely to be due to a weak bond of sodium cations with the anion crystalline framework.Despite of the available data on sodium-iron phosphate, it is interesting to study the structural features, the conducting and dielectric properties of Na3Fe2(PO4)3 synthesized by hot pressing.The aim of this work is to study the structural features, the conducting and dielectric properties of Na3Fe2(PO4)3 synthesized by hot pressing and to establish the correlations between the structure, the conducting and dielectric properties of this material in various polymorphic modifications.The following reagents were used: high-purity Na2CO3 (Labrfarm), high-purity Fe2O3 (Labrfarm), high-purity NH4H2PO4, and ZrO2 powder (Labrfarm).The reagents were weighted using a Shimadzu Type ELB 200, and the initial charge was milled in an agate mortar. The samples were synthesized in platinum crucibles.The Na3Fe2(PO4)3 polycrystals were prepared by solid-phase synthesis by the ceramic technology from the charge 3Na2CO3 + 2Fe2O3 + 6NH4H2PO4 taken in the stoichiometric proportions during two-stage burning. The first burning was performed at 870 K.The second burning was performed by hot pressing under hydrostatic pressure P = 2 × 105 Pa at temperature 970 K. The burning time of the samples at each stage of the solid-phase synthesis was 8 h.For the synthesis of the samples under pressure, we created an installation consisting of four components: pressing mechanism, hinged furnace, alumina mold (with inner diameter 14 mm) and two long Al2O3 rods 20 mm and 14 mm in diameters at different ends, respectively. The wide end of the lower alumina rod was rigidly fixed on a steel platform, and the upper endwith the lower diameter was inserted to the mold at a depth of 8 mm. The sample (pressed pellet) was placed in the center of the mold and covered with ZrO2 powder on all sides. The upper alumina rod was fixed to the plunger of the pressing device by its wide end and can be inserted into the mold by another end and can be freely displaced along it. The hydrostatic pressure on the sample was produced by the mechanical pressing mechanism, the mold, the two dies, and zirconia powder. The mold with the sample was placed in the center of the hinged furnace. The temperature was measured by a platinum–platinum–rhodium thermocouple disposednear the sample.The phase state and the structural parameters of the Na3Fe2(PO4)3 polycrystalline samples were studied by X-ray powder diffraction using a DRON-3 diffractometer (CuKα radiation).The nonlinear optical properties of the Na3Fe2(PO4)3 polycrystal were determined by the second harmonic generation (SHG) method from a neodymium laser radiation.The conducting and dielectric properties of the samples were measured by impedance spectroscopy.The studies were carried out in the temperature range 295–573 K using ВМ-507 and ВМ-538 impedance with the frequency ranges 5–105 and 5 × 105–5 × 107 Hz, respectively. For the measurements, palladium electrodes were deposited on the samples.The synthesized Na3Fe2(PO4)3 polycrystal had a dark-rose color, and they were 1-mm-thick pellets 10 mm in diameter. It was revealed that the polycrystalline samples had the highest density of 98% of the theoretical density.The X-ray diffraction measurements show that the samples are single-phase. The X-ray powder diffraction pattern is shown in Fig. 1.The X-ray diffraction patterns enable us to establish the type the crystal lattice and the structural parameters of the samples at room temperature. The unit cell of the α-phase of Na3Fe2(PO4)3 has a monoclinic distortion with space group C2/m, and Table 1 gives the found structural parameters. For comparative analysis Table 1 also contains the structural data for Na3Fe2(PO4)3 obtained other authors [6, 10, 13].As seen from Table 1, the structural data for α-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 are very ambiguous. It seems likely that the available contradict data on the α-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 are due to the fact that this compound crystallized in different forms in the dependence on the thermodynamic synthesis conditions; i.e., the thermodynamic synthesis conditions were determining factor in the formation of the resulting structure of theα-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 crystals.Note that, in [10], the superstructure distortions that can be characterized by the following expression were observed in a α-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 single crystal.According to [10], the crystal structure in β-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 conserves weak superstructure reflections and can have space group or P3c1, and, in this case, the unit cell can be described by the following expressions The test for the noncentrosymmetricity of the α-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 polycrystal enabled us to reveal the absence of SHG signal, which enabled us to consider the low-temperature α phase as a centrosymmetric nonpolar phase. Similar results were obtained upon the studies of the test for the centrosymmetricity in the isostructural analog α-Na3Cr2(PO4)3, although, in the case of another analog α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3, the noncentrosymmetricity of the low-temperature α phase was observed.Figure 2 shows the dependences of the reactive component of the impedance on its active component jZ11(Z1) on complex plane Z* = Z1 + jZ11 for the Na3Fe2(PO4)3 polycrystalline sample at two temperatures.As seen from Fig. 2, the most complete hodographof the impedance was obtained at 290 K (Fig. 2b) andhas a form of two semicircles with the ascendingbranch at low frequencies. Such a hodograph correspondsto the equivalent electrical circuit (Fig. 2c) thatis built of the capacity of the double layer (Cel) correspondingto the metal–Na3Fe2(PO4)3 polycrystalboundary) and two electrical circuits connected inseries. One of the circuits consists of the crystallitecapacity (Ccr) and its active resistance (Rcr) connectedin parallel and another circuit consists of the interaβcrystallite interlayer capacity (Cin) and its active resistance(Rin) of the polycrystalline sample connected inparallel.The value of the crystallite resistance ( ) correspondedto the small semicircle diameter along theabscissa axis (the resistance and the capacity of thecrystallite are lower than those of the intercrystalliteinterlayer due to a higher crystallite density) and thesecond semicircle diameter gives the value of the resis-tance ( ) of the intercrystallite interlayer. The conductivityof a polycrystal grain (σcr) was calculated byformulaThe phase transitions are shown in dependenceσT(T) by “extended” temperature ranges that are connectedby lines in the form of “slant steps” (Fig. 3).This result is likely due to the isotropy of the physicalproperties of the polycrystalline samples. Conversely,in the case of Na3Cr2(PO4)3 single crystals, we foundthat the steps are rectangular [14] and they characterizesharp jumps of the conductivity during the phasetransitions. The middle of the first “extended” temperaturerange in temperature dependence σT(T) correspondsto T = 368 K, which indicates the existenceof the temperature phase transition (Tα→β) from the αphase to β-Na3Fe2(PO4)3.The results of the measurements of the temperaturedependence of the ionic conductivity of Na3Fe2(PO4)3crystallites enable us to separate in dependence σT(T)three linear segments corresponding to three polymorphicmodifications α, β, and γ (Fig. 3) which areindicated by the dashed lines.Using the corresponding processing of theobtained experimental data (σT(T) in Fig. 3), wedetermined the parameters of the ionic conductivityand the phase transition temperatures of sodium–ironphosphate given in Table 2.According to Table 2, the parameters of the ionicconductivity of Na3Fe2(PO4)3 noticeably differ fromthe data of [10]. First, the samples prepared by hotpressing have the conductivities markedly higher andthe activation energies lower in the α and β phases ofNa3Fe2(PO4)3 as compared to the corresponding characteristicsof the single-crystal samples.Since the charge carrier concentration in α- andβ-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 is not dependent on the preparationtechnology, the decrease in the activation energy andthe increase in the conductivity in the polycrystallinesample can be associated with a partial removal of themonoclinic distortion of the crystalline frame. It islikely that the conditions of hot pressing (influence ofthe pressure and temperature) favor the formation ofthe α- and β-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 polycrystals, in which themonoclinic distortion were partially removed (as comparedto the crystals synthesized at the atmosphericpressure), and this fact can lead to a decrease in theactivation energy and an increase in the conductivity(Table 2) as sodium cations transit from A-void toB-void in the crystalline frames of α and β phases ofNa3Fe2(PO4)3. This assumption easily agrees with thefact that the difference of the activation energies inthe samples under consideration are particularlynoticeable in highly distorted crystalline α- andβ-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 phases (Table 2).In the γ-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 samples, the conductivityparameters are lower as compared to the parameters ofthe single-crystal sample. It is likely that, in theγ phase of Na3Fe2(PO4)3 (although all structural distortionsin the crystal are removed) the influence ofthe hydrostatic pressure on the structure is only insig-nificant “compression” of the crystalline frame duringthe crystallization.As a whole, the low-temperature α-Na3Fe2(PO4)3phases of both types of the samples are characterizedby low conductivities and high activation energies,which is characteristic of insulators.At T = 373 K, the β-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 phase demonstratesthe substantial increase in the conductivity andthe decrease in the activation energy (Table 2), andthis fact can be associated with the structural transformationsin the crystalline frame [6, 10]. The Tα→βphase transition is likely to favor a marked removal ofthe monoclinic distortion of the crystalline frame,which leads to an increase in the mobile sodium ionconcentration and also to their more homogeneousdistribution over A and B voids of the crystallineframe.In spite of the fact that the activation energy ofβ-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 is quite high, the noticeable jump inthe conductivity (Δσ ≈ 102 Ω–1 cm–1) and the decreasein the activation energy from 0.68 eV to 0.47 eV at theα → β phase transition enables us to conclude that theconductivity has a superionic character.A further increase in temperature leads to the nextin-turn phase transformation at Tβ → γ = 418 K thatleads to a much larger increase in the polycrystal conductivity(Table 2) and also to the decrease in the activationenergy to 0.39 eV that can be related to thecomplete removal of the monoclinic distortions ofthe crystalline frame. So, the conductivity of theγ-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 can be considered superionic.The temperature dependence of the conductivityshown in Fig. 2 can be described by the Arrheniusequation and, taking into account the existence ofthree phases in Na3Fe2(PO4)3, it can be expressed bythe relationship [14]where ΔEi the activation energy of the conductivity ofthe ith phase, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is temperature,and Ai are constant coefficient that characterizethe ith phase states.According to the theoretical dependence of thedielectric permittivity (ε(T)) shown in Fig. 4, thelow-temperature α-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 phase can be considereddielectric to 365 K, since the action of anexternal field and temperature only slightly influencedependence ε(T).A very weak interaction of an applied electric fieldwith the polycrystal in the low-temperatureα-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 phase (Fig. 4a) can be related to thefact that all sodium cations are ordered into lowmobilecompensated sodium dipoles.However, as temperature increases further, thedielectric permittivity of the sample increases, anddependence ε(T) demonstrates a “step” due to thejump of the dielectric permittivity (Δε = 1.5 × 103) correspondingto the phase transition region Tα→β =368 K (Fig. 4a). In addition, this Tα→β transition ischaracterized by a jump of the conductivity Δσ ≈102 Ω–1 cm–1 (Fig. 3) and the specific heat jump3 kJ/mol, according to [10].Note that dependence tanδ(T) for α-Na3Fe2(PO4)3shows that the dielectric loss tan δ have low values upto 1.0 in the temperature range from 295 K to 360 K(Fig. 4b). In this case, the dielectric loss weaklyincrease with temperature (curves 1–7). As a whole,according to the values of tan δ, the low-temperatureα-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 phase corresponds to a dielectricphase, because the dielectric loss are close to unity(tanδ ≈ 1).The weak change in the tanδ values in the low-temperatureα-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 phase is likely can be relatedto the retarded processes of the thermal relaxationpolarization of low-mobile “condensed” charge particlesunder action of an external applied electric field.Figure 4b shows a small anomaly tanδ = 0.7 independence tanδ(T) near T = 368 K that correspondsto a change in the energy loss near the α → β phasetransition as a result of the structural transformation ofthe crystalline frame in Na3Fe2(PO4)3 from monoclinicC2/m phase to the pseudo-rhombohedralphase.According to [16], the “step”-like anomaly observedin dependence ε(T) is characteristic of improper ferroelectricphase transitions. Taking into account the dataon the conductivity of α-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 and also theexistence of the superstructure distortions (by analogywith α-Na3Cr2(PO4)3 observed in [14]) and theappearance of the “step”-like anomaly in curve ε(T),we can classify the Tα→β transition as an improperantiferroelectric phase transition (Fig. 4a), and considerthe low-temperature phase of sodium–ironphosphate as an antiferroelectric phase.The absence of polarity and a low dielectric permittivityin the ε(T) dependence for the low-temperatureα-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 phase can be associated with thefact that sodium cations become ordered into compensatedstatistical sodium dipoles and they are “condensedat the bottom of the potential wells of the crystallineframe (at the bottom of deformed B voids of the{[Fe2(PO4)3]3–}3∞ crystalline frame due to the monoclinicdistortion of the structure (space group C2/m).After the Tα→β phase transition, the dielectric permittivitiesin the β-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 polycrystal noticeablyincrease at low frequencies (500 Hz–30 kHz)(Fig. 4a), and this increase can be related to theappearance of a significant number of polarizedmobile sodium cations as a result of a partial removalof the monoclinic distortions of the crystalline frame.However, at frequencies 300–500 kHz, the dielectricpermittivity increases only slightly. Most of mobilesodium cations are likely to be capable to participateonly in slow polarization processes under action oflow-frequency oscillations of electric field (500 Hz–15 kHz); thus, we observe a high polarization of thesample (curves 1–3 in Fig. 4a). A decrease in thepolarization with the increase in the electric field frequencycan be explained by the fact that not all sodiumcations have time to follow electric field, i.e., to takepart in fast polarization processes (curves 4–9 inFig. 4a).The transition to the β phase is accompanied by aslight increase in the dielectric loss tangent at high frequencies(curves 1–4) in the tan δ(T) dependence andits sharp increase at low frequencies (curves 5–7)(Fig. 4b).Additional information on the polarization processesin Na3Fe2(PO4)3 can be obtained by studyingthe frequency dependences of dielectric permittivityP3c1ε(T) and dielectric loss tangent tanδ(ω) (Figs. 5aand 5b).According to dependence ε(ω) shown in Fig. 5a,we can clearly separate the low-temperature dielectricα-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 phase, represented by curves 1–3,which are characterized low dielectric permittivities atlow frequencies and a much larger decrease with anincrease in the frequency.The β-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 phase represented by curves4–6 in the ε(ω) dependences (Fig. 5a) has, at lowfrequencies, a high dielectric permittivity varyingwithin wide limits (ε = 7.5 × 104–14 × 104) in thedependence on temperature.Significantly higher permittivities are characteristicof γ-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 (curve 7 in Fig. 5, ε = 25 × 104).We also studied the frequency characteristics of thedielectric loss tangent tanδ(ω) for the polycrystallineNa3Fe(PO4)3 sample (Fig. 5b). Small changes in tanδ(ω) are characteristic of α-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 (curves 1–3 in Fig. 5b). For β-Na3Fe2(PO4)3, the maxima of thedielectric loss tangent are observed in dependencestanδ(ω) at certain temperatures, which can be due tothe thermal relaxation polarization processes in thesample (Fig. 5b). In this case, the relaxation maximafor β-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 shift to higher frequencies as temperatureincreases, and this result is characteristic ofthe Debye-type relaxation, since the experimentalcharacteristic of the sample shown by curve 1 in Fig. 6is close to the theoretical Debye curve (4) [17]:where τ is the relaxation time of a dipole in a dielectricunder action of an external field, ε0 and ε∞ are thestatic and optical dielectric permittivities, respectively;ω is the circular frequency, and σ is the ionic conductivity.Similar relaxation processes were observed inα'-Na3Cr2(PO4)3 and β-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 and discussedin [14, 15]. The observed relaxation processes can bedue to the vibrations of mobile sodium cations andweakly mobile compensated statistical sodium dipolesin partially deformed B voids of the crystalline framein β-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 under action of an electric fieldand temperature higher than 368 K.The clear definiteness of the peaks in dependencetanδ(ω) for β-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 is likely to be related tothe fact that the main contribution to the dielectricloss tangent is from the loss related to the interactionof relaxing particles.To characterize the relaxation process in β-Na3Fe2(PO4)3, we determined the potential barrierheight (E) and the relaxation time of relaxing particles.The activation energy and the average relaxation time(τ) for this phase at zero temperature were determinedby constructing dependence ωmax(T).According to [17], relaxation time τ can be determinedas where ν is the eigenfrequency of dipole vibrations,exp(ΔE/kT) reflects the probability of overcoming by adipole particle of the potential barrier with height ΔEthat separates dipoles in their stable state, and k is theBoltzmann constant.The optical and static dielectric permittivities weredetermined by constructing and analyzing the Cool–Cool diagrams, i.e., by constructing dependence ε'(ε'')for the β-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 phase.Using additional processing of the obtained experimentaldata, we obtained the relaxation polarizationparameters for β-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 given in Table 3.The relaxation polarization parameters on microscopiclevel can be described by Eq. (4); thus, therelaxation polarization processes can be demonstratedusing the model of a deep potential well with two equilibriumpositions separated by a potential barrier asshown in Fig. 7.Based on this model and also on results of studyingthe β phase of Na3Fe2(PO4)3, we can propose themodel of two-minimum potential relief along the conductionchannel (Fig. 7). In this case, the potentialrelief depth in the model for the α-phase is larger thanthat in the model for the β-phase of Na3Fe2(PO4)3,because the depth is dependent on the degree of thestructural distortions of the crystalline frame.The α-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 phase is characterized by theexistence of a deep potential relief along the conductionchannel and the splitting of sodium positions Na2in B voids of the crystalline frame because of monoclinicdistortions of the crystal structure [8]. It seemslikely that the reason of the formation of sodiumdipoles are the summary displacements of sodium cationswith respect to summary negative anion centers inB voids of the {[Fe2(PO4)3]3–}3∞ crystalline frame.Due to the crystalline frame stiffness, relaxers duringthe relaxation polarization can be both sodium cationsformed by a partial decomposition of compensatedstatistical sodium dipoles and sodium dipoles themselves.Figure 7 shows the schematic image of a compensatedsodium dipole that forms from two oppositelydirected statistical sodium dipoles due to doublingthe unit cell volume of the crystal.The transition in the β-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 is accompaniedby partial decomposition of compensated statisticalsodium dipoles as demonstrated by a high ionicconductivity, the jump in the temperature dependenceof the conductivity (Fig. 3), the structural data given inTable 1 and also by the found relaxation polarizationprocesses and the relaxation parameters (Fig. 5 andTable 3).The relaxation polarization process in β- andγ-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 can be considered as the interactionof an external electric field with mobile charged particlesin the sample. The appearance of mobile sodiumcations enables us to observe the relaxation polarizationprocesses. According to the data presented inFig. 5, the β phase is characterized by the existence ofslow polarization processes, since the polarizationprocesses begin to enhance only at frequencies lowerthan 50 kHz. All the results completely agree with thefact that relaxers in β-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 are both freesodium cations and compensated sodium dipoles.The high-temperature γ-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 phase ischaracterized by the existence of faster relaxation processes,but this problem is not considered in this workin detail because of instrumental limitations.The processes of structural disordering during theα → β and β → γ phase transitions take place also inNa3Sc2(PO4)3 [15, 18], and they lead to the samechanges in the properties as in sodium–iron phosphate[10]. The generality of the structure and properties ofβ- and γ-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 and β- and γ-Na3Sc2(PO4)3follows unambiguously from the Na3Sc2(PO4)3–Na3Fe2(PO4)3 phase diagram [19].The structural features and the properties ofNa3Sc2(PO4)3 are given in [11, 12, 15, 18, 20–22].In [11, 12], it is shown that the {[Sc2(PO4)3]3–}3∞anionic crystalline frame that has three-dimensionalchannels is formed due to the joint of A and B voids. Inthis case, the A voids have smaller sizes as compared tothe B voids. In α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3, sodium cations areordered of B voids into sodium dipoles due to themonoclinic distortion of the crystalline frame. In thetransitions to high-temperature β and γ phases, thedipole are sequentially disordered, and the slightlycoupled sodium cations are homogeneously distributedboth in A and B voids.However, unlike α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3, the character ofdipole ordering in the α-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 superstructurecell is related to the statistical compensated sodiumdipoles.Thus, we can conclude that compounds of theNASICON structural type, in the case of monoclinicdistortions of the {[Me2(PO4)3]3–}3∞ (Me are trivalentmetals) crystalline frame, form statistical sodiumdipoles of two types: noncompensated, as inα-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 [11, 12, 15, 20] and compensateddipoles in α-Na3Fe2(PO4)3.Based on the crystallochemical model developed in[18], a refined model can be proposed for the α, β, andγ phases of Na3Fe2(PO4)3 that is shown schematicallyin Fig. 8.The existence of vacant A voids is shown in Fig. 8by a bright circle inscribed into a square and numbered1; the presence of the ordered states and compensatedstatistical sodium dipoles in crystallineframes of α-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 are numbered 3 and 4,respectively (Fig. 8). The statistical occupations of theA and B voids of the crystalline frame with sodium cationsare numbered 2 (Fig. 8).In, γ-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 crystal symmetry increases,which leads to complete disruption of the dipoleorderedstates and to more homogeneous statisticaldistribution of sodium cations over A and B voids ofthe crystalline frame as shown in Fig. 8.Based on the obtained experimental data, the followingconclusions can be made.(1) The α- and β-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 polycrystals preparedby hot pressing have higher conducting propertiesthan the crystals obtained by traditional meltingmethod. It was concluded that α-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 is adielectric and γ-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 is a superionic conductor.(2) The α-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 crystals are shown canhave a dipole ordering of the antiferroelectric type,and the α → β phase transition can be classified as animproper antiferroelectric transition. During theα→β and β → γ phase transitions in Na3Fe2(PO4)3crystals, acts of sequential increase in the crystal symmetrytake place.(3) In β-Na3Fe2(PO4)3, the relaxation polarizationhas the Debye character; in this case, the relaxers canbe both free sodium cations and compensated statisticalsodium dipoles.(4) We proposed the crystallochemical model thatexplains the phenomena of the dipole ordering andionic conductivity in Na3Fe2(PO4)3.(5) The existence in the literature of most of contradictorydata on the structural and conductingparameters, the phase transformation temperatures,and also the enhancement of the conducting propertiesin the α- and β-Na3Fe2(PO4)3 polycrystalsobtained by hot pressing can be associated with the“elasticity and openwork” of the three-dimensionalrhombohedral {[Fe2(PO4)3]3–}3∞ crystalline framewhich enables a wide spectrum of the crystallizationforms of the sample in the dependence on the the thermodynamicregime and synthesis conditions.