All  solid-state  sodium-ion  electrolytes  have  attracted  increasing  attention  due  to  their  wide  range  of  applications  in  secondary  batteries. Here,  a new  fluorophosphate  glass-ceramic electrolyte,  (Na2O+NaF)-TiO2-B2O3-P2O5-ZrF4  (NTBPZ),  was  proposed  and  synthesized.  Due  to  a  low  activation  energy  of  13.9  kJ·mol-1 and  reduced  resistance  at  the  grain  boundaries,  the  NTBPZ  glass  ceramic  has  a  room-temperature  ionic  conductivity  as  high  as  3×10−5  S·cm−1.  In  addition,  the  NTBPZ  electrolyte  has  excellent  thermal  and  chemical  stabilities  in  ambient  condition.  These  outstanding  performances  make  the  NTBPZ  a  promising  electrolyte for all-solid-state sodium-ion batteries.

Increasing  demand  for  large  scale  secondary  batteries  with  high  energy  densities  has  been  accelerated  by  fast  spreading  electric  vehicles  and  distributed  power  systems  at  individual  houses.1-4 The  rechargeable  all-solid-state  sodium-ion  batteries  have  attracted  increasing  attention  in  the  application  of  large-scale  energy  storage  due to the abundant sodium sources.3-6 The safety and cost issues of  the  organic  liquid  electrolytes  have  stimulated  the  development  of  all-solid-state sodium-ion batteries.

In the literature, chalcogenide glass and glass-ceramic electrolytes  with high ionic conductivities have been extensively studied for the  room-temperature  sodium-ion  batteries.  Since  the  discovery  of  sulphide  glass  electrolytes  in  1980,  significant  advances  have  been  witnessed  by  some  representative  glasses,  such  as  Na2S-SiS2  and  Na2(Ga0.1Ge0.9)2Se4.95  with  room-temperature  ionic  conductivity  up  to  10-5  S·cm-1.10,  11    Most  recently,  Hayashi  et  al.  reported  a  cubic  Na3PS4 glass-ceramic with a record high ionic conductivity of 3×10-4  S·cm-1 at room temperature.6 Nevertheless, suffering from high cost  of  the  raw  materials  and  poor  ambient  stability,  the  chalcogenide  glass and glass-ceramic electrolytes are far from practical uses.

In contrast, oxide glass and glass-ceramic electrolytes have much better  chemical  stability,  simple  preparation  processes,  and  easy  availability  and  low  cost  of  the  raw  materials.17-19  Moreover,  the  room-temperature  ionic  conductivities  have  been  demonstrated  for  the  sodium  oxide  glasses such  as  Na2O-SiO2, P2O5-FeO-Na2O, and  P2O5-B2O3-Na2O with 1×10-7 S·cm-1, 5×10-7 S·cm-1, and 10-9 S·cm-1,  respectively.  20-22  The  relatively  low  conductivities  are  partially  resulted  from  high  activation  energies  and  grain  boundaries.23  Comparing  with  the  glass-ceramic  electrolytes,  in  the  same  system  the  pure  glass  and  pure  ceramic  electrolytes  have  the  largest  grain  resistance and interparticle resistance, respectively. 

In  this  study,  we  developed  a  stable  glass-ceramic,  which  is  a  high-temperature  phase  converted  fluorophosphate  (Na2O+NaF)-TiO2-B2O3-P2O5-ZrF4  (NTBPZ)  glass.  The  starting  material,  P2O5-B2O3-Na2O  (NBP)  system,  has  a  large  temperature  range of glass formation. Then an addition of certain amount of ZrF4  and  TiO2  plays  a  role  of  nucleating  agent.  Meanwhile,  the  NaF  inhibits fast crystallization  during  the  cooling  of  the  glass.  Overall,  the NTBPZ glass-ceramic is feasible to make. 

A room-temperature ionic conductivity of 3×10-5 S·cm-1 and a low  conduction activation energy (Ea) of 13.9 kJ·mol-1 were obtained for  the  NTBPZ  glass-ceramic  electrolyte.  The  conductive  phase,  NaTi2(PO4)3  nanocrystals,  provided  spacious  conductive  channels  for  the  NaTi2(PO4)3  nanocrystals  in  the  NTBPZ  glass-ceramic  lowered  the  activation  energy. The grain boundary resistance of the NTBPZ electrolyte was  reduced  by  heat  treatment  and  cold-pressing  processes.  The  relationship  between  the  sodium-ion  conductivity  and  the  grain  boundary resistance was discussed. Compared with the chalcogenide  glass-ceramic  electrolytes,  the  NTBPZ  glass-ceramic  is  prepared  using  simpler  processes  and  cheaper  raw  materials,  and  thus  is  promising for the large-scale application.  

In order to obtain a homogenous NTBPZ glass-ceramic conductor,  the  NTBPZ  glass  powder  was  heated  above  the  crystallization  temperature (Tc). When the temperature exceeded the glass transition  temperature  (Tg),  the  glass  particles  were  fused  into  a  dense  unity  which was subsequently transformed into a glass-ceramic by further  heat treatment above the Tc. 

The  Tg  at  451  °C  and  the  Tc  at  485  °C  were  determined  by  the  differential  scanning  calorimetry  (DSC)  while  the  exothermic  crystallization ended at 650 °C (Fig. S1). In order to control the size  of the NaTi2(PO4)3 nanocrystals, the heat treatment temperature was  set at 515 °C . As shown in the  Fig.  S2, the ionic conductivity was  decreased if the heat-treat temperature was below or above 515 °C.   After  treatment,  part  of  NTBPZ  glass  phase  was  transformed into NaTi2(PO4)3 nanocrystals. Fig. 1a shows the X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  patterns  of  the  NTBPZ  glass  and  glass-ceramic.  The  NaTi2(PO4)3  crystal  is  R-3c  type  according  to  previous  reports.30,31  The  transmission  electron  microscope  (TEM)  image  clearly  shows  the  nanocrystals  embedded  in  the  glass  matrix  (Fig.  1b).    The  lattice  constants  and  corresponding  (210),  (321),  (21-1),  and (200) planes are marked in the Fig. 1b. The electron diffraction  pattern of the NaTi2(PO4)3 is shown in the inset of the Fig. 1b. 

In  the  sodium  oxide  glass,  the  network  connections  of  glass  structure is consisted of the oxygen ions with covalent bonds , only  little  sodium  ions  can  move  in  the  network,  leading  to  low  ionic  conductivity. 32-34 But some defects formed during the crystallization  lowered the activation energy (Ea). The unit-cell of the NaTi2(PO4)3  trigonal structure consists of TiO6 (octahedron) and PO4 (tetrahedron)  (Fig.  2a).  The  size  of  the  channels  for  the  Na+  becomes  greater  (102Å)  with  the  existence  of  Ti-O  and  P-O  (Fig.  2b).  The  ionic  conductivity  is improved significantly due to the R-3c (167) spacegroup  of  the  NaTi2(PO4)3  that  opens  wide  clearance  for  Na+  transmission. 

The  alternating  current  (AC)  impedance  measurements  were  employed to evaluate the conductivities of the NTBPZ glass and the  glass-ceramic.  While  the  cold-press  method  moulds  the  glassceramic  powder  into  a  dense  pellet,  the  grain  boundaries  could  hardly  be  eliminated.  The  AC  impedance  spectra  are  clearly  separated  into  the  cold-pressed  NTBPZ  glass  and  NTBPZ  glassceramic  at  32  MPa  (Fig.  S3).  The  Nyquist  plot  of  the  impedance  spectrum of the NTBPZ glass pellet exhibits a big semicircle at high  frequency and a slope at the low-frequency region which are due to  bulk  and  grain  boundary  responses  together.  In  contrast,  the  impedance  spectrum  of  the  pellet  of  the  NTBPZ  glass-ceramic  prepared by heat treatment at 515 °C exhibited a smaller semicircle,  and  the  pellet  decreased.  The  sodium-ion  conductivities at 25 °C of the cold-pressed NTBPZ glass and glassceramic  at  32  MPa  are  2×10-9  S·cm−1  and  5×10-6  S·cm−1,  respectively.  Compared  with  the  NTBPZ  glass,  this  difference  is  attributable  to  the formation  of NaTi2(PO4)3  nanocrystals (Fig.  S4).  While the total number of defects fitting the conductive ions formed  by  NaTi2(PO4)3  nanocrystals  are  more  than  conductible  ions,  the  energy  of  movable  ions  will  be  regard  as  a  part  of  energy  which  provide  for  the  conductive  ions  transmitting  in  the  NTBPZ  glassceramic ,it would be equal to approximately lattice energy. 

Although grain boundary  resistance  of the NTBPZ glass-ceramic  (32  MPa)  has  reduced  more  than  the  NTBPZ  glass  (32  MPa)  (Fig.  3d),  the  all boundary (bulk  and  grain) of the NTBPZ glass-ceramic  still  remained  a  large  grain  boundary  resistance.  The  impedance  spectra  are  clearly  semicircle  only  in  low  pressure.  When  the  pressure  increases  from  32  MPa to  160  MPa,  the  semicircle at low  frequencies  of  the  glass-ceramic  disappears,  and  the  sodium-ion  conductivity  is  up  to  3×10-5  S·cm−1  (Fig.  3b).  The  Bode  plots  at  25 °C of the pellets of the NTBPZ after cold pressing glass-ceramic  at 160 MPa and 32 MPa are showed in Fig. S5. The disappearance of  the semicircle suggests the contribution of the grain boundary to the  total  resistance  in  the  NTBPZ  glass-ceramic  by  the  given  pressure  improved,  which  can  be  expected  from  the  grain  boundaries  in  the  SEM image (Fig. 3a, 3c).  

the  reversible  sodium  deposition  and  dissolution  of  Na+/Na  currents  take  place  from  1  V  to  6  V.  The  counter/reference electrode measured is sodium foil and a stainlesssteel disk as the working electrode. The  potential sweep was  tested  by a scanning rate of 5 mV·s-1 at room temperature.   

The  sodium  electrolytes  can  be  realized  in  the  sodium  batteries  needed  high  sodium-ion  conductivity  as  well  as  excellent  chemical  stability.  The  sodium-ion  conductivity  of  chalcogenide  electrolytes  can be decreased due to unimproved chemical stability. In this study,  we  put  the  samples  in  open  air  in  order  to  track  the  relationship  between  the  chemical  stability  and  sodium-ion  conductivity  of  the  NTBPZ glass-ceramic and Na2O-B2O3-P2O5 glass 30 for ten days and  two months, respectively. 

It should be noted there is a significant difference in the chemical  stability between NTBPZ glass-ceramic and NPB glass, which have  a  great  impact  on  the  sodium-ion  conductivity.  However,  the  NBP  glass  makes a reaction in the air  and  weathered  (Fig. 6a).  It  can  be  observed  that  the  NTBPZ  glass-ceramic  has  a  better  chemical  stability  than  the  NBP  glass.  At  the  same  time,  the  sodium-ion  conductivity  of  the  NBP  glass  and  the  NTBPZ  glass-ceramic  changed  over  time  as  shown  in  Fig.  6b.  It  can  be  proved  that  the  sodium-ion  conductivity  of  NTBPZ  glass-ceramic  remained  unchanged basically,  but the sodium-ion conductivity  of  NBP glass  has  been  rapidly  lower.  This  agreement  suggests  that  the  NTBPZ  glass-ceramic  can  be  used  for  a  safety  ionic  electrolyte  at  roomtemperature.  Consequently,  it  can  maintain  stable  high  sodium-ion  conductivity for long time. 

In  summary,  an  (Na2O+NaF)-TiO2-B2O3-P2O5-ZrF4  (NTBPZ)  glass-ceramic electrolyte with an ionic conductivity up to 3×105 S·cm−1 at room temperature is realized for the first time.  The  conduction activation energy of this electrolyte is 13.64 kJ·mol-1.  In addition, the NTBPZ glass-ceramic electrolyte has an excellent  thermal  stability  below  500  °C  and  chemical  stability  in  the  ambient  condition.  The  electrolyte  is  made  with  low-cost  raw  materials and simple preparation processes.  

It  can  be  showed  in  Fig.  3a,  c  that  the  cold-compress  pressure  dependency  of  the  bulk  and  grain  boundary  contributions  in  glassceramic  material  at  room  the  other  hand,  temperature dependencies of the ionic conductivities can be showed  in  Fig.  S2.  The  results  showed  that  heat-treat  temperature  and  holding  time  are  two  important  factors  affecting  the  grain  size  and  uniformity, then affected the sodium-ion conductivity.  

The  activation  energies  (Ea)  of  the  NTBPZ  glass  and the NTBPZ glass-ceramic are 58.75 kJ·mol-1 and 13.64 kJ·mol-1,  respectively,  calculated  by  fitting  the  data  to  the  Arrhenius  equation.38  The  NTBPZ  glass  pellet  (open  circles)  has  the  best  conductivity of 7×10-9 S·cm-1 at room-temperature. Such differences  would  be  expected  to  build  dependence  between  non-Arrhenius  temperature  and  ionic  conductivity,  where  the  lower  active  energy  can get higher ionic conductivity. It can be shown that as the average  value  of  the  energy  distribution  changes  with  changing  glass  or  glass-ceramic  composition  to  higher  and  lower  values,  these  temperature ranges would in turn change to higher and lower values,  respectively. The evidence is consistent with the behaviour observed  for nearly all oxide glasses studied in the literature to date, although  some examples of non-Arrhenius behaviour do exist.39-41 Moreover,  in  the  more  recent  literature  of  the  glasses  with  higher  ionic  conductivity  (lower average  activation  energy), several  instances  of  non-Arrhenius  ionic  conductivity in sulphide glasses can be found.

By the method of cyclic voltammogram, we measured the voltage  window of the NTBPZ glass-ceramic electrolyte, as shown in Fig.5.  It  suggests  that  the  NTBPZ  glass-ceramic  electrolyte  has  a  wide  electrochemical  window  except  an  insignificant  oxidation  currents 

The  molten  sample  was  rapidly  quenched  in  liquid  nitrogen  to  obtain  the  NTBPZ  glass.  The  NTBPZ  glass  powders  took  preparation  of  the  NTBPZ  glass  by  a  mechanical  method  through  planetary  ball  mill  (QM-QX,  QM-QX4).  The  NTBPZ  glass was placed into a zirconia (ZrO2) vessel (internal volume  of 50 ml) with 40  ZrO2 balls (4 mm in diameter). The  process  used rotation speed of 510 r.p.m. for 5 hours. Then, the NTBPZ  glass powders were heated at 515 °C for 15 hours to obtain the  NTBPZ  glass-ceramic  powders.  Finally  the  NTBPZ  glass  and  glass-ceramic  electrolyte  powders  were  compressed  by  a  cold  pressed method to prepare a pellet that was 10 mm in diameter  and 1 mm thick for electrical measurements. 

The  Tc  was  determined  by  differential  scanning  calorimetry  (PerkinElmer,  STA  8000).  XRD  (D8  Advance,  Bruker)  measurements of the  prepared materials  were performed  using  Cu  Kα  to  identify  the  crystalline  phases.  Microstructure  of  cross-section  for  the  electrolyte  pellets  was  observed  by  SEM  (S4800,  Hitachi).  Transmission  electron  microscope  images  of  the diffraction ring were tested by TEM (2100F, JEM).  

The  electrical  conductivities  of  the  cold-pressed  NTBPZ  glass  and  glass-ceramic  powder  samples  were  measured  using  an AC impedance method under Ar gas. The NTBPZ glass and  glass-ceramic  were  cold-compressed  in  32  MPa  and  160  MPa  (MS1-100,  RIKEN)  separated  into  pellets  with  a  10  mm  diameter,  stainless  steel  plates  were  attached  to  both  sides  of  the  pellet  as  the  electrodes.
