Aqueous alkali ion batteries offer an economical method for large-scale energy storage demanded by current sources of renewable energy. Although NASICON-type NaTi2(PO4)3 is an attractive anode material with high capacity and a low redox potential allowing for high voltage cells, it suffers from considerable capacity fade when cycled slowly and deeply. In this work polypyrrole has been introduced as a coating for NaTi2(PO4)3 through a high-energy ballmilling process. When an excessive coating was applied, no + redox reactions from the NaTi2(PO4)3 were visible due to the poor Na diffusion through the polypyrrole. However, the as-coated composites containing 5 wt% polypyrrole showed much better capacity retention compared to the uncoated material, retaining 57% of the initial discharge capacity after 50 cycles compared to the uncoated material, which retained only 10% of the initial discharge capacity. It is concluded that coating NaTi2(PO4)3 with conducting polymers can be an effective strategy for promoting battery lifetime.

Large-scale energy storage is needed for the deployment of gridtied and distributed renewable energy sources such as solar installations and wind farms, which rely on power generation that is inherently intermittent. For this kind of storage, the single most important performance attribute is the amortized cost of stored electricity over the life of the energy storage device; as such long life and robustness through thousands of use cycles are critical attributes.1,2 As such, we have sought to develop low cost, easy to manufacture battery chemistries that are composed of benign materials and have the necessary long-term stability. Neutral pH aqueous based battery systems are well suited for this purpose. The higher conductivity of aqueous electrolytes allows for thicker electrodes, low cost electrolyte salts such as Li2SO4 and Na2SO4 can be used in place of LiPF6, and nonwoven cellulose separators can be used in place of more expensive porous polyoleﬁns.

Many possible anode and cathode materials exist for use in aqueous cells including: LiMn2O4, LiCoO2, LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2, 7–18 as cathode materials, and acMnO2, Na4Mn9O18, and LiFePO4 tivated carbon, MoO3, VO2, V2O5, LiTi2(PO4)3, NaTi2(PO4)3, and 7,9–11,15,19–27 as anode materials. While a signiﬁcant amount of TiP2O7 research has been carried out on the failure mechanism of cathode materials, little has been done to elucidate the anode material role in battery failure in aqueous electrolytes. Furthermore, there are some cathode systems that have exhibited many thousands of stable cycles without loss in function,8,28 while materials at useful anode potentials tend to lose function rapidly.

Of particular interest are the sodium super ionic conductor (NASICON) titanium phosphates due to their high ionic conductivities, relative low cost of production, and chemical stability.11,24,25 In particular, NaTi2(PO4)3 with a theoretical capacity of 133 mAh/g and the ability to replace lithium salts with sodium equivalents should offer a cost-effective alternative to the lithium equivalent. However, this material commonly exhibits signiﬁcant capacity fade, especially when cycled deeply/slowly, and the phenomena responsible for this loss in function remains poorly understood.11,29 The rate dependence of this capacity loss indicates a kinetic limitation to the degradation mechanisms. A possible mechanism involves a multi-step process based on the reduction of water by Ti(III) ions at the surface of the electrode − material causing a local increase in pH due to the presence of OH ions. This is followed by the alkaline oxidation of the carbon conductive additive to carbonate ions at potentials lower than −1.38 V vs Hg/Hg2SO4 of the cell.

If this is indeed the case, developing a method to prevent contact between the electrolyte and active material surface will be necessary to avoid reactions that lead to functional degradation. One method that has proven useful in the stabilization of aqueous electrode materials is the coating of active material with an electronically conducting or functionalized/conjugated polymer material that is stable in the electrolyte and will serve to protect the active material.

Conjugated polymers are linear molecules with partially ﬁlled valence or conduction bands. Often based on a series of alternating double and single bonds, which leads to a network of sp2-hybridized bonds with the pz-orbitals of the carbon atoms overlapping, leading to the delocalization of charge carriers along the backbone of the polymer chain.34 Similar to inorganic semiconductors, these polymers can be doped to become either n-type or p-type, dramatically increasing the electronic conductivity of the polymer. The conductivity of these −10 to 103 S/cm depending on synthesis polymers can range from 10 method and the degree of doping.35–37 Although the conductivity of conjugated polymers can be varied through electrochemical reduction and oxidation, the conductance will be highly dependent on the morphology of polymer ﬁlm formed. Generally speaking, the more ordered the polymer chains are, the higher the conductance of ﬁlm. This degree of order can be varied by changing counter-ion dopant, synthesis parameters (time, temperature, solvent), and processing method. The p-type conjugated polymers are most widely studied as they can be easily synthesized through oxidative polymerization in the presence of an appropriate counterion to act as the dopant.

These polymers have been widely tested in Li-ion type batteries as stand alone cathode materials with moderate speciﬁc capacities,35,36 or as additives/coatings to help prevent particle fracture due to volume expansion or dissolution of active materials.27,32,38–40 More recently some groups have demonstrated their use in aqueous rechargeable lithium batteries (ARLB). Liu et al. showed that coating α-MoO3 with polypyrrole vastly improved the cycling stability of the material by preventing the dissolution of molybdenum ions.27,31 In addition, although the PPy coating would be expected to be in the neutral state at the redox potentials of α-MoO3 and thusly provide no enhancement of electronic conductivity, a decrease in charge transfer resistance was reported but no potential mechanism was offered. Similarly, Tang et al. showed that coating a composite of V2O5 and multiwalled carbon nanotubes with polypyrrole improved the cycling performance of the material by preventing the dissolution of vanadium ions.33 Although only the increased cycling stability and lack of change in electrolyte color were given as reasons for supporting the conclusion that vanadium ions were not solvated in the electrolyte. Therefore, we propose coating of NaTi2(PO4)3 with polypyrrole will improve the cycling stability of the material by preventing unwanted side reactions with the electrolyte. It should be noted that, similar to the case of α-MoO3, the low redox potential (−1.25 V vs Hg/Hg2SO4) of NaTi2(PO4)3 implies that the polypyrrole coating will be in its fully reduced state and provide no enhancement of the electronic conductivity. However, given a sufﬁciently thin coating, electron transport should still be possible.

All chemicals used were of reagent grade. In a typical synthesis, 0.71 g Na2HPO4, was dissolved in a solution of 10 mL deionized H2O containing 2.88 g of 85 wt% aqueous H3PO4. Under vigorous stirring 1.60 g of TiO2 (21 nm Sigma Aldrich) was slowly added to the mixture. This mixture was then heated, until enough water had evaporated that C a thick paste was formed. This paste was then decomposed at 500 ◦ for 3 h before being placed in a furnace at 1000 C for 6 h. The asformed material was lightly ground in a mortar and pestle before use. This material, NaTi2(PO4)3, is referred to as NTP.

Reagent-grade pyrrole (Py) and 4-dodecylbenzenesulfonic acid (>95%) (DBSA) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further puriﬁcation. To produce the polypyrrole doped with DBSA (PPy-DBSA), 0.588 g (1.8 mmol) of DBSA was dissolved in 6 mL of distilled water at 25 C under vigorous stirring. Then 250 μL (3.6 mmol) of Py was added and dissolved into the solution. The reaction was cooled in an ice water bath for several minutes. The oxidant solution was prepared by dissolving 0.164 g (0.72 mmol) ammonium persulfate (APS) in 1.2 mL distilled water before being added dropC and wise to the monomer solution. The reaction was warmed to 25 was left stirring for 48 hours. The mixture was transferred to a 50 mL centrifuge tube, ﬁlled to the top with distilled water, and centrifuged at 4400 rpm on an Eppendorf Centrifuge 5702 R for approximately 15 minutes. The supernatant was then decanted and the process repeated twice more with water and twice with methanol. Afterwards, the product was left to dry in a fume hood for two days, redispersed in water, sonicated, and then washed with water over a Buchner funnel under vacuum.

For galvanostatic cycling with potential limitation (GCPL) a sodium manganese oxide cathode consisting of Na0.55MnO2 (NMO) was prepared. This was used as a sodium containing cathode material, and has been shown to be stable through hundreds of cycles in neutral aqueous electrolytes.28 Stoichiometric amounts of Na2CO3 and Mn2O3 (∼7 g total) were milled for 30 mins in a SPEX 8000M highenergy ball mill using a Si3N4 canister with one grinding bead. This mixture was then place in a box furnace under ambient air conditions ◦ C followed by a 12 hr soak before being cooled to and heated to 800 ◦ 25 C. X-ray powder diffraction using a PANalytical X’Pert Pro MPD with a CuKα source and a nickel ﬁlter was used to characterize the ◦ 2θ crystal structure of the tested materials. A scan range of 10–60 was used for all scans. The morphology was examined by SEM and TEM imaging using a Philips XL-30 scanning electron microscope and a JEOL-2000EX transmission electron microscope.

For comparison, an electrode composite was prepared containing 80 wt% NTP, 10 wt% carbon black (CB), and 10 wt% polyvinylidene ﬂuoride (PVDF). Brieﬂy, an appropriate amount of NTP was ball milled with the carbon black in a SPEX 8000M for 30 minutes. This was then mixed with the CB in a mortar and pestle, before Nmethylpyrrolidone (NMP) was added to the mixture and ground until a uniform thick paste was formed. This paste was dried in a vacuum oven at 80 stainless steel screen. This material will be referred to as NTP-C.

The composite of NTP and PPy-DBSA was made through a highenergy ball milling process. Previous results with in the group have shown this to be a reliable method for coating hard ceramics with polymers. Two composites were tested, one containing a weight ratio of NTP to PPy-DBSA of 80:20 and another containing ratio of 95:5, these ratios would produce an idealized coating between 5–25 nm in thickness. To form these composites an appropriate amount of NTP and PPy-DBSA were added to a Si3N4 milling canister and milled for 30 minutes. After removing the powder, a mixture of 80 wt% NTP-PPy (either 80:20 or 95:5 ratio), 10 wt% CB, and 10 wt% PVDF were mixed in a mortar and pestle containing NMP until a smooth thick paste was formed. This mixture was then dried and granulated in the same manner as the control. These mixtures will be referred to as NTP-PPy-8020 and NTP-PPY-955 for the 80:20 and 95:5 ratio respectively.

A Bio-Logic VMP3 was used for all electrochemical tests. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was used to characterize the produced composites between −1.5 V and −0.5 V vs. Hg/Hg2SO4 and between −1.5 V and 0 V for the as produced PPy-DBSA. Samples for testing were prepared by pressing about 2 mg of the material into a 50-mesh stainless steel screen, with a sample area of about 0.25 cm2. The sample was then cycled in a three electrode set up containing 1 M Na2SO4 made with 18.2 MOhm deionized water with platinum wire as a counter electrode and a Hg/Hg2SO4 in saturated K2SO4 as a reference electrode. In order to test for changes in conductivity upon cycling electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was carried out in conjunction with a cyclic voltammetry experiment. The same experimental cell was used as previously described. The test procedure consisted of a single CV scan at 0.50 mV/s between −0.5 V and −1.5 V vs. Hg/Hg2SO4 in 1 M Na2SO4 followed by EIS under potential control at the end of oxidation. This procedure was repeated for 50 total cycles. A scan range of 100 kHz to 100 mHz with a 5 mV amplitude was used. The sampling frequency was 10 points per decade with 3 measures per frequency and a 0.1 second wait between measurements.

Three electrode Swagelok cells with stainless steel rods as current collectors were used for GCPL testing, with voltage limits of the NTP being set at −0.5 V and −1.4 V at a C/5 rate (based on initial discharge times). In these cells the NTP-containing composites were used as an anode and an NMO-containing composite, prepared in the same manner as the other electrode materials, was used as a cathode. The anode was prepared by pressing a 35 mg pellet of composite material in a 10 mm die set at 3 tonnes on a Carver Model C Laboratory Press. The cathode was prepared by pressing 300 mg of the NMO composite in a 15 mm die set at 3 tonnes. An Hg/Hg2SO4 in saturated K2SO4 reference electrode was used. The difference in mass and area between the anode and cathode ensured that the limiting electrode would always be the anode, so any loss in functionality at the cathode due to cycling would be minimal. Only the NTP charge-discharge curves are presented in this work. Figure 1 shows the prepared electrodes used for CV and GCPL as well as the experimental cells used for testing.

SEM of the prepared raw materials are shown in Figure 2 . NTP shows a relatively isometric morphology with an average particle size of 270 nm. There are two different morphologies present in the PPy-DBSA: a larger primary particle on the order of 20–100 μm with a glassy morphology and relatively smooth fracture surfaces, and smaller, isometric secondary particles interspersed with a particle size of around 0.1–3 μm. For the composites NTP-PPy-8020 and NTP-PPy-955, assuming spherical particles and densities of 2.8 g/cm3 and 1.8 g/cm3 for NTP and PPy-DBSA respectively, the predicted thickness of coatings is ∼23 nm and ∼8 nm. SEM of the composites (Figs. 3a, 3b) shows the NTP to be relatively tightly bound into dense agglomerates. It is also apparent that the high-energy ball milling process did not entirely coat the NTP particles, with some sharp facets of the particles still clearly visible. Inspection of particle surfaces using TEM (Figs. 3c, 3d) shows the polymeric coatings, with thicknesses close to that predicted from the particle sizes. It is evident from these coatings that the high-energy ball milling process is a reliable method for coating NTP particles with PPy-DBSA.

However, for the NTP-C electrode, the once smooth surfaces now show a roughened surface texture. The nature of this texturing is not known, though it could indicate a dissolution and precipitation type mechanism being present. It could also be residual PVDF binder that has had the embedded carbon particles corroded away.

X-ray diffraction patterns of the NTP contain composites and PPYDBSA can be found in Figure 5. The raw NTP shows no presence of crystalline impurity phases and assuming a R¯3c crystal structure has calculated lattice parameters of a = b = c = 8.76 Å and α = β = γ = 57.95 ◦ , in good agreement with JCPDS 85–2265. PPy◦ DBSA shows a low intensity, broad peak around 20 2θ, indicative of an amorphous type structure. This peak can be deconvolved into ◦ ◦ 2θ, in good agreement with and 25.5 two peaks centered at 19.6 ◦ ◦ and 26 that have been attributed to previously reported values of 20 the pyrrole-counter ion and pyrrole-pyrrole interaction scattering.41 X-ray diffraction patterns of the composites NTP-PPy-955 and NTPPPy-8020, prior to the addition of carbon black and PVDF, show the same pattern as the NTP, but with decreased peak intensity, as would be expected from the presence of an amorphous coating. Electrochemical characterization of PPy-DBSA (Fig. 6 ) shows a moderate speciﬁc discharge capacity of ∼28 mAh/g, with some hysteresis between the charge and discharge processes. This hysteresis is clearly visible in the inset of Figure 6b, with the discharge curves showing a sharp inﬂection at the start of discharge that is not present during the end of the charge curve. This hysteresis has been attributed to variation in the conductivity upon oxidation/reduction and the lag between the current ﬂow and relatively slow ion-exchange process. It is also clear from the Coulombic efﬁciency that there exists a relatively long break-in period, in which the PPy-DBSA experiences some form of a side reaction that consumes charge. This side reaction dissipates and is no longer present by about the 50th cycle. This charge consumption could be caused by some electrochemically unstable regions of the polymer reacting with the electrolyte due to the applied current. Further investigation is needed to elucidate the precise nature of this charge consumption.

Cyclic voltammograms of the composite materials and the control can be found in Figure 7 and Figure 8 in which only the ﬁfth cycle for each of the scans from 0.5–20 mV/s have been presented. Cyclic voltammetry of the NTP-PPy-8020 in 1 M Na2SO4 (Fig. 7a) indicates that if the coating of PPy is too thick, sodium ion diffusion into the NTP is completely absent at the redox potential of NTP. This manifests as a visible capacity from the PPy-DBSA coating but no visible redox peaks from the NTP even though it is the dominant component of the composite. This ﬁnding is somewhat contradictory to potassium and lithium ion diffusion in previously reported polypyrrole coatings of thicknesses 10–20 nm and 10–12 nm on α-MoO3 and V2O5 respectively.27,32 NTP is known to undergo redox reactions with lithium similar to those with sodium,42 and thus should still present a + is capable of diffusing through the coating. Howredox peak if Li ever, no redox peaks for NTP are seen (Fig. 7b). Potassium sulfate was not tested with the composite material since NTP is not known to + . The results of the CV indicate that undergo redox reactions with K the difference is not a function of the electrolyte cation in this case. It is possible that this poor ionic transport is a function of the synthesis process, method of compositing the polymer with the active material, overall thickness of the coating, or some combination thereof. It is clear from comparing the CV curves of NTP-PPy-8020 (Fig. 7a ) and NTP-PPy-955 (Fig. 8b) that somewhere between 8–23 nm of coating, cationic transport through the PPy-DBSA incorporated through milling becomes too limiting for efﬁcient energy storage. This is not to be wholly unexpected, as the nature of the redox reaction in these polymers, when doped with relatively mobile anions, involves removal and insertion of these anions and in some cases solvent molecules, but not cations.35,43 Polypyrrole in its neutral, or fully reduced state is also known to have poor ionic and electronic transport properties44,45. Previous reports of coating anode materials with PPy have used in-situ synthesis of the polymer in the presence of the active material; the authors attempted in situ synthesis, but it appeared that the synthesized PPy did not readily adhere to the NTP surface. This manifested as visible phase separation during the centrifuging process, with a layer of white uncoated NTP, and a layer of black PPy or PPy coated NTP. Because of this, the results of this material have not been presented here. Further investigation will be needed to promote adhesion of PPy to the NTP surface.

EIS results after one cycle and after ﬁfty cycles can be found in Figure 7d. The high frequency response indicates that both NTP-C and NTP-PPy-955 have similar electronic resistances of 0.8 Ohm and 1.2 Ohm respectively. Since this electronic resistance is a combination of the apparatus resistance, electrode resistance, and DC ionic resistance of the electrolyte, the difference may be a result of small differences in apparatus set up or electrode placement with respect equivalent at ∼98%. This lower initial efﬁciency of the NTP-PPY-955 can be accounted for by considering the long break-in time for the PPy-DBSA coating on the material, which undergoes some electron consuming side reaction that persists for many cycles. Taking a closer look at the charge-discharge curves in Figure 9a we see the expected long plateau of NTP centered at −1.25 V, typical of a two-phase redox reaction. It is also apparent that the voltage separation between the initial charge and discharge plateaus is smaller for NTP-PPY-955 than NTP-C. This would seem to contradict the CV results that show the NTP-PPYy-955 to have slower kinetics. However, given the GCPL was carried out at a C/5 rate, which is relatively slow, the overpotentials associated with higher rates may not be appreciable. This smaller separation may then be a consequence of a smaller charge transfer resistance, as was reported for polypyrrole coatings on α-MoO3.

The composite containing polypyrrole also showed considerably better cycling performance when compared to NTP-C. By the 10th cycle NTP-C has lost 50% of its initial discharge capacity compared to NTP-PPy-955 having lost only 23%. After 50 cycles the control has lost 90% of its discharge capacity and NTP-PPy-955 has lost only 43%. Although the speciﬁc capacity is somewhat lower than previous works, the cycle stability is notable when compared to previous results of NTP that has been cycled at low rates. The NTP-C shows a similar percentage decrease in capacity when compared to a similar electrode tested by Li et al. with 80 wt% NTP, carbon nanotubes, and a PTFE binder and cycled in neutral 1 M Na2SO4.46 There, the material’s discharge capacity was found to fade to ∼17% of it’s initial discharge capacity in 50 cycles. Though in this study both of the electrode materials still fade considerably upon cycling, the PPy coated composite fades at a signiﬁcantly slower rate. It is possible that this improvement can be much more profound if a more complete and well distributed coating were to be achieved, since our data indicate that the current coating is not completely consistent and, as such, may be limiting.

The ultimate cause of capacity loss in this materials system is still not completely understood, however these results suggest that the effect can be diminished by protecting the NTP surface from the electrolyte environment. It also remains to be seen if optimizing the coating composition and conditions can result in even more improvement; work is ongoing to both understand the capacity loss phenomenon more completely as well as to generate a more complete/optimal coating solution based on the compelling preliminary results presented here.

In this work we have tested the feasibility of using polypyrrole as a coating for NaTi2(PO4)3 anodes. Although the coated material shows considerable improvement in cyclability, the poor sodium and lithium ion diffusion of PPy doped with DBSA at potentials below −0.9 V vs. Hg/Hg2SO4 limits the thickness of the coating that can be used. With the upper limit in thickness that still allows for sodium ion diffusion lying somewhere between 10–20 nm, it may not be possible to fully prevent interactions with the electrolyte using this particular form of polypyrrole. Although at the redox potentials for NaTi2(PO4)3 polypyrrole is almost fully reduced and as such should not be electronically conducting, it appears to have a negligible effect on the overall performance of the electrode material. Future work will focus on enhancing the sodium ion diffusion with in the polypyrrole coating through modiﬁcation of the dopant ions during the synthesis process of the polymer and functionalization of the pyrrole monomer.
