Sodium  super  ion  conductor  (NASICON)  type  structure  materials  (e.g. 

Na3V2(PO4)3, NaTi2(PO4)3) have been considered as promising electrode materials for 

sodium-ion  batteries  (NIBs).  However,  the  inherent  poor  electronic  conductivity  of 

the NASICON type structure materials owing to their poor electronic conductivity of 

phosphates  lead  to  poor  cyclability  and  rate  capability.  Here,  we  develop  a  general 

strategy  to  achieve  high  rate  capability  and  long  cycle  life  by  preparing  “double 

carbon coating” NASICON NaTi2(PO4)3 using a soft-chemical method. The obtained 

carbon-coated  NaTi2(PO4)3  within 

the  porous  carbon  matrix 

NTP@C@PC) delivers a reversible capability of 103 mAhg-1 at 5 C after 5000 cycles 

and a rate capability of 64 mAhg-1 at 50 C for the sodium storage. The high capacity, 

stable  cyclability  and  excellent  rate  capability  of  the  NTP@C@PC  are  attributed  to 

the advantages of the special structure: the fast Na+/etransfer in the nanocomposites, 

large  surface  area and mesoporous  of the  3D porous carbon  matrix  that facilitate  the 

electrolyte to soak in, intimate interaction between the particles and carbon matrix. In 

addition,  the  3D  porous  carbon  matrix  could  effectively  accommodate  the  volume 

variation during repeated sodiation/desodiation process.   


Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are considered one of the most popular power sources 

for  portable  electronic  devices  due  to  their  long  lifetime  and  high  energy  density.1-4 

Recently,  there  is  increasing  concern  about  the  cost  and  lithium  resources  for 

large-scale energy storage applications.5-8 Room-temperature Na-ion batteries (NIBs) 

have been  demonstrated as promising alternatives  to  LIBs because  sodium  resources 

are  cheap,  inexhaustible  and  unlimited  everywhere  around  the  world.9, 10  However, 

compare  with  LIBs,  the  practical  application  of  NIBs  is  still  hindered  by  the  poor 

cyclability  and  rate  capability.  The  main  reason  is  that  the  larger  ionic  radius  of  Na 

results  in  lower  diffusion  coefficient  of  Na+  and  huge  volume  change  during  Na+ 

intercalation-extraction  reaction.

For  high  power  application,  the  electrode  materials  in  NIBs 

must possess rapid ionic and electronic diffusion. Unfortunately, the NASICON-type 

material  has  an  inherent  poor  electronic  conductivity  owing  to  the  poor  electronic 

conductivity  of  phosphates,  which  limits  its  application  in  high-performance  NIBs.1, 

Approaches  for  enhancing  ion  and  electron  transport  kinetics  in  batteries  include 

applying  nanostructured  materials,  designing  porous  structure  and  enhancing  the 

electronic  conductivity  with  a  surface  conductive  layer.21,  23,  27-29  Among  them, 

NASICON-type  materials  coated  with  carbon  shells  are  attractive  in  improving  the 

cycling  performance.30-33  Nevertheless,  if  the  carbon  coating  layer  is  too  thick,  the 

migration  of  Na  ions  through  interfaces  between  electroactive  materials  and 

electrolytes  could  be  prevented,  which  is  attributed  to  the  thick  carbon  layer  hinder 

the  electrolyte  penetration  in  the  active  material.34  Another  effective  approach  is  to 

decrease  the  size  of  electroactive  materials  particles  to  the  nanoscale,  which  can 

reduce  the  transport  lengths  of  both  sodium  ions  and  electrons.

In  order  to  combine  all  of  the  advantages  described  above,  one  of  the  most 

promising  strategies  is  to  confine  electroactive  materials  within  uniform  thin  carbon 

shells  and  then  to  embed  them  in  3D  interconnected  porous  carbon  matrix,  thus 

forming  mixed  conducting  3D  networks.32,  33  To  realize  this  double  protection 

strategy  of  NASICON-type  materials,  we  developed  a  simple,  facile,  and  high  yield 

method  to  construct  “double  carbon  coating”  structure,  which  shows  superior  power 

rate  and  ultralong  cycle  life.  The  “double  carbon  coating”  design  possesses  the 

following  merits:  i)  The  first  shell  carbon  coated  on  the  surface  of  NASICON-type 

material  prevents  the  particles  growth  during  the  post-heated  process  and  promotes 

the  migration  of  Na  ions  through  interfaces  to  active  materials  surface.36,  37  ii)  The 

second  shell  of  porous  carbon  matrix  accommodates  the  volume  variation  during 

sodiation/desodiation  process.  iii)  The  porous  carbon  matrix  also  offers  3D  porous 

interconnect  network,  which  improves  the  electrical  contact  as  well  as  sodium  ion 

conduction.3,  5,  38  In  our  proof  of  concept  study,  we  successfully  demonstrated 

carbon-coated NaTi2(PO4)3 nanoparticles uniformly embedded within a porous carbon 

matrix  (denoted  as  NTP@C@PC).  The  obtained  NTP@C@PC  exhibits  an  ultralong 

cycle life (103 mAhg-1 at 5C after 5000 cycles), superior rate capability (64 mAhg-1 at 

50 C) and excellent cycling efficiency. 

The overall synthetic procedure of double carbon coating NTP@C@PC composite 

was  illustrated  in  Scheme  1a.39  First,  Titanium  (IV)  acetylacetonate  with  precursor 

3dissolved in tetraethylene glycol (TEG) that acts as three important roles: 

solvent,  reducing  agent  and  capping.39  Next,  after  the  polyol  process,  an  amorphous 

NTP@C  core-shell  structure  was  obtained.26,  40  Finally,  thermal  treatment  of 

amorphous  NTP@C  encapsulated  within  TEG  leads  to  form  the  double  carbon 

coating  NTP@C@PC  composite.26  As  the  carbon  layer  is  derived  from  the  TEG 

solvent  in  precursor,  undesired  particle  growth  is  effectively  suppressed  during 

annealing  process,  leading  to  smaller  nanocrystalline  NTP  particles  with  a  complete 

and  uniform  carbon  shell.41, 42  The  optimal  core−shell  nanostructure  combined  with 

the  nanoporous  carbon  matrix  ensures  the  effective  diffusion  of  Na+ and  e−  into  and 

out  of  the  NTP  nanocrystalline  structure  (Scheme  1b).  For  comparison,  the  carbon 

free NTP was prepared via a similar method without TEG. Detailed procedures were 

described in the experimental section.   

Figure  1a  shows  the  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  patterns  of  the  NTP  and 

NTP@C@PC, demonstrating the formation of a high crystalline phase after annealing. 

All  diffraction  peaks  of  both  samples  could  be  indexed  to  a  high  purity 

NASICON-type  framework  (JCPDS  no.33-1296).  The  Raman  spectrum  of  the 

NTP@C@PC  nanocomposites  was  shown  in  Figure  1b.  Two  obvious  bands  were 

observed  at  1357cm-1  and  1595cm-1  due  to  the  D-band  (disordered  carbon)  and 

G-band (graphitic carbon) of the carbon, respectively. The peak intensity ratio of D to 

G band  (ID/IG)  is about 0.99,  which  shows a  relatively  high  degree  of  graphitization. 

Determined  by  Thermogravimetry  (TG)  analyses  (Figure  S1),  the  carbon  content  of 

NTP@C@PC  was  17.34%.  For  comparison,  the  carbon  content  of  the  NTP  can  be 

ignored  (Figure  S1).  The  Brunauer-Emmet-Teller  (BET)  surface  area  and  the  pore 

size  of  the  NTP@C@PC  were  investigated  by  Nitrogen  adsorption-desorption 

technique. The nitrogen adsorption-desorption isotherms of NTP@C@PC (Figure 2a) 

shows a typical hysteresis as well as  the high surface area (133 m2g−1). The Barrett–

Joyner–Halenda (BJH) method was used to investigate the pore size distributions for 

the  NTP@C@PC  nanocomposites,  presenting  a  pore  size  centered  around  ~5.2  nm 

and  the  pore  volume  of  ~0.27  m2g−1  (Figure  2&Table  S1,  Supporting  Information). 

The pure NTP has a BET surface area of only 4 m2g−1 that is much smaller than that 

of the NTP@C@PC nanocomposites (Figure S2&Table S1).   

Figure 3a shows the SEM image of the pure NTP composite, which consists of the 

uniform  scattered  micro-sized  particles  (size:  ~1  µm).  Figure  S3  reveals  that  no 

carbon layer appears on the surface of the NTP. Compared to NTP, the morphology of 

NTP@C@PC  nanocomposite  is  microsized  clusters  with  agglomerated  nanosized 

grains.  The  grain  sizes  are  around  10-300  nm  (Figure  3b&  inset  of  Figure  3b).  It 

indicates  that  the  carbon  coating  and  the  3D  porous  carbon  matrix  could  effectively 

limit  the  particles  growth  during  the  post-heated  process  at  high  temperature.  The 

morphology  and the  structure  of the  NTP@C@PC  nanocomposites  were 

characterized  by  transmission  electron  microscopy  (TEM)  (Figure  3c)  and  high 

resolution  transmission  electron  microscopy  (HRTEM)  (Figure  3d).  Figure  3c 

confirms that the nanoparticles of the NTP embedded in a porous carbon matrix. The 

HRTEM  image  (Figure  3d)  reveals  that  a  thin  carbon  shell  (~  2nm)  has  formed 

during  the  carbonization  process  and  coated  every  crystallite  to  form  a  NTP@C 

core−shell  structure.  The  porous  carbon  matrix  makes  sure  the  electrical  continuity 

around  the  NTP  crystallites.  Moreover,  Na+  can  easily  pass  through  the  thin  carbon 

shell and react with NTP which is associated with the accepted electrons.   

The electrochemical performances  of both NTP  and NTP@C@PC  nanocomposite 

have been investigated in sodium storage. The reversible capacity of the carbon in the 

composites is negligible because of the discharge voltage of carbonaceous materials is 

below  1.0  V.43-45  Figure  4a  compares  the  1st  charge-discharge  profiles  of  both  NTP 

and  NTP@C@PC  in  a  potential  window  of  1.5-2.8  V  at  the  rate  of  1  C  (1  C  =130 

mAhg-1). NTP@C@PC displays a perfect discharge/charge profiles with flat plateaus 

around 2.1 V, relationship among the redox pair of Ti4+/Ti3+.20 It delivers a capacity of 

127  mAhg-1, corresponding  of  95% theoretical capacity  (theoretical capacity  of NTP 

is  133  mAhg-1).  An  obvious  narrower  gap  between  charge  and  discharge  profiles  of 

the  NVP@C@PC  electrode  was  found  and  the  initial  Coulombic  efficiency  of 

NTP@C@PC  could  reach  95%,  indicating  the  double  carbon  coating  design  could 

realize the high utilization of the active materials as well as the highly reversible Na+ 

insertion/extraction. In case of NTP electrode, the curves of charge and discharge for 

NTP appear slopes, suggesting the high polarization of NTP due to the poor electronic 

conductivity.  The  NTP  only  delivers  an  initial  discharge  capacity  of  93  mAhg-1. 

Figure 4b compares the long cycle life of both NTP and NTP@C@PC electrodes at 

the rate of 1 C. The NTP@C@PC delivers a stable reversible specific capacity of 113 

mAhg-1  after  1000  cycles.  Compare  to  NTP@C@PC,  the  NTP  shows  a  reversible 

capacity of 37 mAhg-1 at the first 20 cycles, and then it drops rapidly to ~20 mAhg-1 

probably due to the disconnection of particles for the NTP. The voltage profiles of the 

NTP@C@PC at the current rates of 0.5−30 C were shown in Figure 4c. At the initial 

lower rate of 0.5C, the NTP@C@PC electrode shows a flat voltage plateau of ~2.1 V 

and exhibits a discharge capacity of 133 mAhg-1. With increasing current density, the 

discharge capacities  of NTP@C@PC are 121, 118, 116, 112, and 104, at 1, 2, 5, 10, 

and 20 C, respectively. It is worth noting that the double carbon coating NTP@C@PC 

delivers the reversible high rate capacities of 94 mAh g-1 at 30 C, resulting from the 

substantial increase in electric conductivity by uniform carbon coating for faster Na+ 

insertion  to  NTP.  Figure  4d  shows  the  discharge  capacities  against  different  current 

rates, each sustained for 10 cycles. It exhibits stable cyclic performance for all rates. 

Even at the current density of 50 C, the electrode can still deliver a reversible capacity 

of  64  mAhg−1.  This  corresponds  to  a  charge  or  discharge  time  of  72  seconds, 

indicating  the  excellent  rate  capability  of  the  cathode.  Remarkably,  even  the  current 

density was tuned back to 0.5 C after 90 cycles at higher rates, a specific capacity of 

122 mAhg-1 was recovered. 

Figure  5a  shows  cyclic  voltammetry  (CV)  curves  of  NTP@C@PC  as  anode  for 

NIBs at a fixed scan rate  of  0.1  mV  s-1.  A couple  of  redox peaks  of  Ti4+ to  Ti3+  was 

found,  which  in  a  good  agreement  with  the  discharge-charge  voltage  plateau  of  the 

NTP@C@PC  at  1  C  (Figure  4a).  In  addition,  the peak  shape  and  potential  position 

were  nearly  unchanged for the first three  cycles, demonstrating  the excellent cycling 

stability of the NTP@C@PC electrode. Considering the super cycling behavior of the 

NTP@C@PC cell, we also investigated the cycling performance of the NTP@C@PC 

anode materials at 5 C as long as 5000 cycles (Figure 5b). In the whole process, the 

super  cycling  performance  is  observed,  showing  high  stable  discharge  capacities  of 

103  mAhg-1  at  5  C  after  5000  cycles,  which  corresponds  to  77%  of  theoretical 

capacity.  In  addition,  the  structure  of  the  NTP@C@PC  was  unchanged  except  the 

carbon  layer  on  the  surface  of  NTP  particles  became  slightly  thicker,  resulting  from 

the  formation  of  the  solid  electrolyte  interphase  (SEI)  films.46  Figure  S5  shows  the 

CV  curves  of  the  pure  carbon  matrix  in  the  potential  window  of  0.005-2.8  V  (vs. 

Na+/Na) at a scan rate of 0.2 mV s-1 for the first three cycles. No oxidation/reduction 

peak was observed in the potential range of 0.005-1.5 V, demonstrating the discharge 

voltage of the pure carbon matrix is below 1.5 V. Therefore the reversible capacity of 

the pure carbon matrix in the composites between 1.5-2.8 V is negligible.7, 44 

Furthermore,  the  long-life  cycling  performance  of  the  NTP@C@PC  anode 

materials at 10 C (Figure 6) and 20 C (Figure S6) were investigated.  At the current 

density of 10 C (Figure 6), the NTP@C@PC exhibits an initial discharge capacity of 

110  mAhg-1  and  displays  a  reversible  capacity  of  76  mAhg-1  after  6000  cycles.  As 

shown  in  Figure  S6,  the  NTP@C@PC  displays  a  stable  reversible  capacity  of  70 

mAhg-1 at 20C after 9000 cycles and the Coulombic efficiency can achieve constant at 

approximately  100%  throughout  the  whole  cycle  process,  demonstrating  that  this 

novel composite could serve as promising anode materials for high-performance NIBs  in a wide range of applications. 

In  order  to  further  study  the  relationship  between  the  porous  structure  of  the 

electrode materials and electrochemical performance, the electrochemical impendance 

spectroscopy  (EIS)  was  investigated.  Figure  7  shows  the  Nyquist  plots  of  the  NTP 

and NTP@C@PC electrodes in fresh cells and the thrice test cells (the cell was tested 

after  the  three  cycles)  with  equivalent  circuit  inset.  A  semicircle  and  a  straight  line 

were found in each the Nyquist plot for the samples.47 The semicircle in high-medium 

frequency  is  related  to  the  charge-transfer  resistance  (Rct),  which  represents  the 

diffusion of the sodium ion between the electrode and electrolyte.48  The straight line 

in  the  low  frequency  represents  the  sodium  ion  diffusion  in  the  active  electrode 

material.  The  fitting  results  were  concluded  in  the  Table  1.  The  Rct  value  of  the 

NTP@C@PC  (959  Ω)  is  much  smaller  than  that  of  the  NTP  (1193  Ω)  in  fresh  cells 

(see in Table 1), which demonstrates that both Na+/ecan easy diffusion between the 

NTP@C@PC  electrode  and  the  electrolyte.20, 49  After  3  cycles  at  1  C,  the  Rct  of  the 

pure NTP decreased to 1019 Ω (decreased by 174 Ω), which may be attributed to the 

destruction  of  the  passivation  layer  on  the  sodium  metal  surface.41, 45, 50  In  addition, 

the Rct of NTP@C@PC electrode decreases by 450 Ω, resulting from the large surface 

area and the porous structure of the NTP@C@PC nanocomposites (see in Table 1).41 

In  addition,  the  Rct  values  of  the  NTP  (1019  Ω)  are  much  larger  than  that  of  the 

NTP@C@PC  (509  Ω)  after  3  cycles  at  1C,  which  indicates  the  electron  can  fast 

transfer between the NTP@C@PC electrode and electrolyte, leading  to the excellent 

electrochemical performance for the NTP@C@PC electrode. 

In  summary,  we  have  demonstrated  a  simple  soft-chemistry  approach  to  prepare 

NASICON  type  materials  with  double  carbon  coating,  where  carbon  coated 

NASICON  type  material  nanoparticles  embedded  in  porous  carbon  matrix.

The  resulting  NTP@C@PC architectures  possess  high  surface  area,  porous  structure  and  high  electrical 

conductivity,  facilitating  the  diffusion  of  both  Na+  and  electrons  during  sodium 

storage.  Moreover,  the  3D  porous  carbon  matrix  structure  can  rapidly  accommodate 

the  volume  variation  during  repeated  Na+  insertion/extraction.  Benefiting  from  the 

specific structure, NTP@C@PC anode delivers extremely high rate performance (64 

mAh g-1 at 50C) and ultra-long cycle life (70 mAhg-1 at 20 C after 9000 cycles). We 

believe  that  such  a  simple  and  efficient  soft-chemistry  process  offers  an  effective 

method  to  prepare  various  materials  with  double  carbon  coating  structure  for  wide 

applications  in  supercapacitors,  lithium  ion  batteries  and  sodium-ion  batteries  with 

high power and energy densities.   

The double carbon-coated NaTi2(PO4)3 composite (NTP@C@PC) was    prepared by 

a  simple  method.  In  a  typical  synthesis  process,  Titanium  (IV)  acetylacetonate 

(0.2mmol,  C10H14O5Ti),  sodium  acetate  (0.1mmol,  CH3COONa)  and  ammonium 

dihydrogen  phosphate  (0.3mmol,  NH4H2PO4)  were  dissolved  in  the  tetraethylene 

glycol  (30mL,TEG)  under  stirring.  After  getting  a  homogenous  solution,  The  mixed 

solution was heated at 300  oC for 3h in a round bottom flask hang onto the refluxing 

condenser under continuously stirring. Then the obtained powders were washed with 

ethanol and acetone for some times and were dried at 60 oC for 12h in a vacuum oven. 

The resulting product was obtained by preheated at 650 oC for 6 hours in Ar/H2 (95:5) 

and  heated  in  Ar  atmosphere  at  800 oC  for  8  hours.  For  comparison,  the  pure  NTP 

composite was prepared without TEG in a similar abovementioned process.   

The structural properties  of  the  samples  were  studied by  X-ray powder diffraction 

(XRD) (Philips X’Pert PRO SUPER X-ray diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation). The 

Raman  spectroscopy  was  used  to  study  the  degree  of  graphitization.  The  carbon 

contents in the as-prepared samples were determined by Thermogravimetry (TG). The 

Filed-Emission  Scanning  electron  microscopy  (FESEM,  JEOL,  Tokyo,  Japan)  was 

employed  to  characterize  the  morphologies  of  the  samples.  Transmission  electron 

microscopy  (TEM,  JEOL,  Tokyo,  Japan)  and  high-resolution  TEM  (HRTEM)  were 

used to study the microstructural properties. An ASAP 2020 Accelerated Surface Area 

and  Porosimetry instrument  was  used to  measure the  products’  nitrogen 


The electrodes were made by putting the mixture of 70 wt% active material, 20 wt% 

carbon  black, and  10  wt%  PVDF  with 

appropriate 

amount  of 

N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) as a solvent on a Cu foil. Then the working electrode 

was dried in a vacuum oven for 12 hours at 60 oC. The 2032 coin cells assembled in a 

glove  box  (MBRAUN  LABMASTER  130)  filled  with  pure  argon  gas  where  both 

moisture  and  oxygen  levels  were  kept  below  0.1  ppm.  In  sodium  half  cells,  sodium 

metal  was  used  as  the  counter  electrode,  a  1  M  solution  of  NaClO4  in  ethylene 

carbonate  (EC)  and  dimethyl  carbonate  (DMC)  (WEC:WDMC=1:1)  was  used  as  the 

electrolyte,  and  glass  fiber  (GF/D)  from  Whatman  was  used  as  the  separator.  The 

galvanostatic charge-discharge tests were carried out at a voltage window of 1.5-2.8 V 

on a battery  test  system (Neware  BTS-610).  The specific capacity  was calculated on 

the  basis  of  the  active  anode  material  after  deduction  the  carbon  content.  Cyclic 

voltammetry  measurements  were  conducted  at  a  scan  rate  of  0.1  mVs-1. 

Electrochemical impedance  spectrum  (EIS)  measurements  were performed  on a  CHI 

660D  electrochemical  workstation  (Chenhua  Instrument  Company,  Shanghai,  China) 

in the frequency range from 100 kHz to 0.01 Hz. 
