Electrical  properties of  Lithium based  Li1.3Al0.3-xYxTi1.7(PO4)3  (LAYTP)  system  was  prepared  using  solid state reaction route. The samples  were subjected to differing duration of sintering.  X-ray diffraction  was  used  to  investigate  the  microstructure  while  density  measurement  was  performed  to  determine  the  effect  of  sintering  on  the  density  of  the  prepared  samples.  Electrical  properties  of  the  material  were  studied  using  impedance spectroscopy, in frequency range 20 MHz to 1 Hz and in temperature range 303 K to 423 K. It was  found  that  sample  with  least  amount  of  yttrium  and  which  was  sintered  for  least  duration  had  superior  conductivity  over  other  samples.  It  was  also  found  that  grain  boundary  conductivity  improved  marginally  for  sample with higher proportion of yttrium heat treated for longer duration. 

This NASICON an acronym for (Na like Super Ionic Conductors) is an important class of ceramic material that  has been investigated for its role as electrolytes in solid state batteries. It has a rhombohedral structure (space group small amount of doping without affecting the overall structure and symmetry. Cation vacancy sites are formed as a  result of a structure formed by sharing corner oxygen atoms from two TiO6 octahedra and six PO4 tetrahedra. These  sites are termed M1 and M2 sites, in general. Lithium based NASICON materials like LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) [1, 2] had  been extensively investigated. It was found that doping LTP with trivalent cations like aluminum can increase the  Li+ ionic conductivity [4]. Due to superior Li+ conductivity (~ 10-3S/cm), Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 (LATP) system has  been  extensively  investigated  for  its  electrical  properties  [3,  4].  In  earlier  studies [5–8] yttrium a  trivalent  cation  (Y3+) was also doped in parent system Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP). Y3+ tends to replace Al3+ cations due to similar  valence. In the present study samples of two concentrations (with 1 at% and 15 at% yttrium)  are doped in parent  system Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) to form Li1.3Al0.3-xYxTi1.7(PO4)3 (LAYTP) system. These samples are subjected  to heat treatment (sintering) at 1373 K for durations of 1 hr, 2 hrs and 3 hrs. The effect of these conditions on Li +  conductivity in grain and grain boundary regions and the density of the material are discussed. 

Laboratory  grade  lithium  carbonate  (Li2CO3),  ammonium  diphosphate  (NH4H2(PO4)),  yttrium  oxide  (Y2O3), titanium oxide (TiO2), alumina (Al2O3) (Loba Chemie, Mumbai, India) were taken according to their weight  percentages to create samples of two concentrations (1 at% and 15 at% yttrium) in a cool and dry atmosphere. The  weighed powders were mixed and ground using mortar and pestle for 30 min. This mixture was heated in ceramic  boats (which exposed the powders to atmosphere) in an electrical furnace upto 873 K for 20 minutes. On cooling,  the material was again ground and heated to 1073 K for 45 minutes. The last cycle of hand grinding was done for 30  minutes resulting in a very fine white powder. Pellets of 2-3 mm thickness and approximately 10 mm diameter were prepared  using  a  die  set  on  a  hydraulic  pelletizer  at a  pressure  of approximately 70 MPa. The  pellets  were  then  batched  into  three  groups.  The  first  group  was  heated  up  to  1373  K  for  1hour  and  allowed  to  cool  slowly.  The  second batch was heated for 2 hours and the third batch for 3 hours. Details of sample composition are presented in  table-1. 

All  the  samples  were  characterized  using  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD),  Energy  Dispersive  Spectroscopy  (EDS),  density measurements and impedance spectroscopy. Structural characterization of the material was done by X-ray  Diffraction  (XRD)  (Rigaku  MiniFlex  Cu  Kα  line  (λ=1.5405  Å)).  Energy  Dispersive  Spectroscopy  (EDS)  using  OXFORD EDS analyzer measurements were performed to determine the chemical composition of the compounds.  Density was measured using Archimedes principle. Methanol was used as a displacing liquid. The results of EDS  are presented in table-2. Impedance measurements were performed in the frequency range of 20 MHz to 1Hz and  temperature range 303 K to 433 K, using the impedance gain/phase analyzer (SOLARTRON 1260). Silver paint was  applied on the two surfaces of the pellets to work as electrodes. 


The XRD patterns indicate the presence of mixed phases. Apart from the regular LTP phases which have phases, YPO4 and LiTiPO5 are also observed in the XRD patterns. These are indicated by appropriate symbols. Fig.  2(a) and (b) describe the Nyquist (impedance) plots of the two samples at 413 K (140° C) (for two concentrations –  1 wt% and 15wt%) sintered for 1 hour while fig 3  (a) and (b) describe the Nyquist plots of the samples of same  concentrations  at  413  K  but  sintered  for  3  hours.  In  the  inset  of  the  figures,  equivalent  circuits  used  to  fit  the  impedance data from the Equivalent Circuit theory by MacDonald [9, 10] are shown. According to this theory the  fitting of the impedance data can be done using a combination of R and C. It is clear that as yttrium concentration  and  the  sintering  duration  increases,  the  number  of  circuit  elements  used,  also  increase.  This  is  because  as  the  amount of impurities increase, pure capacitive behavior (C) is replaced by constant phase elements (CPE) [10]. The  impedance  plots  contain  two  semi  circular  arcs.  At  higher  frequencies  (>  5×104  Hz)  the  Li+  experiences  low  impedance (and high conductivity) which corresponds to smaller semi circle, which describes the Li+ conduction in  grain region. At lower frequencies, the impedance is higher which indicates the Li+ motion in grain boundary region.  Therefore as the amount of dopant and the sintering duration increases in the samples, the dopants act as impurity  phases and block the Li+ ion transport across the grain and grain boundary regions. The fall of conductivity is also  indicated  by  Arrhenius  plots  for  grain  and  grain  boundary  regions  (Fig.  4(a)  and  4(b)  respectively).  Highest  Li+  conductivity  (5.9×10-3  S/cm  for  grain  and  7.2×10-4  S/cm  at  403  K  (130°  C)  for  grain  boundary)  is  obtained  for  sample  S1-H1  (with  1  wt%  yttrium  and  1  hour  sintering  duration).  It  was  observed  that  the  grain  boundary  conductivity  (8.4×10-5  S/cm  at  403  K)  improved  for  S2-H3  sample  (with  15  at%  yttrium  and  3  hours  sintering  duration) compared to other samples (which is the highest grain boundary conductivity after S1-H1 sample). Thus it  can be concluded that there is a marginal improvement in grain boundary conductivity if the sintering duration is enhanced. 

Li1.3Al0.3-xYxTi1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) has a rhombohedral (R 885) 3364)c) structure. When trivalent Y3+ is doped it tends to replace the trivalent cation Al3+ at tetrahedral and octahedral sites within the LATP framework. But Y3+ (ionic radii  0.93 Å) is not able to replace Al3+ (0.53 Å) due to its massive ionic size. Hence the yttrium oxide present in the grain  region tends to settle near the octahedral sites [11]. Due to this, it blocks the pathways for Li+ migration near the M1  vacancy sites. In octahedral (TiO6) position it tries to replace Ti4+ (0.64 Å) which have a slightly comparable ionic  radius. Due to this the Li+ conductivity is better for sample containing lesser proportion of yttrium. This can be seen  from  the  smaller  values  of  activation  energy  (table-1).  When  the  samples  are  sintered  at  sufficiently  high  temperatures (1000° C) heavy impurities like YPO4 tend to segregate at grain boundary [12, 13]. These phases are  detected in the XRD patterns as well. They form glassy phases which enhance grain contacts and hence the overall  density  of  the  material.  This  is  seen  from  the  increasing  values  of  density  (table-1)  as  a  function  of  sintering  duration. 

LATP samples were doped with trivalent cation yttrium for two concentrations (1 at% and 15 at%). These  samples were prepared using solid state reaction method. They were sintered for 1, 2 and 3 hours duration at 1373 K  to study their microstructure  and conductivity. It was concluded that due to dopants, impurity phases are formed  which adversely affect the  Li+  conductivity across grain and  grain boundary  regions. The  yttrium  phases  tend  to  segregate towards grain boundary as sintering time is increased. Due to this, grain contacts improved. This improved  the grain boundary conductivity of sample containing higher proportion of yttrium (and sintered for longer duration  of time).     
