A mixed aqueous/aprotic Na-air cell that works at room temperature has been fabricated and its discharge properties have been examined experimentally as a primary cell. A dense Na3Zr2Si2PO12 ceramic with an ionic conductivity of 1.3 × 10 −1 C and a porous electrode containing Mn3O4 catalyzed carbon are used as a solid electrolyte separator and an air electrode, at 25 respectively. This cell gives a maximum output power density of 21 mW·cm C, which is one of the best results among alkali metal-air cells reported to date. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy reveals that a reduction in ohmic resistivity of the ceramic separator is now crucial for a further increase in power density. © 2015 The Electrochemical Society. [DOI: 10.1149/2.0421507jes] All rights reserved.

The growing interest in electric vehicles and in hybrid electric vehicles has led to a requirement for smaller and lighter batteries. The energy densities of current rechargeable lithium ion batteries (LIBs) are around 100–200 Wh· kg −1. A threeto ten-fold increase is required for driving ranges comparable to gasoline powered automobiles.1,2 Lithium-air batteries (LABs) have a theoretical speciﬁc energy density of approximately 5,200 Wh· kg −1 (Ref. 3) and are, therefore, promising candidates to overcome the limitations of LIBs.4,5 However, the discharge products of LABs with conventional design are insoluble in organic electrolytes. Clogging of the gas-permeable electrode terminates the discharge process, which signiﬁcantly limits its practical capacity. Large overpotentials during the discharge and charge processes are also a general problem of LABs resulting in relatively low round-trip energy efﬁciencies.

Recently, replacing the lithium in LIBs and LABs with sodium has attracted much attention.6–8 Despite sodium substitution is apparently not advantageous for battery performance, various unexpected beneﬁts become evident. For example, a nonaqueous Na-air battery gave low overpotentials three to four times lower than that of LABs owing to differences in the discharge product (change from lithium peroxide to sodium superoxide) and because of the relevant discharge and charge reactions.7,9,10 Recently, we reported a proof-of-principle study on an aqueous Na-air cell that was characterized by the protection of a metallic Na anode by a ceramic membrane. This enabled us to incorporate a basic aqueous solution as the catholyte. The aqueous Na-air cell can potentially give higher practical performance in terms of both power and energy densities.6 However, no gaspermeable air electrode was examined and the cell design has not been optimized.

In the present study, Na-air cells with a planar design that include a gas-permeable electrode of Mn3O4-catalyzed activated carbon are constructed. Their discharge properties are examined as a primary battery. The improved design reduces the inner resistance of the cell efﬁciently, delivering high power density. The cell was found to exhibit one of the best discharge properties among the alkali metal-air cells reported to date.

Figure 1 shows a schematic diagram and an appearance of the sodium-air cell employed in this study. As for the preparation of ceramic membrane of NASICON, its detail has been described in our previous work.6 The air electrode is composed of a gas diffusion layer, a catalyst layer, and a nickel mesh. The gas diffusion layer was prepared by mixing acetylene black (Lion, Tokyo, Japan) and a polytetraﬂuoroethylene (PTFE) emulsion (Toyo corporation, Tokyo, Japan) at a weight ratio of 60:40 wt% in isopropanol (Wako pure chemical industries Ltd., Osaka, Japan). The mixture was dried at ◦ C under a 80 pressure of 25 MPa. The catalyst was prepared by the calcination of a mixture of Mn(NO3)2 · 6H2O (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri) and activated carbon (Wako) so that the ﬁnal Mn3O4 and carbon ratio was 75:25 wt%.11 The Mn3O4/carbon composite was mixed with the PTFE emulsion at a ratio of 60:40 wt%. The air electrode was obtained by hot-pressing of the gas diffusion layer and the catalytic ◦ C layer onto the nickel mesh (100-mesh, Nilaco, Tokyo, Japan) at 200 and under 30 MPa. The ﬁnal weight of catalytic layer (Mn3O4/carbon −2, composite) was 3.8 mg per effective area of air electrode, 0.79 cm accounting for 6.8% of total weight of the air electrode. A 1 M NaOH solution (Wako) was used as the aqueous electrolyte. A 0.5 M solution of sodium triﬂate salt (NaSO3CF3, Sigma-Aldrich) in diethylene glycol dimethyl ether (diglyme, Sigma-Aldrich) was prepared as the ether-based organic electrolyte. A solution of 1 M NaClO4 (SigmaAldrich) as a Na salt and 1 vol% ﬂuoroethylene carbonate (FEC, Tokyo Chemical, Tokyo, Japan) as an additive in ethylene carbonate (EC, Wako)/dimethyl carbonate (DMC, Wako) at a ratio of 1:1 were prepared as the carbonate-based organic electrolyte. Conductivity of liquid electrolyte was measured using a CM-30R conductivity meter (DKK-Toa Corporation, Tokyo, Japan).

X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) patterns of the ceramic separator and the catalyst were measured using a Rint-2000 diffractometer (Rigaku Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). Their microstructures were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using S-4200 SEM (Hitachi Ltd., Hitachi, Japan).

For the assembly of cell (Fig. 1), metallic Na (purity of 99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich) with a weight of 6.9 mg and an area of 0.79 cm2 was placed on a stainless steel anode ﬂange equipped with a nitrile rubber O-ring, and an organic electrolyte was poured onto it in a dry box. Then this anode compartment was hermetically sealed by a ceramic separator, another O-ring, and an insulating ﬂange made of polyetheretherketone (PEEK) resin. Finally, 0.1 mL of the aqueous electrolyte was poured on the ceramic separator and the air electrode was placed on the top. Electrochemical tests were performed using a potentio-galvanostat (Type 1287, Solartron Analytical, Cambridge ◦ C in air with a relative humidity, RH, of 80%, which was UK) at 25 controlled using a constant temperature and humidity chamber. Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were measured using a Solartron 1260 frequency response analyzer combined with a Solartron 1287 electrochemical interface in a frequency range of 0.01–5 × 104 Hz.

Cell components.— Figure 2a shows an XRD pattern of the ◦ Mn3O4/C composite. The broad main peak located at 25 is assigned to activated carbon, while other peaks are assigned to Mn3O4. The broad peaks suggest a small particle size for Mn3O4.

According to SEM observation (Fig. 2b), ﬁne Mn3O4 particles with diameters of approximately 30 nm are supported on carbon grains.

An XRD pattern of Fig. 3a was measured in the as-prepared ceramic separator. It was mainly composed of NASICON crystal with monoclinic symmetry (space group C2/c), indicating that its chemical composition is close to Na3Zr2Si2PO12.12 ZrO2 was present as a minor phase. The ceramic was a gastight with a speciﬁc density of 3.22 g· cm −3, which corresponds to 98.5% of the theoretical density. + Figure 3b shows Arrhenius plots for the Na ion conductivity. The activation energy of the total conductivity was 0.28 eV, which is typical value for NASICON according to the results of previous studies.

Conductivities of the carbonate-based electrolyte was 1.0 S·m−1, which cor◦ The total conductivity at 25 responds to an effective resistance of 93  for a separator with a thickness of 0.96 mm and an area of 0.79 cm2 (cell i, see below for detail). Fig. 3c shows SEM image of as-prepared NASICON. Average grain size was estimated to be 0.7 μm. −1, which was larger than that (1.5 × 10 −1) of the ether-based electrolyte by ∼7 times. Partial ohmic resistances of the carbonateand the ether-based electrolytes in our cell (Fig. 1a) are calculated to be 42 and 6 , respectively. Conductivity of the aqueous electrolyte was 95.5 S·m −1, which corresponds to the partial cell resistance of 0.05 .

The ceramic separator was immersed in the 1 M NaOH (aqueous electrolyte) and 1 M NaClO4 in EC/DMC with 1% FEC (carbonatebased organic electrolyte) at room temperature for two days. XRD patterns and SEM images after the immersion are shown in Fig. 3a, and Figs. 3c–3e, respectively. No signiﬁcant structural change was observed between ceramic separator of the as-prepared state and those immersed for 2 days, indicating an acceptable stability of the ceramic separator against the liquid electrolytes.

Three kinds of cells are constructed, and their speciﬁcations are summarized in Table I. Figure 4a shows their current-voltage (I-V) characteristics, which are based on the effective area (0.79 cm2) of the cell. The inner resistance of the cells at maximum IV value was estimated from slope of the I-V characteristics, and indicated in Table I.

Cell i consists of the ether-based electrolyte and the ceramic separator with a thickness of 0.96 mm. This cell delivered a maximum areal output power density of 8.0 mW· cm C. Cell ii was similar to cell i except for the organic electrolyte, which was changed to the carbonate-based one. The areal output power density increased to 15.0 mW· cm −2. When the thickness of the ceramic separator was reduced to 0.83 mm as in cell iii, the maximum power density further increased to 21.1 mW· cm −2. The maximum power density of the cell iii increased to 25.4 mW· cm −2 at an elevated temperature ◦ C (Fig.4a). Table II compares areal powder densities at I of of 50 1.0 mA· cm −2 and at maximum IV value among alkali metal-air cells reported in literatures. To the best of our knowledge, the power densities in the present study are one of the best values obtained for alkali metal-air cells to date at room temperature.6,16–19 Figure 4b shows the galvanostatic discharge proﬁle in cell iii at a current density of 1 mA· cm −2. The cell voltage was 2.6 V initially, which is higher than that of Na-air cell without using Mn3O4 as the catalyst, indicating the good catalytic performance of Mn3O4. The cell voltage decreased slightly during the discharge most likely because of an increase in NaOH concentration in the aqueous electrolyte and an increase in the interfacial resistance. The latter is discussed later. The discharge capacity of 650 mAh· g −1 corresponds to 78% of the theoretical capacity. The capacity loss is possibly ascribed to oxidation of metallic Na during cell assembly, occurrence of Na side reactions with the organic electrolyte,6 and detachment of shrunken Na foil from the anode ﬂange at the end of discharge.

A high frequency intercept of the semicircle on the real axis corresponds to the resistance of electrolytes (RE) including a bulk resistance of the NASICON and resistances of the two liquid electrolytes. A larger semicircle in higher frequency range is ascribed to the resistance of interfaces (RI) including a grain boundary resistance of the ceramic separator and interfacial resistances between the solid and the liquid electrolytes. Smaller semicircle in the middle frequency range corresponds to the resistance (RS) of a solid electrolyte interphase on the sodium surface, and the charge-transfer resistance (RCT) in an air electrode.20 CPEI, CPES, and CPECT are their associated capacitances described by the constant phase elements. The lowest frequency range is described by the ﬁnite length Warburg element (ZW) arising from a diffusion process in the air electrode.22 These parameters of the equivalent circuit are summarized in Table III.

Partial resistances of cell components obtained by EIS are consistent with the individual resistances of electrolytes and total cell resistance estimated from the I-V characteristics. In the cell iii, for example, the sum of bulk resistance of NASICON (50 ) and liquid electrolytes (6.1 ) reasonably agrees with the value of RE (57.8 ). Then, the interfacial resistance between the solid and the liquid electrolytes is estimated to be ∼50  from the difference between the grain boundary resistance of NASICON (30 ) and the value of RI (80.6 ).

As for the improvement in the cell performances from cell i to ii, main contributions are ascribed to reduction of both RE and RI owing to the decrease in the resistivity of organic electrolyte and its interfacial resistance with the solid electrolyte. The reduction in RE coincides with the difference in resistances of organic electrolytes. The reduction in interfacial resistance between organic and solid electrolytes is found to be as large as ∼60  from the reduction in the value of RI by assuming that the aqueous-solid interface resistance and the grain boundary resistance were unchanged. As far as the discharge properties of the aqueous Na-air cells, the higher conductivity of the carbonate-based electrolyte is advantageous to the ether-based electrolyte. The latter is expected to be effective rather for improving

the cycle performance of nonaqueous Na-air cells.23 The improvement from cell ii to iii is due to a reduction in the grain boundary resistance of the ceramic separator. It is noted that the resistive components related to the air electrode (RCT and ZW) are relatively small as compared with other components. As a result, the resistance of the ceramic separator occupies 60% of the total resistance of the cell iii. Reduction of a resistance of ceramic separator is the most important issue to further enhance the output of the planar type cell.

EIS of cell iii after discharge is shown in Fig. 4d. Evaluated parameters of the equivalent circuit ﬁtting are listed in Table III . A marked increase was found in RI, while the other parameters did not changed much after the discharge. The value of RI includes the grain boundary resistance of NASICON ceramics and the interfacial resistances with two liquid electrolytes. Among them, the solid-aqueous interface is most likely ascribed to the origin of the resistance increase.

Nevertheless the total resistance of the planar type cell iii before the discharge was reduced by 65% as compared with a beaker type cell in the previous study.6 The resistance of the aqueous electrolyte became negligibly small in the planner cell. Moreover, the EIS results demonstrated that the resistive components related to the air electrode with Mn3O4 catalyst is small enough, improving the cell performances effectively as compared with a Pt mesh cathode in the beaker type cell.6 Since Mn3O4 is a bifunctional catalyst suitable for charging as well,24 a key for achieving rechargeability is likely a reaction at the negative electrode, i.e. an electrodeposition of metallic Na in aprotic electrolyte. It has been proposed that a maximum discharge power density of 100 mW·cm −2 should be a goal toward the development of alkali-air cells for their practical application in electric vehicles.2 It is suggested that the aqueous Na-air cell becomes a powerful option for reaching this goal, if the rechargeability is achieved.

The discharge properties of aqueous Na-air cells that contain organic electrolytes, a NASICON ceramic separator, and an aqueous electrolyte were investigated. These cells with a planar design contribute to low inner resistance and high power density. A maximum power density of 21 mW·cm C when a carbonate-based organic electrolyte was used and when the thickness of the ceramic separator was reduced to 0.83 mm. The areal power density of this cell was found to be one of the best among alkali metal-air cells reported to date. According to the EIS result, the ohmic resistance of the ceramic separator is responsible for most of the total cell resistance and therefore a decrease in this resistance is crucial to further improve the performance of Na-air cells.
