A Li1.4Al0.4Ge0.2Ti1.4 (PO4)3 (LAGTP) ﬁlm was prepared by a tape-casting method using a ﬁne LAGTP powder prepared by the sol-gel method. A LAGTP composite ﬁlm formed with approximately 2 wt% epoxy resin was water-impermeable and had high mechanical strength. The highest lithium ion conductivity of 5.26 × 10 C was obtained for the LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlm. The LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlm was stable in an aqueous solution with a high content of lithium ions. The −2. The water-impermeable three-point bending strength of the 75 μm thick LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlm was 125 N mm composite ﬁlm with excellent mechanical properties is an attractive candidate for the water-stable lithium electrode in rechargeable aqueous lithium-air batteries.

Rechargeable lithium-air batteries are a promising power source for electric vehicles because they have a far higher theoretical energy density and lower material cost than conventional batteries. Recently, many research groups have been developing lithium-air batteries.1–5 Two types of lithium air batteries, non-aqueous and aqueous, have been investigated to date. The non-aqueous system consists of a lithium metal electrode, a non-aqueous electrolyte, and an air electrode. The aqueous system consists of a lithium metal electrode protected by a water-stable lithium conducting solid electrolyte, an aqueous electrolyte, and an air electrode.

The calculated energy densities including oxygen (discharged −1 for reaction 1 with an open circuit voltage state) are 3460 Wh kg −1 for reaction 2 with an OCV of (OCV) of 2.96 V,6 and 1910 Wh kg 3.0 V.7 Reaction 2 involves water in the electrolyte as an active material; therefore, the energy density of the aqueous system is lower than that of the non-aqueous system. These calculated speciﬁc energy densities are 5–8 times higher than that of a conventional lithium-ion battery with a carbon anode and a LiCoO2 cathode.3 However, the calculated speciﬁc energy density should be multiplied by a conversion yield to obtain the speciﬁc energy density of the practical battery.7 For example, the conversion yields are 0.35 for lead acid and nickel metal halide batteries and 0.26–0.65 for lithium-ion batteries, which is dependent on the cell size. The non-aqueous system has higher energy density than that of the aqueous system, however, it has some severe problems that must still be addressed, such as lithium corrosion by water from air, electrolyte decomposition, and high polarization for the reduction of Li2O2.3,4 The aqueous system overcomes these problems because the lithium electrode is protected by a water-stable solid lithium ion conducting electrolyte, and the reaction product of LiOH is soluble in the electrolyte. The key material of the aqueous lithiumair battery is the lithium conducting water-stable solid electrolyte. The water-stable solid electrolyte should have a high lithium ion conductivity and be stable in an aqueous solution saturated with LiOH because the discharge product of the aqueous lithium-air system is LiOH, as shown in Equation 1. Imanishi et al. reported that the NASICON-type lithium conducting oxides of Li1+x+yAlx(Ti,Ge)2-xP3-ySiyO12 (LATP), Li1+xAlxTi2-x-yGey(PO4)3, and Li1.4Ti1.6FexAl0.4-x(PO4)3 are unstable in concentrated LiOH aqueous solution, but stable in an aqueous solution saturated with LiOH and LiCl.8–11 The water-impermeable LATP plates were supplied from Ohara Inc. Japan. Typical LATP plates have a thickness of 250–150 μm and an ionic conductivity of 1 × C.12 The plate was prepared by quenching from 10 the melt and recrystallization at a high temperature (glass ceramic).13 This glass ceramic is expensive and the size is limited. In addition, the conductivity is not acceptable for the electrolyte of lithium-air batteries with high power density. The speciﬁc area resistance of 150  cm2 for a 150 μm thick LTAP plate is too high at the high current −2 necessary for EV applications;4 the IR density drain of 8 mA cm −2 is as high as 1.2 V. We have predrop for the LTAP plate at 8 mA cm viously reported that Li1.4Al0.4Ge0.2Ti1.4 (PO4)3 (LAGTP) has a high conductivity of 1.29 × 10 −1 at 25 −3 S cm ◦ C and is stable in an aqueous solution saturated with LiOH and LiCl.10 The aqueous system cannot be operated without the water-stable lithium ion conducting solid electrolyte. The contribution of the electrolyte to the speciﬁc energy density of the aqueous lithium-air system is considerable and the thickness of the electrolyte should thus be decreased as much as possible.

In this study, we have prepared a high conductivity LAGTP ﬁlm by a tape-casting method, which is suitable for large-scale production of large sized thin ﬁlms, and a water-impermeable LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlm. The composite ﬁlm of LAGTP and epoxy resin showed a high conductivity of 5.26 × 10 C and was water-impermeable. A test cell of the rechargeable aqueous lithiumoxygen cell with the composite ﬁlm electrolyte was demonstrated.

The NASICON-type Li1.4Al0.4Ge0.2Ti1.4 (P04)3 powders were prepared by the sol-gel method using citric acid as reported previously.10 Stoichiometric amounts of Ti(OC4H9)4 (Aldrich) and Ge(OC2H5)4 (Aldrich) were dissolved in ethylene glycol, and then added to a 0.2 M aqueous solution of citric acid, and stirred continuously with a ◦ magnetic stirrer at 120 C for 12 h to obtain a homogeneous solution. After preparation of the gel was completed, stoichiometric amounts of LiNO3, Al (NO3)3 · 9H2O, and NH4H2PO4 were added to the gel + + Al3+ + Ge4+ + Ti4+ solution. The molar ratio of citric acid to (Li ) was 4:1. After a homogeneous solution was formed, the gel was kept ◦ C for 4 h to allow evaporation of the water and to promote at 170 ◦ C esteriﬁcation and polymerization. The gel was then heated at 500 for 4 h to complete the chemical decomposition of nitrates and organic compounds. The black product with residual carbon was ground to a uniformly ﬁne powder with an agate mortar and pestle to increase the surface area of the samples before sintering at 800 reaction and to remove organic residues.

Tape-casting slurries were prepared by the following procedure. Fine LAGTP powders prepared by the sol-gel method were dispersed in a mixed solution of ethanol and toluene (1:1 v/v) using menhaden ﬁsh oil (2 wt% to LAGTP) as a dispersant. The mixed slurry was then ball-milled at 120 rpm using a ZrO2 vessel and ZrO2 balls for 24 h with a high energy mechanical mill (HEMM; Fritsch Planetary Micro Mill). Polyvinyl butyl alcohol (8 wt% to LAGTP) as a binder and butyl benzyl phthalate (7 wt% to LAGTP) as a plasticizer were then added to the mixed slurry and ball-milled using the HEMM at 150 rpm for another 24 h. The slurry was de-aired under vacuum for 9 min using a planetary vacuum mixer (Thinky, Japan) before casting to remove air bubbles. Tape-casting was performed on a silicon coated polyethylene substrate foil using double blades with gap heights of −1. After 700 and 400 μm, and a constant casting speed of 60 cm min tape-casting, the green sheets were kept in a sealed box with a small amount of ethanol in a refrigerator to slowly dry at 5 C for 24 h. Three C for 10 min and then green sheets were hot pressed together at 90 sintered at 850–950C for 3–11 h in air.

The tape-cast LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlms were prepared by dropping a mixed dilute solution of 1 M 1,3-phenylenediamine and 2 M 2,2-bis(4-glycidyloxyphenyl)propane (0.5:1.0 molar ratio) in tetrahydrofuran (THF) on the surface of the tape-cast LAGTP ﬁlm as reported previously.15 The LAGTP ﬁlms with the epoxy resin solution were kept under vacuum for 30 min to allow the solution to penetrate into the pores of the LAGTP ﬁlms. Excess solution on the surface of ◦ composite ﬁlms was wiped clear, and the ﬁlms was then dried at 80 C ◦ for 2 h and polymerized at 150C for 24 h.

The X-ray diffraction (XRD) data were obtained using a Rigaku Rint 2500 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation in the 2θ range from −1 with Si powder as an internal ◦ 10 standard. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images and the relative contents of the elements were measured using a Hitachi S-486 microscope with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). AC impedance spectroscopy of the tape-cast LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlm with sputtered gold electrodes was measured in air using a frequency response analyzer (Solartron 1260) in the temperature ◦ C and the frequency range of 0.1 Hz to 1 MHz. range from 20 to 80 The impedance proﬁles were analyzed to estimate the bulk and grain boundary conductivities using a non-linear instant ﬁt program in the Zview software package. The tape-cast LAGTP and composite ﬁlms were immersed into aqueous solutions of saturated LiCl, saturated LiOH with saturated LiCl, and distilled water at 60 C for one month to investigate the stability of the ﬁlms in aqueous solutions. After im◦ mersion, the LAGTP ﬁlms were washed with water and dried at 150 C for 5 h under vacuum. The epoxy resin content in the composite ﬁlms was estimated from the weight loss measured by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA; Rigaku Thermoplus TG8120). The particle size distribution of the LAGTP powders was measured using a particle size analyzer (Nikkiso Microtrac S S3500). The three-point bending strength of the LAGTP ﬁlms at room temperature was measured using a materials tester (Shimadzu EZ-SX 500 N).

Water permeation tests were conducted using an H-type cell15 with saturated LiCl aqueous solution on one side and distilled water on the other side. The LAGTP ﬁlm was enveloped with a plastic ﬁlm. The package was then evacuated and heat-sealed apart from a 5 × 5 mm window on the LAGTP ﬁlm. The LAGTP ﬁlm covered with the plastic was useful in measuring the water permeation, because of its excellent sealing with the H-type cell. The water permeation rate through the LAGTP ﬁlm was estimated from the change of the chlorine content in the distilled water over time measured using a chlorine meter (Kasahara Chemical Instruments, Japan).

The stability of the water-stable lithium electrode with the tapecast LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlm as a protective layer was examined using an in-house-built lithium-air test cell,16 which consisted of a lithium metal anode, a protective inter layer of ethylene carbonate (EC) and diethylene carbonate (DEC) (1:1 v/v) with 1 M LiPF6, a tape-cast LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlm electrolyte, a saturated LiCl electrolyte, and an oxygen electrode consisting of a mixture of Ketjen black and polytetraﬂuoroethylene (85:15 w/w). The electrolyte solution of LiPF6 in EC-DEC between the lithium metal anode and the composite ﬁlm electrolyte was used to prevent direct contact between lithium metal and the composite ﬁlm electrolyte, because LAGTP is unstable in contact with lithium metal.12 The distance between the lithium metal anode and the LATGP-epoxy composite ﬁlm was approximately 1.0 cm, and the thickness and contact area of the LAGTP-epoxy composite ﬁlm with the liquid electrolyte were ◦ 0.018 cm and 1.2 cm2, respectively. The cell was operated at 25 C under an air atmosphere.

Figure 1 shows XRD patterns of the tape-cast LAGTP ﬁlms sin◦ C for 3, 7, and 11 h. tered at 850, 900, and 950 Impurity phases of Ti4O7 and AlPO4 were observed for the ﬁlms sin◦ C for 7 h, respectively. The XRD patterns of the tered at 850 and 950 ◦ C for 3, 7, and 11 h showed no impurity phases, ﬁlms sintered at 900 although the cell lattice parameters and the relative density showed a slight change with the sintering time; the a-axis lattice constant C, while the c-axis showed no change with the sintering time at 900 lattice constant changed with the sintering time. The c-lattice constant ◦ C for 3 h was increased of 2.0725 nm for LAGTP sintered at 900 C for 7 h, and then decreased to 2.0753 nm for that sintered at 900C for 3, 7, and 11 h.

The decrease in the lattice constant for the prolonged sintering period may be due to the evaporation of lithium, and the low lattice constant for LAGTP sintered for a short period may be due to incomplete reaction of the precursors. The relative densities and three-point bending strengths for LAGTP sintered at 850, 900, and 950 C for 3, 7 and 11 h were measured. The highest relative density of 91.2% −2 were obtained for and the highest bending strength of 65 N mm ◦ LAGTP sintered at 900 C for 7 h was too low to measure, due to the presence of the AlPO4 impurity phase. The particle size distribution analysis indicated a uniform size ◦ C for 7 h in the distribution for the LAGTP powder sintered at 900 range of 0.1–0.5 μm with an average particle size of 0.18 μm.

The effects of the sintering temperature and time on the electrical conductivity were examined. Figure 2 shows impedance proﬁles ◦ measured at 25 C for the tape-cast LAGTP ﬁlms sintered at vari◦ C. These ous temperatures for 7 h and for various periods at 900 impedance proﬁles showed a semicircle, which is attributed to the grain boundary resistance.17 The semicircle due to the bulk resistance was out of the frequency range for the impedance analyzer used. The intercept of the semicircle on the real axis at high frequency represents the bulk resistance, and the diameter of the semicircle indicates the grain boundary resistance. The grain boundary and bulk resistances are dependent on the sintering temperature and time. The highest total conductivity, which was estimated from the total of the bulk and grain boundary resistances, was observed for the tape-cast LAGTP ﬁlm sin◦ C for 7 h; the total, bulk, and grain boundary electrical tered at 900 ◦ C were conductivities for the as-sintered tape-cast LAGTP ﬁlms at 25 −3, 5.54 × 10 1.62 × 10−3, and 2.22 × 10C was decreased to 1.29 × 10

The LAGTP pellets prepared by sintering the pressed samples showed a signiﬁcant aging effect on the electrical conductivity;10 the total electrical conductivity for the as-sintered LAGTP of 2.25 × −1 after 10 one month storage in an air atmosphere. Therefore, the changes of the impedance proﬁle with aging were examined. Figure 3 shows impedance proﬁles for the tape-cast LAGTP ﬁlm at 25 C as a function ◦ C for 7 h of aging period, where the samples were sintered at 900 and stored in an air atmosphere or an Ar-charged glove box (dew C). The total electrical conductivity of 1.62 × 10 point of −99 ◦ −3 S ◦ −1 at 25 cm C for the as-sintered tape-cast LAGTP ﬁlm decreased to 4.44 × 10 −1 after storage for 20 days in an air atmosphere. −4 S cm The decrease in conductivity is mainly due to the decrease of the grain boundary conductivity. In contrast, there was no signiﬁcant degradation in conductivity for ﬁlms stored in a glove box under ◦ C was an Ar atmosphere, where the conductivity measured at 25

stable at approximately 1.22 × 10 −1 while stored in a glove box under an Ar atmosphere for 20 days. The slight increase in the grain boundary resistance with the aging period for the ﬁlm stored in the glove box under an Ar atmosphere could be explained by a metastable impurity phase with high conductivity in the as-sintered sample, which may change to the stable low conductivity phase by aging. The signiﬁcant increase in the grain boundary resistance for the ﬁlm stored under an air atmosphere may be due to the formation of Li2CO3 resulting from the reaction of CO2 and LiOH, which is + with moisture in the air formed by an exchange reaction of H atmosphere.

An important requirement for the protective layer of the waterstable lithium electrode in rechargeable lithium-air batteries is to minimize water permeation through the lithium conducting solid electrolyte. Water permeation tests were conducted using an H-type cell ◦ with the tape-cast LAGTP ﬁlm sintered at 900 C for 7 h. Figure 4(a) shows the chloride ion transport rate through the 150 μ m thick ﬁlm with a cross-section of 0.25 cm2 at room temperature. A linear increase in the chloride ion concentration with time was observed for the tape-cast ﬁlm, which indicates that water can easily penetrate through the ﬁlm. Water penetration through the ﬁlm was due to the presence of open pores in the ﬁlm. To suppress water permeation through the LAGTP ﬁlm, the open pores in the ﬁlm were ﬁlled with epoxy resin. Epoxy resin is the best candidate to ﬁll up these pores because it can be polymerized from a low viscosity solution and is stable in alkaline solution. The water permeation test results through the tape-cast LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlm are shown in Fig. 4b, where the amount of epoxy resin was ca. 2 wt%. No chloride ions were detected in the distilled water side of the H-type cell after storage for 8 days. SEM images and EDX mapping showed a homogenous distribution of the epoxy resin throughout the tape-cast LATGP ﬁlm matrix prepared by vacuum ﬁltering of a solution of the epoxy resin monomers in THF followed by polymerization.

Figure 5 shows the dependence of the three-point bending strength on the ﬁlm thickness for the tape-cast LAGTP-epoxy resin composite C for 7 h. The threeﬁlms and tape-cast LAGTP ﬁlms sintered at 900 −2 point bending strength of the tape-cast LAGTP ﬁlm was 65 N mm and was not dependent on the thickness. However, the bending strength of the tape-cast LAGTP ﬁlm was improved by the addition of epoxy resin. The three-point bending strength of the LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlm decreased with increasing thickness, which may be caused by due to incomplete penetration of the epoxy resin into the −2 for the pores of the thick ﬁlms. The bending strength of 125 N mm 75 μm thick LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlm is comparable with that of the LTAP glass ceramic ﬁlm.

The activation energies for electrical conduction in the cm tape-cast LAGTP ﬁlm and the tape-cast LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlm were calculated from the temperature dependence of the electrical conductivity The activation energies for the bulk conductivity of the tape-cast LAGTP ﬁlm and tape-cast LAGTP-epoxy resin −1, respectively, and those composite ﬁlm were 23.6 and 24.1 kJ mol −1, for the grain boundary conductivities were 41.86 and 59.5 kJ mol respectively. The activation energies for the bulk conductivity in the tape-cast LAGTP ﬁlm and tape-cast LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlm are comparable with that for a pressed and sintered LAGTP pellet. The activation energy for the grain boundary conduction of the tape-cast LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlm is higher than those of both the tape-cast LAGTP ﬁlm and a pressed and sintered LAGTP pellet. The high activation energy for the grain boundary conductivity of the composite ﬁlm may be due to the inhibition of lithium diffusion through the insulator layer of epoxy resin at the grain boundaries.

The lithium conducting solid electrolyte used as the protective layer for the water-stable lithium electrode in aqueous lithium-air batteries should be stable in an aqueous solution with saturated LiOH because the reaction product of the aqueous lithium-air batteries is LiOH. Shimonishi et al.9 reported that LATP is stable in aqueous solution saturated with LiOH and LiCl. 

X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of Li1.4Al0.4Ge0.2Ti1.4(PO4)3 immersed these solutions at 60 C for one month revealed no impurity phases and there was no change in the ratio of the diffraction peaks. However, the impedance proﬁles showed signiﬁcant changes by immersion in water. Figure 7 shows the impedance proﬁles of the tapecast LAGTP ﬁlm and tape-cast LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlms C for one month and immersed in the various aqueous solutions at 60 two weeks. The grain boundary resistance of the tape-cast LAGTP ﬁlm was increased signiﬁcantly from 500 to 57000  cm by immersion in distilled water, while the bulk resistance was only increased from 175 to 487  cm [Figure 7g]. The grain boundary resistance of the tape-cast LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlm was also increased signiﬁcantly from 1200 to 47000  cm by immersion in distilled water, while the bulk resistance was increased only from 565 to 718  cm [Figure 7h]. The increases in the grain boundary resistance + could be explained by the ion exchange of Li observed 18 and Li7La3Sn2O12.19 No signiﬁcant changes of in Li3xLa2/3TiO3 the grain boundary and bulk resistance of the tape-cast LAGTP and tape-cast LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlms were observed after immersion in the aqueous solution with saturated LiCl and LiOH for two weeks.

LiCl and LiOH for two weeks was comparable to that stored in an Ar-ﬁlled glove box for two weeks. These results suggest that the tape-cast LAGTP and tape-cast LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlms are stable in aqueous solution with saturated LiOH and LiCl. The three-point bending strengths of the tape-cast LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlms immersed in water and the saturated LiOH and LiCl aqueous solution were measured. The bending strength of a 130 μm thick composite ﬁlm immersed in the saturated LiOH and LiCl aqueous solution for 6 days showed no change, but that immersed in water was decreased from 124 to 116 N mm2.

A low electron (and/or hole) transport number is an important requirement for solid electrolytes used for batteries. The electronic conductivity of the tape-cast LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlm was estimated by the Hebb-Wagner method21 using a LiCoO2/tape-caste LAGTP-epoxy resin ﬁlm/Au cell, where LiCoO2 was used as the cathode to ﬁx the lithium potential because LAGTP is unstable in contact with lithium metal. A small direct current was passed through the cell and the steady cell voltage was measured as a function of the current density. After application of a voltage through the cell, the current will achieve steady-state as the ionic current is stopped with an ion blocking electrode. The electronic conductivity of the samples can then be obtained from the Hebb-Wagner relation, where σh and σe are the hole and electron conductivity, respectively, I is the current density, R is the gas constant, F is the Faraday constant, T is the absolute temperature, and E is the applied voltage. The relation between the E and I did not obey the Hebb-Wagner equation; the deviation from the Hebb-Wagner equation may be due to ◦ C the potential change of LiCoO2. The electronic conductivities at 25 were estimated from the steady-state cell voltages at various applied current densities; 2.8 × 10 −10 S −1 at 1.25 V. The electronic conductivity contribution to the total cm conductivity for the tape-cast LAGTP-epoxy composite ﬁlm may thus be negligibly low compared to that from the ionic conductivity.

The stability of the water-stable lithium electrode with the tape-cast LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlm as a protective layer was examined using a lithium-air test cell of Li/LiPF6 in EC-DEC/LAGTPepoxy resin/saturated LiCl aqueous solution/carbon, air. 

The OCV is slightly higher than that reported previously for the Li/LiClO4 in ECDEC/LATP/aqueous solution with saturated LiOH and LiCl/carbon, ◦ C.16 Figure 8a shows the change in the lithium electrode air cell at 25 impedance with the storage period at room temperature, which was measured using a reference electrode of platinum with platinum black immersed in the LiCl saturated aqueous electrolyte. The impedance proﬁles show three semicircles. The small semicircle in the high frequency range may correspond to the grain boundary resistance of the composite electrolyte ﬁlm. The large semicircle in the middle frequency range may be attributed to the resistance of a solid electrolyte interlayer (SEI) produced between lithium and the LiPF6-EC-DEC electrolyte, and the interface resistance between the composite electrolyte ﬁlm and the saturated LiCl aqueous electrolyte. The third semicircle in the low frequency range may be due to the charge transfer resistance for lithium deposition and stripping. The SEI resistance increased slightly with the storage period and the other resistances were almost constant for 3 weeks. Therefore, the LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlm is stable in the lithium-air cell and the interface resistance between the composite electrolyte ﬁlm and the saturated LiCl aqueous solution is not so high. Figure 8b shows the change in the C under lithium electrode potential by cycling at 0.4 mA cm air using the platinum reference electrode. The cell was discharged for 2 h and rested for 0.25 h, and then charged for 2 h and rested for 0.25 h. The lithium metal electrode with the LAGTP-epoxy resin composite lithium conducting solid electrolyte ﬁlm showed excellent cyclic performance at room temperature under air. The over-potential for lithium deposition is comparable with the IR drop estimated from the electrode resistance, but a slightly high over-potential and strange potential behavior were observed for lithium stripping from the lithium electrode. The strange potential behavior may be due to irregular lithium deposition on the lithium electrode in the LiPF6-EC-DEC electrolyte.