All-solid-state lithium-sulfur batteries show increasing potential for practical applications in portable electronic devices and electric vehicles due to their high energy density, low cost, and environmental friendliness. However, the large interface impedance of solid-state lithium-sulfur batteries leads to low capacity and short cycle life. In this study, a hierarchical design of sandwiched NASICON-type Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) solid-state electrolyte with surface modification by a solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) is proposed for high-performance lithium-sulfur batteries. Due to the unique hierarchical structure of the solid electrolyte in which SPE (PEO: LiTFSI = 8: 1) layer is coated on NASICON solid electrolyte surface, the direct contact between lithium metal anode and LATP solid electrolyte can be avoided, and the improved interfacial property between the electrolyte and electrodes can be achieved. As a result, the as-prepared solid-state Li|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li symmetrical cell exhibits a stable cycling performance. Moreover, solid-state lithium-sulfurized polyacrylonitrile (SPAN) battery based on such electrolyte delivers an ultrahigh initial discharge capacity of 1793 mAh g-1 at 75 °C with high coulombic efficiencies and stable cycling performance. The present work provides a creative design of battery configuration for manufacturing high-performance and safe solid-state lithium-sulfur batteries.
Li-S rechargeable batteries have been regarded as one of the most promising candidates for the next-generation energy storage systems because of their high theoretical capacity of 1672 mAh g-1 and energy density of 2600 Wh kg-1 [1,2]. Despite great efforts have been made during the past three decades, traditional liquid Li-S batteries still suffer from sever safety problems and rapid capacity attenuation due to the insulating nature of sulfur, the dissolution-derived polysulfide shuttle reaction, large volume change and the formation of lithium dendrites [3-5]. Particularly, under the situation of large charge/discharge current, uneven deposition of lithium ions in liquid Li-S battery accelerates the growth of lithium dendrites, which seriously deteriorates cycle performance of batteries [6, 7]. 
In order to solve the problem of lithium dendrite growth, numerous methods have been adopted such as introducing lithium salts or additives into liquid electrolytes [8, 9], surface modification of anode [10-13] and replacing liquid electrolytes with solid electrolytes [14, 15]. Among them, developing solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) to replace conventional organic liquid electrolytes to explore all-solid-state batteries has broad prospects for further advances in high-performance energy storage systems due to good mechanical properties, non-combustibility and large electrochemical window of SSEs [16-19]. Inorganic NASICON-type Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 (LATP) ceramic electrolytes are widely studied because of their high ionic conductivity, low cost, wide electrochemical voltage window and excellent stability to water and air [20-24]. Nevertheless, in traditional solid-state battery, there is a large gap between the electrolyte and lithium anode due to the solid-state nature of both electrolyte and anodes, which would lead to an increase in the interface impedance of solid-state batteries as well as a large polarization, resulting in poor cyclic stability and low capacity of solid-state batteries [25, 26]. Furthermore, poor processability issues exist in LATP SSEs associated with their chemical instabilities when contacting with lithium metal, consequently leading to poor cyclic performance [27].
To address the LATP/Li interface problem, many strategies have been proposed [28-32]. One of the effective methods is utilizing pulsed laser deposition (PLD). Hasegawa et al. sputtered a LiPON electrolyte film on the surface of the solid electrolyte to prevent the Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 electrolyte from reacting with lithium metal while providing good electrical conductivity [29]. Li et al. designed 3D fiber-network-reinforced continuous solid composite electrolyte with flexible Li+-conductive network (denoted as LATP/PAN) to enhance the electrochemical stability of the electrode/electrolyte interface [32]. However, current research work on the improvement of LATP/Li interface property in solid-state lithium-sulfur batteries is still rare, which remains a daunting challenge. Meanwhile, most reports on solid-state lithium-sulfur batteries blocked the shuttle effect by the physical properties of solid electrolytes, but the problem of polysulfide formation has not been fundamentally resolved.
In this contribution, we proposed a strategy using a PEO polymer solid electrolyte to modify LATP ceramic sheet as a sandwiched-structure electrolyte. Subsequently, high-performance all-solid-state lithium-sulfur batteries were archived through matching the electrolyte with sulfurized polyacrylonitrile (SPAN) cathode [33-35]. SPAN cathode is a typical sulfur-containing compound, which does not form long-chain polysulfides during discharge, and instead, sulfide is chopped off the polymer-bound sulfur chains to directly from Li2S. This high reversibility of this process accounts for great cycle stability and high discharge capacity of SPAN cathodes [33]. By introducing a solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) layer on the surface of the LATP ceramic sheet, the interface resistance between the LATP and electrodes is effectively reduced and the direct contact between the LATP and lithium anode is avoided, thereby preventing the violent reaction of the electrolyte and lithium anode. As-prepared Li|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li symmetric battery demonstrates the importance of SPE for stabilizing interface between LATP and lithium anode. More importantly, combining the characteristic of SPAN that it does not generate polysulfide during discharging with the advantages of SSE, solid state lithium-sulfur battery assembled with the SPE-LATP-SPE solid electrolyte, SPAN cathode and lithium anode achieves superior cycle performance. 
Nanosized Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 powder is prepared by mechanical milling method. Li2CO3, TiO2, Al2O3, NH4H2PO4 are used as starting materials, then mixed in a zirconia jar according to a mass ratio of chemicals: zirconia balls as 1:10. The planetary ball milling treatment is carried out on the mixture in alcohol solvent with a rotation speed of 500 rpm for 18 h. As obtained LATP precursor is placed in a muffle furnace for heat treatment. The LATP precursor powder is first sintered at 350 °C for 2 h to remove residual organics, then sintered at 900 °C for 5 h to obtain LATP ceramic powder. In order to reduce the particle size of the ceramic powders, the sintered LATP ceramic powder is ball-milled by a planetary ball mill for 6 h with 300 rpm. The nanosized powders are cold pressed into pellets with a diameter of 12 mm and then sintered at 900 °C for 8 h in the air to obtain dense LATP ceramic pellet. PEO (Mw=600000, Sigma Aldrich) and lithium bis-trifluoromethanesulfonate (LiTFSI) (99.99 %, Sigma-Aldrich) with an EO:Li molar ratio of 8:1 are dissolved in acetonitrile solvent and stirred in an argon-filled glovebox for 12 hours to obtain a uniform SPE precursor solution [36]. In order to prepare the SPE membrane on the surface of LATP, a suitable amount of SPE precursor solution is dropped on one surface of the LATP ceramic pellet by a simple method such as drop coating. The sample is then transferred to a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 12 h to evaporate the organic solvent. A sandwich-structured solid electrolyte can be prepared by this simple interfacial modification and defined as SPE- LATP-SPE electrolyte.
Rigaku, D/max diffractometer via X-ray diffraction (XRD) is used to characterize the crystal phases of LATP powder and pellet with 2θ in the range of 10-90°. Morphology of solid-state electrolyte and element distribution are observed by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) (ZEISS SUPRA55) and an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of the SPE-LATP-SPE and LATP electrolyte is tested by solartron electrochemical station (1287 + 1260) within a frequency range from 10 MHz to 1 Hz with a temperature from 25 to 90 °C. The ionic conductivity of LATP and SPE-LATP-SPE electrolyte are calculated by the following Eq (1): Where L (cm) is the thickness of LATP pellet and SPE-LATP-SPE, A (cm2) is the area, where electrolyte and R (Ω) is the bulk resistance of electrolytes.
Through applying a DC voltage of 0.01 V to the electrolyte and recording the current versus time curve and the spectra of electrolyte resistance before and after polarization, the lithium transference number t can be calculated by equation (2): Where I0 and Is are initial and steady-state current, R0 and Rs are the resistance values before and after polarization. CR2032-type Li|SPE-LATP-SPE|SPAN coin cells and symmetric Li|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li cells are assembled in an Ar-filled glove box and tested at 55 ℃ and 75 ℃. Li|SPE-LATP-SPE|SPAN coin cells are assembled with Li metal, SPE-LATP-SPE electrolyte and SPAN cathode in an argon-filled  glove box. SPAN cathode material is prepared according to the literature [34]. Polyacrylonitrile and sulfur with a mass ratio of 1:3 are mixed in a mortar and then heat a mixture in a tube furnace under the nitrogen atmosphere at 500 °C for 6 h (~40 wt% sulfur). Its element distribution is shown in Fig. S1. To fabricate SPAN cathode, SPAN powders are mixed with carbon black and polyvinylidene fluoride at a weight ratio of 70:15:15 and dissolved in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone solvent, then slurry was coated on carbon coated aluminum foil and dried at 60 °C under vacuum for 36 h. Mass loading of active material (SPAN) is about 1 mg cm-2. It is worth mentioning that all batteries need to be placed at 80 °C for 3 h before tested to make better contact between electrode and electrolyte. The battery testing system (Wuhan LAND electronics Co, China) is used to measure the galvanostatic charge/discharge performance of Li|SPE-LATP-SPE|SPAN cell within a voltage range of 1-3 V at 75 °C.
A schematic diagram of the solid-state Li-S battery model is illustrated in Fig. 1. SPAN cathode is a typical sulfur-containing compound, which was supposed to be efficient to eliminate polysulfide dissolution and the shuttling effect. During the reaction process, sulfur dehydrogenates PAN forms a conductive main chain similar to polyacetylene. Meanwhile, high-polarity-CN functional groups circularly form at the melting state, resulting in a thermally stable heterocyclic compound in which elemental sulfur is embedded [33]. SPAN molecular structure is composed of a polysulfide chain and two polypyridyl rings. A PEO-based polymer electrolyte layer is introduced onto the interface between the electrodes and the NASICON-type LATP ceramic electrolyte. The PEO-based polymer electrolyte changes from a solid state to a viscoelastic state at temperature above 60 ℃, which can serve as a buffer layer to improve the contact between electrodes and solid electrolyte. Moreover, the reaction between NASICON-type electrolyte and lithium metal could be hindered by PEO layer, significantly decreasing the interfacial impedance.
Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 (x = 0.3) is chosen and prepared as electrolyte in this work due to its superior electrochemical performance among NASICON-type LATP electrolytes. The microstructure and morphology of LATP powders prepared by mechanical ball milling are showed in Fig. S2a. LATP powders (calcined at 900 °C for 6 h after ball milling) exhibit a homogeneous distribution of particle size with an average size of 200 nm. The cross-section SEM image of LATP ceramic fragments after sintering indicates that LATP particles closely contact with each other to form a dense structure (Fig. S2b). The density of the LATP ceramic electrolyte sheet obtained by the drainage method is up to 96 %, indicating that the ceramic electrolyte sheet with high density can be obtained by cold pressing sintering method. The cross-section SEM image of LATP pellet at higher magnification (inset of Fig. S2b) further shows that the LATP pellet has a dense structure, which can effectively block the vertical growth of lithium dendrites and provide continuous ionic pathways. Moreover, the XRD patterns of LATP powder and ceramic disk (Fig. S2c) reveal that all the diffraction peaks are indexed to the phase of LiTi2(PO4)3 (a primary NASICON structure with the rhombohedral lattice in space group R3̅c). Compared with LATP powder, the XRD pattern of LATP pellet shows an increase in the peak intensity without any other peaks observed, which indicates that LATP exhibits good stability to water and air. The particle size distribution curve (Fig. S2d) of the LATP powder suggests that LATP powders mainly possess a particle size of around 100 nm.ig. 2a indicates a piece of polished LATP ceramic disk prepared in this work which presents a relatively clean surface, and the polished LATP ceramic sheet possesses a thickness of 360 µm. However, the simple polishing method cannot completely solve the roughness surface of LATP pellets (Fig. 2b). The rough surface of LATP ceramics could deteriorate the stability when matching with lithium metal. After the introduction of SPE on its surface (Fig. 2c), the PEO-based polymer electrolyte layer evenly covers on the surface of the LATP ceramic sheet, which effectively fills the pores of ceramic sheet surface. Furthermore, the cross-section SEM image of such a sandwich-type electrolyte (Fig. 2d) shows that the SPE evenly attaches on the surface of the ceramic sheet. The EDS images (Fig. 2e-h) further reveal a sandwiched element distribution since PEO polymer provides numerous C-O bonds, which are the main source of carbon (C), and LATP provides aluminum (Al), phosphorus (P) and titanium (Ti) elements. 
The poor stability between solid electrolytes and lithium anode has become a critical factor limiting the development of solid-state lithium batteries. In order to investigate the electrochemical compatibility and stability of the prepared SPE-LATP-SPE solid electrolyte with lithium metal, a symmetrical lithium battery is assembled and tested at 75 °C. For comparison, bare LATP ceramic sheets are also tested in the same condition. The continuously increasing interface resistance between the LATP pellet and Li anode in Li|LATP|Li symmetrical battery is presented at Fig. 3a, which indicates that the LATP electrolyte reacts violently with lithium metal. Because of the strong -oxidizability of Ti4+ in LATP, the surface of lithium anode is significantly oxidized after contacting with LATP, and the high-temperature environment further aggravates the reaction, resulting in a continuous increase in interface impedance with reaching 60,000 Ω after 5 days. As the battery-placement time increased, the symmetric battery assembled with SPE-LATP-SPE solid electrolyte shows excellent stability since the PEO-based polymer electrolyte layer effectively isolates the LATP with lithium metal anode, consequently preventing the reaction between them. Stable and intimate contact between the polymer and the lithium metal anode endows Li|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li with outstanding stability, showing low volume and interface impedances (Fig. 3b). The interface impedance experiences a slight increase in the initial period and stabilizes at a low value of 270 Ω for the next 4 days. In order to further investigate the interfacial stability and polarization voltage at different current densities, Li|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li and Li|LATP|Li symmetrical batteries are examined through a combination of direct current (DC) cycling at 75 °C. The cyclic stability of Li|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li symmetric battery at current density of 0.25 mA cm-2 is shown in Fig. 3c. The Li|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li symmetric battery shows a small polarization voltage (45 mV), and flat and stable voltage plateaus for Li plating/stripping over 250 h with few fluctuations. In order to testify the role of sandwich structured SPE-LATP-SPE, Li|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li symmetric battery was disassembled after cycling. Compared with pristine Li (Fig. S3a), no Li dendrite is observed on the surface of Li anode (Fig. S3b) after 250 h cycles, which provides good evidence that the sandwich structured SPE-LATP-SPE can effectively inhibit the dendrite growth during charge/discharge cycles. In a sharp contrast, the symmetrical lithium battery assembled with a bare LATP ceramic sheet exhibits obvious changes in polarization voltage at the same current density of 0.25 mA cm-2 (Fig. 3d). The polarization voltage significantly changes from 2 V to 5 V within 6 h, which indicates that the Li|LATP|Li symmetric battery undergoes a strong interfacial reaction and the rough interface of bare LATP ceramic sheets causes the large initial polarization-voltage. As shown in Fig. 3e, current densities of 0.05 to 0.7 mA cm-2 are applied to the Li|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li symmetric battery and the corresponding polarization-voltage change is recorded. As the current density increases, the polarization voltage of the symmetric battery also increases. However, even if the current density reaches up to 0.7 mA cm-2, the symmetrical battery is not short-circuited. The high safety and durability of the battery is attributed to the synergistic effect that the dense LATP ceramic sheet effectively blocks the growth of lithium dendrites, and meanwhile the PEO polymer electrolyte layer regulates the uniform deposition of lithium and effectively hinder the reaction between LATP and Li.
As is well-known, the melting point of PEO polymer is 65 °C. In order to verify the influence of the physical state of PEO-based polymer electrolyte on symmetric battery, Li|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li symmetric batteries are electrochemically characterized at 55 °C and 75 °C, respectively, under test conditions of current densities of 0.25 mA cm-2 and 0.5 mA cm-2. As shown in Fig. S4a, the current-voltage curve of the symmetrical battery exhibits an initial polarization voltage of 300 mV at a current density of 0.25 mA cm-2, much higher than that of the Li|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li symmetric battery at 75 °C (Fig. 3c), which indicates that the viscoelastic PEO-based polymer electrolyte at 75 °C exerts more positive effect on improving the interface contact between electrodes and electrolyte since high crystallinity of the PEO-based polymer at low temperature hindering the thermal movement of the polymer segment leads to a low conductivity of the PEO-based polymer electrolyte. Moreover, the curve of Li|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li symmetrical battery (Fig. S4b) at high current density (0.5 mA cm-2) indicates that SPE-LATP-SPE solid electrolyte can withstand the large current. The polarization voltage (500 mV) after 220 h cycling (Fig. S4d) changes little compared to the initial polarization voltage (450 mV) (Fig. S4c), indicating that the battery with relative higher polarization voltage at lower temperature (55 °C) can also remain stable cycling and inhibit the growth of dendrites.The conductivity, electrochemical window and lithium ion migration number of solid electrolytes were tested and the related results are shown in Fig. 4. Fig. 4a shows the ion conductivity of SPE-LATP-SPE solid electrolyte in a temperature region from 25 °C to 90 °C. For comparison, the ionic conductivities of single-component SPE and LATP ceramic sheets were also tested under the same conditions. Due to the high crystallinity of the polymer PEO seriously hindering the transmission of lithium ion in SPE, the solid electrolyte SPE exhibits a terrible ionic conductivity (1.9×10-5 s cm-1) at room temperature. When SPE is attached as an interface layer to the LATP ceramic sheet, the conductivity is improved (4×10-5 s cm-1), but still lower than pure LATP (2.3×10-4 s cm-1). The CV curve of Li|SPE-LATP-SPE|stainless-steel coin cell at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s-1 from −1 to 6 V vs Li/Li+ at 75 °C is shown in Fig. 4b. Only redox peaks of lithium plating-stripping can be observed in the CV curve, which reveals that the SPE interface layer effectively prevents the direct contact between LATP and lithium metal. The current in the CV curve starts to increase significantly at 4.3 V, which indicates that PEO starts to oxidize at 4.3 V. Fig. 4c shows the polarization current curve of the battery after applying 10 mV voltage to Li|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li symmetric battery. After applying a voltage to the battery, the polarization current drops rapidly from the initial value I0 (22.4 µA), and reaches a stable value Is (7.9 µA) after several hours. Fig. 4d shows the impedance change of symmetrical battery before and after polarization. The AC impedance spectrum of the battery in Fig. 4d consists of two semicircles, where the semicircle in the high frequency region corresponds to the bulk impedance of the electrolyte, and the semicircle in the low frequency region corresponds to the interface impedance of the electrolyte. The corresponding tLi+ value of SPE-LATP-SPE solid electrolyte calculated according to equation (2) is 0.27. 
The solid-state battery assembled with SPAN cathode, SPE-LATP-SPE solid electrolyte and lithium metal anode is charged and discharged at 75 °C, and the charge and discharge current density is set to 0.1 C (167 μA cm-2). Fig. 5a shows the specific capacity and corresponding coulombic efficiency versus cycle number. The initial discharge capacity of the battery is up to 1793 mAh g-1, which is beyond the theoretical capacity of sulfur cathode (1675 mAh g-1) [37], and the the capacity stabilizes at around 976 mAh g-1 in the following initial cycles. After that, the capacity experiences a gradual decrease and finally reaches at 784 mAh g-1 at 120th cycle with a capacity retention of 80.1% compared to that at the 8th cycle (stable state). The surface morphology of lithium metal (Fig. S5) still remains flat and smooth after SPAN|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li solid-state lithium battery cycling, which shows that the sandwich structured SPE-LATP-SPE can effectively suppress the Li dendrite growth. The charge-discharge curves (Fig. 5b) of SPAN|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li battery show that the discharge curve of SPAN electrode only presents one platform different from the S positive discharge curve (two platforms at 2.05 V and 2.3 V), which is related to the reaction: SPAN-Sx+2Li++2e-→SPAN-Sx-1-+Li2S. The discharge voltage platform for the first cycle is 1.7 V, which gradually increased in subsequent cycles. Fig. 5c shows the cyclic-voltammogram (CV) profiles of the SPAN|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li cell with a potential initially swept in a negative direction from the 2.65 V to 1 V. During the first cathodic process, there is a cathodic peak (1.22 V), which corresponds to the first discharge voltage platform of SPAN|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li cell in Fig. 5b. Due to the complex bond formed between the sulfur and nitrogen, and the C=N double bond in the SPAN positive electrode, during the first-discharge reaction. In addition to sulfur, some of the C=C and C=N bonds in the molecular structure participate in the lithium storage reaction, resulting in a lower discharge voltage platform [38]. The cathodic peak shifts positively and divides into two peaks in the second and following scans. Because these two cathodic peaks are very close, only one discharge voltage platform is distinguished which corresponds to an average discharge voltage of 1.85 V. The rate performances of the SPAN|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li battery at 75 °C is also evaluated (Fig. 5d). Retained discharging capacities of 952.8, 692.9, 540.2, 428.4 and 362.3 mAh g-1 are obtained at the rate of 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5, 1 C, respectively, and when back to 0.1 C, the capacity is nearly to 939.7 mAh g-1. The performances of SPAN|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li battery are obviously better than some previous reports [39-40]. Excellent rate performance is attributed to the good mechanical properties and ability to direct the lithium ions uniform deposition of the SPE interface layer. The combination of SPE interface and LATP ceramics ensures that the battery to work at higher current densities.
In summary, a new solid-state lithium-sulfur battery was designed in this work, which is assembled with SPAN cathode, SPE-LATP-SPE sandwiched solid electrolyte and lithium metal anode. In the unique architecture of this hierarchical electrolyte, PEO based polymer electrolyte (EO:Li = 8: 1) layer is deposited on LATP solid electrolyte surface to avoid direct contact between lithium metal anode and LATP solid electrolyte, and also to provide a strong connection between the electrolyte and electrodes. As a result, the solid-state Li|SPE-LATP-SPE|Li symmetrical cell exhibits a stable cycling performance over 200 h. Moreover, the solid-state Lithium-SPAN batteries deliver an attractive initial discharge capacity of up to 1793 mAh g-1 at 75 °C and shows high coulombic efficiency and outstanding cyclic stability. This work provides a new idea for the structural design of solid-state lithium-sulfur batteries, showing great promise in applications of high-safety, high-energy density energy storage systems.
