Sulfate-based (SO42-)polyanion materials with low cost and ionic-conduction break fresh ground for  !rocking-chair" systems. But the  Sulfate-based (SO4 high  moisture  sensitivity  and  limited  conductivity  lead  to  their  poor  crystal  stability  and  inferior  alkaline-ion  intercalation  chemistry.  Here we report a design of graphene-based sandwich-type nanoarchitecture for sulfate. The three-dimensional graphene-based network  not  only  provides  continuous  electron/ion  pathways  for  fast  intercalation  kinetics,  but  also  effectively  protects  crystal  structure  from  deterioration  to  depress  moisture  sensitivity.  As  a  case  study,  the  hydrated  sulfate  (Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O)-graphene  composite  with  sandwich-type structure is prepared by a facile low-temperature synthesis. The depressed moisture sensitivity of hierarchical grapheneNa2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O  than  pristine  one  is  demonstrated  by  comparing  their  hydration  process,  and  moreover,  a  shell-core  hydration  mechanism  is  disclosed.  The  hierarchical  composite  exhibits  improved  electronic  conductivity  and  better  sodium/lithium  insertion  capability than the pristine one. It delivers reversible capacity of 72 and 69 mAh$g-1 with redox potentials of 3.415/3.234 V (vs. Na+/Na)  and  3.579/3.483V  (vs.  Li+/Li)  in  sodium  and  lithium  intercalation  systems,  respectively.  Moreover,  it  also  exhibits  superior  high  rate  capabilities and good cycling stability, which delivers 81% (for sodium) and 70% (for lithium) of the capacity at the 5 C rate. Therefore,  the hierarchical sandwich-type architecture is favorable to realizing superior electrochemical performance for the sulfate, which puts a  significant step forward to develop low-cost large-scale batteries.  

The development of solar and wind energy demands more  efficient  energy  storage  systems.  Among  various  options  available, electrochemical storage represents the most promising  strategy  because  of  its  flexibility,  high  energy  conversion  efficiency and easy maintenance1. Lithium ion battery, which has  the  highest  energy  density,  is  the  best  choice  for  portable  electronics  and  electric  vehicle2,3.  However,  its  application  is  limited by such disadvantages as high cost and scarce resource of  lithium. Therefore, employing other guest ion as an alternative to  lithium  ion  is  favorable  to  developing  intercalation  chemistry.  Sodium ion battery with abundant resource and low cost appears  as  a  promising  alternative  to  lithium  ion  battery4,5.  Particularly,  the  superiority  of  sodium  battery  over  lithium  counterpart  becomes  more  notable  as  applied  in  large-scale  storage  where  sustainability and cost are primary concerns. However, the larger  ionic radius of sodium than lithium makes it more difficult to find  a  suitable  host  for  fast  ion  de/intercalation.  Thus  it  is  urgent  to  discover  novel  electrode  materials  with  enhanced  ion  intercalation capability for superior electrochemical properties.  

Among  present  electrode  materials,  polyanion  materials  have  attracted  a  large  attention.  Since  1980s,  various  polyanionic  materials  such  as  silicates  (A2MSiO4)6-9,  borates  (AMBO3)10,  (AMP2O7)13-19,  and  phosphates  fluorophosphates (AMPO4F)20,21, have been extensively studied. But  the  low  operating  potentials  restrict  their  practical  application.  Knowing  that  the  redox  potential  of  an  intercalation  compound  is  associated  with  the  iono-covalency  of  metal-anion  bonding22,23,  great  efforts  have  been  made  to  search  for  more  electronegative  2-) materials  polyanions. On this background, sulfate polyanion (SO4 come  into  sight  as  a  new  member  in  the  polyanionic  family24-28.  Compared  with  other  polyanion  materials,  the  sulfates  possess  stronger  electronegativity,  which  is  favorable  to  achieving  higher  redox  potential.  Recently,  a  series  of  sulfate-based  polyanionic  LiMSO4OH27,28,  compounds  Na2M(SO4)2$nH2O29,30,  Na2M2(SO4)3 fluorosulfates  of  LiMSO4F32,33  have  been  investigated.  The  exploration  of  these  sulfate-based compounds dramatically expands the research scope of  intercalation  chemistry  and  provides  new  opportunities  for  polyanion materials. 

Especially,  a  very  recently  reported  iron-based  hydrated  sulfate,  kr%hnkite-type  Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O,  has  captured  our  attention.  The  symmetrical  arranged  SO4  tetrahedral  and  FeO6  octahedral units construct pseudolayered monoclinic structure for  Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O,  which  results  in  the  convoluted  sodium  channels and reversible ion intercalation30. As the first member of  bihydrated  sulfate  for  sodium  ion  battery,  the  discovery  of  Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O  opens  up  new  routes  for  sulfate  chemistry.  However,  facing  the  same  problems  as  other  sulfate-based  materials,  namely  the  high  moisture  sensitivity  and  limited  conductivity24,25, its crystal structure stability and electrochemical  kinetics  are  severely  restricted.  Therefore,  further  improvements  on both thermodynamic stability and fast intercalation chemistry  are still big challenges for it. 

In the "rocking-chair" system, the transports of electron and  intercalation  kinetics.  ion  are  crucial  Nanoengineering  the  ion/electron  diffusion  length  and  facilitate  their  transport34,35.  However, lower volume densities and poor connectivity between  individual particles always take place as decreasing particle size.  Thus it is highly desirable to discover new strategies to meet ever  increasing  demands  of  high  power  applications.  Constructing  three-dimensional conductive scaffold is an effective approach to  enhance electronic conductivity. The 3D scaffold not only acts as  a volume buffer but also builds continuous electron pathways36-38.  Therefore, if the sulfate nanoparticles could be assembled into a conductive  matrix  and  form  hierarchical  structure,  it  would  be  one  of  the  most  effective  approaches  towards  high  performance  electrode materials.  

Following  this  viewpoint,  we  design  and  construct  3D  graphene-based  sandwich-type  architecture  for  sulfates.  We  choose bihydrate sulfate (Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O) as a model material,  but this strategy can also be applied to other sulfates as well. A  simple  low-temperature  synthetic  approach  is  employed  to  prepare  the  hierarchical  composite.  As  schemed  in  Figure  1(a),  the  approach  starts  from  dispersion  of  graphene  nanosheet  in  distilled  water.  Then  sodium  sulfate  (Na2SO4)  and  hydrate  iron  sulfate  (FeSO4$7H2O)  with  desirable  amount  of  iron  wire  were  added  to  the  suspension.  After  the  mixture  turns  to  a  uniform  sticky  suspension,  it  was  transferred  to  an  oven  at  70  oC  after  removal of surplus iron wire for final hierarchical composite. The  low-temperature  synthesis  ensures  slowly  in-situ  crystallization  of  hydrate  sulfate,  which  results  in  the  desirable  phase  and  morphology for the target composite. 

Figure 1(b) illustrates  the  hierarchical  sandwich-type  Figure  1(b)  nanostructure  for  the  prepared  Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O-graphene  composite.  The  hydrated  sulfate  nanoparticles  uniformly  anchored on each graphene nanosheet, and all of graphene-sulfate  sheets  pile  up  layer  by  layer  to  construct  3D  sandwich-type  architecture. The graphene-based scaffold provides fast electronic  pathways  and  gives  protection  for  sulfates  against  structural  deterioration.  Therefore,  improved conductivity,  better  electrochemical  kinetics  and  enhanced  structure stability are expected.

Inspired  by  these  advantages,  the  crystal  stability  and  sodium/lithium  intercalation  chemistry  of  prepared  sandwichtype Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O-graphene composite were investigated in  this  study.  The  structure  deterioration  of  bihydrate  sulfate  is  discussed  and  a  possible  shell-core  hydration  mechanism  is  disclosed.  

A simple low-temperature synthetic approach is employed to  prepare Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O-graphene hierarchical nanostructures.  Graphene  was  produced  by  the  reduction  of  graphene  oxide  prepared by a modified Hummers method, which was purchased  from  Nanjing  XFNANO  Materials  Tech  Co.,  Ltd.  Firstly,  the  graphene nanosheet was dispersed in 10 ml distilled water under  ultrasonic  for  two  hours.  Then  equal  amount  of  sodium  sulfate  (Na2SO4)  and  hydrate  iron  sulfate  (FeSO4$7H2O)  with  desirable  amount  of  iron  wires  were  added  to  the  suspension  under  magnetic  stirring.  After  it  turns  to  a  uniform  sticky  suspension,  the mixture was transferred to an oven at 70  oC with removal of  iron  sandwich-type  Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O-graphene composite. 

Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker D8/Germany) using  Cu K( radiation was employed to identify the crystalline phase of  the material. The experiment was performed by using step mode  with a fixed time of 3 s and a step size of 0.02o. The morphology  was  observed  with  a  scanning  electron  microscope  (SEM,  HITACHI S-4700) and a transmission electron microscope (TEM,  JEOS-2010  PHILIPS).  X-ray  photoelectron  spectroscopy  (XPS,  Thermo ESCALAB 250) was employed to measure the chemical  state  of  each  element  in  the  surface.  Infrared  spectra  were  recorded  using  a  Fourier  transform  spectrophotometer  (FT-IR,  Bruker VERTEX 80/Germany). Raman spectra of the composites  were  collected  on  a  Jobin-Yvon  Labor  Raman  system  (Raman,  HR-800 HORIBA). The electronic conductivity was measured on  the  pellet  of  powder.  The  powder  was  pressed  into  a  disk  with  gold painted on both sides to ensure electrical contact. 

The  electrochemical  measurements  were  carried  out  using  coin type cells. For sodium system, the Na foil was employed as  counter and reference electrode and 1 mol)L-1 NaClO4 dissolved  in propylene carbonate (PC) was used as electrolyte. For lithium  system,  the  Li  foil  was  employed  as  counter  and  reference  electrode  and  1  mol)L-1  LiPF6  dissolved  in  the  mixture  of  ethylene carbonate (EC) and dimethyl carbonate (DMC) was used  as  electrolyte.  Galvanostatic  charge/discharge  tests  were  performed  in  the  potential  range  of  1.5~4.2  V  vs.  Na/Na+  and1.7~4.5 V vs. Li/Li+ at ambient temperature on a Land battery  testing  system  (Wuhan,  China).  Current-voltage  curves  were  conducted using a Zivelab electrochemical workstation. 

Figure  2(a)  shows  XRD  patterns  of the  pristine  Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O and hierarchical Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O-graphene  composite.  Both  materials  can  be  indexed  to  the  kr%hnkite  monoclinic structure (space group: P21/c) with the parameters of  a=5.7685(3),  b=12.9835(4),  c=5.4536(1)  *,   =105.9623(5)o  and  a=5.7712(1),  b=12.9804(6),  c=5.4558(6)  *,   =105.9380(6)o  for  pristine and hierarchical sample, respectively. Compared with the  pristine  sample,  the  hierarchical  composite  reveals  much  lower  peak densities, which can be attributed to the attachment of sulfate  particles  the  Na2Fe(SO4)2$4H2O  phase  coexists  as  a  secondary  phase  as  illustrated  in  Figure  2(b).  Based  on  the  Rietveld  results,  about  3.82%  and  3.56%  of  Na2Fe(SO4)2$4H2O  impurity  phases  were  detected in the pristine and hierarchical composite respectively.  

The  crystal  structure  of  Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O  are  illustrate  in  inset  of  Figure  2(b).  The  [Fe(SO4)2$(H2O)2]   is  constructed  through  each  [FeO6]  octahedral  sharing  four  corners  with  four  adjacent  [SO4]  tetrahedral  and  two  other  corners  contribute  to  structural  H2O  molecules.  Sodium  atoms  occupy  interstitial  positions along the [Fe(SO4)2$(H2O)2]  chains, which in turn linked  by  both  Na-O  and  hydrogen  bonds  to  construct  the  pseudolayered  structure.  Sodium  ions  can  diffusion  along  the  well-defined  convoluted  channels  in  the  framework.  Therefore,  the  structural  of  Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O  is  favorable  to  realizing  reversible sodium de/intercalation.

In  the  crystal  structure  of  Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O,  the  sulfate  units act as the polydentate ligands, which is revealed by FT-IR  spectrum.  As  displayed  in  Figure  2(c),  the  spilt  of  asymmetric  stretching (v3: 1101 cm-1) and bending (v4: 608 cm-1) mode at low  wavenumber  indicate  the  degeneration  of  pristine  peaks  for  sulfate  group.  It  demonstrates  the  overall  asymmetry  of  SO4  arrangement  and  indicates  its  connecting  role  in  the  crystal  structure.  On  the  other  hand,  obvious  broad  peaks  at  3213  and  3410  cm-1  are  observed  in  the  high  wavenumber,  which  corresponds  to  the  hydroxyl  groups  and  H2O  units.  It  further  confirms  the  enriching  hydroxyl  groups  in  the  crystal  structure.  Compared  with  the  pristine  one,  the  hierarchical  composite  displays  much  low  wavenumber  (400~1700  cm-1),  which  indicates  the  dramatically  decreased  signal of sulfate group in the sandwich-type architecture.

The  morphology  and  microstructure  of  the  hierarchical  composite were investigated by SEM and TEM observations. As  shown  in  Figure  3(d)  and  (e),  the  sulfate  nanoparticles  are  encompassed  by  graphene  sheets,  which  the  hierarchical  architecture  of  the  composite.  The  enlarged  parallel  view  of  one  the  nanoparticles  with  the  diameter  of  50-100  nm  are  well  wrapped  by large graphene sheet and results in each layer with hierarchical  structure.  The  vertical  view  of  graphene  network  (Figure  3i)  reveals that the graphene sheets pile up layer by layer to construct  3D  conductive  framework  for  stacking  sulfate  nanoparticles.  It  provides  intimate  contact  between  each  other  and  builds  continuous electron transport pathways. The vertical view of the  hierarchical composite (Figure 3g and h) further indicates that the  nanoparticles are anchored on each graphene sheet on both sides,  which  forms  the  sandwich-type  architecture  of  the  composite.  Moreover,  the  EDX  result  (Figure  3f)  suggests  that  the  element  ratio of Na: Fe: S for the hierarchical composite is 1.965:1: 2.042, which is coincided with the designed value. Therefore, the results  demonstrate  that  the  Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O-graphene  composite  with  hierarchical  sandwich-type  nanostructure  has  been  successfully constructed.  

In  order  to  investigate  the  effects  of  hierarchial  sandwich  nanostructure  on  electronic  transport  capability  for  sulfates,  the  electronic  conductivity  of  hierarchical  Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2Ographene  composite  and  pristine  Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O  are  estimated  at  room  temperature.  As  displayed  in  Figure  4(a),  the  linear  fits  of  the  current-voltage  curves  were  reached  for  both  materials.  The  calculated  electronic  conductivity  (-)  for  the  pristine  Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O  is  about  9.4.10-15  s$cm-1  at  ambient  temperature  (Figure  2b).  The  result  is  in  agreement  with  the  previously  reported  sulfates  such  as  Li2Fe(SO4)2  (-~10-16  s$cm1)26  and  Li2Co(SO4)2  (monoclinic  phase,  -~10-18  s$cm-1;  orthorhombic  phase,  -~10-14  s$cm-1)25.  All  these  electronic  conductivity  values  of  the  sulfates  were  much  lower  than  the  other  polyanion  materials,  for  example,  the  most  commonly  40: -~10-9 s$cm-1. Thus the poor conductivity has become  LiFePO4 one  of  the  most  serious  problems  for  sulfates  as  electrode  materials.  Significant  the  hierarchical composite, which increased to about 4.33.10-4 s$cm-1  at  room  temperature.  The  enhanced  conductivity  is  associated  with  the  special  architecture  of  hierarchical  composite.  The  graphene-based  skeleton  constructs  3D  conductive  network  for  sulfates  and  the  sandwich-type  structure  ensures  the  intimate  contact between nanoparticles and the conductive network. Both  facilitate  electron  transport  and  result  in  the  good  conductivity.  Thus  that  graphene-based  sandwich  hierarchical  nanostructure  is  high-efficient  to  modify  poor  electronic conductivity for sulfate-based materials.  

The  high  moisture  sensitivity  is  another  special  character  to  easy  structure  It  for  sulfate-based  compounds.  deterioration  during  storage  and  their  practical  application. This problem is even serious for the bihydrate sulfate  (Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O).  In  order  to  investigate  the  effects  of  sandwich-type architecture on the moisture sensitivity of sulfates,  we expose both the pristine and hierarchical samples to ambient  environment  and  compare  their  XRD  patterns  after  different  exposure  time  (Figure  5a).  Based  on  the  refinement  results  of  XRD  and  Na2Fe(SO4)2$4H2O  phases  in  both  samples  are  determined.  As  displayed in Figure 5(b), the ratio of Na2Fe(SO4)2$4H2O impurity  phase  increases  as  increasing exposure time. Then it turns to slow down and finally  becomes  stable  after  two  months.  The  result  indicates  that  the  structural deterioration of bihydrate sulfate is associated with the  hydration  reaction.  Compared  with  the  pristine  material,  less  structure  deterioration  was  observed  the  hierarchical  composite.  After  one  month/s  air-exposure,  the  ratio  of  Na2Fe(SO4)2$4H2O  phase  in  the  hierarchical  sample  is  only  half  of the value for the pristine sample. Even after two months, there  is still about two thirds of the original Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O phase  in  the  hierarchical  composite.  The  results  demonstrate  that  the  hierarchical  composite  has  higher  ratio  of  Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O  phase  than  pristine  one  under  same  exposure-time,  which  demonstrates  its  improved  structure  stability  and  depressed  moisture sensitivity. 

In order to investigate the process of hydration reaction, an apparent oxidation rate is calculated as following equation, where  v  is  the  apparent  hydration  rate;  m  is  the  mole  ratio  of  hydrated phase; t is the air exposure time.  

The calculation results are summarized in Figure 5(c) and a  typical  example  calculation  is  displayed  as  an  inset.  For  both  samples, apparent hydration rate initially decreases quickly as airexposure time increases. Then it turns to slow and finally become  stable.  Compared  with  pristine  sample,  the  hierarchical  one  exhibits much lower hydration rates. On the other hand, the O1s  XPS  spectra  of  pristine  sample  suggests  the  area  of  peaks  corresponding  to  H2O  and  OH after  air-exposure  are  much  higher than those of unexposure one (Figure S2). It indicates that  the  contents  of  H2O  and  OH on  the  particle  surface  increase  during  air-exposure.  Therefore,  both  apparent  reaction  rate  and  XPS spectra results suggest that the product of hydrated reaction  initially  exists  on  the  surface  of  the  particle,  which  would  embarrass  the  hydration  reaction  to  inner  part  of  particle  and  leads to decreased reaction rate as increasing time.         The above results suggest a shell-core hydration mechanism  which is depicted in Figure 6(a) and (c). When the sulfate particle  is  exposed  in  the  moisture-bearing  air, water  is  absorbed  on  the  surface of the particle and the hydration reaction thus takes place.  Initially,  the  hydrated  sulfate  (Na2Fe(SO4)2$4H2O)  scatters  randomly  on  the  surface  of  the  particle  of  Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O.  The surface occupied by the hydrated sulfate grows continuously  until  the  entire  outer  surface  is  covered  by  the  hydrated  phase.  The  hydration  rate  in  this  process  is  proportional  to  the  unhydrated  surface  area  which  continually  decreases  with  the  progression  of  the  hydration  reaction.  When  an  outer  !shell"  of  the hydrated phase is formed, the absorbed water molecules have  to penetrate through the !shell" in order to reach the inner !core"  of  the  sulfate,  thus  the  hydration  rate  dramatically  slows  down  upon  further  air  exposure.  The  hydration  rate  in  this  stage  is  inversely proportional to the thickness of the  !shell". Therefore,  the  variation  of  the  hydration  rate  predicated  by  the  shell-core  hydration mechanism is in accordance with that observed by the  experimental measurements while the air exposure of the pristine sample  is  involved.  This  is  an  indication  of  the  validity  of  the  core-shell hydration mechanism. 

For  the  hierarchical  composite,  the  graphene  nanosheet  wrapped  the  sulfate  particles,  which  decreases  the  opportunities  of direct contact between the particle and water molecule (Figure  6b). Thus the sandwich-type structure effectively embarrasses the  hydration  reaction  of  sulfate  particles,  which  results  in  the  decreased  apparent  reaction  rate.  Therefore,  the  hierarchical  composite exhibits better crystal structure stability, less moisture  sensitivity and easier storage than the pristine one. Combined all  of  the  above  results,  it  indicates  that  the  hierarchical  sandwichtype  nanoarchitecture  is  favorable  to  enhancing  the  electronic  conductivity  and  suppressing  the  moisture  sensitivity  of  the  sulfate.          Inspired  by  the  advantages  of  hierarchical  sandwich-type  architecture,  the  sodium  and  lithium  ion  intercalation  chemistry  of  hierarchical  Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O-graphene  composite  was  investigated. Figure 7 (a) and (b) shows the galvanostatic chargedischarge characteristics of the hierarchical composite in sodium  and  lithium  systems,  respectively.  It  exhibits  electrochemical  activities  in  both  systems.  For  sodium  intercalation  system  (Figure 7a), the composite exhibits an initially discharge capacity  of 72 mAh$g-1 at 0.05 C rate.  One pair of charge and discharge  potential  galvanostatic  charge/discharge  profiles,  corresponding  well  to  the  oxidation  (3.415 V vs. Na+/Na) and reduction (3.234 V vs. Na+/Na) peaks  in  the  dQ/dV  curve.  The  symmetrical  redox  potentials  indicate  the  reversible  redox  reaction  of  Fe2+/Fe3+  in  the  hydrate  sulfate  (Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O),  which  agree  well  with  those  reported  by  Barpanda  et  al30.  The  shape  of  galvanostatic  curves  changes  slightly during cycles and it turns to stable after five to ten cycles.    

Compared  with  the  sodium  system,  the  electrochemical  behaviors  of  the  sulfates  in  lithium  intercalation  system  are  different.  As  displayed  in  Figure  7  (b),  it  exhibits  only  a  low  discharge capacity of 59 mAh$g-1 in the first cycle with short and  inconspicuous potential plateau. As increases cycle number, both  the discharge capacities and potential plateau gradually increase.  After  six  cycles,  the  capacity  reach  the  maximum  value  of  69  mAh$g-1.  Then  it  turns  to  stable  and  slightly  decreases  in  the  following cycles. The change of charge/discharge characteristics  in lithium system is associated with the structure altering process  of hybrid ion systems. Barker41, Nazar42 and Banks43,44 et al have  operated the sodium intercalated materials such as Na3V2(PO4)2F3,  Na3V2(PO4)3  and  NaVPO4F  in  a  lithium  based  electrolyte  and  discovered hybrid ion batteries (HIB). Based on the rocking chair  chemistry of HIB, the gradual capacity alteration process during  initial  cycles  is  associated  with  the  initially  temporary  disorder  induced  by  hybrid  de/insertion  process,  which  would  be  suppressed and reformed by the predominately Li ion transport in  the  sequential  cycles  due  to  a  vast  excess  of  Li41-44.  And  the  stabilization  suggests  the  completion  of  the  transformation  process. Therefore, the change of charge/discharge profiles in our  study  can  be  attributed  to  the  transformation  process  from  the  hybrid  ions  (sodium  and  lithium)  transport  to  the  lithium  dominates  transport.  Evidences  from  the  ex-situ  XRD  patterns  also support this intercalation process. As displayed in Figure S3,  obvious right shift was observed in the XRD patterns after initial  cycle,  which  suggests  the  alteration  of  crystal  volume  during  initial cycle. Then the shift turns to slow and become stable after  five cycles. It suggests the structure re-construction process takes  place during initial a few cycles and completes after five cycles.  The  ex-situ  XRD results coincide well with the capacity change  during  cycles.  Two  well  defined  charge/discharge  potential  plateaus  were  observed  in  the  charge/discharge  profile  after  stabilization,  which  corresponds  to  the  oxidation  (3.579  V  vs.  Li+/Li) and reduction (3.483 V vs. Li+/Li) peaks in the dQ/dV curve. The redox potential in lithium system is higher than that in  sodium  system,  which  can  be  attributed  to  the  different  redox  potentials of two alkaline metals. Therefore, all of above results  demonstrate  that  the  Na2Fe(SO4)2$2H2O  composite  can  be  employed as the host material for Li as well as Na. 

Motivated by the good compatibilities of Na/Li ion, the high  rate  capability  and  cycling  stability  of  both  pristine  and  the  hierarchical  samples  ion  batteries  were  investigated.  A  series  of  current  densities,  from  0.05  C  to  10  C  are  employed  to  evaluate  the  rate  capability.  All  of  the  rate  capacity  tests  were  carried  out  after  five  to  ten  precycles  to  eliminate initial instability. As displayed in Figure 8 (a) and (d),  in  both  lithium/sodium  intercalation  systems,  similar  capacities  are observed for the pristine and hierarchical composites at 0.05  C  rate.  When  the  current  density  is  high  than  0.5  C,  obvious  higher capacity was observed for the hierarchical composite than  the pristine one. As the current densities increases, the differences  between two samples become more significant. For example, the  hierarchical  composite  delivers  63.5  and  49.6  mAh$g-1  of  the  capacities at the 1 C and 10 C rates in sodium battery. They are  higher  than  those  of  the  pristine  material,  which  only  delivers  58.4 and 35.2 mAh$g-1 of capacities at 1 C and 10 C, respectively.  Moreover, both materials exhibits better properties in sodium ion  system  than  those  in  lithium  ion  system,  especially  at  high  rate  (Figure  8b  and  e).  For  example,  the  hierarchical  composite  exhibits the capacity of 55.3 and 39.4 mAh$g-1 in the sodium ion  battery at 5 C and 20 C rate, corresponding 81% and 57% of the  capacity at 0.05 C. The values are higher than those in lithium ion  battery,  which  are  47.9  and  27.1  mAh$g-1  at  5  C  and  20  C  corresponding to only 70% and 40% of capacity at 0.05  C. The  inferior  property  of  sodium-containing  materials  in  lithium  ion  system  have  also  been  observed  in  previous  reports  on  Na3V2(PO4)3,  NaCo(PO4)2P2O7,  Na7V4(P2O7)4(PO4),  et  al41-44.  It  is proposed to be associated with the structure change induced by 

On  the  other  hand,  the  hierarchical  composite  also  exhibit  better cycling property than the pristine one (Figure 8c and f). At  the  5  C  rate,  higher  cycling  stability  of  92%  and  85%  are  obtained  for  the  hierarchical  composite  in  sodium  and  lithium  system  respectively,  which  are  higher  than  those  of  the  pristine  one (77% for sodium and 63% for lithium system). On the basis  of above results, the superb high rate property and good cycling  stability  of  graphene-sulfate  composite  can  be  attributed  to  the  advantages  of  the  hierarchical  sandwich-type  architecture  as  illustrated  in  Figure  1.  The  3D  graphene-based  framework  constructs  conductive  network  for  the  sulfates,  which  provides  continuous  electron/ion  pathway  and  guarantees  the  effective  electron  contact  upon  prolonged  cycling.  Therefore,  is  favorable  to  the  fast  electrochemical  kinetics  and  stable  cycling  property.  

4 Conclusions 

In  summary,  a  graphene-based  sandwich-type  structure  has  been  designed  and  fabricated  to  develop  high-performance  sulfate-based  hierarchical  nanoarchitecture  consisting  of  3D  graphene  network  and  sulfate  nanoparticles effectively addresses the inherent problems such as  intrinsically  low  electronic  conductivity  and  high  moisture  sensitivity  in  the  sulfate  chemistry.  As  a  case  study,  the  hierarchical  composite  was  constructed. It exhibits good sodium/lithium insertion capability,  superior  high  rate  property  and  depressed  moisture  sensitivity.  The  improved  properties  are  attributed  to  3D  conductive  framework and hierarchical sandwich architecture, which provide  continuous electronic pathways for fast kinetics and gives strong  protection  for  sulfates  against  structure  deterioration.  Therefore,  the  graphene-based  hierarchical  sandwich-type  architecture  is  demonstrated  to  be  a  promising  approach  for  sulfate-based  materials,  in  view  of  wide  validity,  superior  electrochemical  performance and easy storage. 
