We here describe the extraordinary performance of NASICON Na3V2(PO4)3-carbon nanofibers  (NVP-CNF) composites with ultra-high power and excellent cycling performance. NVP-CNFs  are composed of CNFs at the center part and partly embedded NVP nanoparticles in the shell.  We first report this unique morphology of NVP-CNFs for the elec-trode material of secondary  batteries as well as general energy conversion materials. Our NVP-CNFs show not only a high  discharge  capacity  of  ~88.9  mAh  g-1  even  at  a  high  current  density  of  50  C  but  also  ~93%  cyclic  retention  property  after  300  cycles  at  1C.  The  superb  kinetics  and  excellent  cycling  performance  of  the  NVP-CNFs  are  attributed  to  the  facile  migration  of  Na  ions  through  the  partly  exposed regions of NVP nanoparticles  that directly  contact with an elec-trolyte  as  well  as the fast electron transfer along the conducting CNF pathways.   

Rapid  advancements  in  renewable  energy  sources—including  solar,  wind,  water,  etc.—have  encouraged  the  development  of  reliable  energy  storage  systems  (ESSs).1,2  Up  to  now,  lithium  ion  batteries  (LIBs)  have  been  considered  as  one  of  the  most  attractive ESSs owing to their high energy/power densities and  stable  cycling  performance.  However,  the  growing  concern  about  the  exhaustion  of  lithium  resources  and  the  subsequent  increase in their cost have restricted the application of LIBs to  large-scale  power  sources  including  ESSs.3,4  On  the  contrary,  Na ion batteries (NIBs) are a leading candidate for new energy  storage  and  powering  systems  necessary  for  large  appliances  because  of  the  higher  abundance  of  Na  resources  (Na  is  the  fourth  most  abundant  element  in  the  earth’s  crust),  their  environmental  benignity,  and  intercalation  chemistry to LIBs.5,6 However, the low ionic mobility of Na in  the  crystal structure of  cathode  materials for NIBs, induced  by  the larger ionic radius of Na compared with lithium, has limited  the  practical  application  of  NIBs.  In  the  development  of  high-performance  cathode  materials  for  NIBs  should be considered as a priority for the commercialization of  (e.g.,  NaxCoO2,7  NIBs.  Various  Na0.44MnO2,8,9  and  Na4Fe(CN)6/C12)  have  been  reported,  but  they  have  suffered  from  long-term  cycling  performance.  In  spite  of  these  drawbacks,  the  interest  in  the  cathode  materials  with  3-D  open  frameworks  has  increased  owing to their large interstitial sites for accommodating Na ions  during cycling.13  Na3M2(XO4)3  with  a  Na  super  ionic  conductor  (NASICON)  framework  is  a  typical  example  of  an  open-structured  cathode  material  for  NIBs.14  In  particular,  Na  vanadium  phosphate, Na3V2(PO4)3  (NVP),  has  attracted  great  attention  thanks  to  its  inherently  high  ionic  conductivity  and  high  operating  voltage  (~3.4V vs. Na+/Na) that corresponds to V4+/V3+ redox couples.  According  to  previous  reports,  however,  the  poor  electronic  conductivity  and  large  particle  size  of  NVP  tend  to  lower  its  electrochemical  performance.15,16  Hence,  a  new  strategy  is  required  to  realize  ultra-high  power  NVP  by  enhancing  its  electronic  conductivity  and  shortening  the  diffusion  length  of  Na ions inside it.  One  of  the  most  common  and  effective  ways  to  improve  the  electronic  conductivity  of  NASICON-structured  cathode  materials is to coat the conductive carbon layers on the surfaces  of  these  materials.17-21  However,  the  migration  of  Na  ions  through  interfaces  between  cathode  materials  and  electrolyte  could  be  hindered  by  the  thick  and  uniform  carbon  layers.22,23  This  double-sideness  of  carbon  coating  made  us  consider  another structure for NVP-carbon composites. We have noticed  that  the  structural  characteristics  of  anode  material-1D  carbon  composites  based  on  carbon  nanotube  (CNT)  and  so  on  significantly  contributed  to  their  excellent  electrochemical  performances.  Actually,  the  nano-sized  anode  materials  well  grown  on  the  surface  of  CNT  demonstrated  greatly  improved  kinetic  properties.24  So,  in  the  viewpoint  of  high  electron  conduction  and  facile  Na  ion  transport,  this  structure  looks  clearly fascinating when it is adopted for the electrode material  of  LIBs  or  NIBs.  Because  this  structure  has  been  made  primarily  through  precipitation  until  now,  it  has  been  rarely  reported for the cathode materials of LIBs or NIBs.  Here,  toward  facile  Na  ion  migration  and  rapid  electronic  conduction,  we  report  on  a  distinctive  composite  structure  in  which  NVP  nanoparticles  are  partly  embedded  in  carbon  nanofibers  (NVP-CNF).  The  opposite  side  of  partly  embedded  NVP nanoparticles was directly exposed to an electrolyte. This unique  morphology  of  NVP-CNF  not  only  provides  fast  electron  transfer  channels  along  the  CNF  but  also  enables  Na  ions to readily come from the electrolyte through the regions of  NVP exposed to the electrolyte. In addition, the short diffusion  length of Na ions in the NVP nanoparticles can make a positive  effect  on  the  kinetics  of  NVP-CNF.  Consequently,  the  CNFinduced  high  electronic  transfer  and  facile  Na  ion  migration  through  the  partly  embedded  NVP  particles  enabled  an  impressive  improvement  in  the  electrochemical  properties  (capacity,  rate  capability,  and  cycling  performance)  of  NVPCNF  cathode  materials.  NVP-CNF  was  prepared  by  electrospinning  method  followed  by  thermal  treatment.  Here,  we could make a difference in its final morphology by changing  the  calcination  time  from  4h  (NVP-CNF-4h)  and  to  6h  (NVPCNF-6h).    Experimental  Preparation  of  NVP-CNF-4h  and  NVP-CNF-6h  by  electrospinning  method.  To  prepare  the  electrospinning  solution,  stoichiometric  amounts  of  NH4VO3,  NH4H2PO4,  and  CH3COONa were mixed with 5 mL 14 wt% citric acid solution  and  stirred  for  4  h  at  70oC.  Following  this,  the  prepared  NVP  precursor  solution  was  added  to  4  mL  of  DI  water  solution  containing  1  g  of  poly-(vinylpyrrolidone)  (PVP,  Mw  =  1  300  000). The mixed solution then stirred for 4 h. The mixture was  immediately  loaded  into  a  plastic  syringe  equipped  with  a  27gauge  needle  made  of  plastic.  The  needle  was  connected  to  a  high-voltage  supply  that  generated  a  DC  voltage  of  22.5  kV.  The feeding rate for the precursor solution was 0.2 mL h-1 using  a  syringe  pump,  and  the  needle-to-collector  distance  was  7.5  cm.  The  electrospinning  process  was  conducted  in  air.  The  electrospun fiber products were annealed at 800oC for 4 h and 6  h in an Ar atmosphere at a ramp rate of 2oC min-1 to yield NVPCNF-4h and NVP-CNF-6h, respectively.  Characterization.  The  crystal  structure  of  NVP-CNF-4h  and  NVP-CNF-6h  were  characterized  by  an  X-ray  diffractometer  (Rigaku  Ultima  IV).  The  wavelength  selected  for  the  experiments  was  CuKα  radiations.  The  diffractometry  wavelength  was  calibrated  with  an  external  Si  standard.  Data  were  taken  over  the  range  10-60°  at  a  2θ  step  of  0.02º.  The  morphological  structure  and  microstructure  of  the  NVP-CNF  were  observed  by  a  field-effect  scanning  electron  microscope  (JEOL  JSM-6700F,  operated  at  15  kV)  and  a  transmission  electron  microscope  (JEOL  JEM-3010,  operated  at  300  kV).  The  carbon  content  of  the  composite  and  characteristics  were  determined  by  thermogravimetric  analysis  (Perkin  Elmer,  STA6000) and Raman spectroscopy (MonoRa 750i/ELT10000),  respectively.  Electrochemical measuremetns Electrodes were fabricated by  mixing  active  material  (NVP-CNF-4h  and  NVP-CNF-6h,  respectively),  acetylene  black,  and  polyvinylidene  fluoride  (PVDF)  at  a  weight  ratio  of  75  :  10  :  15  using  Nmethylpyrrolidone  (NMP)  as  a  solvent.  The  resulting  slurries  were  pasted  onto  Al  foils  and  then  dried  in  a  vacuum  oven  at  120oC  for  5  h.  After  drying,  the  electrode  foils  were  pressed  and then punched into a rectangle shape. The loading density of  active material was 1.9 mg cm-2. The electrochemical properties  of the prepared electrodes were evaluated using CR 2032 cointype  cells  assembled  in  an  argon-filled  box.  Na  metal  foil  was  used  as  a  counter  electrode,  and  1M  NaPF6  in  ethylene  carbonate  (EC)  and  diethyl  carbonate  (DEC)  (1:1,  v/v)  was  employed  as  the  electrolyte. 

The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the synthesized NVPCNF composites are shown in Fig. 1a. All the diffraction peaks  of  NVP-CNF  were  well  matched  to  the  reference  pattern  for  NVP with the rhombohedral R-3c space group.14,25  The  crystal  structure  of  NVP  is  depicted  in  Fig.  1b.  The  VO6  octahedron links via corners sharing with tetrahedral PO4 units,  which  leads  to  the  3D  [V2(PO4)3]3 framework.  Na  ions  are  occupied  in  two  different  sites  having  different  oxygen  environments:  Na(1)  and  Na(2)  interstitial  sites  with  six and  eight-fold coordination, respectively.26 As reported by Weixin’s  group,  the  Na(2)  sites  are  relatively  weakly  connected  to  surrounding  oxygen  atoms  when  compared  with  Na(1)  sites.  Thus, the Na ions located in Na(2) sites are primarily involved  in the electrochemical properties of NVP.27 The stable and large  Na(2) sites formed in the crystal structure of NVP suppress the  stress/strain  that  occurs  when  Na  ions  are  diffused  into/out  of  NVP crystals.   

Even though  most  of  composite  nanofibers  had  the  above-mentioned  structural  characteristics  after 4h calcination, some of them have already shown not only  NVP  layer  agglomeration  but  also  the  following  formation  of  uneven  surface.  This  uneven  distribution  of  NVP  and  carbon  observed at NVP-CNF-4h was confirmed by energy dispersive  X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) line scanning results given in Fig. S4.  This  clearly  proves  that  NVP-CNF  starts  to  form  NVP  crystal  and  thereby  the  morphological  feature  of  our  final  NVP-CNF  composites  somewhat  appears  around  4h  calcination  (Fig.  3c).  Finally,  the  outer  NVP  region  completely  changed  into  the  spherical NVP particles partly embedded in the inner CNF as a  result  of  a  phase  separation  after  6h  heat  treatment,  and  thereafter  the  advantageous  structural feature of NVP-CNF for  facile Na ion migration as well as fast electron conduction has  been completed as shown in Fig. 3d.     

Fig.  2  demonstrates  the  morphological  characteristics  of  the  NVP-CNF-6h  investigated  by  electron  microscopy.  The  field  emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) image of the  NVP-CNF-6h  showed  a  uniform  distribution  of  NVP-CNF  nanofibers  (Fig.  2a  and  S1).  Moreover,  from  the  transmission  electron  microscope  (TEM)  images  shown  in  Fig.  2b  and  2c,  we found that the CNF networks constructed the main stream of  NVP-CNF  composites,  and  NVP  nanoparticles  (50–200  nm  in  diameter)  were  irregularly  dangled  onto  the  CNF  stem.  The  high-resolution  TEM  (HRTEM)  image  of  the  NVP-CNF  exhibited a distinct lattice fringe, indicative of single crystalline  NVP  (Fig.  2d).  The  width  of  6.19  Å  between  neighboring  lattice  fringes  corresponds  to  (0  1  2)  planes  of  NVP,  while  no  periodic atomic arrangements were observed in CNF regions in  the  HRTEM  image.  However,  the  Raman  spectroscopy  of  the  NVP-CNF  shown  in  Fig.  S2a  revealed  that  the  CNFs  were  comprised  of  crystalline  carbon  (G-band)  and  disordered  carbon  (D-band).28  Specific  signals  for  NVP  were  also  observed in the  Raman spectra.29 The  amount  of  carbon in the  NVP-CNF  was  ~8.34  wt%,  as  indicated  by  thermogravimetric  analysis  (Fig.  S2b).  Herein,  no  carbon  was  found  on  the  surfaces  of  NVP  nanoparticles  that  were  exposed  to  an  electrolyte.  Instead,  NVP  nanoparticles  were  partly  embedded  in  the  CNF  networks  (Fig.  2c  and  2d).  Considering  that  a  thick/dense carbon coating layer might hinder Na ion migration  between  the  active  material  and  an  electrolyte,  the  unique  morphology  of  our  NVP-CNF  can  maximize  ionic  conductivity  without  sacrificing  its  electronic  conductivity  by  partial adhesion between NVP nanoparticles and CNFs.  

Fig.  3  (a)  Schematic  diagram  of  formation  process  of  NVPCNF composite. TEM images of (b, c) NVP-CNF-4h observed  at two different points and (d) final NVP-CNF-6h.    Fig.  3a  presents  the  schematic  diagram  for  the  formation  process  of  the  NVP-CNF  composite,  which  was  clearly  arranged  by  comparing  the  morphological  difference  between  NVP-CNF-4h  and  NVP-CNF-6h.  Fig.  S3  the  representative  TEM  images  of  NVP-CNF-4h.  Unlike  NVPCNF-6h  (Fig.  2),  NVP-CNF-4h  contained  smooth  nanofiber  surface  with  little  roughness.  The  morphological  change  of  NVP-CNF  depending  on  heating  time  demonstrated  how  the  unique  morphology  NVP-CNF-6h  was  formed  with  a  simple  electrospinning  route.  At  the  initial  stage  for  calcination,  Fig.  3b indicates that the outer thick layer with ~ 65 nm thickness is  composed  of  NVP  crystals  that  include  ~6  nm  carbon  coating  layer on its surface.

Fig.  4  (a)  Initial  galvanostatic  (0.1  C)  voltage  profiles,  (b)  capacity  retention  of  discharge  capacities  at  various  current  rates (0.5 to 50 C-rates), (c) long-term cycling performance  (1  C) up to 300 cycles and (d) diffusion resistance of NVP-CNF4h and NVP-CNF-6h calculated from GITT curves.    The  electrochemical  properties  of  the  NVP-CNF  composites  are shown in Fig. 4, which were measured in a voltage range of  2.7–4.0  V  vs.  Na+/Na.  Benefiting  from  morphological  characteristic,  better  electrochemical  performance  than  NVP-CNF-4h  in  terms  of  initial discharge capacity, rate capability, and long-term cycling  performance. The galvanostatic (0.1 C-rate) voltage profiles of  the NVP-CNF-4h and NVP-CNF-6h featured a voltage plateau  at  ~3.4  V  that  corresponded  to  a  V4+/V3+  redox  reaction.  (Fig.  4a). In this voltage plateau region, the material undergoes twophase  reaction  between  Na3V2(PO4)3  and  Na1V2(PO4)3  (Fig.  S5).30  The  initial  discharge  capacity  of  NVP-CNF-6h  was  ~112.5  mAh  g-1  at  0.1  C-rate,  quite  comparable  to  the  theoretical capacity (117.6 mAh g-1) of NVP. In particular, the  maintenance of high capacity (~88.9 mAh g-1) of NVP-CNF-6h  even  at  an  extremely  high  current  density  of  50  C-rate  should  be  noted  and  emphasized,  which  coincided  with  ~79%  of  its  initial capacity measured at 0.1 C-rate (Fig. 4b). In contrast, the discharge  capacity  of  NVP-CNF-4h  rapidly  decreased  as  a  function  of  the  applied  current  density;  it  dropped  to  less  than  20  mAh  g-1  at  a  current  density  of  30  C-rate.  Here,  we  can  suggest  that  the  superior  rate  capability  of  NVP-CNF-6h  to  NVP-CNF-4h is mainly attributed to the unique morphology of  the  NVP-CNF-6h,  as  previously  discussed  in  Fig.  2  and  3.  As  observed  in  Fig.  4c,  NVP-CNF-6h  maintained  ~93%  of  its  initial  discharge  capacity  cycled  at  1  C  even  after  300  cycles.  On the other hand, NVP-CNF-4h showed ~78% retention of its  initial capacity just after 100 cycles (see inset of Fig. 4c). This  stable cycling performance of NVP-CNF-6h is very remarkable,  because  most  of  cathode  materials  for  NIBs  undergo  serious  capacity  decay  during  cycling.  Further  evidence  for  the  enhancement  in  kinetic  properties  of  NVP-CNF-6h  was  provided  by  the  galvanostatic  intermittent  titration  technique  (GITT) curves of NVP-CNF (Fig. S6). The diffusion resistance  of  NVP-CNF  could  be  estimated  from  the  difference  between  the open circuit voltage (OCV) and the constant current voltage  (CCV) obtained from GITT results.  Resistance is  known to  be  correlated  with  voltage  polarization  by  Ohm’s  law  (R=∆V/I).  Herein, we excluded the voltage polarization linked to IR-drop  resistances that related to internal resistance of the material (Fig.  S6)    only  to  measure  the  change  of  diffusion  resistance.  The  calculated  diffusion  clearly  demonstrates  the kinetic  difference between NVP-CNF-4h  and  NVP-CNF-6h.  In  the  initial  stage  of  charge  reaction,  NVPCNF-4h looks like having a serious difficulty to extract Na ions  from  NVP  structures.  Actually,  the  calculated  diffusion  resistance of NVP-CNF-4h was three times higher than that of  NVP-CNF-6h.  Even  though  both  samples  showed  similar  diffusion  behaviors  during  V4+/V3+  redox  reaction,  NVP-CNF4h  went  through  eight  times  higher  diffusion  resistance  compared  to  NVP-CNF-6h  to  extract  two  formula  units  of  Na  ions completely in the last stage of charge reaction. The kinetic  superiority of NVP-CNF-6h was also verified when Na ions reinserted  into  NVP  structure.  Na  ions  easily  migrated  into  not  only NVP-CNF-4h but also NVP-CNF-6h in the initial stage of  discharge.  However,  NVP-CNF-4h  eventually  underwent  a  sudden  surge  of  diffusion  resistance  in  the  last  stage  of  discharge  reaction.  Fig.  S7  proves  that  NVP-CNF-6h  is  much  superior  terms  of  electronic  conductivity.  To  further  demonstrate  the  merit  of  our  final  morphology,  we  prepared  the  electrodes  without  acetylene  black  and  galavanostatically  charged  and  discharged  them  at  0.1C  (Fig.  S8).  In  spite  of  the  absence  of  acetylene  black,  the  capacity of NVP-CNF-6h electrode without conducting agent at  0.1C  nearly  approaches  that  of  conducting  agent-incorporated  electrodes.  However,  NVP-CNF-4h  electrode  without  conducting  agent  showed  significantly  decreased  capacity  and  much higher overpotential. The difference between NVP-CNF6h  and  NVP-CNF-4h  seems  to  well  demonstrate  that  our  suggested  final  morphology  the  electrochemical  properties  of  electrode  materials.  Hence,  we  believe  that  the  improved  electrochemical  performance  of  NVP-CNF-6h  can  result  from  the  facile  migration  of  Na  ions  through  its  unique  structure  that  NVP  nanoparticles  are  partly  embedded  into  CNFs  and  fast  electron  supply  along  CNFs  toward NVP nanoparticles.      Conclusion    In  summary,  we  succeeded  in  realizing  NVP-CNF  composites  with  ultra-high  power  and  excellent  cycling  performance  by  electrospinning  process  followed  by  the  regulated  heat treatment.  The  NVP-CNFs  were  comprised  of  CNFs  at  the  center  of  the  NVP-CNFs  and  partially  embedded  NVP  nanoparticles onto the CNFs. In this characteristic morphology  of  NVP-CNFs,  while  CNFs  acted  as  a  backbone  for  providing  electronic  conducting  pathways  toward  the  partially  embedded  NVP nanoparticles, the opposite NVP region that were exposed  to and directly contacted with an electrolyte improved the ionic  conductivity  of  Na  ions  into/out  of  NVP  nanocrystals.  Thus,  this  unique  shape  of  NVP-CNF  exhibited  extraordinary  electrochemical performances, which have been unprecedented  to  date  for  the  cathode  materials  of  NIBs.  Our  NVP-CNF  not  only  showed  a  high  discharge  capacity  even  at  high  current  density  of  50  C-rate  but  also  maintained  ~93%  of  its  initial  discharge capacity (1 C-rate) even after 300 cycles. 
