
This work focuses on the H2 sensing performance of the sensor with buried Au sensing electrode and spinel-type oxide CoCrMnO4 insensitive reference electrode within sodium super ionic conductor(NASICON) film. The  sensor showed the highest response to H2 gas on the insensitive material sintering at 800 °C. Compared with those of  the  traditional  structure  device,  the  sensitivity  and  selectivity  of  the  sensor  using  buried  sensing  electrode  were  greatly improved, giving a response of –177 mV in 9×10–5 g/L H2, which was about 3.5 times higher than that of  sensors with traditional structure. Moreover, the ΔV value of the sensing device exhibited linear relationship to the  logarithm of H2 concentration and the sensitivity(slope) was –135 mV/decade. A sensing mechanism related to the  mixed potential was proposed for the present sensor.

Hydrogen(H2), as one of the most ideal alternative energy  sources, is used in many chemical processes and various industries including aerospace, medicine, petrochemistry and transportation. Moreover, hydrogen is a colorless and odorless gas,  which  is  flammable/explosive  in  a  concentration  range  of  4%―75%(volume  fraction)  when  mixed  with  air.  Explosion  accidents may be caused when it leaks out. Therefore, the development of the smart gas sensing device is imperatively necessary  for  measuring  H2  concentration.  The  application  of  sensors to detecting H2 has been reported in the literature, e.g.,  thin  film  type[1,2],  semiconductor  metal  oxide  type[3―7],  FETs  type[8,9] and solid electrolyte type[10―14], etc. Among these sensors, the solid electrolyte type H2 sensors have attracted signi ficant  attention  because  of  their  high  sensitivity,  speedy  response  and  excellent  stability.  Lu  et  al.[15]  reported  a  mixed  potential  H2  sensor  made  from  YSZ  and  oxide  electrode.  Although this sensor shows a high sensitivity and good long-term  stability,  the  high  operating  temperature(500―700  °C)  limits  its application. Contrary to the sensors based on YSZ, sodium  super ionic conductor(NASICON)-based sensors are generally  operated  at  the  intermediate  temperatures(300―500  °C),  so  they are more suitable for detecting the gases in the atmosphe ric  environment.  Owing  the  above  merits,  various  NASICON-based  sensors,  e.g.,  potentiometric  type  sensors[16―18],  amperometric  type  sensors[19],  as  well  as  mixed potential  type  sensors  using  oxide  sensing  electrode[20―24],    have been investigated in the past few years. As for NASICON based mixed potential type sensors utilizing different oxides  [27], etc., have  as electrode for detecting SO2 been widely studied. 

The mixed potential type sensor can be expressed by the following electrochemical cell. The  potential  difference  between  the  sensing  electrode    (SE)  and  reference  electrode(RE)  is  measured  as  the  sensing  signal. For the present device, the sensing performance will be  improved by promoting electrochemical reaction on SE or restraining reaction on RE. In order to achieve this purpose, two  ways  are  adopted:  choosing  excellent  electrode  material  and  changing electrode structure. In this work, the spinel-type oxide  CoCrMnO4  with  a  high  oxidizability  was  prepared  as  the  insensitive  reference  electrode  for  restraining  the  reaction  on  reference  electrode  and  Au  was  chosen  as  sensing  electrode  which showed very good performance in many researches[28,29].  On the other hand, a buried sensing electrode was designed to  improve the sensitivity and selectivity of the sensor.

NASICON  was  prepared  from  ZrO(NO3)2,  NaNO3,  (NH4)2HPO4 and Si(C2H5O)4 by a sol-gel process and sintered  at 1000 °C for 12 h[30]. The spinel-type CoCrMnO4 was synthesized  by  the  auto-combustion  of  ethylene  glycol-metal  nitrate polymerized  gel  precursor.  The  powders  of  Co(NO3)2·6H2O,  Cr(NO3)2·9H2O,  and  Mn(NO3)2·4H2O  were  respectively      dissolved  in  20  mL  of  deionized  water,  to  which  10  mL  of    concentrated  nitric  acid  was  added  under  stirring  at  room    temperature. Then ethylene glycol(EG, 80 mL) was added into  the above solution to form a gel. This gel was treated at 80 °C  for  16  h,  and  dried  at  130  °C  for  24  h.  After  drying,  the  gel    was  respectively  sintered  at  600,  800  or  1000  °C  in  air  for   2 h[31]. 

Two  types  of  sensing  devices(types  A  and  B)  were  designed  and  fabricated,  as  shown  in  Fig.1.  The  fabrication  process of the sensor of type A as a traditional device was described  in  our  previous  paper[30].  For  type  B  device,  an  Au  mesh-shaped  sensing  electrode  was  sandwiched  between  the  two NASICON layers which were prepared from the mixture of  NASICON  powder  and  α-terpineol  at  a  mass  ratio  of  1:1,  to  make an insensitive reference electrode. Then, an oxide layer as  the  insensitive  reference  electrode  was  coated  on  the  second  NASICON layer. NASICON was used as the ionic conduction  layer and the metal oxide was utilized as the insensitive refe rence electrode.   

Gas sensing properties of the sensors were measured by a  conventional  static  method[32,33].  The  Ni-Cr  coil  inserted  into  the alumina tube offered the operating temperature for the sensor  device.  The  sample  gases  containing  different  concentrations of H2 were obtained by diluting pure H2 with air. When  the sensor was exposed to air or the sample gas, the potential  difference  between  SE  and  RE(V)  as  a  sensing  signal  was  measured with a digital electrometer(Rigol. DM3054) and the  results obtained were registered with a computer connected to  the  electrometer.  X-Ray  diffraction(XRD)  pattern  of  CoCrMnO4  was  recorded  on  a  Rigaku  wide-angle  X-ray  diffractometer(D/max rA, using Cu Kα radiation at λ=0.1541 nm).  Field emission scanning electron microscopy(FESEM) images  were recorded on a JEOL JSM-7500F microscope operated at  15 kV.  The  current-voltage(polarization)  curves  in  a  potential  range of 25 to –250 mV were measured at a CHI600C electrochemical  workstation(Instrument  Corporation  of  Shanghai,  China).  The  complex  impedance  of  the  sensor  in  sample  gas  was  measured  by  means  of  an  impedance  analyzer(Solartron  1260 and Solartron 1287) in a frequency range of 1―1×106 Hz.  The amplitude of the ac potential signal was ﬁxed at 50 mV in  all measurement experiments. 

Fig.2 shows the XRD patterns of CoCrMnO4 samples sintered at 600, 800 and 1000 °C respectively. It can be seen that  CoCrMnO4  retained  its  crystallographic  phase(rhombohedral)  corresponding to JCPDS PDF(No.70-2465). With the sintering  temperature  increasing,  the  peaks  of  CoCrMnO4  were  strengthened,  which  indicates  that  the  crystallization  quality  of  CoCrMnO4  was  improved  with  increasing  sintering  temperature. 

Fig.3  shows  the  SEM  image  of  the  sectional  view  of  NASICON layer. It can be easily seen that the NASICON film  was  porous,  which  indicates  that  the  buried  sensing  electrode  was  not  completely  hermetic.  Obviously  the  volatilization  of  organic solvent in the sintering process led to the formation of  these pores. Therefore, H2 could easily reach SE to participate  the electrochemical reaction via these tiny pores in NASICON  coating layer. 

In order to obtain higher sensitivity, a novel sensor(type B)  with a buried electrode, which suppressed the exposure of SE  to O2, was designed. Fig.4 shows the responses of the sensors  of types A and B in 9×10–5 g/L H2. Compared with that of the  sensor  of  type  A,  the  response  of  the  sensor  of  type  B  was  greatly  improved.  The  sensor  using  buried  sensing  electrode  gave a response of –177 mV in 9×10–5 g/L H2, which is about  3.5  times  higher  than  those  of  the  sensors  with  traditional  structure.  This  suggests  that  sensing  electrode  covered  with  NASICON could partly block the contact of SE with O2, which  could restrain the reaction (4). The potential difference between  the sensing and reference electrodes was obviously increased.  On the other hand, for sensor of type B, since the sensing electrode  was  covered  by  the  two  NASICON  layers,  the  direct  contact  between  Au  SE  and  the  NASIOCN  coating  layer  resulted in an extension of the TPB(triple phase boundary) region.  Therefore the area for the electrochemical reaction on sensing  electrode  was  greatly  enlarged.  Above  two  aspects  obviously  enhanced the sensitivity of the sensor of type B. 

For  testing  the  selectivity  of  the  sensor,  the  devices  of  types A and B were tested in 1.8×10–5 g/L H2 mixed with the  other interference gases, such as SO2, NO2, CH4, C2H4, H2, CO  and NH3. The results are shown in Fig.5. Compared with that of  the sensor of type A, the response change of type B in a mixed  gas  is  very  small,  which  indicates  that  the  sensor  has  a  good  selectivity for H2. Such a drastic improvement in H2 selectivity  was  attributed  to  NASICON  coating  with  a  large  number  of  pores,  which  might  make  interference  gas  molecules  be  partially blocked. While the electrochemical reaction efficiency of H2 in the NASICON layer might not be significantly influenced  due  to  the  small  size  of  the  H2 molecule,  which  results  in  an  improvement in H2 selectivity[34]. 

The  relationship  between  ΔV  of  the  sensor  and  sintering  temperature of CoCrMnO4 was investigated, as shown in Fig.6.  It is found that the sensor using CoCrMnO4 sintered at 800 °C  has the highest sensitivity(slope) to H2 at 350 °C. As shown in  the inset of Fig.6, it can be seen that the average particle size  and specific surface area of the sample sintered at 800 °C are  moderate,  so  an  excellent  balance  of  BET  surface  area  and  electrochemical  catalytic  activity  of  oxide  layer  could  be  formed, which results in the increasing of the sensitivity to H2.   

Fig.7  shows  the  dynamic  response  of  the  sensor  with  CoCrMnO4  electrode  in  4.5×10–5  g/L  hydrogen  at  different  temperatures. From Fig.7, the sensor at 350 °C gives the highest sensitivity. In addition, the sensor exhibits a quick response  to and recovery of H2 at 350 °C. A response time of 90% to and  a recovery time of 90% of the CoCrMnO4-attached device for  H2 are 10 and 20 s, respectively. With the response time of the  sensor  taken  into  consideration,  350  °C  was  selected  for  the  operating temperature. 

Temperature/°C: a. 275; b. 300; c. 325; d. 350; e. 375;    f. 400.  The  dynamic  response  characteristics  of  the  sensor  towards  H2  with  different  concentrations  were  investigated,  as  shown  in  Fig.8.  It  is  found  that  the  sensor  with  coated  CoCrMnO4  as  insensitive  reference  electrode  also  showed  a  fast  transient  response  and  stable  output  signal.  The  response time and recovery time of the sensor were 10 and 20 s, respectively. The inset of Fig.8 shows the dependence of ΔV on the H2  concentration. The sensitivity(slope) was –135 mV/decade. 

Besides,  the  continuous  response  and  recovery  transients  of  the  sensor  to  10  g/L  Cl2 were  also  examined  as  shown  in changes in a range of 4.1% to –2.8%. On the premise of considering the interference of environment and error in the experiment process, the result indicates that the sensor has good repeatability. 

When  only  one  electrochemical  reaction  takes  place  on  sensing electrode, the difference in chemical potential of conducting  ions  of  solid  electrolyte  used  between  sensing  and    reference electrodes induces electromotive force(V), which can  be expressed by the Nernstian equation. This electrode potential  is  equilibrium  potential.  But  when  two  or  more  electrochemical  reactions  proceed  simultaneously  on  the  same  electrode, the electrode potential, which is determined by the rates  of the electrochemical reactions involved, is non-Nernstiant. A  similar sensing mechanism would be attempted to apply to the  present sensors in this work. Fig.10 schematically illustrates H2  sensing model of the device with an additional NASICON layer.  The  reference  electrode  of  the  sensor  was  covered  by  the    insensitive material, which could restrain electrochemical reactions on RE by oxidizing hydrogen molecules diffused in oxide  layer.  When  gas  diffused  through  the  NASICON  layer,  the triple-phase  bounelectrochemical  reactions  occurred  at  dary(TPB) on the sensing electrode. In this process the diffusion  of  O2  in  the  porous  NASICON  coating  layer  was  more  difficult than that of H2, leading to the enhancement of the sensitivity. By treating Eqs.(3) and (4) with the same process described  in  Refs.[36―39],  the  electric  current  densities  of  the  electrochemical  oxidation  and  reduction  reactions  (3)  and  (4)  can be represented by the following equations, where E is the electrode potential, F the Faraday constant, R the  gas constant, T the temperature. E0, i0 and α the electrode potential  at  equilibrium,  the  exchange  current  density,  and  the  transfer coefﬁcient, respectively. When reactions (5) and (6) are  at  the  equilibrium  state,  we  can  express  the  equilibrium  state  with the following equation: 

EM is the electrode potential of the sensing electrode at the  equilibrium state, which is determined by electrochemical reactions (2) and (3), simultaneously, so it is called a mixed potential. 

According to Eq.(9), if the concentration of oxygen is certain, EM changes linearly with the logarithm of the concentration of H2, which can explain the correlation of the mixed potential  value(V)  and  H2  concentration  shown  in  Figs.6  and  8.  Reversely,  when  the  mixed-potential is linear to the logarithm of the O2 concentration.  In  order  to  verify  this  conclusion,  the  effect  of  the  co existing  O2  concentration  was  investigated.  Fig.11  shows  the  response transient of sensor of type A in 9×10–5 g/L H2 in atmospheres containing 1%, 10%, 15%, 20% O2 respectively at  350  °C.  As  shown  in  Fig.11,  the  response  reduced  with  the  increasing concentration of O2.

It is observed that the response is almost linear to the logarithm of the  O2 concentration and the slope is positive. Similar results have  been  found  in  YSZ-based  NO2  sensor[40].  Such  a  result  confirms  that  restraining  the  semi-reaction  (4)  will  improve  the  potential of SE. To the buried sensing electrode, O2 molecules  were  partially  blocked  by  tiny  pores  of  porous  NAISOCN    layer, which effectively restrained the electrochemical reaction  of  O2  on  sensing  electrode.  Therefore  the  sensor  of  type  B    using  buried  sensing  electrode  showed  higher  response  to  H2  compared with sensor of type A. 

As reported previously[41], the total resistance of sensor is  affected by the interfacial resistance between the sensing electrode and NASICON, which is affected by many variables but  not  limited  to  SE/NASICON  interfacial  reaction  area(namely,  the  number  of  reaction  sites  on  TPB).  For  investigating  the  effect of NASICON coating layer on sensor performance, Nyquist plots were measured in the sample gas(9×10–5 g/L H2) at  350 °C for sensors of types A and B. As shown in Fig.12, it is  clearly  that  in  the  low  frequency  range,  the  interfacial  resistance of the sensor of type B is far lower than that of the sensor  of type A. It might be due to the Au sensing electrode of the  sensor  of  type  B  coated  by  the  NASICON  layer,  leading  to  better  contact  compared  to  that  of  the  sensor  of  type  A.  This  direct contract between sensing electrode and the Na+ conduc ting  NASIOCN,  resulting  in  a  large  extension  of  the  triple  phase  boundary  region.  Greater  three-phase  boundary  length means  more  reactive  sites.  Hence,  it  is  reasonable  to  believe  that the electrochemical catalytic activity of the sensor of type  B should be relatively stronger than that of sensor type A, due  to a comparatively bigger number of reaction sites. 

In  order  to  conﬁrm  the  above  mixed  potential  type,  the  anodic  and  cathodic  polarization  curves  of  the  present  sensor  were  measured.  The  mixed  potentials  estimated  from  the  cathodic and anodic curves intersections for the sensor were –126    and –173 mV for 4.5×10–5 and 9×10–5 g/L H2 in air, respectively. Additionally, these estimated values are very similar to those  observed  values  of  –126  and  –175  mV,  as  shown  in  Fig.13,  which confirms that the present sensors are operated under the  mixed-potential mechanism. 

The present paper reports a compact solid electrochemical  H2 sensor with an Au sensing electrode and spinel-type oxide  CoCrMnO4  insensitive  reference  electrode.  When  insensitive  material was sintered at 800 °C, the sensor showed the highest  sensitivity to H2. Compared with those of traditional device, the  sensitivity  and  selectivity  of  the  sensor  with  a  buried  sensing  electrode  were  greatly  improved.  The  present  sensor  showed  excellent  sensing  characteristics  in  9×10–6―4.5×10–4  g/L  H2  and the sensitivity of the sensor was –135 mV/decade at 350 °C.  The 90% response time and recovery time of the device with  CoCrMnO4 as insensitive reference electrode were all less than  10 and 20 s, respectively. The sensing mechanism related to the  mixed potential could explain the sensing behavior of the sensor.  Therefore,  the  sensor  exhibits  great  applicable  value  for  detecting hydrogen in atmosphere based on its excellent sensing performances. 
