Controlling the materials chemistry of the solid-state ion conductor NaSICON is key to realizing its potential utility in emerging sodium-based battery technologies. We describe here the inﬂuence of excess sodium on phase evolution of sol-gel synthesized NaSICON. Alkoxide-based sol-gel processing was used to produce powders of Na3Zr2PSi2O12 NaSICON with 0-2 atomic % excess sodium. Phase formation and component volatility were studied as a function of temperature. NaSICON synthesis at temperatures between 900-1100°C with up to 2% excess sodium signiﬁcantly reduced the presence of zirconia, sodium phosphate, and sodium silicate secondary phases in ﬁred NaSICON powders. Insights into the role of sodium on the phase chemistry of sol-gel processed NaSICON may inform key improvements in NaSICON development.

S ODIUM ion chemistries present some of the most promising opportunities for next generation battery technologies.1 The sodium ion battery is proposed for stationary power storage and supply due to advantages stemming from low sodium ion cost and the use of aqueous electrochemical environments for planar bipolar stacks and ﬂow designs. Realizing these battery chemistries cannot be achieved without the development of a robust, eﬃcient solid-state electrolyte. In these systems, this electrolyte must not only be capable of high sodium ion conductivity, but often must serve as an impermeable barrier, separating molten sodium from chemically incompatible catholytes. The solid-state electrolyte NaSICON (Sodium Super Ion Conductor) with the composition Na3Zr2PSi2O12 is a promising candidate electrolyte that has demonstrated excellent sodium ion conductivity.

NaSICON ceramic electrolytes are commonly synthesized by high-temperature sintering (>1200°C). These high-temperature processes, however, are well-known to produce secondary ZrO2 phases, ostensibly resulting from the thermal decomposition of NaSICON at elevated temperatures or volatility of Na and P species.7–10 As a contaminant phase, ZrO2 stands to degrade ionic conductivity, integrity concerns related to volume changes during the tetragonal to monoclinic phase transformation in ZrO2, and is associated with the formation of secondary compositional and microstructural defects that degrade the integrity and performance of NaSICON.7,8,11–13 Historically, the most well-known strategy to mitigate excess ZrO2 formation was described by Von Alpen, et al.,14 who synthesized a ZrO2–free NaSICON from Zr-deﬁcient compositions, though this process generated an amorphous secondary phase (sodium silicophosphate containing trace Zr) that was not stable to aqueous solutions.15,16 Yoldas and Lloyd13 reported a “chemical polymerization” approach which they argued contained no free monoclinic zirconia though there was no discussion of other secondary phases presented. It remains a challenge to create phase pure, ZrO2-free NaSICON ceramic materials.

In contrast to high-temperature solid-state syntheses, solgel synthesis of NaSICON oﬀers increased synthetic ﬂexibility and has produced NaSICON at reduced sintering temperatures.17–23 These traits oﬀer potential in addressing the aforementioned NaSICON decomposition or reagent volatility often linked to secondary phase formation in hightemperature syntheses. In the present work, we have adapted a sol-gel process described by Porkodi, et al.,24 using a molecular precursor approach with acetylacetone-chelated Zr alkoxides as a low-temperature NaSICON powder synthesis platform to assess: (1) if processing NaSICON at lower temperatures with this chemistry addresses secondary ZrO2 phase formation, and (2) how the addition of small amounts of excess sodium aﬀect NaSICON phase chemistry.

The Na3Zr2PSi2O12 NaSICON composition was cated using (Na3PO412H2O, >99.4%; Sigma-Aldrich Corp., St. Louis, tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS, >99%; Aldrich), and MO), Zirconium (IV) butoxide (80 wt% in 1-butanol; SigmaAldrich) as precursors. The Zr butoxide solution was assayed gravimetrically for true Zr content, and the concentration was used with the molar stoichiometry for subsequent powder precipitation.

For compositions containing excess Na ion, sodium acetate trihydrate (Certiﬁed A.C.S. Grade, Fisher Scientiﬁc, Pittsburgh, PA) was added at values of 1% or 2% (atomic %) to the stoichiometric sodium concentration. The initial pH was adjusted to 11.8 using 1.0 N nitric acid (Sigma-Aldrich). The phase separated TEOS reacted over the course of 1–3 h to create an opaque suspension. The Zr butoxide was diluted in 200 mL isopropanol [Cleanroom LP grade (KMG Electronic Chemicals, Inc., Houston, TX)] with the addition of acetylacetone (Reagent Plus, >99%, Sigma-Aldrich) as a chelating agent in a 1:2 molar ratio (Zr:acetylacetone) to prevent premature. Hydrolysis of the alkoxide precursor. The isopropanol solution was added rapidly under high stirring to the aqueous precursor suspension, resulting in the immediate formation of a white precipitate, more opaque than the initial aqueous suspension. The precipitate was recovered using rotary evaporation and drying at 80°C under vacuum to obtain a precursor powder.

The precursor powder was calcined under ﬂowing air (4.7 L/min) at 800°C for 12 h. The calcined powder was attrition milled using a Union Process mill with yttria-stabilized zirconia media [2 mm diameter, Tosoh (Tosoh Speciality Chemicals, Grove City, OH)]. Four hours at 550 rpm in ethanol was used for particle size reduction. The milled powder was ﬁred in air using a ramp rate of 5°C/min and a 12 h hold at the ﬁring temperature. Samples were then slowly cooled to room temperature.

Thermal evaluation of the sol-gel powders was performed using a DTA/TGA (Netzsch STA409PC; Netzsch Instruments North America, Burlington, MA) using a 30 min hold at 30°C to stabilize the measured mass, followed by a 10°C/ min ramp to 1300°C to evaluate mass stability and phase reactions. Thermal stability of the powder was also studied in an isothermal hold at 1050°C and 1100°C for the stoichiometric composition under ﬂowing N2. The sample was ramped to temperature at 10°C/min, and held to evaluate weight loss during the sintering process.

X-ray diﬀraction was performed on a Rigaku Geigerﬂex Diﬀractometer (Rigaku, Scottsdale, AZ) using CuKa radiation at an accelerating voltage of 40 kV and a current of 30 mA. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed on ﬁred powders using a Zeiss Supra 55VP (Carl Zeiss Promenade 10, Jena, Germany) ﬁeld-emission gun scanning electron microscope at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV.

We utilized a combination of DSC, TGA, and XRD characterization to characterize the sol-gel synthesis of NaSICON outlined above. To better understand the inﬂuences of excess sodium addition during synthesis, the conditions for eﬀective synthesis of stoichiometric NaSICON (Na3Zr2PSi2O12) were ﬁrst determined. Figure 1 shows TGA data used to deﬁne the upper thermal limits of synthesis below 1100°C. These data reveal the volatile mass lost from NaSICON precursor powder held at 1050°C or 1100°C for approximately 24 h. The sample held at 1100°C experienced a measureable mass loss (~5%), ostensibly due to sublimation of volatile species, while the samples held at lower temperatures (1050°C shown here), exhibited eﬀectively stable masses throughout the high-temperature soak. These data suggest that to avoid problems of reagent volatility, synthesis should be performed below 1100°C.

The lower limit for stoichiometric NaSICON synthesis using this sol-gel process was determined using TGA/DTA and XRD analysis. The large exotherm peaking at 957°C in Fig. 2 is attributed to NaSICON formation. Consistent with these data, the XRD patterns collected from NaSICON powders ﬁred between 800°C and 1100°C (Fig. 3) show that NaSICON crystallization was not evident until 900°C, and complete crystallization was not complete until between 1000°C and 1100°C. These data, together with the TGA volatility data above, suggest that optimal NaSICON synthesis occurs in a window between 1000°C and 1100°C.

Closer examination of the XRD data in Fig. 3, however, shows that a number of secondary and intermediate phases the NaSICON synthesis. At 800°C, no form throughout NaSICON diﬀraction peaks are visible, but the spectrum reveals a minor amount of poorly crystalline sodium phosphate (Na3PO4) (PDF 01-071-1918)25 and a signiﬁcant nanocrystalline tetragonal ZrO2 phase (PDF 00-050-1089).26 The unexpected formation of this high-temperature form of ZrO2 is likely related to the size dependence of metastable nanocrystalline tetragonal zirconia,27,28 formed during the decomposition of the zirconium-acetylacetonate precursor used here. Zirconia nanoparticles can exist in a metastable tetragonal phase below a critical size or if under suitable strain conditions,29 and ﬁring these nanoparticles leads to grain growth and a transition to the stable monoclinic phase.30 By 900°C NaSICON peaks3 clearly emerge, and they continue to become increasingly crystalline with increasing temperature. Another minor transient phase, a sodium silicate (Na2Si2O5) (PDF 00-029-1261),31 emerges at 900°C though it is no longer visible by 1100°C. Starting at 900°C, there is also a notable decrease in the tetragonal zirconia peaks concomitant with the emergence of monoclinic zirconia peaks,

Excess Sodium in NaSICON Synthesis suggesting the transformation of the tetragonal ZrO2 to monoclinic ZrO2 (PDF 00-037-1484).32 This transformation continues at 1000°C, and is evidently complete by 1100°C, with the monoclinic ZrO2 peaks persisting as a signiﬁcant secondary phase in these materials. It is noteworthy that this ZrO2 formation/transformation at temperatures well below the observed threshold for signiﬁcant component volatility suggests that the primary mechanism for ZrO2 contamination in this sol-gel approach is not likely related to reagent loss during heating or thermal decomposition of NaSICON.9 Clearly, simply lowering the reaction temperature to avoid the loss of potentially volatile compounds or the thermal decomposition of NaSICON is not an eﬀective strategy to eliminate the ZrO2 contamination, and stands to introduce additional contamination from sodium phosphate and sodium silicate phases. Recognizing that ZrO2 (and other phases) formation at low temperatures can lead to persistent secondary phase contamination is crucial to ultimately determining a route to eliminating these undesired phases.

To address the challenge of eliminating this low-temperature persistent secondary ZrO2 phase, in particular, we investigated the addition of excess sodium to the NaSICON sol-gel synthesis. Although the addition of excess sodium stands to compensate for high-temperature Na-volatility, sometimes believed to contribute to ZrO2 formation, it is also expected to inﬂuence the NaSICON conversion chemistry. NaSICON conversion (and sintering) is believed to require the formation of a high-temperature liquid phase, rich in sodium phosphates and sodium silicates, which facilitate rapid, uniform mass transport required for the conver-

Fig. 4. XRD patterns showing the inﬂuence of excess sodium addition on ZrO2 formation during NaSICON synthesis at 1000°C. Monoclinic ZrO2 peaks ( 129)) are dramatically reduced with even small excess sodium addition and NaSICON peaks (∘) indicate increased crystallinity with increased sodium content. Intermediate Na3PO4 (Y) and Na2Si2O5 (X) phases are also substantially reduced or eliminated with increased sodium content.

Figure 4 shows the powder XRD scans of NaSICON synthesized at 1000°C with varying concentrations of excess sodium incorporated into the sol-gel precursor powder. At excess sodium concentrations as low as 1 atomic %, the contaminant ZrO2 content is dramatically reduced, and is almost entirely eliminated with 2 atomic % excess sodium, still producing crystalline NaSICON in each case. In a previous report, Boilot, et al.33 described eﬀorts to add large amounts of excess sodium (Na3.4Zr2Si2PO12 and Na4Zr2Si2PO12) to a sol-gel preparation, but did not observe ZrO2–free ceramics using this method. In contrast, the present results show that the use of much lower excess sodium content can dramatically reduce the ZrO2 content using a lower temperature solgel route to process the NaSICON. Interestingly, not only was the ZrO2 content reduced, but so were sodium-rich contaminants such as Na2Si2O5 and Na3PO4. At only 1000°C, the sodium silicate was essentially eliminated, and the sodium phosphate content was dramatically reduced. Although the removal of ZrO2 from these NaSICON remains an important objective, the reduction of these other contaminant phases is also extremely relevant, as even in small quantities, these secondary phases can dramatically impact ceramic performance. For example, Mauvy, et al.34 has previously described the high solubility of Na3PO4 phases in stoichiometric NaSICON, and leaching of these soluble phases from the NaSICON structure would likely have severely detrimental eﬀects on ceramic stability in aqueous media.

Figure 5 compares a series SEM images taken of NaSICON powders ﬁred at 1000°C with 0%–2% excess sodium introduced into the sol-gel precursor. These images present a visual correlation to the x-ray diﬀraction data presented in Fig. 4. The image of the stoichiometric powder in Fig. 5(a) shows an extremely inhomogeneous mixture of varied crystalline phases and poorly crystalline phases, a result consistent with the mixed-phase composition indicated by the XRD pattern for 0% excess sodium in Fig. 4. In contrast, the powder produced with 1% excess sodium [Fig. 5(b)] appears considerably homogeneous. A small number of secondary particles, ostensibly ZrO2 do appear in the micrograph, but the image is dominated by the primary NaSICON phase. Early evidence of crystallization is also apparent in the NaSICON, revealed by the emergence of small faceted grains on the order of several hundred nanometers in size. Again, this image agrees with the powder diﬀraction for 1% excess sodium in Fig. 4, which showed a dramatic reduction of secondary phase formation with a reduced fraction of ZrO2 still present. The image corresponding to NaSICON made with 2% excess ZrO2 [Fig. 5(c)] is also consistent with the XRD data from Fig. 4. The image shows little or no evidence of secondary phase formation, and the increased appearance of faceted particles (again on the order of several hundred nanometers in size) suggests a slightly more advanced stage of NaSICON crystallization. Collectively, these SEM images oﬀer compelling corroboration of the XRD data from Fig. 4, and support the assertion that a small amount of excess in the present case is believed to either promote the formation of the liquid sintering/conversion phase at lower temperature, or to increase mass transport properties (decreased viscosity) of this liquid phase, allowing for more facile chemical conversion. These inﬂuences explain both the lower temperature crystallization behavior shown in Fig. 7, and the decreased secondary phase content observed. Increased mass transport will have facilitated accelerated conversion of zirconia (as well as minor phosphate and silicate contaminants) into the emerging NaSICON phase. In addition, enabling this process at lower temperature will also have prevented preexisting ZrO2 nanoparticles from growing, making their ultimate transformation into NaSICON more facile.

These studies reveal that the introduction of a small amount of excess sodium can have a dramatic eﬀect on the phase chemistry of sol-gel synthesized NaSICON. We utilized solgel chemistry to create NaSICON (Na3Zr2PSi2O12), and the eﬀects of excess sodium and synthesis temperatures on materials chemistry were explored. The presence of persistent ZrO2 contaminant phase in stoichiometric, low-temperature syntheses was determined to form not as a result of hightemperature reagent volatility or NaSICON decomposition, but from premature ZrO2 crystallization prior to NaSICON formation. secondary sodium phosphate and sodium silicate phases emerged during synthesis of the stoichiometric compound. The addition of small quantities (2 at. % or less) led to a decreased NaSICON crystallization temperature and a dramatic reduction in the presence of crystalline secondary phases, including ZrO2. This eﬀect is attributed to the inﬂuences of sodium on the mass transport properties of the high-temperature liquid phase associated with the conversion of precursor and intermediate phases into NaSICON. This work reveals a new mechanism to improve the phase purity of NaSICON that may lead to enhanced performance and stability of these promising ion-conducting ceramic materials.
