Process assessment experiment was conducted to investigate the applicability of integration technology (CCI, concentration, cooling and ion exchange) to manufacture sodium-free lithium chloride from salt lake brine. The preliminary separation process of sodium from brine, using evaporating concentration by adding surfactant, showed the amount of sodium in brine decreases to below 0.187%. Then, brine was further cooling separation process which was characterized in that the ammonia is added in order to decrease the solubility of NaCl. The puriﬁcation of lithium chloride from cooling brine was then conducted with a novel separation process which was designed by a novel ion exchange method using inorganic ion-exchanger Li1.4Cr0.4Ti1.6 (PO4)3. The total yield of LiCl with the present puriﬁcation process was 86.16%, and the sodium concentration in the supernatant is 0.0005 wt.%.

Salt lake resources are very abundant in China, and the lithium in the brine is quite famous in the world [1]. But now the exploitation of salt lake resources in China is just at the elementary level. At present, the demands for lithium chloride, especially the sodium-free lithium chloride, are increasing rapidly. Lithium chloride is all just an industrial raw material, from which lithium compounds and in particular metallic lithium are produced. To make additional processing of the lithium chloride more economic and efﬁcient, it is quite necessary to give the raw material as pure as possible. Sodium in lithium metal is very harmful, even if a few of sodium (about 0.01%) would make it highly reactive and much different in properties than purity lithium metal. So as the raw material of lithium chloride, it is necessary for low content of sodium [2–5].

Lithium naturally coexists with many other minerals such as sodium, calcium and magnesium. At present, the commonly used separation methods including the solvent extraction, salting out, ion-exchange, coprecipitation method, nanoﬁltration, etc. There has no any single technique that will meet all requirements; so we must design a series of interrelated techniques according to the composition of brine [6–10].

It is well known that solutions containing lithium chloride, which is contaminated with sodium chloride, can be puriﬁed by evaporating the solution, cooling the evaporated solution and separating the crystallized sodium chloride [11]. This process becomes feasible in that sodium chloride is under a lower solubility in water than lithium chloride. When alkali chlorides are present in an aqueous solution, the solubility of the sodium chloride is reduced by the presence of the lithium chloride; sodium chloride is pushed out of the solution by the lithium chloride, so to speak, and will crystallize out, where this effect becomes effective in particular when the contaminated solution is cooled to temperatures <0 °C. Natrium superionic conductor (NASICON) ceramics present interesting sensitive and selective properties against alkaline cations due to their structure. In the ion-covalent structure, Li+ move from one site to another passing through bottlenecks deﬁned by the anionic skeleton. NASICON materials are especially good candidates to determine alkaline ion concentrations in solution or to separate monovalent cations from a mixture of multivalent ions [12,13,9,14].

The purpose of the present work was to investigate the applicability of integration technology (CCI, concentration, cooling and ion exchange) for recovering sodium-free lithium chloride from lithium-containing brine, based on process assessment experiments and technical comparison.

The composition of brine used throughout this work was drawn from salt lake brines and supplied by the Qinghai Lithium Co. Ltd., China. The chemical analyses of the brain are shown in Table 1. All the chemicals Viz., dodecyl benzene sulfonic acid sodium salt (LAS), p-acetamidobenzene sulfonyl chloride (ASC), ammonia, LiOH and NaOH used in the experiment are of analytical grade and purchased from the Shanghai Chemical Reagent Corporation. The stock LiCl, NaCl, CaCl2 and MgCl2 solution was used for calibration in ﬂame atomic absorption spectroscopy (FAAS) analysis. The ion exchange Li1.4Cr0.4Ti1.6 (PO4)3 (LCTP) was prepared from a mixture of Li2CO3, TiO2, Cr2O3, and NH4H2PO4 as described in the previous articles [15].

The puriﬁcation process for the separation of sodium, calcium, and magnesium was constructed, based on the experimental results and the subsequent data analysis. The process ﬂow is shown in Fig. 1. The method is useful to prepare lithium compounds with high value and the comprehensive utilization of salt lake lithium resource.

Batch experiments were conducted using a certain amount of ion exchanger added to the cooling lithium chloride brine. The mixture was shaken constantly at a speed of 200 RPM. Aliquots were removed at predetermined time intervals within a period of 200 min. The solutions were centrifuged at a speed 3500 RPM for 5 min and Na(I) ion concentration in the supernatant measured by FAAS.

The effect of varying ion exchanger mass while maintaining the concentration constant was studied as follows: 1.00, 1.05 and 1.10 g portions of the ion exchanger were placed in 100 g 39.20% (w/w) lithium chloride brine at 60 ± 1 °C. The mixture was shaken constantly at a speed of 200 RPM. After 200 min, the solutions were centrifuged at a speed 3500 RPM for 5 min and Na(I) ion concentration in the supernatant measured by FAAS.

FAAS was used for analysis of Na+, Li+, Ca2+, Mg2+, Australia, GBC-932 AAS. Magnetic stirrer model DF-101B (YuyingShanghai, voltage adjusting and temperature controlling) was used in agitating the samples at the required speeds while the centrifuge model Xiangzhi TDZ5-WS series was used for dividing the residue from the solution.

During the process of extracting lithium chloride from brine, how to get rid of sodium chloride and reduce the loss of lithium chloride by evaporation and crystallization is one of the fundamental problems.

In the past, forced circulation type evaporator and chemical cleaning were used to solve the problem of scale, but the cost of production increased [16]. In the concentration process, surface active agent can increase the particle size of sodium chloride and reduce the solvent entrainment.

With the concentrated temperature increasing, removal of sodium chloride increased, but, the loss of lithium chloride also rose. Therefore, the concentrated temperature of the ﬁrst step is 104–105 °C for considering these two factors. This will separate out 78.22% sodium chloride, and the precipitate could easily be ﬁltered out. The second step is 129–130 °C. The ﬁlter cakes return to the ﬁrst step concentration, so as to reduce the losses of lithium chloride. Sodium concentration could be as low as 0.0725% in brine from the subsequent evaporation. The composition of brine is given in Table 1.

Based on the above discussion, aiming at separating sodium, calcium and magnesium, a workable separation technological process for the complicated multi-metal solution including Li, Na, Ca and Mg has been proposed.

In the process of extracting lithium from brine, some lithium chloride will be carried along with the separating out of the bulk of sodium chloride, which not only has serious harm on the continual exploitation of salt lakes, but also wastes away plenty of valuable lithium resources. So it is urgent that how to decrease the loss of lithium chloride. The condensing temperature attached remarkable effect of the removal of sodium chloride and the loss of lithium chloride, as showed in Fig. 2.

The brine was concentrated to about 20% based on the solubility data of the LiCl–NaCl–H2O system [17]. During the process of evaporation crystallization, the temperature rises continually (not constant temperature evaporation), which is similar to the practical production condition. The binary surfactant mixture was added during the process of concentration. The effect of binary surfactant mixture in the loss of LiCl and the particle size of NaCl was discussed as follows.

Fig. 3 represented the results of the content of LiCl and H2O in ﬁlter cake at different concentration of surfactant varying between 0.0% and 0.4%. We can observe that the content of LiCl reduce evidently with the surfactant content increase. The loss rate decreases to 40% when the surfactant content reaches 0.2%, which indicates the viable direction clearly for further study and provides references to the industrialization.

The effect of the surfactant on the particle size of NaCl was determined as showed in Fig. 4. We can point out that the particle size of NaCl increases gradually when the concentration of surfactant reaching 0.2%. The particle size increases by 26% in this condition. The result showed that LAS/ASC could be successfully used in the process of extraction lithium from brine. Compared with other methods, the novel method described here is a simpler and more convenient way to reduce the loss of LiCl, which is very apt to separate NaCl from brine. And the concentration of NaCl in brine can be less than 2.55%. The problem of scale and chemical cleaning was avoided, which reduces the costs of production. The material balances in the ﬁrst and second stage of evaporating concentration are given in Tables 2 and 3 respectively.

Lithium chloride brine, which is contaminated with sodium chloride, can be puriﬁed by cooling the brine and separating the crystallized sodium chloride. This process becomes probable in that NaCl is under a lower solubility in water than LiCl.

According to preliminary experiment, the effects of time, temperature, kind of alkali and additional amount were investigated using the orthogonal test method. The result indicated that the effect from the highest to the least was kind of alkali, time, temperature and additional amount. The optimum technological conditions to separate sodium are: temperature,  15 °C, time, 5.0 h, alkali, NH3H2O and additional amount: 0.2%. The material balance of this process is given in Table 4.

The effect of contact time is evaluated for 39.20% (w/w) lithium chloride brine (Na+: 0.020% (w/w)) at different temperatures for LCTP. As shows in Fig. 4, the sodium content will decrease by extending action time and attains to a plateau value after 200 min to lithium chloride brine. Therefore, in all further experiments the contact time is used at 200 min. An increase in sodium removal with an increase in temperature from 20 °C to 60 °C is also observed. The diffusion rate of Li+ and Na+ increases with increasing temperature in lithium chloride brine, which accelerates Na/Li ion exchange. LCTP showed excellent separation and puriﬁcation performance from an NaCl-contaminated aqueous LiCl solution (see Fig. 5).

As can be seen from the data in Table 5, the ion exchange exhibits favorable sodium removal from brine. Sodium concentration in the supernatant is 0.0005 wt.%. About 97.4% of the sodium is removed from use of a 1.10 g exchanges on a 100 g brine. As showed in Table 6, the yield of lithium chloride can reach above 97% in this process.

The stability of the system of treating LiCl brine was investigated during a 72 h continuous operation. The results are presented in Table 7. With brine as starting material, lithium chloride was extracted by concentration, cooling and ion exchange that the total yield was 86.16%, and the efﬁciency of sodium removal reaches 99.993%.

The manufacture of sodium-free lithium chloride from salt lake brine, by utilizing the integration technology methods, was investigated with the following results.

The material brines were evaporated in two steps. LAS/ASC could not only reduce the loss rate of lithium chloride but also increase the particle size of sodium chloride. Through orthogonal analysis, optimum cooling conditions were determined as:  15 °C of temperature, 5 h of cooling duration and 0.2 wt.% NH3H2O, under which the sodium content in LiCl was 0.0991%. The optimum ion exchange conditions are as follows: 12 h of ion exchange duration, 60 °C of operating temperature, and 1.10 wt.%. The total yield of LiCl with the present process was 86.16%, and the concentration of sodium in the lithium chloride brine is lower than 0.0005 wt.%. High sodium removal efﬁciency increases the possible practical applications in lithium industry.
