A novel electrode material, Na3V2(PO4)3 with a rhombohedral, Na+ superionic conductor 

(NASICON)-type  structure,  was  synthesised  for  use  in  sodium-ion  batteries  (NIBs)  via  a 

solid-state  carbon-thermal  reduction  reaction  assisted  by  mechanochemical  activation. 

Electron  microscopy  analysis  showed  that  the  synthesised  Na3V2(PO4)3  particles  had  a 

core-shell  structure,  with the  particles,  which  had  an  average  size  of  300  nm,  being  coated 

with a uniform layer of carbon 3 nm in thickness. This carbon coating, which was formed in 

situ,  retarded  the  growth  of  the  Na3V2(PO4)3  particles  and  improved  electronic  contact 

between them. As a result, the composite material exhibited excellent electrochemical and rate 

cycling performances when used in NIBs. As a cathode material, Na3V2(PO4)3/C exhibited an 

initial specific discharge capacity of 98.17mAhg-1  at  0.1C  for  potentials  ranging from  2.5 to 

3.8V.  This  was  owing  to  the  V3+/V4+ redox couple,  which  corresponded  to  the  two-phase 

transition  between  Na3V2(PO4)3  and  NaV2(PO4)3.  The  cathode  lost  4.92%  of  its  discharge 

specific capacity after 50 cycles.  As  an  anode  material,  Na3V2(PO4)3/C exhibited an initial 

specific discharge capacity of 63.2mAhg-1 at 0.1C for potentials ranging from 1.0 to 2.5V. This 

was  owing  to  the  V2+/V3+  redox  couple,  which  corresponded  to  the  two-phase  transition 

between Na3V2(PO4)3 and Na4V2(PO4)3. The anode lost approximately 5.41% of its discharge 

specific capacity after 50 cycles.  The  three-dimensional channel structure  of  NaV2(PO4)3 and 

the  changes  induced  in  its  lattice  parameters  during  the  charge/discharge  processes  were 

simulated on the basis of density functional theory.   


Since the combustion of fossil fuels results in air pollution and increases the greenhouse 

effect, much attention is being focused on the exploitation of new energy sources, such as solar, 

wind, tidal, and geothermal ones [1]. Significant progress has been made in the development of 

renewable  energy  technologies.  The  development  of  devices  and  technologies  for  storing 

electrical energy is also important, as these will allow for hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) and 

electric  vehicles  (EVs)  and  can  act  as  back-ups  for  wind  and  solar  energy  sources  [2-4]. 


Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are considered the most efficient energy storage systems and are 

used  widely  in  portable  electronic  devices,  owing  to  their  high  open-circuit  voltage,  high 

energy  density,  flexibility  and  lightweight  design,  long  cycle  life,  and  environmental 

friendliness[5, 6]. However, lithium is not available in the amounts necessary for meeting the 

increasing  market  demand.  Thus,  rechargeable  batteries  based  on  alternative,  abundantly 

available materials need to be developed[7]. 

Sodium-ion  batteries(NIBs)  are  a  promising  alternative  to  LIBs  for  large-scale  energy 

storage applications, because of the high availability of sodium, its low cost, and the similarity 

in  the  intercalation  chemistry  of  sodium  and  lithium[8-10].  The  fully  developed  lithium 

electrochemical system can be exploited for  developing the Na counterpart[11]. A  number  of 

studies have focused on developing improved electrode materials for NIBs in the last few years. 

For  example,  electrode  materials  such  as  Na2V6O16[12],  NaV6O15[13],  Na0.6VO2[14], 

Na3V2(PO4)2F3[11,  31],  Na2Ti3O7[32-35],  Li4Ti5O12[36],  and  Na2C8H4O4[37]have  been 

explored for use as active electrode materials in NIBs. 

To  further  improve  the  energy density, safety, and life cycle of NIBs[38],  new  cathodic 

materials  need  be  developed.  Owing  to  their  high  redox  voltage  and  steady  reversibility, 

polyanionic materials have attracted a great deal of interest as cathodic materials for NIBs. Of 

late,  Na+  superionic  conductor(NASICON)-type  insertion  hosts  are  being  investigated  as 

prospective electrode materials for NIBs. These materials have the following general molecular 

formula: AxM2(XO4)3, where A = Na or Li; M = Ti, V, or Fe; and X = P, S, Mo, W, or As. In the 

crystal structure of these materials, which have a  NASICON framework, the MO6 octahedral 

units share all their corners with XO4 tetrahedra, and the XO4 tetrahedral units share all three 

corners  with  MO6  octahedra.  This  allows  for  the  formation  of  interstitial  and  conduction 

channels along the c-axis direction; alkali metal ions (Na+ or Li+) can occupy the interstitial 

positions in these channels [39]. The energies of the M(m+1)+/Mm+ redox couples are strongly 

influenced  by  the  counteraction  in  the  polyanion  tetrahedron  (XO4).  In  particular, 

phosphate-based Na-insertion hosts have attracted significant interest, because of the strong 

P–O bond in the (PO4)3units; the bond provides structural stability even in the high-charge 

states and lowers the energy of the top of the O–2p bands. Hence, the cathodic material  has a 

higher intrinsic voltage limit, which is determined by the pinning of the Fermi energy at the top 

of the O–2p bands[40].   

Rhombohedral  Na3V2(PO4)3  (NVP),  which  is  a  polyanionic  material,  has  a  robust 

structure,  good  ionic  mobility,  a  high  theoretical  specific  capacity  (117.6mAh  g-1),  and  a   

high operating voltage (up to 3.4 V). As a result, it should be a suitable cathodic material for 

NIBs.  NVP  consists  of  a  three-dimensional  (3D)  framework  of  VO6  octahedra  and  PO4 

tetrahedra, which share oxygen vertices, hosting Na ions in the relatively large interstitial sites. 

However, the poor intrinsic electronic conductivity of NVP, which results from the separation 

of the VO6 octahedra from the PO4 tetrahedra in the rhombohedral structure, limits its practical 

use. Recently, Jian et al.[41] reported a sugar-assisted one-step solid-state reaction to prepare 

NVP/C powders  with  an  average  particle  size  of  3µm.  These  powders  exhibited  an  initial 

discharge capacity of 93.0mAh g−1at a current rate of 0.05C; however their rate capabilities 

and  cycling  performance  were  not  high  enough.  Lim  et  al.[42]  synthesised  NVP  by  a 

polyvinylpyrrolidone  (PVP)-assisted  sol-gel  method;  the  fabricated  sample  exhibited  a 

discharge  capacity  of  84.8mAh g−1.  Further,  Jung  et  al.[43]employed  a  sol-gel  method  to 

synthesise graphene-coated NVP, which exhibited a slightly low discharge capacity. In view 

of these previous reports, finding a simple, low-cost, and efficient synthesis process is one of 

the main concerns related to the use of such materials in NIBs.   

In  this  study,  we  employed  a  simple  solid-state  reaction-based  method  to  synthesise 

NVP-based cathodic materials using low-cost glucose as the carbon source. Glucose was used 

because it could be readily dispersed in the precursor, owing to its small molecular size and 

chain  structure.  As  result,  carbon  was  generated  in  situ  from  the  glucose,  which  was 

distributed  uniformly  in  the  entire  reaction  system,  resulting  in  improved  electrochemical 

performance.  The  charge-discharge  capacities  and  cycling  performances  of  the  cathodic 

materials  when  used  in  NIBs  were  investigated.  In addition, the diffusion coefficient of Na 

ions in NVP was determined through cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance 

spectroscopy  (EIS).  Finally,  we  performed  structure-energy  calculations  on  the  basis  of 

density  functional  theory  (DFT)  to  elucidate  the  Na+  extraction/insertion  mechanism  in  the 

NVP structure during cycling. 

The NVP/C powders  were synthesised by a carbon-thermal reduction method. NH4VO3 

and NaH2PO4·2H2O were used as the starting materials and glucose (in the appropriate amount) 

was used as the carbon source. The materials were mixed and dispersed in alcohol and then ball 

milled for 24 h in a planetary mill. Then, the obtained mixture was dried at 80 176) C in an oven to 

evaporate  the  alcohol.  After  the  alcohol  had  been  evaporated,  the  remaining  precursor  was 

transferred into a porcelain boat and calcined  at the required temperature for 4 h under an Ar 

flow in a tube furnace. This yielded the NVP/C composite. 

The  phases  and  crystal  structures  of  the  synthesised  materials  were  analysed  using  a 

powder  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  analysis  system  (D/MAX2500V,  Rigaku,  Japan)  equipped 

with  a  Cu  Kα  radiation  source.  The  morphological  features  of  the  powder  particles  were 

analysed by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM)(SU8020, Hitachi, Japan) 

and high-resolution  field-emission transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM)(JEM-2100F, 

The cathodes used for the electrochemical tests consisted of 75 wt% active material (i.e., 

the NVP/C composite), 15 wt% acetylene black, and 10 wt% polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), 

which was used as the binder. A slurry of the mixture was prepared by adding an appropriate 

amount  of  N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone  (NMP)  to  it.  This  slurry  was  cast  on  an  aluminium  foil 

using  a  doctor's  blade.  The  slurry  was  then  dried  at  120 176) C  for  12  h  in  a  vacuum  oven. 

Electrodes of the desired size were then punched out from the dried slurry. Electrochemical 

cells based on the electrodes were assembled in a glove box filled with high-purity argon; pure 

sodium foil was used as the counter electrode, 1 M NaClO4 in propylene carbonate (PC) was 

used  as  the  electrolyte,  and  glass  fibre  was  used  as  the  separator.  The  charge–discharge 

measurements were performed over potentials ranging from 2.5V to 3.8V and 1.0 V to 2.5V (vs. 

Na+/Na) at various  C  rates at room temperature. For the galvanostatic charge/discharge tests, 

the  current  rate  was  C/10  (11.76  mAg-1)  for  both  the  charge  and  the  discharge  stages.  We 

determined that a current rate of 1C corresponds to 117.6mA g-1 on the basis of the theoretical 

capacity of the two-phase transition between Na3V2(PO4)3 and NaV2(PO4)3 (117.6mAh g-1). For 

the rate-performance tests, all the electrochemical cells were charged to 3.8 V at a rate of C/10, 

and then discharged to 2.5 V at various C rates. Unless otherwise noted, all voltage values were 

referenced to the standard redox potential of Na+/Na. CV measurements were performed using 

a CHI660D (Shanghai, China) electrochemical workstation at a scan rate of 0.05 mV s−1 over 

potentials ranging from 1.2 to 3.8 V (vs. Na+/Na).  EIS was performed using a three-electrode 

cell  in  which  sodium  foil  was  used  as  both  the  counter  and  the  reference  electrodes.  EIS 

measurements  were also  performed  using  the  above-mentioned electrochemical  workstation 

over  frequencies  ranging  from  100  kHz  to  0.01  Hz  during  the  discharge  stage  (2.5V)  by 

applying an AC signal of 5 mV. 

The XRD patterns of the samples synthesised by carbon-thermal  reduction at different 

sintering  temperatures  are  shown  in  Fig.  1.  The  sample  synthesised  at  600 176) C  (Fig.  1  (c)) 

exhibited  amorphous characteristics. On the other hand,  the diffraction peaks of the samples 

synthesised  at  650 176) C  (Fig.  1  (b))  and  900 176) C  (Fig.  1  (a))  were  suggestive  of  a  pure 

NASICON-type Na3V2(PO4)3 structure that was free of impurities, indicating the completion of 

the reduction reaction. These results were in good agreement with those reported previously 

[41-43]. Thus, it was found that the phase-pure Na3V2(PO4)3  can be obtained by sintering at 

temperatures in the range of 650 to 900 176) C. The sample prepared by sintering at 900 176) C for 4 h, 

in order to restrain grain growth, had highly crystalline characteristics. The diffraction peaks of 

the samples could be attributed to a pure Na3V2(PO4)3 phase with a NASICON-type structure 

with the R-3c space group (167). This suggests that the presence of carbon did not affect the 

structure of Na3V2(PO4)3. The results of structural refinement showed that lattice parameters of 

the particles of the synthesised NVP powders were a= 8.7212 Å and c= 21.8372 Å; these values 

are consistent with those  reported in the literature for Na3V2(PO4)3[8, 44]. Further, as can be 

seen from Figs. 1(a) and (b), no diffraction peaks related to carbon were noticed in the XRD 

patterns. This indicated that the residual carbon from the glucose was present in the composites 

in a very small amount and in an amorphous state. Finally, field-emission transmission electron 

microscopy (FETEM) images confirmed that the NVP nanoparticles were uniformly coated 

with carbon.   

Figure 2(a) shows the NASICON-type structure of Na3V2(PO4)3 projected on the (3 0 0) 

plane. The structure consists of a 3D open framework consisting of 3D channels; Na ions can 

easily migrate through these 3D channels. This results in extremely high ionic mobility. Each 

primitive cell of Na3V2(PO4)3 contains six Na3V2(PO4)3 formula units[41]. As illustrated in 

Fig. 2(a), each VO6 octahedron shares corners with three PO4 tetrahedrons. This builds up the 

framework anion [V2(PO4)3]3− units along the c-axis, and each [V2(PO4)3]3− unit is interlinked 

to the same neighbouring units by the PO4 tetrahedron along the a-axis, forming the open 3D 

framework structure[8, 41, 42]. This arrangement leads to the formation of well-defined ion 

channels, with Na ions being located in the tunnel sites. These channels in the structure act as 

pathways for the diffusion of Na ions. Since it is open 3D structure, the special plane (300) 

was chosen to show how the sodium ions diffuse and there exists similar pathways in other 

planes, thus leading to the formation of 3D ions channels in this material. The diffusion of Na2 

ions along a curved pathway is also indicated in figure 2. Na3V2(PO4)3 contains two kinds of 

Na sites, namely, M1 and M2 sites. Na ions selectively occupy the M1 (octahedral sites) and 

M2 (tetrahedral sites) sites[41]. Na1 ions occupy M1 sites and Na2 ions occupy M2 sites  as 

shown  in  figure  2.  The  two  independent  Na  atoms  are  located  in  the  channels  of  the 

framework having two different oxygen environments. The M1 sites are situated between two 

adjacent [V2(PO4)3]3units along the c-axis, while the M2 sites are located at the same z value 

as the phosphorous atoms[8, 42]. In the case all the M1 and M2 sites are occupied, a total of 

four Na ions are contained  within each formula unit of Na4V2(PO4)3, with one Na ion being 

present at the M1 site and three at the M2 site [42]. However, recent studies have reported that 

Na  ions  occupy  all  the  M1  sites  and  two-thirds  of  the  M2  sites in  the  crystal structure of 

Na3V2(PO4)3[41, 42].

The norm-conserving pseudopotential was used for the electron-ion 

interactions,  and  the  cut-off  energy  was  set  to  330eV.  The  Brillouin  zone  sampling  k-point 

set-mesh  parameters  were  3×3×2.  In  order  to  reflect  the  stronger  inductive  effect  in 

Na3V2(PO4)3, a higher U parameter of 4.2 eV was used[42]. The lattice parameters from our 

XRD measurements were used as the initial values for the calculation, and the calculation was 

performed for 150 iterations, that is, until the results were almost constant. After  all  the  Na+ 

ions located at the M2 sites had been extracted during the charging process, the compound 

underwent a phase transformation to NaV2(PO4)3, which also had a NASICON-type structure. 

A projection of this structure on the (3 0 0) plane is shown in Figure 2b. According to the results 

of the calculation, the lattice parameters of NaV2(PO4)3 corresponded to the R-3c space group 

(167)  and  were  a=  8.3738  Å  and  c=  21.4261  Å;  these  values  are  very  similar  to  those  of 

Na3V2(PO4)3[45]. The lattice parameters and other structural information, including the atomic 

positions of Na3V2(PO)4, NaV2(PO4)3 and Na4V2(PO4)3, are listed in Tables 1, 2, 3, and 4. The 

results  indicate  that  the  3D  framework  of  NVP  is  not  damaged  during  the  charging  and 

discharging processes and that the volumetric change is 9.65%. This suggests  that the fact the 

change in volume is small might  facilitate the diffusion of Na ions in the structure and cause 

minimal distortion of the crystal lattice. Thus, using the synthesised NVP/C powders with a 

stable NASICON-type structure as an electrode  material for NIBs  should result in superior 

charge-discharge rate performance.   

The morphological features of the synthesised  NVP/C powders  are shown in Fig. 3. The 

low-magnification FESEM image of the NVP/C sample synthesised at 900 176) C (Fig. 3a) shows 

that 

its  particles,  whose  average  size  was  1.0µm,  had  an 

irregular  morphology. 

High-magnification  images  of the sample (Figure 3b) showed that its  primary particles were 

less than 300nm in size and agglomerated to form larger secondary particles with sizes on the 

micrometer  scale. This is to  be expected in  the  case  of  products  formed  through  solid-state 

reactions  that  occur  at  high  temperatures  and  last  for  several  hours.  The  smaller  primary 

particles, which have a larger specific surface area, allow for the ready transfer of Na ions and 

electrons during the cycling process. This likely results in better electrochemical performance 

than that when larger particles with lower specific surface areas  are  used. Moreover, a high 

surface area increases the electrode/electrolyte contact area and promotes greater ion diffusion 

between the cathode and the electrolyte during the electrochemical reaction, resulting in high 

rate performance [46]. 

The HRTEM image in Fig. 3c shows clearly that the NVP powder particles were dispersed 

well in the carbon matrix and were several hundreds of nanometres in size. Further, it can be 

seen clearly from Fig. 3d that the particles  were uniformly coated with a layer of amorphous 

carbon and that this coating was approximately 3 nm in thickness. No lattice fringes related to 

the surface carbon layer were observed; this was proof of its amorphous nature. The content of 

residual carbon was measured to be 2.9 wt% from gravimetric analysis after dissolution of the 

material in a hydrochloric solution. In this study, glucose not only acts as a reductant, reducing 

V5+  to  V3+  during  the  heat-treatment  process,  but  also  results  in  the  formation  of  network 

consisting of carbon shell layers. This network  enhances  the electronic contact between the 

particles. It also  restricts the growth of the NVP crystalline particles and prevents them from 

agglomerating  during  the  annealing  process.  This  further  improves  the  electrochemical 

properties of the synthesised material. Figures  3e and 3f also show that the NVP/C composite 

was  highly  crystalline  and  exhibited  clear lattice fringes.  It  is  believed  that  materials  with 

higher  crystallinity  undergo  minimal  crystal 

lattice  distortion  and  form  smoother 

ion-migration  channels.  In  the  case  of  the  NVP/C composite, these channels  facilitate  the 

diffusion of Na ions within the structure. The clear lattice fringes with interfringe distances of 

0.253 and 0.282nm (see Fig. 3f) were in keeping with the d-spacings of the (3 0 0) and (1 1 6) 

planes of NASICON-type  NVP, respectively. This was also true for the selected area electron 

diffraction  (SAED)  patterns  shown  in  the  figure.  These  results  further  confirmed  that  the 

synthesised powder with sub-micron size particles was crystalline in nature. 

Figure  4a  shows  the  CV  curves  corresponding  to  the  first  two  cycles  of  the  NVP/C 

composite for potentials ranging from 1.2 to 3.8 V (vs. Na+/Na); the scan rate was 0.05 mV s-1. 

It can be seen clearly that the electrode made from the NASICON-type material displayed two 

pairs  of  well-defined  redox  peaks  between  1.2  and  3.8  V.  Thus,  the  material  exhibited 

outstanding reversibility with respect to the Na extraction/insertion reactions. The oxidation 

(Na extraction) and reduction (Na insertion) peaks located at 3.51 and 3.30 V (vs. Na+/Na), 

respectively, that is, the peaks in the high-voltage region correspond to the extraction/insertion 

of two Na ions located at the M2 sites into a single formula unit of the compound. These peaks 

can be assigned to the V4+/V3+ redox couple on the basis of the two-phase transition between 

Na3V2(PO4)3 and NaV2(PO4)3. In the low-voltage range, the redox peaks located at 1.71 and 

1.58 V could be attributed to the V3+/V2+ redox couple, which corresponds to the compositional 

transition between Na3V2(PO4)3 and Na4V2(PO4)3. The polarisation voltage was approximately 

0.2 V for the V4+/V3+ redox couple and 0.1 V for the V3+/V2+ redox couple. It is known that 

well-defined  oxidation  and  reduction  peaks  as  well  as  small  differences  in  the  polarisation 

voltages corresponding to the peaks, which depend on the transitions between the V3+/V4+ and 

V2+/V3+ redox states,  are indicative of high  reversibility with respect to the carbon-assisted 

extract/insertion  of  Na  ions.  Therefore,  the  synthesised  NVP/C  composite  should  exhibit 

excellent charge–discharge performance as an electrode material.   

Figure  4b  shows  the  CV  curves  of  the  electrode  formed  using  the  synthesised  NVP/C 

composite synthesised at 900 176) C for different scan rates; the potentials ranged from 2.7 to 4.0V. 

The CV curves shown are related to only one redox couple, the one corresponding to the two 

compositional  transitions  between  Na3V2(PO4)3  and  NaV2(PO4)3.  As  can  be  seen  from  the 

figure, there were a few obvious differences between the various CV curves. As the scan rate 

was  increased,  the  cathodic  and  anodic  peaks  moved  to  lower  and  higher  potentials, 

respectively,  and  the  peak  intensity  increased.  The  difference  in  the  potential  of  the  anodic 

peaks and that of their corresponding cathodic peaks became larger with the increase in the 

scan rate. This was further evidence of the irreversible nature of the electrochemical reactions, 

owing to the degree of electrode polarisation being higher at the higher scan rates. Because 

the extraction/insertion of Na+ ions into the NVP particles is a diffusion process, the electrode 

reaction can be attributed to semi-infinite and finite diffusion. The peak current in the case of 

the  diffusion-controlled  behaviour  is  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the  scan  rate.  This 

relation can be expressed by the classical Randles–Sevcik equation[47, 48]: 

where Ip is the peak current (A), n is the number of electrons transferred per molecule during 

the  electrochemical  reaction,  S  is  the  active  surface  area  of  the  electrode  (cm2),  Co  is  the 

concentration of Na+ ions in the bulk of the electrode (mol cm−3), DNa is the apparent diffusion 

coefficient of Na ions in the solid state (cm2 s−1), and v is the potential scanning rate (V s−1). 

On the basis of Eq. (1), the value of DNa can be calculated from the slopes of the Ip vs.  ν1/2 

curves. Figure 4c shows the relation between the anodic/cathodic peak currents (Ip) and the 

square  root  of  the  scan  rates  (v1/2),  confirming  that  the  behaviour  was  diffusion  controlled. 

The  calculated  values  of DNa  were  3.57×10−13  and  5.81×10−12 cm2  s−1  according  to  cathodic 

and  anodic  peak  current, respectively. These  values were  2  to  3  orders  of  magnitude larger 

than that of Li ions in Li3V2(PO4)3/C, as Na has a larger ionic radius. 

The  electrochemical  properties  of  the  Na  half-cells  fabricated  using  the  synthesised 

composites  as  the  cathode  material  are  shown  in  Fig.  5.  Figure  5a  shows  the  initial 

charge–discharge voltage profiles of the cathodes based on the NVP/C composites synthesised 

at different temperatures; the current rate was 0.1C and the potentials ranged from 2.5 to 3.8V 

(vs. Na+/Na).The curves indicate that two Na+ ions were extracted from/inserted into NVP per 

formula unit during the charging/discharging processes, which lasted for 10 h. As can be seen 

from the figure, the charge curves for all the cathodes exhibited a plateau at approximately 3.4 

V  and  so  did  the  corresponding  discharge  curves;  these  were  attributable  to  the  two-phase 

transitions  that occur during the electrochemical reaction and agreed well with the CV curves 

showed in Fig. 4a. The sample synthesised at 900 176) C  exhibited the longest charge–discharge 

plateaus and the smallest difference in the potentials  associated with the charge and discharge 

plateaus. This indicated that this cathode had the lowest degree of electrochemical polarisation 

and thus exhibited the highest  reversibility with regard to  the charging/discharging processes; 

this observation can be attributed to the  higher crystallinity and uniform,  sub-micron particle 

size of the sample. It can be seen from Fig. 5a that the initial discharge capacities for the NVP/C 

composite  samples  synthesised  at  700,  750,  800,  850,  and  900 176) C,  when  measured  over  a 

period  of  4  h at  potentials  ranging  from  2.5  to  3.8V,  were  84.88,  90.72,  93.62,  96.61,  and 

98.17mAh g−1, respectively. It should be noted that the initial charge capacity of the sample 

synthesised  at  900 176) C  was  115.18mAh  g−1,  which  is  very  close  to  the  theoretical  capacity 

(117.6mAh g−1) of NVP  for this range of potentials. The initial coulombic efficiency of the 

samples  was  approximately  85%,  which  is  close  to  the  value  reported  by  other  research 

groups[43]. The discharge capacity of the sample synthesised at 900 176) C decreased slowly, from 

98.17mAh g−1 during the 1st cycle to 93.35mAh g−1 during 50th cycle, indicating that it retained 

95.08% of its initial discharge capacity. This again indicated high electrochemical reversibility. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  sample  synthesised at  700 176) C  retained  91.35%  of  its  initial  capacity 

after  50  cycles.  Thus,  the  discharge  capacity  retention  rate  decreased  gradually  with  a 

decrease  in  the  annealing  temperature, demonstrating  that  the  synthesis  temperature  has  a 

significant  effect  on  the  electrochemical  cycling  performance.  The  fact  that  the  potential 

profiles  of  the  different  samples  during  the  cycling  process  were  similar  indicates  that  the 

extraction/insertion of Na ions does not cause significant changes to the material structure; this 

is because the  volumetric change during the two-phase transition between Na3V2(PO4)3 and 

It is known that Na occupies two different positions in the NVP structure. Therefore, on 

the basis of the extraction of three Na+ ions from the NVP lattice,  the theoretical capacity  of 

NVP can be said to be 176 mA h g-1. However, the extraction of the third Na+ ion is kinetically 

difficult,  owing  to  the  significantly  lower  electronic  conductivity  of  the  end-member  of 

V2(PO4)3[44] and the lower Na-occupancy energy of the M1 sites[42]. Therefore, the two Na 

ions located at the M2 sites can be extracted/inserted easily and reversibly between 2.5 and 3.8 

V on the basis of the V3+/V4+ redox couple, giving rise to the theoretical capacity of 117.6mA h 

g-1. That phosphate-based Na-insertion hosts are preferable can be attributable to the strong 

inductive  effect  of  the  covalent  (PO4)3

2 units.  These  units  moderate  the  energetics  of  the 

transition metal redox couple and result in the operating potentials of these compounds (i.e., 

phosphate-based Na-insertion hosts) being relatively high. In addition, the compounds exhibit 

high  thermal  safety  and  structural  stability  even  at  high  temperature  states,  in  contrast  to 

oxide-based Na-insertion hosts, as reported in previous literature[42]. Moreover, the presence 

of the thin carbon layer on the particle surfaces  restrains particle growth at high temperatures 

and results in the formation of a conductive network, which  improves electronic conductivity 

significantly.  As  a  result,  the  obtained  NVP/C  composite  exhibited  significantly  improved 

electrochemical performances in NIBs even at high charge–discharge rates. 

Because  the  carbon  shell  layer  improves  the  discharge  capacity  and  the  rate  cycling 

performance  of  the  NVP/C  composite  (pure  NVP  exhibits  poor  electrical  conductivity),  the 

amount in which glucose is added had a significant effect on the charge-discharge capacity 

and  electrochemical  reversibility  of  the  resulting  composite.  Figure  5b  shows  the  initial 

charge–discharge curves of NVP/C samples having different thicknesses of the carbon shell 

layer owing to different glucose contents; the charge rate was 0.1C and the potentials ranged 

from  2.5  to  3.8  V.  As  can  be  seen  from  the  figure,  the  voltage  interval  decreased  with  an 

increase in the glucose content. For instance, in the case of the sample with 12.5 wt% glucose, 

the sloping voltage plateaus and the large difference between the voltages corresponding to its 

charge  and  discharge  plateaus  were  representative  of  its  relatively  high  polarisation  and 

sluggish kinetics; these, in turn, can be attributed to its poor electronic conductivity owing to 

the low thickness of the carbon shell layer. The initial discharge capacities of the samples with 

glucose contents of 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, and 20% were 93.16, 98.12, 95.74, and 92.90mAh 

g−1, respectively, It should be noted that the discharge capacity of the sample with a glucose 

content of 12.5% was lower than that of the sample with a glucose content of 15%, indicating 

that a thin carbon shell layer had a negative effect on the specific discharge capacity of the 

composite, as this led to its electrical conductivity being low. However, it is important to point 

out that the discharge capacities decreased with the increase in the thickness of carbon shell 

layer owing to the increase in the glucose content when the thickness of carbon shell layer 

was enough, particularly for the samples with the glucose contents of 17.5% and 20.0%. The 

coulombic efficiency increased with the increase in the glucose content, indicating that there 

was a significant increase in the electrical conductivity with an increase in the thickness of the 

carbon layer. After the 50th cycle, the rates of discharge capacity retention of the composites 

with  glucose  contents  of  12.5%,  15%,  17.5%,  and  20%  were  93.5%,  95.1%,  95.6%,  and 

96.4%,  respectively,  showing  an  increase  with  the  increase  in  the  carbon  content.  That  the 

coulombic efficiency and cycling performance increased significantly with the increase in the 

glucose content can be attributed to the resulting improvement in electrical conductivity. On 

the other hand, the calculated specific capacity values suggested that the discharge capacity of 

the  composite  decreased  slightly  when  the  residual  carbon  coating  layer  was  too  thick. 

Therefore,  the amount of glucose used during synthesis  is  one of the  most important  factors 

determining the electrochemical performance of the NVP/C composite.   

Figure 6a shows the initial charge–discharge curves of the sample synthesised at 900 176) C at 

various C rates; the potentials ranged from 2.5 to 3.8V (vs. Na+/Na). It can be observed that the 

initial discharge capacities for the sample at the current rates of 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, and 

30C  were  98.17,  97.62,  96.52,  95.26,  93.66,  91.63,  88.21,  84.90,  and  76.44mAh  g−1, 

respectively. Surprisingly, the electrode exhibited satisfactory performance even at 20 and 30C; 

the  initial  discharge  capacities  at  these  rates  were  much  higher  than  those  reported  in  the 

literature. This indicates that the electrode continued to exhibit excellent rate performance and 

retained  77.86%  of  its  initial  specific  capacity  during  discharge  when  the  current  rate  was 

increased from 0.1C to 30C. Figure 6b shows the cycling performance of the NVP/C electrode 

at various C rates. Between the voltages of 2.5 to 3.8 V, the electrode exhibited good cyclability 

within the first 50 cycles; the losses in the discharge capacity between the 1st and the 50th cycles 

were  less than 7.9% and 13.4% at 1C and 10C, respectively. When cycled at a current rate of 

30C,  the  electrode  retained  a  reversible  capacity  of  58.79mAh  g-1throughout  the  50  cycles, 

indicating that, in this material, the insertion/extraction of Na ions was highly repeatable even 

at high current rates. The high cyclability was indicative of a stable crystal framework within 

the  NASICON-type  structure.  The  high  rate  capacity  and  excellent  cyclability  of  the 

NASICON-type cathode can be attributed to the small size of the NVP/C crystals, their narrow 

size distribution, and the sufficiently thick carbon coating that formed in situ on the surfaces of 

its  particles.  This  coating,  which  acts  as  an  electrical  conduit  during  the  electrochemical 

reaction,  appears to improve  interparticle  connectivity  and  thus the  electronic conductivity. 

Furthermore,  the  high  cyclability  and  rate  performance  can  also  be  attributed  to  the 

well-defined 3D channel structure of the composite, which facilitates the insertion/extraction of 

Na+ ions; this was in keeping with its NASICON-type structure.   

It can be seen clearly from the CV curves (Fig. 4a) that NVP also exhibits a redox couple 

in the low-voltage region. Therefore, it could potentially be used as an anodic material for NIBs 

based  on  the  V2+/V3+  redox  couple,  which  corresponds  to  the  two-phase  transition  between 

Na3V2(PO4)3 and Na4V2(PO4)3. It is known that one-third of the M2 sites in the crystal structure 

of NVP are not occupied, owing to the relatively unstable oxidation state of V2+. On the other 

hand, when the electrode is discharged at voltages lower than 1.6V, Na+ ions can occupy all of 

these positions under an electric field. This is what results in the occurrence of the two-phase 

transition  reaction  at  approximately  1.6V.  Figure  7a  shows  the  1st  cycle  charge-discharge 

curves  of  the  electrode  based  on  the  NVP/C  composite  synthesised  at  900 176) C  for  different 

current rates; the cut-off potentials ranged from 1.0 to 2.5 V.  It can be seen clearly that all the 

charge–discharge curves exhibit a redox plateau  at  approximately 1.6V. The initial discharge 

capacities  of  the  electrode  were  63.2,  62.53,  61.59,  60.16,  56.55,  51.65,  46.15,  42.49,  and 

36.74mAh  g−1  at  current  rates  of  0.1,  0.2,  0.5,  1,  2,  5,  10,  20,  and  30C,  respectively.  This 

indicates that  the  material had  excellent  rate  performance  and  a  discharge  specific capacity 

retention  rate  of  58.1%  even  when  the  current  rate  was  increased  from  0.1C  to  30C. 

Interestingly,  in  addition  to  the  excellent  properties  displayed  when  used  as  a  cathode,  the 

NVP/C composite also exhibited a high rate capacity and excellent cyclability when used as an 

anode.  The  charge  and  discharge  curves  plateaued  at  approximately  1.71V  and  1.58V  (vs. 

Na+/Na), respectively, at the current rate of 0.1C; this was in keeping with what was observed 

in the CV curves as well. During subsequent cycles, the observed voltage profiles remained 

unaltered,  demonstrating  that  the  composite  had  excellent  reversibility  during  the  cycling 

process. The initial reversible capacity was 63.2mAh g-1, and the discharge capacity remained 

at 60.29mAh g-1 after 50 cycles, with discharge capacity retention rate being 95.4%. Figure 7b 

shows  the  cycling  performance  of  the  synthesised  material  at  different  current  rates.  The 

discharge capacities were 56.13, 39.78, and 29.82mAh g-1 after the 50th cycle for current rates 

of 1, 10, and 30C, respectively, with the discharge capacity retention rates being 93.3%, 86.2%, 

and  81.2%,  respectively.  It  can  be  concluded  that  the  cycling  performance  of  the  NVP/C 

composite  was  good.  At  the  high  current  rates,  the  material  exhibited  stable  cyclability, 

indicating that the insertion/extraction of Na+ ions in the system does not affect its cyclability 

and that the crystal structure of the material remains relatively unchanged  under the higher 

discharge current. 

To further understand the electrode reaction kinetics of the composite, EIS measurements 

were performed before and after the 1st cycle for frequencies ranging from 0.01 Hz to 100 kHz 

during the discharge state. EIS  is a useful technique for evaluating the diffusion coefficient of 

Na+  ions  and  the  changes  in  the  impedance  of  the  sample.  This  is  because  the  Warburg 

impedance of an electrode material in the low-frequency range is directly related to the Na-ion 

diffusion  process  in  the  material  [48].  Figure  8a  shows  the  Nyquist  plots  of  the  NVP/C 

composite synthesised at 900 176) C. The plots were obtained under an open-circuit potential during 

the discharge stage; the equivalent circuit model is shown in the inset. It can be seen that the 

Nyquist  plots  consist  of  a  small  intercept  in  the  high-frequency  region,  two  partially 

overlapping curved sections in the highand medium-frequency regions, and a linear part in the 

MANUSCRIPT ACCEPTEDACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 

low-frequency region. The very small intercept on the Zreal-axis in the high-frequency region is 

attributable to the combined resistance (Re) of the electrolyte, the separator, and the electrode. 

The  curved  sections  in  the  high and  medium frequency  ranges  are  attributable  to  the 

charge-transfer impedance (Rct) and the double-layer capacitance at the electrode–electrolyte 

interface  (i.e.,  the  solid-electrolyte  interphase  or  SEI),  while  the  sloping  line  in  the 

low-frequency  range  corresponds  to  the  Warburg  impedance,  which  is  associated  with  the 

diffusion  of  Na  ions  in  the  bulk  of  the  electrode  material  [49].  It  can  be  seen  that  the 

charge-transfer resistance after the 1st  cycle was larger than that before the 1st  cycle. This  is 

mainly because the continuous deposition of Na ions  in the SEI film increases its thickness, 

which,  in  turn,  increases  the  charge-transfer  resistance.  The  inset  in  Fig.  8a  shows  the 

equivalent  circuit  used  to  obtain  the  electrochemical  impedance  spectrum  data.  Here,  Re 

represents the solution resistance, and Rct  is the charge transfer resistance. ZW represents the 

Warburg impedance, which is related to the solid-state diffusion of ions in the active material 

and corresponds to the slopping line in the  low-frequency region. Qct is associated with the 

surface property of the electrode. Cint is the capacitance resulting from ion transfer in the active 

material [44]. The fitting parameters are shown in Table 5. All the errors were within bounds. It 

can be seen that the charge-transfer resistance at the electrolyte–electrode interface is one of the 

primary reasons for the poor performance of the electrode.   

The  apparent  diffusion  coefficient  of  the  Na+  ions  (DNa)  can  be  estimated  from  the 

low-frequency regions of the plots using the following two equations [44, 47]: 

It is obvious that Eq. (1) is not suitable in the present case, owing to the titration potential 

curve being flat [47].In Eq. (2), R is the gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, S is the 

active surface area  of the cathode, n is the number of electrons per species reaction during 

oxidisation, F is the Faraday constant, C is the concentration of Na ions in the cathode electrode 

(which was approximately 6.92×10-3 mol cm-3, given the chemical composition of the active 

material) [44], and σ is the Warburg factor, which obeys the following relationship[47]: 

where  Re  is  the  resistance  between  the  electrolyte  and  the  electrode,  and  Rct  is  the 

Figure 8b shows the linear relationship between Zreal and the square root of the frequency 

(ω−1/2) in the low-frequency region, from which the slope, σ, was 10.04 (before 1st cycle) and 

11.95 S-1 s-1/2 (after 1st cycle) can be obtained. Using this value of σ, it was possible to calculate 

the DNa value of the composite. Thus, on the basis of Eq. (2), the DNa values were calculated to 

be 4.59×10−13  and  3.24×10−13cm2 s−1,  respectively. It can be seen that the DNa  value obtained 

using EIS was similar to that obtained from the  CV measurements. In addition, the values of 

DNa for NVP obtained in this study were much higher than that of olivine NaFePO4 (8.63×10−17 

cm2 s−1) [50], indicating that NVP could be a promising cathodic material for high-power NIBs. 

The difference in the ion-diffusion coefficients of the two phosphate materials is attributable to 

the differences in their structural properties. In the case of olivine NaFePO4, Na+ ions can only 

be transported  along a 1D pathway, while the  NASICON-type structure of NVP allows Na+ 

ions to be transported reversibly in a 3D framework, resulting in faster diffusion. 

An NVP/C composite was successfully synthesised as an electrode material for NIBs by a 

carbon-thermal reduction method using glucose as the carbon source. The carbon coating on 

the NVP particles not only retarded the growth of the particles, but also improved the electronic 

contact between them, resulting in high electronic conductivity. The well carbon-coated (~ 3 nm 

in thickness)  NVP sample, which had  a uniform particle size distribution,  exhibited voltage 

plateaus at 3.4 V and 1.63 V; these were probably attributable to the V4+/V3+ and V3+/V2+ redox 

couples in the material, which showed promise as a cathodic  as well as an anodic material for 

NIBs.  The  NVP/C  composite  exhibited  high  specific  capacity  and  excellent  cycling 

performance. This  suggests that the extraction/insertion of Na ions does not make the system 

unstable.  At  the  current  rate  of  0.1C,  the  NVP/C  composite  exhibited  initial  discharge 

capacities of 98.2 and 63.2mAh g−1for potentials  ranging from 2.5 to 3.8V and 1.0 to 2.5 V, 

respectively.  The  values  of  the  apparent  diffusion  coefficient  of  Na  ions  in  the  NVP/C 

composite, determined using CV and EIS, were approximately 3.24×10−13 and 5.81×10−12 cm2 

s−1, respectively. These values are higher than those for other Na ions-based cathodic materials. 

This can be attributed to the NASICON-type structure of the NVP/C composite, which allows 

for fast ion diffusion. Therefore, the synthesised NVP/C composite can be considered a suitable 

cathodic material for high-performance, rechargeable NIBs.   
