Reliable electrochemical investigations of electrode materials are indispensable for the development of next-generation energy storage devices.  In the case of multivalent cation-based electrochemistry, intense attention should be paid to the cell configuration for obtaining reliable data.  In particular, the electrolyte and reference electrode must be appropriately selected considering the potential window of electrolyte and the validity of reference.  Here, we demonstrate the detailed electrochemical examination for the Mg2+-storage capability of the NASICON-type framework derived from Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP).  Combination of the Mg(BF4)2-based electrolyte with high anodic stability and the reliable Ag pseudo-reference electrode offers the decent electrochemical test results.  Despite suffering from the polarization concerning magnesiation, the desodiated NVP electrode can deliver a well-defined discharge plateau at ~2.7 V (vs. Mg2+/Mg) with the reversible capacity of >100 mAh g–1 at room temperature.  The impedance analysis results indicate that the increased charge transfer resistance on discharging due to the high energy barrier for desolvation of divalent cations is responsible for the large polarization but not extremely significant, allowing for the room-temperature operation.  The findings obtained herein also highlight the importance of the structural robustness of host lattice, which is required to withstand a strong amorphization tendency during Na+-extraction and Mg2+-insertion/extraction. 
The advent of rechargeable Li-ion batteries (LiBs) in non-aqueous electrolyte, which allows for the high operating voltage over 3 V, have ignited the rapid progress in various portable devices.  In line with this trend, each device has become smaller yet delivered superior functionality with a prolonged continuous running, which demands further development of rechargeable batteries.  Meanwhile, the global spread of electronic technology requires a larger production at lower cost.  On this account, rechargeable batteries based on ubiquitous ions other than Li ion have been attracting a lot of attention.  Use of divalent Mg ion as an alternative charge career is regarded as a promising way because of several benefits from a Mg metal anode, such as low cost, mitigated safety issue based on scarce dendrite growth tendency, and high volumetric capacity (~3830 mAh cm–3). Toward a practical use of rechargeable batteries with a Mg metal anode, i.e. Mg batteries (MBs), the search for a suitable cathode material has been continued for many years, which still remains a formidable challenge. Electrolyte bearing a sufficiently wide potential window is mandatory for examining the electrochemical characteristics of electrode materials. Otherwise, the electrolyte breakdown generates a current, which disturbs the detection of focusing redox signals, and the decomposition products frequently inhibit an innate electrochemical response of an active material.  In the case of MBs, however, no electrolyte has been found to date that fulfills various requirements such as good Mg plating/stripping capability and high anodic stability on multiple substrates in addition to those for a practical use in terms of cost and safety. A bottleneck behind the unachievement lies in a limited choice of commercially available Mg salts with high quality enough for non-aqueous batteries.  It appears that this is not because of the synthetic technology of chemical manufacturers but probably due to the small market of the MBs research field so far.  It follows that MBs might experience rapid advance once a promising electrolyte is invented.  For the sake of contributing to that development in future, it is of importance to pursuit cathode candidates for high-voltage MBs.
The representative MB cathode material is undoubtedly a Chevrel compound of Mo6S8, which can deliver the well-defined two-step plateau in the discharge profile.  The critical issue of sluggish ionic migration in solid for divalent cations suffering from the strong interaction with lattice anions is addressed by the combination of the open geometry of host lattice and the substitution of the polarizable soft anion (S2–) for O2– to reduce electrostatic attraction.  The specific Mg2+-intercalation mechanism at the Mo6S8 surface was also proposed as a pivotal contributor to the exquisite change and discharge behavior. Nevertheless, the low operation voltage of around 1.1 V for this prototype MB loses the important advantage of non-aqueous electrolytes.  In general, the redox potential becomes lower in the transition metal sulfides compared with the oxide counterparts because of the different orbital states between the two anions.7  As such, the demand for high-voltage secondary batteries drives researchers to screen for oxide candidates.  The accumulated insights into Mg2+-insertion/extraction capabilities of oxides unveil that most of the synthesized metal oxides containing Mg show poor performances plagued by large polarization.2,8  Rong et al. put forward that the compounds inherently embracing Mg2+ tend to incur high energy barrier on Mg2+-extraction due to the thermodynamically favorable coordination state in the crystal lattice.
Similar ionic sizes between Li+ and Mg2+ inspires a potential of Mg2+-intercalation into the host lattice derived from LiB cathodes.  In this context, an approach based on the ion exchange has been proposed, enabling to examine thermodynamically unstable candidates as well.9-11  The preceding studies have discovered various LiB cathode materials that can retain their original lattice structures even after the full extraction of Li+, most of which consist of polyanion species affording robust crystal lattices.12  However, this scenario does not come true for the most common and reliable LiFePO4 olivine-type cathode11 though the other olivine-type compound of Li2FeSiO4 allows the ion exchange at the elevated temperature.
We have focused on the ion exchange from Na+, which is larger than Mg2+, and targeted the NASICON-type compounds.  Fast ionic conduction through the three-dimensionally open channel in a variety of NASICON-type crystals has been reported to date,13 involving the studies on the Mg2+ conduction.14  The vanadium-based NASICON-type compound, Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP), is currently regarded as one of the most promising cathode material owing to the superb charge/discharge behavior with a well-defined plateau at ~3.4 V (vs. Na+/Na) as well as good rate capability and cycleability.15-19  The NASICON-type host lattice framework is built up of fully corner-sharing VO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra with the ratio of 2:3 (known as “lantern”) as displayed in Figure 1.  Two types of interstitial sites (6b and 18e) exist in the rhombohedral crystal; three Na+ per formula unit are allocated in both sites with the ratio of (Na1):(Na2) ≈ 1:2.  The two Na+ at 18e site can be extracted with respect to the charging plateau at ~3.4 V (vs. Na+/Na), resulting in NaV2(PO4)3, in which only 6b site remains to be occupied to keep the structural integrity.
Recently, the electrochemical behaviors for the charged state of NVP electrodes (desodiated NVP) in the Mg salt-based electrolytes have been reported, which verified the successful Mg2+-insertion into the empty sites in the desodiated NVP.20-23  However, the details about this electrochemical reaction still remains ambiguous because of the unreliable cell setup in these studies.  Electrochemical measurements using a two-electrode cell (coin-type cell) gives no information on the redox potential of a working electrode.  Although Cabello et al. provided the data obtained with the three-electrode configuration,21 the Mg pseudo-reference electrode in bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)amide (Mg(TFSI)2)-based electrolyte does not work well as corroborated by Tchitchekova et al.24  The detrimental potential shift from the theoretical value as large as 1.07 V was detected in addition to a continuously fluctuating behavior, which suffers from the high impedance originating from the passivation layer formed on metal surface.  The use of a Mg(TFSI)2-based electrolyte,25,26 though it becomes very common these days, is not suitable for the detailed investigation of cathode materials for MBs.  The electrolyte breakdown commences at ~3 V (vs. Mg2+/Mg) on porous carbon electrodes, and moreover, the decomposition products from TFSI anion show the reversible redox, which can severely mislead the interpretation of the electrochemical results.
In this study, we have probed the electrochemical Mg2+-insertion/extraction properties of the desodiated NVP electrode in the Mg(BF4)2-based electrolyte with high anodic stability.  The redox potential concerning the Mg2+-storage in the NASICON-type framework was measured according to the Ag pseudo-reference whose validity was ensured by the reliable internal reference redox couple of ferrocene.24,28  The potential dependence of impedance was examined in both Na-ion and Mg-ion cells, and the difference in charge transfer resistance between the two ions is discussed.  For reference, the change of crystal structure and surface chemistry of the NVP electrode throughout the electrochemical reactions was also investigated.
High purity reagents of MgCl2 (≥99.99%; packed in an Ar-filled ampoule tube), AgBF4 (≥99.99%), and poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVdF, average Mw ~534 000) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co.  Mg ribbon and acetylene black (AB) were obtained from Nilaco Corp., and DENKA Co., Ltd., respectively.  The other reagents were purchased from Kishida Chemical Co., Ltd.  The water content in the electrolyte solvent of ethylene carbonate (EC)/diethyl carbonate (DEC) (v/v = 1/1; battery grade; Kishida Chemical Co., Ltd.) was less than 15 ppm according to the manufacturer.  Distilled water was used for the synthesis of NVP/carbon particles.
The NVP/carbon composite particles were synthesized by the citrate gel method.  In a typical synthesis, 3 mmol of CH3COONa (98.5%), 2 mmol of NH4VO3 (99%), 3 mmol of NH4H2PO4 (99%), and 1 mmol of citric acid (99.5%) were dissolved in distilled water (10 mL).  The solution was then stirred overnight in an open glass tube at 70 °C using an oil bath to obtain the citrate gel.  The citrate gel was dried at 80 °C for 24 h, which was calcined at 800 °C for 2 h in a tubular furnace with a heating rate of 5 ºC min1 supplying N2 gas at a rate of 0.5 L min1 to obtain the black powder of NVP/carbon composite. 
he Mg-based electrolyte, 0.3 M Mg(BF4)2 in EC/DEC (v/v = 1/1) was prepared in an Ar-filled glove box (< 1 ppm of O2 and H2O) by the metathesis of AgBF4 and MgCl2: 2AgBF4 + MgCl2 → Mg(BF4)2 + 2AgCl↓.  The preparation method was referred to the patent by Sony Corp.29  First, AgBF4 was dissolved in EC/DEC to obtain a 0.6 M AgBF4 (EC/DEC) solution, and MgCl2 was added (molar ratio of AgBF4:MgCl2 was 2:1) followed by vigorous stirring at 45 °C for 12 h.  After removing the precipitates by filtration, pieces of Mg ribbon (polished in the glove box) was added to the filtrate containing soluble Mg(BF4)2.  If the Mg metal corroded, which means that there remained unreacted AgBF4, 5% of the initial amount of MgCl2 was added to the solution and reacted at 45 °C for 12 h.  This process was repeated until the Mg ribbon kept a shiny surface in the electrolyte solution (typically once or twice).  Finally, the Mg(BF4)2-based electrolyte was obtained as a colorless transparent solution.
Microscopic observation and elemental analysis were performed with a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM; S-5200; Hitachi High-Technologies Corp.).  For an atomic-resolution imaging, a scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM; JEM-ARM300CF; JEOL Ltd.) equipped with a JEOL DELTA corrector, cold field emission gun and an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) apparatuses was employed.  To suppress the electron beam irradiation, the microscope was operated at 80 kV and the illumination semi-angle was set to 20 mrad.  Typical beam current was less than 2 pA. Two detectors for annular dark-field (ADF) and annular bright-field (ABF) imaging were implemented, where the detection semi-angles were in the ranges of 10–20 mrad and 48–200 mrad, respectively.  Thermogravimetric-differential thermal analysis (TG-DTA) was carried out by Thermo Plus TG 8120 (Rigaku Corp.) at a heating rate of 5 ºC min–1 with continuously supplying air (100 mL min–1). Crystalline phases of the electrode materials were identified by powder X-ray diffractometry (XRD) using a D8 ADVANCE (Bruker AXS GmbH) using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5404 Å).  The XRD profiles were analyzed by the whole powder pattern decomposition (WPPD) method using TOPAS software (Bruker AXS GmbH).  The N2 adsorption-desorption isotherm was measured at 77 K with BELSORP-mini II (BEL Japan, Inc.) for investigating the micro- and mesopore characteristics.  Before N2 physisorption measurement, the samples were degassed at 200 ºC under vacuum.  The specific surface area was assessed by the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) method. Raman spectroscopy was carried out using a micro-Raman spectroscope (XploRA, HORIBA, Ltd.) with a 532 nm semiconductor laser as an incident light.  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS; AXIS-ULTRA; Shimadzu Corp.) was performed for the surface elemental analyses of the electrodes.  The monochromatic X-ray Al K radiation (1486.6 eV) was used.  The core levels were calibrated by reference to the first component of the C ls core-level peak (unfunctionalized hydrocarbons) set at 284.5 eV.  For some cases, the electrode surface was etched by Ar+-sputtering to remove a surface film derived from decomposition products.
All the electrochemical tests were carried out in a three-electrode beaker cell on a VMP3 potentiostat (Bio Logic Science Instruments) in the Ar glove box at room temperature (ca. 25 ºC).  For preparing the composite electrode, the electrode slurry composed of 80 wt.% NVP/carbon particles, 10 wt.% AB, and 10 wt.% PVdF binder in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone was coated onto an Al foil, which was dried under vacuum at 60 ºC for 24 h.  The typical density of the active material on the composite electrode was approximately 0.8–1.0 mg cm–2.  CV measurements and galvanostatic charge-discharge tests were carried out at a scan rate of 0.05 mV s–1 and a current density of 5 mA g–1, respectively, unless otherwise noted.  For consistency, the calculations were based only on the mass of NVP in the pristine composite electrode.  Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were conducted at varied potential values with alternating current (AC) amplitude of 50 mV in the 10 mHz–100 kHz frequency range.  The electrode was kept at each potential until equilibrium was reached followed by the EIS tests.
For the electrochemical tests related to Na+ ion, Na metal was used for both counter and reference electrodes, while 1 M NaPF4 electrolyte in EC/dimethyl carbonate (DMC; 1:1 in v/v) containing 5 vol.% of fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) was employed as an electrolyte solution.  The electrochemical extraction of Na+ ion from the NVP electrode was conducted by the galvanostatic charging to 3.6 V (vs. Na+/Na) at 5 mA g–1.  The electrode was thoroughly washed by immersing in 1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME) for 12 h with exchanging a flesh solution for four times, followed by drying in the Ar-filled glove box.  This washing process was also performed for preparing the electrodes for the ex-situ analyses.
In the case of the tests related to Mg2+ ion insertion into the desodiated NVP electrode, 0.3 M Mg(BF4)2 in EC/DEC (1:1 in v/v) and a 500 µm-thick activated carbon monolithic electrode (typically ~5 mg)30 was used as an electrolyte and a capacitive counter electrode,4 respectively.  The reference electrode was prepared with a polished Ag wire immersed in the prepared Mg(BF4)2 electrolyte, which was separated from the main electrolyte by porous Vycor® glass.  The potential of the Ag pseudo-reference was determined by the CV measurement of 0.3 M Mg(BF4)2 in EC/DEC containing 10 mM ferrocene at a scan rate of 100 mV s–1.
A versatile synthetic method of the citrate gel method was employed to prepare the NVP/carbon composite electrode material.  Calcination of the citrate gel involving Na, V and P with the stoichiometric molar ratio of NVP under inert atmosphere produced the NVP crystallites with carbonaceous species.  Incorporation of carbon not only imparts electronic conductivity to the NVP particles but also suppresses undesired crystal growth by surrounding discrete crystallites and preventing fusion.  For the purpose of obtaining NVP crystals with good crystallinity and enhancing the conductivity of carbon, the citrate gel precursor was calcined at 800 °C though the crystallization of NVP occurs at a lower temperature.
The black powdery products were obtained as aggregates composed of fine grains with irregular size and shape as displayed in Figure 2 (a).  The corresponding XRD pattern in Figure 2 (b) is indexed to the single-phase NVP with the rhombohedral NASICON structure reported previously.15-19  The crystalline size of NVP was estimated as ca. 100 nm according to the XRD profile.  The N2 physisorption measurement of the sample gave a type-IV isotherm (Figure 2 (c)) indicating the presence of mesopores, which is attributable to interstices of primary particles in the aggregates.  The specific surface area was calculated as 30 m2 g–1 by the BET method.  Incorporation of carbon in the product was corroborated by the Raman spectrum shown in Figure 2 (d).  The D- and G-bands derived from amorphous carbon are clearly observed at 1370 cm–1 and 1590 cm–1, respectively.  The subtle signals located at 300–450 cm–1 and at 900–1100 cm–1, which are assigned to PO4 tetrahedra and VO6 octahedra,17 indicate that most of the surface of particles was covered with carbon moieties. The carbon content in the NVP/carbon specimen was assessed from the TG-DTA curve depicted in Figure 2 (e).  After the evaporation of adsorbed water, the steep weight decrease related to the pyrolysis of carbon was detected in the range of 300–400 °C.  Unfortunately, as the oxidation of NVP along with the weight gain took place simultaneously with the carbon pyrolysis above ~400 °C, the accurate value was hardly obtained but the carbon content was estimated as ~1.2 wt.%.  Herein, the mass of the NVP/carbon sample is employed as that for the active material in the composite electrodes.
Figure 2 (f) represents the charge and discharge curves of the NVP composite electrode derived from the abovementioned NVP/carbon sample in the Na-based cell, verifying a good reversible Na+-extraction/insertion capability.  A well-defined plateau at around 3.4 V (vs. Na+/Na) reflects the two-phase reaction of Na3V2(PO4)3/NaV2(PO4)3 associated with the V3+/V4+ redox.15-19  The computational and experimental studies16,18,19 have already unraveled that Na ions in 18e site (Na2 in Figure 1) are extracted and inserted during the two-phase reaction due to the better mobility compared to those in 6b site.  Accordingly, all the Na ions are to be occupied in the 6b sites of NaV2(PO4)3 with empty 18e sites.  The reversible capacity of the NVP composite electrode was 107 mAh g–1 at 10 mA g–1, indicating that more than 90% of Na3V2(PO4)3 on the electrode were active for the electrochemical reaction based on the theoretical capacity of 117.6 mAh g–1.
In an effort to extend a potential window of the electrolytes for MBs starting from the primitive Grignard solutions, especially to push up the anodic limit, a variety of electrolytes have been proposed, which are based on numerous magnesium salts including organohaloaluminates, borohydrides, and carboranes.3,27  However, these electrolytes do not show a high oxidative stability on the industrially available Al substrate because of its essentially poor durability without an appropriate passivation film.  Recently, the MB electrolytes with fluorine-containing magnesium salts other than Mg(TFSI)2 have been proved to bear high anodic stabilities on an Al electrode,31,32 on the basis of the preceding researches on LiBs.33-36  Although TFSI– anion does not offer a good protective layer by its decomposition on Al,37 the fluorine-containing anions, such as PF6– and BF4–, can form a dense surface film predominantly composed of AlF3 and Al2O3.33-36  Because it was put forward that BF4– provides the better passive layer than PF6– not only for protecting the corrosion of Al but also for the stable galvanostatic cycling both of the graphite anode and the high operation voltage cathode of LiNiO2,34 we employed a Mg(BF4)2-based electrolyte to inspect the electrochemical Mg2+-storage behavior in the NASICON-type host.
As high purity salt is not commercially available, the Mg(BF4)2-based electrolyte was prepared by the salt metathesis technique, which utilizes a large difference in solubility between two salts.  This technique has been employed as a viable and versatile method for preparing organometallic compounds and ionic liquids.38-41  Combination of AgBF4 and MgCl2 was chosen as a pair of initial reactants due to the fairly low solubility of AgCl (an order of 10–5 M in carbonate solution).42  The solubility of MgCl2 in a EC/DEC solvent was found to be relatively low (~20 mM at room temperature) while AgBF4 is moderately soluble according to our empirical assessment.  Hence, MgCl2 was added to the preliminary prepared AgBF4-based solution, where the reaction between abundant Ag+ and modest Cl– originated from the slightly dissolved MgCl2 precipitated AgCl, which was confirmed by XRD (Figure S1).  As such, the insoluble salts gradually altered from MgCl2 to AgCl, leaving a Mg(BF4)2-based solution.  Note that the resultant solution contained tenuous Ag+ and Cl– according to the equilibrium solubility product,42 which does not interfere with the electrochemical measurements as described below.  The conductivity of 0.3 M Mg(BF4)2 in EC/DEC was determined as 1.5 mS cm–1 at room temperature, which is in the same order of magnitude as those reported for Mg(TFSI)2-based electrolytes. As the Mg pseudo-reference electrode is not reliable,24 the reference electrode was prepared by immersing Ag wire in the aforementioned electrolyte.  Since the Ag electrode potential is slightly varied depending on the circumstance as well, the actual potential of the prepared Ag pseudo-reference was evaluated by introducing an internal reference redox couple of ferrocenium ion/ferrocene (Fc+/Fc), which is one of the most reliable techniques.  The CV profile (Figure S2) signifies that the Ag+/Ag potential of the Ag pseudo-reference corresponds to about 0.4 V (vs. Fc+/Fc).  While the Fc+/Fc redox potential is also influenced by solvent species, it was reported to be ~3.24 V (vs. Li+/Li) in 1 M LiClO4 (EC/dimethyl carbonate) by Tang et al.43 and 3.36 V (vs. Li+/Li) in 0.1 M LiClO4 (EC/propylene carbonate) by Tchitchekova et al.24  It follows that the Ag pseudo-reference potential is approximated as 2.95–3.07 V (vs. Mg2+/Mg) considering the potential difference of 0.69 V between Li+/Li and Mg2+/Mg.  In the following, the supplemental potential based on Mg2+/Mg is expressed as –3.0 V (vs. Ag+/Ag).
The anodic stability of the Mg(BF4)2-based electrolyte was investigated on an Al electrode as well as the AB composite electrode, which was prepared by depositing the mixture of AB and PVdF (AB:PVdF = 2:1) on Al (loading mass of AB was ~0.6 mg cm–2).  The corresponding CV profiles are presented in Figure 3 (a) and (b), respectively.  On the Al electrode, the oxidative current appeared with the onset potential of ~0.2 V (vs. Ag+/Ag) in the initial cycle.  The observed anodic reaction can be ascribed to the breakdown of the electrolyte over the natural oxide film of Al.  From the second cycle, the anodic current became faint shifting the onset potential to ~1 V (vs. Ag+/Ag) corresponding to the anodic potential limit of ~4 V (vs. Mg2+/Mg).  It is plausible that a passivation film formed during the first cycle effectively prevented the electrolyte decomposition as mentioned above.34,35  On the AB composite electrode, in contrast, the anodic decomposition of the electrolyte took place reversibly with the two-step increase in current.  Note that the substantially increased current compared to that on the Al is due to the difference in surface area.  The first onset potential was found to be similar to that observed in the first CV cycle on the Al electrode, whereas the second at ~0.6 V (vs. Ag+/Ag) initiated the more significant electrolyte breakdown.  The similar observation can be found in the study on the practical stability of magnesium electrolytes on carbon black by Lipson et al.27  It is deduced that a small number of highly active sites on carbon like specific edge sites are responsible for the first one followed by the oxidation on the rest of carbon surface starting from the more positive potential.  Although the specific mass of AB on the NVP composite electrode discussed hereafter was fairly less than the AB electrodes in Figure 3 (b), the electrochemical response derived from the electrolyte decomposition needs to be taken into account.
The electrodeposition of Mg metal was not observed in Mg(BF4)2 in EC/DEC as far as we examined (Figure S3).  This is in contrast to the Ca-based system, where the Ca plating/stripping was found to be allowed in the Ca(BF4)2 in the carbonate solvent.44  Further efforts for inspecting the possibility of Mg plating in Mg(BF4)2-based electrolytes are required, for example by utilizing the artificial interphase technique,45 but that is outside the scope of this study.  Instead of the Mg counter electrode, the capacitive counter, whose quick electric-double layer formation ensures the proper recording of working electrode performance,4 was implemented to configure the three-electrode cell for the following measurements. 
The Na+-extraction from NVP was carried out by the electrochemical manner, where the NVP composite electrode was charged to 3.6 V (vs. Na+/Na) at the low current density of 5 mA g–1.  The cutoff voltage was regulated to the relatively low potential in order to minimize the amount of decomposition products from the NaPF6-based electrolyte.  The charge capacity values recorded with this condition were similar to that shown in Figure 2 (f); approximately 90% of NVP on the composite electrode were converted to the desodiated NVP, i.e. NaV2(PO4)3.  The desodiated electrode was then subjected to the solvent exchange to DME followed by drying in order to remove the residues derived from the NaPF6-based electrolyte from the composite electrode.
Figure 4 (a) represents the CV profile of the desodiated NVP electrode in 0.3 M MgBF4 in EC/DEC.  The typical open circuit potential of the desodiated NVP electrode was in the range from –0.2 V to 0.2 V (vs. Ag+/Ag).  On sweeping the potential toward the negative side from the open circuit potential, a broad cathodic hump appeared, which was centered at around –0.65 V (vs. Ag+/Ag).  The subsequent anodic scan gave rise to a relatively sharp oxidative signal with the peak at 0.2 V (vs. Ag+/Ag) accompanied by a small shoulder band at –0.1 V (vs. Ag+/Ag).  The pair of redox signals was found to be reversible, which can be attributed to the V3+/V4+ redox reaction associated with Mg2+-insertion/extraction into/from the NASICON-type host lattice,20-23 while the band width gradually broadened on cycling.  The broadening indicates an increase of resistivity possibly associated with the compromised crystallinity as discussed later.
The initial anodic sweep also signified another oxidative current above 0.6 V (vs. Ag+/Ag), which was irreversible in the successive cycles.  As the onset potential of this anodic current lies between those of the electrolyte decomposition on the Al electrode and the AB composite electrode shown in Figure 3, it is reasonable that the detected current is derived from the oxidation of electrolyte over the desodiated NVP (and coexsisting amorphous carbon), probably in concert with forming a passivation film that protect the further electrolyte breakdown from the second cycle.
The galvanostatic charge and discharge behavior pertaining to the Mg2+-storage in the desodiated NVP is displayed in Figure 4 (b).  For reference, the correspondent charge (Na+-extraction) curve of the NVP electrode in the Na-ion cell is superimposed in accordance with the Na pseudo-reference potential of –3.36 V (vs. Ag+/Ag) assuming the potential difference of 0.36 V between Na+/Na and Mg2+/Mg.  The estimated Na pseudo-reference potential is close to the value (–3.42 V (vs. Ag+/Ag)) that we measured in 1 M NaClO4 in EC/DEC using the Ag reference electrode with the similar configuration previously.
In the first discharge (Mg2+-insertion), a well-defined plateau at around –0.3 V (vs. Ag+/Ag) can be noticed; the plateau potential corresponds to the nearly halfway of the cathodic hump in the CV curve (Figure 4 (a)).  The discharge capacity of 103 mAh g–1 was recorded, leading to the coulombic efficiency of ~97%.  The following charging shows the two plateaus consisting of the short one at –0.2 V (vs. Ag+/Ag) and the major one at 0 V (vs. Ag+/Ag), which are in line with the pronounced anodic current together with a shoulder observed in the CV.  It is noteworthy that the potential of the main plateau for Mg2+-extraction from the NASICON-type host agrees well with that for the two-phase reaction of Na3V2(PO4)3/NaV2(PO4)3.  Given that the V3+/V4+ redox occurs at almost the same potential of ~0 V (vs. Ag+/Ag), equivalent to ~3.36 V (vs. Na+/Na), for both desodiation and demagnesiation, it is deduced that the large polarization observed between the charge and discharge curves in Figure 4 (b) is predominantly caused by a high resistivity for the discharge (Mg2+-insertion) reaction.  This is consistent with the appreciably broad cathodic hump in comparison to the anodic counterpart in the CV curve (Figure 4 (a)).  In the second cycle, the slope region from 0.1 V to –0.3 V (vs. Ag+/Ag) appeared in addition to the plateau in the discharge curve, increasing the capacity to 115 mAh g–1.  It seems that the slope region is associated with the slope in 0–0.5 V (vs. Ag+/Ag) in the charge curve.  Although the discharge curve in the Na-ion cell also shows a slope component (Figure 2 (f)), the capacity is smaller (less than half of that in the Mg-ion cell).  There is no clue to figure out the origins of the short plateau at –0.2 V (vs. Ag+/Ag) in charging and the slope region capacity so far.  They might be due to the by-products formed during the initial Mg2+-insertion.  It is also conceivable that the electrochemical reaction might proceed via multiple steps, not solely through the two-phase reaction.
Notably, the well-defined charge and discharge plateaus were reversibly obtained as shown in Figure 4 (b).  Although the cycle performance in Figure 4 (c) shows moderate capacity fading resulting in 87 mAh g–1 in the 20th cycle, the cycleability is believed to be ameliorated by modifying NVP crystals and improving the synthetic process of composite electrodes.22,23  It should be highlighted that, as the discharge plateau potential of –0.3 V (vs. Ag+/Ag) is comparable to 2.7 V (vs. Mg2+/Mg), the galvanostatic measurement result unveils that the desodiated NVP cathode affords >2.5 V-class secondary MBs if assembled with a Mg metal anode and an ideal electrolyte.
As described above, the charge and discharge behavior of the Mg2+-storage in the NASICON-type host exhibited the clear plateau region as observed in the Na+-storage counterpart, but there is a noticeable difference in terms of the polarization degree.  The similar tendency with large polarization was also exemplified in the previous report.21  In order to grasp more information about such a difference between the Mg2+ and Na+ cases, the AC impedance tests were performed at varied potential values for both systems.  The mass loading of the active material on the electrode was almost identical, and the impedance measurement began with the positive end (4.0 V (vs. Na+/Na) and 0.5 V (vs. Ag+/Ag) for the Na-ion and Mg-ion cell, respectively) to the negative.  The obtained Nyquist plots in the Na-ion and Mg-ion cells are demonstrated in Figure 4 (d) and (e), respectively.  Considering the redox potential in each cell, the impedance spectra at the two potentials from the highest (4.0 V and 3.5 V (vs. Na+/Na) in Figure 4 (d) and 0.5 V and 0 V (vs. Ag+/Ag) in Figure 4 (e)) are mostly correlated with the de-intercalation from the NASICON-type host lattice with abundant vacancies, whereas the other two spectra reflect the intercalation into the lattice embracing more intercalants (either Na+ or Mg2+).
ach Nyquist diagram comprises a semicircle, which is dependent on the potential, and a linear component in the case of Na-ion cell, whereas the additional small semicircle is discernible at the high frequency region for the Mg-ion cell.  The high frequency and potential independence indicates that the small semicircle in Figure 4 (e) probably arises from a passivation film, or cathode electrolyte interphase (CEI).  It is plausible that the charge transfer at the electrolyte/NASICON-type crystal interface accounts for the potential-dependent semicircle.  In both systems, since the semicircle is conspicuously larger at the lower two potentials, the charge transfer resistance (Rct) is much higher for the intercalation reaction than that for the extraction.  This is because the intercalation reaction associates with the de-solvation of cations, which is interpreted as a rate-limiting stage of interfacial charge transfer process for intercalation-type electrodes in most cases.  The rate-limiting tendency of de-solvation should be more significant for the divalent cations resulting in a remarkably increase of Rct.  The resistance for the Mg2+-insertion is consistently enhanced comparing with that for the Mg2+-extraction, but not surprisingly high (2300–2750 Ω for –0.5 V and –1.0 V (vs. Ag+/Ag)), which is ~1.8 times higher than that for the monovalent Na+ (1320–1480 Ω for 3.0 V and 2.5 V (vs. Na+/Na)).  The computational study has corroborated the considerably larger activation energies of Mg2+ comparing with those of Na+: the calculated de-solvation energy values for Mg2+ were reported to be 552.9 kJ mol–1 and 623.0 kJ mol–1 with EC and DEC, respectively, in stark contrast to those for Na+ of 151.9 kJ mol–1 (EC) and 147.5 kJ mol–1 (DEC).47  Indeed, such large activation energies for de-solvation are the major obstacle of Mg electroplating.  It is speculated that the CEI layer might help a smooth de-solvation and following intercalation of Mg2+.  The moderate charge transfer resistance might allow for the charge and discharge capability at room temperature.
Focusing on the linear component at low frequencies, which is relevant to the ionic diffusion in solid, the impedance spectra of the Mg-ion cell (Figure 4 (e)) exhibit the sloping line with the angle of ~45° following the Warburg impedance, thereby implying the semi-infinite diffusion.  On the contrary, the steeper slope is given in the Na-ion system with the identical crystalline size of the active material, indicative of the finite diffusion-like behavior and thereby the higher Na+ mobility.48,49  The relatively fast Na+ diffusion is supported by the preceding work on the electrochemical investigation of the NVP dense sheet reporting the ionic conductivity of ~10–5 S cm–1 at 25 °C.50  Multivalent cations with higher charge are naturally affected by the electrostatic interaction from more polarized host lattice resulting in the reduced diffusion rate, which has been manifested by many preceding researches.1,2  In addition, the ionic mobility is also influenced by the population of ions (or vacancies) in the host lattice.  Referring to the ab intio study by Rong et al.,7 the dependence of diffusion barrier on the intercalant concentration depends on the type of host lattice; spinel Mn2O4 and layered NiO2 show the lower barrier in the cation-intercalated (fully occupied) state while the remarkably higher energy is required for the ionic migration in the discharged olivine FePO4 host in comparison to the empty state.  In the case of the NASICON-type desodiated NVP, the decreased diffusion coefficient and thus slower migration of Mg2+ for the magnesiation process was reported like the olivine system.
On discharging, the desolvation of Mg2+ in the electrolyte takes place followed by the insertion at the crystal surface.  Then, the boundary between the magnesiated phase and NaV2(PO4)3 moves inward in each crystal, if assuming the simple two-phase reaction.  Since the empty state is dominant in the host lattice at the early stage of discharging, where the electrode experienced the large polarization as shown in Figure 4 (b), the faster Mg2+ mobility in the empty state would lead to the opposite polarization behavior if the electrochemical reaction is governed by the diffusion process.  It follows that the observed large polarization on discharging arose from the interfacial charge transfer step and thereby the de-solvation of Mg2+.  In another scenario, it is speculated that the incipient process of the Mg2+-insertion into NaV2(PO4)3 correlated with the slope region from 0.1 V to –0.3 V (vs. Ag+/Ag) in Figure 4 (b) might be incriminated as a cause of the large polarization. 
Introduction of Mg ions in the NASICON-type host lattice was investigated by the STEM observation associated with the elemental mapping analysis as shown in Figure S4.  The presence of Mg was verified by the EDS mapping image, where the Mg signals were distributed over the particles.  The detection of Mg in the area other than the NASICON-type crystals indicates the formation of a CEI film containing Mg by the electrolyte breakdown.
The elemental profile of the electrode after the intercalation of Mg2+ was also probed by the XPS measurement.  The selected XPS core-level spectra for the Mg2+-inserted electrode was exhibited in Figure 5, comparing with those for the pristine NVP and Na+-extracted electrodes.  The Na 1s peak intensity relative to the V 2p counterpart obviously decreased by the electrochemical Na+-extraction, while the Mg 2p peak appeared after the Mg2+-insertion.  Simultaneously, the V 2p peaks shifted to the higher binding energy by the Na+-extraction, which reverted back after the Mg2+-insertion.  These results substantiate the successful Na+-extraction and Mg2+-insertion of NVP in concert with the oxidation and reduction of vanadium.17  The XPS spectra of the Mg2+-inserted electrode involve signals derived from the passivation film.  The previous work documented that the anodic decomposition products of LiBF4 in carbonate-based electrolyte were composed of lithium organic salts like lithium oxalate and alkyl carbonates as well as LiOH.35  Hence, the passivation film on the Mg2+-inserted electrode probably consists of magnesium analogues.  The C 1s and O 1s core-level spectra (Figure S5) showing the bands assigned to O–C=O and C–O–C indicate the presence of alkyl carbonates.  It was also confirmed that these signals were diminished in the C 1s spectrum while changed to the single band of PO4 (532 eV) in the O 1s spectrum on sputtering the surface, as shown in Figure S5 (a) and (b). On the contrary, although the small decrease in the peak intensity was observed by sputtering, the intense peak at 51.7 eV persisted in the Mg 2p spectrum (Figure S5 (c)).  This result underpins the introduction of Mg2+ inside the NASICON-type host crystallites. The structural variation of the NASICON-type host lattice through the electrochemical Na+-extraction and Mg2+-insertion was investigated by the ex-situ XRD measurement.  The samples after the electrochemical reactions were measured in an air tight cell under Ar atmosphere.  The XRD pattern indexed in the space group of R3c for the pristine NVP sample was preserved through the electrochemical processes whilst the peak shift was detected arising from the change of lattice constants, as demonstrated in Figure S6 (a).  The calculated lattice parameters were plotted in Figure S6 (b).  As reported previously,17,18 the Na+-extraction from NVP caused the decrease in both a and c lattice constants and thereby the volume shrinkage of the lattice.  After the magnesiation, the cell expanded again in terms of both a and c axes.  The increase of lattice constant was larger for the c axis than that for the a axis, and this tendency agrees with the result reported by Zeng et al.
For the direct investigation of the structural variations induced by the Mg2+-insertion, we performed atomic-resolution ABF- and ADF-STEM imaging for the pristine NVP and Mg2+-inserted sample, as shown in Figure 6 (a) and (b), respectively.  The images are viewed along the [110] direction as illustrated in Figure 6 (c).  In order to reduce the significant electron beam irradiation damage, we sequentially acquired multiple-frames at the same area, which were averaged by the cross-correlation alignment.51  The repeating-unit-cell averaging technique52 was also leveraged to improve the signal-to-noise ratio resulting in the clearer images (see the insets in Figure 6 (a) and (b)).  As the heavier atomic column becomes brighter in ADF-STEM images owing to the Z-contrast nature (Z specifies the atomic number),53 the atomic columns of P and V can be well-visualized as bright-dot contrasts in the case of NVP.  Meanwhile, the ABF-STEM imaging is sensitive to both light and heavy atoms, where the atomic column locations are visualized as dark-dot contrasts.54  Comparing the ABF-STEM images with the respective ADF images, the dark-contrast elongations were observed near the P atomic columns in the ABF images, indicating the presence of light atoms including O, Na and Mg atoms (refer to Figure 6 (c)). 
As confirmed by the XRD analysis, the NASICON-type host lattice framework maintained even after the Na+-extraction and Mg2+-insertion.  However, the slight obscuration of the ADF- and ABF-STEM images by the Mg2+-insertion, as shown in Figure 6 (b), suggests that the lattice distortion was introduced by the electrochemical magnesiation.  This behavior might be associated with the gradual broadening of the redox signals on cycling observed in the CV curves (Figure 4 (a)).  It transpires that the intercalation of Mg2+ induces the amorphization of host lattice in some cases, which imposes the poor electrode performance.  For instance, Zhang and Ling set forth the fairly poor Mg2+-storage capability in the olivine-type FePO4 lattice by the surface amorphization caused by the initial Mg2+-insertion.11  Sun et al. also remarked such an amorphization penalty with respect to the calcium ferrite-type host lattice.55  In the case of the NVP-derived host lattice, the magnesiation compromised the integrity to some extent, but the robust framework composed of three-dimensionally tethered VO6 and PO4 polyanions managed to stand for the amorphizing force.
The current study demonstrates the Mg2+-insertion/extraction property of the NASICON-type host lattice derived from NVP, which was prepared via the citrate gel route followed by the anodic de-intercalation of Na+.  The electrochemical properties of the desodiated NVP electrode in a Mg-ion cell were obtained by means of the three-electrode cell assembled with the reliable Ag reference and the Mg(BF4)2-based electrolyte with high oxidative stability.  The charge and discharge profile exhibited the decent performance in reversible capacity (>85% of the theoretical capacity) and the high operation potential.  Though suffering from the relatively large polarization for discharging, the results signify the potential of the NASICON-type cathode to offer >2.5 V-class rechargeable batteries together with a Mg metal anode operable at room temperature.  To this end, it is necessary to find an appropriate electrolyte as well as to develop a facile synthetic route to obtain either NaV2(PO4)3 or MgxNaV2(PO4)3.  Synthesis of NaV2(PO4)3 by means of the desodiation of NVP is, irrespective of the oxidation process (chemical or electrochemical), costly and time-consuming, which is unfavorable for a large production.  However, all the trials for synthesizing MgxNaV2(PO4)3 via the citrate gel approach have failed as far as we challenged so far.  Other NASICON-type analogues are worthwhile being investigated, which is our ongoing research.