In the present study, the electrical properties of lithium-based Li1.3Al0.3−xYxTi1.7(PO4)3 (LAYTP) system is reported. Yttrium is a rare earth element and has been found to be an excellent sintering aid in ceramic electrode materials. Earlier attempts to replace the tetravalent Ti4+ using trivalent cations like Al3+, Y3+, In3+, and Sc3+ in rhombohedral NASICON structure have resulted in enhanced electrical conductivity. The effect of trivalent cation Y3+ doping in an optimized system Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) is discussed. The electrical properties of this ceramic compound in temperature range of 303 to 423 K and in the microwave frequency range of 20 MHz to 1 Hz were studied for the LAYTP system using impedance spectroscopy. The role of yttrium to improve the density of the material and thereby the study of the grain and grain boundary is explored.

Na-like super ionic conductors (NASICONs) are an important class of ion-conducting solids. First of such solids was predicted and studied by Goodenough et al. [1] and Hong [2]. NASICONs form an important class of materials which have been studied for their potential applications in batteries [3, 4]. Doping variations at octahedral (tetravalent cation) site have been attempted for a number of compositions [5]. An excellent review of NASICON materials is available by Anantharamulu et al. [6]. Lithium-based NASICON compounds like lithium titanium phosphate (LiTi2(PO4)3) (LTP) [7–11] have attracted much attention as cathode materials due to their open structure, facilitating intercalation and decalation that can be used in lithium batteries. These compounds have open channels (called bottlenecks) which span across the 3-D structure. [12–14]. The Li+ ions traverse along these channels in the NASICON compounds to reach cationic vacancy M1 sites. These sites are formed inside the rhombohedral (R3c ) NASICON phase. The NASICON phase is formed at the inversion center of three PO4 tetrahedra and two MO6 octahedra (where M is a trivalent cation like Al3+ and Y3+). The NASICON ceramic compounds have a general formula (LiMIV(I)(PO4)3) (where M is a tetravalent cation like Ti4+, Ge4+, and Zr4+). In these studies (especially by Aono et al. [7]), it was found that doping a NASICON material like LTP with trivalent cations like Al3+ ,Ga3+, Sc3+, In3+, Y3+, Fe3+, and Cr3 increases the Li+ ionic conductivity. The general formula for Al-doped LTP system is Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 (LATP), in which partial replacement of Ti4+ (0.6 Å) by Al3+ (0.53 Å) is possible due to comparable ionic radii of Ti4+ and Al3+. But, this leads to a distortion in the unit cell of the rhombohedral LTP unit. Of the different concentrations studied for Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 systems, the optimum ionic conductivity has been found to be for concentration x=0.3.

Doping of yttrium in the NASICON system LTP and thereby examining its effect on the electrical properties had been attempted by Aono et al. [7, 8] and Sobiestiankas et al. [12]. The maximum overall ionic conductivity for such Li–Y– −3 S/cm, Ti–(PO4)3 system was found to be of the order of ~10 and it might seem that Y3+ contributes to Li+ ion conductivity in LTP system. Replacing Al3+ by another trivalent cation in the optimized Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) system could yield interesting results because there is a possibility of further distortion of the rhombohedral lattice structure due to larger ionic radii of Y3+ (0.93 Å). Hence, the ceramic system Li1.3Al0.3−xYxTi1.7(PO4)3, x=(0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15), has been investigated in the present study. Salkus et al. have also studied Li1.3Al0.15Y0.15Ti1.7(PO4)3 ceramic (LAYTP) [15, 16] for its structure and conduction properties and proved that the grain and grain boundary conductivities are thermally activated.

In general, the crystalline NASICON materials synthesized via a solid-state reaction suffer from a lack of proper grain contacts. The ion experiences a resistance at the grain boundary which becomes an important factor in the overall conductivity [13, 14]. We have also tried to investigate the possibility of using yttrium oxide (Y2O3) as a binder for better grain contacts.

Laboratory-grade lithium carbonate (Li2CO3), ammonium diphosphate (NH4H2(PO4)), Y2O3, titanium oxide (TiO2), and alumina (Al2O3) (Loba Chemie, Mumbai, India) were taken according to their stoichiometric weight percentages in a cool and dry atmosphere. The compositions and nomenclature of the different samples are listed in Table 1. The weighed powders were mixed in a ceramic mortar and pestle and hand-grinded for 30 min. The mixture was then heated in ceramic ampoules in a furnace to 873 K for 20 min. Later, in the furnace itself. This mixture was again hand-grinded for 20 min. The resulting white fine powder was heated in ceramic ampoules to 1,073 K for 45 min after and was then left in the furnace to cool. The next cycle of hand grinding was done on the mix for 30 min. This resulted in a very fine white powder. Pellets of 2–3-mm thickness and 10-mm diameter were prepared on a hydraulic pelletizer at a pressure of 5 tons psi. The pellets were heated to 1,173 K for 1 h and allowed to slowly cool in the furnace itself. The pellets so obtained were white, hard ceramics with a smooth surface. We have done wet grinding manually in all grinding cycles in an agate mortar and pestle.

For the electrical characterization of the samples, impedance spectroscopy was done using the impedance gain/phase analyzer (SOLARTRON 1260) interfaced to a computer in the frequency range of 2 MHz to 1 Hz in a temperature range of 303 to 423 K. For impedance measurements, silver paste was applied on both sides of the pellets before mounting them on a sample holder. X-ray diffraction (XRD) using Rigatu MiniFlex CuKα line (λ=1.5405 Å) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (JOEL, Oxford) were performed on the samples to ascertain the microstructure of the prepared samples. The density measurements were done using Archimedes principle by weighing the sample in air and then in methanol in a cool and moisture-free atmosphere.

Figure 1 shows the XRD scans of the four samples of the LAYTP series. The NASICON phase (LiTi2(PO4)3) peak is prominently seen at 2θ≈24° with space group (R3c ). As shown in the figure, there are various impurity phases (at 2θ≈36°, 44°, etc.) along with the NASICON phase. These impurity phases have a negative influence on the Li+ ionic conductivity. These are mainly TiO2 and TiP2O7 phases which are assumed to block the passageways for Li+ ions in the NASICON particles. From the XRD scans, it is clear that with the decrease in the amount of Al in the system, the intensity of the NASICON phase LiTi2(PO4)3 peaks that are typically at 2θ≈24° decreases for the samples. Other LiTi2(PO4)3 peaks are also indicated in Fig. 1.

Equivalent circuit fitting method was used to fit the impedance results. Figure 2 shows the fitted impedance scans for sample S1 at two temperatures 403 and 423 K. The ions move easily in the NASICON phase passageways (bottlenecks). The NASICON units are located within the grain. Therefore, the Li+ motion within the NASICON particles (and hence grains) is easy and corresponds to a smaller circle on the impedance (Nyquist) plot (Fig. 2). The decreased ionic motion (due to glassy phases) in the grain boundary region corresponds to larger impedance which is shown to fall in the lowfrequency region in the Nyquist plot in Fig. 2. The frequency values corresponding to smaller and bigger circles are indicated in Fig. 2. The low-frequency regime corresponds to ion transport in the grain boundary region, and the high-frequency regime corresponds to the in-grain ion conduction [17–21]. The flow of the Li+ ions in the highand low-frequency domains and across the grain and grain boundary regions can be mimicked by using R and CPE elements in an equivalent circuit model as the fitted values in a Nyquist plot for two temperatures (Fig. 2). Typical values of RGr~105 Ω and that of −9 F from RGB~106 Ω, while CGr~10 the equivalent circuit fitting. With the increase in temperature, the grain and grain boundary impedances decrease, but the capacitance values change little in the studied temperature range. This is typical in polycrystalline materials, where the size of the grain boundary is much smaller than that of the grains.

The conductivity variation in the temperature range of 323 to 423 K for sample 1 (S1) has been shown in Fig. 3. The variation of conductivity across the samples of increasing concentration of Y (and decreasing Al) is shown in Fig. 4 for the LAYTP series. A comparison with the LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) sample indicates the negative impact on conductivity, from the usage of yttrium in the NASICON system. It is clear that Y cannot enter the NASICON framework due to its large ionic radii and cannot contribute to the Li+ ionic conductivity within the grain. This is also seen from the absence of peaks of the yttrium phases in the XRD scans. It is clear from Figs. 3 and 4 however that there are two dispersive regimes in the conductivity isotherms. The highest conductivity is seen for sample S1. This is followed by S3 which has a lower proportion of Al in grains. The least conductivity is found for sample S4 where the concentration of Al is the lowest amongst all the samples studied. From Fig. 4, it can be seen that the grain boundary dispersive region of S4 overlaps other isotherms. This shift for sample 4 is depicted by an arrow in Fig. 4. The changeover in structure and composition of the grain boundary for sample S4 happens at the crossover of low to high frequency. This superior behavior in sample S4 for grain boundary conductivity may be attributed to better grain contacts due to higher concentration of Y2O3 compared to the other samples. On the other hand, the presence of impurities in the grains (like phases of TiO2 and TiP2O7) indicated in Fig. 1 contribute to a compromised Li+ ionic conductivity (notably in sample S2).

The conductivity isotherms are fitted using non-linear curve fitting of the form y= a + bxc which is similar to Jonscher's power law [22], given as follows, where σdc indicates dc conductivity, A is a pre-exponential factor, ω is the jump frequency, and p is the exponential term. Figure 5a, b shows temperature dependence of dc conductivity in grain and grain boundary regions, by Arrhenius plots. The Arrhenius plots indicate that the pristine LTP phase has a maximum number of NASICON units and corresponding vacancies for the Li+ ions to be conducted within the NASICON framework. The number of vacancies exhibits thermally activated nature; hence; the dc conductivity corresponding to the grains in LTP is maximum, followed by the samples of the LAYTP series. It is hence clear that Y (or its phases) acts to either block the vacancy sites if they are present content and proportionately increase Y. The yttrium phases like YPO4 and LiY2(PO4) (not detected in XRD) tend to segregate at the grain boundary which act as binders. This can be seen from Table 1, wherein the density of the samples increases as Y increases in this ceramic system [23]. The density due to the Y phases tends to be at grain boundary in particular.

Sample S1 (Li1.3Al0.29Y0.01Ti1.7(PO4)3) has the highest conductivity value because its composition and structure are nearest to those of Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 which is known to be one of the best Li+ NASICON compounds. Sample S3 (Li1.3Al0.20Y0.10Ti1.7(PO4)3) has also a high conductivity since the amount of Al is higher than that of Y, besides substantial amount of Y2O3 present in the system which acts as a binder at the grain boundaries. It seems that the presence of Y at the grain boundary also alters the grain boundary structure to enhance the passing Li+ mobility. It has been suggested by Arbi et al. [20] that grain boundary might also contain glassy phases with Li. Due to these trapped Li, another Li+ passing by experiences a Li-Li repulsive correlation, which in effect, enhances the mobility (and hence conductivity) of the passing Li+. This might become possible in the present system if LiY2PO4-like glassy phases are formed at the grain boundary. This perhaps might be a reason for superior grain contacts in sample S4 (which contains maximum amount of Y) and increased grain boundary conductivities in S4 (as seen in Figs. 4 and 6). Orliukas et al. [24], for Li1.3Al0.3 −xYxTi1.7(PO4)3 (LAYTP system) series composition, concluded that as Y increased in the system, the overall conductivity increased. They attributed this behavior to Y bonding with less electronegative elements and forms non-crystalline yttrium oxide-like compounds which might have segregated at high temperatures. They show that the overall Li+ conductivity decreases with decreasing concentration of Al.

The conductivity, activation energy, and density are given in Table 1. It is found that the grain conductivity constitutes a major part of the overall conductivity and that the grain boundary resistance is a limiting factor for the Li+ conduction in the system. The overall conductivity of each sample is found to increase with temperature. It has been found by Arbi et al. [15] that excess Al (after concentration x=0.3) is likely to be deposited in the grain boundary regions as glassy phases or forms irreversible phases like berlinite (AlPO4). In the present study, we decrease the Al presence of Al in this system was found to increase the Li+ conductivity. The amount of Al when steadily decreased results in a fall in the Li+ ionic conductivity. The Li+ conductivity of sample S3 which had less Al compared to sample S2 was found to be better in this series. The presence of TiO2 phase and its corresponding peak in the XRD scan for S2 at (006) or (114) parameters might have created a blocking effect (distorted vacancy site) at the octahedral site, resulting in a decrease of conductivity. It also does not seem likely that much of Y enters the rhombohedral structure and distorts the unit cells to further enhance the Li+ ionic conductivity. On the contrary, the Y that might have entered or is near to the NASICON lattices could only block the motion of Li+. Y in the grain boundary also bonds with (PO4)2− units to form glassy phases and contributes in diminishing the population of NASICON LiTi2(PO4)3 phase. These might be possible reasons for decreased Li+ ionic conductivity on replacing Al3+ by Y3+.

In the present work, there is a possibility that sample S2 forms a separated phase of TiO2. From the XRD patterns, it is observed that this separated phase of TiO2 seems to be prominent at 2θ ≈ 27° (006 or 201) only for sample S2 (Li1.3Al0.25Y0.05Ti1.7(PO4)3). Such sites where Ti4+ might be replaced either by Al3+ or by Y3+ may also act as blockages, owing to the distorted unit cell and vacancy site structure. An aggregation of such TiO2 blocking phase(s) in sample S2 may be a probable reason for slightly decreased conductivity compared to S1 and S3.

The SEM images of samples S1 and S4 are given in Figs. 7 and 8, respectively. The SEM images show that even though there are more pores in S4, there seem to be better linkages in S4 at the grain boundaries, compared to S1. But, these linkages seem to be incomplete which may be due to lack of proper heat treatment after the pellets were formed. The number of pores in S4 is observed to be more as compared to that in S1, and also the Al content in S4 has significantly decreased. Due to this, the Li+ conductivity in S4 is found to be minimal amongst the four samples. It seems that the grain boundary structure is altered favorably, and there might be more secondary phases of Y in sample S4, but since the number of Al and NASICON particles have decreased drastically in S4, the grain conductivity has decreased. This effect is also seen clearly in Fig. 5. The grain boundary transport of Li+ seems to have clearly picked up due to the presence of the phases of Y.

The samples were prepared using stoichiometric proportions of the contents. The microstructure details have been analyzed for concentration variation of Al with respect to Y in a system of optimized concentration Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP).