Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) is a promising solid electrolyte for all-solid-state Li ion batteries. In this work, it was synthesized using solid-state reaction with an excess amount of Li to improve grain boundary ionic conductivity. The additional Li improved grain boundary conductivity even though the relative density decreased. This improvement may originate from a beneﬁcial characteristic of grain boundary induced by the segregation of some of Li to the grain boundary. This segregation was indirectly observed by the change of morphology of particles in samples with excess Li. The segregation of Li may result in a facile Li transport in grain boundaries, as indicated by low activation energy and a high pre-exponential factor of the grain boundary conductivity. Through improving grain boundary conductivity with excess Li, a high total ionic conductivity of 1.9 × 10−4 S·cm−1 is achieved at room temperature even with a low relative density of 78%. This porous and high ionic conducting solid electrolyte can be useful in conﬁguring the electrode composite of all-solid-state cells.

Li ion batteries (LIBs) are widely used as power sources for portable devices, and their applications are about to be extended to large-scale applications such as electric vehicles and electrical energy storage systems. The cost, safety, and cycle life requirements of batteries in largescale applications are quite different from those in portable devices [1–3]. For example, safe problems related to liquid electrolyte in present LIBs becomes more important in large-scale batteries [2]. Use of solid electrolytes in a cell can reduce this problem while still meeting the requirements of LIBs in large-scale applications because solid electrolytes have several advantages over liquid electrolytes [4]. Solid electrolytes in a cell can achieve higher energy density because they can have a wide electrochemical window over 4.5 V vs. Li/Li+ which is the upper limit voltage of conventional liquid electrolytes [5]. Furthermore, volumetric energy density of a cell that uses solid electrolyte can be increased because all-solid-state cells can be stacked compactly.

Although solid electrolytes have several advantages, they have lower ionic conductivity than do liquid electrolytes [6]. Solid electrolytes can be sulﬁde-based or oxide-based. Among sulﬁde-based solid electrolytes (SBSEs), Li10GeP2S12 (LGPS) shows the highest ionic conductivity, ~1.2 × 10−2 S·cm−1 at room temperature; this exceeds the ionic conductivity of conventional liquid electrolyte [7]. However, LGPS suffers from strong reactivity with air and moisture which can lead to an expensive synthesis [8,9] and other SBSEs suffer from strong reactivity with air and Li metal [10–13]. Oxide-based solid electrolytes (OBSEs) have been actively developed to achieve high ionic conductivity; they also have high stability with Li metal or air [14,15]. However, the ionic conductivity of OBSEs is not high enough because of very low grain boundary conductivity. Many efforts have been focused on improving grain boundary conductivity of OBSEs. A main idea for these efforts is to minimize the effect of grain boundaries on ionic conductivity. Methods to accomplish this minimization include the development of a glass-ceramic process and use of sintering to increase OBSE density [16,17].

Among OBSEs, Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) has several advantages over other electrolytes such as Li1 + xAlxTi2 − x(PO4)3 (LATP) or Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO). Although LAGP and LATP have the same NASICON-type structure, LAGP has a wide electrochemical window whereas LATP has a narrow one because LATP reacts with Li metal at ~2.4 V (vs. Li/Li+) due to the redox reaction of Ti4+ [18]. Compared to garnet-type solid electrolytes such as LLZO, LAGP can be easily synthesized without any phase transition during synthesis.[6,11,19]. However, LAGP still suffers from poor ionic conductivity; to improve it, characteristics of grain boundary should be understood and grain boundary ionic conductivity should be increased. In this study, we developed a simple way of using an excess amount of Li to increase grain boundary conductivity. LAGP samples with excess amounts of Li were synthesized by simple solid-state reaction. The additional amount of Li in LAGP samples increased grain boundary conductivity, thereby leading to an increase in ionic conductivity. Some of the excess Li could be segregated to the grain boundary. This segregation may lead to beneﬁcial Li transport in the grain boundary, and facile Li transport can increase grain boundary conductivity.

However, the segregation of Li to the grain boundary can reduce the relative density of LAGP samples. Although the excess Li reduced the relative density of the samples, the grain boundary conductivity was comparable to bulk ionic conductivity. We investigated the effect of microscopic physical factors on the electrical properties and discussed a possible mechanism for the increase of grain boundary conductivity despite the decrease in relative density.

Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 was synthesized by solid-state reaction. Li2CO3, Al2O3, GeO2, (NH4)2HPO4 were stoichiometrically weighed [20]. An additional 10 or 20% of Li2CO3 was added to the precursors. The precursors were mixed overnight by ball milling with 3, 5, and 10-mm zirconia balls and acetone solvent at 200 rpm. The mixture was dried on a hot plate, then ground using an agate mortar with a pestle. Then the mixture was calcined at 900 °C for 2 h in a box furnace in air to evaporate volatile material and to form the LAGP phase. The LAGP powder was ground again in an agate mortar with a pestle then pulverized to about half micrometer size using a planetary ball mill with 1-mm zirconia balls and acetone solvent in a zirconia container at 500 rpm for 2 h. After drying and grinding, the pulverized particles were put into a mold and pressed at ~500 MPa for 5 min to form a 12.9-mm pellet. The pellet was sintered in a box furnace again at 800 °C for 2 h in air.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the samples were obtained using a Rigaku XRD (D/MAX-2500/PC) using Cu Kα radiation in the 2θ range from 10° to 60° at a rate of 2°·min−1. The sintered samples are measured in their pellet shape. The obtained XRD patterns were analyzed using the MDI jade 6 software program. The theoretical density of LAGP and LAGP with excess Li was calculated from the rietveld reﬁnement by using X'pert highscore plus software program. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurement was performed on cross sections of sintered and broken pellets using a Philips electron optics B.V. ﬁeld emission SEM (XL30S FEG). The ionic conductivity of the synthesized samples was measured by using Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS, Ivium).

The prepared pellets were disk-shaped with diameter ~1.2 cm and thickness ~0.16 cm. Ag paste was applied to both sides of the pellet to form ionic blocking electrodes, then dried at 200 °C for 10 min. The impedance spectroscopy of the samples was measured over the range of frequencies from 1 MHz to 0.01 Hz with an applied voltage of 0.1 V [21]. The data were described as customized equivalent circuits using ZView2 impedance software.

The conductivity of bulk and grain boundary can be distinguished at low temperatures. During measurements, the sample was held in a temperature and humidity test chamber (Jeio tech., Republic of Korea) to maintain and control the temperature and humidity. Impedance spectra were measured at temperatures from 80 °C to −40 °C to obtain Arrhenius plots.

XRD patterns (Fig. 1) of all LAGP samples were measured after sintering at 800 °C for 2 h. The LAGP phase was well-synthesized under all conditions. As the amount of additional Li increased, the amount of the GeO2 phase linearly increased. The bulk composition of LAGPs with excess Li may have less Ge than does LAGP because of the existence of GeO2. Therefore, the bulk composition of LAGP samples with excess Li may be slightly different from the stoichiometry.

The sintered LAGP (Fig. 2a) and LAGP with 20%Li (LAGP20%L) (Fig. 2b) had similar particle sizes. However, contacts between particles in LAGP and LAGP20%L are different because the gaps between the particles were smaller in LAGP than in LAGP20%L. This difference affected the density of the pellet: the average relative density of LAGP was 87% (2.97 g·cm−3) and that of LAGP20%L was 78% (2.68 g·cm−3). Therefore, the excess Li decreased the densiﬁcation of the pellet. Furthermore, the LAGP particles were faceted whereas the LAGP20%L particles were rectangular. Typically, the shape of particles is controlled by their surface energy during sintering [22]. Therefore, LAGP and LAGP20%L may have different surface energies. This different morphology indirectly indicates that the excess Li can migrate to the surface or the grain boundary, thereby changing its surface energy.

The electrical properties of the LAGP samples were measured at various temperatures and the Nyquist plot at −40 °C was drawn (Fig. 3). Using this impedance data, resistances of the samples were obtained and their conductivities were calculated with their geometric factor. For the LAGP system, the Li ions in the bulk respond at higher frequency than those in the grain boundary so the resistivity at high frequency is related to bulk conductivity and the resistivity at low frequency is related to grain boundary conductivity [23]. It is worthy to note that the bulk semicircle did not appear at room temperature and was deviated at high frequency even at low temperature partly due to the limitation of frequency range in EIS equipment. However, this deviation did not affect the bulk resistance because that resistance was measured from the zero to right intercept of bulk semicircle. At temperatures b0 °C, the bulk can be easily distinguished from the grain boundary because the two semicircles that appeared; the conductivities of the bulk and the grain boundary are calculated by ﬁtting [24]. Total (Fig. 3b), bulk (Fig. 3c) and grain boundary ionic conductivity (Fig. 3d) increased with temperatures. The range of the measured temperature was 80 °C to −40 °C for total conductivity and 0 °C to −40 °C for bulk and grain boundary conductivity. The total ionic conductivity of the samples also increased as the excess of Li increased (Fig. 3b). The change of bulk conductivity with increasing Li excess was not signiﬁcant (Fig. 3c) although the stoichiometry of LAGP was slightly changed due to the existence of GeO2 impurity. The GeO2 phase barely affects the ionic conductivity even though the amount increased as the excess of Li increased.

Grain boundary conductivity increased as the Li increased (Fig. 3d). Furthermore, the grain boundary conductivity of the LAGP20%L was the highest among all samples (Fig. 3d) and is similar to the bulk conductivity of the LAGP20%L. Therefore the increase of total ionic conductivity in the samples with excess Li mainly originates from grain boundary conductivity, not from bulk conductivity.

To understand the origin of the increase in total ionic conductivity, the Arrhenius-type conductivity Eq. (1) was used to calculate the activation energies and pre-exponential factors (Table 1) of the samples using the bulk and grain boundary ionic conductivity data measured at different temperatures, where σ [S/cm] is conductivity, σ0 is a pre-exponential factor which is related to parameters such as hopping distance, carrier concentration and entropy, Ea [eV] is activation energy, k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is absolute temperature [K]. In the samples with excess Li, the activation energy of total conductivity for all samples was ~0.41 eV, which is consistent with the reported value and changes very little.[24] In contrast, the excess of Li in the samples slightly increased the activation energy of the bulk and decreased the activation energy of the grain boundary. However, the difference between the activation energies of the bulk and the grain boundary was only ~0.03 eV; this similarity is very different from typical oxygen ionic conductor such as YSZ [25].

The excess of Li increased the pre-exponential factors for total, bulk and grain boundary conductivity in the samples, especially, that of the grain boundary. Although the activation energy in the LAGP20%L sample was slightly lower in the bulk than at the grain boundary, the bulk and grain boundary conductivities were similar over the measured temperature range because of high pre-exponential factor of the grain boundary conductivity.

The value of the pre-exponential factor for the grain boundary can also explain the difference of grain boundary conductivities between LAGP10%L and LAGP20%L. Therefore, the excess Li in LAGP samples may inﬂuence the activation energy and the pre-exponential factor of the grain boundary conductivity. The total conductivity of the LAGP20%L sample at room temperature was 1.9 × 10−4 S·cm−1 which is slightly higher than in the other samples. The total conductivity in the LAGP samples increased because the grain boundary conductivity is substantially improved by the low activation energy and the high pre-exponential factor. The total ionic conductivity of the LAGP20%L sample synthesized by simple solid-state reaction at room temperature is comparable to that of glass ceramic LAGP from literatures [20,24,26].

Total ionic conductivities at room temperature varied with the relative densities of the samples (Fig. 4). The theoretical densities of the samples are obtained from XRD reﬁnement. The theoretical density of LAGP and LAGP with excess Li is 3.41 g·cm−3 and 3.42 g·cm−3, respectively. However, the pellet densities of LAGP samples were from 2.6 g·cm−3 to 3.0 g·cm−3. As the excess amount of Li increased, the relative density decreased and the total ionic conductivity at room temperature increased (Fig. 4). Typically, ionic conductivity of a polycrystalline material increases with its density [16,27]. However, the observed trend was opposite to this expectation: the total conductivity of LAGP20%L was higher than that of LAGP even though the relative density of LAGP20%L is much lower than that of LAGP. Considering that the increase of total conductivity with excess Li originates from the increase of grain boundary conductivity, excess Li substantially increased grain boundary conductivity, thereby overcoming the negative effect of low relative density on the conductivity.

As the excess amount of Li added into the precursors of LAGP increased, the total ionic conductivity increased because of increase in the grain boundary conductivity. However, the estimated grain boundary conductivities do not represent the characteristic of the grain boundary, because the obtained conductivities were calculated using the geometry of the pellets, not the geometry of the grain boundary. To obtain intrinsic grain boundary conductivity, the geometry of grain boundary should be considered. However, direct measurement of the geometry of grain boundary such as thickness or area is a difﬁcult task.

The grain boundary conductivity of LAGP material can be indirectly obtained by utilizing a Brick-layer model (BLM) which simpliﬁes the structure of the bulk and grain boundary [28]. Using this model, the thickness of a single serial grain boundary or the thickness ratio of the grain boundary to single bulk can be estimated. The grain boundary conductivity that is calculated by this ratio is called speciﬁc grain boundary conductivity [24,28]. Considering that the bulk and grain boundary component are in series (Fig. 3a) and that the bulk is much thicker than the grain boundary in SEM images (Fig. 2), the BLM can be applied in this study. Also, the contribution of parallel grain boundary to the total ionic conductivity of the samples can be assumed to be negligible [24].

From the BLM model, speciﬁc grain boundary conductivity σsgb can be obtained using Eqs. (2) and (3), where subscript b means bulk, subscript gb means grain boundary, C [F] is capacitance, ε is the permittivity of the sample, S [cm2] is the cross sectional area of one grain and one grain boundary, d [cm] and D [cm] are thickness of a grain boundary and a grain respectively, R [Ω] is the resistance, t [cm] is the thickness of the sample, and A [cm2] is its cross sectional area. For the BLM model, S and ε are the same for the bulk and the grain boundary. We also assume that grains and grain boundaries have identical permittivity; then, from (2), Cb/Cgb = d/D. If the capacitance of the bulk and the grain boundary in samples are calculated using customized equivalent circuits, then the speciﬁc grain boundary conductivity can be obtained. Cb and Cgb of the samples (Table 2) were obtained at −40 °C with the measured impedance spectra data (Fig. 3), where C [F] is capacitance, Qo is the numerical value of the admittance (1/|Z|) at ω = 1 rad s−1, n is related to the depressed angle of a semicircle, and R [Ω] is resistance [29]. The capacitances were calculated from the impedance data. The capacitance of the bulk is strongly affected by the bulk resistance that can be correctly obtained at low temperature because the bulk and grain boundary are clearly distinguished and the deviation of the bulk semicircle at high frequency is minimized at lower temperature. To correctly obtain the capacitance of the bulk and the capacitance ratio, the data obtained at −40 °C was utilized. And then, the capacitance ratios of bulk to grain boundary at different temperatures were assumed to be the same because the thickness of bulk and grain boundary is independent of the measurement temperatures. Therefore, the activation energy of a speciﬁc grain boundary is the same as that of the grain boundary. The speciﬁc grain boundary conductivity of the samples was calculated using the ﬁtted Cb/Cgb values.

In Arrhenius plots (Fig. 5) of speciﬁc grain boundary conductivity of the LAGP samples, the speciﬁc grain boundary conductivity has a similar tendency to that of the grain boundary conductivity obtained using the geometry of the pellet. Speciﬁc grain boundary conductivity increased linearly with the excess amount of Li. This implies that the increase of grain boundary conductivity is a characteristic of the grain boundary of the material, not of the pellet. Therefore, excess Li may have positive effects on the characteristics of grain boundary, thereby resulting in the increase in its conductivity. For example, a facile Li conduction in grain boundaries at the samples with the excess Li may be possible and increases speciﬁc grain boundary conductivity.

Although relative densities of the samples decreased as the amount of excess Li increased, total ionic conductivities increased due to the increase in grain boundary conductivity (Fig. 4). To understand this behavior of total conductivity, the characteristics of grain boundary can be

Table 2 Estimated capacitances of bulk, grain boundary and their ratio of LAGP samples at −40 °C.

Fig. 4. The relationship of total ionic conductivity (right, square) with relative density (left, circle) in all sintered pellets at room temperature. Red closed circle represents the average pellet density and black closed square represents total ionic conductivity at each condition. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Although the excess Li can reduce the density of the samples (Figs. 2d, 4), the grain boundary conductivity is further increased. This indicates that the enhancement of the characteristic of the grain boundary outweighs the negative effect of the low relative densities on the grain boundary conductivity. The factor that most strongly affects grain boundary conductivity may be the characteristic of the grain boundary. Using a simple approach such as providing an excess of Li in LAGP, the characteristic of grain boundary is beneﬁcially controlled and the grain boundary conductivity is increased even with the low relative density.

Furthermore, this porous solid electrolyte with high ionic conductivity such as the LAGP20%L sample can be very useful in conﬁguring electrode composite in all-solid-state cell because pores of the electrolyte can help increase the contact of an active material or a conducting additive, and can accommodate the volumetric change during charging/ discharging.

We developed a simple solid-state process to increase the conductivity of the grain boundary in Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) by using an excess of Li. The excess of Li increased the total ionic conductivity by increasing both grain boundary conductivity and speciﬁc grain boundary conductivity. This increase of the grain boundary conductivity may originate from segregation of Li to the grain boundary to form Li-rich structures which may reduce the activation energy and increase the concentration of charge carriers, thereby increasing grain boundary conductivity. The excess Li also decreases the relative density, and can therefore reduce the ionic conductivity. However, even though relative densities of the samples decrease as the amount of excess Li increased, the grain boundary conductivity in the samples is increased. This indicates that beneﬁcial effects of excess Li on the grain boundary conductivity outweigh the negative effect of relative density on the conductivity. The increased grain boundary conductivity in the LAGP20%L sample was close to the bulk conductivity. This simple approach of adding excess Li achieved 1.9 × 10−4 S·cm−1 total ionic conductivity at room temperature in the LAGP20%L sample even though the relative density was only 78%.
