NASICON-type Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) has been regarded as one of the most promising cathode materials for high-voltage sodium-ions battery because of its high theoretical energy density and stable crystal structure. However, NVP suffers from low electronic conductivity, limiting the utilization of active material and hampers its rate performance. Herein, a facile one-pot synthesis to construct dual nitrogen-doped carbon decorated on NVP is proposed to improve the cyclic stability and capacity of NVP. In addition, the pyrolysis of urea at high temperature produces volatile materials that expand the reduced graphene oxide (rGO) mechanically while doping nitrogen into the carbon layer creating defects in the carbon layer. Consequently, the NVP@C/rGO-U delivers 107, 101, and 87 mAh g-1 at 1 C, 5 C and 25 C, respectively, and 91% capacity retention after 500 cycles at 5 C. Furthermore, even at a higher mass loading, it can still deliver 96 mAh g-1 at 5 C with a good capacity retention, implying its outstanding electrochemical properties. Additionally, the NVP@C/rGO-U shows excellent structure stability and delivers 162 mAh g-1  at 1 C when the voltage window increases to 1-4 V. The facile synthesis method provides an alternative insight to industrial production of high-energy-density SIBs with superior fast-charging properties.
n the search of alternative to lithium-ion battery, sodium-ion battery is one of the most promising candidates for large scale electrochemical storage system.1-2 Besides being abundant and low cost, sodium-ion battery also has similar electrochemical mechanism as lithium-ion battery. However, Na+ ions are 55% larger than Li+ ions leading to more  sluggish transference in crystal structure of the cathode material. Thus, it is still challenging to develop a high capacity cathode material that Na+ ions can (de)intercalate at a fast rate with a good cyclic stability for commericialisation.
Na3M2(PO4)3 (M = V, Ti, or Fe), as a NASICON-type of electrode, has a robust framework with PO4 tetrahedra sharing corner with MO6 octahedra.5-7 Na ion can occupy two Na sites (one Na(1) and three Na(2) per formula unit) and 0.75 occupation for all site. The strong covalent lantern unit provides high structural stability and small volumetric change during intercalation/de-intercalation of Na ions. In additional, the 3D large open framework and wide interstitial channel provide fast Na+ diffusivity within its crystal. The rhombohedral Na3V2(PO4) 3 (in short NVP) with R3c space group has three redox potential at 0.5 V, 1.6 V and 3.4 V vs Na/Na+ that is addressed to V2+/V1+, V3+/V2+ and V3+/V4+ respectively. Despite so, NVP is only deemed as one of the strongest candidates to be utilised as cathode at 3.4 V vs Na/Na+ (V3+/V4+) due to its high theoretical energy  density of around 400 Wh kg-1 (or 118 mAh g-1) when two Na ions are being extractedrom the lattice. In addition, the good thermal stability allow operation at a wide temperature range. At 3.4 V redox potential, the transition from Na3V2(PO4)3 to NaV2(PO4)3 involved two-phase reaction under operation conditions (eg. Na3V2(PO4)3 ↔ Na2V2(PO4)3 ↔ NaV2(PO4)3).8 Moreover, a moderate volume change of around 8.26% uring makes NVP significant for long term cycling and large-scale application.
However, the poor intrinsic electrical conductivity of NVP has resulted in sluggish eaction kinetics through the electrode and low utilization of active material even at low harge rates. Thus, integration of a current conductive phase, such as carbon, and conductive phase coating with nanosized NVP particles are important to improve the electrochemical performance.13-20 More importantly, graphene is one of the most interesting 2-dimensional (2D) honeycomb lattice with carbon atoms that has remarkable electron mobility (ca 200 000 cm2 V-1 s-1) and high mechanical strength. Due to easy processing and handling, graphene oxide (GO) is usually used as the precursor and it was reduced to obtain reduced graphene oxide (rGO) that has similar property as graphene. Consequently, composite cathode, such as carbon-coated nanosized NVP and rGO, has significantly improve the electronic conductivity resulting in discharge capacity closed to the theoretical value.24-33 For example, NVP embedded in rGO layers presented to have a reversible capacity of 107 mAh g-1 and retained 90% of initial discharge capacity after 1000 cycles at 10 C rate.33 However, carbon suffers from poor Na+ ions diffusion and limited active sites for the electrochemical reaction resulting from the tight carbon-NVP wrapping. It has been reported that nitrogen (N) doped carbon layer has numerous defects that will not only enhance the electron transportation, but also facilitate the diffusion Na ions through the carbon layer during electrochemical reaction. Figure 1(a) shows the three different N-C bonding configurations, namely, pyridinic N, pyrrolic N, and quaternary N, in N-doped graphene. Pyridinic N is bonded to two C atoms n the hexagonal ring and denotes one p-electron to the aromatic π system, pyrrolic N is bonded to two C atoms in the pentagonal ring and donate two p-electrons, and quaternary N substitute carbon atom on the edge or inside without altering the carbon structure.36, 38- The existence of both pyridinic N and pyrrolic N can create extrinsic defect sites that provides electrochemical active sites for the smooth Na+ migration through the carbon layer.
Besides, even though composite NVP-rGO cathode can deliver good capacity rating and cyclability in current researches, it requires hydrothermal and/or freeze-drying method to achieve the NVP-rGO structure. These processes have made this material less attractive for commercialization due to longer processing time and high cost. In this work, dual-carbon strategy with NVP particles connected by 3D mesoporous carbon structureanchored on expanded N-doped rGO is proposed using a facile sol-gel method. The mesoporous carbon structure can be obtained due to the crosslinking of citric acid forming a carbon framework at the initial mixing stage. During thermal treatment, the pyrolysis of urea expanded the GO mechanically while doping the carbon layer with nitrogen shown in Figure 1(b). ccordingly, the NVP@C/rGO-U delivered a high discharge capacity of 107 and 86 mAh g-1 at 1 C and 25 C, respectively, with  91% capacity retention  at 5 C after 500 cycles. More importantly, the discharge capacity merely decreases with the mass loading increasing due to the superior Na+ diffusion induced by dual nitrogen doping and effective containing of volume expansion of NVP by the soft carbonaceous matrix, which gives much opportunity for the high-energy-density SIBs with superior fast-charging properties.As depicted in Figure 1(b), the mesoporous carbon network with Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP)embedded on expanded rGO (NVP@C/rGO-U) was synthesized via a facile process. Firstly, 4.68 g of NH4VO3 was dissolved in 40 mL DI water at 80 °C, and then 8.97 g of citric acid was added into the solution (V source: citric acid molar ratio of 6:7). Besides being the carbon source, citric acid also acts as the reducing and chelating agent. The reduction of V was indicated when the orange solution turned into dark blue. Subsequently, 3.18 g of Na2CO3 and 7.04 g of NH4H2PO4 were added into the solution and stirred to obtain a homogenous solution. GO, from Abaloynx, and urea were added into the mixture and stirred vigorously with intermediate ultrasonic vibration to expand the  GO and obtain homogenous mixture. Then, the mixture was stirred to dry at around 60 °C to dry. The precursor was grounded and calcined at 750 °C for 8 h in Ar/H2 (95:5) environment. As a control material, NVP@C was synthesized without addition of GO and  urea. To investigate the effect of urea in reducing the GO, NVP@C/rGO was synthesized in similar steps without the addition of urea.  The crystal structure of the electrodes was characterised using X-ray diffraction (XRD) Cu Kα (Shimazu, XRD-6000) at a step size of 0.02 °, and an exposure time of 5 s. The  XRD pattern was refined using GSAS software. The morphology, microstructure and crystallinity of the electrodes were observed via field emission scanning electron microscopy (Hitachi, S4300) and transmission electron microscopy (JEOL, JEM-2010F). Carbon content of the electrodes were determined using thermal-gravimetric analyser (TA instrument, TGA Q500) and the property of the carbon was analysed using Raman  imaging microscopy (Renishaw, inVia Raman microscope, 514 nm excitation wavelength). The elemental state in the electrode surface was probed by X-ray  photoelectron spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, ESCALABTM 250Xi).The electrode slurry consists of active material, acetylene black, and PVDF with a mass ratio of 7:2:1 in N-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP) solvent. The active material is calculated  based on subtracting the carbon content in the cathode material. The slurry was coated  on aluminium foil using the doctor blade method. Then, the working electrode was dried  at 90 °C in vacuum. The mass loading of the active material is around 1.8-2.1 mg cm-2.  In the half cell system, the counter electrode is sodium metal. The half-cell was fabricated in glovebox using 2032 coin-type cell. 1M NaClO4 in EC:DEC=1:1 vol% with 2% FEC  addition was used as electrolyte and glass fibre (GF/D) from Whatman was used as separator. The galvanostatic charge-discharge test was conducted on the battery test system (Land, CT2001A). Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and AC-impedance spectra were measured using electrochemical work station (Solartron, SI 1400). 
Figure 2(a) shows the X-ray Diffraction (XRD) spectra of pristine NVP@C, NVP@C/rGO and NVP@C/rGO-U powders. All electrode materials reveal high crystallinity with rhombohedral R3c NASICON structure (PDF: 53-0018). Generally, the  diffraction peaks remain relatively at the same position suggest that addition of rGO and urea do not alter the bulk crystal. The refined XRD pattern, as shown in Figure S1, and the lattice parameters matches well with the standards(Table S1).41-42 Comparing the lattice parameters, the NVP@C/rGO-U has the smallest crystal volume suggesting a more stable structure closed to the standard NASICON phase, which can be beneficial for electrochemical reaction.33 The carbon content in the composite electrode was determined using thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) as shown in Figure S2. NVP@C shows the lowest carbon content at 5.3 wt.%, while both NVP@C/rGO and NVP@C/rGO- U showed similar carbon content at 7.5 and 7.8 wt.%, respectively. The increased in carbon content is consistent with the amount of GO added into the mixture. Figure 2(b-d) shows the Raman spectra of the three types of electrode powder measured between 800 – 2000 cm-1. It is notable that the NVP Raman fingerprints measured between 800 – 2000 cm-1. It is notable that the NVP Raman fingerprints penetration depth for carbon in Raman spectroscopy is approximately 30 nm, thus, the screening effect of carbon on the NVP spectra should not be expected.43 From the Raman spectra, it can be deduced that the penetration depth for NVP in Raman experiment should be small as the detector only collect negligible signal from the NVP@C.44 The two broad and strong bands at around 1350 and 1605 cm-1 are attributed to the D-band (defects in the graphite structure) and G-band (graphite carbon) peaks respectively. The ratio of the corresponding peaks (Id/Ig) for NVP@C, NVP@C/rGO, and NVP@C/rGO-U are 0.89, 0.85, and 0.83, respectively. NVP@C/rGO and NVP@C/rGO-U have lower Id/Ig confirms that the GO has been successfully reduce to rGO resulting in higher content of G-band carbon. In addition, the two broad peaks can also be deconvoluted into four peaks by Gaussian numerical simulation. The two peaks at around 1350 and 1590 cm-1 are attributed to the sp2 type carbon while the other two at 1180 and 1510 cm-1 are due to the sp3 type carbon.15, 33, 45 A lower integrated area ratio (Asp3/Asp2) indicates larger fraction of carbon exist in sp2-type. The fitted Asp3/Asp2 ratio of NVP@C, NVP@C/rGO, NVP@C/rGO-U are around 0.32, 0.28, and 0.28, respectively. Again, this suggests that composite electrode with rGO contain slightly higher amount of sp2 carbon that is favourable for the higher electronic conductivity.
X-ray photoemission (XPS) studies were conducted to understand the surface chemical bonding state of the electrodes. Figure 3(a) shows the survey scan of the electrodes and the spectral peaks for Na 1s, O 1s, V 2p, N 1s, C 1s, P 2s, and P 2p. The high-resolution V 2p peaks in Figure S3 can be deconvoluted into two different peaks with centre at 516.5 and 523.5 eV, which can be attributed to V 2p3/2 and V 2p1/2 for V3+, respectively.41, 46-48 This suggest that the V5+ from NH4VO3 precursor has been successfully reduced to V3+.The high-resolution C spectrum in Figure 3(b) can be resolve into four component with centre at 284.8, 285.0, 286.2, 289.3 eV, which can be attributed to graphite-like sp2 bond, C-O or C=N bonds, C=O or C-N bonds, and O-C=O bonds, respectively.49 Table 1 listed the detailed atomic ratio of the C bonding and it can be observed that NVP@C/rGO- U has slightly highest atomic content of the sp2 carbon. It can be speculated that pyrolysis of urea has assisted in the reduction of GO to rGO. In addition, both the NVP@C/rGO and NVP@C/rGO-U show higher atomic content of the sp2 carbon than NVP@C, which is consistent with the Raman spectra analysis. Interestingly, small traces of N are found in the all electrodes and this could be due to the ammonium precursors used.41, 50 The high resolution of N 1s in Figure 3(c) can be deconvoluted into three peaks at 398.3, 400.9, 402.1 eV, corresponding to pyridinic N, pyrrolic N, and quaternary N, respectively, indicating that N has been doped into the carbon layer.36, 38 In Table 1, the majority of the N in NVP@C/rGO-U existed in the form of pyridinic N and pyrrolic N (93.47 At.%) creating extrinsic defect sites in the carbon layer that can enhance both the ions and electrons transportation through the layer.  In addition, the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images in Figure 4(e) and (f) show areas with low contrast further supports that the presence of mesoporous carbon structure.34 It is worthy to note that mesoporous structure is beneficial for the electrochemical reaction as it can increase the electrode-electrolyte contact area, which results in better utilization of the active materials and reduction of the contacting ohmic polarization. 
As shown in Figure 4(c) and (d) and Figure S5(a) and (b), NVP@C/rGO and NVP@C/rGO-U show a smaller NVP@C composite particle size. Since GO is super hydrophilic and can be easily exfoliated by ultrasonic agitation, which will act as a physical separator that limits the chelated cluster in the solution.54 This has caused the citric acid to chelate on the NVP precursors in smaller clusters with GO as the separator leading to a smaller particle being observed in rGO electrode. There is also a noticeable difference in the rGO morphology after urea addition. The rGO in NVP@C/rGO-U is highly wrinkled, which further extends away from the edge of NVP@C (Figure 4(g) and (h)). Furthermore, the contrast of rGO is much lower, indicating that the thickness of rGO layers is much thin because the transmission electrons in TEM is much sensitive to the thickness. However, without the addition of urea, the rGO in NVP@C/rGO tends to consolidate itself duringwithout the addition of urea, the rGO in NVP@C/rGO tends to consolidate itself during he drying process owing to the strong Van der Waals forces among individual graphene oxide sheet as shown in Figure S4(c-d). This expansion of rGO would not only offer better coverage of electronic conductive network around the NVP@C particles but also expose the active material to the electrolyte that are beneficial to the electrochemical reaction. Moreover, lattice fringes with a d-spacing of 0.37 nm and 0.28 nm, corresponding to he (113) and (116) planes of the rhombohedral NVP, respectively, in the high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image in Figure S5(e). 
To validate the reduced agglomeration of particles and the mesoporous carbon structure, Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) nitrogen adsorption-desorption testing was conducted to determine the specific surface area and pore size distribution. Figure S6 shows the BET curve with pore size distribution, and the estimated specific surface area of NVP@C/rGO and NVP@C/rGO-U are 41 and 37 m2 g-1, respectively, and both are higher than NVP@C (24 m2 g-1). The BJH pore-size distribution curve of all electrodes exhibit the pore size are between 4 to 12 nm. The large surface area and mesoporous structure do not only facilitate the infiltration of electrolyte inside the material, which reduces the diffusion length of Na+/e- in NVP, but also provides a large electrochemical reaction interface, which will reduce the electrochemical polarisation and improve the reversible capacity at higher current density. 
In order to investigate the electrochemical performance of the electrode, half cells (2032-type coin cell) were assembled with metallic Na as the counter electrode at a potential window of 2.5-4.0 V. Figure 5(a) shows the charge and discharge profile of the electrodes at 0.5 C (1 C =118 mA g-1) . All electrode showed cathodic and anodic peaks between 3.35 V and 3.42 V at 0.5 C, which correspond to the redox pair of V3+/V4+. In addition, NVP@C/rGO-U showed the smallest overpotential (38 mV) compared to NVP@C/rGO (56 mV) and NVP@C (47 mV), implying that NVP@C/rGO-U has enhanced electrochemical activity and resulted in smaller polarization. Figure S7(a) illustrate the there is a well-defined charge and discharge plateaus at 1 C but there is a step discharge curve at higher rate which is not observed in the charging curve due mainly to the higher charging/discharging rate inducing localised heating and hence causing the structural rearrangement of the Na ion from Na(1) to the Na(2) site.18, 60-61 Figure 5(b) depicts the rate performance of the electrodes, NVP@C/rGO-U delivered a reversible capacity of 107, 106, 103, 101, 97, 94, 91, 86 mAh g-1 at 0.5, 1, 3, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25 C, respectively.
When the current density returns to 0.5 C, the discharge capacity of 107 mAh g-1 can be maintained showing the structural stability of NVP@C/rGO-U after exposure to high current density. As it can be observed that all electrodes deliver around similar discharge capacities at around 105-107 mAh g-1 (or about 91% of the theoretical capacity) at 0.5 C, the discharge capacity of NVP@C and NVP@C/rGO were only 65 and 77 mAh g-1 at 25 C, respectively. The estimated energy density of NVP@C/rGO-U is 351.4 Wh kg-1 (or 88% of the theoretical energy density) with a power density of 0.38 kW kg-1. It still retained 73% of the energy density (256.6 Wh kg-1) when the power density is increased one order of magnitude to 8.7 kW kg-1 indicating that high energy density and power can be achieved simultaneously. In comparison, NVP@C/rGO is only able to deliver an energy density of 220.2 Wh kg-1 with a power density of 7.5 kW kg-1. In order to investigate the contribution of the rGO and urea, NVP@C with higher carbon content (NVP@C-HC) was prepared by adding more citric acid while NVP@C-U was prepared by adding urea in the synthesis of NVP@C. The carbon content of NVP@C-HC is around 8.1 wt% as verified by TGA shown in Figure S7(b). Figure S7(c) shows NVP@C-HC delivered a reversible capacity of 99, 97, 92, 89, 81, 73, 65 mAh g-1 at 0.5, 1, 3, 5, 10, 15, 20 C, respectively, and NVP@C-U delivered a reversible capacity of 95, 92, 90, 89, 83, 80, 70 mAh g-1 at 0.5, 1, 3, 5, 10, 15, 20 C, respectively. Thus, further showing the superior electrochemical performance of NVP@C/rGO-U. Figure 5(c) shows the cyclic stability at 5 C, the reversible capacity of NVP@C/rGO-U is 96 mAh g-1 or around 91% of the initial capacity after 500 cycles while NVP@C and NVP@C/rGO only retained 87% and 85% of the initial capacity, respectively. Additionally, the average columbic efficient is close to 100% suggesting the excellent reversible of NVP@C/rGO-U during the repeated extraction/insertion of Na+ at high-rate cycling. Figure S7(d) summarises the comparison of rate capacities of the high mass loading NVP electrode reported in the literature and it can be observed that the excellent electrochemical performance is comparable to many state-of-the-art NVP electrode.25, 31-33 Such performance is attributed to the expanded rGO, reduced agglomeration of particles and higher amount of defects in the carbon layer due to N doping that have great importance of having both high electronic and ionic conductivity to facilitate the Na ion (de)intercalation process. 
In order to further investigate the enhancement of electrochemical performance, cyclic voltammetry (CV) at 0.1 mV s-1 was conducted on the electrode and is shown in Figure 6(a). Similar to galvanostatic voltage platform, all electrode shows a pair of well-defined redox peaks at around 3.3/3.5 V which are assigned to the Na+ extraction/insertion in the NVP structure (Na3V2(PO4)3 ↔ NaV2(PO4)3) and the additional cathodic peak at 3.2 V is due to the structural reorganisation which is in good agreement with the charge-discharge urve in Figure S7(a).31, 61 Again, NVP@C/rGO-U possessed the smallest potential curve in Figure S7(a).31, 61 Again, NVP@C/rGO-U possessed the smallest potential polarisation (180 mV) and has the highest current, indicating that it has the lowest electrochemical polarization compared to others. In order to further investigate on the enhanced redox kinetic, CV was performed on different scanning rate and are presented in Figure S8(a-c). With increasing scanning rate, the anodic peak shift to the higher potential while the cathodic peak shift to the lower potential due to the aggravated polarisation. It is worth noting that the reorganisation cathodic peak disappeared with aster scanning rate and there was no destructive redox couple within the voltage range. More importantly, the NVP@C/rGO-U is still able to maintain the well-defined redox peak at high scan rate of 1.5 mV s-1 in the 2.5 – 4.0 V, and it has the highest current among all further support that its high reversibility and fast kinetic during electrochemical reaction. The relationship between the i and ν can be described by i = aνb, where a is constant and the b value is related to the type of sodium reaction process. When b is close to 0.5, the reaction process is controlled by diffusion, and when b is close to 1, the reaction process determined by capacitive effect.33, 62 Figure S8(d-f) show the linear relationship between the peak current (Ip) and square root of the scanning rate (ν1/2), which indicates a diffusion-controlled process during the sodium intercalation in NVP. Therefore, the faster diffusion kinetics would lead to a better electrochemical performance. According to the measured Ip and ν, the Na+ diffusion coefficient can be calculated using Randle Sevcik equation (Equation 1): where Ip is the peak current, n is the number of electrons involved in the half-reaction for the redox potential (n = 2), A is the area of the electrode, C is the concentration of Na+ ions in a solid (0.0069 mol cm-2), and v is the potential scan rate. The calculated cathodic and anodic DNa+ of NVP@C/rGO-U are 1.64 × 10-10 and 2.07 × 10-10 cm s-1, respectively, higher than that of NVP@C (9.56× 10-11 and 1.53  × 10-10 cm s-1) and NVP@C/rGO (9.79 × 10-11 and 1.66 × 10-10 cm s-1). The higher DNa+ value is mainly attributed to the expanded rGO and N-doped carbon layer have enhanced the Na+ insertion/extraction through the carbon layer.Figure 6(b) shows the Nyquist plot and the corresponding equivalent circuit. The depressed semicircle at the high-middle frequency-range can be assigned to the charge transfer (Rct) between the electrode and electrolyte and the tail at low-frequency range stands for the Warburg resistance (ZW), which is related to the Na-ion diffusion (DNa+).15, The DNa+ of the electrode can be calculated using Equation (2) and (3) based on the linear relationship between ω-1/2 and Z’.63  Table 2 lists the charge-transfer impedance (Rct) and the Na-ion diffusion coefficient (DNa+) of the electrodes. It can be seen that the values of Rct of NVP@C/rGO and NVP@C/rGO-U are smaller than that of NVP@C, indicating that rGO can effectively improve the charge transfer kinetics. Besides, NVP@C/rGO-U has the smallest Rct among all, which validates the expanded rGO with high amount of pyridinic N and pyrrolic N can enhance both the ion and electron transportation than that of pure rGO. Furthermore, the Na-ion diffusion coefficient (DNa+) using this method agrees well with earlier analysis that suggest NVP@C/rGO-U possesses the highest Na+ migration velocities compared to others. where R is the gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, A is the surface area of the cathode, n is the number of electrons per molecule during reaction, F is the Faraday constant, C is the molar concentration of Na+, and σ is the Warburg factor related to Zre. Motivated by the performance of NVP@C/rGO-U, further investigation on the effect of mass loading density by having a thicker electrode layer was conducted. The inset figure in Figure 7(a) shows the rate capacity for NVP@C/rGO-U with a mass loading density 2,1, 2.7, and 3.1 mg cm-2 and it can be observed that there is no obvious drop in the discharge capacity. All mass loadings have shown a high discharge capacity close to 105 mAh g-1 at 0.5 C and 95 mAh g-1 at 5 C. This can be attributed to the well-connected carbon network with expanded N-doped rGO ensure that both Na ions and electrons can transport through the thickness easily.42, 64  In addition, Figure 7(a) shows that the high mass loading NVP@C/rGO-U can still retain around 89 % of the capacity after 300 cycles at 1 C further demonstrating the structural stability of the NVP@C/rGO-U. 
Likewise, NVP has another redox potential at around 1.6 V vs Na/Na+, which correspond to the V2+/V3+ couple (eg. Na3V2(PO4)3 ↔ Na4V2(PO4)3), and a theoretical specific capacity of around 60 mAh g-1.15, 34, 65 Figure 7(b) shows the rate capacity of NVP@C/rGO-U at 1-2.2 V and it delivers close to 57, 51.3, 44.6, 41.7, 37.5, 34.7, 31.6 mAh g-1 at 0.5,  1, 3, 5, 10, 15, 20 C, respectively, (1 C = 60 mA g-1). In addition, the specific capacity returns to 56 mAh g-1 when current density returns to0.5 C and 50.3 mAh g-1 at 0.5 C after 50 cycles as depicted in Figure S9(b). This demonstrated the structure stability after exposure to high current density. To further investigate the structural stability of the NVP@C/rGO-U, the electrode was tested under a wider voltage window (eg. 1-4 V) to (de)intercalate three Na+ ions from NVP and induce a bigger volumetric expansion during the charge/discharge process. Besides, the specific capacity can also be significantly increased with a broader voltage window. To explore the redox activities of NVP@C/rGO-U electrode, the electrochemical performance was evaluated by CV and galvanostatic cycling within the voltage range of 1-4 V as presented in Figure 7(c) and (d). The two well-defined redox couples (at 1.6 V and 3.4V) are consistent with the redox reaction of V2+/V3+ and V3+/V4+, respectively. Thus, the overall electrode reaction within 1-4 V voltage range is as follow: With 3 Na ions being (de)intercalated into NVP, the initial specific discharge capacity increased to 162 mAh g-1 (or 376.4 Wh kg-1). Figure 7(d) shows the cyclic stability of NVP@C/rGO-U at 1 C (1 C = 118 mA cm-2) and the cell delivered 144 mAh g-1 or around 89 % of the initial discharge capacity after 100 cycles with close to 100 % coulombic efficiency. This could be attributed to the good mechanical strength of rGO that mitigate the detrimental effect of the volumetric changes during the three sodium ions (de)intercalation process while improving the electronic conductivity, charge transfer and Na+ diffusion. It is also noticeable that the voltage plateaus at 3.4 V and 1.6 V are still well-defined even after 100 cycles as shown in Figure S9(b) indicating stable lectrochemical reaction within the voltage window. However, the polarisation of NVP@C/rGO-U at 1.6 V and 3.4 V plateaus increases with the charge/discharge cycle number. As shown in Figure S9(c) and (d), the polarisation is more stable when NVP@C/rGO-U is cycled between 2.5-4 V and 2.2-1 V. This suggests that cycling with a wider voltage window could induce larger electrode polarisation that could lead to faster capacity fading.66 Further studies on the structural change and formation of solid-electrolyte interface (SEI) during the wide voltage window has to be conducted to understand the cause of the polarisation and fading of capacity. Nevertheless, the outstanding electrode stability withing the wider voltage window at high charging rate has created another opportunity to increase the practical capacity of NVP. 
A dual nitrogen-doped carbon strategy on nanosized carbon-coated NVP particles with expanded rGO has been synthesized through a facile method with the assistant by pyrolysis of urea. The pyrolysis of urea produces volatile materials that not only facilitate the reduction of GO to rGO while doping N into the carbon layer but also expand the rGO mechanically and reduce the agglomeration of particles. The novel structure provides electron transport pathway and high Na+ diffusion, and a stable structure for (de)intercalation of Na+, leading to good rate capacity and long-life cycling stability. With a voltage window of 2.5-4 V, the NVP@C/rGO-U composite electrode delivers a reversible discharge capacity of 101 mAh g-1 at 5 C and 86 mAh g-1 at 25 C, and retains 91% of the initial capacity after 500 cycles at 5 C. Furthermore, the rate performance of NVP@C/rGO-U is merely affected by the increasing of the active material mass and the electrode layer thickness. More importantly, NVP@C/rGO-U delivers an initial discharge capacity of 162 mAh g-1 when three sodium ions (de)intercalation from the structure. The unique structure can accommodate the repeated volumetric changes during the charge/discharge cycle and delivered a stable capacity of around 144 mAh g-1 at 1 C after 100 cycles. This proposed facile synthesis process uses relatively affordable precursors that would make industrialisation of the high-energy-density sodium-ion battery highly attractive.
