We report the preparation and characterization of hybrid inorganic–organic membranes based on NASICON-type Li1 + xAlxGe2 − x(PO4)3 (LAGP) as the fast ion conducting ceramic and fast ionic polymeric solid electrolyte PEO: PVDF:LiBF4 for possible application as Li anode protecting membrane in lithium air batteries. The resulting membranes showed enhanced conductivity of 10−4 S cm−1 in combination with improved mechanical ﬂexibility when compared to the ceramic along with higher stability in aqueous solutions in comparison with pure polymer.

Increasing demand of the world for energy highlights the importance of energy storage at the present time. Li-ion battery (LIB) has played an important role since it was ﬁrst introduced in 1991 but key market segments such as transportation or grid support require higher energy densities than theoretically achievable with LIBs. Finding a reliable high energy density alternative for LIB has inspired intensive research recently [1]. In this context lithium air battery (LAB) has been receiving increasing attention as a promising candidate.

Li–O2 batteries were originally proposed by Bauman et al. at Lockheed in the late 1970s [2–4], and yet they began to receive global attention just this decade, mostly due to their extreme energy density of up to 3458 Wh/kg for non-aqueous systems or 2249 Wh/kg for aqueous systems (see e.g. [5,6]), which is signiﬁcantly higher than for any other rechargeable battery systems. Coupled with the higher efﬁciency of electric propulsion systems, Li–O2 batteries offer driving ranges comparable to those of gasoline powered cars [5–7]. Until recently, research activity was focused on organic Li–O2 batteries that promise the highest energy densities (due to the low speciﬁc weight of Li2O2) and the lower chemical reactivity of organic electrolytes with Li, but at the same time these batteries face challenges due to high polarization during the charge and discharge process [8,9] with gradual decomposition of the organic (polycarbonate) electrolytes and contamination with moisture in the air [10]. Due to the low solubility of Li2O2 in polar organic electrolytes, the reaction product Li2O2 is deposited on the air cathode reducing catalyst efﬁciency, and causing high overpotentials and low cycle efﬁciencies.

With the progress in the development of lithium-ion conducting solids, aqueous lithium air batteries have been reconsidered by Visco et al. [11] and Imanishi et al. [12,13]. In these systems catholytes with high solubility for the discharge product (LiOH, HCl, acetic acid, etc.) enhance the cycle efﬁciency, but the Li anode has to be safely protected from direct contact with such reactive catholytes. Lithium air batteries with aqueous catholytes promise somewhat lower theoretical energy density, but a higher potential to reach theoretical limits in practical devices. For the use as anode-protecting membrane Li solid electrolytes need to exhibit high ionic conductivity along with wide electrochemical window. Both fast ion conducting ceramics and polymer electrolytes have been explored as anode protecting membranes in LABs. Among oxide based solid conductors, NASICON-type ceramic fast ion conductors [14] are potential candidates. Here we focus on Li1 + xAlxGe2 − x(PO4)3 (LAGP) with the rhombohedral NASICON-type structure, consisting of an open three-dimensional framework of GeO6 (or AlO6) octahedra sharing all corners with PO4 tetrahedra [15]. According to Fu et al. [15], maximum conductivity for Li1 + xAlxGe2 − x(PO4)3 is achieved around x = 0.5. In this work, the preparation and characterization of hybrid inorganic–organic membranes consisting of NASICON-type Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) as the fast ion conducting ceramic (with conductivities N 10−4 S cm−1) and the polymer electrolyte polyvinylidene ﬂuoride (PVDF):polyethylene oxide (PEO): LiBF4 (room temperature conductivity 7 × 10−4 S cm−1) is investigated to address the above-mentioned issue.

Li1 + xAlxGe2 − x(PO4)3 (LAGP) glass was prepared using the stoichiometric amount of Li2CO3 (Alfa Aesar, Ward Hill, MA), Al2O3 (Sigma Aldrich, Milwaukee, WI), GeO2 (Alfa Aesar, Ward Hill, MA) and NH4H2PO4 (Merck). The ball milled precursor mixture was initially heated in air to 700 °C and kept at this temperature for 2 h to remove all volatile components. Subsequently the temperature was increased to 1450 °C and kept for 1 h to produce the melt. The melt was then quenched on a copper plate yielding a transparent glass, which was powdered and shaped into pellets. The pellets were then annealed at temperatures of 650–800 °C to ensure the formation of crystalline LAGP.

The preparation of hybrid inorganic–organic (composite) membranes involved stirring 1 g of a mixture of polyvinylidene ﬂuoride (PVDF), polyethylene oxide (PEO) and LiBF4 in 5 ml of N-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone (NMP) for 6 h at 100 °C as a solvent. The dried powdered crystalline LAGP was subsequently introduced into the polymer mixture while stirring and the slurry was stirred for another 6 h. The optimized composition contained 70 wt.% LAGP crystal, 18 wt.% PVDF as a binder, 6 wt.% PEO as a plasticizer and 6% LiBF4. This batch was then tape-cast on a Mylar sheet using a doctor blade and dried at 80 °C for 24 h. The tape is ﬂexible enough to be cut into desired shape for further characterization. Adding crystalline LAGP into the slurry instead of the glass eliminates the need for further sintering of the tape. For comparing the contribution of each component of the composite membranes, pure polymer blend membranes were prepared using the same procedure except for the last step of mixing the polymer solution with LAGP.

Structural characterization of the samples was carried out using high resolution X-ray powder diffractometer (Bruker D8) or high temperature powder diffractometer (PANalytical X'pert PRO with Anton Paar HTK-1200 N oven chamber) employing Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å) in the 2θ range of 10–100°. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was conducted over the temperature range from 100 to 1000 °C (TA instruments, SDT-Q600). AC impedance measurement was performed on silver pasted LAGP pellets and gold coated composite membranes using impedance spectroscopy (IS) (Solartron SI1260) in the frequency range of 100 Hz–5 MHz. Impedance spectra were ﬁtted using the FRA software applying the equivalent circuit R(RQ)(RQ). The ﬁrst semicircle is attributed to the grain boundary resistance of the sample while the intercept of the semicircle on the real axis at high frequency represents the bulk resistance. Bulk and grain boundary conductivities are calculated using the geometrical dimensions of the sample. The temperature range for IS was optimized depending on the sample being tested. Chemical stability tests of LAGP membrane were carried out by immersing the membrane for different periods up to 1 month into aqueous solutions of phosphate buffer (0.1 M H3PO4 and 1 M LiH2PO4) and glacial acetic acid.

Fig. 1(a) presents the change in the heat ﬂow vs. temperature for LAGP glass as it is heated from 100 to 1000 °C with a heating rate of 10 °C/min. According to the DSC curve, the glass transition temperature (Tg) is 515 °C and crystallization occurs at 623 °C (Tc), indicating the low temperature limit for annealing the material. The values are close to the values reported by Fu [15]. Fig. 1(b) shows in situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns for LAGP glass sample during stepwise heating in the temperature range of 650 °C to 900 °C in steps of 50 °C/2 h. As can be noticed therefrom, new impurity peaks of GeO2 arise for annealing temperatures ≥ 800 °C. In order to avoid the formation of GeO2 phase the sintering temperature thus has to be maintained between Tc = 623 °C and 800 °C.

Samples crystallized in the range of 650 °C to 800 °C were studied by impedance spectroscopy, showing that crystalline LAGP sintered at 750 °C for 2 h exhibited the highest room temperature conductivity of 5.3 × 10−4 S cm−1 and 4.6 × 10−4 S cm−1 for bulk and grain boundary, respectively (total conductivity 2.5 × 10−4 S cm−1) as shown in Fig. 2(a). These values harmonize to the earlier reported total conductivity of 2 × 10−4 S cm−1 [16]. Effect of sintering time on the conductivity value is negligible. Nyquist plots of room temperature impedance spectra and the powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern for this particular sample are shown in Fig. 2(b) and (c), respectively. The Rietveld-reﬁnement of the XRD data for the sample annealed at 750 °C ascertained that NASICON-type LAGP (space group R-3c with lattice parameters of a = 8.2539(1) Å, c = 20.6843(3) Å) is the dominant crystalline phase present along with an impurity of AlPO4. From the reﬁned Al occupancy, the Al content is accordingly only x = 0.3, somewhat smaller than the intended x = 0.5.

From the Arrhenius plot for the temperature dependence of the total conductivity of LAGP in Fig. 3 the activation energy for LAGP sintered at 750 °C was determined as Ea = 0.36 eV in line with literature ﬁndings [15]. The slightly lower activation energies for (less pure) samples annealed at lower temperatures (0.31 eV at 650 °C, 0.33 eV at 700 °C) may be tentatively ascribed to their higher defect concentration.

Composites of the LAGP phase sintered at 750 °C and of the polymer electrolyte PVDF:PEO:LiBF4 were used for the preparation of hybrid inorganic–organic membranes. Fig. 4 represents the SEM micrographs of the membrane before and after immersion in phosphate buffer or glacial acetic acid. The dense membrane was geometrically stable in both solutions after 1 month immersion and the volume change in the membrane before and after immersion is less than 0.1%, suggesting that the membrane is stable in both solutions. However the conductivity of the membranes dropped drastically; After immersion for 1 week in the phosphate buffer, the conductivity was reduced by a factor of 4.3 so that it should still be acceptable for application as a membrane, while after a month the conductivity dropped by 2.5 orders of magnitude. For the more corrosive acetic acid one week of immersion already caused a conductivity drop by a factor of 70. SEM micrographs show that immersion of the membrane attacks the exposed polymer compo− will be nent. As a result of this attack, it is also to be expected that BF4 leached out of the polymer membrane. The change in composition and resistance of the polymer due to the attack increases the resistance for charge transfer between the LAGP grains.

The effect of temperature on impedance spectra for the membrane in the temperature range of 30 to 60 °C is shown in the Nyquist plots in Fig. 5(a). Room temperature bulk (σb) and grain boundary (σgb) conductivities of the membrane are 3.1 × 10−4 S cm−1 and 1.4 × 10−4 S cm−1, respectively. The conductivity increases with an increase in the temperature until about 65 °C. Above 65 °C, the conductivity drops due to the start of the melting temperature range of PEO (66–70 °C). Arrhenius plots for the bulk contributions of the polymer phase (σpolymer) and of the ceramic phase (σceramic) and for the total conductivity (σtotal) of the membrane are shown in Fig. 5(b). The total conductivity of the membrane is slightly higher than the total conductivity of the LAGP ceramic, and the (average) activation energy is slightly reduced to 0.27 eV. The bulk conductivity of the ceramic phase appears almost unchanged (Ea = 0.39 eV), while the bulk conductivity of the polymer phase is 2–3 times smaller than the conductivity of the polymer itself, which might indicate some adsorption of the LiBF4 at the polymer:ceramic interface. The performance of the composite membrane was assessed in the lithium air cell with the conﬁguration as shown in Fig 6. Fig. 6 presents a constant current (0.32 mA cm−2) charge–discharge curve of the introducing LAGP into the membrane resulted in a greatly improved stability of the composite membrane in aqueous solutions compared to the pure polymer membrane. However, the decrease in conductivity of the membrane after immersion needs to be addressed by improving the stability of the polymer component or protecting it from direct contact with the catholyte. The applicability of the membrane in an aqueous lithium air battery has been demonstrated. High ionic conductivity, improved mechanical properties along with ease of preparation make these membranes a potential candidate for a new generation of high energy density batteries.
