Glass–ceramics of the phosphorus-containing Na5RSi4O12-type (R = rare earth) Na+-superionic conductors were prepared by crystallization of glasses with the composition Na3 + 3x + yY1 − x − zRzPySi3 − yO9 (NaYRPSi; R = Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Dy, Er, Yb) (x = 0.4, y = 0.2, z = 0.1). The crystallization kinetics of the glasses was examined by DTA, and the effects of R elements on the separation of the phase and the microstructural effects on the conduction properties of glass–ceramics were discussed. The activation energy of crystal growth of the NaYRPSi glass decreases as the ionic radius of R is increased. The conductivity of the NaYRPSi glass–ceramics increases as the ionic radius of R is increased.

The use of glass-making processing is favorable for the fabrication of Na+ conducting electrolyte tubes, which has been the key to the technological development of 1 MW Na/S secondary battery plants. However, the processing technique cannot be applied to well-known βand β″-aluminas (e. g., NaAl11O17 and NaAl5O8) and Nasicons (Na1 + xZr2P3−xSixO12) because their high inclusion of Al2O3 or ZrO2 brings about the inhomogeneous melting or crystallization from glasses. Glass–ceramics of the phosphorus containing Na5RSi4O12 (N5)-type (R = rare earth) [1,2] Na+-superionic conductors [3,4] have been developed by crystallization of glasses with the composition Na3 + 3x − y R1 − xPySi3 − yO9 (NaRPSi) [5–11]. These materials are comparable to the conventional ceramic Na+-conductors such as βand β″-aluminas and Nasicons. The R elements have a signiﬁcant effect on the crystallization of glasses [6], as well as on the conduction properties [1]. To date, polycrystalline N5-type NaRPSi has been obtained with Sc, Y, Gd or Sm as the R element. It is currently assumed from the analogy with N5 that all the R ions can be octahedrally coordinated with the nonbridging oxide ions of the (SiO4, PO4)-tetrahedra of the 12-membered rings. The reported results on the silicate ceramics [1] show that the conductivity of N5-type NaRPSi increases with increasing size of its R ions. Our phosphorus containing compositions have been conﬁrmed superior to the mother composition of N5, especially in the production of the single-phase glass–ceramics. Considering the inference, our main work has recently been focused on the synthesis of various glass– ceramics with N5 single-phase.

In the present study, the various R elements were substituted for the yttrium. The glass–ceramics of the phosphorus-containing N5-type Na+-superionic conductors from the glasses with the composition Na3 + 3x + yY1 − x − zRzPySi3 − yO9 (R = Nd; NaYNdPSi, R = Sm; NaYSmPSi, R = Eu; NaYEuPSi, R = Gd; NaYGdPSi, R = Dy; NaYDyPSi, R = Er; NaYErPSi, R = Yb; NaYYbPSi, and NaYPSi) (x = 0.4, y = 0.2, z = 0.1) were prepared. The effects of R elements on the separation of the phase and the microstructural effects on the conduction properties of glass–ceramics were discussed, and the crystallization kinetics of the glasses was examined by differential thermal analysis (DTA).

The glass–ceramics have been obtained under the appropriate sets of the parameters x, y and z of the composition formula Na3 + 3x + y Y1 − x − zRzPySi3 − yO9 (NaYRPSi; R = Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Dy, Er, Yb) (x = 0.4, y = 0.2, z = 0.1). The precursor glasses were made by melting stoichiometric mixtures of reagent-grade powders of anhydrous Na2CO3, Y2O3, R2O3 (R = Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Dy, Er, Yb), NH4H2PO4 and SiO2 at 1350 °C for 1 h after calcinations at 400 °C for 0.5 h and 900 °C for 0.5 h. The melts were quickly poured into a cylindrical graphite. The glass transition temperature (Tg) had been determined in advance by DTA. The quenched glasses were annealed for several hours at an optimum temperature (ca. 25 °C below Tg) to release internal stress. Crystallization was carried out according to the previous report [5]; bulk glasses were heated to a temperature above ca. 50 °C of Tg. This pretreatment was done in order to obtain homogeneous nucleation. The annealed specimens were heated up to 900 °C for 5 h for crystallization. Crystallized bulky specimens were crushed to powders, and then subjected to X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis for the calculation of the hexagonal lattice constants as well as for phase conﬁrmation. Ionic conductivities were measured by the AC two-probe method on cylindrical glass–ceramics of typically 15 mm in diameter and 2 mm in thickness. Electrodes were prepared by sputtering of gold on polished surfaces. The applied ac ﬁeld ranged from 5 to 10 MHz in frequency. The temperature dependence of the conductivity was measured in a similar way at several temperatures ranging from room temperature to 350 °C.

The N5-type glass–ceramic NaYRPSi (R = Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Dy, Er, Yb) and NaYPSi with the Na4.4Y0.6P0.2Si2.8O9 composition, respectively, were successfully synthesized by crystallization of glasses. Most of the compounds were obtained as crack-free glass–ceramics. The XRD patterns of the obtained glass–ceramics were given in Fig. 1. Table 1 shows the lattice constants of these glass–ceramics. The lattice constant of the glass–ceramic NaYRPSi increases as the ionic radius of R is increased (Fig. 2).

Apparent activation energies for crystallization (crystal growth) were determined by employing the non-isothermal modiﬁed Kissinger methods [12,13] in which some characteristic of the crystallization peak determined by DTA, is monitored as a function of heating rate or temperature. The following relationship is then applied where α is the heating rate, T0 is the peak crystallization temperature at a given heating rate, E is the apparent activation energy, R is the gas constant, and m and n are numerical factors which depend on the crystallization mechanism (m depends on the dimensionality of crystal growth). When bulk crystallization occurs with an increasing number of nuclei (i.e. the number of nuclei is inversely proportional to the heating rate), m = 3 and n = 4 (three-dimensional growth of crystals). In this study, the parameters m and n are assumed as 3 and 4, respectively, because bulk glasses were heated to a temperature above ca. 50 °C of Tg in order to obtain homogeneous nucleation. Representative DTA curves of the prepared glasses with NaYPSi were given in Fig. 3. Fig. 4 shows the modiﬁed Kissinger plots for NaYPSi glass. Table 2 summarizes the DTA peak temperatures and activation energies (Ea) of crystal growth obtained from the modiﬁed Kissinger-equation under nonisothermal condition of the NaY(Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Dy, Er, Yb)PSi and NaYPSi glasses. The activation energies of crystal growth of the NaYRPSi glass were of 232 to 564 kJ/mol. The activation energy of crystal growth of the NaYRPSi glass decreases as the ionic radius of R is increased (Fig. 5). The formation of N5-type structure from the precursor glasses is a matter of crystallization kinetics. It is noted here that the precursor phases identiﬁed were Na3RSi3O9 (N3)or Na9RSi6O18 (N9)-type. Both N3 and N9 are considered to form iso-structural [4,14,15] with Ca3Al2O6 [16] to be comprised of the skeleton structure of 6-membered SiO4-tetrahedra rings [5]. It is therefore presumed at present that the substitution of large R ions has the weakening effect on the bonding of the skeleton structure of 6-membered SiO4-tetrahedra rings, resulting in the tendency to form the stable 12-membered structure.

The complex admittance diagrams of the glass–ceramic NaYPSi specimen is shown in Fig. 6(a) as an example. Those admittance diagrams were analyzed with the equivalent circuit shown in Fig. 6(b). The complex admittances of the measured glass–ceramic specimen consisted of two semi-circles at lower temperatures. The two intercepting points on the real axis are interpreted as the resistance of crystallized grains (RG(c)) and the total resistance of grains and remaining glassy grain boundaries (RGB(g)). Assume the complex admittance diagram shown in Fig. 6(c), where the parameters L1 and L2 are set here as the radii of the two arcs 1 and 2. 

Therefore, in an ideal glass–ceramics (composite consisting of crystallized grains and small amounts of residual glass (b1%)) where residual glass would have negligible inﬂuence on the total, arc 2 would be much smaller than arc 1, since L2/L1 → 0.

Fig. 7 shows examples of the temperature dependence Arrhenius plots made on the basis of the calculated conductivity values of grains and grain boundaries of the glass–ceramic NaYPSi specimen, in which the geometrical ratios of thickness to surface area for grains were also used for convenience for those of grain boundaries because of their undeﬁnable shapes. The conductivity of the total bulk (T) is as close as to that of grains (G) at higher temperatures, while the resistance of grain boundaries (GB) dominates the whole conductance at lower temperatures. It should be noted that, concerning the conduction properties of grain boundaries, only the activation energies are signiﬁcant, since the conductivity of grain boundaries were calculated using the geometry ratio of surface area to thickness of the whole glass–ceramic bulk.

Table 3 summarizes the conduction properties of NaYRPSi and NaYPSi glass–ceramics. Their conductivities and activation energies were of the order of 10−2 S/cm at 300 °C and of 33 to 37 kJ/mol, respectively. The conductivity of the NaYRPSi glass–ceramics increases as the ionic radius of R is increased (Fig. 8). It is presumed that rare earth ions, octahedrally coordinated with the non-bridging oxide ions of the 12-membered rings of silica tetrahedra, work to expand the conduction

Fig. 9 shows SEM photographs of the microstructure of NaY(Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Dy, Er, Yb)PSi and NaYPSi glass–ceramics. The grain sizes of the specimens were about 3–6 μm. The grain size of the NaYRPSi glass– ceramics increases as the ionic radius of R is increased.

We have successfully synthesized the glass–ceramics of the phosphorus-containing N5-type Na+-superionic conductors from the glasses with the composition Na3 + 3x + yY1 − x − zRzPySi3 − yO9 (R = Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Dy, Er, Yb) (x = 0.4, y = 0.2, z = 0.1). The main features of this work are as follows:

1. The lattice constant of the glass–ceramic NaYRPSi increases as the ionic radius of R is increased.

2. The activation energies of crystal growth of the NaYRPSi glass were of 232 to 564 kJ/mol. The activation energy of crystal growth of the NaYRPSi glass decreases as the ionic radius of R is increased.

3. The ionic conductivities and activation energies of the glass–ceramic NaYRPSi were of the order of 10−2 S/cm at 300 °C and of 33 to 37 kJ/mol, respectively. The conductivity of the NaYRPSi glass– ceramics increases as the ionic radius of R is increased.

4. The grain sizes of the NaYRSi glass–ceramic specimens were about 3–6 μm. The grain size of the NaYRPSi glass–ceramics increases as the ionic radius of R is increased.
