The   monoclinic   form   of   Li3Cr2(PO4)3 is  galvanostatically   cycled   in   a  half  cell   versus   lithium   as   anode.   For the   ﬁrst   time   active   redox   behaviour   of   trivalent   chromium   in  a  phosphate   matrix   at   around   4.8   V  vs. Li+/Li   is   demonstrated.   The   coulombic   efﬁciency   ideally   approaches   80%.   Based   on  extensive   XPS   analyses,   a  possible   oxidation   scenario   is   suggested,   which   considers   the   formation   of   both   diphosphorus(V) pentaoxide   and   chromyl(IV)   compounds.   Further   possible   parasitic   reactions   like   the   formation   of  a  solid electrolyte   interface   at   the   cathode   side   are   discussed.

Associated  with  the  continuous  development  of  new  cathode materials  for  lithium  ion  batteries,  polynary  compounds  with  a LISICON  (Lithium  Super  Ionic  Conductor)  -related  3D  framework are  extensively  studied.  Nanjundaswamy  and  Padhi  et  al.  ﬁrstly described  the  advantages  of  such  compounds  with  respect  to  the limitations  of  presently  used  commercial  layered  oxides  or  spinel frameworks  [1–3].  LISICON  materials  have  a  more  open  structure due  to  the  larger  polyanions  instead  of  the  smaller  oxide  ions  and therefore  offer  a  larger  free  volume  for  the  motion  of  guest  species like  Li+.  In  polynary  compounds  the  transition-metal  redox  couples are  differently  stabilized  by  the  inductive  effect  within  the  linkage  M-O-X  (M  =  Fe,  V,  Ti,  Cr,  X  =  Mo,   W,   S,  P).  The  polarization  of the  oxygen  atoms  toward  the  X  cation  lowers  the  strength  of  the M-O  covalency  and  as  a  consequence  raises  the  redox  potential  of the  transition  metal  [4].  Based  on  those  advantages  and  due  to  the chemical  versatility  of  compounds  LixM2(XO4)3 (M  =  Fe,  V,  Ti,  Cr) (X  =  Mo,   W,   S,  P)  intensive  research  was  devoted  to  LISICON  materials  during  the  last  decade.  Table  1  summarizes  the  experimentally proven  redox  couples  of  several  phosphates  Li3M2(PO4)3 (M  =  Ti, Fe,  V,  Cr).  Numerous  studies  focused  on  monoclinic  Li3V2(PO4)3 as  cathode  material  for  lithium  batteries  due  to  its  high  average oxidation  voltage  and  large  speciﬁc  capacity  [5–7].  Chen  et  al. investigated  the  inﬂuence  of  the  partial  vanadium  substitution  in Li3V2-xCrx(PO4)3 with  chromium.  Since  the  upper  charge  voltage was  limited  to  4.8  V  vs.  Li+/Li,  chromium  related  redox  couples were  not  covered.  However,  it  could  be  demonstrated  that  proper amount  of  chromium  (x  <  0.5)  can  stabilize  the  crystal  structure during  delithiation  and  thus  improves  the  capacity  retention  [8]. In  contrast  to  V-LISICON,  Li3Fe2(PO4)3,  which  contains  iron  +III, cannot  be  further  oxidized  but  lithium  can  be  intercalated  in  this material  [4,9,10].  The  redox  properties  of  those  phosphates  raised the  question  about  the  behaviour  of  chromium(III)  in  a  phosphate matrix.  As  reported  by  Patoux  et  al.  the  Cr3+/Cr2+ redox  couple  can be  considered  as  inactive  in  LiTiCr(PO4)3-LISICON  [11].  So  far,  the redox  couple  Cr4+/Cr3+ in  a  phosphate  matrix  was  not  experimentally  proven.  Tetravalent  chromium  in  phosphates  is  not  available by  wet   chemical  reactions,  even  with  strongly  oxidizing  agents like  H2O2.  However,  ab  initio  DFT  calculations  suggest  that  the redox  potential  Cr4+/Cr3+ can  be  expected  at  about  4.9  V  vs.  Li+/Li [12],  which  is  within  experimentally  coverable  potential  window. In  1983  d’Yvoire  ﬁrstly  described  several  structure  modiﬁcations of  Li3Cr2(PO4)3 [13],  followed  by  fundamental  studies  concerning phase  transitions  and  ionic  conductivity  [14,15]. Recently  Sun  et  al. presented  a  detailed  structural  model  of  monoclinic  Li3Cr2(PO4)3 suggesting  that  lithium  is  unequally  disordered  over  six  crystallographically  independent  sites.

Furthermore,  a  Li3Cr2(PO4)3 containing composite  is  galvanostatically  cycled  in  a  half  cell  against  lithium. Different  ﬁnale  charge  voltages  and  speciﬁc  currents  are  applied and  redox  potentials  are  determined.  For  the  ﬁrst  time  active  redox behaviour  of  chromium(III)  in  a  phosphate  matrix  is  demonstrated and  possible  reaction  mechanisms  are  discussed.

Li3Cr2(PO4)3 powder  was  obtained  by  a  solid  state  reaction. A  precursor  was  produced  by  dissolving  Li2CO3 (Acros,  99%), Cr(NO3)3·9H2O  (Acros,  99%),  and  (NH4)2HPO4 (Merck,  Darmstadt, 99%)  in  molar  ratio  3:4:6  in  nitric  acid  (c  =  30%wt.).  After  evaporation  to  dryness  under  constant  stirring  (Tmax ≈   473  K),  the  obtained residues  were  transferred  into  silica  crucibles  and  calcined  at 1073  K  in  air  for  14  days.  Thus  obtained  powders  were  analyzed by  image  plate  (IP)  Guinier  photographs  [16].

Li3Cr2(PO4)3 crystals  were  obtained  by  experiments  aiming  at the  crystallization  of  “LiCrIIPO4”.  In  addition  to  Li3Cr2(PO4)3 and Cr2O3 two  new  phosphates  Li5CrII 4(PO4)3 [17,18]  were  observed  in  these  experiments.  The  starting  materials  were  Li3PO4,  CrPO4 and  Cr  (ca.  5%  surplus)  as  reducing  agent. The  mixture  was  ground  in  an  agate  mortar  and  pressed  into  rod≈ shaped  pellets  (   250  mg).  These  were  loaded  into  silica  tubes and  sealed  under  vacuum  with  ca.  10  mg   iodine  as  mineralizer. Isothermal  heating  at  1073  K  for  7  days  led  to  the  formation  of  crystals  suitable  for  X-ray  single-crystal  structure  analysis.  Purity  of  the obtained  Li3Cr2(PO4)3 crystals  was  checked  by  EDX  analyses.

To  ensure  a  high  electronic  conductivity,  80%  (w/w)  of  the  as prepared  powder  were  ground  with  10%  (w/w)  carbon  black  and 10%  (w/w)   polytetraﬂuoroethylene  (PTFE)  in  a  mortar.  About  10  mg of  the  mixture  were  pressed  with  22  MPa   on  aluminium  mesh  (3  t at  a  circular  die  with  A  =  1.33  cm2).  The  samples  were  dried  for  24  h in  a  vacuum  oven  at  373  K.

Swagelok-type  cells  were  assembled  in  an  argon-ﬁlled  glove  box using  lithium  foil  as  anode,  1M  LiPF6 in  an  ethylenecarbonate  (EC) and  dimethylcarbonate  (DMC)  mixture  in  the  ratio  EC:DMC  =  1:1 as  electrolyte  (NOVOLYTE,  USA)  and  a  glassﬁber  sheet  as  separator. Electrochemical  experiments  were  carried  out  with  a  multichannel  potentiostat-galvanostat  (VMP  3,  Bio-Logic,  France).  The  cells were  galvanostatically  charged  and  discharged  at  298  K  at  different  C-rates.  1  C  is  deﬁned  as  the  current,  which  is  set  to  achieve a  fully  charge  or  discharge  of  the  electrochemical  cell  in  one hour  respectively.  We   assumed  that  one  lithium  per  formula  can ␮A/mg be  deintercalated,  which  yields  a  speciﬁc  current  of  65.4  at  1C.

To  determine the initial  valence  state,  pure  as  prepared Li3Cr2(PO4)3 powder  was  pressed  on  an  aluminum  mesh.  In  order to  investigate  the  charged  or  discharged  electrode  respectively,  the Swagelok  cells  were  disassembled  in  a  glove  box  in  argon  atmosphere  after  the  electrochemical  measurements.  The  composite containing  aluminum  mesh  was   slightly  scraped  with  a  diamondcoated  ﬁle  to  reduce  carbon  contamination.  After  washing  in  DMC and  drying  in  vacuum,  the  sample  was  transported  to  the  XPS  spectrometer  in  a  transfer  chamber  (Physical  Electronics)  to  avoid  any air  or  moisture  contact  [21].  A  PHI  5600  CI  (Physical  Electronics) XPS  system  with  a  150  mm  diameter  hemispherical  energy  analyzer  was  used.  A  pass  energy  of  29  eV  was   chosen  and  the  analysis ␮m  diameter.  In  most  cases  the  monochromatic area  was   set  to  800  Al  K␣   excitation  (350  W)   was  combined  with  a  low-energy  electron charge  neutralizer.

Single  crystal  diffraction  data  for  Li3Cr2(PO4)3 were  recorded  at -CCD  diffractometer  (Enraf-Nonius ambient  temperature  using  a    =  0.71073 ˚A)  radiation.  The  crystal  structure Inc.)  with  Mo-K␣ was  solved  by  direct  methods  and  reﬁned  allowing  anisotropic  displacement  parameters  for  all  atoms  (SHELX-97  suite  [19]  in  the  3)-Fourier  syntheses  allowed WinGX  [20]  framework).  Subsequent  localization  of  six  only  partially  occupied  sites  for  lithium.  The occupation  factors  for  the  lithium  atoms  were  reﬁned  independently  for  all  sites  and  were  restrained  by  the  command  SUMP in  SHELX  [19]  for  charge  balance.  All  lithium  atoms  were  reﬁned isotropically  with  a  single  temperature  factor.  Further  details  on the  structure  reﬁnement,  the  atomic  coordinates  and  the  isotropic displacement  parameters  for  Li3Cr2(PO4)3 are  given  in  Table  2  and Table  3.  Selected  interatomic  distances  and  anisotropic  displacement  parameters  are  provided  as  supporting  information,  Table  S1 and  Table  S2,  respectively.

In  accordance  with  our  structure  reﬁnement  from  singlecrystal  data  (Table  1)  the  XRPD  (IP  Guinier  technique,  Cu-K␣1) of  Li3Cr2(PO4)3 powder  was  assigned  completely  with  the  monoclinic  unit  cell  a  =  8.452(2) ˚A,   b  =  8.547(2) ˚A,  c  =  11.872(2) ˚A  and   =  90.42(3)◦.  Following  d’Yvoire  et  al.  [13]  this  modiﬁcation  can ˇ be  classiﬁed  as  form  II,  which  is  isotypic  to  the  monoclinic  modiﬁ␣-Li3Fe2(PO4)3 [14]  and  to  the  comprehensively  studied cation  of  cathode  material  Li3V2(PO4)3 [6].

Our  structure  reﬁnement  is  in  very  good  agreement  with  the  one published  only  recently  by  Sun  et  al.  [22].  As  illustrated  in  Fig.  1  the structure  of  Li3Cr2(PO4)3 consists  of  CrO6 octahedra  sharing  corners  with  six  PO4 tetrahedra.  We   would  like  to  emphasize  here a  structural  feature,  which  was  not  recognized  by  Sun  et  al.

Distances  d(Li-Li)  within  these  channels  range  from  1.41  to  2.22 ˚A,  whereas  the  distances  to  lithium ≥   2.90 ˚A).  This sites  in  adjacent  channels  are  much  longer  (d(Li-Li)  arrangement  of  the  lithium  sites  suggests  only  one-dimensional mobility  of  the  Li+ ions.  On  average  the  lithium  atoms  are  coordinated  by  four  oxygen  atoms  (Fig.  2).  Due  to  the  separation  of the  CrO6 octahedra  by  phosphate  tetrahedra  a  quite  low  electronic  conductivity  can  be  expected  for  Li3Cr2(PO4)3 [23].  For this  reason  a  composite  of  Li3Cr2(PO4)3 and  conductive  carbon to  enhance  the  electronic  conductivity  was  used  as  electrode material.

To  prevent  kinetic limitations  during  the  electrochemical cycling,  at  ﬁrst  the  cells  were  charged  with  rather  low  speciﬁc  currents  equivalent  to  C/10.  A  potential  window  between  3  V  and  5.2  V vs.  Li+/Li  was   chosen.  In  the  dQS/dV  plot  of  Fig.  3  a)  three  charge maxima  can  be  observed:  two  pronounced  at  4.81  V  and  4.91  V  and a  weak  broad  peak  at  around  4.85  V  vs.  Li+/Li.  The  charge  process is  accompanied  by  the  deintercalation  of  1.3  lithium  per  formula, which  is  equivalent  to  a  speciﬁc  charge  capacity  of  85  mAh/g.  No discharge  maximum  can  be  observed.  At  these  high  potentials,  electrolyte  decomposition  should  be  taken  into  account.  According  to Aurbach  et  al.  [24]  and  Fransson  et  al.  [25],  electrolytes  containing LiPF6 can  be  subject  to  strong  oxidation  effects  at  potentials  higher than  4.5  V.  Due  to  the  fact,  that  the  differential  charge  values  are approaching  zero  at  potentials  higher  than  5  V  those  reactions  are assumed  to  play  a  minor  role  in  our  system.  However,  they  cannot be  neglected,  as  it  will  be  discussed  in  the  context  of  the  C-rate  and XPS  results.

Experiments  with  the  cut-off  voltage  limited  to  4.9  V  vs.  Li+/Li were  performed.  Fig.  3  b)  displays  a  reduction  peak  at  4.77  V  vs. Li+/Li.  During  oxidation  about  one  lithium  per  formula  unit  is  deintercalated  (65  mAh/g).  On  discharge  a  speciﬁc  capacity  of  32  mAh/g corresponding  to  about  0.5  lithium  per  formula  unit  is  obtained (Ah =  49%).  A  further  decrease  of  the  cut-off  voltage  to  4.8  V  vs. Li+/Li  reduces  the  deintercalated  amount  of  lithium,  however,  the columbic  efﬁciency  does  not  exceed  60%.

In  order  to  elucidate  the  dominant  fatigue  mechanism,  cells were  charged  with  higher  speciﬁc  currents.  C-rates  between  C/10 and  2C  were  applied.  The  ﬁnal  charge  voltage  was   ﬁxed  to  4.9  V vs.  Li+/Li.  The  twentyfold  increase  in  current  changes  the  oxidation and  reduction  potential  by  only  about  60  mV,   respectively  (Fig.  4). This  rather  low  polarization  losses  can  be  attributed  to  the  high lithium  ion  mobility  within  the  LISICON  structure  of  Li3-xCr2(PO4)3. Furthermore,  the  potential  maxima  and  minima  show  an  almost ␮A/mg   C/10)  at  a  potential Fig.  3.  Galvanostatic  cycling  of  Li3Cr2(PO4)3 (Is =  6.54  window  3–5.2  V  vs.  Li+/Li  (a)  and  3–4.9  V  vs.  Li+/Li  (b)  respectively.  The  speciﬁc  dQ/dV plot   enables  an  accurate  determination  of  the  oxidation  and  reduction  maxima.  The insets  illustrate  the  calculated  de and  reintercalated  lithium  per  formula  unit.

Assuming  equal  transfer  voltages  at  rather  low  currents  for  both  the  oxidation  and  the reduction  process  (see  Figure  S  1  in  the  supplementary  information),  the  observed  ohmic  behavior  at  medium  currents  allows  an equilibrium  potential  approximation  to  E0 =  4.78  V  vs.  Li+/Li,  which is  very  close  to  the  predicted  Cr4+/Cr3+ redox  potential  [12].  The coulombic  efﬁciency  at  higher  C-rates  is  signiﬁcantly  improved (black  line  in  Fig.  5)  and  approaches  almost  80%  at  2  C.  The  highlighted  box  compares  two   experiments  at  different  C-rates  with the  same  deintercalated  amount  of  lithium,  revealing  that  irreversible  reactions  during  the  oxidation  of  Li3Cr2(PO4)3 are  strongly kinetically  controlled.

As  reference  for  the  cycled  materials  XPS  spectra  of  pure Li3Cr2(PO4)3 powder  and  of  an  uncycled  composite  electrode (Li3Cr2(PO4)3,  conductive  carbon  and  PTFE  binder),  which  was exposed  to  the  electrolyte  and  washed  in  DMC   following  the  same procedure  as  for  the  cycled  materials,  were  recorded.  Challenging for  all  such  electrically  non  conducting  materials  is  the  necessary referencing  of  the  binding  energy  scale,  because  the  individual peaks  are  shifted  by  surface  charging.  This  is  usually  done  using  the always  present  adventitious  carbon  as  reference  and  setting  the  C1s peak  to  284.6  eV.  Similar  procedures  were  used  by  the  authors  of  the reference  papers  cited  in  the  next  section.  Applying  this  correction, the  binding  energies  for  Li1s,  Cr2p3/2,  P2p  and  O1s  of  the  composite  electrode  appear  to  be  shifted  by  about  2  eV  to  higher  binding energies  when  compared  to  the  pure  powder  (Fig.  6).  This  effect can  be  explained  by  differential  charging  within  the  composite.  The carbon  and  the  LISICON  material  in  the  composite  strongly  differ in  their  electronic  conductivity.  Therefore,  different  energy  shifts can  be  expected  for  carbon  and  Li3Cr2(PO4)3 particles  respectively. Since,  the  overall  surface  area  of  carbon  in  the  composite  strongly exceeds  that  of  Li3Cr2(PO4)3,  referencing  to  the  284.6  eV  peak  compensates  for  the  shift  due  to  charging  of  the  carbon  particles  but  not of  Li3Cr2(PO4)3.  In  the  cycled  material  this  effect  has  less  inﬂuence due  to  the  presence  of  a  layer  of  electrolyte  decomposition  products  on  the  carbon,  reducing  its  surface  conductivity.  Therefore  the O1s  binding  energy  of  the  phosphate  groups  at  531  eV  was  used  for energy  calibration  (black  solid  line  in  Fig.  6)  as  it  is  expected  that its  binding  energy  is  only  weekly  inﬂuenced  in  the  charged  material.  Comparing  the  red  with  the  black  solid  line  in  Fig.  6  reveals, that  the  spectra  of  the  pure  powder  and  the  composite  ﬁt  to  each other.  The  differences  in  the  ﬂuoride  spectra  can  be  attributed  to additional  PTFE,  LiPF6 and  LiF  species  after  contact  with  the  electrolyte,  as  compared  to  ﬂuorine  trace  impurities  in  the  pure  LISICON material.

Normalized  XPS  spectra  of  differently  charged  and  discharged states  are  displayed  in  Fig.  7.  Spectra,  named  as  “reference”  show the  initial  state  of  the  uncharged  composite  as  described  previously. For  the  cycled  electrodes  the  spectra  of  the  charged  state  are  given in  red  and  those  of  the  discharged  state  in  black.  The  upper  cut-off voltages  for  charging  of  the  electrodes  were  selected  as  4.85  V  vs. Li+/Li  and  5.20  V  vs.  Li+/Li,  corresponding  to  voltages  slightly  above the  maxima  of  the  observed  oxidation  peaks.  The  determined  binding  energies  are  additionally  summarized  in  Table  4. 

potentials  exceeding  4.5  V  vs.  Li+/Li,  which  is  the  typical  upper boundary  of  the  electrolyte  stability  window,  is  reduced  by  the higher  cycling  rates,  the  irreversible  reactions  may   be  attributed to  electrolyte  oxidation  and  solid  electrolyte  interface  formation. However,  irreversible  structural  transformations  of  the  LISICON material  are  kinetically  controlled  as  well  and  cannot  be  neglected. Especially  at  high  charge  amounts  (general  coulombic  efﬁciency x   =  1)  underlying  structural  fatigue  mechanisms drop  at  around 

Fig.  6.  XPS  spectra  with  different  sample  preparation  and  energy  calibration:  pure  Li3Cr2(PO4)3 powder,  energy  calibration  to  C1s  =  284.6  eV  (red  solid  line);  Li3Cr2(PO4)3 composite,  dissembled  from  a  non-cycled  cell  and  washed  in  DMC,  energy  calibration  C1s  =  284.6  eV  (black  dashed  line)  and  energy  calibration  to  O1s  =  531  eV  (black  solid line).

Chromium: The  peak  maximum  of  Cr2p3/2 in  the  initial  state  can  be  identiﬁed  at  577.6  eV,  which  is  signiﬁcantly  higher  than  that  of  trivalent chromium  in  an  oxide  matrix,  e.g.  LiCrO2 (577.0  eV)  or  Cr2O3 (576.8  eV)  [26].  This  can  be  explained  by  the  strong  inductive  effect of  P5+ exerted  via  the  Cr-O-P  bridge.  After  charging  to  4.85  V  vs. Li+/Li  a  shoulder  at  higher  binding  energies  appears  that  grows to  a  peak  at  579.2  eV  after  further  charging  to  5.2  V  vs.  Li+/Li. According  to  the  investigations  of  Allen  et  al.  [26,27]  or  Rosseinsky et  al.  [28]  the  binding  energy  of  579.2  eV  lies  at  the  lower  limit  of chromium  (VI)  compounds  binding  energies,  which  were  reported to  vary  between  579.1  eV  for  BaCrO4 and  579.9  eV  for  CaCrO4. However,  for  phosphate  compounds  an  even  stronger  shift  to  high binding  energies  than  for  CaCrO4 should  be  expected  due  to  the aforementioned  strong  inductive  effect.  The  observed  shoulder  or maximum,  respectively  at  579.2  eV  is  therefore  most  likely  due  to the  formation  of  chromium  (IV)  in  the  phosphate  matrix  of  the LISICON  material.  Nevertheless,  the  formation  of  small  amounts of  chromium  in  higher  valence  states  cannot  be  ruled  out  due  to a  tailing  of  the  chromium  spectra  up  to  584  eV.  The  tailing  may also  be  explained  by  the  formation  of  Cr-F  compounds,  which  have binding  energies  at  around  583.0  eV  according  Allen  and  Tucker [26].  Compounds  containing  Cr-F  bonds  can  be  formed  by  the contact  with  electrolyte  which  always  contains  traces  of  HF  and may   be  part  of  a  solid  electrolyte  interface  (SEI),  which  prevents oxidation  of  the  electrolyte  at  voltages  exceeding  4.5  V  vs.  Li+/Li.  So far,  only  the  charged  states  have  been  discussed.  Concerning  the discharged  states  (black  lines)  a  slight  decrease  of  the  shoulders, which  form  during  charging,  in  the  oxygen  and  chromium  spectra can  be  observed  for  the  sample  charged  to  4.85  V  vs.  Li+/Li.  For the  sample  charged  up  to  5.20  V  vs.  Li+/Li  no  changes  between the  charged  and  discharged  state  are  observed.  This  demonstrates that  chromium  can  be  partially  reduced  to  trivalent  chromium,  if the  ﬁnal  charge  voltage  is  limited  to  4.85  V  vs.  Li+/Li  (correlated  to roughly  one  deintercalated  lithium  per  formula).  However,  comparison  to  the  spectra  of  the  pristine  material  clearly  shows  that  the reduction  is  incomplete,  which  is  consistent  with  the  electrochemical  results  and  conﬁrms  the  presence  of  irreversible  structural transformations.

Lithium: The  Li1s  binding  energy  was  found  to  be  55.1  eV  for  the  pristine material,  which  is  0.7  eV  higher  than  the  binding  energy  of  Li1s in  LiCrO2 [27]  and  can  also  be  explained  by  the  inductive  effect of  P5+ in  Li3Cr2(PO4)3.  After  electrochemically  charging  the  Li1s signal  is  rather  weak,  which  is  unexpected,  since  about  1.5  lithium per  formula  unit  should  remain  even  in  the  material  charged  to 5.20  V  vs.  Li+/Li.  This  indicates  that  the  particle  surface  is  strongly depleted  in  lithium  compared  to  the  bulk.  Differences  between  the charged  and  discharged  states  of  the  4.85  V   sample  indicate  that lithium  is  partially  reinserted  into  the  LISICON  lattice  (compare black  with  red  line  at  55.1  eV).  This  effect  is  absent  for  the  sample charged  to  5.20  V  vs.  Li+/Li.  The  shoulder  at  higher  binding  energies between  56.5  eV  and  58.5  eV  with  a  maximum  at  57.1  eV  can  be associated  with  the  formation  of  Li-F  (56.9  eV)  [29]  bonds.  Several authors  observed  a  SEI  formation  on  the  cathode  site  of  secondary lithium  ion  batteries  and  identiﬁed  Li-F  species  as  main  product of  the  decomposition  of  LiPF6 besides  other  compounds  like LixPFy and  LixPFyOz [30,31].  We   believe  that  such  decomposition products  mainly  contribute  to  the  broad  shoulder  at  higher  binding energies  in  the  Li-spectra.  On  the  anode  side  the  SEI  formation leads  to  irreversible  charge  consumption  during  the  ﬁrst  cycle [32,33]  but  also  acts  as  a  protective  layer,  which  prevents  the electrolyte  from  further  decomposition  [34].  It  is  assumed,  that the  SEI  on  the  cathode  side  has  similar  properties,  which  explains the  electrolyte  stability  at  applied  voltages  higher  than  4.50  V vs.  Li+/Li.  However,  the  formation  of  a  cathode  side  SEI  reduces the  coulombic  efﬁciency  in  the  ﬁrst  cycle  and  therefore  explains the  upper  limit  of  ideally  80%  besides  structural  related  reactions (compare  Fig.  5).  Cathode  side  SEI  formation  should  be  considered as  one  possible  degradation  mechanism.  However,  structural degradation  processes  as  described  later  presumably  dominate.

Phosphorus: Only  few  changes  in  the  P2p-spectra  can  be  observed.  In  all cases  the  peak  maximum  can  be  identiﬁed  at  133.3  eV,  which  is very  close  to  P2p  in  CrPO4 (133.6  eV)  [35]  and,  therefore,  conﬁrms the  presence  of  phosphate  in  our  sample.  Charging  to  5.20  V  vs. Li+/Li  leads  to  a  small  shoulder  at  higher  binding  energies  of about  136  eV,  which  decreases  with  discharging.  After  charging to  5.20  V  vs.  Li+/Li  no  changes  between  charged  and  discharged state  (compare  the  black  with  the  red  line  in  the  upper  spectra) can  be  observed.  This  shoulder  can  be  most  likely  referred  to  P2O5 according  to  Gresch  and  Müller  (P2p  at  135.8  eV)  [36].

Oxygen: Beside  the  main  peak  at  531  eV,  which  was  used  as  reference,  a broad  shoulder  up  to  binding  energies  of  536  eV  can  be  observed, which  decreases  after  discharging  from  4.85  V  vs.  Li/Li+.  The binding  energies  of  the  observed  shoulder  corroborate  a  P2O5 formation  if  the  investigations  of  Gresch  and  Müller  [36]  are considered  again.  They  measured  two  O1s  peaks  at  532.8  eV  and 534.5  eV  in  P2O5,  corresponding  to  non-bridging  and  bridging oxygen,  respectively.

Summary  of  the  XPS-results  and  possible  reaction  scenario: The  main  ﬁndings  of  our  XPS  investigations  can  be  summarized  as  follows:  After  charging  the  Li3Cr2(PO4)3 composite  mainly chromium(IV)  was  detected,  which  conﬁrms  the  oxidation  of  trivalent  chromium  in  a  phosphate  matrix.  A  limitation  of  the  ﬁnal charge  voltage  to  4.85  V  vs.  Li+/Li  leads  to  a  partial  reversible  redox behavior.  We   assume  an  SEI  formation  on  the  cathode  side  that protects  the  electrolyte  against  decomposition  at  potentials  higher than  4.50  V  vs.  Li/Li+.  Both,  phosphorus  and  oxygen  spectra  are  indicating  the  formation  of  P2O5.  This  is  explained  with  the  following possible  reaction  scenario:

The  small  and  highly  polarizing  Cr4+ ions  should  behave  in  phosphates  similar  to  Ti4+ and  V4+ which  are  forming  characteristic (M  =  O)2+ groups  like  in  e.  g.  TiIV 5O4(PO4)4 [37],  LiTiIVO(PO4)  [38], (VIVO)2P2O7 [39],  (VIVO)(PO3)2 [40,41],  (VIVO)Si(PO4)2 [42].  Due to  bond  valence  considerations  [43,44]  (M  =  O)2+ groups,  which should  be  part  of  highly  distorted  octahedra  [(M  =  O)O5],  are  incompatible  with  the  regular  octahedral  coordination  of  the  Cr3+ sites by  six  phosphate  groups  in  the  LISICON  structure  type.  A  similar crystal  chemical  problem  arises  from  substitution  of  M4+,  which is  in  regular  octahedral  coordination  in  pyrophosphates  MP2O7 (e.  g.  [45–47]),  by  M5+ ions.  Instead  of  “MV 0.8P2O7 7) 7) the  substitution  is  charge-balanced  via  a  loss  of  P5+ according  to  MVP1.8O7 (for  MV:  Nb  [48]).  Thus,  oxide  ions  are  formed  that  lead  to  the  formation  of  (M  =  O)3+ groups.  In  a  similar  way  the  crystal  structure of  (MoVO)4(P2O7)3 [49]  and  its  very  close  relation  to  the  crystal structure  of  cubic  pyrophosphates  MIVP2O7 [45–47]  can  be  rationalized  crystal  chemically.  During  the  electrochemical  oxidation  of Li3CrIII 2(PO4)3 the  formation  of  oxide  for  the  chromyl(IV)  groups results  from  degradation  of  orthophosphate  groups  into  P2O5 and O2−according  to  a  Lux-Flood  acid-base  reaction  [50,51]  (Equation 2).  There  might  be  an  inﬂuence  of  the  charging  state  on  the  extension  of  the  acid-base  reaction  as  a  consequence  of  the  redox  process. In  situ  synchrotron  measurements  will  substantiate  our  XPS  results and  possible  reaction  scenarios  [52,53].   Li2CrIIICrIV(PO4)3 +

The  structure  of  monoclinic  Li3Cr2(PO4)3 was  described  in  detail and  compared  to  the  latest  publications.  Dominating  lithium  diffusion  paths  parallel  to  the  a-axes  were  discussed  by  Li-Li  bond distance  analysis.  A  composite  with  Li3Cr2(PO4)3,  carbon  black and  PTFE  binder  (8:1:1)  was  galvanostatically  cycled  in  a  half  cell versus  lithium  as  counter  electrode.  An  equilibrium  potential  of E0 =  4,78  V  vs.  Li+/Li  was  determined,  which  is  the  highest  experimentally  proven  redox  potential  within  the  LISICON  family.  This ﬁts  very  well  with  the  redox  potential  of  the  Cr4+/Cr3+ couple, which  was   predicted  by  DFT  calculations  [12].  A  further  distinct oxidation  maximum  at  4.91  V  vs.  Li+/Li  was   measured.  If  the  charge process  covers  this  second  oxidation  maximum,  the  coulombic  efﬁciency  approaches  zero.  However,  the  ﬁrst  oxidation  process  shows partial  reversibility  of  ideally  80%.  Parasitic  side  reactions  like  cathode  side  SEI  formation  are  revealed.  For  the  ﬁrst  time,  XPS  studies after  electrochemical  cycling  demonstrate  the  active  redox  couple Cr4+/Cr3+ within  a  phosphate  matrix.  So  far,  tetravalent  chromium in  a  phosphate  environment  has  been  unknown.  The  electrochemical  oxidation  process  seems  to  open  the  door  to  a  new  family  of phosphate  containing  high-valence  transition  metals.  Herein  the formation  of  chromyl  compounds  is  presumably  accompanied  by the  degradation  of  orthophosphate  groups  via  a  Lux-Flood  acidbase  reaction.  In  order  to  prove  this  new  octahedral  coordination of  chromium  in  a  phosphate  matrix  comprehensive  in  situ  synchrotron  powder  diffraction  experiments  have  been  concluded  at P02.1  (DESY  Hamburg)  [52,53]  and  are  currently  at  the  analysis stage.
