The improvement of the sensing performance for the mixed-potential-type acetone sensor using NASICON and Cr-based spinel-type oxide (ACr2O4, A = Zn, Co, Ni) sensing electrode was examined by increasing the length of three-phase boundary (TPB). Among the spinel-type oxides tested, NiCr2O4 was found to be the best suited for the sensing electrode. The NASICON powder was mixed with NiCr2O4 in different mass fraction (10 wt.%, 20 wt.%, 30 wt.% and 40 wt.%) to improve the length of TPB. By mixing NASICON powder into the NiCr2O4 electrode, the contact between NASICON and the sensing material existed not only at the interface between the NASICON layer and the oxide thick ﬁlm, but also at the inside of the sensing electrode. As a result, a threedimensional TPB was constructed, and showed an enhancing effect on the sensitivity of the sensor. The sensitivity of the device using NiCr2O4 electrode mixed with 30 wt.% NASICON to 5 ppm–100 ppm C3H6O vapor was − 58 mV/decade at 375 °C, which was higher than other devices (10 wt.%, 20 wt.% and 40 wt.%). It was also observed that the sensor showed a speedy response and recovery kinetics to acetone vapor.

Acetone as a general chemical reagent in industries and from interior trim materials is a typical volatile organic compound, causing many health problems like restraining central nervous system and damaging visceral organs. Therefore, it is necessary to detect and monitor acetone concentration in the atmosphere. Comparing with other types of gas sensors, solid electrolyte sensor has attracted signiﬁcant interest because of their chemical/physical durability and excellent sensing performance. Specially, the mixed potential type gas sensors based on solid electrolytes (stabilized zirconia, NASICON) and oxide electrodes have widely reported [1–3]. To this kind of gas sensor, two or more electrochemical reactions take place simultaneously on the same electrode (sensing electrode), the electrode potential is determined by the rates of the electrochemical reactions involved and is non-Nernstian. When the rates of the reactions were equal to each other, they arrived at a dynamic equilibrium, and the electrode potential at the sensing electrode was the mixed potential. For a mixed-potential-type sensor, the electrochemical reactions, which produce the mixed potential, occur simultaneously at the three-phase boundary (sensing electrode–electrolyte–gas). Greater three-phase boundary length means more electrochemically reactive sites and selectively enhances the reaction involved in the target gas, so the increased TPB can increase the mixed potential (sensor signal). For further improvement of the sensing performance of this kind of sensor, the exploration of the new type oxide electrode material with high performance has been broadly carried out. In recent years, some special attentions have been paid on the spinel type oxide electrodes. Spinel type oxides are represented by the chemical formula AB2O4, in which A ions are generally divalent cations occupying tetrahedral sites and B ions are trivalent cations in octahedral sites. It was widely used in CO hydrogenation process [4], catalytic removal of NOx [5], a cathode material of lithium ion battery [6] and sensing electrode of the solid electrolyte sensors. N. Miura et al. have examined that the YSZ based sensors using CdCr2O4, ZnCr2O4 or ZnFe2O4 sensing electrode showed excellent sensing properties to NOx at high temperatures [7–9]. G. Kale et al. also revealed that CuO + CuCr2O4 were suitable for sensing NO2 [10]. In addition, W. Moon et al. developed high performance CO sensors using SnO2– Zn2SnO4 sensing electrode [11]. Besides, G. Dražič et.al found that the sensor device using MgCr2O4 sensing electrode exhibited well sensing performances to CO2 [12]. On the other hand, an attempt in improving the performance of the sensor by constructing high-performance TPB has aroused researchers' interest. For example, G. Lu et al. reported a high performance mixed-potential-type zirconia-based NO2 sensor with three-dimensional three-phase boundary [13], indicating the effectiveness of this strategy.

In this work, we present the design and evaluation of a compact NASICON-based acetone sensor. The sensor performance was improved by using Cr-based spinel oxides and constructing three-dimensional three-phase boundary. A sensing mechanism involved in the mixed potential at the sensing electrode was suggested.

NASICON was synthesized from ZrO(NO3)2, NaNO3, (NH4)2HPO4 and Si(C2H5O)4 by sol–gel process and sintered at 900 °C for 6 h [14].

The sensor was evaluated in a closed box. The sample gases containing different C3H6O concentrations were obtained by diluting acetone vapor with air. When the sensor was exposed to air or the sample gas, the electromotive force (V) was measured with a digital electrometer (Rigol. DM3054) as a sensing signal and the results obtained were registered with a computer connected to the electrometer. The complex impedance of the sensor in sample gas was measured by means of an impedance analyzer (Solartron, 1260 and Solartron, 1287) in the frequency range of 0.1 Hz–1 MHz. The amplitude of the ac potential signal was ﬁxed at 50 mV in all measurements.

Fig. 1(a) shows the XRD pattern of the as-prepared products. It can be seen that the as-prepared oxides (CoCr2O4, NiCr2O4 and ZnCr2O4) retain their crystallographic phases (cubic) corresponding to JCPDS PDFs (#22-1107, #78-711, #88-108, respectively). The XRD patterns of the NASICON powder mixed with NiCr2O4 with different mass fractions (10 wt.%, 20 wt.%, 30 wt.% and 40 wt.%) were showed in Fig. 1(b). The characteristic peak of NASICON became more obvious with the increase of mixing amount.

Cr-based spinel-type oxides were prepared by a citric acid complex method [15]. The fabrication process of sensor as a traditional device structure was described in our previous paper [14]. The sensing material was applied on one side of Au electrodes as the sensing electrode. Au reference electrode was coated by NASICON layer in order to prevent its contacting with the sample gas. For the improvement of the length of TPB, the NASICON powder was mixed with NiCr2O4 in different mass fractions (10 wt.%, 20 wt.%, 30 wt.% and 40 wt.%) and mixed uniformly by mechanical lapping. Finally, a Ni–Cr coil was inserted into the alumina tube as a heater.

It is clear that the sensor using NiCr2O4 as sensing electrode shows the highest response to 100 ppm acetone vapor comparing with the devices utilizing the other oxide electrodes. It could be attributed to high electrochemical catalytic activity of NiCr2O4 to the C3H6O. In order to examine the electrocatalytic properties of different sensing materials, Fig. 3 shows a comparison of the cyclic voltammograms for the sensors with NiCr2O4, CoCr2O4 and ZnCr2O4 sensing electrodes cyclic scanned between −2 and 2 V with a scan rate 10 mV/s respectively in the same concentration (100 ppm) of acetone vapor. Compared with the sensors using CoCr2O4 and ZnCr2O4, the device attached with NiCr2O4 exhibited obviously higher peak current for the electrocatalytic oxidation of C3H6O at 0.75 V. At this point the electrochemical redox reactions occurred and a large number of electrons were losing and gaining on the surface of the electrode, which made a large value of current. Under the same conditions, the higher peak current means higher electrochemical reaction rate. Because the sensor produced the open-circuit voltage in the atmosphere, as shown in Fig. 3, the location of curves shifted. For example, for the curve of sensor using NiCr2O4, the value of open-circuit voltage was −0.78 V and the actual stating scanning potential was −2.78 V.

In order to further improve the sensitivity of the sensor, a threedimensional three-phase boundary was constructed by mixing NASICON powder into NiCr2O4. Fig. 4 shows the ΔV to 100 ppm C3H6O for the device using NiCr2O4 mixing NASICON powder with different mass fractions (0%, 10 wt.%, 20 wt.%, 30 wt.% and 40 wt.%). As shown in Fig. 4, the sensor using NiCr2O4 mixing 30 wt.% NASICON gives the highest response (ΔV = −115 mV), comparing with other devices (ΔV10wt.% = −66 mV, ΔV20wt.% = −78 mV, ΔV40wt.% = −53 mV). The sensing mechanism was related to the mixed potential theory.

When the sensor was exposed to the acetone vapor, the C3H6O gas molecule reached the triple-phase boundary, the following anodic (1) and cathodic (2) reactions could simultaneously occur at the TPB. 

Reactions (1) and (2) construct a local cell at the TPB. When the rates of the reactions were equal to each other, they arrived at a dynamic equilibrium, and the electrode potential at the sensing electrode was the mixed potential. For this sensor, since the sensing was attached with the oxide and the reference electrode was covered by NASICON layer, the rate of the above-mentioned two reactions at the sensing electrode was higher than the reference electrodes, which produced the difference of mixed potentials between these two electrodes. The difference of the sensing and reference electrode potentials is measured as the sensing signal.

TPB is a reaction ﬁeld for the reactions (1) and (2). It is a onedimensional three-phase (oxide–gas–electrolyte) coexisting region, which is measured by the three-phase boundary length. Greater threephase boundary length means more reactive sites. So microstructure of TPB directly affects the rates of the above-mentioned electrochemical reactions. To the TPB of a traditional device, the TPB only exists in the surface of the NASICON complanate space (two-dimensional). In this work, the three-dimensional space was constructed by mixing the electrolyte with electrode material to extend the existence of the TPB space. As

when NASICON powder was mixed into the sensing material, NASICON particles randomly distribute in the oxide thick ﬁlm approximately 10 μm thick. The position of these NASICON particles contacts with oxide and acetone formed a new three phase boundary area in the oxide thick ﬁlm. Thus the contact between NASICON and sensing material not only occurred at electrolyte interface, but also occurred at the inside of the sensing material. And then a three-dimensional threephase boundary was formed, which provided more active position for reactions (1) and (2). As reported previously [16], the total resistance of sensors seems to be affected by the interfacial resistance between the SE material and NASICON, which is affected by many variables including but not limited to: SE/NASICON interfacial reaction area (namely, the number of reaction sites on TPB). In order to investigate the relationship between TPB length and NASICON mixed ratio, Nyquist plots were measured in the sample gas (100 ppm acetone + air) at 375 °C for sensors using the NiCr2O4 + NASICON (0%, 10%, 20%, 30% and 40%)-SEs and are shown in the Fig. 6. In the low frequency range, the interfacial resistance changes with the mixed ratio (40% N 0% N 10% N 20% N 30%). The trend of interfacial (reaction) resistance of the NASICON/SE was found to decrease with increasing mixing amount of NASICON powder (≤ 30 wt.%). This result might be due to the fact that the sensor using NiCr2O4 + 30 wt.% NASICON had the largest TPB length comparing with other mixing ratios, which decrease the interfacial resistance. It can be observed that the response of the sensor to C3H6O changes with increasing mixing quantity of NASICON powder (ΔV40 wt.% b ΔV0 wt.% b ΔV10 wt.% b ΔV20 wt.% b ΔV30 wt.%), as shown in

Fig. 4. This result is consistent with regularity of the interfacial resistance changing. Hence, it is reasonable to believe that the electrochemical catalytic activity of the sensing materials mixed with 30 wt.% NASICON powder should be relatively stronger than that of the sensing materials with other mixing ratios, due to a comparatively bigger number of reaction sites. But when the mixing quantity was about 40%, the sensitivity of the sensor starts to reduce because of the decreasing of the active sites induced by the excessive mixing of NASICON powder. The sensor attached with NiCr2O4 doping 30 wt.% NASICON as sensing electrode gave the highest sensitivity to 5–100 ppm acetone vapor.

Operating temperature as an important parameter of sensor performance was investigated in this work; Fig. 7 displays the response to 100 ppm C3H6O for the sensor using NiCr2O4 doping 30 wt.% NASICON at 300 °C, 325 °C, 350 °C, 375 °C and 400 °C, respectively. It could be observed that the largest response to 100 ppm C3H6O appeared at 375 °C. The response of this kind of sensor is mainly inﬂuenced by the following two factors: 1. the concentration loss generated from the oxidation reaction in the oxide layer, which affects the sensitivity of the sensor in negative direction; and 2. the rate of the electrochemical reaction at the triple-phase boundary (TPB), which affects the sensitivity in positive direction. These two factors are related to the chemical and electrochemical catalytic activities of the oxides, respectively. With increasing operating temperature, both the chemical and electrochemical activities increase, and the response value of the sensor is decided by the competition of two processes. At 375 °C, the largest response value was obtained due to the best balance between the acetone molecular diffusion and the electrochemical reaction [3].

Fig. 8 shows the dependences of ΔV on C3H6O concentration for the devices attached with NiCr2O4 doping 30 wt.% NASICON and NiCr2O4 only at 375 °C. The ΔV values of the devices were almost linear with the logarithm of C3H6O vapor concentration, the sensitivity (slope) of the device attached with NiCr2O4 + 30 wt.% NASICON is −58 mV/decade, higher than that with NiCr2O4 (−22 mV/decade). Besides, Fig. 9 shows the response–recovery transient to different concentrations of acetone, the 90% response and the recovery times to 5 ppm acetone which are less than 15 and 180 s, respectively.

In addition, for testing the selectivity of the sensor, the device was tested in interference gases, such as CO, NO2, C7H8, CH2O and C2H6O at 375 °C. The results are shown in Fig. 10. Though the response of the sensor to 100 ppm C3H6O was the highest comparing with the responses to other gases, the sensor still showed responses to the interference gases. We will try to improve the selectivity of sensor in the future.

If a single electrochemical reaction proceeds on an electrode, the electrode potential is equilibrium potential. The difference in chemical potential of conducting ions of solid electrolyte used between sensing and reference electrodes induces electromotive force (EMF), which can be expressed by the Nernstian equation. However, if two or more electrochemical reactions take place simultaneously on the same electrode, the electrode potential is determined by the rates of the electrochemical reactions involved and is called mixed potential. In order to conﬁrm the above mixed-potential-type, the anodic and cathodic polarization curves of the present sensors were measured. The mixed potentials estimated from the cathodic and anodic curve intersections for sensor using NiCr2O4 + (0 wt.%, 10 wt.%, 20 wt.%, 30 wt.% and 40 wt.%) NASICON powders were −60, −115, −72, −51 and −109 mV for 100 ppm Cl2 in air, respectively. Additionally, these estimated values are very similar to those observed values −61, −115, −70, −50 and −108 mV, respectively, as shown in Table 1, which conﬁrms that the present sensors are operating under the mixed-potential mechanism.

This paper reported a NASICON-based electrochemical gas sensor with a three-dimensional three-phase boundary for detecting C3H6O in air at medium temperature. Three kinds of Cr-based spinel-type oxides/ACr2O4 (A = Zn, Co, Ni) used for the sensing electrodes were prepared by a citric acid complex method and their sensing properties were investigated. Among these complex oxides tested, NiCr2O4 was found to be best suited for the sensing electrode. In addition, the doping of

NASICON to NiCr2O4 electrode further enhanced the sensing performance. The sensitivity of the device attached with NiCr2O4 doping 30 wt.% NASICON to 5 ppm–100 ppm C3H6O vapor was −58 mV/decade at 375 °C, which was higher than devices attached with other doping concentrations (0 wt.%, 10 wt.%, 20 wt.% and 40 wt.%). Such a behavior can be ascribed to the increasing contacting area between NASICON and NiCr2O4. It was also observed that the sensor showed a speedy response and recovery kinetics to acetone vapor. Based on the good sensing properties, the present sensor displays great potential for detecting acetone vapor in the atmosphere.
