Herein, we report a study on the structural and thermodynamic eﬀects that cation size disparity may have in NASICONtype solid solutions. A sol−gel procedure was used to synthesize two new NASICON-type lithium-ion conductors with nominal compositions LiGe2−ySny(PO4)3 and Li1+xAlxGe2−y−(1/2)xSny−(1/2)x(PO4)3. The eﬀect of tin substitution on structure and lithium-ion conductivity was studied with powder X-ray diﬀraction, Raman spectroscopy, and dielectric spectroscopy. It is found that, although increased unit-cell dimensions derived from X-ray data suggest that tin incorporation should open the conduction bottleneck regions and improve conductivity, a decrease in conductivity is observed. Analysis of the electrical data shows that the conduction activation energy is comprised of contributions from carrier motion and generation, the latter accounting for up to 20% of the total activation energy. This result, currently unreported for NASICON-type materials, is correlated with local structural distortions observed in Raman spectra. It is deduced that the bottleneck regions suﬀer distortions due to the large ionic radius disparity among cationic constituents, which results in the “trapping” of charge carriers. Data estimated for the entropy of motion are also presented and discussed, considering the most probable thermodynamic equilibrium states.

With the ever-increasing storage capacity demands on rechargeable lithium-ion batteries, research eﬀorts over the past decade have focused on the development of emerging technologies having the potential for improved performance. Lithium−air batteries are one promising candidate but are currently limited by the availability of high-conducting separator materials. First discovered in 1976,1 materials of the Sodium Super Ionic Conductor (NASICON) family are receiving renewed attention as the mechanically robust, airand water-stable separator that is required for lithium−air batteries.

In the case of ion-conducting solids such as the NASICONtype materials, conductivity (σ) is governed by the relation σ = cμq where c is the density of charge carriers, μ the mobility of the charge carriers, and q the charge carried by each carrier. When considering lithium ions (Li+) as the only charge carriers, two primary strategies for enhancing conductivity exist: increasing the number of Li+ ions per unit cell or increasing the mobility of the Li+ ions. As a key example, the roomtemperature conductivity of lithium germanium phosphate can be increased by 3 orders of magnitude by adopting the → following heterovalent substitution scheme:6,7 LiGe2(PO4)3 Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3. Since the Ge4+ (0.53 Å) and Al3+ (0.535 Å) ions have nearly the same radius, and there are many unﬁlled sites available for the additional Li+ ions in the structure, the substitution is easily accomplished.

In NASICON crystals of general formula LiM2(PO4)3, columns of MO6 octahedra are linked by PO4 tetrahedra.1 Li+ ions reside in two possible sites: the “M1” site, which is 6-fold coordinated and located directly between two stacked MO6 units, and/or the “M2” site, which lies in an 8-fold coordinated location between two columns of MO6 units. During longrange motion, the ions hop between these two sites as they traverse the crystal. Lithium-ion mobility is controlled by the most In NASICON-type structures, the largest restriction to lithiumion motion results from a window between sites M1 and M2 made of three O atoms bound to neighboring M cations. Figure 1 shows a representation of a typical NASICON crystal with the 3D conduction pathways drawn. A close-up of the so-called “bottleneck” region at the intersection of three pathways is depicted in the upper left. In the past, a link between the size of this bottleneck and the size of the M cation has been established,8 but there remains some ambiguity as to whether this causal relationship holds when M is a main group element or when multiple substitutions are enacted.

In this study, we examine the eﬀects of partial Sn4+ for Ge4+ substitution on the structure and lithium-ion conductivity of NASICON-type materials. Since germanium and tin reside in the same group on the periodic table, their similar electronic structures and tendency to adopt 4+ oxidation states make it possible to focus on the eﬀects that ion size diﬀerence has on crystal structure and ion mobility. It is hypothesized that the inclusion of the larger Sn4+ (0.69 Å) will open the bottleneck points and promote enhanced lithium-ion mobility. Herein, we report on two new tin-bearing NASICON crystals with nominal compositions LiGe2−ySny(PO4)3 and Li1+xAlxGe2−y−(1/2)x Sny−(1/2)x (PO4)3 and provide a comparison to the analogues without tin. Here, tin-for-germanium substitution was ﬁxed at 50 mol % (y = 1) for ease of comparison. The M4+ → Al3+ + Li+ substitution rate was chosen to match the composition of LAGP demonstrated to have the highest conductivity in the series Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3, namely, x = 0.5.7,9 We use powder X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) to study lattice constants and longrange order, Raman spectroscopy to study the local order of PO4 groups in the anionic backbone of the structure, and dielectric (electrochemical impedance plus electric modulus) spectroscopy to elucidate the ion hopping dynamics in the bulk of these materials. We use insights gained from structural characterizations to propose explanations for the observed thermodynamics associated with lithium-ion motion in the crystal.

A Pechini-type sol−gel process using citric acid and ethylene glycol was used to synthesize all of the materials evaluated in this study. All solutions were prepared from as-received precursors stoichiometric ratios. Moisture-sensitive precursors were stored in a dry argon glovebox prior to use. Alcoholic and aqueous solutions of precursors were prepared separately and then mixed. The [citric acid + ethylene glycol:metal ion] ratio was ﬁxed at 4:1. To prepare the alcoholic solutions, Ge(OC2H5)4 (Gelest, >95%), ·C3H7OH (Gelest, >95%), and an appropriate amount of Sn(OC3H7)4 citric acid (Alfa, 99.5%+) were dissolved in isopropanol under vigorous stirring at 80 °C for 1 h. At the same time, aqueous solutions of LiNO3 ·9H2O (Alfa, 98%−102%), NH4H2PO4 (Sigma, (Alfa, 99%), Al(NO3)3 ≥99.99%), and an appropriate amount of citric acid dissolved in deionized water were prepared by stirring at 80 °C for 1 h. Next, the aqueous solution was slowly added to the alcoholic solution under vigorous stirring. Ethylene glycol (Mallinckrodt Chemicals, 99%) was then added to promote polymerization of the complex upon drying, and the mixture was held at 80 °C under stirring for 6 h. Finally, the sol was transferred to an oven and dried at 120 °C overnight. The resulting dry gel was ground with mortar and pestle and treated for 8 h at 500 °C to decompose the organics, which left a ﬁne powder coated in carbon residue. This powder was again ground with mortar and pestle and treated an additional 8 h at 900 °C to burn oﬀ carbon residue and complete the reaction to form ﬁne particles of the NASICON-type materials. The ﬁnal treatment temperature of 900 °C was chosen based on previously reported phase purity data for the LiGe2(PO4)3 system,6,10,11 and on our own observations, which show that signiﬁcant GeO2 generation, likely driven by lithium loss, occurs above this temperature. For the remainder of this article, we will refer to materials by the following acronyms: LGP = LiGe2(PO4)3, LAGP = Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3, LGSP = LiGeSn(PO4)3, and LAGSP = Li1.5Al0.5Ge0.75Sn0.75(PO4)3.

Powder X-ray Diﬀraction (XRD). XRD patterns of powdered samples were collected with CuKα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å) in the 2θ range of 10°−90°, using a Phillips X’Pert MPD system operated at 45 kV and 40 mA. An X’celerator 1D detector with a step size of 0.008° and collection time of 5 s per step were employed. Sample displacement was corrected by using a pure corundum internal standard. Rietveld-type proﬁle ﬁts of the data were carried out using the General Structure Analysis System (GSAS) software to extract lattice parameters using LiGe2(PO4)3 JCPDS File Card No. 80-1922 and results from ref 12 as structural models.

Raman spectra were recorded in the range of 150−1300 cm−1, using a JASCO NRS-3100 system equipped with a 532-nm laser at a power level of 22 mW. Raman shift was calibrated using a silicon standard, and accuracy was estimated to be ±2.5 cm−1 Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS). Samples for EIS measurements and subsequent analysis were prepared by the following procedure. First, powders were dried overnight at 120 °C to remove adsorbed water. The dry powder was then deagglomerated and dispersed by gentle roller-milling overnight with zirconia media in a 50:50 mixture of MEK:ethanol with 2.5 wt % Menhaden ﬁsh oil (Tape Casting Warehouse). Next, 3 wt % poly(vinyl butryal) (Tape Casting Warehouse) was added as a binder and the mixture was again milled overnight. The resulting slurry was dried back to powder, which then had well-dispersed particles and a homogeneous incorporation of binder. Cylindrical pellets ∼12 mm in diameter and 1 mm in thickness were uniaxially pressed from this powder at 377 MPa in a stainless steel die. These “green” pellets were subjected to binder burnout and a ﬁnal sintering of 12 h at 900 °C on platinum foil in air. Final density and porosity was measured using the Archimedes method with deionized water as the buoyant medium. From the theoretical densities estimated from reﬁned XRD patterns, the porosity in these samples ranged from ∼15% to 20% after sintering. The consequences of this residual porosity will be discussed later; however, it is worth stressing here that there was no impact on the comparative analysis carried out in this study.

To enable electrical measurements, a Technics Hummer V Sputter Coater was used to deposit 500 nm of pure gold onto each face of the pelletized samples. Pellets were then sealed in a custom apparatus that allowed tests to be conducted in ﬂowing dry argon, thereby excluding the eﬀects of moisture. Impedance (Z* = Z′ − iZ″) and electric modulus (M* = 1/C* = iωZ*) spectra were recorded in the range from 500 mHz to 5 MHz, using a Solartron 1250B FRA + 1287 electrochemical interface. Amplitude of perturbation was ﬁxed at 100 mV. In order to distinguish bulk from grain boundary contributions, it was necessary to cool the samples, thereby bringing the naturally high-frequency bulk spectral features into the experimental frequency window. Cooling to −70 °C was accomplished by submerging the air-tight test apparatus in a bath of ethanol and dry ice.

ICP-OES and Diﬀerential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC). Assynthesized chemical composition of the materials was determined by inductively coupled plasma−optical emission spectroscopy (ICPOES). The average mole fraction deviation from the target composition was <3.2% for each constituent (excluding oxygen). All materials considered in this study adopt a “high temperature” βNASICON phase at room temperature, but since a conversion to a poorly conducting α-phase is possible, we made an attempt to determine this transition temperature. DSC experiments were carried out with a Netzsch DSC 204 F1 Phoenix system at a heating/cooling rate of 10 °C/min under N2 ﬂow in the range from 150 °C to −100 °C. No phase transitions were observed in this region, indicating that the β-phase is stable to the lower limit of practical operating temperatures.

The conventional NASICON-type solid electrolyte adopts a well-deﬁned structure in the rhombohedral crystal system, where the M4+/3+ cations are, to a certain degree, interchangeable and forming solid solutions. Winand et al.13 have capable of suggested a loose limit on the ionic radius diﬀerence between two cations of Δr = 0.1 Å as the upper limit for good solid solution formation. In the case of the materials studied here, ionic radii as determined by Shannon14 are 0.53 Å for Ge4+, 0.535 Å for Al3+, and 0.69 Å for Sn4+. Al3+ and Ge4+ ions have approximately the same radius and can be expected to intermix, but Sn4+ and Ge4+, with ΔrSn−Ge = 0.16 Å, should not be as amenable to NASICON solid-solution formation. Hume−Rothery rules15 also suggest that this 30% size diﬀerence makes solid solution formation unlikely; here, however, the valency, electronegativity, and preferred coordination are similar between the two.

Figure 2 shows the powder XRD patterns of the four compounds studied in this work. Observed for all but LGSP is a single phase, which can be indexed based on LiGe2(PO4)3 (JCPDS File Card No. 80-1922). Shown below the patterns are ticks, indicating the peak positions of LGP and LSP (LiSn2(PO4)3 JCPDS File Card No. 87-2078). The tin-bearing phases exhibit peaks located between these two end members, indicating a solid solution of Ge−Sn NASICON phase was formed. This is consistent with previous studies, which have reported NASICON solid solutions involving constituents of large size diﬀerence.

The diﬀraction pattern of LGP exhibits sharp peaks, which is indicative of a well-ordered crystal. In the case of LGSP, however, the diﬀraction pattern shows broad, overlapping peaks that correspond to two or more NASICON phases with slightly diﬀerent lattice constants. A similar result was noted in the case of NaGeSn(PO4)3.13 In addition, peaks corresponding to SnP2O7 are observed, which can indicate an incomplete reaction.17 Here, the calcination temperature of 900 °C may not be high enough to drive the Ge−Sn solid solution formation to completion, because of inadequate mobility of the large Sn4+ ion. As a consequence, the long-range order of the crystal is disrupted, likely resulting in small domains of diﬀering compositions close to the nominal LGSP composition, causing the observed broad diﬀraction peaks.

The diﬀraction patterns of LAGSP and LAGP both exhibit fairly sharp peaks, conﬁrming NASICON solid solution formation with good long-range crystal ordering. Why LAGSP calcines to a much higher degree than LGSP remains a point in need of further investigation. Possible explanations for enhanced tin cation mobility during calcination include the greater polarizability of Al3+, relative to Ge4+, or the higher lithium content, which creates additional Li−O bonds that pull electron density away from the path of a migrating tin ion; however, these points remain unclear.

Table 1 summarizes the reﬁned lattice constants and unit cell volumes for each material. Similar unit cells are seen for LGP and LAGP, in agreement with previous results.18 A signiﬁcant increase in unit-cell size is seen for LAGSP, indicating that the incorporation of tin has increased spacing within columns of MO6 units as well as between them, thereby suggesting an opening of conduction channels. By extension, the estimated hop distance between M1 and M2 sites, as directly extracted from crystal models built from XRD data (such as in Figure 1), also increases.

In a qualitative sense, it can be expected that a widening of conduction channels makes Li+ ion motion easier and, therefore, should result in enhanced Li+ conductivity. This has been observed when comparing lithium titanium phosphate (LTP) with LGP, where the larger unit-cell volume of LTP leads to larger conduction channels and lower activation energy.18 It is worth noting that, although LGSP displays the largest unit-cell volume and jump distance, these parameters were derived from a diﬀraction pattern with signiﬁcantly broadened peaks and are likely overestimated.

Ionic Conductivity. As NASICON materials are renowned to be excellent Li+-ion conductors, we evaluated ionic conductivity for each material using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Figure 3a shows a typical complex impedance spectrum, as recorded for LAGSP at −55 °C. An equivalent circuit involving resistances (R) and constant phase elements (CPE), as shown in Figure 3a, was ﬁt to each spectrum using the ZView software (Scribner Associates, Inc.). In practice, the impedance spectra approached the Debye model, for which a CPE reduces to a simple capacitive element(C). These models were used to estimate values of R and C for each equivalent circuit. Following the accepted criterion for order of magnitude of capacitance in electroceramics,19−21 the features attributed to Li+-ion motion in the bulk (high-frequency semicircle, C ≈ 10−11F), grain boundaries (intermediate-frequency semicircle, C ≈ 10−9F), and at the blocking electrode interfaces (lowfrequency spike, C ≈ 10−6 F) were identiﬁed for each material. In this study, however, only the bulk response is considered for analysis. Conductivity data recorded over a range of temperatures is plotted in Figure 3b. The bulk conductivity of each material follows the expected Arrhenius relationship, where Ea is the activation energy for ion conduction, k the Boltzmann constant, T the temperature (in Kelvin), and σ 0 is the exponential prefactor. From eq 1, the slope of the line made by each data set in Figure 3b gives the estimated activation enthalpy for long-range lithium conduction. Typically, the activation energy is reported using the notation Ea, but for the purpose of consistency in the following discussion, we will refer to this parameter as ΔHc. Figure 4 shows the conductivity and activation enthalpy for conduction at room temperature for each material in this study. Since the samples studied here have porosities on the order of 15%−20%, the measured conductivities can be expected to be slightly lower than the theoretical conductivity of the following the Maxwell−Wagner formula material. That derived from the eﬀective medium model,19 the relationship between the experimental total conductivity (σexp) and the ⎤⎦P extent of porosity (P) follows the relation, where σtheo total conductivity, and the conductivity of gas-ﬁlled pores has been considered to be null. Accordingly, the 15%−20% porosity in these samples can aﬀect a decrease in total conductivity (mainly from the grainboundary contribution, but also to a limited extent from the bulk) of 20%−27%, with respect to fully dense samples. We should stress here that, since the goals of this study do not involve optimizing conductivity, this porosity does not present a problem. Furthermore, sample density has no impact on the temperature dependence of conductivity, and a standard analysis of activation energy remains valid.

LGP exhibits a low activation energy, but also a low conductivity. The low conductivity of LGP is a function of both the lower Li+-ion content, compared to that of LAGP, and also of Li+ site occupancy. The thermodynamic reasoning for the latter point will be discussed later. LGSP exhibits the highest activation energy and lowest conductivity, which is not surprising, based on the poor crystal ordering observed by XRD. LAGP and LAGSP both show low activation energies and high conductivities. Compared to LAGP, it is observed that LAGSP has a slightly higher activation energy for conduction and is slightly less conductive at temperatures of <100 °C. This is unexpected, based on unit-cell XRD data. Insight into this unexpected result can be gained by considering the mobility of Li+ ions in each material. The prefactor to the Arrhenius expression for ion conductivity encompasses many terms related to structural factors, carrier concentration, hopping frequency, and thermodynamic information on Li+ motion.22,23 A more general expression for the conductivity of any given material is where c is the concentration of mobile charge carriers, z the charge on each carrier, F the Faraday constant, and μ the mobility of each carrier.

It is clear from eq 8 that the measured conductivity, and, more speciﬁcally, is a convolution of free energies of carrier generation and carrier motion. It is possible to separate these contributions and probe only the activation of carrier hopping rate by analysis of the frequency dependence of feature in EIS data.11,25−28 In the case of solid-state ion conductors, electric modulus spectroscopy often provides more-instructive spectra, as the modulus is inversely related to capacitance (M* = 1/C*) and the bulk microregions of the material typically have the smallest capacitance by 2−3 orders of magnitude, when compared with the grain boundaries.19−21,29 For this analysis, M″ vs f was plotted and the critical frequency of the loss peak corresponding to the bulk response was followed over the temperature sweeps. Figure 5a shows selected data points recorded for LGP that demonstrate the temperature dependence of the imaginary modulus loss peak position. The inset of Figure 5a highlights the beneﬁt of working within the modulus formalism, as, in contrast to the impedance formalism, the bulk feature is readily observable. From the analysis of ln(fcrit) vs 1000/T shown in Figure 5b, the Arrhenius relation for the hopping rate (ν = fcrit) from eq 10 was solved to extract the bulk hopping enthalpy and entropy terms.

This can be rationalized by the fact that LGP has Li+ only in M1 sites,30 whereas, since there is more Li+ than available M1 sites, LAGP has Li+ in both M1 and M2.18 The enthalpy of ion motion is understood as the energy required to strain the lattice and push through the bottleneck plus the energy diﬀerence between sites of through bottleneck) + ΔH(site 1 ↔ site 2 energy diﬀerence). Having a Li+ ion occupying an M2 site lowers the potential of that site and helps lessen the energy diﬀerence between M2 and M1.31 in LAGP, ΔH(M1 ↔ M2 energy diﬀerence) is Therefore, smaller than that of LGP, making ΔHm smaller.

The enthalpy of motion measured for LAGSP is approximately the same as that of LAGP. Given similar Li+ occupancy, if the bottleneck was larger in LAGSP than in LAGP, as predicted by increased c-axis length, a lower ΔHm could be expected. These data suggest that local ordering eﬀects in the crystal may aﬀect ion mobility. The highest ΔHm is measured for LGSP. Following the lattice-size logic above, LGSP could be expected to have a lower ΔHm than LGP. However, as XRD patterns have suggested an inhomogeneous structure for LGSP, ion-hopping dynamics are likely also inhomogeneous, and the measured value of ΔHm should be approached cautiously. Based on eq 8, the diﬀerence in activation energy between the values recorded from hopping rate analysis (ΔHm) and those from conductivity analysis (ΔHc) must be due to the energy required for free carrier generation (ΔHf). All of the values of enthalpy and entropy thus derived have been included in Table 2. It is worth noting that, in the context of fast ion conductors such as those in the NASICON family, all of the charge carriers are already “generated”. If charge carriers are present but not participating in conduction, they may, for some reason, be “trapped”. In this sense, the diﬀerence between measured enthalpies for conduction and hopping may be the additional enthalpy needed to free a trapped charge carrier: ΔHf = ΔHtrap = ΔHc − ΔHm. Therefore, eq 7 should be understood here as reﬂecting a change in concentration of charge carriers that are free for motion, having been previously “trapped” and immobile. For LGP, all of the potential charge carriers are mobile, since the activation enthalpies for hopping (ΔHm) and long-range conduction (ΔHc) are almost the same. However, for the other compositions, there is a varying degree of additional energy required to free-up charge carriers (see Table 2).

At this point, we would like to comment on the observed entropy of motion in this germanium phosphate family, as listed in Table 2. While the role and signiﬁcance of enthalpy terms are fairly well understood, the entropy terms derived from the analysis of dielectric spectroscopy data continue to be a subject of debate.27,28 Entropy is a measure of speciﬁc ways in which a thermodynamic system can be arranged, with entropy reaching a maximum when equilibrium is reached. In order to deﬁne ΔSm, we assign the initial state as that of rest, with no applied electric ﬁeld (no long-range Li+ hopping), and the ﬁnal state as that of ion motion under an applied ﬁeld (dynamic long-range Li+ hopping). In the case of LGP, previous studies have conﬁrmed that Li+ ions reside exclusively at M1 sites while at rest.30 Therefore, long-range ion motion through hopping between M1 and M2 sites implies some portion of Li+ are not at the thermodynamically preferred M1 site. This means that the system had a higher entropy at a state of rest (closer to equilibrium); therefore, ΔSm is negative, and we can consider ion motion to be entropically hindered. In the case of LAGP and LAGSP, ΔSm is positive, suggesting that ion motion is entropically favored. This can be interpreted that, during ion motion, a higher fraction of the Li+ ions reside, at thermodynamic preference (lower energy). This calls to question the occupancy of M1 and M2 sites in these Al-substituted materials. It is clear that there is more Li+ than there are M1 sites, so some number of Li+ must reside in M2 sites. The bolstered lithium concentration creates new Li−Li repulsive interactions between occupied, neighboring M1 and M2 sites, and the lithium population reconﬁgures in a way to balance M1 occupancy and Li−Li repulsion. The result is that some Li+ are forced oﬀ M1 sites and onto M2 sites to reduce the electrostatic repulsion. Therefore, although the M1 site may be the lower-energy, preferred site for a Li+ ion, at rest, M1 site occupancy is <100%.18,32,33 Now, during a state of dynamic long-range hopping, a greater M1 site occupancy may be temporarily achieved. This makes sense as each M1 site serves as a junction to three conduction pathways and therefore likely spends a greater fraction of time occupied by a passing ion. Therefore, the M1/M2 occupancy ratio achieved during long-range motion is slightly more thermodynamically favorable than the site populations at rest, and, therefore, entropy acts to enhance conductivity.

Although the results shown in Table 2 indicate that LGSP has an entropy of motion similar to that of LAGP and LAGSP, we again attach limited signiﬁcance to this particular value. Since XRD patterns show that there is not a well-deﬁned crystalline phase present, it is currently impossible to deﬁne or speculate on site occupancies during rest and steady-state motion in the crystal. Similarity between ΔSm values for LAGP and LAGSP may suggest similar ion dynamics in these materials.

The above discussion may also be approached from the viewpoint of conﬁgurational entropy. An M1 site has six neighboring M2 sites, while an M2 site has two neighboring M1 sites. For LGP at rest, all of the Li+ ions are sitting on an M1 site and the conﬁgurational entropy is already maximized. The

average number of options for a lithium jump is six. During steady-state long-range motion, some fraction of the lithium ions are now on an M2 site. If you were to take a snapshot of the lithium occupancy in this state and evaluate the number of jump options for each Li+ ion, the average number would now be less than six. Therefore, conﬁgurational entropy is lower during long-range motion than it is at rest and ΔSm is negative. A similar rationale can be applied to the aluminum-substituted materials that have a higher fraction of Li+ ions on M1 sites during long-range motion, compared to that at rest.

In NASICON-type materials containing a mixture of cations of diﬀering size, local distortions not observable via XRD may begin to inﬂuence ion conductivity. Although XRD may suggest a larger bottleneck size based on increased unit-cell dimensions, local distortions can alter bottleneck geometry in a way that actually constricts the conduction pathway.34 To this end, Raman spectra were recorded for all materials in order to evaluate the local order of each structure.

In phosphate compounds of this nature, the Raman response mainly results from the vibrations of the PO4 structural group itself.35 In the case of the NASICON materials in the present study, this PO4 group provides the link between columns of MO6 octahedra, sharing oxygen atoms with the M4+/3+ and Li+ ions in the structure. Factor group analysis of these compounds with space group R3̅c dictates 14 Raman active vibrational modes: 6 stretching modes and 8 bending modes for the PO4 structural unit.36 Figure 6a depicts a portion of a NASICON unit cell as a visual aid for understanding how local structure may inﬂuence the vibrational spectrum. Figure 6b displays the Raman spectra recorded in the range of 200−1300 cm−1 for these materials. The observed spectra display sets of peaks in good agreement with the factor group analysis. Peaks in the range 300−500 cm−1 may be attributed to components of ν 2 symmetric bending, while those in the range 500−800 cm−1 will be components of ν 4 antisymmetric bending. The higher energy stretching modes are observed in the range 900−1300 cm−1. At present, it is diﬃcult to distinguish symmetric (ν 1) from antisymmetric modes (ν 3), but all of the 6 total expected modes are observed.

From Figure 6b, the spectrum of LGP is observed to have sharp, well-deﬁned peaks, while the other compositions demonstrate varying degrees of peak broadness. Previous work by Barj et al.37 has shown that peak broadening in the Raman spectra of NASICON materials can be attributed to disorder in the PO4 sublattice. As the stretching modes ν 1 and ν 3 are very sensitive to disorder, it is instructive to focus on the spectral region where they are observed. Figure 7 shows a closeup of the range of 850−1300 cm−1 with the results of a multipeak ﬁtting analysis accompanying each spectrum. Regarding LGP, the XRD pattern (Figure 2) indicates reasonable long-range ordering and the sharp peaks in the Raman spectrum likewise suggest a high degree of local order in the PO4 structural units. Indeed, NMR studies have concluded that, for single M4+ NASICON materials, PO4 distortion is insigniﬁcant.38 If we now consider the substitution of Al3+ + Li+ for Ge4+ to create LAGP, we observe that Raman peaks broaden slightly. As Ge4+ and Al3+ have very similar ionic radii, this broadening can be attributed to the extra Li+ occupying the M2 site in the structure.37 With Li+ in M2 sites, new Li−O bonds are formed and the result is a slight smearing of the vibrational bands of the PO4 units. Also observed in the spectrum of LAGP (Figure 7) is a broad low-intensity peak near 975 cm−1 likely due to GeO2 impurity.

Interesting to note is that peaks from LGSP are actually narrower than those from LAGSP. Barj et al. assert that, in poorly calcined materials (i.e., those with a higher degree of cation disorder), the PO4 sublattice remains more ordered. If calcination is allowed to carry on closer to completion, cation ordering increases at the expense of PO4 order. Our data may suggest this as well, since LGSP shows poor cation ordering in XRD while LAGSP shows a much higher degree of ordering. With the additional substitution of tin into LAGP to form the LAGSP, we observe a large additional broadening of vibrational bands. In this case, Sn, Al, and Ge all occupy the same type of site in the lattice. XRD conﬁrms that the substitution is successful and long-range order is maintained, but the disparity in ionic radius between Sn and the other two cations manifests in distortions of the local structure.

Sn4+ will obviously form a larger MO6 unit than will Al3+ or Ge4+. As can be visualized with the aid of Figure 6a, if a large MO6 unit is adjacent to a smaller one, nearby MO6 and PO4 units will need to rotate and/or distort to accommodate the size diﬀerence. The PO4 distortions are recorded in broadened peaks in the Raman spectra (Figure 7), and since each oxygen is shared in a bond with a M4+/3+ cation, this implies an eﬀect on MO6 units as well. The heavier M atoms remain fairly ordered as observed in the XRD patterns, and the MO6 units respond to the lattice strain primarily through rotation about the c-axis.39 Relative rotation of MO6 units will obviously distort the geometry of the bottleneck. A distortion and squeezing of bottleneck regions could lead to a closure of the local conduction pathway and a “trapping” of Li+. The addition of thermal energy and the resulting structural expansion would help to reopen the closed pathways, and this will be recorded in conductivity analysis as activation energy for charge carrier generation. By isolating the activation energy for lithium hopping (ΔHm) and comparing with the overall activation energy for long-range lithium conduction (ΔHc), this additional carrier generation energy (ΔHf) can be quantiﬁed. As stated earlier, charge carriers in fast ion conductors are already “generated”, which means that, for the materials studied here, the following is true: ΔHf = ΔHtrap (see Table 2). This “trapping” enthalpy is seen to follow the trend in observed peak broadening in the Raman spectra (Figure 7). LAGP and LAGSP display similar values for bulk hopping activation enthalpy, as reported in Table 2. While the incorporation of tin appears to create enlarged bottlenecks based on unit-cell enlargement, the reality is that many bottlenecks are distorted and are, in fact, not any easier for a Li+ ion to cross. As carriers trapped in constricted conduction pathways are freed with the addition of thermal energy, they begin to participate in conduction; this is the source of the additional activation energy observed in impedance data and described by eq 7.

In this work, we have synthesized new Sodium Super Ionic the Ge−Sn solid Conductor (NASICON) compounds of solution and evaluated their structure and ionic conductivity with X-ray diﬀraction, Raman spectroscopy, and dielectric spectroscopy. Increases in unit-cell size and c-axis length following the incorporation of Sn suggest that an enhancement in conductivity should be expected; however, this is not the ion conduction is case. explained by considering local distortions in structural polyhedra observed in Raman spectra. Disorder in MO6 units results in a distortion of local bottleneck regions, partially closing the local conduction pathway and trapping Li+ ions. An extra thermal activation is observed in EIS data that is attributed to the energy required to reopen conduction pathways and free trapped Li+. This work demonstrates that care must be taken in the design of NASICON-type electrolytes such that the choice of constituents does not introduce a high degree of local structural distortion, which may decrease overall electrolyte performance.
