Many compounds adopting the tavorite-type crystal structure have attracted considerable attention as cathode materials for lithium ion batteries due to the favorable structural characteristics, facilitating promising electrochemical  performances.  Recent  reports  have  highlighted  the  complex  mechanism  of  lithium  insertion/extraction  in  some  of  these compounds, such as the stabilization of intermediate phases in the LiFeSO4OH and LiVPO4F systems. In the case of  tavorite LiFeSO4F, reported density functional theory (DFT) calculations have suggested the possibility of a similar behavior,  but  thus  far,  no  experimental  verification  of  such  a  process  has,  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  been  successfully  demonstrated. In this work, we investigate the structural evolution of LiFeSO4F upon extraction/insertion of lithium ions  from/into the host framework. By thorough ex-situ characterizations of chemically and electrochemically prepared LixFeSO4F-samples  (0≤x≤1),  we  demonstrate  the  stabilization  of  an  intermediate  phase,  Li1/2FeSO4F,  for  which  one  possible  structural model is proposed. However, results indicating charge ordering on the iron-sites, suggesting the formation of a  super structure with a larger unit cell, are also highlighted. Moreover, the degree of formation of Li1/2FeSO4F is shown to  be highly dependent on the rate of lithium extraction as a result of an exceptionally small potential separation (~15 mV  during  charging)  of  the  two  subsequently  occurring  biphasic  processes,  LiFeSO4F/Li1/2FeSO4F  and  Li1/2FeSO4F/FeSO4F.  Finally, the intermediate phase is shown to be formed both on charge and discharge during battery cycling, even though  an  contrary.

The  recently  raised  interest  in  large-scale  exploitation  of renewable energy sources, such as wind and solar power,  and  in  expanding  the  usage  of  electric  vehicles  for  a  more sustainable future, has intensified the development  of  suitable  integrated  energy  storage  devices.  For  such  applications,  lithium  ion  (Li-ion)  batteries  represent  one  of  the  most  promising  technologies,  and  they  have  already been in operation successfully for decades in portable electronics. To meet the increasing demands on energy  and  power  density,  cycling  life  time,  cost,  and  green  chemistry in these systems, research and development of  new  and  improved  battery  materials  is  constantly  ongoing. 

Among  cathode  materials,  the  layer  structured  LiCoO2  and its Ni and Mn-substituted derivatives have been dominating the commercial market for many years. However,  1 triggered a considerable  the discovery of olivine LiFePO4 interest  within  academia  and  industry  towards  cathode  materials  based  on  polyanionic  frameworks.  This  type  of  materials  embodies  rich  chemistries  with  large  tuning  possibilities of the structural, and in turn electrochemical,  properties  based  on  the  chosen  transition  metal  redox couple, Mn+/M(n+1)+, and the polyatomic anion (XO4 make  the  building  blocks  of  the  Li-hosting  framework.  Their inherent limitations, such as low ionic and electronic conductivities, can today be overcome by nano-scaling  and  surface  decoration  techniques.  In  the  wake  of  the  successes  for  LiFePO4,  many  promising  alternative  cathode  materials  have  been  identified,  such  as  silicates2–7  (Li2MSiO4),  borates8  (LiMBO3),  NASICON-structure  phosphates9,10  pyrophosphates11–14  (Li2MP2O7), phosphate fluorides15–18 (LixMPO4F, commonly  called  “fluorophosphates”),  and  sulfate  fluorides19–24  (LiMSO4F,  commonly  called  “fluorosulfates”).  The  two  latter  systems,  incorporating  fluoride  anions  in  addition  to  the  polyatomic  moieties,  have  generated  considerable  attention  recently  by  demonstrating  promising  electrochemical performances with record-high insertion potentials for the Fe2+/Fe3+ (3.6 and 3.9 V vs. Li/Li+ in LiFeSO4F  prepared in the tavorite and triplite structure, respectively19,22,23)  and  the  V3+/V4+  (4.25  V  vs.  Li/Li+  in  tavorite  LiVPO4F16) redox couples. In  general, the high operation  voltages  are  explained  by  the  inductive  effect25–28  where  -/F--ions  gives  the  large  electronegativety  of  the  PO4 rise  to  a  high  degree  of  ionicity  of  the  M-(O,F)  bonds,  resulting in an increased oxidation energy barrier for the Mn+/M(n+1)+ redox couple. Moreover, many of the LiMXO4F  compounds  adopt  the  tavorite-type  crystal  structure  (named  after  the  mineral  LiFePO4OH29)  which  has  been  shown  to  facilitate  high  ionic  conductivities  due  to  the  spaceous  framework  with  three-dimensional  cationtransportation  channels30,31.  This  negates  the  necessity  of  nano-scaling the material to achieve a functional electrochemical  performance.  However,  further  enhancements  can be achieved by applying a surface confined electronically conducting layer, as we previously demonstrated for  LiFeSO4F32.  

It is well known that the insertion and extraction of Li+  in  materials  adopting  the  tavorite  structure  proceeds  mainly by two-phase reactions, typically seen as domains  of fairly constant potential in the electrochemical trace of  galvanostatically cycled battery cells19,32–36, as predicted by  Gibbs’ phase rule. For compounds of LiMXO4F-type, such  a  biphasic  reaction  can  be  described  by  the  following  general reaction scheme: 

However,  recently  both  LiVPO4F  and  LiFeSO4OH  in  the  tavorite structure were shown to undergo two subsequent  biphasic  processes  during  the  extraction  of  one  Li+  per  formula unit due to the formation of distinct intermediate  phases, Li2/3VPO4F33,34 and Li1/2FeSO4OH36, respectively. In  the case of tavorite-type LiFeSO4F, reported density functional  theory  (DFT)  calculations  highlight  the  possibility  of  a  similar  behavior  by  forming  a  hypothetical  intermediate  phase  Li1/2FeSO4F,  but  the  authors  stress  that  the  stabilization  of  it  is  negligible  and  that  there  is  yet  no  clear experimental evidence of its existence36. Thus, LiFeSO4F  has  so  far  been  considered  as  a  classic  two-phase  material  undergoing  one  biphasic  reaction  (between  LiFeSO4F  and  FeSO4F)  upon  extraction  and  insertion  of  Li+ 19,36–38.  

During the course of our previous work on surface decoration  of  tavorite  LiFeSO4F  with  an  electronically  conducting polymer32, we noticed certain peculiarities in the  analyses  of  chemically  oxidized  and  reduced  samples,  including  unidentifiable  Bragg  reflections  in  the  X-ray  diffraction  patterns  and  preferentially  oxidized/reduced  iron-sites in the Mössbauer spectra. Thus in this work, to  investigate the cause of the previously observed features,  we are taking a deeper look into the structural evolution  of  the  tavorite  LiFeSO4F  framework  as  a  function  of  Li+composition,  LixFeSO4F  (0≤x≤1).  This  is  carried  out  by  thorough ex-situ characterizations using X-ray diffraction  and  Mössbauer  spectroscopy  on  a  series  of  samples  prepared  both  by  chemical  and  electrochemical  extraction  (and re-insertion) of Li+ from pristine LiFeSO4F. Based on  this  experimental  data,  we  point  out  the  existence  of  a  distinct  intermediate  phase,  Li1/2FeSO4F,  never  before  experimentally identified.  

LiFeSO4F was synthesized using a low temperature solvothermal  approach39.  First,  a  FeSO4·H2O  precursor  was  prepared by partial dehydration of commercially available  FeSO4·7H2O  (Sigma-Aldrich,  >99%)  at  100  °C  under  a  constant flow of N2 for 3 h. The FeSO4·H2O precursor was  then mixed with a slight excess (1.15:1 molar ratio) of LiF  (Alfa Aesar, >99%) by ball-milling the powders in acetone  for 1 h. This precursor mixture, summing to a total batch  mass of approximately 1 g, was then dispersed in 30 mL of  tetraethylene  glycol  (TEG)  by  stirring  for  30  min.  The  dispersion was heated in a 45 mL Teflon-lined steel autoclave  (Parr  Instruments)  using  a  temperature  program  optimized  for  obtaining  a  product  of  high  purity  and  atomic  order40.  The  program  consists  of  a  slow  initial  temperature  ramp  (RT-200  °C  at  1.5  °C/min  and  200-220  °C at 0.07 °C/min), followed by a temperature dwell at 220  °C for 50 h, and a final ramp step to 230 °C (0.17 °C/min)  before allowing for a slow cooling. The resulting product,  having an ivory white color,  was collected by centrifugation,  washed  with  acetone  (BDH,  99.5%  min.),  dried  at  room  temperature  under  N2  flow,  and  was  finally  stored  under an Ar atmosphere. 

Chemical  oxidations  (Li+-extractions),  to  prepare  a  series  of  LixFeSO4F-samples  within  the  composition  range  0≤x≤1,  were  performed  by  mixing  ~100  mg  of  pristine  LiFeSO4F  together  with  desired  stoichiometric  amounts  of  the  oxidation  agent  NO2BF4  (Alfa  Aesar,  96%)  in  ~15  mL of anhydrous acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.8%). The  solutions were stirred for 12 h under an Ar atmosphere to  allow for the oxidation reaction to complete. The samples  were  then  washed  with  acetonitrile  and  acetone,  recovered  by  centrifugation,  and  analyzed  with  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  and  Mössbauer  spectroscopy  (MS),  as  described below. 

Electrochemical  cycling  of  LiFeSO4F  was  perform  on  a  surface  modified  sample  –  coated  with  ~10  wt  %  of  an  electronically  poly-3,4ethylenedioxythiophene  (PEDOT)   in  order  to  enhance  its battery performance. The details regarding the preparation  of  this  LiFeSO4F-PEDOT  composite  material  and  information  about  how  the  coating  affects  the  electrochemical  performance  are  presented  elsewhere32.  The  electrochemical  cycling  of  the  LiFeSO4F-PEDOT  composite was carried out in Swagelok-type cells equipped with  a spring mechanism in order to maintain a stack pressure.  The cells were typically loaded with 15-25 mg of LiFeSO4FPEDOT  composite  powder  (consisting  of  90  wt  %  of  active material) mixed with 15 wt % of carbon black (Super  P,  TIMCAL  Graphite  &  Carbon).  Metallic  lithium  was  used as a combined reference and counter electrode, and  two  stacked  glass  microfiber  filter  sheets  (Whatman,  GE  Healthcare) were employed as separator. Aluminium and  nickel  current  collectors  were  used  at  the  positive  and  negative electrode, respectively. A commercial electrolyte  (Merck) was employed,  consisting of 1 M LiPF6 dissolved  in  equal  volumetric  amounts  of  ethylene  carbonate  (EC)  and  diethylene  carbonate  (DEC).  All  cells  were  cycled  at  room  temperature  (~21°  C)  in  galvanostatic  mode.  The  cells were also subjected to a preconditioning cycle at the rate C/10 (extraction/insertion of one Li+ per formula unit  of active material in 10 hours) to minimize overpotentials  in the electrochemical trace  related to the polymer coating32.  After  completion  of  the  electrochemical  experiments, the cells were disassembled and the cathode powders  were  retrieved  for  ex-situ  X-ray  diffraction  and  Mössbauer spectroscopy characterizations. 

XRD patterns were collected using a Bruker D8 diffractometer equipped with a Cu X-ray tube (λ1 = 1.54056 Å, λ2  =  1.54439  Å)  and  a  Lynxeye  linear  detector  with  fluorescence  suppression.  Crystal  structure  refinements  were  performed  using  the  Rietveld  method41  implemented  in  the FullProf42 software.  

Mössbauer spectra were collected in transmission mode  using a 57CoRh source of constant acceleration, covering a  velocity  span  of  ±  5  mm/s.  The  absorbers  were  prepared  by  mixing  ~30  mg  of  active  material  (LixFeSO4F,  0≤x≤1)  with  a  suitable  amount  of  an  inert  filler  (boron  nitride),  which  was  then  spread  evenly  over  a  13  mm  in  diameter  absorber disc. Due to the moisture sensitivity of the active  material,  the  absorbers  were  kept  under  a  constant  flow  of  N2  during  the  measurements.  The  spectra  were  Lorentzian  line  least-square  fitted43  using  the  Recoil  software. The center shift, CS, being the sum of the true isomer  shift  and  the  second  order  Doppler  shift,  is  given  relative to metallic iron (α-Fe) at room temperature. The  magnitude of the quadrupole splitting, QS, is given as the  peak separation in the doublet, and the line width, W, is  the experimental FWHM of the spectral peaks. 

The  first  part  of  the  Results  and  Discussion  addresses  characterization  of  the  as-prepared  LiFeSO4F.  This  is  followed  by  XRD  and  MS  characterizations  of  a  series  of  samples,  LixFeSO4F  (0≤x≤1),  prepared  by  chemical  oxidation  of  the  pristine  LiFeSO4F,  with  the  aim  to  study  the  structural  evolution  upon  delithiation.  Finally,  ex-situ  analyses  are  performed  on  electrochemically  prepared  samples,  focusing  on  lithium  compositions  of  specific  interest.     The  X-ray  diffraction  pattern  (Figure  1)  of  the  asprepared  LiFeSO4F  powder  confirmed  that  the  desired  tavorite phase was obtained via the solvothermal synthesis (described in the Experimental section), with expected  weak  reflections  from  LiF  which  was  used  in  excess  in  order to ensure a complete reaction. No other crystalline  impurities  were  observed.  The  LiFeSO4F-structure  was  refined within the space group P-1 (triclinic system), using  a  Li-site,  (Fe(2))1a(Fe(1))1b{S2i[O2i]4}F2iLi2i,  as  suggested  from  reported  neutron  diffraction  studies44.  The  refinement  resulted  in unit cell parameters of a = 5.1754(1) Å, b = 5.4896(2) Å,  c  =  7.2216(2)  Å,  α  =  106.514(3)°,  β  =  107.191(3)°,  γ  =  97.843(3)°,  giving  a  cell  volume  of  V  =  182.395(9)  Å3,  in  good  agreement  with  previous  reports19,39  (more  refinement parameters are given in Table S1, Supporting Information).  

The as-prepared LiFeSO4F was further characterized by  Mössbauer  spectroscopy  (MS).  The  spectrum  (Figure  1,  inset (a larger graph is provided in Figure S1a, Supporting   Information)) shows two sharp and well resolved doublets  with  hyperfine  parameters  (Table  S2a,  Supporting  Information)  corresponding  to  Fe2+  in  a  high  spin  coordination,  as  expected  from  the  two  distinct  crystallographic  iron  sites,  Fe(1)  and  Fe(2),  within  the  tavorite-type  LiFeSO4F19,45. Here, the outer and inner doublets are ascribed  to the Fe(1)-site (Wyckoff position 1b (0, 0, ½)) and to the  Fe(2)-site  (Wyckoff  position  1a  (0,  0,  0)),  respectively,  consistent with previously suggested assignments by us40  and  others45.  The  lack  of  additional  signals  from  ironcontaining  species  and  the  relatively  narrow  line  widths,  W,  of  the  spectral  peaks  with  a  slight  asymmetry  of  the  inner  doublet  (W-/W+  =  1.10)  indicate  a  sample  of  high  purity  and  high  atomic  order,  as  has  been  thoroughly  discussed elsewhere40. 

To screen the structural evolution of tavorite LiFeSO4F  upon Li+-removal, a series of chemically oxidized samples,  LixFeSO4F,  with  evenly  distributed  compositions  in  the  range 0≤x≤1 were prepared from the pristine material (as  described in the Experimental section). The XRD patterns  of these samples are shown in Figure 2b-f, and the given  compositions  were  determined  by  MS,  presented  in  Figure  S1b-f  and  Table  S2b-f,  Supporting  Information.  The  diffraction  patterns  of  the  fully  lithiated  (Figure  2a)  and  fully delithiated (Figure 2f) samples show the characteristic  reflections  that  are  expected  from  these  extensively  characterized and well known phases19,39,44, with no traces  of  crystalline  impurities.  Looking  at  the  diffraction  patterns  for  the  entire  series,  going  from  high  to  low  Licontent  (x=1  to  x=0  in  LixFeSO4F),  it  is  evident  that  the peaks of the LiFeSO4F-phase are decreasing in intensity at  the  expense  of  growing  FeSO4F-reflections,  and  only  minor  shifts  of  the  peak  positions  are  observed.  This  is  in  good agreement with previously reported results where it  was concluded that the insertion/extraction of Li-ions  in  LiFeSO4F  is  occurring  mainly  through  a  single  biphasic  reaction  mechanism  accompanied  by  a  certain  degree  of  solid  solution  behavior19,38.  However,  in  addition,  we  notice that the XRD patterns of the samples with compositions 0.27≤x≤0.74 (Figure 2b-e) also show the presence of  new Bragg reflections (the visually most evident and well  resolved  peak  is  seen  in  the  23-23.3°  region)  that  cannot  be  assigned  to  either  the  LiFeSO4F  or  the  FeSO4F  endmember, indicating the existence of an additional phase.  Interestingly, one can observe similar peaks in a previous  work, but these were not identified as a separate phase19.  The relative intensity of these new reflections appears to  be  highest  for  the  samples  Li0.44FeSO4F  (Figure  2d)  and  Li0.56FeSO4F  (Figure  2c),  indicating  that  the  unidentified  phase  is  stabilized  at  compositions  close  to  Li0.5FeSO4F  (i.e.  when  half  the  initial  Li+-content  has  been  removed  from the pristine LiFeSO4F-structure). At a first glance, it  appears surprising to have three phases in co-existence in  some  of  the  samples  (Li0.44FeSO4F;  Li0.56FeSO4F,  and  Li0.74FeSO4F),  as  it  is  contradictory  to  Gibbs’  phase  rule.  However,  considering  the  aggressive  oxidation  process  that is driven by NO2BF4, having a redox potential of ~5.1  V vs. Li/Li+, it is reasonable to expect an inhomogeneous  delithiation  of  the  sample  resulting  in  non-equilibrium  situations, where Gibbs’ phase rule does not apply.  

To  study  the  structural  evolution  of  LiFeSO4F  under  well defined conditions closer to equilibrium, and investigate the implications on the redox behavior, the material  was  cycled  in  electrochemical  cells  of  Swagelok  type  where the rate of oxidation was controlled fined plateau with low polarization and with sharp charge  and discharge end points, and the practical specific capacity obtained was 135 mAh/g (corresponding to the extraction  of  0.9  Li+  per  formula  unit  of  LiFeSO4F).  However,  when rescaling the y-axis for a more detailed look into the  nuances of the redox behavior, two distinct plateaus centered  around  ~3.585  and  ~3.600  V  and  separated  by  an  inflection  point  can  clearly  be  distinguished  on  charging  (Figure 3b). This suggests the presence of two subsequent  biphasic  processes,  and  the  position  of  the  inflection  point  suggests  that  the  new  phase  formed  has  a  distinct  composition of Li0.5FeSO4F. It should be noted that similar electrochemical behavior has been observed previously21,36,  but  the  two  plateaus  have  been  interpreted  as  a  biphasic region followed by a solid solution domain21. 

To  obtain  a  better  insight  of  the  structural  aspects  of  the  material  at  this  global  composition  of  Li0.5FeSO4F,  another Swagelok cell was cycled at C/100 and stopped at  the  inflection  point  (Figure  4a,  inset),  whereupon  it  was  disassembled to retrieve the electrode powder for ex-situ  XRD  and  MS  characterization.  The  collected  Mössbauer  spectrum, shown in Figure 4b, confirms an overall sample  composition (within the uncertainty of the measurement)  of  Li0.5FeSO4F,  as  expected  from  the  charge  passed  through the cell (the corresponding Mössbauer hyperfine  parameters  are  presented  in  Table  S3,  Supporting  Information). The diffraction pattern of this sample (Figure 4a)  is  significantly  dominated  (~90%  contribution  to  the  pattern  as  suggested  by  the  multi-phase  refinement)  by  reflections that cannot be attributed to either of the endmembers,  LiFeSO4F  or  FeSO4F,  which  confirms  the  formation of a completely new phase. Here, we have indexed  these  reflections  in  a  triclinic  cell,  space  group  P-1  (in  good  agreement  with  reported  DFT  calculations36),  with  unit  cell  parameters  a  =  5.1427(3)  Å,  b  =  5.2972(4)  Å,  c  =  7.3234(3)  Å,  α  =  108.830(6)°,  β  =  109.394(6)°,  γ  =  94.274(5)°,  giving  a  cell  volume  of  V  =  174.382(18)  Å3  (more refinement parameters are given in Table S4, Supporting Information). For clarity, this intermediate phase  will hereafter be denoted Li1/2FeSO4F.     Looking closer into the details of the proposed structural model of Li1/2FeSO4F, it clearly exhibits strong similarities  to  LiFeSO4F  and  FeSO4F.  Just  as  the  end-members  (Figure  5a  and  5c),  the  intermediate  phase  consists  of  FeO4F2  octahedra  linked  together  through  F-vertices,  creating  zigzag-like  chains  along  the  c-axis  (Figure  5b).  All oxygen atoms are covalently bound to sulfur, forming  SO4  tetrahedra  which  are  bridging  the  Fe-chains.  While  the  overall  structural  framework  is  similar  for  all  three  phases,  the  differences  lie  in  the  distinct  distortions  and  rotations  of  the  polyhedra,  as  well  as  the  subsequent  changes of the unit  cell  parameters (Table 1). In the first  biphasic region, when going from LiFeSO4F to Li1/2FeSO4F  upon removal of o.5 Li+ per formula unit, one can notice a  significant  expansion  of  the  c-axis  accompanied  by  contractions  of  the  a  and  b-axes  (as  well  as  changes  of  the  unit  cell  angles),  effectively  resulting  in  an  overall  decrease of the unit cell volume by ~4.4%. The c-axis expansion is due to an elongation of the Fe-F bonds within the galvanostatically.  To  optimize  the  battery  performance,  maximizing  the  practical  capacity  and  minimizing  the  polarization during charge and discharge, the as-prepared  LiFeSO4F powder was coated with the electronically conducting  poly-3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene  (PEDOT). A detailed description of the coating procedure  and  its  effects  on  the  electrochemical  performance  is  presented  elsewhere32.  For  the  sake  of  completeness,  an  XRD analysis of the LiFeSO4F-PEDOT composite material  was conducted showing that the desired tavorite structure  had  been  preserved  after  the  coating  process  (Figure  S2,  Supporting  Information).

However,  the  dihedral  angle  between  adjacent  FeO4F2  octahedra  (O(4)-Fe(2)-Fe(1)-O(2),  seen along the c-axis) is effectively preserved when going  from pristine tavorite LiFeSO4F (Figure 5d) to Li1/2FeSO4F  (Figure 5e), changing from 28.1 to 27.8°, respectively. For  the  second  biphasic  process,  going  from  Li1/2FeSO4F  to  FeSO4F  upon  removal  of  the  remaining  Li+,  the  a  and  baxes are further contracted while the c-axis remains fairly  constant  (note  that  this  is  true  only  if  FeSO4F  is  represented  in  the  P-1  space  group,  shown  in  Table  S5,  Supporting  Information).  Together  with  the  changes  of  the  unit cell angles, this result in a further contraction of the  unit cell (V/Z) by ~6.1% (in total, the difference in volume  between  LiFeSO4F  and  FeSO4F  accounts  for  ~10.3%,  in  good  agreement  with  previous  reports19).  The  FeSO4F  phase  presents  more  symmetric  FeO4F2  octahedra  that  become  crystallographically  indistinguishable  as  this  second  biphasic  phase  transition  leads  to  an  increase  in  symmetry from P -1 to C 2/c. Moreover, the dihedral angle  between  adjacent  octahedra  in  FeSO4F  (Figure  5f)  is  significantly reduced compared to the situation in LiFeSO4F  (Figure 5d) and Li1/2FeSO4F (Figure 5e).     While the overall structural features of the intermediate  phase and the evolution of the unit cell parameters in the  LiFeSO4F/Li1/2FeSO4F/FeSO4F-system  reasonable  and  realistic,  it  is  important  to  point  out  details  in  the  results  suggesting  that  the  chosen  structural  representation  of  Li1/2FeSO4F  may  not  be  the  most  optimal.  Firstly,  the  Mössbauer  spectrum  of  the  Li0.5FeSO4F-sample  (Figure  4b)  shows  preferentially  oxidized  Fe2+-sites,  suggesting a charge order in the Li1/2FeSO4F-phase. Interestingly,  from  the  total  oxidation  degree  of  50%,  the  individual  contribution  from  the  crystallographic  Fe(1)  and  Fe(2)sites is ~2/3 and ~1/3, respectively. Surprisingly, this is in  contrast  to  previously  reported  in-operando  MS  measurements  on  LiFeSO4F  where  no  preferential  oxidation  was  observed45.  Such  a  distribution  of  charges  over  the  two  Fe-sites,  with  a  close  relation  to  a  ratio of  1/3,  could  be  an  indication  of  the  formation  of  a  super  structure,  where at least a three times larger unit cell should be used  for  a  structural  description  of  Li1/2FeSO4F  with  distinct  ordering  of  Fe2+  and  Fe3+.  Such  a  hypothesis  is  further supported  by  the  significantly  distorted  polyhedra,  in  particular  the  SO4-tetrahedron,  observed  in  the  refined  structural model for Li1/2FeSO4F. This could be a result of  averaging  the  geometries  of  several  distinct  polyhedra  situated in the unit cell of a hypothetical super structure  through  the  use  of  this  smaller  unit  cell.  However,  we  have  not  yet  spotted  any  clear  evidence  of  a  superstructure from the collected XRD patterns. Nevertheless, these  findings strongly encourage further studies to fully understand the structural nature of the intermediate phase. 

Even though Li1/2FeSO4F is significantly dominating the  contribution  to  the  XRD  pattern  shown  in  Figure  4a,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  pattern  also  contains  traces  of  the  end-members  (contributing  with  ~5%  each).  This  highlights  the  difficulty  of  stabilizing  solely  the  intermediate phase in a powder sample, even by electrochemical cycling at the slow rate of C/100. To obtain an insight into  the  role  of  the  cycling  rate  on  the  stabilization  of  Li1/2FeSO4F,  another  cell  was  cycled  and  stopped  at  the  inflection point during charge, but using the significantly  higher  cycling  rate  C/20.  The  ex-situ  XRD  pattern  and  Mössbauer spectrum of this  sample (Figure  S3, with corresponding hyperfine parameters in Table S6, Supporting  Information)  show  a  high  resemblance  with  the  results  from the sample  cycled at C/100. However, at the higher  cycling  rate  the  amount  of  Li1/2FeSO4F  formed  is  slightly  lower (~80% contribution to the pattern as determined by  a multiphase refinement). Thus, the direct comparison of  the  XRD  results  from  electrochemical  cycling  at  C/100  and  C/20,  together  with  the  chemical  oxidations  discussed  above,  leads  one  to  conclude  that  a  faster,  more  aggressive,  delithiation  reaction  results  in  formation  of  less  amount  of  the  intermediate  phase,  and  more  of  the end-members, LiFeSO4F and FeSO4F. Such an observation  seems  reasonable  considering  that;  (i)  one  can  expect  a  faster  galvanostatic  charge  (or  discharge)  to  induce  a  larger distribution of local electrochemical potentials over  the  whole  electrode  as  a  result  of  variations  in  the  electronic wiring  between the electrode particles (giving  rise  to different iR-drops) and (ii) one can expect to have local  variations  in  Li+-accessibility  in  the  electrode  due  to  different  particle  sizes  of  the  active  material.  Both  these  effects  are  expected  to  result  in  local  variations  of  the  sample  composition  that  is  deviating  from  the  global  composition  (in  this  case  Li0.5FeSO4F).  Considering  the  exceptionally low energetical separation of up to ~15 meV  between  the  three,  seemingly  thermodynamically  stable  phases of this system, such a composition distribution in  the  powder  is  expected  to  trigger  crystallization  of  all  of  them.  Furthermore,  the  equilibration  process  of  the  system, reducing the FeSO4F phase by LiFeSO4F to form only  Li1/2FeSO4F, is expected to be slow given the small potential driving force. 

Finally, to confirm the existence of two subsequent biphasic  domains  during  electrochemical  extraction  of  Li+,  another  two  cells  were  cycled  at  a  rate  of  C/100  and  stopped  during  charging  (Figure  6b,  also  presented  with  rescaled  y-axis  in  Figure  S4,  Supporting  Information),  targeting  nominal  compositions  of  LixFeSO4F  x=0.25  and  x=0.75,  respectively.  After  cell  disassembly,  ex-situ  MS  and XRD measurements were carried out on the retrieved  electrode  powders  and  compared  to  the  results  of  the  sample  with  the  global  composition  Li0.5FeSO4F,  with  known  predominance  of  the  intermediate  phase.  The  Mössbauer  spectra  (Figure  6c-d,  with  corresponding  hyperfine  parameters  in  Table  S7,  Supporting  Information)  indeed  confirmed  compositions  close  to  those  desired,  namely Li0.22FeSO4F and Li0.74FeSO4F. Looking at the corresponding XRD analysis of these samples (Figure 6a), the  pattern of the sample with a composition of Li0.74FeSO4F  clearly  shows  a  mixture  of  Bragg  reflections  from  the  LiFeSO4F  and  Li1/2FeSO4F  phases,  and  no  contribution  from FeSO4F can be observed. Moreover, the sample with  a  composition  of  Li0.22FeSO4F  shows  a  mixture  of  contributions from the Li1/2FeSO4F and FeSO4F phases, with no  presence  of  LiFeSO4F.  These  results,  combined  with  the  observation  of  the  two  voltage  plateaus  upon  electrochemical  cycling  (Figure  3b),  strongly  suggest  the  occurrence  of  two  subsequent  biphasic  processes  in  the  LiFeSO4F-system, which can be summarized by the following  equations: 

Additionally, both these biphasic processes are accompanied  by  certain  degrees  of  solid  solution  reactions,  as  indicated  by  small  shifts  of  the  diffraction  peaks  for  all  three  phases  during  multi-phase  refinements  of  XRD  data.  It  should  also  be  mentioned  that  the  direct  two-phase transition from LiFeSO4F to FeSO4F is probably also  possible, as suggested by DFT calculations36, especially at  higher  cycling  rates  and  for  electrode  composites  with  poor  electronic  wiring,  resulting  in  larger  overpotentials  and  a  less  pronounced  inflection  point  in  the  electrochemical  trace.  Hence,  the  improved  electronic  wiring  through  the  electrode  provided  by  the  PEDOT  coating  used  in  this  work32  should  effectively  facilitate  the  formation  of  Li1/2FeSO4F,  and  could  be  an  explanation  why  we spot this intermediate phase more clearly compared to  many  other  studies  where  no  electronically  conductive  coatings are usually used. 

Until  this  point,  the  conducted  experiments  in  this  work have mainly considered the extraction process of Li+  from  LiFeSO4F.  Focusing  now  on  the  insertion  process,  interestingly, the electrochemical trace from the full cycle  obtained  at  C/100  (Figure  3b)  shows  no  evidence  of  two  plateaus  on  discharge.  This  is  in  contrast  to  the  electrochemical  behavior  observed  for  the  isostructural  LiFeSO4OH-system36,  but  similar  to  that  of  LiVPO4F33,34.  For  LiFeSO4OH,  an  intermediate  phase,  Li0.5FeSO4OH,  was  indeed  identified  during  the  lithiation  process,  as  expected. In the case of LiVPO4F, the lack of a clear inflection point on discharge was attributed to the occurrence  of only one biphasic process during electrochemical lithiation,  with  no  stabilization  of  the  intermediate  phase,  Li0.67VPO4F. Thus, at this point, it was intriguing to investigate  the  structural  behavior  of  the  LiFeSO4F-system  during lithiation, so another cell was cycled at C/100 and  stopped as close as possible to a targeted composition of  Li0.5FeSO4F  during  discharge  (Figure  S5a,  inset,  and  Figure  S5b,  Supporting  Information).  Just  as  previously,  the  cell was disassembled to retrieve the electrode powder for  ex-situ characterizations. MS confirmed a sample composition of Li0.5FeSO4F (within the uncertainty of the measurement),  and  interestingly,  a  preferential  reduction  of  the iron sites was observed (Figure S5c, with corresponding  hyperfine  parameters  in  Table  S8,  Supporting  Information).  Surprisingly,  the  collected  XRD  pattern  of  the  sample  (Figure  S5a,  Supporting  Information)  revealed  a  predominant  contribution  from  Li1/2FeSO4F  (60%  contribution  to  the  pattern  as  suggested  by  a  multi-phase  refinement),  besides  the  co-existing  LiFeSO4F  and  FeSO4F  (contributing  with  ~20%  each),  showing  a  significant  stabilization of the intermediate phase despite the lack of  clear  features  in  the  electrochemical  trace.  So  far,  this  rather  contradictable  phenomenon  is  not  well  understood, which further points out the need of a thorough insitu XRD study. 

In this Article, we have investigated the structural evolution  of  the  tavorite-type  LiFeSO4F  upon  chemical  and  electrochemical  Li+-extraction  (and  re-insertion).  The  results  show  that  the  delithiation/lithiation  occurs  through  two  subsequent  biphasic  processes  due  to  the  stabilization of an intermediate phase, Li1/2FeSO4F, never  before  experimentally  characterized.  Surprisingly,  even  though  the  Li1/2FeSO4F  is  shown  to  form  both  on  charge and discharge of a half cell (vs. Li/Li+), the electrochemical  trace  shows  a  significant  asymmetry  with  a  clear  inflection  point  appearing  only  during  the  former  process.  Due  to  the  overall  low  energetical  separation  observed  between the phases of this system (LiFeSO4F, Li1/2FeSO4F,  and  FeSO4F),  namely  ~15  meV  during  charging,  the  degree  of  formation  of  the  intermediate  phase  at  a  global  sample composition of Li0.5FeSO4F is shown to be particularly  sensitive  to  the  rate  of  Li+-extraction/insertion.  Slower delithiations were shown to maximize the amount  of Li1/2FeSO4F formed, which was attributed to lower local  composition  inhomogeneities  within  the  powder  samples/electrodes.  However,  even  at  exceptionally  slow  electrochemical delithiation rates of C/100, the maximum  degree of Li1/2FeSO4F formed within a powder sample was  ~90%.  Finally,  the  Rietveld  refinement  of  ex-situ  powder  X-ray  diffraction  data  presents  an  overall  reasonable  structural model for Li1/2FeSO4F with realistic evolution of  the  unit  cell  parameters  between  the  intermediate  and  end-member  phases.  Nevertheless,  we  also  highlight  details in the results indicating charge ordering between the  two distinct Fe-sites in Li1/2FeSO4F, suggesting that a larger unit cell might be needed for a more accurate structural representation.  
