Li-ion batteries have enabled a revolution in the way portable consumer-electronics are powered and will play an important role as large-scale electrochemical storage applications like electric vehicles and grid-storage are developed. The ability to identify and design promising new positive insertion electrodes will be vital in continuing to push Li-ion technology to its fullest potential. Utilizing a combination of computational tools and structural analysis, we report new indicators which will facilitate the recognition of phases with the desired redox potential. Most importantly of these, we ﬁnd there is a strong correlation between the presence of Li ions sitting in close-proximity to the redox center of polyanionic phases and the open circuit voltage in Fe-based cathodes. This common structural feature suggests that the bonding associated with Li may have a secondary inductive eﬀect which increases the ionic character of Fe bonds beyond what is typically expected based purely on arguments of electronegativity associated with the polyanionic group. This correlation is supported by ab initio calculations which show the Bader charge increases (reﬂecting an increased ionicity) in a nearly linear fashion with the experimental cell potentials. These features are demonstrated to be consistent across a wide variety of compositions and structures and should help to facilitate the design of new, high-potential, and environmentally sustainable insertion electrodes.

Since their commercialization by Sony1 more than two decades ago, Li-ion batteries have dominated the market as a tool for portable energy storage, and now there is signiﬁcant interest in developing Li-ion batteries for use in larger volume applications such as electric transportation or stationary storage. Such largescale applications, however, have far more challenging requirements compared to portable devices in terms of energy density, safety, cost, and sustainability.2,3 Signiﬁcant eﬀort has, therefore, been devoted to searching for new materials that can be produced from abundant and low-cost resources. Given that iron is the most abundant transition metal in the Earth’s crust, this would clearly be the most logical choice for a redox center; however, Fe-based cathodes are not ideal because the Fe3+/Fe2+ redox-couple tends to operate at relatively low potentials compared to elements like Co or Mn.

Over the years, several strategies have been developed to raise the potential of these Fe-based phases. John Goodenough ﬁrst showed that increasing the electronegativity of the anionic groups, which thereby increases the ionic character of the transition metal bonds, in the isostructural NASICON frameworks resulted in an increased open circuit voltage by as much as 0.8 V.4,5 This argument, based purely around electronegativity, proved extremely robust and, indeed, can explain many of the trends observed for a variety of polyanionic groups such as those illustrated in Figure 1. Following similar considerations, attempts to incorporate ﬂuorine in oxide or polyanionic compounds were pursued to further enhance the ionic character of these bonds.6−8 Indeed, our group recently demonstrated the ability to stabilize several new polymorphs of LiFeSO4F, one of which is isostructural to the mineral triplite and operates at a potential of 3.90 V vs Li+/Li0; the highest potential for the Fe3+/Fe2+ redox couple ever reported for an inorganic compound and at least 300 mV higher than most other Fe-SO4-based materials.9,10 Even though the exact origin of this very high potential was not immediately clear, it was not long before Li2Fe(SO4)2 was discovered11,12 and it too was found to operate at a comparably high potential of 3.83 V vs Li+/Li0.

Given the similar electrochemistry, it was not surprising that some features in the structures of triplite and Li2Fe(SO4)2 were recognized to be topologically similar. the arrangement of SO4 groups in the two compounds results in similar chains of Li/Fe octahedra, and therefore, comparable coordination environments for Fe as illustrated in panels a and b in Figure 2. This motivated a deeper investigation into trying to understand the source of these unusually high redox potentials, which we discuss in the following.

Before beginning, it is instructive to review the inductive eﬀect as originally proposed by Goodenough.4,5 At its simplest level, the inductive eﬀect is a result of the electronegativity of the constituent elements in a compound altering the balance between the ionic and covalent character of the metal−ligand bonds. More electronegative elements draw more charge density toward their nuclei and thereby cause an increase in the ionic character of the bonds to the transition metal. As the ionicity of the antibonding states associated with the Fe3+/Fe2+ redox potential are pushed lower in energy and the open circuit voltage of the cell goes up. More fundamentally, however, it must be remembered that the ionocovalent character of the bonding in extended solids is determined from an amalgam of structural features which includes, but is not limited to: crystal ﬁeld eﬀects, regularity of the coordination environment, site energies, and unit cell volume. Thus, making an a priori prediction for how a material may behave as an insertion electrode is an immensely challenging problem and new guidelines are desperately needed to increase the speed with which we can identify new and promising phases. Diﬀerences in electronegativity oﬀer the simplest way to understand changes in the electrochemical performance when the structure of a material is held constant, as in NASICON or tavorite; however, it is highly nontrivial to understand the reasons for changes in the open circuit voltage across diﬀerent compounds or polymorphs. For example, it may be tempting to attribute the increased potential in Li2Fe(SO4)2 (3.83 V) when compared with tavorite-LiFeSO4F (3.60 V) to the increased number of charge-withdrawing SO4 tetrahedra that are coordinated to each Fe octahedron (six instead of four); however, the redox centers in NASICON Fe2(SO4)3 have a nearly identical coordination by six SO4 groups yet only operate at 3.60 V. Hence, the number of polyanionic groups bound to each site alone does not appear to be a suﬃcient increased redox potentials. Additionally, if electronegativity really were the only relevant factor, Li2Fe(SO4)2 would actually be expected to display a lower potential than all the polymorphs of LiFeSO4F because of the absence of ﬂuorine; the most electronegative element in the periodic table. This, in fact, is clearly not the case and appears to be consistent with recent the incorporation of ﬂuorine does not guarantee an increased open circuit voltage. Thus, traditional arguments based purely around electronegativity are not always a suﬃcient predictor for the open circuit voltage. inspection of metal−ligand bond lengths can provide some insight into the character of the bonding since shorter bonds (which reﬂect an increase in orbital overlap) should intuitively be more covalent whereas longer bonds should be more ionic. This structural indicator can prove useful as a ﬁgure-of-merit as recently demonstrated in the polymorphs 13 However, a metal−oxygen bond which is shared of Li2FeSiO4. with a SO4 group, as illustrated in Figure 3a, will always prove to be more ionic than a bond of the same length which is shared with a PO4 group because of the diﬀerence in electronegativity, so comparisons between diﬀerent polyanionic families often fails to be informative. It is also worth noting that accurate bond lengths cannot, under any circumstance, be determined from Rietveld reﬁnements against powder diﬀraction data when a material is atomically disordered like the triplite-phase of LiFeSO4F. The distance that is obtained from this type of analysis is actually an average value of the bond lengths for all the elements sharing the same site and cannot be trusted to reﬂect an accurate metal−ligand bond length.

Accordingly, considerable eﬀort was dedicated to identifying a more appropriate structural descriptor which could be used to assist in the identiﬁcation of new phases which may exhibit large redox potentials across a variety of polyanionic families. Upon inspection of several Fe-based insertion electrodes, which included SO4-, SiO4-, PO4-, and P2O7-based phases, a common structural found to exhibit a strong correlation with trends in the redox potentials was the number of Li ions sitting in proximity to the transition metal. More speciﬁcally, the number of bonds that Fe and Li share to a common polyanionic group, as illustrated in Figure 3b, appears to track extremely well with the open circuit voltage. To illustrate this, the coordination environments of Fe in several polyanionic compounds were evaluated and are shown in Figures 4 and 5.

This is not the ﬁrst time it has been suggested that the position of Li with respect to the redox center can inﬂuence the open circuit voltage of positive electrodes.19−21 Indeed, the ability of alkaline metals to inﬂuence the ionocovalent character of transition-metal bonds has been demonstrated extensively by the work of Pouchard, Hagenmuller, et al.22,23 Here, just as in the work of Pouchard, the rationale is straightforward. When Li occupies a site which is very close to the Fe−O polyhedra, there will be an interaction between the Li and O ions which are already bound to the Fe and SO4 groups (see Figure 3b). The presence of this electropositive cation will pull additional charge density out of the existing Fe−O bond and further reduce its covalent character in addition to the eﬀect that comes from the polyanionic group’s electronegativity. This interaction with Li can also be viewed as the anions in the lattice becoming observably more overbonded and, as a result, unable to donate the same amount of charge density into the bonding interactions with the redox center.

It is important to note that because Li has one of the smallest electronegativities in the periodic table, its inﬂuence is certainly be expected to be small and it appears that multiple shared Li− O−Fe bonds are necessary in order to produce a cumulative eﬀect which results in an observable change in the open circuit potential. Additionally, Li’s inﬂuence only seems to play a role in situations where the metal−oxygen bonds have already been suﬃciently weakened by the primary inductive eﬀect from the polyanionic group. Thus, strongly covalent (shorter) bonds or bonds that are shared with an anion which is not part of a polyanionic group, such as the F in some of the ﬂuorosulphates, are not as strongly inﬂuenced by interactions with Li. Hence, the inﬂuence of Li should be considered as a secondary inductive eﬀect and should only be invoked when the primary inductive eﬀect of Goodenough cannot fully explain the observed behavior.

Figure 4. Illustration of the local environment of Fe and the metal−ligand bonds that are shared with Li in several (a−c) SO4-based and (d−g) SiO4based compounds. Note that the increasing number of shared bonds with Li correlates well with the increase in potential across the series. The increasing number of Li neighbors can be considered as a reﬂection of the increasing ionic character of the bonds. It should also be recalled that the Fe−F bonds in the tavorite phase (a) and the Fe−O bonds in the Li2FeSiO4 phase (g) are signiﬁcantly shorter than those in the other phases and therefore are not as likely to be aﬀected by the presence of Li.

however, that due to the signiﬁcant degree of site-mixing between the Fe and Li metals it is impossible to distinguish precisely how many bonds are shared with Li versus Fe and could vary anywhere from six in the fully site-ordered case to ten for an Fe that is completely surrounded by Li locally. interactions appears to always Regardless, increase as the potential goes from 3.60 V in tavorite to 3.83 V in Li2Fe(SO4)2 and ﬁnally 3.90 V in triplite. Several polymorphs of Li2FeSiO4 also demonstrate an increasing number of Li−O−Fe interactions which is accompanied by an increase in potential from 3.03 to 3.16 V across the series13 (see Figure 4d−f). It is interesting to note that for the most stable polymorph (see Figure 4g), which forms with extended exposure to air or upon full electrochemical oxidation, all of its Fe−O bonds interact with the surrounding Li, yet it exhibits only a 2.8 V potential. However, this is a similar situation to what was seen in tavorite as one can see upon closer inspection of the individual Fe−O bond lengths that signiﬁcantly shorter, and therefore most covalent Fe−O bonds. So, as was already mentioned, it is unlikely that Li will inﬂuence the character of these bonds as strongly as in the other three phases.

Several phosphate-based phases were also examined, but the trivalent state of the PO4 groups presents a challenge. The reader redox potentials are strongly inﬂuenced by the position of the antibonding states on Fe regardless of whether the starting compound contains Fe2+ or Fe3+. That is to say, even though Li is inserted into LiFePO4F (Fe3+ reduced to Fe2+) while it is removed from LiFePO4 (Fe2+ oxidized to Fe3+), the character of the bonds is still principally dictated by the structure at the beginning, rather than the structure at the end of cycling. Once this consideration is addressed, Figure 5a−c clearly shows that olivine-LiFePO4 (3.45 V) is far more densely packed with Li than either LiFePO4F (2.80 V) or ortho-LiFePO4 (3.15 V)24 and the proposed rationale holds true. In fact, it is particularly interesting to mention that the FeO6 octahedra in LiFePO4 actually share an edge with the PO4 groups, which is an unusual orientation for a

To verify the robustness of interact with Li in the manner discussed will experience this secondary eﬀect and thereby result in a change in the potential. several polyanionic families were examined and their Fe coordination environment scrutinized. In the tavorite polymorph of LiFeSO4F (illustrated in Figure 4a), four Li ions sit near the FeO4F2 octahedra; however, the Fe−F distances are signiﬁcantly shorter (∼1.9 Å) than the Fe−O distances (∼2.1 Å) and are not part of a polyanionic group. They will, therefore, not be expected to inﬂuence the bonding to the Fe. In the case of Li2Fe(SO4)2, all six of the oxygen atoms in the octahedra interact with Li (Figure 4b), likewise all of the oxygen in triplite (Figure 4c) interact with a neighboring metal site. It should be noted, polyanionic group and may further help to explain the additional increase in the redox potential found in LiFePO4. Finally, LiFeP2O7 and Li2FeP2O7, which possess completely diﬀerent structures in addition to the diﬀerences in their redox potentials, were also compared (see Figure 5d, e) and found to show the same correlation found in the other polyanionic families. Thus, structures containing Fe3+ appear to ﬁt in with the the trends seen for proposed secondary inductive eﬀect is clearly very weak compared with the primary eﬀect of the polyanionic group so one must be careful not to overinterpret the inﬂuence of the Liposition without also taking into consideration the eﬀects we have previously mentioned that can also aﬀect the open circuit potential.

Indeed, although the structural features discussed up to this point clearly act as good qualitative indicators of experimental performance, is obvious that a more rigorous way of describing and predicting the ionocovalent character of these materials would be extremely desirable; the remainder of the manuscript will focus on identifying a more quantitative indicator that can be used for the screening of new compounds. Considering their usefulness in approximating oxidation states and verifying structural models for crystallographers, bond valence sums (BVS)25 would seem to oﬀer a natural starting point in this pursuit. Unfortunately, this kind of analysis relies heavily on tabulated bonds lengths, which are the result of averaging bond lengths across several kinds of compounds in the literature. Thus, it is not surprising that we found no correlation between the BVS and the experimental voltages (see Table 1).

A natural progression from BVS analysis is to employ more system-independent computational tools to provide a timeeﬃcient and less empirical method for determining the nature of bonding in these materials. As such, we analyzed several structures containing a variety of polyanionic groups using the partial atomic charge and hardness analysis (PACHA) formalism,26 which is described in detail in the Methods section. We applied this analysis to several compounds which were chosen for the structural data, availability of electrochemical data, and absence of atomic disorder. The results from the PACHA analysis, shown in panels a and b in Figure 6, demonstrate that the experimental open circuit voltage increases as the mean electronegativity increases, giving a sound theoretical explanation to the observed redox potentials. It is worth noticing that the ortho-LiFePO4 (red diamond at 3.15 V)24 is actually found to have a higher mean the reliability of electronegativity than the more heavily studied olivine-LiFePO4 (red diamond at 3.45 V). In this case, it is possible to attribute the diﬀerence in open circuit voltage between the two polymorphs to the large iron partial charge that is found in the orthorhombic polymorph as compared to the one in the olivine one (Figure 6b). Two main reasons may be invoked to explain these diﬃculties. First, in PACHA the Madelung potential is evaluated using a Ewald summation in order to ensure a full convergence of the partial charge distributions. Consequently, small errors in the lithium position may have large eﬀects on the mean electronegativity. Partial charges, on the other hand, are much less sensitive to these long-range Madelung eﬀects. It is worth noticing that in the orthorhombic polymorph, the lithium is coordinated by just four oxygen atoms but moving just slightly could lead to a 6-fold coordination as in the olivine polymorph. Second, the spherical charge approximation in PACHA requires a linear variation of electronegativity with the partial charge. This is not possible with alkaline elements owing to steep discontinuities which exist in ionization potentials after removal of the only valence electron. This approximation thus seems to be justiﬁed for structures that do not display the same stoichiometry, but fails for true polymorphs that only diﬀer by the spatial arrangement of the atoms.

Hence, it appears that ab initio calculations based on density functional theory (DFT), which can fully characterize all of the quantum mechanical behavior of these systems are absolutely necessary to accurately describe changes in the bonding of these systems. DFT also opens the possibility of studying systems with less-well-deﬁned experimental structures where the position of very light elements like protons on hydroxyl groups or Li are diﬃcult to determine experimentally. Bader analysis, which partitions the calculated charge density into discrete atoms using a well-deﬁned mathematical criterion, allows one to determine the total electronic charge residing on each atom and thereby quantify the ionocovalent character of the bonding. Within this scheme (see the methods section for a more detailed description), larger values reﬂect a more ionic character with smaller values indicating more covalency. Thus, the application of Bader analysis to determine the character of bonds has recently proven to be particularly powerful for a range of solid state compounds.27,28

As shown in Figure 7, regardless of the polyanionic group, there is clear evidence for an increasing ionic character on the Fe in each compound that correlates well with increases in the experimental open circuit potential. The Bader charge of the other elements in the composition can be found in Table 2. An interesting result is that for all of the structures we have done calculation on, the Bader charge associated with Li appears to be roughly constant around +0.86.

Lastly, we note that in terms of classical thermodynamic arguments, the open circuit voltage of a battery is usually taken as the diﬀerence in the total free energy of the delithiated and lithiated forms of the cathode. From this perspective, the creation of more ionic interactions that must be broken and reformed on reversible insertion of Li should clearly result in an increased open circuit voltage. This is consistent with our ﬁnding which once again does not require knowledge of the structure in the delithiated phase to rank materials with respect to each other in terms of redox potentials.

In summary, we have presented several structural and computational indicators which can be used to identify new Fe-based electrodes with exceptionally large potentials. In the course of this discussion, we have identiﬁed what looks to be a secondary inductive eﬀect in polyanionic materials that results from the reallocation of charge density as Li is inserted into a structure. This eﬀect is easily explained using the PACHA formalism within the framework of the spherical charge approximation of DFT equations. This formalism shows that any increase in open circuit voltage should be linked to an increase in Fe partial charge (iono-covalency eﬀects) and/or an increase in the Madelung potential (inductive eﬀects) experienced at the iron site. More interestingly, we have demonstrated through the use of two very diﬀerent computational approaches that these materials correspond well with calculated values such as the Bader charge and the PACHA electronic chemical potential of Fe within the structure. More simply, the ideas presented here can be considered to reﬂect the general trend that more densely packed compounds tend to have a higher ionic character to their bonds and therefore demonstrate higher redox potentials. This observation implies a delicate balance in the design of new Fe-based materials between the desire for an open framework structure which allows facile diﬀusion of ions and densely packed structures to give the largest potentials possible at the risk of exhibiting poor electrode kinetics. We also wish to point out that although it has been well-demonstrated that the open circuit voltage of materials can be readily approximated using ab initio calculations, an accurate understanding of the delithiated structure is critical in order for these values to be reliable. If the delithiated structure is unknown, and structural relaxations fail to accurately predict it, the calculated redox potential will not be accurate and ab initio approaches may miss a truly promising phase. Thus, most importantly, the structural features and Bader charge as described above should serve as valuable new ﬁgures-of-merit for the prediction and identiﬁcation of new and higher-performing Fe-based cathode materials in these highthroughput computational searches. Yet, in order for the charge on Fe to act as a true indicator, it is clear that the community of computational chemists and physicists need to develop more robust and accurate ways to quantify the covalent versus ionic character of these compounds.

Partial Atomic Charge and Hardness Analysis (PACHA). This approach is based on a powerful density functional theory (DFT) theorem identifying electronegativity as a measure of the negative of the electronic chemical potential.30 Both redox potential and electronegativity are a measure of the aﬃnity of a substance for electrons as shown in the series: Li (−3.05 V, 1.0), Al (−1.66 V, 1.5), Fe (−0.44 V, 1.8), I (+0.54 V, 2.5), Cl (+1.36 V, 3.0), and F (+2.87 V, 4.0) where the second number is the well-known Pauling electronegativity. Consequently, the higher the electronegativity becomes, the lower the electronic chemical potential (i.e., the HOMO energy for a molecule or the Fermi level for a solid) and hence the more positive the redox potential becomes. The PACHA formalism has the advantage of implementing the rigorous DFT-based electronegativity equalization principle using a nonempirical atomic parametrization based on the use of Allen’s electronegativity scale29,31 and on the radius Ri of the most diﬀuse valence orbital derived by relativistic quantum-mechanical methods for approximating chemical hardness.32 Using a spherical charge approximation of DFT equations, is possible to express the electronegativity of an atom EN in any substance as a sum of three terms: the Allen’s electronegativity χ i(V), the product of its chemical hardness [η 0Ri)] by its partial charge qi and the Madelung potential times the partial charge [φ i(V) = (e/(4πε iqi. As all three terms are in volts and as EN should be the same for all atoms, it is possible to anticipate a direct correlation between EN and the redox potential. This expression shows that the redox potential may be increased either by increasing atomic electronegativity of the redox center χ i, increasing the positive partial charge qi (i.e., by surrounding the redox center with electronegative elements), contracting atomic orbitals of the redox center (decrease in Ri), or increasing the Madelung potential, i.e., bringing large positive charges qj close to the redox center (small Rij). The ﬁrst three factors (χ i, qi) explain why the higher the ionicity, the higher the redox potential, whereas the Madelung term explains why the higher the number of Li the higher the redox potential.

Density Functional Theory Calculations. The structure and total energy of the bulk compounds (LiFeBO3, ortho-LiFePO4, tripliteand tavorite-LiFeSO4F, Li2Fe(SO4)2, as well as the polymorphs of Li2FeSiO4 and LiFeSO4OH) were obtained using a plane-wave DFT method, as implemented in the code VASP.33,34 The Perdew-BurkeErnzerhof gradient corrected functional, revised speciﬁcally for solids (PBEsol)35 was used to treat the exchange and correlation, with +U correction of 4 eV applied to the Fe d states.36 The frozen-core electrons were treated within the projector augmented-wave method.37,38 Structural optimizations of each compound were performed at a series of volumes in order to calculate the equilibrium lattice parameters. In each case the atomic positions, lattice vectors and cell angles were allowed to relax, whereas the total volume was held constant. The resulting energy volume curves were ﬁtted to the Murnaghan39 equation of state to obtain the equilibrium bulk cell volume. This approach avoids the problems of Pulay stress and changes in basis set which can accompany volume changes in plane wave calculations. For the tavorite-LiFeSO4OH, which did not have a deﬁned crystal structure available, we tested many positions of Li within the FeSO4OH cell, allowing the cell and all atomic positions to relax, with the results of the lowest energy structure used to calculate the Bader charges presented. A plane-wave cutoﬀ of 750 eV was used to deﬁne the basis set, with well-converged k-point sampling for each of the compounds [e.g., 8 × 6 × 6 Γ-point centered mesh was used for Li2Fe(SO4)2]. All calculations were spin polarized to account for the antiferromagnetic ordering in these materials. Structural optimizations were considered converged when the force on every ion was less than 0.01 eV Å−1. To quantify the distribution of charges in these systems, we have performed Bader analysis40 using the program developed by the Henkelman group.41

To analyze the Bader charge on the atomically disordered triplite phase of LiFeSO4F, four separate low-energy atomic conﬁgurations as determined in the work of Yamada et al. were calculated and analyzed. All results yielded essentially the same Bader charge of +1.51e on each Fe and therefore this value was taken as representative.

Bader Analysis. Quantum chemical theory does not directly deﬁne atomic charges in molecules or solids. DFT outputs the electron density, which in the framework of a plane wave basis set scheme, makes determining how the electrons should be partitioned quite diﬃcult. In quantum chemistry, the most commonly used partioning scheme is the Mulliken analysis, but this approach is predicated on localized basis sets, and therefore in not appropriate for our DFT systems. Instead we use the Bader40 charge analysis method (Atoms in Molecules, AIM), using the program developed by Henkelman et al.41 In this scheme, we deﬁne an atomic volume as that region of space, including the nucleus, which lies within all zero ﬂux surfaces surrounding the nucleus. We start at a maximum in the electron density (at the nucleus) and work outward (opposite direction to density gradient) until the gradient reaches zero and starts to rise again. At the zero point, we have a bond between two atoms. In AIM theory, the partial atomic charge is the diﬀerence between the nuclear charge and the number of electrons residing within an atomic basin (number of electrons is the integral of the density over space) where the volume of the atomic basin (the zero ﬂux surface) is given by Ω ■ AUTHOR INFORMATION Corresponding Author *E-mail: jean-marie.tarason@college-de-france.fr. Notes The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest.
