The development of highly efficient CO2 capture materials would contribute to reducing atmospheric CO2 in air and avoiding irreversible climate change. Therefore, it is important to propose a useful evaluation system that allows for rapid screening of promising CO2 capture materials. In this study, we used a solid electrolyte CO2 sensor for the performance evaluation of CO2 capture materials in place of large and expensive analytical equipment. We examined the ability of polyethylenimine (PEI)-coated silica (SiO2-PEI), which can capture ppm (parts per million)-level CO2 in air at room temperature. The CO2 sensor clearly indicated that the CO2 concentration in the outlet gas decreased after a sample gas containing ppm-level CO2 in air passed through an adsorption column packed with SiO2-PEI. From the sensor signal, the CO2 adsorption capacity and rates of adsorption and desorption were successfully estimated. We also evaluated the CO2 capturing properties of CaO using our CO2 sensor. The results demonstrate that the use of the cheap, compact, and efficient CO2 sensor is feasible for the performance evaluation of CO2 capture materials.
Past and current human activities have resulted in significant accumulation of carbon dioxide (CO2) in air. To avoid irreversible climate change by further CO2 accumulation, it is highly important to control and reduce CO2 emission to air. Up to now, various methods to reduce the CO2 concentration in air have been proposed, including capture of CO2 from concentrated industrial exhausts [1–3], sequestration of CO2 in the underground [4,5], and conversion of CO2 to energy-rich carbohydrates [6,7]. The effective use of biomass in place of fossil fuel would be also a promising way in reducing atmospheric CO2 [8–12]. In particular, CO2 capture using adsorbents is one of the promising methods to reduce atmospheric CO2 in air because of their low cost and easy handling. Currently, efficient CO2 capture materials are appearing and some of them can capture ppm (parts per million)-level CO2 in air [13–17].
Monitoring CO2 concentration in air is also important. Currently, CO2 concentrations are officially determined by standard analytical methods such as gas chromatography (GC). This technique features the high sensitivity to CO2 in ppm concentration and the good reliability. However, such a conventional analytical method requires expensive and large instruments as well as time-consuming procedures. Moreover, it is difficult to continuously monitor CO2 in the real atmosphere. For continuous monitoring of CO2 concentrations, a number of chemical and physical sensors have been developed as alternative to typical analytical instruments [18–23]. In particular, solid electrolyte sensors are among the promising devices for commercial use because of their high selectivity, ease of operation, fast response, and compactness [24–30]. We have developed a high-performance CO2 sensor using a sodium ion conductor, NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO4), attached with carbonate as a CO2 detecting auxiliary layer [31–35]. The sensor can detect CO2 in ppm concentration with a high sensitivity and selectivity and it is now commercialized by Figaro Engineering Inc., Japan. We reported that the sensor can also be applied to concentration determination of standard organic gases including volatile organic and anesthetic gases [36,37].
In this study, to further extend the applicability of the CO2 sensor, it was used for the performance evaluation of CO2 capture materials. Usually, thermogravimeter (TG) techniques are used to estimate the CO2 adsorption capacity of adsorbents. However, this method simply measures weight changes of adsorbents and does not directly measure the adsorption and desorption of CO2. If the desorption of H2O and other gases simultaneously happens, the exact measurements are difficult. In contrast, CO2 sensors can directly detect CO2 and thus exactly measure adsorption and desorption behaviors of adsorbents. CO2 analyzers are also used for that purpose, but they are large, heavy, and expensive. Therefore, the use of the cheap, compact, and efficient CO2 sensor in place of a large and expensive CO2 detector is favorable. To the best of our knowledge, there has been no attempt to apply a gas sensor to concentration determination of CO2 that is captured by or released from CO2 adsorbents. Here, we introduce a simple system where CO2 in sample gases are captured by an adsorbent and then the resulting change in CO2 concentration is detected using a solid-state CO2 sensor. This method allows for direct monitoring of changes in CO2 concentration that is caused by the adsorbent. Moreover, the CO2 adsorption capacity and rates of adsorption and desorption were estimated using the CO2 sensor. We evaluated the ability of polyethylenimine (PEI)-coated nanosilica (SiO2-PEI) and CaO in terms of CO2 capture from air.
Fig. 1 shows a schematic drawing of the structure of the CO2 sensor device fitted with a carbonate sensing electrode and a solid-reference electrode. A NASICON disk (12 mm in diameter and 1.5 mm in thickness) was fabricated by a sol-gel method using alkoxides of NaOC2H5, S i (OC2H5)4, Zr(OC4H9)4, and PO(OC4H9)3 [33]. For the sensing layer, a binary carbonate powder was prepared by calcining a mixture of Li2CO3 and BaCO3 powders (1:2 M ratio) in a crucible at 750 °C in air for 10 min. For the solid reference electrode, BiCuVOx (Bi2V0.9Cu0.1O5.35) and perovskite-type oxide (La0.6Sr0.4Co0.78Ni0.02Fe0.2O3) were prepared by conventional solid-state reaction methods [34]. The composite of BiCuVOx and the perovskite-type oxide (1:4 wt ratio) as the solid-reference electrode was formed on one side of the NASICON disk by applying an α-terpineol-based paste containing the mixture, followed by calcination at 850 °C for 1 h. A layer of carbonate as the sensing layer was deposited on the same side of the NASICON disk, followed by calcination at 750 °C for 10 min. Au mesh electrodes with Au wires were also attached on the reference and sensing electrodes. The sensor was fitted with a thin film Pt-heater.
To apply the CO2 sensor to performance evaluation of adsorbents, we selected polyethylenimine (PEI)-coated silica (SiO2-PEI) because of its simple synthesis process and high CO2 adsorption capacity [38–41]. It has been reported that SiO2-PEI can capture ppm-level CO2 in air. SiO2-PEI was synthesized by the method reported in the literature [38]. Firstly, 9 g of fumed silica (diameter: 7 nm, surface area: 292 m2/g; Nippon Aerosil Co., Ltd.) and 9 g of polyethyleneimine (Molecular weight (Mw) = 10,000; JUNSEI CHEMICAL Co.Ltd,) were dissolved in 396 mL of methanol under continuous stirring for 3 h. The solution was heated at 50 °C under vacuum (< 1 mmHg) with a rotary evaporator overnight. The properties of the synthesized adsorbent including surface area, pore volume, pore size, and PEI loading amount were presented in Table 1. The PEI loading percentage was determined with a thermogravimeter-differential thermal analyzer (TG-DTA) (EXSTAR 6000 TG/DTA 6200, Hitachi High-Tech Science Corp.). The adsorbent was heated under N2 at 25–800 °C with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 and the PEI loading was determined from the weight loss. The surface area, pore volume, and pore diameter were analyzed by the BrunauerEmmett-Taylor method using a surface area analyzer (BELSORP-miniIISP1, Microtrac BEL Corp.).
As a reference, we also evaluated the CO2 capture performance of CaO, which was purchased from FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Co.,Ltd. Prior to use, the reagent grade CaO was pretreated at 650 and 900 °C. The removal of Ca(OH)2 and CaCO3 from CaO at 900 °C was confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements (Supplementary Material: Fig. S1).
Fig. 2 shows the experimental setup for the performance evaluation of CO2 adsorbents using the CO2 sensor. The system includes an adsorption column (inner diameter: 3 mm. length: 300 mm), a bypass (inner diameter: 3 mm. length: 300 mm), and a sensor chamber (16 mm inner diameter, 60 mm length). The column, bypass, and chamber were all made of quartz. Sample gases were prepared by diluting a commercial standard CO2 (2073 ppm in air) with synthetic air using massflow controllers. The standard CO2 gas was purchased from Takachiho Chemical Industrial Co., Ltd. The sample gases under atmospheric pressure were introduced into the adsorption column. After passing through the adsorption column where adsorbents were packed, the sample gases were delivered to the quartz chamber where the CO2 sensor was installed. The adsorbent was externally heated at 30−900 °C with an electric furnace. The operating temperature of the CO2 sensor was set to 500 °C with a thin-film Pt heater. The sensor signal, i.e., electromotive force (EMF) generated between the sensing and solid-reference electrodes, was measured with an electrometer (8240, ADC Corp.). The sensor was annealed at 450−500 °C to stabilize the sensor signal prior to use. The novelty of the system is that the sensor can be placed very close to adsorbents. This configuration enables quick analysis of CO2 concentrations near the adsorbents. It should be also noted that the use of the quartz-made column and chamber is important because conventional silica glasses containing alkaline ions gradually release CO2, making the sensor signal unstable.
Silver carbonate (Ag2CO3) was used as a standard CO2 releasing material. It generates a predictable amount of CO2 according to the following decomposition reaction:
The decomposition occurs at temperatures higher than 210 °C. A designated amount of Ag2CO3 (0.1−0.5 g) was packed in the adsorption column and heated with an electric furnace. For the decomposition tests, 2073 ppm CO2 in air was flowed to the adsorption column with a flow rate of 100 mL min−1. The electric furnace was heated at 300 °C with a heating rate of 65 °C/min. We measured a change in CO2 concentration with time using the sensor. The EMF signal of the sensor was converted to CO2 concentration (ppm). The areas of peaks due to CO2 release was used to calculate the CO2 desorbed amount from carbonate. A calibration curve was drawn from the correlation between the peak areas and the amounts of CO2 released from known amounts of carbonate.
 CO2 adsorption and desorption properties of SiO2-PEI were measured using the above system under the atmospheric pressure. SiO2-PEI (0.1−0.5 g) was packed in the adsorption column with a quartz wool. Prior to adsorption measurements, SiO2-PEI was heated at 130 °C for 30 min under an air flow to remove pre-adsorbed CO2 and water. For adsorption tests, an inlet gas containing CO2 (2073 ppm in air) was flowed to SiO2-PEI heated at 30 °C and CO2 concentrations in the outlet gas were measured by the sensor. For desorption tests, the inlet gas was switched from air containing CO2 to air using the bypass tube and then air was flowed to the adsorbent that was heated at 110 °C. An increase in CO2 concentration in the outlet gas was measured by the sensor.
For temperature-swing measurements, at first CO2 was adsorbed on the adsorbent at 20 °C for 60 min, and next the adsorbent was quickly heated to 85 (or 130)°C for 60 min for desorption. Then, the adsorbent was cooled down to 20 °C for re-adsorption, and heated again for redesorption. This cycle was repeated for four times and changes in CO2 concentration in the outlet gas was monitored with the sensor. During the measurements, air containing 400 ppm CO2 was continuously flowed into the system at a rate of 100 mL/min.
heated at 900 °C for 30 min before starting experiments. Air containing 400 ppm CO2 was flowed into the system at a rate of 100 mL/min during the pretreatment. Then, the gas was switched to air and the adsorbent was cooled down to 20 °C. The gas was switched from air to air containing 400 ppm CO2 again and the adsorbent was heated at 650 and 900 °C for CO2 capture and release, respectively. Temperatureswing measurements were also performed using 0.1 g of CaO. One cycle consists of heating the sample at 650 and 900 °C for 30 min each for CO2 desorption and adsorption, respectively. This cycle was repeated for six times.
In the NASICON-based sensor fitted with a carbonate layer, the following electrochemical reactions occur at the sensing electrode, reference electrode, and interface between carbonate and NASICON, respectively: [34]
Accordingly, the electromotive force (EMF) is generated between the sensing and reference electrodes, as follows.
Where R is the gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, F is the Faraday constant, and n ( = 2) is the reaction number. In this sensor, we used a composite of Li2CO3-BaCO3 as the auxiliary layer for CO2 detection. Mixing BaCO3 to Li2CO3 significantly improves the stability against water and increases the porosity of the auxiliary layer, leading to an efficient CO2 sensing. As the reference electrode, a mixture of BiCuVOx and perovskite-type oxide was used. In order for the reaction (3) to proceed efficiently, a good oxygen ion conductor of BiCuVOx and an active electrocatalyst of the perovskite-type oxide were mixed and applied to the solid-reference electrode. The composition of the perovskite-type oxide (La0.6Sr0.4Co0.78Ni0.02Fe0.2O3) was tuned to maximize the mixed ion-electron conductivity.
Fig. 3 shows a typical calibration curve that is obtained with standard CO2. The EMF was linear to the logarithm of CO2 concentration, in good agreement with the behavior expected from Eq. (5). The slope of the curve was 68.2 mV/decade, which corresponds to the apparent reaction electron number (n) = 2.25. This value slightly deviated from the theoretical value of n = 2.0. The EMF of the device is expressed as a function of CO2 concentration (ppm) as follows:
 The response and recovery characteristics of the sensor are shown in Fig. 4. The 90 % response time was 52 s. The dead volume of the present system, including the adsorbent column, sensor chamber, and gas lines, was 20 cm3. Taking into account the dead volume and the flow rate, the time required for gas replacement was estimated to be 12 s. Thus, the response time was calculated to be 40 s by subtracting the gas replacement time from the observed response time (52 s). If the volume of the system is large, the time needed for the gas replacement increases, making the response time longer. Thus, it is critical to make the dead volume of the system small enough for the sensor to reach the steady state within a short time. The response time of the sensor is the key when estimating the adsorption rate of CO2 capture materials. If the response time of the sensor is too large, the estimation of the adsorption rate is difficult. According to our sensor’s characteristics, the present system can estimate the CO2 adsorption rate, provided that the time needed for an adsorbent to capture CO2 is much longer than the sensor response time (40 s). Another advantage of our CO2 sensor is that it has little cross-sensitivity to humidity, as reported in literature [34]. Because of this property, the sensor can evaluate the performance of CO2 capture materials without significant interference by water vapor that is desorbed from samples.
In separate experiments, we also evaluated the long-term stability of our sensor. We fabricated an electrochemical cell with three sensing electrodes (Fig. S2(a)) and tested its stability in air containing CO2 at 450 °C for 5 days. The sensor signal gradually changed as time passed, but the signal was stabilized after approximately one day, as shown in Fig. S2(b). Afterwards, only little change in sensor signal was observed. The sensor showed an excellent sensor response to CO2 even after heated for 2 days (Fig. S3). Furthermore, we tested the stability of the solid-reference electrode in air containing CO2 at a high temperature using a device (Fig. S4(a)) with the same structure as that noted above. The reference electrode potential was stable at 450 °C for 5 days (Fig. S4(b)) and showed no response to CO2 at all (Fig. S5). The results indicate that our sensor equipped with Li2CO3-BaCO3 and BiCuVOx-perovskite oxide as the sensing and solid-reference electrodes, respectively, has a good stability for continuous use.
Adsorption capacity is the most important characteristic of an adsorbent. CO2 adsorption capacity can be determined by measuring the amount of CO2 that is adsorbed or desorbed. We first used the sensor device to measure the amount of CO2 produced by decomposition of standard carbonate at higher temperatures. Fig. 5 shows the time dependence of CO2 concentration during the course of heating of Ag2CO3 that is heated from 20 to 300 °C. A jump in CO2 concentration was observed when the temperature reached 210 °C. This change in CO2 concentration corresponds to the decomposition of Ag2CO3. The peak intensity increased as the amount of Ag2CO3 increased as shown in Fig. 6, clearly indicating that the sensor quantitatively detects CO2 that was emitted from carbonate. The area of peaks was multiplied by the flow rate to convert the unit to mass (mg), according to the following equation:
Where C is the CO2 concentration, t is the time, and v is the flow rate. Using different amounts of standard carbonate, we obtained a calibration curve, as shown in Fig. 7. A good correlation was obtained (R2 = 0.963) and was used for determination of CO2 adsorption capacities.
We next determined the CO2 adsorption capacity of SiO2-PEI using the developed system. Fig. 8 shows adsorption and desorption curves of SiO2-PEI heated at 30 and 110 °C, respectively. In the adsorption curve, the CO2 concentration in the inlet gas was 2073 ppm when the adsorbent was bypassed. The CO2 sensor indicated that the CO2 concentration sharply decreased immediately after opening the CO2 flow to the adsorbent, indicating that SiO2-PEI efficiently captured CO2. After the CO2 concentration reached the minimum, a slow increase in CO2 concentration in the outlet gas was observed, suggesting that the CO2 adsorption was almost saturated and partial CO2 adsorption started afterwards. The 90 % response time of the sensor for the first drop in CO2 concentration was 2 min, which is much longer than the response time of the sensor (40 s). Thus, the adsorption rate can roughly be estimated to be 204 μmol/min (9.0 mg/min). In the desorption curve, a spike of CO2 desorption was clearly observed after switching the inlet gas from air containing CO2 to air. In this case, the 90 % response time was 1.5 min. Thus, the desorption rate is calculated to be 306 μmol/min (13.5 mg/min). The observed high adsorption and desorption rates confirm the promising properties of the SiO2-PEI adsorbent to capture CO2 in air. Next, the CO2 adsorption capacity was estimated from the areas of desorption and adsorption peaks for different amounts of SiO2PEI using the calibration curve shown in Fig. 7. The average value of the adsorption capacity of SiO2-PEI was 45 mg/g. This value almost agrees with the reported value of 52 mg/g, demonstrating the validity of our system in evaluating the adsorbent’s performance.
We also evaluated the performance of SiO2-PEI by means of temperature-swing adsorption measurements. Fig. 9 shows adsorptiondesorption cycles of SiO2-PEI heated at 85 (or 130)°C and cooled to 20 °C. The CO2 sensor quickly responded to changes in CO2 concentration in the outlet gas. At each cycle, the sensor clearly indicated that the CO2 concentration in the outlet gas decreased and increased by CO2 adsorption at 20 °C and desorption at 85 (or 130)°C, respectively, confirming the regenerability of SiO2-PEI. The initial rates of adsorption at the first cycle were calculated to be 42.0–50.0 μmol/min, which values were almost constant at both temperatures. However, the desorption peak at 85 °C was much lower than that for 130 °C; the calculated initial desorption rates were 5.97 and 523 μmol/min at 85 and 130 °C, respectively. The results indicate that the desorption of CO2 did not efficiently proceed at 85 °C. Consequently, the CO2 capturing properties degraded as the number of cycles increased. Thus, it can be concluded that the regeneration of the SiO2-PEI adsorbent should be performed at 130 °C. Here, we demonstrated that the operation conditions of adsorbents can also be optimized using our system.
CaO has recently been attracting much attention because of its natural abundance, low cost, and high adsorption capacity (786 mg/g at full conversion). The developed system was applied to evaluate the performance of CaO as a CO2 adsorbent. Fig. 10 shows the adsorption and desorption curves of CaO heated at 650 and 900 °C, respectively. As in the case for SiO2-PEI, the CO2 sensor successfully monitored changes in CO2 concentration in the outlet gas upon adsorption and desorption.
It is known that the CO2 capture and release take place on CaO according to the following equations [43]:
The CO2 capture and release are ascribable to carbonation and decomposition of CaO, respectively. These reactions are dependent on temperature and partial pressure of CO2, as illustrated in the phase diagram (Fig. S6). If the above reactions completely proceed, a high amount of CO2 can be captured and released reversibly.
However, the CO2 adsorption capacity estimated from the adsorption peak area at 650 °C was 0.284 mg/g, which is much lower than the theoretical (786 mg/g) and reported [42] (62 mg/g) values. It has been reported that CaO cannot react with CO2 completely because of the formation of surface layers during operation. The dense surface layer prevents the bulk CaO from reacting with CO2. The thermal sintering of particles is also the cause of decreasing the reactivity because the sintering blocks the CO2 diffusion [42–45]. In addition, the CO2 desorption amount estimated from the desorption peak at 900 °C was 4.57 mg/g, which was higher than the CO2 adsorption capacity estimated from the adsorption peak at 650 °C. According to the phase diagram (Fig. S6), the decomposition of CaCO3 is thermodynamically feasible at 650 °C in a ppm-level CO2 atmosphere. This suggests that the adsorption and desorption of CO2 competed each other over CaO at 650 °C. Because of these reasons, the reagent grade CaO, of which particle size and morphology were not optimized did not show a high CO2 adsorption capacity in air containing 400 ppm CO2.
Fig. 11 shows adsorption-desorption cycles of CaO heated at 650 and 900 °C. The adsorbent exhibited a good cyclability, i.e., stable capture-release behaviors. This is probably due to an effective use of the reactive surface for CO2 capture and release. However, the CO2 capture amount was still low probably because the bulk CaO remained intact. We thus judged that CaO adsorbents are not suitable for capturing ppmlevel CO2 in the atmosphere.
Using the NASICON-based potentiometric CO2 sensor, we successfully monitored a change in CO2 concentration caused by the CO2 adsorbents, PEI-SiO2 and CaO. The integration of a flow-through adsorption system with the CO2 sensor allows for the estimation of the CO2 adsorption capacity and rates of adsorption and desorption. The compact sensor can be placed very close to adsorbents, enabling the precise analysis of adsorption and desorption rates. We demonstrated that the use of laboratory-made, cheap, and compact CO2 sensor is feasible in evaluating the performance of CO2 adsorbent materials. It also might be useful in rapid screening of materials. However, the CO2 sensor still has the following drawbacks and limitations: (1) The absolute EMF is different from device to device. The device should be calibrated using standard CO2 prior to use. (2) The sensor signal becomes saturated at higher CO2 concentration (> 10 %). 