The structural aspects of the glass-to-crystal transition in the technologically important ion conducting glass ceramic system Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.75) have been examined by complementary multinuclear solid state nuclear magnetic single and double-resonance experiments. In the crystalline state, the materials form solid solutions in the NASICON structure, with additional nanocrystalline AlPO4 present at x values ≥0.5. Substitution of Al in the octahedral Ge sites results in a binomial distribution of multiple phosphate species, which diﬀer in the number P−O−Al and P−O−Ge linkages and can be diﬀerentiated by 31P chemical shift and 31P{27Al} rotational echo adiabatic passage double resonance (REAPDOR) spectroscopies. The detailed quantitative analysis of these data, of complementary 27Al{31P} rotational echo double resonance (REDOR) and of homonuclear 31P−31P double quantum NMR studies suggest that the AlO6 coordination polyhedra are noticeably expanded compared to the GeO6 sites in the NASICON-type LiGe2(PO4)3 (LGP) structure. While the glassy state is characterized by a signiﬁcantly larger degree of disorder concerning the local coordination of germanium and aluminum, dipolar solid state NMR studies clearly indicate that their medium range structure is comparable to that in NASICON, indicating the dominance of P−O−Al and P−O−Ge over P− O−P and Al−O−Ge connectivities.

The rapid growth in global energy demand in the face of dwindling global resources has been stimulating increasing eﬀorts toward the development of high energy and high power batteries based on both lithium ion1 and solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC)2 technologies. Both processes utilize fast ion transport in the solid state at ambient or elevated temperatures. During the past two decades a large number of crystalline and glassy fast ion conductors have been identiﬁed and thoroughly characterized, and excellent reviews on oxide and proton conductors for fuel cell applications,3 as well as fast ion conductors for lithium batteries, are available.4−6 The highest lithium ion conductivities in the solid state are generally encountered in crystalline compounds with highly disordered cation sublattices, termed superionic crystals. On the other hand, ion conducting glasses are often preferred in practice as they do not suﬀer from grain boundary eﬀects and form more homogeneous interfaces with the anode and cathode compartments of a solid state electrochemical cell. The favorable features of both the crystalline and the glassy state can be combined in an ideal way using ion conducting glass ceramics, and numerous promising systems presenting electrical conductivities in excess of 10−3 (Ω·cm)−1 at room temperature have been developed.7,8 One particularly attractive system is based on the crystallization of precursor glasses in the systems Li2O-MO2-Al2O3-P2O5 (M = Ge, Ti). While the glasses themselves are poorly conducting, they crystallize in the NASICON structure, which features exceptionally high ionic conductivities.9−15 Their structure is derived from the phases MTi2(PO4)3 (M = Li, Na) and MGe2(PO4)3, which feature octahedrally coordinated Ti4+ and Ge4+ cations linked through phosphate tetrahedra via corner sharing (see Figure 1).16 The monovalent ions are situated within large channels and possess considerable ionic mobility. The Ti4+ and Ge4+ species can be isomorphously substituted by Al3+, providing the opportunity of introducing additional monovalent cations into vacant sites of the structure. The resulting materials, having the composition Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3 or Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 have shown great promise as solid electrolytes in lithium/air batteries oﬀering potential energy densities of up to 11140 Wh/kg.17,18 Further progress in this ﬁeld will require a deeper fundamental understanding of the atomic structure/dynamics relationship in these electrolytes, the role of composition, the structural organization of the glassy state and the mechanism of crystallization. As previously shown, NMR spectroscopy is an element-selective, inherently quantitative method ideally well suited for developing such an understanding.19 The nuclear precession frequencies are sensitively inﬂuenced by a number of copper or stainless steel plates. All the samples were stored inside a desiccator. Glass transition and crystallization temperatures were measured using a Netzsch STA 409 Thermal Analyzer, operated at a heating rate of 10 °C/min. The glass transition and crystallization temperatures (onset points) are listed in Table 1.

Fully crystallized summarizes the individual samples were obtained by annealing the glasses at Tg for 72 h (x = 0.25), 700 °C for 20 min (x = 0.50), and 670 °C for 20 min (x = 0.75). two cases, crystallization temperatures signiﬁcantly higher than Tg were necessary for obtaining fully crystalline samples within the time periods stated. The crystallized phases were characterized by X-ray powder diﬀraction, using a Bruker D8 Discover diﬀractometer. The results suggest single-phase materials, with small impurities of Li4P2O7 in the x = 0.75 material. As discussed further below, NMR data suggest the additional presence of some nanostructured AlPO4 in the latter sample.

Structural Investigations by Solid State NMR. Highresolution 6/7Li, 27Al, and 31P NMR spectroscopy was done under conditions of magic-angle spinning (MAS), enabling the characterization of local structural environments based on isotropic chemical shift measurements. These studies were conducted on a Bruker Avance DSX spectrometer operating at 9.4 T using a commercial 4 mm triple resonance MAS NMR probe. Typical spinning speeds between 12.0 and 14.0 kHz were used in all experiments. The spectra for 6Li, 7Li, 27Al, and 31P were recorded at resonance frequencies of 58.9, 155.5, 104.2, and 162.0 MHz using pulse lengths of 8.0 μs for 6Li, 2− 3.5 μs for 7Li, 1.5−2.0 μs for 27Al, and 3.0−4.0 μs for 31P. Recycle delays were chosen at 60−100 s, 10 s, 0.5−1 s, and 200−1000 s for 6Li, 7Li, 27Al, and 31P, respectively. Resonance shifts were referenced to 1 M LiCl aqueous solution, 1 M Al(NO3)3 aqueous solution and 85% H3PO4. In addition, advanced dipolar recoupling experiments were carried out to measure the strengths of heteroand homonuclear magnetic dipole−dipole interactions under the high resolution conditions aﬀorded by MAS. For the 27Al{7Li}and 27Al{31P}-rotational echo double resonance (REDOR)27 experiments, typical πpulse lengths for 27Al were 6.0 μs and 9.4 μs for 7Li and 7.0 μs for 31P. The compensated REDOR method was used,28 and the corrected 27Al{31P}-REDOR curvatures within the data range (ΔS/S0 < 0.3) were analyzed according to the parabolic approximation,29

Indeed, a number of solid state NMR studies have appeared in the literature, mostly on the Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 system, discussing the structural consequences of Al substitution, the distribution of the lithium ions over the available sites in the NASICON structure, and monitoring their mobility on the basis of Li quadrupolar splittings and spin−lattice relaxation times.20−26 However, to date, no structural information is available about the local atomic environments and the polyhedral connectivities in the glassy state and the structural relation between glass and crystal. In the present contribution we address this question for the Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3 system, which forms particularly stable glasses and glass-ceramics over a wide composition range. Besides standard magic-angle spinning (MAS) NMR we have applied a number of other selective averaging methods designed for measuring the strength of homoand heteronuclear magnetic dipole−dipole couplings. As these interactions can be related to internuclear distance distributions, their measurement represents a powerful approach for testing spatial distribution models and interatomic connectivity scenarios in the glassy state and provides a quantitative basis for comparisons to the structures of the crystalline materials.

Glasses were prepared from stoichiometric ratios of Li2CO3 (Acros, 99%), Al2O3 (Aldrich, 99.5+ %), GeO2 (Alfa Aesar, 99.98%), and NH4H2PO4 (Sigma-Aldrich, 99%). Starting materials were dried at 200 °C for 24 h, ground in an agate mortar, and heated at 400 °C for 2 h within a Pt crucible to decompose the ammonium dihydrogen phosphate precursor. Subsequently the mixtures were melted between 1300 and 1500 °C for approximately 1 h.

Recoupling dipolar interactions of the observed nucleus to a quadrupolar nucleus is most conveniently studied by Rotational Echo Adiabatic Passage Double Resonance (REAPDOR) experiments.31 In the present contribution, these experiments employed π/2 pulses for 31P of 4.4−4.6 μs length and adiabatic passage pulses of 25.6 and 27.8 μs (one-third of the rotor period) at the 27Al resonance. The experiments were conducted at a 27Al nutation frequency of 43.5 kHz measured on a liquid sample.

27Al 2D-triple-quantum (TQ)-MAS NMR spectra were obtained with a three pulse z-ﬁltering method32,33 using the following acquisition parameters: 3.0 μs and 1.2−1.6 μs for the ﬁrst two pulses at a nutation frequency of 119.0 kHz and 2.5 μs for the last pulse at a 27Al nutation frequency of 41.7 kHz. Sampling in the t1 dimension was done with a dwell time of 20 μs (1/4 rotor period). Data are presented in the sheared mode. The connectivity between and among the various aluminum species was explored by 27Al single quantum/double quantum correlation spectroscopy. This experiment is based on the 27Al−27Al dipole−dipole interrecoupling of homonuclear actions by stimulating double quantum coherences via symmetry-based pulse sequence schemes.34 In the present 2 pulse scheme developed by Wang et al.35 is study, the BR21 used for this purpose. The experiment was carried out on a Bruker DSX-400 spectrometer equipped with a 4 mm MAS probe operated at 14.0 kHz. Both the excitation and reconversion times were set to 856.7 μs. The central transition selective π pulse and reading π/2 pulse were set to 40 and 20 μs, respectively. The rotor-synchronized increment interval in the indirect dimension t1 was set to 71.43 μs, and the twodimensional data sets consisted of 32 points in t1 and 512 points in t2. 15232 and 30464 FIDs were acquired for each increment with a recycle delay of 0.2 s. The k value is set to 0.25, giving a chemical shift scaling of 0.5. Following double Fourier transformation the correlated signals are displayed at 1/ 2 of the sum of their chemical shifts in the F2 dimension. Site-resolved 31P−31P homonuclear dipole−dipole coupling measurements were conducted using a recently developed dipolar recoupling method denoted DQ-DRENAR (doublequantum based dipolar recoupling eﬀects nuclear alignment reduction).36 In DQ-DRENAR, double quantum coherences are stimulated during 2n rotor periods Tr, using the POST-C7 excitation scheme.37 This causes a decrease in the longitudinal 31P magnetization, which is then probed under systematic incrementation of this stimulation time. One measures a − S′)/S0 by comparing the znormalized diﬀerence signal (S0 magnetization in the presence and the absence of the DQHamiltonian, as a function of dipolar mixing time NTr. The strength of the homonuclear multispin dipole−dipole coupling, speciﬁed by the quantity ∑ 2 , can then be extracted by ﬁtting kbjk − S′)/S0 up to 0.3−0.5 to the the initial data range of (S0 expression36 − ′ S S speciﬁes the dipolar coupling constant between the observed nucleus j and another nucleus k of the same kind, separated by the distance rjk. In multispin systems, eﬀective summed squares of dipole−dipole coupling constants can be accurately estimated by this technique. Experiments were conducted at spinning speeds of 7.0, 8.0, 9.0, 10.0, and 11.0 kHz.

The spectra are consistent with the XRD results, suggesting the formation of single-phase materials and small amounts of Li4P2O7 for the x = 0.75 composition. In the region between −20 and −40 ppm, multiple signals are observed, whose intensity distribution depends on the aluminum content. The individual peaks are assigned to the ﬁve possible phosphorus nAl (0 ≤ n ≤ 4), diﬀering in the number n of environments, P(4) Al next nearest neighbors. From the compositional dependence it is clear that the 31P chemical shift increases with increasing number of Al atoms in the second coordination sphere of phosphorus. While the analogous assignment was proposed previously for the spectroscopic resolution is signiﬁcantly better in the present case and is comparable to that observed in NASICON-type Na1+xZr2−xInx(PO4)3.38 The intensity ratios follow binomial statistics, consistent with random substitution of Ge by Al in the octahedral sites.

Table 2 illustrates reasonable agreement between nominal and derived sample compositions. Enhanced Al concentrations have been observed, however, for samples prepared within alumina crucibles (data not shown). In the case of the x = 0.75 sample, application of eq 5 to the peak areas listed in Table 2 would result in an x-value of 0.71. However, based on the 27Al NMR results discussed below, 6% of the phosphorus inventory is concluded to be present in the form of AlPO4 and will thus contribute to the 31P NMR signal component near −28.0 ppm. Taking this eﬀect into consideration, the correct composition of the NASICON phase is deduced to be x = 0.66. The peak assignments summarized in Table 2 are independently conﬁrmed using 31P{27Al} REAPDOR NMR. Figure 3b illustrates the diﬀerence in dipolar dephasing observed for the the 31P MAS NMR line shape, various components of indicating that the 27Al−31P dipole−dipole coupling strength increases with increasing chemical shift. Figure 3b shows a quantitative comparison of the experimental REAPDOR

These simulations take into consideration the experimental 27Al nuclear electric quadrupolar coupling constant of 1.8 MHz (see results below), a P···Al internuclear distance of 3.10 Å, using the value from the LGP crystal structure, and the experimental 27Al nutation frequency used in the REAPDOR experiment. The resonance near −41 ppm shows a near-zero REAPDOR eﬀect, thus justifying its assignment to a P(4) 4Ge unit. The REAPDOR curve observed for the −36 ppm resonance agrees rather well with that simulated for a 31P···27Al two-spin system, in accordance 3Ge1Al unit. For the −31 ppm peak with its assignment to a P(4) the agreement of the experimental data with that predicted for a 2Ge2Al unit is only qualitative and this suggests that the P···Al P(4) distances are actually somewhat larger than those present in the LGP structure. As indicated below, this conclusion is consistent with results from 27Al{31P} REDOR and 31P-DQ-DRENAR experiments. Finally, Figure 3 indicates that the REAPDOR curves measured for the P(4) 0Ge4Al units are not consistent with their assignments. However, we have to bear in mind that the limited peak intensities observed for these higherfrequency peaks make the REAPDOR analysis diﬃcult, which may result in large experimental errors. The strength of the homonuclear 31P−31P magnetic dipole− dipole interactions was studied in a site-resolved fashion on the x = 0.5 sample using the above-described DQ-DRENAR method. The results are summarized in Figure 4. The average squared dipolar coupling constants ∑ 2 obtained from the parabolic analysis (eq 3) from these individual DRENAR curves within the data range ΔS/S0 < 0.5 are summarized in Table 3. They may be compared to the value of 6.6·105 Hz2 calculated from the crystal structure of LGP, where the shortest P···P distance is 4.12 Å. There is a clear trend toward a decreased 31P−31P dipole−dipole coupling strength in the Al-substituted material, with a successive weakening of the interaction relative to that found for the P(4) 4Ge site, for those P(4) sites with increasing numbers of Al in the second coordination sphere. These results suggest that local substitution of a Ge4+ ion by an Al3+ ion results in an expansion of the octahedral site.

27Al Single and Double Resonance MAS NMR. Figure 5 summarizes the 27Al MAS NMR spectra. The interaction parameters extracted from additional TQMAS experiments (data shown in Figure S2 of the Supporting Information) are summarized in Table 4. For all three compositions the dominant resonance at an isotropic chemical shift near −13 ppm corresponds to the expected 27Al NMR signal of the sixcoordinated aluminum site. In addition, Figure 5 indicates the ∼39 ppm) for the x = 0.5 and appearance of a new signal (δ 0.75 samples, signifying aluminum in a four-coordinate environment.

27Al{31P} REDOR data are summarized in Figure 6, indicating that the second coordination sphere of both aluminum species is dominated by phosphorus. Data analysis within the range ΔS/S0 < 0.3 according to eq 1 yields second moment values M2 = 4.6 × 106 rad2/s2 and 6.8 × 106 rad2/s2 for the six-coordinated Al species in the x = 0.5 and the x = 0.75 samples, respectively. These values are to be compared with a value of 7.4 × 106 rad2/s2 computed from the crystal structure of LGP, assuming the P···Al distance to be identical to the P··· Ge distance in the latter compound. While the agreement for the x = 0.75 sample can be considered within the usual experimental error of ±10% the deviation observed for the x = 0.5 sample may indicate that the P···Al distances are somewhat enlarged locally. From the experimental M2 value a distance of 3.30 Å can be deduced, corresponding to a lengthening of the Al···P distance by ∼7% compared to the Ge···P distance.

This conclusion is qualitatively consistent with the 31P{27Al} REAPDOR and 31P DQ-DRENAR results detailed above. The appearance of a four-coordinated Al environment noted for both the x = 0.5 and 0.75 samples has been subject to considerable discussion in the literature, relating to analogous observations in the Ti-based system.21−24 It indicates that, besides the isomorphous Al for Ge substitution, a second process occurs during the crystallization, which gains importance with increasing Al content. Crystallization of additional AlPO4 has been invoked, assuming a decomposition process according to


This explanation is plausible particularly in view of the fact that the 27Al chemical shift is identical to the one measured in crystalline AlPO4 (berlinite). From the integration of the 27Al NMR signal, y can be estimated as 0.03 and 0.18, for the x = 0.5 and the x = 0.75 materials, respectively. In the latter case, the mass fraction of the AlPO4 in the crystallized materials would be near 10%, that is, somewhat above the generally accepted detection limit of powder diﬀractometry if the phase is well crystallized. On the other hand, the XRD powder pattern of the x = 0.75 phase obtained in the present study (Figure S2) shows no evidence of secondary phase formation. Of course minor fractions of AlPO4 impurities may easily escape XRD detection if they are nanocrystalline. Alternatively, Forsyth et al. and subsequently also Losilla and co-workers have attributed their four-coordinate aluminum to a partial observation of − units in the anionic substitution of phosphate species by AlO4 sublattice.23,24 In this case, the formation of a separate lithium phosphate phase would be expected. Indeed, Figure 1 conﬁrms the formation of crystalline Li4P2O7, which was also observed by X-ray powder diﬀraction. Furthermore, if both the fourand the six-coordinated Al species occur within the same phase, a magnetic dipole−dipole interaction between them should be for example via the excitation of a 27Al double detectable, quantum coherence. This concept was recently demonstrated experimentally in a LaAlO3 glassy material.40 A 2-D single quantum/double quantum correlation experiment obtained with this particular objective (Figure S3) shows only diagonal peaks, however, revealing DQ coherence buildup due to dipolar coupling among equivalent four-coordinated Al species and dipolar coupling among equivalent six-coordinated Al species. No cross-peaks correlating the fourand the six-coordinated aluminum species were detectable, however, giving no positive evidence for the Forsyth model. Likewise, the 31P{27Al} CP/ HETCOR spectrum (see Figure S4) is more consistent with a separate AlPO4 phase, as the 27Al resonance near 39 ppm is found to be exclusively correlated with a signal at δ iso(31P) = −28.0 ppm (chemical shift of AlPO4-berlinite) and no other 31P resonances. A decisive distinction between the two models is given by the 27Al{31P} REDOR data shown in Figure 6b, for the Al(4) signal. The experimental second moment of 4.6 × 106 rad2 s−2 is close to that measured experimentally (4.8 × 106 rad2 s−2) for the berlinite polymorph of AlPO4. While the theoretically expected value for berlinite is 6.2 × 106 rad2 s−2 systematic deviations between experimental and theoretical values of this magnitude are rather common. A review of other AlPO4 polymorphs reveals M2(31P−27Al) values within a range of 5.8−6.2 × 0.106 rad2 s−2). In contrast, the AlO4 3− − for PO4 substitution model predicts much longer 27Al···31P internuclear distances (4.12 A) and, hence a substantially smaller M2 value of 2.1 × 106 rad2 s−2, which is clearly at variance with the experimental data. We can therefore conclude that the dominant side reaction observed at higher x values corresponds to process 6. For the nominal x = 0.75 sample, the number y = 0.18 implies substitution corresponds to only x = 0.57. We consider this the lower limit, as a minor fraction of Al might indeed substitute on the phosphate sites. As discussed above, from an analysis of the 31P MAS NMR spectrum we deduce x = 0.66, by correcting for the fact that AlPO4 contributes to the line shape component 3Al sites near −28 ppm. The quantitative attributed to the Q(4) contribution is 0.18/3 = 6% of the total 31P NMR area. 7Li and 6Li MAS NMR. Figure 7, top, shows the 7Li MAS NMR spectra obtained at room temperature. The Lorentzian lineshapes and the very low spinning sideband intensities indicate that the large majority of the lithium species are in the fast motion limit. Thus, the spectra only reﬂect the timeaveraged chemical environment. There is a strong dependence of the isotropic chemical shifts on x: averaged chemical shifts generally positive temperature coeﬃcient of the lithium NMR chemical shifts.

Structural Characterization of the Glassy State. 31P Single and Double Resonance MAS NMR. Figure 8 summarizes the 31P MAS NMR data measured for the glass samples. Broad Gaussian-shaped curves are obtained, whose central chemical shifts move from −23.5 ppm (x = 0.25) to −24.7 ppm (x = 0.50) to −28.3 ppm (x = 0.75). The chemical shifts observed in the glasses occur at signiﬁcantly higher values than the centers of gravity of the peak multiplets measured in

Figure 7. Top, 7Li MAS NMR spectra of crystalline Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3 with three distinct compositions x. Bottom, variable temperature 6Li MAS NMR spectra of crystalline samples with nominal compositions Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (left) and Li1.75Al0.75Ge1.25(PO4)3 (right). are −1.3, −1.0, and −0.4 ppm for x = 0.25, 0.50, and 0.75, respectively. This is not unexpected because the crystallographic Li site in LGP is fully occupied and the substitution of Ge by Al + Li leads to the additional introduction of lithium, which increases the occupancy of the interstitial Li2 site (which is vacant in LGP), as x is increased. Thus, the shift trend reﬂects an increasing contribution of the Li2 site to the averaged lithium environment as x is increased. Figure 7, bottom, shows low-temperature 6Li MAS NMR spectra obtained on the x = 0.50 and 0.75 samples in an attempt to freeze out the lithium ion diﬀusion on the NMR time scale. (The 6Li isotope was chosen here to reduce homonuclear dipolar broadening eﬀects, which still aﬀect the MAS NMR spectra of the more abundant, higher-gamma 7Li isotope, resulting in improved spectroscopic resolution).41 Indeed, at 165 K, temperature accessible, the data obtained for the x = 0.75 sample indicate almost complete separation into the two distinct lithium sites. Based on the composition dependence of the spectra shown in the fast exchange limit, we assign the peak observed at −2.1 ppm the regular LGP site Li1, and the peak at −0.9 ppm to the lithium ions Li2 on the interstitial sites. At 180 K and above, part of the lithium ions still seem to be undergoing exchange on the NMR time scale, producing considerable additional spectral intensity in the in-between frequency region. The simultaneous occurrence of lithium species in the slowand in the fastexchange regime apparent near 180 K suggests some dynamical heterogeneity, corresponding to a distribution of lithium ionic mobilities. At temperatures above 200 K, we observe the successive transition into the intermediateand fast-exchange regions.

This structural organization of these glasses diﬀers substantially from those in the crystals in this respect. The full width at halfmaximum remains approximately constant near 3300 ± 100 Hz, reﬂecting a distribution of isotropic chemical shifts caused by variations in the local environments of the phosphate ions. shift dispersion is associated with a variation of the number of Al atoms in the second coordination sphere of the phosphate ions, an 31P{27Al} REAPDOR experiment was carried out and analyzed by deconvoluting the MAS NMR line shape into nine Gaussian components of equal width and an equal frequency spacing of 5 ppm (see Figure 9a). The results of this analysis are summarized in Figure 9b for those ﬁve central components (−15 to −35 ppm) for which the signal-to-noise ratio allowed a meaningful data analysis. The curvatures of the parabolae are seen to increase steadily with decreasing resonance frequency, from 0.31 ms−2 for the −15 ppm component, toward 0.59 ms−2 (for the −30 and −35 ppm components), suggesting that also in the glass the strength of the 31P−27Al magnetic dipole-envisioned to be more random, resulting in the probability of encountering shorter separations. The situation is similar to the one described some time ago for the glass-to-crystal transition in CdGeP2.44 This compound crystallizes in the chalcopyrite lattice, a zincblende-type superstructure with P atoms strictly on anionic sites, whereas the glassy state can be envisioned in terms of a random close-packed structure, with a considerable probability of encountering other phosphorus atoms in the ﬁrst coordination sphere. As a result, the average homonuclear 31P−31P dipolar coupling strength is signiﬁcantly stronger in the glassy than in the crystalline state. We invoke an analogous explanation in the present system, where the random organization of coordination polyhedra may result in shorter 31P···31P distances not encountered in the crystals. The formation of P−O−P linkages appears unlikely, however, as no separate peaks for such Q(1) species are observed. 7Li MAS NMR. The 7Li MAS NMR spectra in the glassy state were found to be Gaussian-shaped curves centered at −0.8 ppm, with line widths of 3300 ± 100 Hz.

27Al Single and Double Resonance MAS NMR. Figure 11 shows the 27Al MAS NMR spectra obtained for the present dipole coupling is correlated with the 31P isotropic chemical shifts. Interestingly, however, the correlation is opposite to that observed in the crystalline state: lower chemical shifts are associated with stronger 27Al−31P dipolar interaction strength. Thus, we must conclude that the 31P chemical shifts in the glassy state are dominated by other eﬀects than simply the Al/ Ge distribution in the neighboring six-coordinate sites. This can also be rationalized by the 27Al MAS NMR spectra (to be discussed below), which show aluminum in four-, ﬁve-, and sixcoordination. We suspect that germanium likewise is not fully six-coordinated in the glassy state but also occurs in coordination numbers ﬁve and four. This view is supported by 29Si NMR spectra obtained on alkali phosphosilicate glasses featuring comparable alkali/silicon/phosphorus molar ratios.42 Such glasses contain both fourand six-coordinate silicon, whose second coordination sphere is dominated by phosphorus.43 Figure 9c illustrates that the overall 31P{27Al} REAPDOR curve measured for the x = 0.5 sample agrees well with a simulation based on a single aluminum neighbor at an internuclear distance of 3.20 ± 0.10 Å. This value corresponds to the average environment of the phosphate species in a glass having a germanium to aluminum ratio of 3:1 if the Al−O−P versus the Ge−O−P connectivity distribution is random. The parabolic curvature determined for the REDOR analysis of the overall line shape is 0.49 ms−2 (Figure 9c). Taking this value as representative for P atoms with a single P−O−Al linkage, we conclude that the high-frequency wing of the 31P MAS peak in Figure 9a represents P atoms with a lower average P−O−Al connectivity, while the low-frequency wing represents P atoms with a higher average P−O−Al connectivity. experiment shown in Figure 10.

They indicate the presence of four-, ﬁve-, and sixcoordinated aluminum, similar to the situation in many alkali aluminophosphate glasses. As observed for these reference systems, there is a tendency toward increased concentrations of four-coordinate Al with increasing Al/P ratio. Table 4 summarizes the 27Al NMR interaction parameters for these diﬀerent Al environments, as extracted from TQ MAS NMR data. As the four-coordinate Al species are generally considered network forming species, the possibility of Al−O−Ge linkages (which are analogous to Al−O−Si linkages in aluminosilicate glasses) must be considered. This question can be explored on the basis of the 27Al{31P} REDOR results shown in Figure 12. As is the case for the large majority of aluminophosphate glasses, the 27Al{31P} REDOR curves obtained for the Al(4), Al(5), and Al(6) species are essentially indistinguishable within experimental error, suggesting comparable interaction strengths (see Figure S4, Supporting Information). For this reason, the REDOR diﬀerence signal was determined from the integrated 31P DQ-DRENAR curve of glass with the nominal Figure 10. composition Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3. The solid curve is a parabolic ﬁt to the experimental data points within the data range ΔS/S0 < 0.4.

7.5 × 105 Hz2 is signiﬁcantly larger than that measured in the crystalline compound, suggesting, on average, a stronger 31P−31P magnetic dipole−dipole coupling strengths in the glassy state. This ﬁnding appears plausible, as the crystal structure of LGP corresponds to an ordering scheme with a leading to the maximized dispersion of the phosphate ions, highest possible phosphorus−phosphorus separation at the composition given.

In conclusion, multinuclear single and double resonance solid state NMR results indicate that the crystallization of glasses in the system Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3 is associated with dramatic structural changes, in particular with regard to the coordination state of the aluminum and (by inference) the germanium species. Nevertheless, dipolar solid state NMR experiments indicate that the phosphate species in both phases are dominated by Ge−O−P and Al−O−P connectivities, while P−O−P and Ge−O−Al connectivities are largely absent. Crystalline materials with x < 0.5 are best described as solid solutions with the NASICON structure, where Al and Ge are exclusively six-coordinated. Aliovalent substitution of germanium by aluminum in the crystalline phases results in an expansion of the AlO6 coordination polyhedra, as suggested by 31P{27Al} REAPDOR results as well as by site resolved 31P-DQ DRENAR experiments. For samples with x ≥ 0.5, glass crystallization is accompanied by the formation of some nanocrystalline AlPO4, suggesting phase separation to some extent. This latter result explains why, according to several studies, the ionic conductivity of Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3 glass ceramics does not increase signiﬁcantly beyond x = 0.5, despite the expected linear increase of mobile ion carriers with increasing x. Samples with x > 0.5 are multiphase, featuring lithium sequestration into Li4P2O7 and an additional nonconducting AlPO4 phase impeding long-range charge transport. Thus, solid state NMR is an extremely sensitive method for characterizing the stability range of the NASICON solidsolution system, allowing composition and ceramization conditions to be optimized for maximum yield of the superionic crystalline phase with the highest possible lithium content.
