Glass sample with composition Li1.3Nb0.3V1.7(PO4)3 was prepared by quenched melt technique. Double heat treatments performed for different time intervals (12, 18, 24 and 30 h) to obtain glass ceramics with different nanoscale grain sizes. The glassy nature was conﬁrmed from the glass transition temperature using differential thermal analysis (DTA) for the as quenched sample. In addition, the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns conﬁrmed the glass nature for the as quenched sample. After heat treatment (HT) the structure of all samples was characterized by XRD. Ionic conductivity and impedance measurements of the derived glass ceramics were systematically investigated. It is observed that the electrical conductivity is enhanced by 103 times for the heat treated glass sample of 24 h, whereas with further increase of HT time up to 30 h, the conductivity started to decrease. Therefore, the phase observed in the 24 h HT is found more suitable to be used as a cathode material in solid batteries compared to its vitreous counterpart.

Recently there has been much interest in ﬁnding many new glassbased solid electrolytes with high ionic conductivity for applications in solid state batteries, fuel cells, sensor, etc. Several glasses have been shown to have high ionic conductivity and are referred to as superionic conducting glasses [1,2]. Among the glass formers, the phosphates are the best ones and have been widely investigated [3–6].

Moreover, phosphates with the general formula AmBn(PO4)3 crystallize mainly in the NASICON-type (acronym for “Na Super Ionic Conductor”) structure, where A is an alkali or alkaline earth metal ion and B is one or more metal ions in tri, tetra or pentavalent state [7]. NASICON stands for a well-known family of solid electrolytes of sodium superionic conductor. This family of materials has attracted the attention of researchers looking for ion-selective electrodes or gas sensor devices, fuel cell, batteries, etc. [8,9]. NASICON-type materials have fascinated much awareness in recent past, as they facilitate a large scope for preparing number of materials with variation in their constituent metal ions and composition [10,11].

Several studies have been reported on lithium ion conducting materials with NASICON-type structure because of its high ion conductivity [12–22]. Spectroscopic studies on the structure of NASICON vanadium and niobium phosphate glasses with related structures have been performed by Rao et al. [12]. W. Zhang et al. [13] reported the synthesis and electrochemical properties of Nb containing NASICON-type phases with compositions Li3V2 − xNbx(PO4)3/C (x = 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.5). To date, there are several articles related to the investigation on substitution effects of divalent (e.g., Co [14] and Mg [15,16]), trivalent (e.g., Fe [17], Al [18] and Cr [19,20]) and tetravalent (e.g., Ti [21] and Zr [22]) ions in vanadium sites in Li3V2(PO4)3 systems.

In the present work the structure and electrical properties of NASICON-type phase with the composition Li1.3Nb0.3V1.7(PO4)3 is examined to check the enhancement of ionic conductivity of the glass ceramics.

On one hand, glass sample of the composition Li1.3Nb0.3V1.7(PO4)3 was prepared by the quenched melt technique from reagent grade Li2CO3, V2O5, Nb2O5 and NH4H2PO4, respectively. The batch was mixed and milled in an agate mortar and then heated in alumina crucibles at 300 and 600 °C for 2 and 4 h, respectively, in order to decompose the Li2CO3 and NH4H2PO4 completely with the emission of ammonia, carbon dioxide gases and water vapor. Then the mixture was cooled, reground and melted at 1200 °C in an alumina crucible for an hour to make sure the complete homogeneity in a preheated furnace. The melt was then poured and rapidly quenched between two copper plates; hammer and anvil. Sheets of opaque black glass samples of 1.5 mm thick were obtained.

On the other hand, glass–ceramics were prepared by heating the glass plates with a two-step heat treatment on the basis of DTA results. Firstly, the heat treatment was carried out for 2 h at the temperature between the glass transition temperature (Tg) and the ﬁrst crystallization temperature (Tc1) to form enough crystal nuclei, and then heated up to the temperature above the Tc1 to help the crystal growing. The second step was performed at different periods (12–30 h) to establish the optimum heat treating time.

The regime of glassy specimen's crystallization was selected on the basis of DTA analysis using Shimadzu (DTA) instrument. The bulk densities were measured at room temperature using Archimedes method with carbon tetrachloride as the immersing liquid (1.593 g·cm−3). The error in the density measurement is within ±0.02 g/cm3. XRD measurements of the glass sample and their corresponding glass ceramics were performed using [Rigaku RINT 2100] with [CuKα = 0.1541 nm] radiation. The maximum current and voltage were 30 mA and 50 kV. FT-IR spectra were measured for all samples in range (400–4000 cm−1) using computerized FT-IR spectrophotometer JASCO [FT-IR-300E] and using KBr as a reference material.

In addition, the DC electrical conductivity for glass sample and their corresponding glass ceramics were measured by means of the twoprobe technique as well. Silver painted electrodes were pasted on the two faces of polished samples. A Picometer 760 was used to collect the DC data over the temperature range (300–600 K). The sample temperature was measured by a chromal–alumal type K thermocouple which is placed as close as possible to the sample. The error in the DC data is within ±0.02 S/m. The complex impedance measurements were carried out in the frequency range 42 Hz to 5 MHz at 300 K by using HIOKI 1.03 LCR meter.

In order to identify the characteristic temperatures of the glass sample, thermal analysis was carried out by DTA. Fig. (1) shows the DTA curve of the glass sample of the composition Li1.3Nb0.3V1.7(PO4)3. The glassy nature was conﬁrmed by the observation of the glass transition temperature in DTA for the as quenched sample. The glass sample exhibit endothermic minimum which represent the glass transition temperature (Tg) at around 480 °C, the onset crystallization temperature (Ts) at around 584 °C and two successive exothermic peaks corresponding to crystallization temperature (Tc1,Tc2) at around 664 and 784 °C, respectively. The signiﬁcant difference that exists between the glass transition, Tg and the onset of the crystallization temperature Ts accounts the thermal stability of the glass sample. The thermal stability (ΔT) parameter is usually employed to estimate the glass stability [23] which is deﬁned by Table 1 Glass transition temperature (Tg), onset crystallization temperature (Ts), crystallization peak temperature (Tc1, Tc2), and thermal stability (ΔT, S) for the glass sample.

According to Saad and Poulain [24] the thermal stability parameter (S) which reﬂects the resistance for devitriﬁcation of glass and it is deﬁned by S ¼ Tc–Ts

In the above equation (Tc − Ts) is the rate of devitriﬁcation transformation of glassy phase. The value of ΔT and S, calculated from Eqs. (1) and (2) respectively, are presented in Table (1). This reveals that the glass sample has high thermal stability and good glass forming ability.

The density is a powerful tool to explore the changes in the structure of the materials. The density (ρ) of the glass and glass ceramic samples is listed in Table (2). The molar volume Vm (cm3/mol) for all samples is calculated by using the formula; Vm ¼ M=ρ where M and ρ are the molecular weight in (g/mol) and the measured density (g/cm3), respectively. The molar volume for all samples are listed in Table (2). From Table (2), it is clear that the molar volume decreased gradually with increasing HT time.

It is observed that the density of the glass sample exhibit small value than that of the HT samples, where their density increased gradually with increasing HT time. The increase in density of glass ceramics may be due to the rearrangement of molecules causing structural changes in glass ceramics. That is to say, the structure is more closely packed in glass ceramic than that in glass [25]. This result is in good agreement with a reported work elsewhere [26].

XRD analysis was employed to characterize their amorphous and/or crystalline nature of the glass and glass ceramic samples. Fig. (2) shows XRD patterns of Li1.3Nb0.3V1.7(PO4)3 glass and glass ceramics. In the case of as quenched sample Fig. (2) shows broad humps around 2θ = 25 with no indication of diffraction peaks. This conﬁrms the amorphous nature of the glass sample. After HT number of peaks are observed and they are identiﬁed to be LiVNb(PO4)3 (JCPDS card 51–1660) with a structure close to monoclinic and LiV(P2O7) crystals (JCPDS card 85–2381) with a structure close to monoclinic also. It is clear that the major phase is LiVNb(PO4)3, which indicates the formation of NASICON compound after HT process.

where β is FWHM, θ is the Bragg angle, c is the correction factor (c ≈ 1), D is the crystallite size, λ is the wavelength of X-ray, and ε is the lattice strain. Fig. (4) shows the crystallite size dependence of HT times for glass ceramic samples. It is observed that the crystallite size was increased gradually from 58 to 106 nm with increasing HT times.

the effect of crystallite size induced broadening and strain induced broadening at full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the XRD proﬁle, the Williamson–Hall (W–H) plot for the glass ceramic samples was performed and the result is given in Fig. (3). Crystallite size is calculated using (W–H) method according to the formula [27]; β cosθ ¼ cλ D

In order to obtain the structural groups, FT-IR study was performed. FTIR absorption spectra of Li1.3Nb0.3V1.7(PO4)3 system are shown in Fig. (5). In the case of as quenched sample, the broad band observed at ~510 cm−1 is assigned to asymmetric bending vibration modes of O\P\O units [28,29]. After HT this broad band splitted into two bands at 551 and 611 cm−1. The ﬁrst band at 551 cm−1 is attributed to asymmetric bending vibration modes of O\P\O units [28,29]. The second band at 611 cm−1 is assigned to harmonic bending vibration of O\P\O [29,30]. On the other hand, this band may be assigned to the vibrational coupling of [(Nb\O) (medium Nb\O distances) (O\P\O)] stretching with deformation modes [31].

In the case of as quenched sample, the shoulder at 771 cm−1 is attributed to symmetric stretching vibrations of P\O\P bridging bonds in pyrophosphate (P2O7)4− units [32]. This shoulder became a band after HT for different times, this band shifts to higher wavenumbers with increasing HT time. The bands in the region 927–1056 cm−1 indicate the presence of the (PO4)3− ionic group vibration [29,33]. Generally the vibrational modes of NASICON phases can be assigned to PO4 tetrahedral (internal and external modes) and to lattice modes of metal octahedral. The bands corresponding to PO4 unit are more intense than metal octahedral bands. Thus, the presence of the (PO4)3− ionic group indicates the formation of NASICON phase. This result is consistent with XRD result. The observed bands in the region 1117–1245 cm−1 may be due to the (P\O)(−) ionic vibration [29,34,35]. The absorption band at 1640 cm−1 is due to the deformation vibration modes of the H2O [29,36]. The bands in the region 3420–3450 cm−1 may be due to the stretching vibration modes of the OH [36].


The reciprocal temperature dependence of the D.C. conductivity for glass and glass ceramic samples are investigated in Fig. (6). Generally, the electrical conductivity in this kind of materials obeys the Arrhenius law, which can be expressed according to the relationship, where σo is the pre-exponential factor, Edc is the activation energy for the long-range diffusion of the mobile ions, and kB is the Boltzmann constant. The increase in D.C. conductivity with temperature is due to the increase in the thermal activated drift mobility of ions according to hopping conduction mechanism.

The pre-exponential factor of the NASICON-type glasses is found to vary by many orders of magnitude. The magnitudes of σo and activation energies, Edc, are linked by the Meyer–Neldel (M–N) rule or compensation law of the form [37]: Inσo ¼ αEdc þ β where α and β are constants.

The expression for the pre-exponential factor σo is derived from the

theory of ionic conduction and it is found to be [37,38], where N is the number of lattice sites available for the mobile ions, e is the mobile ion charge, α is the hopping distance, c is the fractional occupancy of the mobile ion sites, γ is a dimensionless geometrical factor, υo is the fundamental vibrational frequency of the mobile ions and ΔS is activation entropy for ion conduction.

In order to determine the pre-exponential factor from a microscopic model, the microscopic parameters N, α and υo must be estimated. Assuming a homogenous distribution of the Li-cations within the glass and glass ceramic samples, the normal site concentration, N, can be calculated from experimental density according to the relation [39]: N ¼ ρNA=M where ρ is the density, NA is the Avogadro's number and M is the molecular weight of the compound. In addition, the distance between two stable sites, α, is given by [39] α ¼ 1=Nð

The values of normal site concentration, N, and the distance between two stable sites, α, for glass and glass–ceramic samples are presented in Table (2). The ionic attempt frequency, υo, may be assumed to an approximate value of 1013 Hz [39]. The entropy term in Eq. (7) is a possible source of the large variation in the pre-exponential factor. The values of pre-exponential factor for glass and glass ceramic samples are presented in Table (2).

The activation energies (Edc) for mobile ions were calculated from the values of slope of the straight lines in Fig. (6) and given in Table (3). The magnitude of σdc at 300 K for glass and its glass ceramic samples are listed in Table (3). It is observed that the α constant is negative because the activation energy decreases with increasing HT times. Thus, all samples do not obey the Meyer–Neldel rule. It could be concluded that Meyer–Neldel rule is not generally valid for families of solid electrolytes [40,41]. It is observed that the electrical conductivity is enhanced by almost three orders of magnitudes, 103, in the HT glass sample for 24 h, whereas with further increase of HT time up to 30 h, the conductivity decreased. Therefore, the phase observed in the HT glass sample for 24 h is more suitable to be used as a cathode material in solid batteries compared to its vitreous counterpart.

On one hand, the enhancement of the conductivity might be attributed to the formation of the conducting crystalline phase with NASICON-type structure after HT process, together with the percolation effect of the remaining matrix glass. As known, glass ceramics generally consist of small amounts of residual glass and crystalline grains, which are embedded in the glass matrix. Consequently, when the NASICONtype structure formed in the grains, the polycrystalline grains provided suitable channels for the migration of Li+ ions. Furthermore, due to the orientated effect of the NASICON-type grains, the ﬁrst few atomic layers of matrix glass surrounding the grains perhaps have a near-NASICON structure. Accordingly, the amorphous phase between any two crystalline grains behaved almost like a NASICON phase. As a result, percolation paths were created in the remaining amorphous phase [42,43]. Therefore, the energy barrier for mobile ions in the case of glass ceramics was much smaller than that of the parent glass and an enhancement in the ionic conductivity was observed.

On the other hand, the higher conductivity in the HT glass compared to that of the parent glass is due to (i) the higher average coordination number of Li+ in the HT glass compared to the corresponding glassy phase [44–46], (ii) the smaller energy barrier in case of the HT glass because of the good and regular ﬁt of the channels in the macro-molecular backbone skeleton of the NASICON structure with the lithium cations, resulting in a consequent lowering of the system entropy [39,46,47]. This result is in good agreement with our previous work [48].

In order to characterize the response of ionic conductors an impedance measurement is often used [49]. The complex impedance plots (Cole–Cole plot) of the glass and glass ceramic samples at 300 K is shown in Fig. (7). For the glassy sample a semi-circle is observed at 300 K, whereas the HT glass shows a semi-circle and a spike at 300 K. The impedance spectra having spike in low frequency region are due to the surface related artifacts between the electrode and the sample and it is represented as electrode polarization effect. The appearance of a low-frequency tail in the case of ionically blocking electrodes is an indication of the ionic nature of the NASICON-type material [50–53]. The value of bulk resistance Rb was determined from the intersection of the semicircle with the real axis of the impedance Z′. The magnitude of dc conductivity, σ(0) was then calculated from Rb by the relation σ(0) = d / (RbA), where d and A are the thickness and area of the sample, respectively. It is observed that the behavior of σdc agreed with those dc conductivity σ(0) determined from the complex impedance plots.

The glassy nature was conﬁrmed by the observation of the glass transition temperature in DTA for the as quenched sample. In addition, the XRD patterns conﬁrmed the glassy nature for the as quenched sample. After HT of the glass sample, the structure of NASICON-type was characterized as LiVNb(PO4)3 and LiV(P2O7) of monoclinic structure. The calculated crystallite size exhibits increasing values from 58 up to 106 nm with increasing HT time. The density of the glass sample exhibits smaller value than that of the HT samples, where their density increased gradually with increasing HT time. It is observed that the electrical conductivity is enhanced by almost three orders of magnitudes in the HT glass sample for 24 h, whereas with further increase in HT time to 30 h, the conductivity decreased. Therefore, the HT glass sample for 24 h is more suitable to be used as a cathode material in solid batteries compared to its vitreous counterpart. The impedance results showed a low frequency tail in the case of ionically blocking electrodes which is an indication of the ionic nature of NASICON-type material.
