Glass sample with a composition of Li1.3Nb0.3Fe1.7(PO4)3, prepared by a conventional melt-quenching method, was heat treated to obtain glass ceramics of NASICON type. Glass transition (Tg) and crystallization (Tc) temperatures of asquenched glass sample were determined by differential thermal analysis (DTA). X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns also confirmed the formation of glass sample. After heat treatment above Tc, precipitation of crystalline particles with NASICONtype structure was confirmed by XRD. Valency and local structure of Fe atoms were investigated by Mössbauer spectroscopy at room temperature. DC-conductivity and impedance measurements of the glass ceramics proved the increased electrical conduction caused by heat treatment.

Much attention has been paid to alternative energy technologies, which require suitable materials having high lithium-ion conductivity. In this context, there is considerable interest in NASICON-type compounds having a general formula of AM2(PO4)3 (A: alkali ion, M: one or more ions of tri-, tetraor penta-valent states), which offer high ionic conductivity, high thermal stability, low thermal conductivity and low thermal expansion [1, 2]. Crystallographic NASICON structure was first identified by Hagman and Kierkegaard [3]; representative structure is rhombohedral with space group R3’c. Some compounds, however, have a low temperature phase of monoclinic symmetry [4–6]. The framework is built up of M2(PO4)3 units in which two MO6 octahedra and three PO4 tetrahedra share oxygen atoms. They form conducting channels and two types of interstitial spaces where conducting cations are distributed. Structural and electrical properties of NASICON-type compounds are known to vary with the composition of the framework.

In the present work, we investigated glass sample with a composition of Li1.3Nb0.3Fe1.7(PO4)3 and its related glass ceramics. Local structure of these samples were investigated by means of FT-IR and 57Fe Mössbauer spectroscopy.

Li1.3Nb0.3Fe1.7(PO4)3 glass was prepared by conventional melt-quenching technique with analytical reagent grade of chemicals. After being pulverized in an agate mortar, the reagent mixture was calcined with an alumina crucible in an electric furnace at 300 C for 4 h, in order to decompose the Li2CO3 and NH4H2PO4 completely. After having been cooled to room temperature in air, the mixture was ground well, and was melted at 1200 C for 1 h in an electric furnace, in order to increase the homogeneity of the glass sample. The melt was poured as quickly as possible on a copper plate at room temperature and was pressed with two copper plates, yielding a glass plate of about 1.5 mm thickness. Glass sample was kept in a desiccator to prevent it from absorbing moisture.

Glass ceramics were prepared by heating the glass plates by two-step heat treatments on the basis of the data obtained from DTA (Shimadzu). Heat treatment was first carried out for 2 h at a given temperature between glass transition temperature (Tg) and crystallization temperature (Tc) for nucleation. Each sample was heated up to the temperature above Tc for the sufficient crystal growth, which was performed for 12 to 30 h.

Bulk density was measured at room temperature by the Archimedes method with −3). XRD measurement carbon tetrachloride as the immersing liquid (ρ: 1.593 gcm was conducted using Rigaku RINT 2100 with CuKα radiations (λ: 0.1541 nm). FT-IR −1 using computspectra were recorded for all samples in the range of 400–4000 cm erized FT-IR spectrophotometer: JASCO (FT-IR-300E) by KBr disk method.

DC electrical conductivity of glass and glass ceramics was measured by means of two-probe method, which is generally applied to those of which resistivity is more than 10 M. Silver paste coated on the polished surface of each sample was attached to two copper lead wires used for electrodes. Picometer-760 was used to collect the DC data over the temperature range of 300–600 K. Sample temperature was measured by a chromel-alumel type K-thermocouple which was placed close to the sample. Complex impedance measurement was carried out in the frequency ranging from 42 Hz to 5 MHz at 300 K using HIOKI 1.03 LCR meter. Mössbauer spectra were measured in a standard transmission geometry, using a source of 57Co (925 MBq) diffused in a rhodium matrix. Calibration of the spectrometer was made with a natural iron foil, which was also used as reference of isomer shift (δ).

DTA curve for as-prepared Li1.3Nb0.3Fe1.7(PO4)3 glass is shown in Fig. 1, which reflects glassy nature of the sample. DTA chart exhibits two endothermic minima which represent glass transition temperatures of Tg1, Tg2 at around 435 and 565 C, respectively, and successive exothermic peak corresponding to crystallization peak temperature (Tc) at around 676 C, followed by two endothermic peaks due to remelting temperatures of Tm1 and Tm2 at around 890 and 982 C, respectively. Estimated Tg and Tc values are comparable to those reported for related sample having similar composition [7].

Figure 2 shows XRD patterns of Li1.3Nb0.3Fe1.7(PO4)3 glass and glass ceramics. In the case of as-quenched sample, only halo peak was observed at around 2θ = 25 degrees. After heat treatment, several sharp peaks were observed which were ascribed to LiFe(P2O7) (JCPDS card 80-1371) having a structure similar to that of monoclinic Li3Fe2(PO4)3 crystals (JCPDS card 78-1106). Size of crystallite particle was calculated with a Williamson–Hall (W-H) plot [9] of β cos θ against sin θ, expressed by, where β is the full-width at half maximum (FWHM), θ the Bragg angle, c the correction factor (c ≈ 1), D the crystallite size, λ the wavelength of X-rays and ε the lattice strain. It is observed that the crystallite size was increased from 82 to 124 nm by increasing the heat treatment time, as given in Fig. 3.

FT-IR spectroscopy is effective for the characterization of glass and glass ceramics. FT-IR absorption spectra of Li1.3Nb0.3Fe1.7(PO4)3 system are shown in Fig. 4. In the −1 is case of as-quenched glass sample, the broad band observed at about 540 cm assigned to asymmetric bending mode of O–P–O units [10, 11]. After heat treatment −1. Two this broad band was split into three bands as observed at 548, 574 and 611 cm −1 are assigned to asymmetric bending vibration modes of bands at 548 and 574 cm −1 to harmonic bending vibration of O–P–O units [10, 11], while the band at 611 cm O–P–O [11, 12]. This band might be ascribed to the vibrational coupling of (Nb–O) and (O–P–O) stretching modes with deformation [13]. A shoulder peak observed at −1 in as-quenched glass is attributed to symmetric stretching vibration of P–O– 760 cm P bridging bonds of pyrophosphate (P2O7)4− units [14]. This peak was also observed after heat treatment for different times. The absorption bands in the region of 925– 949 cm group vibration [11, 15]. Generally, the vibrational modes of NASICON phases can be assigned to tetrahedral PO4 units (internal and external modes) and to lattice modes of metal with octahedral symmetry. Since the bands corresponding to PO4 unit are more intense than those of metal-octahedra, the presence of ionic (PO4)3− groups indicates the formation of NASICON phase. −1 may be due to the ionic The observed bands in the region 1070–1125 cm−1 is asso(P–O)(—) vibration [11, 16, 17]. The absorption band observed at 1620 cm ciated with the deformational vibration mode of the H2O [11, 18]. The bands in the −1 will be due to the stretching vibration mode of OH groups in region 3440–3453 cm water molecules [18].

Mössbauer spectra measured at room temperature are shown in Fig. 5. Each spectrum was analyzed into one paramagnetic doublet due to octahedral Fe3+ and to a weak doublet due to octahedral Fe2+ . Mössbauer parameters are summarized in −1 due to octahedral Table 1. Each doublet has δ values 0.42–0.49 and 1.11–1.28 mms Fe3+ ions, respectively. The appearance of FeO6 octahedra −1 is evidently consistent with the fact that metal with δ value higher than 0.4 mms ions form MO6 octahedra in NASICON-type compounds. After heat treatment, the and Fe2+ spectra showed decreasing quadrupole splitting () values of both Fe3+ ions. This means that the local symmetry around the iron atoms was increased as the heat treatment proceeded. It is observed that the relative absorption area (A) for octahedral Fe2+ decreased from 27.0 to 14.3 % with an increasing heat treatment time, while octahedral Fe3+ exhibited an increasing A value from 73.0 % to 85.7 %. Similar Mössbauer spectra were reported in different NASICON-type compounds containing trivalent iron [19].

Density of glass and glass ceramics are listed in Table 2. As expected, glass ceramics had higher density than as-quenched glass sample. The gradual increase in the density of glass ceramic will be associated with the rearrangement of the structural units causing more closely-packed structure than in glass [8].

Impedance measurement is a versatile tool that is often used to characterize the response of ionic conductors [20]. Figure 6 shows the complex impedance plots (Cole– Cole plot) of glass and glass ceramic samples measured at 300 K. In the glassy sample, “semicircle” was observed at 300 K, whereas the glass ceramics showed “semicircle and spike” at 300 K. Impedance spectra having spike in low frequency region are due to the surface-related artifacts between the electrode and the sample, being known as an electrode polarization effect. The appearance of low-frequency tail in the case of ionically-blocked electrodes is an indication of the ionic nature of the NASICONtype material [21–24]. The value of bulk resistance Rb was determined from the intersection of the semicircle with the real axis of the impedance Z

Electrical conductivity of the glass and glass ceramics are plotted in Fig. 7. Straight line obtained from the Arrhenius plot yields activation energy (Edc) according to the relationship, where σo is the pre-exponential factor, Edc the activation energy, kB the Boltzmann constant. Values of Edc for the electrical conduction are summarized in Table 2, from which we can know that σ of 3.70 × 10−6 Sm −1 and Edc of 0.42 eV were obtained at 300 K when the glass was heat treated for 24 h at temperature higher than Tc. It is noted that as-quenched glass had smaller σ of 1.16 × 10−9 Sm −1 and larger Edc of 0.70 eV at 300 K.

It is noteworthy that the conductivity of glass ceramic, heated for 24 h above Tc, is three orders of magnitude larger than that of as-quenched glass. The enhancement of the conductivity may be attributed to the formation of conducting crystalline phase with NASICON-type structure, together with the percolation effect of the remaining glass matrix. It is generally known that glass ceramic generally consists of crystalline grains or phase precipitated in the glass matrix. If a NASICON-type structure was formed in the crystalline grains, it will provide suitable channels for the migration + of Li ions. It is also speculated that glass matrix surrounding the crystalline grains will form a NASICON-like structure [25, 26]. As a result, percolation paths will be created between the grains [25, 26], and the energy barrier for the mobile ions to move in the glass ceramics will become much lower than that in the as-quenched glass, accompanying an enhancement of the ionic conductivity. Probability of the electron conduction due to small polaron hopping from Fe2+ ions, if present, will be decreased in the glass ceramic, since the fraction of Fe2+ was decreased by the heat treatment, as elucidated in the Mössbauer study. From Table 2, we can understand that the behavior of σdc is consistent with that of dc conductivity σ (0) determined from the complex impedance plots (see Fig. 6).

After heat treatment of Li1.3Nb0.3Fe1.7(PO4)3 glass, precipitation of NASICONtype Li3Fe2(PO4)3 and LiFe(P2O7) of monoclinic structure was confirmed by XRD. Calculated crystallite size exhibited an increasing size from 82 to 124 nm with an increasing heat treatment time. Heat-treated sample at above Tc for 24 h exhibited a highest ionic conductivity at 300 K which was about three orders of magnitude larger than that of as-quenched glass. Mössbauer results at room temperature showed the presence of octahedral Fe2+ ions. After the heat treatment, Mössbauer spectra showed that  values of both Fe3+ were gradually decreased with the increasing heat treatment time. This means that the local symmetry around the iron nucleus was increased as the heat treatment time was prolonged. It was also observed that the relative absorption area (A) of Fe2+ showed a gradual decrease after the heat treatment, while Fe3+ showed an increase in A. Density of heat-treated −3 with an increasing heat samples was gradually increased from 3.06 to 3.35 gcm treatment time. Impedance study showed a low frequency tail in heat-treated samples due to the precipitation of ionic NASICON-type nanocrystals, which increased the DC conductivity.
