A number of NASICON-related MIGe2(PO4)3 (MI – Na, K, Ag) have been prepared using a high-temperature solution method in the molten system MI-Ge-P-O (MI – Na, K) based on the solubility data for GeO2 at 1123 K for the Na-PO system and 1173 K for the K-P-O one. The single crystals of AgGe2(PO4)3 were obtained after crystallization of a melt with Ag/P = 1.4. It crystallizes in the trigonal system, space group R-3, cell parameters a = 8.06340(1) ˚A, c = 21.8385(4) ˚A, Z = 6. The framework is built up from two GeO6 units that are isolated from each other by PO4 tetrahedra to form the main building block of the structure [Ge2(PO4)3]−. Two types of silver cations M1 and M2 are found to have different coordination requirements shown by the bond valence sum calculations.

Flexible three-dimensional phosphate frameworks of the family AxMy(PO4)3 have received considerable attention both from practical and theoretical points of view due to their high ionic conductivity and amenability to a huge variety of cationic and anionic substitutions at different crystallographic positions [1, 2]. A large number of closely related compounds have been produced during the last decade representing structural and compositional diversity [3, 4]. Partial replacement of P by Si [5], As [6] or different occupation of M sites by di-, triand tetravalent transition-metal ions [7] leads to framework distortions in rhombohedral, monoclinic, triclinic and orthorhombic systems. The parent compound is believed to be a rhombohedral one having the composition NaMVI 2(PO4)3 (MVI – Ge, Ti and Zr) [2].

In the network mentioned A is an alkali metal ion and M is a multivalent one. The charge-compensating A cations occupy two types of sites, A1 and A2, in the interconnected channels formed by corner-sharing PO4 tetrahedra and MO6 octahedra. A1 sites are surrounded by six O and located at an inversion center and A2 sites are symmetrically distributed around a three-fold axis of the framework with different oxygen coordination [3, 6, 8]. This common model pays most attention to the role of the rigid fragments PO4 and MO6, whereas it ignores the role of countercation played by the negatively charged framework for the A metal [10–14].

Considering the synthetic pathways silvercontaining compounds, it should be noted that the application of molten-salt synthesis is much narrower in comparison with solid-state synthesis [9, 10] or the hydrothermal approach [11]. One of the difﬁculties of crystal growth from molten salts is the selection of a suitable ﬂux provided comparatively low melting point, good solubility of the reagents, inertness toward the container used, low volatility and a sizable temperature window. Taking into account these criteria, molten phosphates were proven to be good reaction medium for the crystal growth of refractory compounds [12]. In the present study, the role of alkaline metal is investigated in the light of crystal-growth conditions, and structural peculiarities the NASICON-related compounds MIGe2(PO4)3 (MI – Na, K, Ag).

To study the solubility of GeO2 in a phosphate media a set of initial high temperature solvents have been prepared within molar ratios MI/P = 0.8–1.6. The calculated amounts of (NH4)H2PO4 and MI 2CO3 (MI – Na, K) have been slowly preheated to 973K to get rid of gaseous components (CO2, NH3, H2O), then heated to 1373K for further investigation. At this temperature, the calculated amount of GeO2 has been added to the melt under stirring. The dissolution has been checked by optical microscopy and is achieved in 6–8 and 8–10 h for sodiumand potassium-containing systems correspondingly. The solubility curves have been built for MI-Ge-P-O (MI – Na, K) systems at 1123K (Na) and 1173 (K) for annealing time 10h.

Each high-temperature solution containing the maximum germanium oxide content has been cooled with a rate 30K/h to 1073–973 К and the rest of the melt was poured out from crystalline products. Finally, crystals have been leached out from solidiﬁed melt by hot distilled water.

On the ﬁrst stage of investigation, the mixture of a composition 1.4Ag2O-P2O5 has been preheated (mixture of AgNO3 and (NH4)H2PO4 with a molar ratio 7:5 to 973K. Secondly, powder of GeO2 has been added to the solution under stirring (initial ratio Ge/Р = 1:8), then the mixture has been cooled down to 973 K with a rate of 30 K/h. Cubic-like crystals have been obtained after washing off with hot distilled water.

Phase composition has been investigated by powder XRD (diffractometer Shimadzu XRD-6000, curved pyrolitic graphite counter monochromator, CuKα radiation λ = 1.54184 ˚A, 2θ = 5–90°) operating in Bragg–Brentano (q/2q) geometry using known powder patterns for GeP2O7 (PDF2 No. 82-0829), NaGe2(PO4)3 (PDF2 No. 331245), KGe2(PO4)3 (PDF2 No. 85-1536), GeO2 (PDF2 No. 65-8032 (hexagonal), No. 88-0285(tetragonal)).

The structure of AgGe2(PO4)3 has been determined from single-crystal X-Ray diffraction data obtained using an Oxford Diffraction XCalibur-3 diffractometer equipped with 4 MPixel CCD detector. It was solved using direct methods with SHELXS-97 and reﬁned using fullmatrix least-squares technique in anisotropic approximation with SHELXL-97 [15]. The heavy atoms were located directly, whereas the remaining oxygen atoms were found using difference Fourier maps calculated during reﬁnement.

Among different synthetic approaches that are used for phosphates preparation the high – temperature solution method has been used. On the ﬁrst stage of the study, the solubility of GeO2 powder in phosphate media depending on the MI/P ratios and the nature of alkali metal have been conducted.

BVS values for central atom are found to crystallize from high-temperature solutions within MI/P = 0.8–1.6: Ge2P2O7, MIZr2(PO4)3 and GeO2. The width and localization of every single-phase region depend on the nature of alkali metal (ﬁgure 1). Thus, the area of germanium pyrophosphate has been found only in a mixture with orthophosphate NaZr2(PO4)3 in a narrow range of ratios Na/P = 0.90–0.97, whereas for potassium-containing melts this trend hasn’t been detected. The dramatic change in GeP2O7 ﬁeld location for sodium and potassium-containing systems may be caused by two additive factors. The ﬁrst one is due to increase of the ionic radii in the row Li–Na–K that causes weaker electrostatic interaction with phosphate groups within molten media and leads to increase of basicity in corresponding melts and lowering of melt viscosity. Secondly, addition of GeO2 displaces the equilibrium of phosphate forms to pyrophosphate region due to a scheme:

Taking into account low solubility of GeO2 in molten salts [12] the solubility isotherms at 1123K for sodiumand 1173K for potassium-contain molten phosphate salts have been constructed as a function of MI/P ratio. It should be pointed out, that dissolution of GeO2 in molten phosphate media is rather slow, requiring annealing under continuous stirring at 1173 К for 10h at least. Frequently, crystallization tends to start on a surface of an unsolved oxide. Consequently, synthesis of pure single-phase products without solubility data is rather complicated.

Generally, the dissolution behavior of germanium (IV) oxide strongly depends on basicity of the corresponding melts. The minimal content of the oxide dissolved has been found to be 15 mass % under Na/P = 1.1. On the contrary, this point for potassium-containing melts corresponds to the highest solute content 35 mass %.

Since the presence of GeO2 affects physical and chemical properties of the melt including viscosity and volatility, the dependence represents complex behavior indicating changes in association and polymerization of the orthophosphate and polyphosphate fragments in a high-temperature solution (ﬁgure 1).

As a result the melts’ basic properties required for MIGe2(PO4)3 crystallization is reached easier for potassiumcontaining melts (MI/P > 0.90). It should be pointed out, that viscosity and solubility toward GeO2 in molten K-Ge-P-O system is rather high providing vitreous products after crystallization. At the contrary, for sodiumcontaining melts the recrystallization of GeO2 has been observed in a range of ratios Na/P = 1.15–1.60. To obtain single crystals of silver germanium orthophosphate AgGe2(PO4)3 the ratio MI/P in a melt has been increased from 0.90–1.15 (NaGe2(PO4)3 synthesis) up to 1.40 (15 mass % GeO2 in a charge) taking into account relatively low basicity of silver cation in comparison with sodium one.

The member of NASICON – related compounds AgGe2(PO4)3 has been found to be isostructural to other representatives of MIGe2(PO4)3 in this group [8, 9]. The structure is build up from GeO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra linked by corner sharing O atoms to originate 3D – framework (ﬁgure 2). Two neighbouring GeO6 are isolated from each other by PO4 tetrahedra which serve as bridges between octahedra to form the main building block of the structure – the “lantern” (ﬁgure 3). The connectivity of the latter one forms cavities where alkaline cations A1 and A2 are located.

The value for Ag(2) was found to be less than the theoretical one. Moreover, the same feature has been found for Sodium and Potassium analogues MIGe2(PO4)3: BVS values for Na(1) – 0.89(1) and K1 – 0.92(1). Moreover, the BVS values for the second alkaline metal position are found to be higher than expected ones. Since the bond over is a function of bond distance, some MI-O distances may be shortened or lengthened to preserve the correct number of corresponding bonds. A structure with atoms whose total bond orders are less (underbonded) than or greater (overbonded) than their common valence is more likely to be unfavored. Considering the main structural motif of the titled compound, which includes two “lanterns” [Ge2(PO4)3]intermediated by two types of MI cations on the three-fold axes, the tendency of framework strain may be seen by the difference in oxygen surrounding of silver atoms. Herein, Ag(1) is slightly overbonded, while Ag(2) is underbonded.

Thus, we can conclude that the main strain of the structure is probably relaxed by interchannel cations, in case of germanium containing NASICON by A1 position occupied by silver atoms.

The high-temperature solution method has been shown to be suitable for yielding single-phase materials with NASICON structure with high phase purity. The solubility curves of GeO2 in molten alkaline phosphates have

The framework delimits two types of channels in which two types of silver atoms are located. The thermal displacement ellipsoids of Ag atoms are found to be higher in comparison to other atoms (ﬁgure 2). Having both Ge octahedra and tetrahedra almost regular (Table 3), the coordination of silver is worth discussing. Taking for comparison crystallographic data for other analogues MIGe2(PO4)3 (MI = Na, K) [3] the Bond Valence Calculations (BVS values) have been used. Previously reported data on powder diffraction of silvercontaining compounds [9] was not precise, bondvalence calculations were performed taking the parameters reported by [14] for all types of atoms on a basis of our X-Ray single crystal diffraction data. The calculated BVS values for Ge and P atoms are close to the chemical presented complex behavior, indicating mild conditions for MIGe2(PO4)3 polycrystalline materials synthesis. The BVS calculations for MIGe2(PO4)3 show the difference between the two positions M1 and M2. The ﬁrst one possesses a slightly lower BVS value, probably being responsible for the crystal structure strain relaxation.
