This work aimed to develop NASICON-type Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) ceramic as a new type of high-temperature microwave absorption material. LATP ceramics were prepared by traditional solid-state reaction with sintering temperature ranging from 950 to 1100 °C for phase, microstructure, conductivity, dielectric property, and microwave absorption property study. Moreover, the dielectric property and microwave absorption property of LATP ceramic and NASICON-type Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (NZSP) ceramic in our previous work were compared. Results showed that LATP ceramic sintered at 1050 °C exhibited the highest conductivity of 2.43 × 10–4 S cm−1 and optimal microwave absorption property. The minimum reflection loss (RLmin) was − 13.4 dB at 11.14 GHz and the bandwidth (RL < − 10 dB) was 2.27 GHz (9.63–11.90 GHz) in 2.2 mm. The values of complex permittivity of NZSP and LATP ceramics were similar. While the frequency dispersion effect only occurred in LATP ceramic, which resulted in its superior microwave absorption property over NZSP ceramic.
With the rapid development of stealth technology, the demand for high-temperature microwave absorption material is ever-increasing. The present preparation method of high-temperature microwave absorption material is to fill the high-temperature absorbents into the ceramic or glass matrix to form the composite materials [1]. The absorption properties can be optimized by adjusting the type, content, size, morphology, and distribution of the absorbents [2, 3]. The common high-temperature absorbents include SiC [4, 5], ZnO [6, 7], Ti3SiC2 [8, 9], and so on. Moreover, metamaterials with structural design also aroused tremendous attention in the application of microwave absorption [10–13]. Although good microwave absorption properties can be obtained by the above materials, the difficulty of long-term stability exists. Up to now, the high-temperature microwave absorption composite materials are still facing the problems of absorbent oxidation, interfacial chemical reaction, and interface diffusion in long-term service [14]. Therefore, it is necessary to solve the problem of high-temperature stability.
Developing a single-phase ceramic as high-temperature microwave absorption material can avoid the above problems of the composite materials, which provides a new method to solve the high-temperature stability of the materials. NASICON-type Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) ceramic is a kind of conductive ceramic with a structure of Li+ ions transporting in a rigid three-dimensional network, which is applied in the field of energy storage [15]. The current researches mainly focused on its conductivity, few reports were about the dielectric and microwave absorption properties. In view of the following three reasons, LATP ceramic was chosen as a new type of microwave absorption material. First, ceramic is a good option for high-temperature material owning to its high-temperature stability. Second, LATP ceramic has good ionic conductivity and its value can be adjusted by doping strategy and process optimization, which makes its electromagnetic parameter controllable. Last, LATP had low density (2.94 g cm−3) [16], which was beneficial for weight reduction.
In NASICON system, Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (NZSP) and LATP ceramics have the relatively highest conductivity, which are the two most commonly used solid electrolytes [17]. Our previous work had deeply explored the dielectric and microwave absorption properties of NZSP ceramic. Although it had microwave absorption property, the bandwidth was not wide [18–20]. In this work, LATP ceramics with different sintering temperatures were prepared by solid-state reaction. The phase, microstructure, conductivity, dielectric property, and microwave absorption property were thoroughly analyzed. Meanwhile, the dielectric and microwave absorption properties of NZSP and LATP ceramics were compared, and the superiority of LATP ceramic as microwave absorption material was elaborated.
According to the solid-state reaction equation, LATP powders were synthesized by weighing 0.715 mol Li2CO3, 1.7 mol TiO2, 0.15 mol Al2O3, and 3 mol NH4H2PO4. 10 wt% quantity of excessive Li2CO3 was added into the raw material for hig-temperature lithium volatilization supplement. All the weighed powders were ball milled with a rotary speed of 300 rpm for 6 h. Then, the slurry was dried at 60 °C for 36 h and calcined at 900 °C for 4 h. The calcined mixtures were ball milled again for powder refinement with a rotary speed of 300 rpm for 6 h. Next, the synthetic powders using polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) as the binder were poured into two kinds of steel dies applying a pressure of 200 MPa. One of the dies was a circle with a diameter of 13 mm, and the other die was a rectangle with the dimensions of 30 l mm × 15w mm. After burning of PVA, the compact specimens were sintered at 950 °C, 1000 °C, 1050 °C, and 1100 °C for 4 h with the heating rate of 5 °C/min. At last, the wafer sample was coated with silver paste on each face for conductivity measurement. The large rectangle sample was mechanically cut into a size of 22.86l mm × 10.16w mm × 1.95t mm for complex permittivity measurement.
X-ray diffraction (XRD) was used to characterize crystal structure of LATP ceramics. Archimedes method was used to measure the density of LATP ceramics. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to observe microstructures of fractured cross-section of LATP ceramics. Electrochemical workstation with electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was used to test the conductivity of LATP ceramics. Vector network analyzer was used to examine the complex permittivity of LATP ceramics in 8.2–12.4 GHz. The specific test methods of both conductivity and permittivity had been described detailedly in our previous work [18–20]. The reflection loss (RL) was calculated according to the transmission line theory.
XRD patterns of LATP powders and LATP ceramics sintered at different temperatures are depicted in Fig. 1. All observed peaks in LATP powders matched well with the LiTi2(PO4)3 rhombohedral (R̅3c) phase (PDF#35-0754) [21] and no impurity peaks appeared, which indicated that pure LATP powders had been synthesized at 900 °C. When the sintering temperature was below 1100 °C, single LiTi2(PO4)3 phase was found in all the ceramics. When the sintering temperature reached 1100 °C, AlPO4 impurity phase was detected, which was attributed to the decomposition of LATP phase at high temperature [22].
Figure 2 shows the variation curve of density with sintering temperature for LATP ceramics. A growth trend of density was seen from 950 to 1050 °C, and an obvious drop appeared at 1100 °C. The grain boundaries moved so fast at higher temperature that the pores were too late to escape from the sintered body, which caused the decrement of density. The LATP ceramic sintered at 1050 °C had the highest density of 2.70 g cm−3 and the relative density was 92%.
Figure 3 exhibits the fractured cross-sections of LATP ceramics sintered at different temperatures. The microstructure was composed of large gains and small grains, which belonged to a bimodal grain size distribution. The grains grew up gradually as the sintering temperature increased. Large pores emerged in Fig. 3a, d, and dense microstructure could be seen in Fig. 3c, which was consistent with the result of density. Compared with the fractured cross-sections of NZSP ceramics [18–20], no liquid phase was formed in LATP ceramics.
The typical impedance spectra of LATP ceramics sintered at different temperatures are shown in Fig. 4. The equivalent electrical circuit used for resistance fitting is also given in Fig. 4. According to the fitting result, Table 1 lists the values of grain resistance (Rg), bulk conductivity (σg), grain boundary resistance (Rgb), grain boundary conductivity (σgb), and total conductivity (σ) of LATP ceramics sintered at different temperatures. The conductivity increased first and then decreased, and peak value of 2.43 × 10–4 S cm−1 was obtained at 1050 °C, which exhibited a same trend as the density. The close contact among grains was conducive to the rapid migration of Li+ ions between grains and grain boundaries, thus the dense ceramic sintered at 1050 °C had the relatively highest bulk conductivity, grain boundary conductivity, and total conductivity. The decrease of conductivity at 1100 °C was mainly due to the distribution of nonconducting AlPO4 impurity at grain boundary. Compared to NZSP ceramics [18–20], the effect of sintering temperature on the conductivity of LATP ceramics was less pronounced. In other words, the density of LATP ceramic had little influence on its conductivity.
The complex permittivity of LATP ceramics sintered at different temperatures was exhibited in Fig. 5. Arrhenius plots of total conductivities with testing temperatures were also given in Fig. 5a. Both the real part (ɛʹ) and imaginary part (ɛ″) increased firstly and then decreased with elevated sintering temperature, but the variation was little. Based on Debye’s theory, ɛʹ is related to polarization mechanism and ɛ″ is determined by both polarization loss and conduction loss. LATP ceramic has a stable three-dimensional network, which consists of TiO6 octahedral and PO4 tetrahedral sharing common corners, aluminum is located at either tetrahedral (denoted as AlT) or octahedral (denoted as AlO) site. And Li+ ions passed though the gaps between the octahedral and tetrahedral. The main polarization mechanism is thermal ion relaxation polarization in LATP ceramic, which is induced by the migration of activated Li+ ions under an electromagnetic field. The degree of polarization depends on the activation energies of Li+ ions. The lower the activation energy of Li+ ions was, the better the polarization ability was. It was facile for Li+ ions migration in 3D framework with low activation energy, which led to an asymmetrical charge distribution. Then the electric dipole moment was formed, and the polarization occurred. From the Arrhenius plots in Fig. 5a, the calculation results of activation energies were 0.38 eV, 0.38 eV, 0.37 eV, and 0.39 eV for LATP ceramics prepared with sintering temperature ranging from 950 to 1100 °C. Because of the lowest activation energy of LATP ceramic sintered at 1050 °C, it was easier to be polarized. Moreover, the sintered LATP ceramics could be viewed as a composite material of low-permittivity pores, low-permittivity AlPO4 impurity, and high-permittivity LATP phase, which also explained the low ɛʹ at 950 °C, 1000 °C, and 1100 °C. For the conductive LATP ceramic, the variation of ɛ″ was mainly controlled by the conductivity loss. Due to the slight differences of activation energies and conductivity among different sintering temperatures, the variations of ɛʹ and ɛ″ were rather small.
 Figure 6 compared the complex permittivity of NZSP and LATP ceramics at their respective optimum sintering temperature. The temperature with the highest density and the best performance was selected as the optimum sintering temperature, which was 1250 °C and 1050 °C, respectively, for NZSP and LATP ceramic. The ɛʹ of NZSP ceramic ranged from 10.1 to 11.8 and ɛ″ ranged from 2.1 to 3.7. And the ɛʹ of LATP ceramic ranged from 10.2 to 13.1 and ɛ″ ranged from 2.1 to 3.5. The values of complex permittivity of NZSP and LATP ceramics were similar. While the complex permittivity decreased with the increasing frequency only in LATP ceramic, which was the frequency dispersion effect mainly caused by the polarization process. As the migration ions, Li+ ions have smaller size compared with Na+ ions. It is more sensitive for the speed of polarization establishment relative to the change of the extra electric field frequency in LATP ceramic. Thus, the polarization of the dipoles may not catch up with the variation in the frequency of electromagnetic field, which leads to the decreased complex permittivity with increasing frequency [23].
The reflection loss (RL) of LATP ceramics sintered at different temperatures in 2.2 mm thickness is presented in Fig. 7. Considering the three factors of thickness, minimum RL (RLmin) and bandwidth, the optimum thickness was chosen as 2.2 mm. According to the calculated results of RL, the sample sintered at 1050 °C had the optimum microwave absorption property with a RLmin of − 13.4 dB and a bandwidth (RL < − 10 dB) of 2.27 GHz. And the coverage of its bandwidth (RL < − 5 dB) included the whole frequency range in X-band.
Figure 8 compares the RL of NZSP and LATP ceramics at their respective optimum sintering temperature. The frequency dispersion effect was vital for bandwidth expanding, thus LATP ceramic had a better microwave absorption property. Compared with NZSP ceramic, the optimum thickness of LATP ceramic became thinner from 2.3 to 2.2 mm, the corresponding RLmin became less from − 12.9 to − 13.4 dB, and the bandwidth (RL < − 10 dB) became wider from 1.30 to 2.27 GHz. All of the results manifested that LATP ceramic was a better choice for microwave absorption material.
This work developed LATP ceramic as a new type of hightemperature microwave absorption material. LATP ceramic sintered at 1050 °C exhibited the highest conductivity and complex permittivity, while the performance difference was slight among different sintering temperatures. It had the optimum microwave absorption property with a bandwidth (RL < − 10 dB) of 2.27 GHz and a RLmin of − 13.4 dB in 2.2 mm thickness. Compared with NZSP ceramic, the complex permittivity of LATP ceramic had a frequency dispersion effect, which was conducive to broad bandwidth. Due to the smaller size of Li+ ions, the polarization establishment relative to electric field variation was sensitive, which led to the polarization of dipoles lagging behind the change of electric field frequency. The calculated RL values indicated that LATP ceramic exhibited more potential as a microwave absorption material, and much work should be done to further understand the frequency dispersion mechanism and adjust the frequency dispersion property.