Glass ceramics containing Nasicon-type crystal MgTi4(PO4)6 were prepared by heat-treating MgO–TiO2– P2O5–SiO2 glasses, and their photocatalytic activities were evaluated by the decomposition of methylene blue (MB) and acetaldehyde, and measuring the water contact angle under UV irradiation. Highly photocatalytic oxidization ability and super-hydrophilicity were observed. These properties are comparable with those of the TiO2-coated photocatalyst.

TiO2 is an excellent photocatalyst and has been used in environment ﬁelds such as air puriﬁcation, deodorization, sterilization, as well as self-cleaning for its strong oxidization ability and super-hydrophilicity [1]. TiO2 is also an important component for glass ceramics. It is often introduced as nucleating agent to the base glass to boost the nucleation process in order to obtain a glass ceramic with desired crystallite size and crystallinity [2]. Glass ceramics have advantages in low-cost production and ease of manufacture in different sizes and shapes, such as sheets, rods, tubes and ﬁbers. Therefore, developing photocatalytic glass ceramics would be of signiﬁcant from the viewpoint of practical applications. Recently, a few works have been conducted on exploring TiO2-precipitated glass ceramics as photocatalytic materials [3–5]. Yazawa et al. prepared rutile type TiO2-containing glass ceramics from the silicate glasses [4]. The present author obtained anatase type TiO2-containing glass ceramics from the phosphate glasses [5]. Evaluation of degradation of methylene blue under UV irradiation indicated that these TiO2-precipitated glass ceramics exhibited photocatalytic activity indeed. More recently, the present author has found different type of photocatalytic glass ceramics which was based on Nasicon-type crystals rather than TiO2 [6]. In the present work, Nasicon-type crystal MgTi4(PO4)6 was precipitated from MgO–TiO2–P2O5–SiO2 glass by heattreatments and the photocatalytic activities of the resultant glass ceramics were quantitatively evaluated and compared with TiO2coated photocatalyst.

Preparation of glass ceramics: A glass with the molar composition 12MgO–48TiO2–31P2O5–9SiO2& was prepared. Reagent grade SiO2, NH4H2PO4, TiO2 and Mg(PO3)2 were used as starting materials. About 300 g of batches were placed in platinum crucibles and melted in an electrical furnace. The batches were ﬁrst kept at 700 1C for 3 h in order to release volatile products coming from the starting materials. Then, they were heated to 1450 1C and melted at the temperatures for 3 h. Finally, the melts were poured onto preheated stainless steel mold, and subsequently annealed and cooled to room temperature. The glass was cut and polished to a thickness of 2 mm and then converted to glass ceramics by heat-treating the glasses at temperatures higher than the crystallization temperature.

Characterization: The glass transition temperature and crystallization temperature were determined by differential thermal analysis (DTA) at a heating rate of 10 K/min.

Crystalline phases were identiﬁed by X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) (Philips Diffractometer) on the surfaces of the bulk samples. CuKα radiation was obtained from a copper X-ray tube operated at 40 kV and 40 mA. The measurements were made in continuous mode and the diffraction angle (2θ) ranged from 101 to 601. The surface morphology was observed by a scanning electron microscopy (SEM; S-3000N, Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan).

Evaluation of photocatalytic activities: Photocatalytic oxidization activity of the glass ceramics were evaluated by the decomposition of both methylene blue (MB) and acetaldehyde. For the evaluation of MB decomposition, Japanese Industrial Standard (JIS R 1703-2) was referenced [7]. A quartz cylinder of ∅10  30 mm was vertically ﬁxed on the glass ceramic surface with silicon grease. After ﬁlling with 0.02 mM MB solution, the cylinder was kept in the dark for 24 h to saturate the adsorption of MB on the surface of amount of unknown phases is additionally present in the sample heated at 900 1C. SEM micrographs of the surfaces of both samples are shown in Fig. 2. Rough surfaces and irregular particles in shapes are observed. The rough surfaces are due to the HF etching process, by which the residual glassy phase has been removed and as a result more crystal particles are exposed on the surfaces. Such surface morphology is considered to be favorable for the enhancement of the photocatalytic activity because of the larger speciﬁc surface areas. It is obvious that increasing the heat-treatment temperature results in larger crystal particles. The size of the particles varies in the range of about 20–60 nm for the sample heated at 800 1C, and about 40–100 nm for the sample heated at higher temperature, 900 1C. Based on the XRD results, the observed particles are believed to be MgTi4(PO4)6 crystals.

Photocatalytic activities of the glass ceramics: Decomposition rates of MB were measured to evaluate the photocatalytic oxidization activity of the glass ceramics. The results are shown in Fig. 3, where the rates for the as-made glass and TiO2-coated photocatalyst are also included for comparison. The decomposition rate of MB for the glass is nearly zero, implying the glass does not have oxidization ability. After heat-treatments, however, the rate increases to 27–32 nmol/L/min. These values are slightly larger than that of the TiO2 photocatalyst, indicating that the glass ceramics possess higher oxidization ability than the TiO2 photocatalyst. The oxidization ability of the glass ceramics was further glass ceramic. Then the MB solution is replaced by the 0.01 mM and the concentration of MB under UV irradiation was measured at an interval of 30 min using UV spectrometer (V-650, JASCO Corporation). Based on the changes of the concentration, the decomposition rate of MB is calculated for every sample. For comparison, the same measurements were also conducted on a TiO2-coated photocatalyst which was prepared by the sol–gel method. For the evaluation of acetaldehyde decomposition, a rectangular glass ceramic with 75 cm2 surface area was placed in a tightly sealed quartz vessel. Gaseous acetaldehyde was injected into the vessel, and the concentration changes of both acetaldehyde and carbon dioxide were monitored using a gas chromatography (GC-8A, SIMADZU) before and after UV irradiation. The experimental error for the evaluation of MB and acetaldehyde decomposition is 73 nmol/L/min and 75 ppm, respectively.

Photo-induced hydrophilicity was evaluated from the water contact angle value using a commercial automatic contact angle system with an experimental error of 31 (DM-501, Kyowa Interface Science, Japan).

Before the measurements, the glass ceramics were soaked in 4.6 wt% HF aqueous solution for 60 s. In order to eliminate the residual glassy phase in the surface. The UV light source used in this study is Toshiba FL-10BLB and the irradiation intensity on the surfaces of samples is 1.0 mW/cm2.

Crystallization of the glasses: Glass plates with sizes of more than 150  120  5 mm were easily formed for the present composition although it contained concentrations of TiO2 up to 48 mol%. DTA measurements showed that the glass transition temperature was located at 650 1C and the crystallization took place at 780 1C. Two bulk glass ceramics were prepared by heating the glasses at 800 1C and 900 1C for 4 h, respectively. No signiﬁcant deformation or occurrence of cracks was observed in either glass ceramic. After being etched with 4.6 wt% HF aqueous solution for 60 s, the glass ceramics were used for the following evaluation. Fig. 1 shows the XRD patterns of the surfaces of the glass ceramics. Nasicon-type crystalline phase MgTi4(PO4)6 is detected in both samples. It is the only crystalline phase in the sample heated at 800 1C but small conﬁrmed by the photo-decomposition of CH3CHO as shown in Fig. 4. Before the UV irradiation, there were little changes in the concentrations of CH3CHO and no CO2 was detectable. However, when irradiated with UV light, CH3CHO began to decrease immediately and at the same time CO2 appeared. After about 4 h of UV irradiation, CH3CHO almost vanished and the concentration of CO2 reached about 170 ppm. This amount is approximately twice as much as that of the initial indicating the complete decomposition of CH3CHO after UV irradiation.

Fig. 5 shows changes of the water contact angles for the glass, glass ceramics, TiO2-coated photocatalyst under UV irradiation. It is observed that the initial angles for the glass ceramics are much lower than that of the as-made glass. This is probably due to the rougher surfaces of the glass ceramics as observed by the SEM (Fig. 2). When being irradiated with UV light, the water contact angle of the as-made glass remained almost unchanged but those of the glass ceramics and TiO2-coated photocatalyst showed continuous decrease and approached to zero after irradiation for about 60 min. This result indicates that the present glass ceramics possess photoinduced hydrophilicity and this property is comparable with that of the TiO2-coated photocatalyst. The hydrophilic state of the present glass ceramics can last for a long time during dark storage as shown in Fig. 6 and shows a good reversibility.

Glass ceramics containing MgTi4(PO4)6 crystals exhibited strong oxidization ability and super-hydrophilicity under UV irradiation. These two photocatalytic properties are comparable with those of TiO2-coated photocatalyst, indicating that the present glass ceramics are promising photocatalyst for practical applications.
