A series of isostructural trigonal molybdates CsMZr0.5(MoO4)3 with M = Al, Ga, In, Sc, Cr, V, Fe, and CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3 was synthesized by solid state reactions and characterized by synchrotron powder diﬀraction, diﬀerential scanning calorimetry, thermal conductivity measurements, and magnetization measurements for compounds with a magnetic 3d transition metal cation. The NASICON-type structure of these compounds represents a three-dimensional framework of corner-sharing trigonal MoO4-pyramids and MO6-octahedra, in which M and Zr (Ti) ions are randomly distributed. The Cs ions occupy large channels along the c-axis. A combination of phenomena like a drastic increase of thermal conductivity, endothermic signals in the DSC curve and anomalies in the thermal expansion coeﬃcients, observed for the compounds with M = Cr, V, Fe, and CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3 above 700 K, allows one to propose a structural phase transition. The crystal structure of the hightemperature phase is very close to the low-temperature one. A signiﬁcant hysteresis in high-temperature electronic and thermal conductivity was observed. A possible transition from the piezoelectric to the paraelectric state is discussed.

Ternary molybdenum(VI) oxides with alkaliand 3d transition metals were intensively investigated over the last few decades due to their unusual transport properties, ability to accommodate ions in the lattice, large surface area, and hence their potential use as solid electrolytes, catalysts, and Liand Na-ion battery materials.1−3 Numerous studies were devoted to Liand Na-containing compounds, because of their high ionic conductivity.4,5 Indeed, ionic conductivities of about 10−4 − 10−5 S/cm at room temperature were determined for the NASICON-type oxides Li3M(MoO4)3 (M = Cr, Fe) with Li in large channels, which is comparable to the atoms conductivity of well-known one-dimensional lithium ion conductors such as LiAlSiO4 and LiSbO3.

Note that signiﬁcant cation mobility was also measured for complex molybdenum oxides with much larger cations such as Rb, Cs or Tl, three-dimensional frameworks.7−9 For example, a series of Rb5LnHf(MoO4)6 situated in cavities of compounds (Ln − a rare-earth element from Ce to Lu) possesses a mixed electronic-ionic conductivity of about 10−5 S/cm at 673−773 K. Further increasing temperature leads to enhancement of the ionic part in the total conductivity for most rare-earth elements excluding Gd and Lu, which become pure electronic conductors.7 Unfortunately, any information about crystal structures of Rb5LnHf(MoO4)6 at these temperatures is missing.

Another interesting feature of ternary molybdenum oxides with monoand trivalent elements among diﬀerent structure families is a complicated temperature-induced polymorphism, which is often accompanied by change in dielectric properties.3 For example, ferroelectric-paraelectric phase transitions were described for some A+R3+(MoO4)2 and A5 +R3+(MoO4)4 compounds.3 A transition from a piezoelectric to a paraelectric phase is mostly coupled with a second order displacive structural phase transition, accompanied by a lower symmetry in the piezoelectric phase. However, also jump-like spontaneous polarizations according to a ﬁrst order phase transition are also observed.3 It should be noted that information about structural aspects of piezoelectric-paraelectric transitions in complex molybdates is in many cases limited to the wolframite and scheelite structure types.

A series of CsM3+Zr0.5(MoO4)3 compounds with large channels occupied by Cs ions can represent appropriate test systems to ﬁnd out a relationship between electrical and structural properties, since a signiﬁcant electrical conductivity of about 1 × 10−5 S/cm at 800 K with a predominant ionic component above 673 K and average activation energies of 0.3−0.6 eV was measured for M = Al, Sc, In.9 A nonlinear character of the temperature dependence of conductivity, which was observed in ref 9, was, however, not discussed, although this nonlinearity could point out a rather complicated underlying mechanism with possible changes in the crystal structure. The crystal structure of these compounds was ﬁrst determined for CsFeZr 0 . 5(MoO 4) 3 and CsAlZr0.5(MoO4)3 (ref 11) by single-crystal X-ray diﬀraction using direct methods, giving the centrosymmetrical space group R-3. This NASICON-type three-dimensional framework consists of edge-sharing trigonal MoO4-pyramids and (M,Zr)O6-octahedra. The channels along the c-axis are ﬁlled by Cs-ions, which form CsO12-polyhedra (Figure 1).

The aim of the present work was to describe unusual structural behavior of CsMZr0.5(MoO4)3 coupled with sizable eﬀects in DSC curves and increase of thermal conductivities. Two phenomena, namely abrupt rise in the ionic conductivity, and piezoelectric-paraelectric phase transition, which could be responsible for the observed anomalies, are discussed. We expanded the CsMZr0.5(MoO4)3 series and synthesized compounds with transition metals M = Cr, V, and CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3 in addition to the already known compounds with M = Al, Ga, In, Sc, Fe. Thermal conductivity measurements, diﬀerential scanning calorimetry and synchrotron powder diﬀraction studies of the crystal structure at elevated temperatures were performed for the compounds with 3d metals. For CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 dielectric permittivity and electronic conductivity were also measured. For compounds with magnetic 3d transition metals, magnetization measurements were carried out.

In a ﬁrst synthesis step, Cs2MoO4 and Zr(MoO4)2 molybdates were prepared and after that mixed with either M2O3 (M = Al, Ga, In, Sc) and MoO3, or with M2(MoO4)3 (M = Cr, Fe). The obtained mixtures were placed in Al2O3-crucibles, put into the furnace and annealed in air at temperatures of 873−1023 K depending on the metal cation M. For Cs2MoO4 synthesis, a step-like temperature regime was used: the starting temperature was 623 K, which was held for 20 h and after that it was increased by 50 K for 20 h. This procedure was repeated up to 1023 K. The Cr2(MoO4)3, Fe2(MoO4)3 and Zr(MoO4)2 compounds were prepared at 1073 K. Synthesis of CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3 was carried out from Cs2MoO4, Cr2(MoO4)3, TiO2 and MoO3 at 883 K. Due to oxidation of V2O3 in air the synthesis of CsVZr0.5(MoO4)3 was performed from Cs2MoO4, Zr(MoO4)2, V2O3, and MoO3 in an evacuated and sealed silica tube at 813 K for 60 h. The products were characterized by X-ray powder diﬀraction using a STOE STADI P diﬀractometer (Mo−Kα1 and Cu−Kα1 radiation). Structure parameters of CsMZr0.5(MoO4)3 and CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3 were determined by Rietveld reﬁnement using the program FullProf within the software package WinPLOTR.

The thermal behavior of the obtained ternary molybdates was examined by diﬀerential scanning calorimetry using a DSC8500 device (PerkinElmer) in the temperature range of 293−873 K. Pellets of the compounds were placed into Al2O3 crucibles and heated up and cooled down in an Ar atmosphere with 10 K/min. Heating and cooling of the samples were repeated twice. For CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3 and CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3, the thermal behavior was tested in diﬀerent gas atmospheres (O2 and Ar) with diﬀerent heating rates.

Thermal diﬀusivity a was measured by using a laser ﬂash technique (Netzsch LFA 457) in helium atmosphere in the temperature range of 300−950 K. The samples were pressed into pellets of 6 mm diameter by the pressure of 4 t. Thermal conductivity was then calculated via k(T) = a(T)·ρ·Cp, where ρ and Cp are the density and speciﬁc heat, respectively, which are considered in ﬁrst approximation to be constant for the whole temperature range. The density (ρ) was calculated, based on reﬁned structural data from X-ray powder diﬀraction at room temperature. The values of speciﬁc heat were used as average values of the experimental speciﬁc heat, taken at 650−700 K. For CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3, the thermal diﬀusivity was measured during heating and cooling.

Synchrotron powder diﬀraction data on CsMZr0.5(MoO4)3 (M = V, Cr, Fe) and CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3 were collected in the temperature range of 300−1050 K with the powder diﬀractometer B2 (ref 13) (HASYLAB/DESY, Hamburg, Germany). First, 0.5 mm quartz capillaries were ﬁlled with the samples in air or in Ar as in the case of CsVZr0.5(MoO4)3. The capillaries were mounted in a STOE furnace equipped with a Eurotherm temperature controller and a capillary spinner. The diﬀraction patterns were collected at ﬁxed temperatures with the on-site readable image-plate detector OBI.14 The wavelengths λ = 0.73048(1) Å and 0.68813(1) Å were selected using a Si(111) double-crystal monochromator. Rietveld reﬁnement, based on the synchrotron data, was performed using Fullprof.

For electrical measurements, the CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 pellets were sintered at 873 K for 6 h to obtain dense samples. Both sides of the pellet were polished by ﬁne sandpaper and coated with conductive silver paint followed by slow drying at 423 K for 2 h before carrying out the experiments.

The electrical capacitance C and the dielectric loss tangent tg(δ) measurements were carried out using a Motech MT 4090 automatic LCR meter in the heating and cooling modes at temperatures between 300 and 780 K with a rate of 10 K/min and frequencies f = 0.1, 1, 10, 100, and 200 kHz, and a probing voltage amplitude of 1 V.15,16 Dielectric measurements at frequencies from 25 to 106 Hz were performed with an E7−20 computer-interfaced LCR meter. The dielectric and resistive characteristics were calculated using the formulas ε = 113·h·C/ S, and ρ = 1012·S·[2π·f·h·C·tg(δ)]−1, where S is the electrode area in mm2, h is the sample thickness in mm, and f is the frequency (Hz).

Magnetization measurements of CsMZr0.5(MoO4)3 with M = V, Cr and Fe were performed with a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) from Quantum Design. Measurements were done in ﬁeld-cooled (FC) and zero-ﬁeld cooled mode (ZFC) in the temperature range of 1.8−350 K with an external magnetic ﬁeld strength of 0.01 T. Field dependence of magnetization was measured at 2 K up to 6 T. For CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3, the magnetization was measured up to 780 K in a magnetic ﬁeld of 0.5 T. 

According to the X-ray powder diﬀraction data, all synthesized compounds CsMZr0.5(MoO4)3 with M = Al, Sc, V, Cr, Fe, Ga, In, and CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3 are isostructural and crystallize in the R-3 space group (see Table 1).

The unit cell volume increases linearly with increasing ionic radius of the trivalent element (Figure 2a). The melting points of the compounds with partially ﬁlled 3d-shells of the transition metal are somewhat lower than for compounds with M = Al, Ga, In (Figure 2b); perhaps due to a more covalent character of the M−O-bonds in these compounds the lattice becomes less stable. All compounds show incongruent character of melting. The powder diﬀraction pattern of CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3 is presented in Figure 3. The structure parameters and some interatomic distances of the compound, reﬁned using the structure model of CsAlZr0.5(MoO4)3 from ref 11, are listed in Table 2. The average interatomic distances (Cr,Ti)−O of 1.97 Å in (Cr,Ti)O6-octahedra, Mo−O of 1.78 Å in MoO4-pyramids and Cs−O of 3.34 Å in CsO12-polyhedra are in excellent agreement with the literature data.17,18

The DSC-curves of CsMZr0.5(MoO4)3 with M = V, Cr, Fe, and CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3 are diﬀerent: whereas for M = V, Cr, and CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3 two close endothermic signals above 700 K are seen during sample heating, only one endothermic signal is visible for CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3, see Figure 4. Note, there is no diﬀerence in DSC proﬁles for the samples measured in oxygen and argon atmosphere. During cooling, CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3 shows only one exothermic eﬀect, while during next heating process two endothermic eﬀects were again observed (data not shown). According to the XRD analysis, after DSC measurements all compounds remained single-phase samples. The estimated standard enthalpy of these thermal eﬀects corresponds to about 11.9 kJ/mol for M = V, 4.3 kJ/mol for M = Fe, 1.4 kJ/mol for CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3.

In order to elucidate the underlying structure−property relationships, structural studies at elevated temperatures were performed using synchrotron powder diﬀraction. Any temperatureinduced reconstructive structural phase transition in CsCrZr0.5(MoO4)3, CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3, CsVZr0.5(MoO4)3 and CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 can be ruled out, because all reﬂections in the diﬀraction patterns at high temperatures can be satisfactorily described by the room temperature structural model (Table 3). However, the thermal expansion behavior of the compounds shows anomalies at the temperatures, at which DSC signals appear (see Figure 5). There is no discontinuity in the unit cell volume, but only change in the slope for all investigated compounds. The Zr-containing phases are characterized by a very small or even negative thermal expansion along the c-direction in the low-temperature region,

For CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3 thermal expansion along the c-axis above 800 K is practically temperature-independent, whereas along the a-direction it is higher than at low temperatures. Structural details of CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 at room temperature, at 723 K with the minimum value of the c-parameter, and at highest measured temperature of 1023 K, are presented in Table 3. The average Cs−O and (M,Zr)−O oder (Cr,Ti)−O distances increase with increasing temperature, whereas the average Mo−O distance slightly decreases. The temperature dependence of the isotropic thermal displacement parameters of Cs ions in CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 and CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3 is monotonous without any kink in the whole temperature range indicating no drastic increase of the Cs+ mobility in the whole investigated temperature range (Figure 6). Table 4 shows thermal expansion coeﬃcients for CsMZr0.5(MoO4)3 (M = V, Cr, Fe) and CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3 linear temperature dependence. Note that for Zr-phases the volume thermal expansion coeﬃcient in the high-temperature region is clearly smaller than in the low-temperature region, whereas for the Ti-phase the volume expansion becomes higher in the hightemperature region. The obtained values are in accordance with the thermal expansion of a large molybdenum and tungsten oxides family containing a network of corner-sharing octahedral and tetrahedral sites, which often shows a negative thermal expansion. However, the negative expansion around room temperature is rather rare.19 The above listed anomalies in the thermal expansion for all compounds at 700−800 K could be explained either as (i) a ﬁrst-order isosymmetrical phase transition with a quite diﬀerent thermal expansion behavior for the high-temperature phase, or (ii) a displacive phase transition R3→R-3 with a noncentrosymmetric structure at temperatures. Such a transition cannot be ruled out, because the room-temperature single crystal structure reﬁnement of CsAlZr0.5(MoO4)3 yielded nearly the same R-factors for the centrosymmetric R-3 and noncentrosymmetric R3 space groups.11 The crystal structure had been ﬁnally reﬁned in the centrosymmetric space group of the higher symmetry, because of no indication for a lower symmetry.11 Since the R3 group is a subgroup of the R-3 group, the structure model from synchrotron powder diﬀraction data was reﬁned in both space groups with nearly the same Rfactors. The character of such phase transition should be displacive, resulting in the shift of M,Zr-atoms from the special 9e site (inversion center) of the R-3 space group to the general position of the R3 space group. The reﬁned displacement parameters of M, Zr atoms of 0.013 Å from the (0.5,0,0) position in the R3 space group at 500 K is of a typical order for ferroelastic or piezoelectric phases.

Detailed proﬁle analysis of the 113 and 220 reﬂection for CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3, CsVZr0.5(MoO4)3, CsCrZr0.5(MoO4)3, and CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3, which have one or two features on the DSC curves, revealed diﬀerent pictures. For CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 with only one DSC-signal an ordinary slight decrease of full widths at half-maximum (FWHM) parameters with temperature without any anomaly for both reﬂections was detected (see inset on Figure 7a for the most intensive 220 reﬂection as an example). For CsVZr0.5(MoO4)3, an anomalous increase of the FWHM(220) below 720 K was registered. A broad maximum in the FWHM(220) at 800 K, observed for CsCrZr0.5(MoO4)3, and a very sharp maximum at 813 K for CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3 (Figure 7b) may correspond to the formation of an intermediate phase between highand lowtemperature polymorphs. These intermediate phases are probably responsible for the ﬁrst endothermic peak on the DSC curve during heating the samples. For CsVZr0.5(MoO4)3, the existence of an intermediate phase between 700 and 730 K could be supposed as well because of signiﬁcant change of reﬂection width and some scattering in the c parameter with the temperature. However, instrumental resolution does not allow us to make a conclusion about the structure symmetry. Detailed structural investigations using neutron and synchrotron diﬀraction with a higher instrumental resolution are needed for understanding the type and mechanism of these phase transitions.

Note that an isostructural phase transition without any noticeable changes in the crystal structure was proposed for LiMg3VMo2O12 (S. G. Pnma), which shows a drastic increase of the ionic conductivity at high temperatures.21 A short-range ordering of Li-ions in the low-temperature nonconducting phase, which is not visible by powder X-ray and neutron diﬀraction, was suggested.21 Our synchrotron diﬀraction data gave no evidence for a local ordering of Cs+ ions in the channels below the transition temperatures.

The temperature dependences of the thermal conductivity show a complicated behavior for all investigated compounds. In the low-temperature region up to 550 K, a decrease of the thermal conductivity was observed, while in the high-temperature region above 700 K a signiﬁcant increase was measured (see Figure 8a). All compounds excluding CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 have very similar values of the room temperature thermal conductivity of about 0.4 W/m·K, whereas the thermal conductivity of CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 is larger (0.55 W/m·K), indicating some amount of another type of heat carriers. It is known that three types of heat carriers contribute to the thermal conductivity of solids, i.e., phonons, electrons and photons.22 Their contribution to the conductivity can be qualitatively estimated by an expression k = (A/T + B + CT3), where A, B and C are constants for the given crystal structure. The ﬁrst, second and the third terms correspond to the contribution of the phonon, phonon and electron, and photon conduction, respectively.

Taking into account low electron and ionic conductivities, measured for related complex molybdates around room temperature, a predominant phonon contribution to the thermal conductivity for all investigated compounds in the temperature range of 300−500 K can be concluded (Figure 8a). A similar thermal behavior was also observed for Cs2MoO4 below its structural phase transition.23 The abrupt increase of the thermal conductivity above the transition temperature was related to the increase of the values of A and C in the expression above for the high-temperature phase with higher symmetry.23 In the case of CsMZr0.5(MoO4)3 a signiﬁcant increase of the thermal conductivity should also point to a phase transition. For all samples, the anomalies in thermal expansion and the endothermic signals in the DSC curves are observed at those temperatures, at which the thermal conductivities increase signiﬁcantly.

Note that the thermal conductivities, measured during heating and cooling for another CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 sample, which was additionally annealed at 873 K in air for 10 h, shows a signiﬁcant hysteresis between heating and cooling curves (Figure 8b).

The temperature dependences of the ac and dc resistivity for CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 are shown in Figure 9a,b. Above 550 K the ac resistivity at frequencies between 0.1 kHz and 200 kHz does not depend signiﬁcantly on the frequency and can be described by a straight line in lg(ρ) − 1/T coordinates, which reveals a thermally activated semiconducting behavior (Figure 9a). Above 750 K the slope becomes larger. Below 420 K the resistivity shows strong frequency dependence and weak temperature dependence what probably corresponds to the predominant hopping mechanism of conductivity. Between 550 and 420 K both mechanisms coexist. The temperature dependences of the dc and ac resistivity show a sizable hysteresis of unknown origin between heating and cooling; see for example the dc measurements in Figure 9b. This hysteresis could not be explained by decomposition of the compound during heating in an argon atmosphere, because the DSC data did not point out any additional features after several cycles in Ar for the same sample.

Since silver electrodes as blocking electrodes for Cs ions were used, the dc conductivity is electronic after reaching the steadystate conditions.

The room-temperature electronic resistivity of ∼109 Ω·cm for CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 corresponds to a typical value for dielectrics. The resistivity decreases to 104 Ω·cm at 800 K.

An Arrhenius plot for heating and cooling has three regions with diﬀerent slops similar to the temperature dependence of the thermal conductivity (see for comparison Figure 8 and Figure 9b). During heating, only two temperature regions, i.e., the one between 300 and 500 K and the other one between 500 and 700 K, have a negative temperature coeﬃcient of resistivity, indicating thermally activated conduction (i.e., semiconducting character). Above 700 K an increase of the electronic resistivity with temperature is observed, which shifts to much lower temperatures of 350−300 K during cooling. The activation energies for the electrical conductivity of CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 are given in Table 5.

The temperature dependence of the permittivity ε(T) of CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 (Figure 10, left), measured at frequencies 0.05−100 kHz, show an increase at 700−780 K. Temperature dependence ε(T) for CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3, measured at 1 MHz from room temperature to 860 K (Figure 10, right), has a welldeﬁned maximum at about 805 K, which is most likely due to a transition into a piezoelectric state. This temperature corresponds to the change in the thermal expansion coeﬃcients along the aand c-axes. The endothermic signal at 820 K should also relate to the sharp increase of the dielectric constant.

The eﬀective paramagnetic moments were calculated from the temperature dependencies of the magnetic susceptibility using the Curie− Weiss law χ = C/(T − θ).

CsCrZr0.5(MoO4)3 is paramagnetic down to 20 K with a paramagnetic moment of 3.96(4) μ B, which is in agreement with the spin-only value for Cr3+ (d3-conﬁguration, 3.87 μ B). The ﬁeld dependence of the magnetic susceptibility at 2 K shows a nonlinear behavior low ﬁelds (Figure 11), indicating weak ferromagnetic components in the sample.

CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 is paramagnetic down to 5 K with an eﬀective paramagnetic moment of 6.05(1) μ B, which is typical for high-spin Fe3+ ions (5.9 μ B). High-temperature measuretherefore, no ments did not indications for a high-spin to low-spin transition up to 780 K. The ﬁeld dependence of magnetization reveals a small hysteresis at 2 K (see Figure 11).

The experimental paramagnetic moment of V3+ in CsVZr0.5(MoO4)3 of 2.54(3) μ B is somewhat smaller than the theoretical value of 2.83 μ B for the spin-only value for a d2electron conﬁguration. The reduced total magnetic moment could be due to spin−orbit coupling. Below 10 K there is a strong increase of to ferromagnetic components in the sample, also evidenced by the presence of a hysteresis at 2 K (Figure 11).

The CsMZr0.5(MoO4)3 compounds with M3+= V, Cr, Fe show a similar structural behavior during heating and similar temperature dependences of the thermal conductivity. Since no spin transition was detected for CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 by hightemperature magnetization measurements, this compound was chosen for detailed characterization of electrical properties as a representative for other isostructural CsMZr0.5(MoO4)3 with M = V, Cr. An abrupt rise of the ionic conductivity due to high Cs+mobility in channels can be ruled out for all studied CsMZr0.5(MoO4)3 and CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3, because the thermal with a slightly negative or slightly positive thermal expansion along the c-axis and a positive expansion along the a-axis, (ii) an intermediate one up to 750 K with a much stronger negative expansion of the c-axis and a higher positive expansion along the a-axis, and (iii) a high-temperature range above 750−800 K with positive thermal expansion coeﬃcients for the aand caxes. For CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 these regions are nearly consistent with diﬀerent slopes of the dc resistivity curve in Arrhenius coordinates.

For CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3, only two temperature regions were observed, with positive expansions along the aand c-axis at low temperatures and a signiﬁcant higher expansion along the a-axis and a slightly negative expansion along the c-axis at high temperatures.

Thermal conductivity measurements of CsMZr0.5(MoO4)3 allow to propose a dominant phonon contribution from room temperature up to 530−550 K, since it slightly decreases with temperature. The sharp increase of the thermal conductivity above 730 K is an indication for a phase transition,24 probably a displacive one which could be accompanied by a loss of the inversion center. A signiﬁcant hysteresis behavior is observed in the thermal conductivity of CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 during heating and cooling from 750 K down to room temperature.

The temperature dependence of the dielectric permittivity of CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 revealed a very strong increase of ε near 750 K, whereas the temperature dependence of the dielectric permittivity for CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3, measured up to higher temperatures, shows a clear maximum at 800 K. Note that CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 with ε values of 106 at 700 K belongs to dielectrics with colossal dielectric constants.24

All these observations allow us to postulate a phase transition with very close crystal structures of low-temperature and hight e m p e r a t u r e p h a s e s a n d CsMZr0.5(MoO4)3.

The mechanism of this transition is very likely diﬀerent for diﬀerent transition metals. In contrast to CsFeZr0.5(MoO4)3 with no anomalies in synchrotron diﬀraction patterns during increasing temperature a broadening of some reﬂections like the 220 one around the transition temperature allowed to suggest an intermediate phase formation for CsCrZr0.5(MoO4)3 and CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3. For CsVZr0.5(MoO4)3 some decrease of the FWHM(220) around transition temperature may point out a more complex structural behavior.

It is known that several ternary molybdates like Cs2Zn(MoO4)2 or K2Pb(MoO4)2 display an anomalous character of displacement parameters of Cs ions change linearly with temperature, reﬂecting a normal harmonic vibration. For the Zr-containing compounds three temperature regions with diﬀerent thermal expansion coeﬃcients can be extracted: (i) a low-temperature one from room temperature up to 500−600 K

the temperature dependence of the dielectric permittivity together with a kink in the temperature dependence of resistivity,25 which allowed the authors to propose a ferroelastic phase transition. However, for the most triple molybdates a kink in the resistivity ρ(T) with a higher slope at higher temperatures was interpreted as a mixed electron-ion conductivity in the low-temperature region and phase transition into a superionic phase with increasing temperature. This explanation was suggested, for recently investigated isostructural new compounds RbMTi0.5(MoO4)3 with M = Fe, Cr, crystallizing in the R-3 space group.18 A strong increase of the electrical conductivity from 10−6 S/cm at 298 K to 10−2 S/cm at 780 K, coinciding with an endothermic eﬀect detected by DTA, was explained by the appearance of a superionic high-temperature phase with a disorder of Rb ions, but without a proof by a high-temperature structural investigation. However, a similar piezoelectric-paraelectric phase transition R3→R-3, analogically to the one proposed in the present work could probably cause the observed endothermic signal and much stronger temperature dependence of the conductivity in the paraelectric phase.

For the studied CsMZr0.5(MoO4)3 (M = V, Cr, Fe) and CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3 compounds, anomalies in the thermal expansion together with signals in the DSC curves and signiﬁcant increase of the thermal conductivities point out a phase transition. The low-temperature and high-temperature phases are structurally very close. This allows to propose a R3→R-3 phase transition during heating, since no additional reﬂections appear. A piezoelectric-paraelectric character of this phase transition could be postulated for CsCrTi0.5(MoO4)3, because the compound shows a clear maximum in the temperature dependence of permittivity at the transition temperature. For the Zr-containing compounds a piezoelectric-paraelectric character of the phase transition may be proposed analogically to the Ti-containing compound. Further investigations of the structural and dielectric properties are needed to characterize the piezoelectricity in these materials, and to detect possible additional cooperative phenomena such as ferroelectricity or ferroelasticity.
