This   paper   presents   a  dual-electrolyte   lithium-silver   battery   by   using   Celgard®   to  separate   organic   electrolyte   and  aqueous   electrolyte.   Such   type   of   battery   can   output   a  maximum   power   density   of   29.9   mW cm−2 (or  denoted   as   915   W   kg−1),  and   can   also  deliver   high   energy   density   (650   Wh   kg−1)   at   1  mA   cm−2. The  power   density   obtained   is   about   2  times   higher   than   that   of  dual-electrolyte   Li-air   battery   with   the NASICON-type   lithium-ion   conducting   solid   electrolyte.   The   high   power   density   performance   is   main   cm−2)   which   soaked   in   1  M   LiClO4 attributed   to  the   low   area-speciﬁc   impedance   of   Celgard®   2325   (5.6   in   PC/DMC.   The   infrared   spectra   results   of   fresh   Celgard®   2325   sample   and   with   above-mentioned   organic electrolyte   and   aqueous   electrolyte   treatment,   respectively,   indicate   that   Celgard®   2325   is  chemically stable  in   used   electrolyte   condition.   In  addition,   the   capacity   utilization   efﬁciency   of  the  battery   active materials   is  about   93%,   indicating   the  Celgard®   2325   possesses   obvious   water-proof   property   at   all   of used  discharge   operation   condition.

In  energy  challenged  society,  there  is  a  pressing  need  to  develop suitable  electrical  energy  systems  to  balance  supply  with  portable electronics,  electric  vehicles  (EVs)  [1],  aerospace  and  military  applications  [2].  Lithium-air  battery  has  been  focused  extensively  more than  ten  years  due  to  its  very  high  energy  density  [3–6].  Generally  speaking,  lithium-air  battery  has  been  mainly  divided  into pure  aprotic  electrolyte  lithium-air  battery  and  organic-water  dualelectrolyte  lithium-air  battery.  Until  now,  cyclic  property  of  pure aprotic  electrolyte  lithium-air  battery  is  not  good  enough,  ascribed to  decomposition  of  electrolyte  and  lithium-oxide  deposition  in discharge  process  at  condition  of  super-oxide  and  peroxide  species formation  [7–9].  To  avoid  these  problems,  different  kinds  of  dualelectrolyte  lithium-air  batteries  are  proposed  [4,10,11].  Zhou  et  al. [4]  proposed  ﬁrstly  a  kind  of  dual-electrolyte  lithium-air  battery with  500  hours  continuous  discharge  time,  and  a  high  power  density  lithium–air  capacitor-battery  [12].  Besides,  they  also  addressed some  new  concept  dual-electrolyte  batteries,  such  as  the  organic electrolyte  A/LISICON/organic  electrolyte  B,  the  aqueous  electrolyte A/LISICON/aqueous  electrolyte  B  [13],  these  topics  may   meet  with the  next  generation  power  sources.  Subsequently,  Manthiram reported  a  type  of  high  voltage  (3.5  V)  rechargeable  dual-electrolyte Li-air  battery  based  on  acidic  aqueous  electrolyte  [10].  In  such two  types  of  dual-electrolyte  battery,  NASICON-type  lithium  ion conducting  solid  electrolyte  (Li1+x+yAlxTi2−xSiyP3−yO12,  LATP,  also called  LISICON  [4])  is  employed  as  separator  to  keep  favorable  electrolyte  condition  for  air  positive  electrode  and  lithium  negative electrode,  respectively.  The  LISICON  separator  shows  some  merits,  such  as  Li+ transportation  only  [14,15],  excellent  properties  of water-proof  and  oxygen  resistance  when  in  direct  contact  with oxygen-contained  aqueous  electrolytes.  Meanwhile,  LISICON  still appears  also  some  drawbacks,  for  example,  lower  conductivity  (0.1 mS   cm−1)  [10,16],  poor  chemical  stability  in  strong  alkaline  electrolyte  et  al.  [17,18].  In  addition,  due  to  obvious  electrochemical polarization  of  air  electrode  and  lower  conductivity  of  LISICON, charge/discharge  reversibility  and  high  current  performance  of dual-electrolyte  Li-air  battery  are  still  not  good  enough  [10,19,20]. Based  on  higher  electrochemical  reversibility  of  positive  electrode reaction,  however,  dual-electrolyte  Li-Cu  system  [14]  and  Li-Ni  battery  [15]  suggest  a  promising  direction  for  development  of  high power  density  dual-electrolyte  lithium  batteries.

As  well  known,  zinc-silver  battery  exhibits  excellent  performance  at  high  current  density  condition  [21–23]  due  to  excellent electrochemical  reversibility  of  electrode  reactions  [24].  However, it  is  limited  in  discharge  voltage  and  energy  density  owing  to  higher potential  and  electrochemical  equivalent  of  zinc  electrode.  To  combine  the  merits  of  Li  redox  couple  (Li/Li+),  such  as,  low  electrode potential  (-3.04  V  vs.  SHE)  [25]  and  low  electrochemical  equivalent (0.259  g  Ah−1),  high  exchange  current  density  [26],  theoretically,


The  electrochemical  reactions  of  Li-Ag  battery  and  relevant  electrochemical  parameters  are  listed  as  follows.

Li-Ag  will  also  become  a  possible  high  power  density  battery  coupled  with  high  energy  density.

Various  Celgard®  separators  have  been  used  widely  in  both aqueous  and  organic  batteries  [27,28]  because  of  high  conductivity and  chemical  stability.  Besides  these  merits,  in  practical  application  and  industrial  manufacture,  ﬂexibility  is  another  un-neglected advantage  of  separators.  In  this  paper,  we  report  a  high  power  density  dual-electrolyte  Li-Ag  battery  with  Celgard®  separators.  Owing to  Ag2O  is  more  thermal  stable  and  less  alkaline  soluble,  we   here  use the  Ag2O  as  the  positive  active  materials  rather  than  the  divalent oxide  form  (AgO).

The  structure  of  the  dual-electrolyte  lithium-silver  battery  was shown  in  Fig.  1.  A  piece  of  lithium  foil  was  used  as  negative  electrode.  The  mixture  of  Ag2O  powder  and  polytetraﬂuoroethylene (PTFE)  emulsion  binder  was  rolled  onto  Ni  foam  to  prepare  the positive  electrode  (denoted  as  Ag2O/Ni).  PC/DMC  (1:1  v/v),  containing  1  M  LiClO4,  a  piece  of  Celgard  2325,  aqueous  electrolyte  (0.1  M LiOH  +  1  M  LiNO3)  were  used  as  aprotic  electrolyte,  separator  and aqueous  electrolyte,  respectively.  The  Li  foil,  organic  electrolyte and  Celgard  2325  were  assembled  as  negative  half  battery  in  an argon-ﬁlled  glove  box,  and  subsequently  combined  with  aqueous electrolyte,  Ag2O/Ni  positive  electrode  in  air.  All  of  reagents  were analytic  grade  or  better.  Aqueous  electrolyte  was  prepared  by  MilliQ  water.

Chronopotentiometry  analysis  and  electrochemical  impedance ␸∼t  curves  of analysis  were  carried  out  by  PARSTAT  2273.  The  Ag2O/Ni  electrode  were  measured  in  conventional  three-electrode system  including  Ag2O/Ni  working  electrode,  HgO/Hg  (14  mol   L−1 NaOH)  reference  electrode  [29]  and  Ti  counter  electrode.  The electrochemical  impedance  analysis  of  the  Li-Ag  battery  was  performed  in  the  frequency  range  of  1  MHz   to  0.01  Hz  at  open-circuit voltage  (OCV)  condition  and  AC  amplitude  of  Electrochemical Impedance  Spectroscopy  (EIS)  was  10  mV.   The  measurement  of total  impedance  of  electrolytes  was  carried  out  by  blocking  electrode.  Discharge  behavior  of  Li-Ag  battery  was  measured  by  Land CT2001A.  The  Fourier  transform  infrared  spectra  (FTIR)  were recorded  by  Thermo  Scientiﬁc  Nicolet  spectrometer  in  wavenumber  scope  of  400-4000  cm−1.  All  of  experiments  were  carried out  at  24 

On  discharge,  metal  lithium  is  oxidized  and  then  Li+ diffuses from  organic  electrolyte  to  aqueous  electrolyte.  At  the  same  time, Ag2O  is  reduced  to  Ag,  liberating  electrons  and  providing  the  current.

Fig.  2.a)  shows  electromotive  force  (E0),  OCV  and  typical  dis∼   40  mA   cm−2.  We   ﬁnd  that  the charge  curves  of  Li-Ag  battery  at  1  value  of  OCV  is  kept  at  3.28  V  approximately.  The  OCV  value  is  close to  the  E0 value  (3.44  V),  revealing  electrode  reactions  of  this  battery  can  reach  steady  state  in  used  electrolyte  conditions  easily.  At lower  current  density  scope,  the  relatively  ﬂat  discharge  plateaus and  higher  voltage  value  can  be  observed.  Furthermore,  discharge plateaus  can  still  appear  clearly  even  at  20  mA   cm−2,  indicating  the dual-electrolyte  Li-Ag  battery  can  also  present  excellent  high  current  performance  as  classical  mono-electrolyte  Zn-Ag  battery  does. We  also  investigate  the  exchange  current  density  of  Ag2O/Ni  by ∼ ␸   t  curves  at  different  current  densities  (marked  as  ia)  in  used aqueous  electrolyte  and  the  results  of  Chronopotentiometry  analysis  are  exhibited  in  Fig.  2  b).  The  exchange  current  density,  about 10  mA   cm−2,  can  be  calculated  from  the  intercept  of  relationship ␩∼lgia when  lgia is  equal  to  zero.  The  higher  exchange  current of  density  indicates  that  Ag2O/Ni  is  similar  to  a  quasi-reversible  redox electrode  in  used  aqueous  electrolyte.  As  well  known,  Li/Li+ couple has  been  used  as  simple  reference  electrode  in  coin  battery  measurement  extensively  because  of  high  exchange  current  density [26].  Based  on  these  higher  reversible  electrode  reactions,  (1)  and (2),  the  high  rate  performance  of  Li-Ag  battery  can  be  kept  at  good level.  Moreover,  calculating  from  the  discharge  curve  of  1  mA   cm−2, we  can  know  the  speciﬁc  capacity  of  Li-Ag  battery  is  202  mAh   g−1 or  so.  The  speciﬁc  capacity  is  equal  to  93%  of  the  theoretical  capacity  (218  mAh   g−1,  based  on  the  above  mentioned  total  reaction (3)),  and  the  energy  density  reaches  650  Wh   kg−1,  which  is  near 3-5  times  higher  than  reported  performance  of  traditional  Li  ion battery  [30].  These  results  indicated  that  Celgard  membrane  play valid  separation  role  in  dual-electrolyte  Li-Ag  battery.  Next,  different  discharge  densities  are  employed  to  investigate  the  power performance  of  the  battery.  Fig.  2  c)  shows  a  volcano-type  dependency  on  the  power  density  of  the  current  density.  29.9  mW  cm−2 is  read  to  top  their  corresponding  volcano  plot,  which  is  around  2 times  of  reported  dual-electrolyte  Li-air  battery  with  the  LISICON plate  [10,12].  In  addition,  the  maximum  power  density  value  of  the Li-Ag  battery  is  about  915  W  kg−1,  higher  than  that  of  zinc-silver battery  (600  W  kg−1)  obviously  [31].

In  order  to  know  the  impedance  performance  of  the  entire battery  and  only  electrolytes  with  Celgard  separator  well,  we   measured  them  at  condition  of  OCV  and  the  data  are  exhibited  in  Fig.  2 d).  The  inset  of  Fig.  2  d)  is  enlargement  view  of  frequency  range from  1  M  Hz  to  1  Hz.  From  that,  we  can  know  the  total  resistance (Re)  of  the  two  electrolytes  with  Celgard  separator,  taken  from  the intercept  on  real  axis  of  complex  proﬁle,  is  43    which  is  equal to  impedance  sum  of  aqueous  electrolyte,  organic  electrolyte  and  2))   approximately.  And  for  the  entire  batCelgard  membrane  (41  tery,  the  semicircle  in  high  frequency  range  is  attributed  to  charge transfer  and  interfacial  resistance  (Rct  + int)  between  the  two  electrodes  and  the  two  electrolytes,  and  Rct  + int is  48    [32].  Compared with  the  reported  rigid  LISICON  ceramic  electrolytes,  Celgard  separator  exhibited  lower  resistance  in  dual-electrolyte  Li-Ag  system. The  results  also  suggest  that  the  Li  ion  transfer  across  the  Celgard  is easier.  Besides  of  high  electrochemical  reversibility  of  Li  electrode and  Ag  electrode,  this  character  of  Celgard  is  also  a  key  factor  for dual-electrolyte  Li-Ag  to  appear  high  current  performance.

FTIR  spectra  of  fresh  Celgard  (a),  Celgard  after  being  soaked  in  1  M LiOH  (b),  1  M  LiClO4 in  PC/DMC  (c)  for  10  days  and  Celgard  after  the battery  discharge(d).

Moreover,  EIS  character  of  different  Celgard  2325  samples  is investigated  and  the  results  are  exhibited  in  Fig.  3  a).  The  results indicate  that  Celgard  2325  performance  does  not  appear  obvious change  after  being  soaked  in  1  M  LiOH  aqueous  electrolyte  for  10 days  and  Celgard  2325  still  keeps  as  a  pure  capacitor  because  of high  hydrophobic  property.  On  the  contrary,  Celgard  2325  is  inﬁltrated  well  in  used  organic  electrolyte,  PC/DMC  (1:1  v/v)  containing 1  M  LiClO4,  the  bulk  resistance  (Rb)  of  the  wetted  membrane  is  2),  which  is  determined  by  intercept  on  the  real  axis about  8.6  of  complex  impedance  proﬁle  from  the  inset  of  Fig.  3  a).  Noteworthy,  the  area-speciﬁc  impedance  (ASI)  of  the  wetted  Celgard 2325  is  slightly  bigger  than  the  ASI  of  the  same  product  model  in   cm−2,  1.2  M  LiPF6 in  EC/EMC)  2) analogous  organic  electrolyte  (3  [33],  but  signiﬁcantly  smaller  than  the  ASI  of  the  LISICON  plate   cm−2,  recalculated  from  Refs.  [10,16]).  And  in  order  to  2) (449.6  know  chemical  stability  of  Celgard  2325  well,  a  piece  of  employed Celgard  sample  is  taken  from  discharged  battery  and  then  analyzed  by  FTIR.  The  results  are  exhibited  in  Fig.  3  b).  A  multiple ∼   2850  cm−1, absorption-peak,  locate  at  frequency  scope  of  2954  is  attributed  to  -CH3 group  asymmetric  stretching.  The  vibrational band  at  1462  cm−1 and  1377  cm−1 can  be  assigned  to  the  asymmetric  and  symmetric  bending  vibrations  of  -CH3 group,  respectively. The  two  pair  peaks,  presented  in  the  section  I  (1900-1550  cm−1) and  section  II  (1250-1000  cm−1),  are  assigned  to  C  =  O  and  C-O stretching  vibration,  respectively.  This  may   be  caused  by  PC/DMC solvents  remaining  in  used  Celgard  sample.  Compared  with  the  IR results  of  the  sample  wetted  in  pure  PC/DMC/1  M  LiClO4 (1:1  v/v), we  can  speculate  that  there  may   be  a  mixture  solvents  region  inside the  used  Celgard  sample,  due  to  the  weakness  of  the  two   pairs  peaks in  spectral  line  d  compare  to  spectral  line  c.  Except  section  I  and section  II,  we  can  ﬁnd  that  the  other  part  of  spectra  of  the  four samples  are  almost  same,  indicating  Celgard  2325  is  chemically stable  in  pure  basic  aqueous  electrolyte,  pure  organic  electrolytes and  the  discharged  dual-electrolyte  Li-Ag  battery.  Based  on  the results  of  IR,  we  can  suggest  that  amount  of  micro-ITIES  (that  is, Interface  between  Two  Immiscible  Electrolytic  Solutions),  similar  to previous  reported  cases  [11,34,35],  are  formed  and  supported  by these  micro-holes  of  porous  Celgard  2325.  In  discharge  process, the  Li+ transfer  across  on  these  ITIES,  which  similar  to  else  alkali metal  ions  transfer  across  on  reported  ITIES.  The  lower  impedance, see  Figure  3a,  also  agrees  with  previous  results  [34,36].  In  viewpoint  of  ITIES,  the  interfacial  impedance  of  Li+ transfer  reaction, happened  on  ITIES,  should  ascribed  to  difference  of  solvation  free energy  of  Li+ in  different  electrolytes  [37].  Additionally,  the  materials  made  for  Celgard  separators  are  mostly  polyoleﬁns,  which must  be  modiﬁed  before  they  used  in  aqueous  batteries,  due  to their  hydrophobia  [28].  Otherwise,  it  should  be  pointed  out  that Celgard  2325  is  a  porous  polymer  membrane,  which  means  it  is not  very  good  at  water  retarding  as  solid  electrolyte.  However,  it  is more  pliable  and  tough  than  solid  electrolyte,  and  more  chemically stable  than  the  LATP  glass.  In  the  future,  adjustment  of  pore  diameter  and  hydrophobic  performance  of  porous  polymer  membrane should  be  essential  investigation  directions  for  the  development  of dual-electrolytes  Li  batteries.

All  of  results  prove  that  the  ﬂexible  polymer  material  of  Celgard is  more  conductive  and  more  chemically  stable  than  the  LATP  glass does.  Meanwhile,  the  materials  used  in  Celgard  separators  manufacture  are  mostly  polyoleﬁns  (PP,  PE,  PP/PE/PP),  which  must  be modiﬁed  before  they  are  used  in  aqueous  batteries,  due  to  their hydrophobia  [28].  For  the  further  development,  on  the  one  hand, narrowing  down  the  pore  diameter  or  introducing  ﬂuorine  functional  group  into  the  membrane  may   promote  the  water  retarding performance,  on  the  other  hand,  the  PTFE  or  poly(vinylidene  ﬂuoride)  (PVDF)  membrane  can  be  acted  as  more  suitable  candidates. Results  of  our  exploration  suggest  dual-electrolyte  Li-Ag  battery, as  well  as  Li-Ni,  Li-Cu  batteries,  is  also  a  promising  development tendency  of  dual-electrolyte  battery  for  practical  applications.

In  this  paper,  we  have  presented  a  newly  fabricated  dualelectrolyte  lithium-silver  battery  by  employing  Celgard  2325  to separate  organic  electrolyte  and  aqueous  electrolyte  instead  of the  LISICON  plate.  This  battery  exhibits  a  high  power  density  of 29.9  mW  cm−2 and  a  high  energy  density  of  650  Wh   kg−1 based on  both  high  reversible  electrode  reaction  and  high  conductivity membrane.  Moreover,  our  results  indicate  that  high  power  density dual-electrolyte  battery  is  also  a  promising  candidate  for  next  generation  high  power  density  batteries  based  on  both  high  reversible electrodes  and  high  conductivity  polymer  membrane.
