Electric relaxation in ion conducting  materials is still interesting due to its deviation from the ideal resistor  capacitor  behavior  due  to  correlated  hopping  ion  dynamics.  In  the  present  study  we  have  used  an  unusual  complex  anomalous  relaxation  function  which  has  a  functional  form  in  both  frequency  and  time  domain  to  understand  the  correlated  motion  of  ions.  Ion  conducting  Na4Nb(1-x)Cd2.5xP3O12  (x=0.1,  0.25,  0.5)  glass  are  prepared  and  its  ac  impedance spectroscopic data are investigated for ion dynamics and electric relaxation have studied in terms of fast and  slow process.  

The mechanism of ion conduction is an important  physical phenomenon due to various application of ion  conducting  materials.  Ac  impedance  spectroscopy  is  one  of  the  widely  used  tools  to  study  the electrical relaxation of materials. It is observed that  most  of  the  ionic  conducting  materials  show  a  deviation  from the Debye type ideal resistor capacitor  circuit behavior. There are several empirical relaxation  functions  like  Cole-Cole,  Cole-Davison,  HarviliakNegami  which  shows  a  good  agreement  with  the  observed data. But these functions lack to give a good  physical  picture  of  ion  dynamics.  In  the  present  work  an  unusual  complex  relaxation  function  proposed  by  G.  Govindaraj  [1 3]  is  used  to  investigate  the  correlated  hopping  ion  dynamics.  NASICON  (Na  Super Ionic Conductor) type phosphate materials have  much  importance  due  to  its  three  dimensional  frame  work  for  ionic  conductivity.  Among  them  Niobium  based  phosphate  materials  are  good  candidates  for  various applications [4-6].  

Ion  conducting  Na4Nb(1-x)Cd2.5xP3O12  glass  were  prepared  with  different  composition  x=0.1,  0.25,  0.5  by conventional melt quench method using A.R grade  Na2CO3,  Nb2O5,  CdO  and  NH4H2PO4.  Required amount  of  chemical  are  ground  to  a  homogeneous  mixture  with  an  agate  mortar  and  heated  until  melt  (around 1073K) and the melt were quenched rapidly to  room temperature  with a stainless steel plate. XRD of  the  samples  shows  amorphous  nature  and  the  formation  of  glass  are  confirmed  with  the  glass  transition temperature Tg in  DSC. The glass transition  temperature  Tg  is  shown  in  Table  1  and  it  decreases  slightly  as  Cd  replaced  by  Nb,  due  to  the  decrease  in  bond strength and crosslinking in phosphate glass. The  glass  samples  were  smoothened  and  polished  and  silver  electrodes  are  passed  at  ends.  The  ac  electrical  impedance  data  of  the  samples  have  carried  out  for  a  to  1MHz  for  various  frequency  range  of  1Hz  temperatures  with  Novocontrol  band  dielectric/impedance spectroscope (BDS). 

Impedance  spectroscopic  data  of  all  the  samples  show  anomalous  behavior  in  the  electrical  relaxation  which  shows  a  depressed  semicircle  nature  in  the  impedance  Nyquist  plot.  The  physical  picture  of  hopping  relaxation  mechanism can be obtained from the impedance data.   A  relatively  new  anomalous  relaxation  function  proposed  earlier  by  G.  Govindaraj  et  al  [1-3]  has  a  simple  form  in  both  time  and  frequency  domain.

Even  though  the  value  of  g  remains constant throughout the temperature range for  a  certain  composition,  the  number  of  hopping  charge  carriers may increase due to the increase of free charge  carries Nc. 

For  hopping  ion  have  to  overcome  an  average  energy  barrier  Eh.  This  energy  barrier  shifts  due  to  reiterated  forward  backward  ion  hopping  originates  from  the interaction among the  gNcq  hopping charges  and  (1-g)Ncq  trapped  charges.  Eh  shifts  to  a  lower  barrier  Ec=gEh  and  the  initial  hopping  distance  ‘a’  changes  to  a  new  hopping  distance  ‘b’.  With  the  applied  electric  field  ξ  barrier  energy  shifts  to  Eh(gq)bξ/2  and  Eh+(gq)bξ/2,  where    b  is  the  hopping  distance is shown in Fig. 2.  

This  fast  and  slow  hopping  relaxation  process  of  Na4Nb(1-x)Cd2.5xP3O12, x=0.5 at 393K is  shown  in Fig.  2.  The  relaxation  time  of  the  fast  process  1.85×10-5s  slows down to 4.93×10-5s due to the interaction among  the  hopping  and  trapped  charge  carriers.  The  parameter g=0.91 shows, 9% of the initial free charge  carriers  are  trapped  and  remaining  91%  are  free  for  hopping.  

This  electric  response  function  will  show  ideal  R-C  parallel  behavior  for  g=1.  The  parameter  g  quantifies  the  anomalous  behavior.  This  function  a  good  match  with  impedance  data  as  like  Cole-Cole  type  function  and gives a better physical interpretation [7-8]. 

The  ion  conduction  may  occur  due  to  a  series  of  jump  from  site  to  site  through  random  free  energy  barrier of the disordered host lattice. The phase factor  i(1-g) slows down τ by a factor of (1/τ)(1-g) which makes  the  anomalous  behavior  relaxation.  According  the  non-Debye  relaxation  occurs  due  to  structural  disorder  and  collective  motion  of  hopping  ions.  The  collective  motions of hopping ions are nonrandom motion and it  is  attributed  to  the  trapping  of  charge  carriers.  Disordered materials have random free energy barriers  and  conduction  occurs  due  to  a  series  of  backwardforward jumps from site to site.  

The  parameter  g=1  corresponds  to  the  initial  fast  relaxation  process  and  0<g<1  corresponds  to  the  later  slow  relaxation  process  of  nonrandom  motion  of  ions  due  to  a  gNcq  hopping  charges  and  (1-g)Ncq  trapped  charges were Nc is free charge carrier density and q is  the  charge  of  the  carrier.  Hence  the  fast  and  slow  process and their correlation are accounted by a single  exponent g. 

The impedance data of all the samples for various  temperatures  are  fitted  for  the  anomalous  relaxation  function  with  complex  nonlinear  least  square  fit.  The  impedance data shows a good match with the function  and it is shown in Fig. 1.  

The  present  glass  samples  show  a  slight  decrease  in conductivity as Cd replaced by Nb and it follows the  Eq.  (5)  and  is  shown  in  Fig  4.  Activation  energy  for  conduction is less composition dependent and is listed  in  Table  1.  Hopping  frequencies  follows  Eq.  (3)  as  shown  in  Fig.  4.  The  activation  energies  and  attempt  jump of hopping are listed in Table 1.    

Magnitude  of  the  attempt  frequencies  are  of  the  order  of  1016Hz,  the  phonon  frequencies  of  the  ionic  conducting  systems  and  it  is  the origin of  fast and slow process for both dc and ac  conductivities.  Even  though  attempt  jump  increases  with increase with Cd substitute with Nb the activation  energy increases and the conduction decreases.  

Na4Nb(1-x)Cd2.5xP3O12  glass  with  x=0.1,  0.25  and  0.5  were  prepared  and  characterized  for  formation  of  glass  has  confirmed.  Ac  electrical  studies  of  the  samples  show  a  good  ionic  conducting  nature.  Electrical  relaxation  studies  and  ion  dynamics  have  studied  with  an  unusual  anomalous  relaxation  function.  Impedance  data  shows  good  agreement  relaxation  function  and  it  provides  better  physical  picture  of  correlated  ion  hopping  in  terms  of  fast  and  slow relaxation process.  
