Sodium zirconium phosphate, NaZr2P3O12, thin ﬁlms have been prepared via a chemical solution approach on platinized silicon substrates. The ﬁlms are observed to crystallize at temperatures in excess of 725 C and are highly 012-textured. Film grain size ◦ ◦ C, respectively. C to 800 scales with processing temperature with grain sizes of 96 to 142 nm measured for ﬁlms processed at 750 Room temperature sodium-ion conductivity also scales with processing temperature with values of 3.5 × 10 −7 to 5.1 × 10 −7 ◦ S/cm measured. Activation energies for sodium-ion conduction measured from room temperature to 150 C were invariant with processing condition and are approximately 0.49 eV. The ionic conductivity and activation energy values agree well with bulk ceramic reference data and thus demonstrate that sodium super ionic conducting thin ﬁlms with bulk-like properties are possible in thin ﬁlm embodiments. © 2014 The Electrochemical Society. [DOI: 10.1149/2.068403jes] All rights reserved.

Thin ﬁlms of ionic conducting solids are a desirable component for low aspect factor energy storage devices and sensors. To date there have been signiﬁcant efforts on the preparation of high-quality solid-state lithium-ion conductors for thin ﬁlm battery electrolytes.1,2 Several materials systems have been demonstrated with ionic conduc−3 S/cm at room temperature, however, owing to tivities of up to 10 low electronic conductivity and stability over many charge-discharge cycles the most widely used is amorphous lithium phosphorus oxynitride (LiPON) with a room temperature lithium ionic conductivity of ∼10 −6 S/cm.3 In addition to lithium-ion conductors, there is gaining interest in the development of sodium-based energy storage and sensor devices.4–6 Sodium super ionic conductors based upon solid solutions of NaZr2P3O12 and Na4Zr2Si3O12 (Na1+xZr2P3-xSixO12, NaSICon) have been demonstrated in bulk ceramics to possess ion −3 S/cm at room temperature7 and, thereconductivities of up to 10 fore, may be a viable electrolyte material for thin ﬁlm batteries and sensors if the desirable high ionic conductivities scale to reduced dimensions.

While there have been many studies concerning the preparation and properties of bulk ceramics of NaSICon (see for example references 8 and 9 and references therein), to date there have been limited studies on the preparation of thin ﬁlms of NaSICon. Deposition methods that have been explored include chemical solution deposition,10–13 sputtering,14–16 E-beam evaporation,16 and pulsed-laser ablation.17 Of these reports, few have rigorously demonstrated correct phase assignment and clean evidence of sodium ion conduction. In the present work, we demonstrate the preparation of the phosphorus NaSICon end-member, NaZr2P3O12 (NZP), via a chemical solution deposition method and study the effects of processing temperature on the microstructure and sodium-ion conductivity. In doing so, we show that thin ﬁlms of NaSICon can be prepared via a relatively simple chemical solution approach and that the thermal budget used in processing dictates the ﬁnal grain size and, ultimately, the sodium-ion conductivity. Additionally, we will show that the ionic conduction properties of these ﬁlms are similar to those of bulk materials of the same nominal composition. The bulk-like properties and simple preparation method of this electrolyte provides a promising pathway toward the realization of solid-state sodium-ion based thin ﬁlm batteries.

The solution chemistry used to prepare NZP ﬁlms was based upon previous research by Gasmi et al.18 and Martucci et al.10 Sodium ethoxide (Sigma-Aldrich) was dissolved in anhydrous nbutanol (Sigma-Aldrich) under constant stirring. Separately, an excess of zirconium butoxide (Sigma-Aldrich) was chelated with 0.5 molar equivalents of 2,4 pentanedione (Sigma-Aldrich). The chelated zirconium butoxide solution was added to the dissolved sodium ethoxide in a 2:1 ratio, as monitored by constituent masses. The solution was stirred and a 3:1 molar ratio of di-butyl phosphate (Sigma-Aldrich) to sodium was added to the solution under stirring. The solution was then diluted to 0.15M (as referenced to an entire NZP formula unit) with n-butanol. All chemical preparation was performed within a glove box with an argon atmosphere. A slightly yellow transparent solution resulted. Thin ﬁlms were prepared by spin casting onto Pt/ZnO/SiO2/Si substrates with respective layer thicknesses of 100 nm/40 nm/400 nm/handle that were prepared via rf magnetron sputtering on commercially acquired thermally oxidized wafers (SiliconQuest International). This particular metallization stack was chosen as it has been shown in previous research to minimize deleterious diffusion of substrate adhesion layers into the deposited ﬁlms and it allows for annealing at temperatures that are difﬁcult to achieve using conventional platinized silicon metallization schemes (i.e. greater ◦ C).19 Films were spin cast at 3000 RPM for 30 seconds and than 750 subsequently placed on a 300 C hotplate for 5 minutes for solvent evaporation and gel consolidation. The ﬁlms were then inserted into ◦ C) for 10 minutes a preheated tube furnace (temperatures 725–800 in air prior to depositing subsequent layers following the same spin casting, pyrolysis, and high-temperature annealing steps. Films that were three total layers in thickness are reported in this work.

Film phase assemblage was assessed by X-ray diffraction (Cu Kα) using a Bruker D2 Phaser instrument. Microstructure was assessed using scanning electron microscopy within a Zeiss Supra 55 VP instrument using an in-lens imaging mode. Grain sizes were assessed from the electron micrographs using a linear intercept method.20 Errors are assessed as 95% conﬁdence intervals for the average grain size. To prepare structures for electrical characterization, ion-blocking platinum top electrodes (∼800 μm× 800 μm) were deposited through a shadow mask at room temperature via rf magnetron sputtering. The size of each measured electrode was determined using optical microscopy and image analysis (ImageJ, National Institutes of Health). Impedance spectroscopy was used to determine sodium-ion conductivity. Several electrode pads were measured on each sample to provide

Figure 2. Plan-view and cross sectional scanning electron micrographs of ◦ NaZr2P3O12 thin ﬁlms processed at 750 C (c&f). The bright ﬁne features are consistent with the ﬁne-grained ZrO2 impurity phases and an arrow is used to identify this phase in panel (f).

Figure 1. Log scale X-ray (Cu-Kα) diffraction patterns for NaZr2P3O12 thin ﬁlms deposited on Pt/ZnO/SiO2/Si substrates with processing temperatures ◦ ranging from 725 C. Bar markers indicate expected peak positions and relative intensities of NaZr2P3O12 and tetragonal ZrO2 phases.21,22 012 and 024 reﬂections are labeled to emphasize the preferred orientation. Peaks from silicon, ZnO, and platinum are attributed to the substrate metallization stack.

for additional certainty into the measured properties. An Agilent 4284 instrument with a rms oscillator of 50 mV over a frequency range of 1 MHz to 20 Hz was used for all room temperature measurements and a HP 4192A instrument with a rms oscillator of 50 mV over a frequency range of 1 MHz to 20 Hz was used for temperature dependent measurements. Sample temperature during temperature dependent impedance measurements was controlled within a Delta Design 9023 chamber with an external thermocouple in contact with the sample used to verify the temperature. Impedance spectra were collected ◦ C. Complex plane impedance data were ﬁt between 25 using EC-Lab software (Bio Logic Science Instruments).

Figure 1 shows the X-ray diffraction patterns of ﬁlms ﬁred at C. Expected positions and temperatures ranging from 725 22 are inrelative intensities of NZP21 and impurity tetragonal ZrO2 dicated as bar markers at the bottom of the plot. No evidence of ◦ C condition with the only ﬁlm crystallization is observed for the 725 diffraction peaks present being attributed to layers within the substrate C conditions, and substrate metallization stack. For the 750 diffraction peaks that can be indexed to rhombohedral NZP and tetragonal ZrO2 are observed. It is interesting to note that while the peak positions of the NZP phase agree well with those expected from the literature, the peak intensity ratios are substantially different, with the 012 family of reﬂections being signiﬁcantly more intense than the 110 reﬂection, which is the most intense in a random powder pattern. This suggests that these ﬁlms nucleate and grow in a preferential 012orientation on this particular substrate (111-oriented platinum). The cause of this preferential orientation is unclear at this time and no obvious lattice matching between the (012) plane of NZP and (111) plane of platinum could be identiﬁed. Regardless, the agreement between the expected peak positions for bulk NZP and these ﬁlms indicates that this processing method allows for preparation of NZP thin ﬁlms. The presence of a ZrO2 secondary phase is not unexpected for NaSICon materials and is a commonly observed impurity. The tetragonal zirconium oxide polymorph is typically a high-temperature phase, however in ﬁne crystallite sizes it can be metastable at room temperatures.23 The ZrO2 impurity peak intensity may increase slightly with processing temperature, which suggests that either the size of the ZrO2 grains is increasing or the volume fraction is increasing, or a combination thereof. It should be emphasized, however that the intensity of the ZrO2 secondary phase peak is quite small compared to the NZP phase and suggests that it is present in a low concentration in each crystallized ﬁlm.

Figure 2 shows plan-view and cross-sectional scanning electron C. microscopy images of the NZP ﬁlms prepared at 750, 775, and 800 From these images, two distinct phases are present – a dense continuous NZP phase and a discontinuous ﬁne-grained phase, which appear as brighter regions. The small size and relatively low volume fraction of the secondary phase is consistent with the ZrO2 phase identiﬁed by XRD. It appears that the amount of ZrO2 secondary phase scales weakly with the processing temperature, though the size of the grains does appear to increase slightly and is consistent with the increase in ZrO2 intensity in the XRD data. It is also observed that the grain size of the NZP phase increases in as the processing temperature increases. Fractured cross-sections show relatively dense NZP ﬁlms for each condition; a small amount of porosity is present, but the areal fraction measured from image analysis is less than 1%, suggesting that these ﬁlms are dense. Grain structure is difﬁcult to discern in the cross-sectional images, but there do appear to be some grain boundaries spanning the thickness of the ﬁlms, which would be consistent with a columnar grain morphology and would also be consistent with a crystallographically textured ﬁlm. Average ﬁlm thickness is invariant across the different processing temperatures and is approximately 280 nm. Average grain size was assessed from the plan-view SEM images. Values of 96 ± 7 nm, 113 ± 16 nm, and 142 ± 11 nm were measured for ﬁlms processed at 750, 775, and 800 C, respectively, resulting in a 47% increase in grain size. Compared to other oxide thin ﬁlm systems,24,25 grain size in NZP materials appear to be quite sensitive to process temperature with a substantial grain size change ◦ over just a 50C processing temperature.

Representative complex plane impedance spectra for the three ﬁlms at room temperature are shown in Figure 3a–3c along with the circuit model used and its ﬁt to the data. For each sample a high frequency arc is observed that transitions to a nearly vertical component at low frequencies. The data was ﬁt with a ZARC (resistor in parallel with a constant phase element) in series with a constant phase element, which are common ﬁtting elements for solid electrolyte materials.26 Only one arc was necessary to achieve a high quality ﬁt to the data – no separation of bulk and grain boundary components was observed and the high frequency intercept of the ZARC with the  5) real component of impedance axis (Z ) was zero Ohms. This may be expected, given the geometry of the sample being very thin, and the highest frequencies being in the MHz range. At high frequency, there is limited ionic response from the material, and it acts much like a pure capacitor, resulting in an impedance approaching zero. The presence of the low frequency nearly vertical component is consistent with ion

Figure 3. Representative complex plane impedance spectra for NaZr2P3O12 thin ﬁlms with platinum contacts processed at (a) 750 C and (d) calculated room temperature sodium ionic conductivities for each processing condition. The circuit diagram shown in (a) was used to ﬁt all data. Open circles in (a)-(c) represent the raw measured data and the solid lines represent the modeled response.

blocking at the platinum electrodes.27 Since this blocking spur is not vertical, it suggests that there is a nonideality in the response, manifested as an exponential response to frequency. This exponent value is normally between zero and one, and for these ﬁlms is between 0.75 and 0.80. The constant phase element nonideality usually has some basis in the physical world, often as the roughness of the electrodes measuring a system.28 From the SEM data presented, however, the interfaces between the NaSICon and the electrodes are very smooth. It may be possible that other sources of nonideality are causing the sloping behavior of the low frequency tail and non-unity value for the frequency exponent. Since previous observations have identiﬁed a secondary ZrO2 phase present in the NZP matrix, this may be giving rise to some nonideality. Further experiments to more fully determine this are in order.

Extending the low frequency blocking spur response back to the real axis (which ignores the high frequency response region of the plot) enables measurement of the resistance of the system between the electrodes. This intercept is the total resistance of the system, which in the case of the ionic conductor can be equated to the total ionic resistance of the system. In these data, this intercept correlates with the resistance value determined from the ZARC ﬁt. This re-

sistance along with the measured ﬁlm thickness and electrode area was used to calculate the ionic conductivity for each sample. Several electrode pads were measured and ﬁt for each sample to provide for some statistical certainty in the reported ionic conductivities. Figure 3d shows the processing temperature dependence of the room temperature ionic conductivity in these NZP ﬁlms. Error bars on the data points represent one standard deviation from the mean calculated values. A clear trend of increasing ionic conductivity with increasing processing temperature and, subsequently, increasing grain size is observed with room temperature values of 3.5 × 10 −7, and 5.1 × 10 C processed samples, respectively.

The trend of increasing ionic conductivity with increasing grain size suggests an inﬂuence of microstructure on sodium ion transport. As the grain size is increased, the relative volume of grain boundary in the ﬁlm is decreased and may result in an overall increase in total ionic conductivity. This would be consistent with results presented for bulk ceramic NaSICon in the literature where a correlation with grain size and total conductivity was revealed.29 Without being able to assess the individual intragranular and grain boundary responses in the impedance data this mechanism cannot be conﬁrmed and other effects

ﬁlms. It was shown that temperatures in excess of 725 C are required to realize crystalline thin ﬁlms with 10 minute anneals in air. All crystalline ﬁlms exhibited a preferred 012-orientation, with a columnar grain morphology and high density. Increasing the crystallization an◦ C resulted in a 47% increase nealing temperature from 750 in grain size and a 43% increase in the measured room temperature sodium ion conductivity. The ionic conductivity values and activation energies measured are consistent with those of bulk ceramics over the same temperature ranges.

The authors acknowledge technical assistance from Mia BleaKirby, Ryan Wilkerson, and Bonnie B. McKenzie and discussions with Dr. Frank Delnick concerning the interpretation of the impedance spectra. Critical review of this manuscript by Dr. Erik Spoerke is greatly appreciated. Initial ﬁlm synthesis efforts were developed under support from the U.S. Department of Energy’s Ofﬁce of Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability (OE) Energy Storage Program managed by Dr. Imre Gyuk (C.A., D.I., and J.I.). Synthesis optimization and characterization was supported by the Laboratory Directed Research and Development Program (LDRD) at Sandia (W.M., A.M., and J.I.). Sandia National Laboratories is a multiprogram laboratory managed and operated by Sandia Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Lockheed Martin Company, for the United States Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-AC04-94AL85000.

Figure 4. Arrhenius plot of the sodium-ion conductivity of NaZr2P3O12 thin ◦ ﬁlms measured between 25 C. An activation energy of 0.49 eV was measured for each ﬁlm.

may be in play. These inlcude increasing crystallinity and loss of ionically interacting defects in the ﬁlm, which could also be participating in the increasing conductivity. Further insight into the primary conduction pathway can be gained, however, from the semicircular, high frequency region of the curve. The capacitive component of the arc was extracted from the RC behavior, knowing the resistance of the ﬁlm. From these data, it was found that the areaand thickness-normalized capacitance of the arc is ∼9 pF/cm. The grain boundary normalized capacitance for related ionic-conducting materials has previously been shown to be ∼250 pF/cm,30 a value that is over an order of magnitude larger, which suggests that these measurements on the NZP ﬁlms are primarily sampling the bulk, transgranular, response, rather than the grain boundary response. It is noteworthy that the ionic conductivities for these thin ﬁlm samples are of the same order (∼10 −7 S/cm) as values measured for bulk ceramics of similar composition.31–34 This suggests that even with the ﬁne grain sizes present and the limited thermal budgets used compared to those for conventional bulk ceramics, bulk-like conductivity values are achievable in thin ﬁlms.

Temperature dependence of ionic conductivity is shown in Figure 4. The data was ﬁt with an Arrhenius relation:σT = σ0 exp

where σ is the measured ionic conductivity, T is the absolute temperature, σ0 is a pre-exponential factor, Ea is the activation energy, and k is Boltzmann’s constant. Regardless of processing temperature, an activation energy for ionic conduction of 0.49 eV was determined from the ﬁt. This activation energy is again similar to that measured for NZP bulk ceramics over similar temperature ranges.31–34 The preexponential factors spanned a range from 1.9 × 104 to 2.9 × 104 K S/cm for the three samples. Combined, the similar ionic conductivity and activation energy compared to bulk ceramics of the same nominal composition suggests that this chemical solution deposition method allows for high quality bulk-like materials to be prepared.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated a chemical solution deposition approach to preparing thin layers of sodium zirconium phosphate
