Abstract. Besides a continuous increase of the worldwide use of electricity, the electric energy storage technology market is a growing sector. At the latest since the German energy transition ("Energiewende") was announced, technological solutions for the storage of renewable energy have been intensively studied. Storage technologies in various forms are commercially available. A widespread technology is the electrochemical cell. Here the cost per kWh, e. g. determined by energy density, production process and cycle life, is of main interest. Commonly, an electrochemical cell consists of an anode and a cathode that are separated by an ion permeable or ion conductive membrane – the separator – as one of the main components. Many applications use polymeric separators whose pores are ﬁlled with liquid electrolyte, providing high power densities. However, problems arise from different failure mechanisms during cell operation, which can affect the integrity and functionality of these separators. In the case of excessive heating or mechanical damage, the polymeric separators become an incalculable security risk. Furthermore, the growth of metallic dendrites between the electrodes leads to unwanted short circuits. In order to minimize these risks, temperature stable and non-ﬂammable ceramic particles can be added, forming so-called composite separators. Full ceramic separators, in turn, are currently commercially used only for high-temperature operation systems, due to their comparably low ion conductivity at room temperature. However, as security and lifetime demands increase, these materials turn into focus also for future room temperature applications. Hence, growing research effort is being spent on the improvement of the ion conductivity of these ceramic solid electrolyte materials, acting as separator and electrolyte at the same time. Starting with a short overview of available separator technologies and the separator market, this review focuses on ceramic-based separators. Two prominent examples, the lithium-ion and sodium-sulfur battery, are described to show the current stage of development. New routes are presented as promising technologies for safe and long-life electrochemical storage cells. Keywords:  Separator, ceramic, composite, solid electrolyte, energy storage  PACS:  88.80.F-, 82.45.Mp, 66.30.H-, 82.45.Xy, 88.80.ff, 88.05.Ec

Electric energy has become one of the most versatile applicable form of energy since the 19th century. For instance, in 2010 about 22 EWh of electric energy were produced worldwide with an expected increase of about 2 % per year. After well-known physicists such as James C. Maxwell elaborated the theoretical basis, numberless inventions and applications concerning electric energy were pursued that represent important steps during industrialization. Prominent examples are the transmission of electromagnetic waves for communication over large distances (for instance telegraphy), the incandescent lamp, the electromotor or the microprocessor, and electric energy storage devices.

Numerous technologies for electrical energy storage are employed today, such as pumped hydro energy storage, ﬂywheel, supercapacitor, accumulator, or ﬂow battery. Two important factors drive the demand on energy storage devices: ﬁrst, the growing share of so-called renewable or alternative energy on the total energy generation. In Germany, the eschewal of nuclear power after the Fukushima accident, as well as ambitious climate objectives (“CO2 neutral” energy generation) are leading to a shift towards the use of renewable energy carriers such as solar radiation or wind. Characteristic for these power sources is their modulated generation of electricity. These variations have to be compensated by storing the produced energy to ensure a reliable energy supply. Energy storage devices can also be used to buffer momentary variations of electricity, thus ensuring the malfunction-free supply of electric energy: according to Frost & Sullivan more than 80 % of general power line disturbances in the US (about one every two days in 2012) last less than a second. This is long enough to cause failure of high-tech industrial equipment leading to estimated costs of up to 188 billion dollars each year only for US businesses. The second important driver for the development of energy storage devices is the increasing demand for energy supply in portable devices and for electromobility.

In particular regarding a decentralized and location-independent supply of electric energy, the electrochemical storage technologies are of great relevance. This is attributed to their comparable high energy densities of up to 400 Wh/kg1. In 2010, about 380 GWh of rechargable electrochemical cells were installed worldwide, with an expected compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of about 8 . Up to today, much progress has been achieved in electrochemical storage technology, both through continued improvement of speciﬁc electrochemical systems and the development and introduction of new chemistries. Nevertheless, there is no one “ideal” battery regarding cost per kWh, environmental sustainability, toxicity, recyclability, and safety that gives optimum performance under all operating conditions.

Electrochemical storage devices require three main components for operation: anode, cathode and electrolyte. However, electrochemical cells for practical use always additionally contain a separator, which in some cases can simultaneously act as the electrolyte (Fig. 1). The precise interplay of the individual components is of great importance for best device performance.

In this review, after a general introduction to the function of separators, used materials and concepts, the focus is set on ceramic separator technologies, which are gaining increasing scientiﬁc and technological importance. This review article can be regarded as an extension of the contribution by Weber et al.  in these proceedings, so that organic and composite separator materials and related technologies will be only shortly discussed.

FIGURE 1. Schematic representation of a battery with the most important components shown during the charge and discharge process. Big spheres represent the active species, as e. g. Li+, while the smaller spheres indicate the electron ﬂow.

The separator is the part of the electrochemical cell that is placed between the electrodes of opposite polarity. The term “separator” emphasizes the functionality to spatially isolate the anode from the cathode. Its function is to prevent electric contact of the electrodes, which would cause self-discharge, but simultaneously allows ion ﬂow as basis for energy delivery. The ion ﬂow can be conducted by the separator itself or by liquid electrolytes that ﬁll the pores of a separator membrane. Thus, in this regard separators can be categorized (Fig. 2) as ion conductive (solid electrolytes) or ion permeable (pervious membranes). Prominent examples of pervious separators are polymer-based porous membranes, as well as nonwovens2. So-called composite separators gained in importance during the last decade for the development of improved lithium batteries. Ion conductive separators can be subdivided into polymer, ceramic and glass solid electrolytes. This categorization (Fig. 2) is based on characterisitics such as physical properties, crystallographic features, morphology and composition, which appeared suitable for subdivision into groups with similar separator properties and production technology. Other separator categorizations can be found elsewhere.

In a more detailed view, separators should fulﬁll a set of speciﬁcations. On the one hand, they should preferably enable good ion conductivity to ensure high energy 

2 Nonwovens are deﬁned as sheets, webs or matts manufactured from ﬁbers that are bonded by adhesion, cohesion, chemical bonds, friction or heat treatment. However, paper and woven, sewn or tufted products are excluded. Commercially used nonwovens have been made of e.g. polyethylene, polytetraﬂuoroethylene, polyethylene terephthalate, polyvinylidene diﬂuoride or polytetraﬂuoroethylene. They are mainly produced by a wet-laid process, which has been described elsewhere.

FIGURE 2. Categorization scheme of the electrodes´ interspace in electrochemical cells (see text for details).

and power densities. For example, the ion conductivity of novel polymer membranes, based on poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride-co-hexaﬂuoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP) co-polymer hosts, ﬁlled with liquid electrolyte is 3.5 · 10−3 S/cm for lithium-ion battery systems at room temperature. On the other hand, separators should exhibit an insigniﬁcant electronic conductivity to prevent self-discharge. A typical value of the PVDF electronic conductivity is 10−13 S/cm.

The ion conductivity greatly depends on the porosity of the separator material and the soaking electrolyte, respectively. In the common case of pervious membranes, the ability of efﬁcient wetting with the liquid electrolyte is most important. Furthermore, for a faultless and efﬁcient cell operation, the separator should generally possess the following properties:

sufﬁcient mechanical strength or bendability, structural and dimensional stability, suppression of unwanted exchange of materials (e. g. electrode material), suppression of ion ﬂow in case of a short-circuited battery to prevent thermal runaway, and stability over the operating temperature range of the electrochemical cell. These chemical, mechanical and thermal properties of separators are crucial for electrochemical cell performance and safe operation. In dependence of the particular storage chemistry and technology, separators are exposed to different stress levels affecting the separator properties and thus cell performance. First of all, changes in environmental conditions can be mentioned, e. g. variations in temperature of up to 100 °C, as is typical for operating lead-acid-batteries in automobiles. Lithium-ion batteries can reach temperature values of up to 65 °C during discharge, whereas in case of a short-circuit a temperature increase of even more than a 100 °C within seconds can occur. For the operation of sodium-sulfur batteries or high-temperature solid oxide fuel cells, temperatures of around 300 °C and T > 500°C , respectively, are necessary for normal operation, so that high-temperature stability for the separator is required.

With regard to current events, as e. g. the Tesla S electric vehicle (EV) that cought ﬁre, the safety of battery systems has even more turned into focus. Today, combinations of different polymers, either during separator synthesis or afterwards as multilayer stacks, are used to prevent thermal runaways by improving the shutdown ability of the separator while simultaneously maintaining mechanical integrity. If the battery gets too hot during operation, the polymer with the lower melting point softens and closes the pores of the polymer membrane, thus shuting down the ion conduction and with it battery operation. Furthermore, the polymer with the higher melting point ensures stability and thus suppresses short circuits, which could cause ﬁre and explosion. However, the shutdown is often incomplete and does not block all conductivity. Thus, the cell temperature may continue to rise, which further degrades the stability of the separator. Therefore, the use of ceramic-based separators has become attractive for future applications as it has been shown that separators that contain non-ﬂammable and stable ceramic particles exceptionally enhance the mechanical stability and thus ensure the isolation of the electrodes at elevated temperatures.

However, from the production point of view, the most important properties are mechanical stability and simultaneous bendability, which are needed to let separators withstand the cell assembly process, as well as the volume changes of up to e. g. 300 % in case of operating lithium-ion batteries. Moreover, chemical inertness of the separator against electrolytes is indispensable.

In order to characterize an effective separator, different parameters can be utilized. As an example, Tab. 1 lists selected parameters regarding separators for lithium-ion batteries for electronic vehicles according to the United States Advanced Battery Consortium.

In summary, separators should be designed such that they are not the rate-limiting component in an electrochemical cell, by e. g. hindering ion ﬂow, inﬂuencing the charge/discharge rate, cell temperature, obtainable power, and cycle life of the whole

TABLE 1. Compendium of selected parameters describing separator materials that meet the requirements for electric propulsion vehicles as given by the United States Advanced Battery Consortium in 2006.

Sales Price Thickness Pore size Puncture strength Permeability (MacMullin Number) < 11 Thermal stability Tensile strength Moisture Content Shut down temperature Structural stability Chemical Stability < 5 % shrinkage after 60 min at 90 °C < 2 % offset at 1000 psi < 50 ppm 100 – 110 °C ≥ 200 °C Stable in battery for 10 years.

electrochemical cell. Hence, a thoroughly selection of separator materials and their careful processing during fabrication and cell assembly play a key role in the operation of electrochemical storage devices.

The oldest known separator materials originate from the ﬁrst experiments by A. Volta at the end of the eighteenth century. Volta demonstrated the generation of electricity from his “voltaic pile” using a cloth as separator, which was soaked in a sodium chloride solution. Later, a variety of other separator materials became known, manufactured from cedar shingles and sausage casings, cellulosic papers, wood, cellophane, nonwoven fabrics, foams or microporous polymeric membranes. The development of dedicated separators in the second half of the twentieth century was particularly driven by the emerging chemical industry. A detailed overview of separator materials and technologies for batteries is given by Arora et al. and Daniel and Besenhard. A review, dedicated to the technology of lithium-ion batteries only, has been published by Huang.

Industrially produced organic separators can be fabricated from a variety of materials, such as microporous polymer ﬁlms (e. g. polypropylene (PP), polyethylene (PE), polytetraﬂuoroethylene (PTFE)), nonwoven fabrics (commonly made from polymer ﬁbers) or naturally abundant materials. In commercial batteries, separators made from microporous polymeric ﬁlms dominate. The fabrication of these synthetic separator materials was predominantly inspired by existing technologies in the ﬁeld of plastics production . Two fundamentally different production methods, the “wet-process” and the “dry-process”, are technologically employed. In order to avoid water contamination of the electrochemical cell, careful dry procedures in dry rooms can be employed. Sufﬁcient mechanical strength of the separator itself is mandatory in order to guarantee fast and highly reproducible processing in cell pro-

duction technologies. After processing, the ﬂexible polyoleﬁn separators can either be stacked between anode and cathode or wound up together with the electrodes. As these methods are well known, this review will focus on the technology of the emerging ceramic separators instead.

Nowadays, synthetic separator materials are mostly supplied by leading chemical companies (Tab. 3). Considering the global unit shipment of separators (cf. Tab. 2), separators for the lead acid technology signiﬁcantly dominate the alternative energy storage market. The separator market is expected to grow strongly over the next decade (cf. Tab. 2), especially for mobile and stationary applications using large-sized cells. The analysis of separators for the large-scale lithium-ion storage systems segment in Europe, for example, suggests revenues of 0.12 million US$ for 2017 and a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 38.9 %. The total lithium-ion battery market in 2009 comprised 258 million m2 of separators. As reported in [33] separators presumably account for about 5 % of the cost of a lead-acid battery and about 20 % of the cost of a lithium-ion battery. Given a revenue of the total secondary lithium-ion battery market of 9.8 billion US$ in 2010, a separator market size of 2.0 billion US$ is calculated.

Since for the fabrication of separators mostly established technologies have been adopted, they can be produced in high quantity at relatively low cost. The latter aspect is an important consideration in the commercialization of batteries, because the battery industry traditionally operates with thin proﬁt margins and relatively small research budgets . According to Frost & Sullivan [31] the price for separator materials for the large-scale lithium-ion battery segment is in the range of 1 to 9 US$/m2. This price is about 1/4 to 1/10 lower than for other cell components in comparison. Nevertheless, the United States Battery Consortium [25] claimed that these costs are still at a high level due to high demand and low supply and market forces from the portable electronics and computer industries.

Commercially available separators for batteries are typically developed within spinoff activities out of existing technologies. Therefore, they were usually invented for a speciﬁc type of battery and thus are not completely optimized regarding other applications. More than 100 companies in the alternative energy market are present. Major separator suppliers are Asahi Kasei, BASF, Chemicals Corporation, Celgard LLC, Entek Membranes LLC, Evonik Industries AG, Exxon Mobil Corporation/TonenGeneral Sekiyu K.K, Hitachi Maxell Global Ltd, LG Chem Ltd., Porous Power Technologies LLC, SK energy, UBE Industries Ltd. among others [3, 10, 14]. Table 3 provides a list of products from major suppliers and specialized companies, categorized in accordance to Fig. 2.

Up to the present, commercially employed separators for lithium-ion batteries have been predominantly based on microporous polymeric membranes ﬁlled with liquid

TABLE 2. The global shipment of separators applied for alternative energy storage and their average fraction on the weight (wt%) of the electrochemical cell for different battery types. The data is taken from a study of Frost & Sullivan [3]. The last column provides the data for separator plus electrolyte to allow the comparison with solid electrolyte separators.

Battery type Lead acid batteries Sodium-Sulfur Batteries Nickel-Cadmium Batteries ZnBr Flow Batteries Vanadium Redox Batteries Lithium-Ion Batteries 

electrolytes. However, their safety, energy density, and performance have been limited. Especially for applications in lithium-ion batteries for EVs or hybrid EVs, separators with high thermal stability are needed to improve the battery abuse tolerance. As already mentioned, in the case of excessive heating and subsequent dimensional shrinking or melting, polymer separators become an incalculable security risk. Due to the markedly reduced mechanical strength at increased temperatures, hot spots emerge that lead to short circuits and ignition. Additionally, the growth of metallic dendrites between the electrodes that lead to unwanted short circuits, as well as structural changes due to chemical attack and oxidation degrade the separator. To improve the thermal stability, high melting temperature polymers, such as polyamide and polyimide, or ceramic based materials, which are characterized by a higher thermal, chemical, and dimensional stability, are suggested. Ceramic based separators for secondary batteries gained interest during the past decade as one possible way to potentially overcome these challenges and construct safe and reliable all-solid-state batteries.

In general, ceramics are non-metallic inorganic materials. However, the term is not uniquely deﬁned and comprises today also metal oxides. A more restrictive deﬁnition includes the need to exhibit a crystalline fraction of more than 30 %, water resistance and high-temperature treatment during production or use. In contrast, glass solid electrolytes exhibit a non-crystalline (amorphous) structure. In general, the synthesis of ceramics is realized by mixing ﬁne-grained raw materials with water and molding at room temperature. After drying, the resulting so-called green body is then treated at higher temperatures (sintering), which determines the characteristic properties of the resulting ceramic product. Note that glass-ceramics also belong to ceramic materials. Although they are processed in a similar way as glasses, they subsequently undergo controlled crystallization.

TABLE 3. Suppliers of different separator products categorized in accordance to Fig. 2 with SE, PM and CS denoting solid electrolytes, polymer-based membranes (comprising porous polymer membranes and nonwovens), and composite separators, respectively.

PVDF polyoleﬁn PP/PE ceramics under development water-soluble polymers

polyimide-based polymer gel processed ultra high molecular weight polyethylene, porous membrane unﬁlled or ﬁlled with metal oxide particles Al2O3 coating layer on a microporous PE separator

PET nonwovens, coated with inorganic particles polyoleﬁn separator coated with metal oxide particles ﬁberglass beta-alumina wet processed polyoleﬁn membranes ceramic-coated microporous separators PP/PE Li1+x+yAlx(Ti,Ge)2−xSiyP3−yO12 nanoporous ceramic ﬁlled with electro lyte PVDF polymer reinforced with polyester nonwovens, ﬁlled with ceramic particles glass-ceramic dry and wet processed polyoleﬁn

ceramic-coated separator PVDF combination of polyoleﬁn based material and an aramid heat resistant layer polyethylene ﬁlm grafted by an acrylic monomer PE substrate, coated with aramid or a ﬂuorine-based compound PE monolayer ﬁlms or multilayer ﬁlms polyoleﬁn ceramic particles-coated polyoleﬁne separator

Besides pottery or plumbing, today ceramics are encountered in numerous different domains due to their superior mechanical properties, corrosion and oxidation resistance, and unique thermal, electrical, optical, and magnetic properties. This material class is ﬁnding increasing industrial use for structural, electrical, and coating purposes. They ﬁnd application in e. g. cosmetics, cars as temperature sensors, as dental implant or joint prosthesis or as isolators in electronics. Moreover, they are inevitable for the chemical industry as substrates for catalysis and in machine construction as e. g. heat exchanger or ball bearings. Ceramic porous membranes have also been employed for ﬁltration applications, for instance for the removal of cadmium and arsenic from wastewater [38–40]. Furthermore, ceramic membranes can be used for electrodialysis [41] or, for instance, to recycle aqueous alkali chemicals [42] and as membranes placed between liquids in chemical reactors for electrolysis [43–46]. Moreover, they are used for catalysis [47], syngas production [48], or the production of CO-free hydrogen for proton exchange membrane fuel cells [49]. The two types of ceramic-based separators – composite and solid electrolyte separators (cf. Fig. 2) – are described in the following sections.

An option to minimize the risk of thermal damage of polymer-based separators is blending or coating with ceramic particles. These novel materials are termed as composite separators or ceramic-enhanced separators [14]. Particular advantageous properties are thermal stability and negligible shrinkage at high temperatures [34], excellent wettability and comparable high thermal conductivity. The latter promotes fast heat dissipation, preventing damage of the electrodes [14, 34, 35]. Roth et al. [22], for example, reported the safety advantage of composite separators: The separator from Evonik Degussa (SEPARION) prevented the lithium-ion cell from short circuit up to temperatures of about 220 °C, whereas a conventional polyoleﬁn separator already broke down at 165 °C. Additionally, a higher overcharge abuse tolerance was observed.

Another advantage of composite separators is their enhanced hydrophilicity that allows the use of ionic liquids as electrolytes, which are less volatile and ﬂammable in comparison with their carbonate-based counterparts [50]. In the case of gel polymer electrolytes, an enhanced ion conductivity in comparison with the separator without ceramic ﬁllers was reported [51]. This ﬁnding was assigned to the interaction of the polar surface groups of the gel electrolyte and the ceramic particles, which created additional conduction pathways for the ion transport. From a technological point of view, the most important advantage is that composite separators can still exhibit enough bendability to manufacture commercially standardized wound cells [50]. Disadvantages can be the greater separator weight due to the incorporation of heavy ceramic ﬁllers and their usually lower tensile strength in comparison to plain polymeric separators [14].

Different designs have been reported for composite separators (cf. Fig. 3). They can be produced as a multilayer system with the ceramic layer supported by a polymer membrane substrate [52]. However, a multilayer approach involves the risk of delamination

FIGURE 3. Examples of different morphologies of ceramic composite separators: (a) Field Emission Scanning  Electron  Microscopy  photograph  of  an  Al2O3/PVDF-HFP  coating  layer  on  a  microporous  PE  separator  [56].  (b)  Scheme  of  the  SEPARION  separator,  consisting  of  a  polyethylene  terephthalate  nonwoven  support  layer  with  alumina,  zirconia,  or  silica  particles  [34,57].  Reprinted  with  permission  from Chem. Mater., 24, 1107–1115 (2012). Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.

and the susceptibility to cracks. For instance, the ceramic particle layer of SEPARION (Fig. 3b) was found to shed off the nonwovens [53]. Thus, some separator producers instead incorporate ceramic particles as ﬁllers, e. g. in woven, nonwoven and porous polymer matrices, which opens a huge variety of material combinations [53–55]. Thermal shutdown of such composite separators can be provided by waxy or polymeric particles coated on the surface, which melt at the desired temperature, clog the pores and shut down the ion conductivity [50].

Instead of utilizing a porous substrate material, the ceramic particles itself can be processed in such a way that, by adding a small amount of binder, a ﬂexible separator is obtained [58, 59]. Furthermore, Berger et al. [60] suggested to ﬁll a ceramic segment matrix with e. g. polymer or ionic liquid electrolytes.

In general, the ceramic particles used as ﬁllers help to create a porous network and offer a high surface area, both of which increase the wettability. Up to the present, the ﬁllers used for commercially available composite separators are not intended to additionally serve as solid electrolyte, which means they do not contribute to the ion conductivity. As it is reported that the utilization of ion conductive particles did not enhance the overall ion conductivity of pervious separators, cheaper non-conductive particles are employed [61]. More than a decade ago, Prosini et al. [59] reported the development of a composite separator for lithium-ion batteries that utilized Al2O3, MgO2, and LiAlO2 ceramic particles as ﬁllers for a PVDF-HFP polymer matrix. Among them, Al2O3 became the most popular ﬁller [50, 54, 56, 59, 62, 63], but TiO2 [64], CaCO3 [58], SiO2 [14, 50, 54, 63, 65] and ZrO2 [50, 51, 63] have also been used. In general, besides the mentioned oxides and carbonates, also nitrides or carbides of Si, Al, Zr, Sn, Ce or Y have been suggested [50], such as SiC [63].

Due to the highly competitive environment in the energy storage market, especially for the lithium-ion battery domain, technology demarcation became an important success strategy for companies [3]. Most manufacturers have been thriving primarily due to their strong in-house R&D or by co-licensing or co-developing their technologies [3]. Up to now, there is only little information available on the marked situation and detailed processing methods of novel ceramic composite separators by industrial producers. However, synthesis routes and processing steps have been frequently patented by industry and research institutions [50, 53, 60, 63, 66–70].

According to Orendorff [35] SEPARION from Evonik Degussa (Fig. 3b) was among the ﬁrst commercially available ceramic composite separator. It consists of ultrathin polyethylene terephthalate (PET) nonwovens coated on both sides with oxide particles (Al2O3/SiO2/ZrO2) [34]. For instance, Freudenberg separators use a PET nonwovens as well, with alumina ﬁllers applied onto and into the support layer [11]. This separator is meant to be stable up to temperatures of approx. 700 °C [33]. Other representatives of the multilayer approach, with the ceramic particle layer supported by a conventional polyoleﬁn membrane, are LG Chem and Hitachi Maxell.

Porous Power Technologies, in contrast, distributes the ceramic particles throughout a PVDF membrane [26]. Different ﬁllers have also been incorporated in gel-processed Ultra High Molecular Weight Polyethylene (UHMWPE) by Entek Membranes [53] and in High-Density Polyethylene (HDPE) by Sony [54]. In contrast to the separators with ceramic coating, these blended ceramic composite separators more easily conform to the surface of the electrode, which can prevent voids. Even though composite separators are already commercially available, no sold secondary batteries are known to the authors that apply such ceramic-based separators.

Some preparation routes in the production of ceramic-enhanced separators have already been presented by Huang et al. [14]. Here, a categorization and brief summary of the different conventional production routes are given (Fig. 4). Furthermore, alternative synthesis concepts are presented. The most often used concept is the dispersion of ceramic particles in different solvents building a slurry or paste. Solvents can be e. g. polymeric binders [56, 66, 68–71] or metal alkoxides [63]. The solution can be brought onto and into the substrate by spraying [56], dip-coating [56, 71], casting [68–70], or rollcoating [50]. Knifecoating, printing or compressing are also conceivable techniques [50]. As already mentioned, porous polyoleﬁn membranes can be used as substrates [72]. However, more commonly nonwoven supporting layers are utilized [11, 26, 50]. After the dispersion is applied on the substrate, a drying/solidiﬁcation at elevated temperatures follows to evaporate the solvent and form a stable composite (see e. g. [63]). Separator manufacturers employing this or a similar route are e. g. Evonik Degussa [50], Freudenberg [11], Hitachi Maxell Ltd [67], LG Chem [68–70] and Optodot Corporation [72].

Additionally, it is worth mentioning that a biomimetic approach for composite separators has recently been tested utilizing a direct growth method [73]. The beneﬁt of this method is that the applied siliﬁcation takes place in vitro under aqueous and mild conditions, without the need of binders. This possibly more cost efﬁcient and environmentally friendly dipping process starts with the surface modiﬁcation of a PE membrane. Inspired

FIGURE 4. Scheme of common technologies for the commercial production of ceramic composite separators.

by mussel adhesion [74], an adhesive catecholamine is used to immobilize molecules containing tertiary amines on the separator surface. Subsequently, the membrane can be immersed into a monosilicic-acid-buffered solution, which results in a silica-coated separator.

In another not yet established approach, the authors investigate the applicability of a marine sponge (Porifera) formation process to separator material technology development [75]. Especially sponges of the Verongida Order possess unique nanostructured chitinous skeletons, whose porosity, huge surface area, mechanical properties and thermostability up to 360 °C can be attractive for the development of porous separator membranes. First experiments have shown successful functionalization of the chitin scaffolds of poriferan origin utilizing nanophase-ZrO2 precursors at 150 °C [76, 77] as well as ZnO at 70 °C [78]. Moreover, in vitro siliciﬁcation of these scaffolds under hydrothermal

synthesis conditions (120 °C) lead to the development of novel nanostructured composite materials [79, 80].

Another approach, as utilized by Sony and Entek, is to extend the conventional route for the synthesis of porous separators [14, 53, 54, 81]. Ceramic particles or ﬁbers are simply added to the raw material before it undergoes the well-known wet process (phase inversion process) or gel process. In the process applied by Sony, a mixture of PE resin, mineral oil and alumina particles are extruded into a sheet at the melting point of the polymer. Subsequently, by means of volatile solvents, the oil is extracted, leaving a porous structure behind. Ceramic particles added to a polymeric binder or polymer electrolyte can be also processed in other ways. The mixture can be applied directly on an electrode by e. g. hot lamination [59], spraying [65] or a solution casting technique [51]. Except for the hot lamination route, a drying step is necessary, which can be followed by curing [65]. Moreover, a self standing separator membrane can be obtained by hot rolling [58].

Similarly, it has recently been shown that adding silica nanoparticles facilitates the porosity of cellulose nanoﬁber paper separators [82]. The particles are dispersed in water and mixed with the cellulose nanoﬁber suspension. Subsequently, the suspension is poured onto a ﬁlter that is positioned onto a funnel, vacuum ﬁltered and dried.

Instead of blending ceramic nanoparticles in organic matrices, it has also been suggested to produce a ceramic nanoﬁber membrane, which can be ﬁlled with electrolyte [83]. Such inorganic membrane can be produced on an industrial scale by electrospinning. An organoelement polymer precursor solution is injected from a needle in the presence of an electric ﬁeld, which is employed to overcome the surface tension of the liquid [84]. Fibers with diameters ranging from 10 nm to about 1 µm can be extracted. The amorphous network is then converted to a ceramic by annealing at temperatures of 400 °C to 1200 °C. Indeed, electrospinning has been recently used for the ﬁrst time to produce a composite separator for lithium-ion batteries by synchronous electrospinning of PVDF homopolymer and a SiO2 sol [85].

Even though the risk of a thermal damage is signiﬁcantly reduced by composite ceramic separators, a high-temperature use is still limited by the melting point of the organic matrix. Furthermore, some embodiments show reduced ion conductivity in comparison to their counterparts without ﬁllers. Both drawbacks can be overcome by the use of solid electrolyte separators. In the following paragraphs, ceramic solid electrolytes are discussed, whereas many aspects such as advantages and disadvantages referring to their use as separator also hold for glass solid electrolytes.

In the case of solid electrolytes, as already mentioned, the separator provides both the isolation of the electrodes and the ion conductivity without the need of a liquid electrolyte. Thus ceramic separators can be used to build an all-solid-state battery. Therefor, adequate ion conductance and at the same time a high mechanical stability

of the supposed brittle material are required. Solid electrolyte ceramic materials for different kinds of ions can be selected from various material classes discussed below. The advantages of solid electrolytes are that they cannot leak, boil, freeze, ignite or cause side reactions as conventionally used carbonate-based electrolytes. They are inert against strong bases and acids as well as oxidizing agents, in contrast to polymer membranes [40, 41], which enables the use in demanding environments and also opens the door for the use of new, high-capacity electrode materials. For instance, in the case of lithium-ion batteries, a ceramic separator allows for the utilization of metallic lithium as anode material, which would essentially increase the energy density [86]. Furthermore, metal-air batteries [87, 88], which are becoming especially important for EVs, as well as sea water batteries [89] require solid electrolytes to block the water molecules and surrounding water, respectively, in order to prevent the reaction with the metal anode. Moreover, ceramic separators provide selective ion migration, do not show phase transitions at ambient temperatures [90, 91] and cause only negligible self-discharge [92]. As the ion ﬂow is not associated to pores, the resistance is not increased during cycle life by clogging of the pores as observed for lithium-ion cells with polyoleﬁn separators [93]. Therefore, rechargeable batteries with ceramic separators are usually characterized by excellent storage and cycle stabilities [94–96].

Another advantage from a technical point of view is that there is no need for the timeconsuming, electrolyte-ﬁlling step during battery assembly [32]. Furthermore, simpliﬁed battery structures can be designed: In the case of cell stacks, all batteries can be mounted in one container, instead of connecting individual containers as necessary for the use of liquid electrolytes [87]. However, the rigid nature of ceramics poses problems to cell winding and assembly. It also leads to stress during charge and discharge due to the associated volume change of the electrodes, which can result in cracking of the separator and in delamination of the sintered electrode layers. However, it should be noted that this issue is less relevant for intercalation electrodes, as they do not cause large volume changes [87]. Normally, the thickness of ceramic separators is determined by the compromise between a sufﬁcient mechanical strength and high ion conductivity. One way to avoid low conductivities due to high separator thickness could be to utilize a stacked structure: Schilm et al. [97] suggested a separator composed of a dense ion-conducting layer covered by a porous ceramic ﬁlm that is immersed in a liquid electrolyte. This structure would be thicker and more stable than single-layered ones, while still providing sufﬁcient ion conductivity. However, these multilayer separators would also include the disadvantages connected to liquid electrolytes.

Further disadvantages of ceramic separators are the reduced electrode/electrolyte contact area and the overall lower ion conductivity at room temperature in comparison to liquid electrolytes. However, e. g. in the case of lithium ions, a ceramic material (Li10GeP2S12) with a conductivity comparable to conventional organic electrolytes (10−2 S/cm) has been found [98]. Additionally, a strategy to avoid the high-resistance problem of the electrode/solid electrolyte interface and simultaneously keep the high temperature stability is to use an ionic liquid as wetting agent, which has been already demonstrated by Kim et al. [99].

Fast ion conduction in solids at ambient temperatures was ﬁrst found at the beginning of the last century in α-AgI [100]. Today, there is a broad variety of single-crystalline, polycrystalline and amorphous materials to choose from, which most commonly belong to the group of oxides (e. g. β -Al2O3 [19, 101]), sulﬁdes (e. g. Li10GeP2S12 [98]), and phosphates (e. g. LiZr2P3O12 [86]). Materials that conduct monoand divalent ions such as Ag+ [102], Na+ [19], Li+ [87, 103], K+ [104], H3O+ [105], Tl+ [106], NH+ 4 [107], Cu+ [108], F− [109], OH− [110], O2− [105, 111], Ca2+, Sr2+ , Ba2+, Zn2+, Cd2+, Pb2+, and Hg2+ [112], but also triand tetravalent ions as Al3+, Zr4+, Hf4+, Ti4+, Ge4+, and Sn4+ [113, 114] have been found. Solid electrolytes can be roughly divided into two-dimensional layered, three dimensional network, and vitreous structures [92]. Most materials show sufﬁcient conductivity only at elevated temperatures, which still limits their commercialization. However, on-going research, especially on lithium-ion batteries, have spawned many promising materials that may overcome this issue in future. Recently, an all-in-one all-solid-state battery was realized utilizing a roomtemperature ion-conducting perovskite SrTiO3 [115].

In principle, ion conductivity occurs via the motion of point defects (e. g. interstitial sites or vacancies). Their creation and movement requires energy, so the conductivity follows the Arrhenius law with activation energies in the range of 0.25 eV to 1 eV [19]. Therefore, ceramic separators operate well at elevated temperatures. One way to improve the conductivity at room temperature is the increase of defect density, for instance by ion substitution [92]. The activation energy for ion conduction can be controlled by the lattice parameters [92], whereas grain boundaries can inﬂuence the resistance signiﬁcantly [92]. Thus, the ion conductivity of the ceramic separator is determined by the volume resistivity, which is in general anisotropic for the crystalline phase, and the resistance at the grain boundaries or surfaces.

Especially glass-ceramic materials can be in general considered suitable systems for separator technology. The advantage of a glass-ceramic is its reduced porosity, as the crystallites are connected through glass, which increases the ion conductivity and suppresses undesirable gas or liquid transport. Furthermore, these materials provide high variability of chemical composition and thus tunability of material properties.

Some prominent examples of solid electrolytes acting as separator materials are outlined for the lithium-ion and sodium-sulfur battery type, respectively.

Materials for Lithium-Ion Batteries. Research on solid electrolytes has been pushed by the need for safer lithium-ion batteries. Furthermore, these materials are expected to play an important role in developing batteries with high-energy density. An thorough review on the development of solid electrolytes and their application as separator for all-solid-state lithium-ion batteries has been published by Takada [87]. Li+-conducting compounds have been categorized into LiI and Li3N-related, NaSICON-type (Na Super Ionic CONductor), γ-Li3PO4-type, perovskite-type, garnet-type, glassy and crystalline sulﬁdes [87]. In the following paragraphs, only the most important or promising material classes are selected for discussion, to provide a reasonable overview of this rapidly evolving ﬁeld.

FIGURE 5. Example of a commercial lithium-ion conducting NaSICON-type ceramic separator (OHARA LICGCTM). The differently shaded regions in the scanning electron microscope image (BSE mode) belong to different crystal phases of the ceramic: Li1+xAlxGeyTi2−x−yP3O12, Li1+x+3zAlx(Ge,Ti)2−x(SizPO4)3 and AlPO4 (courtesy of OHARA).

The NaSICON-type material class is characterized by high ion conductivities and mechanical stability. Its ion conductivity strongly correlates with the size of the threedimensional network structure, as an increasing unit cell volume opens the conduction channels [116]. NaSICON-type compounds have the general formula AxBy(PO4)3, with A denoting an alkali metal ion and B being a multivalent metal ion. A prominent Na+conducting compound is Na3Zr2Si2PO12, but there are also Li+-conducting materials with A = Li and B = Ti, Zr, Ge, Hf [117]. The highest conductivity has been observed so far for Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4) (10−4 S/cm at room temperature) [118]. Up to now, commercially available ceramic separators belong to this class (Fig. 5).

Another class is the perovskite (ABO3)-type Li+ conductor, which shows a strong correlation between the lattice size and ion conductivity as well [87]. Even though e. g. [(Li1/2La1/2)1−xSrx]TiO3 exhibits a high conductivity of 10−3 S/cm [119], perovskitetype compounds can hardly be applied for high-energy-density batteries, as they are unstable in contact with metallic lithium electrodes. Elemental lithium will rapidly undergo insertion and consequently reduce Ti4+ to Ti3+, resulting in high electronic conductivities [117]. To suppress this reaction, titanium can be substituted by tantalum forming La1/3−xLi3xTaO3 [120]. However, another disadvantage, which is true for both NaSICON and perovskite-like ion conductors, is the high grain boundary resistance [121].

More recently developed oxide electrolytes have garnet-type structures (e. g. Li5La3M2O12 with M = Nb, Ta or Li6ALa2M2O12 with A = Ca, Sr, Ba; M = Nb, Ta [117]). They show a small grain boundary resistance and are stable against lithium as anode material [122]. However, their ion conductivities are smaller compared to NaSICON and perovskite structures [87]. The most promising materials are vitreous or crystalline sulﬁdes. The so-called thioLiSICONs, generally described by the formula LixM1−yM 48) yS4 (M = Si, Ge, and M’= P, Al, Zn, Ga) [123], have shown the highest reported ion conductivities. The high polarizability of sulﬁde anions weakens their interaction with Li+, which promotes fast ion transport [87]. Recently, Kamaya et al. reported a conductivity of 1.2 · 10−2 S/cm

for Li10GeP2S12 [98]. Further advantages are the low grain-boundary resistance and the absence of oxidizable transition metal elements. However, the weak attraction to lithium ions will also limit the ion transport when the separator is combined with a conventional LiCoO2 cathode: the lithium ion concentration on the electrolyte side will be lowered in equilibrium due to the different electrochemical potential. Thus, a less conductive interface layer is formed [124]. A simple way to suppress the formation of a lithium depleted space-charge layer is to apply an oxide electrolyte buffer layer [125] or, more cost efﬁcient, an aluminum-substituted LiCoO2 cathode [126].

In the sodium-sulfur technology, only inorganic ceramic separators such as sodium alumina (general formula (Na2O)1+xAl2O3) or NaSICON-type as well as glass-ceramic (e. g. Na3PS4) or glass separators can be used due to the high operation temperatures well above 285 °C and the intense reaction between sodium and sulfur at these temperatures [19, 127, 128]. The Na+-conducting ceramic separators, such as sodium containing β or β ”-alumina, are well known and ﬁnd application as conventionally tube-shaped solid electrolytes in high-temperature batteries since the 1980ies [129] (Fig. 6). The β and β ”-alumina are non-stoichiometric compounds with hexagonal P63/mmc (β -alumina) [130, 131] and rhombohedral R¯3m (β ”-alumina) [132, 133] crystal structures, respectively. These structures have a twodimensional character. They comprise alternating, closely packed Al-O slabs (spinel type blocks) and loosely packed layers. A spinel block is bonded to two adjacent spinel blocks via conduction slabs. β and β ”-alumina compounds differ in the stoichiometry and stacking sequence of oxygen ions across the conduction layer. In these layers, the intercalated Na+-ions can migrate via existing vacancies generated by the nonstoichiometry of the overall compound [134] in two dimensions along the paths of the hexagonal lattice [135]. Hence, the non-stoichiometry of the chemical compound and thus the crystal structure are decisive for the ion transport. Due to the two-dimensional conductivity, the geometry of the material has an effect on the ion conductivity. Hence, planar alignments have higher ion conductivities than tubular ones [136].

FIGURE 6.  In a sodium-sulfur battery, Na+-conducting β -Al2O3 is used as separator and electrolyte. In  (a) tube-shaped sintered ceramics are depicted (courtesy of Ionotec Ltd). The polycrystalline microstructure  is  shown  in  (b),  whereas  the  X-ray  diffraction  pattern  (c)  proves  the  crystallinity  as  well  as  the  arbitrary orientation distribution of the crystallites (Debye-Scherrer geometry, Mo-Kα  radiation, Bruker  D8 Quest). (b) is reproduced by permission of the International Journal of Applied Ceramic Technology:  Oshima, T., Kajita, M. and Okuno, A., 1.3, 269–276 (2004).

A disadvantage of β -alumina is the requirement of higher temperatures to achieve an adequate ion conductivity. The ion conductivity of the related phase, the β ”-alumina,

is higher. Therefore, this phase is preferred for application in batteries. However, from the technological point of view, the synthesis of a pure β ”-phase requires well deﬁned thermal processing: The β ”-alumina forms at temperatures of 1100 °C but again transforms to the unfavorable β -alumina at 1550 °C [127]. Thus, a pure β ”-phase is usually not obtained. Therefore, doping with Li2O or MgO (Li+, Mg2+) [19] is necessary to stabilize the β ”-phase. This results in compositions of Na1.67Al10.67Li0.33O17 and Na1.67Al10.33Mg0.67O17 [19]. It is supposed that a selective occupation of the Al3+ sites in selected polyhedra play a crucial role for phase stabilization [137]. Using dedicated synthesis methods operating at temperatures of 1600 °C, a raw material with a β ”-Al2O3 fraction up to 90 % can be achieved [127]. Therefore, the precise control of the composition and the synthesis process are critical to guarantee high-quality β ”-alumina material. In addition to stabilization, doping can also improve ion conduction. Moreover, there are so-called cooperative effects that cause multiple Na+-ion transport (Na+-ion pairs or Na+-clusters), which is energetically more favorable in comparison to single-ion transport [138]. In literature, a maximum conductivity of 3.6· 10−1 S/cm for polycrystalline and 1 S/cm for single crystalline materials at 300 °C is reported [139]. At ambient conditions, single crystals still exhibit an ion condcutivity of 1.4− 4.0· 10−2 S/cm, while the commercially available polycrystalline β ”-Al2O3 manufactured by Ionotec is characterized by 1.7· 10−3 S/cm [140]. In general, single crystalline materials exhibit higher conductivity (up to 5 times at 300 °C) than polycrystalline ones, which is attributed to the anisotropy of Na+ conduction and the absence of grain boundaries [134, 141].

The limitation of ion migration due to the anisotropic conduction mechanism of β Al2O3 can be overcome by materials with isotropic ion transport. In the 1970ies, for the purpose of obtaining an isotropic structure, Goodenough & Hong designed the threedimensional network structure with a suitable tunnel size for Na+ migration, and named the materials Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 with 0 < x < 3 Na Super Ionic CONductor [2, 142]. These Na+ conductors exhibit comparably high conductivities (10−3 − 10−1 S/cm) at room temperature, which are in the range of liquid electrolytes [92]. Therefore, they are in the focus of current research – even though in an early stage of development [19]. Due to the wide homogeneity range, numerous possibilities for element substitution exist and thus a manifold of possible compositions with tailored properties [143]. A review of NaSICON based compounds was published by Anantharamulu et al. in 2011 [144]. To the best of our knowledge, no battery application of Na+-conducting ceramic materials with sufﬁcient conductivity at room-temperature exists. A collection of Na+-conducting glasses (σ ∼ 10−4 S/cm at 300 °C) was published by Hunter et al. [145]. Moreover, Banks et al. [146] reported both compounds Na3YSi3O9 and Na5YSi4O12 to show conductivities in the order of 10−4 S/cm at 250 °C in glass and at 280 °C in glass-ceramic phases. Another family of glass-ceramics are the so-called NaRPSI glass-ceramics with the formula Na3+3x−yR1−xPySi3−yO9, R being a rare earth element, x < 0.6, and y < 0.5 [147]. After synthesis, these compounds can reach Na+ conductivities in the order of 2.2· 10−5 − 1.3· 10−1 S/cm at 300 °C. By substitution (changes of stoichiometry) and crystallization, their properties can be tuned.

The mentioned as well as further typical solid electrolyte materials for sodium-sulfur batteries and their condcutivities are summarized in [141, 148].

For ceramic separator production, proven, established and available technologies are used which are state-of-the-art. Nevertheless, the automation in the fabrication of highquality ceramics for cost reduction is still a demand, to compete with more easily processable and thus lower cost polymer-based separators [117]. Furthermore, for commercialization, an absolutely reliable material and thus production route is most important. Besides industrially usable melting and milling equipment, ﬁlm casting plants and sinter plants can be used. Since the fabrication of ceramic separators is similar as for other ceramics, the technological challenges are similar. Due to the high synthesis temperatures employed, loss of material by evaporation is possible. A subsequent grinding procedure requires inert atmospheres due to a strong hygroscopicity and thus susceptibility to moisture of ceramics. Ceramic powders allow realizing different shapes, such as monolithic ﬂat plate, tubular, or honey-comb geometries [149]. Curved shapes can be achieved e. g. by means of a ﬁxation prevention sheet and a dedicated sintering tool [150]. There exist several pending patents of solid-electrolyte separators of the Ceramatec, Inc. company [151–154] which are meant to be used at temperatures of about 170 °C and are inert to e. g. several sulfur compounds, aqueous or alcoholic solutions.

The market for composite or, in particular, ceramic separators is not yet mature but an emerging niche. For example, Ionotec Ltd. offers a separator that according to its speciﬁcations can be adopted to severals mobile species (Na+, K+, Ag+, Pb2+, Sr2+, Ba2+ or Gd3+) [140]. In the ﬁeld of glass-ceramic manufacturing, companies such as Schott AG are able to implement glass-powder production on large-scale. Furthermore, powder processing for the production of solid electrolytes in general can be realized by companies such as Kerafol GmbH, H. C. Starck or Ceramtec. The whole manufacturing process as well as ongoing research is in the focus of the Fraunhofer Institute for Ceramic Technologies and Systems (IKTS), which is conducting fundamental research in cooperation with German industry. In the following, the lithium-ion and sodium-sulfur battery technology are described in more detail.

Lithium-Ion Battery. The production methods of lithium-ion conducting ceramic separators and their application in batteries are still under development by industry and scientiﬁc institutions [86, 97, 149, 155–159]. Separator samples, based on NaSICONtype materials, can be ordered from e. g. OHARA and Ceramatec. The main reason given by OHARA for the still pending commercialization is the polishing process, which is important to ensure good contact with the electrodes [160]. It requires a minimum diameter of the brittle separator. As a consequence, the resulting thickness is normally too high to obtain convenient conductivities [156, 160].

The production processes of ceramic separators can be generally divided into two routes: direct casting of the melt (Fig. 7) and powder processing. The conventional commercial process is to melt the inorganic raw materials (e. g. in a platinum crucible at 1500 °C [156]) and form a dense solid by direct casting. Subsequently, the received, commonly planar material can be crystallized by suitable temperature treatment (e. g. at 950 °C for 12 h [156]). As already mentioned, mechanical processing steps such as polishing follow the crystallization step, to ensure a smooth separator surface.

Recently, Schott AG suggested producing a highly ion conductive glass-ceramic

FIGURE 7. Processing steps for the production of lithium-ion conducting ceramic separators, as applied by OHARA. The embedded images are courtesy of OHARA and belong to the production of LICGCTM.

without titanium or sulfur addition, as it would be more stable against reduction and oxidation [86]. Therefore, they melted the raw material (SiO2, Al2O3, Na2O4, etc. ), heat molded it and subsequently cooled it quickly by twin-roller quenching [161] to prevent devitriﬁcation. Finally, the conductivity of the material was enhanced substituting the alkali ions in a lithium nitrate bath at 340 °C.

Today, however, the trend is towards powder technology as it is cheaper and allows simple shaping, which is underlined by patents published in 2013 [97, 149, 155]. Three dimensional ion conductors, as e. g. NaSICON-type and sulﬁde compounds, are suitable for producing highly conductive separators from powders. There is a variety of ways to process the inorganic powders. Ceramatec patented the production of dense ceramic, which is hermetic to gas, by milling calcined precursors, shaping of a green form by e. g. tape casting, and subsequent sintering [149]. Alternatively, they state, the separator may be produced by PVD, CVD, or plasma spraying deposition upon a support.

Schilm et al. [97], in contrast, suggested to ﬁrstly produce ﬂakes of Li+ conducting material by melting the respective mixed raw material (Li2O, Al2O3, TiO2, SiO2, P2O5) in a Al2O3 crucible at 1300 – 1400 °C, and molding it into distilled water. The ﬂakes are milled up to the micrometer range by vibratory disc milling, and subsequent planetary ball milling. Afterwards, the powder is cold pressed and sintered. Another procedure, similar to the hot rolling route presented for composite separators, was patented by OHARA [155]. Opposed to the aforementioned methods, binders and plasticizers are added to the inorganic powders. Sheets are formed e. g. by the calendaring or doctor blade method. Due to the organic components, the sheets are ﬂexible and can be cut in arbitrary shape. To enhance the minuteness after ﬁring, the sheets can then undergo roll pressing. Afterwards, the sheets are sintered with at least one side covered with a setter layer. During ﬁring, gasiﬁed residual organic components escape through the edges. Thus, they leave less pores in the ion conduction direction, which reduces moisture permeation.

The further processing of the material depends on the separator and electrode material. For instance, in the case of oxides, a high temperature treatment of the separatorelectrode stack to ensure good contact could be detrimental, due to the already discussed

possible interdiffusion between the materials. In this case, evaporation deposition of the electrode e. g. by sputtering can be applied [156, 162].

Sodium-Sulfur Battery. For long-term, large-scale energy storage applications in the 100 MW range, there exist several promising technologies on a commercial scale [3, 128]. Among them, the sodium-sulfur battery technology accounts for the largest market share and is therefore of global interest. The most expensive and challenging component is the separator [101].

Ford Motor Company ﬁrst developed the sodium-sulfur battery in the 1960s [163]. This was possible due to the afore discovered compound NaAl11O17 (β -alumina), which shows high conductivity for sodium ions at the operating temperature of 300 °C [164]. It was used by Ford for EV’s in the 1990s. NGK Insulators Ltd. from Japan developed the β -alumina-based ceramic electrolytes and further improved the concept for commercialization as an advanced energy-storage technology in cooperation with Tokyo Electric Power Company (TEPCO) [6, 134]. In April 2003, NGK launched production on a commercial scale [129]. Since 2012, in the consortium BaSta [165], ﬁnanced by the The Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation, Building and Nuclear Safety (Germany), a low-temperature sodium-sulfur battery is being developed.

A detailed description of the synthesis of β -alumina is provided in [19, 101, 134]. Raw powders (particle sizes in the order of 50 – 500 µm) of β -alumina can be synthesized via various processes such as conventional solid-state reaction, sol-gel, coprecipitation, spray-freeze/freeze-drying, ﬂame-spray pyrolysis, microwave heating or mechano-chemical processing. The applied temperatures of more than 1600 °C for the solid-state calcination are responsible for unwanted material evaporation losses and thus changes in phase content, crystal structure and morphology of the powders. Thus, low temperature processes are employed.

In a so-called zetaor double-zeta process, β -alumina, Na2CO3, MgO, Li2CO3, similar precursors, or alternatively cheap abundant raw materials from the hydroxyl alumina group, such as boehmite and bayerite [166], are mixed together and ball-milled, calcinated, molded and ﬁnally sintered (Fig. 8). NGK modiﬁed this process in such a way that no calcination was employed to obtain β -alumina powder [129]. The raw materials are ﬁrst mixed and milled. After granulation, the green product is formed. The resulting tube is then ﬁred, whereby the transition from α-alumina to β -alumina takes place.

The high process temperatures can be overcome by solution-based chemical methods that at the same time can produce more homogenous powders, as was shown by employing the double-zeta powder process (cf. Fig. 8) together with spray drying [101]. For the powder process the zeta-lithium alumina (Li2O·5 Al2O3) and zeta-sodium alumina (Na2O·5 Al2O5) were used as precursors. First, they are mixed and the resulting green powders are made as homogeneous as possible by the double-zeta process before the forming starts. Subsequently, the green tubes were produced by spray dried powders and an isostatic pressing forming technique at a pressure of 2.5 · 103 kg/cm2. Finally, they were sintered at temperatures of 1580 – 1650 °C resulting in ceramic tubes with a typical wall thickness of 1.3 mm, sodium ion conductivity of 0.4 S/cm at 350 °C, a ring compression strength of 320 MPa and a density of 3.23 g/cm3 [129].

The fabrication of one-end closed, tube-shaped β -alumina separators is another major

FIGURE 8. Schematic illustration of the double-zeta process employed at the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (after [167]).

challenge, since a dense, ﬁne-grained, homogenous and mechanically stable microstructure is required. Here, strength and fabricability issues limit practical designs to cylindrical shapes [129]. In particular, the orientation distribution of the β ”-alumina particles has to be controlled, so that they do not increase the length of the sodium ion diffusion path and thus the ion resistivity [129]. Several techniques such as isostatic pressing, electrophoretic deposition (EPD, used by Ionotec Ltd. [12]), extrusion, and others are employed and summarized elsewhere [101, 168]. In the EPD process, individual particles of the powder are dissolved in an organic liquid. This solution is placed between two electrodes. At one electrode, the particles will be charged. The charged particles then move to the second electrode due to an applied electric ﬁeld. The shape of the second electrode determines the shape of the end product [168]. Even though uniform green tubes can be produced with EPD, due to the difﬁcult removal from the inserted mandrel, extrusion and isostatic pressing are economically more attractive [101]. Finally, the green body is densiﬁed by sintering, whith the concomitant phase transformation to β ”-alumina.

By adding ZrO2, the mechanical strength of the resulting tube is increased [169, 170]. A high wettability of the separator material by the liquid sodium is mandatory for

operation. This can be reached by different pretreatments, such as coating porous carbon, summarized in [101], since the wettability of pristine β ”-alumina below 300 °C is rather poor [171].

For NaSICON, modiﬁed production processes are employed. Commonly, NaSICON is synthesized via a sol-gel-route or a conventional solid-state method. Stoichiometric mixed powders are treated with established ceramic techniques (pressing, sintering) and processed to molded paddings [143, 172–174]. A sinter temperature of 1200 °C is applied, which leads to a speciﬁc conductivity of up to 1 · 10−2 S/cm at ambient conditions [175–177], thus allowing the development of low-temperature sodium-sulfur batteries [165].

Another production route for NaSICON-like glass-ceramics combines glass melting with subsequent quenching to a glass frit [19]. A challenge in this process is the inhomogeneous melt, resulting in an inhomogeneous microstructure when the transition from the glass to a glass-ceramic takes place, accompanied by low conductivities [147].

Glass-ceramic materials with sufﬁcient conductivity are mostly unstable against moisture or they are sensitive to oxidation. Therefore, these glasses must be processed completely under inert conditions.

Recently, a Na+ ion conductor, Na3PS4, was reported which contained a hightemperature phase that was stabilized by crystallization from the glassy state [148]. At ambient temperature, a conductivity of more than 10−4 S/cm was achieved, which enabled to realize an all-solid-state sodium battery. This ortho-thiophosphate Na3PS4 glass was prepared by a mechanochemical technique using ball-milling. The starting mixture of 75 mol% Na2S and 25 mol% P2S5 was hand-ground and the then placed into a zirconia (ZrO2) vessel with ZrO2 balls. The mechanochemical reaction was performed for 20 h to form Na3PS4 glass powders. A conventional uniaxial cold press was employed to prepare a pellet that was 1–1.5 mm thick. To obtain glass-ceramics with different crystallite sizes, the glass pellets were crystallized by heating at 270 °C in an electric furnace. All the processes were performed in a dry air atmosphere. In the ﬁnal product, a remaining glass-component was observed as well as the cubic phase of Na3PS4. These materials overcome the disadvantages of, for instance, oxide Na+ ion conductors, including β -alumina, that generally require high-temperature sintering to reduce their grain-boundary resistance. As sintering is unnecessary for Na3PS4, deterioration of the electrode–electrolyte interface due to undesirable side reactions is avoided [148].

In this review, we presented a categorization of available separators and separator technologies for electrochemical storage cells. In particular, we offered an insight into the research and development of ceramic-based separators. Up to the present, reviews focused on particular classes of electrochemical cells or ceramic materials. Here we summarized existing technologies to encourage further research, especially for nextgeneration all-solid-state storage devices. To overcome the indicated challenges, the consideration of recently disclosed patents and literature, also comprising biomimetic approaches, can be beneﬁcial.

Two categories of ceramic-based separators have been outlined: composite and ceramic solid electrolyte separators. Several advantages related to these classes were pointed out, e. g. the high thermal and mechanical stability, providing safer devices with longer lifetime. In the case of composite separators, i. e. porous membranes blended with ceramic ﬁllers, the ceramic material also enhances the wettability with liquid electrolytes and thus the conductivity. Conversely, ion conduction of ceramic solid electrolytes occurs via diffusion paths within the material itself, which usually results in lower conductivities compared to liquid electrolytes at room temperature. Furthermore, the rigidity of ceramic materials complicates industrial processing. However, as ceramic solid electrolyte separators allow employing a wide spectrum of solid and even liquid or gaseous electrodes for new battery types, intense research is spent on these and other challenges (e. g. price, reproducibility).

Within the growing separator market, ceramic-based separators are expected to be of particular importance for EVs, mobile devices and stationary storage applications. Taking the number of released patents into account, one can see that much effort is spend on in-house R&D. Yet, the ceramic-based separator market is not mature but an emerging niche. Two technologies, which have been subject to most preliminary work in this area, the lithium-ion as well as sodium-sulfur technology, were presented to exemplify the current state of development.

This work has been ﬁnancially supported by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) within the joint research project "CryPhysConcept” (03EK3029A), and the Federal Ministry for Environment, Nature Conservation, Building and Nuclear Safety within the joint research project “BaSta” (0325563D) and the SAB within the project “PyroConvert” (100109976). We would like to thank the editors of the Journal of The Electrochemical Society and Journal of Applied Crystallography for the permission to reproduce ﬁgures for this manuscript.

