Universal dielectric response (UDR) and nearly constant loss (NCL) dispersive regimes have been investigated in fast ion conductors with perovskite and NASICON structure by using NMR and impedance spectroscopy In this study, the electrical behavior of La0.5Li0.5TiO3 (LLTO-05) perovskite and Li1.2Ti1.8Al0.2(PO4)3 (IS). (LTAP0-02) NASICON compounds was investigated. In both systems a three-dimensional network of conduction paths is present. In the Li-rich LLTO-05 sample, lithium and La are randomly distributed on A-sites of perovskites, but in LTAP0-02 Li and cation vacancies are preferentially disposed at M1 and M2 sites. In perovskite compounds, local motions produced inside unit cells are responsible for the large ‘‘near constant loss’’ regime detected at low temperatures, however, in the case of NASICON compounds, local motions not participating in long-range charge transport were not detected. In both analyzed systems long-range correlated motions are responsible for dc-conductivity values of ceramic grains near 10 3 S cm 1 at room temperature, indicating that low-temperature local motions, producing large NCL contribution, are not required to achieve the highest ionic conductivities.

All solid-state battery is one of the main targets for microelectronic integration and storage of energy. Due to the increasing interest in solid electrolytes, a large eﬀort for understanding long-range limiting reasons for Li mobility is now under progress. At present, the study of ion motion mechanisms has many points that still deserve study in fast ion conductors.1

In many cases, the variation of the real part of the conductivity as a function of frequency, denoted ‘‘Universal Dielectric Response’’ (UDR) by Jonscher, displays a static (DC) and a characteristic AC dispersive part.2 At suﬃcient low temperatures, a new phenomenon, called ‘‘nearly constant loss’’ (NCL), was reported by Nowick in 1981.3 This regime was characterized by a linear or almost linear frequency dependence of the AC conductivity (i.e. constant or nearly constant dielectric loss function e00(o)) and a weak temperature variation.3,4 At low temperatures, NCL has been observed in a broad number of liquids, glasses and crystalline solids, suggesting the existence of a universal response that has not been recognized.5 The NCL behaviour has also been observed in the frequency range extending from 1 MHz up to GHz.

The simultaneous presence of UDR and NCL makes the possible connection between both regimes one interesting point to be debated in solid electrolytes. Some authors believe that there does not exist any relation,6–9 but others claim that the correlation between the NCL regime and DC-conductivity is mandatory.10,11 In general, it has been shown that normalized 0T) plots often match both electric UDR (s0(o)/sdc and NCL responses.12 In this analysis, some authors have found that the UDR/NCL crossover frequency is temperature dependent with activation energy lower than that of DC-conductivity.13 In this case, the crossover activation energy has been associated with the potential energy barrier that ions have to overcome to abandon their structural sites. This conclusion suggests that NCL contribution does not go in parallel with UDR, but UDR is a consequence of NCL at increasing temperatures.14

Ngai’s coupling model predicts slope changes when going from UDR to NCL regimes. In this context, the NCL cannot work in parallel with the UDR response. However, the series NCL contribution can only be considered as a first approach, as no analytical expressions are available to describe the evolution from NCL to hopping contribution.15 Macdonald reported the best fittings when using parallel circuit arrangements to describe the electric response. The absence of an explicit model equation for the transition from NCL to UDR behaviour, means that the ‘‘extended Jonscher expression’’ has often be used to describe conductivity in complex non-linear least square (CNLS) fittings. The analysis of published papers related to NCL phenomena suggests that the strength of the NCL must be related to the network polarizability and/or mobile ions concentration,16,17 so that diﬀerent NCL behaviours can be expected in diﬀerent crystalline structures.

In this paper, a parallel NMR and broad-band conductivity study has been performed on two of the best crystalline Li conductors: La0.5Li0.5TiO3 perovskites and Li1.2Ti1.8Al0.2(PO4)3 NASICON compounds, with rhombohedral structure (S.G R-3c) displaying ion conductivities close to 10 3 S cm 1 at 300 K. In this work, important diﬀerences have been detected in the low temperature NCL contribution of the samples, aﬀording new insights into the NCL regime and its possible relation to the diﬀusion hopping processes.

The polycrystalline Li0.5La0.5TiO3 sample was prepared by a solid state reaction from stoichiometric mixtures of high purity LiOHH2O, La2O3 and TiO2.18 Possible Li losses produced during calcinations were minimized using slow heating rates (11 min 1). Pellets of the reacted powder were fired at 1375 K in air for 12 h; afterwards, samples were re-grounded in an agate mortar, compacted again and re-fired in air at 1475 K for 12 h. From this temperature, the samples were quenched into liquid nitrogen.

The NASICON Li1.2Ti1.8Al0.2(PO4)3 sample was prepared by heating at 1225 K stoichiometric mixtures of Li2CO3 (Z99%), TiO2 (99%), Al2O3 (99.99%), and (NH4)2HPO4 (Z99%).19 The reagents were first dried at 390 K for 10 h and then mixed in an agate mortar and heated in a platinum crucible at increasing temperatures up to 1250 K at low heating rate (11 min 1).

In all cases, XRD patterns of samples were analyzed to confirm the elimination of starting reagents and the formation of final compounds. The temperature and reaction times were chosen to minimize the formation of secondary phases.

In fast ion conductors, the enlargement of the frequency window to higher frequencies is necessary. When the frequency window does not cover properly the range covered by UDR and NCL regimes, the correct evaluation of conductivity parameters becomes diﬃcult.20 To achieve the proper characterization of Li fast-ion conductors at increasing temperatures, the frequency range was extended here by using three experimental set-ups:

(i) An automatically controlled Agilent Precision LCR E4980-A Analyzer for the 20 Hz–2 MHz range between 77 K and 550 K. The sample was placed in a JANIS VPF 750 cryostat, allowing 4L-configuration measurements.

(ii) An automatically controlled Agilent E4991-A RF Impedance/ Material Analyzer in the 1 MHz–3 GHz interval in the temperature range 150–550 K. For determination of the conductivity, the coaxial line was interrupted by inserting the sample between the central conductor of the Wiltron 18A50 air-line and the short connector. The signal was 100 mV, the number of measured frequencies 200. The result at each frequency is the average of 100 measurements. The result at each temperature is the average of three frequency sweeps.

In all samples, the relative density of pellets was near 90%. To perform the electrical characterization in the 20 Hz to 3 GHz range, pellets of 3 mm diameter and 0.5 mm thickness were cut from larger ceramics. When the larger surfaces of the pellets were polished until mirror finishing, sputtered Pt electrodes were deposited on polished surfaces. Then, Pt Au paste electrodes were painted and sintered at 1123 K. After sintering, paste electrodes were finally polished.

(iii) Time-domain THz spectroscopy measurements were performed in the transmission mode using an amplified femtosecond laser system. Two identical 1 mm thick [110] ZnTe single crystals were used to generate and detect THz pulses. Experimental details of the custom-made setup are described elsewhere.21 The THz technique allows the determination of the complex dielectric response, e*(o) = e0(o)   ie00(o), in the 3–80 cm 1 range (0.1–2.4 THz). Samples for THz measurements were parallelepipeds of 10  10  (0.1–0.3) mm3. The major surfaces were polished to mirror finishing.

NMR measurements 7Li (I = 3/2) NMR spectra were recorded at room temperature on a SXP 4/100 spectrometer, after irradiation of samples with p/2 radiofrequency pulses of 4 ms. The frequency used for 7Li was 11 MHz. Spectra were recorded in the temperature range 100–500 K. 7Li NMR chemical shifts were referred to a 1 M LiCl aqueous solution.

Quadrupole interactions detected in 7Li NMR spectra remain small (CQ o 70 KHz), making the irradiation of central and satellite transitions non-selective. NMR spectra fittings were performed using the Bruker WINFIT software package.22 In both analyzed samples the variation of the quadrupole constants as a function of temperature was investigated.

7Li spin–lattice relaxation times (T1) were measured with the p-t-p/2 sequence. In analyzed samples, the recovery of magnetization was exponential. Reciprocal spin–spin relaxation times  1) were deduced from the full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) (T2 of central NMR components recorded under static conditions.  1 was calculated to be 0.6p times In the case of Gaussian lines, T2  1 was the FWHM central line, in the case of Lorentzian lines T2 calculated to be p times the FWHM.

XRD patterns of analysed samples indicate that prepared samples are single phases, maintaining their corresponding rhombohedral structure (space group R%3c in the temperature range 200–500 K).23,24 High temperature phase transitions detected in perovskite LLTO-05 were analyzed in previous work.25 AC electric characterization

In fast ionic conductors, conductivity relaxation times are usually short and the grain boundary contribution reduces the frequency window, limiting the detection of the bulk (i.e. grain) DC-plateau at high temperatures. This restriction is severe when analysing conductivity dispersions in fast-ion conductors. The frequency dependence of the real part of conductivity was determined by using two experimental set-ups described in the experimental section. In measured frequency and temperature ranges, grain boundary blockings, ‘‘bulk’’ DC-plateaus and high-frequency dispersions were studied. At 183 K the typical response of ionic conductors with the transition from the UDR to NCL regimes was detected in the perovskite sample, see Fig. 1a. In the case of the NASICON sample the transition between both dispersive regimes is not observed, Fig. 1b. In both figures, THz measurements (measured between 100 K and 450 K) were included.

To highlight the changes produced at increasing frequency, the mathematical derivative Dlogo(log s) was calculated.26 In Fig. 2a, the frequency dependence of derivative values of LLTO-05 conductivity is shown at diﬀerent temperatures. In this plot, the minimum of derivative values corresponds to the bulk DC-plateau. The evolution from the DC-conductivity plateau to the UDR response (derivative value close to 0.6), and the onset of the NCL regime (derivative value near to 1) were detected between 183 and 253 K. At increasing frequencies the derivative exhibits values closer to one (NCL regime). At high temperatures, derivative values larger than 1 indicate the presence of undesired/spurious eﬀects on the air-line compensation.

The conductivity response of the LTAPO-02 sample is diﬀerent from that reported in LLTO-05 perovskite. In this sample the onset of the NCL behaviour was not observed in experimental plots. The electric response is mainly formed by the evolution from the bulk plateau to the UDR response. In Fig. 2b, the ‘‘derivative criterion’’ plot is depicted. In this plot, the maximum derivative value reaches a value of 0.7, without detection of the NCL regime (slope near to 1). At higher frequencies the derivative value increases to values larger than 1, associated again to some problems with the air-line compensation.

In Fig. 3, the response of two samples including the extrapolation of experimental data to THz measurements is shown at 300 K. In this figure, it is clear that THz conductivity is higher for LLTO-05 than for the LTAPO-02 sample, despite the larger ‘‘bulk’’ conductivity at RT of the latter. The extrapolated straight line joining two experimental sets of data

Fig. 1 Frequency and temperature dependences of the conductivity (a) LLTO-05 and (b) LTAPO-02. The measuring temperatures are depicted in the plot.

15348|Phys.Chem.Chem.Phys.,2014,16,15346--15354Thisjournalis©theOwnerSocieties2014Published on 19 June 2014. Downloaded by Universitätsbibliothek Bern on 30/09/2014 22:40:34. View Article OnlinePaper

Fig. 3 Frequency dependence of the conductivity at room temperature, covering about 10 decades of frequency.

displays slopes near 1.1 for LLTO-05 and 0.44 for LTAPO-02 samples. The results described here indicate that the UDR behaviour dominates the high-frequency conductivity response of the NASICON sample, but the NCL response dominates that of the perovskite.

The real part of the relative dielectric permittivity is qualitatively similar for the two samples, see Fig. 4a and b. At high frequencies and low temperatures, a constant value for the relative permittivity is obtained. This value was detected near 114 and 14 in LLTO-05 and LTAPO-02 samples. In both samples, the THz dielectric response decreased to 90 and 10, respectively. It should be noted that the LLTO-05 sample shows a larger temperature dependence of the relative permittivity. The imaginary part of the complex permittivity corresponds to dielectric losses, Fig. 4c and d. At first glance, the dielectric behaviour of the NASICON sample is diﬀerent from that reported in perovskite. At the lowest temperatures, a constant value of dielectric losses was detected in perovskite that increases slightly with temperature (Fig. 4c).

The strength of the NCL response can be estimated using the expression:

where e00 is the relative dielectric loss and e0 is the vacuum permittivity. e00 values are 1.23, for LLTO-05 and 0.01 (estimated) for LTAPO-02 at the lowest measured temperatures, see Fig. 4c and d. The activation energy of the NCL regime is quite low for perovskite (almost zero at low temperatures and frequencies near MHz). The NASICON samples exhibit an activation energy for dielectric losses that is compatible with that deduced from the UDR behaviour.

In analyzed samples, two activation energies were found in the sT plots of the ‘‘bulk’’ response (Arrhenius plots).

The perovskite LLTO-05 displays activation energy values near 0.35 eV at low temperatures, decreasing to 0.31 eV at increasing temperatures. The NASICON LTAPO-02 exhibits the lowest activation energy at low temperatures, 0.28 eV, decreasing to 0.24 eV at higher temperatures. At high temperatures, both samples display similar bulk DC-conductivity values.

Fig. 4 Frequency dependence of the relative permittivity as a function of temperature. (a) Dielectric constant of the real part LLTO 05 ceramic. (b) Dielectric constant of the LTAPO-02 ceramic. (c) Dielectric loss behaviour of the LLTO 05 ceramic. (d) Dielectric loss behaviour of the LTAPO-02 ceramic. The red lines are the calculated NCL at 150 K using the 0 values for NCL dispersion values of p = 0.98 (solid line) experimental eTHz and p = 0.99 (dashed line). The blue lines are the calculated NCL at 150 K using the deduced e0DN values for p = 0.98 (solid line) and p = 0.99 dashed line. The temperatures in all the plots are the same as in Fig. 1 except for (d) where 83 K and 103 K are not included because of the large experimental noise.

Another interesting parameter related to the conductivity is the inverse of the dielectric relaxation time op presented in Fig. 5, deduced from the conductivity plots, using the Jonscher’s relation:

The frequency op corresponds to the attempt frequency at the measured temperature. Activation energies deduced from op agree with those deduced from the ‘‘bulk’’ conductivity in the same temperature range. Attempt frequencies are similar in perovskites and larger in the NASICON materials. At 250 K, a diﬀerence of 2 orders of magnitude was detected between LTAPO-02 and LLTO-05.

NMR results 7Li (I = 3/2) NMR spectra are formed by three components that are ascribed to the central ( 1/2 1/2) and satellite ( 3/2  1/2 and 1/2 3/2) transitions.18,19 These transitions are produced by quadrupolar interaction of Li ions with the electric field gradient at occupied sites. In perovskites, the local Li motions average the quadrupole interactions making the detection of residual interactions diﬃcult; however, in the Nasicon sample, three transitions are visible.

the temperature dependence of 7Li NMR spin–lattice (1/T1) and spin–spin (1/T2) relaxation rates of LLTO-05 and LTAPO-02 samples are plotted in the temperature range 100–500 K. Dipolar interactions of Li with atoms disposed at short distances cause the broadening of the central transition (proportional to 1/T2). Li mobility decreases at 1/T2 and increases at 1/T1 relaxation rates. At increasing temperatures, 1/T1 values pass through a maximum near 300 and 250 K in LLTO-05 and LTAPO-02 respectively. At the maxima, residence times of Li ions at structural sites verify the relation tR E 1/o0 E 10 8 s.

Fig. 6 Temperature dependence of the 7Li NMR spin–lattice (1/T1) and spin–spin (1/T2) relaxation rates of the (a) LLTO-05, and (b) LTAPO-02 samples.

In LLTO-05, spin–spin relaxation rates T21 remain constant in the temperature range 100–190 K, region I in Fig. 6a, indicating the absence of Li mobility. The spin–lattice relaxa 1 display different slopes at both sides of the tion rates T1 maximum. In the temperature range 170–250 K, the activation energy is 0.14 eV, but in the range 350–500 K the activation  1 decreases is energy is 0.26 eV. The temperature at which T2 considerably higher than that corresponding to the 1/T1 increment, region III in Fig. 6a. This observation has been ascribed to the existence of local motions that do not change the mean Li–Li distances (dipolar interactions), but produce an efficient spin–lattice relaxation. Above 160 K, hopping motions are responsible for the 1/T1 increment and 1/T2 decrement, region II in Fig. 6a.

The temperature dependence of NMR relaxation rates in LTAPO-02 diﬀers from that detected in LLTO-05 perovskites.

15350|Phys.Chem.Chem.Phys.,2014,16,15346--15354Thisjournalis©theOwnerSocieties2014Published on 19 June 2014. Downloaded by Universitätsbibliothek Bern on 30/09/2014 22:40:34. View Article OnlinePaper

 1 maximum is symmetric in the first case, In particular, the T1 but clearly asymmetric in the second one. At the low temperature branch, the activation energy is 0.19 eV but at the high temperature branch, the activation energy is 0.21 eV. The spin– spin relaxation rate 1/T2 is constant in the interval 100–170 K, indicating that Li mobility increases appreciably only above 160 K, region I in Fig. 6b. This temperature matches with the increment detected in the spin–lattice relaxation plot, indicating that long range motions are directly established in the LTAP-02 sample, region II in Fig. 6b. The temperature dependence of 1/T2 plots is complex, indicating the presence of two relaxation mechanisms in the LTAP-02 sample. These two relaxation mechanisms could not be resolved in the 1/T1 plot of the Nasicon system.

The electric behaviour of perovskite and NASICON samples diﬀers considerably at low temperatures. In the case of the NASICON system, the NCL regime is negligible or absent but in the case of perovskites this contribution is important. As electric measurements have been measured with the same blocking electrodes, we can conclude that the NCL contribution cannot be ascribed to the series electrode polarization often described in previous papers. In the literature, the NCL contribution has been related to ion oscillations in potential well-cages that slowly decay with time.27 In this approximation, a thermally activated cross-over from the NCL to UDR process should be observed in conductivity plots. This approximation forced a series link between NCL and UDR regimes that implies that NCL has to be cancelled when hopping behaviour starts. In this case, all ions that are participating in hopping behaviour, leading to the dc-conductivity, should have been involved in NCL processes. A relationship between the magnitude of the constant loss value (A) and the DC-conductivity was proposed by Leon et al. for a large variety of ionic conductors.28 These authors suggest that:

where Ea is the microscopic activation energy and T0 is the temperature related to the onset of the NCL behaviour. Using this expression they found a good correlation between Ea and A in a wide variety of solid electrolytes. In Fig. 7 we have plotted the curve obtained by Leon et al. (Fig. 1 of ref. 28) including our results for LLTO-05 and LTAPO-02 samples. In the case of perovskites our results agree with published results; however, in the case of the NASICON, our results are lower than those reported in other samples and far below the model curve.

In previous studies, Macdonald concluded that local ion motions, related to the NCL contribution, must be related to the bulk polarization.17 On the other hand, Nowick et al.29 ascribed the NCL to oﬀ-centering local motions of atoms. In relaxor ferroelectrics, which are high-permittivity disordered dielectrics, the NCL regime observed at low temperatures was assigned to hopping of polar nanoregions over a broad distribution of potential barrier heights.30

Fig. 7 Relationship between the NCL strength A and the microscopic activation energy Em deduced from NCL and UDR regimes (from ref. 28). In this plot values deduced in this work (solid circles) are included.

The concentration of mobile ions also has a significant influence on the shape and strength of the NCL. In diluted systems (low carrier concentration), instead of the constant loss regime a Debye-like peak was found that smeared out upon increasing the carrier concentration.29 Based on previous studies, both mobile ion concentration and ‘‘bulk’’ polarizability must contribute to the NCL response. Taking into account that NCL is related to dipolar moments and that they enhance the dielectric constant at high frequency, it is important to understand its influence at the microscopic level.

In a recent paper, Macdonald17 proposed that the high frequency dielectric constant is formed by two contributions where e0CN is related to the ion motion and e0DN to the ‘‘bulk’’ polarization of the structure. In the case of e0CN the relationship with charge carrier concentration is

where N is the concentration of charge carriers, g the fraction of mobile ions, (qd) the induced dipolar moment and other parameters have the usual meaning. The high-frequency dielectric constant is then related to ionic conductivity which is proportional to the number of charge carriers, their charge q and their displacement d.

Then e0CN can be compared with the expression of DC

where c0 is the concentration of mobile ions, Vm is the molar volume, oAV is the mean jump frequency and other symbols have their usual meaning. oAV is the result of multiplying the probability to move by the jump attempt frequency of free carriers (op), see eqn (2). Nowick et al.29 demonstrated that oAV E op (exactly speaking oAV r op), because probability lies between 0 and 1.

The DC conductivity can also be expressed as:

where s(0) = Knop

The DC conductivity can be related to eqn (5) for e0CN,

because gN can be expressed as c0/Vm

The value of Kn at each temperature can be deduced from experimental AC conductivity values using eqn (2) and (7). If the calculation is made at 150 K, log Kn of LLTO-05 and LATPO 02 samples display  11.16 and  12.38 values respectively. Applying eqn (9) to calculate e0CN values of 78 and 5 were obtained respectively.

On the other hand, e0 values can be estimated at 1 MHz at the same temperature. If calculated e0CN values are subtracted from the relative dielectric permittivity values at 1 MHz and 150 K (134, and 15), e0DN values of 56 and 10 were deduced. If these values are compared with the relative dielectric con0) at the same temperastant measured in the THz range (eTHz ture, values of 98 and 10 were obtained, see Fig. 4a and b. At this very high frequency the contribution to the permittivity of the mobile ions must be small. It is interesting to note the 0 close agreement between calculated e0DN and observed eTHz values for the NASICON samples, indicating that permittivity is related to pure the ‘‘bulk’’ eﬀect and so at 1 MHz the dielectric constant is the sum of the structure polarizability and the contribution of the moving ions. However, calculated e0DN 0 values in perovskites. This values are much lower than eTHz discrepancy should be related to the influence of the charge carriers to the THz permittivity, so to some extent moving ions are still contributing to the permittivity value in the THz region, confirming the existence of a strong coupling between e0DN and e0CN in perovskites. This coupling was described by Macdonald to explain the relation between NCL and ionic conductivity.

Taking into account that the dispersion exponent of NCL approaches 1, the constant phase element (CPE) formalism leads to

where B is very close to the real part of the relative permittivity in the frequency region where the NCL behaviour dominates. The strength of the NCL (A) is given for p values close to 1 by

The value of A depends on B and p through the parameter tan dp (loss tangent). In Fig. 4c and d, the NCL strength calculated for p = 0.99 (blue) and p = 0.98 (red) at 150 K is included in the loss curves of LLTO-05 and LTAPO-02 samples for calculated e0DN values (dashed lines) and diﬀerent values of high-frequency relative permittivity eTHz (solid lines). The results obtained for perovskites indicate that experimental NCL values are in good agreement with those calculated by 0 and an exponent 0.99 for NCL dispersion. In using eTHz perovskite, e0DN values produce small NCL values in comparison with experimental values. The result obtained for LTAPO-02 indicates that the experimental NCL behaviour lies below the calculated NCL value for both possibilities and it is below the sensitivity of the experimental set-up. This result indicates a much lower coupling between ionic conductivity and THz permittivity.

The NCL eﬀect seems to be related to the concentration of charge carriers and induced dipolar moments. The concentration of charge carriers is maximum in LLTO 05, so the NLC strength is higher. In the NASICON sample, Li dc-conductivity is one of the highest reported but NCL contribution is too small to be experimentally measured using our experimental set up. In NASICON compounds the value of Kn is much lower than that of the perovskite. The low values of Kn parameter and polarizability of the NASICON structure could be responsible 0 and the absence of a measurable NCL for the low value of eTHz response. The high ionic conductivity detected in the NASICON samples must be related to a higher ionic mobility of Li, as indicated by high op values measured. At present, the question remaining is regarding the origin of low Kn values in the NASICON sample. Despite both structures possessing the same space group of symmetry, the topology and the structural positions occupied by the Li ions is diﬀerent. In LLTO-05, Li ions and vacancies are randomly distributed in A sites of the perovskite,25 however, in LATPO-02 Li ions are preferentially located at M1 sites and most vacancies are disposed near M2 interstitial sites.19 The diﬀerent distribution of Li ions and vacancies in both structures must lead to a diﬀerent conductivity mechanism.

The influence of the pre-movements leading to NCL behaviour in perovskite and NASICON samples is reflected in the NMR response. For the perovskite three regions of behaviour are clearly observed in the perovskite and only two in the NASICON sample. Region III is related to the existence of local motions that do not change the mean Li–Li distances (dipolar interactions) and so do not change the spin–spin relaxation (1/T2), but produce an efficient spin–lattice relaxation (1/T1). This region III is almost suppressed in the NASICON sample. This difference supports the idea of the absence of important local motions in the NASICON sample responsible of large NCL responses.

At present, two scenarios can be imagined. In the first one, it can be assumed that the NCL response is not present in NASICON samples, and ions go directly from a stationary position to the hopping process. This should be related to atom oscillations around lattice positions that do not generate dipolar moments. The absence of the NCL response does not prevent, however, the existence of other structural sources that produce similar polarizations. The second scenario is that NCL

15352|Phys.Chem.Chem.Phys.,2014,16,15346--15354Thisjournalis©theOwnerSocieties2014Published on 19 June 2014. Downloaded by Universitätsbibliothek Bern on 30/09/2014 22:40:34. View Article OnlinePaper

is not absent but is very small. Returning to the model eqn (3), this means that the proportionality constant is much lower than that observed in perovskites. In the case of the NASICON, the NCL regime should be very small even at the lowest temperatures, indicating that vibration of ions in potential wellcages does not induce strong relaxations, remaining vibrations similar to those predicted by Debye approximation.

From our results it is diﬃcult to find an explanation for diﬀerences in the NCL behaviour of perovskite and NASICON compounds. As pointed out by some authors,17 the polarization of the structure plays an important role in the NCL response. The study of the terahertz permittivity at low temperatures has shown a larger value for LLTO-05 (90) than LATPO-02 (10). This analysis proves that perovskites are much more polarisable than NASICON samples. In other words, the phonon contributions to static permittivity must be much higher in LLTO-05 than in LATPO-02.

The dielectric behaviour of the La0.53Na0.41 xLixTiO3 perovskites was studied by Katsumata et al.31 for samples with x o 0.12, they found a quantum paraelectric behaviour and for x = 0.08 and 0.012 a broad ferroic dielectric peak. Both are signatures of a highly polarisable network. In La0.5Na0.5TiO3 the permittivity is more than 100 and increases upon cooling due to the polar phonon softening.32

From this analysis, it can be concluded that the presence of strong NCL is not required for achieving high values of ionic conductivity. This conclusion can be derived from the study of the NASICON sample, where NCL contributions could not be detected. To confirm this idea, additional work must be done to find structural reasons that explain high conductivity values measured in NASICON compounds with such a low Kn value.

A parallel NMR and impedance spectroscopy study of La0.5Li0.5TiO3 (LLTO-05) perovskite and Li1.2Ti1.8Al0.2(PO4)3 (LATPO-02) NASICON compounds by spectroscopy has been performed in the temperature range 100–500 K. In both cases, a three dimensional conduction network is present in rhombohedral (R-3c S.G.) phases, in LLTO-05, Li ions and vacancies are randomly distributed in A sites of the perovskite, however, in LATPO-02 Li ions are preferentially located at M1 sites and most vacancies are disposed near M2 sites.

In the two types of compounds, correlated UDR motions are detected between 250 and 500 K, however, local motions at lower temperatures are diﬀerent. In perovskite, local motions produced inside unit cells are responsible for the NCL regime; however, in the NASICON phase, local motions, not participating to the long range regime, were almost absent. In both types of samples, long-range motions are responsible for e bulk DC-conductivity values near 10 3 S cm 1 at R.T., indicating that a strong NCL contribution at high-frequency and lowtemperature, related to the local motions of the charge carriers, is not required to achieve important ionic conductivity values.

Authors thank MINECO (project MAT2010-19837-C06-02) and the regional Government (project S-2009/PPQ 1626) for financial support. S.K and D.N. were supported by Czech Science Foundation (Project No. P204/12/02321163). We would like to thank Prof. J.R Macdonald for stimulating discussions.