Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) is an attractive cathode material for sodium ion batteries due to its high theoretical energy density and stable three-dimensional (3D) NASICON structure. In this paper, a NVP@C core–shell nanocomposite has been synthesized through a hydrothermal assisted sol–gel method. Ascorbic acid and polyethylene glycol 400 (PEG-400) were synergistically used to control the particle growth and provide the surface coating of conductive carbon. The as-prepared nanocomposite was composed of a nanosized Na3V2(PO4)3 core with a typical size of 40 nm and a uniformly amorphous carbon shell with the NVP@C core–shell the thickness of a few nanometers. The electrode performance of nanocomposite as cathode for sodium ion batteries is investigated and compared with that of bare NVP and NVP/C. Among the samples examined, the NVP@C nanocomposite showed the best cycle life and  1 at 5 C with a rate capability. It rendered an initial capacity of 104.3 mA h g remarkable capacity retention of 96.1% after 700 cycles. Moreover, a full cell using the as-prepared nanocomposite as both the cathode and the anode active material has been successfully built, showing  1 at 2 C with an output voltage of about 1.7 V and a speciﬁc energy a reversible capacity of 90.9 mA h g  1. The enhanced electrode performance is attributed to the combination density of about 154.5 W h kg of particle downsizing and carbon coating, which can favor the migration of both electrons and ions.

Lithium ion batteries (LIBs) have captured a large market share in the global market of rechargeable batteries.1–3 However, there is still much concern whether the viable lithium resources on earth can aﬀord the increasing large-scale applications of lithium.4,5 As sodium is one of the most abundant elements on this planet and exhibits similar chemical properties to lithium, sodium ion batteries (NIBs) are promising alternatives in future battery technologies.6–9 However, the storage and cycling abilities of NIBs are generally inferior to their lithium counterparts due to the bigger ionic radius of Na+ and the larger volume change upon Na/Na+ removal or insertion.10 Therefore, desirable electrode materials for NIBs should adopt robust and exible crystal structures that can accommodate large sodium ions. In this context, many electrode materials such as layered transition sodium oxides NaxMO2+y (M ¼ Mn, Co, V), olivine NaMPO4 (M ¼ Fe, Mn) and sodium super ionic conductor

(M ¼ V, Ti) have been inves(NASICON) NaxM2(PO4)3 tigated.9,11–17Among the various cathode materials for NIBs, Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) with a NASICON structure has received extensive interest owing to its advantages of high Na+ ion conductivity, small volume change upon Na+ intercalation/ deintercalation, moderate potential plateau (3.4 V), high theo 1), and high thermal retical energy density (400 W h kg stability.18–20 Nevertheless, NVP still suﬀers from intrinsic low electric conductivity, which limits the practical rate capability and cycling ability. In the case of the other polyanionic compounds, carbon coating and particle downsizing have been oen attempted to improve the performance.21–23 The coating of nanosized NVP particles with a thin carbon layer to form a NVP@C core–shell nanostructure is particularly favorable because of the simultaneously reduced diﬀusion length for Na+ intercalation and enhanced electron conduction. However, the preparation of a NVP@C nanocomposite is not an easy task. The formation of a NVP phase with a large anionic framework generally involves a high-temperature calcination process, in which NVP tends to grow and aggregate into large grains.16,18,20 Moreover, it is challenging to achieve the homogeneity of both particle size and surface carbon coating.

Recently, we have developed a hydrothermal assisted sol–gel method for the synthesis of uniform nanosized Li3V2(PO4)3@C core–shell nanocomposites for LIBs.24 The key of the synthesis is the hydrothermal pretreatment of reactants, in which partially carbonized species are evenly coated on the phosphate precursors to restrict particle enlargement during the followed calcination process. Herein, we extend the synthetic concept for NVP@C nanocomposites. The electrochemical properties of NVP@C core–shell nanostructures in NIBs are investigated and compared with those of bare NVP and NVP/C particles. The NVP@C core–shell nanocomposites exhibit remarkable electrode performance such as prolonged cycling life, enhanced rate capability, and low polarization. Furthermore, two redox couples of V4+/V3+ and V3+/V2+ endow NVP with two diﬀerent voltage plateaus at 3.4 V and 1.6 V, respectively. This shows that NVP is a suitable candidate either as the cathode or as the anode. Thus, we construct rechargeable sodium-ion full cells by applying the as-prepared NVP@C nanocomposite as the initial active material of both the cathode and the anode. The battery can work well with an output voltage of 1.7 V and realize a  1. A preliminary test specic energy density of 154.5 W h kg shows that a cycle life exceeding 50 cycles with an initial  1 and a capacity retention of 81.4% at 2 capacity of 90.9 mA h g C was obtained.

Three kinds of NVP materials, including NVP@C nanocomposite (nano NVP@C), NVP/C composite (NVP/C) and bare NVP (NVP), were synthesized in this work. The nano NVP@C was obtained by a hydrothermal assisted sol–gel approach. In a typical synthesis, 4 mmol V2O5, 12 mmol NH4H2PO4 and 6 mmol Na2CO3 were added to 70 mL of distilled water and magnetically stirred at room temperature. Then, 6 mmol ascorbic acid and 6 mL of polyethylene glycol 400 (PEG-400) were added to form a blue suspension, which was stirred for 30 min before being transferred to a 100 mL Teon-lined autoclave. The sealed autoclave was kept at 180 C for 40 h, and then naturally cooled to room temperature. The resulting brown mixture was ultrasonically treated for 90 min to make a uniform dispersion, and then heated on a hot plate at 95 C with stirring to evaporate water. The obtained brown sol was dried at 120 C overnight. This precursor was thoroughly ground and preheated at 350 C for 4 h. The preheated sample was ground to powders and nally calcined at 750 C for 6 h in owing Ar atmosphere. For comparison, the NVP/C composite was prepared via a method similar to that used for preparing nano NVP@C but without the hydrothermal process. NVP was synthesized using a procedure similar to that used for preparing NVP/C composite except for the use of H2C2O4 as the reductant with a molar ratio of V2O5 : H2C2O4 ¼ 1 : 3.

The as-synthesized samples were characterized by powder X-ray diﬀraction (XRD, Rigaku MiniFlex600, Cu Ka radiation). XRD patterns were rened by the Rietveld renement program GSAS.25 The morphologies and microstructures of the samples were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL JSM7500F) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Philips

Tecnai F20). The specic surface area and pore-size distribution were measured by Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) nitrogen adsorption–desorption measurement (Japan, BELSORP-Mini). The carbon layer was analyzed by Raman spectroscopy (DXR, ThermoFisher Scientic, 532 nm excitation) and an elemental analyzer (German, VarioEL).

Electrochemical measurements were carried out using CR2032 coin cells. The working electrodes were made by blending 80 wt% of the active material, 10 wt% of KS6 graphite, and 10 wt% of a polyvinylidene diuoride (PVDF) binder in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone. The obtained slurry was pasted onto an aluminum foil and dried at 110 C for 10 h in vacuum to evaporate N-methyl-2pyrrolidone. Sodium metal was used as the anode for half cells. The full cell was constructed using nano NVP@C as both cathode and anode with the capacity limitation of the cathode. The weight ratio of the cathode and the anode was about 3 : 5. The electrolyte was propylene carbonate (PC) containing 1 M NaClO4. Cells were assembled in an argon-lled glove box. The assembled cells were cycled at diﬀerent charge–discharge rates on a Land CT2001A cell testing system. The cyclic voltammograms (CV) were obtained on a Parstat 263A potentionstat/galvanostat workstation. Impedance measurements were conducted using a 2273 potentiostat/galvanostat workstation with an amplitude of 5 mV over the frequency range of 100 kHz to 10 mHz. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was collected at the conditions of 50% depth-of-discharge, 3.4 V potential, 5th cycle, and rate of 1 C. All the electrochemical measurements were tested at 298 K.

Results and discussion Na3V2(PO4)3 adopts the NASICON structure with an R3c spacegroup, as shown in Fig. 1a. Each octahedron corner of VO6 is shared with three PO4 tetrahedrons. One Na+ occupies the M1(6b) site, and the other two are located in the M2(18e) site of the interstitial sites.9,18,26 The VO6 octahedrons and PO4 tetrahedrons together constitute a highly covalent three-dimensional framework. The channel between two PO4 tetrahedrons combined with the voids between a PO4 tetrahedron and a VO6 octahedron as well as a curved pathway is a possible site for sodium ion diﬀusion, eliciting the favourable 3D transport character.27 Powder X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) patterns of the obtained samples are shown in Fig. S1.† All reections can be indexed to the pure Na3V2(PO4)3 phase as reported in previous literature.15,18 Fig. 1b shows the XRD pattern of nano NVP@C with a rened Rietveld analysis. The calculated pattern matches well with the experimental prole with a relatively low Rwp (8.17%) and Rp (6.21%). This indicates that the purity of the phase is high. The cell parameters are calculated to be a ¼ 8.72 ˚A, c ¼ 21.81 ˚A, a ¼ 90, and g ¼ 120

Fig. 1c shows the SEM image of nano NVP@C, which displays a uniform distribution of the nanoparticles. The average diameter of the nanoparticles is around 40 nm. Moreover, the nanoparticles seem to arrange themselves to form crystalline indicating highly inter-particle voids, resulting in a porous structure that is favorable toward increasing the contact between the electrode and the electrolyte. The HRTEM image of nano NVP@C (Fig. 1d) clearly reveals that an amorphous carbon shell is coated on the surface of crystallized nano Na3V2(PO4)3 with the thickness of a few nanometers, demonstrating the successful formation of a nano core–shell structure. The clear lattice fringes with dspacing of 0.624 nm correspond to the (012) plane of NASICON Na3V2(PO4)3, characteristics. Furthermore, the proposed nano core–shell structure has been further supported by more TEM images, as shown in Fig. S2.† The formation mechanism of nanostructured grains has been systematically discussed in our previous report.24 Briey, the hydrothermal treatment makes ascorbic acid partly carbonize and then uniformly coat the precursor, which has been conrmed by the TEM and Raman measurements of the precursors (Fig. S3†). During the high-temperature calcinations, the partly carbonized organics and PEG-400 were completely transformed into a well-coated carbon layer. This signicantly prevents particle agglomeration and thus generates uniform nanosized grains. On the contrary, if only ascorbic acid or PEG400 was used, the products displayed an irregular and agglomerated morphology with larger sizes (Fig. S4†). This indicates that the combination of ascorbic acid and PEG-400 plays an essential role in the formation of nano NVP@C. In

comparison, NVP/C composite and bare NVP also showed a pure NASICON structure (Fig. S1†). Without using hydrothermal treatment or ascorbic acid and PEG-400, the particle sizes become irregular and larger (Fig. S5†). Therefore, the hydrothermal assisted sol–gel method is useful for the synthesis of the nanosized Na3V2(PO4)3@C composite.

The carbon contents of nano NVP@C, NVP/C, and NVP obtained by an elemental analysis are 12.5 wt%, 11.8 wt%, and

Fig. 2 Raman spectrogram of nano NVP@C electrode.

The Raman spectrum was also recorded for nano NVP@C (Fig. 2). Two obvious bands were observed at 1350  1 (G band) related to the typical cm Raman features of carbon.28 The peak intensity ratio of D to G band (ID/IG) is 0.96, showing a high degree of graphitization with high conductivity.29,30 The two broad peaks of each sample can be deconvoluted into four peaks (labeled peaks 1–4) using a Gaussian numerical simulation.31 As we have reported before, the tted Asp3/Asp2 value provides useful information on the nature of carbon.24 For nano NVP@C, this value is 0.31, suggesting a high content of sp2 type carbon. Therefore, the results indicate that the coated carbon layer favors the enhanced electrical conduction.

Fig. 3 shows the nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherm and pore-size distribution curves of nano NVP@C. For NVP/C and NVP, the tested results are presented in Fig. S6.† Among the three samples, nano NVP@C has the largest surface area of

Fig. 3 Nitrogen adsorption and desorption isotherm of nano NVP@C. (inset: pore-size distribution curves).

Fig. 4 Electrochemical properties of nano NVP@C, NVP/C, and NVP. (a) Typical charge and discharge proﬁles, (b) corresponding dQ/dV plots, (c) cyclic performance of diﬀerent electrodes at 0.5 C, (d) comparison of the rate capability of the three samples, and (e) Coulombic eﬃciency and speciﬁc reversible capacity versus cycle number for nano NVP@C at 5 C rate for 700 cycles.

The impressively high surface area of and NVP (4.97 m2 g nano NVP@C is mainly attributed to the existence of pores generated by the accumulation of nanosized particles, as observed in the SEM image (Fig. 1c). The pore-size distribution curve determined using the BJH method shows peaks around 10–40 nm, verifying the mesoporous character. This high surface area and nanoporous structure favor the penetration of electrolyte and promote the interfacial contact,32–36 thus leading to better solid state diﬀusion kinetics of sodium intercalation. Further investigations of the electrochemical performance for the prepared samples were carried out. Fig. 4a displays the typical charge and discharge proles of the three samples with a potential range of 2.5–3.8 V at the rate of 0.5 C. All curves have at charge and discharge plateaus around 3.4 V, which are consistent with the previous reports.18,19 The capacity of nano  1, which is about 88.4% of its NVP@C reached 104.3 mA h g  1). Such a high capacity indicates theoretical value (118 mA h g that the small nanosized particles could realize the high utilization of the active materials. On the contrary, the discharge  1, capacities of NVP/C and NVP are only 81.7 and 67.4 mA h g respectively. Fig. 4b shows the corresponding dQ/dV plots. A couple of the oxidation and reduction peaks, which are attributed to the V4+/V3+ redox couples, can be clearly seen for the three samples. This is similar to the CV proles (Fig. S7†). Notably, nano NVP@C exhibits the most highly symmetrical sharp peaks. The value of the potential polarization (DE) for nano NVP@C is only 31 mV (inset of Fig. 4b), which is not only relatively lower among the reported results for Na3V2(PO4)3,15,19 but also comparable to the potential polarization (DE) of LiFePO4 in LIBs.37 Such a small DE completely justies the lower electrode polarization and easier migration of Na ions, which is a benet of using nanosized particles with a conductive coating. The cyclic performance of the three samples at 0.5 C is compared in Fig. 4c. Aer charge and discharge for 50 cycles, the capacity retention of nano NVP@C, NVP/C, and NVP is 99.6%, 87.6%, and 63.6%, respectively. Fig. 4d shows the rate capability of the three samples at 0.5 C to 10 C. Obviously, nano NVP@C has the highest capacities at all tested rates. Even at 10  1, corresponding to C, it could oﬀer a capacity of 88 mA h g 83.9% of the capacity obtained at 0.5 C. The minute capacities gap between diﬀerent rates may facilitate the application of the battery system at a high rate. The long cycling stability at a high rate of nano NVP@C was further studied at the 5 C rate. In  1, and Fig. 4e, the initial discharge capacity was 94.9 mA h g 96.1% of this value was still retained aer 700 cycles. In addition, the coulombic eﬃciency can reach up to approximately 100% in the overall battery operation, demonstrating a prominent high-rate cycling performance of nano NVP@C. This can be traced to its unique nano core–shell structure with a porous character.

impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed to investigate the kinetics of the electrode process. The Nyquist plots and equivalent circuit of the three samples are presented in Fig. 5a. All curves contain a semicircle in the high frequency and a straight line in the low frequency, suggesting that the electrochemical process is controlled by both charge

Fig. 5 (a) The Nyquist plots and equivalent circuit of nano NVP@C,  1/2 in the low NVP/C and NVP. (b) The relationship between Z0 frequency region.

transfer and sodium ion diﬀusion.23,38 The diameter of the semicircle in the high frequency region on the Z axis is approximately equal to the charge transfer impedance (Rct).39,40 Obviously, nano NVP@C exhibits the lowest Rct, signifying the best sodium ion intercalation kinetics; moreover, the diﬀusion coeﬃcients of the three samples were calculated.39 The linear plot is associated with the diﬀusion of Na+ ions in the cathode material. The sodium ion diﬀusion coeﬃcient can be calculated using the following equation:39

where R is the gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, A is the surface area of the electrode, n is the number of electrons per molecule during oxidization, F is Faraday's constant, C is the concentration of sodium ions, and s is the Warburg factor related to Z and the recip 1/2) in the low frequency rocal square root of frequency (u region. The calculated diﬀusion coeﬃcients of the sodium ions (DNa) of nano NVP@C, NVP/C and NVP are 2.4  10  13, 6.94   1, respectively. This demonstrates 10 that the combined action of carbon coating and nanostructure could signicantly promote electron conduction and sodium ion diﬀusion, and thus give high-rate capability.

To further understand the remarkable electrode performance of nano NVP@C, the electrode tested aer 50 cycles at 1 C rate was investigated by XRD and TEM. As shown in Fig. 6a, intensive diﬀraction peaks in the XRD patterns and clear lattice fringes corresponding to the Na3V2(PO4)3 phase in the HRTEM image are well maintained aer the cycling test. Moreover, a Na3V2(PO4)3 core with a carbon shell could be clearly seen from

the HRTEM image (Fig. 6b), suggesting that the nano core–shell structure of the electrode could be essentially preserved even aer cycling for a long time. These results further illustrate the architectural merit of the as-prepared nano NVP@C with high electrochemical performance.

The as-prepared nano NVP@C can also be used as the anode material for sodium ion batteries. Cyclic voltammogram proles were recorded for nano NVP@C half cell in the range of 1.3 to 3.8 V (Fig. S7†). Two obviously sharp redox peaks were observed in the low voltage and high voltage regions, which correspond to the anode reaction and the cathode reaction, respectively. Hence, the anode performance of nano NVP@C was evaluated. The typical charge and discharge proles at 0.2 C in the voltage range of 1.3–2 V are displayed in Fig. 7a. The voltage plateau located around 1.64 V corresponds to the V3+/V2+ redox couple, agreeing well with previous studies.18 By combining the carbon coating and nanosizing, nano NVP@C also exhibited favorable cycle performance (Fig. 7b), displaying an initial charge capacity  1 with a capacity retention of 93.2% aer 50 of 70.7 mA h g cycles. This is comparable to previous results.15,18,35

Motivated by the above results, a full cell based on the nano NVP@C as both the cathode and the anode was built. Similar to the Li3V2(PO4)3 system,41 the cell reactions in the full cells of Na3V2(PO4)3 can be described as follows:

Fig. 6 (a) XRD pattern and (b) HRTEM image of nano NVP@C electrode after cycling for 50 cycles at 1 C rate.

As anticipated, these full cells exhibited open-circuit voltage near zero, as the initial active material of both electrodes is the

Fig. 7 (a) Voltage proﬁles and (b) capacity retention of nano NVP@C at 0.2 C rate in the voltage range of 1.3–2.0 V; (c) 2 C charge–discharge proﬁles and (d) cycling performance of the full cell employing nano NVP@C as both the cathode and the anode in the voltage range of 1–2.2 V.

when cycled at diﬀerent rates. Remarkably, a full cell with the as-prepared composite as the active material of both positive and negative electrodes oﬀers an output voltage of 1.7 V, a  1 and a specic energy density specic capacity of 90.9 mA h g  1. The synthetic strategy should be of about 154.5 W h kg helpful for the design of other uniformly nanosized core–shell materials for electrodes with a high-rate requirement.

Fig. 8 Schematic illustration of electron conduction and Na+ transport within (a) NVP, (b) NVP/C, and (c) nano NVP@C.

same. During the charge–discharge process, the cathode and the anode materials undergo the reversible electrochemical reactions and Na3V2(PO4)3/ Na5V2(PO4)3, respectively. Fig. 7c illustrates the typical charge– discharge curves of the full cell cycled between 1 and 2.2 V. Two distinct voltage plateaus during the charge process and one during the discharge process were observed. This feature is in accordance with the CV prole (Fig. S8†). The full cell utilizes the existing concept but oﬀers better performance than that of the prior system.41 It delivered a reversible capacity of 90.9 mA h  1 at 2 C with an output voltage of about 1.7 V, corresponding g  1. Furtherto a specic energy density of about 154.5 W h kg more, the capacity retention reached 81.4% aer 50 cycles (Fig. 7d). With a cathode limited design, the estimated capacity is based on the active mass of the cathode material. Moreover, the Coulombic eﬃciency is increased to about 99% within 5 cycles, and then maintained for the measured 50 cycles, which shows the feasibility for practical applications.

Based on the above results, nano NVP@C indeed has better electrochemical properties than the other two samples. The advantages of the nano NVP@C core–shell structure are easily accountable. As illustrated in Fig. 8, for NVP (Fig. 8a), as a result of the limited diﬀusion length, the reaction of Na+ can only occur on the outside part of the larger particles. Moreover, the   transfer of e is blocked by the hampered conductivity, leading to poor performance. For NVP/C (Fig. 8b), the conductivity is increased in a way, but part of the big particles is still kept inactive due to the long ion diﬀusion passage. However, for nano NVP@C (Fig. 8c), the core–shell structure with a small particle size and conductive carbon coating oﬀers suﬃcient electric and ionic conduction. This enables the full utilization of the active material with high capacity, long cyclability and high rate capability.

Conclusions In summary, a nano core–shell Na3V2(PO4)3@C material with a particle size of around 40 nm has been successfully prepared using a hydrothermal assisted sol–gel method. The as-prepared Na3V2(PO4)3@C nanocomposite exhibited impressive electrochemical performance as a cathode material for NIBs when charged and discharged in the voltage range of 2.5–3.8 V,  1 at 0.5 rendering an initial discharge capacity of 104.3 mA h g  1 at 5 C with 96% capacity retention aer 700 C and 94.9 mA h g cycles. Furthermore, the discharge capacities changed slightly