Iron(III) sulfate, a rhombohedral NASICON compound, has been demonstrated as a sodium intercalation host. This cost-eﬀective material is attractive, as it can be slurry processed in bulk with ballmilling, while utilizing the iron 2+/3+ redox couple, oﬀering stable 3.2 V performance for over 400 cycles.

Following a few decades of intensive research and development of lithium ion batteries (LIBs), sodium ion batteries (NIBs) have recently become a topic of renewed interest in the battery community.1 NIBs could be attractive in applications, such as stationary energy storage, where their lower energy density relative to LIBs is not a major issue.2 There are a few reasons for this renewed interest in NIBs, including: (1) naturally abundant sodium-containing resources (2) the opportunity to develop new intercalation chemistries based on cost-eﬀective, environmentally benign transition metals, such as iron, and (3) the ability to use all aluminium current collectors. In this context, significant progress has been achieved to date, including the development of a two layer prismatic (P2) and three layer octahedral (O3) type oxides, utilizing the iron 3+/4+ redox couple.3,4 The more common iron 2+/3+ redox couple has also been successfully demonstrated in the hexacyanoferrate, pyrophosphate, mixed-phosphate/pyrophosphate, fluorophosphate, and fluorosulfate based structures.5–10

For these reasons, we turn our attention to ways in which the electrochemical properties of iron can be leveraged in the NASICON (Natrium Super Ionic Conductor) class of electrode materials. Recent studies have succeeded in demonstrating the electrochemical capabilities of NASICON-type Na3V2(PO4)3 for sodium ion intercalation.11–13 The functional properties of this compound are derived from the use of the vanadium 3+/4+ redox couple in a rhombohedral phosphate framework. However, it has been shown that sulfate polyanion groups enable a significantly higher redox potential for a particular transition metal compared to phosphate.14 This is important in the case of iron, as using sulfate in the NASICON structure would provide a greater than 3 V cathode material versus Na/Na+. Iron(III) sulfate (ferric sulfate, Fe2(SO4)3) is thus of much particular interest, as it has not been studied to date for sodium intercalation. Understanding its properties is an important step towards further development of many prospective NASICON-type electrode materials. Furthermore, this compound is inexpensive, at $0.05 usd per gram (Alfa Aesar) during the time of writing. 
This is half the cost of potassium hexacyanoferrate, which is the usual precursor for the commonly-reported, low-cost transition metal hexacyanoferrate compounds.5,6 Iron(III) sulfate can crystallize in both rhombohedral and monoclinic forms, with the former being more common. The lithium intercalation properties of both polymorphs was first studied by Manthiram and Goodenough.15 Subsequent studies have re-examined Fe2(SO4)3 on numerous separate occasions since then for lithium.14,16–18 Sodium intercalation was also initially examined in 1997, as discussed by Okada and Yamaki.19 In our work, the rhombohedral form was chosen for study due to its structural similarity to previously reported NASICON compounds.11,12 The open channels of this form facilitate a useable range of sodium solubility in the structure, despite potential limitations imposed by the large ionic size of sodium (Na B 116 Å vs. Li B 90 Å, six-coordinate Shannon radius).

The space group of rhombohedral Fe2(SO4)3 is R3, with lattice parameters of: a = 8.2362 Å, c = 22.1786 Å, a = 901, g = 1201 (ICSD #22368). Fig. 1 illustrates the pristine empty structure in the charged

Fig. 1 Crystal view of [001] plane (left), and [111] plane (right).

Fig. 2 Cyclic voltammogram at various scan rates.

For electrochemical evaluation, commercial Fe2(SO4)3 was heat-treated, ball-milled, and processed into electrodes (see ESI†) and used for all electrochemical experiments. Fig. 2 shows the cyclic voltammogram at various rates, from 0.05 to 2.0 mV s 1, which demonstrated excellent reversibility and only moderate polarization. At the slow scan of 0.05 mV s 1 (Fig. 3a), an oxidation peak at 3.35 V, reduction peak at 3.05 V, and an average working potential of 3.20 V were observed. With regard to lithium, the sulfate groups facilitates a 0.8 V larger redox potential than the phosphates in the same NASICON structure.14 A similar diﬀerence has also been observed in the case of sodium.19

Through galvanostatic testing it was found that about 1 mole of Na+ per unit mole of Fe2(SO4)3 can be electrochemically stored, rather than 2 moles (134 mA h g 1 theoretical capacity). This is in contrast to lithium, where full capacity can almost be attainted and is likely due to the larger ionic radius of sodium. This is not an isolated case, as other recently reported compounds have also displayed such behaviour, accommodating only about half the amount of sodium as compared to lithium.20

Indeed, the galvanostatic study (Fig. 3b) revealed that the first cycle discharge capacity is 65 mA h g 1, upon discharge to 2.0 V at 13 mA g 1. While only two-thirds of this is recovered upon subsequent charging, the material maintains consistent cycling stability thereafter. Eﬀort spent optimizing material properties could likely eliminate this irreversibility.

A comparison of various charge–discharge rates is shown in Fig. 3c. At up to 130 mA g 1, Fe2(SO4)3 maintained excellent rate capability. Once 650 mA g 1 was applied, significant capacity decrease was observed – which is an expected diffusion limitation. Upon returning to 13 mA g 1, even higher charge capacity was recorded compared to what was obtained earlier in the test. The charge and discharge capacities equilibrate after a few cycles. At 26 mA g 1 for 400 cycles, a capacity fade of about 20% was observed in our preliminary studies (Fig. 3d), despite no commonly-used in situ carbon coating or particle size control. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) and Galvanostatic Intermittent Titration Technique (GITT) were carried out to further study the sources of overpotential in Fe2(SO4)3

Fig. 3 (a) Cyclic voltammogram at 0.05 mV s 1. (b) First two discharge & charge cycles of galvanostatic test, at 13 mA g 1. (c) Rate capability test at 25 cycles per rate. (d) Cycle stability test at 26 mA g 1 for 400 cycles.

throughout sodium (de)intercalation. From here the eﬀects of activation, ohmic, and concentration overpotentials could be further studied.

EIS was first performed throughout various amounts of intercalated Na+ (Fig. 4). This was done at open circuit after

Several features, including extremely low cost and high cycling stability make this material fundamentally attractive for electrode applications. In addition, the inductive eﬀect of sulfate polyanions facilitate a high redox voltage for iron. Electrochemical sodium intercalation proceeds through a single phase mechanism, similar to that of lithium, and is limited to about 1 mole of stored sodium.

We believe that the insights provided here will facilitate the development of further advanced and sodiated polyanionic cathode materials. Particle size reduction and in situ carbon coating could likely further improve the rate capability and stability, while minimizing first cycle capacity loss. Beyond this, combining the desirable characteristics of other NASICON materials, such as Na3V2(PO4)3, hybrid materials that augment the high voltage of sulfates, larger capacity of phosphates, and low cost of iron can possibly be developed, promoting the potential commercial realization of a sodium ion battery.

The present work was supported by the Singapore National Research Foundation (NRF) through its Campus for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise (CREATE) program.

Fig. 4 Charge transfer resistance (RCT) extracted from PEIS analyses at various states of charge and discharge. 0% corresponds to full charge, 100% to full discharge.

a half hour relaxation period, following application of constant current. Interestingly, the charge transfer resistance (RCT) of the active material was the only value that changed significantly during charge and discharge. With a de-intercalated structure, RCT began at less than 150 O, and steadily increased to 400 O on 60% discharge before dropping slightly at the end once 2 V cutoﬀ was reached. The opposite eﬀect was even more pronounced on recharge, as RCT rapidly dropped below 200 O, where it remained until it reached 4 V charge.

Next, GITT was used to quantify the apparent diﬀusion rate. Fig. 4 illustrates that the diﬀusion coeﬃcient is about 10 11 cm2 s 1 at full charge. Midway through discharge, a dramatic decrease of two orders of magnitude was calculated. This behaviour is expected as dE/dt becomes smaller in the mildly-sloped regions. It then recovered as the voltage dropped below 3 V and the material accommodated up to 1 mole Na+. The deintercalation process closely mirrors the intercalation process, as Fe2(SO4)3 becomes charged again (Fig. 5).

In the case of lithium intercalation, no presence of a two phase mechanism has been observed.15 Our initial studies correlate with this analysis, and do not indicate a structural change upon sodium intercalation. Chemical sodiation for 24 h in diﬀerent molar ratios was carried out on the pristine compound with both naphthalene/THF and biphenyl/DME-based reducing agents. Regardless, no noticeable change in the powder X-ray diﬀraction pattern was observed (ESI,† Fig. S2).

In summary, we have demonstrated the capabilities of NASICON Fe2(SO4)3 as a sodium-intercalating electrode material.

Fig. 5 Diﬀusion coeﬃcient calculation at various states of charge.