The stability of lithium ion conducting glass ceramic Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 in different aqueous solutions was analyzed with X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and impedance analysis methods. The XRD results showed that LAGP glass ceramic decomposed into impurity phase Li3PO4 after being immersed in LiOH alkaline aqueous solution for 6 months. The results of impedance analysis indicated that the conductivity of glass ceramic immersed in 0.1 M LiOH alkaline aqueous solution at room temperature for 6 months obviously decreased. However, no conductivity change was observed for samples that were immersed in 1.0 M LiOH solution and saturated LiCl-HAc-H2O and LiCl-LiOH-H2O solutions. This result clearly indicates that Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 glass ceramic has excellent stability in saturated LiCl-HAc-H2O and LiCl-LiOH-H2O solutions, suggesting that it is a promising solid electrolyte and electrode protective layer for practical application in lithium/water battery.

During the past few years, much attention has been paid on lithium/ water and lithium/air batteries, because they have stood a good chance in achieving better discharge capacities than conventional batteries owing to the fact that they use lithium metal as the anode [1,2]. Lithium/water battery has great potential use especially in high-discharge-capacity power supplies for the long term operation of deep sea applications. The theoretical capacity of lithium/air battery is about 5.8–11.4 kWh/kg.

The solid electrolyte is one of the most important components that control the properties of lithium/water secondary battery. In the past decades, lots of investigations have been carried out on Li-analogs of NASICON structured lithium ion conductor with the general formula of LiGe2(PO4)3, because it is particularly stable against Li metal and can be used as the solid electrolyte and the protective layer for the lithium metal electrode [3–12].

Though the stability of Li1 + x + yTi2 − xAlxP3 − ySiyO12 in acid solutions had been reported [13], the stability of Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (denoted as LAGP) glass ceramic specimens soaked in aqueous solution of Li salt and LiOH alkaline aqueous solutions is scarcely understood up to now. Therefore, in the present work, we investigated the stability of the LAGP glass ceramic specimens that were soaked in different types of aqueous solutions (such as saturated LiCl-HAc-H2O solutions, saturated LiCl-LiOH-H2O solutions and various concentrations of LiOH solution) with XRD, SEM and AC impedance measurement.

Stoichiometric amounts of Li2CO3, Al2O3, GeO2 and NH4H2PO4 were used as the starting materials to prepare Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 glass ceramic by a conventional solid solution method. 10% excess Li2CO3 was employed to compensate the loss of lithium during the melting

Fig. 1. XRD proﬁles of LAGP specimens immersed in various aqueous solutions at room temperature for 6 months: (a) the pristine plate, (b) the specimen immersed in saturated LiCl-HAc-H2O, (c) the specimen immersed in saturated LiCl-LiOH-H2O, (d) the specimen immersed in 1.0 M LiOH, and (e) the LAGP plate immersed in 0.1 M LiOH.

process. The powders were weighed, mixed and milled in a high energy milling machine for 60 min. Then they were transferred to an electric furnace and heated to 700 °C in an alumina crucible for 2 h in order to decompose ammonia, carbon dioxide and water vapor out from the starting materials. Finally, the powders were melted at 1350 °C for 2 h and poured onto preheated stainless steel plates. The cast glass sheets were annealed at 470 °C for 2 h to release the thermal stresses and then cooled down to room temperature. To obtain the glass ceramic specimens, the annealed glass sheets were crystallized at 825 °C for 6 h with a heating rate of 5 °C/min.

Crystalline phases were identiﬁed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis at room temperature using Cu-Kα radiation. The microstructures of the crystalline phases were observed by means of ﬁeld emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JSM-5510LV, Japan) on fractured surfaces. The ionic conductivities were determined using impedance spectroscopy (Solartron2016 impedance analyzer) in the frequency

range of 0.1–106 Hz, with a voltage amplitude of 5 mV. After polishing, platinum was sputtered onto the two parallel faces of the specimens in order to ensure the necessary electrical contacts. The platinum coated specimens were assembled into a cell using stainless steel blocking electrodes in a cell ﬁxture.

The XRD patterns for the LAGP glass ceramic specimens immersed in various aqueous solutions for 6 months at room temperature are shown in Fig. 1. The NASICON structure phase of LiGe2(PO4)3 (JCPDS card 801923) was found to be the major crystalline phase in all LAGP glass ceramic specimens. As shown in this ﬁgure, no change in the XRD patterns were observed in saturated LiCl-HAc-H2O and LiCl-LiOH-H2O

Fig. 2. SEM photographs of LAGP specimens immersed in various aqueous solutions at room temperature for 6 months: (a) the pristine plate, (b) the specimen immersed in saturated LiCl-HAc-H2O, (c) the specimen immersed in saturated LiCl-LiOH-H2O, (d) the specimen immersed in 1.0 M LiOH, and (e) the specimen immersed in 0.1 M LiOH.

solutions, compared to the pristine LAGP plate. Interestingly, the Li3PO4 phase (JCPDS card 87-0039) was observed for LAGP specimens immersed in 0.1 M and 1.0 M LiOH aqueous solutions at room temperature for 6 months (cf., Fig. 1(d) and (e)), indicating that LAGP glass ceramics were unstable in LiOH alkaline aqueous solutions. Besides, the diffraction intensity of Li3PO4 phase from specimen immersed in 0.1 M LiOH aqueous solution was much higher than that immersed in 1.0 M LiOH aqueous solution. This is relevant information from a practical standpoint for the glass ceramics in lithium/water batteries, because strong alkaline solutions cannot be used as electrolytes at the water electrode.

The stability of the LAGP glass ceramic plates immersed in various aqueous solutions was also conﬁrmed from the SEM observations. Fig. 2 shows the SEM images of the LAGP specimens immersed in saturated LiCl-HAc-H2O, saturated LiCl-LiOH-H2O, and 1.0 M LiOH solutions at room temperature for 6 months. No signiﬁcant surface morphology change can be observed in LAGP specimens after being immersed in saturated LiCl-HAc-H2O and LiCl-LiOH-H2O solutions, compared to the surface of pristine LAGP plate. However, obvious surface morphology change is observed in the specimen immersed in 0.1 M LiOH aqueous solution at room temperature for 6 months (cf., Fig. 2(d)). The surface of the sample is corroded seriously and rhombohedral crystal grains are observed clearly. The morphology change may be due to the dissolution of the decomposition reaction of crystalline phases and residual glass phase of LAGP specimens immersed in alkaline solutions, which is supported by XRD investigations (cf., Fig. 1). It is known that the glass phase of glass ceramic is more easily corroded than the crystal phases when the samples are immersed in strong alkaline solution.

The room temperature complex impedance plots for LAGP specimens immersed in various aqueous solutions for different times at room temperature are shown in Fig. 3. As can be seen, there is only one depressed semicircle and oblique line observed for all specimens. The depressed semicircle represents the grain boundary resistance while the intercept of the semicircle on the real axis at high frequency (low x value of abscissa axis) represents the bulk resistance. In addition, the appearance of a low frequency oblique line in the case of ionic blocking electrodes is an indication of the ionic nature of the NASICON structure material [14]. Accordingly, the total resistance of the specimen is obtained from the right intercept of the semicircle with the real axis in the plots, while the total conductivity (σt) of LAGP glass ceramic is calculated by σt = H / (S·Rt), where H is the sample's thickness and S is the sample's surface area [15].

In Fig. 3(a) and (b), the complex impedance plots of the pristine LAGP plates are compared with the LAGP specimens immersed in the saturated LiCl-HAc-H2O and LiCl-LiOH-H2O solutions at room temperature for 7 days, 60 days and 180 days, respectively. The impedance proﬁles of LAGP specimens immersed in the saturated LiCl-HAc-H2O and LiCl-LiOH-H2O solutions almost show no change except that the grain boundary resistances slightly ﬂuctuate. In the same way, Fig. 3(c) and (d) show the LAGP specimens immersed in 1.0 and 0.1 M LiOH alkaline aqueous solutions for different times. The grain boundary resistance of LAGP plates slightly increases after being immersed in 1.0 M LiOH alkaline aqueous solution for 6 months.

Especially, it should be noted that the grain boundary resistances of LAGP plates immersed in 0.1 M LiOH alkaline aqueous solution sharply increase with immerse times (cf., Fig. 3(d)), attributing to the resistance of decomposition product such as impurity phase Li3(PO4)3 segregated

Fig. 3. Complex impedance plots at room temperature of the LAGP specimens immersed in (a) saturated LiCl-HAc-H2O, (b) saturated LiCl-LiOH-H2O, (c) 1.0 M LiOH, and (d) 0.1 M LiOH aqueous solutions for different times.

Table 1 Electrical conductivities of the LAGP plates immersed in various aqueous solutions for different times.

Saturated LiCl + LiOH solution 2.592 Saturated LiAC + HAc solution 2.621 2.736 1.0 M LiOH alkaline solution 0.1 M LiOH alkaline solution 3.432

from LAGP glass ceramic. Moreover, these resistance changes may be due to the signiﬁcant loss of lithium ions in the major conducting phase LiGe2(PO4)3. The results indicate that the stability of LAGP plates not at all depends on the pH value of alkaline solution, which is a little different from the result reported by Shimonishi [13,16].

From the complex impedance plots of Fig. 3, the room temperature conductivities of LAGP plates immersed in various aqueous solutions for different times are summarized in Table 1. The conductivity of LAGP plates shows no signiﬁcant change after being immersed in these aqueous solutions for different times, except that in 0.1 M LiOH alkaline aqueous solution for several months. Though both of the samples in 0.1 M and 1.0 M LiOH alkaline aqueous solutions contain Li3PO4 impure phase according to XRD patterns (cf., Fig. 1), the conductivity of sample immersed in 1.0 M LiOH aqueous solution is much higher than that immersed in 0.1 M LiOH aqueous solution. This is probably because there are more Li+ in 1.0 M LiOH aqueous solution, which are greatly beneﬁcial to the conduction of lithium ions. In other worlds, the decreasing effect of conductivity from Li3PO4 impure phase plays a less important role than the increasing effect of conductivity from Li+ that dissociated from 1.0 M LiOH alkaline aqueous solution.

Hence, it can be concluded that the LAGP glass ceramics could be used not only as the solid electrolyte but also as the protective layer of lithium

metal electrode for lithium/water batteries with saturated LiCl-HAc-H2O and LiCl-LiOH-H2O aqueous solutions. However, the activation energy of conduction Ea, the bulk conductivity and the grain boundary conductivity of LAGP specimens are not analyzed in the present study, which needs more work in the next phase of our work.

The lithium ion conducting glass ceramic Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3, which was immersed in LiOH alkaline aqueous solution for 6 months, partly decomposed into impurity phase Li3PO4. However, the glass ceramics were excellently stable in saturated LiCl-HAc-H2O and LiCl-LiOH-H2O aqueous solutions. On the basis of the above results, it can be concluded that Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 glass ceramics are promising solid electrolytes and electrode protective layers for practical application in lithium/water batteries.