A new type of anode material for sodium-ion batteries is proposed which has been synthesized through solid state reaction. The galvanostatic charge/discharge cycling is carried out with a voltage range of 0.01–2.5 V vs. Na+/Na. First-principles calculations are also employed to theoretically investigate the crystal structure change and the insertion–extraction mechanism of Na ions in the NaZr2(PO4)3 structure. The Nasicon material exhibits an excellent reversible charge/discharge capacity under diﬀerent current densities, which is mainly attributed to the open and strongly bonded NaZr2(PO4)3 structure, allowing the high mobility of the Na ions tunnelling through the PO4–ZrO6 polyhedra chain.

In the eld of electrical energy storage, lithium-ion batteries have been widely used in portable electric vehicles and electric power storage devices.1–3 However, recent research is focusing on rechargeable sodium-ion batteries operable at room temperature, owing to the low cost and natural abundance of sodium. A large number of materials have been suggested as candidates for sodium-ion batteries.4–7 Due to its high Na+ rhombohedral R3c mobility within a three-dimensional network, the Nasicon material NaZr2(PO4)3 has been extensively investigated.8,9 This framework structure consists of PO4 tetrahedra and ZrO6 octahedra sharing corners and Na+ ions are located in the holes between the ZrO6 octahedra. The open and strongly bonded structure allows the high mobility of the Na+ ions tunnelling through the PO4–ZrO6 polyhedra chain.10 This Nasicon material NaZr2(PO4)3 is an attractive material for sodium-ion batteries, however, to the best of our knowledge, its application in sodium-ion batteries has not been reported.

In this work, using a simple, one-step solid reaction approach, NaZr2(PO4)3 was synthesized at 1200 C in the air. The as-prepared NaZr2(PO4)3 exhibits good electrochemical performance as an anode material for sodium-ion batteries. This work not only provides a new kind of anode material, but introduces a way for seeking Nasicon materials as new types of materials for sodium-ion batteries.

The Nasicon material NaZr2(PO4)3 was prepared by the one-step solid reaction sintering method. Stoichiometric proportions of Na2CO3, nanosized ZrO2 and NH4H2PO4, synthesized as described below, were heated to give the following overall reaction:

The starting materials were ground in an agate mortar for 30 C in the air. min and then heated in a muﬄe furnace at 1200 The samples were heated at a relatively low heating temperature speed (100 C for 10 h to release the gases (CO2, NH3 and H2O). Finally the samples were kept at 1200 C per hour) and were kept at 400 C for 12 h.

The morphology and microstructure of the as-prepared sample were characterized by X-ray diﬀraction measurement (XRD, Rigaku, D/max-RB), scanning electron microscopy (SEM, CAMBRIDGE, S-360) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL, JEM-2010). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Kratos AXIS Ultra DLD) was also applied to analyze the valence change.

Electrochemical measurements were conducted at room temperature using coin cells prepared inside an Ar-lled glovebox. The working electrodes were prepared by mixing the active material of NaZr2(PO4)3 powder, acetylene black and Teon (poly(tetrauoroethylene), PTFE) binder at a weight ratio of 75 : 15 : 10 to form a homogeneous slurry. Then the slurry was pasted uniformly onto copper foil and dried at 120 C for 12 h. The electrolyte was 1.0 M NaClO4 in a propylene carbonate electrolyte solution. A glass ber (GF/D) from Whatman was used as the separator. The cells were galvanostatically charged and discharged in a voltage range of 0.01–2.5 V versus Na/Na+ under diﬀerent current densities. The coin cell was also measured by electrochemical Solatron 1287/1255B) with a frequency range from 1  105 Hz to 0.1 Hz.

The XRD pattern of the sample is shown in Fig. 1(a). All Bragg peaks in the diﬀraction pattern are indexable to the pure phase of NaZr2(PO4)3 with JCPDS le number 71-959. The sharp peaks indicate that NaZr2(PO4)3 is well crystallized. The theoretical density (r) of the NaZr2(PO4)3 is estimated based on the following equation: r ¼ 

where M is the relative molecular mass, a, b, c, a, b, and g are the lattice parameters, NA is the Avogadro constant, and n is the number of molecule in one unit cell. The theoretical density is  3. The tap density of NaZr2(PO4)3 is estimated to be 3.2 g cm  3, and this is relatively higher than other tested to be 1.46 g cm particles with the same size, which can be attributed to the round-like particle shape (Fig. 1(c)).11 Consequently, high volumetric energy density and volumetric capacity are obtained in practical batteries.

Fig. 1(b) and (c) present the SEM and TEM images of the assynthesized NaZr2(PO4)3. The sample consists of many microsized granules, which tightly or loosely aggregate each other with an average particle size of 400–500 nm. Selected area electron diﬀraction (SAED, inset in Fig. 1(c)) shows clear spots and orderly arrangement. Fig. 1(d) displays the HRTEM image of NaZr2(PO4)3. Two diﬀerent lattice spacings of 4.40 ˚A and 6.33 ˚A can be seen obviously, corresponding to (110) and (012) lattice planes.12 The material exhibits clear atomic layers and well-crystallized structure.

In order to illustrate the crystal structure change and the insertion–extraction mechanism of Naions in the NaZr2(PO4)3

(c) TEM and (d) HRTEM images of the Fig. 1 synthesized NaZr2(PO4)3. The inset of (c) is the corresponding SAED pattern.

structure, the rst-principles plane-wave pseudopotential method13 implemented in the CASTEP package14 was employed to calculate the formation energy, the unit cell volume change and the XRD peaks for Na-ion insertion. Generalized gradient approximation (GGA) with norm-conserving pseudopotentials15 was used with the plane-wave cut-oﬀ of 400 eV. In order to study Na insertion and extraction, we constructed a primitive cell consisting of two NaZr2(PO4)3 molecules. Brillouine-zone integrations are made using (3  3  3) special-k-point meshes according to the Monkhorst–Pack scheme.16 For each geometry optimization both atomic positions and lattice parameters are fully relaxed using the quasi-Newton method.17 The convergence thresholds between optimization cycles for energy change, maximum force, maximum stress, and maximum displacement are set as 2  10  1, 0.1 GPa, and 0.002 ˚A, respectively. The optimization terminates when all of these criteria are satised. The choice of these computational parameters ensures good convergence in present studies.

As sodium ions are successively incorporated into the NaZr2(PO4)3, the formation energy is de ned as: Ef (Na) ¼ Etot(Na1+nZr2(PO4)3)   Etot(NaZr2(PO4)3)

here Etot(Na1+nZr2(PO4)3) is the total energy of the NaZr2(PO4)3 containing n sodium atoms in a primitive cell, Etot(NaZr2(PO4)3) is the total energy of the NaZr2(PO4)3 without any other sodium atom, and Etot(Na) is the total energy of a sodium atom in the reservoir (i.e., bulk Na).

The formation energy calculated by the rst-principles theory with respect to the number of Na ions in a NaZr2(PO4)3 unit cell is shown in Fig. 2(a). As the inserted Na ions increase, the formation energy inclines to more negative. The more negative of the formation energy, the more stable are the sodium ions located in the lattice. Therefore, according to the formation energy, it is predicted that more Na ions can insert into the NaZr2(PO4)3 structure.

Fig. 2(b) presents the volume change per unit cell during the insertion of Na ions into NaZr2(PO4)3 calculated from the rstprinciples theory. As the number of the located Na ions in a molecule ranges from 1.0 to 3.0, the volume of per unit cell increases from 0.532 nm3 to 0.585 nm3, only 10% volume increasing.

Nevertheless, the XRD patterns and the relaxed atomic structures calculated by the rst-principles theory (Fig. 2(c)) further explain the Na ions insertion behavior. As the x values in the NaxZr2(PO4)3 range from 1.0 to 2.5, the XRD peaks change only a little, indicating a stable structure in this process. The unchanged structure during Na insertion can provide a stable tunnel for Na ions, which benets the Na transmission in the electrodes. Consequently, it is possible to charge and discharge at high rates with less capacity decay in a Na ion battery. When x value approaches to 3.0, the XRD patterns quite diﬀer from the previous, and the original structure is destroyed.

The crystalline structures of NaxZr2(PO4)3 are also shown in the structure change. 

Fig. 2 (a) The relationship between the formation energy and the number of Na in NaxZr2(PO4)3. (b) Volume with respect to the number of Na ions in NaxZr2(PO4)3. (c) XRD patterns and the atomic structures calculated by the ﬁrst-principles.

NaZr2(PO4)3 to Na2.5Zr2(PO4)3, all lattices are made up of a series of PO4 tetrahedra and ZrO6 octahedra, and the alkali atoms are located in the holes between the ZrO6 octahedra. This structure is open and strongly bonded, and Na ions can easily tunnel through the interstitial sites determined by the PO4 and ZrO6 polyhedra and superionic conductivity is obtained. However, with more Na ions inserted, such as Na3Zr2(PO4)3, the ZrO6 octahedra is distorted and the skeleton of this crystalline structure is broken.

Fig. 3(a) shows the galvanostatic charge/discharge proles at  1 in the 100 cycles. The cut-oﬀ a current density of 20 mA g voltage is set in the range of 0.01 to 2.5 V vs. Na+/Na. It is found that the discharge capacity of the rst cycle is particularly high, which is ascribed to the formation of the solid electrolyte interface (SEI) and the capacity contribution of the acetylene black. The second discharge capacity of this material declines to  1, and the capacity loss of the following cycles is 150 mA h g very little. According to the specic capacity, approximately 2.8 mol Na ions are inserted and extracted in one mole NaZr2(PO4)3 during the charge and discharge process. Therefore, combining with the analysis in Fig. 2, it can be assumed that between Na1 xZr2(PO4)3 and Na3 yZr2(PO4)3 (0 < x < 1, 0 < y < 1). Therefore, the theoretical specic capacity is about 153 mA h  1. Comparing with some other anode materials of Na-ion g batteries, neither the energy density nor the capacity of NaZr2(PO4)3 is high enough.18,19 However, the open and strongly bonded structure of this Nasicon material has shown preliminarily the high mobility of the Na ions tunnelling through the PO4–ZrO6 polyhedra chain. The attempt to develop the Nasicon structure material for Na-ion batteries is worth pondering. More research needs to be done in the future to enhance the capacity and energy density, including doping, nanocrystallization and seeking Nasicon structure analogs.

Fig. 3 (a) The 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 50th, and 100th charge/discharge curves  1. (b) Coulombic eﬃciency proﬁles of the of NaZr2(PO4)3 at 20 mA g NaZr2(PO4)3 particles at 20 mA g

the coulombic eﬃciencies of the  1. It NaZr2(PO4)3 particles at the current density of 20 mA g obviously demonstrates that the as-prepared material exhibits high coulombic eﬃciencies. Aer several cycles, the coulombic eﬃciency is steady and almost near 100%, which means that during cycling the structure of NaZr2(PO4)3 is very stable.

XPS analysis is conducted to conrm the valence state of zirconium aer the discharge process, as is shown in Fig. 4(a). Before XPS measurements, the electrode was rst thoroughly washed with PC solution and then vacuum-dried to remove residual NaClO4. It can be obviously seen that both Zr4+ and Zr2+  1. exist aer discharging20 at a low current density of 20 mA g The insertion of Na ions into the NaZr2(PO4)3 structure is responsible for the coexistence of diﬀerent Zr valences. The detailed reaction kinetics of the as-prepared electrode are investigated using EIS in the frequency range of 1  105 Hz to 0.1 Hz at 5 mV amplitude. Fig. 4(b) gives the representative Nyquist plots of diﬀerent cycles. In the high frequency region, obvious depressed semicircles are found, which is attributed to

Fig. 4 (a) XPS Zr 2p spectra of the as-prepared material after the discharge process. (b) Impedance spectra for diﬀerent cycles.

charge/discharge impedance. In the low frequency region, the slope line (about 45 ) is due to Warburg impedance, attributable to the semiinnite diﬀusion of Na ions into the electrode– electrolyte interface. The slope lines at 10th and 50th cycles are both longer than the initial cycle, which reveals that the diﬀusion of Na ions into the electrode–electrolyte interface becomes more diﬃcult aer dozens of cycles. In the high frequency region, the diameters of the depressed semicircle at 10th and 50th cycles are also larger than that at the initial cycle, conrming higher charge transfer impedance. The increase of the charge-transfer impedance is mainly ascribed to an increased interfacial changes or side reactions.21 Nevertheless, the Nyquist plots at 10th and 50th cycles nearly coincide, which suggests that the crystalline structure of the electrode is maintained and no obvious structure change happens during the long cycling test. The steady state of the electrochemical impedance is interpreted as the result of the stable SEI formation throughout cycling.22 Owing to the particular Nasicon structure, the Na ions can insert and extract in the NaZr2(PO4)3 electrodes easily and, consequently stable and low electrochemical impedance is obtained. These results are consistent with the cycle performance illustrated in the following section.

Fig. 5(a) displays the initial charge and discharge curves tested at diﬀerent current densities. Even at a high current  1, the discharge capacity can still remain to density of 500 mA g  1, which shows excellent rate performance. be 112 mA h g Similar shapes with the increase of the voltage oﬀset are shown at diﬀerent current densities. The voltage oﬀset is mainly due to polarization losses and mechanical energy dissipation caused by the charge discharge induced stress eﬀect.23,24 Energy eﬃciency of the batteries will be lowered by the voltage oﬀset, which can be minimized by further improving the kinetics of the electrode, such as nanocrystallization and doping.25

The cycle performance of the NaZr2(PO4)3 electrodes is displayed in Fig. 5(b). The samples are tested at diﬀerent current  1 over 100 cycles. At the current densities from 20 to 500 mA g  1, the specic discharge capacity remains density of 20 mA g  1 aer 100 cycles. Comparing to the capacity of the 123 mA h g second cycle, this battery exhibits the capacity retention of 88% at the 50th cycle and 82% even at the 100th cycle. A quite high  1 is also carried out, and a very current density of 500 mA g stable discharge capacity is obtained. Even aer 100 cycles, the  1. The excellent discharge capacity still remains at 81 mA h g performance is mainly due to the open and strongly bonded

Fig. 5 (a) The initial charge and discharge curves tested at diﬀerent current densities. (b) Cyclic performance under diﬀerent current densities.

structure of this Nasicon material that allows the high mobility of the Na ions tunnelling through the PO4–ZrO6 polyhedra chain. The long-term stability and high charge/discharge rates make it possible to utilize this material in sodium-ion batteries for large-scale applications.

Through a simple solid state reaction, NaZr2(PO4)3 particles have been successfully synthesized. The electrochemical and structural properties of NaZr2(PO4)3 anodes for sodium-ion batteries have been investigated. This material oﬀers a decent  1 and low charge transfer storage capacity of 150 mA h g resistance. The open and strongly bonded Nasicon structure of this Nasicon material has exhibited bright prospects for its high mobility of the Na ions tunnelling through the PO4–ZrO6 polyhedra chain, leading to good rate performance and ionic conductivity.

The work was supported by the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University, Ministry of Education of China (NCET-2011-0577), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (FRF-TP-12-002B).