This paper presents studies of gas sensors prepared in ceramic technology with Nasicon as a solid electrolyte. Sensors work in the  voltammetric mode thus based on the excitation of a sensor with a periodic potential signal while current response is recorded.  The main aim is to investigate a Bi8Nb2O17 reference layer influence on sensor properties. Sensors I-V characteristics in different  concentration of nitrogen dioxide have been measured. Three different constructions of the sensor are compared.  © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.  © 2014 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license  Peer-review under responsibility of the Gdansk University of Technology.   (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/). Peer-review under responsibility of the Gdansk University of Technology Keywords: electrocatalytic sensor; gas sensor, nitrogen dioxide; solid state electrolyte 

In  recent  years  electrochemical  gas  sensors  based  on  solid  state  electrolytes  have  been  intensively  developed.  They are easy to obtain, use and relative durable [1]. Nasicon is one of the most promising materials, which have  been used in construction of gas sensors based on solid electrolytes. Most of these devices work in potentiometric or  amperometric  mode.  However,  some  works  are  dedicated  to  sensors  working  in  electrocatalytic  mode [2, 3].  Reported results indicate that such sensors have enhanced selectivity [3]. Principle of operation of such sensors is  based  on  the  galvanic  cell  excitation  with  a  periodic  potential  signal,  while  current  response  is  recorded.  When  a voltage  is  applied  to  sensors  electrodes  an  oxidation  or  a  reduction  of  chemical  species  occurs.  This  results  in  a unique  current-voltage  (I-V)  characteristic  for  each  type  and  concentration  of  measured  gas  mixture.  As  a  consequence gas concentration determination is possible. 

Electrocatalytic sensors usually employs simple structure of a solid electrolyte and two metal electrodes [3, 4]. In  this study electrocatalytic sensor with additional, reference layer is proposed. Our main goal was to check if presence of  Bi8Nb2O17  reference  layer  has  any  beneficial  effect  on  sensor  properties  in  case  of  electrocatalytic  nitrogen  dioxide sensor. In case of potentiometric gas sensor with such layer an improvement of sensor properties have been  reported [5]. Properties of the sensors with and without this layer are compared. 

Nasicon  pellets  were  prepared  using  the  sol-gel  method [6].  As  a  substrates  NH4H2PO4,  Na2SiO3·9H2O  and  ZrO(NO3)2·xH2O were used. Aqueous solution of ZrO(NO3)2 was mixed with aqueous solutions of NH4H2PO4 and  Na2SiO3·9H2O (molar ratio of components was 2:1:2) to form a sol. In order to obtain a gel, sol was heated at 100ºC  for 12 hours and continuously dried at 100ºC to form xerogel. First calcination at 750ºC for 2 hours and afterwards  sintering  at  1000ºC  for  12  hours  were  performed.  Reference  electrode  material  (Bi8Nb2O17)  was  prepared  from  Bi2O3 and Nb2O5. These oxides were mixed at the molar ratio 4:1 (Bi2O3:Nb2O5). Calcination of oxides powders at  750ºC for 5 hours and sintering at 950ºC for 10 hours were performed. 

One side of a Nasicon pellets was painted with Pt paste and then sintered at 900ºC. On the opposite side of pellet  a layer of Bi8Nb2O17 and Pt mixture was obtained in similar manner. Two kinds of sensor with reference layer were  investigated, one with both electrodes exposed to the test gas mixture and other with Pt+Bi8Nb2O17 electrode coated  with  dielectric  sealing.  Properties  of  these  two  sensors  were  compared  with  results  obtained  for  the  symmetrical  sensor without the reference electrode. Investigated sensors structures are presented in Fig. 1 and referred later as a  sensor 1, sensor 2 and sensor 3. 

Fig. 1. Sensor 1 with additional layer sealed (a), sensor 2 with additional layer unsealed (b) and sensor 3 with symmetrical structure (c) 

Measurement  stand  is  presented  in  the  Fig. 2.  The  measurements  were  performed  using  the  electrochemical  interface SI 1287 and a PC with suitable software for system control and data acquisition. Linearly changing voltage  of symmetrical triangular shape (range from 5 V to –5 V) was used. Temperature was fixed to 300ºC. 

Fig. 2. Measurement stand 

Fig. 3. Cyclic voltammograms at 300ºC measured for sensor 1 (a), sensor 2 (b) and sensor 3(c) 

Sensor 1 with sealed electrode  Sensor 2 with unsealed electrode  Sensor 3 with symmetrical

Fig. 4. Comparison between cyclic voltammograms measured for all sensors in 10 ppm NO2 

Current-voltage  plots  measured  for  all  sensors  in  the  atmosphere  of  the  mixtures  of  synthetic  air  and  nitrogen  dioxide  are  shown  in  the  Fig. 3.  It  is  visible  that  in  case  of  all  sensors  shape  of  obtained  plots  depends  on  the  concentration of NO2. In the Fig. 4 shapes of the I-V plots measured in the atmosphere containing 10 ppm of NO2  for  all  investigated  sensors  have  been  compared.  I-V  plots  measured  for  sensor  3  (Fig. 3c)  with  symmetrical  structure are almost symmetrical. Characteristics registered for two sensors with additional reference layers are less  symmetric. For sensor 1 with sealed electrode current-voltage plots (Fig. 3a) ‘positive’ peaks are much higher than  negative peaks.   

Fig. 5. Maximum current peak for different NO2 concentrations  sensor 1 (a), sensor 2 (b) and sensor 3 (c) 

Fig. 6. Potential dependence of NO2 concentration for all sensors. 

The maximum current peak value can be consider as a measure of the NO2 concentration [4]. Maximum peak  current dependences on NO2 concentration are presented in the Fig. 5. IMAX in the figure indicate maximum current  value of ‘positive’ peaks and IMIN maximum current value of ‘negative’ peak. In the most cases an increase of NO2  concentration causes an increase in the current value. In the Fig. 6 values of potentials corresponding to the IMAX and  IMIN are presented. This is the potential, in which chemical reaction occurring on the sensor electrodes is the fastest.  This potential is almost independent of the NO2 concentration and sensor structure. Only in case of sensor 2 values  of potentials corresponding with IMIN are slightly different.  

Value of registered currents strongly depends on structure of the sensor. The highest values of the currents were  recorded for the sensor without additional layers. This can be explained by the fact that electrochemical reaction can  freely  occur  on  both  electrodes.  In  case  of  the  sensor  with  sealed  reference  electrode  reactions  occur  mainly  on  unsealed Pt electrode, alternately oxidation and reduction. In case of sensor 2 one of the electrodes active area is  reduced by presence of Bi8Nb2O17 layer. 

In this work properties of the electrocatalytic sensors based on Nasicon and Bi8Nb2O17 with different construction  were  investigated.  Voltammetric  response  of  this  sensors  in  different  NO2  concentrations  have  been  measured.  Obtained results are compared with results of sensor with regular, symmetrical construction without any additional  layers.  It  has  been  proved  that  presence  of  auxiliary  layer  influenced  on  sensor  response.  Based  on  performed  experiments it is hard to judge if Bi8Nb2O17 improves sensor properties. Further studies are necessary. 

This  work  was  partially  supported  by  the  Polish  Ministry  of  Science  and  Higher  Education  under  grant 