A solid-state potentiometric CO2 sensor of the type CO2, O2, Au, Li2CO3-BaCO3 | Nasicon | Na2Ti6O13-TiO2, Au, O2, CO2 was  fully manufactured in planar thick-film technology. On the rear side of the sensor substrate an integrated heater is applied. Thus,  it is possible to operate the sensor as a stand-alone device. On the one hand, based on the special meander structure of the heater,  a homogeneous temperature distribution on the sensor side can be obtained. And on the other hand, it is possible to operate the  sensor with the ideal working temperature of 525 °C. At this temperature, the sensor signal follows the theoretical considerations  and responds to the Nernst equation. That way, it is possible to use the sensor in different applications, for example to detect the  CO2 concentration of human breathing air or to monitor the air quality in closed rooms.    © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license  © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.  (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/). Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of Eurosensors 2014.   Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of Eurosensors 2014 Keywords: CO2 sensor; nernstian behavior; Nasicon; potentiometric gas sensor 

Monitoring  the  CO2  concentration  is  necessary  in  many  everyday  applications,  for  example  to  examine  the  quality of the ambient air, in automotive applications or for human breath analysis [1, 2]. Solid-state potentiometric gas sensors provide many advantages. They are inexpensive and a fast sensor response behavior, high selectivity,  and long term-stability [3]. The first potentiometric CO2 sensor based on carbonates was proposed by Gauthier et al.  [4]. Several types of  CO2  sensors using a carbonate phase  with a  solid electrolyte like β-alumina or Nasicon are  described in literature [5-7]. 

Fig. 1: Sensor setup (cross section of the sensor setup; on top of the substrate there are the sensor layers and on the other side there is the heating 

Similar as suggested in [1] or [8], planar fast potentiometric CO2 sensors with Nasicon as a sodium conducting  phase, a carbonate mixture as sensing electrode, and Na2Ti6O13|TiO2 as reference electrode were manufactured (see  Fig.  1).  Due  to  the  low  affinity  of  Li2CO3  to  water  vapor  [9],  a  eutectic  mixture  of  Li2CO3|BaCO3  was  used  as  sensing electrode material. This system (so-called type IIIa according to Weppner et al. [10]) is thermodynamically  well-defined. The sensor characteristics are in very good agreement with the theoretical considerations and follow  the Nernst equation (1) without cross-dependency to the oxygen partial pressure.  

Due  to  the  planar  heater  structure  (see  Figure  1)  on  the  reverse  side  of  the  sensor  substrate,  it  is  possible  to  operate the sensor as a stand-alone device at an operating temperature of 525 °C. In the area of the functional sensor  materials (upper half of the sensor substrate), there is a homogeneous temperature distribution due to the optimized  heater structure. 

The  investigated  potentiometric  CO2  sensors  were  fully  manufactured  in  thick-film  technology.  All  ceramic  precursor powders were prepared by a mixed-oxide route, as suggested in [8]. In order to prepare screen-printable  pastes, each of the prepared powders was mixed with an organic binder to form a homogeneous paste. 

On top of a bare Al2O3-substrate (3.5 mm x 9.75 mm) a Nasicon layer was screen-printed. Then, the reference  phase Na2Ti6O13|TiO2 was printed on one side of the Nasicon film. Two gold grid electrodes were printed according  to Figure 1. Finally, the sensitive Li2CO3|BaCO3 mixture was printed on top of one gold grid. 

First of all, the sensors were calibrated. Therefore, the sensors were located in a flow channel and heated up to  525°C by the integrated heating element on the reverse side of the sensor element. Then, a synthetic gas with N2, 

15 % O2 and varying CO2 concentration (0.25 % 5 %) passed through the flow channel, while the sensor voltage  was measured. 

In a setup for breath analysis, the flow channel was realized as an orifice, in which the sensor was mounted. It  was heated up to 525 °C by the heating filament on the rear side of the sensor substrate. Then, a person inhaled and  exhaled through one entry of the orifice.  

Furthermore, such sensors can be used to monitor the air quality in closed rooms. For that purpose, a sensor was  placed in a closed room during a seminar and heated up to its working temperature of 525 °C. The sensor voltage  was recorded. 

Fig. 2: a) and b): Characteristic curve of the tested sensor; a) logarithmic scale as it is interesting from a scientific point of view; b) applicationoriented linear representation. c): Measured CO2 concentration during a few respiratory cycles of a person. The curves agree with a typical breath cycle, according to [11]. 

After  the  calibration  of  the  CO2  sensor,  the  characteristic  curve  of  the  sensor  (see  Figure  2a  and  2b),  which  responds  to  the  Nernst  equation,  is  obtained  (m = 75 mV/decade pCO2,  i.e.,  n = 2.20).  Using  the  previously  determined characteristic curve of the sensor, the CO2 concentration of the human breathing air (almost 0 % during  inhaling, up to 5 % during exhaling) could be detected (see Fig. 3). Due to the fast response time of the sensor and  the ability to operate the sensor as a stand-alone device, it can be used to monitor human breathing. 

Fig. 3: CO2 concentration during a meeting in a small class room with three presentations. After ca. 35 and 50 min, the windows were opened. 

Such sensors were also investigated as sensors to monitor the air quality in closed rooms. Figure 3 shows data  obtained in a class room during a seminar. During the presentations, the CO2 concentration increased. After each  presentation, the windows were opened and the CO2 concentration decreased almost to the initial value. Please note  that the slope after each airing is identical, since it is a measure for the number of people in the room. 

A  potentiometric  CO2  sensor  with  an  internal  heating  element  on  the  reverse  side  was  fully  and  reproducibly  manufactured  in  thick-film  technology.  The  sensor  characteristics  are  in  good  agreement  with  the  theoretical  considerations and the sensor could even be used as a stand-alone device. Due to its fast response and the good longterm stability, measurements with real breathing air and measurements to control the air quality in closed room are  possible. 

This work was supported by the Bavarian Research Foundation (Bayerische Forschungsstiftung; AZ-879-09) 