Solid State Ionics 253 (2013) 217–222

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Solid State Ionics

Inﬂuence of Cationic ordering on ion transport in NASICONs: Molecular dynamics study Supriya Roy, P. Padma Kumar ⁎ Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati, Assam -781 039, India

Article history: Received 6 May 2013 Received in revised form 15 September 2013 Accepted 19 September 2013 Available online 25 October 2013

Molecular dynamics investigations suggest the signiﬁcance of Si/P ordering on the nature of ion transport in NASICONs (acronym for Na-superionic conductor). For certain Si/P ordering predominantly two dimensional transport of Na+ ions in Na2Zr2SiP2O12 is predicted, which is otherwise known to be an isotropic ionic conductor. The microscopic energetic barriers and topology of the conduction channels are analyzed.

NASICONs (acronym for Na-superionic conductor) have attracted numerous experimental investigations since the observation of fast ion transport in Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12, where 0 ≤ x ≤ 3, by Hong and Goodenough et al. [1,2]. These solid solutions have an oxide framework, consisting of ZrO6 octahedra sharing corners with (Si/P)O4 tetrahedra, which is characteristic of NASICONs. The Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 solid solutions stabilize in rhombohedral R3c space group, though compositions in the range of 1.6 ≤ x ≤ 2.2 exhibit a monoclinic (B2/c) distortion at low temperatures, below 440 K [3]. The versatility of NASICON framework in accommodating a variety of ions has been exploited in the last three decades to synthesize a large number of iso-structural solids, and their potential in diverse applications, such as low-thermal expansion ceramics, nuclear waste disposal materials, refractory materials, sensors and as solid electrolytes, are being explored [4–10]. However, despite the advances on the broader aspects, such as on the prospects of these materials for technological applications, our understanding of microscopics of ion transport, particularly, the energetic and factors that control it, in these systems remains far from complete. Some of the outstanding issues that are of critical importance in the design and tailor making of future battery materials shall be brieﬂy reviewed below. The Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12, 0 ≤ x ≤ 3, series forms one of the most extensively investigated systems, and is known to exhibit a maximum in ionic conductivity around x = 2, for Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (dc conductivity,σdc ~ 10−1 S/cm at 573 K), while the end members x = 0 and x = 3 show signiﬁcantly lower conductivity (σdc ~ 10-4 S/cm) [11]. The NASICON framework renders high density of interstitial sites favorable for alkali ion occupation — the prominent Na(1) and Na(2) sites (respectively the 6b and 18e sites of R3c space group), and the midNa site (36f) of relatively low per-site occupancy [11,12]. The major conduction channel in the framework has been identiﬁed as the one connecting Na(1) – mid-Na –Na(2) sites from previous X-ray diffraction [11,13] and simulation studies [14]. The conductivity variations with composition accompany interesting structural modiﬁcations, where a parameter of the rhombohedral cell is observed to increase with x, while the c parameter exhibits a maximum around x = 2. Boilot et al. showed that these lattice parameter variations result in an anomalous expansion of Na-O6 octahedra peaking, again, around x = 2, which is directly linked to the expansion of the triangular bottleneck for Na + transport along the Na(1) – mid-Na – Na(2) channel [11]. The anomalous conductivity variation of Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 with the maximum around x = 2 has been variably attributed to this opening of the bottleneck [15] and ion–ion correlations [11,16] by investigators. In the absence of detailed microscopics of ion motion, understanding of the different factors that control the ion transport in NASICONs remains largely speculative.

The ionic conductivity of NASICONs has been found to be sensitive to synthesis roots and sintering temperatures of samples [11,17,18]. Colomban [3] carried out systematic investigation of the dependence of thermal history of samples on conductivity and the normal–superionic transition (monoclinic B2/b to rhombohedral R3c) of Na3Zr2Si2PO12. It is shown that samples sintered at high temperatures systematically showed larger conductivity and low activation barriers. Also, the hightemperature-sintered samples exhibited sharper features of monoclinicto rhombohedral transition around 450 K, including distinct slopes in the Arrhenius plot for the highand low-temperature phases [3]. These aspects which are central to design and fabrication of energy devises, however, have not received due attention. This calls for detailed investigation of microscopic structure and ion transport, where atomistic simulation techniques, such as molecular dynamics, would be of great utility as demonstrated in the past [19–21].

Recently, Taskin et al. [22,23] demonstrated that the oxygen diffusivity in Gd0.5Ba0.5MnO3-δ can be enhanced by orders of magnitude by inducing ordering of Gd and Ba ions at the A-sites of its ABO3-perovskite structure. Molecular dynamics simulations on GdBaCo2O5+δ-double perovskites by Parﬁtt et al. [24] showed that cationic disorder of Gd–Ba sublattice results in an overall reduction of oxygen diffusivity, but promotes degree of isotropy of conduction. Effect of cationic disorder on oxygen transport is predicted in Ba0.5Sr0.5Co1−xFexO2.5, where 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, as well [25]. More recently, based on molecular dynamics investigations on the high conducting Na3Zr2Si2PO12 we proposed that the Si/P order in the NASICON framework plays an important role on the Na+ transport in the system [26]. The stronger Coulombic repulsion between Na+ and P5+ ions modiﬁes the local electrostatic potential energy barrier for Na+ along the conduction channel, depending on the P5+ locations in the unit cell. Thus certain Si/P arrangements result in more than one order of magnitude conductivity over other, suggesting a new structural feature that controls fast ion transport in solids [26]. The investigation on the role of Si/P ordering in NASICONs is extended to the x = 1 composition, Na2Zr2SiP2O12, here. The present study predicts predominantly two dimension Na+ transport for certain Si/P ordering in the NASICON framework which is otherwise known to be isotropic.

Microcanonical molecular dynamics (NVE-MD) simulations are performed at 623 K employing the inter atomic potential,

where qi is the charge and σi the ionic radius of the ith ion; Aij and Cij are, respectively, the overlap repulsive energy and dispersion constant between the pair of ions. The parameters are listed in reference 27. This interatomic potential has performed exceptionally well in reproducing various properties of NASICONs including the gross conductivity variations in Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 with composition, across the range 0 ≤ x ≤ 3 [27,28]. In addition to, various bond lengths and bond angles in the system, the monotonic increase in a-parameters, and anomalous changes in c-parameter, that peaks around x = 2, were predicted in good agreement with experimental results [28]. The simulations estimated the Na+ populations at Na(1), Na(2), mid-Na sites in agreement with the X-ray results of Boilot et al. [11] and the conduction channel was recognised as Na(1) to Na(2) through the mid-Na sites [28]. More recently, the potential has been employed to study the distortions and orientational disorder of the polyhedra in MZr2P3O12, where M = Li, Na, K, Rb and Cs, and their role on the anisotropic variations of the lattice parameters and low thermal expansion, over a wide range of temperatures [29].

The simulations are performed on 3 × 3 × 1 rhombohedral (R3c) unit cells of Na2Zr2SiP2O12 containing a total of 1026 ions, starting from the X-ray structure at 623 K [11]. However, in the absence of speciﬁc knowledge on the Si and P locations in the unit cell, two structural models (Fig. 1), differing only in their Si/P order in the framework, are

Fig. 1. The two Si/P ordered frameworks of Na2Zr2SiP2O12; S1-S1-S1 structure (on left) and S0-S0-S3 (on right). One column of ‘lantern units’ along the c-axis is shown along with all the SiO4 (green) and PO4 tetrahedra (red), and few a ZrO6 octahedra (violet) in a unit cell. A few of the prominent Na+ sites, Na(1) (grey) and Na(2) (yellow), are also shown.

investigated. The eighteen (Si/P)O4 tetrahedra in a unit cell are located on six basal planes, parallel to the ab-plane, at a spacing of c/6 along the c-axis. The ﬁrst structure, labelled S1-S1-S1 (left panel in Fig. 1), has one SiO4 tetrahedron and two PO4 tetrahedra on each of the basal planes. The second structure, labelled S0-S0-S3, has repeating units of two phosphorous rich planes sandwiching one silicon rich layer (right panel in Fig. 1) — two such units per unit cell.

The above choice of Si/P ordering is made only to create contrasting local coordination with Si4+ and P5+ ions at the Na(1) and Na(2) sites, but otherwise not unique. For instance, the Na(2) sites are also located on these basal planes, and are 3 coordinated to the coplanar Si/P sites at a distance of about 3.15 Å. The Na(1) sites fall between these basal planes, and are six coordinated to the Si/P sites above and below it, at a larger distance of 3.76 Å. These two different structures, S1-S1-S1 and S0-S0-S3, thus create different Si/P co-ordination to the Na(1) and Na(2) locations. Since the pathway of Na+ migration in the NASICON structure is the one that connects Na(1) and Na(2) sites [11,13,14], the electrostatic potential felt by the Na+ ions along the migration channel is modiﬁed depending on the local coordination with Si4+ and P5+. It may be noted that the interchange of Si and P ions in these two frameworks corresponds to the two ordered structures, P1-P1-P1 and P0-P0P3, of the x = 2 composition, Na3Zr2Si2PO12, where our previous investigation predicted more than one order higher Na+ conductivity for the former [26].

Periodic boundary conditions under minimum image convention are imposed for calculation of short range interactions, while Ewald summation technique employed for the convergence of long-range Coulombic interactions [30]. Newton's equations of motion are integrated, for all the 1026 ions (in the simulation super-cell consisting of 3 × 3 × 1 unit cells), using velocity-Verlet algorithm at a time step of 2 femto seconds. Four nanoseconds at the start of the simulation are dedicated for temperature control, through velocity scaling, and equilibration of the system. The production runs are 6 nano seconds long during which trajectory samples are stored at intervals of 0.4 picoseconds for analysis of structural and dynamical properties. Simulations using 5 × 5 × 2 unit cells are performed to conﬁrm the adequacy of the system size.

The radial distribution functions (RDF), g(r), between select ion pairs, Zr–O, Si–O, P–O and O–O, for the S1-S1-S1 and S0-S0-S3 structures having different Si/P orders are shown in Fig. 2, along with those for the X-ray structure [11]. While the Zr–O and O–O distributions are nearly identical for the two Si/P orders, the corresponding Si–O and P–O distributions show slight differences, at long range, owing to different locations of Si and P in the framework. The Zr–O, Si–O and P–O bond-lengths in the simulated system are respectively 2.07, 1.61 and 1.52 Å in agreement with previous X-ray studies [11]. Since Si/P locations are indistinguishable in X-ray study corresponding Si–O and P–O RDFs are identical, and their ﬁrst peak positions reﬂect average Si/P–O bond lengths, not their individual values. Overall, the RDFs suggest that the Si/P order in the framework does not result in appreciable changes in the NASICON framework.

The mean squared displacements (MSD) of Na+ ions at 623 K for Na2Zr2SiP2O12 having S1-S1-S1 and S0-S0-S3 ordering are shown in Fig. 3. A comparison to the high conducting x = 2 composition, Na3Zr2Si2PO12, with Si and P locations in the framework interchanged, P1-P1-P1 and P0-P0-P3, are provided for comparison. Self diffusion coefﬁcient of Na+ ions is conveniently calculated from the slope of the curve, [30]

where r(t), r(0) are the position vectors of a particular ion at two instances separated over a period t, the b … N in the MSD (numerator) indicates average over the species and over different time origins. Our previous MD simulation [26] showed that the MSD of Na+ ions in the P1-P1-P1 structure of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (where one P and two Si are arranged on each of the six basal planes along the c-axis per unit cell) are more than an order higher than the P0-P0-P3 structure (where two Si-rich planes, followed by one P-rich plane are staked along the c-axis). However, in the present case of Na2Zr2SiP2O12 the overall diffusivity of Na+ is similar in magnitude for the S1-S1-S1 and S0-S0-S3

Fig. 2. The radial distribution functions, g(r), between select ion pairs, Zr–O, Si–O, P–O and O–O, for Na2Zr2SiP2O12 frameworks with two different Si/P orders from MD simulation at 623 K. The intensities of the ﬁrst peaks are truncated for optimal view of the function at long range. The vertical bars in brown are for the corresponding X-ray structure [11] in arbitrary units. The functions are uniformly displaced along the Y-axis for clarity.

Fig. 3. The mean squared displacements (MSD) of Na+ ions with time for Na2Zr2SiP2O12 having different Si/P ordering from MD simulation at 623 K. Also shown are the corresponding MSDs for the two different Si/P orders, P1-P1-P1 and P0-P0-P3 for the Na3Zr2Si2PO12, from previous MD simulation [26] at 623 K. The lower panels show the MSD resolved along the x-, y-, and zdirections for S1-S1-S1 and S0-S0-S3 structures.

structures, that the inﬂuence of Si/P order in the x = 1 composition is less dramatic, quantitatively. The dc conductivity of Na+ ions is calculated from the Nernst–Einstein relation,

where n is the number of the species per unit volume, q — the charge of the ion, D — the self diffusion coefﬁcient, k — the Boltzmann constant and T — the temperature of the simulation in Kelvin. The Na+ conductivity of the x = 2 composition for the P1-P1-P1 structure (σdc = 0.366 S cm−1), is estimated to be several folds higher than that for comparable structure, S1-S1-S1 of the x = 1 composition (σdc = 0.06 S cm−1).

The MSDs of the S0-S0-S3 structure of the x = 1 composition, x-, yand zdirections are shown in the lower panels of Fig. 3. The MSDs calculated along the x-axis (chosen along the a-axis of the rhombohedral cell), yaxis (chosen to lie on the ab-plane, 30° clock-wise to the b-axis of the rhombohedral cell) are comparable. We shall note in passing that, the y-component is expected to be lower than the x-component, by a fraction of cos230° (=3/4), as distances along b-direction (equivalent to a-direction for the rhombohedral cell) are projected on y-axis by a fraction of cos30°, and MSDs involve squares of distances traversed by an ion. Interestingly, the MSDs calculated along the z-direction (identical to the c-axis of the rhombohedral cell), are nearly zero, suggesting predominantly two dimensional transport of Na+ in the NASICON framework. This is in contrast to the case of the S1-S1-S1 structure where the MSDs along all three axes are comparable. Thus, the present MD simulations predict observation of two dimensional ion transport in Na2Zr2SiP2O12 system depending on the Si/P order in the framework. This result cautions that, though perceived ‘isotropic’, the NASICON framework is not necessary so in general, and gets lifted depending on cationic order present in the framework.

Detailed microscopic information related to the nature of ion transport in Na2Zr2SiP2O12 can be derived from the density and energy proﬁles of the Na+ ions. Fig. 4 has the statistical distribution of Na+ in the simulation cell, consisting of 3 × 3 × 1 rhombohedral unit cells, where coordinates of all Na+ ions over the stored trajectory are visualized

Fig. 4. The three-dimensional distributions of Na+ in the simulation cell — snapshots superimposed over six nanoseconds long MD simulation of Na2Zr2SiP2O12 at 623 K. One MD conﬁguration of the two framework structures, S1-S1-S1 (top panel) and S0-S0-S3 (bottom panel), is shown in ball-and-stick model (Si — green; P — red; Zr — grey; O — not shown).

perpendicular to the c-axis in a single frame, along with one conﬁguration of the framework species. The Na+ distribution for the S1-S1-S1 structure suggests well connected percolation pathways extending in all directions, and is very similar to that observed for the P1-P1-P1 structure of the Na3Zr2Si2PO12-system examined in our previous study. Evidently, six Na+ migration channels originating from a Na(1) site connecting to six neighbouring Na(2) sites, three on basal planes above and three below, can be seen. No direct channels connecting two neighbouring Na(2) or Na(1) sites are present. This explains the near isotropic nature of the Na+ transport observed for the S1-S1-S1 structure. The distribution of Na+ for the S0-S0-S3 is most striking with bands of high and low populations stacked along the c-axis of the cells (Fig. 4, lower panel). The bands of high Na+ populations are appearing systematically around the two Si-rich basal planes per cell, and each extends over c/3 distance between two S0-basal planes (P-rich) below and above it. The high density bands include two layers of Na(1) sites each. The low density bands appear between neighbouring S0-planes and include one layer Na(1) sites which are nearly fully populated but remain disconnected islands of Na+ in all three directions. On the other hand, the Na(1) sites in the high density bands are well connected with Na(2) sites on planes above and below it, forming pseudo-two-dimensional migration channels for Na+ transport in the system. The Na+ ions localized in Na(1) sites between the S0-planes, form 1/3rd of the total Na+ ions in the system, and do not contribute appreciably to the average diffusivity calculated from the MSD. This accounts for the slightly lower value of overall Na+ diffusivity in the S0-S0-S3 structure, roughly by a 2/3rd, relative to the S1-S1-S1 structure.

The potential energy proﬁle of Na+ ions moving in the interstitials of the framework helps in identifying the microscopic energy barriers for

ion transport in the system. The energy proﬁle of the ith ion due to its interaction with all the other ions in the system is computed as,

such that the total potential energy utot of the system is written as,

where u(rij) is the inter atomic potential between ions i and j, separated by a distance rij under periodic boundary conditions. The energy proﬁle with respect to their z-coordinates, averaged over the stored trajectory from MD simulation at 623 K, is shown in Fig. 5. The potential energy proﬁle for the S1-S1-S1 structure is relatively ﬂat with minima appearing at Na(1) and Na(2) sites. The energy of Na(1) site is observed to be lower by about 0.1 eV relative to Na(2) site, and a barrier of about 0.15 eV can be estimated from Fig. 5. The width of the basins at Na(1) and Na(2) sites is in agreement with the corresponding breadth of Na+ distribution at these sites along the c-axis (see Fig. 4). The energy proﬁle for the S0-S0-S3 structure has large barriers along the c-axis, with a twinmaxima appearing between the P-rich (S0) basal planes, and a deep minimum at the centre — coinciding with Na(1) sites encompassed by these P-rich planes. The near full occupancy of these Na(1) sites imposes large barriers (due to Na+ – Na+-repulsion) to the oncoming Na+ ions, preventing long range transport of Na + along the c-axis. The broader

Fig. 5. The potential energy proﬁle (blue) and the histogram of Na+ population (violet) along the c-axis for Na2Zr2SiP2O12 having different Si/P ordering from MD simulation at 623 K. Locations of Na(1) and Na(2) sites are shown by vertical bars. For the S0-S0-S3 structure the locations of Si-rich and P-rich basal planes are marked. The Na+ populations are normalized to the total number of the species in the simulation cell.

basin observed around the Si-rich (S3) planes essentially constitutes the pseudo two-dimensional conduction channel along the ab-plane. The appearance of a few well deﬁned peaks in the Na+ density in the absence of well deﬁned minima in energy, suggests that the broad-shallow nature of basin is a result of dynamical smoothening due to signiﬁcant Na+–Na+ correlations.

The Na+ conduction channel in the S0-S0-S3 structure is visualized in Fig. 6, where a cross section of Na+ population (in arbitrary scale) on the ab-plane corresponding to one of the two dense bands in a unit cell (refer to Fig. 4, as well) is shown. The population includes all Na+ ions in a slab of 5.1 Å thickness, that covers the Na(2) sites on the Si-rich basal plane and Na(1) sites above and below this basal plane. Pathways from Na(1) to the ‘terminating’ Na(2) sites on the Prich planes (see also Fig. 4), which do not contribute to long range ion transport, are also visible. The well integrated network of Na+ population on the ab-plane accounts for the long-range motion of Na+ in the S0-S0-S3 structure. Thus the topology of the Na+ channel in this

Fig. 6. The un-normalized population of Na+ (in logarithmic scale) on the ab-plane (of 3×3 unit cells) on a slab of 5.1 Å thickness (along the c-axis) around the Si-rich plane demonstrates the migration pathway of ions in S0-S0-S3 structure. The locations of high Na+ population correspond to the Na(2) sites and the tri-junctions are the Na(1) sites.

structure can described by, Na(2)/S3 – 2 Na(1)/Si–P – 3 Na(2)/S3, meaning, every Na(2) site on Si-rich plane is connected to two Na(1) sites at the interlayer of Siand P-rich planes that is connected to three Na(2) sites on Si-rich plane.

Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of NASICONs having two different Si/P orders highlight signiﬁcance of the interaction between mobile species with the framework cations. The nature of Na+ transport in Na2Zr2SiP2O12 is found sensitive to the Si/P order present in the framework owing to the increased Coulombic repulsion of Na+ with P5+ relative to Si4+. Interestingly, the framework with Si-rich basal planes sandwiched between two P-rich planes, stacked along the c-axis favors two dimensional conduction along the basal plane, while a ‘uniform’ distribution of Si along the c-axis results nearly isotropic transport of Na+. This behavior is agreement with the energetic barriers calculated for the two structures. The topology of the Na+ channel in this structure is, Na(2)/S3 – 2 Na(1)/Si–P – 3 Na(2)/S3, where a Na(2) site on Si-rich plane is connected to two neighboring Na(1) sites above and below it, that is connected to three Na(2) sites on Si-rich plane.

While there are no direct experimental evidence pertaining to Si/P order in NASICON frameworks, the variance in conductivity and activation energies across previous experimental reports, in the light of these molecular dynamics studies, suggests that the Si/P order is likely to be sensitive to synthesize roots and heat treatment of samples. We shall note that the two ordered structures examined were close in their average potential energies at 623 K (by less than 10% of the thermal energy of ions), and no attempt to judge their relative thermodynamic stability is attempted.

The conductivity dependence on the order of framework cations, predicted in molecular dynamics studies, is expected to be a general phenomena, particularly in aliovalently substituted fast ion conductors. This effect will be important in the design and fabrication of energy materials, and calls for more experimental and theoretical efforts towards elucidation of microscopic structure and energetics in fast ion conductors.