The discharge performance of the water-stable lithium electrode (WSLE) is improved by introducing the surface modiﬁcation of the glass-ceramic plate (LAGP and LATP). The water-stable lithium electrodes are prepared with the NASICON-type glass-ceramic plates as protection layer, and using organic electrolyte  1 are wateras interlayer. The glass-ceramic plates with ionic conductivity of 4  10 stable and 300e500 mm thick. The modiﬁed layer is deposited onto the glass-ceramic plates by RF magnetron sputtering from a Li4Ti5O12 target. The modiﬁed layer is analyzed by XRD, SEM-EDX, Raman and XPS. The Li-air test-cells are assembled with an SCE as reference electrode in aqueous solution. In the Li-air test-cells, the AC impedance and constant polarization potential measurements are carried out to identify the improvement of modiﬁcation. The impedance of interface between the glass-ceramic plate and organic electrolyte decreases about 20e50%. Consequently, the discharge current is promoted about 70e80%. Then, by introducing interfacial modiﬁcation of glass-ceramic plate, the power performance of WSLE is remarkably promoted.

The lithium-air and lithium-water battery has attracted many researchers’ attention, as the extremely high speciﬁc energy storage system in principle. Although the energy potentiality is high comparing with other electrochemical systems, the practical implementation still has to face several issues regarding both the electrodes and electrolytes. One of the issues, which have to be solved, is that the discharge product Li2O2 is insoluble in organic electrolyte and clogs the porous air-electrode gradually.

Visco et al. and Imanishi et al. proposed a water-stable lithium anode protected by Li3M2(PO4) solid electrolyte, which conquered this issue [1e4]. The Li3M2(PO4) with NASICON-type structure is a kind of water-stable lithium-ion super conductor. And since the Li3M2(PO4) has reduction reaction with lithium metal in contact, a lithium-ion conductive interlayer was employed between Li3M2(PO4) and the Li-metal. At ﬁrst solid-state lithium-ion conductors have been proposed as protective interlayer, such as LiPON etc. However, the solid-state interlayer has low ionic conductivity and can’t adapt to the surface-morphological changes of Li-metal electrode during discharge. Subsequently, the polymer electrolyte and organic electrolyte was proposed as the interlayer for better lithium-ion conductivity and surface-morphological adaptability [5e10]. In our previous work, it is found that the interface impedance between the solid electrolyte plate and the organic electrolyte is dominant during discharge in WSLE, which is controlling the current density [11]. Then, the interface impedance between the solid electrolyte and organic electrolyte became important. For improving the performance of water-stable lithium anode protected by solid electrolyte plate, the interface impedance must be reduced.

In this work, the water-stable electrolyte plates were prepared by a Li2OeAl2O3eTiO2eP2O5 (LATP) or Li2OeAl2O3eTiO2eP2O5 (LAGP) system glass-ceramic, which primarily consisted of Li1þxTi2xAlx(PO4)3(x ¼ 0.3) or Li1þxGe2-xAlx(PO4)3(x ¼ 0.5) respectively. And the thickness was about 300e500 mm. The surface of the glassceramic plates was modiﬁed to promote the electrochemical performance of the interface between glass-ceramic plate and organic electrolyte.

The LATP glass-ceramic [14Li2O 9Al2O3 38TiO2 39P2O5 (mol %)] exhibits high lithium-ion conductivity and has been prepared into thin plates in reports [12e14]. The 14Li2O 9Al2O3 38TiO2 39P2O5 glass-ceramic was synthesized by reagent grade chemicals, including Li2CO3, Al2O3, TiO2, and NH4H2PO4. The synthesis process is same with the report by Thokchom et al. [13,14]. The LATP glassceramic plates were reﬁned shape and polished to a 300e500 mm thick plate.

The LAGP glass-ceramic [0.8Li2O 0.25Al2O3 1.5GeO2 1.5P2O5 (mol %)] has the same structure with LATP and was made into thin electrolyte plates [15e17]. In this work, the LAGP plates were synthesized by Li2CO3, Al2O3, GeO2, and NH4H2PO4. The four raw materials were weighted and mixed by the stoichiometry of 0.8Li2O 0.25Al2O3 1.5GeO2 1.5P2O5. To begin with, the mixed raw materials were heated slowly to 723 K and kept for 1.5 h to release gaseous production. Subsequently, the mixture was heated up to 1723 K and melted for 2 h. And then the molten mixture was poured in a heated plate mold and pressed by another one. The glass plate, which was casted by the molten mixture, was annealed at 823 K for 2 h and cooled in furnace. After being annealed, the glass plate crystallized at 1223 K for 12 h and became a dense opaque white specimen. This specimen was reﬁned shape and polished to a 300e500 mm thick plate [11].

A thin ﬁlm of lithium titanium oxide (LTO) was deposited onto glass-ceramic plate surface by RF magnetron sputtering in argon (Ar: 50%)/oxygen (O2: 50%) plasmas. The sputtering targets were prepared by compressing Li4Ti5O12 powder (99.9%) into a 100 mm diameter pellet and were sintered at 1023 K for 6 h in air. The  3 Pa. The Ar/ vacuum chamber was evacuated to a base pressure 10 O2 mixture gas pressure was maintained at 1 Pa. The deposition rate was 15 A min

In all physical and electrochemical measurements, a big glassceramic plate was cut into 10e20 pieces of small ones (about 1 cm2 each) in order to exclude the effect of different batches of the glass-ceramic plate. Half of them were tested after surface modiﬁcation; others were tested in same way for comparison.

The surface morphology of the glass-ceramics with and without modiﬁcation was characterized by a Hitachi S-4800 ﬁeld emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM-EDX). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of LAGP, LATP and modiﬁed layer were recorded by a Rigaku TTRAX Ⅲ diffractometer employing a CueKa source. Raman spectra of samples were recorded on a Jobin-Yvon T64000 double monochromator equipped with a spatial ﬁlter. The modiﬁed layer samples, prepared for Raman testing, were deposited on nickel plate to avoid the inﬂuence of glass-ceramic plate substrate.

The ionic conductivity of glass-ceramic plate was measured by AC impedance. A 0.5 mm thick Ag coating was evaporated onto both sides of the glass-ceramic plate. The Ag coated plate ﬁxed by two stainless blocking electrodes in a cell. At the room temperature (298 K), the impedance measurements were carried out on the cell using a Solartron instrument (model 1470E þ 1455A) in 0.1 to 106 frequency range. The electrochemical impedance spectra were ﬁtted using Zview software.

A test-cell was designed for electrochemical measurements, as shown in Fig. 1. The test-cell was separated into a Li electrode area and an air-electrode area by 0.25 cm2 glass-ceramic plate with a thickness of 300e500 mm. The Li electrode area contained a Limetal electrode in organic electrolyte (EC: DEC: EMC ¼ 1: 1: 1, 1 M LiPF6); the air-electrode area contained an air-electrode (SuperP carbon loaded Ni foam) and a reference electrode (an SCE connected by salt bridge) in water solution (0.5 M LiOH and 0.5 M KCl).

Fig. 2 (LAGP) shows an XRD patterns of the LAGP plate which consists of Li1þxAlxGe2-x(PO4)3(x ¼ 0.5) and AlPO4 crystals[15e17]. The Li1þxAlxGe2-x(PO4)3 (x ¼ 0.5) phase is dominant in LAGP glassceramic, and other peaks indicate the presence of an AlPO4 phase. Fig. 2 (LATP) provides an XRD patterns of the LATP plate, which consists of Li1þxTi2-xAlx(PO4)3 (x ¼ 0.3) and AlPO4 phases, the peaks corresponding to them are observed in XRD patterns [13,14]. The Li1þxTi2-xAlx(PO4)3 (x ¼ 0.3) phase is dominant in LATP glassceramics. The peak around 36 indicates the presence of an AlPO4 phase.

Fig. 3 shows the morphology of the LAGP surface (a, b) and LATP surface (c, d). The LAGP and LATP surface is close-grained and has visible traces of polishing. Few chips of LAGP/LATP glass-ceramic attach on surface, which were produced by polishing. Figs. 4 and 5 is the impedance spectrum of LAGP and LATP plate by blocking electrode test. The ionic conductivity of LAGP and LATP plate can be  1, calculated and can reach 5.7  10 respectively. [The formula: ε ¼ d/(S$R); d: thickness of electrolyte plate; S: area of electrolyte plate; R: resistance of electrolyte plate]. Fig. 6 shows the small angle XRD patterns obtained from modiﬁed layer on LATP. The XRD pattern suggests that the LTO modiﬁed layer is amorphous, because it is prepared by RF magnetron sputtering.

Fig. 7 shows the surface morphology of the LTO modiﬁed layer on SiO2 plate (a) and LAGP plate (b, c, d). The surface of SiO2 is

Fig. 1. A schematic representation of the 3 electrode Li-air test-cell.

Li4Ti5O12 target. And the modiﬁed layer is a continuous, closegrained and uniform deposition layer, which closely growing on the LAGP surface.

Fig. 8 shows an EDX mapping of the modiﬁed layer on the LAGP for Ti element and Ge element. Existence of the Ti element of modiﬁed layer is observed and uniformly distributed. And existence of the Ge element of the LAGP substrate can also be observed, because the analysis depth of EDX is 1e2 mm which is more than the 400 nm thickness of the modiﬁed layer.

As Fig. 9(b) shows, a Raman spectrum of the Li4Ti5O12 target has six characteristic bands which appear at 165, 239, 344, 430, 674,  1 can be assigned to the and 754 cm bending vibrations of OeTieO bonds; the bands at 674 and  1 are attributed to vibrations of TieO bonds in TiO6 octa754 cm  1 are attributed to the hedra, the bands at 344 and 430 cm stretching vibrations of the LieO bonds in LiO4 and LiO6 polyhedra,  1 is attributed to respectively [18]. The weak feature at 165 cm  1 assigned to F2g bending vibrations of OeLieO bonds and 274 cm modes [18e21].

In Fig. 9(a), the evolution of the Raman spectrum is caused by the structural changes that occurred in the LTO modiﬁed layer upon the RF magnetron sputtering. The Raman spectrum of the modiﬁed  1, which can be layer still has the bands at 674 and 754 cm attributed to vibrations of TieO bonds in TiO6 octahedra. The band  1 disappears due to the absent of LiO6 polyhedra by the at 430 cm RF magnetron sputtering. And the Raman spectrum shows the  1 and the absence of the bands at 239 and bands at 200 and 360 cm  1. As Julien et al. report, the Li7Ti5O12 displays a tetragonal 344 cm structure with 141/amd (D19 4h) space group, which induces three  1 [21]. When typical Raman bands located at 200, 360 and 465 cm x > 1.4 of Li4þxTi5O12, the Raman spectrum displays the bands at  1 disappear.  1 and the bands at 239 and 344 cm 200 and 360 cm  1 could be attributed to the weak The lack of band at 465 cm  1 can be assigned to Raman-activity of it [21]. The band at 1096 cm the vibration of CO3 which is formed at surface in reaction between superﬂuous lithium and CO2. Then, the modiﬁed layer should consist of Li4þxTi5O12 (1.4 < x < 3).

Fig. 2. XRD patterns of the LAGP and the LATP.

smoother than LAGP and LATP plate. It’s better for the analysis of the LTO modiﬁed layer’s morphology without the inﬂuence of morphology of the LAGP and LATP surface. As shown in Fig. 7(a), the modiﬁed layer, which is deposited onto the surface of SiO2 substrate, is continuous and uniform. Fig. 7(b) is a SEM cross-section of a modiﬁed layer on the LAGP substrate. The cross-section shows a modiﬁed layer is deposited onto the surface of the LAGP substrate. The thickness of the modiﬁed layer is about 400 nm. Fig. 7(c, d) shows the SEM top view images of the modiﬁed layer on the LAGP surface. The modiﬁed layer is composed of many small grains and rougher than the LAGP surface. The modiﬁed layer would change the electrochemical characteristic of the interface between the organic electrolyte and LAGP plate, which covered on both hills and valleys of the whole LAGP surface. According to the observation of SEM images, the LAGP surface is completely covered by the modiﬁed layer which is prepared by RF magnetron sputtering from a

Fig. 3. SEM images of the LAGP plate (a, b) and the LATP plate(c, d).

Fig. 4. Impedance spectra of the LAGP.

To obtain direct information about Ti valence of the modiﬁed layer, a modiﬁed layer is deposited onto nickel plate and studied by XPS, and the corresponding Ti 2p spectra are shown in Fig. 10. In Fig. 10, the XPS spectrum of the modiﬁed layer has two peaks at 458.8 and 464.6 eV. The two peaks of Ti 2p binding energies is mixed-valence of Ti (þⅣ) and Ti (þⅢ). The binding energies at 458.8 and 464.8 eV indicate the existence of Ti (þⅣ) [22,23]. The peaks locate at 462.8 and 456.8 eV belongs to Ti (þⅢ), which demonstrate the existence of Ti (þⅢ) [22e25]. According to the analysis of each peak, the Ti (þⅢ) occupy about 36e50%. This suggests that the x of Li4þxTi5O12 should be 1.8e2.5, because the x of Li4þxTi5O12 is equal to the number of Ti3þ in each ﬁve Ti-atoms. Thus, the modiﬁed layer includes Ti3þ , and the x of Li4þxTi5O12 is 1.8e2.5, which agrees with the analysis result of Raman spectra, but more accurate.

Fig. 5. Impedance spectra of the LATP.

Fig. 6. XRD patterns of the LTO modiﬁed layer.

According to the analysis of EDX mapping, XRD patterns, Raman spectra and XPS spectra, the modiﬁed layer is amorphous and composed of Li4þxTi5O12 (1.8 < x < 2.5).

The water-stable lithium metal electrode consists of lithium metal, organic electrolyte, and glass-ceramics electrolyte plate, in which the organic electrolyte is employed as an interlayer to reduce the contact resistance between the glass-ceramic plate and lithium electrode, and to protect the reduction of LATP by lithium metal [2]. Fig. 11 shows impedance spectra of three-electrode test-cell with the LAGP and the modiﬁed LAGP plate. The impedance spectra of test-cell with the LAGP display a small semicircle at high frequency and a large semicircle at low frequency which may be a pressed semicircle or two overlapped semicircles. The impedance spectrum of test-cell with the modiﬁed LAGP shows a small semicircle at high frequency, a half semicircle at middle frequency and a large semicircle at low frequency. The modiﬁed layer between the LAGP plate and the organic electrolyte has made an impedance decrease of test-cell, which should be corresponding to the half semicircle at middle frequency. And the large semicircle of the LAGP test-cell should be two overlapped semicircle.

The equivalent circuit, proposed for ﬁtting, is similar with reports, which include Re, Rg, Rint and Rsei with respective constant phase element (CPE1, CPE2 and CPE3), and W (represent a Warburg resistance) [5e7]. Re represents the bulk resistance of the LAGP plate, organic electrolyte and wires, which is corresponding to the intercept of the small semicircle with the real axis. Rg is the grain boundary resistance in LAGP plate, which is corresponding to the small semicircle. The large circle includes two overlapped semicircles, which represent the interfacial resistance of the LAGP plate at middle frequency range (Rint), and the interfacial resistance of the lithium electrode at low frequency range (Rsei). While discharging, the SEI impedance (Rsei) decreased with polarization potential, but the organic electrolyte/LAGP impedance (Rint) changed a little and became the major impedance [11]. The impedance of electrolyte/LAGP interface controlled the discharge current density [11]. Then, the improvement of modiﬁcation can be estimated by the contrast of Rint, which is corresponding to the middle frequency semicircle. The simulated impedance spectra of the equivalent circuit ﬁt with the impedance spectra well, and the parameter of the equivalent circuit is listed in Table 1.

In Table 1, Re, Rg and Rsei of the test-cell with the LAGP plate are roughly equal to the one with the modiﬁed LAGP plate. However, the Rint with modiﬁed LAGP is decreased 40%e50% (about 220 U). Accordingly, the discharge current of the test-cell with the modiﬁed

Fig. 7. SEM images of the modiﬁed layer: (a) on SiO2; (b) a cross-section of the modiﬁed layer on the LAGP plate (c, d) on the LAGP plate.

LAGP plate should increase. Then, some tests about discharge current have been carried out. Fig. 12 shows two constant potential polarization curves of the WSLE with and without interface modiﬁcation. At  2.9 V vs. SCE þ (about 0.4 V vs. Li/Li ), the current of the WSLE with interface modiﬁcation is about 100% more than the one without. At the same

polarization potential, the current curves of the WSLE with and without interface modiﬁcation could represent the power performance when discharging. Then, the power performance of the WSLE can be remarkably promoted by introducing the modiﬁed layer, which is deposited by RF magnetron sputtering from the Li4Ti5O12 target. The 50% decrease of Rint resulted in the 100% increase of discharge current, which is also an evidence of our previous the organic electrolyte/LAGP impedance controlled the current density when discharging [11].

At the interface of solid-state electrolyte or organic electrolyte, the ionic conduction phenomena have been explained by two different theories respectively.

At the interface of solid-state electrolyte, the phenomena are characterized by the term “nanoionics” to describe about ionic conduction [26]. At the interface, two kinds of solid-state ionic

Fig. 8. EDX mapping images of the modiﬁed layer on the LAGP plate.

Fig. 9. Raman spectra of the LTO raw material and the LTO modiﬁed layer.

Table 1 The parameter of the equivalent circuit of test-cell with LAGP and modiﬁed LAGP.

Similar nanoionic phenomena should take place at the LAGP side of interface between the LAGP and the organic electrolyte, developing a space-charge layer. When the LAGP is in contact with the organic electrolyte, the large difference between their chemical þ potentials can make Li ions accumulate at LAGP interface, further developing the space-charge layer and resulting in a very large interfacial resistance. The interposition of buffer layer is a strategy which has been reported to suppress the space-charge layer [28,29]. The buffer layer introduces two interfaces: LAGP/LTO and LTO/organic electrolyte. The space-charge layers at both interfaces will be less developed, because the former consists of solid-state oxides with similar chemical potentials, and the latter consists of mixed conductor materials. And the electronic conductivity of Li4þxTi5O12 (x ¼ 1.8e2.5) is enhanced via the generation of mixedvalence titanium [Ti (Ⅲ)/Ti (Ⅳ)].

Then, the energy barrier of Li-ion transfer between the LAGP and organic electrolyte is divided into two smaller energy barriers, which are the energy barriers of LAGP/LTO interface and LTO/ organic electrolyte interface. The actual process may be more complex, which needed further study.

And the Li4þxTi5O12 (1.8 < x < 2.5) should be a zero strain compound, which has the similar characteristic of Li4Ti5O12 [30]. In that case, even if the formation of space-charge layer made lithiumion unhomogeneously distribute, there still has no strain to break the modiﬁed layer.

Fig. 13 shows the impedance spectra of the three-electrode testcell with the LATP and the modiﬁed LATP plate. The impedance spectrum of test-cell with the LATP and the modiﬁed LATP displays a small semicircle at high frequency, a half semicircle at middle frequency, and a large semicircle at low frequency which is corresponding to the SEI impedance. Same to LAGP plate, the equivalent circuit include Re, Rg, Rint and Rsei with respective constant phase elements (CPE1, CPE2 and CPE3), and W (represents a Warburg resistance). Re is corresponding to the intercept of the small semicircle with the real axis, and Rg is corresponding to the small semicircle. Rint is corresponding to the half semicircle, and Rsei is

Fig. 10. XPS patterns of Ti 2p of the modiﬁed layer.

conductor correspond to two different phenomena of conduction.

One is the contact of the electron-insulating ionic conductors.   And one example is that two kinds of F ion conductor (BaF2 and CaF2) were brought into contact with each other [27]. The compositions and structures of solid electrolytes have been well tailored to achieve high ionic conductivities. However, the compositions deviate from the optima at the space-charge layer. And therefore, the conductivity should be lower than that of bulk, increasing the interfacial resistance [28]. For reducing the interfacial resistance, the Li4Ti5O12 or LiNbO3 layer is introduced as the buffer layer. Because the interposition of buffer layer can suppress the development of space-charge layer, the interfacial resistance is obviously reduced [28,29].

The other one is the contact of the mixed conductors, which are materials with a signiﬁcant fraction of ionic as well as electronic. For instance, a space-charge layer in the LiCoO2 should vanish when in contact with a mixed conductor, because the electronic conduction resolves the concentration gradient of the Li

Fig. 11. Impedance spectra of the WSLE with the LAGP and the modiﬁed LAGP in the three-electrode test-cell.

Fig. 12. Constant potential polarization curves of the WSLE with the LAGP and the modiﬁed LAGP at  2.9 V vs. SCE at 298 K.

Table 2 The parameter of the equivalent circuit of test-cell with LATP and modiﬁed LATP.

Fig. 13. Impedance spectra of the WSLE with the LATP and the modiﬁed LATP in the three-electrode test-cell.

Fig. 14. Constant potential polarization curves of the WSLE with the LATP and the modiﬁed LATP at  2.9 V vs. SCE at 298 K.

corresponding to the large semicircle at the low frequency. The ﬁtting lines of impedance spectra are also showed in Fig. 13, and the analysis results of impedance are listed in Table 2.

In Table 2, Rint with LATP is more than LAGP, which should be attributed to the low Li-ion conductivity of LATP and could also be different from actual area. Rint with modiﬁed LATP decreased about 240 U which is 20e30% of Rint without modiﬁcation.

Fig. 14 shows two constant potential polarization curves of the WSLE protected by the LATP with and without interface modiﬁcaþ tion. At  2.9 V vs. SCE (about 0.4 V vs. Li/Li ), the current of the WSLE with interface modiﬁcation is about 80% more than the one without. Then, the power performance of WSLE can be remarkably promoted by the modiﬁed layer, which is similar as the modiﬁcation of LAGP plate Fig. 12.

By using the modiﬁcation of the interface between the glassceramic (LAGP/LATP) plate and the organic electrolyte, the discharge performance of the WSLE can be remarkably promoted in aqueous solution.

The modiﬁed layer decreased the interfacial impedance between the glass-ceramic plate and organic electrolyte. The modiﬁed layer Li4þxTi5O12 (1.8 < x < 2.5) can offer more lithium-ions and vacancy sites and has electronic conduction. And, it introduced two interfaces, such as glass-ceramic plate/LTO and LTO/organic electrolyte, at which the space-charge layer was less developed. Because the Li4þxTi5O12 (1.8 < x < 2.5) the modiﬁed layer is a mixed conductor and covered the whole LAGP plate, which buffered the direct contact between the glass-ceramic plate and organic electrolyte. Then, the energy barrier of Li-ion transfer between the LAGP and organic electrolyte become two relative small energy barriers.