Accepted Manuscript

Electrochemical properties of carbon-composite NASICON-type iron sulfate Fe2(SO4)3 as a cathode for lithium secondary batteries

S0378-7753(13)00219-X 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.01.161 POWER 16838

To appear in:

Journal of Power Sources

Received Date: 1 November 2012 Revised Date: 16 January 2013 Accepted Date: 28 January 2013

Please cite this article as: E. Setiawati, M. Hayashi, M. Tsuda, K. Hayashi, R. Kobayashi, Electrochemical properties of carbon-composite NASICON-type iron sulfate Fe2(SO4)3 as a cathode for lithium secondary batteries, Journal of Power Sources (2013), doi: 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.01.161.
We studied the effect of carbon treatment on improving the electrochemical properties (capacity and cyclability) of NASICON-type iron sulfate (Fe2(SO4)3) for the cathodes of lithium ion batteries (LIBs).  An optimized ball milling technique that was applied to a mixture  of  as-synthesized  iron  sulfate  and  conductive  carbon  ketjen  black  EC-600JD (KB) resulted a high capacity of 117 mA h g-1, which is close to its theoretical capacity of 134 mA h g-1. Moreover, the cyclability of coin-type test cell was doubled to 58 cycles by adding a polymer followed by heat treatment to the mixture of conductive carbon and Fe2(SO4)3.  

The  smaller  particle  size  and  more  uniform  distribution  in  the  mixture  of conductive carbon and Fe2(SO4)3 particles accounted for the improved electrochemical properties after treatment, as confirmed by FE-SEM observations. 

Of  the  several  electrochemically  active  compound  materials  containing transition metals that have been considered for use as the next generation cathodes for lithium ion batteries (LIBs), interest in iron-based compounds has increased because of their  abundance  and  low  cost.  Many  researchers  have  been  attempting  to  find  a high-performance  iron-based  electrode  material  by  studying,  for  example,  FeOCl, FeOOH, FePS3, FeS, [1] and FeF3 [2]. However, their results have shown that these iron compounds have relatively poor cyclability and a low discharge voltage, making them unsuitable for cathode applications.  

Interest in studying polyanion based electrodes began after Goodenough [3-4] and Delmas [4] introduced the concept of three-dimensional lithium intercalation using a polyanion ((XO4)n-) compound as an alternative to the closely packed oxygen atoms. This kind of polyanion was found to possess strong covalently bonded oxygen atoms [4, 5] that offered better stability in terms of both shifting the temperature of oxygen release and heat generation to higher one. Since then, iron-based polyanion compounds such as PO43-,  and  SO42 have  attracted  the  interest  of  many  researchers  [6]. 

However, due to the low potential of Fe2+/3+ in these iron-based polyanion compounds, layer-structure cathodes such as LiCoO2 was dominantly used for commercial LIBs.  On the other hand, in recent years several environmental and energy issues have triggered a shift in the use of LIBs from small-sized batteries for mobile applications to large-capacity  batteries  for  both  cycle  usage  (electric  vehicles  and  smart  grids)  and back-up power usage. Although several safety measures have been employed with large cells,  such  as  controlling  the  cut-off  voltage  using  a  battery  management  system  and equipping the cell with a shutdown separator and valve tools, several issues still remain. 

In particular, safety concerns have been raised in relation to back-up applications, where the battery is kept in a stand-by condition, ready to meet a sudden demand. For this reason, a material that is stable at charge state (Li delithiation condition) is preferable. This is why iron phosphate (LiFePO4) with olivine is now applied as a cathode for large-capacity LIBs despite its lower energy density (capacity 150 mA h g-1, discharge voltage 3.5 V) [5] compared with other commercially available cathodes.   

Another  polyanion iron compound consisting  of iron  sulfate  Fe2(SO4)3  with a NASICON  structure  has  been  suggested  as  a  prospective  material  for  the  cathodes  of LIBs because it has a flat profile at a high voltage of 3.6 V vs. Li metal and is easy to synthesize [6,7]. There are two kinds of NASICON-type iron sulfates that differ in terms of their monoclinic and hexagonal phase frameworks. Nanjundaswamy et al. [7] reported that although both phases provide a similar flat electrochemical profile, greater capacity fading was observed for the material with the monoclinic framework. Thus, our study was focused on the hexagonal type. A thermal study suggested that iron sulfate decomposes at temperatures above 600oC, while a Co based layer type LiCoO2 cathode and a spinel type LiMn2O4 cathode decomposes and releases oxygen at 250oC, indicating that iron sulfate exhibits  excellent  stability  at  high  temperature  [1].  This  is  advantageous  in  terms  of preventing the undesired heat release that might occur as a result of oxygen loss, even in an overcharged condition. However, there are still several technical problems, including low conductivity and the unavailability of lithium in the compound, with regard to using an iron sulfate cathode.  

Carbon  treatment  has  been  used  as  an  effective  method  for  obtaining  better electrochemical  performance  from  active  materials,  namely,  longer  cyclability  and  a larger capacity. In particular, the existence of conductive carbon between the particles of an  active  material  is  favorable  in  terms  of  the  electrochemical  reaction  because  it enhances the electron transport [8]. Moreover, the conductive carbon that is present on the surface of an active material also protects the active material from direct contact with the  electrolyte [8], thus avoiding  any  undesired surface  degradation that might  lead to poor  cyclability.  We  studied  a  method  of  improving  the  electrochemical  properties (capacity and  cyclability)  of  NASICON-type  iron  sulfate  (Fe2(SO4)3)  by  applying  two kinds  of  carbon  treatment;  the  conventional  carbon  treatment  (CCT)  and  the  polymer modified carbon treatment (PMCT). The former was carried out with a dry ball mill to obtain a homogeneous mixture of active material and conductive carbon, while the latter was  carried  out  with  the  addition  of  a  polymer  as  a  carbon  source  into  a  mixture  of conductive carbon and active material, followed by heat treatment.  

Synthesis and characterization of NASICON type Fe2(SO4)3 Fe2(SO4)3  with  a  hexagonal  framework  was  synthesized  by thermal decomposition of ferrous ammonium sulfate hexahydrate (NH4)2Fe(SO4)2.6H2O (Kanto Chemical Co., Inc.) in air at 500oC for 10 h, as reported elsewhere [6-7]. The resulting powder was vacuum treated for at least 12 h before being stored in a dry room with a constant dew point of -50oC. The structure of the obtained powder was characterized with an  X-ray  diffractometer  (Rigaku,  RINT2000),  using  CuKaradiation  under  a  constant power  of  30  kV  and  100  mA.  The  structural  phases  of  the  synthesized  powder  were identified  using  the  database  of  the  International  Center  for  Diffraction  Data  (ICCD). Moreover, to estimate the ratio of carbon to active material, the elemental composition was analyzed using the following three methods; inductively coupled plasma combined with atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP/AES, Shimadzu Instrument, ICPS-8000) for Fe and S analysis, a flame spectrophotometer (Varian Spectra, SpectrAA-55) for Li analysis, and an infrared  combustion  analyzer  (Horiba,  EMIA-800)  for  C  analysis.  The  particle morphology was observed using a field emmision scanning electron microscopy (JEOL JSM-890). The sample was prepared by spreading the particle in the double-side carbon Carbon treatment 

Generally,  during  electrode  preparation,  active  material  is  mixed  with  a conductive carbon such as acetylene black (AB), in order to assist the electron transfer between  the  particles.  When  we  employed  a  conventional  mixing  method  to  mix  the conductive carbon AB and active material iron sulfate by grinding, the capacity was only 55 mA h g-1 (about 60% of its theoretical value). We assumed that this low capacity was because the active material iron sulfate and conductive carbon were insufficiently mixed. We studied two factors that were considered important in creating a uniform mixture of conductive carbon and active material iron sulfate, namely the type of conductive carbon and the mixing method.  First,  we  studied  four  types  of  conductive  carbon;  carbon  nanotubes  of  C60 (CNT), maxsorb 3100 (Max), denka black (widely known in battery research as acetylene black (AB)), and ketjen black EC-600JD (KB), as given in Table 1. All the conductive carbons were pre-vacuumed for at least 12 h. The mixture of active material (Fe2(SO4)3 powder) to conductive carbon weight ratio was kept constant at 70:25.  In the next stepwe studied  the effects of different  mixing  methods,  namely  grinding,  mixing, and  ball milling. The last evaluation involved in optimizing the ball mill conditions; i.e. rotationspeed and mixing time.  

After ball milling, the mixture of conductive carbon and the active material were sieved and stored in a dry room (dew point = -50oC). This mixture was then subjected to a vacuum  for  at  least  12  h  before  binder  was  added  in  preparing  pellet  electrode  for electrochemical evaluation.  

In this study, additional polymer was mixed together with conductive carbon KB and active material of iron sulfate through ball mill. The mixture was then heat treated to carbonize the polymer. The ball mill condition was the optimized one described in 2.2.1, in which the rotational speed was kept constant at a 200 rpm for 24 h. We used three kinds of  polymer,  polyvinyl  alcohol  (PVA),  polyvinylpirrolydone  (PVP)  and  polyethylene glycol (PEG). The polymers used in this study are solids at room temperature, as can be seen from their glass transition temperatures (Tg) given in Table 3 [10]. Since the particle sizes appeared to be important to obtain a homogeneous mixture, we ground and sieved the polymer before ball milling it with the conductive carbon and active material. To find the optimum heat treatment condition we varied the temperature in the range of 150-450oC and time in the range of 1-10 h. The heat treatment was carried out in a carbon-reduced atmosphere. The concept in using a carbon-reduced atmosphere is to create a reduced atmosphere through carbon combustion and to avoid sample oxidation during heat treatment. The experimental set up is shown in Fig.1. We used two different sizes of aluminum crucible; a small one for the polymer added carbon and iron sulfate mixture, and a large one for the combusting carbon. The carbon we used for combustion was  a  granular  form  of  activated  charcoal  (Kanto  Chemical)  with  a  particle  size  of 3.35-4.75 mm. This reduced atmosphere treatment is advantageous for a mass production because of its low cost.  

Similar  with  the  CCT  samples,  after  ballmilled  and  heat  treated,  the  PMCT mixture was sieved and stored in a dry room (dew point = -50oC). It was then subjected to a  vacuum  for  at  least  12  h  before  binder  was  added  in  preparing  pellet  electrode  for electrochemical evaluation.  It is worth noting that since the carbonization process involves decomposing the polymer through heat treatment, the total weight ratio of active material to conductive carbon  is  changed  by  the  treatment.  An  evaluation  with  a  thermogravimetric  analysis technique (TG/DTA, Rigaku, Thermoplus TG-8120) indicated that a weight loss of 20-30 wt%  occurred  during  the  heat  treatment.  This  amount  is  larger  than  the  amount  of additional  polymer  that  was  kept  constant  at  15  wt%.  Therefore,  we  assumed  that  the additional polymer was decomposed completely during the heat treatment, and moreover part of the conductive carbon was loss during the heat treatment process. The final ratio of active material to carbon was used to calculate the capacity of the sample after treatment.  Electrochemical characterizationThe electrochemical characterizations were carried out using a coin-type test cell (type  2320).  A  polytetrafluoroethylene  (PTFE)  binder  was  added  to  the  mixture  of conductive  carbon  and  active  material,  with  a  mixture  to  binder  weight  ratio  of  95:5, ground in an agate mortar and then roll-pressed into a 0.5 mm thick sheet to be installed in a coin-type test cell as a positive electrode. Lithium metal (0.3 mm thick) was used as a negative electrode. A microporous polypropylene film (Celgard) was inserted between the two electrodes as a separator. The electrolyte was 1 mol/L of LiPF6 in an equal volume of ethylene carbonate (EC) and dimethyl carbonate (DMC) solution (Kishida Chemical, 

The entire preparation and test cell assembly process was carried out in a dry room (dew point = -50oC). The electrochemical evaluations were performed in a constant temperature-controlled  chamber  (T=20oC).  The  electrochemical  evaluation  was conducted at a constant current density of 1 mA/cm2 in the 4.2 to 3 V range, with a rest period of 10 min between the charge and discharge steps. For each conditions carried out in  the  carbon  treatments,  we  prepared  3  test  cells  to  ensure  the  repeatability  of  our 

The capacity of charge and discharge was estimated from the amount of active material  existed  in  the  measured  pellet  electrode,  which  contained  active  material (Fe2(SO4)3), conductive carbon and PTFE binder. In a conventional electrode, where the active material and conductive carbon was ground, the ratio between active material and conductive carbon in the mixture was assumed to be constant before and after grinding. However, when the same assumption (a constant ratio of active material and conductive carbon) was applied to both CCT and PMCT, a capacity exceeding its theoretical value was obtained. Therefore, a correction factor, namely the ratio of iron (Fe) to carbon (C) before  and  after  each  treatment  (CCT  and  PMCT),  was  applied  to  each  of  our measurements, as shown in Table 2. The weight percent of Fe, S and C data were obtained from the characterization of the elemental composition, while the O data were derived from a calculation by assuming the stoichiometry amount of the Fe2(SO4)3. The accuracy of each  measurement  was  estimated to  be  3%, which  is  within  the measurement error range.  The  correction  factor  was  determined  from  the  weight  ratio  of  Fe2(SO4)3  to conductive carbon before and after treatment. Elemental characterization was undertaken for as-synthesized Fe2(SO4)3, CCT (200 rpm ball milling with KB for 24 h) and PMCT (PVA addition with 350oC carbon reduced heat treatment for 5 h). 

Capacity improvement by CCT  was  ball  milled  with  KB  conductive  carbon.  Both  patterns  correlated  well  with  the standard pattern for Fe2(SO4)3 (PDF#33-0679), as shown in the bottom part of the figure. The  Fe  to  S  ratio for  the  pure  and  KB  mixed  samples  evaluated  using  ICP/AES  were 0.682 and 0.673, respectively. These values are close to the stoichiometry value of 0.667 with a measurement error of 2%. There was no significant change in either the structure or the chemical formula of the Fe2(SO4)3 before and after ball milled with KB conductive iron  sulfate.  SSA  is  an  abbreviation  of  specific  surface area.  The  results indicated  the small particle size and large SSA are key factors in selecting the conductive carbon. The carbon black (both AB and KB) appears to be favorable in improving the capacity. It is worth noting that KB tends to agglomerate due to its high porosity. For this reason, it is important to select a mixing-method that creates a well-dispersed KB. Among three kinds of mixing method that were studied, particularly ball milled exhibited a large capacity improvement (85 mA h g-1 for a ball milled sample), as seen in Fig. 3. Our result, in which an improved capacity achieved by ball milling, is in a good agreement with the research trend in LIBs [8].  Janot  et  al.  [9]  mentioned  that  with  ball  milling,  several  factors  such  as  therotation speed and mixing time influence the resulting mixture. The effects of rotation speed (mixed for 24 h) and mixing time (at constant rotation speed of 200 rpm) are shown in  Fig.  4  (a)  and  (b),  respectively.  The  discharge  capacity  for  the  5th  cycle  for  three different rotation speeds indicated that a fast rotation speed of 400 rpm resulted in poor 

cyclability,  while  200  rpm  provided  a  relatively  stable  cycle  (Fig.  4  (a)).  Figure  4  (b) showed  that  a  longer  mixing  time  resulted  in  a  significant  capacity  improvement,suppression of capacity fading, and better cyclability. After several attempts, we found that  the  optimum  condition  was  obtained  by  ball  milling  with  conductive  carbon  KB under rotation speed of 200 rpm for 24 h. This optimized sample is denoted as a CCT Cyclability improvement by PMCT Figure 5 shows the effect of heat treatment temperature on the crystal structure. 

The polymer used was PVA under a heat treatment in carbon reduced atmosphere for 5 h. For comparison, the XRD pattern of a CCT sample (after ball milling) is shown in the bottom  part  of  the figure.  For  a  mixture  that  was  heat  treated at  450oC, in  addition  to having  a  lower  intensity  and  broader  peak,  the  main  (113)  peak  was  shifted  and  the secondary (012) peak disappeared. Since the Fe2(SO4)3 was synthesized at 500oC, a heat treatment carried out in a temperature close to this might cause a decomposition of iron 

The effect  of  polymer-type  on improving both  the capacity  and cyclability  of Fe2(SO4)3  is  summarized  in  Table  3.  With  the  exception  of  PEG,  which  exhibited  a capacity of 96 mA h g-1, the capacities were improved with PVP and PVA to 130 and 127 mA h g-1, respectively. Figure 6 shows the dependence of cyclability on the polymer type. Although PVP and PVA revealed a similar improvement, it was clearly shown that PVA provided better cyclability. The cycle number for 20 % capacity fading was originally 38 cycles  for  a  CCT  sample  (optimized  ball  milled  sample),  and  this  was  significantly improved to 43, 51 and 58 cycles by the addition of PVP, PEG and PVA, respectively. In PMCT, heat treatment is important, since during this process, the polymer isdecomposed and carbonization occurs. The effect of varying temperature (at a constant heat treatment time of 5 h) and time (at a constant temperature of 350oC) for PVA are summarized in Fig. 7 (a) and (b), respectively. A sudden capacity reduction that occurred for the sample treated at 450 oC was considered due to the decomposition of iron sulfate, as shown in Fig. 5. Moreover, Figure 7 (b) revealed that the capacity improved with a longer  heat  treatment  of  1  to  5  h,  but  there was no  significant improvement  when the treatment lasted longer than 5 h. It appears that a treatment under temperature close to its Tm  results  in  a  better  carbonization  process,  which  ultimately  leads  to  better electrochemical  properties.  This  explained  why  the  electrochemical  properties  were improved better when PVA was used.  The sample with PVA addition that was ball milled at a constant rotation speedof 200 rpm for 24 h followed by applying an optimized carbon heat treatment process of 350oC for 5 h is denoted as a PMCT sample. Particle morphology after treatment  The  as-synthesized  Fe2(SO4)3  was  consisted  of  primary  particles that agglomerated forming a secondary particle with an average size ranging between 5 to 10 m m. Similarly, the as-received condition of conductive carbon KB tends to agglomerate as  mentioned  before.  These  agglomerated-forms  in  both  Fe2(SO4)3  and  KB  were  still existed  after  grinding  (untreated  sample),  as  can  be  seen  in  Fig.  8(a).  The  Fe2(SO4)3 appears bright (white), while the carbon appears dark (grayish). The conductive carbon in the  mixture  mostly  existed  on  the  surface  of  Fe2(SO4)3  particle,  creating  an  undesired carbon-free region. The conductivity of this region is low and it is considered to be an electrochemically inert area, resulted an inferior capacity. The homogeneity of mixture was improved with CCT and moreover with PMCT as can be seen in Fig. 8(b) and (c), respectively. Specifically, the conductive carbon KB was  not  only  existed  in  the  surface,  as  observed  in  the  conventional  grinding,  but dispersed thoroughly in the mixture. We estimated the particle size was reduced to less than 8 m m for conventionally ground sample to less than 1 m m and less than 0.5 m m for CCT  and  PMCT  ones,  respectively.  This  smaller  particle  size  and  well  distributed conductive  carbon  in  both  CCT  and  PMCT  are  favorable  because they  minimized  the undesired carbon-free areas that still existed in the conventional grounding method. This result  agrees  well  with  the  study  of  olivine-type  iron  phosphate  [8],  in  which  a  small particle-size  and  carbon  treatment  are  the  two  key  factors  in  improving  the electrochemical properties.  

To  clearly  understand  the  differences  between  PMCT  and  CCT,  we  observed both  their  macroscopic  and  microscopic  morphology  shown  in  Fig.  9  and  Fig.  10, respectively. The observations were carried out directly after treatment without sieving them. We observed several large agglomerations in the macroscopic view of mixture in PMCT (Fig. 9(b)), in contrast to the well-dispersed one in CCT (Fig. 9(a)). The polymer in PMCT, which dispersed in the mixture during ball milling, was softened and clustered during  heat  treatment  at  a  temperature  close  to  its  Tg  and  Tm,  respectively  [10].  The clustered polymer was decomposed and carbonized during combustion process (above its Tm,)  and  finally  it  was  solidified  during  cooling  process  to  room  temperature.  These explained why large clusters were observed in PMCT (Fig. 9 (b)). Moreover, it is worth noting that the clusters were fragile and very easy to be dispersed. In the electrochemical evaluation,  these  large  agglomerations  were  not  accounted  because  we  sieved  them before preparing pellet electrode. A  microscopic-scale  observation  was  carried  out  to  compare  the  surface condition  among  the  conductive  carbon  and  Fe2(SO4)3  active  material.  Figure  10 indicates how well the conductive carbon KB was incorporated to the active material. In particular,  the  microscopic-view  indicated  that  the  homogeneity  mixture  among conductive carbon and Fe2(SO4)3 in PMCT sample (Fig. 10 (b)) is superior than the one in CCT sample (Fig. 10 (a)). From both the microscopic and macroscopic view of PMCT sample, we confirmed that the large cluster observed in the macroscopic scale consisted of a homogeneous mixture. Specifically, it can be seen that the surface of active material in PMCT was well-covered with carbon (both the condutive carbon KB and additional carbon from polymer). In the early heat treatment process, the softened polymer might fill the remaining voids between conductive carbon and active material Fe2(SO4)3. After heat treatment, this polymer carbonized and served as connector creating  additional carbon network among the mixture, which is known as a composite. Apparently, the improved cyclability in PMCT was achieved because the contacts between particles of conductive carbon and Fe2(SO4)3 were improved.  

This  result  indicates  that  the  polymer  has  two  roles.  Besides  serving  as  an additional  carbon  source  [8],  it  also  acts  as  a  binder  that  serves  as  a  template,  which assists the formation of the composite between conductive carbon and active material. In other word, the PMCT provided two beneficial factors in improving electron transfer thus delivering a larger capacity as well as more stable cyclability. The first, is the formation of uniformly  well  distributed  mixture  that  contained  small  particle  size  of  Fe2(SO4)3  and conductive  carbon.  The  latter  is  a  formation  of  composite,  in  which  the  existence  of carbon network serves to connect the conductive carbon and Fe2(SO4)3.  

Two kinds of carbon treatment methods, CCT and PMCT, were applied to iron sulfate (Fe2(SO4)3) powder. The conventional mixing method depends strongly on the particle size of the conductive carbon and the mixing condition. Several conditions: the mixing method, the carbon types, and the ball milling conditions such as time and rotation speed were studied. The optimized conventional method, denoted as CCT sample, was obtained by ball milling a mixture of Fe2(SO4)3 and conductive carbon KB for 24 h, resulted in a capacity of 117 mA h g-1 (5th cycle) and was stable up to 38 cycles. An optimized polymer modified sample, denoted as PMCT, was obtained when the Fe2(SO4)3, KB and PVA were ball milled for 24 h with carbon-reduced heat treatment at 350oC for 5 h. The addition of polymer followed by carbonization during the heat treatment improved both capacity and cyclability.  In  particular, the  added  polymer was  carbonized  to form  a composite  with Fe2(SO4)3 and conductive carbon, which resulted in a capacity as large as 130 mA h g-1 that was stable up to 58 cycles. 