Electrocatalytic  sensors  belong  to  family  of  electrochemical  sensors  with  solid  state  electrolyte.  Their  sensing  mechanism  is  based on  application  of  periodically  changing  voltage  and  acquisition  of current  response.  Obtained  in  this  way  current–voltage  plot  provides  ﬁngerprint  information  about  ambient  gases,  which  interact with  sensor  surface  due  to  electrical  excitation.  The  sensor  name, electrocatalytic,  is  a  direct  consequence  of  sensing  mechanism,  i.e. the  electrochemical  reactions  results  from  the  electric  excitation [1,2].  So  far  relatively  simple  sensor  structures  have  been  investigated.  Mostly,  these  structures  consisted  of  different  types  of electrolyte  and  metallic  electrodes  [3–6].  We   have  been  investigating  these  sensors  before  and  it  seems  that  Nasicon  electrolyte with  platinum  electrodes  is  a  useful  structure  for  sensing  mechanism  investigation  [6,7].  This  structure  provides  in  I–V  plot  unique response  to  different  gases.  So  far,  the  major  drawback  of  electrocatalytic  sensor  is  related  to  instability  due  to  formation  of  chemical phases  on  the  sensor  surface,  which  covers  and  block  triple  phase boundary.  However,  it  was  found  that  the  sensors,  which  exposed and  poisoned  by  nitrogen  dioxide,  can  be  at  any  time  refreshed by  short  time  high  temperature  treatment  [8].  In  order  to  improve sensor  stability  in  different  gases  it  is  necessary  to  better  understand  the  sensors  sensing  mechanism.  This  work  aims  to  investigate Nasicon  electrocatalytic  gas  sensor  sensing  mechanism  in  nitrogen dioxide  and  ammonia.

In  this  paper,  Nasicon  (Na2.8Zr2Si1.8P1.2O12)  sensors  with  platinum  electrodes  were  prepared  and  investigated.  Namely,  Nasicon powder  was   prepared  by  the  conventional  solid-state  ball  milling method  from  the  zirconium  oxide,  silicon  oxide  and  trisodium phosphate.  The  components  were  mixed  in  ball  mill  and  annealed at  1373  K  (900 ◦C).  Obtained  in  this  way  powder  was  compacted into  pellets  (∼12  mm  in  diameter  and  1  mm  thick)  by  iso-axial pressing.  The  pellets  were  sintered  in  air  for  2  h  at  1373  K  (1100 ◦C). Electrodes  were  made  by  coating  both  sides  of  the  pellet  with  the platinum  paste  (ESL  ElectroScience,  ESL  5542)  and  ﬁring  at  1173  K (900 ◦C)  (surface  area  of  0.5  cm2).  Measurements  were  conducted in  mixtures  of  high  purity  gasses:  nitrogen  dioxide  or  ammonia and  synthetic  air,  which  were  supplied  with  a  constant  gas  ﬂow  of 100  cm3 min−1 maintained  by  mass  ﬂow  controllers.  The  experiments  were  conducted  in  a  tube  furnace,  which  temperature  was controlled  with  accuracy  better  than  0.5  K.  The  measurements  were performed  using  the  electrochemical  interface  Solartron  SI  1287.

To  obtain  sensor  sensitivity  in  nitrogen  dioxide  and  ammonia,  a  triangular  voltage  excitation  signal  with  the  amplitude  of 5  V  and  sweep  rate  of  50  mV/s  was   applied  to  the  sensor.  The electrical  current  was  recorded  during  sensor  polarization.  On  the current–voltage  plot  the  peaks  with  different  heights  (maximum of  the  electric  current)  were  visible  for  different  concentrations  of ammonia  and  nitrogen  dioxide.  This  information  was  used  to  obtain sensors  sensitivity  S  at  different  temperatures  (1): = Imax

where  c  is  the  measured  gas  concentration  (ppm),  while  I0-max and Imax are  the  heights  of  the  peaks  in  the  synthetic  air  and  the  measured  gas,  respectively.  The  I0-max was  obtained  from  reproducible I–V  response  in  synthetic  air  after  the  measurement  in  tested  gas. Usually,  the  reproducible  response  was  obtained  within  2  h  of  voltage  cycling.  At  some  temperatures  (below  350 ◦C)  for  ammonia the  I–V  response  in  synthetic  air  before  and  after  measurement in  tested  gas  was  not  exactly  the  same.  Namely,  the  currents  were higher  than  before  the  measurements,  which  may   suggest  that  the surfaces  of  electrodes  are  covered  by  some  reactions  products.  The high  temperature  treatment  of  the  sensor  (about  600 ◦C  in  synthetic  air)  refreshes  the  sensor  and  the  level  of  currents  become  low again  [8].

To  investigate  sensors  sensing  mechanisms  XRD  pattern  of  the electrode  surface  was  investigated.  Namely,  a  freshly  fabricated Nasicon  sensor  was  exposed  to  100  ppm  of  ammonia  or  nitrogen dioxide  at  473  K  (200 ◦C)  or  at  623  K  (350 ◦C).  At  those  temperatures  the  maximum  sensitivity  was  recorded  for  each  gas.  When the  temperature  was  stabilized  the  sensor  was  polarized  (biased) with  1  V  for  different  periods  to  form  a  sensing  phase  on  the  surface of  electrode.  The  same  sensing  phase  is  formed  during  normal  sensor  operation,  i.e.  when  the  sensor  is  excited  with  triangular  signal. On  current–voltage  plot  it  is  reﬂected  by  the  appearance  of  peaks due  to  electrochemical  reaction  of  formation  and  decomposition of  the  phases.  The  surfaces  of  the  sensors  were  investigated  using X-ray  diffractometry  in  order  to  determine  the  composition  of  the formed  phase.  XRD  patterns  were  recorded  with  Cu  K␣   radiation  at room  temperature  using  Philips  X’Pert  Pro  diffractometer.  Qualitative  phase  analysis  of  diffraction  pattern  was  carried  out  with  ICDD PDF  database.  The  AFM  images  were  collected  using  Atomic  Force Microscope  NTegra  (NT-MDT).

Nitrogen  dioxide  and  ammonia  contain  nitrogen  atom  and both  gases  are  environmentally  hazardous.  However,  it  seems  that sensing  mechanism  of  electrocatalytic  sensor  is  not  the  same.  In Fig.  1,  the  response  of  the  sensor  to  different  concentration  of nitrogen  dioxide  at  200 ◦C  (Fig.  1a)  and  different  concentration  of ammonia  at  350 ◦C  (Fig.  1b)  are  presented.  The  I–V  plot  presented in  Fig.  1a  shows  only  one  sharp  peak  for  positive  and  negative voltages.  This  reﬂects  one  step  formation  and/or  decomposition reaction  occurring  at  the  triple  phase  boundary.  The  I–V  plot  for ammonia  at  350 ◦C  (Fig.  1b)  reveals  broader  peak,  which  seems  to consist  of  two  components.  This  may   indicate  either  a  two-step process  or  two   different  reactions  at  the  triple  phase  boundary. As  presented  in  Fig.  2,  at  those  temperatures  about  the  maximum sensitivity  for  each  gas  was  obtained.  Based  on  the  results  shown in  Fig.  2,  it  is  evident,  that  the  sensitivity  level  and  the  temperature of  the  maximum  sensitivity  are  different.  Namely,  for  the  nitrogen  dioxide  the  maximum  sensitivity  of  3.4  ppm−1 was  obtained at  about  175 ◦C,  while  for  ammonia  of  0.1  ppm−1 at  about  350 ◦C. The  sensitivity  in  the  ammonia  is  much  lower  than  in  the  nitrogen  dioxide,  which  can  be  explained  by  different  catalytic  activity of  electrodes  towards  speciﬁc  electrochemical  reaction.  In  is  worth noting  that  for  ammonia  mixed  potential  potentiometric  Nasicon sensor  the  optimum  sensing  temperature  was  found  to  be  between 300 ◦C  and  350 ◦C  [9],  which  in  accordance  with  current  ﬁndings. The  operation  temperature  of  Nasicon  potentiometric  nitrogen dioxide  sensors  reported  in  the  literature  scatter,  i.e.  400 ◦C  [10] and  100 ◦C  [11].

To  investigate  sensors’  sensing  mechanism,  freshly  fabricated sensor  structures  were  polarized  at  different  temperatures  in 100  ppm  of  nitrogen  dioxide  and  ammonia.  The  electrodes  of  the sensors  were  investigated  by  XRD  in  order  to  determine  phases,

Fig.  1.  Response  of  the  sensor  to  different  concentration  of  nitrogen  dioxide  at  200 ◦C (a)   and  different  concentration  of  ammonia  at  350 ◦C  (b).

which  were  formed  on  the  electrodes  as  the  result  of  sensor electrical  excitation.  Fig.  3  presents  XRD  pattern  of  the  sensor exposed  to  100  ppm  of  nitrogen  dioxide  at  200 ◦C  and  polarized with  1  V  for  7  h.  It  was  found  that  on  the  negatively  polarized electrode  the  chemical  compound  was   formed  (see  Fig.  3a),  which does  not  exist  on  positively  polarized  electrode.  The  chemical  compound  was  determined  to  be  sodium  nitrate  or  sodium  nitrite

Fig.  2.  Sensitivity  plot  of  sensor  at  different  temperatures.

Fig.  3.  XRD  diffraction  patterns  of  both  sides  of  the  sensors  biased  with  the  voltage of   1  V  in  100  ppm  of  NO2 for  7  h  at  200 ◦C  (a)  and  negative  polarization  sides  of  the sensor  at  200 ◦C  and  350 ◦C  (b).  N  –  Nasicon,  Z  –  zirconium  oxide,  and  Pt  –  platinium.

and  it  is  expected  that  this  compound  is  formed  and  decomposed during  normal  sensor  operation.  Unfortunately,  sodium  nitrate  and sodium  nitrite  show  nearly  the  same  XRD  pattern,  so  it  is  impossible  to  distinguish  between  them.  Fig.  3b  presents  XRD  pattern  of the  sensor  exposed  to100  ppm  of  NO2 for  7  h  at  200 ◦C  and  350 ◦C. The  XRD  reﬂection  related  to  NaNO2/NaNO3 layer  is  much  higher at  200 ◦C  than  at  350 ◦C.  The  sensitivity  of  the  sensor  at  200 ◦C  is much  higher  than  at  350 ◦C,  what  is  in  agreement  with  the  hypothesis  that  the  NaNO2 or  NaNO3 is  responsible  for  sensing  mechanism of  electrocatalytic  sensors. The  XRD  pattern  of  the  sensors  exposed  to  100  ppm  of  nitrogen  dioxide  at  200 ◦C  and  polarized  with  1  V  for  different  times was  also  investigated.  Namely,  the  freshly  fabricated  sensors  were polarized  for  10  min,  1,  2,  5  and  15  h.  These  durations  of  polarization  were  selected,  because  the  electric  charge  was   doubled  during subsequent  polarizations.  Therefore,  one  may   expect  that  the  thickness  of  the  formed  layer  is  doubled  for  the  subsequent  durations of  polarizations.  Fig.  4  presents  XRD  diffraction  patterns  of  the sensors’  negative  polarization  side.  It  can  be  seen  that  with  the increase  of  the  polarization  durations  the  height  of  the  peak  related

Fig.  4.  XRD  diffraction  patterns  of  the  sensors’  negative  polarization  side.  The  sensors   are  biased  with  the  voltage  of  1  V  in  100  ppm  of  NO2 for  10  min,  1,  2,  5  and  15  h at   200 ◦C.

Fig.  5.  AFM  images  of  negative  (a)  and  positive  (b)  polarization  sides  of  the  sensors biased  with  the  voltage  of  1  V  in  100  ppm  of  NO2 for  15  h  at  200 ◦C.

to  NaNO2/NaNO3 increases.  In  case  of  the  polarization  durations  of 10  min,  1  and  2  h,  the  peak  is  barely  visible,  while  for  5  and  15  h  its existence  is  unambiguous.  It  can  be  expected  that  for  the  shorter polarization  times  the  NaNO2/NaNO3 is  formed  within  the  pores  of platinum.  For  the  longer  polarization  times  the  pores  are  probably partially  ﬁlled,  what  forces  the  NaNO2/NaNO3 to  grow  on  exposed for  X-rays  surface  of  platinum.  Therefore,  there  is  signiﬁcant  peak intensity  difference  between  shorter  and  longer  polarization  times. The  surface  of  the  sensors  after  exposition  to  100  ppm  of  nitrogen  dioxide  at  200 ◦C  and  polarized  with  1  V  for  15  h  was  examined by  atomic  force  microscopy.  The  AFM  images  of  surfaces  of  the  negative  and  positive  polarization  sides  are  presented  in  Fig.  5.  It  is evident  that  both  surfaces  show  different  microstructure.  The  surface  of  negative  polarization  side  shows  nanostructures  of  about 60  nm  in  diameter,  which  is  expected  to  be  NaNO2/NaNO3.  Those nanostructures  are  not  visible  on  the  surface  of  positive  polarization  side.

Contrary  to  the  sensor  exposed  to  nitrogen  dioxide,  in  ammonia  the  surface  of  the  negative  (and  positive)  sensor’s  electrode  is

Fig.  7.  Response  of  the  sensor  to  80  ppm  of  ammonia  and  80  ppm  of  nitrogen  dioxide at   350 ◦C.

Fig.  6.  XRD  diffraction  pattern  of  the  sensors’  negative  polarization  side.  The  sensors are  biased  with  the  voltage  of  1  V  in  100  ppm  of  NH3 for  15  h  at  350 ◦C.  N  –  Nasicon, Z   –  zirconium  oxide,  and  Pt  –  platinum.

free  from  any  traces  of  NaNO2/NaNO3 both  at  200 ◦C  and  at  350 ◦C. Instead,  small  traces  of  sodium  peroxide  were  detected  on  the  surface  of  negative  polarization  side  at  350 ◦C  (see  Fig.  6).  At  200 ◦C the  sodium  peroxide  is  not  detected,  but  at  the  same  time  the sensitivity  of  the  sensor  is  lower  than  at  350 ◦C.  Therefore,  it  can be  concluded  that  sensing  mechanism  of  electrocatalytic  sensor  is different  in  nitrogen  dioxide  and  ammonia.  Namely,  in  nitrogen dioxide  the  sodium  nitrate/nitrite  is  formed  on  the  sensor  electrode, while  in  ammonia  the  sodium  peroxide.  The  following  reaction  can be  proposed  in  nitrogen  dioxide: 2NaNO3 →   2NO2 + NaNO3 →

According  to  their  physical  properties,  the  NaNO2 decomposes at  271 ◦C,  while  the  NaNO3 at  380 ◦C.  It  can  be  expected  that  below 270 ◦C  the  mixture  of  sodium  nitrate  and  sodium  nitrite  is  formed and  decomposed  at  the  triple  phase  boundary.  Above  271 ◦C  only NaNO3 is  expected  as  a  result  of  nitrogen  dioxide  electrochemical decomposition.  Ono  et  al.  [12]  has  investigated  reaction  product  of Nasicon  amperometric  NO2 sensor  with  gold  electrodes  at  150 ◦C. Based  on  chronopotentiometry  experiments  he  has  concluded  that both  NaNO2 and  NaNO3 are  formed  on  sensing  electrode  in  nitrogen dioxide.  Moreover,  the  NaNO2 is  formed  as  a  primary  product,  while NaNO3 as  secondary  product  converted  from  NaNO2.

In  case  of  the  ammonia  based  on  X-ray  diffactogram  reactions product  of  electrochemical  decomposition  of  ammonia.

Differently,  in  the  paper  by  Liang  et  al.  [13]  related  to  ammonia mixed  potential  potentiometric  sensing,  reactions  (6)  and  (7)  are suggested  to  occur: 2NH3 + + +

However,  sodium  oxide  (Na2O),  which  was   not  detected  in  this study,  reacts  violently  with  water  existing  during  ammonia  decomposition  what  suggest  that  this  oxide  is  less  stable  than  sodium peroxide.  Ono  et  al.  [12]  during  his  chronopotentiometry  experiments  in  synthetic  air  at  200 ◦C  revealed  formation  NaOx on  the sensing  electrode.  He  ascribed  this  oxide  to  sodium  peroxide. As  presented  in  Fig.  1b,  the  double  peak  is  visible  in  I–V  plot  for ammonia  at  350 ◦C.  In  Fig.  7  is  presented  an  I–V  plot  of  the  sensor  in 80  ppm  of  ammonia  and  in  80  ppm  of  nitrogen  dioxide  at  350 ◦C.  It is  visible  that  the  peak  existing  in  nitrogen  dioxide  can  be  matched to  one  of  the  peaks  existing  in  ammonia.  Therefore,  one  may   expect chemical  decomposition  of  ammonia  to  nitric  oxide  (8)  [14]: 4NH3 + which  may   further  lead  to  the  formation  NaNO3 at  the  triple  phase boundary  according  to  reaction  (9):

This  can  explain  similarities  between  the  ammonia  and  nitrogen

dioxide  I–V  plots.

In  this  paper  the  sensing  mechanism  of  electrocatalytic  Nasicon sensor  in  nitrogen  dioxide  and  ammonia  was  investigated.  It  was found  that  at  200 ◦C  the  sensor  is  sensitive  to  nitrogen  dioxide  due to  sodium  nitrate/nitrite  formation.  At  350 ◦C  sodium  nitrate/nitrite was  barely  detected.  In  case  of  the  sensor  exposed  to  ammonia, formation  of  sodium  peroxide  was   detected.  The  amount  of  this phase  is  lower  at  200 ◦C  than  at  350 ◦C,  what  is  in  agreement  with sensitivity  level  at  those  temperatures.