The co-precipitation method can make the materials react uniformly at molecular level and has the advantages of lower polycrystalline synthesized temperature and shorter sintering time. Therefore, it is expected that the mass production of Li1.5Al0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3 (LATP) solid electrolyte would be possible by application of the co-precipitation method for LATP preparation. In this study, an application of the co-precipitation method for a preparation of LATP solid electrolyte is attempted. Crystallized LATP powder is obtained by heating precipitant containing Li, Al, Ti, and PO4 at 800 °C for 30 min. The LATP bulk sintered pellet is successfully prepared using the crystallized LATP powder by calcinating at 1,050 °C. The cross-sectional SEM images show that many crystal grains exist, and the grains are in good contact with each other, i.e., there is no void space. All diffraction peaks of the pellet are attributed to LATP in XRD pattern. The sintered pellet is obtained by calcinating at 1,050 °C, which is more than 150 °C lower than that of conventional method. The LATP solid electrolyte shows a good conductivity −1 for which is 1.4×10 total conductivities, respectively.

The world’s growing demands in energy are the main focus of recent research both academically and industrially. Lithium ion batteries (LIB) as electrochemical energy storage devices are essential in managing the green transition from fossil fuels to clean and renewable technologies with applications ranging from portable devices to high power sources for the automotive industry. LIB based on liquid and gel electrolytes have driven industrial progress in the past decades. However, the LIBs still have safety issues caused by flammable organic solvents contained in the electrolytes. In order to solve the safety issues, the all-solid-state batteries with inflammable inorganic ceramic electrolyte have been suggested [1]. The all-solid-state batteries do not contain any flammable components; thus, the safety issues would be solved.

Many kinds of Li ion conductors which mean solid electrolytes for the all-solid-state batteries have been reported thus far. NASICON (Na Ion Super Conductor) structure phosphates Li1+xM′xM″2-x(PO4)3 (M′=Al, Y, Fe. etc., M″=Ti, Ge, Hf etc.) are considered as possible electrolyte candidates for the all-solid-state lithium batteries [2–4]. Among them, Li1.5Al0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3 (LATP) is especially expected for the application of all-solid-state battery because of its high lithium −1) [5]. Hoshina et al. fabricated ion conductivity (∼10 the all-solid-state thin-film battery composed of LATP solid electrolyte and LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode. They operated the thin-film battery successfully [6]. Kotobuki et al. also fabricated the all-solid-battery with three dimensionally ordered structure using LATP solid electrolyte and Li4Mn5O12 electrode and observed charge and discharge behaviors [7]. One of the problems of LATP for practical application is the difficulty in mass production. Most studies on LATP have adopted solid state reaction and melting–quenching methods for the LATP preparation [8, 9]. These methods cannot be easily applied to the mass production due to high energy consumption and contamination of impurities in the final products.

The co-precipitation method makes the materials react uniformly at molecular level and has the advantages of lower polycrystalline synthesized temperature and shorter sintering time [10–12]. The lowering synthesized temperature and

The as-prepared and milled powders and the sintered pellets were subjected to X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku UltimaIV) measurement using Cu Kα radiation to identify crystal phases of them. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL, JSM-6300LA) was used to observe the morphologies of the powders and the pellet cross section.

The Li ion conductivity was measured by the AC impedance method. Both surfaces of the sintered pellet were polished to obtain flat surfaces and to control its thickness before measuring Li ion conductivity. Prior to measurement, Au was sputtered onto both sides of the pellet to prepare Li blocking electrodes and to ensure an electrical contact between the pellet and Cu current collectors. The AC impedance data were collected at ±10 mV voltage signal in a frequency range of 100∼1 MHz using a chemical impedance meter (HIOKI Chemical Impedance Meter 3352-80). The measurement was performed at 30 °C.

Figure 1 shows XRD pattern of the precursor powder after heating at 800 °C. Comparing with the standard peaks of LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) having NASICON structure, all diffraction peaks of the precursor powder before ball-milling (Fig. 1a) were well consistent with the standard peaks, indicating that the LATP was formed after heating the precursor precipitant. Lower peak intensities in the powder after ball-milling were observed because the LATP was crushed, and its particle size was reduced by the ball-milling.

SEM images of the precursor powder before and after the ball-milling are displayed in Fig. 2a, b, respectively. Notably, both powders have completely different morphologies. The powder before the ball-milling was composed of irregularshaped particles whose diameter was approximately 10∼ 300 μm. The powder was crushed by the ball-milling and the particle size was reduced to ∼100 nm. This result was consistent with XRD results.

The milled powder was used to form the pellet, which was then calcined at 1,050 °C for 6 h. The XRD pattern of the calcined pellet was depicted in Fig. 3. All diffraction peaks were well matched with the standard pattern of LTP, and no impurity phase was observed. The peak intensities were stronger than the

Fig. 1 XRD patterns of precursor powder prepared through the coprecipitation. a Before ball-milling, b after ball-milling, and c standard pattern of LiTi2(PO4)3 (PDF 35-0754)

shorter sintering time allow us to reduce process cost for the LATP production. Therefore, it is expected that the mass production of LATP solid electrolyte would be possible by application of the co-precipitation method for LATP preparation.

In this study, we attempted the application of co-precipitation method for the LATP preparation. The LATP solid electrolyte was successfully prepared by the co-precipitation method, and its Li ion conductivity was comparable with reported value.

LATP solid electrolyte was prepared by the co-precipitation method. Li2C2O4 and Al(NO3)3·9H2O were dissolved into purified water, and the resultant solution was dropped into NH4HCO3 solution under vigorous stirring. To compensate an evaporation of Li during heat treatment and calcination, 10 % of excessive amount of Li was added into the precursors. After that, Ti(C3H7O)4 and NH4H2PO4 solution were dropped into the solution. The mixture was dried at 100 °C to remove the solvent. The dried mixture was heated at 800 °C for 30 min. Obtained precursor powder was ground by a ball-milling at 650 rpm for 1 h (Pulver Risette 7, Fritsch) with φ0.5 mm Zirconia ball to supply to a sintered pellet preparation. The milled powder was pressed into a pellet form with 20 mm in diameter and then sintered at 1,050 °C for 6 h in air. All reagents were purchased from Wako Chemical Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan, and used without further purification.

Fig. 2 SEM images of precursor powder prepared through the coprecipitation. a Before ballmilling, b after ball-milling

Fig. 3 XRD patterns of LATP pellet calcined at 1,050 °C for 6 h

precursor powder heated at 800 °C because of high crystallinity of prepared LATP pellet.

Fig. 5 A complex impedance plot of LATP pellet calcined at 1,050 °C for 6 h measured at 30 °C

Cross-sectional SEM images of the LATP pellet prepared through the co-precipitation method are presented in Fig. 4. The pellet is thought to be sintered well because no void space was observed in its cross section. Many crystal grains were observed, and the grains were in good contact with each other. Complex impedance plots of LATP pellet using Au blocking electrodes are depicted in Fig. 5. A semicircle and a tail were observed in the highand low-frequency ranges, respectively. This characteristic profile of the impedance plot appears often in ceramics with ion conductive nature [13, 14]. The tail can be attributed to Warburg-type impedance, which originates from the diffusion of Li ions in the blocking electrodes. The intercepts of the semicircle at the highand lowfrequency sides were ascribed to inner crystal and total (inner crystal and grain boundary) impedances, respectively [15]. The bulk (inner crystal) and total Li ion conductivities were esti−1, respectively. These mated to 1.4×10 values are comparable to previously reported values [15, 16].

In this study, the preparation of LATP solid electrolyte through the co-precipitation was studied. The precipitant containing Li, Al, Ti, and PO4 species was converted into LATP by heating at 800 °C. The LATP powder was easily crushed by the ball-milling and its diameter was reduced to ∼100 nm.

Fig. 4 Cross-sectional SEM images of LATP pellet calcined at 1,050 °C for 6 h

Well-sintered pellets could be successfully obtained at calcination temperature of 1,050 °C. The conventional solid state reaction and melting–quenching methods have required the calcination temperature as high as 1,200 °C to prepare the bulk LATP. The co-precipitation allows us to reduce the calcination temperature more than 150 °C. The XRD pattern of sintered pellet did not reveal diffraction peaks assigned to impurity phases as shown in Fig. 3. Xu et al. observed AlPO4 contamination in the LATP pellet [17]. The co-precipitation method can make the materials react uniformly at molecular level. Therefore, it is thought that uniform mixture of precursor species at molecular level by the co-precipitation avoided a formation of AlPO4, which is Tiand Li-lacking phase of LATP.

The bulk and total Li ion conductivities of prepared LATP −1, respectively. were estimated to 1.4×10 The Li ion conductivity of practical liquid electrolyte soaked in −1 [18]. The total conducseparator is approximately ∼10 tivity of the prepared LATP was lower than present liquid electrolyte and not high enough for application to the all-solidstat batteries. This was attributed to low grain boundary conductivity because the bulk (inner crystal) conductivity was comparable to the liquid electrolyte. This was supported by SEM images in Fig. 4, which revealed many grain boundaries in the cross section. Therefore, higher total conductivity would be obtained by improvement of the grain boundary conductivity. In our previous study, which investigated a preparation of LATP using sol–gel method, an amorphous LATP powder was used to

form pellet and calcined at 1,000 °C. The bulk and total conduc−3 and 4.5× tivities of sintered LATP pellet were 3.1×10 −1, respectively, higher than this study [19]. This 10 makes an image that the grain boundary conductivity can be improved by using the amorphous powder. In this study, crystallized LATP powder was supplied for pellet formation. Therefore, the grain boundary and total conductivities could be improved if the amorphous powder, which was prepared by heating precipitant at low temperature, was used.

It is verified that the co-precipitation method can be applied for the LATP preparation, and it can reduce calcination temperature compared with the conventional methods.

In this work, co-precipitation method was adopted to prepare LATP solid electrolyte. Crystallized LATP powder was obtained by heating co-precipitant at 800 °C for 30 min. The LATP bulk sintered pellet was successfully prepared using the crystallized LATP powder. The sintered pellet was composed of LATP crystal phase, and no impurity phase was observed. The crosssectional SEM images showed that many crystal grains existed, and the grains were in good contact with each other, i.e., there was no void space. The sintered pellet was obtained by calcinating at 1,050 °C, which was more than 150 °C lower than that of conventional method. The LATP solid electrolyte showed −1 for bulk and a good conductivity which was 1.4×10 −1 for total conductivity, respectively. These 1.5×10

values are comparable to previous reports. The total conductivity could be improved by using amorphous powder for pellet formation.