We report on the transport properties of lithium ion conducting r e p r e s e n t e d b y g l a s s c o m p o s i t i o n Li1+x−yAlx (PO4)3 with NASICON-type structure and their stability in contact with lithium metal. In particular, solid electrolyte phases with M = Ge, M = Ti, Ge, and M = Ti, Ta were investigated. AC impedance spectroscopy and DC polarization measurements were applied to determine the conductivity as a function of temperature, and to extract the partial electronic conductivity. The maximum total conductivity at room temperature was found to be about 4 × 10−4 S/cm for the solely Ge containing sample. We demonstrate that the combination of vacuum-based lithium thin ﬁlm deposition and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is well suited to study the reactivity of the solid electrolyte membranes in contact with lithium. As a major result, we show that none of the materials investigated is stable in contact with lithium metal, and we discuss the reactive interaction between solid electrolytes and Li metal in terms of the formation of a mixed (ionic/electronic) conducting interphase (MCI) following the well-known SEI concept in liquid electrolytes.

In current generations of rechargeable lithium ion batteries (LIBs), liquid or gel-polymer electrolytes with aprotic solvents are applied rather than solid electrolytes. The reasons are twofold: First, the slow transport of ions in most storage materials requires the use of highly interpenetrating electrode networks of the electronconducting carbon additive, and the lithium ion conducting electrolyte with typical dimensions of the diﬀerent phases on the nanoand microscale. In conventional electrodes, these networks are easily formed by ﬁlling the porous solid electrode composite with liquid electrolyte. Second, liquid electrolytes typically show a higher conductivity than solid electrolytes. Interestingly, using liquid aprotic electrolytes, the formation of the so-called solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) on the negative electrode is one of the reliable functionality of LIBs. The SEI to be a solid multiphase lithium ion-conducting ﬁlm with a thickness in the nanometer range preventing continuous decomposition of the aprotic solvent during cycling and which in the case of graphite also protects against cointercalation of solvent molecules and exfoliation.1,2 In fact, today, suitable additives in the liquid electrolyte of LIBs support the formation of the SEI.3 Therefore it is no surprise that continuous eﬀort is spent to develop

lithium conducting glasses, ceramics, polymers, or composites of those as electrolyte materials with high stability, high conductivity, and high transference number for Li ions, hoping that these might later be used to build a stable “artiﬁcial SEI” or an ion-selective membrane in batteries.

In fact, solid electrolytes are already successfully employed in all-solid-state lithium batteries (SSLB) produced in thin ﬁlm technology;4,5 ﬁrst commercial products have recently become available.6,7 In these SSLBs, the solid electrolyte ﬁlm is in direct contact with lithium metal and the positive electrode.

In the future, solid electrolytes may also become necessary in lithium/sulfur batteries as a physical barrier to prevent the socalled polysulﬁde redox shuttle mechanism:8,9During cycling, lithium polysulﬁde (Li2Sx, 2 < x < 8) intermediates are formed at the positive electrode, which dissolve in the liquid electrolyte. Without physical barrier, the soluble polysulﬁdes are able to diﬀuse toward the negative electrode (metallic lithium), where they chemically react, leading to an internal short-circuit.10,11 The same concept of such “hybrid cells”, i.e., cells including both solid and liquid electrolytes, can be employed in the

It is obvious from the aforementioned that solid electrolytes need not only to show high Li ion conductivity and negligible electronic conductivity. Rather, it is as important that a chosen solid electrolyte is (electro-)chemically stable against lithium metal and/or other cell components. It is interesting to note that the question of stability is rarely addressed in the literature, but that most emphasis is in fact given to the conductivity.

In the present paper, therefore, we focus on the interface reactivity between lithium metal and lithium conducting glassceramic membranes of composition (PO4)3, where M4+ and M5+ are metal Li1+x−yAlx ions. These materials are structurally related to the so-called Na super ion conductor (NASICON) phases, which form a wellknown class of ionic conductivity.13 Within this group, the properties of the two 4+ (PO4)3 with M = Ge or Ti, named LAGP phases Li1+xAlxM2−x or LATP, have been studied most,14−16 and have already been applied as membranes in lithium/oxygen and lithium/sulfur cells.17−19 We investigated the reactivity of lithium metal toward (a) LAGP, (b) a commercial solid electrolyte containing Ge, Ti, and Si,20 and (c) a new, in-house developed germanium-free phase (M = Ti, Ta).21 These materials are abbreviated in the following as LAGP, LATGP, and LATTP, respectively.

For titanium-containing solid electrolytes, it is well-known that reduction occurs upon contact with lithium.22 Generally, germanium-containing materials are reported in the literature to be stable,23,24even the LAGP phase.25 The reduction of LAGP has not yet been described in the literature, but our results clearly indicate that germanium undergoes reduction as well (Ge4+ ↔ Gex+): We further demonstrate that the combination of lithium metal thin ﬁlm deposition and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy is an excellent tool to analyze the stability of solid electrolytes, and that this approach could generally be used to study the reaction of battery materials with lithium (e.g., electrode materials). Finally, we discuss alternatives on the basis of thermodynamic calculations.

SECTION Synthesis of LAGP and LATTP Materials.26 The base materials (in wt %) for the LATTP synthesis were 5.35% Al2O3 (source: Al(PO3)3), 5.22% Li2O (source: LiH2PO4), 45.91% P2O5 (including LiH2PO4 and Al(PO3)3), 3.94% SiO2, Ta2O5 23.17%, and TiO2 16.41%. The base materials for the LAGP synthesis were 6.08% Al2O3 (source: Al(PO3)3), 5.7% Li2O (source: LiH2PO4), 50.7% P2O5 (including LiH2PO4 and Al(PO3)3), and 37.43% GeO2. The nominal elemental formulas a r e f o r Li1.6Al0.5Ti0.95Ta0.5(PO4)3 and Li1.6Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3, respectively. The materials were melted in a quartz crucible at temperatures of 1500 °C − 1650 °C in air and then cast to glass plates of 3−8 mm in thickness and 30−40 mm in diameter. The slabs were annealed just below the glass transformation temperature (500 °C for LAGP, 530 °C for LATTP) and slowly cooled to room temperature (rate 20 K/h ). Nucleation and crystallization temperatures were determined by DTA, and accordingly samples were annealed at 500−600 °C for up to 4 h and 850 °C for 12 h. A XRD pattern of the LATTP material is shown in Figure S1. The main phase is

isostructural to LiGe2(PO4)3 and LiTi2(PO4)3. SiO2 (Cristobalite) is observed as impurity phase (<2 wt %), originating from the melt.

LATGP denotes commercial LICGC (lithium ion conducting glass ceramic) samples purchased from Ohara GmbH (Germany). Membranes of the dimensions 1 sq in. and 150 μm as well as 500 μm in thickness were used as delivered.

Conductivity Experiments. For determination of the total conductivity, the solid electrolyte membranes were coated with gold thin ﬁlm electrodes of approximately 100 nm thickness by thermal evaporation (see Figure S2). Impedance measurements were carried out in a temperature range from −40 to 60 °C using a SP300 Potentiostat (BioLogic SAS) and a WKL64 climatic chamber (Weiss) or a Alpha Impedance Analyzer equipped with an Quatro Cryosystem (Novocontrol). Electronic partial conductivity was measured using a DC polarization technique. Samples were polarized with a constant potential, and the current response was recorded over time using a 6430 source-meter with remote preamp (Keithley). In order to reduce electric disturbances the samples were placed in a homemade test ﬁxture for “high-impedance guarding”.

X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS). To study the reaction of the diﬀerent solid electrolytes with lithium the samples were partially coated with a lithium metal thin ﬁlm using a homemade thermal evaporation system connected to an argon ﬁlled glovebox. Samples were coated at room temperature under vacuum (<10−3 mbar) with a lithium ﬁlm of roughly 200 nm thickness applying a deposition rate of approximately 2 nm/s. After deposition, the samples were transferred to the XPS system without contact to air. The XPS experiments were performed using a PHI 5000 Versaprobe Scanning ESCA Microprobe (Physical Electronics). XPS spectra were acquired at a chamber pressure in the range of 10−8 mbar using a monochromatized aluminum X-ray anode (beam area 200 μm × 1400 μm, X-ray power 100 W). The analyzer was operated at constant pass energy of 46.95 eV for detail and at 187.85 eV for survey spectra. After an initial analysis, all samples where sputter etched by using a C60 ion source that was operated at 10 kV. We used the O 1s line at 531 eV as an internal binding energy standard as this line showed only slight changes upon lithiation of the samples. Elemental quantiﬁcation was performed using the PHI multipack software package and is based on the empirical atomic sensitivity factors derived by Wagner.27

Thermodynamic data were taken from HSC Chemistry 7.00

The ideal solid electrolyte can keep up with its liquid counterparts in terms of lithium ion conductivity (10−3 S/cm to 10−2 S/cm) and shows a negligible transference number for electrons, as it would cause an internal short circuit of the battery. In addition, the material should exhibit negligible reactivity with the electrode materials: In the ﬁrst part of this work, the NASICON-based membranes are discussed. We used a combination of two-probe impedance spectroscopy and DC polarization to determine the total conductivity as well as the electronic transference number of the solid electrolyte membranes. The second part of this work, then, focuses on the reaction of the solid electrolytes with lithium. Third, on the basis of some simple thermodynamic calculus, free enthalpies for reduction reactions, we explain some details of

Liquid and solid electrolytes may be “sorted” by the majority type of species that carry electric charge and therefore contribute to the total conductivity. The total conductivity (σ tot) always refers to the sum of all partial conductivities (σ i) of the diﬀerent charge carrying species. In liquid electrolytes, only ions are mobile charge carriers, and therefore the total conductivity is the sum of the cationic and anionic partial conductivities. The lithium transference number (tLi+) is then given as tLi+ = σ tot. In solid electrolytes, usually only one kind of ionic species is mobile: in our case, lithium ions. But in any solid, electrons (or holes) are also mobile to a certain extent, and therefore the total conductivity of a solid ion) and electronic electrolyte consists of the partial conductivities (σ e). Then the transference number for electrons is calculated by te = σ Li+/ σ tot. In an ideal solid electrolyte with negligible electronic partial conductivity the former is zero, the latter unity. Figure 1A−C shows impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) of the diﬀerent solid

The spectra for all samples can be basically described by two semicircles at high and medium frequencies and a steep increase in −Im(Z) at low frequencies. The high-frequency isdue to its small semicircle of impedanceshown in the inset of Figure 1C. All spectra were simulated by a series of three parallel RQ circuits, where R is an ohmic resistance and Q is a constant phase element, here, representing a nonideal capacitance.28 The latter was chosen to account for the nonideal, slightly suppressed semicircles, as by so doing the best agreement between experimental data and simulation were obtained. Solid lines within the graphs show the simulated impedance spectra. Usually an additional series resistance is included in the equivalent circuit for simulations accounting for sample wiring. However, for all measurements carried out in this work, its value was observed to be negligibly small compared to the total resistance of the samples. It should be noted that inductive eﬀects can lead to the appearance of a “pseudo” series resistance:29 Inductivities lead to signiﬁcant suppression and deformation of the high frequency semicircle, and the intersection with the Re(Z) axis can be misinterpreted as a series resistance. This led to a signiﬁcant overestimation of conductivity values of LAGP materials in the literature.26,30

The three RC circuits used in the equivalent circuits are separated to (i) intragrain or bulk transport (high-frequency semicircle), (ii) intergrain or grain boundary transport (midfrequency semicircle), and (iii) electrolyte/electrode interface due to the following well-accepted considerations:31

The lowest capacitances in ceramic electrochemical systems are usually observed for the grain interior or the geometric capacitance of the sample investigated. As the apex frequency of a semicircle is given by ω = (RC)−1, the high frequency semicircle is then usually related to the bulk or intragrain transport. A second semicircle in impedance data is, for example, observed when the investigated electrolyte is of polycrystalline nature and the grain−grain interfaces (= grain the mobile charge carriers.32 boundaries) are barriers for Reasons for such an observation are either space charge eﬀects in the vicinity of the grain boundaries, loose contacts between the grains (constriction resistance), or the precipitation of a second phase within the grain boundaries that shows a lower ionic conductivity than the grain material.29,33−35

All three investigated types of materials show signiﬁcantly diﬀerent grain boundary impedance behavior. The lowest grain boundary impedance is observed for the LAGP membranes, the highest is seen for the LATTP material. Therefore one might assume that the materials show a quite diﬀerent microstructure. Figure S3 shows scanning electron microscopy (SEM) crosssection images of all electrolyte phases. Comparing the LAGP and the LATGP material, it is obvious that the latter shows a signiﬁcantly smaller average crystalline size and therefore a higher fraction of grain boundaries that could explain the relative large semicircle in the impedance spectrum. Grains within the LATTP, however, are even larger than that of the LAGP, as shown in Figure S3C. The same part of the LATTP material is shown in panel (D) of Figure S3, but using the back scattering electron detector of the microscope; besides topographical, electron density contrast also contributes to the image. It seems that between the large crystallites, a second phase, indicated by the dark areas, has been formed that may

Figure 1. Impedance spectra of (a) LATGP, (b) LAGP, and (c) LATTP at −40 °C using gold electrodes. The inset in panel c is a zoom-in of the high-frequency (low impedance) data. Please note that values in panels a, b, and c are of the units kΩ·cm and MΩ·cm, respectively. Open circles represent experimental data, lines the corresponding ﬁts to the impedance data. The numbers represent the frequency decade of the indicated data point (e.g., 4: f = 104 Hz).

lead to a high intergrain impedance. EDS analysis (data not shown) reveals that these parts show high silicon content, well in line with SiO2 found as impurity phase via X-ray diﬀraction analysis.

The low frequency RC circuit is attributed to the electrode/ electrolyte interface. The gold electrodes are, ideally, blocking for lithium ions, therefore only electrons contribute to the charge transport at frequencies tending to zero leading to high total impedances.

From the sum of the resistances of the highand the midfrequency RC circuit, we calculate the total conductivity of the solid electrolytes; values as a function of temperature are shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2. Total conductivity as a function of temperature as obtained from impedance measurements. The point connecting lines are only for eye guidance.

Using impedance spectroscopy, the total conductivity of a solid electrolyte is obtained, as both ions and electrons contribute to charge transport in an ac electric ﬁeld, regardless of the use of blocking or reversible electrodes. As electronic transport leads to an undesired, internal short circuit and selfdischarge of the battery, it is worth estimating the transference number (te) for electrons in the material. Therefore dc potentials between 1 and 3 V were applied to the samples, and the current transient was recorded until a steady-state current was reached. At this state, only electronic charge carriers can contribute to the electric current, as the gold electrodes block the lithium ions. The resulting currents were very small, and we used a special setup for these measurements including two faradaic cages and an amperemeter capable of measuring currents smaller than 0.1 pA. Figure S5A shows a typical current transient obtained for a LAGP sample at 2 V. In the inset of panel a, the current transient within the last 2 h of the measurement is shown; virtually no further change was observed. By comparing this dc resistance with the sample resistance from the impedance spectroscopy experiment (Figure S6), one can estimate the electronic transference number of the solid electrolyte. Figure S5B shows the obtained dc resistance values (logarithmic scale) as a function of the applied voltage. LAGP shows an electronic transference number smaller than 10−7. Both titanium containing electrolytes show about 2 orders of magnitude higher values (lower dc resistance), which is in good agreement with other titanium containing solid electrolytes like lithium lanthanum titanate.22 The redox activity (Ti4+ ↔ Ti3+) appears to support the formation of electronic defects in the material. Regarding both total conductivity and electronic transference number, the titanium free LAGP material shows the best performance, whereas the LATTP material shows the poorest performance

investigated in this work is a commercial product, and a conductivity of 1 × 10−4 S/cm at 25 °C is given in the data sheet. We measured a value of 1.2 × 10−4 S/cm, which is very close to the manufacturers’ information. The room temperature conductivity of the LAGP and LATTP materials were 4.0 × 10−4 S/cm and 8.9 × 10−6 S/cm, respectively. The results agree with previous reports and the general understanding that germanium favors a high ionic conductivity. From the temperature dependence of the conductivity data we obtained activation energies for lithium ion migration. The activation energies are all around 0.4 eV, which is in good agreement with other reports in literature.36 LATTP shows the highest activation energy, which is in line with its comparably poor conductivity. More details can be found in the Supporting Information (Figure S4 and Table S1).

We note that a slight overestimation of conductivity values results from the electrode arrangement as shown in Figure S2. For experimental reasons, the electrodes do not completely cover the solid electrolyte surfaces. As a result, the eﬀective charge transport cross section is slightly underestimated leading to overestimated conductivity values. According to ﬁnite element simulation of the electric ﬁeld distribution (data not shown), using electrolyte and electrode geometries applied in this work, this overestimation is below +10%. The conductivity of the materials could be further improved by reducing grain boundary resistances due to optimizing the annealing conditions,29 which is, however, not part of this study.

We stress that a for precise determination of transference numbers, the solid electrolyte needs to be measured. It is a function of the chemical potential of lithium within the material,37 and as two ion-blocking gold electrodes were used in our experiments, the chemical potential of Li in the solid electrolyte is thermodynamically not ﬁxed. This rather abstract treatment of in solid materials indeed is of high practical relevance: The electronic partial conductivity of both active electrode materials and solid electrolytes, in consequence, changes with cell voltage. Ideally one reversible electrode with a deﬁned chemical potential for lithium, e.g., lithium metal, is used and the electronic partial conductivity is determined using the so-called Wagner−Hebb polarization method.38−40 For the investigated in this work, a Wagner−Hebb electrolytes arrangement suﬀered from degradation reactions at the lithium electrode. Furthermore, even at voltages as high as 3 V, we measured only currents in the sub-nanoampere range. These values may simply originate from electrochemical decomposition of the electrode interfaces, and therefore, we are not able to provide precise values of the electronic partial conductivity.

As already mentioned above, all three materials investigated in this work were instable reactions in contact with metallic lithium, and chemical occurred: Figure 3A−C shows impedance spectra of the electrolytes when lithium metal foils were used as electrodes. Impedance spectra were collected in certain time intervals after applying the lithium electrodes. The numbers next to the

Figure 4 shows a cross-section SEM image of a LATGP sample after 12 h in contact with lithium. It can be seen that the

Figure 3. Impedance spectra of (a) LATGP, (b) LAGP, and (c) LATTP samples with two lithium electrodes. The approximate time after cell assembly is given in hours near the corresponding spectrum. Experiments were carried out at room temperature (approximately 20 °C) in an Ar-ﬁlled glovebox.

spectra denote the elapsed time in hours between cell assembly and data recording. Experiments were carried out in an argonﬁlled glovebox to exclude the inﬂuence of humidity or air contamination. For LAGP and LATGP, the sample impedance increases continuously with time. Already after 1 h in contact with lithium metal, these values rose to about 21 kΩ·cm and 81 kΩ·cm, respectively. For comparison, Figure S6A and C shows the impedance data for the materials using gold electrodes. Total resistance (neglecting electrode resistance) is about only 3 kΩ·cm and 10 kΩ·cm for LAGP and LATGP, respectively. The resistance of the LATTP material using lithium electrodes is more than 1 order of magnitude higher compared to the measurements with gold electrodes. However, a clear time dependence, as in the case of the other materials is not observed. The resistance changes with time, indicating changes in the materials properties in contact with lithium, but a continuous increase is not observed.

In summary, the electrolyte resistance signiﬁcantly increased for all samples when brought into contact with metallic lithium. One could ﬁrst argue that an increase in resistivity is related to a nonideal contact between lithium and the solid electrolyte. This can easily be the result of the sample preparation, as lithium foil is mechanically pressed on the samples, which can lead to signiﬁcantly lower contact area, e.g., due to surface roughness, resulting in an overestimation of the electrolyte resistance. Regardless of the applied mechanical pressure, we always found only partial contact. Higher mechanical pressures can lead to breaking of the membranes and were therefore not applied. However, this eﬀect should not be time dependent and hence does not explain the gradual increase in resistance by time. The samples became signiﬁcantly electrolyte surfaces of all darkened, almost black colored, indicating a reaction of the materials in contact with lithium, too (Figure S6B,D). Better insight into the reactions has been obtained by surface analysis, as described in the next section.

Figure 4. SEM cross-section image of a LATGP sample after approximately 12 h contact with lithium metal. The white arrow indicates the chemical diﬀusion of lithium into the material.

material has undergone signiﬁcant changes even at a distance of 15 μm from the lithium/electrolyte interface. The image shows a reaction front moving from the lithium-exposed surface into the bulk of the solid electrolyte. This reaction front indicates visibly the lithiation, i.e., reduction of the solid electrolyte. We assume that all elements except lithium have negligible mobility at room temperature, and thus, coupled (chemical) diﬀusion of lithium ions and electrons into the bulk of the material occurs. We know from the dc polarization experiments that the intrinsic electronic conductivity of the material (about 10−10 S/ cm) is much lower than the ionic conductivity (10−4 S/cm). Hence, the chemical diﬀusion coeﬃcient of lithium is limited by the electronic transport, and the lithiation should proceed slowly. We propose to term this mixed ionic/electronic region as “mixed conducting interphase” (MCI).

In the next step, we aimed to prove that the electronic conductivity of the solid electrolyte is altered upon lithiation. Therefore, we coated a pristine LATGP surface with a lithium thin ﬁlm of several 100 nm. The coated areas of the material turned black within minutes after lithium deposition, as already observed when using lithium foil. In a second step, two copper thin ﬁlm electrodes were coated on this surface, and the DC resistance between the electrodes was measured as a function of temperature (see Figure S7). The obtained electronic conductivity at room temperature is almost 10−7 S/cm (U = 1 V), which is about 3 orders of magnitude higher than for the bare LATGP membrane. For the conductivity, we used the total membrane thickness of 150 μm (see Figure S7A for the cell arrangement), although the degraded part of the material is signiﬁcantly smaller. Thus, the given value above can be seen only as a rough estimate, and the true electronic conductivity of the lithiated solid electrolyte is probably much higher, which explains the fast lithiation kinetics.

As already mentioned, generally, germanium containing materials are reported in the literature to be stable against lithium,23,24 even the LAGP phase,25 but our results clearly indicate that germanium undergoes reduction as well.

Figure 5. XPS detail spectra of a LATGP sample before (bottom, black line) and after lithiation (middle, red line). Further spectra were recorded after 30 s of C60 ion etching of the lithiated sample (top, blue line). Please note that the y-axis is arbitrarily scaled in order to emphasize signal shapes rather than absolute intensities, and that the vertical dashed lines are only guides for the eyes.

into the reduction process, we investigated the lithium-coated solid electrolytes by XPS. Using proper masks during the lithium deposition process, we ensured that only some parts of the sample surface were coated with lithium in order to compare those with the pristine electrolyte material. The possible formation of surface layers was investigated by etching the samples with C60 ions for a short time. C60 sputtering is known for causing less sputter damage than conventional Ar ion etching, particularly on organic or hybrid samples such as solid electrolyte interphase layers; beneﬁcial eﬀects are also reported for the depth proﬁling of battery electrodes.41,42 Nevertheless, some metal oxides including Ti and Ta oxides are prone to reduction due to preferential sputtering eﬀects. Survey spectra of the bare and of the lithium-coated ceramics can be found in Figures S8−S10. Photoelectron signals of the electrolyte material are still dominant after the deposition of roughly 200 nm lithium metal. Owing to the surface sensitivity of the XPS method, it can be concluded that no compact lithium layer has been formed on the surface and that a major amount of lithium has diﬀused rapidly into the material, as expected from the initial lithiation experiments.

XPS detail spectra of bare and lithiated LATGP samples are shown in Figure 5. Upon lithiation, strong reduction is indicated by the titanium and germanium photoelectron signals: The Ti 2p3/2 line can be described by two separate peaks, each representing an oxidation state. The bare sample contains mainly Ti4+ (459.3 eV) and only minor fractions of Ti3+ (≈ 458.1 eV), but after Li deposition more Ti3+ than Ti4+ was found. Furthermore, the Ge 3d line for the pristine material at 32.3 eV matches well with the reported binding energy values for the fully oxidized species (Ge4+).43 After lithiation,

two new lines form at 31.2 eV and at 29.2 eV, which can be attributed to Ge in lower oxidation states. Close to the Ge 3d line, we also found the Ti 3p line, which shifts to lower binding energy, thus, conﬁrming the reduction of titanium as a second component. Moreover, the photoelectron signal of aluminum is slightly changed as a consequence of lithium deposition: for the pristine sample the Al 2p line can be described by one component at 74.5 eV corresponding to Al3+ species in the NASICON matrix, but after lithiation, the peak broadened, and a second line (indicated as “B” in Figure 5) at lower binding energy (BE), (73.6 eV) appeared. The formation of metallic aluminum seems highly unlikely, as the BE of Al0 is reported at signiﬁcantly lower BE values. Therefore, this second line may indicate the formation of a diﬀerent compound containing Al3+ in a diﬀerent environment at the surface due to lithium coating. Obviously, lithium deposition leads to an increase in the Li 1s signal, but as most of the lithium diﬀused into the material, the atomic concentration only changed from 5% to 11% lithium. No signiﬁcant changes could be observed in the positions and shapes of the oxygen and phosphorus signals.

After 30 s of C60 ion etching, the most strongly reduced component of the Ge 3d (29.2 eV) line decreases in intensity, and a major fraction of germanium is found in an intermediate oxidation state (31.2 eV). Moreover, after sputtering, the second component at low BE in the Al signal vanishes, and also the titanium line has shifted back to a more oxidic BE. However, the lithium content is unaﬀected by ion etching.

Combining these results, it becomes evident that a thin and strongly reduced ﬁlm is formed at the LATGP surface after lithium deposition that can be partly removed by 30 s of ion beam etching. New phases may have been formed in this topmost ﬁlm. Even though exact etching rates are unknown, we

Figure 6. XPS detail spectra of an LAGP sample before (bottom, black line) and after lithiation (middle, red line). Further spectra were recorded after 30 s of C60 ion etching of the lithiated sample (top, blue line). Please note that the y-axis is arbitrarily scaled in order to emphasize signal shapes rather than absolute intensities, and that the vertical dashed lines are only guides for the eyes.

Figure 7. XPS detail spectra of a LATTP sample before (bottom, black line) and after lithiation (middle, red line). Please note that the y-axis is arbitrarily scaled in order to emphasize signal shapes rather than absolute intensities and that the vertical dashed lines are only guides for the eyes.

estimate that during C60 sputtering, at most a few nanometers of the material were removed. The thin surface layer is then followed by a region with higher lithium concentration compared to the pristine LATGP and partially reduced germanium and titanium species, which is well in line with the observation of a reaction front moving into the material by cross-sectional SEM (Figure 4) analysis of the LATGP ceramics. Thus, we see a graded interphase, the MCI, with a chemically strongly modiﬁed electrolyte thin ﬁlm close to lithium and a more extended lithiated solid electrolyte region next to this surface ﬁlm.

prone to reactions with even small contaminations of the protective atmospheres used. For this and other reasons, in situ XPS experiments are highly desirable.

To make sure that no such unwanted reactants take part in the observed reaction, we performed an in situ lithiation experiment inside of the XPS chamber as drafted in Figure 8.

A very similar behavior was observed for the titanium-free LAGP sample, as can be seen from the XPS detail spectra in Figure 6. After lithium coating, the Ge 3d line has shifted from the oxide (i.e., Ge4+) position (32.2 eV) by 4 eV to the BE value of elemental Ge (28.2 eV), conﬁrming that germanium ions are almost completely reduced. Again, and more pronounced than for the LATGP sample, a second component forms in the Al 2p signal at 72.9 eV after lithiation, hinting at the formation of a diﬀerent aluminum (Al3+) containing compound on the surface.

For LAGP, the atomic concentration of lithium on the surface and after ion etching is substantially higher (bare ﬁlm: 8%, lithiated ﬁlm: 30%, after sputtering: 29%) than for the equally treated LATGP and LATTP samples, indicating slower lithiation kinetics. Most notably, after lithiation the oxygen/ phosphor ratio is increased from O/P = 5 to a value of 12, evidencing the formation of other oxygen containing compounds rather than phosphates. Indeed, in addition to the newly formed Al3+ signal, subtle changes on the low BE sides of both oxygen lines hint on the formation of Li2O and the appearance of a small component in the C 1s signal at about 289 eV (not shown) can be attributed to carbonate species.

As already observed for the LATGP system, C60 sputtering partly removes the highly reduced surface ﬁlm as indicated by increasing signals at intermediate germanium oxidation states, by the decrease of the second Al component and by the recovery of the O/P ratio to a value of 6.

Finally, by comparing XPS detail spectra of the bare and lithiated LATTP samples (see Figure 7) it can be clearly seen that upon lithiation, titanium is partially reduced from Ti4+(459.6 eV) to Ti3+ (458.0 eV) oxidation state. We note that also the pristine sample shows a small fraction of Ti3+ species. The tantalum Ta 4f7/2 line of the bare material is found at 26.9 eV matching well with BE values reported for Ta5+.44 After lithium deposition, a shoulder on the low BE side of the signal appears, showing that Ta is slightly reduced as well. For the LATTP material, no changes can be observed in the aluminum photoelectron lines and in those of oxygen and phosphorus. The atomic concentration of lithium increases from 6% to 15% upon lithiation. In contrast to the LAGP and LATGP solid electrolytes, the metal ions in LATTP are only partially reduced. This indicates that for the germanium-free sample, the formation of a highly reduced surface layer is less favored.

ion etching was found to yield ambiguous results because even for sputtering the bare LATTP ceramics (not shown) titanium and tantalum were heavily reduced, making it impossible to diﬀerentiate preferential sputtering eﬀects and changes due to lithium deposition.

Even though the present results provide unambiguous prove of the degradation mechanisms at the lithium/solid electrolyte interface, the XPS study is a surface method, and lithium is

Figure 8. In situ lithiation of solid electrolytes during XPS surface analysis. The argon ion gun is used to sputter a lithium metal foil placed in the vicinity of the sample of interest.

The argon ion gun is used to sputter a lithium metal foil placed in the vicinity of the sample of interest. This leads to a deposition of lithium species on the sample, which then results in a simple covering of the sample or a reaction or insertion process, depending on the material system. Since the deposition rate for this process is very low, the reduction of the solid electrolyte happens very slowly. The results for LAGP and LATTP are shown in Figure 8 as well. After 30 min of sputtering the lithium foil with 4 kV Ar+ ions the Ge 3d and the Ti 2p lines of LAGP and LATTP, respectively, are signiﬁcantly broadened, and a low energy shoulder appears, clearly indicating a reduction of the transition metals. These data conﬁrm the results from the ex situ deposited samples and emphasize the high reactivity of the electrolyte materials with lithium.

3. Thermodynamic Assessment. As proven above Ti4+, Ge4+, and Ta5+ ions as constituents of solid electrolytes undergo reduction processes in contact with lithium metal. Though we only studied three speciﬁc cases, we believe that reduction will also occur in other cases. In order to judge better why Ti, Ge, and Ta are reduced and which other elements could be used to compose a solid electrolyte that is stable against degradation by reduction, we consider the thermodynamics of electrolyte

reduction in this section in a rather simple but intuitive way. Due to the complex composition of most solid electrolyte materials, usually being at least ternary or higher phases, precise quantitative information will only be obtained by meticulously analyzing reacting interfaces using, e.g., XPS or transmission electron microscopy (TEM).

the decomposition routes of multinary solid electrolytes,45 we provide a rather simple estimate of the electrolyte stability. For the sake of simplicity, we compare the free enthalpy of reaction for various solid state reactions of binary oxides (e.g. TiO2, GeO2) with lithium metal in a temperature range from 0 °C to 200 °C (Figure 9). We assume that we can judge the stability of

Figure 9. Thermodynamic assessment of reaction enthalpies for the reduction of various binary oxides with metallic lithium.

the multinary compound by simply considering the stability of the constituting binary oxides. Then the least stable binary constituent will be the major cause for electrolyte decomposition. From the data shown, only the oxides of Sc, Y, Ca, Be, Mg, and La show a positive free enthalpy, meaning that the binary oxides of these metals will not react with lithium for thermodynamic reasons. All other binary oxides in the graph should react with lithium metal, once no kinetic barriers cause metastable states. In the light of our experimental results, it is no surprise that the oxides of Ti, Ta, and Ge are found among the reactive oxides, with Ta2O5 being the most and GeO2 the indicate that least stable. The data further the complete reduction from Ge4+ to Ge0 (Δ rG ≈ −150 kJ/mol(Li)) has a higher free reaction enthalpy per transferred Li atom than the reduction from Ge4+ to Ge2+ (Δ rG ≈ −112 kJ/mol(Li)). On the other hand, the formation of Ti3+ from Ti4+ (Δ rG ≈ −108 kJ/mol(Li)) is more favored than the complete reduction to Ti0 (Δ rG ≈ −58 kJ/mol(Li)). These data are in very good agreement with our ﬁndings from the XPS analysis: after exposure to lithium, we ﬁnd only Ti3+ as reduced Ti species in the solid electrolytes, but germanium is to a certain amount almost completely reduced.

Clearly, this simple thermodynamic calculus can only be a rough guide for several reasons: First, the multinary solid electrolytes have a more complex composition and structure

than the binary compounds. But to a good approximation, we may consider the multinary phases as solid solutions of binaries. In the solid solution, an oxide AOx has a lower activity than 1, and, therefore, a lower driving force for the reduction process results. If we consider the multinary solid electrolyte phases as ideal solutions, the activities of the constituting binary phases correspond to their molar fraction, and we can very roughly assume that the activities will be of the order of 0.1. This changes the Δ rG values roughly by about +10 kJ/mol. As a consequence, some metals that are supposed to undergo reduction reactions with lithium as a binary oxide may be stable in a solid electrolyte material. An example may well be ZrO2 as a binary constituent of the garnet-type lithium ion conductor Li7La3Zr2O12 for which no reactions with lithium metal are reported until now.46 The group of garnets is in general quite promising, as the structure appears to be quite stable upon substitution of cations, and as the conductivity of just below 1 mS/cm is the highest in lithium conducting oxides.47,48

Second, in judging possible reactions, one has to be careful as insertion of lithium into the solid electrolyte matrix leads to quite diﬀerent free enthalpies of reaction, compared to the reaction forming a new phase (Li2O): For example, the partial reduction of Ti4+ (TiO2) to Ti3+/Ti4+ (Ti3O5) releases −105 kJ/mol(Li) when Li2O is formed. The reduction process in lithium titanate upon lithium insertion (Li4Ti5O12 + 3 Li → Li7Ti5O12, E0 = 1.55 V vs Li) has a higher Δ rG of approximately −150 kJ/mol(Li), showing that the simple thermodynamic assessment already yields at least considerable qualitative agreement with experimental data of more complex reactions. it is possible that products other than Li2O, e.g., Li3PO4 or Li2S, see Figure S11 (Supporting Information), are formed in a solid state reaction with lithium metal, also leading to a diﬀerent driving force of the reduction process. The small Δ rG of only approximately −17 kJ/mol(Li) appears to make Al2O3 a suitable component of solid electrolytes; however, in contrast, the reduction of AlPO4 to Al and Li3PO4 has a very high driving force (Δ rG ≈ −116 kJ/mol(Li)) due to the high stability of Li3PO4. Even though no metallic Al was detected via XPS, the calculations hint towards the possible reactivity of Al in phosphate based electrolytes.

As there is a growing interest in developing materials for sodium ion batteries and the sodium analogues of nextgeneration cell systems,49−52 i.e., Na/air and low-temperature Na/S, we add information on the potential stability of sodium electrolytes. We only need the free enthalpy of the conversion reaction of sodium oxide with lithium to lithium oxide and sodium (approximately −93 kJ/mol(Li)) to calculate the shift of the Δ rG data. As a consequence of Hess’s law, all oxides having higher free enthalpy values are thermodynamically stable in contact with sodium metal, and therefore, more metal oxides can be used as constituents of stable sodium solid electrolytes (See Figure S12). In particular, we like to note that Ta and Ti may be stable constituents of sodium solid electrolytes.

Finally, we also looked into selected sulﬁde and phosphide compounds as they are used, e.g., in the previously mentioned solid electrolyte Li10GeP2S12 with its very high ionic conductivity of about 10 mS/cm at room temperature,23 which can meet up with aprotic liquid electrolytes. Here we ﬁnd large driving forces for the reduction of GeS2 to GeS or Ge (Figure S11, Supporting Information), assuming a formation of Li2S of about −190 kJ/mol(Li), making it very unlikely that Ge4+ is stable in the solid electrolyte, regardless of its dilution in the solid solution. Phosphorus pentasulﬁde (P2S5) is another binary constituent of the mentioned electrolyte, and again the reduction via lithium shows a strong thermodynamic driving force toward the potential products Li2S and P or P4S3, (about −200 kJ/mol(Li)). These simple estimates are well in line with the more advanced theoretical calculation by Mo et al. predicting the formation of, e.g., Li2S in contact with lithium.45 Mo et al. concluded from their calculations the experimentally observed “stability” of Li10GeP2S12 in contact with lithium is most likely a result of passivation phenomena due to the formation of Li2S at the lithium/solid electrolyte interface. In terms of SEI formation, one may then consider Li10GeP2S12 as an example of an electrolyte with stabilizing SEI and LATGP, LAGP, and LATTP as examples of electrolytes with unfavorable MCI (mixed conducting interphases) that cause continuous degradation: From the phenomenological point of view, the degradation of solid electrolytes by Li metal may be compared with SEI formation on Li by reactions with liquid electrolytes. A stable SEI in liquid electrolytes requires the formation of a mechanically well-adhering ﬁlm with suﬃcient ionic but negligible electronic partial conductivity. A stable SEI between Li and solid electrolyte should show the same properties. Ifas in the present case of NASICON-type electrolytesthe reaction leads to electronically conducting MCI with suﬃcient ionic conductivity, the degradation is not self-limiting, and the solid electrolyte is unsuited for use in contact with Li metal. seemingly the case of Li10GeP2S12 still ion-conducting but electronically insulating, its growth is self-limiting, and a stable SEI is formed.

the composition Lithium conducting glass ceramics of Li1+x−yAlx (PO4)3, with M = Ge (LAGP) as well as M = Ti,Ta (LATTP) were synthesized and compared to a commercial Ti and Ge containing material (LATGP). The total conductivity and the electronic transference number were determined using impedance spectroscopy and DC polarization techniques. The solely Ge containing LAGP material shows the highest ionic and lowest electronic transference number. Experiments with lithium electrodes revealed that all materials undergo degradation reactions at the lithium/electrolyte interface leading to an increase in the electrolyte impedance with time. Further insight into the degradation processes and corresponding chemical changes was obtained by applying a combination of lithium thin ﬁlm deposition and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Using XPS, with its depth resolution of only a few nanometers, no compact lithium metal ﬁlm on the coated electrolyte surfaces was found after deposition, implying that lithium quickly reacts and/or diﬀuses into the material. This was conﬁrmed by the chemical shift of the binding energies of titanium, tantalum and germanium to reduced oxidation states. We therefore conclude that especially Ti and Ge are not suited as constituents of solid electrolytes (for the use in contact with Li) from the thermodynamic point of view. For the LATGP and the LAGP materials, even changes in the aluminum signal were detected, indicating the formation of a new surface phase upon contact with lithium. A short ion etching step revealed that these surface layers are very thin and that the material in deeper regions is less but still signiﬁcantly aﬀected by lithium exposure. This lithiation comes along with the formation of a mixed (electronic/ionic) conducting interphase (MCI). Our results clearly show that, when searching for new solid electrolytes, it is by far not suﬃcient

to improve only the bulk transport properties. It is of upmost importance to account the electrolyte materials in contact with the highly reactive electrodes applied in lithium batteries. From the conceptual point of view, the degradation of solid electrolytes in contact with lithium metal and the formation of thin reaction layers is similar to the formation of SEI in liquid electrolytes. In this regard, we emphasize the analysis of lithium exposed material surfaces using XPS, as this method is highly sensitive to chemical changes of the components.

Supporting Information XRD of LATTP, photographs of samples, cross-section SEM images of solid electrolytes, XPS survey spectra. This information is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org

Corresponding Author *Mailing address: Physikalisch-Chemisches Institut, JustusLiebig-Universität Gießen, Heinrich-Buﬀ-Ring 58, 35392 Gießen, Germany. Tel.: +49-641-9934501; juergen.janek@ phys.chemie.uni-giessen.de. Notes The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest.

We acknowledge funding by the German Research Foundation (DFG) within the coordinated program “Lithium high performance batteries” (Project Ja648/15-1) and by the consortium “High Energy Lithium Ion Battery (HE-Lion)” the innovation alliance of “Lithium Ion Battery under (LIB2015)” and by the consortium “GLANZ” under the alliance “STROM” both funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF). One of the authors (P.H.) acknowledges a Ph.D. grant by the Funds of the Chemical Industry (FCI). We appreciate fruitful discussion within the BASF SE Network for Electrochemistry.