The thermophysical and structural properties of calcium and barium zirconium phosphate ceramics (CZP and BZP) have been investigated for their potential candidacy as actinide hosts for inert matrix fuels (IMF) in nuclear reactors. These phosphate ceramics, which can accommodate minor actinides as well as the resulting ﬁssion products, are found to be thermally stable to 1600 °C in air, however they begin to decompose in an inert atmosphere above approximately 1400 °C. The heat capacity, thermal conductivity and bulk thermal-expansion were measured from room temperature up to 1200 °C. Structural changes in this temperature region as well as the anisotropic thermal-expansion behaviour were studied using hightemperature X-ray diffraction. A phase change from R-3 to R-3c was identiﬁed for Ba0.5Zr2(PO4)3 near 880 °C. The thermal conductivity for these ceramics at 1000 °C was found to be 1.0 W m 1 K 1, a relatively low thermal conductivity that was increased to 5.0 W m 1 K 1 at 1000 °C for BZP:Ni (25:75 mass ratio) cermet composites.

Inert matrix fuel (IMF) materials offer the advantage of burning plutonium and other transuranic elements produced from the fuel cycle with minimal production of higher actinides. Potentially this strategy simultaneously utilises the energetic value of plutonium and reduces the radiotoxicity and proliferation risk in spent fuel. There is extensive literature on various materials for use as IMFs for burning plutonium [1–3], however little consideration has been given to the fate of the ﬁssion products (FPs) generated and to the disposition of the spent IMF [4]. One concept would be to design the IMF composition such that FPs could be incorporated into durable phases within the fuel, thus allowing direct geological disposal following irradiation in a once-through burning system combined with direct disposal of the spent IMF after cooling. The rock-like oxide IMF developed in Japan is an example of this concept [5,6], a multi-phase composite of radiation resistant mineral-like compounds such as ZrO2, Al2O3 and MgAl2O4. The zirconia phase immobilizes plutonium, other actinides, and lanthanide FPs by incorporating them in solid solution. Another mineral suggested for this type of concept is the ‘‘near-universal solvent’’ ceramic phase based on the sodium zirconium phosphate [NaZr2(PO4)3, or NZP] type structure [4].

Crystalline compounds with the NZP structure have long been proposed as candidates for the immobilisation of radioactive waste [7–12]. The NZP structure consists of vertex linked ZrO6 octahedra ⇑ Corresponding author. Tel.: +61 2 9717 7075; fax: +61 2 9717 9225.

and PO4 tetrahedra which form chains aligned along the c-axis. There are two kinds of cavities, MI and MII, within this framework and the Na cations occupy the MI cavities which also align along the c-axis. The symmetry is lowered from R-3c to R-3 when the monovalent Na cation is substituted by a divalent cation such as Ca, as an ordering of cations and vacancies in the MI cavities occurs [13]. A unique feature of this structure is its ﬂexibility as it can incorporate a vast array of different cations within framework or inter-framework positions. Its ﬂexibility extends to cations with oxidation states from 1+ to 5+ and Shannon radii [14,15] from 0.53 to 1.65 Å and can potentially accommodate both the FPs and the actinides [16–18] within its crystal structure. This makes it a system of interest as a once-through IMF, potentially allowing direct disposal of the spent fuel.

IMF materials must meet speciﬁc critical requirements that include high temperature stability, good irradiation behaviour, high thermal conductivity, hot water corrosion resistance and neutron transparency. In this regard, NZP has been shown previously to have low thermal expansion, high chemical and radiation stability and all the elements that make up its structure have low neutron absorption cross-sections [7]. It has also been reported that NZP structured materials such as Ca0.5Zr2(PO4)3 (CZP) and Ba0.5Zr2 (PO4)3 (BZP) are stable to temperatures above 1700 °C [19], however the exact decomposition temperature is unknown. The most important properties involved in the prediction of IMF behaviour are heat capacity, thermal-expansion, and thermal conductivity. High thermal conductivity is essential as it allows heat to escape from the fuel pellet, thus preventing excessive centerline temperatures. The presently available experimental heat capacity data

for NZP type compounds are limited to the low-temperature region (<600 °C) [20–22], with microscopic and bulk thermal-expansion limited to <1000 °C [23–27].

In this work we present a basic study to establish the high temperature thermophysical properties of CZP and BZP to investigate its potential candidacy as an IMF. The thermal stability of CZP and BZP in an inert atmosphere, the heat capacity and bulk thermal-expansion up to 1650 °C and the microscopic thermal-expansion up to 1350 °C are established. Following laser ﬂash analysis, the thermal conductivity data for CZP and BZP were determined up to 1200 °C. In an attempt to enhance the thermal conductivity, a cermet (ceramic–metallic) composite of CZP or BZP and nickel has been fabricated and the thermal conductivity ascertained.

All samples were prepared by a modiﬁed alkoxide route. Stoichiometric amounts of tetrabutyl zirconate (TBZ) [Zr(OC4H9)4] in butanol were dissolved in isopropanol and intimately mixed with aqueous solutions containing Ca(NO3)2, Ba(NO3)2, and 85% H3PO4 in a stainless-steel beaker. The mixture was heated to dryness with stirring on a hot plate at 110 °C. The dried powder was subsequently calcined in air for 20 h at 700 °C. The calcined powder was then milled using yttria-stabilized zirconia balls in cyclohexane for 16 h and dried at 110 °C. In preliminary work the calcined powder was pressed into a pellet and sintered in air up to 1600 °C for 24 h. For dense samples 50 g of the calcined powder was pressed into a pellet, placed in a stainless steel (30 4) straight walled can, heated to 600 °C under vacuum, sealed by welding on a lid, and hot isostatically pressed (HIP) at 1200 °C and 100 MPa using argon as the pressure medium in an AIP 6-30H press for 2 h. Cermet composites were fabricated by shake-mixing CZP or BZP precursor calcined powder with nickel metal (99.9%,  200 +325 mesh) in the required mass ratio in plastic containers. Pellets were prepared using a uniaxial press, cold isostatically pressed at 400 MPa and sintered at 1250 °C for 2 h under an inert atmosphere of argon. In this manner, cermets of six compositions were prepared, namely 25%ceramic–75%Ni, 50%ceramic–50%Ni and 75%ceramic–25%Ni, by mass for each of CZP and BZP. Sample density and porosity were recorded using Archimedes’ method in distilled water. Theoretical bulk densities for CZP and BZP were calculated from the unit cell volume as determined from X-ray diffraction. Theoretical values for cermet bulk density were calculated using the weight fraction and theoretical densities of the ceramic and metallic components [28].

Powder X-ray diffraction patterns were measured using a Philips PW1050 diffractometer (PANalytical Ltd., Almelo, the Netherlands) with Cu Ka radiation, in an angular range of 10–110° 2h, with a step size of 0.03° and a counting time of 5 s per step. The thermal-expansion was investigated by high-temperature X-ray diffraction (HT-XRD) using a Pt heating strip. For temperature stabilisation at every interval the samples were maintained at temperature for 10 min prior to starting data collection. Unit cell parameters were determined using the Le Bail method [29] with the RIETICA program (version 1.7.7) [30]. The peak proﬁles were approximated by the Pseudo-Voigt function. The lattice parameters were reﬁned with the gradual addition of parameters and continuous graphical modeling of the background until the R factors ceased to change. The average axial expansion coefﬁcient, al, for lattice parameter l, between temperatures T1 and T2 was determined using the relation; al = (l2   l1)/(l1(T2   T1)). The average volume expansion coefﬁcient (avol) was calculated similarly.

A Zeiss Ultra Plus scanning electron microscope operating at 15 kV and equipped with an Oxford Instruments X-Max 80 mm2 SDD X-ray microanalysis system was used for microstructural and semi-quantitative phase-composition analysis. Samples were mounted in an epoxy resin and polished to 1 lm diamond ﬁnish. A carbon ﬁlm (5 nm) was deposited onto the polished surface.

Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) from room temperature up to 1950 °C of 60 mg of powder was investigated by TG in a 70 ml/min helium ﬂow with a heating rate of 20 °C/min using a NETZSCH model STA 449 F3 Jupiter apparatus equipped with a graphite furnace. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) from room temperature up to 1650 °C of 60 mg of powder was investigated by TG–DSC in a 70 ml/min argon ﬂow with a heating rate of 20 °C/min using a NETZSCH model STA 449 F3 Jupiter instrument equipped with a rhodium furnace. Sapphire was used as a calibration standard. Dilatometer measurements were carried out on a NETZSCH model 402 pushrod dilatometer in a 50 ml/min helium ﬂow with a heating rate of 5 °C/min. The data were corrected using the calibration correction derived from an alumina standard. Thermal diffusivity was measured using a NETZSCH model 427 laser ﬂash apparatus from room temperature up to 1200 °C in an argon atmosphere. A laser pulse was directed on the front face of a sample (3 mm thick disc) and the temperature rise on the back face of the sample was measured using an In–Sb detector. Each sample was coated with graphite. The results obtained were an average of ﬁve individual tests (each of which was within 5% of the others). Thermal conductivity was calculated from experimentally measured thermal diffusivity, heat capacity, and density, according to the relationship; K = DqCp; where K is the thermal conductivity (W m 1 K 1), D is the thermal diffusivity (m2 s 1), q is the density (kg m 3), and Cp is the heat capacity (J kg 1 K 1). Density was calculated as a function of temperature using the relation; q = q0/(1 + DL/L0)3; where DL/L0 is the linear thermal-expansion coefﬁcient datum found from dilatometry and the subscript 0 refers to room temperature values. The uncertainties in the measurements have been estimated as approximately 5% for the thermal diffusivity and 5% for the heat capacity. Hence the precision on the absolute values of the thermal conductivity were estimated to be approximately 10%.

The bulk densities of samples cold-pressed and sintered up to 1600 °C in air reached approximately 90% and 70% of the theoretical values for CZP and BZP, respectively, in preliminary work. By contrast however, the bulk densities of hot isostatically pressed (HIPed) CZP and BZP were found to be >95% theoretical values (see Table 1).

The HIPed samples were identiﬁed by laboratory XRD as near single phase materials with the NZP-type crystal structure. The XRD patterns were in excellent agreement with the standard pattern of CZP and BZP (JCPDS card no. 00-033-0321 and 00-0490647, respectively; space group R-3). Trace impurities were evident in the XRD patterns; Zr2O(PO4)2 and ZrO2 were found within the main CZP phase and ZrO2 in the main BZP phase. An SEM image collected for each sample with the backscatter detector conﬁrmed the presence of the main phase together with the above trace impurities (Fig. 1). Cracks are clearly visible in both ceramic samples as expected due to the build-up of stress during the HIPing of a material that has signiﬁcant anisotropic expansion. The fracture surfaces (see Fig. 1) show mostly transgranular and some intergranular fracture, indicating good adhesion between the grains and therefore good sintering. The samples appear to have a well-densiﬁed microstructure with little porosity and a grain size of >20 lm.

Fig. 1. Backscattered scanning electron micrographs of the polished surfaces of HIPed (a) CZP (main phase is CZP, light grey is Zr2O(PO4)2 (ZP), white phase is ZrO2) and (b) BZP (main phase is BZP, white phase is ZrO2) showing phase composition and of the fractured surfaces of (c) CZP and (d) BZP. The black areas are pores (Po).

Thermogravimetric analysis was used to assess the thermal stability of HIPed CZP and BZP in an inert atmosphere from room temperature to 1950 °C (Fig. 2a). Partial decomposition occurs at temperatures above approximately 1400 °C; CZP displays a mass loss of 42.2% with an onset at 1350 °C while BZP shows mass loss of 36.7% above 1400 °C. In contrast, there was no change to the XRD patterns of HIPed CZP and BZP following heat treatment in air up to 1600 °C and we suggest that decomposition in the helium atmosphere of the TGA is due to reduction of the phosphate to elemental phosphorus and subsequent loss of phosphorus and associated oxygen. This can be described for BZP using chemical equation (1):

As a result a theoretical mass loss of 43.7% and 39.7% for CZP and BZP, respectively, is expected in good agreement with the experimental results. To conﬁrm this hypothesis, a BZP pellet was heat treated at 1400 °C in a graphite crucible for 5 h. The pellet was found to have lost 41% of its mass following thermal treatment. Characterisation of the resulting pellet by XRD and SEM indicated the presence of only ZrO2, BaZrO3 and 1–5% Ba-doped ZrO2. No phosphorus containing phases were found.

Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was undertaken in an inert atmosphere up to 1650 °C to determine the dependence on temperature of the heat capacity of CZP and BZP (Fig. 2b). Heat capacity room

Fig. 2. Temperature-dependent (a) mass change and (b) heat capacity of CZP and BZP. It should be noted that the data in (b) no longer reﬂect heat capacity of CZP and BZP at temperatures above the decomposition temperature.

temperature to 1.1 J g 1 K 1 at 1350 °C for CZP and from 0.6 J g 1 K 1 to 1.0 J g 1 K 1 for BZP. Above 1350 °C the DSC curves rise sharply due to sample decomposition in the inert gas environment. The data collected here are in reasonable agreement with those available in the literature which investigates the low temperature region only. The heat capacities of CZP reported by Pet’kov et al. [20] up to 377 °C are higher by 3–15% when compared to the corresponding values found in this study, while those reported by Krishnaiah et al. [21] up to a maximum temperature of 577 °C were 3–24% lower. Values for BZP found in this study are lower by up to 7% when compared to the corresponding reported values which were measured up to 340 °C [22]. No grain size information was reported in any of these heat capacity studies. The heat capacity data of CZP show no singularities and smoothly increase with temperature up to 1350 °C, however there is evidence for a broad singularity in the BZP curve around 877 °C. This feature represents an endothermic process suggesting a polymorphic transformation at this temperature.

The bulk thermal-expansion data for HIPed CZP and BZP are depicted in Fig. 3. Initially for CZP the sample length decreased to a minimum at 560 °C, followed by a slight increase in length with temperature up to 1000 °C. Further heating resulted in a strong increase in the sample length between 1000 and 1350 °C with a maximum in the thermal-expansion rate at 1090 °C. The thermal expansion curve levels out above 1350 °C where sample decomposition is expected to commence. The sample length for BZP initially increased up to a maximum at 720 °C. A small step was observed between 790 and 900 °C with a minimum at 850 °C (see inset of Fig. 3). Similar results were found for a second heating of BZP after cooling to room temperature. The sample length then decreased smoothly with further heating until phase decomposition above 1400 °C. The small step in the thermal-expansion curve of BZP has not been observed previously, most likely as large temperature increments have been used in earlier studies. The temperature for this step corresponds well to the singularity found in the heat capacity results discussed above (877 °C) and is further evidence for a polymorphic transformation at this temperature. As a result the bulk thermal-expansion behaviour for BZP changes above 900 °C and the sample length decreased with temperature. The bulk average coefﬁcients of thermal expansion (CTE) are summarised in Table 2 between room temperature and 1000 °C (to allow comparison with reported data). The results obtained in the pres-

Fig. 3. Temperature dependence of bulk thermal-expansion of polycrystalline CZP and BZP. The inset shows an expanded section of the thermal-expansion of BZP heat 1.

ent work are in reasonable agreement with published data and this contrasting thermal behaviour for CZP and BZP is a result of an opposite anisotropy in the unit cell parameters following heat treatment, as described further in the XRD section below. This has also been explained previously by other researchers [24,31– 33]. Minor differences in the values can be attributed to the differences in temperature range in which average thermal-expansion was evaluated, densiﬁcation, small zirconia contaminations and grain size differences of the corresponding samples. It should be noted that the CTEs found here are lower than that of UO2 [34]. The CTE of BZP (same sample) in the second dilatometric heating program (a = 0.35  10 6 °C 1) is signiﬁcantly less than that found in the ﬁrst (a = 1.08  10 6 °C 1). This cannot be attributed to trapped, highly pressurised gas bubbles which can result from the HIPing process [35]. These bubbles would be expected to expand upon softening of the ceramic at high temperature, however no length change (to within 1%) was noted for a 10 mm rod of HIPed material following heating to 1400 °C and cooling to room temperature. Hysteresis of bulk thermal-expansion plots and a similar lowering of thermal-expansion coefﬁcient data for NZP type ceramics have been described previously [27,36]. Yamai and Ota [36] attributed this phenomenon to microcracking following cooling of the highly thermally anisotropic ceramic that occurs when the grain size exceeds a certain critical size (approximately 1–2 lm for CZP and BZP [36,37]). In the present study, CZP and BZP have a grain size of >20 lm, their thermal-expansion anisotropy (Da, Table 3) is large and their bulk density is high, therefore microcracking is expected. SEM examination of a fractured surface of HIPed BZP was carried out after heating to 1400 °C in air (Fig. 4). The SEM image clearly shows the formation of grains of approximately 1–2 lm as a result of microcracking and thermal etching. To further demonstrate this, a polished ceramic sample was heated in air to 1400 °C, cooled and examined in the SEM (Fig. 4). Again, the images show the formation of grains with average size of the order of approximately 1–2 lm for both CZP and BZP. This change to the microstructure following heating of the HIPed samples is likely to contribute signiﬁcantly to the thermal-expansion properties of HIPed CZP and BZP.

High temperature X-ray diffraction (HT-XRD) was employed to further investigate the thermal-expansion of HIPed CZP and BZP (Fig. 5). CZP shows negative thermal-expansion along the a-axis and positive thermal-expansion along the c-axis. The opposite behaviour was observed for BZP, i.e., expansion along the a-axis and contraction along the c-axis. This thermal anisotropy has been explained previously [38–41] and the model proposed suggests that the thermal expansion in NZP materials is due to the coupling of the ZrO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra which perform constrained rotation during heating. During heating the expansion of the weaker MI–O bonds is much larger than that of the stronger Zr–O and P–O bonds, which results in anisotropic size changes: expansion along the c-axis and contraction along the a-axis. In the case of CZP and BZP the occupancy of the MI site is <1 and as such a contribution from the occupied and unoccupied MI sites must be taken into account. Further, the size of the empty MI site depends on the size and charge of the MI cation and the unoccupied MI sites expand with increasing temperature in CZP and contract with larger cations. The observed thermal expansion is therefore an interplay between the expansion of occupied MI sites and the expansion/contraction of unoccupied MI sites along the caxis. The average axial thermal-expansion coefﬁcients, aa and ac, and one-third of the average volume thermal-expansion coefﬁcient, avol/3, which is an equivalent of the estimated bulk linear thermal-expansion coefﬁcient, between room temperature and 1000 °C (to allow comparison to reported data) are listed in Table 3. The results in the present study for CZP and BZP are in reasonable agreement with those reported previously at this temperature.

Again, minor differences in the values can be attributed to the differences in temperature range in which average thermal-expansion was evaluated, small zirconia contaminations and grain size differences of the corresponding samples. It should be noted that Limaye et al. [24] reported a value of avol/3 =  0.069  10 6 °C 1 for data up to a maximum temperature of 500 °C which is in agreement with our value (avol/3 =  0.089  10 6 °C 1) in a similar temperature range. The difference in bulk thermal-expansion coefﬁcient obtained from dilatometric data when compared to HT-XRD data, which were obtained on a powdered sample, can be explained by considering the elastic constraints between the grains in the ceramic body as previously described [24,31].

The low angle reﬂections (Miller indices (003) and (101), 2h = 10.8° and 12.2°) in the XRD pattern for BZP (Fig. 6b) at room

Fig. 4. Scanning electron micrographs of (a) and (b) the fractured surface of HIPed BZP and polished samples of (c) CZP and (d) BZP, all following thermal treatment to 1400 °C in air.

Fig. 5. Thermal evolution of CZP (j) and BZP () lattice parameters (a) a-parameter, (b) b-parameter, and (c) unit cell volume.

Fig. 6. Lowand high-temperature X-ray diffraction patterns of (a) CZP and (b) BZP.

temperature are no longer present in the pattern at 1200 °C indicating a change in crystal symmetry. This behaviour is analogous to that of NaSn2(PO4)3 [42] and may be explained similarly as a second order phase transition from R-3 (low temperature phase) to R-3c (high temperature phase) [43,44]. In the room temperature form for CZP and BZP, it has been established that substitution of the monovalent Na cations by a divalent cation such as Ca or Ba creates an ordering of the cations and vacancies in the MI sites, which lowers the symmetry to R-3 [13]. In the high temperature phase with R-3c symmetry we likely lose this ordering through cation migration to form a structure with half occupied but disordered MI sites, a structure similar to that suggested for Ba0.5Ti2(PO4)3 [13]. Woodcock et al. have shown that the anisotropic thermal-expansion behaviour is intricately linked to the order/disorder behaviour of the MI sites [45]. As such, further evidence for the disordering of the MI sites is seen as a slight discontinuity in the plots of temperature vs the aand c-parameter for BZP between 800 and 1000 °C (Fig. 5). The XRD data reported here correlate well with results obtained from DSC and dilatometry which provide evidence for the polymorphic transformation at around 877 °C. More detailed diffraction studies however, are necessary to conﬁrm this hypothesis. In contrast, the corresponding low angle reﬂections (Miller indices (003) and (101), 2h = 11.4° and 12.0°) are still present in the XRD pattern of CZP at 1350 °C, however their relative intensity is signiﬁcantly reduced when compared to the room temperature pattern (Fig. 6a). This would suggest an incomplete transition to the high temperature R-3c phase for CZP with transition potentially occurring at temperatures >1350 °C.

The experimental thermal diffusivities of HIPed CZP and BZP were determined at each temperature by laser ﬂash analysis and the corresponding thermal conductivity of CZP and BZP is plotted in Fig. 7. Similar results were obtained for each composition and follow a parabolic curve with a minimum of approximately 0.7 W m 1 K 1 at a temperature of 600 °C and a maximum of approximately 1.45 W m 1 K 1 occurring at 1200 °C. These values are in reasonable agreement with available data on related high-density NZP-type ceramics. The thermal conductivity for Ca0.9Mg0.1Zr4(PO4)6 was reported to be constant at around 1.2– 1.4 W m 1 K 1 from room temperature to 600 °C [46] while it was found to increase from 0.7 to 1.4 W m 1 K 1 in the 600– 1200 °C temperature range for Ca0.8Mg0.2Zr4(PO4)6. [47]. The thermal conductivity of SrZr4(PO4)6 with high density was reported to be 1.0 W m 1 K 1 at room temperature [48]. CZP and BZP have a thermal conductivity of 1.0 W m 1 K 1 at 1000 °C which is lower

than that found for cubic ZrO2 at this temperature (2 W m 1 K 1 [6]), as well as for UO2 (3.5 W m 1 K 1 [34]). It should also be mentioned however that the thermal conductivity of UO2 is significantly higher at lower temperatures. The parabolic nature of the thermal conductivity data of CZP and BZP can be explained through phonon/photon mechanisms. The decrease in thermal conductivity from room temperature to 600 °C is seen similarly in most ionicbonding polycrystalline materials and is related to the lattice thermal conduction (the phonon mechanism) [49]. At temperatures above 600 °C, the increase in thermal conductivity may be attributed to an increase in the contribution of radiation conductivity (or photon transport) [50]. It is unknown at this stage whether the second order phase transition from low temperature R-3 to high temperature R-3c or indeed if microstructural changes, which occur at high temperature, also have an effect on the thermal conductivity.

A strategy often employed to enhance the thermal conductivity of a ceramic is to form a cercer (ceramics embedded in another ceramic) or cermet (ceramics embedded in metal) composite. Nickel cermet elements for reactor core applications have been reported in the literature previously [51,52], hence nickel has been chosen as metal in this preliminary study to investigate its effect on the thermal conductivity in a cermet composite. Nickel has a high melting point, high thermal conductivity and low neutron absorption cross-section. In this regard, cermet composites of CZP (or BZP) and nickel were fabricated from nickel metal powder and ceramic precursor powder with varying mass ratios of ceramic:nickel. After sintering at 1250 °C in an inert atmosphere of argon, the XRD patterns of the composites show peaks which correspond to CZP (or BZP) and cubic Ni (JCPDS reference code 01-070-1849) only. The presence of just two phases is conﬁrmed using backscattered SEM analyses (Fig. 8) and the nickel phase appears to be well-densiﬁed with little porosity. Table 4 summarises the cermet samples investigated in this study and the results from density analyses. Porosity in the cermet samples is expected to be due to incomplete densiﬁcation of the ceramic phase at these temperatures. The actual volume ratio of ceramic:metal was calculated assuming full densiﬁcation of the metal phase and the results are displayed in Table 4.

The results following heat capacity and thermal conductivity analyses are summarised in Fig. 9. The heat capacity found for the cermet samples in this temperature region is in the range of 0.7–1.0 J g 1 K 1, similar to those results obtained for the ceramic only samples. Thermal conductivity data are reasonably consistent over the temperature range investigated and the thermal at

Fig. 7. Temperature dependence of thermal diffusivity and thermal conductivity of (a) CZP and (b) BZP.

Fig. 8. Backscattered scanning electron micrographs of polished surfaces of (a) 50%BZP–50%Ni and (b) 25%BZP–75%Ni showing phase composition. Compositions are in mass ratios and the black areas are pores (Po).

Table 4 Composition and density of the cermet samples.

Fig. 9. Temperature dependence of (a) heat capacity and (b) thermal conductivity of the cermet composites. Compositions are in mass ratios.

1000 °C for BZP:Ni cermets with mass ratios of 75:25 and 50:50 are 1.8 and 1.2 W m 1 K 1, respectively. These samples show little improvement in thermal conduction when compared to the ceramic only samples, indicating the percolation threshold of this system has not been reached. Samples with higher nickel content (mass ratio = 25:75 ceramic:Ni) however show a signiﬁcant increase in thermal conductivity with values of 16 and 5 W m 1 K 1 found for CZP:Ni and BZP:Ni, respectively. According to percolation theory, after the percolation threshold is reached the conductivity

of the composite increases signiﬁcantly with volumetric concentration of the particle with higher transport property [53]. This can be seen when comparing the thermal conductivity of CZP:Ni (50:50 cer:met vol.%, 16 W m 1 K 1) and BZP:Ni (60:40 cer:met vol.%, 5 W m 1 K 1). The higher volume of Ni results in a signiﬁcant increase in the thermal conductivity for CZP:Ni (50:50 cer:met vol.%) when compared to BZP CZP:Ni (60:40 cer:met vol.%) although the large difference in porosity (94.6% TD for CZP and 76.4% TD for BZP cermet) is also likely to contribute signiﬁcantly.

D.J. Gregg et al. / Journal of Nuclear Materials 441 (2013) 203–210

A high Ni content is required (>20 vol.%) to increase the thermal conductivity especially if there is poor interface conductance between the ceramic and the metal phase, as suggested previously for Cr3C2:Ni cermets [54].

From the viewpoint of neutron economy, materials with low thermal neutron absorption cross sections are more desirable for IMF materials. The cermets prepared here require signiﬁcant proportions of Ni-metal content in order to enhance the thermal conductivity of the composite to reasonable values, and this is likely to have a considerable inﬂuence on the neutron economy. Replacement of Ni for example for zirconium may prove a better option with regard to neutron economy. Although there are several attractive features for the application of NZP type materials for IMF application; such as potential to incorporate actinides and FPs into durable phases within the fuel, thus allowing direct geological disposal following irradiation, there are also several disadvantages as highlighted in this work. Decomposition above approximately 1400 °C in an inert atmosphere, grain size variance with temperature, a phase transition around 900 °C and a low thermal conductivity are all signiﬁcant issues that would need to be addressed.

The NZP crystalline structure provides a ‘‘near-universal solvent’’ framework with potential candidacy as an IMF material for once-through burning combined with direct disposal. In this concept the NZP phase immobilizes plutonium and the minor actinides as well as the FPs within its crystal structure. CZP and BZP pellets with >95% density were produced by hot isostatic pressing at 1200 °C and 100 MPa for 2 h and characterised by SEM and XRD. The most important thermophysical properties for the prediction of in pile fuel temperature have been measured for CZP and BZP. These are heat capacity, thermal conductivity, and thermal-expansion. Although the materials were stable in air up to at least 1600 °C, they began to decompose at around 1400 °C in an inert atmosphere due to phosphate reduction to elemental phosphorus and associated phosphorus and oxygen loss. A phase change at high temperature has been observed in DSC, dilatometry and high temperature XRD data and is explained through MI site disordering. The thermal conductivities were assessed and the values for CZP and BZP at high temperature were found to be lower than that of cubic ZrO2. Thermal conductivity was enhanced signiﬁcantly in the composite cermet with nickel content at least 60:40 cer:met vol.%, a relatively high proportion of Ni-metal is therefore required. These results highlight several concerns with application of this material as a host matrix for minor actinide transmutation.