In  many  electroceramic  materials,  the  determination  of  the electrical  conductivity  plays  a  crucial  role,  especially  for  high temperatures.  Material  examples  of  interest  are  solid  electrolytes or  electrodes  for  fuel  cells  or  batteries.  Not  depending  whether the  conduction  mechanisms  of  the  materials  are  of  electronic  or ionic  nature,  the  density  of  the  charge  carriers  and  their  mobility  determine  the  overall  conductivity  of  a  homogeneous  material. Sometimes  this  is  referred  as  the  intrinsic  grain  contribution  to distinguish  between  interfacial  effects  between  different  grains that  may   also  reduce  the  overall  conductivity  (grain  boundary  contribution).  Both  effects  together  determine  the  bulk  conductivity, consisting  of  the  grain  and  the  grain  boundary  resistances  [1].

In  many  cases,  however,  effects  occurring  at  the  interfaces between  bulk  and  electrodes  cannot  be  neglected;  sometimes  they may   even  determine  the  materials  performance.  Typical  examples are  high  ohmic,  Schottky  barrier-type  grain  boundary  resistances between  an  n-type  semiconductor  and  a  noble  metal  electrode  with a  high  work  function,  like  Pt  or  Au.  Other  examples  are  blocking electrodes  for  ion  conductors  or  reaction  or  transfer  impedances  at the  electrodes,  e.g.  [2].

Besides  others,  impedance  spectroscopy  (IS)  is  a  powerful  tool to  distinguish  between  these  effects  and  to  determine  the  processes dominating  the  charge  transport  in  the  material.  By  applying  sinusoidal  voltage  stimulation  on  the  unknown  material  system  and measuring  the  resulting  (sinusoidal)  current,  one  can  calculate  the Z,  between  the  electrodes  [3,4].  Since  distinct complex  impedance,  conduction  mechanisms  or  processes  at  the  electrodes  appear  at distinct  frequencies,  typically  a  broad  frequency  range  spectrum is  scanned.  Usually,  measurements  are  conducted  in  a  two-wire mode.  Then,  the  resulting  spectrum  gives  an  overall  view  of  different  relaxation  processes  of  the  participating  charge  carriers,  redox reactions,  or  even  diffusion  processes  [3].  To  distinguish  between these  mechanisms  or  to  attribute  them  locally,  several  experiments with  varying  parameters  (such  as  temperature,  electrode  material, sample  thickness,  electrode  sizes  and  morphology,  gas  atmosphere, etc.)  are  required.  In  some  cases,  for  instance  for  cation  conductors, the  use  of  special  non-blocking  electrodes  is  helpful  [5].

To  distinguish  between  bulk  and  electrode  effects,  the  use  of a  four-wire  method  is  preferred,  because  electrode  resistances  as well  as  resistances  of  leads  or  contacts  do  not  contribute  to  the impedance  spectra  in  the  four-wire  mode.

Unfortunately,  setups  for  four-wire  impedance  spectroscopy are  not  simple  [6].  Often,  the  conductivity  is  thermally  activated and  the  conduction  mechanisms  of  interest  appear  at  high  temperatures.  This  may   cause  problems  with  respect  to  electrodes, homogeneous  sample  temperatures,  and/or  deﬁned  ambient  atmospheres.  Four-point  probing  by  spring-loaded  pins  is  used  in  the

semiconductor  ﬁeld  [7],  but  this  method  only  allows  determining the  surface  resistivity  and  high  temperature  springs  are  difﬁcult  to realize.

For  high  temperature  sensor  applications,  planar  structures are  abundant.  Onto  electrically  insulating  materials  like  alumina, electrodes  (often  interdigital  electrodes,  IDEs)  are  applied,  the  electroceramic  material  is  deposited  on  top,  and  the  resistances  or the  impedances  of  such  setups  are  determined.  Planar  four-wire impedance  spectroscopy  is  used  rarely.  To  distinguish  between electrode  and  bulk  effect  in  zeolite-type  gas  sensors,  a  four-wire approach  has  been  suggested  recently  [8].  However,  in  that  work the  focus  was  especially  on  the  zeolite  properties.  Moreover,  the samples  were  heated  “passively”  in  a  tube  furnace.

The  present  contribution  describes  further  and  more  general steps  on  that  topic.  A  self-heated  materials  test  platform  for four-wire  impedance  spectroscopy  is  introduced  with  a  planar thick-ﬁlm  heater  on  the  reverse  side.  This  tool  allows  fast  materials testing  at  different  temperatures  and  deﬁned  ambient  gas  atmospheres.  The  beneﬁt  of  this  platform  for  materials  characterization is  demonstrated  by  means  of  three  material  examples:  vanadiatungsten-titanium  oxide  (VWT)  as  an  n-type  semiconducting  gas sensor,  oxygen  ion  conducting  yttria  stabilized  zirconia  (YSZ),  and −   xSixO12).  In  all  cases, sodium  ion  conducting  Nasicon  (Na1  +  xZr2P3  it  is  conveniently  possible  to  separate  bulk  and  electrode  effects in  dependence  of  temperature  and/or  ambient  gas  atmosphere. It  should  be  noted  at  this  point  that  the  intention  of  this  work is  to  demonstrate  the  capability  of  such  test  platforms  for  fourwire  impedance  spectroscopy.  A  detailed  discussion  of  the  nature  of interfacial  electrode  effects  is  out  of  the  scope  of  this  work.  It  should be  annotated  that  this  tool  is  not  intended  to  obtain  high-precision materials  data  since  the  investigated  materials  are  often  applied  in thick  ﬁlm  technology  by  screen-printing  leading  to  a  porous  morphology.  However,  estimations  about  the  dominating  effects  are possible  as  well  as  rough  estimations  of  materials  parameters.

This  article  is  organized  as  follows:  in  the  ﬁrst  section,  some basic  considerations  on  the  four-wire  impedance  spectroscopy with  respect  to  the  here-shown  planar  setup  are  given.  Then,  technological  aspects  of  the  platform  preparation  and  characterization are  discussed.  Measurements  on  unheated  transducers  without  any material  covering  were  conducted  to  determine  the  idle  capacitance.  The  basic  functionality  of  the  four-wire  setup  was  proven  by impedance  spectroscopy  of  water  droplets  with  a  known  dielectric constant  at  room  temperature.  Results  for  three  ceramic  material examples  conclude  the  article.

An  ideal  setup  for  four-wire  measurements  of  a  material  compact  sample  should  have  a  deﬁned  (e.g.  cylindrical)  geometry  with planar  electrodes  on  both  opposite  faces.  Measuring  the  voltage drop  should  be  realized  with  two  inﬁnitesimal  small  ring  electrodes  that  do  not  disturb  the  electrical  ﬁeld  lines  (Fig.  1a).  In  this case,  one  could  even  determine  speciﬁc  values  like  conductivity  or dielectric  constants.  However,  often  exact  speciﬁc  values  are  not the  key  aspect  of  the  impedance  spectroscopy  experiments,  but  it is  of  interest  to  obtain  approximate  data  and  to  distinguish  between the  different  mechanisms  that  determine  the  impedance.

The  novel  approach  uses  four  micro-patterned  electrodes  on  a planar  ceramic  substrate.  A  schematic  cross  section  and  a  part  of the  electrode  design  are  given  in  Fig.  1b  and  c,  their  technical  realization  is  described  in  detail  below.  The  structure  consists  of  two interdigital  electrodes  (A  and  D)  with  two  additional  electrodes meandering  between  them  (B  and  C).  The  material  to  be  examined  could  be  applied  as  a  thin  or  thick  ﬁlm  (e.g.  screen-printed

Fig.  1.  Conventional  ideal  setup  for  four-wire  impedance  spectroscopy  on  a  material compact  with  thin  ring  electrodes  for  voltage  pick  off  (a),  cross-section  of  planar four-wire  electrodes  (b),  and  schematic  (partly)  top  view  on  the  four-wire  electrode design  (c).

thick-ﬁlm  layer)  on  top.  Gas  diffusion  to  the  functional  layer  is  possible  and  the  test  setup  is  close  to  possible  real  world  applications. If  the  functional  layer  is  porous,  even  gas  diffusion  to  the  electrodes is  possible.  Furthermore,  the  whole  tool  can  be  heated  rapidly  and easily  to  constant  temperatures  by  integrating  a  planar  thick-ﬁlm heater  on  the  reverse  side  of  the  substrate.

The  planar  non-inﬁnitesimally  small  electrodes  do  not  provide ideal  conditions,  since  they  affect  the  electrical  ﬁeld  distribution. The  schematically  illustrated  distribution  of  the  electrical  ﬁeld (Fig.  2)  elucidates  that  there  is  a  symmetry  line  in  the  center  of each  of  electrode  A  or  D  with  a  vanishing  electrical  ﬁeld  component.

For  each  IDE  element,  only  one  half  of  the  electrode  areas  A  or  D is  available,  the  other  halves  belong  to  the  neighboring  IDE  elements.  Since  the  half  electrode  areas  cause  the  double  electrode resistance,  one  has  to  conclude  that  for  the  complex  electrode  resisZel,C = tances  Zel.  The  meaning  of  the  complex  impedances  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  1b. Zbulk Between  each  pair  of  electrodes,  one  material  bulk  impedance  appears  in  the  equivalent  circuit  model.

In  a  ﬁrst  (simple)  case  one  can  conduct  two-wire  impedance spectroscopy  by  pairwise  connection  of  two  electrodes.  There  are six  possible  connection  conﬁgurations:  connection  at  the  outer interdigital  electrodes  A  and  D  (Fig.  2  (top)),  connection  at  the  inner meandered  electrodes  B  and  C  (Fig.  2  (center)),  crosswise  connection  A  and  C  (Fig.  2  (bottom),  or  B  and  D,  respectively)  or  connection of  the  neighbored  electrodes  A  and  B  (or  C  and  D,  respectively).  In theory,  this  allows  to  vary  sample  geometries  of  the  same  material  layer  within  one  setup.  Depending  on  the  two-wire  connection mode,  different  overall  impedances  should  be  obtained  as  shown in  Table  1.

In  other  words:  if  semicircles  in  the  complex  impedance  plane appear  in  the  two-wire  impedance  spectroscopy  data  that  represent  the  bulk  behavior,  their  diameter  should  depend  on  the connection  mode.  An  increase  by  a  factor  of  three  is  expected when  measuring  between  A  and  D  compared  to  a  measurement between  B  and  C  (or  A  and  B  or  C  and  D,  respectively).  Initial  measurements  on  ion-conducting  zeolites  as  functional  layer experimentally  proved  Eqs.  (1)–(4)  for  bulk  and  for  electrode impedances  [8].

Applying  the  current  at  A  and  D  and  measuring  the  voltage response  at  B  and  C  allows  four-wire  measurements.  The  voltage pick  off  between  B  and  C  is  currentless,  i.e.  no  charge  carriers  pass this  bulk–electrode  interface.  Therefore,  the  expected  result  should consist  of  one  single  bulk  impedance  of  the  same  size  as  obtained from  a  two-wire  measurement  between  B  and  C  without  any  electrode  part,  as  shown  in  Eq.  (5).

By  comparing  the  two and  four-wire  measurements  (in  both cases  the  voltages  are  picked  off  at  B  and  C),  the  electrode  contribution  of  the  two-wire  impedance  can  be  separated.  The  difference Ztwo-wire measured  at  the  electrodes  B  and between  C  contains  two  times  the  impedance  coming  from  the  meandered electrodes,  i.e.  from  Eq.  (2)  and  Eq.  (5)  one  obtains: 2Zel =

The  setup  consists  of  two  independently  manufactured  parts: a  heater  element  and  a  top  side  element,  on  which  the  fourwire  electrodes  are  deposited  (Fig.  3a).  After  applying  the  material to  be  tested  onto  the  top  side  element,  both  parts  are  glued together  using  a  covered  all  over  Au  thick-ﬁlm  layer,  ﬁred  at  850 ◦C. This  intermediate  layer  also  works  as  an  equipotential  layer  to avoid  perturbation  of  the  impedance  measurement  by  the  heater

Fig.  3.  (a)  Schematic  view  on  the  four-wire  transducer  consisting  of  two  substrates: sensing  electrodes  (top  side)  and  heating  element  (lower  side).  The  substrates  are stuck  together  by  an  Au  thick-ﬁlm  layer.  (b)  Micrographs  of  the  laser-patterned Au  four-wire  electrodes.  (c)  Four-wire  transducer  ready  to  use  with  YSZ  thick-ﬁlm covering  the  electrode  area.

current.  How  important  such  an  equipotential  layer  can  be  for  the measurement  of  small  signals  is  impressively  shown  for  thermoelectric  gas  sensors  in  Ref.  [9].

The  heating  elements  are  screen-printed  (Pt,  LPA  88-11,  Heraeus)  onto  96%  alumina  substrates  (Rubalit  708S,  CeramTec).  Since the  resistance  of  the  heater  is  also  used  for  temperature  control,  it  is designed  in  four-wire  technique  to  prevent  inﬂuences  of  leads  and contact  wire.  To  protect  heater  and  contact  tracks,  an  electrically insulating  glass  ceramic  ﬁlm  (QM42,  DuPont)  is  applied  by  screenprinting.  All  layers  are  ﬁred  in  accordance  to  the  manufacturer’s speciﬁcations.

For  the  electrode  side,  screen-printed  structures  are  not  sufﬁcient,  since  the  typical  pattern  deﬁnition  (widths  of  lines  and ␮m,   at  least  for  typical  commerspaces)  is  limited  to  about  100  cially  available  pastes.  Therefore,  to  reduce  the  internal  resistance of  some  higher-ohmic  ﬁlms,  the  IDE  structures  are  laser-patterned. First,  ﬁlms  are  printed  over  the  whole  area  that  should  later  be × the  electrode  area  (about  5  mm    6  mm).   Au  electrodes  are  made ␮m),  whereas of  KQ500  (Heraeus,  double  printed,  ﬁred  thickness  4  ␮m)   is  used  for  Pt  electrodes.  Then,  a LPA  88-11  (single  printed,  7  frequency-tripled  Nd:YAG  UV  laser  (LPKF  Microline  350L)  scribes the  “spaces”  directly  in  the  screen-printed  full  metal  area,  similar ␮m  (for  both as  described  in  [10]  or  [11].  Hereby,  a  resolution  of  30  lines  and  spaces)  is  obtained.  Fig.  3b  and  c  shows  details  of  a  realized structure.

A  simple  housing  for  the  platform  is  made  by  a  stainless  steel tube.  Cables  are  connected  by  parallel  gap  welding  (UB   25,  Unitek) and  ﬁxed  by  a  polymer  epoxy.

Fig.  4.  Top  views  on  planar  four-wire  electrodes  with  different  water  droplets  (a)–(e).  The  given  values  indicate  the  degree  of  coverage,  a,  relatively  to  the  whole  electrode area.   (f)  Interrupted  feed  lines  right  before  the  electrode  area  to  determine  Cfeed.

impedance  measurements  were  conducted  using  an impedance  analyzer  (Alpha  Analyzer,  Novocontrol).  The  temperature  was  controlled  by  utilizing  the  relationship  between  heater resistance  and  temperature,  which  had  been  evaluated  beforehand. Details  of  the  calibration  can  be  obtained  from  [12].  By  this  method, the  sensing  element  is  heated  correctly  without  being  inﬂuenced by  the  gas  ﬂow  velocity.

Other  experimental  details  like  preparation  of  the  functional materials  or  measuring  conditions  are  given  in  the  according  sections.

Before  covering  the  electrodes  area  with  any  functional  layer, the  idle  capacitance,  Cidle,  was  determined  and  the  inﬂuence  of cables  and  feed  lines  were  examined.  Furthermore,  the  values  for Cidle according  to  the  different  two-wire  connection  modes  should ensure  that  there  are  no  technological  problems  like  electrical  short circuits  between  IDE  electrodes  or  any  interruptions  of  them.

For  that  purpose,  we  conducted  two-wire  and  four-wire  measurements  in  the  range  of  100  Hz  to  1  MHz   at  room  temperature without  added  test  material  on  the  IDEs.  These  data  lead  to  Cidle, i.e.  to  the  capacitances  of  each  connection  mode  including  feed lines,  connections,  and  cables  (exactly  spoken  to  the  complex  idle jωCidle).  Afterwards,  the  feed  lines  of  that  senadmittance  sor  transducer  were  interrupted  directly  before  the  IDE  (see  Fig.  4f) and  all  measurements  were  repeated  to  determine  the  inﬂuence  of

Y feed = cables  and  feed  lines.  So,  we   achieved  Cfeed (exactly  spoken  jωCfeed)  for  all  connection  modes.  Assuming  a  parallel  circuit between  cables,  feed  and  IDE,  subtraction  of  the  complex  admittances  (Eq.  (7),  for  each  frequency)  lead  to  a  corrected  admittance Yidle,corr concerning  the  idle  capacitances  of  the  electrode  structures. Yidle − From 

Table  2  gives  an  overview  on  the  measured  and  calculated  data. It  can  be  seen  that  the  corrected  values,  Cidle,corr,  depend  on  the spacing  between  the  measuring  electrodes  monotonously.  The higher  the  electrode  distances  the  lower  is  the  corrected  idle  capacitance.

To  conﬁrm  the  applicability  of  such  four-wire  electrode  transducers,  we   measured  water  droplets  at  room  temperature  (with εr =  81)  on  the  IDE,  as  it  has a  well-known  dielectric  constant  of  already  been  reported  for  the  two-wire  setup  [13].  For  that  reason, we  conducted  impedance  spectroscopy  measurements  in  the  fourwire  mode  with  varying  water  coverage  on  the  four-wire  platform. The  different  droplet  sizes  and  their  estimated  coverage  in  relation

Table  2 Idle  capacitances  and  corrected  idle  capacitances  of  the  four-wire  sensor  platform.

factor  F  to  calculate  the  material  permittivity  from  the  obtained capacitances  by  applying  to  Eq.  (11)  is  only  fully  valid  if  the  material  layer  thickness  is  larger  than  the  electrode  spacings,  i.e.  all  ﬁeld lines  need  to  be  inside  of  the  material.

to  the  whole  electrode  area  (denoted  as  a,  which  means  a  degree of  coverage)  are  shown  in  Fig.  4. The  impedance  results  in  case  of  water  coverage,  a,  follow  an  R

C equivalent  circuit  model.  We   processed  the  data  by  application  of Eqs.  (7)–(9)  and  then  evaluated  the  capacitance  Cfour-wire,corr in  the high  frequency  range.  These  values  are  plotted  against  a  (Fig.  5).  A linear  correlation  like  as  already  suggested  also  for  the  two-wire IDEs  in  [13]  occurs.  This  agreement  validates  our  assumptions.

Now,  these  data  are  used  (as  a  calibration)  for  deﬁning  a geometry  factor,  F.  This  factor  allows  ascribing  “the  capacitance calculation  to  the  well-known  parallel-plate  capacitor  geometry” [13].  That  means  the  ratio  of  the  plate’s  surface  and  their  distance according  to  the  parallel-plate  geometry  (A/d  in  Eq.  (10))  is  represented  by  this  geometry  factor  concerning  the  capacitance  of  a planar  IDE  electrode  geometry  and  the  special  electrical  ﬁeld  distribution  between  the  IDE  electrodes  (Eq.  (11)). Cparallel-plate = ε0 × CIDE,four-wire,corr = We  calculated  F  by  determining  the  slope  of  the  “measured”  capacitances  Cfour-wire,corr (which  depend  on  the  water  coverage  a,  Fig.  5) after  Eq.  (12). = Cfour-wire,corr − εr ×

As  this  geometry  factor  depends  only  on  the  IDE  geometry  (i.e. line-,  space  parameters,  substrate  material  and  thickness),  it  can also  be  used  in  further  measurements  to  calculate  the  idle  capacitance  (when  measured  without  test  material)  or  speciﬁc  values like  dielectric  constants  or  conductivities  from  four-wire  measurements  of  an  unknown  test  material  applied  on  the  electrode  area. However,  it  should  be  clear  that  the  application  of  the  geometry

Fig.  5.  Capacitances  of  planar  four-wire  electrodes  with  different  water  coverage measured  by  four-wire  impedance  spectroscopy  and  corrected  by  the  capacitances of  the  electrical  connectors  (cables  and  feed  lines)  after  Eqs.  (7)–(9).

As  written  above,  three  different  electroceramic  material  classes were  selected  to  demonstrate  the  applicability  of  the  described four-wire  platform:  vanadia  doped  tungsten-titanium  oxide  (VWT) representing  an  n-type  electronic  conductor  for  gas  sensor  purposes,  yttrium  stabilized  zirconia  (YSZ)  as  an  oxygen  ion-conductor, and  Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (Nasicon)  as  a  sodium  ion  conductor.

Vanadia  doped  tungsten-titanium  oxide  (VWT)  is  a  well-known catalyst  material  for  NOx removal.  It  can  be  found  in  exhaust aftertreatment  applications  for  industrial  or  automotive  (Diesel) exhausts  [14,15].  We   recently  investigated  this  material  as  a  resistive  type  sensor  material  to  detect  SO2 [16,17].  The  results  showed a  direct  dependence  of  the  overall  conductivity  of  VWT   thick-ﬁlms toward  different  SO2 contents  in  a  test  gas.

In  the  ﬁeld  of  planar  conductometric  metal  oxide-based  gas  sensor  applications,  it  is  for  each  material  under  discussion  whether the  gas  sensitive  effect  (conductivity  change)  is  a  pure  intrinsic effect,  i.e.  the  charge  carrier  changes  are  dominated  by  a  bulk  effect or  by  a  grain–grain  interface  effect,  or  whether  interfacial  effects between  the  gas  sensitive  material  and  electrodes  are  responsible  for  the  gas  sensitive  overall  change  in  the  conductivity.  In  the ﬁrst  case,  improving  such  sensors  would  be  possible  by  modifying  the  morphology  of  the  functional  material,  i.e.  by  reducing  the grain  size  or  the  ﬁlm  thickness  [18,19].  However,  if  for  instance, low-conducting  depletion  layers  between  a  noble  metal  electrode and  the  n-type  metal  oxide  are  modulated  by  reducing  or  oxidizing  gaseous  species  in  the  ambient  atmosphere,  then  the  measured conductance  change  is  dominated  by  the  so-called  electrode  contribution  [20,21].  Very  often  it  is  not  clear  of  which  origin  the  observed effect  is.  In  this  case,  the  four-wire  impedance  spectroscopy  can help  to  distinguish,  as  will  be  shown  for  n-type  conducting  vanadia doped  tungsten-titanium  oxide.

The  VWT   material  was   prepared  by  a  co-impregnation  method using  titanium  oxide  (Aeroxide  P25,  Evonik)  as  a  starting  powder. The  details  are  as  follows:  ammonium  metavanadate  and  ammonium  (para)tungstate  hydrate  were  added  into  water  and  dissolved by  stirring.  Then,  the  titanium  oxide  powder  was  dispersed  in  the solution.  Afterwards,  the  solution  was   dried.  The  dried  powder was   calcined  at  450 ◦C  to  obtain  VWT.  Concentrations  of  vanadium oxide,  tungsten  oxide  and  titanium  oxide  are  3,  10,  and  87  wt%, respectively.  The  achieved  VWT   powder  was   processed  to  a  screenprintable  paste  (organic  contains  terpineol  and  ethyl  cellulose)  and applied  on  top  of  the  Au  four-wire  electrodes  by  single  screenprinting.  Subsequently,  the  sensor  was  ﬁred  at  700 ◦C  for  20  min. ␮m  and  a  porous  strucThe  obtained  ﬁlm  had  a  thickness  of  10–20  ture.  The  sensor  device  was  measured  at  400 ◦C  in  a  ﬂowing  base  gas of  compressed  air  (5  l/min)  in  the  frequency  range  from  200  mHz to  11  MHz.

Fig.  6  shows  the  results  verifying  the  electrode  setup  by  comparing  two-wire  measurements  in  different  connection  modes.  All Nyquist  spectra  show  two   parts:  a  high  frequency  semicircle,  which behaves  electrically  like  an  RC  parallel  equivalent  circuit  (R

C), and  another  semicircle-like  contribution  that  is  not  fully  developed  in  the  lower  frequency  range.  The  sizes  of  the  ﬁrst  semicircles depend  on  the  connection  mode  as  expected.  The  real  parts  of these  R

Fig.  6.  Two-wire  impedance  spectra  (200  mHz–11  MHz)  of  VWT   in  air  at  400 ◦C.

distribution,  as  expected  from  Eqs.  (1)–(4),  i.e.,  the  number  of  spacings  between  the  connecting  electrodes  deﬁnes  the  factor  for  the enlargement  of  the  semicircles  size.  In  the  case  of  three  spaces  (connection  between  A  and  D),  the  resistance  (1.2  M 4))  is  three  times higher  than  the  one  in  the  B–C,  A–B  or  C–D  mode  (0.4  M 4)).  Connection  between  A–C  or  B–D  leads  to  a  resistance  two  times  higher, respectively  (0.8  M 4)). At  this  point,  it  is  not  possible  to  determine  the  nature  of the  semicircles.  Usually,  the  high-frequency  R

C  elements  are attributed  to  conduction  mechanisms  in  the  bulk.  This  can  be  veriﬁed  by  the  four-wire  measurement.

The  high  frequency  semicircle  in  the  four-wire  connection  mode looks  very  similar  to  that  of  the  two-wire  result  measured  between B  and  C.  Fig.  7  compares  data  with  and  without  200  ppm  SO2 admixed  to  the  base  gas  for  a  two-wire  (B–C)  and  the  four-wire mode.  Since  both  impedances  are  almost  identical,  an  interfacial effect  between  noble  metal  and  n-type  semiconductor  (e.g.  a  gas concentration  dependent  depletion  layer)  can  be  excluded  as  an origin  of  the  gas  sensitivity.

One  should  also  recognize  that  the  low  frequency  part  does  not appear  that  distinct  in  the  four-wire  data  as  it  does  in  the  two-wire measurements.  Hence,  the  two-wire  measurements  are  slightly affected  by  an  unknown  effect  occurring  at  the  VWT–electrode interface,  but  seemingly  being  independent  on  the  gas  atmosphere. Since  this  effect  becomes  marked  only  at  very  low  frequencies,  to avoid  polarization  effects,  it  is  preferred  for  real  world  applications

Fig.  7.  Two-wire  and  four-wire  impedance  spectra  (200  mHz–11  MHz)  of  VWT   with and   without  200  ppm  SO2 in  air  at  400 ◦C.

Fig.  8.  Impedance  spectra  of  a  YSZ  thick-ﬁlm  on  planar  Pt-electrodes  at  400 ◦C: (a)  measured  in  two-wire  mode  as  indicated  (note  that  in  case  A–B/B–C/C–D  all the   curves  are  lying  over  each  other)  and  (b)  comparison  of  two and  four-wire measurement.

to  determine  impedances  in  an  ac-mode  instead  of  measuring  dc resistances.

The  electrode  effects  are  very  small  in  the  case  of  this  electron conducting  VWT.  Therefore  the  advantages  of  the  four-wire  technique  are  not  as  striking  as  expected.  However,  it  becomes  clear that  the  presented  platform  works  well.  More  pronounced  effects are  expected  to  occur  for  interfaces  between  electrodes  and  ionconductors.  This  will  be  investigated  in  the  next  section.

ion-conducting  material,  we  selected yttrium  stabilized  zirconia  (YSZ).  This  oxygen  ion-conducting material  is  well  examined  and  ﬁnds  application  in  sensors,  fuel cells  and  other  high  temperature  electrochemical  processes  with high  industrial  impact  [2,22].  For  SOFC,  YSZ  ﬁlms  are  used  and  need to  be  characterized  also  to  ﬁnd  the  best  ion-conductor/electrode interface  [23,24].

For  the  tests,  a  commercial  YSZ  powder  (8Y-S,  Tosoh)  was  used as  starting  material  and  was  processed  to  a  screen-printable  paste. The  sensor  setup  for  this  investigation  was  very  similar  to  the  work before  (VWT)  apart  from  the  sintering  temperature  of  the  functional  material  (here:  1270 ◦C)  and  the  applied  electrode  material (here:  Pt).  The  obtained  YSZ  ﬁlms  showed  an  open  porosity. Two and  four-wire  impedance  spectra  were  taken  from  7  Hz  to 10  MHz   in  air  between  350 ◦C  and  650 ◦C.  Again,  the  temperatures were  adjusted  utilizing  the  internal  heater.

First  of  all,  one  should  have  a  look  on  the  results  of  the  twowire  impedance  measurements  again.  Fig.  8a  gives  an  exemplary view  on  the  results  achieved  at  400 ◦C  when  plotted  in  the  complex  plane.  All  spectra  mainly  consist  of  three  parts.  At  higher frequencies  semicircles  occur.  Their  diameters  depend  on  the  connection  mode  as  expected  from  Eqs.  (1)–(4).  This  strongly  indicates a  bulk  origin.  Two  additional,  partly  overlapping  semicircles  occur at  lower  frequencies.  They  are  not  fully  developed  at  400 ◦C.

The  result  of  the  four-wire  measurements  (Zfour-wire)  compared to  the  two-wire  results  recorded  between  the  electrodes  B  and  C (Ztwo-wire(B–C))  is  shown  in  Fig.  8b.  The  low  frequency  parts  are almost  completely  vanished,  proving  that  the  high  frequency  semicircles  in  fact  can  be  attributed  to  a  bulk  origin.

As  mentioned  above,  these  experiments  were  conducted  at different  temperatures.  Since  the  phase  angles  at  7.29  Hz  in  the four-wire  mode  were  almost  zero,  the  ohmic  resistances  R  can  be  5),  was  calculated  using  R  and  the seen  as  geometry  factor  F  =  0.16  m.   Both,  R  and    are  plotted  in  Fig.  9.  An activation  energy,  Ea,  was   calculated  from  the  slope  of  the  Arrhenius  plot  to  be  0.90  eV  (86.6  kJ/mol).  The  data  for  Ea are  in  good agreement  with  the  literature  data  for  YSZ  thin  ﬁlms  or  compact devices  (Ea =  1.05  eV  for  polycrystalline  YSZ  [25],  Ea =  0.66–0.98  eV with  grain  boundaries  dominating  the  conductivity  in  YSZ  prepared by  plaster  casting  [26],  Ea =  1.03–1.15  eV  for  600  nm  YSZ-thin-ﬁlms in  [27]).  Since  in  the  here-investigated  ﬁlms  both  grain  and  grain boundary  contributions  are  measured,  the  obtained  0.9  eV  seems a  reliable  result.  If  one  compares  the  absolute  conductivity  values  with  literature  data,  one  ﬁnds  a  (about  one  order)  lower × ×   10−4 S/cm  @  600 ◦C  [25];  4.5    10−4 S/cm conductivity  (e.g.,  50  @  600 ◦C  for  an  8  ␮m-YSZ-ﬁlm  obtained  by  reactive  sputtering ×   10−4 S/cm  @ deposition  [23],  between  0.35  400 ◦C  for  5–10  ␮m  thick  YSZ-ﬁlms  prepared  by  slip  casting  and ×   10−4 S/cm  @  400 ◦C  for  a  bulk  reference  [24]).  The  differences 1.05  between  the  here-determined  conductivities  and  the  literature data  can  be  attributed  –  at  least  partly  –  to  the  porous  microstructure.  Additionally,  one  has  to  keep  in  mind  that  here  both,  grain and  grain  boundary,  contribute  to  the  overall  conductivity.  Furthermore,  the  geometry  factor  as  determined  above  has  to  be  corrected, since  the  small  ﬁlm  thicknesses  do  not  fully  justify  the  assumption  that  all  ﬁeld  lines  are  in  the  material.  However,  the  interest of  this  work  is  not  to  study  the  behavior  of  the  here-applied  YSZ but  to  separate  the  electrode  contribution  elegantly  from  the  bulk behavior.

In  many  cases,  the  electrode  reaction  on  the  three-phase  contact between  ion-conductor,  gas  atmosphere  and  electron  conductor (most  likely  Pt  to  enhance  the  catalytic  properties)  is  of  high  interest.  The  conversion  of  oxygen  ions  or  molecular  oxygen  vice  versa (O2 +  4e− ↔   2O2−)  is  the  basis  for  most  YSZ  applications.  These  reactions  are  electrically  “visible”  by  the  electrode  impedance  in  the  IS Zel) result.  Using  the  four-wire  setup,  the  pure  electrode  part  (2  was  separated  by  subtracting  the  measured  four-wire  impedances at  all  frequencies  from  the  measured  two-wire  ones,  as  shown  in Eq.  (6).  The  so-calculated  results  (regarding  the  measurements  at 400 ◦C)  are  given  in  Fig.  10a.  The  discussion  of  the  electrochemical  origin  of  the  pure  electrode  contribution  is  explicitly  not  a subject  of  investigation  here.  The  shape  reminds  to  a  Gerischer impedance  [3]  or  to  a  ﬁnite-length-Warburg-type  impedance  [28], but  also  two  R impedances  (2Zel)  by  subtracting 

Fig.  10.  Calculated  electrode  four-wire from Z two-wire(B–C)  of  a  YSZ  thick-ﬁlm  on  Pt  four-wire  electrodes  at  different  temperatures.  Please  note  the  different  scale  of  the  axes.  With  higher  temperatures  the curves  shift  on  the  real  part  axis  to  higher  resistances  because  of  increasing  ohmic resistances  of  the  B  and  C  feed  lines.

generally  decrease  but  also  the  distribution  of  different  mechanism concerning  the  electrode  impedance  changes.  The  results  are  given in  Fig.  10.

One  may   object  that  the  results  cannot  be  generalized  for any  platinum–YSZ  interfaces.  Of  course,  the  electrode  impedances should  depend  on  the  three-phase  contact  (YSZ,  Pt,  gas).  Usually, cermet-materials  are  used  to  enhance  the  interfacial  properties. At  low  frequencies,  reactions  with  the  ambient  gas  atmosphere

G.  Hagen  et  al.  /  Sensors  and  Actuators  B  187 (2013) 174–  183

(oxygen)  can  be  seen  in  the  impedance  spectra  [29].  We   did  not focus  on  the  best  performance  of  three-phase  Pt  connection  of the  YSZ.  The  calculated  electrode  impedances  of  a  screen-printed electrode  structure  with  commercial  Pt  covering  the  porous  YSZ material  are  in  our  special  case  higher  than  the  bulk  impedance. For  a  more  detailed  investigation,  one  would  have  to  vary  both electrode  materials  and  gas  atmospheres.  With  the  presented  platform,  such  measurements  are  easy  to  conduct  even  with  respect  to special  applications.

Another  point  concerns  the  question  of  grain  and  grain  boundary  inﬂuences  on  the  impedance.  If  one  has  a  look  on  the  four-wire result  in  Fig.  8b  (Zfour-wire)  at  least  two  impedance  parts  are  visible.  We   sum  up  these  effects  as  “bulk”  effect.  A  distinction  between grain  and  grain  boundaries  contribution  would  be  possible  by  varying  sintering  temperatures  or  the  electrode  geometry  like  in  [25] in  accordance  with  extensive  materials  characterization.

The  third  example  to  show  the  applicability  of  the  presented platform  is  sodium  ion-conducting  Nasicon.  It  is  in  use  for  several types  of  electrochemical  cells,  like  gas  sensors  or  high  temperature batteries  [30,31].  The  Nasicon  experiment  was  conducted  similar to  the  YSZ  measurements.  Raw  Nasicon  powder  was   prepared  by mixing  Na2CO3 (Merck),  NH4H2PO4 (VWR),  SiO2 (VWR),  and  ZrO2 (AlfaAesar)  in  stoichiometric  amounts  in  a  ball  mill  (conventional mixed-oxide  route)  and  subsequent  calcination  at  1050 ◦C  for  12  h. − We  achieved  Na1  +  xZr2P3    xSixO12 with  x  =  2.2  (for  further  details see  [32]).  A  screen-printable  paste  of  this  material  was  applied  on laser-patterned  Pt  four-wire  electrodes  and  annealed  at  1050 ◦C. The  samples  were  measured  in  the  temperature  range  from  280 ◦C to  480 ◦C.

First  of  all,  here  also  the  two-wire  measurements  should  give  a ﬁrst  hint  on  the  basic  conduction  mechanism  and  what  happens

when  the  geometry  is  varied  (this  is  realized  by  the  measurements  in  different  connection  modes  with  one,  two  or  three spaces  between  the  electrodes).  Surprisingly,  the  expected  behavior  (i.e.  equidistantly  distributed  impedance  elements  by  increasing amounts  of  spaces  between  the  measuring  electrodes)  did  not appear.  At  lower  temperatures  (e.g.  at  280 ◦C,  Fig.  11  left  hand  side), the  spectra  consist  of  a  damped  semicircle  in  the  high  frequency range  and  an  increasing  tail-like  contribution  at  lower  frequencies.  Furthermore,  the  high-frequency  semicircles  could  not  be attributed  to  a  connection  mode  due  to  its  size.  At  higher  temperatures  (e.g.  at  480 ◦C,  Fig.  11  right  hand  side)  the  high-frequency  part shows  a  more  semicircles  shape  and  the  tail-like  fraction  increases strongly.

Analysis  of  the  four-wire  measurements  reveals  some  interesting  effects:  the  bulk  impedance  of  our  Nasicon  test-material  shows well-known  semicircles  (followed  by  some  small  low-frequency contributions)  in  the  complex  plane  as  well  at  lower  as  at  higher temperatures  (see  also  Fig.  11a).  Expecting  mobile  sodium  ions  in the  Nasicon  bulk  material,  this  seems  an  appropriate  result.  These effects  are  also  activated  by  increasing  temperature  (Ea ≈   0.73  eV). Calculating  the  electrodes  impedances  like  before  helps  to  interpret  the  two-wire  curves.  It  becomes  clear  that  the  electrode impedance  consists  of  at  least  two   parts:  an  expected  tail-like  contribution  at  lower  frequencies,  which  can  be  attributed  to  “blocking electrodes”  and  an  additional  higher  frequency  electrode  contribution.  At  higher  temperatures  (right  hand  side  diagrams  in Fig.  11,  exemplary  for  480 ◦C)  the  additional  higher-frequency  elecZfour-wire and trode  contribution  decreases.  Here,  the  impedances  Ztwo-wire(B–C)  show  (high-frequency)  semicircles  of  the  same  size and  shape  and  could  be  clearly  attributed  to  the  bulk  conductivity. One  should  note  here  that  the  resistances  of  meandered  electrodes B  and  C  lead  to  serial  ohmic  impedances.  Therefore  the  two-wire Re(Z)  direction  (Fig.  11a, measurement  is  shifted  in  the  positive  480 ◦C).

Fig.  11.  Comparison  of  two and  four-wire  measurements  of  a  Nasicon  thick-ﬁlm  on  planar  Pt  four-wire  electrodes  at  280 ◦C  and  480 ◦C  (a)  and  their  calculated  electrode impedances  (b).

G.  Hagen  et  al.  /  Sensors  and  Actuators  B  187 (2013) 174–  183

Fig.  11a  compares  the  two and  four-wire  results  for  the  lowest and  the  highest  measured  temperature,  Fig.  11b  shows  the  calculated  electrode  impedances  respectively.

At  this  point,  the  question  remains  what  happens  (or  what  does not  happen)  at  lower  temperatures  at  the  Au–Nasicon  interface. As  these  measurements  were  conducted  in  lab  atmosphere  (not under  deﬁned  gas  compositions  but  with  at  least  400  ppm  CO2) it  might  be  possible  that  Na+ form  any  kind  of  carbonate  intermediate  layers.  The  electrode  effects  in  this  special  setup  should not  be  discussed  here.  But  near  to  potential  applications  one  can characterize  very  easily  the  corresponding  material/electrode  composition  under  deﬁned  conditions  (in  this  case  varying  CO2 contents in  a  test  gas).

Impedance  spectroscopy  is  a  well-established  method  to  elucidate  conduction  mechanisms  in  electroceramic  materials.  In  many cases,  this  implicates  high  efforts  in  sample  preparation  or  measurement  techniques.

The  present  contribution  introduces  a  simple  setup  as  a  novel tool  for  complex  materials  characterization.  A  planar  electrode structure  manufactured  in  laser-patterned  thick-ﬁlm  technology allows  conducting  four-wire  impedance  spectroscopy  on  a  variety of  materials  which  can  be  easily  processed  as  thick-ﬁlms.  Therefore, as  an  additional  advantage  the  test  setup  is  close  to  real  applications such  as  sensor  devices.

Initial  tests  on  electron  or  ion-conducting  materials  show  the

widespread  possibilities  for  using  the  presented  tool.

Vanadia  doped  tungsten  titania  oxide  as  a  catalyst  material  used for  sensor  purposes  does  not  exhibit  pure  ohmic  behavior  in  dc measurements.  The  gas  dependent  effect  (concerning  SO2 in  the test  atmosphere)  is  caused  by  bulk  conductivity  changes.

Yttrium-stabilized  zirconia  is  a  well-investigated  material.  Separating  bulk  conduction  from  electrode  effects  is  possible  with  the described  setup.  The  internal  heater  in  our  structure  allows  adjusting  very  easily  a  deﬁned  measuring  temperature.

Nasicon  as  a  cation  conducting  material  was  also  applied  as  a thick-ﬁlm  on  our  planar  four-wire  electrodes.  The  plot  in  the  complex  plane  shows  the  typical  shape  of  an  ion-conductor  with  a  high frequency  semicircle  and  a  strong  low  frequency  increase  of  the imaginary  part.  The  common  interpretation  of  such  spectra  is  to attribute  the  semicircle  to  any  bulk  conduction,  but  the  four-wire measurement  shows  clearly  that  this  is  not  the  correct  conclusion in  this  case.  At  lower  temperatures  (about  280 ◦C),  the  electrode impedance  consists  of  two  parts  whereas  one  superposes  the  bulk conductivity  in  the  high-frequency  range.

In  summary,  the  presented  device  with  planar  four-wire  electrodes  and  integrated  heating  element  provides  a  powerful  tool  for fast  electroceramic  materials  characterization.  Especially  in  sensor applications  this  “easy-to-use”  structure  provides  many  advantages.  But  also  other  materials  e.g.  organic  functional  materials  or polymer  insulators  are  possible  test  candidates.