Solid-electrolyte   impedancemetric   NOx   (NOx;   NO,   NO2)   sensor   devices   were   designed   by   using   metal oxides   (Fe2O3,   Co3O4,   NiO,   CuO,   ZnO)   as   a   receptor   material   and   an   8  mol%-yttria-stabilized   zirconia (YSZ)   plate   as   a   solid   electrolyte   transducer   material.   The   sensing   signal   could   be   simply   detected   as   the impedance   change   of   the   transducer.   The   sensing   performance   of   the   impedancemetric   NOx   sensor   for the  detection   of   NOx   in   the   range   10–150   ppm   at   300–500 ◦C   was   investigated   using   impedance   analyzer. Among   the  sensor   device   tested   NiO/YSZ   sensor   showed   good   sensing   properties   for   NO   and   NO2 at   400 ◦C on  100   kHz.   Moreover,   the   sensing   response   properties   showed   good   selectivity   and  stability   to  NO2.

Nitrogen  oxides  (NOx;  NO,  NO2)  have  become  the  cause  of  atmospheric  pollutants  such  as  an  acid  rain  and  photochemical  smog. A  major  source  of  recent  NOx  emissions  is  thought  to  be  automobile  exhaust  gas,  and  the  number  of  automobiles  worldwide  is increasing  rapidly.  Therefore,  monitoring  of  the  exact  amount  of NOx  and  development  of  compact  sensors  applicable  to  automobiles  become  important  for  the  protection  of  global  environments. Various  types  of  NOx  gas  sensors,  including  semiconductor  type [1–3],  solid  electrolyte-based  potentiometric  type  [4–6],  amperometric  type  [7–9]  and  impedancemetric  [10–17]  sensors,  have  been investigated.  The  solid  electrolyte  type  is  of  particular  interest  from the  viewpoints  of  sensitivity,  selectivity,  and  stability  at  high  temperatures  [18–21].  However,  these  sensor  devices  still  have  a  rather complicated  structure.  They  still  need  reference  and/or  counter electrodes  at  the  opposite  side  of  the  electrolyte.  Therefore,  we   have proposed  a  new  concept  of  a  solid-state  NOx  sensor  combined  with a  solid  electrolyte  as  an  impedance  transducer  and  a  metal  oxide  as a  receptor  [21–23].  The  new  type  of  impedancemetric  sensor  has an  advantage  in  its  simple  sensor  structure,  in  which  there  is  no need  for  reference  and/or  counter  electrodes  at  the  opposite  side of  the  senor  device.  An  impedancemetric  solid-state  sensor  using  a cation  (Li+)  ionic  solid  electrolyte  transducer  attached  to  an  oxide

layer  as  a  gas-sensing  receptor  showed  relatively  good  NOx   sensing properties  [16,18]. In  this  study,  we   used  anion  (O2−)  ionic  solid  state  electrolyte 8  mol%-yttria-stabilized  zirconia  (YSZ)  as  a  solid  electrolyte  transducer  and  metal  oxides  as  a  receptor  to  improve  the  transducer function  of  the  solid-state  impedancemetric  NOx  sensor.  We   report the  NOx  sensing  performance  and  the  effect  of  the  receptor  material on  the  impedancemetric  solid  electrolyte  NOx  sensor.

The  sensor  device  was   fabricated  using  an  8  mol%-YSZ  plate (Nikkato  Corp.,  Japan)  as  a  transducer  and  various  metal  oxides (Fe2O3,  Co3O4,  NiO,  CuO,  ZnO;  reagent  grade,  Wako,  Japan) as  receptors.  The  sensor  structure  consisted  of  an  YSZ  plate ×   1t mm),   a  receptor  layer,  and  Au  electrodes  at (10  mm  the  opposite  surface  of  the  YSZ  plate  as  shown  in  Fig.  1.  The  Au electrodes  were  tightly  coated  with  an  inorganic  adhesive  (Aron Ceramic,  TOAGOSEI,  Japan).  A  receptor  paste  prepared  with  metal ␣-Terpineol  (C10H18O,  Wako,  Japan)  was  painted  onto oxide  and  the  surface  of  the  YSZ  plate,  and  the  plate  was  dried  and  sintered at  500 ◦C  for  2  h. NOx   sensing  experiments  were  carried  out  in  a  conventional ﬂow  apparatus  equipped  with  a  heating  facility  at  300–500 ◦C.  Sample  gases  containing  NO  or  NO2 were  prepared  from  each  parent gas  at  a  ﬁxed  O2 pressure  of  21  vol%  and  NO  diluted  with  nitrogen or  NO2 diluted  with  a  dry  synthetic  air  (79  vol%  N2 +  21  vol%  O2 gas mixture),  by  mixing  it  with  N2 (99.999  vol%)  or  air  at  a  total  ﬂow  rate of  100  ml/min.  Frequency  properties  of  this  sensor  were  measured between  50  Hz  and  5  MHz,  and  the  sensor  responses  (resistance  and

Fig.  1.  Schematic  diagram  of  the  impedancemetric  NOx  sensor  device  using  metal oxide  (receptor  layer)  and  YSZ  (transducer  layer).

Fig.  2.  Sensitivity  (resistance  component)  of  various  oxide/YSZ  devices  to  NOx  at 400 ◦C,  100  kHz.

capacitance)  were  measured  at  various  concentrations  of  each  NOx gas  with  an  impedance  analyzer  (LCR  3532-50,  HIOKI,  Japan).

The  resistance  component  sensitivity  (R)  to  each  target gas  was  deﬁned  here  as  a  difference  between  resistance  value of  the  sensor  device  in  the  sample  gas  and  that  in  air.  Also, the  value  of  the  relative  sensitivity  (SR or  SC)  was   deﬁned  as SR =  (Rgas −   100  (%),  in which  Rgas (Cgas)  and  Rair (Cair)  is  resistance  (capacitance)  in  the sample  gas  and  that  in  air,  respectively.

First,  we  investigated  the  response  characteristic  of  the  sensor devices  using  various  receptor  materials  for  150  ppm  NOx  (NO  and NO2)  at  400 ◦C,  100  kHz.  The  resistance  component  sensitivities  of each  of  the  sensor  devices  for  various  receptor  materials  are  summarized  in  Fig.  2.  The  response  property  of  excellent  resistance change  was  observed  in  the  case  of  NiO  or  CuO.  The  resistance  component  sensitivities  of  these  sensors  were  affected  by  the  ability  of the  receptor  materials  used  to  detect  the  gas  at  different  NOx  concentrations,  and  the  NiO  receptor  showed  the  highest  sensitivity among  the  sensors  tested  as  shown  in  Fig.  3.

Fig.  4  shows  frequency  properties  of  the  NiO/YSZ  sensor  to  different  concentrations  of  NOx.  Nyquist’s  plots  and  Bode  plots  of  the NiO/YSZ  sensor  showed  that  impedance  change  at  various  concentrations  of  NOx  which  was  caused  at  the  interface  impedance  area.

Fig.  4.  Nyquist’s  plots  (a)  and  Bode  plots  (b)  of  the  NiO/YSZ  sensor  at  frequency range  from  50  Hz  to  5  MHz   in  air,  100  ppm  NO,  and  100  ppm  NO2 at  400 ◦C.

We   investigated  the  response  characteristic  of  the  sensor  at  the ﬁxed  frequency  of  100  kHz  as  a  sensing  signal,  because  response change  was   observed  from  100  kHz  as  shown  in  Fig.  4.  We   also investigated  the  effect  of  distance  between  Au  electrodes,  and  the results  are  presented  in  Fig.  5.  The  results  showed  that  the  sensing property  of  the  NiO/YSZ  sensor  was   weakened  with  increase  in  electrode  distance  from  1  mm  to  5  mm.   Therefore,  we   ﬁxed  the  receptor material  and  electrode  distance  as  NiO  and  1  mm. In  this  condition,  the  effect  of  working  temperature  was  examined  from  300  to  500 ◦C.  The  sensitivity  and  stability  of  the  NiO/YSZ sensor  at  various  working  temperatures  are  summarized  in  Table  1. The  response  properties  of  the  NiO/YSZ  sensor  could  be  obtained good  sensitivity  and  stability  of  response  to  NO2,  at  400 ◦C  by  resistance  component.  Also,  the  responses  of  the  NOx  sensors  could  be

Fig.  3.  Sensing  performances  (resistance  component)  of  the  NiO/YSZ  and  CuO/YSZ devices  to  NOx  at  400 ◦C,  100  kHz.

Fig.  5.  The  effect  of  Au  electrode  distance  on  the  NiO/YSZ  sensor  for  various  concentrations  of  NO  and  NO2 at  400 ◦C,  100  kHz.

Table  1 Sensing  response  property  of  NiO/YSZ  sensor  for  various  working  temperatures.

Fig.  7.  Sensing  response  curves  of  the  NiO/YSZ  sensor  for  various  concentrations  of NO2 at  400 ◦C,  100  kHz.

Fig.  8.  Response  performance  of  the  NiO/YSZ  sensors  for  NO  and  NO2 at  400 ◦C, 100   Hz.

Fig.  9.  Response  sensitivities  of  the  NiO/LATP  sensor  for  various  gases  at  400 ◦C, 100  kHz.

Fig.  6.  Sensing  response  curves  of  the  NiO/YSZ  sensor  for  various  concentrations  of NO  at  400 ◦C,  100  kHz.

Figs.  6  and  7  show  the  response  curves  of  each  resistance  component  (R)  and  capacitance  component  (C)  of  the  NiO/YSZ  sensor, respectively,  for  various  concentrations  of  NO  and  NO2 at  400 ◦C, 100  kHz.  In  the  case  of  NO,  the  response  curve  of  the  resistance component  (R)  tended  to  increase  with  increasing  NO  concentration,  while  the  capacitance  component  (C)  tended  to  decrease  with increasing  NO  concentration  as  shown  in  Fig.  6.

On  the  other  hand,  the  response  curve  of  NO2 showed  good response  properties  as  both  resistance  (R)  and  (C)  capacitance  components;  the  resistance  decreased  and  capacitance  increased  with increase  in  NO2 concentration  as  shown  in  Fig.  7.  The  response curves  showed  good  dependence  on  each  NO2 concentration  and this  result  showed  applicable  to  selective  sensing  to  NO2.  For  example,  the  response  for  NO  showed  negative  response  in  sign,  whereas those  to  the  response  for  NO2 showed  positive  response  in  sign for  resistance  component  (R).  Furthermore,  the  NiO/YSZ  sensor showed  high  response  curve  and  stable  recovery  curve.  The  90% response  and  recovery  times  of  the  NiO/YSZ  sensor  to  150  ppm  NO2 were  about  30  s  and  5  min,  respectively. The  response  performance  of  resistance  (SR)  and  capacitance (SC)  of  the  NiO/YSZ  sensor  at  400 ◦C  are  shown  in  Fig.  8.  The NiO/YSZ  sensor  showed  excellent  NO2 sensing  response  and  good

Fig.  10.  The  sensing  mechanism  of  NiO/YSZ  sensor  for  response  of  NOx.

dependence  for  each  NO2 concentration  as  shown  in  Fig.  8.  Moreover,  this  showed  to  be  applicable  to  selective  sensing  by  difference sensing  performance  of  NO2.  The  NiO/YSZ  sensor  showed  difference sensing  performance  for  NO2 but  not  for  the  other  gases  as  shown in  Fig.  9.  For  example,  in  the  case  of  the  resistance  component, the  response  for  NO2 showed  positive  response  in  sign,  whereas those  to  the  response  for  NO  and  CO  showed  negative  response and  the  other  gases  showed  no  response.  Also,  the  NiO/YSZ  sensor  had  good  reproducibility  of  sensing  performance  to  NO2,  i.e., the  sensor  showed  the  almost  same  response  to  NO2 at  the  same concentration.

The  sensing  mechanism  of  the  NiO/YSZ  sensor  is  schematically shown  in  Fig.  10.  First,  the  NiO/YSZ  sensor  was  exposed  to  clean  air and  then  oxygen  ions  (O−)  would  form  at  the  surface  of  NiO  in  a sequence  of  physisorption  and  charge  exchange  reactions  with  the bulk  of  NiO  grains,  as  described  by  Eq.  (1).

The  adsorption  of  oxygen  ions  would  result  in  the  generation of  electrical  force  by  polarization  in  the  receptor  layer.  When  the NiO/YSZ  sensor  has  been  exposed  to  NO,  the  NO  gas  would  react with  O− (ads),  as  Eq.  (2),  and  cause  reduction  of  holes  in  the  receptor

layer,  resulting  in  a  decrease  in  the  electrical  force.  For  this  reason, the  resistance  component  of  the  NiO/YSZ  sensor  decreases. O2 +   2e +   O NO 

On  the  other  hand,  when  the  NiO/YSZ  sensor  is  exposed  to  NO2, (ads),  as  Eq.  (3),  and  cause  an  increase  in −,  resulting  in  a  decrease  in  the  resis-

NO2 would  react  with  O− holes  by  adsorption  of  NO3 tance  component. (ads) → NO2 +   O

Thus,  it  is  thought  that  the  sensing  response  occurs  at  the  receptor  layer  due  to  adsorption  of  O2 and/or  NOx  on  the  surface  of  the receptor.

An  impedancemetric  sensor  has  been  designed  using  various metal  oxides  (Fe2O3,  Co3O4,  NiO,  CuO,  ZnO)  as  a  receptor  material

and  8  mol%-yttria-stabilized  zirconia  (YSZ)  plate  as  a  transducer material.  The  impedance  responses  of  the  NiO/YSZ  sensor  device could  be  obtained  as  components  of  resistance  and  capacitance. Moreover,  the  NiO/YSZ  sensor  device  showed  excellent  sensitivity and  good  dependence  on  each  NOx  concentration.

In  addition,  the  response  performance  of  NiO/YSZ  sensor  device showed  difference  response  performance  to  NO2 that  compared  to the  response  performance  of  other  gases.  The  results  suggest  that the  impedancemetric  gas  sensor  based  on  the  NiO  as  a  receptor and  YSZ  as  a  transducer  have  the  potential  to  become  selective  NO2 sensor  as  real-time  environmental  monitoring.