Materials design and synthesis is critical for reliable fabrication of stable and high-performance lithium-air batteries that are competitive with other energy delivery systems. Intensive research activities have focused on the development of efﬁcient cathode catalysts and stable electrolytes in the past several years and many review articles are already available. This review aims on lithium ion conducting membranes that are barely studied although they are essentially indispensible for building batteries composed of aqueous electrolytes and batteries composed of non-aqueous electrolytes for long-term operation. In a typical lithium-air battery cell, a lithium ion conducting membrane is sandwiched between the lithium metal anode and the air cathode to prevent the lithium metal anode from reacting with poison species (e.g., water, oxygen, etc.) diffused from cathode to anode, leading to a signiﬁcant increase in lifetime of the battery. A number of solid materials including polymer/polymer-ceramic composites, non-oxide inorganic compounds, perovskite-type oxides, garnet-type oxides, g-Li3PO4 oxides, NASICON-type oxides, and singlecrystalline silicon that exhibit good lithium-ion conductivity are comprehensively summarized and discussed in this review. Although only a few of NASICON-type oxides and single-crystalline silicon have been evaluated as the lithium ion conducting membranes in lithium-air battery cells, all of the solid materials summarized in this review and their possible derivative composites are also promising to be developed as lithium ion conducting membranes for lithium-air batteries. This review is also expected to be an advocate for research in lithium ion conducting membranes. & 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Rechargeable Li-air batteries (also called Li–O2 batteries) are attracting more and more attentions in the past several years due to the requirement for developing electrochemical energy storage devices with high energy densities that can prompt the mass production of hybrid electrical vehicles (HEVs) and electrical vehicles (EVs) [1,2]. For example, oxidation of 1 kg of Li metal can theoretically release energy of 11,680 Wh that is close to the energy density of gasoline (i.e., 13,000 Wh/kg). Given the fact that the average tank-to-wheel efﬁciency of the U.S. combustion vehicle ﬂeet is 12.6%, the usable energy density of gasoline required for driving automobile vehicles is about 1700 Wh/kg that corresponds only to 14.5% of the theoretical energy content of Li metal. This energy density is possible to achieve in Li-air batteries at the cell level along with intensive and long-term development work. Abraham and Jiang, in 1996, introduced a rechargeable Li–O2 battery comprising a Li + conductive polyacrylonitrile (PAN) based plasticized polymer electrolyte sandwiched by a thin Li metal foil (anode) and a thin carbon composite electrode on which molecular O2 can be electrochemically reduced during discharge process. With the incorporation of cobalt phthalocyanine as catalysts in the carbon electrode, the Li–O2 cell can be recharged with a good coulombic efﬁciency [3]. In the following ten years, the research activities in Li–air batteries were very limited probably because the portable electronics representing the major revolutionary devices can be effectively powered by Li-ion batteries (with

Figure 1 Times of citation of the two ﬂagship papers (i.e., refs. #3 and #4) of lithium-air batteries in different years. Data was obtained from ISI Web of Science.

energy densities of 200–250 Wh/kg). The recent demand for developing storage devices with higher energy density that can be used to power HEVs and EVs and temporarily store electricity generated by alternative energy sources (e.g., solar, wind, and hydropower) boosts research activities related to Li-air batteries, in particular, since Bruce and co-workers revisited the Li–O2 cell composed of a Li metal anode, an non-aqueous electrolyte (1 M LiPF6 in propylene carbonate) impregnated into a glass ﬁber separator, and a porous cathode (i.e., a mixture of Super S carbon, electrolytic manganese dioxide, and Kynar 2801) in 2006 [4]. The progress is clearly reﬂected in Figure 1 with the charts showing the dramatic increase in citation times of these two ﬂagship papers. In the short period of 2010–2012 hundreds of papers including tens of review articles on the topic of Li-air batteries were published [1,2,5–11]. However, there are still many challenges including fundamental understanding of the complex chemical/physical processes and discovery of new materials before Li-air batteries can meet the criteria for commercialization.

A Li-air battery cell is generally composed of a Li metal anode, a porous cathode, and an electrolyte in which Li+ ions ﬂow from one electrode to the other. According to the media (non-aqueous solvents, organic–aqueous hybrid solvents, solid state matrixes) used for dissolving Li salts, Li-air batteries can be categorized into four types with different conﬁgurations (Figure 2). Depending on the property of an electrolyte a Li-air battery is driven by speciﬁc electrochemical reactions for energy storage and release. For instance, in a Li-air battery with a non-aqueous electrolyte (i.e., Li salt dissolved in an aprotic solvent), the Li anode is oxidized during the discharging process to release Li+ ions that diffuse to the porous carbon electrode on which O2 molecules are reduced to 2  or O2  species. At the same time the Li + ions react with O2 2  and O2  species to form solid precipitates of Li2O2 and the O2 Li2O, respectively, on the porous carbon (Figure 2a). In the charging process, the Li2O2 and Li2O solids are oxidized to release O2 and Li+ ions that diffuse to the Li anode followed by reduction and deposition on the surface of the Li anode. Same reactions occur in a Li-air battery with a solid-state electrolyte (Figure 2d). One challenge for fabricating high performance Li-air batteries is to develop efﬁcient catalysts for both oxygen reduction reactions (ORRs) and oxygen evolution reactions (OERs) in non-aqueous eletrolytes [6]. Another challenge is the selection of robust electrolyte for long-time operation under ambient environment. In order to efﬁciently catalyze the reduction of molecular oxygen, the non-aqueous solvents

Figure 2 Schematic illustration of cell conﬁgurations for the typical Li-air batteries. Organic (non-aqueous) electrolytes are liquid solutions of lithium salts dissolved in organic solvents and aqueous electrolytes are liquid solutions of lithium salts dissolved in water. LICM represents lithium ion conducting membrane that is sandwiched between the lithium metal anode and porous air cathode of a lithium-air battery cell. The solid state electrolyte in (d) can also be considered as a solid LICM. The LICM in (a) was not included in the battery cells reported in literature although it is important for long-term operation. Adapted from Ref. [8] with permission.

should well dissolve O2 molecules to enable them well contact with the surfaces of catalysts. On the other hand, the good solubility of O2 in electrolytes results in the possible crossover of O2 from the cathodes to the Li anodes to react with the Li anodes, leading to a degradation and consumption of the Li anodes. High concentration of O2 in the electrolytes may also signiﬁcantly degrade the constituents of the electrolytes if they are not stable towards oxidation [12]. Such instability of both the Li anodes and electrolytes represents the critical problems to achieve long-term stability and recyclability of Li-air batteries. Intensive studies in the past focused on the optimization of cathode catalysts and oxidation-resistive electrolytes. For example, Bruce’s group reported that a rechargeable Li–O2 battery composed of a Li anode, a porous gold cathode, and a dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) electrolyte of LiClO4 exhibited very good recyclability with 95% capacity retention even after 100 cycles [13]. Jung et al. demonstrated a Li–O2 battery consisting of a Li anode, a porous Super P carbon electrode, and a tetraethyleneglycol dimethylether-lithium triﬂate (TEGDMELiCF3SO3) electrolyte could also be operated over many cycles (4 100 times) with capacity and rate values as high as 5000 mAh/gcarbon and 3 A/gcarbon, respectively [14]. The improved recyclability of the Li–O2 batteries reported in the most recent work is ascribed to that the formation and decomposition of Li2O2 can efﬁciently occur on the cathodes and the decomposition of electrolytes is dramatically prevented. However, the instability of the Li anodes in these Li–O2 batteries still represented a potential problem for longterm operation because crossover of the dissolved O2 was not prevented. These batteries were characterized in pure O2 atmosphere. If the batteries were used in ambient air, in

addition to O2, H2O (from moisture), N2, CO2 molecules also possibly diffused from the cathodes to the Li anodes to react with the metallic Li. The degradation of Li anodes might not be pronounced if the Li–O2 batteries were characterized for a short period of several days, in particular when excess Li metal was used. However, the stability could be signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced in long-term operations although no such studies have been done. As a result, insertion of a Li + conducting membrane that can effectively block the diffusion of O2 (as well as H2O, N2, CO2, etc.) between the Li anode and cathode in a Li-air battery represents a critical strategy for realizing long-term operation stability of the battery. However, research in development of Li+ conducting membranes for Li-air batteries has not been actively initiated yet.

In Li-air batteries with aqueous electrolytes (Figure 2b and c), Li + conducting membranes becomes indispensable to separate the Li anodes and the aqueous electrolytes because the direct contact of H2O and Li can induce severe reactions even for a very short time. Polyplus Co., in 2004, introduced glassy ceramic membranes (i.e., LiSICON-type LiM2(PO4)3) with high conductivity for Li + to protect Li metal, enabling the stability of Li anodes in aqueous electrolytes [15]. With incorporation of the membranes, Li-air batteries using an aqueous electrolyte (Figure 2b) were developed in Polyplus [16,17]. The company also introduced a hybrid version of liquid electrolytes with a cell conﬁguration of Li anodejjnon-aqueous electrolytejionic conducting glassy ceramic membranejaqueous electrolytejjair cathode. During the discharge process, in a Li-air cell with aqueous electrolyte O2 molecules are reduced to OH  ions, which do not precipitate with Li + ions.

Elimination of the solid products can avoid the clogging of the pores in the cathode. In contrast, the precipitation of solid Li2O2 and Li2O can clog the pores in the cathode of a non-aqueous electrolyte battery, leading to a blockage of oxygen diffusion from outside environment into the cell and thus a decrease in electrochemical performance. In spite of such advantages, the use of aqueous electrolytes requires Li + conducting membranes to protect the Li metal anodes. This review aims on summarizing the possible materials that can be exploited for Li + conducting membranes. Primary examples of Li-air batteries integrated with Li + conducting membranes are also discussed. This speciﬁc topic is highlighted in this review because: (i) development of cathode catalysts and electrolytes have been extensive studies and many reviews have already appeared in the literature in the past couple of years; and (ii) Li + conducting membranes for preventing O2 crossover cannot be excluded even for Li-air batteries with non-aqueous electrolytes if long-term stability is expected.

As shown in Figure 2, a lithium-ion conducting membrane (LICM) used in a Li-air battery has to exhibit a high conductivity towards Li + ions, a very low diffusion coefﬁcient for the species (e.g., O2, H2O, CO2, N2, et al.) that exist in air and can rigorously react with Li metal, a high stability in organic solvent(s) and/or water, a high resistance towards the direct reaction with Li metal if the direct contact between the membrane and Li anode is necessary. Development of Li + conducting membranes can beneﬁt from the extensive studies on ‘‘Li + conducting solid electrolytes (LICSEs)’’ that represent the critical components of solid-state lithium batteries. In principle, all of these solid electrolytes can be fabricated to form LICMs with appropriate geometries and dimensions. In a LICM, Li + ions are blended with a variety of solid materials such as polymers, glasses, ceramics, and their combinations. According to the solid matrixes, the LICMs can be classiﬁed into different categories.

solvent [20]. Although the relatively low conductivity of polymer LICSEs, Abranham and Jiang demonstrated their potential applications in rechargeable Li-air batteries with conﬁguration of Figure 2d by using the PAN-based LICSE [3]. The stability and recyclability of the resulting Li-air batteries are still to be signiﬁcantly improved before they can be practically useful. In a polymer LICSE that exhibits macroscopic mechanical properties similar to a solid, a mechanism for short-range ionic motion provided by local liquid-like relaxation processes at the atomic level is responsible for the conductivity of Li +.

The conductivity of a polymer LICSE can be dramatically increased when ceramic dielectric particles are added to the electrolyte. The polymer and ceramic phases in the LICSE interact via dipole–dipole interactions to suppress the crystallization of the polymer, providing a stable, amorphous phase that beneﬁts the motion of Li + ions. Kumar et al. revealed that the addition of ceramic powders of MgO and BaTiO3 to a polymer LICSE consisting of PEO and LiBF4 could increase its conductivity by 4–5 orders at room temperature [21]. The composites with nanometer sized ceramic powders exhibit higher conductivities than the ones with micrometer sized ceramic powders due to an enhanced interaction associated with larger surface areas. In the study of a PEO:LiN(SO2CF2CF3)2 LICSE doped with ceramic powders of BN and Li2O, the same group proposed the improved conductivity is due to the interface-mediated electrochemical  ) effects [22]. Some conducting ions (e.g., Li +, N(SO2CF2CF3)2 interact with the ceramic particles (e.g., BN, Li2O) and attach to the dispersed ceramic particles to form charged complex. The charged complex becomes a source of local electric ﬁelds that can accelerate transport of the remaining conducting ions. In addition to enhanced ionic conductivity, the incorporation of ceramic components in a polymer also beneﬁts cationic transport number and electrode–electrolyte interfacial stability. However, their instability in moisture environment, weak chemical resistance against oxygen, and narrow operating temperature range are still challenging to employ them in high-performance Li-air batteries.

Polymers represent a class of the most extensively studied materials for making Li + conducting solid electrolytes because of their low density, manufacturability, and mechanical ﬂexibility that can accommodate volume changes occurring in electrochemical processes [18]. A Li + polymer electrolyte is an ionically conducting solid phase formed through dissolution of a Li salt by ion-coordinating macromolecules. For example, Watanabe et al. reported the formation of a polymer LICSE by dissolving LiN(SO2CF3)2 (or LiTFSI) in comb-shaped copolymer of poly[ethylene oxide-co-2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl glycidyl ether] [P(EO/MEEGE)] [19]. The conductivity of the resulting LICSE increases with the concentration of MEEGE in the copolymer matrix and reaches a maximum at MEEGE concentration of 20–30%. By mixing LiClO4–LiClO3 with small quantities of the polymers, e.g., polypropylene oxide (PPO) and polyethylene oxide (PEO), Angell and co-workers developed a rubbery LICSE called ‘‘polymer in salt’’ material. This kind of LICSEs exhibit a conductivity higher than 10 4 S/cm that is still about one order of magnitude lower than that of the organic

Inorganic ceramic LICMs may (or at least partially) solve the problems existing in polymer LICMs for Li-air batteries. LiI represents the ﬁrst material of LICSE exploited for building the high-voltage, solid state battery system of LijjLiIjjAgI. Such design was commercialized for use in pacemakers for patients with heart disease in the early 1970s [23]. In a typical cell, the anode and cathode electrodes are Li metal and an iodine complex of poly-2-vinylpyridine  nI2, respectively. A thin ﬁlm of LiI (that can be considered as a LICM) is sandwiched between these two electrodes to conduct Li + ions during the discharge process. Due to the low conductivity (i.e., 10 7 S/cm) of LiI at room temperature, the discharge current density in a typical cell is about 10 mA/ cm2. Liang and co-workers reported that the conductivity of polycrystalline LiI was enhanced after a small amount (0–3%) of CaI2 is added [24]. The introduction of Ca2 + ions to the LiI crystals induces Schottky defects and the Li + conductivity is greatly enhanced by 2 orders with 2% (molar) CaI2 doping although the electronic conductivity is negligible. However

the high conductivity of the CaI2 doped LiI decreases with time. The same group exploited the addition of insulating Al2O3 powders to increase the Li + conductivity of polycrystalline LiI in 1973 [25]. The best LiI–Al2O3 composite LICMs exhibit a conductivity of 3.75  10 5 S/ cm at room temperature [26]. In the composites, no Al2O3 powders were found to be soluble in the LiI crystals under the experimental conditions. As a result, the increased conductivity could not be explained by the classical doping mechanism as that for CaI2 doped LiI. On the other hand, the enhancement in conductivity was approximately proportional to the total surface areas of the dispersed Al2O3 particles, indicating the interface-mediated electrochemical effects played the critical role similar to the polymer LICSEs doped with dielectric ceramic powders (discussed in Section 2.1). The high conductivity of the LiI–Al2O3 composites remained stable with time. These results indicate that mixing insulating ceramic powders with solid electrolytes to form ceramic composites is one promising technique for enhancing the Li + conductivity.

Another class of Li + conducting materials is lithium nitride (Li3N) that crystalizes in a layered structure with a space group P6/mmm. The Li3N layers are perpendicular to the hexagonal c axis and they are connected with the Li + ions occupying the sites between the respective N atoms. Therefore, in a Li3N crystal the thermal motion of the Li + ions should take place preferentially in the Li layers perpendicular to the Li–N bonds [27]. A very high Li + conductivity of 1.2 10 3 S/cm at room temperature was obtained in a single crystal of Li3N along the direction perpendicular to its c axis. The conductivity was about two orders (i.e., 1 10 5 S/cm) of magnitude lower along the direction parallel to its c axis. [28] Due to the anisotropy of Li + conductivity along different crystalline orientations and the difﬁculty for growing large single crystals, Li3N single crystals are not practical for applications. Much follow-up effort was concentrated on the polycrystalline Li3N that was much easier to fabricate. The best conductivity achieved from the thermally densiﬁed Li3N polycrystalline ﬁlms was 4  10 4 S/cm at room temperature [29]. Li3N can be decomposed at a very low potential of 0.445 V that limits the maximum electromotive force (EMF) output of the batteries using Li3N. The low EMF can be increased by alloying Li3N with LiI that leads to the formation of a new cubic crystalline phase. The Li3N–LiI system exhibits a decomposition potential higher than pure Li3N, but its room-temperature conductivity (1  10 6 S/cm) is more than two orders of magnitude lower than that of the polycrystalline Li3N [30]. Similar to LiI and polymer LISCEs, addition of insulating dielectric powders, such as LiOH, to the Li3N–LiI alloys can also increase the Li + conductivity due to the interface-mediated electrochemical effects. For example, the conductivity of the quasi-ternary Li3N–LiI–LiOH (1:2:0.77) system is 9.5 l0 4 S/cm at room temperature and its decomposition potential is 1.6 V that is much higher than the 0.445 V of pure Li3N [31]. The improved properties of this quasi-ternary composite imply that one can mix different LICSE materials to take advantages of one component to overcome (at least partially) the shortages of the other component. This strategy might be useful for designing and synthesizing promising LICMs for practical applications.

Glassy lithium sulﬁde (Li2S) represents another class of base materials for LICSEs, for example, Li2S–P2S5-LiI [32], B2S3-Li2S–LiI [33], and Li2S–SiS2-LiI [34]. Their conductivities can reach 10 3 S/cm at room temperature, while they are not stable in contact with Li metal due to the inclusion of LiI [35]. Replacing LiI with Li3PO4 to dope the Li2S–SiS2 glass signiﬁcantly improves the resistance of the LICSE towards the electrochemical reduction in contact with Li metal [36,37]. Oxygen doping associated with the addition of Li3PO4 prompts the formation of glass network that is responsible for the increased stability towards Li metal, while the additional Li + ions from Li3PO4 accounts for the increase of Li + conductivity. The maximum conductivity obtained from Li2S–SiS2–Li3PO4(58:39:3) is 6.9  10 4 S/cm at room temperature [36].

These inorganic LICSE materials were comprehensively studied in the last century due to the promise in the fabrication of high performance solid-state batteries. One of the most serious problems is deliquescence of these materials in ambient air and in contact with aqueous electrolytes, which prevent them from being used in Li-air batteries. On the other hand, these development efforts indicate that following strategies may be helpful for synthesizing useful inorganic LICMs for Li-air batteries: (i) alloys of a number of LICSE materials may be better than individual LICSE materials; (ii) additional of insulating ceramic powders to LICSE materials can increase their Li + conductivity; (iii) oxygen doping can increase chemical stability of LICSE glassy materials, suggesting that development of oxide based LICMs could be promising for practical applications in Li-air batteries.

The stability of inorganic oxides towards water has prompted the synthesis of oxide based LICSEs. Inorganic oxides are usually crystallized and Li + ions migrate through lattice frameworks. As a result, the conductivity of Li + ions is strongly dependent on the crystalline structures and lattice parameters of the oxides. Oxides with four different crystalline structures are discussed in this section.

Perovskite-type oxides with A-site deﬁciencies Perovskite (ABO3)-type lithium lanthanum titanate (LLT) Li3xLa2/3 x&1/3 2xTiO3 (&: A-site vacancies) has been extensively studied as crystalline inorganic LICSEs in the last two decades [38]. For example, the highest Li + conductivity of 10 3 S/cm at room temperature has been obtained from the single-crystal LLT with x=0.1 that exhibits an activation energy of 0.4 eV [39]. The high Li + conductivity of LLT is due to the presence of high-concentration A-site vacancies that enable the motion of Li + ions by a vacancy mechanism through the wide square planar bottleneck between the A sites. Tilting of the TiO6 octahedral may facilitate the Li + mobility in the pervoskite structure. The LLT materials are usually synthesized from La2/3&1/3TiO3 by substituting the A-site vacancies with Li + ions. The typical range of x is 0–0.16 although higher values are possible and the resulting LLT materials exhibit perovskite-type structures with varying crystalline symmetries. For example, Li0.5La0.5TiO3 (x=1/6) powders synthesized through

a sol–gel method adopt a tetragonal lattice symmetry with the space group of P4/mmm after they are annealed at 1350 1C for 6 h [40]. Hexagonal lattice symmetry is also observed in Li0.5La0.5TiO3 d (0rdr0.06) crystals [39] and the ab initio molecular dynamics studies reveal this hexagonal LLT can exhibit Li + conductivity up to 1.7– 1.9 10 3 S/cm at room temperature [41]. It is worthy of note that the La3 + can be substituted by other lanthanide ions to modulate Li + conduction. Replacement of La3 + by lanthanide ions with smaller ionic radii decreases the Li + conductivity, while substitution of La3 + by ions with larger ionic radii (e.g., Sr2 +) increases the Li + conductivity [42]. The LLT materials have been exclusively reviewed in the recent papers [38,43].

In spite of the high Li + conductivity in single-crystal LLT materials, LICSEs and LICMs made of polycrystalline LLT still exhibit much lower conductivities (e.g., o10 5 S/cm) due to the large grain boundary resistance [44]. As a result, high temperature sintering is required for densifying the polycrystalline LLT materials, leading to reduce the grain boundaries and increase Li + conductivity. However, annealing the LLT materials at high temperature vaporizes elemental Li, resulting in the difﬁculty in controlling Li + content and Li + conductivity. In addition, Ti4 + can be reduced by metallic Li and thus the LLT-based LICSEs and LICMs cannot be used in applications that require the direct contact with Li metal.

Garnet-type oxides LixLa3M2O12 (M=Zr, Nb, Ta, Sb, Bi; and x=5 or 7) with garnet-like structure have received much attention since Thangadurai et al. reported the successful synthesis of Li5La3Nb2O12 (M=Nb, Ta) because this class of materials exhibit both relatively high Li + conductivity and electrochemical stability towards Li [45]. The Li5La3M2O12 materials are usually crystallized in a cubic phase with the space group of I213. Each unit cells includes an excess of 16 Li + ions in comparison with the ideal garnet composition. The eight and six coordination sites are occupied by La and M ions, respectively, and the Li + ions sit on the six-fold coordination sites. Densiﬁed LixLa3M2O12 polycrystalline materials are synthesized through high-temperature annealing of micrometer sized powders at 750 1C for more than ten hours. When the powder sizes are decreased to the values less than 100 nm, the lowest annealing temperature for synthesizing densiﬁed materials can be lowered to 650 1C for pure garnet-like Li5La3Bi2O12 [46]. The lowered temperature helps eliminate the evaporation of lithium, thus lead to an improvement in phase purity. The increased electrochemical stability in comparison with the perovskitetype LLT materials has been studied with the ﬁrst-principles density functional theory [47]. The results indicate that the electrochemical stability of LixLa3M2O12 depends on the composition and crystalline structure. When the cation M has a lower effective nuclear charge (i.e., a higher screening constant for an unoccupied orbital), the LixLa3M2O12 materials exhibit higher electrochemical stability against metallic Li. The calculation results agree well with the experimental the inertness of Li7La3Zr2O12 and Li5La3Ta2O12. In the crystalline unit cells the linkage of MO6 octahedrons also strongly inﬂuences the

electrochemical stability. For instance, in spite of stability of the garnet-type Li5La3Ta2O12 towards Li metal the perovskite-type La1/3TaO3 with the same constituent elements is reactive in contact with Li metal due to the cornersharing MO6 octahedral network. The Li + conductivity can also be interpreted from the aspect of crystalline structure although the exact mechanism is still unknown. Cussen studied Li5La3Ta2O12 with neutron diffraction and revealed that Li + ions occupy on 80% tetrahedral sites and 40% octahedral sites [48]. The distribution of Li + ions among tetrahedral and octahedral sites is sensitive towards the annealing temperature. This spatial distribution signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the mobility of Li + ions within the garnet-type framework structure. The Li + ions on the octahedral sites are mobile, while the tetrahedral sites seem to act as Li + traps to immobilize Li + ions [49].

The La3+ ions in Li5La3Sb2O12 can be replaced with different trivalent lanthanide cations (Ln=La, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu) [50]. The activation energy is higher at low temperature in the derived garnet-type oxides, indicating the introduction of defects for Li+ trapping. The La3+ ions in the garnet-type Li5La3Ta2O12 materials can also be substituted by low valence ions of alkaline metals and alkaline earth ions, such as K+ [51], Ca2+, Sr2+, and Ba2+[52]. This kind of substitution inﬂuences the crystalline lattice parameters and Li+ conductivity. The maximum Li+ conductivity has been observed as 4 10 5 S/cm at room temperature in barium doped Li6La2BaTa2O12 [52]. The M5+ (e.g., Ta5+, Nb5+) ions can also be substituted by low valence ions such as In3+ to increase Li+ conductivity. For instance, Li5.5La3Nb1.75In0.25O12 exhibit Li + conductivity as high as 1.8 10 4 S/cm at 50 1C [51]. Such cation exchange provides an efﬁcient way to formulate a large number of possible garnettype LICSEs and LICMs with high Li+ conductivity.

c-Li3PO4-type oxides g-Li3PO4 with an orthorhombic structure and a space group of Pmna represents another class of Li + conducting materials. The O2  anions in the Li3PO4 lattice are hexagonally close packed, and the cations of 3Li + and P5 + fully occupy the sites with four-fold oxygen coordination [53]. Firstprinciples modeling based on density functional theory (DFT) and the nudged elastic band method has been used to study the possible Li + diffusion mechanisms in ideally crystallized L3PO4 [54]. As for the diffusion of Li + vacancy, the direct hopping between neighboring metastable vacancies requires a minimal migration barrier of 0.6 eV. As for the Li + interstitial diffusion described in an interstitialcy mechanism, the migration barrier involved in the concerted motion of an interstitial Li + and a neighboring Li + of the host lattice is 0.2 eV. The minimal formation energy of a Li + vacancy-interstitial pair is determined as 1.6 eV and the activation energy for Li + diffusion is 1.0–1.2 eV that is consistent with the experimental values of 1.1–1.3 eV. In the Li3PO4 crystals the concentration of Li + vacancies/ defects is very low. By substituting the penta-valent P with other cations of lower valences, the concentration of Li + vacancies/defects can be increased, and thus the Li + conductivity of the doped Li3PO4 crystals is increased accordingly. For example, in the Li4SiO4 doped Li3PO4 (i.e., Li3 + xP1 xSixO4) each P5 + ion is partially substituted by two cations of Si4 + and Li +. The additional Li + ions

cannot occupy the cation sites coordinated by four oxygen anions because the number of total cations is more than that of the cation sites. In order to maintain a charge balance of cations and anions, the excessive Li + ions exist in migratory spaces between the MO4 (M=cation) tetrahedrons to increase Li + conductivity. The activation energy for Li + decreases due to the doping with Li4SiO4. The maximum conductivity and the minimum activation energy for Li + migration have been obtained for x=0.5 [55].

A new class of materials with a crystalline framework related to the g-Li3PO4 crystal, for instance, Li14ZnGe4O16 and the related derivatives of Li2 + 2xZnl xGeO4, has been extensively exploited after Hong reported the ﬁrst successful synthesis in 1977 [56]. Due to the excellent Li + conductivity of these materials, they are named as Li + super ionic conductor (LISICON) [57,58]. For example, the Li + conductivity of Li2 + 2xZnl xGeO4 (x=0.75) is very high at elevated temperatures, e.g. 1.3  10 1 S/cm at 300 1C. However, their conductivity is less than 10 6 S/cm at room temperature. Furthermore, the LISICON materials are reactive with Li metal and atmospheric CO2, leading to a decrease in conductivity with time. Oxygen in LISICON materials can be replaced with sulfur to form thio-LISICON that was initially introduced by Kanno and coworkers [59,60]. The substitution of O2  by larger and more polarizable S2  in the LISICON framework improves ionic mobility. The maximum Li + conductivity of the orthorhombic parent compound Li4 2xZnxGeS4 observed in the materials with x=0.05 is still quite low at 3  10 7 S/cm at room temperature [59]. Signiﬁcant improvement of Li + conductivity is observed in Li4 + x dGe1 x + dGaxS4 (x=0.25) and the value is as high as 6  10 5 S/cm at room temperature. Conductivity higher than 10 4 S/cm has been obtained in Li4 xGe(Si,P)1 xMxS4, in which M represents a trivalent or penta-valent cation [61]. For instance, the highest Li + conductivity of 2.2 10 3 S/cm has been observed from the solid solution of Li4 xGe1 xPxS4 (x=0.75) at 25 1C. Such LISICON materials exhibit negligible electronic conductivity, high electrochemical stability, no reaction with Li metal, and no phase transition up to 500 1C [62]. The thio-LISICON compounds with silicon constituent have been observed a conductivity as high as 6.4  10 4 S/cm in the solid solution of Li4 xSi1 xPxS4 (x=0.6) at 27 1C. They also exhibit very high electrochemical stability up to 5 V versus Li metal at room temperature [60].

NASICON-type oxides Another class of extensively studied oxide materials are LiM2(PO4)3 (MIV=Ge [63], Ti [64–68], Hf [69], and Zr [70,71]) that adopt the structure similar to Nal + xZr2SixP3 xO12 (NASICON) designed by Goodenough et al. Such NASICON materials crystallize into a three-dimensional (3D) network structure (R3c) which possesses a suitable tunnel size for the migration of the large Na + ions [72,73]. Similarly, in LiM2(PO4)3 crystals two types of polyhedrons, i.e., MO6 octahedrons and PO4 tetrahedrons, are linked by their corners to form the [M2(PO4)3]  rigid skeleton and the Li + migrate in the 3D tunnels. In the typical NASICON-type materials, Li ions can occupy at two different sites, i.e., A1 and A2 [74]. In LiM2(PO4)3 (M=Ge, Ti, Hf, Zr), the A1 sites are fully occupied while the A2 sites are completely

unoccupied. In the case of the Lil + xAlxTi2 x(PO4)3 system, the tetravalent Ti4 + are partially substituted by Al3 +. The residual negative charges have to be neutralized with additional Li + that can occupy the A2 sites, leading to an increase of x in Lil + xA1xTi2 x(PO4)3. Among the Al-doped materials, the nominal composition Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) of 3  10 3 S/cm at 25 1C [75]. The substitution of Ti4 + by smaller Al3 + cations reduces unit cell dimensions of the NASICON framework and signiﬁcantly enhances Li + conductivity by about 3 orders of magnitude [76]. The trivalent cations include Al, Cr, Ga, Fe, Sc, In, Lu, Y, or La. The compound family with general formula Li1 + xTi2 xMx(PO4)3 (M=Al, Ga, In, Sc) has been systematically investigated in terms of lithium mobility in them [76]. In general, densifying the polycrystalline NASICON-type oxides with reduced porosity can improve their Li + conductivity due to the decreased grain boundary resistance [77]. Such NASICONtype oxides are not stable in contact with Li metal due to the reduction of Ti4 + with Li.

NASICON-type LICMs and LICSEs have been commercialized by OHARA Inc., a Japan based company and Li-air/Liwater batteries with the use of these commercial LICMs have been developed by PolyPlus Battery Company Inc. (Berkeley, California, US). These commercialization activities in combination with the advantages of lithium-air batteries motivate researchers to explore the use of NASICON-type LICMs fabricating high performance lithium-air batteries. The progresses in the past several years are discussed in Section 3.1.

The aforementioned polycrystalline ceramic materials exhibit high Li + conductivity and some of them have been commercialized for solid lithium ion batteries and lithiumair batteries. The polycrystallinity of these LICSEs and LICMs represents a very important factor to prevent their Li + conductivity from being signiﬁcantly improved due to the high resistance at the grain boundaries. Mechanical strength of these polycrystalline LICMs is arguable in particular for long-term operation in the environments where the LICMs can be etched. On the other hand, single-crystal LICMs may exhibit better characteristic performance although growing large-area single-crystals is difﬁcult and expensive. In this section, single-crystal silicon membranes, a common material used in the modern semiconductor industry, are discussed here to demonstrate their potential to be used as LICMs.

The DC (direct-current) Li + conductivity of single-crystal silicon membranes is measured by following the requirements: (i) a Si membrane should be immersed in a homogeneous Li + electrolyte, i.e., the two surfaces of the membrane expose to the same environment; (ii) the Li + concentration in the electrolyte should remain constant during measurement by using metal Li foils as probing electrodes; and (iii) the metal Li electrodes should not be in contact with the Si membrane to eliminate the spontaneous reaction between Si and Li. Such measurements can be performed in the testing cells highlighted in Figure 3a [78]. Each testing cell is constructed with a Si

Figure 3 (a) Schematic illustration of the setup for evaluating Li + conductivity in single-crystal Si membranes. The setup includes a test cell formed with a single-crystal Si membrane sandwiched between two PDMS slabs, electrolyte (purple), two lithium metal foil electrodes, source meter, and wiring. (b) Optical graph of a test cell with a single-crystal Si membrane with a thickness of 20 mm. (c) Proﬁle of the applied DC current (red curve) and the corresponding proﬁle of potential drop (black curve) between the two lithium metal electrodes of a test cell with a Si membrane of 5 mm in thickness as a function of time. (d) Dependence of the net resistance of the single-crystal Si membranes on their thickness. The surface area of the membranes in contact with electrolyte was 1 cm2. Reprinted from Ref. [78] with permission.

membrane sandwiched by two concave polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) molds. Special processing enables the formation of strong covalent bonds between the silicon membrane and the PDMS molds to avoid leakage of liquid electrolyte. Figure 3b is the photograph of a typical testing cell incorporating a Si membrane with a thickness of 20 mm. In this testing cell, we can ﬁll the two compartments with the same propylene carbonate (PC) solution of 1 M LiPF6. The measurement of Li + conductivity is carried out by applying a constant current to the two Li foils followed by recording the corresponding potential as a function of time. With a constant current, Li + ions in the electrolyte ﬂow from the compartment with anode to that with cathode while the Li metal anode is oxidized to release Li + ions to compensate the Li + ions diffused to the cathode compartment, in which the additional Li + ions diffused from the anode compartment are reduced to deposit on the cathode. The stability of the concentration of Li + ions in the electrolyte eliminates the contribution of conductivity caused by the concentration gradient of Li + ions, ensuring the accuracy of conductivity measurement. The contribution of electrolyte resistance is subtracted from the overall resistance to calculate the accurate conductivity of Li + ions in the Si membrane. Figure 3c plots the measurement results for a single-crystal Si membrane with a thickness of 5 mm, clearly showing that the potential drop between the two Li electrodes (i.e., DV) increases with increase of the applied current. Analysis reveals that the data perfectly

follow an ohmic relationship and the net resistance of the Si membrane is 0.84 kO. The total resistance of the Si membrane is determined by the sum of (i) interfacial resistance related to inserting Li + ions into the Si membrane and extracting Li + ions from the Si membrane at the two Si/electrolyte interfaces; and (ii) diffusive resistance related to the diffusion of Li + ions in the bulk, single-crystalline Si lattices. The interfacial resistance contributes a signiﬁcant fraction to the total resistance for a thin Si membrane while the diffusive resistance dominates the total resistance for thick silicon membranes [79]. The Li + conductivity in the Si membrane is 6  10 7 S/cm. As shown in Figure 3c, the resistance of the silicon membrane is independent of the polarity and density of current, indicating a low possibility of the formation of Li/Si alloys in the Si membranes that can trap Li in the silicon lattices. Real-time X-ray diffraction patterns obtained from the Si membrane reveal that the single crystallinity of the membrane remains during the long-time measurements. The resistances of the Si membranes exhibit a logarithmic dependence on their thicknesses when the thicknesses are larger than 5 mm (Figure 3d): lg R=0.082  L–0.48, where the units of R and L are kO and mm, respectively. When the thickness of a Si membrane is too small, the contribution of interfacial resistance cannot be ignored because insertion of Li + ions into silicon lattices becomes more difﬁcult than into a thick membrane possibly due to a so-called ‘‘self-puriﬁcation’’ mechanism that corresponds to the difﬁculty in doping

nanoparticles with small lateral dimensions [80]. As a consequence of the difﬁculty in lithium insertion, the concentration of Li + ions in a thin Si membrane is usually lower than that in a thick one, leading to a higher diffusive resistance. The increase in both interfacial and diffusive resistance is responsible for the increase of the total resistance in membranes thinner than the critical thickness of 5 mm. For instance, the Si membrane with a thickness of 2.5 mm exhibits a total resistance of 6.66 kO (Figure 3d). The results clearly show that the single-crystalline Si membranes are capable of conducting Li + ions through their lattices to support current density as high as 1 mA/cm2 for potential applications. However the Li + conductivity of the single-crystal Si membranes is still 3–4 orders lower than that of the best NASICON-type LICMs. Their ionic conductivity might be improved by doping the surface lattices of single-crystal Si membranes with P or Al to lower the interfacial energy barriers for inserting Li + into Si lattices and extracting Li + from the Si lattices [81]. In addition, partial lithiation of the single-crystal Si membranes can increase the concentration of Li + ions in the membranes to reduce their diffusive resistance, leading to enhanced overall conductivity. Although the Si membranes are stable in many electrolytes including neutral/acidic aqueous electrolytes and aprotic organic electrolytes, they are not stable in contact with metal Li due to the severe electrochemical reactions.

As shown in Figure 2, LICMs are crucial for Li-air batteries with aqueous electrolytes to avoid the severe reaction between of metallic Li anodes and water. Although most Li-air batteries with non-aqueous electrolytes reported in literature do not include LICMs, the LICMs are still important for the batteries to be operated in ambient air for long time. The LICMs can prevent the diffusion of water (from moisture), oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, etc. existing in air from the cathodes to metal Li anodes. Such protection is expected to signiﬁcantly improve the stability of Li-air batteries for long-term operations. The solid-state electrolytes used in the batteries shown in Figure 2d can be considered as LICMs themselves. Integration of LICMs with high-performance rechargeable Li-air batteries represents an important research direction although the progress is far behind the research in liquid electrolytes and cathode catalysts. As an emerging area, only NASICON-type LICMs and single-crystal Si LICMs have been recently reported in Li-air batteries.

NASICON-type LICMs have been extensively studied since they are commercialized by OHARA Inc. They were originally used as LICSEs and most recently they are used as LICMs to protect metal Li in PolyPlus Battery Company Inc. In the past several year, three groups at the University of Dayton Research Institute (USA, led by J.S. Thokchom and B. Kumar), Mie University (Japan, led by N. Imanishi), and National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) (Japan, led by H. Zhou) have actively involved

in developing Li-air batteries with incorporation of NASICON-type LICMs. These groups have focused on different aspects of the LICMs and the Li-air batteries. For instance, Thokchom and Kumar and co-workers have concentrated in understanding the superionic conductivity of glass-ceramic lithium aluminum titanium phosphate (LATP, Li1 + xAlxTi2 x(PO4)3) and lithium aluminum germanium phosphate (LAGP, Li1 + xAlxGe2 x(PO4)3) LICMs [82–89]. It is found that the existence of dielectric domains in the glass-ceramic LICMs play the important role in the enhancement of Li + conductivity due to the space-charge-medicated effect around the dielectric domains [87]. This enhancement mechanism is similar to that in polymer-ceramic composite LICSEs. Typical dielectric domains include AlPO4 and Li2O that are formed during vitriﬁcation of the LICMs at high temperatures [84], as well as Al2O3 and Ba0.6Sr0.4TiO3 that are intendedly doped [85]. The resulting highly conductive LICMs have been used as solid electrolytes in combination with polymer LICMs containing dielectric domains of BN, AlN, Si3N4, or Li2O that separate the NASICON-type LICMs from metallic Li anodes in the Li-air batteries with conﬁguration shown in Figure 2d [89]. The resulting totally solidstate, rechargeable Li-air batteries can be operated at temperature ranging from 30 to 105 1C with excellent thermal stability. The batteries can be charged/discharged for 40 cycles at current densities in the range of 0.05– 0.25 mA/cm2. It is believed that the solid-state batteries represent a class of ultrahigh energy density electrochemical power sources with expected speciﬁc energies 41000 Wh/kg. Most recently, Kitaura and Zhou built the solid-state Li-air battery cells by using LATP LICMs provided by OHARA Inc. in combination with PEO-LiTFSI composite LICMs that serve as the interlayers between the LATP LICMs and Li anodes to avoid the direct reaction between LATP and Li [90]. The air cathodes are made of LATP ceramic powders and carbon nanotubes that provide conduction paths for Li + ions and electrons, respectively. In addition, the carbon nanotubes also play the role as catalyst for oxygen reduction reactions. The battery cells exhibit a reversible capacity of 400 mA h g 1 few cycles. The interfacial resistance between the Li anodes and the PEOLiTFSI LICMs is large, limiting the performance of the batteries in terms of charge/discharge rate.

The team led by N. Imanishi extensively studied the stability of silicon-doped LATP (Li1 + x + yAlxTi2 yP3 ySiyO12) in varying aqueous solutions (e.g., acidic HCl, basic LiOH, and neutral LiNO3 and LiCl) [91] and used the LATP LICMs for fabricating Li-air batteries with aqueous electrolytes that adopt the conﬁguration shown in Figure 2b. In a typical Li-air battery the LATP LICM is separated from the metallic Li anode by an additional LICM that is electrochemically stable towards both the Li anode and LATP LICM to avoid the severe reaction between the LATP LICM and Li. Lithium phosphorous oxynitride (Li3 xPO4 yNy, or LiPON) represents a promising candidate as the interlayer material to prevent the direct contact of LATP LICMs with Li anodes [92]. A LiPON layer can be deposited on a LATP LICM by sputtering a Li3PO4 target in a nitrogen gas ﬂow. The interfacial resistance between the LATP LICM and the LiPON layer is reduced by sputtering a thin layer of LATP on the LATP LICM before the deposition of LiPON, leading to an enhanced performance of the resulting Li-air battery. For example, a

battery consisting of Li-Al/LiPON/LATP/aqueous 1 M LiCl/Pt exhibits a room-temperature open circuit voltage (OCV) of 3.6 V, that is slightly lower than the theoretical OCV value of 2Li+(1/ 2)O2+H2O=2LiOH [91]. The OCV and cell resistance remain stable for 1 week. In addition to LiPON, polymeric composite LICMs including PEO (with average molecular weight of 6 105)-LiTFSI and PEO-LiTFSI doped with BaTiO3 have also been used as interlayers to prevent the LATP LICMs from reacting with the Li anodes in Li-air batteries [93,94]. The Li/PEO-LiTFSI/LATP/PEO-LiTFSI/Li symmetric cell exhibits a total resistance of 800 O cm2 at 60 1C that remains stable for over 1 month. The corresponding Li-air battery consisting of Li/PEO-LiTFSI/LATP/aqueous LiCl/Pt shows a stable OCV of 3.7 V at 60 1C for 2 months [93]. The battery can be discharged/charged at a current density up to 0.25 mA/cm2 at 60 1C although the good recyclability is not demonstrated. By using the BaTiO3-doped PEO-LiTFSI composite LICM, a multiple-layer electrode of Li/PEO–LiTFSI–10 wt% BaTiO3/LATP exhibits a stable resistance of only 175 O cm2 at 60 1C for more than one month. The resulting Li/PEO– LiTFSI–10 wt% BaTiO3/LATP/aqueous 1 M LiCl/Pt Li-air battery generates a stable OCV of 3.8 V that equals to the theoretical value. The operation recyclability of this battery is signiﬁcantly improved in comparison with the battery including the PEO-LiTFSI layer without BaTiO3 [94]. The Li/ PEO–LiTFSI/LATP electrode can also be operated in an acidic solution of CH3COOH (HAc, 90% in volume)-H2O (10% in volume)-saturated CH3COOLi (LiAc), displaying a total resistance of 164 O cm2 at 60 1C. The corresponding Li-air cell of Li/PEO–LiTFSI/LATP/HAc–H2O–LiAc/Pt black shows a low polarization for Li dissolution and deposition at a current density even as high as 1 mA/cm2, indicating a good charge and discharge recyclability [95]. Prototype Li-air batteries of such design as shown in Figure 4a have been built with the use Pt nanoparticles (1–4 nm) or Pt black on the support of carbon paper as catalysts of air cathodes [96]. In a battery cell, a porous polypropylene ﬁlm (with thickness of 100 mm) impregnated with the HAc–H2O–LiAc aqueous solution provides electrolyte to connect the LATP LICM and the air cathode. The whole battery resistance is 5466 O cm2 at 25 1C and dramatically decreases to 185 O cm2 as temperature increases to 60 1C. Such a battery has been characterized by sealing it in a high-pressure vessel with 3 atm. of air to eliminate evaporation of the electrolyte. Figure 4b presents a typical charge–discharge curve measured at 0.5 mA/cm2 at 60 1C. The appearance of plateaus during discharge and charge processes indicates the ideal electrochemistry in this battery. The discharge capacity is calculated as 225 mA h g 1 with consumption of 56% HAc, corresponding to an energy density of 779 W h kg 1 against the weight of both Li anode and HAc. This battery cell can retain a discharge–charge capacity of 250 mA h g 1 that is determined according to the weight of HAc for 15 cycles (Figure 4c).

The Zhou’s group has focused on the development of Li-air batteries with the use of both organic and aqueous electrolytes that are separated by the LATP LICMs supplied by OHARA Inc. In a typical battery cell as shown in Figure 2c, the metallic Li anode and the air cathode are in contact with aprotic organic electrolyte and aqueous electrolyte, respectively. With this design the direct contact of LATP

LICMs with Li metal can be avoided. The use of aqueous electrolyte for the electrochemical reactions on the air cathode is advantageous because the high solubility of the product (i.e., LiOH) in water can eliminate the possibility of the product to clog the pores in the air cathode. In contrast, the reaction products (e.g., Li2O, Li2O2, etc.) formed in the Li-air batteries shown in Figure 2a are not soluble in the organic solvents and they tend to deposit in the pores of the air cathodes to block the diffusion of oxygen, leading to a cease of electrochemical reactions. The Li-air batteries shown in Figure 2c can be continuously operated in a cycling model similar to the traditional H2-O2 fuel cells by mechanically reﬁlling the metallic Li anodes after the batteries are discharged [97]. Zhou and co-workers have studied different air cathodes with varying catalysts for oxygen reduction reactions in such Li-air fuel cells. Catalysts in the air cathodes include Mn3O4 nanoparticles for alkaline aqueous LiOH electrolyte [98], nanoand micro-sized TiN powders for both alkaline aqueous LiOH electrolyte [99] and weakly acidic electrolyte (LiAc saturated 90 vol% HAc solution) [100], N-doped graphene nanosheets for acidic aqueous electrolyte (1 M Li2SO4+0.5 M H2SO4) [101], and Cu foil for neutral aqueous LiNO3 (1 M) electrolyte [102]. Similar to all batteries the hybrid electrolyte Li-air fuel cell batteries cannot deliver high peak power, in particular when the conductivity of LICMs is not high enough. In order to overcome this problem, a capacitor electrode can be added to the organic electrolyte solution as an additional cathode in parallel with the air cathode in the aqueous electrolyte solution [103]. The resulting three-electrode cell can exhibit the characteristic properties of both capacitor that can provide high peak power output and Li-air battery that can deliver high energy for long operation time. The adjustability of power output and energy output in one cell demonstrates that the three-electrode battery might be a promising class of power system for future EVs. The hybrid electrolyte Li-air batteries can also be operated in a rechargeable way. For instance, hybrid electrolyte Li-air battery cells have been fabricated with the use of metalfree graphene nanosheets as catalysts in air cathodes [104]. As shown in Figure 5a, a typical battery cell is composed of a Li foil anode, an organic electrolyte of 1 M LiClO4 dissolved in ethane-1,2-diamine/diethyl carbonate solvent, a LATP LICM, an aqueous electrolyte of 1 M LiNO3 and 0.5 M LiOH, and an air cathode containing graphene nanosheets. The edge defects of the graphene nanosheets are active in catalyzing the dissociation of O2 into atomic oxygen that migrates to the graphene surfaces. Due to the high reactivity, the atomic oxygen on the graphene surfaces can be easily reduced with the electrons received from the external circuit to form OH  ions. Figure 5b and c presents the charge–discharge curves recorded from a battery cell operated at a current density of 0.5 mA/cm2 for 50 cycles. The difference between the charge curves and discharges curves indicates the electrochemical polarity of the cell, which can be estimated with the voltage gap between the plateaus of charge and discharge curves. The voltage gap is 0.55 V at the ﬁrst cycle and increases to 1.20 V at the 50th cycle due to the increase of charge voltage (from 3.55 to 3.98 V) and decrease of discharge voltage (from 3.00 to 2.78 V). The variation of voltage gap can be minimized by annealing the graphene nanosheets in 4% H2/Ar atmosphere at 950 1C for

Figure 4 (a) Schematic illustration of the conﬁguration of a lithium-air battery cell with an acidic aqueous electrolyte and a LATP LICM. (b, c) Charge–discharge curves of a Li/PEO-LiTFSI/LATP/HAc-H2O-LiAc/Pt black lithium-air battery cell recorded at 60 1C as a constant current density of 0.5 mA/cm2 was maintained. Pt black distributed in a carbon paper was used as cathode catalysts for promoting the oxygen reduction and evolution reactions. Reprinted from Ref. [96] with permission.

30 min. This team also demonstrated that simply drawing on LATP LICMs with pencils enables the deposition of penciltrace containing graphitic layers that can serve as air cathodes to catalyze oxygen reduction reactions [105].

This direct integration of air cathodes on the LATP LICMs eliminates the use of aqueous electrolyte in Li-air batteries. The resulting Li/organic electrolyte/LATP/pencil-trace battery cells exhibit a discharge capacity of 950 mA h g 1 at a

Please cite this article as: Lithium ion conducting membranes for lithium-air batteries, Nano Energy (2013), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ j.nanoen.2013.02.003

Figure 5 (a) Schematic illustration of the conﬁguration of a lithium-air battery cell with the use of both organic and basic aqueous electrolytes. The cathode electrode was made of graphene nanosheets that were conﬁrmed to be active for catalyzing oxygen reduction and evolution reactions. (b, c) Charge–discharge curves of a resulting lithium-air cell plotted as a function of capacity (b) and time (c). The characterization was performed at room temperature. Reprinted from Ref. [104] with permission. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.

Figure 6 (a) Schematic illustration of the conﬁguration of a lithium-air battery cell consisting of an organic electrolyte (i.e., 1 M LiPF6 dissolved in propylene carbonate) and a single-crystalline Si membrane. (b) Charge–discharge curve recorded from a lithiumair cell with a Si membrane of 10 mm in thickness as a current density of 0.35 mA/cm2 was maintained. (c, d) SEM images of the two surfaces of the Si membrane after the battery cell used for (b) failed: (c) the surface facing the oxygen cathode and (d) the surface facing the Li anode. All the measurements were carried out at room temperature under an atmosphere of pure oxygen. Reprinted from Ref. [78] with permission.

current density of 0.1 A/g and a switch voltage of 2.0 V. The capacity does not signiﬁcantly change over 15 charge– discharge cycles. It is necessary to clarify that the LICMs used in Prof. Zhou’s work have NASICON-type crystalline structures although LISICON has been used in their papers to describe the LICMs.

As discussed in Section 2.4, the single-crystal Si membranes exhibit reasonable conductivity for Li + ions. Meanwhile, the diffusion coefﬁcient of oxygen in silicon is extremely low at room temperature, i.e., 4  10 44 cm2 s 1 [106], that is more than 34 orders smaller than the diffusion coefﬁcient of lithium. As a result, the single-crystal Si LICMs can be integrated with lithium-air batteries in which the Si LICMs are sandwiched between lithium anodes and air cathodes to prevent the oxygen crossover. Figure 6a presents the conﬁguration of a typical lithium-air cell with a silicon membrane of 10 mm in thickness and an electrolyte composed of 1 M LiPF6 dissolved in propylene carbonate (PC). The Si LICM is bonded to a PDMS support that increases the handleability of the fragile Si membrane and prevents possible leakage of electrolyte from the entire assembly [107]. The charge–discharge curve of the battery measured at a current density of 0.35 mA cm 2 is plotted in Figure 6b, clearly showing that the cell can be discharged twice and charged once before it fails. Analysis reveals that the

electrochemical failure is caused by a signiﬁcant increase in resistance of the Si membrane. This resistance increase is ascribed to the formation of additional solid-electrolyte interface (SEI) layers that are generated from the decomposition of electrolyte in contact with oxygen and the possible reactions between the electrolyte and the Si membrane. Exposing the electrolyte to oxygen may accelerate the reactions to deposit the SEI layers more quickly to reduce the Li + conductivity of the Si membrane. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the two surfaces of the Si membrane are recorded after the battery has failed. As shown in Figure 6c and d, clear difference is observed from the two surfaces: the surface facing the cathode (Figure 6c) becomes rough and is covered with densely packed dots that are derived from the undesirable reactions, while the other surface facing the lithium anode (Figure 6d) remains intact and smooth. The selective deposition of SEI materials only on the surface facing the oxygen cathode provides the direct evidence that oxygen molecules can be effectively blocked to prevent them from diffusing through the membrane. These characterizations demonstrate the feasibility to use the single-crystal Si LICMs to prevent oxygen crossover in Li-air batteries although the life-time of this battery cell is not ideal. Replacing the PC electrolyte that is easily decomposed to form carbonates [12,108] in contact with oxygen with a more stable electrolyte such as tetraethylene glycol dimethylether (TEGDME)LiCF3SO3 may help eliminate the formation of SEI materials on the surfaces of the Si membranes, leading to longer

operation time. Alternatively, aqueous electrolytes (such as lithium acetate, CH3COOLi) can be used in the Li-air cells shown in Figure 2b and c (with examples shown in Section 3.1) to eliminate the possible deposition of SEI materials on the Si membranes.

Lithium-air batteries have been extensively studied in the past several years because developing high-capacity energy storage devices are highly demanded to power HEVs and EVs. In spite of many research activities, grand challenges in terms of efﬁcient catalysts for oxygen reduction and evolution reactions, stable and conductive electrolytes, stability of lithium anodes, as well as the stability of the integrated systems still exist for a long period before lithium-air batteries are commercialized and widely used in our daily lives. As highligted in the Introduction, LICMs present a class of less studied materials in comparison to cathode catalysts and electrolytes although LICMs are critical to protect the lithium anodes from degradation and assure the long-term operation of lithium-air batteries. Comprehensive summary of potential LICM materials in this review may help accelerate the research in fabrication and characterization of LICMs as well as integration them into high-capacity lithium-air batteries. As discussed in the previous sections, many materials exhibit the potential to be used as LICMs. The compatibility of LICMs with electrolytes and electrodes of lithium-air batteries have to be carefully estimated because LICMs represent only one important component of the batteries. The long-term stability and Li + conductivity of LICMs are also important parameters for selecting new

materials for making LICMs. One material may exhibit performance merits in particular aspects (e.g., stability, conductivity) and disadvantage in other aspects. In order to take the advantage of different materials, mixing multiple LICSE materials is promising to fabricate LICMs with high Li + conductivity and stability. Cost represents another important aspect to be seriously considered for mass production. The cost and performance should be balanced, i.e., material performance should be slightly sacriﬁced in order to lower the overall fabrication cost. We can either develop cost-effective fabrication methods for high-performance materials or increase the material performance for the materials that are already produced with low cost. For example, the NASICON-type LATP glass-ceramic LICMs exhibit very high Li + conductivities (i.e., 10 4 S/cm) as described in examples shown in Section 3.1. A LATP plate with a size of 1  1 in2 (as shown in Figure 7, the small square) is sold by OHARA Inc. for 250 US dollars. In contrast, the single crystalline Si membranes as discussed in Sections 2.4 and 3.2 represent a class of materials mass produced for semiconductor industry. One standard 4-inch wafer with a thickness of 20 mm (as shown in Figure 7, the large circle) costs only 25 US dollars. Preliminary measurement of the single crystalline membranes shows a Li + conductivity of 6  10 7 S/cm, that is 2–3 orders smaller than the LATP plates. However the conductivity of Si membranes can be deﬁnitely increased by taking the advantage of the forthcoming more research efforts. The comparison between the commercially available LATP plates and single-crystal Si wafers clearly demonstrates the necessity for cost/performance balance.