Materials belonging to NASICON family of compositions NaHfM(PO4)3 and AgHfM(PO4)3 (M = Ti and Zr) are prepared by sol–gel and ion exchange methods, respectively. Ethylene glycol is used as a gelating agent. All the compositions are characterized by powder X-ray diffraction, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, 31P MAS NMR, UV–Vis DRS, XPS and energy dispersive spectral methods. All these phosphates are crystallized in rhombohedral lattice with space groupR3c. These compounds exhibit characteristic PO4 vibrational modes in their FT-IR spectra. The 31P MAS NMR gave broad signals indicating distribution of chemical environments around P ion. The dc and ac conductivity of AgHfM(PO4)3 (M = Ti and Zr) are higher compared to their sodium containing compounds. The Cole–Cole plots of impedance show semicircles between 373 and 623 K. The variation of dc conductivity with temperature follows the Arrhenius equation. The photocatalytic activity of all the samples was studied against methylene blue decomposition using sun

light. AgHfM(PO4)3 (M = Ti and Zr) have shown higher photoactivity than the sodium containing Nasicons. Keywords Sol–gel method  Impedance spectroscopy  Infrared spectroscopy  Powder X-ray diffraction  Ionic conductivity  Photocatalytic activity

The NASICON (acronym for sodium (NA) super (S) ionic (I) conductor (CON)) type phosphates of general formula AMM0(PO4)3 are important due to their potential applications. The rigid frame work structure of these materials is built by corner sharing of MO6 (M0O6) octahedra with PO4 tetrahedra [1]. The mobile sodium ions occupy two crystallographically inequivalent sites in the channels. The structure is ﬂexible for substitution at A site by uni, di, tri or tetravalent ions, M (or M0) site by tri, tetra or pentavalent transition metal ions and P site by Si or As giving rise to a large family of materials. These materials have high ionic conductivity (C0.2 S cm-1 for Na3Zr2PSi2O12 at 573 K), low thermal expansion, high temperature stability and fairly large surface area [2, 3]. These compounds have potential applications in (a) electrochemical devices such as rechargeable batteries, fuel cells and sensors, [4–6], (b) radioactive waste storage [7] and (c) catalytic supports [8]. The sodium ions can be exchanged with H?, K?, Ag? and Li? ions. It in systems such as A1±xTi2-xMx(PO4)3 (A = Na and Ag, M = Nb5? and Ga3?), the mobility of A? ions increases considerably leading to an increase in the ionic conductivity compared to parent ATi2(PO4)3 [9–12]. Substitution of tri or pentavalent ions at M site possibly increases the defect density

and diffusion rate leading to an increase in the ionic conductivity. Compared to sodium and lithium containing AMM0(PO4)3 type compounds, the studies of NASICON type silver compounds are limited. The catalytic activity of AgZr2(PO4)3 and AgHf2(PO4)3 in the butan-2-ol conversion to butane and methyl ethyl ketone was reported [8]. The crystal chemistry and ionic conductivity of AgTi2xZrx(PO4)3 and Ag1?xTi2-xMx(PO4)3 were investigated by Couturier et al. [13, 14]. Pinus et al. have studied the impedance xTi2-xMx(PO4)3 (M = Nb5?, Ga3?) [15]. We have earlier reported the DC conductivity of Ag3-2xTaxAl2-x(PO4)3 (x = 0.6–1.3 in steps of 0.1) and impedance spectroscopy of (i) AgSbM(PO4)3 (M = Al, Ga, Fe and Cr) and (ii) AgTaM(PO4)3 (M = Al, Ga, In, Cr, Fe and Y) [16–18]. To our knowledge, the conductivity studies of AHfTi(PO4)3 and AHfZr(PO4)3 (A = Na and Ag) are not reported. In this paper, we present the preparation, characterization, DC conductivity and impedance studies of NaHfTi(PO4)3, NaHfZr(PO4)3, AgHfTi(PO4)3 and AgHfZr(PO4)3 (here after referred as NHTP, NHZP, AHTP and AHZP respectively).

NaHfM(PO4)3 (where M = Ti, and Zr) were prepared by Sol–gel method. Ethylene glycol is used as gelating agent. Stoichiometric amount of Ti metal powder was dissolved in H2O2 (30 %) and ammonia solution (25 %). Then stoichiometric amounts of NaNO3 and NH4H2PO4 were dissloved in *20 ml of distilled water separately. All the solutions were mixed under constant stirring and stoichiometric amount of HfO2 was added. Subsequently, citric acid was added to this resultant solution such that the mole ratio of metal ions to citric acid was 1:2. After 1 h of continuous stirring at room temperature, the pH of the solution was adjusted to 6–7 by using dilute amonia solution. The above solution was slowly evaporated on a hot plate under constant stirring till a thick viscous solution was obtained. At this stage, ethylene glycol was added such that the mole ratio of citric acid to ethylene glycol is 1:1.2. Then the solution was evaporated at 100 °C till a gel was obtained. The temperature was increased to 160–180 °C to get a black porous solid. This solid was ground thoroughly using spectral grade acetone to obtain ﬁne powder (designated as ‘precursor’) and heated at 400, 500, 700, 800 and 900 °C for 5 h. The procedure was repeated for NHZP using ZrO(NO3)2 in place of Ti metal powder. A white poly crystalline powder was obtained. The silver analogues viz., AgHfM(PO4)3 (M = Ti and Zr) were prepared by ionexchange method [19, 20]. Attempts to prepare AgHfM(PO4)3 (M = Ti and Zr) by sol–gel method were unsuccessful. One g (0.00187 mol) of NaHfM(PO4)3

(M = Ti and Zr)) and 0.3554 g (0.002806 mol) of AgNO3 (the mole ratio of NaHfM(PO4)3 and AgNO3 is 1:1.5) are added to 40 ml of distilled water in a round bottom ﬂask and reﬂuxed for 6–12 h. This process is repeated once again by taking freshly prepared AgNO3 solution in the same ratio. The resultant ash colored product was washed with distilled water several times to remove the byproduct, NaNO3. The obtained product was dried at 100 °C on a hot plate. The possible reaction is shown in Eq. (1).

the samples were recorded on Philips X’pert Analytical X-ray diffractometer using Nickel ﬁltered Cu-Ka radiation of wave length 1.5406 A˚ for phase conformation in the 2h range of 10–80°. The unit cell parameters were calculated by least square reﬁnement technique using POWD program. Density of all the samples was determined by Archimedes principle using xylene as immersion liquid. The morphological and compositional studies of all the samples were carried out using Hitachi S-520 scanning electron microscope. The samples used in energy dispersive (EDS) measurements were coated with gold in HUS-SGB vacuum coating unit and were mounted on an aluminum support stub using a double adhesive carbon tape. Infrared spectra of all the samples were recorded using KBr pellets in the wave number range 4,000–450 cm-1 with JASCO FTIR-5300 spectrometer. The room temperature 31P solid state MAS-NMR spectra were recorded with a Bruker MSL-300 MHz solid state high resolution spectrometer operating at 121.49 MHz with a 10 kHz spinning speed. The samples were packed in a 4 mm Zirconia rotor. Pulses of 90° with 5 ls duration were used with a recycle delay of 5 s between pulses. The chemical shift values are given with respect to an 85 % H3PO4 solution. XPS data were obtained in a SPECs XPS system with 150 W Al Ka radiation at 1,486.6 eV energy. Survey scan was obtained at 70 eV pass energy. Core level spectra were obtained at 40 eV pass energy and ﬁtted with Gauss-Lorentzian peaks to get oxidation states and different chemical states. Composition was obtained by using the area under the respective core level spectra and using their respective atomic factors. The DC conductivity measurements were carried out in the temperature range 300–623 K using conventional two probe method on the sintered pellets coated with silver paint. For this, a Keithley Electrometer 6485C is used. AC impedance measurements were carried out using HP4192A impedance analyzer in the temperature range 323–623 K in the frequency range of 102–106 Hz. UV–Vis difffuse reﬂectance spectra (DRS)

The photocatalytic activity of NHTP, NHZP, AHTP and AHZP samples was evaluated for the degradation of methylene blue (MB) under sunlight. In a typical experiment, 100 ml of MB solution (1.567 9 10-5 mol l-1) was taken in a round bottom ﬂask and mixed with 100 mg of NHTP. The resultant suspension was kept in the dark for *1 h to ensure the establishment of an adsorption/ desorption equilibrium. Subsequently, the contents were kept in the sunlight for 3 h with constant stirring and circulation of cold water to minimize the evaporation of water from the suspension. At regular intervals of time, about 5 ml of suspension was collected, ﬁltered through Millipore ﬁlter and measured its optical density using Systronics UV–Visible spectrophotometer at 665 nm. The procedure was repeated using NHZP, AHTP and AHZP. Speciﬁc surface area (As, m2 g-1) was determined for all the compounds by Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) nitrogen adsorption method in a Quantachrome Autosorb Automated Gas Sorption System surface area analyzer. The samples were dried and degassed, and analyzed using a multipoint N2 adsorption/desorption method at room temperature.

The powder patterns of NHTP, NHZP, AHTP and AHZP are shown in Fig. 1. All the diffraction patterns are found to be free from impurities and can be compared with the diffraction patterns of NASICON type compounds reported earlier [21–24]. The d-lines of all the samples are similar to each other except the intensity. All these compositions crystallize in rhombohedral lattice with space group R3c.The unit cell parameters of all these compositions were obtained from XRD patterns using least square ﬁt and are given in Table 1. The values obtained in the present measurements are also compared with reported values NaTi2P3O12 [PDF no 84-2008] [25], AgTi2P3O12 [15] and NaZr2P3O12 [PDF no 70-0233] [26]. The unit cell parameters of NHZP are very close to that of NaZr2(PO4)3. Since the ionic radii of Zr4? (0.86 A˚ for six coordination) is close to that of Hf4? (0.85 A˚ for six coordination), the unit cell parameters of NHZP are expected to be close to that of NaZr2P3O12. However, the unit cell parameters of NHTP are found to be higher compared to that of NaTi2(PO4)3. Replacement of Ti4? (0.74 A˚ ) with Hf4? (0.85 A˚ ) tend to increase both a and c unit cell parameters of hexagonal lattice. The unit cell parameters of AHZP and AHTP are close to their parent compounds viz., NHZP and NHTP

Fig. 1 Powder X-ray difractograms of AHfM(PO4)3 (A = Na and Ag, M = Ti and Zr). a NHTP, b AHTP, c NHZP and d AHZP

respectively. As the silver ions occupy the channels replacing sodium ions, the skeletal structure remains the same leading to approximately same unit cell dimensions. The observed and calculated densities of all these compositions are also presented in Table 1 along with the values reported for similar systems. The observed densities are lower than theoretical values. This may be due to the method of preparation. Generally, the sol–gel derived materials have lower density compared to those prepared by solid state method.

EDS of all the compositions in the present investigation were recorded to conﬁrm the replacement of Na? by Ag?. The EDS of AHZP and NHZP (representative) is shown in Fig. 2a, b. The intensity of sodium peak at 1.2 keV in AHZP is about 7 % compared to its intensity in NHZP indicating that about 93 % of Na? ions are exchanged by Ag? ions. The molecular formula of AHZP can thus be written as Na0.07Ag0.93HfZrP3O12. Similarly, the molecular formula of AHTP obtained from its EDS is found to be Na0.08Ag0.92HfTiP3O12.

the compositions were recorded in the range 4,000–400 cm-1. All the compounds exhibit strong absorption bands below 1,500 cm-1 (Fig. 3). The vibrational modes of these phases can be divided into two types: (a) internal and external modes of tetrahedral PO4 [27, 28] and (b) lattice modes of octahedral MO6 units. Of these, the bands corresponding to PO4 unit are more prominent than the other. According to factor group analysis, PO4 group gives following signiﬁcant vibrational modes [27, 29, 30]: (i) the symmetric non degenerate P–O stretching (ms or m1, 950–1,070 cm-1), (ii) asymmetric, m2, doubly 440–450 cm-1), (iii) symmetric, triply degenerate O–P–O bending (dd or m3, 1,100–1,210 cm-1) and (iv) triply

degenerate, asymmetric and harmonic O–P–O bending (dd or m4, 560–680 cm-1). The observed band positions for all the samples are assigned and shown in Fig. 3. Barj et al. have reported that m3 mode is sensitive to the polarizing nature of the metal ion. Ions with small size and large charge have more polarizing nature leading to localization of electron density on the P–O(M) bond which in turn increases the force constant and hence the vibration frequency. Since the Ti4? and Zr4? belonging to group IVB and ionic size follows the trend Ti4? (0.74 A˚ ) \ Zr4? (0.86 A˚ ) is expected to be NHTP [ NHZP. The observed m3 values for NHTP and NHZP support this view. Similar trends were observed in the case of AHTP and AHZP. The absence of strong bands in the region of 740–730 and well above 1,250 cm-1 indicates the absence of pyrophosphate and long phosphate chains respectively [32–39].

The 31P-MAS NMR is a good probe to ﬁnd the local structure of phosphorous ions in framework structure. It is noticed that chemically/crystallographically inequivalent sites of phosphorous give different NMR signals. For the 31P MAS NMR spectra of MZr2(PO4)3 example, (M = Na and Li) and Ca0.5Ti2(PO4)3 gave a symmetric peak implying that all the phosphorous atoms occupy only one site at 18e position of the rhombohedra lattice with R3c space group. On the other hand, two peaks were observed in Na5Ti(PO4)3 suggesting the occupation of phosphorous at [40]. The 31P-MAS NMR spectra of NHTP and NHZP (Fig. 4) are

characterized by sharp peak centered at -32 and -29 ppm with small splitting indicating distribution of chemical environments for P ion. In the NASICON frame work structure, each PO4 unit shares oxygens with four MO6 (M0O6) octahedral units. On the basis of random distribution of Hf and Ti (or Hf and Zr) different possible environments such as P(OHf)4, P(OHf)3(OTi), P(OHf)2(OTi)2, P(OHf)(OTi)3 (similarly for Hf and Zr) can be imagined which give rise different NMR signals. The observation of splitting of NMR signal in both NHTP and NHZP may be due to such chemical environments. Similar observations were made by Losilla et al. in Na1?xM2-xInxP3O12 [41]. In both AHTP and AHZP, single broad peaks centered at -33 and -28 ppm were observed probably due to the overlap of components corresponding to the above mentioned environments. The average peak positions of NHTP and NHZP are nearly similar to AHTP and AHZP as the phosphorous site is not disturbed.

The surface characterization of the materials was carried out by XPS method. The fully scanned spectra of all the samples are shown in Fig. S1. The proﬁles of NHTP and NHZP are characterized by peaks belonging to Na 1 s (1,071 eV) Hf 4f (17.1 eV), Zr 3d 5/2 (182.4 eV), Ti 2p3/2 (458.5 eV), O 1 s (531.7 eV) and C 1 s (284 eV) (Fig. S1a and b). Similarly, the proﬁles of AHTP and AHZP also have all these peaks except Na 1 s and an additional peak belonging Ag 3d3/2 and 3d5/2 (367.9 and 373.83 eV). The presence of C 1 s peak can be attributed to the contamination incomplete

increase of frequency, attains a peak at a particular temperature and then decreases. The frequency at which peak is attained depends on temperature of the measurement. Peak frequency is larger at higher temperatures. The inverse of this peak frequency (relaxation time) varies exponentially with the inverse of absolute temperature. All the Z00 versus frequency curves tend to merge into single curve at higher frequencies. Similar behavior is observed for AHZP also (Fig. 5b). AHZP samples showed smaller values of impedance compared to NHZP samples. The high frequency Z00 values are more dispersed compared to NHZP values. Frequency at which Z00 reaches maximum is lower in AHZP samples in comparison with NHZP samples. NHTP and AHTP samples show that the Z00 values increases with increase of temperature in the range 373–623 K. The entire Z00 versus frequency curves do not merge into single curve at high frequencies. AHTP samples showed smaller values of impedance compared to NHTP samples. The frequency at which Z00 reaches maximum is lower in AHTP samples in comparison with NHTP samples. Observation of peaks in these plots indicates the existence of relaxing species in the samples. Log–log representation of the frequency dependence of the real part (Z0) of the impedance shows blocking effects at grain boundaries due to charge accumulation leading to double layer capacitance at the grain boundaries and shifting of peak to higher frequencies with increasing temperature conﬁrming that conductivity in the sample is basically ionic.

In Fig. 6a–d, the imaginary part (Z00) is plotted against real part of impedance (Z0) at various temperatures. These plots are almost perfect semi-circles for NHZP and AHZP (Fig. 6a, b) samples in the temperature region 373–623 K. For NHTP and AHTP (Fig. 6c, d) samples Z00–Z0 curves are elongated semicircles in the low temperature region (373–523 K). It is known that the observation of semi circle in the Z00–Z0 plots indicate the presence of single relaxation species [44]. Thus, both NHZP and AHZP samples show presence of single relaxation species while NHTP and AHTP samples show multiple relaxation species as evidenced by the observed elongated semicircles in these samples. Two main features are then evident: an incomplete arc at low frequency is typical of grain boundary contributions and another one at high frequencies normally associated with the bulk contribution. The bulk and grain boundary contributions respectively are obtained directly from experimental curves at frequencies higher and lower than the frequency range where the relaxation is observed (Fig. 5). In fact, the experimental complex impedance data can be described by using an equivalent circuit model of the form (Rb//Qb) (Rgb//Qgb) where the bulk (b) and grain boundary (gb) contributions are in series, and R and Q in parallel the corresponding resistance (R) and capacitance (Q) values of each contribution.

Fig. 3 FT–IR spectra of AHfM(PO4)3 (A = Na and Ag, M = Ti and Zr). a NHTP, b AHTP, c NHZP and d AHZP

decomposition of organic gel. The absence of Na 1 s peak in AHTP and AHZP clearly shows complete exchange of Na? by Ag? ions. This result should also be compared with EDS results discussed earlier. The EDS data show that about 92 and 93 % of Na? was exchanged by Ag? in AHTP and AHZP respectively. Since XPS method gives surface composition only, the remaining 8 % Na may be present in the bulk of the samples. Thus both EDS and XPS results conﬁrm that at least *92 % (*93 %) of Na? was exchanged by Ag? in NHTP (NHZP). Elemental Ag is known to give peaks at 369.2 and 375.8 eV for Ag 3d3/2 and 3d5/2 respectively [42, 43]. In the present investigation, the Ag peaks are located at 367.9 and 373.83 eV conﬁrming silver in the form of Ag? in the lattice and not as elemental Ag. The peak observed for oxygen 1 s position at 528–532 eV is ﬁtted to two gaussians centered at 531.34 (O 1 s) and 529.98 eV (O 1 s) indicating two types of oxygens.

Figure 5a–d presents the variation of imaginary part of impedance (Z00) as a function of frequency on log–log scale at different temperatures. NHZP and AHZP samples (Fig. 5a, b) show frequency dependent peaks in the temperature range 373–623 K. The Z00 values of NHZP (Fig. 5a) increased with

AC conductivity as a function of frequency at different temperatures shows power law variation with change in slopes (Fig. 7a–d). Both NHZP and AHZP samples exhibit two slopes at all the temperatures of the measurements. On the other hand, NHTP and AHTP samples show two slopes at 373 and 423 K and only one slope at higher temperatures. NHZP samples show linear variation of conductivity with frequency in the temperature range of 573–623 K. The curves merge at higher frequencies. Conductivity variation with frequency of AHZP samples showed two slopes. At the slope increases with increase of temperature and shows a tendency of frequency independent conductivity. Similar behavior is observed for NHTP and AHTP samples. These samples also show a typical log–log representation of the frequency dependence of the real part of the electrical conductivity, r0(x), over a range of temperatures (Fig. 7). As Fig. 7c shows the AC conductivity which exhibits an almost constant value at low frequencies associated to the DC conductivity regime rdc and a cross-over to power-law type dependence at sufﬁciently high frequencies and/or low temperatures.

Arrhenius plots of AC conductivity of all the samples are given in Fig. S2. These plots indicate that the conorder r (AHTP) [ r ductivity (NHTP) [ r (AHZP) [ r (NHZP). The activation energy

for conduction, obtained from these plots, also follows the same order (Table 2). The intrinsic conductivity region is not obtained in the present range of measurement as evidenced by the dispersive nature of the conductivity curves at higher temperatures of present measurements.

The relaxation times of the relaxing species in the samples were obtained from the peak frequencies of the Z00 versus frequency plots at different temperatures. The variation of relaxation time (s) as a function of inverse of absolute temperature is plotted in Fig. S3. The similarity of these parameters with conductivity indicates that the charge species which is responsible for relaxation effects is also participating in charge transport in these samples.

The conductivity in these materials is because of ion transport by vacancy or interstitial mechanism. During the charge transport, the vacancy left behind and the ion being transported induce polarization. This would increase interaction between mobile ions (by direct interaction or indirect interaction) and co-operative ion hopping. These interactions would lead to decrease in mobility and increase in activation energy. In fact, the activation energy Ea for the barrier that ions must overcome to hop (independently) between neighboring vacant sites in the present series, can thus be estimated according to Eq. (2) by using the experimental values obtained for Edc and n. A value of

Fig. 5 Imaginary part of impedance (Z00) versus frequency at different temperatures of a NHZP, b AHZP, c NHTP and d AHTP

0.30–0.64 eV for Ea is found (Table 3). As it has been shown for similar systems, high ion contents lead to a higher degree of structural disorder (the size mismatch between cations at the A-site and those located at the B-site decreases) where enhanced ion–ion interactions are expected. The more disordered structure fosters greater ion–ion correlations. These interactions lead to an increase of the energy penalty and impose restriction on long-range ionic conductivity. r ¼ r0 exp ð Ea=kTÞ here r0 is conductivity at inﬁnite temperature.

The DC conductivity (r) of samples was studied in the temperature range 373–623 K. Figure 8 shows the variation of log (rT) with 1,000/T. The DC conductivity of these compositions shows that the mobility of the Na? and Ag? ions in these materials is mostly inﬂuenced by the size of the bottlenecks through which the ions have to pass. The long range ionic transport can be measured using DC conductivity. It is observed that the conductivity increases with increase in the temperature. The isothermal conductivities at 373 and 623 K of these compositions are given in

Table 3. The temperature variation of conductivity is found to obey the Arrhenius Eq. (3) rdcT ¼ r0 expð Ea=kTÞ ð3Þ where r0 is pre-exponential factor, T is the absolute temperature, Ea is the activation energy for conduction and k is the Boltzmann’s constant. The conductivity plots of the samples show slight deviation from linearity in the lower temperature region 300–373 K. However in the high temperature region (373–623 K), the conductivity has linear dependence for all the samples. The activation energies for conduction of these samples are given in Table 3 along with the conductivities at 373 and 623 K. It is observed that the activation energies fall in the narrow range of 0.49–0.79 eV. These values compare well with the reported activation energies such as AgTi2P3O12, AgHf2P3O12 and AgZr2P3O12 [13, 14, 17]. The ionic conductivities of parent compounds (NHTP and NHZP) are lower than the ion exchanged compounds (AHTP and AHZP) which may be due to the fast Ag? ion transport in the phase resulting from its large polarizability [8, 14]. The origin of its high mobility is due to the ﬁlled

Fig. 6 Z00 versus with Z0 plots of a NHZP, b AHZP, c NHTP and d AHTP at indicated temperatures

4d10 orbitals, and the silver ion is classiﬁed as ‘soft’ ion against np6 orbitals of alkali ions [45]. A comparison of ionic conductivity of (i) NHTP and NHZP and (ii) AHTP and AHZP is interesting. The conductivity of NHTP is found to be higher compared to that of NHZP. I. Y. Pinus et al. have reported that the decrease in the conductivity of AgZr2(PO4)3 compared to that of AgTi2(PO4)3 is due to lattice disorder which inﬂuences the silver ion transport considerably [17]. Another possible reason for the lower conductivity of zirconium containing compositions is its longer structural relaxation time due to difference in bond energy resulting from the substitution [17]. In the present investigation the lower conductivity may be due to lattice order. Similar trend was observed in the case of AHTP and AHZP. Further, the log (r T) with 1,000/T plots appear to merge together at higher temperatures indicating appearance of intrinsic conductivity in the present series of samples.

The light absorption properties of NHTP, NHZP, AHTP and AHZP were investigated. Figure 9 shows the diffused reﬂectance spectra (DRS) of these materials in the range 200–900 nm. The DRS of NHTP and NHZP are characterized by two bands in the 240–295 nm region. These

bands are assigned to charge transfer O2? M4? (M = Zr and Ti) transitions [46, 47]. The absorption proﬁles of AHTP and AHZP also show these bands in the same region with a small red shift and tailing towards longer wavelength. Further, both AHTP and AHZP show broad and weak absorption centered at about 450 nm. The interpretation of bands observed in silver exchanged materials is diverse and complex. Rui Bartolomeu et al. have shown that the band observed in the region 200–240 nm correspond to Ag? while Ag0 particles give bands above 350 nm [48]. On the other hand, Aspromonte et al. [49] and Shi et al. [50] have reported that bands at 400 and 430 nm correspond to Ag2O nano particles and ill– deﬁned silver oxides respectively. In the present investigation both AHTP and AHZP are prepared by ion exchange using silver nitrate at room temperature. Therefore, the possibility of Ag or Ag2O formation is ruled out. Hence the observed weak band centered at 450 nm may be due to electronic transition of Ag? ions between 1S (4d10) and 3D (4d9 5S1) [51].

Accurate band gap energy of semiconducting oxides can be obtained from the Kubelka–Munk plot of (Khm)1/2 versus hm where K is reﬂectance transformed according to

Fig. 7 Frequency versus rac of a NHZP, b AHZP, c NHTP and d AHTP at indicated temperatures

Table 2 Activation energy (in eV) of AHfMP3O12 (A = Na and Ag, M = Ti and Zr) compositions

Kubelka–Munk (K ¼ ð1 RÞ2 2R , where R is reﬂectancy (%)) and hm is photon energy. Extrapolation of linear portion of the plot to (Khm)1/2 = 0 (i.e. onto the x-axis) gives an estimation of band gap energy. The band gap energy of all the samples was obtained (from Fig. 9) and found to be 3.74, 3.65, 3.25 and 3.11 eV for NHTP, NHZP, AHTP and AHZP respectively. The introduction of Ag? ions into the lattice of NaHfM(PO4)3 (M = Ti and Zr) reduces the band gap energy considerably as observed from the red shift of the absorption bands. The observed reduction in the band gap energy in the case of AHTP and AHZP is due to the introduction of fully occupied d-states of Ag? (d10 conﬁguration) into the VB. The hybridization of these states with O 2p states contribute to an up-shift of the top of VB

position giving rise to a decrease in the band gap energy [52–54]. Hence, these materials could potentially be very useful in the photocatalysis.

Photocatalytic activity of the catalysts NHTP, NHZP, AHTP and AHZP was evaluated for the degradation of methylene blue under sunlight. Before the irradiation, the sample consisting of methylene blue solution mixed with catalyst (NHTP) was kept in dark for 1 h under constant stirring for the establishment of adsorption/desorption equilibrium. Subsequently, the sample was exposed to sunlight for 3 h with constant stirring and circulation of cold water. At regular intervals of time, about 5 ml of the sample solution was taken out and ﬁltered to remove the catalyst particles. The absorbance was measured at 665 nm. The procedure was repeated for the rest of compositions. Figure 10 shows the concentration of methylene blue as a function of irradiation time. All the samples exhibit photocatalytic activity for MB degradation. It is observed that the photocatalytic activity of silver containing NASICON type of compounds is higher than their parent compounds. Both AHTP and AHZP degrade MB to an extent of 73 and 74 %, respectively within ﬁrst 120 min and thereafter the degradation is slow. The degradation of MB by NHTP and NHZP was about 41 and 37 %,

Fig. 8 DC conductivity plots of AHfM(PO4)3 (A = Na and Ag, M = Ti and Zr)

Fig. 10 Photo catalytic activity of AHfM(PO4)3 (A = Na and Ag, M = Ti and Zr)

the material etc. Further, it was also reported that the presence of silver has a beneﬁcial inﬂuence on the photoactivity of nano crystalline semiconductor photocatalysts [55]. The BET surface area was found to be 5.71, 6.52, 5.65 and 6.78 m2/g for NHTP, NHZP, AHTP and AHZP respectively. The surface area of NHTP and AHTP is almost the same. Similarly, the surface area of NHZP and AHZP is also of the same order. As the silver ions occupy the Na? sites in the tunnels along the c-axis of the lattice, the substitution of Na? by Ag? may not lead to signiﬁcant variation in the surface area. The incorporation of Ag? into the Nasicon lattice leads to an increase of photoactivity (73 and 74 %, respectively for AHTP and AHZP) against MB degradation. The enhanced degradation under visible light irradiation may be due to (i) lower Eg value of silver compounds (AHTP and AHZP) and/or (ii) silver acting as electron trap leading to better electron excitation and subsequent transfer to the adsorbed oxygen [56].

Fig. 9 UV–Vis DRS Kubelka–Munk plots of AHfM(PO4)3 (A = Na and Ag, M = Ti and Zr)

respectively in 120 min. The photoactivity of a material depends on several factors such as surface structure, extent of crystallinity, surface area, structure of the material, the adsorption ability of the pollutant and band gap energy of

New silver and sodium super ionic conductor type compositions, AHfM(PO4)3 (A = Na and Ag, M = Ti and Zr) were prepared and characterized by powder X-ray

infrared spectra, EDS, XPS and 31P MAS diffraction, NMR. All the samples crystallize in rhombohedra lattice of framework. The unit cell parameters of NHZP are close to that of NaZr2(PO4)3 while the unit cell parameters of NHTP are higher compared to that of NaTi2(PO4)3. The infrared spectra of these compositions show characteristic PO4 vibrations. The 31P MAS NMR of both NHTP and NHZP exhibits small splitting suggesting different chemical environments for P ion. EDS data show that more than 90 % of sodium ions are exchanged by silver ions. The ionic conductivities of NHTP and NHZP are lower compared to AHTP and AHZP respectively due to low ionic mobility of Na? ions. The conductivity of Zr bearing samples (AHZP and NHZP) is lower compared to Ti bearing samples due to lattice disorder in the Zr containing samples. NHTP and NHZP has higher band gap than the AHTP and AHZP. The higher photo activity of AHTP and AHZP compared to their sodium analogues may be due to their lower band gap energy and silver ions acting as electron traps.

Acknowledgments The to thank Head, Department of Physics, Osmania University for extending powder XRD & SEM/EDS facilities, NMR Research centre IISC Bangalore for 31P MAS–NMR and Dr. C. Anadan SED NAIL Bangalore for extending XPS. Financial assistance from DST-PURSE is gratefully acknowledged. One of us (Suresh Palla) thanks CSIR, New Delhi for the award of Senior Research Fellowship.