Cubic garnet of nominal composition Li7La3 Zr2O12 (LLZO) is of interest as a possible electrolyte in a Li–metal halide battery composed of molten Li and an insoluble metal halide as electrodes operating in the temperature range of *300–350 °C. As a consequence, the chemical stability of LLZO with molten Li in this temperature range was investigated. After heating in molten Li, the LLZO surface had undergone chemical coloration. X-diffraction, X-ray photoemission spectroscopy, electron paramagnetic experiments suggest that chemical coloration is a result of the formation of color centers, composed of an electron trapped at an oxygen vacancy. It was also observed that after immersion in molten Li that LLZO exhibited intergranular cracking. It is believed that cracking results from stresses generated from an increased Li? content, gained during immersion.

Cubic garnet of nominal composition Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO) is of interest as a possible electrolyte and physical barrier in Li–metal halide batteries composed of a molten Li anode and an insoluble metal halide cathode operating at temperatures of 300–350 °C [1]. If LLZO is to be used in this application, one important requirement is the chemical

stability of LLZO with molten Li in this temperature range. Preliminary color change and X-ray diffraction results suggest that LLZO is chemically stable with molten Li [2, 3]; however, no temperatures were reported. Thus, one is not sure if LLZO is truly stable with molten Li at temperatures of 300–350 °C. Consequently, it is the purpose of this paper to investigate the chemical stability of LLZO with molten Li in the temperature range 300–350 °C, where it is anticipated to be used in molten Li–metal halide batteries.

The cubic LLZO garnet material used in this study was prepared by a solid-state powder processing method and consolidated by uniaxial hot pressing, as described previously [4]. The exact composition of is Li6.28Zr2La3Al0.24O12. The addition of Al stabilizes the higher conductivity cubic structure at room temperature compared to the tetragonal structure [4, 5]. X-ray diffraction conﬁrmed a single-phase cubic material with no preferred orientation as a result of hot pressing. The LLZO material had a relative density of 97 % with an equiaxed grain morphology and mean grain size of *5 lm [6]. The hot-pressed LLZO material was cut into rectangular parallelepipeds of approximate dimensions: 4–8 9 4–8 9 1–2 mm (thick) and polished with no lubricants in a dry room prior to chemical stability testing.

All chemical stability testing, including the standardizing heat treatment, was conducted in a glove box under argon with an

oxygen and water content less than 1 ppm. All samples were heated at 800 °C for 2–4 h to standardize the specimens prior to testing. The purpose of this heat treatment was to remove any surface ﬁlms prior to testing. It has been shown for the case of Na wetting on beta-alumina that heating at high temperature enhanced Na wetting [7, 8]. It was suggested that the enhanced wetting was a result of the removal of surface ﬁlms such as water, carbonates, or hydroxides [7, 8]. It was observed by infrared spectroscopy that LLZO samples left in ambient air over time developed a Li2CO3 surface layer on them. The Li2CO3 layer could be removed by heating at 800 °C for 2–4 h. The Li2CO3 layer did not reform as long as the sample was not exposed to ambient air. For chemical stability testing, a LLZO sample was wrapped in Li foil, after which the wrapped sample was placed into a stainless tube, which was subsequently sealed at both ends by stainless steel end caps, tightened with a wrench. The sealed tube was heated in a furnace at temperatures of 300–350 °C for a period of time ranging from 24 to 168 h. The sealed stainless steel tube was furnace cooled to room temperature, after which the sample was removed from the stainless steel tube, placed into a glass bottle sealed, then removed from the glove box to a dry room. In the dry room, the sample was placed in a beaker of dry methanol to remove any adhering metallic Li on the surface, after which it was then stored in the dry room in a sealed pouch until it was analyzed.

To conﬁrm the results, some additional LLZO samples were placed on an alumina disc. This was then placed on a hot plate and ball of Li was placed on the LLZO sample. The hot plate was heated to a maximum temperature of *330 °C. The temperature was measured by a thermocouple touching the alumina disc. The LLZO samples were heated at time periods ranging from 1 to 4 h using this method. From the second method, it was observed that a temperature of *300 °C is required for almost complete Li wetting of LLZO. Similar results (coloration and cracking, discussed later) were obtained by both testing methods.

The phase(s) present in the LLZO samples prior to and after chemical stability testing were determined using X-ray diffraction with a Rigaku Ultima III X-ray diffractometer in a parallel beam geometry. Lattice constants were determined via Rietveld reﬁnement of the parallel beam X-ray data using the RIQAS program.

The surface composition of LLZO samples prior to and after chemical stability testing was determined using X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS). XPS spectra were acquired using a Kratos Axis 165 X-ray photoelectron spectrometer

operating in hybrid mode, using monochromatic Al ka radiation (1486.6 eV) at 220 W. The spectrometer was at 5 9 10-8 Torr or lower throughout data collection. Survey spectra and valence-band high-resolution spectra were collected with pass energies of 160 and 20 eV, respectively. All data were calibrated to the hydrocarbon contamination peak at 284.8 eV.

The microstructure of the LLZO samples prior to and after chemical stability testing was examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (FEI Quanta 200 F). In addition, the chemical composition of several LLZO samples after chemical stability testing was investigated in the SEM using energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS).

The hot-pressed LLZO samples were tan-white colored after heat treatment at 800 °C. After heating in molten Li at 300–350 °C, the LLZO surface had undergone chemical coloration and become gray-black. The reacted layer was estimated to be *300 nm after 168 h at 300 °C.

The X-ray diffraction patterns of the LLZO samples before and after immersion in molten Li at 300 °C for 196 h are shown in Fig. 1. From Fig. 1, it is seen that the diffraction patterns look similar, before and after immersion in molten Li. For all chemical stability tests, the diffraction patterns looked similar before and after testing, suggesting that no new phases formed during immersion. All patterns are predominantly single phase of cubic symmetry with space group Ia 3d. There was a very slight increase in lattice parameter, a, and hence an increase in lattice volume after immersion for all stability tests [a0 = 12.9773 A˚ (6)]. The relative change in lattice volume, DV/V, where DV is the volume change after immersion minus the volume change before immersion and V0 is the volume before immersion [DV/V0 = (Da/a0)3] ranged from 0.2 to 0.5 %.

Figure 2 is the XPS spectra of the Li 1 s core level electron in LLZO before and after immersion with molten Li at 300 °C for 168 h. From Fig. 2, it can be observed that the binding energy for the Li 1 s electron in LLZO before and after immersion is the same (55.0 eV). This suggests that only one oxidation state for Li is present in both materials,

Fig. 1 X-ray diffraction patterns of Li7La3Zr2O12 before and after immersion in molten Li for 168 h at 300 °C

Fig. 2 X-ray photoemission spectroscopy spectra of the Li 1 s core level in Li7La3Zr2O12 before and after immersion in molten Li for 168 h at 300 °C

Li?, no metallic Li is detected in the LLZO material after immersion. In addition, from Fig. 2, it is observed that the relative intensity of the Li? 1 s electron peak is higher in the LLZO material after immersion compared to the asreceived material, suggesting that during immersion with molten Li, the Li? content of LLZO has increased. This was conﬁrmed by XPS sputtering proﬁles of LLZO samples after immersion. XPS analysis revealed no shift in the binding energy of the La 3d, Zr 3d, and Al 2p electrons before and after immersion with molten Li, suggesting that there was no valence change of La?3, Zr?4, and Al?3 in LLZO after immersion in molten Li.

Figure 3 is an SEM image of the LLZO sample after immersion in molten Li at 300 °C for 92 h. From Fig. 3, it can be observed that the sample exhibits cracks that are nearly perpendicular to each other. Figure 4 is a highmagniﬁcation image of a cracked region, revealing that the fracture mode is entirely intergranular. Cracks were observed in all samples after immersion testing. No cracks were observed on the sample surface prior to immersion.

From the above results, it is observed that there are two potential issues. The ﬁrst is chemical coloration and the second is cracking. These will now be discussed.

Fig. 3 Scanning electron micrograph of Li7La3Zr2O12 after immersion in molten Li for 92 h at 300 °C

Chemical coloration has also been observed for the case of both beta-alumina [7, 9–14] and Nasicon [7, 15] after exposure to molten Na without the passage of current. Beta-alumina and Nasicon samples started out tan-white and after exposure to molten, Na turned gray-black. These results are similar to what was observed in this study for LLZO samples after immersion in molten Li. One potential problem with the onset of chemical coloration is enhanced electronic conductivity [9, 17]. For the case of beta-alumina, increased electronic conductivity was observed with

heat-treatment atmospheres, and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) results [10, 11, 13, 14, 16]. From Eqs. 1 and 2, it is expected that an increase in Li? content should be observed in the reacted LLZO region compared to the as-received LLZO for the case of color center formation in the reacted region. This is in agreement with the experimental XPS results, which reveal an enhanced Li? content in the reacted LLZO region compared to the as-received LLZO region. For the case of color centers in beta-alumina, it was found that they could be bleached (change color from gray-black to the original tan-white as a consequence of the destruction of the color centers) as a result of heating at high temperatures in an oxidizing atmosphere [10, 11, 13, 18]. It was observed that when the gray-black colored reacted LLZO was heated in air at 800 °C for 2–4 h, it became tan-white colored. The same color as the asreceived material. This result is also consistent with the suggestion that the gray-black color in LLZO after Li immersion is associated with the formation of color centers. As a further test for the presence of color centers in LLZO after immersion in molten Li, powdered samples of as-received (white) and after immersion (black) LLZO samples were sent to ChemAnalytical, LLC (Pittsford, NY) to obtain EPR spectra at room temperature using an X-band CW-EPR spectrometer. Figure 5 shows the room temperature EPR spectra of the as-received (a) and the reacted (b) LLZO powders. A comparison of Fig. 5a, b reveals a strong EPR signal around 3500 G in the reacted powders, whereas no detectable signal is exhibited in the as-received powders. This result is similar to the case for EPR studies on beta-alumina, where EPR signals where observed around 3500 G in the dark-colored samples (reacted) and none observed in the white material (unreacted) [13]. Based on the 3500 G (g * 1.997) value, it was suggested that this signal came from unpaired electrons trapped at oxygen vacancies (color centers) [13]. Hence, the similarity of the EPR results from LLZO and beta-alumina gives additional evidence that most likely explanation for chemical coloration of the LLZO samples after immersion in molten Li is a result of color centers, composed of electrons trapped at oxygen vacancies.

The observation that LLZO cracked after immersion in molten Li at temperatures ranging from 300–350 °C is in agreement with the results of L. Viswanathan and A. V. Virkar [7] and H. Schmid et al. [15] who observed a similar effect with Nasicon, in that it cracked after exposure to molten sodium. Schmid et al. [15] observed a similar crack pattern to that observed in Fig. 3, in that the cracks in Nasicon were also nearly perpendicular to each other. Based on the nature of the crack pattern

Fig. 4 High-magniﬁcation scanning electron image of Li7La3Zr2O12 after immersion in molten Li for 92 h at 300 °C

the appearance of the gray-black color [9, 17]. Unfortunately, in our case, the samples were too badly cracked after testing to allow for a measurement of the electronic conductivity.

Several possible explanations have been suggested for the origin of the chemical coloration in beta-alumina [10, 11, 13, 16]. These include: (1) metallic Na in beta-alumina, (2) transition metal impurities in beta-alumina, and (3) Na atoms diffuse interstitially into beta-alumina then dissociate to form Na ions and electrons, which is followed by trapping of the electrons by oxygen vacancies to form color centers according to the following defect reactions [13, 14]: ð1Þ ð2Þ

where Kroger–Vink notation is used. For the case of LLZO, explanation number (1) can be ruled out, since no metallic Li was observed following immersion of LLZO in molten Li. Explanation (2) can also be ruled out as a possible reason, since LLZO contains no transition metal cations and XPS analysis revealed that La, Zr, and Al did not change valence state after immersion. However, during chemical stability testing, LLZO was placed inside a stainless steel tube. To check whether LLZO picked up any transition metal impurities from the stainless steel tube, EDS was conducted using the SEM for Ni, Fe, and Cr on LLZO tested for 92 and 168 h. No transition metal impurities were found. Also, XPS analysis of the immersed 168-h sample also revealed no transition metal impurities. It has been suggested that chemical coloration in betaalumina after immersion in molten Na is associated with color centers composed of electrons trapped at oxygen vacancies (Eqs. 1 and 2), based on the results of kinetic studies, microstructural observations, the effect of different

where r is the stress, E is Young’s modulus, m is Poisson’s ratio, DV is the volume change, and V is the original volume. The room temperature values for the LLZO composition used in this study are E = 150 GPa and m = 0.27 [6]. X-ray diffraction data yielded DV/V = 0.2–0.5 %. Substituting these values into Eq. 3 results in stress values ranging from 200 to 500 MPa. Unfortunately, at present, no fracture stress data for LLZO are available to compare to the predicted stress values.

However, fracture stress values do exist for another material of (cubic garnet) Y3Al5O12 (YAG). Fracture stress values for YAG range from 200 to 300 MPa [20, 21]. In addition, fracture stress values for other Li(Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 [22]) and Na-ion (Nasicon [23, 24] and beta-alumina [25]) conducting electrolytes are available. They range from *150 to 300 MPa [20–25]. The fact the predicted stresses values for LLZO are in close agreement with measured fracture stress values for YAG and other solid-state electrolytes may suggest in ﬁrst approximation that LLZO cracking is indeed a result of the volume expansion due to additional Li? gained during immersion. In order to conclusively conﬁrm this suggestion, the fracture stress of LLZO as a function of temperature and the values of E, m, and DV/V as a function of temperature are required.

The chemical stability of cubic Li7La3Zr2O12 in molten Li in the temperature range 300–350 °C, where a molten Li–metal halide battery is anticipated to operate in, was investigated. After heating, the LLZO surface had undergone chemical coloration, changing from an initial tanwhite color to gray-black. X-diffraction, X-ray photoemission spectroscopy, electron paramagnetic resonance, and heat-treatment experiments suggest that chemical coloration is a result of the formation of color centers, an electron trapped at an oxygen vacancy, similar to what has been postulated for chemical coloration of beta-alumina after immersion in molten Na.

It was also observed that after immersion in molten Li that LLZO exhibited cracks, whereas no cracks were observed in the samples prior to immersion. The fracture mode is entirely intergranular. Based on the nature of the LLZO cracking pattern and the close agreement of the predicted stresses with experimental fracture stress values for other cubic garnets such as YAG and other solid Liand Na-ion conductors, it is believed that the fracture of LLZO

Fig. 5 Electron paramagnetic resonance spectra of Li7La3Zr2O12 before and after immersion in molten Li for 168 h at 300 °C

(perpendicular cracking is often stresses generated as a result of volume changes [18]) and the fact that X-ray diffraction measurements showed an increase in lattice volume, Schmid et al. [15] suggested that the cracking of Nasicon was due to stresses generated as a result of volume changes associated with the addition of Na? gained during immersion. In addition, Schmid et al. [15] observed an intergranular fracture mode for Nasicon after exposure to molten Na at 300 °C, in agreement with the results of this study (Fig. 4). Owing to the similarity of the crack pattern for LLZO with that for Nasicon and the fact that X-ray diffraction and XPS analysis of the reacted LLZO material conﬁrmed the presence of increased lattice volume and enhanced Li? compared to the as-received material, respectively, it is highly likely that the cracking in LLZO is a result of stresses generated by volume changes due to additional Li? gained during immersion. If this is true, it is of interest to determine the stresses generated as a result of the increased Li? content due to immersion in molten Li and see how they compare to the fracture stress for LLZO. The stress generated as a result of a volume change is


is a result of the stresses generated as a consequence of extra Li? gained during immersion.

It appears at present as a consequence of chemical coloration, which can lead to enhanced electronic conductivity, and more importantly the cracking that operation of a molten Li–metal halide battery in the temperature range 300–350 °C or higher with an LLZO electrolyte is not possible unless these issues can be eliminated.

Acknowledgements JW, JAL, JR would like to acknowledge support of the Army Research Laboratory. JS would like to acknowledge the support of the US Army Research Ofﬁce (ARO).