A   mixed   potential   type   sensor   based   on   NASICON   (sodium   super-ionic   conductor)   was   designed   for  the detection   of   hydrogen.   Two  original   ways   were   combined   to   promote   the   sensor’s   sensitivity.   LaCrO3 was   applied   on   Au   reference   electrode   as   H2 oxidation   layer   to  minimize   the   H2 response   on  reference electrode.   Additional   NASICON   layer   was   coated   on   Au   sensing   electrode   serving   as   sensitive   electrode for   limiting   the  O2 diffusion.   H2 temperature-programmed   reduction   (TPR)   measurement   was   conducted to   test   the   oxidizability   of   LaCrO3.   The   effect   of  O2 concentration   on  sensor’s   sensitivity   was  discussed to  verify   the  function   of   additional   NASICON   layer.   The   correlation   between   the   thickness   of   additional NASICON   diffusion   layer   and   sensor’s   sensitivity   was   also  studied.   The   research   showed   that   the  sensor attached   with   0.3   mm   thick  additional   NASICON   layer   exhibited   the   largest   sensitivity   to   100–5000   ppm −123   mV/decade.   In   addition,   the   sensor   exhibited   excellent   selectivity   to   H2 H2 at   400 ◦C,   the   slope   was   against   the  other   interference   gases,   such   as  CO,   NO2,  NH3,  C7H8,   C2H4,   CH2O,   C3H6O   and   CH4.

Hydrogen  (H2),  a  kind  of  clean  energy,  has  been  widely  used in  fuel  cells,  cars  with  H2 engine,  industrial  processing  and  others [1,2].  However,  its  security  is  very  important  in  practical  application,  since  H2 is  a  kind  of  hazardous,  odorless  and  ﬂammable gas.  Based  on  this,  the  detection  of  H2 has  recently  attracted  considerable  interest.  Hydrogen  sensors  based  on  various  sensing principles  and  materials  have  been  widely  investigated  and  developed,  e.g.,  thin  ﬁlm  type  H2 sensor  [3,4],  semiconductor  metal oxides  type  [5–7],  diode  type  [8],  FETs  type  [9,10],  solid  electrolytes type  [11–15],  etc.  Among  these  sensors,  the  solid  electrolyte  type H2 sensor  exhibits  high  sensitivity,  speedy  response  kinetics  and excellent  stability  [11–15].  Lu  et  al.  has  developed  the  mixed  potential  H2 sensor  based  on  stabilized  zirconia  and  oxide  electrode  [16]. Though  the  H2 sensing  device  showed  an  excellent  sensing  performance,  the  high  operating  temperature  (500–700 ◦C)  limited its  further  application.  NASICON  (Na3Zr2Si2PO12)  electrolyte  can work  at  the  temperature  range  of  100–500 ◦C,  and  has  been  widely used  as  sensing  materials  for  detecting  various  gases.  Besides their  relative  lower  operating  temperature,  the  gas  sensors  based on  NASICON  have  obvious  advantages,  such  as  high  selectivity, rapid  and  reproducible  response,  low  concentration  detection.  Various  NASICON-based  sensors,  e.g.,  potentiometric  type  CO2 sensor

[17–19],  amperometric  type  NO2 sensor  utilizing  the  nitrite  auxiliary  electrode  [20],  as  well  as  mixed  potential  type  sensors  using oxide  sensing  electrode  [21–25],  have  been  investigated  in  the  past few  years.  However,  few  researches  about  NASICON-based  H2 sensors  have  been  reported.  As  for  NASICON-based  mixed  potential type  sensors,  most  attentions  have  been  paid  on  searching  new sensing  electrode  materials.  The  study  found  that  NASICON-based sensors  attached  with  Pr6O11-doped  SnO2 [22],  V2O5-doped  TiO2 [23],  CaMg3(SiO3)4-doped  CdS  [24],  or  Cr2O3 [25]  as  the  sensing electrodes,  can  give  sensitive  and  selective  respond  to  dilute  H2S, SO2,  Cl2 or  NH3 in  air,  respectively.

For  the  NASICON-based  mixed  potential  sensors  in  which  the sensing  and  reference  electrodes  are  exposed  to  the  same  gases, electrochemical  reactions  occur  at  both  electrodes,  and  the  difference  of  the  sensing  and  reference  electrode  potentials  is  measured as  the  sensing  signal  (sensitivity)  [26].  Thus,  blocking  the  electrochemical  reactions  at  the  reference  electrode  could  raise  the sensitivity  of  sensor  to  target  gases.  Miura  et  al.  used  Mn2O3 as gas-insensitive  reference  electrode  for  yttria-stabilized  zirconia (YSZ)-based  potentiometric  oxygen  sensor  [27],  the  oxygen  sensor attached  with  a  couple  of  Au  sensing  electrode  and  Mn2O3 reference  electrode  exhibited  large  responses  to  CO,  H2 and  unsaturated HCs.

In  this  work,  a  new  kind  of  H2 sensor  has  been  fabricated  and evaluated.  To  get  a  H2-insensitive  reference  electrode,  LaCrO3 has been  applied  on  the  Au  electrode  because  of  its  oxidation  to  H2 at high  temperature.  Moreover,  Au  electrode  has  been  used  as  sensing electrode  for  the  H2 sensor  and  an  additional  NASICON  layer  has

Fig.  1.  Schematic  structure  of  the  sensor.

been  coated  on  Au  sensing  electrode  for  limiting  the  diffusion  of  O2, resulting  in  a  great  enhancement  of  sensor’s  sensitivity.  A  sensing mechanism  involved  in  the  mixed  potential,  gas  diffusion  and  H2 oxidation  in  the  LaCrO3 layer  has  been  proposed.

ZrO(NO3)2,  NaNO3, (NH4)2HPO4 and  Si(C2H5O)4 by  sol–gel  process  and  calcined at  900 ◦C  for  6  h  [24].  Perovskite-type  oxide  LaCrO3 was   prepared by  a  citric  acid  complex  method  [28].  La(NO3)3 6H2O  and  Cr(NO3)2 9H2O  were  used  as  sources  of  La  and  Cr,  respectively.  The  above metal  nitrates  in  stoichiometric  ratios  were  ﬁrst  dissolved  in an  aqueous  solution  with  an  equimolar  amount  of  citric  acid, making  [M]:[citric  acid]  =  1:1.  This  mixture  was  evaporated  at 80 ◦C  to  make  a  sol–gel  of  organic  metal  complex,  followed  by  an overnight  drying  at  120 ◦C  and  pre-decomposition  at  400 ◦C  for 2  h.  The  precursors  were  ﬁnally  calcined  in  air  at  800 ◦C  for  5  h, the  increasing  and  decreasing  rates  were  10 ◦C/min  and  5 ◦C/min, respectively.

Phase  composition  of  the  prepared  powder  was   veriﬁed  by  Xray  diffraction  (Rigaku  wide-angle  X-ray  diffractometer  (D/max  rA, using  Cu  K␣   =  0.1541  nm)).  Temperatureprogrammed  reduction  (TPR)  measurements  were  conducted  with a  Micromeritics  AutoChem  2910  Automated  Catalyst  Characterization  System.  About  0.1  g  of  sample  placed  in  the  reactor  was activated  in  a  ﬂow  of  synthetic  air  at  500 ◦C  at  a  rate  of  10 ◦C/min  for 1  h.  After  the  sample  was  cooled  to  50 ◦C  in  synthetic  air,  a  mixture of  10  vol%  H2/Ar  was  introduced  into  the  sample  loop  at  50  ml/min. The  sample  was  heated  at  a  rate  of  10 ◦C/min  to  800 ◦C.  The  efﬂuent gas  was  passed  through  a  viscous  solution  of  isopropanol,  cooled by  liquid  N2 to  remove  the  water  produced  during  the  reduction, and  analyzed  with  a  thermal  conductive  detector.

Fig.  2.  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  pattern  of  LaCrO3.

Gas  sensing  properties  of  the  sensors  were  measured  by  a  conventional  static  mounting  method.  The  sample  gases  containing different  H2 concentration  were  obtained  by  diluting  pure  H2 with air.  When  the  sensor  was  exposed  to  air  or  the  sample  gas,  the electromotive  force  (V)  was  measured  with  a  digital  electrometer (RIGOL  TECHNOLOGIES,  INC,  DM3054,  China)  as  a  sensing  signal and  the  obtained  results  were  registered  with  a  computer  connected  to  the  electrometer.

Fig.  2  shows  the  XRD  pattern  of  the  as-prepared  material.  It  can be  seen  that  the  as-prepared  oxide  retained  its  orthorhombic  crystallographic  phases,  corresponding  to  JCPDS  PDFs#71-1231  and was  testiﬁed  to  be  pure  perovskite-type  oxide  LaCrO3.  The  particle size  of  LaCrO3 calculated  by  Debye–Scherrer  equation  was  about 38  nm.

LaCrO3 is  applied  on  Au  reference  electrode  as  oxidation  layer for  H2,  the  overall  H2 consumption  has  effect  on  sensor’s  sensing properties.  The  oxidation  behavior  of  LaCrO3 examined  by  TPR  is shown  in  Fig.  3.  The  TPR  proﬁle  of  LaCrO3 sample  exhibited  two distinct  peaks  at  335  and  435 ◦C.  When  LaCrO3 was   heated  up  to

The  schematic  structure  of  NASICON-based  sensor  is  shown  in Fig.  1.  A  thick  ﬁlm  of  NASICON  was  formed  on  the  outer  surface of  an  alumina  tube  as  the  ionic  conductor  layer  by  applying  NASICON  precursor  paste  and  sintering  at  900 ◦C  for  6  h.  A  couple  of ring-shaped  Au  electrodes  were  formed  on  the  two  ends  of  the NASICON  thick  ﬁlm.  An  additional  NASICON  layer  and  LaCrO3 layer was  coated  on  one  and  the  other  Au  electrode  by  sintering  NASICON  and  LaCrO3 paste  at  800 ◦C  and  600 ◦C  for  6  h,  respectively.  The sensors  with  0  mm,   0.1  mm,   0.3  mm  and  0.6  mm  thick  additional NASICON  layer  were  marked  as  sensor  A,  B,  C  and  D,  respectively. A  sensor  without  LaCrO3 layer  and  with  0.3  mm  thick  additional NASICON  layer  was  marked  as  sensor  E.  For  keeping  the  sensor  at  an appropriate  operating  temperature,  Ni–Cr  coil  heater  was  inserted into  the  alumina  tube.

Fig.  3.  H2 TPR  proﬁle  of  LaCrO3 and  dependence  of  H2 conversion  ratio  on  temperature.

250 ◦C,  H2 began  to  be  consumed.  The  inset  in  Fig.  3  shows  the  relationship  between  H2 conversation  ratio  and  temperature.  It  can  be observed  that  H2 conversation  ratio  was  almost  90%  when  temperature  reached  450 ◦C.  Such  results  veriﬁed  that  LaCrO3 was  an appropriate  oxidation  layer  to  make  reference  electrode  insensitive.

Fig.  5.  Response  transient  of  sensor  A,  B,  C  and  D  to  1000  ppm  H2 at  400 ◦C.

Table  1  lists  the  different  properties  of  sensors  with  different structure.  Firstly,  the  effect  of  LaCrO3 on  sensing  properties  was studied.  Fig.  4  shows  the  responses  (V)  of  the  sensor  C  and  E to  100–5000  ppm  H2 at  400 ◦C.  For  both  sensing  devices,  the  V was  almost  proportional  to  the  logarithm  of  H2 concentrations,  the −123  mV/decade sensitivities  (slopes)  of  the  sensor  C  and  E  were  −60  mV/decade,  respectively.  And  the  sensitivity  of  the  senand  sor  C  was  much  larger  than  that  of  sensor  E.  It  indicated  that  the increasing  of  response  can  be  attributed  to  the  coating  of  LaCrO3 on  the  Au  reference  electrode.  For  the  NASICON-based  sensor  using Au  sensing  and  reference  electrodes,  the  sensing  signal  is  the difference  of  the  mixed  potentials  in  the  sensing  and  reference  electrodes.  Since  H2 was  oxidized  almost  completely  on  the  LaCrO3,  the response  to  H2 was  largely  enhanced.  In  addition,  both  electrodes  of sensor  E  were  formed  by  Au  porous  layers,  after  applying  the  additional  NASICON  layer,  the  sensor  E  showed  low  sensitivity  (slope) in  the  range  of  100–5000  ppm  H2.  In  lower  H2 concentration  range V   was  a  plus  value.  When  the  H2 concentra(100–200  ppm),  the  tion  was  higher  than  200  ppm,  it  became  minus.  It’s  because  that the  additional  NASICON  layer  controls  the  gas  diffusion  into  the triple-phase  interface.

Secondly,  the  correlation  between  the  thickness  of  additional NASICON  diffusion  layer  and  sensor’s  sensitivity  was   investigated. Fig.  5  shows  the  dependence  of  the  responses  of  the  sensor  A,  B,  C and  D  to  1000  ppm  H2 at  400 ◦C.  It  can  be  observed  that  the  sensor

using  0.3  mm  thick  NASICON  covering  layer  exhibited  the  largest response  to  1000  ppm  H2.  When  the  thickness  of  NASICON  layer increased  to  0.3  mm  from  0  mm,   the  sensitivity  to  1000  ppm  H2 at −24  mV.   The  sensitivity  increased  to 400 ◦C  reached  nearly  seven  times  higher.  The  inset  in  Fig.  5  shows  the  response transients  of  the  sensors  with  different  NASICON  layer  thickness. The  sensor  A,  B  and  D  exhibited  speedy  response  kinetics,  but  the sensor  C  displayed  a  slower  recovery  property.  The  details  will  be discussed  in  Section  3.4.

Finally,  other  sensing  properties  of  sensor  C  were  performed. Since  the  sensitivity  of  the  mixed  potential  type  sensor  based  on NASICON  and  oxide  electrode  is  strongly  dependent  on  the  operating  temperature,  the  correlation  between  the  sensitivity  of  the sensor  C  and  the  operating  temperature  was   measured  and  shown in  Fig.  6.  It  can  be  seen  that  the  sensor  C  gave  the  largest  sensitivity to  H2 at  400 ◦C,  indicating  that  the  optimal  operating  temperature was  400 ◦C.

The  response  and  recovery  curve  of  the  sensor  C  was  measured and  displayed  in  Fig.  7.  Sensor  C  was  exposed  to  air  and  H2 for 90  s  alternately.  The  90%  response  times  of  sensor  C  to  100  and 5000  ppm  H2 were  35  and  25  s,  respectively.  And  the  90%  recovery  times  were  50  and  75  s  at  400 ◦C,  respectively.  The  responses slightly  increased  with  time,  especially  in  the  low  concentration  H2. While  the  responses  increased  in  small  range,  the  responses  ﬁnally became  constant  when  exposed  in  target  gas  for  more  than  1  min

Fig.  4.  Dependence  of  400 ◦C.

For  the  sensors  using  NASICON  and  the  oxide  electrodes,  we have  proposed  the  sensing  mechanism  involved  in  mixed  potential at  the  sensing  electrode  [22–25].  Therefore,  a  similar  sensing  mechanism  would  be  attempted  to  apply  for  the  present  sensors.  Fig.  10 schematically  illustrates  H2 sensing  model  of  the  device  attached additional  NASICON  layer.  Two  main  processes  are  involved,  gas diffusion  through  the  additional  NASICON  layer  and  the  electrochemical  reactions  occurring  at  the  triple-phase  boundary  (TPB). In  the  gas  diffusion  process,  the  diffusion  rate  is  determined  by  gas diffusion  coefﬁcient,  concentration  of  sample  gas  and  the  thickness of  additional  NASICON  layer.  The  diffusion  of  O2 is  more  difﬁcult than  that  of  H2,  which  leads  to  the  enhancement  of  the  sensitivity  to  H2.  The  present  sensor  can  be  expressed  by  the  following electrochemical  cell:

When  H2 molecule  reaches  the  triple-phase  boundary,  a  couple of  following  electrochemical  reactions  (2)  and  (3)  can  occur  at  the Au  sensing  electrode  simultaneously. + + 2H2 + + +

Reactions  (2)  and  (3)  form  a  local  cell  at  the  TPB.  When  the  rates of  the  reactions  are  equal  to  each  other,  they  arrive  at  a  dynamic equilibrium,  and  the  electrode  potential  at  the  sensing  electrode is  the  mixed  potential.  By  treating  Eqs.  (2)  and  (3)  with  the  same process  described  in  Refs.  [16,26,29],  the  electric  current  densities of  the  electrochemical  oxidation  and  reduction  reactions  (2)  and (3)  can  be  represented  by  the  following  equations: iO = iH = E  is  the  electrode  potential,  F  the  Faraday  constant.  E0,  i0 and    are the  electrode  potential  at  equilibrium,  the  exchange  current  density,  and  the  transfer  coefﬁcient,  respectively.  For  reactions  (4)  and

Fig.  8.  Reproducibility  of  sensor  C  to  400  ppm  H2 at  400 ◦C.

Besides,  the  continuous  response  and  recovery  transients  of  sensor  C  to  400  ppm  H2 at  400 ◦C  were  also  examined  as  shown  in  Fig.  8. The  value  of  ﬁrst  response  was  used  as  criterion  to  calculate  the decay  of  other  responses.  The  results  showed  that  changes  were  in −3.6  to  −0.6%,  indicating  that  sensor  C  showed  good the  range  of  repeatability  to  H2. Fig.  9  displays  the  cross-sensitivities  of  the  sensor  C  to  various  gases  at  400 ◦C,  such  as  CO,  NO2,  NH3,  C7H8,  C2H4,  C3H6O, CH2O  and  CH4.  As  shown  in  Fig.  9,  the  sensor  C  exhibited  much larger  sensitivity  to  H2 than  the  other  gases.  It  indicates  that  the

Fig.  9.  Cross-sensitivities  to  various  gases  for  sensor  C  at  400 ◦C.

transients  reduced  with  the  increasing  concentration  of  O2.  The inset  in  Fig.  11  shows  the  correlation  between  response  and  O2 concentration.  It  can  be  observed  that  the  response  was   almost  linear to  the  logarithm  of  the  O2 concentration  and  the  slope  was  positive.  Such  results  conﬁrmed  the  sensing  mechanism  involved  in  the mixed-potential.  Similar  results  have  been  found  in  YSZ-based  NO2 sensor  [30].

(5)  at  the  equilibrium  state,  the  absolute  values  of  the  above  electric  current  densities  are  same,  but  the  directions  are  opposite.  So, we  can  express  the  equilibrium  state  with  the  following  equation:

iO =   0  We   suppose  that  the  exchange  current  densities  obey  the  fol-

lowing  kinetic  equations,  respectively: i0 O

i0 H Here,  C  represents  the  concentration  of  H2 or  O2,  and  B1,  B2,  m and  n  are  the  constants.  Let  us  combine  Eqs.  (4)–(8),  the  following equation  can  be  attained: EM = Here, E0 =

R  is  the  gas  constant  and  T  the  temperature.  EM is  the  electrode potential  of  the  sensing  electrode  at  the  equilibrium  state,  so  it is  called  a  mixed  potential.  When  the  concentration  of  oxygen  is ﬁxed,  the  mixed  potential  changes  linearly  with  the  logarithm  of the  concentration  of  H2.  Such  analysis  can  explain  the  correlation of  V  (EM)  and  H2 concentration  shown  in  Figs.  4  and  6.

For  the  present  sensor,  since  the  sensing  and  reference  electrodes  are  exposed  to  the  same  target  gases,  the  sensing  signal is  the  difference  of  the  sensing  and  reference  electrode  potentials.  Considering  the  high  oxidizability  of  perovskite-type  oxides, LaCrO3 is  covered  on  the  reference  electrode  to  make  the  reference electrode  insensitive.  When  H2 diffuses  through  the  LaCrO3 catalyst layer,  most  of  H2 is  oxidized,  only  little  H2 arrives  in  the  three-phase boundary  and  participates  in  the  electrochemical  reactions  on  the reference  electrode.  So  the  mixed  potential  induced  by  H2 on  the reference  electrode  is  very  small.  The  function  of  the  LaCrO3 layer is  to  improve  the  sensor’s  sensitivity  by  canceling  the  effect  of  H2 on  the  reference  electrode.

According  to  Eq.  (9),  when  the  H2 concentration  is  ﬁxed,  the mixed-potential  is  linear  to  the  logarithm  of  the  O2 concentration in  a  plus  slope.  In  order  to  verify  this  conclusion,  the  effect  of  the coexisting  oxygen  concentration  was  investigated.  Fig.  11  shows the  response  transient  of  sensor  A  to  1000  ppm  H2 in  atmospheres containing  1%,  5%,  10%,  20%  O2 at  400 ◦C.  As  expected,  the  response

For  most  mixed  potential  type  sensor,  the  sensing  electrode  is directly  exposed  to  sample  gas.  O2 can  diffuse  through  it,  then  reach the  TPB.  As  previously  discussed,  response  of  sensor  A  decreases with  the  increasing  concentration  of  O2.  Here  we   use  the  additional  NASICON  layer  as  a  natural  gas  diffusion  barrier  to  reduce O2 diffusion  without  affecting  H2 diffusion  too  much,  for  increasing  the  sensor’s  sensitivity.  The  thickness  of  additional  NASICON layer  can  also  affect  the  gas  diffusion  and  sensor’s  sensitivity.  To explain  the  effect  of  additional  NASICON  layer  on  sensor’s  sensitivity,  a  gas  diffusion  model  based  on  Fick’s  ﬁrst  law  is  established.  By postulating  that  the  ﬂux  changes  from  high  concentration  to  low one,  it  is  proportional  to  the  concentration  gradient.  Only  considering  the  diffusion  in  the  direction  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of the  additional  NASICON,  the  following  equation  can  be  obtained: =

Here,  J  is  diffusion  ﬂux,  D  is  gas  diffusion  coefﬁcient,  x  is  the  posi∂C/∂x  is tion,  C  is  the  gas  concentration  which  is  a  function  of  x,  the  concentration  gradient,  the  minus  sign  indicates  that  gas  diffusion  proceeds  from  high  concentration  to  low  one.  The  value  of  D depends  on  the  nature  of  gas,  the  gas  permeability  of  diffusion  layer, the  temperature  and  so  on.  According  to  Graham’s  law  of  effusion at  the  same  temperature  and  pressure,  the  rate  of  effusion  for  a  gas is  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  its  mass.  Assume  the rate  of  effusion  and  the  molar  mass  of  H2 and  O2 is  RH,  MH,  RO and MO,  respectively.  The  formula  can  be  written  as:

Therefore,  effuse  rate  of  hydrogen  molecules  is  four  times  to  that of  oxygen.  Besides,  the  average  size  of  pores  in  additional  NASICON layer  is  tiny,  the  diffusion  of  O2 in  the  additional  NASICON  layer is  very  difﬁcult.  It  can  be  concluded  that  the  diffusion  coefﬁcient of  H2 (DH)  is  much  larger  than  that  of  O2 (DO).  Ignoring  irregular distribution  of  pores  in  NASICON  and  the  complex  gas  concentration  gradient,  it  can  be  assumed  that  there  are  a  few  cylindrical gas  diffusion  channels  in  the  additional  NASICON  layer.  The  gas concentration  presents  a  linear  distribution  along  the  channel.  The number  of  channels  is  N,  the  diffusion  area  of  each  channel  is  A, the  thickness  of  additional  NASICON  layer  is  L,  the  concentration gradients  are  CH/L  and  CO/L.  Eq.  (12)  can  be  simpliﬁed  as: JH = NADHCH

Generally  speaking,  Au  electrode  favors  reaction  (2)  more  than reaction  (3).  So  that  a  more  intense  non-Nernstian  response  can be  achieved.  But,  the  increasing  of  the  O2 concentration  enhances the  reaction  (3),  resulting  in  the  reduction  of  the  non-Nernstian response.  Eq.  (9)  also  reveals  that  the  increasing  of  O2 concentration  would  decrease  the  absolute  value  of  EM.  For  the  reference electrode  of  the  sensor  E,  H2 and  O2 can  easily  arrive  at  the  TPB and  higher  O2 concentration  intensely  reduces  the  non-Nernstian

L.  Xishuang  et  al.  /  Sensors  and  Actuators  B  185 (2013) 77–  83

response,  since  Au  layer  is  directly  exposed  to  the  target  gas.  For the  sensing  electrode  of  the  sensor  E,  H2 and  O2 diffusion  were both  blocked  by  the  additional  NASICON  layer  specially,  but  O2 diffusion  was  largely  restrained.  The  isolation  of  O2 could  efﬁciently raise  the  non-Nernstian  response.  According  to  Eq.  (14),  JH is  proportional  to  CH.  When  the  H2 concentration  is  lower  than  200  ppm, the  H2 concentration  at  the  TPB  of  the  sensing  electrode  is  key  factor,  which  is  much  lower  than  that  of  reference  electrode.  So  the response  of  sensor  E  is  plus.  However,  when  CH >  200  ppm,  most H2 arrives  at  the  TPB  of  the  sensing  electrode  oppositely,  the  oxygen  concentration  is  a  key  factor.  The  non-Nernstian  response  of sensing  electrode  induced  by  the  decreasing  of  the  oxygen  concentration  is  larger  than  that  of  reference  electrode,  so  the  sensor  E gives  a  negative  response.  As  for  the  effect  of  the  additional  NASICON  layer  thickness  on  the  response  of  the  sensor,  JH and  JO are both  inversely  proportional  to  the  thickness  of  additional  NASICON layer,  according  to  Eqs.  (14)  and  (15).  As  DO  5)   DH,  the  reduction of  JO with  increasing  L  is  much  more  intense  than  that  of  JH.  So, when  L  <  0.3  mm,   the  decreasing  of  the  oxygen  concentration  is a  key  factor,  the  response  increases  with  increasing  thickness  of NASICON  layer.  With  the  further  increasing  of  L,  H2 diffusion  was largely  restrained.  JH decreases  intensely  and  less  H2 arrives  at  the TPB,  the  sensor’s  response  decreases.  Such  analysis  could  explain the  sensing  behavior  to  H2 for  the  sensor  using  the  LaCrO3 catalyst layer  and  the  additional  NASICON  layer.

LaCrO3 was  an  efﬁcient  H2 oxidation  layer,  the  almost  complete oxidation  of  H2 made  reference  electrode  insensitive  to  H2.  With the  application  of  LaCrO3,  the  sensitivity  of  H2 sensor  at  400 ◦C −123  mV/decade.  When  the  thickraised  from  ness  of  additional  NASICON  layer  was  0.3  mm,   the  sensor  exhibited the  largest  sensitivity  to  H2.  In  addition,  the  sensor  exhibited  an excellent  selectivity  to  H2 against  the  other  interference  gases  and fast  response  kinetics.