Two kinds of planar-type potentiometric CO2 gas sensors using thermal evaporated Li3PO4 thin ﬁlm as solid electrolyte were fabricated. Alumina plates with rough and smooth surfaces were used as the substrates of the sensors. X-ray diffraction analysis, atomic force microscopy and scanning electron microscopy were used to characterise the Li3PO4 ﬁlms. The sensing properties were investigated in the range of 500–5000 ppm CO2 concentrations at 480°C. Both the rough substrate-based sensor (r-sensor) and the smooth substratebased sensor (s-sensor) were sensitive to CO2 gas and showed a good Nernst behaviour. The output electromotive force (EMF) of the s-sensor showed a more stable signal than the r-senor. The ΔEMF/decade values obtained from the r-sensor and the s-sensor were 45 and 55 mV/decade, respectively. The response and recovery time were not primarily inﬂuenced by the electrolyte ﬁlm. It was found that the sensitivity of the s-sensor was closer to the theoretical value. The results revealed that the substrate surface roughness may inﬂuence the characteristics of Li3PO4 ﬁlm and the response properties of the sensors to CO2.

Since the industrial revolution, there has been a rapid increase of greenhouse gases caused by increasing use of fossil fuel. It was not until the last few decades that humans became aware of the global climate crisis from the greenhouse effect. With rapid climate change and fast deterioration of people’s living environments, there has been an increasing need for the detection and control of greenhouse gases. In detecting the major greenhouse gas (CO2 gas) which arises from many ﬁelds of industrialisation, solid state potentiometric gas sensors have been studied for years [1–7]. Among these researches, sensors with a lithium ion transporting solid electrolyte and two electrodes (a sensing electrode and a reference electrode) have been paid much attention owing to their good sensing performances [8–10].

CO2 sensors based on bulk-type and ﬁlm-type Li3PO4 have been reported [11–16]. The ﬁlm-type sensor can be miniaturised for lowpower consumption as well as low-cost applications. Response characteristics of the sensors based on Li3PO4 ﬁlm with thicknesses of 0.3, 0.65 and 1.2 μm to CO2 and the effect of the thickness of the electrolyte ﬁlm on response property has been reported [15]. The results revealed that the ΔEMF/dec values increased with increase of electrolyte thickness. However, some work still needs to be done when making miniaturised thin ﬁlm gas sensors. It is unlike bulk-type electrolytes which are thick and needless of a substrate when fabricating a gas sensor. When designing a ﬁlm-type sensor, a substrate is needed as a predecessor. However, the surface roughness of the substrate may inﬂuence the characteristics of the electrolyte ﬁlm. This is due to the comparable dimensions between thin ﬁlm thickness (about 1 μm) and substrate roughness (about 0.1 μm to several nm). Surface roughness may also affect the response property of the sensor. The inﬂuence of roughness on the performance of the sensor based on thin electrolyte ﬁlm will be a new and interesting subject, which may help us to accurately design such kinds of sensors.

To investigate the effect of substrate roughness on a ﬁlm-type gas sensor, a sensor based on rough substrate (r-sensor) and a sensor based on smooth substrate (s-sensor) with thermally evaporated lithium phosphate (Li3PO4) thin ﬁlm were fabricated. The structures of the sensors were: CO2, O2, Au, Li2CO3|Li3PO4|TiO2 + Li2TiO3,

Au, O2 and CO2. In this reported work, substrates and electrolyte ﬁlms were analysed. The response properties of the sensors were investigated. The work provides a clue to improving the performance of thin ﬁlm type electrolyte gas sensors in the future.

The schematic of the gas sensor and of its fabrication process are shown in Figs. 1a and b. Alumina plates with a rough surface and smooth surface were used as the substrate of the sensors. The rough surface substrates were directly made from an industrial moulding process, whereas the smooth surface substrates were subsequently polished to obtain a the Al2O3 smaller substrates were 10 × 10 × 0.5 mm3. The substrates were immersed in acetone and washed for 10 min by the method of ultrasonic washing. Then, they were cleaned with alcohol and deionised water and dried. Li3PO4 (Aldrich, 99.99%) powder was used as the electrolyte and it was deposited on the two kinds of substrates by the thermal evaporation method with a working voltage of 4.2 V, − 3 Pa. The current 180 A and working pressure of 3 × 10 thickness of the ﬁlms on the rough substrate and smooth substrate was measured to be about 1.0 μm. The as-deposited thin ﬁlms were sintered at 700°C for 2 h in a tubular furnace in the air atmosphere. Two Au electrodes were sputtered on the electrolyte ﬁlms to have a ﬁne contact with the electrolyte ﬁlm and the thickness was about 400 nm. The reference electrode materials were composed of Li2TiO3 (Aldrich, 99.99%) and 10 mol% TiO2 (Shanghai Chemical Reagent Research Institute, 99.99%). The reference materials were mixed with an organic vehicle consisting of alpha-terpineol and ethyl cellulose. Then, the paste was screen printed on the Au electrode and sintered at 700°C for 1 h. The thickness of the reference electrode was about 15 μm. In a similar way, a Li2CO3 (Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Company Limited, 99.99%) sensing electrode with thickness of 10 μm was prepared and sintered at 600°C for 1 h. Finally, Pt wires were attached on the gold electrodes and annealed at 600°C for 2 h to make good contact.

An X-ray diffractometer, atomic force microscope (AFM) and scanning electron microscope (SEM) were used to characterise the Li3PO4 thin ﬁlms based on rough and smooth substrates.

that the morphologies of the deposited thin ﬁlms were reﬂected from the substrates. It means that the smoother the substrate surface, the smaller ﬁlm roughness will be. However, after annealing, the ﬁlm morphologies on both the rough substrate and the smooth substrate changed a bit. As shown in the images of Figs. 3c and f, the average roughness values of the two ﬁlms were 75 and 50 nm, respectively. The variations of the roughness of the ﬁlms were because of the recrystallisation process of the electrolyte and there was a trend for the surface morphologies of the ﬁlms to become similar. The reason may be that considerable dimensions of the peaks and valleys of the rough surface were induced randomly alongside growing paths for the evaporated thin ﬁlm grains. Thus, the two ﬁlms presented a difference in their morphologies. The results indicate that the surface morphologies of electrolyte thin ﬁlms were inﬂuenced by both the roughness of the substrates and the recrystallisation process of the electrolyte. Fig. 4 shows the SEM images of the annealed electrolyte ﬁlms on the two substrates. Grain sizes of the rough and smooth substratesbased ﬁlms were about 1–2 μm. However, the average grain size of the smooth ones was bigger. The two electrolyte ﬁlms presented an obvious difference in their morphologies and grain structures. The rough one (image of Fig. 4a) showed a clubbed shape with a porous structure, whereas the smooth one (image of Fig. 4b) obtained a polygonal shape with a much denser structure. The difference of the grain structure may inﬂuence the connectivity and ion conductivity of the solid electrolyte ﬁlm. The smooth substrate-based ﬁlm with the compact microstructure may be a good ion conductor.

For measurement of the properties of the sensors based on two kinds of electrolyte ﬁlms, different concentrations of CO2 gases (500–5000 ppm) were synthesised via a gas distribution system. In the system, two mass ﬂow controllers connected to a computer were used to prepare a series of different concentrations of CO2 gas. The total ﬂow rate of the gas was set as 200 sccm. The working temperature of the sensors was controlled by a tubular furnace (HTL1000–80). The sensing characteristics of the sensors to CO2 were investigated at a temperature of 480°C, since at around such temperature this kind of sensor showed good properties [12, 16]. The electromotive force (EMF) was collected by a multimeter (Agilent 34410A).

For the potentiometric gas sensor, the sensing mechanism is based on the electrochemical equilibrium equations in the sensing electrode and the reference electrode. Redox reactions in the two electrodes are denoted by the following equations

Figure 1 Schematic of gas sensor, and of fabrication process a Gas sensor b Fabrication process

X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns are shown in Fig. 2. Li3PO4 material was conﬁrmed in the two kinds of ﬁlms and the results revealed that the annealed Li3PO4 ﬁlms were the γ-phase. The peaks of Li3PO4 are marked with symbol ▪. However, when comparing the diffraction pattern of the smooth substrate-based ﬁlm (b) with the rough one’s (a), some peaks [(141), (311), (042), (160)] of Li3PO4 between 40° and 55° have not been found. The crystal orientations were inﬂuenced by the substrates. It means that the recrystallised electrolyte ﬁlm on the centralised crystal orientations which may be preferable for a simple ﬁlm structure.

To study the inﬂuence on electrolyte ﬁlms by differentiate substrate, three-dimensional (3D) morphologies of the substrates and electrolyte ﬁlms were analysed with an AFM and NanoScope Analysis software. Fig. 3 shows the scanned images of the substrates and the Li3PO4 thin ﬁlms on the substrates. Images Figs. 3a and d are the 3D morphologies of the rough alumina substrate and smooth alumina substrate. Average roughness values of the substrates were calculated to be 80 and 5 nm, respectively. The images of Figs. 3b and e show the 3D morphologies of the thermal evaporated Li3PO4 thin ﬁlms before annealing, and the roughness values were 87 and 30 nm, respectively. This indicates

and the overall reaction can be expressed by the following equation

The EMF (E) value between the two electrodes is determined by the Nernst equation in the following equation

where E0 is a certain value in a given working environment for a certain kind of sensor, R is the universal gas constant, T is the ambient temperature, n is the number of reaction electrons and F is the Faraday constant. When the temperature is ﬁxed, the EMF value is mainly determined by the partial pressure of CO2 ( p(CO2)). Fig. 5a shows the output EMF of the r-sensor and the s-sensor from 500 to 5000 ppm and then back to 500 ppm at a temperature of 480°C. The sensors were tested for weeks and they obtained good reproducibility before the study was carried out. The results indicate that the s-sensor and the r-sensor were sensitive to CO2. The EMF values decreased with increase of the partial pressure of CO2. The r-sensor showed unstable signals throughout the whole curve, whereas the s-sensor showed a more ﬂat signal in

Micro & Nano Letters, 2013, Vol. 8, Iss. 8, pp. 445–449 doi: 10.1049/mnl.2013.0256

447 & The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2013

the testing points. The stable signals from the s-sensor may provide easy post-processing of signals when the sensor is used for applications. The absolute EMF values were increased with decrease of the surface roughness of the substrate. Fig. 5b is the response and recovery characteristics of the sensors from 500 to 2000 ppm CO2 concentration. For the sensors tested, 90% average response time and recovery time were about 40 and 70 s, respectively. There was no big difference in the response and recovery time between the two kinds of sensors, although the r-sensor showed unstable signals. This means that response and recovery speed were not primarily inﬂuenced by the electrolyte ﬁlm.

Fig. 6 shows that the EMF values of the sensors correspond well with the Nernst’s slope in the logarithm view. The coefﬁcients of determination of the two ﬁtted lines were calculated to be 99.7 and 99.8%. This means that the measured values of EMF have a good linear relationship with logarithmic gas concentrations. The ΔEMF/dec values (sensitivities) of the s-sensor and the r-sensor were 55 and 45 mV/dec, respectively. The limits of detection (LOD) were calculated to be 0.029 and 0.015, respectively. It can be found that the s-sensor obtained a larger ΔEMF/dec value than the r-sensor. The ΔEMF/dec value of the s-sensor was closer to the theoretical value (74.7 mV/dec) at a temperature of 480°C. The smaller LOD value of the s-sensor was an evaluation for its stable signals. The phenomenon obtained by the experiments revealed that the ΔEMF/dec values of the sensors may be inﬂuenced by the morphologies of the electrolyte ﬁlms which were reﬂected from the substrate surfaces. The exact mechanism of the inﬂuence has not been clearly explained so far, and in our opinion it may be attributed to ionic conductivity, different polarisation ability and other factors.

Figure 5 EMF changes of sensors to various CO2 concentrations (500– 5000 ppm), and response-recovery characteristics of sensors from 500 to 2000 ppm CO2 concentration a EMF changes b Response-recovery characteristics

Figure 6 EMF against logarithmic CO2 concentrations

showed that annealed electrolyte ﬁlms were inﬂuenced by the differentiate substrate surface and the recrystallisation process of the electrolyte. The smooth substrate surface resulted in a smooth electrolyte surface. The results were conﬁrmed by the SEM images. Analysis showed that the morphologies and crystal structures of thin ﬁlms were affected by varied surface roughness of substrates and the characteristics of the sensors were inﬂuenced. The stability of the signals and the sensitivity of the ﬁlm-type sensor were decreased with increase of substrate surface roughness. The porous morphology and scattered crystal orientations of the rough substrate-based sensor were discussed and are thought to be the reasons substrate roughness on thin ﬁlm electrolyte CO2 sensors may be a reference for other thin ﬁlm gas sensors.