A Li1.4Al0.4Ge1.6(PO4)3 (LAGP) sheet was prepared using a tape casting method with a ﬁne LAGP power prepared from a solegel precursor. The addition of nanosize TiO2 as a sintering additive was effective to enhance the  1 was ionic conductivity of the tape-cast sheet. The highest electrical conductivity of 8.37  10 observed for the tape-cast LAGP sheet with 5 wt.% TiO2 at 25 C. A hybrid sheet of the tape-cast LAGP and epoxy resin was water impermeable. The electrical conductivity of the water impermeable hybrid sheet with ca. 4%  4 S cm  1 at 25 C. The three-point bending strength of the LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2eepoxy epoxy resinwas 4.19 10  2, which is comparable with a Li1þxþyAlxTi2 xP3 ySiyO glass ceramic plate. resin hybrid sheet was 111 N mm The Li/PEO18(CF3SO2)2N/LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2eepoxy sheet was successfully operated as a lithium electrode in saturated LiCl aqueous solution.

Lithium-air rechargeable batteries have theoretically higher energy density than lithium ion batteries, and are therefore attracting increased attention as possible power sources for electric vehicles [1e4]. Two types of lithium-air batteries have been developed; aqueous and non-aqueous systems. The non-aqueous system consists of a lithium electrode, a non-aqueous electrolyte, and an air electrode, and are based on two possible reactions [5]: 2Li þ O2 ¼ Li2O2,

Reaction (1) is reversible, but reaction (2) is irreversible. In the aqueous system, the lithium electrode is protected by a waterstable lithium ion-conducting solid electrolyte, and the cell reaction is [6]: 4Li þ 6H2O þ O2 ¼ 4(LiOH$H2O),

where water in the electrolyte is involved in the cell reaction. The  1 for calculated energy densities including oxygen are 3460 Wh kg reaction (1) using an open circuit voltage (OCV) of 2.96 V, and  1 for reaction (3) using an OCV of 3.0 V. The non1910 Wh kg aqueous system has higher energy density than the aqueous

system, but it has some serious problems, including high polarization for the charge and discharge processes, electrolyte decomposition, and contamination by moisture in the air. These problems could be overcome for the aqueous system. The most important issue for the aqueous system is to develop a water-stable lithium electrode, because lithium reacts severely with water and should be covered with a water-stable lithium conducting solid electrolyte. Recently, Visco et al. [7] proposed a water-stable lithium metal electrode protected by an NASCION-type water-stable lithium ionconducting glass ceramic of Li1þxþyAlxTi2 xP4 ySiyO12. (LATP). The discharge product of the aqueous lithium-air system is LiOH, and the LiOH is saturated to approximately 5% discharge depth, because of the solubility limit of LiOH in water at room temperature is ca.  1. LATP is unstable in concentrated LiOH aqueous solution, 5 mol L but Imanishi et al. found that LATP is stable in an aqueous solution saturated with LiOH and LiCl [8]. Therefore, LATP could be used as the protective layer of a lithium metal electrode for lithium-air batteries with a LiCl saturated aqueous solution. The LATP glass ceramic, which is supplied by Ohara Co., Japan, had a high lithium  1 at room temperature. The ion conductivity of 3.5  10 glass ceramic was prepared by quenching from the melt and crystallized at high temperature. This glass ceramic is expensive and the sizes are limited. We have previously reported that Li1.4Al0.4Ge1.6(PO4)3 (LAGP) is stable in an aqueous solution saturated with LiOH and LiCl, and the electrical conductivity is higher than that of Li1.4Al0.4Ti1.6(PO4)3 [9]. LAGP is the other candidate for the protective layer of the water-stable lithium metal electrode. In this study, we have prepared LAGP thin sheet by the tape casting method, which is suitable for the production of large sized thin sheets. The electrical conductivity, mechanical properties, and water permeability of a hybrid sheet prepared with epoxy resin and the tape-cast sheets were examined. In addition, the stability and chargeedischarge performance of the Li/PEO18Li(CF3SO2)2Ne10% BaTiO3/LAGPeepoxy hybrid sheet/saturated LiCl aqueous solution/Pt cell were examined. LAGP is unstable in contact with lithium metal; therefore, the polyethylene oxide (PEO)-based polymer electrolyte was used as an interlayer between Li and LAGP.

The NASICON-type LAGP powder was prepared using a precursor prepared by the solegel method with citric acid, as reported previously [9]. Stoichiometric amounts of Ge(OC2H5)4 (Aldrich), chemical grade LiNO3, Al(NO3)3$9H2O, and NH4H2PO4 were dissolved in a 0.2 M aqueous solution of citric acid and stirred continuously with a magnetic stirrer to obtain a homogeneous solution. A certain volume of ethylene glycol [citric acid:ethylene glycol molar ratio ¼ 1:1, (citric acid þ ethylene glycol):(Li ) molar ratio ¼ 4:1] was added to the mixed solution to prevent the formation of hard agglomerates and promote polyesteriﬁcation and polycondensation. The mixed solution was kept at 80 C during the solegel preparation process. After a homogeneous solution was formed, the gel was kept at 170 C for 1 day to allow the evaporation of water and to promote esteriﬁcation and polymerization, and the gel was then heated at 500 C for 4 h. The powder obtained was uniformly ground to a ﬁne powder with an agate mortar and pestle before sintering at 800 C for 5 h to complete the chemical reaction. Stoichiometric amounts of LAGP powder made by solegel method, and TiO2 (Aldrich), GeO2 (Aldrich), or ZrO2 (Tosoh) ﬁne powers were dispersed in ethanol and toluene mixed solution (3:7 volume ratio) using Menhaden ﬁsh oil (2 wt.% to LAGP) as a dispersant. The mixed slurry was then ball milled with ZrO2 balls for 24 h using high energy mechanical milling (HEMM; Fritsch Planetary Micro Mill). A certain amount of poly(vinyl butyral) (Aldrich, Butvar B-98, 7 wt.% to LAGP) as a binder and butyl benzyl

phthalate (7 wt.% to LAGP) as a plasticizer were then added into the mixed slurry and ball milled using HEMM for another 24 h. The slurry was defoamed for 3 min using a planetary vacuum mixer (Thinky, Japan) before casting to remove air bubbles. Tape casting was performed on a silicon coated polyethylene substrate foil using double blades with gap heights of 700 and 400 mm. The casting  1. After tape casting, the green speed was constant at 60 cm min sheets were left to dry at room temperature for 24 h. The green sheet was cut into small pieces of 1.2e1.5 cm  1.2e1.5 cm. Three green sheets were hot pressed together at 90 C for 10 min and then sintered at 900 C in air.

The LAGP and epoxy resin hybrid sheets were prepared by dropping a mixed dilute solution of 1,3-phenylenediamine  1) (1 mol L in tetrahydrofuran on the surface of LAGP sheet. The LAGP sheets with the epoxy resin solution were kept in vacuum for several minutes to allow the solution to penetrate into the pores of the LAGP sheets. The hybrid sheets were then placed into an oven at 80 C for 2 h and then at 150 C for 24 h to allow evaporation of the solvent and to promote polymerization.

The crystal structure of the samples was analyzed using X-ray diffraction (Rigaku RINT-2500) with Cu Ka radiation in the 2q range  1. Impedance from 10 to 90 at a scanning step rate of 0.02 s measurements of the LAGPeepoxy resin hybrid sheet with gold electrodes sputtered on both surfaces were conducted using an impedance analyzer (Solartron 1260) in the temperature range from 20 to 80 C and in the frequency range of 0.01 Hze1 MHz. The impedance proﬁles were analyzed using a nonlinear instant ﬁt program in the Z-View software. The hybrid sheets were immersed in an aqueous solution with saturated LiOH and LiCl at 60 C for one week to test their stability. The LAGP sheets were then washed with distilled water and dried in a vacuum oven at 110 C for 5 h before measuring the electrical conductivity and XRD patterns. The epoxy resin content in the samples was estimated from the weight loss measured by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA; Rigaku Thermoplus TG8120). The three-point bending strength of the LAGP sheet was measured using Shimadzu EZ-S 500 N at room temperature.

The water permeation test was performed using an H-type cell with saturated LiCl aqueous solution on one side and distilled water on the other. The LAGP sheet was packed using a plastic ﬁlm. The package was then evacuated and heat-sealed apart from a hole with a 6 mm diameter on the LAGP sheet. The water permeation speed through the LAGP sheet was estimated from the change of the chloride ion content in the distilled water over time, measured using a chorine meter (Kasahara Chemical Instruments).

The lithium ion-conducting polymer membrane of PEO18Li(CF3SO2)2N (LiTFSI)e10% BaTiO3 was prepared using a previously reported casting technique [10]. A certain amount of PEO (Aldrich, average molecular weight 6  105) powder and lithium salt of LiTFSI (Aldrich) with Li/O ¼ 1/18 were dissolved in a certain volume of acetonitrile. 10 wt.% nanosize BaTiO3 particles of (100 nm particle size, Sakai Chemical Industry) were added to the solution as the ﬁller. The solution was stirred at room temperature for 24 h in an Arﬁlled dry glove box. The homogeneous slurry was then cast into a clean Teﬂon dish. The acetonitrile solvent was allowed to evaporate slowly in an Ar-ﬁlled dry glove box for 24 h, and then dried at 110 C for 24 h under vacuum. The water-stable lithium anode was assembled by laminating lithium metal, PEO18LiTFSIe10 wt.% BaTiO3 and the LAGPeepoxy resin hybrid sheets in a plastic package, leaving a circular window of 6 mm in diameter. Nickel foil was used as the anodic current collector. The stability and electrochemical performance of the water-stable lithium electrode were examined using a beaker-type cell of Li/PEO18LiTFSIe10 wt.% BaTiO3/LAGPeepoxy/LiCl saturated aqueous solution/Pt, air at 60 C.

The tape-cast ﬁlms sintered at 900 C for 12 h showed single phase NASICON-type LAGP without impurity phases such as AlPO4 and GeO2. However, the mechanical properties of the tape-cast ﬁlm were somewhat poor and the relative density was less than 88%. To improve the mechanical properties, ﬁne powders of TiO2, ZrO2, and GeO2 were added into the starting slurry as sintering additives. Fig. 1 shows XRD patterns of the tape-cast LAGP sheets with 5 wt.% TiO2, 3 wt.% ZrO2 and 3 wt.% GeO2, along with the lattice constants. LAGP with 5 wt.% TiO2 had no diffraction peaks of TiO2 and the other starting materials. The c-lattice parameter of LAGP (2.0625 nm) was decreased (2.0444 nm) and the a-lattice parameter remained unchanged by addition of 5 wt.% TiO2. Some Ti4þ cations may substitute for Ge4þ . The LAGP sheet with 3 wt.% GeO2 shows diffraction peaks of GeO2, and that with 3 wt.% ZrO2 had peaks indicating Li2Zr(PO4)3. The c-axis parameter of LAGP with 3 wt.% GeO2 was 2.0471 nm and the a-axis parameter remained unchanged by the addition of GeO2. The LAGP with 3 wt.% ZrO2 showed no signiﬁcant change in either of the aand c-lattice parameters. Fig. 2 shows typical impedance proﬁles for tape-cast LAGPe 5 wt.% TiO2, LAGPe3 wt.% ZrO2, and LAGPe3 wt.% GeO2 at 25 C, of which the relative densities were 92, 91, and 92%, respectively. These relative densities are slightly higher than that of a sintered pellet of LAGP (89.3%) [9]. The impedance proﬁles are typical of solid ionic conductors with a blocking electrode [11], which consists of two semicircles, followed by a straight line. The semicircles are attributed to the bulk and grain boundary resistances; however, the semicircle for the bulk resistance was outside the frequency window examined for the samples. The intercept of the semicircle on the real axis at high frequency represents the bulk resistance (Rb), and the diameter of the semicircle is attributed to the grain boundary resistance (Rgb). The highest conductivity was observed for LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2, of which the bulk and grain boundary con 4 and ductivities at 25 C were estimated to be 9.54  10  1, respectively. The total conductivity was 6.83  10  1, which is slightly lower than that of a sintered 8.37  10  1) [9]. The bulk conductivities of pellet of LAGP (1.22  10 LAGPe3 wt.% GeO2 and LAGPe3 wt.% ZrO2 were lower than that of LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2. A high grain boundary conductivity of  1 for LAGPe3 wt.% GeO2 and a low grain boundary 1.21 10

Fig. 1. XRD patterns and lattices parameters of tape-cast (a) LAGP, (b) LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2, (c) LAGPe3 wt.% ZrO2, and (d) LAGPe3 wt.% GeO2.

Fig. 2. Impedance proﬁles of tape-cast LAGP sheets annealed at 900 C for 12 h at 25 C; (-) LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2, (C) LAGPe3 wt.% ZrO2, and (:) LAGPe3 wt.% GeO2.

 1 for LAGPe3 wt.% ZrO2 were conductivity of 3.42  10 observed. Fig. 3 shows the electrical conductivity at 25 C of tapecast sheets of LAGP with TiO2, ZrO2, and GeO2 as a function of the additive content. The highest conductivity was observed for LAGP with 5 wt.% TiO2. The relative densities of the LAGPeTiO2 sheets were 88% for LAGP, 87% for LAGPe1 wt.% TiO2, 89% for LAGPe3 wt.% TiO2, 92% for LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2, and 90% for LAGPe7 wt.% TiO2. The highest conductivity of the LAGPeTiO2 system was observed for the sample with the highest relative density. The mechanical properties were enhanced by the addition of TiO2 into LAGP. The threepoint bending strength of LAGP at room temperature was  2 by the addition of 48 N mm 5 wt.% TiO2. The highest conductivities were observed at 3 wt.% ZrO2 for LAGPeZrO2 and at 3 wt.% GeO2 for LAGPeGeO2. The activation energies for electrical conduction were estimated from  1 for LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2, Arrhenius plots to be 30.1 kJ mol  1 for LAGPe 30.2 kJ mol 3 wt.% GeO2, which are comparable to that of a sintered LAGP pellet at 31.1 kJ mol

The important requirement for the protective layer of the waterstable lithium electrode is to minimize water permeation through the sheet. Water permeation tests were conducted using the high conductivity LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2 sheet sintered at 900 C for 12 h. Fig. 4 shows the chloride ion transport rate through the ﬁlm at room temperature, where the thickness of the ﬁlm was approximately 0.2 mm with a cross-section 0.28 cm2. A linear increase of the chloride ion concentration over time was observed for the tapecast LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2 sheet; therefore, water easily penetrates through this sheet. The water penetration through the sheet may be due to the presence of open pores in the sheet. A dense sintered body could generally be obtained by sintering at a higher sintering temperature for a long sintering period; however, the tape-cast LAGP sheets sintered at 950 C for 5 h and at 900 C for 17 h had lower conductivity than that of the tape-cast LAGP sheet sintered at 900 C for 12 h, due to the evaporation of lithium oxide at high temperature for long sintering periods. To suppress water permeation through the LAGP sheet, the open pores were ﬁlled with epoxy resin, which is stable in water, as reported in our previous paper [12]. The water permeation test results through the LAGPe 5 wt.% TiO2eepoxy resin hybrid sheet are shown in Fig. 4. TGA suggested that the content of epoxy resin in the hybrid sheet was ca. 4 wt.%. No chloride ions were detected in the distilled water side

Fig. 3. Electrical conductivities of tape-cast (-) LAGPeTiO2, (C) LAGPeZrO2, and (:) LAGPeGeO2 at 25 C as a function of the content of MO2 and the Arrhenius total electrical conductivity plots of tape-cast (-) LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2, (C) LAGPe3 wt.% ZrO2 and (:) LAGPe3 wt.% GeO2.

of the H-type cell after storage for 7 days. The impedance proﬁles of the LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2eepoxy hybrid sheet are compared with that of the LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2 sheet in Fig. 5. The bulk conductivity of the hybrid sheet is the same as that of the sheet without epoxy resin, but the grain boundary conductivity of the hybrid sheet is signiﬁ 1 for the sheet without  3 S cm cantly decreased from 6.83  10  4 S cm  1. The low grain boundary conepoxy resin to 6.93  10 ductivity (high resistance) may be due to the presence of an insulator phase of epoxy resin at the grain boundary. The total electrical  1) at 25 C is conductivity of the hybrid sheet (4.19  10 approximately half that of the LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2 sheet without epoxy resin, and higher than that of the dense LATP glass ceramic  1) [13] and compasupplied by Ohara Co., Japan (3.5  10 rable to that of an LATPeepoxy hybrid ﬁlm [12]. The mechanical properties of the LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2 were improved by the addition of epoxy resin, The three-point bending strength at room temper 2 for LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2 was increased to ature of 74 N mm  2 by the addition of epoxy resin, which is also compa111 N mm rable with that of the Ohara LATP glass ceramic plate and higher than that of the LATPeepoxy hybrid ﬁlm (52 N mm

The water impermeable LAGP hybrid sheet should be stable in an aqueous solution saturated with LiOH, because the reaction product of aqueous lithium-air batteries is LiOH. We have previously reported that a saturated aqueous solution of LiCl and LiOH has a low pH of ca. 9, due to the low dissociation of LiOH in the

The impedance proﬁles presence of a high concentration of Li of the LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2eepoxy resin hybrid sheet immersed in saturated LiCl aqueous solution and saturated LiCl and LiOH aqueous solution at 50 C for one week are shown in Fig. 5. Both the bulk and grain boundary resistances are comparable before and after immersion in these solutions. XRD analysis also indicated no structural change in the hybrid sheets by immersion in these solutions. Therefore, it could be concluded that the LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2eepoxy resin hybrid sheet is stable in saturated LiCl and LiOH aqueous solution and is thus suitable as the protective layer of a water-stable lithium metal electrode.

The stability and electrochemical performance of the waterstable lithium metal electrode with the LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2eepoxy resin hybrid sheet as the protective layer were examined. Impedance proﬁles of the Li/PEO18LiTFSIe10 wt.% BaTiO3/LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2eepoxy resin hybrid/saturated LiCl aqueous solution/Pt plate with Pt black, air cell measured at 60 C are shown as a function of the storage time in Fig. 6. The polymer electrolyte was used to prevent direct contact between the lithium metal and the LAGP sheet, because LAGP is unstable in contact with lithium metal [9]. The room temperature conductivity of the polymer electrolyte was too low to pass a high current; therefore, the stability test was

Fig. 4. The water permeation test results of tape-cast (a) LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2 and (b) LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2eepoxy resin hybrid sheets at room temperature.

Fig. 5. Impedance proﬁles of tape-cast (a) LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2, (b) LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2e epoxy, and (c) LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2eepoxy sheets immersed in saturated LiCl aqueous solution at 50 C for one week, and (d) LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2eepoxy resin hybrid sheet immersed in saturated LiCl and LiOH aqueous solution at 50 C for one week.

R1 ¼ 83, R2 ¼ 98, and Rc ¼ 17 U cm2, where Rb is the bulk resistance of the hybrid sheet and the polymer electrolyte. The charge transfer resistance is not as high as the other resistances. To reduce the cell resistance, the resistance of LAGP (Rb þ R1) and the interface layer between lithium and polymer electrolyte (R2) should be improved. Recently, Liu et al. reported that the interface resistance between PEO18LiTFSI and lithium was reduced to ca. 25 U cm2 by the codoping of an ionic liquid and nanosize SiO2 into the polymer electrolyte [15]. The change of the lithium electrode OCV with the storage time is shown as an inset in Fig. 6. The stable OCV for the lithium electrode of 3.4 V vs. Pt/air was observed for 15 days, and is comparable to theoretical OCV.

Fig. 7 shows the change in the potential of the lithium electrode by lithium deposition and stripping for the Li/PEO18LiTFSIe10 wt.% BaTiO3/LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2eepoxy resin/saturated LiCl aqueous solution/Pt plate with Pt black, air cell at 60 C, where the lithium electrode potentials were measured using a Pt black reference electrode. The lithium deposition and stripping overpotential of the  2. The water-stable electrode was around 0.5 V at 0.5 mA cm overpotential caused by cell resistance is 0.125 V; therefore, the electrode polarization by the lithium deposition and stripping processes should be reduced to pass a higher current density for application as a power source in electrical vehicles.

A high conductivity and water impermeable LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2e epoxy hybrid sheet with a thickness of ca. 200 mm was prepared by the tape casting method. The electrical conductivity of the hybrid  1 at 25 C, which is comparable to that of ﬁlm was 4.19  10 a tape-cast LATPe3 wt.% TiO2eepoxy sheet and is higher than that of an Ohara LATP glass ceramic plate. The three-point bending  2, which is strength of the LAGPeepoxy hybrid ﬁlm was 111 N mm comparable to that of the Ohara glass ceramic, and higher than that  2. A water-stable of LATPeepoxy hybrid sheet at 60e100 N mm lithium electrode with LAGPe5 wt.% TiO2eepoxy resin hybrid protective ﬁlm with high conductivity and excellent mechanical properties was successfully operated in saturated LiCl aqueous solution. Thus, the hybrid sheet is attractive as a protective layer for the water-stable lithium metal electrode of aqueous lithium-air rechargeable batteries.