Crystallization  kinetics  parameters  of  a  stoichiometric  glass  with  the  composition  Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 were investigated by subjecting parallelepipedonal samples (3 × 3 × 1.5 mm) to  heat treatment in a differential scanning calorimeter at different heating rates (3, 5, 8 and 10 °C/min).  The data were analyzed using Ligero’s and Kissinger’s methods to determine the activation energy  (E) of crystallization, which yielded, respectively, E = 415 ± 37 kJ/mol and 378 ± 19 kJ/mol. Ligero’s  method was also employed to calculate the Avrami coefficient (n), which was found to be n = 3.0. A  second set of samples were heat-treated in a tubular furnace at temperatures above the glass transition  temperature, Tg, to induce crystallization. The X-ray diffraction analysis of these samples indicated  the  presence  of  LiGe2(PO4)3 which  displays  a  NASICON-type  structure. An  analysis  by  optical  microscopy revealed the presence of spheric crystals located primarily in the volume, in agreement  with the crystallization mechanism predicted by the Avrami coefficient.

Knowledge  about  crystallization  kinetics  is  essential  for  the  production  of  glass-ceramics.  The  glass-ceramic  obtained from the stoichiometric Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 glass  composition presents a NASICON (acronym of Na Super  Ionic Conductor)-type structure, which is well-known for its  high ionic conductivity. Furthermore, LAGP compounds are  also chemically stable when in contact with metallic lithium.  Because of these characteristics, LAGP compounds are of  technological interest, since they are good candidates to be  used as solid-electrolytes in lithium ion batteries1-3, or as  membranes in electrochemical sensors4.  Since electrical and  mechanical properties are dependent on the microstructure5,  which  may  be  tailored  by  controlled  crystallization,  knowledge about the crystallization kinetics of this family  of glasses is of fundamental interest.

Recently,  Kun  et  al.6  investigated  the  crystallization  mechanism  and  conductivity  of  Li(1+x)AlxGe(2-x)(PO4)3  glass-ceramics, with x varying from 0 to 0.7. The activation  energy for crystallization, E, and the Avrami coefficient, n,  of each composition were calculated using the Kissinger  and Augis-Bennet  models,  respectively.  These  authors  found that the values of E increase while n decreases as the  Al2O3 content increases. In fact, they obtained values of E  *e-mail: acmr@ufscar.br

varying from 270 to 330 kJ/mol, while n varied from 3.7 to  2.8. For the same glass composition investigated here, i.e.,  with x = 0.5, Kun et al. obtained E = 300 kJ/mol and n = 3.0. Despite  the  absence  of  any  information  about  particle  size,  which  could  alter  the  influence  of  surface  crystallization,  the  results  obtained  by  Kun  et  al.6  point  to  a  tendency  for  volume  crystallization  in  these  glass  compositions. In fact, Cruz et al.8 provided strong evidence  that Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 glass presents volume, supposedly  homogeneous, crystallization.

Accordingly, in this study, we determined the activation  energy for crystallization and the Avrami coefficient in a  stoichiometric  glass  of  composition  Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3,  based on the non-isothermal models proposed by Ligero9  and Kissinger10, respectively. While Kissinger’s method is  widely employed, Ligero’s method has been little applied  to study the crystallization kinetics of glass systems that  present internal nucleation, such as the LAGP composition.  In  fact,  as  far  as  we  know,  this  model  has  only  been  applied to metallic9 and silicate systems11,12 that nucleate  heterogeneously.

Parallelepipedonal samples (3 × 3 × 1.5 mm) were used  in order to minimize the effect of surface crystallization,  ensuring that differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) curves  reflect predominantly the volume crystallization.

The  crystallization  process  in  a  glass  occurs  via  a  combination  of  nucleation  and  crystal  growth.  Under  isothermal  conditions,  the  kinetics  of  these  phenomena  can  be  described  by  Equation  1,  which  was  developed  independently by Johnson, Mehl, Avrami and Kolmogorov  (JMAK)  and  which  expresses  the  crystallized  volume  fraction as follows7:

where  x  is  the  transformed  volume  fraction  at  a  given  temperature  and  at  a  certain  time  (t);  n  is  the Avrami  coefficient,  which  is  associated  with  the  dimensionality  of the crystal and the nucleation mechanism7, and K is a  reaction constant that can be expressed by Equation 2.

In Equation 2, R is the gas constant, T is the absolute  temperature,  E  is  the  activation  energy  for  the  overall  crystallization process, i.e., nucleation and crystal growth,  and Ko is a parameter independent of temperature, known as  the frequency factor, which is related to the probability of  a molecule participating in the process of crystallization7,9.  If  crystallization  (or  crystal  growth)  occurs  from  a  fixed  number of nuclei, E will be representative of the activation  energy  for  crystal  growth.  However,  if  nucleation  and  growth occur simultaneously, E will be representative of the  activation energy for the overall crystallization process, i.e,  nucleation and crystal growth.

Regarding the Avrami coefficient, n, it is worth noting that  it may vary between 1 and 4 depending on the crystallization  mechanism and the crystal morphology7. According to Gutzow  and  Schmelzer7,  n  equal  to  3  indicates  either  i)  volume  crystallization  of  spherical  crystals  starting  from  athermal  nuclei (from a limited number of nuclei) or ii) crystallization  of disc-like (two-dimensional) crystals starting from sporadic  (homogeneous) nucleation, or iii)  homogeneous (sporadic)  nucleation and growth on a surface.

Because  they  provide  rapid  results,  thermal  analysis  techniques such as differential scanning calorimetry (DSC)  have  become  an  attractive  option  for  the  determination  of  the  kinetic  parameters  n  and  E.  However,  the  use  of  such techniques depends on mathematical models for the  interpretation of experimental data. In this regard, several  models  based  on  Equation  1  have  been  proposed  and  successfully  applied  to  characterize  the  kinetics  of  glass  crystallization9,10,13-15.

If one differentiates Equation 1 with respect to t and  applies the logarithm, it is possible to obtain the following  expressions:

where f (x) is a function of the crystallized volume fraction  (x)  and  the Avrami  coefficient  (n)7,9,  and  (dx/dt)  is  the 

variation of the crystallized volume fraction as a function of  time, or the rate of crystallization. It is worth noting that in  Equation 3a (dx/dt) varies with temperature, which assumes  a  non-isothermal  regime.  Taking  into  account  the  range  of crystallized volume fractions in which f(x) is constant,  one can observe that there is a linear relationship between  ln(dx/dt)  and  the  reciprocal  of  the  absolute  temperature.  Therefore,  E  and  ln[Ko f  (x)]  can  be  determined  from  the  slope  and  the  intercept  to  the  ordinate  of  the  plot  of  ln(dx/dt) vs. 1/T, respectively.

Based  on  Equations  3a,  b,  Ligero 9  proposed  to  analyze  (dx/dt)  for  different  heating  rates. Thus,  a  given  crystallization rate (dx/dt) occurs at a different temperature  for each heating rate. In this way, taking two given values  of the crystallized volume fraction, x1 and x2, chosen such  as ln[Ko f (x1)] = ln[Ko f (x2)], it is possible to calculate the  Avrami coefficient (n) through the following expression, as  proposed by Ligero9:

The  activation  energy  of  overall  crystallization  can  also  be  estimated  from  the  Kissinger  method10,  through  Equation 5:

where Tp is the crystallization peak temperature, φ is the  DSC heating rate and C is a constant.

A  18.8Li 2O⋅6.2Al 2O 3⋅37.5GeO 2⋅37.5P 2O 5  glass  was  synthesized,  starting  from  the  analytical  reagents  Li2CO3  (Synth-C1006.01.AE), Al2O3  (Pc Alcoa A16),  GeO 2  (Aldrich-CAS  1310-53-8)  and  NH 4H 2PO 4  (Aldrich-7722-76-1). The powders were mixed for 24 hours  to  render  them  homogeneous.  Subsequently,  the  powder  mixture was heated to 700 °C for 1 hour to allow for the  decomposition of Li2CO3 and NH4H2PO4. The mixture was  then placed in an alumina crucible and melted in an electrical  furnace at 1350 °C for 30 minutes. The viscous liquid was  poured and cooled by “splat cooling” (pressing the hot liquid  between two metal plates, at room temperature, to increase  the  cooling  rate  and  prevent  crystallization). Annealing  was performed at 450 °C for 2 hours to relieve the residual  thermal stresses, and to enable cutting of the sample. The  annealing  temperature  was  chosen  based  on  previous  knowledge of the glass transition temperature, Tg = 505 °C,  which was obtained by DSC at a heating rate of 10 °C/min.

Vitreous  samples  were  heat-treated  at  610  °C  for  20 minutes and ground in an agate mortar. X-ray diffraction  analysis was carried out in a Siemens Ultimate IV X-ray  diffractometer with CuKα radiation in a 2 theta range from 

Rodrigues et al.Materials Research2013; 16(4)

10° to 80°, an angular step of 0.02° and a counting time  of  1/2  s.  Data  were  collected  at  room  temperature.  The  diffraction peaks obtained were indexed using the Search  Match® program.

Optical  microscopy  was  employed  to  ascertain  the  occurrence of volume nucleation and to observe the crystal  morphology.  To  render  the  crystals  visible  by  optical  microscopy, single heat treatment at 590 and 610 °C were  conducted  for  50  and  20  minutes,  respectively.  These  chosen  temperatures  are  lower  than  that  corresponding  to  the  crystallization  peak,  in  order  to  prevent  rapid  crystallization and allow for the detection of the crystals by  optical microscopy. The samples were then cut, grinded and  polished with cerium oxide. Subsequent etching was applied  with a solution of 50/50 HCl/HF for 15 seconds to reveal  the crystals. The crystals were then observed under 100X  magnification using a Neophot Carl Zeiss Jena microscope.

To determine the kinetics parameters for crystallization,  E  and  n,  annealed  parallelepipedon-shaped  samples  (3 × 3 × 1.5 mm) with a mass of approximately 50 mg were  heat-treated in platinum crucibles at different heating rates  (3,  5,  8  and  10  °C/min)  in  a  NETZSCH  404  differential  scanning  calorimeter.  The  data  were  processed  by  the  Proteus-Thermal Analysis  program16. The  dependence  of  the glass transition temperature, Tg, and the crystallization  temperature, Tc, on the heating rate was then evaluated.

diffraction Figure  1  shows  the  X-ray  diffractogram  of  the  glass-ceramic Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3, which was obtained by  heat-treating the glass at 610 °C for 20 minutes. As can be  observed,  the  peaks  match  the  NASICON-type  structure  (space  group  R-3C)  LiGe2(PO4)3  corresponding  to  the  JCPDS  80-1924  card  index  file.  Note  that  because  there  is no aluminum in the LiGe2(PO4)3 structure described by  the JCPDS card, it can be stated that aluminum is in solid  solution within the structure. In fact, the similar ionic radii  of Ge4+ (0.53 Å) and Al3+ (0.54 Å) allows for the formation  of a solid solution while maintaining the same NASICON  structure. The substitution of Ge4+ by Al3+ was investigated  by Aono et al.17, who found that this substitution leads to a  decrease in the cell volume.

The  micrographs  of  samples  heat-treated  at  590  and  610 °C for 50 and 20 minutes, respectively, showed circular  (spherical)  crystals  homogeneously  distributed  in  the  vitreous matrix, see Figure 2a, b. As observed in section 4.1,  these crystals correspond to a NASICON-type phase. The  crystals in Figure 2a have a mean size of 3 μm while those in  Figure 2b show an average size of 10 µm. This fact suggests  that the crystal growth rate at 610 °C is higher than that at  590 °C. This assumption is corroborated by the fact that the 

maximum crystal growth rates usually occurs at temperatures  close to the melting temperature, as was demonstrated by  Fokin et al.18 for several silicate glasses. In the case of LAGP,  the melting point of the crystals is 1130 °C8.

The  images  in  Figure  2  show  cross-sectional  area  of  spherical crystals and confirm that the crystallization of the  LiGe2(PO4)3 phase occurs mainly in the volume, as already  predicted by Cruz et al.8.

Figure  1.  X-ray  diffractogram  of  the  Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3  glass-ceramic obtained at 610 °C after 20 minutes.

Figure  2.  Micrographs  of  glass-ceramics  obtained  from  Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3  glass  heat-treated  at  590  °C  for  50  minutes  (a) and heat-treated at 610 °C for 20 minutes (b). The images were  obtained by reflected-light optical microscopy.

Determination of Crystallization Kinetics Parameters of a Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP)  Glass by Differential Scanning Calorimetry814

Figure  3a  shows  the  thermograms  obtained  by  subjecting  50  mg  samples  to  different  heating  rates  (3, 5, 8 and 10 °C/min). As expected, the temperature of the  crystallization peak increases with the heating rate. In fact,  this dependence is a direct result of a higher concentration of  nuclei, due to a longer time for nucleation at lower heating  rates, which results in the shift of the onset of crystallization  toward lower temperatures. This behavior is consistent with  theoretical19,20  and  experimental15,21  investigations.  If  one  considers the volume of nuclei negligible, the area of the  peak obtained at different heating rates should be constant  since it is representative of the heat of crystallization. Hence,  because crystallization occurs in a shorter period of time 

at higher heating rates, the peak is narrower and should be  more intense than peaks obtained at lower heating rates, as  observed in Figure 3a.

The dependence of Tg on the heating rate is shown in  Figure 3b. As the heating rates applied here are relatively  low and close to each other (3, 5, 8 and 10 °C/min), Tg does  not increase markedly from 5 °C/min.

To  evaluate  (dx/dt),  the  partial  area  under  the  crystallization peak corresponding to each analyzed volume  fraction  (0.08,  0.10,  etc.)  and  the  resulting  temperature  which  delimit  this  partial  area  were  estimated  using  the  Proteus program16. Figure 4 indicates that the variation of  ln(dx/dt)  with  the  reciprocal  of  temperature  is  linear  for  crystallized volume fractions of 0.08 to 0.14. This relation 

Figure 3. (a) Thermograms of samples subjected to heating rates of 3, 5, 8 and 10 °C/min. (b) Crystallization peak temperature, Tc, and  glass transition temperature, Tg, as a function of heating rate.

Figure 4. ln(dx/dt) as a function of inverse temperature for the indicated crystallized volume fractions. The straight lines have been displaced  on the y axis for clarity. Therefore, values of dx/dt refer only to the crystalized volume fraction of 0.08. Note that for each crystallized  volume fraction, different points were obtained at a different heating rate.

Rodrigues et al.Materials Research2013; 16(4)

was nonlinear for crystallized volume fractions above 0.14.  In Figure 4, note that for each crystallized volume fraction,  different  points  were  obtained  at  different  heating  rates.  In fact, for each heating rate, a given crystallized volume  fraction occurs at a different temperature. It should be noted  that Ligero’s method to calculate the activation energy of  crystallization implies the use of different heating rates.

Using Ligero’s method, an average activation energy for  overall crystallization of 378 ± 19 kJ/mol was obtained from  the slope of the straight lines shown in Figure 4.

For  the  sake  of  discussion,  the  activation  energy,  E,  was also calculated using Kissinger’s method (Equation 5).  Figure 5 shows the plot of ln(φ/Tp

As  indicated  in  Figure  5,  the  calculated  activation  energy is equal to 415 ± 37 kJ/mol. Taking into account the  mathematical errors, and comparing the activation energy  calculated by the models of Ligero and Kissinger, one can  observe that these values are very close. This fact indicates  that Ligero’s model can provide reliable values of activation  energy for overall crystallization, as was also suggested by  Silva et al.11 and Teixeira et al.12.

On  the  other  hand,  both  values  are  higher  than  the  activation energy (E = 300 kJ/mol) obtained by Kun et al.6,  using Kissinger’s method. Nevertheless, it should be kept in  mind that these authors did not provide information about the  particle sizes of the glassy powders used in their experiment.  In fact, it is known that the temperature of the crystallization  peak  (Tp)  increases  logarithmically  with  particle  size22.  Therefore, as the values of E calculated from Ligero’s and  Kissinger’s equations depend on Tp, a dependence of these  parameters on particle size is also expected.

The difference between the activation energy obtained  by Kissinger’s method in this study and by Kun et al.6 may  also  be  due  to  a  possible  difference  in  the  real  chemical  composition of each investigated glass. Such a difference  can be inferred from the discrepancy in the glass transition  temperatures, since at 5 °C/min the Tg of the glass studied  in this work is 496 °C, while the one prepared by Kun et al.6  is 537 °C. 

The  crystallization  rate  and  the  activation  energy  estimated  in  section  4.3  were  employed  to  calculate  ln [k0 f(x)] using Equation 3a. Thus, ln [k0 f(x)] values were  plotted  as  a  function  of  the  crystallized  volume  fraction  at  each  heating  rate. As  an  example,  Figure  6  shows  the  plot of ln [k0 f(x)] versus the crystallized volume fraction  obtained  at  a  heating  rate  of  3  °C/min.  From  this  plot,  it  is  possible  to  determine  a  pair  of  crystallized  volume  fractions (x1 and x2), for which f (x1) = f (x2), and therefore,  ln [k0 f (x1)] = ln [k0 f (x2)], as indicated by the dotted lines.  The same procedure was performed for all the heating rates  investigated here to obtain x1 and x2 pairs. Using Equation 4  and  crystallized  volume  fractions  of  x1 and  x2  pairs,  an  average value of the Avrami coefficient equal to 3.0 ± 0.3  was obtained.

As  mentioned  earlier,  n  equal  to  3  indicates  volume  crystallization  starting  either  from  spontaneous  (homogeneous)  nucleation  (in  this  case  the  crystals  are 

Figure 6. ln[K0 f (x)] versus x at a heating rate of 3 °C/min. The  dotted lines indicate a pair of volume fractions (x1 and x2), for which  ln[K0 f (x)] has the same value. From these x1 and x2 values, the  Avrami coefficient was calculated using Equation 4.

two-dimensional,  for  instance  disk  or  plate-shaped)  or  athermal (in this case the number of nuclei is fixed and the  crystals  are  spherical,  i.e.,  tri-dimensional)  nuclei7.  It  is  worth noting that a fixed number of crystals does not exclude  homogeneous  nucleation.  In  fact,  in  the  case  of  glasses  presenting high nucleation rates and low overlap between  nucleation and growth curves (as a function of temperature),  nuclei  may  be  formed  at  temperatures  before  the  DSC  crystallization  peak,  and  thus,  crystallization  at  the  DSC  peak may occur from a fixed number of crystals. In this way,  taking the result of the Avrami coefficient, n = 3 combined  with  the  micrographs  presented  in  Figure  2  which  show  the cross-sectional area of spherical crystals, it is possible  to conclude that the Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 glass crystallizes  mainly in the volume. These results, combined with some  other characteristics, such as the reduced glass transition  temperature  Tgr =  0.57[8]  points  towards  homogeneous  nucleation. Furthermore, an Avrami coefficient of 3.0 is in  accordance with that determined by Kun et al.6 for a similar  glass composition.

Determination of Crystallization Kinetics Parameters of a Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP)  Glass by Differential Scanning Calorimetry816

Crystals with NASICON-type structure homogeneously  distributed in a vitreous matrix were obtained by heat-treating  a stoichiometric Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 glass. Using DSC at  different heating rates and applying Ligero’s and Kissinger’s  methods, the values of activation energy obtained for overall  crystallization were 378 ± 19 kJ/mol and 415 ± 37 kJ/mol,  respectively. Micrographs of partially crystallized samples  show  internal  growth  of  spherical  crystals.  Thus,  the 

calculated Avrami  coefficient  (3.0  ±  0.3)  is  attributed  to  volume  crystallization,  starting  from  a  fixed  number  of  nuclei. Volume crystallization is a relevant finding, since  it allows for control of the glass-ceramic microstructure.

The authors are grateful to FAPESP and CNPq (Brazil)  for their financial support of this work. We are also indebted  to Prof. Dr. Edgar D. Zanotto for his invaluable input.