The   electrochemical   performance   of  a  novel   all   solid-state   sodium-ion   symmetrical   battery   with Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (NASICON)   as   a  solid   electrolyte   and   Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP)   as  the  active   electrode   material was   examined.   The   all   solid-state   cell   was   fabricated   by   a  combination   of   screen   printing   and   hot   pressing.  The   electrochemical   characterization   of  the   NVP   active   material   in   the  metallic   sodium   half-cells   at 80 ◦C   indicated   that  this   NASICON-related   phosphate   undergoes   reversible   sodium   extraction/insertion reactions   at   electrode   potentials   of  1.6   and   3.4   V  vs.  Na.   These   insertion   properties   allowed   the   NVP  to function   successfully   as  the   active   material   for   both   the   positive   and   negative   electrodes   in   a   sodiumion   cell   conﬁguration.   A   charge–discharge   cycling   test   of   the  fabricated   symmetrical   all   solid-state   cell was   carried   out   at   room   temperature   within   the   voltage   range   of   0.01   and   1.9   V.   It  was  found   that   the cell  can   work   as  a  secondary   battery   and  showed   ﬁrst   discharge   capacities   of  68   and   32   mAh   g−1 at   the ␮A  cm−2,   respectively.   Furthermore,   the   lack   of   reactivity   between   the current   densities   of  1.2   and   10   all-solid-state   cell   components   during   long-term   cycling   was   conﬁrmed.

Lately,  much  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  development  of  all solid-state  secondary  batteries  because  the  replacement  of  conventional  liquid  electrolytes  with  non-ﬂammable  inorganic  solid electrolytes  generally  allows  for  improvement  of  the  safety  and reliability  of  such  batteries  [1,2].  So  far,  most  investigations  have focused  on  lithium-ion-based  secondary  batteries  due  to  their extremely  high  speciﬁc  energies.  However,  the  much  lower  price of  sodium  ($0.08/equivalent  for  sodium  in  comparison  with  $0.50 equivalent  for  lithium  [3])   provides  a  compelling  reason  to  study sodium-ion-based  batteries  as  well.

Intensive  study  of  this  kind  of  batteries  was  stimulated  by the  development  of  fast  Na+-conductors  in  the  compounds  of Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 (0  <  x  <  3),  reported  by  Hong  [4]  and  Goodenough  et  al.  [5]  in  1976.  These  materials  demonstrated  sodium ionic  conductivity  in  a  three-dimensional  framework  (any  crystallographic  direction)  in  comparison  with  Na-␤-alumina,  which possesses  only  two-dimensional  Na+ mobility.  The  best  sodium ionic  conductivity  has  been  obtained  for  materials  in  the  range  of 1.8  <  x  <  2.2  [6],   where  the  structure  of  Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 retains monoclinic  symmetry.  The  commercially  available  Na3Zr2Si2PO12

(hereafter,  NASICON;  Natrium  Super  Ionic  Conductor)  provided  by Figaro  Engineering  Inc.  has  been  examined  in  a  CO2 electrochemical sensor  [7–10]  and  as  a  solid  electrolyte  in  Na/NASICON/S  secondary batteries  [4,5,11–13].

NASICON-related  phosphates,  such  as  Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP),  have been  identiﬁed  as  promising  candidates  for  electro-active  materials  in  sodium  insertion  batteries  [14].  This  material  has  attracted a  great  deal  of  interest  because  of  its  two  redox  electric  potentials  based  on  the  V4+/V3+ and  V3+/V2+ redox  couples.  It  seems  that NVP  can  be  successfully  applied  as  a  positive  as  well  as  a  negative  electrode  material.  We   recently  reported  the  performance  of  a symmetric  NVP/liquid  electrolyte/NVP  sodium-ion-based  cell  with organic  and  ionic  liquid  electrolytes  [15,16].  The  fabrication  of  such a  symmetric  cell  is  very  attractive  and  promising  from  a  commercial  standpoint,  since  a  single  electrode  coating  may   be  employed and  the  as-fabricated  cell  can  be  charged  in  either  direction.  Moreover,  substitution  of  Na  metal,  commonly  used  as  an  anode,  by the  cheaper  composite  material  allows  reduction  of  the  battery cost.

In  this  work,  we  report  on  the  fabrication  of  a  NVP/NASICON/ NVP  all  solid-state  symmetric  cell,  in  which  identical  electrode compartments  are  utilized  for  the  cathode  and  anode.  The  stability  of  the  NASICON  solid  electrolyte  against  reaction  with  the  NVP electrodes  as  well  as  the  detailed  charge–discharge  performance  of the  all  solid-state  cell  examined  at  room  temperature  is  reported here.

Please  cite  this  article  in  press  as:  Y.  Noguchi,  et  al.,  Fabrication  and  performances  of  all  solid-state  symmetric  sodium  battery  based  on  NASICONrelated   compounds,  Electrochim.  Acta  (2012),  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2012.11.038

The  rhombohedral  NVP  active  material  was  prepared  by  the  conventional  solid-state  reaction.  The  NaH2PO4 (Kanto  Chemical  Co., Inc.)  and  V2O3 (Rare  Metallic  Co.,  Ltd.)  [17]  were  mixed  in  stoichiometric  amounts  and  calcined  twice  at  900 ◦C  for  20  h  with intermediate  regrinding.  Both  calcinations  were  performed  under an  argon–hydrogen  (5  vol.%)  gas  mixture  ﬂow  in  order  to  prevent the  oxidation  of  V3+ to  V4+.

The  NASICON  solid  electrolyte  was  prepared  by  the  sol–gel method  as  described  elsewhere  [18,19].  Alkoxides  of  constituent elements,  i.e.  tetraethoxysilane  (Si(OC2H5)4,  TEOS),  zirconium  nbutaxide  (Zr(OC4H9)4),  tri-n-butylphosphate  (PO(OC4H9)3)  and sodium  ethoxide  (NaOC2H5)  were  sequentially  dissolved  in  a  mixture  of  ethanol,  water  and  nitric  acid  at  70 ◦C  under  the  ﬂow  of  dry N2 and  stirred  vigorously  for  about  6  h.  Then,  the  above  prepared solution  was  kept  open  to  atmospheric  air  at  room  temperature  for about  1  month  in  order  to  hydrolyze  gradually  with  atmospheric moisture.  The  resulting  xerogel  was  dried  at  120 ◦C  for  24  h  and then  calcined  at  750 ◦C  for  1  h.

The  structures  of  the  synthesized  materials  were  identiﬁed  by X-ray  powder  diffraction  (XRD;  Rigaku  RINT2100HLR/PC;  Japan)   range  of  10–80◦ at with  Cu  K␣ a  rate  of  2◦/min  with  steps  of  0.01◦.

The  obtained  NASICON  powder  was  ground  and  pressed  at 370  MPa   into  thick  pellets  (8  mm   in  diameter  and  0.6  mm  in  thickness)  followed  by  annealing  at  1000 ◦C  for  5  h  under  Ar  ﬂow.  In order  to  improve  the  contact  between  the  NASICON  solid  electrolyte  and  the  stainless  steel  (SS)  current  collectors,  thin  platinum layers  were  sputtered  on  both  sides  of  the  NASICON  pellets.  The SS/Pt/NASICON/Pt/SS  blocking  cell  was  then  sealed  into  coin-type cells  (type  2032  made  from  stainless  steel  SUS316)  in  a  glove box  ﬁlled  with  Ar  (water  vapor  and  oxygen  concentrations  were less  than  1  ppm).  The  impedance  measurements  of  the  fabricated blocking  cell  were  carried  out  using  an  impedance  analyzer  (Autolab/FRA)  in  the  frequency  range  of  0.1  Hz  to  10  MHz   at  room temperature.

In  the  present  study,  two  types  of  all  solid-state  cells  were  fab-

ricated  and  examined: theconventionalnon-symmetricNametal/NASICON/NVPcell 

and thesymmetricNVP/NASICON/NVPcell.

(II) In  the  conventional  cell  (I),   V3+/V4+ and  V3+/V2+ redox  of NVP  were  investigated  against  Na  metal.  Here,  as  with  the impedance  measurements,  the  NASICON  solid  electrolyte  pellets were  obtained  by  cold  press  method  (14  mm  in  diameter  and 0.6  mm  in  thickness).  Then,  the  all  solid-state  cells  (I)  and  (II)  were prepared  using  a  combination  of  screen  printing  and  hot  pressing. In  the  case  of  cell  (I),   a  metallic  sodium  disk  12  mm  in  diameter  was  used  as  an  anode/cathode.  For  the  preparation  of  the  NVP electrodes,  the  synthesized  NVP  active  material  (49  wt.%),  NASICON  solid  electrolyte  (49  wt.%)  and  acetylene  black  (AB;  2  wt.%) were  ﬁnely  mixed  by  ball  milling  for  4  h  at  200  rpm.  The  BL-S (polyvinyl  alkyl  acetate  alcohol  (Sekisui  Chemical  Co.,  Ltd.)/CS-12 (2,  2,  4-trimethyl-2,  4-pentanediol  mono  isobutyrate  (Chusso  Co., Ltd.))  organic  binder  was  added  to  the  obtained  powder  mixture  in

order  to  prepare  the  electrode  slurry.  This  slurry  was  then  screen␮m  thick)  on  one/both  sides  of  the  NASICON  solid printed  (10–20  electrolyte  and  dried  at  100 ◦C  for  40  min.  Finally,  the  fabricated cells  were  sintered  by  hot  pressing  at  700 ◦C  for  5  h  under  65  MPa. To  improve  the  contact  between  the  NVP  electrodes  and  SS  current collectors,  platinum  thin  layers  applied  by  sputter-coating  were used.  Finally,  cells  (I)  and  (II)  were  assembled  into  coin-type  cells in  an  Ar-ﬁlled  glove  box.

Electrochemical  measurements  of  the  fabricated  all  solid-state cells  (I)  and  (II)  were  performed  in  galvanostatic  mode  using  a charge–discharge  cycle  analyzer  (BTS2400W,  Nagano  Electric  Co., Japan).  The  charge–discharge  proﬁles  for  cell  (I)  were  obtained between  1.5–2.0  and  2.0–3.6  V  vs.  Na  at  80 ◦C  under  the  constant ␮A  cm−2,  whereas  cell  (II)  was   investigated current  density  of  10  within  the  voltage  range  of  0.01–1.9  V  vs.  Na  at  room  temperature ␮A  cm−2,  respectively. and  under  the  current  densities  of  1.2  and  10  In  the  cycle  test  of  the  prepared  all  solid-state  cells,  a  constant  current  charge  followed  by  a  constant  voltage  charge  (CCCV  mode) was  employed.

To  check  the  thermal  stability  of  the  Na  metal/NASICON  solid electrolyte  interface,  a  mixture  of  these  two   compounds  was packed  in  an  SS  pan,  crimp-sealed  in  an  Ar-ﬁlled  glove  box  and heated  from  25 ◦C  to  150 ◦C  at  a  heating  rate  of  3  K  min−1.  The  thermal   stabilities  of  the  Na  metal  and  NASICON  were  monitored  using differential  scanning  calorimetric  (DSC)  analysis  (Rigaku  Thermo plus  TG8110,  Rigaku,  Japan).

It  should  be  pointed  out  that  the  preparation  of  the  NASICON  single  phase  with  highly  conductive  monoclinic  symmetry  is  a  difﬁcult task  [5,11,12,20,21].  To  avoid  the  formation  of  lower  conductive rhombohedral  NASICON  phase  and  the  appearance  of  Zr2O  as  a side  product  [11,13],   the  low-temperature  sol–gel  technique  was used  [22].  The  XRD  patterns  of  the  obtained  NVP  electro  active material  and  NASICON  solid  electrolyte  are  shown  in  Fig.  1a  and b,  respectively.  Indexation  of  the  reﬂection  peaks  of  the  obtained XRD  patterns  indicated  that  both  the  NVP  and  NASICON  samples crystallized  in  a  single  phase  with  an  ordered  NASICON-like  structure  corresponding  to  the  rhombohedral  R3c  [23]  and  monoclinic C2/c  [19]  crystallographic  symmetries,  respectively.

ion-blocking  SS/Pt/ NASICON/Pt/SS  cell  is  depicted  in  Fig.  2.  The  obtained  Nyquist plot  for  the  blocking  cell  was  found  to  consist  of  a  semicircle  in the  high-frequency  range  and  a  straight  line  in  the  low-frequency region.  The  intercept  of  the  semicircle  on  the  real  axis  (Z 4))  at the  highest  frequency  was  assigned  to  the  grain  resistance  (Rg) whereas  the  intercept  at  the  lower  frequency  could  be  attributed to  the  resistance  along  the  grain  boundaries  (Rgb).  The  total  bulk resistance  (Rbulk)  of  the  prepared  NASICON  solid  electrolyte  was considered  the  sum  of  Rg and  Rgb.  Based  on  the  obtained  results, ×   103  4).  The  linear the  Rg was   about  120  Warburg  element  beyond  the  semicircle  may  be  attributed  to  the specimen–electrode  interaction.

The  resistance  results  allowed  us  to  calculate  the  conductivity  5)g ×   10−4 S  cm−1 at ×   10−5 S  cm−1.  Comparing  the  5)bulk  5)g.  In  this  study,  we along  the  grain  ( 5)g)  and  the  total  (bulk)  conductivity  ( 5)bulk).  The  of  the  NASICON  solid  electrolyte  was   around  9.4  25 ◦C  and  its  results  of  the  calculated  conductivities,  it  is  seen  that  the  was  about  one  order  of  magnitude  less  than 

Please  cite  this  article  in  press  as:  Y.  Noguchi,  et  al.,  Fabrication  and  performances  of  all  solid-state  symmetric  sodium  battery  based  on  NASICONrelated   compounds,  Electrochim.  Acta  (2012),  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2012.11.038

because  it  is  a  parameter  which have  chosen  to  characterize  the  can  correlate  with  the  structure  parameters,  and  a  fundamental objective  is  to  determine  the  correlation  with  selectivity  properties.  5)g was   compared  with  previously Our  experimental  value  for  the   5)g at  25 ◦C  for reported  data.  The  concentration  dependence  of  NASICON  samples  sintered  at  1000  and  1200 ◦C,  reported  elsewhere  [4,24–26],  is  presented  in  Fig.  3.  It  is  seen  that  our  obtained  5)g =  3.03  S  cm−1)  was  generally  congruent  with  the value  for  data  in  the  literature.

As  mentioned  above,  the  NVP  electrode  for  the  NASICON  solid electrolyte  was  fabricated  by  a  combination  of  screen  printing  and hot  pressing.  Hence,  it  is  very  important  to  ﬁnd  the  optimum calcination  temperature  for  the  hot  pressing  synthesis.  For  this determination,  a  ball-milled  cathode  mixture  comprising  49  wt.% NVP  +  49  wt.%  NASICON  +  2  wt.%  AB  was  annealed  for  5  h  at  several temperatures  in  the  range  of  600  and  900 ◦C  in  Ar.  The  upper  limit of  the  annealing  temperature  was  set  at  900 ◦C  to  avoid  the  possible  devastating  decomposition  of  NASICON,  probably  due  to  the sublimation  of  the  phosphorus  component  [26].  In  our  case,  the color  of  the  samples  did  not  change  during  the  annealing.  Fig.  4 shows  the  XRD  patterns  of  the  calcined  composite  NVP  cathode. It  is  seen  that  after  calcinations  at  600  and  700 ◦C,  separate  XRD peaks  ascribed  to  the  NVP  and  NASICON  compounds  were  clearly observed.  This  fact  indicates  the  stability  of  these  substances  as  well as  the  absence  of  reaction  between  them.  On  the  other  hand,  the XRD  patterns  of  the  composite  mixture  observed  after  annealing at  800  and  900 ◦C  were  found  to  be  much  more  complicated.  This is  probably  due  to  the  interaction  between  the  components  or  the decomposition/degradation  of  NVP  and  NASICON.  This  assumption could  be  conﬁrmed  in  part  by  the  appearance  of  additional  XRD peaks  which  could  be  assigned  to  the  Na4SiO4 or  SiP  products.  As seen  from  Fig.  4,  the  formation  of  such  products  was  minor  after annealing  at  800 ◦C  and  became  more  signiﬁcant  at  900 ◦C.  Thus,  it follows  that  the  composite  NVP  electrode  is  thermally  stable  up  to 700 ◦C;  as  a  consequence,  the  calcination  temperature  for  hot-press synthesis  was   chosen  at  700 ◦C.

Since  sodium  metal  is  often  used  as  the  negative  electrode  in sodium-ion  secondary  batteries,  the  compatibility  of  a  Na  electrode  and  the  NASICON  solid  electrolyte  needed  to  be  examined. This  examination  was   performed  using  DSC  measurements  which were  recorded  during  the  heating  and  cooling  of  samples  in  the temperature  range  of  25–150 ◦C.  The  DSC  traces  of  the  pure  Na and  the  mixture  of  Na  and  NASICON  powders  are  shown  in  Fig.  5.

Fig.  1.  XRD  patterns  using  Cu-K␣ radiation  for  (a)  the  Na3V2(PO4)3 active  material and  (b)  Na3Zr2Si2PO12 solid  electrolyte.

Fig.  2.  Impedance  spectra  of  the  Na3Zr2Si2PO12 solid  electrolyte  in  the  0.1–106 Hz frequency  range  at  room  temperature.

Please  cite  this  article  in  press  as:  Y.  Noguchi,  et  al.,  Fabrication  and  performances  of  all  solid-state  symmetric  sodium  battery  based  on  NASICONrelated   compounds,  Electrochim.  Acta  (2012),  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2012.11.038

Fig.  4.  XRD  patterns  of  electrode  mixtures  comprising  NVP,  NASICON  and  AB  in the   weight  ratio  of  49:49:25  calcined  at  600–900 ◦C  for  5  h  in  comparison  with  the parent  compounds.

The  DSC  traces  of  the  pure  Na  metal  (0.92  mg)   showed  a  single endothermic  peak  around  98 ◦C  related  to  the  Na  melting  during the  heating  process.  The  exothermic  heat  of  metallic  Na  solidiﬁcation  was  observed  at  the  same  temperature  in  the  reverse  scan. The  melting  (Qm)  and  solidiﬁcation  (Qs)  heat  generations  of  the Na  sample  were  equal  to  116.6  J  g−1 modulo  and  their  correlation (Qm/Qs)  was   equal  to  1.  The  DSC  traces  obtained  for  the  mixture  of  Na  and  NASICON  powders  in  the  ratio  of  1:1  wt.%  (overall 1.84  mg)   were  basically  the  same  as  those  for  the  metallic  Na  except for  the  shift  of  the  exothermal  peak  (Qs =  122.3  J  g−1)  to  a  lower temperature  during  the  cooling.  However,  again  we   can  notice  that −118.4  J  g−1)  appeared  at  about  98 ◦C the  endothermic  peak  (Qm = 

Fig.  6.  Impedance  spectra  of  (a)  NVP/NASICON/Na  and  (b)  NVP/NASICON/NVP  solidstate  cells  in  the  0.1–106 Hz  frequency  range  at  room  temperature.

Qm/Qs correlation  for  the  mixture during  the  heating,  and  the  of  the  two  compounds  was  equal  to  1.03.  Thus,  the  DSC  traces  of the  metallic  Na  and  those  of  the  Na  and  NASICON  mixture  did  not show  an  essential  distinction,  and  it  might  be  considered  a  procedural  bias.  This  allows  us  to  conclude  the  absence  of  a  chemical reaction  between  the  NASICON  solid  electrolyte  and  the  metallic Na  electrode  in  the  examined  operating  temperature  range.  Therefore,  the  Na  metal  is  suitable  for  use  as  a  negative  electrode  in  the all  solid-state  NASICON-based  secondary  battery.

between Na/NASICON  and  NVP/NASICON  were  studied  by  the  AC  impedance method.  Fig.  6a  and  b  shows  the  AC  impedance  spectra  (Nyquist plots)  at  25 ◦C  for  cells  (I)  and  (II),   respectively.  It  was  discovered that  the  Rbulk values  for  the  two  systems  were  almost  comparable. However,  the  interfacial  resistance  (Rint)  at  the  electrode/solid electrolyte  interface  differed  drastically.  Particularly  at  room ×   10−4  4))  was  about  two temperature,  the  total  Rint for  cell  (I)  (2  ×   10−4  4)).   It  should  be  pointed times  larger  than  that  of  cell  (II)  (1  out  that  the  Rint for  cell  (I)  was   considered  as  the  sum  of  resistances at  the  Na  metal/NASICON  and  NASICON/NVP  interfaces  while  that for  cell  (II)  was  the  sum  of  the  resistances  at  both  NVP/NASICON interfaces  (Fig.  6).  Thus,  it  is  proposed  that  such  a  difference in  Rint values  is  caused  by  very  high  resistance  at  the  metallic Na/NASICON  interface.  Therefore,  the  sodium  ion  transfer  through

Fig.  5.  DSC  curves  of  pure  Na  metal  and  mixture  of  the  Na  metal  and  NASICON  solid electrolyte  powder  from  25 ◦C  to  150 ◦C  at  a  heating  rate  of  3  K  min−1.

Please  cite  this  article  in  press  as:  Y.  Noguchi,  et  al.,  Fabrication  and  performances  of  all  solid-state  symmetric  sodium  battery  based  on  NASICONrelated   compounds,  Electrochim.  Acta  (2012),  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2012.11.038

the  Na  metal/NASICON  interface  seems  to  be  extremely  slow  at room  temperature  and  meaningful  charge/discharge  results  cannot  be  obtained.  It  was  previously  reported  that  an  easy  exchange of  sodium  ions  at  the  interface  of  Na  electrode  and  solid  electrolyte took  place  when  a  liquid  sodium  electrode  was  used  [27].  In  our case,  to  obtain  good  contact  at  the  Na/NASICON  interface,  the half-cell  was  kept  at  80 ◦C  (near  the  sodium  melting  point)  before and  during  the  charge/discharge  studies.  It  can  be  speculated that  such  a  thermal  treatment  allowed  extension  of  the  contact area  between  the  metallic  Na  electrode  and  the  NASICON  solid electrolyte  due  to  the  softening  of  the  Na  foil.  Greater  contact  area at  the  metallic  Na/NASICON  interface  as  well  as  a  higher  operating temperature  may   have  resulted  in  easier  sodium  transfer  through the  interface,  thereby  allowing  charge/discharge  measurements  to be  performed.

It  is  known  that  the  NVP  active  material  has  two  redox  electric  potentials  based  on  the  V4+/V3+ and  V3+/V2+ redox  couples. Moreover,  it  was  reported  that  the  NASICON  solid  electrolyte  supporting  fast  Na+ ionic  transfer  allows  up  to  four  alkali  cations  per formula  unit  in  the  interstitial  space  [28].  This  means  that  the  base NVP  material  possessing  the  NASICON  3D  framework  is  capable  of extracting  as  well  as  interacting  with  Na  atoms.  Thus,  two   typical  solid-state  half-cells  (I)  were  fabricated  and  examined.  The  ﬁrst half-cell  was  cycled  starting  with  sodium  extraction  between  2.0 and  3.6  V  vs.  Na,  where  the  NVP  worked  as  a  cathode.  The  second one  was  tested  within  1.5–2.0  V  vs.  Na  beginning  from  the  sodium insertion,  and  the  NVP  worked  as  an  anode.  The  evaluation  of  electrochemical  performance  of  these  cells  was  carried  out  at  80 ◦C ␮A  cm−2.  The  voltage  curves  and under  the  current  density  of  10  the  cycle  performance  of  these  cells  are  presented  in  Fig.  7a  and b,  respectively.  The  voltage  of  the  sodium  extraction  from  the  NVP cathode  was  ﬂat,  at  about  3.4  V,  and  was  associated  with  the  V4+/V3+ redox  couple  (see  Fig.  7a).  The  plateau  at  around  1.6  V  was  associated  with  the  V3+/V2+ redox  couple  and  indicated  electrochemical insertion  of  Na  atoms  into  the  NVP  anode.  Two  Na  atoms  per  formula  unit  were  extracted  in  the  ﬁrst  cycle  at  the  high-voltage  range of  2.0–3.6  V.  On  the  other  hand,  only  approximately  0.8  Na  atoms per  formula  unit  were  inserted  within  the  range  of  1.5–2.0  V.  Thus, the  capacity  of  the  anode  was  about  three  times  less  than  that  of the  cathode.  A  signiﬁcant  irreversible  capacity  was  observed  in  the ﬁrst  cycle  for  the  cathode  as  well  as  for  the  anode.  During  the  following  cycles,  the  reversibility  of  redox  reactions  increased,  but  the capacity  gradually  decreased.

The  capacity  of  the  NVP  cathode  was  found  to  decay  over  50 cycles  (see  Fig.  7b).  Although  such  a  tendency  was   not  observed for  the  anode  cycle  performance,  its  capacity  was   only  about 30  mAh   g−1.  One  of  the  plausible  reasons  for  the  cathode’s  capacity  decay  is  that  it  was  triggered  by  undesirable  side  reactions  at the  electrode/electrolyte  interface  during  the  cycling,  resulting  in reaction  products  may   have  blocked  ion  exchange  at  the  interface and/or  enhanced  the  cell  resistance.  Another  possible  reason  of the  capacity  decay  is  the  result  of  increasing  cell  polarization  due to  contact  losses  in  the  electrolyte/electrode  interface,  which  may occur  by  the  volume  change  during  the  charge/discharge  cycles.

The  capacity  decay  mechanism  of  the  sodium-ion  half-cells was  studied  by  disassembling  the  charge/discharged  cells  and analyzing  their  electrodes  by  ex  situ  XRD  measurements.  Fig.  8a and  b  shows  the  XRD  patterns  of  the  NVP  cathode  and  anode, respectively,  before  and  after  charge/discharge  cycles.  The  XRD peaks  for  both  the  initially  fabricated  solid-state  half-cells  indicate the  presence  of  all  the  characteristics  peaks  attributable  to  the NVP  electrode  and  NASICON  solid  electrolyte.  After  the  ﬁrst  charge

Fig.  7.  The  charge–discharge  proﬁles  (a)  and  cycle  performance  (b)  of  the  metallic sodium  NVP/NASICON/Na  half-cells  cycled  within  2.0–3.6  and  1.5–2.0  V  vs.  Na  at 10  

of  the  NVP  cathode  to  3.6  V  (vs.  Na),  the  peaks  related  to  the  NVP material  were  shifted  slightly  to  the  right.  This  indicates  a  contraction  in  the  lattice  parameters  due  to  the  extraction  of  almost  two Na  atoms  per  unit.  On  the  other  hand,  the  XRD  peaks  associated with  the  NASICON  remained  at  their  initial  positions.  After  the ﬁrst  discharge,  the  XRD  peaks  of  the  NVP  cathode  returned  to  their base  positions,  suggesting  the  absence  of  a  re-crystallization  of  the rhombohedral  lattice  as  well  as  an  electrochemical  interaction  of NVP  and  NASICON  materials  at  the  ﬁst  cycle.  In  the  case  of  the  NVP anode,  its  XRD  peaks  were  not  shifted  after  the  ﬁrst  charge  or  ﬁrst discharge.  Probably,  the  insertion  of  small  amounts  of  Na  atoms did  not  result  in  appreciable  changes  in  the  NVP  lattice  parameters which,  in  turn,  were  not  reﬂected  in  the  XRD  patterns.

However,  in  the  XRD  patterns  of  the  NVP  cathode  as  well  as  the anode  after  the  50th  cycle,  a  minor  additional  peak  was  observed at  around  2  =  18◦,  identiﬁed  as  NaVO3.  It  seems  that  NVP  and NASICON  materials  interacted/decomposed  slightly,  but  only  after long-term  cycling;  thus,  the  formation  of  a  by-product  was  obviously  not  a  dominant  contributor  to  the  decay  of  capacity  retention over  50  cycles.  It  was   suggested  that  the  observed  capacity  decay of  the  solid  half-cell  was  a  result  of  increasing  cell  polarization due  to  a  rise  in  the  internal  resistance.  Electrode/solid  electrolyte contact  aggravation  because  of  quick  multiple  changes  of  the  electrode  volume  during  deep  cycling  is  one  of  the  critical  points  of  the electrochemical  stability  of  all  solid-state  batteries.

Please  cite  this  article  in  press  as:  Y.  Noguchi,  et  al.,  Fabrication  and  performances  of  all  solid-state  symmetric  sodium  battery  based  on  NASICONrelated   compounds,  Electrochim.  Acta  (2012),  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2012.11.038

Fig.  9.  The  charge–discharge  proﬁles  of  the  symmetric  NVP/NASICON/NVP  solid␮A  cm−2,  between  0.01  and  1.9  V  vs. state  cell  tested  (a)  at  10  Na   at  room  temperature.  The  speciﬁc  capacities  are  plotted  based  on  the  cathode weight.

the  voltage  range  of  0.01  and  1.9  V.  It  should  be  emphasized  that both  the  symmetric  all  solid-state  cells  worked  successfully  as  secondary  batteries  even  at  room  temperature.  The  voltage  proﬁle ␮A  cm−2 exhibited  a  ﬁrst  discharge  capacity  of  about obtained  at  10  30  mAh  g−1.  Furthermore,  the  cycling  performance  for  the  symmet␮A  cm−2 revealed ric  solid-state  cell  tested  at  current  density  of  10  similar  behavior  for  the  charge  and  discharge  proﬁles  and  exhibited  large  irreversibility  of  redox  reactions.  Deep  capacity  decay was  observed  within  the  initial  ﬁve  cycles  on  the  charge  capacity proﬁle.  During  the  following  cycling  (after  the  5th),  the  charge  and discharge  capacities  of  the  symmetric  cell  fell  only  gradually.  Probably,  this  initial  decline  in  capacity  was  primarily  due  to  losses  of interfacial  contact  between  the  NVP  electrodes  and  NASICON  solid electrolyte  upon  cycling,  which  increased  the  internal  resistance  of symmetric  solid-state  cell  (II).   Moreover,  the  broken  character  of the  observed  cycling  curves  may   indicate  current  leakage  into  an external  circuit  through  the  micro-porosity  of  the  NASICON  solid electrolyte.  It  is  noted  that,  in  this  study,  the  NASICON  was  sintered at  a  low  temperature  (less  then  1100 ◦C)  to  avoid  the  formation  of monoclinic  ZrO2 along  the  grain  boundaries  [10],  and  the  obtained density  was   about  89–90%  of  the  theoretical  value  (3.259  g  cm−3). The  poor  densiﬁcation  of  NASICON  may   have  been  detrimental  to its  stability  [12].

It  should  be  noted  that  the  application  of  lower  current  density seems  to  be  very  important  for  all  solid-state  cells  in  order  to  avoid

Fig.  8.  XRD  patterns  of  (a)  NVP  cathode  and  (b)  NVP  anode  before  and  after charge/discharge  cycles.

The  above-mentioned  galvanostatic  investigation  of  the  two solid-state  half-cells  (I)  has  offered  the  possibility  of  using  NVP  as both  the  positive  (cathode)  as  well  as  negative  (anode)  electrode  in a  lithium-ion  cell  [29].  As  the  NVP  anode  charge/discharge  capacity  was  found  to  be  about  three  times  less  then  that  of  the  cathode one  (see  Fig.  7a),  it  was  suggested  that  a  cathode-to-anode  mass ratio  of  1:3  is  appropriate  for  the  construction  of  symmetric-type cell  (II).   Fig.  9a  and  b  shows  the  voltage  proﬁles  of  symmetric  solidstate  cell  (II)  obtained  at  25 ◦C  under  the  current  densities  of  10 ␮A  cm−2,  respectively.  Both  the  cells  were  tested  within and  1.2 

Please  cite  this  article  in  press  as:  Y.  Noguchi,  et  al.,  Fabrication  and  performances  of  all  solid-state  symmetric  sodium  battery  based  on  NASICONrelated   compounds,  Electrochim.  Acta  (2012),  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2012.11.038
the  deterioration  of  electrodes  and  electrolytes.  Therefore,  the  voltage  proﬁles  for  symmetric  cell  (II)  were  obtained  at  a  lower  current ␮A  cm−2 (see  Fig.  9b).  As  expected,  the  ﬁrst  disdensity  of  1.2  charge  capacity  was  higher,  about  68  mAh   g−1,  which  is  around  80% of  the  ﬁrst  discharge  capacity  for  the  liquid  NVP//NVP  symmetric lithium-ion  cell  using  1  M  NaClO4/PC  as  an  electrolyte  [15,16],   and around  58%  of  the  NVP  theoretical  capacity  (117  mAh   g−1).  Thus,  the observed  charge/discharge  characteristics  of  the  fabricated  symmetric  all  solid-state  cells  obtained  even  at  room  temperature  seem to  be  very  attractive  for  investigation  and  further  optimization  of cell  performance.

The  NASICON-related  Na3Zr2Si2PO12 solid  electrolyte  synthesized  by  the  sol–gel  route  in  monoclinic  crystallographic  symmetry (C2/c)  showed  high  sodium-ion  conductivity  at  room  temperature as  well  as  superior  stability  against  sodium  metal.  NVP  prepared  by a  solid-state  reaction  with  the  rhombohedral  NASICON-like  structure  was  used  as  the  active  electrode  material  in  the  fabricated  all solid-state  cells.

The  all  solid-state  secondary  battery  (I)  fabricated  by  the combination  of  the  NVP  cathode  and  sodium  foil  as  the  anode exhibited  a  gradual  reduction  of  speciﬁc  capacity  from  80  mAh  g−1 to  53  mAh   g−1 over  50  cycles  at  80 ◦C.  The  opposite  conﬁguration, in  which  NVP  was  used  as  the  anode,  showed  much  lower  speciﬁc capacity  of  about  30  mAh   g−1 at  the  same  operating  temperature. symmetric NVP/NASICON/NVP  sodium-ion  cell  (II)  fabricated  by  a  combination  of  screen  printing  and  hot  pressing  was  demonstrated  for the  ﬁrst  time.  The  fabricated  symmetric  cell  was  examined  at  room temperature  and  offered  a  relatively  ﬂat  discharge  proﬁle  at  the average  discharge  voltage  of  1.8  V  vs.  Na.  The  ﬁrst  speciﬁc  capacity was  about  68  mAh   g−1 which  is  80%  of  the  discharge  capacity  for the  equivalent  liquid  symmetric  cell  (using  NaClO4/polycarbonate organic  electrolyte),  and  58%  of  the  NVP  theoretical  capacity.  Our preliminary  results  indicated  that  the  cycle  performance  of  the all  solid-state  symmetric  cell  can  be  signiﬁcantly  improved  by decreasing  the  internal  porosity  of  the  NASICON  solid  electrolyte as  well  as  by  precise  control  of  the  contact  at  the  NVP/NASICON interface.  It  is  believed  that  the  development  of  sodium-ion  all solid-state  symmetric  cells  is  very  advantageous  from  a  commercial  standpoint.  Such  cells  exhibit  excellent  safety,  acceptable  cost and  simplicity  of  operation  because  the  as-fabricated  batteries  can be  charged  in  either  direction.