Batteries   are   key   systems   for   the   development   of   technologies  such   as   portable   devices   and   transportation   systems.   One of  the   most   appealing   challenges   is   the   increase   of   their   speciﬁc  mass   energy   for   applications   requiring   large   energy   storage capacity  e.g.   electric   vehicle   or   grid   storage.1,2 In   this   respect, reversible  lithium-air   batteries   with   an   expected   energy   density  of   more   than   500   Wh/kg   i.e.   a  potential   range   of   more than  800   km   have   shown   promising   results.3–5 So   far,   two   main solvent-based   technologies   have   been   studied:   aqueous6,7 and non  aqueous   lithium-air   devices.8,9 Other   concepts   are   also being  investigated,  e.g.   an   all-solid   state   device   was   described recently   by   Kumar   et   al.10 In   water-based   devices,   the   main electrolyte  is   aqueous-saturated   lithia.   In   order   to   prevent   reactions  of   the   lithium   anode   with   the   aqueous   electrolyte,   an ionic  conducting   separator   is   necessary.   Accordingly,   a  lithiumconducting   solid   electrolyte   is   necessary   for   both   all-solid state  and   water-based   technologies.   Solid   electrolytes   such   as

Li3N   compounds   and   sulﬁde-based   glasses   are   good   candidates −3 S/cm.11 However,   being with   conductivity   as   high   as   6   hygroscopic,  their   fabrication   in   inert   atmosphere   is   mandatory.  Oxide   electrolytes   such   as   LiSICON   electrolyte   are   more suited  due   to   their   ease   of   preparation.   Even   though   LiSICON  type   compound   Li2+2xZn1−xGeO4 (0.45   <   x   <   0.55)   was reported  as   being   highly   conductive,   its   conductivity   is   still   too −6 S/cm).12 With   conductivity   in low  at   room   temperature   (10 −4 S/cm,   NaSICON   type   Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 the  range   of   10 (LATP)   compounds   with   x  =  0.3–0.4   beneﬁt   from   one   of   the lithium   conductivity   amongst   air   and   moisture   stable best  compounds.13 In   strongly   reducing   environment   (e.g.   lithium metal  electrode),   LATP   materials   are   combined   with   a   protective  layer   (e.g.   LiPON)   to   avoid   Ti4+ reduction.14 The   synthesis of  LATP   via   solid-state   chemistry   is   much   documented.15,16 Thanks   to   the   large   choice   in   the   raw   material   nature   and synthesis  parameters,   solution   chemistry   favors   the   preparation  of   powders   with   controlled   composition   and   morphology. In  this   work,   we   propose   a   method   for   the   preparation   of high-purity   LATP   powder   by   co-precipitation.   By   optimization  of   the   sintering   parameters,   pellets   with   conductivity −4 S/cm   at   room   temperature   were   preas  high   as   1.6   pared.

Crystallographic   phases   analysis   was   carried   out   by   X-ray diffraction   with   a   Brucker   D4   Endeavor   diffractometer   using   a Cu  K␣   =   0.15418   nm).   Elementary   analyses  were   performed   by   SCA   –  CNRS.   Inductively   couple plasma  (ICP)   analyses   were   used   for   quantity   determination of  lithium,   aluminium,   titanium   and   phosphorus.   Thermogravimetric  analyses   were   performed   on   a   Setaram   TG-DTA   92 microbalance   with   30   mg   of   sample   and   alumina   as   a   reference.  Scanning   electron   microscope   with   Field   Emission   Gun (FEG-SEM)   JEOL   JSM   6700F   with   a   5   kV   accelerating   voltage was  used   for   morphological   and   microstructural   investigations. Agglomerates  sizes   were   determined   by   laser   granulometry.   The density  of   the   pellets   was   determined   via   Archimede’s   method on  a   KERN   ARJ   220-4   M   balance.   A   density   of   2.92   g/cm3 is   taken   as   the   theoretical   value   of   bulk   LATP   (x   =   0.3).   Surface  roughness   of   the   pellets   was   studied   by   optical   surface proﬁlometry  with   an   optical   interferometer   Zygo   New   View 100  with   MetroProTM   software.   Impedance   spectroscopy   was used  to   determine   the   conductivity   of   the   pellets.   Gold   electrodes  were   deposited   on   the   two   faces   of   the   pellets   by   a  gold sputter-coater.   Impedance   measurements   at   frequencies   from 1  Hz   to   107 Hz   with   varying   temperature   were   performed   using a  Solartron   1260   impedance   analyser   and   a   furnace   equipped with  a  Eurotherm   temperature   controller.   Micro   hardness   tests were  performed   on   a  polished   surface   with   a   Vickers   indenter HMV-2000   Shimadzu.

The   powder   synthesis   is   based   on   the   co-precipitation   of alkoxide  and   metallic   salts   adapted   from   a   procedure   of   Cretin et  al.17 The   water/ethanol   ratio,   hydrolysis  ratio   and   annealing temperature  were   optimized.

≥99%),   ammonium phosphate  monobasic   (NH4H2PO4,   99.999%   pure),   aluminium ≥97%)   and   titanium   isotri-sec  butoxide   (Al(tri-sec-OBu),   ≥97%)   were   used   as   raw   precursors propoxide   (Ti(OiPr)4,   and  purchased   from   Sigma–Aldrich.   A   solution   v/v   80/20 water/ethanol  with   a   concentration   of   0.4   mol/L   of   metallic salts  and   stoichiometric   proportions   of   precursors   is   obtained by  addition   of   a  water   based   solution   with   appropriate   amounts of  lithium   acetate   and   ammonium   phosphate   monobasic   in the  ethanol   solution   containing   titanium   and   aluminium   alkoxides.  The   hydrolysis  ratio   (h   =   [H2O]/([Ti(OiPr)4]  +  [Al(tri-secOBu)])  was   high   (h   =   200),   so   that   polycondensation   occurred and  a   precipitate   was   formed.   Solution   was   stirred   for   2  h   at   room temperature.   After   solvent   evaporation   at   80 C   for   48   h   a   white powder  was   obtained.   The   resulting   powder   was   annealed   at temperature   from   450 C/h temperature   ramp   in   heating   and   300

the NaSICON-type   (Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12,  0   <  x  <   3)   structure.   It crystallizes  in   the   rhombohedral   system   (space   group   R3¯c)   with cell  parameters   a   =   8.48(2) ˚A,   c   =   20.76(2) ˚A.16 The   structure   is built  up   with   TiO6 octahedra   and   PO4 tetrahedra   sharing   corners  to   form   a  3-D   open   framework   as   schematized   in   Fig.   1.   Li cations  are   located   into   two   sites   labeled   MI and   MII.   The   main one  (MI),   which   is   identical   to   that   of   un-substituted   LTP   parent  structure,   corresponds   to   a  distorted   octahedral   oxygenated environment.  The   substitution   of   Al3+ to   Ti4+ leads,   for   charge compensation,  to   extra   lithium   ions   located   in   MII sites   with irregular   eight   coordinated   sites.18,19

Fig.  2.  X-ray  diffraction  diagrams  measured  at  room  temperature  for  LATP powder  annealed  at  temperature  from  450

MI-MII-MI.19,20 It   was   also   shown   that   the   narrowest   places   of the  bottleneck   shaped   channel   are   large   enough   for   Li+ ion   to migrate  without   any   distortion   of   the   LTP   network.   TiIV substitution  by   AlIII contributes   to   open   the   bottleneck   size   by   increasing the  occupation   of   the   MII sites.21 This   effect   added   to   the   increase in  Li+ concentration   favors   Li+ diffusion   in   LATP   as   compared to  LTP.   This   results   in   conductivity   at   room   temperature   of −6 S/cm   for 10 LTP.22

X-ray   diffraction   patterns   of   samples   annealed   at   temperature ranging  from   450 C   are   reported   in   Fig.   2.   The   crys◦ tallization  of   LATP   occurs   at   700 C.   Pure   LATP   is   obtained   for ◦ annealing  temperatures   from   750 C   to   850 C, decomposition   occurs   leading   to   the   formation   of   secondary phases  AlPO4,   TiO2 and   Li4P2O7.   For   further   experiments,   the annealing   temperature   is   then   set   at   850

The   composition   of   this   powder   was   checked   by   inductively  coupled   plasma   (ICP)   elementary   analyses.   A   composition of  Li1.21±0.01Al0.32Ti1.72±0.02P3O12 was   then   obtained   which implies  an   evaporation   of   0.2%   w/w   of   lithium   as   compared   to the  theoretical   stoichiometry   Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 with   x   =   0.3. This  corresponds   to   a   maximum   of   2–4   w/w   %   of   impurities (AlPO4 or   Li4P2O7 by-product   considered)   present   in   the   powder.

Scanning   electron   micrographs   of   LATP   powder   are   presented  in   Fig.   3.   The   non   annealed   powder   is   mostly   composed of  particles   of   50–100   nm   in   size   with   additional   larger   particles  of   200–400   nm.   The   annealing   at   850 C   leads   to   particles larger  than   100   nm   with   a   large   distribution   in   shapes.   The   results of  the   850 C   annealed   powder   are   conﬁrmed   by   laser   granulometry,  as   presented   in   Fig.   3(b),   with   a   calculated   mean

Fig.  3.  Images  of  LATP  powder  obtained  by  scanning  electron  microscopy  and distribution  in  size  of  particles  obtained  by  laser  granulometry:  (a)  powder  before thermal  treatment,  (b)  powder  annealed  at  850

diameter   of   520   nm   and   90%   of   the   agglomerates   in   the   range of  400–1000   nm.

To   our   knowledge,   whereas   LATP   structure   with   x  =  0.3   has been  demonstrated   as   convenient   for   lithium   conduction,   no mention  of   the   percolation   behavior   of   such   powder   has   been reported   in   the   literature.   In   order   to   determine   whether   a   percolation  network   could   be   formed   at   room   temperature   between   the LATP  grains,   the   conductivity   of   a  pressed   pellet   has   been   measured  by   impedance   spectroscopy.   The   chosen   LATP   powder (annealed   850 C,   2   h   30)   was   pressed   in   between   two   brass   disc electrodes.   The   maximum   compaction,   which   corresponds   to the  minimum   in   sample   thickness,   is   reached   at   an   applied   pressure  of   110   MPa.   Nyquist   impedance   plots   for   several   applied pressure   present   the   same   behavior.   One   semicircle   is   observed at  high   frequency   and   an   inclined   tail   is   observed   at   low   frequencies.   The   resistance   was   measured   by   ﬁtting   the   semi-circle

Fig.  4.  Impedance  spectra  of  the  pressed  powder  depending  on  the  pressure applied  and  corresponding  conductivity.

with   R1 the   electrical   resistance   of   the   measurement   system, R2 the   resistance   of   the   electrolyte   and   CPE   the   corresponding  constant   phase   element.23 The   Nyquist   plots   normalized in  surface   and   thickness   are   given   in   Fig.   4(a).   No   difference of  resistivity   is   measured   as   compaction   increases   and   thickness  decreases   so   that   the   measured   phenomenon   arises   directly from  the   resistance   being   proportional   to   the   pellet   thickness. Whatever  the   compaction   ratio,   a  low   conductivity   (in   the   range −7 S/cm)   is   obtained.   The   contact   between   the of  3.1–3.6   grains  is   not   efﬁcient   enough   to   create   a  percolation   network that  would   enhance   lithium   conductivity.

Since   physical  binding   is   not   sufﬁcient   enough   for   allowing lithium  conduction   within   the   pellets,   sintering   of   the   powder was  performed   to   promote   chemical   bonding   between   the   grains. LATP  powders   annealed   at   850 C   were   pressed   into   pellets between  two   sheets   of   graphite   papers   (Papyex®)   and   sintered under  vacuum   using   the   Spark   Plasma   Sintering   (SPS)   technique  in   a   SPS   2080   Sumitomo   apparatus.   A   pulse   sequence (12  pulses,   2  idle   time,   3.3   ms/cycle)   with   adjusted   current   was applied.  The   die   was   heated   up   to   the   sintering   temperature   with   a 100 C/min   ramp.   An   isostatic   pressure   of   100   MPa   was   applied before  heating.   The   beginning   of   the   sintering   occurs   at   750 C with  a   maximum   in   the   shrinkage   rate   at   800–850 C   as   observed by  dilatometric   studies.

Fig.  5.  X-ray  diffraction  diagrams  at  room  temperature  for  pellets  sintered  by SPS  under  100  MPa  applied  pressure,  vacuum  atmosphere.  Sintering  duration: 5  min.  Sintering  temperatures:  850

from   5  min   to   20   min   were   used.   After   sintering,   the   samples were  polished   in   order   to   remove   the   graphite   paper.

the   sintering  in Figs.  5   and   6.   All   the   major   peaks   are   indexed   in   the   crystal system  of   the   LATP   powder.   No   change   in   cell   parameters   is   0.03 ˚A).   Side   prodobserved  (a   =   8.48   ucts  AlPO4 appear   in   all   the   pellets,   except   for   the   pellet   sintered ◦ at  the   lowest   temperature   for   short   time   (850 C,   5   min)   in   which only  a   small   amount   of   Li4P2O7 is   present.   Li4P2O7 could   be present   in   all   the   samples,   however   in   some   cases   only   the   major peak  (2θ )   that   is   a   common   peak   with   AlPO4 phases   is visible.  In   addition,   a  Li2C2 phase   is   detected   for   pellets   sintered  for   more   than   5   min.   A   sharpening   of   the   peaks   on   the XRD  patterns   is   observed   for   sintering   temperature   from   850 C to  950 C,   so   that   the   primary   particles   increase   in  size   with increasing  sintering   temperature.

Figs.   7   and   8  show   the   evolution   of   the   density   (measured at  room   temperature)   of   the   SPS-prepared   pellets   versus   sintering  temperature   and   duration.   Whatever   the   sintering   conditions, pellets  with   density   ranging   from   2.82   g/cm3 to   2.84   g/cm3 (i.e. 97%  of   the   theoretical   density)   were   obtained.   It   should   be   noted that  since   all   the   samples   have   the   same   density,   the   direct   comparison  of   the   conductivity   of   the   LATP   pellets   is   accurate.

Room  temperature   conductivities   of   the   pellets   exhibit   a   similar  behavior   to   the   one   described   for   LATP   powder   in   Section 3.4.  Only   one   semi-circle,   representative   of   the   total   resis−4 S/cm tance  of   the   electrolyte,   is   observed.   Values   from   1   −4 S/cm   are   obtained   for   pellets   sintered   between to  1.6   ◦ 850 C.   These   values,   similar   to   those   reported   in the  literature,1,3,24 indicate   in   addition   that   the   conductivity increases  with   increasing   temperatures.   However,   while   sintering  at   temperature   above   1000 C   leads   to   almost   fully   dense −5 S/cm   which pellets,   their   conductivities   drop   down   to   1   fully  contradict   the   expected   evolution.

In  order   to   determine   whether   the   difference   in  conductivity could  be   related   to   a   change   in   microstructure,   SEM   micrographs analysis  of   the   cross-section   of   the   samples   has   been   performed. The  microstructure   of   the   pellets   strongly   depends   on   the   sintering  temperature.   Whereas   the   pellet   sintered   at   1000 C   present   a ␮m   in   diameter), uniform  microstructure   with   large   grains   (6–30   for  pellets   sintered   at   850 C,   a   heterogeneous microstructure   appears.   As   presented   in   Fig.   9,   parts   with   only small  grains   of   200–300   nm   in   diameter   were   present   close   to zones  with   large   grains   of   tens   of   micrometres.   As   temperature increases,  the   surface   area   covered   by   large   grains   becomes   predominant.   On   the   contrary,   the   duration   of   sintering   does   not mainly  inﬂuence   the   microstructure.   The   same   structure   with large  and   small   grains   is   obtained   for   pellets   sintered   at   850 C for  5,   10,   15   and   20   min   (micrographs   not   shown   here).   For LATP  materials   (x   =   0.3–0.4),   bulk   conductivity   is   reported   to be  higher   than   grain   boundaries   conductivity.17 The   presence of  larger   grains   is   then   expected   to   be   beneﬁcial   to   conductivity  which   fully   agrees   with   the   observed   evolution   for   pellets ◦ sintered   between   850 C   and   950 C.   However,   the   drop   down ◦ C,   whereas   only   a   population in  conductivity   observed   at   1000 of  large   grains   is   observed,   contradicts   this   expected   evolution. The  aggregation  of   a   non   Li+ conductive   secondary   phase   at   the grain  boundaries   could   explain   this   phenomenon.   However   no signiﬁcant  difference   in   grain   boundaries   compositions   has   been observed  by   EDX   analyses   on   conductive   and   non   conductive samples.  A   careful   observation   of   pellets   sintered   above   1000 C indicates  that   the   cohesion   between   large   grains   is   weak   as   shown in  Fig.   10.   Then   the   lack   of   cohesion   between   the   grains   can   be suspected   to   be   at   the   origin   of   the   drop   in   conductivity.

The  effect   of   sintering   duration   has   also   been   studied   and   plotC.   The   densities ted  in   Fig.   8   for   a   sintering   temperature   of   850

In   order   to   study   the   mechanical   behavior   of   the   zones   with small  grains   and   the   zones   with   large   grains,   Vickers   microhardness   measurements   under   various   normal   loads   (2   N,   2.9   N, 4.9  N   and   9.8   N)   were   performed.   Optical   microscopy   and   SEM analyses  of   the   indented   surfaces   have   been   carried   out.

A  Vickers   hardness   decrease   from   700–800   HV   for   the   zones with  small   grains   to   only   300–400   HV   in   the   zones   consisting of  large   grains   is   observed.   The   decrease   of   plastic   yield   stress with  increasing   grain   size   has   been   described   by   the   Hall–Petch σ∞ law:  yield   stress   of   the   single   crystal,   σy plastic   yield   stress   that   is considered  as   proportional   to   the   hardness   for   such   ceramics.25 This   law   is   relevant   for   grains   from   several   tens   of   nanometers  to   several   tens   of   microns   such   as   the   size   of   grains   in the  materials   studied   in   this   work.   Moreover,   fractures   surging  from   the   sides   of   the   Vickers   indentation   are   only   visible   in

Fig.  8.  Density  measured  by  Archimede’s  method  and  conductivity  measured by  electrochemical  impedance  spectroscopy.  Pellets  A1-850-5,  A2-850-10,  A3850-15,  A4-850-20.  Temperature  of  sintering:  850

Fig.  9.  SEM  images  of  the  fracture  surface  of  pellets  sintered  at  (a)  850

Fig.  10.  SEM  images  of  the  fracture  surface  of  pellets  sintered  at  1000

Fig.  11.  Optical  micrographs  of  Vickers  hardness  indentation  marks  in  sintered  pellets  for  several  applied  loads.  (a)  Zones  with  small  grains  and  (b)  zones  with  large grains.

the   zones   with   small   grains   due   to   the   higher   hardness   of   this zone.

Optical   micrographs   after   indentation   on   zones   with   large grains  and   zones   with   small   grains   are   shown   in   Fig.   11.   A

deformation   around   the   indentation   is   visible   in   both   cases   even for  the   lowest   load   (2   N).   The   zones   with   large   grains   are   more subject  to   large   deformations   at   the   edge   of   the   indentation. Under  a   load   from   2   N   to   9.8   N,   the   mark   left   in   this   zone   is   1.5

S.  Duluard  et  al.  /  Journal  of  the  European  Ceramic  Society  33  (2013)  1145–1153

Fig.  12.  Micrographs  obtained  by  SEM  on  sample  surfaces  after  indentation  at  9.8N  load  (a)  in  the  zones  with  small  grains  (b)  in  the  zones  with  large  grains.

larger   in   diagonal   than   in   the   zone   with   small   grains.   Moreover, broken  parts   of   large   grains   are   observed   in   Fig.   12,   by   SEM micrographic   analysis   at   the   edge   of   the   indentation.

This  tendency   of   large   grains   to   be   taken   off   the   matrix   is also  supported   by   surface   roughness   measurements   after   polishing  of   the   samples.   Whereas   parts   with   small   grains   are   smooth ␮m,   a   residual   roughness with  a  peak-to-valley   height   of   0.4   after  polishing   is   measured   on   the   zones   with   large   grains   with   a ␮m   (which   is   the   average   size   of   large peak-to-valley  value   of   10   grains).  Moreover,   the   skewness   of   the   roughness   proﬁle   is   neg−3.   These   large   negative  values −1   to   ative  with   values   from   are  typical   of   asymmetrical   roughness   proﬁles   with   preponderance  of   holes   as   compared   to   hills   (the   bulk   of   the   material   being above  the   mean   line).

Hence,   lack   of   cohesion   between   the   large   grains   could   be the  limiting   parameter   to   lithium   migration   and   the   explanation of  the   lower   total   ionic   conductivity   of   the   pellets   sintered   at C.   For   the   other   pellets,   the   presence   of   zones   with   large 1000 grains  is   not   detrimental   to   the   global   conductivity.   We   can   then infer  that   in   these   cases   the   zones   with   small   grains   promote   the mechanical   cohesion   between   the   large   particles.

Powders   with   high   purity   have   been   prepared   by   coprecipitation  method.   LATP   pellets   sintered   by   Spark   Plasma Sintering   with   conductivities   amongst   the   highest   published   are −4 S/cm   at   room   temperature.   Very   high obtained  with   1.6   densities  are   also   obtained   (97%   of   the   theoretical   density)   so that  these   membranes   can   be   readily   used   as   separator   for   aqueous  lithium-air   batteries.   Moreover,   these   dense   and   conductive pellets   were   synthesized   at   temperatures   as   low   as   850 C   and   for treatment  duration   of   5   min   whereas   by   classical   sintering   at   temperature  of   1000 C   for   1   h  would   be   necessary.   A   new   feature

that   could   be   brought   to   the   knowledge   of   the   research   ﬁeld   is   the correlation  of   the   drop   in   conductivity   with   the   loss   of   cohesion of  grains   as   SPS   sintering   temperature   reaches   1000 C.   Investigations  are   going   on   to   determine   the   origin   of   this   phenomenon, where  the   presence   of   amorphous   phases   at   the   grain   boundaries is  being   hypothesized.

This  work   was   supported   by   the   French   National   Research Agency  (project   ANR   LiO2).   The   SPS   sintering   was   performed at  the   SPS   French   National   Platform   (PNF2/CNRS)   at   Toulouse. We  especially   thank   Geoffroy   Chevallier   and   Claude   Estournes for  their   technical   support.