During last two decades, lithium-based glasses have been studied extensively as electrolytes for solid-state secondary batteries. For practical use, solid electrolyte must have high ionic conductivity as well as chemical, thermal and electrochemical stability. Recent progresses have focused on glass electrolytes due to advantages over crystalline solid. Glass electrolytes are generally classiﬁed into two types oxide glass and sulﬁde glass. Oxide glasses do not react with electrode materials and this chemical inertness is advantageous for cycle performances of battery. In this study, major effort has been focused on the improvement of the ion conductivity of nanosized LiAlTi(PO4 2)3 oxide electrolyte prepared by mechanical milling (MM) method. After heating at 1000 C the material shows good crystallinity and ionic conductivity with low electronic conductivity. In LiTi2(PO4 2)3, Ti4+ ions are partially substituted by Al3+ ions by heat-treatment of Li2O–Al2O3–TiO2–P2O5 glasses at −3 S/cm at room temp. The glass– 1000 ceramics show fast ion conduction and low Ea value. It is suggested that high conductivity, easy fabrication and low cost make this glass-ceramics promising to be used as inorganic solid electrolyte for all-solid-state Li rechargeable batteries. Keywords: Inorganic Compounds, Chemical Synthesis, X-Ray Diffraction, Electrochemical

Solid-state lithium batteries have been studied as a fundamental solution of safety issue of conventional lithium batteries with solid electrolytes. Solid electrolytes for the thin ﬁlm batteries are required to have a higher ionic conductivity1 2) 2 a negligible electronic conductivity and be stable in contact with the anode and cathode electrodes. Progress in lithium batteries relies as much on improvements in the electrolyte as it does on the electrodes.

Solid inorganic electrolytes are currently the most popular electrolytes for lithium ion batteries which represent the ultimate in terms of desirable properties for batteries because they can offer an all-solid-state construction, simplicity of manufacture, good mechanical and electrochemical properties, a wide variety of shapes and sizes and a higher energy density as the constituents of the cell are more tightly wound. In solid electrolytes only ions are mobile. The LiPON is now being used Li

Author to whom correspondence should be addressed.

with good results by a number of research and development groups. The LiPON electrolyte has an acceptable lithium ionic conductivity (2 × 10 −6 S/cm) and a good electrochemical stability with both metallic lithium and the transition metal cathodes at cell potentials up to 5.5 V versus Li. Solid lithium-ion conducting materials consisting of nonﬂammable inorganic compounds have been studied to develop solid-state batteries with high safety and good performance. Glass-ceramics a category of dense materials of great potential as solid electrolytes and they can be made into desired shape and size more easily.

In recent years numerous studies have been devoted to + ion solid electrolytes for their the development of high Li potential applications in high energy density batteries and other electrochemical devices. Although a few kinds of conductors such as Li3N single crystal3 and some chalcogenide glasses4 have been found to show high conductiv−3 S/cm, they are not manufactured easily and ity over 10 have poor chemical stability, largely restricting their practical use.

Delivered by Publishing Technology to: Florida State University, College of Medicine

the NASICON-type structure, composed of both MO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra which are linked by their corners to form a three-dimensional (3D) network structure.5 The resulted structure consists of type I and type II sites for the mobile +  3) 3, which possesses Li the NASICON-type structure with a partial substitution Ti4+ → Al3+ , the xLi ions occupy the type II sites (10-fold O-coordination).5–7 The occupation of Li ions at the type II sites is favorable for the chemical stability of electrolyte materials. The LATP glass-ceramics prepared by a conventional mechanical ball milling method C) was reported to at high temperature (up to 1000 −1 at room −3 S cm exhibit a high ionic conductivity of 10 temperature8 with a good chemical stability. The current work attempted to synthesize the LATP glass-ceramics by mechanical milling (MM), which has been demonstrated as a simple and promising way to prepare inorganic solid electrolytes.8–12 The crystalline phase development of the glass-ceramics and the mechanisms for the enhancement of ionic conductivity in glass-ceramics were discussed. The glass-ceramics have a great advantage because they can be easily manufactured into desired sizes or shapes and have dense microstructures. Therefore, the development of fast ion conducting glass-ceramics is of greater practical signiﬁcance. Our aim is to prepare high conductive solid electrolyte which will have good stability after the intercalation and deintercalation of Li

Analytical reagent grade chemicals of Li2O, Al2O3, TiO2 and P2O5 (Aldrich 99.9% pure) were used as starting materials. The powders were thoroughly mixed by planetary ball milling. A 10 g batch consisting of Li2O (14%), Al2O3 (9%), TiO2 (38%) and P2O5 (39%) (in mol%) was placed in a crucible and heated in an electrical furnace. The batch C for 1 h in order to release was initially kept at 400 volatile products coming from the starting materials.

C for 10 h. A ball milling bottle is kept for 90 rpm at room temperature. Because of mechanical milling a churning of solid powder happened and uniform mixing of the composition is possible. Dense glass ceramic pellets (12 mm in diameter) were obtained by pressing the as-prepared powders under the pressure of two ton and then sintered for 6 h. Phases of powders and glass-ceramics were identiﬁed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis at room temperature. In order to determine the lattice constant, the diffraction peak positions were precisely measured by scanning between 2 4) = 10 . The microstructures of the crystalline phases were observed by means of scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Platinum electrodes were sputtered on both sides of the samples. Polished samples were used for ionic conductivity measurements. Current verses voltage plot for this electrolyte has been studied in the cell. Lithium metal was used as

both counter and reference electrodes. The entire cell was assembled with a liquid electrolyte of 1 M LiCiO4 in Propylene carbonate (PC) in an argon-ﬁlled glove box.

Figure 1 shows the XRD patterns of the LATP glass 3) ceramics obtained at 1000 C for 10 h. Diffraction peaks  3) arising from the LiTi2(PO4 3-type NASICON phases are observed in the specimen. It was also seen that the peaks are sharpen because of high temperature synthesis at 1000 3 phase. AlPO4 crystals are observed in the XRD patterns. A peak at 20.735, 22.284 and 26.450 suggests the presence of  3) an AlPO4 phase. The derivative LiAlTi(PO4 3 structure  3) resulted from the basic structure of LiTi2(PO4 3 possesses a NASICON type structure. The lithium titanium phosphate (LTP) consists of two polyhedra-TiO6 octaand PO4  3) tetrahedra, linked by their corners to form a Ti2(PO4 3 rigid three-dimensional skeleton. The skeleton provides a three dimensional tunnel where the Li can reside and migrate. In such a NASICON-type structure, there are two different sites, A1 and A2, available for Li ions. For the 3 the A1 sites are fully occupied and A2 sites  3) LiTi2(PO4 3 system Al3+  3) are vacant. In the LiAlTi(PO4 partially substitutes for a tetravalent Ti4+ ion because of similar ionic radii Ti4+ = 0 5)06 nm and Al3+ = 0 5)054 nm. The substitution also requires charge neutrality which is fulﬁlled by the presence of additional Li ions now occupy the A2 site. The X-ray pattern for sintered LiAlTi(PO4

The aand c-parameter for the former specimen were about 0.8491 nm and 2.0839 nm respectively. These two  3) values are smaller than those of the sintered LiTi2(PO4 (a = 0 5)8512 nm, c = 2 5)0858 nm) suggesting that the A13+ 3 ions replace the Ti

Fig. 1. X-ray diffraction patterns of LiAlTi(PO4

Structural and Electrical Properties of NASICON Type Solid Electrolyte Nanoscaled Glass-Ceramic Powder

Fig. 2. Cyclic voltammogram of LiAlTi(PO4 recorded at scan rate of 5 mV/s.

fabricated to test the electrochemical properties of bulk electrolyte. The cells were assembled in an argon ﬁlled glove-box. The electrochemical tests were started with slow scan rate of 5 mV/min in 0 to 4 voltage range. It is observed that this electrolyte shows the current in the range of −0 5)45  6)A to 0.15  6)A when cycled from 0 to 4 volt 3 shows stable perforas shown in Figure 2. LiAlTi(PO4 mance to this voltage range.12

Fig. 4. Shows the room temperature complex impedance plots for the LATP treated at 100

Figure 3 shows SEM microstructure of the LATP glassceramics pellet before and after cycling heat-treated at C for 10 h. The grain size of the prepared electrolyte 1000 was more uniform. It could be seen that after two cycling there is no change in the microstructure of the electrolyte. The average grain size of the glass-ceramics treated at C was about 400–500 nm and the grain size remains

The room temperature complex impedance plot for the LATP was obtained as shown in Figure 4. For the LATP Delivered by Publishing Technology to: Florida State University, College of Medicine C for 10 h, the values of glass-ceramics treated at 1000  7)b and  7)t at room temperature were 1 5)09×10 −3 S/cm and 5 5)16× 10 −4 S/cm, respectively. This phenomenon is consistent with those observed for ion conductivity and diffusion in nanocrystalline materials. The electrical properties can be improved substantially by decreasing the length scale to the nanoscale.13–14

Highly lithium ion conductive glass-ceramics containing LATP crystalline phase have been successfully prepared from glassy powders by mechanical milling. Good samples were obtained after mechanical milling for sufﬁcient time. The LATP glassy powders converted into glass-ceramics C for 10 h displayed the highthrough treating at 1000 est ambient lithium ion  7)b of 1 5)09× 10 −3 S/cm at room temperature. LATP crystalline powder shows stable performance in the voltage range 0 to 4 volt. Thus, Li2O–Al2O3– TiO2–P2O5 glass ceramics have great potential for use as solid electrolytes for solid-state lithium secondary batteries. Moreover, mechanical milling has been demonstrated as a simple and useful procedure to prepare high-lithiumion conducting inorganic solid electrolytes.

Acknowledgment: This research was supported by the Fusion Research Program for Green Technologies through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology

Structural and Electrical Properties of NASICON Type Solid Electrolyte Nanoscaled Glass-Ceramic Powder

(No. 2010-0019089). One of the authors Dr. Vaishali Patil would like to thank Hon. Rajkumar Agarwal Chairman and Mr. Bharat Agarwal, Managing Trustee, Bansilal Ramnath Agarwal Charitable Trust, Pune, India for deputing her to Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul, South Korea.