The samples of tin (Sn) modified NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) type solid electrolyte are prepared and their electrical properties are investigated. The two modified compositions of NASICON in which zirconium (Zr) atoms are replaced by Sn atoms i.e., Na3ZrSnSi2PO12 (NASN) and Na3Sn2Si2PO12 (NASN2), are prepared by solid state reaction technique. The structural studies show variation in the lattice parameters a and c which enhance the bottle neck size. The FT-IR results also confirm structural modification (stretching of bond lengths) on addition of Sn. The electrical studies show when one atom of Zr is replaced by one atom of Sn (NASN), both DC and AC electrical conductivities increase as compared to unmodified NASICON material while for replacement of both the Zr atoms by Sn atoms (NASN2), the electrical conductivity decreases.

From past few decades, the discovery of NASICON (Na1 +xZr2SixP3-xO12) material (acronym for Na SuperIonic CONductors) gained an important achievement in the field of solid electrolytes. Because of its high ionic conductivity and three dimensional networks, people have been using it successfully for various applications such as gas sensing, Na+ based batteries, fuel cells and ion selective electrodes [1–5]. High ion charge carrier concentration, high mobility and stability of phosphate units are the key factors which are responsible for such high ionic conductivity of these materials and these P. Yadav : M. C. Bhatnagar (*) Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 110016, India e-mail: mukesh@physics.iitd.ac.in

properties are due to the crystal structure of these compounds [5–10]. General formula of three dimensional network of NASICON phase is written as AnMmP3O12, where A can be filled by alkali ion or alkaline earth ions which can freely move inside the structure with low activation energy and M site is occupied by di, tri, tetra and penta valent transition metal ions. Generally NASICON material possesses rhombohedral symmetry in which three dimensional framework of (Si,P)O4 tetrahedra are corner shared with ZrO6 octahedra and two types of Na sites (Na1 and Na2) are available for Na+ migration. The Na1 site is placed between two octahedra along the c axis and other site Na2 is placed at midway of two Na1 sites along the a axis [8–10]. Na+ migrates from Na1 to Na2 sites, inside the channels, through triangular bottlenecks of oxygen atoms. The bottleneck between both sites for the rhombohedral symmetry consists of three oxygen atoms whose centres make up an isosceles triangle [11] and is shown in Fig. 1. Such a high value of ionic conductivity of NASICON compounds is dependent on the size of bottleneck, activation energy required for the movement of ions and lattice parameters. These values can be modified by changing the composition of NASICON such as substitution by ions with different sizes and different chemical valences [12]. Different approaches such as changing the compositions, addition of dopants, elemental replacement such as Li, Hf in place of Na and Sc, Ti, Fe in place of Zr [13–20], have already been reported to improve the conductivity of the materials of this series. The ionic conductivity due to movement of Na+ also depends upon the number of sodium atoms present in the NASICON type compounds and when sodium atoms present in structure are nearly three, the compound exhibits maximum unit volume and minimum resistivity [12, 21]. In this paper, we have proposed the synthesis of new type of NASICON material by solid state reaction using inorganic compounds, keeping three sodium atoms in the compound. Two types of NASICON structures have been discussed. In the first structure, one atom of Zr is replaced by one atom of Sn

mixed together according to their molar ratios to get NASICON with x02. First, known amounts of (NH4)H2PO4 and NaOH were mixed in water separately. Both of the aqueous solutions were rigorously stirred for an hour and intermixed. After this, known amounts of ZrOCl2, NaOH and SiO2 were mixed separately in water, stirred and intermixed as above. Now these two prepared solutions were intermixed and stirred for an hour. Above obtained solution was ball milled to obtain a powder with uniform particle size distribution and the final solution was dried for 2 h at 150 °C. After drying NASICON powder was found which was again sintered at 1000 °C for 3 h. Sample of composition Na3ZrSnSi2PO12 (NASN) was also prepared by the same procedure; two oxides (SnO2, ZrO2) in adequate proportion being used. Firstly, amount of ZrO2 and SnO2 were mixed in appropriate ratio and thoroughly homogenised in distilled water in a ball mill for 10 h. Afterwards this mixture was dried for 2 h at 500 °C. After drying this zirconium tin oxide mixture was further added to the stoichiometric ratio of other starting materials (NaOH, SiO2, (NH4)H2PO4) and all were mixed and stirred for an hour. Finally obtained solution was dried for 2 h at 150 °C and then sintered at 1000 °C for 3 h as described above. Similarly Na3Sn2Si2PO12 (NASN2) was obtained by adding appropriate molar weight of SnO2 to the mixture of above compounds. Prepared sintered powders were uniaxially (11 MPa) pressed in the form of pellets and again sintered at 1000 °C for 3 h.

The X-Ray diffraction patterns of NASICON, NASN and NASN2 samples were recorded by using Philips XPERT-PRO diffractometer system (2 theta range was taken from 10° to 50°) using Cu Kα radiation having a wavelength of 1.5406 Å. All the patterns were taken at room temperature. The IR reflectance measurements were carried out using the PerkinElmer Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectrophotometer (model Spectrum BX-2) in the wave number range 400 to 1500 cm-1. LCR meter (HIOKI 3522–50) had been used for measuring AC conductivity in a frequency range of 10 Hz– 100 kHz at a temperature of 300 °K. Electronic conductivity was measured by Keithley electrometer. For both of these measurements silver electrodes were deposited on both sides of the NASICON pellets. To compare the ionic conductivity of Na+ of NASICON, NASN and NASN2 pellets, an electrochemical cell method was used [11] in which Ag/AgCl electrodes were used. The cell is given by the following sequence:

here, [ref] is the concentration of the reference NaCl solution, and was taken equal to 0.1 M throughout the experiment and [?] is for unknown Na+ concentration that was to be measured. The schematic of the electrochemical cell is shown in Fig. 2. The Ag/AgCl electrodes were prepared electrochemically by coating an AgCl layer around a silver wire dipped in HCl liquid

Fig. 1 Schematic representation of NASICON structure. Two sites for Na+ ions are represented as follows: Na1 by double circles and Na2 by open circles. Oxygen atoms are represented by closed circles and the bottleneck is shown by dotted lines

(Na3ZrSnSi2PO12) and in the second one, both atoms of Zr are replaced by Sn atoms (Na3Sn2Si2PO12). These two structures have been compared with standard NASICON structure Na3Zr2Si2PO12 in terms of their structural properties and electrical conductivities. In NASN both DC and AC electrical conductivity is enhanced as compared to unmodified NASICON material while in NASN2, the electrical conductivity decreases. The mechanism behind the enhancement in electrical conductivity is correlated with modification in bottle neck size and lattice parameters

For the preparation of NASICON powder, sodium hydroxide (NaOH), silicon dioxide (SiO2), ammonium dihydrogen phosphate (NH4)H2PO4), tin oxide (SnO2),zirconium oxide (ZrO2) and zirconium oxychloride (ZrOCl2) were purchased from Merck. For testing purposes, sodium chloride (NaCl) was also purchased from Merck. The water used for making different samples of NaCl-water solution was taken from a millipore system. For electrodes, silver wire (99.99 % pure) was purchased from a local supplier. All the chemicals were used in the same form as received, without any further purification process.

The standard NASICON and Sn modified NASICON bulk samples have been prepared by conventional solid state reaction method [16, 22]. The known weights of following compounds NaOH, SiO2, (NH4)H2PO4 and ZrOCl2 were

prepared by solid state reaction method. Figure 3(a) shows the peaks corresponding to NASICON material which are well matched to the peak positions assigned in standard JCPDS file. The structural modifications observed on replacement of Zr atoms by Sn, are shown by XRD spectra in Fig. 3(b and c). Table 1 shows the values for lattice parameters while Table 2(a, b & c) shows the d values (observed and fitted values) of different h k l planes for NASICON, NASN and NASN2. All these values have been calculated from XRD data by using Xpowder ver.2004.04.70 PRO software and UNITCELL refinement program software assuming rhombohedral structure for NASICON, NASN and NASN2. It has been observed that, a parameter, is almost equal for NASN (c02.271 nm, a00.897 nm), NASN2 (c0 2.203 nm, a00.897 nm) and NASICON (c02.233 nm, a0 0.898 nm). The bottleneck size is related to the variation in the lattice parameters a and c. In general, the parameter, a, is directly related to ionic radius of Zr4+ (0.160 nm) and Sn4+ (0.156 nm), amount of sodium content and bond length between Zr4+ or Sn4+ and oxygen. In our case, very small change in the value of a parameter is observed for NASN and NASN2 as compared to NASICON which could be attributed to small change in ionic size of Zr4+ or Sn4+. This decrease in a parameter may be due to smaller ionic size of Sn4+as compared to that of Zr4+.

Fig. 2 Schematic representation of the electrochemical cell used for Na+ concentration measurements

electrolyte. Solutions of different molarity were used to record electromotive force (emf) readings, across the electrodes.

Figure 3(a, b and c) shows the XRD patterns of NASICON and Sn modified NASICON (NASN and NASN2) materials

Fig. 3 XRD patterns of 3(a) NASICON, 3(b) NASN and 3 (c) NASN2 samples at room temperature. ZrO2 peaks are represented by asterisk and SnO2 peaks are represented by double plus sign and other unidentified peaks are the mixed phase of ZrO2, SiO2 and sodium compounds

Table 1 Lattice parameters (calculated by UNITCELL software) and structure for NASICON, NASN and NASN2 compounds

As reported in literatures that variation in c parameter depends upon several factors such as size of substituted ion, electrostatic force between sodium ion and substituted cations through the shared faces, repulsion between substituted cations, sodium and oxygen attraction and oxygen-oxygen repulsion when Na1 site is empty [23]. For our case, the first three reasons are ineffective because of equal charge on both Zr and Sn ions. The possible reasons for variation in c parameter are repulsion force between oxygen-oxygen ions when Na1 site is empty, sodium-lattice and lattice-lattice interactions [12]. It means that on octahedral substitution of Sn in place of Zr changes the occupation rate of Na1 and Na2 sites. It is also noted that SnO2 peaks have also been

Table 2 Calculated and observed d values of different h k l planes for (a) NASICON (b) NASN (c) NASN2

found with NASICON peaks in NASN (when one Zr atom is replaced by one Sn atom) it means only small amount of Zr is replaced by Sn and rest of the Sn is present in form of SnO2. In NASICON, two planes [104] and [110] are prominent. In NASN, these two peaks are suppressed because of existence of high intensity peaks of SnO2. While in NASN2, peaks corresponding to [104] and [110] planes appear with high intensity it means that in the absence of Zr, new type of NASICON is formed in which Sn is present in place of Zr.

From the FT-IR spectra one can get information about the role of Sn atom in NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) crystal lattice. FT-IR studies have been carried out to know whether Sn atom is replacing Zr atom or is located at inter-grain boundaries. The FT-IR spectra of NASICON, NASN, and NASN2 are shown in Fig. 4. The FT-IR spectra of NASICON materials are dominated by intense, overlapping intrastretching modes (ν1 and ν3) that range molecular PO4 −1 from 1300 to 700 cm has been observed which is characterized by anti-symmetric stretching vibrations of metal-oxygen bonds ([ZrO6], [PO4] and [SiO4] clusters) in pure NASICON crystal phase [19, 24–27]. The substitution of [ZrO6] by [SnO6] clusters creates internal stresses on the octahedral and tetrahedral sites. The spectra also show displacement in the absorption band

−1) for NASN towards lower wave number region (966 cm −1) for NASN2 and higher wave number region (976 cm which confirms the substitution of Sn atoms in NASICON (which is shown by dotted circle in Fig. 4). In this process Sn may be modifying the interaction forces between the O– P–O, O–Si–O and O–Zr–O bonds, which can lead to considerable displacement of the absorption band. The stretching modes of the asymmetric stretching vibration are also −1 as broad band which confirms observed at 984 to 1078 cm the modifications in basic structure due to change in bondlengths present in the structure.

In order to confirm whether the modifications in the bond lengths observed in Sn modified NASICON structures are in favour of enhancing the ionic conductivity, sodium ion concentration measurements have been performed. From electrochemical cell method, emf values for NASICON, NASN and NASN2 compositions have been measured for different molarity of the solutions (M00.1, 0.5, 1.0 and 1.5) at room temperature, keeping both reference and the measured solutions stationary. In electrochemical cell, NaCl solution of molaity 0.1 is taken as reference solution and four other solutions of NaCl of different molarity are prepared for testing purposes. The variation of measured emf with molarity of different solutions for NASICON, NASN and NASN2 samples is plotted in Fig. 5. It has been found

that the emf value is higher for NASN than that of other compositions for all the solutions. It means that the amount of Na+ present into the solution is highest for NASN. By Nernst equation, the emf of the cell is given by

here R is the gas constant, F is faraday constant. Superscripts ref and? denote the values [Na+] (sodium ion concentration) and γ (mean ionic activity coefficient) at two sides of the cell. By substituting the value of emf, concentration of reference solution and mean ionic activity coefficient of NaCl [28] in Nernst equation, the unknown Na+ concentration in the solution has been calculated for all the three NASICON, NASN and NASN2 compositions. Table 3 shows that sodium ion concentration is higher for NASN as compared to NASICON and NASN2 at room temperature.

DC conductivity is measured by using two silver electrodes deposited across the thickness of the samples and 5 VDC voltage is applied. DC electrical conductivity was measured by formula σDC ¼ 1 ρ

Table 3 Sodium ion concentration for NASICON, NASN and NASN2 samples. Mean ionic activity coefficients have been taken from reference [28]

Mean ionic activity coefficient (ϒ) for molarity 1.0 M [28]

Table 4 Capacitance (Cp), AC conductivity and ionic transference number of NASICON, NASN and NASN2 at room temperature

other capacitive element CP with a constant phase angle (Fig. 8). From Fig. 7 the nature of the complex impedance plots at lower frequencies indicates (maxima is occurring nearly at 15 kHz for all the three samples in Fig. 7) that the principle charge carriers are ions rather than electrons. The value of both types of resistances (grain resistance and grain boundary resistance) for all the three materials depends upon the structure of the materials. In this case, both grain resistance and grain boundary resistance are modified because it may be possible that after adding Sn atom the bonding between the atoms is modified. According to Table 4, the calculated values of AC conductivity (bulk conductivity) [11] for NASICON, NASN and NASN2 samples at room temperature (300 K) are 2.21 μS/m, 2.85 μS/m and 1.77 μS/m, respectively so we can conclude that AC conductivity for NASN is higher as compared to that of NASICON at room temperature which has also been confirmed from Fig. 5 in which the ionic conductivity (Na+ conduction) of NASN material is enhanced which means that the conduction path (bottle neck size) for Na+ gets broaden. The broadening can be due to the difference in ionic size, bond strength and atomic positions.

Simple and useful technique to measure the ionic transference number is Wagner’s polarization method [29–31]. Using this method, NASICON samples were sandwiched between two silver electrodes and 0.5 VDC voltage was

Fig. 7 Impedance spectra of NASICON, NASN and NASN2 samples at room temperature

here R, L, A represents the resistance, thickness and crosssectional area of the sample and ρDC is the resistivity of the sample under test.

From the graph (Fig. 6) it is seen that DC conductivity is increasing with increase in temperature. For NASN, DC conductivity is higher as compared to other compositions. The activation energies, calculated from the Fig. 6 for NASICON, NASN and NASN2 compositions came out to be 26.98, 23.99 and 26.82 kJ/mol respectively.

To get the knowledge about electrical microstructure of material, complex plane analysis, a well-known technique, is generally used. For the interpretation of the experimental data, equivalent circuit model is required. Fig. 7 shows the complex impedance plots for NASICON, NASN and NASN2 at 300 K. The spectra can be easily fitted to a RC circuit in which simple resistance RS is in series (because impedance plot is not passing through origin) with a parallel combination of two components one is resistance RP and

Fig. 8 Equivalent circuit of the samples on the basis of impedance analysis

Fig. 9 Plot of ionic transference number for NASICON samples

applied across it. Figure 9 shows the variation of current with time. At the initial stage, maximum current was flowing in the circuit which is due to both ionic and electronic current. From the figure it can be seen that current decreases exponentially with time and finally saturates. This saturated current is only the electronic current [32]. As we know that ionic transference number is the ratio of ionic and total current, (Iion/I total where I total is the sum of ionic and electronic currents) the ionic transference numbers, calculated for all the three samples came out to be 0.97, 0.95 and 0.95 for NASICON, NASN and NASN2 respectively, as given in Table 4. Electronic current is higher in the case of NASN and NASN2 because of the presence of unreacted SnO2 which is also clear from the XRD data.

The electrical conductivity and structure of NASICON are modified by addition of Sn atoms in place of Zr atoms. When one atom of Zr is replaced by one atom of Sn, DC and AC conductivity are enhanced due to change in bottleneck size (cross section area for Na+ migration) and activation energy. FT-IR studies confirm the modification in lattice structure through incorporation of Sn atoms in the lattice. XRD data analysis also revealed modification in lattice parameters, a and c. The modification in unit volume is also observed which has been attributed to O-O repulsion, difference in ionic sizes and change in bond length. This material because of its high ionic conductivity can be used as sensing material with fast response time.