Sodium ion batteries are attractive for the rapidly emerging large-scale energy  storage market for intermittent renewable resources. Currently a viable  cathode material does not exist for practical non-aqueous sodium ion battery  applications. Here we disclose a high performance, durable electrode material  based on the 3D NASICON framework. Porous Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 /C was synthesized using a novel solution-based approach. This material, as a cathode, is  capable of delivering an energy storage capacity of  ∼ 400 mWh/g vs. sodium  metal. Furthermore, at high current rates (10, 20 and 40 C), it displayed  remarkable capacity retention. Equally impressive is the long term cycle life.  Nearly 50% of the initial capacity was retained after 30,000 charge/discharge  cycles at 40 C (4.7 A/g). Notably, coulombic efﬁ ciency was 99.68% (average)  over the course of cycling. To the best of our knowledge, the combination of  high energy density, high power density and ultra long cycle life demonstrated  here has never been reported before for sodium ion batteries. We believe our  ﬁ ndings will have profound implications for developing large-scale energy  storage systems for renewable energy sources. 

Introduction   Energy storage in utility power grids has been known for many  years; however, it is receiving more attention recently due to the  proliferation  of  intermittent  renewable  energy  resources.  As  a  majority of nations continue to enhance their renewable energy  portfolio, the importance of load leveling in these power grids  is signiﬁ cantly elevated. The basic requirements for large-scale  storage systems are ultra long cycle life, high power capability,  high round trip energy efﬁ ciency (RTEE) and low cost. Unfortunately, existing battery technologies available for these largescale  applications  are  either  too  costly  (sodium-sulphur  and  lithium-ion)  or  do  not  endure  deep  charge/discharge  cycling  over a long period of time (lead-acid). [  1–3  ]  

 In  this  context,  lithium  ion  battery  (LIB)  technology  has  been  viewed  by  many  in  the  industry  as  the  best  solution  for  demanding  energy  storage  applications. [  4  ]   However,  LIBs  have  continued  to  be  primarily  relegated  to  the  electronics  market  due to cost and material stability issues. The entrance of LIBs 

into  high  energy  ﬁ elds,  such  as  electric  vehicles  and  grid  storage  puts  into  question  the  availability  of  readily-accessible  lithium  in  the  environment.  Though  the  abundance  of  lithium  resources  is  not  an  immediate concern, an expanding market  for  LIBs  may  induce  strain  on  lithium  supply. [  5  ]   As  expected,  an  increase  in  demand  will  have  a  corresponding  effect  on  the  price  of  lithium  compounds,  thus  alternative  battery  chemistries  should  be  explored. 

 The  sodium  (Na)  ion  battery  (NIB)  is  a  promising  alternative  to  the  aforementioned  battery  technologies.  In  particular,  the abundance of easily accessible sodiumcontaining  signiﬁ cantly  greater  than  that  of  their  lithium  counterparts,  which  makes  NIB  a  potentially  cost  effective  technology  (Na 2 CO 3   0.07– 0.37  ¤  kg  − 1  vs. Li 2 CO 3  4.11–4.49  ¤  kg  − 1 ). [  6  ]   Furthermore, the alkaline ion chemistry of  NIBs is similar to that of LIBs, and many  of  the  materials  and  design  processes  currently  used  for  LIBs  can also be used in the production of NIBs. 

 Despite the numerous advantages of NIB technology, it still  remains in the nascent stage due to challenges in ﬁ nding suitable  electrode  materials.  Considerable  effort  has  been  dedicated to the design and fabrication of novel, high performance  NIB  electrodes. [  5–7  ]   Different  types  of  carbonaceous  materials  have  exhibited  electrochemical  activity  towards  Na  +    ions  at  lower  voltages  (as  anode); [  8  ,  9  ]   however  their  storage  performance  and  cyclability  does  not  perform  equally  to  their  lithium  counterparts, due to the bigger ionic radius of the Na  +   ion (Li  +    0.69Å vs. Na  +   0.98Å). This is also true for the cathode. Recently  Na 2 FePO 4 F/C, [  10  ]   Na 0.85 Li 0.17 Ni 0.21 Mn 0.64 O 2 , [  11  ]   Na 4 Mn 9 O 18 , [  12  ]   Na 0.6 Fe 0.5 Mn 0.5 O 2 , [  13  ]   Fe(CN) 6  4–   doped  polypyrrole [  14  ]   and  Na 4 Fe(CN) 6 /C [  15  ]   have  been  tested  for  hosting  Na  +    ions,  but  their long term cycle life or rate capability do not meet necessary  requirements for use in stationary energy storage applications.   To overcome such performance and cyclability limits imposed  by  sodium’s  larger  ionic  radius,  unique  crystalline  structures,  such  as  open  framework  or  3D  structures  with  large  tunnels,  have to be employed to accommodate these large sodium ions  for  a  lattice  perturbation-free  intercalation/de-intercalation  process. [  5–7  ]  In this context, NASICON (Na 3 M 2 (XO 4 ) 3 ); X  =  Si 4 +  ,  P 5 +  ,  S 6 +  ,  Mo 6 +  ,  As 5 +  )  framework  materials  are  well  known  for  their facile sodium ion conductivity but they have not yet been  signiﬁ cantly explored as NIB electrodes. [  16  ,  17  ]  Amongst various  materials  with  the  NASICON  structure,  the  theoretical  energy 

density of Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3  (NVP) as a cathode material is impressive, at 400 Wh/kg (117.6 mAh/g  ×  3.4 V for the V 3 +  /V 4 +   redox  couple).  Further,  the  material  was  reported  to  possess  good  thermal stability (450  ° C) under charged state which could aid  safe battery operation. [  18  ]  Yet, limited reports of NVP’s performance as a battery electrode exist in literature. The ﬁ rst report by  Uebou  et al.  [  19  ]  on Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3  in NIBs showed electrochemical  activities at 3.4 V and 1.6 V, corresponding to the V 3 +  /V 4 +   and  V 3 +  /V 2 +   redox couples, respectively. The reversibility and cyclability were found to be poor, though. More recently Hu  et al.  [  20  ]   showed  improved  performance  at  low  current  rates,  with  relatively  stable  cyclability  (80  cycles). [  21  ]   However,  the  full  theoretical  capacity  of  Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3   has  not  been  realized,  even  at  moderate C-rates. [  19  ,  20  ]  This is because the synthetic procedures  reported so far typically involve high temperatures and lengthy  solid state methods (900  ° C for 24-48 h) that yields large micronsized particles ( > 2  μ  m). [  16  ,  19  ,  20  ,  22–23  ]  The long Na  +   diffusion pathways present in these particles and poor electronic conductivity  of  phosphate  framework  restrict  the  high  rate  operation  and  cyclability of NVP. In this regard, a novel, low temperature solution process for the preparation of porous NVP nanostructures,  integrated within a conductive network, is attractive. 

 Herein,  we  report  such  an  NVP  architecture  that  demonstrates impressive storage and cycle performance in a manner  not previously reported. At moderate current rates (1C), nearly  full theoretical capacity and a high RTEE of 96% were achieved  in  half  cells.  Furthermore,  this  material  provided  superior  sodium storage capacity of 62 mAh/g at a high current rate of  40  C  (4.7  A/g)  (90  sec  of  charge/discharge)  and  impressively  50% of this capacity is retained even after 30,000 cycles.  

 A novel soft template approach was used to synthesize porous  NVP/C  composite.  This  method  involved  a  one  pot  synthesis,  in which cationic surfactant along with stoichiometric amounts  of precursors were dissolved in a mixture of water and ethanol.  This allowed the uniform mixing of the reactants at the atomic  level,  and  subsequently  amorphous  NVP  precursors  were  precipitated.  At  the  end  of  the  precipitation  step,  the  surfactant  (carbon source) used was localized within aggregates of amorphous  NVP  precursors.  This  was  in  turn  decomposed  during  the subsequent annealing process (650  ° C/6 h) to form an integrated  conductive  carbon  matrix  for  hosting  the  crystallized  NVP nanoparticles. This carbon matrix restricted the growth of  the primary grain during the sintering process and spread uniformly throughout the sample (Figure S1).  

Figure  1    depicts  the  powder  X-ray  diffraction  pattern  (PXRD)  of  the  as-synthesized  NVP.  Rietveld  reﬁ nement  of  the  PXRD  pattern  was  performed  to  show  the  pure  phase  formation  of  NVP,  without  any  impurities.  All  peaks  in  the  PXRD  pattern 

Figure  1 .      PXRD pattern of the NVP/C nanoparticles synthesized by the  soft template method (R exp : 11.30, R wp : 7.74, R p : 6.12).  

were  indexed  to  the  NASICON  structure  ( Figure     2  )  with   R -3c  space  group  (Rhombohedral  unit  cell).  The  lattice  parameters  obtained  for  these  NVP  nanoparticles  were   a    =   8.6217  Å  and   c    =   21.6924  Å.  These  values  compare  well  with  existing  literature  of  Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3  [  22  ]   and  JCPDS  card  no.  53-0018.  There  is  no evidence in the PXRD pattern for the presence of crystalline 

Figure  2 .      View of the NVP NASICON structure on the  ab  plane.  

Figure   3 .      Morphological  analysis  of  NVP/C.  FESEM  images  at  (a)  low,  and (b) high magniﬁ cation. (c-e) TEM images at different magniﬁ cation.  (f) HRTEM image. Circle in (d) shows the NVP particle anchored on the  carbon matrix. Rectangle shows the amorphous carbon matrix (diffused  rings in the SAED conﬁ rms the amorphous nature of carbon).  

or  amorphous  carbon.  However,  conﬁ rmation  for  a  uniform  carbon  coating  over  NVP  nanoparticles  is  shown  in  the  transmission electron microscopy (TEM) ( Figure    3  c, d) and Raman  spectroscopy (discussed later).    

 Figure   2   demonstrates  the  NASICON  framework,  rhombohedral  form  of  NVP,  which  is  built  up  from  isolated  VO6  octahedra  and  PO4  tetrahedral  units  interlinked  via  corners  to  establish  the  framework  anion  [V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 ] 3 −  .  The  two  independent sodium atoms are located in the voids/channels of the  framework  with  two  different  oxygen  environments,  with  six  fold coordination for the ﬁ rst and eightfold for the second Na  +    cation. [  24  ]  The open, 3D nature of the NASICON framework is  known for facile sodium ion migration. This outstanding ionic  mobility has been well documented. [  25  ]   

 Morphology of the as-synthesized NVP powder was characterized by electron microscopy. Low magniﬁ cation ﬁ eld emission  scanning  electron  microscope  (FESEM)  images  (Figure   3 a,b)  showed  a  network  of  NVP  particles  with  an  irregular  morphology  (particle  and  sheet)  and  various  sizes  ranging  from  500–900 nm. At higher magniﬁ cation (Figure  3 b), it was noted 

that  these  particles  are  formed  by  the  agglomeration  of  NVP  nano-grains  of  50–300  nm.  TEM  analysis  revealed  that  the  NVP  nano-grains  were  well  dispersed  in  the  carbon  matrix  and high resolution TEM showed an  ∼ 8 nm coating of carbon  on  the  surface  of  these  nano-grains  (Figure   3 c–e).  Raman  spectroscopy  (Figure  S2)  showed  that  this  carbon  matrix  was  composed  primarily  of  graphene  clusters  (SP 2 )  with  some  disordered  carbon,  which  is  known  to  enhance  the  electronic  conductivity. [  26  ]  In addition, the Brunauer, Emmett, and Teller  (BET)  surface  area  of  the  NVP/C  particles  was  found  to  be  40 m 2 /g with peak pore size distribution around 4-20 nm (refer  Figure S3). The relatively high surface area and the electronically interconnected pores of the material were instrumental in  retaining higher capacity at increasing current rates (discussed  later). 

 Upon inspection of HRTEM images, clear lattice fringes indicating single crystallinity of the nanoparticles were also detected  (Figure   3 f).  The  width  of  6.1  and  3.1  Å  between  neighboring  lattice fringes corresponds to the (0 1 2) and (0 2 4) planes of  NVP,  respectively,  thus  conﬁ rming  a  pure  crystalline  phase  of  these nanoparticles (Figure  3 f). Spots on the selected area electron diffraction pattern (SAED) (Figure  3 e inset) are consistent  with the PXRD pattern results shown in Figure  1 .  

To  gauge  the  electrochemical  activity,  [NVP/C Na]  cells  were  constructed.  Slow  scan  cyclic  voltammetry  (CV)  (refer  Figure  S4)  was  performed  on  the  half  cells to ﬁ nd out the electrochemically active regions of NVP/C.  Two  sharp  redox  peaks  were  observed  in  the  low  voltage  and  high voltage regions. The mid-composition reaction potential at  1.64 V vs. Na  +  /Na in the low voltage region is attributed to the  V 3 +  /V 2 +   redox couple and high voltage peak at 3.37 V vs. Na  +  / Na corresponds to the V 4 +  /V 3 +   redox couple. These redox peaks  are in good agreement with previous studies. [  19  ,  20  ]  

 The galvanostatic cycling curves obtained for porous NVP/C  as a positive electrode in a NIB cell are presented in  Figure    4  a.  Up  to  two  Na  +    ions  per  formula  unit  were  extracted  during  charging. The voltage proﬁ le had a ﬂ at charge plateau at 3.39 V  before  it  rose  steeply  to  the  cutoff  voltage  of  3.90  V.  The  discharge curve commenced from 3.90 V, with a direct voltage drop  to  3.36  V  followed  by  a  very  ﬂ at  voltage  plateau  that  spreads  over  a  long  range  of  sodium  composition  (up  to  1.88  mole  of  Na  +  ) and then falls steeply to the cutoff voltage (2.30 V), leading  to  the  storage  capacity  of  116  mAh/g.  The  ﬂ at  voltage  proﬁ le  for a wide range of sodium ion molar concentrations observed  for NVP/C is much higher than any other known sodium positive electrode material. During subsequent cycles, the observed  voltage  proﬁ les  remained  unaltered,  demonstrating  excellent  reversibility of the cycling process (refer Figure S5 for detailed  cycling).  

 During  cycling  at  1C  rate,  a  capacity  of  114  mAh/g  was  observed, and 92.2% of this capacity (106 mAh/g), was retained  during  cycling  at  10  C.  Even  at  much  higher  rates  of  20  and  40 C, nearly 80% and 54% of the capacity was retained, respectively (Figure  4 b). This capacity retention at high current rates  compares  well  with  reports  on  LiFePO 4 , [  27  ]   a  well  studied  LIB 

Figure   4 .      Electrochemical  characterization  of  NVP/C  as  a  cathode.  (a)  Galvanostatic  cycling  proﬁ le  of  NVP/C  at  different  current  rates  between  2.3–3.9 V. (b) The capacity retention of the as-synthesized NVP/C at different current densities in comparison with the best positive hosts recently  tested for the Na  +   intercalation (Na 2 FePO 4 F/C, [  10  ]  Na 0.85 Li 0.17 Ni  0.21 Mn 0.64 O 2 , [  11  ]  Na 4 Mn 9 O 18 , [  12  ]  Na 0.6 Fe 0.5 Mn 0.5 O 2 , [  13  ]  Fe(CN) 6  4–  doped polypyrrole, [  14  ]   Na 4 Fe(CN) 6 /C). [  15  ]  (c) Long term cycle life and coulombic efﬁ ciency for 30,000 cycles at 40 C. (d) The  Δ  V of NVP/C at different current densities (measured at the middle of cycling proﬁ le) in comparison with Na 4 Fe(CN) 6 /C [  15  ]  and Fe(CN) 6  4 −  -Ppy [  14  ]  (only two other NIB systems with charge/discharge  proﬁ les have been reported at different rates).  

cathode,  and  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  has  never  been  reported on a non-aqueous NIB. 

 In addition to the tremendous capacity retention at high current rates, ultra long cycle life of a non-aqueous NIB electrode  is  displayed  here  for  the  ﬁ rst  time  (Figure   4 c).  Nearly  50%  of  the initial capacity was retained after 30,000 discharge cycles at  40  C  (4.7  A/g)  rate  and  coulombic  efﬁ ciency  averaged  99.68%  throughout, with a standard deviation of 0.09%. At other rates  (1 C, 10 C and 20 C) ( Table    1   and Figure S5), more than 85%  of the initial capacity could be retained after long-term cycling  ( > 1000).  Note  that  large-scale  energy  storage  mainly  requires  long cycle life and high rate capability, which we have conclusively  demonstrated  here.  This  excellent  long  term  cyclability  compares  well  with  the  commercial  LIBs  and  exceeds  most  other  rechargeable  batteries,  including  those  used  in  grid  storage applications (lead-acid, Na-S). Although the theoretical  capacity  of  NVP/C  is  less  than  the  recently  reported  layered 

positive electrodes for NIBs, the capacity retention at high current  densities  and  cyclability  achieved  here  surpassed  them  signiﬁ cantly. [  13  ,  28  ]   

 The  voltage  difference  ( ΔV)  between  the  charge  and  discharge  plateaus  of  an  electrode  signiﬁ cantly  affects  energy  efﬁ ciency.  To  benchmark  our  porous  NVP/C,  the   Δ  V  of  other  existing  NIB  positive  electrodes  were  plotted  at  different  current  rates  (Figure   4 d,  Figure  S6).  The  observed   Δ  V  values  are  superior to the other non-aqueous NIB electrodes tested so far  and also compare well with the best LIB electrodes (LFP). [  27  ]  

 Energy and power density of NVP/C at different current densities (Figure  5 ) clearly distinguish it from the existing cathode  materials  for  NIBs.  If  a  suitable  anode  with  a  stable  capacity  ( ∼ 120  mAh/g)  at  low  insertion  potential  is  achieved  (e.g.  hard  carbon [  29  ]   or  Na 2 Ti 3 O 7   (NTO)), [  30  ]   then  an  energy  density  close  to 400 mWh/g is achievable with the as-prepared NVP cathode.  This  is  nearly  10  times  higher  than  the  commercial  lead  acid  batteries  currently  employed  in  the  electrical  grid,  demonstrating  the  feasibility  of  this  material  to  meet  demanding  requirements for grid applications. [  3  ]   

 The round-trip energy efﬁ ciency (RTEE) is a critical para meter  for stationary energy storage systems due to the large quantity  of  energy  being  transferred  through  the  system.  RTEE  is  the  product  of  voltage  efﬁ ciency  and  coulombic  efﬁ ciency  (refer  Figure  S7).  Since  the  porous  NVP/C  cathode  exhibited  outstanding  coulombic  efﬁ ciency  and  very  minimal   Δ  V  values,  it 

Adv. Energy Mater. 2013, 3, 444–450

Figure  5 .      Comparison of energy and power density of NVP/C electrodes against other cathode materials. (a) Energy density, (b) power density of the assynthesized NVP/C at different current densities in comparison with the best positive hosts recently tested for the Na  +   intercalation Na 0.6 Fe 0.5 Mn 0.5 O 2 , [  13  ]   Na 2 FePO 4 F/C, [  10  ]  Na 0.85 Li 0.17 Ni 0.21 Mn 0.64 O 2 , [  11  ]  Na 4 Fe(CN) 6 /C, [  15  ]  Fe(CN) 6  4–  doped polypyrrole. [  14  ]  (The mid-composition reaction potential was carefully  extracted from the galvanostatic proﬁ les of the above reported positive hosts) (Energy and power densities were calculated based on the active material weight in the cathode)  

is expected to also deliver high RTEE values. Based on the coulombic efﬁ ciency ( ∼ 99%) and voltage efﬁ ciency ( ∼ 98%) observed  at 1C for the as-prepared porous NVP/C, one can expect  ∼ 96%  full  cell  RTEE  for  a  corresponding  NIB  constructed  with  a  reversible anode exhibiting low  Δ  V values and high coulombic  efﬁ ciency. This full cell RTEE would easily exceed that of conventional  rechargeable  batteries  (60–85%). [  31  ]   Moreover,  even  at  higher  rates  (10  C),  NVP/C  can  deliver   ∼ 91%  RTEE.  This  enhancement in RTEE greatly reduces expensive energy losses.  

 NVP  also  displayed  electrochemical  activity  at  a  lower  voltage  and at this juncture, its properties as an anode were also evaluated  (Figure  S4).   Figure     6  a  shows  the  galvanostatic  proﬁ les  of  NVP/C  at  different  current  rates  in  the  voltage  window  of  1.3–2.0  V.  Again,  a  ﬂ at  voltage  proﬁ le  was  observed  during  the  charge/discharge  process.  The  initial  charge  capacity  of  50  mAh/g  was  observed  at  0.2C  and  85%  of  this  capacity  (42 mAh/g) was retained at 10 C, along with plateau behavior  and  minimal   Δ  V  throughout  cycling  at  various  C-rates.  Interestingly, in addition to the excellent properties displayed when  used as a cathode, exceptional cyclability, rate capability, capacity  retention  and  coulombic  efﬁ ciency  were  also  observed  in  the 

anode  region  (Figure   6 b).  Hence  by  combining  the  properties  of NVP as both an anode and cathode, a symmetrical cell with  an output voltage of 1.70 V was built (refer Figure S8).  

 Interestingly,  we  observed  a  well-deﬁ ned  step  in  the  discharge voltage proﬁ le of both NVP as a cathode (3.27 V) and as  an anode (1.56 V), especially at higher current rates (Figure  4 a  and  6 a). This was not observed during extraction and this feature  corresponds  well  with  a  split  in  the  cathodic  peak  of  the  corresponding cyclic voltammograms (Figure S9). It was previously  reported  that  the  transfer  of  Na  ions  from  the  Na(1)  to  the Na(2) sites is commonly observed with an increase in temperature.  This  rearrangement  triggers  a  number  of  small  but  considerable  changes  in  the  NASICON  Na 3 M 2 (PO 4 ) 3   (M)  Sc,  Cr, Fe) framework. [  32  ]  Since higher charge/discharge rates may  induce  local  heating,  we  believe  similar  structural  rearrangements  could  happen  in  our  porous  NVP/C  system  at  higher  current  rates.  Synchrotron  X-ray  studies  are  being  pursued  to  gain further insight into the origin of plateau splitting.  

 Ex-situ XPS studies were carried out to examine the Na insertion/extraction mechanism. The transition from Na 3 V 2 (PO4) 3  to  NaV 2 (PO 4 ) 3  during charging, and then back to Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3  after 

Figure  6 .      Electrochemical characterization of NVP/C as anode. (a) Cycling proﬁ le of NVP/C at different current rates in the anode region. (b) Rate  capability of NVP/C (voltage window 1.3–2.0 V).  
Figure  7 .      Ex-situ XPS studies of NVP/C electrodes. (a) Pristine sample  (b) Charged (c) Discharged.  

discharging, is expected to be accompanied by the oxidation and  reduction  of  vanadium  from  V 3 +    to  V 4 +    and  back  to  V 3 +  .  XPS  ( Figure     7  )  was  used  to  probe  the  oxidation  states  of  the  vanadium in the as-prepared, charged and discharged states. It was  found that the as-prepared material displayed a peak located at  binding energy of 515.5 eV, corresponding to V 3 +  . [  33–36  ]  Notably,  after  charge,  the  binding  energy  of  V 3 +    increased  signiﬁ cantly  (1  eV)  from  its  original  value,  indicating  the  formation  of  a  higher oxidation state. In this state, only V 4 +  , without V 3 +   or V 5 +    species, [  34–37  ]  was detected. Upon discharge, the V 4 +   species was  fully reduced to V 3 +  . The above results showed that the intercalation of two Na  +   ions in the as-prepared NVP is possible, thus  accounting for the close-to-theoretical capacity achieved.    

We  show  for  the  ﬁ rst  time  a  sodium  ion  battery  material  (cathode  and  anode)  that  demonstrates  the  durability  and  rate  performance  needed  for  demanding  applications,  with  over  30,000 cycles vs. sodium metal, capable of charge and discharge  in  a  matter  of  minutes.  NVP/C  was  produced  using  a  novel,  scalable  aqueous  precipitation  method,  with  a  relatively  low  annealing  temperature  (650   ° C)  and  short  crystallization  time  (6  hr).  Combined  with  this  facile  synthesis  procedure,  NVP/C 

can  offer  capabilities  nearly  matching  those  of  LIB  materials.  The material’s excellent electrochemical properties are attributed  to facile sodium ion diffusion in the nano-sized NVP particles,  embedded in a conductive matrix. In light of our breakthrough,  we anticipate our ﬁ ndings to have profound implications in the  ﬁ eld of grid-connected energy storage.  

 Carbon-coated  porous  Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3   was  synthesized  using  the  soft template method. [  38  ]  Cationic surfactant (CTAB) was taken  in  a  round-bottomed  ﬂ ask  and  was  dissolved  in  a  mixture  of  de-ionized water and absolute ethanol. To this solution stoichiometric  mixture  of  sodium  acetate,  vanadium  (III)  acetylacetonate and ammonium dihydrogen phosphate (1:2/3:1 millimolar  ratio)  were  added  with  continuous  vigorous  stirring.  The  resulting  precipitate  was  then  continuously  stirred  for  several  hours and dried using rotor evaporator at 70  ° C. Annealing was  done in Ar-H 2  (95:5) atmosphere at 650  ° C for 6 h to remove the  organic template and to increase the cross-linking of the inorganic framework. 6 wt% carbon was found from the elemental  analyses on NVP/C. 

 Powder  X-Ray  diffraction  (PXRD)  patterns  were  recorded  using  a  D5005  Bruker  X-ray  diffractometer  equipped  with  Cu  K α  radiation. The accelerating voltage and current were 40 kV  and 40 mA, respectively. A scan speed of 0.015 ° /s was used to  record  the  PXRD  patterns.  Lattice  parameters  were  obtained  using TOPAS-R (version 3.0) software. The morphology of the  product  was  examined  using  ﬁ eld  emission  scanning  electron  microscope (FESEM) model Jeol JSM-7000F operated at 15 kV  and  20  mA  and  high  resolution  transmission  electron  microscope (JEOL JEM-2010). For SEM examination, the sample surface  was  sputtered  with  a  thin  gold  coating.  For  TEM  studies,  the sample was dispersed in ethanol by sonication, a drop was  loaded on Cu-grid and dried. XPS studies were performed with  a  Kratos  AXIS  Ultra DVD   (Kratos  Analytical  Ltd)  at  a  base  pressure  of  1   ×   10  − 9   Torr  and  a  working  pressure  of  5   ×   10  − 9   Torr  with a mono Al K α  radiation.  

 For energy storage studies, composite electrodes were fabricated  with the active material, Super P carbon black (CB) and binder  (Kynar 2801) in the weight ratio 75:15:10 using N-methyl-pyrrolidone (NMP) as solvent. Electrodes with a thickness of 10  μ  m  were prepared using an etched aluminium foil (20  μ  m thick) as  current  collector  by  using  the  doctor-blade  technique.  Sodium  metal foil, 1 M NaClO 4  in ethylene carbonate (EC) and propylene  carbonate (PC) (1:1 v/v) (Merck) and Whatman Glass Microﬁ bre  Filter (Grade GF/F) were used as counter electrode, electrolyte  and  separator,  respectively,  to  assemble  coin-type  cells  (size  2016)  in  an  Ar-ﬁ lled  glove  box  (MBraun,  Germany).  The  geometrical area of the electrode was 2.0 cm 2 . The active material  content in the electrode was around 3.0 mg. Charge–discharge 

cycling  at  a  constant  current  mode  was  carried  out  using  a  computer-controlled Arbin battery tester (Model, BT2000, USA)  and cyclic voltammetric and galvanostatic intermittent titration  technique studies were carried out at room temperature using a  computer controlled VMP3 (Bio-logic, France).   