This   work   focuses   on   the   sensing   performance   of  the   sensor   to  chlorine   (Cl2)   gas   in   air   based   on   sodium super   ionic   conductor   (NASICON)   and   oxide   electrode.   Among   eight   single   oxides   examined,   Cr2O3 exhibited  the   highest   sensitivity   to  Cl2 gas   in   air   at   300 ◦C.  EMF   values   of   the   sensing   device   attached   with Cr2O3 changed   linearly   with   the   logarithm   of   Cl2 concentration   in   the   range   of   5–50   ppm.   The   sensitivity of   the   sensors   was   testiﬁed   by   using   Cr2O3 electrode   sintered   with   different   temperature.   The   sensor using   Cr2O3 sintered   at   600 ◦C   showed   the  largest   sensitivity   to  Cl2 at   300 ◦C.  Through   burying   the  reference   electrode   in   middle   of   the   NASICON   layer   and   decreasing   the   area   of   the   reference   electrode,   the sensitivity  of   the   sensor   to   Cl2 can   be   greatly   improved.   Finally,   a  sensing   mechanism   related   to  the   mixed potential   was   proposed   for   the  sensor   based   on   NASICON   and   oxide   electrode.

Chlorine  widely  used  in  industrial  processes  is  strongly  harmful and  toxic  when  emitting  into  air,  so  high-performance  Cl2 sensors have  been  urgently  desired  for  detecting  chlorine  in  the  atmosphere.  Up  to  now,  various  kinds  of  chlorine  sensors  based  on semiconductor  oxide  [1],   organic  thin  ﬁlm  [2]  and  solid  electrolytes [3–6]  have  been  developed.  Among  them,  the  solid  electrolyte type  sensors  exhibit  excellent  sensing  performance,  such  as  high sensitivity,  rapid  response  kinetics,  outstanding  selectivity  and reproducibility.  For  the  solid  electrolyte  sensors,  most  researches focused  on  the  sensors  based  on  yttria  stabilized  zirconia  (YSZ) and  sodium  super  ionic  conductor  (NASICON).  In  general,  the  YSZbased  sensor  was  operated  at  high  temperature  (600–800 ◦C),  so  it seems  to  be  inappropriate  for  detecting  the  gases  in  atmospheric environment  because  of  its  high  power  consumption.  Contrary  to the  YSZ-based  sensors,  the  mixed  potential  type  sensors  based on  NASICON  are  generally  operated  at  the  intermediate  temperatures  (300–500 ◦C),  so  they  are  more  suitable  for  detecting  the toxic  gases  in  the  atmospheric  environment.  In  recent  years,  more and  more  researches  have  been  reported  about  choosing  suitable oxide  electrodes  for  improving  the  sensing  characteristics  of  mixed potential  type  sensors.  For  example,  Miura  et  al.  reported  that  the YSZ  based  sensors  using  ZnCr2O4,  ZnFe2O4,  NiO  or  Cr2O3 +  NiO  as sensing  electrode  showed  excellent  sensing  properties  to  NOx at elevated  temperatures  [7–9].  Park  et  al.  also  examined  that  NiO

and  CuO  were  suitable  as  the  sensing  electrode  for  NO2 sensor [10].  In  addition,  Miura  et  al.  developed  high  performance  CO  and H2 sensors  combining  stabilized  zirconia  and  CdO/SnO2 sensing electrode  [11].  Liang  et  al.  investigated  the  sensing  properties  of the  sensor  using  NASICON  and  V2O5-doped  TiO2 electrode  to  SO2 [12].  Another  approach  to  improve  the  performance  of  this  type  of sensor  is  to  optimize  the  sensor  structure.  Miura  et  al.  designed  a tubular  mixed-potential  sensor  which  can  effectively  prevented  the reactions  between  the  target  gas  and  the  reference  electrode,  however  the  fabrication  processes  were  rather  complex  and  the  devices are  easily  damaged  [11].  Except  for  the  tubular  ones,  Elumalai  and Miura  reported  a  planar  NO2 sensor  using  stabilized  zirconia  and NiO  as  sensing  electrode  at  high  temperature  with  simple  fabrication  processes  [13].  Nevertheless,  the  reference  electrode  was exposed  to  the  sample  gases  that  could  reduce  the  sensitivities  of the  sensor.

Among  the  solid  electrolyte  sensors  reported,  the  sensor  for detecting  chlorine  is  rarely  studied.  Recently,  we  have  designed a  compact  tubular  potentiometric  Cl2 sensor  and  the  structure  has been  described  in  our  previous  paper  [14].  This  paper  presents  the fabrication  and  the  sensing  properties  of  the  Cl2 sensor  based  on NASICON  and  oxide  sensing  electrodes.  The  inﬂuence  of  the  sintering  temperature  of  Cr2O3 on  the  performance  of  the  sensor is  discussed.  Special  structures  of  the  sensor  devices  have  been designed  too.

The  NASICON  was  prepared from  ZrO(NO3)2,  NaNO3, (NH4)2HPO4 and  Si(C2H5O)4 by  sol–gel  process  and  sintered at  1000 ◦C  for  12  h  [14].  Eight  kinds  of  single  metal  oxides  (Cr2O3,2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Please  cite  this  article  in  press  as:  H.  Zhang,  et  al.,  NASICON-based  potentiometric  Cl2 sensor  combining  NASICON  with  Cr2O3 sensing  electrode, Sens.   Actuators  B:  Chem.  (2012),  doi:10.1016/j.snb.2012.03.024

CuO,  ZnO,  WO3,  NiO,  SnO2,  Fe2O3,  Co3O4)  as  sensing  electrodes were  synthesized  by  chemical  precipitation  or  thermal  decomposition  process.  For  example,  in  a  typical  synthesis  process  of  SnO2, SnCl4·5H2O  (5  g)  was  added  to  deionized  water  (100  mL).  After dissolving  completely,  aqueous  ammonia  (0.5  M)   was   added  until the  pH  of  the  solution  reached  3  to  obtain  Sn(OH)4 precipitation. Then  the  resultant  product  was  centrifuged  and  the  washed  with deionized  water.  This  cycle  was  repeated  for  several  times  in order  to  eliminate  the  chloride  ions.  The  precipitate  was   dried  and then  ground  using  an  agate  pestle  and  mortar  to  obtain  Sn(OH)4 powder.  Finally  the  powder  was  calcined  at  500–800 ◦C  for  6  h  in air.  Other  oxides  were  prepared  by  the  same  method  [11].

XRD  pattern  was  recorded  by  Rigaku  wide-angle  X-ray (D/max  rA,  using  Cu  K␣ radiation  at  wavediffractometer   3)   =  0.1541  nm).  N2 adsorption–desorption  isotherms  were length  measured  at  77  K  on  a  Gemini  VII  surface  area  and  porosity  system.  The  speciﬁc  surface  area  was  estimated  by  the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller  (BET)  method.

Three  types  of  sensing  devices  (Types  A-C)  were  designed  and fabricated,  and  the  schematic  cross-section  views  are  shown  in Fig.  1.  The  fabrication  process  of  Type  A  as  a  traditional  device  structure  was  described  in  our  previous  paper  [14].  NASICON  was  used as  the  ionic  conduction  layer  and  metal  oxides  were  utilized  as  the sensing  electrodes.  After  applying  oxide  paste  on  the  NASICON  layer and  drying  at  100 ◦C  for  1  h,  the  sensors  were  sintered  at  600 ◦C. Then,  on  the  basis  of  Type  A,  the  reference  electrode  was  completely covered  by  a  thick  layer  of  NASICON  to  fabricate  a  simple  buried device  as  shown  in  Fig.  1.  For  Type  C,  an  Au  point/ring-shaped  reference  electrode  was  formed  on  the  ﬁrst  NASICON  layer  and  covered by  a  second  NASICON  layer.  Then,  an  oxide  layer  as  the  sensing  electrode  was  formed  on  the  mesh-shaped  Au  electrode.  Gas  sensing properties  of  the  sensors  were  measured  by  a  conventional  static method  [15,16].   The  Ni–Cr  coil  inserted  into  the  alumina  tube  offers the  operating  temperature  for  the  sensor  device.  The  sample  gases containing  different  Cl2 concentration  were  obtained  by  diluting 10,000  ppm  Cl2 with  air.  When  the  sensor  was  exposed  to  air  or the  sample  gas,  the  electromotive  force  (EMF)  was  measured  with a  digital  electrometer  (Rigol.  DM3054)  as  a  sensing  signal  and  the results  obtained  were  registered  with  a  computer  connected  to  the electrometer.

Fig.  2.  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  patterns  of  the  Cr2O3 samples  sintered  at  different temperatures.

Fig.  2  shows  the  XRD  patterns  of  Cr2O3 sintered  at  500,  600,  700 and  800 ◦C.  It  can  be  seen  that  Cr2O3 retains  its  crystallographic phase  (rhombohedral)  corresponding  to  JCPDS  PDF  (#38-1479). The  particles  sizes  of  the  Cr2O3 samples  sintered  at  500,  600,  700 and  800 ◦C  were  calculated  by  Debye–Scherrer  equation,  which were  about  109,  112,  135  and  182  nm,   respectively.

Fig.  3  shows  BET  surface  area  and  pore  volume  of  the  Cr2O3 sintered  at  different  temperatures.  The  BET  surface  areas  of  the Cr2O3 products  calcined  at  500,  600,  700  and  800 ◦C  were  27,  20, 16  and  10  m2/g,  while  their  pore  volumes  were  0.18,  0.08,  0.06  and 0.04  cm3/g,  respectively.  BET  surface  area  and  pore  volume  of  the Cr2O3 is  reduced  with  increasing  the  calcining  temperature.

The EMF   (EMF  (Cl2)  –  EMF   (air))  to  10  ppm  chlorine  for  the  sensors  (A)  attached  with  various  oxide  (Cr2O3,  CuO,  ZnO,  WO3,  NiO, SnO2,  Fe2O3,  Co3O4)  sensing  electrodes  were  tested  and  exhibited in  Table  1.  Among  eight  oxides  examined,  Cr2O3 showed  the  highest EMF   to  10  ppm  chlorine.  It  could  be  attributed  to  higher  electrochemical  catalytic  activity  of  Cr2O3 to  the  Cl2.  Thus,  the  sensing properties  of  the  sensor  attached  with  Cr2O3 electrode  have  been further  investigated  in  detail. EMF   of  the  sensor attached  with  Cr2O3 to  10  ppm  Cl2 at  300 ◦C  and  the  sintering  temperature  of  Cr2O3.  It  was  found  that  the  sensor  using  Cr2O3 sintered

Fig.  4(a)  shows  the  relationship  between 

Fig.  3.  Correlation  between  BET  surface  area  (or  pore  volume)  and  sintering  temperature  for  the  Cr2O3 samples.

Please  cite  this  article  in  press  as:  H.  Zhang,  et  al.,  NASICON-based  potentiometric  Cl2 sensor  combining  NASICON  with  Cr2O3 sensing  electrode, Sens.   Actuators  B:  Chem.  (2012),  doi:10.1016/j.snb.2012.03.024

Fig.  4.  (a)  The  sensitivities  to  10  ppm  Cl2 for  the  sensors  (A)  attached  with  Cr2O3 sintered  at  different  temperatures.  (b)  The  response  transients  to  10  ppm  chlorine  for  the sensor  attached  with  Cr2O3 electrode  at  various  temperatures.

at  600 ◦C  had  the  largest  response  to  10  ppm  Cl2 at  300 ◦C.  This seemed  to  be  ascribed  to  the  best  balance  of  porosity,  chemical and  electrochemical  catalytic  activities  for  Cr2O3 sintered  at  600 ◦C. From  the  data  of  XRD  and  BET,  it  can  be  seen  that  the  particle  size and  speciﬁc  surface  area  of  the  sample  sintered  at  600 ◦C  are  moderate,  so  an  excellent  balance  of  the  diffusion  of  Cl2 through  oxide layer  and  electrochemical  catalytic  activity  can  be  formed,  resulting in  the  increasing  of  the  response  to  Cl2. Fig.  4(b)  displays  the  response  transients  to  5  ppm  Cl2 in  air  at 200,  250,  300,  350  and  400 ◦C.  It  can  be  observed  that  the  response and  recovery  time  of  the  sensor  was  shorten  with  increasing  the operating  temperature.  The  reason  may   be  that  the  spread  and  penetration  rate  of  the  gas  molecules  through  the  electrode  layer  and the  speeds  of  electrochemical  reactions  at  the  triple-phase  boundary  (TPB)  have  been  accelerated  when  the  operating  temperature of  the  sensor  is  increased.  However,  the  sensitivities  of  the  sensor at  300  and  250 ◦C  are  almost  same.  Taking  the  response  time  of the  sensor  device  into  consideration,  300 ◦C  was  selected  for  the operating  temperature.

Besides,  the  continuous  response  and  recovery  transients  of  the sensor  to  10  ppm  Cl2 have  been  also  examined  as  shown  in  Fig.  5. × The  result  shows  that  [(EMF     100%]  changes −4.9  to  8%,  indicating  that  the  sensor  has  better in  the  range  of  repeatability.

In  addition,  for  testing  the  selectivity  of  the  sensor,  the  device was  tested  in  10  ppm  Cl2 mixed  with  the  other  interference  gases, such  as  CO,  NO,  NO2,  H2,  C7H8,  C2H4 and  CH4 at  300 ◦C.  The  results are  shown  in  Fig.  6.  Comparing  with  the  response  of  the  sensor  to 10  ppm  of  pure  Cl2,  the  response  of  sensor  in  a  mixed  gases  changed −25%  to  15%.  It  indicated  that  the  interference  gases  could from  be  catalyzed  by  the  oxide  and  participated  in  the  electrochemical reaction,  which  produced  the  potential  at  the  sensing  electrode. Thus  the  coexisting  gases  affected  the  response  to  Cl2 to  a  certain extent.  We   will  try  to  improve  the  selectivity  of  sensor  by  doping or  adding  the  second  component  into  the  oxide  in  the  future.

Table  1 The  sensitivities  to  10  ppm  Cl2 for  the  sensors  (A)  attach  with  different  sensing electrodes  at  300 ◦C.

Sensing  electrodes 

The  sensitivities  (EMF)  to  10  ppm  Cl2 (mV)

Fig.  5.  Continuous  response  and  recovery  transients  to  10  ppm  Cl2 and  repeatability for   the  sensor  using  Cr2O3.

For  testifying  the  reproducibility  of  the  measuring  results,  two experiments  were  carried  out.  Firstly,  we  investigated  the  stability of  the  sensor  by  measuring  the  sensing  signal  in  a  speciﬁc  interval  (5  days).  The  measuring  result  is  displayed  in  Fig.  7.  It  can  be seen  that  the  sensing  signal  is  very  stable  during  the  testing  period (three  weeks).  Secondly,  the  sensor  fabricated  about  one  year  ago was  re-measured  for  inspecting  the  reproducibility  of  the  sensor. As  a  result,  the  response–recovery  transient  obtained  at  present  is

Fig.  6.  Cross-sensitivities  to  various  gases  for  the  sensor  attached  with  Cr2O3 electrode  at  300 ◦C.

Please  cite  this  article  in  press  as:  H.  Zhang,  et  al.,  NASICON-based  potentiometric  Cl2 sensor  combining  NASICON  with  Cr2O3 sensing  electrode, Sens.   Actuators  B:  Chem.  (2012),  doi:10.1016/j.snb.2012.03.024

Fig.  7.  Long-term  stability  of  the  sensor  attached  with  Cr2O3 electrode  at  300 ◦C.

Fig.  9.  Dependence  of  proportion  of  reference  electrode.

EMF   on  the  Cl2 concentration  for  the  sensor  with  different

similar  to  that  one  year  ago,  except  the  over  recovery,  indicating that  the  sensor  using  Cr2O3 electrode  has  rather  good  stability.

For  a  traditional  sensor  (Type  A),  since  the  sensing  and  reference electrodes  were  simultaneously  exposed  to  the  target  gases,  the sensing  signal,  a  difference  of  the  mixed  potentials  produced  in  the sensing  and  reference  electrodes,  was  greatly  reduced.  In  order  to obtain  higher  sensitivity,  we  try  to  optimize  the  sensor  structure  by block  the  exposure  of  RE  to  the  target  gases  and  design  Types  B  and EMF   on  the  Cl2 concenC  sensors.  Fig.  8  shows  the  dependence  of  tration  for  different  type  of  sensors  (Types  A–C).  It  is  found  that  the Types  B  and  C  with  the  buried  reference  electrodes  show  larger  sensitivities  than  Type  A  without  buried  reference  electrode.  The  Type C  in  which  the  reference  electrode  is  completely  buried  by  NASICON  layer  exhibits  largest  sensitivity  among  three  types  of  sensors. This  suggested  that  covering  reference  electrode  with  NASICON  in Types  B  and  C  can  block  the  contact  of  RE  with  the  Cl2 and  restrain electrochemical  reaction  in  the  reference  electrode.  The  potential difference  between  the  sensing  and  reference  electrode  as  well  as the  sensitivity  of  the  sensor  has  been  obviously  increased.  The  other way  of  enhancing  the  sensitivity  is  to  increase  the  effective  area  of the  sensing  electrode.  For  the  sensors  A  and  B,  because  the  sensing electrode  and  reference  electrode  were  located  at  both  ends  of  the same  NASICON  layer,  the  area  of  the  sensing  electrode  was   reduced to  about  one  half  of  the  surface  area  of  the  ﬁrst  NASICON  layer.  However,  for  Type  C,  since  the  sensing  electrode  almost  covers  the  all  of the  surface  area  of  the  second  NASICON  layer  (Fig.  1(C)),  the  area  of the  sensing  electrode  is  greatly  enlarged,  and  the  sensitivity  of  the Type  C  is  obviously  enhanced.

The  Au  electrode  as  RE  usually  shows  obvious  response  to  Cl2. Although  Type  C  sensor  with  buried  RE  was  designed  to  reduce  the effect  of  the  RE,  the  covering  layer  of  NASICON  could  not  completely restraint  the  entrance  of  Cl2.  Therefore,  we  want  to  further  reduce

the  effect  of  RE  by  decreasing  the  area  of  RE.  This  is  because  the small  RE  cannot  supply  large  three  phase  boundary.  As  a  result,  the sensitivity  of  the  sensor  with  point  RE  (1  mm2)  is  larger  than  that with  ring  RE  (7  mm2),  as  shown  in  Fig.  9,  indicating  that  such  an approach  is  very  effective  for  increasing  the  sensitivity  to  Cl2.

If  a  single  electrochemical  reaction  proceeds  on  an  electrode, the  electrode  potential  is  equilibrium  potential.  The  difference  in chemical  potential  of  conducting  ions  of  solid  electrolyte  used between  sensing  and  reference  electrodes  induces  electromotive force  (EMF),  Which  can  be  expressed  by  the  Nernstian  equation. However,  if  two  or  more  electrochemical  reactions  take  place simultaneously  on  the  same  electrode,  the  electrode  potential  is determined  by  the  rates  of  the  electrochemical  reactions  involved and  is  non-Nernstian  (mixed  potential).  In  this  work,  when  the  sensor  was   exposed  to  the  chlorine  atmosphere,  two   main  processes took  place  on  the  sensing  electrode.  At  ﬁrst,  the  Cl2 molecules  penetrated  through  the  electrode  layer  to  disperse  on  the  triple-phase boundary  (TPB).  In  this  process,  the  reaction  (1)  proceeded  in  the oxide  layer,  and  Cl2 concentration  would  be  reduced  [17].  This  indicated  that  reaction  (1)  had  minus  contribution  to  the  sensitivity  of the  sensor.  Secondly,  when  the  Cl2 gas  molecule  reached  the  triplephase  boundary,  the  following  cathodic  (2)  and  anodic  (3)  reactions can  occur  at  the  TPB  simultaneously.   4Cl2 + 2Cr2O3 +   O2 = − + Cl2 + + (inNASICON)    2Na   2e → + +   O2 + 2Na2O 

Reactions  (2)  and  (3)  construct  a  local  cell  at  the  TPB,  as  shown in  Fig.  10.   When  the  rates  of  the  reactions  were  equal  to  each  other, they  arrived  at  a  dynamic  equilibrium,  and  the  electrode  potential at  the  sensing  electrode  was  the  mixed  potential.

The  difference  of  the  sensing  and  reference  electrode  potentials is  measured  as  the  sensing  signal  [11].  For  a  mixed  potential  type

EMF   on  the  Cl2 concentration  for  different  type  of  sensor

Fig.  10.  Sensing  model  of  the  sensor  using  oxide  electrode.

Please  cite  this  article  in  press  as:  H.  Zhang,  et  al.,  NASICON-based  potentiometric  Cl2 sensor  combining  NASICON  with  Cr2O3 sensing  electrode, Sens.   Actuators  B:  Chem.  (2012),  doi:10.1016/j.snb.2012.03.024

sensor,  oxide  plays  an  important  role  as  an  electrochemical  catalyst and  provides  a  large  amount  of  active  sites  for  the  reactions,  then increases  the  mixed  potential  (response).

From  the  sensing  mechanism  expressed  above,  it  can  be  seen that  reactions  (1)  and  (2)  affect  the  sensitivity  of  the  sensor  in opposite  direction.  When  the  temperature  increased,  the  rate  of  the reactions  (1)  and  (2)  simultaneously  became  fast.  But  the  reaction (1)  inhibits  the  sensitivity  of  the  sensor,  and  conversely,  the  reaction  (2)  enhances  the  sensitivity.  Therefore,  it  can  be  concluded  that the  inﬂuences  of  the  two  reactions  are  competitive.  As  the  result  of the  competition,  the  present  sensor  exhibits  the  largest  sensitivity to  chlorine  at  250 ◦C,  as  shown  in  Fig.  4(b).

The  present  paper  reported  a  solid  electrochemical  Cl2 sensor device  based  on  NASICON  and  oxide  electrode  sensing  electrodes. Eight  kinds  of  metal  oxides  (Cr2O3,  CuO,  ZnO,  WO3,  NiO,  SnO2, Fe2O3,  Co3O4)  as  the  sensing  electrodes  were  prepared  by  chemical  precipitation  or  thermal  decomposition  processes.  Among  the oxides  tested,  Cr2O3 sintered  at  600 ◦C  was  found  to  be  best  suitable for  the  sensing  electrode.  The  device  attached  with  Cr2O3 electrode showed  excellent  sensing  characteristics  to  5–50  ppm  Cl2 in  air  at 300 ◦C.  The  90%  response  and  90%  recovery  times  to  10  ppm  Cl2 at 300 ◦C  for  the  Cr2O3-attached  device  were  5  s  and  10  s,  respectively. The  EMF  value  of  the  device  was  almost  linear  with  the  logarithm of  Cl2 concentration.  The  buried  reference  electrode  which  reduces the  proportion  of  RE  can  improve  the  sensitivity  of  the  sensor  effectively.  Based  on  the  excellent  sensing  properties,  this  kind  of  sensor has  important  application  value  for  detecting  chlorine  in  the  atmosphere.

Supported  by  NSFC  (No.  61074172),  (No.  61134010),  (No. 61104203)  and  Program  for  Chang  jiang  Scholars  and  Innovative Research  Team  in  University  (No.  IRT1017),  and  Jilin  province  Science  and  Technology  Development  Plan  Program  (20106002)  are gratefully  acknowledged.