We demonstrate a biomimetic synthesis methodology that allows us to create Li2O–MgO–P2O5–TiO2 nanocrystalline glass with mesoporous structure at lower temperature. We design a ‘nanocrystal-glass’ conﬁguration to build a nanoarchitecture by means of yeast cell templates self-assembly followed by the controlled in-situ biomineralization of materials on the cell wall. Electrochemically active nanocrystals are used as the lamellar building blocks of mesopores, and the semiconductive glass phase can act both as the ‘glue’ between nanocrystals and functionalized component. The Li2O–MgO–P2O5–TiO2 nanocrystalline glass exhibits outstanding thermal stability, high conductivity and wide potential window. This approach could be applied to many other multicomponent glass–ceramics to fabricate mesoporous conducting materials for solid-state lithium batteries.

Due to the organic liquid electrolytes currently used in commercial lithium batteries being ﬂammable, the short-circuit of the batteries may lead to ﬁre or even explosion. The use of solid lithium ion conductors—based on glasses and ceramics—as the electrolyte would potentially improve the stability of lithium batteries while alleviating the safety concerns. Glasses and ceramics commonly do not offer the advantage of ﬂexibility and high ionic conductivity, but they are able to pass the challenge of chemical compatibility and conduct via a fast ion mechanism, in which the lithium ions move within an essentially static framework [1,2]. Solid lithium ion conductors, such as Li3N [3], LixLa1−xTiO3 [4], NASICON (sodium super ionic conductor) structure phosphates Li1+xMxM/ 2−x(PO4)3 (M=Al, Y, Fe, etc.; M/=Ti, Ge, Hf, etc.) [5–10] and so on, are considered as possible electrolyte candidates for all-solid-state lithium batteries. Among these materials, the NASICON-type exhibits the highest conductivity and the lowest activation energy for Li+ migration, without any hygroscopic properties. Among the various NASICON-type materials, the LiTi2(PO4)3-based conductors have the most suitable lattice for Li+ migration and exhibit the highest conductivity. N.V. Kosova et al. reported that LiTi2(PO4)3 and Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 prepared using conventional ceramic and mechanical activation methods showed enhanced Li ion conductivity [11]. One of most serious problems in this method is that it requires

heat-treatment temperature as high as 1500 °C. The melting and heat-treating process at such a high temperature generally leads to obvious lithium loss. Therefore, there is a strong need for a suitable method that can provide the NASICON-type solid conductors at lower temperatures. The conductivity for LiTi2(PO4)3 can be enhanced by Ti4+ site replacement by M3+ or M2+ ion, or by the addition of magnesium compound resulting in an increase of sinterability. L.Z. Huang et al. reported that sub-micron Li1.4Al0.4Ti1.6(PO4)3 ceramic powder was synthesized by a co-precipitation method and Ti4+ site replacement by Al3+ ion [12]. X.X. Xiong reported that Li1.4Al0.4Ti1.6(PO4)3 glass–ceramics were synthesized by a citric acid-assisted sol–gel method [13]. However, these synthesis methods have some shortcomings, such as energy consumption, complex operation and high cost.

Biomineralization, a process in living system, currently ﬁnds increasing research interest [14–17]. The advantage of biomineralization processes is that they not only yield advanced synthetic materials in environment benign system, but also enable controlling over the phase, size, morphology and crystallographic orientation of inorganic crystals. In addition, biomineralization is a typical self-organized formation of nano structures at ambient atmosphere. Yeast is ubiquitous unicellular eukaryotic microorganism, and can be used for basic investigations of cellular processes, gene structure and protein function. Very recently, we have proposed an approach, by which we are able to prepare advanced mesoporous materials using yeast cells as biotemplate under ambient conditions. Meanwhile, We have synthesized mesoporous Li3V2(PO4)3/C microspheres by this way, which exhibits higher electrochemical performances for high-power Li-ion batteries [18]. An ordered

hierarchical mesoporous TiO2 synthesized by this way [19] exhibits higher visible-light harvesting and photocatalytic abilities, and hence high efﬁciency in treating paper industrial waste water. In addition, other mesoporous materials, e.g., hollow cuprous oxide microspheres, mesoporous zirconium phosphate and mesoporous zinc phosphate nanoparticles, have been synthesized using baker's yeast as biotemplate [20–24]. However, to our best knowledge, synthesis of the Li2O–MgO– P2O5–TiO2 nanocrystalline glass with mesoporous structure using yeast as biotemplate and study of their ionic conductivities have not been reported.

Herein, we report the low temperature biomimetic synthesis of Li2O–MgO–P2O5–TiO2 nanocrystalline glass. This material has the mesoporous structure and exhibits fast lithium ion conduction. The idea is that yeast cell wall are combined with at least two inorganic components using adsorption and biomineralization to produce an amorphous, self-ordered, organic–inorganic hybrid. After the yeast cell templates have been removed from the inorganic framework through heat treatment, Li2O–MgO–P2O5–TiO2 nanocrystalline glass with mesoporous structure will be produced. Subsequent heattreatment will force desirable nanocrystals to nucleate and grow from the hybrid. We characterize the morphology, structure, chemical composition and performances of Li2O–MgO–P2O5–TiO2 nanocrystalline glass, and discuss its ionic conductivity, activation energy and formation mechanism. AC impedance was measured and the conductivity of the nanocrystalline glass at room temperature was therefore obtained.

The reagents used in this work included TiCl4 (99%, Tianjin Guangfu Fine Chemical Research Institute), HCl (36–38%, Laiyang Fine Chemical Factory), NH4H2PO4 (99%, Tianjin Bodi Chemical Co., Ltd.), MgCl2·6H2O (98%, Tianjin Bodi Chemical Co., Ltd.), NH4OH (25–28%, Yantai Shuangshuang Chemical Co., Ltd.), Li2CO3 (97%, Tianjin Damao Chemical Co., Ltd.), and yeasts (Instant dry yeast, Angel Yeast Co., Ltd.). Distilled water was used through all the experiments.

The samples were prepared by biomimetic method. Quantitative instant dry yeast (50 g L−1) was cultivated in 100 ml glucose aqueous solution (5 wt.%) at ambient temperature. After 30 min of stirring, a uniform bioemulsion was formed. NH4H2PO4, MgCl2·6H2O and TiCl4 hydrochloric acid solution (1 mol L−1) in a stoichiometric ratio were added to the bioemulsion under stirring, respectively. The stirring was maintained for 6 h. Ammonia solution (25–28%) was then added dropwise to adjust the pH to 7–8 while stirring for 1 h. The formed white precipitate was collected and carefully washed with distilled water and absolute ethanol, and dried at 70 °C in air for about 24 h. The dried samples were grinded with Li2CO3 to obtain the homogeneous small as-prepared powder. The as-prepared powder was pressed to pellets (the diameter is 13 mm) at 10 MPa by tablet machine, and heat-treated at 400, 500, 600, 700 °C for 3 h (Eq. (1)). The thickness and diameter of the as-prepared and sintering pellets at 600 °C for 3 h were shown in Table S1 (in the Supporting Information). The ﬁnal products Li1+2xMgxTi2−x(PO4)3 obtained were white powder or pellets, and were marked on MP-LMTP (with yeast) and LMTP (without yeast), respectively. Li2CO3 þ 0:5MgCl2⋅6H2O þ 1:5TiCl4 þ 3HCl þ 3NH4H2PO4 þ 7NH3→ Li2Mg0:5Ti1:5 PO4 ð1Þ

The as-synthesized samples were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique, on a PANalytical X'Pert PRO X-ray diffractometer

(Netherlands) with Cu Kα radiation (λ=0.15418 nm). The diffraction patterns were collected over the diffraction angle 2θ range of 10–80°, with an acquisition time of 12.0 s at 0.02° step size. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (JEM-100X, Japan) operating at 100 kV was employed to characterize the morphologies of the samples. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to observe the morphologies of yeast cells. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) was carried out on a Philips Tecnai 20U-TWIN microscope, working at 300 kV. Differential thermal analysis (DTA) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) analyses were carried out on a CRY-2 differential thermal analyzer and TGA/SDTA851e under nitrogen ﬂow. The precursor was heated from ambient to 850 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) is used for determination of glass transition temperature (Tg) and crystallization temperature (Tc) of the samples based on the onset temperature of the DSC endothermic curve, using a Rigaku DSC 8240D provided with a TAS 200 thermal analysis system. The nitrogen (N2) adsorption–desorption isotherms and Barrett–Joyner–Halenda pore size distributions were carried out at 77 K using a computercontrolled sorption analyzer (Micromeritics, Gemini V2380, USA) operating in the continuous mode. Before measurement, the samples were degassed in vacuum at 150 °C. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) was performed using a Nicolet Nexus spectrometer (Nicolet, NEXUS 470, USA) by using a KBr wafer technique in order to study the composition of the samples. Infrared spectra were recorded in the region 4000–450 cm−1, with a resolution of 4.00 cm−1.

Polished pellet samples were served for ionic conductivity measurements. Silver electrodes were sputtered on both sides of the samples. The measurements were carried out with complex impedance method using a Parstat 2263 advanced electrochemical workstation connected to a computer. The frequency range used was 10−2–106 Hz. Ionic conductivity values were calculated with σ ¼ d AR, where d is the sample thickness, A is the area of the electrodes and R is the sample resistivity corresponding to the total of the bulk and the grain-boundary components.

Scheme 1 illustrates a biomimetic mineralization approach that has been applied to prepare the MP-LMTP. The yeast cell wall consists of wave-like phosphomannan, glucan, mannoproteins on the surface and various kinds of proteins inside cell wall (see Scheme 1a) [25]. Evidence for the wavelike/zig-zag surface pattern of the yeast cell wall was obtained by AFM image of yeast cell (see Fig. 7b). Like most natural cells, Saccharomyces cerevisiae can induce spontaneous mineralization on its surface, due to the relatively low charge density [26]. During the cultivation processes of yeast cells (fermentation), a bioemulsiﬁer with acidic matrix macromolecules metabolites including extracellular proteins and polysaccharides was produced on the surface of cells [27–29]. The critical micelle concentration (CMC) of the bioemulsion is found to be 0.007 g mL−1. These biosurfaceactive macromolecules contain some hydrophilic anion groups including 2− [30,31]. It should be mentioned that the hydrocarboxyl and –OPO3 philic anion groups mainly serve for the following two purposes: (1) they provide oriented nucleation sites for target cations [32], and (2) they accumulate more negative charges on the biotemplate surface. More recently, our previous study conﬁrmed that the yeast cell surface has surplus negative charges as a result of cultivation [18]. The mineralization ability of yeast cells can be improved by producing biosurfaceactive macromolecules with hydrophilic anion groups on the cell surface. The biosurfaceactive macromolecules are intimately involved in regulating crystal nucleation and growth [31,32].

When titanium and magnesium cations were added into the bioemulsion, positively charged titanium and magnesium cations were

Scheme 1. Schematic drawing of the templating mechanism of biomimetic mineralization process on the surface of the yeast cell.

combined with the negatively charged –COO− and –OPO3 2− groups, and were self-assembled to the yeast cells surface by electrostatic interaction. This self-assembly induced the formation of titanium and magnesium cation layers on the surface of the yeast cell wall. Evidence for metal ion adsorption was obtained by TEM images of yeast cells after addition of the metal ions into the bioemulsion mineralizing for 1 h. A gray ring was seen on the surface of yeast cell (Fig. 7d). The gray ring appeared because the diffraction contrast of the metal ion shell differs from that of yeast cells. This indication that metal ions can be rapidly induce mineralization. Next, when NH4H2(PO4)3 solution was added to the system, the yeast/Li1+2xMgxTi2−x(PO4)3 core–shell spheres were formed due to situ hydrolysis and polycondensation of titanium and magnesium cations (see Scheme 1b). Finally, after calcination, the yeast/Li1+2xMgxTi2−x(PO4)3 core–shell spheres were converted to eggshell like Li1+2xMgxTi2−x(PO4)3 with open wave-like mesopores (15 nm) on the surface and plugged mesopores (39 nm) in the bulk (see Scheme 1c and Fig. 5). In summary, the entire process can be brieﬂy deﬁned to four steps: 1. Adsorption; 2. Inducing mineralization; 3. In situ hydrolysis and polycondensation; and 4. Removing template.

The thermal behavior of the precursor sample of MP-LMTP has been investigated by TGA and DTA (Fig. 1). About 60% weight loss is observed during the temperature sweep to 850 °C in the TGA curve. About 600 °C, the change of weight loss become insigniﬁcant when the temperature is further increased to 850 °C. The distinct regions of weight-loss were divided into two regions 25–250 °C and 250– 600 °C. The ﬁrst weight-loss region, i.e. before 250 °C is mainly attributed to the release of little physical absorbed water and crystal water (ca. 15 wt.%), corresponding with two obvious endothermic peaks in the DTA curve. The steep weight loss, which occurs between 250 and 600 °C, arises from the pyrolysis of the carbonate and the remaining organic compounds of yeast (ca. 45 wt.%), and the mass loss reaches equilibrium after 600 °C. According this result, we choose 600 °C as heating temperature.

Compositions studied in the present paper were expressed by Li1+2xMgxTi2−x(PO4)3 (x=0.0–1.0). Glass formation was ﬁrst investigated. DSC is used for determination of glass transition temperature

(Tg) and crystallization temperature (Tc) of the samples based on the onset temperature of the DSC endothermic curve (Fig. 2b). Fig. 2a shows the DSC proﬁles of the nanocrystalline glass in the system Li1+2xMgxTi2−x(PO4)3 in the range of 0–1.0, from which the glass transition temperatures (Tg) and crystallization temperature (Tc) were estimated for all specimens. Table 1 shows the glass transition temperature (Tg) and crystallization temperature (Tc). Increasing the x from 0 to 0.5 resulted in an increase Tc−Tg, indicting the enhanced thermal stability of the glass with the substitution of Mg2+ ions for Ti4+ ions. However, further increase of x from 0.5 to 1.0 resulted in a decrease Tc−Tg, representing decreased thermal stability with the increasing content of Mg. In short, in the Li1+2xMgxTi2−x (PO4)3 system, the thermal stability of the glass for the composition with x of 0.5 is the best.

Fig. 3 showed the X-ray diffraction patterns of the MP-LMTP (x= 0.5) powders heat-treated at different temperature for 4 h in air. The pattern of MP-LMTP (x=0.5) heat-treated at 400 °C exhibit one very broad peaks in the 2θ range of 20–30° and some diffraction peaks, which indicate the presence of the amorphous nature of the framework walls and lithium chloride impurity, respectively. A crystallized

Fig. 1. TGA and DTA proﬁle of as-prepared Li1+2xMgxTi2−x (PO4)3 (x=0.5) sample.

Fig. 3. X-ray diffraction patterns of the MP-LMTP (x=0.5) powders heat-treated at different temperature for 4 h.

Fig. 2. (a) DSC curves of glass–ceramic in the system MP-LMTP (x=0.0–1.0) and LMTP (x=0.5), and (b) the amplifying DSC curve of MP-LMTP, x=0.5 in (a). Tg and Tc denote the glass transition and crystallization temperature, respectively.

phase is observed in the XRD pattern of the sample calcinated at 600 °C. This is in good agreement with the result observed from the DTA curve. Some clear diffraction peaks can be assigned to the NASICON LiTi2(PO4)3, which are consistent with the standard reported values (JCPDF card no. 00-35-0754) [12]. Other clear diffraction peaks can be assigned to the LiMgPO4.

The NASICON-type network structure of Li1+2xMgxTi2−x(PO4)3 is presented in Fig. S1. Li1+2xMgxTi2−x(PO4)3 is composed of both MO6 (M=Mg, Ti) octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra, which are linked by their corners to form a three-dimension (3D) network rhombohedral structure (space group R3c). Li+ ions in the Li1+2xMgxTi2−x(PO4)3 occupy the A1 sites. Fig. 4 showed the X-ray diffraction patterns of the LMTP (x=0.5) and MP-LMTP (x=0.0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0) powders heat-treated at 600 °C for 4 h in air. Comparison of lattice parameters of the synthesized samples were shown in Table 2. Crystallite size were estimated using Scherer's relation t=0.9λ/β1/2cosθ, where λ is the X-ray wave length, θ is the Bragg angle and β1/2 is the

Table 1 Glass transition temperature (Tg) and crystallization temperature (Tc) of glasses in the system MP-LMTP (x=0.0–1.0) and LMTP (x=0.5).

Fig. 4. The XRD pattern of Li1+2xMgxTi2−x (PO4)3/yeast (x=0.0, x=0.2, x=0.4, x= 0.5, x=0.6, x=0.8, x=1.0) and Li1+2xMgxTi2−x (PO4)3 (x=0.5) sample synthesized at 600 °C for 3.0 h: (a) the integral region at 10–80° and (b) the magniﬁed region at 15–35°.

Table 2 Comparison of lattice parameters of the synthesized samples.

angular full-width-half maximum of the chosen (113) reﬂection in radian. Diffraction peaks arising from LiTi2(PO4)3 were observed in all the specimens. Only the diffraction peak due to LiMgPO4 was observed, and it could be detected more clearly and intense with increasing the x of LMTP, indicating gradual growth of the LiMgPO4 phase. From the diffraction peak position, the lattice constants were estimated for MP-LMTP (x=0.5) and LMTP (x=0.5). The aand c-parameter for the former specimen were about 8.496 Å and 20.795 Å, respectively, and for the latter 8.5036 Å and 20.816 Å, respectively. These two values are smaller than those of the sintered LiTi2(PO4)3 (a=8.512 Å, c=20.858 Å) [6], suggesting that the Mg2+ ions replace the Ti4+ ions in the present LiTi2(PO4)3. Thus the precipitated conducting phase can be expressed as Li1+2xMgxTi2−x(PO4)3.

The mesoporosity was further characterized by nitrogen-adsorption measurements. Fig. 5 shows the adsorption–desorption isotherm and Barret–Joyner–Halenda pore-size-distribution curve of the typical sample MP-LMTP (x=0.5) and control sample LMTP (x=0.5) at 77 K. All the pore structure data of the these samples were shown in Table 3. According to the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry regulation [33], their isotherm shapes in Fig. 5a are type-V pattern that indicate mesoporous characteristics. The hysteresis loop of MP-LMTP (x=0.5) sample consists of open wave-like pore structure (H4) and plugged pore structure (H2) [34]. Fig. 5b shows a bimodal pore-size distribution of MP-LMTP (x=0.5) sample, the pore-size distribution of open wave-like pore structure centered at 15.0 nm and that of plugged pore structure centered at 39.0 nm. The LMTP (x=0.5) sample only has a unimodal pore-size distribution centered at 36.7 nm. The BET surface area and pore volume of the MP-LMTP (x=0.5) is larger than LMTP (x=0.5) sample, but the pore size is smaller than LMTP (x=0.5) sample. This opening porous structure may provide more pathway for Li+ migration and achieve good ion conduct performance.

The chemical bond linkages between bioacromolecules in yeast cells with titanium, magnesium, phosphoric acid root ions were studied by FT-IR (see Fig. 6a, b). FT-IR spectrum of pure yeast cells is shown in Fig. 6a. The broad band at 3500 cm−1 is ascribed to the O\H stretching vibration of water. The dominant bands near 1652 and 1534 cm−1 are assigned to amideI and amideII of the proteins in yeast cells. The band at 2920 cm−1 is derived from CH2 asymmetry stretching vibration of protein and carbohydrate in yeast cells. The band at 1047 cm−1 is caused by the C\O stretching of carbohydrates found in the RNA, the DNA, and the cell membrane of yeast cell [35]. Comparing Fig. 6a with Fig. 6b, there are mainly three changes seen from FTIR spectra: (1) all the amide peaks have shifted to lower wavenumbers, in FTIR spectrum of MP-LMTP precursor. It proves the existence of chemical interactions between metal ions and bioacromolecules. It is concluded that yeast protein molecules interact with metal ions via the amide reductase; (2) CH2 vibration peak in yeast cell disappear and new P\O peak forms, which are ascribed to the protein binding with metal ions by amine group and phosphating; and (3) the increase at 1045 cm−1 3− group. (C\O) is due to the nestiﬁcation of bands C\O and PO4 These results manifested that the carboxyl (COO−), hydroxyl (OH−)

Fig. 5. N2 adsorption–desorption (a) and pore size distribution (b) of the LMTP and MP-LMTP sample.

2− play an important role in chemical interaction between

and –OPO3 protein macromolecules in yeast cells with metal ions.

The in-situ nanocomposited linkages of MP-LMTP prepared at different temperature were studied by FT-IR (see Fig. 6c–e). The peaks at 1040 cm−1 (PO4) and 800/670cm−1 (Ti–O) are characteristic peak of LiTi2(PO4)3 [36]. The wide peak at 1040 cm−1 reveals the asymmetric 3−[37]. The peak at 1229cm−1 and stretching vibration (γ3) of PO4 1197 cm−1 show the O_P\O\ stretching vibration of the terminal 3− [38]. The peaks at 800 cm−1 and 670 cm−1 were assigned to PO4 the Ti\O stretching (γ1) and bending (γ4) vibrations of the Ti4+ in the TiO6 octahedra, respectively [38]. Through the FT-IR spectroscopy result, we verify that the deposited and self-assembled mechanism is feasible for synthesizing MP-LMTP.

Fig. 7a shows that the atomic force microscope (AFM) image of yeast cells exhibits well-deﬁned oval shape with diameters of 1–5 μm. Fig. 7b shows AFM image of local surface on the baker's yeast cell wall, and presents periodic speculate cluster and wave-like

Table 3 Pore structure parameters of the synthesized samples.

the cultivation processes. The structure directing effect of the yeast cells as soft templates enables the formation of mesoporous structure.

Fig. 8 shows the complex impedance plots for the sample with MP-LMTP (x=0.5) at different temperature. Two semicircles were observed. The semicircle in the low frequency range was attributed to the grain boundary (Rg) and the semicircle in the high frequency range was attributed to the bulk of the grain (Rb) [39]. However, only one distorted semicircle which was composed of the above mentioned two semicircles was observed for some samples. Rb could not be obtained in these samples. From the complex impedance plots the total resistivity (Rg+Rb) was determined and used to calculate the conductivity of the present nanocrystalline glass [40].

Fig. 6. FTIR spectra of pure yeast, MP-LMTP (x=0.5) sample at different temperature: (a) yeast; (b) as-prepared; (c) 400 °C in O2; (d) 500 °C in O2; and (e) 600 °C in O2.

textural pore structures. Fig. 7c shows TEM image of yeast cell with elliptical morphology. Fig. 7d shows TEM image of yeast cell after adding 3−. Baker's yeast cells possess spherical or Ti4+, Mg2+, Li+, and PO4 elliptical morphology, ﬁne nanostructure, many biomacromolecules on cell wall and abundant surface charge [25–27]. They can interact with metal ions, provoke the deposition of mineral, provide oriented nucleation sites, immobilize the particles, and ﬁnally establish mesoporous structure. Fig. 7e shows TEM images of MP-LMTP (x=0.5) with the existence of disordered mesoporous structure. The MP-LMTP possesses outstanding mesoporous structure for achieving good electrochemical performance. In the structure of nanoparticle, surface transport/diffusion becomes a signiﬁcant component of overall transport/diffusion as the dimension of particles. Hence, because the ration of easily-transporting surface to slowly-transporting volume is enhanced, the nanoparticle can effectively reduce the length of Li+ solid state transport paths to give high diffusion rate. The interconnected mesopores among the nanoparticles may provide more pathway for Li+ migration and achieve good ion conduct performance. Fig. 7f shows TEM images of control sample LMTP (x = 0.5). From the control sample, large agglomerates with few mesopores are observed. In order to further understand the ﬁne nanostructure of MP-LMTP (x=0.5), HRTEM analysis was employed as shown in Fig. 7g.

The HRTEM image reveals that there are abundant wave-like mesopores (white area) distributed throughout in the interior of the sample, which construct three-dimensional interconnected channels. The aggregates were composed of nano-sized crystal particles (black area with regular lattice fringes) and an amorphous glass network (gray area without lattice fringes) completely coated on the surface of crystal particle. HRTEM images conﬁrm that the mesoporosity of the sample is mainly due to interparticle porosity rather than intraparticle porosity. This porous structure was expected to easily allow Li ions to penetrate into the sample. As shown schematically in Fig. 7h, the glass coating layer of the nano-crystal particle is 4–8 nm in thickness, as reﬂected by an irregular strip on the surface of the particle. From the electron diffraction of the selected area in the inset of Fig. 7h, it is seen that the regular lattice fringes exists in the crystal particle. This indicates that the particle has fully crystallized. The TEM and HRTEM results further suggest that the yeast cells play a key role in the creation of the special morphology and structure. As structure directing agents, microbial yeast cells differ from the other templates such as soft or hard chemical templates due to their special biological functions. Living yeast cells are integration of hard templates (cell bodies) and soft templates (from the control sample from microbial biocatalysis), which are produced during

Fig. 9 showed the temperature dependence of the conductivity of MP-LMTP (x=0.0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.8)and LMTP (x=0.5)nanocrystalline glass treated at 600 °C for 4 h over the temperature range from 25 °C to 300 °C. The plots of lg σTð Þ against 1000 T are found to be linear   and well ﬁt the Arrhenius equation, σT ¼ A exp −Ea where A is the pre-exponential factor, Ea the activation energy for conduction and R the gas constant.

The results demonstrate that there were no structure or phase changes for all samples in the temperature range studied. Both the conductivity at room temperature and the activation energy (Ea) are shown in Fig. 10. The total conductivity (σt) increases with the initial increase in x and reaches the highest value at σt=4.39×10−5 S cm−1 at around x=0.5 in MP-LMTP glass–ceramic system. The maximum value of σt is more than four times as large as that of the x=0.0 in the MP-LMTP glass–ceramic system. The Ea, on the other hand, passes through a minimum value, 38.68 kJ mol−1 (0.39 eV), at around x=0.5 and the compositional dependence of Ea mirrors that of σt, indicating that changes in σt over the composition range x=0.0–0.8 are probably due to an increase in grain size and the appearance of pores and cracks in the in the intergranular region, which result in changes in the activation energy (Ea) [40,41].

Fig. 11 shows the cyclic voltammogram for the MP-LMTP (x=0.5) glass–ceramics recorded at room temperature with a scanning rate of 0.5 mV s−1. Lithium deposition (Li++e−→Li) and dissolution (Li→Li++e−) are observed in the potential range from −0.5 V to 0.4 V. No other reaction are observed in the potential range versus Li/Li+, indicating a wide electrochemical window for MP-LMTP (x= 0.5) glass–ceramic, which are almost the most stable inorganic solid oxide Li+ ion conductors to date. Crystalline materials with high ionic conductivities such as Li3N and Li1/3−xLi3xNbO3 have low electrochemical stabilities; for example, Li3N [42] has a decomposition potential of 0.44 V and Li1/3−xLi3xNbO3 perovskite has a reduction potential of 1.7 V. The present MP-LMTP (x=0.5) nanocrystalline glass has both a high ionic conductivity and a high decomposition potential

Fast Li+ ion conducting nanocrystalline glass composed of MP-LMTP with mesoporous structure have been synthesized using yeast cells as structure templates. The study of the formation of mesoporous structure of MP-LMTP via yeast cells has lead to a deep understanding of the synthesis mechanism, structure and ion conduction property of the MP-LMTP. The yeast cells act both as hard template (cell bodies) directing the formation of a hollow-structured spheres and as soft template (bioactive surface macromolecules from microbial catalysis) causing MP-LMTP nanoparticles to constitute a mesoporous structure. Results of DSC and impedance analysis clearly indicate that in the MP-LMTP system, the thermal stability of the glass for the composition with x of 0.5 is the best, and the total conductivity (σt) reaches the highest value at σt=4.39×10−5 S cm−1, the activation energy passes

3−, (e) TEM Fig. 7. (a) AFM image of yeast cells, (b) the magniﬁed region of yeast cell, (c) TEM image of yeast cell, (d) TEM image of yeast cell after adding Ti4+, Mg2+, Li+, and PO4 image of MP-LMTP (x=0.5), (f) TEM image of LMTP (x=0.5) Li1+2xMgxTi2−x(PO4)3 (x=0.5), (g) HRTEM image of MP-LMTP (x=0.5), and (h) HRTEM image of the magniﬁed region in (g).

Fig. 10. Electrical conductivity at room temperature and activation energy of MP-LMTP nanocrystalline glass as a function of x.

Fig. 11. Cyclic voltammogram of MP-LMTP (x=0.5) nanocrystalline glass recorded at a scanning rate of 0.5 mV s−1.

through a minimum value at 38.68 kJ mol−1 (0.39 eV), at around x = 0.5.

The authors thank Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51272144, 51172132 and 51042003) for the ﬁnancial support; they also thank the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong, China (Grant Nos. Y2008F39 and Y2008F08), the Taishan scholarship program in the ﬁeld of Glass and Ceramics and National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (Grant No. 50925205), for the technological support. We also thank Jingjie Cui, Meimei Zhang, Jianan Liu, Xueguang Zhang, Dandan Min, Yanpeng Li, Haiming Li, Zhiying Bi, Shanshan Liu, Fengxiu Xu and Shujiang Liu for their technological helps.