The sintering temperatures were set according to the TG/DSC analysis. The solid-phase sintering method was used to prepare the NASICON-type solid electrolyte in ATi2(PO4)3 (A = Li/Na/K) system. FT-IR spectroscopy conforms to the different chemical bond strengths of Li+, N a+, and K+ in phosphate compositions. The main crystal phases retrieved from the three compositions are NASICON-type ATi2(PO4)3 (A = Li/Na/K) in rhombohedral structure with the R c3‾ space group. The presence of heterogeneous LiTiPO5 phases can reduce the grain boundary resistance and increase the density of LiTi2(PO4)3 electrolyte. However, heterogeneous TiP2O7 in NTP and KTP compositions does not contribute to the ionic conductivity. SEM results reveal that the crystal grains of LTP composition are denser than that of NTP and KTP, which is more beneficial to improve ionic conductivity. The LTP electrolyte sintered at 800 °C for 10 h shows the highest ionic conductivity of 3.1 × 10−5 S c m−1 at 25 °C.
Lithium batteries have the advantages of admirable power density, high energy density, high voltage, stable discharge, and long storage time. In recent years, lithium-ion batteries are widely used in human production and life, such as energy storage systems include hydraulic, thermal, wind, solar power stations and suchlike devices, and electric tools, electric bicycles, electric motorcycles, electric cars, military equipment, aerospace and other fields [1–3]. Organic liquid electrolytes are applied for traditional lithium-ion batteries, which are a couple with many safety issues, such as leakage, flammability, and unstable chemical properties. All-solid-state lithium-ion batteries based on solid electrolytes developed in recent years, using solid electrolytes, can eliminate hidden safety hazards such as battery smoke and fire caused by leakage, and have become a new type of safe battery system currently recognized [4].
The solid electrolyte is one of the core components of solid-state lithium-ion batteries. The improvement of its comprehensive properties such as ionic conductivity and chemical stability is an important guarantee for achieving the good performances of the battery system. The solid electrolytes that have been developed can be divided into two categories: polymer electrolytes and inorganic solid electrolytes. Although polymers have excellent flexibility and processability, the insufficient performance in chemical stability and mechanical strength within a limited temperature, limiting their application as solid electrolytes [5,6]. Accorded to the types of compounds, inorganic solid electrolytes can be divided into Li3N, halides, sulfides, and oxides. The electrolyte materials developed in the early stages have problems such as unstable chemical properties and difficult preparation [7–10]. When considering the stability and mechanical strength, oxide electrolytes have more advantages [6]. Oxide electrolytes include garnet-type structural [11], perovskite structural [12] and Na super ion conductor (NASICON) structural systems [13,14], etc. Various systems as solid electrolytes have both advantages and defects. For example, garnettype solid electrolytes exhibit a wide electrochemical window [15] (0–6 V), high ionic conductivity at room temperature (10−3 S/cm) [16], which has a better stability for lithium cathodes [17,18], however, its high ionic conductivity requires the synthesis of stable cubic phases at higher temperatures [19]. Although the perovskite-structure system has fine grain conductivity, its grain boundary conductivity is low (less than 10−5 S/cm), limiting the practical application [20].
Phosphate solid electrolyte with a NASICON-type structure is mainly composed of four types of elements, and the chemical formula is AM2 (XO4)3 (A = alkaline metal, M = transition metal, X = Si4+, P5+,S6+, etc.). The ATi2(PO4)3 system with NASICON structure, as a potential candidate for solid electrolyte, has attracted the attention of scientific researchers in recent years [13]. ATi2(PO4)3 is an rhombohedral structure, and the space group is R c3‾ . Ti, P, and O occupy the Wyckoff sites of (12c), (18e) and (36f), respectively, while Li, Na, and K mainly occupy the (6b) site. TiO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra units are corner-sharing to constitute a framework-like skeleton structure. The migration of alkali ions in this structure is mainly realized by jumping through the bottleneck of the network skeleton between [TiO6] octahedra and [PO4] tetrahedral units. At present, the research about ATi2(PO4)3 solid electrolytes primarily focuses on the research about the dopant of LiTi2(PO4)3 component, and the basic ionic conductivity at room temperature of LiTi2(PO4)3 is 10−6 S c m−1. However, doping substitution of the alio-valent cation (Al3+, S c3+, Y3+, L a3+, etc.) can increase the content of Li+ and the density of the structure to enhance the ionic conductivity [13,21–23]. In particular, Al3+ doped samples exhibited obvious superiority, for instance, Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 that prepared by Ma et al. via a solution method, exhibits a higher ion conductivity of 1.21 × 10−3 S c m−1 [22].
 Given the shortage of lithium resources, the application of this material is limited. We propose to consider NaTi2(PO4)3 and KTi2(PO4)3 with similar structures as candidates for solid electrolytes to explore their comprehensive electrochemical performances. So far, there are few reports about these two types of materials, mainly focusing on the application of composite cathode materials or batteries [24–26]. It is still a challenge to understand the structure, morphology, and ion conduction of the solid electrolyte materials. In this work, the direct correlation between the chemical composition, structure, and electrochemical properties of NASICON conductors of phosphate systems containing alkali metal ions (Li+/Na+/K+) was discussed. The effects of reaction parameters such as sintering temperature and holding time on the crystal structure and ionic conductivity of the solid-phase reaction products were studied.
Solid electrolytes in ATi2(PO4)3 (A = Li/Na/K) system were prepared by solid-phase sintering method. Laboratory-grade reagents Li2CO3, N a2CO3, K2CO3, TiO2, and NH4H2PO4 were mixed according to the stoichiometric ratio of different components, which were obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. The objective phases are LiTi2(PO4)3, NaTi2(PO4)3 and KTi2(PO4)3, respectively. The chemical equation of the reaction is as follows:
Because the decomposition temperature of lithium carbonate is low and volatile at high temperatures, an excess of 10% Li2CO3 is added in this experiment. What's more, Li2CO3 reagent should be kept at 150 °C for 6 h to remove the adsorbed moisture and gas.
High-energy ball-milling was used to obtain reactant raw materials with uniform and fine particles. The ball milling rate was 400 rpm and the ball milling time was 4 h. The dried raw materials are kept at 550 °C for 10 h, so that the carbonate and phosphate can be fully decomposed. Ethanol was used as a ball milling medium, and the cooled calcined product was ball-milled again for 6 h using a planetary ball-mill. The ball-mill product was then dried in a drying cabinet at 95 °C for 8 h. The cold isostatic pressing method was used to press it into a disc with a diameter of 12 mm and a thickness of 2 mm at a pressure of 25 MPa. The samples were sintered in air, and the isothermal annealing temperatures were 700, 800, and 900 °C, respectively. The sintering temperature rose from room temperature (about 25 °C) to 100 °C, then to 400 °C, and finally to the isothermal annealing temperature (700, 800 or 900 °C), then it is cooled to room temperature at a controlled rate. That is, the samples were heated from room temperature (about 25 °C) to 100 °C after 30 min, then heated to 400 °C after 2 h, held at 400 °C for 30 min, then heated to the isothermal annealing temperature (700, 800 or 900 °C) at a heating rate of 2 °C/min, held at the annealing temperature for 10–20 h. After the sintering process was completed, the samples were cooled to 400 °C at a cooling rate of 2 °C/min, held at 400 °C for 2 h, and finally cooled to room temperature (about 25 °C) after 6 h. Details of the unit cell parameters of the three component reactants sintered at different temperatures are listed in Table 1.
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and thermogravimetric analysis (TG) were performed on the samples using an STA 8000 Thermal Analyzer (PerkinElmer Instruments (Shanghai) Co., Ltd.) in an air atmosphere. The samples were treated from room temperature to 1000 °C at a heating rate of 5 °C/min, and alumina was chosen as the thermogravimetric reference. The experimental error of temperature is ± 3 °C.
Crystal phase analysis of the sintered samples was obtained by the D/max 2500 type X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku, Japan) with Cu-Kα radiation of 1.541 Å at room temperature. The XRD patterns of the sintered samples were continuously recorded in the 2θ range of 10°–80° with a step size of 0.05°. To obtain the unit cell parameters of the samples as a function of sintering temperature, the XRD data were used for refining the crystal structure by the Rietveld method with the TopsAcademic program.
In order to further characterize the structural characteristics of the phase, a NICOLET 6700 FT-IR spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was selected for the structural test of the samples. Ceramic powder and spectroscopic grade KBr are poured into an agate mortar for grinding and mixing, and then the mixture is pressed into a thin sheet and placed in an infrared spectrometer for testing in the frequency range of 400–4000 cm−1.
Quanta 450FEG Field Emission Electron Microscope (FEI, USA) was used to analyze the microstructure of the samples, and the secondary electrons generated were used as imaging signals to obtain the fracture morphology of the samples. To prevent surface electrons from accumulating, a thin layer of metal gold was vacuum-deposited on the surface of the samples.
Before conducting the AC impedance test, the samples sintered at different temperatures were polished to the optical level, and then their parallel surfaces were covered with a thin layer of the silver epoxy compound with excellent electrical conductivity. The samples were kept at a temperature of 150 °C for 10 min to decompose the organic epoxy and solidify the silver paste. The AUTOLAB electrochemical workstation (Metrohm, Japan) was selected for the AC impedance test at 25 °C. The test frequency range was from 50 Hz to 0.5 MHz, and the applied AC amplitude voltage was 50 mV. Z-View software was used to establish an equivalent circuit to the test data and perform a non-linear fitting analysis to obtain the resistance value of the samples and to calculate the conductivity by the following formula:
where l represents the pellet thickness, R represents the resistance and s represents the area of the electrolytes.
Quantitative thermal reaction analysis is accompanied by several changes, such as evaporation, gas adsorption, and dehydration decomposition of reactant raw materials. Fig. 1 shows the TG/DSC profiles of the ATi2(PO4)3 (A = Li/Na/K) compositions in the stoichiometric ratio from room temperature to 1000 °C. The thermogravimetric curves of the three samples are generally similar, but there are some obvious differences in the DSC curves. That is because the decomposition products are the same and the differences in the raw materials used, then the crystal phases formed are different.
From the TG curves, it's obvious that there are two main weight losses in the measured region. The first loss is located from the room temperature to 210 °C, which is corresponding to the evaporation of water and it is supported by the DSC curve showing an endothermic peak around 210 °C with a mass change of 1–2%; the second weight loss is about 21% in the temperature range from 210 °C to 500 °C, which is the decomposition temperature of phosphates and carbonates [27], indicating that a large amount of CO2 and NH3 are generated at the second temperature section. It is worth noting that a significant exothermic peak appears around 320 °C, which is speculated to be the phase transition temperature of TiP2O7. There is almost no weight loss up to 500 °C, indicating that the decomposition reaction is completed. However, more thermal fluctuations generate after 300 °C in Fig. 1(a), which is mainly due to the existence of more intermediate products during the formation of the main crystal phase of the LTP system, such as Li4P2O7, LiTiPO5 and other heterogeneous phases [28]. According to related literature [29], the formation temperature of LiTi2(PO4)3 crystal phase is about 640 °C. Therefore, the sintering temperature in the first stage of this experiment was selected to be 550 °C and held for 10 h to completely separate the volatile components; the sintering temperature in the second stage was set to 700 °C and the holding time was more than 10 h to make the crystal phase grow sufficiently.
X-ray diffraction can be used to identify the phases of the sample, reflect the detailed cell parameters and crystal size related to the crystal structure. Fig. 2 shows the X-ray diffraction patterns of ATi2(PO4)3 (A = Li/Na/K) compositions at different sintering temperatures. The main crystal phases retrieved from the samples of the three systems are LiTi2(PO4)3 (JCPDS card PDF# 35–0754), NaTi2(PO4)3 (PDF# 33–1296) and KTi2(PO4)3 (PDF# 34–0131) of NASICON-type rhombohedral structure with the R3 ̅c space group.
The sintering temperature of the precursor powder was uniformly 550 °C. The three main crystalline phases have been formed at this temperature and the secondary phase TiP2O7 has been produced. However, LiPO3 still exists in the precursor of the LTP system, as shown in Fig. 2(a). The existence of this heterogeneous phase may be caused by lithium excess [30]. There are almost no heterogeneous phases in the LTP system after secondary sintering at different temperatures, except for the calcined product at 800 °C, which contains a small amount of LiTiPO5. In view of the refined results of XRD data, it is found that the content of heterogeneous phases decreases with the increase of sintering time. The content of LiTiPO5 is 1.94% (800 °C for 10 h, Rwp = 8.976%), 1.43% (800 °C for 15 h, Rwp = 9.411%), 0.94% (800 °C for 20, Rwp = 9.293%), respectively. The LTP samples that prepared at 800 °C for 10 h show the highest ionic conductivity, which indicates that the presence of LiTiPO5 can reduce the grain boundary resistance and increase the sample density, thereby improving the ionic conductivity.
All the samples sintered at different temperatures in the NTP and KTP system contained a small amount of TiP2O7, which was presumed to be caused by the volatilization of Na and K elements as the sintering temperature raising. The results demonstrate that it is feasible to synthesize ATi2(PO4)3 (A = Li/Na/K) compositions of NASICON-type rhombohedral phases via a solid-phase sintering method.
To obtain more detailed information about the unit cell parameters related to the crystal structure of the sintered products at different temperatures, the Tops-Academic program was used to refine the XRD data, and the partial results are listed in Table 1. The stoichiometric LiTi2(PO4)3 (R c3‾ , a ≈8.51 Å, c ≈ 20.89 Å), NaTi2(PO4)3 (R c3‾ , a ≈8.49 Å, c ≈ 21.79 Å), KTi2(PO4)3 (R c3‾ , a ≈8.36 Å, c ≈ 23.09 Å) crystalline structure was chosen as the starting model for different system, respectively. It can be found that the unit cell volume generally enlarges with increasing temperature. Among them, the unit cell volume of the LTP system sintered at 800 °C is about 1310.81 Å3, which is consistent with that reported in the literature [23]. As the ionic radius of Li+ (0.76 Å), Na+ (1.02 Å), K+ (1.38 Å) increase in sequence, the cell volume of KTP composition is the largest.
Fig. 3 shows the Rietveld refinement patterns for LTP and NTP compositions after sintering at 800 °C for 10 h, respectively. It showed that the percentage of the content of LiTiPO5 was 1.94%. However, as an impurity in the NTP and KTP compositions, patterns for TiP2O7 contains excessive peak positions, which will increase the structure reliability factor when added to the structure model. Thus, the model should not be used for detailed refinement experiments. The corresponding unit cell parameters of all compositions are summarized in Table 1. It can be seen that as the temperature increases, both the unit cell parameters and volume increase slightly, but the changes are not evident, which indicates that the change in sintering temperature has little effect on the unit cell parameters.
 The characteristics of the infrared absorption spectrum are closely related to the characteristics of chemical bond vibration. Various vibration modes of the groups in each frequency range reflect the difference and connection of the structural groups. Fig. 4 shows the infrared spectra of all the samples synthesized by solid-phase sintering at 800 °C for 10 h. The infrared absorption spectra of all the samples are generally similar, indicating that their structural compositions are similar. In these spectra, the main frequency ranges of the absorption peaks are present at 3440–3446, 1628–1633, 1216–1227, 1032–1040, 636–644, and 576-580 cm−1. The slight difference in the fundamental vibration frequency is mainly due to the difference in the relative atomic mass and bond energy between different atoms, or due to possible errors in the test process.
According to the relevant literature, the absorption in the fingerprint region in the range of 4000–1500 cm−1 is mainly dominated by the moisture absorption characteristics of the phosphate matrix and the water mixed in by the KBr tablet method during the measurement [31]. The absorption bands near 3446 cm−1 and 1633 cm−1 are attributed to the bending vibration and symmetrical stretching vibration modes of H–O–H bonds, respectively [32,33]. The bands in the frequency of 1300–400 cm−1 are mainly assigned to the infrared absorption characteristics of different atomic groups in the phosphate structure after adding TiO2. Bands near 1216 cm−1 correspond to the stretching vibration (vs) of the O–P–O non-bridge oxygen bonds [34], and the sharp and broad feature bands near 1040 cm−1 belong to the stretching modes of (PO4)3- groups in the LTP, NTP and KTP compositions [35–37]. It is worth noting that the intensity of the corresponding IR absorption peak is different for different types of alkali metal ions contained in the structural group.
The infrared absorption bands in the low-frequency region are mainly near 644 cm−1 and 580 cm−1, which are attributed to the stretching vibration bands of the Ti–O–P bonds [38,39] and the bending vibration absorption bands of the P–O–P bonds [40,41], respectively. For the ATi2(PO4)3 (A = Li/Na/K) compositions, as the alkali ion bond energy gradually increases, the infrared features in this region gradually become sharper and move to higher frequencies, eventually split into double peaks in the KTP composition, indicating that the crystal structure begins to change slightly due to the difference in the ionic bonding of the alkali metal. This result is consistent with the various lattice parameters of the different compositions mentioned above.
A field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) can be used to characterize the surface morphology of different materials, such as crystal shape, size, and particle dispersion. The SEM images of the surface morphology of the ATi2(PO4)3 (A = Li/Na/K) compositions synthesized via solid-phase sintering method are presented in Fig. 5. I n general, the crystalline grains were relatively well dispersed in the samples, whereas the particle size is not uniform, and the samples synthesized from the precursors of the three compositions at a temperature not exceeding 800 °C present pores. It can be known from the references that some pores will inevitably exist in the products obtained by solid-phase sintering [42].
The microstructure of the LTP samples depends largely on the sintering temperature. The surface morphology of LTP composition sintered at 700 °C, 800 °C, and 900 °C for 10 h are shown in Fig. 5(a), (b), (c), respectively. According to the XRD patterns, it can be seen that the main crystalline phase LiTi2(PO4)3 is formed in the LTP samples at the above-mentioned temperatures (700 °C, 800 °C and 900 °C). It can be observed that the grain size increases with the raising of temperature and the corresponding density increases. As the sintering temperature is promoted to 900 °C, the grains will be most closely agglomerated. However, the excessive compression causes the grains to deform significantly at the same time, holes and cracks began to appear (shown in Fig. 5(c)). In this case, lithium-ion transport would be impeded [22]. Based on the experimental results, the optimal sintering temperature of NASICON-type phosphate electrolyte was 800 °C. Fig. 5(b) shows that LiTi2(PO4)3 electrolyte sintered at 800 °C for 10 h present a clear square shape with the grain size of 0.5–1.5 μm, which is significantly larger than NaTi2(PO4)3 (Fig. 5(d)) and KTi2(PO4)3 (Fig. 5(e)). Furthermore, it can be found that the grains of the LTP samples are denser than the NTP and KTP compositions.
It is worth noting that KTi2(PO4)3 synthesized at the same temperature has the smallest grain size (about 0.1–0.5 μm). As shown in Fig. 5(f), the grains no longer grow substantially as the holding time is extended to 20 h. The above results show that for NASICON-type phosphate system electrolytes, the effect of sintering temperature rather than holding time on the crystal morphology is more obvious. Therefore, the ionic conductivity of corresponding samples at different sintering temperatures will be significantly different.
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) used in this experiment is a common electrochemical measurement technology. This method has a very wide range of test frequencies and small disturbances to the test system. It is an important tool for studying electrode dynamics, electrode surface phenomena and measuring the conductivity of solid electrolytes. A small amplitude AC signal with different frequency is imposed to the electrochemical system, to measure the change of the ratio of the AC voltage signal to the current (that is, the impedance) with the sine wave frequency ω, or the phase angle Φ of the impedance with ω. When small amplitude sine wave disturbance signals with various frequencies are applied to the electrode system, the electrode impedance can be obtained from the relationship between the response of the electrode system and the disturbance signal, and the equivalent circuit of the electrode is inferred. The parameter values of related components such as the electric double-layer capacitance of the electrode, the reaction resistance of the charge transfer process and the parameters of the diffusion mass transfer process, are used to estimate the kinetic parameters of the electrode system, furtherly, the dynamic process and mechanism of the corresponding electrode system are analyzed.
Fig. 6 shows a Nyquist diagram of an ideal circuit with a resistor in parallel with a capacitor, AC impedance is an electrical concept, in a circuit with resistors, capacitors, and inductors, the obstruction of these circuit elements to AC current is called AC impedance, commonly used Z to represent:
When multiple components in the circuit are connected in parallel, the inverse of the total impedance is equal to the sum of the inverse of each parallel impedance:
The impedance complex planes of different systems sintered at 700, 800 and 900 °C for 10 h are shown in Fig. 7, Fig. 8 and Fig. 9, and the curves fitted by equivalent circuits are also shown in these figures. For easier comparison, the plots of the samples were normalized to the geometrical factor s/l. l represents the thickness, s represents the area of the samples. The Nyquist diagrams at room temperature consist of a single depressed semicircle at high frequency and an inclined spike in the low-frequency region. Combining the above-mentioned principle of impedance spectroscopy, it can be seen that the intersection of the semicircular arc and the real axis in the impedance spectroscopy is the total resistance of the samples, and the straight region is the blocking response related to the contact part between the charge carrier and the silver electrode, which is also called the electrode polarization response [43]. The high-frequency region in the references contains two semicircular arcs, which represent the grain response and grain boundary response, respectively [44–46]. However, due to the limitations of sample preparation methods and test conditions, not all the grain and grain boundary responses can be clearly distinguished. Therefore, only the total impedance of the samples was discussed. As shown in the internal diagram in Fig. 7, the impedance value is obtained through the parallel connection of R and CPE (constant phase element) to establish an equivalent circuit. Here RL refers to the electronic resistance of the measurement system, R refers to the total resistance of the test samples, and the balanced phase element (CPE) refers to the phenomenon that the double-layer capacitance deviates from the ideal state due to the dispersion effect of the time constant. CPE1 and CPE2 represent the impact of the electrolyte (including grains and grain boundaries) and electrode polarization during the charge transport process, respectively.
The complex impedance spectra of LTP samples sintered at 700, 800, and 900 °C for 10 h are shown in Fig. 7. From the resistance behavior, it can be seen that LTP samples sintered in 800 °C presents the smallest electrical resistance, that is, the corresponding ionic conductivity is the highest, and the ionic conductivity can reach 3.1 × 10−5 S c m−1. In order to reduce the error impedance test caused by the measurement, the tests were repeated for a couple of times. By comparing the ionic conductivity of the LTP samples sintered at 800 °C
for 10, 15, 20 h, the optimal holding time was 10 h. On the one hand, prolonging the holding time may cause abnormal growth of the crystals, causing distortion and deformation of the crystal grains, thereby affecting its impedance behavior. On the other hand, in the light of the refined results of XRD data, it can be seen that the LTP samples synthesized at 800 °C produces heterogeneous LiTiPO5, the content of which decreases with holding time, that is to say, the LiTiPO5 content is 1.94% (holding time = 10 h, Rwp = 8.976%), 1.43% (15 h, Rwp = 9.411%), and 0.94% (20 h, Rwp = 9.293%), respectively, indicating the presence of LiTiPO5 can reduce the grain boundary resistance and increase the sample density, thereby improving its ionic conductivity.
Fig. 8 shows the temperature dependencies of Nyquist plots of NTP samples with different holding temperatures. Similarly, NaTi2(PO4)3 sintered at 800 °C shows the smallest electrical resistance, and the corresponding ionic conductivity is 7.36 × 10−7 S c m−1. As the NTP samples were kept at 800 °C for 10, 15, 20 h, respectively, the impedance behaviors showed not much different. In other words, the average conductivity of the samples synthesized at different holding times (sintered at 800 °C) did not change significantly. According to the SEM tests, it is clear that the grain size of NTP composition is smaller than LTP, but the existence of pores makes it have enough space to grow, so as not to distort the crystalline structure. Therefore, as the sintering time is extended, the conductivity of the samples does not change much. The impedance behavior of KTP composition (shown in Fig. 9) is similar to NTP composition, so it will not be described in detail here. It is worth noting that the conductivity is higher than that of NTP compositions.
After the impedance is fitted by the Z-view software, the interrelated conductivity can be calculated from formula (2). l represents the thickness of the samples, s represents the surface area of the parallel surface coated with silver paste, and R represents the resistance value obtained from the fitting. The ionic conductivity of the ATi2(PO4)3 (A = Li/Na/K) electrolytes is listed in Table 2. The ionic conductivity of the LTP compositions is higher than that of the NTP and KTP compositions. The main reason is that the radius of Li+ is smaller than that of Na+ ions and K+ ions, and Li+ ions are more likely to migrate in the NASICON-type network framework, which is beneficial to the improvement of ionic conductivity. Based on this point, a network skeleton that facilitates the migration of Na+ and K+ ions can be manufactured, for instance, appropriate ions doping to widen the ion migration channel is expected to improve the ionic conduction efficiency of the NTP and KTP compositions.
In summary, NASICON-type phosphate compositions have been successfully synthesized using a solid-phase sintering method. The optimum sintering condition was obtained by TG/DSC analysis combined with related literature. XRD data show that the main crystal phases of all compositions have been formed. Besides, the precursor of LTP composition generates almost no heterogeneous phase at different temperatures, except that it contains a small amount of LiTiPO5 when sintered at 800 °C. However, a small amount of TiP2O7 phase was present in NTP and KTP systems sintered at different temperatures. The presence of heterogeneous LiTiPO5 phases can reduce the grain boundary resistance and increase the density of LiTi2(PO4)3 electrolyte, thereby improving the ionic conductivity. In contrast, TiP2O7 in NTP and KTP compositions does not increase ionic conductivity. FT-IR spectroscopy analysis conforms to different chemical bond strengths of Li+, N a+, and K+ in phosphate compositions. The atomic bonding of lithium ions in the structure of ATi2(PO4)3 is weaker, which is conducive to ion migration. SEM images reveal that LiTi2(PO4)3, NaTi2(PO4)3 and KTi2(PO4)3 are generally irregular grains with good dispersion, and it is worth noting that the crystal grains of LTP composition is denser than that of NTP and KTP, which is more beneficial to improve ionic conductivity. Prolonging the holding time does not increase the ionic conductivity, as it may cause abnormal crystal growth, resulting in grain distortion and deformation, which affects the impedance behavior. The LTP compositions sintered at 800 °C for 10 h exhibit the highest ionic conductivity of 3.1 × 10−5 S c m−1 at 25 °C. Obviously, the ionic conductivity of the LTP compositions is higher than that of the NTP and KTP compositions. However, a network skeleton that facilitates the migration of Na+ and K+ ions can be manufactured, appropriate ions doping to widen the ion migration channel is expected to improve the ionic conduction efficiency of the NTP and KTP compositions. 