The   gas   sensing   properties   of   NASICON-based   CO2 sensor   attached   with   a  composite   of   Bi8Nb2O17 plus small   amount   of   Pt   as  a  solid-reference   electrode   has   been   investigated   for   application   of  the  sensor   at   high CO2 concentration.   Compared   with   conventional   sensor   coated   with   Pt   reference   electrode,   the   sensor attached   with   solid-reference   electrode   was   found   to   efﬁciently   improve   the   detection   limit  due   to  the presence   of   solid-reference   electrode   prevented   NASICON   reacting   with   CO2 and   water   to  form   carbonate or  bicarbonate.   A   good   bonding   interface   between   the   solid-reference   electrode   and   NASICON   was  formed as   revealed   by   the  scanning   electron   spectroscopy   (SEM),   which   provided   a  powerful   guarantee   for   the thermal   stability   of   the   sensor.   Furthermore,   the   as-fabricated   sensor   also   exhibited   fast   response   time, small   cross-sensitivity   to   humidity   and   little   interference   from   the   coexistent   oxygen   partial   pressure   at 500 ◦C.   All   the   present   results   suggest   that   using   the   composite   of   Bi8Nb2O17 plus   Pt   as   a  solid-reference electrode   is  a  promising   candidate   for   NASICON-based   CO2 sensor.

Development  of  compact,  inexpensive,  low  energy  consumption and  reliable  solid  state  sensors  for  measuring  CO2 concentrations  has  been  in  high  demand  for  numerous  applications  ranging from  control  of  combustion  processes  to  environmental  monitoring  [1].   So  far,  many  types  of  solid  state  CO2 sensors  based on  optical  properties  [2],   capacitance  [3],   ﬁeld  effect  transistor (FET)  [4]  and  electrochemical  potential  [5]  have  been  investigated. Among  them,  the  electrochemical-type  is  more  suitable  than  others  because  CO2 is  not  a  redox  gas  but  an  acid–base  active  gas, which  usually  reacts  with  ions  of  solid  rather  than  electrons  [6]. NASICON  (Na3Zr2Si2PO12:  Na+-ion  conductor)-based  potentiometric  CO2 sensors  covered  with  a  binary  carbonate  Li2CO3–BaCO3 (1:2 in  molar  ratio)  are  one  of  the  most  popular  candidates  due  to  their excellent  performance  such  as  good  sensitivity,  high  selectivity  and fast  response  time  [7].   However,  such  sensors  suffer  from  signiﬁcant  interference  from  humidity  [8,9].  Thus  the  long-term  stability of  the  sensors  cannot  be  guaranteed.  The  existing  researches  conﬁrm  that  the  stability  of  the  sensor  is  affected  not  only  by  the electrode  composition  [10,11],   but  also  by  the  geometry  of  sensor  [12–14],   thermal  treatment  history  [15],  and  the  presence  of humidity  [16–18].  And  the  alkaline  metal  carbonates  often  used  as auxiliary  electrode  was  attached  on  one  side  of  NASICON  disk  by

mechanical  press  [19],  leading  to  poor  chemical  stability  [20]  and low  mechanical  strength  due  to  the  thermal  expansivity  of  auxiliary  electrode  layer  was  much  different  from  that  of  NASICON electrolyte.  From  this  point  of  view,  our  previous  work  demonstrated  that  the  use  of  Li2CO3,  NASICON  and  Pt  as  auxiliary  electrode enhanced  the  electrode  mechanical  strength  as  well  as  expanded the  amount  of  triple  phase  boundaries  (TPBs),  giving  a  good  performance  of  the  sensor  [21].  Sadaoka  et  al.  [22]  reported  that  the degradation  of  the  performance  of  the  sensors  due  to  humidity resulted  from  the  formation  of  NaHCO3 and  NaOH  at  the  grain boundary  of  the  NASICON  electrolyte,  due  to  the  easy  diffusion  of H2O  and  CO2 into  NASICON.  And  both  Lee  et  al.  [23]  and  Aono  and Sadaoka  [24]  pointed  out  that  the  following  reactions  might  occur when  the  reference  electrode  was  not  sealed.

Thus,  the  Na2O  activity  in  NASICON  may  probably  be  altered by  the  formation  of  these  new  compounds  at  the  reference  electrode,  which  results  in  the  electromotive  force  (EMF)  drift  of  the sensors.  Especially,  once  the  Na2CO3 formed  on  the  surface  of  reference  electrode,  the  identical  electrode  reaction  will  occur  at  both auxiliary  electrode  and  reference  electrode,  resulting  in  the  EMF   to deviate  from  Nernst  equation.

works  as  an  oxygen-conduction  membrane  and  physical  barrier  of hindering  diffusion  of  CO2 and  water  vapor  [25,26].  Up  to  now, some  oxygen  ion  conductors  such  as  yttrium  stabilized  zirconia (YSZ)  [27]  and  BICUVOX  [28–30]  have  been  investigated.

In  the  present  work,  we  propose  another  fast  oxygen  ionic  con−   x)Bi2O3·xNb2O5 system)  for ductor  of  Bi8Nb2O17 (i.e.  x  =  0.2  in  (1  reference  electrode  material  to  upgrade  the  performance  of  the  sensor.  As  for  oxygen  ion  conductors,  the  high-temperature  form  of ı-Bi2O3 has  a  face-centered  cublic  (fcc)  structure bismuth  oxide  with  an  average  oxygen  vacancy  rate  of  25%,  is  recognized  as  one of  the  best  solid  state  oxygen  ionic  conductors,  and  Nb2O5 can  be added  by  7.6–25.0  mol%  to  stabilize  the  cubic  phase  down  to  room temperature  [31].  Meng  et  al.  [32]  reported  that  the  conductivity ×   10−1 S  cm−1 at  700 ◦C,  which  was  approxof  Bi8Nb2O17 was  1.9  imately  1–2  orders  of  magnitude  higher  than  that  of  YSZ  [33].  In ı-Bi2O3 decreases addition,  the  thermal  expansion  coefﬁcient  of  with  increasing  Nb2O5 content  [34].  Thus,  Nb2O5 containing  could be  tailored  to  match  the  thermal  expansivity  of  NASICON  electrolyte.  The  applicability  of  Bi8Nb2O17 plus  Pt  as  solid-reference electrode  materials  for  the  NASICON-based  potentiometric  CO2 sensor  was  examined  in  this  work.

NASICON  solid  electrolyte  was  prepared  by  a  sol–gel  method using  Na3PO4·12H2O,  Si(OC2H5)4 and  ZrO(NO2)·2H2O  as  main reagents,  as  described  in  our  previous  work  [35].  The  as-prepared NASICON  precursor  was  compacted  into  a  disk  (8  mm  in  diameter  and  2  mm  in  thickness)  in  a  stainless  steel  die  at  a  pressure of  50  kN.  The  disk  was  then  sintered  at  different  temperature  in air  for  2  h  to  obtain  crystalline  NASICON.  And  Bi8Nb2O17 was  prepared  through  a  conventional  solid-state  reaction  using  a  mixture of  Bi2O3 and  Nb2O5 in  analytical  reagent.  The  starting  oxide  powders  were  ball-milled  for  10  h  in  the  presence  of  ethanol  solvent. The  dried  mixture  was  pretreated  at  750 ◦C  for  5  h  and  then,  after being  ground  in  an  agate  mortar,  calcined  ﬁnally  at  850 ◦C  for 5  h  to  obtain  the  ﬁnal  product.  The  prepared  powders  including NASICON  and  Bi8Nb2O17 were  characterized  by  the  means  of  Xray  diffraction  (XRD,  MXP21VAHF,  Japan).  The  thermal  expansivity of  Bi8Nb2O17 also  was  tested  by  a  PCY-series  thermal  expansion instrument  made  by  China.

The  schematic  diagram  of  the  sensor  is  shown  in  Fig.  1.  A ˛-terpineol  was paste  dispersing  Li2CO3 and  NASICON  powder  into  deposited  on  the  NASICON  sintered  disk  together  with  Pt  paste  as a  sensing  electrode.  The  Bi8Nb2O17 plus  a  small  amount  of  Pt  (ca. 20  wt%)  as  a  solid-reference  electrode  was  screen-printed  on  the designated  region  of  the  NASICON  disk.  For  comparison  with  the conventional  Pt  reference  electrode,  Pt  paste  was  directly  printed on  the  same  side  of  the  NASICON  disk.  Thus,  the  potential  of  sensing  electrode  at  different  CO2 concentration  referring  two   different reference  electrodes  can  be  measured  simultaneously.  Then  the  asfabricated  sensor  was  calcined  at  600 ◦C  for  2  h  in  air  to  decompose ˛-terpineol.  The  interface  structure  between  NASICON  electrolyte and  the  solid-reference  electrode  (or  Pt  reference  electrode)  was examined  by  a  scanning  electron  microscope  (SEM,  JSM-6480LV, JEOL,  Japan).

All  electrochemical  measurements  were  performed  in  a  conventional  gas  ﬂow  apparatus  equipped  with  an  electric  furnace.  In

Fig.  1.  Schematic  diagram  of  the  structure  of  the  sensor  device  using  Bi8Nb2O17/Pt and   Pt  as  two  different  kinds  of  reference  electrodes,  respectively.

order  to  obtain  the  detection  limit,  the  sensor  was  tested  under high  CO2 concentration  in  the  ranges  of  20–90%.  The  total  ﬂow  rate of  the  mixed  gas  was   maintained  at  l  L/min.  The  effect  of  relative humidity  (RH)  was  measured  by  allowing  the  sample  gas  to  bubble through  water  and  then  passed  into  the  testing  system.  The  potentials  of  sensing  electrode  referring  to  the  solid-reference  electrode and  Pt  reference  electrode  respectively,  were  monitored  under  dry as  well  as  humidity  conditions  at  500 ◦C.  The  EMF   of  the  sensors was  measured  by  an  electrochemical  workstation  (CHI1140,  Chenhua  Instruments  Inc.,  China).  The  response  and  recovery  time  for 90%  saturation  were  denoted  by  Res  and  Rec,  respectively. In  order  to  check  the  thermal  stability  of  the  sensor,  the  sensor temperature  was  changed  repeatedly  between  400 ◦C  and  600 ◦C by  switching  off  and  on  the  electric  furnace.  At  the  same  time, the  potentials  of  the  sensing  electrode  referring  to  two   different reference  electrodes  were  measured  separately  with  time.

The  XRD  patterns  of  NASICON  and  Bi8Nb2O17 powders  are presented  in  Figs.  2  and  3,  respectively.  As  shown  in  Fig.  2,  a broad  single  peak  (1  1  6)  ascribable  to  NASICON  phase  could  be clearly  observed  at  diffracting  angle  of  30–31◦ for  the  sample sintered  at  600 ◦C,  indicating  the  initial  formation  of  crystalline NASICON.  After  being  sintered  at  900 ◦C,  all  the  characteristic peaks  are  in  good  agreement  with  the  literature  data  [36]  and without  any  second  phase.  Whereas  ZrO2 exists  as  impurity  when the  sample  sintered  at  1100 ◦C  due  to  the  volatilization  loss  of sodium  or  phosphorus  at  elevated  temperature  [37,38].  Therefore, the  sample  sintered  at  900 ◦C  was  used  for  the  CO2 gas  sensors  in the  present  work.  In  Fig.  3,  the  XRD  patterns  of  the  as-synthesized Bi8Nb2O17 indicate  that  all  the  peaks  correspond  the  characteristic peaks  of  JCPDS  card  No.  33-210.  The  temperature  dependences  of expansion  of  Bi8Nb2O17 sample  (ϕ   =  8  mm,   L  =  18  mm)   are  shown  in Fig.  4.  The  mean  thermal  expansion  coefﬁcient  calculated  from  the ×   10−6 K−1,  which  is  very  close  to  the  value  of  NASICON slop  is  6.9  material  (ca.  6.0 

The interface  structure  between  NASICON  electrolyte  and two  kinds  of  reference  electrodes  has  been  investigated  by  SEM analysis,  as  shown  in  Fig.  5.  As  for  Pt  reference  electrode  (Fig.  5(a)),

Fig.  2.  XRD  patterns  of  NASICON  powders  sintered  at  different  temperatures  for  2  h.

Fig.  3.  XRD  patterns  of  Bi8Nb2O17 powders.

m  with  porous  structure. the  thickness  of  Pt  layer  is  about  30  There  is  an  obvious  gap  between  NASICON  and  Pt  electrode layer.  This  is  because  the  thermal  expansion  coefﬁcient  of  Pt  (ca. ×   10−6 K−1)  is  much  different  from  that  of  NASICON  electrolyte 9.0 

Fig.  5.  SEM  image  of  the  interface  structure  of  Pt  reference  electrode  (a)  and Bi8Nb2O17-Pt  reference  electrode  (b).

×   10−6 K−1),  leading  to  the  thermal  stress  occurs  [39].  To (ca.  6.0  reduce  the  thermal  stress,  only  in  the  form  of  very  thin-ﬁlm  can  Pt be  applied  on  NASICON  surface  as  a  reference  electrode.  However, the  very  thin-ﬁlm  is  hard  to  be  fabricated  by  conventional  screenprinting  method.  In  contrast,  the  thickness  of  solid-reference ␮m  and  ﬁrmly  adhere  to  NASICON  surface electrode  is  about  50  without  any  gap  or  crack  as  shown  in  Fig.  5(b).  This  is  believed  to be  closely  related  to  the  low  thermal  expansivity  of  Bi8Nb2O17, leading  to  reduce  the  thermal  stress.  The  solid-reference  electrode with  a  dense  gastight  morphology  as  physical  barrier  also  could protect  the  NASICON  from  reacting  with  water  vapor  and  CO2 [40].

Fig.  6  shows  the  EMF   of  sensing  electrode  separately  referring to  the  solid-reference  electrode  and  Pt  reference  electrode  as  a function  of  logarithm  of  partial  pressure  of  CO2 at  500 ◦C.  For  the solid-reference  electrode,  the  EMF   is  linear  to  the  logarithm  of  CO2 concentration,  obeying  the  Nernst  equation.  The  number  of  reaction  electrons  calculated  from  the  slop  of  the  correction  equal  to n  =  2.0,  in  excellent  agreement  with  the  theoretical  value  for  the following  2-electron  reaction  occurring  at  sensing  electrode: Li2CO3 =

Fig.  4.  The  thermal  expansion  curve  as  a  function  of  temperature  for  Bi8Nb2O17.

The  reaction  electron  number  (n)  is  1.9  when  Pt  using  as  reference  electrode.  This  may   be  caused  by  the  slower  electrode  reaction as  described  by  Satyanarayana  et  al.  [41]  due  to  the  presence  of

Fig.  6.  Dependence  of  the  sensing  electrode  potential  separately  relative  to  the solid-reference  electrode  and  Pt  reference  electrodes  at  500 ◦C.

gap  between  NASICON  and  Pt  electrode  layer  (as  seen  in  Fig.  5(a)). More  seriously,  the  EMF   signiﬁcantly  deviates  from  the  straight line  when  the  concentration  exceeds  60%.  In  other  words,  the  CO2 change  cannot  be  effectively  recognized  by  the  sensor.  This  result proves  that  NaHCO3 or  Na2CO3 may   be  formed  at  the  reference electrode,  as  mentioned  in  the  previous  section.  Base  on  the  thermodynamic  calculation  result,  Wang  and  Kumar  [42]  demonstrated that  Na2CO3 could  be  formed  at  the  reference  electrode  when  CO2 partial  pressure  was  higher  than  104 Pa  at  500 ◦C.  In  addition,  Kishi et  al.  [43]  pointed  out  that  Na+-ion  in  NASICON  may  react  with CO2 to  form  carbonate  when  Pt  was  directly  used  as  the  reference electrode,  which  caused  the  deviation  of  electrode  potential.  In  contrast,  this  situation  would  not  be  occurred  for  the  solid-reference electrode.  This  is  because  that  H2O  and  CO2 are  cut  off  from  contacting  with  NASICON  by  the  dense  solid-reference  electrode  layer.  The obtained  results  clearly  suggest  that  the  solid-reference  electrode can  signiﬁcantly  improve  detection  limit  of  the  sensor.

In  general,  the  EMF   of  sensor  should  be  independent  of  coexisting  oxygen  partial  pressure  in  the  gas  phase  [44].  Fig.  7  shows the  variation  of  EMF   as  a  function  of  coexisting  oxygen  partial pressure  at  500 ◦C  for  solid-reference  electrode.  It  is  noted  that the  EMF   maintains  almost  at  a  constant  value  for  each  ﬁxed ±1  mV.   The  obtained CO2 concentration  and  ﬂuctuates  within 

Fig.  7.  Variation  of  EMF   as  a  function  of  coexisting  oxygen  partial  pressure  at  500 ◦C for  solid-reference  electrode.

Fig.  8.  Response  transients  of  sensor  attached  with  two  different  reference  electrodes  to  CO2 under  0%  and  70%  RH  at  500 ◦C:  (a)  Pt  reference  electrode  and  (b) Bi8Nb2O17-Pt  reference  electrode.

demonstrate  that  the  solid-reference  electrode  successfully eliminates  any  coexisting  oxygen  interference,  conﬁrming  the Bi8Nb2O17 is  promising  as  a  stable  solid-reference  electrode material  for  NASICON-based  CO2 sensors. The  response  transients  of  sensor  attached  with  two  different reference  electrodes  to  CO2 gas  under  0%  and  70%  RH  at  500 ◦C are  shown  in  Fig.  8.  The  response  and  recovery  time  of  sensor attached  with  solid-reference  electrode  (Res:  57  s  and  Rec:  65  s) are  a  bit  longer  than  that  of  sensor  attached  with  Pt  reference electrode  (Res:  47  s  and  Rec:  60  s),  but  still  acceptable.  The  reason is  that  open  Pt  reference  electrode  is  more  favorable  to  adsorption/desorption  of  gases.  On  the  other  hand,  the  sensor  attached with  solid-reference  electrode  exhibits  a  smaller  cross-sensitivity to  water  vapor  (4.5  mV)   than  that  of  Pt  reference  electrode  (10  mV). This  is  because  the  dense  solid-reference  electrode  acts  as  a  natural physical  barrier  of  humidity.  These  results  powerfully  suggest  that the  solid-reference  electrode  can  effectively  improve  the  waterresistance  of  sensor.

In  general,  it  is  required  that  electrochemical  sensor  lifetime should  last  at  least  2–3  years  as  described  in  the  previous  work [45]  because  the  electrode  or  electrolyte  will  be  used  up  as  time passes,  which  is  caused  by  the  electrode  reaction  (oxidization or  reduction).  However,  the  sensor  lifetime  will  be  shortened  by some  other  factors  including  humidity,  temperature,  mechanical strength  of  the  electrode  and  so  on.  In  particular,  the  sensor  will inevitably  endure  the  heating–cooling  process  in  its  practical application.  Thus,  the  performance  of  thermal  stability  will  affect the  sensor  lifetime  directly.  Fig.  9  shows  the  thermal  stability of  the  sensor  attached  with  two  different  reference  electrodes. During  the  heat-cycle  test,  the  temperature  of  sensor  was   switched repeatedly  between  400 ◦C  and  600 ◦C.  The  accurate  temperature  of the  sensor  was   calibrated  by  K-thermocouple  and  is  also  presented in  Fig.  9.  As  shown  in  Fig.  9,  there  is  an  EMF-overshooting  at  the initial  period  for  each  platform  and  thereafter  the  EMF   becomes stable.  This  phenomenon  can  be  ascribed  to  the  heat-inertia  of electric  furnace  as  seen  from  the  temperature  curve  (dash  line). At  the  two  adjacent  temperature  platforms  of  400 ◦C,  the  EMF of  sensor  with  solid-reference  electrode  was   located  at  the  same potential  level  as  shown  by  dotted  lines.  However,  in  the  case  of Pt  reference  electrode,  the  EMF   at  second  400 ◦C  platform  did  not

Fig.  9.  Behavior  of  EMF   for  the  sensor  attached  with  two  different  reference  electrodes  during  the  heat-cycle  test  in  20%  CO2. recover  to  the  level  of  the  ﬁrst  400 ◦C  platform  (EMF:  7  mV)   even when  the  temperature  was  allowed  to  equilibrate  for  2  h.  At  two 600 ◦C  platforms,  the  EMF   of  the  sensor  continuously  shifts  upward with  time.  It  can  be  explained  that  the  sodium  carbonate  may   be easily  formed  at  elevated  temperature  due  to  the  Na2O  activity in  NASICON  increased  with  the  temperature  as  demonstrated  in Ref.  [42].  Additionally,  the  gap  between  Pt  reference  electrode and  NASICON  as  shown  in  Fig.  5(a)  may   be  expanded  at  elevated temperature  since  the  thermal  expansivity  of  Pt  is  great  different from  NASICON  electrolyte.  From  the  heat-cycle  test,  we   can  draw a  conclusion  that  the  thermal  stability  of  the  sensor  attached  with the  solid-reference  electrode  is  more  preferable,  which  is  believed to  be  closely  related  with  the  good  bonding  interface  between  the solid-reference  electrode  and  NASICON  electrolyte.

In  this  work,  a  composite  of  Bi8Nb2O17 and  Pt  as  a  solidreference  electrode  material  has  been  prepared  for  NASICON-based CO2 sensors.  The  EMF   of  the  as-fabricated  sensor  is  linear  to  the logarithm  of  CO2 concentration,  obeying  Nernst’s  correction.  Moreover,  no  any  obvious  interference  from  oxygen  partial  pressure is  observed.  In  comparison,  there  is  no  the  deserved  detectability above  60%  CO2 for  the  sensor  using  Pt  as  reference  electrode,  suggesting  that  the  solid-reference  electrode  can  signiﬁcantly  improve detection  limit  of  the  sensor.  The  solid-reference  electrode  also showed  smaller  humidity  interference  from  water  vapor  than  that of  Pt  reference  electrode.  And  the  thermal  stability  of  the  sensor  attached  with  the  solid-reference  electrode  is  preferable  as revealed  from  the  thermal  cycle  test.  All  the  obtained  results  suggested  the  composite  of  Bi8Nb2O17 plus  Pt  as  a  solid-reference electrode  is  suitable  for  NASICON-based  CO2 sensor.