This is an Accepted Manuscript, which has been through the RSC Publishing peer  review process and has been accepted for publication.

Accepted Manuscripts are published online shortly after acceptance, which is prior  to technical editing, formatting and proof reading. This free service from RSC  Publishing allows authors to make their results available to the community, in  citable form, before publication of the edited article. This Accepted Manuscript will  be replaced by the edited and formatted Advance Article as soon as this is available.

To cite this manuscript please use its permanent Digital Object Identifier (DOI®),  which is identical for all formats of publication.

More information about Accepted Manuscripts can be found in the  Information for Authors.

Please note that technical editing may introduce minor changes to the text and/or  graphics contained in the manuscript submitted by the author(s) which may alter  content, and that the standard Terms & Conditions and the ethical guidelines  that apply to the journal are still applicable. In no event shall the RSC be held  responsible for any errors or omissions in these Accepted Manuscript manuscripts or  any consequences arising from the use of any information contained in them.

On  a  broader  scale,  energy  innovation  plays  an  important  role  in  the  reduction  of  carbon  emission  in  the  atmosphere  and  global  warming.  In  consequence,  technological  advances  are needed in energy storage technology for the integration of intermittent renewable energy  resources  on  electricity  markets  and  grids.  The  low-cost  and  high  abundance  of  sodium  versus lithium  make sodium batteries a promising  technology in the long term. Na battery  technology  is  regarded  as  being  promising  in  the  future  of  stationary  energy  storage  and  battery  electric  vehicles  (BEV).  For  this  purpose,  development  of  novel  electrode  and  electrolytes  materials  is  needed.  Although  inorganic  or  polymer  solid  electrolytes  plays  a  fundamental  function  in  the  successful  progress  of  all  solid-state  rechargeable  sodium  batteries,  they  have  received  less  attention  until  very  recently.  For  this  reason,  this  article  focuses on solid electrolytes for next generation batteries.  

The progress in the research and development of high temperature sodium batteries suggests that all-solid-state batteries with inorganic  or polymer solid electrolytes are promising power sources for a wide range of applications due to their high thermal stability, reliability,  long-cycle lives and versatile geometries. The electrolytes play a fundamental role in terms of current (power) density, the time stability,  and  the  safety  of  the  battery  and,  as  a  result,  their  continuous  improvement  and  innovation  are  indeed  critical  to  success.  In  fact,  inorganic  solid  electrolytes  pave  the  way  for  improving  the  cost-effective  development  of  rechargeable  sodium  batteries.  This  review  describes a state-of-the-art overview of most of the Na+ conductors for using electrolytes in sodium/sulphur and ZEBRA batteries. The  emphasis  of  this  article  is  on  inorganic  solid  electrolytes,  specially,  ceramic  and  glass-ceramic  electrolytes  as  promising  alternative  applicable to all solid-state batteries. As part of a continuing effort to find new materials that operate at room temperature and moderate  temperatures, NASICON electrolytes  will be also considered. Polymer electrolytes based on poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) are also very  suitable  for  all  solid-state  batteries.  Hence,  the  review  focuses  on  ion  transport  based  on  the  observed  conductivity,  electrolytes  preparation, safety and environmental impact.  

Energy storage technology will be of vital importance in the near  future  as  a  result  of  energy  demand  and  the  gradual  increase  in  the price of fossil fuels and their environmental impact. Not only  energy storage systems are required for load levelling because of  the  intermittent  nature  of  energy  sources  (solar,  wind  and  tide),  but  also  for  energy  usage  (peak  vs.  off-peak  hours).  Such  cells  would  smooth  fluctuations  thereby  optimizing energy collection, storage, and usage. Figure 1 shows  several electrical energy storage (EES) systems in terms of power  rating,  which  identifies  potential  applications,  and  duration  of  discharge1.   

aDepartamento de Quíımica Inorgánica, Universidad del País  Vasco UPV/EHU, P.O. Box. 644, 48080 Bilbao, Spain. Fax: +34  946013500; Tel: +34 946012458  bCIC ENERGIGUNE, Parque Tecnológico de Álava, Albert  Einstein 48, ED.CIC, 01510 Miñano, Spain.   E-mail:             

Batteries represent an excellent energy storage technology for the  integration  of  renewable  resources.  Due  to  the  fact  that  many  global  lithium  reserves  are  located  in  remote  or  in  politically  sensitive areas and the high cost of lithium-ion batteries, Na and  Na-ion  batteries  has  re-emerged  as  candidates  for  medium  and  large-scale  stationary  energy  storage.  The  use  of  a  naturally  abundant  element,  low  cost  and  very  suitable  redox  potential  (E°(Na+/Na)  =  -2.71 V  versus  standard  hydrogen  electrode;  only  0.3 V  rechargeable  electrochemical  cells  based  on  sodium  also  hold  much  promise  for  energy  storage  applications2,3.  All-solid-state  batteries  with  inorganic  solid  electrolytes  are  promising  power  sources  for  a  wide  range  of  applications  because  of  their  safety,  long-cycle  lives  and  versatile  geometries4.  However,  not  only  cathodic  and  anodic  materials  must  be  optimized,  but  also  new  electrolytes  should  be  synthesized  as  they  are  the  key  point  for  Na  batteries  success5.   

On a broader scale, energy innovation plays an important role in the reduction of carbon emission in the atmosphere and global  warming.  In  consequence,  technological  advances  are  needed  in  energy  storage  technology  for  the  integration  of  intermittent  renewable  energy  resources  on  electricity  markets  and  grids.  The  low-cost  and  high  abundance  of  sodium  versus  lithium  make  sodium batteries a promising technology in the long term. Na battery technology is regarded as being promising in the future of  stationary  energy  storage  and  battery  electric  vehicles  (BEV).  For  this  purpose,  development  of  novel  electrode  and  electrolytes  materials is needed. Although inorganic or polymer solid electrolytes plays a fundamental function in the successful progress of all  solid-state rechargeable sodium batteries, they have received less attention until very recently. For this reason, this article focuses  on solid electrolytes for next generation batteries.  

Energy & Environmental Science Accepted ManuscriptDownloaded by North Carolina State University on 18 January 2013Published on 14 January 2013 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C3EE24086JView Article OnlinePage 3 of 18

Among  the  possible  solid  electrolytes,  ceramic  or  polymer  electrolytes  provide  each  specific  advantage  such  as  easy  handling,  high  low  self-discharge  rates,  operable  over  a  wide  range  of  environmental  conditions,  durability, reliability, no flammable components and without the  need  for  containment  as  for  liquid  electrolytes.  The  high  elastic  moduli  of  ceramics  make  them  more  suitable  for  rigid  battery  designs whereas the low elastic moduli of polymers are useful for  flexible  battery  designs.  The  main  advantages  of  the  solid  ceramic electrolytes are its simple manipulation, versatility, high  stability,  long  life,  high  performance,  safe  operation  and  no  leakage.  

Figure  1.    Comparison  of  discharge  time  and  power  rating  for  various  electrical  energy  storage  systems.  Reprinted  from  ref.  1.  Courtesy  of  Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA. 

Ionic conduction in ceramic compounds occurs by  movement of  ionic  point  defects,  the  creation  and/or  movement  of  which  requires  energy,  so  the  conductivity  follows  Arrhenius  law  with  activation  energy  of  0.25  to  1  eV.  Therefore,  ceramic  solid  electrolytes  are  suitable  for  high-temperature  applications6.  Sodium-sulphur  (Na-S)  and  ZEBRA  batteries  are  the  high  temperature  systems  commercially  available  up  to  this  point  in  time.    Figure  2  summarizes  a  general  vision  of  the  two  high  temperature  their  characteristics,  applications,  advantages,  shortcomings  and  recycling that will be more deeply described and studied in detail  throughout this review.       

Figure  2.  Schematic  summary  of  the  main  features  of  the  high  temperature sodium batteries. (Data from ref. 6-9, 27, 28 and 30, that will  appear below).  

  The  evolution  of  interest  in  researching  sodium  batteries  operating  at  high  temperature  has  been  depicted  in  Figure  3A.  This  search  shows  the  number  of  articles  appeared  in  scientific  journals  per  year,  based  on  the  keywords  “Na  battery  high  temperature”. During the 90s, a  continuous trend can be seen in  the  number  of  articles  published  about  this  research  topic.  A  decrease  is  observed  in  the  early  years  of  the  21st  century.  However,  in  the  last  few  years,  a  growing  attention  to  high  temperature  batteries  for  energy  storage  market  reappears.  The  increasing  interest  in  developing  innovative  materials  and  new  designs for sodium batteries can also be measured by the number  of  patents.  In  terms  of  number  of  patents  relative  to  sodium  batteries  operating  at  high  temperature,  a  remarkable  growth  during the last years has been observed (see Figure 3B).     

rupture of the thin and fragile β”-alumina ceramic membrane. In  fact,  a  recent  fire  related  to  Na-S  batteries  made  by  NGK  Insulators  temporally  stopped  their  use  as  a  precautionary  measure.  For  safety  reasons,  Na-S  batteries  are  considered  unfavourable  for  transportation  and  they  are  being  exploited  predominantly  for  stationary  storage19.  The  Na-S  batteries  are  available for grid applications, with 200 installations worldwide,  accounting for 315 MW of discharge power capacity20.  

approximately  80%.  The  estimated  life  of  a  Na-S  battery  is  practically 15 years after 4500 cycles at 90% depth of discharge.  However, despite the high specific capacity of sulphur cathodes,  low  cost  and  availability,  wide  operation  temperature  range  and  possibility of long cycling, Na-S represents only the third ranking  (≈ 3600 MWh) installed capacity worldwide (see ref. 1).    It  is  known  that  beta-alumina  solid  electrolyte  (BASE)  avoids  self-discharge, because it is a good conductor of sodium ions but  an insulator for electrons. When sodium gives off an electron, the  Na+  migrates  to  the  sulphur  container.  The  electron  drives  an  electric current through the molten sodium to the contact, through  the  electrical  load  and  back  to  the  sulphur  container.  Here,  2-,  sodium  another  electron  reacts  with  sulphur  to  form  S4 polysulphide.  The  discharge  process  can  be  represented  in  equation  (3)  and  graphically  in  Figure  5,  whereas  schematic  diagram of a Na-S battery is shown in Figure 6.   

Although  the  theoretical  gravimetric  capacity  of  the  sulphur  electrode is 1675 mAh.g-1 based on full reduction to Na2S, most  reports  fail  to  achieve  a  third  of  this  capacity  (see  ref.  2).  Therefore,  the  highest  disadvantage  of  this  cell  is  the  limited  gravimetric  capacity  of  the  positive  electrode  (836  mAh.g-1)  caused  by  the  polysulphide  formed  as  by-products  during  the  process of the discharge (see Fig. 4). Another drawback of Na-S  batteries is the necessity to be operated at temperatures ≈ 300 °C  to  use  liquid-state  sulphur  and  sulphide  positive  electrodes  and  sodium  negative  electrodes,  and  to  enhance  the  conductivity  of  β”-alumina  solid  electrolyte  (see  ref.  4).  The  high  operating  temperature forces a fraction of energy to be used to maintain this  operating  temperature,  resulting  in  a  lower  overall  efficiency  (87%)18.  Besides,  at  the  operating  temperatures  (270-350 °C),  molten  sulphur,  sodium  and  the  polysulphide  compounds  are  highly  corrosive,  therefore  resistant  containers  such  as  high  chromium steel and molybdenum-lined steels have to be used in  these cells (see ref. 2).     Another  concern  is  the  possibility  of  a  violent  uncontained  reaction between molten sodium and molten sulphur in case of a 

Figure 6. A typical Na-S cell contain molten Na (anode) within a sodium  β”-alumina tube as the solid electrolyte which is surrounded by molten S  (cathode).  The  cross  section  of  the  cell  shows  the  direction  of  Na+  transport through the β”-alumina electrolyte. On discharge, Na combines  with the S to form Na polysulphides. These reactions are reversed during  charge, and Na returns to the interior of the tube. (Derived from ref. 20).  

NGK  INSULATORS,  LTD.  has  implemented  countermeasures  since the incident occurred on September 21, 2011 involving the  Na-S batteries for electricity storage. The main causes of the fire  were:  one  cell  out  of  384  battery  cells  which  form  the  modular  battery was faulty and leaked hot molten material, making a short  between  battery  cells  in  an  adjoining  block.  There  was  no  fuse  installed  between  the  battery  cells  so  the  short  circuit  current  flowed  continuously  and  emitted  heat,  which  destroyed  other  battery  cells  and  they  caught  fire21.  The  safety  enhancement  measures to prevent the spread of  fire in  modular batteries were  fuses between battery cells in modular batteries, insulation boards  between blocks and anti-fire boards between battery modules.    Other critical components of these batteries are seals, which must  not only be hermetic in the 300 to 350°C range but also withstand  the  Na  and  S  vapours  and/or  contact  with  the  highly  reactive  molten  electrode  materials.  Recent  studies  show  that  the  glassceramic  sealants  can  be  highly  resistant  to  sodium  and  that  the  thermal  expansion  coefficient  (TEC)  of  these  materials  can  be  modulated to match with those of α-alumina and β-alumina. Song  et al.22 studied the borosilicate glass with TiO2 as the nucleating  agent. Moreover, in their work, Y2O3 was doped to modulate the  TECs,  and  CaF2  was  added  to  decrease  the  viscosity  of  the 

borosilicate glass. The TEC of the sealants was 6-7×10-6 °C after  heat  treatment.  In  addition,  the  thermal  shock  resistance  of  the  seal  was high, and no microcracking appeared after 100 thermal  cycles. 

Also  Na/Ni3S2  cells  with  liquid  electrolytes  have  successfully  been developed23. However, today’s tendency is the development  of solid-state batteries because cells with liquid electrolytes may  form  dendritic  growths  that  may  cause  short  circuits,  similar  to  lithium batteries cycled at room temperature24. Therefore, a safer  alternative  is  to  use  a  solid  electrolyte  that  acts  as  a  barrier  to  prevent  dendritic  growths  and  replace  flammable  solvents  (see  ref. 18).    From a safety viewpoint, developing low-cost Na-S batteries with  high-capacity  energy  storage  systems  that  operate  at  lower  temperature  are  strongly  desirable  in  order  to  overcome  the  hurdles  described  above.  All-solid-state  batteries  are  the  promising power sources for a wide range of applications because  of  their  long-cycle  lives,  versatile  geometries,  low  cost  and  safety.  Moreover,  these  batteries  do  not  suffer  from  leakage,  volatilization, or flammability.    Although ambient temperature sodium batteries are in early stage  of  development,  they  are  highly  promising  for  large-scale  grid  storage  applications  due  to  the  abundance  and  very  low  cost  of  sodium-containing precursors used to make the components25. In  order to meet the challenge of developing solid-state batteries that  operate at ambient and moderate temperatures, solid electrolytes  that  have  high  Na+  ion  conductivities  at  room  temperature  and  close  contact  with  electrode  active  materials  are  indispensable  (see ref. 4). Therefore, the low temperature Na-S cell entails new  approaches  to  devise  protective  layers  for  both  the  positive  and  negative electrode, and the development of improved electrolytes  hold  promise  for  the  future  of  these  batteries  (see  ref.  2).  One  strategy  to  develop  a  design  that  works  at  low  temperature  is  to  use  NASICON  membranes  to  allow  operation  at  90  ºC  with  all  components remaining solid. On the other hand, since the design  of  these  batteries  is  based  on  many  fragile  parts  involving  ceramic  electrolyte  membrane,  glass  (ceramic)  sealants,  and  ceramic insulators, more contributions to improve all the ceramic  materials should be made.       1.2.  ZEBRA batteries 

The ZEBRA batteries also have gained high attention due to the  number of useful characteristics such as high energy density (120  Wh·kg-1),  high  voltage,  maintenance  free  operation,  no  gassing,  and  zero  self-discharge26.  The  safety  features  of  this  technology  storage  make  ZEBRA  batteries  particularly  suitable  for  electric  and  hybrid  vehicles.  They  can  also  be  used  for  stationary  applications in support to renewable energy for load-levelling.  These  cells  contain  a  liquid  sodium  negative  electrode,  a  metal  chloride  positive  electrode,  usually  NiCl2,  and  β”-Al2O3  as  electrolyte and separator. Addition of iron to the cell increases the  power  response.  The  charge-discharge  reactions  and  potentials  versus sodium at 300 °C are shown:   

(Anode)  (Cathode)  (Overall cell)  NiCl2 + 2Na , Ni + 2NaCl    In the case of iron chloride the homologous overall cell reaction  is as follows:    FeCl2 + 2Na , Fe + 2NaCl    The cathode has a porous structure of nickel and salt NaCl which  is impregnated with NaAlCl4, a 50/50 mixture of NaCl and AlCl3.  The sodium ion transport during the discharge process is depicted  in Figure 7. Sodium ions resulting from the oxidation of sodium  at  the  negative  electrode  are  transported  through  the  β”-Al2O3  electrolyte  to  the  NiCl2  by  the  secondary  electrolyte  (NaCl  and  AlCl3). The ZEBRA battery typically operates at 300 ºC or above  due  to  the  high  ohmic  resistance  of  a  thick  beta-alumina  solid  electrolyte  (BASE)  and  the  necessity  of  the  molten  secondary  electrolyte NaAlCl4 (melting point = 157 ºC) in the cathode so as  to ensure facile sodium ion transport between the BASE and solid  cathode  materials.  The  nucleation  of  Ni°  and  NaCl  is  also  facilitated. 

Figure  7.  Schematic  representation  of  Na/NiCl2  (ZEBRA)  cell  on  discharge. (Derived from ref. 2). 

The  schematic  diagram  of  ZEBRA  battery  describing  the  main  components and principle operation of the cell during discharging  process is shown in Figure 8.     Another function of the NaAlCl4 salt is to overcome the problems  of  overcharge  reactions.  The  charge  capacity  of  ZEBRA  cell  is  determined  by  the  quantity  of  salt  (NaCl)  available  in  the  cathode.  When  the  charge  voltage  continues  to  be  applied  in  a  fully  charged  cell,  the  liquid  salt  NaAlCl4  supplies  a  sodium  reservoir following the reversible reaction27:   

Figure  8.  ZEBRA  cell  chemical  reactions  during  discharging.  (Derived  from ref. 26). 

This  overcharge  reaction  requires  a  higher  voltage  than  the  normal charge as illustrated in Figure 9. 

Figure  9.  Na/NiCl2  (ZEBRA)  cell  reactions  at  300  ºC.  Theoretical  specific energy: 790 Wh.kg-1, under normal operation. (Derived from ref.  27).  

The  overcharge  reaction  has  three  practical  very  welcome  consequences:  (a)  Any  further  charge  current  is  stopped  automatically  as  soon  as  the  increased  open  circuit  voltage  equalises the charger voltage. (b) If cells fail in parallel strings in  a battery, the remaining cells in the string with the failed cells can  be overcharged in order to balance the voltage of the failed cells.  (c)  For  a  vehicle  with  a  fully  charged  battery  which  goes  downhill  there  is  an  overcharge  capacity  of  up  to  5%  for  regenerative breaking so that the braking behaviour of the vehicle  is fundamentally unchanged.    Moreover, as from the very first charge the cell has a surplus of  sodium  in  the  anode  compartment  so  that  for  an  over-discharge  tolerance sodium is available to maintain current flow at a lower  voltage. In a recent work, Gerssen-Gondelach et al. (see ref. 28)  examined  the  prospects  of  available  and  new  technologies  for  battery electric vehicles (BEVs). As it can be seen in table 1, Liion  and  ZEBRA  batteries  are  considered  to  play  the  most  important role in the short term, while other commercial available  battery technologies (lead-acid, NiMH and Na-S) are considered  to be less attractive for BEVs28.    The ZEBRA battery exhibits a number of advantages over de NaS  battery,  which  include  higher  voltage,  better  tolerance  against  overcharging  and  easiness  of  assembly  in  the  discharged  state  with  NaCl,  AlCl3,  nickel  and  iron  power.  ZEBRA  cells  are  produced in the discharged state so that no metallic sodium is to  be  handled  and  all  the  required  sodium  is  inserted  as  salt.  In  addition,  the  positive  electrode  is  comprised  mostly  of  solid  materials  which  reduces  corrosiveness  and  makes  the  cell  intrinsically  safer  than  the  Na-S  battery.  On  the  other  hand,  ZEBRA battery performance has been optimized to solve several  technical  issues  such  as  the  formation  of  low-conducting  nickel  chloride,  the  solubility  of  nickel  chloride  in  NaAlCl4  melt  and  cell capacity fade with time. These problems have been mitigated  by  using  additives  such  as  sodium  bromide,  sodium  iodide,  sulphur, aluminium, iron, and sulphide29.      

The addition of NaF and other sodium halides (NaI and NaBr) is  beneficial  in  suppressing  the  FeCl2  dissolution  and  provides  a  degree of overcharge protection. However, the formation of AlF3  on the surface of β”-Al2O3 is the cause of the resistance increase  and subsequent failure of the cells cycled at 260 ºC. Therefore, as  NaI and NBr provide the same benefits associated with NaF, then  the  formation  of  AlF3  whose  melting  point  is  1291  ºC  can  be  avoided. Nevertheless, capacity loss in the cells cycled at 350 ºC  can be attributed to the growth of Ni particle size. A combination  of  high  temperature,  increased  NiCl2  dissolution  in  molten  electrolyte  and  the  formation  of  Ni3S2  phase  are  responsible  for  Ni grain growth in high temperature cells as reported by Petric et  al30.    ZEBRA cells can be connected in parallel and in series. Different  battery types have been made with one to five parallel strings, up  to  220  cells  in  series  and  100-500  cells  in  one  battery  pack.  Between every second cell there is a cooling plate through which  ambient  air  is  circulated.  For  thermal  insulation  and  mechanical  support  the  cells  are  surrounded  by  a  double  walled  vacuum  insulation  typically  25  mm  thick.  Figure  10  illustrates  all  components of the complete system ready assembly. The resistive  heater  and  the  fan  for  cooling  are  controlled  by  the  battery  management interface (BMI) for thermal management. 

ZEBRA  cells  may  be  of  practical  use  in  electric  vehicles  especially buses if the synthesis and processing of the β”-alumina  components  are  optimized  (see  ref.  2).  Another  interesting  strategy is lowering the temperature (≤ 200 ºC) to improve cycle  life.  These  may  decrease  the  degradation  mechanisms  due  to  particle  ripening  and  side  reactions  that  occur  in  the  cathode  at  high operating temperatures. The reduced temperature technology  may  also  enable  the  use  of  low  cost  materials  of  sealing  and  construction  providing  an  easier  path  towards  broad  market  penetration  for  grid  storage.  A  new  low-temperature  design  has  been proposed by Lemmon et al.31. They cycled a ZEBRA battery  with a planar composite BASE (α-Al2O3/yttria-stabilized zirconia  (YSZ) discs sintered in loose β”-Al2O3 powder) under C/3 rate at  175  ºC.  This  study  concludes  that  operating  temperature  gave  significant influences on the stability of cell performance during  cycling. Overall, the higher operating temperature resulted in the  more  rapid  increase  in  cell  polarization  with  cycling;  a  55%.  Increase  in  end-of-charge  polarization  was  observed  at  280 ºC  after 60 cycles, while little changes were found in the cell tested  at 175 ºC (see Fig. 11). Moreover, the performance degradation at 

higher temperatures was due to the particle growth of both nickel  and sodium chloride (~ 50 µm in size) in the cathode. Therefore,  these  results  indicate  the  feasibility  of  a  cell  operation  below  200 ºC resulting in a better stability.   

Figure  11.  Cell  polarization  tested  at  various  temperatures:  (a)  Cell  polarization  at  the  end  of  charge  and  (b)  cell  polarization  at  the  end  of  discharge. Reprinted from: X. Lu, G. Li, J. Y. Kim, J. P. Lemmon, V. L.  Sprenkle, and Z. Yang, The effects of temperature on the electrochemical  performance  of  sodium–nickel  chloride  batteries,  Journal  of  Power  Sources, 215, 288–295, Copyright 2012, with permission from Elsevier. 

Gerssen-Gondelach  et  al.  predict  that  ZEBRA  battery  performance  projections  will  focus  on  radical  changes  in  chemistry  to  achieve  specific  energy  and  peak  power  values  of  more than 200 Wh.kg-1 and 400 W.kg-1 and enhancement of the  power rate to improve the power/energy ratio (see ref. 28).    Moreover,  low  operating  temperatures,  further  efforts  need  to  be  made  in  terms  of  improving  the  ionic  conductivity  of  BASE  and  the  electrolyte  adjacent  to  the  cathode,  or  if  other  better  Na-ion  solid  state  electrolytes  are  developed,  as  well  as  overcoming  the  wetting  problem by liquid sodium.       2.  Electrolyte materials 

The  electrolytes  play  a  fundamental  role  in  terms  of  current  (power)  density,  the  time  stability,  and  the  safety  of  the  battery.  Besides  the  ionic  conductivity,  a  good  electrochemical  stability  and  compatibility  with  the  electrodes  are  also  desirable  in  electrolyte  optimization.  The  electrochemical  is  evaluated  by  considering  interfacial  resistance,  the  electrochemical  window  and  the  electrolyte  behaviour during battery cycling test. The solid electrolyte is the  critical  part  of  the  cell  configuration;  therefore,  to  deliver  the  expected  performance  the  following  important  properties  should  be  met32:  (i)  High  ionic  conductivity  to  reduce  the  resistance  polarization  effects  in  a  solid  state  battery.  (ii)  Need  to  be  thermodynamically  stable  and  to  perform  well  in  a  wide  temperature  range.  (iii)  Should  be  physically  and  chemically  compatible with the anode and cathode.     

In order to give a global view of the sodium electrolytes  for the  described batteries, different types of inorganic solid electrolytes  such  as  beta-alumina,  glass,  glass-ceramic  and  NASICON-type  are  described  along  this  section,  among  others.  In  some  cases,  lithium  electrolytes  will  be  included  to  compare  their  ionic  conductivity with the sodium ones.      2.1.  Beta-alumina 

β-alumina solid electrolyte (BASE) is historically the first fast ion  conductor material used in both Na-S and Na-metal chloride so as  to  take  advantage  of  the  increased  conductivity  of  this  solid  electrolyte at elevated temperatures. There are two distinct crystal  structures: β-Al2O3 (hexagonal: P63/mmc; a0 = 0.559, c0 = 2.261  mm)  and  β”-Al2O3  (rhombohedral:  R3m;  a0  =  0.560,  c0  =  3.395  mm). The β-Al2O3 has a stoichiometry of (Na2O · (8-11) Al2O3),  while the β’’-Al2O3, which exhibits higher ionic conductivity, has  a  lower  alumina  content  with  an  ideal  formula  of  (Na2O  ·  (5-7)  Al2O3).  Therefore, they differ in  chemical stoichiometry and the  stacking sequence of oxygen ion across the conduction layer. The  basic  unit  consist  of  spinel  blocks  and  conduction  planes.  The  spinel  block  is  a  four  layer  ABCA  stack  of  oxygen  ions  with  aluminium ions and the conduction planes or slabs contain fewer  O  atoms  and  more  room  for  sodium  cations.  One  full  unit  cell  requires  three  sets  of  this  pairing.  Figure  12  shows  the  ABCA  oxygen  layer  of  the  spinel  blocks  and  conduction  planes  of  the  structure33.                     

Figure  12.  Crystal  structure  of  β”-Al2O3  showing  the  spinel  blocks  identified  with  D  and  conduction  slabs  by  H.  Large  circles  are  O2-.  Medium-sized shaded circles are Na+ and the small solid ones are Al sites  while checkerboard circles are the Al2 site where stabilizer ions substitute  (Mg2+, Li+, etc). (Derived from ref. 33). 

There  are  a  variety  of  methods  to  synthesise  β”-Al2O3  powers  such  as  via  a  conventional  solid-state  reaction34-37,  the  sol-gel  process38-43444546,  the  co-precipitation  technique47,48,  the  sprayfreeze/freeze-drying  method  (see  refs.  44-45),  flame  spray  pyrolysis49,  microwave  heating50  and  mechanochemical51.  The 

β”-Al2O3 phase was found to give a better ionic conductivity than  the β-Al2O3 phase. Nevertheless, in the solid-state reaction route  and the solution-based chemical methods it is difficult to obtain a  uniform  product  because  the  synthesized  β”-Al2O3  is  often  epitaxially  mixed  with  β-Al2O3  and  with  remnant  NaAlO2  distributed along grain boundaries in the first route. Boehmite and  bayerite  have  been  used  to  prepare  pure  β”-Al2O3  (see  ref.  31).  Besides its composition, the ionic conductivity of polycrystalline  β’’-Al2O3  depends  on  the  ratio  of  β’’/β  and  the  microstructure  (grain size, porosity, impurities, etc.).    It  is  also  important  to  take  into  account  the  reactivity  of  the  conventional β/β”-Al2O3 with water. The conventional solid-state  reaction  process  leaves  remnant  NaAlO2  along  the  β/β”-Al2O3  grain boundaries, making the product susceptible to H2O and CO2  attack  from  the  atmosphere.  A  vapour-assist  method  has  been  proposed  by  Vikar  et  al.52  to  obtain  Na-β”-Al2O3  with  superior  chemical  stability  and  mechanical  strength  compared  to  Na-β”Al2O3  synthesized by the  conventional solid-state reaction route.  Figure 13 illustrates a schematic description of the vapour-assist  conversion process in the case of Na-β”-Al2O3 formation. In this  process,  the  starting  material  of  α-Al2O3  and  YSZ  (yttriastabilized zirconia) are sintered at 1500-1600 ºC and then buried  in loose powder of sodium source (e.g. Na2CO3 or NaAlO2). The  alkali  compounds  decompose  and  allow  a  vapour-assist  reaction  of alkali oxides with α-Al2O3. 

Figure  13.  A  schematic  explanation  for  the  mechanism  of  the  vapourassist  conversion  process  for  synthesis  of  beta-alumina  ion  conductors.  (Derived from ref. 55). 

In  terms  of  conductivity  at  room  temperature,  single  crystals  in  the  plane  direction  can  reach  0.1  S.cm-1,  while  commercial  β”Al2O3  manufactured  by  Ionotec53  provides  0.002  S·cm-1.  The  ionic conductivity at 300 °C of a single crystal β”-Al2O3 is about  1  S.cm-1,  which  is  almost  5  times  that  for  polycrystalline  β”Al2O3  (0.2–0.4  S.cm-1)  (0.24  S.cm-1  at  300ºC  and  0.38  S.cm-1  at  400ºC  as  Ionotec  commercial  product.  The  ionic  conductivity  of  polycrystalline  β”-Al2O3  at  300ºC  is  0.22-0.35  S.cm-1 as reported in ref. 6).     Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) technique is used  to  study  the  electrochemical  properties  of  the  electrolytes.  In  Figure  14  the  AC  impedance  spectra  of  sodium  beta-alumina 


One  of  the  optimum  candidate  structures  for  ion  migration  was  called Na Superionic Conductor (NASICON) and was developed  by  Goodenough  et  al.  in  1976,  in  order  to  achieve  a  high  ionic  conduction56.  The  original  NASICONs  were  solid  solutions  derived from NaZr2P3O12 by partial replacement of P by Si with  Na excess to balance the negatively charged framework to  yield  (0 ≤ x ≤ 3)57.  The  the  general  NASICON  compound  is  produced  by  Ceramatec,  Inc  of  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah  and  has  been  proposed  for  using  as  solid  electrolyte  in  solid-state  electrochemical  devices  such  as  Na-S  batteries58, gas sensor devices59-6061, and ion sensors62.    NASICON as the  β-aluminas is a superionic solid with covalent  framework.  They  have  high  Debye  temperature  and,  therefore,  high  lattice  thermal  conductivity.  Na3Zr2Si2PO12  show  a  weaksecond  order-like  transition  that  involves  structural  changes  of  smaller  magnitude.  These  superionic  solids  with  covalent  framework  are  also  of  great  technological  importance  because  they  have  high  thermal  and  chemical  stabilities.  Moreover,  it  is  important  that  the  system  does  not  undergo  considerable  structural changes near the operating temperature63.     The  3-D  network  of  NASICON  compounds is  a  phosphosilicate  characterized  by  thus,  Na3Zr2Si2PO12  has  corner  sharing  tetrahedra  of  phosphate  and  silicate,  (Si,P)O4,  with  zirconia,  ZrO6,  centred  octahedral  sites,  where  for  every  two  octahedral  sites  there  are  three  tetrahedral  sites comprising two silicate and one phosphate centre. That way  the  SBU  are  connected  by  (Si,P)O4  tetrahedra  to  form  infinite  ribbons parallel to the c-axis. The Na+ interstitial sites, located in  the  inter-SBU  positions,  are  connected  by  wide  channel  where  Na+ ions can diffuse through bottlenecks that exceed 4.8 Å64. The  conduction pathways of sodium ions (Na(1) and Na(2) sites) are  of a zigzag shape in three dimensions (see Fig. 16). NASICONtype  compounds  exhibit  monoclinic  to  rhombohedral  reversible  structural  transition,  at  transition  temperature  depending  on  composition (x), in the interval 1.8 < x < 2.2 a small distortion of  monoclinic symmetry takes place. 

structural  building  units 

Figure  16.  NASICON  structure  in  rhombohedral  symmetry,  showing  ZrO6  and  (Si,P)O4  polyhedra.  Dark-shaded  circles  represent Na(1) positions, light-shaded circles Na(2) position, and  curved  arrow  represents  the  conduction  path  of    Na+  ions.  (Derived from ref. 60, 64 and 71). 

This  NASICON  framework  allows  a  wide  range  of  chemical  substitutions65 and its flexibility is responsible for its low thermal  expansion, and makes them one of the most attractive families of  materials  for  solid  electrolytes66.  Most  of  the  studies  on  this  family  of  materials  have  been  concentrated  in  the  composition  range 1.8 < x < 2.4, presenting the highest ionic conductivity  for  x  = 2, higher  than  that of  β-alumina  which  has  two-dimensional  mobility.  In  addition  to  their  high  ionic  conductivity,  it  has  claimed  stability  in  humid  air  and  aqueous  solutions.  However,  NASICON-type  ceramics  have  a  low  stability  in  contact  with  molten sodium or molten sodium salts (see ref. 64).    In  the  synthesis  of  NASICON,  ZrO2  impurities  appear  (see  Fig.  17) decreasing the ion conductivity. To avoid remaining ZrO2 in  the final NASICON phase not only the synthesis method but also  controlling  the  sintering  temperature  is  the  key  factor67.  Porkodi  et al.68 have proposed a new synthesis method to yield phase-pure  NASICON  based  on  a  molecular  precursor.  Pellets  with  a  pure  Na3Zr2Si2PO12 phase prepared by this route and annealed at 900  ºC  for  4  h  exhibited  ionic  conductivities  at  room  temperature  of  about 5.3×10-3 S.cm-1 and 2.5×10-3 S.cm-1 , for the sample sintered  at 1220 ºC for a period of 40 h. 

Figure  17. XRD of the solid electrolyte NASICON sintered at different  temperatures. Reprinted from: F. Qiu, Q. Zhu, X. Yang, Y. Quan, and L.  Sun,  Investigation  of  CO2  sensor  based  on  NASICON  synthesized  by  a  new  sol–gel  process,  Sensors  and  Actuators  B:  Chemical,  93,  237–242,  Copyright 2003, with permission from Elsevier.  

The relationship between microstructure and electrical properties  of the Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12 materials has been studied by Fuentes et  al.69. This work proved that grain size of NASICON yttria-doped  tetragonal  polycrystalline  zirconia  (ZrO2)0.97(Y2O3)0.03  ceramics  depends  on  sintering  conditions,  temperature  and  time.  They  showed  the  existence  of  an  increase  of  the  grain  size  when  ceramics are sintered at higher temperatures or for longer periods  of time. A maximum conductivity value of about 2.7×10-3 S.cm-1  at room temperature was obtained with the yttria doped tetragonal  phase.    Mixtures  of  Na4Zr2Si3O12  and  TiO2  have  been  patented  by  Takeuchi et al. as possible solid electrolytes  for sodium–sulphur  batteries70,  due  to  their  conductivity  value  (4.9×10-4  S.cm-1  at  room temperature). However, other NASICON materials such as 

It  can  be  observed  that  the  capacity  of  the  sodium-sulphur  cell  decreased for the first ten cycles but then was substantially stable  over the next forty cycles. The non-porous solid electrolyte stops  the migration of sodium polysulphides to the anode in each cycle,  avoiding irreversible capacity loss (see ref. 72).    The  specific  energy  versus  cycle  for  the  first  150  cycles  at  different current density of the last cell is represented in  Figure  20. The plot shows a drop in the specific energy at higher current  densities,  but  at  lower  current  density,  the  specific  energy  rebounds back, with very little cycle fading.   

Na1.8Ti1.2Al0.8(PO4)3 samples exhibit an ion conductivity close to  10-5  S.cm-1  at  200  °C71.  NASICON  may  be  fabricated  in  thin  films  of  no  more  than  a  few  microns  in  thickness  to  provide  strong membranes and a mechanical barrier to sodium dendrites.  NASICON ceramic membranes have been developed to improve  the  performance  of  sodium-sulphur  batteries  to  operate  at  temperatures below 200 °C. Various dopants may be added to the  NASICON to improve strength, conductivity, and/or sintering72.    The impedance spectrum of the Nasicon material synthesized by  a sol-gel process starting from tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) and  sintered at different temperatures is shown in Figure 18. A sharp  decrease  in  resistance  with  increasing  sintering  temperature  is  observed.  This  behaviour  can  be  mostly  due  to  the  grain  boundary  contribution  because  all  high  frequency  intercepts  of  the  grain  boundary  arcs  are  highly  close  to  each  other.  The  sintered pellets at 800, 900 and 1000 ºC, reached density values  of 89, 91 and 94% respectively, almost the theoretical density of  3.27  g.cm-3.  The  decrease  of  grain  boundary  resistance  was  related to the densification of the pressed bulk. 

Figure 20. Specific energy versus cycle number with the current density  variation of a Na-S cell with 1 mm thick NASICON membrane. (Derived  from ref. 72).  

Figure  18.  Complex  impedance  plots  for  NASICON  bulk  sintered  at  different  temperatures.  Reprinted  from:  F.  Qiu,  Q.  Zhu,  X.  Yang,  Y.  Quan,  and  L.  Sun,  Investigation  of  CO2  sensor  based  on  NASICON  synthesized  by  a  new  sol–gel  process,  Sensors  and  Actuators  B:  Chemical, 93, 237–242, Copyright 2003, with permission from Elsevier.  

    The  charge  –  discharge  curves  of  a  sodium-sulphur  cell  using  tetraglyme  as  the  cathode  solvent  and  non-porous  NASICON  membrane as electrolyte are shown in Figure 19. It represents the  charge and discharge characteristics for 50 cycles at a discharge  current of 0.03 mA.cm-2.  

  Figure  19.  Charge  and  discharge  of  a  sodium-sulphur  cell  using  tetraglyme  as  the  cathode  solvent  and  NASICON  ceramic  disc  as  the  separator between electrodes. (Derived from ref. 72). 

    Rapid  capacity  fade  on  cycling  and  high  self-discharge  are  the  two  main  reasons  for  shortening  sodium-sulphur  battery  life.  However,  NASICON-type  membranes  have  minimal  capacity  fade and a relatively stable shelf life, as they selectively transport  the  electrode  solutions.  Therefore,  sodium  NASICON-type  materials  as  electrolytes if the conductivity at room temperature is enhanced.      2.3.  Glass and glass-ceramic electrolytes 

Another  choice  for  using  a  solid  electrolyte  is  a  Na+  ionconducting  glass.  Different  glass-ceramic  electrolytes  have  been  synthesized  toward  realizing  all-solid-state  Na-S  batteries.  Conventionally, glasses are made by heating raw materials above  the  melting  point  and  quickly  cooling  to  below  the  glass  transition temperature (Tg). In a different route to the amorphous  (glassy)  state  below  the  liquidus  or  melting  point  for  a  given  phase,  crystalline  materials  that  are  excessively  mechanically  deformed  may  react  to  create  amorphous  products  that  are  chemically distinct from the starting materials (see ref. 18).    Alkali  sulphide  glasses,  such  as  xLi2S-(1-x)P2S5  glassy  electrolyte,  have  attracted  significant  interest  because  of  their  high ionic conductivity (3.2×10-3 S.cm-1) at room temperature and  negligible electronic conductivity. Moreover, these glasses have a  wide electrochemical window and also excellent cycling and rate  performances73-7476.  The  crystalline  material  Li3.25Ge0.25P0.75S4 

Energy & Environmental Science Accepted ManuscriptDownloaded by North Carolina State University on 18 January 2013Published on 14 January 2013 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C3EE24086JView Article OnlinePage 13 of 18

exhibits the highest ambient temperature conductivity of 2.2×10-3  S.cm-1 and the lowest conduction activation energy of 20 kJ mol-1  in  the  series  of  thio-LISICON  (see  ref.  74),  together  with  negligible electronic conductivity, high electrochemical stability,  no reaction with lithium metal, and no phase transition up to 500  °C77,78. Also the 3-D framework  solid electrolyte Li10GeP2S12 or  superionic  conductor  presents  an  extremely  high  ionic  conductivity  (about  1.2×10-2  S.cm-1  at  room  temperature).  the  cyclic  Moreover,  voltammogram  of  a  Li/Li10GeP2S12/Au  cell  with  lithium  reference electrode has been tested. No significant currents due to  electrolyte  decomposition  were  detected  in  the  scanned  voltage  range  of  -0.5  to  5  V.  Other  advantages  of  this  superionic  conductor are its stability, safety and wide potential window79.    As  far as  we are aware, there is not an equivalent sodium phase  such  as  Na10GeP2S12.  However,  xNa2S  +  (1-x)P2S5  amorphous  materials  (see  ref.  18)  and  Na2S−GeS2  glasses80  have  been  recently prepared by melt-quenching and mechanical milling, and  by mechanical alloying, respectively. In a thorough study, Martin  et  al.  characterized  these  materials  with  Fourier-transform  infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) to examine the extent of chemical  reaction between Na2S and P2S5 (see Fig. 21).                                      

Figure  21.  FT-IR  spectra  of  the  starting  materials  and  mechanically  milled xNa2S + (1−x)P2S5 products. Reprinted from: S. S. Berbano, I. Seo,  C. M. Bischoff, K. E. Schuller, and S. W. Martin, Formation and structure  of  Na2S+P2S5  amorphous  materials  prepared  by  melt-quenching  and  mechanical  milling,  Journal  of  Non-Crystalline  Solid,  358,  93–98,  Copyright 2012, with permission from Elsevier. 

They obtained information about the basic framework structure of  Na2S-GeS2  glasses  and  the  environment  of  Na  ions  with  reverse  Monte Carlo (RMC) simulation of the (Na2S)50(GeS2)50 glass by  using  both  the  neutron  and  X-ray  diffraction  data.  They  determined  the  minimum  allowable  distances  between  atoms  by  reference  to  the  experimental  total  correlation  functions  and  typical atomic sizes (see table 2).    Table  2.  Minimum  allowance  distances  between  atoms  in  the  reverse  Monte Carlo simulation for the (Na2S)50(GeS2)50 glass, being NBS and BS  for non-bridging S atom and bridging S atom, respectively.  

  The RMC model indicated that the Ge−S framework was formed  through  the  connection  of  corner-sharing  GeS4  tetrahedra  and  about 40% of the Na ions are coordinated by four sulphurs (nonbridging S atom, NBS, and/or bridging S atom, BS).     The  conductivity  of  typical  inorganic  solid  electrolytes  that  exhibit Na+ ion conductivities such as NASICON, beta-alumina,  glass  and  glass-ceramic  electrolytes  is  shown  in  Figure  22.  As  can  be  seen  in  this  figure,  sulphide  glasses  in  systems  such  as  Na2S-SiS2, Na2S-GeS2 and Na2S-P2S5 are less conductive than the  NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) phase. While the glass-ceramic with  cubic Na3PS4 (closed circles) has a conductivity of 2×10-4 S.cm-1  at  room  temperature,  one  order  of  magnitude  lower  than  that  of  sintered β-alumina and the NASICON-type crystal (10-3 S.cm-1 at  room temperature).                                Figure  22.  Conductivity  of  inorganic  solid  electrolytes.  Temperature variation of the conductivities of several Na+ ion conductors  such as β-alumina, NASICON, Na3PS4 glass (open circles) and the glassceramic prepared at 270 ºC (solid circles) and sulphide glasses. Reprinted  from:  A.  Hayashi,  K.  Noi,  A.  Sakuda,  and  M.  Tatsumisago,  Superionic  glass-ceramic  electrolytes  for  room-temperature  rechargeable  sodium  batteries,  Nature  Communications,  3,  856–861,  Copyright  2012,  with  permission from Nature Publishing Group. 

The  electrochemical  window  of  this  sulphide  glass-ceramic  electrolyte with cubic Na3PS4 has been examined by performing  cyclic  voltammetry  measurements  (see  Fig.  23).  Reversible  sodium  deposition  and  dissolution  currents  were  observed  at  about  0 V  versus  Na+/Na,  and  no  remarkable  oxidation  currents  were observed up to 5 V. Therefore, this sulphide electrolyte has  a  wide  electrochemical  window  of  5  V  and  is  electrochemically  stable against Na metal (see ref. 4).   

Figure 23. Cyclic voltammogram of the Na3PS4 glass-ceramic electrolyte.  The  potential  sweep  was  performed  with  a  scanning  rate  of  5  mVs-1  at  25 ºC.  Reprinted  from:  A.  Hayashi,  K.  Noi,  A.  Sakuda,  and  M.  Tatsumisago, Superionic glass-ceramic electrolytes for room-temperature  rechargeable  sodium  batteries,  Nature  Communications,  3,  856–861,  Copyright 2012, with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 

    Charge-discharge  curves  of  the  all-solid-state  cell  (Na-Sn/  Na3PS4/TiS2)  at  room  temperature  are  shown  in  Figure  24.  The  average  cell  voltages  from  the  second  tenth  cycles  were  1.6  V,  which  approximately  correspond  to  the  potential  difference  between  the  Na-Sn  counter  electrode  (ca.  0.3  V  versus  Na+/Na)  and  the  TiS2  working  electrode  (ca.  2.0  V  versus  Na+/Na).  The  reversible  capacity  of  the  cell  was  about  90  mAh  per  gram  of  TiS2 and the cell kept the capacity for 10 cycles.   

ionic conductivity. In a similar way to this ternary phase, Na3PS4,  it  would  be  interesting  to  synthesize  a  sodium  quaternary  phase  equivalent  to  Li10GeP2S12  in  order  to  find  out  a  new  material  exhibiting high  conductivity  in  sodium  at  room  temperature  and  also providing a good electrode–electrolyte contact.      2.4.  Other sodium ion conductors 

In solid electrolytes, the more stable structure and higher sodium  ion-conductivity have been much expected. In order to fulfil these  essential  requirements  Onishi  et  al.  have  predicted  that  the  NaAlO(CN)2 perovskite can be utilized as sodium ion-conductor.  This phase has two sodium ion-conduction paths along xand zaxes.  However, the activation energy  for sodium ion-conduction  along  x-axis  (5.55  eV)  is  too  high,  while  the  activation  energy  along z-axis (0.06 eV) is very small for sodium ion-conduction at  room temperature81.       2.5.  Polymer electrolytes 

is  extremely  reactive  with  classical 

Polyethers  like  poly(ethylene  oxide)  (PEO)  have  been  mostly  used with lithium metal anodes and commercial batteries now use  LiFePO4 cathodes. Polymer electrolytes are less conductive than  superionic inorganic materials, and need to work at 60 – 80°C to  reach  10–4  S.cm-1  but  are  easily  formed  into  large  surface  films,  leading  to  batteries  with  a  total  thickness  100-200  µm.  While  sodium  metal  liquid  is  much  more  resistant.  All  solid-state  electrolytes,  PEO  Na°/PEO-NaClO4/V2O5  batteries  have  been  studied  by  West  et  al.82,83.  Several  tens  of  cycles  could  be  obtained  with  limited  capacity  fading.  Keeping  a  battery  at  this  operating  temperature  consumes 10% of its own energy over one week, to be compared  with 14% per day for high temperature systems.    Ahn et al.84 have reported the electrochemical properties of a NaS battery using a PEO polymer  electrolyte that is operated at 90  ºC.  The  first  discharge  capacity  is  about  505 mAh.g-1  sulphur,  which  is  similar  to  that  expected  for  the  formation  of  Na2Sn  (n ≤ 3), especially Na2S3. The upper plateau region may be related  to the reduction of sulphur to Na2S4 or Na2S5, and lower plateau  to the reduction of sulphur to Na2Sn (n ≤ 3) (see Fig. 25). 

Figure 24. Cyclic voltammogram of the Na3PS4 glass-ceramic electrolyte.  The  potential  sweep  was  performed  with  a  scanning  rate  of  5  mVs-1  at  25 ºC.  Reprinted  from:  A.  Hayashi,  K.  Noi,  A.  Sakuda,  and  M.  Tatsumisago, Superionic glass-ceramic electrolytes for room-temperature  rechargeable  sodium  batteries,  Nature  Communications,  3,  856–861,  Copyright 2012, with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 

    Nevertheless, in order to use these materials as solid electrolytes,  further studies are needed to determine their thermal stability and 

Figure 25. First discharge curve of Na/PEO/S battery at 90 ºC. Reprinted  from: C.-W. Park, H.-S. Ryu, K.-W. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, J.-Y. Lee, and H.-J.  Ahn,  Discharge  properties  of  all-solid  sodium-sulfur  battery  using  poly  (ethylene  oxide)  electrolyte,  Journal  of  Power  Sources,  165,  450–454,  Copyright 2007, with permission from Elsevier. 

The  discharge  capacity  of  the  Na-S  battery  as  a  function  of  cycling  number  is  given  in  Figure  26.  The  discharge  capacity  remains at 166 mAh.g-1 sulphur after 10 cycles,  which is higher  than that given by a Na/PVdF/S battery at room temperature (see  ref.  84).  The  discharge  capacity  for  Na/PVdF/S  cells  decreases  continuously  during  cycling  and  becomes  117  mAh.g-1  after  ten  cycles85.   

Figure 26. First discharge curve of Na/PEO/S battery at 90 ºC. Reprinted  from: C.-W. Park, H.-S. Ryu, K.-W. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, J.-Y. Lee, and H.-J.  Ahn,,  Discharge  properties  of  all-solid  sodium-sulfur  battery  using  poly  (ethylene  oxide)  electrolyte,  Journal  of  Power  Sources,  165,  450–454,  Copyright 2017, with permission from Elsevier.  

    Finally, an overview indicating future main trends with respect to  the development of the high temperature batteries and electrolytes  described on this review is shown in Scheme 1.    Scheme  1.  Trends  of  the  electrolyte  for  sodium  batteries  at  different  temperatures.  

sodium batteries based on Na-S and Na-NiCl2 (ZEBRA) are two  of  the  most  promising  candidates  for  stationary  energy  storage  and  battery  electric  vehicles  (BEV)  applications,  respectively.  Although these batteries need high temperature (250-300 ºC), the  tendency,  nowadays,  is  shifting  towards  designs  that  work  at  intermediate  temperature  (between  100  °C  and  170  ºC)  and  ambient-temperature  thermal  management problems and thermal sealing issues87. A new work  about  an  advanced  intermediate-temperature  (~150  ºC)  Na-S  battery has been recently reported by Pacific Northwest National  Laboratory  (PNNL)88.  Lu  et.  al.  tested  Na-S  cells  with  the  mixture of S and Na2S4 as the cathode and tegraglyme plus 1 M  NaI  as  the  catholyte  at  150  ºC.  This  battery  showed  dramatic  improvement  in  rate  capacity  and  cycling  stability  over  roomtemperature Na-S batteries.    Furthermore, an optimization of the ceramic electrolyte/electrode  interfaces  is  needed.  ZEBRA  battery  performance  projections  will focus on achieving specific energy and peak power values of  more than 200 Wh.kg-1 and 400 W.kg-1 and enhancement of the  power rate to improve the power/energy ratio. All-solid-state NaS  batteries,  which  operate  >  100°C,  will  be  developed  in  near  future  using  glass-ceramic  electrolytes.  Moreover,  NASICONtypes  electrolytes  such  as  Na3Zr2Si2PO12  or  Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12  (1.6 < x < 2.4),  that  are  substantially  impermeable  to  water,  are  proposed to avoid the drawbacks of using the hygroscopic, fragile  and  requiring  high  temperature  β”-alumina  solid  electrolyte  (BASE).  The  Na3PS4  glass-ceramic  electrolyte  can  also  be  used  to  develop  all-solid-state  rechargeable  sodium  cells  that  are  safe  and  possibly  inexpensive.  Polymer  electrolytes  offer  another  route  that  is  inexpensive  with  high  productivity  technology.  All  these next-generation batteries with new electrolytes operating at  room temperature may contribute to promote sustainable energy.       

This  work  was  the  Gobierno  Vasco/Eusko  Jaurlaritza  (IT-312-07).  K.B.H.  thanks  the  Basque  Government for a postdoctoral PIC contract. 

Notes and references  a Departamento de Química Inorgánica, Universidad del País  Vasco UPV/EHU, P.O. Box. 644, 48080, Bilbao, Spain. Fax: +34  946013500; Tel: +34 946012458.  b CIC ENERGIGUNE, Parque Tecnológico de Álava, Albert  Einstein 48, ED.CIC, 01510, Miñano, Spain; Tel: +34  945297108; E-mail: trojo@cicenergigune.com  † Electronic  Supplementary  Information  (ESI)  available:  Figure  S1. See DOI: 10.1039/b000000x/          1.  Electrical energy storage technology options, (Report 

Sodium  batteries  are  considered  promising  candidates  as  a  substitute  of  lithium  batteries  due  to  the  lower  price  and  abundance of sodium, and to its similar intercalation chemistry to  lithium.  As  the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy  (DEO)  Pacific  Northwest  National  Laboratory  compiles  on  the  website86,  the 