A hot-pressing process is applied to improve sinterbility of NASICON (Na ion conductor)-type of Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) solid electrolyte prepared by sol-gel method. During the hot-pressing process, amorphilization caused by Li loss and reduction of LAGP is observed due to a contact with a carbon mold. To compensate the Li loss, addition of 15% LiNO3 into LAGP powder before the hot-pressing is needed. By the hotpressing, the porosity of the LAGP pellet is decreased from 12% to 4%. The grain boundary conductivity of hotpressed LAGP pellet is 5 times higher than that of conventional atmospheric sintered LAGP pellet. Contrary, bulk conductivities are almost same, indicating that the hot-pressing affects only grain boundaries, not crystal structure. The highest conductivity is obtained in the hot-pressed LAGP pellet with 15% LiNO3 addition and bulk, grain boundary and total conductivities are 3.22 × 10-4, 1.69 × 10-3, 2.7 × 10-3 S cm-1, respectively. The activation energy is 0.31 eV, which is comparable to that prepared by conventional melt-quenching method.
Li analogs of NASICON (Na ion conductor)-type structure (LiM2(PO4)3) have been studied extensively because of their superior high ionic conductivity and electrochemical stability [1–8]. The threedimensional (MIMIIPO3) skeleton of NASICON structure is composed of MO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra providing two types of interstitial sites, Li1 and Li2 as shown in Fig. 1, where the mobile Li ions can jump between these two sites, leading to fast Li transport [9–13]. Among all the chemical composition of NASICON-type structure, Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) is one of the most promising compositions because it has not only comparable high conductivity to Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) which showed the highest Li ion conductivity to date, but also is inert to electrochemical reactions with electrodes [14–16] as well as wide electrochemical window [17,18].
LAGP has been synthesized by many different methods such as solid-state reaction, melt-quenching and sol-gel methods [14,19,20,21]. Melt-quenching method is one of the most effective ways to obtain high conductive LAGP and the total conductivity could reach to ~10−4 S cm−1 [22–24]. However, this method requires to heat raw materials to high temperature (> 1200 °C) to form a melt. Therefore, an inert crucible, very often expensive Pt crucible, must be used, leading to high processing cost. The solution based methods like sol-gel method can react the materials uniformly in molecular level and has an advantages of lowering temperature for synthesis of polycrystalline ceramics and shorter sintering times [25,26]. Kotobuki et al. applied the sol-gel and co-precipitation methods for LATP preparation and succeeded in lowering the synthesis temperature by > 200 °C comparing the conventional melt-quenching method [27,28]. However, so far, the ionic conductivity, especially grain boundary conductivity of solid electrolytes prepared by the solution-based methods are still relatively low because of their high porosity which is around 15%, while the porosity of solid electrolyte prepared by the melt-quenching method is usually < 2% [19,20,29].
Low density of ceramic pellets is mainly caused by microvoids, cracks and impurity phases generated during sintering process. To reduce the microvoids and cracks, many techniques have been employed, among which the most common way is to optimize the heating parameters in sintering process [19,24]. Zhang et al. reported that 10.7% of porosity of Li1.4Al0.4Ge1.6(PO4)3 could be obtained by sintering the pellets at 850 °C for 11 h. They tried to further improve the density by increasing the sintering temperature to 900 °C. However, a high resistive phase formed at grain boundary and thus the conductivity decreased although the density of Li1.4Al0.4Ge1.6(PO4)3 increased [20].Another way to improve ceramic pellets' density is to add densification agents that often also reduce grain boundary conductivity since the densification agents are very often segregated alone at the grain boundaries. The hot-press sintering that gives a pressure to a sample at high temperature, offers some advantages over conventional sintering methods which are performed under atmospheric pressure, i.e. lowering sintering temperature and shortening sintering time [30,31]. For example, Sakamoto et al. obtained dense Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZ) solid electrolyte by hot-pressing at 1000 °C for 1 h under 40 MPa of pressure [32] whereas conventional sintering needed to heat the LLZ solid electrolyte to 1230 °C for 36 h under atmospheric pressure [33].
In this work, the hot-press technique was applied for sintering LAGP prepared by the sol-gel method to obtain dense LAGP pellet with high ionic conductivity. By the hot-pressing, the grain boundary conductivity increased drastically, 5 times higher than that of the LAGP sintered at atmospheric pressure.
LAGP powder was prepared by a sol-gel process [20,29]. All reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used without purification. In the sol-gel processing, LiNO3 (> 99.0%), Ge(OC2H5)4 (> 99.95%), Al(NO3)3·9H2O (> 98.0%) and NH4H2PO4 (> 98%) were dissolved into 150 ml of 2 M citric acid (> 99.5%) in a molar ratio of Li:Al:Ge:P = 1.65:0.5:1.5:3.10% excess Li added to compensate evaporation of Li in following sintering processes. Then, ethylene glycol (> 99.8%) was added and stirred continuously to promote polyesterification and polycondensation. The molar ratio of citric acid to ethylene glycol was set to 1:1. The solution was then stored in an oven at 170 °C for 12 h to form an aerogel. The aerogel was ground in a ZrO2 jar with four ZrO2 balls (Retsch PM100) at a speed of 200 rpm for 4 h. The ground powder was then heated at 500 °C for 4 h followed by heat treatment at 800 °C for 5 h in air to obtain the desired NASICON phase. The heated powders were ground by a high energy ball mill (Spex CertiPrep 8000 Mixer/Mill) for 1 h and the obtained fine powder was pressed into pellets by cold pressing and then sintered at 800 °C for 11 h. The sintered pellets were crushed and ground by an agate mortar and pestle into powder form. Then, excess LiNO3 was added again to compensate Li loss in following hot-press process.
For the hot-pressing process, the powder obtained from previous steps was loaded into a graphite mold with an internal diameter of 10 mm. The mold was placed in the chamber of hot-pressing machine (MRF3852, United States) and heated to 600 °C in argon atmosphere at a heating rate of 5 °C min−1. When the temperature reached to 600 °C, a pressure of 25 MPa was loaded. The pressure was kept for 80 min while the temperature remained at 600 °C for 1 h. Then, the sample was cooled down to room temperature at a cooling rate of 5 °C min−1. For comparison, the same precursor powder was sintered at 800 °C for 11 h under atmospheric pressure.
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was conducted on the precursor powder using a NETZSCH instrument model STA 409C/CD. The measurement was performed from room temperature to 1000 °C with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 in air atmosphere. Structure of hot-pressed LAGP pellets was analyzed by X-ray diffractometry (XRD) using a Shimazu XRD-7000 with Cu Kα radiation and Bragg-Brentano geometry, operating at 40 kV and 30 mA. The pellets were scanned in the 2θ range from 10 to 80° using step scan at 0.02° incremental. The elemental analysis was carried out by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES, Optima 5300DV). The pellet was dissolved using HF solution and the solution was diluted to adjust concentrations of Li, Al, Ge and P ions to be suitable concentration ranges before the measurement. Precipitate was observed after dissolving by HF. The morphology on cross-section of pellets was observed by scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM Hitachi S-4300) operated at 15 kV. The Archimedes method was applied to measure the pellets' density using deionized water as an immersion medium.
Electrochemical impedance measurement was carried out using a Solartron impedance analyzer 1470E cell test system. The consolidated LAGP pellets were polished to obtain flat surface and to control their thickness. Then, both surfaces of the pellets were coated by gold to prepare Li ion blocking electrode. The measurement was performed in a frequency range of 10 MHz–1 Hz. A nonlinear instant fit program in ZView software (Ametek Scientific Instruments Co. Ltd.) was used to simulate the impedance data. The tested pellets are in circular shape with diameters of 8–10 mm and thicknesses of ~1 mm.
Fig. 2 reveals the TGA curve of the LAGP sol-gel precursor powder before the heat treatment to study decomposition temperature of organic-based materials. The sol-gel precursor was heated from room temperature to 1000 °C in air. The weight was slowly decreased until 200 °C. This was thought to be due to moisture and gas desorption. A sharp drop of weight was observed between 200 and 400 °C, which could be attributed to the pyrolysis of polymer precursor. Above 400 °C, the weight loss became slower until 800 °C, after that the change of the weight was negligible. Based on the observation from TGA, the precursor was decided to be heated at 500 °C, then at 800 °C, prior to sintering processing so that organic compounds in the precursor can be fully decomposed and removed.
Fig. 3(a) shows the XRD patterns of the hot-pressed LAGP pellets. As observed, the dominant phase of hot pressed pellets is LiGe2(PO4)3 with rhombohedral structure (PDF #80-1924). After hot-pressing of LAGP powder without LiNO3 addition, the XRD pattern of LAGP pellet showed a high hump at about 2θ = 10°. The hump is a characteristic pattern in amorphous ceramics. Therefore, in the hot-pressing, amorphilization of LAGP occurred. Additionally, color of the pellet was changed from white to black during the hot-pressing. The color change occurred even inside the pellet. Therefore, the black color was not due to residential carbon from the mold. It is thought that the color change was occurred by Li loss and reduction of LAGP, most probably Ge4+ was reduced to Ge3+ and/or Ge2+, caused by a contact with the carbon mold because the hot-pressing temperature, 600 °C was too low to decompose LAGP. Additionally, the black pellet returned to white color after heating at 850 °C in air.
Li loss usually takes places in high temperature treatment because of the high volatility of Li compounds. Uncontrolled Li loss will result in deviations from stoichiometry, which may lead to a decrease in ionic conductivity [34,35], formation of impurity phases [32,35,36], even a phase transformation [37]. To counter the effects of Li loss, excess Li salt could be added in the powder mixture before heat treatment. In most studies, the additional Li salts were identical with the Li compounds used as starting material to avoid possible side reaction [35,38,39]. Therefore, LiNO3 was mixed with heat-treated LAGP before the hot-pressing here. On the other hand, the thermal decomposition temperature of LiNO3 is relatively low (475–650 °C) with products of Li2O, O2 and NO2, which is beneficial for its reaction with other compounds.
The XRD patterns of LAGP pellets with 10 and 15% LiNO3 addition after the hot-pressing are also shown in Fig. 3(a). In both patterns, the hump disappeared, but clear diffraction peaks of LAGP with NASICON structure were observed. The amorphilization was suppressed by the addition of LiNO3, indicating that the Li loss would be a reason for the amorphilization. Fig. 3(b) reveals the XRD patterns of LAGP powders with 15% LiNO3 addition before and after the hot-pressing. It is evident that both powder and hot-pressed pellet have identical structure. However, a small amount of impurity phase AlPO4 was observed after the hot-pressing. This may be due to the local Li deficiency caused by inhomogeneous distribution of additional Li salt.
Chemical composition of hot-pressed LAGP pellet with various amounts of LiNO3 addition was studied by ICP analysis and result was tabulated in Table 1. When LAGP was dissolved by HF, precipitation was observed. Probably, the precipitation would contain Ge, therefore, Ge amount calculated by ICP was lower than theoretical value. It is well-known that Li is dissolved into HF solution well. Thus, all Li components should be dissolved into the HF solution. Li contents in all samples were higher than theoretical value. The reason for higher Li content would be inaccuracy of calibration curve used to calculate Li concentration. However, Li contents among the samples can be compared because same calibration curves were used. Li amount of hotpressed LAGP without excess LiNO3 addition was smaller than LAGP powder before the hot-pressing. This evidenced the Li loss occurred during the hot-pressing. The composition of hot-pressed LAGP with 15% excess LiNO3 addition was almost same as that before the hotpressing, implying that Li loss was compensated by 15% LiNO3 addition.
Fig. 4 shows the SEM/TEM images of precursor powder (dried gel, Fig. 4(a, b)) and cross section of pellets sintered at 800 °C under atmospheric pressure without hot pressing (Fig. 4(c, d)) and after hotpressing (Fig. 4(e, f)). As shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b), after polyesterification and polycondensation, the obtained dry gel precursor was composed of clusters of small and round particles with a diameter of around 1 μm (inset on the right corner of Fig. 4(a)). With the heat treatment, the round particles turn into rectangle grains with sharp corners (Fig. 4(c)). In low magnification (Fig. 4(d)), cracks and some pores were observed in the cross section of the pellets after atmospheric sintering. The presence of pores would be due to incomplete sintering and presence of gases that were entrapped inside pellets. The cracks were caused by residual tensile stresses. Although cooling rate was as low as 5 °C min−1, residual strains could not be released completely at this cooling rate. Once the residual stresses became larger than fracture strength, cleavage crack was generated. Contrary, the hot-pressed sample showed different morphology. Firstly, as shown in Fig. 4(e), grains did not have very sharp edge and grain size were slightly bigger comparing with Fig. 4(c). At a low magnification image (Fig. 4(f)), grains were sintered well without microcracks and pores. The density measured by Archimedes method is shown in Fig. 5. Hot-pressing process greatly improved the density of pellets from 3.06 to 3.26 g cm−3 and decreased the porosity from 12% to 4% based on theoretical density of LAGP to be 3.43 g cm−3. The LiNO3 addition influenced the density of the pellets. The density increased with amount of LiNO3 addition and reached to 3.32 g cm−3 in 15% LiNO3 addition.The complex impedance plots of the hot-pressed pellets with various amounts of LiNO3 addition are shown in Fig. 6. All plots are normalized by surface area and thickness of samples. The plots were composed of a semicircle at high frequency region and a spike at low frequency region. The semicircle was contributed by grain boundary, where its diameter represents the grain boundary (GB) resistance [40,43,44]. The intercept of the semicircle with real axis at high frequency side is considered as bulk resistance. It can be seen that the hot-pressed pellets with 0% and 10% LiNO3 addition revealed the irregular semicircle shapes due probably to the existence of Li loss (amorphous) area. It is speculated that there were two kinds of grain boundaries, one of which is original boundaries between LAGP grains and another is those areas that were less Li (amorphous). This assumption is schematically illustrated in Fig. 6(a) in which the light blue area represents the grain boundaries that are partially amorphized during the hot-pressing (R1) whereas the black lines between grains represent normal grain boundaries (R2). The semicircles of the hot-pressed LAGP with 0 and 10% LiNO3 addition shown in Fig. 6(b) were considered to two semicircles with different time constants and diameters by R1 and R2. Therefore, a series of two paralleled resistance and capacitance in the circuit shown in Fig. 6(b) was applied to simulate the semicircle in these two samples. For the hot-pressed pellet with 15% LiNO3 addition (Fig. 6(c)), nearly no amorphilization occurred and only the original grain boundary would exist in the sample. Hence the shape of the semicircle was not irregular shape. Fitting results are shown in Table 2.
Calculated ionic conductivities are also summarized in Table 2. As can be seen, the bulk conductivities (σbulk) were quite close among all samples. Thus, crystal phase in all samples would be same stoichiometry. The main difference was the grain boundary conductivities (σGB). As known, grain boundary conductivity is highly dependent on the local microstructure. The grain boundary conductivity obtained here is a homogenized value with respect to the whole LAGP pellet. The grain boundary conductivity of the hot-pressed sample with 15% LiNO3 addition was nearly 5 times higher than that of sample sintered under atmospheric pressure. From ICP measurements, Li concentration of the sample with 15% LiNO3 addition was almost same as that before the hot-pressing, implying that amount of remaining LiNO3 in the sample was negligible. Therefore, amorphous phase at grain boundaries formed by the Li loss during the hot-pressing was the reason for low grainboundary conductivity of the samples with 0 and 10% LiNO3 addition. AlPO4 formation was observed in the sample with 15% LiNO3 addition. AlPO4 should lower the grain-boundary conductivity because AlPO4 does not have Li ion conductivity. However, the sample showed the highest grain-boundary conductivity. So, suppression of amorphilization would surpass negative effect of AlPO4 formation. Additionally, absent of microcracks and pores in the sample with 15% LiNO3 addition (Fig. 4f) was another reason for high grain-boundary conductivity.
Fig. 7 reveals the Arrhenius plots of total conductivity of the LAGP pellets sintered under atmospheric pressure and by the hot-pressing. Considering the unification of chemical composition, no additional LiNO3 was added in the sample sintered under atmospheric pressure, while the hot-pressed sample is with 15% LiNO3 addition. Both plots were fitted to straight line well. The activation energy can be estimated by the slope of straight lines. The activation energy of the sample sintered under atmospheric pressure was 0.33 eV, while that of hotpressed sample was slightly lower, 0.31 eV. This value is comparable to that of the LAGP glass-ceramics prepared the melt-quenching method, which is reported to be about 0.30 eV [24,41].
The total conductivity of the hot-pressed sample was comparable to that reported by other groups [42,43], even though the grain-boundary conductivity was higher. The reason for that is considered to low bulk conductivity. Some groups reported high bulk conductivity of LAGP (8.0 × 10−4–1.1 × 10−3 S cm−1 [18,19,44]). On the contrary, the bulk conductivity of our sample was 3.22 × 10−4 cm−1. If improvement of the bulk conductivity would be achieved by optimization of the sol-gel method and the LAGP powder would be supplied for hotpressing, high Li ion conductive LAGP pellet could be obtained.
A hot-pressing process was applied to improve the ionic conductivity of Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) solid electrolyte prepared by the sol-gel method. During the hot-pressing, amorphilization of LAGP caused by Li loss and reduction was observed. To compensate the Li loss and avoid the amorphilization, addition of 15% LiNO3 to LAGP powder before the hot-pressing was needed. The porosity of hot-pressed LAGP pellet was only 4%, whereas relatively high porosity of 12% was obtained in conventional atmospheric sintered LAGP. As a result, the grain boundary conductivity of the hot-pressed LAGP pellet was 5 times higher than that sintered under atmospheric pressure, although bulk conductivities of both samples were almost same, indicating that the hot-pressing influences mainly grain boundaries, not grain itself. Also, among the hot-pressed samples, 15% LiNO3 added sample showed the highest grain boundary conductivity due to less amorphous grain boundary. The bulk, grain boundary and total conductivities of the 15% LiNO3 added sample were 3.22 × 10−4, 1.69 × 10−3 and 2.70 × 10−4 S cm−1, respectively. Temperature dependency of total conductivity of the sample followed the Arrhenius relationship and activation energy was estimated to 0.31 eV, which was comparable to that prepared by the melt-quenching method.