An aqueous (mixed aqueous/aprotic) Na-air cell is fabricated and its discharge properties are examined experimentally. This design is attractive because Na is not only more abundant and cheaper than Li, but also potentially advantageous for enhancing cell output. The theoretical energy density of the aqueous Na-air cell exceeds that of a Li one under conditions where precipitation of hydroxides in the + −1 at aqueous electrolyte is not allowed. Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (NASICON) ceramics, which has a Na 50 C, is used as a solid electrolyte separator in the Na-air cell. Involvement of O2 gas in the cell reaction is veriﬁed by changing cell voltage in the presence or absence of O2 ﬂow through the aqueous electrolyte. The Na-air cell exhibits an electrochemical discharge of ∼600 mAh· g −1 based on the weights of reacted Na and H2O. Its maximum areal output power is 11 mW· cm −2 and depends on the thickness of the NASICON ceramic separator, the concentration of NaOH in the aqueous electrolyte and the type of cathode, suggesting that cell performance can be improved by optimization of these components. © 2013 The Electrochemical Society. [DOI: 10.1149/2.067309jes] All rights reserved.

metallic Li and in strong basic solution, limiting cell design and deep discharge. To avoid corrosion of LATP, use of a protective layer on the solid electrolyte,15 buffer solution,12,19 and an ion-exchange membrane for the aqueous electrolyte14 have been examined. Very recently, a good durability of a Li-ion conducting ceramics, La2/3−xLi3xTiO3 (3x = 2.9), for alkaline solution and its application to a Li-air cell was reported.20

Another solution may be substitution of Na for Li; i.e., development of an aqueous Na-air cell (Fig. 1a). Although the Na substitution apparently decreases energy density, this is not always the case, as described below. Substitution of Na for Li has the following additional advantages: 1) Na is one of the most abundant elements on the earth, which is beneﬁcial for availability and cost reduction;22–24 2) Cheaper materials for use as current collectors and organic electrolytes may be available according to studies on Na-ion batteries;22–24 3) Ionic conductivities in organic,25 aqueous and solid electrolytes10–19,26–32 are generally higher in Na-based systems than Li ones, which helps to increase power density. Theoretical standard cell voltages and energy densities for aqueous Liand Na-air batteries are compared in Table I. Detail of calculations will be described in the next section. It should be noted that when the weight of an alkali hydroxide-saturated aqueous solution is taken into account, namely, under conditions where precipitation of hydroxides in the aqueous electrolyte does not occur, the energy density of the Na system exceeds that of the Li one because of the higher solubility of NaOH than LiOH in water.35 A clogging of hydroxide product on a cathode is again a potential cause for the incomplete discharge. Overall, the Na-based system is more suitable to improve practical energy density than the Li-based one.

In this study, the ﬁrst mixed aqueous/aprotic Na-air cell is fabricated and its discharge properties are investigated. A NASICON

The application of Li-ion batteries has been expanded to electric vehicles. Contemporary practical Li-ion batteries exhibit speciﬁc energies of around 100–200 Wh· kg −1, although improvement of current technology is predicted to lead to an ultimate energy density of 250 Wh· kg −1.1,2 However, this is still not satisfactory; threeto tenfold enhancement is required to achieve the equivalent driving range to those of petrol powered vehicles.1,2 This shortfall has stimulated recent development of new types of batteries with different working principles to those of Li-ion batteries.

One promising candidate is the Li-air battery,2–9 which was originally demonstrated by Abraham and Jiang.4 Li-air batteries contain metallic Li as a negative active material, a gas permeable membrane with a catalyst as a positive electrode, a polymer separator, and an organic electrolyte. The original target cell reaction was Li + 1/4O2 → 1/2Li2O, but the actual dominant reaction is Li + 1/2O2 → 1/2Li2O2 because of incomplete cathodic reduction of oxygen upon discharge. However, the peroxide is considered to be advantageous for charging the cell via the reverse reaction.3 The theoretical speciﬁc energy density of a Li-air battery is as high as ∼5,200 Wh· kg −1 based on the weights of Li and O2 gas,3 and ∼11,100 Wh· kg −1 when the weight of oxygen is excluded. Although experimental energy densities were markedly lower at 250–360 Wh· kg −1 including the weight of the packages, these values are much larger than those of practical LIBs.8 The energy density, rate, and cycling properties of Li-air batteries have been improved considerably recently.3,9 The low experimental energy density is partially ascribed to deposition of discharge products on the air electrode. These deposits are not soluble in the organic electrolyte, thus they clog the gas-permeable electrode to terminate discharge.

To solve the problem of insoluble cathodic product formation, a modiﬁed type of Li-air battery called the aqueous (or mixed aqueous/aprotic) Li-air battery has been proposed.10–20 This conﬁguration incorporates a solid electrolyte that decouples the positive and negative compartments containing liquid (or polymer) electrolytes. The negative compartment is in principle the same as that in a conventional Li-air battery, while the positive contains an aqueous electrolyte. As a result, the cell reaction is altered to Li + 1/4O2 + 1/2H2O → 1/2LiOH. Because LiOH is soluble in aqueous electrolyte, the cell can fully discharge without being limited by cathode deposits. In addition, the solid electrolyte helps to prevent a dendritic short. The theoretical energy density of the aqueous Li-air battery is 5,800 Wh· kg −1 based on the weight of active materials, and a discharge equivalent to ∼800 Wh· kg −1 has been demonstrated experimentally.13,14 One of the most popular materials for the solid electrolyte is a ceramics with the composition Li1+xAlx(Ge1–yTiy)2−x(PO4)3 (LATP),10–19 which is a derivative of NASICON.21 However, LATP corrodes in contact with

Figure 1. Structure of Na-air cells. (a) Planar stacked structure with an air electrode. (b) Experimental cell used in this study.

ceramics with a composition of Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 (x = 2)26–32 is used as a solid electrolyte separator because of its phase stability toward aqueous solution29 and metallic Na around room temperature.34 The two following cell reactions in the presence or absence of O2 will be examined to verify the involvement of O2 gas in the cell reaction.

[2] Theoretical cell voltages and speciﬁc capacities for reactions 1 and 2 are presented in Table II. Because water is involved in these reactions, they are termed Na-water/oxygen, which we abbreviate as Na-air, and Na-water cells, respectively. A primary Na battery involving reactions 1 and 2 has been examined by Will and Mitoff.36 They used a β-alumina ceramics as a solid electrolyte separator and Na-Hg liquid amalgam as an anode. However, Hg is not only toxic but also decreases energy density markedly. The present study shows that solid Na anode combined with an organic electrolyte can produce a cell with good discharge properties.

A full-form cell notation of the Na-air cell (Eq. 1 and Fig. 1b ) is (aq),H2O(l)|O2(g)|Pt, [3] where PC and NASICON indicate the organic and the solid electrolytes in our experimental cell, respectively. The essential part is abstracted to a short-form described below:

[4] Its cathode and anode half-cell reactions in the form of reduction reaction and their standard potentials are given by Eqs. 5 and 6 according to data in Ref. 37, Cathode : O2 + 2H2O + 4e + + e

[6] Overall, the standard cell voltage of the Na-air cell is 3.11 V. Similar consideration for the Li-system gives a standard cell voltage of 3.45 V,11,18 as listed in Table I. From the relationship of G

is the standard Gibbs energy change in a cell reaction, n is the number of electron ◦ value transferred in the reaction, F is the Faraday constant, the G for the Na-air cell reaction (Eq. 1) is calculated to be −300 kJ· mol −1, which agrees well with other thermodynamic data provided by Ref. 35 within a deviation of 0.3%. Theoretical energy efﬁciency,

η = G ◦ ◦ , is calculated to be 91.4% using the standard enthalpy /H , of−328 kJ · mol ◦ −1. Table I describes theoretical enchange, H ergy densities based on weights of reactants built in the cell [1 mol of Na (or Li) and 1/2 mol of H2O], those including 1/4 mol of O2, and those further including minimum amount of H2O that fully dissolves the NaOH (or LiOH) product, in which solubilities of NaOH ◦ C is 2.73 mol (109 g)/100 mL and 0.53 mol and LiOH in water at 20 (12.8 g)/100 mL,38 respectively. The larger solubility of NaOH by more than 8 times on the weight basis than that of LiOH is origin of the reverse of energy density between Na and Li systems. When ◦ C, the difference in the energy density temperature increases to 60 further expands (1320 Wh· kg −1 for the Na system and 450 Wh· kg −1 for the Li-system) owing to an enhanced solubility of NaOH. , in the Na-air cell reaction (Eq. 1 ) is−101 J· mol −1, from which the temperature coefﬁcient of standard cell voltage is calculated to be −1.05 mV· K −1 around ◦ C. Nernst equation based on Eqs. 5 and 6 gives a dependence of the 25 equilibrium cell voltage, E, on chemical activities of relevant species:

◦ The standard entropy change, S

ln cNaOH − 2RT ln γ± + RT 4F F ◦ ◦ where the value of E C, R is the gas constant, T is is 3.11 V at 25 the absolute temperature, cNaOH is the concentration (mole· kg −1) of NaOH dissolved in the aqueous electrolyte, γ± is the mean activity + ions, and pO2 is the partial oxygen pressure coefﬁcient of Na (atm) that is in equilibrium with the aqueous electrolyte.

− and OH

Cell notation, cathode and anode reactions, and their standard

potentials for Na-water cell (Eq. 2) is written as:

+ Cathode : 2H2O + 2e + + e

− (aq), OH − → 2OH − → Na, Overall, the cell voltage is E is negligibly small (−0.01 mV· K

Anode : Na

[10] ◦ = +1.88 V. Its temperature coefﬁcient

−1) around 25 ◦

The Na-air cell is regarded as a hybrid cell of an alkali metal-water and an alkaline fuel cells.13 The fuel cell delivers a standard voltage ◦ = +1.23 V via the reaction of Eq. 11,39 of E

1/2H2(g) + 1/4O2(g) → 1/2H2O(l). Its cell notation, half-cell reactions are represented as,

Pt|H2(g)|OH Cathode : O2 + 2H2O + 4e Anode : 2H2O + 2e

[14] Sum of the two standard cell voltages is equal to that of the Na-air cell. The ‘hybrid’ character is found in the fact that the theoretical efﬁciency

Table II. Reactions, standard cell voltages, and speciﬁc capacities in Na-water and Na-air cells.

of the Na-air cell (91.4%) takes an intermediate value between those for the Na-water cell (97.9%) and the fuel cell (83.0%).

In oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at cathode in alkaline fuel cell, a two-electron ORR often tends to dominate with the formation of hydroperoxide ion especially in stronger alkaline solutions and at higher current densities,11,39 Cathode : O2 + H2O + 2e

[15] ◦ value provided by Ref. 37 is used, although a slightly where the E ◦ value11 have been also reported. A replacement of the fourdifferent E electron ORR (Eq. 5) with the two electron ORR (Eq. 15) decreases the cell voltage of the Na-air cell to (E

of NASICON ceramic separator.— Powders of ZrO2, SiO2 and Na3PO4 (Kojundo Chemicals, Japan) were mixed in appropriate ratios to obtain a composition of Na3Zr2Si2PO12, and then ground with a mortar. The mixture was cal◦ C for 12 h, and then crushed by ball milling at 150 rpm cined at 1100 for 18 h with zirconia balls with a diameter of 4 mm using ethanol as a dispersant in a polyamide pot. The resultant powder was shaped into disks by uniaxial pressing, which was followed by cold isostatic ◦ C for pressing at 200 MPa. Sintering was performed in air at 1275 15 h in an alumina crucible, during which the disks were embedded in the calcined powder to suppress Na volatilization. The sintered ceramics was ground with emery paper and ﬁnished with a diamond abrasive paste with a grain size of 3 μm to adjust the thickness of the disk to between 0.42 and 1.03 mm.

The sintered samples were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a RINT-2000 diffractometer (Rigaku, Japan). Density of the sintered pellets was measured by the Archimedes + method. Ionic conductivity of Na was measured by impedance ◦ spectroscopy at temperatures between 25 and 250 C using a 1260A impedance/gain-phase analyzer (Solartron, UK) with a modulation voltage of 20 mV in a frequency range of 1 to 10 MHz. Prior to impedance measurements, an Ag-based electrical paint (Furuya Metals, Japan) was applied to the pellets and sintered at 500

Cell tests.— Figure 1b shows a schematic diagram of the cell used in this study. The NASICON ceramic separator was ﬁxed onto a custom-made polyetheretherketone (PEEK) resin container with a nitrile rubber O-ring sealant and a Teﬂon washer by a PEEK resin cap. The effective area of the ceramic separator was 0.79 cm2. Metallic Na (purity of 99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) (few tens of mg) was adhered onto a Pt mesh (100-mesh) with an area of 0.36 cm2 that was connected to a Pt lead as an anode. Solutions of NaPF6 (0.50 or 1.0 M, >98%, Tokyo Chemical, Japan) as a Na salt and ﬂuoroethylene carbonate (0.05 M, >98%, Tokyo Chemical, Japan) as an additive22 in propylene carbonate (>98%, Wako, Japan) were used as the organic electrolyte. The Na-adhered Pt anode and organic electrolyte were placed in the container and its end was hermetically capped by a blind cover (NW-16). These operations were performed in a dry box. The container has free space with a volume of few cm3 ﬁlled with Ar. This space acts as a buffer for increasing internal pressure by an unintentional gas evolution reaction. Pressure inside the container was measured using a Bourdon tube pressure gauge with a full scale of 0.20 MPa during some cell tests. The anode compartment assembly was plunged into an aqueous solution of NaOH (0.01–0.50 M) together with the cathode, which consisted of Pt mesh (100-mesh) with an area of 1.0 cm2 or a Pd-catalyzed high-density graphite plate (IGS-744, Nippon techno-carbon, Japan) with and area of 28 cm2. Pd particles were deposited on the graphite plate by sputtering in 0.2 Torr Ar with a current of 6 mA for 30 min. The amount of the aqueous solution was approximately 100 cm3, which is excess to amounts of Na for the stoichiometric cell reactions. To control the cell reactions given in Eqs. 1 and 2 , O2 or H2 (5% H2 balanced with Ar) gas was bubbled through the aqueous solution. Before starting measurement, O2 gas

was ﬂowed through the solution for 3 h to saturate it with dissolved oxygen, or H2 gas was ﬂowed through the aqueous solution for 24 h to remove dissolved oxygen. The aqueous solution was stirred and its ◦ temperature was kept at 50 C using a hot stirrer. Cell characteristics were measured using a potentio-galvanostat (1285, Solartron, UK).

Properties of NASICON ceramics.— The formation of monoclinic NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) phase in the sintered pellets was conﬁrmed by XRD. Weak peaks assigned to ZrO2 were also observed. It is accepted that a stoichiometric composition of the raw materials leads to formation of ZrO2 because of nonstoichiometry in the NASICON phase,27 and that the ZrO2 precipitate has little inﬂuence on grain boundary resistance.27,28,30 The speciﬁc density of the pellets was 3.21 g· cm −3, which corresponds to 98% of their theoretical density. Its gas tightness was checked by a vacuum leakage test.

Figure 2 shows an impedance spectrum of the sintered NASICON ◦ C (inset of Fig. 2) contains a semicircle in pellets. A Nyquist plot at 25 the high frequency range and a near-straight line in the low frequency range, which are assigned to grain boundary and interface components, respectively. The parallel capacitance component of the semicircle was −8 F. This value is typical of the capacitance of grain in the order of 10 boundaries in samples of the dimensions investigated here, thereby supporting its assignment. The contribution from the bulk and grain boundary components to the conductivity of the NASICON sample was 1.2 × 10 C, which corresponds to an effective resistance of 24  for a separator with a thickness of 1.03 mm and area of 0.79 cm2. The conductivity ◦ C is of the separator in the temperature range between 25 and 250 shown in Figure 2. Its activation energy was estimated to be 0.26 eV, which is consistent with reported values.27–32

Cell properties.—Equilibrium cell voltage.— The open circuit voltage (OCV) was measured in 0.5 M NaOH aqueous solution at ◦ C. A typical OCV of Na-air cell with under O2 gas ﬂow laid around 50 2.85 V, which is lower than the theoretical cell voltage of 3.08 V C by∼0.2 V. The OCV of the Na-water cell under H 2 gas ﬂow ◦ at 50 was decreased to the values ranging from 2.2 to 2.0 V. However these ◦ C by values are higher than theoretical cell voltage of 1.88 V at 50 ∼0.1–0.3 V. There was a tendency that the observed OCV approaches more to the theoretical value after some discharges.

Figure 2. Conductivity of the NASICON ceramics. Inset is a Nyquist plot of ◦ the impedance spectrum at 25 C. Blue curve is a ﬁtted result, and the dashed line is drawn to enhance each component.

Figure 4. Characteristics of the Na-air cell under O2 gas ﬂow (brown curves) ◦ and Na-water cell under H2 gas ﬂow (blue curves) at 50 C. The thickness of the NASICON separator was 1.03 mm and 100-mesh Pt with an area of 1.0 cm2 was used as the cathode. (a) Current-voltage and areal power density-voltage characteristics. (b) Discharge behavior at a constant current of 0.63 mA· cm −2.

◦ Figure 3. NaOH concentration dependence of OCV in the Na-air cell at 50 C. The theoretical E0 value corrected with the activity coefﬁcient of NaOH is drawn by the dashed line.

To analyze these discrepancies between measured and theoretical cell voltages, NaOH concentration, cNaOH, dependence was measured in the Na-air cell, and the result is plotted in Figure 3. The cell voltage decreases with nearly proportional to the logarithm of cNaOH as predicted by the Nernst equation (Eq. 7). However, an extrapolation of the plot of E + 2RT/F ln cNaOH to cNaOH = 0 gives 2.87 V, which still deviates from the theoretical cell voltage of 3.08V. The discrepancy is −15 not ascribed to solely the pO2, because a pO2 of on the order of 10 atm, which is unrealistically low, is required to account for it. We propose the discrepancy is attributed to a partial contribution of the − two-electron ORR (Eq. 15) accompanied by the formation of HO2 ion at the cathode. This is supported by the fact that the observed cell voltage lies halfway between the standard voltage of Na-air cell ◦ C) and that with reaction with the four-electron ORR (3.08 V at 50 ◦ C). Similar discrepancy between two-electron ORR (2.67 V at 25 measured and theoretical cell voltages is found in an experimental data of the aqueous Li-air cell,16 and is likely ascribed to the contribution of the two-electron ORR. Conversely, the OCV of Na-water cell is higher than the theoretical voltage, and slightly varied with experimental runs. It is presumed that an equilibration has not achieved owing to an incomplete elimination of dissolved oxygen from aqueous solution, as in a case of a previous study of aqueous Li-air cell.18

Although some discrepancies were observed between the experimental and theoretical cell voltages, the clear difference of the cell voltages between the Na-air and Na-water cells demonstrates the contribution of dissolved oxygen to the cell reactions, and hence our cell works as an ‘air cell’ when O2 gas is supplied.

Discharge characteristics.— Figure 4a shows current-voltage ◦ C. The (I-V) curves measured in the Na-air and Na-water cells at 50 thickness of the ceramic separator was 1.03 mm and Pt mesh was used as the cathode. The current density was normalized by the effective area of the ceramic separator. The cells generated a maximum areal output of 4–5 mW· cm −2. In the Na-air cell, ﬂuctuation was observed at high current density, which will be investigated later. Figure 4b shows the galvanostatic discharge proﬁles at a current density of 0.63 mA· cm −2. Voltages for the Na-air and Na-water cells were kept nearly constant at around 2.5 and 1.7 V, respectively. These voltages agree with those at the same current densities in the I-V curves (Fig. 4a). We also examined the effect of switching of the gas ﬂow from O2 to H2 during discharge under the same conditions as those described in Fig. 4. The discharge voltage decreased dynamically from around 2.5 to 1.7 V upon switching of the gas, leading to appearance of two discharge plateaus.18 These experimental observations further

support that O2 gas is involved in the cell reaction when it is present. The ﬁnal voltage drop to 0 V in Fig. 4b corresponds to complete consumption of the metallic Na active material. Its disappearance from the Pt mesh anode was checked visually.

Electrochemical capacity based on the total weight of reactants (Na and H2O) consumed by the cell reactions and corresponding theoretical values are presented in Table II. The capacities at the terminal points in the Na-air and Na-water cells were 600 and 460 mAh· g −1, respectively. These values are 70% and 71% of the theoretical ones, respectively, thus there are unintentional losses of ∼30% in our cells. The losses are mainly ascribed to oxidation of Na during cell assembly or operation caused by leakage of O2 or H2O into the anode compartment. Because the amount of Na in each test was quite small, surface oxidation would have a marked effect on apparent capacity. Another possible contribution is side reaction of Na with the organic electrolyte or NASICON separator. Further investigation is required to clarify the origin of these losses.

The weight-based energy density of the cells was calculated by integrating discharge curves, as shown in Fig. 4b. The Na-air cell generated 1480 Wh· kg −1, which are 57% and 61% of the theoretical values, respectively. Because speciﬁc capacity losses of about 30% have already been found, the internal resistance loss during discharge is estimated to be 15–20%. This estimation agrees with the observed voltage drop with respect to the standard cell voltages.

Cell resistance and improvement of power density.— To clarify the component(s) of the cells that can be modiﬁed to enhance cell performance, the resistance of each component was estimated. The total resistance of the Na-air cell was estimated to be ∼440  from the slope of the I-V curve in Fig. 4a. The effective resistance of the NASICON ceramic separator and aqueous electrolyte were 65 and 200 , respectively. These components account for 60% of the total cell resistance. The resistance of the organic electrolyte is negligible because the gap between metallic Na and NASICON ceramic separator was less than 30 μm. Therefore, an effective way to enhance the performance of the cells is to reduce resistivities of both solid and aqueous electrolytes.

The thickness of the NASICON separator was reduced from 1.03 to 0.42 mm, and the concentration of NaOH in the aqueous electrolyte was increased from 0.1 to 0.5 M. The concentration of NaPF6 in the organic electrolyte was increased from 0.50 to 1.0 M. Furthermore, the cathode was changed to the Pd-catalyzed graphite plate with an area of 28 cm2 that mimics a porous electrode with a large surface area. Pd was chosen because it is reported to be the best among noble metals for ORR in nonaqueous Li-air cell.7 Figure 5 depicts I-V characteristics of the improved cell together with those before improvement. The improved cell achieved a maximum output power in the order of 10 mW· cm −2 per effective area of ceramic separator. This value is slightly lower than that of an aqueous Li-air battery using

A novel Na-air cell was fabricated and its discharge properties + were experimentally demonstrated. NASICON ceramics with a Na ion conductivity of 2 × 10 C was used as a separator, enabling us to introduce an aqueous electrolyte. The change in OCV by the presence or absence of O2 ﬂow in the aqueous electrolyte conﬁrmed the involvement of O2 gas in the cell reaction and that the cell worked as an ‘air cell’. The Na-air cell exhibited an electrochemical discharge of ∼600 mAh· g, which is 30% lower than the theoretical value. This loss is ascribed mainly to unintentional surface oxidation of metallic Na on the anode. The energy density of the cell based on the weights of active materials, Na and H2O, reached around 1500 Wh· kg −1. Although this value does not account for other cell components including package, the energy density was several times larger than that of Li-ion batteries. The maximum areal output power of the Na-air cell was 11 mW· cm −2, and was markedly affected by the thickness of the NASICON ceramic separator, the NaOH concentration in the aqueous electrolyte and the type of cathode. Further improvement of cell performance is anticipated upon optimization of these components.

This study was supported by MEXT Elements Strategy Initiative to Form Core Research Center, and Noguchi Shitagau Research grant.

Figure 5. Current-voltage and areal power density-voltage characteristics of Na-air cells before (brown curves, replot of data in Fig. 3a) and after improvement (red curves).

LATP ceramic with a thickness of 0.1 mm,13,14 while it is several times higher than that of an Na(Hg)-air cell.36 For practical application of the Na-air cell in electronic vehicles, a further ten-fold enhancement of performance may be necessary.2

The total resistance of the improved cell was estimated to be 210 , while the resistance of the NASICON ceramic separator and aqueous electrolyte were 26 and 44 , respectively. Therefore, the contribution of these components to the total cell resistance is decreased to 33%. The marked decrease in the conductance of the electrolytes means that the total cell resistance is instead dominated by interface components. This type of air cell contains multiple interfaces that cause resistance, including metal-organic electrolyte, organic electrolyteceramic separator, ceramic separator-aqueous electrolyte, and cathode (air electrode). Understanding each contribution is generally difﬁcult, but is curial to improve cell performance. The disappearance of the ﬂuctuation in I-V characteristics in the improved cell suggests that the ﬂuctuation originated from a cathode reaction in the original cell, thereby enabling us to specify its contribution. In the original cell, it is likely that the limited surface area of the Pt mesh caused the ﬂuctuation, accelerating voltage drop in higher current range. A rapid voltage drop in low current range in the original cell was also disappears. The voltage drop is likely ascribed to a growth of the two-electron ORR, which was also suppressed in the improved cell.

Further improvement of cell performance is anticipated upon optimization of cell components. Moreover, realization of an electrochemical charge and O2 gas reaction via a gas-permeable positive electrode remain as important steps to establish this cell with high energy density secondary battery that is composed of abundant elements.

+ ion in the crystal and hydronium (H3O

Hydronium ion exchange.— NACICON exhibits a topotactic ionic + ) ion exchange between Na in an aqueous solution.31,33 The ion exchange decreases transference + ion, and hence harmful for Nanumber and partial conductivity of Na + air or Na-water cell performances. Moreover, permeation of H3O ion to the anode causes an evolution of hydrogen gas and forms an oxide + layer which further blocks the Na ion transport. To minimize the ion exchange effect, we have chosen the aqueous solutions of NaOH for the catholytes. As far as our monitoring of pressure inside the anode compartment during cell tests, no perceivable change in the pressure owing to the hydrogen evolution was observed. However detailed + investigation will be needed for clarifying how much the H3O ion exchange or permeation occur under cell operation conditions and their effects on cell performances.