Developing the next generations of Liand Na-ion batteries relies  on  designing  new  sustainable,  low-cost  and  safe  electrode  materials.  In  such  an  attempt,  we  investigated  several  series  of  bimetallic sulfates, among them we identified Na2Fe(SO4)2·4H2O,  Na2Fe(SO4)2  attractive  electrochemical properties against both lithium and sodium. With a  potential  of  3.83  V  vs.  Li+/Li0,  the  new  lithium  iron  sulfate  Li2Fe(SO4)2 displays indeed the highest potential ever obtained for  the  Fe3+/Fe2+  redox  couple  iron-based  fluorine-free  compound. 

The beginning  of the 21st century  has  known  an  unexpected widespread  use of portable  electronics, in which the development of lithium-ion batteries has played a key-role. Now  the use of batteries is being actively explored to be implemented in larger systems, such  as  electric  vehicles  or  stationary  storage.  These  new  applications  are  associated  with  more restrictive requirements in terms of energy density, safety, costs and sustainability,  which  are  not  matched  with  current  commercial  batteries.  Basically,  the  present  challenges  are twofold:  (i)  on the  one hand,  small  electronic  devices  and  zero-emission  vehicles ask for high-energy and high-voltage systems, for which Li-ion batteries would  be  preferred;  (ii)  on  the  other  hand,  cheaper  batteries  are  needed  in  order  to  develop  stationary storage and smart electric grid. The volume and weight of the system are less  critical  in  such  applications,  which  would  make  possible  to  take  advantage  from  the  abundance and low cost of sodium in building Na-ion batteries. 

However,  whatever  lithium or  sodium-ion  technologies,  building  sustainable  batteries displaying better performances supposes designing new electrode materials. For  reasons of sustainability,  they should be composed of non-toxic, abundant and low  cost  light  elements,  and  obtained  from  low-energy  demanding  processes.  Incidentally,  it  is 

interesting  to  note  that  moving  from  the  classical  high  temperature  ceramic  routes  to  lower temperature processes (iono-, solvoor hydrothermal routes, solution-precipitation,  etc.) also provides the possibility of controlling the size and shape of the particles. 

Several strategies can be employed in order to design new electrode materials. One of  them  is  to  improve  existing  electrode materials  which  have some  limitations.  To  do  so,  one  can  either  modify  their  chemical  composition,  for  example,  through  metallic  substitutions as it has been widely explored in the case of layered compounds LiMO2 (M  =  Co,  Ni,  Mn,  Fe  and/or  Al…),  or  alter  the  morphology  of  the  particles  and  the  formulation  of  the  electrodes  in  order  to  get  better  performances.  Another  option  is  to  design very new phases by taking example from compounds which are known in another  field  of  chemistry,  and  turn  them  into  attractive  electrode  materials.  To  do  so,  one  can  work  by  analogy  and  use  the  chemist’s  tools  that  are  composition,  iono-covalency,  structural similarities, thermodynamics, etc. 

In our case, we got inspired by what the Nature makes, and we focused on minerals.  There are indeed more than 4000 reported mineral species on Earth, which constitutes a  precious database of known compounds in which we can identify attractive structures to  design  electrode  materials.  Moreover  understanding  the  conditions  of  their  formation  may suggest a starting point for their artificial synthesis, which could then be generalized  to their structural derivates. One can thus recall that many of the polyanionic compounds  studied as electrode materials display original structures of minerals. 

In  this  context,  we  focused  on  two  types  of  minerals,  namely  the  Kröhnkite  (with  chemical  formula  Na2Cu(SO4)2·2H2O)  and  the  Bloedite  (with  chemical  formula  Na2Mg(SO4)2·4H2O),  because  their  structures  suggested  some  pathways  for  the  sodium  cation  to  diffuse.  Playing  with  metallic  substitutions  and  dehydration  processes,  we  explored  numerous  bimetallic  sulfates  A2M(SO4)2·nH2O  (A  =  Li,  Na,  M  =  Mg,  Mn,  Fe,  Co,  Ni,  Cu,  Zn,  Cd,  and  n  =  0,  2,  4).  Among  the  isolated  phases,  the  iron-based  compounds  Na2Fe(SO4)2·4H2O,  Na2Fe(SO4)2  and  Li2Fe(SO4)2  revealed  appealing  electrochemical  properties  as  positive  electrodes  versus  both  lithium  and  sodium.  The  new lithium iron sulfate Li2Fe(SO4)2 displays an open circuit voltage of 3.83V vs. Li+/Li0,  which is in fact the highest potential ever  obtained for the  Fe3+/Fe2+  redox  couple  in  an  iron-based  fluorine-free  compound  (1,2)  and  is  only  matched  by  LiFeSO4F  (3,4) triplite phase.  

Na2M(SO4)2·nH2O.    Hydrated  sodium  metal  sulfates  Na2M(SO4)2·nH2O  (M  =  Mg,  Mn,  Fe,  Co,  Ni,  Cu,  Zn,  Cd,  n  =  2,  4)  were  prepared  using  three  different  routes.  Kröhnkite and  Bloedite-type  compounds  (n=2  and  n=4,  respectively)  have  first  been  obtained from evaporation at low temperature (from RT to 80°C) of a solution of sodium  sulfate Na2SO4 and the corresponding metal sulfate MSO4·nH2O, taken in stoichiometric  proportions. Later we accelerated the crystallization of the phases by precipitating these  solutions into alcohol. Finally, using a SPEX 8000M miller for 20 minutes, we found that  direct mechanical milling of the powders of the  precursors mentioned above also led to 

the targeted compounds. When preparing the Na2Fe(SO4)2·4H2O, special care was taken  by  working  under  inert  conditions  and  with  degassed  solvents  in  order  to  avoid  the  oxidation of iron (II) into iron (III). 

Li2M(SO4)2.    Lithium  metal  sulfates  Li2M(SO4)2  (M  =  Co,  Fe)  were  prepared  from  solid-state routes. First stoichiometric amounts of anhydrous lithium sulfate Li2SO4 and  anhydrous metal sulfate MSO4 were intimately mixed by mechanical milling under argon  for 20 minutes with a SPEX 8000M® miller, and then pressed into a pellet. In the case of  Li2Co(SO4)2, this pellet was directly annealed under air at 300°C for 12 hours; whereas to  get  pure  Li2Fe(SO4)2 the  pellet  was  first  sealed  under  vacuum  in  a  quartz  tube  before  being  heated  at  325°C  for  more  than  24  hours,  so  that  iron  II+  is  preserved  from  oxidation.  

Li2M(SO4)2  (M  =  Co,  Fe)  were  also  synthesized  via  Spark  Plasma  Sintering  (SPS)  with an HPD 10 FCT SPS  machine connected to an argon dry box. About 300 mg of a  Li2SO4-MSO4  mixture,  prepared  by  a  45-minute  ball  milling,  was  placed  between  two  carbon paper disks (Papyex®) and introduced in a 10-mm inner-diameter carbon matrix  (Mersen 2333), then pressed at 50 MPa and annealed at 320°C (75°C/min via a sequence  of 1 pulse of 1 ms of DC polarization) for 15 minutes in the SPS machine. 

XRD.    X-ray  powder  diffraction  patterns  were  recorded  using  a  Bruker  D8  diffractometer with a Vantec detector and a Co-Kα source (λ1 = 1.78897 Å, λ2 = 1.79285  Å),  operating  at  40  kV  and  40  mA.  Additional  high-resolution  synchrotron  powder  diffraction  data  were  collected  at  the  11-BM  beamline  at  the  Advanced  Photon  Source  (APS Argonne National Laboratory) using a wavelength of 0.4131 Å. 

Powder  patterns  were  indexed  using  the  Dicvol  program  (5),  and  structure  determinations were carried out with both the Expo software (6), using the direct method,  and  the  FOX  program  (7),  using  global  optimization.  The  structures  were  standardized  using the STRUCTURE TIDY program (8). The powder patterns were refined using the  Rietveld method as implemented in the FullProf program.(9)

Electrochemical  tests.    For  the  electrochemical  studies,  the  active  materials  were  mixed under argon with SP carbon for 20 minutes, using a SPEX 8000M miller (70:30  mass  ratio  for  Na-based  materials  and  80:20  mass  ratio  for  Li-based  ones).  These  asprepared positive electrodes were tested in standard Swagelok® configuration, involving  a sodium or lithium anode and two sheets of Whatman GF/D borosilicate glass fibre disks  as separator, saturated with 1M NaClO4 or LiClO4 in PC as the electrolyte. Galvanostatic  charge-discharge  tests  were  recorded  using  a  MacPile®  unit  (Bio-Logic  SAS),  with  a  cycling  rate  of  1  Na  in  50h  and  1  Li  in  20h  for  sodium and  lithium-based  materials,  respectively. 

TGA-MS.  Thermogravimetric analyses coupled with mass spectrometry were carried  out  under  Argon  flow  (50cm3/min)  on  ~20  mg  of  powder  samples  in  the  temperature  range  20-800°C  (heating  rate  =  10°C/min)  using  a  STA-449C  Jupiter®  unit  (Netzsch)  and a quadripole mass spectrometer QMS 403 C Aëolos® (Netzsch) with stainless steel  capillary and a secondary-electron multiplier detector (Channeltron).  

The  hydrated  bimetallic  sulfates  Na2M(SO4)2·nH2O  studied  in  this  work  form  two  different families: the Kröhnkite-type phases (n = 2, M = Cu, Mn, Cd) and the Bloeditetype  ones  (n  =  4,  M  =  Mg,  Fe,  Co,  Ni,  Zn).  The  most  obvious  way  to  prepare  these  compounds  was  first  to  mimic  what  the  Nature  makes  by  evaporating  a  solution  of  sodium sulfate and the corresponding metallic sulfate. Then, in order to shorten the time  of  preparation  of  these  phases,  we  developed  new  synthetic  routes  such  as  (i)  the  precipitation  of  the  above  solution  into  alcohol  or  (ii)  the  mechanical  milling  of  the  precursor  powders.  From  these  three  routes,  we  got  pure  phases  of  the  targeted  compounds, whose XRD patterns are displayed in Figure 1. 

Figure  1.    X-ray  diffraction  powder  patterns  of  the  Kröhnkite-type  (left)  and  Bloeditetype (right) compounds. 

The structures of these minerals and synthetic compounds have been widely studied  before  by  several  groups  (10–21).  The  Bloedite  structure  is  built  upon  isolated  units  of  M(SO4)2(H2O)4.  In  a  unit,  the  metal  is  in  an  MO6  octahedral  configuration:  the  four  oxygens lying in the basal plane belong to four molecules of water, while the other two in  trans  position  are  part  of  the  two  sulfate  tetrahedra.  Sodium  atoms  sit  in  between  these  units, so as one can identify diffusion channels along the c-axis as shown in the right part  of  Figure 2.  As  for the  Kröhnkite  structure,  MO6  octahedra  are  linked  two  by  two  with  bridging SO4 tetrahedra, so as to form chains along the c-axis. These chains form layers  in the plane (100), in between which sodium atoms sit (left part of Figure 2). 

Figure  2.    Structures  of  the  Kröhnkite  (left)  and  Bloedite  (right)  compounds.  Sodium  atoms  (displayed  as  single  circles)  lie  in  between  chains  (left)  or  isolated  units  (right)  composed of MO6 octahedra surrounded by SO4 tetrahedra and H2O molecules. 

Among all the prepared phases, only the iron-based analogue Na2Fe(SO4)2·4H2O was  found to be electrochemically active against sodium (Figure 3a). Nearly one sodium can  be  removed  from  the  structure  during  the  first  charge,  which  suggests  the  oxidation  of  Fe2+ into Fe3+. In order to check the changes in the oxidation state of iron, we performed  Mössbauer spectroscopy  on the pristine material  and on the  chemically  oxidized  phase,  which was prepared by reaction of the former with NO2BF4 in acetonitrile. The spectrum  of  Na2Fe(SO4)2·4H2O  shows  a  single  and  narrow  doublet  of  Fe(II)  while  the  one  of  NaFe(SO4)2·4H2O presents only the signature of Fe(III) (Figure 3b).  

Figure  3.    (a)  Typical  curve  obtained  from  cycling  Na2Fe(SO4)2·4H2O  versus  metallic  sodium. The derivative curve dx/dV of the first cycle and second charge is shown as an  inset.  (b)  Mössbauer  spectra  of  the  pristine  material  (bottom)  and  of  the  chemically  oxidized phase (top). 

Moreover,  one  can  note  that  the  shape  of  the  curve  changes  upon  cycling:  the  first  charge is quite flat while the subsequent discharges and charges are much more sloping.  This kind of behaviour is often the consequence of a change in the electrode morphology.  This was confirmed  by  XRD measurements performed at different states of charge and  which show the amorphization of the active material along the first charge. 

Finally,  the  electrochemical  activity  of  this  phase  is  centered  around  3.3  V  versus Na+/Na0, which is a well respectable potential with respect to other iron-based electrode  materials  for  Na-ion  batteries.  However,  we  have  to  admit  that  this  new  electrode  material presents very low intrinsic capacity (theoretical capacity: 73 mAh/g) due to the  four molecules of  water  that constitute a dead weight for the electrode  material  as they  are  not  implied  in  the  electrochemistry  activity.  Thermogravimetric  analyses  coupled  with mass spectroscopy showed that the whole water is released from Na2Fe(SO4)2.4H2O  in almost one step (Figure 4). The results of the study of this anhydrous Na2Fe(SO4)2 will  be reported in a forthcoming paper. 

Figure  4.    TGA-MS  curves  of  Na2Fe(SO4)2.4H2O  showing  the  complete  loss  of  the  structural water in almost one step at temperature below 250°C. 

Having  demonstrated  the  electrochemical  activity  of  sodium  iron  sulfates,  we  investigated  the  possibility  of  preparing  lithium  analogues  to  these  compounds.  Indeed  we could not stabilize any hydrated phase with lithium, but in the early 1990’s Touboul et  al.  mentioned  the  existence  of  an  anhydrous  lithium  cobalt  sulfate  that  they  could  not  isolate and which structure remained unsolved up to now (22,23).  

We  first  succeeded  in  preparing  pure  phases  of  Li2M(SO4)2  (M  =  Co,  Fe)  through  ceramic  route  (1,2),  as  described  in  the  Experimental  details.  Their  structures  were  determined  from  laboratory  X-ray  diffraction  powder  patterns,  and  we  later  confirmed  them by refinement of Synchrotron XRD data (Li2Co(SO4)2: P21/c, a = 4.9787(1) Å, b =  8.1113(1) Å, c = 8.7831(1) Å, β = 121.811(1) °, and Li2Fe(SO4)2: P21/c, a = 4.9886(1) Å,  b = 8.2062(1) Å, c = 88293(1) Å, β = 121.7499(1) °). They are built upon isolated cobalt  octahedra  MO6  which  are  linked  together  by  sulfate  tetrahedra  through  the  corners  (Figure 5). This 3D framework lets then appear some opened channels  along the  a-axis  where the lithium cations sit. 

Figure 5.  (a) Rietveld refinement of the X-ray diffraction pattern of Li2Fe(SO4)2. The star  indicates a tiny excess of FeSO4. (b) Illustration of the crystal structure of Li2M(SO4)2 (M = Co, Fe). Lithium atoms (displayed as single circles) lie in between a 3D framework of  MO6 octahedra and SO4 tetrahedra. 

Once again, only the iron-based compound demonstrates an electrochemical activity.  A  typical  voltage-composition  curve  obtained  for  Li2Fe(SO4)2  is  shown  in  Figure  6.  During  the  first  charge  to  4.5  V  vs.  Li+/Li0  nearly  one  lithium  was  removed  from  the  structure. On discharge, 0.85 lithium was re-inserted to give a reversible capacity ranging  from about 88 mAh/g as compared to the theoretical capacity of 102 mAh/g for complete  extraction and reinsertion. The plateau on charge and on discharge suggests a two-phase  mechanism,  which  was  confirmed  by  both  PITT  and  in  situ  XRD  experiments  (1)  (not  shown  here).  Finally  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  electrochemical  activity  of  Li2Fe(SO4)2 is centered at 3.83 V vs. Li+/Li0, which is the highest potential observed for  the Fe3+/Fe2+ redox couple in a fluorine-free iron-based material. 

Figure 6.  Typical voltage-composition curve obtained from cycling Li2Fe(SO4)2 versus lithium. The derivative curve dx/dV of the first cycle is shown as an inset. 

Recently,  we  considerably  reduced  the  preparation  time  of  these  new  compounds  Li2M(SO4)2  (M  =  Co,  Fe).  Using  Spark  Plasma  Sintering  (SPS)  we  passed  from  more  than 24 hours of annealing to only 20 minutes(24). The electrochemical properties of the  iron analogue prepared by this technique are very similar to the ones obtained when the  materials is acquired through classical ceramic route, as seen in Figure 7. 

Figure 7.  Comparison of the XRD powder patterns of Li2Fe(SO4)2 prepared via ceramic  or SPS routes and the corresponding voltage-composition curve versus lithium.  

Conclusion 

In  conclusion,  we  have  demonstrated  the  feasibility  of  working  by  similarities  on  minerals in order to turn them into electrode materials. Starting from the Bloedite mineral  structure,  we  prepared  two  sodium  iron  sulfates  which  demonstrated  electrochemical  activity  against  sodium.  Then  replacing  the  sodium  by  lithium,  we  prepared  a  new  lithium iron sulfate Li2Fe(SO4)2 which presents a high potential of 3.83 V versus lithium. 

However,  the  capacity  of  these bimetallic sulfates  does  not  exceed  100  mAh/g,  and  this reminds us that searching for new electrode materials does not systematically lead to  compounds with high performances. Looking at new structures can help to spot the ones  favourable  for  ion  mobility,  but  still,  there  is  no  mean  to  predict  the  electrochemical  properties  of  a  given  compound  before  having  synthesised  it.  The  “Material  Genome”  program (25,26) intends to meet such a challenge in the future, but meanwhile, we must  rely on a few concepts (namely inductive effect (27,28), iono-covalency, etc) to direct our  search for new materials. 

the  thermogravimetric analyses, J-C. Jumas for assistance with Mössbauer measurements and  N.  Recham  for  helpful  discussions.  Use  of  the  Advanced  Photon  Source  at  Argonne  National Laboratory was supported by the U. S. Department of Energy, Office of Science,  Office  of  Basic  Energy  Sciences,  under  Contract  No.  DE-AC02-06CH11357.  Finally,  M.R.  acknowledges  the  French  “Ministère  de  l’Enseignement  Supérieur  et  de  la  Recherche” for her Ph.D. Grant. 