Natrium  superionic  conductor  (NASICON)  ceramics  present  interesting  sensitive  and  selective  properties against alkaline cations due to their structure. The powder of Li1.4La0.4Zr1.6(PO4)3 has been synthesized  by a solid phase reaction. The removal of sodium was studied in an extensive series of tests involving different  ionic exchange process variables such as time and temperature. The results indicated that its exchange capacity is  very  high,  even  reach  41.3  mg/g.  The  Na/Li  ion  exchange  reaction  rate  increased  obviously  with  increasing  temperature,  and  the  kinetic  data  fitted  well  to  the  equation  of  Johnson-Mehl-Avrami-Kolmogorov  with  a  regression coefficient value of above 0.99.     KEY WORDS: Brine, Lithium chloride, Sodium, Separation   

  Lithium chloride is an industrial raw material, which can be used to produce lithium compounds  and in particular metallic lithium. The presence of very small quantities of sodium in the lithium  metal will make it highly reactive and much different in properties than lithium metal with high  purity. So as the raw material of lithium chloride it is required in low content of sodium [1-3].  The economic and efficient further processing of the lithium chloride is necessary to provide the  raw material as pure as possible. 

There is a great reserve of salt lake resources in China, from which relatively low-cost crude  lithium  chloride  can  be  obtained  [4].  The  aim  of  the  present  work  is  to  prepare  high  purity  lithium chloride from such feedstock. 

Some special  methods,  such as  the solvent  extraction method, the cooling method and the  ion exchange resins method, can be used to prepare high purity lithium chloride, depending on  the  properties  of  the  feedstock  [5].  All  aforementioned  methods  for  yielding  lithium  from  natural brines or mixtures of alkali and alkaline earth metal salts involve difficult or expensive  separations, and have  not,  in general, provided lithium products of sufficient purity for use in  certain industrial applications. 

Various types of inorganic and organic ion exchangers have been synthesized, and inorganic  ion exchangers generally are superior to organic resins because of their greater resistance to high  temperature and high radiation [6-8]. Moreover, they have unusual selectivity for ionic species  and versatility in separation sciences. 

Natrium  superionic  conductor  (NASICON)  ceramics  present  interesting  sensitive  and  selective properties against alkaline cations due to their structure. In the ion-covalent structure,  Li+  ions  move  from  one  site  to  another  passing  through  bottle-necks  defined  by  the  anionic  skeleton.  NASICON  materials  are  especially  good  candidates  to  determine  alkaline  ions  concentrations in solution or to separate monovalent cations from a mixture of multivalent ions  [9-14].  

The resulting structure consists of Type (octahedral O-coordination) and Type II (10-fold Ocoordination) sites for the mobile Li ions to occupy. Li1.4La0.4Zr1.6(PO4)3 (LLZP) also possesses  the  NASICON  structure  with  a  partial  substitution  Zr4+  →La3+  +  Li+,  the  Li+  ions  occupy  the  Type  I  and  Type  II  sites.  The  occupation  of  Li  ions  at  the  Type  II  sites  is  favorable  for  the  chemical stability of materials [15, 16]. 

The  objectives  of  the  present  study  is  to  determine  the  capacity  and  kinetics  of  Na(I)  ion  exchange  on  LLZP  as  a  function  of  temperature,  contact  time  and  pH  in  industrial  lithium  chloride brine. 

  Synthesis  of  LLZP.  The  powder  of  Li1.4La0.4Zr1.6(PO4)3  (LLZP)  has  been  synthesized  from  mixture  analytical  reagent-grade  chemicals  of  lithium  carbonate,  zirconium  oxide,  lanthanum  oxide and ammonium dihydrogen phosphate by solid state reaction. The mixture was thoroughly  mixed by planetary ball milling and then heated in an alumina crucible at 500 oC for 2 h in air in  order to release volatile products. The product obtained was transported to sealed stainless pots  with  stainless  balls.  The  mass  ratio  of  chemicals  and  balls  was  1:15.  Then,  the  high-energy  mechanical  milling  treatment  was  carried  out  at  approximately  500  rpm  at  room  temperature.  Dense glass-ceramic pellets (10 mm in diameter) were obtained by cold pressing (20 MPa) the  as-prepared powders and then sintering at 1000  oC for 10 h. The different steps of the process  are summarized in Figure 1.              Figure 1. Synthesis of the Li1.4La0.4Zr1.6(PO4)3 NASICON compound.    Characterization  of  LLZP.  The  powdered  pattern  of  the  sample  was  determined  by  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  with  Cu  Kα  radiation  (λ=  0.15406  nm),  Rigaku  D/max-3B  X-ray  Diffractometer.  The  samples  were  also  examined  for  structural  characteristics  by  Fourier  transform  infrared  spectrophotometer,  Thermo  Nicolet  Nexus  using  KBr  pellets.  The  morphology of the sample was observed by scanning electron microscope (SEM), JEOL JSM5600LV.    Ion exchange capacity of LLZP    Reagents.  The  crude  lithium  chloride  brine  used  in  this  work  was  extracted  from  salt  lakes  brines  and  supplied  by  the  Qinghai  Lithium  Co.  Ltd.  China.  The  chemical  analyses  of  the  feedstock are listed in Table 1.    Table 1. Impurities contents in the feedstock brine.   

  Apparatus.  Flame  atomic  absorption  spectrophotometer  (FAAS)  (GBC-932  AAS,  Australia)  was  used  for  determination  of  Na(I)  ions.  The  FAAS  was  set  at  the  optimum  operating  conditions  at  wavelength  589.6  nm;  the  slit  length  was  maintained  at  0.2  nm.  All  the  pH 

Selective sodium removal from lithium chloride brine with novel inorganic ion exchanger 

measurements  were  performed  with  a  calibrated  pH-meter  equipped  with  a  standard  calomel  electrode (SCE), Yidian·Shanghai PHS-3C. Magnetic stirrer model DF-101B (Yuying·Shanghai,  voltage adjusting and temperature controlling) was used in agitating the samples at the required  speeds  while  the  centrifuge  model  Xiangzhi  TDZ5-WS  series  was  used  for  separating  the  residue from the solution.    Determination  of  the  equilibrium  time. 1.00 g of LLZP was mixed with 100 g, 39.20% (w/w)  lithium chloride brine of Na(I) ions at initial concentrations of 0.010% (w/w). The mixture was  shaken  constantly  at  a  speed  of  200  rpm.  Aliquots  were  withdrawn  at  predetermined  time  intervals within a period of 200 min. The solutions were centrifuged at a speed 3500 rpm for 5  min and Na(I) ion concentration in the supernatant measured by FAAS.    Effect of temperature. Batch experiments were carried out using 1.00 g LLZP added to 100 g,  39.20% (w/w) lithium chloride brine at equilibrium pH of 7.0 and at the following temperatures:  20, 40, 60 and 80±1 oC. The mixture was agitated for 200 min and the remaining solution was  analyzed for Na(I) ions at each temperature.     Effect  of  pH.  1.00  g  LLZP  weighed  accurately  was  added  to  100  g,  39.20%  (w/w)  lithium  chloride brine of Na(I) ions at initial concentrations of 0.010% (w/w) at 80±1 oC and at pH 5.0,  6.0, 7.0, 8.0 and 9.0. The pH was varied from 5.0 to 9.0 by careful addition of 0.01 M HCl or  0.01  M  NaOH  drop  wise  until  the  desired  pH  was  obtained.  The  mixtures  were  agitated  for  approximately  200  min,  centrifuged  and  the  concentrations  of  Na(I)  ions  in  equilibrium  with  LLZP determined.    Manufacturing  high  purity  lithium  chloride.  The  effect  of  varying  ion  exchanger  mass  while  maintaining the concentration constant was studied as follows: 2.45, 2.55 and 2.65 g portions of  the ion exchanger was placed in 100 g, 39.20% (w/w) lithium chloride brine at 80±1 oC and at  pH 7.0. The mixture was shaken constantly at a speed of 200 rpm. After 200 min, the solutions  were centrifuged at a speed 3500 rpm for 5 min and Na(I) ion concentration in the supernatant  measured by FAAS. 

  Spectroscopic studies. The result of XRD analysis shows LLZP as the major mineral constituent  as seen in the spectra (Figure 2). An attempt was made to observe the change of the crystalline  structure  by  the  substitution  of  La3+  for  Zr4+.  Results  showed  that  lanthanum  has  no  obvious  effect on the structure. The LLZP structure is indexed in the rhombohedral system with lattice:  rhomb-centered, space group   and the cell parameters: a = 8.8077 Å, b = 8.8077 Å, c =  22.715 Å, α = 90°, β = 90°, γ = 120°. The crystalline of LLZP phase improve with the increase  of  heating  temperature,  which  shows  higher  temperature  is  beneficial  to  the  growth  of  the  crystal. 

Infrared absorption spectrum of LLZP is presented in Figure 3. There are four kinds of basic  3−:  ν1(A1),  ν2(E),  ν3(F2)  and  ν4(F2),  corresponding  to the  PO symmetric  vibration  modes  in  PO4 stretching  vibration,  PO2  symmetric  bending  vibration,  PO  antisymmetric  stretching  vibration  and PO2 antisymmetric bending vibration [17, 18]. The frequency of the broad features between  700  and  850  cm−1  in  the  spectrum  of  LLZP  are  somewhat  lower  than  expected  for  PO4 3−  stretching  modes.  In  fact,  bands  in  this  region  of  the  spectrum  are  often  due  to  condensed  4− or extended polyphosphate structures. However, there are no  phosphate groups such as P2O7 bands  near  750  cm−1  in  the  infrared  spectrum  to  indicate  the  presence  of  bridging  P–O–P  groups. The band detected at 636.87 cm−1 is assigned to ν1. Three ν4 bands are observed in the 

infrared  spectrum  at  601.69,  575.26  and  557.23  cm−1,  which  might  indicate  some  degree  of  3−  anions  as  Li+  is  inserted  into  the  compound.  Infrared  local  disordering  about  the  PO4 characteristic absorbing peaks of the groups have small change before and after ion exchange.  The results are presented in Table 2. LLZP is ion exchanged with sodium ion in lithium chloride  brine as follows. 

  Figure 2. X-ray diffraction (XRD) scan of LLZP.    Table 2. IR data for LLZP before and after ion exchange.   

Peaks (cm-1), before ion exchange  Peaks (cm-1), after ion exchange 

  Figure 3. FTIR spectrum of LLZP.    Microstructure analysis. Figure 4 shows microstructure of the specimen. The results show that  the specimen is highly dispersive particles with diameters ranged at 10-30 µm.   

Selective sodium removal from lithium chloride brine with novel inorganic ion exchanger 

  Figure 4. SEM image of LLZP.    Ion exchange capability of LLZP    Effect  of  contact  time  and  temperature.  The  effect  of  contact  time  was  evaluated  for  39.20%  (w/w)  lithium  chloride  brine  (Na+  :  0.010%  (w/w))  at  different  temperatures  for  LLZP.  As  shown  in  Figure  5,  the  ion-exchange  capacity  increases  with  the  contact  time and attains  to a  plateau value after 200 min. Therefore, in all further experiments the contact time is used as 200  min. An increase in sodium removal with an increase in temperature from 20  oC to 80  oC was  also observed. The diffuse rate of Li+ and Na+ increases with increasing temperature in lithium  chloride brine, which accelerates Na/Li ion exchange on LLZP. 

  Figure 5. Influence of time on exchange capacity at pH 7.0, agitation speed 200 rpm.    Effect of pH. The effect of pH on the ion-exchange capacity of Na(I) ions is presented in Figure  6. The exchange capacity varied between 40.57 and 41.30 mg/g when pH is varied between 6.0  and  9.0.  Above  pH  9.0  insoluble  lithium  hydroxide  starts  to  form.  The  exchange  capacity  is  35.23 mg/g at the pH of 5.0, this is because at low pH the LLZP surface is completely covered  by H+ increasing the competition for the available exchange sites with Na(I) ions. 

  Figure 6. Effect of pH on the exchange capacity. Initial Na(I) ion concentration 0.01%(w/w), ion 

exchanger dose 1.00 g/100 g, time 200 min, agitation speed 200 rpm.  

  Exchange  kinetics  analysis. Kinetics law of Na/Li ion exchange fraction on LLZP depends on  time  can  be  expressed  using  Johnson–Mehl–Avrami–Kolmogorov  (JMAK)  equation  [19-21].  The equation may be linearized by taking the logarithm of both sides of equation 1 and linear  form of JMAK equation can be given as equation 2: 

where  x  is  ion  exchange  fraction  of  Na/Li  on  LLZP,  k  is  the  dynamics  constant,  t  is  the  time(minute), n is the time factor. 

The constant values of the isotherms were obtained from the slope and intercept of the plots 

(Figure 7). The JMAK equation represents adequately the Kinetics law of Na+ ions on LLZP.     

Figure 7. ln[-ln(1-x)] against ln(t) of Na/Li ion-exchange of LLZP.     Manufacturing  high  purity  lithium  chloride.  As  can  be  seen  from  the  data  in  Table  3,  LLZP  exhibits  favorable  sodium  removal  from  lithium  chloride  brine  and  a  slight  excess  of  ion 

Selective sodium removal from lithium chloride brine with novel inorganic ion exchanger 

exchanger  can  be  used  to  ensure  optimum  sodium  removal.  Sodium  concentration  in  the  supernatant is 0.0005% (w/w). About 95% of the sodium is removed from use of a 2.65 g of the  exchanger in a 100 g of the brine.     Table 3. Ion  exchange  data  for  LLZP  (initial  ion  concentration  0.01  %(w/w),  pH  7.0,  time  200  min, 

The purpose of this study was to investigate the suitability of ion exchanger to separate sodium  from industrial lithium chloride brine and in which brine sodium ions are not the predominant  metal ions. A novel ion exchanger LLZP was synthesized and characterized using FTIR, X-ray  diffraction  and  SEM  techniques,  which  exhibits  little  change  in  its  infrared  spectra  after  ion  exchange.  The  data  revealed  that  the  ion-exchange  capacity  was  affected  by  the  pH  and  temperature of solution. The ion exchange studies also showed that the maximum ion exchange  capacity was 41.30 mg/g at a pH of 7.0, 80 oC and the kinetics equation was nearly described by  the JMAK equation. Although further investigations are needed in order to understand the ion  exchange mechanism fully, the results obtained here give a fairly good idea of the ion exchange  behaviour  towards  Na(I)  ions.  The  high  exchange  capacity  increases  the  possible  practical  applications in lithium chloride industries.   

  This  work  was  supported  by  a  grant  from  the  Natural  Science  Foundation  of  Shandong  (No.  ZR2009FQ027) and the Technology Program of Shangdong institution of higher education (No.  J09LB52). 