NASICON based low cost, highly sensitive sensor probe  for detection of very small content of  the water  nearly ppm level in ethanol has been fabricated and characterized. The sensor utilizes the electrochemical cell method  for  detection  of  water  content  in  ethanol.  The  results  indicate  nearly  linear  variation  of  emf  with  increase  in  water  content  upto  10  %  with  a  sensitivity  of  0.001mV  per  ppm.  Such  a  high  value  of  sensitivity  is  extremely  useful  in  detection of water in medical science and chemical industries where ethanol is used as an organic solvent.   Keywords: : Nasicon, Water Sensor, Ethanol  PACS: 07.07.Df  

In  recent  years,  NASICON  (Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12)  material (acronym for Na SuperIonic CONductors) is  used for various applications such as gas sensing, Na+   based  batteries,  ion  selective  electrodes.  The  high  value of ionic conductivity of this group of compounds  is because of its high ion charge carrier concentration  and high mobility of the charge carriers. 

Detection of water contents in ethanol has become  very  important  as  these  are  commonly  used  in  the  routine  pharmaceutical  industries and in other applications as well. Ethanol is  commonly used in the chemical industries as general  solvents  or  as  extraction  agents.  Water  is  completely  soluble in ethanol so in the production process of this  compound  it  can  come  out  as  an  impurity.  A  lot  of  well established methods are there for the analysis of  water  contents  in  ethanol  but  convenient  and  simple  methods  are  required  for  the  determination  of  water  content  in  the  ethanol.  In  this  paper  we  report  the  fabrication  and  characterization  of  a  low  cost  NASICON  based  solid  electrolyte  sensor  for  the  detection  of  very  small  content  of  water  nearly  ppm  level. 

NASICON  powder  has  been  prepared  by  solid  state  reaction  technique  in  which  a  measured  volume  of 

ZrOCl2  was  mixed with distilled water. This  solution  was  then  mixed  with  aqueous  solution  of  NaOH  and  SiO2  powders  in  appropriate  ratio  and  stirred  for  30  minutes.  The  aqueous   NH4H2PO4  was  added  to  previous  solution  and  kept  for precipitation. The final precipitate was dried at 150  0C  and  then  sintered  at  1000  0C  for  2  h.  Prepared  sintered  powder  was  uniaxially  (11  MPa)  pressed  in  the  form  of  pellet  and  sintered  at  1000  0C  for  3  h.  Pellet prepared this way was attached at the bottom of  hollow  glass  tube  whose  diameter  was  0.9  cm.  Schematic of the probe is shown in fig.1. A silver wire of  1.5  mm  of  diameter  was  polished  and  fixed  with  a  silver conducting  glue (EPOTECHNY)  on one  of  the  faces  of the  pellet. After drying, the  pellet was fixed  with Araldite glue on  the  end side of  a glass tube so  that no water can penetrate into the tube. The surface  area  in  contact  with  the  liquid  electrolyte  was  2.54  cm2. The external reference electrode was an Ag wire.  The  electrochemical  cell  can  be  described  by  the  following sequence:  Ag / Ag / Ag+ // NASICON // solution under test / Ag 

Figure  2(a)  shows  the  XRD  pattern  of  NASICON  nanograin  powders,  prepared  by  solid  state  reaction  technique  and  sintered  at  10000  C.  Peaks  are  well  matched  to  the  NASICON  phase,  reported  elsewhere  which confirms the formation of NASICON phase. To  study  the  response  characteristics  of  the  sensor,  emf 

values  were  recorded  for  different  percentages  of  water in ethanol. Figure 2(b) shows the graph between  emf  and  water  percentage  in  ethanol  for  NASICON  sensing  probe  with  varying  water  percentages.  It  is  observed  from  the  figure  that  corresponding  to  a  particular water percentage in ethanol–water solution,  a  unique  emf  was  generated.  The  emf  measurements  were  carried  out  for  ethanol  containing  0.01%  (100  ppm) to 100% water. From the figure it is clear that the  emf increases linearly at the rate of 0.001 mV per ppm  with increase in water  concentration in ethanol up  to  10%  but  for  higher  concentration  of  water,  the  emf  increases gradually at the rate of 0.00055 mV per ppm.  From  the  figure  we  can  see  that  line  joining  the  experimental data is not passing through the origin and  cutting the x axis which confirms that some amount of  water is already present in ethanol as an impurity.    

FIGURE 1.  Schematic of NASICON based probe. 

  FIGURE 2.  (a) XRD pattern of NASICON sintered at 1000 0C (b) Variation of EMF with water content in ethanol–water 

mixture

NASICON based low cost, highly sensitive sensor with fast  response  probe  for  detection  of  very  small  content  of  the  water, nearly ppm level, in ethanol has  been  fabricated and  characterized. The results indicate nearly linear variation of  emf  with  increase  in  water  content  upto  10%  with  a  sensitivity  of  0.001  mV  per  ppm.  This  probe  is  extremely  useful for detection of water in medical science and chemical  industries.   

Parul Yadav is thankful to Council for Scientific and  Industrial Research, India for providing research fellowship 