Na3V2(PO4)2F3, which could be used as cathode in Na-ion or Li-ion rechargeable batteries, was synthesized by carbothermal reduction (CTR) method at 700 C with coralline structure by SEM analysis. The Na3V2(PO4)2F3 cathode in Li-ion battery displayed an appreciable capacity of 188 mAh/g with a discharge plateau at 3.7 V under close-to-equilibrium galvanostatic conditions illuminating the feasible extraction of three Na ions per unit, and 130 mAh/g with retention of 96.8% after 37 cycles at 0.1 C. The NASICONtype structure could produce a large diffusion coefﬁcient due to the three-dimensional framework, but cause a low conductivity and OCV around 3 V. The cathode could reach 188 mAh/g at 0.1 C, with a more 20 mAh/g at 3.7 V after washing by distilled water.

The improvement of rechargeable lithium-ion batteries has been long boosted since the ﬁrst commercialization in 1991, owing to its intensive use in various kinds of portable electronics or future hybrid electric vehicles. As one component in this battery, the cathode material has been treated with great importance in energy storage devices due to the inﬂuence on the whole cost and properties of ﬁnal product. Recently, a series of ﬂuorophosphate materials, such as Li2MPO4F (M ¼ Fe, Co) [1,2], Na2FePO4F [3,4], Na3V2(PO4)2F3 [5e8], NaVPO4F [9], Na2Fe1   xMnxPO4F [10] have been proposed elsewhere to be treated as suitable candidates for the traditional oxide cathode, because its inherent thermal properties linked the stability of phosphate-metal bounds could greatly reduce the likelihood of oxygen liberation from the structure [11]. Furthermore, the inductive effect derived from ﬂuorophosphatebased functional groups enhances a higher work potential in comparison to the corresponding oxide, as a consequence of the lager ionicity of the MeF bound compared to the MeO one. Moreover, the positive effect of ﬂuorine afﬁliation between the phosphate and the relative ﬂuorinated poly-anionic compounds is that the introduction of ﬂuorine into the phosphate-based

structure could increase the Li-ion insertion voltage, which has been theoretically investigated by De Dompablo et al. [12].

Among these ﬂuorophosphates, Na3V2(PO4)2F3 was especially notable because of the high theoretical capacity (192 mAh/g) as well as the low cost of raw materials, safer applications and high work potential. Furthermore, this multifunctional material could not only be used as cathode in Li-ion battery but also in Na-ion battery, in conjunction with a suitable Li-salt or Na-salt electrolyte and a hard-carbon anode, respectively. Na3V2(PO4)2F3 has a tetragonal crystal structure with space group of P42/mnm, and this structure has been characterized with an extended threedimensional framework, built up by [V2O8F3] bi-octahedral and [PO4] tetrahedral. The [V2O8F3] bi-octahedral is bridged by one þ ions are statistically distributed in the ﬂuorine atom, while the Na resultant network. The structure also referred as NASICON-type one could provide a three-dimensional tunnel for ion transportation, leading to an effect of fast ion diffusion. However, the NASICON-type material has also shown a low electronic conductivity owing to the separation of vanadium atoms by [PO4] tetrahedral, where nanoscale and particle engineering should be applied to mitigate this shortcoming [13].

Barker et al. have prepared Na3V2(PO4)2F3 by a two-step solidstate method with the orthorhombic V(III) phosphate, VPO4, as the reaction intermediate [5], which required a complex operation procedure and a long calcinated time to ensure the ideal structure and morphology of this intermediate. Meanwhile, solegel method [6] has been considered as a feasible and effective but complicated,

scale-limited way to prepare Na3V2(PO4)2F3. Taking the simple and economical carbothermal reduction (CTR) method has been an optimum way to prepare a series of analogical cathode materials such as Li3V2(PO4)3 [14], which could leave the coated carbon on particles to suppress their growing and increase the electronic conductivity. In this work, the CTR method was used to synthesize Na3V2(PO4)2F3/C composite and the electrochemical properties were investigated.

Stoichiometric amounts of analytical purity NaF, Na2CO3, NH4H2PO4, V2O5 and acetylene black powders (the weight ratio of carbon to the other total materials was 1:20) were mixed and ground. The mixture was pre-heated at 350 C under ﬂowing argon for 8 h. After cooling down to room temperature, the precursor was reground and further ﬁred at 550e750 C under ﬂowing argon for 8 h. Then, the obtained material was washed with deionized water three times and ﬁltered, subsequently dried in a vacuum at 80 C overnight.

The crystal structure of the material was studied by X-ray diffraction (XRD) by a Bruker D8 diffractometer with monochromatic Cu Ka radiation (l ¼ 1.5406 Å), and the diffraction data was recorded in the 2q range of 10e60 with a scan rate of 8/min. The surface morphology of the composite was investigated by a FEI Quanta 200 scanning electron microscopy (SEM).

The cathode electrode was fabricated with the active material, carbon black, and binder (polyetraﬂuoroethylene, PTFE) in a weight ratio of 8:1:1 by using ethanol as solvent and an etched aluminum foil as current collector. Then, the cathodic piece was dried at 110 C for 24 h in a vacuum oven to be cathode electrode. The R2016 coin cell was assembled in an argon-ﬁlled glove box, using lithium foil served as anode electrode, Celgard 2500 membrane as separator. The electrolyte was 1 M LiPF6 dissolved in a mixture of ethylene carbonate (EC), dimethyl carbonate (DMC), diethyl carbonate (DEC) (v/v/v, 1/1/1). Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic charge/ discharge cycling tests were carried out in the voltage cut-offs of 1.6e4.3 and 1.6e4.2 V by using an electrochemical workstation (CHI660C) and a CT2001A LAND battery tester, respectively. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was studied using a Zahner IM6e. The impedance spectrum was recorded using an AC voltage of 5 mV in the frequency range from 1 MHz to 10 mHz. All electrochemical tests were carried out at room temperature.

Fig. 1 shows the XRD analysis of the as-prepared Na3V2(PO4)2F3. The diffraction peaks of the main phase were in good agreement with previously reported results [6,8], with the weak but broad ones indicating a small coherent domain size [6]. The V2O3 and Na3V2(PO4)3 impurities may be produced as a consequence of side and incomplete reactions, while the NASCION-type Na3V2(PO4)3 [15] might inﬂuence the properties of the basic tetrahedral structure due to the intensity ratio of Bragg reﬂections resulting from a disordered distribution of cations.

The simulative structure on the top of Fig. 1, shows a threedimensional framework with interconnected interstitial space as

Fig. 1. XRD analysis of Na3V2(PO4)2F3 calcinated at 700 C, and a schematic illustration of the crystal structure is shown on the top.

a potentially fast ionic conductor fabricated by VO6 octahedron and þ PO4 tetrahedron sharing oxygen at vertexes. The Na ions are located in relatively interlayer sites and possess facile migration from the analogous Li2NiPO4F [16] and pathways, different Na2MnPO4F [17] which adopt tunnels rather than layer frameworks. There were no traces of carbon in the XRD pattern, implying that the residual carbon in the material was an amorphous state coated on particles as shown in Fig. 2(d), and/or the thickness of residual carbon layer is too thin to be detected by the powder XRD, which was attributed to the CTR mechanism [18,19]. Fig. 2(aec) displays some pores and coralliform structures on the surface of Na3V2(PO4)2F3/C composite which could facilitate the electrolyte ions transportation.

To decrease the adverse inﬂuence of polarization to the battery property, a close-to-equilibrium condition (deﬁned as C/50) [3] of inﬁnitesimal current density was employed for galvanostatic test, and the ﬁrst potential proﬁles of Na3V2(PO4)2F3/C composite prepared at different temperatures were shown in Fig. 3(a). The largest speciﬁc capacity of 188 mAh/g with a voltage plateau of 3.7 V was obtained when the composite was prepared at an optimum temperature of 700 C. Also, the voltage plateau was 0.3 V higher than that of relative phosphate, Na3V2(PO4)3 [20], because, in principle, when three oxygen ions were replaced by ﬂuorine, the more ionic VeF bond could stabilize the energy of the antibonding VeO orbital, consequently increasing the voltage at what ion insertion took place.

Furthermore, the obtained capacity ca. 97.9% of the theoretical þ ion extraction value illuminated the possibility of the third Na owing to the effect of inﬁnitesimal current density, though the total was not obtained due to the impurities above mentioned. We sugþ gested that the close-to-equilibrium condition could provide Na ions adequate energy to overcome the restrict from bonds in Na3V2(PO4)2F3 structure, but the total ions extraction might easily cause the lattice to collapse making a poor cyclic performance. The enhanced chargeedischarge rates almost caused an 80 mAh/g decrease in speciﬁc capacity of the analogous batteries as shown in Fig. 3(b), and the cycling performance with a capacity retention of 96.8% after 37 cycles was presented in Fig. 3(c), which might illuminate a low conductivity of this material resulting from the inherent shortcomings of the crystallized structure and the impurities.

Fig. 4 shows the electrochemical voltageecomposition curve of initial cycle at 0.1 C, and the chargeedischarge proﬁle was shown in

Fig. 2. SEM images of Na3V2(PO4)2F3/C composite prepared at (a) 650 C, (b)700 C, (c) 750 C and (d) 700 C followed by washing.

þ the insert. Two Na ions in Na3V2(PO4)2F3 could migrate under large current density and the voltage plateau of 3.7 V should be attributed to V3þ redox couple since they could take place at 3.5 and 4 V [21]. The inset displays the speciﬁc capacity of 130 mAh/ g with a coulomb efﬁciency of 99%, 2 mAh/g more than theory if þ ions could extract from per cell unit, and the excess may two Na result from the side reaction of the impurities. The discharging þ /V4þ cations equivalent to only Na transition were not equal to these in charge (Dx ¼ 1). Together with the high coulomb efﬁciency, all have indicated that the initially þ because of some irrereturned ions were mixed with Na þ ions mainly from SEI ﬁlm, and the feasible versible factors for Na þ ion in the Na3V2(PO4)2F3/Li system. The high migration of Li ions coulomb efﬁciency may be mainly due to the back of more Li þ ions as its smaller ionic radius. substituting the irreversible Na Furthermore, the sloping curve on oxidation for Na3V2(PO4)2F3 has suggested the presence of a solid solution up to the composition NaV2(PO4)2F3 according to the charging capacity.

The charging voltage plateau of 3.8 V on cycling was lower than that of Li3V2(PO4) (4.1 V), and the open circle voltage (OCV) was also lower than that of V3þ/4þ couple in Li3V2(PO4) [21] (3.0 V vs. 3.5 V). þ in the lattice, which This is partly due to the initial presence of Na will slightly lower the redox potential. Moreover, the all-cornershared lattice of the metal and ﬂuorineephosphorus polyhedral in Na3V2(PO4)2F3 lead to a lower potential as a consequence of less repulsion between Vnþ

Sequential cyclic voltammetry curves at a scan rate of 0.5 mV/s are shown in Fig. 5. The ﬁrst cathodic peak was obviously deviated from the following ones at a lower voltage, demonstrating that the þ þ , initial insertion ions were hybrid ions combined with Na

which was coherent with the analysis from Fig. 4. What’s more, the mixed Li/Na (de)insertion predominantly favored Li after the ﬁrst cycle deﬁned by the similar shapes of the following four cycles, þ and a vast which resulted from the irreversible factors for Na in the cell. The anodic peaks shifted to higher potenexcess of Li tials while the corresponding cathodic peaks to lower values beginning with the second cycle, illuminating that the irreversible behaviors has been more and more manifest in cycling. And the increasing hysteresis (DV) between the cathodic and anodic peaks could indicate the increasing polarization of the electrode. Moreover, the shift of peak potentials may be an indication toward the reformation of electrode in the ﬁrst few cycles, whereby the active material undergoes minor structure rearrangement and makes good electrical contact among the carbon-coated particles in the composite, current collector and electrolyte [22]. Good liner relationship between the square root of scan rates y 1/2 and peak current icp, was presented in the inset based on the cathodic peaks of CV plots at different scan rates without using anodic peak values, because one of the anodic peaks had integrated and disappeared gradually with the increase of scan rates similar with the reported analysis [18]. And the linear relationship demonstrated a diffusioncontrolled process for the whole electrode reaction and a typical equilibrium behavior of an intercalation type electrode [18]. Thus, the ion diffusion is a key factor to the Na3V2(PO4)2F3 electrode kinetics.

The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) has been a powerful technique to determine the ionic diffusion coefﬁcient D [18,23,24], and the Nyquist plots carried on a cell after different CV cycles at 0.5 mV/s but at an uniform voltage charged to 4 V, are shown in Fig. 6(a). The very small intercept at the Zre axis was

Fig. 4. The electrochemical voltageecomposition curve for the cell of Na3V2(PO4)2F3/C vs. Li at 0.1 C. The inset shows initial chargeedischarge proﬁles.

the ZView package after different cycles are listed in Table 1. The increased Rct with 26 U in initial 6 cycles and 120 U in later 6 cycles, may be responsible for the capacity fading of the material via cycling.

The ion diffusion coefﬁcient of the composite can be estimated

by the following equation [25]: D ¼ R2T2=2S2n4F4C2s2

where R is the gas constant, T the absolute temperature, n the number of electrons in reaction (n ¼ 1), F the Faraday constant, C the ionic concentration, and s is correlated to Warburg impedance calculated by the following equation [26], obtained from the slope in Fig. 6(b). Zre ¼ Rf þ Rct þ su 1=2

The calculated results of D are listed in Table 1, and the values  1 are consistent with Jiang et al. [6], with a magnitude 10 with an explanation to the similar variation of D, while the smaller

Fig. 3. First chargeedischarge potential proﬁles of Na3V2(PO4)2F3/C composite (a) prepared at different temperatures at 0.02 C, and (b) prepared at 700 C at different current rates. (c) Cycling performance of Na3V2(PO4)2F3/C composite prepared at 700 C at different current rates.

attributed to the internal resistance of the cell, which consisted of the resistance of the electrolyte and electrode. The semicircle in high frequency region represented the charge transfer resistance (Rct) between the electrolyte and active material, involving SEI ﬁlm resistance. The sloping line in the low frequency region correþ ions in the electrode bulk, sponding to the diffusion of Li namely Warburg impedance. Compared values of Rct ﬁtted by using

Fig. 5. Cyclic voltammogram at a scan rate of 0.5 mV/s. The inset shows the relationship between the square root of the scan rate y 1/2 and peak current icp based on CV plots at different scan rates: 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 0.8 and 1 mV/s.

Fig. 6. (a) Nyquist plots of the Na3V2(PO4)2F3/C composite after 0, 6 and 12 cycles of cyclic voltammetry at a scan rate of 0.5 mV/s. (b) Liner ﬁtting of Zre vs. u 1/2 after 0, 6 and 12 cycles.

þ one without cycling may be due to the only diffusion of heavier Na ions. However, the magnitude of D is much larger than that of  16e olivine LiFePO4 measured by Prosini et al.  1) [27], as a consequence of the NASCON-type 1.8  10 structure characteristic allowing ions transport in an opening framework while the olivine owing only one dimensional pathway. In addition, the lithium content in Na3V2(PO4)2F3/C composite (or the voltage) and morphology including the shape and size of the particles may be also play an important role in inﬂuencing the D value. To investigate the effect of wash on the properties of Na3V2(PO4)2F3/C composite prepared at 700 C, a wash by distilled water followed drying was carried out and the potential proﬁles are shown in Fig. 7. The ﬁrst discharge capacity of the composite at 0.1 C increased to 188 mAh/g with a more 20 mAh/g at the voltage plateau, and the improved performance might result from the inexistence of

Table 1 Charge transfer resistance (Rct) and ion diffusion coefﬁcient of the Na3V2(PO4)2F3/C composite material at a charging voltage of 4 V upon different CV cycles.

Fig. 7. First discharge curves at 0.1 C of the Na3V2(PO4)2F3/C composite prepared at 700 C before/after wash by distilled water. The inset shows the cycling performance of washed composite.

hydro-soluble impurities in the product. However, the capacity has decreased to 178 mAh/g in the second cycle and 148 mAh/g in the eighth, unexpectedly, attributing to the destruction of coralliform structure or surface activity of Na3V2(PO4)2F3 by wash. More exploration deserves to be done and elucidate this phenomenon, considering the predominant properties of the material and the economical procedure.

As we all known, NH4VO3 is a staple raw material often being used in solegel [6] method to prepare the cathode materials, and it can easily transform into V2O5 by calcination in the air as following equation: NH4VO3/V2O5 þ NH3 þ H2O

Theoretically, Na3V2(PO4)2F3 could be obtained by the same route when using NH4VO3 substituting V2O5. Fig. 8 displays the potential proﬁles of the obtained composite and the cyclic performance in the inset. The best property with a speciﬁc capacity of 87 mAh/g appeared at 650 C, which was rather unsatisfying compared with the performance when NH4VO3 used for solegel method owning 120 mAh/g and ideal capacity retention [6]. The

undesirable electrochemical performance may be attributed to the secondary phases or too large particle size of the product, or the different intermediate phases by carbothermal reduction which play an important role in the properties of ﬁnal product [6].

Na3V2(PO4)2F3 was synthesized by CTR method at optimum 700 C, and the Na3V2(PO4)2F3 cathode in lithium ion battery presented a speciﬁc capacity of 188 mAh/g with a voltage plateau of 3.7 V under close-to-equilibrium condition. When measured at 0.1 C, the Na3V2(PO4)2F3 could produce 130 mAh/g and retain 96.8% after 37 cycles. The low conductivity and OCV around 3 V may be attributed to the NASICON-type structure with a three-dimensional framework, but beneﬁcial for ions transportation and making a large ion diffusion coefﬁcient (D). After being washed by distilled the Na3V2(PO4)2F3 could reach an initial capacity of water, 188 mAh/g at 0.1 C with a raising 20 mAh/g at plateau voltage. By comparison, the electrochemical performance of Na3V2(PO4)2F3 prepared from V2O5 was more desirable than that from NH4VO3 by CTR. Thus, Na3V2(PO4)2F3 can be considered as a potentially cathode material for Li-ion or Na-ion rechargeable batteries, and the application to industrial purpose is competitive because of its low cost in preparation.

We thank for the ﬁnancial support from Qihang program of innovation and entrepreneurship (No. 2011CY03, 2009CX46) and Caitian xuanzhu program of innovation and entrepreneurship (No. 12CT10) of Central South University.