The   carbon-coated   monoclinic   Li3V2(PO4)3/C  composite   was   prepared   via   rheological   phase   method   with EDTA   (ethylene   diamine   tetraacetic   acid),   a  new   type   of   carbon   source.   XRD   patterns   demonstrate   the  pure monoclinic   structure   of   the   sample.   The   images   of   SEM   show   the   uniform   and   optimized   particles   size, which   greatly   improves   the   electrochemical   performance.   The   TEM   test   shows   the   amorphous   carbon around   the   surface   of   the   particles.   In  the  potential   range   of   3.0–4.3   V,   the  initial   discharge   capacity is   129.1   mAh/g   at   0.1   C   which   is  almost   near   the   theoretical   capacity,   and   it   keeps   so   fairly   stable   that  a discharge   capacity   of  more   than   125   mAh/g   can   still   be  held   after   50   galvanostatical   cycles.   It  also   exhibits an   excellent   rate   capability   with   high   discharge   capacities   of   more   than   108   mAh/g   at   2  C   after   100   cycles.

Energy  crisis,  that  is  extremely  urgent,  has  sparked  an  increasingly  development  in  new  energy,  speciﬁcally  in  the  area  of  electric vehicles.  It  supervenes  with  extensive  market  demand  for  lithiumion  power  battery,  which  has  higher  energy  and  steady  voltage platform.  Consequently  the  research  of  some  recommendable  cathode  materials,  such  as  phosphate-based  polyanion  materials  in special,  has  become  the  hot  spot  of  the  battery  materials  ﬁeld.  As everyone  knows,  LiFePO4,  introduced  by  Padhi  et  al.  [1],   the  most outstanding  phosphate-based  polyanion  material,  has  been  extensively  studied,  as  it  has  many  excellent  characters  such  as  superior thermal  stability,  high  security  and  resource-abundance  [2].   However,  because  of  the  stability  of  d-electron  orbital  in  the  structure which  hinders  the  transportation  of  electrons,  this  kind  of  materials has  lower  electronic  conductivity  [3].   Lithium  vanadium  phosphate (Li3V2(PO4)3,  LVP),  compared  with  LiFePO4,  presents  a  higher  electron/ion  conductivity,  theoretical  capacity  and  charge/discharge voltage  platform.  Even  under  the  high  charge  voltage  of  4.8  V,  it  can maintain  a  stable  framework.  LVP  of  course  is  considered  as  a  favorable  cathode  material  for  lithium  ion  power  batteries  [4–7]  Over  the

past  decade,  and  progress  has  been  mainly  made  on  synthesis  and modiﬁcation  of  LVP  [8–10].

As  our  previous  article  summarized  [11],  if  using  the  conventional  methods  of  solid  state  method  to  prepare  LVP  [12,13],   the material  will  have  a  larger  and  asymmetrical  particle  size;  while using  sol–gel  method  [14,15]  or  hydrothermal  synthesis  method [16,17],   the  procedure  will  be  too  complicated  and  costly.  But  some novel  methods,  which  are  low  cost  and  easy  to  operate,  can  solve these  problems  to  some  extent.  For  example,  wet  coordination method  has  been  invented  by  our  laboratory  [18,19],   which  is  the fastest  way   to  prepare  LVP  material  at  the  lower  temperature  of 600 ◦C.  And  specially,  rheological  phase  reaction  method,  which  is ﬁrstly  used  by  Chang  et  al.  [20]  to  prepare  LVP,  has  been  successfully  used  to  synthesize  homogeneous  LVP  material  with  excellent rate  performance  [21]  in  our  lab.  The  preparation  process  is  mixing  the  solid-phase  reactants  and  adding  an  appropriate  amount  of solvent  to  form  a  uniform  rheological  system,  afterwards  deposing the  system  at  the  appropriate  reaction  conditions  to  get  the  precursor.  Compared  with  sol–gel  method,  the  main  difference  is  that  the reactants  are  completely  dissolved  in  the  sol–gel  processing,  but is  not  in  the  rheological  phase  method  processing,  which  includes both  solid  phase  and  liquid  phase.  Particles  of  materials  prepared via  this  method  are  ﬁne  and  distribute  evenly  [11].

Besides,  the  modiﬁcation  methods  are  widely  studied  to enhance  the  low  electronic  and  ionic  conductivities.  In  general,  the modiﬁcation  methods  include  three  classes:  carbon-coating  [22], metal  oxide  coating  [23]  and  metal  ion  doping  [24–26].  For  the  sake of  cost-cutting,  carbon-coating  is  the  most  optimized  modiﬁcation

Fig.  1.  XRD  patterns  of  both  uncoated  and  coated  LVP  samples.

way.  Moreover,  it  renders  the  materials  better  cycling  and  rate performances,  which  leads  to  longer  distance  and  higher  speed  of vehicles.  Therefore,  a  variety  of  carbon  source  with  diverse  structure  were  introduced  into  LVP  particles,  such  as  acetylene  black [27],  sucrose  [28],  maltose  [15],  citric  acid  [29],  and  polyethylene glycol  [30],  and  the  inﬂuence  they  have  on  the  electrochemical  performance  has  been  compared.  In  a  word,  no  matter  what  the  carbon source  is,  inorganic  or  organic,  it  can  well  boost  the  electronic  conductivity  both.  But  material  coated  with  organic  carbon  sources provides  a  better  electrochemical  performance  because  of  the  speciﬁc  coordination  of  organic  carbon,  used  to  uniformly  disperse metal  ion  [31].

So  it  is  the  coordination  of  organic  carbon  source  that  has  indispensable  effect  on  LVP’s  properties.  Ethylene  diamine  tetraacetic acid  (EDTA)  is  a  polyamino  carboxylic  acid,  which  has  six  ligating  atoms  that  can  form  a  rather  stable  water-soluble  complex with  alkali  metals,  rare  earth  elements  and  transition  metals  [32]. Its  usefulness  arises  because  of  its  role  as  a  hexadentate  (“sixtoothed”)  ligand  and  chelating  agent.  It  is  widely  used  in  industry [33],  medicine  [34]  and  laboratory  applications  [35].  However,  such outstanding  chelating  agent  has  not  yet  been  spread  in  the  preparation  of  materials  for  Li-ion  batteries.

In  conclusion,  we  employed  rheological  phase  reaction  method and  introduced  EDTA  as  new  type  of  carbon  source  into  raw  materials  to  synthesis  LVP  cathode  material.

Li2CO3,  V2O5,  NH4H2PO4 and  EDTA  were  employed  as  the starting  materials.  The  chemicals  in  quantities  corresponding  to 0.005  mol   stoichiometric  Li3V2(PO4)3,  and  a  proper  amount  of  EDTA were  fully  mixed  by  grinding  for  half  an  hour.  An  amount  of  deionized  water  was  dropwise  added  to  get  a  rheological  body.  The mixture  was  transferred  into  a  sealed  polytetraﬂuoroethylene  container  and  then  the  container  is  maintained  at  80 ◦C  for  12  h,  ﬁnally dried  and  grinded  at  60 ◦C  to  give  a  lavender  precursor.  The  precursor  was  initially  calcined  at  350 ◦C  for  3  h  and  then  treated  at  800 ◦C for  8  h  under  ﬂowing  argon  to  yield  a  composite  10%  by  weight in  carbon  (LVP/C).  Besides,  uncoated  sample  was  prepared  by  the same  process  for  comparison.

Fig.  2.  SEM  images  of  uncoated  (a,  ampliﬁed  by  3000  times)  and  coated  (b,  ampliﬁed by   20,000  times)  LVP  samples.

The  thermal  behavior  of  the  precursor  was   analyzed  with Thermo  Gravimetry  (TG)  apparatus  (Pyris  Diamond,  Perkin-Elmer Thermal  Analysis)  under  nitrogen  ﬂow.  The  sample  was  heated from  ambient  to  900 ◦C  at  the  rate  of  10 ◦C  min−1.  The  phase purity  and  structure  were  detected  with  Powder  X-ray  Diffraction  (XRD,  Bruke  D8)  employing  Cu  KR  radiation.  The  particle  size was  observed  with  a  Scanning  Electron  Microscope  (SEM,  HITACHI S-4700).  Moreover,  Transmission  Electron  Microscopy  (TEM,  JEM2100)  with  Energy  Dispersive  Analysis  of  X-rays  (EDAX)  were performed  to  inspect  the  surface  morphology  of  the  sample.  The composite  electrode  was   made  from  a  mixture  of  the  prepared  sample,  conductive  carbon  black,  and  polyvinylidene  ﬂuoride  (PVDF)  in a  weight  ratio  of  80:10:10.  By  a  battery  tester  (LAND  CT2001A), the  batteries  were  galvanostatically  charged–discharged  within 3.0–4.3  V  (vs.  Li/Li+)  under  current  density  of  13  mA/g  (0.1  C), 130  mA/g  (1  C),  260  mA/g  (2  C)  and  390  mA/g  (3  C),  respectively. Cyclic  Voltammogram  (CV)  was  conducted  by  an  electrochemical work  station  (CHI660A).  The  carbon  content  was  determined  by Elemental  Analysis  (EA),  and  the  result  was   veriﬁed  by  dissolving LVP/C  in  hydrochloric  acid  and  weighing  the  remains.

Fig.  1  shows  the  XRD  patterns  of  both  carbon-coated  and uncoated  LVP  composites.  Compared  with  the  uncoated  sample, the  sharper  diffraction  peaks  of  coated  one  indicate  a  better  crystallinity  of  the  composite.  Three  maximum  characteristic  peaks at  20.60◦,  24.26◦and  29.30◦ (2)  prove  the  typical  space  (P21/n) structure  of  LVP,  which  are  largely  consistent  with  the  previous reports  [18,19,21],   and  there  are  no  diffraction  peaks  of  impurity  phase.  The  lattice  parameters  (Table  1)  carried  out  by  means of  the  computing  of  the  software  named  Jade  further  prove  the monoclinic  feature  of  the  materials.  In  a  word,  a  pure  phase of  monoclinic  LVP/C  coated  with  EDTA  as  the  source  of  carbon  was  successfully  synthesized  and  its  sharp  diffraction  peaks of  patterns  predict  a  good  electrochemical  performance  of  sample.

Table  1 Lattice  parameters  of  both  uncoated  and  coated  LVP  samples.

The  SEM  images  of  both  coated  and  uncoated  LVP  samples are  shown  in  Fig.  2.  It  can  be  observed  that  diameter  of  primary ␮m  (Fig.  2(a)),  while particles  of  uncoated  LVP  sample  is  about  2  that  of  coated  sample  merely  distributes  in  range  of  50–300  nm (Fig.  2(b)).  The  diameter  of  primary  particles  of  coated  LVP  is  relatively  smaller  because  the  residual  carbon  from  EDTA  plays  an important  role  in  reducing  particle  size  by  hindering  the  growth of  LVP/C  particles  during  heating.  As  seen  from  Fig.  2(a),  the agglomeration  of  uncoated  LVP  sample  is  such  serious  that  the diameter  of  the  secondary  particles  is  nearly  12  ␮m.  Fig.  2(b)  shows that  the  introducing  of  EDTA  also  results  in  relatively  minimal agglomeration  accompany  with  more  uniform  in  distribution  and much  smaller  secondary  particle  size  with  some  small  clusters (0.5–3 

In  addition,  distribution  of  main  elements  (C,  V,  O  and  P)  of  the coated  sample  was   analyzed  by  EDX.  As  shown  in  Fig.  3,  it  can  be found  that  the  main  elements  of  LVP  (P,  V,  O)  distribute  symmetrically  in  the  composite.  Speciﬁcally  the  element  C  from  the  pyrolysis of  EDTA  distributes  homogeneously  among  the  LVP  material,  which predicts  the  carbon  is  well  and  uniformly  coated  on  the  sample.  In order  to  further  certify  it,  TEM  test  was  implemented.

Fig.  4  shows  the  results  of  TEM  test.  From  Fig.  4(A),  we  can clearly  ﬁnd  that  both  the  primary  and  the  secondary  particles are  uniformly  coated  with  a  carbon  layer.  And  in  Fig.  4(C),  the

Fig.  4.  TEM  (A,  C)  and  magniﬁed  HRTEM  (B,  D)  images  of  the  coated  LVP  sample.

magnifying  picture  at  point  (a),  further  calculates  the  thickness of  carbon  layer  (ca.  60  nm).  Both  panels  of  Fig.  4(B)  and  (D) are  the  images  of  HRTEM  test,  from  which  the  crystal  texture of  Li3V2(PO4)3 and  amorphous  texture  of  coated  carbon  can  be observed.  Furthermore,  the  magnifying  picture  of  Fig.  4(B)  shows the  lattice  fringe  image  at  (1  2  1)  crystal  face  which  can  be  testiﬁed by  XRD.

these  advantages,  such  as  smaller particles,  uniform  and  well-dispersed  particle  size  as  well  as homogeneously  carbon-coating,  it  is  believed  to  help  to  the  electrochemical  performance  of  LVP/C  composites  for  it  can  provide short  diffusion  paths  and  fast  diffusion  rates  along  their  grain boundaries.

The  charge–discharge  proﬁles  of  both  coated  and  uncoated  sample  are  shown  in  Fig.  5.  It  can  be  clearly  seen  that  the  curves exhibit  three  charge  ﬂat  plateaus  and  correspondingly  three  discharge  ones,  which  are  identiﬁed  as  the  two-phase  transition processes  during  the  electrochemical  reactions.  In  cut-off  potential  range  of  3.3–4.3  V,  three  plateaus  at  3.59,  3.67  and  4.08  V are  observed,  corresponding  to  the  extraction  of  two  lithium  ions and  the  phase  transitions  of  LixV2(PO4)3 from  x  =  3.0–2.5,  2.0  and 1.0.  The  ﬁrst  lithium  ion  is  extracted  with  two   steps  due  to  the existence  of  the  ordered  phase  Li2.5V2(PO4)3.  Then,  the  second

lithium  ion  is  removed  via  a  single  step,  accompanied  with  the complete  oxidation  of  V3+ to  V4+.  Three  discharge  plateaus  at  4.05, 3.65  and  3.56  V  are  assigned  to  the  reinsertion  of  the  two  lithium ions,  corresponding  to  the  phase  transitions  of  LixV2(PO4)3 from x  =  1.0–2.0,  2.5  and  3.0,  respectively.  In  the  cut-off  potential  range of  3.3–4.8  V,  a  sloping  plateau  above  4.50  V  in  the  charge  proﬁle reveals  the  extraction  of  the  third  lithium  ion/electron  and  the formation  of  a  V2(PO4)3 framework.  This  process  is  kinetically  difﬁcult.

Compared  with  the  uncoated  sample  in  the  potential  range  of 3.0–4.3  V  at  0.1  C,  initial  capacity  of  coated  sample  is  132.3  mAh/g in  charge  and  129.1  mAh/g  in  discharge  which  is  much  higher  and even  corresponds  closely  to  the  theoretical  capacity  (133  mAh/g). And  the  coulomb  efﬁciency  is  about  97.6%,  while  that  of  uncoated sample  is  only  88.7%,  indicating  its  outstanding  reversibility.  Similarly,  in  the  potential  range  of  3.0–4.8  V  at  0.1  C,  the  initial  capacity is  about  197  mAh/g  in  charge  and  170.8  mAh/g  in  discharge  with a  coulomb  efﬁciency  of  around  87%,  while  that  of  uncoated  sample  is  135.4  mAh/g  in  charge  and  107.4  mAh/g  in  discharge  with  a coulomb  efﬁciency  of  79.3%.

The  cyclic  performance  at  0.1  C  in  different  cut-off  potential ranges  is  shown  in  Fig.  6.  It  obviously  shows  that  discharge  capacity and  cycle  performance  of  coated  LVP/C  sample  is  much  higher  than that  of  pristine  LVP  sample.  Between  3.0  and  4.3  V,  discharge  capacity  of  the  coated  one  could  be  maintained  more  than  125  mAh/g after  the  30th  cycle  with  a  capacity  retention  of  98%,  while  that

Fig.  5.  The  initial  charge–discharge  proﬁles  of  both  uncoated  and  coated  samples at  0.1  C  in  cut-off  potential  range  of  3.0–4.3  V  (a)  and  3.0–4.8  V  (b).

Fig.  7.  T  The  rate  performance  of  the  coated  LVP  sample  in  cut-off  potential  range of   3.0–4.3  V.

of  the  uncoated  one  is  only  above  53.6  mAh/g  with  a  capacity retention  of  55.4%.  Between  3.0  and  4.8  V,  the  discharge  capacity  of the  coated  sample  decreases  from  an  initial  value  of  170.2  mAh/g to  142.7  mAh/g  after  30  cycles  with  a  capacity  retention  of  83.8%, while  that  of  the  uncoated  one  decreases  from  107.4  mAh/g  to 74.7  mAh/g  with  a  capacity  retention  of  69.5%.

Therefore,  using  EDTA  as  the  carbon  source  greatly  improves  the electrochemical  performance  of  LVP  materials  either  in  the  low  or high  cut-off  potential  range.  Appropriate  amount  of  EDTA,  as  the

Fig.  6.  The  cyclic  performance  of  both  uncoated  and  coated  samples.

coordination  reactant,  could  be  used  to  prepare  a  homogeneous precursor,  and  also  provide  a  carbon-bronzed  net  that  increases the  contact  area  of  the  reactants  during  the  pre heating  process. Moreover,  due  to  the  high  speciﬁc  surface  area  of  the  reducing  agent (amorphous  carbon),  it  plays  a  key  role  in  lowering  the  activation energy.  To  further  testify  the  superior  performance  of  the  coated LVP/C  material,  rate  behavior  was   investigated  in  the  cut-off  voltages  of  3.3–4.3  V  under  different  discharge  rates  (0.1  C,  1  C,  2  C,  and 3  C).  Specially,  the  cycle  performance  under  high  rate  of  2  C  was testiﬁed.

Fig.  7(a)  presents  the  rate  behavior  of  the  test  cells  in  the  cutoff  voltages  of  3.3–4.3  V  under  different  discharge  rates  (0.1  C,  1  C, 2  C,  and  3  C).  The  initial  discharge  at  0.1  C  shows  a  high  capacity of  129  mAh/g  and  retains  almost  unchanged  by  5th  round  cycling test.  At  the  discharge  rate  of  1  C,  a  capacity  of  about  122  mAh/g can  still  be  held  after  5  rounds,  which  exhibits  a  high  reversible performance.  At  the  high  discharge  rate  of  2  C  and  3  C,  the  capacity can  maintains  around  116  mAh/g  (2  C)  and  110  mAh/g  (3  C),  respectively,  after  5  rounds.  So  the  test  cells  exhibit  good  rate  performance attributed  to  the  boost  in  electronic  conductivity  from  the  layer  of coated  carbon.  Besides,  Fig.  6(b)  shows  the  cyclic  properties  at  high discharge  rate  of  2  C  between  3.0  and  4.3  V.  The  discharge  capacity  keeps  upon  108  mAh/g  after  100  cycles  from  an  initial  value of  116.5  mAh/g.  The  capacity  retention  reaches  up  to  96.5%  (after 30  cycles)  and  93.1%  (after  100  cycles),  which  further  proves  the  distinguished  cyclic  performance  and  rate  properties  of  LVP/C  material carbon  coated  with  EDTA  as  carbon  source.  It  can  be  deduced that,  in  this  paper,  the  sample  with  good  electrochemical  performance  is  derived  from  its  small  particle  size  and  carbon-coated layer.

LVP/C  has  been  successfully  prepared  via  rheological  phase method  with  EDTA,  a  new  type  of  carbon  source.  And  for  comparison,  uncoated  sample  was  synthesized  via  the  same  method. XRD  patterns  demonstrate  the  pure  monoclinic  structure  of  the coated  sample,  and  sharper  diffraction  peaks  indicate  a  better crystallinity  and  electrochemical  performance  which  has  ﬁnally been  certiﬁed.  The  images  of  SEM  show  the  uniform  and  optimized  particles  size,  which  greatly  improves  the  electrochemical performance.  In  the  potential  range  of  3.0–4.3  V,  the  initial  discharge  capacity  is  129.1  mAh/g  at  0.1  C  which  is  almost  near  the theoretical  capacity.  And  it  keeps  so  fairly  stable  that  a  discharge capacity  of  more  than  125  mAh/g  can  still  be  held  after  30  galvanostatical  cycles.  It  also  keeps  upon  a  high  discharge  capacity of  more  than  108  mAh/g  at  2  C  after  100  cycles  from  an  initial  value of  116.5  mAh/g.  The  capacity  retention  reaches  up  to  96.5%  (after 50  cycles)  and  93.1%  (after  100  cycles),  which  further  proves  the distinguished  cyclic  performance  and  rate  properties  of  coated LVP/C  material.  Similarly  electrochemical  performance  of  coated LVP/C  sample  is  much  higher  than  uncoated  one  in  the  potential  range  of  3.0–4.8  V.  The  excellent  electrochemical  performance should  be  attributed  to  the  coated  carbon,  which  enhances  the electronic  conductivity  of  the  as-prepared  LVP/C  material.  In  all, all  the  test  results  demonstrate  that  LVP/C  is  a  promising  cathode material  for  higher  energy  density  and  power  demanding  lithiumion  batteries  used  in  hybrid  electric  vehicle  (HEV)  or  electric vehicle  (EV).

This  work  was  ﬁnancially  supported  by  the  National  Key  Program  for  Basic  Research  of  China  (No.  2009CB220100),  National 863  Program  (No.  2011AA11A235)  and  Basic  research  fund  of  BIT (No.  3100012211111).