Sol–gel routes for synthesizing super ionic conducting solids (e.g. NaSICON) are more economically advantageous and results in higher homogeneity and purity as well as ﬁner grain size of the ﬁnal product compared to other techniques. One prerequisite towards arriving at an effective sol–gel process is to cope with the obstacles at each step of solution and gel preparations, and heat treatment process. In the present work we attempt to develop a procedure for synthesis NaSICON-type ZrNb(PO4)3 based on the Pechini method, which offers easier process and better quality of the ﬁnal product. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) was employed to evaluate the bonding characteristics of the obtained gel. The effect of heat treatment procedure on the purity and crystallographic structure of the ﬁnal product was studied by the use of X-ray diffraction. Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA) together with Differential Thermal Analysis (DTA) was used to investigate the variations of dried gel properties with temperature and to identify the appropriate heating process. & 2012 Elsevier Ltd and Techna Group S.r.l. All rights reserved.

Fast ion conductors are ionic conducting solid electrolytes with high conductivity below their melting point [1], which are extensively used in rechargeable batteries, fuel cells, chemical sensors and ion separators. In solid electrolytes, the conducting species are usually monovalent [2] or divalent [3] ions. The main problem of migration of higher valence ions stems from the strong electrostatic interaction between mobile cations and anions in the structure. However, in rhombohedral NaSICON (Na Super Ionic CONductor) structure, which consists of a three-dimensional rigid framework with MO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra sharing common corners [4], the mobile ion has sufﬁcient space to move through the interstitial tunnels in surrounding anions.

formula of AM(PO4)3, the appropriate selection of atom M is prerequisite

for attaining high conduction of mobile ions especially at higher valences. In the case of tetravalent Zr ion, M should be a penta(or more) valent ion to provide enough electrostatic interaction with anions and to enhance the Zr4þ ion mobility. ZrNb(PO4)3 [5] and ZrTa(PO4)3 [6] were the ﬁrst structures synthesized via solid state route. Thereafter, it was shown that a partial addition of W6þ [8] in ZrTa(PO4)3 structure can improve its conduction. The methods used for developing these compounds were solid state and sol–gel.

On the other hand, higher homogeneity and purity, ﬁner grain size of the ﬁnal structure, lower cost and low heattreatment temperatures can be accounted as the advantages of the sol–gel method compared to the solid state for synthesizing such structures [9]. Among different types of sol–gel routes, the Pechini method offers several advantages including very stable citrate/metal complexes, lower cost, homogeneous compositions, high purity, lack of sensitivity to the moisture and low heat-treatment temperatures.

There are pertinent factors in the Pechini method which may affect the purity and characteristics of the ﬁnal product. At gel production step, metal ions/citric acid

molar ratio (M:CA), citric acid/ethylene glycol molar ratio (CA:EG), and pH should be controlled to prevent the precipitation of undesirable compounds and to ensure the completion of the esteriﬁcation reaction. Heat treatment is the next important step, which can be held in one or more passes. During heat treatment, organic materials are removed and the desired structure is obtained. However, in some cases, one or more crystalline intermediate phases may be formed at lower temperatures, which transform to the ﬁnal structure by heating at higher temperatures.

To the authors’ best knowledge,

there is no work reporting the use of the Pechini method for synthesizing ZrNb(PO4)3 structure; the ﬁnal product, obtained via this method, has the minimum amounts of impurities compared to other synthesizing technique [6]. In the present work, a procedure is developed for synthesizing ZrNb(PO4)3 NaSICON structure based on the Pechini sol–gel method for the ﬁrst time. The effect of single-pass and multiple-pass heat treatment at different temperatures are studied while the parameters of M:CA, CA:EG, and pH were held constant. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was employed to investigate the complexing and esteriﬁcation processes, and thermal analysis was used to optimize the heating temperatures to improve the obtained structure.

For synthesizing ZrNb(PO4)3 the following precursors of analytical grade were used: ZrOCl2  8H2O (SigmaAldrich), NbCl5 (SigmaAldrich), citric acid (Merck), ethylene glycol (Merck), NH4OH (Merck), and H2O2 (Merck). The detailed synthesis procedure of ZrNb(PO4)3 is presented in Fig. 1. Niobium chloride solution was prepared by dissolving a given amount of NbCl5 in the diluted ammonia. Then, citric acid (CA) and hydrogen peroxide were added into the solution and stirred at around 70 1C for 1 h. The obtained transparent niobium solution was mixed with the aqueous solution of NH4H2PO4 (phosphate solution). For the preparation of zirconium solution, CA was ﬁrst dissolved in distilled water and then ZrOCl2  8H2O was introduced to this solution. By mixing the obtained solution with the phosphate solution (containing Nb5þ and PO4 ), ethylene glycol (EG) was added with molar ratio CA:EG of 1:2.
The ﬁnal solution was heated at 96 1C to obtain a gel which then dried at 150 1C for 5 h. Two types of heat treatment; single-pass and multiple-pass heat treatment were applied on the dried gel. Many of NaSICON materials crystallize at temperatures up to 700 1C. However, for Zr/Hf NaSICON, this was not the case [7–15].

Fig. 1. Proposed ﬂowchart for synthesis of ZrNb(PO4)3 based on the Pechini sol–gel method.

Therefore, in order to achieve a crystalline structure, it was decided to increase the calcination temperature to higher temperatures up to the capacity of the furnace used in this study. Thus, to ﬁnd the suitable calcination temperature, the single-pass heat treatments were performed for 12 h at different temperatures of 700, 1000, and 1200 1C. The latter was reheated at 1200 1C for 12 h.

Based on our preliminary studies (unpublished data) and also the Bakar et al. (2010) [10] work on BaZr0.85Zn0.05Y0.1O2.95 the multiple-pass heat treatment procedure was performed at 3 stages of 400, 900, and 1200 1C for 12 h at each stage. Another multiple-pass heat treatment was applied on the dried gel at 300, 950, and 1300 1C for 12 h at each step. These temperatures were chosen based on the obtained thermal analysis data, which showed that a considerable weight loss occurred at these temperatures. Twelve hours retention time was implemented at each step

to allow enough time for the reactions to get completed and for the volatile components to escape.

IR spectrum of the dried gel was recorded using a Nicolet Nexus 870 FTIR spectrometer in the range of 400–   1. X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) patterns were 4000 cm obtained at room temperature using Cu-Ka radiation (Equinox 3000, Inel, France). The 2y range in XRD analysis was 10–401 with a step size of 0.0311. PANalytical X’Pert HighScore software was used to interpret the XRD data. Simultaneous thermal analysis (STA) including thermogravimetric and differential thermal analyses (TGA–DTA) was performed on the dried gel by a NETZSCH STA 409 PC/PG instrument. The temperature range was   1 using 25–1460 1C with a heating rate of 10 1C min Al2O3 crucibles in air. The microstructures of the obtained powders heated at 1200–1200 1C, 400–900–1200 1C and 300–950–1300 1C were evaluated by a Philips XL36 scanning electron microscope.

Regarding the high afﬁnity of Nb to form insoluble compounds in the aqueous solutions (especially Nb2O5), the stabilization of Nb solutions is the crucial step in the preparation of sol. For complete conversion of NbCl5 to Nb2O5, NH4OH was added into the system. By the addition of citric acid to the system (with the molar ratio of NbCl5/CA¼ 2.5) and in the presence of hydrogen peroxide, Nb2O5 precipitates were converted to dissolved species of Nb.

The mentioned Nb, phosphate and Zr solutions were mixed to obtain a solution containing soluble complexes of Nb, phosphate and Zr (sol). The mixing step of these two solutions strongly affects the stability of ion complexes and the transparency of the sol. Such effect is ascribed to the variation of pH during each step, which can cause the formation of an undesirable compound. Finally, by introducing EG to the sol and heating the system at 96 1C, a relatively transparent gel was obtained. The obtained gel was then dried at 150 1C for 5 h.

Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) is one of techniques available for studying a reactive system. In order to shed more light on the bonding the dried gel, FTIR spectrum was characteristics of employed (Fig. 2).   1 corresponds to the stretching of the O–H bonds in the citric acid derivatives and the trapped water molecules [16]. More  1 and the peak over, the broad peak observed at 3165 cm

The peak that appeared at around 3415 cm

Fig. 2. FTIR spectrum of the gel prepared at 96 1C and dried at 150 1C for 5 h.

  1are assigned to the N–H stretching in ammoat 1721 cm nium group and the monodentate ligand of metal ion with carbonyl groups (COO  ), respectively. The appearance of these peaks conﬁrms both the presence of ammonium salts (in the forms of ammonium chloride and ammonium citrate) [17] and the occurrence of the complexing reaction   1 (which is [18]. Moreover, the bands at 1652 and 1385 cm   1) are alloslightly overlapped by the band at 1404 cm cated to the asymmetric and symmetric stretching mode of a carboxylate group, respectively; which can be considered as an evidence for the formation of CA complexes with both Nb and Zr [19]. The sharp peak that appeared at 1404 cm in ammonium compounds [20].

Additionally, esteriﬁcation reaction between ethylene glycol and citric acid might be corroborated by C–O   1 [21]. The sharp stretching band at 1194 and 1080 cm   1 are related to P–O stretching modes peaks at 1024 cm   1 are corresponded [22] and the bands at 800 and 687 cm to Nb–O stretching and Nb–O–Nb bridging modes in the polymeric intermediates, respectively [23]. Finally,   1 are ascribed to peaks observed at 595 and 520 cm Zr–O and Zr–O–Zr bonds, respectively [24].

The obtained dried gel contains the main species of NaSICON structure (i.e. zirconium, niobium, and phosphate ions) together with many undesired compounds such as organic materials and ammonium compounds. Thus, heat treatment of this gel is essential not only for removing the extra undesired species, but also for crystallization of NaSICON structure. Therefore, two heat treatment procedures, namely single-pass and multiple-pass, were applied. three different temperatures (700, 1000, and 1200 1C) for 12 h. Fig. 3 shows the XRD patterns of the heat-treated samples at different temperatures. According to the XRD pattern presented in Fig. 3(a), the single-pass treatment at 700 1C is an unsuccessful process for achieving a completely result was obtained for crystalline structure. Similar

Close observation of Fig. 3b reveals the appearance of a peak at 19.41 which is the main peak of NaSICON it was decided to conduct the structure. Consequently, single-pass heat temperature (1200 1C). The XRD pattern corresponding to this procedure is presented in Fig. 3c in which the main peaks of NaSICON structure appear. Additionally, since there are still some additional peaks in the XRD pattern (Fig. 3c), which probably belong to unwanted niobium and zirconium phosphates, heat treatment was repeated at 1200 1C for 12 h. The resulted XRD pattern (Fig. 3d) shows the removal of some impurities and consequently higher purity as well as improvement of NaSICON-phase crystallinity (sharper 141 and 19.51 peaks).

In multiple-pass heat treatment, an initial two-step treatment was carried out at 400 and 900 1C and then it continued by a step at 1200 1C. The period of treatment in all steps was 12 h. The XRD pattern corresponding to this heat treated sample (Fig. 4) implies a NaSICON phase with the sharp and distinctive peaks. This pattern is in complete agreement with the pattern obtained by Imanaka et al. [6]. These ﬁndings indicate that multiple-pass heat treatment result in a better NaSICON structure (higher purity). However, in order to cope with the small amounts of impurities present in the ﬁnal product, thermal analysis was employed for identiﬁcation of the suitable heat treatment temperature.

Based on the results discussed in Section 3.3, simultaneous thermal analysis was employed to investigate the detailed variations of dried gel properties with temperature. Fig. 5 illustrates the results of simultaneous thermal analysis (STA) of the dried gel. The ﬁrst weight loss at 25–210 1C range observed on thermogravimetry (TGA)

Fig. 4. XRD pattern of heated gel at 400, 900, and 1200 1C for 12 h. The impurity peaks are marked.

diagram is due to the elimination of the water molecules which are trapped in the polymer chains of the dried gel [25]. The second weight drop at 210–930 1C is related to the deformation of the polymer network, burnout of most of the organic residues, [26] and evaporation of ammonium compounds [20]. Finally, the third weight decrease at 930– 1367 1C can be attributed to the evaporation of the residual carbon from the decomposed organic compounds generated in the previous stage [27].

These results also conﬁrmed by differential thermal analysis (DTA) curve. The endothermic peaks observed at 235 and 307 1C can be due to the decomposition of CA and EG in the polymeric network [28]. The broad exothermic peak at around 850 1C may be due to the elimination of organic materials and the formation of a crystalline phase, which continues to an endothermic peak at 993 1C and another broad exothermic peak at around 1200 1C. Thus, the crystalline phase forming at 900 1C is an intermediate phase and it converts to the ﬁnal NaSICON structure at higher temperatures. This type of evolution was also reported by Sudreau et al. for LiZr2(PO4)3 NaSICON-type structure [29]. Eventually, the endothermic peak at 993 1C may relate to the decomposition of remaining carbonates [27].

Based on the above ﬁndings, a multiple-pass heat treatment at 300, 950, and 1300 1C (the temperatures at which a considerable weight loss occurred) for 12 h was implemented. Fig. 6a shows the XRD pattern of the powder obtained from heating at 300 and 950 1C. The obtained structure is very similar to that obtained by single-pass heat treatment at 1200 1C. The crystalline structure indicates that employing a two-step heat treatment leads to a decrease in the temperature at which the amorphous phase disappears. This crystalline structure should be the intermediate phase produced before 993 1C. After heating up to 1300 1C, the NaSICON structure is completely formed with lower amounts of impurities (Fig. 6b). More comprehensive work is planned for thermodynamic and kinetic investigation of the phase formation.

The SEM image of the powder heated at 1200–1200 1C (twice at 1200 1C) shows that the particle size is about 400 nm (Fig. 7a). It seems that the powder is partially sintered (non-spherical grains); however, the NaSICON peaks do not completely appear in the XRD pattern (Fig. 7a). The grain size of the powder heated at 400– 900–1200 1C (Fig. 7b) is also around 400 nm; however, the shape of the grains is spherical. This results from the fact that the required time for breaking down the polymeric network and leaving the sample is provided by employing multiple-pass heat treatment at lower temperatures. In addition, reducing the residence time of the powder at high temperature (1200 1C) prevents the sintering and results in homogenous powders.

Fig. 7c shows the microstructure of the powder heat treated at 300–950–1300 1C. It is observed that the grains were sintered at this high temperature and some grain growth occurred. There are also some pores which are

formed by evaporation of the remaining organic materials. Heating at 1300 1C reduces the sintering ability of the ﬁnal powder compared to 1200 1C for further treatments, such as preparing a bulk; this means that the higher purity is obtained at the expense of sinterability which results in weaker ionic conductivity.

In this work, ZrNb(PO4)3 with NaSICON-type structure was successfully synthesized via the Pechini-type sol–gel method for the ﬁrst time. The main ﬁndings in this study were the following.

In the preparation of appropriate solution (sol), Nb2O5 was effectively dissolved by the addition of citric acid in the presence of hydrogen peroxide. The precipitation problem was solved by changing the sequence of mixing the Zr, Nb and phosphate solutions. Eventually, ethylene glycol was added into the Nb–Zr sol and a relatively transparent gel was obtained by heating the system at 96 1C.

Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) of the dried gel showed the characteristic peaks corresponding to the monodentate ligand of metallic ions with carbonyl groups (COO  ) and C–O stretching, which conﬁrmed the formation of CA complexes with both Nb and Zr and the occurrence of esteriﬁcation reaction, respectively.

Based on the results obtained by Simultaneous Thermal Analysis (TGA – DTA), a multiple-pass heat treatment at 300, 950, and 1300 1C was implemented for 12 h. X-ray Diffraction pattern of the samples treated under this condition showed a NaSICON phase with the sharp and distinctive peaks which revealed fewer impurities compared to previously reported pattern.

SEM images of the powder obtained from a 400–900– 1200 1C heat treatment process, in which its structure is the
