In  recent  years,  lithium–air  batteries  became  a  major  trend  of new  chemical  power  sources  system  research.  This  system  employs inexhaustible  oxygen  from  air  as  electrode’s  reagent  and  metallic  lithium  as  electrode  with  the  most  negative  potential  and  high capacity  of  3860  mAh   g−1 . According  to  air  electrode  and  lithium electrode,  the  theoretical  speciﬁc  energy  of  lithium–air  battery  is around  3500  Wh   kg−1 for  reaction  forming  Li2O2.  However,  until now,  the  lithium–air  battery  application  has  to  face  two  problems:  one  is  the  insoluble  Li2O2 accumulates  and  blocks  reaction in  porous  air  electrode  in  organic  electrolyte.  Another  is  lithium electrode  reacts  with  the  oxygen,  carbon  dioxide  and  water,  which diffuse  from  air  electrode  [1–10].

For  avoiding  mentioned  problems  of  Li–air  battery,  Visco  et  al. and  Imanishi  et  al.  [11–14]  proposed  a  water  stable  lithium  electrode  (WSLE)  that  is  a  metallic  lithium  electrode  protected  by  a water  stable  lithium-ion  super-ionic  conductor  glass  (NASICON) plate  with  the  interlayer  which  could  be  solid,  polymer  or  organicliquid  electrolyte.  The  interlayer,  which  is  between  the  lithium metal  electrode  and  water  stable  glass  plate,  is  used  to  provide

better  contact  and  prevent  the  reaction  between  the  lithium  and glass  plate.  Rather  than  the  non-aqueous  Li–air  battery,  a  hybrid electrolyte  lithium–air  battery  (HELB)  was   developed  using  WSLE. In  HELB,  an  air  electrode  in  aqueous  electrolyte  and  a  metallic lithium  electrode  in  organic  or  polymer  electrolyte  was  separated by  a  NASICON  glass  plate  [Li3M2(PO4)],  such  as  Li1+xTi2−xAlx(PO4)3 (x  =  0.2–0.3)  and  Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3 (x  =  0.5)  [12–20].  At  the  same time,  as  the  application  required,  HELB  can  be  designed  as  a  high energy  density  rechargeable  battery  or  a  lithium–air  fuel  cell  with aqueous  solution  cycle  system  [9].

in  organic electrolyte,  the  Li+ migration  of  HELB  includes  complex  diffusion  processes  and  interface  processes,  such  as  the  diffusion  in solid  electrolyte  phase,  aqueous  electrolyte  and  organic  electrolyte,  the  interface  of  organic-electrolyte|solid-electrolyte  and solid  electrolyte|aqueous  electrolyte.  During  Li+ migration,  the impedance  of  these  processes  caused  a  more  “polarization  potential”  than  that  of  the  non-aqueous  Li–air  battery.  Then,  for improving  the  discharge  performance  of  HELB,  it  is  essential  to decrease  the  Li+ migration  impedance  of  WSLE.  Furthermore,  it would  be  required  the  study  of  impedance  of  WSLE  to  decrease the  impedance.

The  EIS,  as  a  technique  for  impedance  research,  have  been  performed  in  the  study  of  solid  electrolyte  plate  and  HELBs  impedance [1–3,17].  The  AC  impedance  was  employed  to  compare  and  analyze the  characteristic  of  WSLEs.  However,  the  analysis  of  the  impedance of  WSLEs  was   scarcely  reported  during  the  discharge.  In  this


work,  for  studying  the  impedance  of  WSLE  the  ac  impedance  was measured  with  reference  electrode  and  four-electrode  test-cell. During  discharging,  in  order  to  study  the  impedance  of  water-stable lithium  electrode,  the  polarized  water-stable  lithium  electrodes were  measured  by  EIS.  As  a  result,  the  impedance  spectra  were analyzed  and  discussed  for  proposing  the  way  to  decrease  the impedance  of  WSLE.

The  LAGP  glass–ceramic  [0.8Li2O·0.25Al2O3·1.5GeO2·1.5P2O5 (mol%)]  exhibited  high  lithium-ion  conductivity  and  was  made  into thin  electrolyte  plates  [15–17].   In  this  work,  the  LAGP  plates  were synthesized  by  reagent  grade  chemicals,  including  Li2CO3,  Al2O3, GeO2,  and  NH4H2PO4.  The  four  raw  materials  were  weighted  and mixed  by  the  stoichiometry  of  0.8Li2O·0.25Al2O3·1.5GeO2·1.5P2O5. To  begin  with,  the  mixed  raw  materials  were  heated  slowly  to  723  K and  kept  for  1.5  h  to  release  gaseous  production.  Subsequently,  the mixture  was  heated  up  to  1723  K  and  melted  for  2  h.  Subsequently, the  molten  mixture  was  poured  in  a  heated  plate  mold  and  pressed by  another  one.  The  glass  plate,  which  was  casted  by  the  molten mixture,  was  annealed  at  823  K  for  2  h  and  cooled  in  furnace.  After annealing,  the  glass  plate  crystallized  at  1223  K  for  12  h  and  became a  dense  opaque  white  specimen.  This  specimen  was   reﬁned  shape and  polished  to  a  200–500 

In  order  to  exclude  the  effect  of  different  batches  of  the  LAGP plate,  a  big  LAGP  plate  was   cut  into  10–20  pieces  of  about  1  cm2 small  ones  for  contrast  in  all  physical  and  electrochemical  measurements.

The  morphologies  of  the  LAGP  surfaces  were  characterized by  a  Hitachi  S-4800  ﬁeld  emission  scanning  electron  microscopy (FESEM).  The  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  patterns  of  LAGP  thin  plates were  recorded  by  a  Rigaku  TTRAX  III  diffractometer  employing  a Cu-K␣

The  ionic-conductivity  of  LAGP  plate  was  measured  by  EIS.  A ␮m  thick  Ag  coating  was  deposited  on  both  sides  of  the  LAGP 0.5  plate  by  evaporation.  The  plate  coated  with  Ag  was   ﬁxed  by  two stainless  blocking  electrodes  in  a  blocking  test  cell.

The  three-electrode  test-cells  were  assembled  with  organic electrolyte  (EC:DEC:EMC  =  1:1:1,  1  M  LiPF6)  and  three  lithium  electrodes,  which  were  employed  as  electrode  (WE,  0.5  cm2),  counter electrode  (CE,  0.5  cm2)  and  reference  electrode  (Ref.,  0.25  cm2) respectively.

The  HELBs  with  a  reference  electrode  were  designed  and  assembled  for  impedance  spectroscope  measurements,  as  shown  in Fig.  1(b).  The  HELBs  were  separated  into  a  Li  electrode  region  and  an air  electrode  region  by  LAGP  plate  (0.25  cm2 working  area)  with  a ␮m.   The  Li  electrode  region  was  ﬁlled  with  organic thickness  of  500  electrolyte  (EC:DEC:EMC  =  1:1:1,  1  M  LiPF6)  and  contained  a  Limetal  electrode  (0.5  cm2).  The  air  electrode  region  was  ﬁlled  with aqueous  solution  (0.5  M  LiOH  and  0.5  M  KCl)  and  contained  an  airelectrode  (Super-P  carbon  loaded  Ni  foam,  1  cm2)  and  a  reference electrode  (SCE  in  KCl  saturated  solution,  connected  by  salt  bridge). A  four-electrode  test-cell  was  designed  for  further  electrochemical  impedance  spectroscope  measurements,  as  shown  in Fig.  1(c).  The  test-cells  were  separated  into  two   regions  by ␮m  thick  LAGP  plates  with  0.25  cm2 working  area. 500  There  are  two  metallic  lithium  electrodes  and  organic  electrolyte (EC:DEC:EMC  =  1:1:1,  1  M  LiPF6)  which  sealed  in  each  region.  In  one

Fig.  1.  Schematic  representations  of  test-cells:  (a)  the  three-electrode  test-cell  with organic  electrolyte  (WE   and  CE:  0.5  cm2 Li  metal,  RE:  0.25  cm2 Li  metal),  (b)  the three-electrode  test-cell  with  hybrid  electrolyte  (WE:  0.5  cm2 Li  metal  in  organic electrolyte,  RE:  salt  bridge  +  SCE  in  KCl  saturated  solution,  CE:  1  cm2 air-electrode in   aqueous  solution)  and  (c)  the  four-electrode  test  cell  with  hybrid  electrolyte  (WE and   CE:  0.5  cm2 Li  metal;  RE1  +  RE2:  0.25  cm2 Li  metal,  all  in  organic  electrolyte separated  by  LAGP)  (organic  electrolyte:  EC:DEC:EMC  =  1:1:1,  1  M  LiPF6;  aqueous solution:  0.5  M  LiOH  and  0.5  M  KCl  aqueous  solution).

region,  the  two  lithium  electrodes  were  used  as  a  work  electrode (WE,  0.5  cm2)  and  reference  electrode  1  (Ref.  1,  0.25  cm2).  In  the other,  the  two   lithium  electrodes  were  used  as  a  counter  electrode (CE,  0.5  cm2)  and  reference  electrode  2  (Ref.  2,  0.25  cm2).


instrument model,  1470E  +  1455A),  controlled  by  MultiStatData  software,  was employed  for  obtaining  impedance  spectra  at  the  room  temperature  (298  K).  Unless  speciﬁed,  the  AC  impedance  measurements were  performed  at  OCP  with  the  AC  amplitude  of  10  mV   and  frequency  ranged  from  0.1  to  1  MHz.  The  collected  EIS  were  ﬁtted using  ZView  software.

For  discussing  the  characteristics,  the  XRD,  SEM  and  EIS were  measured.  Fig.  2  provides  XRD  patterns  of  the  LAGP  plate which  consists  of  Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3 (x  =  0.5)  and  AlPO4 crystals [15].  In  XRD  patterns,  the  peaks  marched  the  characteristic  of Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3 (x  =  0.5)  and  AlPO4.  The  Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3 (x  =  0.5)  phase  is  dominant  in  LAGP  glass–ceramics,  and  other  peaks indicates  the  presence  of  an  AlPO4 phase.

Fig.  3  shows  SEM  images  of  the  LAGP  surface.  The  LAGP  surface is  smooth,  close-grained  and  has  visible  traces  of  polishing.  Fig.  4

Fig.  2.  XRD  patterns  of  LAGP  plate.

Fig.  3.  SEM  images  of  LAGP  plate  surface;  (a)  10,000× and  (b)  50,000×.

shows  the  impedance  spectra  of  blocking  electrode.  In  Fig.  4,  the impedance  spectra  of  LAGP  have  a  semicircle  or  distorted  one  at high  frequency  and  a  line  at  low  frequency.  The  conductivity  of ×   10−4 S  cm−1 [the  forLAGP  plate  can  be  calculated.  It  can  reach  4  mula:  ε  =  d/(S·R);  d:  thickness  of  LAGP;  S:  area  of  LAGP;  R:  resistance of  LAGP]  [21–23].

lithium electrode  impedance,  organic  electrolyte  impedance,  solid-state electrolyte  impedance  between them.  For  studying  the  interfacial  phenomenon  of  one  interface, impedance  spectra  of  either  HELBs  or  the  symmetric  Li–Li  test-cells without  reference  electrode  were  usually  used  [1–3,8,10,13,14]. However,  a  HELB  combines  the  interfacial  properties  of  the  WSLE and  the  air  electrode.  Thus,  the  interfacial  impedance  of  WSLE  was not  exactly  reﬂected  by  it.  Through,  in  Li–Li  test-cells  without  reference  electrode,  the  impedance  of  WSLE  has  been  estimated  by  EIS, the  interfacial  impedance  in  WSLE  was  not  analyzed  in  detail.  Then, a  series  of  three or  four-electrode  impedance  measurements  has been  conducted  to  investigate  the  interfacial  impedance  on  WSLE. At  ﬁrst,  three-electrode  test-cells  with  three  lithium  electrodes were  used  to  investigate  the  properties  of  the  Li|organic-electrolyte interface.  The  conﬁguration  of  three-electrode  test  cell  is  shown  in Fig.  1(a).

As  Fig.  5,  two  overlapped  semicircles  are  shown  in  the  initial  impedance  spectrum  of  lithium  electrode  in  three-electrode

test-cell,  in  which  the  high  and  low  frequency  semicircle  is  caused by  solid  electrolyte  interface  (SEI)  impedance  and  charge-transfer impedance  respectively.  It  is  consistent  with  the  reports  of  Li  electrode  impedance  [24].  The  typical  equivalent  circuit  of  Li  electrode was  used  for  ﬁtting  the  impedance  spectra.  Re  is  ohmic  resis 3)),   which  was   estimated  by  the  intercept  of  the  high tance  (21   3)); frequency  semicircle  with  real  axis.  Rsei  is  SEI  resistance  (350  CPE1  is  a  constant  phase  element,  which  represents  the  geometric  3));   CPE2 capacitance  of  SEI.  Rct  is  charge-transfer  resistance  (105  represents  a  capacitance  related  to  charge-transfer.  By  contrasting  the  impedance  spectra  of  the  initial  and  an  hour  storage,  the increase  of  SEI  impedance,  corresponding  to  the  semicircle  at  high frequency,  can  be  observed.  The  result  of  ﬁtting  analysis  is:  Re  is  3),   Rsei  is  549   3).   The  Rsei  markedly  increased  with 27  the  storage  time.

The  formation  of  SEI  layer  is  essential  and  durative  process  on the  surface  of  metallic  lithium  [25,26].  In  view  of  the  growth  of SEI  layer  within  hours  or  months,  the  three-electrode  test-cells were  stood  at  room  temperature  and  measured  impedance  at  different  time.  Fig.  6  shows  the  ﬁve  impedance  spectra  of  Li  electrode at  1  h,  24  h,  72  h,  a  week  and  a  month.  In  the  impedance  spectra, the  semicircle  at  low  frequency  corresponds  to  the  charge-transfer impedance.  The  semicircle  at  high  frequency,  which  corresponds to  the  SEI  impedance,  increased  and  covered  the  one  at  low  frequency  gradually.  The  two   semicircles  were  combined  to  form  one big  semicircle,  in  which  the  SEI  impedance  is  dominated.  Then, if  the  Rct  is  reduced  from  the  resistance  of  big  semicircle,  it  was

Fig.  4.  An  AC  impedance  spectrum  of  Ag/LAGP  plate/Ag  test  cells  at  25 ◦C.

Fig.  5.  An  AC  impedance  spectrum  and  ﬁtting-line  for  the  cell  with  three  Li  electrodes  at  25 ◦C.

Fig.  6.  Time  dependence  of  the  impedance  spectra  for  the  cell  with  three  Li  electrodes  at  1  h,  24  h,  72  h,  a  week  and  month.

Fig.  8.  Time  dependence  of  the  impedance  spectra  and  ﬁtting-lines  of  WSLE  in  Li/air battery.

estimated  that  the  SEI  resistance  increased  from  500    to  around  3).   The  increase  of  SEI  impedance  was  caused  by  SEI  layer 3100  growing  at  the  Li|organic-electrolyte  interface  [24–26].   This  kind of  impedance  spectra  of  Li  electrode  with  a  single  semicircle  was also  reported  [24].

The  WSLE  and  air  electrode  was  assembled  into  a  HELB,  adding a  SCE  in  aqueous  solution  as  reference  electrode.  After  assembly, the  impedance  spectra  were  measured  and  shown  in  Fig.  7.

In  Fig.  7,  the  high  frequency  semicircle  corresponds  to  the  grain boundary  impedance,  which  can  be  estimated  from  the  diameter  of  small  semicircle  and  the  reports  of  WSLE  [3].   The  medium and  low  frequency  semicircle  should  correspond  to  the  impedance of  SEI  and  charge-transfer,  and  the  interfacial  impedance  at  LAGP plate/liquid  electrolyte.  However,  the  medium  and  low  frequency impedance  spectra  could  be  a  compressed  semicircle  but  could  also be  two  or  three  overlapped  semicircles,  by  which  the  number  of processes  and  the  impedance  of  each  process  cannot  be  estimated and  analyzed  exactly.

Fig.  8  shows  the  impedance  spectra  of  WSLE  in  HELBs  at  different  standing  time.  The  impedance  of  WSLE  increased  with time  and  the  medium  and  low  frequency  semicircle  became  two semicircles,  which  the  medium  frequency  one  increased  and

Fig.  7.  An  AC  impedance  spectrum  of  WSLE  in  Li/air  battery.

Table  1 The  resistances  of  the  equivalent  circuit  of  WSLE  in  Li/air  battery  at  different  time.

reached  stable  within  a  week  and  the  low  frequency  one  was  still increasing.

In  Fig.  8,  the  impedance  spectra  suggests  that  the  medium and  low  frequency  semicircles  correspond  to  at  least  two  interface  processes,  and  one  must  correspond  to  SEI  layer  impedance, another  corresponds  to  the  impedance  of  organic-electrolyte|LAGP and  LAGP|aqueous-solution  interface.  In  respect  that  the  increase of  low  frequency  semicircle  is  almost  equal  to  the  increase  of  SEI semicircle  in  Fig.  6,  the  low  frequency  semicircle  should  correspond  to  the  impedance  of  SEI  layer  and  charge-transfer.  Then,  the medium  frequency  semicircle  should  correspond  to  the  impedance of  organic-electrolyte|LAGP  and  LAGP|aqueous-solution  interface. Then,  in  HELBs,  the  impedance  of  WSLE  included  four  parts: 1,  the  bulk  impedance  of  solution,  LAGP  plate  and  current  collector;  2,  the  impedance  of  LAGP  grain  boundary;  3,  the  impedance of  organic-electrolyte|LAGP  and  LAGP|aqueous-solution  interface; 4,  the  impedance  of  SEI  layer  and  charge-transfer.  The  semicircle diameter  and  shape  of  SEI  layer  and  charge-transfer  are  dominated  by  the  impedance  of  SEI  layer.  As  a  result,  the  low  frequency semicircle  has  the  similar  shape  and  change  with  time.  Then,  an equivalent  circuit  of  three-electrode  test-cell  can  be  proposed,  as Fig.  8.  In  equivalent  circuit,  Re  is  the  bulk  resistance  of  solution, LAGP  plate,  wire  and  electrode;  Rg  is  the  resistance  of  LAGP  grain boundary;  Rint(N  +  A)  is  the  resistance  of  organic-electrolyte|LAGP and  LAGP|aqueous-solution  interface;  Rsei  is  the  resistance  of  SEI layer  and  Li+ charge-transfer  in  equivalent  circuit.  Because  the semicircle  is  distorted,  the  constant  phase  element  has  been  chosen  to  replace  the  capacitance.  The  CPE1,  CPE2  and  CPE3  are  the respective  constant  phase  elements  of  Rg,  Rint(N  +  A)  and  Rsei.

Table  1  shows  a  resistances  list  of  the  equivalent  circuit  with time,  in  which  Re  and  Rg  was  almost  constant  and  Rint(N  +  A) increased  and  reached  stable  within  a  week.  Although  the  estimated  resistances  of  Rint(N  +  A)  and  Rsei  were  not  accurate  due to  the  overlapped  two   semicircles  in  the  impedance  spectrum  of an  hour  standing,  the  resistances  still  can  be  a  contrast.  The  Rsei, corresponding  to  impedance  of  SEI  layer  and  charge-transfer,  was

Fig.  9.  Time  dependence  of  the  impedance  spectra  of  WSLE  (3-electrode  test).

Fig.  10.  An  AC  impedance  spectra  of  WSLE  (3-electrode  and  4-electrode  test,  a week).

the  impedance  difference  is  almost  equal  to  the  impedance  of  Li electrode  in  Fig.  11.   It  suggests  that  the  organic-electrolyte|LAGP impedance  can  be  reﬂected  by  a  single  low  frequency  semicircle  in  four-electrode  impedance  spectra,  instead  of  three-electrode impedance  spectra  in  which  the  both  of  the  SEI  layer  and  organicelectrolyte|LAGP  impedance  cannot  be  exactly  analyzed  with  an overlapped  semicircle.

Since  the  time  constant  of  each  interface  processes  is  close and  the  diameters  corresponding  to  impedance  are  lengthy,  the all  semicircles  usually  overlap  and  are  looked  like  one  semicircle  [1–3,13,14].   However,  the  impedance  spectra  of  four-electrode test  made  that  the  impedance  of  WSLE  can  be  reﬂected  and analyzed.  By  this  method,  the  grain  boundary  and  organicelectrolyte|LAGP  were  measured  and  used  for  discussing  the organic-electrolyte|LAGP  impedance.

Then,  the  impedance  of  each  in  four-electrode  test-cell  can  3),  which  was   estibe  estimated.  In  Fig.  11,   Rsei  was   around  630  mated  by  the  diameter  of  semicircle.  The  resistances  of  equivalent ≈  3), circuit  can  be  estimated  from  Fig.  10  (Re    310  Rint(N  +  N) ≈  1500   3)).   Consequently,  the  resistance  of  a  single organic-electrolyte|LAGP  interface  is  around  750  The  impedance  of  LAGP|aqueous-solution  can  be  estimated  and calculated  by  the  impedance  of  organic  solution|LAGP|aqueoussolution  and  organic  solution|LAGP.  It   3).  The

increasing  with  SEI  layer  growth  and  became  the  main  impedance of  WSLE  in  a  month.

In  the  impedance  spectra  of  HELBs  with  reference  electrode, the  impedance  of  each  interface  cannot  be  analyzed  exactly,  then, the  impedance  spectra  of  four-electrode  test-cell  were  performed. In  four-electrode  test-cell,  there  are  only  two  interfaces  which are  Li|organic-electrolyte  and  organic-electrolyte|LAGP  interface. By  using  two  reference  electrodes,  the  impedance  of  organicelectrolyte|LAGP  interface  was  estimated  and  analyzed.

The  four-electrode  test-cell  included  a  current  control  and  measurement  circuit  that  consists  of  WE   (as  work  electrode)  and  CE  (as counter  electrode),  and  a  potential  control  and  measurement  circuit  that  consists  of  Ref.  1  (as  reference  electrode  No.  1,  connect with  sensor  1)  and  Ref.  2  (as  reference  electrode  No.  2,  connected with  sensor  2).

impedance spectra,  three-electrode  impedance  spectra  were  measured  in four-electrode  test-cell,  in  which  the  RE2  was   used  as  reference electrode;  the  impedance  of  Li  electrode  was  also  measured  in  the same  test-cell  with  one  reference  electrode  (Ref.  1).  The  impedance spectra  are  showed  in  Fig.  9.  The  impedance  spectra  of  an  hour standing  has  two  semicircle,  the  high  frequency  one  is  small  and corresponds  to  the  impedance  of  grain  boundary,  the  low  frequency  one  is  ﬂat  circle  and  should  correspond  to  the  impedance  of SEI  layer,  charge-transfer,  and  organic-electrolyte|LAGP  interface. After  a  week  and  a  month,  similarly  with  Fig.  8,  the  one  semicircle  at  low  frequency  region  grew  and  became  two  semicircles.  The low  frequency  semicircle,  which  corresponds  to  the  impedance of  SEI  layer  and  charge-transfer,  changed  with  SEI  layer  formation  and  growth,  which  is  the  same  to  the  phenomenon  of  WSLE in  HELBs.  Consequently,  the  medium  frequency  semicircle  should correspond  to  the  impedance  of  organic-electrolyte|LAGP  interface. Then,  in  four-electrode  test-cell,  the  impedance  composition of  WSLE  is  similar  with  HELBs,  except  the  LAGP|aqueous-solution interface.  The  equivalent  circuit  can  be  proposed  for  it,  including: Re,  Rg,  Rsei  and  Rint(N  +  N).  As  symmetric,  the  test-cell  consists of  two  organic-electrolyte|LAGP  interfaces  so  that  the  interfacial resistance  [Rint(N  +  N)]  was  twice.

Fig.  10  shows  the  difference  of  impedance  spectra  for  threeelectrode  test  and  four-electrode  test.  The  low  frequency  semicircle with  four  electrodes  that  excluded  the  Li|organic-electrolyte  interface  is  smaller  to  the  low  frequency  one  of  three-electrode,  and

Fig.  11.  An  AC  impedance  spectrum  of  Li  electrode  (3-electrode  test,  a  week).

Table  2 The  resistances  of  the  equivalent  circuit  of  WSLE  with  thin  LAGP  plate  in  fourelectrode  test  cell  at  different  time  (3  electrodes  test).

An  hour  A   day A   week 

Fig.  12.  An  AC  impedance  spectrum  and  ﬁtting-line  of  WSLE  (3-electrode  test).

impedance  of  the  symmetric  aqueous  solution  test-cell  is  about  3),   corresponding  to  impedance  of  both  LAGP|aqueous-solution 100  interfaces.  That  means  about  40–50    for  each  interface,  which  is similar  with  estimated  result,  but  more  accurate.

The  impedance  spectra  of  WSLE  are  affected  by  the  thickness and  ion  conductivity  of  LAGP  plate,  as  Fig.  12.   In  four-electrode test-cell,  the  impedance  spectrum  with  a  reference  electrode  has two  semicircles  which  correspond  to  grain  boundary  impedance at  high  frequency  region  and  organic-electrolyte|LAGP  interface  at low  frequency  region  respectively.  The  semicircle  corresponding to  LAGP  grain  boundary  cannot  be  distinguished,  since  it  was  small and  overlapped  by  the  semicircle  of  SEI.  According  to  the  equivalent circuit  model,  the  line  of  ﬁtting  calculation  is  shown  in  Fig.  12,   as  3). a  result,  Re  Since  the  semicircle  of  Rg  is  indistinct  small,  the  calculation  result of  it  is  inaccurate;  nevertheless  the  results  of  other  resistances  are worth  to  analyze.

Fig.  13  shows  the  impedance  of  WSLE  with  LAGP  plate  is  increasing  with  time.  The  impedance  spectra  were  analyzed  by  ﬁtting  lines and  the  resistance  of  each  was  estimated  and  listed  in  Table  2. The  Rsei  increased  with  time  in  a  month,  which  can  be  attributed to  the  SEI  layer  growth.  The  Rint(N  +  N)  increased  within  a  week and  kept  stable  subsequently,  which  the  phenomena  also  described above.  It  suggests  that  the  SEI  impedance  would  become  the  main impedance  of  WSLE  by  the  growth  of  SEI  with  time  at  OCP.  About

Fig.  14.  AC  impedance  spectra  of  Li  electrode  at  different  polarized  potential  (3electrode  test,  a  week).

the  impedance  increase  of  the  organic-electrolyte|LAGP  interface within  a  week,  it  may   be  caused  by  a  kind  of  interface  layer  on  the LAGP,  which  conduct  Li  ion  and  affect  the  Rint(N  +  N)  by  formation and  growth.

Although  the  impedances  spectra  of  WSLE  were  measured  and analyzed  in  different  cell  at  OCP,  the  main  impedance  of  polarized WSLE  may  change  while  discharging.  During  discharge  polarization,  the  impedance  spectra  were  measured  in  four-electrode test-cell  for  discussing  the  polarization  inﬂuence  of  each  part  of the  impedance.

Fig.  14  shows  that  the impedance  of  Li  electrode  rapidly decreased  with  enhance  of  polarization  potential,  which  measured  by  three-electrode  EIS  in  four-electrode  test-cell.  When the  Li  electrode  polarized  at  0.2  V,  Rsei  decreased  to  around  3)  3),   which  was   caused  by  the  break  of 260  SEI  layer  at  the  Li  metal  surface.  In  contrast,  Fig.  15  shows

Fig.  13.  Time  dependence  of  the  impedance  spectra  and  ﬁtting-lines  of  WSLE  (3electrode  test).

Fig.  15.  AC  impedance  spectra  of  WSLE  (3-electrode  and  4-electrode  test,  a  week).

the  Rg  was  almost  constant  and  Rint(N  +  N)  decreased  slightly. When  the  polarization  potential  between  two  reference  electrodes  was  0.2  V,  Rint(N  +  N)  of  two  organic-electrolyte|LAGP  3).   Consequently,  resisinterfaces  decreased  from  1565  tance  of  organic-electrolyte|LAGP  decreased  from  782   3). impedance  decreased  much During  the  polarization,  the  SEI  more  than  the  organic-electrolyte|LAGP  impedance.  It  suggests that  although  the  SEI  impedance  was  more  than  the  organicelectrolyte|LAGP  impedance  at  OCP,  the  organic-electrolyte|LAGP impedance  was  almost  constant  and  became  the  main  while  discharging.  So  the  Li+ migration  at  the  organic-electrolyte|LAGP interface  is  an  process  which  cannot  be  intensively  affected  and controlled  by  potential.  Therefore,  the  Li+ migration  between two  kinds  of  electrolyte  is  a  process  including  diffusion  and electro-migration,  and  mainly  affected  the  discharge  current density.  Then,  to  improve  the  discharge  performance  of  Li–air battery,  the  decrease  of  organic-electrolyte|LAGP  impedance  is essential,  which  should  be  achieved  by  the  research  of  new solid  and  non-aqueous  electrolyte  and  modiﬁcation  of  the interface.

Summarily,  the  four-electrode  EIS  was  employed  to  analyze  the impedance  of  the  organic-electrolyte|LAGP  interface,  which  can eliminate  the  combination  effect  of  semicircles  in  AC  impedance spectra.

The  impedance  of  WSLE  protected  by  LAGP  was  investigated during  the  discharge.  In  the  impedance  spectra  tested  at  OCP, the  SEI  impedance  became  the  main  impedance  of  WSLE  as  the growth  of  SEI  with  time.  While  discharging,  the  SEI  impedance rapidly  decreased  with  polarization  potential,  but  the  organicelectrolyte|LAGP  impedance  changed  a  little  and  became  the  major impedance  on  organic-electrolyte|LAGP impedance.  Then,  the  interface  was  the  main  problem  to  improve  the  discharge  performance,  which  should  be  decreased  by  the  study  of  new  electrolyte and  interface  modiﬁcation.