Rhombohedral NaZr2(PO4)3 is the prototype of all the NASICON-type materials. The ionic diffusion in these rhombohedral NASICON materials is highly influenced by the ionic migration channels and the bottlenecks in the channels which have been extensively studied. However, no consensus is reached as to which one is the preferential ionic migration channel. Moreover, the relationships between the Na+ distribution over the multiple available sites, concerted migration, and diffusion properties remain elusive. Using ab initio molecular dynamics simulations, here it is shown that the Na+ ions tend to migrate through the Na1–Na3–Na2–Na3–Na1 channels rather than through the Na2–Na3–Na3–Na2 channels. There are two types of concerted migration mechanisms: two Na+ ions located at the adjacent Na1 and Na2 sites can migrate either in the same direction or at an angle. Both mechanisms exhibit relatively low migration barriers owing to the potential energy conversion during the Na+ ions migration process. Redistribution of Na+ ions from the most stable Na1 sites to Na2 on increasing Na+ total content further facilitates the concerted migration and promotes the Na+ ion mobility. The work establishes a connection between the Na+ concentration in rhombohedral NASICON materials and their diffusion properties.
Fast ion conductors (FIC) with high ionic conductivity but negligible electronic conductivity are of immense use in diverse electrochemical applications, such as solid state batteries, fuel cells, and gas sensors.[1–7] The NASICON (NAtrium SuperIonic CONductors)type materials with the general formula AxM2(XO4)3 (A: alkali metals, alkaline earth metals, etc.; M: transition metals or metalloids; X: P, Si, etc.) are one large group of FIC.[8–12] First reported by Hong and Goodenough in 1976, NaxZr2Six−1P4−xO12 (1 ≤ x ≤ 4) exhibits fast ion mobility because of its 3D framework which provides multiple positions for mobile charge carriers.[13,14] There are two known phases of NaxZr2Six−1P4−xO12. At room temperature, the space group of NaxZr2Six−1P4−xO12 for x < 2.8 and x > 3.2 is rhombohedral R−3c (No. 167), while that for 2.8 ≤ x ≤ 3.2 is monoclinic C2/c (No. 15).[10] Over the past years, many experimental and theoretical studies have been published that focus on investigation of the possible Na+ sites, migration channels, and Na+ diffusion properties for both the rhombohedral and monoclinic phases.[14–27]  
In the rhombohedral Na+-conducting NASICON structure, the migration ions occupy three different sites: the sixfold oxygen coordinated Na1 site (6b), the eightfold oxygen coordinated Na2 site (18e), and the fivefold oxygen coordinated Na3 site (36f). The Na3 site, also known as mid-Na site, lies between the Na1 site and Na 2 site and was first reported by Boilot et al. in 1987 .[20,21] Since then, the existence of the Na3 site has been gradually accepted by other researchers but the role of the available sites in Na migration has been debated over the years.[14–27] In 1976, Hong first proposed the Na1–Na2 migration channel and the bottleneck in this channel is a puckered hexagonal ring formed by alternating edges of ZrO6 octahedra and PO4/SiO4 tetrahedra.[14] In 1981, Qui et al. suggested that the Na2–Na2 channel is more favorable than the Na1–Na2 channel because the Na2–Na2 channel has the maximum channel opening.[15,16] In the next few year, Kohler et al. argued that the Na1–Na2 channel is the only choice for Na+ ion diffusion and limited by two triangular bottlenecks in the Na1–Na2 channel.[17–19] These two triangular bottlenecks were then well known as the T1 and T2 bottlenecks.[22] Until now, the debate on the preference between the Na1–Na2 and Na2–Na2 channels has not been definitively resolved, which was exacerbated by the contested role of the Na3 site.[23–26] Most recently, Zhang et al.[27] proposed two possible migration channels Na2–Na3–Na1–Na3–Na2 and Na2–Na3–Na3–Na2 channel but the detailed microscopic mechanism, including possible concerted Na+ ion transport, remains to be investigated.
Concerted migration[28] (also referred to as correlated migration[27] or collective migration[29] in the literature) mechanism, which involve the simultaneous correlated motion of several atoms appears to be quite common in many fast ion conductors, such as Li3N,[30] CaF2,[31] AgI,[32] garnet-related lithium ion conductors,[28,33–38] LISICON and thio-LISICON analogs,[29,39–43] NASICON-type lithium ion conductors,[44–47] etc. This phenomenon is triggered by Coulomb interaction between the migrating and neighboring mobile ions.[7,29] The migration barrier for the correlated motion of several mobile ions is often lower than that of the uncorrelated single ion jumps.[48–50] Mo et al. further illustrated the reduction of the migration barrier by demonstrating flattening of the energy landscape due to the potential energy transfer from the ions in high energy sites to the ions in the low energy sites during the migration process.[51] As a result, the authors also proposed that the migration ion configuration, and their strong interactions are the keys to enabling the concerted migration. This naturally begs a question of how we can achieve the unique migration ion configurations in the fast ion conductor design.
Recently, Klerk et al. developed a MATLAB code to determine if jumps of different migration ions are correlated in time and space by knowing the position of the migration ions and time of jumps in the ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations.[52] This correlated jump analysis gives a way to quantify the degree of the concerted migration. The higher percentage of the correlated jumps (i.e., the ratio of correlated jumps over all jump events), indicates more ions diffuse in the concerted migration mechanism. The site occupancy analysis of this approach, which is crucial for defining jump events, is a distance-based method which uses crystallographic sites of migration ion from diffraction experiments and considers a migration ion to be resident at a site when the distance of the ion to the center of the crystallographic site within a given cutoff distance.[52] Consequently, the accuracy of this method highly depends on the preexisting knowledge of the crystallographic sites, the choice of the cutoffs and the geometry of sites.[53] The site occupancy analysis by topology-based method assigns the migration ions to the sites based on convex-hull analysis of site polyhedra.[54,55] This method does not require arbitrary distance cutoffs[53] and thus is more suitable for studying the material with the crystallographic sites of migration ion which have the special coordination environments, such as garnet and NASICON. As a consequence, the correlated jump analysis could be improved by using topology-based site occupancy analysis.[27]
In this work, we use the pristine and Si-doped NaZr2(PO4)3 as examples and present an in-depth analysis of the preferential migration channel for Na+ ion diffusion in rhombohedral NASICON framework by integrating crystal structure analysis, bond valence energy landscape (BVEL) analysis, and AIMD simulations. Additionally, we reveal concerted migration mechanisms of Na+ ions in this system via an improved correlated jump analysis. Furthermore, we elucidate the relationship between the Na+ content, its distribution, multiple Na+ ions concerted migration, and overall Na+ diffusion properties. We then outline a rational optimization strategy for further enhancing the Na+ ion mobility of rhombohedral NASICON-type materials.
We used the crystallographic data for rhombohedral NaZr2(PO4)3 from the crystallographic information files icsd_467 .cif.[14] By the crystal structure analysis, as expected we confirm three inequivalent crystallographic Na sites Na1, Na2, and Na3 site in agreement with literature[20,21] (Figure 1a). As shown in Figure 1c, Na1 site is sixfold oxygen coordinated antiprismatic site with the NaIO6 coordination polyhedron;Na2 site is eightfold oxygen coordinated site with the NaIIO8 coordination polyhedron; Na3 site is fivefold oxygen coordinated site with the NaIIIO5 coordination polyhedron. Moreover, according to these coordination polyhedra, we can partition the NaZr2(PO4)3 crystal into a geometric network of nonoverlapping polyhedra with oxygen ions as vertices (Figure 1b). These nonoverlapping polyhedra share faces with each other. For example, a NaIO6 polyhedron shares six faces with six adjacent NaIIIO5 polyhedra, while a NaIIO8 polyhedron shares two faces with two adjacent NaIIIO5 polyhedra; as for a NaIIIO5, except they share the faces with NaIO6 and NaIIO8 polyhedra, it also shares two other faces with the two adjacent NaIIIO5 polyhedra. It was rationally assumed that all Na ions migrate in this geometric space. Moreover, the three types of faces shared by these adjacent Na–O polyhedra are considered as the bottlenecks of the corresponding migration channels which will be discussed later.
To uncover the migration channels of the rhombohedral NaZr2(PO4)3, we performed a geometric crystal structure analysis using the CA VD software[56] and a BVEL analysis based on our homemade code.[57,58] As can be seen in Figure 2a, there is good general agreement between the topology of the ionic-conduction pathways and the result of BVEL. Most significantly, there are two kinds of conduction pathways for the long-range diffusion of Na+ ions, i.e., the Na1–Na3–Na2–Na3–Na1 and Na2–Na3–Na3–Na2 channels, as shown in Figure 2b,c. These two conduction pathways consist of three elementary segments Na1–Na3, Na2–Na3, and Na3–Na3. The local channels bypassing the Na1 site via the Na3–Na3 sites are also found. Moreover, as can be seen in Figure 2d,e, there are three distinct bottleneck areas: one is in the Na1–Na3 channel named bottleneck A (also known as bottleneck T2[9,22]) which is the face shared by the adjacent NaIO6 and NaIIIO5 polyhedra; one is in the Na2–Na3 segment named bottleneck B (also known as bottleneck T1[9,22]) which is the face shared by the adjacent NaIIO8 and NaIIIO5 polyhedra; and the other is in the Na3–Na3 segment named bottleneck C which is the face shared by two adjacent NaIIIO5 polyhedra. These bottlenecks are formed by three O2− ions in the PO4 tetrahedron and ZrO6 octahedron pockets.
The bottleneck sizes in the segments of some typical Nacontaining rhombohedral NASICON-type materials are summarized in Table S1 (Supporting Information). For NaZr2(PO4)3, the size of bottleneck B (2.218 Å) located in Na2–Na3 segment is smaller than the bottleneck A (2.265 Å) located in Na1–Na3 segment. As a consequence, the bottleneck B is likely the limiting factor for Na+ ion conduction in the Na1–-Na3–Na2–Na3–Na1 channel. However, the size of bottleneck B is slightly smaller than the sum of the O2− and Na+ radii (≈2.35 Å according to the Shannon effective ionic radius table[59]) which needs to be further tailored. For the Na2–Na3–Na3–Na2 channel and the local channels around Na1 site (via the Na3–Na3 sites, Figure 2b,c), Na+ ion conduction is likely highly dependent on whether the central Na1 site is occupied or not. If Na1 site is empty, the Na+ at Na3 might tend to migrate to Na1 site through the Na1–Na3 segment because the size of the bottleneck A (2.265 Å) is larger than that of the bottleneck C (2.169 Å). In contrast, if the Na1 site is occupied, the Na3–Na3 segment is blocked due to the short distances (smaller than 1.92 Å) between Na1 site and Na3 site. As the Na1 sites of rhombohedral NASICON-type materials are commonly fully occupied, the Na3–Na3 segments tend to be blocked.
To further uncover the preferential migration channel for Na+ ions under dynamic conditions, we also performed AIMD simulations on an extended cell containing eight formula units of the pristine and Si-doped NaZr2(PO4)3, i.e., Na8Zr16P24O96 and Na9Zr16P23SiO96, with 144 atoms and 145 atoms, respectively. As the Na1–Na3–Na2–Na3–Na1 channel has the segments of Na1–Na3 and Na2–Na3, while the Na2–Na3–Na3–Na2 channel has the segments of Na2–Na3 and Na3–Na3, the difference of the Na1–Na3 and Na3–Na3 segments play the important role in the preference of Na+ ion conduction. Figure 3 shows the percentage of different jump types in different channels for these systems at 800 K from AIMD simulations. As can be seen, the jump events in Na3–Na3 channel are very rare (below 3%), while the jump events in Na1–Na3 channel are predominant. The same behavior is confirmed for all the used simulation temperatures ranging from 800 to 1400 K, as shown in Table S2 (Supporting Information). These results indicate that Na+ ions prefer to migrate through the Na1–Na3–Na2–Na3–Na1 channels rather than through the Na2–Na3–Na3–Na2 channels which is consistent with the static bottleneck analysis above. Moreover, with the increase in simulation temperature and in Na+ concentration by Si doping, the total jump events increase rapidly (Table S3, Supporting Information), which indicates the enhancement of Na+ mobility.
Since the Na1–Na3–Na2–Na3–Na1 channel is more favorable than the Na2–Na3–Na3–Na2 channel for Na+ ion conduction, a rhombohedral NASICON-type material with a larger Na1–Na3–Na2–Na3–Na1 channel will have a higher ion conductivity. For example, the most common cathode material Na3V2(PO4)3 has a small size of bottleneck B (2.153 Å) which can explain why it demonstrates low ion conductivity of 1.9 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 200 °C;[60] in contrast, the typical solid electrolyte Na3Zr2Si2PO12 with a relatively large size of bottleneck B (2.273 Å) demonstrates significantly higher ionic conductivity of 1.5 × 10−3 S cm−1 at 200 °C.[60]
In the pioneering work of Goodenough et al.,[13] they posed that Na+ ion conductivity in the NASICON system requires a correlated ionic motion: Na2 + Na1 + Va(Na2) → Va(Na2) + Na1 + Na2. To examine in detail the Na+ ion migration mechanism, we scrutinized the site-to-site jump events and timings by tracking the site identity of each Na+ ion during the AIMD trajectory, as shown in Figures S1 and S2 (Supporting Information). We observe that with the increase of Na+ concentration and temperature, the jump frequency increases. Moreover, the Na+ ions are more likely to stay at the Na1 site for NaZr2(PO4)3, while for Na1.125Zr2Si0.125P2.875O12 they have to occupy both Na1 and Na2 sites because there are not enough Na1 sites for all Na ions and a lot of available Na2 sites for the extra Na+ ions. In addition, we also find that the Na+ ions are not likely to occupy the Na3 sites as reflected by the short residence time of Na+ ion in the NaIIIO5 polyhedra. Most importantly, we find that some Na+ ions indeed migrate in a cooperative manner as Goodenough et al.[13] suggested and is discussed in more detail below.
As shown in Figure 4a,b, by examining the snapshot sequences for the specific Na+ ions pairs, we observe that there are two types of concerted migration mechanisms: two Na+ ions at adjacent Na1 and Na2 sites migrate i) along the same direction and ii) in almost orthogonal directions within 1 ps. For example, first the 2nd Na+ ion hop from the 2nd Na1 site to the 44th Na3 site while the 7th Na+ ion hop from the 20th Na2 site to the 36th Na3 site; then the 2nd Na+ ion hop from the 44th Na3 site to the 24th Na2 site, while the 7th Na+ ion hop from the 36th Na3 site to the 1st Na1 site (Figure 4a). In addition, the shortest distance between the two Na+ ions during the hopping process is less than 3.5 Å which indicate there is a strong Coulomb interaction between them, as shown in Figure 4c,d. These results indicate that during the concerted migration process the elementary jump events between different ions are highly correlated in time and space. As a consequence, using appropriate temporal and spatial conditions in the trajectory analysis, we identify correlated jumps, as proposed by Klerk et al.[52] By using the correlated jump analysis code,[27] we examined the number of the correlated jumps (the jump event of a Na+ ion affected by the jump of a different Na+) and uncorrelated jumps (the jump event of a single Na+ ion without the effect of other Na+ ions) during the AIMD simulations and thus obtained the percentage of the correlated jumps, which will be discussed later.
To rationalize the mechanism of the concerted migrations, we calculated the energy landscapes of multi-ion migrations compared with the single ion migration using climbing image nudged elastic band (CI-NEB) method. Figure 5a shows that the energy barrier is 0.472 eV for the single Na+ ion migration. When the energy landscape reached the saddle point, we surprisingly find that it corresponds not to any bottleneck but to Na2 site which indicate that Na2 site is a high energy site. When extra Na+ ions are added to the structure, e.g., by P /Si substitution, the Coulomb force will push some of the Na+ ions into the high energy Na2 site. This configuration is energetically stable because the Na1 sites are mostly occupied since they have lowest energy based on density functional theory (DFT) calculations. However, once the Na+ ion located at Na1 site jumps to the adjacent Na3 site, this local balance will be broken. As a result, the Na+ ion originally located at the Na2 site will move toward the next Na1 site and the strong Coulomb force will push that Na+ ion to the next Na2 site. The migration barriers of the concerted migrations along the same direction and along different directions are 0.103 and 0.242 eV , respectively (Figure 5b) which are much lower than that of the single ion migration. This decrease of the migration barriers for concerted migrations is caused by the potential energy transfer between the ions at high energy Na2 site and the ions at low energy Na1 site, i.e., when the Na+ ion at the high energy Na2 site moves down to the adjacent low energy Na1 site, the decrease of potential energy would cancel out the required potential energy for the Na+ ion at the low energy Na1 site moving up to another high energy Na2 site. This phenomenon is quite analogous to the Newton’s cradle and is in agreement with the mechanism in Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 proposed by Mo et al.[51]
The average site occupancies of the different Na sites show that all the Na sites are partially occupied for the pristine and Si-doped NaZr2(PO4)3 at each simulation temperature (Table S4, Supporting Information). As can be seen, at lower temperature (800 K), the occupancy of the Na1 sites are over 90% for NaZr2(PO4)3 and Na1.125Zr2Si0.125P2.875O12 which indicates that the Na1 site is a low energy site. When the simulation temperature increases, the occupancy of the Na1 site decreases and those of Na2 and Na3 sites increase, which indicates that more Na+ ions of the Na1 sites were activated to Na2 and Na3 sites. Moreover, when the overall Na+ content increases, the occupancies of Na2 and Na3 sites also increase markedly due to the Coulomb force of the Na+ ions located at Na1 sites. The results indicate that the increase in temperature or Na+ concentration leads to the higher occupancies of Na2 site and the increased number of the Na+ configurations of “Na2 + Na1 + Va(Na2).”
As mentioned previously, there are three diffusion modes in our systems, i.e., one type of singe Na+ ion migration with the migration barrier of 0.472 eV and two types of two Na+ ions concerted migration with the migration barrier of 0.103 and 0.242 eV , respectively. By the correlated jump analysis, we could obtain the percentage of the correlated jumps (i.e., the ratio of correlated jumps over all jump events). As shown in Figure 6a, with the increase in simulation temperature or Na+ concentration, the percentage of correlated jumps increases which indicate that more Na+ ions diffuse in the concerted migration mechanism with lower migration barrier. This result is likely related to the redistribution of Na+ from Na1 to Na2 and thus the increasing number of the Na+ configurations of “Na2 + Na1 + Va(Na2),” which facilitate the concerted migrations. The tracer diffusion coefficients (D) of Na+ ions, which reflect the Na+ ion mobility, were estimated from the slope of mean square displacement (MSD) plots (Figure S3, Supporting Information). The overall activation energy (Ea) determined form AIMD simulations contains the migration energies of different diffusion modes and the energies to form the corresponding Na+ ion configurations. As shown in Figure 6b, since Na+ ions migration through the concerted migration mechanism has the lower energy barrier, the increase of the percentage of correlated jumps which caused by increasing the Na+ concentration will decrease the overall Ea to 0.23 eV , which will lead to a high diffusion coefficient and thus a high ionic conductivity at room temperature. These findings establish a rational connection between the Na+ concentration in rhombohedral NASICON materials and their diffusion properties.
In addition, because the Na+ ion concentration highly influences the number of Na+ configurations of “Na2 + Na1 + Va(Na2),” we rationally speculate that with the continuous increase of the Na+ ion concentration, the number of Na+ configurations of “Na2 + Na1 + Va(Na2)” would first increase to a saturation and then decrease. As a consequence, the percentage of correlated jumps and diffusion properties would follow the same trend which needs further investigations.
In this work, we identified the migration channels and bottlenecks in the rhombohedral NASICON and unraveled the preferential migration channel for Na+ ion diffusion by crystal structure analysis, BVEL analysis, and AIMD simulations. The Na+ ions preferentially migrate through the Na1–Na3–Na2–Na3–Na1 channels rather than through the Na2–Na3–Na3–Na2 channels. Moreover, two types of concerted migration mechanisms were found: two Na+ ions located at the adjacent low-energy Na1 and high-energy Na2 sites can migrate either along the same or almost orthogonal directions. The Coulomb interactions between these two Na+ ions lead to the concerted migration, which in turn lowers the migration barrier due to the potential energy conversion during the Na+ ions migration process. Additionally, when increasing the Na+ concentration, more Na+ ions tend to occupy the high energy Na2 site and the number of Na+ configurations of “Na2 + Na1 + Va(Na2)” increases, which further facilitates the concerted migration, decreases the overall activation energy and thus promotes the mobility of Na+ ions. The revealed relationships between the crystal structure, Na+ distribution,concerted migration, and diffusion properties can be used to optimize the Na+ ion mobility by tuning Na+ content and Na+ site energetics via rational substitutions in the NASICON framework.
Crystal Structure Analysis and Bond Valence Energy Landscape Analysis: Crystal structure analysis was performed using the homemade software: Crystal structure analysis by Voronoi Decomposition (CAVD)[56,57,61,62] The CAVD software is based on radical Voronoi decomposition which gives a better characterization of void space for ionic transport analysis due to the consideration of ionic radii. The BVEL analysis was performed utilizing the homemade code[57,58] built upon the bond valence-based approach developed by Adams et al.[63] with the same parameters used in the previous work.[62] The enclosed isosurfaces of BVEL map were corresponding to the migration channel. The graphical representations and others to come in this paper were generated using the VESTA visualization software program.[64]
DFT Calculations: All DFT[65,66] calculations in this work were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP)[67] with the plane-wave projector augmented (PAW) method.[68] The exchange-correlation term was treated with the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof functional[69] based on the generalized gradient approximation. Valence electron configurations for the elemental constitutions are as follows: O, 2s22p4; Na, 2p63s1; Si, 3s23p2; P, 3s23p3; Zr, 4s24p65s24d2. Initial configurations for rhombohedral NaZr2(PO4)3 (R−3c, No. 167) was created based on the crystallographic information files icsd_467.cif.[14] The calculations were performed on an extended cell containing eight formula units of NaZr2(PO4)3 which was built by a transformation matrix of [1, 1, −1; −1, 1, 1; 1, −1, 1] acting on the primitive cell, leading to a moderate-sized supercell of ≈13 Å in each lattice direction. The schematic diagram of the transformations is shown in Figure S4 (Supporting Information) and the corresponding transformation matrices are shown in Table S5 (Supporting Information). The relaxation of the cell volume and atom positions has been carried out for the initial structure. The doped system was constructed in which one P5+ is replaced by Si4+ and a Na+ added to maintain overall charge neutrality. For the initial structure of this structure, only the atom positions have been relaxed, and the relaxed cell constant of NaZr2(PO4)3 has been used because of the rather small volume changes.
The Na+ ion dynamics of the pristine and Si-doped NaZr2(PO4)3 were calculated using AIMD simulations. Nonspin-polarized AIMD simulations were carried out for the canonical ensemble using a Nosé– Hoover thermostat[70,71] at four elevated temperatures (800, 1000, 1200, and 1400 K) in order to observe the diffusive behavior for the Na+ ions over the time scale of the simulations. The AIMD simulations were carried out for at least 200 ps at each temperature with a time step of 2 fs. To reduce the computational cost of the calculation, the plane-wave basis set was determined with a cutoff energy of 400 eV and integration in reciprocal space was performed at the Γ-point only. The samples were heated up to the targeted temperature by velocity scaling over 2 ps, and then equilibrated at the desired temperature. No framework melting was observed in all simulations. The MSD[72] of the Na+ ions were generated using the atomic configuration information from every finite MD time step. The tracer diffusion coefficients (D)[72] of Na+ ions were estimated based on the slope of the diffusive regime in the MSD plots. The overall activation energy Ea of Na+ ions diffusion can be obtained through fitting the data of log D versus 103/T to the Arrhenius relationship
where D0 is the pre-exponential factor, T is the temperature in Kelvin, and kB is the Boltzmann constant.
The energy profiles of single ion migration and multi-ion concerted migration for rhombohedral NaZr2(PO4)3 were computed using the CI-NEB method.[73] For the single ion migration, one Na+ ion was removed to create a vacancy; for the multi-ion concerted migration, the Na+-ion concentration was increased by adding a Na+ ion. The defect charge was compensated by a uniform background charge to retain the charge neutrality. The convergence criterion of the self-consistent iterations was set to 10−4 eV for the total energy difference and 0.02 eV Å−1 for the forces. The lattice parameters were fixed to the calculated bulk values, and the atomic positions were fully relaxed.
Correlated Jump Analysis: The correlated jump analysis[27] for the AIMD data was performed using the homemade python code which idea comes from Klerk et al.[52] By using this code, except for the site occupancy and the jump events, it could be easily determined whether two jump events are correlated in time and space and further obtain the ratio of the correlated jumps, due to the improvement on determining the position of each Na+ during the AIMD simulations. Similar to the step in the previous work,[27] Figure S5 (Supporting Information) shows a schematic of the correlated jump analysis used in this work: i) identify all the inequivalent crystallographic Na sites; ii) partition the crystal into a compact geometric network of nonoverlapping polyhedra with oxygen ions as vertices and every Na ion is assigned to an available polyhedral site in each MD snapshot; iii) detect the site-to-site jump events and timings by comparing the difference of site occupancy between the consecutive MD steps; iv) judge the correlation between two different jumps of two different Na+ ions under some specific temporal and spatial conditions; v) count the number of correlated jumps and uncorrelated jumps and obtained the percentage of the correlated jumps. In this case, the temporal criterion is 0.22 ps and the spatial criterion is 4.5 Å which are consistent with the previous study.[27]