The prototype potentiometric chlorine gas sensor was constructed using Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (Nasicon) as a solid electrolyte, two-phase (1 – y)LaOCl–yNaCl as a sensing electrode, and 0.85Na2Ti3O7-0.15Na2Ti6O13 as a reference electrode. Nasicon, 0.85Na2Ti3O7–0.15Na2Ti6O13 two-phase system and LaOCl powders were prepared by solid‐state reaction method. Two-phase materials (1 –y)LaOCl–yNaCl of different compositions were obtained by doping LaOCl with Na2CO3. The best preparation conditions were determined based on differential thermal analysis and thermogravimetry (DTA and TG). All the samples were studied by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. Electrical conductivity of (1 – y)LaOCl–yNaCl was measured using electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The source voltage (SV) of the fabricated cell was measured as a function of temperature (400–600 °C), Cl2 partial pressure in the range 1–9 Pa and time. Constructed sensor shows the most effective performance at 500 °C and in Cl2 pressure range of 3–9 Pa.

The chlorine gas (Cl2) is one of the most common industrial reagents. It is indispensable for production of many chemicals including polyvinylchloride (PVC), pesticides, and household cleaning products. Cl2 supports the manufacture of gasoline additives, brake ﬂuid and antifreeze, as well as processing of popular metals such as titanium, magnesium and aluminum. It is also used in paper and textiles bleaching. The electronics industry relies on Cl2 in the production of microprocessors and computers. Chlorine compounds are commonly used to disinfect drinking water and swimming pools.

On the other hand, chlorine gas is also noxious for higher organisms including human beings and animals. One of the reasons that the Cl2 gas is harmful for living organisms is that it is highly reactive with water producing a corrosive acid solution which burns tissues, e.g. mucous membranes of the lungs and eyes. The odor threshold is approximately 0.3–0.5 ppm. When Cl2 gas is inhaled at concentrations above 30 ppm, it begins to react with water, which changes it into hydrochloride acid (HCl) and hypochlorous acid (HClO). Exposure to 60 ppm in air leads to lung damage, exposure to 430 ppm for 30 min causes death.

Moreover the density of the gas is greater than that of air, causing it to remain near ground level and increasing exposure time. It is also hazardous as it may react with ﬂammable materials.

The workplace limit of Cl2 gas allowed in air is 0.01 ppm. Therefore sensitive, unfailing and inexpensive sensor is invaluable for the real-time monitoring of the Cl2 concentration in air in a wide range of industrial environments. The group of potentiometric gas sensors fabricated with solid electrolytes elements has a great advantage among the gas sensors due to high sensitivity and selectivity, rapid response and long-term stability. According to Weppner [1,2] potentiometric gas sensors can be divided in three general groups: conventional (type I), sensors based on equilibration with the mobile component of solid electrolyte (type II) and surface-modiﬁed with additional auxiliary phase, AP (type III).

In general, potentiometric gas sensors of III type are electrochem-

ical cells that can be described as follows:

where X(g) denotes atmosphere containing detected gas, Me, Me′ metallic electrodes, AP auxiliary phase, SE solid electrolyte, B phase providing constant potential on reference electrode.

Yamazoe and Miura [3] divided type III sensors into three subgroups depending on whether the mobile ions of solid electrolyte, SE, and AP are:

the same-type III a different but of the same sign-type III b of a different sign-type III c.

One of the solid electrolytes that have been used in an AP type IIIc potentiometric chlorine gas sensor is lanthanum oxychloride LaOCl

[4–6]. It shows a high Cl− conductivity as well as mechanical, chemical and thermal stability. Moreover, it is insoluble in water. Modiﬁcation of LaOCl by doping it with Mg2+ or Ca2+ ions leads to creation of the Cl− anion vacancies and increases total electrical conductivity. Previous studies revealed that a cell based on La0.9Mg0.1OCl0.9 is a promising candidate as conventional potentiometric chlorine gas sensor. It was also proved that LaOCl is oxygen-ionic conductor [7].

One of the well‐known Na+ superionic conductors is Nasicon. Sintering the material at temperature 1250 °C, which is very near its melting point, guarantees that obtained sintered bodies are of sufﬁcient mechanical stability as well as high density and gas tightness. Previously such solid electrolyte was used in carbon dioxide gas sensor constructions [8]. Constant value of potential on the reference electrode was provided by 0.85Na2Ti3O7–0.15Na2Ti6O13 two-phase system. Such device exhibited stable behavior and excellent detecting properties over a long time [9].

The purpose of this work was to investigate the performance of potentiometric chlorine gas sensor of IIIc type based on Nasicon with 0.85Na2Ti3O7–0.15Na2Ti6O13 as reference electrode material and (1−y)LaOCl–yNaCl as AP. LaOCl electrolyte in this case was doped with Na+ ions in order to facilitate occurrence of electrochemical chain between SE and AP. All necessary powders were prepared by solid‐state methods. Optimal composition and preparation conditions of two‐phase (1 –y)LaOCl–yNaCl were deﬁned using differential thermal analysis (DTA), theromogravimetry (TG) coupled with mass spectrometry (MS) and X-ray diffraction (XRD).

Afterward, the gas sensor of IIIc type was constructed. It can be de-

where Pt denotes porous platinum electrode and R two‐phase reference material 0.85Na2Ti6O13–0.15Na2Ti3O7 on the reference electrode. Detecting properties of the cell were tested and optimal performance conditions have been speciﬁed.

Nasicon, LaOCl and 0.85Na2Ti3O7–0.15Na2Ti6O13 powders were prepared by methods described elsewhere [10–12]. LaOCl was doped using Na2CO3 by a solid‐state reaction to obtain nominally La1 − xNaxOCl1 − 2x (x=0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2). The optimal calcination conditions (400 °C/6 h) were determined by means of the differential thermal analysis (DTA) and thermogravimetry (TG). The measurements were performed in TA Instruments Deviratograph System type SDT 2960 in the temperature range 20–550 °C (heating rates 15 °C/min) under synthetic air atmosphere. After calcination, the materials were crushed in agate mortar. Powders were formed into pellets of 10‐mm diameter and with a thickness of 3 mm isostatically pressed at 250 MPa and sintered at 800 °C for 2 h. Powders obtained after calcination as well as sintered bodies were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) method. The measurements were done in air at room temperature using CuKα radiation (Philips X' Pert) within the 2Θ range 10–90° with the scan rate of 0.008°/s.

Pellets from LaOCl and of nominal composition La0.95Na0.05OCl0.9 were prepared for electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements by covering the samples on both sides with Pt paste and ﬁring at 850 °C for 5 min. The EIS measurements were performed in synthetic air using a frequency analyzer (Solartron model FRA 1260) coupled with Dielectric Interface (model 1296). Frequency range was 0.1 Hz–10 MHz; the amplitude of sinusoidal voltage signal was 20 mV. The values of the resistances were derived using the ZView software (version 2.2, Scribner Associates, Inc.).

The sensor manufacture consisted of several steps. The obtained Nasicon was formed into pellet of 10‐mm diameter and with the thickness of 2 mm, then isostatically pressed at 250 MPa and sintered

at 1250 °C for 24 h. The measured volume shrinkage of the pellet was about 27% indicating that obtained material is dense and gastight. Both sides of polished Nasicon pellet were covered with the Pt paste. It was ﬁred at 850 °C for 5 min. 0.85Na2Ti3O7–0.15Na2Ti6O13 powder was mixed with organic binder and used for the formation of the reference electrode. After ﬁring (850 °C/5 min), the powder of nominal composition La0.95Na0.05OCl0.9 was mixed with organic binder, mounted on the Pt electrode and ﬁred at 850 °C for 5 min. Pellet was attached to Al2O3 tube using the ceramic adhesive to allow the separation of both electrode compartments during the sensor operation. Such construction permits application of different gas atmospheres at both electrodes. Afterward constructed sensor was placed in the cell holder. The gas mixtures with different compositions were obtained using MKS ﬂow controllers. The source voltage (SV) of the fabricated cell was measured by Hewlett-Packard multimeter as a function of temperature (400–600 °C), Cl2 partial pressure in the range 1–9 Pa and time.

LaOCl and Na2CO3 powders were mixed in agate mortar in order to obtain La1 − xNaxOCl1 − 2x2 materials of different compositions. Fig. 1 shows examples of DTA and TG curves for the sample of nominal La0.95Na0.05OCl0.9 composition. The DTA and TG curves for all studied La1 − xNaxOCl1 − 2x powders were very similar. The observed endothermic peaks on the DTA curve at the temperature range 50– 100 °C may correspond to liberation of water vapor absorbed previously from the air. The sharp endothermic minimum at 350 °C may be due to the reaction between Na2CO3 and LaOCl that led to the creation of two-phase (1−y)LaOCl–yNaCl and liberation of CO2 from the system. Based on DTA and TG data, the optimal calcination temperature was determined at the level of 400 °C. The total weight loss of the sample during heating from room temperature to 400 °C was 1.5% and is related to the escape of water vapor and CO2.

XRD analysis performed on Na-doped LaOCl powders after calcination and on sintered bodies revealed that materials keep constant compositions, crystallographic structure and lattice parameters during sintering at 800 °C/2 h. Fig. 2 shows exemplary XRD spectra obtained for Na-doped LaOCl powders of different compositions, after calcination. It was found that the materials crystallized in tetragonal P4/nmm structure. Traces of NaCl phase are present in the investigated samples. The fragments of XRD spectra with peaks coming from the second NaCl phase are shown in Fig. 3. Additionally, lattice parameters are of similar values for all samples. It indicates that introduced Na+ ions did not substitute La3+ site and additional Cl− vacancies were not created. It may

Fig. 1. DTA and TG curves obtained for a powdered material of nominal composition La0.95Na0.05OCl0.9.

Fig. 2. XRD patterns of (1− y)LaOCl–yNaCl powders with different compositions after calcination.

be due to the difference between Na+ and La3+ radii. Thus, a twophase (1− y)LaOCl–yNaCl material was obtained instead of the expected La1 − xNaxOCl1 − 2x.

The inﬂuence of NaCl presence in LaOCl on its electrical properties was studied by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. The obtained Nyquist spectrum at temperatures 350–650 °C consists of two overlapping semicircles. It was assumed that the part of the spectrum at high frequencies is related to solid electrolyte bulk properties and intermediate-frequency part corresponds to phenomenon occurring on grain boundaries. The values of electrical resistances for bulk and grain boundaries components were determined by a simpliﬁed evaluation method provided by the Z View software. Knowing the geometry of the samples the conductivities were calculated. Fig. 4. shows the results plotted in log(σT) vs. 1/T coordinates. The obtained linear dependence is consistent with the Arrhenius' law. In the case of LaOCl, at each temperature, the values of grain boundaries conductivities are somehow higher than the values of bulk conductivities. The opposite situation is observed for the Na-doped material. The values of total conductivities for both samples were also calculated as σT=(σB·σGB)/(σB+σGB) and the results are shown in Fig. 5. The values of total electrical conductivities for LaOCl are much higher than that for (1−y)LaOCl–yNaCl at each temperature. It is evident

Fig. 4. The dependence of bulk and grain boundaries conductivity of LaOCl and (1−y) LaOCl–yNaCl as a function of temperature in log(σT) vs. 1/T coordinates.

that the presence of second NaCl phase deteriorates the ionic conductivity properties of the LaOCl material.

The SV measurements with the prototype sensor were performed at a temperature range 400–600 °C. Fig. 6 presents the SV responses to the changes in Cl2 concentration in synthetic air in the sensing electrode compartment. During the measurements, the reference electrode was kept in synthetic air at a constant pressure of 1 atm. The testing procedure for each temperature was conducted in the same way. The sensing device was preheated for several hours at a given temperature. The measurements in each Cl2 pressure in the range of 1–9 Pa were performed for 1 h, followed by 1‐h measurements without Cl2 in the sensing electrode compartment.

At 400 °C, the sensor's behavior is unstable and the read SV values appear random, i.e. not correlated with Cl2 concentration. At temperatures 450–550 °C, the sensing device shows a sluggish response to the Cl2 presence in the monitored atmosphere, while at 600 °C no response is noticed. At 450 °C, after an initial rise in the SV value, an inexplicable fall is observed at a constant Cl2 pressure in the sensing electrode compartment.

The best performance of the prototype construction is at the temperature 500 °C. The cell shows a response to the Cl2 pressure as low

Fig. 3. Fragments of XRD spectra of (1− y)LaOCl–yNaCl powders with peaks coming from NaCl phase.

Fig. 5. The dependence of total conductivity of LaOCl and (1−y)LaOCl–yNaCl as a function of temperature in log(σT) vs. 1/T coordinates.

Fig. 6. Measured SV for the constructed cell at temperature range 400–600 °C.

as 2 Pa. At the temperature 550 °C, the cell's behavior is very similar but it does not detect the lower concentrations of Cl2 in the range of 1–4 Pa. The long response and recovery times make the cell unsuitable for practical use as a chlorine gas detector. Further studies are necessary in order to explain the mechanism of action and to improve the sensing properties of the cell, e.g. by modiﬁcation of the used materials.

The Cl2 sensing properties of the constructed electrochemical cell based on Nasicon and Na-doped LaOCl as a sensing electrode were investigated. The addition of Na+ ions to the LaOCl sensing electrode material was chosen in order to guarantee the formation of electrochemical chain within the whole cell. XRD spectra revealed that doping LaOCl by Na ions led to the formation of two-phase (1− y) LaOCl–yNaCl, rather than the intended single-phase La1 − xNaxOCl1 − 2x materials. IS measurements showed that the presence of NaCl phase into LaOCl deteriorated the electrical conductivity. The manufactured cell shows a sluggish response for Cl2 presence in the monitored atmosphere. The construction method needs to be modiﬁed in order to improve its Cl2 sensing properties and long-term stability. More studies are indispensable to explain sensing mechanism of the cell.

The ﬁnancial support of the Regional Development of the European Union Programme for Technological Development, grant No. POIG.01. 03.01-02-002/08-00 is acknowledged.