In the context of the development of NMR Fermi contact shift calculations for assisting structural characterization of battery materials, we propose an accurate, eﬃcient, and robust approach based on the use of an all electron method. The full-potential linearized augmented plane wave method, as implemented in the WIEN2k code, is coupled with the use of hybrid functionals for the evaluation of hyperﬁne ﬁeld quantities. The WIEN2k code uses an autoadaptive basis set that is highly accurate for the determination of the hyperﬁne ﬁeld. Furthermore the implementation of an onsite version for the Hartree−Fock exchange oﬀers the possibility to use hybrid functional schemes at no additional computational cost. In this paper, NMR Fermi contact shifts for lithium are studied in diﬀerent classes of paramagnetic materials that present an interest in the ﬁeld of Li-ion batteries: olivine LiMPO4 (M = Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni), anti-NASICON type Li3M2(PO4)3 (M = Fe and V), and antiﬂuorite-type Li6CoO4. Making use of the possibility to apply partial hybrid functionals either only on the magnetic atom or also on the anionic species, we evidence the role played by oxygen atoms on polarization mechanisms. Our method is quite general for an application on various types of materials. Furthermore, it is very competitive compared to the other methods recently proposed that are based either on a plane wave basis set with a PAW implementation or on an LCAO one with a full potential description.

In the context of ﬁnding new and eﬃcient electrochemical energy storage solutions, important eﬀorts have been devoted to the study of transition metal (TM) compounds as materials ion batteries.1 In this highly for positive electrodes in Li competitive and strongly applied research domain, there is still an important need in having a very good knowledge of the bonding properties of together with information on its crystal structure and/or local structure organization. On the latter point, solid state magic angle spinning nuclear magnetic resonance (MAS NMR) is a very powerful and accurate technique that is now widely used for studying electrode materials. Relevant examples can be found in refs 2−8 where 7Li or 6Li MAS NMR is used to study Li environment in battery materials.

Due to the hyperﬁne interactions between the nuclear magnetic moment of Li and the electronic spin density induced by paramagnetic TM ions, the NMR shift of Li nucleus in LiTM compounds in diamagnetic environments. Hyperﬁne interactions consist of through space dipolar interactions and a through bond Fermi contact one. For Li-TM oxide compounds considered here, the Li MAS NMR shift is mainly determined by the isotropic Fermi

contact interaction which is due to the presence of electron spin density on the Li nucleus, as transferred from the orbitals of neighboring paramagnetic species. When diﬀerent NMR signals are observed in concordance with the existence of more than one Li environment, it becomes crucial to correctly assign those NMR peaks. When paramagnetic compounds are submitted to an external magnetic ﬁeld, a macroscopic magnetization develops due to the diﬀerence in the population of the two spin channels: the majority one (up, aligned with the applied ﬁeld) and the minority one (down). Two basic mechanisms have been proposed to account for the transfer of electron spin density inducing the Fermi contact shift in lithium transition metal compounds: spin delocalization and spin polarization.9,10 The delocalization mechanism corresponds to transfer of unpaired electron spin density from a TM d orbital to the Li nucleus with the same polarity (up) by orbital overlaps, either directly or via oxygen. This leads to a positive NMR shift on the Li nucleus. The spin polarization mechanism corresponds to the polarization of a fully occupied (either d

cationic or p anionic) orbital induced by unpaired electrons in the d orbital of the TM ion. Due to the presence of spin polarized partially occupied d orbitals, mixing interactions (i.e., covalency) between the anionic p and cationic d levels are diﬀerent on the majority (up) and minority (down) spin channels. This induces a negative spin polarization for the occupied orbitals which can be transferred to Li again either directly or via oxygen depending on the geometry. Consequently, a negative NMR shift on Li ion is observed when such polarization occurs. This mechanism will be discussed in detail in a forthcoming paper. The occurrence and the relative importance of these delocalization and polarization mechanisms depend on the spin state of transition metal ions and the local environment of the Li ion. An analysis based on these two mechanisms can be used to qualitatively assign the lithium NMR signals in simple cases, but for compounds with complicated structure or when only small diﬀerences between diﬀerent signals exist. Hence, theoretical calculations are very helpful for this purpose and some of us initiated such developments.8,9,11 Using the VASP code, a qualitative approach based on plane wave/pseudopotential calculation was thus introduced to investigate the transfer mechanisms. Furthermore, the assignment of the NMR peaks in a given compound was correlated to the integrated spin density found in a sphere around Li. However, as shown below this method suﬀers from some limitations and, in some cases, correct assignment of NMR shifts requires the calculation of the Fermi contact shift

where S is the total spin quantum number of the paramagnetic ions, ge is the free electron g factor, μ B is the Bohr magneton, μ 0 is the magnetic permeability in vacuum, γi is the gyromagnetic ratio of the probed nucleus, ℏ is the reduced Plank constant, k is Boltzmann constant, χ M‑Curie is the Curie-like theoretical molar magnetic susceptibility, μ the theoretical magnetic moment, NA is Avogadro’s number, and T is the temperature. Ai is the isotropic hyperﬁne coupling constant, which is related to the portion of the global magnetization that is present at the nucleus site

μ 0 S 3 where ρ i (0) is the electron spin density averaged inside the HFF Thomson sphere and has been used by many authors for the calculation of hyperﬁne ﬁeld14−16

Whereas eq 1 has been used recently by Mali et al. for the calculation of the Fermi contact shift in orthosilicate positive electrode materials,17,18 the experimental magnetic suscepti-

bility often deviates from the theoretical Curie-type susceptibility due to possible orbital contribution and/or residual magnetic correlations. Modeling of the magnetic behavior can be attempted as performed by Robert et al.19,20 Another strategy consists in calculating the Fermi contact shift using either the experimental eﬀective magnetic moment or the magnetic susceptibility as:

where χ M‑exp is the experimental molar magnetic susceptibility, eff−exp is the experimental eﬀective magnetic moment, and Θ is μ the Weiss constant. A recent paper of Kim et al.21 clearly recommends the use of the experimentally determined Curie−Weiss parameters to calculate the Fermi contact shift, which is also supported by our previous calculations.22 Moreover, we showed that for cases where the magnetic behavior is not Curie−Weiss type at the temperature of the NMR measurements, one should preferably use the experimental susceptibility at this temperature to calculate the NMR shift.23 Therefore, in the present paper, we will only deal with Fermi contact shift values calculated with eqs 4a or 4b depending of the applicability of the Curie−Weiss law or the experimental susceptibility. Furthermore, the temperature used in these equations will be that of the sample during the NMR measurement with which we wish to make a comparison. Based on the details of the NMR measurements, this temperature was estimated as stated in each case.

Assuming that the magnetic susceptibility is known, the other key quantity that enters eq 4b for the calculation of Fermi contact is the hyperﬁne coupling constants Ai for which an accurate knowledge of ρ (0) is needed. Many calculations of Fermi contact coupling constants of atoms or molecules have been performed with post Hartree−Fock theory using molecular approaches.24−28 Those results showed that it is a great challenge to obtain a good agreement between calculations and experiments, the accuracy of these calculations being very much dependent on the basis set completeness and of the correlation level. Pretty good agreement between experimental and theoretical values can be obtained using high level post Hartree−Fock methods coupled with extended basis sets.26−28 Unfortunately, such calculations are limited to small molecular or cluster systems due to the large cost of such computations. In recent years, density functional theory (DFT) has been considered as a good alternative to post Hartree− Fock methods for the calculation of Fermi contact coupling constants as it requires a much lower computational cost. Many examples of applications can be found on molecular systems with lots of tests and developments using various exchange/ correlation functionals or for improving the basis set.29−35 It is now well established that spin density values at atomic nuclei are very sensitive to the exchange/correlation potential used in the DFT framework and that hybrid functional approaches, in which a ﬁx amount of Fock exchange is introduced,36,37 need to be used for reaching accurate theoretical predictions.10,33,35

Concerning the study of crystalline compounds, people in the context of Mössbauer or ESR spectroscopies were traditionally more interested in the hyperﬁne ﬁeld (HFF) which is indeed a quantity directly correlated to the spin density around the nucleus (eq 3). While all-electrons methods are still the reference ones when periodic boundary conditions need to be applied,14,38−41 pseudopotential approaches have recently demonstrated their eﬃciency for the calculation of ρ (0).42 This is related to the development of the PAW i HFF implementation43 and, in addition, the possibility to take into account the core states relaxation.44−46 Improvement of the exchange/correlation potential within periodic boundary conditions, is by far a more complicated task compared to molecular approaches. To overcome the self-interaction error inherent to the DFT, “GGA+U” correction was ﬁrst proposed in which a Hubbard type interaction is added to localized d or f electrons in place of the generalized gradient approximation (GGA).47 Concerning the introduction of so-called hybrid functionals,36,37 the large computational eﬀort required to evaluate the Fock exchange under periodic boundary conditions made the application of classical full range approaches, like PBE0 or B3LYP, almost intractable for solids. The short-range conﬁnement for the Fock exchange, more recently proposed by Heyd et al.,48,49 is now an alternative hybrid functional solution for periodic systems,50 but it is at least 1 order of magnitude more computationally demanding compared to “GGA+U”.51

From a practical point of view, in order to obtain correct hyperﬁne coupling constants Ai for solids, we need a method that can accurately describe the valence states but also the semicore and core states very close to the nucleus. Mali et al. have calculated hyperﬁne coupling constants of Li2MnSiO4 polymorphs with the Quantum Espresso package. They used standard GGA for the exchange correlation potential, a plane wave basis set coupled with norm-conserving pseudopotentials, implemented in the “GIPAW and the PAW development package” for recovering all-electrons properties but apparently no core states relaxation. NMR Fermi contact shifts were calculated by assuming an ideal Curie behavior (eq 1) at room temperature.17,18 Kim et al. have adopted a more accurate and robust approach for studying several paramagnetic Fe(III) phosphates.21 They have used an all-electron linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO) in the Crystal06 code together with hybrid functional method (derived from B3LYP and using various diﬀerent Fock exchange percentages) for calculating the spin density at the nucleus. NMR Fermi contact shifts were then obtained considering experimental Curie−Weiss type behaviors (eq 4a). Such an approach is however very computationally demanding due to the use of a nonseparable hybrid functional scheme and the requirement for a large basis set the Fermi contact shift calculation.

In the present paper, we selected the full-potential linearized augmented plane wave (FP-LAPW) method implemented into the WIEN2k code to perform the calculations,52 as we recently ·H2O did for several phases.22,23 The full-potential linearized augmented plane wave (FP-LAPW) method is usually recognized to be the most precise one for electronic structure calculation of periodic compounds. Contrary to an LCAO method, the full potential WIEN2k/LAPW method uses an adaptive basis set whose completeness can be easily evaluated. Furthermore, the possibility to use a fully relativistic basis set has demonstrated its interest in the determination of nuclear properties like

HFF15 (or ρ HFF(0), eq 3) which is obtained by averaging spin density inside the nuclear Thomson sphere.14 Beside the standard GGA method, we also evaluated the performance of GGA+U and hybrid functional methods within this code. In is divided into (1) nonoverlapping WIEN2k, the unit cell atomic spheres centered at the atomic sites and (2) an interstitial region. The “U” term in GGA+U is applied to localized d or f orbitals, only inside the corresponding atomic spheres. This is the general way to perform the GGA+U calculation. Concerning hybrid functional capabilities of WIEN2k, the present version oﬀers the simpliﬁed scheme developed by Novak et al.:53,54 “exact exchange for correlated electrons”. In this onsite hybrid functional version, the exact exchange part is by construction very short-range because it is only applied to a selection of l-channels (atomic orbitals) inside given atomic spheres. This method has the advantage of oﬀering, at a similar computational cost, a better description of the exchange/correlation potential compared to GGA or GGA +U.

In this article, we have selected several Li transition-metal compounds to calculate the Fermi contact shift of the Li nucleus. First, we selected the LiMPO4 (M = Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni) phosphates with olivine structure. There is only one kind of Li site in LiMPO4, and the experimental Fermi contact shifts for Li are positive (Mn) and negative (Fe, Co, and Ni), respectively.3 Second is the antiﬂuorite-type Li6CoO4. The Fermi contact shifts of the two Li sites have been measured and qualitatively analyzed by some of us before.8 Here we will present quantitative results and compare them with the previous ones. Finally, the monoclinic Li3Fe2(PO4)3 and Li3V2(PO4)3 phases are discussed. The Fermi contact shifts of the three Li ions in Li3V2(PO4)3 have been measured by Cahill et al.,6 and that of Li3Fe2(PO4)3 have been measured by Davis et al.,7 and simultaneously by some of us.11 The Fermi contact shifts and mechanisms in these two compounds have been qualitatively modeled by some of us.11 This will allow us to point out the limitations of the earlier qualitative method.

METHODS Before calculating ρ HFF(0) (or HFF) with the WIEN2k code, the crystal structure of every compound has been fully relaxed with the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP),55−57 using the experimental crystal structure as a starting point. Relaxations have been carried out using the PBE-type GGA58 for the exchange correlation potential and all the ρ HFF(0) calculations obtained afterward with diﬀerent functionals (GGA, GGA+U, Hybrid) are performed on these optimized structures. By this way, we can directly compare the eﬀect of diﬀerent exchange-correlation potentials on the spin transfer mechanism keeping the structural features unchanged. Bonding and electronic structure analysis can be done afterward and will be detailed on a forthcoming paper.59 To test the validity of our calculations, HFF were also calculated on structures relaxed within the GGA+U formalism. In most cases, the conclusions obtained with these two diﬀerent sets of structures are similar, hence only the results obtained by the former methodology (GGA relaxation) are included in this paper. The relaxation has been performed using the standard PAW PBE pseudopotentials proposed with the VASP package, a plane wave energy cutoﬀ of 600 eV and a k-mesh dense enough to reach the convergence. HFF(0) calculations with WIEN2k, the spherical radii of atoms have been chosen in such a way that those spheres are nearly touching in the unit cell. The number of k-

points in the Brillouin zone and the energy cutoﬀ have been chosen to ensure the convergence of total energy, charge and spin density ρ the parameters used in the calculation are (1) LiMPO4 (M = Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni): ≈ 7.0; atomic spheres radii of Li, P, and M (M = Mn, RminKmax Fe, Co, and Ni) are 1.87, 1.61, and 2.0 au, respectively; atomic sphere radii of O in M = Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni are 1.3, 1.26, 1.3, and 1.27 au, respectively; 47 irreducible k-points with a (5 × 9 × 11) k-point mesh; (2) Li6CoO4: RminKmax =7.6, 90 irreducible k-points with a (9 × 9 × 12) k-point mesh, atomic spheres of Li, Co, and O are 1.87, 1.99, and 1.7 au, respectively; (3) Li3M2(PO4)3 (M = Fe and V): RminKmax = 6.9; 24 irreducible kpoints with a (5 × 3 × 5) k-point mesh; the atomic spheres of Li, V, P, and O in V case are 1.80, 1.87, 1.44, and 1.44 au, respectively; while the atomic spheres of Li, Fe, P, and O in Fe case are 1.81, 1.89, 1.42, and 1.42 au, respectively.

As mentioned previously, the purpose of this study is to quantitatively evaluate NMR Fermi contact shifts in order to discuss on the performance of various functional for the accurate description of the ρ HFF(0). Therefore, we chose a set of compounds presenting diﬀerent spin transfer mechanisms. Beside standard PBE/GGA approach, GGA+U and hybrid functional methods were tested. The Hubbard U correction was applied on the TM-3d orbitals using the formalism introduced by Anisimov et al.60 The adequate value for the “U” term being however unknown for most TM; we take it as a variable in the calculation. Only an eﬀective value Ueff = U − J is used in the present GGA+U method, where U is the on site electron− electron repulsion and J the exchange interaction. Concerning hybrid functionals, there are many kinds of them in the literature, such as PBE0, B3LYP, B3PW91, HSE, etc., and every method contains a ﬁxed weight of exact exchange the suitable ratio of exact exchange potential. However, potential to be applied depends on the system. Thus, it is not easy to get good results for all compounds with a ﬁxed weight of exact exchange potential, especially for the calculation of Fermi contact shifts, which are subtly dependent on the electronic states of neighboring ions. Here, we therefore adopt the PBE-Fock-α method for the hybrid functional calculations. In this method, the weight of exact exchange potential can be controlled by the fractional variable α. PBE−Fock−α is calculated

(5) PBE[ρ] is the PBE exchange-correlation potential of the corr] are exact and PBE-type

where Exc system and Ex exchange potential of the corresponding orbitals.

In the WIEN2k code, the exact-exchange/hybrid methods are implemented only inside the atomic spheres and traditionally for the localized electrons. However, as we have mentioned above, the oxygen ion may play an important role in the spin transfer from the TM ions to the Li nucleus, via both spin delocalization and spin polarization mechanisms. To take this into account, we have also applied the Fock correction to O-2p orbitals in addition to TM-3d orbitals. Thus, there are two types of hybrid functional calculations in this paper: in the ﬁrst case, the partial GGA exchange potential of the sole transitionmetal 3d orbitals inside the corresponding atomic spheres is replaced by the corresponding exact potential (hybrid functional I: HyF1) and in the other case the partial GGA exchange potential of transition-metal 3d and O-2p orbitals in the

corresponding atomic spheres are both replaced by the corresponding exact potential (hybrid functional II: HyF2). This distinction is important in the calculation as we will see in the following. Furthermore, partial GGA exchange potential of other atoms in the unit cell can also be replaced by exact exchange potential besides transition-metal 3d and O-2p orbitals, but the results show that there is no improvement in this calculation when compared to HyF2 kind of calculation (as illustrated for selected examples in the Supporting Information, Table SI-1).

Study of LiMPO4 Phases (M = Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni). Olivine LiMPO4 phases crystallize in the Pnma space group, and consist of distorted LiO6, MO6, and PO4 units. The phosphorus ions occupy tetrahedral sites, while the lithium and transition-metal ions occupy octahedral sites. There is only one kind of lithium ion site (4a site) in LiMPO4 compounds. Every LiO6 octahedron shares edges with two MO6 octahedra and corners with four other MO6 polyhedra (Figure 1). The

Figure 1. Environment of Li atoms in LiMPO4. The LiO6 octahedron shares edges with two MO6 octahedra and corners with four other MO6 polyhedra.

experimental crystal parameters are: (LiMnPO4: a = 10.431 Å, b = 6.0947 Å, c = 4.7366 Å),61 (LiFePO4: a = 10.338 Å, b = 6.011 Å, c = 4.695 Å),62 (LiCoPO4: a = 10.2001 Å, b = 5.9199 Å, c = 4.690 Å),63 and (LiNiPO4: a = 10.0275 Å, b = 5.8537 Å, c = 4.6763 Å).61 The transition metal ions in these compounds 2, S = 5/2), HSare divalent: High Spin(HS)-Mn2+ (3d5: t2g 2, S = 2), HS-Co2+ (3d7: t2g Fe2+ (3d6: t2g 2, S = 3/2), and Ni2+ (3d8: t2g 2, S = 1). For convenience, here we still use the term “t2g ” to denote electrons in diﬀerent d orbitals of M ions though it is not strictly correct because of the distortion of MO6 octahedra. Note that we also adopt the usual * antibonding denomination “eg hybrid orbital with oxygen. The experimental room temperature NMR Fermi contact shifts of 7Li at 310 K, eﬀective magnetic moments and Weiss constant for LiMnPO4, LiFePO4, B, −58 K), (−8 ppm, LiCoPO4, and LiNiPO4 are (68 ppm, 5.4 μ B, −70 K), and (−49 ppm, 6.8 μ dx.doi.org/10.1021/jp304762f | J. Phys. Chem. C 2012, 116, 17393−17402

Table 1. Comparison of Experimental Fermi Contact Shifts (ppm, in bold) with the Calculated Ones Obtained for Various Compounds with Diﬀerent Functionals Using Either eq 4a or 4b (See Text)

aThe eﬀective potential (Ueff) is given in Ry. bMixing parameters used for the hybrid functionals are reported.

B, −60 K), respectively.3 We used eq 4a to calculate the 3.1 μ Fermi contact shift of Li, listed in Table 1 and plotted in Figure 2, with T = 310 K.

Figure 2. Comparison of experimental Fermi contact shifts of Li in olivine LiMPO4 (M = Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni) with the calculated ones obtained with diﬀerent approaches using eq 4a (T = 310 K). For the GGA+U, the eﬀective potential (Ueff) is given in Ry and for the hybrid functionals (HyF1 of HyF2, see text) mixing parameters are reported: a = 0.35 (Mn, Co, and Ni); a = 0.5 (Fe).

For the GGA case, the calculated values are 131 ppm (Mn), 118 ppm (Fe), 73 ppm (Co), and −63 ppm (Ni), respectively. The calculated value for Li in LiNiPO4 is negative and only a little smaller (i.e., in absolute value) than the experimental one. On the contrary, the calculated values of LiMnPO4, LiFePO4, and LiCoPO4 are much larger than the corresponding experimental ones. In fact, the negative chemical shifts of Li in LiFePO4 and LiCoPO4 are even predicted to be positive by the GGA calculation. The selected results of “GGA +U” method are also listed in Table 1 and plotted in Figure 2, and are better than those from GGA calculation. For example, the calculated Fermi contact shift of Li in LiNiPO4 are −53 ppm (with Ueff = 0.1 Ry) and −40 ppm (with Ueff = 0.3 Ry), respectively, which are close to the experimental values. This implies the spin polarization eﬀect from eg orbitals to the Li nucleus. The positive Fermi contact shift of LiMnPO4 is decreased with the

increase of Ueff and consequently the agreement between calculation and experiment is improved. However, for Ueff = 0.5 Ry, the calculated value is about 93 ppm, which is still larger than the experimental value of 68 ppm. Better agreement with experiment can be obtained using even larger Ueff (0.7 Ry∼1.0 this is over the values commonly accepted for Ry), but the transitional metal calculated Fermi contact shifts are also decreased with the increase of Ueff, but they are still positive, even when very large Ueff is used in the calculation. An important result is therefore that we cannot get a negative Fermi contact shift for Li in these two compounds with GGA+U calculations.

No improvement over the GGA+U method can be obtained when partial exact exchange potential is added to the transitionmetal ions only (HyF1). From Table 1 and Figure 2, we ﬁnd that the result of HyF1 calculation is similar to that of GGA+U: the best agreement with experiment can be obtained in LiNiPO4, then LiMnPO4, while the (experimentally negative) Fermi contact shifts in LiFePO4 and LiCoPO4 are still predicted to be positive. In contrast, obvious improvement can be obtained with the HyF2 method. Now the positive Fermi contact shift of Li ion in LiMnPO4 decreases largely with the increase of exact exchange potential, and good agreement with experiment can be obtained when ∼35% of exact exchange potential (mixing parameter α = 0.35) is added. The negative value of LiNiPO4 increases slowly (smaller absolute value) when a large portion of exact exchange potential is added, and a pretty good agreement with experiment is also obtained with a mixing parameter α ≈ 0.35. The most obvious improvement is observed in LiNiPO4 and LiCoPO4. The experimental negative Fermi contact shifts are now predicted by the HyF2 calculations with the appropriate portion of exact exchange potential: it is about −2 ppm with α ≈ 0.5 for LiFePO4 and −21 ppm with α ≈ 0.35 for LiCoPO4. However, these negative values do not decrease monotonously with an increase of exact exchange potential, as can be seen from the results of α = 0.35 and 0.5. We propose that the diﬀerence between HyF2 and HyF1 methods for the Fermi contact calculation can be understood as follows. Though the SIE deﬁciency in GGA is generally strong for localized d or f orbitals, it should also have some inﬂuence on other orbitals, such as O-2p ones. These

inﬂuences may be tiny on the calculation of common quantities, such as total energy and magnetic moment, and can be omitted in the corresponding calculation. However, for a quantity sensitive to neighboring environment, such as Fermi contact shift, these inﬂuences can not be omitted. Thus, to improve the results of the Fermi contact shift calculations, the addition of partial exact exchange potential is also needed for the O-2p orbitals. From the calculated Fermi contact shifts of Olivine LiMPO4 compounds with HyF2 method, we ﬁnd that the best agreement with experiment can be obtained when mixing parameter α is about 0.35 except for LiFePO4. The calculated Fermi contact shift of Li in LiFePO4 is about 9 ppm when α = 0.35 (−8 ppm experimentally). Though they have opposite signs, the diﬀerence between the calculated and experimental values is not large, and we can conclude that a mixing parameter α = 0.35 is globally appropriate to calculate the Fermi contact shift of Li ions in Olivine LiMPO4 compounds. The spin polarized density of states (DOS) and magnetic moment on transition metal ions for LiMPO4 compounds are given in the Supporting Information (Table SI-2 and Figure SI1), showing that the expected transition metal spin states mentioned above are obtained whatever the calculation. It is interesting to note that the distortion of the TM octahedra is strong enough to induce a separation in energy within the t2g orbitals. This can be seen from the projected DOS on Co-3d orbitals in LiCoPO4 in the Supporting Information, Figures SI2 and SI-3, where two spin-down electrons mainly occupy spindown dxz and dyz orbitals and leave the spin-down dxy orbital empty. This is an important fact for analyzing the electron spin density transfer mechanisms, as will be illustrated in subsequent reports.

There is obvious diﬀerence between the theoretical (spinonly) and experimental eﬀective magnetic moments of LiMPO4, especially for LiFePO4 and LiCoPO4.3 In order to consider whether that may contribute to this diﬀerence can aﬀect the Fermi contact shift on Li ions, we also performed the GGA or GGA+U calculation including spin−orbital coupling (SO). The result can be found in the Supporting Information, Table SI-3: the diﬀerence of Fermi contact shift of Li obtained by calculation with and without spin−orbital coupling is negligible for LiMPO4. Similar conclusion can also be found in the Li6CoO4 case discussed in the following section.

Study of the Li6CoO4 Phase. The space group of Li6CoO4 is tetragonal P42/nmc. The crystal structure contains CoO4 tetrahedra and two diﬀerent types of Li sites: Li(1) and Li(2), where the Li(1)O4 and Li(2)O4 tetrahedra present diﬀerent bonding topologies with the surrounding atoms (Figure 3). The Li(1)O4 tetrahedron shares one edge and two corners with CoO4 tetrahedra, whereas the Li(2)O4 tetrahedron shares its four corners with four CoO4 tetrahedra. The lattice parameters of Li6CoO4 were fully relaxed with VASP (GGA) using the experimental ones as a starting point (a = 6.536 Å and c = 4.654 Å).64 Co2+ ions in Li6CoO4 are in e4t2 3 conﬁguration (S = 3/2). Some of us have recorded 7Li NMR spectra showing two isotropic signals corresponding to the two Li sites: one is strongly positive (885 ppm) and the other is strongly negative (−232 ppm). In this study, the electronic structure of Li6CoO4 was also calculated using the VASP code to help in the interpretation of NMR experimental results.8 However, because the spin density near the Li nucleus or the HFF is not currently accessible in VASP, the net spin inside spheres around each Li ion (calculated by integrating the spin

Figure 3. Environment for the two Li sites of Li6CoO4 showing the local geometry: (a) Li(1) and (b) Li(2).

density inside those spheres) was used for interpreting the Fermi contact shift. With this method, the positive and negative shifts were unambiguously assigned to Li(2) and Li(1), respectively, but the calculated Li(2)/Li(1) net spin ratio was largely diﬀerent from the experimental Fermi contact shifts ratio. Indeed, the experimental Fermi contact shift ratio Li(2)/ Li(1) is close to 3.8 (in absolute value), whereas the spin densities calculated with GGA in a 0.6 Å radius sphere yield a much larger ratio of 14.8. With GGA+U method, the Li(2)/ Li(1) absolute spin density ratio was lowered (12.2), but it is still much larger than that of the NMR shifts. The Fermi contact shifts of Li6CoO4 is calculated using eq 4a and considering the experimental Weiss constant of −8 K and the eﬀective magnetic moment of 4.1 μ B.65 The sample temperature is taken as 320 K in the 30 kHz spinning NMR measurement, as determined by standardization.23 The results are given in Table 1 and shown in Figure 4. With GGA calculation, the calculated Fermi contact shifts on Li(1) and Li(2) are about −176 and 1441 ppm, respectively. Both values have the correct sign, to the corresponding experimental ones (−232 and +885 ppm), but the calculated shift for Li(2) is too large and for Li(1) it is not enough negative. Consequently, although the calculated ratio between those two values has been improved compared to previous calculations,8 it is still too large (in absolute value) compared to the experimental one (8.2 against 3.8, respectively). Applying the “GGA+U” method to Co-3d electrons, the positive Fermi contact shift on Li(2) is decreased, and a better agreement with the experiment the negative Fermi contact shift on Li(1) is also decreased (in absolute value), so that the diﬀerence between calculation and experiment is even larger than in the GGA case. Therefore, the ratio between the calculated NMR shifts of Li(2) and Li(1) is still far from the


Figure 4. Comparison of experimental Fermi contact shifts of Li(1) and Li(2) in Li6CoO4 with the calculated ones obtained with diﬀerent approaches using eq 4a (T = 320 K). For the GGA+U, the eﬀective potential (Ueff) is given in Ry and for the hybrid functionals (HyF1 of HyF2, see text) mixing parameters are reported.

experimental one whatever the Ueff term introduced in the calculation: 8.1, 9.9, and 7.2 (in absolute value) with Ueff = 0.1, 0.3, and 0.5 Ry, respectively. Just like for the LiMPO4 compounds, adding partial exact exchange potential for the Co-3d orbitals (HyF1) has an eﬀect similar to the GGA+U method: both the positive and negative NMR shifts are weakened compared to the pure GGA functional. Consequently, only the Fermi contact shift calculation on Li(2) can be improved, whereas a worse disagreement with experiment is obtained for the negative shift of Li(1). On the other hand, if we add partial exact exchange potential to both Co-3d and O2p orbitals (HyF2), a good agreement with experiment can be obtained: the positive value on Li(2) is decreased and the negative value on Li(1) is enlarged, leading to a much improved global agreement. The best agreement with experiment for both Li(1) and Li(2) can be obtained when about 15% of the GGA exchange potential is replaced by the corresponding exact potential: 941(Li(2)) and −265(Li(1)) with a ratio close to 3.5 (in absolute value). To check the validity of each of these calculations, we also plotted the spin-polarized DOS and computed the magnetic moment on Co (in the Supporting Information, Table SI-2 and Figure SI-4), which shows that Co2+ (e4 t2 3) is obtained in each case. To summarize this part and as already observed for the olivine phases, the anionic p states play an important role in the polarization mechanism and therefore have to be corrected from the SIE using a hybrid scheme.

Study of the Li3M2(PO4)3 (M = V and Fe) Phases. The two Li3Fe2(PO4)3 and Li3V2(PO4)3 phases are isostructural with a monoclinic cell (P21/n space group). The lithium ions are distributed in three distinct sites: Li(1), Li(2), and Li(3) (Figure 5). Here we use the nomenclature adopted by Patoux et al.66 Li (1) is in a tetrahedral site sharing edges with two MO6 octahedra; Li(2) is in a distorted trigonal bipyramid site sharing respectively an edge and a face with two MO6 octahedra; ﬁnally, Li(3) is also in a distorted trigonal bipyramid site sharing respectively a face and two corners with three MO6 octahedra. There are two non symmetry related positions of Fe or V in Li3M2(PO4)3. They occupy distorted octahedral sites with the following conﬁgurations: HS Fe3+(t2 g 2) and 0). The 7Li MAS NMR spectra of Li3Fe2(PO4)3 V3+(t2 g have been measured by some of us with the observation of three distinct signatures at 189, 89, and 39 ppm, respectively.11 Similar results have been simultaneously obtained by Davis et al.7 The 7Li NMR spectrum of Li3V2(PO4)3 have been recorded by Cahill et al. and exhibits three isotropic signals at 103, 52,

Figure 5. Environment for the three Li sites of Li3V2(PO4)3 showing the local geometry: (a) Li(1), (b) Li(2), and (c) Li(3).

and 17 ppm, respectively.6 The unambiguous assignment of NMR signals to the three distinct Li sites is however not obvious due to the complicated crystalline structures and the small diﬀerences observed between those NMR signals. For instance, in the case of the Li3Fe2(PO4)3 phase, Davis et al. proposed the following ranking for the three Li NMR peaks: δ (Li3) > δ (Li1) > δ (Li2), based on the structural analysis,7 while Kim et al. gave a diﬀerent assignment using calculations based on the Crystal06 code: δ (Li1) > δ (Li2) > δ (Li3).21 For the Li3V2(PO4)3 phase, Cahill et al. proposed a ranking similar to the one suggested by Davis et al. on Li3Fe2(PO4)3, i.e., δ (Li3) > δ (Li1) > δ (Li2).6 In our previous paper where the VASP code is used for interpreting the NMR Fermi contact shift, diﬀerent attributions were proposed for these two compounds.11 Eﬀectively, as in the case of Li6CoO4, the HFF or spin density near the Li nucleus was not directly accessible. Consequently, the net spin (or integrated spin amount) inside spheres around each Li ion was used to represent the Fermi contact shift. For Li3Fe2(PO4)3, these calculations led to the

assignment we now propose is therefore diﬀerent from that obtained with our previous calculations.11 This diﬀerence can be explained by analyzing the evolution of the averaged spin density inside the diﬀerent atomic spheres. The values reported in Figure 7a are those obtained by the present WIEN2k

The Journal of Physical Chemistry C

following assignments: δ (Li1) > δ (Li3) > δ(Li2), whatever the method (GGA or GGA+U) or the radius of the integration sphere, with rather close expected shifts for Li(3) and Li(2). For Li3V2(PO4)3, the relative net spins calculated around each Li ion depend strongly on the method (GGA or GGA+U) used, and within a given method depend very slightly on the radius size. The GGA method leads to the following assignment δ (Li3) > δ (Li2) > δ (Li1), whereas GGA+U leads to the δ (Li1) > δ(Li3) > δ (Li2) or δ (Li3) > δ (Li1) > δ (Li2) depending on the radius size and the U value. These results are therefore diﬀerent from those of Davis et al. or Cahill et al. To further study this question we recalculated the Fermi contact shift of ions using the WIEN2k approach discussed in the present paper. For Li3Fe2(PO4)3, we have used the experimental eﬀective magnetic moment (5.89 μB) and the Weiss constant (−55 K)67 to do the calculation (eq 4a), considering 320 K as the sample temperature. The results are presented in Table 1 and shown in Figure 6a. The GGA

Figure 7. Average spin density around the three Li nuclei for Li3Fe2(PO4)3 (a) and Li3V2(PO4)3 (b) as a function of the integration sphere radius. Results are given for the GGA and GGA+U (Ueff = 3 eV) calculations.

Figure 6. Comparison of experimental Fermi contact shifts of Li(1), Li(2), and Li(3) in Li3M2(PO4)3 (M = Fe (a) and V (b)) with the calculated ones obtained with diﬀerent approaches using eqs 4a or 4b (see text, T = 320 K). For the GGA+U, the eﬀective potential (Ueff) is given in Ry and for the hybrid functionals (HyF1 of HyF2, see text) mixing parameters are reported.

calculated Fermi contact shifts of Li(1), Li(2), and Li(3) in Li3Fe2(PO4)3 are thus 391, 222, and 196 ppm (δ (Li1) > δ (Li2) > δ(Li3)), respectively. Adding a U term or replacing partial GGA exchange-potential with exact exchange potential on Fe-3d orbitals decreases these values and maintains the ranking among them, but the corresponding results are still than the experimental values. When partial exact larger potential the situation gets better as we have encountered for the other systems discussed above. There is a reasonable agreement with experiment when about 20% of GGA exchange potential of Fe3d and O-2p orbitals is replaced by exact potential. With this adjustment, the three signals 189 ppm, 89 ppm and 39 ppm can be assigned to Li(1), Li(2) and Li(3), respectively. The

calculations with the GGA and GGA+U with a Ueff = 3 eV (this Ueff = 3 eV or 0.22 Ry was one of the Ueff values used in ref 11). Crossing points can be observed between the spin density curves of Li(2) and Li(3). At small radius (about R < 0.45 Å), the averaged spin density on Li(2) is larger than that on Li(3), whereas at larger radii (R > 0.45 Å), the averaged spin density on Li(2) becomes In these previous calculations the radii selected for the analysis were above the crossing point value (between 0.6 and 0.8 Å); this explains the ranking that was proposed: δ(Li1) > δ(Li3) > δ(Li2). Furthermore, this ranking was supported by a detailed analysis of the local conﬁguration for each Li site based on the possible overlap of the Li 2s orbital with idealized 3d orbitals of Fe3+ containing the electron spins. Note, however, that the relative positions of Li(2) and Li(3), both from the geometry analysis and the calculations, were considered rather close, as conﬁrmed by the present results in ﬁgure 7a. In the present paper, using the HFF approach (eq 4a) to calculate the Fermi contact shift, we now get an assignment consistent with that by Kim et al.21 (δ (Li1) > δ (Li2) > δ(Li3)) with however a better agreement with experimental results.

Turning to the vanadium phase, the experimental molar magnetic susceptibility of Li3V2(PO4)3 at the temperature of the NMR experiment is about 0.006 emu/mol.68 However, the number of V ions is 2 NA/mol, so the magnetic susceptibility used in the calculation is half of the experimental value. In GGA calculation, the Fermi contact shifts on Li(1), Li(2), and Li(3) ions are 135, 40, and 65 ppm, respectively, and the ranking of Fermi contact shifts is δ(Li1) > δ(Li3) > δ(Li2) (see Table 1 and Figure 6b). Adding partial exact exchange potential or U term (GGA+U) to Fe-3d orbitals decreases these values, especially that on Li(3). So the calculated Fermi contact shift on Li(3) becomes smaller than that one on Li(2), and now the ranking is δ(Li1) > δ(Li2) > δ(Li3). The best agreement with experimental NMR shifts is again obtained for the HyF2 calculation with 20% GGA exchange potential on V-3d and O2p orbitals replaced by exact exchange potential. Consequently, the three experimental peaks of 103, 52, and 17 ppm can be assigned to Li(1), Li(2), and Li(3) ions, respectively. This is in agreement with our earlier local geometry analysis that we were not able to conﬁrm using DFT/VASP calculations.11 The reason of this diﬀerence can be analyzed as above for Li3Fe2(PO4)3 looking at the evolution of the average spin density as a function of the sphere radii (see Figure 7b). When increasing the sphere radius for the integration, we indeed observe the occurrence of crossing points (∼0.5−0.6 Å) where Li(2) and Li(3) average spin densities become larger than the Li(1) one. Furthermore, the choice of the functional also determines the existence of a crossing point for Li(2) and Li(3). This clearly demonstrates the qualitative method that was previously used for interpreting the NMR Fermi contact shift. In any cases, the best agreement with experiment is obtained for both Li3Fe2(PO4)3 and Li3V2(PO4)3 when 20% GGA exchange potential is replaced by exact exchange potential.

The spin polarized density of states (DOS) and magnetic moment on transition metal ions for all Li3Fe2(PO4)3 and Li3V2(PO4)3 calculations are given in the Supporting Information, Table SI-2 and Figure SI-5. In Li3V2(PO4)3, there are two t2g electrons for the three t2g orbitals. Our previous calculation with VASP showed that the three t2g orbitals are all partially occupied in GGA calculation, but only two orbitals are occupied in GGA+U calculation,11 thus participating diﬀerently to the spin transfer mechanisms. To conﬁrm these results, we also plotted the partial V-3d DOS with GGA+U (Ueff = 3 eV, see the Supporting Information, Figure SI-6).
results, we have In order to reproduce the experimental calculated the 7Li in several Li paramagnetic periodic compounds with ﬁrst principle calculations based on DFT. By studying diﬀerent structural types or electronic conﬁgurations for the transition metal ions, we conﬁrm that the calculated Fermi contact shift is very much dependent on the exchange correlation potential used in the calculation, with the need to use hybrid functional approaches for reaching good accuracies, as commonly accepted for molecular systems. While those hybrid functional schemes are widely used on nonperiodic systems, their implementation and generalization for solids is rather new due to the excessive computational cost associated. For a few years only, thanks to the development of a range separated Fock operator (HSE scheme), hybrid functional schemes have been occasionally

used in periodic systems but still with the need of large computational eﬀorts compared to standard GGA. We therefore present here a cost-eﬀective and accurate method for reaching good agreements between theoretical and experimental NMR contact shifts, as follows.

the Fermi contact

that are needed for

The F(L)APW method, as implemented in the WIEN2k code, is particularly well adapted to provide the accurate HFF quantities shift calculations. It oﬀers many advantages compared to the diﬀerent approaches that have been recently proposed in the literature for carrying out similar calculations on periodic solids. Among those advantages, we can recall the beneﬁt of using an autoadjustable basis set that is accurate enough, and at no additional computational cost, to provide a very precise spin density at the nucleus. Compared to a PAW pseudopotential/ plane wave basis set that traditionally uses the frozen core approximation or to the use of an LCAO one for which a large basis set and a great deal of expertise and testing is needed before reaching convergence of the HFF, we evidence that the (L)APW basis is particularly well designed and eﬃcient for calculating nuclear-related properties. Furthermore, the judicious and cheap way the calculation of exact exchange correction is implemented in the WIEN2k code (onsite approximation) allowed us to use hybrid functional approaches on large systems, a really great advantage compared to competing approaches. A controlled-range (similar to HSE) full hybrid implementation in WIEN2k being just developed69 and very recently released, it will then be interesting to compare it with our present approach in terms of accuracy and computational eﬀort.

Supporting Information Additional tables and ﬁgures are provided. Table SI-1 gives calculated Fermi contact shifts when the hybrid scheme is applied on all the atoms of the unit cell. Table SI-2 shows some dependence of the local atomic magnetic moment with respect to functional parameters. Table SI-3 shows the eﬀect of the spin−orbit coupling on Fermi contact shift calculations. Figure SI-1 shows the DOS for olivine compounds and some dependence of PDOS with respect to functional parameters. Figures SI-2 and SI-3 are used to show the diﬀerences on the PDOS Co-d orbital in LiCoPO4 between a standard GGA calculation and a hybrid scheme. Figure SI-4 shows some dependence of PDOS in Li6CoO4 with respect to functional parameters. Figures SI-5 and SI-6 show some dependence of DOS and PDOS in Li3M2(PO4)3 (M = Fe, V) with respect to functional parameters. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.