ZrOCl2·8H2O and ZrO(NO3)2·2H2O were used respectively to synthesize a NASICON solid electrolyte by a sol-gel method. The  structure and properties of two samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The crystal structure was investigated by the Rietveld refinement. It is found that both the samples  contain a monoclinic C2/c phase as the main conductive phase with the lattice parameters of a=1.56312 nm, b=0.90784 nm and c=0.92203  nm, though a small amount of rhombohedral phase is also detected in the final product. The sample synthesized by ZrO(NO3)2·2H2O contains more monoclinic phase (89.48wt%) than that synthesized by ZrOCl2·8H2O (74.91wt%). As expected, the ionic conductivity of the latter  is higher than that of the former; however, the activation energy of the latter (0.37 eV) is slightly higher than that of the former (0.35 eV).  Keywords: NASICON; superionic conducting materials; sodium compounds; sol-gel process; microstructure; electrical conductivity   

Sodium  super-ionic  conductors  (NASICON)  with  the  general formula Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 (0≤x≤3) were first synthesized by Hong [1] and Goodenough et al. [2]. The NASICON structure has rhombohedral symmetry, except in the  interval  1.8≤x≤2.2,  where  small  distortion  to  monoclinic  symmetry takes place. The highest ionic conductivity is observed  in  the  monoclinic  structure  obtained  for  x=2.0  and  close to that of β-alumina, which has two-dimensional ionic  mobility. A compound Na3Zr2Si2PO12 has a structure made  by  a  three-dimensional  framework  of  SiO4/PO4  tetrahedra  corners sharing with ZrO6 octahedra, in which Na+ ions occupy the interstitial sites. Ionic conduction takes place when  Na+  ions  move  from  one  site  to  another  through  “bottlenecks”  formed  by  oxygen  ions.  NASICON  with  nominal  composition Na3Zr2Si2PO12 has attracted more and more attention for promising use in solid-state electrochemical de-

The  NASICON  material  is  usually  synthesized  by  two  methods  (the  traditional  solid  state  reaction  and  sol-gel  method), which affect the microstructure of samples [8-9].  The solid state method requires a higher temperature leading  to the volatilization of Na2O and P2O5 and the resultant segregation of zirconia at the grain boundary, which causes a  decrease  in  ionic  conductivity.  A  reduced  sintering  temperature  seems  to be  advantageous for obtaining a desired  composition.  The  newly  developed  metal-organic  sol-gel  procedure has overcome the problems, but the raw material  is very expensive, and thus limits the method to be extensively  applied  [10].  Subsequently,  some  inorganic  metal  salts such as ZrOCl2·8H2O or ZrO(NO3)2·2H2O were used as  a substitute for metal-organic [11-13]. However, there is little  information  about  the  difference  in  the  microstructure  and electrical properties of NASICON synthesized by two 

Corresponding author: Xing-min Guo        E-mail: guoxm@ustb.edu.cn  © University of Science and Technology Beijing and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012   

kinds of zirconium salts in literatures. 

In  the  present  work,  we  have  prepared  the  NASICON  material  using  a  sol-gel  method  with  two  different  zirconium salts mentioned above and compared the difference in  the microstructure and electrical properties.   

The  NASICON  material  was  synthesized  by  a  sol-gel  method [14]. ZrOCl2·8H2O was used as main raw materials  and the preparation process is shown in Fig. 1. ZrOCl2·8H2O  was dissolved in deionized water to form an aqueous solution  first.  The,  NH4OH  was  added  to  the  above  solution  dropwise  under  stirring.  The  complete  precipitation  of  ZrO(OH)2 was realized by controlling the pH value of the  solution  above  7.2.  The  purified  ZrO(OH)2  was  dissolved  into an aqueous solution of nitric acid after Cl− was eliminated by washing away iteratively. The solution was stirred  at 50°C for 0.5 h to get a clear solution of Zr(NO3)4. The  silica sol was prepared in a molar ratio of [H2O]/[C2H5OH]/  [Si(OC2H5)4]=0.717:0.717:1  and  added  into  the  previous  solution.  Finally,  a  Na3PO4·12H2O  aqueous  solution  was  quickly added as the required proportion. The mixture was  stirred to form a sol and then dried at 80°C for 24 h to form  a xerogel. The xerogel was ball milled into fine powders and  then pre-calcined at 500°C for 0.5 h in air to remove organic  compounds.  Then  the  resulted  NASICON  precursor  powders were formed into pellets under the uniaxial pressure of  50 kN. Sintering was done at 900°C for 2 h. In the case of  ZrO(NO3)2·2H2O  used  as  a  raw  material,  the  preparation   

Fig. 1.    Preparation process of the NASICON material. 

process is similar to that of ZrOCl2·8H2O. Compared with  ZrOCl2·8H2O, NASICON synthesized by ZrO(NO3)2·2H2O  is far simpler because Cl− is nonexistent in the raw material.  The preparation process has been described in detail in our  previous  work [15]. NASICON  samples  synthesized using  ZrOCl2·8H2O  and  ZrO(NO3)2·2H2O  as  main  raw  materials  are indicated as sample A and sample B, respectively.  2.2. Measurements 

X-ray diffraction (XRD, by MXP21VAHF, MAC Seience  Co. Ltd. JPN) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM, by  JSM-6480LV, JEOL Ltd. JPN) were used to determine the  composition and microstructural properties of the prepared  pellets. To further confirm the crystal structure, the Rietveld  refinement  was  employed  using  the  FULLProf  computer  tools.  The  density  of  pellets  was  measured  by  the  Archimedes  method  with  ethanol  as  an  immersion  medium.  Electrical  properties  were  determined  based  on  electrochemical  impedance  spectroscopy  (EIS)  measurements  in  the frequency range of 0.01-105 Hz between 200 and 400°C  in air. The amplitude of sinusoidal voltage was 5 mV. The  sample was allowed to equilibrate for 2 h before measurements.  Prior  to  the  measurements,  two flat  surfaces of  the  NASICON pellets were polished and a pair of Pt electrodes  was  deposited  by  screen-printing  on  both  flat  sides  of  the  pellets.  2.3. Equivalent circuit model 

Electrochemical  impedance  spectroscopy  is  a  powerful  technique for unraveling the electrical properties of an electrolyte [16]. It enables the overall electrical properties of the  electrolyte  material  to  be  separated  into  their  components,  which can then be systematically studied or modified. Frequently,  experiment  is  carried  out  over  a  wide  frequency  range (0.01-105 Hz in our present experiment as mentioned  above),  and  the  interpretation  of  the  resulting  spectra  is  aided  by  analogy  to  equivalent  circuits  involving  simple  components  such  as  resistors,  capacitors  and  some  other  elements.  Normally,  impedance  data  are  presented  in  the  Nyquist (−ImZ vs. ReZ) form. A good correspondence between experimental data and fitted curves is then taken as a  confirmation that the proposed circuit provides a good description of the system under investigation. Here an equivalent  circuit  model  with  explicit  physical  meaning  is  proposed as shown in Fig. 2. In Fig. 2, Rb is the resistance of the  bulk; Cgb and Rgb represent the capacitance and resistance of  grain  boundaries,  respectively;  Cdl  and  Rct  are  the  double  layer capacitance and the charge transfer resistance of electrodes,  respectively;  and  Q  is  the  constant  phase  element 

(CPE)  related  to  the  ions  diffusion  process.  The  adapted  equivalent circuit is finally used to fit our experimental impedance data. 

Fig. 2.    Equivalent circuit for simulating the impedance spectra of two samples. 

The densities of the samples were measured based on the   

Int. J. Miner. Metall. Mater., Vol.19, No.8, Aug 2012 

Archimedes law. The results are listed in Table 1. Sample B  has  the  density  of  2.71  g·cm−3,  which  is  much  lower  than  that of sample A (2.96 g·cm−3, close to the theoretical value  of 3.26 g·cm−3). This may be caused by the bigger volumetric  shrinkage  of  sample  A  (32.9%)  than  that  of  sample  B  (6.78%).  Furthermore,  the  true  porosity  of  sample  B  (16.85%) is far larger than that of sample A. Both the values  of  density  and  porosity  seem  to  suggest  that  using  ZrOCl2·8H2O as the main raw material is helpful to enhance  the densification of NASICON sintered pellets.     

Fig. 3 illustrates the surface microstructure observed by  SEM for the two samples. An obvious difference in the microstructures was observed. There are lots of pores in sample B synthesized by ZrO(NO3)2·2H2O with a rough surface,  while the surface of sample A is relatively smooth and dense.  These findings are consistent with that discussed above. 

Table 1.    Values of density and porosity of two investigated NASICON samples 

Fig. 3.    SEM photographs of samples A (a) and B (b). 

The XRD patterns of the two samples are shown in Fig. 4.  It is worth noting that there is no ZrO2 phase appearing in  both the samples, which tends to appear easily in the normal  high-temperature  solid-state  reaction  process  [17-19].  The  XRD patters of both the samples are almost the same while  the  crystallization  degrees  are  different.  It  is  believed  that  the crystallization degree of sample A is better than that of  sample B because the XRD peaks of sample A are sharper  and narrower than those of the sample B, as shown in Fig. 4.  To further confirm the crystal structure, the Rietveld method  was employed. The main crystal phase in both the samples  is identified in the monoclinic system of C2/c space group,  although  small  amount  of  rhombohedral  phase  ( 3R c )  is   

also detected in the final product. The refined cell parameters are a=1.56312 nm, b=0.90784 nm and c=0.92203 nm,  which  are  in  good  agreement  with  the  values  reported  by  Hong [1]. The main difference is that sample B contained  more monoclinic phase (89.48wt%) as the main conductive  phase [8] than sample A (74.91wt%). It seems to imply that  sample B is expected to have a higher conductivity than the  sample A.  3.2. Electrical conductivity   

The electrical properties of the NASICON samples were  measured  by  EIS,  which  allowed  distinguishing  the  resistances of the bulk and the grain boundary for a polycrystal

Fig. 4.    XRD patterns and their Rietveld refinement results of samples A (a) and B (b). 

line  electrolyte.  The  Nyquist  diagrams  of  the  two  samples  are  shown  in Fig. 5.  The geometrical  shape of  the  impedance spectra of both the samples is similar. The contribution  described  at  low  frequencies  characterizes  the  response  of  the NASICON/Pt electrode interface. The spectra observed  at  mediate  frequencies  translate  the  blocking  effect  of  charge carriers at the grain boundaries. At high frequencies,  the impedance diagram corresponds to the specific response  of the bulk. In this present experiment, the impedance data  were  recorded  at  higher  temperatures.  Consequently,  the  semicircle corresponding to the bulk impedance is out with 

respect to the frequency scale of the instrumentation. Normally,  the  resistance  of  grains  in  the  samples  can  be  obtained at the intersection point of the spectra with the real  axis  at  high  frequencies.  The  correspondence  between  experimental data and fitted curves obtained with the equivalent  circuit  (Fig.  2)  is  excellent  over  the  whole  frequency  and  temperature  range  measured,  implying  the  model  is  a  reasonable explanation for the spectra. The impedance parameters were derived from the spectra by fitting the data to  an  equivalent  circuit  using  complex  nonlinear  least  square  (CNLS) fitting techniques.   

Fig. 5.    Impedance diagrams in Nyquist coordinates of samples A (a) and B (b). Solid lines represent CNLS fitting to the equivalent  circuit at different temperatures.   

The conductivity of both the samples is given by 

where D and l are the diameter and the thickness of the two  samples  respectively,  and  R  is  the  resistance  of  the  bulk  given by the above fitting results. The ionic conductivities of  samples A and B at 300°C are 0.32 S·cm−1 and 0.48 S·cm−1,  respectively,  which  are  in  the  same  order  of  magnitude  compared with results reported by Andersen et al. [20] at the  same  temperature.  Furthermore,  the  activation  energy  (Ea)  of  Na+  ion  migration  in  both  the  samples  is  given  by  the  Arrhenius equation as follows:   

where σ0 is the pre-exponential factor, T is the temperature  in Kelvin, k is the Boltzmann’s constant. While the natural  logarithm is taken to Eq.(2), it can be transformed into 

Thus,  ln(σT)  is  linear  to  1/T  with  a  slope  of  Ea/k.  The  evolution  of  conductivity  in  the  Arrhenius  plot  is  represented  in  Fig.  6.  As  shown  in  this  figure,  the  relationship  between the conductivity and temperature is in good agreement with the Arrhenius relationship for both the samples.  The activation energy of Na+ ion migration in the samples is  determined  from  the  slope  of  the  fitted  straight  line.  The  conductivity  of  the  two  samples  increases  with  increasing  temperature. As  expected,  the  conductivity  of  sample  B  is  higher than that of sample A. The finding is consistent with  the expected by examining the Rietveld refinement results.  On  the  other  hand,  for  sample  B,  the  activation  energy  of  Na+ ion migration (0.37 eV) is slightly higher than that of   

Fig. 6.    Arrhenius plots of the samples. 

Int. J. Miner. Metall. Mater., Vol.19, No.8, Aug 2012 

sample  A  (0.35  eV).  The  results  of  activation  energy  are  very close to the values reported in other literatures [21-23]. 

ZrOCl2·8H2O  and  ZrO(NO3)2·2H2O  were  used  as  the  main  raw  materials  respectively  to  synthesize  NASICON  solid  electrolyte  materials  by  a  sol-gel  method.  Compared  with the sample synthesized by ZrO(NO3)2·2H2O, the sample  synthesized  by  ZrOCl2·8H2O  shows  to  be  more  dense  with a density of 2.96 g·cm−3, being close to the theoretical  value.  As  revealed  by  the  Rietveld  refinement  result,  both  the  samples  contain  a  monoclinic  system  of  C2/c  space  group  as  the  major  crystalline  phase  with  cell  parameters  a=1.56312 nm, b=0.90784 nm, and c=0.92203 nm, though a  small amount of rhombohedral phase is also detected in the  final product. However, sample B contains more monoclinic  structure  (89.48wt%)  than  sample  A  (74.91wt%).  As  expected, the ionic conductivity of sample B is higher than that  of sample A. As for the activation energy of Na+ ion migration,  sample  B  (0.37  eV)  is slightly higher  than sample  A  (0.35 eV), which is closely related to its microstructure of  high porosity. 