Withthe increasing demands for monitoring and controlling CO2 concentration in parts per million (ppm) + range, solid electrolyte NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12; Na conductor)-based potentiometric CO2 sensor has attracted much attention due to its compact, low cost, high sensitivity and quantiﬁcation [1-5]. In general, binary carbonate Li2CO3BaCO3 (1:2 in molar ratio) is used as auxiliary phase coated on the sensing electrode [6-7]. The reference electrode is based on an equilibrium potential. The redox process containing CO2 can be expressed as follows: Sensing electrode: Li2CO3=2Li + + 1/2O2 + 2e Reference electrode: 2Na At the interface between electrolyte and auxiliary phase, the following ion exchange reaction is occurred: + + Na2O.

Thus, the potential of the sensor device depends not only on the partial pressure of CO2, but also on the partial pressure of O2. In this case, it is necessary to separate the reference electrode and sensing electrode by a gas-tight seal to stabilize the potential of the reference electrode. Fortunately, if the planertype sensor with an open-reference electrode was designed, both electrodes can be exposed to the test gas, which by eliminating the need for separate the two electrodes simpliﬁes the sensor design and thus reduces cost [8-11]. However, even so, cross-sensitivity to water vapor and long-term stability are still two current major issues for urgent solution [12, 13]. In order to overcome these problems, some efforts have been done. Aono et al. [14] used a mixture of Nd2O3 and Li2CO3 as auxiliary electrode material to improve the sensing stability of the sensor. Lee et al. [12] developed a humidity interference free CO2 sensor by using BaCO3-coated Li2CO3 auxiliary electrode. And Morio et al. [15] reported that the use of porous auxiliary layer could effectively reduce the cross-sensitivity to humidity. Recently Kida et al. [16] demonstrated that fast oxygen ion conductor of BiCuVOx (Bi2Cu0.1V0.9O5.35) could be used as a solid-reference electrode to stabilize the sensor signal under highly humidity conditions.

In this paper, in response to the trend of miniaturization and to overcome the two major issues mentioned above, a planar-type CO2 sensor device attached with integrated auxiliary electrode (IAE) is designed. IAE is made up of NASICON, Li2CO3 and small quantity of Pt paste. NASICON can be added to improve the mechanical strength of auxiliary electrode and Pt paste plays a role of an electron conductive phase. The planar-type sensor device ﬁtted with the IAE brings at least two advantages: First, the IAE structure enhances the bonding strength between electrolyte and auxiliary phase. Second, it expands reactive sites (three-phase interface: solid electrolyte, Pt electrode and carbonate), which will lead to quick equilibrium of the electrode reaction from a view of kinetics.

Manuscript received November 24, 2011; revised January 3, 2012; accepted March 13, 2012. Date of publication April 3, 2012; date of current version May 24, 2012. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China, under Grant 50974012 and Grant PCSIRT0708. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was Dr. Sandro Carrara.

A. Preparation of NASICON Powder NASICON powder was prepared by a wet chemical processed with sol–gel method using Na3PO4·12H2O, Si(OC2H5)4 and ZrO(NO3)2·2H2O as main raw materials, as described elsewhere [17]. All the chemical reagents used were of analytical grade without further puriﬁcation. They were mixed in aqueous solution according to the required molar ratio of 1:2:2 and added some extra C6H8O7 as dispersant.

Schematic diagram of two sensor devices. (a) NASICON-based Fig. 1. CO2 sensor attached with binary carbonate auxiliary electrode. (b) Thick-ﬁlm NASICON-based CO2 sensor attached with IAE.

The ﬁnal mixture was continuously stirred at 50 °C for 3 h, and then aged at room temperature for 3 days to form a sol. The gel was prepared by evaporating water from the sol at 80 °C in an electrical oven. As the viscosity of solution increased with dehydration, the dried gel started to be formed. The obtained xerogel was grounded in an agate mortar and pre-sintered at 500 °C for 30 min in air to remove organic compounds. Then the precursor was pressed into disks in a stainless steel die at a pressure of 50 kN. The disk-shaped samples were sintered again at 700–1100 °C for 2 h to produce Na3Zr2Si2PO12 solid electrolyte. X-ray diffraction (XRD, MXP21VAHF, JPN) was employed to identify the phase structure of the ﬁnal products.

For the purpose of comparison, two sensor devices were fabricated in this paper as shown in Fig. 1. Device A was a conventional sintered pellet sensor ﬁtted with binary carbonate Li2CO3-BaCO3 (1:2 in molar ratio). Device B was the planartype sensor attached with IAE. The fabricated device was mounted on an alumina substrate. A paste was made by mixing of NASICON power with α–terpineol. The NASICON layer was screen-printed on the alumina substrate. The Pt electrodes were screen-printed on the designated regions after the deposition of the NASIOCN layer and ﬁred at 850 °C for 30 min. Afterwards, the IAE were prepared by dispersing the mixture of Li2CO3-NASICON powder (1:2 in molar ratio) with a small quantity of Pt paste into α-terpineol forming a screen printable paste and subsequently printed on the Pt sensing electrode. The thickness of the Pt layer was about 10 μm. Pt wires were used as lead wires for both device A and B. The assembled two sensors were ﬁred at 600 °C for 2 h in air to decompose α-terpineol.

All electrochemical measurements were carried out in a conventional gas ﬂow apparatus equipped with a heating facility at various temperatures in the range of 350–500 °C. By diluting a parent gas (1.5% CO2 in high purity nitrogen) with synthetic air, the concentrations of CO2 in the sample gas was varied in the range of 300–750 ppm. Effect of relative humidity (RH) was tested by allowing test gas to bubble up through the water at 25 °C (70% RH) and then passed into the measuring system. The total ﬂow rate of the mixed gas was maintained at

Fig. 2. XRD patterns of samples sintered at various temperatures for 2 h.

1L/min. The EMF of the sensor was measured by a four-probe electrochemical workstation (CHI660B, Shanghai Chenhua Instruments Inc., CHN).

The XRD patterns of the NASICON samples sintered at different temperatures are shown in Fig. 2. For the assynthesized precursors, a broad single peak (116) ascribable to NASICON phase was clearly observed at diffracting angle of 30∼31° for the sample sintered at 700 °C, indicating the the crystallization was just initiated since the other characteristic peaks were still very weak in this sintering condition. After being sintered at 900 °C for 2 h, all the characteristic peaks of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 phase were in good agreement with the XRD patterns reported previously and without any second phase, whereas complete phase formation occurs only at 1220 °C in the solid-state method [18]. However, the coexisting ZrO2 phase was observed when the sample sintered at 1100 °C. The main reason is that heat-treating process at elevated temperature leads to the loss of sodium and phosphorus, resulting in the free zirconia usually occurs as a second phase [19, 20]. We should try to avoid the presence of ZrO2 in synthesizing the NASICON phase because the additional phase decreases the ion conductivity at low operating temperature. Therefore, the precursor of NASICON sintered at 900 °C is used for the CO2 gas sensor.


Fig. 3 shows the EMF response to CO2 as a function of the CO2 concentration at various temperatures. The relationship between EMF of the sensor and the logarithm of CO2 concentration is linear for both devices at various temperatures in the range of 300–500 °C. The number of reaction electrons (n) for the electrochemical reduction can be calculated from the slopes. As the temperature increased, the absolute value of the EMF tended to increase and the n asymptotically approached the theoretical value (n = 2.0). Quite noticeably, the number of reaction electrons of device B coincided with the theoretical value at 400 °C and above, whereas n = 1.98 appeared only at

Fig. 5. 350 and 500 °C in 300 ppm CO2.

Behavior of EMF for both devices in heat-cycle tests between

Fig. 3. EMF response to CO2 as a function of CO2 concentration for two type devices at various temperatures.

that of device A (21 mV). This result suggested that the signiﬁcant difference in the cross-sensitivity to humidity closely associated with the morphology of auxiliary phase. IAE signiﬁcantly increases the amounts of The use of the chemical reaction three-phase sites. This means that (Eq. 1) can take place in the whole volume of auxiliary − phase, not just at the interface. This is because Na coexist simultaneously in the auxiliary phase. Thus, the redox process can not be easily attacked by water vapor for device B attached with IAE. The present experimental result powerfully demonstrated that planar-type sensor device attached with IAE could effectively improve the performance of the sensor under humidity condition, although the cross-sensitivity to water vapor has not yet been completely eliminated. Since the relative humidity dependence of EMF originates from both the auxiliary and counter electrodes [21-23], its elimination needs further exploration from various standpoints.

Fig. 4. Response transients of two type devices to CO2 under 0% and 70% RH at 500 °C. Res and Rec represent the 90% response and recovery time, respectively.

500 °C for device A. This result conﬁrmed that the planar-type device attached with IAE could work fairly well at relatively low temperature. Compare with sintered pellet sensor device A ﬁtted with binary carbonate, device B has a hetero-junction between electrolyte and auxiliary phase. It seems that the junction should play an important role in the excellent CO2 sensing performance.

Fig. 4 shows response transients of two type devices to CO2 gas under 0% and 70%RH at 500 °C. Response and recovery speeds of device A (Res: 63 s, Rec: 70 s) were almost similar to those of device B (Res: 50 s, Rec: 72 s) under 0%RH condition. However, device B exhibited a small cross-sensitivity to water vapor (4 mV) compare with

Thermal stability is a key performance index for a sensor because the sensor inevitably undergoes the heating-cooling process in practical application. Fig. 5 shows the thermal stability of the two types of device (A and B) in the heatcycle tests between 350 °C and 500 °C in 300 ppm CO2. The EMF of device A, though fairly stable during the heat cycles, tended to decrease gradually (absolute value) when the temperature kept at 500 °C for a long time. In contrast, EMF of device B was always kept at constant level at 500 °C without any degradation. This result conﬁrmed that device B attached with IAE was more stable than device A under the heatingcooling cycles. Furthermore, in order to check the long-term stability of device B, the EMF was repetitively measured at 500 °C at an interval of 3 days for 16 days. A good stability over more than half-month at the operation temperature was observed, as it can be seen from the EMF at three different ﬁxed CO2 concentrations 300 ppm, 450 ppm and 750 ppm in Fig. 6. Roughly speaking, the EMF responses to CO2 at 500 °C maintained at an almost constant level at each CO2 concentration and ﬂuctuated within 3 mV.

These results described above, can be attributed to the IAE. Besides the advantage of supplying numerous reaction sites,