NASICONs (acronym for Na-SuperIonic CONductors) forms a large family solids having high thermal and chemical stabilities, with potential technological applications in nuclear waste immobilization, as refractory materials, low thermal expansion ceramics, and as solid electrolytes [1–15]. The best studied NaZr2P3O12 that is prototypical of NASICON solids stabilizing in the rhombohedral R3c structure [16], has a three dimensional framework structure of ZrO6-octahedra sharing corners with PO4-tetrahedra. The corner sharing of the polyhedra, opposed to edge sharing, makes the NASICON framework (often referred to as the NZP-framework/skeleton) highly ﬂuxional allowing for wide ranges of chemical substitutions [17]. The framework ﬂexibility of NASICONs is responsible for their low thermal expansivity, and makes them one of the most attractive family of materials in the search for better solid electrolytes [16–20].

Several experimental reports are available in the literature on the low-anisotropic nature of thermal expansivity of NZP skeleton [21–24]. Alamo and coworkers have proposed a structural model [17, 25, 26], which provides a qualitative explanation of the low-anisotropic changes in the lattice parameters in terms of coupled rotations of the structural polyhedra. However certain underlying assumptions of the structural model, such as the distortions of the polyhedra and the extent of polyhedral rotations are not critically evaluated against experimental results. Further it would be of interest to examine if these polyhedral disorders are static, frozen-in or a dynamical one.

We present results based on Monte Carlo investigation of the structural changes in the NZP-skeleton upon substitution of alkali ions of varying sizes. The ability of the

interatomic potential in reproducing the gross experimental results on NZP solids, when loaded with larger alkali ions, and over a wide range of is critically examined comparing with available experimental results. The extent of validity of the rigid polyhedra based structural model of Alamo and coworkers [17, 25, 26] in explaining the anisotropic variations in lattice parameters of these solids is investigated. The nature of the polyhedral disorder in these systems is also examined in the light of the present simulation results.

The isobaric–isothermal (NPT) ensemble Monte Carlo simulation (NPT–MC) is employed in the present study. The NPT–MC method employed [27] allows changes in the shape and size of the simulation box—in contrast to canonical (NVT) ensemble Monte Carlo method—such that uniform-hydrostatic pressure is maintained in the system. This method is well suited in the studies of structural transformations of solids. Following earlier computer simulation investigations on Na1?xZr2SixP3-xO12 by Padma Kumar and Yashonath [28, 29] the present study employs inter-atomic potentials of the form,

where qi and ri are respectively the effective charge and ionic radius of ith ion. rij is the inter-atomic distance, Aij and Cij are the overlap-repulsive energy and dispersion terms respectively between ion pairs i and j. The ionic radii of ions employed in the present study are taken from Huheey [30]. The parameters employed are as listed in Table 1. The potential between important pairs are plotted in Fig. 1. A remarkable feature of this potential function, originally proposed by Vashishta and Rahman [31] for AgI, is the softer overlap repulsion (*1/rn with n \ 12) compared to the more popular Born–Mayer and Lennard–Jones forms. The softness further depends on the nature of the charge of the ions—more so between negatively charged

Fig. 1 Plots of the interaction potential between select species, Na– Na, O–O (top panel), Na–O, Zr–O and P–O (lower panel), are given over a range of 1–5 A˚

species with n = 7. The partial charges on ions accounts for the partial covalent nature of the interatomic interactions, and were optimized along with Aij and Cij’s to reproduce the X-ray structure and ionic conductivity of the high conducting, rhombohedral-phase of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 at 600 K [28]. Though less obvious, short range repulsion between Oxygen ions plays a crucial role, along with the Zr–O and P–O interactions, in maintaining the polyhedral structure intact. The short range repulsion between the sodium ions and the Na–O interactions inﬂuence Na? mobility in Na3Zr2Si2PO12.

of MZr2P3O12 systems, where M is Li?, Na?, K?, Rb? or Cs?, are carried out over the temperature range of 300– 900 K, all at one atmospheric pressure. The simulations of all MZr2P3O12 systems at 600 K are started from the R3c-rhombohedral X-ray structure of NaZr2P3O12, with unit cell parameters—a = b = 8.80 A˚ and c = 22.83 A˚ , a = b = 90° and c = 120° [16]. It may be noted that there are three prominent alkali ion sites in the rhombohedral NASICON structure. These sites shall be referred to as M(1), M(2), and mid-M, which correspond to 6b, 18e, 36f

Table 1 Interaction potential parameters between, species X and oxygens, where X = M, Zr, P or O and M = Li?, Na?, K?, Rb? and Cs?

a AM–M = 5 eV and nM–M = 11. All the other parameters not listed above are kept zero b rLi = 0.90 A˚ , rNa = 1.13 A˚ , rK = 1.51 A˚ , rRb = 1.66 A˚ and rCs = 1.81 A˚

simulations are started with all alkali ions placed at the 6b sites (shall be referred to as M(1) sites henceforth). The simulation includes a total of 972 ions, equivalent to 3 9 3 9 1 rhombohedral unit cells, each containing 6 formula units of MZr2P3O12. Simulations at temperatures other than 600 K are started from the ﬁnal conﬁgurations (coordinates of the atoms and simulation cell parameters) for the closest temperature available. Typically, 40000 MC steps were dedicated for equilibration and another 40000 MC steps for averaging. By an MC step, we mean, attempts to move all the ions in the system—starting from a randomly picked ion and proceeding serially over all the remaining ones [27]. Attempts to change the shape and size of the simulation supercell are performed once in every four MC moves. The atomic conﬁgurations are written out after every 8 MC steps for detailed structural analysis. Simulation using 5 9 5 9 2 unit cells were performed to conﬁrm the adequacy of the system size employed here. The choice of NPT–MC over NPT–molecular dynamics (NPT–MD) made here, is in view of the better converge of thermodynamic averages in MC for the same computing time [32], and the ease of implementation.

Statistical error estimates for lattice parameters from the present simulation are estimated by the method of block averages [27]. The data from the MC sampling is divided into nb blocks of size sb. The statistical inefﬁciency of the sampling is then calculated as,

blocks, and r2 að Þ refers to variance over the entire data set. The saturation value of S, Splateau, when plotted against -1/2 gives the minimum block size beyond which data are sb uncorrelated. Finally the statistical errors are estimated as,

The average cell parameters of the MZr2P3O12 systems, where M is Li?, Na?, K?, Rb? and Cs?, at 600 K is shown as a function of the alkali ion size in Fig. 2. Also shown are the error bars estimated employing the block averages (Eq. 3). The average cell angles obtained (not shown) are within 0.5% of the rhombohedral values, and the difference in a and b are within 0.2%, in all cases, conﬁrming the rhombohedral symmetry of the system. An anisotropic variation in lattice parameters—an increase in the cparameter and a decrease in the a-parameter—with the size of the alkali ion is observed. This is in good agreement with previous experimental results (the experimental data shown are extracted from Fig. 3 of reference 33).

The effect of the anisotropic changes in lattice parameters on the distribution of M(1) sites is examined using the radial distribution function (rdf) between the alkali ions calculated over the 40000 MC steps at 600 K (shown in Fig. 3). The prominent, ﬁrst peak in the rdfs appear at around 6.2 A˚ which correspond to the separation between the neighbouring 6b sites [M(1)–M(1) distance]. The six neighbouring M(1) sites [of a given M(1) site] are on two different a–b planes, c/6 above and c/6 below the plane containing the reference M(1) site. An M(1) site has six of

Fig. 2 Variation of average lattice parameters c and a over 40000 MC steps with the size of the alkali ion incorporated in NASICON framework at 600 K

Fig. 3 The radial distribution functions between the alkali ions from NPT–MC simulation at 600 K. The bars indicate the M(1)–M(1) distances for Na? (red) and Cs? (violet)—substituted systems calculated from their respective X-ray structure [16, 34] (Color ﬁgure online)

its second neighbouring M(1) sites at a distance equal to lattice parameter a on the same a–b plane, while another six-third neighbours, are arranged on two a–b planes, c/3 above and c/3 below them. For the Na? system, for instance, these sites (2nd and 3rd neighbours) occur at close distances of 8.8 and 9.13 A˚ at 600 K, and fall within the broad second peak of the rdf. However, for larger alkali ion containing systems, the distance to the in-plane 2nd neighbours decrease while the distance to off-plane 3rd neighbours increases due to the anisotropic expansion of the unit cell. This results in the splitting of the second peaks of the M–M rdfs (Fig. 3). The agreement in the positions of the peaks in the M–M rdfs for the simulated Na and Cs-systems to the M(1)–M(1) distances from their respective X-ray structures [16, 34], shown by vertical lines in Fig. 3, reﬂects this aspect. It may be noted in passing that at higher temperatures (above 600 K) Na? and larger alkali ions remain at the M(1) sites. The Li?-ions, however, starts hoping between the M(1) and M(2) sites above 600 K, which is expected as LiZr2P3O13 undergoes a transition from normal to fast ion conductor around 600 K [35, 36]. A demonstration of the alkali ion localization at M(1) sites is provided in Fig. 4, where the coordinates of alkali ions, Li?, Na?, Cs? across the 40000 MC conﬁgurations, folded back into a single unit cell at 600 K is shown amidst the framework structure and the M(1) and M(2) sites of the respective system. The alkali ions (blue dots) evidently populate the M(1) sites (light-green balls) at 600 K, leaving vacant the M(2) sites (yellow balls). The extent of the alkali ion distribution around M(1) sites provides a measure of the thermal amplitudes of the alkali ions which are larger for smaller alkali ions.

the building polyhedra and their connectivity are obtained from the analysis of the MC conﬁgurations generated. Table 2 lists the bond-lengths between select atomic pairs, Zr–O, P–O, M–O, obtained from the respective rdfs at 600 K. Zr and P ions show sharp coordination numbers of six and four with oxygens respectively, as expected of ZrO6-octahedra and PO4-tetrahedra. Alkali ions, however, exhibit relatively weak six coordination with oxygens due to their larger thermal amplitudes. It may be noted from Table 2 that the Zr–O and P–O bond lengths do not change appreciably with the size of the alkali ion incorporated in the framework. Signiﬁcant increase in the average M–O distances are observed, as expected. The poor agreement in Li–O distance between simulation results and experimental data [36] are due to the fact that the Li? ions are found located off-centred in the Li–O octahedral hole in simulations. Thus this value does not serve a good measure of the octahedral hole in the case of the Li-system. The value of 2.22 A˚ from simulation appears more reasonable in the light of the neutron diffraction results [37]. Other interatomic distances are in good agreement with previous Xray studies [18, 34]. The interest thus, how the [Zr2P3O12]framework accommodates the increase in the M–O6 octahedron without appreciable change in the covalent bond-lengths in the system.

The anomalous changes in the lattice parameters were explained by Alamo and co-workers based on a mechanism involving coupled rotations of the polyhedral [17, 25, 26]. The pressure exerted on the two neighbouring ZrO6 octahedra by the larger cation in the M(1) sites results in an in-equivalent rotation of the two triangular faces of the

Fig. 4 The alkali ion positions from 40000 MC conﬁgurations (blue dots) folded back into a single unit cell for, a Li?, b Na? c Cs? —substituted systems (not to scale). The M(1) and M(2) sites of the alkali ions are shown respectively by light-green and yellow balls. A single and stick

framework conﬁguration in ball

representation, where Zr (silver), P (mauve) and O (red), is also shown. The scattered alkali ion positions appearing away from the M(1) sites shown are largely the population around the M(1) sites of the neighbouring unit cells (Color ﬁgure online)

The distances RZ1, RZ2, RP1, RP2, DZ, DP and the angles /1, /2, h1 and h2 are illustrated in Fig. 5. RZ1 and RZ2 measures the circum radii of the triangular faces of the ZrO6 octahedra parallel formed respectively by O1 and O2 -oxygens. The O2-oxygens are those forming the triangular basal planes of the two

Table 2 Select interatomic distances in A˚ , for pairs M–O, Zr–O and P–O from NPT–MC simulations at 600 K

The values in parenthesis are experimental data

octahedra (parallel to the a–b plane) about its threefold axis parallel to the c-axis. As the Zr–O and P–O bonds are practically rigid the PO4 tetrahedra connected to the two neighbouring ZrO6 octahedra are bound to rotate about their twofold axis parallel to the a–b plane. By projecting distances measured along the Zr–O and P–O bonds on to the a–b plane and c-axes of the rhombohedral cell, Alamo and co-workers proposed the following exact equations connecting the rotational angles of the polyhedra and the lattice parameters [25, 26],

Fig. 5 The illustration of angles and distances employed in the structural analysis (see text for details). An M(1) site (marked Na), and the lateral connectivity of an M(1)O6 octahedron to a ‘lantern unit’ consisting of two ZrO6 octahedra pillared by three PO4 tetrahedra are shown in (c)

ZrO6 around an M(1) site of the alkali ions (thus forming the M(1)O6 octahedra), and the O1-oxygens forms the basal planes of two neighbouring ZrO6 pillared by the edges of three PO4 tetrahedra when viewed along the c-axis. RP1 and RP2 are respectively half the O1–O1 and O2–O2 distances of the PO4 tetrahedra. DZ measures the height of the ZrO6 octahedra along the c-axis, and DP the dimension of the tetrahedra measured along the twofold axis parallel to the a–b-plane. /1 measures the rotation angle of the triangular face formed by O1-oxygens of the octahedra with respect to the b-axis, and /2 is the angle the O2-oxygens makes with the vector, a ? b, as shown in Fig. 5. h1 is the tilt angle O1–O1 edge of PO4 makes with the c-axis, and h2 is the angle O2–O2 edge of PO4 makes with the a–b-plane.

The rotational angles of the polyhedra calculated from the present NPT–MC simulation at 600 K is listed Table 3. The rotational angles calculated by us from the X-ray structures [16, 34] for Na and Cs-systems, as well as those reported for K? substituted system [25] are also given for comparison. It can be seen that the rotational angles of the polyhedra—/1 and /2 of the octahedra, and h1 and h2 of the tetrahedra—increase with the size of alkali ion. These increased rotations of the octahedra about its three-fold axis and the tilt of the tetrahedra about its two-fold axis are in agreement with the experimental results. Based on the structural model, Alamo [26] has predicted the tilt angle, h1, for Li, Na, K, Cs-systems by ﬁtting to the respective

experimental lattice parameters (also listed in Table 3). A ‘rigid’ polyhedral model with parameters, RP1, RP2, DP, RZ1, RZ2 and DZ, taken from K? substituted system is presumably employed in this analysis [22]. Over all, simulation results are in better agreement with experimental results than those predicted by the structural model [25].

It may be noted that Alamo and coworkers’ estimates of polyhedral rotations are based on ‘rigid’ polyhedral model, subject only to torsional modiﬁcations [25]. We have examined the extent to which this ‘rigid’ polyhedral model holds for these systems. To this end, the detailed structural parameters of the polyhedral units, averaged over all the polyhedra and over the 40000 MC steps, are computed (see Table 4). The distances RP1 and DP show changes of 0.04 and 0.06 A˚ , respectively, between the end members—Li? and Cs?-substituted systems; while RP2 remain almost a constant across the series. From Eq. 4, the decrease in DP contributes to about 0.12 A˚ decrease in the a-parameter, accounts for about 1/3rd of the change observed between the Li? and Cs? substituted systems. The internal measures of the ZrO6 octahedra, RZ1 and DZ changes through 0.08 and 0.14 A˚ , respectively, while RZ2 remain nearly constant across the series. The elongation of the octahedra thus contribute to about 0.84 A˚ of change in c-parameter between the Li and Cs-systems, again accounts for nearly 1/3rd of the total change observed.

The internal measures of the polyhedra computed from MC are compared with data extracted from X-ray

Table 3 Rotational angles of the polyhedra (in degrees) for the various alkali ions substituted NASICON framework from NPT–MC simulations at 600 K

The values in parenthesis are experimental data. h1 (SM) refers to values predicted by Alamo [26] based on the structural model

Table 4 The internal measures of pertaining to the PO4 tetrahedra and ZrO6 octahedra, from NPT–MC simulation at 600 K

The values in parenthesis are calculated from respective X-ray structure

structures for Na? and Cs? substituted systems [16, 34] (given in parenthesis in Table 4). The agreement is within 4% in the case of PO4 tetrahedra, and within 8% for ZrO6 octahedra. These differences are responsible for the relative larger values of a-parameters observed in simulations (Fig. 2). Turning to the structural model–as noted earlier, Alamo’s estimates of rotational angles are on the higher side for larger ions, though the Eqs. 4 and 5 provided by the structure model are exact. This owes to the fact that the internal measures of the polyhedra, particularly DP and DZ, are kept constant throughout series. Thus, the present simulation results as well as experimental observations do not support the ‘rigid’ polyhedra model, and emphasis the need to account for the polyhedral distortions.

It is worth examining these polyhedral deformations a little more closely, and their connection to the size of the alkali ion inserted. The larger cations exert a vertical (along the z-axis) stress on the two neighbouring ZrO6 octahedra resulting the expansion of M(1)O6 octahedra along the z-axis. This stress gets transferred across to the ‘lantern units’, consisting of two octahedra pillared by three tetrahedra (Fig. 5c). Since the height of the M(1)O6 (along the z-axis) equals half the height of the lantern units its expands correspondingly. Thus, the polyhedra show an overall expansion in the z-direction, and explains the increase in DZ and RP1 (Fig. 5a, c). On the other hand some of the polyhedral measures on the a–b-plane, such as DP and RZ1 decreases, while others RP2 and RZ2 remain constant with the size of the alkali ion (Fig. 5b, c). This behaviour owes to the fact that the stress due to the larger alkali ions is oriented along the z-axis, and is consistent with the small reduction in a-parameter. Further, the increase in DZ owes entirely to DZ1 (not listed in Table 4), which is the distance from Zr to the O1-triangular face of the octahedra, that is away from the alkali ion site. (Note that RZ1 and DZ1 are projections of Zr–O bond on to the a–b-plane and the c-axis respectively, and Zr–O bond lengths remain nearly a constant. Thus, the reduction in RZ1 causes an increase in DZ1.) Similarly, the increase in RP1 accounts for the reduction in DP1. Thus, the deformations of the polyhedra are more intricate than an expansion along the z-axis and a contraction on the a–bplane.

Colomban et al. [38] examining the phase transition in Na3Zr2Si2PO12 have proposed that the nature of the polyhedral rotation can have a profound inﬂuence on the thermodynamics of the distribution functions (un-normalized) of the rotational angles of the PO4 tetrahedra, h1 and h2, and those of the ZrO6 octahedra, /1 and /2, of NaZr2P3O12 at 600 K are shown. The distribution function for each of these angles are computed in two ways—one, averaged over all the polyhedral units and over all MC conﬁgurations (shown as continuous lines); two, for an arbitrary chosen polyhedra over all MC conﬁgurations (shown by circles). It is noted that the distribution functions averaged over all the polyhedral units compares well with the corresponding distribution computed for an arbitrarily chosen polyhedron. This demonstrates that each polyhedron undergoes rotations over the entire range of angles, suggesting the dynamical nature of polyhedral rotations in NASICONs. It shall be noted in passing that molecular dynamics approach would be better suited for a more detailed investigation of this dynamical polyhedral rotations.

Previous experimental studies have shown that

the thermal expansion of NASICON framework is signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the interstitial ion as well as framework compositions [39–45]—a very useful property in the tailor making of low thermal expansion solids. In Fig. 7 the variation of lattice parameters with temperature for the different alkali ion substituted NASICONs is shown over the range of 300–900 K together with data extracted from previous experimental work [33]. Note that for Li and Cssystems data are shown over restricted ranges of temperatures1 The c-parameter increases with the temperature, while a smaller negative change in a-parameter is observed with temperature across the series. The quantitative agreement with experimental results in the c-parameter

1 For the Li-system simulations are not performed below 500 K, as the system is known to undergo monoclinic distortion below 443 K. The Cs-system on the other hand is found to be unstable, and undergoes a structural transformation at 900 K in our simulations; hence omitted from the results. No further analysis of this transformation is carried out. We are not aware of any experimental observation of a transformation in the CsZr2P3O12 at 900 K; the observation, rather suggests the limit the interatomic potentials can faithfully emulate the system.

Fig. 7 The variation of c and a parameters with temperature for the alkali ion incorporated NASICONs, from NPT–MC simulations. Lines are experimental data extracted from the Fig. 3 of reference 33. Symbols are simulation results

Fig. 8 Variation of lattice parameters, c versus a, over the temperature range of 300–900 K for MZr2P3O12, where M = Li?, Na?, K?, Rb? and Cs?. The solid line is only to guide the eye

variation is excellent across the series. The absolute values of a-parameters from simulation show typical deviations of about 1% from the corresponding experimental values, across the series, making the agreement appears largely qualitative in the expanded scale of Fig. 7.

Following earlier experimental studies the variation of c-parameter is plotted against a for all compositions (M = Li?, Na?, K?, Rb? and Cs?) over the range of 300–900 K. The thermal effects being small relative to the size of the alkali ion incorporated, the data divides into ﬁve distinct clusters (shown encircled in Fig. 8), each corresponding to a particular alkali ion and contains data for the entire temperature range. The fact that all data points, irrespective of the temperature, fall nearly to the same ‘universal’ curve conﬁrms that the dominant mechanism of

anisotropic thermal expansion of these systems also involve coupled polyhedral rotations. This suggests that the larger thermal ellipsoid of the alkali ion due to increase in temperature mimic an increase in the size of the ion itself.

Monte Carlo simulation allowing for changes in the shape and size of the system is performed on NASICON solids (MZr2P3O12) incorporating different alkali ions, M = Li?, Na?, K?, Rb? and Cs?. The c-parameter of the rhombohedral unit cell is found to increase with the size of the ion, while the a-parameter found decreasing in alkali agreement with previous experimental results. The alkali ions are found localized at the M(1) sites (6b sites of R3c) over the entire range of temperatures explored (300– 900 K), except Li? which was found to populate the Na(2) sites (18e sites of R3c), partially, at temperatures above 600 K. The changes in the Zr–O and P–O bond lengths across the series is found marginal, however, signiﬁcant changes ion–Oxygen (M–O) distances are observed.

The extent of the coupled rotations of PO4 tetrahedra and ZrO6 octahedra as well as the distortions of these polyhedra for different alkali ion containing NASICON framework are in agreement with X-ray structure. The present simulation results suggest that while dominant mechanism of anisotropic variation of lattice parameters involve coupled rotations of the polyhedra, as proposed by Alamo and coworkers, the contribution from polyhedral distortions are also signiﬁcant. The distortions of the structural polyhedra are estimated to contribute about one-third of the cell parameter variations for the NASICON solids examined here. The anisotropic thermal expansion of MZr2P3O12systems follows the same qualitative pattern observed with the size of the alkali ion at a given temperature. The ‘universal’ behaviour of the cversus a-parameter variation suggests that the anisotropic thermal expansion involves the same mechanism that allows insertion of larger alkali ion in the NZP-skeleton. Our results suggest that these polyhedral rotations are dynamic in nature.

It is remarkable that the simple form of the interatomic potential employed here faithfully reproduces the complex structural features of the NZP-skeleton that are generally non-trivial to model. We hope the present study will stimulate the use of this interatomic potential in future studies of low/anisotropic thermal expansion of NASICON solids.

Acknowledgements The authors thank Prof. S. Yashonath, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, for illuminating discussions. Financial support through a research grant from Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati is acknowledged.