NASICON-type solid electrolyte such as Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3(LATP) has advantages of environmentally friendly, air-stability, low cost and high ionic conductivity. However, the unstable Li/LATP interface usually leads to fast degradation of batteries. The knowledge of inherent failure mechanism of the interface, especially the interfacial reaction products, dynamic electron/ion transport processes and subsequent chemo-mechanical effects at nanoscale level will provide important scientific basis to develop strategies towards mitigation failure of batteries. Herein, we conduct a series of study on the interface between LATP and lithium metal by using solid-state NMR (ss-NMR) along with XRD and in-situ TEM. A lithiated phase Li3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 is firstly confirmed with at least three orders of magnitude higher electronic conductivity enhanced at Li/electrolyte interface, which is the chief culprit for continuous growth of interphase. The high electronic conductivity can also induce direct deposition of lithium dendrites inside the electrolyte. Moreover, the sizeable volumetric expansion was observed in the lithiated LATP, which eventually breaks up the bulk electrolyte and induces high resistance. Finally, we elucidated the chemo-mechanical degradation mechanism of Li/LATP interface which has important implications to the interfacial problems in numerous electrolytes who are unstable with lithium.
Lithium-ion batteries(LIBs) have shown tremendous potential for electric vehicles (EV) and large-scale energy storage system with the virtue of high efficiency and reliability1-2. Current commercialized LIBs have been suffering from safety problems due to the inherent flammability of liquid esters solvents. All-solid-state lithium batteries (ASSLBs) are considered to be the ultimate answer to solve both safety and energy density problems3-4. Massive efforts have been devoted to developing high-performance solid-state electrolyte (SSE) materials during the decade years, including sulfide, garnet, perovskite, NASICON-type, and polymer electrolytes5. Among them, NASICON-type solid electrolytes are gradually catching people's eyes because of inexpensive raw materials, high conductivity, and stability to moisture air. Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3(LATP) and Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3(LAGP) are two representative examples, both of which exhibit high ionic conductivity (10-4-103 S/cm)6-7 and especially excellent stability against air/water8. Unfortunately, both of them are thermodynamically unstable with Li metal. The high valent metal cations, Ti4+ and Ge4+ can be easily reduced at low potential and result in the growth of interfacial resistance, and batteries are doomed to fail. An artificial layer at the electrolyte/anode interface is necessary to stabilize the interface. Many buffer layers, including liquid electrolyte, polymer layer, LiPON, germanium, Al2O3, boron nitride(BN) etc9-14, have been put forward to alleviate the interfacial side reactions during the past decades. However, few of the buffer layers can completely construct a compatible interface between NASICON-type electrolyte and Li metal. In some cases, interfacial reaction still goes on to some extent which hinders the long cycle of the batteries. A better understanding about the intrinsic interfacial reaction is vital to fundamentally address these problems.
Although NASICON-type electrolytes have achieved much progress on the interfacial modification, there are few researches elaborating the inherent nature of the interfacial reaction. Kang's group firstly reported the strong thermal run-away phenomenon of LAGP, which is accompanied with the electrolyte's pulverization upon contact with lithium metal at 200 ℃ . They attributed this behavior to the sharp reaction of oxygen, released from chemically formed interfacial layer15. Janek's group reported the transport properties of interfacial phase between several NASICON-type lithium ion conductors and Lithium metal16. Cheng et al. carried out some in-situ experiment and proved the reactivity of LATP and amorphization trend upon contact with lithium metal17. However, their work mainly focused on the mitigation of chemical instabilities within solid-state batteries through BN protection layer and did not give further detailed investigation about the (electro)chemo-mechanical failure of Li/LATP interface. A fundamental study on constituent/property of the formed interphase between the easily reducible SSE and Li metal is helpful to address the interfacial reaction problem and to design electrolyte with more stability to lithium metal. This is especially important to achieve the long life of solid-state batteries. Moreover, chemical reaction is usually coupled with mechanical process. Volume variation during the evolution of interphase can produce stress inside the solid electrolyte and strongly affect the mechanical integrity of solid electrolyte pellet and electrolyte/ electrode contact18-19. For example, Lewis et, al has discussed in detail the chemo-mechanical challenges of solid-state batteries in a recently published review20. And McDowell's group has also done many studies on this. They uncovered the high current-induced nonuniform growth of interphase at LAGP/Li interface and its influence on the mechanical degradation of LAGP21. Later, they visualized by X-ray computed tomography method the dynamic mechanical cracking process of LAGP electrolyte caused by the volume expansion resulted from growth of the interphase22. They've also tried to use chromium protection layer to alter the reaction pathway of interphase formation and electrochemical reaction at the interface23. All the above research has deepened our understanding of Li/SSE interface, but there are still some key questions need to be further clarified, such as what kind of (electro-)chemical transformation process happened at the interface and the corresponding mechanical degradation20, the related evolution of the electronic/ionic properties and the origin of the increased electronic conductivity, the growth of lithium dendrite and its role on the failure of interfaces within batteries, etc.
Here we choose LATP, whose conductivity is higher than LAGP and shows distinct cost superiority for large-scale commercialization compared with other electrolytes24, to do a fundamental research of the chemomechanical effects induced by interfacial side reactions from both macroscopical and nanoscale level. Firstly, XRD combined with ss-NMR identified the chemical composition of interphase. Chemical transformation is found at the interface during the reaction process and a lithiated phase Li3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 is confirmed to be the main composition of interphase. Furthermore, both calculation and experimental measurements support the significant enhancement of electronic conductance property resulted from reduction of titanium during the chemical transformation process. In-situ TEM is conducted to investigate the effects of high electronic conductivity on Li deposition process and the growth of highly reactive lithium dendrites is thought to accelerate the mechanical and chemical degradation of the electrolyte. Next, both lattice refinement and in-situ TEM lithiation process offered robust evidence about the mechanical degradation of LATP in contact with Li metal. Finally, a chemo-mechanical failure model in LATP-based solidstate Li metal battery is put up, which strongly emphasizes the necessity of an artificial layer to stabilize the intrinsically incompatible interface.
2.1. Preparation of LATP pellet: LATP was synthesized by a modified method referring to the liturature25. Ti(OC4H9)4 were dissolved into a citric acid solution. After a homogenous solution was formed, stoichiometric amounts of LiNO3, Al(NO3)3·9H2O and NH4H2PO4 were added into the above solution under continuous stirring. Glucose (C6H8O7·H2O) was used as a dispersing agent. Finally, the solution was heated at 120 ℃. The powders were then calcined at 850℃ for 5 h in a muffle furnace to get LATP powders. Then the LATP powders were crushed by ball milling. After that, the fine powders were pressed axially under 900 MPa pressure followed by calcined at 850℃ for 3h in air. The pellet was then polished by 600 mesh Al2O3 paper. The thickness of the final pellet is about 1.5 mm with a diameter of 11 mm.
2.2. Preparation of the samples: Chem-LATP sample was made by directly mixing LATP powders with lithium and heated at 220℃ for 0.5 h in Argon-filled glove box to verify the chemical reaction. The powders were washed with alcohol after reaction to remove the residual lithium metal. The colour of the powders changed from white to gray as shown in Figure S3 c) and d). For the LATP discharged sample, LATP powders were mixed with acetylene black and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVdF) in the weight ratio of 7:2:1. The slurry was coated on aluminum foil or copper foil to prepare LATP electrode. The electrode was then assembled into CR2025 coin cells with lithium metal as the counter electrode. The electrolyte was 1.0 M LiPF6 dissolved in ethylene carbonate (EC)/ethyl methyl carbonate (EMC) (3:7 by vol). After discharged to 1 V with a current density of 10 mA/g, the battery was disassembled, and the electrode was thoroughly washed with EMC for further characterization.
2.3. Characterization of the materials: The crystal structures of the samples were identified by the Rigaku Ultima IV powder X-ray diffractometer equipped with Cu Ka radiation (λ=1.5406 Å) and operated at 35 kV, 15 mA in the range of 10-90. Rietveld refinement was performed on General Structure Analysis System (GSAS) software package. Morphology observation was carried out on a Hitachi S-4800 scanning electron microscope. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement was carried out on PHI-5000 Versa Probe Ⅱ spectrometer (ULVAC-PHI, Inc, Japan) with monochromatic Al Kα 1486.6 eV radiation, operating at 25 W and in a vacuum of <10-8 Torr. All NMR experiments were performed on a Bruker Avance III 400 MHz spectrometer with 1.3 mm probe-head under spinning rates of 50 kHz. The 7Li, 27Al, and 31P single pulse experiments were performed with π/4 pulse length of 1.0 us, 1.2 us and 2.2 us respectively. The chemical shifts of 7Li, 27Al, and 31P were calibrated with lithium chloride(1M), aluminum nitrate(1M) and ammonium dihydrogen phosphate. The recycle delay were 5 s, 20 s and 60 s for 7Li, 27Al and 31P respectively. All data processing was conducted by Bruker Topspin 3.2 package. In-situ TEM experiments were conducted in an environmental transmission electron microscope (ETEM, FEI Titan G2, 300 kV) with a TEM-STM (Scanning Tunneling Microscopy) holder (Pico Femto FE-F20). For better observation, the LATP particle was cut into a nanorod in a FEI Helios G4 CX focus ion beam (FIB) microscope. Then the LATP nanorod was welded to the TEM half-grid and lithium metal was scratched on to a tungsten rod. Next, these probes were mounted onto the TEM-STM sample holder inside an argon-filled glove box. Afterwards, the holder was transferred to the TEM under the protection of inert gas. LATP nanorod was then brought into contact with lithium and a bias voltage was applied on the probes to drive either the lithiation or delithiation process. A low dose rate of 0.68 e/nm2s was chosen to avoid the influence of electron beam.
2.4. Electrochemical tests: Lithium with a diameter of 9 mm was directly pressed on LATP pellet to prepare Li/LATP/Li symmetrical cell. The prepared sandwich cell was put into a self-made battery model. The cell was then cycled at 25 A/cm2 for the first two cycles and then 50 A/cm2 for later cycles. The capacity was controlled to be 50 Ah/cm2. All galvanostatic chargedischarge of the cells was carried out on a Land CT-2001A (Wuhan, China) battery test system. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed on Solartron 1260 or Versa STAT MV Multichannel with the frequency range from 1MHz to 1mHz and an amplitude of 10 mV. For ionic conductivity test, Au was sputtered on the pellet as electrodes. To measure the electronic conductivity of interphase, symmetrical Li/LATP/Li cells were cycled at a low current density of 50 A/cm2 and the cycle time was controlled at 200 hours to make a certain depth of interphase meanwhile keeping the integrity of the pellet. There is a thick black layer on both sides of the pellet after cycle. The pellets were then thoroughly washed by ethanol to remove any possible residual lithium metal, followed by drying and polishing by 600 mesh Al2O3 paper. The gold electrode was then sputtered on the surface of the black layer. The direct-current polarization method was then used to measure the electronic conductivity with the DC voltage of 0.2 V and elapsed time of 36000 seconds.
2.5. Theoretical Calculation: The geometry and electronic density of state (DOS) were investigated by density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP)26-27. Projector Augmented Wave method (PAW)28 and Perdew−Burke−Ernzerhof functional (PBE) were used29. The valance electron configurations are 1s22s1 for Li, 3s23p1 for Al, 3p63d24s2 for Ti, 3s23p3 for P, 2s22p4 for O. Plane-wave basis cutoff is 600 eV. Two simulate cells, Li8Al2Ti10P18O72 and Li18Al2Ti10P18O72 were established for pristine LATP and lithiated LATP, respectively. The structure is shown in Figure S12. Lithium occupancy is random. The atomic positions were optimized firstly with 0.02 eV/ Å force convergence criterion, and K-points sampling is 3 3 1. The DOS × × calculations were performed upon the optimized structures with 7 7 2 × × K-points sampling. The total energy convergence criterion is 10-5 eV. Allcalculations are spin polarized and ferromagnetic state is considered for Li18Al2Ti10P18O72.
 3.1. Comprehensive characterization of interfacial reaction products at Li/LATP interface. Generally, the short circuit failure mechanism caused by penetration of lithium dendrites is common in garnet or some sulfide electrolytes30. As a reflection, voltage of the symmetric cell will sharply drop to 0 V when lithium dendrites penetrate through the electrolyte. However, things become quite different in NASICON-type electrolyte-based cells. As illustrated in Figure S2, the polarization voltage of symmetrical cell is continuously increasing even cycled at a low current density of 0.05 mAcm-2. The area resistance showed a rapid increase after cycling. After disassembling the battery, the pellet was found to break up into pieces. When peeling off lithium foil from the electrolyte, a black layer is found covering the surface of lithium metal which should be the reaction products of LATP and lithium metal, as shown in Figure S3 a) and b). Black powders are then scraped off from lithium foil for further characterization and labelled as EC-LATP-Surface. The shattered pieces (labelled as EC-LATP-bulk) indicate mechanical failure of the electrolyte during cycling. Also, the colour of the bulk pellet became gray, which means the chemical state of the electrolyte should have been changed. Crosssection SEM image of the fragments can be seen in Figure S2c). Compared to the well-crystallized particles of pristine LATP pellet in Figure S1, the morphology of electrolyte particles facing lithium side was significantly changed, which is likely to contain amorphous phase, and micro-cracks are seen all over the electrolyte. These results indicate LATP is incompatible with lithium metal and drastic chemical reductions take place at the electrolyte/Li metal interface.
To figure out how does the reduction happen and its effects on the performance of electrolyte, identification of the interfacial species is necessary. Firstly, the pristine electrolyte powders were mixed with acetylene black and binder and discharged to a low voltage in liquid electrolyte-based cells to simulate the lithiation process. As shown in Figure S2d), the reduction potential of pristine LATP is about 2.45 V (vs Li+/Li), a little higher than the calculated result (2.16 V vs Li+/Li)31. According to thermodynamic formula G = -zFE, this high reduction voltage indicates the high reactivity of LATP with Li metal in thermodynamics. A recent study also proved the thermal runaway of LATP upon contact with Li metal at high temperature by using the accelerating rate calorimeter (ARC)32. Furthermore, the flat discharge plateau suggests there is a phase transition process during the lithiation process.
Secondly, we used X-ray diffraction (XRD) to investigate the structure change of the material after lithium intercalation. The synthesized LATP can be well indexed to the standard card for LiTi2[PO4]3(PDF#35-0754) with high purity. However, after discharging to 1 V, another set of diffraction pattern emerged, which can match well with Li3Al0.18Ti1.82(PO4)3 (ICSD 193036), as shown in Figure 1a). Thus, the main lithiated phase is attributed to Li3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3. The residual LATP signal is due to the hysteresis kinetics of pristine LATP whose intrinsic electronic conductivity is rather low (10-9 S/cm). Therefore, the lithiation process of LATP undergoes a phase transition process and the lithiated product is mainly a Li-rich phase Li3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3. For better comparison of the electrolyte/electrode interfacial products, XRD patterns of the prepared LATP samples under different conditions were collected, as shown in Figure 1b). The diffraction peak position of EC-LATPsurface and EC-LATP-bulk is similar to the discharged sample, suggesting the interphase is mainly consisted of Li3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3. In addition, chemical reaction sample (labeled as Chem-LATP), made by directly mixing LATP powders with lithium at 220 C for 0.5 h, was also investigated; there is not much difference between the chemical driven interphase and electrochemical driven interphase; the former is a slow, static process while the electrochemical process may bring dynamical evolution with lithium stripping/plating process. The XRD patterns of Chem-LATP are similar to the EC-LATP-bulk sample, suggesting the interfacial reaction is the chemical reaction between LATP and lithium. Also, when carefully comparing the peak intensity of EC-LATP-surface and EC-LATP-bulk sample, the spatial distribution of lithiated phase is found to be gradient, which suggests higher reaction degree near lithium metal surface. The different reaction degree of surface and bulk electrolyte can lead to nonuniform spatial stress distribution and induce mechanical failure of the electrolyte, which will be discussed later. Figure 1c) gives the crystal structure of pristine and lithiated LATP phase. The Li3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 is in R-3 structure with the symmetry a little lower than pristine sample. Lithium ions tend to occupy the distorted tetrahedral sites M3/M3' near M2 sites31, 33, while lithium ions prefer occupying the octahedral M1 and M2 sites in the pristine LATP structure (R-3c space group). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out to further understand the chemistry of the interface. Figure 1d) are the Ti 2p XPS spectra before and after lithiation. For pristine LATP, only two peaks at 465.6 eV and 459.8 eV are observed, representing the binding energy of Ti4+ 2p1/2 and 2p3/2 orbital, respectively. After reacting with lithium metal, two peaks at lower binding energy appeared, indicating the lithiation process is accompanied by the injection of electrons into the electrolyte, leading to the reduction of Ti4+ to Ti3+.
Thirdly, Solid-State Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (SS-NMR) was carried out to check the reaction products and change of local ionic environment after interfacial reaction. SS-NMR signal is sensitive to nuclear despite the existing form of elements, either it is in the crystalline or noncrystalline phase, while XRD is only sensitive to crystalline materials. Since the resonance frequency of 47Ti and 49Ti is too low, which is beyond our transmitter's limitation, thus we mainly tested the signal of 7Li, 27Al and 31P, as shown in Figure 2. For pristine sample, there is only one strong sharp peak for 7Li, 27Al, and 31P.The tiny peak at 40 ppm in 27Al spectroscopy is the phase of AlPO4, which is invisible in XRD, indicating the high purity of LATP sample. After reacting with lithium, the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 7Li, 27Al, and 31P are widened, especially for the EC-LATP-surface sample. The main peak of 7Li shifted from 1 ppm to 0.4 ppm for EC-LATP-surface. And a shoulder peak located at around 20 ppm appeared for Chem-LATP, ECLATP-bulk, and EC-LATP-surface. Broadening and shift of the peak is mainly caused by the hyperfine interaction originated from the paramagnetic electron. As mentioned above, Ti4+ can be reduced by lithium metal. For Ti4+, the d orbital is vacant, while the valence electron configuration of Ti3+ is 3d1. Thus, a strong electro-nucleus dipolar interaction will result in broadening of the peak. The delocalized single electron will also transfer from t2g orbital of Ti3+ to the 2s orbital of lithium, leading to Fermi contact shift of the spectroscopy. It is also noted that in the structure of lithiated phase Li3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3, the number of Al, Ti, and O sites is doubled compared to pristine LATP, making the environment of lithium much more complex. Different geometries for the orbital overlaps can lead to different contact shifts of lithium, making a broad peak of the 7Li signals. Apart from this, the line width is also highly correlated with the mobility of lithium ions in the structure34. Lower lithium ions diffusion rate can also contribute to the broadening of line width. For EC-LATP-Surface sample, the peak at around 40 ppm in 27Al NMR and the new peak at 10 ppm in 31P NMR is also the signal of Li3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 as a consequence of Fermi contact shift, instead of AlPO4 whose 31P signal is usually negative35. Relative intensity change of the new peaks also manifests the degree of side reactions across the solid electrolyte/Li metal interface. The closer to the interface, the more severe side reaction takes place, which coincides with the XRD result. Combined with XRD and ss-NMR, it can be deduced that the interphase between LATP and lithium metal is mainly composed of Li3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3.
3.2. Transport properties of the interphase. The electronic/ionic transportation properties of the interphase play an important role on the destiny of batteries. Generally, an ionic conductive but electronic insulating interphase is desirable; unfortunately, the actual interface between NASICON-type electrolyte and Li metal doesn't belong to this situation. The growing interfacial resistance and enlarged polarization voltage suggest the interphase is unstable, which is more likely to be a mixed conducting interphase that can transport ions and electrons simultaneously. As is known to all that the electronic conductivity is extremely low for NASICON-type electrolyte hence it can be considered as a pure ionic conductor. However, it looks like there is a significant improvement in electronic conductivity for the newly formed interphase after lithiation. Experimental measurement confirmed our conjecture. A direct-current polarization method was conducted to evaluate change of the electronic conductivity before and after lithiation. The results are shown in Table 1. Detailed information about the sample preparation, cell architecture and tests can be seen in Supplementary material (Figure S4 and S5). The electronic conductivity of pristine LATP is about 10-9 S/cm; however, after reacting with lithium metal, the electronic conductivity increased to 10-6 S/cm, which is three orders of magnitude higher than the pristine sample. Since the electrical property of interphase is determined by its chemical composition, it seems reasonable that the lithium-rich phase Li3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 is the chief culprit.
bandgap indicates pristine LATP is highly prohibitive for electronic conduction, similar to Li2CO3, Li2O or LiF36. After lithiation, Ti4+ is reduced to Ti3+ with an electron injected to the d orbital of titanium. The valence band is much closer to conduction band. The much-lowered band gap accounts for the raised electronic conduction. A recently published article37 has also pointed out that abundant Ti3+ can improve the electronic conductivity of Na2Ti3O7. Anyway, once Ti4+ is reduced to Ti3+, the lithiated LATP tends to conduct more electrons compared with pristine phase. Meanwhile the total ionic conductivity of the whole pellet obtained from Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) test also shows a little decrease from 410-4 S/cm to 2.710-4 S/cm. It should be noted that this value is got by sputtering gold electrode on double planes of the pellet. It is an average value of the whole pellet. If we use coplanar electrode model in Figure S4a) to test EIS, the resistance will increase from 2.7 kΩ to 18 kΩ, as shown in Figure S6. The insertion of lithium ions into LATP can increase the correlation effects, making the mobility of lithium more difficult33. The lithiation process will also decrease the lithium vacancies, which also contribute to the lower mobility. Anyhow, although the ionic mobility of the lithiated phase is lower than pristine LATP, it still exhibits some ionic conductivity. Therefore, both experimental and theoretical calculation indicate that the formed interphase at LATP/Li interface is an ionic/electronic mixed conducting layer.
3.3. In-situ TEM observation of dynamic changes at Li/LATP interface. The chemical effects of the mixed conducting interphase are reflected in two aspects. Firstly, under the drive of chemical potential and electronic field, electrons and lithium ions are ceaselessly transferred into LATP, leading to continuous reduction of LATP, as evidenced by the aforementioned experiments. Secondly, the high electronic conductive interphase will also induce the growing of lithium dendrites. Lithium nucleation can form directly inside the bulk SEI if the electron tunneling energy barrier is low38-39. Here, an in-situ TEM experiment was carried out to observe the impacts of high electronic conductivity on the deposition of Li metal. For better observation, the LATP particle was cut into a nanorod by focused ion beam and brought into direct contact with lithium metal, as shown in Figure 4 and Supplementary Video 1. It should be noted that high-energy electrons may damage the electrolyte easily through primary knock-on damage, radiolysis or local heating effects during the in-situ experiment40. Thus, it is highly necessary to fine control the experiment conditions and choose a limited electron dose carefully. Here a low electron dose was chosen to avoid the damage meanwhile guaranteeing the image sharpness. Detail information about the TEM test can be found in supplementary material. In the beginning, a negative bias voltage was applied to drive lithium ions into LATP to enable the reaction process. Later, the voltage was flipped to depositing lithium on lithium metal side. At the initial stage of lithium deposition, lithium grew slowly at the contact interface. However, lithium clusters soon began to come out directly from the electrolyte and grew along the LATP nanorod over time. To exclude the influence of electron dose on the growing of lithium dendrites, we also did control experiment in which the electron beam was blocked during the lithium deposition process. After a while, we still observed the lithium dendrites, as shown in Figure S7. It should be noted that if the lithium dendrite is initiated from the lithium anode side, the morphology will be more like a needle30. However, we observed spherical-like lithium growing from the solid electrolyte here. This phenomenon further evidenced the high electronic conductivity of the interphase. The high electronic conductivity can lead to lower critical potential at some local sites inside the interphase. As a result, lithium can deposit directly at these sites. In a recently published article, Wang's group has also pointed out the high electronic conductivities of Li7La3Zr2O12 and Li3PS4 should bear major responsibility for lithium dendrites in solid-state batteries30. This experiment coincides with Wang's conclusion that high electronic conductivity is one of the critical factors for lithium dendrites growth30. Short circuit phenomenon caused by these lithium dendrites is common in garnet based solid-state batteries41. Nevertheless, we didn't observe direct short circuit of Li/LATP/Li symmetrical cells, possibly due to the quick side reaction of LATP with lithium dendrites as the nanoscale lithium dendrites can be highly reactive with LATP. These highly reactive lithium dendrites will also accelerate the chemical degradation of electrolyte in turn. It should be noted that in-situ TEM study on the lithiation of LATP nano particles was also conducted by Cheng et al.17 They showed that electrochemical lithiation leads to amorphization of bare LATP nano particles but not on BN-coated LATP nano particles, which provides an important strategy to stabilize LATP towards lithium metal. However, their result focused on the mitigation of chemical instabilities within solid-state batteries through BN protection layer. They did not give much discussion about the nature of the interface nor did any delithiation experiments on LATP.
Mechanical stress is usually coupled with chemical process. Related mechanical break-down issues have come into notice of both academia and industry these years. Originated from volume change during the lithiation or delithiation process, large anisotropic stress is produced inside the electrode particles, causing cracks and fractures of the particles42. In solid-state batteries, things can be even worse considering the different mechanical properties of interphase, electrolyte and composite electrode materials. Mechanical instability related to electrode volume changes, such as deformation, pulverization, and loss of contact, which can lead to fast capacity fade and poor cycle stability, is being reported more often.
Firstly, to verify the influence of the interfacial reaction on mechanical failure, lithium metal symmetric cells with pristine LATP pellets were assembled and aged at 30 C without electrochemical cycling to preclude the effect of volume change introduced by cycled lithium stripping/plating process. After sufficient reaction, the cells were carefully disassembled. In this case, although there is no volume change induced by electrochemical lithium stripping/plating, fragmentation and discolour still took place, as shown in Figure S8. Therefore, merely interfacial reaction will bring about mechanical failure of the pellet, let alone the volume change of electrochemical lithium stripping/plating. The observed fragments of the pellet demonstrate large stress generated during the interfacial reaction.
Secondly, powerful evidence, from the atomic to macroscale level, are provided by lattice refinement and in-situ TEM observation to help further understand the mechanical degradation process of LATP in contact with Li metal. Based on the two-phase model, the XRD pattern of LATP-discharged to 1 V was refined by the Rietveld whole pattern fitting method. The results are shown in Figure S9, and corresponding cell parameters are summarized in Table 2. Compared with pristine LATP, the lithiated LATP presents a slightly increase along c-axis and shrinkage along a-axis and 5% total volume expansion of the cell. Anisotropic change of the structure is thought to be the origin of mechanical stress and has far-reaching consequences. Later, in-situ TEM was carried out to directly observe the morphology evolution of LATP in contact with Li, as shown in Figure 5 and Supplementary Video 2. During the in-situ lithiation, The LATP nanorod suffered severe expansion within several minutes. The integral area encircled by dash line finally grows by 18% after lithiation. Note that the value calculated from XRD refinement is a three-dimensional result while the area change integrated from TEM images is a two-dimensional data. Due to the complexity of calculation and measurements of mechanical stress, we are now unable to provide precise mechanical value and this part of experiments will be carried out in later work. Anyhow, such a huge anisotropic volume changes even bent the nanorod, indicating large stress generated inside the electrolyte. Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern is also carried out to identify the structure change. As shown in Figure 5e), the pristine LATP exhibits a well crystalized rhombohedral structure. After the reaction, the diffraction spots are quickly disappeared, suggesting amorphization of the material. This observation is also similar to the previous work. 17. It should be mentioned that different samples were used between our experiments and Cheng et al.'s17: we used LATP nanorodes fabricated by FIB, while Cheng et al. used as-synthesized nanoparticles, we provide a clear and dynamic picture of the electrolytes during the whole in-situ experiments because of a better interfacial contact within the in-situ cell. Also, the lithiation induced amorphization of LATP was observed in both samples, indicating FIB processing did not alter the structure of LATP. Lewis et al also observed the amorphization of LAGP particle during the in-situ TEM experiment21, but only observed an amorphous phase in the XRD result, suggesting the different reactivity of LATP and LAGP upon contact with Lithium metal. A relevant calculation also demonstrated the reduction voltage of LAGP is higher than LATP43. Thus, LAGP may suffer a more severe chemical transformation than LATP upon contact with Lithium metal. Although an interphase of Li3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 can be verified in the XRD experiments, here we only observed an amorphous phase from TEM diffraction after reaction. Since the LATP nanorod can be highly reactive with lithium metal at nanoscale, it is no wonder that the LATP nanorod was quickly over lithiated to an amorphous phase. While in the XRD experiment, the pellet is bulk and may need a long time to achieve full lithiation. Thus, we cannot observe any broad peak indicating the massive existence of amorphous phase. To verify this point, we also discharged the LATP electrode to 0 V (vs Li+/Li) in a liquid electrolytebased battery with electrochemical method. As shown in Figure S10, the diffraction patterns disappeared except for the peak of Aluminum oxide, indicating the amorphization tendency of LATP under over lithiation condition. Anyway, the in-situ TEM provides dynamic structural and volumetric evolution process of LATP during the in-situ lithiation; the visible results further validate that dramatical volume change during the interfacial reaction.
 LATP exhibits a high Young's modulus of 115 GPa, indicating the intrinsically high stiffness44; however, this also means a high risk of fracture. The intercalation of Li ions happens first at contact interface, and the phase transformation leads to a large enhancement of electronic conductivity; as a result, reduction of LATP will keep on spreading, and the stress caused by volume expansion accumulates gradually. Finally, mechanical damage will come up if accumulated stress exceeds the yield limit of electrolyte pellet. Cracks are seen all over the pellet, as shown in Figure S3. Similar lithiation induced crack formation was also observed by Tippens et al.22 Internal cracks together with the low ionic mobility of intercalated phase give rise to the high resistance. That is why the polarization voltage of Li/LATP/Li symmetrical cells increases rapidly.
3.4. Discussion of degradation mechanism. With ongoing indepth research of solid-state batteries, it is more and more recognized the solidstate interphase plays a vital role in the destiny of cells. As discussed above, a preferred SEI layer should be ionically conductive but electronically insulating. In liquid electrolyte-based batteries, such an interphase can passivate the electrode and inhibit further side reactions with the electrolyte. The same principle goes for solid-state batteries. Many solid-state electrolytes will suffer side reactions or phase transformation upon contact with lithium metal. The question is whether this interphase is (electro)chemically and mechanically stable. For NASICON-type solid-state electrolyte LATP, which is notorious for its high reduction potential, the side reaction is mainly a lithiation process accompanied by structural and volumetric expansion. When the LATP electrolyte contacts with Li metal, partial Ti4+ is reduced to Ti3+ accompanied by the injection of electrons, forming the lithiation phase Li3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3. The reduction of Ti4+ will lead to a higher electronic conductivity at the interphase. On the one hand, the electrons can transport through the interphase and inject into the electrolyte leading to constant consumption of electrolyte. On the other hand, the high electronic conductivity of the interphase may lead to the low potential at some local sites inside the interphase; once the local potential reaches or is below the critical potential of lithium deposition during electrochemical cycling, lithium may grow directly from the interphase. The highly reactive lithium dendrites will also react with electrolyte further accelerating the side reactions in turn. Therefore, the interphase will be thicker and thicker and spread into the bulk electrolyte. Further lithiation will cause structure destruction of interphase, finally thermodynamics supported amorphous products can be formed, such as Li2O, Li5AlO4, Li4TiO4, Li3P, TiAl, or Ti7P4, etc. The specific reaction products can vary with the stoichiometric ratio of the electrolyte and lithium metal according to Ceder's calculation45-46. Such decomposition products can be firstly expected at the very near surface of lithium metal, but they cannot suppress the interfacial reaction because some of the products (TiAl, Ti7P4, etc.) can still conduct electrons.
The influence of interphase on the electrochemical performance includes not only chemical reaction or lithium dendrite growth, but also mechanical instability. With continuous lithium ions' insertion, the lattice expansion will produce great internal stress. Once the stress induced by volume change cannot be balanced, pressure changes are taken up by solid-state electrolyte itself, and mechanical destruction of LATP is inevitable. The emerging lithium dendrites and subsequent reaction will accelerate the fragmentation of electrolyte. Once mechanical cracks are formed, ionic transportation will be obstructed. As a reflection of the mushrooming resistance, polarization voltage increases rapidly beyond the limit of instrument, which announces the death of battery. A graphic illustration of the failure mechanism can be seen in Figure 6 a). Similar degradation mechanisms can be expected for those solid electrolytes who are thermodynamically unstable against Li metal, such as LixLa2/3-x/3TiO3, Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 and Li10MP2S12 (M = Ge, Sn)5, 47-48.
 To stabilize the solid electrolyte/Li interface, an artificial layer is highly necessary to prevent the continuous side reactions. Here, the artificial layer must physically separate the electrolyte from direct contact with lithium metal with high chemical stability; meanwhile it should be an ionic conductor but electronic insulator. Although some mixed ionic/electronic conductors are proposed for modification of lithium metal and electrolyte49-51, it is only effective for those electrolytes which are chemically stable with lithium metal. As for LATP, who are reactive with lithium metal, the electronic conductivity at Li/electrolyte is detrimental, as we have discussed above. Following this concept, there have been a few satisfactory results9-10. For example, with the protection of BN and PEO, the reduction of LATP has been much alleviated17. And it is expected inorganic layer combined with a thin layer of soft polymer will be an effective solution to the incompatible interface, as illustrated in Figure 6 b). The inorganic layer such as LiF-based halides, which have been proved to be highly effective for modification of lithium metal in some cases52-53, Li3PO4 and garnet, etc., will provide enough mechanical and chemical stability to cut off the contact of electrolyte and lithium metal. The polymer, such as PEO and PMMA, can help to build a compact interface to lower physical contact resistance. In this way, the advantages of ceramic LATP electrolyte can be exploited to the full.
In summary, the interfacial reaction process, dynamic morphology changes and chemo-mechanical effects of the interphase between LATP and lithium metal are systematically investigated through ss-NMR, XRD and in-situ TEM. These results suggest the (electro-)chemical transformation at the interface and the interphase is mainly composed of Li3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 phase. This (electro-)chemical transformation process leads to a significant enhancement of electronic conductivity and ignites continuous side reactions at the interface. High electron conductivity of the side reaction products can also induce the direct growth of lithium metal in/-passing through the interphase and accelerate the chemical and mechanical degradation of the electrolyte. What's worse, the formation of new phase and coupled mechanical stress will finally break up the electrolyte and its connection with electrode, leading to a large internal resistance of solid-state batteries. An artificial layer with robust chemical and flexible properties is imperative to avoid the formation of ion/electron mixed interfacial conductor and alleviate the corresponding mechanical stress. This is especially important to achieve long cycle life of solid-state batteries. All in all, this work is beneficial for understanding the degradation mechanism for a number of solid electrolytes who are unstable with lithium metal.
 