The pressing need for advanced energy storage devices with high energy density and safety is leading research to solid-state Li metal batteries (SSLMBs). However, the advancement of this type of battery is impeded by the incompatibility and the inferior interfacial contact between solidstate electrolytes and electrodes. In this work, the issues are addressed by introducing the PEGDA/Pyr13TFSI ionogel into the interfaces between a NASICON-type Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) solid electrolyte and the electrodes via a simple drop coating and in-situ polymerization method. It is demonstrated that the formed robust and elastic ionogel interlayers not only preclude the adverse reactions between the LATP pellet and the Li metal anode but also significantly reduce the interfacial resistances. As a result, the cycling life of the Li/Li symmetric cell with the ionogel interlayers reaches up to 300 h, whereas the cell using the bare LATP dies after only 10 h. More notably, the Li/ionogel/LATP/ionogel/LiFePO4 full battery delivers a high capacity of 152.5 mAh g-1 at 0.5 C at 60 ℃ with a retention of 91.5% after 200 cycles, in a sharp contrast to the value of as low as 46 mAh g-1 even at 0.1 C given by the Li/ionogel/LATP/LiFePO4 cell. These encouraging results demonstrate that the interfacial modification strategy proposed in this work is effective in constructing stable, compact and durable interfaces between solid electrolytes and electrodes, thereby paving the way for high-performance SSLMBs.
 Solid-state Li metal batteries (SSLMBs) are widely considered as the most promising candidates for next-generation energy storage systems due to their high energy density and superior safety.As the key component in SSLMBs, solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) with high shear modulus and wide electrochemical windows (~5 V vs. Li/Li+) can potentially incorporate the Li metal anode with high-voltage cathodes, thereby achieving high energy densities.Moreover, unlike conventional liquid electrolytes, the intrinsic non-flammability of the inorganic SSEs guarantees superior safety, making SSLMBs even more attractive.However, the development of SSLMBs is severely hindered by two challenges, i.e., the low ionic conductivities of SSEs and the interfacial issues between the SSEs and electrodes (including both anodes and cathodes).In recent years, intensive efforts have been made to boost the ionic conductivities of SSEs and great progress has been achieved. For instance, the ionic conductivities of some sulfide electrolytes even surpass those of liquid ones (e.g., ~25 mS cm-1 for the LGPS-type Li9.54Si1.74P1.44S11.7Cl0.3).  Unfortunately, the SSE/electrodes interfacial issues remain a huge obstacle in realizing highperformance SSLMBs.
It is worth pointing out that the interfacial issues in SSLMBs can be further divided into two categories. One is the inferior SSE/electrodes (including both the anode and cathode) interfacial contact due to the rigidity of the solid materials, which leads to a large interfacial resistance and low active material utilization.In addition, the volumetric change of electrodes during cycling provokes crack formation, further deteriorating the solid-to-solid interfaces and thus causing rapid battery decay.To address this challenge, Lu et al. applied the fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) modified succinonitrile (SN) electrolyte as interlayers for both the cathode and anode in Li/LLZTO/LiFePO4 cells and successfully reduced the overall resistance from ~13,000 Ω cm2 to ~560 Ω cm-2.Similarly, Wang et al. modified the interfaces in the LGPS-based SSLMB with plastic crystal electrolytes (PCE), enabling the battery to be stably cycled for over 120 cycles at 0.5 C.The other issue originates from the interfacial incompatibility between the SSE and Li metal anode, which causes detrimental side reactions. Because of the highly reductive nature of the Li metal, a wide variety of SSEs with high ionic conductivities, such as NASICON-type Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3, Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3, perovskite-type Li0.33La0.557TiO3 and thio-LISICONtype Li10GeP2S12, will be reduced when contacting it, resulting in resistive interfaces and even battery failure.To circumvent this problem, an effective strategy is to separate the direct contact between the SSEs and Li metal with lithiophilic materials.For example, Liu et al. coated the LATP pellet with a thin Al2O3 layer and enabled the Li/Li symmetrical cell to be cycled for 600 h.Recently, Cheng et al. reported a Li/Li symmetric battery with the BN nano-film modified LATP pellet, which could be operated for over 500 h. Although significant progress has been made by these endeavors, few high-performance SSLMBs have been successfully demonstrated up to now as most of the reported methods can only address interfacial issues of either the anode or the cathode side.Advanced strategies, which can ameliorate the inferior interfacial contact on both anode and cathode sides and prevent adverse reactions between SSEs and the Li metal anode simultaneously, are still in urgent demand.
In this contribution, we develop a facile yet effective strategy to address the interfacial contact and incompatibility issues in SSLMBs by introducing cross-linked PEGDA/Pyr13TFSI ionogel interlayers via an in-situ polymerization reaction. The NASICON-type Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) is chosen due to its high ionic conductivity (~1 mS cm-1), low cost, high moisture stability, and light weight (2.9 g cm-3).21,31 However, it suffers from the serious side reaction with the Li metal anode , which results in a resistive and unstable interface.
To construct the SSLMB with in-situ forming ionogel interlayers, the liquid-state precursor is firstly drop coated onto both the anode and cathode electrodes before staking them with the LATP pellet, as illustrated in Fig. 1. After solidification, the interlayers can not only substantially reduce the SSE/electrodes interfacial resistances by providing continuous Li+ ion pathways at the interfaces but also effectively protect the LATP pellet from the Li metal anode. Additionally, the in-situ formation of the ionogel interlayers enable intimate adhesion between the LATP pellet and the electrodes, thus minimizing extra resistances introduced by the additional interfaces.Furthermore, the elasticity of the ionogel can buffer the volumetric change of the electrodes during repeated cycling, conducive to the long-term stability of the SSLMB. As a result, a Li/Li symmetric cell achieves stable cycling performance for over 300 h, whereas the cell using the bare LATP only lasts for 10 h. More remarkably, the Li/ionogel/LATP/ionogel/LiFePO4 full battery is capable of delivering a high capacity of 152.5 mAh g-1 at 0.5 C at 60 ℃ with a retention of 91.5% after 200 cycles, far surpassing that of the battery with an unmodified cathode (only 46 mAh g-1 even at 0.1 C). This work provides a novel avenue to address the interfacial issues between the SSE and electrodes and could be readily applied in a wide range of SSEs beyond LATP, paving the way for high-performance SSLMBs.
The NASICON-type SSE Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) was synthesized by a facile sol-gel method. Fig. 2a and b exhibit SEM images of the top and cross-section view of the as-prepared LATP pellet, from which dense and uniform morphologies are clearly seen. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern shown in Fig. 2c matches well with the standard one (PDF 35-0754), confirming the pure NASICON phase has been successfully obtained.The ionic conductivity is determined by the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) test using Ag blocking electrodes and calculated to be 0.32 mS cm-1 at room temperature (Fig. 2d) and 1.75 mS cm-1 at 60 ℃ (Fig. S1), which is consistent with the value reported previously.
Ionic liquids (ILs), which are salts that are composed of organic cations and inorganic or organic anions, have been widely studied for electrochemical devices due to their excellent electrochemical properties, such as wide electrochemical windows, low volatility and favorable compatibility with Li metal.Derived from ILs, ionogels are a novel class of hybrid materials, which are generally characterized by immobilizing ILs within polymeric matrices, thereby imparting the mechanical integrity and persistent structure to the ILs.Here, the Pyr13TFSI IL is chosen to incorporate into the PEGDA blocking polymer to generate the cross-linked PEGDA/Pyr13TFSI ionogel, and 1 M LiTFSI was added. The solidification of the ionogel is accomplished through the free radical polymerization of PEGDA monomers initiated by the Azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN) at 60 ℃.Owing to the excellent crosslinking capability, PEGDA monomers can be polymerized at an ultralow volume concentration of 15:85 against the Pyr13TFSI IL, enabling the solid-state ionogel to achieve a high elasticity and ionic conductivity by making the most of the IL. As shown in Fig. 3a, the liquid-state precursor (the left one) is solidified (the right one) after heating at 60 ℃ for 6 h, indicating the polymerization of the PEGDA monomers. The disappearance of the FTIR peaks (exhibited in Fig. 3b) corresponding to the acrylic C=C bonds (1610 ~ 1625 cm−1) in the solidified sample further verifies the successful preparation of the PEGDA/Pyr13TFSI ionogel. The ionic conductivity of the solidified PEGDA/Pry13TFSI ionogel is measured by the EIS test (shown in Fig. 3c) to be 0.50 mS cm-1 at room temperature, which is close to that of the IL (0.57 mS cm-1) and much higher than that of the solidified PEGDA (1.6 × 10-4 mS cm-1). The high ionic conductivity inheriting from the IL guarantees the fast Li+ ion transport across the interface. It should be noted that the PEGDA/Pry13TFSI ionogel is deformable and unable to withstand a significant shear force, preventing its application as a freestanding separator (shown in Fig. S3). Nevertheless, its excellent wettability and electrochemical properties make it an ideal interlayer material for SSLMBs.
To evaluate the effect of the PEGDA/Pyr13TFSI ionogel interlayer in improving interfacial contact and protecting the LATP pellet from the Li metal, symmetric cells with and without the ionogel modification were assembled and tested. As displayed in Fig. 4a, an inferior interface with gaps between the bare LATP pellet and the Li metal is clearly observed, indicating the poor contact between these two phases. More seriously, it is reported that the side reactions that occur at the contact area are unstoppable due to the formation of the mixed ion-electron conducting interphase (MCI), as illustrated in Fig. 4b. The growth of the resistive MCI will continuously increase the interfacial resistance and eventually crack the LATP pellet due to its volume expansion, resulting in a fast battery failure.On the contrary, Fig. 4c unveils that an intimate contact between the LATP pellet and Li metal is achieved by incorporating a thin layer of ionogel. The compact yet electronic-insulating interlayer will dramatically reduce the interfacial resistance by providing fast  and continuous Li+ transport pathways, meanwhile effectively enhance the interface stability by preventing the side reactions. 
To evaluate the stability of the ionogel interlayers, EIS tests were conducted on the Li/Li symmetric cells at different time intervals. As exhibited in Fig. 5a, for the cell with bare LATP, the Nyquist plots consist of a semicircle at the high frequency and a tail with finite length at the low frequency.The semicircle can be assigned to two parts, i.e., the grain boundary resistance of the LATP (Rgb) and the LATP/Li metal interfacial resistance (Rinterface), while the x-intercept of the semicircle at high frequency represents the bulk resistance of the LATP (Rb). Comparatively, for the cell with ionogel modified LATP as shown in Fig. 5b, the semicircle can be assigned to the Rgb, and the ionogel interlayer (Rinterlayer), which includes the resistances of the ionogel and the formed SEI layer.As both the Rgb and Rb come from the LATP pellet itself and remain constant during testing, the overall resistance (Rb + Rgb + Rinterface/Rinterlayer) that reads from the x-intercept of the semicircle at low frequency can be used as the figure of merit for inspecting interfacial resistance change. As shown in Fig. 5a, the overall resistance of the symmetric cell assembled with the bare LATP pellet experiences a sharp increase from 690 Ω cm2 at 2 h to 3810 Ω cm2 at 24 h, verifying the continuously deteriorating LATP/Li interfaces due to the unstoppable side reactions. In contrast, the value for the cell with ionogel interlayers remains much more stable, which slightly increases from 140 Ω cm2 at 2 h to 160 Ω cm2 at even 100 h as shown in Fig. 5b, indicating that the side reaction has been effectively precluded. It should also be noted that the overall resistance of the modified symmetric cell is significantly lower than that of its unmodified counterpart, suggesting that the poor interfacial contact has been well ameliorated.Long-term galvanostatic cycling tests were conducted to further evaluate the durability of the ionogel interlayers. As depicted in Fig. 5c, the cell with the bare LATP exhibits a large and continuously increasing overpotential and suffers from failure after only 10 h even at a low current density of 0.1 mA cm-2. This is due to the formation of the MCI, which makes the detrimental reactions inexorable as mentioned before. As shown in the inset image in Fig. 5c, the surface of the LATP pellet turns black after cycling with Li metal, suggesting that the severe reaction occurs at the interface. By contrast, the cell with the ionogel interlayers achieves an ultra-stable lithium plating/stripping performance for 100 h at the same current density (Fig. 5c) and can even be stably cycled for another 200 h at a higher current density of 0.2 mA cm-2 (Fig. 5d), demonstrating the superb interfaces enabled by the ionogel interlayers. After disassembling the cell, the surface of the cycled LATP pellet remains its original color (inset in Fig. 5c), which confirms that the side reaction has been prevented. Additionally, as shown in Fig. S8, the critical current density of the ionogel-modified LATP was determined to be 0.65 mA cm-2.
 To elucidate the advantages of the hybrid ionogel over the single materials, symmetric cells modified by only the Pyr13TFSI IL and the in-situ solidified PEGDA were also prepared and measured. As shown in Fig. S4, the cell with the IL shows a lower overpotential compared with the one with solidified PEGDA interlayers at the first few cycles, while both of them suffer from continuous decay in the long-term range. For the former one, although the IL can reduce the interfacial resistance during the initial few cycles due to its good wettability and high ionic conductivity, it is not robust and durable enough to effectively block the side reactions in the long run.For the latter one, the solid-state PEGDA is unable to construct highly-conductive and stable interlayers because of its low ionic conductivity and brittle nature (shown in Fig. S3).
By well inheriting the superior electrochemical properties from the IL and the excellent mechanical properties from PEGDA, highly-conductive, compact and stable ionogel interlayers at the LATP/Li metal anode interfaces are achieved accordingly. The XPS results of the Li metal derived from the Li/ionogel/LATP/ionogel/Li symmetric cell after cycling were collected to analyze the composition of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) formed on the Li metal surface. The signals of LixSOy (167.2 eV), RCOOLi (288.9 eV), Li3N (397.7 eV) and LiF (684.8 eV) shown in Fig. S5 are ascribed to the decomposition products of TFSI- anions in the Pry13TFSI IL and LiTFSI, which indicates the formation of a stable SEI on the Li metal surface.All these results suggest that the in-situ solidified PEGDA/Pyr13TFSI ionogel interlayers can not only enable intimate LATP/Li metal contact but also provide durable protection for the LATP pellet.
To investigate the effect of the PEGDA/Pyr13TFSI interlayers in addressing the interface issues on the cathode side as well as their feasibility to enable the solid-state configuration, SSLMBs Li/ionogel/LATP/ionogel/LiFePO4 and Li/ionogel/LATP/LiFePO4 were assembled and evaluated. Because it is difficult to observe the interface between the bare LiFePO4 (LFP) cathode and the LATP pellet due to their poor adhesion, only the cathode morphology is shown in Fig. 6a for comparison. It is seen that the LFP cathode is highly porous, which will lead to limited interfacial contact area and discontinuous Li+ ions transport pathways, and thus result in a high interfacial resistance and low active materials utilization, as illustrated in Fig. 6b. In contrast, a superb interface contact is achieved after introducing the ionogel, as no gaps/voids can be detected in the cross-sectional SEM image (Fig. 6c). Moreover, the ionogel is readily infiltrated into the voids within the cathode, which will facilitate the transport of Li+ ions at electrolyte/electrode interfaces and thus leading to a much higher active material utilization as illustrated in Fig. 6d.
Fig. 7a and b show the EIS results of the Li/ionogel/LATP/ionogel/LFP and Li/ionogel/LATP/LFP SSLMBs. It is seen that the Li/ionogel/LATP/LFP SSLMB exhibits a much higher overall resistance (~1250 Ω cm2) than the Li/ionogel/LATP/ionogel/LFP (~80 Ω cm2) does. Since the only difference between these two batteries lies in the interface condition at the cathode side, the substantial drop in the overall resistance can be ascribed to the improved interfacial contact achieved by the ionogel modification. The charge/discharge curves in Fig. 7c reveal that the Li/ionogel/LATP/LFP SSLMB displays a large voltage hysteresis of 0.22 V and an initial capacity of as low as 46 mAh g-1 at 0.1 C (1 C = 170 mAh g-1), corresponding to a low LFP utilization rate of only 27%. This is due to the above-mentioned poor LFP/LATP contact and limited Li+ ion transport pathways within the LFP cathode. By comparison, the Li/ionogel/LATP/ionogel/LFP SSLMB presents a low voltage hysteresis of 0.07 V and a high capacity of 163.1 mAh g-1 at 0.1 C and 145.5 mAh g-1 even at 1 C, confirming the effectiveness of the ionogel interlayer in improving the interface at the cathode side.
The rate performance of the Li/ionogel/LATP/ionogel/LFP cell is shown in Fig. 7e. It is found that the capacity decreases slightly with the increase of the C rate up to 1 C and then recovers to be higher than 160 mAh g-1 after cycling at different rates, suggesting the excellent robustness of the ionogel interlayers. Fig. 7d and f shows the cycling performance of the Li/ionogel/LATP/ionogel/LFP SSLMB at 0.5 C at 60 ℃. The discharge capacity of the SSLMB retains 139.5 mAh g-1 after 200 cycles, corresponding to a high capacity retention of 91.5%, which again confirms the excellent durability of the ionogel interlayers. As shown in Fig. S10, the SSLMB with ionogel interlayers is even capable to deliver a specific capacity of 125.7 mAh g-1 at 0.2 C and 117.8 mAh g-1 at 0.3 C, and no obvious decay was detected after 80 cycles at room temperature. These outstanding performances can be attributed to the following factors. First, owing to the favorable wettability and the in-situ solidification procedure, the ionogel interlayers are able to tightly adhere the electrodes to the LATP pellet and sufficiently infiltrate into the porous LFP cathode, significantly reducing the interfacial resistances and boosting the utilization of the active materials. Moreover, the ionogel with high elasticity can buffer the stress generated from the volumetric change of the electrodes during cycling, which benefits the long-term stability.All these unique and desired properties promise the ionogel to be stable, compact and durable interlayers at both anode and cathode sides, paving the way for the development of highperformance SSLMBs.
In summary, we developed a novel approach to address the interfacial issues (both contact and compatibility) in SSLMBs. Robust and elastic cross-linked PEGDA/Pyr13TFSI ionogel interlayers were introduced to the interfaces between the LATP SSE and the electrodes through a facial insitu polymerization reaction, which not only significantly reduced interfacial resistances but also precluded the adverse reactions between the LATP pellet and the Li metal, thus enabling the Li/Li metal symmetric cell to be stably cycled for 300 h and the Li/ionogel/LATP/ionogel/LiFePO4 SSLMB to deliver a high capacity of 152.5 mAh g-1 at 0.5 C at 60 ℃ with a decent capacity retention of 91.5% after 200 cycles. This work provides a promising strategy to modify the SSE/electrodes interfaces, thereby paving the way for SSLMBs with high energy density and safety.
 The NASICON-type LATP solid electrolytes were synthesized by a facile sol-gel method. Stoichiometric raw materials LiNO3 (15% excess, Aladdin, 99.9%), Al(NO3)3·9H2O (Sigma-Aldrich, 98%), NH3H2PO4 (Aladdin, 99%) were dissolved in certain amount of deionized water and stirred until a clear solution was obtained. Titanium(IV) isopropoxide (Sigma-Aldrich, 97%) was added dropwise into this solution to precipitate TiO2. Subsequently, a proper amount of H2O2 (30%) and HNO3 (69%) were added until all the white precipitates dissolved and the solution turned wine red. The solution was then dried at 80 ℃ for 36 h to produce a white gel precursor, which was further heated at 450 ℃ for 20 h to fully eliminate reaction gases and calcined at 900 ℃ for 10 h to form crystalline LATP powders. After ball milled in ethanol for 48 h, the resulting powers were dried and pressed to discs at 60 MPa, followed by sintering at 950 ℃ for 6 h to obtain the LATP pellets, which were polished by 800 mesh abrasive papers prior to use. The thickness and diameter of the polished LATP pellets are around 0.55 and 13 mm respectively.
Pyr13TFSI (N-propyl-Nmethylpyrrolidiniumbis (trifluoromethanesulfonyl) amide) ionic liquid (Shanghai Chengjie Company, 99%) and PEGDA (average Mn 575, Sigma-Aldrich) were dried at 110 ℃ and 60 ℃ respectively in a vacuum and stored in glovebox prior to use. The ionogel precursor solution was prepared by mixing the Pyr13TFSI IL with PEGDA monomers at a ratio of 85:15 by volume, followed by adding 1 M LiTFSI and 0.5 wt% AIBN (thermal initiator). The precursor solution can be solidified at 60 ℃ within 6 h due to the polymerization reaction of PEGDA monomers to obtain the targeted solid-state ionogel. The pure Pyr13TFSI IL solution was prepared by mixing Pyr13TFSI and 1 M LiTFSI without adding the PEGDA, while the PEGDA solution was prepared by mixing PEGDA monomers with 1M LiTFSI and the AIBN without adding the IL. All the preparation and application procedures were done in an Ar-filled glovebox with O2 and H2O concentrations lower than 0.01 ppm.
To prepare the LiFePO4 cathode, LiFePO4 powder (MTI Co.), carbon black (Shenzhen Kejing Star Technology Co.) and polyvinylidene fluoride (Shenzhen Kejing Star Technology Co.) were mixed at a ratio of 8:1:1 by weight in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (Sigma-Aldrich) solvent and stirred for 12 h at 1500 rpm. Then the mixture was cast on a carbon-coated aluminum foil, followed by drying at 80 ℃ overnight in a vacuum. The loading of active material was weighed to be around 1.8 mg cm-2.
 For the Li/Li symmetrical cell, 5 µL liquid-state ionogel precursor was dropped on the surface of Li metal. Then, the LATP pellet was sandwiched between two modified Li metal electrodes. After that, the batteries were sealed in the Swagelok cell and heated at 60 ℃ for 6 h to in-situ solidify the ionogel. The symmetric cells with ionic liquid or PEGDA interlayers were prepared in the same way. The symmetric cell with bare LATP pellet was prepared by directly pressing the Li metal on the LATP pellet. For the Li/ionogel/LATP/ionogel/LFP full battery, 5 µL ionogel precursor solution was drop coated on the surface of both the Li metal anode and cathode. After that, the battery was sealed in a Swagelok cell and then heated at 60 ℃ for 6 h to form ionogel interlayers.
X-ray diffraction (XRD) was carried out on Philips high-resolution XRD system (model PW 1825) using Cu Kα radiation in the 2θ range from 10° to 80° at an operation voltage of 40 kV and a current of 40 mA. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained on a JEOL6700F instrument. Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) tests were carried out on Vertex 70 Hyperion 1000 in ATR mode. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed using a PHI5600 instrument and Al monochromatic X-ray at a power of 350 W.
The electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) tests were conducted on a potentiostat (EG&G Princeton, model 2273) in the frequency range from 7 M to 1 Hz with an amplitude of 10 mV. The conductivity was calculated based on the equation , where L is the thickness of the σ = L/(Z ∙ A) solid electrolytes, Z is the impedance read form the real axis in Nyquist plot, A is the surface area. 53 For the LATP pellet, the conductivity was measured using Ag as blocking electrode. For the PEGDA/Pry13TFSI ionogel, the Pry13TFSI IL and the solidified PEGDA, the ionic conductivities were obtained by injecting their precursors into glass fiber membranes and using stainless steels as blocking electrodes. All cells were tested on a battery cycling system (Neware, CT-3008W) at 60 ℃.
The equivalent circuit of the Li/Li symmetrical cell, the cycling performance of Li/Li symmetric cells with the bare LATP pellet, the digital images of ionogel and polymerized PEGDA polymer, the long-term cycling of Li/Li symmetrical cells with different interlayers, the XPS results of Li metal surface protected by the ionogel interlayer after cycling, the SEM image and EDX mapping of the SSE/cathode interface.          