Structure and ion transport in Li3Fe2(PO4)3 synthesized by solution combustion technique Lakshmi Vijayan, Rajesh Cheruku, and G. Govindaraj    Citation: J. Appl. Phys. 111, 064905 (2012); doi: 10.1063/1.3697685  View online: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.3697685  View Table of Contents: http://jap.aip.org/resource/1/JAPIAU/v111/i6  Published by the American Institute of Physics.    Related Articles The induction of nanographitic phase on Fe coated diamond films for the enhancement in electron field emission properties  J. Appl. Phys. 113, 094305 (2013)  Note: Size effects on the tensile response of top-down fabricated Si nanobeams  Rev. Sci. Instrum. 84, 036102 (2013)  Double-sided tin nanowire arrays for advanced thermal interface materials  Appl. Phys. Lett. 102, 093105 (2013)  Controlled growth of vertical ZnO nanowires on copper substrate  Appl. Phys. Lett. 102, 083105 (2013)  Silver nano-entities through ultrafast double ablation in aqueous media for surface enhanced Raman scattering and photonics applications  J. Appl. Phys. 113, 073106 (2013)    Additional information on J. Appl. Phys. Journal Homepage: http://jap.aip.org/  Journal Information: http://jap.aip.org/about/about_the_journal  Top downloads: http://jap.aip.org/features/most_downloaded  Information for Authors: http://jap.aip.org/authors 

Li3Fe2(PO4)3 is interesting because of its technological application and environmentally benign nature. Nanocrystalline Li3Fe2(PO4)3 is synthesized by a solution combustion technique. The role of fuels/complexing agents in deciding the structural parameters and ac electrical behavior is investigated in this study. Antiferromagnetic nature and direct bandgap energy of 3.09 eV ion in are recognized in the material. Enhanced conduction is established through mobility of Li four co-ordination in the modiﬁed monoclinic symmetry and high temperature stability through orthorhombic symmetry. Quality of electrical data is conﬁrmed through a Kramers-Kronig test and electrical relaxation parameters are obtained from modulus analysis. Scaling analysis of modulus data conﬁrmed the time-temperature superposition principle. VC 2012 American Institute of Physics. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.3697685]

NASICONs have been extensively explored as electrolytes in solid state electrochemical devices.1 It has the general formula, A3B2(XO4)3, where the mixed framework, [B2(XO4)3]n  , has an important role in crystal chemistry of compounds with tetrahedral anions. In this framework, oxygen atoms are shared between XO4 tetrahedra and BO6 octahedra. The element B can be in different oxidation states such as þ2, þ3, þ4, þ5 and X¼ Si, P, As, S, Mo, and W. Usually monovalent cations compromise the negative charges in the framework; even multivalent cations are suitable.2 In general, these family members exist in different polymorphs, i.e., rhombohedral, orthorhombic, monoclinic, and triclinic, and crystallized in either R3c, P21/n, and Cc space groups.

This system is interesting due to technological application in electrochemical systems and an environmentally benign nature of iron. A drawback of this system is its less conductivity at room temperature for application purposes and it exhibits reversible structural phase transitions at higher temperatures.3 In negation with typical rhombohedral symmetry of NASICON, the framework containing Fe3þ in the B site shows a monoclinic phase of lower symmetry and attempts are reported to synthesize these systems in a thermally stable form by chemical methods.4 The present study explored a solution combustion technique to prepare these systems, and thermally stable nanocrystallites are formed. Even though various groups reported structural peculiarities during phase transition, a perceptible study on ion transport and electrical relaxation are lacking in these materials. Glycine and ethylene glycol-citric acid mixture are used as a fuel/chelating agent in the combustion process, and its inﬂuence on structural parameters and electrical properties are investigated in this study.

a)Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. Electronic mail: ggraj_7@yahoo.com. Tel.: þ91 413 2654405. Fax: þ91 413 2656988.

The present study investigated structural, optical, magnetic properties, and ion dynamics in Li3Fe2(PO4)3. X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform-infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), thermogravimetry, and differential thermal analysis (TG-DTA), scanning electron microscope (SEM), and transmission electron microscope (TEM) are used for structural characterization. Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectroscopy is used for exploration of electronic transition in transition metal ions and a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) is used for ﬁnding out the magnetic behavior of the Fe3þ ion. The Wagner dc polarization technique is used for conﬁrmation of conducting species in the investigated material. The ac electrical studies are carried out by exploring the impedance/dielectric spectroscopy.

In this study, Li3Fe2(PO4)3 is synthesized using different fuels, i.e., ethylene glycol-citric acid mixture and glycine. For the synthesis of Li3Fe2(PO4)3 using an ethylene glycol-citric acid mixture, a stoichiometric amount of LiNO3, Fe(NO3)39 H2O, NH4H2PO4, and a fuel/complexing agent were mixed in required molar ratios in a minimum volume of de-ionized water. The metal cations were complexed by citric acid and pH of the resultant solution is adjusted in the range 7-8 using ammonia solution. This mixture is kept under constant stirring for 12 h and NH4H2PO4 is added to this clear solution. After further stirring, ethylene glycol is added while keeping the molar ratio with citric acid at 1:1. The clear homogeneous solution is heated further for burning and carbonaceous powder is formed, known as an as-prepared material. Further calcination at 800 C crystallized the material in phase pure symmetry. The objective of the present investigation is to synthesize nanocrystalline Li3Fe2(PO4)3 by a unique combination of citric acid as the complexing agent and ethylene glycol as the polymerizing agent. The same procedure is followed for the synthesis using a glycine fuel/complexing

agent in 1:2 molar ratio with metal nitrates, which resulted in phase pure nanocrystallites of Li3Fe2(PO4)3. Before carrying out the electrical measurements, pellets were sintered between 900 C and 950 C. XRD patterns were recorded using a Philips X’pert PRO diffractometer in the 2h range 10–75. TG-DTA is used to ﬁnd out the thermal behavior of samples, i.e., parameters such as crystallization temperature, melting point, and phase transition temperatures. The FT-IR spectrum is recorded between 400  1 using KBr as the diluter. The morphology of and 1800 cm the samples is recorded using SEM and TEM. The UV-vis spectrum is recorded in the 200 to 800 nm range to identify the electronic transitions in the material and VSM is used to identify the nature of magnetic species. Silver paint was evenly applied on both sides of the pellets for better electrical contact. The ac electrical measurements were carried out using a broadband dielectric spectrometer from Novocontrol. The ionic transport number is measured by means of the Wagner dc polarization technique.

Li3Fe2(PO4)3 synthesized by ceramic route is crystallized in b-Fe2(SO4)3 type monoclinic symmetry at room temperature and undergoes reversible structural phase transitions below 350 C. But these XRD patterns do not show any modiﬁcations due to phase transitions because phase changes did not alter the ordering of networks. d’Yvoire et al.3 and Bykov et al.5 showed that the monoclinic phase transforms reversibly to orthorhombic phase above 270 C due to progressive breakþ ions in the interstitial space. ing of long-range ordering of Li The Fe2(SO4)3-type phase generally crystallizes in two symmetries: (1) primitive monoclinic (P21/n) and (2) orthorhombic (Pcan) of highest symmetry.5 In the present investigation, the XRD pattern of combustion synthesized Li3Fe2(PO4)3 does not exhibit any variation with temperature due to the absence of ordering of the network.

In the present study, Li3Fe2(PO4)3 compositions are crystallized as a mixture of monoclinic (P21/n) and orthorhombic (Pcan) symmetry, i.e., room and high temperature ions distribute disorphases. In the orthorhombic phase, Li derly in the available sites which contributes to phase stability in synthesized Li3Fe2(PO4)3. Due to sintering in air, the XRD patterns show the presence of minor phases of LiFeP2O7 that crystallized in monoclinic symmetry. Figure 1 shows an XRD pattern of 900 C sintered Li3Fe2(PO4)3 synthesized using glycine (LFP:G) and ethylene glycol-citric acid mixture (LFP:EG:CA). The black, red, and violet color indexes are reﬂections, respectively, from monoclinic and orthorhombic symmetry and LiFeP2O7 phase. The crystallite size is calculated using Scherrer formula6

where B is the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of XRD peaks, K is the Scherrer constant, D is the crystallite size, k

FIG. 1. XRD patterns of (a) Li3Fe2(PO4)3:G and (b) Li3Fe2(PO4)3:EG:CA sintered at 900 C.

is the wavelength of the x-ray, and h is the Bragg angle. For Gaussian x-ray proﬁles, B can be calculated as

where Bm is the FWHM of the material and Bs is the FWHM of the standard sample; silicon is taken as the standard for calculation of instrumental parameters. The density of sintered pellets is measured by the Archimedes principle. The lattice parameters and unit cell volume are calculated for sintered pellets using CELREF3 software.7 The crystal system and physical parameters are given in Table I.

FT-IR is a general spectroscopic technique to identify the functional groups for structural exposition and compound identiﬁcation. FT-IR spectra of NASICON materials are dominated by intense, overlapping PO3  stretching modes  1.8 In most of the 4 (1 and 3) ranging from 1300 to 700 cm cases, experimentally measured vibrations are divided into

TABLE I. Structural and electrical parameters of Li3Fe2(PO4)3 systems.

FIG. 2. FT-IR spectra of Li3Fe2(PO4)3:G.

internal and external modes. Internal modes consist predominantly of intra-molecular stretching and bending motions of PO3  anions, described as fundamental vibrations of free anion (i.e., 1 – 4). The high frequency band observed at  1 in the FT-IR spectra of Li3Fe2(PO4)3:G is due to 1031 cm 3  ionic group. Bands between 650 and vibration of the PO4  1 are attributed to harmonics of the deformation of 400 cm the O–P–O angle (2 and 4 modes).9 Bands in the region  1 are attributed to asymmetric bending vibrational 580 cm  1 is modes of O–P–O units.10 The region 931–870 cm assigned to PO2  ionic group vibration11 and external modes , and PO3  are composed of Li translations and pseudo-rotations. Separation of internal and external modes is justiﬁed because intramolecular PO3  vibrations have much larger force constants than external modes. Li translatory vibrations (cage modes) often occur at relatively high frequencies and mix with PO3  4 bending modes of identical symmetry.12 In these vibrations, Li ions undergo translatory motions in a potential energy environment that is determined by nearest neighbor oxygen atoms. The factor group splitting  1 in Li3Fe2(PO4)3 is due to the coupling present at 466 cm of transition metal Fe3þ anion and Fig. 2 shows FT-IR spectra of Li3Fe2(PO4)3:G.

Thermal study is an inevitable technique to spot the phase transition; additionally it provides parameters like

reaction enthalpy. Thermal and gravimetric analyses of asprepared materials are carried out in the temperature range 40 C to 1000 C. The surface area and size of crystallites are primarily decided by enthalpy or ﬂame temperature in a combustion process. Addition to that nature of fuel/complexing agent and its molar ratio with metal nitrates has an inevitable inﬂuence on it. Rapid evolution of a large volume of gases during combustion dissipates heat, which limits an increase in temperature and reduces the possibility of premature local partial sintering among primary particles, reducing the inter-particle contact. Mainly two factors controls the crystallite size, i.e., adiabatic ﬂame temperature and number of moles of gases released. A high value of ﬂame temperature resulted in the formation of dense agglomerates and is disintegrated by release of more amounts of gases.13 The competition between ﬂame temperature and number of moles of gases released decided the crystallite size.

DTA curves of Li3Fe2(PO4)3 compositions are dissimilar due to a difference in the chemical decomposition of organic components as shown in Figs. 3(a) and 3(b). Out of the two exothermic peaks observed in DTA, the broad peak around 200–400 C corresponds to the decomposition of organic fuel/complexing agent and nitrates. The gravimetric plot shows signiﬁcant weight loss in the temperature range 300 C to 500 C, which is due to the decomposition of an organic intermediate. Further weight loss between 800 C and 900 C is due to the formation of a NASICON phase that is articulated in the DTA plot as a sharp exothermic peak. The crystallization temperature depends on the nature of the fuel/complexing agent and its molar ratio.

a. Scanning electron microscopy. Figures 4(a) and 4(b) are SEM images of sintered pellets of Li3Fe2(PO4)3:G and Li3Fe2(PO4)3:EG:CA, respectively. The submicrometer sized particles are agglomerated, its morphology and sinterability are inﬂuenced by the nature of fuel/complexing agents. X-ray mapping is an imaging technique that provides a high magniﬁcation image related to distribution and relative abundance of elements present in the material. This technique is used for mapping the spatial distribution of a speciﬁc element and phase on the material surface. Figures 4(c)–4(f) show x-ray mapping of the image in Fig. 4(a).

FIG. 3. Thermal and gravimetric plots of as-prepared (a) Li3Fe2(PO4)3:EG:CA and (b) Li3Fe2(PO4)3:G.

FIG. 4. (a) and (b) SEM image of sintered pellet of Li3Fe2(PO4)3:G and Li3Fe2(PO4)3:EG:CA and (c)–(f) shows x-ray mapping of the image in (a).

Energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy is used for quantitative chemical analysis, but unable to detect elements with less atomic weight, hence Li cannot be identiﬁed by this technique. The percentages of elements detected by the instrument and calculated from molecular formula fall within the error.

b. Transmission electron microscopy. The nanocrystalline nature of the samples is conﬁrmed from TEM images. Figure 5(a) shows lattice fringes in different orientations and the fringe spacing of 1.98 A˚ corresponds to diffraction from the ( 1, 2, 4) plane of Li3Fe2(PO4)3:G. Figures 5(b) and 5(c) show diffraction patterns from different planes.

B. Optical characterizations

1. Ultraviolet and visible absorption spectroscopy analysis

UV-vis spectroscopy is a tool to identify the electronic state of a transition metal in the material. In the present

context, a fraction of Fe3þ may exhibit variable valency and can coordinate tetrahedrally or octahedrally. Each coordination state produces its own characteristic absorption band in the UV-vis range, which is a ﬁngerprint of the material and is related to electronic contribution. Both Fe2þ and Fe3þ ions can exist in tetrahedral and octahedral sites but a greater number of Fe3þ occupies the tetrahedral network. The double absorption band at 340 and 380 nm may be attributed to 4D5 for Fe3þ in the tetrahedral state and at 440 nm is due to 4G5 for Fe3þ in the tetrahedral state. The band at 410–420 nm is of 3F2!3P4 transition, related to Fe3þ in octahedral symmetry. Fe2þ in the octahedral site contributes to the absorption band at 560–580 nm.14 Li3Fe2(PO4)3: EG:CA and Li3Fe2 (PO4)3:G show absorption bands in the region of 420–430 nm as in Fig. 6, characteristic of Fe3þ in the octahedral state. The broad band in the region 200–400 nm is due to a phosphate group and its location is independent of nature of cation. The UV-vis study qualitatively conﬁrms that a fraction of Fe2þ contributing to the electronic part is negligible in the system. The optical bandgap energy is calculated to be 3.09 eV.

FIG. 5. (a) Lattice fringes of Li3Fe2(PO4)3:G in different orientations, (b) and (c) show diffraction patterns from different (hkl) planes of Li3Fe2(PO4)3:G.

FIG. 6. UV-vis spectrum of Li3Fe2(PO4)3:G and Li3Fe2(PO4)3:EG:CA.

C. Magnetic characterizations

Magnetic behavior and qualitative conﬁrmation of electronic contribution to total conductivity is accomplished through room temperature VSM studies. Generally, exchange interaction between equal valence ions is antiferromagnetic and interaction between ions with different valence states, i.e., Fe3þ (3d6) is ferromagnetic.15 Electronic contribution to total conductivity is related to co-existence of different valence states.

In the present study, magnetization is recorded over a range of ﬁeld, using VSM at room temperature. The linear and non-hysteric behavior of a magnetic ﬁeld is shown in Fig. 7 for Li3Fe2(PO4)3 compositions, indicating the antiferromagnetic character of the ordered Fe3þ state. The lack of ferromagnetic interaction indicates the absence of different valence states, implying the negligible contribution from the electronic part.

To validate the electrical microstructure of a system, i.e., grain, grain-boundary, and other parameters such as

electrode polarization, ac electrical parameters are plotted in the complex impedance formalism. The Kramers–Kronig (K–K) relation is used to evaluate the quality of measured impedance data. The K-K relations are true for complex impedance spectroscopic data that are linear, causal, and stable. Figure 8 shows the K-K ﬁt to Li3Fe2(PO4)3 compositions at 383 K. These ﬁts match well with the experimental data, implying a good quality of measured data. The KramersKronig ﬁt to the complex impedance data is achieved through K-K test software.

The ac electrical measurements were carried out using a broadband dielectric spectrometer in the frequency range 50 Hz to 1 MHz. The present study used complex impedance formalism for extraction of ac electrical parameters at different temperatures. Elements of an equivalent circuit model represent various macroscopic processes involved in the transport of mass and charge. Using non-linear least square (NLLS) ﬁtting techniques, all parameters in the equivalent circuit are adjusted simultaneously, obtaining an optimum ﬁt to the measured dispersion data. A more general NLLS-ﬁt program based on Marquardt algorithm has been used. Impedance parameters are obtained by ﬁtting the data to an equivalent circuit using NLLS ﬁtting procedure due to Boukamp.16,17

The complex impedance spectra of Li3Fe2(PO4)3:EG:CA at 373 K is shown in Fig. 9(a), and the equivalent circuit representation is Rc(RgQg)(Qe). Rc denotes the resistance of electrolyte–electrode contact, characterized by a shift of impedance arc from the origin. (RgQg) represents parallel combination of Rg and Qg, denoting contribution from grain, where Rg is the grain resistance and Qg is the constant phase element due to grain contribution. Qe is the constant phase element representing electrode polarization at the interface. In this equivalent circuit representation, contact resistance, contributions from grain and electrode-sample interface effects are in series with each other. Grain-boundary contribution is observed at higher temperatures in addition to grain contribution in this composition. Equivalent circuit parameters of Li3Fe2(PO4)3:EG:CA in the temperature range 303–443 K is given in Table II for a few temperatures. Figure 9(b)

FIG. 7. Magnetization vs applied magnetic ﬁeld at room temperature for (a) Li3Fe2(PO4)3 :EG:CA and (b) Li3Fe2 (PO4)3:G.

a long interval of 48 h the cell is completely polarized and delivers a steady current, Is; further, there is no change to this steady current with time. A decrease in the polarization current is attributed to migration of ions due to applied ﬁeld and is balanced by diffusion due to concentration gradient. The ionic contribution is evaluated through the equation20

where ti is the ionic transference number, Is is the steady current, and I0 is the instantaneous initial current. The ionic transference number is found to be nearly equal to unity for the investigated system.

Electrical dispersion phenomena in ionic conductors, which do not contain permanent molecular dipoles, arises from the long range ionic diffusion process involving a jump over free energy barriers of varying heights. The dispersion connected to the long range ionic diffusion process is called conductivity relaxation to distinguish it from the dispersion due to permanent dipole reorientation. Ionic conductivity is a series process involving consecutive hops of an ion over the potential energy barriers in the direction of electric ﬁeld. As the impedance are additive for a series process rather than admittance, for analyzing conductivity relaxation a dimensionless parameter called complex electric modulus, M xð Þ, inverse of complex permittivity is used and is deﬁned as

shows Arrhenius temperature dependence of grain and grain boundary dc conductivity and hopping frequency values of Li3Fe2(PO4)3 compositions. The dc conductivity values of Li3Fe2 (PO4)3:G are higher than similar composition obtained using ethylene glycol-citric acid mixture; these values are one order higher than the microcrystalline analog as evident from literature.3 The magnitude of dc conductivity mainly depends on carrier density and mobility in ion conducting materials; carrier density is almost the same for both Li3Fe2(PO4)3 compositions as shown in Fig. 10(a). Better mobility, due to hopping rate and larger framework volume, is the reason for enhanced conduction in Li3Fe2(PO4)3:G.2 The spectroscopic plot of Z00(x) in Li3Fe2(PO4)3:G at different temperatures is shown in Fig. 10(b). Activation energies, Eh, for electrical relaxation is given in Table I and is found to be independent of synthesis parameters in Li3Fe2(PO4)3 compositions. In the þ ions are in the four co-ordination site in present study, Li contrast to the six co-ordination site in typical NASICON symmetry. The four co-ordination site is preferable to the six co-ordination site for ion conduction18 that may contribute to higher conduction in the investigated compositions.

The Li3Fe2(PO4)3 materials investigated in the present study contain a Fe3þ transition element. Due to the presence of variable valency states, Fe3þ may contribute to the electronic part and is determined quantitatively by a transport number measurement through Wagner polarization technique. In this technique, a sample is placed between a pair of silver blocking electrodes19 and maintained at 250 C for 2 h. On application of dc voltage of 400 mV to the above conﬁguration, an instantaneous initial current, I0, is produced. After

FIG. 9. (a) Complex impedance plane plot of Li3Fe2(PO4)3: EG:CA at 373 K. (b) Arrhenius plots of grain and grainboundary dc conductivity and dispersion peak frequency in Li3Fe2(PO4)3 systems.

Modulus21,22 is deﬁned as the Fourier transform of Kohlrausch-Williams-Watts (KWW) relaxation function, U tð Þ. It is given by

where M1¼ 1=e1, where e1 is the high frequency value of real part of dielectric permittivity. / tð Þ describes the evolution of electric ﬁeld within the material for a macroscopic current decay after an electric ﬁeld change and is of the form23

where sp is conductivity relaxation time and 0 < b < 1 is an exponent that measures the extent of non-exponential behavior and tends toward unity for Debye-type relaxation. The

thermally activated average conductivity relaxation time for ion motion is given by

where Eh is activation energy for hopping and kB is Boltzmann constant. The plot of imaginary part of electric modulus against log frequency is not uniform in shape, is broader than the single relaxation time, as shown in Fig. 11(a) for Li3Fe2(PO4)3:EG:CA. It curves on both sides of the maximum, but asymmetric and skewed toward the high frequency side of maximum. The shape of M00 xð Þ curve assumes a distribution function, g(s), intermediate between symmetric log Gaussian,24 Cole-Cole function,25 and highly asymmetric Cole-Davidson function.26

The imaginary part of the complex modulus in the frequency domain is due to the KWW function and is well approximated by Bergman27 in the form     p xð Þ 1þb b xp

p xð Þ is the peak maximum and xp¼1/sp is the peak where M00 frequency of M00 xð Þ. The parameters such as M00 p xð Þ, b, and xp are extracted by the ﬁtting of M00 xð Þ data. The charge carriers are mobile over long distances in the region left of the peak, while right of the peak ions are spatially conﬁned to the potential wells.28 The frequency of relaxation, xp, 00 xð Þ occurs is an indication of transition from where Mp shortto long-range mobility at decreasing frequency. xp exponentially increases with temperature and the activation energy for relaxation is calculated from Arrhenius behavior and is given in Table I. The proximity between activation energies of dc conduction and relaxation shows that while conducting and relaxing ion has to overcome the same energy barrier, such ion transport features are dominant in fast ion conductors due to hopping conduction.

The scaling of the imaginary part of modulus of Li3Fe2(PO4)3:EG:CA at different temperatures is shown in Fig. 11(b). In the present scaling analysis, the frequency axis is scaled by xp and the M00(x) axis is scaled by M00 p. A perfect overlap of the curves at different temperatures to a single master curve indicates that the dynamical processes occurring at different frequencies have the same thermal

FIG. 10. (a) Charge carrier concentration, nc, of Li3Fe2(PO4)3 systems over the temperature range: 300–420 K and (b) frequency dependence of imaginary part of impedance of Li3Fe2(PO4)3:G showing grain contribution to relaxation.

FIG. 11. (a) Real and imaginary part of modulus of Li3Fe2(PO4)3:EG:CA showing the broad nature of relaxation and (b) scaling of imaginary part of modulus in Li3Fe2(PO4)3:EG:CA at different temperatures.

and L. Montanaro, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 19, 925–929 (1999); M. L. Di Vona, E. Traversa, and S. Licoccia, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol. 19, 463–467 (2000). 5A. B. Bykov, A. P. Chirkin, L. N. Demyanets, S. N. Doronin, E. A. Genkina, A. K. Ivanov-Shits, I. P. Kondratyuk, B. A. Maksimov, O. K. Melonikov, L. N. Muradyan, V. I. Simonov, and V. A. Timofeeva, Solid State Ionics 38, 31–52 (1990). 6P. Scherrer, Nachr. Ges. Wiss. Goettingen, Math.-Phys. Kl. 26, 98–100 (1918). 7 CELREF3, Unit-Cell reﬁnement software on a multiphase system. 8D. E. C. Corbridge and E. J. Lowe, J. Chem. Soc. 78, 493–502 (1954). 9A. Osaka, K. Takahashi, and M. Ikeda, J. Mater. Sci. 3, 36–38 (1984); J. Wong and C. A. Angell, Glass Structure by Spectroscopy (Marcel Dekker, New York, 1976).

Infrared and Raman Spectra of activation energy. Scaling of modulus spectra provides the time-temperature superposition principle of ion dynamics in these materials.

The present study explored a chemical method of solution combustion for the synthesis of nanocrystalline Li3Fe2(PO4)3. Structural parameters and phase formation are controlled by a fuel/complexing agent, i.e., glycine and ethylene glycol-citric acid mixture, used in synthesis. By this synthesis procedure, the Li3Fe2(PO4)3 system is crystallized in a mixed symmetry of monoclinic and orthorhombic. The high temperature phase stability is inevitable due to technological applications and is achieved by orthorhombic ion. In monosymmetry due to disordered distribution of Li is in a four co-ordination site compared clinic symmetry, Li to six co-ordination of typical NASICON symmetry, resulting in a less activation energy path for ion conduction. Even if the carrier concentration is independent of nature of fuel, enhanced electrical properties synthesized Li3Fe2(PO4)3 is due to a larger unit cell volume and mobility conduction and relaxation is investiin the composition. Li gated in complex impedance and modulus representations. The scaling analysis of modulus data conﬁrmed the timetemperature superposition principle.