Aiming at the development of new proton conducting solids, recent studies of the NaH2PO4  H2O– NaH2AsO4  H2O system have lead to the synthesis of a new compound NaH2(PO4)0.48(AsO4)0.52  H2O (NDAP). Calorimetric studies have conﬁrmed the presence of four reversible phase transitions (abbreviated by PhT), at 257/270 (PhT, IV), 261/290 (PhT, III), 267/301 (PhT, II) and 317/317.5 K (PhT, I) (for cooling/heating processes, respectively). It is shown that the III and IV phase transitions are of a ﬁrst order type, with a ‘‘order-disorder and displacive’’ character, accompanied by speciﬁc dielectric anomalies. The behavior of the dielectric constant e0 r and of tan d shows that, at 272 K, the (PhT, IV) could be ferroelectric–paraelectric. As for the (PhT, III) at 296 K, it leads to a superionic–protonic phase; a jump in the conductivity is associated to this transition with an unusual high value of conductivity 1.07  10   1 and a low activation energy 0.39 eV (Kh. Jarraya et al.). Quandratic nonlinear (NLO) properties of NDAP powder was conﬁrmed efﬁciency of the grown crystal by the Kurtz and Perry second harmonic generation (SHG) technique.

The KDP family of compounds (KH2PO4) of the general formula MH2XO4 (where M is a monovalent cation: K, Rb, Cs and X is P or As) has been of great interest owing to its structural and physical properties. In fact, KDP is a typical hydrogen bonded material, which displays interesting piezoelectric, ferroelectric, electro-optic and nonlinear optical properties [1–5]. KDP and its isomorphs becomes the subject of a wide variety of investigations to advance and improve its physical properties [6] because it has many applications in technology due to their interesting electrical and optical properties, structural phase transitions, and ease of crystallization. The mixed material elaborated in this work (formula NaH2(PO4)0.48 (AsO4)0.52 H2O) crystallizes in an orthorhombic system with space group P212121, a¼5.1383(5) ˚A, b¼8.3301(8) ˚A, c¼10.2492(10) ˚A and Z¼4 [7]. In this structure, PO3  4 anions are homogeneously distributed in the crystal, resulting in increased entropy as compared to structures containing only phosphate or arseniate ions, and in the presence of two types of hydrogen bonds, which can be associated with speciﬁc physical properties. The crystal structure of NDAP is built up from discrete tetrahedra [P(As)O4]3  connected to each other via O–H?O hydrogen bonds, with strong electrostatic actions with Na cations (Fig. 1). Such a compound exhibits a structural phase transition and interesting physical properties as superprotonic conductivity [8]. Thus, the aim of our study is to shed the light on this compound and report results of calorimetric and dielectric measurements, X-ray sctarring from powders, impedance spectroscopy and SHG experiments, in order to elucidate, to the best of our knowledge, its phase transitions, ferroelectricity and NLO properties.

The resulting solution was kept under ambient conditions that allowed a slow evaporation. Three days later, we obtained transparent, lamellar-shaped and colorless crystals with approximately (0.25 0.25 0.30) mm3 of size. The crystals were selected from the homogeneous powder using a polarizing microscope for all analyses. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements were carried out using a NETZSCH DSC 204F1 in the temperature 

the linear extrapolation to zero scanning rate in the present experiment. On the other hand, the character of the phase transition (order–disorder or displacive) is identiﬁed on the basis of the corresponding entropy variation, DS. If this DS comes close to 5.76 J/mole K or higher, then the phase transition may be identiﬁed as an order–disorder one [9]. The parameters characterizing the phase transitions in NDAP are collected in Table 1.

DSC thermograms of the NDAP crystals (Fig. 2a) shows three reversible solid–solid phase transitions and one reversible solid– liquid phase transition below the decomposition point at Td¼391 K. The shape of the observed anomalies clearly conﬁrms the discontinuous nature and the value of the temperature hysteresis for the 257 and 261 K peaks (cooling regime for both of them) associated with (PhT, IV) and (PhT, III), respectively. This clearly indicates ﬁrst-order

interval 220–420 K, under the following conditions: heating rate   1, sample weight of 18.29 mg, sensitivity of 10 mV/mW, of 2 K min   1). TGA measurements were and ﬂowing Argon (ﬂow rate: 1 dm3 h performed on a Rigaku TG-DTA 8120 instrument in nitrogen atmosphere; the mass of the sample is 10 mg, the temperature ranges   1. The scan was from 293 to 450 K with a heating rate of 5 K min   1). The measureperformed in ﬂowing nitrogen (ﬂow rate: 1 dm3 h ments of the complex dielectric permittivity (e*¼e0  je00) were   1 Hz and in a performed over a frequency interval of 106–10 temperature range of 233–323 K. To cover the above frequency range, a NOVOCONTROL spectrometer integrating an ALPHA dielectric interface was employed with a precision in tand¼e00/e0 ¼10   5. In these experiments, the temperature was controlled by a nitrogen jet (QUATRO from Novocontrol) with a70.1 K temperature error during every single sweep in frequency. The crystalline samples of NDAP were crushed and pressed into pellets at the pressure of 200 MPa at room temperature. Dense translucent pellets of 10 mm in diameter and 1–2 mm in thickness were obtained. Circular gold electrodes were applied to their large faces. The electrical properties were investigated under a non-circulating air atmosphere. X-ray powder diffraction patterns were collected from samples using a Philips X’Pert Pro (Cu-Ka, 40 kV, 40 mA) at a scan rate of 0.61 2y min

The order of the phase transition (ﬁrst or second order) may be determined by analyzing data collected from calorimetric measurements. Thermal hysteresis properties were estimated from

Fig. 1. Projection of the NDAP crystalline structure in the b,c plane. Hydrogen bonds O–H?O are indicated.

Fig. 2. (a) DSC thermograms of the NDAP crystals for the cooling and heating runs between 220 and 420 K. (b) TGA scan for NDAP between 293 and 450 K.

Table 1 Parameters characterizing the phase transitions in NDAP.

phase transitions. Their discontinuous character of these transitions is conﬁrmed by the presence of a phase front observed on a single crystal sample under a polarizing microscope (OLYMPUS, BX60 SYSTEM). The characteristic amplitude and slope changes corresponding to the 261 K peak (cooling scan, PhT, II) is typical of a quasi second-order phase transition. The character of (PhT, I) and of (PhT, II), is considered as of a ‘‘order-disorder’’ type, but the low entropy values accompanying (PhT, III) and (IV) transitions are of both ‘‘order-disorder’’ and ‘‘displacive’’ natures [10]. First the phase transition with a high temperature at 317/319 K (on cooling/heating, respectively) is accompanied by a very high enthalpy variation due to melting of NDAP without any loss of water as compared with the mother compound NaH2PO4 2H2O [11]. Second, the phase transition at 267/301 K (on cooling/heating, respectively) may be explained by an increase of the reorientational motion of the   H2PðAsÞO 4 anions. Moreover, the phase transition at 261/290 K (on cooling/heating, respectively) seems to designate a superionic– protonic phase transition (SPT), which is conﬁrmed by dielectric and conductivity measurements using impedance spectroscopy [8]. The lowest phase transition at 257/270 K (on cooling/heating, respectively) corresponds probably to a ferroelectric–paraelectric phase transition involving a hydrogen bond where the motion of the protons in a double well potential is related to the ferroelectric properties as in the KH2PO4-type family.

Fig. 2b shows a thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of NDAP, recorded between 293 and 450 K. Clearly, all anomalies are not accompanied by a loss of mass, except for the last peak at 391 K, which corresponds to the salt decomposition. Moreover, at this temperature, the weight loss Dm observed is approximately equal to 22%. It must undoubtedly be attributed to the loss of two water molecules from the crystal structure in which the color has changed.

In order to conﬁrm the reversibility of all phase transitions of NDAP, we have performed X-ray powder diffraction after and before heating the sample. In Fig. 3, the ﬁrst spectrum (a) is recorded at 272 K after cooling from ambient. The second one (c) is recorded after heating the sample at 335 K and cooling it to 252 K. The superposition of the two spectra (a) and (c) at 272 and 252 K conﬁrms the results found by DSC, i.e., that the four phase transitions detected at 272, 296, 306 and 330 K are reversible

[12]. The difference between (a) and (b) spectra conﬁrms the phase transition detected at 272 K, the ﬁrst spectrum being recorded at 272 K and the second one at a temperature just before the transition at 262 K.

The temperature dependence of the dielectric permittivity e0

r of NDAP at four selected frequencies is shown in Fig. 4. Indeed, three peaks were detected in the 233–323 K temperature range, and have been observed by DSC during a heating process. The ﬁrst anomaly is observed during the ﬁrst increase of permittivity at 272 K, probably corresponding to a ferroelectric–paraelectric phase transition. The second peak at 296 K seems to indicate a superionic–protonic phase transition (SPT). The most intense peak at 324 K corresponds to the melting of the compound under study.

The evolution of e0r for various frequencies has shown a signiﬁcant

variation of the permittivity in this material. The maximum e0 rmax decreases when frequency increases, due to the fact that the material presents a long-range ion diffusion. Consequently, two polarization mechanisms are possible and the real part of dielectric constant can be presented as: ð Þþe0 ð r ¼ e0 e0 r latt: r carr: where e0 r (latt.) represents the lattice response related to permanent dipole orientation or to other features do not involving long-range displacement of mobile charge carriers. In this contribution, we observe that changes can be caused by the ferroelectric–paraelectric transition. e0 r (carr.), which represents the conductivity relaxation, or response carrier, is associated to a long-range migration. The second contribution is tightly linked to the frequency, especially in the low frequency domain. This part of the permittivity characterizes the conductivity mechanisms [13–15].

Fig. 5 Shows the temperature evolution of the dissipation factor (tan d). The values of tan d are relatively important, indicating a signiﬁcant contribution of the conductivity in this material. The dielectric loss increases with the increase in temperature, and presents a maximum. Then it decreases and displays a minimum in the vicinity of the transition temperature. The position of tan d maximum depends on the frequency: it shifts to higher temperatures when the frequency increases.

The behavior of dielectric constant e0r and tan d and the evidence of a reversible phase transition strengthen the hypothesis that the

Fig. 3. X-ray powder diffraction of NDAP: the (a) and (b) spectra are recorded at 272 K and 262 K, respectively, after cooling from room temperature, the (c) spectrum is recorded at 252 K after heating the sample at 335 K.

Fig. 4. Temperature dependence of e0 different frequencies.

r for NDAP as a function of temperature, for

N. Ennaceur et al. / Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 73 (2012) 418–422

Fig. 5. Thermal evolution of the dissipation factor d for NDAP as a function of temperature, for different frequencies.

Fig. 6. Schematic representation of the experimental setup for the SHG efﬁciency measurement at 1.064 mm. F: Filter, M: Mirrors, GP: Glass plate, L: Lens, P: Polarizer, l/2: Half wave plate, MD: Motor Driver, PMT: Photomultiplier tube, NPP: Reference material.

Fig. 7. SHG signal (I2o) recorded with respect to the square of the incident laser intensity (Io)2, for NDAP (squares) and KDP (triangles).

respect to the laser beam. The second harmonic signal at 532 nm is collected from the front face of the sample at 901 with respect to the incident fundamental laser beam. Appropriate ﬁlters are used to eliminate IR photons at 1.064 mm before reaching detector (PMT). The detected signal is then sampled and averaged using a Stanford Research System box car integrator and processed by a computer. A low intensity reference IR beam is extracted from the main beam at a 451 incidence angle by a glass plate and focused onto a highly nonlinear NPP (N-4-nitrophenyl-prolinol) [18] powder used as a frequency doubler. This NPP sample emits a strong SHG signal that is proportional to the square of the incident laser intensity (Io)2. The variation of the second harmonic intensity scattered from the KDP or NDAP samples is recorded on the computer as a function of the reference second harmonic signal provided by the NPP powder. The dependence of the signal (I2o) with respect to the square of the incident laser intensity (Io)2 is shown in Fig. 7. The NLO efﬁciency of NDAP crystals is found to be almost identical to that of pure KDP, the slope of the line displayed in Fig. 7 for NDAP being 0.9 times that of KDP.

phase transition at 272 K is of a ferroelectric–paraelectric type [15,16].

The quadratic NLO response of, NDAP has been evaluated by performing SHG on a sample of NDAP powder. A schematic representation of the SHG setup is shown in Fig. 6. Measurements were made using the Kurtz and Perry powder technique [17]. About 50 mg of pure NDAP are selected using a polarizing microscope among the mixture of crystals obtained via the reaction given by Kh. Jarraya et al. [7] in order to eliminate impurities. The material is inserted into a sample holder, which consists in two Pyrex (25 75 1) mm microscope slides (Can Lab). Two strips of a masking tape placed on the periphery of the slides a separated by 2 cm limit the space left to the NDAP powder. This thin space (0.3 mm thick) is ﬁlled with the NDAP powder, which is sandwiched between the two pyrex slides. A 1.064 mm fundamental laser beam is emitted by Qswitched Nd3þ : YAG nanosecond laser (SAGA from Thales Laser) at a 10 Hz repetition rate. A Schott RG 1000 ﬁlter is used to ﬁlter out any remaining visible light from the laser ﬂash lamps. The intensity of the incoming fundamental beam is varied using a half-wave plate rotated between two crossed polarizers. The laser beam is directed onto the samples (KDP, used a reference material, and NDAP) oriented at a 451 incidence angle with

NDAP belongs to the KDP family with a non-centrosymmetric space group, which exhibits a structural phase transition and interesting physical properties. These characteristics were examined by different methods. Thermal studies have evidenced the presence of three reversible solid–solid phase transitions (PhT II, III and IV) and of one reversible solid–liquid phase transition (PhT I), detected by both X-ray powder and dielectric measurements. The character of the phase transition (PhT III and IV) is considered as a ‘‘order-disorder’’ one. On the other hand, the (PhT I and II) are of both ‘‘order–disorder’’ and ‘‘displacive’’ natures. The superposition of the two spectra in X–ray analysis, at 272 and 252 K in cooling/ heating, respectively, justiﬁes the results found by DSC and conﬁrms that the four phase transitions detected at 272, 296, 306 and 330 K are reversible. The behavior of dielectric constant e0 r and tan d and the reversible character of phase transition conﬁrms the hypothesis that at 272 K the phase transition is of a ferroelectric– paraelectric type. The quadratic NLO properties of the crystalline sample were conﬁrmed by the emission of crystal second harmonic signal from a powdered sample recorded as a function of a reference second harmonic signal provided by the NPP powder. Comparison with a KDP powder shows that the NLO efﬁciency of NDAP is signiﬁcant and almost the same as that of KDP.