Energy conversion and storage have become key issues concerning our welfare in daily life. The urgent need for using renewable and cleaner energy sources, such as solar radiation, wind and waves, has brought about the problem of modulating energy sources that are variable in time and diffuse in space. These sources require storing the off-peak electricity and releasing the stored energy during the on-peak period, so that the

aDepartamento de Quımica Inorganica, Universidad del Paıs Vasco UPV/EHU, P.O. Box. 644, 48080 Bilbao, Spain. Fax: +34 946013500; Tel: +34 946012458 bCIC ENERGIGUNE, Parque Tecnologico de Alava, Albert Einstein 48, ED.CIC, 01510 Mi~nano, Spain. E-mail: trojo@cicenergigune.com; Tel: +34 945297108

efﬁciency, stability, and reliability of an electricity supply system can be signiﬁcantly improved. The most appropriate form of energy storage in terms of energy density is chemical energy. For this purpose, batteries provide stored chemical energy with the ability to deliver it as electrical energy with high conversion efﬁciency and no gaseous exhaust. Therefore, of great interest are low-cost, safe, rechargeable batteries of adequate voltage, capacity, and rate capability.

Among the various available energy storage technologies, the Li-ion battery, which has conquered the portable electronic market, has become the prime candidate to power the next generation of electric vehicles and plug-in electric vehicles. Li-ion cells offer the largest energy density and output voltage of all rechargeable battery technologies in use. Moreover, Li-ion technology relies on a rich and versatile chemistry leading to

In the present framework, it is undeniable that the world has to face energy challenges in a sustainable way. For this reason, and taking into account recent concerns about a possible lithium shortage with the spread of electric vehicles, it is urgent to search for alternative energy storage systems that could complement the existing Li-ion technology. For this purpose, Na-ion technology can be a suitable choice in terms of battery cost, safety and raw material abundance. Although these systems would be of lower energy density, they could be applied in static storage to buffer renewable energy. In order to be ready to introduce new alternative energy storage systems in the market, Na-ion knowledge must be deeply explored. This work claims to be a good starting point for this purpose.

This way, up till now, Li-ion batteries have attracted all the attention in energy storage, but recently, Na-based compounds have made a comeback because of controversial debates regarding the size of reserves and higher cost to obtain Li.1 Of late, concerns have surfaced about the resource availability of lithium and hence future cost, in light of the projected orders-ofmagnitude increase in lithium usage in batteries for low emission hybrid and electric vehicles (EV). While modest expansion of Li production can support 1 MM 40 kW h vehicle batteries, to meet a long-term target of 100 MM 40 kW h Li-based EV batteries per year a dramatic expansion of annual production will be necessary (more than one order of magnitude).2 The issue is not insufﬁcient lithium on a global scale, but what fraction can be used and still be economically effective.3 Most untapped

lithium reserves occur in remote or politically sensitive areas. Scale-up will require a long lead time, involve heavy capital investment in mining, and may require the extraction and processing of lower quality resources, which could drive extraction costs higher. Currently, high costs remain a critical barrier to the widespread scale-up of battery energy storage. With respect to the long-term ‘‘stock’’ goal of 1 billion 40 kWh vehicle batteries, the reserve base of several Li-based materials is sufﬁcient, but near the limit of what is available. Indeed, if such a path is pursued, Li recycling will be necessary (see ref. 2). While the debate over the feasibility and environmental impact of lithium carbonate production continues, sodium-based compounds are under consideration as options for large scale energy storage coupled to renewable energy sources, for example. Expansion of battery research into alternative materials may accelerate the ability to work through both the scaling and cost challenges inherent in long-term planning for battery energy storage,2

Veronica Palomares (1981, Bilbao) received her PhD in Chemistry from the University of the Basque Country (UPV/ EHU) in 2009. During her PhD she worked on nanostructured cathodes for Li-ion batteries in collaboration with Cidetec-IK4. She has been a post-doctoral fellow at the University of the Basque Country, and nowadays is an associate professor at the UPV/EHU. She works in the ﬁeld of new electrode materials for lithium and sodium ion batteries.

Paula Serras Malillos (1983, San Sebastian) is an Environmental Chemical Engineer from the Faculty of Engineering of Bilbao (2001–2006). She has been working in wastewater treatment area for almost four years in LEIA (Mi~nano, 2006– 2007) and CEIT (San Sebastian, research centers. At the moment she is a PhD student in the Department of Inorganic Chemistry at UPV/EHU and she is working in the ﬁeld of new cathode materials for sodium ion batteries.

Irune Villaluenga (1982, Bilbao) received her PhD in Chemistry in 2010 from the the Basque University Country for research carried out at Tecnalia Research & Innovation. During her PhD she investigated TiO2 nanoparticles and coatings for air and water puriﬁcation and undertook internships at the University of Stockholm (Sweden) and the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (Japan). She is currently as a researcher at the University of the Basque Country in the ﬁeld of novel polymer electrolytes for sodium ion batteries.

Karina Beatriz Hueso was born in Nevers, France. She received her PhD in Analytical Chemistry from the University of Salamanca (USAL, Spain) in 2010. During her PhD she spent two months at the Faculty of Science and the Environment at the University of Hull, United Kingdom. She has a multidisciplinary background in the ﬁelds of biochemical, biopolymers and ﬂow-injection analysis. After obtaining a master’s degree in new materials from the University of the Basque Country (UPV-EHU, Spain) in 2011, she joined the Inorganic Chemistry department at UPV-EHU. Currently, her research interests focus on novel materials for sodium-ion batteries.

The use of Na instead of Li in rocking chair batteries could mitigate the feasible shortage of lithium in an economic way, due to the unlimited sodium sources, the ease to recover it, and its lower price (Table 1). Moreover, for positive electrode materials sodium intercalation chemistry is very similar to Li, thus making it possible to use very similar compounds for both kinds of systems. Furthermore, if a rechargeable sodium-ion battery with good performance characteristics could be developed, it could have the advantage of using electrolyte systems of lower decomposition potential due to the higher half-reaction potential for sodium relative to lithium. This low voltage operation would make Na-ion cells cheaper, because water-based electrolytes could be used instead of organic ones. This alkali metal has already been successfully used in Na/S and Na/NiCl2 Zebra cells. It must be pointed out that electrochemical Na-ion cells will always fall short of meeting energy densities compared to Li-ion batteries. First, because equivalent weight of Na is higher than Li, and second because there are two competing factors regarding sodium-based intercalation compounds commonly employed as anode materials in ‘‘rocking

Gonzalez Javier studied Chemistry at the Universidad Complutense. He obtained his PhD in 2009 working nanocomposites with Dr Miguel Angel Lopez Manchado at the Institute of Polymer Science and Technology. Javier joined the Nanotech the University of Texas at Dallas in 2008 with Professor Ray H. Baughman ﬁrst as a PhD student and later as a research associate. At Nanotech he was on multifunctional working materials based on carbon nanotubes, graphene nanoribbons, electrochemical capacitors as well as in the rational design of carbon nanotubes of unique type. Currently Javier is a postdoctoral researcher at CIC Energigune.

chair’’ type batteries: one is the ionization potential and the other the size of the alkali metal. The ionization potential increases from 3.893 eV to 5.390 eV as we go from Cs to Li in the series of alkali metal elements in the periodic table. The lower the ionization potential, the more easily the electron transfers from the alkali metals to graphite for example, which is used as standard anode material. Consequently, the energy gain upon the charge transfer becomes smaller in the order of Cs > Rb > K > Na > Li. However, this picture looks inconsistent with what really happens with lithium intercalation. This fact can be explained by the smallness of the ionic diameter of Li. The ionic diameter  decreases from 4 A for the same series. Thus, Na-based cells will have difﬁculties competing with Li based cells in terms of energy density. However, they can be considered for use in applications where the weight and footprint requirement is less drastic, such as storage of off-peak and essentially ﬂuctuating renewable energies, such as wind and solar farms. In spite of these considerations, there exists growing interest on Na-ion technology. Recent computational studies by Ceder et al. on voltage, stability and diffusion barrier of Na-ion and Li-ion materials indicate that Na-ion systems can be competitive with Li-ion systems.5 In any case, Na-ion batteries would be interesting for very low cost systems for grid storage, which could make renewable energy a primary source of energy rather than just a supplemental one.

The search for commercially viable Na-ion batteries demands ﬁnding and optimizing new electrode materials and electrolytes, in order to get more economic, safer and long life batteries. One of the ways to get more economic systems would be searching for an aqueous electrolyte battery that would not need ultra-dry fabrication conditions and would not use higher cost organic electrolytes, such as sodium ﬂuorinated salts. Another indirect saving could be the use of cheaper materials in the assembly of the battery, for example, the current collectors.

Teoﬁlo Rojo received his PhD from the University of the Basque Country in 1981. He has spent various research periods at several European and American universities. Since 1992 he has been a Full Professor of Inorganic Chemistry at the UPVEHU. His research has been focused on Solid State Chemistry and Materials Science. Since 2010 he is the Scientiﬁc Director of the CIC-Energigune and his research is focused on the study of materials for both lithium and non-lithium based batteries. He holds different positions in various scientiﬁc bodies in Spain, being the chairman of the Solid State Chemistry Group within the Spanish Royal Society during the last ten years.

Downloaded by University of Sussex on 30 July 2012Published on 01 February 2012 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C2EE02781JView OnlineNaxCoO2 bronzes have been tested as cathodes for Na polymer electrolyte cells. In NaxCoO2 bronzes x may be varied in the range 0.4 < x < 1. These compounds are layered oxides with the sequence OMOAOMOA., where O ¼ oxygen, M ¼ Co and A ¼ Na. Within the composition range 0.5 < x < 1, up to four

phases have been identiﬁed in which the sodium coordination is either octahedral or trigonal prismatic.6–9,56 In the nomenclature used to distinguish these phases, O and P represent octahedral or trigonal prismatic coordination of the sodium ions and 3 or 2 represents the number of distinguishable sodium layers. This 0 way, O3, O 3, P3 and P2 phases are comprised in the mentioned x range. Although all these four phases have been shown to react reversibly versus sodium insertion, P2 bronze offers better cycle life and better energy efﬁciency,10 thus it was studied more deeply.

Doeff et al. prepared sodium electrochemical cells using P(EO)8NaCF3SO3 sodium triﬂuoromethanesulfonate) as electrolyte and metallic sodium as anode. These cells showed an open circuit potential of about 2.8 V when C.11 Discharge of the P2-NaxCoO2 material operated at 90–100 led to sloping curves with several voltage steps due to ordering transitions of the Na ions between the layers (Fig. 2). Thus, cationic distribution in P2-NaxCoO2 phase changes with sodium content, leading to diverse Na+/vacancy ordered distributions for deﬁnite sodium concentrations. Registered cationic exchange  1. was of 0.5–0.6, which would correspond to ca. 141 mA h g Cyclability limitations associated with cathodic material were observed.

The crystal structure of the sodium cobalt oxide P2-NaxCoO2 phase during cycling versus Na/Na+ has recently been published by Delmas et al. It showed a multistep voltage–composition curve with several reversible biphasic and single-phase domains from 2 to 3.8 V.12

On the other hand, Na insertion and extraction into and from P2-Na2/3[Ni1/3Mn2/3]O2 phase have been studied by Lu and Dahn.13 All the sodium can be reversibly extracted from the phase, unlike its Li analog that only extracts 1/3 of the Li ions.  1 was achieved, very This way a speciﬁc capacity of 161 mA h g  1. Several voltage close to the theoretical one, of 173 mA h g plateaux were observed from 3 to 4.1 V vs. Na/Na+.

Because of the complexity of the electrochemical behavior of P2-NaxCoO2 and P2-Na2/3[Ni1/3Mn2/3]O2 systems, exhibiting

Fig. 1 Most important cathode and anode materials studied for their application in sodium ion batteries, represented by their speciﬁc capacity and operating voltage versus a sodium metal anode.

Fig. 1 depicts the most important cathodic and anodic materials for sodium-ion batteries, indicating their speciﬁc capacity and operating voltage.

As it can be seen, many materials have been proposed in the literature as possible cathodes for Na-ion batteries, whereas only some carbon-based anodes have been pointed out for this storage technology. This disparity can be observed in the different lengths of the cathode and anode sections of this work.

The best candidates to be cathodic materials in a Na-ion battery are phosphate based materials, because of their thermal stability and higher voltage due to the inductive effect. We can mention olivine NaFePO4, with the highest theoretical speciﬁc capacity, NaVPO4F, Na3V2(PO4)2F3, Na2FePO4F and Na3V2(PO4)3. These phosphates require conductive coating and nanostructured morphology in order to improve their electrochemical performance.

Among the possible electrolytes, the use of both solid polymer systems and aqueous electrolytes is studied by many researchers. In particular, gel polymer electrolytes are prepared by combining a polymer matrix with an ionic liquid and/or nanoparticles and have a unique hybrid structure. Moreover, gel polymer electrolytes possess cohesive properties of solids and diffusive properties of liquids simultaneously. On the other hand, aqueous electrolytes such as Na-based aqueous electrolyte could be made for a lower cost. Speciﬁcally, Na2SO4, NaNO3, NaClO4, Na3PO4, Na2CO3, and NaOH solutions could be used to generate aqueous electrolytes.

In the case of anodic materials, the use of metallic sodium is not advisable because of dendrite formation and interface aging problems. Moreover, alternative anode materials must be searched in order to make aqueous Na-ion cells. This work gathers the most representative materials that have been tested in Na-ion cells, or that could be good candidates to be used in Naion technology.

Research on positive electrodes for lithium and sodium electrochemical cells was ﬁrst focused on several sodium–cobalt and sodium–manganese oxides

Fig. 2 Cell potentials vs. x for NaxCoO2 in a cell with a sodium anode and a P(EO)8NaCF3SO3 electrolyte at 90 C. The current density was 0.5  2. Reproduced by permission of The Electrochemical Society mA cm from ref. 11.

Fig. 3 Structure of Na0.44MnO2 perpendicular to the ab plane.

plateaux and sloping zones at different voltages, these materials cannot be considered as appropriate electrodes for Na-ion batteries.

Among the small number of oxide materials of potential interest identiﬁed as possible candidates to be used in secondary sodium battery applications, Na0.44MnO2 is particularly attractive because of its crystal structure forming suitable large-size tunnels for sodium incorporation.14 Manganese oxides form a very rich and versatile structural family enlisting materials structures.15 having either 1D, 2D, or 3D type tunnel Na0.44MnO2 crystallizes in an orthorhombic lattice cell with Pbam space group (Fig. 3). The manganese ions are located in two different environments: all MnIV+ ions and half of the MnIII+ cations are in octahedral sites (MnO6), while the other MnIII+ are gathered in a square-pyramidal environment (MnO5). The latter forms edge-linked chains linked to two double and one triple octahedral chain(s) by the vertices, leading to the formation of two types of tunnels. Two sodium sites (referenced as Na1 and Na2) are situated in large S-shaped tunnels, while another site (Na3) is found in smaller tunnels. According to this structure, the c direction is the main path for sodium diffusion. The entitled Na0.44/Mn ratio corresponds to a ﬁlling of the Na3 sites, whereas the S-shaped tunnels are only half ﬁlled.

The sodium manganese bronze NaxMnO2 phase was ﬁrst studied by Doeff et al. as cathode material for both sodium and lithium secondary batteries. A reversible intercalation of 0.6 Na+

Structural in situ study of Na0.44MnO2/C composite electrodes in a Na-ion cell during cycling was performed by Tarascon et al.17 Na content varied in the range 0.18–0.64 between 2 and 3.8 V vs. Na/Na+. The potential–composition curve showed multitransition processes, underlining the complexity of the insertion/ deinsertion mechanism. The incremental capacity curve obtained in PITT (Potentiostatic Intermittent Titration Technique) mode indicates the presence of at least ﬁve biphasic transitions on narrow domains within the 0.22 # x # 0.66 composition range (Fig. 4).

 1 was achieved at very low currents (C/200). Capacity retention of this oxide at C/10 was not good because half of the capacity was only retained after 50 cycles. When this material was cycled faster than C/20, a drastic decrease in the capacity was noticed, demonstrating kinetic limitations. Further work would be needed in order to limit the self-discharge effect and the short cycling life, either by coating of the particles or via cationic substitution.

The sodium intercalation compound Na0.44MnO2 has been revisited by Whitacre as a potential positive electrode in an aqueous electrolyte hybrid energy storage device.18 Activated carbon was chosen as anode material, and 1 M Na2SO4 solution was used as electrolyte. This hybrid system was cycled through a 0.6 V range from Na0.44MnO2 to Na0.22MnO2, showing  1 (ref. 19) (Fig. 5). Cathodic a speciﬁc capacity of 45 mA h g material demonstrated to be fully stable in an aqueous environment. The electrochemical device demonstrated very good cyclability for 1000 cycles. The discharge capacity proﬁle shown consists of a sloping line with very small pseudo plateaux, making it less appealing to battery applications.

A recent publication addresses NaV6O15 nanorods as a possible cathodic material for sodium-based batteries.20 This phase has been previously used in a lithium-ion battery, and it exhibited stable and reversible lithium-ion insertion/deinsertion  1 speciﬁc capacity value.21 Its structure with a 328 mA h g consists of a (V2O5)x framework constructed by the VO5 pyramid

Fig. 4 PITT curve of a Na0.44MnO2/C composite electrode starting at reduction and corresponding incremental capacity curve. Reprinted with permission from: F. Sauvage, L. Laffont, J.-M. Tarascon, and E. Baudrin, Inorganic Chemistry, 2007, 46, 3289–3294, Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.

Fig. 5 Discharge proﬁle of a Na0.44MnO2/activated carbon cell at C/8. Reprinted from: J. F. Whitacre, A. Tevar and S. Sharma, Na4Mn9O18 as a positive electrode material for an aqueous electrolyte sodium-ion energy storage device, Electrochemistry Communications, 12, 463–466, Copyright 2010, with permission from Elsevier.

Downloaded by University of Sussex on 30 July 2012Published on 01 February 2012 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C2EE02781JView Onlineand VO6 octahedra. This framework possesses tunnels along the b axis, where Na ions are aligned.22,23 NaV6O15 nanorods aligned in the c direction showed a charge/discharge plateau at approximately 2.5 V vs. Na/Na+, and a speciﬁc capacity value of 60 mA  1 at a medium cycling rate between 1.5 and 4 V. The need for h g controlling the cut-off potential window and current rate to get good speciﬁc capacity values and improved cycling stability makes it necessary to look for new ways of improving its electrochemical performance.

Fluoride-based cathode materials have also been proposed as cathodic materials for both Li and Na-ion batteries with the aim of overcoming the theoretical speciﬁc capacity limit of poly-

anionic cathodes. This way, NaMF3 (M ¼ Fe, Mn, V and Ni) type compounds have been prepared, with speciﬁc capacities  1.24,25 Great polarization has also ranging from 30 to 170 mA h g been observed for this family of compounds. Thus, further development is needed in order to make these compounds suitable cathodes for Na-ion batteries.

Framework materials based on the phosphate polyanion have recently been identiﬁed as potential electroactive materials for sodium metal and sodium ion battery applications. The metal phosphates based on either the olivine or NASICON structures appear to hold particular promise. It is the strong inductive effect of the PO4 polyanion that moderates the energetics of the transition metal redox couple to generate relatively high operating potentials for these compounds.26

Table 2 displays some compounds that could be useful as cathodes in Na-ion batteries with their theoretical speciﬁc capacities.

2.3.1. Olivine NaFePO4. The material with highest theoret 1. This ical speciﬁc capacity is olivine NaFePO4, with 154 mA h g phase has not been deeply studied, as in the case of LiFePO4, due to the difﬁculty to get it directly by standard routes. The most stable polymorph of NaFePO4 is maricite, which is structurally analogous to LiFePO4, but presents some important differences. In maricite, Na+ cations occupy the 4(c) Wyckoff sites and the Fe2+ species are situated in 4(a) sites, while in olivine LiFePO4 the Li+ and Fe2+ ions occupy 4(a) and 4(c) sites, respectively. This is probably due to the larger ionic radius of Na+ compared to that of Li+.27 This way, maricite presents one-dimensional, edgesharing FeO6 octahedra and no cationic channels, thus hindering

Table 2 Main phosphate phases that can be used as positive electrode material in Na-ion batteries and their theoretical speciﬁc capacity

Fig. 6 Structure of (a) maricite NaFePO4, (b) olivine LiFePO4, and (c) olivine NaFePO4. 4(a) and 4(c) crystallographic sites are marked.

cation exchange. Fig. 6 shows the crystallographic structure of the three compounds.

Recent preparation of the olivine NaFePO4 and Na0.7FePO4 phases has been reported,28 demonstrating reversible insertion and extraction of Na into olivine FePO4 at 2.8 V. The preparation process involves two steps: ﬁrst, chemical oxidation of LiFePO4 to heterosite FePO4 by using NO2BF4 in acetonitrile29 or bromine dissolved in water,10,30 and second, electrochemical Na insertion by using FePO4 as the positive electrode and metallic Na foil as anode. A discontinuity in the potential– composition curve has been detected in the vicinity of Na0.65FePO4, both on discharge and on charge (Fig. 7, point B). This discontinuity corresponds to an electrochemical biphasic process involving a Na0.7FePO4 phase in equilibrium with FePO4, as conﬁrmed by ex situ X-ray diffraction diagrams. The occurrence of an intermediate phase while cycling in the case of sodium, whereas intermediate compositions for lithium iron phosphate were only characterized under special conditions,31 illustrates the increasing interaction of sodium ions compared to lithium ones with the host structure. A similar behavior is observed by comparing the number of phases obtained in the LixCoO2

32 and NaxCoO2 systems.33

Fig. 7 Electrochemical curve for the synthesis of NaFePO4 and Na0.7FePO4 in PITT mode. Reprinted with permission from: P. Moreau, D. Guyomard, J. Gaubicher and F. Boucher, Chemistry of Materials, 2010, 22, 4126–4128, Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.

 1 speciﬁc capacity has been obtained by Zaghib et al. in the ﬁrst discharge of an electrochemically synthesized NaFePO4 at 60 C and C/24 rate (see ref. 30), but poor revers 1 in the ibility has been achieved by the moment (50.6 mA h g second cycle). Moreau et al. could cycle reversibly 0.9 Na in the  1), but the cycle life of ﬁrst charge/discharge cycle (139 mA h g the produced material was not investigated. Much more work has to be performed with this material in order to develop a high capacity olivine Na-based cathodic material.

The research on olivine structure materials for Na-ion

batteries has been extended to Na[Mn1 xMx]PO4 (M ¼ Fe, Ca, Mg) by Nazar et al.34 A new method based on topochemical synthesis has demonstrated to be useful to prepare different sodium metal olivines from NH4MPO4$H2O precursor. Preliminary galvanostatic tests at low cycling rate in Na cells indicated that electrochemical reaction takes place in a single-phase, with a sloping voltage proﬁle. However, this point must be conﬁrmed, because kinetic limitations may induce the sloping voltage curve.

2.3.2. Sodium ﬂuorophosphates. In the quest for new cathode materials, some sodium-based cathode materials have recently emerged as a new choice. A series of sodium ﬂuorophosphates, for example, NaVPO4F, Na3V2(PO4)2F3, Na1.5VOPO4F0.5 and Na2FePO4F, have shown to be promising candidates to be considered. Recent works have demonstrated that these cathode materials exhibit electrochemical behavior similar to that of the conventional lithium-based cathode materials.

2.3.2.1. Sodium vanadium ﬂuorophosphates. The sodium involving NaVPO4F, Na3V2vanadium ﬂuorophosphates, (PO4)2F3 and Na1.5VOPO4F0.5, have attracted considerable interest due to the low-cost raw materials, safe applications and high working potentials.

NaVPO4F was ﬁrst proposed by Barker et al., who described it as a tetragonal symmetry structure (space group I4/mmm)35 related to that found for the sodium aluminium ﬂuorophosphate

(a-Na3Al2(PO4)2F3)36 (Fig. 8). It is believed that this compound represents one of the ﬁrst examples of ﬂuorophosphate-based compounds that have been recognized as alkali ion insertion hosts. Indeed, this phase has been identiﬁed as a potential electroactive material for novel sodium ion applications.

This compound has been electrochemically tested vs. metallic lithium and hard carbon anodes. Galvanostatic cycling of the NaVPO4F phase vs. Li/Li+ between 3 and 4.5 V at C/4 rate  1 charge and discharge speciﬁc revealed a 117 and 107 mA h g capacity, respectively (Fig. 8). Repeated cycling at this rate provoked a discharge capacity fade of about 10% after 100 cycles. Thus, the mixed Li+/Na+ insertion reactions did not lead to unfavorable inﬂuence on the long-term cycling stability.37

A similar hybrid-ion cell made by Barker et al.38 displayed  1 reversible speciﬁc capacity at a low rate. Cycle life a 110 mA h g tests at C/5 demonstrated outstanding insertion stability, characterized by reversibility of the alkali metal insertion reaction over an extended cycling regimen of 400 cycles (Fig. 9).

Galvanostatic cycling of the same phase in a Na-ion cell, i.e. vs. a hard carbon anode with a sodium electrolyte, at 23 C and C/10 rate between 2.5 and 4.25 V, showed speciﬁc capacities of 79 and  1 for the ﬁrst discharge and second charge processes, 82 mA h g respectively. Discharge capacity of this cell decayed to less than 50% of the initial one after 30 cycles (see ref. 45).

Concerning NaVPO4F compound, even if very good cyclability results have been observed in hybrid Li//NaVPO4F cells, improvements are already needed in Na-ion cells.

On the other hand, Zhao et al. (see ref. 37), Zhuo et al.39 and Liu et al.40 reported another interesting NaVPO4F phase as a monoclinic crystal with a space group of C2/c, which is in good agreement with the related Na3Al2(PO4)2F2 phase. The structure of this material is described as made up of two [PO4] tetrahedra that share two corner-oxygen atoms with two different [VO4F2] octahedra.

Zhao et al. (see ref. 37) described the formation of this NaVPO4F polymorph when using the sol–gel synthesis method and C, whereas the tetragonal phase was subsequent ﬁring at 700 formed at 750

Electrochemical tests of this monoclinic polymorph have only been carried out on doped samples, such as NaV1 xAlxPO4F and NaV1 xCrxPO4F (see ref. 39 and 40). Speciﬁc capacity values

Fig. 8 First charge/discharge curves of the tetragonal NaVPO4F vs. Li/ Li+ at C/4 rate in the voltage range of 3.0–4.5 V in a hybrid lithium ion battery (from ref. 37). Reprinted from: J. Zhao, J. He, X. Ding, J. Zhou, Y. Ma, S. Wu and R. Huang, A novel sol–gel synthesis route to NaVPO4F as cathode material for hybrid lithium ion batteries, Journal of Power Sources, 195, 6854–6859, Copyright 2010, with permission from Elsevier.

5890 | Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5884–5901

Fig. 9 Cyclability of Li//NaVPO4F cells cycled between 3.00 and 4.50 V at C/12 and C/5 rates. Reproduced by permission of The Electrochemical Society from ref. 38.

This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012

Downloaded by University of Sussex on 30 July 2012Published on 01 February 2012 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C2EE02781JView OnlineFig. 10 Crystal structure of Na1.5VOPO4F0.5. Polyhedral representation, spheres: disordered Na atoms (from ref. 41).

obtained in Na cells were around 80 mA h g performance of both samples was improved with doping.

The second vanadium ﬂuorophosphate is the previously mentioned Na1.5VOPO4F0.5. Its space group is I4/mmm, and it is formed by layers of alternating [VO5F] octahedra and [PO4] tetrahedra sharing O vertices parallel to the ab plane (Fig. 10). Along the c direction the V octahedra are joined pairwise through common F vertices in the inversion centres. The sixth O vertex of the V octahedron is the terminal oxo ligand of a vanadyl group. Thus, the structure is described by a mixed paraframework of octahedra and tetrahedra {V2O2F[PO4]2}NNN with disordered Na atoms in the interstices.41 Crystal structure, electronic structure and magnetic behavior of the Na1.5VOPO4F0.5 phase have been recently reported by Tsirlin et al.42

Only one article that presents electrochemical measurements of Na1.5VOPO4F0.5 has been found.43 Sauvage et al. assembled a Na-cell with the following conﬁguration: [Na//NaClO4 1 M PC//Na1.5VOPO4F0.5–C (composite)]. The electrochemical curve of the cathodic material was studied in PITT mode, and the extraction–insertion of Na into the structure proceeded in two different steps at about 3.60 and 4.00 V vs. Na/Na+ (Fig. 11). A

Fig. 12 Evolution of capacity retention of the 1st and 2nd plateaux recorded for Na1.5VOPO4F0.5 in NaClO4 1 M/PC electrolyte over 50 cycles at C/20 rate (from ref. 43). Reprinted from: F. Sauvage, E. Quarez, J. Tarascon and E. Baudrin, Crystal structure and electrochemical properties vs. Na of the sodium ﬂuorophosphate Na1.5VOPO4F0.5, Solid State Sciences, 8, 1215–1221, Copyright 2006, with permission from Elsevier.

 1 was obtained by galvanostatic speciﬁc capacity of 87 mA h g cycling of the material at C/20, which is below the theoretical one.

On the other hand, as it can be seen in Fig. 12, the lower voltage plateau process showed a sustained reversibility over 50 cycles, in contrast with a poor one for the high voltage process. This capacity fading was associated with a cell polarization increase that could be consistent with the formation of a surface layer resulting from electrolyte degradation at the surface of the materials.

Finally, the Na3V2(PO4)2F3 phase has a tetragonal crystal structure with a space group of P42/mnm (Fig. 13).44 Structural analyses show that the crystal structure is consistent with the sodium aluminium ﬂuorophosphate (a-Na3Al2(PO4)2F3), which was put forward by Le Meins (see ref. 36).

Fig. 11 Charge and discharge curve for Na1.5VOPO4F0.5 vs. Na/Na+ (from ref. 43). Reprinted from: F. Sauvage, E. Quarez, J. Tarascon and E. Baudrin, Crystal structure and electrochemical properties vs. Na of the sodium ﬂuorophosphate Na1.5VOPO4F0.5, Solid State Sciences, 8, 1215– 1221, Copyright 2006, with permission from Elsevier.

A recent article by Jiang et al. proved that the electrochemical insertion mechanism in a Li//LiPF6 (EC/DMC)//Na3V2(PO4)2F3 cell gradually shifted from predominant Na+ insertion to Li+ insertion in the initial cycles. Galvanostatic charge/discharge cycling of Na3V2(PO4)2F3 carried out in the 3–4.5 V potential region at C/10 showed a speciﬁc capacity value very close to the  1 with quite good capacity theoretical capacity, 128 mA h g retention.46

To conclude, it must be remarked that Sauvage et al. (see ref. 43) questioned the stoichiometry given by Barker for NaVPO4F. In fact, they mentioned that structural data of only two compounds containing the same ﬁve elements (Na, V, P, O and F) could be found in the literature: Na3V2(PO4)2F3 and Na1.5VOPO4F0.5. Up till now, to our knowledge, no structural data have been reported for the NaVPO4F phase.

2.3.2.2. Sodium iron ﬂuorophosphates. Na2FePO4F has been for Li-ion cells. This tested as positive electrode material compound is isostructural with both Na2FePO4OH and Na2CoPO4F, and comprises bioctahedral Fe2O7F2 units made of face-sharing FeO4F2 octahedra that are connected via bridging F atoms to form chains, and joined by PO4 tetrahedra to form [FePO4F] inﬁnite layers. The two Na cations located in the interlayer space possess facile two-dimensional migration pathways (Fig. 16).

This compound has been tested with a metallic lithium anode, exchanging rapidly one mobile Na for Li. This way, one sodium per formula is completely deintercalated upon charging of the material in a lithium electrochemical cell, showing a speciﬁc  1 for 50 cycles at C/10 rate (see ref. 1). For capacity of 124 mA h g this mixed cell, the (Na, Li)FePO4F compound has a theoretical  1 and the electrochemical proﬁle speciﬁc capacity of 135 mA h g displays quasi-solid solution at room temperature.

The unit cell of the oxidized compound (NaFePO4F) is only 3.7% smaller than that of Na2FePO4F, which makes this compound a low strain material. An intermediate Na1.5FePO4F phase is obtained with lattice parameters intermediate between

Fig. 14 Na3V2(PO4)2F3 vs. Li/Li+. Reproduced by permission of The Electrochemical Society from ref. 45.

Gover et al. demonstrated the reversible cycling of two alkali ions per formula unit for this compound in the 3–4.6 V potential range vs. a Li anode45 (Fig. 14). Although an additional voltage plateau was present at around 4.9 V vs. Li, only a small percentage of the associated oxidation charge was found to be reversible. This observation may be consistent with electrolyte decomposition rather than some inherent active material limitation. The associated speciﬁc capacity at C/20 was around 120 mA h g

The stability of the insertion–extraction reactions was conﬁrmed by long term cycling experiments at C/15 and C/7, which demonstrated low capacity fade over the initial 220 cycles. Barker et al. carried out an interesting study by using Na3V2(PO4)2F3 vs. a graphite anode with a LiPF6 based electrolyte. The volume of electrolyte used was carefully controlled, so as to allow charging of the graphite active material to an  1 of Li0.81C6. During approximate utilization limit of 300 mA h g the initial charge process, sodium ions were extracted from the ﬂuorophosphate cathode, while lithium ions from the electrolyte were intercalated into the graphite anode, forming a lithiumbased solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) passivation layer on the carbon anode. Speciﬁc capacity data collected at C/2 and 2C

Fig. 15 Graphite//LiPF6 (EC/DMC)//Na3V2(PO4)2F3 cells between 3 and 4.6 V. Reproduced by permission of The Electrochemical Society from ref. 45.

Fig. 16 Crystal structure of Na2FePO4F. The iron octahedra are plotted in blue, phosphate tetrahedra are shown in orange, ﬂuorine atoms in green and Na ions in yellow.

5892 | Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5884–5901

This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012

Downloaded by University of Sussex on 30 July 2012Published on 01 February 2012 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C2EE02781JView Onlineorder to form these tunnels, manganese octahedra share only one common F vertex to form Mn2F2O8 chains parallel to the b-axis of the monoclinic unit cell. These chains are linked by PO4 tetrahedra in a and c directions and lead to tunnels for possible cationic Na transport.

Substitutions of Fe by Mn were also explored in the Na2Fe1 xMnxPO4F (0 < x < 0.2) series. Na2MnPO4F exhibited very poor electrochemical behavior despite the presence of an open pathway for alkali migration (see ref. 2). Electrochemical performance of substituted samples decreased with increasing the manganese content. Thus, Mn based species showed much worse performance, even in the same structure as the Fe-based compound.

On the other hand, in order to get higher voltage materials, the Na2CoPO4F phase was prepared by Ellis et al. (see ref. 3). This phase was structurally identical to the Fe analogue. Electrochemical tests versus a Li anode showed a good charging capacity (85% of the theoretical value) but a poor discharging capacity (25% of the theoretical value). This can be due to the high operation voltage of this material that cycles between 4.7 and 5 V vs. Li/Li+. The use of a sodium anode would diminish the operation voltage and, thus, it would dim electrolyte degradation in order to provide longer cycle life and better speciﬁc capacity values.

Furthermore, Ellis et al. also prepared the Na2NiPO4F phase, which is isostructural to Na2FePO4F. An electrochemical cell which contained Na2NiPO4F as the positive electrode material did not show any electrochemical activity below 5 V, but it is expected that this compound has a Ni2+/Ni3+ redox couple above 48 5 V, similar to that of other nickel phosphates such as LiNiPO4 and Li2NiPO4F.49 It is worth mentioning that this compound may also be used versus a sodium anode in order to investigate if the operation voltage is inside the electrolyte potential window. Substitutional solid solutions such as Na2(Fe1 xCox)PO4F (0 # x # 1) and Na2(Fe1 xMgx)PO4F (x < 0.15) were also prepared (see ref. 3) but, in the ﬁrst case, minimal reversibility was registered, and, in the second one, only slight improvements from the Na2FePO4F phase were observed.

2.3.3. Na3M2(PO4)3 NASICON framework compounds. NASICON (Na+ superionic conductor)-related compounds have been shown to be promising cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries, exhibiting high Li+ ion mobility and reasonable discharge capacities. The compounds with the highest ionic mobilities possess rhombohedral R-3 symmetry. Both Li and Na ions can be inserted into a series of compounds having a general formula AnM2(XO4)3 because they have a large lithium or sodium site based on a 3D framework. The M2(XO4)3 scaffold is built of (XO4)n  (X ¼ Si4+, P5+, S6+, Mo6+, etc.) tetrahedral corner-linked to octahedral-site Mm+ (M ¼ transition metal). In

this structure, alkali ions can occupy two different sites. At low alkali content (x < 1 in AxM2(XO4)3) an octahedral site, A(1), is selectively occupied (Fig. 19).50 With x > 1, the alkali ions are randomly distributed among the A(1) and three 8-coordinate sites, A(2). This way, the open 3D nature of the structure allows easy migration of the alkali ions between A(1) and A(2).

The Na3V2(PO4)3 compound was used to prepare rhombohedral Li3V2(PO4)3 because monoclinic polymorph is obtained by direct synthesis of the Li phase. This way, rhombohedral

Fig. 17 Galvanostatic cycling vs. Na/Na+ of the Na2FePO4F material synthesized by the ionothermal process at C/15 rate. Inset: Cyclability of Na2FePO4F. Reproduced by permission of The Electrochemical Society from ref. 47.

the two end members. Its structure undergoes a slight change in

symmetry to a monoclinic unit cell (P2/c, b ¼ 91.22 

This compound has also been studied by Recham et al.47 The ionothermal synthesis process consisted of using ionic liquids as both solvent and template to grow the desired phase at lower temperatures than those needed for solid state methods. This way, morphology could be controlled and 2.5 nm particles were obtained. Nanosized particles improved electrochemical performance slightly by showing better initial capacity, lower irreversible capacity, lower polarization and better capacity retention. These ionothermally synthesized compounds were tested both in Li and Na electrochemical cells. The discharge speciﬁc capacity in a sodium cell for this sample was over 100 mA  1 for 10 cycles. Electrochemical voltage proﬁles versus h g metallic sodium displayed a reversible two-plateaux behavior and lower potential, due to different alkali intercalation potentials within the same host material (Fig. 17).

2.3.2.3. Other sodium ﬂuorophosphates. As in the case of Na2FePO4F, the Na2MnPO4F phase was also prepared by the ionothermal process. This phase is compositionally identical, but structurally distinct. It presents a tunnel structure formed by MnO4F2 entities where alkali cations are located (Fig. 18). In

Fig. 18 Crystal structure of Na2MnPO4F. The manganese octahedra are plotted in purple, phosphate tetrahedra are shown in orange, ﬂuorine atoms in green and Na ions in yellow.

built by Yamaki et al.58 and the key cell reactions in the considered symmetric cells can be described as follows:(Anode):

Fig. 19 Rhombohedral form of the NASICON structure.

Li3V2(PO4)3 was of Na3V2(PO4)3 to V2(PO4)3, followed by intercalation of Li,51 or by ion exchange by stirring the Na phase in an aqueous solution of in n-hexanol.55 As obtained LiNO3 rhombohedral Li3V2(PO4)3 can extract two alkali cations/electrons between 3 and 4.5 V under C/10 conditions in a two-phase process with an equilibrium potential of 3.77 V (see ref. 52). Moreover, a mixed-alkali insertion NASICON Li2NaV2(PO4)3  1 at 0.50 cathode produced a discharge capacity of 96 mA h g  2, with a 10% capacity fade through the ﬁrst 50 cycles (see mA cm ref. 53).

Rhombohedral NASICON form of Na3V2(PO4)3 was ﬁrstly tested as cathodic material versus metallic sodium by Yamaki et al.56 showing reversible sodium insertion up to 0.8 Na+ and subsequent extraction up to 2.6 Na+ ions. This way, the initial phase was cycled from x ¼ 1.2 to x ¼ 3.8 in NaxV2(PO4)3. Two

plateaux were observed for this composition range: one at 1.5 V vs. Na/Na+ when 3 # x # 3.8 and the other one when 1.2 # x # 3. In the same work, the Na3Fe2(PO4)3 compound was also tested as positive electrode material versus sodium, but it only showed a plateau around 2.5 V, and a discharge speciﬁc capacity of 45 mA h g

In a similar way, Na3Fe2(PO4)3 has also been used to prepare rhombohedral Li3Fe2(PO4)3 by ion exchange, using a concentrated aqueous solution of LiNO3 at 40 C. The as prepared material exhibited a long, ﬂat plateau at around 2.7 V vs. Li/Li+ which corresponded to 1.6 Li+ ion insertion per formula unit.57 Fig. 20 shows the reversible gravimetric energy density for the ﬁrst cycle of different electrochemical systems, calculated from experimental data (see ref. 56). As it can be seen Na/Na3V2(PO4)3 provides more energy than other related compounds.

In the case of the vanadium NASICON the existence of two voltage plateaux at 1.6 and 3.4 V vs. Na/Na+ allows using this phase not only as cathode but also as anode in a symmetric cell depending on the voltage window used. This kind of cell has been

First, the Na3V2(PO4)3 material was tested vs. a metallic sodium anode. As it can be seen in Fig. 21, the electrochemical proﬁle of the material showed a clear plateau at about 3.4 V which corresponded to the extraction of almost 1.7 atom of sodium associated with the V4+/V3+ redox reaction, and a lower voltage plateau associated with the V3+/V2+ couple around 1.6–1 V.

Symmetric Na3V2(PO4)3//1 M NaClO4/PC//Na3V2(PO4)3 cells were found to work as reversible sodium ion batteries with coulombic efﬁciency of 75% for the ﬁrst cycle. To improve the safety, a non-ﬂammable electrolyte based on EMIBF4 ionic

Fig. 21 Electrochemical charge–discharge curves for the Na3V2(PO4)3// 1 M NaClO4/PC//Na cells at room temperature. Reproduced by permission of The Electrochemical Society from ref. 58.

This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012

Downloaded by University of Sussex on 30 July 2012Published on 01 February 2012 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C2EE02781JView Onlineliquid (1-ethyl-3-methyl imidazolium tetraﬂuoroborate) was used instead of explosive organic solvents. The substitution of the organic electrolyte by the ionic liquid-based one in the examined symmetric cell resulted in the decrease of the ﬁrst discharge capacity and rate capability at high current densities. However, the ionic liquid-based cell exhibited better cycling performance due to the lower reactivity of the ionic liquid used. Compounds based on the NASICON framework are remarkable because of their compatibility with aqueous electrolytes. This fact makes these phases very interesting from the economical point of view, because an aqueous electrolyte-based battery would contribute to diminish production costs and, in combination with sodium affordable price, it would produce a low cost battery.

2.3.4. Alluaudite framework compounds. Within the set of phosphate compounds that exhibit framework structures built up from both (MOn) polyhedral and (PO4)3  tetrahedral polyanions, alluaudite type phases were ﬁrst pointed out as Li insertion hosts by T.J. Richardson.59 This group of compounds has the general formula X1X2M1M2 2(PO4)3, where X1 and X2 are cations residing in different sites in c-axis oriented tunnels formed by chains of edge-shared MO6 octahedra linked by tetrahedral PO4 units (Fig. 22). NaFe3(PO4)3 and LixNa2 xFeMn2(PO4)3 alluaudite compounds were prepared, but obtained reversible speciﬁc capacities were very low and signiﬁcant hysteresis was observed between charge and discharge processes.

On the other hand, Delmas et al. have recently pointed out NaMnFe2(PO4)3 alluaudite type phases as feasible polyanionbased insertion hosts.60 The solid state synthesis method led to 1– 3 mm sized particles of the desired material. When NaMnFe2(PO4)3 was tested as the positive electrode in lithium cells, up to 0.2 Na+ ions per formula unit could be extracted during the ﬁrst charge with an average voltage around 3.2 V, and about 1.8 and 1.4 Li+ ions could be intercalated during the following discharges with an average voltage around 3.2 V. These data

 1 discharge capaccorrespond to 100 mA h g ities. In the tests as positive electrode versus Na/Na+, this compound showed weak electrochemical activity in the 4.3–1.5 V range. Samples with smaller particle size would show better results and, to improve their performance, nanomaterials are certainly required.

The Li0.5Na0.5MnFe2(PO4)3 and Li0.75Na0.25MnFe2(PO4)3 compounds have also been synthesized by the group of Delmas et al. and their electrochemical activity versus Li has been tested, but none of them showed better speciﬁc capacity than that of the NaMnFe2(PO4)3 phase.61

In recent times, the use of sodium complexed electrolyte ﬁlms has been found to exhibit several advantages over their lithium counterparts. There are a few studies based on conductive polymeric electrolytes that have been completed for Na-ion batteries, for Li-ion batteries.62 The research and development on new electrolytes could be the key point for Na+ battery success because they could avoid dendrite formation or interface aging, for instance. It is, therefore, a need to develop high sodium ion conducting nonaqueous electrolytes suitable for the fabrication of rechargeable sodium batteries. Sodium salts are often less soluble in organic solvents than the lithium analogs, which limits the choice of electrolytes. The development of sodium ion conducting nonaqueous polymer electrolytes should be preferred in view of their higher conductivity values (comparable to liquid electrolytes), mechanical and electrochemical properties.

However, it has been recently shown that the polymer electrolytes can be considered as an excellent substitute for the liquid electrolytes, due to their most appealing feature of free standing consistency which contributes easy handling and cell design, modularity and reliability in various electrochemical devices63–65 (Fig. 23).

Fig. 22 View of the alluaudite structure in the ab plane.

This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012

Fig. 23 Image of a NaTf/EMITf/PVdF-HFP gel polymer electrolyte ﬁlm (from ref. 71). Reprinted from: D. Kumar and S. A. Hashmi, Ionic liquid based sodium ion conducting gel polymer electrolytes, Solid State Ionics, 181, 416–423, Copyright 2010, with permission from Elsevier.

Downloaded by University of Sussex on 30 July 2012Published on 01 February 2012 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C2EE02781JView Onlineimmobilized with the matrix of polymer hosts such as polyethylene oxide (PEO),66,67 polyvinyl alcohol (PVA),68 etc. have been reported. The solvent or salt-solution is retained in polymeric gel electrolyte and helps in the ionic conduction process, whereas the host polymer matrix provides mechanical stability by enhancing the viscosity of the gel electrolytes. An effective method is polymer blending because it reduces the crystalline content and enhances the amorphous content. So, Kumar et al. have obtained polymer blend electrolytes with great ionic diffusivity, based on polyethylene oxide and polyvinyl pyrrolidone complexed with NaF salt using the solution casting technique.69 In gel polymer electrolytes, the connected network of amorphous regions provides an improvement in ion mobility, and hence, ionic conductivity (Fig. 24). However, the properties of gel polymer electrolytes deteriorate over time due to loss of liquid. A possible remedy for prevention of deterioration in materials properties could to be replace low viscosity solvents with very high viscosity solvents. Thus, Patel et al. reported the beneﬁts of introducing succinonitrile (a viscous organic plastic as additive) in PEO-NaCF3SO3 electrolytes. The addition of succinonitrile resulted in a rise of ionic conductivity and mechanical properties.70 Most of

the reported gel polymer electrolytes comprise solvents such as propylene carbonate (PC), or ethylene carbonate (EC), but room temperature ionic liquids could also act as solvents to obtain thermally and electrochemically stable gel polymer electrolytes. Ionic liquids meet the requirements of plasticizing salts and also offer improved thermal and mechanical properties to ﬂexible polymers. Innovative sodium salts or mixing salts (NaTFSI, NaFSI, NaTf.) could be used in these solvents. A new sodium ion conducting gel polymer electrolyte based on the solution of sodium triﬂate (NaCF3SO3) in ionic liquid EMI-triﬂate immobilized with the host polymer PVdFHFP has been recently reported by Kumar and Hashmi (see ref. 71). This gel polymer electrolyte showed high ionic conductivity at room temperature with a sufﬁciently wide electrochemical potential window and excellent thermal stability (Fig. 25).

On the other hand, various research groups have reported composite/nanocomposite gel polymer electrolytes generated by the addition of the dispersion of microor nano-sized ceramic ﬁllers. Bhide and Hariharan obtained a new Na+ ion conducting polymer electrolyte (PEO)6:NaPO3 dispersed with 3–10 wt%

Fig. 25 Ionic conductivity as a function of temperature for the blends of ionic liquid/PVdF-HFP (a) 3 : 1 w/w; (b) 4 : 1 w/w; and (c) ionic liquid/ PVdF-HFP (1 : 1 w/w) + NaTf gel polymer electrolyte. Reprinted from: D. Kumar and S. A. Hashmi, Ionic liquid based sodium ion conducting gel polymer electrolytes, Solid State Ionics, 181, 416–423, Copyright 2010, with permission from Elsevier.

BaTiO3 ﬁllers.72 Aravindan et al. prepared sodium ion conducting composite polymer electrolytes by a solution casting technique in the skeleton of poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride-co-hexaﬂuoropropylene)/poly(ethyl methacrylate) (PVdF-HFP/PEMA) blend, with DC and EC as plasticizer and nanosized Sb2O3 as ﬁller.73 Finally, Kumar and Hashmi obtained gel polymer electrolyte nanocomposites based on poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) and dispersed silica nanoparticles as ﬁllers.74 Such ﬁllers generate a slight enhancement in the sodium ion transport number and preserve a porous structure that maximizes the adsorption of liquid electrolyte and reduces the risk of leakage. The enhancement in ionic conductivity due to addition of ﬁller

Fig. 24 Transformation of polymer electrolytes from non-percolative regions to a percolative region of gel electrolyte. Reprinted from: M. Patel, K. G. Chandrappa and A. J. Bhattacharyya, Increasing ionic conductivity of polymer–sodium salt complex by addition of a non-ionic plastic crystal, Solid State Ionics, 181, 844–848, Copyright 2010, with permission from Elsevier.

5896 | Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5884–5901

Fig. 26 Variation of room temperature electrical conductivity of gel polymer electrolyte nanocomposite ﬁlms as a function of nano-sized SiO2 content. Reprinted from: D. Kumar and S. A. Hashmi, Ion transport and ion–ﬁller–polymer interaction in poly(methyl methacrylate)-based, sodium ion conducting, gel polymer electrolytes dispersed with silica nanoparticles, Journal of Power Sources, 195, 5101–5108, Copyright 2010, with permission from Elsevier.

This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012

Downloaded by University of Sussex on 30 July 2012Published on 01 February 2012 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C2EE02781JView OnlineFig. 27 Temperature dependence of electrical conductivity of (a) EC– PC–NaClO4 + PMMA gel polymer electrolyte and with nano-SiO2 of (b) 10 wt% and (c) 25 wt%. Reprinted from: D. Kumar and S. A. Hashmi, Ion transport and ion–ﬁller–polymer interaction in poly(methyl methacrylate)-based, sodium ion conducting, gel polymer electrolytes dispersed with silica nanoparticles, Journal of Power Sources, 195, 5101– 5108, Copyright 2010, with permission from Elsevier.

particles depends on the ﬁller concentration and amorphous phase in the polymer host matrix (Fig. 26 and 27).

Thakur et al. observed by FTIR spectroscopy the existence of ion pairs and free anions whose proportion varies due to the they proposed dispersion of ﬁller particles. Furthermore,

a mechanism based on ion–polymer, ion–ﬁller and polymer–ﬁller interactions along with the cluster formation at higher concentration of ﬁller particles, which explains the variation of Tg with respect to ﬁller concentration75 (Fig. 28).

3.2. Ceramic electrolytes for Na-ion batteries

Ceramic solid materials would be another kind of electrolytes for Na ion batteries. The use of a solid electrolyte would eliminate the need for a separator, and avoid the use of organic electrolytes, leading to safer batteries and avoiding leakage risks. Moreover, ceramic materials could facilitate miniaturization and make battery design more versatile.76

Among the possible ceramic materials, sodium b00

C of a single crystal b00

-alumina solid electrolyte (BASE) ceramic and NASICON phases stand out as possible electrolytes in Na ion batteries. With respect to the Na-b alumina, there are two distinct crystal structures: b-Al2O3 (hexagonal: P63/mmc; a0 ¼ 0.559, c0 ¼ 2.261 mm) and -Al2O3 (rhombohedral: R3m; a0 ¼ 0.560, c0 ¼ 3.395 mm). b00 They differ in chemical stoichiometry and the stacking sequence of oxygen ion across the conduction layer. In terms of conduc 1. tivity at room temperature, single crystals can reach 0.1 S cm -Al2O3 is The ionic conductivity at 300  1, which is almost 5 times that for polycrystalline about 1 S cm b00 -Al2O3 phase was found to give a better ionic conductivity than the b-Al2O3 phase. Nevertheless, it is difﬁcult to obtain a uniform product because the synthesized b00 -Al2O3 is often mixed with b-Al2O3 and with remnant NaAlO2 distributed along grain boundaries. Besides its composition, the ionic conductivity of polycrystalline b00 -Al2O3 depends on the ratio of b00 /b and the microstructure (grain size, porosity, impurities, etc.). The strength and fracture toughness can be enhanced by incorporating ZrO2 into the b00 /b-Al2O3 matrix. It must be noted, however, that adding ZrO2 into the b00 -Al2O3 might deteriorate the electrical performance because ZrO2 is not a sodium-ionic conductor at battery operating temperatures (<450 C). However, the resistivity remains less  than 10 U cm at 300 C with up to 15 vol% of ZrO2 addition. The enrichment in sodium or substitution of aluminium ions with monoor divalent ions (e.g., Li+, Mg2+) leads to higher Na+ conductivity. Two ideal b00 -Al2O3 stoichiometries, Na1.67Al10.33 Mg0.67 O17 (Mg2+ doped) and Na1.67Al10.33 Li0.33 O17 (Li2+ doped),77 have been obtained but no conductivity values have been published.

 1). The b00

On the other hand, NASICON phases stand for a well known family of Na+ superionic conductors based on the formula

AnM2(XO4)3 (A ¼ alkali, M ¼ transition metal, X ¼ Si4+, P5+,

S6+, Mo6+, etc.). More speciﬁcally, the compounds of general formula Na1+xZr2SixP3 xO12 (0 < x < 3) were ﬁrstly suggested as solid electrolyte materials for Na+ ion-based batteries,78 and also proposed for all-solid-state electrochemical cells such as gas sensors,79 ion sensors80,81 and Na–S batteries.82 The framework of these latter compounds is a phosphosilicate; thus, Na3Zr2Si2PO12 has corner sharing tetrahedra of phosphate and silicate with zirconia centered octahedral sites, where for every two octahedral sites there are three tetrahedral sites comprising two silicate and one phosphate center. This arrangement is repeated spatially to form the monoclinic/rhombohedral phase of NASICON.

Fig. 28 Schema of ion–polymer matrix–ﬁller interactions and cluster formation in the PEO matrix. Reprinted from: A. K. Thakur and S. A. Hashmi, Polymer matrix–ﬁller interaction mechanism for modiﬁed ion transport and glass transition temperature in the polymer electrolyte composites, Solid State Ionics, 181, 1270–1278, Copyright 2010, with permission from Elsevier.

relationship between microstructure and electrical properties of the Na1+xZr2SixP3 xO12 materials has been studied by Fuentes et al.83 This work proved that grain size of NASICON yttria-doped tetragonal polycrystalline zirconia (ZrO2)0.97(Y2O3)0.03 ceramics depends on sintering conditions, temperature and time. It showed an increase of the grain size when ceramics are sintered at higher temperatures or for longer

periods of time. A maximum conductivity value of about 2.7   1 at room temperature was obtained with the yttria-

NASICON compounds have usually been synthesized by two methods: traditional ceramic route and sol–gel process (see ref. 78), but other synthetic strategies have also been used.84–87

Porkodi et al. have proposed a new synthesis method for these phases based on a molecular precursor.88 The conductivity value of the best sample was 2.2  10  1. Mixtures of Na4Zr2Si3O12 and TiO2 have been patented by Takeuchi et al. as possible solid electrolytes for sodium–sulfur batteries,89 but due to their conductivity value (4.9  10  1 at room temperature), they could also be tested as solid electrolytes for Na-ion technology.

Thin ﬁlm solid electrolyte materials are very promising in the ﬁeld of microbatteries. The relatively low conductivity of ionic conductors at room temperature can be optimized by using thin ionic conducting ﬁlms, which improve ionic diffusion.90 For this purpose, several processes have been used, such as RF sputtering,91 laser ablation (see ref. 90), pulsed laser deposition92 and spin coating methods.80

The search for appropriate anodes for Na-ion batteries is complex, and, although a great variety of phases that can potentially be used as positive electrodes have been identiﬁed, very few materials have been reported to be useful as negative electrodes.

First, it must be stated that the use of metallic sodium is not advisable because of dendrite formation, as for metallic lithium. Besides, safety of sodium anodes has been further put into question by its low melting point of 97.7 C compared to 180.5  C for lithium.93

Although reversible electrochemical mechanism of lithium insertion in graphite for electrode in lithium ion batteries has been widely studied, most of the intercalation methods of alkali metals in graphite like vapor-phase reaction, high pressure reaction, electrochemical reaction and reaction in a solvent have rendered a much lower amount of Na ions between the graphene layers than for Li ions. This is due to the fact that sodium hardly forms staged intercalation compounds with graphite.94 Besides this fact, graphite electrochemical insertion of sodium into graphite is expected to occur below the sodium plating potential (#0.1 V), thus the reductive or charging process cannot be observed. However, for disordered carbons, insertion of sodium occurs at higher voltage than graphite and can be studied.

 2) of Na/P(EO)8NaCF3SO3/C cells Fig. 29 Discharge curves (50 mA cm heated to 86 C. The spikes in the proﬁles are due to periodic current interrupts to assess the cell polarization. Reproduced by permission of The Electrochemical Society from ref. 11.

 1. Thus, they evidenced the highest value reported for 85 mA h g electrochemical ‘‘intercalation’’ of Na ion on carbonaceous materials (NaC15) by using submicron particle sized carbon powder (see ref. 11) (Fig. 29). In this work, the authors also claimed that a stoichiometry of NaC24 (using coke) exhibited a reversible intercalation and also that by using crystalline graphite the ﬁnal stoichiometry was NaC70.

Tirado’s group showed the reversible insertion of 0.0155 moles of Na per cm3 of amorphous carbon black95 and capacity values  1 considering only the of 121 mA h g discharge. It was observed that Na was stored between the bent graphene layers in the amorphous carbon black and that the carbon surface available was also the limiting factor for the capacity. The same research group, some years later, showed improvements by using amorphous carbon obtained from the pyrolysis of a polymeric resin forming microspheres with high surface area (Fig. 30).96 The capacity value for reversible inser 1 when ether type tion of Na ion in this material was 285 mA h g solvents were added to the liquid electrolyte. As ether-type solvents have shown higher chemical stability against metallic sodium than carbonate based-electrolytes, the optimization of liquid and solid electrolytes containing ether groups could also be the key to improve the electrochemical efﬁciency.

Dahn’s group reported high gravimetric capacity values of  1 for Na insertion by using hard carbons obtained 300 mA h g from pyrolyzed glucose.97 These values were close to those

Fig. 30 SEM of carbon microspheres. Reproduced by permission of The Electrochemical Society from ref. 96.

obtained for Li insertion in the same type of carbons. The voltage curves indicated that the insertion of alkali ions on hard carbon took place between the graphene layers of the graphitic particles and also into the pores created during the synthesis of this type of carbon (see Fig. 31).

Recently, Prof. Janek’s group has prepared a templated  1 at C/5, 2C and 5C carbon that showed 130, 120 and 100 mA h g rates, respectively.98 The ﬁrst capacity value corresponds to a NaC17 nominal composition, that is, 17 carbon atoms are needed to accommodate one sodium atom. To date, similar capacities at room temperature could only be achieved for carbon black at currents as small as C/75 with very low cyclability. This remarkable result is attributed to the hierarchical pore system in the material, which consists of interconnected pores in the macroand mesopore range that enable fast ion transport and short diffusion lengths. This structure is produced from porous silica as template and mesophase pitch as carbon precursor, which develops into a well-deﬁned and thus highly conductive carbon microstructure compared to other carbons.

As it has been evidenced graphite did not allow signiﬁcant sodium insertion whereas pyrolyzed enriched carbon precursors provided promising results. Other strategies can be adopted to enhance the accommodation of sodium ions in carbon materials. For instance, a grinding process raised the reversible capacity  1 in graphite samples.99 Sodium from 16 mA h g insertion enhancement can also be achieved with heteroatoms like hydrogen and oxygen after pyrolysis of cellulose to produce hard-carbons for intercalation. This method has evidenced higher reversible capacities for sodium intercalation than outgassed samples.100

A recent communication by Palacın et al. describes the use of titanates as possible anodes for a room temperature Na-ion cell.101 In this article, the Na2Ti3O7 material is prepared and tested versus a sodium anode. This compound allows the intercalation of two sodium ions in a plateau around 0.3 V vs. Na/  1 speciﬁc capacity. In Na+, which corresponds to a 200 mA h g this sense, other titanate compounds that have been tested in Liion cells, such as Na2Ti6O13 or Na4Ti5O12, could be applied to sodium ion technology. This way, a new family of compounds has joined the quest of an anode material for Na-ion cells.

Apart from carbonaceous materials, anodic compounds compatible with water-based electrolytes should be searched. Aqueous systems possess three big advantages against nonaqueous second,

they are nonﬂammable;

Fig. 32 Comparison of cyclability of NaTi2(PO4)3 phase in an organic electrolyte of 1 M NaClO4/EC : DMC (1 : 1) in volume, and aqueous  2. Reproduced by electrolyte with 2 M Na2SO4 at a rate of 2.0 mA cm permission of The Electrochemical Society from ref. 102

materials and process costs are considerably reduced; and, third, aqueous solutions present high conductivity, thus leading to very low internal resistance.

Titanium phosphate has been recently reported as a good anode material to be used in aqueous Na-ion batteries.102 The NASICON structure of NaTi2(PO4)3 material can deliver  1. This compound a theoretical speciﬁc capacity of 130 mA h g  1 in nondischarged at speciﬁc capacities of 120 and 123 mA h g aqueous and aqueous electrolytes, respectively. The aqueous electrochemical cell showed much lower polarization, better cyclability and rate capability. This way, in spite of the limited voltage range that is allowed to aqueous electrolytes, waterbased cells would beneﬁt from long cycle life, very low polarization, low cost and sustainability (Fig. 32).

Na-ion battery technology is a promising system as a substitute for Li-ion batteries for low cost applications due to the lower price and abundance of sodium, and its similar intercalation chemistry to lithium. There is much work to do in order to make Na-ion technology keep up with the standards needed for its application in, for example, grid storage. Several Na insertion cathodic materials have been studied: oxides, ﬂuorophosphates and phosphates. Among them, oxides do not seem to be the best option due to the complexity of their insertion–extraction behavior that corresponds to multiple sloping electrochemical curves. On the other hand, phosphates and ﬂuorophosphates can be a good choice because of their great stability and because greater working potentials are produced by the inductive effect of the phosphate polyanion. But these latter must be studied deeper in order to clarify their structural characteristics and Na insertion–extraction mechanisms.

-alumina solid electrolyte (BASE) and NASICON materials such as sodium phosphosilicates exhibit major advantages because of their safe operation, versatility and no leakage. These materials also show promising ionic conductivity at room temperature. Single crystal b00 -Al2O3 was reported to have a Na+ conductivity of about 0.1 S  1 at room temperature. Meanwhile, NASICON type matecm  1. Therefore, BASE and rials present about 10

Further work must be done on graphitic-like materials as negative electrodes in Na based batteries. The chemical modiﬁcation through the incorporation to the sp2 structure of graphene sheets of heteroatoms during the synthesis or post-synthesis process could beneﬁt the insertion of Na ions between the stacked layers of graphene.

The search for new anodes for Na-ion batteries is not restricted to carbonaceous materials. Other compounds, such as titanates, have recently been pointed out as new negative electrodes for these systems, and surely new phases will arise in order to play the counterpart for the great variety of cathode materials that have been researched up till now.

Acknowledgements

This work was ﬁnancially supported by the Ministerio de Educacion y Ciencia (MAT2010-19442), the Gobierno Vasco/Eusko Jaurlaritza (GIU06-11, ETORTEK CIC ENERGIGUNE 10, SAIOTEK SA-2010/00096 TEMAGEAL). V.P. thanks UPV/ EHU for a postdoctoral fellowship.