Nasicon compounds AxB2(PO4)3 have been extensively investigated owing to their interesting physical properties with potential applications as fast ion conductors [1–9] and low thermal expansions’ ceramics [10–12]. The Nasicon structure [13] is built up of corner-sharing BO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra leading to a framework of B2P3O12 formulas with interconnected channels where cations can be inserted in two types of sites usually noted M1 at 6b (0,0,0) and M2 at 18e (x,0,1/4) wickoff positions. The great ﬂexibility of this structure allows large chemical substitutions [14–17] and makes it possible that the sites M1 and M2 may be empty as in Nb2(PO4)3 [18], partially occupied as in [19–21] or completely full as in Na4Zr2(SiO4)3 [22]. The ionic transport in these compounds is due to the migration of the cations through the cavities in the interconnected channels where an order– disorder phenomenon is possible in the partially ﬁlled cases. On the other hand, the thermal behaviour is related to the variation of lattice parameters versus temperature generally variable in opposite senses. Thus, the detailed structural characterisation particularly of the atomic positions and the bond lengths is essential to understand the underlying mechanisms and to optimise such properties. The study of the solid solutions

In this paper, we report the structural characterisation of the phases in the solid solution LiTi2  xSnx(PO4)3 (x¼0–1.8) using the powder X-ray diffraction and the Rietveld reﬁnements. Their microstructures are studied using scanning electronic microscopy and their ionic conductivity is measured by impedance spectroscopy up to 423 K. The associated activation energy is correlated with the structural parameters.

Syntheses of LiTi2  xSnx(PO4)3 (x¼0, 0.2, y, 1.8) were carried out using the conventional solid state reaction techniques. First, stoichiometric mixtures of Li2CO3, (NH4)2HPO4, TiO2 and SnO2 were heated at 673 K for 5 h in order to decompose the ammonium phosphate and lithium carbonate. In a second step, the ﬁnely ground samples were heated twice at 1473 K for 48 h at each time. The X-ray diffraction patterns were recorded at room temperature with a D8Advance Diffractometer of Bruker AXS (CuKa radiation) equipped with a curved graphite monochromator in the secondary beam. The data were collected in the 141–1041(2y) range in steps of 0.021 and a counting time of 16 s per step. The reﬁnement of the structure by the Rietveld method was performed using the Rietica program [24]. The surface morphologies of the pellets were observed with scanning

electron microscopy on a PHILIPS XL 30 apparatus. For the impedance spectroscopy measurements, powders were ground and pelletized under a pressure of 10 t. Then, the pellets were sintered at 1473 K for 24 h. Impedance measurements were done from room temperature up to 423 K; a Hewlett Packard 4284 A apparatus was used, in a frequency range from 20 Hz to 1 MHz and with an oscillating voltage of 100 mV.

Preliminary unit-cell parameters determination was obtained by full pattern decomposition according to the Lebail method. Starting structural parameters for Rietveld reﬁnement were taken from the usual Nasicon data in the R-3c space group. The structural reﬁnements were carried out with a polynomial function for the background, pseudo-voigt function for the peak-shape; the other reﬁned parameters include scale factor, lattice parameters, atomic coordinates and isotropic thermal parameters. The titanium and tin cations were assumed to be randomly distributed over the same crystallographic site, with the respective occupancies corresponding to the nominal composition. Details of all the ﬁnal structural models over the composition range are given in Table 1. For example, the ﬁnal Rietveld plot for the composition x¼1 is presented in Fig. 1.

The unit-cell parameters for the compound LiTi2(PO4)3 (x¼0) are in good agreement with those reported in previous works [25,26]. In all the compositions, the M1 site is fully occupied whereas M2 one is empty. The space group R-3c is here conserved over the whole composition range, unlike the Na-Analogue solid solution [23]. In this case, this space group is only adopted for xr1 and a transition to R-3 is noted for x41. A related feature is observed concerning the evolution of lattice constants versus x; in LiTi2  xSnx(PO4)3 phases, we note a nearly linear increase for both a and c parameters (Fig. 2). However, an unusual behaviour is encountered for Na-Analogue phases where the a parameter passes through a maximum at x¼1.

The increase of the inter-atomic distances in the Ti/SnO6 octahedra (Table 2) can be associated with the increase of the averaged cationic size along with this substitution. The distances P–O (Table 2) are in good agreement with those typically observed in Nasicon phosphates. The Li–O bond lengths (Table 2) have also slightly increased; the same evolution was observed in other Nasicon structures as pointed out particularly by Alami et al. [27]. The details of the Nasicon structures have been discussed by some authors [28–31].

This structure can be described as built up of inﬁnite 1D ribbons O3BO3M1O3BO3 connected by PO4 tetrahedra (Fig. 3). The spatial distribution of ionic charges (Fig. 4) on these ribbons gives

particularly rise to the displacement of the B cations along c towards O1 anions. As consequence, it is the presence of these opposite stresses on adjacent BO6 octahedra, which induces the split of the O1 anions in the (a, b) plane and the increasing of the corresponding lattice parameters. The off-centring of the B cations in their octahedra and its magnitude as indicated by the difference between the bond lengths B–O1 and B–O2 and also the distances O1–O1 (Table 3) conﬁrm this view point. In this context, one can note that for the same type of A (or B) cation, the smaller the cation B (or A) i.e. with more dense positive charge, the larger is this effect.

The distance O1–O1 has a direct inﬂuence on the value of the a parameter, which explains the shortening of this parameter with the increase of the A cation size in the M1 site. This situation is achieved by the chemical nature of this cation or with rising temperature. Furthermore, the slope of this shrinking should be more reduced for larger B cations [37]. It is obvious that if the M1 site is empty, the distance O2–O2 along c will be enhanced and the off-centring of the B cations will be reversed, as shown for example in Nb2(PO4)3 [18] and NbTi(PO4)3 [38] where the (1.993 ˚A, corresponding bond lengths (B–O1, B–O2) are of 1.968 ˚A) and (1.978 ˚A, 1.924 ˚A), respectively. Finally, each kind of cation, A or B, will inﬂuence the averaged size of the coordination polyhedron around the other one. In fact, the electron density of the oxygen anions coordinating larger cation in one site will occupy more of volume and consequently will be more reduced, which in return will lengthen their distances with the other cation. As the case of Li cation mentioned above [27], the Na–O bond lengths in the Nasicon compounds are also found to increase with the B cation size, as shown by the structures of NaTi2(PO4)3 [32], NaMo2(PO4)3 [39] and NaZr2(PO4)3 [35] where the distances Na–O are of 2.427 ˚A, 2.467 ˚A and 2.550 ˚A, respectively. Owing to its coordination polyhedron, the M2 site is of 3D character. Depending on its occupancy, the presence of cations in this site can attenuate or overcome the effect of the cations in the M1 one

Fig. 3. The Nasicon crystal structure.

Fig. 2. Evolution of the unit-cell constants versus x for LiTi2  xSnx(PO4)3.

Fig. 4. The opposite local stresses applied on adjacent BO6 octahedra in the O3BO3M1O3BO3 ribbons.

Table 2 Bonds’ lengths versus x for LiTi2  xSnx(PO4)3.

Table 3 Inﬂuence of the nature of A and B cations on some structural details of the Nasicon Structures.

Compound

Fig. 5. SEM micrograph of LiTi0.6Sn1.4(PO4)3 (x¼1.4).

is deduced from the relation s¼L/(RS), where L is the thickness and S the area of the pellet. For examples the values of s at 373 K are of (2.17 10   1 for LiTi1.4Sn0.6(PO4)3, LiTi0.6Sn1.4(PO4)3 and LiTi0.4Sn1.6(PO4)3, respectively. These results are in agreement with previous works [41,42]; s seems decreasing with the increase of the averaged size of the B cations, which proves that the underlying mechanism is not related exclusively to steric effects and the energetic proﬁle through the conduction path should be considered.

The activation energy Ea associated with the ionic motion, according to the Arrhenius law can be evaluated from the variation of dc conductivity (log s) versus inverse temperature (Fig. 6). Linear curve is encountered for the x¼0.6 composition with an activation energy of 0.32 eV; for the Sn-rich compositions, one can observe signiﬁcant deviation from linearity, which can be related to a variable range hopping mechanism [43] or to a partial ordering of the Ti and Sn cations not detected by the X-ray structural analysis. Moreover, the linear behaviour requires that Ea has to be constant over the temperature range; this fact is practically veriﬁed along with smooth variation of structural features. However, the large thermal expansion of the c parameter [37] in the Nasicon structure can also induce a variation of the activation energy and causes the curvature of log s versus 1/T.

The structural study of the solid solution LiTi2  xSnx(PO4)3 shows linear variations of the unit-cell parameters, the conservation of the space group R-3c over the whole composition range and the location of the Li cations on the M1 sites as conﬁrmed by the off-centring of the Ti/Sn cations in their octahedra. The macrostructures are relatively porous. The ionic conductivity is   1. The variation of activation of the order of 10 energy with the temperature is related to the crystal structure evolution.