NASICON-type Na3V2(PO4)3 with a three-dimensional open framework structure has attracted wide attention, and it is regarded as one of the most promising cathode material for sodium-ion batteries. However, the low electronic conductivity restricts its charge–discharge capacity and electrochemical performance. With the purpose to solve this problem, polystyrene microspheres are applied in the preparation of cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries. Particular porous-structured Na3V2(PO4)3 composing of interlaced nanosheets is obtained samples by a simple hydrothermal-assisted sol–gel method via a self-sacrificed template (polystyrene microsphere). As expected, the as-prepared porous sample delivers a reversible capacity of 109.2 mAh g−1 at 0.2 C, an excellent rate performance (89.6 mAh g−1 at 50 C) and superior cyclic stability (retention of 94% over 500 cycles at 50 C). The outstanding rate and cyclic performance are attributed to its unique porous structure which is conducive to improve electron conductivity and facilitate the diffusion of sodium ions.
It is common knowledge that lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are gradually mature in the applications of energy storage because of the large energy capacity and high safety. LIBs have become the most promising rechargeable batteries during the past few decades [1, 2]. However, LIBs are suffering from less distribution of lithium and increasing prices which restrict its applications in large grid-level storage [3, 4]. Recently, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) have attracted extensive attention due to their abundant reserves and low cost. Meanwhile, as sodium and lithium belong to the same main group, so they have similar chemical properties. However, there are still several non-negligible problems with SIBs compared with LIBs. The sodium ions with larger ion radius (1.02 Å) cannot easily insert into/extract from the crystal structure of the cathode materials, and the relatively large volume change caused by the de-intercalation of Na+ leads to slower reaction kinetics and poorer reversibility [5, 6]. Therefore, it is of great practical significance for the large-scale applications to explore stable and safe cathode materials for SIBs [7, 8].
The cathode materials can be generally divided into metal oxides NaxMO2 (M = Mn, Co, Fe, etc.) [9–12], polyanionic compounds (NaFePO4 Na3V2(PO4)3, e t c . ) [13, 14], and fluorides (Na2FePO4F, NaFeSO4F, etc.) [15, 16]. Among them, phosphate-based materials with an open-frame structure and thermal stability are regarded as the most suitable cathode materials for SIBs [6]. NASICON type with threedimensional structure can improve the reaction kinetics characteristics of sodium ions during electrochemical migration. During the NVP electrochemical reaction process, the V3+/ V4+ and V2+/V3+ redox couples correspond to potential plateaus of 3.4 and 1.6 V vs Na/Na+, and the theoretical capacities are 117 and 236 mAh g−1, respectively. However, the divalent V2+ is extremely unstable, so the valence state of vanadium in NVP is generally trivalent V3+, and the valence state evolution of vanadium can be achieved by controlling the electrochemical reaction within a certain voltage range [17].
 Compared with other NASICON-typed materials, NVP has the advantages of easy preparation, superior reversible capacity, and high operating potential [18, 19], but the poor electron conductivity limits its electrochemical performance [20, 21]. Quite a lot of efforts have been made to improve the electrochemical performance of NVP, such as doping and carbon coating. For instance, Zheng et al. [22] p r e p a r e d Li-substituted Na3-xLixV2(PO4)3 by a sol–gel method, and the authors suggested that lithium ions in the compound can be replaced reversibly by sodium ions. Among all the samples, Na2.9Li0.1V2(PO4)3 shows the best electrochemical performance, which delivered 102 mAh g−1 even at 20 C. Duan et al. [23] synthesized a NVP@C core-shell nanocomposite; the material rendered 94.9 mAh g−1 discharge capacity at 5 C in the first cycle and the capacity retention was 96.1% after 700 rounds. Besides, optimizing the morphology is also a valid way to enhance the electrochemical performance by accelerating electronic conduction and shortening the transfer distance of sodium ions. Xu et al. [24] prepared N-doped carbon-coated Na3V2(PO4)3 by a solvent evaporation method; the coating layer provided a stable framework which accommodated the agglomeration of the electrode; the cathode retained 91.3% of the initial capacity at 5 C after 500 cycles. Ni et al. [25] synthesized 3D electronic channels wrapped Na3V2(PO4)3 by the electrospinning method. Benefited from its 3D channel structure, the material could deliver a reversible discharge capacity of 63 mAh g−1 at 30 C after 300 cycles.
In this report, based on a simple hydrothermal-assisted sol– gel technique, polystyrene microspheres were employed as templates to prepare porous-structured Na3V2(PO4)3/C composing of interlaced nanosheets. The mono-disperse polystyrene microspheres were selected as templates because they have no impurity elements and were self-decomposition at medium temperatures [26]. The porous morphology composing of interlaced nanosheets effectively enlarges the specific surface area of the cathodes, thus improve the charge/ discharge capacity and the electrochemical performance.
Na3V2(PO4)3/C was prepared by a hydrothermal-assisted sol– gel technology. Ascorbic acid was used as a reducing agent and carbon source. Ascorbic acid, NH4H2PO4, N H4VO3, a n d NaOH were dissolved in deionized water in order (stoichiometric ratio of 1.5:3:2:3). After homogeneously dissolution, the solution was transferred into a Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave and heated at 190 °C for 36 h. Soap-free emulsion polystyrene microspheres with solid content of 4.2 wt% were slowly added to the above solution in a volume ratio of 1:1 and then ultrasonicated for 60 min. Then, the solution was stirred at 80 °C for 5 h to obtain a gel, which was dried in an oven at 80 °C for 12 h in the atmosphere. The ground powder was heated at 350 °C for 3 h and at 800 °C for 16 h under argon atmosphere to obtain the final product H-NVP. For comparison, Na3V2(PO4)3/C without template (P-NVP) was also prepared under the same conditions. The detailed preparation process is illustrated in Scheme 1.
The crystal structure of the obtained H-NVP and P-NVP were tested through X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku) measurements with Cu kα radiation from 5–65° at 4° min−1. The morphologies and size of the samples were observed by a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Zeiss Supra 55) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JOEL 2100F). INVIA Raman spectroscopy was performed to analyze the properties of carbon. The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) was employed to calculate the specific surface area under N2 absorption with SSA-4300. The carbon content of the samples is calculated using thermogravimetric analysis (TGA, HCT-2) from room temperature to 650 °C in air.
Coin half cells (CR2032) were assembled in a glove box filled with argon. The cathode material was mixed with acetylene black and polytetrafluoroethylene (PVDF) at a weight ratio of 8:1:1. The slurry was uniformly spread onto the Al foil and then dried at 80 °C for 12 h in a vacuum. Sodium disks were used as counter electrodes, and Whatman Glass Fiber (GF/D) was used as a separator. The electrolyte was 1 M NaClO4 in ethylene carbonate (EC)/dimethyl carbonate (DEC) (1/1, v/v) and 5 wt.% fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC). The mass loading of the active material was 1.3–1 . 5 m g c m−2. The charge/ discharge performance of the cells was detected in the voltage ranges of 2.5–3.8 V vs. Na/Na+ at various current densities (0.2–50 C). All the performance was measured at room temperature (25 °C). Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was tested at a scanning rate of 0.1 mV s−1 and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed between 10−1 and 105 Hz using Solartron Analytical 1260A/1287A.
The crystal structure of H-NVP and P-NVP samples is illustrated in Fig. 1a. The diffraction peaks of NVP/C are indexed to the 3D NASICON structure with the R-3c space group (JCPDS card No.00–062–0345). The absence of a Bragg peak in the impurity phase suggests that the template does not affect the basic structure of NVP/C. Moreover, there is no amorphous peak of carbon in the XRD spectrum, indicating ascorbic acid has been thoroughly decomposed in the calcining process. Each unit cell consists of six Na3V2(PO4)3 structural u n i t s , w h i c h i s m a d e u p o f V O6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra through the common apex oxygen atom into the polyanion [V2(PO4)3]3−. According to different coordination environments, Na+ has two kinds of occupancies: one is the Na1 position where the 6-coordinate environment is located in the octahedral position and the other is the Na2 position where the 8-coordinate environment is located in the tetrahedral position, so one structural unit contains one Na1 bit and three Na2 bits. Figure 1b illustrates the crystal structure of NVP. 
Figure 2 shows the morphologies of the H-NVP and PNVP. P-NVP (Fig. 2a) is aggregated by the small primary particles (300–600 nm) with a secondary size of about 1–2 μm. As a contrast, it is obvious that a lot of nanosheets are interconnected with each other and form pore structure, as shown in Fig. 2d and e. The formation of porous morphology is attributed to the decomposition and carbonization of the PS microspheres. Other scattered small particles around nanosheets are caused by non-adsorption of PS microspheres. Significantly, an increase in specific surface area enlarges the contact area between electrode and electrolyte, which is expected to have a positive effect on the electrochemical performance of the material. The overall morphology of H-NVP is shown in Fig. S1; the particles have a relatively uniform distribution with an average diameter of 2 μm. The microstructure of H-NVP is further investigated by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), as shown in Fig. 2e and f. T h e image of H-NVP can be divided into two regions. The one is a hole-shaped black area (cathode materials), and the other is irregular flocculent material (carbon), which is in good agreement with the SEM result. Fig. S2 shows the HRTEM images of a single particle of H-NVP; it is clear that the material is covered with the carbon layer.
The specific surface area is calculated by the Brunauer– Emmett–Teller (BET) measurement (Fig. 3a). The BET surface area of H-NVP is 36.297 m2 g−1, which is much larger than that of P-NVP (12.498 m2 g−1). The higher specific surface area is caused by the existence of holes, which is consistent with the SEM images.
The Raman spectra determine the presence of carbon on the surface of H-NVP and P-NVP in Fig. 3b. The peak at 1348 cm−1 is related to the disordered carbon peak (D-band), and the peak at 1605 cm−1 is related to graphitized carbon (Gband) [27]. The peak intensity ratio of the D- and G-band (ID/IG) for H-NVP and P-NVP is 1.01 and 0.95, respectively, demonstrating a higher degree of graphitization and conductivity of H-NVP [23].
The carbon content of the two samples is calculated by thermogravimetric analysis; the TGA curves of the samples are shown in Fig. 3c. The samples are heated from room temperature to 650 °C, the slight mass loss before 400 °C is ascribed to the volatilization of the absorbed moisture. After 400 °C, the carbon starts to oxidize and the rapid mass decreases due to the intense oxidation of carbon, when the temperature reaches up to 650 °C, the residual mass of H-NVP and P-NVP are 90.7% and 63.5%, suggesting the carbon content of the two samples are 9.3% and 36.5%, respectively.
Figure 4 shows the electrochemical performance of P-NVP and H-NVP in Na+ half cells. The initial charge/discharge curves are shown within the potential window between 2.5 and 3.8 V. P-NVP and H-NVP exhibit the initial discharge capacity of 102 mAh g−1 and 109.2 mAh g−1 at 0.2 C, respectively. Moreover, the flatter and longer voltage plateau of HNVP has a smaller space between discharge and charge plateaus, indicating less polarization and better cyclic reversibility. The results suggest that porous structure can effectively reduce the polarization of the electrode. The rate performance of the samples at 0.2 C, 0.5 C, 1 C, 2 C, 5 C, 10 C, 20 C, and 50 C is shown in Fig. 4b. Obviously, the discharge capacity decreases as the current density increases. H-NVP delivers a reversible capacity of 109.2, 106.8, 103.9, 101, 98.7, 96, 90.6, and 89.5 mAh g−1 at the different rates, respectively. By comparison, H-NVP shows enhanced electrochemical performance than that of P-NVP at the same rate. When the rate falls back to 0.2 C after 80 cycles, the discharge capacity of the HNVP recovers 108 mAh g−1 quickly (98.9% of the initial discharge capacity), which demonstrates excellent reversibility against rate change of the H-NVP cathode. A high surface area not only provides more sodium-ion diffusion channels but also can effectively alleviate the volume evolution during charge and discharge, so the basic structure of H-NVP remains stable at a large rate [28, 29].
The cycling stability is a critical performance for the applications of cathode materials. The long-term cyclic performance of H-NVP and P-NVP samples at 50 C is compared Fig. 4 a Charge and discharge curves of H-NVP and P-NVP at 0.2 C. b Rate performance of H-NVP and P-NVP from 0.2 to 50 C. c Cycling performance of H-NVP and P-NVP at a rate of 50 C over 500 cycles Ionics in Fig. 4c. Obviously, H-NVP displays much higher the initial discharge capacity (89.6 mAh g−1) compared with P-NVP (68 mAh g−1). H-NVP can remain 84 mAh g−1 (~ 94% retention) after 500 cycles, showing a better reversible property. In contrast, the capacity retention of P-NVP is only ~ 66% after 500 cycles. The excellent long-term stability of H-NVP is attributed to the unique porous structure, which provides sufficient contact between the active cathode material and the electrolyte and shortens the distance of ion diffusion, thereby improving the cyclic stability.
To further investigate the electrochemical performance of the samples, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was employed. Which was measured between 2.5 and 3.8 V at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 in Fig. 5a. One pair of redox peaks are related to the redox reaction of V3+/V4+ [30]. The potential interval between the oxidation and reduction peaks of P-NVP and H-NVP is 191 mV and 148 mV, respectively. A smaller potential interval leads to a lower polarization of H-NVP electrodes. In addition, the current intensity of H-NVP is also higher than that of P-NVP, indicating faster kinetics through enhanced electron conduction [31].
Kinetic characteristics of the two samples were evaluated by EIS measurement from 101 to 105 Hz before cycling. The Nyquist plots and the equivalent circuit of the two samples are shown in Fig. 5b. Each spectrum consists of two parts: one is a semicircle in the high-frequency region, corresponding to the charge transfer impedance (Rct), while the sloped straight line in the low-frequency region represents the semi-infinite Warburg impedance (Zw). CPE is affected by surface characteristics [32, 33]. Re is the composite resistance between electrolyte and electrode. The sodium-ion diffusion coefficient (DNa) can be calculated using the following formula [1]:
where R, T, S, n, a n d F represent the gas constant, the absolute temperature, the surface area of the electrode, the transfer charge number, and Faraday's constant, respectively. C is the Na-ion concentration of in the cathode electrode (6.92 × 10−3 mol cm−3), and σ is the Warburg factor related to Z′ [2]:
Figure 5c presents a linear fit of Z′ and ω, and the slope of fitting can be used to calculate the Na-ion diffusion coefficient. According to Eq. (1), DNa is equal to 1.67095 × 10−14 and 1.1096 × 10−13 cm2 s−1 of P-NVP and H-NVP. The difference in the diffusion coefficient indicates that the porousstructured H-NVP can shorten the transport path of sodium ions and favor the migration of Na+ in the material.
The unique cathode Na3V2(PO4)3 with the porous structure for SIBs was prepared by a simple hydrothermal-assisted sol– gel method. H-NVP sample exhibits excellent high-rate performance at 50 C (initial capacity of 89.6 mAhg−1) and fine cyclic performance (94% capacity retention after 500 cycles). The material shows interconnected porous morphology formed by nanosheets. The porous structure effectively enlarged the contact area between electrode and electrolyte, which contributed to the diffusion of sodium ions and improved electronic conductivity, thus enhanced the electrochemical performance of the cathode. Generally, this work provides a new idea for preparing high-performance NVP cathodes for SIBs.