With the development of solid state ionic power  devices, more and more emphasis is applied on high  energy density sources. Due to the safety and high  reliability including long cycle life and long shelf life  compared with the liquid systems, inorganic solid  electrolytes are attracting a great interest for their  potential applications in lithium batteries. However,  solid-state  lithium  batteries  with  inorganic  solid  electrolytes have been generally lower in energy density  and current drain than liquid systems[1]. As a key  material of solid-state batteries, ionic conductive layer  with high ionic conductivity may result in a reduction  in internal resistance of the device, accordingly increase  power density. Large surface area is also necessary to  achieve a large electrode area in order to generate a  large current drain. Recently, lithium ionic conductors, 

Funded  by  National  Basic  Research  Program  of  China  (No.2009CB939704), National Natural Science Foundation of China  (Nos.51032005, 60808024) and the Fundamental Research Funds for  the Central Universities (Wuhan University of Technology)

orthophosphate LiTi2(PO4)3 with a NASICON structure,  has  been  widely  investigated  due  to  possessing  many potential advantages, such as high lithium ion  conductivity, water stability, electrochemical stability  window, easy fabrication, especially suitable for high  energy density lithium air batteries[2-4].

Compared  with  other  lithium  oxide  ceramic  or sulfide based glasses, LiTi2(PO4)3 glass-ceramic  prepared by glass melting and later crystallization[5,6]  is rather stable with high room temperature ionic  conductivity of 1.3×103 S•cm1 and activation energy  of 31.5 kJ/mol. The value is twice as large as the  highest one of the traditional sintered Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3  [7] and is almost the same as that of Li3N[8] which is well  known to possess the maximum conductivity for a solid  electrolyte. However, decomposition voltage of Li3N is  too low and hardly fabricated.

In this study, LATSP (2[Li1.8Al0.4Ti1.6Si0.4P2.6O12]• AlPO4) glass were fabricated from a melt by stainless  steel-cooling, and the addition of Al2O3 and SiO2  to the system could improve the glass-forming and  crystallization behaviors. Specifically, its thermal  stability, crystal structure, microstructure of samples  crystallized, electrical conductivity and electrochemical  characterization were discussed on the effects of heattreatment temperatures.

The  2[Li1.8Al0.4Ti1.6Si0.4P2.6O12]•AlPO4  glass  examined  in  this  work  was  prepared  using  the  conventional melt quenching method starting from  commercial powder reagents lithium carbonate Li2CO3,  aluminum hydroxide Al(OH)3, titanium oxide TiO2,  silicon  dioxide  SiO2  and  ammonium  dihydrogen  phosphate NH4H2PO4 (in mole%). After mixed in  appropriate proportions described by Fu[9,10], a 100 g  batch were melted using a corundum crucible. Initially,  the furnace was heated to 700 ℃  and held for 2 h to  release the volatile batch components, then raised to  1 450 ℃ and melted for 2 h in an electric furnace. The  melt obtained was poured into a steel pre-heated to 300  ℃ and pressed into slices about 2 mm, then annealed at  550 ℃ for 2 h to relieve internal thermal stresses, and  allowed to cool naturally to room temperature, then  transparent purple glass slices were obtained.

The annealed glass slices were cut and polished  into  15×15  mm  slices  about  1  mm,  subsequently  crystallized at 700 ℃, 800 ℃, 850 ℃, 900 ℃, 950  ℃,  1 000  ℃ for 12 h, then cooled to room temperature  naturally, respectively. In fact, serious defects such as  cracks of final crystallized products were observed in  some specimens prepared in the present work. In order  to avoid sample crack or split, a slow heating rate was  adopted at the rate of 1 ℃/min over the predetermined  temperature. After crystallization, crystallized glassceramic changed from transparent, purple to colorless  due to the reoxidation of Ti3+ to Ti4+  (T <700 ℃), and  then white opaque due to grain growth (T ≥700  ℃) at  higher temperature. 2.2  Characterization of the materials

The glass transition (Tg), crystallization (Tx)  and  melting  (T m)  temperatures  of  the  glass  were  characterized by differential scanning calorimetry  (DSC, Netzsch) in the temperature range 100-1 200  ℃ with a heating rate of 10 ℃/min. The phases for  the LATP glass and ceramic was investigated by X-ray  diffraction (XRD) using Cu Kα radiation and X-ray  diffractometer (Rigaku), 2θ scanning from 10 to 70º.  The morphology and microstructure of specimens  were observed by scanning electron microscopy (JSM5610V). For the measurement of electrochemical  properties, an about 1 μm thick silver coating was  printed on both sides of these specimens with silver  slurry  and  subsequently  dried  at  200  ℃  for  2  h. 

Conductivity of the glass-ceramic sheet specimens was  measured by electrochemical a.c. impedance analyzer  (CHI 760d) with a small perturbation voltage of 5 mV  in a frequency range from 106 to 1 Hz. 

The DSC thermograms of samples are shown by  the traces (a) and (b) corresponding to glass powder  and glass flake, respectively, in Fig. 1. There is no  obvious  difference  between  (a)  and  (b),  only  the  endothermic peak on (a) (elliptic line in Fig. 1) at  glass transition is smoother than the one on (b). To  further understand the glass-forming behavior and to  better investigate the effect of SiO2, the value of Tg  (glass transition temperature), Tx (the crystallization  temperature), Tm (melting temperatures) and KH are  presented in Table 1. It is seen from this figure and  table that the difference between Tg and Tx is very  small, which indicated that glass-forming ability of  the composition is comparatively weak, so the glass  is required to be quenched rapidly, otherwise it was  crystallized extensively. Comparing the glass-forming  region in LATP (Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3) with one in LATSP,  the difference of two numbers (Tx-Tg) increased; it  illuminated more glass-forming ability of quadrupled  phosphate systems containing SiO2.

To compare the glass-forming ability of samples  quantitatively, the Hrubÿ parameter was calculated  for each glass. This parameter, which is enumerated  as a suitable criterion for glass stability on heating, is  deﬁ ned according to the following relationship[11]:

Where, Tx, Tg and Tm are the crystallization temperature,  glass transition and melting temperatures on heating  estimated by DSC, respectively.

Table 1 shows the calculated value KH of glasses.  The higher the KH value, the better glass-forming ability 

Journal    of    Wuhan    University    of      Technology-Mater.    Sci.  Ed.      Feb.2012

on cooling and the glass stability against crystallization  on  heating.  In  spite  of  varieties  in  compositions,  homogeneous glasses were just obtained. In this work,  the KH value is higher than LATP and LiGe2(PO4)3  glass, which shows glass formation ability of the Si and  Al-incorporated LiTi2(PO4)3 glass was improved. 

It should be noted that two crystallization peak  temperatures were detected (Tc and Tc1) in the DTA  profiles. The exothermic peak (Tc) at about 649 ℃ is  intense and the width of peak is quite narrow, which  means the exothermic energy quantity of nucleation  and crystallization is very low and it is hard to obtain  well-controlled glass-ceramics. The faint peak appeared  at 949.9 ℃, which means chemical reaction occurred.  3.2  Structural properties

The X-ray diffraction patterns of the glass and  glass-ceramics  obtained  by  thermal  treatments  at  different temperatures are shown in Fig.2. The XRD  pattern  of  the  as-cast  glass  exhibits  only  a  wide  smooth halo, which is a ﬁ ngerprint of fully amorphous  glassy structure. The prominent diffraction peaks  can be ascribed to the reflections of lithium-analogue  of NASICON LiTi2(PO4)3 structure[2,7] (JCPDS card  35-754) and other minor peaks consisting of AlPO4,  TiO2 and TiP2O7. Certainly, the crystal phase appears  when the annealing temperature is higher than 700   ℃. On the other hand, with the enhancement of heattreatment temperature, grains grew larger gradually, 

devitrification enhanced, and the strong diffraction  line become narrower accordingly. Some strong peaks  attributed to the presence of unexpected TiP2O7 phase  were visible in the patterns for the glass-ceramics  obtained at 800 ℃ and 850 ℃; subsequently, TiP2O7  phase  reduced  and AlPO4  and TiO2  impure  phase  appears with higher temperatures. At high temperature  (1  000    ℃), TiP2O7, TiO2  and  Li2O  participate  in  reaction and re-melted in the glass-ceramic, leading to  the peak of TiP2O7 disappeared and the peaks intensity  of TiO2 becoming lower on X-ray patterns[13]. The  formula is as follows:

Meanwhile, the diffraction peaks of SiO2 and  LiTi2(PO4)3 or other crystals phase were overlapped,  it  is  hard  to  distinguish  because  of  technical 

Vol.27 No.1  CHEN Hongping et al: Thermal Behavior and Lithium Ion Conductivity of ...

complications. And yet obvious defects like bloating  and cracking of some crystallized samples was noted,  which illuminated that high expanding α-quartz or  higher inflation β-quartz existed in samples along  with the increase of temperature. When the stress of  expansion cannot be defused by the ﬂ ow of glass phase,  the samples cause to craze, broken or crushing. 

Scanning electron micrographs images of surfaces  for as-cast glass and glass-ceramics prepared at 700,  800, 900 and 1 000  ℃ are shown in Fig.3. Fig.3(a)  reveals  that  homogeneous  glasses  were  obtained  and had no grains. The microstructure of Fig. 3(b)  indicated that glass has partly devitriﬁ ed, these crystals  are  approximately  100  nm  in  size  and  obviously  distributed with random orientation in this micrograph.  Microstructure similar to Fig. 3(b) is also observed  in Fig. 3(c). Just grains grew and almost connected  together. As the temperature continued to rise, glasses  completely crystallized (Fig. 3(d)-(e)). In addition, the  grain distribution and grain boundaries become far  more apparent. It is visible that the AlPO4 and other  impurity phases are primarily embedded in grains.  Furthermore, some tiny crack is found in Fig. 3(e),  therefore leading to easily broken sample. The crystal  size grew larger noticeably and accordingly grain  boundary decreased. 3.3  Electrochemical properties

The electrochemical impedance measurements  were taken using the sandwich configuration of Ag/ LASTP/Ag and the ac impedance spectroscopy of  glass and glass-ceramics obtained at 700, 800, 900 and  1 000 ℃ for 12 h are shown in Fig. 4. According to the  previous report[14], the impedance spectroscopy of the  ceramic can be divided into two semi-circles which  attribute to different contributions, namely the bulk  part in high-frequency part and the grain boundary in  mid-frequency, and an inclined line in low-frequency  part corresponding to the impedance of the electrode/ electrolyte interface belonging to Warburg diffusion. In  this work, only one semi-circle was observed normally,  another was very small and needs to be measured at  lower temperatures (< -10 ℃) and higher frequencies  (>1 MHz), which was reported by Fu[5]. Due to the  restriction of instrumentation equipment (1 MHz is  the upper limit for the electrochemical workstation  CHI760D),  impedance  spectroscopy  of  higher  frequencies can not test. 

As expected, all samples showed one depressed  semicircle at low temperatures and an oblique line  corresponding to a characteristic capacitive spike 

typical of a blocking electrode (Fig. 4). In the ascast glasses this is associated with bulk resistance,  which  is  due  to  their  homogeneous  amorphous  structure  confirmed  by  XRD  as  shown  in  Fig.  1.  While semicircles in samples prepared at different  temperatures are attributed to the contributions of  grain boundary[15]. With the enhancement of the heattreatment temperature, semicircle diameter became  smaller  and  was  compressed  worse,  even  almost  disappeared  and  leaved  only  the  blocking  spike  observable over the frequency range used at 1 000   ℃. The analysis reveals that the bulk and inter-grain  resistance decreased gradually at higher crystallization  temperature, because grain size grew larger gradually  and grains were closely connected as confirmed in  Fig.2 and Fig.3. Meanwhile, with the elevation of  measured temperature, impedance semicircle become  more incomplete (Fig.5), this phenomenon can be  analytically explained by the coordinate action of  the ‘Constant phase element’ (CPE) model and the  ‘Concept of Mismatch and Relaxation’ model (CMR)  [16], which is based on the ‘Jump relaxation model’  [17].  Each ion and mobile defect on a sublattice is assumed  to be ions. Due to the repulsive Coulomb interaction  between them, the mobile ions tend to stay at some  distance from each other. Each of them wishes to  be at the position of its cage-effect minimum. The  neighborhood is relaxed with respect to the “central”  ion and the interaction results in a time dependent  potential provided by its mobile neighbors. Therefore,  the “time constant” of the forward-backward successive  jumps process increases as time progresses, and the  resulting spectra hence seems like a “distribution of  relaxation times”. The higher temperature, the stronger  the  (decaying)  negative  contributions  to  velocity  autocorrelation function due to the back-hop process.  This explains the dispersive conductivity observed in the  impedance diagram of solid ionic materials (Fig. 4 and Fig. 5).

 The ionic conductivity was calculated according  to  the  impedance  value  (R)  determined  from  the impedance  diagrams  by  means  of  the  following  equation:

σ = d/(R×A)                              

(1) Where, d is the specimen slice thickness, A the valid  area and R the electrolyte resistance fitted by Zview  software.

To illustrate the effect of the temperature on the  charge transfer, the alternating current impedance with  different temperatures was measured. These data were  fitted to a straight line, which abided by the rule of  Arrhenius equation: σ =σ0/T exp(Ea/kT), where E a  is the activation energy, T is the isothermal absolute  temperature, k is the universal gas constant and σ0 is the  pre-exponential factor, respectively. The approximate  activation  energy  and  pre-exponential  factor  was  calculated by the fit straight line in Fig. 6 and the  corresponding value are shown in Table 2. 

From Table 2, Ea value of as-cast glass was the  biggest  and  the  annealed  glass-ceramics  changed  slightly, approaching to 30-31 kJ/mol. Nevertheless, 

with  the  enhancement  of  crystallization,  the  ion  conductivity enhanced gradually and the maximum  value comes up to 4.1×104 S/cm at 25 ℃ while the  glass crystallized at 1 000  ℃ for 12 h. Associated  with the XRD and SEM, it could be explained that  grains grew rapidly, grain boundary cut down and the  samples come denser, thus more conduction channels  are  suitable  for  lithium  ion  mobile,  accordingly  conductive characteristic got better. Certainly, another  reason is that the activation energy declined and the  pre-exponential factor increased with the sintering  temperature increasing. In addition, the dielectric  AlPO4 phase is believed to enhance the conductivity via  the space-charge effect[18]. The blocking effect of TiO2,  TiP2O7 and unexpected phases seems to dominate.  Nevertheless, the further reasons about the coordinated  action of blocking effect and space-charge effect need   to be investigaed deeply.

These  glass-ceramics  were  fabricated  by  conventional  glass  melting  and  crystallization  of  LATSP glasses at 700-1 000 ℃. Firstly, the KH value  increased and glass-forming ability got better due  to the Si-incorporated.  The phase evolution and the  microstructure of the optimized composition during  crystallization were evaluated at different temperatures.  With the enhancement of crystallization temperature, 

the grain of samples grew and the grain boundary  decreased, which naturally led to the increased ionic  conductivity. The maximum ionic conductivity at  room  temperature  obtained  at  heating-treating  of  1 000  ℃ approach or attain equality with 4.1×104  S/cm at 25  ℃. Meanwhile, due to the jump relaxation  of the mobile ions, the impedance diagram appeared  a dispersive phenomenon. All these characteristics of  the LATSP glass-ceramics show that it is a potential  candidate  for  the  electrolyte  used  in  lithium  ion  batteries, sensors and electrochemical devices.