A detailed study of the topotactic reaction of lithium insertion was undergone in Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3. For this purpose, a large number of in-situ XRD patterns were recorded during the ﬁrst cycle evidencing a solid solution system. The full pattern reﬁnement revealed an anisotropic variation of the cell parameters while M1 sites were ﬁlled, leading to constancy in the cell volume. Otherwise, cell parameters monotonically increased when the M2 sites are occupied by the incoming lithium ions. The high reversibility of the deinsertion process led to the recovery of the initial cell parameters at the end of the charge. The lithium cell delivered 119 mAh/g after the ﬁrst discharge and values as high as 110 mAh/g were kept after 15 cycles at C/20. Moreover, the capability of inserting sodium ions was also demonstrated. Although a loss of capacity was inevitable, 97 mAh/g were recorded for the ﬁrst discharge. © 2012 The Electrochemical Society. [DOI: 10.1149/2.060210jes] All rights reserved.

The use of transition metal phosphates as electrode materials for lithium insertion has recently attracted much attention1–4 due to their wide variety of compositions with superior structural stability and to the inductive effect which places the Fe3+ couples ◦ . Among them, the NASICON type at quite interesting values vs. Li framework provides a wide interstitial space within a 3-D network that can accommodate large compositional varieties in the generic formula Ax(MyMz’)2(PO4)3, (A= Li, Na, Mg, Ca, . . . ; M,M’ = Fe, Zr, Ti, V, Nb, . . . .) the value of x being directly linked with the respective + of M and M’.5–10 The NASICON structure oxidation states n is based on so-called “lantern” building blocks consisting of three PO4 tetrahedra and two MO6 octahedra sharing all corners, which generate a ﬂexible host with good stability upon long electrochemical cycling. Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3 was ﬁrst reported by Barth et al. as belonging to the NASICON-type structure (space group R-3c)11 into which Mg2+ ions ﬁll half of the octahedral M1 sites sharing faces with two adjacent TiO6 octahedra along the hexagonal c-axis. The closed electronic shell of the Mg2+ ion induces a highly symmetric oxygen coordina− tion, which contributes to the stability of the covalent [Ti2(PO4)3] framework. Contrarily, both TiO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra are slightly distorted. The ion diffusion path is ensured by the presence of three M2 interstices per formula unit that interconnect the M1 sites.12–14

Several authors have reported possible electrochemical cation in+ per formula unit within sertion in related compounds, such as 2 Li Mn0.5-xCaxTi2(PO4)3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.5).15 According to Aatiq et al., Mn2+ plays the important role of redistribution of divalent cations over all M1 sites during the lithium intercalation.15 Makino et al. have reported on the electrochemical insertion of magnesium in this family of compositions16 with one Mg2+ ions inserted per formula unit but the low mobility of the alkaliearth ions into the host material revealed a poor kinetic behavior. A more limited extent of magnesium insertion was reported for the related Mg0.5+x(FeyTi1y)2(PO4)3 series.17 The same authors described preliminary results on the electrochemical lithium insertion in Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3.16

The aim of this work was to develop a detailed study of the structural changes involved during the electrochemical lithium or sodium insertion in Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3 by performing in-situ X-ray diffraction. As will be demonstrated below, the presence of Mg2+ within the + [Ti2(PO4)3] framework changes noticeably the mechanism of Li insertion/extraction, which is important to address in order to envisage

Electrochemical Society Student Member. ∗∗ Electrochemical Society Active Member. zE-mail: iq1lacap@uco.es

similar beneﬁts for NASICON compositions with more attractive intrinsic features (sulfates, Vanadium or iron-containing).

Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3 was synthesized by a co-precipitation method. For this purpose, stoichiometric amounts of Mg(CH3COO)2 · 4 H2O (Panreac), and NH4H2PO4 (Aldrich) were ﬁrst dissolved in de-ionized water into which an appropriate ratio of ﬁne powdered TiO2 (Merck) was dispersed under vigorous stirring. After solvent evaporation, the solid precursor was recovered and ball milled in an agate jar for 30 minutes in the presence of hot ethanol. The ﬁnal crystallized form ◦ of Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3 was obtained after annealing at 900 C for 12 h under argon atmosphere.

The X-ray diffraction pattern of the original sample was recorded in a D4-Bruker diffractometer (equipped with a Cu anticathode) between 10 ≤ 2θ ≤ 110 ◦ . Unit cell parameters were calculated using the Fullprof software. In situ X-ray diffraction patterns + insertion/extraction using were recorded during electrochemical Li a D8-Bruker diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. The in situ electrochemical cell18 was discharged (and charged) at a current equivalent to C/50 rate during which XRD patterns were collected, every hour, between 2θ = 13 ◦ after which angle high-intensity diffraction peaks of Be tend to “screen” those of the studied phase. At in 2θ (dhkl = 2.33 Å), the diffraction peak of aluminum is present ◦ 38.6 and used as a position-reference peak for successive experiments. The 31P MAS NMR spectrum was recorded in a Bruker Avance400WB instrument with a 4 mm diameter rotor and working at 12 kHz of spin rate. A 85% H3PO4 solution was used as reference. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were recorded in a PHILIPS CM-10 microscope.

The electrode materials were prepared by mixing the phosphate sample, carbon black and PVDF (polyvinylidene ﬂuoride) in a 70:20:10 ratio, respectively. A slurry was formed by adding Nmethyl-2-pyrrolidone which was subsequently ball milled at 500 rpm for several hours. The working electrode was prepared by pasting ◦ C under the mixture on a 9 mm aluminum disk and dried at 120 vacuum. Afterwards, the electrodes were kept overnight in an argon C in order to improve the polymer characteristics. atmosphere at 250 Electrochemical cycling investigation was performed using two electrodes Swagelok type cells using a lithium or sodium disk (diameter of 9 mm) served as a counter electrode. The electrodes were separated by glass ﬁber sheets (GF/A-Whatman) soaked in 1 M LiPF6 (EC:DEC) acting as electrolyte and assembled in a glove box under a controlled argon atmosphere. These cells were galvanostatically cycled at several C/n rates, where n is the number of hours needed for the reaction with 1 lithium per formula unit at the applied current intensity. Potentiostatic Intermittent Titration Technique (PITT) was performed in a

Figure 2. 31P MAS NMR spectrum of Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3. A: Mg2P2O7 and B: TiP2O7 impurities.

VMP system applying 1.5 mV potential steps. The relaxation current was limited to 10 μA, equivalent to a C/300 rate.

An Autolab PGSTAT12 system was used to carry out Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). For this purpose, the electrode was assembled in a three-electrode Swagelok type cell using a lithium disk as a reference electrode. The cell was cycled, stopped at the end of the nth discharge and let to relax for at least 12 h to achieve quasi-equilibrium system. The impedance spectra were recorded by perturbing the equilibrium potential by an AC voltage signal of 5 mV which was applied from 100 kHz to 2 mHz.

The Rietveld reﬁnement of the Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3 pattern was done according to the R-3c space group proposed by Barth et al.11 The reﬁnement of the hexagonal parameters yielded values of a = 8.4898(2) Å and c= 20.9793(7) Å (Rwp = 4.54%; RBragg = 3.85%). A minor impurity phase, β-TiP2O7 (∼5% as determined by Rietveld reﬁnement) was identiﬁed and indexed with the Pa-3 space group (Figure 1). Nevertheless, a more precise determination of the impurity should require a calibration procedure. The presence of this phase was inevitable (as previously reported11) whatever the many synthesis conditions explored, including the adjustment of the precursor molar ratio to avoid the intrinsic disorder. It was only minimized by using the preparation here described. The reason for the systematic occurrence of minor amounts of TiP2O7 has been explained by Hagenmuller et al.11 According these authors, the separation of TiP2O7 is accompanied by an enrichment in magnesium to produce Mg0.5+xMgxTi2x(PO4)3, in a molar ratio 6 to 1 resulting from the stoichiometry of the reaction they propose. Such reaction may take place in our samples only in a minor extent. In Mg0.5+xMgxTi2x(PO4)3, a simple model of intrinsic disorder with Mg2+ ions sitting on Ti sites could be expected, that demands a simultaneous insertion of additional magnesium for charge balance.11 However, attempts to identify this additional magnesiumrich phase were not successful due to its very low contribution as expected from the molar ratio above mentioned. TEM images showed well-crystallized particles ranging from ca. 100 nm to only a few nanometers in size (Inset in Figure 1). These particles are mutually aggregated and deﬁne interparticulate hollow spaces.

31P MAS NMR allows to have more detailed information of the local environment of phosphorous in the structure. Isotropic peaks are observed under MAS conditions due to the I = 1/2 nuclear spin of the 31P nucleus. The spectrum in Figure 2 exhibits two small peaks at −13.1 and −19.3 ppm (marked with A symbol in the ﬁgure) that 19 and a set of minor signals between could be identiﬁed as Mg2P2O7 −35 and −55 ppm (marked with B symbol in the ﬁgure) attributed to TiP2O7.20 A number of peaks are located at −22.7, −30.1 −33.7 and −39.3 ppm which are assigned to the main phase. Contrarily to the be-

havior of phosphorous in related compounds in which a unique signal can be discerned,7,15 the presence of several peaks is associated to the occurrence of different local environment of phosphorous atoms. The inset in Figure 2 shows the local environment of phosphorous atoms surrounded by oxygen in the corners of the tetrahedra and titanium and / magnesium (blue and white color) at the center of the octahedron. The four peaks of the main phase could be assigned to (POMg3Ti1), (POMg2Ti2), (POMg1Ti3) and (POMg0Ti4) phosphorous environments, with more negative shifts on increasing the number of titanium atoms surrounding phosphorous. According to this model, the high intensity of the peaks at −22.7 and −30.1 ppm would be indicative of a strong localization of Mg2+ ions in M1 sites. The absence of other resonances ascribable to a phase with Mg2+ ions on Ti sites can be explained similarly to the absence of diffraction lines in Fig. 1 by its low expected proportion.

Lithium cells assembled with the Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3 electrode material were initially cycled at C/20 in a wide voltage range between ◦ 1.0 and 4.2 V vs. Li , in order to determine the most efﬁcient cellpotential window. As can be seen in Figure 3, the discharge proﬁle

Figure 3. (a) Voltage versus capacity plot for a lithium cell assembled with Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3 and cycled between 4.2 and 1 V at C/20; (b) Nyquist plots of electrodes partially discharged at 2.4 and 1.25 V.

Figure 4. (a) XRD patterns of the studied Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3 and TiP2O7 enriched sample. Voltage versus capacity and derivative curves for (b) Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3 and c) TiP2O7 enriched sample recorded at C/20.

reveals several quasi-plateaus up to 2 V which are reversible during further discharge. These quasi -plateaus are commonly attributed to the reduction of Ti4+ , while lithium ions are accommodated in vacant available M1 and M2 sites of the structure. On further discharge ◦ , which was an extended quasi-plateau was developed at ca. 1 V vs. Li partially reversible, thus producing an unwanted capacity fading after a few cycles. Previous reports on Co0.5TiOPO4 have also mentioned an extended capacity beyond the expected Ti4+ reduction, correlated to the irreversible reduction of Ti3+ /Ti2+

Additional information about the consequence of decreasing the lower cutoff potential can be inferred from the impedance spectra of partially discharged cells. Figure 3b displays the Nyquist plots obtained for a lithium cell discharged at 2.4 and subsequently to 1.25 V. The spectrum proﬁle of the cell discharged at 2.4 V (1 F/mol) is characterized by two depressed semicircles at high and medium frequencies and a sloping straight line at low frequencies. These semicircles are commonly attributed to the migration of lithium ions through the solid electrolyte interphase and to the charge transfer at the electrode/electrolyte interphase, respectively. The diameter of these semicircles is directly related to the resistance hindering lithium migration through the electrode-electrolyte interphases.22,23 Thus, the resistance due to solid electrolyte interphase was kept constant on discharging below 2 V, while the resistance ascribable to the charge transfer increased hugely for the electrode discharged at 1.25 V. This result reveals that the full occupancy of the M2 sites at the end of the corresponding quasi-plateau hinders the insertion of further alkali ions into the framework. For this reason, the lithium cell discharge was subsequently limited to the range between 4.2 and 2.0 V.

In order to discard the possible contribution of the inevitable TiP2O7 minor impurity to electrode capacity a sample intentionally prepared with an excess of TiP2O7 was used. In the XRD pattern of this mixture, intense diffraction peaks at 2 Theta = 22.5, 25.2 and 27.6, were respectively ascribed to (200), (210) and (211) reﬂections in the Pa-3 space group, according to previous reports (Figure 4a).24 The electrochemical insertion of lithium into TiP2O7 has been reported in both aqueous25 and organic electrolytes.26,27 The electrochemical phenomenon located at 2.60 ± 0.02 V vs. Li is therefore attributed to Li insertion/extraction into/from TiP2O7 (Figure 4c), based on Patoux’s investigation of this compound.28 The absence of this effect in Fig. 4 allows us to state that the capacity delivered by our sam-

Figure 5. Step potential curve for Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3. Steps of 1.5 mV were applied until a relaxation current of 10 μA was reached. Inset: Relaxation curves for 0.8 ≤ x ≤ 0.9.

ples is exclusively due to the electrochemical insertion of Li Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3.

Lithium insertion in highly pure Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3 at C/20 proceeds ◦ ﬁrst through a small contribution at 2.86 V vs. Li ascribable to the progressive ﬁlling of M1 sites. Subsequently, additional lithium is hosted in M2 sites as reﬂected by the appearance of two reduction signals at 2.48 and 2.21 V and the corresponding oxidation counterparts ◦ (Figure 4b). These phenomena may be at 2.30 V and 2.51 V vs. Li correlated to lithium ordering at the M2 sites which in turn depends on the distribution of Mg2+ and Ti4+ in the structural framework. The 31P MAS NMR results above discussed evidenced different local environment of phosphorous atoms ascribable to the exchange between magnesium and titanium atoms (Figure 2). This effect would affect the energy of the M2 sites and consequently leading to different voltages at which lithium can be inserted in these sub-sites.

Therefore, the contribution of the impurity to the electrochemical performance of highly pure Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3 can be eventually neglected. A PITT experiment was carried out by subjecting the lithium cells to short potential steps. The absence of bell-shape current response along the whole insertion reaction allowed to conclude on the occurrence of a LixMg0.5Ti2(PO4)3 solid solution system for the whole discharge (Figure 5).

Valuable information about the structural modiﬁcations occurring along the insertion process was gathered by recording in-situ the XRD patterns for a full electrochemical discharge-charge cycle down ◦ to 2 V. vs. Li (Figure 6). From point “a ” to “b” in the discharge

Figure 6. In-situ XRD patterns of partially discharged and charged Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3.

Figure 7. Full Pattern Matching reﬁnement of selected XRD patterns of partially discharged and charged Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3 electrodes.

+ curve, corresponding to the quasi-plateau at ca. 2.8 V vs. Li /Li, the reﬂections are slightly shifted and not always in the same direction. ◦ is shifted to For instance, the (211) reﬂection located at ca. 32.5 ◦ low angles, while the (116) peak at ca. 33.3 (2θ) is shifted at high angles. It suggests anisotropic variations in cell parameters as will be discussed below. From “b ” to “c”, all the XRD peaks are shifted toward low angles involving an enlargement of the unit cell when lithium is inserted into the M2 sites and Ti4+ being reduced to the trivalent state. The complete reduction undergoes from “c ” to “d”. In this third region, the shift of the reﬂections to low angles continues. Moreover, a new ◦ . effect is evidenced for the (101) and (003) reﬂections located at ca. 21 These peaks are progressively separated and their intensity decrease signiﬁcantly. This fact had been ascribed to a disorder effect that + in the M1 sites.15 involved a statistical distribution of Li On further charging, the reversibility of the topotactic reaction is clear. The reﬂections are shifted in the opposite sense to that observed during the discharge and eventually the diffraction pattern recorded for the pristine material is restored.

The values of the unit cell parameters were calculated by Full Pattern Matching reﬁnement of each XRD pattern and collected in Figure 7. A continuous increase of the parameter a is observed during the insertion of lithium in the M1 sites, while the parameter c is contracted in the same voltage range. This behavior reveals an anisotropic expansion/contraction of the rhombohedral cell when lithium ions are hosted in the M1 sites (c is contracted when positive charges “screen” negatively-charged octahedral faces along [001], as previously observed for the LiTi2(PO4)3-Li3Ti2(PO4)3,29 Na3Fe2(PO4)330 and LiV2(PO4)3-Li3V2(PO4)3 systems.31 After a less Li3Fe2(PO4)3 steep region in the vicinity of point b, the lithium insertion into the M2 sites involved an increase of both cell parameters until the end of the discharge. As previously mentioned, the reversibility of the lithium

Figure 8. (a) Voltage versus composition plot of a lithium cell assembled with Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3 as a working electrode recorded at C/20. Inset: Variation of capacity as a function of the cycle number. (b) Galvanostatic cycling of a Li/Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3 cell at several C rates.

insertion is evidenced by the symmetrical shape of the cell parameter + inserted/extracted, restoring at the end evolution as a function of xLi of the charge process cell parameters similar to that of the pristine material. The inspection of the variation of cell volume values along the ﬁrst cycle reveals a constancy of the framework volume until of the M1 sites are completely ﬁlled. Makino et al.16 reported a linear increase of the parameter a, while c remained constant during the whole process. However, our in-situ XRD measurements allowed us to appreciate more subtle variation in the unit cell parameters.

The extended galvanostatic cycling of lithium cells was carried out at several C rates. The discharge and charge proﬁles reveal low polarization and high reversibility in the cell potential window between 4.2 and 2.0 V (Fig. 8a). The lithium cell delivered 119 mAh/g after the ﬁrst discharge at C/20. After a limited loss of capacity during the second discharge, values as high as 110 mAh/g were kept after 15 cycles at C/20. Figure 8b shows the galvanostatic cycling under successive kinetic rates. The increase of the current intensity involved a progressive decrease in capacity to 80 mAh/g for C/5 and 50 mAh/g for 1C. Then, the recovery of the C/10 rate induced an increase of the capacity values.

The possible sodium insertion reaction in Mg0.5Ti2(PO4)3 as working electrode was also investigated. For the sake of comparison, Figure 9a shows the galvanostatic proﬁles for the ﬁrst discharge of lithium and sodium cells at C/20. The quasi-plateau at ca. 2.8 V vs. Li ascribable to the lithium insertion in M1 sites is replaced by a sloping voltage accounting for 0.9 sodium insertion per formula unit. Then,

rence of several peaks in the 31P MAS NMR spectrum of the pristine material, non ascribable to minor impurities, revealed distinct local environments for phosphorous atoms. The exchange of Mg and Ti atoms between M1 and M2 sites may justify this result.

Two different regions were detected during the discharge of a lithium cell. Firstly, a highly reversible one consisting of several quasi-plateaus between 2.8 and 2.0 V, ascribable to lithium insertion in M1 and M2 sites. Further reaction until 1 V involved a large irreversible quasi-plateau in which the cell impedance increased probably as a consequence of the full occupancy of the vacant sites in the framework.

A galvanostatic pulse technique evidenced a solid solution mechanism for the lithium insertion. This result was conﬁrmed by the in-situ XRD patterns recorded during the ﬁrst cycle. A continuous shift of the peaks allowed us to discard the occurrence of a two-phase system. Moreover, the evaluation of the unit cell parameters revealed constancy in the cell volume while M1 sites are ﬁlled. Otherwise, cell parameters monotonically increased for the region at which the ﬁlling of M2 sites is expected. During the subsequent charge, the cell parameters decreased until reaching values close to the pristine material. This fact reﬂects the high reversibility of the lithium insertion mechanism. The lithium cell delivered 119 mAh/g after the ﬁrst discharge at C/20. After a limited loss of capacity during the second discharge, values as high as 110 mAh/g were kept after 15 cycles.

Alternatively, sodium insertion was also essayed. The quasiplateau ascribable to the insertion in M1 sites is absent though a steady voltage decrease accounted for the insertion of 0.9 sodium ions per formula unit. Then, a quasi-plateau at ca. 2.05 V, ascribable to the insertion of sodium ions in the M2 vacant sites extents for an overall capacity of 97 mAh/g for the ﬁrst discharge, equivalent to 1.6 sodium per formula unit. Although a signiﬁcant irreversibility led to values of 80 mAh/g after the second discharge, the capacity retention allowed keeping values of 50 mAh/g after 18 cycles.

The authors are grateful to MICINN (MAT2011-22753), Junta de Andaluc´ıa for ﬁnancial support (Contract FQM-6017) and ALISTORE-ERI. We thank to SCAI (UCO Central Service for Research Support) and C. Vidal-Abarca is indebted to MCYT for her predoctoral grant.