Principle of operation of electrocatalytic gas sensors is based on the excitation of a sensor with a periodic potential  signal, while current response is recorded. Usually such sensors employ cyclic voltammetry, where linearly changing  voltage excitation of symmetrical triangular shape, typically in range of ±5 V, is used. In this work we present results  of electrocatalytic sensors employing staircase cyclic voltammetry technique. Presented results concern sensors based  on  Nasicon  with  platinum  electrodes.  It  is  demonstrated  that  such  sensor  can  be  used  for  measuring  NO2  concentration in mixtures with synthetic air.    © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd.  © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of the Symposium Cracoviense    Sp. z.o.o. Keywords: voltammetry; gas sensor; Nasicon;  

Cyclic  voltammetry  (CV)  is  a  method  widely  used  in  liquid  electrochemistry  for  determination  of  chemical species concentration. The method is based on oxidation and reduction of chemical species on  electrodes  polarised  using  linearly  changeable  voltage.  Electrochemical  reactions  produce  peaks  on  current-voltage  plots,  which  is  dependent  on  the  concentration  of  chemical  species.  In  the  case  of  the  electrocatalytic gas sensors, instead of liquid solution the solid state electrolyte is used as ion conducting  medium.  As  in  the  case  of  liquids  the  electric  current  is  measured,  while  voltage  excitation  of  certain  shape is applied to the sensor. Current-voltage (I-V) response shape depends in on the gas type and its  concentration.  Usually  current  peaks  are  observed  in  the  current-voltage  sensor  response  plot.  Such  a  response contains significantly more information comparing with other sensors. Sometimes position of the 

peak can be related to the type of gas, while the peak height can be related to the concentration of this gas.  This feature can be used for improvement of selectivity or multigas sensing [1]. 

During voltammetric experiment, the electric current flowing through the sensors electrodes has two  components:  the  capacitive  current  and  the  faradic  current.  Only  the  latter  corresponds  to  the  useful  information from reduction or oxidation of a chemical species. The capacitive current acts non-specific  background interference [2]. In CV the current at a working electrode is measured, while the potential is  swept linearly in time. Application of staircase cyclic voltammetry (STCV), where the potential sweep is  a series of stair steps, may increase sensor sensitivity. In STCV the current is measured at the end of each  potential  change,  so  that  the  contribution  to  the  current  signal  from  the  capacitive  charging  current  is  reduced. As a result, electrocatalytic sensors properties can be enhanced. 

In  this  work,  performance  of  electrocatalytic  sensors  employing  STCV  technique  is  compared  with  properties of ‘standard’ electrocatalytic sensor, which uses CV. Presented results concern sensors based  on  Nasicon.  It  is  demonstrated  that  such  sensor  can  be  used  in  NO2  concentration  determination  in  synthetic air. 

NASICON  (chemical  formula  Na2.8Zr2Si1.8P1.2O12)  powder  was  prepared  by  the  conventional  solidstate ball milling method. Pellets in the form of discs of 12 mm diameter and 1 mm thick were prepared  by  iso-axial  pressing  and  sintering.  Electrodes  were  made  by  coating  opposite  pellet  faces  with  the  platinum  paste  (ESL  5542).  Measurements  were  conducted  in  mixtures  of  high  purity  gases:  nitrogen  dioxide and synthetic air of controlled concentrations. The precision mass flow controllers were used for  obtaining gas mixtures composition. A constant gas flow of 100 sccm was maintained. Sensor was placed  in a tube furnace. More detailed description of NASICON preparation procedure, sensor construction and  measuring stand can be found in our earlier publications [3]. 

The  measurements  were  performed  using  the  electrochemical  interface  SI 1287  and  a  PC  computer  with  suitable  software  for  system  control  and  data  acquisition  (CorrWare,  Scribner  Associates,  Inc.).  STCV technique is not supported by SI 1287. Staircase voltammetry was obtained by measuring a set of  potentiostatic  experiments.  Controlling  of  potentiostatic  experiment  voltage  and  duration  allowed  obtaining desired staircase voltage excitation and measuring current response. Both voltage excitations  used in experiments are presented in Fig. 1 left. For each temperature and gas mixture two measurements,  CV  and  STCV,  were  conducted.  In  Fig. 1 right  I-V  response  obtained  at  200°C  with  both  methods  is  compared. Characteristic for STCV seems to have more preferable shape, current peak is more distinct  and higher, while measured currents for remaining part of curve are smaller. 

Fig. 1. (left) comparison of excitation signal of CV & STCV; (right) comparison of CV & STCV I-V response (synth. air, 20mV/s) 

Typical sensor response using CV and STCV to different nitrogen dioxide concentrations at 250°C is  presented in Fig. 2. This temperature was chosen based on our earlier experience. Our previous reports  proved  that  at  this  temperature  high  sensitivity  for  NO2  and  rapid,  stable  sensor  response  can  be  obtained [4]. In both cases two double symmetrical peaks near ±0.3 V and ±1.5 V are visible. With the  increase of NO2 concentration in the surrounding atmosphere the size of both peaks increases. Peaks for  STCV  are  more  distinct  and  steeper,  but  for  CV  and  high  nitrogen  dioxide  concentration  measured  currents are higher. 

Fig. 2. Electrocatalytic sensors response (50mV/s) to different NO2 concentrations (left) employing CV; (right) employing STCV   

Fig. 3. (left) Comparison I-V responses (40 ppm NO2, 50mV/s); (right) the current peak maximums   

 Direct comparison of plots for 40 ppm of NO2 is presented in Fig. 3 left. In contrast to measurements  obtained in synthetic air the peaks obtained in CV are higher than in STCV. Still, the peaks obtained in  STCV  are  steeper  than  in  CV.  For  the  part  of  curve  not  directly  related  with  nitrogen  dioxide  peak,  namely for voltages from 2.5 V to 5 V, the measured currents in STCV are much lower. This proves that  STCV technique helps reducing undesired capacitive current contribution.  

The electrocatalytic gas sensor response in the form of current-voltage dependence does not give the  possibility to obtain direct information about the concentration of gas in the vicinity of the sensors. A 

maximum  current  at  peak  can  be  used  as  a  measure  of  gas  concentration.  The  maximum  current  as  a  function  of  carbon  dioxide  concentration,  obtained  for  all  measured  and  discussed  earlier  sensor  responses, are presented in Fig. 3 right. In all cases almost linear dependence is observed. Unfortunately,  sensitivity, which can is related to slope of presented curves, is higher for CV method. 

The  results  of  electrocatalytic  gas  sensors  employing  sodium  ion  conducting  solid  electrolyte  (Nasicon)  investigation  were  presented.  Two  techniques,  namely  standard  cyclic  voltammetry  and  staircase cyclic voltammetry, applied in electrocatalytic gas sensor were compared. It is demonstrated that  all  investigated  types  of  the  sensor  excitations  can  be  used  for  the  detection  of  NO2  concentration  in  synthetic  air.  The  current-voltage  response  depends  in  a  unique  way  on  the  type  of  gas  and  its  concentration exposed to the sensor. The obtained results should be treated as preliminary. The STCV  method allows easier peak separation than CV, what is more suitable for multigas measurements. In this  case a few peaks are present in I-V plot and a peak position can be related to gas type. Application of the  STCV method allows selecting desirable stair size. Therefore, this method it gives additional freedom in  electrocatalytic sensor excitation optimization. 

This work was partially supported by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education, project  No. N N515 243437,  and  the  National  Centre  for  Research  and  Development,  project  LIDER  No. 22/103/L-2/10/NCBiR/2011.  