A single phase NASICON-type lithium conducting solid electrolyte, Li1.4Ti1.6 Al0.4(PO4)3 (LTAP), was synthesized from the precursor prepared by a sol-gel method with citric acid. The bulk and grain boundary conductivity in open air (relative humidity; C, respectively, from ca. 60%) of the LTAP sintered at 950 the impedance proﬁle analysis. The grain boundary resistance almost vanished following immersion in a saturated LiCl aqueous −3 S cm −1 in open solution at 50 air. The high conductivity has not changed for a long period in open air. The total conductivity of the immersed LTAP was dependent on the humidity in the atmosphere and was comparable to that of the pristine LTAP at as low humidity as in a glove box (dew point of ca. −80 C). The conductivity enhancement was explained by the formation of a low resistance LiCl-xH2O phase trapped in the grain boundaries of LTAP nanoparticles. 

Lithium ion conducting solid electrolytes have been extensively studied for the past half century and many solids with high lithium ion conductivity at room temperature, such as Li3N,1 Li2Sbased glass,2 NASICON-type Li1+xTi2−xAlx(PO4)3,3, 4 LISICON-type Li3+xZn1−xGeO4,5 and polymer electrolytes,6 have been reported. −1 at room Li3N exhibits lithium ion conductivity as high as 10 temperature. However, Li3N has a low decomposition potential of 0.445 V, which limits its usefulness as a practical solid electrolyte for battery applications. Recently, Tatsumisago et al.7 reported a high lithium ion conductivity of glass ceramics of Li7P3S11−z, the conductivity of which is as high as 5 × 10 −1 at room temperature. And more recently, Kanno et al.8 found a new lithium ion conducting solid of Li10GeP2S12, which has a one dimensional lithium diffusion path way and exhibits an extremely high lithium ion conductivity of 1.2 × 10 −1 at room temperature. The conductivities of these Li2S-based solid electrolytes are comparable to those of organic electrolytes used in lithium ion batteries, but they are quite hydroscopic and unstable in open air. The NASICON-type lithium ion conductors are attractive as electrolytes for batteries and electrochemical devices, because they exhibit a high conductivity of 7 × 10 −4 S cm −1 at room temperature and are stable under atmosphere and in water.9

The water stable NASICON-type lithium ion conducting solid electrolyte, Li1+xTi2−xAlx(PO4)3 (LTAP), has potential application for high energy density lithium/air secondary batteries, as proposed by Abraham et al.,10 and for alkaline-ion batteries, as proposed by Goodenough et al.11 as a protective layer for the lithium metal anode. Recently, lithium/air rechargeable batteries have been extensively studied as a power source for electric vehicles, because they possess the highest calculated gravimetric energy density among galvanic cells, which is comparable to that of gasoline.12 We have developed a water stable lithium electrode that consists of lithium metal, poly(ethylene) oxide-Li(CF3SO2)2N protective layer, and the water stable LTAP.13 The polymer protective layer is used to prevent the direct contact of LTAP and lithium metal, because LTAP is unstable with lithium metal. This type of electrode is stable for long periods in aqueous electrolyte; however, the electrical resistance of LTAP should be further reduced for the development of a high performance water stable lithium electrode. In previous studies,9, 13 LTAP plates supplied from Ohara Co., Japan were used for the water stable electrode, which consisted of the sintered dense glass ceramic with some sintering additives, and ◦ the conductivity at 25 C was approximately 3.5 × 10.

The electrical conductivity of LTAP has been reported by many researchers and is dependent on the preparation method and the stoichiometry (x in Li1+xTi2−xAlxP3O12). The ﬁrst reported conductivity for LTAP by Aono et al.4 for Li1.3Ti1.7Al0.3(PO4)3 prepared by conventional solid state reaction was as high as 7 × 10 −1 at C. Fu14 reported a higher conductivity of 1.3 × 10 −1 at ◦ 25 room temperature for the Li1+xTi2−xAlx(PO4)3 glass ceramic prepared by quenched from 1450 C. The impedance C and sintered at 550 proﬁles of the glass ceramics suggested that the bulk conductivity was as high as 6 × 10 −1 and the conductivity was dominated by −3 S cm the grain boundary resistance. Samples of this glass ceramic powder C for 12 h had a bulk conductivity of 9.2 × 10 ◦ −4 S sintered at 1,000 −1 at room −4 S cm cm temperature.15 The electrical conductivity of Li1.3Ti1.7Al0.3(PO4)3 prepared by solid state reaction was estimated to be 3 × 10 −3 S cm −1 for the bulk and 7 × 10 −1 for the grain boundary at room temperature.4 Weppner et al. also reported a high bulk conductivity of 3 × 10 −1 and a low grain boundary conductivity of 3 × 10 −1 at room temperature for Li1.3Ti1.7Al0.3(PO4)3.17 The −3 S total conductivity of sintered LTAP could be enhanced to over 10 −1 at room temperature by reducing the gain boundary resistance. cm −1 is the target for the solid electrolyte of A conductivity of 10 batteries for operation at high current density.18 We have previously reported that the electrical conductivity of the Ohara LTAP plate was enhanced slightly by immersion in LiCH3COO saturated CH3COOHH2O solution.15 In this study, sintered Li1.4Ti1.6Al0.4(PO4)3 pellets using a precursor prepared by a sol-gel method are immersed in saturated LiCl aqueous solution and signiﬁcant enhancement of the electrical conductivity is observed in open air. The conductivity of LTAP immersed in the saturated LiCL aqueous solution was dependent on the humidity of the environment and that of the immersed LTAP in the glove box (dew point of ca. −80 ◦ C) was comparable to that of the pristine LTAP. The mechanism of the conductivity enhancement by immersion of LTAP in saturated LiCl aqueous solution was examined.

The ﬂow chart for the preparation method of Li1.4Ti1.6Al0.4(PO4)3 (LTAP) is shown in Fig. 1. The precursor of LTAP was prepared by a sol-gel method with citric acid.19 The titanium solution was prepared by dissolving Ti(OC4H9)4 (Nacalai Tesque, Japan) into an aqueous citric acid (Nacalai Tesque, Japan) solution (0.2 M) under stirring at ◦ 95 C for 20 h. The concentration of Ti(OC4H9)4 was 0.8 M. Stoichiometric amounts of chemical grade LiNO3, NH4H2PO4, and Al(NO3)3 were added into the titanium solution. The polymer precursor was prepared from a mixture of the prepared solution and ethylene glycol (Nacalai Tesque, Japan) with the molar ratio of citric acid to ethylene glycol at 1:1. The resultant solution was heated with stirring at 120 C ◦ for 30 min and 150 C until a dry ◦ powder was produced. The obtained powder was heated at 500 C for 4 h to promote pyrolysis. The ﬁnal powder precursor was calcined in open air at 800 C for 5 h to obtain LTAP powder. The LTAP powder was milled using high energy mechanical milling (HEMM, Fritsch planetary micro mill) and the ﬁne powder was isostatically pressed into a pellet form at a pressure of 150 M Pa and sintered at 950 C for 6 h on a gold plate in a high purity alumina crucible. Immersion tests in various aqueous solutions were then conducted using the sintered pellets. Sintered pellets of approximately 2 mm thick were immersed into water and aqueous solutions with different LiCl contents at 50 C for one week. The immersed LTAP pelts were washed with water and ◦ dried at 220 C for 12 h under vacuum.

The electrical conductivity of the specimens in open air and regulated relative humidity (RH) was computed from AC impedance measurements (Solatron 1260 frequency response analyzer) of cells prepared with gold electrodes sputtered onto the LTAP surface in the frequency range of 0.1 Hz to 1 M Hz. Zplot software was employed for impedance data analysis. X-ray diffraction (XRD) data were obtained using a Rigaku RINT 2500 with a rotating copper cathode. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images and the relative contents of the elements were measured using a Hitachi S-486 SEM with an energy dispersion X-ray spectrometer (EDX). Raman spectroscopy was carried out using a Horiba-Ramanol T-64000 at room temperature. Xray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) studies were carried out using a Shimadzu ESCA 3400. Infrared spectra were obtained using a JASCO FT-IR 4100 spectrometer. The Li content in LTAP was analyzed using inductively coupled plasma spectroscopy (ICP, Shimadzu ICP1000).

Sintered Li1.4Ti1.6Al0.4(PO4)3 pellets (s-LTAP) without impurity phases were prepared at a low sintering temperature of 950 C for 5 h using a ﬁne Li1.4Ti1.6Al0.4(PO4)3 power synthesized by a solgel method with citric acid. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the pulverized s-LTAP from the sintered pellets are shown in Fig. 2 with those of s-LTAP immersed in water (H2O-LTAP) and in saturated LiCl aqueous solution at 50 C for one week (LiCl-LTAP). After immersion in the aqueous solution, the LTAP pellets were dried under vacuum ◦ at 220 C overnight. The pristine s-LTAP, H2O-LTAP and LiCl-LTAP have the NASICON-type phase without any trace impurity phases such as AlPO4, TiO2, and TiP2O7. The LTAP sintered at 1,100 C for 6 h had a trace impurity phase of AlPO4. The lattice parameters of s-LTAP and LiCl-LTAP were estimated to be a = 0.8496 nm and c = 2.0784 nm, and a = 0.8497 nm and c = 2.0807 nm, respectively using Si as an internal standard. The c axis is slightly increased by immersion in saturated LiCl aqueous solution. Aono et al.4 reported the lattice parameters of Li1.4Ti1.6Al0.4(PO4)3 prepared by solid state reaction as a = 0.8495 nm and c = 2.080 nm. The differences in the lattice parameters after immersion in saturated LiCl aqueous solution could be considered to be within the experimental error.

The electrical conductivity of sintered pellets of s-LTAP, H2OLTAP, and LiCl-LTAP was examined in open air. The measured densities of the sintered samples were approximately 90% of the theoretical density calculated from the lattice constants. Figure 3 shows impedance proﬁles of s-LTAP and LiCl-LTAP measured using sput◦ tered gold electrodes at 25 C in ambient atmosphere. The impedance spectrum of s-LTAP shows a semicircle, which almost disappeared by immersion of s-LTAP in the saturated LiCl aqueous solution at ◦ 50 C for one week. The semicircles could be attributed to the grain boundary resistance and the intercept of the semicircles on the real axis at high frequency represents the bulk resistance of s-LTAP.20 The bulk resistance (Rb) and the grain boundary resistance (Rgb) of sC were estimated to be 116 and 179  cm2, respectively, LTAP at 25 using the equivalent circuit shown in the inset of Fig. 3A. These resistances correspond to 1.9 × 10 −1 for the bulk and grain boundary conductivities, and the total conductivity is 7.5 × 10 −1. The bulk conductivity is almost the same and the grain boundary conductivity higher than those reported previously for Li1.4Ti1.6Al0.4(PO4)3 prepared from a sol-gel precursor.16 LiClLTAP has a small semicircle; Rb and Rgb are estimated to be 10.5 and 13.4  cm2, respectively, which indicates that Rb and Rgb are signiﬁ◦ cantly reduced. The bulk and grin boundary conductivity at 25 C are as high as 2.1 × 10 −2 and 1.6 × 10 −1, respectively. The total C are estimated to be 9.2 × 10 −1. The to◦ conductivities at 25 tal conductivity of LiCl-LTAP is approximately one order higher than the total conductivity and four times higher than the bulk conductivity of s-LTAP. In microcrystalline solids, where the effective grain boundary width is negligible compared to the grain size, the contribution of parallel grain boundaries can be neglected, which results in an equivalent circuit with a grain boundary parallel resistance-capacitor connected in series with a grain bulk resistance (A in Fig. 3).21 The parallel grain boundary contribution must be taken into account when the parallel grain boundary conductivity becomes signiﬁcantly larger than that of the bulk,22 as shown an equivalent circuit B in Fig. 3, and the bulk conductivity cannot be estimated from the intercept of the semicircle on the real axis at high frequency as simulated by Bouchet et al.23 The high total conductivity of LiCl-LTAP may be due to the parallel contribution of the low grain boundary conduction. The semicircle for the bulk was outside the frequency window, so that Rb could not be estimated from the Nyquist plots. The bulk conductivity of LiCl-LTAP may be same as that of s-LTAP. The total conductivity of LiCl-LTAP (9.2 × 10 C) is slightly lower than that of the recently reported new lithium conducting solid Li10GeP2S12,8 which exhibits the highest conductivity of solid lithium ion conductors (1.2 × 10 C) reported previously. The conductivity of LiCl-LTAP is comparable to that of a typical liquid electrolyte composed of LiPF6 in an ethylene carbonate, propylene carbonate, and diethyl carbonate mixed solution (1 × 10 C).24 The lithium ion conductivity of LiCl-LTAP is rather higher than that of the liquid electrolyte, because the ionic transport number of the

liquid electrolyte is less than 0.424 and that of LiCl-LTAP is unity. Higher ionic conductivities for solid electrolytes at room temperature were reported previously for single crystal β-alumina (3 × 10 −2 S −1),26 and Rb4Cu16I7Cl13 (3.4 cm × 10 −1).27 These super high ionic conductivities for solid electrolytes were observed only for special crystal structures, where the mobile ions have more available positions in the crystal lattice points, similar to that in molten salts. On the other hand, the ionic conduction mechanism in the NASICON-type Li1+xTi2−xAlx(PO4)3 could be explained by an excess of interstitial site lithium ions introduced to maintain the charge balance by substitution of Al3+ for Ti4+ in the three-dimensional tunnel structures of [PO4] tetrahedral connected by a sharing arrangement with TiO2 octahedra.28 The high conductivity of LiCl-LTAP could be not be explained by a special crystal structure, but by the contribution of low Rgb with high lithium ion conductivity.

The electronic conductivity contribution in ionic conductivity dominant solid electrolytes of MX was estimated by the Wagner method29 using the M/MX/M’(Pt, Au, or carbon) cell. However, LTAP is unstable in contact with lithium metal. Therefore, the contribution of electronic conduction was determined using a lithium ion blocking Au/LiCl-LTAP/Au cell. A small direct current was passed through the cell and the cell voltage was measured as a function of time at room temperature. The electronic conductivity of LiCl-LTAP was estimated −1 from the cell voltage at a low current to be less than ca. 10 drain as show in Fig. 4A. That is, the electronic conductivity contribution is negligible compared to the total conductivity. Furthermore, the direct current behavior of LiCl-LTAP was measured using a lithium ion non-blocking Au/LiCoO2/LiCl-LTAP/LiCoO2/Au cell in open air, because in some cases the impedance proﬁle cannot cover the behavior in the low frequency range. LTAP is unstable with lithium metal9; therefore, LiCoO2 was used as the non-blocking electrode. LiCoO2 is known as a mixed electron and lithium ion conductor, of which the −1.30 LiCoO2 thin lithium ion conductivity is approximately 10 ﬁlms of several micrometers thick were sputtered on the LiCl-LTAP pellets. The cell voltage change between the anode and the cathode over time was measured as a function of the applied current at 25 C, and typical results are shown in Fig. 4B. Stable cell voltages were −2. The exact dc lithium ion conductivity observed at up to 2.6 mA cm of LiCl-LTAP could not be estimated from these data because of the contribution of electrode polarizations, but the low voltage jump in an instant of current on and the low polarization potentials at high current densities suggest that the conduction in LiCl-LTAP is due to lithium ions. Therefore, we have concluded that the high electrical conductivity of LiCl-LTAP is due to the contribution of lithium ion conduction. The enhancement of conductivity by immersion in saturated LiCl aqueous solutions was dependent on the LiCl concentration. The grain boundary conductivity of LTAP immersed in a 1 M ◦ LiCl aqueous solution at 50 C for one week was slightly increased. In contrast, that of LTAP immersed in a 0.1 LiCl aqueous solution decreased. LTAP immersed in water without lithium ions at 50 C for one week had a signiﬁcantly high Rgb, but no signiﬁcant change of Rb. The bulk and grain boundary conductivities of H2O-LTAP were estimated to be 1.94 × 10 C, respectively. There was no change of the XRD patterns observed before and after immersion in water, as shown in Fig. 2. The low grain boundary conductivity of H2O-LTAP could be explained by the formation of a resistive phase at the grain boundary by an exchange reaction of lithium ions and protons.31 However, FT-IR measurements showed no difference between s-LTAP and H2O-LTAP. Sintered LTAP pellets were immersed in another hygroscopic lithium salt of LiNO3 at 50 C for one week and dried at 220 C for 12 h under vacuum, followed by impedance measurements. LTAP immersed in the saturated LiNO3 aqueous solution showed a signiﬁcant conductivity enhancement in the atmosphere.

Figure 5 shows the temperature dependence of the total conductivity for s-LTAP and LiCl-LTAP in the temperature range of 80 to −20 ◦ C was as high as 1.2 × 10 −1. Generally, a conductivity knee or jump in the Arrhenius plots of conductivity is observed for ionic solids, which is due to phase transition and the interaction of mobile ions and the doped ions or impurity ions.32 The conductivity curves for LiCl-LTAP ◦ had a slight conductivity knee near 0 C. The activation energy for the conductivity of LiCl-LTAP was calculated from Arrhenius plots to be −1 in the low 19 kJ mol −1 in the high temperature range and 23 kJ mol temperature range. The activation energy is higher than those of the −1)26 and Rb4Cu16I7Cl13 super-ionic conductors of RbAg4I (7.1 kJ mol −1),27 but similar to those of the Li-βAl2O3 single crystal (7.0 kJ mol −1).8 Estimation of the −1)33 and Li10GeP2S12 (24 kJ mol (18.5 kJ mol activation energy for the bulk conductivity of LiCl-LTAP was difﬁcult, due to the parallel grain boundary conductivity contribution. The activation energies for s-LTAP in the high and low temperature ranges −1, respectively, which is in were estimated to be 28 and 32 kJ mol good agreement with those reported previously.4, 16 The activation energies for the bulk conductivity and the grain boundary conductivity −1, respectively. The of s-LTAP were estimated to be 8.9 and 51 kJ mol activation energy for the bulk conductivity of s-LTAP is comparable to those of the super-ionic conductors. The conductivity data in open air for s-LTAP and LTAP immersed in various aqueous solutions are summarized in Table I.

The conductivity enhancement of Li1+x+yTi2−xAlxP3−ySiyO12 by immersion in aqueous solution has been reported by Shimonishi et al.15, where the electrical conductivity of pellets of the glass ceramic powder (supplied from Ohara, Japan) sintered at 1000 C increased from 1.48 × 10 −1 by immersion in LiCH3COO saturated CH3COOH-H2O solution at 50 C for one week. On the other hand, a signiﬁcant decrease in conductivity was observed when the glass ceramics pellet was immersed in acetic acid solution without the mechanism for conductivity enhancement has not yet been discussed. XRD patterns of s-LTAP and LiCl-LTAP showed no change after immersion, as shown in Fig. 2. Raman scattering spectra of LTAP have been reported to inanions.33 The spectra of vestigate the effect of Li s-LTAP and LiCl-LTAP were similar to those reported previously, with no signiﬁcant difference between s-LTAP and LiCl-LTAP as shown in Fig. 6. In addition, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis showed no difference between s-LTAP and LiCl-LTAP. These results suggest that the conductivity enhancement of s-LTAP by immersion in saturated LiCl solution cannot be explained by a structural change of s-LTAP. The conductivity of LiCl-LTAP of 9.2 × 10 −1 at 25 ◦ C under atmosphere (RH of ca. 50%) decreased to 7 × 10 −1 after storage in a dry glove box for a few hours (dew point of ca. −80 ◦ C), which is comparable to that of s-LTAP. The conductivity of the sample increased again to the original value outside of the dry glove box, which indicates the conductivity change is reversible. Figure 7 shows the relationship between the electrical conductivity of LiCl-LTAP at ◦ 25 C and relative humidity along with impedance proﬁles, where a clear dependence is evident. The total conductivity in the dry glove box −3) is comparable to that of s-LTAP. (water content of ca. 0.00061 g m The high bulk conductivity compared to that of s-LTAP may be due to the effect of inductance at high frequencies, because of the long lead wire to measure the impedance from the dry glove box. The total con−3 S ductivity at 5% RH (water content of ca. 1.15 g m −1, which is comparable to the bulk conductivity at low RH in a dry cm ◦ glove box. At 15% relative humidity and 25 C, the conductivity is still as high as 7.5× 10 −1. Energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis shows that a small amount of Cl is observed at the grain boundaries in LiCl-LTAP, as shown in Fig. 8. The average amount of Cl is less than 1 wt% in the grain boundaries and no Cl is observed within the grains.

The LiCl-LTAP pellets were immersed in water for one night and the Cl content of the water was analyzed using inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES) and the results are shown in Table I. The Cl content in the LTAP immersed in the aqueous LiCl solution increased with the LiCl content in the solution. The dependences of the electrical conductivity on the humidity and Cl content in LTAP suggest that the conductivity enhancement can be explained by the presence of a low resistance phase of LiCl-xH2O at the grain boundary.

Figure 9 shows impedance proﬁles of LiCl-LTAP and the electrical C in open air; no changes in the impedance proﬁles were observed. The grain boundary conductivity at −20 ◦ −3 S −1 using the equivalent circuit shown in Fig. 2. No phase transition cm of LTAP with LiCl-xH2O at the grain boundaries was observed in the temperature range of 80 to −20 C. Furthermore, the room temperature conductivity of LiCl-LTAP was not changed for two months when stored in open air, which indicates the LiCl-xH2O phase at the grain boundaries in the ﬁne LTAP particles (particle size of 0.1–1.0 μm) is stable in open air for a long period in this temperature range. The decrease in conductivity of LiCl-LTAP with decreasing water content in atmosphere could be explained by the decrease in conductivity of the LiCl-xH2O phase at the grain boundaries.

the electrical conductivity of the water stable NASICON-type LTAP solid lithium ion conductor prepared from a sol-gel precursor and sintered at 950 C was signiﬁcantly enhanced by immersion in the saturated LiCl aqueous solution. The conductivity of 9.2 × 10 C is comparable to that of previously reported highest solid lithium ion conductors.8 The high conductivity of LTAP immersed in the saturated LiCl aqueous solution can be explained by the formation of a low resistive LiCl-xH2O phase at the grain boundaries in the nanosize LTAP particles. The LiCl-xH2O phase trapped in the ﬁne pores of LTAP nanoparticles is stable in open air and stable conductivity was achieved in open air for a long period. The enhancement of conductivity by modiﬁcation of the grain boundaries could be useful for other lithium ion conducting solid electrolytes with nanosize pores. This type of water stable high lithium ion conductivity solid electrolyte is an attractive candidate for the protective layer of a water stable lithium electrode for lithium/air secondary batteries13 and as an electrolyte for all-solid-state lithium batteries.34
