A novel dual-electrolyte rechargeable Li-air cell, consisting of lithium metal anode in an aprotic electrolyte, an air electrode in an aqueous phosphate buffer catholyte, and a NASICON-type lithium-ion conducting solid electrolyte (Li1 + x + yAlxTi2 − xSiyP3 − yO12 or LTAP) separator, has been investigated. The solid electrolyte separates the aprotic electrolyte from the aqueous catholyte, while providing pathways for lithium-ion transport. The phosphate buffer solution with a moderate pH helps to keep the solid electrolyte stable and reduces internal resistance and overpotential, while enabling a rechargeable Li-air cell with a high operating voltage and energy density. The Li-air cell exhibits a discharge capacity of 221 mAh g− 1 at a current density of 0.5 mA cm− 2 with good cycle life.

Current lithium-ion batteries with insertion-compound electrodes fall short of the high power and energy densities demanded by multifunctional portable electronic devices, electric vehicles, and grid storage [1]. Metal-air batteries, with the highest energy density of all known batteries, have the potential to provide solutions for these applications. Among the metal-air batteries, Li-air batteries offer the highest theoretical energy density (11,680 Wh/kg), rivaling that of gasoline (13,000 Wh/kg), due to the high capacity of both the electrodes and the high operating voltage of the Li-O2 couple [2].

Abraham and Jiang [3] reported the ﬁrst rechargeable lithium–oxygen cell based on an aprotic electrolyte, which was then further developed by others [4–7]. However, most aprotic lithium–oxygen cells are operated in pure oxygen or a mixture of dry oxygen and nitrogen since the moisture in ambient environment can degrade the nonaqueous electrolyte and the lithium metal anode, resulting in poor cycle life. The lithium-air cells based on aprotic electrolytes also suffer from clogging of the porous air cathodes by insoluble products like Li2O2 and Li2O. To overcome this problem, Visco et al. [8] proposed the use of water-stable NASICON-type solid electrolytes (Li1 + x + yAlxTi2 − xSiyP3 − yO12 or LTAP) to protect the lithium metal anode. This idea has been applied to many dual-electrolyte lithium cells, including dual-electrolyte Li-air cells [9–11]. For example, Zhang et al. [12] developed a Li|PEO18LiTFSI|LTAP|HOAc (90 vol.%)–H2O–LiOAc (sat) (10 vol.%)|Pt-black air battery, which delivered a discharge capacity of 250 mAh g− 1 for 15 cycles.

However, the cell had to be operated at 3 atm of air to improve the utilization of acetic acid and at 60 °C to maintain low interfacial impedance. Wang et al. [13] proposed a Li|organic electrolyte|LTAP| 10 mL 1 M KOH|Mn3O4 cell, but they needed to divide the aqueous electrolyte into two compartments with a cation exchange membrane (CEM) to protect the LTAP membrane from corrosion by the discharge product, LiOH [14]. Unfortunately, CEM increases the complexity and cost of the whole system.

We report here a novel dual-electrolyte Li-air battery system, in which a phosphate buffer solution is used as the catholyte with the cell conﬁguration of Li|1 M LiPF6 in EC/DEC|LTAP|0.1 M H3PO4+1 M LiH2PO4|Pt air. Phosphoric acid is a moderately strong acid and could corrode the LTAP membrane, if used solely. However, a phosphate buffer solution consisting of a mixture of 0.1 M phosphoric acid and 1 M LiH2PO4 with a net pH value of 3.14 at room temperature can avoid the corrosion of the LTAP membrane, and the results are presented here.

All experiments were conducted with a PTFE-plate constructed battery mold shown in Fig. 1. This layered battery structure consists of a nickel foam current collector, lithium foil, aprotic electrolyte (1 M LiPF6 in EC/DEC (1:1 v/v)), LTAP membrane (0.15 mm thick, 0.76×0.76 cm, OHARA Inc., Japan), aqueous catholyte (0.1 M H3PO4+ 1 M LiH2PO4), an air electrode with carbon-supported platinum catalyst (0.76×0.76 cm), and a platinum mesh current collector. The air electrode was prepared by spraying the catalyst ink made with Pt/C (40 wt.%, Johnson Matthey) and Naﬁon (5 wt.%, EW1000, Dupont) onto a 10 BA gas diffusion layer (SGL). The Pt loading and Naﬁon content in the air electrode were, respectively, 1.2 mg cm− 2 and 20 wt.%.

In order to protect LTAP from being reduced by lithium metal, the lithium metal and LTAP were separated with two layers of Celgard® polypropylene impregnated with the aprotic electrolyte [10]. The anode side of this cell was assembled in an argon-ﬁlled glove box and then combined with the cathode side in air followed by adding 0.4 mL of catholyte containing 0.1 M H3PO4+1 M LiH2PO4.

Charge–discharge tests were conducted with an Arbin BT 2000 battery test system. Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were recorded at open circuit voltage (OCV) with an impedance analyzer (Solartron 1260 A) in the frequency range of 2 MHz to 1 Hz. The ac voltage amplitude was 10 mV. Polarization curves were recorded with a potentiostat (Solartron 1287) in the potential range of OCV to 0 V with a scan rate of 5 mV s− 1. All tests were conducted at room temperature.

During the discharge–charge process, the reversible electrode reactions and the overall cell reaction occur as shown below in reactions 1, 2, and 3, which are similar to those in the aqueous Li-air cell reported by Zhang et al. [12]:Anode : Li↔Li Cathode : H3PO4 þ 1=4O2 þ e−↔ðH2PO4Þ− þ 1=2H2O Overall : Li þ H3PO4 þ 1=4O2↔LiH2PO4 þ 1=2H2O.

The forward reaction 2 refers to the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and the backward reaction 2 refers to the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). During discharge, O2 diffuses to the catalyst active sites and combines with protons in the catholyte to form water. While in the aprotic electrolyte, the lithium metal anode is oxidized to Li+ ions, which diffuse through the LTAP membrane into the catholyte to form LiH2PO4. During charge, water splits into oxygen and protons; while oxygen is removed as bubbles, the protons combine with (H2PO4)− to form phosphoric acid. Lithium ions in the catholyte diffuse back to the aprotic electrolyte and get reduced and plated onto the lithium metal anode.

Fig. 2(a) shows a typical discharge–charge curve of the Li-air cell at ambient environment. The cell was discharged for 3 h and then charged for 3 h at 0.5 mA cm− 2. The observed capacity of 221 mAh g− 1 based on H3PO4 (excluding the air electrode and the theoretical capacity (273 mAh g− 1) of oxygen) is 81% of 3.92 mg H3PO4 within the catholyte. The energy density of H3PO4 based on the ﬁrst discharge capacity and cell voltage is ~770 Wh kg− 1. The theoretical energy density of the cell based on the overall cell reaction 3 (involving Li metal and H3PO4, but excluding oxygen and air electrode) and a theoretical voltage of 4.27 V is 1089 Wh kg− 1. Fig. 2(b) shows the discharge voltage proﬁles of the cell at various current densities of 0.1−0.5 mA cm− 2 for half an hour at each current density. The very ﬂat discharge plateaus seen at different current densities demonstrate excellent rate capability and good electrocatalytic activity and kinetics at the air electrode. The discharge overpotential increases only slightly as the current density increases, revealing very low internal resistance and high catalytic activity of the dual-electrolyte Li-air cell presented here. Using acetic acid as the active material, Zhang et al. [12] achieved a discharge capacity of 250 mAh g-1 for 15 cycles with good rate capability up to 0.5 mA cm− 2 at 60 °C. However, since acetic acid suffers from vaporization problems, its utilization rate is low (56%) even under 3 atm of air [12]. In contrast, H3PO4 is stable and nonﬂammable and offers a high utilization rate of 81% in ambient environment. The utilization rate could increase close to 100% with optimized cell design.

Fig. 2(c) shows the polarization curve of the Li-air cell obtained by a potential sweep method at a scan rate of 5 mV s− 1 with a potentiostat. It displays a maximum power density of 11.9 mW cm− 2 at 1.82 V, which is comparable to the lithium-air fuel cell developed by He et al. [15]. The peak power density could be increased by ten times if a capacitor electrode is incorporated into the cell [16]. The abrupt drop observed at the beginning of the polarization curve at low current densities is due to the activation polarization of the oxygen reduction catalyst. The rest of the polarization curve is almost linear, where the polarization is dominated by the resistance of the LTAP membrane. Compared to aprotic Li-air batteries, the dual-electrolyte Li-air battery offers much higher operating voltage and power density, which are even competitive with those of direct methanol fuel cells [17]. Fig. 2(d) shows a typical impedance proﬁle of the dual-electrolyte Li-air cell at OCV. From the intersection of the semi-circles with the real axis, we can obtain the resistances of the liquid electrolytes (RE), the LTAP membrane (RL), and charge transfer and interface (RF+RI).

Fig. 3(a) shows the extended cycling performance of the Li-air cell at 0.5 mA cm− 2 at ambient environment for 20 cycles. The charge and discharge overpotential increased from 1 to 1.3 V after 20 cycles. In order to understand the cell performance decay associated with the impedance change, the impedance proﬁles before and after cycling were measured, as shown by the Nyquist plots in Fig. 3(b). The total impedance increased from 258 Ω cm2 to 292 Ω cm2 after 20 cycles. The impedance proﬁle shows a large semicircle in the high frequency range and a small semicircle in the low frequency range. Based on the impedance data, the resistances of the liquid electrolytes (RE), LTAP membrane (RL), and charge transfer and interface (RF+ RI) were obtained, respectively, as 57, 155, and 46 Ω cm2 before cycling, which increased to 58, 157, and 77 Ω cm2 after 20 cycles. The ﬁrst semicircle corresponds to the impedance of the LTAP plate, which is close to the theoretical resistance (150 Ω cm2) of the LTAP membrane with a thickness 0.015 cm and a conductivity of 1×10− 4 S cm− 1 at room temperature. Hasegawa et al. [18] pointed out that the LTAP plate will decompose and show high resistance in strong acidic or basic solutions. Wang et al. [14] also reported the instability of the LTAP plate in strong alkaline solutions and tried to stabilize the cell by dividing the aqueous electrolyte into two compartments with a cation exchange membrane (CEM) to protect the LTAP membrane from corrosion [14]. While in our cell, the RE and RL values remained almost constant after 20 cycles, indicating that the robustness of this dual-electrolyte Li-air system is mostly related to the stability of the LTAP membrane in the moderately acidic buffer electrolyte [19]. The RF +RI value increased by 31 Ω cm2 after 20 cycles, which is due to the oxidation and degradation of the air electrode during the high-voltage charge process. This problem could be addressed by developing better bifunctional electrocatalysts to lower the charge potential [20].

In summary, we have successfully developed a new type of dualelectrolyte Li-air battery with high capacity and voltage, consisting of lithium metal in aprotic electrolyte as the anode, an air electrode in an acidic phosphate buffer solution as the cathode, and a solid Li+-ion conducting oxide as the separator. The cell exhibits a high discharge capacity of 221 mAh g− 1 and an energy density of ~770 Wh kg− 1 for H3PO4 at a current density of 0.5 mA cm− 2 for 20 cycles with mild degradation. The cell exhibits very good stability after extended cycles in air, overcoming the instability issues of conventional aprotic Li-air batteries in ambient environment. The phosphate buffer solution proves to be a promising catholyte for this type of novel dual-electrolyte Li-air batteries.

This work was supported by the Department of Energy Ofﬁce of Basic Energy Science grant number DE-SC0005397. The authors thank Dr. Junqing Pan for his assistance at the initial stages with the construction of the lithium-air cells.



