Characteristics  of  the  catalytic  activity  in  the  dehydration  of  butanols  of  copper 2)containing sodium–zirconium–phosphates (NZPs), in which Na+ ions substitute for Cu2+ ions are obtained. It was found that in the 100–370°C region, the action energy of the reaction falls upon the transition through tem 2) perature T * ∼ 300°C, above which the electrophysical and crystallographic properties of phosphates change. The observed dependences are explained by the center (which consists of copper with various positions in the phosphate network at T < T * and T > T *) taking part in the formation of carbonyl compounds. This indicates the presence of a ligand effect, i.e., to structural sensitivity of the dehydration reaction in the case of Cu—NZP catalysts.

The  catalytic  decomposition  of  monoatomic  ali 2) phatic alcohols allows us to obtain products of various classes: olefins by the dehydration reaction and oxy 2) gen 2)containing compounds (ketones, aldehydes) dur 2) ing  alcohol  dehydrogenation  [1].  The  nature  of  the surface  active  centers  and  reaction  mechanism (acidic,  basic,  oxidation–reduction)  can  be  inferred only by the direction of the alcohol transformations. Investigations of these reactions are important nowa 2) days [2–5]. The selectivity of the alcohol transforma 2) tions depends on the catalyst’s composition, its man 2) ner of activation, the structure of the alcohol, and the external conditions (temperature, volume rate under flow  conditions).  Depending  on  the  rate  of  alcohol feed,  it  can  be  transformed  into  aldehyde,  ether,  or ester by the dehydrogenation reaction.

Production of carbonyl compounds from alcohols has  some  advantages  over  catalytic  oxidation,  which occurs at higher temperatures that entail the expendi 2) ture  of  energy,  shorter  catalyst  life,  and  often  the reduction  of  product  yields  because  of  by 2)reactions. The  simple  and  economically  profitable  reactions  of the  dehydrogenation  of  alcohols  also  find  technical application,  e.g.,  in  the  production  of  acetone  from isopropanol and acetaldehyde from ethanol.

It is known that the high yield of aldehydes is hin 2) dered  by  the  formation  of  acetals  and  esters  by  the reaction C3H7CHO + 2C4H9OH → C3H7CH(OC4H9)2 + H2O.

so an increase in the aldehyde yield is achieved via the addition  to  alcohol  of  water  saponifying  acetals  [6]. The catalytic dehydrogenation of butanols is discussed in the literature in lesser degree than the reactions of ethanol and propanol.

A new type of catalyst is solid electrolytes, among which  are  sodium–zirconium–phosphates  (NZPs), representatives  of  the  NASICON  (Na 2)Super 2)Ionic CONductor)  class  of  catalysts.  As  can  be  seen  from Fig.  1a,  the  crystalline  framework  structure  of  NZP has a polyhedral group (a “lamp” of two ВО4 tetrahe 2) drons  and  three  АО6  octahedrons)  and  channels  of ionic conductivity. The structure 2)forming B cation is an ion of zirconium, and the anion forming element is a  phosphor.  The  charge  of  the  anionic  framework  is compensated for by cations: Na+ ions that can occupy two positions, M1 and M2, in a channel. At ~20°C, M1 is completely populated, and M2 is free. Investiga 2) tions  of  the  properties  of  the  basic  monocrystalline phosphate  NaZr2(PO4)3  show  that  the  temperature anomalies  of  electric  conductivity  observed  in  the 250–300°С  range  (Fig.  1b)  are  associated  with  the transition of sodium ions from M1 into M2, as are the unit cell parameters [7].

Systems based on NZPs are promising for catalysis, since they combine in one material thermal stability, rigid frameworks with micropores (conductivity chan 2) nels), and the composition of NZPs can be varied over wide  limits  without  changing  their  crystalline  struc 2) ture.  Regulation  of  the  activity  and  selectivity  of  a reaction is achieved by substituting sodium or zirco 2) nium ions for catalytically active elements, e.g., copper.  Various  methods  for  producing  complex  phos 2) phates have been developed, and their catalytic prop 2) erties  in  alcohol  transformations  have  been  studied [8–10].  The  lattice  structure  of  copper–zirconium phosphates allows us to consider them as zeolite 2)like catalysts  [11]  that  can  have  membrane  properties  as well [12].

The selectivity of dehydration as the main reaction of  butanol  decomposition  was  studied  for  sodium– copper–zirconium–phosphates in [13]. It was shown that the alcohol’s structure and copper content influence the rate and selectivity of olefin formation.

In this work, we discuss peculiarities of the dehy 2) drogenation reaction of butanols on copper 2)contain 2) ing NZPs, proceeding in parallel with alcohol dehy 2) dration. The aim of this work is to compare the butanol example  of  the  dehydrogenating  ability  of  complex phosphates of different Cu2+ contents substituting for the conductivity ions of a solid electrolyte.

Complex phosphates of Na1 ⎯ 2xCuxZr2(PO4)3 were obtained  via  the  sol–gel  method  [9].  The  catalytic activity was tested on a flow 2)type unit with gas chro 2) matographic analysis of the products [13]. A mixture of helium and alcohol vapors entered a microreactor with highly porous glass filter, on which a thin layer of catalyst  (30  mg  weight)  was  deposited.  The  mixture flow rate was 1.1 l/h; the volume rate, 1700–2000 h–1. Under these conditions, the catalytic transformations proceed  in  the  kinetic  region  and  correspond  to  the zero order, as was verified in special tests.

The yield of the products in units of time over units of catalyst weight (n, mol/(h g)), the degree of alcohol conversion, and the reaction selectivity (S) were calculated at a constant temperature. The time in which the catalyst achieved constant activity under isother 2) mal  conditions  during  the  dehydrogenation  of butanol 2)1 and isobutanol was no greater than 10 min. For butanol 2)2 it, it rose to 25 min in dependence on the  temperature  and  catalyst  composition.  Based  on the  temperature  dependences,  the  alcohol  content and  the  products  of  dehydrogenation–dehydration were  determined  according  to  the  effect  of  catalyst composition  and  alcohol  structure  on  the  degree  of conversion (W, %), the selectivity, and the activation energy of dehydrogenation (Еа). The error of Еа deter 2) mination did not exceed 7–10%.

It was established that the copper content in NZPs and the structure of the alcohol considerably affect the total conversion of alcohol and the selectivity of car 2) bonyl compound formation. On NaZr2(PO4)3 double phosphates,  the  dehydrogenation  reaction  does  not occur at all, indicating that copper is a constituent of the catalytically active centers.

The effect of the reaction temperature on the ratio of the carbonyl compound yields nC=O and olefins nC=C for ternary phosphates with different copper contents is shown in Fig. 2. The highest value (close to unity) of nC=O/nC=C (or SC=O/SC=C) was obtained for butanol 2)1 transformations  on  the  sample  with  xСu  =  0.25:  the selectivity of both reactions was ~50% at Т > 300°С. For  the  sample  with  xСu  =  0.15,  the  ratio  nC=O/nC=С was lower by a factor of ~2.5 times. The dependences of  nC=O/nC=C  on  temperature  are  expressed  weakly with the exception of the NZP catalyst with xСu = 0.35 in the butanol 2)1 transformations. Butanol 2)2 is mainly dehydrated, and a slight increase in xСu affects the ratio nC=O/nC=C. In the case of isobutanol, only one catalyst with xСu = 0.35 is active in the dehydrogenation reac 2) tion, and the value of nC=O/nC=C does not exceed 0.3.

The  total  alcohol  conversion  and  product  yield increase for all systems as the temperature rises. The characteristics  of  Cu–NZP  catalyst  activity  for  two temperatures  are  compared  in  Table  1.  The  total degree of conversion is higher for butanol 2)2, but the alcohol  dehydration  predominates.  The  maximum yield  of  methylethylcetone  with  40%  selectivity  at 340°С was obtained for the sample in which all of the sodium  ions, Cu0.5Zr2(PO4)3.  In  the  case  of  butanol 2)1,  the  total conversion  fell  as  xCu  increased,  but  the  selectivity toward aldehyde rose. Isobutanol dehydrogenates with a maximum selectivity of 22%.

An example of the temperature dependences of the dehydrogenation product yields of various alcohols for Cu–NZP with xСu = 0.35 is presented in Fig. 3. The temperature  dependences  of  product  yield  nC=O (Fig. 3) are presented in the Arrhenius coordinates to determine the apparent activation energy (Еа). It was established that all dependences lnnС=О – 1/T have a knee in the region of 280–315°С (553–588 K), which corresponds  to  the  region  of  the  transition  from  the M1 position to the M2 position (Fig. 1). There are no such peculiarities for dehydration reaction. The pres 2) ence of two temperature regions for the dehydrogena 2) tion of alcohols with various values of Еа demonstrates that the reaction proceeds on different active centers. Copper is an important constituent of these centers, but the environment of the Cu2+ ions (their position in the  lattice)  differs  for  the  regions  lower  and  higher than the knee temperature (Т*). At Т < Т*, M1 centers take part in the reaction, and at Т > Т*—M2 centers. Т* values and activation energies of dehydrogenation lower and higher than Т* are presented in Table 2.

From data of Table 2, we can see that during the tran 2) sition through Т*, the   value falls by a factor of 2– 5; the relative decrease, ΔЕа,% = 100(Еа, 1 – Еа, 2)/Еа, 1, is 50–80%. This could be due to the greater strength of the bond of the adsorbed alcohol with the active cen 2) ter, i.e., Q2 > Q1 (heat of adsorption on M1 centers, Q1; on M2 centers, Q2). The effect of the copper content  is not always ambiguous, but as xCu rises the on   value increases linearly in the case of butanol 2)1 aE in the region of Т > Т* (R2 = 0.98) and in the region of Т  <  Т*  in  the  reaction  with  butanol 2)2  (R2  =  0.978). Note that at low temperatures the action energy of the dehydrogenation  of  butanol 2)2  is  lower  than  that  of butanol 2)1, and the predominant reaction is secondary alcohol dehydration.

The catalyst with xСu = 0.35 differs for the rest: it is characterized by the highest value of   for butanal formation in the region of Т < Т* and the lowest value of    of  ketone  formation  without  a  knee  on  the dependence lnnС=О – 1/T (Fig. 4b). The latter can be explained by high activity of butanol 2)2 in the dehydro 2) genation  reaction,  which  begins  at  120°C  and  pro 2) ceeds with 100% selectivity up to 220°C.

It should be noted once again that the insensitivity of the alcohols’ dehydration reaction to the M1 → M2 transition confirms the difference between the centers of  dehydrogenation  and  dehydration.  The  activation energies of butene formation (  were taken from ,  especially  in  the [13])  differ  appreciably  from  case of butanol 2)1 and isobutanol. The   values of butanol 2)1 are 67, 61, and 54 kJ/mol for the samples 1, 2, and 3, respectively; i.e.,   is 50–75% lower than  values (140, 250, and 145 kJ/mol in Table 2). the  The difference for isobutanol only half as great:   = aE С=О 80 kJ/mol and   = 160 kJ/mol. Note that   for aE isobutanol does not depend on xCu, and for samples 1, 2, 3 it is 80–85 kJ/mol. On samples 1 and 3, Butanol 2) 2 is transformed into butene and ketone with activa 2) tion  energies  close  to  the  value  of  dehydrogenation and dehydration.

As  has  already  been  mentioned,  the  drop  in  the activation energy of the dehydrogenation of butanols on  Cu–NZP  after  300°С  is  associated  with  the change of location (ordering) of moveable ions out 2) side the lattice, which can be considered a phase tran 2) sition. At low temperatures, copper ions are between the ZrO6–octahedrons in the distorted oxygen octahedrons (the M1 position); at high temperatures, the M2 positions begin to fill in the irregular oxygen voids (Fig. 1). Channels of conductivity connect the M1 and M2  positions,  forming  three 2)dimensional  networks. The  authors  of  [14,  15]  referred  to  the  M1    M2 transition  as  the  limiting  factor  of  Na+  ion  transfer, explaining the knee in the temperature dependence of volume conductivity σ(Т) of the basic phosphate with the drop in the activation energy of conductivity from 6.52 to 0.29 eV above and below 270°С (Fig. 1b).

According to data from precise structural investiga 2) tions  of  the  temperature  changes  in  the  lattice  con 2) stants of NZP [16, 17], anomalous behavior of the unit cell parameters is also observed at temperatures higher than  280°С.  In  [16],  however,  a  lower  temperature (200°С) above which the linear dependences of NZP lattice  parameters  break  down  was  indicated  (а  falls from  8.8  to  8.78,  while  parameter  с  increases  from 22.87 to 22.92).

In our tests with the Cu–NZP catalyst active in the formation  of  carbonyl  compounds,  the  Cu1  →  Cu2 transition is observed in the temperature range of Т* = 270–300°С. The dehydrogenation reaction senses the change in the copper ions’ position, due to the transi 2) tion of some copper ions from the M1 position to M2 leading to a new catalytically active center (M1–M2) on  which  interaction  with  the  OH  group  of  alcohol,  which  has  higher  bond  energy  than  the adsorption  on  the  M1  center  at  low  temperatures (below  Т*),  occurs.  This  leads  to  a  reduction  in  the experimental  activation  energy  above  the  knee  tem 2) perature (Table 2). The structure of the alcohol has no effect on the change in adsorption, but it does affect Qads,  and  the  dehydrogenation  selectivity  rises  in  the series butanol 2)2 → isobutanol → butanol 2)1, while the total alcohol conversion in the same series declines.

Like  the  total  reaction  of  ionic  conductivity,  the formation  of  M1M2  pairs  (the  populations  of  both positions) depends on the concentration of moveable positions,  the  number  of  the  closest  positions  for jumps, and their length. The M1 → M2 transition is associated with the electrostatic Coulomb interaction and is accompanied by some lattice distortion. We may assume that the two regions of catalytic dehydrogena 2) tion  with  the  participation  of  NZP  demonstrate  the structural sensitivity of this reaction. Within the theory of catalytic processes, this effect can be referred to as a ligand effect. According to the second approximation of the Debye–Hueckel theory of ionic solutions [18], which can be extended to solid electrolytes, the average electrostatic potential of the ions falls faster than it does according to Coulomb’s law, due to the shielding action  of  the  ionic  atmosphere.  The  anionic  lattice acts as the ionic atmosphere. The value of the potential created by the ionic atmosphere depends on the ions introduced into it and the distance. The potential of a copper ion in a channel of solid electrolyte conductiv 2) ity thus depends on its position, and its environment determines  its  interaction  with  the  substrate.  The effect of the order–disorder structural phase transition on the kinetics of the catalytic dehydrocyclization of n–hexane was observed for Ni–21% Mn alloy in [19]. Our  considered  geometrical  (ligand)  effect  does not exclude the electron factor for the alcohol dehy 2) drogenation  reaction,  which  is  a  reoxidation 2)type reaction.

The  following  mechanism  of  the  methylethylke 2) tone  from  butanol 2)2  on  Cu 2)catalyst  of  NASICON type is considered in the literature [20]:2Cu2+ + 2e → 2Cu+, (1) CH3–CH(OH)–CH2–CH3 → CH3–C(O)–CH2–CH3 + 2H+ + 2e, (2) CH3–CH(OH)–CH2–CH3 + 2Cu2+ → CH3–C(O)–CH2–CH3 + 2H++ 2 Cu+.

Two  copper  ions  (+2)  take  part  in  the  reaction.  The ketone yield increases due to the formation of active centers during the reduction of the ion compensator. It is  debatable  that  the  authors  of  [20]  consider  the ketone  formation  reaction  to  be  not  catalytic,  but  a condition of its occurrence is the irreversible exchange of electrons between alcohol and metal cations and the ease of the reoxidation of the reduced copper ions (the reversibility of reaction (1)).

The change in the apparent activation energy of the reaction  detected  in  the  butanol  dehydrogenation reaction on Cu–NZP–catalysts testifies to the struc 2) tural sensitivity of this reaction toward the location of the active centers (Cu+2 ions) in channels of solid elec 2) trolyte conductivity.

We are grateful to the staff of the Department of the Structure of Matter at Nizhni Novgorod State Univer 2) sity, and to Profs. A.I. Orlova and V.I. Pet’kov for pro 2) viding the Na1 ⎯ 2xCuxZr2(PO4)3 samples for our cata 2) lytic investigations.
