LiGe2(PO4)3 (LGP), a NASICON type solid electrolyte has many advantages like superior electrochemical and thermal stability to use in all solid-state lithium batteries. However, its low ionic conductivity is one of the challenges which hinder its practical application commercially. In this work, the influence of adding different amounts of scandium and aluminum on the Li+ conductivity of LGP were investigated computationally and experimentally. Substituting 25% of Ge4+ ions in the LGP structure by Al3+ and/or Sc3+ ions to obtain doped LGP in the form of Li1 +x + yAlxScyGe2 − x − y (PO4) 3, where x + y = 0.5, led to more Li+ in the 36f vacant sites (M2) and resulted in enhanced ionic conductivity of the material. In both approaches, the highest bulk Li+ conductivity of 5.826 mScm-1 was obtained for Li1.5Al0.33Sc0.17Ge1.5(PO4)3, from the experimental measurement. The activation energy was investigated theoretically using nudged elastic band also and the lowest value, 0.279 eV, was obtained for this composition. Furthermore, the Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2-x-y(PO4)3 electrolytes were synthesized using a melt-quenching method then transformed into a glass–ceramics through heat treatment. X-ray Diffraction, Electrochemical Impedance spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry were used to characterize the structure, measure Li+ conductivity and electrochemical window of the synthesized glass-ceramics respectively. There was a remarkable agreement between the computationally calculated and experimentally measured values of ionic conductivity, activation energy and electrochemical window. Finally, its applicability in solid state battery was tested and showed good electrochemical performance.
Nowadays, there is a rapid growing of interest in developing energy storage devices with large specific energy densities as there is possibility in lapse of customary fossil fuels. Batteries are one of the most widely used as an energy source device for various kinds of instruments and electronic equipment. The high energy density and low self-discharge of battery are among their many advantages over other energy source devices. The endeavors to enhance lithium batteries’ performance has demanded enormous concern on the electrolyte materials. Commercial lithium ion batteries use the usual liquid organic electrolytes for Li+ transport between anode and cathode electrodes. However, reactions with electrodes, toxicity, flammability, limited temperature range, poor electrochemical stability are among the many problems of using organic liquid electrolytes.Considering these and other many disadvantages of liquid organic electrolytes, there is a high demand for finding alternatives.
Solid electrolytes consist of lithium superionic conductor materials have superior safety as well as stability and are auspicious to succeed the usual organic liquid electrolytes.One major shortcoming of solid electrolytes is that they have low ionic conductivity at 25 oC. Among the different kinds of solid electrolytes, NASICON type solid electrolytes, which have a general formula of LiM2(PO4)3, where 'M’ can be cations likeTi4+, Zr4+, Hf4+, Sn4+, Ge4+ etc., are one of the promising alternatives to replace liquid electrolytes. These materials have been extensively investigated, because they display excellent properties like chemical and thermal stability and very low electronic conductivity.
However, their low ionic conductivities impede from successful commercial application. Despite various sulfides and oxides were designed as potential candidates of solid electrolytes, their poor ionic conductivity handicaps making marketable for any kind of solid-state electrolyte.
In recent times, Kamaya et al reported that Li10GeP2S12 (LGPS), a solid state electrolyte, was capable of Li+ conductivity as high as 1.2 ×10-2 S cm-1 at 25 ℃, which is remarkably near to the ionic conductivity of the conventional liquid electrolytes. However, different reports indicated that LGPS yields H2S, a poison gas in ambient.Contrarily, NASICON-type solid electrolytes, are inert to electrochemical reactions with electrodes and they are conductive to Li ions. For instance, Aono et al.showed that the Li+ conductivity in solid-state Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 electrolyte prepared from doping of Al3+ into LiTi2(PO4)3(LTP) was equal to 7×10-4 S cm-1 at 25℃ with no structural deterioration. The reason for its ionic conductivity enhancement was supposed to the partial substitution of Ti4+ using aliovalent dopant Al3+ for which the Li content increases to keep the overall charge balance. Nevertheless, it was observed that Ti4+ electrochemically reduced to Ti3+ at Li anode electrode . Comparing to LTP, LiGe2(PO4)3, (LGP), has superior electrochemical stability , against Li anode but has a lower Li+ conductivity. Considering its higher electrochemical stability LGP is a likely future solid electrolyte if its Li+ conductivity is able to be further improved.
Taking into account the importance of LGP material, it is necessary to enhance its ionic conductivity by doping and may provide insight into designing new Li super ionic conductor materials. In recent times, there have been numerous attempts aimed at enhancing the Li+ conductivity of LGP by aliovalent doping. We noted that the effect of aliovalent Al3+ as dopant on the Li+ conductivity of LGP was investigated previously and it was proved that highest Li+conductivity is obtained when only 25% of Ge4+ ions were replaced by Al3+ ions in the LGP crystal structure (x=0.5 in the overall formula of Li1 + xAlxGe2 − x(PO4)3).
In this work, we studied the influence of simultaneous addition of scandium and aluminum as dopants on the Li+ conductivity of LGP electrolyte. Only 25% of Ge4+ ions were replaced by various concentrations of scandium and aluminum in the form of Li1+x+y AlxScyGe2 −x–y(PO4)3, where x + y = 0.5, x = 0.5, 0.33, 0.17, 0 and y = 0, 0.17, 0.33, 0.5. We investigated Li+ conductivity, activation energy, radial distribution function and electrochemical window of a dual doped LGP computationally. Moreover, glass-ceramic Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y (PO4)3 electrolyte samples were synthesized using melt quenching method and structural properties were characterized using Xray diffraction. Properties like ionic conductivity and potential window were measured using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry respectively, which were in good agreement with the computational results. Interfacial resistance against Li electrode was also investigated using time-dependent impedance and galvanostatic cycling.
Crystal structure of LGP shown in Fig 1 was obtained from materials project database (mp541272),which has a rhombohedral structure with space group of R3 containing 108 atoms c for all calculations. Strong interactions are possible between the cell’s mobile ions and their copies in the surrounding cells due to the periodic boundary conditions, which are applied in computational calculations. We computed energy at its most stable state using the Vienna abinitio simulation package (VASP)with projector augmented wave (PAW) pseudopotentials. Electrons exchange-correlation energy was described by applying the generalized gradient approximation (GGA)using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof revised functional (PBE). Optimization computations were employed by setting a plane-wave basis cutoff energy equal to 500 eV and 5  5  3 Monkhorst-Pack k-point grid. The energetically most stable structure was used as the initial structure for LGP doping.
LGP was then doped by partially substitution of Ge4+ in the crystal by aliovalent cations Al3+ and/or Sc3+. The excess Li induced by Al3+ and/or Sc3+ doping for Ge4+ atoms resided at 36f position (M2) is shown in Fig S1 as they thermodynamically prefer 36f positions rather than 18e 28. We prepared four samples in the form of Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2-x-y(PO4)3, where x+y = 0.5 (Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 [LAGP], Li1.5Al0.33Sc0.17Ge1.5(PO4)3 [LASGP1], Li1.5Al0.17Sc0.33Ge1.5(PO4)3 [LASGP2], Li1.5Sc0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 [LSGP]). Crystal structures of each prepared sample were optimized to use as the initial structure for our Ab Initio Molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations.Different potential sites were tested for the added atoms, as shown in Table S1 and Table S2 for the LASGP1 sample for instance, and the most stable sites were used. However, it is important to notice that calculating the most stable sites in only a small crystal structure covers inadequate part of the material’s phase space in which other most stable sites can appear when it is synthesized experimentally.
The AIMD simulations were implemented using a single -unit cell of Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2-x-y(PO4)3. In order to keep the computational cost at a reasonable value, energy cutoff and minimal Γ- centered were used 400 eV and 1×1×1 k-point grid respectively. At the start of the simulation, a 100 K initial temperature based on a Boltzmann distribution was assigned for the Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2-x-y(PO4)3 samples. Non-spin polarized AIMD simulations were conducted in the NVT ensemble in the temperature range of 600 K to 1400 K by velocity scaling over 2 ps, and are then equilibrated for 5 ps at constant volume with a Nosé thermostat . A 1fs time step was chosen, based on the Verlet algorithm integration of Newton’s equation. Diffusion of AIMD simulations was performed for 60 ps. From the AIMD simulations, different parameters were estimated. The mean-squared displacement (MSD) of the mobile ion ( i.e. Li+) is a function of the time interval t and is given by the expression:
The diffusivity, D, of the mobile ion is then given by the slope of the averaged MSD:
The ionic conductivity was calculated based on the Nernst-Einstein relationship using:
ri(t) represents the position of ion i at time t in the AIMD simulation, N is the number of ions that are assumed to be the mobile carriers contributing to diffusion, d is the systems dimension, V represents the total volume of the model, q is the charge of the mobile-ion species, T is the temperature, k is the Boltzmann constant, 0 is the ionic conductivity at T  ∞.
To further elaborate, energy barrier of the different doped samples was determined also using the climbing-image Nudged Elastic Band (c-NEB) method . A Monkhorst-Pack k-point grid of 5  5 2 was used and atomic positions were relaxed until forces were less than 0.02 eV/Å. Furthermore, among the different prepared doped electrolyte samples, density of state (DOS) of the one which has the highest ionic conductivity, was evaluated to calculate its electrochemical window using the Heyd−Scuseria−Erznerhof (HSE06) functional.
To synthesize the Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y (PO4)3 electrolytes, we followed the procedure used by Meesala et al. The chemicals used as precursor were lithium carbonate, Li2CO3 (Sigma Aldrich, 99.5%), ammonium dihydrogen phosphate (NH4)H2PO4 (Sigma Aldrich, >99.8%), aluminum oxide, Al2O3 (Sigma Aldrich, 99.9%), germanium dioxide, GeO2 (Sigma Aldrich, 99.99%), and scandium(III) oxide, Sc2O3 (Sigma Aldrich, 99.98%). Stoichiometric amounts of each chemical were weighed to synthesize the Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y (PO4)3 electrolytes using a melt-quenching method. The weighed chemicals were powdered in an agate mortar and pestle, then mixed in 2propanol solvent. To homogenize the mixture, it was ball-milled for 4 h at 400 rpm using ZrO2 balls and the homogeneous species was put on hot plate for overnight to evaporate the solvent.Then, it was heated at 380 °C in an electrical furnace for 4 h to release decomposed gases like CO2, NH3. The obtained materials were powdered using agate mortar and pestle, then heated at 1280 °C for 1 h in electrical furnace. The uniformly melted glass was quenched and pressed by two preheated (at 350 °C) metal plates. In order to reduce the thermal stress, the formed glass was annealed at 500 °C for 2 h, then it was crystallized for 8 h at 800 °C to produce the glass-ceramic specimens.
Crystal structure of the prepared Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y (PO4)3 electrolytes was observed by X-ray diffraction (XRD-300W, Bruker D8) using Cu Kα radiation in the 2θ range of 10 to 70°. Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope. (FE-SEM) was used to examine morphologies of the prepared Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 electrolyte samples. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (BioLogic SAS) was used to study activation energy and ionic conductivity of the prepared electrolytes. The measurement was employed from 10-2 to 106 Hz frequency range and 5 mV oscillation voltage. Both sides of the prepared Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 electrolyte pellets were polished using pieces of polishing paper in an Ar-filled glove box to obtain a smooth surface, then Au was sputtered to both surfaces of the pellet to use as blocking electrode (Au/ Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3/Au). Li+ conductivities of the species were calculated using the following equation (5).
where R is resistance, S is the surface area and d is the thickness of the specimen.
Cyclic Voltammetry (Metrohm Autolab) was used to examine the electrochemical stability of Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y (PO4)3 against Li metal at a scanning rate of 0.5 mV/s from −0.75 to 7.5 V. The coin batteries consisting of Li metal anode as counter electrode, stainless steel plate cathode as a working electrode and LASGP1 electrolyte were assembled in the glove box filled with argon.
The additional Li atoms that have to be used for charge balance in compositions with aliovalent cation substitutional elements may lead to interstitial migration 36. Firstly, a most stable interstitial site should be found for the Li ion which is added to keep the neutrality of the material. Energy calculations with different Li sites revealed that the extra added Li is preferably to occupy a site near to the substitutional atom. This position is found to be by 0.92 eV more stable than other positions in the crystal structure. Furthermore, stability of different sites for the added Al3+ and Sc3+ was tested by calculating the defect formation energy. However, it was found no significant difference in stability with a maximum energy difference of 0.01 eV among the tested sites.
The XRD patterns shown in Fig 2 (a) are for the prepared samples crystallized at 800 °C for 8 h. Matching with JCPDS # 80-1924 index file, the major peaks correspond to the NASICON-type structure Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 electrolytes of space group (R3 ). The NASICON-type _c Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 structure was retained in the XRD pattern even after some Ge4+ ions were partially replaced by Al3+ and/or Sc3+. Comparing the XRD patterns of the prepared Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 electrolyte samples, the XRD pattern of LASGP1 is more related to the LGP structure. As the amount of Sc3+ increase, the XRD pattern become slightly different from the LGP structure and this could be due to the formation of some secondary phases (like ScPO4 and GeO2) in the grain boundary during the crystallization process. As mentioned above, ionic radius of Sc3+ is slightly bigger than the ionic radii of Ge4+ and Al3+. The slight bigger ionic radius of Sc3+ than that of Ge4+ and Al3+ affects its solubility, subsequently the addition of a higher Sc3+ amount (more than y = 0.17) yields secondary phases in the grain boundaries which affect the samples’ stoichiometry. The XRD pattern of Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 electrolyte samples was rietveld using GSAS II software 37 and the rietveld refinements are shown in Fig 2 (b) for LASGP1 and in Fig S2 for the other remaining Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 electrolyte samples.
As summarized in Table 1, A slight discrepancy on the lattice parameters was observed between the DFT and experimental values. For instance, the 'c’ value was decreased by 2.00%, 1.15%, 2.30% and 3.7% relative to the DFT value for LAGP, LASGP1, LASGP2 and LSGP samples respectively. A similar change on the value of 'a’ was also observed as shown on Table S3. The discrepancy was higher for LASGP2 and LSGP samples relative to LASGP1 which is due to the decomposition of these samples to impurities like GeO2 and ScPO4 as reveled by EDX analysis. Therefore, the source of the difference is inaccurate stoichiometries of the experimental samples caused by the formation of secondary phases. Due to the radii difference between Al3+ and Sc3+ (0.535 and 0.72 Å respectively), there is a slight increase in the lattice parameters of the DFT values with increasing Sc3+ composition because of its higher ionic radius which leads to cell volume expansion. In fact, increasing the cell volume is a beneficial for higher Li+ diffusion. However, as shown from the XRD pattern (Fig 2 (a)), adding more Sc3+ (more than y = 0.17) amount produced secondary phases which causes stoichiometric error and affects the Li+ mobility.
Morphology of the synthesized glass-ceramic samples were recorded using FE-SEM to observe the dopants effect. The SEM images for all Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 electrolyte samples are displayed in Fig S3, and there are no any visible secondary phases for the LASGP1. However, impurities were observed in grain boundaries on the other samples, particularly on LASGP2 and LSGP in conformity to the XRD pattern. These impurities prevent Li+ transport between grains in other words these secondary phases hinder the Li+ migration and lowers the sample’s total ionic conductivity. EDX elemental analysis for all samples is shown in Fig S4. EDX analysis was performed at specified points on the grain and the results are presented in Fig S4 (a-d) and Table S4. EDX cannot calculate the wt% of Li and other alkali metals, but Li amount in the overall formula of Li1.5AlxScyGe2 − x − y(PO4)3 is only less than 2.5 wt% in all compositions, which does not have significant effect on analysis of other elements of the samples. From the analysis, LASGP1 has an excellent agreement with initial stoichiometry of Li1.5AlxScyGe2 − x − y(PO4)3. However, for the remaining samples, there was a slight stoichiometric difference from the initial composition which is due to the formation of impurity. EDX analysis was also performed at the specified points of the grain boundaries as shown in Fig S4 (e-g). The EDX analysis at specified points in grain boundaries for the LAGP, LASGP2 and LSGP samples, reveals formation of GeO2 or ScPO4 or mixture of them. Table S5 shows elemental analysis of the grain boundaries at specified points based on Fig S4 (e-g). According to the obtained results, secondary phases formed in grain boundary shown in Fig S4 (e and f) is related to GeO2 while impurity in Fig S4 (g) is related to mixture of GeO2 and ScPO4. These results confirm the cause of GeO2 and ScPO4 peaks appearance in the XRD patterns. As shown in Table 1, these phenomena affected the samples experimental lattice parameters to be slightly different from the calculated values.
From the AIMD simulation, diffusion coefficients and ionic conductivities were calculated in the temperature range of 600 K to 1400 K. Diffusivity was calculated from an average MSD of Li+ over time of 60 ps simulation. Fig 3 (a) shows Arrhenius plot of the overall diffusivity and its linear fit while Fig S5 presents diffusion plots for the Z direction and XY plane in the given temperature range for different compositions of the dopants. The Li+ diffusivity at 25℃ is then determined by extrapolation from these temperatures using the linear fits. From the extrapolated diffusion, bulk Li+ conductivity of LAGP at 25 ℃ was calculated equal to 3.626 mS/cm very close with the bulk ionic conductivity of 2.989 mS/cm obtained from our experimental measurement.Moreover, as shown in Table 2, when Al3+ and Sc3+ dopants added simultaneously as dual dopants a maximum bulk ionic conductivity of 6.836 mS/cm was obtained for LASGP1 electrolyte.
Diffusivity of Li+ in the three dimensions was observed in the Li+ diffusion trajectory obtained from the AIMD simulations. The diffusivity was examined for all possible pathways and it was found that there was a faster Li+ diffusion along the Z-direction than in the XY plane for all compositions of the dopants. Surprisingly, for LASGP1 it was found that the Li+ diffusion in the XY plane has been highly increased compared to other Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 electrolytes. As presented in Table S6, the XY plane diffusion amount of this composition was very close to the diffusion observed in the Z-direction. Relatively, the magnitude of Li+ diffusion along the Zdirection is at least 10 times than that observed in the XY plane for the remaining Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 electrolytes (Table S6). In all cases, the total Li+ conductivity is in the range between the Z-direction and XY plane conductivities which is expected.
Therefore, the addition of a small amount of Sc3+ helps to enhance Li+ conductivity of the dual doped LGP based solid electrolyte. The enhanced conductivity of LASGP1 as compared to the other Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 electrolytes is because of two reasons. Firstly, there is a channel size difference due to the larger radius of Sc3+ which helped to increase the diffusion channel size, as compared to LAGP as defined and estimated shown in Fig S6 and Table S7, leading to faster Li+ transport. However, Li+ diffusion becomes impeded when the Sc3+ amount becomes much higher in the Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 electrolytes caused by a slight structural distortion due to its larger ionic radius. Doping of a crystal structures using higher ionic radii dopants can lead to a distorted structure at higher or room temperature. In our case it was observed a local displacement of Li atoms to more stable position after crystal structure relaxation. We carefully analyze the position change for each Li atom caused by the local displacement and the average change was only 0.512% for LASGP1 relative to LAGP which is insignificant. However, the Li position change was raised to 5.131% and 9.694% for LASGP2 and LSGP respectively which is an indication for the structural distortion. These structural distortions are clearly noticeable as can be seen from Fig S7. As a result, for other compositions with the higher Sc3+ amount, the Li+ diffusion/conductivity becomes lower even though the channel size has been increased. Secondly, a new diffusion channel is formed in the case of LASGP1 as can be seen from the Li+ diffusion trajectory shown in Fig 3 (b - d) which is the main driving force for accelerating ion mobility. Introducing, a small amount of Sc together with Al as a dopant opened new Li diffusion channel led to a lower migration barrier compared to LAGP.
To understand how this new diffusional path is formed, we analyzed Li ion migration dynamics from the AIMD simulations. Firstly, from the Li+ trajectories we observed that Li+ at the 6b sites move directly to 36f site in the case of LASGP1 which does not happen on the other samples. In contrast, the 6b Li+ moves gradually through 18e to 36f and then to other 6b site in other samples. Secondly, the Li hopping event (which was investigated using the procedure in the supporting information) in the samples is not in the same manner as shown in Fig S8. It was found that multiple Li ions migrate in a highly concerted fashion simultaneously in to the nearest sites in the case of LASGP1 (3 Li ions) and LAGP (2 Li ions) while an isolated single-ion diffusion was observed in the case of LASGP2 and LSGP. These phenomena indicate Li+ diffuses faster in the case of LASGP1 and the simultaneous direct transition from 6b site to 36f site in a highly concerted fashion leads Li+ to diffuse through an additional new diffusional path. The lowest value of Ea for LASGP1 is a result of faster Li+ diffusion, due to simultaneous migration of multiple Li ions, and the formation of a new diffusional path. However, since the Li+ migration in LASGP2 and LSGP samples was different from the Li+ migration in LASGP1, Ea of these samples showed a sudden increment of about 0.2 eV.
 Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurement for the synthesized samples was conducted in order to further clarify the dopants effect on the electrolyte’s ionic conductivity. From the impedance spectroscopy measurement, only one semicircle was observed at a higher frequency for the bulk resistance (Rb). Total impedance together with the mixed bulk and grain impedance was represented by the semicircle, then inclined line of Warburg-type impedance was followed at the lower frequency. The impedance was fitted by the equivalent circuit model shown in Fig 4 (a) to calculate the samples Li+ conductivity. Rs was taken as the circuit resistance external to the Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3, which arises from the semicircle and Z’ intercept at higher frequency region represents the bulk resistance. Rg is interpreted as a grain boundary resistance, CPE1 refers to the bulk capacitance of Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 and Wo is the Warburg impedance attributed to the diffusivity at the electrode/electrolyte interface.
 As shown in Fig 4 (a) and Table 2, the highest Li+ conductivity from the fitted impedances was obtained for LASGP1 (Li+ = 5.826 mS cm-1), while increasing the scandium concentration lowered the Li+ conductivity, which is in a remarkable consistency with the computationally predicted values. The formation of secondary phases during sample preparation causes stoichiometric error in the samples composition and therefore leads to the slight discrepancy between the experimental and calculated ionic conductivity and activation energy values for the samples of LASGP2 and LSGP. Previously reported works for LGP based solid electrolytes showed formation of secondary phases, like GeO2 and AlPO4, during sample synthesis which are a source of stoichiometric error. [35,41] In our case as well, a slightly lower experimentally measured ionic conductivity was obtained comparing to the AIMD value. Relatively, the discrepancy is higher when Sc3+ concentration increased, as shown in Table 2, due to the formation of secondary phases like GeO2 and ScPO4 which affect the samples’ stoichiometry as confirmed from the XRD and SEM/EDX analyses.
The Nyquist plots shown in Fig 4 (b) and Fig S9 are for Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 electrolytes measured at different temperatures from 25 ℃ to 55 ℃. Only a semicircle of grain boundary and the tail of electrode polarization appeared at all temperatures. Inset of Fig 4 (b) shows as temperature increased, the resistances decreased and the frequencies for the bulk conduction increased. The impedances at various temperatures were fitted using the same equivalent circuit, then the conductivity of each Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 electrolyte at different temperatures determined to calculate their activation energy as presented in Fig S10.
 Li ion transference number (t+), is an important factor and was investigated by combining AC impedance and DC polarization measurements. DC polarization measurement was employed to measure the transference number of LASGP1 pellet. A chronoamperometric measurement was conducted for Li/ LASGP1 pellet/Li symmetric cell using a 10 mV controlled voltage for 5 hours. As shown in Fig 11, transference number was calculated using the Bruce−Vincent−Evans equation:
where I0 and IS are initial and steady-state currents from the DC polarization measurement respectively while R0 and RS are impedances before and after the polarization. From the measurements, t+ for the LASGP1 pellet was calculated nearly equal to unity (t + > 0.9998). This shows that the overwhelming majority (>99.98%) of the conductance derives from Li+ ionic mobility.
Ideally, solid electrolytes should not be electrical conductors. However, there is always a concern of electronic conductivity contribution to the solid electrolyte total conduction. Electronic conductivity of the prepared pellet was measured following the procedure in the supporting information using a standard four-point probe technique. It is found that the average electrical conductivity for the LASGP1 pellet was measured 1.308 × 10-10 S cm-1.
 Moreover, the activation energy, Ea, for all Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 electrolytes was investigated using the AIMD simulation. For both cases of diffusional dimensions considered (Zdirection and XY plane), LASGP1 exhibits the lowest activation energy than other compositions as shown in Table S6. The overall calculated activation energy for LASGP1 electrolyte was 0.279 eV. Despite the fact that calculations for the AIMD simulations were conducted at much higher temperatures, the calculated energy barrier was in remarkable agreement with the NEB calculation and with the one obtained from experimentally measured at lower temperature.
To further investigate the activation energy, NEB method was employed and we proposed a Li ion path diffusing from 6b to 36f site. The 6b and 36f of Li sites are shown in Fig 5(a) while Fig 5(b) shows the proposed path in which Li at 6b moves to 36f and the 36f Li diffuse into other 36f. From the NEB calculation, the introduction of small amounts of Sc3+ (in the case of LASGP1) results in lowering the activation energy compared to the other compositions as shown in Fig 5 (c) and Table 3. It is a surprising that the activation energy of this composition is lower than the one doped by Al3+ only (LAGP) although the introduction of Sc3+ does not change the Li concentration. It was observed that adding lower amount of Sc3+ enhances the Li+ mobility to some extent due to increasing channel size as displayed in Table S7. The formation of additional diffusion channel also lowers the microscopic migration barrier of materials as in the case of LASGP131. In contrast, adding higher amount of Sc3+, like in the case of LASGP2 and LSGP, causes crystal structure distortion (Fig S7) because of its larger ionic radius relative to Ge4+ and Al3+. Consequently, the structural distortion leads to a higher energy barrier.
 Using the Arrhenius plot of conductivity as a function temperature, Ea of the Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 electrolytes was evaluated from the EIS measurements. To determine the Ea of Li+ migration in the prepared samples, conductivity was measured at various temperatures for each sample then Ea was estimated using equation (4). As a result, the lowest Ea was obtained for LASGP1 equals to 0.282 eV still in excellent agreement with our computational results indicating the advantage of Al and Sc as dual dopants for LGP solid electrolyte.
Radial distribution function (RDF) gives structural information of a material regarding its interatomic interactions. In this study, we computationally estimated the radial distribution function (RDF) of Li–Li, Li–Al and Li-Sc interactions from the AIMD simulations to furthermore understand the Al3+ and Sc3+ doping effect on the Li-ion behaviors in Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 electrolytes. As clearly shown from Fig 6 (a), there are two peaks in the Li-Li RDF, at around 3.6 Å (M2) and 5 Å (M1). The interaction at the first peak agrees with revealed distance between M2 (36f) sites in the same basin44. The introduction of Sc3+ as dopant changes the distribution of Li+ which is crucial for the Li+ diffusivity in the material. Taking LAGP as a reference for the Li-Li RDF, there was lowest and highest Li-Li interaction at the M2 and M1 positions respectively for the LASGP1 electrolyte. When the concentration of Sc3+ increased, in the case of LASGP2 and LSGP, Li-Li interaction at the M2 position increased while at the M1 decreased. This shows there is deposition of Li to M2 because of Li ion trapping effect, as the Sc3+ amount increases. Fig 6 (b) shows no significant change was observed on the Li-Al interactions in the different types of Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 electrolytes. However, as shown in Fig 6 (c), when the amount of Sc3+ introduced increased, the RDF peak intensity for Li-Sc become increased which indicates there is higher Li-Sc interaction. As can be seen from Fig 6 (b and c), and Table S8 scandium has coordinated with more lithium ions than aluminum. If we see LAGP and LSGP, even though aluminum and scandium have the same fraction in their respective samples, there are approximately five Li+ near to scandium while only two near to aluminum. This shows that as the scandium amount increase, it attracts more Li+ toward itself.
 Besides, considering to the RDF analysis result, we investigated the Li+ diffusivity (mobility) corelating with the number of Li+ near to Sc of all samples at different temperatures. With increasing scandium fraction (which also means increasing Li+ near scandium from the RDF analysis), Li+ diffusivity decrease at all temperatures. As presented in Fig S12, the result revels that the higher Li+ near to Sc, the lower Li+ mobility observed for the sample at all simulation temperatures. Therefore, the lower Li+ diffusion of the material with more Li+ near Sc shows Li+ mobility is hindered due to Li+ trapping effect of Sc when it is used in higher amount. These phenomena lead to a lower ionic conductivity and higher activation energy barrier, when more Sc amount is added. Therefore, we presume the illustrated Li trapping effect of Sc3+ ion is due to an interaction between positively charged interstitial Li+ and negatively charged impurity ' i( )Li defects of Sc3+ ions . Due to this, the Li+ mobility and conductivity become decreased when '' Ge(Sc ) too much Sc3+ is introduced to the material.
To predict the electrochemical window, density of state (DOS) of Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 electrolytes was evaluated using the way which was proposed by Ong et al 45. In brief, DOS of LASGP1 was calculated to evaluate the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energies. Taking into account the obvious weakness of GGA functionals for determining band gaps, the DOS of LASGP1 was computed using the HSE06 functional . As shown in Fig 7 (a), the HSE06 DOS of LASGP1 was estimated to be about 6.72 V, which is almost the same with our experimental determination.
 The electrochemical stability of LASGP1 was also studied using cyclic voltammetry (CV). CV measurement was conducted between -0.75 V and 7.5 V on electrochemical workstation using Li/LASGP1/SS 2032 type coin cells at 25 °C temperature and 0.5 mV/s scanning rate. Except the Li dissolution/deposition peaks, there was no any reaction noticed up to 7.5 V versus Li/Li+ (Fig 7 (b)) and this result was in a remarkable agreement with our computational value and with Illbeigi et al measurement. The theoretical and experimental results indicate the superb stability when in contact with lithium metal foil and a wide stabile electrochemical window for LASGP1 glass– ceramic electrolyte. Therefore, LGP based electrolytes are superior over LATP electrolyte in stability against lithium anode even though the latter has a higher ionic conductivity.
To further elaborate the electrochemical stability of the LASGP1 electrolyte against Li metal anode, interfacial resistance between Li and LASGP1 was studied by time-dependent impedance and galvanostatic cycling. The stability of Li/LASGP1 interface was tested by cycling symmetric Li/LASGP1/Li cells at 25 ℃ and 0.2 mA cm-2 current density. According to the Li/LASGP1/Li symmetric cell, there was a very high interfacial resistance for the 1st cycle and then a sharp decline was observed. As shown in Fig 8 (a), there was no any significant change in polarization voltage and stayed stabilized after the 1st plating and striping cycle indicating that a stable interface was formed between LASGP1 electrolyte and Li electrode. EIS measurements of the symmetric cell were operated with the polarization investigation simultaneously, before cycling, after 1st, 5th and 10th cycles of the direct current polarization test as shown in Fig 8 (b). For the Li/LASGP1/Li symmetric cell, two depressed semicircles were observed, followed by an inclined line. The impedance result of the symmetric cell was then fitted to the equivalent circuit. Bulk resistance (Rb) and grain resistance (Rgb) of LASGP1 electrolyte were represented by the semicircle observed at high frequency region and the interface resistance (Rint) attributed by the second semicircle at the middle frequency represents the resistance at the electrode/electrolyte interface.48 The solid electrolyte bulk resistance of the symmetric cell was consistent with Au/LASGP1/Au cell impedance result shown in Fig 4 (b). From the EIS measurement it was observed that resistance was dropped by about 40% after the 1st cycle. The lowering of interface resistance with stable plating and striping cycle after the first cycle is due to the formation of good electrode/electrolyte interface (EEI). It was then stayed almost with insignificant change for a long time. Even after 10 cycles, resistance of the symmetric cell was almost the same with the resistance measured at 1st and 5th cycles shown in Fig 8 (b). This indicates the stability of LASGP1 in contact with the lithium electrode which is consistent with our computational study on its electrochemical window. The polarization voltage for the symmetric cell was quite stable for over 750 h cycles.
Since the LASGP1 pellet has sufficient ionic conductivity for electrochemical performance, a charge/discharge test was performed to confirm its application in a full cell. Commercially available LiNi0.33Mn0.33Co0.33O2 (NMC) electrode and Li foil as negative electrode were used and the cell was configured as Li/LASGP1/NMC between 2.5 V to 4.3 V potential range with 0.2 mA cm-2 at 25 ℃. In order to improve the interfacial resistance between pellet/electrodes, 2 µL 1 M LiPF6 in EC: DEC (1:1 v/v%) electrolyte was added at each interface, a similar strategy with reported works.49-53 As shown in Fig 9(a), the cell showed good electrochemical performance with initial reversible capacity of 1.72 mA h cm-2. Fig 9(b) shows the cell cycled for over 80 cycles with average Coulombic efficiency of 98.9% and 83.6% capacity retention. The charge/discharge test result indicates the synthesized material is a promising electrolyte for solid state lithium battery.
A novel NASICON type solid electrolyte was studied by simultaneous addition of scandium and aluminum as dopants. The effect of adding scandium and aluminum simultaneously on the properties of LGP like ionic conductivity and activation energy was investigated computationally and experimentally. It was prepared in the form of Li1+x+yAlxScyGe2−x−y(PO4)3 in which the addition of small amount of scandium simultaneously with aluminum helped to increase the crystal cell dimension and formed a new migration path a beneficial to enhance ionic conductivity to 5.826 mS cm-1 almost twice higher than the conductivity measured for LAGP and accelerates the Li+ migration. A maximum Li+ conductivity was calculated computationally and measured experimentally for LASGP1 among the prepared samples. In all cases, the AIMD simulations, NEB calculation and EIS measurements, the lowest activation energy was obtained for LASGP1, which confirmed the addition of small amount of Sc3+ speed up the mobility of Li+ in the material. But when the amount of Sc3+ increased (more than y = 0.17), it caused a slight structural distortion, due to Li ion local displacement to stable sites, which hindered the Li+ migration. Furthermore, Li trapping effect was observed when higher amount of Sc is added to the material which changes the way of ion migration in the crystal structure leading to a lower ionic conductivity and higher activation energy. For the experimentally synthesized samples a stoichiometric error occurred, as Sc amount increased, due to the formation of secondary phases leading to a slight discrepancy between the calculated and experimentally measured ionic conductivity and activation energy values. Excellent electrochemical stability when in contact with Li anode was observed from the cyclic Voltammetry measurement. Moreover, a stable EEI was observed for LASGP1 in the Li/Li symmetry charging/discharging test. The prepared material was also tested for all solid-state Liion cell with Li/LASGP1/NMC configuration and the cell showed a promising cyclability with capacity retention of 83.6% for more than 80 cycles.