This   paper   focuses   on   the  gas   sensing   properties   of   the   mixed-potential-type   NO2 sensor   based   on   yttria stabilized   zirconia   (YSZ)   and   NiO   electrode.   The   sensing   performance   of   the   sensor   was   improved   by modifying   the  three-phase   boundary   (TPB).   Hydroﬂuoric   acid   with   different   concentrations   (10%,   20% and  40%)   was   used   to  corrode   YSZ   substrate   to   obtain   large   superﬁcial   area   of   TPB.   The   scanning   electron microscope   and  atomic   force   microscopic   images   showed   that   the  40%   HF  could   form   the   largest   superﬁcial  area   at   the   same   corroding   time   (3   h).   The   sensitivity   of  the   sensor   using   the   YSZ   plate   corroded   with 40%   hydroﬂuoric   acid   to   20–500   ppm   NO2 was   76   mV/decade   at   850 ◦C,  which   was  the   largest   among the   examined   HF   concentrations.   It   was   also   seen   that   the   sensor   showed   a   good   selectivity   and   speedy response   kinetics   to   NO2.  On   the   basis   of   the   measurements   of   anodic   and   cathodic   polarization   curves,   as well   as  the   complex   impedance   of  the   device,   the   sensing   mechanism   was   conﬁrmed   to   involve   a  mixed potential   at   the   oxide   sensing   electrode.

Some  of  the  most  dangerous  air  pollutants,  nitrogen  monoxide (NO)  and  nitrogen  dioxide  (NO2)  (collectively  referred  as  NOx),  have been  of  great  concern  in  the  past  years  due  to  their  adverse  health effects  and  abundance  in  the  vicinity  of  roads,  particularly  in  the high-density  urban  areas.  Many  toxicological  and  epidemiological studies  established  adverse  health  effects  by  NOx [1,2].  NOx can  be produced  in  the  process  of  the  high  temperature  combustion  of  fossil  fuels,  so  automotive  vehicles  as  well  as  fuel  hungry  industries are  the  major  sources  of  NOx emission  [3–6].  Therefore,  it  is  very important  to  control  the  emission  of  such  gases  and  develop  procedures  for  continuously  monitoring  these  gases  in  the  emission process  and  ambient  atmosphere.  In  order  to  meet  such  needs,  high performance  NOx gas  sensors  are  urgently  demanded.  So  far,  a  special  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  group  of  devices  based  on  the mixed  potential  gas-sensing  mechanism  owing  to  their  attractive performances  [7–24].  In  order  to  improve  the  sensing  properties of  mixed-potential-type  NO2 sensor,  many  researchers  have  been focused  on  the  development  of  new  oxide  electrode  materials  and the  optimization  of  the  microstructure  of  these  oxides.  Miura  et  al. reported  that  ZnCr2O4,  ZnFe2O4,  NiO  and  Cr2O3 +  NiO  could  give good  sensing  properties  for  NOx at  elevated  temperature  [8–14]. Szabo  and  Dutta  also  examined  that  Cr2O3 was  an  excellent  sensing  electrode  [15].  Bartolomeo  et  al.  testiﬁed  that  WO3,  LaFeO3 and  La0.8Sr0.2FeO3 showed  good  sensing  performance  [16].  Xiong and  Kale  developed  CuO  +  CuCr2O4 sensing  electrode  [17].  On  the other  hand,  some  researchers  have  been  trying  to  optimize  the microstructure  of  the  oxide  electrodes  for  increasing  the  sensitivity  to  NOx.  For  example,  Miura  et  al.  investigated  the  dependence  of the  sensitivity  on  the  thickness  of  NiO  sensing  electrode  and  found that  the  sensor  exhibited  the  highest  NO2 sensitivity  as  well  as  fast response  and  recovery  speeds  at  the  operating  temperatures  below 800 ◦C  when  the  thickness  was   about  120  nm  [18,19].  Martin  et  al. used  porous  Cr2O3 as  the  sensing  electrode  material  and  found  that the  surface  topography  of  sensing  electrode  affected  the  sensing performance  of  the  sensor  [20,21].

As  stated  above,  at  the  initial  stage  of  the  investigation  of  the mixed  potential  sensors,  most  of  the  attentions  were  focused  on searching  for  the  new  electrode  materials.  However,  the  effect  of the  microstructure  of  the  three-phase  boundary  on  the  sensing performance  was   almost  ignored.  In  some  early  researches,  the ﬂat  YSZ  plate  or  the  YSZ  tube  with  smooth  surface  were  just  covered  with  an  electrode  material  layer,  as  shown  in  Fig.  1a.  In  this case,  the  effective  area  of  three-phase  boundary  was  decreased, which  led  to  the  decrease  of  the  rates  of  electrochemical  reactions.  Miura  et  al.  had  investigated  the  relationship  between  the roughness  of  YSZ  surface  and  the  sensing  property  tentatively  [22]. However,  only  simply  contrastive  research  was  carried  out  for  commercially  available  YSZ  plates  with  different  surface  roughness  in their  works,  and  the  design  and  control  of  the  surface  roughness were  not  included.

In  the  present  work,  it  was  proposed  to  control  the  roughness of  the  surface  of  YSZ  plate  with  the  hydroﬂuoric  acid  corrosion. The  correlation  between  the  surface  roughness  of  YSZ  plate  and the  corrosion  conditions  (corrosion  time  and  HF  concentration) are  investigated.  The  mixed  potential  type  NO2 sensors  with  high sensing  performance  was  obtained  by  combining  the  rough  YSZ plate  with  NiO  sensing  electrode,  as  shown  in  Fig.  1b.  The  sensing mechanism  referred  to  the  three-phase  boundary  was   suggested.

The  planar  NOx sensors  were  fabricated  using  YSZ  plates  (8  wt.% × Y2O3-doped,  2    2  mm,   0.2  mm  thickness,  Tosoh  Corp.,  Japan).  YSZ plates  were  corroded  by  hydroﬂuoric  acid  (Beijing  Chemical  Works) with  different  concentrations  (10%,  20%  and  40%)  for  3  h  at  room temperature  [25].  A  point-shaped  and  a  narrow  stripe-shaped  Pt electrode  were  formed  on  the  two  ends  of  the  as-corroded  YSZ plate  by  applying  the  commercial  Pt  paste  (Sino-platinum  Metals CO.,  Ltd.).  The  nickel  oxide  powder  was  prepared  by  precipitation method  and  the  obtained  precursors  were  sintered  at  1100 ◦C  for 3  h  [26].  The  as-prepared  NiO  powder  was  mixed  with  pure  water, and  the  resulted  paste  was  coated  on  the  point-shaped  Pt  electrode, followed  by  sintering  at  1200 ◦C  for  3  h.  Then,  a  Pt  heater  formed on  Al2O3 substrate  was  attached  to  the  sensor  device  by  chemical glue  as  shown  in  Fig.  2.

The  crystal  structure  of  the  nickel  oxide  powder  was   conﬁrmed by  X-ray  diffraction  (Rigaku  wide-angle  X-ray  diffraction  D/max rA,  using  Cu  K␣   =  0.1541  nm)  analysis. The  surface  topography  of  the  YSZ  plates  corroded  with  HF  was observed  by  means  of  ﬁeld-emission  scanning  electron  microscopy (FE-SEM;  JEOL,  JSM-7500,  Japan)  and  Atomic  Force  Microscope (AFM;  Being  Nano-Instrument,  Ltd.,  CSPM5500,  China).

Gas  sensing  properties  of  the  sensor  were  measured  by  a  conventional  static  mounting  method.  The  Pt  heater  offers  the  working temperature  for  the  sensor.  The  sample  gases  containing  different NO2 concentration  were  obtained  by  diluting  10,000  ppm  NO2 with the  base  gas  composed  of  O2 (21  vol.%)  and  N2 (79  vol.%).  When  the sensor  was   exposed  to  air  or  the  sample  gas,  the  potential  difference  was  measured  with  a  digital  electrometer  (Digital  Multimeter; Rigol  Technologies,  Inc.,  DM3054,  China)  as  the  sensing  signal,  and the  results  were  recorded  with  a  computer  connected  to  the  electrometer  [27–29].

The  current–voltage  (polarization)  curves  in  the  potential  range −50  to  110  mV   were  measured  by  means  of  potentiodynamic of  method  at  a  constant  scan-rate  of  6  mV/min  using  a  two-electrode conﬁguration  in  the  base  gas  (21  vol.%  O2 +  N2 balance)  and  the sample  gas  (100  and  200  ppm  NO2 +  21  vol.%  O2 +  N2 and  balance) (Instrument  corporation  of  Shanghai,  China,  CHI600C).  The  current axis  of  the  anodic  polarization  curve  was  subtracted  from  that  of the  cathodic  polarization  curve  at  each  potential  so  as  to  obtain  the modiﬁed  polarization  curve  in  which  the  current  axis  is  shown  in absolute  scale.

The  complex  impedance  of  the  sensor  in  air  or  sample  gas  was measured  by  means  of  an  impedance  analyzer  (Solartron,  1260 and  Solartron,  1287)  in  the  frequency  range  of  0.1  Hz–1  MHz.  The amplitude  of  the  ac  potential  signal  was  ﬁxed  at  250  mV  in  all  measurements.

Fig.  3  exhibits  the  XRD  pattern  of  NiO  powders  sintered  at 1100 ◦C  for  3  h  in  air.  It  can  be  seen  that  NiO  retains  its  crystallographic  phase  (face-centered  cubic)  corresponding  to  JCPDS  PDF (#  44-1159).  Due  to  the  sintering  effect  at  elevated  temperature,  all the  peaks  assigned  to  NiO  were  very  narrow.  The  mean  grain  size of  NiO  calculated  by  Debye–Scherrer  equation  was  about  70  nm.

Fig.  4  shows  the  representative  SEM  images  of  the  surface  for the  YSZ  plates  corroded  with  different  concentrations  of  HF.  It  can be  observed  that  the  roughness  of  the  surface  for  the  corroded  YSZ plate  increases  with  the  increase  of  HF  concentration.  The  number of  holes  and  ravines  on  the  surface  stands  for  the  roughness,  the much  bumpier  the  surface  is,  the  larger  the  contact  area  between YSZ  plate  and  the  sensing  electrode.  In  order  to  prove  that  the roughness  will  increase  with  increase  of  the  HF  concentrations, AFM  analysis  was  used  to  investigate  the  surface  roughness  of  the plates  as  shown  in  Fig.  5.  The  surface  root  mean  squares,  which represent  the  roughness  of  the  YSZ  plate  surface,  are  changed  proportionally  to  the  HF  concentrations.  The  results  prove  the  above conclusion.

All  sensors  using  the  corroded  YSZ  plates  and  NiO  electrodes were  sintered  at  1200 ◦C.  The  response  and  recovery  transients  to different  concentrations  of  NO2 for  the  sensors  using  the  YSZ  plates corroded  with  different  HF  concentrations  are  shown  in  Fig.  6.  It can  be  seen  that  the  change  of  potential  difference  (potential  difference  (NO2)-potential  difference  (air))  to  the  same  concentration NO2 increases  at  850 ◦C  with  the  increase  of  the  HF  concentration. The  value  of  the  change  of  potential  difference  among  the  sensors  using  different  corroded  YSZ  plates  becomes  larger  with  the increase  of  the  NO2 concentration.  When  the  concentration  of  NO2 is  low  (less  than  20  ppm),  the  active  sites  on  the  three-phase  boundary  of  each  sensor  are  enough  to  supply  the  reaction  ﬁeld  for  full reaction  with  the  sample  gas,  so  the  sensitivities  of  the  sensors  are almost  independent  of  the  HF  concentrations.  However,  the  number  of  the  active  sites  on  the  three-phase  boundary  seemed  to  be affected  by  the  roughness  of  the  YSZ  substrates,  namely  decided  by the  HF  concentrations.  Therefore,  in  high  NO2 concentration  range (more  than  50  ppm),  the  sensitivities  to  NO2 strongly  depend  on the  HF  concentrations.  It  can  also  be  seen  that  the  response  time for  each  sensor  is  about  3–5  s,  but  the  recovery  rate  become  slower with  the  increase  of  the  surface  roughness  of  the  YSZ  substrate. This  can  be  attributed  to  the  large  contact  area  and  good  porosity which  obstruct  the  desorption  and  diffusion  process  of  the  reaction products.

Fig.  7  shows  the  correlations  between  the  potential  difference  and  the  logarithm  of  the  NO2 concentrations  for  the  sensors.

The  potential  difference  of  the  sensors  is  almost  linear  with  the logarithm  of  the  NO2 concentration  at  850 ◦C.  The  slope  of  the sensor  using  uncorroded  YSZ  plates  is  about  37  mV/decade,  and the  ones  corroded  by  10%,  20%  and  40%  HF  are  about  46,  50  and 76  mV/decade,  respectively.  It  is  obvious  that  the  slope  became larger  with  the  increase  of  the  HF  concentration,  and  the  sensor using  the  YSZ  plate  corroded  with  40%  HF  shows  the  biggest  slope. The  slopes  of  the  sensors  using  the  corroded  YSZ  plates  are  rather larger,  compared  with  the  results  reported  by  the  other  research groups.  For  example,  the  slope  of  planar  NO2 sensor  using  stabilized  zirconia  and  NiO  reported  by  Miura  was   about  22  mV/decade, which  is  smaller  than  our  results  [10].  This  also  indirectly  indicates that  the  improvement  of  the  effective  area  of  three-phase  boundary  plays  an  important  role  in  increasing  the  sensitivity  (slope)  of the  sensor,  although  the  oxide  electrode  is  same.  The  inset  in  Fig.  7 exhibits  the  measured  results  in  1–9  ppm  and  20–1000  ppm.  The slopes  in  lower  and  higher  ranges  are  very  different.  It  can  be  found the  chemical  catalytic  activity  and  thickness  of  oxide  layer  affected the  sensing  performance.  It  can  be  easily  understood  that  part  of the  NO2 will  be  consumed  in  the  oxide  layer  before  arriving  at  TPB and  the  change  ratio  of  NO2 conc.  at  TPB  is  larger  in  the  lower  NO2 concentration  compared  with  higher  conc.  This  is  why  the  slope  in high  NO2 concentration  is  larger  than  low  NO2 conc.  The  present sensor  device  (treated  with  40%  HF)  was   further  subjected  to  additional  test  for  the  response  transients  to  100  ppm  NO2 which  was repeated  six  times  at  850 ◦C.  As  shown  in  Fig.  8,  the  response  transients  as  well  as  the  potential  difference  response  to  100  ppm  NO2 are  almost  reproducible  in  the  successive  runs.

The  sensor  using  the  YSZ  plate  corroded  by  40%  HF  also  exhibits well  selectivity  to  NO2 against  the  interference  gases,  such  as  NH3, H2,  H2S,  Cl2,  C4H10 and  CH4 at  850 ◦C  (Fig.  9).  The  cross-sensitivities of  the  sensor  to  these  interference  gases  are  rather  small  or  almost none  and  indicate  excellent  NO2 selectivity.  According  to  the mixed-potential  sensing  mechanism,  the  response  directions  to reducing  and  oxidation  gases  are  positive  and  negative,  respectively,  if  the  reference  electrode  is  opened  to  air  only.  We   have noticed  that  the  response  directions  of  H2 and  CH4 are  positive, although  these  two  gases  are  the  typical  reducing  ones.  Such  results can  be  attributed  to  the  planar  structure  of  our  sensor.  For  the  planar  type  sensor,  since  both  sensing  electrode  and  reference  one  are exposed  to  the  same  atmosphere,  the  sensing  signal  is  determined by  the  difference  of  the  potentials  at  the  sensing  and  reference  electrodes.  Generally,  either  sensing  electrode  potential  or  reference electrode  potential  is  mixed  potential  under  the  detecting  gases, the  directions  and  values  of  the  two  mixed  potentials  are  dependent  on  the  sensing  properties  of  these  two  electrode  materials.  If the  reference  electrode  is  more  active  than  the  sensing  electrode  to H2 or  CH4,  the  response  should  be  positive.  In  fact,  Miura  et  al.  have reported  that  the  responses  to  CO  and  hydrocarbons  are  positive  at 900 ◦C  [10].

As  described  above,  the  sensor  gave  a  good  linear  relationship between  potential  difference  and  the  logarithm  of  the  concentration  of  NO2 as  switching  on  dilute  NO2 in  Fig.  7.  For  the stabilized  ziconia-based  potentiometric  sensors,  two   main  sensing mechanisms  have  been  proposed.  At  ﬁrst,  some  groups  suggested  a  mixed  potential  sensing  mechanism  involving  the  double electrochemical  reactions  at  the  sensing  electrode  [30–34].   This mechanism  has  been  testiﬁed  by  the  measurable  polarization curves.  On  the  other  hand,  Van  Assche  and  Wachsman  have proposed  a  “Differential  Electrode  Equilibria”  sensing  mechanism  based  on  the  formation  of  charge-building  compounds  for a  special  sensing  material  (e.g.  LaCu2O4)  [35].  In  this  work,  we attempted  to  explain  for  the  sensing  behavior  of  the  potentiometric  NOx sensor  using  the  corroded  YSZ  plate  and  NiO.  This device  can  be  described  by  the  following  electrochemical  cells,In  air  :  O2, In  sample  gas  :  O2 +.

Under  the  coexistence  of  NO2 and  O2,  a  local  cell  is  formed  at the  sensing  electrode  by  the  following  electrochemical  reactions: Cathodic  :  NO2 + Anodic  :  2O2.

When  the  rates  of  the  above  two  electrochemical  reactions  are equal,  the  sensing  electrode  potential  is  so-called  mixed  potential, the  difference  of  the  sensing  and  reference  electrode  potentials  is measured  as  the  sensing  signal.

The  magnitude  of  the  mixed  potential  is  strongly  dependent on  the  kind,  microstructure  and  layer  thickness  of  the  sensing materials.  Three  main  factors  play  the  key  roles  in  determining  the  magnitude  of  the  mixed-potential  [30].  Firstly,  high electrochemical  catalytic  activity  of  the  sensing  electrode  material  to  NO2 or  NO  is  necessary  for  increasing  the  sensitivity. Secondly,  inactivity  to  oxygen  can  reduce  the  rate  of  the  reaction  (2)  and  increase  the  magnitude  of  the  mixed potential.  In  addition,  high  chemical  catalytic  activity  of  the sensing  material  to  the  reaction  NO2 →   NO  +  1/2O2 is  negative for  the  mixed-potential,  because  the  NO2 will  be  consumed in  the  diffusion  process  of  NO2 through  the  sensing  electrode layer.

All  the  above-mentioned  factors  are  entangled  with  each  other in  a  complicated  manner,  ﬁnally  determined  the  sensitivity  to  NOx. In  this  work,  we   paid  special  attentions  for  the  microstructure  of  the triple-phase-boundary  and  tried  to  enhance  the  double  of  electrochemical  reactions  (1)  and  (2)  by  enlarging  the  contact  area  of  YSZ and  the  sensing  electrode.  Larger  contact  area  can  supply  more  electrochemically  active  sites  for  the  reactions  (1)  and  (2),   ﬁnally  result in  the  increase  of  the  sensitivity  to  NO2 at  elevated  temperature.  In our  previous  works,  we   obtained  the  correlation  between  the  mixed potential  and  the  concentrations  of  NOx and  oxygen  according  to the  mixed-potential  sensing  model.  In  the  case  of  detecting  NO2, when  the  NO2 concentration  is  ﬁxed,  the  mixed-potential  is  linear with  the  logarithm  of  the  O2 concentration  in  a  minus  slope.  For  the present  sensor,  in  order  to  verify  this  conclusion,  the  effect  of  the coexisting  oxygen  concentration  was  investigated.  Fig.  10(a)  shows the  response  transient  to  100  ppm  NO2 in  atmospheres  containing 2%,  5%,  10%,  20%  O2 at  850 ◦C.  As  expected,  the  response  transients reduced  with  the  increasing  concentration  of  O2,  the  same  results are  plotted  in  Fig.  10(b).  It  is  observed  that  the  potential  difference is  almost  linear  to  the  logarithm  of  the  O2 concentration  and  the slope  is  negative.  Such  a  result  examined  the  sensing  mechanism involved  in  the  mixed-potential.

In  order  to  further  testify  the  mixed-potential-model,  the  polarization  curves  of  the  sensors  using  the  untreated  YSZ  plate  and  the treated  one  with  40%  HF  were  measured  in  air  and  NO2 +  air.  The anodic  polarization  curve  was  obtained  in  air,  and  the  cathodic polarization  curve  was   obtained  by  subtracting  in  air  from  in NO2 +  air.  The  modiﬁed  polarization  curves  of  the  sensors  using  the untreated  YSZ  plate  and  treated  one  are  shown  in  Fig.  11(a)  and  (b). The  mixed-potential  can  be  estimated  from  the  intersection  of  the anodic  and  cathodic  polarization  curves.  In  Table  1,  we   compared the  estimated  values  and  the  measurable  potential  difference  for the  two   sensors.  It  is  clear  that  the  estimated  values  are  very  close to  the  potential  difference  values  experimentally  observed.  These results  supply  a  new  evidence  for  the  mixed-potential  potential model. Fig.  12  shows  the  complex  impedances  of  the  sensor  at  850 ◦C both  in  air  and  the  sample  gases  containing  various  concentrations  of  NO2.  The  complex  impedance  values  (|Z|)  at  low  frequency (around  0.1  Hz)  decrease  with  an  increase  of  NO2 concentrations. In  contrast,  the    values  at  high  frequency  (around  1  MHz)  are almost  invariant  with  different  concentrations  of  NO2.  The  varying  frequencies  of  the  voltage  between  the  electrodes  are  so  high that  the  rate  of  the  electrochemical  reactions  cannot  keep  up  with them,  while  at  the  low  frequency,  the  time  for  the  electrochemical reactions  is  long  enough.  So  it  can  be  proved  that  the  most  of  the electrochemical  reactions  occurred  in  the  interface.  In  the  present case,  the  appearance  of  NO2 sensitivity  seems  to  be  also  attributable to  the  change  in  the  resistance  of  electrochemical  reaction  at  the interface  between  YSZ  and  NiO  electrode  [36,37].  Thus,  it  can  be concluded  that  most  of  the  electrochemical  reactions  occur  at  the three-phase  boundary.

The  conjecture  that  the  sensing  characteristics  of  mixedpotential-type  NO2 sensor  based  on  an  yttria-stabilized  zirconia (YSZ)  plate  can  be  improved  by  increasing  superﬁcial  area  of three-phase  boundary  is  tested  and  veriﬁed  in  this  work.  Surface topography  of  YSZ  substrate  was  improved  by  the  corrosion  with different  concentrations  of  hydroﬂuoric  acid  (10%,  20%,  and  40%)  for 3  h.  Through  investigating  the  sensing  properties  of  the  NO2 sensors  at  850 ◦C,  it  is  found  that  the  sensitivity  to  20–500  ppm  NO2 is as  high  as  76  mV/decade  for  the  sensor  using  the  YSZ  substrate  corroded  with  40%  HF.  Moreover,  the  sensor  exhibits  well  selectivity and  rapid  response–recovery  characteristics  to  NO2.  The  dependence  of  the  O2 concentration,  polarization  curves  and  complex impedances  of  the  device  indicate  that  the  NO2 sensing  behavior can  be  well  explained  by  the  mixed  potential  model.

The  ﬁnancial  support  of  National  Science  Fund  for  Distinguished Young  Scholar  of  China  (No.  60625301)  and  Project  Supported  by Basic  Research  Fund  of  Jilin  University  (No.  200903080)  is  gratefully acknowledged.
