Thermally   stable   Na3Cr2(PO4)3 nano-crystallites   are   synthesized   through   novel   solution   combustion technique   using   glycine   fuel   in   three   molar   ratios.   Effects   of   fuel   molar   ratio   on   structural   and   electrical properties   are   investigated.   Reaction   parameters   like   fuel   molar   ratio,   ﬂame   temperature   and   number of  moles   of   gases   evolved,   play   a   major   role   in   deciding   physical   and   electrical   properties.   Out   of   the synthesized   samples,   one   which   contains   fuel   in   1:1   molar   ratio   shows   highest   grain   conductivity   of ×   10−6 S  cm−1.   Improved   conductivity   is   elucidated   by   least   size   and   highest   density   of   the   crystal2.35   lites,   which   in   turn   is  decided   by   the   ﬂame   temperature.   Ac   electrical   properties   are   investigated   using complex   impedance   spectroscopy.   Activation   energies   for   dc   conduction   and   relaxation   are   determined and   the   results   are   reported.

NASICON  type  materials  are  potentially  important  in  solid  state ionic  devices  due  to  its  application  as  solid  electrolytes.  High  ionic conductivity  and  stability  of  phosphate  units  are  advantages  of NASICON  over  other  electrolyte  materials  [1].   In  the  frame-work, AxBy(PO4)3,  A  is  an  alkali  metal  ion  and  B  is  a  multivalent  metal ion.  The  charge  compensating  A  cations  occupy  two  types  of  sites, M1   and  M2   (1:3  multiplicity),  in  interconnected  channels  formed by  corner  sharing  PO4 tetrahedra  and  BO6 octahedra.  M1   sites  are surrounded  by  six  oxygens  and  located  at  an  inversion  center  and M2  sites  are  symmetrically  distributed  around  three-fold  axis  of  the structure  with  ten-fold  oxygen  coordination.  In  three-dimensional frame-work  of  NASICON,  numerous  ionic  substitutions  are  allowed at  various  lattice  sites  [2].   Typically,  NASICON  type  materials  are stable  in  rhombohedral  symmetry  with  R ¯3c  space  group.  But  microcrystalline  NASICON,  containing  Cr  and  Fe  in  B  site  exhibit  structural phase  transition  and  crystallized  in  less  stable  monoclinic  symmetry  [3].  While,  the  same  phase  synthesized  through  chemical  route [4]  persists  in  stable  symmetry.  High  ion  conducting  structurallystable  NASICON  material  has  enormous  application  in  solid  state devices.  Especially,  Na+ ion  conducting  NASICON  is  widely  used in  CO2 and  SOx sensors  because  of  its  ion-sensitivity,  and  these materials  exhibit  good  response  and  excellent  selectivity  against CO2 and  NO2.  The  Na3Cr2(PO4)3 could  be  a  possible  material  for sensor  application  owing  to  its  conductivity  and  thermally  stable structure.

Different  preparation  techniques  exist  to  reduce  the  size  of  crystallites;  among  those  hydrothermal,  sol–gel  and  co-precipitation are  commonly  used  for  NASICON  synthesis  [5–7].  Even  though these  methods  have  several  advantages  in  terms  of  homogeneity and  ﬁne  particle  nature;  it  is  difﬁcult  to  obtain  phase  pure  material by  these  methods.  An  alternate  approach  is  solution  combustion technique;  few  reports  are  available  on  the  synthesis  of  NASICON by  this  technique  [8].   Self-propagating  combustion  synthesis  works on  the  principle  of  decomposition  of  an  oxidizing  agent  (metal nitrate),  in  the  presence  of  reducing  agents  like  urea,  citric  acid and  glycine.  This  redox  reaction  completes  in  short  time  followed by  rapid  cooling  leading  to  nucleation  without  the  growth  of  crystallites.  Gas  evolution  during  combustion  promotes  formation  of pores,  which  disintegrates  large  particles  or  agglomerates  and  high purity  products  are  formed.

A  few  studies  reported  the  correlation  between  synthesis parameters  and  electrical  properties  of  NASICON  material.  In  the present  study,  exertion  has  been  made  to  ascertain  the  implication  of  fuel  molar  ratio  on  structural  and  electrical  relaxation dynamics  of  Na3Cr2(PO4)3 crystallites.  Glycine,  one  of  the  smallest  amino  acids  with  the  formula  NH2CH2COOH,  is  used  as  the reducing/complexing  agent  in  different  molar  ratios  1:1,  1:2  and 1:3  in  this  study.  Fuel  molar  ratio  is  an  important  aspect  in  deciding  the  structural  parameters  and  electrical  relaxation  dynamics of  the  material.  Different  characterization  tools  like  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD),  Fourier-transform  infrared  spectroscopy  (FTIR),  UV–vis spectroscopy,  Thermo-gravimetry  and  differential  thermal  analysis (TG-DTA),  Scanning  electron  microscopy  (SEM)  and  Transmission electron  microscopy  (TEM)  are  explored  for  structural  studies.  For exposition  of  ac  electrical  relaxation,  electrical  parameters  are investigated  in  the  frequency  range  of  10  Hz–25  MHz   at  different temperatures  and  the  results  are  reported.

Stoichiometric  amount  of  NaNO3,  Cr(NO3)3·9H2O,  NH4H2PO4 and  glycine  were mixed  in  required  molar  ratios  in  minimum  volume  of  deionized  water.  The  resulting solution  after  homogenous  mixing  and  thermal  dehydration  in  a  magnetic  stirrer became  viscous  liquid.  Temperature  was  increased  to  100 ◦C  for  auto-ignition  with rapid  evolution  of  large  volume  of  gases  to  produce  voluminous  powder,  named to   be  as-prepared  material.  The  nature  of  ignition  depends  on  fuel  molar  ratio  and combustion  was   more  powerful  for  large  molar  ratios. Before  carrying  out  electrical  measurements,  pellets  were  sintered  at  900 ◦C  for 24   h  and  at  1150 ◦C  for  3  h.  Silver  paint  was  evenly  applied  on  both  sides  of  pellets for   better  electrical  contact.  Ac  electrical  measurements  were  carried  out  by  two terminal  method  using  PSM  1735  LCZ  meter  in  the  temperature  range  from  373  K to   503  K  where  complex  impedance,  phase  angle,  conductance  (G)  and  capacitance (C)  were  measured.

The  ion  transport  number  was  measured  by  dc  polarization  technique.  In  this technique,  a  dc  voltage  of  400  mV   is  applied  across  the  sample  kept  between  a  pair of   blocking  silver  electrodes.  The  resulting  polarization  current  through  the  circuit was  measured  as  a  function  of  time  using  Keithley  238  high  current  source  measure unit.

Powder  XRD  patterns  were  recorded  at  room  temperature  using  Philips  X’pert   range  of  5◦–75◦.  High  temperature  XRD  measurements PRO   diffractometer  in  the  2 were  carried  out  using  Anton  par  HT  attachment.  TG  and  DTA  measurements  were carried  out  using  TG-DTA  instrument  Model:  Q600  SDT  from  TA  instruments  in  the temperature  range  of  40–1000 ◦C.  FTIR  spectra  were  recorded  using  Thermo  Nicolet made  FTIR  spectrometer  of  Model:  6700.  Spectrum  was  recorded  between  400  cm−1 and  1400  cm−1 using  KBr  as  diluter  and  UV–vis  spectrum  was  recorded  using Ocean  optics  HR4000  in  the  range  of  200–1100  nm.  Scanning  transmission  electron microscopy  (SEM)  and  transmission  electron  microscopy  (TEM)  were  employed  to distinguish  the  surface  morphology  and  crystallite  size  of  the  products.  SEM  was recorded  using  model  S-3400  from  Hitachi  and  TEM  using  JEOL  2100F.

Glycine  plays  dual  role  in  combustion  reaction;  being  a  carboxylic  group  at  one  end  and  an  amino  group  at  other  end,  it can  behave  as  zwitterion.  Both  end  of  which  can  take  part  in complexation  of  metal  ions  of  varying  sizes,  which  helps  in  preventing  selective  precipitation  to  maintain  compositional  homogeneity among  the  constituents.  Metal  nitrates  are  reduced  by  glycine through  an  exothermic  redox  reaction  during  combustion  and  the adiabatic  ﬂame  temperature  reach  above  1000 ◦C  depending  on  the fuel  ratio.

In  the  case  of  glycine–nitrate  combustion,  primarily  N2,  CO2, and  H2O  are  evolved  as  gaseous  products  [9].   Over  all  reaction  for formation  of  Na3Cr2(PO4)3 using  glycine  in  1:1  fuel  ratio  (denoted as  Na3Cr2(PO4)3-G1:1)  is  given  by, 3NaNO3 + 2Cr(NO3)3 · 9H2O + 3NH4H2PO4 + 8NH2 − CH2COOH+ 5O2−→Na3Cr2(PO4)3 + 10N2 + 16CO2 + 47H2O.

Adiabatic  ﬂame  temperature  for  the  reaction  in  Eq.  (1),   is  calculated  using  thermodynamic  data  given  in  Table  1.  The  enthalpy  of combustion  can  be  expressed  as: H0 =products reactants and H0 = products.

where  n  is  the  number  of  moles,  Tf is  the  adiabatic  ﬂame  temperature  and  Cp is  the  heat  capacity  (constant  pressure)  of  products. Adiabatic  ﬂame  temperature  is  estimated  by  using  the  equation:Tf = T0 + H0.

where  T0 is  the  initiation  temperature  and  Tf is  the  maximum combustion  temperature  achieved  under  adiabatic  conditions.  The adiabatic  ﬂame  temperature  for  1:1  fuel  molar  ratio  turns  out  to be  1509  K  from  Eq.  (3)  and  as  expected  the  ﬂame  temperature increases  substantially  with  fuel  ratio.  However,  actual  ﬂame  temperature  is  much  lower  than  the  theoretical  value  due  to  radiative losses,  incomplete  combustion  and  heating  of  air  [10].  The  powder characteristics,  namely,  crystallite  size  and  surface  area  are  primarily  governed  by  enthalpy  or  ﬂame  temperature  during  combustion, where  the  ﬂame  temperature  depends  on  nature  of  the  fuel  and  its fuel  molar  ratio  [11].  Rapid  evolution  of  large  volume  of  gaseous products  during  combustion  dissipates  heat  during  combustion whereby  limits  the  growth  of  temperature.  This  reduces  the  possibility  of  premature  local  partial  sintering  among  primary  particles. The  gas  evolution  helps  in  limiting  the  inter-particle  contact. As-prepared  material  is  in  amorphous  form  and  the  XRD  patterns  of  sintered  Na3Cr2(PO4)3 at  900 ◦C  are  shown  in  Fig.  1(a). The  spectra  match  well  with  JCPDS  data  reference  number  01-0770748,  which  is  in  rhombohedral  crystal  system  with    space group.  Crystallite  size  is  calculated  from  Williamson–Hall  plot  ,  using  XRD  data.  The  Williamson–Hall between  Bcos    and  4sin  [12]  equation  is: B cos  = KD + 4ε sin .

 where  B  is  the  full  width  at  half  maximum  (FWHM),    is  the  Bragg angle,  K  is  the  Scherrer  constant,  D  is  the  crystallite  size,    is  the ε wavelength  of  X-ray,    is  the  lattice  strain.  For  Gaussian  X-ray  proﬁles,  B  can  be  calculated  as:  B2 = B2 s where  Bm is  the  FWHM measured  for  specimen,  Bs is  the  FWHM  of  silicon  standard,  which is  used  to  eliminate  instrumental  broadening.  Using  a  linear  interpolation  to  Williamson–Hall  plot,  intercept  give  crystallite  size.

The  crystallite  size  is  decided  mainly  by  two  factors  i.e.  adiabatic  ﬂame  temperature  and  number  of  moles  of  gases  released during  combustion.  The  ﬂame  temperature  and  the  number  of moles  of  gases  released  are  more  for  large  fuel  ratio.  High  values of  ﬂame-temperature  result  in  the  formation  of  dense  agglomerates  that  are  disintegrated  by  the  release  of  large  amount  of  gases [13].  Hence,  competition  between  ﬂame  temperature  and  number of  moles  of  gases  released  decides  the  crystallite  size.  Crystallites of  Na3Cr2(PO4)3-G1:1  are  the  smallest  among  the  three  fuel  ratios and  Table  2  shows  variation  of  crystallite  size.  From  these  observations,  present  study  signiﬁes  that  the  ﬂame  temperature  has  more effect  on  controlling  the  crystallite  size  than  the  number  of  moles of  gases  released  during  combustion.  Density  of  sintered  pellets  is measured  through  Archimedes’  method  using  xylene  as  solvent. Table  2  shows  the  variation  in  the  density  of  samples.  All  the  materials  were  sintered  more  than  90%  of  its  theoretical  density.  Among the  materials  of  different  fuel  molar  ratios,  Na3Cr2(PO4)3-G1:1  has the  highest  densely  due  to  close  packing  of  smallest  crystallites[14].  When  compared  to  solid  state  synthesis,  solution  combustion method  enables  dense  sintering  of  materials  at  lower  temperature. The  reduction  in  sintering  temperature  of  solution  combustion method  may   be  explained  based  on  the  enhanced  kinetics  due  to the  ultraﬁne  nature  of  the  nanostructured  material.

Microcrystalline  NASICON  containing  Cr  and  Fe  in  B  site  lattices are  not  thermally  stable.  It  shows  transitions  from  room  tempera  at  166 ◦C. ␥ ture  ␣-form  is  in  monoclinic  phase  with  superstructure  reﬂections, where  Na+ ions  are  located  at  M1   sites  in  ordered  manner  [3].   In ␥-form,  Na+ ions  are  distributed  on  availrhombohedral  phase  of  able  M1   and  M2   sites  in  disordered  manner.  While,  Na3Cr2(PO4)3 nano-crystallites  synthesized  by  this  novel  technique  crystallized in  thermally  stable  rhombohedral  phase.  This  sort  of  structural modiﬁcation  is  common  in  materials  synthesized  by  various  chemical  routes  [3]. In   order  to  conﬁrm  the  structural  stability,  XRD  patterns  of Na3Cr2(PO4)3-G1:1  is  recorded  at  30,  85,  150  and  200 ◦C.  The  high temperature  patterns  match  well  with  the  room  temperature  pattern  as  shown  in  Fig.  1(b).  To  conﬁrm  the  phase,  Rietveld  reﬁnement of  Na3Cr2(PO4)3-G1:1  is  performed  using  GSAS  computer  package [15,16].  In  Fig.  1(c),  symbol  shows  experimental  data  collected  in slow  scan  mode;  calculated  and  difference  patterns  are  in  solid  lines of  different  colors.  Reﬁnement  is  performed  based  on  rhombohedral  crystal  system  with    space  group.  The  parameters  like  zero shift,  unit-cell  parameters,  FWHM,   background,  scale  factor  and pseudo-voigt  coefﬁcient  are  reﬁned  initially.  Then  lattice  parameters,  atomic  positions  of  Cr,  P  and  O  are  reﬁned  in  12c  (0,  0,  z),  18e (x,  0,  1/4),  and  36f  (x,  y,  z)  Wyckoff  positions,  respectively.  Na+ is assumed  to  occupy  M1   site  and  M2   site  partially;  whose  Wyckoff positions  are  6b  (0,  0,  0)  and  18e  (x,  0,  1/4)  respectively  and  results are  given  in  Table  3. Thermal  and  gravimetric  analyses  of  as-prepared  materials  are carried  out  in  the  temperature  range  of  40–1000 ◦C.  This  study conﬁrms  the  structural  phase  change  in  materials  and  enthalpy of  products  can  be  calculated  from  area  of  crystallization  peak. TG-DTA  curve  of  as-prepared  samples  are  shown  in  Fig.  2(a)–(c). Out  of  the  two  exothermic  peaks  observed  in  DTA,  ﬁrst  broad peak  is  around  200–400 ◦C  and  the  second  sharp  peak  is  around 740–780 ◦C.  The  former  peak  indicates  decomposition  of  organic fuel  and  nitrates  producing  NH3 and  NO2 gases,  which  activate main  combustion  reaction;  while  the  latter  corresponds  to  the burning  of  residual  organic  matter  and  its  subsequent  crystallization.  The  gravimetric  plot  shows  signiﬁcant  weight  loss  in  the temperature  range  of  300–740 ◦C  for  all  samples  due  to  decomposition  of  organic  intermediates.  Further  weight  loss  between  740 ◦C and  800 ◦C  is  due  to  the  formation  of  NASICON  phase,  that  is  articulated  in  DTA  plot  as  sharp  exothermic  peak.  For  all  samples,  weight loss  curve  follows  the  same  path,  but  percentage  of  weight  loss  is more  for  1:3  fuel  ratio,  since  it  restrains  more  carbonaceous  material.  DTA  studies  ruled  out  the  plausible  structural  phase  transitions in  the  material.

Infrared  spectroscopy  is  an  important  and  popular  tool  for structural  exposition  and  compound  identiﬁcation.  Broadband  FTIR spectrum  in  Fig.  3  is  of  as-prepared  material  and  the  bands  between 650  and  400  cm−1 of  calcined  powder  attribute  to  harmonics of deformation of O–P–O angle (  2 and   4 modes) [17] Bands of  deformation  of  O–P–O  angle  ( 9)2 and  ∼560  cm−1 are  attributed  to  asymmetric indicated  in  the  region  bending  vibration  modes  of  O–P–O  units  [18–20].   Those  in  the region  of  931–882  cm−1 are  assigned  to  PO3 2− ionic  group  vibration [21].  The  region  1250–900  cm−1 is  owing  to  stretching  vibrations of  PO4 unit  ( 9)1 and   9)3 modes)  [22].  The  interaction  of  P–O  bond  and adjacent  Cr–O  bond  is  visible  in  the  region  of  1227–1185  cm−1 [23]. Vibrational  bands  conﬁrm  the  formation  of  NASICON  structure  and the  spectra  shows  that  there  is  no  change  in  structure  with  molar ratio.

UV–vis  spectroscopic  technique  is  used  to  ﬁnd  out  the  skeleton co-valency  of  the  material,  which  is  related  to  electronic  contribution  to  electrical  conductivity.  The  UV–vis  spectra  in  Fig.  4  of Na3Cr2(PO4)3 in  different  fuel  molar  ratios  show  two   absorption peaks  which  signify  the  octahedral  transitions  of  Cr3+ from  ground term 4A2g to  two  excited  quartet  terms 4T2g and 4T1g [24].  Hence, Na+ ion  is  the  major  conducting  species  in  the  Na3Cr2(PO4)3,  conﬁrming  the  material  to  be  of  ionic  nature  in  conduction.

Fig.  5(a)–(c)  show  SEM  images  of  Na3Cr2(PO4)3 material  after sintering,  synthesized  using  different  fuel  ratios.  The  fuel  ratio affects  product  morphology  and  sinterability.  It  is  evident  from images  that  density  decreases  and  agglomeration  of  crystallites increases  with  fuel  ratio.  The  surface  morphology  reveals  that  particles  are  of  submicron  size.  The  nanocrystalline  nature  of  samples  is conﬁrmed  from  TEM  images.  Fig.  6(a)  and  (b)  show  TEM  images of  sintered  Na3Cr2(PO4)3-G1:1  and  G1:3;  the  agglomeration  of nanometer  range  crystallites  are  clear  in  the  images.  Fig.  6(c)  is  the diffraction  pattern  (seen  clearly  in  the  magniﬁed  scale)  of  selected area  in  the  microscopic  image  of  Na3Cr2(PO4)3-G1:3  of  Fig.  6(b).  It shows  diffraction  pattern  from  different  planes  of  Na3Cr2(PO4)3G1:3  with  lattice  fringes  in  different  orientations.  The  lattice  fringe with  d-spacing  of  5.37 ˚A  is  identiﬁed  in  the  image  that  corresponds to  diffraction  from  (−3,  1,  2)  plane,  as  it  is  evident  from  the  XRD pattern.

The  real  part,  Z 5)(ω),  and  imaginary  part,  Z 5) 5)(ω),  of  the  complex −   iZ 5) 5)(ω),  are  calculated  from  measured  G
impedance  Z*(ω)  =  Z 5)(ω)  and  C  as  follows: Z 5)G (G2 + C2ω2) Cω (G2 +   =  2␲f,  f  being  frequency  in  Hertz.  Experimental  data  is ω where  plotted  in  the  complex  impedance  formalism  to  extract  electrical  parameters,  namely,  grain,  grain-boundary  resistance,  constant phase  elements  and  electrical  relaxation  time.  The  impedance investigation  of  ionic  conductors  in  wide  frequency  range  has advantage  because  it  allows  separating  the  charge  transport process  in  grains  and  grain-boundaries  of  ceramics  in  a  wide  temperature  range.  Complex  impedance  spectra  obtained  for  three  fuel ratios  at  50 ◦C  is  given  in  Fig.  7(a).

The  elements  of  an  equivalent  circuit  model  represent  various  macroscopic  processes  involved  in  the  transport  of  mass  and charge.  Using  non-linear  least  square  ﬁt  (NLLS)  techniques,  all parameters  in  the  equivalent  circuit  are  adjusted  simultaneously, thus  obtaining  optimum  ﬁt  to  the  measured  dispersion  data.  A  more general  NLLS-ﬁt  program  based  on  Marquardt  algorithm  has  been used  for  this  process.  Impedance  parameters  are  obtained  by  ﬁtting  the  data  to  an  equivalent  circuit  using  NLLS  ﬁtting  procedure due  to  Boukamp  [25,26].   Except  for  Na3Cr2(PO4)3-G1:3  [27],  equivalent  circuit  consists  of  a  depressed  semi-circle,  (RgQg)  that  stands for  grain  contribution  and  part  of  another  semi-circle,  (RtQt),  which represents  total  contribution  from  grain  and  grain-boundary  in  the low-frequency  region.  Impedance  plane  plots  are  depressed  due  to distribution  of  relaxation  times;  a  non-ideal  capacitor  or  constant phase  element,  Q,  is  used  to  explain  the  depression  [28].  Rg and Rt of  samples  are  obtained  by  intercept  of  high  frequency  and  low frequency  semi-circles  with  real  axis  and  is  used  to  calculate  dc  11)dct using  the  cell  constant.  Table  4 conductivity  values,  gives  the  equivalent  circuit  and  its  parameter  values  at  different temperatures  for  Na3Cr2(PO4)3 in  three  fuel  molar  ratios.

Kramers–Kronig  (K–K)  relation  is  used  to  check  the  quality  of impedance  data.  Validity  of  these  relations  depends  on  linearity, causality  and  stability  of  impedance  spectroscopic  data.  The  real part  of  a  spectrum  can  be  obtained  by  integration  of  imaginary part  and  vice  versa.  If  the  measured  complex  data  do  not  obey  K–K relations,  data  must  violate  one  of  the  conditions.  K–K  transform requires  integration  over  a  range  of  frequency  from  zero  to  inﬁnity. Since  no  one  can  measure  frequency  over  that  range,  evaluating  the K–K  relations  via  integration  always  involves  assumptions  about the  behavior  of  a  spectrum  outside  the  frequency  over  which  it was  measured.  Practically,  K–K  analysis  is  performed  by  ﬁtting  a generalized  model  to  spectral  data.  Agarwal  et  al.  [29]  proposed a  model,  which  consists  of  m  number  of  serially  connected  Voigt elements:  R(RC)m,  where  m  is  the  number  of  complex  plane  data points  in  the  spectrum.  By  deﬁnition  this  model  is  K–K  compliant.  Boukamp  [30],  proposed  a  method  through  linear  equations  by eliminating  probable  non-convergence  issues.  K–K  ﬁt  to  the  complex  impedance  data  of  Na3Cr2(PO4)3 in  different  fuel  molar  ratios at  120 ◦C  using  the  software  K–K  test  is  shown  in  Fig.  7(b).  This  software  is  based  on  Boukamp’s  model  [31]  and  the  ﬁt  matches  well with  experimental  data  implying  the  good  quality  of  data  for  all  fuel ratios.

At  50 ◦C  magnitudes  of  Qg and  Qt are found to  be (1.80  for Na3Cr2(PO4)3-G1:1,  this  implies  that  Qg and  Qt are  grain  and  11)dcg grain-boundary  contributions,  respectively.  The  parameters   11)dct are  thermally  activated  and  shows  Arrhenius  dependence and  on  temperature  and  it  is  given  by:dcT = 0exp− E kBT.

where dc is  the  dc  conductivity,where0 is  the  pre-exponential  factor, where  T  is  the  temperature  in  Kelvin,  E␴ is  the  activation  energy  for  dc conduction  and  kB is  the  Boltzmann’s  constant.  The  dc  conductivity  values  and  activation  energy  obtained  from  slope  of  Arrhenius plot  are  given  in  Table  5.  Arrhenius  plot  of  dc  conductivity  values,  11)dcg and   11)dct,  obtained  for  three  fuel  molar  ratios  are  shown  in Fig.  8.  The  highest  dc  conductivity  value  is  found  for  Na3Cr2(PO4)3G1:1  and  its  magnitude  is  one  order  higher  than  the  reported  value ×   10−7 S  cm−1,  for  conventionally  synthesized  material  [3]. 

The  present  study  shows  that  grain  and  total  conductivity  decreases with  fuel  ratio  and  is  quite  dependable  on  the  material’s  density. Least  conductivity  of  the  fuel  rich  molar  ratio  is  due  to  its  low density  and  large  crystallite  size.

Characteristic  relaxation  frequencies  for  the  grain  are  obtained from  the  peak  of  imaginary  part  of  the  impedance  spectrum.  The dispersion  curves  in  Fig.  9(a)  of  Na3Cr2(PO4)3-G1:1  show  high  frequency  grain  and  low  frequency  grain-boundary  contributions. Frequency  of  relaxation  (ωR)  exponentially  increases  with  temperature  and  its  activation  energy,  ER,  is  obtained  from  Arrhenius  plot in  Fig.  9(b),  and  its  value  is  given  in  Table  5.  This  illustrates  that while  relaxing,  ions  have  to  overcome  less  energy  barrier  compared to  the  conducting  process.

Transport  number  measurement  is  done  by  Wagner’s  polarization  technique.  In  this  method  a  constant  dc  voltage  of  400  mV  is applied  to  the  sample  between  a  pair  of  silver  blocking  electrodes [32].  The  conﬁguration  is  maintained  at  250 ◦C  for  2  h  for  temperature  stabilization  and  on  application  of  voltage,  the  instantaneous ␮A.  After  48  h  the  cell  is  completely  polarinitial  current,  I0,  is  14  ␮A,  further  there  is  no ized  and  delivers  a  steady  current,  Is,  of  0.19  change  in  this  steady  current  with  time.  Decrease  in  polarization current  can  be  attributed  to  the  migration  of  ions  due  to  applied ﬁeld  and  is  balanced  by  diffusion  due  to  the  concentration  gradient. Thus,  the  resulting  steady-state  current  is  due  to  electrons  or  holes, and  its  contribution  is  0.01.  The  ion  transport  number  is  evaluated by  the  equation  [33], ti =   1 which  is  found  to  be  nearly  equal  to  unity.

By  novel  solution  combustion  method  Na3Cr2(PO4)3 nanocrystallites  are  synthesized  in  a  stable rhombohedral  phase.  The  effect  of  glycine  fuel  molar  ratio  on  physical  and  ac  electrical  properties  of  the  material  are  investigated. Compared  to  the  conventional  methods,  this  technique  saves  time, energy  and  turns  to  be  effective  for  producing  phase  pure  material  in  nano-crystalline  form.  XRD,  FTIR,  TG-DTA  and  SEM/TEM techniques  conﬁrm  the  phase  formation  of  the  material.  Rietveld reﬁnement  of  room  temperature  XRD  unveils  Na3Cr2(PO4)3 structure  to  be  of  rhombohedral  phase  with    space  group.  It  is observed  that  the  lattice  parameters  and  crystallite  size  are  reliable  on  fuel  ratio.  As  the  fuel  ratio  increases,  agglomeration increases  due  to  hike  in  the  ﬂame  temperature.  The  agglomeration decreases  density  owing  to  less  packing  of  larger  crystallites,  which affects  the  electrical  properties  adversely.  UV–vis  spectroscopy and  dc  polarization  techniques  are  utilized  to  conﬁrm  the  ionic nature  of  conducting  species.  Among  the  synthesized  materials Na3Cr2(PO4)3-G1:1  show  the  highest  conductivity  that  is  an  order of  magnitude  higher  than  the  reported  value.  This  study  concludes that,  the  fuel  molar  ratio  play  a  major  role  in  deciding  physical  and electrical  properties  and  1:1  is  the  optimized  ratio  in  this  study. These  materials  could  ﬁnd  possible  application  in  gas  sensors  due to  its  thermal  stability  and  high  ion  conductivity.

Financial  support  from  DST  research  project  no.  SR/S2/CMP61/2006  and  UGC  research  project  no.  33-32/2007  (SR)  is  gratefully acknowledged  and  LV  would  like  to  thank  DST   for  JRF.  Authors would  like  to  acknowledge  the  UGC  Special  Assistances  Programme F.530/15/DRS/2009  (SAP-I)  for  the  ﬁnancial  support.  Authors  would like  to  thank  Central  Instrumentation  Facility  (CIF),  Pondicherry University  for  SEM,  DTA-TG  and  FTIR  facilities.  Dr.  G.  Saini,  AIRF, JNU,  New  Delhi  is  acknowledged  for  providing  TEM  image.
