Solid electrolyte materials Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (NASICON, R-3c) were synthesized via novel acetate routes A (simple precipitate), A1 (spray-dried precipitate) and B (sol–gel synthesis) and their properties are compared. Spray-dried spherical granules show characteristic features as a result of their particular microstructure. Temperature dependent DC measurements provide an informative basis to discuss two different grain boundary ionic conduction mechanisms in these spray-dried granules.

Phosphate based crystalline compounds are interesting materials for electrode applications and solid electrolytes for lithium ion batteries because of their high structural stability, low cost and environmental friendliness. Li1 + xAlxTi2 − x(PO4)3 (LATP, NASICON, R-3c) is one of the most promising solid electrolyte materials for all solid state lithium ion batteries [1–4]. To optimize certain properties of this material many researchers modiﬁed synthesis of LATP precursor solutions and suspensions. For example to prepare thin ﬁlms [5] or to improve densiﬁcation properties for sintering LATP pellets to enhance lithium ionic conductivity [6]. Meanwhile there exist many strategies to design LATP materials [1–11]. Values for total ionic conductivities σtot are a function of synthesis and sintering conditions and vary between 6.2∗10− 5 and 1.3∗10− 3 S/cm. In general to apply materials it is important to simplify synthesis routes as well as to achieve non-toxic synthesis conditions and concurrently maintaining certain material properties.

In this study the structure, microstructure and ionic conductivity of three different LATP materials with the composition Li1.3Ti1.7Al0.3 (PO4)3 are investigated. Synthesis conditions and processing strongly inﬂuence the particle habitus of the LATP materials and thus allow the correlation between their microstructure and their properties.

Most of the synthesis routes are based on solid state synthesis established by Aono et al. [7]. Usually sol–gel synthesis of LATP is based on NH4H2PO4 and Ti-alcoxides [4,5]. The difﬁculties to create sol–gel synthesis are associated with the low solubility of phosphates in alcoholic solvents and the formation of hydrolysis products of Tialcoxides if water is present. We succeeded in a very simple and non-toxic precipitation synthesis of LATP based on precursors derived by precipitation reaction (LATP-A): Starting materials Al(CH3COO)2OH, NH4H2PO4 were dissolved separately in ethanol/H2O, Li (CH3COO)∗2H2O in ethanol/acetic acid and Ti(OCH2(CH2)2CH3)4 were dissolved in pure ethanol ratio Li:Al:Ti:P:CH3COOH=1.3:0.3:1.7:3:2). Li and Al solutions were mixed, stirred for several hours and slowly added to the Ti solution. Precipitation of the LATP precursor occurred when NH4H2PO4 solution was added to the mixed cation solution. Resulting dispersion was stirred for several hours and dried at 80 °C (180 mbar).

Another synthesis route (LATP-B), similar to sol–gel synthesis already reported [5], was created as follows: (i) dropwise addition of concentrated HNO3 to facilitate higher solubility of NH4H2PO4 in ethanol and to reduce the amount of water in the ethanol/H2O solution, (ii) addition of acetylacetone to stabilize Ti4+ in a complex (Ti: acetylacetone= 1:2) to avoid precipitation of hydrolysis products of Ti(OCH2(CH2)2CH3)4. Resulting sol was stirred for several hours and dried at 80 °C (180 mbar).

To ensure continuous drying conditions and uniform particle morphology, synthesis A was modiﬁed to obtain a good starting mixture to apply spray-drying process: The addition of small amounts of HNO3 to the precipitated reaction mixture LATP-A results in a better homogeneity of the precipitated precursor suspension LATP-A1. The resulting suspension was spray-dried at a temperature about 90–100 °C.

LATP precursors A, A1 and B were calcined at 750 °C (0.5 h) in a chamber furnace.

Speciﬁc surface area of porous LATP materials was measured by nitrogen adsorption method at 97 K using a Flowsorp II 2300 purchased from micromeritics corporation. Samples were dried for 2 h at 300 °C under measuring gas (N2/He) before the adsorption experiments.

Surfaces of LATP particles were observed by a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM) of the type Zeiss Supra 55 with an accelerating voltage of 10 kV and a working distance of 2–5 mm. Samples were sputtered with Au/Pd to generate an electronically conductive layer on the surface of porous LATP particles.

Identiﬁcation of gaseous decomposition products during precursor ﬁring was carried out with a thermal gravimetric analysis (Netzsch STA 449) coupled with a Bruker Vertex 70 IR TGA-IR spectrometer module. For this reason LATP precursor samples were ﬁlled in an alumina crucible and heated up to 1000 °C with a heating-up rate of 10 K/min. Simultaneous thermal analysis allows the determination of mass loss during decomposition of the precursors into crystalline LATP materials.

IR spectra were measured using the Bruker Vertex 70 FT-IR

Measurement of XRD patterns to identify crystalline phases remaining after precursor calcination was performed with a Siemens D5000 x-ray powder diffractometer using Cu–Kα radiation in the 2Θ range of 15–60 in steps of 0.05.

Four-probe dc conductivities of the LATP materials were measured using an Arbin Testing System BT2000 (Arbin Instruments) in the r.t. − 90 °C (296–363 K) temperature range. Materials were pressed between LiI pellets applying a pressure of 867 MPa.

Impedance spectra in the 1 Hz–2 MHz frequency range were measured with an electrochemical Workstation ZENNIUM (ZAHNER-Elektrik GmbH & Co.KG).

LATP precursors derived from simple precipitation route (A), spray-drying process (A1) and the sol–gel route (B) are compared concerning their decomposition into gaseous and solid products between room temperature and 1000 °C. The results of thermal analysis coupled with FT-IR spectroscopy are summarized in Table 1.

As expected the precipitated precursor A decomposes into CO2, acetic acid, NH3 and H2O. When HNO3 is added (suspension A1 and sol–gel derived precursor B) thermal decomposition additionally leads to N2O as a result of the exothermic reaction between − →N2O +2 H2O) attended with NH4H2PO4 and HNO3 (NH4 small amounts of NO2. Thermal analysis provides a mass loss at calcination temperature 750 °C about 25% for LATP-A and about 45% for LATP-B. This is consistent with the presence of signiﬁcant amounts of additives in B-precursors. In all cases phase pure LATP materials remain after thermal treatment of the precursors up to 1000 °C.

SEM images (Fig. 1) show signiﬁcant differences in particle morphology as a result of different synthesis conditions. LATP-B material shows higher porosity, primary particles apparently have more distinct crystal edges and faces than in case of LATP-A material.

After calcination at 750 °C, LATP-A1 samples consist of 4–10 μm spherical granules with lower porosity and more sintering necks. This leads to a higher degree of interconnection between the primary particles (Fig. 2).

Speciﬁc surface area shows the most signiﬁcant difference between LATP-A, A1 and B (Table 2): Much higher BET surface for the LATP material B derived from sol–gel route can be determined due to the higher degree of cation cross linking caused by the addition of acetylacetone during precursor synthesis. Lowest BET surface can be observed for spray-dried LATP-A1 because of the lower porosity of spherical spraydried granules and more distinct sintering necks. The spray-drying process provides materials with deﬁned morphology as well as a deﬁned size and shape of spherical granules. Temperature dependent investigations of speciﬁc surface (graph not shown) illustrate that there are no signiﬁcant changes in BET surface of A1, A and B above 750 °C.

The amount of additives during precursor synthesis and of course processing determines particle morphologies and speciﬁc surfaces as well as crystallinity and resulting properties of LATP materials.

XRD patterns (Fig. 3, left) show LATP as major crystalline component and Aland Ti phosphates as usual impurities [12]. Intensities of the sharp LATP reﬂexes correlate with intensities of vibrational modes (Fig. 3, right). Well resolved IR modes and sharp reﬂexes are characteristic for well deﬁned crystalline materials with ionic bonding.

Especially the phononic region below 800 cm− 1 corresponds to coupled vibrations of the atoms in the rhombohedral lattice [6]. These bands are primarily inﬂuenced by long-range effects [13] and if well resolved they indicate a well ordered material. This is the more distinctive for materials derived from sol–gel synthesis than for materials derived from simple precipitation. Spray-drying process provides a higher degree of crystallinity corresponding to well deﬁned and continuous synthesis conditions. In comparison to LATP-A and A1 the XRD pattern of LATP-B shows a slight shift to higher 2Θ indicating a more decreased lattice due to more distinctive insertion of Al3+ ions (r(Al3+)=0.54 Å, r(Ti4+)=0.605 Å)[14]. In fact, cell parameters only slightly change within substitution of Ti4+ by Al3+. FT-IR spectra provide more accurate information about Al substitution: The internal PO4-modes above 800 cm− 1 depend on the intramolecular forces and represent local symmetry in a crystal [13]. Compared to the IR spectra of LiTi2(PO4)3 [16] there are 5 highfrequency modes above and one slightly below 1000 cm− 1 which are characteristic for a local change in crystal structure. These local changes result in non-equivalent PO4-groups caused by the substitution of Ti ions by Al [6]. Modes below 700 cm− 1 are highly mixed and 3− bending modes and M–P–O considered to consist of coupled PO4 (M= Li, Ti, Al) external modes. They are expected to be most inﬂuenced by cation substitution: Compared to spectral analysis of LiTi2 (PO4)3 (LTP) and Li3Ti2(PO4)3 [16], LATP materials A1, A and B show broad bands between 500 and 200 cm− 1 which can be understood as a result of structural distortion in the rhombohedral unit cell due to Ti4+ substitution by Al3+.

Different synthesis conditions cause slight differences between LATP materials regarding the degree of cation substitution, crystallinity and the formation of impurities. But the greater differences in microstructure should mainly inﬂuence the physical properties of LATPA, A1 and B, namely their ionic conductivity.

Temperature dependent DC measurements were carried out to determine the lithium-ion conductivity σtot of the LATP materials A, A1, and B. The LATP powder was pressed between equal amounts of LiI (0.5 g) in a 12 mm cylindrical cavity and a square wave voltage of 17 MHz between +/−2.5 V (switched every 60 s) was applied to the multilayer with stainless steel (SS) as a current collector. The absolute value of the current measured at the end of a constant voltage period varies from 0.1 to 100 μA causing a negligible SS/LiI contact reaction. As neither signiﬁcant change of the interface SS/LiI nor a reduction of Ti4+ at the interface of LATP to LiI was observed steady state behavior of the electron blocking Li+ ion conductor LiI was assumed during measurement. Ti4+ can only be reduced to Ti3+, the possible reaction at the interface of pressed LiI powder to pressed LATP powder is − þ Ti4þ↔Ti3þ þ 1=2 Ι2: I.

Even if the equilibrium is “shifted” towards Ti3+ this contact reaction is static and should not change during Li+ conduction because Li+ is not involved in Eq. (1).

The Arrhenius plot (σT =f (103/T), Fig. 4, left) allows the determination of the activation energy EA and the pre-exponential factor A0 following the equation σ=A0/T∗e^(EA/kBT). kB is the Boltzmann constant. This model implies a conduction mechanism based on the hopping process of adabatic small polarons valid for the ionic conduction in porous materials [17]. Table 3 compares the values of EA and A0 for the three different samples. For LATP-A1, two different slopes lead to two different values of EA (EA=518 meV for T b310 K and EA=935 meV for T N310 K) and A0 indicating two different conduction mechanisms with the beneﬁt of a higher σtot. The LATP materials A, A1 and B have total lithium ionic conductivities σtot=0.7–4.1∗10− 8 S/cm which are slightly decreased compared to values reported for other ceramic samples [6].

In general electrochemical impedance measurements (EIS, Fig. 4, right) allow to distinguish between different conduction mechanisms σbulk and σgrain boundary which contribute to σtot. In this case the exact determination of the bulk conductivity is difﬁcult because the semicircles of the both RC circuits, bulk and boundary, are overlaid. Obtained values for σbulk vary between 10− 6 and 10− 4 S/cm and are not reliable. Considering the fact that σbulk is a fundamental value for Li1.3Ti1.7Al0.3(PO4)3 and is at least two magnitudes higher than σtot the total conductivity is determined by the grain boundary conductivity. The low packing density explains the high inﬂuence of the grain boundaries and may partially explain the higher conductivity of LATP-A1 (Table 4).

As σtot reﬂects the σgrain boundary it is more likely to explain the unusual temperature dependence of the ionic conductivity of LATP-A1 by two different grain boundary conduction mechanisms in these spray-dried spherical granules: One can assume that the migration of Li+ ions through the more deﬁned interface between crystallites inside the spherical granule (intragranular) needs a different activation energy than the migration between the stochastically disordered interfaces between the granules (intergranular). LATP-A1 has larger grain sizes and more deﬁned sintering necks in spherical granules than the ungranulated materials. This leads to both, better densiﬁcation properties and a better ionic conductivity.

Simple synthesis routes for LATP are successful and allow to adjust its morphology via different synthesis conditions and processing. In general, although lithium conductivity should be improved in nanocrystalline materials [15] there are not enough interconnections between the grains without sintering. Synthesis of spray-dried granulates of nanocrystalline LATP offers an interesting way to increase its ionic conductivity while maintaining the beneﬁts of powder processing. The unusual temperature dependence of ionic conductivity in spray-dried LATP granulates requires further investigations to clarify the origin of this phenomenon.

The authors would like to thank the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) and the Ministry of Science, Research and Art Baden-Württemberg (MWK) for ﬁnancial support.
