In general, solid electrolyte based potentiometric CO2 sensors respond well to changes in CO2 concentration, following Nernst equation when dry CO2 is used. Unfortunately, the sensing capability will be fatally disturbed when these sensors are exposed to humid conditions. To overcome this problem, a sensor using a porous BaCO3 ﬁlm as counter electrode (p-Sensor) was fabricated. For the purpose of comparison, sensor without this porous structure (o-Sensor, i.e. an opened counter electrode) and sensor with a dense BaCO3 ﬁlm (d-Sensor) also have been fabricated. The electromotive force (EMF) of all sensors exhibited excellence Nernstian behavior with the logarithm of CO2 concentration in the range 300–755 ppm at 400 °C under dry condition. However, the EMF values of each sensor tended to shift upward with increase of relative humidity. It was found that the relative humidity dependence of EMF originates from both of auxiliary and counter electrodes. Under the same humid conditions, the order of the EMF deviation of three types of sensors was shown as the following: d-sensor Np-sensor No-sensor. Nevertheless, only p-sensor still remained the Nernstain behavior even under humid conditions. The electron transfer numbers are in good agreement with theoretical value of n=2. Moreover, the transients were sufﬁciently sharp, taking less than 1 min for 90% response or recovery. The most important thing is EMF can rapidly recover the original value without any deterioration. The reason for the satisfactory performance of p-sensor under humid condition was suggested to be due to the amount of H2O molecular adsorbed on the porous counter electrode is very close to that of auxiliary electrode. Published by Elsevier B.V.

Solid electrolyte based potentiometric CO2 sensors have been subject of research for more than 30 years [1]. Potentiometric sensors are favorable because of their good selectivity, small size, high reliability and low cost etc. [2–10]. The device showed fairly good CO2 sensing properties under dry conditions but the sensing capability was fatally disturbed under humid conditions [11–15], though numerous approaches have been used to solve these problems. For instance, Yao et al. [16] have used binary carbonate Li2CO3-BaCO3 (1:2 in molar ratio) as the auxiliary material to improve the sensing performance at high temperature. Miyachi et al. [17] have improved the warming-up characteristics of the NASICON-based potentiometic CO2 sensor by using SiO2:Na2O:B2O3:Al2O3 glass-coated Na0.6CoO2 reference electrode. Wang et al. [18] have demonstrated a stable potentiometric CO2 sensor based on interfacing two composites solid electrolytes-Nasicon/glass and Sr-β-Al2O3/YSZ with a BaCO3/Na2CO3 (44:56 in weight ratio) auxiliary electrode. Recently, Morio et al. [19] have reported that the water-resistance of the NASICON-based CO2 sensor can be signiﬁcantly improved by introducing a macroporous structure into the auxiliary phase. They have demonstrated that the sensor with this macroporous structure showed a better performance than that of sensor with a dense or a thicker auxiliary layer. The EMF shift was only about 10 mV when the humidity was changed from 0% RH to 70%RH, which was much smaller than that of sensor with a dense (26 mV) or a thicker (35 mV) auxiliary layer at 400 °C. The authors explained that the amount of H2O molecules adsorbed on the auxiliary layer with a porous structure was considered to be very close to that of the uncovered counter electrode layer. From this point of view, if the same porous structure is also been introduced into the counter electrode layer simultaneously, water resistance of the sensor may be able to get a further improvement.

In this work, to investigate the practical feasibility of the porous BaCO3 ﬁlm for the counter electrode materials, its sensing capability under humid conditions was examined. In addition, the reactivity between Pt electrode and H2O molecular has been discussed to explain the drift phenomenon of two electrodes potential.

NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) was prepared by the conventional sol–gel method, as described elsewhere [20]. Na3PO4·12H2O, Si (OC2H5)4 and ZrO (NO3)2·2H2O were used as raw materials without further puriﬁcation since all chemicals used were of analytical grade. They were mixed in aqueous solution according to the required ratio and added some extra C6H8O7 as dispersant. The ﬁnal mixture was stirred at 50 °C for 3 h to form clariﬁed sol, which was then aged at 25 °C for 3 days. The xerogel obtained was dried at 80 °C for 24 h and then heated at 500 °C for 30 min in air to remove organic compounds and to get the NASICON precursor. In order to obtain the pure NASICON phase, the obtained precursor was uniaxially (50 kN) pressed into a disc (10 mm in diameter and 2 mm thick) and then sintered at 900 °C for 2 h in air, respectively. Finally, the product after sintering has been identiﬁed by XRD.

A schematic diagram of the three types of sensors investigated in this work is shown in Fig. 1. To fabricate these sensors, the sintered pellets were polished on both sides into smooth surface with a ﬁne emery paper at ﬁrst step. And then a pair of Pt electrode was applied initially as a paste brushed onto both sides of the NASICON pellet then heat-treated at 850 °C for 30 min in air. A polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA, 1.5 μm in diameter) template ﬁlm was covered on both Pt electrodes by dip-coating of an aqueous PMMA suspension containing a dispersant (PEG, MW: 20000). Thereafter, the template was air-dried at room temperature, allowing the PMMA microspheres to self-assemble into 3D array by sedimentation. Subsequently, a binary carbonate paste, which contained Li2CO3 and BaCO3 powders in α-terpineol (1:2 in molar ratio), was attached on one side of the pellet by using the screen-printing technology. On the other side of the pellet, the counter electrode was prepared by dispersing the powdered BaCO3 into α-terpineol, forming a screen printable paste and subsequently printed. The whole assembly device was ﬁred at 600 °C for 2 h to decompose the PMMA template and to obtain a porous structure for both electrodes. The sensor with such a porous counter electrode layer will be referred to as p-sensor.

In the case of d-sensor, the sensor was fabricated by the similar process, but without PMMA template ﬁlm for counter electrode. BaCO3 paste was attached on the counter electrode directly. As for o-sensor, counter electrode was not covered with BaCO3 but exposed to the atmosphere, i.e. an opened reference electrode structure. The microstructure of counter electrode structure of p-sensor and d-sensor was observed by a ﬁeld emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM. JSM-6701F. JEOL Ltd. JPN).

The sensing properties experiments were carried out in a typical conventional gas ﬂow apparatus equipped with a heating facility. The sensor was exposed to the ﬂow (1 L/min) of sample gases, which were prepared by diluting a parent gas (1.5% CO2 in dry nitrogen) with synthetic air. The concentrations of CO2 range from 350 to 750 ppm were obtained by computer regulated mass ﬂow controllers. Humid conditions were prepared by allowing some of sample gas to bubble through water and then passed into the testing system. Humidity in the sample gases was measured with a humidity meter. The EMF of the sensor was measured by a four-probe CHI660B electrochemical workstation (Shanghai Chenhua Instruments Inc., CHN).

Fig. 2 shows the obtained X-ray diffraction patterns of NASICON powder. In order to conﬁrm the crystal of structure, the Rietveld method was employed using the FULLProf computer tools. The main crystal structure of NASICON was identiﬁed in monoclinic system of C 2/c space group (no.15) using hexagonal axes, though small amount of the rhombohedral structure (10.52% in weight radio) was also detected in the ﬁnal product. The reﬁned cell parameters are a=15.6312 nm, b=9.0784 nm and c=9.2203 nm, close to the values previously reported by H. Y-P. Hong [21]. The illustration shows the 3D polyhedral model structure of NASICON after reﬁned. It is very obviously that the structure of NASICON is formed by SiO4/ PO4 tetrahedron sharing corners with ZrO6 octahedron.

SEM photographs of a PMMA template ﬁlm fabricated on both sides of NASICON pellet are shown in Fig. 3(a). The relatively uniform PMMA microspheres with diameter of ca. 1.5 μm were observed from this photograph. Fig. 3(b) shows a porous BaCO3 ﬁlm used as the counter layer for p-sensor fabricated by utilizing the PMMA template. The porous structure with a diameter of ca. 6–15 μm was observed on the surface of the counter electrode layer. The size of porous was much bigger than that of microsphere diameter (1.5 μm). Additionally, the distribution of porous is not uniform. This result may be significantly associated with the size of BaCO3 chemical reagent and adding quality of α-terpineol. The more α-terpineol added in the paste, the more liquidity of the paste. Even so, the porous structure is still being formed, which is far different from the dense ﬁlm (as shown in Fig. 3(c)). A fair well-densiﬁed BaCO3 ﬁlm was found to be obtained from BaCO3 paste by using screen-print technology for d-sensor.

For the purpose of comparison, three types of sensors were investigated under the same conditions. The CO2 sensing properties were measured in the range of 300–750 ppm CO2 concentration under dry conditions at 400 °C. Fig. 4 shows the Nernst's correlations between EMF response and the logarithm of CO2 concentration. The slope of the correlations coincided with the theoretical one for n=2.0 for all the sensors, where n is the number of electrons associated with the electrochemical reaction of CO2. There properties are almost the same as those of sensors reported in literatures [22,23].

This result is conﬁrmed that the sensor using BaCO3 ﬁlm as counter electrode works well when dry CO2 is used. It should be noted that the EMF of d-sensor is much bigger than that both of p-sensor and o-sensor at a ﬁxed CO2 concentration. This result is mainly caused by the extremely dense BaCO3 ﬁlm as shown in Fig. 3(c), resulting in different oxygen partial pressure (PO2) of two electrodes for dsensor, though the PO2 was kept a constant for all the experiments. It is assumed that auxiliary electrode undergo the cathodic reaction:Li2CO3¼ 2Liþþ CO2þ 1=2O2þ 2e 2Naþþ 1=2O2þ 2e¼ Na2O in NASICON ðÞ.

If the PO2 is different for both electrodes, O2 should also play an important role in determining the potential of whole electrochemical cell. However, the situation is just the opposite for both p-sensor and o-sensor due to the counter electrode was not sealed.

Although the satisfactory performance is obtained under dry conditions, all the above sensors were fond not to be free from the disturbance by water vapor. The EMF to a ﬁxed concentration of CO2 showed slight dependence on RH, as shown in Fig. 5. The EMF values of each sensor tended to shift upward with increase of relative humidity. These phenomena have also been supported by Y. Miyachi et al. [24] and S. Kishi et al. [25]. The results implied that the relative humidity dependence of EMF originates from both of the auxiliary and counter electrodes. The following reduction reactions of H2O will occur on the platinum electrode in humid conditions: H2O þ 2e.

The sodium ions then react with the active oxygen ions on the

electrode to give sodium oxides that cause a decrease in the EMF.

Besides platinum electrode, Li2CO3 in auxiliary phase is vulnerable to attack by water vapor. The interference of humidity to Li2CO3 auxiliary electrode could arise from the solubility of Li2CO3 in water (1.3g/100H2O at 20 °C), which can result in the formation of compounds such as LiOH, LiHCO3 and Li2CO3·H2O in the presence of water vapor [26].

These two aspect's reasons lead to a larger deviation of auxiliary electrode potential than that of counter electrode potential under the same humid conditions. The deviation of EMF originates from the difference between two electrodes potential. Thus, the deviation of EMF will be alleviated by the drift of counter electrode potential. The general trend of EMF tends to shift upward with increase of relative humidity. The maximum deviation of EMF on increasing RH from 10% to 70% was 12.5 mV for d-sensor, which was bigger than that of o-sensor (6.2 mV). This is because the amount of H2O molecules adsorbed on the counter electrode of d-sensor is less than that of oSensor due to its dense BaCO3 ﬁlm (Fig. 3(c)). Similarly, the deviation of counter electrode potential in case of p-sensor is considered to be smaller than that of o-sensor. Thus, under the same humid conditions,the order of the deviation of three types of sensors was shown as the following: d-sensor Np-sensor No-sensor.

On the EMF dependence of RH, the effect of humidity to o-sensor is smaller than p-sensor. This result seems to suggest that o-sensor may be more suitable to detect CO2 under humid conditions, but in fact the reverse is true. Fig. 6 shows the EMF response to CO2 as a function of CO2 concentration under 70%RH conditions. Although the EMF values of both d-sensor and o-sensor was still very much linear to the logarithm of CO2 concentration under humid conditions, the electron transfer numbers calculated from the slope deviate from theoretical value (n=2) rather signiﬁcantly. The observed n values for d-sensor, p-sensor and o-sensor were 1.7, 2.0 and 2.4, respectively. This result suggests that of p-sensor is closer to theoretical value. These phenomena can be explained that the deserved EMF of whole cell has been enlarged in the case of d-sensor, resulting in smaller electron transfer number. In contrast, the situation for the d-sensor is just the opposite. However, for the p-sensor, the CO2 sensing capability remained almost intact under 70%RH at 400 °C. This is because in case of p-sensor two Pt electrodes potential dependence of RH canceled each other out due to almost the same porous structure for both auxiliary and counter electrodes. The result indicated that porous BaCO3 ﬁlm acted a crucial role in improving CO2 sensing under humid conditions. Fig. 7 shows response transients to CO2 at 70%RH at 400 °C for the p-sensor and d-sensor. The transients were sufﬁciently sharp with the 90% response time of less 1 min for p-sensor. It is notable that the EMF of p-sensor can easier to recover the original value even under humid conditions (70%RH), compared with dsensor. The satisfactory performance of p-sensor should be attributed to the porous structure of both electrodes. Porous auxiliary layer makes CO2 molecular can easily diffuse onto the Pt electrode underneath the auxiliary layer, i.e. reaction sites (three-phase interface of solid electrolyte, Pt electrode and carbonate for electrode reaction) and then quick equilibrium of the redox process mentioned above (Eqs.1 and 2). These results suggest that both porous auxiliary and counter electrodes for NASICON-based CO2 sensor are highly effective for improving the CO2 measure precision, especially under humid conditions.

A sensor attached with a porous BaCO3 ﬁlm as the counter layer was prepared by utilizing polymethylmethacrylate microspheres as a template, although the distribution of porous is not uniform. The experimental results demonstrated that potential of the whole cell tended to shift upward with increase of relative humidity. Although three types of sensors exhibited excellent CO2 sensing properties at 400 °C under dry conditions, only p-sensor still maintained satisfactory performance under humid conditions, in a good agreement theoretical value n =2.0. Furthermore, the transients were sufﬁciently sharp with the 90% response time of less 1 min. The most important thing is EMF can rapidly recover the original value without any deterioration. The reason for the good performance of p-sensor under humid condition was suggested to be due to the almost the same porous structure of both electrodes that make two Pt electrodes potential dependence of RH cancel each other out.

The authors would like to acknowledge the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC: 50974012) and PCSIRT0708 for their ﬁnancial support for this work.
