A novel route for preparation of mixed ionic–electronic (MIE) glass-ceramics is proposed. Glass-ceramic nanocomposites are prepared by externally dispersing MIE glass viz. [Li2O]x-[V2O5-P2O5]100 − x (where x = 10 and 20 wt% with and the ratio of V2O5 and P2O5 has been kept to 9:1 and 3:1) in the NASICON-structured LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) matrix using mechanical milling-assisted synthesis route. After subjecting these glass-ceramic composites to suitable sintering temperature, the samples are structurally and electrically characterized using XRD, FESEM, and impedance spectroscopy. The maximum conductivity (100 °C) is found to be 5 × 10−5 Ω−1 cm−1 for an LTP-glass-ceramic composite, which is significantly higher than that of LTP. Impedance spectroscopy, electronic conductivity, and cyclic voltammetry scans strongly suggest simultaneous transport of ions and electrons. These composites exhibit thermal stability up to ~250 °C. These mixed conductors are found to be potential candidates as electrode/cathode materials in all-solid-state Li+ ion batteries.
In the recent years, lithium ion-based solid electrolytes and electrodes, particularly oxides, are being widely pursued for the development of all-solid-state battery applications [1–3]. One of the Li+ ion conductors based on the NASICON (sodium superionic conductor) framework, LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) has garnered attention in view of its high bulk conductivity [4, 5]. However, high grain boundary impedance has been its drawback, thereby restricting its applications. There have been numerous attempts to enhance the total conductivity of LTP. For example, incorporation of a trivalent cation (Al3+, C r3+, e t c . ) in place of Ti4+ in a nominal composition leads to significant conductivity enhancement [6, 7]. Likewise, substitution of some other cations, e.g. Ga3+ for Ti4+, also improves conductivity [8]. There have also been attempts to enhance the total conductivity by preparing composites of LTP with LiI and LiNO3. These foreign phases incorporate high Li+ ion concentration at the grain boundaries that lead to enhanced intern grain transport [9, 10]. These NASICON-structured compounds have been found to be useful in all-solid-state battery (ASSB) applications.
Additionally, conductivity enhancement in LTP has also been attempted by synthesis of LTP-based glass-ceramics. Various groups have tried precipitating these fast Li+ ion crystallites (LTP and analogues) in the oxide glass matrix [11]. These glass-ceramic composites are potential candidates for solid electrolytes, but issues viz. (i) high temperature processing and (ii) the inability to control the shape and size of the precipitated crystallites limit its usage. As an alternative, a novel mechanical milling-assisted synthesis route has also been used by us [12–14] and others [15], whereby the fast ion-conducting glass is externally dispersed in the Li+– NASICON matrix followed by sintering at a suitable temperature. The novel processing route leads to the formation of a dense glass-ceramic. The composites exhibit a high ionic conductivity near room temperature along with a wide thermal stability window [14].
Along with the development of solid electrolyte, a suitable cathode (electrode) is also required for a smooth interfacial ion transport. It should facilitate electronic as well as ionic transport, thereby providing ion diffusion/intercalation. In addition, they should also show good electrochemical stability against electrolyte, capacity retention, and longer shelf life [16, 17]. Ionic conductivity in sulphides has been found to be better than those of oxides. However, sulphide-based cathodes led to the growth of dendrite at the solid electrolyte interface [18]. In view of smooth intercalation process through the electrode– electrolyte interface, oxide-based cathodes have been explored thoroughly. For example, LiCoO2 and LiMn2O4 cathodes were developed and used in most Li+ ion batteries [16] [19, 20]. Ever since the discovery of NASICONs [21], there has been an urge to develop NASICON-based cathodes, as its structure would allow lithium intercalation and extraction [16]. Thus, Masquelier et al. [17] reported that L i3Fe2(PO4)3 with NASICON structure exhibited about 2.8 V versus Li/Li+. In another work, Wang et al. [22] showed that Li3V2(PO4)3 could also be successfully used as a cathode in energy storage devices.
On the other hand, mixed ionic–electronic (MIE) glasses and glass-ceramics are also of growing interest as potential cathode materials for Li+ ion batteries [23–25]. It is well known that transition metal oxide (like V2O5) containing glasses exhibit electronic conductivity. Presence of transition metal ions governs the polaron hopping mechanism [25]. This polaron hopping occurs from V4+ to the neighboring V5+ sites [26]. Further, when alkali ions are introduced in the glassy matrix, MIE conduction is observed. For example, Jozwiak et al. [27] demonstrated that by addition of Li2O i n the V2O5-P2O5 glasses, ionic conduction could be introduced along with the conduction of electrons. On similar lines, Hisam et al. [28] studied the electrical properties of mixed ionic electronic glass, viz. 30Li2O-40MoO3-(66 − x)TeO2-xV2O5. Interestingly, glass-ceramics can also be a good choice for mixed ionic–electronic conduction. For cathode applications, Kjeldsen et al. [29] investigated electronic conductivity in 2TeO2-V2O5 glass-ceramics in a wide crystallinity range. They explored electronic conductivity in both 2TeO2-V2O5 glasses and glass-ceramics and concluded that electronic conduction is due to thermally activated hopping.
Present work proposes a novel strategy of incorporating electronic conduction in LTP-based composites to develop MIE materials for cathode/electrode applications. A novel route is proposed by which MIE glass can be incorporated between tiny LTP grain–grain interfaces. To demonstrate the same, MIE glass viz. Li2O-V2O5-P2O5 is chosen, and using milling-assisted synthesis route [12], a glass-ceramic composite is prepared with LTP. Thus, the objective of the present study is to develop Li+–NASICON-based glass-ceramics with an idea that the MIE glass will provide electronic and ionic conduction, while the LTP will facilitate Li+ ion motion. Presence of MIE glass will also provide Li+ ion concentration at the grain–grain interface, thus may facilitate long-range ionic transport. Thus, the work presents an interesting approach to systematically tailor electronic/ionic transport in the composite by compositional alterations. Preliminary investigations on structural, thermal, and electrical transport have been reported.
The glass composition viz. [Li2O]x-[V2O5-P2O5]100 − x (where x = 10 and 20 mol%) was prepared by conventional roller melt-quenching technique [12–14]. The ratio of V2O5-P2O5 was fixed to two compositions 9:1 and 3:1. For x = 10 mol%, the glassy sample was abbreviated as 10L-67VP [viz. 10(Li2O)-90{(0.75V2O5)-(0.25P2O5)}], when the ratio of V2O5–P2O5 was fixed to 3:1. Further, for the ratio of 9:1, it was abbreviated as 10L-81VP [viz 10(Li2O)-90{(0.9V2O5)-(0.1P2O5)}]. Similarly, for x = 20 mol%, the glassy samples were abbreviated as 20L60VP [viz. 20(Li2O)-80{(0.75V2O5)-(0.25P2O5)}] and 20L-72VP [viz. 20(Li2O)-80{(0.9V2O5)-(0.1P2O5)}] when the ratio between V2O5 and P2O5 was kept as 3 : 1 and 9:1, respectively. The NASICON-structured LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) was prepared by solid-state reaction route as described elsewhere [13, 14]. The mixed ion– electron conducting (hereafter MIE) glass, LTP were then separately ball-milled for 18 h at 400 rpm using agate pot and balls in acetone medium to reduce the size of the grains/flakes to nano range using Fritsch Pulverisette-6 planetary ball mill. Subsequently, the mixture was again ball-milled at 100 rpm in acetone for 1 h to ensure homogeneity. The slurry was then dried and subsequently pelletized in a composition of (MIE glass)y-(LTP)100 − y where y = 5–20 wt% at a pressure of 4 t/cm2 applied for 15 min. As a next step, the pellets were sintered at 800 °C (i.e., above the melting point of glass) for 0.5 h. The glass content was optimized to 20 wt%, as above this composition glass melting leads to deformation of the pellet. Likewise, pristine LTP pellets were also prepared by using similar sintering conditions for comparison. The preparation route is given in Fig. 1.
The samples were characterized using X-ray diffraction (Rigaku Miniflex-II) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). In order to study the surface morphology and elemental distribution in the sample, field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) measurements were carried out using FEI-Apreo-S. To perform thermal studies, differential scanning calorimetry (Schimadzu, DSC-60) measurements were carried out at 10 °C/min. To study the electrical transport in the sample, the symmetric cells of the type Ag|sample|Ag were used, and steady-state electrical measurements were performed using computer-interfaced HIOKI impedance analyzer model IM3570 (4 Hz to 5 MHz), in a temperature range of 50–165 °C. The same cell configuration was also used to measure the electronic contribution in the samples by the Hebb–Wagner DC polarization method. Electrochemical stability measurements were carried out using cyclic voltammetry (CH instrument model 1200C).
At the outset, effect of milling on glass structure was investigated. Figure 2a shows the XRD patterns for 20L-72VP glass milled from 0 to 18 h. As apparent, the non-milled pristine 20L-72VP glass exhibits a halo pattern with precipitation of a phase identified as LiV3O8, though in a small amount [31]. However, after performing milling for a longer duration (18 h), there is a slight increase in precipitation of LiV3O8 in the glassy matrix. XRD also confirms that even after milling the glass for longer duration, precipitation of crystallites is minimal. Further, MIE glass content in the matrix is fixed to 20 wt%, and its composition is varied. Figure 2b shows XRD patterns of (i) 20(10L-67VP)-80(LTP), (ii) 20(10L-81VP)80(LTP), (iii) 20(20L-60VP)-80(LTP), and (iv) 20(20L72VP)-80(LTP) glass-ceramic composites. XRD patterns depict effect of changes in glass composition on the structure of the glass-ceramic composite. For two fixed contents of 10 and 20 mol% Li2O in the glass, the V2O5-to-P2O5 ratio was varied from 3:1 to 9:1. Evidently, for low Li2O content of 10 mol% with V2O5-to-P2O5 ratio of 3:1, there is a slight precipitation of two phases identified as those of LiV3O8 and V2O5 crystallites [31, 32]. For the ratio of 9:1, this precipitation was seen to increase. On the other hand, for 20 mol% Li2O content, there is significant precipitation of LiV3O8 and V2O5 crystallites in the glass-ceramic with increasing V2O5 content. Thus, addition of Li2O content beyond 20 mol% is avoided to prevent such unwanted precipitation. It is evident that for a Li2O content of 10 mol% in MIE glass, about 67 mol% of V2O5 can be accommodated. Higher V2O5 content (81 mol%) leads to slight precipitation of LiV3O8 and orthorhombic V2O5 is seen in the glass-ceramic.
The average crystallite size of these precipitated LiV3O8 crystallites is found to be ~40 nm using Debye Scherer's relation:
where D is the average crystallite size, 0.9 is the shape factor, λ is the wavelength of the X-ray used (CuKα radiation = 0.154 nm), β is full width at half maximum, and θ is the Bragg's diffraction angle [33–37]. Interestingly, it is to be noted that there is no precipitation of LiPO3 or any natural glass former (P2O5)-based compound in the composite.
Thus, P2O5 remains in amorphous state. In addition, XRD results also suggest that the preparation of the glass-ceramic composite does not introduce any lattice strain in the LTP structure as there is no significant shift observed in the LTP peak positions [30].
FESEM images of (i) non-milled and (ii) milled 20L-72VP glass powders are shown in Fig. 3a. The glassy flakes appear to exhibit a layered structure and are seen to be more ordered, and of uniform size, after 18 h of milling.
Further, cross-sectional surface [38] of the glass ceramic composite pellet namely, 20(20L-72VP)80(LTP) was used for FESEM studies, after carefully cutting out few surface layers. Thus, FESEM micrograph of the fracture surface of the glass-ceramic pellet is shown in Fig. 3a. Tiny grains of almost uniform size of ~50 nm are evident. It appears that during composite formation (T > Tm), glassy phase spreads evenly in the matrix. Further, no significant pores are seen in the matrix that suggest dense glass-ceramic formation.
EDS mapping (qualitative) was carried out to study the presence of mixed conducting glass in the NASICON matrix. The EDS image of the fracture surface of glass-ceramic composite 20(20L-72VP)-80(LTP) is shown in Fig. 3b. The elemental distribution map of the composite shows dense presence of elements, namely, P and Ti without any segregation. The distribution of elements viz. V and O are less dense, nevertheless, dispersed evenly in the composite.
Figure 4a shows DSC thermograms for non-milled pristine 20L-72VP glass and 18-h–milled 20L-72VP glass. It is readily observed that for non-milled pristine glass, the glass transition temperature (Tg) is seen around ~220 °C, with two prominent crystallization (Tc) peaks at 250 °C and 420 °C. In the case of the 18-h–milled glass, the Tg, though evident, is seen to be shifted to a higher temperature. Further, a broad but subtle crystallization peak is observed with onset around ~400 °C followed by melting at ~540 °C. The weak crystallization may be attributed to glass milling that anyway leads to LiV3O8 precipitation (Fig. 2a). In the inset of Fig. 4a, a DSC scan is shown for the composite 20(20L-72VP)-80(LTP). As apparent, Tg is not visible. Instead, a broad exothermic hump is evident that indicate weak crystallization of some compound in the composite.
To identify the precipitated compound in the pristine and milled glass, XRD patterns were obtained again after annealing the samples above the crystallization temperature (Tc) o f the glassy phase. These are shown in Fig. 4b for non-milled 20L-72VP pristine glass annealed at (i) 300 °C for 1 h and (ii) 450 °C for 1 h. As seen, when the non-milled glass is annealed at 300 °C, there is slight precipitation of LiV3O8 and V2O5 in the glassy matrix. On further heating the glass to 450 °C, these peaks are seen to intensify and increase in number [39]. Similarly, for the 18-h–milled 20L-72VP glass, peaks corresponding to the precipitation of LiV3O8 and V2O5 (in a small amount) crystallites are observed after annealing the glass at 450 °C for 1 h (Fig. 4b). Structural and thermal studies, thus, suggest that there is precipitation of LiV3O8 and V2O5 (orthorhombic) during glass-ceramic formation, though in a small amount. Further, P2O5 remains in amorphous/glassy phase. The glass-ceramic composites are thermally stable up to ~250 °C.
In order to explore the electrical properties, impedance spectroscopy was used to study frequency dependence of various parameters [38, 40]. The conductivity values have been calculated from the Nyquist plots. Further, from the semicircles, the associated capacitance to a bulk/grain boundary process was calculated using the following relation:
where the semicircle is modeled as a parallel combination of a resistance R and capacitance C, a n d ωmax is the frequency corresponding to apex of the semicircle. Thus, if the capacitance is found in the range of 10−8–10−11 F o r 1 0−11–10−12 F, then the semicircles are attributed to grain boundary and bulk electrical transport, respectively. Alternatively, the bulk and grain boundary conductivities can also be obtained from the plateau observed in σ–ω plot where conductivity values corresponding to ωmax are assigned as per the associated capacitances [12].
In addition, the total conductivity (σtotal) can be calculated using the following relation:
Here, σb and σGB are bulk and grain boundary conductivities, obtained from the respective resistances of semicircles. For samples with large grain boundary impedance, the total conductivity is dominated by grain boundary contribution, σGB.
Figure 5a depicts the effect of milling on conductivity for 20L-72VP glass. Here, the frequency dependence of total conductivity has been shown for non-milled glass, 6-h–milled 20L-72VP glass, 12-h–milled 20L-72VP glass, and 18-h– milled 20L-72VP glass at 100 °C. Interestingly, the conductivity isotherm exhibits two plateau regions unlike the pristine glass. To understand this behavior, the Nyquist plots of 6- and 12-h–milled 20L-72VP glass are also shown in Fig. 5b. A s apparent, these exhibit a single depressed semicircle. It is also evident that these semicircles do not extrapolate to origin at high frequency, but terminate at a finite |Z′| value. The system, therefore, may be modeled as in Fig. 5b. The capacitance value obtained from the semicircle lies in the range~10−8 F, thus, may be attributed to grain boundary transport. Further, at the higher frequency, the resistance (Rb) must be attributed to bulk conductivity. Since milling leads to partial crystallization, system behaves like a glass-ceramic, unlike the pristine glassy sample. The high-frequency plateau for the milled samples thus corresponds to the bulk conductivity. The high σb should be attributed to precipitation of ion-conducting LiV3O8 crystallites.
The total conductivity is approximated (using Eq. 3) from the low-frequency plateau region of the σ–ω plot. As observed, conductivity is seen to increase systematically with the milling time. As seen from the XRD, there is slight precipitation of LiV3O8 crystallites in the glass matrix after milling. Thus, these crystallites could be facilitating ionic conduction. As also shown by Shchelkanova et al. [41], the layered structure of LiV3O8 facilitates intercalation/diffusion of Li+ ions thereby making it a suitable cathode material facilitating ionic transport. However, there is another possibility that milling of glass may lead to a significant increase in V4+ states. It is known that Vanadium oxidation state changes from V5+ to V4+ due to heat treatment when oxygen is liberated. It is thus suggested that the same change can be brought about by mechanical activation as well. In the inset of Fig. 5a, temperature dependence of conductivity is shown for the non-milled 20L-72VP glass, 18-h–milled 20L-72VP glass, non-milled 10L-81VP glass, and 18-h–milled 10L81VP glass. It may be readily seen that the 10L-81VP glass also follows the same trend, i.e., conductivity increases with increase in the milling time.
Since the composites contain MIE glass and LTP, conductivity is studied with a systematic compositional variation to comprehend mechanism. Firstly, the glass content in the LTP matrix has been fixed to 20 wt%. Secondly, within the glass, Li2O content is fixed to 10 and 20 mol% and ratio of V2O5 and P2O5 is kept as 9:1 and 3:1.
Figure 5c depicts the σ–ω plot for 20(10L-67VP)80(LTP), 20(10L-81VP)-80(LTP), 20(20L-60VP)-80(LTP), and 20(20L-72VP)-80(LTP) glass-ceramic composites at 100 °C. For lower contents of V2O5 and Li2O, two weakly separated plateau regions are seen corresponding to bulk and grain boundary conductivities at high and low frequencies, respectively, as discussed earlier [13, 14]. The associated capacitances obtained from the Nyquist plot lie in the range of 10−8–10−9 F and 10−11–10−12 F for low- and highfrequency semicircles, thus confirming the same. It may be observed that as the V2O5 content increases in the glass matrix, the conductivity isotherm tends to exhibit only a single plateau corresponding to the total conductivity, suggesting a major change in the mechanism of electrical transport. Thus, the maximum conductivity is exhibited when the Li2O content in the glass matrix is 20 mol%, while the V2O5-to-P2O5 ratio is fixed to 9:1.
As a next step, the glass content (for a fixed composition 20L-72VP) is varied between 5 wt% and 20 wt% in the LTP matrix. The frequency dependence of conductivity is shown in Fig. 6 for (a) 5(20L-72VP)-95(LTP) and (b) 20(20L-72VP)80(LTP). For glass content of 5 wt% in LTP, two wellseparated plateau regions (characteristic feature of electrical transport for LTP) are seen [12–14]. As also discussed earlier, the high-frequency region corresponds to bulk/in-grain conduction [14]. Further, the transport across grain boundaries is inferred from the low-frequency region. A fall in conductivity at further low frequencies is due to the polarization of the electrode–electrolyte interface, suggesting predominant ionic motion. Also, the conductivity increases monotonically with temperature. Primarily, these results suggest that for low glass content, LTP dominates the electrical transport and that the electrical conduction is preferably due to ions. On the other hand, for higher content of glass in LTP, i.e., 20(20L-72VP)80(LTP), only a single plateau is visible with relatively much lesser polarization at low frequencies. Separate evaluation of electrical transport of phases, i.e., from the MIE glass and LTP, appears tricky when the glass content is significant in the matrix. Nevertheless, composite variation presents a good qualitative picture, i.e., (i) LTP addition increases ionic transport, and (ii) higher glass content leads to increase in electronic conductivity, essentially due to the V2O5 amount in glass.
 The total conductivity values for composites where glass is fixed to 5 wt% in LTP was approximated from the plateau region and plotted as a function of temperature in Fig. 7a. F o r composites with the glass content being fixed to 20 wt% in LTP, the total conductivity values from low-frequency plateau are used for analysis (Fig. 7b). Temperature dependence of conductivity of LTP is also shown for comparison.Interestingly, for both the cases, conductivity reaches to a maximum value when the Li2O content in glass is maximum along with the ratio of V2O5 and P2O5 being fixed to 9:1. A maximum total conductivity is exhibited by 20(20L-72VP)80(LTP) and a value of ~5 × 10−5 Ω−1 cm−1 is found at 100 °C. Such high value of total conductivity should be attributed to contribution from both mobile electrons and ions.
In order to further understand the electrical transport in 20(20L-72VP)-80(LTP) glass-ceramic composite, Nyquist plots are shown at various temperatures in Fig. 7c. A single depressed semicircle is noticed. In addition, the low-frequency region almost extends in a decade of frequency in which the |Z′′| does not exhibit appreciable variation with |Z′| [42, 43]. This region of the Nyquist plot possibly represents an extremely depressed semicircle modeled as shown in the Fig. 7c. Thus, the electrode–sample interface acts like a leaky/ imperfect capacitor that allows buildup of ionic polarization along with electronic charge transfer. The extent of ionic polarization is limited though due to substantial electronic conductivity in the sample.
For comparison, electronic and total conductivities are plotted as a function of temperature for the best conducting composite, 20(20L-72VP)-80(LTP) in Fig. 8a. To evaluate the electronic contribution in total conductivity, the Hebb– Wagner method was used with symmetric cell configuration [44–46]. In this, samples were polarized using a DC voltage of 1 V for a sufficiently long time (~2 h). The transient polarization current was measured as a function of time that was seen to fall initially, followed by saturation. The electronic conductivity was calculated from the saturated current (Is) using the following relation:
where Vp is the polarization potential. Thus, at every temperature, the Is value was carefully measured. The steady state σe was estimated and used for analysis. Apparently, the total conductivity is relatively higher than the electronic conductivity that readily suggests contribution of electrons as well as ions.
In the inset of Fig. 8a, the electronic transport number (te, the ratio of electronic to total conductivity) is plotted as a function of temperature for the composite. The te value exhibits an interesting trend with temperature, i.e., it suggests a gradual transition from predominantly electronic to ionic.When the temperature is low, the ionic contribution to total conductivity is poor and electrons contribute to electrical conductivity. As the temperature increases, inter-grain transport is facilitated that leads to adequate ionic conduction. It may be inferred that 20(20L-72VP)-80(LTP) exhibits a predominantly ionic nature at higher temperatures while a dominant electronic contribution is seen at lower temperatures with a smooth transition.
To investigate the thermal stability and the effect of thermal events (Tg, Tc) on electrical transport, total conductivity of non-milled 20L-72VP glass along with 20(20L-72VP)82(LTP) composite was obtained at a particular heating rate (5 °C/min) in a wide range of temperature (Fig. 8b). As observed, for pristine 20L-72VP glass, the conductivity exhibits almost an Arrhenius behavior up to a temperature of ~350 °C beyond which conductivity shows an anomalous rise deviating from linearity. On further heating, at ~350 °C, conductivity falls notably. As indicated in Fig. 8b, the onset of rise in conductivity is attributed to Tg, where structural units perform localized motion due to increase in free volume of glass [47]. The conductivity fall is attributed to crystallization, as the crystalline state is less favorable for ionic motion. Evidently, the thermal events seen in the σ–T cycles do compliment the DSC results (Fig. 4a), though the Tg and Tc appear to be shifted towards lower temperatures. This is possibly due to different heating rates used in the two experiments.
On the other hand, for glass-ceramic composite, conductivity rises linearly up to ~250 °C, where it drops slightly followed by a rise. This fall may be again attributed to crystallization in the glass existing between the LTP grains. On further heating, at a temperature of ~350 °C, conductivity shows saturation followed by another massive fall at ~400 °C due to crystallization. Unlike the pristine glass, presence of Tg is not evident in glass-ceramic. In fact, multiple crystallizations are seen that affect the σ–T cycles. The Tg is not evident in glassceramic phase, possibly because glass is trapped between the LTP grains, and the free volume change is restricted. However, the crystallization (seen only as a broad hump in the DSC) is apparently noticed in multiple stages in σ–T cycles. Possibly, precipitated compounds offer high impedance in the matrix. These results suggest that (i) the thermal events in the glassy phase decide thermal stability of the composite,and (ii) glass-ceramic composite is stable up to a temperature of ~250 °C and can be used in high-temperature applications as well.
To understand the mixed ionic electronic nature of the composites, dielectric constant (ε′) was studied as a function of frequency. For various composites, it is plotted as a function of frequency (at 100 °C) in Fig. 8c. As noticed , at low frequencies, the ε′ values are higher by ~3–4 order sofmagnitude than the high frequency values that should be attributed to interfacial polarization. This readily suggests ionic contribution in electrical transport. As the frequency increases, ε′ exhibits a rapid decrease followed by a plateau where a rapid reversal of electric field leads to minimal charge accumulation. For 20 (10L-67VP)-80(LTP), a second stage polarization, due to charge accumulation at grain boundaries, is also evident at relatively higher frequencies (~7 kHz– 135 kHz), where ε′ falls rapidly and exhibits a tendency to form another plateau.
The actual value of ε′ though may still be affected due to local polarization effects; however, it is not the focus of the present study. As apparent, ε′ increases when more Li+ ion content is added to the matrix. This clearly indicates that mobile Li+ ions (from Li2O) contribute significantly in electrical transport. The σ–ω behavior (Figs. 5c and 6b) also compliments interfacial polarization, for some samples though visible on an extended scale. On the other hand, prominent polarization at lower frequencies is again witnessed when V2O5-toP2O5 ratio in the glass increases from 3:1 to 9:1 (for a fixed salt content). This may be attributed to high polarizability of vanadium ions [43], though needs further investigation.
Further, the Z″–ω plots (normalized against Z″max) a r e shown in the inset of Fig. 8c for four compositions. These are particularly useful to comprehend relaxation at resistive regions of the sample where polarization is prominent due to charge accumulation, e.g., grain–grain interface. A broad relaxation peak is evident with the relaxation frequency shifting to higher values, when Li+ ion content is increased. This readily suggests improved Li+ ion response (mobility) to the external electric field [48]. Further, for a fixed salt content, on increasing V2O5-to-P2O5 ratio, the peak position shifts to lower values of frequency. This may be attributed to decrease in ionic mobility and hence ionic contribution to the conductivity. It is once again evident that, as a consequence of Li2O a n d V2O5 content variation in the matrix, levels of ionic and electronic transport can be greatly affected. This in fact compliments electron transport studies.
Additionally, electronic and ionic conductivity values along with the electronic transport number are reported for all composites in Table 1 at two different temperatures. As observed, highest V2O5 content in the glass-ceramic composite also exhibits a maximum electronic conductivity.
Besides, to understand the mechanism of ionic/ electronic transport, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is plotted in Fig. 9 for (a) non-milled 20L-72VP glass and (b) 20(20L72VP)-80(LTP). For pristine glass as well as LTP glassceramic composites, the spectra exhibit two well-separated peaks at 516 and 524 eV, respectively. These may be attributed to the spin orbit splitting of V5+ states. The low energy peak may be deconvoluted into two well-separated peaks, out of which, the peak at ~515 eV of relatively smaller intensity may be attributed to V4+ states, as also suggested previously [49–52]. It is interesting to observe that V4+ states exist in pristine glass as well as LTP glass-ceramic composites. This, in turn, suggests possibility of polaron hopping mechanism for electronic transport in the glass as well as glass-ceramics [32, 46].
Considering the above discussion on structural and electrical properties, a tentative conductivity mechanism has been proposed.
Firstly, in the MIE glass, it is observed that mechanical milling enhances conductivity that may be attributed to rise in electronic and/or ionic conductivity. It is likely that milling may introduce V4+ states and thus, electronic conductivity. In addition, milling also leads to precipitation of crystallites (LiV3O8) that may facilitate ionic conduction as well. The Li+ ions may use surface/inner states of these crystallites for ionic transport. Therefore, high conductivity in milled glass may be attributed to both of these possibilities. Thus, milling leads to increase in mixed conduction as schematically shown in Fig. 10a and b.
Secondly, in the case of LTP–glass-ceramics, the glassy phase is seen to exist between the LTP grains. Such Li+ ion conductive glass binder has already been mentioned as a potential source of enhanced inter-grain transport [12–14]. As noticed, the embedded tiny LiV3O8 crystallites in the glassy phase are not resistive to Li+ ion motion, when they are in lesser amount. Therefore, long-range Li+ ion migration is expected in these composites. On the other hand, glassy phase does contain significant V4+ states and therefore, lead to expected changes in electronic conduction. Electrons bypass the LTP grains and move only through the glassy phase by polaron hopping mechanism. When concentration of V2O5 increases, it leads to an enhancement in total conductivity essentially due to increase in electronic transport. Such a situation is depicted in Fig. 10c and d, where mixed ion–electron conduction in glass-ceramic may be witnessed. The mechanism is based on experimental observations, and more theoretical/ experimental inputs are required to develop a better understanding in such complex systems.
Finally, in Table 2, total conductivity values at different temperature of previous MIE glasses and glass-ceramic composites have been compared with the present work.
Cyclic voltammetry scans are shown for (a) 20(10L67VP)-80(LTP), (b) 20(10L-81VP)-80(LTP), (c) 20(20L60VP)-80(LTP), and (d) 20(20L-72VP)-80(LTP) at 100 °C in Fig. 11. These CV scans have been performed using graphite electrodes in a range of ±4 V over 10 cycles. For sample with maximum Li2O content and the ratio between V2O5 and P2O5 being 9:1, the sample tends to exhibit an ohmic nature suggesting a dominant electronic nature. As the ratio is decreased, hysteresis is seen indicating that the sample tends to exhibit an ionic nature. The CV scans are reproducible over 10 cycles. Additionally, nature of the CV scans do not change when graphite electrodes are replaced by silver, as shown for highest conducting composite viz. 20(20L-72VP)-80(LTP) at 100 °C (Fig. 11e). Thus, with proper engineering of electrodes, these samples may be used as cathode in all-solidstate Li+ ion battery.
Preliminary investigations on the MIE glass-ceramic composites reveal interesting results. Incorporation of a mixed ion– electron conducting glass in the LTP matrix by millingassisted synthesis route leads to the development of a novel MIE system with a flexibility of controlling ionic/electronic transport. A maximum conductivity (5 × 10−5 Ω−1 cm−1 at 100 °C) is obtained for 20 wt% of 20L-72VP glass in 80 wt% of LTP which is relatively higher than LTP. Near room temperature, the composites are dominantly electronic whereas at higher temperatures, gradually ionic nature is introduced. Composition and amount of glass (precisely V2O5 content) in the LTP matrix plays an important role in controlling electronic conductivity. A tentative mechanism of conductivity suggests that LTP facilitates long-range Li+ ion motion, whereas, glass-ceramic phase supports electronic conduction. These composites are dense, homogeneous, and exhibit an even distribution of glass-ceramic phase between LTP grains. These are useful for cathode/electrode applications in Li+ ion batteries.