Substitution   of   5%   of   Zr   by   Ca   in   LiZr2(PO4)3 transforms   the   structure   to   that  of   rhombohedral   NASICON   10−4 S  cm−1,   which   is   comparable   to   that to   give   a  room-temperature   bulk   Li-ion   conductivity   of   Li1.3Ti1.7Al0.3(PO4)3 now   being   used   as   a   solid   Li-ion   separator   in   test   cells   of  novel   Li-ion   batteries.

Interest  in  all-solid-state  Li-ion  batteries  and  in  Li-ion  batteries using  a  solid  separator  of  an  organic-liquid  electrolyte  on  the  anode side  and  an  aqueous  or  air  cathode  has  stimulated  the  search  for Li-ion  solid  electrolytes  having  a  room-temperature  Li-ion  conduc 2)Li tivity  than  oxides,  they  cannot  be  used  if  there  is  an  aqueous  solution  on the  cathode  side  of  a  solid  separator.  At  present,  the  best  commercially  available  oxide  Li-ion  solid  electrolyte  is  slightly-modiﬁed Li1.3Ti1.7Al0.3(PO4)3 [3–5]  having  the  structure  of  rhombohedral NASICON  [6,7].  However,  the  presence  of  the  Ti(IV)  ion  makes  it necessary  for  an  aqueous  cathode  solution  to  be  restricted  to  a  limited  pH  range.  Therefore,  there  is  motivation  to  ﬁnd  an  isostructural  2)Li that  does  not  contain  a  cation  so  easily oxide  of  comparable  reduced  as  Ti(IV).

The  zirconium  phosphate  LiZr2(PO4)3 can  be  expected  to  be electrochemically  more  stable  than  the  LiTi2(PO4)3 analog  since Zr(IV)  is  a  stable  oxidation  state  in  oxides  containing  isolated  (ZrO6) octahedra.  However,  LiZr2(PO4)3 is  triclinic  at  room  temperature   10−8 S  cm−1 [8,9],  the  rhombohedra  NASICON  strucwith  a  ture  of  LiZr2(PO4)3,  which  is  the  structure  allowing  fast  alkali-ion transport,  is  only  stable  above  50 ◦C  [10].  Since  a  higher   2)Li can  be attained  by  aliovalent  doping  of  LiTi2(PO4)3 to  introduce  mobile  Li+ ions  in  the  M(II)  site  of  the  interstitial  space  [11],  we  have  investigated  doping  LiZr2(PO4)3 by  substitution  of  Ca  for  Zr,  thereby introducing  additional  Li+ ions  and  favoring  stabilization  to  room temperature  of  the  rhombohedral  phase.

The  compound  Li1.2Zr1.9Ca0.1(PO4)3 was  prepared  by  conventional  solid  state  reaction  as  described  in  Ref.  [8]  with  Li2CO3,  ZrO2, NH4H2PO4,  CaCO3 as  the  starting  materials.  10%  more  Li2CO3 was used  to  compensate  for  the  loss  of  lithium  during  the  high  temperature  heating  processes.  A  pellet  of  high  mechanical  strength  was obtained  after  the  ﬁnal  heat  treatment.

Powder  X-ray  diffractogram  (Philips  X-ray  diffractometer, model:  PW  1830)  recorded  in  air  at  room  temperature  was   applied to  investigate  the  phase  formation  and  to  calculate  the  lattice parameters.  The  scanning  range  was  from  10◦ to  60◦,  with  a  step  of 0.02◦ and  a  dwell  time  of  12  s.  Rietveld  structure  reﬁnement  was carried  out  with  the  FullProf  software.

Field-emission  scanning  electron  microscopy  (FESEM,  Quanta FEG  650)  with  an  EDS  attachment  (Bruker)  was  used  to  obtain the  surface  microstructure  of  the  pellet  and  the  distribution  of  the zirconium  and  calcium  elements.

To  measure  the  ionic  conductivity,  both  parallel  surfaces  of the  pellet  were  sputtered  with  a  layer  of  gold.  The  ionic  conductivity  was  obtained  from  the  impedance  plot  measured  with a  Solartron  Impedance  Analyzer  (model  1287).  The  applied  frequency  range  was  from  106 to  1  Hz  with  a  10  mV   AC  amplitude.  The Li-ion  conduction  activation  energy  (Ea)  was  calculated  from  the Arrhenius  plot  of  the  relationship  of  the  total  ionic  conductivity  to temperature.

The  XRD  pattern  of  the  compound  after  sintering  is  shown  in Fig.  1.  It  is  clear  that  the  obtained  compound  can  be  indexed  to  the rhombohedral  NASICON  structure.  No  impurity  peak  was  observed. In  the  inset,  we  compare  the  lattice  parameters  of  the  obtained compound  with  those  of  the  pure  LiZr2(PO4)3 with  the  same  structure  (JCPSD#:  01-072-7742)  obtained  at  150 ◦C  [10].  Structural  data extrapolated  to  room  temperature  from  the  thermal-expansion data  above  150 ◦C  are  also  listed  in  the  table.  It  is  shown  that  both  a and  c  dimensions  increase  on  doping  with  Ca2+;  the  Ca2+ ion  is signiﬁcantly  larger  than  Zr4+.  The  DTA  curve  (not  shown  in  the paper)  obtained  in  ﬂowing  air  atmosphere  from  room  temperature to  1000 ◦C  shows  no  detectable  endothermic  or  exothermic  peak  on both  heating  and  cooling,  which  indicates  that  the  NASICON  phase is  thermally  stable  to  at  least  1000 ◦C.

Fig.  2a  displays  the  surface  microstructure  of  the  pellet  after sintering.  The  grains  are  in  good  contact  with  each  other  although a  certain  amount  of  pores  in  the  boundary  area  can  be  observed. ␮m  in  size.  The  distribution  of  Zr  and Most  of  the  particles  are  5–10  Ca  elements  obtained  by  EDS  is  shown  in  Fig.  2b.  The  Zr  and  Ca elements  are  seen  to  be  evenly  distributed  throughout  the  whole area.

The  impedance  plot  and  its  ﬁtted  curve  (solid  line)  at  room temperature  are  presented  in  Fig.  3a  with  the  equivalent  circuit in  Fig.  3b  [12,13].  In  the  circuit,  R  is  for  resistance,  Q  for  constant phase  element.  Re is  added  to  the  circuit  due  to  the  electronic  resistance  of  the  measurement  system;  subscripts  b  and  g  refer  to  bulk and  grain  boundary,  respectively,  and  el  is  the  blocking  electrode, which  corresponds  to  the  long  tail  at  the  low  frequency  end  of  the plot.  This  long  tail  indicates  that  the  material  is  an  ionic  conductor [13].  The  impedance  plot  consists  of  two  semicircles  at  high  temperature  range,  as  is  clearly  shown  in  the  inset  of  Fig.  3a.  The  ﬁrst semicircle  at  the  high  frequency  end  is  ascribed  to  the  bulk  and  that at  the  intermediate  frequency  range  to  the  grain  boundary.

The  bulk  ionic  conductivity  calculated  from  the  ﬁtted  result  is × 10−4 S  cm−1.  However,  due  to  the  porous  structure  of  the  sin1.2  tered  pellet  as  shown  in  Fig.  2a,  the  grain-boundary  resistance  is higher  than  the  bulk.  In  fact,  the  grain  boundary  contributes  about 59%  of  the  total  resistance  of  the  sample.  Consequently,  the  total ×   10−4 S  cm−1,  still  several  times ionic  conductivity  is  about  0.49  higher  than  that  of  pure  LiZr2(PO4)3 with  the  NASICON  structure  at about  50 ◦C  [10].

The  activation  energy  Ea for  the  Li-ion  conduction  of  the  mate␴0 exp(−Ea/kT), rial  can  be  obtained  from  the  Arrhenius  plot  of   2)0 is  the  pre-exponential  factor,  R  is  the  universal  gas  conwhere  stant,  k  is  the  Boltzmann  constant,  T  is  the  absolute  temperature.

Since  it  is  difﬁcult  to  separate  the  bulk  and  grain-boundary contributions  at  temperatures  above  room  temperature  with  the impedance  spectra,  the  total  ionic  conductivity  was   determined. The  Arrhenius  plot  shown  in  Fig.  4  gives  an  Ea =  0.48  eV.

Although  the  total  ionic  conductivity  is  lower  than  that  required for  practical  application  at  room  temperature,  these  properties  may be  further  improved  through  optimizing  the  doping  element  and content  [14,15]  by:  (a)  increasing  the  density  of  the  bulk  material to  minimize  the  grain-boundary  resistance;  (b)  introducing  more Li  into  the  framework  to  increase  the  mobile-ion  concentration and  (c)  tuning  the  lattice  parameter  to  optimize  the  size  of  the interstitial  channel  for  Li-ion  conduction.

The  introduction  of  Ca  into  LiZr2(PO4)3 stabilizes  the  rhombohedral  NASICON  structure  and  increases  the  Li-ion  concentration to  give  a  dramatic  increase  in  the  bulk  Li-ion  conductivity  to  2)Li ≈ ×   10−4 S  cm−1.  A  measured  activation  energy  Ea =  0.48  eV includes  the  grain-boundary  contribution  that  can  be  decreased  by densiﬁcation  of  the  solid.  The  octahedral-site  Zr(IV)  should  not  be reduced  in  any  anticipated  applications.  Based  on  the  fact  that  the ionic  conductivity  of  the  pure  LiZr2(PO4)3 with  the  NASICON  structure  is  higher  than  that  of  the  LiTi2(PO4)3 with  the  same  structure, we   believe  that  LiZr2(PO4)3 is  a  promising  host  material  for  fast Li-ion  conduction.

This  work  was  supported  by  the  Assistant  Secretary  for  Energy Efﬁciency  and  Renewable  Energy,  Ofﬁce  of  Vehicle  Technologies of  the  US  Department  of  Energy  under  Contract  No.  DE-AC0205CH11231,  under  the  Batteries  for  Advanced  Transportation Technologies  (BATT)  Program  subcontract  #6805919.  The  authors also  thank  the  National  Science  Foundation  (Grant  No.  0959037) for  funding  the  Quanta  650  ESEM  used  in  this  work.
