A   fast   sodium   ion  conductor,   NASICON   (Na3Zr2Si2PO12),  has   been   widely   used   for   gas   sensor   applications.   In  this   study,   we   demonstrate   that   a  device   combining   NASICON   with   an   oxygen-ion   conductor of   BiCuVOx   (Bi2Cu0.1V0.9O5.35)   can   electrochemically   detect   volatile   organic   compounds   (VOCs),   such   as ethanol,   formaldehyde,   and   toluene.   The   sensing   electrode   made   of   BiCuVOx   was   attached   onto   a   sintered NASICON   disk   at   high   temperature   to   produce   an   interfacial   layer   that   had   a   different   morphology   and composition   from   those   of   NASICON   and   BiCuVOx,   as   observed   by   scanning   electron   microscopy-energy dispersive   X-ray   spectroscopy   analysis.   The   device   in   which   NASICON   was   ﬁtted   with   the   BiCuVOx-based electrode   was   found   to   efﬁciently   detect   VOCs   in   ppm   concentrations.   The   sensor   signal   (electromotive force)   exceeded   100   mV  in   response   to  10   ppm   HCOH   at   400 ◦C,   demonstrating   the   high   sensitivity   of the   device.   It  also   exhibited   a   relatively   quick   response,   reproducible   and   stable   sensor   signals,   and   high selectivity   to   VOCs.   The   sensor   responses   followed   behavior   typical   for   mixed-potential-type   gas   sensors based  on   oxygen-ion   conductors.   It   was   thus   suggested   that   the   electrochemical   oxidation   of   VOCs   with oxide   ions   took   place   at   the   interfacial   oxygen   ion-conductive   layer   that  was   formed   by   the   reaction   of NASICON   with   BiCuVOx.

NASICON  is  a  sodium  super  ionic  conductor  typically  represented  by  the  chemical  formula  Na3Zr2Si2PO12 and  has  been  widely used  as  a  base  electrolyte  material  for  electrochemical  gas  sensors because  of  its  high  sodium  ion  conductivity  (0.2  S  cm−1 at  300 ◦C) and  ease  of  fabrication  into  gas-tight  sintered  disks  (or  membranes)  [1–3].  There  are  several  types  of  potentiometric  (Nernstian) NASICON-based  gas  sensors  that  are  able  to  detect  various  gases such  as  SO2 [4,5],  CO2 [6–12],  NO2 [13],  and  Cl2 [14]  in  parts  per  million  (ppm)  concentrations.  The  sensors’  sensitivities  to  target  gases can  be  tuned  by  the  appropriate  selection  of  auxiliary  layers  that are  attached  onto  NASICON  disks.  Among  these,  NASICON-based CO2 sensors  attached  with  carbonate  auxiliary  layers  are  the  most studied  devices  because  of  their  excellent  properties,  which  include high  sensitivity,  high  selectivity,  good  stability,  and  low  cost  [6–12]. Due  to  extensive  studies  for  more  than  two  decades,  a  sensor  of this  type  has  now  been  commercialized  by  Figaro  Engineering  Inc., Japan.

The  NASICON  electrolyte  was   also  used  for  mixed-potential (nonNernstian)-type  gas  sensors  to  detect  NOx   [15,16],   H2S  [17], SO2 [18,19],  Cl2 [20],  NH3 [21,22],   and  toluene  [22,23].   Liang  et  al. reported  in  a  series  of  papers  that  devices  in  which  NASICON  was ﬁtted  with  different  oxide  electrodes  responded  to  NH3,  toluene, and  H2S  according  to  the  mixed-potential  theory  [17,21–23].   They claimed  that  a  cathodic  reaction  of  sodium  ions  in  NASICON  with oxygen  and  an  anodic  reaction  of  Na2O  with  target  gases  simultaneously  occurred  at  the  electrodes,  which  produced  mixed  potentials. However,  the  detailed  mechanism  has  yet  to  be  clariﬁed.  The  sensitivities  to  various  gases  depended  signiﬁcantly  on  the  type  of  oxide electrode  materials  used.  Therefore,  it  is  possible  that  interfacial structures  between  NASICON  and  oxide  electrodes  as  well  as  their electrocatalytic  activities  inﬂuenced  the  sensing  properties.

We  have  been  investigating  the  properties  of  NASICON-based potentiometric  CO2 sensors  attached  with  carbonate  auxiliary  layers  to  elucidate  the  sensing  mechanism  and  thus  further  upgrade their  performance,  and  we  found  that  the  interfacial  structures between  NASICON  and  the  carbonate  layers  governed  the  stability and  sensing  performance  of  the  devices  [24–26].   We   also  developed  a  CO2 sensor  ﬁtted  with  a  BiCuVOx  (Bi2Cu0.1V0.9O5.35)-based reference  electrode  to  improve  the  stability  of  NASICON  [27,28].  A ×   10−3 S  cm−1 at  250 ◦C) fast  oxygen  ion  conductor  of  BiCuVOx  (1  was  found  to  be  an  efﬁcient  reference  electrode  material  that  can stabilize  the  sensor  signal  even  under  highly  humid  conditions. A  mixed  (electron  and  oxygen  ion)  conducting  perovskite-type oxide  was  also  added  in  the  reference  electrode  as  an  electron conductive  phase;  this  material  is  known  to  improve  the  oxygen reduction  kinetics  of  the  electrode  because  of  its  high  catalytic and  electrocatalytic  activities.  Furthermore,  we  revealed  the  pres␮m  thickness)  at  the  interface  between ence  of  a  new  layer  (ca.  10  NASICON  and  BiCuVOx,  which  may   protect  NASICON  from  reacting  with  CO2 and  water  and  thus  stabilize  the  sensor  signal  [29]. Our  scanning  electron  microscopy-energy  dispersive  X-ray  spectroscopy  (SEM-EDX)  and  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  results  suggested that  an  oxygen-ion  conductive  layer  was  formed  at  the  interface through  the  reaction  of  NASICON  with  BiCuVOx.  These  ﬁndings prompted  us  to  investigate  the  sensor  response  of  the  interfacial layer  to  combustible  gases.  It  is  expected  that  the  oxygen  ionconductive  layer  would  induce  anodic  oxidation  of  combustible gases  with  oxide  ions,  and  thus  generate  sensor  responses,  as observed  in  many  mixed-potential-type  sensors  using  oxygen-ion conductors  [30–37].   Recently,  Teranishi  et  al.  have  reported  that  a proton-conducting  thin  layer,  which  was  formed  at  the  surface  of an  oxygen  ion-conducting  yttria-stabilized  zirconia  by  its  reaction with  H3PO4,  responded  selectively  to  ammonia  according  to  the mixed-potential  theory  [38].  This  ﬁnding  indicates  that  another ion-conductive  layer  formed  on  a  supporting  solid  electrolyte may   be  used  as  a  platform  for  the  selective  detection  of  target gases. 

In  this  study,  we  investigated  the  gas-sensing  properties  of  a NASICON  (Na+ conductor)/BiCuVOx  (O2− conductor)  heterojunction  device  in  which  an  interfacial  layer  was  formed  at  the  junction. The  validity  of  heterojunction  devices  that  combine  two   different ion  conductors  for  potentiometric  gas  sensors  has  been  reported [6,39–46].  By  contrast,  the  present  study  was  performed  to  focus on  how  the  new  layer  formed  on  the  NASICON  surface  responds  to gases.  Volatile  organic  compounds  (VOCs)  such  as  ethanol,  toluene, and  formaldehyde  were  selected  as  target  gases  because  of  their growing  concern  as  indoor  air  pollutants.

Fig.  1  shows  the  structure  of  the  fabricated  sensor  device  in which  the  electrodes  made  of  BiCuVOx  and  a  perovskite-type  oxide were  attached  to  a  NASICON  disk.  The  NASICON  (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) disk  (9  mm  in  diameter,  1.2  mm  thick)  was  prepared  by  a  sol–gel method  starting  from  Si(OC2H5)4,  Zr(OC4H9)4,  PO(OC4H9)3,  and NaOC2H5,  as  described  elsewhere  [47].  BiCuVOx  (Bi2Cu0.1V0.9O5.35) powders  were  prepared  by  two  different  methods:  solid-state  reaction  (SSR)  and  liquid-phase  reaction  (LPR).  For  the  SSR  method, the  starting  oxide  powders  of  Bi2O3,  V2O5,  and  CuO  mixed  in  a stoichiometric  ratio  were  ball-milled  for  10  h  in  an  ethanol-based solvent.  The  resulting  mixture  was  dried  at  120 ◦C,  thoroughly ground  to  break  up  large  agglomerates,  and  then  calcined  at  600 ◦C for  10  h  in  air.  For  the  LPR  method,  stoichiometric  amounts  of Bi(NO3)3·5H2O,  Cu(NO3)2·3H2O,  and  NH4VO3 were  dissolved  in a  nitric  acid  solution  (2  mol   l−1).  Then,  a  tetramethyl  ammonium solution  was  added  dropwise  to  the  mixed  solution  until  its  pH reached  7.  The  solution  was  stirred  for  1  h  at  room  temperature to  form  precipitates.  They  were  ﬁltered  and  washed  with  a  copious  amount  of  water  and  then  dried  at  60 ◦C  for  24  h.  The  product was  calcined  in  air  at  450 ◦C  for  2  h  to  obtain  a  BiCuVOx  powder. A  perovskite-type  oxide  (La0.6Sr0.4Co0.78Ni0.02Fe0.2O3)  was   prepared  by  an  amorphous  malic  precursor  method  using  nitrates of  La,  Sr,  Co,  Ni,  and  Fe.  The  nitrates  in  appropriate  stoichiometric  ratios  were  dissolved  in  water  with  malic  acid.  The  solution was   adjusted  to  pH  3  by  addition  of  aqueous  ammonia  under  vigorous  stirring.  Then,  the  solution  was   heated  to  dryness,  and  the dried  powder  was  calcined  at  1000 ◦C  for  5  h  to  produce  100–300nm  sized  particles.  The  prepared  materials  were  analyzed  by  XRD (RINT2100,  Rigaku)  with  copper  K␣   radiation  and  SEM-EDX  (JSM6340F,  JEOL).

Composites  of  BiCuVOx  and  perovskite-type  oxide  (5:1  weight ratio)  were  attached  as  sensing  and  counter  electrodes,  respectively,  onto  the  NASICON  disk  using  an  alpha-terpineol-based  paste containing  a  powdered  mixture  of  BiCuVOx  and  the  perovskitetype  oxide.  These  materials  were  precalcined  at  the  designated temperatures  noted  above.  For  BiCuVOx  prepared  by  the  LPR method,  a  screen  printing  method  was  used  to  deposit  the  elec␮m. trode.  The  thickness  of  the  sensing  electrode  was   set  to  ca.  30  The  deposited  electrodes  were  calcined  at  850 ◦C  for  3  h.  Pt  wires were  attached  in  the  sensing  and  counter  electrodes  before  the  electrodes  were  calcined.  The  device  was  ﬁxed  onto  a  quartz  tube  with an  inorganic  adhesive.  In  contrast,  for  BiCuVOx  prepared  by  the  SSR method,  the  electrode  was  deposited  by  applying  the  paste  onto  the NASICON  disk  by  hand.  This  is  because  large  particles  obtained  by the  SSR  method  were  not  suitable  for  use  in  the  screen  printing method.  In  this  case,  the  thickness  was   ca.  800  The  device  was   installed  in  a  conventional  ﬂow  chamber  made of  quartz  and  externally  heated  at  400–500 ◦C  by  an  electric  furnace.  The  electromotive  force  (EMF)  of  the  device  at  the  sensing electrode  with  respect  to  the  counter  electrode  was  measured  by an  electrometer.  The  counter  electrode  potential  was  ﬁxed  by  exposure  to  a  continuous  ﬂow  of  dry  synthetic  air  (100  cm3/min).  The sensing  electrode  was  exposed  to  dry  air  (100  cm3/min)  containing  VOCs  (ethanol,  toluene,  and  formaldehyde)  at  5–200  ppm.  CO and  CO2 gases  were  also  used  to  check  the  cross-sensitivity  of  the device.  Sample  gases  with  different  concentrations  were  prepared by  diluting  parent  standard  gas  mixtures  (certiﬁed  compressed gases;  Sumitomo  Seika  Chemicals)  with  commercial  synthetic  air (Sumitomo  Seika  Chemicals).  The  gas  ﬂow  rate  was   controlled  with mass  ﬂow  controllers.  The  sensitivity  (EMF)  was  deﬁned  as  the absolute  value  of  the  EMF   difference  between  the  sensing  and counter  electrodes  in  response  to  a  sample  gas.

Fig.  2  shows  the  SEM  images  of  BiCuVOx  powders  prepared  by the  two  different  methods.  By  the  SSR  method,  large  particles  with ␮m  were  observed.  In  contrast,  by irregular  shapes  around  0.3–1  the  LPR  method,  ﬁne  particles  of  about  100  nm  were  formed.  Moreover,  it  seems  that  the  particle  size  distribution  became  narrower for  the  latter  method.  This  is  apparently  due  to  homogeneous nucleation  and  growth  of  precursor  particles  in  the  liquid  phase. The  XRD  patterns  shown  in  Fig.  3  clearly  show  that  the  obtained ␥ particles  were  composed  of  the  fast  oxygen  ion-conducting  phase  (Bi4V2O11).  The  patterns  were  in  good  agreement  with  the reported  results  [48].  In  fact,  the  formation  of  the  high-temperature stable    phase  was  indicative  of  successful  incorporation  of  Cu in  the  lattice.  The  peak  widths  were  obviously  increased  for  the LPR  method.  This  observation  also  conﬁrmed  the  formation  of  ﬁne BiCuVOx  particles  via  the  LPR  method.  Note  that  the  LPR  method successfully  lowered  the  formation  temperature  of  BiCuVOx  from 600  to  450 ◦C.  The  above  results  indicate  that  the  method  applied here  is  promising  to  prepare  ﬁne  BiCuVOx  particles,  which  may   be used  for  making  ﬁlms  or  disks  at  low  sintering  temperatures.

Fig.  4  shows  the  interfacial  structure  of  the  junction  between NASICON  and  the  sensing  electrode  composed  of  BiCuVOx  prepared by  the  LPR  method.  At  the  junction,  there  was  an  intermediate layer  that  had  a  different  morphology  from  that  of  NASICON  and the  sensing  electrode,  as  reported  for  BiCuVOx  prepared  by  the SSR  method  [29].  The  elements  of  NASICON  and  Bi,  V,  and  La were  detected  in  the  EDX  spectra  taken  at  the  interfacial  layer (see  points  B  and  C).  The  EDX  results  indicated  that  the  sintered NASICON  disk  reacted  with  the  electrode  composed  of  BiCuVOx and  the  perovskite-type  oxide  to  form  the  interfacial  layer  on  the NASICON  surface.  It  is  possible  that  the  layer  was   a  mixed  phase, which  included  NASICON,  BiCuVOx,  and  reaction  products,  and therefore  had  oxygen  and  sodium  ion  conductivities.  The  thickness ␮m  for  the  SSR  and of  the  interfacial  layers  was  ca.  10  LPR  methods,  respectively.  It  is  thought  that  ﬁne  BiCuVOx  particles prepared  by  the  LPR  method  because  of  their  high  surface  energy had  higher  reactivity  than  the  micro-sized  particles  prepared  by the  SSR  method.  The  higher  reactivity  would  assist  in  the  diffusion of  elements  such  as  Bi  and  V  inside  the  sintered  NASICON  disk  to form  the  thick  interfacial  region.

Fig.  5  shows  the  EMF   response  transients  to  ethanol  at  400 ◦C for  the  devices  using  BiCuVOx  prepared  by  the  SSR  and  LPR  methods.  Both  devices  responded  to  changes  in  ethanol  concentration (5–20  ppm),  indicating  that  electrochemical  reactions  of  ethanol took  place  at  the  sensing  electrodes.  However,  the  device  for  the SSR  method  exhibited  very  slow  responses.  It  took  a  long  time  for the  signal  of  the  device  to  stabilize.  Thus,  we  could  not  perform the  measurement  at  the  same  time  scale  as  that  of  the  device for  the  LPR  method.  Moreover,  the  sensitivity  (EMF  change)  and the  response  speed  differed  greatly  between  the  two   devices. The  sensitivity  for  the  SSR  method  was  two  orders  of  magnitude  lower  than  that  for  the  LPR  method.  It  has  been  reported that  increasing  the  thickness  of  the  electrode  decreases  sensor responses  for  mixed-potential-type  sensors  [36,49–51].   This  is because  combustible  gases  are  easily  decomposed  inside  a  thick electrode  layer  when  diffusing  through  it  to  the  reaction  interface between  a  solid  electrolyte  and  electrode.  The  electrode  for  the  SSR ␮m)   than  that  for  the  LPR  method method  was  much  thicker  (800  ␮m).   Thus,  the  larger  electrode  thickness  for  the  SSR  method (30  would  impede  the  diffusion  of  ethanol  to  the  NASICON/electrode interface,  resulting  in  the  low  sensor  response.  The  resulting  slow diffusion  through  the  thick  electrode  was  also  responsible  for  the slow  response  speed  observed.  The  effect  of  electrode  thickness on  sensitivity  is  more  clearly  displayed  in  Fig.  6.  The  sensitivity to  ethanol  was  signiﬁcantly  decreased  by  increasing  the  electrode thickness  from  30  to  800m.

As  shown  above,  the  device  fabricated  by  the  LPR  method showed  promising  properties  as  a  VOC  sensor.  In  the  following,we   focus  on  the  device’s  VOC-sensing  properties  such  as  sensitivity,  response  speed,  and  cross-sensitivity.  Fig.  7  shows  the dependence  of  EMF   on  ethanol  and  formaldehyde  concentrations. In  both  cases,  the  EMF   was   linearly  proportional  to  the  logarithm  of  VOC  concentration.  This  behavior  is  in  good  agreement with  those  for  mixed-potential-type  sensors  [30,32–34,36,37].  The slopes  of  the  curves  were  different  for  the  two  cases,  ethanol and  formaldehyde  detection.  Differences  in  the  rate  of  their  electrochemical  reactions  would  cause  the  disagreement.  Notably, the  device  showed  a  high  sensor  response  to  ethanol  at  a  very low  concentration  of  5  ppm;  the  change  in  the  EMF   exceeded 100  mV   at  400 ◦C.  However,  the  sensor  response  was  decreased by  increasing  the  operating  temperature  from  400  to  500 ◦C.  The increase  in  the  operating  temperature  must  increase  the  rate of  heterogeneous  catalytic  (nonelectrochemical)  combustion  of ethanol  and  formaldehyde  inside  the  sensing  layer.  This  then decreased  the  rate  of  electrochemical  reactions  taking  place  at  the NASICON/BiCuVOx  interface,  which  caused  the  EMF   response  to decrease.  The  observed  trend  is  typical  for  mixed-potential-type sensors  [34,36,37].

Fig.  8  shows  the  dynamic  response  transients  of  the  device to  10  ppm  ethanol  at  400,  450,  and  500 ◦C.  The  device  quickly responded  to  changes  in  ethanol  concentration.  In  addition,  the EMF  returned  to  its  original  value  after  switching  the  atmosphere in  the  chamber  from  ethanol  to  air.  The  responses  were  also  reproducible  and  stable,  as  shown  in  the  ﬁgure.  However,  the  response speed  was  not  as  high  as  that  for  other  mixed-potential-type sensors,  although  it  was  increased  by  increasing  the  operating  temperatures.  The  reason  for  this  is  not  clear  yet,  but  the  structural optimization  of  the  interfacial  structure  such  as  thickness  and  composition  may   improve  the  response  speed. Fig.  9  shows  the  sensitivities  of  the  device  to  VOCs,  CO,  and  CO2 at  400  and  500 ◦C.  The  device  responded  to  combustible  CO  and toluene  but  showed  a  negligible  response  to  CO2.  The  CO2 resulting  from  the  catalytic  combustion  of  VOCs  did  not  participate  in the  electrochemical  reactions.  This  result  agrees  with  the  previous results  that  the  electrode  made  of  BiCuVOx  was  stable  against  CO2 [28,29].  We   thus  expect  that  the  sensing  electrode  should  also  be stable  against  humidity,  as  reported  in  the  previous  paper  [28,29]. However,  the  observed  response  to  VOCs  is  disadvantageous  for  a gas-insensitive  reference  electrode.  Therefore,  thickness  control  or coating  a  combustion  catalyst  over  the  electrode  is  necessary  when the  electrode  is  used  as  a  reference  electrode.  The  device  exhibited higher  sensitivity  to  ethanol  and  formaldehyde  than  CO  and  toluene even  though  their  concentrations  were  much  higher  than  those of  ethanol  and  formaldehyde.  Because  CO  is  more  combustible than  VOCs,  it  can  be  efﬁciently  oxidized  inside  the  electrode  before arriving  at  the  reaction  interface.  Contrary  to  that,  toluene  is  less combustible  than  ethanol  and  formaldehyde.  Thus,  it  is  possible that  the  rate  of  electrochemical  oxidation  of  toluene  may   be  lower, generating  smaller  EMF   responses.

From  the  obtained  results,  we  postulate  that  the  following  reactions  occur  at  the  interface,  as  schematically  shown  in  Fig.  10. Cathodic  reaction  :  O2 + − →   2O2−   4e +   6O2− → Anodic  reaction  :  C2H5OH  +   CO2 + −(2) (2 5)) The  simultaneous  occurrence  of  the  above  cathodic  and  anodic reactions  at  the  interface  generates  a  mixed  potential  when  the rates  of  cathodic  and  anodic  reactions  are  equal.  In  this  mechanism,  we  assume  that  an  oxygen  ion-conducting  layer  was   formed on  the  Na+ ion  conductor  through  the  reaction  of  NASICON  with BiCuVOx.  The  layer  provides  reaction  sites  where  electrochemical  reactions  associated  with  oxide  ions  proceed  to  generate  the mixed  potential.  It  is  proposed  that  oxide  ions  at  the  interface electrochemically  react  with  VOCs  to  form  CO2 (or  partially  oxidized  species).  The  electrochemical  reduction  of  oxygen  that  forms oxide  ions  simultaneously  takes  place  at  the  interface.  The  electrochemical  oxidation  of  VOCs  at  the  interface  competes  with  their heterogeneous  catalytic  oxidation  inside  or  on  the  surface  of  the BiCuVOx/perovskite-type  oxide  electrode.  The  thinner  electrode for  the  LPR  method  assists  in  the  former  reaction,  generating  larger EMF   responses.  However,  the  proposed  mechanism  needs  to  be further  investigated  along  with  more  detailed  studies  on  the  interfacial  structure  between  NASICON  and  BiCuVOx.  Nevertheless,  the present  study  suggests  that  the  formation  of  a  different  ion  (O2−, H+,  Cl−,  F−,  etc.)  conductive  phase  on  a  base  solid  electrolyte  would offer  a  promising  route  to  designing  new  solid  electrolyte  gas  sensors.

A  BiCuVOx  powder  was   prepared  by  a  liquid-phase  reaction method  in  which  precursor  particles  were  precipitated  by  hydrolysis  in  a  solution  containing  Bi(NO3)3,  Cu(NO3)2,  and  NH4VO3.  The calcination  of  the  product  at  450 ◦C  produced  nearly  monodisperse ␥ ﬁne  BiCuVOx  particles  (ca.  100  nm)   having  a  highly  conductive  phase.  The  device  when  attached  with  the  electrode  composed of  ﬁne  BiCuVOx  particles  showed  good  VOC-sensing  properties at  400–500 ◦C;  the  sensor  responses  were  well  correlated  with log[VOC],  reproducible,  stable,  and  selective  to  VOCs.  The  obtained results  suggested  that  the  electrochemical  oxidation  of  ethanol with  oxide  ions  and  the  electrochemical  reduction  of  oxygen occurred  at  the  interface  where  an  oxygen  ion-conductive  layer  was formed  by  the  reaction  of  NASICON  with  BiCuVOx.  Such  a  newly formed  ion-conductive  layer  on  a  supporting  solid  electrolyte  may open  up  new  avenues  for  applications  of  solid  electrolytes.

This  work  was  supported  by  the  NISSAN  Science  Foundation, and  by  the  Nippon  Sheet  Glass  Foundation  for  Materials  Science and  Engineering.  The  support  was  also  provided  by  GIFT  (Education  Center  for  Green  Industry  friendly  Fusion  Technology)  of  Pusan National  University.
