Sintering temperature is used to control the microstructure of Li1 + x + yAlxTi2 − xSiyP3 − yO12 (x=0.3, y=0.2), a NASICON-type glass-ceramic. Scanning Electron Microscope imaging, X-Ray Diffraction, and Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy are employed to show that increase in sintering temperature increases conductivity while generating secondary crystalline phases. Total conductivity is as high as 3.81×10−4 S cm−1 for sintering temperatures above 1000 °C. Crystallization of dielectric phases places the optimal sintering temperature in the 900 °C to 1000 °C range. Thermal analysis of the glass precursor reveals the glass transition, and crystallization temperatures.

The search for lithium ion batteries that can meet the needs of the automobile industry continues. Batteries with greater charge and discharge rates are required to be able to replace the unique combination of power, safety, and convenience offered by internal combustion engines. High energy density lithium air batteries have great potential to meet these automotive needs. Recent research has shown that lithium air batteries, using Li1 + x + yAlxTi2 − xSiyP3 −yO12 (LTAPS) as a solid electrolyte, show favorable charge and discharge performance, and water stability [1]. Maximizing ionic conductivity of the water stable solid electrolyte is a key step in maximizing battery performance. LTAPS is a NASICON-type, lithium conducting, glassceramic material. Glass-ceramic materials can be cast from a melt and then crystallized upon heat treatment, allowing for good microstructural control. NASICON-type materials utilize an open unit cell supporting lithium ion hopping and storage [2]. The formula of LTAPS used is Li1 + x + yAlxTi2 − xSiyP3 − yO12, where x=0.3 and y=0.2. Charge balance dictates that inclusion of Al3+ on the Ti4+ sites (and Si4+ on the P5+ sites) incorporates greater concentrations of lithium ions in the solid phase. Addition of dopant material also reduces the porosity of the material, which has the effect of improving conductance [3]. The addition of silicon also improves the ﬂuidity of the melt and the thermal stability of the glass [4]. Work by other authors has shown notable room temperature conductivity and good stability of LATPS [3,5,6]. Subramanian et al. showed that this system is unique among NASICON-type systems in its ability to retain trigonal symmetry at room temperature [7]. The current work shows that alterations of the microstructure of samples crystallized from the glass phase can optimize the conductivity of this electrolyte material. However, cracking of the sample during heat treatment impeded the production of dense samples of the crystalline phase.

The method for glass-ceramic preparation has previously been described by Fu [4,5]. Precursor materials were weighed out as follows: 10.3 g Li2CO3 (Johnson Matthey, 99%), 73.6 g NH3H2PO4 (Fisher Chemicals), 32.8 g TiO2 (Alfa Aesar, 99.9%), 7.8 g Al(OH)3 (Fisher Chemicals), and 4.8 g SiO2 (Alfa Aesar 99.9%). The powders were mixed together in a 250 ml Nalgene bottle, along with alumina grinding media, and mixed on a roller mill for approximately 1 h. Then, 30 ml of powder was measured out and placed in a 50 ml platinum crucible. The powder mixture was placed in the melting furnace and heated to 700 °C and held for 1 h to evolve gas from the decomposing powders. The powders were then heated to 1475 °C and held for 1.5 h. A pair of precision ground, 440C stainless steel plates (McMasterCarr) were heated to 550 °C and held between 0.5 and 1 h in an annealing furnace. The glass melt was removed from the melting furnace and cast onto the bottom plate in the annealing furnace. The second plate was gently, but quickly, lowered down on the glass to quench it and form it into a plate. Tape-cast alumina chips were used as spacers between the steel plates, ensuring that the glass plate had a minimum thickness of 1.7 mm. The annealing furnace was closed, and the glass and the metal plates were annealed at 550 °C for 2 h and then cooled in the furnace. The resulting glass plate was sectioned into 1 cm2 samples. These samples were placed in a furnace and heated to a crystallization temperature between 700 °C and 1100 °C and held there for 12 h. Gold blocking electrodes were sputtered onto both sides of the samples using an Anelva E-200S sputtering system. The coated samples were then mounted in a stainless steel battery test stand, fabricated at Mie University, which uses a steel piston on a low pressure spring to hold the sample against another steel electrode. The steel electrodes are insulated from each other by plastic washers, and connected to the measurement device by strips of steel sheet. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were taken, using a Solartron SI 1247 Electrochemical Interface with a Solartron SI 1260 Impedance/Gain-Phase Analyzer, at frequencies between 10−2 and 106 Hz. Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) images were taken using at Quanta 600 by FEI. Scrap material from the cast glass plates was ground by mortar and pestle and then placed in alumina crucibles (CoorsTek). The powders underwent the same heat treatment process as the sectioned samples. Crystallized powders underwent X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) in a Phillips X-Pert XRD System with an Xcelerator X-ray detector.

Glass plates thicker than 2 mm retained sufﬁcient heat to start crystallizing during the cooling of the glass, which was evident as small white dots in the otherwise violet colored glass plates. Glass plates containing these crystals were discarded to insure that all samples were fully amorphous before sintering. Glass plates pressed to 1.7 mm formed samples that had no crystals detectable optically or by X-Ray Diffraction. There were no missing or additional peaks in the XRD measurements of crystallized powder when compared with XRD measurements on LTAPS powder supplied by Ohara Corporation. Therefore, crystallization of the glass-ceramic resulted in the desired material.

Heat treatment caused all of the samples to crack. In some cases, the cracking event was so severe that the samples were ejected from their stands and the pieces were found at opposite sides of the furnace at the end of the heat treatment. Thermal analysis was carried out to ﬁnd the cause of the cracking. Fig. 1 shows the dilatometry data for the crystallization process. A sample of the glass was heated to 1000 °C at 5 K min− 1 and held for 12 h. If the sample had failed catastrophically, the dilatometer would have detected a signiﬁcant contraction and remained at the same negative value for all temperatures: this did not occur. All of the events that are expected in glass crystallization are evident. The dilatometric softening temperature is 640 °C, while the glass transition temperature, found by the slope intercept method, is 622 °C. The crystallization temperature, taken as the temperature at maximum compression of the sample before the sample reached 1000 °C, is 667 °C. During the 12h soak at 1000 °C the sample densiﬁed. Subsequent cooling showed that the coefﬁcient of thermal expansion of the crystalline phase is 9.1×10−6 K−1. Inspection of the sample after testing showed it to have hairline fractures and no catastrophic failures.

Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) measurements were taken in order to better understand the reason for cracking. Samples of glass powder were heated at rates of 5, 10, 20, 30, and 40 K min− 1. Fig. 2 shows the combined data from each of these experiments, offset for clarity. The x-axis shows temperature in centigrade, while the yaxis shows energy in units of mW/mg, with negative values being exothermic. Glass crystallization should show an endothermic peak related to the glass transition temperature and an exothermic peak related to crystallization. The absence of any abnormal peaks or valleys in the DSC data means that the cracking is not the result of any kind of explosive crystallization phenomenon. The DSC results conﬁrm that, for a ramp rate of 5 K min− 1, the glass transition temperature occurs at approximately 625 °C and the temperature of crystallization is approximately 675 °C.

To establish the temperature where the cracking occurs, samples were heat treated without reaching the crystallization temperature. Samples were heated to 650 °C at ramp rates 5 K min−1 and 0.5 K min−1, soaked for 1 h, and cooled down to room temperature. These samples cracked in the same manner as those undergoing the full crystallization heat treatment, meaning the cracking is not due to the formation of a crystalline phase. Cracking could therefore be attributed to gas bubbles trapped in the amorphous phase.

EIS measurements of crystalline samples revealed that ionic conductivity increased with increase in sintering temperature. Fig. 3 shows the Nyquist plot for the sample sintered at 1000 °C for 12 h.

Table 1 compares the conductivity values of the various sintering temperatures. Conductivity is calculated by the equation σ=(t/A)(1/R) where t is sample thickness and A is the area of the smaller of the two electrodes. Electrode area was measured by image analysis by ImageJ photo imaging software. The resistance value was calculated using the Z-View EIS analysis software. A curve was ﬁt to the data using an equivalent circuit consisting of a resistor in series with a second resistor in parallel with a constant phase element. The resistor represents the resistance to conduction of the ions through the bulk of the crystalline body, while the resistor and constant phase element in parallel represent the grain boundaries. The total conductivity increases signiﬁcantly, from 3.98×10−6 S cm−1 at sintering temperature 900 °C to 2.77×10−4 at sintering temperature 1000 °C. Samples sintered at temperatures at and above 1000 °C showed total conductivity comparable to that of other authors [5,6].

Fig. 4 shows the scanning electron micrographs of the samples. At sintering temperatures below 900 °C, individual crystalline grains are difﬁcult to discern. Fig. 4a shows a polished and thermally etched surface of the sample heat treated at 700 °C. Relatively low magniﬁcations show that there are no discernible crystalline regions and the sample shows no macroscopic porosity. The same magniﬁcation of the 800 °C sample shows regions of high crystallinity scattered throughout the polished surface of the amorphous matrix. At 900 °C, there are grains large enough to resolve in the microscope. Average grain size is below 1 μm. The sample heat treated at 1000 °C shows a similar microstructure, with larger grains. Heat treatment at 1100 °C shows the development of grains of another crystalline phase. XRD patterns are shown in Fig. 5. Heat treatments below 900 °C are sufﬁcient to form LTAPS, but insufﬁcient to form any other crystalline phases. Heat treatment at 900 °C is sufﬁcient to begin crystallization of the rutile structure of TiO2, which has (110) planes that diffract at 2θ=27.489 [8]. The intensity of the rutile (110) peak increases with increase in temperature. This is the titanium rich phase evident as large, highly reﬂective crystals in the SEM image, Fig. 4e. Samples sintered at 1000 °C and above show the (100) peak of the AlPO4 (berlinite) phase.

In addition to the total conductivity, Table 1 shows the change in grain bulk and grain boundary conductivity. The grain bulk conductivity increases from 4.6×10−6 S cm−1 to 1.09× 10−3 S cm−1 when the sintering temperature is increased from 700 °C to 900 °C. However, the grain boundary conductivity does not change by more than an order of magnitude. The large increase in conductivity from 900 °C to 1000 °C can be attributed to an increase in grain boundary conductivity. Increasing sintering temperature coarsens the microstructure and increases the concentration of secondary phases. Kumar et al. concluded that the addition of dielectric phases, such as Al2O3, reduces conductivity, because any conductivity gains from the space– charge effect are overshadowed by the blocking effect [9]. It is understood that in this system, the blocking effect of the TiO2 phase will dominate. AlPO4 has already been credited with conductivity enhancement via the space–charge effect [10]. Therefore, it must be concluded that the coarsening of the microstructure, and increased berlinite crystallization, is responsible for the increased conductivity shown in Table 1. The optimal sintering temperature is between 900 °C and 1000 °C, where LTAPS grain size is maximized and the volume fraction of TiO2 is minimized.

The conductivity of lithium titanium phosphate based materials can be tailored through control of heat treatment temperature. The maximum conductivity is found in materials processed at temperatures between 900 °C and 1000 °C. Sintering for 12 h at 1000 °C produced a conductivity of 2.77×10−4 S cm−1. Heat treatments lower than these were successful in producing a crystalline phase, however the measured conductivity was very low, on the order of 10−6 S cm−1. Exceeding this upper limit produces excessive amounts of secondary crystalline phases. Cracking of the glass during crystallization prevented the production of a dense electrolyte. Thermal analysis has shown that the cracking phenomenon must be related to air bubbles in the glass castings.

Paul Johnson would like to recognize NEDO and Coors Tek for their ﬁnancial support of the research presented in this paper.
