In this report, efforts were made to investigate and characterize a variety of compositions in a glass system of general formula Na3+xCrxTi2−x(PO4)3 (x = 0, 0.25, 0.5 and 0.75 mol%, designated as NCTPx) to optimize their properties for use in Na-ion batteries. Several crystalline phases such as Na3Ti2(PO4)3 (COD-4106515) (NASICON), Cr2O3 (ICSD-25781) and Cr(PO3)3 (ICSD-39410) are precipitated during the process of crystallization. The microstructures of all the glass and glass–ceramic samples are analyzed using SEM and are correlated with powder XRD to explain the ionic conductivity for a given glass–ceramic sample. Single semicircle in the complex impedance plots clearly suggests that the present NCTPx glass samples exhibit a predominantly single-ion conduction mechanism. Electrical conductivity data follow the Arrhenius equation. The power-law exponent 's’ is observed to be the lowest (0.70) for the best conducting glass–ceramic sample NTCP0.5 (4.24 × 10−4 S/cm). The electrical modulus study proves that the conductivity relaxation of NCTPx glass–ceramic samples is temperature independent. Scaling behavior in the normalized spectra indicates that frequency-dependent relaxation behavior is unaffected by the temperature.
In recent times, Na-ion batteries have been heralded as the best possible option for large-scale stationary energy storage from renewable sources such as wind and solar [1, 2]. The advantages of good redox potential, low cost due to widespread distribution of sodium abundance, higher safety, better cycle life and ease of maintenance have made Na-ion batteries more viable [3, 4]. Though both lithium- and sodium-ion batteries operate on the same principle, the highly efficient material systems which are optimized for Li-ion batteries are not applicable directly for Na-ion batteries. This is due to the fact that Na+ ion is almost 35% heavier than Li+ ion and higher reactivity of Na metal compared to Li. The use of suitable solid electrolyte between the stable electrodes plays a significant role to improve the safety, operational voltage (> 4.5 V) and performance of Na-ion battery. Crystalline and amorphous (glass and glass–ceramic) materials follow the same ion transport mechanism as these materials conduct by the way of interstitial positions at the local atomic scale. A variety of crystalline material systems has been applied as suitable electrolytes to meet the targeted capacity and cycle stability; however, each system has its own difficulties, arising from crystallization [5–9]. Recent articles by Hayashi et al. and Honma et al. on various oxide and sulfide-based glass and glass materials have highlighted the superior ionic conductivity and stability of these systems [10–13]. The availability of flexible NBO (non-bridging oxygen) sites for the easy migration of Li+/Na+ ions via glass network promotes the superionic conductivity which is typically better than the same crystalline material systems [5, 14, 15]. Therefore, the glass-based material systems appear to be more promising than crystalline materials for application in solid-state batteries. In addition, glass materials generally crystallize at their crystallization temperature (Tc), promote more open structure to achieve better ionic conductivity and are also free from porosity due to the precipitation of conducting crystalline phases (NASICON (sodium superionic conductor), pyrophosphate, etc.). Our group has been working on a variety of glass, and glass–ceramic-based systems have observed improvement in their ionic conductivity, stability and redox voltage window to a certain extent [16–19]. Hence, it is worth to report the structural and electrical investigations on Na3+xCrxTi2−x(PO4)3 (x = 0, 0.25, 0.5 and 0.75 mol%) glass system before and after crystallization at around crystallization temperatures. This is a nontoxic, stable composition and also ensures a large-scale and long-term applications. The significant advantage of NCTPx glass system can be explained in two ways: (1) almost similar size of octahedral Cr+3 (0.0755 nm) and tetrahedral Ti+4 (0.0745 nm) ions and (2) formation of wider active centers upon the substitution of Ti+4 by Cr+3 ions during heat treatment of glass at crystalline temperature (Tc).
In this article, NCTPx glass and glass–ceramic powder are synthesized with the help of the melt quenching method and followed by heat-treating them at Tc for 5 h. The as-synthesized powder has been further ball milled for 30 h to ensure the best homogeneity glass–ceramic powders up to nanoscale which is a proven method to establish a good solid electrolyte interface (SEI) between the electrodes. The structural and conductivity investigations of the obtained glass and glass–ceramic samples have been monitored via XRD, SEM and impedance spectroscopy, respectively.
AR-grade chemicals (Na2CO3, NH4H2PO4, Cr2O3 and TiO2 (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.9%)) have been used to synthesize all the NCTPx glass samples via melt quenching method followed by ball milling for 30 h to obtain homogeneous nanoscale glass powders. DTA has been carried out to understand the glass transition phenomenon (Tg, Tc and Tm) of the as-prepared glass samples (SII EXSTAR 6300 (rate of heat 10 K/min)). As-formed glass samples have been crystallized by heat-treating them at Tc for 5 h in an Ar gas flowed tubular furnace. The amorphous and crystalline nature of all the NCTPx samples was checked using powder XRD (PANalytical diffractometer (40 kV, 30 mA with Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 0.154056 nm))). The microstructures were analyzed by FE-SEM (Gemini Zeiss (SupraTM 35 VP, Carl Zeiss, Germany). Electrical studies and relaxation anomalies were monitored by impedance spectroscopy (Solartron 1260 Impedance/Gain Phase Analyzer).
DTA curves of all the NCTPx glass samples are shown in Fig. 1. Glass transition temperature (Tg) of Cr2O3 free sample NCTP0 is marked to be at 960 K. As the Cr2O3 content increases from 0 to 0.5 mol%, Tg slowly decreased from 960 to 856 K (Fig. 1). Similarly, crystalline temperature (Tc) also decreases from 1102 to 1016 K up to x = 0.5 mol% of Cr2O3 content in NCTP0.5. The increasing trend in the modifying action of Na+ ions might be the reason for the reduction in 'Tc,’ and this trend is reversed when x > 0.5 mol% (Table 1) [20]. This indicates that 0.5 mol% of Cr2O3 in the Na3+xCrxTi2−x(PO4)3 glass network is a perfect choice of composition for the glass sample to crystallize perfectly. The NCTP0.5 glass sample is further subjected to heat treatment at 'Tc’ for 5 h in order to monitor its structural and electrical properties via the precipitation of various crystalline phases.
XRD profiles of the synthesized NCTPx glass samples heattreated at their corresponding crystallization temperatures (Tc) are shown in Fig. 2. It shows that crystalline phases such as Na3Ti2(PO4)3 (COD (crystallography open database)-4106515) (NASICON), Cr2O3 (ICSD (inorganic crystal structure database)-25781) and Cr(PO3)3 (ICSD-39410) are precipitated during the process of crystallization. Among them, the major NASICON-type Na3Ti2(PO4)3 phase stands for better stability and ionic conductivity which is due to the partial substitution of Ti4+ ions by Cr3+ ions during the conversion of glass into glass–ceramic. However, the other minor phases (Cr2O3 and Cr(PO3)3) are considered as impure phases (Fig. 2). Interestingly, the intensity of Na3Ti2(PO4)3 phase gradually increases with increasing Cr2O3 content and reaches a maximum at 0.5 mol% Cr2O3. Further addition of Cr2O3 leads to a decrease in the NASICON phase in the samples. Hence, the NCTP0.5 glass sample has been heattreated at 1016 K (Tc) for 5 h to scale up the correlation between microstructure and electrical properties (Fig. 2) [7, 21, 22]. The maximum intensity of best conducting crystalline Na3Ti2(PO4)3 phase for NCTP0.5 glass–ceramic sample is directly ascribed to the formation of a large number of vacancies with positive charge deficiency by the partial substitution of tetravalent Ti4+ ions by trivalent Cr3+ ions [23–25]. This would create positive charge deficient wider active centers with which Na+ ion reacts very easily.
However, the size of active centers shrinks due to the presence of impure crystalline phases (Cr2O3 (ICSD-25781) and Cr(PO3)3 (ICSD-39410)) as is evident from the XRD profiles of glass–ceramic samples (other than NCTP0.5) which resist the migration of Na+ ions in the glass–ceramic network. It is also justified from Fig. 3 where crystallization temperature (Tc) and bulk conductivity (σb) are inverse correlated with each other. Nevertheless, the decreasing trend in the ionic conductivity from NCTP0.5 to NCTP0.75 might be due to presence of incremental impurities in the crystalline phases. Williamson–Hall plots have been used to obtain the average crystallite sizes which are found to vary between 81 and 195 nm (Fig. 4). The volume of unit cell obtained from the XRD profiles of all the NCTPx glass samples after crystallization was found to be highest (V = 1481.33 Å) for the NCTP0.5 sample which can be attributed to the highest modifying action of Na+ ions (Fig. 3). Table 2 shows the calculated and experimental structure parameters of all the NCTPx glass–ceramic samples.
The microstructural surfaces of all the NCTPx glass–ceramic samples have been analyzed using SEM (Fig. 5a–d). The size of the grain-like crystallites is seen to vary from 150 to 400 nm. The existence of TiO2 crystallites in the form of Na3Ti2(PO4)3 (NASICON type) phase for NCTP0 (Cr2O3 free) glass–ceramic sample is shown in Fig. 5a. Herein, grain size gradually decreases with increasing Cr2O3 content and growth of well-shaped grains is observed until it reaches its maximum at 0.5 mol% Cr2O3. This will lead to lower grain boundary resistance (Rgb) due to improvement in the close contact between grain boundaries. Therefore, the mobility of Na+ ions will be increased resulting in the best ionic conductivity for the NCTP0.5 glass–ceramic sample (Fig. 5c). However, Rgb started increasing by addition of more Cr2O3 content (> 0.5 mol%) (Fig. 5d) due to the domination of crystalline phase over amorphous phase in the glass network which will create discontinuous pathways for free migration of Na+ ions via wider active centers leading to reduction in the electrical conductivity which has been reviewed in the next section.
Complex impedance spectra (Z″ vs Z′) of all NCTPx glass–ceramic samples exhibit single semicircles (Fig. 6). The width of the single semicircle gradually decreases with an increase in Cr2O3 content up to 0.5 mol% which offers its bulk resistance (Rb) for a given sample. With the addition of Cr2O3 content more than 0.5 mol%, the value of 'Rb’ started increasing. An inclined line is also seen toward the lower frequency side, which reflects the Warburg diffusion (Fig. 6). Bulk conductivity is also calculated for all the NCTPx glass–ceramic samples with the help of its bulk resistance (Rb) by taking the sample geometry (t = thickness and A = area) into account:
The lowest value of 'Rb’ is achieved for NCTP0.5 glass–ceramic sample which exhibits the highest bulk conductivity (σb) and lowest 'Tc.’ Temperature-dependent characteristic complex impedance plots for the best conducting NCTP0.5 glass–ceramic sample are presented in Fig. 7. It can be seen that the Z′ values are shifting toward the lower side as the temperature increases from 303 to 423 K.
Impedance data related to conductivity obey the Arrhenius equation:
where σ0 = pre-exponential factor, Eaσ = activation energy for the conduction, k = Boltzmann’s constant and T = absolute temperature.
Figure 8 presents the variation of conductivity as a function of 1000/T for all NCTPx glass–ceramic samples. The slope of the straight lines in Fig. 8 is used to evaluate the activation energy for conduction (Eaσ). The activation energy for conduction (Eaσ) as a function of Cr2O3 content, measured at 303 K, is shown in the inset of Fig. 8. The important point to be noted is that the activation energy for conduction is observed to be minimum for the best conducting NCTP0.5 glass–ceramic sample. The linear relationship between conductivity and the activation energy explains that the present NCTPx glass–ceramic samples exhibit only a single-ion conduction mechanism. This might be due to precipitation of crystalline NASICON-type phase (Na3Ti2(PO4)3) in the present NCTP glass–ceramic samples which trigger the mobility of charge carriers to a considerable extent [16, 17]. It is further understood that the present Na3+xCrxTi2−x(PO4)3 glass system consists of only one Na+ ion which is mobile in glass network, whereas the rest of them take part in stabilizing the glass network. Therefore, the conductivity part of this glass system is predominantly due to the mobility of Na+ ions [12, 17, 26].
Power-law equation is successfully explained the frequency-dependent electrical conductivity:
where σ0 = frequency independent conductivity(dc conductivity), A = constant and s = characteristic parameter (0 < s < 1).
Figures 9 and 10 show the frequency-dependent AC conductivity of all the NCTPx glass–ceramic samples, measured at 303 K and different temperatures (303 K, 343 K, 383 K and 423 K), respectively. Herein, the conductivity curve exhibits two changes: (1) The higher frequency region of the curve is frequency dependent and started dispersing from a particular frequency known as critical frequency (ωp = fo) and (2) after critical frequency, the curve toward lower frequency region is linearly progressing and almost frequency independent (Fig. 9). Frequency-independent conductivity (σ0) is evaluated by extending the conductivity curve up to ω = 0. On the other hand, frequency-dependent conductivity variations follow the power-law equation. The precipitation of only one highly intensified Na3Ti2(PO4)3 (COD4106515) (NASICON) major conducting phase without any impurity phase might be the reason to achieve the best ionic conductivity for NCTP0.5 compared to all other samples under investigation. However, the presence of impure phases (Cr2O3 (ICSD-25781) and Cr(PO3)3 (ICSD-39410)) are expected to disconnect pathways for the migration of Na+ ions for all other NCTPx samples and therefore the conductivity exhibits a decreasing trend [17, 27]. Nevertheless, critical frequency (ωp = fo) slowly shifts toward a higher frequency side where conductivity relaxation effects started appearing in NCTPx glass–ceramic samples [28]. A clear shift in the critical frequency (ωp = fo) for the AC conductivity curves can be clearly seen in best conducting NCTP0.5 glass–ceramic sample measured at different temperatures which are thermally activated with the same activation energy as σ0 (T) (Fig. 10) [29]. It can be seen from Eq. 3 that the characteristic parameter (s) is a material dependent which derives the correlation between characteristic parameter (s) and conductivity (σ) as a function of composition. The slopes of curves in Fig. 9 are used to calculate 's’ whose values are decreased from 0.73 to 0.70 up to 0.5 mol% (NCTP0.5) and further increased (Fig. 11). The minimum value of 's,’ achieved for the NCTP0.5 glass–ceramic sample, determines its largest number of wider active centers with positive charge deficiency where Na+ ion reacts very easily than other samples under investigation [30]. However, impure phases (Cr2O3 and Cr(PO3)3) are not favorable to form the wider active centers. Therefore, the conductivity is decreased from NCTP0.5 (x = 0.5 mol%) to NCTP0.7 (x = 0.7 mol%). Summary of electrical parameters (electrical conductivity (σb), activation energy (Eaσ) and characteristic parameters (s)) of all the Na3+xCrxTi2−x(PO4)3 glass–ceramic samples, measured at 303 K, is tabulated in Table 3.
Nevertheless, the data related to frequency-dependent real (ε′) and imaginary dielectric constant (ε″) clearly stated that ε″ dominates the bulk conductivity (σ0 or σdc). Hence, electrical modulus formalism was employed to monitor the degree of Na+ ion conductivity in the Na3+xCrxTi2−x(PO4)3 glass system which will be useful to evaluate the average conductivity for relaxation times τσ [31, 32]. Variation of imaginary electric modulus M″ against frequency (log (f)) for all the NCTPx glass–ceramic samples, as measured at 303 K, is depicted in Fig. 12. The asymmetry of M″ curves for all the NCTPx glass–ceramic samples in Fig. 12 obviously demonstrates their relaxation behavior. In addition, skew and relaxation behavior of M″ curves for the best conducting NCTP0.5 glass–ceramic sample spread over wider frequency range than other samples under investigation which might be another supporting factor to justify that this NCTP0.5 glass–ceramic sample possesses a large number of wider active centers with positive charge deficiency.
Imaginary electrical modulus (M″) data of all the NCTPx glass–ceramic samples perfectly match with the KWW equation (Kohlrausch–Williams–Watts) [31]:
where τ = characteristic relaxation time, and β = stretched exponent (0 ≤ β ≤ 1).
Figure 13 shows the variation of imaginary electric modulus (M″) with frequency (log (f)) of NCTP0.5 glass–ceramic sample, measured from 303 to 423 K. Peak positions of M″ curve remain unaltered (Mmax″) at relaxation frequency (fmax) and move toward higher frequency region as the temperature increases from 303 to 423 K (Fig. 13). The reciprocal of the peak frequency of M″ represents the timescale of the transition from the long-range to short-range mobility and is defined as characteristic relaxation time τ, calculated using the relation τ = 1/2π fmax. Furthermore, relaxation time (τ) is obtained for each and every experimental temperature which is increased with temperature and the data are well followed by Arrhenius expression:
where τ0 = pre-exponential factor and Eaτ = activation energy for conductivity relaxation.
Figure 14 represents the Arrhenius plots (log (τ) vs 1000/T) of all the NCTPx glass–ceramic samples, measured from 303 to 423 K. The slope of these plots (Fig. 14) are used to evaluate the activation energy for the conductivity relaxation (Eaτ) (Table 3). Figure 15 shows stretched exponent (β) and activation energy for relaxation (Eaτ) as a function of Cr2O3 content. The best conducting NCTP0.5 glass–ceramic sample exhibits the lowest values of β (0.824) and Eaτ (0.571) (Fig. 15). Formation of the largest number of positively charged deficient vacancies results in the reduction in the values of β and Eaτ as these parameters are material dependent [33, 34]. This will boost up the conductivity along the vicinity of the conduction path. Nevertheless, the values of activation energies (Eaτ and Eaσ) specified that the present NCTPx glass–ceramic samples consist of a single-ion conduction mechanism (Table 3). The close agreement between Eaτ and Eaσ obviously suggests that the hopping mechanism is predominantly due to ions only for both conductivity and relaxation behavior which is justified from Fig. 15 [35]. Figure 16 shows the variation of log (σ) and M″ versus log (f) for the best conducting NCTP0.5 glass–ceramic sample, measured from 303 to 423 K. The M″ and Z″ peaks at every experimental temperature (303 K, 363 K and 423 K) closely overlap which indicates that all the NCTP glass–ceramic samples predominantly have ion conduction mechanism (Fig. 16). The summary of relaxation time (t), activation energy (Eaσ) for the conductivity relaxation (Eaτ) and the stretched exponent (β) of all the NCTP glass–ceramic samples, measured at 303 K, is listed in Table 3.
 Conductivity-normalized spectra are analyzed to explain the correlation between the ionic conductivity phenomena with respect to composition and temperature (Fig. 17) [36, 37]. All these plots are overlapped perfectly into a single curve. The formation of a single curve is clear evidence of composition and temperature-independent conduction transport mechanism (Fig. 17). Similarly, the single curves obtained in normalized spectra of imaginary electrical modulus (Fig. 18) as a function of composition and temperature are clear evidence to understand that dynamic processes occurring at different scales exhibit the same activation energy and frequency-dependent relaxation times and are temperature independent.
 The lowest value crystalline temperature (Tc = 1016 K) for NCTP0.5 glass–ceramic sample exhibits the best modifying action of Na+ ions which is a perfect choice of composition for the further crystallization process. Among various major and minor crystalline phases precipitated, a major phase (Na3Ti2(PO4)3) is regarded as stable and exhibits better ionic conductivity. However, the other minor phases (Cr2O3 and Cr(PO3)3) are identified as impure phases which results in discontinuation of conduction paths for Na+ ions. The activation energy (0.472 eV) and power exponent s (0.7) are achieved to be lowest for the best conducting NCTP0.5 glass–ceramic sample (σb = 4.24 × 10−4 S/cm). The M″ and Z″ as a function of log (f) for the best conducting NCTP0.5 glass–ceramic sample measured at different temperatures appeared at approximately the same fmax, which reveals that the present NCTPx glass–ceramic samples exhibit the single-ion conduction mechanism. The single curve in the normalized electrical modulus formalism suggests that the distribution relaxation time mechanism of glass–ceramic samples is temperature independent. Further, efforts are being initiated to improve the ionic conductivity on the targeted glass–ceramic sample (NCTP0.5) by heat-treating at and above 'Tc’ for different time schedules.