Sodium Super Ionic Conductor (NASICON) structured phosphate framework compounds represent a very attractive class of materials for the use as Na-ion battery electrodes. A series of NASICONstructured NaxTi2(PO4)3 compounds corresponding to varying degrees of sodiation (x = 1, 2, 3, 4 ) are investigated by high-level hybrid density functional theory calculations using the Linear Combination of Atomic Orbitals and Gaussian-type basis set formalism together with hybrid B1WC and HSE06 exchange-correlation functionals. Using primitive cells of NaxTi2(PO4)3 compounds with different stoichiometry, sodium sublattice structure and titanium oxidation states are constructed and analyzed using the group theoretical symmetry considerations. The existence of mixed titanium oxidation states for x = 4 (Ti+2/Ti+3) and x = 2 (Ti+3/Ti+4) and a single oxidation state for x = 1 (Ti+4) and x = 3 (Ti+3) is demonstrated. The results show a necessary set of symmetry reductions taking place due to the highest possible sodium/vacancy and titanium charge ordering with changing x. For each composition, an electroneutrality condition for the oxidation states of all atoms was applied which led to the discovery of several energy minima corresponding to different electronic configurations as identified by different Ti magnetic moments. An interesting relation between the bulk electronic properties of NaxTi2(PO4)3 compounds and the variation of sodium content was also found. In addition to sodium and titanium oxidation state charge ordering, the existence of large differences between the origin and the size of band gap is shown. The band gap changes from 4.05 eV 2p - 3d gap in Na1Ti2(PO4)3 to 0.59 eV 3d - 3d gap in Na4Ti(PO4)3 with extra states due to mixed titanium valence. These results serve as an important electronic structure benchmark for further studies of such polyanion materials and help to explain some important properties of these systems relevant for battery applications.
The search for novel battery materials offering superior performance characteristics is one of the key topics in modern materials science. Sodium ion batteries (SIB) are believed to become a lower cost, more sustainable and cleaner alternative to the current generation of lithium ion batteries (LIB). However , the progress in this field is still hindered by the lack of suitable electrode materials showing sufficient capacity, cycling stability, rate capability etc. Sodium Super Ionic Conductor (NASICON) structured phosphate framework compounds with a general formula of NaxM2(PO4)3 (where M is usually a transition metal e.g. Ti, V, Cr , Fe, Mn etc. or their combination) show a number of favorable properties. These include: a wide range of redox potentials, electrochemical stability and durability , high ionic mobility and low cost, making them one of the leading candidate electrode materials for SIBs. Since graphite, a typical negative LIB electrode material, shows a very low capacity for Na-ion intercalation (<35 mAh/g), there is a great challenge to find suitable negative SIB electrode materials. NaTi2(PO4)3 (N1TP) with an electrode redox potential of 2.1 V vs. Na+/Na and theoretical capacity of 133 mAh/g for two moles of Na is attracting a lot of interest as a negative electrode material. It is especially suitable for aqueous SIBs (ASIB) since its potential closely matches the thermodynamic potential of hydrogen evolution reaction (∼2.3 V vs. Na+/Na at pH = 7). At the expense of lower energy density , ASIBs offer an intriguing and viable alternative to the more widespread nonaqueous batteries due to their higher safety , sustainability , available power and lower cost.  However , some of the serious issues hampering the use of NASICON-type materials for battery electrode applications is their low intrinsic electronic conductivity and limited stability in aqueous electrolytes during electrochemical cycling. Despite a substantial experimental and theoretical effort in this field, there is still a very limited understanding of the electronic structure and key interactions in these systems at the atomic level, which govern the materials properties relevant for the electrochemical applications: formation and mobility of ionic and polaronic charge carriers, interactions and ordering within the sodium and transition metal sublattices, variation of the electronic band structure during the intercalation reactions etc.
In this study , we chose the NASICON-structured NaxTi2(PO4)3 system (NxTP, where x = 1, 2, 3, 4) corresponding to different degrees of sodiation. The phases where x = 1, 3, 4 have been previously reported and are known to be experimentally accessible via electrochemical intercalation of sodium.The Na2Ti2(PO4)3 (x = 2) phase is only accessible chemically at high temperature and tends to phase separate into Na1Ti2(PO4)3 and Na3Ti2(PO4)3 at lower temperature and in an electrochemical reaction.The traditionally reported NxTP NASICON structures for x = 1 and x = 4 adopting the space group R3c consist of an open framework of corner sharing TiO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra with two different sites available for Na occupation. At low sodium content, the octahedrally coordinated M1 (Wyckoff: 6b (0, 0, 0)) site is preferably occupied. At higher degrees of sodiation, Na atoms are distributed among one M1 and three M2 (Wyckoff: 18e (x, 0 , 1/4)) sites with 8-coordination. Facile Na-ion movement among the available sites is responsible for the high three-dimensional Na-ion mobility and ionic conductivity of NASICON-type materials. Similarly to other NASICON structured compounds, NxTP are also believed to be wide band gap insulators with a very low electronic conductivity taking place via polaronic mechanism.
NASICON compounds typically crystallize in the following crystalline phases: (i) a high symmetry rhombohedral (R3c) γ-phase at high temperatures, (ii) a lower symmetry rhombohedral βphase or monoclinic α0-phase with some sodium ordering at intermediate temperatures, and (iii) a low symmetry fully sodium ordered triclinic α-phase at low temperatures. The exact symmetry and transitions between phases are strongly dependent on the cationic and anionic composition of a particular compound. The most experimentally studied NaTi2(PO4)3 with x = 1 is known to crystallize only in the high-symmetry (R3c) γ-phase.case of Na3Ti2(PO4)3 with x = 3, an existence of high temperature sodium disordered γ- and low temperature sodium ordered α-phases was previously reported. Experimental investigation of low temperature sodium ordering phase transitions is highly non-trivial due to the low scattering power of sodium ions requiring high intensity X-Ray sources and careful control of the sample preparation and measurement conditions.
In this theoretical study , we attempt to provide a comprehensive investigation of the electronic structure of a series of NxTP compounds using high-level hybrid density functional theory cal culations within the Gaussian-type Linear Combination of Atomic Orbitals formalism combined with the group theoretical symmetry analysis. The structures corresponding to varying degrees of sodiation are analyzed in terms of ordering and available symmetries within the partially occupied sodium sublattice and charge ordering in the case of mixed oxidation state (sometimes interchangeably termed as mixed-valence) transition metal sublattices. In addition to the optimization of atomic positions and cell parameters, harmonic phonon frequencies at Γ-point of the first Brillouin zone were also calculated for the discovered low energy configurations. Finally, for the lowest energy structures at each degree of sodiation, the electronic density of states were calculated and analyzed in terms of different atomic contributions. In this study, we find the highest possible degree of structural and charge ordering, calculate the origin and changes of the electronic band gaps and connect these properties to the important applications of these materials in energy storage. To the best of our knowledge, there are not any studies where such aspects would have been addressed at this level of detail and complexity.
In the present study , we employ the density functional theory (DFT) within the linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO) formalism together with B1WC and HSE06 hybrid exchangecorrelation functionals as implemented in the CRYST AL17 computer program.All-electron Gaussian basis sets of triple-zeta valence with polarization functions on Na, Ti, P and O were taken from Peintinger et al.The number of contracted basis functions (s/p/d/f) is 73211/511/1 for Na, 842111/6311/411/1 for Ti, 73211/5111/1 for P, and 6211/411/1 for O. The MonkhorstPack scheme was applied to select the k-points on a 8x8x8 mesh for the integration of the first Brillouin zone in spin polarized calculations of primitive unit cells.The Coulomb and exchange integral tolerance factors 8, 8, 8, 8, 16 were used in the calculations together with the extra-large numerical integration grid. The energy convergence threshold was set to 10−8 a.u. for the self-consistent field (SCF) total energy and 10−7 a.u. for the optimization of lattice parameters and atomic positions. In the present study , due to available symmetries, it is sufficient to consider only a primitive unit cell containing three times fewer atoms (42, 40, 38, and 36 atoms for x = 4, 3, 2, and 1, respectively) than the conventional unit cell which still allows us to include all the necessary Na configurations and Ti oxidation states. After the full structure optimization was carried out, the threshold on the total electronic energy convergence was increased to 10−10 a.u. in order to calculate the phonon frequencies within the harmonic approximation using the direct method.High accuracy calculations allowed us to properly calculate the phonon frequencies at the Γ-point and search for imaginary modes indicating the instability of certain configurations. We stress the importance of selection of an appropriate hybrid exchange-correlation functional for the approximate treatment of electronic correlation effects in the transition metal compounds.It is well known, that the standard generalized-gradient approximation (GGA) exchange-correlation functionals underestimate the band gap and are unable to reproduce the correct electronic configuration (magnetic state) together with the associated structural distortions in the transition metal compounds.Hybrid exchange-correlation functionals effectively combine the Hartree-Fock (HF) and DFT approaches yielding significantly better results and more accurate properties for many materials and behavior of defects therein.Wu and Cohen proposed a non-empirical density functional with an improved exchange part of the standard PBE density functional (denoted as WC functional).It appeared that the functional is very suitable for the calculations of properties of solids. Bilc et al.effectively combined the WC functional and hybrid B1 functional with a mixing parameter for the exact exchange, i.e.
 In addition to the B1WC functional, we also employ a rangeseparated hybrid HSE06 functional.In the HSE06 functional, only the short-range (sr) exchange is treated exactly whereas the PBE functional is used for the long-range exchange part:
In the HSE06 hybrid density functional, the length scale separation of 0.11 Å−1 was applied. We use both hybrid exchangecorrelation functionals to model and analyze the NaxTi2(PO4)3 series of compounds in terms of transition metal oxidation states and basic bulk electronic properties. In addition, we calculate the Mulliken charges, magnetic moments, and the electronic density of states (total and atom projected).
We start our analysis of the NaxTi2(PO4)3 (where x = 1, 2, 3, 4) series of compounds from the highly symmetric primitive unit cell of N4TP containing 42 atoms and having a maximum Na occupancy . We proceed by sequentially removing an appropriate number of sodium atoms from N4TP in order to obtain N3TP (x = 3), N2TP (x = 2) and N1TP (x = 1). However , the initial primitive unit cell is kept throughout these constructions and later analyses. This was done in order to describe the highest possible degree of ordering in the sodium and/or mixed oxidation state titanium sublattices and obtain the highest possible symmetry reduction. The phonon frequencies and the electronic densities of states for the resulting structures are also calculated and analyzed within the primitive unit cell setting.
It is well known that for certain systems, DFT calculations lead to multiple solutions corresponding to different local energy minima. Unfortunately , this issue is rarely discussed in literature extensively , despite the complete characterization of such solutions being the main purpose of theoretical calculations. We can only mention a couple of studies such as Janotti et al.where several competing configurations (solutions) for the doubly charged oxygen vacancy and small polarons in SrTiO3 were discussed. Another set of studies classified the different solutions for oxygen vacancy in CeO2 and interstitial oxygen defects in Al2O3 using the site symmetry approach. In the present study , we suggest a careful group theoretical symmetry analysis and electroneutrality condition method to address this problem.
 In this section, we address symmetry reduction aspects in the NaxTi2(PO4)3 family of compounds with a variable number of Na atoms (x = 4, 3, 2, 1) in the primitive unit cell. We treat all low symmetry phases with several non-equivalent (split) Ti positions in order to consider all possible configurations and find the lowest energy one. This aspect is particularly important in the case of mixed Ti+4/Ti+3/Ti+2 oxidation (valence) states. The stability of lowest energy configurations is also checked by calculating the phonon frequencies at the Γ-point.
Let us first consider a fully sodiated Na4Ti2(PO4)3 (N4TP) (x = 4) compound which can only crystallize in γ-phase with a rhombohedral (R3c) symmetry and Z = 2 (42 atoms) in the primitive cell.The Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) results are consistent with the presence of mixed Ti+2/Ti+3 oxidation states in N4TP.8 Na atoms in the primitive unit cell are split into two groups with 2 and 6 atoms at two different Wyckoff positions, 4 equivalent Ti atoms at the same Wyckoff position, 6 equivalent P atoms, and 24 O atoms also split into two groups. Na atoms occupy the Wyckoff position M1: 6b (000) and Wyckoff position M2: 18e (x,0,1/4) with the site symmetry S6 and C2 in the hexagonal setting, respectively . It is important to note that the local site symmetry group of oxygens is very low . Since there is only one possible Wyckoff position for Ti in the highly symmetrical N4TP, the charge ordered mixed-valence state Ti+2/Ti+3 dictated by the electroneutrality condition cannot be described within the R3c space group anymore, and a symmetry reduction to at least R32 (No. 155) space group is required. It is important to note that experimentally observed R3c structure corresponds to statistical mean distribution, whereas our calculations are done within the smallest possible primitive unit cell. The Ti atoms in the N4TP having the space group R32 are split into two groups which distinguish it from the experimentally observed Ti+2/Ti+3 charge disordered N4TP having the space group R3c.
In the R3c space group, Ti atoms are surrounded by 6 oxygen atoms subdivided into two groups distinguished by different Ti-O distances. In Section 3.2, we discuss how the two groups of oxygens and the Ti-O distances are influenced by the symmetry reduction. The hypothesized phase transition from R3c to R32 in the N4TP systems would correspond to the charge ordering transition within the mixed oxidation state Ti+2/Ti+3 sublattice without any accompanying Na+-vacancy ordering due to full Na-sublattice occupancy . Although up-to-date, no such charge ordering transition has been reported in the NxTP systems - it might take place at lower temperatures - never probed for this family of compounds. Interestingly , there is an evidence of exactly such charge ordering transition taking place in the V+3/V+4 mixed -valence NASICON structured Li2V2(PO4)3 even at close to room temperature, which also seems to have a pronounced effect on the electrochemical properties of such materials as well.The positions of different oxidation state Ti atoms in the primitive unit cell of N4TP are explicitly shown in Fig. 1.
In the next step, we construct structures for NaxTi2(PO4)3 corresponding to lower degrees of sodiation, namely x = 3 (N3TP), x = 2 (N2TP) and x = 1 (N1TP). Our approach is based on respectively removing 2, 4, and 6 Na atoms from the highly symmetrical N4TP. It yields three possible structures for both N3TP and N2PT within the same sized primitive unit cell.
In contrast to N4TP, Na3Ti2(PO4)3 (N3TP) has been reported to crystallize in two phases: a highly symmetric (R3c) γ-phase at high temperature and a low symmetry (P1 (No. 2)) α-phase at low temperature.In the case of N3TP, if both of the available Na atoms are removed from the Wyckoff position 1 in N4TP, the symmetry is fully restored to the space group R3c (Configuration 1 (Con1) in Table 1). However, if two Na atoms are removed from the Wyckoff position 2 in N4TP, it leads to the space group C2 (No. 5) (Configuration 2 (Con2) in Table 1). Finally, if one Na atom is removed from each Wyckoff position of the highly symmetrical N4TP, the lowest possible symmetry triclinic P1 (No. 1) space group is obtained (Configuration 3 (Con3) in Table 1). In the case of N2TP, if four Na atoms are removed from the Wyckoff position 2 in N4TP, the symmetry is reduced to the space group Cc (No. 9) (Con1 in Table 1). If two Na atoms are removed from the Wyckoff position 1 and two Na atoms from the Wyckoff position 2 of N4TP, the symmetry is further reduced to the space group C2 (No. 5) (Con2 in Table 1). Finally , if one Na atom is removed from the Wyckoff position 1 and three Na atoms from the Wyckoff position 2 in N4TP, the symmetry is reduced even further to P1 (No. 1) (Con3 in Table 1). Our calculations indicate that N2TP is a mixed Ti+3/Ti+4 valence compound as well, which introduces additional symmetries due to possible charge ordering among the different oxidation states, which are also included in our further analysis. The experimental isolation of N2TP phase might be problematic, because the electrochemical intercalation reaction N1TP + 2Na+ + 2e− → N3TP takes place via two-phase mechanism with clear phase separation into N1TP and N3TP.Nevertheless, it might be possible to obtain it via a chemical route and investigate for possible Na+-vacancy or Ti+3/Ti+4 charge ordering at sufficiently low temperatures.
In the last case of N1TP (x = 1), our calculations indicate that it adopts the highly symmetric R3c space group (Fig. 1), in agreement to the experimental data.This phase cannot show any additional Na-vacancy ordering due to the full occupancy of the Wyckoff position 1 and completely empty Wyckoff position 2. Finally , all titanium atoms are in Ti+4 state with empty 3d0 orbitals so it cannot show any mixed oxidation state ordering either.
We also calculated the total energy differences with respect to the lowest energy structure (configuration) and the phonon frequencies at the Γ-point for each x in NaxTi2(PO4)3 (Table 1). The results of hybrid DFT calculations show that N4TP necessarily undergoes a symmetry reduction to R32 space group at the maximum degree of Ti+2/Ti+3 charge ordering. N3TP undergoes a maximum symmetry reduction to P1 at the highest degree of Navacancy ordering, although C2 configuration is only 0.15 eV/cell higher in energy and might be entropically relevant at higher temperatures. Out of all the analyzed structures, only the N3TP Con1 with space group R3c demonstrated the presence of two imaginary phonon frequencies (Table 1). It is a good indication of the existence of an additional phase transition at the Γ-point. We found the phase transition to the space group P1 (No. 2) possible at the Γ-point using the group-subgroup relations for the crys talline phase transitions with ISOTROPY code.We also do not exclude the possibility of the phase transitions at other special kpoints, however , such calculations would be very time consuming and were not included in the present analysis. On the other hand, N2TP is shown to undergo a Ti+3/Ti+4 charge and Na-vacancy ordering adopting Cc symmetry . However , the lowest symmetry P1 N2TP configuration is only 0.13 eV/cell higher. Finally, our calculations show that only the lowest sodium content N1TP adopts the usual highly symmetric R3c configuration because it cannot have addition symmetries due to sodium and charge ordering among titanium oxidations states.
It is well known that the sum of oxidation states for all atoms in the compound must be zero to ensure elecroneutrality.For the primitive unit cells analyzed in this work the stoichiometry should read as Na+1k Ti+l2 Ti+m2 P+56 O−224 , and the electroneutrality condition as 1 · k + l · 2 + m · 2 + 5 · 6 = 2 · 24 assuming the formal (common) OSs: +1 for Na, +5 for P, and -2 for O.The solutions for this algebraic equation assuming the possible formal OS for Ti +2, +3 and +4 in NxTP are collected in Table 2. The other Ti OS and corresponding solutions are excluded from the analysis as irrelevant. Here l and m are the formal OSs for two groups of Ti atoms in the primitive unit cell. This is allowed by the symmetry reduction from space group R3c down to at least space group R32. We assume that Ti atoms in NxTP can have at most two different OSs, hence if l = m then all Ti atoms are considered equivalent, and nonequivalent if l≠ m.
For x = 4, the number of Na atoms in the primitive unit cell is k = 8, then l + m = 5. The most interesting solution is the one with l = 2 and m = 3, leading to mixed OSs in N4TP (Table 2). Indeed, our calculations confirm that the latter solution is the most energetically favorable and has the space group R32 as shown by the symmetry analysis. In Table 2, we show that the mixed OS is characterized by different Ti magnetic moments (µ) µ(Ti) = 1.75 µB and µ(Ti) = 0.95 µB corresponding to l = 2 (Ti+2) and m = 3 (Ti+3), respectively . Furthermore, the calculations in the space group R32 for N4TP allow us to obtain several solutions which could, at least in part, be explained by the charge delocalization effects. For example, there exists a solution with µ(Ti) = 1.75 µB and µ(Ti) = 0.00µB (Table 2). The magnetic moment µ(Ti) = 0.00 µB here should not be confused with m = 4 as one might expect because it would violate the electroneutrality condition, but rather with the singlet state of l = 2 (Ti+2) electrons. Such a solution is energetically unfavorable by 1.61 eV/cell. Another important case is represented by l = m = 2.5 which corresponds to a charge delocalized (non-mixed-valence) state with uniform Ti+2.5 OS. In this case, all transition metal atoms in the unit cell are equivalent and characterized by the same atomic charge and magnetic moment. Our calculations indicate that although such situation exist in N4TP, it is significantly higher in energy than the other solutions.
For x = 3, the number of Na atoms in the primitive unit cell is k = 6, therefore l +m = 6. In this particular case of N3TP, the total number of solutions is 2 (Table 2). Namely , the first one where l = 2 and m = 4 and the second where l = m = 3. Our calculations show that the latter solution is the most energetically favorable for N3TP. Moreover , in accordance with the symmetry analysis this solution could be obtained within all three space groups: R3c, C2, and P1 as discussed previously . The total energy differences between the l = m = 3 solutions in different space groups decreases together with the symmetry reduction: 0.41 eV (between R3c and P1) and 0.14 eV (between C2 and P1) in favor of low symmetry P1 case.
It is then easy to demonstrate that the solution for N2TP is l = 3 and m = 4, which is also the most energetically favorable solution. Similarly to the case of N4TP, for N2TP there are also solutions with l = m = 3.5 corresponding to a charge delocalized state with the formal Ti+3.5 OS. These solutions are also significantly less stable than the ones corresponding to the mixed OSs.
In the case of x = 1 in N1TP, Ti+4 have empty 3d0 orbitals and the only possible solution allowed by the electroneutrality condition is with l = m = 4 with µ(Ti) = 0.00 for all titanium atoms (Table 2).
We calculated the bulk electronic properties for the lowest energy configurations in the NxTP series using two hybrid density functionals, namely B1WC and HSE06. These functionals are currently among the most popular and show excellent results in the calculations of many properties of diverse materials and systems.We use these two hybrid functionals for a general comparison and as an important computational benchmark due to their differences as discussed in Section 2. To the best of our knowledge, despite its importance, the electronic structure of NxTP compounds has not been discussed in detail yet. N4TP is the only member where Ti can have the Ti+2 OS (in fact it is a mixed Ti+2/Ti+3 OS). Ti+2 also possesses the largest magnetic moment (Table 3), whereas Ti+3 in N4TP shows the same µ and atomic charges as in N3TP, independently of the functional. Surprisingly , the µ values of Ti+3 calculated with the B1WC functional in N2TP are slightly smaller than in N4TP and N3TP (0.87 µB in N2TP vs 0.95 µB N4TP vs 0.93 µB in N3TP). Despite this, we may assume that the µ and atomic charges are relatively independent of the selection of functional for the NxTP compounds. The Ti+4 OS exists in N2TP (mixed OS) and in N1TP. In the case of 3d0 orbitals the atomic charge of Ti is larger than for the other OSs. Surely , the OSs changes are also reflected in the atomic charge value of oxygen atoms, which increase from -0.75e (B1WC) in N1TP to -0.95e (B1WC) in N4TP if Ti+2 is the closest neighbor.
 The comparison of calculated lattice parameters for N4TP with the literature data shows that the B1WC functional performs better than the HSE06 functional: a = 9.07 Å and 9.12 Å, respectively versus the experimental a = 9.06 Å (PBE+Ue f f gives 9.23 Å and PBE 9.14 Å).The c lattice parameter calculated with the HSE06 functional is very close to the one calculated with the PBE+Ue f f approach (c = 21.42 Å) and is slightly larger than the experimental value (c = 21.38 Å).However , the B1WC functional underestimates the c parameter with the value being closer to the one calculated using the PBE functional (c = 21.25 Å)(Table 3). It is important to note that the experimental data are refined within the R3c space group, whereas we assume a setting of lower symmetry due to mixed-valence charge ordering.
In contrast to N4TP, in our study the N1TP is described within the R3c space group in accordance to the experimental data. The two employed hybrid functionals yield similar lattice parameters for N1TP. The a and c lattice parameters are respectively only ∼0.1 Å and ∼0.05 Å larger than the experimentally measured ones (a = 8.49 Å, c = 21.79 Åand a = 8.48, c = 21.77 Å). The PBE+Ue f f functional overestimates the c parameter by 0.2 Å in comparison to experiment (22.05 Å, 22.09 Å). Note that the Ue f f value is quite different in the two studies, i.e. 4.0 eV in Senguttuvan et al.and 2.4 eV in Lu et al.. The Ue f f values were tuned to reproduce the lattice parameters in the former and the band gap value in the latter studies, respectively . In the present study of N3TP, we find that its a and b lattice parameters are calculated well with both hybrid functionals (the experimental values are a = 8.86 Å and b = 8.87 Å). However , the c parameter is overestimated by almost 0.3 Å using the same functionals (the experimental values are c = 21.63 Åand 21.64 Å). Interestingly , the PBE and PBE+Ue f f calculated values of 21.65 Å and 21.70 Å, respectively are significantly closer to the experiment.The unit cell volume for the NxTP series correlates directly with the sodium content and no such effects as chemical expansion as seen in some battery oxides were observed in this study (Table 3).
Analysis of the atomic relaxation patterns around Ti ions in different OSs could also be important for the better understanding of NaxTi2(PO4)3 properties. The oxygen atoms surrounding Ti ions in N1TP and N4TP are subdivided in two groups, namely 3 shorter Ti-O distances and 3 longer Ti-O distances (Fig. 2 a) and d)). In the low symmetry situation of N2TP (mixed OS), the oxygen atoms surrounding the Ti atoms in the OSs +4 and +3 are not equivalent. It is reflected in their atomic charges, being -0.75e for oxygens close to Ti+4 and -0.81e for oxygens close to Ti+3 (B1WC functional) and in the Ti-O interatomic distances (varying from 1.88 Å to 2.03 Å for oxygens close to Ti+4 and from 1.94 Å to 2.05 Å for oxygens close to Ti+3 in Fig. 2 c). The analysis shows that the Ti bonding patterns in N2TP could be characterized by the Ti-O distances of two oxygens only , i.e. those oxygen atoms which have the shortest distance with the Ti atoms (Fig. 2 c)). The other four oxygens have very close Ti-O distances, independently of the OS. As expected, the case of N3TP is characterized by a more complex picture due to its low symmetry . However , only one of the Ti-O distances (1.94 Å) in N3TP is much different in comparison with the others (Fig. 2 b)).
Typically , the values of lattice parameters, atomic charges and magnetic moments in NxTP calculated with the HSE06 functional are slightly larger than those obtained by the B1WC functional (Table 3). The same also applies to the calculated band gaps. However , this, at least in part, could be explained by the smaller amount of exact exchange in the B1WC case. The most important result is reflected in the band gap dependence on the OS. It changes irregularly with respect to the sodium content and average Ti OS. The smallest band gaps of 0.59 eV and 0.65 eV were respectively estimated for N4TP and N2PT having mixed OS Ti atoms. They are significantly smaller than the 2.16 eV and 4.05 eV respectively obtained for N3TP and N1TP which are characterized by a single Ti OS. The calculated electronic Density of States (DOS) (Fig. 3) show that the origin and character of the band gap among N4TP, N3TP, N2TP and N1TP is of completely different origin. In N1TP, the band gap is a p – d gap between the valence band comprised of mostly O 2p states and the conduction band formed of mostly Ti 3d states. However, in N4TP, N3TP and N2TP, the band gap is a d – d gap. Although in these systems, the energy position of Ti+3 3d states with respect to the O 2p states remains similar (∼3 eV), the occupancy of 3d band changes from 3d0 to 3d1 in N2TP and N3TP and from 3d1 to 3d2 in N4TP, thus shifting the character of the band gap from p - d to d - d. Moreover , in the mixed OS N2TP and N4TP, the presence of Ti+4 and Ti+2 states respectively , form additional bands close to the occupied Ti+3 states, which reduces the band gap even further.
The fundamental electronic properties such as the band gaps estimated in this study are of great relevance for the electrochemical applications of NxTP systems as battery electrode materials. Because the origin and the character of the band gap so strongly depends on the Na content it should have decisive consequences for many properties sought by materials scientists such as the concentration and mobility of electronic charge carriers. The electronic conductivity is one of the key properties limiting the performance of these materials as battery electrodes. First of all, our results indicate that the band gap should change dramatically as the the material gets sodiated/desodiated leading to greatly different electronic charge carrier densities. During the electrochemical cycling of NxTP there is always a off-stoichiometry of sodium which should always effectively reduce the band gap leading to higher electronic charge carrier density and faster electrochemical kinetics than might be anticipated from the electronic structure of e.g. N1TP. Moreover , the electrochemical kinetics should be significantly faster at high sodium in comparison to low sodium content phases affecting the performance of these materials in battery applications. Second, the polaronic charge transport mechanism of these carriers should also be greatly affected by the changes in the electronic properties of NxTP system with respect to Na content. Finally, it indicates that it is highly unlikely that there is a single doping strategy which would improve the bulk electronic conductivity of these materials, and the formation energetics and mobility mechanisms of polaronic charge carriers responsible for the electronic conductivity would require different control strategies.
Hybrid DFT calculations using two (B1WC and HSE06) exchange-correlation functionals were performed on a series of NaxTi2(PO4)3 (x = 1, 2, 3, 4) compounds. Group theoretical approach was used to construct the structures and carefully analyze the possible symmetries. This was performed within the smallest possible primitive unit cells, therefore the results correspond to the highest available degree of structural and charge (due to mixed oxidation state) ordering in these systems. General considerations based on the electroneutrality condition for the oxidations states of all atoms were used to identify the different electronic configurations. The obtained lowest energy configurations were further refined by the calculation of phonon frequencies at the Γ-point and analyzed by calculating the total and atom projected electronic density of states. The calculation results indicated single and mixed Ti oxidations states for x = 1, 3 and x = 2, 4 in NaxTi2(PO4)3, respectively . The oxidation states were identified by the calculation of Ti magnetic moments and Mullikan atomic charges. NaTi2(PO4)3 with all titanium atoms in the oxidation state Ti+4 and no magnetic moment was shown to adopt the highly symmetric R3c space group with neither sodium nor charge ordering. The lowest energy configuration of Na2Ti2(PO4)3 adopted the charge ordered mixed oxidation state (Ti+4/Ti+3) with the space group Cc and certain degree of sodium ordering. Na3Ti2(PO4)3 with all Ti atoms in the Ti+3 oxidation state was shown to adopt the lowest symmetry P1 space group. This is almost the same as the experimental result of the P1 space group obtained in a larger supercell setting. 22 We suggest that our solution for Na3Ti2(PO4)3 represents the highest possible degree of sodium ordering since it was obtained in the smallest primitive unit cell setting. The fully sodiated Na4Ti2(PO4)3 requires symmetry reduction down to the space group R32 to reproduce its charge ordered mixed oxidation state (Ti+3/Ti+2). The end members Na4Ti2(PO4)3 and NaTi2(PO4)3 are of higher symmetry due to the absence of freedom in their sodium sublattices. Our study shows that the lattice parameters of N1TP, N3TP and N4TP calculated by the hybrid DFT compare well to the available X-Ray Diffraction data. The lattice parameters and unit cell volume systematically increased with x which also correlated with the increase in Ti-O bond lengths. In contrast, the band gap value demonstrated a more complex behavior . The Na4Ti2(PO4)3 and Na2Ti2(PO4)3 with mixed oxidation states are characterized by a significantly smaller band gap values in comparison to Na3Ti2(PO4)3 and NaTi2(PO4)3 with single oxidation states. Whereas the band gap in the latter is of O 2p– Ti 3d character , it is of Ti 3d - Ti 3d character in all of the former . The variation of d – d band gap values is mostly related to the effect of additional isolated bands appearing between the Ti+3 band and the conduction band states for the mixed oxidation states. Finally , we do not observe significant differences between the B1WC and HSE06 functionals for the calculated bulk properties except for the bandgap value. The bandgap value calculated with the HSE06 functional is significantly larger in comparison with the B1WC functional. The change in origin and character of the band gap upon sodium content in these systems indicate several important consequences for their applications as battery materials. The charge carrier concentration in sodiated state is predicted to be significantly higher than at low sodium content affecting the electrochemical kinetics and behavior of these materials in battery applications. Moreover, no single doping strategy can be used to, for example, tune the electronic conductivity and the behavior of polaronic charge carriers in these compounds, because the electronic structure changes so drastically upon the sodium intercalation. 