The ionic conductivity of LiZr2(PO4)3 (LZP), a NASICON-type electrolyte, can be altered by doping, annealing temperature, and pressure. In this study, the rhombohedral framework of Li1+xAlxZr2-x(PO4)3 (LAZP, x = 0 . 1–0.9) solid electrolyte, for application in Li-air batteries, are synthesized using a facile solid-state reaction. A systematic dual effect of dopant and annealing environment on the grain boundary resistance, ionic conductivity, and ions diffusion are investigated for this electrolyte. With the substitution of Al3+, the rhombohedral solid electrolyte structure synthesized in various environments becomes stable at room temperature due to additional Li+ ions and provides high ionic conductivity. LAZP ionic conductivity is 4 times higher than that of LiZr2(PO4)3 at room temperature due to the formation of a high-temperature-stable phase by Al doping. Additionally, the solid electrolyte properties significantly depended on the synthesis environment; the maximum ionic conductivity and Li-ion mobility are observed for Li1.3Al0.3Zr1.7(PO4)3 solid electrolyte synthesized in an oxygen environment.
Rapid developments in electronic devices, hybrid electric vehicles, and electrical storage grids have increased the demand for lithium batteries with high energy density, which can be obtained using lithium anode. However, using the lithium anode raises various critical issues during charge/discharge cycles [1]. Conventional batteries have certain limitations due to the use of liquid organic electrolytes, such as safety, leakage of liquid, toxicity, difficulty in miniaturization,inflammation, corrosion, and explosion by short circuit. These issues urged a change in research focus to fast ionconducting electrolytes in recent years. The most attractive solution for the abovementioned issues involves exchanging the liquid electrolytes with inorganic solid-state ionic conductors, including perovskite-type, NASICON-type, LISIONtype, and garnet-type electrolytes [2]. Such electrolytes are essential not only to address the limitations but also to guarantee long cycle life due to the stable structures of the allsolid-state energy storage devices [3]. However, none of the solid electrolytes currently in use demonstrate an adequate ionic conductivity, high stability, wide operating potential window, and low interfacial resistance comparable with those of liquid organic electrolytes. Because of grain boundary resistances, the inorganic crystalline electrolytes show lower ionic conductivities [4]. Thus, intensive focused research is required to improve the overall lithium ion conductivity of the electrolytes. Many research groups have attempted this by doping, mixed sintering, mechanical attrition, etc., but no substantial developments have been achieved thus far.
Among solid-state electrolytes, LiM2(PO4)3 materials with NASICON structures have been studied extensively due to their potential advantages in future energy storage applications. Such compounds exhibit corner-sharing PO4 tetrahedrons and MO6 octahedral frameworks, providing open 3D interstitial tunnel networks, which facilitates Li+ ion mobility. Various compounds with M = Ti, Zr, Sn, Hf, Sc, etc. have been prepared and studied to understand their structures and electrochemical behaviors [1]. Rhombohedral Ti-based materials showed the highest ionic conductivities at ambient temperature among various LiM2(PO4)3 solid electrolytes. Electrochemical stability contrary to lithium anode, high room-temperature ionic conductivity, good chemical stability, wide stable electrochemical operating window, and difficulty in synthesis are grave issues that hamper the application of these compounds as inorganic solid-state electrolytes in batteries [5, 6].
LiZr2(PO4)3 (LZP) electrolyte is estimated to be electrochemically more stable than LiTi2(PO4)3 due to its stable oxidation state. Moreover, its high reduction potential against metal anode makes it a suitable electrolyte for high-energydensity Li batteries. LZP exhibits four different polymorphs depending on the annealing temperatures and conditions, and its ionic conductivity and grain boundary resistance depend on the polymorphism. Therefore, stabilizing the high-ionicconductivity rhombohedral phase of LZP under ambient conditions is a key issue. Aliovalent cation doping is a wellknown technique to change the crystal structure phasetransition temperatures in different inorganic solid-state materials by altering the crystal structure distortion levels [3]. Doping has been reported as an effective way to stabilize phase at room temperature [4, 6–9]. Furthermore, ionic conductivities of solid-state electrolytes strongly depend on the doping, morphology, annealing temperature and environment, density, grain boundary resistance, elemental distribution, and chemical composition. However, the relationships among annealing environment, grain boundary resistance, ionic conductivity, and Li-ion diffusivity have not been established thus far.
In this study, LZP and LAZP compounds with various Al concentrations (0 ≤ × ≤ 0.9) were synthesized in various annealing environments for the first time. The relationships among ionic conductivity, structure, chemical composition, and annealing environment are recognized and clearly discussed. This can help further the improvement of inorganic solid-electrolyte composition and environmental conditions, to optimize the grain boundary resistance and maximize the ionic conductivity-diffusivity.
A facile solid-state reaction was used to synthesize a series of NASICON-type Li1 + xAlxZr2-x(PO4)3 (x = 0 . 0 , 0 . 1 , 0 . 2 , 0 . 3 , 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, and 0.9) materials using lithium hydroxide monohydrate, ammonium phosphate monobasic, aluminum nitrate nonahydrate, and zirconyl chloride octahydrate as the starting materials. For each composition, stoichiometric starting materials were weighed and grinded thoroughly in a mortar grinding machine. The grinded mixtures were initially heated at 700 °C for 2 h to remove volatile constituents, and the obtained powders were called HT700 powder. Each composition of these HT700 powders were grinded and made into 3 pellets with a diameter of 2 in. and a thickness of 2–3 m m using hydraulic press, applying a pressure of 40 MPa. One pellet of each composition was considered as a batch for further heat treatment; each batch of samples was loaded in an alumina crucible and heat-treated in a furnace at 1400 °C for 4 h. The samples were annealed in various environments, such as normal atmosphere, N2, a n d O2 following similar procedures. The N2 and O2 environments were maintained inside the furnace by allowing the respective gases with a flow rate 1 L/min. Here onwards, the samples prepared at various environments are referred to as follows: the samples prepared under normal atmospheric conditions are AA-0.0, AA-0.1, AA0.2, AA-0.3, AA-0.4, AA-0.5, AA-0.6, AA-0.7, AA-0.8, and AA-0.9 for Al (0.0 ≤ × ≤ 0.9), the samples prepared in O2 environment are OA-0.0, OA-0.1, OA-0.2, OA-0.3, OA-0.4, OA-0.5, OA-0.6, OA-0.7, OA-0.8, and OA-0.9 for Al (0.0 ≤ × ≤ 0.9), and the samples prepared in N2 environment as NA-0.0, NA-0.1, NA-0.2, NA-0.3, NA-0.4, NA-0.5, NA0.6, NA-0.7, NA-0.8, and NA-0.9 for Al (0.0≤×≤0.9).
The structural analysis of synthesized solid electrolytes was performed by using X-ray diffraction (XRD, PANalytical) technique with a 2θ step size of 0.02°. Morphologies of the electrolytes were analyzed by using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S-4800, Japan) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM, Titan). Energydispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analysis was performed in combination with the SEM and HR-TEM analyses. Thermo Fisher Scientific MultiLab 2000 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used for chemical analysis of the synthesized solid electrolytes. The Raman modes were recorded on a Horiba Raman spectrometer at 532 nm. Fourier-transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy was performed on a Perkin Elmer spectrum100 spectrometer. Model micromeritics instrument was used to estimate the Brunauer Emmett-Teller (BET) specific surface areas of the synthesized solid electrolytes. The pellets were polished using a 3000 grit size sand paper (Starcke, Germany) and coated with silver paste on both sides for electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) analysis. The EIS spectra were recorded using a potentiostat (Sp-200 Bio-Logic, France) in the frequency range from 10 mHz to 6 MHz. Further, the ionic conductivities of the synthesized solid electrolytes were estimated from the impedance analysis using the following relation [10]:
where R is the resistance of the solid electrolyte obtained from the Nyquist plots, t is the thickness of disk solid electrolyte, and A is the area of the electrode in cm2. In addition, the diffusivities of these electrolytes are also calculated from the relation [11].
where σcon is the ionic conductivity obtained from equation (1), Kb is the Boltzmann constant (1.3806 × 10−19 cm2 kg s−2 K−1), q is an elementary charge value, and N is the number density of Li ions.
The XRD analysis of Li1+xAlxZr2-x(PO4)3 (LAZP; x = 0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, and 0.9) solid electrolytes synthesized in various environments are shown in Fig. 1. I n a l l the environments studied, the solid electrolyte without Al showed a pure rhombohedral phase of LiZr2(PO4)3 (LZP) with a space group of R-3c, in good agreement with the reported structures [12], and no impurity peaks were observed except for the samples synthesized in N2 environment. The obtained peak positions along with planes are given in Table S1. The impurity peaks observed for the NA-0.0 sample corresponded to ZrP2O7, probably formed due to the absence of oxygen during synthesis. LZP samples prepared in various environments showed XRD peak splitting, which suggests no distortion of the NASICON-type structure [12], indicating that the solid electrolyte was formed with stable NASICON-type structure. With increasing Al content in the LAZP electrolytes, no change in crystalline structure was observed; however, the XRD peaks were shifted to higher angles, mainly due to the ionic radii difference between host and dopant materials. The intensity of the strong peak at 19.7° (104) gradually decreased with increasing Al content. Furthermore, the growth of the (110) plane at 20.3° increased steadily with increasing Al content, while the growth of the (104) plane gradually decreased simultaneously. With increasing Al content, additional peaks corresponding to the rhombohedral phase of LAZP were observed, initiated in the AA-0.2, NA0.5, and OA-0.3 samples. The impurity peaks of AlPO4 are noticed at low Al content onwards for all the samples; these peaks were gradually intensified with increasing Al concentration. Lattice parameters, cell volume, microstrain, and stack fault probability were also calculated for the synthesized solid electrolytes. The obtained lattice parameters are shown in Fig. S1. Almost constant lattice parameters of a = 8 . 7 7 2 Å a n d c = 22.647 Å are observed for the LZP electrolytes synthesized in different conditions. The lattice parameters a and c increased and decreased, respectively, with increasing of Al content in LAZP (Fig. S1(a) and (b), respectively). This trend is expected due to the difference in ionic radii of Al3+ (0.535 Å) and Zr4+ (0.72 Å), considering that Al3+ replaced Zr4+ at the M site in LAZP and led to shrinkage of the unit cell [13]. With increasing Al content, the change in lattice parameters became sluggish, confirming that Al3+ partially incorporates Zr4+ in these samples, resulting in the AlPO4 peak [1].
To investigate the effect of Al content and annealing environment conditions on the ionic conductivity of LZP and LAZP solid electrolytes, the electrochemical impedance measurements were carried out. Figure 2a–c show a semicircle at higher frequencies and a tail at lower frequencies, which are quite common impedance spectral characteristics of solid electrolytes. The semicircular radii of LZP and LAZP samples prepared with various Al contents and in various environments show significant variation, indicating that both the dopant and annealing environment influence the Nyquist plots of the solid electrolytes. LZP samples show similar trends in impedance plots in all the annealing environments. However, the semicircular radius of their Nyquist plots is much larger than those of LAZP electrolytes, indicating that the LZP samples exhibit higher resistance than the LAZP electrolytes. The similar impedance analyses of solid electrolytes are well matched with reported literatures [12, 14–16]. Generally, the complex impedance plots of solid electrolytes consist of three high-frequency curves corresponding to electrode resistance, grain boundary, and grain interior [3, 17]. The semicircle in the Nyquist plot for solid ionic electrolytes is commonly attributed to the main influence of the grain boundary resistance [18]. The grain boundary contribution normally appears as a semicircle at higher frequencies in Nyquist plots [18]. In this study, the above phenomenon is well resolved for all the solid electrolytes studied. Representative grain interior (gir) and grain boundary (gbr) resistances for the AA-0.0 sample are shown in Fig. S2. T h e addition of Al and the annealing environment have significant effects on the gir and gbr of solid electrolytes (Fig. 3). The gir values of LZP are influenced by the annealing environment; the lowest gir value of ~ 10.7 kΩ was obtained for the OA-0.0 sample (Fig. 3a). In contrast, the gir value is varied drastically with increasing Al content and changing annealing environment, with no clear trend with respect to Al content or annealing environments. Among all the LAZP electrolytes, the lowest gir value of 307 Ω was obtained for the AA-0.2 sample. The gbr values of the LZP samples are also strongly influenced by the annealing environments. LZP samples annealed in different environments and the corresponding typical fitted curves along with the equivalent circuit model diagrams are shown in Fg . S3. In the fitted equivalent circuit model Q1||R1 + Q2||R2 as follows: Q1||R1 represents the total resistance from the grain interior (gir) and grain boundary (gbr) i n all samples whereas Q2||R2 represents the response from the sample—electrode interface [1]. The NA-0.0 sample shows the lowest grain boundary resistance of 5.66 × 108 Ω, p r o b a bly due to presence of ZrP2O7 impurity (inset of Fig. 3b). For all the annealing environments, the gbr values of the LAZP samples showed parabolic trends with increasing Al content. The LAZP samples annealed in atmospheric environment exhibits lesser gbr values than those of samples annealed in other environments. However, the lowest gbr value of 5.68 × 108 Ω was achieved for the OA-0.3 sample (Fig. 3b). Furthermore, the total resistance (Tr) is calculated using the following relation [17]:
 The obtained Tr values for all the solid electrolytes are shown in Fig. S4. For the LZP samples, the lowest Tr value is observed for NA-0.0, probably due to the ZrP2O7 impurity phase. For the LAZP samples, a parabolic trend is observed with increasing the Al content for all the solid electrolytes annealed in various environments, the lowest Tr value being achieved for the OA-0.3 sample.
The inclined lines in the lower-frequency region are not clearly seen, demonstrating that the contributions of the electrode/solid electrolyte interface to the total ionic conductivity of the LZP samples are insignificant (Fig. S3). A similar tendency was noticed in Li0.33La0.55TiO3 solid electrolyte by Bharathi et al. [18]. The tail at lower frequencies was probably due to the transport effect of lithium ion mobility [19, 20]. The complex impedance spectra of LAZP samples annealed in various environments show inclined lines at lower frequencies with increasing Al dopant, indicating that Li ion mobility was much higher than that of LZP samples (Fig. 2). The lines at lower frequencies are not perfectly upright due to the surface roughness of the electrolyte [5].
The ionic conductivities of the LZP and LAZP samples have been calculated by considering the resistance obtained from the impedance spectra and using equation (1). The resistances of the electrolytes are estimated by fitting the Nyquist spectra with an equivalent circuit model; a typical fitted impedance analysis for synthesized solid electrolytes is shown in Fig. S3, along with the equivalent circuit in the inset. From the fitted analysis, the resistance of each solid electrolyte was obtained and the corresponding ionic conductivity was calculated. The variations in ionic conductivities with Al content for electrolytes synthesized in various annealing conditions are shown in Fig. 4. F i g u r e 4a–c) shows that the ionic conductivity of LZP and LAZP solid electrolytes depends considerably on the Al dopant content and the annealing environment. In the absence of Al, the ionic conductivities of AA-0.0, NA-0.0, and OA-0.0 were 4.83 × 10−11, 1 . 1 3 × 1 0−10, a n d 5.47 × 10−11 S c m−1, respectively. The highest ionic conductivity of 1.13 × 10−10 S c m−1 was obtained for the LZP electrolyte annealed in a N2 environment, probably due to the low grain boundary resistance [21]. For the LAZP electrolytes, the ionic conductivity shows a parabolic trend with increasing Al content in all the annealed environments. With increasing Al content, the conductivity decreases probably due to the Li trapping effect on Al ions [22]. Among all the annealing environments, annealing in atmospheric environment yielded the best ionic conductivity for the LAZP samples. For each annealing environment, the best ionic conductivities of 9.96 × 10−8, 1 . 1 1 × 1 0−7, and 1.12 × 10−7 S c m−1 were achieved for AA-0.2, NA-0.6, and OA-0.3, respectively. However, the highest ionic conductivity was obtained in oxygen annealing environment, probably due to the larger sizes or lower grain boundary resistances and the number of oxygen ions, which contributes to the formation of a bottleneck [22]. Bharathi et al. [18] reported that process environment has a significant influence on the ionic conductivity of the Li0.33La0.55TiO3 solid electrolyte. This suggests that variations in dopant and process environment influence the microstructure, which can be used to increase the ionic conductivity, e.g., by growing larger grain sizes and thereby reducing the number of grain boundaries. Lu et al. [4] studied the effect of mixed degrees of sintering on solid lithium ion conductor and achieved an ionic conductivity of 1.8 × 10−7 S c m−1.
 To understand the effects of Al doping and process environment on lithium ion diffusion in LZP and LAZP electrolyte, the Nernst-Einstein relation in equation (2) was used to estimate the lithium ion diffusion coefficient (ω). The achieved ω values are represented in terms diffusivity vs. Al content for all the electrolytes synthesized in various environments, as shown in Fig. S6. For LZP electrolytes, ω values of 5.27 × 10−11, 1 . 3 7 × 1 0−10, and 6.65 × 10−11 cm2 S−1 were obtained. The highest diffusivity was obtained for the LZP samples synthesized in N2 environment. For the LAZP solid electrolytes, irrespective of annealing environment, the diffusivities increased with increasing Al content and reached a maximum for the AA-0.2, NA-0.6, and OA-0.3 samples; any further increase in Al content led to decrease in diffusivity. Replacing Zr4+ with Al3+ in the rhombohedral structure of NASICON-type solid electrolyte is assumed to affect the lithium ion mobility due to the increased amount of Li ions in the electrolyte and interstitial immigration with lower activation energies [23, 24]. The annealing environment also significantly influenced the diffusivity of the LAZP electrolytes. Similar diffusivities were obtained in normal atmosphere and oxygen environment; however, the maximum diffusivity of 1.36 × 10−7 cm2 S−1 was achieved for the OA-0.3 solid electrolyte. The electrolytes synthesized in normal atmosphere and oxygen environment show maximum diffusivity at lower Al content than the samples synthesized in nitrogen environment, probably due to higher grain resistance.
A schematic representation of the Li ion migration path along with bottlenecks for the LAZP solid electrolyte is shown in Fig. 5. The Li, Zr, P, Al, and O atoms are depicted in black, blue, green, silver, and red colors, respectively, and the gray disks refer to the bottlenecks of the LAZP skeleton. In general, a NASICON-type LAZP solid electrolyte forms a threedimensional network structure with an AxBy(PO4)3 phase via corner sharing between BO6 (i.e., ZrO6) octahedron and PO4 tetrahedron along the c-axis direction. The A cations in the structure are distributed mainly in the M′ and M″ interstitial sites for charge compensation. The M′ and M″ sites are located between the adjacent [ByP3O12]x− units along the caxis. The mobile A cations migrate through the bottlenecks from one site to another, and the size of the bottlenecks depends on the nature of the skeleton ions and concentration of mobile ions at the interstitial sites [25]. The Li+ ion diffusion paths in the LAZP electrolyte are indicated by curved arrows (Fig. 5). The optimal ionic conductivity depends on the size of the ions and the bottlenecks; the bottlenecks should be smooth and without wide or narrow sections [26]. The dopant ions could also alter the bottleneck size and the rotation/tilt of ZrO6, thereby enhancing the ionic conductivity of LAZP electrolyte [18]. In addition, for higher ionic conductivity, ion transport between adjacent sites should have similar potential energies with low migration barriers [27]. The diffusivity of the Li+ ions is significantly improved by introducing Al3+ ion as a dopant along with an oxygen environment, thus prompting higher ionic conductivities and Li ion diffusivities of the LAZP (OA-0.3) solid electrolyte. Furthermore, to understand the above analysis, the optimized samples are subjected to morphology, elemental, and optical analyses.
 The morphologies of the optimized solid electrolytes AA0.2, NA-0.6, and OA-0.3 samples are examined by SEM (Fig. S7). Almost similar morphologies were observed for all the optimized samples. However, larger grain sizes were observed in OA-0.3 than the other samples; therefore, it showed lower grain boundary resistance and high ionic conductivity. The grains and grain boundaries are denoted by red arrows in Fig. S7. Elemental mapping was performed to investigate the distribution of core elements in the solid electrolytes. The EDS mapping analysis results of AA-0.2, NA-0.6, and OA-0.3 (Fig. 6) show a highly uniform distribution of core elements like Zr, Al, P, and O; Li distribution could be shown due to instrument limitation. In addition, the atomic percentage of elements for the optimized solid electrolytes, obtained via EDS analysis, are shown in Fig. 6(e, j, o), as an inset table. No impurity elemental peaks were observed for the optimized electrolyte samples. The HR-TEM image for OA-0.3 is shown in Fig. 7. Figure 7a shows a clear distribution of lattice fringes with a fringe width of 0.267 nm, indicating that the sample exhibits crystalline nature well matched with the XRD analysis. Furthermore, the EDS mapping analysis results obtained from the HR-TEM image (Fig. 7b–f) show the distributions of Al, Zr, P, and O, respectively (due to instrument limitation of HR-TEM, the Li element mapping could not be shown in this analysis). These results are well-matched with EDS analysis obtained from SEM-EDS.
The room-temperature Raman spectra of the optimized LAZP samples are shows in Fig. 8. Generally, the identified modes in the frequency range 900–1200 cm−1 are ascribed to the ν1 and ν3 stretching vibrations of PO4 tetrahedra, and those in the 400–650 cm−1 range are assigned to ν2 and ν4 bending vibrations of PO4 tetrahedra. Furthermore, the vibration modes observed below 400 cm−1 correspond to the translations of Li and Zr ions and translations and librations of PO4 [28]. Table 1 shows the phonon modes with the observed peak frequencies for the optimized solid electrolytes. The spectra show no distinctive changes in phonon modes at the Zr-site for AA-0.2, NA-0.6, and OA-0.3. However, for the NA-0.6 sample, all the phonon modes in the frequency range 900– 1200 cm−1 are combined, and in the low-frequency range, few modes disappeared or became too weak to be observed, indicating that the annealing environment influenced the structure of the solid electrolytes. Furthermore, wavenumber peak shift was observed when the annealing environment was varied. Peak broadening in the higher-frequency region specified that the PO4 tetrahedra are distorted and distortion increased on varying the process environments. Moreover, the doping and annealing environment influence the internal phonon modes, indicating that the prepared sample is distorted upon doping at the Zr-site [1]. This distortion clearly affects the internal stretching and bending vibrations of PO4. Similar reports have been published in the literature [1, 28].
The difference in ionic radii of Al3+ and Zr4+ may result in distortion of the octahedra, which may in turn lead to distortion in PO4 tetrahedra. The shifts observed (Δω) in the bending and stretching phonon vibration modes are ~ 4 and 2 cm−1, respectively. The change in the frequency of the stretching mode is almost half of that of bending modes, signifying that the bending vibration modes are more susceptible to doping. Moreover, the bending vibration modes (ν2 and ν4) are less localized than the stretching vibration (ν1 and ν3) modes for PO4 tetrahedra. Therefore, the bending modes are more sensitive.
The FT-IR spectra of the optimized samples (AA-0.2, NA0.6, and OA-0.3) are shown in Fig. S8. As per literature survey, the PO43− polyanion (ν1–ν4) vibrations are split into various components due to the correlation effect [29]. The ν1 and ν3 modes are associated with the symmetric and antisymmetric stretching vibrations of the P–O b o n d s , r e s p e c t i v e ly, while ν2 and ν4 are related to the O–P–O symmetric and antisymmetric bending modes, respectively, with slight contributions from the P vibration and well separated from each other. Table 2 shows the observed IR band assignments. In this study, the symmetric stretching vibration-related modes (ν1) are observed between 965 and 970 cm−1. The peak assigned to the asymmetric vibration of PO43− is observed at 1054 cm−1 for the NA-0.6 sample. [30]. The antisymmetric stretching vibration (ν4) mode is observed between 625 and 632 cm−1. Additional bands are identified between 712 and 736 cm−1. These bands are assigned to the antisymmetric and symmetric stretching modes of the P-O-P bridges. The peaks assigned to stretching vibrations of water molecules were observed between 2980 and 3000 cm−1. Furthermore, the peaks associated with −CH2− and C=O stretching vibrations are observed at 2901 and 1398 cm−1, respectively, in all the samples [31, 32]. No significant changes were observed for the bonds in the optimized solid electrolytes.
XPS analysis was conducted for the optimized samples of each batch (AA-0.2, NA-0.6, and OA-0.3) to investigate their chemical compositions and electronic structures. The XPS spectra of the optimized samples (Fig. S9(a)) show only the presence of core elements of LAZP, such as Li, Al, Zr, P, and O. The peaks of Li1s, Zr4p, Zr3d, Zr3p, Zr3s, Al2p, P2p, and O1s were located at 54.81, 31.03, 183.24, 333.91, 347.02, 433.92 eV, 74.90 eV, 134.14 eV, and 530.62 eV, respectively, which designated the core elements in the LAZP electrolyte. No impurity peaks were observed except the reference peak of C1s, indicating that the samples exhibit high purity. Variation in atomic percentage was observed with variation in Al content; the corresponding atomic percentages for the optimized samples are shown in the inset of Fig. S9(a). Furthermore, the core level spectra of Li2p, Zr3d, Al2p, P2p, and O1s for the optimized samples in each batch confirmed the formation LAZP (Fig. S10-S13). Figs. S9(b–d) show the Li2p corelevel spectra of AA-0.2, NA-0.6, and OA-0.3. The fitted Li1s core-level spectra of the optimized LAZP samples are resolved into only one major peak at a binding energy of ~ 54.85 ± 0.4 eV (Table S2). A similar binding energy for Li1s in dimethyl sulfoxide and acetonitrile in Li-O2 batteries was reported [33, 34]. The fitted Al2p core-level spectra of the optimized samples are shown in Fig. S10. The fitted Al2p core-level spectra of AA-0.2 were resolved into two major peaks at 75.37 and 76.79 eV (Fig. S10(a)), which can be assigned to Al3+ and aluminum suboxide [35]. The fitted Al2p core-level spectra of NA-0.6 and OA-0.3 could be resolved into only one major peak at ~ 75.14 ± 0.2 eV, attributed to Al3+ (Table S2). No aluminum suboxide peak was observed in these samples, probably due to the samples being annealed in specified environments. The experimentally measured binding energies for Al2p are well matched with reported values [36, 37]. Fig. S11 shows the XPS core-level spectra of Zr3d for AA0.2, NA-0.6, and OA-0.3 solid electrolytes. For all the optimized samples, the Zr3d spectrum was resolved into two major peaks, except for AA-0.2. Zirconium suboxide peaks were observed in AA-0.2 solid electrolyte, probably due to the annealing the sample in normal atmospheric. The major peaks at 183.15, 184.94, 183.03, 185.19, 182.96, and 185.14 eV were attributed to the Zr3d spin-orbit splitting components (Table S2) ( Z r 3 d5/2 and Zr3d3/2). These characteristic peaks confirm that the Zr3d is in the Zr4+ oxidation state. The occurrence of Zr4+ oxidation state accomplishes an electrochemically stable with Li in oxides containing ZrO6 octahedral [38]. The binding energies achieved for Zr3d are consistent with reported values [3, 39]. Fitted P2p core-level XPS spectra of the optimized samples are shown in Fig. S12. T h e P2p peaks are resolved into two major peaks corresponding to P2p3/2 and P2p1/2, the observed binding energies for which are shown in Table S2. The peaks located at lower binding energies of 133.33, 133.03, and 133.08 eV are related to the P2p3/2 components, while the peaks at 135.33, 134.03, and 134.01 eV are assigned to P2p1/2, confirming the existence of P5+ ions in LAZP [39]. These obtained binding energies of P2p peaks were well-matched with reported values [3, 34].The fitted O1s core-level XPS spectra for the optimized samples are shown in Fig. S13(a–c). The O1s core level can be resolved into two major peaks; the observed binding energies for lattice O1s are shown in Table S2. The binding energies of ~ 531.12 ± 0.1 eV and ~ 532.24 eV correspond to lattice oxygen and adsorbed oxygen, respectively [39]. All the achieved binding energies of O1s are consistent with reported values [39].
The N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms of the optimized solid electrolytes in each batch were measured at 77 K (Fig. S14). The optimized solid electrolyte samples show a hysteresis loop in the adsorption-desorption isotherms, suggesting the presence of a microporous structure. However, the adsorption-desorption isotherms of solid electrolytes nearly overlap, demonstrating relatively poor porosity behavior, corresponding to type IV isotherms [40]. The obtained parameters of BET surface area, pore volume, and average pore size are given Table S3. The inset of Fig. S14 shows the variation of pore diameter against pore volume: Pore diameters of 155.010, 168.985, and 188.889 Å were observed for AA0.2, NA-0.6, OA-0.3, respectively. Low porosities of solid electrolytes have been achieved in this study, which may improve the boundary conductivity [13]. Le et al. [41] a l s o r e ported similar pore sizes for a perovskite-structured Al-doped Li–La–Ti–O solid electrolyte.
NASICON-type Li1+xAlxZr2-x(PO4)3 (0.0 ≤ × ≤ 0.9) solid electrolyte was successfully synthesized in various annealing environments using a solid-state reaction, and the effect of Al dopant and annealing environment on structure, grain boundary resistance, and ionic conductivity were systematically investigated. Room-temperaturestable rhombohedral frameworks of LZP and LAZP solid-state electrolytes were observed in all the annealing environments studied. Various analytical techniques were used to prove that the Al3+ dopant was uniformly distributed throughout the LAZP electrolytes. The XPS results confirmed that Al3+ replaced the Zr4+ in the host structure. The annealing environment effect on ν1 and ν3 v i brational modes and ν2 and ν4 bending modes of PO4 tetrahedra was observed. The substitution of Al3+ in the host structure reduced the grain boundary resistance, and thus, increased the ionic conductivity of LAZP more than that of LZP. The highest diffusivity of 1.36 × 10−7 cm2 S−1 was obtained for Li1.3Al0.3Zr1.7(PO4)3 solid electrolyte synthesized in oxygen environment.