In order to understand the mechanism resulting in the high flexibility of the NZP skeleton in accommodating  cations  of  varying  sizes,  we  have  carried  out  a  series  of  NPT-Monte  Carlo  simulations  on  MZr2P3O12,  where  M=Li+,  Na+, K+, Rb+ and Cs+. Anisotropic changes in the lattice parameters a contracts and c expands with the size of the  cation substituted, in agreement with previous experimental reports. It is observed that  the building polyhedral blocks,  ZrO6  octahedra  and  PO4  tetrahedra,  of  the  framework  do  not  suffer  significant  modifications,  suggesting  variation  in  lattice  interlinked.   

NASICONs (acronym for  Na-SuperIonic  CONductors)  forms  large  family  solids  having  high  thermal  and  chemical  stabilities,  with  potential  technological  nuclear  waste  immobilization,  as  refractory  materials,  low  thermal  expansion  ceramics,  and  as  solid  electrolytes.  The  best  studied  NaZr2P3O12  that  is  prototypical  of  NASICON  solids  stabilizing  in  the  rhombohedral  three  dimensional  framework  structure  of  ZrO6-octahedra  sharing  corners  with  PO4-tetrahedra.  The  corner  sharing  of  the  polyhedra  makes  the  NASICON  framework  (referred  to  as  the  NZP-skeleton)  highly  fluxional  allowing  for  wide  ranges  of  chemical  substitutions  [2]. The framework flexibility is held responsible for  their low thermal expansivity, and  is also one of the  key  factors  contributing  to  the  enhanced  ionic  conduction in these solids.  

Several  experimental  reports  are  available  in  the  literature  on  the  very-low  and  the  anisotropic  nature  of  thermal  expansivity  of  NZP  skeletons  [3].  Alamo  and coworkers have proposed [4] a structural model,  which  allows  for  the  coupled  rotations  of  the  structural polyhedra without significant distortions of  the  polyhedra  itself,  provides,  arguably,  the  best  of  explanations  we  have  on  the  anomalous  thermal  expansivity  of  these  solids.  However  many  an  underlying assumptions of the structural model, such  as the rigidity of the polyhedra, the nature as well as the  extent  of  polyhedral  rotations,  lacks  direct  experimental  to  unavailability  of  efficient  microscopic  experimental  probes.  Atomistic  computer  simulation  techniques  such  as  the  one  employed  here  makes  a  powerful  complementary tool in situations like this.  

We  report  preliminary  results  based  on  Monte  Carlo  investigation  of  the  structural  changes  in  the  NZP-skeleton  upon  substitution  of  alkali  ions  of  varying sizes. The ability of the interatomic potential  in reproducing the gross experimental results on NZP  solids  are  critically  examined.  Validity  of  some  of  the underlying assumptions of the structural model of  Alamo are also examined. 

The  NPT-ensemble,  variable-shape  and  -size,  Monte Carlo simulations (NPT-MC) employed in the  present study follows the procedure described in Ref.  5.  simulation  investigations  on  Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12  by  Padma  Kumar and Yashonath [6], the present study employs  inter-atomic potentials of the form, nij i j ij ij q q A C U.

Where qi and σi  are repectively the charge and ionic  radius  of    ith  ion.  rij  is  the  inter-atomic  distance  and  Aij,  Cij  are  the  overlap-repulsive  energy  and  dispersion terms respectively between ion pairs i and j.  These  parameters  are  as  in  Ref.  6.  The rhombohedral simulation cell includes of 3×3×1  units  cells,  each  containing  6  formula  units  of  MZr2P3O12.  The  atomic  coordinates  and  lattice  parameters  for  the  starting  configurations  of  all  MZr2P3O12 systems (where M is Li+, Na+, K+, Rb+ or Cs+)  are  chosen  as  that  of  the  X-ray  structure  of  NaZr2P3O12  at 600 K (unit cell parameters: aR = 8.80  Å  and  cR  =  22.83  Å).  Simulations  are  performed  at  600  K  for  different  alkali  ion  containing  systems  all  at  1  atmospheric  pressure.  40000  MC  steps  were  dedicated  for  equilibration  and  then  another  40000  MC steps for averaging.   

The  rhombohedral  cells  parameters  for  ion  substituted  NZP-skeletons,  different  alkali  calculated over 40000 MC steps at 600 K, are plotted  against  the  ionic  radii  in  Figure  1.  The  c-parameter  increases  while  the  a-parameter  decreases  and  in  lesser  extent,  with  the  size  of  the  alkali  ions.  The  results  are  in  excellent  agreement  with  previous  experimental  studies  [7].  Statistical  error  bar  computed by the block average procedure [5] is also  given. In all cases the average cell angles α, β, γ were  less  than  0.1%  from  their  respective  rhombohedral  values.  

Table 1 lists Zr-O and P-O bond-lengths for  all  systems,  together  with  M-O  distances,  all  averaged over MC steps at 600K.  It shows that Zr-O  and  P-O  bond  lengths  remain  nearly  constant,  while  significant increase in M-O distance is observed with       the  size  of  the  alkali  ion  (M).  Larger  cations  exert  pressure  on  its  6  nearest  oxygens  in  the  octahedral  configuration  resulting  in  the  increases  of  M-O  distance.  The  behavior  can  be  traced  back  to  the  largely  ionic  character  of  the  M-O  interaction  contrary  to  the  covalent  nature  of  Zr-O  and  P-O  bonds. Table 2 lists some of the select bond angles of the  framework.  The  O-Zr-O,  O-P-O  bond  angles  indicate that the shape and size of the PO4 and ZrO6    polyhedra are not significantly affected by the size of    the  alkali  ion.  However  noticeable  changes  in  the  inter-connectivity  of  the  polyhedra  are  reflected  in  the  variation  of  Zr-O-P  angles  with  the  size  of  the  alkali ion. 

To conclude, the interatomic  potential  employed  reproduces  the  anisotropic  variation  of  lattice  parameters  with  alkali  ion  substitution,  in  excellent  agreement  with  the  experimental  results.  The  structural  analysis  suggests  that  the  framework  polyhedra  remain  fairly  rigid  while  noticeable  modification  in  their  interconnectivity  is  observed.  Significant increase in the size of the M-O6 octahedra  is  observed  with  the  size  of  the  alkali  ion.  The  plausible  role  of  coupled  rotations  of  the  polyhedra  in  is  presently  under  investigation.                 

The authors acknowledge financial support through a  grant from Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati.  
