This paper presents a micro solid electrolyte CO2 gas sensor in which Li2CO3, Li2TiO3-TiO2 serves as sensing and reference electrodes respectively, and the Li3PO4 film acts as  the electrolyte. The sensor was constructed in the sequent layers of O2, CO2, Li2CO3, Pt | Li3PO4 | Pt, Li2TiO3-TiO2, O2, CO2 on the Al2O3 substrate by MEMS process. Experimental results indicate that the micro solid-electrolyte CO2 gas sensor has a relatively rapid speed of response. By discussions, we may find that the improved performance will be realized by optimizing the primary parameters of the sensor. 

The atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2) is increasing continuously because of the rapid industrialization. It is well known that over-emission of such gas can bring about serious global effects. Many researchers have paid much attention on how to detect and reduce air pollution arising from various fields like industry, automobiles, etc. By now, control of the green house effects and development of low-carbon economy becomes new challenges for human beings, and all of these put forth requirement for developing the new CO2 sensors which not only have the good serving properties but also should be low cost [1, 2, 3]. The CO2 sensors presently in the industry are mainly grouped into the infrared, the capacitive and the electrochemical by their working principles. The infrared absorption CO2 detection sensor or system has been widely used for its rapid response and high accuracy. However, its complex structure makes such kind of detecting system difficult to set up and maintain, resulting in very high cost. The traditional electrochemical sensors, especially the solid electrolyte CO2 sensors, are also widely used since they are low cost and high sensitivity for monitoring environmental pollutants. CO2 gas sensor based on the typical electrolyte-Na+ conductor (NASICON), has excellent performance. However, its low heating efficiency, high power consumption, and complex preparation process limits its applications. A solid electrolyte gas sensor is usually made up of three components, those are, the ionic conductor, the sensing or auxiliary phase and the reference electrode. In alkali metal salt sensors, lithium electrolyte based sensors are promising owing to their faster speed and lower water reactive nature of the lithium ion than any other alkali metal [4, 5]. Most of the commercial solid electrolyte sensors are fabricated by bulk materials and in stack-type. Some researchers tried to use thick film technology in the solid-electrolyte fabrication [6, 7]. Some researchers also tried to prepare the electrolyte and the sensing materials by the thin film process [8, 9]. However, the qualitative factors of these sensors are still need to improve further.  This paper presents a micro solid-electrolyte CO2 sensor, which was prepared by MEMS technologies. In the micro CO2 gas sensor, thin film Li3PO4 solid electrolyte was deposited by using the thermal evaporation method instead of bulk type Li3PO4, thin film Pt reactive electrodes was   patterned by a steel plate mask and Pt sputtering, , and Li2TiO3-TiO2was sintered as the reference electrode. After soldering the wire, the sensor chips were finished and their primary performances wastested. Discussion brings forth the methodologies of how to miniaturize size, prolong life and reduce cost of the micro CO2 sensor.   

In the Micro CO2 gas sensor, the sensing and reference electrodes were actually patterned by the thick film process. At the beginning, the Li3PO4 films (thickness: 650nm) were deposited using a thermal evaporator onto Al2O3 substrate with size 20mm×25mm. During deposition, the applied chamber pressure was 2.7×10-3Pa, power was 3.1V×177A and the deposition time was 30min. Since the heat treatment can improve the quality of film, the as-deposited thin films were sintered at 800℃ for 2 hr in air. The grain size and distribution of the film were observed with a scanning electron microscope (JEOL JSM-6390A). Then, in accordance with the schematic diagram of sensor structure, shown in Fig.1, two Pt electrodes were sputtered on the electrolyte thin film directly by placing a steel plate (thickness: 50µm) with designed pattern as the mask. Table 1 is the parameters of sputtering Pt electrodes process. Li2TiO3 and TiO2 (5mol %) were grinded in a ceramic mortar for 1hr and mixed with the terpineol. The reference layer was fabricated by printing the paste on Pt electrode with the thickness of 10µm and being sintered at 700℃for 1 hr. In the similar way, the Li2CO3 paste was prepared. Then coated the working layer about 10µm thickness and sintered it at 600℃ for 1 hr. Finally, Pt-wire was attached for test the sensor with silver conductive adhesive. The EMF (electromotive force) of the sensor was tested by a two-probe FLUKE 8845A high precision digital multimeter. The multimeter is connected to a computer through FLUKE VIEWER software for data acquisition.  

By working principle, the micro CO2 gas sensor structure may be depicted as a cell as follow:  O2, CO2, Li2CO3, Pt | Li3PO4 | Pt, Li2TiO3-TiO2, O2, CO2.The behavior of the sensor was defined by the Nerst equation [10]: E =E0RT/nF ln ρ (CO2). Where E is the EMF, E0 the EMF for a given ρ(CO2) at the standard condition, n the number of reaction electrons and F the faraday constant. The sensing reaction of the sensor can be denoted by the equation [11] : Li2CO3 ⇔ 2Li+ + 2e+ CO2 + ½ O2.On the reference side, 2Li+ + 2e+ TiO2 + ½ O2 ⇔ Li2TiO3.And the overall reaction for the sensor can be written as : Li2CO3+TiO2⇔ Li2TiO3+CO2.

From the equation (3), (4) one may find that the oxygen partial pressure or chemical potential of the oxygen is the same at both the electrodes. Therefore, the overall reaction only depends on the CO2 partial pressure. Fig.2 shows the SEM images of the surface morphology of Li3PO4 electrolyte thin film with different temperature heat treatment. The pictures (a), (b) show the Li3PO4 electrolyte thin film sintered at 700℃ and 800℃for 2hr in air respectively. Observed from the images,  the grain size and distribution become better when the temperature rises to 800℃. Compared with bulk-type Li3PO4,  film-type electrolyte has much denser structure and fewer voids. As we know, the ion is more easily passing the crystal than grain boundaries and the ion conductance in the solid electrolyte material directly affects the sensor’s response speed. So to acquire good performance of the sensor, the  Li3PO4 electrolyte film should be processed by  the appropriate heat treatment. Fig.3 shows the EMF change of CO2 sensors that processed by different heat treatment. The operating temperature is 430℃, realized in the chamber of a furnace. Picture (a) and (b) indicate that the sensor with Li3PO4 film sintered at 800℃ has better response characteristics and response time is much shorter. This is in accordance with analysis above, that is, the characteristics of CO2 gas sensor will be improved if the optimized heat treatment is applied to the thin film electrolyte. In addition, because it adopts film-type electrolyte, the micro sensor also lowers the consumption power of the sensor efficiently.    

The micro CO2 gas sensor has been developed successfully on the Al2O3 substrate using MEMS technologies. By comparing and analyzing the SEM images, we may find that the film-type Li3PO4 is much denser than the bulk-type Li3PO4, and furthermore, the response characteristics and response speed of the sensor would be very good when the grain of electrolyte film was large and well distributed. Finally, one feasible method of improving performance of the gas sensor is appropriate heat treatment. These results provide valuable guideline  for developing the micro CO2 gas sensor using film type solid-electrolyte of Li3PO4 in future work. 

This work was supported by the “New Century Talents Scheme” Grant of China’s Ministry of Education (NCET-09-0643) and the “National High Technology Research and Development Program” Grant of China (2009AA04Z330).
