Lithium vanadium ﬂuorophosphate, LiVPO4F, was utilized as both cathode and anode for fabrication of a symmetric lithium-ion LiVPO4F//LiVPO4F cell. The electrochemical evolution of the LiVPO4F//LiVPO4F cell with the commonly used organic electrolyte LiPF6/EC-DMC has shown that this cell works as a secondary battery, but exhibits poor durability at room temperature and absolutely does not work at increased operating temperatures. To improve the performance and safety of this symmetric battery, we substituted a non-ﬂammable ionic liquid (IL) LiBF4/EMIBF4 electrolyte for the organic electrolyte. The symmetric battery using the IL electrolyte was examined galvanostatically at different rates and operating temperatures within the voltage range of 0.01–2.8 V. It was demonstrated that the IL-based symmetric cell worked as a secondary battery with a Coulombic efﬁciency of 77% at 0.1 mA cm−2 and 25 ◦C. It was also found that the use of the IL electrolyte instead of the organic one resulted in the general reduction of the ﬁrst discharge capacity by about 20–25% but provided much more stable behavior and a longer cycle life. Moreover, an increase of the discharge capacity of the IL-based symmetric battery up to 120 mA h g−1 was observed when the operating temperature was increased up to 80 ◦C at 0.1 mA cm−2. The obtained electrochemical behavior of both symmetric batteries was conﬁrmed by complex-impedance measurements at different temperatures and cycling states. The thermal stability of LiVPO4F with both the IL and organic electrolytes was also examined.

Recently, room-temperature ionic liquids (RTILs) have come to be considered acceptable media for various chemical and electrochemical applications due to their attractive properties such as wide electrochemical window, good ionic conductivity, high chemical loyalty, negligible vapor pressure and non-ﬂammability. In particular, RTILs, usually called as ILs, have been widely studied as agents for extraction and separation processes, organic syntheses and catalysis, as well as potential electrolytes for energy storage devices and electroplating [1–5]. ILs were ﬁrst used as electrolytes in lithium-ion batteries more than two decades ago [6]. The main purpose of using them was to address the limitations of conventional organic solvents, especially their ﬂammability, and as a result to improve the batteries’ durability and safety, extend their operation temperature ranges, and enhance their power and energy densities. Special interest in different practical applications of ILs has developed ever since the moisture-stable compound 1-ethyl-3methylimidazolium tetraﬂuoroborate (EMIBF4) was discovered [7]. However, the reduction potentials of EMIBF4 and many similar ILs, some of them are shown in Table 1, are too high to be employed in batteries using Li-metal anodes. One of the most promising ways to avoid the reduction of cations in such ILs is to employ anode materials possessing a higher reduction potential than that of metallic lithium [12]. For instance, the lithiated metal oxides, Li4Ti5O12 [12] and ␤-LiAl [13] were employed as anodes in an EMIBF4-based electrolyte. Nevertheless, one of the important problems still to be solved is the discovery of an alternative anode material for an IL-based electrolyte with high reduction potential.

NASICON-type Lithium Vanadium Phosphate Li3V2(PO4)3 has been identiﬁed as a useful cathode material for lithium metal and lithium-ion battery applications [14]. In recent studies, monoclinic Li3V2(PO4)3 demonstrated a cathode performance with two plateaus at around 3.8–4.1 and 1.75 V vs. Li/Li+, associated with V+4/V+3 and V+3/V+2 redox couples, respectively [15–17]. Such properties allow the use of Li3V2(PO4)3 as an anode as well as a cathode. Indeed, quite recently, in our group, this unique ability of Li3V2(PO4)3 was successfully employed in the construction of a symmetric lithium-ion secondary battery, Li3V2(PO4)3//Li3V2(PO4)3 [15]. The performance of the Li3V2(PO4)3 symmetric battery was examined with an IL electrolyte based on EMIBF4 and, also, an organic electrolyte with EC-DMC (1:1) solvent. Recently, the structural and lithium insertion properties of lithium vanadium ﬂuorophosphate, LiVPO4F, have been proposed and described in detail by Barkers’ group [18–24]. LiVPO4F has been identiﬁed as isostructural with the naturally occurring minerals travorite, LiFePO4·OH [25], and amblygonite, LiAlPO4 (OH, F) [26], crystallizing with a triclinic structure (space group P1). The LiVPO4F structure comprises a 3D framework built up from [PO4] tetrahedra and [VO4F2] octahedra with shared oxygen atoms [22,23]. In this framework structure, there are two crystallographic positions within which the lithium ions are statistically distributed [27]. It was reported that LiVPO4F demonstrated a reversible lithium extraction/insertion reaction based on the V3+/V4+ redox couple operating at around 4.2 V vs. Li/Li+, which is about 0.3 V higher than that for the above-mentioned Li3V2(PO4)3, because of the positive impact of the electronegative ﬂuorine atom on the induc3− polyanion in the LiVPO4F structure. More tion effect of the PO4 recently, investigations have established an additional lithium insertion reaction at around 1.8 V vs. Li/Li+ associated with the V2+/V3+ redox couple. This allowed the consideration of LiVPO4F as a potential anode material as well as a cathode. Based on that, it was reported on the fabrication of a symmetric LiVPO4F//LiVPO4F lithium-ion battery, in which [1M] LiPF6/EC-DMC (2:1 by weight) was utilized as the electrolyte [21]. Due to their relatively low operating potentials of about 2.4 V, the Li3V2(PO4)3and LiVPO4Fbased symmetric cells can provide only moderate energy density. However, there are clearly advantages from a commercial standpoint, since the as-made lithium-ion cell may be charged in either direction. Furthermore, such symmetric cells should possess good safety characteristics and a low price in a view of the elimination of cost for Li metal. More importantly, since the low redox potentials (compared to the V2+/V3+ redox couple) of Li3V2(PO4)3 (−1.25 V vs. Ag+/Ag) and LiVPO4F (−1.2 V vs. Ag+/Ag) lie within the electrochemical window of the ILs shown in the Table 1, these polyanionic compounds might be candidates for alternative anode materials working in combination with an IL-based electrolyte possessing high reduction potential.

In the present study, we report on the fabrication and evaluation of a LiVPO4F//LiVPO4F symmetric battery using an IL-based electrolyte. Special attention is paid to improvement of the battery safety by substitution of the commonly used organic electrolyte, LiPF6/EC-DMC, with a non-ﬂammable ionic liquid one, LiBF4/EMIBF4.

The LiVPO4F active material was prepared via a two-step synthesis method, described in detail by Barker, Saidi and Swoyer [20], involving vanadium(III) phosphate, VPO4, as an intermediate phase. The VPO4 was prepared using the carbothermal reduction (CTR) method [28] based on the C→ CO carbothermal reaction mechanism, in accordance with the following reaction as: 0.5 V2O5 + NH4H2PO4 + C → VPO4 + NH3 + 1.5 H2O + CO.

The precursors, V2O5 (99.0%, Kanto Chemical Co., Inc., Japan), NH4H2PO4 (99.0%, Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd., Japan) and acetylene black (DENKA Co. Ltd., Japan) were ﬁnely mixed by ball milling for 4 h at 200 rpm and then pelletized. To enable complete vanadium reduction and to ensure the presence of residual carbon in the product phase, a 25% mass excess of carbon was used over the stoichiometric conditions based on Reaction (1).

An alumina crucible with the precursor mixture was placed into a temperature-controlled tubular furnace and heated up to an ultimate reaction temperature of 750 ◦C at 2 ◦C/min heating and cooling rates. The annealing was held for a dwell period of 4 h under a ﬂowing argon atmosphere.

In the second stage of preparation, the obtained VPO4, which was predominantly black in color (consistent with the presence of residual carbon black), was further reacted with LiF to yield the single-phase LiVPO4F product LiF + VPO4 → LiVPO4F.

The mixture of LiF and VPO4 was placed in a quartz tube sealed under a vacuum in order to avoid vanadium oxidation. The Reaction (2) was carried out at 750 ◦C for a dwell period of 15 min with heating rate of 2 ◦C/min. After calcination, the tube was quenched by quickly immersing it into a cold bath, to produce LiVPO4F as a single-phase.

Structural characterization of the synthesized VPO4 and LiVPO4F products was carried out by means of powder X-ray diffraction using a Rigaku RINT2100HLR/PC with Cu K␣ radiation ( 2) = 1.54056 nm) in the 2 range of 10◦–80◦ with a step of 0.2◦.

Electrochemical Li+ intercalation/extraction was carried out using coin-type cells (type R2032 made from stainless steel SUS316). The symmetric coin cells were assembled using LiVPO4F as the active materials for both anode and cathode. In order to separate the anodic and cathodic compartments, a polypropylene separator (Celgard 3501) was used. The cathode as well as the anode was fabricated by mixing the active material (LiVPO4F) with acetylene black (AB) and polytetraﬂuoroethylene (PTFE) binder at a weight ratio of 85:10:5. The mixtures were rolled into a sheet and punched into pellets of about 10 mm in diameter. The pellets were further dried in an oven at 110 ◦C for 12 h in vacuum. Two types of electrolytes were employed for fabrication of the symmetric cells: organic [1M] LiPF6 in EC-DMC (1:1) (volume ratio) and IL [1M] LiBF4 in EMIBF4. The fabrication of the coin-type cells was carried out in a glove box ﬁlled with Ar (moisture and O2 contents less than 1 ppm).

The possibility of using the LiVPO4F material as a cathode as well as anode was estimated by a quasi-open circuit voltage (QOCV) measurement. For the QOCV analysis, conventional metallic lithium half-cell construction was employed at room temperature. The Li/LiPF6/EC-DMC/LiVPO4F cell was investigated in two different potential ranges: beginning with charging from 2.5 to 5.2 V vs. Li/Li+ and starting from discharge from 2.5 to 1.3 V vs. Li/Li+. To minimize the kinetic effects, QOCV measurements were carried out using intermittent charging/discharging [29] of the metallic lithium cells, so-called half-cells, as follows: a current of 0.2 mA cm−2 was supplied for 30 min, corresponding to 0.05 moles of Li per mole of active cathode material. This was followed by a rest period of 30 min before the next charge/discharge. The charging/discharging was continued until one mole of Li was extracted/intercalated from/in the LiVPO4F electrode.

Electrochemical measurements of the LiVPO4F symmetric cells were made galvanostatically at various current densities (0.1–0.8 mA cm−2) and temperatures (25 and 80 ◦C) with a chargedischarge cycler (BTS2400W, Nagano Electric Co., Japan). In each cycle test, a constant current charge followed by a constant voltage charge (CCCV mode) was employed.

Li+-ion transfer at the interface between the electrode and electrolyte was studied by AC impedance spectroscopy using an impedance analyzer (Autolab/FRA). Complex-impedance measurements were performed in the frequency range of 0.1–10 MHz at various operating temperatures and cycle states of the LiVPO4F symmetric cells.

The thermal stability of the charged LiVPO4F electrode (measured in contact with controlled amounts of the electrolytes) was examined using a TG/DSC differential scanning calorimeter (Rigaku Thermo plus TG8110, Rigaku, Japan). The mixture of the delithiated LiVPO4F sample with the electrolyte was packed in a stainless steel pan, which was then crimp-sealed in a glove box ﬁlled with Ar. In this case, no leakage occurred, as conﬁrmed by the TG data measured simultaneously with the DSC measurements. All DSC experiments were carried out from 25 to 400 ◦C at a heating rate of 5 K min−1.

The vanadium contents in the LiVPO4F electrodes were analyzed using atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS). Each sample was prepared by dilution of about 30 mg of the LiVPO4F composite electrode material in 50 ml of nitric acid. After that, 10 ml of the obtained solution was diluted to 50 ml with distiller water. The AAS observation was carried out using a polarized Zeeman (Z5310) atomic absorption spectrophotometer (Hitachi Ltd., Japan). A vanadium hollow-cathode lamp (Hitachi High-technologies Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) operating at 10 mA, which provided a 318.4 nm line, was employed.

The VPO4 as the intermediate phase was prepared via the CTR method that reduces V2O5 to VIII in the presence of phosphate. Recently, Makimura, Cahill, Iriyama, Goward and Nazar [30] reported that, owing to its nanoparticulate dimensions and higher surface area, amorphous VPO4 is much more effective as a precursor for ﬂuorophosphate compound preparation. In the present work, the annealing temperature of the precursors was selected purposely to complete the Reaction (1) and avoid crystallization of the VPO4 compound. XRD analysis of the VPO4 powder (not shown here) sintered at 750 ◦C conﬁrmed that this material was purely amorphous.

Fig. 1 shows XRD patterns collected for the prepared LiVPO4F samples under different experimental conditions. When stoichiometric amounts of VPO4 and LiF were heated at 750 ◦C for 15 min using heating and cooling rates of 2 ◦C/min under a ﬂowing Ar atmosphere, the obtained LiVPO4F powder contained the impurity of monoclinic-phase Li3V2(PO4)3 induced by the loss of VF3 from the reaction mixture due to sublimation [22] as detected by XRD pattern (Fig. 1a). The same impurity has been observed and reported by Reddy et al. [31] and Zhou et al. [32]. In order to complete Reaction (2) and avoid this minor product formation, the LiVPO4F material was prepared by reaction of the amorphous VPO4 with 1 mol excess amount of LiF under the same conditions. In this case, the sintered LiVPO4F was almost pure single-phase material, accompanied by small traces of LiF (Fig. 1b). It was made an attempt to reﬁne the LiVPO4F sample by reducing the fraction of LiF by means of extraction in N-methyl formamide (NMF) solution [30], but the diffraction peaks of LiF did not disappear. Recently, it has been shown that ﬂuorophosphates, such as LiVPO4F, form quickly for a few minutes but then decompose into Li3V2(PO4)3, Li3PO4, LiF and V2O3 on heating due to their metastability [30]. To prevent such a regression, quick quenching of the synthesized LiVPO4F was carried out. For that, the synthesis of LiVPO4F was performed in a sealed quartz vacuum tube, as described in the Experimental section. The XRD results (Fig. 1c) showed no signs of the above-mentioned impurities in the quenched sample and allowed identiﬁcation of the LiVPO4F product as a compound with triclinic structure using space group P1. The cell parameters for the quenched LiVPO4F were a = 5.16(2) ˚A, b = 5.35(2) ˚A, c = 7.19 ˚A, ˛ = 72.505◦, ˇ = 106.525◦,  4) = 81.284◦, and cell volume = 172.16 ˚A3. For comparison, the XRD pattern reported in [20] for the single-phase LiVPO4F based on a triclinic structure (P1 space group; a = 5.173(8) ˚A, b = 5.309(6) ˚A, c = 7.250(3) ˚A, ˛ = 72.479(4)◦, ˇ = 107.767(7)◦,  4) = 81.375(7)◦, V = 174.35 ˚A3) are also depicted in Fig. 1d.

As already mentioned, LiVPO4F has two redox electric potentials based on the V4+/V3+ and V3+/V2+ redox couples, which offers the possibility of using LiVPO4F for the cathode as well as anode. QOCV measurement was carried out to determine the phase transition potentials of those redox couples and the optimal charge cutoff voltage for the prospective symmetric LiVPO4F//LiVPO4F cell. Towards this purpose, two typical metallic lithium half-cells, Li/LiPF6/EC-DMC/LiVPO4F, were fabricated and examined. The QOCV for the ﬁrst half-cell was made starting from lithium extraction by interrupting the current (0.2 mA cm−2) after a predetermined time (30 min) of charging, in high potential range from 2.5 to 5.2 V vs. Li/Li+. The second one was tested starting from lithium insertion in low potential range from 2.5 to 1.3 V vs. Li/Li+. The QOCV curves for both cells are presented in Fig. 2.

As can be seen, the entire QOCV proﬁle has two clear plateaus. One of them appeared upon charging in high potential range at ∼4.2 V (vs. Li/Li+), which corresponds to the reversible extraction of almost 0.9 mole of lithium from the LiVPO4F cathode and was associated with the V4+/V3+ redox couple. The other voltage plateau occurred upon discharging in low potential region at around 1.8 V (vs. Li/Li+) and it was associated with the V3+/V2+ redox couple. It should be noted that the reversible capacity in low potential range corresponded to around 0.64 mole of lithium, which is two-thirds of the capacity determined in high potential range. Thus, based on the correlation of high (cathode) and low (anode) potential parts of the QOCV curve, the optimal quantitative ratio of cathode to anode active materials for the fabrication of symmetric LiVPO4F batteries can be estimated as 1:1.5. Additionally, the optimal charge cutoff voltage for the LiVPO4F//LiVPO4F battery was established at about 2.8 V, while the difference of redox potentials for this kind of battery was estimated as 2.4 V.

Fig. 3 shows the ﬁrst charge and discharge curves (a) and capability (b) of the symmetric battery using the organic electrolyte: (−) LiVPO4F/LiPF6/EC-DMC/LiVPO4F (+). The organic-based symmetric battery was tested within the voltage range of 0.01–2.80 V at 25 ◦C and at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2. The ﬁrst discharge capacity was about 124 mA h g−1, which is around 80% of the LiVPO4F theoretical capacity (155.5 mA h g−1) (Fig. 3a). The reversible capacity of the symmetric cell using the organic electrolyte conforms to a Coulombic efﬁciency of 93%. It should be emphasized that initially this cell worked successfully as a secondary battery, exhibiting good reversibility. However, after the seventh cycle, the battery performance fell drastically to less than 60 mA h g−1 (see Fig. 3b). One plausible explanation for this behavior is the interaction of the LiVPO4F electrode material with the highly acidic LiPF6-based organic electrolyte. It is well known that the interaction of LiPF6 solution with traces of moisture can impart signiﬁcant acidity to this system [33]. Based on similar instabilities encountered for related vanadium oxide phases [34–37], it was considered that in such a highly acidic electrolyte a vanadium-based active material may be particularly prone to dissolution problems likely bring about an irreversible deterioration in cell performance. In addition, a change in color of the LiPF6/EC-DMC organic electrolyte and deterioration of the LiVPO4F electrode (anode, especially) surface after the charge-discharge treatment were visually detected at the battery disassembly. A certain capacity drop was also observed by Barker [20] for the (−) Li/[1M] LiPF6/EC-DMC (2:1)/LiVPO4F (+) battery that was cycled between 1.8 and 2.8 V at 23 ◦C, after the fourth to ﬁfth charge/discharge cycle. In the present work the vanadium content in the LiVPO4F cathode and anode was inspected by AAS before and after the deep cycling of the LiVPO4F//LiVPO4F battery using the organic electrolyte (Section 3.8). Moreover, in comparison with conventional Li//LiVPO4F half-cell test (Fig. 2), the observed irreversible capacity in the LiVPO4F//LiVPO4F full cell might be also partially caused by lower Coulombic efﬁciency of the LiVPO4F anode.

To overcome the high acidity and high reactivity of the LiPF6/EC-DMC organic electrolyte, we substituted a nonﬂammable and more modestly reactive IL-based electrolyte, [1M] LiBF4/EMIBF4. Fig. 4a shows the ﬁrst voltage proﬁle for the (−) LiVPO4F/LiBF4/EMIBF4/LiVPO4F (+) battery under the same experimental conditions, i.e. at 25 ◦C and 0.1 mA cm−2. It is clearly seen that, by analogy with the aforementioned results for the organic-based symmetric battery, the IL-based symmetric cell also worked as a secondary battery, but revealed a large irreversible capacity even during the ﬁrst cycle of charge/discharge. The ﬁrst discharge capacity of this battery was about 93 mA h g−1, which is around 60% of the LiVPO4F theoretical capacity. The Coulombic efﬁciency of the IL-based symmetric battery was about 77%. Hence, the substitution of the organic electrolyte by the IL-based one resulted in the decrease of discharge capacity by about 20–25%. This seems to be attributed to the lower conductivity of the IL-based electrolyte, LiBF4/EMIBF4 (∼7.4 mS cm−1 at 25 ◦C [12,38]), than that of the organic electrolyte, [1M] LiPF6/EC-DMC (1:1) (∼12 mS cm−1 at 25 ◦C [39]). Generally, the lower conductivity of the IL electrolyte is a result of its higher viscosity (∼32 cP at 25 ◦C [12,38]). However, based on the cycle performances obtained for the organic(Fig. 3b) and IL-based symmetric (Fig. 4b) batteries, it may be concluded that the latter cell exhibited much more stable behavior and showed better discharge capacity and capability over twenty cycles than the organic-based battery.

AC impedance spectroscopy is a useful technique for studying the electrode kinetics of electrode materials for Li-ion batteries. The ﬁrst electrochemical impedance study of LiVPO4F cathode against Li-metal counter electrode has been reported by Reddy, Subba Rao, Chowdari [31]. In the present investigation the impedance measurements were performed to examine the electrochemical behavior of the studied symmetric batteries with the organic and IL electrolytes. The typical Nyquist plots of both batteries before cycling (as-assembled) and after 10 charge/discharge cycles at room temperature are depicted in Fig. 5. It can be seen that each of the plots showed two semicircles and an inclined line on a complex plane. The high-frequency limit refers to the bulk electrolyte resistance (Rb). The ﬁrst semicircle (R1) at the high-frequency region can be assigned to the impedance related to the presence of a solid electrolyte interface (SEI) at the electrode/electrolyte boundary [40] or associated with electric contact resistance in the electrode [41,42]. The second semicircle (R2) appearing at the middle-frequency region is derived from the charge-transfer process at the electrode/electrolyte interface. The straight line in the low-frequency region is attributed to the Warburg diffusion associated with the ﬁnite lithium motion in the electroactive material lattice. However, as the impedance measurement was curried out for two electrode cells the observed resistance includes contributions from both the positive and negative electrodes. The equivalent circuit for such cells is, probably, more complex that described above and a rigorous identiﬁcation of a combination of poorly separated arcs is beyond the scope of this work. Of particular interest in the ac impedance spectra is the total cell resistance (Rtotal).

For the as-assembled IL-based symmetric battery (Fig. 5a), its total resistance was larger than that for the organic-based symmetric one (Rtotal IL = 21.3  5) > Rtotal org = 16.7  5)). Probably, all these factors, such as relatively higher electrolyte resistance (Rb IL = 8.56  5) > Rb org = 5.8  5)), higher viscosity, and, hence, poor wettability of the IL-based electrolyte with the electrode active material hinder fast lithium migration and may lead to larger charge transfer resistance at the electrode/electrolyte interface for the IL-based battery compared to the organic-based one.

On the other hand, the impedance data of the organicand IL-based symmetric batteries demonstrated the opposite behavior after 10 charge/discharge cycles, as shown in Fig. 5b. Particularly, the total resistance of the organic-based symmetric battery was found to increase signiﬁcantly. This may be due to the formation of a poorly conducting SEI ﬁlm on the electrode surface in the aggressive organic electrolyte, LiPF6/EC-DMC, and partial loss of the LiVPO4F electroactivity under the cycling. The impedance data of the IL-based symmetric battery also displayed a reasonable increase, but to a far lesser degree. As a result, after the battery cycling, the total resistance of the organic-based battery increased several times in comparison with that obtained for the IL-based battery (Rtotal IL = 29.6  5) < Rtotal org = 74.2  5)). Based on the obtained impedance data, the poor durability of the organic-based symmetric battery shown in Fig. 3b can also be explained by strong interfacial reaction between the LiVPO4F electrode and LiPF6/ECDMC electrolyte materials.

The thermal performances of the LiVPO4F symmetric cells using organic and IL electrolytes were studied at different operating temperatures and current densities. The comparison of the ﬁrst charge/discharge proﬁles for both symmetric batteries operated at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2 and temperatures of 25 and 80 ◦C is presented in Fig. 6. It is noted that the speciﬁc capacity of the LiVPO4F symmetric battery using the IL-based electrolyte was essentially enhanced at 80 ◦C (Fig. 6a). By contrast, the discharge capacity of the LiVPO4F symmetric battery using the organic electrolyte decreased dramatically at high operating temperatures (Fig. 6b). Moreover, the organic-based LiVPO4F symmetric battery was burst open after 2–3 cycles at 80 ◦C due to the starting evaporation of the organic solvents (EC-DMC). The cycle performance of the IL-based LiVPO4F symmetric battery operated at current densities of 0.1 and 0.3 mA cm−2 and temperatures of 25 and 80 ◦C is shown in Fig. 7. It was found that initially the LiVPO4F symmetric battery operating at 0.1 mA cm−2 and 80 ◦C demonstrated high discharge capacity and good reversibility. However, after about 6 cycles the capacity for this battery dramatically decreased. The performance of this battery at the same current density and 25 ◦C was signiﬁcantly lower but the cell exhibited more stable behavior during cycling. Most probably, the low cycling rate in combination with elevated temperature results in the irreversible oxidative decomposition of EMIBF4 electrolyte (side reactions of molten salt oxidation on the cathode surface). As contrasted to that, the discharge capacity of the IL- based LiVPO4F symmetric battery observed at 80 ◦C and a current density of 0.3 mA cm−2 was also higher than that at room temperature, however, it should be noted that the cyclabilities of the IL-based LiVPO4F symmetric battery cycled at higher current density remained stable over 20 cycles at 25 ◦C as well as at 80 ◦C.

The obtained thermal behaviors of the ILand organic-based LiVPO4F symmetric batteries were also conﬁrmed by compleximpedance measurements, which were carried out for both the as-assembled batteries at 25 and 80 ◦C. The obtained Nyquist plots for the as-assembled LiVPO4F symmetric batteries using the IL and organic electrolytes are shown in Fig. 8a and b, respectively. The Fig. 8a demonstrates clearly the essential shift of the impedance semicircles towards the low-resistance region, at increasing temperature from 25 to 80 ◦C. In other words, the signiﬁcant reduction of the total resistance (from 21.3 to 5.64  5)) was observed for the IL-based LiVPO4F symmetric battery at increasing operating temperature. This seems to be ascribed to the thermal reduction of viscosity of the IL electrolyte. The total resistance of the organicbased LiVPO4F symmetric battery has also decreased, but not as much (from 16.7 to 8.3  5)). As a result, under high temperature conditions, the total resistance and all its components in the ILbased LiVPO4F symmetric battery were found to be less than that in the organic-based one. Thereby, the LiVPO4F symmetric cell with IL-based electrolyte exhibited better performance than the battery using organic electrolyte, even before the change/discharge cycling.

The cycle decay proﬁles of LiVPO4F symmetric batteries with the organic and IL-based electrolytes were observed at various current densities of 0.1–0.8 mA cm−2. Based on those proﬁles, the rate capabilities of the second discharge capacities for both the LiVPO4F symmetric batteries are summarized in Fig. 9. As shown, the organic-based LiVPO4F symmetric battery operated at 25 ◦C demonstrated gradual diminution of the discharge capacity at increasing current densities. In spite of the fact that the substitution of the organic electrolyte in the LiVPO4F//LiVPO4F battery by the IL one resulted in an intense reduction of its discharge capacity, in general, the rate capability of the LiVPO4F symmetric batteries using different types of electrolytes did not differ sharply at room temperature. On the other hand, the discharge capacity as well as the rate capability of the IL-based LiVPO4F symmetric battery was affected by raising the operating temperature. It should be noted that the discharge capacity of the IL-based battery within the low current density range (0.1–0.3 mA cm−2) at 80 ◦C was even higher than that for the organic-based battery. However, this performance was not sufﬁciently stable, as already discussed above (Fig. 7). In the relatively high current density range (from 0.3 mA cm−2 to 0.8 mA cm−2), the discharge capacity of the IL-based battery varied slightly and the inclination of the rate capability curve essentially decreased.

The thermal evolution of electrode/electrolyte mixtures was examined using thermal analysis (DSC) from room temperature (RT) up to 500 ◦C in Ar atmosphere. The DSC measurements were done after the ﬁrst charge of LiVPO4F. Fig. 10 shows the DSC curves of the LiVPO4F cathode (85% LiVPO4F, 10% AB, 5% PTFE) with the organic electrolyte [1M] LiPF6/EC-DMC (solid curve) and IL-based electrolyte [1M] LiBF4/EMIBF4 (dashed curve). For comparison, the DSC curve obtained for the pure LiPF6/EC-DMC electrolyte is also shown here (dotted curve). Two exothermic heat peaks at about 180 and 260 ◦C were observed on the DSC plot belonging to the combination of the LiVPO4F cathode and organic electrolyte (solid curve). Most probably, the ﬁrst observed heat generation is caused by a simple heterogeneous reaction between the electrolyte solvent and LiVPO4F cathode, resulting in the formation of a passivating SEI ﬁlm on the LiVPO4F electrode surface. The formation of such an SEI ﬁlm did not occur at room temperature because the PTFE binder protected the electrode material against contact with the electrolyte. With the increase in heating temperature, the effect of PTFE binder protection seemed to become insufﬁcient, allowing a reaction between the solvent and LiVPO4F electrode. The second broad exothermic peak appearing at about 260 ◦C seemed to be caused by the thermal decomposition of organic solvent EC-DMC due to the low boiling point of its components. This speculation could be conﬁrmed by the DSC measurement of the pure organic electrolyte LiPF6/EC-DMC (dotted curve), where only one exothermic peak at about 270 ◦C was observed.

On the contrary, the DSC measurement of the LiVPO4F + LiBF4/EMIBF4 couple revealed only one exothermic reaction started at about 340± 10 ◦C. According to [4,43], the EMIBF4 is stable up to 390 ◦C. In our previous investigation, the LiBF4/EMIBF4 displayed high thermal stability up to even 450 ◦C [15]. Therefore, the observed heat generation is not associated with IL decomposition. It could be supposed that the heat generation at around 340 ◦C might be assigned to some exothermic reaction between LiVPO4F electrode and LiBF4/EMIBF4 electrolyte. Anyway, the higher stability of the IL electrolyte we used with respect to the LiVPO4F active material was conﬁrmed. Therefore, unlike the conventional organic-based batteries, the LiVPO4F symmetric battery using the IL electrolyte could provide excellent safety.

In order to comprehend the reasons for the observed above sudden decline of the symmetric battery performance operated with the organic electrolyte at 25 ◦C (Fig. 3b) and with the IL electrolyte at 80 ◦C (Fig. 7), the vanadium content in these LiVPO4F electrodes was determined by means of AAS. Five samples were prepared in accordance with the method described in the Experimental section: one sample of the freshly fabricated (before cycling) LiVPO4F complex electrode (85 wt.% of LiVPO4F, 10 wt.% of AB and 5 wt.% of PTFE), one samples each of the LiVPO4F complex cathode and anode extracted from the symmetric battery cycled with the organic electrolyte for 10 charge/discharge cycles (0.1 mA cm−2, 25 ◦C) and one samples each of the LiVPO4F complex cathode and anode from the symmetric battery cycled with the IL electrolyte for 10 charge/discharge cycles (0.1 mA cm−2, 80 ◦C). The obtained AAS results for the vanadium content in the above-mentioned samples are summarized in Fig. 11. The middle column is the vanadium content in the freshly fabricated LiVPO4F complex electrode, which was considered 100% for the comparison. The left and right columns are corresponding to the vanadium content in the LiVPO4F electrodes from the batteries cycled with IL and organic electrolytes, respectively. As shown, the vanadium content in the LiVPO4F electrodes taken from the IL-based battery (two left-side columns in Fig. 11) decreased slightly, on average by 13%, after 10 cycles at 0.1 mA cm−2 and 80 ◦C. Moreover, it should be pointed out that the decreases in the amount of vanadium amount in the work-out LiVPO4F cathode and anode were almost equal. On the contrary, the vanadium content in the LiVPO4F anode taken from the organic-based battery fell to about 32.5% after 10 cycles at 0.1 mA cm−2 and 25 ◦C, whereas the amount of vanadium in the LiVPO4F cathode remained unchanged (two right-side columns in Fig. 11). Thereby, the obtained AAS results conﬁrmed the signiﬁcant dissolution of the LiVPO4F anode in the highly acidic LiPF6/EC-DMC electrolyte during charge/discharge cycling. That is the most probable reason for the irreversible deterioration in the organic-based LiVPO4F//LiVPO4F battery performance. Actually, the exhaustive explanation of why during the battery cycling just one electrode from two homogeneous LiVPO4F electrodes, namely, anode suffers heavily is not yet completely understood. It is possible to make suggestion that since the LiVPO4F anode demonstrated primarily larger irreversible capacity and poorer performance than that of LiVPO4F cathode (Fig. 2), some structural changes of the anode material and vanadium dissolving might occur during the deep battery discharging.

The obtained AAS data for the LiVPO4F electrodes cycled with the IL electrolyte at low current densities and elevated temperature are inconclusive for a comprehensive explanation of the observed collapse in battery performance shown in Fig. 7. It seems that a deeper examination of the IL electrolyte after battery cycling is required.

In the present study, we fabricated and examined the performance of a symmetrical lithium-ion cell (−) LiVPO4F//LiVPO4F (+) using a safe IL-based electrolyte composed of a lithium-conductive salt and a room-temperature ionic liquid, LiBF4/EMIBF4. The evaluation of the insertion properties for the LiVPO4F electrodes showed that the lithium extraction/insertion reaction occurred at electrode potentials of 1.8 and 4.2 V vs. Li/Li+ related to the V3+/V2+ and V4+/V3+ redox couples, respectively. Based on the obtained QOCV results, an optimal charge cutoff voltage was established at about 2.8 V for the LiVPO4F symmetric batteries. It was found that the initially symmetric LiVPO4F battery using the common organic electrolyte, LiPF6/EC-DMC, worked successfully as a secondary battery, exhibiting good reversibility with a Columbic efﬁciency of 93% for the ﬁrst cycle. However, the durability of the organic-based symmetric battery was insufﬁcient due to the dissolution of the LiVPO4F anode in the highly acidic LiPF6-based electrolyte, as was conﬁrmed by the results of AAS.

On the other hand,the IL-based electrolyte LiBF4/EMIBF4 instead of the organic electrolyte resulted in obvious improvements in battery durability and safety. Particularly, it was found that the symmetric cell using the IL-based electrolyte worked as a secondary battery and exhibited much more stable behavior during long-term cycling than the same symmetric cell with the organic electrolyte at 0.1 mA cm−2 and 25 ◦C. Moreover, the IL-based symmetric battery successfully worked at elevated temperatures, especially in the relatively high region of current density (0.3–0.8 mA cm−2). Based on the impedance measurement results, the battery performance was drastically improved at 80 ◦C because of the thermal reduction of interfacial resistances on the LiVPO4F electrode surfaces in contact with the IL electrolyte. The better stability of the IL electrolyte with respect to the LiVPO4F active material in the operating temperature range was conﬁrmed by the DSC thermal analysis. Therefore, we believe that the LiVPO4F//LiVPO4F symmetric cell using the IL electrolyte should possess improved safety characteristics and a more stable cycle life.


This research was ﬁnancially supported by NGK and JST progressive engineering development research programs, Japan.
