and cation vacancies were found at the octahedral cation site (B site).  Change in cell dimension was smooth and monotonous, while  structure  refinements utilizing only high angle data  (147 out of 182 Bragg points  with sinθ/λ ≥ 0.6) showed that the most of structural parameters have  different trends with Ti doping higher and lower than 2%. 

Anisotropy in ADPs at the octahedral cation site (B site)  was high  in the stoichiometric specimen [1] and this high anisotropy was kept in  Ti 2% specimen. This anisotropy, however, got smaller with increasing  Ti doping as it was reported on cation-deficient magnetite [2]. ADPs at  the tetrahedral cation site (A site) and that at the oxide ion site along   <111> increased steeply with Ti doping at concentrations higher than  5%. 

As  it  has  been  repeatedly  reported,  the A-O  and  B-O  distances  in  magnetite  are  longer  and  shorter  than  ivFe3+-O  and  average  of  viFe2+-O  and  viFe3+-O  distances,  respectively,  in  hitherto  reported  Febearing  spinels  [3]. The A-O  distance  increased  moderately  with Ti  doping, indicating transfer of remnant electron from the B site due to  substitution of Fe2+ by Ti4+. Change in the B-O distance showed convex  feature with an amount of Ti: the B-O distance abruptly increased with  Ti doping from 0 to 2%, then it turned into moderate convex trend with  further Ti doping. Intercept at Ti = 0% extrapolated from Ti 5% and  10% data [d(B-O) = 2.0610(6) Å at Ti = 5% and 2.0607(6)  Å at Ti =  10%] was 2.0615 Å. While the value (2.0615 Å) was still smaller than  the average of d(ivFe2+-O) and d(ivFe3+-O) estimated from bond-valence  scheme (2.078 Å), this trend itself indicated change in nature of Fe-O  bonding in the B-O bond (semi-metallic to ionic nature) with a little  amount of Ti doping. 

Difference  Fourier  synthesis  on  the  stoichiometric  specimen  showed positive residues on B-O bonds, particularly in the vicinity of  the B site (at 1/2, 1/2, 1/2), and also positive residues on non-bonding  directions in the vicinity of the A site. These features, however, were  not clearly seen on Ti 2% and 5% specimens and vanished on Ti 10%  specimen. 

Oxide  spinels  include  a  very  large  group  of  structurally  related  compounds having a considerable technological importance. Among  them, zinc aluminate (ZnAl2O4), known by the mineral name gahnite,  is of interest due its good combination of semiconducting and optical  properties which makes it useful in various photoelectronic devices [1].  When doped with some transition-metal cations or rear-earth cations,  it  exhibits  luminescence  and  can  be  used  as  a  cathodoluminescence  material  [2].  Gahnite  possesses  a  cubic  spinel-type  structure,  space  group Fd-3m [3]. Although gahnite doped with various cations already  has  wide  applications,  some  cases  of  doping  are  not  completely  elucidated. 

Three  series  of  nanocrystalline  powder  gahnite  samples  were prepared by a sol-gel technique: (i) samples doped with 0-100 at% Co  (substituted for Zn), (ii) samples doped with 0-60 at% Mn (substituted  for Zn), (iii) samples doped with 0-12.5 at% Ti (substituted for Al).  Structural changes due to Co, Mn and Ti incorporation in the gahnite  lattice  were  studied  by  XRD.  Crystal  structures  were  refined  by  the  Rietveld  method  [4],  including  the  analysis  of  diffraction  line  broadening. Valence state and location of dopant cations in the gahnite  lattice were determined by EPR spectroscopy. 

Unit-cell parameter of gahnite increased on doping with Co, Mn  and Ti. Doping with cobalt and manganese induced a partial inverse  spinel structure, with Co2+ and Mn2+ cations residing on both tetrahedral  and  octahedral  cation  sites  of  the  gahnite  structure  respectively.  On  the  other  hand,  Ti4+  dopant  cations  occupied  only  octahedral  sites  substituting for Al3+. In the latter case the excess Zn2+ cations (included  during  the  synthesis  procedure)  were  also  situated  on  octahedral  cation  sites  due  to  charge  compensation.  On  cobalt  doping  as  well  on titanium doping, the metal-oxygen distances in gahnite structural  tetrahedra  decreased  while  in  structural  octahedra  increased.  In  the  case of manganese doping the situation is just opposite: metal-oxygen  distances in structural tetrahedra increased and in structural octahedra  decreased. Such  behavior is a consequence of ionic radii of involved  dopant cations and their contents on the respective cation sites.

The Nasicon-type family has been the subject of intensive research  due to its potential applications as solid electrolyte, electrode material,  low thermal expansion ceramics and as storage materials for nuclear  waste  [1-4].  The  structure  of  such  materials  with  general  formula  AxXX’(PO4)3  consists  of  a  three-dimensional  network  made  up  of  corner-sharing X(X’)O6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra in such a way that  each octahedron is surrounded by six tetrahedra and each tetrahedron is  connected to four octahedral. Within the Nasicon framework, there are  interconnected interstitial sites usually labelled M1 (one per formula  unit)  and  M2  (three  per  formula  unit)  through  which  A  cation  can  diffuse,  giving  rise  to  a  fast-ion  conductivity.  The  crystallographic  formula can be written as [M1][M2]3XX’(PO4)3.

A0.50SbFe(PO4)3 (A = Mn, Ca, Cd, Sr) samples were obtained by  solid  state  reaction  in  air.  The  structural  characteristics  by  powder  X-ray diffraction (XRD) study using the Rietveld method show that  A0.50SbFe(PO4)3 (A = Mn, Ca, Cd, Sr) compounds are isostructural and  crystallise in the R  space group. In all samples, A2+ cations occupied  one-half  of  the  M1  sites  and  the  Sb5+  and  Fe3+  cations  are  orderly  distributed  within  the  SbFe(PO4)3  framework.  A  globally  structural  comparison between A0.50SbFe(PO4)3  phases are presented. In order  to obtain further structural information about the nature of bonding in  studied phosphates an assignment of  Raman and Infrared bands was  also realised.

The hollandite oxides with the general chemical formula A2M8O16  (A = alkaline metal; M = transition metal) are a kind of mineral. They  are mixed valent oxides with M3+/M4+ = 1/3 (an averaged valence of  M3.75+). The crystal structure consists of the tubular M8O16-framework  and A-cations at the tunnel sites of the M8O16-framework. The M8O16framework  is  constructed  from  the  double  chains  (zigzag-chains)  formed  by  sharing  the  edges  of  MO6  octahedra.  The  chromium  hollandite  K2Cr8O16,  which  at  room  temperature  is  tetragonal  and  a  paramagnetic  metal  (PM),  becomes  ferromagnetic  with  TC  =  180  K  [1], which is explained by the double exchange mechanism [2], but  surprisingly  this  ferromagnetic  metal  phase  undergoes  a  transition  to  an  insulator  at  lower  temperature,  retaining  ferromagnetism.  The  metal-insulator transition (MIT) at TMI = 95 K is quite unique; it has a  metal (or half-metal) to insulator transition in a ferromagnetic state and  the resulting low temperature phase is a rare case of a ferromagnetic  insulator (FI). In order to elucidate this unique ferromagnetic MIT, it is  crucial to study the crystal structure across the MIT. 

The synchrotron X-ray diffraction study for the single crystal has  revealed the structural distortion from tetragonal to monoclinic with  √2a × √2b × c, where a, b and c are the lattice parameters in the PM  phase (Fig.1). In the FI phase, four Cr sites, two K sites and eight O  sites  become  crystallographically  inequivalent.  Four  Cr  sites  form  the coupled four-chains running in the c-direction by sharing corner  oxygen in the Cr8O16-framework. In this geometry, the alternations of  Cr-Cr bond and Cr-O bond along the c-direction exist in the coupled  four-chains, resulting in a weak tetramerization of the Cr ions. Such  bond alternation could be responsible for the opening of band gap. 

The investigation of the Li2MoO4-NiMoO4-Fe2(MoO4)3 quasi system  led to the synthesis and characterization of a bi-dimensional lyonsitetype  solid  solution,  delimited  by  the  compositions:    Li2Ni2(MoO4)3,  Li3Fe(MoO4)3  and  Li2Ni1.2Fe0.53(MoO4)3,  belonging  to  the  Li2+xNi22xFe1+ x(MoO4)3 and Li2Ni2-xFe0.33x(MoO4)3 systems. The samples were  synthesized  by  a  glycine  soft-combustion  process  and  characterized  by ICP analysis, IR spectroscopy, DTA and powder X-ray diffraction.  The  cation  distribution  was  established  from  a  single  crystal  Xray  study  of  the  Li2Ni1.5Fe0.33(MoO4)3  composition.  In  terms  of  the  M(1)M(2)2M(3)(XO4)3 general formula of the lyonsite, the following  occupancies were found: 0.87 Li in M(1), (0.34 Li + 0.50 Ni + 0.16  Fe)  in  M(2)  and  (0.48  Li  +  0.52  Ni)    in  M(3).  All  these  sites  are  six coordinated. The M(1) sites form zig-zag  chains of edge-sharing  trigonal prisms that run along the [100] direction (Figure 1). The M(2)  sites are  edgeand corner-sharing to form layers perpendicular to the  [001] direction (Figure 2). The M(3) sites are face sharing to produce  infinitive chains propagating along the [001] direction (Figure 3). The  connection of the chains is ensured by MoO4 tetrahedra leading to the  formation a three-dimensional network. 

The  existence  of  vacancies  within  the  M(1)  sites,  suggests  a  high  mobility  of  lithium  along  the  chains  of  edge-sharing  M(1)O6  prisms. However, ionic conductivity measurements, performed by the  impedance spectroscopy technique showed the material to be a poor  ionic conductor, with activation energy of 1.08 eV. This behavior is  attributed to the fact that the mobility of lithium is attenuated due the  one-dimensional character to a one-dimensional pathway.
