Phase pure Na3Cr2(PO4)3 crystallites of 41 nm are synthesized by novel solution combustion technique. Characterization methods like X-ray diffraction, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, UV–vis spectroscopy, Thermo gravimetric, differential thermal analysis and scanning electron microscopy with energy dispersive X-ray analysis are utilized to validate the structure and phase purity. These crystallites are stable in room temperature rhombohedral phase of R ¯3c symmetry. Fascination of the material is because of its structural stability and high conductivity. Due to its structural stability, present study depicts the ion dynamics in the crystal lattice by analyzing the conductivity relaxation process. Interpretations from impedance representation fortify these conclusions and the dc conductivity activation energy is found to be 0.70± 0.02 eV. Almost same value of activation energy for conductivity relaxation from modulus and conductivity representations show that while conducting and relaxing, ion has to overcome the same energy barrier. The conductivity and modulus isotherms are shown to be collapsed to a master curve upon appropriate scaling of the axes; indicating the temperature independent relaxation mechanism. It is evident that the scaling of conductivity and modulus spectra provides the same information on ion dynamics of this material.

Since the discovery of Na+ ion conducting super ion conductors (NASICON) by Hong et al. [1,2] abundant studies on phosphates of similar composition and structure have been reported [3–5]. NASICON type solid electrolytes have been obsessively explored due to its potential application in solid state ionic devices. Different structures can be formed by replacement of cations in the frame work, AxBy(PO4)3, where A is an alkali metal ion and B is a multivalent metal ion. In NASICON, charge compensating A cations occupy two types of sites, M1 and M2 (1:3 multiplicity), in interconnected channels formed by corner sharing PO4 tetrahedra and BO6 octahedra. M1 sites are surrounded by six oxygens and located at an inversion center and M2 sites are symmetrically distributed around threefold axis of the structure with tenfold oxygen coordination.

In order to better understand the relationship between structure and ion transport, series of phosphates of general formula, A3M2(PO4)3, where A = Li, Na and M = Cr, Fe has been investigated [6]. d’Yvotre et al. reported the reversible structural phasetransitions in conventionally synthesized Na3Cr2(PO4)3 (NCP) microcrystalline material. Incongruity with the typical rhombohedral structure of NASICON with R ¯3c space group, microcrystalline NCP shows monoclinic phase of lower symmetry and its conductivity at 313 K is 1.7× 10−7 S cm−1. Attempts have been reported to make thermally stable NASICON structures by chemical methods [6]. In this study, we have attempted the synthesis of NCP by solution combustion method and succeeded in preparing structurally stable phase pure material. Even though many groups have worked on the structural peculiarities during phase transition of NCP material [6]; discernible study of ion conduction and relaxation in this material is lacking. High ion conducting structurally stable NASICON material has enormous application in battery studies as electrolyte material. Na+ ion conducting NASICON is widely used in sensor application because of its ion-sensitivity. Na3Zr2Si2PO12 and Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 are widely used for fabricating CO2 sensors. Sensors using solid state electrolytes, as combination of NASICON and perovskites, are developed for the detection of CO2 in the range of 100–2000 ppm. The SOx sensor using NASICON electrolyte exhibits good response and excellent selectivity against CO2 and NO2 [7]. The Na3Cr2(PO4)3 could be a possible candidate for sensor application owing to its conductivity and thermally stable structure. Hence, as a primary effort we investigated the ac electrical properties of the material in the frequency range 10 Hz–5 MHz at different temperatures.

Self-propagating solution combustion synthesis is a rapid and energy-saving technique, works on the principle of decomposition of an oxidizer, metal nitrate, in presence of fuel [8]. In this study, stoichiometric amount of NaNO3, Cr(NO3)3·9H2O and NH4H2PO4 are dissolved in distilled water along with glycine (NH2-CH2COOH) as fuel in 1:3 molar ratio to form homogenous solution. Slow evaporation of the homogenous solution produces highly viscous gel; further heating results in ﬁring, producing voluminous powder named as-prepared material. One mole of glycine gives ﬁve moles of the following gases as per the reaction 2NH2-CH2COOH + 2O2 → N2↑ + 4CO2↑ + 5H2↑ Hence, overall reaction for formation of NCP is given by: 3NaNO3 + 2Cr(NO3)3 · 9H2O + 3NH4H2PO4 + 24NH2-CH2COOH + 24O2 −→Na3Cr2(PO4)3 + 12N2 + 48CO2 + 21H2 + 45H2O.

As-prepared material is in amorphous form and the phase pure material is formed by sintering at 800 ◦C. Before carrying out the electrical measurements, pellets are sintered at 900 ◦C for 24 h followed by 1150 ◦C for 3 h to an average density of 90%. Silver paint is evenly applied on both sides of the pellet for better electrical contact. AC electrical measurement was carried out by two terminal methods using PSM 1735 LCZ meter (10 Hz–5 MHz) in the temperature range from 373 K to 503 K where |Z*|, phase angle , conductance and capacitance were measured.

The ionic transference number is measured by means of dc polarization technique. In this method, a constant dc voltage of 400 mV is applied across the sample, which is placed between a pair of blocking silver electrodes. The current ﬂowing through the circuit is monitored as function of time using Keithley 238 high current source measure unit. The X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) patterns are recorded at room temperature using Philips X’pert PRO diffractometer in the 2 range 5–75◦. Thermogravimetric (TG) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) are performed using TG-DTA instrument Model: Q600 SDT from TA instruments in the temperature range 40 ◦C to 1000 ◦C. Fourier transform infrared spectra (FTIR) are recorded using Thermo Nicolet made FTIR spectrometer of Model: 6700. The spectrum is recorded between 400 cm−1 and 1300 cm−1 using KBr as the diluter. UV–vis spectrum is recorded using ocean optics HR4000 in the range 200nm-1100 nm. Surface morphology is recorded using scanning electron microscope (SEM) model S-3400 from Hitachi and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis technique is used for identifying the elemental composition of the specimen.

Fig. 1 shows powder XRD pattern of pellets calcined at 900 ◦C and 800 ◦C. Inconsistent with the conventionally synthesized NCP material; here phase pure crystallites are formed in stable rhombohedral symmetry at room temperature. While, for conventionally prepared microcrystalline material, room temperature phase is formed in monoclinic symmetry which is unstable with temperature. Hence it exhibits two main phase-transitions at 138 ◦C and 166 ◦C before stable rhombohedral symmetry is formed. The crystallite size is calculated using Scherrer’s formula [9]: D = K 4)/B cos , where B: the full width at half maximum (FWHM), : Bragg angle of 100% XRD peak, K: Scherrer constant, D: average crystallite size,  4): the wavelength of X-ray. For Gaussian X-ray proﬁles, B is calculated 2 where, Bm: FWHM of XRD peak of synthesized as: B2 = Bm material, Bs: FWHM of XRD peak of silicon standard, which is used to eliminate instrumental broadening. The average crystallite size calculated from XRD pattern of 800 ◦C calcined pellet is 41± 0.52 nm. d’Yvoire et al. reported that in conventionally synthesised material Na+ ions are ordered in M1 site at room temperature and shows monoclinic symmetry with superstructure reﬂections. As the temperature increases, Na+ ions occupy the available sites M1 and M2, and modify the structure to rhombohedral symmetry. This symmetry shows increased conductivity due to mobility of ions in sites M1 and M2. While for NCP prepared by this method, room temperature phase shows rhombohedral symmetry as it is evident from JCPDS reference code: 01-084-1203. The XRD patterns were indexed and all the reﬂections are from rhombohedral phase. In this structure Na+ ions are distributed in M1 and M2 sites at room temperature itself; hence it does not show structural changes with temperature.

FTIR is one of the most general spectroscopic techniques to determine functional groups in materials. It is an important and popular tool for structural exposition and compound identiﬁcation. Broad bands in Fig. 2 are of as-prepared material while sharp peaks correspond to calcined one. Bands between 650 and 400 cm−1 attribute to harmonics of deformation of O–P–O angle ( 5)2 and  5)4 modes) [10]. Bands in the region ∼580 cm−1 are attributed to asymmetric bending vibration modes of O–P–O units [11]. Region 931–870 cm−1 is assigned to PO3 2− ionic group vibration [12]. PO4 unit shows stretching vibrations ( 5)1 and  5)3 modes) in the region 1250–900 cm−1 [13]. The bands at 1227–1185 cm−1 region is owing to interaction of P–O bond and adjacent Cr-O bond [14].

UV–vis spectroscopy is sensitive to covalency of lattice skeleton. UV–vis spectrum of NCP material in Fig. 3 shows two absorption peaks at 470 nm and 684 nm respectively. These peak positions correspond to octahedral transitions of Cr3+ from ground term 4A2g to two excited quartet terms 4T2g and 4T1g [15]. These peak positions ruled out the presence of Cr2+ in the material, substantiating the conductivity of ionic nature.

Thermal studies are functional to determine phase change and reaction enthalpy. Fig. 4 shows DTA and TG plot of as-prepared material. The thermal analysis shows broad exothermic peak in the temperature region 40 ◦C to 600 ◦C due to oxidation of decomposed glycine phosphate gel (carbonaceous product). Further a sharp exothermic peak at 770 ◦C along with the abrupt weight loss in TG plot is due to NASICON phase formation. Absence of any other peak in the DTA plot of synthesized material ruled out the existence of possible structural phase transition, which is present in conventionally prepared NCP material. Fig. 5 shows SEM-EDX results which exclude the presence of impurity elements in the submicron size particles of NCP.

Usually, two formalisms such as the electrical conductivity and modulus have been extensively used to study the ion dynamics. Controversies exist over, which of these two formalisms can provide clear picture about the nature of ion dynamics in disordered lattice. Conductivity considers the electrical conductivity directly, while latter considers the conductivity relaxation. In addition to this, impedance formalism is used to analyze the ac electrical data of current study.

Fig. 6(a) illustrates the log–log plot of frequency dependence of ac conductivity. Low-frequency dispersion in the ac conductivity, arising from the electrode polarization, is followed by a frequencyindependent plateau and cross-over to power law dependence at high frequencies. Random diffusion of the ionic charge carriers via activated hopping gives rise to frequency-independent dc plateau. Above the characteristic cross-over frequency, conductivity increases with increase in frequency, which indicates onset of a relaxation mechanism. Dispersion in conductivity occurs when the carriers are not free to move throughout the sample but it hops around lattice imperfections. This relaxation mechanism is analyzed in the frame work of power law model using universal dielectric response. Almond and West [16] proposed the following power law expression to describe the real part of bulk ac conductivity: (ω) =  7)dc  7) 7) where  7)dc is the dc conductivity and ωH is the cross-over frequency from dc to dispersive part. The frequency exponent n is related to degree of correlation among moving ions and its value is found to be between 0.6 and 1 for ion conducting materials [17]. This expression has been used to describe the conductivity behavior below microwave region. Eq. (1) is used to ﬁt the conductivity data at different temperatures and parameters  7)dc, ωH and n are extracted. In Fig. 6(a) solid line represents best ﬁt to Eq. (1) at 373 K and the low-frequency deviation from experimental data is due to electrode polarization. Lowering the value of exponent n with increase in temperature is typical when relaxation dispersion is observed [18] and in the present case n value varies from 0.74 to 0.69 with temperature. The transition region from dc to ac conductivity shifts to higher frequencies with increase in temperature.

The reciprocal temperature dependence of  7)dc and ωH shows Arrhenius behavior as:  7)dcT =  7)0 exp ωH = ω0 exp where  7)dc is the dc conductivity;  7)o and ωo are pre-exponential factors, T is temperature in Kelvin, E 7) is activation energy for dc conduction, EH is activation energy for hopping and kB is Boltzmann’s constant. The activation energies E 7) and EH are calculated from straight-line ﬁt of Eq. (2) and (3) are found to be 0.70± 0.02 eV and 0.71± 0.02 eV respectively.

Change in the ac conductivity behavior is not very clear when data are represented in power law because in log–log plot power law regime of the ac conductivity is much less temperature dependent than dc conductivity. A better way of displaying the frequency and temperature dependence of ac conductivity is to present the conductivity data in the form of Arrhenius plots at different frequencies. The low-frequency conductivity plateau region is found to increase with temperature. The less temperature dependence of ac conductivity has been conﬁrmed by plotting log( 7)(ω)) versus 1000/T at different frequencies as in Fig. 6(b) and it is clear that at high frequency region (power law region), the conductivity is much less temperature dependent than dc conductivity. The activation energies of ac conductivity at selected frequencies are determined from the slope of log( 7) 7)(ω)T) versus 1000/T and these values are listed in Table 1. The activation energy for the ac conductivity is lower than the dc conductivity activation energy E 7).

Usually, the frequency and temperature dependent conductivity spectra obey the time-temperature superposition principle. This means that, for a given material, the conductivity isotherms can be collapsed to a master curve upon appropriate scaling of the conductivity and frequency axes. It is an important feature to study the mechanism of dynamic processes in disordered solids. The study of conductivity spectra of several materials at different temperatures leads to a scaling law:  7) 7)(ω)  7)dc where ωH is arbitrarily determined characteristic frequency [19]. Fig. 7(a) shows ac conductivity plots scaled using the parameters ωH and  7)dc obtained from power law ﬁt over the range of temperature. In the low-frequency region, electrode polarization contributes for the deviation from the scaled plot. Summerﬁeld scaling law [20] utilizes directly available quantities as scaling parameters for the frequency axis, instead of an arbitrarily determined ωH, and is given by  7) 7)(ω)  7)dc.

Fig. 7(b) shows conductivity plots which are scaled using Summerﬁeld formalism. The conductivity spectra at different temperatures collapsed on a single curve at higher frequencies, which implies that the relaxation mechanism at higher frequency is independent of temperature. While the low-frequency part of plot is not scaled due to the electrode polarization contribution. Summerﬁeld method scaled better than Ghosh’s formalism since it used directly available quantities for scaling.

To validate the electrical microstructure of sample and to differentiate grain-interior, grain boundary and other external parameters such as electrode polarization; ac electrical parameters are plotted in the complex impedance formalism. Kramers–Kronig (K–K) relation is used to evaluate the quality of impedance data; these relations are true for complex impedance spectroscopic data that are linear, causal, and stable. The real part of a spectrum can be obtained by integration of imaginary part and vice versa. If measured real and imaginary spectral data do not obey K–K relations, data must violate one of the conditions. K–K transform requires integration over a range of frequency from zero to inﬁnity. Since no one can measure frequency over that range, evaluating the K–K relations via integration always involves assumptions about the behavior of a spectrum outside the frequency over which it was measured. Practically, K–K analysis is performed by ﬁtting a generalized model to spectral data. The model proposed by Agarwal et al. [21] consists of m series connected Voigt elements: R(RC)m. The parameter m equals number of complex plane data points in the spectrum and this model is by deﬁnition K–K compliant. Boukamp [22] proposed a method for doing K–K ﬁt through linear equations by eliminating probable non-convergence issues. Fig. 8(a) shows K–K ﬁt to complex impedance data, achieved through the software K–K test, which is based on Boukamp’s model [22–23]. The K–K ﬁt matches well with the experimental data, implying the self-consistency of the impedance spectra.

The elements of an equivalent circuit model represent various (macroscopic) processes involved in transport of mass and charge. Using non-linear least square ﬁt (NLLS) techniques, all parameters in equivalent circuit are adjusted simultaneously, thus obtaining optimum ﬁt to the measured dispersion data. A more general NLLS ﬁt program based on the Marquardt algorithm has been used. The impedance parameters are obtained by ﬁtting the data to an equivalent circuit using NLLS ﬁtting procedure due to Boukamp [24]. The complex impedance spectra obtained for NCP at 373 K is shown in Fig. 8(b). Here equivalent circuit consists of a depressed semi-circle, (RgiQgi) that stands for grain-interior contribution and part of another semi-circle, (ReQe), which represents electrode polarization at the low-frequency region. Impedance plane plots are depressed due to distribution of relaxation times; a non-ideal capacitor or constant phase element, Q is used to explain depression [25]. The magnitudes of the ﬁt parameters are: Rgi = 1.29× 105 ± 3.79%, constant phase element, Qgi = 5.14× 10−11 ± 8.66%, exponent ngi = 0.937± 0.57%, Re = 3.92× 105 ± 10.90%, and ne = 0.693± 2.26%. The magnitude of chi-square is found to be 9.027× 10−3. Magnitude of Qgi varied from 10−11 to 10−12 for different temperatures.

Conductivity spectra Fig. 6(a) and impedance spectra Fig. 9 show that there is no grain boundary contribution in the high frequency region, however, only electrode contribution is seen in low-frequency region. Rgi of sample is obtained by intercept of high frequency semi-circle with real axis and is used to calculate dc conductivity value,  7)gi. The parameter  7)gi is thermally activated and shows Arrhenius dependence on temperature. The dc conductivity values and activation energy obtained from slope of Arrhenius plot are given in Table 1. Inset of Fig. 8 (b) shows Arrhenius plot of dc conductivity values obtained from conductivity and impedance representations. Results from conductivity and impedance formalisms are matching well within the experimental error.

The characteristic frequency of relaxation process in graininterior is obtained from maximum of imaginary part of electric modulus or impedance spectrum. Characteristic relaxation frequencies (ωR) obtained from Z 7) 7) (ω) curves shift towards high frequency with increase in temperature and is shown in Fig. 9. The ωR shows Arrhenius behavior with temperature and its activation energy (ER) matches with E 7). Such ion transport peculiarities are dominant in compounds with lithium or sodium as well as in oxygen solid electrolytes. Relaxation time ( 8)R = 1/ωR) as a function of temperature is shown as an inset in Fig. 9, which shows straight-line variation and relaxes fast with temperature. The hopping polarization loss [26] is responsible for peak in dispersive plot of Z 7) 7)(ω).

Macedo et al. [27] formulated a theory for conductivity relaxation in ion conductors in terms of a dimensionless complex electric modulus M*. In modulus formalism the details at high (extra non-conducting relaxation) and low (electrode polarization) frequencies are suppressed [28]. In analogy with mechanical relaxation; the quantity is termed as the complex electrical modulus and is identiﬁed as inverse of dielectric permittivity, ε*. It can be resolved in to real and imaginary parts as: M∗ε∗(ω) The modulus Kohlrausch–Williams–Watts (KWW) relaxation function  10)(t):

where, M∞ = 1/ε∞, ε∞ being the high frequency asymptotic value of real part of dielectric permittivity. The  10)(t) describes evolution of the electric ﬁeld within the material for macroscopic current decay after an electric-ﬁeld change and is of the form [29]:

The  8)p is conductivity relaxation time and ˇ ≤ 1 is an exponent measures extent of non-exponential behavior and tend towards unity for Debye type relaxation.

is taken to be an average relaxation time for the thermally activated ionic motion. But how these parameters are related to the microscopic ionic motion is still an ambiguity. The ˇ values are usually determined by ﬁtting the imaginary part of complex modulus; however it is numerically difﬁcult to ﬁnd Fourier transform of Eq. (8) for ˇ values other than 0.5 and 1. These difﬁculties can be avoided by using an approximate frequency representation of the KWW function, which allows ﬁtting directly in the frequency domain. Such a representation has been anticipated by Bergman [30]. The imaginary part of the complex electrical modulus in the frequency domain due to a KWW relaxation function has been

1 − ˇ + (ˇ/(1 + ˇ))[ˇ(ωp/ω) + (ω/ωP)ˇ]  7) 7)(ω) is the peak maximum and ωp = 1/ 8)p is the peak frewhere Mp  7) 7)(ω) quency of imaginary part of the modulus. The ﬁtting of Mp  7) 7)(ω), ˇ and ωp. The peak maxextracted the parameters like Mp imum shifts to higher frequencies with increase in temperature. The ˇ values are constant over the temperature range and its value is 0.71± 0.02.

The charge carriers are mobile over long distances in the region left to peak; while right to the peak ions are spatially conﬁned  7) 7)(ω) to potential wells. The frequency of relaxation, ωp, where Mp occurs is an indicative of transition from short-range to long-range mobility at decreasing frequency. This value is obtained from the maximum of M 7) 7) deﬁned by the condition ωp 8)p = 1. Frequency of relaxation dispersion exponentially increases with temperature and the activation energy, EM = 0.66± 0.01 eV, is calculated from Arrhenius plot shown in inset of Fig. 10(a). The proximity between activation energies of dc conduction and conduction relaxation shows that while conducting and relaxing ion has to overcome the same energy barrier, such ion transport features are dominant in fast ion conductors due to hopping conduction [31].

The scaling of modulus spectra is shown in Fig. 10(a) where fre 7) 7). Perfect overlap of the quency is scaled by ωp and the M 7) 7) by Mp curves for all the temperatures in to a single curve indicates that the dynamical processes occurring at different frequencies have the same thermal activation energy. Thus the scaling of the conductivity and the modulus spectra provides the time-temperature superposition principle of ion dynamics in the material. Further, Fig. 10 (b) shows that Z 7) 7)(ω) and M 7) 7)(ω) peaks are almost coincident and there is no additional peak in those representations. The single relaxation peak in modulus representation is contributed from grain-interior capacitance. Electrode polarization is suppressed in this representation since it depends on inverse of capacitance contributions from the sample. Since Z 7) 7)(ω) and M 7) 7)(ω) peaks are almost coincident, it is clear that the grain-interior contributes for impedance relaxation. The small separation in modulus and impedance peak position points to good grain connectivity.

In order to conﬁrm the conduction is due the ionic contribution, the ionic transference number is measured. The sample is placed between a pair of silver blocking electrodes [32] and maintained at 250 ◦C for 2 h. On application of a dc voltage of 400 mV to the above conﬁguration, an instantaneous initial current, I0, is 14 ␮A. After a long interval of 48hrs the cell is completely polarized and delivers a steady current, Is, of 0.19 ␮A, further there is no change in this steady current with time. Decrease in polarization current can be attributed to the migration of ions due to applied ﬁeld and is balanced by diffusion due to the concentration gradient. Thus, the resulting steady-state current is only due to electrons or holes and the electronic contribution is found to be 0.01. The ionic contribution is evaluated through the equation [33] ti = 1 − Is I0 where, ti: ionic transference number and is found to be nearly equal to unity.

Novel synthesis technique of solution combustion is used to prepare crystallites of Na3Cr2(PO4)3 in 41 nm range. Combustion technique is a time saving low-temperature preparation technique, which can produces crystallites of nano-size. Na3Cr2(PO4)3 crystallites synthesized by the present technique are stable rhombohedral structure of R ¯3c symmetry in temperature range of measurement. In this structure, Na+ ions are distributed in available M1 and M2 sites; hence ruled out the possibility of structural change with temperature. In the present study, the grain-interior ion dynamics is analyzed using conductivity relaxation and impedance formalism. The power law behavior of ac conductivity is explained by Almond and West formalism and the complex impedance studies corroborate well with the conductivity results. The activation energy for the cross-over frequency (0.71± 0.02 eV) is same as that of Z 7) 7) peak frequency (0.70± 0.01 eV) within the error. Analysis of conductivity and modulus formalism shows that the ion has to overcome almost same energy barrier while conducting and relaxing. Temperature dependence of ac conductivity at different frequencies shows that the activation energy for ac conduction is less than that of dc conduction. Different techniques like UV–vis spectroscopy and transference number measurement are exploited to conﬁrm the nature of the conducting species. Ghosh and Summerﬁeld scaling analysis are applied to conductivity data to validate the temperature independent conduction mechanism at different frequencies. Finally, scaling analysis of conductivity and modulus formalism provides the time-temperature superposition principle on the ion dynamics in the material.

Financial support from the DST research project no. SR/S2/CMP61/2006 and UGC research project no. 33-32/2007 (SR) and F.530/15/DRS/2009 (SAP-I) is gratefully acknowledged. LV would like to thank DST for Junior Research Fellowship. LV would like to thank Central Instrumentation Facility, Pondicherry University for FT-IR, DTA and SEM studies. Dr. R. Venkatesan, Department of Chemistry, Pondicherry University is kindly acknowledged for extending UV–VIS facility.
