We  report  the  electrical  relaxation  in  ion  conducting  Li4Nb1-xZn  2.5xP3O12.These  glasses  were  prepared  by  conventional melt quenching method. The electrical relaxation has been investigated both in ac conductivity as well as  electric  modulus  formalisms.  The  conductivity  isotherms  show  a  transition  from  frequency  independent  dc  region  to  dispersive  region  where  the  conductivity  increases  with  increasing  frequency.  The  power  law  dispersion  of  the  ac  conductivity  scales  regardless  of  the  variation  of  x  in  TTSP  scheme,  and  therefore  suggests  that  relaxation  in  these  glasses is independent of the temperature and composition.

The  study  of  the  NASICON  materials  is  attracting  much  attention  because  of  technological  applications,  especially  in  solid  state  batteries  and  in  chemical  sensors.  This  paper  describes  the  preparation,  characterization,  electrical  properties  and  the  scaling  behavior  of  Li4Nb1-xZn2.5xP3O12  NASICON  type  glasses,  where  x=0.1,  0.2,  0.3,  and  0.4  with  the  corresponding  abbreviations  for  different  compounds  as  LNZ25P,  LNZ50P,  LNZ75P  and  LNZ100P  respectively.  

NASICON  glasses  of composition  Li4Nb1xZn2.5xP3O12  were  prepared  from  the  batch  containing  highly  pure  Li2CO3,  Nb2O5,  ZnO,  and  NH4H2PO4  as  the  starting  materials.  The  XRD  pattern  together  with  DSC  measurements  confirms  the  glassy  nature  of  all  the  materials.  Density  of  the  glass  was  measure  by  Archimedes principle. FTIR spectra illustrates that the  entire  region  down  to  400cm-1   is  dominated  by  the  vibrations  of  the  PO4  tetrahedra  (such  as  O-P-O  bending, P-O-P asymmetric bending, P-O-P stretching,  ionic PO4- vibrations

Polished  samples  of  cylindrical  shape  (of  about  10mm  diameter  and  1mm  thickness),  coated  at  the  parallel  surface  with  silver  paste  were  used  for electrical conductivity  measurements. NOVA  electrical  CONTROL  set  up  was  used  to  carry  out  electrical  conductivity  measurements  in  the  frequency  range  between 100Hz to 1MHz at various temperatures from  273K to 473K in the steps of 10K.  

The  study  of  frequency  dependent  conductivity  spectra is a well established method for characterizing  the  hopping  dynamics  of  ions.  The  angular  frequency  dependence  of  the  conductivity  σ (ω)  at  different  temperatures for LNZ25P is shown in Figure1 (a).  It is  evident  from  the  Fig.1  (a)  that  at  low  frequencies  conductivity is independent  of  frequency which gives to  dc-conductivity  arising  from  the  random  diffusion  of  the  ionic  charge  carriers  via  activated  hopping  process.  However,  at  higher  frequencies,  σ   exhibits  frequency  dispersion  and  the  microscopic  forward-backward  hopping  motion  of  ions. Similar results are obtained for other samples  as  well.  Levenberg-Marquardt  method  of  NLLS  fitting  were  used  to  fit  the  ac  conductivity  data  to  AlmondWest  Formula  [1]  represented  by  Eq.(1)  at  different  temperatures  for  different  samples  and  the  parameters  σdc,  ωp  and  n  were  extracted.  The  Almond-West  formula is given by  σ  (ω)=σdc(1+ω/ωp)n where the frequency exponent 0<n<1. Both parameters  dc conductivity σdc and hopping frequency ωp extracted  from  the  above  fit  are  strongly  dependent  on  temperature  and  obey  Arrhenius  relation.  Fig.1(b)  shows  the  ωp  versus  reciprocal  of  temperature  for  all  the  samples.  The  activation  energy  of  hopping  frequency Ep is extracted from the FIGURE.1.       

The phenomenological nature of electric  modulus  has  been  used  to  make  a  correlation  between  the  conductivity  and  relaxation  of  mobile  ions  in  these  glasses.  Spectra  show  slightly  an  asymmetric  peak  which shifts to high frequency side as the temperature  increases. Bergman formula[2],  which is the  modified form of  KWW function, has been used to analyze our  experimental data is given by max max M max M where  M˝max  is  the  peak  maximum  of  the  imaginary  part  of  the  modulus  and  ωmax  (1/τ)  is  the  peak  frequency  of    the  imaginary  part  of  the  modulus.  Analysis of our experimental data  was done by fitting  Eq.(2).  and  various  parameters  were  extracted.  Activation  energy  Em  calculated  from  the  plot  ωmax  versus  reciprocal  of  the  temperature  is  given  in  TABLE  1.  Fig.3  shows  the  ac  conductivity  scaled  master  plot  of  glasses  at  different  temperatures  where  the  σ(ω)  is  scaled  by  σdc  and  ω  by  ωp.    There  is  a  perfect  overlap  of  the  curves  except  at  the  lower  frequencies  where  the  electrode  effect  is  prominent.  and  these  indicates  that  the  electrical  relaxation  processes  are  temperature  and  composition for these glasses.  

The  financial  support  from  DST,  Govt.  of  India,  research  projects  (SR/S2/CMP-0061/2006)  and  DSTFIST  for  XRD  Facility  and  CIF,  PU  for  NOVA  CONTROL are greatly acknowledged.
