We have developed the high ionic conducting glass-ceramics with the crystalline phase of Li1+x+yAlx(Ti2¹yGey)P3¹zSizO12 with the NASICON type structure. This type of glass-ceramics exhibits high lithium-ion conductivity of 10¹4 S cm¹1 or more at room temperature. Although this glass-ceramics reacts with Li metal gradually with the passage of time, we have improved the thermal and electrochemical properties by controlling constitution of Ti and Ge in the Li-ion conducting glass-ceramics with the NASICON type structure. Those glass-ceramics worked well as electrolyte of a lithium-ion secondary battery by the charge­ discharge test using a half cell with LiFePO4 cathode at room temperature. ©2010 The Ceramic Society of Japan. All rights reserved.

A solid-state lithium-ion secondary battery using a solvent-free solid electrolyte is very attractive from a view point of safety. Therefore, many studies have been performed in various research laboratories.1)­5) However, as the ionic conductivity of such a solid electrolyte is lower than the liquid one and the interfacial resistance with other solid electrode-active materials is larger, the solid electrolyte cannot be put to practical use easily.

We have developed the high performance lithium-ion conducting glass-ceramics. This glass-ceramics contains the crystalline phase of Li1+x+yAlx(Ti2¹yGey)P3¹zSizO12 with the NASICON type structure in the glass, and exhibits high lithiumion conductivity of 10¹4 S cm¹1 or more at room temperature (RT).6)­8) Although this glass-ceramics reacts with Li metal gradually as time passes, formation of Li dendrite leading to an accidental electrical short is hard to occur because of no pores in ceramics.

We investigated the dependence of electrochemical characteristics on composition ratio of Ti and Ge in the glass-ceramics, in order to get the guidelines on which the solvent-free solid electrolyte should be developed for a solid-sate Li-ion battery.

Glass ceramics were made by separating out a crystal in mother glass bulk. Regent-glade chemicals (>98%) of lithium carbonate (Li2CO3, Nippon Chemical Industrial), aluminium metaphosphate (Al(PO3)3, Nippon Chemical Industrial), silica (SiO2, Nitchitsu), germanium oxide (GeO2, Kunming Huiquan High-purity semiconductor materials) titanium oxide (TiO2, Sakai Chemical Industry) and orthophosphoric acid (H3PO4 >89%, Nippon chemical industrial) were mixed together as raw materials for preparing glass. The mixture of raw materials was put in a Pt pot and placed in an electric furnace at 1400­ 1480°C. Melted mixture of the raw materials was stirred using a Pt blade. Glass was produced by casting the molten glass onto the preheated stainless-steel plate and quenching. The resulting glasses were placed in a furnace for annealing at 500°C and cooled down to room temperature.

To investigate the electrochemical speciﬁc eﬀect of component Ti and Ge in the NASICON crystal, the content of Ti and Ge in the mother glass was changed and samples having the contents of 100:0, 50:50, 0:100 (Ti:Ge mol ratio) were fabricated. Glass transition temperature (Tg) and crystallization temperature (Tc) of the glasses were determined using diﬀerential thermal analyses. The measurement conditions kept temperature rising rate of 10°C/min, and air-ﬂow at 60 ml/min. Then the glasses were heated to a temperature (TX) higher than Tg and kept these. The glass-ceramics were analyzed using X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) equipment (Phillips X’pert MPD PW3050), and their crystalline phases were identiﬁed.

The Ti100 samples were prepared in the form of a bulk plate for electrochemical measurements by sintering a glass powder at 1000°C. The Ti100 plate was formed into a 25 mm¤ disk with a thickness of 0.5 ¯m by wet milling, and then sanded and polished. The Ge50 and Ge100 glass samples were heated again in the electric furnace at 800­900°C and the glass samples were crystallized (glass-ceramics). The Ge50 and Ge100 samples were cut from a glass-ceramics bulk into a 25 mm-square plate, and sanded and polished.

A glass-ceramics sample was sanded and polished for electrochemistry measurement. Ionic conductivity measurements were carried out with an AC impedance method using a solartoron 1260 impedance analyzer, with a Au blocking electrode, at RT, in a frequency range from 10 MHz to 0.1 Hz, and in AC amplitude Voltage 50 mV. Electrochemical stability measurements were carried out with a Cyclic Voltammetry using a PARSTAT2273, and a cell constructed from Li/Glass-ceramics/Au. A cell had a PE separator with organic solvent between Li and glass-ceramics. The separator was Celguard, and organic solvent was a 1:1 (v/v) mixture of ethylenecarbonate (EC) and diethylcarbonate (DEC) containing 1 M LiPF6 (Tomiyama Chemicals). The measurement conditions were a scanning range between 2­4 V Li/Li+ and a scanning rate 5 mV/sec at RT. Improvement of glass-ceramics stabilities was estimated with a Li metal electrode and the AC impedance method using a solartoron 1260 impedance analyzer. The measurement conditions were, a frequency range from 10 MHz to 0.1 Hz, and AC amplitude Voltage of 50 mV at RT. To examine whether it functioned as Li ion electrolyte, a half cell was made and its charge­discharge behavior was checked. Battery testing was carried out by a half cell using cathode active material LiFePO4. A half cell of Li/Glass-ceramics/LiFePO4 had a separator with organic electrolyte between the electrodes and glass-ceramics. Charge­discharge tests were performed at a constant current at RT. The measurement conditions were a constant current with a charging cut-oﬀ voltage of 4.0 V, a discharge cut-oﬀ voltage of 3.0 V, and a charge­discharge rate of 1/12 C, and rest for 1 h before charge­discharge testing. The cathode composition ratio was LiFePO4:AB:Pvdf = 80:10:10 (wt %).

The eﬀect of substitution of Ge4+ for Ti4+ in the mother glass on the stability of glasses was investigated. A glass transition point (Tg) and crystallization starting temperature (Tc) were measured and stability of glass was estimated from the TG­DTA. These are indicated in Fig. 1 and Table 1. XRD patterns are showed in Fig. 2, where Ti100 and Ge50 belong to LiTi2(PO4)3, and Ge100 belongs to LiGe2(PO4)3. All the samples were having a NASICON type structure, and containing aluminum orthophosphate. An ionic conductivity of a glass ceramics sample were estimated from an AC impedance method, which was showed in Table 1. The diﬀerence (Tg and Tx) became larger with an increase of Ge composition. In addition, substitution of Ge4+ for Ti4+ in the pseudobinary system 2[Li1+x+yAlx(Ti2¹yGey)-P3¹zSizO12]­[AlPO4] of glass-ceramics didn’t make the ionic conductivity decreased so much, still keeping rather high conductivity over 1 © 10¹4 S/cm. Thus we succeeded in the improvement of stabilities of glass-ceramics electrolyte.

Cyclic voltammograms of these samples were shown in Fig. 3. Both Ti100 and Ge50 samples which contained Ti indicated that an oxidation current and a reduction current around at 2.3 V and that these were stable for 2.5­4 V vs. Li+/Li. It’s thought that it depends on a redox reaction of Ti3+/Ti4+ in the NASICON structure. Here, the Ti100 sample showed a smaller redox current than the Ge50 one. It was speculated that Ti ions of the Ti100 sample are in the more reduced state because of its higher sintering temperature. On the other hand, a redox reaction current was little measured around at 2.3 V for the Ge100 sample with no composition of Ti. It was indicated that the Ge100 sample was electrochemically stable for 2­4 V vs. Li+/Li.

The resistance measurement of Li/glass-ceramics/Li cell was carried out with an AC impedance method and showed Cole­ Cole plots in Fig. 4 and the increasing resistance plotted to time showed in Fig. 5. It showed increased resistance of all samples with time. The resistance of Ti100 was very large, because it had a lot of Ti. However, the resistance of Ge100 also increased, and was larger than Ge50. The resistance increase is also admitted in Ge100, and a constituent of glass-ceramics besides Ti were reduced to Li metal. Improvement their stabilities for Li metal were not found.

Figure 6 shows charging and discharging curves of a half cell using LiFePO4 positive electrode. The discharge plateau of LiFePO4 was observed around at 3.4 V in all half cell using glass-ceramics for electrolyte. LiFePO4 has a theoretical capacity 170 mAh/g, and LiFePO4 active material used in this work also has the capacity near that and good cycling performance.

Figures 7 and 8 show the coulombic eﬃciency and residual capacity of these charge and discharge tests, respectively. The un-reversible capacity on initial cycle was observed in cells using glass-ceramics Ti100 and Ge50 which contain Ti. The Coulombic eﬃciency of Ge100 didn’t contain Ti was high at initial cycle rather than 2nd­3rd cycle, then declined as well as progress of a cycle. However, capacity maintenance rate of Ti100 and Ge50 were very high, nearly 100%, and discharge capacity of Ge100 was decreasing 5% every cycle. We guessed there was a possibility that Ge100 is unstable to organic solvent.

We have improved thermal stability of mother glass and electrochemical stability of glass-ceramics by controlling composition of Ti and Ge of Li-ion conductive glass-ceramics with the NASICON type structure. The stability to Li metal, however, hasn’t be improved yet. It is necessary to use some thin ﬁlm protective toward Li metal anode, or other negative electrode intimate with these glass ceramics for a solid-state battery. From the charge­discharge test, these glassceramics work well as electrolyte of a lithium ion secondary battery.
