Iron phosphates (FePO4) are among the most promising candidate materials for advanced Liion battery cathodes. This work reports upon a combined nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) experimental and periodic density functional theory (DFT) computational study of the environments and electronic structures occurring in a range of paramagnetic Fe(III) phosphates comprising FePO4 (heterosite), monoclinic Li3Fe2(PO4)3 (anti-NASICON A type), rhombohedral Li3Fe2(PO4)3 (NASICON B type), LiFeP2O7, orthorhombic FePO4 · 2H2O (strengite), monoclinic FePO4 · 2H2O (phosphosiderite), and the dehydrated forms of the latter two phases. Many of these materials serve as model compounds relevant to battery chemistry. The 31P spin-echo mapping and 7Li magic angle spinning NMR techniques yield the hyperﬁne shifts of the species of interest, complemented by periodic hybrid functional DFT calculations of the respective hyperﬁne and quadrupolar tensors. A Curie-Weiss-based magnetic model scaling the DFT-calculated hyperﬁne parameters from the ferromagnetic into the experimentally relevant paramagnetic state is derived and applied, providing quantitative ﬁnite temperature values for each phase. The sensitivity of the hyperﬁne parameters to the composition of the DFT exchange functional is characterized by the application of hybrid Hamiltonians containing admixtures 0%, 20%, and 35% of Fock exchange. Good agreement between experimental and calculated values is obtained, provided that the residual magnetic couplings persisting in the paramagnetic state are included. The potential applications of a similar combined experimental and theoretical NMR approach to a wider range of cathode materials are discussed.

Motivated by the promising performance of olivine-type LiFePO4 as a candidate Li-ion battery cathode material,1-5 various Fe(III) phosphate compounds such as Li3Fe2(PO4)3, Fe4(P2O7)3, FePO4, LiFeP2O7, etc., have been synthesized and characterized in regard to their structural and electrochemical properties.2,6-13 Methods such as particle size control3 and surface coating with conductive carbon4,5,14-16 have been reported to improve the electrochemical performance of such materials. Polymorphic hydrated forms of Fe(III) phosphates, FePO4 · nH2O (n ≈ 2), have also been considered as Li battery positive electrodes, permitting reversible reduction to approximately 90% of their theoretical capacities in the 2-4 V range vs Li+/Li,17-20 where this nomenclature denotes a potential relative to a Li-metal negative electrode. However,the electrochemical capacities of the dehydrated orthorhombic (DH strengite) and monoclinic (DH phosphosiderite) FePO4 polymorphs fall signiﬁcantly below that of the heterosite and amorphous forms.7,17,18 Meanwhile, the monoclinic (A type, anti-NASICON) and rhombohedral (B type, NASICON) forms 1,21,22 permit for reversible insertion of apof Li3Fe2(PO4)3 proximately two Li per formula unit at approximately 2.8 V vs Li+/Li.21 Common to all of these phases is the suggestion that the covalency of the Fe-O and P-O bonds plays an important role in controlling the Fe redox potential,23,24 the magnitude of this so-called ‘inductive’ effect being sensitive both to the crystal structure and to the nature of the anion or polyanion (O, PO4, SiO4, SO4, P2O7, etc.). Attempts to improve the electrochemical performance of such cathodes have included syntheses of more disordered materials featuring, for example, mixed phosphate-silicate polyanion sublattices, Li+-Fe2+ exchange, and substitution of various transition metal (TM) cations.

Achieving a more complete description of the lattice and electronic structures of cathode materials at the atomic level remains a key challenge, driven by the need both to rationalize and to learn how to engineer favorable electrochemical properties. In particular, insight is sought into the actual environments experienced by dopant and electrochemically active species, as opposed to the more average structures often provided by conventional diffraction techniques. NMR-based characterizations confer deﬁnite advantages in this regard, especially in light of the fact that many such phases may show inherent structural disorder or may develop such upon partial delithiation. Previous successful NMR studies within the ﬁeld include the characterization of local structure in mixed TM spinels such as 29 and rock-salt-derived layered compounds such LiNixMn2-xO4 as Li[Li1/9Ni3/9Mn5/9]O2,30,31 particle isolation effects and power fading in Li[Ni0.8Co0.15Al0.05]O2 electrodes,32 and identiﬁcation of cation orderings in layered Li[NixMnxCo1-2x]O2 phases.

NMR studies suffer the additional complication that many cathode materials display paramagnetism associated with unpaired TM d electrons at typical battery operating temperatures. Beyond the technical difﬁculties this raises in terms of obtaining sufﬁcient spectral resolution, there remains the urgent need to more fully characterize the empirical relationships linking hyperﬁne NMR shifts to their originating local environments. The present study addresses the latter point for 7Li and 31P sites within a range of paramagnetic Fe(III) phases. Moreover, our related research regards Fe(III)PO4 compounds as models relevant to the adsorption of phosphate ions upon the surfaces of environmentally important iron oxyhydroxides (FeOOH) such as goethite and ferrihydrite.34-39 The present results, spanning a range of Fe-O-P bond path geometries, will assist in determining the sites at and coordination modes with which phosphate ions bind to such materials.

Here we present a combined experimental and theoretical 7Li and 31P NMR study of a range of Fe(III) phosphate materials: FePO4 (heterosite type), monoclinic Li3Fe2(PO4)3 (A type; antiNASICON), rhombohedral Li3Fe2(PO4)3 (B type; NASICON), LiFeP2O7, orthorhombic FePO4 · 2H2O (strengite), monoclinic FePO4 · 2H2O (phosphosiderite), and the DH forms of the latter two materials. Our approach is novel in the extent of the comparisons that it affords between experimental and theoretical NMR parameters for paramagnetic solids, particularly in light of the range of materials considered, and in the use of hybrid DFT functionals. Two complementary techniques are employed: ﬁrst, the NMR spectra are analyzed in terms of simple crystallographic considerations, seeking to relate the geometries of the various Fe-O-P/Li bond paths to the respective hyperﬁne shifts. Second, theoretical hyperﬁne and quadrupolar coupling parameters for all relevant sites are obtained directly from periodic density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Our aim here, uncommon in periodic calculations, is to provide quantitatively accurate shifts, proceeding beyond the methods applied in previous pseudopotential-based studies of TM oxide Li cathode phases.41 The earlier calculations did not access the spin densities at nuclear positions and so could offer only a qualitative interpretation of experimental shifts based upon the integration of spin densities over approximate Li ionic volumes.41 The present study builds upon this approach, deploying an all-electron treatment including variationally free core states, hybrid exchange-correlation potentials beyond the pure density functionals previously applied,41 and an empirical model of the ﬁnite temperature paramagnetic susceptibility. The latter turns out to be a particularly important factor, as shall be shown below.

The use of hybrid Hamiltonians bearing varying admixtures of nonlocal Fock exchange provides useful insight into the variations in hyperﬁne parameters with functional composition.

The DFT calculations are performed within the ferromagnetic state, the hyperﬁne data obtained then being scaled into the experimentally relevant paramagnetic regime by application of the Curie-Weiss-based magnetic model outlined below. Previous computational studies have not, to the best of our knowledge, considered such a scaling technique. Similarly motivated theoretical NMR studies have been applied to varying oxovanadium phosphates, but there the magnetic model involved the direct diagonalization of parametrized Heisenberg-Dirac-vanVleck Hamiltonians.42-44 The present approach is more straightforward and, subject to its successful use here, might be readily applied to the analysis of the paramagnetic NMR spectra of a broad range of TM compounds. Experimentally derived sets of Curie-Weiss parameters deﬁning the temperature-dependent magnetic susceptibility  1)(T) of each material are required. However, the  1)(T) curves of strengite and phosphosiderite have not previously been reported and are therefore obtained and analyzed here.

The article is structured as follows: detailed descriptions of the relevant crystal structures are presented ﬁrst as an aid to the subsequent analyses of the NMR spectra. Next, the NMR shift mechanisms relevant within the present paramagnetic Fe(III) phases are outlined, along with the theoretical method used to obtain the hyperﬁne parameters. The experimental methodology is then presented, followed by the combined experimental and theoretical results, associated discussion, and conclusions.

FePO4 (heterosite type, space group Pnma) is an olivine-type compound,24 the crystal structure8 (Figure 1a) comprising FeO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra linked such that each PO4 unit shares a corner with four FeO6 units and an edge with one further FeO6 unit. A single P sublattice occurs within this material.

Monoclinic Li3Fe2(PO4)3 (A type; anti-NASICON; space group P21/n) is readily formed by the reaction of stoichiometric mixtures of Fe2O3 and LiH2PO4 at approximately 800 °C under air.11,21,45 The structure comprises corner-sharing FeO6 and PO4 units (Figure 1b), with the Fe(III) ions distributed over two and the Li and P ions each over three symmetry-distinct sublattices.11,45 The three P sites, denoted here as P1, P1s, and P2, each contact four Fe(III) ions, in keeping with the corner-sharing motif. The Li1 site is 4-fold coordinated, linking to two neighboring FeO6 units by edge sharing, while the Li2 and Li3 sites are both 5-fold coordinated.11 However, Li2 bears one Li-O bond of length 2.46 Å,11 substantially longer than typical Li-O distances of approximately 1.7-2.0 Å. Similarly, the Li3 site displays two substantially elongated Li-O bonds of lengths 2.37 and 2.44 Å.11 Rhombohedral Li3Fe2(PO4)3 (B type; NASICON; space group R3j) is obtained by ion exchange from Na3Fe2(PO4)3, its framework comprising exclusively corner-sharing FeO6 and PO4 units (Figure 1c).12,46 Here, the Fe(III) ions are distributed over two symmetry-distinct sublattices, while the Li and P ions each occupy a single sublattice. The PO4 ions contact four and the Li ions (in tetrahedral LiO4 coordination) three Fe(III) sites in their ﬁrst cation coordination shells, the LiO4 units displaying two corner-sharing and one edge-sharing contact with neighboring FeO6 units.

The crystal structure of the LiFeP2O7 diphosphate is monoclinic (space group P21), as shown in Figure 1d.8,9,47 Here, the Fe(III) and Li ions each occupy a single sublattice and the P ions two symmetry-distinct sublattices denoted P1 and P2. Each FeO6 unit links to six P2O7 groups such that P ions contact three Fe(III) ions in their ﬁrst cation coordination shells, linking to two Fe(III) ions by corner sharing and to the third by edge sharing split over both P ions in the P2O7 unit. The Li ions occupy tunnels formed by the FeO6 and P2O7 units and contact two Fe(III) ions by edge sharing in their ﬁrst cation coordination shells.

Strengite and phosphosiderite have the same stoichiometry FePO4 · 2H2O, crystallizing in orthorhombic (space group Pbca) and monoclinic (space group P21) lattices, respectively (Figure 1e and 1g).48 The structures of both polymorphs consist of corner-sharing FeO6 and PO4 units, two corners of each FeO6 unit hosting the O atoms associated with structural water molecules. The PO4 units contact four Fe(III) ions in their ﬁrst cation coordination shells. Loss of structural water occurs when strengite is heated to 120 °C and when phosphosiderite is dried at 80 °C under vacuum, leading in both cases to the formation of distinct DH phases.7,19 The FeO6 octahedra are transformed to FeO4 tetrahedra by this process, but the respective space group symmetries of the two forms remain unchanged (Figure 1f and 1h).7 The Fe(III) coordination in DH phosphosiderite might reasonably be regarded as pseudotetrahedral, given the existence of an elongated ﬁfth Fe-O bond of length 2.24 Å. However, FeO4 and PO4 units retain a corner-sharing motif, the P sites again contacting four Fe(III) ions in their ﬁrst cation coordination shells.

Solid-state NMR spectroscopy is well established as offering a quantitative description of the local environments of NMR-active nuclei at the atomic level. However, only a limited number of successful NMR studies of Fe(III) phases exist, a scarcity largely due to the substantial line broadenings and NMR shifts experienced in paramagnetic systems.49-51 Moreover, 31P (nuclear spin quantum number I ) 1/2) emerges as a particularly challenging species from which to obtain high-resolution NMR, as a consequence of both the increased shift due to the relatively large 31P gyromagnetic ratio and the high degree of covalency of TM · · · P bond pathways (of Fe-O-P type in the present materials)52-55 and of the difﬁculties inherent to the excitation of broad resonances. Meanwhile, the 7Li (I ) 3/2) NMR is further complicated by the potential contribution of both dipolar and quadrupolar interactions to the spinning sideband intensities. The latter two interactions may, in principle, be separated by comparing spectra obtained at two different ﬁelds, given that the former scales with the ﬁeld while the latter is ﬁeld independent. Alternatively, 6Li spectra can be acquired, since this I ) 1 nucleus possesses a much smaller quadrupole moment.

The large hyperﬁne shifts obtained in typical inorganic paramagnets may generally be ascribed to the Fermi contact (FC) interaction arising out of the delocalization of some fraction of the spin density nominally resident within the TM d orbitals into the s orbitals of the NMR observed site. The latter restriction reﬂects the fact that it is only s orbitals that manifest ﬁnite values at the nucleus. The contact NMR shift, δiso (ppm), is often predicted or rationalized on the basis of an expression of the form56 where Aiso denotes the isotropic hyperﬁne coupling constant linking the unpaired TM electrons distributed throughout the lattice with the NMR observed nucleus,  1)M is the paramagnetic molar susceptibility of the compound studied, NA is Avogadro’s number, µ0 is the permeability of free space, ge is the electron g factor (assumed equal to the approximated free electron value of 2 hereafter), µB is the Bohr magneton, ν0 ) gIµNB0/h denotes the single quantum resonance frequency of the observed nucleus, gI and µN are the nuclear g factor and magneton, respectively, B0 is the applied static magnetic induction, and h is Planck’s constant.

It is clear that the contact shift varies directly with Aiso, which is in turn proportional to the electron spin density transferred from TM to ligand sites (more speciﬁcally, to the spin density present precisely at the NMR observed nucleus). In practice, this means that Aiso, displays a useful sensitivity to a range of factors deﬁning the local environment of the observed nucleus, including the number, geometry, and degree of covalency of the bond pathways linking the paramagnetic and observed species.41,50,57 The shift also varies directly with the paramagnetic susceptibility,  1)M, which is in turn sensitive to the number of unpaired electrons at and the nature of any residual magnetic correlations between the TM ions. Interestingly, it would seem that there has been little previous systematic study of the inﬂuence of such correlations upon calculated hyperﬁne parameters. Accordingly, both Curie-Weiss and Curie magnetic models are applied below: the former incorporates a mean ﬁeld treatment of the correlations and the latter represents formally isolated TM moments.

Previous Mo¨ssbauer studies of diamagnetic 119Sn dopants in a range of rare earth Fe(III) orthoferrites and Fe2O3 analyzed the spin density transfers arising due to various types of crystalﬁeld-split orbital interactions.58 Extending these models to the present materials and considering Fe-O-P/Li pathways at bond angle θ, we distinguish limiting linear and orthogonal cases as follows: (i) θ ) 180° Fe(eg)-O(pσ)-P/Li (delocalization type); (ii) θ ) 180° Fe(t2g)-O(pπ p.e. pσ)-P/Li (polarization type); (iii) θ ) 90° Fe(eg)-O(pσ p.e. pπ)-P/Li (polarization type); and (iv) θ ) 90° Fe(t2g)-O(pπ)-P/Li (delocalization type), where p.e. denotes an intra-atomic potential exchange (Hund’s ﬁrst rule type) interaction between electrons in O 2p orbitals and σ and π label orbitals relative to the Fe-O vector. The delocalization and polarization mechanisms are expected to transfer majority [i.e., positive, assuming the Fe(III) moments are also positive] and minority (negative) spin density, respectively, from Fe(III) to P/Li sites. However, the former paths are expected to dominate over the latter, given that they involve one and two intervening O orbitals, respectively.

It is difficult to predict the magnitude of the shift at intermediate angles, expressions for the hyperﬁne ﬁeld at 119Sn dopants, Hhf (in theory proportional to the contact NMR shift of eq 1), of the form Hhf(θ) ) R +  7) cos θ + γ cos2 θ having been applied in the previous studies of Fe(III) oxides,58-60 where R,  7), and γ denote ﬁtted coefﬁcients. Here, the ﬁrst term arises due to angularly independent Fe(d)-O(s) σ overlap, the second from angularly dependent Fe(d)-O(sp) σ overlap, and the third from angularly dependent Fe(d)-O(p) σ and π overlaps. The hyperﬁne ﬁeld (and associated contact shift) approaches a minimum at θ ) cos-1(7)/2γ) within the range 90° e θ e 180°. Lacking ﬁtted R,  7), and γ coefﬁcients for the present phases we cannot be more speciﬁc but note instead that the previous 119Sn Mo¨ssbauer study provided values of +949, +2487, and +1889 kOe, respectively, leading to a minimum at θ ) 131°.58 It should be borne in mind, however, that the shift is always expected to be positive within the present materials and should generally increase with the number of Fe-O-P/Li bond pathways. Models for the distance dependence present greater difﬁculties, and so we adopt the straightforward notion that the elongation of the bonds comprising the Fe-O-P/Li pathways should result in weaker overlap and thus in smaller shifts.

While we note the considerable success of even very simple empirical models for the prediction of contact shifts,29-32,61 clear difﬁculties remain, particularly in attempting to assign closely spaced shifts to sites with very similar local bonding environments. Accordingly, we now outline a quantitative periodic DFT-based method for the calculation of hyperﬁne parameters. 

All electronic structure calculations in this work were performed within the CRYSTAL06 linear combinations of atomic orbitals (LCAO) code.62 Given that the reliable calculation of hyperﬁne parameters places heavy demands on basis set (BS) quality, two types of BS were adopted: the ﬁrst is a more limited set amenable to structural optimizations (denoted BS-I hereafter) and the second an extended and more ﬂexible set suitable for single-point hyperﬁne calculations (denoted BS-II). For BS-I, the individual atomic sets are of the form (4s1p)/[2s1p] for H, (7s2p1d)/[1s2sp1d] for Li, (10s4p1d)/ [1s2sp1d] for O, (16s8p1d)/[1s3sp1d] for P, and (20s12p5d)/ [1s4sp2d] for Fe, where the values in parentheses denote the number of Gaussian primitives and the values in square brackets the contraction scheme. The BS-I sets were selected from the CRYSTAL online repository:63 the Fe set having previously been used in a wide range of magnetic Fe compounds, the H, O, and P sets in a recent study of hexagonal hydroxyapatite Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2,64 and the Li set in LiOH.

The BS-II sets were based upon those tested and deemed sufﬁciently accurate within a recent extensive set of EPR calculations for isolated TM complexes by Munzarova´ and Kaupp, albeit with adjustments for use in periodic calculations.66 Modiﬁed IGLO-III sets67 were adopted for H, O, and P, removing the most diffuse s and p shells in the latter two species and the most diffuse s shell in the former, yielding a (5s2p)/ [3s2p] set for H, (10s6p2d)/[6s5p2d] for O, and (11s7p3d)/ [7s6p3d] for P. Lacking a previously deﬁned IGLO-III set for Li, a reasonably ﬂexible and extended TZDP-derived (triple9) plus double-polarization) basis68 was used in which the most diffuse s shell was removed and the exponents of the remaining outermost s shell and two outermost p shells increased, yielding a (9s2p)/[5s2p] set. Tests using the B3LYP method, ﬁxed experimental structures, and a more extended (10s2p)/[6s2p] Li set yielded a mean difference in shift of only 11 ppm, acceptably small in comparison with the mean Li shift of 201 ppm, where the means were computed over the ﬁve Li sites considered. The smaller (9s2p)/[5s2p] Li set is therefore used in all subsequent BS-II calculations. An Ahlrichs DZP-derived (double9) plus polarization) set68 was applied for Fe, removing the most diffuse s and p shell, and increasing the exponent of the next most diffuse s shell, yielding a (13s9p5d)/[7s5p3d] set. Munzarova´ and Kaupp66 further supplemented the DZP Fe functions with a diffuse (1s2p1d) set drawn from the effective core pseudopotential valence basis of Dolg et al.,69 but this was not possible in the present calculations due to ensuing SCF instabilities. Numerical difﬁculties of this type are often encountered when attempting to apply molecular BSs bearing diffuse functions directly within periodic calculations. We note, however, that the proper basis for an inﬁnite crystal comprises a series of Bloch functions, within which low exponent primitives might reasonably be neglected (in close-packed solids, at least), for we need never describe the decay of the electron distribution into vacuum.62

Spin-polarized hybrid exchange-correlation functionals based upon the B3LYP form70-72 and bearing weights of Fock exchange F0 ) 0% (pure DFT), 20% (B3LYP), and 35% were applied. The B3LYP functional has previously demonstrated superior performance in reproducing the properties of a wide range of transition metal compounds,73-76 while the F0 ) 35% functional has been shown to provide magnetic coupling constants in good agreement with experiment.77,78 Again, the motivation here is to examine the ability of a range of functionals to reproduce the experimental hyperﬁne data. Sufﬁcient convergence in total energies and spin densities was obtained by application of integral series truncation thresholds of 10-7, 10-7, 10-7, 10-7 and 10-14 for Coulomb overlap and penetration, exchange overlap, and gand n-series exchange penetration,respectively, along with isotropic Monkhorst-Pack reciprocal space meshes with shrinking factors 6, 6, 4, 4, 5, 5, 6, and 6 for heterosite FePO4, LiFeP2O7, monoclinic and rhombohedral Li3Fe2(PO4)3, strengite, DH strengite, phosphosiderite, and DH phosphosiderite, respectively, where the parameters are all as described in the code documentation.62

Hyperﬁne calculations using the BS-II sets were performed within both the ﬁxed experimental (termed a single point energy, denoted SPE) and the fully geometry optimized (atomic positions and lattice vectors; denoted OPT) structures. The optimizations used the BS-I sets and were pursued until convergence tolerances of 10-7, 0.0003, and 0.0012 au for total energy, root-mean-square (rms) force, and rms displacement, respectively, were simultaneously satisﬁed. Tolerances for maximum force and displacement components were set at 1.5 times the respective rms values. All calculations assume a ferromagnetic spin distribution, as enforced by initial spin constraints on the cells consistent with ﬁve unpaired electrons per Fe(III) site. We note, however, that the ﬁnal total energies and spin and charge distributions are obtained in the absence of such constraints. The charge and spin density distributions within the cells were further analyzed by application of the Mulliken partitioning scheme.

The isotropic chemical shifts at 31P and 7Li sites are assumed to be dominated by the Fermi contact (FC) interaction with Hamiltonian (see Supporting Information for a complete derivation)

where I denotes the nuclear spin angular momentum vector operator [with quantum numbers I ) 1/2 and 3/2 for 31P and 7Li, respectively, and gI values of 2.26322 and 2.170977, respectively.80 I is quantized along the axis deﬁned by the applied static induction, B0, taken here to lie along the z axis. The component along this axis is given by quantum number mI (in units of p), where mI takes the values -I, -I + 1,..., I 1, I]; S is the electron spin angular momentum vector operator [treated analogously to I above, with quantum number S ) 1/2 and components along the B0|z axis (in units of p) given by mS ) (1/2]; |ψR7)(RN)|2 is the spin-unpaired electron density at the position RN of the NMR observed nucleus. The latter quantity represents the sole explicit contribution of the DFT calculations to EFC. A convenient physical model of the interaction amount -VgeµBS|ψR7)(RN)|2 of electronic moment into the nuclear volume V, where it experiences an assumed uniform magnetic ﬂux density B ) 2µ0gIµNI/3V due to the nuclear magnetic moment.

The B0 ﬁelds applied here are sufﬁciently high that we may treat the hyperﬁne interactions within the uncoupled regime, so that HFC then operates upon states deﬁned by good quantum numbers |ISmImS〉 and the factor I · S occurring in HFC may be replaced with the operator product IzSz. The ﬁrst-order energy shift due to HFC is then 〈ISmImS|HFC|ISmImS〉, yielding hyperﬁnesplit energy levels AisomImS where Aiso ) 23 µ0µBµNgegI|ψR-(RN)|2 is the isotropic hyperﬁne coupling constant appearing in eq 1. The selection rules ∆mI ) ( 1 and ∆mS ) 0 deﬁning the present single quantum NMR experiments lead to a hyperﬁne energy splitting Aiso/2 (in addition to the normal nuclear Zeeman splitting) separating the initial and ﬁnal states of the allowed NMR transitions. In a form equivalent to eq 1, the isotropic shift (ppm) associated with the Fermi contact interaction is then straightforwardly obtained as δiso ) 106 AisoΦ where Φ ) Mpara/Msat denotes the magnetization scaling factor (derived below) relating the saturated ferromagnetic magnetization, Msat, represented by the DFT calculations to the much weaker paramagnetic magnetization, Mpara, relevant to the NMR experiments. Note that eq 1 is not used directly here, for it does not include the scaling just discussed.

The electron-nuclear magnetic dipolar (dip) interactions are also computed, where the associated anisotropic hyperﬁne coupling tensor is of the form

where i and j label Cartesian axes. The elements of the symmetric dipolar tensor T at a given nuclear position take the integral form Tij ) ∑µν ∑g Pµνg R-∫ µ(r) r2 ∆ij-3ri rj r 5 ν g (r)dr in which P denotes the direct space spin density matrix, µ and ν label atomic orbitals [ 11)µ in the reference cell (g ) 0) and  11)g ν in the gth cell], g spans the set of lattice vectors, r denotes a position vector originating at the NMR observed nucleus, and ∆ij denotes the Kronecker delta (capitalized to differentiate it from the shift, δ). Here, the T tensor represents the sole explicit contribution of the DFT calculations to Adip ij . Note that eqs 6 and 7 above bear close analogy with a sum over the pairwise dipolar interactions of the observed nuclear moment with each of an array of electronic moments distributed throughout the lattice. Clearly, the present DFT calculations yield the electron spin density as a continuous scalar ﬁeld, necessitating the integral form for Tij adopted in eq 7, but previous studies have made useful progress by considering the unpaired electrons to be completely localized in the form of point dipoles situated at TM nuclear positions.81,82 As for the FC interaction, the NMR selection rules lead to a hyperﬁne energy splitting Adip ij /2 (again in addition to the nuclear Zeeman splitting) separating initial and ﬁnal states of the allowed NMR transitions, the shifts (ppm) associated with the principal tensor components being obtained as δkk ) 106 Adip kk Φ 2hν where k ) x, y, z corresponds to a principal axis of the diagonalized T tensor, the components arranged such that |δzz| g |δxx| g |δyy| and naturally obeying the traceless condition δzz + δxx + δyy ) 0. The dipolar width, deﬁned as |δzz δxx|, is later compared with the experimental spectral widths.

For 7Li sites, the widths of the spinning sideband manifolds due to the ﬁrst-order quadrupole interaction are also computed, where, for I ) 3/2, the upper and lower edges of the satellite transitions are separated in frequency by

in which Q denotes the 7Li electric quadrupole moment of 0.0401 barns83 and Vzz the largest principal component of the diagonalized traceless electric ﬁeld gradient tensor obtained from the DFT calculations. The relative importance of the dipolar and quadrupolar interactions in determining the observed spectral widths is discussed below.

In deriving an expression for the scaling factor, Φ ) Mpara/ Msat, we ﬁrst note that this might normally be assumed equal to the Brillouin function, BJ(λ), for a species with total electronic angular momentum quantum number J84 where λ ) gJµBJB0 kB(T - Θ) and in which gJ denotes the Lande´ g factor, kB the Boltzmann constant, and Θ the experimentally determined Weiss constant of the compound considered. However, a further approximation is made here to more readily incorporate the fact that the experimental effective moment and the spin-only moment represented by the DFT calculations typically differ. Noting that the quotient λ is typically much smaller than unity, we follow the derivation of the Curie law and substitute the Maclaurin expansion for coth(x), yielding BJ(λ) ≈ (J + 1)λ/3J + O(λ3). Retaining only the term linear in λ and noting that the present DFT calculations neglect the orbital angular momentum [likely to be small for Fe(III)], so that a value J ≡ Sform (the formal spin of the TM species) may be assumed in the expression for Msat, the scaling factor for each material is obtained as Φ(B0,T,Θ,Sform,µeff) ) B0µeff
2 3kBgeµBSform(T - Θ where µeff is the experimental effective moment obtained along with Θ from ﬁts of the Curie-Weiss law to the experimental  1)-1(T) curves. A value Sform ) 5/2 is used for Fe(III) hereafter, along with the experimentally derived µeff and Θ values presented in Table 1. A temperature of T ) 320 K is also assumed throughout, partly to account for the effects of frictional heating in the 7Li MAS experiments. The factor Φ for each material is used directly in eqs 5 and 8 above. A detailed derivation of Φ is presented in the Supporting Information.

The potential disadvantages and sources of error arising within this method are apparent. First, it must be regarded as semiempirical, relying as it does upon data derived from experimental susceptibility measurements. Second, implicit throughout is the assumption that the pointwise paramagnetic magnetization in the lattice may be reasonably approximated by an isotropic scaling of the ferromagnetic magnetization. Third, no account has been taken of the effects of magnetic anisotropy (giving rise to the ‘pseudocontact’ shift) and zero-ﬁeld splitting (ZFS) upon the hyperﬁne parameters. The former requires explicit knowledge of the second-rank  1) or g tensor and the latter the second-rank g tensor and ZFS D value. Such effects are expected to be signiﬁcantly smaller than the dominant interactions treated above [in particular, the anisotropy in  1) for a d5 TM ion such as Fe(III) will be small or nonexistent]: the reviews of Bertini et al.56 and Kaupp and Ko¨hler85 provide further discussion.

Strengite (orthorhombic FePO4 · 2H2O) was prepared by mixing 0.009 M FeCl3 · 6H2O and 0.027 M H3PO4 solutions under magnetic stirring.19 The pH of the mixed solution was adjusted to 3 by addition of 0.04 M NaOH solution, and the ﬁnal solution was reﬂuxed for 2 days. A yellowish powder of strengite was obtained following centrifugation and drying at room temperature. A portion of the synthesized material was dried for 12 h at 140 °C, leading to the formation of the DH strengite phase.19 Phosphosiderite (monoclinic FePO4 · 2H2O) was synthesized by mixing 0.009 M FeCl3 · 6H2O and 0.027 M H3PO4 solutions, adjusting the pH to approximately 1 by addition of 0.5 M HCl solution.19 The resulting solution was reﬂuxed for 12 days and the phosphosiderite solid product separated from the mother liquor by centrifugation followed by drying at room temperature. A portion of the synthesized material was dried at 80 °C for 12 h under vacuum, forming the associated DH phosphosiderite phase.7 The preparations of monoclinic and rhombohedral Li3Fe2(PO4)3 and of LiFeP2O7 are described in refs 8, 9, 12, 21-23, and 86.

XRD data (see Supporting Information) were collected for all samples on a Rigaku Miniﬂex diffractometer using Cr KR radiation. Following conversion to the 2θ values appropriate for Cu KR radiation, the XRD patterns of DH strengite and DH phosphosiderite samples were compared directly with the previously reported patterns.7,19 Similarly, the XRD patterns of strengite, phosphosiderite, monoclinic and rhombohedral Li3Fe2(PO4)3 compounds, and LiFeP2O7 were compared with patterns simulated on the basis of the previously reported structural reﬁnements of these compounds.9,11,46,48

The magnetic characterizations of strengite and phosphosiderite were performed using a Quantum Design MPMS XL-5 SQUID magnetometer. The temperature-dependent DC susceptibilities [ 1)(T) ) M(T)/H, where M is the sample magnetization and H the applied static magnetic ﬁeld] were measured while cooling the sample from 300 to 2 K in a static magnetic ﬁeld of 1000 Oe. The Curie and Weiss constants, C and Θ, respectively, were obtained from linear ﬁts to the  1)-1(T) data. In addition, ﬁeld-cooled (FC) and zero-ﬁeldcooled (ZFC) susceptibilities were measured from 300 to 2 K in a magnetic ﬁeld of 10 Oe. The susceptibility data obtained previously7 for DH strengite and DH phosphosiderite were also reanalyzed, the results being presented in the Supporting Information.

31P (I ) 1/2) spin-echo mapping experiments were performed on a CMX-200 spectrometer equipped with a 5 mm Chemagnetics static probe at a Larmor frequency of approximately 81 MHz. The 31P NMR spectra were referenced to an 85% wt H3PO4 solution at 0 ppm. The experiments used a spin-echo pulse sequence of the form 90°xsτs180°ysτsacquire with an evolution period τ of 20 µs and a 90° pulse width of 3 µs. The irradiation frequency was varied with a step size of 0.08 MHz over ranges as large as 2 MHz, where the step size was chosen to be less than ω1,87 a separate spectrum being collected at each irradiation frequency. The individual (phased) spectra were then summed, after addition of an appropriate offset frequency, to yield the full spectrum. We note that this methodology, termed ‘spin-echo mapping’ by some52-54,87-90 and ‘VOCS’ (variable offset cumulative spectrum) by others,91-93 is required in order to uniformly excite resonance(s) the line width of which is greater than the bandwidth and excitation proﬁle of the probe, a condition met by many of the 31P resonances observed here. Such a technique is particularly important if the dipolar width and the center of gravity of a static spectrum are to be extracted with any accuracy. The spin-lattice relaxation (T1) times were measured by use of an inversion-recovery pulse sequence. A pulse delay of 0.01 s was used on the basis of the measured T1 time of approximately 0.5 ms for strengite. The T1 times of the other compounds were assumed to be similar or shorter. The electron-nuclear dipolar couplings arising within the 31P NMR spectrum of LiFeP2O7, the only compound within which appreciably asymmetric line shapes were observed, were simulated using the MATNMR module within MATLAB V.7.1,94 yielding the isotropic resonances.

31P spin-echo MAS NMR experiments for monoclinic Li3Fe2(PO4)3 alone were performed at 11.7 and 4.7 T on Varian Inﬁnity Plus and CMX-200 spectrometers equipped with Samoson 1.3 and 1.8 mm MAS probes, respectively, at Larmor frequencies of approximately 202 and 81 MHz, respectively. The evolution period τ of the spin-echo pulse sequence was synchronized with the spinning speed. A 90° pulse width of 1.15 µs and a pulse delay of 0.05 s were used to acquire the 11.7 T data, while a 90° pulse width of 1.50 µs and a pulse delay of 0.05 s were used for the 4.7 T data. 31P MAS NMR spin-echo mapping experiments, again for monoclinic Li3Fe2(PO4)3 alone, were performed at 11.7 T with an irradiation frequency step size of 0.2 MHz over a 2 MHz range, where the step size was chosen to be less than ω1 (0.22 MHz). A pulse delay of 0.05 s was used.

The 7Li (I ) 3/2) MAS (magic angle spinning) NMR experiments were performed at a Larmor frequency of 77.7 MHz on a CMX200 spectrometer equipped with a Chemagnetics 3.2 mm HFX MAS probe. Spinning speeds in the range 17-20 kHz were used, a 1.0 M LiCl solution at 0 ppm being adopted as a reference. A rotorsynchronized spin-echo pulse sequence with a pulse delay of 0.15 s and a pulse width of 3.3 µs was used.

The XRD powder patterns of as-synthesized strengite, phosphosiderite, and their anhydrous phases are in good agreement with the previously reported data7,19 (Figure S1, Supporting Information). Similarly, the LiFeP2O7 and monoclinic and rhombohedral Li3Fe2(PO4)3 samples yield XRD powder patterns similar to those simulated on the basis of the previously reported crystal structures9,11,46 (Figure S2, Supporting Information).

The ﬁeld-cooled and zero-ﬁeld-cooled (FC and ZFC) susceptibility curves of strengite both show broad peaks at approximately 6-7 K (Figure 2a), indicating the onset of magnetic order. The FC curve of strengite reveals an increase in magnetic susceptibility below the ordering temperature typical of a ferrimagnetic material. The susceptibility follows the Curie-Weiss law above this temperature, a ﬁt of the form  1) )  1)o + C/(T Θ), yielding µeff and Θ values of 5.86 µB and -42.3 K, respectively. Meanwhile, phosphosiderite displays a magnetic phase transition in the range 21-25 K (Figure 2b), ﬁts of the Curie-Weiss form yielding µeff and Θ values of 5.74 µB and -45.8 K, respectively, as presented in Table 1. Phosphosiderite also shows ferrimagnetic ordering, with Sshaped susceptibility curves apparent below the transition. The Curie-Weiss parameters obtained from reﬁtting of the DH strengite and DH phosphosiderite  1)(T) curves (Section S4, Supporting Information) are also presented in Table 1.

The static solid-state NMR spectra of the Fe(III) phosphates presented in Figures 3-5 yield extremely large 31P contact shifts in the approximate range 5700-20500 ppm, with broad spectral widths amounting, in some cases, to more than 4000 ppm. It is noted that many of these resonances are too broad to allow a simple determination of the isotropic resonance even by use of ultrafast MAS (typically >50 kHz), as discussed in more detail later for the case of monoclinic Li3Fe2(PO4)3. The majority of the resonances display near symmetric line shapes within which the peak maxima lie very close to the center of gravity, so that the former may be taken as a close approximation to the value of the isotropic resonance. However, the line shapes of both resonances in LiFeP2O7 are clearly asymmetric, the positions of the isotropic resonances therefore being estimated by spectral simulations in this case. Analysis of the spectrum of monoclinic Li3Fe2(PO4)3 presents greater challenges, as discussed below. The large shifts may be generally ascribed to the FC interaction described above,


typical 31P chemical shifts for diamagnetic phosphate phases lying in the approximate range (100 ppm.95 The broad line widths, meanwhile, may be directly attributed to electron-nuclear dipolar interactions, on the basis that 31P is a spin-1/2 nucleus and therefore experiences no quadrupolar coupling and that typical chemical shift anisotropies in other phosphate phases amount to less than 100 ppm.96-104

Heterosite FePO4 displays one isotropic resonance at 5770 ppm under MAS conditions (spectrum not shown, see ref 105). A peak maximum at 14 350 ppm is observed for rhombohedral Li3Fe2(PO4)3 (Figure 3a), while strengite and DH strengite yield peak maxima at 15 800 and 20 426 ppm, respectively (Figure 3b and 3c) and phosphosiderite and DH phosphosiderite at 16 680 and 19 149 ppm, respectively (Figure 3d and 3e). Each of these six compounds bears only one symmetry unique P site, as discussed above.7,10,46 The number of observed 31P NMR resonances is consistent with the crystallographic data in each case. The magnitudes of the hyperﬁne shifts increase in the order heterosite < rhombohedral Li3Fe2(PO4)3 < strengite < phosphosiderite < DH phosphosiderite < DH strengite. The relevant structural details are reported in Table 2.

Mindful of the simple Fe-O-P bond angle based model (eq 2) described in section 3.1 above, it is difﬁcult to rationalize the ordering of the shifts on the basis of any single factor listed in Table 2. Consider, for example, that the compound with the largest number of Fe-O-P contacts displays the smallest shift. However, a generally increasing trend is evident with opening of the average Fe-O-P angle and with contraction of the average bond distance, both of these factors possibly explaining the smaller shift obtained for heterosite FePO4. The results of the contact shift calculations performed within the ﬁxed experimental structures (SPE), presented in Table 3, reproduce the experimental order, save that the DH phosphosiderite and DH strengite values are transposed. However, the calculations using the fully optimized (OPT) structures further transpose the strengite and phosphosiderite shifts. More detailed comparisons of the experimental and theoretical shifts follow below.

Static spin-echo mapping provides three peak maxima at 14 230, 15 250, and 16 200 ppm for monoclinic Li3Fe2(PO4)3 (Figure 4a), consistent with the number of symmetry-distinct P sublattices discussed above.11 The P2, P1s, and P1 sites display average Fe-O distances of 1.97, 2.04, and 2.01 Å, respectively, all with average P-O bond lengths of 1.53 Å.11 On this basis, the peaks at 14 230, 15 250, and 16 200 ppm are assigned to P1s, P1, and P2 sites, respectively. Here, examination of the average Fe-O-P bond angles for each site does not aid the assignment, given that these span a narrow range of 2.6° around an overall average of 144.7°. The calculations (Table 3) conﬁrm the proposed experimental shift assignments in all methods applied. However, the experimental peak separations δiso(P1) δiso(P1s) and δiso(P2) δiso(P1s) of 1020 and 950 ppm, respectively, are only qualitatively reproduced by the SPE calculations: values of 632 and 536 ppm, respectively, are obtained at F0 ) 0%; 651 and 617 ppm, respectively, at F0 ) 20%; and 622 and 563 ppm, respectively, at F0 ) 35%. The F0 ) 20% OPT method performs signiﬁcantly more poorly, yielding values of 449 and 277 ppm, respectively. However, some of the apparent discrepancies likely arise out of the fact that the resonances overlap in this phase, leading to greater uncertainty in the positions of the isotropic shifts relative to the peak maxima.

In light of these discrepancies and given that monoclinic Li3Fe2(PO4)3 represents the most challenging of the materials studied, we attempted exploratory 31P MAS experiments for this phase alone. The spin-echo mapping MAS spectra (Figure 4b) acquired at spinning frequencies of 50, 53, 55, and 58 kHz in an 11.7 T ﬁeld clearly reveal the most serious challenge, namely, that even over a narrow range of spinning frequencies the peak positions vary signiﬁcantly due to the interplay of the variations in temperature associated with frictional heating and the relative motion in the spinning sideband positions arising directly out of the variations in spinning speed. As a consequence, it is very difﬁcult to unambiguously identify the isotropic resonances. The problem is compounded by the broad line widths of the individual spinning sidebands (approximately 22-32 kHz for this sample, the exact value depending upon the ﬁeld strength). However, by identifying at least one isotropic resonance and tracking the position of this isotropic peak as a function of spinning frequency, it is possible to effectively scale and align the MAS spectra obtained at each spinning frequency onto a selected reference spectrum, thereby negating the effects of frictional heating. The method is fully described in the Supporting Information; Figure 4c shows the ﬁnal MAS spectra at 11.7 T (58 kHz) and 4.7 T (38 kHz) scaled and aligned using the static spin-echo mapping spectrum as reference. Three isotropic resonances at 14 514, 15 401, and 16 235 may be unambiguously identiﬁed from the combined spectra, assigned to the P1s, P1, and P2 sites, respectively, as above and leading to peak separations δiso(P1) δiso(P1s) and δiso(P2) δiso(P1s) of 887 and 834 ppm, respectively. The latter values are in marginally better agreement with the calculated separations presented above.

The line shape simulations for LiFeP2O7 shown in Figure 5 provide two isotropic resonances at 8230 and 14 398 ppm, againconsistent with the number of inequivalent P sublattices determined crystallographically.8,9,47 The reported crystal structure yields longer average Fe-O and similar average P-O bond distances for the P2 site (2.02 and 1.51 Å, respectively) as compared with the P1 site (1.96 and 1.51 Å, respectively).9 The same sites show signiﬁcantly different average Fe-O-P bond angles at 132.8° and 139.3°, respectively. Assuming that both angles lie above the putative shift minimum at θ ) cos-1(7)/ 2γ) (see eq 2), so that an increase in angle leads to increased shift, the peaks at 8230 and 14 398 ppm can reasonably be assigned to P2 and P1 sites, respectively. The calculations (Table 3) conﬁrm this assignment in all methods. Furthermore, the experimental shift separation of 6168 ppm is well reproduced, values of 7401, 6278, 5643, and 7070 ppm being obtained from the F0 ) 0%, 20%, and 35% SPE and F0 ) 20% OPT calculations, respectively.

Table 3 and Figure 6 compare the experimental [MAS isotropic shifts for monoclinic Li3Fe2(PO4)3] and theoretical 31P NMR spectra of monoclinic Li3Fe2(PO4)3: (a) Static Figure 4. spin-echo mapping spectrum at 4.7 T. Inset: the local environments of P ions. (b) Spin-echo mapping MAS spectra at 11.7 T with spinning frequencies of 50, 53, 55, and 58 kHz. (c) Comparison of the spin-echo mapping MAS spectrum at 11.7 T (58 kHz spinning frequency), spinecho MAS spectrum at 4.7 T (38 kHz spinning frequency), and static spin-echo mapping spectrum, the former two scaled to be consistent with the latter. theoretical 31P NMR parameters. Examining ﬁrst the two sets of SPE F0 ) 20% data, it is clear that the inclusion of residual magnetic correlations, as embodied within the Curie-Weiss model, leads to markedly superior agreement with experiment. Application of a Curie-type model, in which µeff is set to the spin-only value of 5.92 µB and Θ to zero, leads to much larger deviations, where it is apparently the omission of accurate Θ values that dominates. It is clear that future theoretical studies of hyperﬁne interactions in related materials must incorporate such effects, ideally deriving the relevant magnetic parameters from ﬁrst principles. Parameterization of Θ on the basis of the total energies of a range of magnetic conﬁgurations would seem to offer a promising initial prospect. We note also that the previous DFT study of hyperﬁne effects in a range of TM oxide cathodes did not fully account for the variations in susceptibilities across the phases considered, although the Weiss constants of many, but not all, of the materials considered were small.41 Second, it is evident that the hyperﬁne shifts depend strongly on the Fock exchange content of the Hamiltonian: F0 ) 0% (pure DFT) overestimating and the F0 ) 35% method underestimating the experimental shifts. This is consistent with the well-known trend whereby the amount of spin density delocalized from TM to ligand sites increases progressively as F0 is reduced,73 due mainly to the concomitant decrease in the strength of the electron pair interactions. Similar effects underlie the equally well-established trend whereby the exchange coupling between TM ions increases in strength as F0 is reduced.73,78 The dipolar interactions are apparently less affected by change of functional, indicating that the relatively small redistributions of spin density (conserving the total number of unpaired electrons per cell) accompanying variations in F0 are not of marked consequence for dipolar effects.

Table 3 also presents the calculated rms errors (rmses) and Pearson correlation coefﬁcients, the former serving as an approximate measure of conﬁdence in the computed results in that sites characterized by hyperﬁne shifts the separations of which are less than the respective rmse value might be incorrectly identiﬁed (save in the case that the errors are mainly systematic in nature). All of the calculations yield high correlation coefﬁcients close to unity. However, comparing rmse values, it is clear that the F0 ) 20% SPE and OPT calculations yield a superior set of shifts, the ﬁtted lines shown in Figure 6 corresponding to δiso,calc ) 1.094δiso,expt 1040 ppm in the former case and δiso,calc ) 1.005δiso,expt + 155 ppm in the latter. On the basis of a gradient very close to unity and the low rmse value and intercept, it is argued that the accuracy of the F0 ) 20% OPT set is superior, providing an overall excellent level of agreement with experiment.

Comparison of the experimental and theoretical dipolar widths is hampered by the fact that the experimental spectra are subject to additional sources of broadening from bulk magnetic susceptibility effects.106 The strength of the effect is not simple to estimate, and importantly here, the resulting spectral proﬁle can no longer be described by a single second rank tensor, the broadening often obscuring the underlying asymmetry of the line shape.106 A reasonable approximation is therefore adopted in which the computed dipolar widths |δzz δxx| are compared with the full experimental widths measured at half peak maximum (fwhm), facilitating the calculation of correlation coefﬁcients. In the case of the monoclinic Li3Fe2(PO4)3 phase, the width is measured at the half-maximum of the central peak. As shown in Table 3, the dipolar correlations are high for all theoretical methods, and it emerges that the rmse values are low, although no real signiﬁcance can be attached to the latter in light of the presence of the broadening discussed above.

Table 1 also presents the Fe and P site unpaired electron counts, nR7), obtained from Mulliken analyses of the ﬁnal BS-I F0 ) 20% OPT wave functions. It is found that the Fe moments are all of the same approximate magnitude, varying over a relatively narrow range from 4.209 to 4.319 unpaired electrons, supporting the notion that a generally similar Fe(III) state persists across all compounds. There is apparently no correlation, however, between the experimental µeff and theoretical nR7)(Fe) values, in keeping with the understanding that the deviations of µeff from the spin-only Fe(III) value of 5.92 µB are likely due to the mixing in of higher lying terms of lower spin multiplicity or to more subtle effects of ordering not fully captured by the ﬁtted Weiss constant. However, it is found that the nR7)(P) values track the computed shifts in an acceptable fashion, supporting the use of spin densities integrated over whole ions as a means by which to rationalize experimental contact shifts, albeit at a qualitative level. This is an important point given that the pseudopotential-based calculations commonly applied in the solid state do not routinely provide the spin densities at nuclear positions.

The LiFeP2O7 and rhombohedral Li3Fe2(PO4)3 structures each contain only one symmetry-distinct Li sublattice,46,86 so that a single isotropic resonance is anticipated within the 7Li MAS NMR spectra, occurring at 162 and 164 ppm, respectively (Figure 7a and 7b). The similarity of the shifts is consistent with the similarities in the Fe-O-Li bond path geometries in both compounds, the average Fe-O and Li-O distances and Fe-O-Li angles differing by only 0.01 Å, 0.01 Å, and 3.1°, respectively. The magnetic parameters of the two phases shown in Table 1 are also similar. Examining calculated values (Table 4), it is only the F0 ) 20% SPE method that reproduces the similarity of shifts in these two materials, the other approaches predicting larger peak separations.

Meanwhile, the three Li sublattices in monoclinic Li3Fe2(PO4)311 give rise to isotropic resonances at 40, 90, and 190 ppm (Figure 7c). Here, the Li1 and Li2 sites display fourand the Li3 site three Li-O-Fe contacts within their ﬁrst cation coordination shells, subject to the criterion that a substantive Li-O chemical bond should be shorter than 2.30 Å. The peak at 40 ppm is therefore assigned to the Li3 site, given that it experiences the smaller number of contacts to Fe sites. The Li1 site displays average Li-O and Fe-O distances of 1.96 and 2.04 Å and the Li2 site 2.00 and 2.08 Å, respectively.11 On this basis, the Li1 and Li2 sites are assigned to the peaks at 190 and 90 ppm, respectively.

Our assignment differs from that reported by Davis et al.,107 in which resonances at 102, 216, and 45 ppm were assigned to the Li1, Li2, and Li3 sites, respectively (where the Li site labels used by Davis et al.107 have been amended here and hereafter to be consistent with the present scheme). The apparent discrepancy highlights the need to discriminate between Li-O contacts that are signiﬁcant in terms of crystallography and lattice stability and those that might reasonably be expected to contribute to the Li contact shift. Davis et al. assign on the basis that the Li1, Li2, and Li3 sites are, respectively, 4-, 5-, and 5-fold O coordinated (in keeping with the crystallographic structure11) and that the Li2 site shows the strongest 90° and the Li3 site the weakest Li-O-Fe orbital overlaps.107 However, as stated above, we contend that Li-O bonds of length signiﬁcantly greater than the typical range 1.7-2.0 Å (1.996 Å in Li2O)108 are likely to be almost entirely electrostatic in character and will therefore convey little spin density to the terminal Li site. Thus, in terms of viable bond paths for contact shifts, the Li1, Li2, and Li3 sites are 4-, 4-, and 3-fold O coordinated, respectively, which, taken together with the mean Li-O and Fe-O bond lengths, leads to the assignment made above. Table S2 in the Supporting Information compares the local Li environments in the Patoux et al.11 and Davis et al.107 structures and the present and previous Li shift assignments. The calculations (Table 4) conﬁrm the present assignment in all methods, placing the Li1 site highest in shift, the Li3 site lowest, and the Li2 site at intermediate shift. However, the experimental δiso(Li1) δiso(Li2) and δiso(Li2) δiso(Li3) peak separations of 100 and 50 ppm, respectively, are only qualitatively reproduced by the calculations, with F0 ) 0% SPE values of 169 and 152 ppm, F0 ) 20% SPE values of 132 and 110 ppm, F0 ) 35% SPE values of 110 and 95, and F0 ) 20% OPT values of 158 and 27 ppm, respectively.

Examining the quality of agreement between the experimental and the theoretical 7Li data presented in Table 4 and Figure 8, it is found that the shift correlation coefﬁcients are all acceptably high. However, even the minimum shift rmse of 41 ppm, as obtained from the F0 ) 35% SPE calculations, amounts to a substantial fraction of the total experimental range of 150 ppm. The least-squares ﬁtted line for the latter method corresponds to δiso,calc ) 1.283δiso,expt 71 ppm: the comparatively large gradient and intercept indicating a signiﬁcantly poorer performance for 7Li sites than was obtained for 31P above. However, as above, it is found that the shifts vary sensitively with choice of functional, being overestimated and underestimated within the F0 ) 0% (pure DFT) and F0 ) 35% SPE calculations, respectively. Again, the application of Curie-type susceptibilities within the F0 ) 20% SPE method leads to higher rmse values and lower correlation coefﬁcients, further emphasizing the need for an accurate treatment of the magnetic susceptibilities.

Analysis of the spectral widths for 7Li sites is complicated by the fact that the dipolar and quadrupolar interactions may both contribute signiﬁcantly to the spinning sideband intensities. Table 4 therefore compares both the |δzz δxx| and the CQ parameters with the experimental data; it emerges that both types of interactions produce spectral widths of near equivalent magnitudes. Again, the effects of spectral broadening render the rmse values meaningless, but it is clear that the correlation coefﬁcients computed on the basis of the dipolar widths are signiﬁcantly higher than for quadrupolar widths, leading us to suggest that dipolar interactions may dominate in the present materials. Experiments at varying static ﬁeld strengths (or with 6Li) would be needed to test this point further. It emerges that both types of interactions are relatively insensitive to the Fock exchange content of the functional. Note that 6Li experiments were not pursued for the reason that 6Li enrichment is generally required in order to obtain spectra of sufﬁcient quality to allow detailed spectral analysis of the line shapes. The 7Li experiments provide hyperﬁne shifts of sufﬁcient accuracy for the present purposes, while the calculated dipolar and quadrupolar correlation coefﬁcients show unambiguously that the former interactions dominate over the latter in determining the spectral width, as discussed above.

Although calculations on a wider range of model compounds are required, the present results suggest that the application of DFT-derived spin densities in support of paramagnetic 6/7Li NMR experiments may be of less assistance than for similar paramagnetic 31P studies. It is of interest to consider the reasons why this may be so. Within the limits of the approach outlined, there is no readily apparent reason why the spin densities at Li nuclei should be inherently less accurate than those at P nuclei. However, a clear distinction does arise in relation to the lower mass of Li relative to P, which might be expected to lead to increased motion in the former case, possibly to the extent that the static calculations performed here might need to be replaced by some form of vibrational averaging of the hyperﬁne parameters. The amplitudes of motion of Li in the current materials might be further enhanced by the nature of the sites occupied, given that Li ions occupying voids or cages within rigid frameworks will likely experience lower average force constants than would P ions in PO4 or P2O7 units. Future studies addressing vibrationally averaged hyperﬁne parameters will be of interest in regard to such issues. Furthermore, given that the 7Li hyperﬁne shifts are much smaller in magnitude than the 31P values, additional contributions not explicitly included within the present DFT approach (e.g., the zero-ﬁeld splitting and pseudocontact terms) might be expected to be more consequential.85

The present study constitutes an extensive investigation of the correlations linking the hyperﬁne NMR parameters and local environments of 7Li and 31P nuclei in a range of Fe(III) phosphate model compounds. In addition to experimental NMR analyses, complementary periodic DFT calculations of the relevant hyperﬁne and quadrupolar parameters have been performed. Hybrid functionals incorporating varying weights of nonlocal Fock exchange have been applied, together with an empirical model of the paramagnetic susceptibilities. The calculations not only conﬁrm the assignments of 7Li and 31P resonances made on the basis of analyses of the crystal structures but also provide further insight into the sensitivity of hyperﬁne and quadrupolar parameters to the composition of the functional. The present approach also offers the advantage that the use of a range of Hamiltonians lends credence to those trends appearing consistently throughout.

The main ﬁnding is that a combined NMR experimental and theoretical approach to the hyperﬁne parameters characterizing the present class of Fe(III)-bearing magnetic materials is both practicable and highly useful. Methods of this type are uniquely placed to further establish the correlations linking contact shifts and electron-nuclear dipolar and quadrupolar tensors to the details of the local environments of the observed nuclei. More speciﬁcally, for DFT calculations, the rmse values and correlation coefﬁcients obtained for 31P sites from the F0 ) 20% SPE and OPT methods indicate accuracies sufﬁcient to permit for the assignment of shifts to the inequivalent sublattices within the more structurally complex materials. This is particularly true when the method of assignment is broadened to include not only the contact shifts but also the relative spectral widths due to dipolar interactions. Similar conclusions hold for 7Li sites, although the relative accuracy of the calculated shifts is somewhat lower, raising the need for further calculations on a wider range of model compounds. Here, the analysis of the spectral widths is further complicated by the potential contribution of both dipolar and quadrupolar interactions. The other signiﬁcant ﬁndings are as follows. (i) The assignment of shifts on the basis of the number and geometry of Fe-O-P and Fe-O-Li bond pathways is reconﬁrmed as a useful albeit qualitative approach. (ii) The proposed scaling of the theoretical shifts computed within the ferromagnetic state on the basis of experimentally derived Curie-Weiss parameters is apparently effective and accurate. (iii) In contrast, the shifts computed using Curie-type susceptibilities, deﬁned as the combination of an ideal Fe(III) spin-only effective moment with a Weiss constant of zero, provide markedly inferior agreement with experiment for both species. The omission of realistic Θ values dominates the effect, clearly demonstrating the need to account for the residual magnetic correlations manifesting within the paramagnetic state. Future work will examine the feasibility of deriving the parameters deﬁning  1)(T) directly from ﬁrst-principles calculations. Parameterization of Θ on the basis of the total energies of a range of magnetic conﬁgurations offers a promising initial prospect. (iv) The variations in Fermi contact shifts with hybrid functional are in keeping with the generally acknowledged trend in which decreasing admixture of Fock exchange leads to the progressive delocalization of spin from TM to ligand sites.73 The effects of variations in Fock exchange content upon the electron-nuclear dipolar and quadrupolar tensors are shown to be less signiﬁcant. (v) The unpaired electron counts for P, nR7)(P), obtained from Mulliken analyses are found to track the experimental shifts, supporting the use of spin densities integrated over whole ions (straightforwardly obtainable from pseudopotential calculations) as a qualitative means by which to analyze experimental spectra. (vi) The consistent experimental and theoretical assignment of shifts to the three inequivalent Li sublattices in monoclinic A-type Li3Fe2(PO4)3 differs from that reported in the previous study by Davis et al.

Applications of a similar approach to a range of Li-ion battery cathode phases are underway, with particular emphasis upon the hyperﬁne and quadrupolar parameters characterizing 6/7Li sites in partially charged and/or disordered phases, the 6/7Li and 31P sites in TM olivine-type phosphates, and materials bearing mixed TM cations wherein the redox processes are not completely understood. Similarly, combined paramagnetic NMR and computational studies of the bonding of phosphate ions to the surfaces of Fe(III) oxyhydroxides are also in progress, motivated by the environmental ubiquity and importance of such reactions. The wider technical questions raised by the present study relate mainly to the effects of motion upon the hyperﬁne parameters. We propose to address this issue for a small number of model phases by combining normal vibrational mode calculations with mode-sampling techniques, so as to arrive at a set of vibrationally averaged contact shifts and dipolar and quadrupolar tensors.

The authors thank Prof. Dr. Martin Kaupp (Julius-Maximilians Universita¨t Wu¨rzburg), Dr. Jordi CabanaJimenez (Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory), and Dr. Junichi Shirakawa (DuPont Japan) for useful discussions. The collection of static spectra and DFT calculations were funded by U.S. National Science Foundation grants CHE-0021934 and CHE-1065905. The collection of MAS data and dipolar calculations were supported as part of the Northeastern Center for Chemical Energy Storage (NECCES), an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S.Department of Energy, Ofﬁce of Science, Ofﬁce of Basic Energy Sciences, under Award Number DE-SC0001294. The authors thank the Management Committee of the Seawulf Cluster at SUNY Stony Brook for the provision of computational resources.

Detailed derivations of hyperﬁne Hamiltonians and magnetization scaling factor, X-ray diffraction patterns of strengite, DH strengite, phosphosiderite, DH phosphosiderite, LiFeP2O7, and rhombohedral and monoclinic Li3Fe2(PO4)3; reﬁtting of the magnetic susceptibilities of DH strengite and DH phosphosiderite; 31P spin-echo MAS NMR spectrum of monoclinic Li3Fe2(PO4)3; comparison of the Li environments and present and previous isotropic resonance assignments in monoclinic Li3Fe2(PO4)3. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.
