This paper discussed a way to improve solid electrolyte carbon dioxide (CO2) sensor by excimer laser annealing of sodium super ionic conductors (NASICON). The CO2 sensor used in this paper consists of a thin NASICON layer. We additionally annealed the NASICON to improve its electrical conductivity by pulsed excimer laser. The laser annealing results in re-crystallization of the NASICON thin ﬁlm and changes the conductivity, grain sizes, and the structure of grain boundaries. From the scanning electron microscope pictures, we saw that NASICON grain sizes were enlarged after laser annealing. Grain sizes were also correlated to laser annealing energy and annealing times. After 2 times annealing of 420 mJ laser energy with 7 pulses each time at 1 Hz repetition rate, the conductivity of NASICON was increased by 90%. When the CO2 concentration was changed from 1000 ppm to 5000 ppm, the sensor resolution was enhanced up to 66%. These results suggested that appropriate laser annealing treatment not only enlarges NASICON grain sizes but also reduces its resistance. Therefore, the NASICON CO2 sensor resolution can be improved accordingly. 

Solid electrolytes are electrical conductors that charged particles can move through their crystal lattice. Solid electrolytes are used in various kinds of gas sensors [1,2] because of their compactness, low cost, and sensitivity. In response to fast growing awareness of greenhouse gas effect, solid electrolyte carbon dioxide sensors draw more attentions in recent years for monitoring air quality [3]. Fig. 1 shows the typical structure of a solid electrolyte CO2 sensor. From top to bottom, a sensor consists of a carbonate auxiliary layer, a sensing electrode (SE), a solid electrolyte layer, and a counter electrode (CE). The carbonate auxiliary layer, usually Li2CO3, is generally used as CO2 sensing material. On the other hand, sodium super ionic conductor (NASICON) is usually selected for the solid electrolyte layer to contain metallic ions stably. NASICON is a well-known solid electrolyte material and has a composition range of Na1 + xZr2SixP3 − xO12 (0≤ x≤ 3.0). This conﬁguration has the advantages of superior sensitivity, selectivity and long-term stability for CO2 gas [4]. When the NASICON-based sensor is exposed to CO2 gas, the following electrochemical reactions occur.

Eq. (1) shows the chemical reaction between a carbonate auxiliary layer and CO2 gas in air, and Eq. (2) shows the interaction between solid electrolyte and the auxiliary layer. Eq. (3) is the overall electrochemical reaction. Chemical species reacting at the interface of electronic conductors and ionic conductors exchange electric charges, which results in an electrical signal. Therefore, the electromotive force (EMF) of the sensor could be described by Nernst's equation: E= E0 + ð Þ RT = nF ln PCO2; where E is the EMF, E0 is the standard potential for the standard free enthalpy change of the overall reaction, R is the gas constant, T is temperature, n is number of electrons transferred, F is the Faraday constant, and the PCO2 is the partial pressures of CO2. As a result, highly conductive NASICON is preferred to maintain above reactions consistently.

To improve the sensing resolution of the NASICON-based solid electrolyte sensor, researchers traditionally apply thermal sintering during fabrication processes to anneal NASICON so that a highly conductive solid electrolyte could be achieved. Generally speaking, higher carrier mobility can be achieved when the material is formed with a larger grain size and fewer grain boundaries by the thermal recrystallization. The previous study [3] pointed out that NASICON thin ﬁlm (2000 Å–2500 Å) was optimized by sintering it at 700 °C for 1 h. The study also showed the scanning electron microscope (SEM)photographs of NASICON thin ﬁlm with different crystalline and grain boundaries at various sintering temperature. Grain sizes and boundaries are correlated to both temperature and time of thermal sintering.

On the other hand, excimer laser with ultra-violet wavelength is an alternative way to anneal materials by efﬁcient absorption [5–8]. Excimer laser annealing has been applied on low temperature polysilicon process for the thin-ﬁlm transistor liquid-crystal display (TFT-LCD) fabrication to enhance electron mobility in polysilicon. According to previous studies, the electrical properties of lasercrystallized silicon ﬁlms were improved even after furnace thermal annealing of polysilicon. It showed that the laser energy irradiation improves the grain properties and reduces ingrain defects. High electron mobility was achieved at larger grain sizes and fewer grain boundaries. However, poor grain sizes were also reported with inappropriate laser energy due to complete melting effect [9]. Therefore, it is important to apply suitable laser energy.

Based on TFT-LCD experience, we used the excimer laser to anneal NASICON layers within CO2 sensors. The laser annealing causes the recrystallization of larger grain size and also enhances sensor performance after appropriate dose. Appropriate laser energy is a key factor to obtain a high conductive NASICON ﬁlm so that CO2 electrochemical sensors performance can be improved. In this paper, we ﬁrst discuss how to calculate appropriate laser energy and estimate its annealing temperature in Section 2. Then we annealed the solid electrolyte (NASICON) layer by excimer laser. Both experiment results and discussions are presented in Section 3. The summary is given at the end of this paper.

We used a KrF (krypton ﬂuoride) excimer laser to anneal CO2 sensors in this paper. KrF laser is also commonly found in eye surgery and semiconductor manufacturing. A KrF laser utilizes the chemical property of krypton gas and the strong oxidizing power of ﬂuorine gas to produce an ultra-violet laser beam by a strong electron energy input. Our KrF laser (LAMBDA PHYSIK COMPEXPro 201) produces energy density tunable from 220 mJ to 620 mJ with 4 mm×4 mm square output beam. The wavelength of the KrF excimer laser is 248 nm. The duration of each laser pulse is 25 ns at a ﬁxed repeatfrequency of 1 Hz. Unlike thermal sinter methods, laser annealing time is quite short. By doing this, laser pulses quickly heat up the sensor surface to reshape the grain size of NASICON.

In order to estimate the annealing temperature caused by the excimer laser, we need to know the ratio of laser intensity absorbed by a sensor chip ﬁrst. The excimer laser beam proﬁle and the sensor chip are illustrated in Fig. 2. According to Gaussian beam equations, we assumed that the spot size W(z) would be at a minimum value W0 on the NASICON surface. In other words, the NASICON sensor chip was placed at the focus spot of the KrF excimer laser. Then the intensity of the laser beam is described by,I = I0 exp − 2R2 W2 0 where I is laser intensity of the particular point of the beam, I0 is the intensity at the center of the beam, R is the laser beam radius, and W0 is the beam waist. The diagonal line of the laser beam is the beam waist, and we can derive that the value of the laser intensity I at the edge of diagonal line is approaching to I0exp(−1). In our case, the laser beam is 4 mm × 4 mm square and the sensor chip is 1.2 mm×1.2 mm square. After integration of the laser energy over the chip area, the absorbed “laser ratio” is 0.39. It means that 39% of the laser energy is absorbed by a chip.

With the ratio of the laser energy on a chip, we were able to estimate temperature on NASICON after measuring its speciﬁc heat (Netzsch STA-409CD and Balzers QMA 400). From the measurement of thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) in Fig. 3, we observed that almost no mass changed before 800 °C. Therefore, it is safe to say that the NASICON did not vaporize before 800 °C. According to differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) data in Fig. 3, which measured the required power to raise the temperature 1 °C per second, we found that the average speciﬁc heat capacity of NASICON before 700 °C is around 0.5 mJ mg−1 K−1. Then we can calculate the needed laser annealing pulses from the equation:H = Laser energy mJ Þ × Pulsenumber × Laser ratio = m × s × ΔT; ð6Þ where H is heat energy, m is mass of sensor chip, s is speciﬁc heat capacity, and ΔT is change of temperature. The heat energy is from the excimer laser, and the area factor of chip size over the laser beam is 0.39. In this case, sensor mass is 3.5 mg and speciﬁc heat capacity is 0.5 mJ mg−1 K−1.

The estimated temperature from Eq. (6) is shown in Table 1. It shows that if we would like to anneal the sensor temperature over 800 °C using 520 mJ laser energy, we need 7 laser pulses. On the other hand, the 500 °C annealing temperature was achieved by 7 pulses of 320 mJ laser each time. As we know that 700 °C was reported previously the optimized thermal sintering temperature [3], it is reasonable to decide on the laser density between 320 and 520 mJ with 7 pulses at each annealing. We chose 320 mJ, 420 mJ and 520 mJ as our annealing energy to evaluate effects of low thermal dose, medium thermal dose and high thermal dose. Each laser annealing time is as short as 7 s. We, however, took a 10-minute break after each laser annealing so that the sensor chip could cool down to room temperature before laser annealing again. We measured the sensor performance right after laser annealing.

After each laser annealing, we measured the solid electrolyte resistance by impedance spectroscopy method [10]. The real part of the impedance that consists of the solid electrolyte resistance should decrease after appropriate laser treatment. Based on the previous works of thermal sintering, the electrolyte resistance decreases due to grain size enlargement. With smaller electrolyte resistance, it is expected that the resolution of the CO2 sensor after laser annealing should be improved. Experiments described in next section show how the performance of sensors is improved after laser annealing.

In our experimental samples, a NASICON ﬁlm (30 μm thick) was screen-printed on an alumina substrate with a patterned Au counter electrode. It is from a paste dispersing the NASICON powder in ethylene glycol. After drying at 120 °C, the Au sensing electrode was also screen-printed (1 μm thick) on the designated region of the NASICON thick ﬁlm. The assembly was then sintered at 700 °C for 1 h in air. Finally, a layer of Li2 CO3 auxiliary phase was deposited (about 10 μm thick) on the Au sensing electrode by a melting-and-quenching method. We then divided samples into three groups that will go through different laser annealing treatments of 320 mJ, 420 mJ and 520 mJ, respectively.

In order to evaluate how well laser annealed samples detect CO2 gas, we connected them in the test circuit diagram of a potentiometric CO2 sensor, shown in Fig. 4. In this diagram, the left part of sensor is the heating circuit, and the right part is the sensing side including the counter electrode (CE) and sensing electrode (SE). By heating the sensor chip with +5 V, the chemical reaction in sensor will be turn on. The EMF of the sensor was ampliﬁed using a high impedance (N100 G Ω) operational ampliﬁer with bias current less than 1 pA (Texas Instruments, model #TLC271). For the practical usage of indoor CO2 monitoring, the CO2 concentration range in this experiment will be set from indoor CO2 concentration (1000 ppm) to the dangerous concentration for humans (4500 ppm). We measured the ampliﬁer voltage output (VO) which is proportional to EMF from the sensors. We also used another infrared CO2 sensor (Union G-100 model) to provide the reference value of CO2 concentration. The NASICON sensor circuit output was connected to a voltage meter (Keithley 2400-C). Fans inside a chamber kept the air circulation. The gas-in valve on the chamber is connected with the air gas cylinder (N2 79%, O2 21%). In order to lower down CO2 concentration, the air gas cylinder is needed. When the gas-in valve is open, the air gas will ﬂow into chamber, and then the original gas will ﬂow out. On the other hand, we slowly inject CO2 gas into the chamber to raise the CO2 concentration gradually by the ampoule.

With 1 Hz repetition rate and 7 laser pulses, all three sample groups were annealed at different laser density separately. According to the analysis of laser annealing calculation in sector II, we annealed the samples with three different laser energy levels at 320 mJ, 420 mJ and 520 mJ, respectively. The experimental results of sensor performance are shown in Fig. 5. We can see that the resolution only slightly changed after the ﬁrst time laser annealing with 320 mJ, 420 mJ, and 520 mJ. After the ﬁrst time annealing, all sensors under different annealing showed resolution improvement (mV/ppm), except 520 mJ samples. This is not surprising because 520 mJ annealing might heat up sensors over 800 °C as calculated in Table 1. This high temperature may damage NASICON. Then we annealed the samples for the second time to observe if the resolution was improved. After laser annealing two times, both laser densities of 320 mJ and 420 mJ could improve the resolution. The samples under 520 mJ did not work at all. We noticed that the device was completely damaged due to overheating. The resolution improvements of sensors after annealing two times with either 320 mJ or 420 mJ are better than the ﬁrst time and the original device without any laser annealing. Due to the high temperature of the 520 mJ laser density, the device was completely destroyed during the second laser annealing, so we took the other two samples to proceed the third laser annealing. After the third annealing, the resolution of the two sensors, under 320 mJ and 420 mJ laser annealing, was obviously worse than previous experiment results. It showed that poor results would occur if sensors were over annealed.

All experimental results of sensor resolution before and after laser annealing are summarized in Table 2. It shows different laser energy from 320 mJ to 520 mJ and different annealing times from one to three. We found the best result was achieved when the sensor was laser annealed two times with 420 mJ laser energy, which the EMF resolution was improved from 21.60 mV/1000 ppm to 35.85 mV/ 1000 ppm. This is almost 66% enhancement. All these results suggested that appropriate laser energy and annealing times could anneal NASICON to a more conductive solid electrolyte for carbon dioxide sensing applications. We found that the sensors did not function properly after more than 3 times laser annealing. Besides, 520 mJ energy was too high for NASICON, which caused device failure. We then measured the solid electrolyte resistance by impedance spectroscopy (Agilent 4294A) method. The real part of the impedance that consists of the solid electrolyte resistance is shown in Table 3. Both of the solid electrolyte resistances of the two sensors annealed with 320 and 420 mJ after two times laser annealing were lower than the original devices. That means the electrolyte layer was more conductive than the original devices. The solid electrolyte resistance of sensor with 420 mJ laser annealing is lower than the sensor annealed by 320 mJ. It suggested that the conductivity is correlated to annealing laser energy. We found that the resistance of NASICON could be lowered from 47.36 kΩ to 25.94 kΩ after two times laser annealing of 420 mJ. The resolution (ΔEMF) could then be improved by conductivity change. We believed that this is mainly due to the charge transfer reaction in the equivalent circuit at the working temperature [11], and the relation of the faradic current against CO2 concentration [12]. This resistance measurement supports why it is possible to enhance NASICON-based CO2 sensors after suitable laser annealing treatment. The measured data above showed that higher conductivity of NASICON was possible only if appropriate laser annealing. We would like to conﬁrm it by observing grain sizes of laser annealed NASICON by SEM pictures (LEO 1530 FE-SEM). The magniﬁcation is from 2000 to 10,000 times with operating voltage from 10 kV to 20 kV. Fig. 6 shows the comparison between the original solid electrolyte grain structure and that after two times 320 mJ and 420 mJ laser annealing. The grain sizes are larger after laser annealing. The grain size of unannealed sample is less than 1 μm. The grain size is about 2 μm and 10 μm for 320 mJ and 420 mJ annealing group, respectively. We can also see that the grain size of electrolyte layer is proportional to the laser energy. larger grain sizes usually means less resistance and this agrees well with our measurement in Table 3. However, the grain sizes were smaller than two times annealing after laser annealing three times. We believed that this was mainly due to the complete melting effect of over annealing [9]. We assumed that the grain size would affect conductivity of NASICON layer of CO2 sensor.

As a result, it is concluded that both annealing energy and total pulses are critical to successful laser annealing on NASICON. Suitable energy makes sure that the NASICON thin ﬁlms are not overheated. On the other hand, appropriate pulses optimize annealing effect without overdose of thermal energy. Two times laser annealing of 420 mJ with 7 pulses each time are most suitable for our samples based on results from SEM pictures, impedance measurement and voltage output of annealed sensors,. However, procedures and calculations shown in this paper could be applied to other NASICON-based CO2 sensors as well.

In this paper, we discussed how to calculate laser annealing temperature on NASICON thin ﬁlm and how sensor performance was improved after appropriate laser annealing. We found that two factors are important to improve sensor performance: the laser energies and the annealing times. From the experiment results, we achieved the 66% resolution improvement of the NASICON CO2 sensor after cumulating laser annealing two times with 7 pulses of 420 mJ laser density each. The resolution of the sensors was also obviously improved after two times of annealing at 320 mJ and 420 mJ laser densities. It also means the laser annealing two times is the most suitable cumulate energy in this case. The SEM pictures and resistance measurement conﬁrm the enlarged grain sizes and improved conductivity of NASICON layers. Therefore, the NASICON CO2 sensor resolution can be improved by pulse laser annealing.

This project is ﬁnancially sponsored by the Taiwan National Science Council under program number 98-2622-E-002-012-CC3.
