The scientiﬁ c principles were formulated that underlie an integrated approach to development and  synthesis of bulk and membrane catalysts for methanol transformation to dimethyl ether and hydrogen which  are  environmentally  friendly  fuels. The  results  were  summarized  for  studies  into  relationships  in  formation  of  phosphates  MZr2(PO4 3))3  (M  =  Na,  K,  Rb,  Cs,  Mg0.5,  Ca0.5,  Sr0.5,  Ba0.5,  Zr0.25 3)),  Cu0.5(1+y)FeyZr2–y(Po4 3))3,  molybdate phosphates Na1–yZr2(Moo4 3))y(Po4 3))3–y , and molybdate Ni0.3Cr0.4Fe1.4(Moo4)3 with the desired structure  and properties controllable by variation of their chemical composition and synthesis parameters. The surface  characteristics and catalytic properties of the resulting systems and the yields of the target product formed from  methanol transformations in inert and oxidizing atmospheres were analyzed in relation to the catalyst synthesis  condition.

One  of  the  worldwide  trends  in  modern  chemistry  is  that  toward  improvement  of  conversion  of  gaseous  and solid hydrocarbon raw materials to more convenient  and environmentally friendly fuels (hydrogen, dimethyl  ether)  and  promising  chemicals,  which  is  highly  topical  in  view  of  the  limited  world’s  oil  reserves  and  global  environmental  problems.  In  this  context,  both the synthesis of reactive and stable catalysts and  the  technological  arrangement  of  the  process  are  of  undoubted importance. 

Much  effort  has  been recently  devoted to  development of technologies for synthesis of composite  membrane  catalysts  (CMCs)  in  which  good  qualities  of conventional (bulk) catalysts are combined with the  separation capabilities of membranes [1–4]. The use of  CMCs allows acceleration of the reactions, suppression  of reverse and side processes, separation of products in  reactors, and involvement of less enriched inexpensive  raw  materials,  thereby  making  CMCs  especially  attractive  for  numerous  catalytic  applications  [5].  However, commercial application of CMCs is hindered  by the lack of membranes that display resistance under conditions of speciﬁ c chemical reactions, as well as by  insufﬁ cient  knowledge  of  the  processes  occurring  in  membrane reactors. 

Here,  we  formulated the  scientiﬁ c  principles  underlying an integrated approach to development and  synthesis of bulk and composition membrane catalysts  for methanol transformation to environmentally friendly  fuels, dimethyl ether and hydrogen. Also, we summarized  the  data  of  studies  into  relationships  in  formation  of  framework  phosphates  and  molybdates  whose  functional properties can be controlled by varying their  chemical composition and synthesis parameters. Lastly,  we analyzed how the catalyst synthesis conditions affect  the  surface  characteristics  and  catalytic  properties  of  the  resulting  systems  and  yields  of  the  target  product  for  methanol  transformations  in  inert  and  oxidizing  atmospheres.    

In synthesis  of  catalysts  we  applied  integrated  approach  (Scheme  1).  It  consists  in  crystal-chemical  design  of  new  compounds  with  a  speciﬁ c  structural  type and  optimization  of  synthesis  of  conventional  and  membrane  catalysts  possessing  reproducible  chemical  and  phase  composition,  as  well  as  surface,  porosity,  and  particle-size  characteristics  and  gas-dynamic  and  thermophysical properties.

As the model catalytic processes served the reactions  of  methanol  transformation  to  dimethyl  ether  (DME),  which is a promising environmentally friendly diesel oil  [6], and hydrogen and formaldehyde that are seeing ever  growing demand now. 

As  known,  suitable  catalysts  for  aliphatic  alcohol  dehydration,  dehydrogenation,  and  conversion  to  hydrogen  can  be  found  in  transition  metal  (iron,  molybdenum,  zirconium,  etc.)  compounds  [7].  The  optimization  criteria  for  the  catalyst  composition  take  into account the direction of the catalytic transformations  of  alcohols,  possibility  of  incorporation  of  a  speciﬁ c  chemical  element  into  a  particular  crystallographic  site of the lattice without breaking down the latter, and  thermal stability.

New catalysts were sought from among 3D framework compounds [L2(TO4)3]3∞ in which the octahedrally  coordinated ions of metals L are fairly strongly bound  covalently  to  oxygen,  TO4  tetrahedral  groups.  The  octahedrons and tetrahedrons are linked through vertices  and sterically   arranged in a manner corresponding to  the structural type in which the compound is crystallized  [8]. In such compounds the catalytically active moieties  are separated, which increases the activity and selectivity  of the catalysts [9].

We used NaZr2(PO4)3 (NZP) and Fe2(MoO4)3 (FM)  framework structures as the base. The members of the  NZP and FM structural families have for the most part  phosphorus and molybdenum, respectively, as the anionforming element T. A suitable structure-forming cation  L  occurring  in  the  oxidation  state  ranging  from  +5  to  +1 can be found in, e.g., a Group IV transition d metal  or in iron. The extraframework sites are convenient for  ﬁ lling by cations whose oxidation state ranges from +1  to  +4.  Owing  to  wide  isomorphism  of  the  cations  in  the crystallographic sites of the NZP and FM structural types, compounds with such structures may exhibit acid,  basic, or redox properties and are suitable as materials  with special and practically important functions [10], in  particular, as catalysts for organic synthesis reactions. 

Previously [9, 11–17] it was found that CuZr2(PO4)3,  Cu0.5L2(PO4)3  (L  =  Ti,  Zr,  Sn), AgL2(PO4)3  (L  =  Zr,  Hf),  Na1–xCuxZr2(PO4)3,  and  Na1+xFexZr2–x(PO4)3  exhibit  high  catalytic  activities  in    dehydration  and  dehydrogenation of butyl alcohols and isopropanol, and  NbTi0.75V0.25(PO4)3 and  M0.5Zr2(PO4)3  (M  =  Mn,  Co,  Cu), in isomerization and selective oxidation of parafﬁ ns.  The chemical bonds in the framework compounds have  a fairly signiﬁ cant covalent component, which endows  them  with  high  thermal  stability  and  resistance  under  high-temperature  exposure  to  water  and  sulfur  oxides  and  also  facilitates  their  carbonization.  The  catalytic  properties  displayed  by  NZP  compounds  in  methanol  transformations, that we discuss here, were not studied  before.  The  only  available  published  data  on  CMCcatalyzed  methanol  conversion  to  formaldehyde  and  DME are those for nonmetallic membranes containing  vanadia,  alumina,  and  silica  as  active  components  [3,  4,  18–21].  Compared  to  conventional  catalysts,  the  membrane  catalysts  prepared  by  molecular  layer  deposition,  magnetron  sputtering,  or  slip  casting  techniques enable higher methanol conversion levels. It  should  be  noted  that  many  commercial  catalysts  used  in  selective  oxidation  processes,  in  particular  those  involving lower aliphatic alcohols, contain molybdenum  compounds  [e.g.,  Fe2(MoO4)3·nMoO3]  as  the  reactive  component [7].

The catalytic action of a compound in the reaction  of interest can be forecast by the analogy method, based  on information about the nature (formation mechanism,  structure,  and  properties)  of  active  complexes  and  mechanism of their catalytic action, as well as about the  relevant  process  condition. This  method  predicted  the  factors responsible for the catalytic activity exhibited by  systems based on framework compounds. These factors  include the surface characteristics, namely, the speciﬁ c  surface area and acidity in the case of dehydration of  lower aliphatic alcohols and the speciﬁ c surface area and  the presence of transition metals whose oxidation state  can  vary  under  catalytic  conditions,  and  possibly  the  oxidizing atmosphere, in the case of dehydrogenation.

Basing  on the  crystal-chemical  approach  and  considering  the  speciﬁ c  requirements  posed  on  the  catalysts,  we  predicted  the  chemical  compositions of  substances  with  the  NZP  and  FM  structures  and  suggested  that  phosphates  MZr2(PO4)3  (M  =  Na,  K,  Rb,  Cs,  Mg0.5,  Ca0.5,  Sr0.5,  Ba0.5,  Zr0.25)  will  be  catalytically  active  in  methanol  dehydration  to  DME,  and  Cu0.5(1+y)FeyZr2–y(PO4)3,  molybdatephosphates  Na1–yZr2(MoO4)y(PO4)3–y,  and  molybdate  Ni0.3Cr0.4Fe1.4(MoO4)3, in methanol dehydrogenation to  hydrogen and formaldehyde. 

The  predicted  structures  of  the  above-mentioned  compounds were validated by their structure simulation  by  the  interatomic  interaction  energy  minimization  technique for a crystal ensemble with the use of a GULP  program  package  [22].  The  atomic  coordinates,  bond  lengths, and unit cell parameters of the crystal structures  were calculated, and the phase stability ﬁ elds and factors  governing their size were determined for the compounds  of interest [23, 24]. 

Formation  of  catalysts  with  the  NZP  and  FM  structures.  Based  on  the  results  of  the  crystalchemical  prediction  of  the  compositions  and  structure  of the catalysts, we carried out their directed synthesis  (Scheme  2).  The  choice  of  the  sol-gel  technique  was  dictated  by  the  chemical  features  of  reactants,  the  desired oxidation states of the cations in the resulting  structure,  and  temperature.  In  the  initial  stage  we  mixed  stoichiometric  amounts  of  aqueous  solutions  of  the  salts  of  metals  in  the  oxidation  state  +1,  +2,  or  +3  with  a  zirconium  oxychloride  solution.  This  was  followed  by  adding,  under  heating  and  stirring,  a  phosphoric  acid  or  an  ammonium  paramolybdate  solution,  also  taken  in  accordance  with  the  phosphate  or molybdate stoichiometry. The resulting gel was dried  and heated under free air access. A stepwise heating of  the  samples  was  alternated  with  dispersing  aimed  at  homogenization of the mixture. The number of stages,  as well as the temperature and time of the heat treatment  of the precursors, were adjusted to the speciﬁ c chemical  composition of the catalyst. 

The Ni0.3Cr0.4Fe1.4(MoO4)3 sample was prepared by  heat treatment of porous stainless steel with  a MoO3  vapor  at  973  K.  The  chemical  composition  of  the  molybdate  corresponded  to  the  composition  of  the  synthesized catalytic membranes, which is determined  by  the  brand  and  treatment  conditions  of  steel  in  the  membrane support. 

The  relationships  in  formation  of  the  structure,  texture,  and  surface  characteristics  of  the  samples  in  the main synthesis stages were examined by up to date techniques: X-ray diffraction analysis, IR spectroscopy,  microprobe and differential thermal analyses, capillary  condensation of nitrogen, heat-programmed desorption  of  ammonia,  and  adiabatic  and  scanning  calorimetry.  For details on the synthesis procedures and examination  methods, see [25–29].

The catalytic properties exhibited by the synthesized  systems in methanol transformations were examined in  a ﬂ ow reactor in inert and oxidizing media at atmospheric  pressure  and  450–700  K;  the  products  were  analyzed  chromatographically [30]. A weighed portion (0.300 g)  of the catalyst was mixed with quartz (1-mm particles).  A  saturated  alcohol  vapor  was  supplied  to  the  reactor  with a thermostat-controlled bubbler in a stream of the  carrier gas (argon or air) at the total rate of 1.2 l h–1.  Using the chromatograms recorded, we calculated the  alcohol  conversion  x,  selectivity  S,  and  yield  of  the  target products A, mmol h–1 g–1, by the formulas X = (φ0 – φ1)/φ0, S = φt /(φ0 – φ1), A = FXS/W where  φ0  and  φ1  are  the  initial  and  running  volume  fractions  of  the  alcohol;  φt,  proportion  of  the  alcohol  spent in the target reaction; F, alcohol vapor supply rate,  mmol h–1; and W, weighed portion of the catalyst, g.

The  calculated  amounts  of  the  spent  alcohol  and  resulting products in all the catalytic experiments were  in agreement with the mass balance equation within the measurement error (3%).

Based on X-ray diffraction patterns, the phosphates  MZr2(PO4)3  (M  =  Na,  K,  Rb,  Cs,  Ca0.5,  Sr0.5,  Ba0.5,  Zr0.25)  were  assigned  to  NZP  trigonal  structural  type,  and the phosphate Mg0.5Zr2(PO4)3, to  FM monoclinic  structural  type  [25,  26,  31–34].  The  phosphates  are  stable up to 1273–1973 K.

The Cu0.5(1+y)FeyZr2–y(PO4)3 samples  with  0  ≤  y  ≤  1.0  crystallized  in  the  FM  structural  type   [35].  The  Cu1.5Fe2(PO4)3  (y  =  2)  phosphate  is  based  on  a  framework  formed  by  FeO6  octahedrons,  FeO5  pentagonal bipyramids, and PO4 tetrahedrons, with the  Cu2+  cations  located  in  the  framework  cavities.  The  sample with y = 1.5 was comprised of a mixture of FM  and copper-iron phosphate phases. 

The X-ray phase and IR spectroscopic examinations  validated  the  theoretically  predicted  structures  for  the molybdate-phosphates Na1–yZr2(MoO4)y(PO4)3–y,  as  well  as  the  concentration  and  temperature  areas  of  existence  of  the  NZP  structure  [24,  36].  In  this  system,  substitution  solid  solutions  are  formed  within a limited composition range (0 ≤ y ≤ 0.6) as  determined by the size of the alkali metal cation and  a  signiﬁ cant  difference  in  the  molybdenum–oxygen  and  phosphorus–oxygen  bond  lengths.  According  to  the  X-ray  phase  analysis  data,  the  molybdate  Ni0.3Cr0.4Fe1.4(MoO4)3  belongs  to  the  FM  structural  family.

We  obtained  reproducible  speciﬁ c  surface  areas,  particle-size distribution patterns, and porosity and acidity  characteristics of the samples at ﬁ xed values of the process  parameters of the sol-gel synthesis proce-dure, including  the composition, concentration, and mixing order of the  solutions of the reactants and the heating temperature and  time. The speciﬁ c surface area of the samples synthesized  at 873–1473 K was estimated at 1–63 m2 g–1 (Table 1); it  tended to decrease with increasing time and temperature  of  annealing  [37].  For  example,  the  speciﬁ c  surface  areas  of  the  sodium-zirconium  phosphate  annealed  for  1  day  at  873,  1073,  and  1273  K,  respectively,  were  estimated  at  63,  24,  and  8  m2  g–1.  In  a  series  of  Cu0.5(1  +  y)FeyZr2  –  y(PO4)3  phosphates  annealed  at  identical temperatures the speciﬁ c surface area tended to  decrease with increasing iron content, speciﬁ cally from  10 (y = 0) to 1 m2 g–1 (y = 2) [35]. For the molybdate  phosphates  Na1  –  yZr2(MoO4)y(PO4)3  –  y  an  increase  in  the molybdenum content resulted in sintering, with the  speciﬁ c surface area decreasing from 63 to 16 m2 g–1 [38].  The predominant size of the crystallites in the samples was  within 1–10 μm. All the synthesized catalysts exhibited a  straight  correlation  between  the  number  of  the  acid  sites and the surface area of the samples (Table 1). Thus,  a  low  annealing  temperature  and  a  variable  chemical  composition  are  of  critical  importance  in  formation  of  a developed surface and optimized reaction zone.  

Properties  of  the  Catalysts.  Of  much  signiﬁ cance  are  thermophysical  properties  of  catalysts,  including  speciﬁ c heat capacity, thermal conductivity, and thermal  expansion. The speciﬁ c heat capacity of the MZr2(PO4)3  phosphates tends to monotonically increase with increasing  temperature and above 500 K varies insigniﬁ cantly [29,  33, 39–40]. Smooth temperature proﬁ les recorded for the  speciﬁ c heat capacity and thermal conductivity suggest  the  lack  of  phase  transitions  at  temperatures  within  7–673  K  [28,  41].    Knowledge  of  the  speciﬁ c  heat  capacity С0 p = f(T) and other thermodynamic functions  of the substances (enthalpy, entropy, and Gibbs function)  allows  identifying  those  chemical  reactions  of  the  catalyst synthesis under preset conditions (temperature,  pressure,  concentration)  that  can  proceed  along  the  desired route and give products in sufﬁ cient yields [40, 41]. Not very high thermal expansion coefﬁ cients [10,  34,  41]  of  the  crystal  structure  make  the  phosphates  suitable for synthesis of catalysts resistant to cracking,  in particular, of CMCs. 

The MZr2(PO4)3 catalysts exhibit high activities in  methanol dehydration to DME in an inert atmosphere:  The  methanol  conversion  approaches  the  equilibrium  levels  xeq  =  88–90%  at  different  temperatures  and  over  different  catalysts  [30,  37].  We  did  not  detect  methanol dehydrogenation and decomposition products  at  temperatures  within  453–693  K.  The  examined  phosphates owe their activity in methanol dehydration  to  their  acid  properties.  This  statement  is  supported  by  a  high  activity  of  the  Zr0.25Zr2(PO4)3  phosphate  (Table  2)  which  does  not  contain  alkali  and  alkalineearth metals, on whose surface there exist strong Zr–OH  and weak P–OH Brønsted acid sites, as well as Lewis  acid  sites  Zr4+,  which  are  possible  adsorption  sites  for  the  alcohol  [45].  Introduction  into  the  phosphates  of  large  alkali  Cs  and  alkaline-earth  Ba  metal  atoms  at  a  higher  ﬁ nal  temperature  of  synthesis  of  the  samples leads to a less defective crystal structure with  smaller  speciﬁ c  surface  areas  and  porosities,  thereby  decreasing  the  activity  of  the  phosphates  in  methanol  dehydration (Tables 1, 2). For the NaZr2(PO4)3 samples  characterized by the ﬁ nal temperatures of synthesis of  873, 1073, and 1273 K, we interrelated the annealing  temperature, speciﬁ c surface area, acidity, and catalytic  activity  in  methanol  dehydration.  The  NaZr2(PO4)3  sample  annealed  at  873  K  was  characterized  by  the  largest speciﬁ c surface area and acidity; it exhibited the  highest catalytic activity in the methanol transformation  (Fig. 1). Lower synthesis temperatures for NaZr2(PO4)3  can lead to a larger speciﬁ c surface area of the samples,  whose phase composition and the degree of crystallinity,  however,  exhibit  inter-experiment  variations.  Tables  1 and 2 suggest that preparation of the phosphates for  methanol dehydration, possessing the maximal catalytic  activity,  requires  a  minimal  synthesis  temperature  for  the  catalyst,  at  which  reproducible  phase  composition  and surface characteristics are obtained.  

To explore the possibility of varying the mixture of  methanol transformation products and their yields, we  studied the catalytic activity of substituted phosphates.  The molybdate phosphates Na1 – yZr2(MoO4)y(PO4)3 – y  exhibit  catalytic  activity  in  methanol  dehydration  to  DME and dehydrogenation to formaldehyde [38]. The  methanol conversion over the molybdate phosphates in  an argon atmosphere reached 93%. The transformation products  include  DME  (selectivity  of  formation  66– 100%), formaldehyde, and carbon oxides (Fig. 2). For  Na0.75Zr2(MoO4)0.25(PO4)2.75  (y  =  0.25)  the  maximal  amount  of  the  methanol  converted  via  dehydration  at  590  K  was  6.5  mmol  h–1  g–1,  and  for  the  sample  with y = 0.5, 4.9 mmol h–1 g–1. This difference can be  attributed  to  a  larger  speciﬁ c  surface  area,  a  higher  acidity, and a lower molybdenum content of the former  sample:  Methanol  dehydration  is  an  acid-catalyzed  reaction, by contrast to methanol dehydrogenation for  which  the  atoms  of  transition  metal,  molybdenum,  are  responsible.  In  all  our  experiments  hydrogen  was  obtained in a yield 2–10 times lower than that expected  from  the  amounts  of  the  alcohol  dehydrogenation  and  decomposition  products  formed,  and  its  amount  decreased with increasing molybdenum content in the  catalyst  sample.  This  difference  is  evidently  due  to  reduction  of  the  Mo6+ ions  in  the  crystal  structure  of  the molybdate phosphates and formation of water. On  this basis we can explain a decrease in time of activity  exhibited  by  the  molybdate  phosphates  in  methanol  dehydrogenation  and  an  increase  in  selectivity  of  methanol dehydration during the catalytic experiments,  as well as the fact that the proportion of water among the  transformation products (~6%) exceeded that suggested  by the amount of the resulting DME.

In  an  oxidizing  atmosphere,  methanol  was exhaustively  transformed  at  a  temperature  by  100  K  lower than that in the experiments conducted in an inert  atmosphere; the reaction products include formaldehyde,  carbon  oxides,  DME,  and  water.  The  highest  activity  (3.6  mmol  h–1  g–1  of  formaldehyde  at  500  K)  and  selectivity  (56–60%)  in  methanol  dehydrogenation  were  exhibited  by  Na0.5Zr2(MoO4)0.5(PO4)2.5  (Fig.  3).  A  higher  yield  of  the  products  obtained  in  molybdate  phosphate-catalyzed  alcohol  dehydrogenation  in  an  oxidizing atmosphere is due to permanent regeneration  of  the  Mo6+  active  sites  (their  amount  in  the  inert  atmosphere decreases during the experiment).

The methanol transformation in an inert atmosphere,  catalyzed by Cu0.5(1+y)FeyZr2–y(PO4)3 at y = 0, results in  dehydration (selectivity of transformation of up to 95% at  88% methanol conversion) into DME and water [35]. At  y > 0 the phosphates did not display noticeable catalytic  activities  because  of  low  speciﬁ c  surface  areas.  In  an  oxidizing medium the methanol transformation proceeded  at a lower ignition temperature of the catalysts with y ≥ 0  and led to predominant formation of formaldehyde (up  to ~1.8 mmol h–1g–1) at temperatures ranging from 470  to 600 K and of the products of exhaustive oxidation of  the alcohol, carbon dioxide and water, above 600 K [35].  Thus,  molybdate  phosphates  Na1–yZr2(MoO4)y(PO4)3–y  and phosphates Cu0.5(1+y)FeyZr2–y(PO4)3 hold promise of  catalyzing synthesis of formaldehyde. 

Selected characteristics of some of the catalysts that we examined make them competitive with the methanol  dehydration  catalysts  used  in  laboratories  and  on  commercial scales (Table 2).  Comparison of the catalytic  activities and methanol conversion levels at 573 K for  the catalysts synthesized by us with those for the known  catalysts shows that Zr3(PO4)4 and NaZr2(PO4)3 perform  better, since they afford conversions that are close to the  equilibrium values at 2–5-fold higher catalyst loads. The  methanol  dehydration  catalysts  synthesized  by  us  are  superior to the known catalysts in activity, despite high  synthesis temperatures (873–1123 K against 773–823 K  for the known catalysts). This allows regeneration of the  phosphates  without  substantially  modifying  their  pore  characteristics and catalytic activity. 

Synthesis and catalytic properties of the CMCs.  The CMCs being developed by us that comprise a layer  of phosphates of metals occurring in a constant oxidation  state  may  offer  advantages  over  the  conventional  catalysts  in  terms  of  higher  conversions  of  methanol  and yields of the product, DME. These advantages are  achieved  through  removal  of  water  from  the  reaction  zone,  which  favors  shifting  of  the  equilibrium  of  the  methanol dehydration reaction to the right. The CMCs  comprising layers of compounds of metals capable for  oxidation and reduction in the catalytic processes will  enable  separation  of  the  methanol  dehydrogenation  products.  

As  support  in  the  membrane  catalysts  served  a  commercially  available  FNS-2  stainless  steel  ﬁ lter  material [chemical composition, wt%: Fe 67, Ni 18, Cr  15; 30% porosity]. The CMCs were prepared either by  deposition of already available phosphate catalyst from  an alcohol suspension onto preoxidized steel, followed  by drying and annealing, or by synthesis of a catalytically  active layer on the surface of the oxidized steel support  by heat treatment with a MoO3 vapor. Steel oxidation  enabled stronger bonding between the phosphates and  molybdates with the support and accelerated formation  of a catalytically active molybdenum-containing layer.  Oxidation of stainless steel in a potassium dichromate  melt  at  720  K  at  the  keeping  time  of  1  h  yielded  a ~6–8-μm-thick loose oxide ﬁ lm. The gas permeability  at  296  K  of  the  oxidized  support  was  estimated  at  385  ×  10–6  and  290  ×  10–6  mol  m–2  s–1  Pa–1  toward  helium and argon, respectively. An X-ray phase analysis  showed  that  the  oxide  layer  was  isostructural  with  hexagonal Fe2O3.

In  deposition  of  the  powdered  catalysts  from  an alcohol suspension onto the oxidized steel support the  maximal amount of the phosphate in dense nonﬂ aking  coatings reaches 10–20 mg cm–2.

When  the  oxidized  steel  support  is  treated  with  a  MoO3  vapor,  the  preparation  of  a  30–80-μm-thick  catalytically  active  layer  characterized  by  the  gas  permeability  toward  hydrogen  and  argon  of  (0.2– 20)  × 10–6 and (0.04–7)  × 10–6 mol m–2 s–1 Pa–1 (296 K),  respectively, takes 1–5 h at 973 K. The content of the  catalyst in the CMC reaches 13–22 mg cm–2. The XPA  and microprobe analyses showed that the catalytic layer  contained  10  wt%  MoO3  and  molybdate  isostructural  with  iron  molybdate.  We  examined  the  catalytic  properties  of  the  CMC  comprising  a  25–30-μm-thick  molybdenum-containing layer. The catalytic layer was  formed  by  regularly  shaped  crystallites  with  a  size  of  1–3 μm (Fig. 4). The CMC cavities contained needlelike MoO3 crystals up to 2 μm in length.

The developed techniques for CMC preparation offer  advantages over the magnetron sputtering technique in  terms of greater simplicity and better performance [4]:  There is no need both in preparation of a dense ceramic  target and in creation of high vacuum, and it takes less  time  to  synthesize  a  thicker  layer  of  active  substance  that is more uniformly spread over the support. 

We  tested  the  synthesized  CMCs  in  a  membrane  reactor  at  473–578  K  with  the  total  ﬂ ow  rate  in  the  membrane  reactor  cavities  being  identical  to  that  in  the experiments with dispersed catalysts. In the case of  CMCs with an active NaZr2(PO4)3, Mg0.5Zr2(PO4)3 layer  the equilibrium of the reversible reaction of methanol  dehydration  was  shifted  toward  DME  formation  by  removal of up to 47% resulting water vapor from the  reaction zone. The alcohol conversion increased by 8%  relative  to  the  conventional  process  catalyzed  by  the  same compounds. 

Using  the  Ni0.3Cr0.4Fe1.4(MoO4)3  catalyst  placed  into  a  ﬂ ow  reactor  we  carried  out  directed  synthesis  of  increasing  O2 :  CH3OH  molar  ratio  from  0  to  5.2  the  selectivity  of hydrogen formation decreased from 30 to 0%, and  that  of  formaldehyde  formation  reached  100%,  the  alcohol conversion being 50–60% (Fig. 5). A maximal  selectivity of methanol conversion to hydrogen by the  reaction  CH3OH  +  0.5O2  =  CO2  +  2H2  was  achieved  at O2 : CH3OH = 0.8. In the case of O2 : CH3OH = 5.2  we  revealed  carbon  dioxide  in  a  signiﬁ cant  yield,  no hydrogen  among  the  alcohol  transformation  products,  and  H2O  :  CH3OH  =  2,  which  suggests  exhaustive  oxidation of methanol by the reaction CH3OH + 1.5O2 =  CO2  +  2H2O.  Clearly,  both  deﬁ ciency  and  excess  of  oxygen compared  to the CH3OH + 0.5O2 stoichiometric  mixture lead to a not very high yield of hydrogen due  to  either  reduction  of  the  catalyst  and  formation  of  water (in the former case) or to predominant exhaustive  oxidation of the alcohol (in the latter case).

The process catalyzed by a molybdenum-containing  CMC  in  a  membrane  reactor  with  the  methanol– oxygen mixture supplied to the catalyst affords a higher  selectivity of hydrogen formation, 50–55% in an inert  atmosphere. The use of the CMC allows removal of up  to 40% hydrogen formed in the reaction at identical ﬂ ow  rates of the carrier gas in the membrane reactor cavities.  The amount of methanol and carbon dioxide penetrating  into the other membrane surface does not exceed 2–4%.

(1)  A  strategy  for  development  of  catalysts  for  methanol  conversion  was  formulated.  Based  on  transition  metal  phosphates  and  molybdates,  bulk  and  composition  membrane  catalysts  were  developed  for  methanol  transformation  to  environmentally  friendly  fuels (dimethyl ether, hydrogen) and formaldehyde.       

(2)  The synthesized  composition  membrane  in  catalysts  exhibit  good  membrane  properties  methanol transformations: They afford higher methanol  conversions  and  yields  of  reaction  products  and  also  enable separation of the latter.

(3)  The  synthesized  catalysts  are  promising  and  competitive  with  commercial  catalysts  conventionally  used for methanol dehydration.  3)


This study was ﬁ nancially supported by the Russian  Foundation  for  Basic  Research  (project  nos.    06-0308064 and 08-03-00082).
