Fully crystallized glass-ceramics of the Li1 + xAlxTi2 − x(PO4)3 system were obtained by crystallization of a precursor glass, which shows a tendency for homogeneous nucleation. Different microstructures were obtained by single and double stage heat treatments. It is shown that, in the case of a single heat treatment, the ionic conductivity increases by three orders of magnitude when the temperature treatment increases from 700 to 1000 °C, reaching a maximum of 1.3×10− 3 S⋅cm− 1 at room temperature. As deduced from Xray diffraction, this enhancement in ionic conductivity is related to an increase of the sample's crystallinity. For samples obtained by double stage heat treatments, i.e., a heat treatment to induce nucleation followed by a second one for crystal growth, the ionic conductivity tends to increase when the duration of the nucleation treatment is reduced which leads to an increase in the average grain size of the glass-ceramics.

Ceramics with the NASICON structure are known to present high ionic conductivity. Systems derived from the LiTi2(PO4)3 composition, in particular, have been widely studied [1–3]. The structure of such compounds consists of PO4 tetrahedrons sharing corners with TiO6 octahedrons and forming open channels that act as conduction paths for Li+ cations located in interstitial sites and presenting either a 6coordination or a distorted 8-coordination [4–6]. In this structure, the partial substitution of the Ti4+ cation by a trivalent cation, M3+, such as Al3+, Ga3+, In3+, Sc3+, Y3+, La3+, Cr3+ or Fe3+ [5,7], generates a deﬁciency in positive charge, which is compensated by additional Li+ ions, leading to the Li1 + xMxTi2 − x(PO4)3 system. According to the work of Aono [8], when titanium is partially replaced by aluminum, the ionic conductivity reaches a maximum for x=0.3. In fact, at room temperature, the Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 composition presents one of the highest ionic conductivities among all inorganic lithium electrolytes [9]. It has also been observed that the electrical resistivity of this ceramic composition is dominated by the grain boundary [10].

Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 ceramics have been synthesized by different routes such as classical sintering of precursor raw materials [8,10,11], mechanical activation [12], sol gel [13], or by glass crystallization. In the latter case, Fu [7] and Abrahams [14] worked with a nonstoichiometric glass composition with excess of AlPO4, probably to enhance the glass-forming ability of the precursor glass. More recently, Xu et al. [3] also synthesized a glass-ceramic by crystallization of nanoglass particles obtained by dry milling. Glass-ceramics are usually obtained by single-stage heat treatments (SHT) [15,16], i.e., a single heating step to a temperature plateau followed by cooling. Some authors [7] claim that the main advantage of the glass-ceramic route is the possibility of obtaining materials with lower porosity than those synthesized by the classical sintering route. However, in a previous work [17], it was shown that the microstructure of Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) glass-ceramics may be controlled by double heat treatments (DHT), i.e., a nucleation step followed by a crystal growth treatment performed at a higher temperature. Double heat treatments are more effective for controlling the microstructure when the precursor is a stoichiometric glass (a glass is called stoichiometric when it generates, by crystallization, a crystal with the same chemical composition as the parent or precursor glass) that presents homogeneous nucleation and the nucleation is well separated from the crystal growth process on the temperature scale. Accordingly, it is suggested here that the principal advantage of the glass-ceramic route is its better and more effective control of the microstructure than that afforded by a classical sintering route. This advantage has been little investigated in the case of ionic conductive materials, especially lithium ion conductors.

Employing a single-stage heat treatment, several authors [3,16] found signiﬁcant differences in electrical conductivity with the increase in crystallization temperature, but no effort was made to explain these experimental results or to correlate them to the glass-ceramic microstructure. Therefore, this work attempts to elucidate the reason why the ionic conductivity of Li1 + xAlxTi2 − x(PO4)3 (LATP) glassceramics obtained by SHT increases by three orders of magnitude when the crystallization temperature increases from 700 to 1000 °C. To this end, an analysis was also made of the electrical conductivity and microstructure of samples obtained by DHT, varying the duration of the nucleation step while keeping the crystal growth temperature at 900 °C, in order to compare the results with those from samples obtained by SHT at the same temperature.

In order to obtain the highly conductive Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 glassceramic, a stoichiometric glass with a molar composition 16.2Li2O⋅ 3.8Al2O3⋅42.5TiO2⋅37.5P2O5 was synthesized using Li2CO3 (SynthC1006.01.AE), Al2O3 (Pc Alcoa A16), TiO2 (Aldrich-CAS 1317-80-2) and NH4H2PO4 (Aldrich-7722-76-1). Appropriate quantities were milled by hand in an agate mortar and then melted in air in an alumina crucible, since P2O5, when combined with a transition metal, corrodes platinum crucibles. The powder mixture of the starting reagents was ﬁrst heated to 700 °C in air for 60 min to allow the Li2CO3 and NH4H2PO4 to decompose. The furnace temperature was then raised to 1400 °C to complete the melting and homogenization. The lowviscous liquid was splat-cooled and annealed at 550 °C (Tg (glass transition)=616 °C) for 2 h to relieve internal thermal stresses. After cooling, a transparent purple glass was obtained.

The purple color is attributed to the presence of Ti3+. The reduction of Ti4+ to Ti3+ is sometimes ascribed to the presence of ammonia [15], which may act as a reducing agent during glass synthesis. However, a glass synthesized starting from P2O5 instead of NH4H2PO4 also presented the same purple color. Thus, the reduction of Ti4+ to Ti3+ is more likely due to a redox equilibrium involving oxygen at high temperatures, as is usually observed in oxide glasses containing transition metals [18,19], according to the equilibrium: 4Ti4++2O2−⇆4Ti 3++O2. At the glass melting temperature (1400 °C), this equilibrium shifts to the right, producing Ti3+, which generates the aforementioned color. However, the equilibrium shifts to the left at lower crystallization temperatures. Thus, samples crystallized at temperatures of T≤800 °C are transparent and colorless due to the reoxidation of Ti3+ to Ti4+. At higher crystallization temperatures, samples are white (opaque) due to grain growth.

In order to identify the characteristic temperatures of the precursor glass, thermal analysis were carried out by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), using a NETZSCH DSC 404 calorimeter and applying a heating rate of 10 °C/min. Fig. 1 shows the DSC curves of the precursor glass, which was prepared in three different batches to conﬁrm the reproducibility of the melting procedure. The characteristic temperatures of the precursor glass were extracted from the DSC curve as follows: glass transition, Tg=889 K (616 °C), onset of crystallization, Tx=938 K (665 °C), and melting temperature, Tm=1515 K (1242 °C). The reduced glass transition, Tgr=Tg(K)/Tm(K)=0.59, suggests a homogeneous nucleation mechanism [20,21] and therefore the possibility of controlling the microstructure by DHT. Thus, in addition to single heat treatment at 700, 800, 900 and 1000 °C (samples are identiﬁed as SHT7, SHT8, SHT9 and SHT10, respectively) for 20 min, double heat treatment were also employed to synthesize the investigated glass-ceramics. In the latter case, the nucleation step was carried out at constant temperature (Tg −10=879 K or 606 °C) for different periods of time, i.e., 10, 30, 60, 120, 240 and 480 min (samples identiﬁed as DHT10, DHT30, DHT60, DHT120, DHT240 and DHT480, respectively), in order to generate different nuclei concentrations, while the crystal growth step was kept constant at 900 °C for 20 min.

After melting, the glass was analyzed chemically by Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometry (ICP OES).

X-ray diffraction analysis was employed to characterize the crystalline phases, using a Siemens diffractometer and CuKα radiation. The data were collected from powdered samples at room temperature. XRD patterns were collected with 2θ varying from 5° to 90° step sizes of 2 s. The glass-ceramic microstructure (fracture surface) was analyzed using a Philips XL 30 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) with Field Emission Gun (FEG) and Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) (Oxford Instruments, INCAx-Sight, Link ISIS). Samples were gold-sputtered after ultrasound cleaning.

SEM images were analyzed using ImageJ (freeware) software. The average grain sizes were identiﬁed by measuring the number of intercepts made by test lines across grain boundary traces in the microstructures, dividing the result by the total test line length. Six micrographs were analyzed for each sample and 8 test lines were drawn in each micrograph. The interfacial area (in nm2/nm3) was also estimated employing the Saltykov method described by DeHoff [22]. Electrical conductivity was measured by impedance spectroscopy, using a Solartron 1260 Impedance/Gain Phase Analyzer in a frequency range of 10 to 107 Hz from room temperature to 100 °C with a twoelectrode conﬁguration, in air atmosphere. Gold electrodes were sputtered on both parallel surfaces of the samples, which had a surface area of about 15 mm2 in a thickness of 1 mm.

Table 1 shows the chemical analysis of 3 different batches of the precursor glasses. The 3 batches showed an increase in alumina content due to chemical attack by the molten glass of the alumina crucibles used for the preparation of the glass. Minor differences between nominal and experimental compositions were detected in all the other oxides. Therefore, the glass composition calculated after chemical analysis corresponds to the mean formula Li1.28Al0.64Ti1.66(PO4)3. Note that this formula respects the atomic content, as determined by the chemical analysis but not the electroneutrality. A slight discrepancy between the total negative and positive charges is attributed to experimental errors intrinsic to chemical analysis.

The XRD patterns of glass-ceramics obtained by single-stage thermal treatments at different temperatures are shown in Fig. 2. In each case, the main peak corresponds to the NASICON LiTi2(PO4)3 structure, JCPDS card 35–754. The increase in heat-treatment temperature makes the peaks (Fig. 2(b)) less broad and more intense. An increase in peak intensity is consistent with a higher crystallinity, referred to here as the degree of structural order in a solid, while the reduction in peak broadness is consistent with larger grains.

Moreover, in the sample obtained by heat treatment at 1000 °C, small peaks related to TiO2 and AlPO4 are also visible. These same peaks were also reported by Kosova [12] and Manso [5]. A peak attributed to an unknown phase is visible in the pattern of the glass-ceramic obtained at 700 °C, in the same position that found by Fu [16].

Fig. 3 shows the SEM images of glass-ceramics obtained by SHT at 700, 800, 900, 1000 °C. Note the increase in grain size as the heat treatment temperature increases. The insets of Fig. 3 show that glassceramic prepared at 700 and 800 °C are, respectively, transparent and translucent. This result will be discussed in section 4.2.

The microstructures of glass-ceramics obtained by DHT (Fig. 4) show that the increase in nucleation time at 606 °C tends to decrease the average grain size (except for sample DHT240, Fig. 4 (e)). This result is expected, since the number of nuclei formed increases when the duration of nucleation treatment increases, thus leading to a larger number of smaller grains. However, the difference in grain size is not as marked as in the case of single heat-treated samples (Fig. 3).

The impedance complex plane plots of the SHT glass-ceramics taken at two different temperatures (Fig. 5) show a single semi-circle, followed by an electrode spike at low frequency characteristic of electrode polarization and ionic conduction. In the case of samples heat-treated at 900 and 1000 °C, the high frequency intercept of the real axis does not coincide with the origin. A similar impedance plot was reported by Xu et al. [23] and Fu [16]. These spectra suggest the presence of high frequency impedance attributed to a low bulk resistance and, at intermediary frequency, a more resistive component attributed to the grain boundary. Since it was not possible to separate grains and grain boundaries contribution in all the samples, only the total resistance was analyzed.

The Arrhenius plot of the overall conductivity (σov) of SHT and DHT samples is presented in Fig. 6a and b. For the precursor glass and all the glass-ceramics investigated, Table 2 lists the electrical conductivity at room temperature, the activation energy (Ea), and log σ0, the pre-exponential term of the Arrhenius expression: σov = σ0 exp −Ea = kBT where kB and T are Boltzmann constant and absolute temperature, respectively.

For single heat-treated samples, the global electrical conductivity increases by three orders of magnitude when the heat treatment temperature increases from 700 to 1000 °C. In the case of glass-ceramics obtained by DHT, the electrical conductivity tends to decrease with longer nucleation treatments at 606 °C.

The XRD patterns of SHT7 and SHT8 samples (Fig. 2b) depict shoulders at the 2θ=20.8 and 24.6° peaks, which are ascribed here to a second solid solution whose composition resembles that of the main LATP phase. The results of backscattered electron and EDS analyses (Section 4.2) conﬁrm this assumption. These shoulders disappear gradually when the heat treatment temperature increases, and is no longer visible in the XRD pattern of the sample heat-treated at 1000 °C, indicating that the primary LATP phase in this sample is fully developed.

An increase in peak intensity, visible simultaneously with a indicates an increase in the samples' reduction in peak width, crystallinity, i.e., the development of a more ordered crystal, corroborating the assumption of the formation of a single LATP phase. In addition, peaks corresponding to TiO2 and AlPO4 appear in the XRD pattern of the sample heat treated at 1000 °C. The formation of TiO2 and AlPO4 at 1000 °C can be understood if one assumes that 1000 °C is a sufﬁciently high temperature to allow for structural reorganization by atomic diffusion, leading to the expulsion of the excess TiO2 and AlPO4 from the LATP solid solution. The presence of excess TiO2 and AlPO4 is consistent with the chemical analysis, which shows that the investigated composition is slightly lithium-deﬁcient compared to the expected composition. Thus, the expulsion of TiO2 and AlPO4 contributes to a more favorable Li+/Ti+ ratio and to a more ordered unit cell, and therefore to the sample's higher crystallinity. This higher crystallinity is believed to favor a better connection between the channels in the NASICON structure through which ionic conduction occurs [24,25], contributing to enhance the material's ionic conductivity.

The XRD patterns of samples obtained by DHT (606 °C+900 °C/ 20 min) (not shown in the text) show well deﬁned peaks comparable to those of samples obtained with SHT at 900 °C.

The analysis of the microstructures in Fig. 3, (SHT samples), shows an increase in the average grain size from 110 nm to 380 nm with increasing heat treatment temperature. This increase in grain size is more important at 900 and 1000 °C, given that at higher temperatures the diffusion mechanisms whereby grains may grow tend to accelerate. As shown in the corresponding inserts in the micrographs, samples heat-treated at the lowest temperatures (700 and 800 °C) are transparent or translucent. This translucency is not modiﬁed by extending the heat treatment to 72 h, indicating that the crystallization process is completed in the ﬁrst 20 min and that the transparency observed is due to the small size of the crystals, smaller than or in the same order of magnitude as the wavelength of the visible light.

Another feature of the microstructures shown in Fig. 3 is that samples single heat-treated at 800 and 900 °C show a bimodal grain size distribution with small grains localized around larger grains. In the case of a sample heat treated at 900 °C, some of these small grains appear in light color in the backscattered electron image (Fig. 7), indicating a higher electronic density. However, the EDS (Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy) analysis (shown in Fig. 7) did not reveal any major difference in the chemical composition of large and small grains. These results are consistent with the hypothesis of a solid solution of the same structure and with a composition close to that of the main LATP phase, as discussed in Section 4.1. According to the EDS results, it can be stated that this second solid solution has a higher electronic density than the main phase and is therefore titanium enriched. Nevertheless, the EDS analysis of the sample heat treated at 1000 °C (shown in Fig. 8) indicates that clearer grains have signiﬁcantly lower phosphorus and higher titanium content than the larger grains. Small grains are thus identiﬁed as TiO2. This result is consistent with the XRD pattern of the sample heat treated at 1000 °C (Fig. 2a), which shows a peak corresponding to TiO2. A small peak corresponding to AlPO4 is also visible in the XRD pattern of this sample. However, since the electronic density of AlPO4 is lower than that of TiO2 or the LATP phase, the contrast is insufﬁcient to clearly separate AlPO4 in the backscattered electron images in Fig. 8.

To summarize, analyses of XRD results combined with SEM and EDS observations indicate that, for SHT samples, two similar NASICON crystalline phases are formed at heat treatment temperatures below 900 °C, one of them with a higher content in TiO2 and Al2O3. Above this temperature, the excess TiO2 and AlPO4 precipitates, generating a single NASICON phase with higher structural homogeneity, i.e., crystallinity.

For samples obtained by double heat treatment, Fig. 4 indicates the dependence of the average grain size on the nucleation time. With the exception of Fig. 4e, the smaller grain size corresponds to the longer nucleation time. However, the increase in grain size observed here is less pronounced than in the case of LAGP samples [17]. This is probably because, on the temperature scale, nucleation in the LAGP glass overlaps less with the process of crystal growth, than in the glass LATP.

As can be seen in Table 2, the activation energy for electrical conduction of the precursor glass is 0.64 eV. The most conductive glass-ceramics in this series presents activation energy of around 0.25 eV, which is consistent with the value reported by Xu [3] for a similar composition. This low value of activation energy is characteristic of a fast ion conductor, and results from the regularity of the diffusion channels in the NASICON structure.

Table 2 also lists the value of log σ0, the pre-exponential term of the Arrhenius expression (expression 1) for ionic conductivity, of all the samples under study. According to the description of a jump mechanism, the pre-exponential term, σ0, is a function of the jump distance (λ), the attempt frequency (ν0) and the total concentration n of lithium cations [26]:σ0≈ F2nλ2ν06R where F is the Faraday constant, R is the gas constant and T absolute temperature.

Formally, this expression shows that σ0 is temperature-dependent. However, these variations are small in the reduced temperature range of our measurements (20 °C b T b100 °C), especially on a log scale, and therefore we may chose a mean value of 313 K for T. An expected value of n for the NASICON structure LiTi2(PO4)3 may be estimated from the crystal density (theoretical density of crystal=2.948 g/cm3, resulting n=5.71×1021 cm− 3), and the jump distance by λ ∼(1/n)1/3. Adopting ν0=1013 Hz, an estimated value of log σ0≈2.2 (σ0 in S⋅cm− 1) can be calculated. This value is comparable to the mean value of log σ0=1.1 (σ0 in S⋅cm− 1), based on data from the 10 investigated glass-ceramics (Table 2).

Fig. 9 depicts the room temperature conductivity for the glassceramics as a function of grain size. This ﬁgure shows that, with a similar average grain size, different electrical conductivities are obtained in SHT and DHT samples, indicating that grain size does not dictate the electrical conductivity in the case of SHT samples. In fact, as discussed in Sections 4.2 and 4.3, in the case of SHT samples, higher treatment temperatures lead to a higher structural order. The decrease of activation energy detected in SHT samples when the heat treatment increases (Table 2) also reﬂects the change observed in the samples' crystallinity, since the higher the structural order the lower the energy barriers the ion must overcome to move, as is the case for samples obtained at the highest temperatures.

However, with the same heat treatment temperature, which is the case of the DHT samples (ﬁnal heat treatment at 900 °C), the same structural order may be expected in the NASICON unit cell. Thus, the minor variation in electrical conductivity found with different nucleation times is attributed here to the grain size. With smaller grain sizes, the volume contribution of the grain boundary is more important and an increase in the interfacial area between grains may be expected. Since the grain boundary is less ordered than the grain, a decrease in the overall electrical conductivity is also expected, as indicated in Fig. 9, which also shows the corresponding interfacial area on a double abscissa scale. It is also interesting to note that sample DHT240 in Fig. 9 corresponds to the sample in Fig. 4(e). The average grain size of the sample in Fig. 4e does not follow the tendency of the series. However,when plotted as a function of grain size, its value of electrical conductivity follows the tendency of the whole series, conﬁrming the effect of grain size on the ionic conductivity of the samples.

Finally, Fig. 10 compares the XRD pattern of SHT8 and DHT60 samples, which present a similar average grain size. A difference in peak intensity is clearly visible; in addition, sample DHT60 shows an extra peak at 2θ=25.6° belonging to the NASICON structure. These observations corroborate the hypothesis that a higher structural order is achieved at higher treatment temperatures, and may explain the difference in electrical conductivity of these two samples.

It is also interesting to note that the electrical conductivity of DHT samples is higher than that obtained by SHT at 900 °C, indicating that the double heat treatment has a favorable effect on the electrical conductivity. Finally, the maximum overall electrical conductivity (1.3×10−3 S⋅cm−1) found for the glass-ceramics obtained by a SHT at 1000 °C is the same as that reported by Fu [16], and higher than that of the most conductive glass-ceramics synthesized by Xu (5.2×10−4 S⋅cm−1) [3]. These glassceramics present higher ionic conductivity than a similar composition prepared by the sintering route by Arbi (5×10−5 S⋅cm−1) [10] and Aono (7×10−4 S⋅cm−1) [8]. These ﬁndings favor the glass-ceramic route.

Fully crystallized glass-ceramics in the Li1 + xAlxTi2 − x(PO4)3 system with different microstructures were obtained by single and double heat treatments. In the case of single heat-treated samples, the increase of three orders of magnitude found at different heat treatment temperatures is attributed to an increase in the sample's crystallinity, i.e., a more ordered structure. The electrical conductivity of double heat treated samples tends to decrease when the nucleation treatment is extended. In this case, the decrease in electrical conductivity may be attributed to an increase of the interfacial area due to the decrease of the average grain size. Samples obtained by double heat treatment with a ﬁnal treatment at 900 °C present higher electrical conductivity than samples obtained by single heat treatment at the same temperature. The latter, in turn, present higher electrical conductivity than samples produced by classical sintering routes.

The authors are indebted to Prof. J. L. Souquet (LEPMI, ENSEEG, Grenoble France) for his helpful discussions. The Brazilian research funding agencies FAPESP (process no. 07/08179-9), CNPq and Capes are also acknowledged for their ﬁnancial support.





