Amorphous ceramics, Li1+x+yAlxTi2−xSiyP3−yO12 (LATSP), by radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering below 180 ◦C. The as-deposited LiCoO2 thin ﬁlms were characterized by X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy and atomic force microscope. All-solid-state Li/PEO18–Li (CF3SO2)2N/LATSP/LiCoO2/Au cells were fabricated using the amorphous ﬁlm. The electrochemical performance of the cells was investigated by galvanostatic cycling, cyclic voltammetry, potentiostatic intermittent titration technique and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. It was found that the amorphous LiCoO2 thin ﬁlm shows a promising electrochemical performance, making it a potential application in microbatteries for microelectronic devices.

All-solid-state thin-ﬁlm batteries using ceramic electrolytes have received great interest due to their high safety, reliability and durability. For the successful cycling of all-solid-state Li-ion batteries, a ceramics electrolyte with a high Li-ion conductivity is an indispensable precondition. Since the pioneering work by Bates et al. to use lithium phosphorus oxynitride (LiPON) as the electrolyte in a Li/LiPON/LiCoO2 batteries [1–4], other ceramic electrolytes such as Li–La–Ti–O [5–9], Li–Si–V–O [10,11], and Li–S–P [12–14] have been suggested as the potential solid electrolytes for all-solidstate Li-ion batteries. Recently, an increasing attention has been paid to NASICON-type electrolytes based on LiTi2(PO4)3, because of their high Li-ion conductivity at room temperature [15–21]. More recently, a Li-ion conductivity as high as 5× 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature has been achieved [22], which is comparable with commonly used liquid electrolyte.

Although electrochemical cycling of all-solid-state Li-ion batteries based on NASICON-type electrolytes has been realized [23–29], some factors must be taken into consideration for integrating the solid thin-ﬁlm batteries onto microelectronic devices. For example, a post-annealing of as-deposited ﬁlm is generally necessary to guarantee its practical use in batteries. This annealing step, however, is not compatible with the integrated silicon substrate. In addition,the performance of the batteries will be deteriorated by the Li-inert interface formed due to the side reactions between electrolyte and cathode ﬁlm during heating [28,29]. Therefore, preference should be given to the low-temperature preparation of the ﬁlms, if they exhibit acceptable electrochemical performance. Previous work [30–32] showed that all-solid-state Li-ion batteries based on the amorphous LiMn2O4 cathode on LiPON have a promising application in microdevices. Considering the fact that low-temperature processed LiCoO2 thin ﬁlms showed a promising electrochemical performance in liquid electrolyte [33–35], an attempt was made to deposit amorphous LiCoO2 thin ﬁlm on NASICON-type glass ceramics, Li1+x+yAlxTi2−xSiyP3−yO12 (LATSP), at low temperature, aiming at a potential application in microbatteries.

The glass ceramic plates, LATSP (0.26 mm in thickness), provided by OHARA Inc., were used as the solid electrolyte for the following experiments. The LiCoO2 thin ﬁlms (8 mm× 8 mm) were deposited on the LATSP substrates (10 mm× 10 mm) by RF magnetron sputtering using an Ulvac SCOTT-C3. The target (50 mm in diameter) used for sputtering was prepared by cold pressing LiCoO2 powder (Aldrich, 99.8%). LiCoO2 sputtering was carried out for 2 h in an Ar/O2 mixture (30% O2) or pure Ar with a total pressure of 2 Pa. An Au ﬁlm was then deposited on the LiCoO2 by RF magnetron sputtering from an Au target in pure Ar for 30 min as the current collector. For comparison, the LiCoO2 thin ﬁlm was also sputtered on Au substrates under the same conditions followed by annealing at 700 ◦C in air for 30 min. The crystalline structure of the ﬁlms was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a RINT2000/PC diffractometer with Cu-K␣ radiation. The surface and cross-sectional morphologies of the ﬁlms were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a Hitachi S-4800. The chemical composition of the ﬁlm was determined by inductively coupled plasma (ICP) spectroscopy using a Shimadzu ICPS-1000IV spectrometer. The surface roughness of the as-deposited LiCoO2 thin ﬁlm was observed by atomic force microscope (AFM) using a Seiko SPI3800N.

Li/PEO18Li(CF3SO2)2N/LATSP/LiCoO2/Au cells were fabricated investigate A poly(ethyleneoxide) ﬁlm, PEO18Li(CF3SO2)2N, was inserted between them to prevent the reactions between Li and LATSP. The polymer electrolyte was prepared by our previously reported method [36]. The thickness of the polymer electrolyte is about 300 ␮m. Galvanostatic cycling of the cells was carried out at 5 ␮A between 2.5 and 4.5 V. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurement was performed between 2.5 and 4.5 V at 0.2 mV s−1 using a Solartron 1287 electrochemical interface. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurement was conducted by applying an ac signal of 10 mV amplitude over the frequency range from 1 MHz to 1 mHz using a Solartron 1287 electrochemical interface combined with a Solartron 1260 frequency response analyzer. Li-ion chemical diffusion coefﬁcients, ˜DLi, were measured by potentiostatic intermittent titration technique (PITT). For the PITT measurements, a potential step of 10 mV was applied and the current was recorded as a function of time. The procedure was repeated between 3.6 and 4.3 V. The CV test was also performed on 700 ◦C-annealed LiCoO2 thin ﬁlm deposited on Au at 0.2 mV s−1 between 3.5 and 4.3 V using a liquid electrolyte composed of 1 M LiClO4 in a mixture of ethylene carbonate (EC)/diethyl carbonate (DEC) (1:1 in volume). All the electrochemical measurements were performed at 50 ◦C.

Fig. 1 shows the XRD patterns of the LiCoO2 thin ﬁlms deposited on the LATSP substrates. No peaks attributed to LiCoO2 can be found when sputtered at 30 and 50 W, indicating that the as-deposited ﬁlm in Ar/O2 (30% O2) is amorphous. When the power is increased to 100 W, a small and broad peak, which corresponds to the (1 0 4) plane of LiCoO2, can be seen, indicating slight ordering within the amorphous bulk, due to the increased temperature inside the sputtering chamber at a higher power. Note that the ﬁlm exhibits a partially crystalline structure with a (1 0 4) preferred orientation when deposited in pure Ar at 50 W, indicating an effect of sputtering atmosphere on the microstructure of the LiCoO2 thin ﬁlm. The compositions of the as-deposited ﬁlms on Au were checked by ICP. The Li-to-Co molar ratios are 0.697:1, 0.797:1, 0.996:1, for the samples prepared at 30, 50 100 W, respectively.

Fig. 2 shows the SEM images of the as-deposited LiCoO2 thin ﬁlm on LATSP prepared in Ar/O2 (30% O2) at 50 W. As seen in Fig. 2(a), the surface of the ﬁlm is rough with irregularly shaped particles. High magniﬁcation image shows that the protruding particles are the clusters separated by the ditches as seen in Fig. 2(b). The enlargement image in Fig. 2(c) clearly shows that the cluster consists of several faceted rods around 100 nm surrounded by sub-micron sized ﬂakes. It seems like that the faceted rods are partially crystallized from the amorphous ﬂakes due to the high temperature inside the chamber. As a result, the as-deposited ﬁlm can be considered to have a locally crystalline structure within the amorphous matrix. Although the exact mechanism of the nucleation and crystallization of the crystallized component is not clear yet, it may be related to the RF plasma irradiated on the ﬁlm [37]. Similar phenomenon was observed in the high-temperature annealed LiCoO2 thin ﬁlm [38]. The thickness of the ﬁlm is estimated to be 0.5 ␮m after 2 h sputtering as shown in Fig. 2(d). Fig. 3 shows a typical three-dimensional AFM image of the ﬁlm at a 3 ␮m× 3 ␮m scale deposited at 50 W. The AFM image further proves that the surface of the as-deposited ﬁlm is rough because of the partial crystallization of the ﬁlm from the amorphous bulk.

Fig. 4 shows the charge–discharge curves of the as-deposited LiCoO2 thin ﬁlm on LATSP. Note that when sputtered at 30 W, the ﬁlm shows a low capacity in ﬁrst charge process than that in the subsequent ones. This may be related to its Li-deﬁcient composition at low power as proved by ICP results. At higher powers, the ﬁrst charge capacity is slightly higher than second one, indicating an increased Li-to-Co ratio in the ﬁlms as conﬁrmed by the ICP test. As shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b), the charge–discharge curves for the ﬁlms sputtered at the low powers of 30 and 50 W exhibit a sloping feature, which are typical of amorphous or partially crystalline materials. In contrast, a quasi-plateau at around 3.8 V can be seen for the ﬁlm sputtered at 100 W as shown in Fig. 4(c), suggesting an increased crystalline-to-amorphous component ratio. It should be emphasized that the crystallization of the ﬁlm is not well developed below 180 ◦C. Thus, the ﬂatness of charge–discharge plateau of the low-temperature prepared LiCoO2 differs from that of the well-crystallized one prepared at high temperature. The ﬂatness of plateau of our sample is comparable with that of the LiCoO2 thin ﬁlm on LiPON annealed at 300 ◦C and is better than that of the asdeposited one [33]. As seen in Fig. 4(c), the deliverable discharge capacity of the as-deposited LiCoO2 prepared at 100 W reaches 200 mAh g−1 with a well-deﬁned plateau, which is comparable with that of the well-crystallized bulk LiCoO2 powders also in 4.5 cut-off voltage [39]. The good electrochemical performance of the as-deposited LiCoO2 thin ﬁlm is attributed to its novel microstructure, that is, in situ formation of the nanocrystals embedded in the amorphous bulk as shown in Fig. 2. Fig. 5 compares the CV plots of the amorphous LiCoO2 on LATSP (50 W) and well-crystallized LiCoO2 on Au annealed at 700 ◦C. As shown in the ﬁgure, the cathodic and the anodic peaks are broad and have a large potential difference between them for the asdeposited thin ﬁlm, implying an amorphous feature. In addition to the low crystallinity, the large charge transfer resistance between LiCoO2 and LATSP also contributes to the broadening of the peaks and large potential difference between the peaks. As previously reported, poorly crystallized LiCoO2 in the liquid electrolyte also showed broad cathodic and anodic peaks, but with a rather smaller potential difference between the peaks [40]. In contrast, for the high-temperature heat-treated LiCoO2 thin ﬁlm, three pairs of symmetrical peaks are well evolved and clearly separated as seen in Fig. 5(b). The meaning of the three pairs of peaks was discussed in our previous report [41].

For the amorphous LiCoO2-based solid batteries, the Li-ion transfer through the LiCoO2 ﬁlm is a crucial factor in determining its electrochemical performance. Therefore, the measurement of the Li-ion chemical diffusion coefﬁcient ( ˜DLi) becomes extremely important. PITT method was using to measure the chemical diffusion coefﬁcients. In PITT, a potential step is applied to change the equilibrium composition of the electrode and the current decay is measured as a function of time. The time (t) dependence of the transient current (It) at each potential step can be expressed as [42]:where F is the Faraday’s constant, S is the area of the ﬁlm, Cs − C0 is concentration difference at the surface at time t and at time t = 0 during the each potential step, and L is thickness of the ﬁlm. The ˜DLi can be calculated from the slope of the linear region of the Ln(It) vs.

t plot using the following equation [42]: ˜DLi = − dLn(It)

The detail of the measurement and calculation of ˜DL values can be referred in Ref. [41]. Fig. 6 shows the potential dependence of ˜DLi values for the three samples deposited at different powers. It is clear that the samples sputtered at lower powers (30 and 50 W) show slightly higher ˜DLi than that at a high power below 4.0 V. Above 4.0 V, both the samples exhibit a rapid decrease of f ˜DLi values with the potential. This may be due to the fact that the amorphous structure is stable and is preferable for the Li-ion transport at a high Li content in LixCoO2, while at a low Li content, a more highly crystalline structure is favored for the Li-ion diffusion. For LixCoO2, abrupt structural changes take place at a low Li content in LixCoO2, which is related to the diffusion of cobalt ions into lithium layers that blocks the diffusion pathways of Li-ions [43]. EIS measurement was conducted to conﬁrm this assumption. Fig. 7 shows the EIS results of the Li/PEO18Li (CF3SO2)2N/LATSP/LiCoO2/Au cell, where LiCoO2 was the amorphous LiCoO2 on LATSP sputtered at 50 W. Note that a semicircle in the high frequency region is observed for the sample at potential below 4.0 V. This semicircle corresponds to the interface resistance between lithium metal and the polymer electrolyte, due to the obstacle for the Li-ion transfer through the Li/polymer interface. An equivalent circuit is used to describe the electrode process in this potential range as shown in Fig. 8(a), where Rs represents the ohmic resistance of the electrolyte and electrode, Rint and Cr represent the Li/polymer interface resistance and the dielectric relaxation capacitance, respectively, and Rw is related to the solid phase diffusion of Li-ions in the bulk electrode. With the increasing potential, another large semicircle appears in the middle frequency region, which could be related to the charge transfer resistance between the LixCoO2 thin ﬁlm and LATSP, due to the obstacle for Li-ion diffusion across LixCoO2/LATSP interface. A Rct/Cd element is used to describe this electrode process as seen in Fig. 8(b), where Rct represents the charger transfer resistance between LixCoO2 and LATSP, and Cd is the associated double-layer capacitance. The high charge transfer resistance may be related to the abrupt structural changes of the amorphous LixCoO2 thin ﬁlm at high potential and the accompanying structural rearrangement of the LixCoO2/LATSP interface. In the case of the LiCoO2 in liquid electrolyte, generally, the charge transfer resistance decreases with the increasing electrode potential. This may be related to the solid electrolyte interface (SEI) formed on the surface of LiCoO2 particles. As was reported by Itagaki et al. [44], the Li-ion conductivity of the SEI layer was increased during the Li-extraction process of LiCoO2, resulting in improved charge transfer ability across the LiCoO2/liquid-electrolyte interface. For the LATSP electrolyte, however, such a SEI layer is absent, leading to a different behavior.

Amorphous LiCoO2 thin ﬁlms with a high operating voltage and a high speciﬁc capacity were prepared by RF magnetron sputtering in Ar/O2 (30% O2) on LATSP at low temperature. The ﬁlms showed structural ordering with the increasing sputtering power due to the elevated auto-generated temperature in the chamber. The ordering of the structure is related to its novel amorphous/crystalline hybrid structure, in other words, in situ formation of nanocrystals inside the amorphous bulk. A discharge capacity as high as 200 mAh g−1 was observed for the ﬁlm with this novel structure. The high capacity and facile processing of amorphous LiCoO2 thin ﬁlms on LATSP make it a promising application in the all-solid-state microbatteries that can be integrated onto microelectronic devices.

This research work was carried out under a collaboration program of Mie University and Genesis Research Institute, Nagoya, Japan. We thank OHARA Inc. for supplying the LATSP plates. We also thank the support of Zijin Program of Zhejiang University, China.
