A new superionic conducting transparent phosphate glasses with composition Li(4þx)TixNb1?xP3O12 (0 ? x ? 1.0) were prepared by rapid melt quenching. As quenched samples were characterized by X-ray powder diffraction, differential scanning calorimetric and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy studies. These glasses were found to have high thermal stability parameter and Li4NbP3O12 has been found to have high glass forming ability. Electrical properties of the present glasses were studied by impedance and dielectric spectroscopy in the frequency range 10 Hze3 MHz in the temperature range 323e523 K. Arrhenius behavior has been observed for all the glass in conductivity, dielectric loss and conductivity relaxation and their activation energies are explained and reported.

Phosphate glasses have received a great deal of attention during the past two decades because of its interesting structure, glass forming ability, electrical and optical properties, high transmission in ultraviolet region, low thermo-optical coefficient, low transition temperature having advantage to various application as well as a good bio-compatible glasses [1e4]. Lithium based phosphate glasses comparatively have high ionic conductivity and are considerably importance because of their potential application in high density power source and solid state batteries. The use of glasses in microbatteries as electrolyte [5,6], sensors and smart windows has provoked the study of ion transport in glasses and a search of fast ion-conducting glasses. Glasses and Ceramic ionic conductors based on a LiTi2(PO4)3 structure, which is analogous to NASICON (NaZr2P3O12) type structure [7], are among the most promising group of oxide-based lithium ion conductors investigated in recent years. The NASICON-type materials have fascinated much awareness recently, as they facilitate a large scope for preparing number of materials with variation in their constituent metal ions and composition [8]. In recent years, attention has been paid on crystallites of the formula A1þxMxTi2?xP3O12, where A ¼ Na or Li, and M is trivalent cations which shows enhanced electrical conductivity features upon partial substitution of Ti4þ by trivalent cations (M3þ, such as Al, Ga, In, Sc, Y, La, Cr or Fe) based different materials with NASICON structure due to enhanced ionic conductivity [8,9]. These materials have inconvenience in applicability of solid electrolytes due to grain boundary contribution. These may be avoided by vitrification of NASICON compound since glass is perhaps the most ubiquitous of all ceramic materials due to the ability of continuously vary its structure and properties through composition. There are also many reports in the preparation and physical properties of LiNbO3 and NaNbO3 embedded in glass matrix [10e15] after the discovery of amorphous LiNbO3 and LiTaO3 by Glass et al. [10,11]. The amorphous LiNbO3 and LiTaO3 possessed extraordinarily high dielectric constants and high Liþ ionic conductivities. The aim of the present work is to report the glass with high ionic conductivity in NASICON framework and its variation with temperature and composition in the system Li(4þx)TixNb1?xP3O12 (0 ? x ? 1) along with dielectric, thermal and structural studies. The unique crystalline form of this parent element Li4NbP3O12 are in the series of NaZr2P3O12 isostructural phosphates [16]. The thermal studies have been done to ascertain the best glass stability. The conductivity data were analyzed using impedance spectroscopy and the dielectric data were analyzed using Hunt's model and KohlrauscheWilliamseWatts (KWW) function to understand the dielectric relaxation of these glasses at different temperatures for given composition at arbitrary temperature.

Phosphate glasses with composition Li(4þx)TixNb1?xP3O12 (x ¼ 0, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 1) (LNTPx) were synthesized by the conventional melt quenching method. Stoichiometric amount of analytical grade Li2CO3, N b2O5, TiO2 and NH4H2PO4 were mixed thoroughly and placed in a platinum crucible into an electric furnace held at 350 ?C for 5 h. This allows P2O5 and Li2O to decompose and react with other batch constituents before melting. After this treatment, each mixture was transferred to another electric furnace open to the atmosphere with its temperature readjusted at 850e900 ?C depend upon the composition. The molten glass was occasionally stirred to ensure homogeneity and retained in the furnace for 1 h. Then the melt was poured into a mild-steel split mould to form colorless and transparent glass discs of 1.5 mm thickness and 10 mm diameter. After casting, each glass piece was immediately transferred to an electric furnace held at 300 ?C for 5 h and then cooled slowly to room temperature. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained for powdered samples using X'Pert PANalytical X-ray diffractometer with monochromatic CuKa radiation (l ¼ 1.5418 ?A) at glancing angles between 5? and 75?. IR spectroscopic analyzes were carried out with a Shimadzu FTIR-8700 Fourier transform infrared spectrophotometer in the wave number range 4000e400 cm?1 with a resolution of 8 cm?1. The differential scanning calorimetric (DSC) studies were carried out using thermal analyzer TA-SDT-Q600 in dry nitrogen ambience in temperature range 313e1173 K a t a heating rate of 10 K min?1 on the as-quenched glass-plate. For the electrical measurements the parallel and opposite sides of the samples were painted with silver paste. The ac conductivity was measured using a Material Mates Impedance Analyzer 7260, in the temperature range of 333e523 K, measuring the real and the imaginary part of the sample impedance (Z* ¼ Z0 ? jZ00) in the frequency range of 10 Hze3 MHz. The real part, 30(u) and imaginary part, 300(u) of the complex permittivity, 3* and real part, M0(u) and imaginary part, M00(u) of electric modulus are calculated by transforming the measured impedance data to complex permittivity using the relation: 3* ¼ 1= ? juC0Z*? ; (1) M* ¼ juC0Z* (2) where Z* is the complex impedance, C0 ¼ 30A/t, t is the thickness of the sample, A is the effective area between the electrodes, C0 is the vacuum permittivity, u ¼ 2pf.

The lack of any sharp peaks for the samples in XRD reveals the amorphous nature of the samples. FTIR spectra of glass samples obviously show five main peaks at w1 170, w1020, w910, w741 and w530 cm?1 in addition to weak band at w617 cm?1. These bands are assigned to the various vibrational contributions of the basic phosphates. Table 1 lists the assignments of FTIR absorption bands based on those given in Ref. [17e22]. The origin of the bands at lower wave numbers, below 600 cm?1, is not quite clear. It is usually assumed that in this range bands originate from vibrations of large groups of atoms, like 3,4-member rings or short chains. The continuous spectrum observed in this region is due to the superposing of band vibrations of structural forms, mentioned above, as well as the bending vibrations of PeOeP and PeOeNb bridges [22].

The glassy nature was confirmed by the observation of the glass transition temperature in DSC for all the samples. The glass transition Tg, the onset of the crystallization Ts, the peak crystallization Tc, and melting temperatures Tm, were determined and listed in Table 2. The Tg is high for LNTP1 and it decreases as titanium is replaced by niobium, whereas the peak crystallization temperature is high for LNTP0 and it decreases as niobium is replaced by titanium. It is known that the Tg decreases with decreasing bond strength and cross-linking in phosphate glasses. The significant difference that exists between the glass transition, Tg and the onset of the crystallization temperature Ts accounts the thermal stability of the glasses. The thermal stability DT parameter is usually employed to estimate the glass stability [23] which is defined by DT ¼ Ts ? Tg (3) According to Saad and Poulin the thermal stability parameter S which reflects the resistance for devitrification of glass and it is defined by [24] S ¼ ðTc ? TsÞ?Tc ? Tg ??Tg (4) In the above equation (Tc ? Ts) is the rate of devitrification transformation of glassy phase. The glass forming ability parameter Kgl known as Hruby's parameter for the different glass is defined by [25] Kgl ¼ ?Tc ? Tg ??ðTm ? TcÞ (5) The value of DT, S and Kgl calculated from Eq. (3)e(5) respectively are given in Table 2. This reveals that the LNTP0 composition glass is comparably have high thermal stability and good glass forming ability than LNTP1.0 and it decreases as niobium is replaced by titanium. According to Hruby, higher the value of Kgl greater its stability against crystallization and supposedly the higher the vitrification ability. The value of Kgl decreases as the niobium ions are replaced by titanium and indicates the progress towards higher degree of disorder as the titanium ions prefer to occupy the network modifying position within the composition.

Electrical properties of the composition were determined using impedance spectroscopy. The resistance and the capacitance associated with the glass could be estimated using impedance spectroscopy. Fig. 1 shows a typical complex impedance plane plots and the corresponding equivalent circuits of LNTP0.5 glass for the temperature range from 403 K to 433 K. The plot shows the typical spectrum of the ionic conductors consist of high frequency arc (or its part) and the low frequency tail. At high frequencies ion migration process connected to the sample occurs, while at low frequencies the electrode polarization occurs due to space charge accumulation between the electrode and sample. This happens due to the multiple point contacts result to spreading resistance and airgap capacitance at electrodes [26]. A deeper insight into the electrical properties of the NASICON-type glasses is obtained from the complex impedance plane plot analysis with Boukamp equivalent circuit package [27]. The value of bulk resistance Rb was determined from the intersection of the arc with the real axis of the impedance Z0. The magnitude of dc conductivity, sdc was then calculated from Rb by the relation sdc ¼ d/(RbA), where d and A are thickness and area of the sample respectively. These glasses have high dc conductivity at ambient temperature as the incorporation of displacive type ferroelectric material in glass matrix will assist the cationic conduction [28]. The small increase in dc conductivity with temperature is due to the increase in the thermally activated drift mobility of ions according to hopping conduction mechanism. As temperature increases, the radius of the arc corresponding to the bulk resistance of the sample decreases indicating an activated conduction mechanism. Generally, conductivity in this kind of materials obeys the Arrhenius law, which can be expressed as follows: sdcT ¼ s0expð ? Es=kBTÞ (6) where sdc is the dc conductivity, s0 is the pre-exponential factor, T is the temperature in K, Es is the dc conductivity activation energy and kB is the Boltzmann's constant. Arrhenius plots of the glass are shown in Fig. 2. The activation energy Es for the conduction process was extracted from the slope of the straight line plot of log(sdcT) against reciprocal temperature 1000/T. The correlation coefficients R for the fit was higher than 0.99 for every sample. The magnitudes of sdc and Es for the different composition are listed in Table 3. I n each case the magnitude of Liþ ion conductivity is remarkable at higher temperature. The maximum value of conductivity in LNTP0 was found to be 5.62 ? 10?3 S c m?1 at 250 ?C. In the present investigated glasses, the niobium and titanium atom prefer the octahedral sites of type [TiO6/2] and [NbeO6/2] respectively [29,30]. These units can act as building blocks in the structure of these glasses, along with [POO3/2] types of tetrahedral units. Further every Nb5þ and Ti4þ atom will convert the non-bridging oxygen in the phosphate glass network into bridging oxygen. This dislocates the negative charges of non-bridging oxygen towards [NbeO6/2] o r [TiO6/2] e octahedral; as a result the mobility of Liþ is higher. Since the lithium content present in the Li(4þx)TixNb1?xP3O12 (x ¼ 0, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 1) system is higher (w40e50 mol%), there is no major structural transformation in this composition range and hence the conductivity for these glasses are less composition dependent [8,31,32]. The activation energy for all samples is almost same (taking into account the errors) but the pre-exponential factor is increasing as x increases. This increase would be mainly due to the increase in the Li ions in the glass matrix. Fig. 3 shows the variation of imaginary part of impedance with frequency at different temperatures for the composition LNTP0.5. The curves are broader than ideal Debye curve and asymmetric. These features indicate that the relaxation time s is not a single valued but it is distributed continuously or discretely around a mean, sm ¼ 1/um [8]. As temperature increases the magnitude of Z00 peak maxima decreases and the peak frequency shifts to the higher values. The inset of Fig. 3 shows the variation of peak frequency, umax, as a function of temperature for LNTP0.50 and it follows Arrhenius relation umax ¼ u0 exp(?Eimp/kBT). The activation energy corresponding to non-Debye type of relaxation is obtained from the linear fit and it is almost equal to the value of activation energy Es as shown in Table 3.

Fig. 4(a) and (b) show the frequency dependent of real and imaginary part of complex permittivity 3* respectively for the composition LNTP0. The observed variation in 30(u) with frequency is ascribed to the formation of a space charge region at the electrode/sample interface, which is familiarly known as un?1 variation or the non-Debye type of behavior. As the vitreous substances are disordered at molecular level, one would expect a variation in the free energy barriers from site to site in the quasi lattice unlike in a material with a long range lattice structure. The observed dispersion in 30(u) can be explained in terms of the ion diffusion and polarization model [33]. The glassy materials have free energybarriers of varying height spaced randomly because of the macrolevel disorder of these materials. The dispersion in 3* is attributed to the lack of translational invariance in the free energy barriers for ion diffusion. The increase of 30(u) in lower frequencies can be attributed to the contribution from polarization of charges. In the low frequency region, the ions jump in the field direction and pile up at sites with high free energy barrier in the field direction after successfully hopping sites with low free energy barrier. This piling of charges leads to a net polarization of the ionic medium and hence a large contribution to the low frequency value of 30(u). At high frequencies the periodic reversal of the field takes place so rapidly that there are no excess ion jumps in the field direction. The 30(u) remains nearly constant at the high frequency which is probably the result of rapid polarization process with no ionic movement contribution. At this frequency the ions can only oscillate without reaching the sample electrode interface [34]. The imaginary part of the complex permittivity, 300(u) do not show any loss peak in the frequency range 10 Hze1 Mz, which normally appears in the low frequency region. An upward trend in 300(u) at low frequencies (lower than 10 kHz) is attributed to dc conductivity with electrode polarization, i.e., the conduction losses is predominate and hence at all temperatures the 300(u) shows the 1/u dependence on the frequency. Also 300(u) is found to increase with increase in temperature and dielectric loss peak has not been observed at any temperature. Hence the determination of characteristic frequency um for the dielectric loss is not possible however according to Hunt's model [35] the Arrhenius law is valid for both low and above the characteristic frequency um, which can be expressed as um ¼ um0exp ? ? W kBT ? (7) where W is the activation energy for dielectric loss and kB and T have usual meaning. From Fig. 4(b) the frequency values corresponding to 300 ¼ 1000 at different temperature have been determined. The inset of Fig. 4(b) shows the variation of characteristic frequency, um, as a function of temperature for glass of composition x ¼ 0 and it follows the Arrhenius relation as per Eq. (7). The activation energy, W of dielectric loss was calculated from the slopes of the least square fit of the data and are given in Table 3 and it is comparable to dc activation energy. The correlation coefficient R for the least square fit is above 0.99. The dielectric loss factor tan(d) ¼ 300/30 reflects the phase difference due to the loss of energy within the sample at a particular frequency, where 30 and 300 are real and imaginary part of dielectric permittivity. The frequency dependence of tan(d) at different temperatures for the glass composition LNTP0 is shown in Fig. 5. A t lower frequencies tan(d) increases with rise in frequency and shows a maximum at particular frequencies for different temperatures. This increase in tan(d) is because, the active component (ohmic) of the current increases more rapidly than its reactive component (capacitive). At higher frequencies tan(d) decreases with increasing frequency because, the reactive component increases in proportion to the frequency whereas the active component of the current is practically independent of frequency [36]. The tan(d) peak shifts to higher frequency with increasing temperature. It should be noted that the dielectric loss peak is positioned at low frequency region, where the conductivity is dominated by dc conductivity. This kind of dependence of tan(d) on frequency is typically associated with losses by conduction. When an external electric field is applied, the alkali ions move through the network and thereby create conduction losses. With falling temperature and rising frequency, the capacity for mobility becomes less and conduction losses decreases or vice-versa. In support of this fact it can be seen from the insert of Fig. 5 that the relaxation time decreases with increasing temperature which indicates that the mobility of ion increases with rise in temperature and the heat produced will be dissipated in the surrounding medium causing the increase in conduction loss. It is obvious that the tan(d) peak frequency ud are dependent on both the composition and temperature. With regard the temperature dependence, the higher the temperature, the higher the value of ud which is connected to the mobility and therefore higher conductivity of lithium ions in high temperature.

n alternative approach to investigate the electrical response of materials is the complex electric modulus M*(u). The electrode polarization effect is minimized in this representation. The complex electric modulus is represented by the following expression [37,38]: M* ¼ 1=3* ¼ juC0Z* ¼ M0ðuÞ þ jM00ðuÞ ¼ MN 2 41 ? ZN 0 expð?jutÞ ?dfðtÞ dt ? dt 3 5 (8) where C0 is the vacuum capacitance of the cell and 3* is the complex permittivity, MN ¼ 1/3N, 3N is the high frequency asymptotic value of the real part of the dielectric permittivity and f(t) is the relaxation function. Fig. 6 shows the real and imaginary part of the modulus M* for the composition x ¼ 0.25 at different temperatures. The fact that at higher frequencies, M0 reaches a maximum constant value MN ¼ 1/3N and at low frequencies M0 approaches to zero indicates that the electrode polarization makes a negligible contribution [39]. The dispersion in between these frequencies is due to the conductivity relaxation. At higher temperatures, MN levels off at higher frequencies because the relaxation processes are spread over a range of frequencies. The imaginary part of the electric modulus M00 plot as a function of angular frequency in semi-log plot shows an asymmetric behavior with respect to M00 peak at all measured temperatures. The shape of the spectrum remains same but the M00 peak frequency shifts towards higher frequency side as the temperature increases. Two apparent relaxation regions appear, the region towards left of the peak is associated to the conduction process where the charge carriers are mobile over a long distance. The region towards right of the peak associated to the relaxation polarization process where the charge carriers are spatially confined to the potential wells. Similar behavior was observed for the other samples also. The non-symmetric modulus plot has been expressed by stretched exponential relaxation (decay) function. The stretched exponential function is defined empirically by KohlrauscheWilliamseWatts (KWW) function [40,41]. fðtÞ ¼ exp " ? ?t s ?b# (9) where s is the characteristic relaxation time and b is the wellknown Kohlrausch parameter and it decreases with increase in the relaxation time distribution. The value of b is less than 1 for ion-conducting materials. Smaller the value of b, greater the deviation of the relaxation with respect to Debye relaxation. The most probable relaxation time, sM00 can be extracted from the position of Mmax00, where sM00 ¼ 1/um. The reciprocal temperature dependence of sM00 satisfies the Arrhenius relation represented by sM00 ¼ s0 exp (Es/kBT), and is shown in Fig. 7. The activation energy for the conductivity relaxation time, Es has been calculated from the least square fitting of data in Fig. 7 and are listed in Table 3 for different composition. To distinguish between the localized (i.e., the defect relaxation) and non-localized conduction (i.e., the ionic conductivity) processes within the bulk material, it is extremely useful to plot the ac data in terms of impedance, Z* and electric modulus, M* simultaneously as shown in Fig. 8 for the composition x ¼ 0.50. From the plots of frequency dependence of the imaginary parts of electrical modulus, M00 and impedance, Z00 it is possible to deduce whether the dielectric response of the sample is the result of the localized (peaks are separated) or non-localized conduction (peaks overlap) process. The normalized plots of modulus isotherms where the frequency axis is scaled by peak frequency um, M00(u) axis is scaled by M00max are shown in Fig. 9 for the LNTP0 glass sample. A perfect overlapping of all the curves on a single ‘master curve’ for all the temperatures is clearly observed. Therefore, that the conductivity relaxation process is temperature independent. Similar behaviors were observed for all other samples.

A new NASICON-type glass series Li(4þx)TixNb1?xP3O12 (x ¼ 0, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 1) were prepared by melt quenching method. The thermal studies have shown that the Li4NbP3O12 glass has higher thermal stability and vitrification ability. The observation of high ionic conductivity glasses opens up a new range of possible materials for application of solid electrolyte. The activation energies of the dielectric losses W and conductivity relaxation Es are comparable to that of the dc activation energy Es. The variation of dielectric constant with frequency is attributed to ion diffusion and polarization occurring in the glasses. The dielectric losses and tan(d) dependence on frequency is typically associated with losses by conduction in the sample. The electrical modulus spectra show the trend of ionic conductivity and get scaled to single master curve.

This work was supported by DST, New-Delhi, Govt. of India under research project SR/S2/CMP-61/2006. Authors would like to thank financial support of UGC-SAP F.530/15/DRS/2009, DST-FIST for XRD Facility and Central Instrumentation Facility, Pondicherry University for DSC measurement.