Ion transport properties of Na2NbZnP3O12, Na2NbCdP3O12, Na2NbPbP3O12, Na2NbCuP3O12 and Li2NbPbP3O12 phosphate glasses were investigated over a frequency range from 100 Hz to 1 MHz at different temperatures. The non-Debye behaviors in real part of ac conductivity and permittivity of these glasses were analyzed using Jonscher's universal power law (UPL), and anomalous diffusion model (ADM). The ADM was used to extract the dc conductivity and the relevant physical parameters, namely, crossover length and relaxation frequency in the ion diffusion process. The dc conductivity extracted from UPL matches well with ADM and hence their activation energy. The electric modulus data were analyzed using the Kohlrausch–Williams– Watts (KWW) stretched exponential function and ADM. The ADM ﬁts superior to the KWW in the high frequency wing of electric modulus.

The discovery of Na+ superionic conductors (NASICON) Na1 + xZr2SixP3 − xO12 (NZSP) represents an important improvement in solid electrolyte developments because of their three-dimensional framework structure with high ionic conductivity comparable to that of two-dimensional networks, such as β-alumina [1]. The amorphous and crystalline form of NASICON materials have been studied since the eighties and these are used in many applications such as ion selective electrodes, gas sensor, fuel cell and batteries. In this NASICON, Na4NbP3O12 has attracted much attention because both glass and crystalline phases have NASICON type structure [2]. It was also reported that Na4NbP3O12 glass has higher conductivity compared to its crystalline phase at ambient temperature [3]. The electrical properties of fast ion conducting materials (FIC) particularly in the amorphous state, have been studied extensively, since they play an important role and often the deciding factors about the suitability of the material for particular electrochemical devices. Due to the structural complexity of glasses the ionic conduction in glasses has turned out to be difﬁcult to understand in microscopic level. Different models or approaches that cover various aspects have been proposed over the years, but so far no generally accepted unifying theory has emerged. Generally the ion transports in FIC are characterized by the electrical relaxation measurements that are performed in frequency domain. The exact physical parameters are extracted by analyzing the data in terms of the complex impedance Z*, complex conductivity σ*(ω)=σ′(ω)+iσ″(ω), complex permittivity ε*(ω) =ε′(ω)−iε″(ω) and complex electric modulus M*(ω)=M′(ω)+iM″(ω) and these are related to each other. These terms display frequency dependence, particularly in ac conductivity and permittivity loss are empirically represented as σ′(ω)∝ωn and ε″(ω)∝ωn − 1, with 0 b n b1 above the dielectric loss peak frequency ω Nωp [4–6]. Despite the fact that each scientiﬁc discipline has developed their own terminology for representing data, alternative representations are equally valid and discuss quite similar experimental facts and/or may provide new insight into the dynamics at hand.

In this paper, we study the effect of addition of various divalent ions in the ac conductivity and dielectric response of niobium based NASICON type glasses. The power law dependence of ac conductivity and permittivity of the present glassy systems were analyzed using Jonscher's universal power law (UPL) [4,5] and Sidebottom's anomalous diffusion model (ADM) [7]. Electrical modulus formalism with ADM provides the same quantitative information regarding the conductivity relaxation frequency and a superior ﬁt to the experimental data when compared to Kohlrausch–Williams–Watts (KWW).

The NASICON type glasses Na2NbZnP3O12 (NNZP), Na2NbCdP3O12 (NNCP), Na2NbPbP3O12 (NNPP), Na2NbCuP3O12 (NNCuP) and Li2NbPbP3O12 (LNPP) were synthesized from the analytical grade of Na2CO3, Li2CO3, Nb2O5, CdO, ZnO, PbO, CuO and NH4H2PO4 from Himedia. The calculated amounts of the starting materials of 5 g in single batch were ground to give a homogeneous mixture. The ﬁnely ground mixture was then placed in alumina crucible and heated slowly in an electrical furnace until the temperature reached to 573 K. The slow heating up to 573 K decomposes the ammonium dihydrogen orthophosphate mixture. The mixture was again grounded and heated for about 16 h at temperature range 900–1000 K without melting the mixtures. The batch was heated further to melt and kept at that temperature for 1h and often stirred to ensure homogeneity. The melts were poured into a stainless steel plate and quenched rapidly by pressing with another stainless steel plate at room temperature.

X ray diffraction patterns were recorded for the samples understudy and they do not display any diffraction peaks, suggesting the amorphous nature of the samples. The density of the glass bits free of air bubbles and crack on visual examination was determined by the Archimede's principle. The density of the glass samples was obtained using a 20-cm3 speciﬁc gravity measurement and toluene as the inert immersion liquid. The density is obtained from the relation: ρ = Waρ1/(Wa− W1), where ρ is the density of the sample, Wa is the weight of the sample in air, Wl is the weight of the sample fully immersed in liquid and ρ1 is the density of the liquid used. The error in the density of measurement is within ±0.03 g/cm3.

The electrical measurements were carried out in the frequency range 100 Hz to 1 MHz in the temperature range 373 K to 523 K on all the samples. The parallel capacitance Cp and conductance G of the samples were obtained by using HIOKI 3532 LCR meter. The real part of complex conductivity, complex permittivity and complex electric modulus were calculated using relations: σ ′ ωð where d is thickness of the sample and S is the area of cross section and ε0 =8.854×10−14 F/cm is the permittivity of free space.

The knowledge of the conductivity is often used to infer information regarding the dynamic behavior of ion conducting materials. The low frequency spectra of conductivity are frequency independent and are illustrated as dc conductivity. The temperature dependence of the dc conductivity gives information about the long time ion dynamics and it is well described by the Arrhenius law, reﬂecting the activated nature of ionic hopping processes. At high frequencies, the conductivity becomes strongly frequency dependent, varying approximately as a fractional power of frequency. Full analysis of this dispersion not only required accurate data, but also appropriate model to represent the response. In the literature, several theoretical models have been proposed to explain the observed dispersive behavior in ac conductivity [8–11] and in these, there are a number of theoretical models based on the anomalous diffusion [12–15]. We have taken Jonscher's UPL and ADM of Sidebottom et al., [7] for ac conductivity and permittivity analyses and the models are compared.

The frequency dependence of the conductivity for NNCP at temperature range from 293 K to 423 K is shown in Fig. 1. The transition point between the frequency-independent to frequencydependent regions is the signature of onset of conductivity relaxation, which shifts towards higher frequencies as the temperature increases. The strong frequency dispersion of the conductivity is due to the inhomogenities in the glasses that may be microscopic in nature with the distribution of energy barriers and hence the distribution of relaxation processes. Over the ﬁxed frequency window, the conductivity dispersion is well described by the Jonscher's UPL as: σ ′ ωð where σdc is frequency-independent conductivity, A is pre-factor that depends on temperature and composition and it is deﬁned as A= (σdc/ωp n) and n is the frequency exponent. In the ADM, the frequency dependence of the conductivity is interpreted as simply the result of changes in the manner in which the ions diffuse [16]. Further, it is used to extract the physically relevant parameters, namely, length and time scales involved in the diffusion process. At longer times (low frequency), the mean-square displacement of a diffusing ion is linear in time, reﬂecting a constant coefﬁcient of diffusion that leads to constant conductivity σdc. At shorter times, the ion is strongly inﬂuenced by the local environment, including interactions with other neighboring ions, and exhibits a mean-square displacement, which increases slowly. Number of models has been proposed based upon anomalous diffusion to account for the ac part of the conductivity. Numerical simulations for the mean-square displacement, br2N, of an ion performing a random walk on a fractal lattice indicate: 〈r2〉∝ t1−n; 0bnb1; r bξ.

According to this, Sidebottom et al., [7] derived an expression for the real part of conductivity given as σ ′ ωð h Þ = σdc 1 + h nð Þ cos with ωσ = f ωc orωσ = σdc = ε∞ε0 where σdc is the dc conductivity, ωσ is the conductivity relaxation frequency, ε∞ is the high frequency dielectric permittivity, ε0 is the permittivity at free space, ξ is the cross over length, n is the frequency exponent (0 b n b1), ωc is the crossover frequency, e is the electronic charge, and ncρ is the number density of charge carrier.

Eqs. (6) and (8) were used to ﬁt the real part of the conductivity and parameters σdc, A, n and ωσ are extracted. At high temperature, low frequency σ′(ω) data are omitted in the ﬁtting process since these data contains electrode polarization contributions and this will inﬂuence in the ﬁtting parameter. Both equations ﬁt well with the experimental data shown in Fig. 2 and the parameters evaluated from the above ﬁtting are represented in Table 1. The dc conductivity obtained from both the approach is almost equal and it increases with increase in temperature and obey the Arrhenius behavior:σdcT = σ0 exp −Eσ = kBT where σ0 is the pre-exponential factor that depends on compositions, Eσ is the dc activation energy and T is the absolute temperature. A similar ﬁtting procedure is followed for the other samples and shown in Fig. 3. Table 1 shows the magnitudes of observed dc conductivity and activation energy for the NASICON glasses. Additions of divalent modiﬁers to the NASICON decrease the electrical conductivity compared to the parent glasses Na4NbP3O12 and Table 2 shows a few representative results [3,17–19]. The decrease in electrical conductivity is not only due to the decrease in mobile ions but also the block in the conduction paths of alkali ions due to divalent ions. Similar result is also observed for Ti4+ based NASICON glasses [17]. The blocking becomes much higher as the size of divalent ion size increase [20]. The divalent and alkali ions form a coordination complex with mutual oxygen ions, thus maximizing the local charge distribution in the glass. The coordination complex has higher activation energy barrier to migration, consequently the ionic conductivity decreases. Though the divalent ion size of copper is small compared to that of the Zn2+ and Cd2+ ion, the glass containing Cu2+ has low conductivity compared to the latter. It is well known that the presence of transition metals such as copper tends to increase the electrical conductivity of the glass, but the electrical conduction process is characterized by a high activation energy which is mainly governed by electronic hopping between Cu+ and Cu2+ ions [21] and hence a mixed polaron-ionic conductivity mechanism or ion–polaron interaction and breaking of percolation paths takes place in coppercontaining glass and this strongly affects the electrical conduction mechanism in lower temperature. Since Li+ is the mobile ions in LNPP glass, it shows higher conductivity compared to the other glass prepared in this series. The physically relevant length and time scales involved in the diffusion process were obtained by using Eq. (9). The number density of charge carrier ncρ was calculated using ρNav/ M,where ρ is density, Nav is Avogadro's number and M is molecular weight of the compound. The cross over length ξ is calculated and it's averaged over the temperature range of investigation and results are shown in Table 1. The crossover length parameter involved in the diffusion process is increasing as the size of divalent ion size increase.

The temperature dependence of real part of dielectric permittivity ε′(ω) versus frequency for the NNPP sample is shown in Fig. 4. The ε′(ω) gradually increases as the temperature increases. All the glasses in the present study show the similar behavior. At high frequency, ε′(ω) follows a well-known non-Debye behavior, ω(n − 1) and it approaches a constant value ε′∞(ω), which is probably the result of rapid polarization effect occurring in the glasses [22]. For all the glasses investigated, the increase in the dielectric permittivity, ε′(ω) at lower frequency is due to electrode polarization, that usually arises due to space charge accumulation at the glass–electrode interface. At higher frequency, the ﬁeld varies too rapidly for the dipoles to align themselves resulting to the negligible contribution towards the polarization and hence to the dielectric permittivity. The real part of the complex dielectric permittivity in the ﬁxed frequency window is obtained from Eq. (6) and it is given by:ε∞ is the background contribution to ε′(ω) arising from unrelated process at high frequency and ε0 is the permittivity of free space. In Sidebottom's ADM approach the real part of the dielectric permittivity is described as: ε′ ωð h Þ = ε∞ 1 + h nð Þ sin.

We have ﬁtted ε′(ω) data at different temperatures to Eqs. (11) and (12) and extracted the parameters ε∞, A, h(n), n, and ωσ respectively. The low frequency ε′(ω) data are omitted in the ﬁtting process. Both equations ﬁt well with the experimental data shown in Fig. 2. The ωσ is strongly temperature dependent and obey the Arrhenius relation: ð13Þ ωσ = ω0 exp −Eω = kBT where ω0 is the pre-exponential of the conductivity relaxation frequency, and Eω is the activation energy for the conductivity relaxation frequency. Fig. 5 shows the plot of log(ωσ) versus 1000/T for different NASICON type glasses. The activation energies, Eσ and Eω determined using Eqs. (10) and (13) and are shown in Table 1. The close match between Eω and Eσ indicates that the charge carriers have to overcome the same energy barrier in both conduction and relaxation processes.

The dielectric response of the materials can be analyzed in terms of complex electric modulus. In modulus representation, the electrode polarization contribution is suppressed [23,24]. The expression for the complex electrical modulus is given by:   Þ = iωC0Z* = M ′ ωð M* ωð Þ + iM ″ ωð Þ Þ dφ tð Þ exp −iωt where C0 is the vacuum capacitance of the cell and ε*(ω) is the complex permittivity, M∞ =1/ε∞, ε∞ is the high frequency asymptotic value of the real part of the dielectric permittivity and the relaxation function φ(t) gives the time evolution of the electric ﬁeld with in the materials. Recently, several researchers have presented the advantages and qualitative appraisal of the electric modulus analysis [25–27] and also some criticized the misleading behavior of the frequency dependence of electric modulus [28–30]. In spite of these criticisms in the modulus analysis; it is still being used in the literature [31–34] for the characterization of ion dynamics. In this paper we have compared the electric modulus ﬁtting by KWW and Sidebottom's ADM and the results are discussed.

Fig. 6(a) and (b) , are representative of curves of the real part M′(ω) and imaginary part M″(ω) of the electric modulus at different temperatures for NNPP glass. In Fig. 6(a), M′(ω) attains a constant value at high frequencies for all temperatures and tends to zero at low frequencies, indicating negligible electrode polarization [24]. The M″(ω) spectra in Fig. 6(b) show asymmetric peak and the peaks are broader than the Debye peak. The M″ asymmetry in glass is usually regarded as an indication of a distribution of relaxation times in the conduction process [35]. According to Hasz et al. [36], the distribution of relaxation time is connected with a distribution of free energy barriers for ionic jumps, in which distribution is increased with increasing disorder. Whereas, Grant et al. [37] attributed the distribution of relaxation times to be not due to the disordered structure of glasses but is assumed to be the consequence of the cooperative nature of the conduction process, as required by the existence of strong repulsive interactions among the mobile cations. The M″ peak heights for the different temperatures are almost constant which shifts towards higher frequencies as temperature increases. This suggests the invariance of dielectric constant, but relaxation times get distributed with temperature [33]. The modulus plot is non-symmetric and can be expressed in non exponential decay function. The stretched exponential function is deﬁned empirically by KWW function [34] φ(t)=exp[−(t/τ)β], where τ is the characteristic relaxation time and β is the well-known Kohlrausch parameter which is less than one for most practical solid electrolyte. Generally, β characterizes the degree of non-Debye behavior and it decreases with an increase in the relaxation time distribution. The experimental data are analyzed using Bergman's formula which is a modiﬁed KWW function [26]. The Bergman's formula for M″(ω) is given as:max β where M″max is the peak maximum of the imaginary part of the modulus and ωm is the peak frequency of the imaginary part of the modulus and the stretching parameter β is approximately equal to 1/ W, where W is the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of M″(ω) normalized to that of a Debye process (1.14 decades) [38]. The β values obtained for different samples are shown in Table 1 and they vary from 0.5 to 0.6. The KWW approach reproduces the usual features of M″ up to 104Hz but at high frequency it underrates the data. The obtained relaxation frequency is temperature dependent and follows the Arrhenius relation ωm =ω0exp(−Em / kBT). We have obtained the activation energy Em for the conductivity relaxation time from the least square straight line ﬁts for all glass compositions.

As an alternate approach, ADM has been used for modulus representation to eradicate the uncertainty in the high frequency data ﬁtting. The ﬁtted data of σ ′(ω) (Eq. (7)) and ε′(ω) (Eq. (11)) have been used in the real and imaginary parts of modulus eqs: M ′ ωð the results are shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b) for NNPP glass at selected temperatures. Though ADM fails to depict ε′(ω) and σ′(ω) at low frequencies dominated by electrode effect and high frequencies dominated by constant loss phenomena, they provide best ﬁtting to the experimental data at the range of frequencies of present interest where M″(ω) peak occurs. It is clear from Fig. 6(b) that the ADM is particularly successful at describing the high frequency wing of M″(ω) where it has been widely acknowledged that ﬁts using KWW typically miss this wing and underestimate the actual data at these frequencies.

The KWW ﬁtting ωmax values and ADM ﬁtting ωσ values are equal and they are shown in Fig. 5. The KWW and ADM ﬁtting approaches provide the same quantitative information regarding the conductivity relaxation frequency i.e., steady state ion transport process. However, the ADM ﬁtting is better than KWW ﬁtting as the high frequency wing of M″(ω) has superior ﬁtting.

The new niobium based NASICON type glasses were prepared by melt quenching method. The electrical properties of the glasses were studied over wide range of temperature and frequency. Jonscher's universal power law and Sidebottom's anomalous diffusion model were used to discuss about the dispersion behavior of the ac conductivity and permittivity. The dc conductivity obtained from UPL and ADM are almost the same and the activation energy extracted from the dc conductivity is almost equal to the conductivity relaxation activation energy. ADM is used to evaluate various parameters such as cross over length ξ and exponent n. The ξ is found to be dependent on the M site substitution and it increases as the cation size increases under the present investigation. The modulus plot shows the non-Debye behavior and is asymmetric with respect to the peak maximum which indicates the distribution of relaxation time in the conduction process. The KWW and ADM ﬁtting approaches provide the same quantitative information regarding the conductivity relaxation frequency i.e., steady state ion transport process. The KWW function traditionally used for the modulus analysis underestimates the data at high frequency wing of M″(ω) where else the ADM provides overall superior ﬁt. It is clear from our investigation that ADM offers a superior ﬁt to σ′(ω), ε′(ω) and M*(ω) over the entire frequency range and provide a superior description of the dielectric properties of the glasses.

The ﬁnancial support from DST, Government of India, research projects SR/S2/CMP-0061/2006 is gratefully acknowledged for this work. We are also thankful to DST-FIST for the XRD facilities. I thank Dr. R. Murugaraj, Assistant Professor, MIT, Chennai, India for the valuable suggestions.
