Preparation and analysis of standard VOC (volatile organic compound) gases are needed when developing and evaluating the performance of analytical methods or instruments to detect VOCs. In this study, we designed and developed a simple system for the analysis of VOCs based on their decomposition into CO2 by a combustion catalyst and their subsequent detection using a solid electrolyte CO2 sensor. In this sensor, NASICON (Na3Si2Zr2PO4; Na+ conductor) and binary carbonate (Li2CO3-BaCO3) were used as the solid electrolyte and the sensing layer, respectively. This developed system proved to be effective in determining the concentrations of standard gases, including VOCs (ethanol, formaldehyde, and toluene), CO, and hydrocarbons in parts per million concentrations (10-500 ppm). The system also could continuously monitor the variations in ethanol vapors prepared by a diffusion method where liquid ethanol was heated at 25 and 50 °C. The advantages and limitations of our developed analytical system are also discussed.

The determination and monitoring of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) has become particularly important due to their serious detrimental effects on both atmospheric environments and human health, which lead to diseases like sick house syndrome. In Japan, stringent regulations of VOC emissions from factories have recently been issued. In addition, there is an environmental standard/guideline for indoor air quality that imposes a requirement on VOC concentrations to be below parts per billion (ppb) levels. Currently, the concentration of VOCs in air is ofﬁcially determined by the standard analytical methods of gas chromatography (GC) and gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/ MS). However, analytical methods based on conventional GC and GC/MS require expensive and large instruments as well as timeconsuming procedures. Moreover, it is difﬁcult to continuously monitor VOCs with these methods, and they are unable to detect a sudden increase in VOC concentrations, although other new and modiﬁed methods are being exploited to improve accuracy, sensitivity, selectivity, and usability.1-7

For the continuous monitoring of VOCs, a large number of chemical sensors have been developed as alternatives to existing analytical instruments. High-performance VOC sensors, combined with autoventilation systems, if available, would greatly contribute to the improvement of indoor air quality. Up until now, several types of VOC sensors have been reported, including surface acoustic wave (SAW) sensors,8 metal oxide-based sensors,9-11 solid electrolyte sensors,12,13 conductive polymer-based sensors,14,15 and inorganicorganic hybrid sensors.16,17 We also reported VOC sensors based on TiO2 nanotubes11 and BiCuVOx (Bi2Cu0.1V0.9O5.35),12,13 which can continuously detect toluene, ethanol, and formaldehyde in low parts per million (ppm) concentrations. However, the performance of existing VOC sensors is still not robust enough for practical applications due to their low sensitivity to VOCs in ppb concentrations, low selectivity, interference from humidity, and low stability. Thus, signiﬁcant further effort should be expended for the development of high-performance VOC sensors.

Continuous generation of standard VOC gas mixtures is generally necessary for both studying VOC sensing properties of fabricated sensors and pursuing quantitative calibration of gas sensor responses. Standard VOC gases are prepared by several methods, such as evaporation methods,18,19 injection methods,18,20 permeation methods,18,21 and diffusion methods,18,22 and they are based on the vaporization of liquid samples in a chamber connected to a ﬂow-through system. VOC concentrations in sample gas mixtures, however, may vary with time as the vaporization proceeds (concentration ﬂuctuation). Thus, even in laboratories there is a need for continuous determination of VOC concentrations in sample gas streams in order to accurately evaluate the sensing properties of fabricated sensors or the performance of analytical methods or instruments.

Here, we introduce a simple system where VOCs in sample gases are decomposed to CO2 via catalytic combustion and then the resulting CO2 is detected using a solid-state CO2 sensor. This method allows for indirect monitoring of organic vapor concentrations in sample gases prepared via vaporization of organic solvents under a gas ﬂow. The use of a cheap, compact, and efﬁcient CO2 sensor in place of a nondispersive infrared (NDIR) detector is the key to the system. Through continuous extensive studies, we have developed a high-performance solid electrolyte CO2 sensor, in which NASICON (Na3Si2Zr2PO4; Na+ conductor) and binary carbonate (Li2CO3-BaCO3) are used as the solid electrolyte and the sensing layer, respectively.23-26 This sensor can detect CO2 in ppm concentrations without interference from other gases like water vapor, O2, CO, H2, NOx, and hydrocarbons. Furthermore, we successfully improved the stability of the sensor under high humidity conditions by using a stable solid reference electrode.27,28 Thus, the sensor can effectively detect CO2 formed by catalytic combustion of VOCs without interference from water vapor concurrently formed. In this study, we investigated the applicability of the solid-electrolyte CO2 sensor combined with a combustion catalyst for the continuous monitoring of VOC gases, such as ethanol, formaldehyde, and toluene. We also note the advantages and limitations of the developed system. 

Sensor Fabrication. Figure 1 shows a schematic drawing of the structure of the CO2 sensor device. For the sensing layer, a binary carbonate powder was prepared by calcining a mixture of Li2CO3 and BaCO3 powders (1:2 molar ratio) in a gold crucible at 750 °C in air for 10 min. For the solid reference electrode, BiCuVOx (Bi2Cu0.1V0.9O5.35) and a perovskite-type oxide (La0.6Sr0.4Co0.78Ni0.02Fe0.2O3) were prepared by a conventional solid-state reaction method.28 For the electrolyte, a NASICON disk (9 mm in diameter, 1.2 mm thick) was fabricated by the sol-gel method.25 A layer of carbonate was deposited on one side of the NASICON disk together with a sensing electrode of a gold mesh, followed by calcination at 750 °C for 5 min. The composite of BiCUVOx and the perovskite-type oxide (1:4 weight ratio) was formed by applying an R-terpineol-based paste containing the mixture on the opposite side of the NASICON disk, followed by calcination at 750 °C for 1 h. The sensor device can be expressed as the following electrochemical cell:

Figure 2 shows the experimental setup of the developed system, in which sample gases were introduced into a quartz chamber packed with a Pt (10 wt %)/Al2O3 catalyst embedded in quartz wool and then delivered to a quartz chamber where the CO2 sensor was installed. Sample gases were prepared by diluting parent standard gas mixtures (certiﬁed compressed gases; Sumitomo Seika Chemicals) with commercial synthetic air (Sumitomo Seika Chemicals). Synthetic air-based mixtures of ethanol (50 ppm), formaldehyde (40 ppm), toluene (200 ppm), CO (500 ppm), C3H6 (50 ppm), CH3 (50 ppm), and CO2 (100 and 2000 ppm) were used as the parent gases. A sample gas was also prepared by a diffusion method using a standard gas generator (Permeater PD-1B, GASTEC), in which a glass tube (diffusion tube) that consisted of a liquid containing portion (20 mm in inner diameter, 25 mm in length) and a diffusing (capillary) portion (9 mm in inner diameter, 100 mm in length) ﬁlled with a liquid sample (ethanol; 4.5 mL) was placed in a thermostatic bath controlled at 25 or 50 °C. Ethanol vapor that diffused outside the diffusion tube was carried by an air-ﬂow (200 mL/min) to a mass ﬂow controller. The ﬁnal ﬂow rate of the sample gas was set to 100 mL/min by discarding a part of the sample gas and diluting it with synthetic air.

The catalyst was heated at 400-600 °C with an electric furnace. The operating temperature of the CO2 sensor was set to 500 °C. The electromotive force (emf) of the sensor between the sensing and composite reference electrodes was measured with an electrometer (R8240, ADVANTEST). All of the measurements were performed using dry sample gases.

Calibration of CO2 Sensor. Figure 3 shows a calibration curve of the CO2 sensor obtained using standard CO2. The emf of the sensor was linear to the logarithm of CO2 concentration in the range of 10-2000 ppm and showed a typical Nernstian behavior. The slope of the straight calibration line was calculated to be 76.96 mV/decade, in good agreement with the theoretical value of 76.71 mV/decade. The calculated reaction electron number (n) was 1.99, suggesting the occurrence of the following electrochemical reaction at the sensing electrode (at the interface between Au and carbonate):

The sensor also showed good response and recovery behaviors to CO2 as the 90% response time was within 1 min. The dead volume of the present system was rather large at ∼144 cm3 due to the combination of both a sensor chamber and a catalyst chamber. Decreasing the dead volume through optimization of the system conﬁguration will likely improve the response behavior of the sensor, as has been reported for semiconductortype gas sensors.29 An emf value in air (air baseline) is also shown in Figure 3. From the baseline value, the detection limit of CO2 was extrapolated to be around 500 ppb.

Detection of Standard Combustible Gases. To prove the validity of the idea of using a CO2 sensor for the indirect detection of VOCs, we measured the sensor responses to standard sample gases. Figure 4 shows emf responses of the sensor to sample gases, including ethanol, formaldehyde, toluene, CO, C3H6, and CH3 after their catalytic combustion. The concentration of CO2 in sample gases was calculated according to the following combustion reaction (complete oxidation):Figure 4. The results clearly demonstrated that sample gases were completely decomposed into CO2 at the catalyst chamber, which were then detected with the CO2 sensor. However, emf values for toluene at 10 ppm, deviated slightly from the calibration curve. This was possibly due to the adsorption or condensation of toluene on the chamber wall and gas lines. This idea was supported by the fact that a long exposure time (more than 24 h) of toluene gas to the system shifted EMF values to near the calibration curve value. The adsorption of toluene beyond the adsorption capacity of the system may block the further adsorption of toluene on the chamber wall and gas lines. Therefore, heating the gas lines would be effective for the analysis of VOCs with lower vapor pressures.

Figure 5 shows a dynamic response transient of the sensor to ethanol (20-100 ppm). The sensor quickly responded to changes in ethanol concentration (i.e., CO2 concentration). It also showed a good recovery behavior because the emf quickly recovered to the original emf value in air even after exposure to CO2. The results indicated that the sensor can continuously respond to sudden increases or decreases in CO2 concentration.

As shown above, the system was proved to be capable of determining concentrations of combustible gases and monitoring their concentration variations. However, the absolute emf values to constant CO2 concentrations and to air slightly vary with time and differ from device to device. Moreover, the slope of the calibration curves sometimes deviated from the theoretical value. It has been elucidated that the emf of NASICON-based sensors gradually vary with time (signal drift) during a longterm operation.30-32 Although the reason for this is not yet clear, the use of a sensor with a higher stability, if developed, would improve the precision and reliability of the present analytical system. The development of highly sensitive and stable CO2 sensors based on solid electrolytes is currently being undertaken by many researchers.

A diffusion method is one feasible method for the continuous generation of standard VOC gases in the concentration range of parts per million to parts per billion. This method is based on the diffusion of organic vapors through a capillary and their transport under a stream of diluting gas (carrier gas).18,22,35 The concentration of organic vapors is dependent on both their diffusion coefﬁcients and the ﬂow rate of the diluting gas.35 Hence, the concentrations of VOCs can be controlled and calculated using these parameters. However, the diffusion coefﬁcients are affected by temperature, pressure, and the shape of the diffusion tube and, therefore, sometimes ﬂuctuate from variations in temperature and pressure. In addition, the determination of the diffusion coefﬁcients of VOCs entails time-consuming procedures, such as measurements of the weight loss of a liquid sample during sample vaporization over a given period of time (gravimetric determination). In this study, we attempted to continuously determine the concentration of VOCs generated by a diffusion method using our developed system.

Figure 6 shows the emf signal of the CO2 sensor in response to ethanol gases prepared by a diffusion method. Ethanol gases with different concentrations were prepared from liquid ethanol heated at 25 and 50 °C. The emf quickly responded upon introduction of the sample gas prepared at 50 °C. Initially, the emf showed gradual variation, suggesting that the sensor was responding to changes in the ethanol concentration in the sample gas. However, after about 100 min, the emf was observed to stabilize. The concentration of ethanol after a 12 h ﬂow was determined to be 1970 ppm from a calibration curve of the CO2 sensor. Additionally, the emf was observed to gradually decrease when the heating temperature was switched from 50 to 25 °C. The observed gradual change in the emf suggests that it took a long time for the temperature in the diffusion tube to become constant after switching the thermostatic bath temperature from 50 to 25 °C. The emf became constant after about 100 min, and the concentration of ethanol reached 860 ppm. The emf was then very stable for a long period of time for the sample gas prepared at 25 °C. At higher temperature, the vaporization of ethanol proceeded more efﬁciently. This may have destabilized the temperature of the liquid sample and caused the ethanol concentration to ﬂuctuate for the sample gas prepared at 50 °C. Nevertheless, the diffusion method proved to be very effective in generating standard VOC gases with a constant concentration over a long period of time.

Advantages and Limitations of the Developed Analytical System. From the obtained results, it appeared that the developed system combining the CO2 sensor with a combustion catalyst could continuously monitor the concentration of standard VOC gases. The system included the following advantages and limitations: (1) The system, which consists of a CO2 sensor device, a sensor-signal acquisition device, a catalyst, and an electric furnace, was simple to construct. Although the sensor device was externally heated with an electric furnace, using a thin metal heater, which could be directly attached to the sensor, could miniaturize the setup. In addition, the optimization of the ﬂow chambers could reduce the size of the system, making the system more compact. (2) The sensor device was cheap and could be fabricated in a laboratory. The sensor and a combustion catalyst were easily integrated into a ﬂow-through system. (3) The solid-electrolyte CO2 sensor had a high selectivity to CO2 without interferences from water and organic gases when operated at high temperature. This allowed the determination of total carbon concentrations in sample gases. However, the present system could not discriminate VOCs with different chemical and physical properties. (4) The sensor could rapidly respond to variations in CO2 concentration in sample gases within 1 min. Reducing the dead volume of the system could further shorten the response time. (5) The absolute emf values of the CO2 sensors in response to constant CO2 concentrations differed from device to device. The emf also slightly changed from the original value once the sensors were cooled to room temperature. Thus, the calibration of the sensor signal with standard CO2 gases was necessary prior to use. (6) The detection of CO2 concentration was limited to around 0.5 ppm with the present sensor. Thus, the direct determination of VOCs with parts per billion concentrations was not possible.

Using the NASICON-based potentiometric CO2 sensor in combination with a combustion catalyst, we successfully determined the concentrations of standard gases of VOCs, CO, and hydrocarbons purchased from a supplier or prepared by a diffusion method using a liquid sample. The sensor and the catalyst were integrated into a ﬂow-through system, which allowed the continuous measurements of standard gases. Thus, a simple, cheap, and rapid system for the analysis of standard VOC gases was established in this study. However, there are some drawbacks in the present system, including no selectivity to different VOCs, low sensitivity to VOCs with parts per billion concentrations, and low accuracy. The use of another compact CO2 sensor with higher reproducibility, stability, sensitivity, and accuracy, if available, is critical for improving the reliability of the developed system.

This work was supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid for Exploratory Research (Grant No. 19659402) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan and by the Environmental Research and Technology Development Fund from the Ministry of Environment of Japan.




