Niobium based glasses of composition Na2NbMP3O12 (where M = Cd, Zn, Pb and Cu) have been synthesized by melt quenching method and characterized by XRD, FTIR and DSC. The ac conductivity measurements have been carried out over wide range of frequencies at different temperatures on these glassy systems. Ac conductivity data are analyzed using conductivity and electric modulus formalisms. The bulk dc conductivity obtained from complex impedance plots follow the Arrhenius behavior and its activation energy matches well with the activation energy obtained from electric modulus formalism. The ac conductivity plot exhibits universal power law features and the temperature dependence of dc and ac conductivity is discussed. The scaling behavior of the ac conductivity and electric modulus spectra with respect to temperature are discussed and reported for these glassy systems.

Phosphate glasses are interesting amorphous materials that have attracted great attention owing to their growing technological importance and increasing demands in several industries [1,2] as well as ease of preparation at lower temperature, best glass formers, simple structure and high ionic conductivities [3,4]. In the literature, the study of electrical properties with different structure of phosphate materials such as NASICON type (AxByP3O12 where A is a monovalent ion, B is a tri, tetra or pentavalent ion) [5,6], apatite (Pb8Ax(PO4)6) [7,8], A2PbP2O7, monetite [9], alluaudite etc., in the crystalline and glassy phases are reported. NASICON-type phosphate materials have been widely investigated because of its three dimension framework for high ionic conductivity and capability of accommodating a wide range of compositional variation, thereby offering ﬂexibility of physical and electrical properties.

In our earlier work, the different NASICON-type materials were prepared, characterized and observed the conspicuous changes in ionic transport, while changing the constituent B with one or more ions of trior tetravalent state [10,11]. Electrical properties of materials with NASICON-type chemistry, containing transition metal ions like Ti and non-transition metal ions like Al, Ge have been extensively studied in glassy and crystalline forms [5,6,11–15]. However, the applicability of polycrystalline materials as solid electrolytes is limited due to Ti4+/Ti3+ reduction [13]. The vitreous forms of niobium based binary phosphate NASICON materials are suitable systems for systematic examination of electrical relaxation process and it is scarcely reported [16–18]. In general, to understand the electrical relaxation process, a few researchers prefer to use conductivity or impedance formalism at different temperatures while others ﬁnd electric modulus formalism as the best option. The present work focus on the electrical properties of different niobium based NASICON-type glasses. We present the results of conductivity measurements for Na2NbMP3O12 (where M = Cd, Zn, Pb and Cu) glasses together with X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). The ac conductivity and relaxation mechanism of these glasses have been analyzed in the framework of the conductivity and modulus formalism. This study reveals that the conductivity and electric modulus formalism endows equivalent information towards relaxation processes. Further, the analysis of the conductivity and electric modulus spectra of present glassy systems at different temperatures leads to a universal scaling behavior and the results are reported.

The glass compositions of Na2NbZnP3O12 (NNZP), Na2NbCdP3O12 (NNCP), Na2NbPbP3O12 (NNPP), and Na2NbCuP3O12 (NNCuP) were obtained by melt quenching technique using analytically pure Na2CO3, NH4H2PO4, ZnO, CdO, PbO, CuO and Nb2O5. Different stoichiometric amount of starting materials were well ground, mixed and progressively heated in alumina crucible up to the melting point around 1450 K. After melting, the samples were stirred for 5–10 min to ensure homogeneity. The melts were then poured into the stainless steel plate and quickly quenched by pressing with another stainless steel plate at room temperature. Residual mechanical stresses were removed by annealing below the glass transition temperature Tg and slowly cooled down to room temperature.

Powder X-ray diffraction patterns were recorded for the four prepared compounds using the X’Pert PANalytical X-ray diffractometer with monochromatic CuK␣ radiation of wavelength,  2) = 1.5418 Å at glancing angles between 5◦ and 75◦. The infrared spectra of these samples were recorded at room temperature by KBr pellet technique. Shimadzu FTIR-8700 Fourier transform infrared spectrophotometer was used to obtain the spectra in the wave number range 4000–400 cm−1 with a resolution of 8 cm−1. Infrared spectra were corrected for the dark current and background noise, and then the IR spectra were normalized. DSC measurements were performed using Metteler Toledo 821e instruments under N2 atmosphere at a scan rate of 10 K min−1 in the temperature range 313–773 K for all prepared compounds. The glass densities were determined by Archimede’s method using glass fragments free from bubbles with Xylene as buoyancy liquid. These measurements were carried out at room temperature with an accuracy of ±0.03 g cm−3. The molar volume (Vm) was calculated from density using formula Vm = M/ 3), where M is the corresponding molecular weight of the samples.

The electrical conductivity measurements were carried out for all the four glass samples. The samples were cut in the form of cylinder with 10 mm diameter and about ∼1.5 mm thickness for electrical conductivity measurements. Both faces of the samples were ground and polished using silicon carbide sheet and silicon carbide powder (∼800 mesh) with water as free lubricant. Then the glass samples were washed with ﬂowing water so that no impurity left on the surface. The water washed samples were slowly heated to 423 K and were held at this temperature for 1 h to remove the water from the surfaces. Silver paint was pasted on parallel faces of the polished samples. The sample was ﬁxed in a spring loaded sample holder for electrical measurements. Parallel conductance (G) and capacitance (C) were measured using Hioki 3532-50 LCR Hitester in the frequency range from 100 Hz to 1 MHz at various temperatures. Before starting the electrical conductivity measurements, the samples were heated at 393 K in the sample holder to stabilize the electrodes. The real part, Z 5)(ω) and imaginary part, Z 5) 5)(ω) of complex impedance, real part of ac conductivity  5) 5)(ω), real part, M 5)(ω) and imaginary part, M 5) 5)(ω) of electric modulus were calculated from Z 5)(ω) =where ω = 2 7)f, f being the frequency in Hz, A is the electrode area, d is the thickness of the sample and ε0 = 8.856× 10−14 F cm−1 is the permittivity of the free space.

The lack of any sharp peaks for all the samples in XRD spectra indicates the amorphous nature of the samples. Fig. 1 shows the FTIR absorption spectra for the prepared glasses. Possible infrared band assignments are indicated by line marks in Fig. 1. As obvious from the spectra, there are four main peaks at ∼1170, ∼1010, ∼910 and ∼530 cm−1 in addition to two weak bands at ∼741 and 617 cm−1. These bands are assigned to the various vibrational contributions of the basic phosphates group [19–24]. The bands arising from the vibrations of phosphate network appear in the range 1200–400 cm−1 and these features are same in all samples and are shown in Table 1. The spectra endorse that the samples are fully vitriﬁed, as there are no traces of initial precursors (absence of carbonate absorption peaks, typically observable in the region 1500–1400 cm−1). The glassy natures of the samples were further conﬁrmed by the observation of the glass transition temperature through DSC measurements. Fig. 2 shows the DSC curve for the NNZP glass. The endothermic peak corresponds to the glass transition temperature Tg and it is indicated in Fig. 2 by arrow mark which is represented as a typical “step” on the baseline. The Tg values for all samples were reported in Table 2. The density and the molar volume of the four glass samples are presented in Table 2.

Ac conductivity measurement is an important tool for studying the ionic transport properties of materials. When an ac electric current passes through a solid electrolyte, the processes like, ion movement through bulk of the electrolyte, charge transfer across the electrode–electrolyte interface, etc., takes place. Each process usually has different relaxation times and therefore they respond to the applied ac electric ﬁeld in different frequency ranges. Experimental complex impedance data may well be approximated by the impedance of an equivalent circuit consists of resistors, capacitors and possibly various distributed circuit elements. These equivalent circuit can be physically interpreted and assign them to appropriate process. Fig. 3(a)–(d) shows a typical complex impedance plane plots and the corresponding equivalent circuits of the NNZP glasses for various temperatures. The impedance spectrum shows depressed semicircle or part of depressed semicircle corresponds to bulk contribution at low temperatures. The bulk resistance (R) relative to experimental temperature is the intercept of the real axis of the zero-phase angle extrapolation of the lowest-frequency curve. The centers of the depressed semicircle lie below abscissa and therefore constant phase elements (Q) have been used in equivalent circuit model. At high temperatures, two depressed semicircles were observed at both low and high frequency regions. In intermediate temperatures, there is a depressed semicircle in addition to a spike or part of depressed semicircle at low frequency region. The impedance spectra having spike or depressed semicircle in low frequency region are due to the surface related artifacts between the electrode and the sample and it is represented as electrode polarization effect. This happens due to the multiple point contacts result to spreading resistance and air-gap capacitance at the electrodes [25]. As temperature increases, the radius of the arc corresponding to the bulk resistance of the sample decreases indicating an activated conduction mechanism. Similar results were observed for other glasses too. A deeper insight into the electrical properties of the NASICON-type glasses is obtained from the complex impedance plane analysis with Boukamp equivalent circuit package [26] as shown in the inset of Fig. 3(a)–(d).

The magnitude of dc conductivity,  5)dc is obtained directly from the value of Rb and sample dimensions. The increase of dc conductivity with temperature is due to the increase in the thermally activated drift mobility of ions according to hopping conduction mechanism. The conductivity data is represented by Arrhenius relation:  5)dcT =  5)0 exp where  5)dc is the dc conductivity,  5)0 is the pre-exponential factor, T is the temperature in K, E 5) is the dc conductivity activation energy and kB is the Boltzmann’s constant. Arrhenius plots of all the prepared glasses are shown in Fig. 4. The activation energy E 5) for the conduction process was extracted from the slope of the straight line plot of log( 5)dcT) against reciprocal temperature 1000/T. The magnitudes of E 5) are reported in Table 2.

Fig. 5 shows the variation of imaginary part of impedance with frequency at different temperatures for NNZP. The curves are broader than ideal Debye curve and asymmetric. These features indicate that the relaxation time  8) is not a single valued but it is distributed continuously or discretely around a mean,  8)m = 1/ωm [27]. As temperature increases the magnitude of Z 5) 5) peak maxima decreases and the peak frequency shifts to the higher values. The inset of Fig. 5 shows the variation of peak frequency, ωpeak, as a function of temperatures for NNZP glass and it follows Arrhenius relation ωpeak = ω0 exp (−Eimp/kBT). The activation energy corresponding to non-Debye type of relaxation is obtained and it is almost equal to the value of activation energy E 5) as shown in Table 2. The dc conductivity extracted from the impedance spectrum shows a general trend of NNZP > NNCP > NNCuP > NNPP. Similar trends were observed for our previous work in Ti based NASICON-type glasses with Cd and Zn as bivalent elements [28]. These trends suggest strong M-site ion radius dependence and possible thermally activated drift mobility of ions, according to hopping mechanism [28].

The conductivity representation is a most prominent representation to relate the macroscopic measurement to the microscopic movement of the ions. The frequency dependence of real part of the conductivity  5) 5)(ω) at various temperatures for NNZP glass is shown in Fig. 6(a). Fig. 6(a) exhibits the typical behavior of ionic materials, i.e. the dc plateau at low frequency region and the frequency dependent at high frequency region. The conductivity is found to be frequency independent in the low frequency region and its magnitude is equal to the bulk conductivity of the sample from impedance analysis.

For all other samples, the ac conductivity behavior is found to be similar to that NNZP glass. Fig. 6(b) shows the frequency dependent conductivity for different glass samples at 423 K. The observed conductivity relaxation at high frequencies is due to the probability of the correlated forward–backward hopping together with the relaxation of the ions. The power law regime of the ac conductivity is much less temperature-dependent than the dc conductivity. At high temperatures, the conductivity data shows dispersion at low frequencies due to the electrode polarization. The electrode contribution in low frequencies at higher temperature region is evident in complex impedance plots analysis and corresponding capacitance or constant phase element values obtained in the order of magnitude 10−6 to 10−8 F. The increase in conductivity with the frequency at high frequency region for different temperatures is described through Jonscher’s universal power law [29] as (ω) =  5)dc +  5)ac(ω) =  5)dc + Aωn  5) 5) (7) where  5) 5)(ω),  5)dc,  5)ac(ω) have the usual meaning, A is a constant and n is the frequency exponent lies in the range 0 < n < 1. In all the samples, the parameters A and n are temperature-dependent. The value of n lies in the range 0.58–0.75 for all samples. The value of n at temperature 423 K for all the samples is shown in Table 2. Depending on the composition and measurement temperature, a dc plateau precedes an increase of conductivity with frequency. The dependence of the  5) 5)(ω),  5)dc,  5)ac(ω) upon reciprocal temperature for NNZP glass is shown in Fig. 7, where the  5)ac(ω) values were derived by subtracting  5)dcfrom the total measured conductivity  5) 5)(ω). The activation energy Eac of  5)ac(ω) conductivity for selected frequency was determined from the slope of log  5)ac(ω)T versus 1000/T and these values are listed in Table 3. The activation energy for the ac conductivity Eac is lower than the E 5). From Table 3, it is observed that the Eac for all the glasses decreases with increasing frequency. The mobile ion concentration factor calculated using K 5) =  5)dc/ωp, where  5)dc is the dc conductivity and ωp = ( 5)dc/A)1/n is the thermally activated hopping rate of the mobile ions. The mobile ion concentration factor K 5) is independent of temperature and is shown in Fig. 8 for NNZP.

The complex electric modulus, M*(ω) is an alternative approach to investigate the electrical response of materials that present some degree of ionic conductivity. M*(ω) has been used in the analysis of the electrical properties since it provides the response due to the bulk and eliminates the electrode polarization effect. The complex electric modulus is represented by the following expression [30,31]: M∗ = 1 where C0 is the vacuum capacitance of the cell and ε* is the complex permittivity, M∞ = 1/ε∞, ε∞ is the high frequency asymptotic value of the real part of the dielectric permittivity and  9)(t) is the relaxation function. Fig. 9(a) and (b) shows the frequency dependence of the real and imaginary parts of the electric modulus of NNZP at various temperatures. The values of the real and imaginary parts of modulus approach almost zero at low frequencies, signify that the electrode polarization makes negligible contribution. The imaginary part of the electric modulus M 5) 5) plot as a function of angular frequency in semi-log plot shows an asymmetric behavior with respect to M 5) 5) peak at all measured temperatures. The shape of the spectrum remains same but the M 5) 5) peak frequency shifts towards higher frequency side as the temperature increases. Two apparent relaxation regions appear, the region towards left of the peak associated with the conduction process where the charge carriers are mobile over a long distance; the region towards right of the peak associated with the relaxation polarization process where the charge carriers are spatially conﬁned to the potential wells. In the real part of the electric modulus, M 5)(ω) dispersion is due to the conductivity relaxation. At higher frequencies, the real part of electric modulus approaches a maximum M∞. Similar behavior was observed for other glassy systems NNCP, NNCuP, NNPP for the measured temperature region.

The non-symmetric modulus plot has been expressedn by stretched exponential relaxation (decay) function. The stretched exponential function is defined empirically by Kohlrausch–Williams–Watts (KWW) function [32,33]. ϕ(t) = exp relaxation (decay) where  8) is the characteristic relaxation time and ˇ is the wellknown Kohlrausch parameter and it decreases with increase in the relaxation time distribution. The value of ˇ is less than 1 for ion conducting materials. The smaller value of ˇ is an indication of larger deviation of the relaxation with respect to Debye’s relaxation.

Recently, Bergman has modiﬁed the KWW function ﬁtting approach, allowing direct analysis in the frequency domain [34]. The imaginary part of the M 5) 5)(ω) has been approximated as:  11)ˇ M 5) 5) max ωmax/ω where M 5) 5) max is the peak maximum of the imaginary part of the modulus and ωmax = 1/ 8) is the peak frequency of the imaginary part of the modulus. The imaginary part of electric modulus for different temperatures were ﬁtted to Eq. (10) independently for all the samples using NLLS ﬁtting of Levenberg–Marquard method and the parameters M 5) 5) max, ωmax, and ˇ were extracted from the analysis. Such ﬁts at different temperatures are shown in Fig. 9(b) for NNZP sample. The measured data are well ﬁtted to Eq. (10) and similarly ﬁttings are observed for other glasses. In the present glass samples ˇ may be considered as independent of temperature in the temperature range studied. The ˇ values obtained for different samples are close to 0.5–0.6 and reported in Table 2. In Fig. 10, the conductivity relaxation time  8)m = 1/ωmax is plotted as a function of temperature. The  8)m is temperature-dependent and follows Arrhenius relation  8)m =  8)0 exp(E 8)/kT), where  8)0 is the pre-exponential factor and E 8) is the activation energy for conductivity relaxation time. The activation energy E 8) is listed in Table 2. The activation energy E 8) is almost equal to the activation energy of dc conductivity E 5), which indicates that loss is mainly due to migration. The non-Debye behavior observed in the Z 5) 5) and M 5) 5) is shown in Fig. 11 for NNZP at 393 K. From Fig. 11, it is observed that the Z 5) 5) max and M 5) 5) max do not occur in the same frequency which is an indication of wide distribution of relaxation times. Fig. 11 shows that the Z 5) 5) spectra broaden in the low frequency side and the M 5) 5) spectra broaden in the higher frequency side. The large rise in Z 5) 5) at low frequencies is due to the electrode polarization.

The study of the conductivity spectra of several glasses at different temperatures leads to a scaling law, which results in a time–temperature superposition (TTSP) principle [35]. The validity of the TTSP suggests that the basic microscopic mechanism of the dynamic processes do not depend on temperature, though the frequency window of these processes exhibits generally strong temperature dependence. In recent publications [35–37], the scaling behaviour in ac conductivity data has been studied by the directly measurable quantities such as the temperature, the dc conductivity, the concentration, dielectric strength, maximum magnitude of dielectric loss and the hopping frequency ωp. In the present work, we have scaled the conductivity spectra by a scaling process [38] reported by Ghosh et al. In this scaling process, the ac conductivity is scaled by  5)dc, while the frequency axis is scaled by the crossover frequency ωp, which is expected to be more appropriate for scaling the conductivity spectra of ionic conductors, as it takes into account the dependence of the conductivity spectra on structure and the possible changes of the hopping distance experienced by the mobile ions. From Fig. 12(a), it is observed that the conductivity curves are superimposed into single master curve. Obviously, the TTSP is fulﬁlled and suggest that the conductivity relaxation mechanism is independent of temperatures. Ac conductivity master plot for various glasses is shown in Fig. 12(b), where the conductivity axis is scaled by  5)dc, and frequency axis by ωp at arbitrary temperatures. The scaled master curve superimposed into single master curve as shown in Fig. 12(b). It is clear that the TTSP is fulﬁlled and suggest that the conductivity relaxation mechanism is independent of various compositions present in the glasses.

The imaginary part of the electrical modulus is scaled by M 5) 5)max and the frequency axis is scaled by ωmax for NNCP glass and the results are shown in Fig. 13 at different temperatures. From Fig. 13, it is observed that the M 5) 5) spectra superimposed into a single master curve. Therefore, that the conductivity relaxation process is temperature independent. Similar behaviors were observed for all other samples.

The new glass compositions with NASICON chemistry were synthesized by melt quenching method. The glassy nature of all the samples was conﬁrmed from XRD and DSC. The phosphate network vibrations of the samples were observed by FTIR spectra. The glass transition temperature is found to be above 680 K for all the prepared glasses. Complex impedance and complex electrical modulus formalism were used to study the frequency dependence of ion dynamics at different temperatures. Complex impedance plane plots show depressed semicircles with their centers below the real axis indicating the distribution of relaxation times. The increase in dc conductivity with temperature follows the Arrhenius behaviour for all the samples and the activation energies were extracted. Frequency dependent conductivity for these glasses obey Jonscher’s universal response with high frequency dispersion attribute to the probability of the correlated forward–backward hopping together with the relaxation of the ions. The dc conductivity features of the present systems suggest strong M-site ion radius dependence and possible thermally activated drift mobility of ions, according to hopping mechanism. The electrical modulus spectra show the trend of ionic conductivity and are analyzed by Bergman’s equation, a modiﬁed KWW model. The mobile ion concentration factor is found to be independent of temperature. The scaling study for the ac conductivity and the electrical modulus further appreciates the merit of the present systems, and shows universal features of other reported glasses.

Financial supports from the DST research project SR/S2/CMP61/2006 and UGC research project 33-32/2007 (SR) are gratefully acknowledged. Authors would like to thank DST–FIST for XRD facility.
