Na super ionic conductor ?NASICON? materials from the Li1+xTi2−xAlx?PO4?3 ?0 ? x ? 0.4? solid solution were prepared using a conventional solid-state reaction. A combination of powder X-ray diffraction analysis, 7Li, 27Al, and 31P nuclear magnetic resonance ?NMR? spectroscopy, and electrochemical techniques was used to fully characterize the lithium insertion into these materials. The electrochemical study showed the reversibility of the process with a hysteresis loop observed during the discharge– charge cycles and the existence of a large biphasic domain. At a discharge rate of C/20, the amount of lithium intercalated during the first cycle was about 0.9 Li/formula unit ?69 mAh g−1?. Under equilibrium conditions, some differences were observed depending on x, with the maximum quantity of intercalated lithium corresponding to 1.6 Li/formula unit ?110 mAh g−1?. Profile refinement of X-ray powder diffraction patterns of pristine samples was achieved with R3¯c, but that of intercalated samples was achieved with the R3¯ space group. 31P magic angle spinning–nuclear magnetic resonance ?MAS–NMR? and susceptibility measurements allowed the estimation of the Ti?IV?-to-Ti?III? reduction extent. From the 7Li MAS-NMR spectra, the structural sites and the mobility of lithium were investigated in pristine and intercalated samples. In general, it was observed that exchange processes between structural sites increase with the amount of Li and Al.

During the past decades, energy consumption has increased considerably due to the developments of some emerging markets such as portable electronic devices ?computers, cellular phones, and notebooks? and the automotive industry ?electric vehicles ?EVs? and hybrid electric vehicles ?HEVs??. Lithium-ion batteries can be considered one of the most important energy storage devices to satisfy the power requirements and emerging ecological concerns of modern society because of their performance in terms of gravimetric and volumetric energy densities1 and their environmental friendliness. The development of new generation lithium-ion batteries needs the special attention of both research and industry for developing high performance electrode materials. Consequently, research on new anode and cathode materials able to improve the specific capacity, cyclability, and safety of lithium batteries has been intense.2-7 The discovery of electrochemical activity in lithium iron phosphate8,9 has opened new perspectives on phosphate-based materials as potential cathodes for secondary lithium batteries because of their competitive energy density and their better thermal properties than those of other cathode materials such as LiCoO2, LiMn2O4 spinel, and V2O5 8-13 besides the larger redox potentials of phosphate-based compounds compared with those of oxides. For instance, besides the phospho-olivine-type compounds LiMPO4 ?M = Fe, Co, Mn?,8,12 a good electrochemical performance has also been reported for Na super ionic conductor ?NASICON?-type materials such as Li3M2?PO4?3 ?M = Fe, Ti, V? 9,14-20 and LiTi2?PO4?3.21-23 The structure of NASICON-type materials displays rhombohedral symmetry, space group ?SG? R3¯c.24 The framework is built up by M2?PO4?3 units in which two MO6 octahedral and three PO4tetrahedral share oxygen atoms ?see Fig. 1?. Each PO4 tetrahedron shares oxygen with four MO6 of three M2?PO4?3 units to form the NASICON’s framework. In this structure, alkali cations can be accommodated at different sites depending on structural distortions of the NASICON network and the size of alkali cations. In rhombohedral sodium phases, Na+ cations are placed at two structural sites: ?i? M1 sites surrounded by six oxygen atoms and located at inversion centers and ?ii? M2 sites with an irregular 10-fold oxygen coordination and disposed symmetrically around ternary axes. Both sites are arranged in an alternating way along the conduction channels. In rhombohedral lithium phases, such as LiGe2?PO4?3 and LiTi2?PO4?3, the preferential occupancy of the M1 sites by lithium has been pointed out from neutron diffraction ?ND? experiments.25,26 When the size of the tetravalent cation increases ?e.g., M = Sn, Hf, Zr?, a triclinic phase ?SG C1¯? has also been detected.27-29 In this phase, Li+ ions are fourfold coordinated at the M1/2 positions located between the M1 and M2 sites ?see Fig. 1?. In titanium-based NASICON-type materials, Li+-ion conductivity is greatly enhanced when Ti4+ is partially replaced by trivalent cations ?Al, Ga, Sc, In, and Y?.30 The maximum conductivity measured at room temperature ?10−2–10−3 ?−1 cm−1? was achieved at x ? 0.3 in the Li1+xTi2−xAlx?PO4?3 series. In samples with x ? 0.3, the decrease in overall conductivity was attributed to the formation of secondary nonconducting phases at the grain boundary of surface particles.31 The insertion–deinsertion of lithium in LiTi2?PO4?3 was previously investigated by Delmas et al.17 The existence of a large biphasic domain and the presence of a hysteresis loop during charge–discharge cycles were shown. In the pristine sample ?SG R3¯c?, Li ions occupy the M1 sites, but in the lithiated sample ?SG R3¯?, Li ions occupy new structural sites between the M1and M2 sites.32 The aim of the present work is the characterization of the insertion reaction of lithium into the Li1+xTi2−xAlx?PO4?3 ?0 ? x ? 0.4? series. As the main result, a core–shell mechanism has been found for this reaction. In this work, the X-ray diffraction ?XRD? technique has been used to follow structural modifications produced during the insertion and deinsertion processes. Magic angle spinning–nuclear magnetic resonance ?MAS-NMR? ?7Li, 27Al, and 31P? spectroscopy has been used to investigate the structural features and mobility of lithium in both pristine and intercalated samples.

Polycrystalline samples of Li1+xTi2−xAlx?PO4?3 materials with 0 ? x ? 0.4 were prepared following the method previously described.31,33 Intercalated samples Li1+x+yTi2−xAlx?PO4?3 were prepared by a chemical route using an excess of n-butyllithium ?nBuLi? in a hexane solution. The immersion of Li1+xTi2−xAlx?PO4?3samples into the n-butyllithium solution led to an immediate color change in the powder from white to brownish-gray. After stirring at room temperature under an inert atmosphere for 1 month, the remaining solid was washed several times with dry and outgassed hexane to eliminate the octane produced during lithiation and the excess of nonreacted n-butyllithium. Finally, the samples were dried under vacuum after lithiation. The single-phase character of the samples was investigated by the XRD technique. Chemically lithiated samples were loaded in sealed 0.3 mm diameter capillaries under inert atmosphere. XRD patterns were recorded at room temperature ?10 ? 2? ? 100°, step of 0.017°? in an X’Pert Pro MPD diffractometer using monochromatized Cu K?1 radiation ?? = 1.54056 Å?. Unit cell parameters of formed phases were deduced by using the Fullprof program34 ?pattern matching technique?. In this analysis, histogram scale factor, background coefficients, zero-shift error, and pseudo-Voigt coefficients corrected for asymmetry were refined besides SG and unit cell parameters. Electrochemical insertion was performed in lithium cells with the electrochemical configuration: Li/LiPF6 ?1 M? in 2:1 ethylene carbonate + dimethyl carbonate ?LP31, Selectipur, Merck?/NASICON ?70–75%? + graphite ?20–25%? + poly?tetrafluoroethylene? ?5%?. Swagelok-type cells were assembled in an argon-filled glove box ?V acSystem, H2O ? 1 ppm?. In this configuration, NASICON compounds constituted the positive electrode, whereas the negative electrode was a disk of lithium metal foil. For this reason, cell voltages were referred to the Li+/Li electrode potential. A Whatman GF/D borosilicate glass fiber sheet soaked with the electrolyte solution was placed between both electrodes. The electrochemical insertion was monitored with the use of a MacPile automatic multichannel cycling/data recording system ?Biologic SA, Claix, France? operating in galvanostatic or potentiostatic modes. Magnetic measurements were performed in a conventional superconducting quantum interference device magnetometer. For that, samples were first cooled to 4 K in a zero magnetic field and then heated in the presence of a magnetic field of 50 Oe. Before calculations, the correction of the ion core diamagnetic contribution was estimated.35 7Li, 27Al, and 31P MAS-NMR spectra were obtained at room temperature using a MSL-400 Bruker spectrometer. To improve the resolution, 6Li spectra of enriched samples were recorded. The frequencies used for 6Li, 7Li, 27Al, and 31P nuclei were 58.86, 155.50, 104.26, and 161.97 MHz, respectively. NMR signals were obtained after a ?/2 pulse irradiation ?4 ?s? with a recycling time of 10 s for lithium and 5 s for aluminum and phosphorus signals ?single-pulse experiments?. During spectra recording, the sample was spun at 4, 10, and 14 kHz around an axis inclined 54°44? with respect to the external magnetic field ?MAS technique?. The number of scans was in the range of 40–800. The 6Li and 7Li, and 27Al and 31P chemical shift values are given relative to 1 M LiCl, 1 M A l C l3, and 85% H3PO4 aqueous solutions. The fitting of NMR spectra was carried out with the Bruker WINFIT software package.36

The XRD study showed that Li1+xTi2−xAlx?PO4?3 ?0 ? x ? 0.4? samples are single-phase materials for x ? 0.2. XRD patterns of all prepared samples were indexed with the hexagonal setting of the rhombohedral SG R3¯c, a ? 8.5 Å, and c ? 20.8 Å. Unit cell parameters decrease as Al content increases. For x ? 0.2, the amount of secondary phases becomes important;31 for that reason, the susceptibility measurements and the NMR study are focused on x = 0.2 and its intercalated derivative. The undoped sample, x = 0, and its corresponding intercalated phase are used as a reference for comparison. Electrochemical and chemical lithium insertion/extraction.— The electrochemical lithium insertion into some selected Li1+xTi2−xAlx?PO4?3 ?0 ? x ? 0.4? samples is depicted in Fig. 2. Data were obtained in the galvanostatic mode by applying a current density of ?0.10 mA cm−2 between 3.3 and 1.5 V , which corresponds to a C/20 rate ?1 lithium per Li1+xTi2−xAlx?PO4?3 in 20 h?. During the first discharge, LiTi2?PO4?3 intercalates ca. 0.9 Li atoms/ formula unit, producing an apparent composition of Li1.9Ti2?PO4?3with a capacity of 69 mAh/g. During the charge process, all intercalated lithium was removed. Similar results were obtained for Li1+xTi2−xAlx?PO4?3 materials. For all these samples, 0.9–1.0 lithium atoms/formula unit were intercalated during the first discharge. In all analyzed cases, lithium insertion–deinsertion processes are reversible, indicating that the NASICON skeleton is maintained during the charging process to 3.5 V. The large observed hysteresis ?polarization of more than 200 mV between discharge and charge potentials? is most likely related to the low electronic conductivity of the Li1+xTi2−xAlx?PO4?3 materials. Because the total reduction of both Ti4+ to Ti3+ should ideally lead to Li3Ti2−xAlx?PO4?3 compositions for the lithiated materials, the discharge of Li1+xTi2−xAlx?PO4?3 compounds has been performed under slower experimental conditions using the potentiostatic intermittent titration technique ?PITT?. Some of the results are given in Fig. 3 as a voltage–composition plot down to 2.3 V . Experimental conditions for the PITT runs were ?20 mV potential steps and 48 h relaxation time at each potential step before applying the next potential step or if I was smaller than 0.0001 mA. The amount of intercalated lithium delivered down to 2.3 V is practically doubled, applying the slower PITT conditions: up to 1.6 Li/formula unit in LiTi2?PO4?3 and Li1.2Ti1.8Al0.2?PO4?3 when compared to ca. 0.8 Li/formula unit using the faster galvanostatic conditions ?see Fig. 2?. Slow discharge conditions favor the participation of more Li1+xTi2−xAlx?PO4?3 grains when compared to the galvanostatic C/20 rate. As indicated in the structural characterization section, secondary phases such as AlPO4 become important for x ? 0.2. This fact would account only partially for the apparently lower amount of intercalated lithium in Li1.4Ti1.6Al0.4?PO4?3 ?x = 0.4?. I n this particular case, the impurity amount is ca. 5–7%. Therefore, the corrected insertion extent is 1.45 Li/formula unit, still clearly smaller than the amounts observed for x = 0 and x = 0 , 2 ?see Fig. 3?. Therefore, it seems that the quantity x of lithium already present in the sample according to the substitution of 1Ti4+ by 1Al3+ + 1 L i+ has an influence on the incoming inserted lithium y. I n i n tercalated samples Li1+x+yTi2−xAlx?PO4?3, the final amount of lithium, 1 + x + y, remains constant to the value of 2.7. This seems to indicate that lithium involved in Ti4+ by Al3+ substitution and lithium resulting from the electrochemical reduction occupy the same crystallographic position. However, to clarify this point, ND data have been recorded on intercalated samples, and the results will be reported elsewhere. To shed light on the nature of the different processes occurring during lithium insertion in Li1+xAlxTi2−x?PO4?3, the variation in the relaxation of the current has been monitored using the above PITT conditions along the electrochemical reduction. As an example, plots of the current variation as a function of time during lithium insertion are given for a Li/Li1.2Ti1.8Al0.2?PO4?3 cell ?inset of Fig. 4a and b?. The inset of Fig. 4a shows typical I-t relaxation curves observed in the time interval 0–105 h, which corresponds to the beginning of lithium insertion in the voltage range 3.2–2.5 V ?labeled A in the voltage–composition curve?. In this region, the cell voltage drops fast and the current relaxation in each potential step follows the t−1/2 law, reaching zero values after a few hours. These findings confirm that lithium diffusion controls the insertion processes in this region. This region A then corresponds to a very narrow solid solution of the initial phase Li1.2+yTi1.8Al0.2?PO4?3 within the approximate limits 0 ? y ? 0.07. In all Li1+xTi2−xAlx?PO4?3 materials, the voltage profile below 2.5 V is characterized by an almost constant voltage region located at 2.45 V. The behavior of I vs t in this region shown in the inset of Fig. 4b ?time interval 105–300 h? is far from the t−1/2 law with an anomalous behavior of the current relaxation curves, indicating that diffusion does not control the insertion process.32 This behavior is typical of a two-phase transformation, along which pristine Li1+xTi2−xAlx?PO4?3 phases coexist with the lithiathed phase Li3AlxTi2−x?PO4?3 in the biphasic region. This second region is then the two-phase domain labeled A + B in Fig. 4b, with compositional limits of 0.07 ? x ? 1.4 along the flat voltage–composition curve. The progress of the insertion reaction along the biphasic region is marked by the progressive disappearance of the initial Li1.2Ti1.8Al0.2?PO4?3 ?A phase? to the benefit of the simultaneous appearance of Li3Ti1.8Al0.2?PO4?3 ?B phase?. At the end of the insertion reaction, e.g., y ? 1.4, a further solid solution is detected in the final phase B, with narrow compositional limits of 1.4–1.55 ?not shown?. For Al-containing Li1+xTi2−xAlx?PO4?3 materials ?0 ? x ? 0.4?, the maximum quantity of lithium intercalated is close to 1.7 lithium atoms/formula unit during the first discharge. To further understand the nature of lithium insertion in LiTi2−xAlx?PO4?3 materials, a series of chemical lithiation experiments was undertaken. Attempts to prepare fully reduced phases Li1+x+yTi2−xAlx?PO4?3, where all Ti?IV? is reduced to Ti?III?, were made by using n-BuLi as a reducing agent in 50% excess with respect to stoichiometric proportions ?see the Experimental section?. The lithiation produced by n-BuLi should lead to the formation of the reduced compositions according to the following reaction Li1+xAlxTi2−x?PO4?3 + y n-C4H9Li → Li1+x+yAlyTi2−y?PO4?3 + y/2 C8H18 where x is the amount of lithium already present in the sample according to the substitution of 1Ti4+ by 1Al3+ + 1 L i+ and y is the content of inserted lithium. Structural and magnetic characterization of lithiated samples.— The XRD patterns of the lithiated samples were indexed with the Le Bail procedure ?pattern matching?. The presence of small new peaks in the R3¯c pattern of the pristine samples justified the choice of an R3¯ unit cell.32 The XRD patterns of the x = 0.2 pristine and lithiated samples are depicted in Fig. 5. The unit cell parameters of the pristine and lithiated samples deduced with R3¯ and R3¯c models, respectively, are given in Table I. From the XRD results, it can be deduced that lithiation increases the c parameters but reduces the a parameters of pristine samples. To get information about the oxidation state of Ti, the temperature dependence of the magnetic susceptibility has been investigated ?Fig. 6?. The magnetic susceptibility of the lithiated samples was fitted in the temperature range 0–330 K according to the Curie– Weiss law ? = C T − ? ?1? The temperature dependence of 1/?m, shown as an inset of Fig. 6, follows the variation expected for a paramagnetic material. At a low temperature, the curve deviates from linearity probably due to antiferromagnetic interactions. The fitting of high temperature data ?200–300 K? yielded effective magnetic moments of 1.24?B for Li3Ti2?PO4?3 and 1.10?B for Li3Al0.2Ti1.8?PO4?3. From these values, the contribution of metal Ti ions to magnetic susceptibility was estimated to be 3.15 and 2.97 ?B in these samples, respectively. The corresponding contribution of two field-free d1 cations to susceptibility was calculated to be 3.46?B and 3.12?B in Li3Ti2?PO4?3 and Li3Al0.2Ti1.8?PO4?3, respectively. In general, the magnetic moments of metal cations, octahedrally coordinated to oxygen atoms, are smaller than those deduced for field-free ions. The origin of residual Ti4+ should be due to an incomplete reduction of the parent materials even under the severe reducing conditions used ?50% excess of n-butyllithium?. Two possible reasons can be invoked to explain the experimental results: ?i? the coexistence of Ti3+ and Ti4+ in a single lithiated phase and ?ii? the simultaneous presence of LiTi2?PO4?3 and lithiated Li3Ti2?PO4?3 phases in the analyzed samples. From the experimental magnetic moments, we calculated the proportion of residual Ti4+ following the equation P = 1 − ?eff z?s.o. ?2? where P stands for the proportion of the remaining Ti4+, ?eff is the effective magnetic moment, ?s.o. is the magnetic moment of the 1d1 ion calculated with the expression ?s.o. = 2 ? S?S + 1? and z is the Ti concentration, z = 2 − y, where y = A l/f.u.. By using Eq. 2, w e estimated 9% of the pristine sample in the intercalated material for x = 0. For the x = 0.2 sample, the calculated quantity is 5%. NMR study.— NMR spectroscopy has been used to analyze the structural features of lithiated samples by comparing the 31P, 27Al, and 7Li spectra of lithiated and pristine samples. The reduction of Ti?IV? to Ti?III? considerably increases paramagnetic interactions, producing important shifts in the analyzed signals. The 31P ?I = 1/2? MAS-NMR spectrum of Li1+xTi2−xAlx?PO4?3 samples displays a symmetric band at ? = −27 ppm. As Al content increases, the 31P NMR line becomes asymmetrically broadened, indicating the presence of additional nonresolved components.31 In lithiated compounds, the central line of 31P MAS-NMR spectra ?Fig. 7? is formed by two components: that located at ? = 10 ppm corresponds to the lithiated phase and that located at ? = −27 ppm corresponds to the pristine sample. The important shift detected in lithiated samples must be ascribed to paramagnetic interactions created during lithium insertion. In NASICON-type materials, P atoms share oxygen with four Ti octahedra; from this fact, the two detected components have been tentatively ascribed to P atoms surrounded by 4 Ti4+ and 4 Ti3+, respectively. A quantitative analysis of 31P NMR spectra shows that the residual amount of the nonreduced phase does not exceed 6% in the two samples. This result agrees with that deduced from magnetic measurements. By taking into account NMR and magnetic results, the presence of LiTi2?PO4?3 cores in lithiated Li3Ti2?PO4?3 particles ?core–shell particle model? could be assumed. The 27Al ?I = 5/2? MAS-NMR spectra of the analyzed samples are formed by five nuclear transitions, modulated by equally spaced spinning side bands associated with the spinning of the sample ?not shown?. The central part of the analyzed spectra is mostly formed by a complex component at ? ? 41 ppm that corresponds to aluminum in octahedral coordination ?AlO? ?Fig. 8?. In pristine samples, this component was located near ? ? −15 ppm.32 The differences ob served in the 27Al MAS-NMR spectra of the pristine and lithiated samples must be ascribed again to changes produced by paramagnetic Ti3+ species in reduced samples. Finally, the narrow line detected at ?40 ppm in the spectrum of the pristine sample does not change in the intercalated sample, indicating that it corresponds to a small amount of the nonreducible residual AlPO4 phase of the starting sample. The 7Li ?I = 3/2? MAS-NMR spectra of the analyzed samples are formed by three transitions modulated again by spinning side bands ?Fig. 9?. In pristine samples, the central part of the spectra is formed by a single component located near 0 ppm. From the analysis of quadrupolar interactions ?CQ ? 50 kHz and ? = 0?, i t w a s deduced that most parts of Li atoms occupy the structural sites with an axial symmetry ?M1 sites?. In lithiated samples, the number of components detected increases considerably. In Li3Ti2?PO4?3, 1 0 narrow lines shifted at positive values were resolved besides that detected at 0 ppm. In lithiated Al-doped samples, the central component is formed by two broadened lines at 20 and 0 ppm. The analysis of quadrupolar interactions ?CQ ? 80 kHz and ? = 0.6? indicates that the symmetry of occupied sites has been changed, and Li ions do not occupy sites with an axial symmetry. To improve the experimental resolution, the 6Li MAS-NMR spectra of the lithiated samples were recorded at room temperature ?not shown?. I n t h e 6Li MAS-NMR spectra, dipolar and quadrupolar interactions are strongly attenuated, reducing the amount of spinning side bands and improving the resolution of central components. In both spectra, the number of detected components is similar, confirming conclusions deduced from the 7Li MAS-NMR spectra. The analysis of the Li MAS-NMR spectra of Li3Ti2?PO4?3 and Li3Ti1.8Al0.2?PO4?3 samples showed that the mobility of Li is higher in Al-doped samples. As a result of Li exchange processes, the position of 10 lines detected in Li3Ti2?PO4?3 is averaged to give the broad component observed in Li3Ti1.8Al0.2?PO4?3 ?Fig. 10?. Similar results were reported in Li3Ti2?PO4?3 where the sample heating produced the mentioned average.32 Taking into account the influence of paramagnetic interactions, we have ascribed lines shifted toward more positive values to Li ions located near the M1/2 sites at different distances from Ti3+ cations and lines disposed near 0 ppm to Li ions disposed at the M1 sites in nonreduced cores of LiTi2?PO4?3composition. Taking into account the amount of Li environments, the presence of several sites where Li can be located must be assumed. However, to better analyze lithium sites occupied by lithium, the ND study of the intercalated Li1+xTi2−xAlx?PO4?3 samples should be undertaken.

Chemical and electrochemical lithium intercalated Li1+x+yTi2−xAlx?PO4?3 samples ?0 ? x ? 0.4? have been investigated by XRD, magnetic susceptibility, and NMR techniques. The amount of intercalated Li greatly depends on the cycling conditions. Although only ca. 0.9 Li/formula unit is inserted under a fast galvanostatic regime, this quantity is practically twice ?up to 1.6 Li/ formula unit? using slower potentiostatic discharge conditions. The reversible lithium insertion–deinsertion reaction has been found to be dominated by a long-phase transformation, and the compositional limits of the solid solutions that sandwich the biphasic domain have been established. Cycling experiments showed an important hysteresis loop between charge–discharge cycles. From the MAS-NMR study, it has been deduced that the insertion of Li produces the formation of Ti3+ that considerably affects the position of 7Li, 27Al, and 31P NMR lines. A quantitative analysis of the 31P NMR spectra of the intercalated compounds shows that 6% of Ti4+ remains not reduced upon insertion. The 7Li NMR spectra show that Li ions occupy the M1 sites in pristine samples but are located near the M1/2 sites in intercalated samples. The NMR study of the analyzed samples also showed that the mobility of Li is higher in the Li3Ti1.8Al0.2?PO4?3 sample than in the Li3Ti2?PO4?3 sample.

The authors gratefully acknowledge the Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación for funding the coordinated project MA T2007-64486C07. The Regional Government of Madrid ?project S-505/PPQ0358? is also acknowledged for its financial support. K.A. thanks the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation for financial support under the contract “Juan de la Cierva.”
