A modified cold sintering process is described which permits the densification of the prototypical sodium ion electrolyte, Na3Zr2Si2PO12, to greater than 90% relative density at a process temperature below 400°C. The room temperature grain boundary ionic conductivity is greater than 2•10-4 S/cm. Sintering of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 to such densities and conductivities typically requires sintering near 1200°C for many hours. We modify the cold sintering process by replacing the aqueous transient solvent with a fused hydroxide (NaOH, Tm = 312°C) to increase the reactivity of the solvent-particle interaction while also retaining the increased driving forces for densification characteristic of cold sintering, namely, the transient nature of the solvent and uniaxial pressure applied to an open system. We demonstrate the changes in phase purity, conductivity, and density by varying the process temperature, weight fraction hydroxide, and dwell time. The best results are obtained near 375°C, 10 w/w NaOH, and 3 hours of sintering.
The multifaceted problem of sustainably storing and distributing energy constitutes one of the major themes of modern materials science. In particular, secondary Li-ion batteries have had incalculable beneficial effects on society and culture in catalyzing the present digital age. However, a second battery revolution may be necessary to meet the growing energy demands and related detrimental effects on the climate.
All-solid-state batteries (ASSBs) have been proposed as a candidate to address the limitations of current secondary ion batteries; ASSBs could attain higher operating potentials, decrease flammability/safety concerns, and thus enable such technological advances such as decentralized grid-based energy storage infrastructure or electric vehicles. While Li-ion ASSBs remain the focus of most of the ASSB attention, Na-ion ASSBs are also of considerable interest given the geologic abundance of the latter metal being orders of magnitude greater than the former, which translates into a potentially inexpensive ASSB formulation6. Furthering the development of sodium ASSBs hinges on breakthroughs in the processing of the solid electrolyte to replace the currently ubiquitous liquid electrolyte.
Solid-state electrolytes based on vitreous, crystalline, polymeric, and other materials have been extensively demonstrated . Among the most prolifically studied are the crystalline electrolytes of the sodium (Na) superionic conductor (NASICON) family, containing the prototypical composition Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (NZSP). The room temperature bulk ionic conductivities are comparable to liquid electrolytes, often in the 10-3 S/cm regime. The high conductivities of polycrystalline NASICON ceramics are, however, contingent on high relative density in addition to the careful control of stoichiometry and phase purity. These requirements are often mutually exclusive when conventional sintering techniques are employed; sintering temperatures in excess of 1200°C are necessary to densify the material but the process simultaneously induces volatilization of sodium and phosphorus as well as formation of non-conductive ZrO2 at grain boundaries.
Accordingly, the sintering process of NASICON electrolytes has been extensively studied, mostly through efforts to either reduce the sintering temperature or reduce the thermal effects on the resultant bulk conductivity. In pursuit of the former, alternative sintering techniques such as field-assisted sintering (FAST),liquid phase sintering (LPS)23,25,26, and the cold sintering process (CSP)22,26,27 have been applied to NASICON-type materials. Pereira da Silva et al. directly compared the cold sintering process to FAST and conventional sintering methods in their respective abilities to densify Na3.4Sc0.4Zr1.6Si2PO12, a NASICON-type electrolyte . The FAST technique was able to reduce the sintering time from hours to minutes, but relative densities greater than 90% were only obtained for process temperatures ≥1100°C, representing only a modest reduction in sintering temperature compared to the conventional sintering process (ca. 1250°C). In contrast, cold sintering was carried out on the same material at 250°C using a variety of transient aqueous solvents, including aqueous solutions of KOH and NaOH which resulted in relative densities of 87% and 82% respectively. The ionic conductivities of these samples, however, remained low (between 10-5 and 10-6 S/cm) and was only improved to approximately 10-4 S/cm when a post annealing process of 800°C was applied. Similar results were obtained by Leng et al., who used pure deionized water as a transient solvent in a 140°C cold sintering process applied to Na3.2Mg0.13Zr1.9Si2PO1227. Doping of NZSP with Mg is thought to promote dissolution in water, which the authors reasoned would be beneficial for the cold sintering process . Ionic conductivities of 4.1•10-5 S/cm were only improved to >10-4 S/cm with a subsequent annealing process at 800°C. Initial relative densities of ca. 83% were only increased to greater than 90% with an 1100°C annealing process. In a subsequent paper by Leng et al., they improved on these results in a second cold sintering study where the transient phase was modified to include water, a binding agent, and a Bi2O3 sintering additive26. The Bi2O3 additive was dispersed with the liquid phase during the cold sintering process, and a subsequent heat treatment at 850°C to 1200°C allowed the Bi2O3 additive to melt and act as a traditional liquid phase sintering agent. Conductivities of 1•10-4 to 5•10-4 S/cm were obtained at the lowest temperature studied, 850°C, with lower temperatures being restricted by the melting temperature of Bi2O3 (ca. 800°C).
In its usual form, cold sintering is characterized by the wetting of a powder followed by uniaxial pressing inside a heated die above the boiling temperature of the wetting solvent(typically aqueous) . In this manner, we have successfully applied cold sintering to the cathodes (MoS2, V2O5, LiFePO4), an anode (Li4Ti5O12), and a NASICON-type solid-state electrolyte (Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3)
for lithium ion batteries, primarily with low temperature aqueous solvents. In densifying the Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 electrolyte, however, we needed introduce a conductive salt additive in order to improve the conductivity to high values (>10-4 S/cm). In turning our attention to Na-ASSBs, we interpreted the previous attempts in low temperature densification of NASICON-type NZSP as collectively implying that NZSP could indeed be densified by cold sintering at reduced temperatures, but a new highly reactive solvent which operated at reduced temperatures would be necessary. The criteria for selection of the more reactive solvent included higher operating temperatures and increased dissolution kinetics of NZSP-type materials relative to ours and other authors previous cold sintering studies employing aqueous solvents.
To this end, we selected molten NaOH as the transient solvent for this study. Its melting temperature (312°C) is attainable in current cold sintering apparatuses, thus enabling a one-step process in which solid NaOH flakes are mixed with NZSP powder, charged into a die, uniaxially pressed and heated to T > 312°C, resulting in a liquid NaOH transient solvent to drive the cold sintering process. Fused hydroxides, and the broader family of ionic liquids, have been widely employed as the reactive solvents in complex compound growth from the melt; with at least one study demonstrating NASICON synthesis from phosphate precursors.
The mechanisms of cold sintering are still under debate, but seem to point to a densification process enabled by a chemical potential gradient generated at the particle-liquid-particle interfaces under the influence of external pressure and where the solvent is allowed to leave the system . In aqueous cold sintering, the solvent is evaporated, while here the NaOH solvent is extruded. Thus, while this process and aqueous sintering processes share many similarities, they may differ fundamentally in their driving force(s). To acknowledge these potential differences and differentiate this work from aqueous processes, we refer to this process as a fused hydroxide cold sintering process (FH-CSP) throughout the duration of this work. In this article we show that FHCSP conducted under 400°C is able to obtain conductivities and relative densities comparable to previous reports of sintering at 800°C to 1000°C. FH-CSP has also been recently applied to the dielectric BaTiO3 with similar success.
The powders used in this study were synthesized via a solution-assisted solid state reaction route (SaSSR) rather than a typical solid-state reaction (SSR). Preliminary experiments showed that the reduced particle size and minimal ZrO2 secondary phase characteristic of SaSSR powders (versus SSR powders) was beneficial to final densities and conductivities. A flowchart of the powder synthesis process is provided in the supplemental information (figure S1).
SaSSR powder synthesis has been described at length in previous publications by Naqash and Ma et al.. Here, NaNO3 (Sigma Aldrich, >99.0%), ZrO2(Alfa Aesar, 99.7%, 325-mesh), Tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS, Sigma Aldrich, 99.0%), and NH4H2PO4 (Alfa Aesar, 98.0%) were used as precursors in the stoichiometric ratio of 3:2:2:1. The precursors were dissolved in the aqueous solution sequentially and stirred at 50°C overnight. The water was then slowly driven off to induce gelation. The drying of the gel was completed in a 120°C oven, giving an agglomerated white powder. The agglomerates were broken up in a pestle and then calcined at 600 °C (3h) in air with under oxygen flow to pyrolyze the carbonaceous, NOx, CO2, and H2O components of the amorphous mixture. This raw powder was further calcined in air (without oxygen flow) at 1000 °C (12h) to obtain the desired NASICON stoichiometry. The calcination temperature and dwell time was increased in relation to the referenced procedure to increase the final grain size of the powder. Further, the reported 800°C calcine was found to not generate completely phase pure NASICON in our laboratory. The calcined powder was milled in ethanol with 70:30 w/w ratio of 5mm:3mm yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) milling media for 24 hours and dried at 80°C. This powder was then kept in a vacuum oven at 75°C when not in use to reduce the absorption of moisture. Dynamic light scattering (PANalytical Mastersizer) of the powder dispersed in ethanol was used to measure the particle size distribution, yielding D90 = 8.8 μm and D50 = 2.2 μm (figure S2).
The sodium hydroxide used in this study was obtained from Sigma Aldrich as solid flakes (NaOH, 97%). The NaOH was used without further purification. When not in use, the flakes were stored under vacuum in the presence of desiccant. It should be noted that previous works have found up to 15 w/w of absorbed H2O in commercial NaOH, which may significantly alter its thermal and chemical properties.
 A prescribed mass ratio of the NZSP and NaOH (ranging from 5 to 15 w/w NaOH/NZSP) to was measured and combined in a mortar and pestle. The mixture was sheared vigorously so the NaOH flakes were distributed relatively homogenously in the NZSP powder. This step was carried out as quickly as possible (< 5 min) to reduce the exposure of the NaOH to the moisture and carbon in the air. The mixture was loaded in a stainless-steel die with a 13 mm inner radius (Across International) which had been lightly lubricated with oleic acid. Disposable 0.1 mm nickel foils (Alfa Aesar, 99.95%) were placed at the interface between the powder and the die punches to reduce potential contamination from die corrosion. The apparatus was then fitted with a band heater and loaded into a uniaxial press equipped with heated platens. The powder was then compacted at 350 MPa for 5 minutes at room temperature to allow for particle rearrangement to occur. The temperature and pressure were then quickly increased to cold sintering conditions, with an approximate heating rate of 20°C/min. Die temperatures ranging from 350°C to 400°C were used to assess the FH-CSP thermal dependence. The heated platens of the uniaxial press were activated (maximum temperature ca. 250°C) to reduce thermal gradients in the system. After the specified sintering time had elapsed, the heating elements were switched off and a small (ca. 15 cm) fan was directed at the die; cooling the setup to room temperature and gradually removing the pressure over the course of approximately 30 minutes. The sintered sample was then removed and dried in a 120°C for 12 hours and then kept in a 75°C vacuum oven for characterization.
Some samples of the same powder were densified by conventional high temperature means for comparison. The powder was pressed in a 13 mm die with 350 MPa and then cold isostatically pressed at 200 MPa. The green compacts were then fired in a furnace at 1200 °C for 6 hours in air without submersion in mother powder.
The density of the sintered pellets was measured by Archimedes method, using ethanol as a reference solvent. The X-Ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of polished sample surfaces were measured by with a PANanalytical Empyrean diffractometer in Bragg-Bretano configuration with operating parameters of 45 kV and 40mA. A 2Θ range of 10-60 was scanned with a step size of 0.026 with Cu Kα radiation. The microstructure of the samples was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI Nova NanoSEM 630) on fracture surfaces coated with ~5 nm of iridium and an accelerating voltage of 15 kV. Microstructural elemental distribution observed was accomplished using electron dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) also at 15 kV.
Further microstructural characterizations were performed by scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM). The electron transparent samples were milled and extracted from the surface of a pellet with a focused ion beam (FEI Helios 660) using Ga+ ions at 30 kV. Scanning transmission electron microscopy (FEI Titan3 G2) was conducted at 200 kV with a bright field detector. EDS mapping was conducted with a SuperX EDS system in STEM mode.
The relative stoichiometry of the initial powder was evaluated using electron probe microanalysis (EPMA, Cameca SX-5). An accelerating voltage of 20 kV, a beam current of 10 nA, and a spot size of 10 μm were used. Synthetic and natural oxides for sodium, zirconium, phosphorus, and silicon were used as calibration standards. The composition was then evaluated assuming the Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12 compositional model, where x was evaluated from the relative atomic abundancies of Si and P.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed to measure ionic conductivity of the dense specimen. The surfaces of the samples were polished by hand up to 1200 grit and a mirror like finish was observed. The samples were then coated with circular gold electrodes using a Quorum Technologies EMS 150R-S sputter coating and a gold target (Kurt J. Lesker). The electrodes were approximately 80 nm in thickness and the areas were about 0.1 cm2; precise measurements of the electrode areas were obtained using ImageJ image processing software 50. Prior to measurement, the coated samples were dried in a vacuum oven at 75°C for 24 hours to remove any moisture. The EIS spectrum was collected with an impedance analyzer (Modulab XM MTS) over a frequency range of 1 MHz to 0.05 Hz with an A.C. amplitude of 0.5 V. EIS measurements as a function of temperature were carried out in air inside a Delta 9023 oven with a nominal thermal soak time of 15 minutes. The thickness of the samples ranged from 0.3 mm to 0.9 mm. EIS spectra were analyzed using the ZView program (Scribner Associates).
The density of FH-CSP samples as a function of three dominant FH-CSP parameters (die temperature, dwell time, and weight fraction NaOH) are plotted in in figure 1. The relative density of the NZSP is increased progressively with increasing temperature (figure 1a). At the lowest temperature studied (350°C), the relative density is 86% of theoretical (3.27 g/cm3). This rises to a plateau of approximately 92% for temperatures of 375°C to 382°C, followed by an increase to 95% at 400°C. The initial increase in density with increasing temperature is likely due to an increased degree of melting, increase in solubility, and decrease in viscosity51,52. Following the aforementioned plateau of ca. 92% relative density, the increase to 95% at 400°C seems to suggest an increased degree of sintering at this slightly higher temperature, however, we also observe an reduction in crystallinity and generation of secondary phases which serve to reduce conductivity, as will be shown later in this article.The relative density as a function of dwell time is plotted in figure 1b (350°C, 10 w/w NaOH). The trend is similar to that of the effect of applied temperature; an initial increase followed by a plateau and then a final increase in density. A dwell time of 1 hour is insufficient to yield significant densification (81%), suggesting that the melting of the hydroxide may occur slowly during the thermal ramp. Dwell times of 2 to 4.5 hours appears sufficient to allow for complete melting and thus the progression of densification, reaching a relative density plateau of around 86%. For the extended dwell time of 6 hours, density is modestly increased to 90% compared to the 86% plateau. A dwell time of 3 hours was adopted for the majority of subsequent experiments based on these relative density results and ionic conductivity measurements which are presented later in this article (section 3.4).
 Density as a function of w/w NaOH, with a dwell time of three hours and die temperatures of 350°C or 375°C, is shown in figure 1c. For a die temperature of 350°C, when the w/w NaOH is increased from 5 to 15, the relative density increases by about 10% from 82% to 92%. When the die temperature is raised to 375°C, the density of the 5 w/w sample is increased to about 87%. At this 375°C die temperature, the relative density increases steadily as the amount of NaOH is increased, reaching values of about 95% for 7.5 to 12.5 w/w NaOH. Samples with greater than 12.5 w/w NaOH with an FH-CSP temperatures ≥ 375°C or greater consistently fractured when being removed from the die.
In sum, these results show that a dwell time of less than 3 hours is insufficient to take full advantage of FH-CSP. For dwell times of 3 hours, the die temperature plays a dominant role in the densification process; density increases steadily as the temperature is raised. However, it is found that intermediate values of die temperature (ca. 375°C) and w/w NaOH (ca.10 w/w) are beneficial attaining both high densities and retaining pellet mechanical integrity.
Figure 2a depicts the XRD patterns of the SaSSR powder and the cold sintered pellets at temperatures of 350°C, 375°C, and 400°C (3h, 10 w/w NaOH, 526 MPa). The strong peaks in the SaSSR powder may be indexed by the rhombohedral R c NASICON crystal structure (PDF: 00-3 034-1334). From EPMA, we evaluate the value of x in Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12 from the Si:P ratio to obtain an average composition of Na2.96(±0.08)Zr2Si1.96(±0.02)P1.04(±0.01)O12, in agreement with the target stoichiometry. No significant amount of ZrO2 is observed in the XRD pattern. This is a significant advantage of the powder synthesized by a SaSSR versus an SSR process. There are some small unidentified impurities between 2Θ values of 16° and 18°. The unidentified impurity/impurities may be unreacted precursor from the calcination reaction; these impurities are only transmitted to FH-CSP samples of low w/w NaOH (ca. 5 w/w figure 2b) so it is likely that they are dissolved and removed during FH-CSP with higher amounts of NaOH.
With a sintering temperature of 350°C, an additional phase appears with peaks adjacent to the primary R c powder peaks but does not correspond to any reported structure within the sodium-3 zirconium-silicon-phosphate solid solution spectrum53 and does not correspond to any reported structure of crystalline NaOH 54. However, the secondary phase matches closely with the structure of rhombohedral (H3O)Zr2(PO4)3 ((H3O)ZP), where all (or at least a large fraction) of the sodium ions have been exchanged for hydronium ions (H3O+) in an acidic medium55–60 over the course of several days. The density and conductivity of these pellets are low, but it is notable that we were able to consistently produce this ion-exchange reaction concurrent with FH-CSP and tune the degree of reaction progression by varying dwell time and w/w NaOH. Additional characterizations such as Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (figure S3) and XRD patterns of a series of increasingly transformed samples (figure S4) are provided in the supporting information.
With a sintering temperature of 375°C (figure 2a), there are no significant changes in peak locations relative to the initial powder. Peak height relative to the background signal becomes lower at higher temperatures, along with a slight peak broadening, indicative of a decreasing amount of crystallinity in the bulk. The decrease in signal height to background noise continues at 400°C and also observed as the weight fraction of NaOH is increased for a constant FH-CSP temperature (figure 2b).
With a sintering temperature of 400°C, a secondary phase similar, but shifted relative to the previously discussed (H3O)ZP-like phase, appears. If the previous notion of an ion-exchanged phase is correct, then a similar process occurs at both 350°C and 400°C but with slightly modified pellets sintered at 5 w/w NaOH (b) and 15 w/w NaOH (c), both at 375°C/3hr. FH-CSP pellets sintered at 350°C (d), 375°C(e), and 400°C(f), are also shown (10 w/w NaOH/3hr). Additional SEM images at higher magnifications of samples sintered at 375°C are also shown (g-i)
Figure 3 presents the microstructures of cold sintered NZSP under a variety of temperatures and with varying weight fractions of NaOH imaged with a SEM, as well as the starting powder (figure 3a). Based on both these SEM observations and the DLS particle size analysis, the initial powder is comprised mostly of 0.5-5 μm particles with some agglomerates thereof. While the powder is homogenous and relatively un-agglomerated, the small grain size may contribute to lower total conductivities compared to the large grains produced by other methods of synthesis.
Figure 3b and 3c show microstructures obtained from NaOH weight fractions of 5 w/w and 15 w/w respectively (both at 375°C, three hours). In the former, there is some evidence of densification with areas of high density and an angular grain geometry showing some of the crystal habit of NASICON-type structures, in comparison to the irregularly shaped initial powder morphology. In addition, small pores (diameters < 1 μm) are observed throughout the microstructure, indicative of an insufficient amount of NaOH solvent. In contrast, at 15 w/w NaOH (figure 3c), no pores are present but the microstructure, but a secondary phase of lamellar crystals are observed. EDS mapping of these crystals (figure S5) indicates that they are composed of primarily sodium, zirconium, and oxygen (i.e. silicon deficient). Kinetically-limited precipitation has been extensively documented in fused salt synthesis literature. Similar crystal precipitates are observed during FAST/SPS with an aqueous solution of NaOH by Pereira da Silva et al.. Non-optimal NZSP stoichiometries are known to be less ionically conducting, so these phases may contribute to the lower ionic conductivity measured at high weight fractions of NaOH presented later.
Figures 3d-f illustrates a progressive increase in temperature from 350°C (figure 3d), 375°C (figure 3e), to 400°C (figure 3f), other processing parameters being equal (3 hours, 10 w/w NaOH).
At 350°C we observe the formation of dense, well-defined, NZSP grains exhibiting the cubic crystal habit typically observed in sintered NASICON-type materials . At 375°C, a similarly dense NZSP matrix is observed and the grain size appears to have been reduced to the submicrometer regime (figure 3g-i). Some secondary precipitates are observed within the microstructure, similar to what is observed within the microstructures of 15 w/w NaOH (figure 3c). Thus, by adding 12.5 w/w NaOH or less, the formation of the secondary phases is minimized, and this presumably contributes to higher total conductivities.
At 400°C, the aforementioned secondary precipitates are increased in number and size but are also mixed with excess NaOH. The excess NaOH in the microstructure can also be detected by thermal techniques such as TGA and DSC in addition to microscopy and impedance as a function of temperature (figure S6-9).
The microstructure was probed further with scanning TEM (STEM) (figure 4). The sample used for STEM imaging was processed at 10 w/w NaOH, 3 hours, and 375°C. Regions of high density and clear triple point grain boundary intersections are immediately evident (figure 4a-b), indicating complete densification of the local microstructure. Numerous white precipitates (figure 4c) are found throughout this dense microstructure, showing little preference in location to either the grain boundary or intragranular. EDS mapping of these precipitates (figure 4d) shows that they are primarily composed of zirconium and phosphorus, suggesting a zirconium phosphate chemistry. No crystalline Zrx(PO4)y phases were detected in XRD so the preciptates are likely amorphous and formed during the powder synthesis process and might therefore be avoided by the use of alternative precursors. These precipitates may systematically reduce the total conductivity of the ceramics in this study but not to a degree which would obscure the effects of FH-CSP.
In most areas of the microstructure, complete densification is evident from the dihedral equilibration of the grain boundary intersections and closed triple points. The extent of the highly densified regions is consistent with the high grain boundary ionic conductivities measured. Based on bright field imaging and EDS observations, no secondary grain boundary phases are evident. Some dark field images, however, show a change in contrast at the grain boundaries which may indicate a yet unidentified secondary phase (figure S10). Attempts to probe the grain boundary at higher magnifications failed due to rapid degradation of the electron-beam sensitive sample.
Some grains also appeared to exhibit a deviation from the initial powder stoichiometry (bright field STEM figure 4e, EDS mapping in figure 4f). As shown in figure 4e and 4f, some of these grains were rich in silicon, agreeing with the notion of slower dissolution of the silicon from the NZSP powder (i.e. NZP precipitates observed at 15 w/w NaOH, figure 3c and S5).
The electrical response and calculated conductivities of the FH-CSP samples are plotted in figure 5. EIS data at room temperature of an FH-CSP sample (375°C, 3 hours, 10 w/w NaOH) and a conventionally sintered sample (1200°C, 6 hours) are shown in figure 5a and at -70°C in figure 5b. The room temperature grain boundary ionic conductivity is plotted as a function of dwell time, temperature, and w/w NaOH in figures 5c-e. The value is calculated from the intercept of the fitted semicircle response with the real axis of the complex impedance plot after accounting for the contact and grain resistance (Ro) (figure 5a). This grain boundary impedance intercept value is then used to calculate the grain boundary conductivity (S/cm) as shown below
Where t is the sample thickness (cm) and A is the electrode area (cm2). The electrical response of the FH-CSP samples is fit using two components in series, each comprised of a resistor and constant phase element (CPE) connected in parallel (figure 5b inset). At temperatures at and above room temperature, only the grain boundary response could be resolved so a single parallel CPEresistor component was used (figure 5a inset). This equivalent circuit is often employed to describe the electrical response of polycrystalline ionic conductors to account for the grain versus grain boundary responses63. An example of a low temperature measurement (-70°C) which exhibits a clear grain and grain boundary semi-circle response in the complex plane is shown in figure 5b. For comparison with the reports of total conductivity in the literature, we also tabulate the total conductivity at room temperature for some FH-CSP samples by extrapolation of the electrode CPE to its intercept with the Z’ axis (figure 5a). The resulting values are reported at the end of this section in table 1.
The effect of die temperature is shown in figure 5c. From 350°C to 375°C,σ increases approximately linearly from 4∙10-5 S/cm to 2∙10-4 S/cm. σ retains the latter value up to 386°C, thereafter reducing to 1∙10-5 S/cm at 400°C. This trend bears similarity to the effect of die temperature of relative density (figure 1a) in the initial increase followed by an initial plateau. The decrease in conductivity at high die temperatures is related to the secondary phases present in the microstructure at these elevated temperatures (see section 3.3 Microstructure).
The σ for dwell times ranging from 1 to 6 hours are shown in figure 5d (350°C, 10 w/w NaOH). As shown in section 3.1 Density, a nominal dwell time of 3 hours is necessary to obtain good results. Dwell times greater than 3 hours, however, reduce the conductivity whereas density is slightly increased. This may be due to increased reaction between the pellet and the die or atmosphere, as well as progression of an ion-exchange process. In light of these results, we find that a dwell time of 3 hours is well-suited for relatively high density and high conductivity.
 σ as a function of w/w NaOH and a die temperature of 350°C and 375°C are presented in figure 5e (dwell time of 3 hours). A die temperature of 375°C results in pellets of much higher conductivity at low weight fractions of NaOH, contrary to what might be expected from the similar trends observed in relative density (figure 1c). Furthermore, at 375°C, the conductivity is relatively insensitive to increased NaOH, until ~12.5 w/w NaOH, above which the pellets are mechanically weak. The apparent insensitivity of the conductivity to the amount of NaOH below 12.5 w/w may be due to the presence of percolated pathways highly densified regions within the microstructure.
Focusing on this series of pellets at processed at 375°C, 3 hours, and < 12.5 w/w NaOH, σ hovers between 9∙10-5 and 2.5∙10-4 S/cm. This latter value is competitive with NZSP samples densified by LPS with Bi2O3 at 850°C26 or an aqueous cold sintering process with an 800°C postannealing step 27 (table 1). While the measured grain boundary conductivity is relatively stable,the higher loadings of NaOH can lead to microstructural instabilities within the pellet stemming from NaOH recrystallization (figure S6 and S8). Accordingly, we conclude that nominal amounts of NaOH (5-10 w/w) are ideal for FH-CSP when targeting maximum conductivity, while noting that increasing the amount of NaOH modestly increases the relative density. To demonstrate the practicality of these EIS results, a symmetric cell was assembled with a thin NZSP pellet, sodium metal electrodes, and a small amount of liquid electrolyte (5 μL) to reduce interfacial impedance. Despite the electrochemical transport limitations inherent to bulk solid electrolyte pellets, the symmetric cell demonstrated fair cycling stability at a modest current density of 0.05 mA/cm2. The presence of liquid electrolyte was necessary to prevent the short circuiting and low impedance of the symmetric cells. Further details are given in the supporting information (figure S11).
The activation energies of the FH-CSP NZSP samples were extracted by measuring the conductivity at a range of temperatures and plotting conductivity against inverse temperature on a natural log-log scale. This Arrhenius plot of grain and grain boundary conductivities is shown in figure 5f for one of the most highly conducting process variable combinations; 10 w/w NaOH, 375°C, 3 hours, 526 MPa. The conductivity as a function of temperature for a conventionally sintered sample is also provided for reference. Very little deviation in Arrhenius behavior, and accordingly the activation energy, is observed (error ±0.01 eV), ensuring minimal ambiguity in assigning and comparing the measured grain and grain boundary activation energies, and comparison of such to those of literature (table 1).
The activation energies of the grain and grain boundary for an FH-CSP sample (375°C, 3 hours, 10 w/w NaOH) are found to be 0.32 eV and 0.36 eV respectively. The grain boundary value is close to what is observed in the literature (0.3 to 0.4 eV)20,22, further supporting the absence of any non-conductive secondary phase(s) impeding the ionic transport across the grain boundary. This is supported by a nearly identical grain boundary activation energy (0.35 eV) measured for our conventionally sintered sample. The grain interior activation energy (0.33 eV) is slightly higher than what is normally cited in the literature (0.2 to 0.3 eV), however, this value is close to the grain interior activation energy measured for the conventionally sintered samples prepared from our powder in this study (0.32 eV). Furthermore, the range of activation energies observed in the highly conducting FH-CSP samples also excludes the possibility of protonic contributions to ionic conduction which occurs with a much lower activation energy of ca. 0.18 eV64. We carried out conventional sintering at 1200°C for 6 hours, which may have been insufficient to form the most highly conducting NASICON samples65, despite the high density afforded by the increased driving forces for sintering from the small initial particle size. It is possible that by addressing the FH-CSP barriers introduced in this article (e.g. secondary phases), the FH-CSP process may be able to attain conductivities similar to other reports of conventionally sintered NZSP (table 1).
The activation energies,σ , and relative density of samples processed under a range of FH-CSP parameters are listed in table 1, alongside similar data for other densification techniques. The grain and grain boundary activation energies of FH-CSP samples range from 0.22 eV to 0.62 eV. For samples processed at 350°C, the grain activation energy is lower (0.22 eV) and the grain boundary activation energy higher (0.40 eV). At 400°C, the grain boundary activation energy is exceedingly high, reaching 0.62 eV, likely from the increase in non-conductive phases which contribute to the overall electrical response.
To place these results in context of previous work, we revisit the numerous recent demonstrations of low temperature sintering of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 reviewed in the introduction of this manuscript by plotting the total ionic conductivity in figure 6a, and the relative density in figure 6b as a function of process temperature for this work and other reports. Process temperature is here defined as the highest sintering or post-annealing temperature observed by the sample prior to measurement. From figure 6a, a predominantly linear relationship between the logarithmic scaling of room temperature conductivity and the process temperature is evident, which is independent of sintering technique used (this work notwithstanding). FH-CSP results in conductivities comparable to LPS at 800°C, effectively halving the processing temperature. Furthermore, FH-CSP is carried out at less than 400°C which translates to a reduction in processing temperature of about 70% compared to conventional sintering (ca. 1250°C).
The cold sintering process was modified by the use of a fused hydroxide (NaOH at T > 312°C) to increase the reactivity of the transient solvent. The fused hydroxide modified CSP process (FHCSP) was shown to be effective in densifying the sodium ion solid-state electrolyte, Na3Zr2Si2PO12 at ca. 375°C in 3 hours with 5 to 12.5 w/w NaOH. The room temperature grain boundary conductivities are above 10-4 S/cm, only one order of magnitude lower than the highest conductivities demonstrated for such systems (10-3 S/cm). The relative densities of the samples are consistently above 90%, with the microstructure showing complete grain boundary dihedral angle equilibration. Below die temperatures of 375°C, a secondary phase structurally similar to hydronium substituted NASICON is observed. Above 375°C, the degree of crystallinity in the system decreases and ionic conductivities are low (> 10-5 S/cm). With careful processing, minimal NaOH is retained in the microstructure and excellent properties and microstructure are observed. Slight deviations in amount of NaOH or other FH-CSP processing parameters results in secondary precipitates in the microstructure and abnormalities in impedance response. Direct comparisons of ambient grain boundary conductivities obtained by FH-CSP with recent applications of aqueous cold sintering, field-assisted techniques, liquid phase sintering, and conventional sintering show that the present work lies in an unexplored and promising region of the conductivity versus sintering/annealing temperature processing space. 