The roles of lithium aluminum germanium phosphate ?LAGP? glass-ceramic ?GC? in cathodes of totally solid-state lithium– oxygen ?Li–O2? electrochemical cells are delineated by conducting discharge experiments as a function of cathode chemistry. It is proposed that LAGP possesses an inherent characteristic to adsorb oxygen molecules due to its open structure. The adsorption is followed by reduction of oxygen to superoxide and peroxide molecules. Subsequently, these molecules react with lithium ions to form respective discharge products. In addition to being an important constituent of the cathode, the LAGP also serves as a solid-state electrolyte membrane due to its superionic lithium-ion conductivity. The dual functions of the LAGP GCs make it a feasible material to process an integrated membrane–cathode element of a Li–O2 cell, although this is not demonstrated in this paper.

Oxygen reduction is a fundamental reaction based on which several industrial products and processes, such as fuel cells, batteries ?zinc–air, aluminum–air, etc.?, oxygen separation membranes, and electrochemical sensors, function. Oxygen reduction is generally a sluggish reaction often requiring the use of catalysts such as precious metals or high temperatures. These catalysts and high temperatures are frequently associated with their own set of limitations that lead to compromises in performance and application of the products. A global concern has been triggered by CO2 emissions from industrial processes ?fossil fuel combustion and cement production, for example?. To mitigate the consequences ?global warming, climate change, etc.? of these emissions, world-wide governmental measures are being planned and executed. It is widely accepted that CO2 emissions must be limited or even reduced to a tolerable level for the good of mankind. These developments have challenged the scientific community to develop renewable energy sources and use nonconventional power generation plants. Oxygen reduction at lower temperatures is an advancement that may facilitate the development of the nonconventional power generation plant. Ceramic materials such as zeolites are known to mediate and enhance the rate of chemical reactions. These are crystalline aluminosilicate ceramics composed of SiO4 and AlO4 tetrahedra arranged in various spatial configurations. The tetrahedra are linked through their corners by sharing oxygen to form ordered lattices. The physical manifestations of these ordered lattices are three-dimensional structures of chains, layers, and polyhedra. Many natural zeolite minerals and a few synthetic varieties are known.1 Lanthanum strontium manganate ceramic is a widely used material for oxygen reduction reaction ?ORR? in solid oxide fuel cells.2 Some glass surfaces, when exposed to normal atmosphere, selectively adsorb carbon dioxide to form an organic compound, e.g., sodium formate.3 It is apparent that the chemical reactions can be facilitated on ceramic, glass, and glass-ceramic ?GC? surfaces, which have been known for decades. The inherent tendency of glass, ceramic, and GC surfaces to adsorb gaseous species with limited bond strength makes them suitable as substrates to enhance the rate of chemical reactions. Lithium aluminum germanium phosphate ?LAGP? GC, a lithiumion conducting material, has received considerable attention during the last decade as an electrolyte for various types of lithium batteries.4,5 The LAGP GC belongs to the general class of the Nasicon structure, which consists of a highly conducting Li1+xGe2−xAl?PO4?3 crystalline phase. The phase is a derivative of the LiGe?PO4?3, a 123 structure that possesses a rhombohedral lat tice ?space group R3c? with an open three-dimensional framework of GeO6 octahedra sharing all corners with PO4 tetrahedra, such as shown in Fig. 1. The polyhedra are linked by their corners to form a ??Ge2?PO4?3??− rigid skeleton, and Li+ ions migrate through the three-dimensional tunnel in the structure. Two different lithium-ion sites ?A1 and A2? exist in the structure. In LiGe2?PO4?3, the A1 site is fully occupied, whereas the A2 site is totally vacant. In the Li1+xAlxGe2−xAl?PO4?3 GC, a tetravalent germanium is partially substituted for by Al3+ ions, requiring the incorporation of additional lithium in the structure to maintain electrical neutrality. The additional lithium ions occupy the A2 sites. For detailed information on the Nasicon structures, the readers are referred to earlier work.6,7 The structure of Li1+xGe2−xAl?PO4?3 in Fig. 1 clearly shows the existence of cavities and tunnels which can accommodate gaseous molecules. In this context, the structures of well-known zeolites and LAGP are similar. It was recently observed8 that in addition to an ability to transport lithium ions, LAGP GC can also facilitate oxygen reduction. This paper presents and discusses the ORR in cathodes containing LAGP at lower temperatures ??100°C?. Lithium– oxygen ?Li–O2? electrochemical cells ?no liquid? were used in the investigation. A detailed description of the Li–O2 cells has been published earlier.8

Figure 2 shows a schematic of a Li–O2 cell. Anodic lithium metal is coupled with a cathode through a membrane laminate consisting of an LAGP GC material and polymer-ceramic ?PC? materials. The processing and properties of the LAGP materials have been reported earlier.5 Two kinds of PC materials were used in the same cell. Lithium metal and LAGP membrane were coupled with a PC material having a poly?ethylene oxide? ?PEO?:lithium bis?perfluoroethylsulfonyl?imide ?LiBETI? ?8.5:1? 1 w t % L i2O composition. The composition was specially designed and developed to address interfacial issues associated with the use of metallic lithium as the anode. A PEO:LiBETI ?8.5:1? 1 wt % BN PC bonded the cathode with the LAGP membrane. The PC?BN? membrane was used to augment the electrochemical connectivity between the LAGP membrane and the cathode. A detailed discussion of the development and characterization of the two PC materials is presented elsewhere.9,10 The membrane laminate composed of the LAGP and two PC materials was designed to provide very high lithium-ion conductivity around ambient temperature, facilitate redox reactions at electrodes, and passivate the lithium surface to enhance lithium–electrolyte interfacial stability. The chemical compositions of the cathode formulations are presented in Table I. The formulations primarily consist of a mixture of LAGP , carbon powder, and poly?tetrafluoroethylene? ?PTFE? binder. The LAGP material was used in a cathode with the intent to transport lithium ions and provide the desired cell capacity. Water-soluble PTFE in liquid form was added as a binder to the mixture of LAGP and carbon. The compositions listed in Table I show the weight and volume percent of carbon, LAGP , and solid PTFE as they were formulated. The batch containing LAGP , carbon, and liquid PTFE was mixed and milled into slurry. A small fraction of the slurry was spread onto the nickel mesh or foam, and was subsequently dried and sintered at 300°C in an argon atmosphere to obtain a working cathode. The working cathode contained about 0.01–0.10 g of the active materials ?carbon, LAGP , and binder? on the nickel mesh or foam. Table I also shows the weight of the active materials in the cathode. The carbon of the cathode formulation was a mixture of PW A activated carbon ?60 wt %? and Ketjen black ?40 wt %?. The components of the cell ?i.e., lithium anode, membrane laminate, cathode, and current collectors? were contained in a commercially available cell casing with an O-ring and spacer. The cathode side of the cell casing was drilled with 46 holes, and all the cells contained holes of similar diameter and symmetry. The components along the casing, O-ring, and spacer were pressed to seal using a Hohsen cell maker ?Hohsen Corporation, Osaka, Japan? into a working cell. These cells were discharged and charged under carefully controlled oxygen atmosphere. In all cases the cell area was 2.00 cm2. The assembled cells were electrochemically characterized using a Solartron instrument ?model 1260 with an electrochemical interface; Solartron, Houston, TX?.

OCV and cell reaction.— The open-circuit voltage ?OCV? of the cell was measured as a function of three parameters: state of charge/ discharge, oxygen pressure on cathode, and temperature. In an oxygen atmosphere, the OCV can vary from 2.6 to 3.6 V , depending upon the state of charge/discharge. After discharge, the OCV tends to increase from 2.6 V to an equilibrium OCV of about 3.1 V . The charged state of the cell yields an OCV around 3.6 V , which has a tendency to decrease and approach an equilibrium OCV of 3.1 V . These observations, along with additional details, have been reported in a recent paper.8 The electrochemical reaction of the cell was also characterized gravimetrically. A Li–O2 cell was discharged at 75°C with a current of 0.2 mA down to 1.0 V . The measured discharge capacity and weight gain of the cell were 14.34 mAh and 16.00 mg, respectively. The experimental weight gain is higher than the theoretical weight gain; 12.573 mg if lithium peroxide ?Li2O2? is assumed to be the discharge reaction product. The difference between the experimental and theoretical values may be attributed to the formation of lithium superoxide ?LiO2? along with Li2O2. The oxygen partial pressure dependence of the OCV of a charged Li–O2 cell is shown in Fig. 3. A linear relationship between the OCV and ln pO2 is obtained, implying the Nerstian behavior as expressed by Eq. 1 E = E0 + RT nF ln pO2 ?1? where E is the measured cell voltage, E0 is the standard state cell potential, R is the gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, n is the number of electrons per mole of reactant, and F is Faraday’s constant ?96,485 C/mol?. The value of n from Fig. 3 was calculated to be 1.3, a noninteger number also suggesting that Li2O2 and LiO2are formed as the products of the cell reaction. The aforementioned investigations led us to conclude that the cell reactions proceed according to Reactions 2 and 3Li + O2 ? LiO2 ?2? 2Li + O2 ? Li2O2 ?3? An occurrence of these reactions has also been reported by Abraham et al.11 in a lithium–oxygen system with organic electrolytes. Cell discharge.— Figure 4 shows the capacities of the Li–O2cells with cathode formulation no. 1, 2, and 4 corresponding to 0, 42.77, and 77.06 wt % LAGP , respectively, with a discharge current of 0.2 mA at 75°C. The capacity of the cell increases with increasing concentration of LAGP . The highest discharge capacity is associated with a cathode formulation that contained 77.06 wt % LAGP . The capacity is reduced to about one-third when the LAGP concentration is 42.77 wt %. The processing parameters ?milling, casting, drying, and sintering? of the three cathodes were kept constant to achieve similar cathode morphology and porosity. The discharge curve of the cathode containing 77.06 wt % LAGP also shows a discharge at a higher voltage ?2.75 V? up to about 6 mAh of its capacity. A subsequent discharge is followed by a step and a lower voltage. The capacities of the cathode formulations corresponding to 64.17, 77.06, and 81.10 wt % LAGP ?3, 4, and 5 cathode formulations? at 75°C with a discharge current of 1 mA are shown in Fig. 5. The discharge curves show that the concentration of LAGP has a major influence on the capacity. The highest capacity is obtained from a cathode formulation that contains 81.10 wt % LAGP. A similar trend was reported in Fig. 4, although at a lower discharge current ?0.2 mA?. The capacities of these cells strongly depend upon the discharge current: The higher the discharge current, the lower the capacity. The capacities of the 3, 4, and 5 cathode formulations at 85°C and 1 mA discharge current are shown in Fig. 6A. The capacities of the cells slightly increased with the increase in temperature from 75°C ?Fig. 5? to 85°C. The capacity declined after the discharge current was increased from 1 mA ?Fig. 6A? t o 2 m A a t 8 5 ° C , a s shown in Fig. 6B. The capacity decline was most severe for 64.17 wt % LAGP , which decreased from 0.35 to 0.15 mAh. The capacities of cathode formulations 1–4 were measured at 75°C with a discharge current of 0.2 mA. The cell and cathode capacities are shown in Table I. A cathode with only carbon ?no. 1? yields a very small capacity because the electrochemical reaction sites are only limited to the membrane–cathode interfacial region. The cathode capacity shows major enhancements as the LAGP concentration is increased. No attempt was made to measure the capacity of cell no. 5 with a discharge current of 0.2 mA at 75°C. A plot of cathode capacity ?mAh/g? vs LAGP concentration ?in wt %? is shown in Fig. 7. The capacity is increased exponentially as the LAGP concentration approaches 100 wt %. The cathodes must use an electronic conductor to transport electrons and facilitate the electrochemical reaction. This is provided by the carbon in the cathode formulations. The concentration of carbon in cathode formulations 4 and 5 are 8.56 and 4.27 wt %, respectively. However, volumetrically the carbon concentrations are quite high ?50.40 and 33.33%?. The volumetric concentrations of carbon in cathode formulations 4 and 5 are more than adequate to allow percolation and transport of electrons to the electrochemical reaction sites. A capacity of 312 mAh/g for cathode formulation no. 4 is lower by almost a factor of 20 as compared to a recently reported value of 5813 mAh/g for carbon.12 However, the present paper reports the cathode capacity of a solid-state cell, whereas the high capacity cathode ?5813 mAh/g? was formulated using a liquid electrolyte. Furthermore, no attempt was made to optimize the cathode capacity by altering the morphology of active materials and the processing of the cathode in this investigation. The effect of discharge current on voltage and capacity for the cathode formulation ?no. 5? containing 81.10 wt % LAGP is shown formulation allowed discharge of the cell at 10 mA. None of the other cathode formulations could be discharged above 5 mA for a significant period ?a few seconds?. The experimental data presented in Fig. 4-8 indicate a relationship between the electrical performance ?rate capability and capacity? and LAGP concentration in the cathodes of the Li–O2 cells. In general, as the LAGP concentration is increased, both the capacity and the rate capability increase. The capacity ?coulomb? is the base quantity, whereas the rate capability ?coulomb per second? is the derivative of the capacity. The roles of LAGP in the cathode are to enhance both of these electrochemical parameters. Physically, the enhanced capacity is explained on the basis of the formation of a larger concentration of the discharge products in the cathode: the higher the concentration of the discharge products, the greater the capacity. The higher concentration of the discharge products may have resulted from the formation of a larger number of triple points or nucleating sites originating from the LAGP surfaces. The rate capability of the cell is believed to result from an enhancement of cathodic reactions facilitated by the LAGP . The discharge current, or the flow of electrons through the external circuit, is primarily determined by the anodic and cathodic reaction kinetics. In addition, the cathodic reaction kinetics involves the flow of electrons ?externally? and ions ?internally?. In this investigation, cathode formulations were modified by varying the ratio of carbon and LAGP. Increasing LAGP concentration increases the rate capability and capacity. The increase in the rate capability is proposed to be related to the reduction of oxygen as mediated by the LAGP because the anodic kinetics remains similar for all the cells. Furthermore, the roles of LAGP appear to be similar to the nonaqueous electrolytes in lithium–oxygen cells investigated by Read,13 who reported that the electrolyte formulation had a major influence on discharge capacity and rate capability. Read13 also observed a correlation between oxygen solubility in the electrolyte and discharge capacity. The cathode formulations of Table I contained carbon, which is a mixture of PW A activated carbon ?60 wt %? and Ketjen black ?40 wt %?. Activated carbons do not bind well with certain chemicals, such as strong acids, bases, and most inorganics ?lithium, sodium, etc.?. The binding of a species on a carbon surface generally occurs by van der Waals forces. Lithium ions are acidic species, and therefore, their bonding with carbon is expected to be weak. To carry out the cathode reaction, Li+ ions, O2, and electrons must meet at a common point ?triple point?. For this to occur, a moderate strength bonding of Li+ ion with a cathode component is essential and is provided by LAGP rather than carbon. Although not drawn to scale, the structure of LAGP as illustrated in Fig. 1 shows available sites for the storage of oxygen molecules. Oxygen is a diatomic molecule, and therefore, it is cylindrical rather than spherical. The diameter of the cylindrical oxygen molecule is in the range of 2.30–3.00 Å. The tunnel containing A1 sites is greater than 3.00 Å in diameter. Also, the cavity in the vicinity of adjoining Ge and P polyhedra can accommodate oxygen molecules. The interaction of oxygen molecules with LAGP and the formation of Li2O2are illustrated by Reactions 4-6 2LAGP–Li+ + O2 → 2LAGP–Li+:O ?4? 2LAGP–Li+: O + 2 e− → 2LAGP–Li+ + 2 O− ?5? 2Li+ + 2 O− → Li2O2 ?6? Similar reactions involving LiO2 as the reaction product are also feasible. The adsorption and bonding of O2 molecules onto the LAGP surface is illustrated by Reaction 4. An intermediate strength bond of the LAGP–Li+:O is desirable. If the LAGP–Li+:O bond is too weak, then it is difficult for oxygen to remain in contact with the LAGP for the subsequent Reaction 5 to occur. The adsorbed oxygen is reduced by electrons ?provided by carbon? to form peroxide ions. In this case, if the LAGP–Li+:O bond is too strong, it would be difficult to liberate peroxide ions ?2O−? to carry out Reaction 6. Therefore, an optimal compromise is an intermediate strength bonding of oxygen in the LAGP–Li+:O complex. The final reaction, Reaction 6, involves lithium and peroxide ions to form Li2O2. Reactions 4-6 illustrate that the diffusion of oxygen and consumption of electrons ?reduction? at the cathode must be facilitated to enhance the discharge current. Either of the two can serve as a limiting factor for the discharge current. The limiting discharge current J is related to the diffusion flux Jdiff by Eq. 7 J = nFJdiff ?7? where n is the number of electrons per mole of reactant and F is Faraday’s constant ?96,485 C/mol?. Equation 7 suggests that both the capacity and the rate capability are related to the diffusion of oxygen molecules within the cathode of Li–O2 cells characterized in this investigation. If this is the case, the oxygen flux as calculated by Eq. 7 decreases by an order of magnitude as the discharge current increases from 1 to 10 mA in a Li–O2 cell ?Fig. 8? using the cathode formulation ?no. 5? containing 81.10 wt % LAGP . To further quantify the factors affecting the discharge current, additional experiments were conducted as described in the next paragraph. Figure 9 shows the discharge profiles of a cell containing a cathode with 81.10 wt % LAGP. The cell was discharged with 0.50, 0.75, and 1.00 mA. During the discharge, oxygen partial pressures were increased from 1 to 150 kPa, and then from 150 to 200 kPa for each discharge current. The transition points ?pressure enhancement? are shown by the arrows in Fig. 9. The effect of oxygen pressure enhancement is reflected by a decrease in the ohmic loss ?voltage increase?. The reduction in ohmic loss is most pronounced for 0.50 mA discharge current when the pressure was increased from 1 to 150 kPa. The effect was progressively suppressed as the discharge current increased to 0.75 and 1.00 mA. These observations suggest that the consumption of electrons at the cathode is limited by both oxygen diffusion and ORR. If it were only the oxygen diffusion, the voltage increase with pressure enhancements should have been a lot more at 0.75 and 1.00 mA discharge currents.

When incorporated in the cathode of Li–O2 cells, the LAGP GC belonging to the Nasicon family enhances electrode kinetics and rate capability. The experimental data show that an increasing proportion of LAGP GC powder in the cathode enhanced the cell capacity and rate capability. It is suggested that the role of LAGP is not only to transport lithium ion in the cathode but also to facilitate the electrode reaction. It is suggested that oxygen molecules are adsorbed in the LAGP structure, which is followed by the reduction of the species into superoxide and peroxide molecules. The final step of the discharge reaction is the interaction of the superoxide and peroxide species with lithium ions forming respective discharge products. It is believed that the role of LAGP is critical to facilitate oxygen molecule adsorption and subsequent reduction. Carbon in the cathode allows transport of electrons in the vicinity of adsorbed molecules to facilitate reduction of oxygen molecules. This paper provides experimental data demonstrating that LAGP can be used for dual purposes, such as a medium for lithium transport and as a facilitator of electrode kinetics to enhance rate capability.

The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the University of Dayton Research Institute.