To improve the thermal stability of lithium- and sodium-ion batteries, the room-temperature molten salts LiBF4/1-ethyl-3-methyl imidazolium tetrafluoroborate ?EMIBF4? and NaBF4/EMIBF4 were used as ionic liquid ?IL? electrolytes instead of flammable carbonate-type organic electrolyte solvents. To avoid cathodic decomposition of the IL electrolytes, a symmetric cell configuration with Na Superionic CONductor ?NASICON?-type A3V2?PO4?3 ?w h e r e A i s L i o r N a? as both cathode and anode was tried in a coin-type cell ?type 2320?. As a result, both the polyanionic-based Li3V2?PO4?3 ?LVP? as well as Na3V2?PO4?3 ?NVP? symmetric cells using organic electrolytes were found to operate as secondary batteries and exhibited satisfactory electrochemical performances. The substitution of the organic electrolytes by the appropriate IL electrolytes in both cases resulted in the reduction in the first discharge capacities. However, the IL-based cells revealed better cyclability and a more stable behavior at elevated temperatures. The obtained electrochemical behavior of the symmetric cells was confirmed by the complex impedance measurements at 25 and 80°C. In addition, the thermal stability of LVP and NVP with the IL electrolytes was also examined.

Organic solvents are widely used in commercial batteries as electrolytes with high electrical conductivity and high oxidation potential. Nevertheless, the reactivity and volatility of organic electrolytes are disadvantageous to its commercial applications. One of the most promising ways to improve the safety of batteries is to substitute commonly used organic solvents with nonflammable ionic liquids ?ILs?, so-called room-temperature molten salts. The use of ILs in lithium batteries began more than two decades ago.1 ILs offer many advantages when used as electrolytes in electrochemical devices: ?i? their nonvolatility makes for easier handling and prevents the electrolyte from drying; ?ii? their nonflammability improves the safety of devices; ?iii? their wide electrochemical window raises power and energy densities; and ?iv? their wide liquidphase temperature range enables the operation of devices in harsh environments. The various practical applications of ILs have been suggested after the discovery of a moisture-stable compound such as 1-ethyl-3-methyl imidazolium tetrafluoroborate ?EMIBF4?.2 The application of EMIBF4 as an electrolyte for lithium secondary batteries has been reported by several authors.3-6 EMIBF4 was considered a versatile electrolyte candidate for lithium batteries due to its desirable properties such as high ionic conductivity, negligible vapor pressure at elevated temperatures, and nonflammability.2,7-10 However, its reduction potential is too high for this purpose; viz., the cathodic limit of EMIBF4 is about ?3 . 0 V v s A g+/Ag, assigned probably to the reduction of the EMI+ cation. Therefore, in an EMIBF4-based electrolyte, the utilization of metallic Li ?Eo = −3.045 V? as a counter electrode is very restricted. There are three primary ways to use ILs to avoid the probable cathodic reduction. First, more stable cations such as tetraalkylammonium,11,12 pyrrolidinium,13 and piperidinium14 can be used. The second way is to use additives that can form a solid electrolyte interface ?SEI? film on the lithium anode and prevent the cathodic reduction physically or kinetically.15,16 The last way is to employ other anode active materials possessing a higher reduction potential than metallic Li3. For example, lithiated metal oxide, Li4Ti5O12,3 which provides an intercalation/extraction potential of around 1.5 V vs Li+/Li ??1.5 V vs Ag+/Ag?, can be used for this purpose. Another known approach for improving the cathodic stability of ILs is to employ ?-LiAl as an anode.4 So, one of the important problems to be solved is the search for alternative anode materials for IL-based batteries. Na Superionic CONductor ?NASICON?-type phosphates such as AyM2?PO4?3 ?A = Li or Na, M = Ti, V , and Fe? are generally known as promising candidates for cathodes in Li- and Na-ion batteries, respectively. AyM2?PO4?3 consists of a three-dimensional ?3D? framework of PO4 tetrahedra, sharing corners with MO6 octahedra, and allows us to host up to four monovalent cations A+ per formula unit. Compared to lithium metal oxides, the phosphate cathodes display remarkable electrochemical and thermal stability due to the strong phosphate–metal bonds, which greatly diminish the likelihood of oxygen liberation from the structure.17,18 Thereupon, lithium and sodium vanadium phosphates, A3V2?PO4?3 ?A = L i o r Na?, have recently attracted great interest as potential cathode materials. Both Li3V2?PO4?3 ?LVP? and Na3V2?PO4?3 ?NVP? can be crystallized in two modifications of rhombohedral NASICON and monoclinic ?-Fe2?SO4?3 types. The rhombohedral NVP phase can be prepared by a direct solid-state reaction. However, the rhombohedral LVP phase is not directly accessible from the elements and can be formed only by ion exchange from the more thermodynamically stable sodium analog, NVP .19,20 Moreover, only two lithium ions can be removed from the rhombohedral LVP phase at 3.77 V , and only 1.3 can be reinserted.20 Therefore, the monoclinic LVP phase is of more interest as a cathode because it can be obtained by a solid-state method,21 and all three lithium ions can be readily removed and reversibly intercalated at a high rate.17,22 Besides, the density of the rhombohedral phase is slightly less than that of the monoclinic one; it implies less mobility of the cations in the pristine phase.23 Hence, it should be expected that LVP , owing to the monoclinic phase, displays better electrochemical properties22 than the rhombohedral one. As was recently shown, the monoclinic LVP showed a cathode performance with two plateaus at around 3.8 and 1.75 V vs Li+/Li associated with the V4+/V3+ and V3+/V2+ redox couples, respectively.22,24 Similarly, the rhombohedral NVP possesses two redox electric potentials ?3.4 and 1.6 V vs Na+/Na? based on the same redox couples.25 Such properties allow using LVP and NVP not only as cathodes but also as anodes. Because the EMIBF4 IL is electrochemically stable within the operating voltage range of 1.5– 3.0 V vs Ag+/Ag,7 both the redox potentials of LVP ?0.8 and ?1.25 V v s A g+/Ag? and NVP ?0.7 and ?1 . 1 V v s A g+/Ag? are inside this electrochemical window. Therefore, the symmetric cell construction with the NASICON cathode and anode must be of interest because such a composition of the batteries admits using a highly safe EMIBF4-based electrolyte, which helps to avoid cathodic decomposition problems during the charge/discharge cycling. The key cell reactions in the considered symmetric cells can be described as follows ?Anode? A3V2 3+?PO4?3 + xA+ + xe− ? A3+xV2−x 3+ Vx 2+?PO4?3 ?1? ?Cathode? A3V2 3+?PO4?3 ? A3−xV2−x 3+ Vx 4+?PO4?3 + xA+ + xe− ?2? ?Overall cell reaction? A3V2 3+?PO4?3 ? A3+xV2−x 3+ Vx 2+?PO4?3 + A3−xV2−x 3+ Vx 4+?PO4?3 ?3? Thus, in the present study, we report on the fabrication of symmetric LVP?LVP and NVP?NVP cells with the IL-based electrolyte. Despite the fact that expected operating potentials of both symmetric systems are relatively low and could provide only moderate energy density, the application of the symmetric batteries could definitely involve several advantages, such as improved safety, long preserve lifetime, ability of charging in either direction, and lower cost because of using the same active material for the cathode and the anode. Additionally, the performances of symmetric LVP and NVP batteries using the safe ?Li or Na?BF4/EMIBF4 ?a chlorideion-free room-temperature molten salt? IL electrolytes were examined in comparison with the characteristics of cells containing the commonly used flammable organic mixtures of ethylene carbonate ?EC? and 1,2-dimethoxycarbonate ?DMC? or propylene carbonate ?PC?.

LVP and NVP electrode materials were prepared by sintering the appropriate amounts of Li2CO3 ?99.0%, Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd.?, V2O3 ?99.0%, Rare Metallic Co., Ltd.?, and NH4H2PO4 ?99.0%, Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd.? or NaH2PO4 ?99.0%, Kanto Chemical Co., Inc.? and V2O3 ?99.0%, Rare Metallic Co., Ltd.?. After mixing the parent compounds at stoichiometric ratios, the mixture was put in an alumina crucible and annealed at 400°C for 2 h, 850°C for 50 h, and 930°C for 12 h in air. NVP was heated under Ar/H2 ?5 vol %? flow ?with a flow rate of 200 mL/min? at 900°C for 40 h. The crystal structures of the obtained compounds were identified by X-ray powder diffraction ?Rigaku RINT2100HLR/PC? with Cu K? radiation ?? = 1.54056 Å? in the 2? range of 10–80° with a scan speed of 0.2° s−1. Fabrication of the LVP and NVP symmetric cells.— Electrochemical Li+ ?or Na+? intercalation and deintercalation were carried out by using coin-type cells ?type 2320 made from stainless steel SUS316?. The symmetric coin cells were assembled using LVP or NVP as both anode and cathode active materials. To separate the anodic and cathodic compartments, a polypropylene separator ?Celgard 3501? was used. The cathode, as well as the anode, was fabricated by mixing the active powder ?LVP or NVP? with acetylene black ?AB? and a poly?tetrafluoroethylene? ?PTFE? binder in a weight ratio of 70:25:5. The mixtures were rolled into a sheet and punched into pellets of about 10 mm in diameter. The pellets were further dried in an oven at 110°C for 12 h in vacuum. The electrolytes used for fabricating the LVP ? LVP cells were 1 M LiPF6 in EC + DMC ?1:1? ?volume ratio? and 1 M LiBF4 in EMIBF4. NaClO4 ?1 M? in PC and 0.4 M NaBF4 in EMIBF4 electrolytes were applied for the construction of the NVP ? NVP cells. The fabrication of coin-type cells was carried out in a glove box filled with Ar ?moisture and O2 contents are less than 1 ppm?. Characterization of the LVP and NVP symmetric cells.— Electrochemical measurements of the fabricated LVP and NVP symmetric cells were galvanostatically made with a charge/discharge cycler ?BTS2400W, Nagano Electric Co., Japan?. In the cycle test of the symmetric cells, a constant current charge followed by a constant voltage charge ?CCCV? mode was employed. The discharge current was changed from 0.1 to 5 mA cm−2. In addition, a charge/ discharge cycle test was performed at different operating tempera tures of 25, 80 95, 100, and 110°C. To minimize the kinetic effects on charge and discharge, the quasi-open-circuit voltage ?QOCV? measurements were carried out by using intermittent charging/ discharging of LVP ? 1 M LiPF6/EC + DMC ? Li and NVP ? 1 M NaClO4/PC ? Na cells at room temperature. To measure the QOCV profiles, we applied an intermittent current density of 0.2 mA cm−2 for 19 min in the LVP cell and for 30 min in the NVP cell, corresponding to 0.05 mol of the intercalated/extracted Li ?or Na? per mole of active cathode material, followed by the same relaxation times of 19 and 30 min for the LVP and NVP materials, respectively. Charging was continued until the cell voltage reached 3.0 V . Li+- and Na+-ion transfer at the interface between the electrode and the electrolyte was studied by ac impedance spectroscopy using an impedance analyzer ?Autolab/FRA?. The complex impedance measurements were performed in the frequency range of 0.1–10 MHz at various temperatures. Thermogravimetry ?TG? and differential scanning calorimetry ?DSC? were performed by a TG/DSC differential scanning calorimeter ?Rigaku Thermo plus TG8110, Rigaku, Japan?. Each sample for the TG–DSC measurement was packed in a stainless steel pan, which was then crimp-sealed in a glove box filled with Ar. In this case, no leakage was confirmed by monitoring TG data simultaneously measured with the DSC measurements. All of the DSC experiments were carried out from 25 to 500°C at a heating rate of 3 K min−1.

X-ray diffraction patterns of the LVP and NVP powders prepared by the conventional solid-state reaction are shown in Fig. 1a and b. X-ray patterns for LVP ?Fig. 1a? showed that the synthesized material is composed of a single phase with an ordered NASICON-type structure corresponding to the monoclinic crystallographic symmetry, which is isostructural with the monoclinic Li3Fe2?PO4?3 phase ?P21/n, a = 12.017?1? Å, b = 8.571?1? Å, c = 8.616?1? Å, ? = 90.52?1?°, V = 887?1? Å3; ICDD no. 43-526?. Their crystal lattices slightly differ due to the ionic radii of iron and vanadium ?rFe 3+ = 0.645 Å, rv 3+ = 0.640 Å?.26 Clearly, no unknown diffraction peaks were detected. The single phase with a rhombohedral NASICON structure of the synthesized NVP material was also confirmed by X-ray diffraction, as shown in Fig. 1b. Lithium and sodium extraction/insertion properties of the NASICON-type phosphates.— The QOCV measurements were performed to determine the potentials of the phase transitions and the overvoltages at different states of charge. Figure 2 shows the QOCV curves for ?a? LVP ? 1 M LiPF6/EC + DMC ? Li and ?b? NVP ? 1 M NaClO4/PC ? Na cells as a function of lithium or sodium content x ?top? and capacity ?bottom? at room temperature. The extraction ?charge? of lithium from LVP might have proceeded in the range of x f r o m 3 t o 1 i n L ixV2?PO4?3 with two-step twophase reactions at ?4.1 and ?3.7 V ?Fig. 2a?. Both plateaus correspond to a lithium extraction associated with the V4+/V3+ redox couple. It is consistent with the result of our previous paper24 for the monoclinic LVP . The monoclinic LVP has three crystallographic independent lithium positions of four-coordinated Li?1?, fivecoordinated Li?2?, and Li?3?.19,27 The first lithium atom extracted at 3.7 V is associated with the Li?3? position and can be considered the most weakly bound in the structure. This extraction results in a slight reorganization of the lattice and a shift in the location of the lithium atom at the Li?2? position to give it a coordination environment similar to that of Li?1?, whereas the Li?1? atom remains essentially fixed in that position. These changes in the site energies and particular oxidation of the cations ?V3+? give rise to the free-energy difference of the phases and hence to the observed voltage jump. Because the second lithium atom to be extracted from the Li?1? position is more stable ?lower energy? than the first one in the Li?3? position, the removal of the second lithium atom consumes higher energy and is thus observed at a higher voltage of 4.1 V ?vs Li+/Li?.27 Thus, upon charging, the LVP cathode exhibited a reversible capacity of about 120 mAh g−1 and a coulombic efficiency of 92%. Upon discharging, LVP showed two voltage plateaus around 2.2 and 1.8 V ?vs Li+/Li? as well, corresponding to the insertion of 2 mol of lithium. However, the reversible capacity of the LVP anode is close to 58 mAh g−1 and correspond to a coulombic efficiency of 44%. Thereby, the discharge region associated with the V3+/V2+ redox reaction is almost half of the charged one ?Fig. 2a?. Compared with the charging of the LVP cell, the QOCV profile of the NVP cell ?Fig. 2b? has only one clear plateau at about 3.4 V , which corresponds to the extraction of almost 1.7 atom of sodium and is associated with the V4+/V3+ redox reaction. It agrees well with the report of Boilot et al.28 No fundamental change in the host structure occurred as the intercalation proceeded. The 3D framework was maintained; the energetically soft conditions required during the intercalation process did not allow for any modification of the skeleton. Only the metal transition valences and the Na+ distribution in the different cationic sites could be modified. The NASICON structure can be regarded as a rigid host framework not only for lithium but also for sodium. Further deintercalation of sodium as well as lithium ions from the NVP or LVP frameworks led to drastic voltage jumps on the QOCV curves. This probably indicates the start of the extraction of the third alkali atom associated with the V5+/V4+ redox couple. As reported by Saidi et al.,17 the removal of the last alkali atom from the NASICON 3D framework is associated with a significant overvoltage, suggesting the consumption of higher energies.

Upon discharging, NVP showed two voltage plateaus at around 1.6 and 1.0 V ?vs Na+/Na?, which correspond to the insertion of 2 mol of sodium. However, on the reverse trace, the voltage plateau associated with the V3+/V2+ redox couple was fuzzy ?Fig. 2b? and close to 36 mAh g−1, which corresponds to ?0.6 mol sodium that is about one-third of the original charge capacity ??100 mAh g−1?. The coulombic efficiencies of these charge and discharge regions were about 85 and 31%, respectively. Based on the obtained QOCV results, the optimal charge cutoff voltage was established at about 2.5 V for LVP and 1.85 V for NVP symmetric cells. Additionally, to adjust the capacity of the reduction–oxidation reaction of the studied symmetric cells, optimal quantitative ratios of cathode:anode active materials were estimated as 1:2 for LVP and 1:3 for NVP cells. The estimation was based on the correlation of the charge and discharge parts of both the QOCV curves represented in Fig. 2a and b. Capability of LVP and NVP symmetric cells.— Figure 3 shows the comparisons of typical charge/discharge profiles with the CCCV mode at the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 5th, and 10th cycles for ?a? LVP and ?b? NVP symmetric cells with the corresponding organic electrolytes: ?a? 1 M LiPF6/EC + DMC and ?b? 1 M NaClO4/PC. The performance of the above-mentioned organic symmetric cells was investigated at a constant current density of 0.1 mA cm−2 in the voltage range of 0.0–2.5 V vs Li+/Li and 0.0–1.85 V vs Na+/Na at 25°C. Agreeing with the first cycle of the cell with LVP electrodes, the lithium extraction from LVP proceeded up to x = 1.92, which corresponds to a charge capacity of 127 mAh g−1 based on the cathode weight ?Fig. 3a?. Moreover, the symmetric cell with LVP electrodes showed two well-defined plateaus at around 1.9 and 2.2 V vs Li+/Li upon charging and 1.0 and 2.15 V vs Li+/Li upon discharging. On the other hand, the sodium extraction from NVP ?Fig. 3b? was limited at x = 1.78, corresponding to a charge capacity of 104 mAh g−1. The CCCV curves of the NVP symmetric cell with the organic electrolyte showed only one voltage plateau at 1.8 V vs Na+/Na upon charging and 1.65 V vs Na+/Na upon discharging. Although the LVP and NVP symmetric cells with organic electrolytes worked as secondary batteries, they correspondingly exhibited large irreversible capacities of about 30 and 26 mAh g−1 upon the first cycle of charge/discharge. The large irreversible capacities for the first cycle correspond to the hysteresis of the charge/ discharge cycle of LVP and NVP ?Fig. 2?. Consequently, the reversible capacity of these LVP and NVP cells conforms to coulombic efficiencies of 77 and 75%, respectively. However, the reversibility of both cells was found to be improved after the second cycle. Finally, after the 10th cycle, the reversibility of redox reactions in the LVP and NVP symmetric cells increased up to 91 and 100%, respectively. The mechanism of capacity fading of such two-electrode polyanionic cells seems to be very complicated, and comprehensive investigations are required for its precise explanation. Admittedly, such an irreversible cell capacity loss was mainly attributed to electrolyte decomposition, resulting in the formation of a passivation film, so-called SEI, on the surface of the anode material after the first cycle of charging.29-31 Moreover, the observed irreversible capacity in these cells might also be partially caused by the lower coulombic efficiency of the LVP and NVP anodes ?Fig. 2?. The charge/discharge curves of the LVP and NVP symmetric cells using the IL-based electrolytes 1 M LiBF4/EMIBF4 and 0.4 M NaBF4/EMIBF4 are shown in Fig. 4. Both symmetric cells were charged and discharged by the same charge/discharge conditions in Fig. 3. At the first cycle, the LVP symmetric cell was charged up to x = 1.7 in LixV2?PO4?3, corresponding to a charge capacity of 113 mAh g−1. A discharge capacity of about 66 mAh g−1 was obtained from the first cycle ?Fig. 4a?. The charge and discharge capacities of the NVP symmetric cell ?Fig. 4b? obtained from the first cycle were found to be 102 and 64 mAh g−1, respectively. By analogy with the aforementioned results for the LVP and NVP symmetric cells using organic electrolytes, in the present case, the LVP and NVP cells with the IL-based electrolytes also worked as secondary batteries, revealing large irreversible capacities of about 47 and 38 mAh g−1 and coulombic efficiencies of about 58 and 63%, respectively, during the first cycle of charge/discharge. In general, a comparison of performances for the NVP symmetric cells using different types of electrolytes with various counterion and salt concentrations is somewhat difficult; nevertheless, such qualitative comparisons are first needed to check the operation of these symmetrical cells. The substitution of the Li-ion organic electrolyte by the appropriate IL-based electrolyte resulted in the reduction in discharge capacity in the LVP symmetric cell. It seems to be attributed to the higher viscosity of the LiBF4/EMIBF4 electrolyte at room temperature than to that of the LiPF6/EC + DMC one because the electrode capability extremely depends on the physicochemical properties of the electrode/electrolyte interface and conductivity of the electrolyte. In the NVP cell, the substitution of an organic Na+-ion electrolyte with an IL-based one also led to the decrease in the first discharge capacity. Complex impedance of LVP symmetric cells.— We selected the LVP ? LVP cells to discuss the possible mechanism of capacity fading. The complex impedance measurements were performed to compare interfacial resistances of the LVP electrode in the organic- and IL-based electrolytes. Typical Nyquist plots of the symmetric cells before cycling ?as-assembled? and after five charge/discharge cycles at room temperature are depicted in Fig. 5. It can be seen that each of the plots showed two semicircles and an inclined line on a complex plane. The high frequency limit refers to the bulk electrolyte resistance ?Rb?. The first semicircle ?R1? at the high frequency region can be assigned to the impedance related to the presence of the SEI film at the electrode/electrolyte interface32 or associated with the electric contact resistance in the electrode.33,34 The second semicircle ?R2? at the middle frequency region is derived from the charge-transfer process at the electrode/electrolyte interface. The straight line in the low frequency region is attributed to Warburg diffusion associated with the finite lithium motion in the electroactive material lattice. For the as-assembled LVP cells ?Fig. 5, ?i??, both Rb and R1 are larger for the IL-based cell than those for the organic-based cell. The larger value of Rb confirms the lower conductivity of the IL-based electrolyte. The observed larger R1 for the IL-based cell can be assigned to the poor wettability of LVP grains covered with a PTFE binder by the IL-based electrolyte with high viscosity. However, the R1 for the IL-based cell was reduced by cycling ?Fig. 5, ?iii??. O n t h e other hand, the impedance data of the organic-based LVP cell demonstrated the opposite behavior ?distinct increase in total impedance after five cycles? ?Fig. 5, ?ii??. This may be due to the formation of a poor conducting SEI film on the electrode surface and partial loss of electroactivity under cycling. Rate capability of LVP and NVP symmetric cells.— Figure 6 shows the rate capabilities of the ?a? LVP and ?b? NVP symmetric cells at 25 and 80°C. It is clearly seen that the organic-based LVP cell exhibited better rate performance than the lithium IL-based cell at room temperature ?Fig. 6a?. Particularly, a gradual decrease in the specific capacity of the LVP organic cell was observed with an increase in discharge current densities. On the contrary, the capacity of the LVP symmetric cell with the IL-based electrolyte rapidly decreased when the current density was increased up to 1.0 mA cm−2. After that, the capacity of the cell remained almost unchangeable. These results also indicate poor rate capability of the IL-based LVP cell against the cell using the organic electrolyte. Such a behavior of the rate capability agrees well with the above-discussed results of complex impedance. Specifically, the sharp reduction in the capacity at higher current densities ?Fig. 6a? is consequent to a high total internal resistance of the IL-based LVP cell, particularly at the beginning of cycling ?Fig. 5, ?i??. Contrary to that, the rate capability of both NVP symmetric cells does not differ so drastically ?Fig. 6b?. Further, despite the fact that the density of the rhombohedral phase is slightly less than that of the monoclinic one, the ion mobility within the latter phase is relatively facile.21,23 Hence, initially, the monoclinic LVP phase showed better electrochemical properties22 than the rhombohedral NVP . Moreover, the ionic conductivity of the 1 M LiPF6/EC + DMC electrolyte is significantly higher than that of the 1 M NaClO4/PC electrolyte. For these reasons, the rate capability of the NVP symmetric cell was poorer than that of the LVP symmetric cell using the organic electrolytes. The rate performances of the IL-based NVP and LVP symmetric cells were almost similar. However, the rate capabilities of these IL-based cells can be improved by increasing the operating temperature, as shown in Fig. 6. Thermal performance of the LVP and NVP symmetric cells.— The cycle fading profiles of the LVP and NVP symmetric cells with the organic and IL-based electrolytes were observed at different operating temperatures of 25, 80, 95, 100, and 110°C ?not shown here? at a constant current density of 0.1 mA cm−2. Based on these profiles, the thermal dependences of the second discharge capacity for the LVP and NVP symmetric cells are summarized in Fig. 7a and b. The specific capacity of the LVP symmetric cell using the IL-based electrolyte at high operating temperatures ?80–110°C? was drastically enhanced ?Fig. 7a?. The important point is that the temperature dependences of the ionic conductivity and viscosity of the IL-based electrolyte are expressed by the V ogel–Tammann–Fulcher ?V? equations3,35 ? = ?0T−1/2 exp?B/?T − T0?? ?4? ? = ?0T1/2 exp?B/?T − T0?? ?5? where ? and ? are the conductivity and viscosity, respectively, and B, T0, ?0, and ?0 are empirically determined constants. It means that the viscosity of EMIBF4 exponentially decrease whereas its ionic conductivity increase with the operating temperature. By contrast, the discharge capacity of the LVP symmetric cell using the organic electrolyte ?LiPF6/EC + DMC? decreased as the operating temperature increased up to 80°C probably due to the evaporation of the organic solvent ?EC + DMC?, whereas the IL ?EMIBF4? is stable even up to 391°C.3 Moreover, the measurements of impedance for both LVP cells at 25 and 80°C ?Fig. 8? confirmed that the conduc tivity of the IL-based LVP cell is enhanced when the operating temperature increases ?Fig. 8, ?ii??. The conductivity of the organicbased LVP cell also increased but was unnoticeable ?Fig. 8, ?i??. A s a result, at 80°C, the conductivity of the IL-based electrolyte was found to be higher than that of the organic one. On the other hand, the thermal performances of both NVP symmetric cells did not significantly differ ?Fig. 7b?. The discharge capacity of the organic-based NVP cell remained relatively stable because the boiling point of the organic solvent PC used in the sodium cell is higher than that of DMC and EC ?Table I?. The discharge capacity of the IL-based NVP cell slightly increased with the operating temperature. Because the viscosity of the less-concentrated IL-based Na+-ion electrolyte is low, the effect of the operating temperature on the conductivity of the IL-based NVP cell was not so significant, as in the IL-based LVP cell. Thermal stability of the LVP and NVP materials in the appropriate electrolytes.— The thermal evolution of the electrode/electrolyte mixtures was also examined using thermal analysis ?TG/DSC? from room temperature up to 500°C in Ar. The TG/DSC measurements were done after the first charge of the LVP and NVP symmetric cells. Figure 9 shows the DSC curves of ?a? the 1 M LiPF6/EC + DMC electrolyte and the lithium-containing cathode ?75% LVP , 25% AB, 5% PTFE? with the organic electrolyte and the IL electrolyte 1 M LiBF4/EMIBF4 and ?b? t h e 1 M NaClO4/PC electrolyte and sodium-containing cathode ?75% NVP , 25% AB, 5% PTFE? with the organic electrolyte and the IL electrolyte 0.4 M NaBF4/EMIBF4. The DSC curve of the LVP cathode with the organic electrolyte ?Fig. 9a? showed mild heat generation starting from about 130°C and continuing until a sharp exothermic heat jump appeared at 290°C. This exothermic heat jump seems to be caused by the decomposition of the organic solvent EC + DMC due to the low boiling point of these components ?Table I?. This assumption was also confirmed by the DSC measurement of the pure organic electrolyte 1 M LiPF6/EC + DMC. By contrast, the DSC plot of the LVP cathode with the IL electrolyte 1 M LiBF4/EMIBF4 did not show any peak and remained stable up to about 450°C. The DSC plot of the NVP cathode with the organic electrolyte 1 M NaClO4/PC showed a small sharp peak at about 270°C ?Fig. 9b? because of the expected decomposition of the used organic electrolyte. The TG/DSC thermal analysis of the NVP cathode with the IL electrolyte 0.4 M NaBF4/EMIBF4 showed a shift in the exothermic reaction between the NVP cathode material and the electrolyte toward higher operating temperatures greater than 400°C. This confirms the higher thermal stability of the IL electrolyte ?EMIBF4? within a wide temperature range.

Li+- and Na+-ion conducting LVP ? LVP and NVP ? NVP symmetric cells were fabricated and examined, with the aim of using them in operation as secondary batteries. The evaluation of the in sertion properties of the LVP and NVP materials showed that their lithium and sodium extraction/insertion reactions occurred at electrode potentials of 1.8–2.2 and 3.7–4.1 V vs Li+/Li and 1.7 and 3.4 V v s N a+/Na, respectively. Based on the obtained QOCV results, the optimal charge cutoff voltage was established at about 2.5 V for LVP symmetric cells and at 1.85 V for NVP symmetric cells. The fabricated LVP and NVP symmetric cells using well-known organic electrolytes based on EC + DMC and PC were found to work as secondary batteries with coulombic efficiencies of 77 and 75%, respectively, under the fist cycle. To improve the safety, the inflammable electrolytes based on EMIBF4 IL were used instead of highly explosive organic solvents. The substitution of the organic electrolytes by the IL-based ones in both the examined symmetric cells resulted in the decrease in their first discharge capacities and rate capabilities at high current densities. However, the IL-based NVP cells exhibited better cycling performance due to less reactivity of ILs used. Moreover, the performance of the IL-based LVP symmetric cell at elevated temperatures was drastically improved as a consequence of the thermal reduction in viscosity for EMIBF4,whereas the specific capacity of the organic LVP symmetric cell decreased because of the usage of volatile EC + DMC. The discharge capacity of the IL-based NVP cell slightly increased with the operating temperature. Because the viscosity of the lessconcentrated IL-based Na+ ion electrolyte is low, the effect of operating temperature on the conductivity of the IL-based NVP cell was not so significant, as in the IL-based LVP cell. Furthermore, the LVP and NVP electrode materials coupled with IL-based electrolytes were quite stable up to about 450 and 400°C, respectively. Thereby, the application of such LVP and NVP symmetric cells using the safe IL-based electrolytes resulted in the improvement not only of the safety but also of the cycle life of the lithium- and sodium-ion secondary batteries. In addition, we can also expect reduction in the process cost and compensation effect of the volume change in the cathode and anode sides with the symmetric cell configuration.

This research was financially supported by NGK and JST progressive engineering development research programs, Japan.
