Li1.4N1.6M0.4(PO4)3 with M = Al, Ga, N = Ti, Ge were prepared by annealing of the mixtures at 800°C. X-ray diffraction showed the formation of NASICON phase with space group R-3c along with a minor impurity second phase. Rietveld refinement of the X-ray data was performed to identify the structural variation. The compound with N = Ti and M = Al exhibited lattice parameters a = 8.5015 Å and c = 20.820 Å, slightly lower than for the undoped Ti compound (N = M = Ti). Measurements of σionic were carried out on sintered pellets by impedance spectroscopy at 30°C, highest ionic conductivity 2.57 × 10-4 S/cm among the prepared samples was observed when N = Al and M = Ti, two orders of magnitude higher than for the undoped case. Bond valence approach was applied to visualize the migration pathways of Li+ ion and barrier energies were estimated. Obtained Li site energy landscapes indicate the continuous Li transport pathway accessible with activation energy of 0.45eV for undoped Li1Ti2(PO4)3 and 0.42 eV for N = Al and M = Ti doped compound.

Rechargeable all-solid-state lithium (Li)- or Li-ion batteries (AS-LIBs) are attractive power sources for applications, like ‘smart’ credit cards and medical implants. They need a Li-fast ion conductor (FIC) as the solid electrolyte. The high cation mobility and thermal stability of NASICON double phosphates allow us to consider them as potential materials for use in electrochemical devices. LiTi2(PO4)3 with NASICON structure is built of two TiO6 octahedra linked via shared oxygen atoms with three PO4 tetrahedra. It is of great interest to understand their fast ionic transport in the solid state, which is also of technological importance for developing solid electrolytes for advanced lithium batteries. In general, crystalline ionic conductors have a number of advantages in conductivity and stability over glassy or polymer systems, i.e., crystalline copper and silver ionic conductors show extremely high conductivities even at room temperature, but no comparable “superionic” lithium solid electrolytes have been identified so far. Materials design of crystalline ionic conductors are based on certain structural criteria:(i) mobile ions should have a suitable size for conduction pathways in the lattice, (ii) there should be disorder in the mobile ion sublattice, and (iii) highly polarizable mobile ion and counterion sublattices are preferable. “Lithium superionic conductor” LISICON [Li14Zn(GeO4)4] is an example of a material which was designed using the above criteria. Many compounds with the same type of framework have been reported in the literature (see e.g. [1-4]) and a wide range of solid solutions formed by aliovalent substitutions (introducing interstitial lithium ions or vacancies) led to high ionic conductivities at elevated temperatures. The conductivity values at room temperature (≈10-6 S/cm for Li3.6Si0.6P0.4O4, for example) are however still by far lower than those of copper and silver ionic conductors. In order to further enhance the ionic conductivity of these materials, glass ceramics have been explored which for Li2O-Al2O3-GeO2-P2O5 result in Li+ ion conductivities of about 10-4 S/cm at room temperature [5-7]. The high ionic conductivity of such glass ceramics was ascribed to the interface region between glassy and crystalline phases [8]. An alternative approach for the improvement of ionic conductivity has been to replace oxides by sulfides, which have a number of advantages over oxides as counterions in cation conductors according to the above criteria of materials design; i.e., larger ionic radii and more polarizable character of sulfide ions will improve the mobility of the conducting species. This has been noted for a variety of sulfide glasses; where high conductivity values of 10-4 to 10-3 S cm-1 at room temperature could be obtained in the Li2S-SiS2-LiI and Li2S-SiS2-Li3PO4 glass systems [9]. On the other hand, oxides are generally more stable than their sulfide analogues. Generally speaking, crystalline materials should have higher conductivity than the corresponding glasses, if their crystal structures have been well designed for high ionic conduction. For example, the highest ionic conductive solids, Rb4Cu16I7Cl13 and RbAg4I5, have higher ionic conductivity than any copper and silver conducting glasses. However, this is not true for crystalline lithium ionic conductors whose ionic conductivities and electrochemical decomposition potentials are usually lower than glassy materials. Therefore, little effort has been devoted into material developments concerning crystalline lithium ionic conductors during the last decade, while a great improvement on glassy lithium ionic conductors has led to the developmental research on all solid-state lithium battery. In this work we aim at the preparation of Li1.4N1.6M0.4(PO4)3 M= Al, Ga, N= Ti, Ge crystalline compounds and understanding the variation of ionic conductivity using bond valence approach by calculating the migration pathways of Li+ ion.

Li1.4Ti1.6Al0.4(PO4)3, Li1.4Ti1.6Ga0.4(PO4)3, Li1.4Ge1.6Al0.4(PO4)3, polycrystalline electrolytes were prepared using analytical grade Li2CO3, NH4H2PO4, TiO2 (or) GeO2, Al(OH)3 (or) Ga2O3 as starting materials. The starting materials were thoroughly mixed using mechanical grinder for 15 min. The mixtures were heated in a Pt crucible at 800 °C for 24 hours to remove all the volatile products and cooled to room temperature with natural cooling rate. The obtained samples were ground manually to make into to fine powder. The samples were then characterized using X-ray powder diffractometry operated with Cu Kα radiation (PANalytical X’Pert PRO) equipped with a fast linear detector (X’Celerator). XRD data were collected in the 2θ range 10-120° with a nominal scan rate of 160 s/step and a step size of 0.017°. Rietveld refinements of XRD powder patterns are performed with the Generalized Structure Analysis System (GSAS) by Larson and von Dreele [10] along with the graphical user interface EXPGUI[11]. Structure data from published neutron diffraction measurements by M. Alami et al.[12] for LiTi2(PO4)3 was used as the starting point of the refinement. All structures are refined based on the same set of 51 refinable parameters: 12 background variables of a shifted Chebyshev function, 7 profile variables, 2 cell parameters, 25 refinable atomic coordinates, 3 atomic displacement parameters, 1 preferential orientation parameter, and an overall scale factor. The cell parameters and atomic positions of the refined data were used for bond valence (BV) calculations. A brief outlook of the BV approach is given below; for more details, one can refer to our previous publications [13-19].

For ionic conductivity measurements the powders were pressed into pellets of ~ 2 mm thickness. Conductivity measurements at different temperatures were carried out by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (Schlumberger Solartron SI 1260) in the frequency range of 1Hz to 1MHz and temperature range of 300K to 420K. Commercially available silver paint (ion-blocking electrode) was applied on both sides of the glass sample to achieve a controlled contact area for the ionic conductivity determination. At each temperature the sample was kept for 20 minutes for thermal equilibration. The bulk resistance Rb was determined from fitting impedance data to Nyquist plots. The equivalent circuit consists of Rb and CPEb, where CPEb is the constant phase element due to the polarization distribution at the interface between blocking electrodes and sample.

Empirical relationships between bond length R and bond valence s are widely used in crystal chemistry to identify plausible equilibrium sites for an atom in a structure as sites where the BV sum of the atom matches its oxidation state. ⎥⎦ ⎤ ⎢⎣ ⎡ ⎟⎠ ⎞⎜⎝ ⎛ −=− b R Rs X Li 0exp [1] A systematic adjustment of BV parameters b to the bond softness, together with the inclusion of interactions beyond the first coordination shell permits more adequate estimates of non-equilibrium site bond valences. The modeling of pathways for mobile Li+ as regions of low site energy E(Li) (or of low bond valence sum mismatch |ΔV(Li)|) has been demonstrated to be a simple and reliable way of identifying transport pathways in local structure models, provided that the local structure model captures the essential structural features. While bond valences sLi-O = exp[(R0 - RLi-O) / b] and hence the BV sum mismatch |ΔV| are mostly expressed in arbitrary “valence units”, they may – as we have shown recently – [18] also be linked to an absolute energy scale by expressing the bond valence as a Morse-type interaction energy: ( ) ( )relrel s s Ds s sD E 21 202min 2min0 − =⎪⎭ ⎪⎬ ⎫ ⎪⎩ ⎪⎨ ⎧ −−= [2] Here, srel equals s/smin and smin represents the value of the bond valence for the equilibrium distance Rmin, which is estimated from the bond valence parameter R0 and typical coordination number NC of the cation as [ ] ( ))ln(2285 . 0 9185 . 0 Li ideal, O Li O Li0min, Li N VbeVRR C O Li ⋅ +⋅+= −−− σ Δ [3] The empirical numerical factor in square brackets, which contains Δσ, the difference of the absolute softnesses of cation and anion (in eV-1), reduces Rmin slightly to compensate that the ideal bond valence sum VLi = 1 includes weak contributions from higher coordination shells, while the average coordination number NC,,Li = 5.021 refers to the first coordination shell only. Pathways for Li+ can then be modelled as regions in the structure, where the Li site energy defined as ) A Li () ( ) Li ( Coulomb 1 2 O Li , min, O Li min, O Li 0 −+ ⎥⎥ ⎥ ⎦ ⎤ ⎢⎢ ⎢ ⎣ ⎡ −⎟⎟ ⎠ ⎞ ⎜⎜ ⎝ ⎛ −− = ∑ = − −− E Ns s sO Li D E N i [4]remains sufficiently low. Regions of low E(Li) are then considered as regions that a mobile Li+ can reach with an activation energy related to the value of E(Li). It is assumed that dc conduction requires continuous pathways that span the unit cell in at least one direction. These pathways are visualized as regions enclosed by isosurfaces of constant E(Li) based on a grid of E(Li) values with a resolution < 0.1 Å covering the unit cell. The threshold value of E(Li) for which the E(Li) isosurfaces form a continuous migration pathway (that includes both occupied and vacant Li sites), permits a rough estimate of the activation energy for the Li+ ion transport process. As such an approach neglects relaxation, the assessment of the activation energy is based on an empirical correlation observed for a wide range of Lithium ion conductors.

XRD patterns of Li1.4Ti1.6Al0.4(PO4)3, Li1.4Ti1.6Ga0.4(PO4)3, Li1.4Ge1.6Al0.4(PO4)3 showed crystalline nature of samples with R-3c space group, popularly known as NASICON phase. In the subsequent descripton we generally refer to the hexagonal setting of this space group. Diffraction patterns for the Li1.4Ti1.6Ga0.4(PO4)3, Li1.4Ge1.6Al0.4(PO4)3 samples showed a low intensity peak indicating the possibility of a minor secondary phase matching with Ga2O3 and Al2O3 respectively. Matching of the peak positions for all these compounds with the reported NASICON structure for LiTi2(PO4)3 indicates the successful doping. In contrast, Li1.4Ge1.6Ga0.4(PO4)3 did not form a single phase. Results of the Rietveld refinements for the compounds under study are summarized and compared with undoped LiTi2(PO4)3 in table 1. As an example, figure 1 shows the refinement of Li1.4Ti1.6Al0.4(PO4)3. The 20% replacement of Ti4+ by Al3+ reduces the unit cell extension along the c-axis. The ionic radius of Al3+ in 6-fold coordination (0.535 Å) is smaller than that of sixfold coordinated Ti4+ (0.605 Å), explaining such a compression along the c-axis. The complete replacement of Ti4+ by Ge4+ and Al3+ with (ionic radii 0.53 for Ge3+ and 0.535 for Al3+) leads to a reduces all lattice parameters (about 2.5% along a-,b- axis and 0.6% along c-aixs). Partial replacement of Ti4+ by Ga3+ (ionic radius 0.62 Å) hardly affects the unit cell dimensions.

Nyquist plots of Li1.4Al0.4Ti1.6(PO4)3 at selected temperatures are displayed in Fig. 1 (r.h.s.) along with the equivalent circuit used for determining the bulk resistance. The Arrhenius-type temperature dependence of the conductivity for all the compounds under investigation, as derived fromthese impedance measurements, is summarised in the l.h.s. graph of Figure 2. The activation energy (Ea ) of Li1.4Al0.4Ti1.6(PO4)3 is 0.42 eV and is lowest among the compounds prepared, as given in table II.

The r.h.s. graph in Figure 2 (r.h.s.) visualizes the structure of Li1Ti2(PO4)3, interstitial Li sites and the Li+ ion transport pathways as calculated using our BV approach. The LiTi2(PO4)3 structure is built of two TiO6 octahedra linked via shared oxygen atoms with three PO4 tetrahedra. In the ordered undoped structure the Li ions fully occupy the regular I1 sites on the inversion center coordinated by 6 O atoms. The Li transport pathways connect two I1 sites via an interstitial site I2 (0.36, 0.36, 0.25). The alternation of these two types of sites along the conduction channels forms a three-dimensional network over which rapid ion transport occurs. Similar transport mechanism is observed in case of doped compounds also. The activation energies calculated based on BV approach are in line with the experimental values as given table II. The high cation mobility and thermal stability of NASICON double phosphates allow us to regard them as potential materials for use in electrochemical devices.

Figure 6 depicts the energy required for Li ion to move from a regular site to the interstitial site (defect formation energy), which together with the energy required for the migration of interstitial Li to the next regular site (migration energy) forms the activation energy. Figure 6 indicates that for the compounds LiTi(PO4)3, Li1.4Ti1.6Al0.4(PO4)3, Li1.4Ti1.6Ga0.4(PO4)3 show the activation energy for Li migration is nearly same. In the case of Li1.4Ge1.6Al0.6(PO4)3, though the energy of the pathway bottleneck is nearly the same as for the other compounds, the energy difference to the more stable regular site is considerably higher (0.63 eV) , thus explaining the high activation energy and low conductivity of Li1.4Ge1.6Al0.6(PO4)3.

Among the investigated samples Li1.4Ti1.6Al0.4(PO4)3 with NASICON type structure showed highest ionic conductivity (~10-4 S/cm) and lowest activation energy 0.42 eV. BV analysis showed that in all these structures the Li ions fully occupy the regular I1 sites on the inversion center coordinated by six oxygen atoms. The Li transport pathways connect two regular sites via an interstitial site. The alternation of these two types of sites along the conduction channels forms a three-dimensional network over which rapid ion transport occurs.

Financial support to S. A. in the frame of the Singapore Ministry of Education Grant MOE2009-T2-1-065 is gratefully acknowledged.
