LiSn 2P3O12 has been prepared using mechanochemical milling method and sintered at 700 °C, 800 °C, 900 °C and 1000 °C for 8 hours. All samples sintered up to 900 °C show a rhombohedral structure. However, the sample sintered at 1000 °C possessed a monoclinic structure. This is attributed to the rotation of skeleton LiSn2P3O12 as indicated by the change in the a and c parameters of the sample. The sample sintered at 700 °C shows the highest bulk conductivity of 1.65 × 10 -6 S cm -1 and the lowest bulk activation energy of 0.09 eV. The grain boundary activation energy of the samples decreases with increase in sintering temperature due to enhancement in grain contacts.

Nasicon structure is a 3D channel structure which enables good ionic conduction. LiSn 2P3O12 (LSP) possesses nasicon type structure built from sharing corners between SnO 6 octahedra with PO 4 tetrahedra which forms a 3D network structure [1]. LSP shows a rhombohedral R3c symmetry phase (high ionic conductivity phase) at high temperature and monoclinic phase (low ionic conductivity phase) at low temperature [1,2]. Most studies on LSP reported on their phase transition phenomenon while limited numbers reported on their conductivity behaviour. However the studies on conductivity were done by mixing Teflon with LSP materials. Teflon was used as a binder to improve the mechanical stability of LSP since the sintered LSP was fragile for handling and easily broken due to phase change phenomenon [3,4]. In this study, we have succeeded in preparing mechanically stable samples without the addition of Teflon by the mechanochemical milling method. The samples were prepared at room temperature where the starting materials and milling balls were put together in a bowl, and rotated at high speed of about 500 rpm. During the milling period, the particles of starting materials are trapped and rolled between the colliding balls which lead to reactions of chemical nature [5]. In this paper, the effects of sintering temperature on the structure and conductivity of the prepared LiSn 2P3O12 samples are discussed.

Stoichiometric amounts of the starting materials Li2O, SnO 2 and NH 4H2PO 4 were used to obtain the LiSn 2P3O12 . These mixtures were heated at 700 °C for 2 hours before being milled. The final product was hand pressed by using Specac Hydraulic Press at pressure of 7 tones to form pellets. The pellets were sintered at 700 °C, 800 °C, 900 °C and 1000°C for 8 hours. Structure and surface morphology were studied using D8 Advance X-Ray Diffractometer-Bruker and FEI Quanta 200 FESEM equipment respectively. The conductivity studies were carried out using Solartron 1260 impedance analyzer.

XRD diffractograms in Fig. 1 show the presence LSP phase in all sintered samples. Traces of SnP 2O7 impurities are observed for samples sintered at 700 °C, 800 °C and 1000 °C and Li 3PO 4 impurities is only observed for the sample sintered at 900 °C. The traces of excess SnO 2 are also detected in all sintered samples. The LSP phase observed in the samples has a rhombohedral structure except for the sample sintered at 1000 °C which showed a monoclinic structure. This means that, the method used in this work produces a monoclinic structure at a temperature 250 °C lower than that of solid state reaction method [3,4]. The transformation from rhombohedral phase to monoclinic phase is due to the rotation of LSP skeleton which is proven by the change of the values of a and c as listed in Table 1 [6]. This phase transformation is further supported by the shift of 2θ peaks towards the right for the sample sintered at 1000 °C. The different values of miller indices for this sample give added evidence to this observation [4]. Table 1 also shows a decrease in degree of crystallinity [7]. The growth of a new LSP peaks at ~21 ° in the sample sintered at 900 °C and 1000 °C indicating an increase in nucleation centres of crystal growth.

Fig. 2 shows the impedance plots of LSP samples sintered at different temperatures. All the plots show two overlapping semicircles and spike. The semicircle at high frequency region is attributed to the bulk response while the semicircle at low frequency region is due to the grain boundary effects in the samples [8]. The bulk and grain boundary conductivities were calculated and listed in Table 2. The grain boundary resistance is observed to be enhanced with increase in sintering temperature. According to Xu et. al the increase in grain boundary resistance is due to grain boundary domination because of large concentration and high mobility of ions in the intergranular region [9]. This accounts for the decrease in the total conductivity with increase in sintering temperature. The highest bulk conductivity is shown by sample sintered at 700 °C. The decreases in bulk conductivity with sintering temperature can relate with the decrease of LSP crystalline phase in the samples. Low value of bulk conductivity for sample sintered at 1000 °C is due to the formation of monoclinic structure in the sample.

The temperature dependence behaviour of conductivity of the grain interior (bulk) and that of grain boundary are observed to follow the Arrhenius behaviour as shown in Fig. 3. The E a values determined from the slope of the plots are listed in Table 2. The total conductivity of samples (not shown) is similar to the grain boundary conductivity due to the domination of grain boundary effects. The grain interior resistance is nearly constant showing small effect of temperature on the bulk property of the samples. The grain boundary resistance decreases with increase in conductivity. It is observed that the sample with the highest conductivity has the smallest bulk Ea. This value is lower compared to those obtain by other workers [1,8,9]. The total conductivity of this sample at 120 °C is 4.83 × 10 -8 S cm -1 which is one order of magnitude higher than that reported by Lazarraga et. al [2].

Morphology analysis of the cross-section of the pellet of as-prepared sample shows highly dense grains that are closely contacted to each other (Fig. 5). The sample sintered at 700 °C exhibits grains of different sizes which may be due to creation of larger number of nucleation centres. Further increase in sintering temperature causes a further increase in nucleation centres that result in the formation of smaller sized grains [10]. This is consistence with the results from the XRD analysis.

Mechanically stable LiSn 2P3O12 pellets have been successfully prepared. Sintering temperatures from 700 °C to 900 °C produce rhombohedral structured materials. While sintering temperature of 1000 °C yielded sample with a monoclinic structure. The highest room temperature bulk conductivity is obtained for the sample sintered at 700 °C which shows activation energy of 0.09 eV. The increase in sintering temperature leads to a decrease in the activation energy of grain boundary.
