Replacement of liquid electrolytes with polymer-based solid electrolytes is considered as the key to the realization of high-energy lithium metal anode in rechargeable batteries. However, the polymer electrolytes suffer from poor lithium-ion conductivity and low lithium-ion transference number. Poly(vinylidene difluoride) (PVDF) based polymer-ceramic composite electrolytes were fabricated at room temperature via the solution casting method. The effect of NASICON-type lithium tin zirconium phosphate (LiSnZr(PO 4)3) particles added as the ceramic filler to the PVDF + LiTFSI polymer-salt matrix on the structure, ionic conductivity, transference number, and electrochemical behaviour was studied. The x-ray diffraction (XRD) and fourier transform infrared (FTIR) absorption studies confirmed the structure of the fabricated polymer as the mixed ( α+β) phases of PVDF. The addition of LiSnZr(PO 4)3 ceramic filler resulted in the enhancement in Li + conductivity of the polymer composite and the sample with 15 wt% ceramic filler (CPE-15) showed the highest lithium-ion conductivity of 5.76 ×10 -5 Scm -1 at 300 K. The addition of 15 wt% LSZP improved the stability window up to 4.73 V as confirmed by linear sweep voltammetry (LSV). A significant improvement in (t Li+ ) resulted from the addition of ceramic filler. The reversibility of Li + transport across the composite ceramic-polymer electrolyte (15 wt% CPE) was confirmed by galvanostatic charging-discharging of symmetric lithium (Li||CPE||Li) cell at various current density for 100 h. Li||CPE||LTO cells with Li 4Ti 5O15 (LTO) as the working electrode, CPE-15 as the Li+ conducting separator, and Li foil as the counter electrode were fabricated to demonstrate the application of the CPE-15 as the electrolyte in all-solid-state batteries. Li||CPE||LTO cell delivered a specific discharge capacity of 133 mAhg-1 and 88% capacity retention after 20 cycles at 0.1C rate.
In view of the climacteric issues related to non-renewable energy resources and to meet the continuous energy requirement of the growing economy of the world, the development of alternative sustainable energy storage systems is a major concern [1, 2]. The drastic progress in space exploration, aircraft engines, electric vehicles, portable electronic devices has focused intense attention on the development of energy storage devices [3-5]. Owing to its high energy density and exceptional cycling life, the rechargeable lithium-ion battery (LIB) has emerged as one of the popular energy storage device technology for varied applications such as mobile phones, laptops, tablets, and even electric vehicles. However, the electrochemical performance of LIBs has been limited by various factors and a further improvement in energy & power density demands exploration of new anodes, cathodes, and electrolytes [4, 6-12]. Conventional LIBs containing flammable organic electrolyte have a limited electrochemical stability window (limiting the usage of high-voltage cathodes) and suffer from catastrophic failure like fissure in the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) on usage of high specific capacity lithium metal anode due to unconstrained deposition of the dead lithium and decomposition of the organic electrolytes which decreases coulombic efficiency. The repeated cycling of these batteries leads to the growth of lithium dendrites which on internal shorting cause an explosion of LIBs. The replacement of organic liquid electrolytes with solid electrolyte would inhibit the development of Li dendrites and improves the safety of the battery pack. These electrolytes could also provide a comparatively wider electrochemical window and thus enabling the use of Li metal anode and high-voltage cathodes [4, 9, 13-15].
Various types of ceramic electrolytes have been employed for improving the performance of LIBs. Among various oxides, Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO) based garnets and NASICON-structured (rhombohedral LiM 2(PO 4)3 where M = Ti, Zr, Ge, etc.) materials are most widely studied owing to the ease of fabrication, decent room temperature ionic conductivity ~10 −4 Scm −1, excellent thermal performance, good moisture and chemical stability, and a wide electrochemical window [16-24]. Various efforts have been made to further improve the ionic conductivity of LiM2(PO4)3 compounds by modifying the Li + transport bottlenecks in the crystal structure via various dopant (Sn 4+, Sr 2+ , Al 3+ , Ca 2+ , Hf 4+ , etc.)[16, 18-22, 24]. For instance, Liang et al. reported an improvement in the ionic conductivity of LiTi 2(PO 4)3(LTP) with the doping of Ga [25]. Liu et al. fabricated Li1+ x+y Al xTi2−xSiyP3−yO12 (x=0.3 and y=0.4) ceramic electrolytes with ionic conductivity 1.33 × 10 -3 Scm -1 [26]. The major disadvantages of employing ceramic as the electrolyte in lithium batteries are high interfacial resistance, high density, and their brittle nature [13, 27-30].
In comparison to inorganic ceramic electrolytes, solid polymer electrolytes have the advantages of being lightweight, flexible, better adhesion to the electrodes, and lower interfacial resistance [14, 31-34]. Various polymer hosts - poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF), poly(vinylidene fluoride-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDFHFP), polyacrylonitrile (PAN), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), etc. - with different ionic salts of lithium have been used for development of solid electrolytes [34-37]. PVDF which has room temperature dielectric constant ~ 8.4 is considered as one of the most attractive polymer hosts for lithium batteries. PVDF is easy to process with its excellent thermal stability, better breakdown strength, and more anodically stable because of the strong electron-withdrawing functional group as compared to other intensively studied polymers such as PEO [33]. The high dielectric constant results in considerable ionization of lithium salt thereby, providing with higher charge carriers [38]. The ionic salts LiBF4, LiClO4, LiN(CF 3SO2)2, LiNO3, LiC2F6NO4S2, etc. have been incorporated into the polymer matrix to make the polymer lithium-ion conducting [31, 35, 39-41]. Still, the polymer electrolyte (polymer + salt) have the issues related to low room temperature ionic conductivity (< 10 -5 Scm -1), low transference number (~ 0.2 – 0.4), and poor oxidation resistance that acts as a roadblock in replacing the conventional liquid electrolytes [42].
Blending of polymers, the addition of plasticizers, copolymerization, and use of inorganic fillers have been employed to enhance the performance of solid polymer electrolytes [28, 36, 38, 40-45]. The strategy of dispersion of inorganic ceramic fillers in a polymer matrix improves ionic conductivity at moderate temperatures and enhances the mechanical strength and electrochemical stability of these polymer systems [37, 46-48]. The dispersion of lithium-ion conductive ceramic fillers (Li7La3Zr2O12 , LiTi2(PO4)3, etc.) in the polymer matrix has been shown to enhance the lithium-ion conductivity through a segmental motion of polymer chains [33, 49]. Keller and coworkers achieved Li + conductivity ~ 10 -6 S cm -1 with the dispersion of garnet type Li 7La 3Zr 2O12 (LLZO) to PEO polymer matrix with lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)-imide (LiTFSI) as the lithium-salt [39, 50]. Huo et al. fabricated polyethylene oxides and Li6.4La 3Zr1.4Ta 0.6 O12 composites and achieved an ionic conductivity ~ 1.6 ×10 -4 Scm -1 at room temperature [51]. Similarly, Chen et al. incorporated Li 6.4 La 3Zr 1.4 T0.6 O12 (LLZTO) to the PEO matrix to obtain the highest ionic conductivity at room temperature about ~ 1.17 ×10 -4 Scm -1 [52].
In this paper, we report the development of ceramic-polymer composite electrolyte (CPE) containing the rhombohedral LiSnZr(PO4)3 (LSZP) as the ceramic filler, PVDF as the polymer host, and LiTFSI as the lithium salt. The NASICON-type compound LSZP, prepared by our group earlier, shows excellent bulk Li + conductivity in the order of 10 -4 Scm -1 at room temperature [20]. The Li + transport channels provided by the LSZP contributes to an enhancement of the Li + conduction and transference number. Rigid LSZP particles with PVDF chain segments are expected to provide a mechanically robust and stable framework against the growth of lithium dendrites. Electrochemical behavior of an all-solid-state cell fabricated using the polymer membrane with 15 wt% LSZP ceramic filler as the electrolyte, lithium titanate (Li 4Ti 5O12 ) as the working electrode, and lithium foil as a counter electrode is also reported.
The ceramic compound LiSnZr(PO4)3 (LSZP) was synthesized via the method reported in reference [20]. PVDF (M w = 5.43×10 5) (Alfa Aesar), LiTFSI (purity >99.0%, Alfa Aesar), and N- Methyl Pyrrolidinone (NMP) (ACS reagent, purity >99.9%, Sigma Aldrich) were used for the synthesis of the polymer membrane. The composite CPE membrane (PVDF +LiTFSI) + x wt% LSZP where x = 0, 5, 10, 15, and 20 were prepared via solution casting technique. Henceforth, the prepared CPE membranes are referred to as CPE00, CPE-05, CPE-10, CPE-15, and CPE-20 based on the percentage of LSZP in polymer-salt. The PVDF and LiTFSI were taken in a weight ratio of 80 wt% and 20 wt%. Firstly, PVDF was dissolved in NMP and the solution was stirred continuously till it becomes transparent. Then, the LiTFSI salt was added to this solution in the desired proportion. After stirring this mixture for 12 h, x wt% LSZP powder was added to this and the solution was kept on stirrer at room temperature for overnight. Subsequently, the as-prepared homogeneous solution was cast on a petri dish and placed under vacuum for 48 h at 50 ℃ to evaporate the solvent. Finally, the composite membrane was peeled off from the dish and stored in an argon-filled glove box for further characterizations and to be used in the battery fabrication to test the electrochemical performance of CPEs.
The lithium titanate (Li4Ti5O12 ) was synthesized in lab using the lithium carbonate (Li2CO3) (purity > 99.0%, Alfa Aesar) dissolved in nitric acid (HNO3), aluminum nitrate nonahydrate (Al(NO 3)3·9H 2O) (ACS reagent, purity > 99.99%, Alfa Aesar), and titanium(IV) bis(ammonium lactato) dihydroxide (C6H18N2O8Ti) (purity > 99.9%, Alfa Aesar) via sol-gel reaction. Briefly, the gel (obtained through the mixing of stoichiometric reactant solutions) was dried at 150 ℃ for 12 h. Later the gel was heated at 400 ℃ for 6 h, and again at 750 ℃ for 12 h to obtain single-phase Li4Ti5O12 powder.
 X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements on the composite membranes were carried out to check the stability of LSZP ceramic in PVDF and NMP during the preparation process. The data were recorded by Cu Ka radiation using a Bruker D2-Phaser diffractometer in 2° ranges from 10° – 70° with a step size of 0.02°. Perkin Elmer Spectrum IR (version 10.6.0.893) was used to record the fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrum data from 350 cm -1 – 4000 cm -1 in transmittance mode. Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and energydispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX) study were performed to observe the morphology and distribution of elements, respectively. The images were recorded using JSM field emission scanning microscope (model JEOL-7610+). The test was carried out using 5 kV accelerating electron beam.
The impedance measurements on all samples were performed using a computer-controlled LCR meter (model: ZM 2376, NF Corp.). Temperature-dependent measurements were carried out in the range -50 ℃ to 60 ℃ using a LakeShore Cryotronics temperature controller (model: 325). For these measurements, CPE membranes were sandwiched either between lithium metal foils (used as non-blocking electrodes) or between stainless steel rods (used as blocking electrodes) in a custom-made test set-up. A sinusoidal signal with 100 mV amplitude was applied over 1 Hz to 5 MHz frequency range and frequency dependence of complex impedance was recorded.
The Li + transport number (t Li+ ) measurements were conducted in combination with sinusoidal impedance measurement and chronoamperometry at room temperature. The chronoamperometry experiment was carried out for 15 h at applied voltage 1 V using the Keithley Source Meter Unit (model 2450-EC). The test was done on symmetric SS||CPE||SS and Li||CPE||Li cell inside the glove box in the argon atmosphere. The impedance measurements were carried out before and after chronoamperometry tests. Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) and cyclic voltammetry (CV) tests are carried out on cells fabricated with CPE membrane in Swagelok with stainless steel (SS) as the working electrode and the lithium metal as the counter and the reference electrode inside an argon-filled glove-box. The galvanostatic charging-discharging tests were performed on the half-cell fabricated using the selected CPE as the solid electrolyte, lithium titanate (Li 4Ti 5O12 ) as the working electrode (cathode), and lithium metal as the reference & counter electrode (anode). A schematic of the all-solid-state lithium cells used in the present investigation is shown in Fig. 1.
 The cathode was prepared with Li 4Ti 5O12 (LTO), Ketjen black (surface area ~ 1400 m2-g- 1), and polyvinylidene fluoride (75:10:15 by wt%). The content is ground in a mortar for fifteen minutes and dispersed in NMP. This solution was then stirred at room temperature for 24 h and the obtained slurry was coated on copper foil. The areal loading of the cathode on copper current collector was ~ 1 mg-cm −2. After drying the coated slurry at 65 ℃ for 24 h in a vacuum oven, the electrode was uniaxially pressed under a pressure of 100 kPa and subsequently, punched into circular disks. The 8 channels battery tester (Lanhe LAND Battery Testing System, model no.: CT2001A) was used for galvanostatic charge-discharge cycling.
The room temperature XRD patterns in Fig. 2 illustrate the phase formation and structure of the various samples used in the present investigation. The semi-crystalline phase formation in pure PVDF is confirmed by the pattern shown in Fig. 2(c). The observed crystalline peaks in two regions 17°-22° and 30°-40° in XRD pattern confirm crystalline α phase of PVDF film. The peaks at 18.3° and 19.7° correspond to (020) and (110), respectively. The peaks at 35.7°, 38.8°, and 41.5° match with the (200), (002), and (111) reflections of γ- phase of PVDF [53, 54]. No significant change in the XRD pattern of CPE00 (PVDF+LiTFSI and no LSZP) is observed which confirms that LiTFSI addition does not have any apparent effect on the structure of PVDF.
 For CPE-05 sample, there is an appearance of low-intensity peaks corresponding to the R3-c rhombohedral phase which is confirmed by reported XRD pattern of NASICON-type LSZP [20]. This R3-c phase coexists with α- phase of PVDF in CPE. This implies the compatibility of LSZP with PVDF and the successful implantation of LSZP in the PVDF matrix. With the increase in the LSZP fraction in the sample (x > 05), the XRD patterns become dominated by the NASICON-type rhombohedral phase (Figs. 2(f) –2(h)). The XRD pattern of the phase pure Li 4Ti 5O12 used in this study is provided in Supplementary Information (Fig. S1).
This evolution of the γ- phase has also corroborated by the FTIR study. Figure 3 shows the FTIR spectra, which supports the XRD patterns recorded for CPE with different LSZP filler content.
Peaks observed at 432 cm -1, 832 cm -1 1410 cm -1, 1176 cm -1, belong to γ- phase, whereas at 876 cm -1 and 1306 cm -1 correspond to β- phase of the host polymer [53]. These peaks were related to C-C-C and C-F stretching vibration, therefore gives information about the amorphous nature of PVDF [43]. The peaks at 1230, 1306 cm -1 is for C-F bonding belongs to segmental movements inside the polymer and enhances the ionic conductivity. The peaks at 1410, 1176, 1064 cm -1 shifted with the increase in the percentage of LSZP ceramic filler. With the addition of filler, there is an appearance of peaks at 1670, 1510, 986 and region between 750- 400 cm -1 becomes more intense [54]. The peak at 986 cm -1 indicates the P-O bond in LSZP. Peaks at 1136 cm −1 and a weak peak at 1487 cm -1 demonstrate the dissolution of the LiTFSI in PVDF. Additionally, out of plane deformation of SO 2 in LiTFSI has been observed by 1136 and 612 cm -1 [55]. The peaks at 1670 cm −1 show the trapping of LiTFSI within the PVDF matrix. The stretching of the C-H bond indicates by weak peaks at 14201440 cm −1 are from a cluster of lithium compounds in PVDF [31, 43].
The morphology and elemental mapping of CPE was carried out using FESEM and EDX, respectively. Figure 4 (a) reveals that LSZP particles uniformly distributed in the PVDF + LiTFSI matrix. Figure 4 (b) represents the elemental distribution of Zr, Sn, P, O, F, S, and C. The mapped images of the elements like Zr, Sn, and P confirm the uniform dispersion of LSZP particles in polymer-salt matrix. The digital photographs of fabricated composite polymer membrane are provided in Supplementary Information (Fig. S2).
The typical room temperature Nyquist plots of composite electrolytes with different amounts of ceramic filler are shown in Fig. 5. All samples show a semi-circular arc in the high-frequency region and a straight-line feature in the low-frequency regime. The semicircular arc represents the contribution of bulk to the complex impedance and the straight line is due to the ion-blocking nature of stainless-steel electrodes [22]. Figure 5(a) shows that the right-side intercept of the semi-circular arcs on the x-axis decreases with the increase in the ceramic filler content (for x ≤ 15%), suggesting the increase in the conductance.
To estimate the room temperature ionic conductivity, the complex impedance data was modeled using the equivalent circuit (shown as the inset of Fig. 5(a)). CPE 1 and R1 in the circuit model denote the constant phase element and resistance components associated with the bulk of the sample, respectively. CPE 2 represents the sample-electrode interface element [21]. The impedance of a constant phase element is given by
Solid lines in Fig. 5(a) shows the fitted data and an excellent match between the experimental and fitted data is observed. The ionic conductivity was calculated using:
where, d and A are thickness and surface area of the sample disc under test, respectively; and R1 is the bulk resistance determined from the complex impedance plane plots using the equivalent circuit model. The increase in the percentage of ceramic filler results in an improvement in ionic conductivity reaching a maximum of around 5.76 × 10 -5 Scm -1 for 15% ceramic filler and then decreases to ~ 1.29 × 10 -6 Scm -1 with further increase in filler percentage. This is illustrated by the shifting of the lower frequency x-axis intercept of the bulk response (semicircular arc) towards zero in Fig 5(a). The improvement in Li + conduction is because of the transport channels provided by LSZP within the PVDF matrix.
When the content of the filler is less than the percolation threshold, at which alternate Li + transfer network is present, the conduction path is dominated by the polymer matrix. However, as the filler amount crosses the threshold value an alternative path for Li + conduction via LSZP starts appearing along with polymer conductive network. The addition of fillers is also known to reduce the crystallinity of the polymer matrix and resultant improvement in ion transport [44, 52]. It is to be noted that the room temperature conductivity of the composite film is higher than either of the pure PVDF + LiTFSI and LSZP samples. The sample with a ceramic filler content of 20% shows the lowest conductivity which can be attributed to the agglomeration of ceramic particles resulting in the appearance of cracks and brittle nature of the composite film.
The temperature-dependent ionic conductivity of composite ceramic polymer membrane PVDF-LiTFSI + x wt% LSZP ( x = 0, 5, 10, 15, 20) is reported in Fig. 5(b). In polymer with a lithium salt, the diffusion of Li + is a combination of the segmental motion of polymer chain and hopping mechanism of lithium ions [50]. Following the Arrhenius relation of the linear fitting, all CPE depicts a common trend of increase in ionic conductivity with the rise in temperature. The highest ionic conductivity is obtained for polymer electrolyte membrane with 15% loading is 1.24 × 10 -6 Scm -1 at 20 ℃ and 1.06 × 10 -4 Scm -1 at 60 ℃. This shows an easy ionic transport in the composite film resulting from the incorporation of filler via the synergistic effect of interfacial phenomenon (LSZP filler and polymer matrix interface) and the increase in the amorphous nature of PVDF matrix.
To further study the behavior of conductivity with temperature, the activation energy (E A) is calculated via Arrhenius fitting from Eq. (3), where, A is the pre-exponential factor, k is the Boltzmann constant and σ is the ionic conductivity at temperature T (in K) [56].
As shown in Table 1, E A decreases with the increase in the content of the ceramic filler in the composite electrolyte. However, CPE with 20% LSZP shows an increase in E A supporting the trend observed in the ionic conductivity for various CPE membrane (shown in Table 1).
The total conductivity of the composite CPE has contributions from both ionic [cations (Li +) and anions (TFSI -)] movement and electronic movement. The effect of the addition of LSZP filler on the lithium-ion transport number (t Li+ ) was determined via the Bruce-Vincent method (Eq. 4) [57].
where, I 0 and R 0 are the initial currents and initial interface resistance, respectively prior to applying DC voltage ∆V, and I ss & R ss are steady-state current & steady-state interfacial resistance measured after cell attains equilibrium from applying DC supply. The resistance of the cell has been calculated via an appropriate equivalent circuit model (as shown as the inset of Fig. 6) of the impedance data. To perform this test, CPE with different content of LSZP filler was sandwiched between Li metal electrodes and the result for the sample CPE-15 is shown in Fig. 6. Exponential decay in the current from 0.594 mA (= I0) at t = 0 to 94 µA (= ISS ) at t = 4 h with an increase in time is observed. The inset of Fig. 6 shows the complex impedance (Nyquist) plot of Li||CPE||Li. The two semicircular arcs without tail confirm that the conduction is due to Li-ion motion. The first semicircular arc in the high-frequency region is due to the conduction of Li-ion through the composite electrolyte. This gives bulk resistance ( R0) due to electrolyte. The second semicircular arc is a result of the transfer of ions at the interface of electrode and electrolyte. The interfacial resistance ( Ri) is calculated from the difference of low frequency to the high-frequency intercept of the second semicircular arc. There is a shift in the low-frequency x-axis intercept of the second semicircular arc away from zero suggesting an increase in the interfacial resistance on applying the DC field while there is only a small change in the bulk resistance. t Li+ as calculated using Eq. (4) for all samples are listed in Table 2 and the highest t Li+ is obtained for the (PVDF 80 –LiTFSI 20 )–15% LSZP sample, supporting the maximum ionic conductivity.
The stability of interfacial resistance is a vital factor that influences the cyclic performance of solid-state batteries. To study the behavior of electrode-electrolyte interface, symmetric cells (Li||CPE||Li) was fabricated by sandwiching the CPEs between Li metal foils. These cells were sealed in leak-proof pouches and were kept under open-circuit conditions in an Ar-filled glove-box. The room temperature frequency-dependent complex impedance measurements carried out on these cells as a function of storage time are shown in Fig. S3 (Supplementary Information). With storage time, bulk resistance of CPE for the Li||CPE||Li symmetric cells shows a continuous increase for the first few days before getting stabilized after 75 days of fabrication. The reason behind the increase in the bulk resistance is not clear at the moment and will be explored in-depth in further studies. The interfacial resistance ( Ri) of Li||CPE||Lisymmetric cell increases rather rapidly for the first 45 days reaching ~ 1500 Ω and with further increase in storage time, Ri seems to in a range of 1550-1600 Ω with some anomalous fluctuations in values. This change in interfacial resistance is known to be a result of the slow reaction between electrode and electrolyte [58, 59]. Keller et al. have attributed the increase in interfacial resistance to the formation of a solid electrolyte interface (SEI) and its stabilization which ceases further reaction [39]. SEI stabilizes Ri and inhibits further change in interfacial resistance. This observation is similar to reported by Chen et al. for PEO/garnet composite electrolytes [52]. The LSZP particles in CPE tend to reduce the exposure of electrode to the PVDF matrix thereby decreases the interfacial resistance and provide conducting path for easy transfer of Li + between electrodes via CPE.
Unlike other traditional batteries, the lithium-ion batteries with wide electrochemical potential window have gained a lot of attention due to higher operating voltage and substantially increased the energy density. As an important component of the high voltage lithium-ion batteries, electrolytes are required to own sufficient electrochemical and thermal stability to ensure the safety and cycling performances of the batteries. In our investigation, the introduction of LSZP as an active filler in the PVDF matrix improves both ionic conductivity as well as the operating potential window. The linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) technique was used to determine the electrochemical stability window of (PVDF 80 –LiTFSI 20 ) – x wt% LSZP, ( x = 0, 5, 10, and 15). The experiment was carried out from 2.5 V to 4.9 V with a scanning rate of 0.2 mVs -1 at room temperature and the current was measured as a function of potential with respect to Li/Li +. At low voltages, only a small current (below 1 µA) is measured for the CPE-00 membrane which starts increasing rapidly once the scanning voltage increases beyond a critical voltage (estimated Eo ~ 4.37 V). The value of stable voltage is determined by linear fitting of the rapid change in current and taking intercept on the voltage axis at zero current [55]. The critical voltage for the CPE-15 sample is estimated to be ~ 4.73 V as illustrated in Fig. 7, which indicates that the composite electrolyte CPE-15 containing is stable up to a higher potential of 4.73 V. These results demonstrate that composite electrolyte CPE-15 can be used safely in the lithium-based batteries with high voltage cathode materials.
The cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were carried out for Li||CPE-15||SS and Li||CPE-15||LTO (LTO stands for Li 4Ti 5O12 ) cells to determine the reversibility and cyclability of lithium-ion motion through the fabricated composite electrolyte film. Lithium metal in these cells is used as the counter and reference electrodes whereas SS and LTO are the working electrodes in the respective cell. The CV tests were performed in the range from -0.6 to 3.5 V with a scan speed of ~ 0.2 mVs -1 at room temperature, and the result of CV measurements on Li||CPE-15||SS cell is shown in Fig. 8(a).
The presence of anodic and cathodic peaks in the CV curve illustrates the interaction of Li + with electrodes. The redox peak pair at +0.3 V and -0.6 V is related to the stripping and plating of lithium at the SS electrode, respectively. However, additional peaks appear around 1.25 V along with the redox peaks during the scan which could be either from the side reactions of CPEs with Li metal and SS electrodes or because of the formation of certain species at the electrolyte-electrode interface. Similar features in the CV curve has been reported for other polymer composite electrolytes [60]. Figure 8(b) shows the result of the CV measurements carried out in the range from 1.0 V to 2.7 V with a scan speed of 0.2 mVs 1 for Li||CCPE||LTO cell at room temperature. Theoretically, the working potential of Li4Ti5O12 is 1.54 V with a specific capacity ~ 175 mAhg -1 (is also used as the nominal capacity for determining C-rate in the next section) [61]. The oxidation/reduction peaks in the CV plot provide information about delithiation/lithiation of the LTO spinel structure. For the Li||CCPE||LTO cell, a cathodic peak is observed at 1.796 V and the corresponding anodic peak at 1.377 V. These peaks are related to the charging and discharging potential of battery [62]. During discharging or Li + deintercalation, Ti 4+ reduces to Ti 3+ and Li 4Ti 5O12 converts to Li 7Ti 5O12 ; reverse reaction takes place while Li + intercalation or charging [63].
 Durability and feasibility of CPE were also tested using the galvanostatic cycling using a proof-of-concept Li-metal||CPE-15||Li-metal symmetrical cell and the voltage response of lithium stripping/plating cycle run of 100 cycles carried at room temperature is shown in Fig. 9(a) . At the current density of ±20 µA/cm 2, the voltage response of the symmetric cell is a plateau ~ ±60 mV with only a small fluctuation (Fig. 9(b)). On increasing the current density to ±40 µA/cm 2, the voltage plateau increases to an average value of ~ ±120 mV (Fig. 9(c)). The voltage profile for the constant current appears to be comparatively more asymmetric with larger polarization for the -ve current. This could be due to the poor contact of composite electrolytes with one of the lithium metal electrodes. Nevertheless, this trend remains invariant with cycling and no significant change in the voltage profile is noticed. With a further, the increase in the current density, the positive and negative voltage of the plateau in each direction increases, asymmetry in the shape and magnitude of positive and negative voltage “plateau” gets accentuated, and this behaviour gets more pronounced on subsequent cycling with the same current density. A significantly larger overpotential than the expected proportional increase due to the higher current density and voltage fluctuations are observed during the lithium stripping/plating process when the current density is ~ 0.1 mA/cm 2 (Fig. 9(a) and 9(d)). Similar voltage fluctuations in form of “peaks” & “arcing” have been observed in symmetric lithium cells and have been attributed to the accumulation of dead lithium and resultant spatial variation in reaction kinetics on the lithium anode surface [64, 65]. The apparent reversal of the overpotential shown in Fig. 9(a) when the applied current density is ±40 µA/cm 2 suggests that the 20 lithium stripping/plating cycles carried out at ~ 0.1 mA/cm 2 caused only a localized accumulation of the small amount of dead lithium at the cell electrodes. It should be noted that continuous stripping/plating process at such high current densities for long-duration would lead to a significant increase in the overall impedance of the cell and eventually to the cell failure.
 The galvanostatic cycling performance of the Li||CPE-15||LTO cell in the voltage range of 1.0 V – 2.5 V is evaluated, and the results are shown in Fig. 10. At C/10 rate, this cell delivers an initial discharge capacity of ~ 133 mAhg -1 (based on the LTO weight in the cathode) which reduces to ~ 124 mAhg -1 in the next cycle (Fig. 10(a)). This irreversible reduction in capacity is usually attributed to side reactions [66]. On further cycling at C/10 rate, the capacity fading is quite small, and the cell delivered a Li + extraction capacity of ~ 119 mAh -1 after 20 cycles with an associated coulombic efficiency (discharging capacity/charging capacity) of about 96%. This capacity fading in the cell with cycling could be due to the change in the composite electrolyte, modification in the LTO structure, and irreversible side reactions in the cell [67]. To further investigate the C-rate capacity behaviour, Li||CPE-15||LTO cell was cycled at C/3 and 1C rates; and a few selected charge/discharge curves are illustrated in Fig. 10(b). On increasing the current density, a serious degradation in specific capacity is observed for the cell, and only ~ 39.7 mAhg -1 and ~ 10 mAhg -1 specific capacity is observed at C/3 and 1C, respectively. Such a dramatic decrease in specific capacity at 1C is related to the increase in overpotential of electrodes as illustrated by the cycling of symmetric Li||CPE-15||Li cell and the electrolyte (IR). As the overpotential of electrodes and electrolyte increases with an increase in discharge rate, the cell is cycled in much shallower true voltage range and as a result, active material LTO in the working electrode is not fully utilized.
 Fabrication of PVDF based composite polymer solid electrolyte with ionic salt LiTFSI at room temperature via solution casting method has been done successfully. The effect of the LSZP-filler content incorporated into PVDF + LiTFSI was analyzed. The structural properties, ionic conductivity, activation energy, and transference number were studied for CPE with the change in LSZP filler content. The field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX) reveals the uniform distribution of active filler LiSnZr(PO 4)3 particles in the PVDF + LiTFSI matrix. The addition of LSZP to the PVDF+LiTFSI matrix results in an improvement in Li + conductivity. The remarkably high ionic conductivity ~ 5.76 ×10 -5 Scm -1 at room temperature and ~ 1.06 × 10 -4 Scm -1 at 60 ℃ were measured for CPE-15. The activation energy for the same combination is calculated to be a minimum of ~ 0.28 ± 0.006 eV. Improvement in ionic conductivity suggests that the addition of lithium-ion conducting LSZP particles helps in providing facile paths for Li + movement. The stability in interfacial resistance of Li symmetric cell shows the compatibility of CPE with Li metal. The linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) showed that the electrochemical stability window (~ 4.73 vs. Li/Li +) for CPE-15 is high as compared to other compositions of CPE. The galvanostatic charge/discharge of Li||CPE||LTO cell showed good cyclability, especially, at low discharging rates and delivered at specific capacity of 119 mAhg -1 after 20 cycles at 0.1 C. Improved electrochemical stability, increase in ionic conductivity & transference number suggests that polymer electrolyte with active (Li + conductors ceramic powder) fillers is a viable candidate for application in all-solid-state lithium batteries.