The structural phase transitions of LiTi 2 ( PO 4 ) 3 , LiInNb ( PO 4 ) 3 , and LiZr 2 ( PO 4 ) 3 have been studied by X-ray diffraction, impedance spectroscopy, 7 Li NMR spectroscopy, and calorimetry. The results indicate that, as the temperature is raised, the lithium ions in the structure of LiTi 2 (PO 4 ) 3 and LiInNb(PO 4 ) 3 redistribute between the M1 and M2 sites. The thermal expansion coefficients along the crystallographic axes of LiTi 2 ( PO 4 ) 3 and LiInNb ( PO 4 ) 3 are estimated.

High cation mobility underlies superionic phase transitions in a considerable number of solid electrolytes, and vice versa: in a number of compounds, phase transitions result in high ionic conductivity [1, 2]. Such phase transitions are most frequently related to redistribution of mobile ions between inequivalent structural sites or to their delocalization in the structure [2]. At the same time, the study of phase transitions is of fundamental interest for gaining greater insight into the mechanisms of cation mobility in solids. NASICON (an acronym for Na superionic conductor, the parent compound of this family) mixed phosphates possessing lithium ion conductivity have attracted wide research interest because of their high ionic conductivity, thermal stability, and low thermal expansion [3, 4]. The structure of the A x MM '( PO 4 ) 3 (A = Li + , Na + , H + , , H 3 O + ; M, M ' = Ti, Ge, Zr, Hf) compounds is made up of êé 4 tetrahedra and åé 6 octahedra. The A cations may occupy two inequivalent sites, M1 and M2, in structural voids. In the general case, such compounds may exist in six related polymorphs, with space groups Ia 3 d , R Pbca , P 2 1 3 , and P 2 1 / n . Most of these polymorphs differ in the degree of A-cation ordering and the associated slight lattice distortions. The diversity of structures, the ease of their mutual transformations, and the high cation mobility in the NASICON materials underlie the possibility of order–disorder phase transitions in them [4]. The phase transitions of sodium-containing double phosphates have been studied in sufficient detail [3, 5]. However, even for these materials there are considerable discrepNH4 + 3c, R3, ancies between the phase-transition temperatures reported in the literature [4, 6]. There is less data on the phase transitions of lithiumcontaining double phosphates. According to X-ray diffraction (XRD) results [7], the lithium tin phosphate LiSn 2 ( PO 4 ) 3 exists in two polymorphs: monoclinic (low-temperature) and hexagonal (high-temperature). Perthuis and Colomban [8] reported the lithium zirconium phosphate LiZr 2 ( PO 4 ) 3 to undergo a monoclinicto-rhombohedral phase transition at temperatures from 298 to 333 K, depending on the annealing temperature [9]. According to neutron diffraction studies [10, 11], the low-temperature phase has triclinic symmetry. Data on the phase transitions of the NASICON compounds LiTi 2 ( PO 4 ) 3 and LiInNb ( PO 4 ) 3 are not available in the literature. The purpose of this work was to compare previous and new data on the phase transitions of a number of NASICON-type lithium polyvalent metal phosphates.

LiZr 2 ( PO 4 ) 3 , LiTi 2 ( PO 4 ) 3 , and LiInNb ( PO 4 ) 3 were prepared by solid-state reactions as described previously [12]. The materials were characterized by XRD on a Rigaku D/MAX 2200 diffractometer (Cu K α radiation). The XRD data were analyzed using the Rigaku Application Data Processing Software Package. Low-temperature XRD patterns were collected on a Siemens D500 diffractometer equipped with an RTI custom cryostat (Cu K α radiation). Ionic conductivity was measured at temperatures from 250 to 870 K and frequencies from 10 Hz to 2 MHz using an IPU-62 ac bridge. The samples had the form of pressed pellets ( R = 5 mm, h = 2 mm) with platinum contacts. The conductivity was determined by extrapolating the semicircle representing the bulk component onto the real axis. Differential thermal analysis was carried out with a Netzsch STA 409 PC Luxx simultaneous thermal analyzer at a heating rate of 5 K/min. Broadband 7 Li nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra were recorded at 34 MHz in the temperature range 80–320 K on a Tesla BS-567A spectrometer modified to measure broad bands.

The double phosphate LiZr 2 ( PO 4 ) 3 crystallizes in triclinic symmetry. However, even at room temperature its XRD pattern shows a number of weak reflections from the rhombohedral phase. Its content in our samples ranged from 2 to 10%. High-temperature XRD data indicate that the triclinic-to-rhombohedral phase transition of LiZr 2 ( PO 4 ) 3 takes place in a wide temperature range (Fig. 1). Because of the unit-cell transformation, heating reduces the intensity of the XRD peaks from the triclinic phase and increases the intensity of the peaks from the rhombohedral phase. During cooling, the reverse transition occurs at substantially lower temperatures and, accordingly, thermal hysteresis is observed (Fig. 2). The present results correlate with earlier 31 ê NMR data [13], which demonstrate that the phase transformation occurs in a wide temperature range and is accom panied by a transition of the phosphorus atoms from three inequivalent sites to one degenerate state. Like the above XRD data, they indicate that this transition has thermal hysteresis. In this study, however, we extended the temperature range of measurements in order to describe this transition in greater detail, which was as a result shown to take place in an even wider temperature range: phase-pure triclinic and rhombohedral samples were obtained below 280 K and above 360 K, respectively.

Moreover, a small, broad exotherm was observed in this temperature range, indicating that the phase transition can be considered first-order [13]. Such phase transitions are referred to as diffuse or martensitic and occur not at a certain temperature but in a temperature range, through variations in the relative amounts of the phases involved [14]. LiTi2(PO4)3 and LiInNb(PO4)3 crystals have hexagonal symmetry even at room temperature and undergo no changes in phase composition during heating to 970 K. This is not surprising because the hexagonal phase is the most symmetrical for the NASICON materials. In this context, these compounds might be expected to undergo phase transitions at lower temperatures. However, low-temperature XRD measurements at temperatures down to 100 K detected no changes in their phase composition. We observed only a shift of XRD peaks, corresponding to the variation in their lattice parameters. At the same time, the ionic conductivity of these materials is more sensitive to changes in cation mobility. The high-temperature ionic conductivity of LiInNbPO4)3 shows Arrhenius behavior (Fig. 3), with an activation energy for conduction of 46 ± 0.2 kJ/mol. Below 300 K, however, the slope of the plot changes markedly, reflecting the increase in activation energy to 79 ± 1 kJ/mol. This provides indirect evidence that the lithium ions pass into another state, with a higher activation energy for mobility. Similar behavior is exhibited by LiTi2(PO4)3. Calorimetry data for LiInNb(PO4)3 and LiTi2(PO4)3show small, broad events, or, rather, a weak maximum in their heat capacity. Such transformations are typical of second-order phase transitions, in which, at low temperatures, an extra heat goes into a transition of some of the ions (molecules or atoms) to a mobile (disordered) state. In this context, consider the evolution of broadband 7LiInNbMR spectra, which provide reliable information about the transition of ions to a mobile state [15]. The 118-K 7Li NMR spectrum of LiTi2(PO4)3 shows a poorly resolved triplet, in which the central line narrows down with increasing temperature, and the quadrupole satellites move in opposite directions. A somewhat different picture was observed in the case of LiInNb(PO4)3 (Fig. 4). Its 118-K spectrum shows a singlet, which narrows down as the temperature is raised to 273 K. At higher temperatures, the spectra broaden abruptly and show well-defined triplet shoulders, whose intensity increases markedly with temperature. According to Paris et al. [16], such shoulders are more characteristic of lithium ions in the M2 site. It is the transition of some of the lithium ions to this site, characterized by a different chemical shift, which is responsible for the effective broadening of the NMR line. Therefore, the observed changes in the spectra of the materials under consideration are due to lithium ion redistribution between the M1 and M2 sites. Low-temperature XRD examination of LiTi2(PO4)3revealed no phase transitions well below room temperature. The variation of the unit-cell parameters of LiTi2(PO4)3, determined by high- and low-temperature XRD measurements, is shown in Fig. 5. The c parameter of LiTi2(PO4)3 decreases almost linearly with decreasing temperature. At the same time, its ‡ parameter varies little with temperature. The estimated thermal expansion coefficient along the ‡ axis is (7.5 ± 0.7) × 10–7 ä–1, and that along the c axis is (277.8 ± 8.47) × 10–7 ä–1. The behavior of the ‡ and Ò parameters during cooling to low temperatures (to 150 K) is very similar to that during heating (to 970 K). Analogous cooling of the zirconium system is accompanied by a phase transition, which involves sharp changes in unit-cell parameters and symmetry.

It seems likely that the lithium redistribution between the M1 and M2 sites has little effect on the structure, which does not show up in low-temperature spectra. On the other hand, the phase transition in these compounds may occur at a temperature so low that, during cooling, their structure simply has no time to change (the kinetic energy of particles at such temperatures is insufficient to overcome the activation energy for the phase transition). The slightly higher phasetransition temperature of LiZr2(PO4)3 leads to thermal hysteresis during heating and cooling. A similar situation was reported for K2Mg2(MoO4)3 [17]: after cooling to room temperature, this compound persisted as a metastable high-symmetry phase for several months. Thus, the present 7Li NMR, calorimetry, XRD, and impedance spectroscopy results indicate lithium ion redistribution between the M1 and M2 sites in the structure of LiTi2(PO4)3 and LiInNb(PO4)3. This process does not change the structure of the materials but leads to weak heat fluxes and a change in the activation energy for conduction at 270 K. In the case of LiZr2(PO4)3, the lithium ion redistribution between the M1 and M2 sites during heating is more significant, giving rise to marked structural changes.

We are grateful to S.S. Khasanov and M.K. Sakharov for the low-temperature X-ray work. This work was supported in part by the Russian Academy of Sciences (program Novel Processes for the Preparation of Chemical Substances and Fabrication of Advanced Materials) and the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant no. 07-08-00590).
