NASICON materials of composition Li 1 + ı Zr 2 – ı In ı ( PO 4 ) 3 ( ı = 0–1) were synthesized. The phase constitution, particle size, and conductivity of these materials were studied as s function of synthesis temperature. High-temperature X-ray powder diffraction was used to study phase transitions in the materials synthesized. Low levels ( ı ≤ 0.1 ) partial substitution of indium for zirconium considerably increase the lithium ion conductivity and reduce the activation energy for conduction compared to the parent compound.

Materials with NASICON structure (NA Super Ionic CONductor; ( å x Ä y ( PO 4 ) 3 , where M is an alkali metal and A is a polyvalent metal with the oxidation number 3–5) are attractive due to their potential for use as solid electrolytes in lithium batteries, sensors, and other electrochemical devices [1, 2]. High ionic conductivity and thermal stability are prerequisites for their efficient performance. The structures of å x Ä y ( PO 4 ) 3 double phosphates are built of Ä O 6 octahedra and PO 4 tetrahedra linked via shared oxygen atoms. An M cation can occupy two positions (M1 and M2) in interstices formed by oxygen atoms. An alternation of such interstices forms a three-dimensional network of conducting channels through which ion transport occurs [3, 4]. The nature and size of A and M cations influence the structure of the compound and thereby its properties including ion conductivity. Most å x Ä y ( PO 4 ) 3 structural varieties differ from one another in the degrees of order of M cations and associated weak distortions of the unit cell. The diversity of possible structures, their easy reciprocal transformations, and high cation mobility in NASICON materials make order–disorder phase transitions possible [4, 5]. The low-temperature NASICON phase of LiZr 2 ( PO 4 ) 3 , as a rule, crystallizes in monoclinic system [6]. The lattice is ordered upon heating to form a rhombohedral phase [7, 8]. Heterovalent doping of LiZr 2 ( PO 4 ) 3 also causes transition into the high-temperature phase and increases low-temperature ion conductivity on account of the generation of extra defects [9]. This work studies the properties of lithium zirconium NASICON phosphate and products of its heterovalent doping by indium ions as dependent on synthesis parameters.

Lithium zirconium phosphate and its indium doping products were synthesized using a ceramic procedure as described in [9]: (1) with, x = 0, 0.02, 0.05, 0.08, 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9, and 1.0. All reagents were carefully triturated in an agate mortar and then annealed in platinum crucibles at 973 K for 1 h. The resulting blend was again triturated, pelletized, and encapsulated with the same powder having an increased lithium level. For optimizing the synthesis, the final annealing temperature was varied from 1270 to 1470 K in 100-K steps. The final annealing lasted 10 h. X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) analysis was carried out on a Rigaku D/MAX 2200 diffractometer equipped with a temperature controller using Cu K α radiation. The Rigaku Application Data Processing program package was used for spectra processing.

High-resolution 7 Li and 31 P NMR spectra were recorded at room temperature on a V arian 500 Minova instrument with a working frequency of 500 MHz for protons. The 7 Li and 31 P resonance frequencies were ~194 and ~202 MHz, respectively. High-resolution spectra were obtained from solid samples with magic angle spinning (MAS) with frequencies of 10–15 kHz. Spectra with satisfactory signal/noise ratios (70 to 2000) for natural isotope concentrations were achieved by averaging of 4–16 spectra. Microstructure was observed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) on a JEM-101 JEOL setup at an accelerating voltage of 100 kV . Ion conductivity was measured on a 2V -1 impedance meter in the frequency range from 10 to 2000000 Hz and the temperature range 298–700 K. The resistance at each temperature was found by extrapolation of impedance spectra to the ohmic resistance axis.

Several processes for preparing NASICON materials are found in the literature, ceramic synthesis being most popular [9–12]. From work to work, the final annealing temperature varied widely from 1070 to 1470 K. After [9], however, high-conductivity materials on the basis of rhombohedral LiZr 2 ( PO 4 ) 3 are formed only at 1470 K. Our attempts to synthesize sam ples of the Li 1 + ı Zr 2 – ı In ı ( PO 4 ) 3 series at this temperature were, however, far from always yielding singlephase materials, although other researchers said that single-phase samples can be prepared even at lower temperatures. Therefore, to study how the annealing temperature influences the phase constitution and properties of Li 1 + ı Zr 2 – ı In ı ( PO 4 ) 3 materials, we synthesized samples with x = 0–1.0 at 1270, 1370, and 1470 K. According to XRD, the crystals of lithium zirconium phosphate LiZr2(PO4)3 prepared at 1470 K are triclinic at room temperature, whereas synthesis at 1270 or 1370 K produces mixtures of monoclinic and triclinic phosphate phases (Figs. 1, 2). In the X-ray diffraction patterns of low-indium Li1 + ıZr2 – ıInı(PO4)3 samples (with 0.02 ≤ ı ≤ 0.05) prepared at 1270–1470 K, there are also reflections corresponding to both triclinic and monoclinic phases; the relative intensities of the reflections from the monoclinic phase increase with increasing indium level. The materials where the indium level ı = 0.08 or ı = 0.1 crystallize in monoclinic system; the materials where ı ≥ 0.3 are orthorhombic. When 0.1 < ı < 0.3, mixtures of the monoclinic and orthorhombic phases are obtained. Peak intensity ratios within the ranges 13°–14° and 19°–20.5° were used to calculate the percentage contents of phases in the samples. Close values were obtained for both ranges (Table 1).

Noteworthy, in many cases single-phase samples are not formed even when the final annealing temperature is as high as 1470 K. For the ı = 0.02 sample, for example, X-ray diffraction patterns contain reflections from the triclinic, rhombohedral, and orthorhombic phases (Fig. 2, Table 1). Triclinic LiZr2(PO4)3 alone is formed only when ı = 0; when ı ≥ 0.5, Li1 + ıZr2 – ıInı(PO4)3 materials are formed as the orthorhombic phase. For the materials prepared at 1270 or 1470 K, we refined unit cell parameters; the refined values are listed in Tables 3 and 4. Because of the narrow range of the compositions where the major phases are rhombohedral and monoclinic, the unit cell parameters of these phases vary relatively little and are virtually unchanged to their uncertainty (Tables 3, 4). When ı ≥ 0.3, the parameters a and b monotonically decrease with increasing doping level for all phases, whereas the parameter Ò, on the contrary, increases. The unit cell volume remains virtually unchanged. Important information on the phase state of a sample is given by NMR spectra [5, 13]. The 31ê NMR spectrum of LiZr2(PO4)3 at 298 K is a triplet (Fig. 3, spectrum 1), which corresponds to the three nonequivalent phosphorus atoms in triclinic LiZr2(PO4)3 [7]. The spectral lines systematically broaden as the indium-for-zirconium substitution level increases. For the ı = 0.02 sample, the line at ≈24 ppm is reduced in intensity because of decreasing percentage content of the triclinic phase. For ı = 0.5 (the orthorhombic phase), the spectrum is a set of lines whose chemical shifts noticeably differ from those for the triclinic or monoclinic phase. 7Li NMR spectra also show a gradual transformation of the triclinic phase to the orthorhombic one (Fig. 4). In this case, line positions are averaged in view of the high cation mobility within one phase; however, line positions for the triclinic and monoclinic phases noticeably differ from line positions in the rhombohedral phase (Fig. 4). High-temperature XRD shows a wide temperature range for the transition from the triclinic to rhombohedral phase in LiZr2(PO4)3 (Fig. 5). Because of the transformation of the unit cell, the lines from the triclinic phase are reduced in intensity upon heating whereas those from the rhombohedral phase rise in intensity. The most likely reason for the coexistence of two phases within some temperature window is the existence of small clusters in LiZr2(PO4)3 with diversified degrees of lithium ion order and, accordingly, diversified structures. The phase transition is reversible, although having some hysteresis (i.e., different degrees of transformation at identical temperatures are observed in the course of heating and cooling) [13]. An Li1.02Zr1.98In0.02(PO4)3 sample prepared at 1270 K, at room temperature is a mixture of two phases: the triclinic phase is ≈7%, and the monoclinic phase is ≈93%. High-temperature XRD shows two phase transitions: from the triclinic to rhombohedral phase at low temperatures (313–333 K) and from the monoclinic to orthorhombic phase at high temperatures (473–623 K). The overall percent ratio between the triclinic and rhombohedral phases does not change in the course of both transitions and remains close to 7 : 93 (Table 2). In many of the tested materials, low-temperature conductivity is not high; in some cases it is impossible to extrapolate impedance spectra, and in this work we compared ion conductivity values for the range 398−770 K. Ion conductivity versus composition plots each have a well-defined maximum in the range of small doping levels for ı = 0.05–0.08 in various samples (Figs. 6–8). The rise in conductivity is due to a doping-induced increase in charge carrier concentration. The defect generation processes associated with indium doping to the LiZr2(PO4)3 structure can be described by the quasichemical reaction (2) According to the Kröger and Wink symbolism, superscripts “*” and “ ' ” denote positive and negative ion charges relative to the relevant site and subscripts denote the location of ions in the structure. Accordingly, a lower positive charge of indium ions at a zirconium site is balanced by the incorporation of lithium ions into interstices ( ). In this connection, while indium levels are low, the charge carrier concentration and, in association, conductivity increase. In further doping, however, defect association processes come into play, and the effective defect concentration decreases. As a result, conductivity gradually decreases to enter a plateau at high substitution levels (0.3 ≤ ı ≤ 1.0) (Figs. 6–8). The samples prepared at 1470 K and having low doping levels (ı ≤ 0.1) have the highest conductivities (Fig. 8). This well agrees with XRD, which detects the high-conductivity rhombohedral phase in the material (Table 1). The crystals of high-indium samples are orthorhombic. The particle size is the decisive factor in their conducting properties. For high doping levels, the maximal conductivity is reached upon annealing at 1270 K. Scanning electron microscopy shows that, as the final annealing temperature rises from 1270 to 1470 K, the crystal size increases systematically from 1.1 to 5.4 μm (Fig. 9), thereby increasing conductivity [2]. Two linear segments with differing activation energies are recognized on conductivity versus inverted temperature plots for the samples prepared at 1270 K. The activation energy for the low-temperature segment (413–598 K) is, on the average, roughly two times that for the high-temperature segment (598–773 K) (Table 5). This matches XRD indications to the occurrence of the monoclinic-to-orthorhombic phase transition. The change in the phase constitution of materials in response to changing chemical composition also leads to a systematic change in activation energy. Noteworthy, the activation energy for conduction systematically decreases within the existence boundaries of the rhombohedral phase as the zirconium substitution level decreases in the samples prepared at 1470 K (Table 5). The conductivity activation energy Eσ can be expressed through the ion migration activation energy Ea and the halved enthalpy of defect generation Δç as follows:

Inasmuch as the substitution of indium for zirconium ions involves extra defect generation in doped materials, the conductivity activation energy decreases to approach the activation energy of ion migration when ı ≤ 0.1. At the same time, the transition of highindium samples to the orthorhombic phase is accompanied by a jump in activation energy. It is also noteworthy that 40% /of the high-conductivity orthorhombic phase in the samples prepared at 1270 K is also responsible for a noticeable reduction in activation energy for conduction in the ı = 0 sample compared to the other compositions. The lower values of the activation energy for conduction in high-indium orthorhombic samples prepared at 1270 K compared to the samples prepared at higher temperatures are likely due to defect generation on the surface of their particles whose sizes are smaller. To summarize our study, a number of Li1 + xZr2 − x Inx(PO4)3 (ı = 0–1) materials have been prepared; these materials can be regarded as promising solid electrolytes having lithium ion conductivity with various temperature windows. The effects of various synthesis processes and heterovalent doping on the phase constitution and ion conductivity of the materials have been compared. The main ion-exchange laws in double phosphates have been studied.

This work was supported in part by the Program of the Russian Academy of Sciences “Development of Synthesis Processes for Chemical Compounds and Materials Design” and the Russian Foundation for Basic Research.
