Phase-pure polycrystalline lead sulfide films have been grown on sodium-ion-conducting solidelectrolyte (NASICON, Na 3 Zr 2 Si 2 PO 12 ) ceramic substrates by chemical deposition from solution. We have studied the microstructure of the films as a function of deposition time (5–180 min) at a fixed deposition temperature of 286 K and the effect of deposition temperature on their growth rate and microstructure. Empirical relations are obtained for the average crystallite size as a function of deposition time and temperature which can be used to select conditions for the growth of PbS films with tailored microstructure.

Polycrystalline films of lead chalcogenides were the subject of intense research in the 1980s–1990s as candidate materials for active elements of infrared detectors and for solar-control coatings [1–5]. A new application area for polycrystalline lead sulfide films is gas sensing, where they can be used as working electrodes of electrochemical hydrogen sulfide sensors. An electrochemical system capable of rapidly and selectively changing its emf in response to changes in hydrogen sulfide concentration in the liquid or gas phase has the form of an Na x WO 3 | NASICON | n -PbS potentiometric electrochemical cell, where Na x WO 3 is the reference electrode, NASICON (Na 3 Zr 2 Si 2 PO 12 ) is a sodium-ion-conducting solid electrolyte, and PbS is the working electrode [6–8]. The microstructure of the thin-film working electrode (surface coverage of the solid electrolyte, crystallite size and shape) may have a significant effect on the rate and nature of the processes at the solid electrolyte/working electrode/gas (liquid) interface and, hence, on the performance of the sensor. Chemical deposition from solution is a viable approach for the preparation of polycrystalline lead sulfide films because it offers the advantages of simple procedure and low temperature, with the possibility of using almost any substrate and varying the process parameters (duration, temperature, initial concentrations, and others) in wide ranges. As shown earlier, the growth rate and microstructure of lead sulfide films depend on the amounts of starting reagents [9–12], composition of the reaction mixture [13–16], synthesis duration [9, 17–19], temperature [9– 11, 19, 20], and the use of solar radiation [21] and seed crystals [22, 23]. Unfortunately, most published data refer to deposition on glass or glass-ceramic substrates and are fragmentary. For this reason, it is difficult or even impossible to select process parameters that will ensure a predetermined film microstructure (surface coverage of the substrate, crystallite size and shape). The purpose of this work was to study the influence of deposition temperature and duration on the growth rate and microstructure of lead sulfide films on the surface of a sodium-ion-conducting solid electrolyte (NASICON).

Lead sulfide films were grown from solution as described by Gorichev et al. [24]. The substrates used were 5-mm-diameter NASICON pellets prepared by hot pressing at the Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences (Chernogolovka). Both substrate faces were polished with 1 µ m diamond paste on synthetic chamois. Without polishing, film growth on the rough NASICON surface was almost instantaneous, which impeded investigation of initial-stage deposition and resulted in a nonuniform crystallite size distribution in the film. The quality of the polished NASICON surface was assessed on an MBS-10 optical microscope. To remove the polish products and residual polishing compound, the pellets were kept in heptane for several hours. Next, the pellets were dried in air and calcined in a muffle furnace at 1270 K for 1 h. Lead sulfide films were grown using 0.25 M thiourea and 0.25 M sodium plumbite solutions. The latter solution was prepared by mixing a lead acetate solution and an excess of a saturated sodium hydroxide solution according to the scheme (1) Next, equal volumes of thermostated starting solutions were added to a beaker, and a substrate was immersed in the mixture for a certain length of time. Lead sulfide was formed by the reaction (2) After deposition, the sample was thoroughly washed with distilled water and dried in air. We examined the effect of deposition time (5– 180 min) at a fixed temperature of 286 K on the film microstructure (surface coverage of the solid electrolyte, preferential orientation, crystallite size and shape). The phase composition of the films was determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) on a Rigaku D/MAX 2500 diffractometer (Cu K α radiation, 2 θ = 5°–80° ). Microstructures were examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) on an LEO SUPRA 50 VP operated at an accelerating voltage of 15–20 kV . The conductivity type of the PbS films was determined from the sign of their thermopower at room temperature.

XRD characterization showed that the PbS films produced by chemical deposition were phase-pure: all of the XRD patterns showed only reflections from lead sulfide and the monoclinic form of NASICON. No preferential orientation was detected in the films. From the sign of their thermopower, the films were determined to be n -type. Figures 1b–1e are SEM micrographs of PbS films grown at 286 K in 5–180 min. For comparison, Fig. 1a shows an SEM micrograph of an annealed, polished NASICON substrate prior to deposition. The microstructure of the films depends on the deposition time. The time dependences of the average size and number density of crystallites (Fig. 2) each consist of two distinct portions. Note that chemical deposition of metal chalcogenides from solution is analyzed at the present stage in terms of two mechanisms [9]: (1) Colloidal metal sulfide particles form in the bulk of the solution, and the film grows through particle adsorption and aggregation (cluster mechanism). (2) Nucleation takes place at the substrate–solution interface, and the film grows through sequential deposition of metal and sulfur ions (ionic–molecular mechanism). At the same time, Markov et al. [9] do not rule out that both mechanisms may be operative during nucleation and film growth,and the question is merely which of them prevails under particular conditions. PbS film growth on NASICON begins in a supersaturated solution ( ≤ 20 min, the initial portion of the 286K curves in Fig. 2). Nucleation and film growth follow the cluster mechanism, which implies homogeneous nucleation in solution. In this stage of the film growth process, the forming crystallites, 15–20 nm in size, are poorly faceted and are spatially isolated from each other. They are uniform in size, with a well-defined maximum in their size distribution (Fig. 3a). It seems likely however that, having a high excess energy, the crystallites are very unstable: their average size rises rather rapidly, and the number of crystallites per square micron drops (Fig. 2). After a certain lapse of time, SEM micrographs show intergrowths of particles, and the crystallites take on a well-defined cubic habit (Figs. 1b, 1c). The crystallites forming in the initial stage of film growth have a pronounced tendency to agglomerate and a high excess energy, as evidenced by the fact that exposure to a 10-keV electron beam leads to their recrystallization. Electron irradiation for a sufficiently long time leads to recrystallization of a surface area and not of individual crystallites (Fig. 4). It is worth noting that high-energy electrons had no effect on the crystallites in the samples kept in solution for more than 20 min. The supersaturation of the reaction solution decreases rapidly over time as a result of lead sulfide precipitation throughout the solution (as a result, the solution turns black). At 286 K, supersaturation is eliminated in 20 min. Further film growth is due to the growth of the already existing crystallites at low supersaturation, presumably through layer-by-layer attachment of Pb 2+ and S 2– ions from solution, as suggested by the fact that faceted growth persists. The growth rate of the crystallites decreases (Fig. 2), and the crystallite size distribution broadens (Fig. 3b). SEM micrographs of the films attest to agglomerate growth and an increase in particle size (Figs. 1d, 1e). PbS deposition seems to be accompanied by mass exchange between the crystallites, resulting in their coalescence. The driving force of this process is minimization of the surface energy of the crystallites in the film. The time variation of the average crystallite size in PbS films at 286 K can be represented by the empirical log–log relations which can be used to select conditions for the growth of PbS films with a particular crystallite size and typical microstructures illustrated in Figs. 1b–1e.

With increasing deposition temperature, the growth rate of lead sulfide crystallites rises considerably, as evidenced by the kinetic curves obtained at 296 and 286 K (Fig. 2). For example, the crystallite size after 30 min of deposition at 296 K is comparable to that after 180 min of deposition at 286 K. Figures 1f–1h are SEM micrographs of the films grown at 296 K in 10–30 min. Comparison of the micrographs in Figs. 1f, 1g, and 1h with those in Figs. 1b, 1d, and 1e, respectively, leads us to conclude that, increasing the deposition temperature, one can obtain lead sulfide films with the same microstructure as at lower temperatures and longer deposition times. At the same time, raising the temperature of the reaction mixture and the growth rate of crystallites leads to their agglomeration, degradation of faceted growth because of the active surface oxidation, and an increase in defect density, which may be undesirable in some instances.

Phase-pure polycrystalline n-type PbS films free of preferential orientation were grown on sodium-ionconducting solid-electrolyte (NASICON) ceramic substrates by depositing lead sulfide from a solution containing thiourea, lead acetate, and sodium hydroxide. The present results demonstrate that the microstructure and growth rate of such films can be controlled by varying the deposition time and temperature. Further research is needed to elucidate the mechanism of PbS film growth on NASICON.

This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research, grant no. 08-03-000991.
