A calcium titanium phosphate glass–ceramic for use as a dental material with excellent chemical durability was derived from a mother glass with a small amount of fluorine. The laser Raman spectroscopic analysis showed that 35CaO–10CaF2–30P2O5– 25TiO2 glass, as the nominal composition, consists of ortho-, pyro-, and meta-phosphate groups. On heating the glass at 8651C, orthophosphate crystals, such as fluorine-containing oxyapatite (Ca10(PO4)6(O,F2)) and the Nasicon-type phase (CaTi4(PO4)6), were preferentially precipitated; the apatite particles of several tens of nanometers in size were embedded in the CaTi4(PO4)6 phase. The pale bluish color of the glass–ceramic indicated that titanium ions were included in the residual glassy phase. When the glass–ceramic was treated with dilute hydrochloric acid, only the apatite particles at the surface were leached out, while no CaTi4(PO4)6 phase was etched; the dissolution of the glass–ceramic was effectively controlled. Almost no dissolution of ions from the glass–ceramic occurred in water. It was suggested that the behavior is a result of the microstructure of the glass–ceramic, which consists of crystalline and glassy phases with excellent chemical durability.

CALCIUM titanium phosphate (CPT) glass–ceramics were reported to be prepared by heating the mother glass, e.g., a typical composition of 45CaO–30P2O5–25TiO2, which induces a spinodal-type phase separation in the glass.1–4 They often consist of Nasicon-type CaTi4(PO4)6 crystals and some crystalline titanium phosphates with calcium phosphate phases.2 Because the calcium phosphate phases in the glass–ceramics are soluble in acidic solutions, they are easily dissolved out by chemical treatment, resulting in materials with well-controlled pores.2–4 Some applications of such porous glass–ceramic materials with a skeleton consisting of functional crystals have been proposed and commercialized.3,4 As another application, artificial dental crowns, which must be precisely reproduced into the shape of the original tooth, can be prepared utilizing the easy shapability of 45CaO–30P2O5–25TiO2 glass and the high mechanical strength of the resulting dense glass–ceramic.1 In this case, the glass–ceramic is coated with a glassy color stain of excellent chemical durability to match the natural teeth. The color staining enables us to use the glass–ceramic as dental crowns with high reliability. Recently, the author’s group has been developing a new type of dental filler material using glass and/or a glass–ceramic. They are now examining the possibility of novel phosphateglass-based fissure sealants with CO2 laser irradiation to prevent dental caries. The CO2 gas laser is applied in some dental treatments such as the repair of restorations to tooth fractures5,6 or pit sealing.7 The laser is effectively adsorbed into phosphate and OH groups. That is, phosphate-glass-based granules are expected to be effectively heated and sintered by the laser irradiation even at a low power. This concept and brief results appear elsewhere.8 Since, acidity in the mouth may increase temporarily, some dental materials require excellent chemical durability, particularly under acidic conditions. In order to use 45CaO–30P2O5– 25TiO2 glass–ceramic as such a filler, the dissolution of calcium phosphate glassy phases should be controlled. To acquire excellent chemical durability, improvement of the microstructure is needed. The formation of fluoroapatite, which has the lowest solubility among various calcium phosphate crystals,9 in the glass– ceramic is anticipated to be one of the ways to improve its chemical durability. The objective in the present work is to prepare novel phosphate glass–ceramics with excellent chemical durability. The present work represents a fundamental investigation of the development of novel dental fissure sealants, using glass-based materials combined with a low-power laser-irradiation process.

A glass with the base composition of 45CaO–30P2O5–25TiO2 (in mol%) was prepared. A mixture of the starting materials, which were reagent-grade CaCO3, H3PO4 (85% liquid), and TiO2, w a s placed with water in a Teflon s beaker (Osaka, Japan) and stirred to make a slurry. The slurry was dried at B2001C. The resulting product was melted in a platinum crucible at 13001C for 40 min. The melt was poured onto a stainless-steel plate, resulting in the formation of a bulk glass, hereafter denoted by CPT glass. As a fluorine-containing glass, the nominal composition of 35CaO– 10CaF2–30P2O5–25TiO2 in mol% was chosen. Firstly, the fired product of a nominal composition (mol%) of 35CaO–30P2O5– 25TiO2 (without 10% CaF2) was prepared by heating at 10001C for 30 min. Next, the resulting product was crushed and mixed with reagent-grade CaF2. The mixture was melted at 13001C f o r 20 min, and subsequently, the melt was poured onto a stainlesssteel plate and quenched to room temperature, resulting in the formation of a bulk glass, hereafter denoted by CPT–F glass. The structure of these glasses was examined by laser Raman spectroscopy (LRS; JASCO NRS-2000, Tokyo, Japan). The compositions of the glasses were roughly estimated by energydispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS; Noran Vantage D1, Middleton, WI) using a device equipped with a scanning electron microscope (SEM; JEOL JSM-6301F, Tokyo, Japan). Heating temperatures for the crystallization of the glasses were determined from differential thermal analysis (DTA; Rigaku Thermo plus TG8120, Tokyo, Japan) at an elevated speed of 51C/min. After the glasses were heated to the determined temperature and held at that temperature for 24 h, they were cooled to room temperature in the furnace. Crystalline phases of the resulting glass–ceramics (denoted by CPT glass–ceramic and CPT–F glass–ceramic, Eindhoven, the Netherlands) were examined by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD; Philips X’pert-MPD) analysis. Fluorine in the CPT–F glass and glass–ceramic was examined by 19F magic angle spinning nuclear magnetic resonance (MASNMR) spectroscopy. The spectra were recorded using a Varian400 plus NMR spectrometer (Palo Alto, CA) operated at 376.3 MHz. A delay time of 10 s and a pulse length of 4.0 ms w e r e used. Chemical shifts were measured relative to CaF2. F l u o rapatite, which was prepared by heating a powder mixture consisting of b-Ca(PO4)2 and CaF2 at 9001C f o r 3 h ,10 w a s u s e d a s a reference material. CPT and CPT–F glass–ceramics were soaked in 1 N HCl aq. for 5 min at room temperature and then washed with distilled water (DW). After this procedure was repeated three times, the surfaces were observed with SEM. The amounts of ions dissolved from the glass–ceramics in water were determined as follows: the glass–ceramics were pulverized into granules with diameters of 53–125 mm. Then 50 mg of the granules was soaked in DW, which had been adjusted to pH 7 using dilute NaOH and HCl, at 371C for 7 days. The amounts of Ca21 and P51 ions dissolved from the samples were determined by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES; Shimadzu ICPS-7000, Kyoto, Japan).

The resulting CPT and CPT–F glasses were clear, with a pale bluish brown color owing to the existence of Ti31 ions.2 Figure 1 shows the LRS spectra of the glasses. There were no significant differences in the spectra between CPT and CPT–F glasses. These glasses included the orthophosphate group (PO43?), the short-chain phosphate structure (P2O74? group), and the long-chain phosphate structure (PO3? group).11–13 Figure 2 shows the DTA curves of the glasses. The glass transition temperatures of CPT and CPT–F glasses were determined to be 6751 and 6151C, respectively; the temperature difference was found to be B601C. The starting points of the exothermic peak due to crystallization were determined to be 7851 and 6851C for CPT and CPT–F glasses, respectively; the difference was B1001C. The lower temperature is due to fluorine inclusion. The CPT–F glass composition estimated roughly from EDS analysis is shown in Table I. Fluorine was partially evaporated, but 2.8% of residual fluorine was included in the glass. Crystallization temperatures were determined to be 7851 and 6851C from the DTA curves of CPT and CPT–F glasses, respectively. Then the glasses were heated at these temperatures for 24 h. Figure 3 shows the XRD patterns of the resulting crystallized glasses. The CPT glass–ceramic includes crystalline phases such as a-Ca2P2O7, C a T i4(PO4)6, T i O2 (anatase), and (TiO)2P2O7, while the CPT–F glass–ceramic includes CaTi4(PO4)6 and apatite. The XRD peaks of the CPT–F glass– ceramic are sharp and their intensities are strong. The formation of the crystals may be reflected by the various structures of phosphate groups in the mother glass. Although there are almost no differences in the glass structures between CPT and CPT–F, as shown in Fig. 1, orthophosphate crystals such as apatite and CaTi4(PO4)6 are precipitated in CPT–F glass without other crystalline phases. Apatite is preferentially formed in CPT–F glass. Almost all of the pyrophosphate groups in CPT–F glass are assumed to be decomposed, which contributes to the crystallization of apatite and CaTi4(PO4)6 during heat treatment. Few pyrophosphate groups would be included in the residual glassy phase, considering the stability of the glassy phase in the glass–ceramic. The CPT glass–ceramic was white, while the CPT–F glass– ceramic was pale bluish. In the CPT glass–ceramic, titanium would be consumed during the formation of crystalline phases such as CaTi4(PO4)6 and (TiO)2P2O7. As a result, a trace amount of titanium may be included in the residual glassy phase. On the other hand, in the CPT–F glass–ceramic, a more substantial amount of titanium is included in the residual glassy phase, as indicated by the pale bluish color. The chemical durability of phosphate glasses was reported to be drastically improved by the inclusion of titanium ions.14 Surprisingly, the structure of the glass–ceramic in the present work is considerably influenced by a small amount of fluorine included in the phosphate glass. Figure 4 shows 19F MAS-NMR spectra of the CPT–F glass and glass–ceramic. In the spectrum of the glass, a broad peak at around ?100 ppm is observed. In the spectrum of the glass– ceramic, a peak at ?103 ppm is observed; this peak is suggested to correspond to that of fluorapatite.15–17 The amounts of fluorine ion and hydroxyl group in the mother glass are quite small, and oxygen in the glass can be used in apatite formation.

Therefore, the apatite in the glass–ceramic is suggested to be fluorine-containing oxyapatite, Ca10(PO4)6(O, F2). Figure 5 shows the SEM images of CPT and CPT–F glass– ceramics after treatment with dilute HCl. Different morphologies are observed. In the CPT glass–ceramic, the characteristic morphology, which is suggested to result from a spinodal-type phase separation of the glass before crystallization, is observed. Our earlier works revealed that, in this kind of glass–ceramic, a calcium phosphate phase and a Nasicon-type crystalline phase such as CaTi4(PO4)6 are three-dimensionally intertwined, and the former is easily dissolved and removed by acid treatment.2–4 On the other hand, in the CPT–F glass–ceramic, after the treatment, numerous independent pits several tens of nanometers in size are observed. The composition of the surface was determined from EDS analysis to be Ca:Ti:P 5 1.0:3.9:5.1 in atomic ratio; this ratio is close to that of the CaTi4(PO4)6 phase. The phase that was leached out is suggested to be apatite, which is embedded in the CaTi4(PO4)6 phase. During the heat treatment of CPT–F glass, apatite is considered to form preferentially, and subsequently, or simultaneously, a large amount of the CaTi4(PO4)6 phase forms around the apatite. As a result, apatite particles several tens of nanometers in size would be apparently embedded in the CaTi4(PO4)6 phase. The orthophosphate group in the glass is consumed in the formation of not only the CaTi4(PO4)6 phase but also the apatite phase. Because of the formation of these phases, the amount of phosphate would decrease, resulting in the controlled formation of crystalline phases such as titanium phosphate and calcium pyrophosphate in the CPT glass–ceramic. Ho¨ land and colleagues reported silicate-based glass–ceramics containing apatite particles several tens of nanometers in size.18–21 In silicate-based glasses, a small amount of phosphorus is reported to be included as an orthophosphate group.21,22 In our preliminary experiments, no apatite formation was observed in fluorinecontaining calcium–phosphate-based glasses consisting of the meta- and/or pyrophosphate groups without the orthophosphate group. The preferential apatite formation is suggested to occur in glasses containing the orthophosphate group. To our knowledge, there are almost no reports on apatite formation in phosphate glasses. Figure 6 shows the amounts of dissolved Ca21 and P51 ions in DW adjusted to pH 7 using dilute NaOH and HCl at 371C. The P51 ion amount measured by ICP-AES is shown here,although there exist ionic phosphate groups in the aqueous solution. The ions were continuously dissolved from CPT and CPT–F glasses and the CPT glass–ceramic during 7 days of soaking; the dissolution behaviors were similar. On the other hand, almost no ions were dissolved from the CPT–F glass– ceramic within the experimental period. Because CPT glass–ceramic includes the calcium phosphate glassy phase, which is three-dimensionally interconnected, as shown in Fig. 5, the ions are considered to be continuously releasable. On the other hand, there was almost no release of the ions from the CPT–F glass–ceramic. Two origins of the excellent chemical durability can be discussed. There would be almost no dissolution of apatite and CaTi4(PO4)6 phases in an aqueous solution at around neutrality. The chemical durability of the residual phosphate glassy phase in the glass–ceramic would be significantly improved by the inclusion of titanium ions. In many cases, the chemical durability of glasses and glass– ceramics deteriorates upon including fluorine. In the present case, however, the crystallization behavior of the CPT glass was drastically influenced by including a small amount of fluorine, and the resulting glass–ceramic showed excellent chemical durability. Upon irradiating CO2 laser at a low power, the fluorine-containing glass or glass–ceramic powders were rapidly sintered. These results will appear elsewhere in the near future.

In order to design a new type of dental filler, a novel CPT glass– ceramic with excellent chemical durability was prepared by including a small amount of fluorine. Fluorine-containing oxyapatite Ca10(PO4)6(O, F2) and Nasicon-type CaTi4(PO4)6phases were preferentially formed during heat treatment of the mother glass. Apatite particles several tens of nanometers in size were embedded in the Nasicon-type phase. Titanium ions were also included in the residual phosphate glassy phase. There were almost no ions dissolved in an aqueous solution adjusted to pH 7. The microstructure of the glass–ceramic was suggested to result in the excellent chemical durability. The glass–ceramic in the present work is expected to be worth developing as a new dental filler. Further evaluation as a dental material is now in progress.
