Highly Al-substituted C-coated Na3V2-xAlx(PO4)3 compounds with a NASICON structure are synthesized by a single and easily scalable sol-gel route. The effect of the experimental conditions is examined. Their structural, chemical and morphological features are described. The first-principles method is used to determine the theoretical voltage vs. Na content profile during Na extraction. The electrochemical Na extraction is characterized by the presence of two plateaus. The first one at ca. 3.4 V is assigned to the V4+/V3+ redox pair, and show a good cyclability. The second plateau at ca. 3.9-4.0 V can be assigned to the V5+/V4+ pair, as evidenced by XPS. This second plateau is less reversible during further discharge.
The concept of sodium-ion battery has been eventually accepted by the scientific community as a promising device to store electricity, as evidenced by a large number of papers reporting meaningful advances on electrode materials and electrolytes [1-3]. For decades, the concerns about their low average cell potential and limited diffusivity of the large Na+ cations as compared to the smaller Li+ ones limited the efforts devoted to the former alkali element. Hopefully, the research of new host networks, better adapted to reversibly insert sodium has revealed cell configurations, which performances are not far away from those of lithium. Moreover, the high abundance and wide dispersion of sodium in the terrestrial crust allow envisaging better perspectives for the economic sustainability of Na-ion batteries. In any case, we should not regard these devices as replacements for the highly competitive Li-ion analogs, rather than electricity storage devices finding their niche of applicability. For instance, their use in large transport and stationary batteries, need for huge amounts of electrode materials in whose case the use of cheaper sodium reagents can be beneficial [4,5].
In recent years, the study of Na3V2(PO4)3 as a positive electrode for Na-ion batteries has been very successful. It exhibits an open framework with a NASICON-type structure, which promotes the reversible sodium insertion [6-9]. This topotactic reaction must undergo parallel to the electron transfer from the transition element. In this respect, the vanadium element furnishes several redox couples ranging from V2+ to V5+ [10,11]. In its role as a cathode, Na3V2(PO4)3 features a flat and reversible plateau at ca. 3.4 V during charge ascribable to the full oxidation of V3+ to V4+ and the extraction of 2 Na+ ions from large distorted cubic sites [12]. The theoretical capacity (117.6 mAh/g) and averaged voltage (3.35 V) of Na3V2(PO4)3 results in an energy density of 394 mWh/g.
First principle calculations have reported that the extraction of the remaining Na+ from distorted octahedral sited would require a very high potential [13]. These authors proposed 4.64 V vs Na+/Na for the pair V5+/V4+. But to our knowledge, this feature has not yet been reported. Hopefully, several papers have demonstrated that the partial replacement of vanadium by other electrochemically active elements as Fe [14,15] and Mn [16], or even non-active ones as Cr [17] and Al [18,19] lead to the appearance of a small high voltage plateau undoubtedly attributed to the reversible oxidation of V4+ to V5+, at least in a limited extent. In the case of the Al substituted series Na3V2-xAlx(PO4)3, the compounds were obtained by solid-state reaction, and limited to x ≤ 0.5. The substitution of one V by one Al (i.e. x = 1) could not be achieved by this method. The partial substitution of V by the lighter element Al to give Na3V1.5Al0.5(PO4)3 allows increasing the theoretical capacity from 117.6 to 120.8 mAh/g. The plateau at higher voltage of the V5+/V4+ redox pair allows also to increase the energy density from 394 up to 423 mWh/g.
 Following the same strategy, Liu et al. reported a highly substituted composition as Na3VCr(PO4)3. The theoretical capacity is similar to the V-pure compound, 117.3 mAh/g, nut the presence of the V5+/V4+ pair could increase the energy density up to 440 mWh/g. Experimentally, the extent of the four volts plateau, due to the participation of the V5+/V4+ redox couple, was as high as 33 % of the overall capacity when the cell was cycled at –15 ºC [20]. These results, showing the plateau of the V5+/V4+ pair, seem to suggest that the very high voltage of the extraction of the third Na+ ion from Na3V2(PO4)3 is more probably due to the unfavorable extraction of this third Na+ ion itself, rather than to the V4+ to V5+ oxidation.
It is worth noting the partial substitution of V3+ by Mn2+, to give Na4VMn(PO4)3 also with NASICON structure, involving to redox pairs: Mn3+/Mn2+ at ca. 3.3 V and V4+/V3+ at ca. 3.6 V [21], with a theoretical capacity of 111.0 mAh/g and energy density of 383 mWh/g. Although it does not improve the capacity/energy values it is compensated with the long durability and excellent rate performance, offering an interesting low-cost alternative for stationary electric power storage.
A larger Al substitution, to give Na3VAl(PO4)3, would have a larger capacity and energy density that the previous cited systems, 124.1 mAh/g and ca. 450 mWh/g, replacing V by a less expensive and more environmental friendly element.
We have prepared Na3VAl(PO4)3/C by a single sol-gel method to replace toxic vanadium by environmentally friendly aluminum atoms. The activation of the V5+/V4+ redox couple may counterbalance the loss of capacity when vanadium content is diminished. The sodium insertion process was evaluated by galvanostatic and potentiostatic experiments and the reaction mechanism determined by X-ray diffraction and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. The experimental voltage values are compared with the theoretical values obtained by first-principle calculations.
Na3VAl(PO4)3/C samples were prepared by a typical citric based sol-gel route.For this purpose, 15 mmoles of citric acid (Aldrich, 99%), 5 mmoles of NH4VO3 (Panreac, 98%), 5 mmoles of Al(NO3)3∙9 H2O (Panreac, 98%) were dissolved in 50 mL of deionized water. A second solution consisted of 15 mmoles NaH2PO4 (Aldrich, 98102 %) dissolved in 50 mL of deionized water. Then, this latter solution was dropwise poured on the former one under continuous stirring. After adjusting the pH to values of 7, 9 or 11, 75 mmoles of ethylene glycol were added and the temperature was set at 80ºC for one hour to favor jellification. Next, the solvent was removed in a rotary evaporator (70 ºC; 200 mbar) and the homogeneous gel was dried overnight at 120 ºC. This greenish solid precursor was ball milled for 5 minutes and subjected to precalcination at 400 ºC for 4 h to remove organic molecules. The blackish solid was pestled and pelletized (3 Tons) before calcining at several temperatures ranging from 650 to 800ºC for 10 h (heating ramp: 5 ºC min-1) under an Ar stream (80 mL min-1). Citric acid is a metal chelating agent, which thermal decomposition under an Ar atmosphere provides a carbonaceous residue for the improvement of the electronic conductivity. Samples prepared at different pH values will be named as A1Px, being x the pH (7, 9 or 11). Alternatively, another sample was prepared at pH = 9 by slightly decreasing the Al content at 0.8 per formula unit. This sample will be labeled as Al08P9.
The purity of the phases and their structural parameters were determined by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD). The patterns were scanned between 10 and 80 o2θ, stepsize 0.02 and 16 s per step on a Bruker D8 Discover A25 diffractometer equipped with Cu Kα radiation, Ge monochromator, and a Lynxeye detector. Cycled electrodes were preserved from moisture air by covering the samples with a Kapton tape. The lattice parameters were refined by the Rietveld method, as implemented in TOPAS v.4.2 commercial software. Carbon content was determined in an Elemental CHNS Eurovector EA 3000 analyzer.
Field-emission scanning electron images (FE-SEM) were acquired in a JSM7800F Prime microscope. This equipment is furnished with an EDX analyzer allowing to record the mapping of elements. Transmission electron micrographs (TEM) were acquired in a JEOL 1400 microscope. A Renishaw Raman instrument (InVia Raman Microscope) equipped with a Leica microscope was used for the acquisition of Raman spectra. Green laser light at 532 nm was employed as an excitation source and the spectra were scanned between 1000 and 2000 cm-1.
The electrochemical behavior was tested by both galvanostatic and potentiostatic methods. For this purpose, SwagelokTM-type cells were used to assemble sodium half-cells into a glove box. Working electrodes were composed of the active material (80 %), carbon black (10 %) and PVDF (polyvinylidene fluoride) (10 %). These components were dispersed in N-methyl pyrrolidone and stirred until the full dissolution of PVDF. This paste was spread on a 9 mm Al disks and dried overnight at 70 ºC and then vacuum dried at 120 ºC for two hours. The mass load was ca. 3 mg. The counter electrode was a 9 mm sodium disk. Both electrodes were separated by glass fiber disks (GF/A-Whatman) soaked in 1M NaClO4 / PC (2% FEC) as an electrolyte solution and assembled in a SwagelokTM type two-electrode cells. The Na half-cells were galvanostatically cycled between 2.0 and 4.3 V vs Na+/Na at several C rates. Galvanostatic intermittent titration technique (GITT) was applied to record one cycle at a quasi-equilibrium state. For this purpose, current pulses at C/20 were applied for 30 minutes, followed by a relaxation period of 1 h. Electrodes subjected to XRD analysis were cycled at C/10. The electrochemical tests were monitored in a VMP multichannel system.
The geometry optimization and total energy calculations were performed within the density functional theory (DFT), as implemented in the Castep code [22]. We used the Generalized-Gradient Approximation (GGA) using the exchange-correlation potential by Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof (PBE) [23], with “on the fly” generated pseudopotentials. A density-mixing scheme with a conjugate-gradient Pulay solver [24] was used for the energy minimization and a Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno (BFGS) algorithm [25] for the internal coordinate optimization. Finally, the approach LDA+U was introduced, using the simplified, rotationally invariant approach as implemented in Castep [26,27]. The value of U effective was 4.2, as used in previous work on the system Na3V2(PO4)3 [13]. The pseudo atomic calculation were performed using the following valence electrons: O 2s2 2p4, Na 2s2 2p6 3s1, Al 3s2 3p1, P 3s2 3p3, and V 3s2 3p6 3d10 4s2. Spin-polarized calculations were performed in all cases. A selected k-point mesh of ca. 0.07 Å–1 (determined by the Monkhorts-Pack scheme) was used, and an energy cut-off of 610 eV. The convergence conditions were: energy, 10–5 eV atom-1; max. force, 0.03 eV Å-1; max. stress 0.05 GPa, max. displacement, 10–3 Å. The calculations were carried out in the P1 space group; i.e. without any symmetry constraints. Thus, all atoms were allowed to relax into their most stable positions.
The XRD patterns of the samples obtained at different pH values and after heating at 650 °C are shown in Figure 1, as well as the Rietveld refinements. All the reflections were indexed according to the R-3c space group. No additional reflection ascribable to impurities or unreacted products were detected. Some selected refined parameters are included in Table 1. In the rhombohedral structure of Na3VAl(PO4)3 (similar to Na3V2(PO4)3) V and Al atoms occupy simultaneously the site 12c, while Na atoms occupy two different crystallographic sites: 6b (0,0,0) and 18e (x,0,¼). On the refinement, we assumed that the site 6b is fully occupied by Na, while the 18e site is occupied at 66.67 % by Na. The relative occupancy of Na, V, and Al in their sites was not refined.
The refined unit cell parameters (Table 1) are smaller than those of the pure vanadium phase Na3V2(PO4)3 and also smaller than the partially substituted phase with Al up to 0.5 in Na3V2-xAlx(PO4)3 [19], as expected from the replacement of V3+ (0.64 Å, in CN = 6) by the smaller Al3+ (0.535 Å). It is worth noting the large value of the width of the reflections. It is reflected in the low value of the size of the coherent diffraction domains, of ca. 30 nm. The increase of the linewidth with the increasing Al content was already observed for the samples with smaller Al substitution Na3V2-xAlx(PO4)3 (x ≤ 0.5) [19]. The authors assigned it to a decrease of the crystallinity with Al content, although no analysis of the linewidth was provided.
We tried to improve the crystallinity/crystallite size of the samples by increasing the calcination temperature but unfortunately, new peaks no ascribable to the main phase appeared progressively as T increased.
The applied sol-gel method is expected to produce also an amorphous carbonbased conductive phase accompanying the main product Na3VAl(PO4)3. The presence of this carbon conductive phase could not be evidenced by X-ray diffraction. At these low calcination temperatures, carbons only feature a broadened (002) reflections at ca. 25 °2θ, overlapping with some reflections of the main phosphate phase.
To unequivocally identify the carbonaceous residues of the calcination, Raman spectra were recorded. The spectra of selected samples are shown in Figure S1 in the range between 1000 and 2000 cm−1. The profiles can be decomposed into five components. The most remarkable components appear at ca. 1354 cm−1 and 1594 cm−1 (labeled as D1 and G in Figure S3 and Table S1). The former signal (D1) is attributed to disordered domains, while the latter one belongs to 'in-plane’ displacement of carbon atoms in the crystalline graphene domains [28]. Additional components ascribable to amorphous carbon also appear at ca. 1507 cm−1 (D3), 1200 cm−1 (D4) and 1701 cm−1 (D2) [29]. The ratio between the integrated areas of G and D1 bands is related to the level of graphitization [28]. This value was ca. 0.42 for all analyzed samples, irrespectively of the sample. This value implies a low level of graphitization. Finally, the carbon content was determined. The results are included in Table 1. The carbon content was very similar for all samples, ranging from 10 and 13 % weight.
 FESEM images included in Figure 2 reveal the most relevant textural and morphological aspects of the studied samples. We observe large aggregated particles bearing sharp edges and heterogeneous sizes. The changes neither in pH value nor in Al content did not exert significant changes in the particle morphology. The carbon coating is clearly visible in Fig. 2-AlP11. The actual thickness was not homogeneous, varying from few nm to 20-30 nm.
The EDX maps for the constituting elements evidencing their homogeneous distribution on the particle surface (Figure S2). This fact confirms the goodness of the sol-gel route-based synthesis method, in which homogeneous precipitation yields a homogeneous distribution of the elements in the final product, in contrast with classical direct calcination of reactants.
Also, the fluorescence spectra and their quantitative analysis are included revealing a close similarity between the theoretical atomic composition deduced from the stoichiometric compound and the experimental values. TEM images allowed a close inspection of the particles to discern the efficient disposal of the in-situ generated carbon coating. This carbonaceous phase is built as a rough layer of ca. 20 nm surrounding the particles (Figure 2 bottom).
The classical description of the NASICON-type R-3c trigonal structure of Na3M2(PO4)3 is usually done using a hexagonal unit cell, where Na atoms occupy 2 different crystallographic sites: 6b (0,0,0) and 18e (x,0,¼). The first site is usually fully occupied, while the second site has a partial occupation of 2/3; i.e. 12 positions are occupied and 6 are empty, as indicated previously. To simplify calculations, we used the rhombohedral unit cell, where Na atoms occupy the sites 2b (0,0,0) and 6e (x, –x+½, ¼). Figure 3 represents the rhombohedral unit cell and the projection along the [1,1,1] and [1,-1,-1] directions. In this unit cell, the site 2b is fully occupied, while the site 6e is partially occupied. The six equivalent 6e positions are numbered from 1 to 6 (Figure 3). In Na3M2(PO4)3 only 4 sites are occupied. The two vacancies can be located as follows:
(a) in the same layer, corresponding to the occupied positions 1-2, 2-3, 3-1, 4-5, 56, and 6-4, as indicated in Figures 3A, 3B and 3C, all six being equivalent configurations. 
(b) in different layers, occupying positions in a symmetric way: 1-6, 2-5, 3-4. 
(c) in different layers, occupying no symmetric positions: 1-4, 1-5, 2-4, 2-6, 3-5, and 3-6.
The structure of Na2M2(PO4)3 was simulated in the same way, but locating now only 2 Na atoms and 4 vacancies in the 6e site. For NaM2(PO4)3, it was assumed that the 6e site is empty. After geometrical optimization, the values of energy revealed that the configurations (b) and (c), with vacancies in different layers, have almost the same energy, while the (a) configuration is less stable, with an energy difference ∆E ≈ 0.13 eV per formula unit (f.u.).
For the description of the Al substituted compound, Na3VAl(PO4)3, we also used the configuration (b:16) for Na atoms. In the rhombohedral unit cell, V atoms occupy the crystallographic site 4c (x,x,x), as represented in Figure 3D. The two Al atoms can be located:
(d) in two consecutive sites along the (1,1,1) direction with a shorter distance,occupying the sites 1-2 or 3-4, as represented in Figure 3D, both being equivalent.
(e) in two consecutive sites with larger distance, occupying the sites 1-4 or 2-3. 
(f) in two alternate sites, occupying the sites 1-3 or 2-4.
The geometrical optimization showed that the configuration (d) is slightly more stable than (e) with ∆E ≈ 0.01 eV per f.u., and much more stable than (f), with ∆E ≈ 0.22 eV/f.u. Concerning the structural variation induced by Al substitution, the calculation shows that the volume is expected to decrease, as compared with the pure V phase, ca. 6%, which is somewhat higher than the experimental value, of ca. 4 %.
With this configuration, we calculated the voltage of the Na extraction from the energy of the different phases, according to:
The calculated voltage for the two-phase reaction NaV2(PO4)3 / Na3V2(PO4)3 is 3.2 V . It is worth noting that the voltage value for the V4+/V3+ pair is ca. 0.2 V lower than the experimental value. This tendency to underestimate the voltage is similar to that observed in previous reports for Na3V2(PO4)3 using similar U values [13]. The use of smaller values of U also results in underestimated voltage values, not only for Na but also for Li phases, Li3V2(PO4)3 [6]. This effect is assigned to the strong inductive effect of phosphate groups surrounding V atoms in this structure. The voltage profile represented in Figure 3 has been calculated obtaining the energy differences between the starting phases, with 3 Na per f.u. and the corresponding Na-extracted phases, and corrected for an offset of 0.18 eV.
The voltage for the extraction of the first Na from Na3VAl(PO4)3 is almost the same that for the pure V phase, and can be assigned to V3+ into V4+ oxidation. On the contrary, for the extraction of the second Na, the voltage of the Al-containing phase increases up to 3.8 V. This plateau can be assigned to the V4+ to V5+ oxidation. Just to check it, the Na extraction was analyzed for the theoretical compound containing Al but not V, i.e. Na3Al2(PO4)3. The calculated voltage for the hypothetical oxidation of Al3+ to Al4+ is 5 V. It confirms the assignation of the 3.8 V step to the V5+/V4+ redox pair.
The theoretical capacity for the plateau at 3.40 V, referred to Na3V2(PO4)3, is 117.6 mAh g-1, and the nominal specific energy density is 399.9 Wh g-1. The partial replacement of V by the lighter Al makes the theoretical capacity of Na3VAl(PO4)3 to increase up to 124.1 mAh g-1. Additionally, because of the increase of the voltage of Na extraction, the calculated specific energy density goes up to reach 447.5 Wh g-1, a relative increase of ca. 12 % as compared with Na3V2(PO4)3. The increase of both the voltage and the energy density makes the V by Al substitution of great interest.
The extraction of the last Na from NaVAl(PO4)3 is expected to take place at high voltage, close to 5 V. From previous calculations, one could think that this high voltage can be due to the improbable oxidation of Al3+ to Al4+. But for the pure V phase, where Al is not present, the voltage of the extraction of the last Na, corresponding to the oxidation of only one V atom per f.u. from V4+ to V5+, also takes place at a high voltage. Thus, this high voltage seems linked to the extraction of the last Na itself, more than to the V5+ or the hypothetical Al4+ oxidation state.
A galvanostatic intermittent titration curve was recorded on A1P9 to unveil the electrochemical behavior of this stoichiometry in a quasi-equilibrium state (Figure 4). On charging, a first plateau appears at ca. 3.40 V. The capacity of this plateau correlates to the extraction of one Na+ ion. These values are highly coincident to those reported for Na3V2(PO4)3 and ascribable to the full V3+ to V4+ oxidation and the corresponding Na+ extraction from distorted eightfold sites [30-34]. This plateau is quite reversible as can be deduced from the extent of its counterpart during cell charging. Their short relaxations involve a fast kinetic response of the insertion process. A second plateau appears at ca. 4.0 V. Although this value is ca. 0.2 V higher than the calculated, it is similar to that observed in previous reports on Al substituted Na3V2-xAlx(PO4)3 with x ≤ 0.5 [19]. These authors suggested the vanadium oxidation to the pentavalent state. Its extent is shorter than that of V3+ oxidation and the reversibility in the subsequent discharge is certainly limited. Also, the relaxation curves recorded at the high voltage plateau appears longer than for the low voltage one. This fact can be related to kinetic hindrance occurring when sodium is extracted and reinserted at 4.0 V.
To throw light to this question, the direct current resistance and the diffusion coefficients were calculated from the GITT curve [35] at different points during the first charge and discharge cycle. Both resistance and diffusion values follow a similar trend as a function of the normalized capacity, the minimum values of diffusion corresponding to maximum values of current resistance (Fig. 5B and 5C), as expected. It is also worth noting that the values of the diffusion are lower for the second plateau at 3.9-4.0 V than for the first one at 3.4 V (and the opposite for the resistance also holds). It agrees with a kinetic hindrance at the 3.9-4.0 plateau. Higher values of diffusion (lower values or resistance) are recovered during the discharge at the plateau at 3.4 V
Impedance measurements also allow obtaining information about diffusion and resistance. Figure S3 shows a linear correlation between the real impedance (Z’) and the reciprocal square root of angular frequencies at low values. It allows determining the Warburg coefficients (σw) from the slope of the straight lines [36,37]. The apparent diffusion coefficients of sodium can be eventually calculated by applying the following equation:
where R is the gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, A is the geometrical electrode area, F is the Faraday’s constant, and C is the molar concentration of Na+ ions in the formula unit.
Figure 5D displays the changes of this coefficient for two selected samples as a function of the normalized capacity. Both samples reveal similar profiles to that obtained from GITT measurements: the coefficients slightly vary along the first plateau at 3.4 V, but then an abrupt diminution is observed during the four volts plateau. Fortunately, these values are retrieved during the subsequent discharge indicating that despite the difficulties of reversibly insert sodium at the latter plateau, the NASICON structure is preserved and sodium can be effectively reinserted in the vacant sites at the low voltage region.
Both Al substitution and Na extraction are expected to be accompanied by a decrease in cell volume. Thus, the cell volume decreases from 1438.3 Å3 for Na3V2(PO4)3 [13] to ca. 1392.6 Å3 for Na3VAl(PO4)3; i.e. a reduction of ca. 3 %. This decrease of volume would be expected from the replacement of V3+ (0.64 Å, in CN = 6) by small Al3+ (0.535 Å). This is also a direct proof of the substitution of vanadium by aluminum in the NASICON structure.
Experimentally, the extraction of 2 Na from Na3V2(PO4)3 results in a volume reduction of ca. 8.1 %, which compares fairly well with our calculations, ca. 9.0 %. In the case of the partially substituted Na3V1.5Al0.5(PO4)3 the extraction of 2 Na resulted in a volume reduction of ca. 6.9 % [19].
For Na3VAl(PO4)3 two partially desodiated samples were studied by XRD, by interrupting the charge curve at 3.7 V (ca. extraction of 0.9 Na), and 4.3 V (extraction of 1.5 Na) (Fig. 7, AlP11 at C/5). The refinement of the unit cell parameters gave the following volume values: 1392.6 Å3, 1342.8 Å3 and 1300.9 Å3 for Na3VAl(PO4)3, Na2VAl(PO4)3 and NaVAl(PO4)3, respectively. The relative volume reduction is ca. 3.6 % and 6.6 % for the successive extraction of 1 and 2 Na. These values agree very well with our calculations. The calculated volume variation are included in Figure 4.
Table 2 shows the refined unit cell parameters, as well as the Na–O distances in the crystallographic site 18e occupied by Na available for extraction. As already indicated, the volume reduces with Al substitution, and then during Na extraction. The Na insertion is accompanied by the V oxidation, and V atoms also reduce the size from 0.64 Å (V3+) to 0.59 Å (V4+) and finally to 0.54 (V5+) giving rise to a decrease of the cell volume. It is worth noting that the size of V5+ is similar to that of Al3+.
Concerning specifically Na atoms, the Na-O bond distances also show an important decrease, especially during Na extraction. It can results in a more difficult Na diffusion in the solid, and thus a lower kinetic, higher polarization and lower reversibility.These structural changes can help to understand why the extension of the plateau at 3.94.0 is smaller than expected, as well as its reversibility.
 Concerning cycling, as the plateau at 3.9-4.0 is almost not recovered from cycle to cycle, it can result in a progressive capacity lost during the first cycles, and most of the reversible capacity on extended cycling is due to the 3.4 V plateau.
The oxidation state of vanadium was evaluated by XPS. Figure 6 shows the V2p core levels in both pristine and charged samples. The deconvolution of profiles recorded for pristine samples revealed three distinct signals. The most relevant ones appeared at 516.8(2) eV and 523.7(1) eV, which are respectively ascribed to theV2p3/2 and V2p1/2 core levels of vanadium in the trivalent state.37,39 Besides, a small O1s X-ray satellite appeared at 520.4(1) eV.
The XPS spectrum of the A1P9 sample charged at 4.3 V showed asymmetric V2p bands largely shifted to high energy bindings. Thus, the V2p3/2 was decomposed in two components at 517.6 eV and 518.7 eV, while V2p1/2 core level signals appeared at 524.3 eV and 525.7 eV. In previous reports, these values were respectively assigned to the presence of V4+ and V5+, evidencing that vanadium may reach the pentavalent state at the end of the four-volt plateau [14,17].
Figure 7-left shows the three first galvanostatic cycles of sodium half-cells at C/5 rate. At first glance, the reversibility of the low voltage plateau is evidenced. Concerning the 4-V plateau, this feature is observed in subsequent cycles despite the low Coulombic efficiency. To propose an optimization strategy of the electrochemical characteristics for this phase Na3VAl(PO4)3, the change of the pH during the gel formation and a slight decrease of the Al content (A108P9 sample) were proposed. The A1P9 sample revealed the lowest overall capacity (67 mA h g-1) and the worst Coulombic efficiency. On varying the pH value from 7 to 11, we observe and a slight increase in capacity from 67 to 79 mA h g-1.
Finally, the slightly decrease the Al content to optimize the eventual composition of the electrode was also regarded. Thus, Al08P9 revealed the highest overall capacity (89 mA h g-1) and Coulombic efficiency. Recently, Liu et al. found a similar plateau at four volts on the related Na3VCr(PO4)3 compound [20]. They also showed poor reversibility of this feature at room temperature. However, electrochemical tests performed at low temperature (-15ºC) suppressed the structural changes leading to the irreversibility. Unfortunately, our attempts to improve the reversibility of the four volts plateau by cycling samples at either lower or high temperatures were less fruitful (Figure S4).
Despite this fact, the rate capability of the studied samples was performed to unveil their electrochemical performance in the whole potential windows between 2 and 4.3 V (Figure 7-right and Figure 8). The galvanostatic curves recorded at increasing the C rates from C/5 to 5C show the typical decrease in capacity and increased charge/discharge polarization due to the kinetic hindrance when a fast kinetic is imposed on sodium migration (Figure 7-right). The comparative study was focused on two distinct parameters. On the one hand, the capacity versus cycle number is shown in Figure 8a.
Although changes in pH values had a minor effect on the discharge capacity, the most relevant result is the decrease of the Coulombic efficiency when the pH values were decreased from 11 to 7 during the gel formation. The highest capacity, showing also a good cyclability, was recorded for A08P9 reaching values of 83 mAhg-1 after 80 cycles. From the galvanostatic curves, additional information can be inferred about the chargedischarge polarization. The mean voltage at the low plateau, responsible for the V4+/V3+ redox pair was determined at both charge and discharge. The difference between both values is plotted versus the applied current in Figure 8b. Samples with Na3VAl(PO4)3 stoichiometry displayed the highest values, though minimized for A1P9. Otherwise, A08P9 showed low polarization values.
Electrochemical impedance spectra evidenced the close relationship between cell polarization in Figure 8b and the internal resistance for Na3VAl(PO4)3 samples prepared at different pH values. Figure 9a shows the Nyquist plots recorded at intermediated stages of the first charge (3.5 V) and further discharge (3.5 V). A1P7 performed the highest real impedance values, which is directly correlated to the cell resistance, while lower values appear for AlP11 and especially for AlP9. For the A1P11 sample, the study of cell impedance was extended to several points of the first cycle (Figure 9b). As can be seen, the cell impedance experienced minor changes while cycling between 3 and 4.3 V. Only when discharging at 2.0 V, an abrupt increase of impedance was observed. However, this fact was quite reversible as can be checked by comparing the profiles after the second charge and discharge.
We synthesized C@Na3VAl(PO4)3 with NASICON-related structure via a sol-gel route. The calcination temperature is critical to obtain a high purity product, while changes of pH during the sol-gel procedure had no effect (from DRX point of view) neither on the structure nor in the purity of the phase. TEM images showed that a thin film of the carbonaceous phase is coating the particles of the Na3VAl(PO4)3 main phase, arising from the decomposition of the organic precursors. Raman spectroscopy confirms the presence of a low graphitized carbon conductive phase.
The electrochemical extraction of Na from Na3VAl(PO4)3, reveals the presence of two plateaus at ca. 3.4 and 4.0 V, in good agreement with firsts principles calculations, being the second plateau absent in Al-free Na3V2(PO4)3. XPS confirms the oxidation of V3+ in charged samples to V4+ and V5+, evidencing that vanadium may reach the pentavalent state at the end of the four-volt plateau. XRD data recorded on desodiated electrodes reveals a relative volume reduction of ca. 3.6 % and 6.6 % for the successive extraction of 1 and 2 Na+ per formula unit. These values agree very well with our calculations.
The apparent diffusion coefficients, calculated from the impedance spectra, show a significant increase during the first charge plateau at 3.4 V, but decreasing during the high voltage plateau at 4.0 V. Fortunately, these values are retrieved during the subsequent discharge, thus indicating that the NASICON structure is preserved and sodium can be effectively reinserted. The best electrochemical performance was determined for the sample prepared at pH=9. Notwithstanding, a slight decrease of the Al content, down to Na3V1.2Al0.8(PO4)3 allowed to slightly improve the electrochemical performances, without sacrificing the good behavior at high rates.
