The kinetics of solid-phase reactions between hafnium hydrogen phosphate and alkali metal chlorides were studied by thermogravimetry with subsequent analysis of leaving gases. For sodium and potassium chlorides, the reaction occurs in two stages; the first stages produces MHHf ( PO 4 ) 2 , and the second yields the MHf 2 ( PO 4 ) 3 NASICON phosphate. For rubidium chloride, the reaction is one stage and produces Rb 2 Hf ( PO 4 ) 2 . For cesium chloride, the reaction is an analogue of the reaction for rubidium chloride, but has two stages. Kinetic data were used to determine interdiffusion coefficients for hydrogen and alkali-metal ions at various temperatures and the activation energies of interdiffusion.

Studies of cationic mobility and diffusion processes are an important field of solid-state chemistry. Ion and atom mobility in inorganic materials holds a significant place in contemporary materials science on account of both fundamental interest and the importance of this problem for particular practical tasks. These tasks include search for new synthetic routes for a number of inorganic and organic materials and description of practically important properties of solids, such as electrical and ionic conduction [1]. Ion-exchange kinetic studies in solids are an important and interesting source of data on diffusion processes [2]. Reactions of hydrogen phosphates of polyvalent metals H x Ä( PO 4 ) 2 , where A = Ta, Sn, Zr, and Ti, with alkali metal halides were gravimetrically studied earlier [3–7]. These studies showed two possible mechanisms of proton exchange for an alkali metal ion. One scheme involves the displacement of the interface between the substituted phase and the unsubstituted one [3, 5]. The other involves the formation of a continuous solid solution [4, 5, 7]. The first kinetic scheme (for example, for Sn ( HPO 4 ) 2 and Zr ( HPO 4 ) 2 ) is well described by the Jander model. In cases of tantalum and zirconium hydrogen phosphates, an insignificant part of the reagents reacts even during mechanochemical treatment [4, 5]. This work studies the reaction between hafnium hydrogen phosphate Hf ( HPO 4 ) 2 and alkali metal chlorides using thermogravimetry followed by analysis of leaving gases.

Hafnium hydrogen phosphate was prepared as follows. Hafnium oxide was dissolved in hydrofluoric acid; then, 50% orthophosphoric acid was added, and the solution was slowly evaporated for 5 h until precipitation occurred [8]. The precipitate was separated by centrifugation. The product composition was formulated as Hf ( HPO 4 ) 2 · 2 H 2 O using thermogravimetry. The kinetics of the solid-phase reaction were studied on stirred mixtures of hafnium hydrogen phosphate preannealed at 175°ë for 0.5 h with sodium, potassium, rubidium, and cesium chlorides in the proportion 1 : 1 and 1 : 2. The reaction with lithium chloride was not studied because of its high tendency to hydration. X-ray powder diffraction was measured on a Rigaku D/MAX-2000 diffractometer equipped with a hightemperature unit and an RTS-30 temperature controller using Cu K α radiation. Thermal analysis was carried out on a Netzsch TG 209 F1 thermobalance in platinum crucibles and was followed by analysis of leaving gases on a Netzsch QMS 403 C mass spectrometer. Heating rate were 5 and 10 K/min; sample sizes were 40–60 mg; and the temperature range was 25–950° C. In isothermal experiments, a test sample was heated to a set temperature at 10 or 20 K/min and then weight loss was monitored for 1 h at a constant temperature. Particle sizes were ascertained by digitizing micrographs obtained using an MFN-11 LOMO microscope. The average particle size of hafnium hydrogen phosphate was 2 µ m.

eat-induced degradation of hafnium hydrogen phosphate occurs in two stages (Fig. 1). In the range 100–400°ë , water of crystallization is eliminated. Then, within 540–700°ë , anhydrous hafnium hydrogen phosphate degrades to hafnium pyrophosphate:Hf ( HPO 4 ) 2 HfP 2 O 7 + H 2 O . (1) Where mixtures of hafnium hydrogen phosphate with alkali metal chlorides are heated, the dehydration scheme remains the same (Fig. 2). However, the overall weight loss at the first stage is slightly greater, especially in cases of sodium and potassium chlorides. The onset dehydration temperatures are also slightly higher. This is more clear from differential weight loss curves in Fig. 3. For example, the weight loss peak associated with the dehydration of hafnium hydrogen phosphate is rather strongly displaced to higher temperatures. The displacement of the weight-loss peak temperature increases in the order Na < K < Rb < Cs. Such trend of the dehydration temperature can arise from the occurrence of a mechanochemical reaction during reagent grinding. In this reaction alkali metal ions are incorporated between phosphate layers and M x H 2 – x Hf ( PO 4 ) 2 solid solution is formed in near-surface layers. Incorporated metal cations inhibit further yield of water molecules from the hafnium hydrogen phosphate crystal lattice. The change in the dehydration temperature increases with increasing radius of the incorporated cation. To verify the occurrence of the mechanochemical reaction, we recorded an X-ray diffraction pattern from a stoichiometric mixture of hafnium hydrogen phosphate and rubidium chloride after annealing it at 350°ë , a temperature corresponding to the complete dehydration of hafnium hydrogen phosphate. This pattern featured only the shift of hafnium hydrogen phosphate lines and no formation of a new phase. This implies partial structural reorganization of Hf ( HPO 4 ) 2 with the incorporation of metal cations. Unfortunately, a similar low-temperature experiment is not so illustrative, because the interplanar distance in hydrated phosphate is initially larger. Thermogravimetry shows that dehydration is the dominant process at low temperatures, as in the case of iron hydrogen sulfate, and mass spectrometry of leaving gases supports this. The main reaction accompanied by a considerable weight loss and HCl evolution ( m / e = 35, 36, 37) occurs in the range 350–700°ë . For sodium and potassium chlorides, however, weak HCl lines appear, together with water lines, in the mass spectrum even at low temperatures. This is another argument in favor of a partial incorporation of metal ions into the phosphate lattice at low temperatures. For the large rubidium and cesium ions, however, the reaction at low temperatures is kinetically hindered, and peaks associated with HCl evolution are not observed in the mass spectrum. Recall that the main reaction occurs at 350–700°ë ; as the cation radius increases, the onset reaction temperature decreases. This can be explained by the fact that the dependence of the process rate on the cation radius is dictated by interplay of two opposing factors. On the one hand, steric hindrances increase with increasing cation radius and cation incorporation into the structure becomes progressively more difficult. On the other, structural voids are sufficiently large, and the accommodation of large cations is thermodynamically more profitable. Once layers somewhat parted as a result of the mechanochemical reaction, further incorporation of ions is eased and steric hindrances become subordinate. In addition, the increasing cation radius increases the polarizability of its shell and also enhances diffusion. Thermogravimetry shows two stages in the reactions of hafnium hydrogen phosphate with sodium, potassium, and cesium chlorides. For rubidium chloride, the stages are virtually unresolved. To refine the decomposition scheme, we obtained high-temperature X-ray powder diffraction data for Hf ( HPO 4 ) 2 mixtures with NaCl (Fig. 4), KCl (Fig. 5), and RbCl (Fig. 6). For NaCl, X-ray diffraction identifies the stable final product as NaHf 2 ( PO 4 ) 3 , whereas the only product of the first substitution stage is NaHHf ( PO 4 ) 2 [9]. Interestingly, the hafnium hydrogen phosphate reflection in the region of 11.5° ( hkl 002 ) shifts to the right as the reaction progresses; this corresponds to a decrease in parameter Ò and, accordingly, a decrease in interplanar spacing (which was expected to increase). At the same time, hafnium hydrogen phosphate reflections in the region of 24.7° ( hkl 201) and 19.5° ( hkl 11) experience a noticeable shift to the left, implying that the other unit cell parameters increase. The incorporation of sodium cations apparently induces partial structural reorganization with a decrease in interlayer spacings. The strongest NaCl line ( 2 θ = 31.5° ) at high temperatures merges with a reflection from the NASICON structure. As temperature elevates to 600°ë , however, this line noticeably shifts to the left but remains virtually unchanged upon further heating. This is precisely due to the fact that at high temperatures this line corresponds to stable NaHf 2 (PO4)3, which has a low thermal expansivity. As probed by X-ray powder diffraction, the reaction between Hf(HPO4)2 and KCl follows the same path; monosubstituted KHHf(PO4)2 is first formed and then rearranged into the KHf2(PO4)3 NASICON structure. At high temperatures, the lines of the reagent chloride and the product do not coincide; above 450°ë, the KHf2(PO4)3 line (2θ = 27.8°) substitutes for the strongly shifted KCl line. Lastly, for RbCl the substitution is one stage (in part, this is seen in the differential thermal curve; Fig. 3) and produces Rb2Hf(PO4)2. The relevant lines appear starting with 400°ë; they shift to smaller angles as temperature elevates, indicating that here, unlike in NaHf2(PO4)3 or KHf2(PO4)3) where parameter Ò decreases, all unit cell parameters increase. Thus, we studied the following processes: (2) Hf(HPO4)2 + RbCl Rb2Hf(PO4)2 + HCl. (3) For rubidium chloride, the two stages are poorly resolved, probably, because of a rather low activation barrier to the second exchange stage. In this case, likely, the incorporation of a rubidium cation requires a very small structural reorganization. Moreover, this cation has the optimal size: it is large enough to match the size of the void it occupies, but allows it to migrate through the structure without great steric hindrances. The cesium cation radius is too large; diffusion through the product lattice is hindered, and the substitution for the second proton shifts to higher temperatures. To study kinetic laws, we measured weight loss versus time upon isothermal exposure in the range 350– 460°ë. The exposure times were chosen in accordance with the earlier determined temperature ranges of exchange reactions. Two schemes of solid-phase exchange are possible: via solid solution formation or via drift of the interface between two coexisting phases. In samples with various extents of exchange, X-ray powder diffraction shows both the reagents and the products. This implies that the reaction follows the heterogeneous grain model and involves the diffusion of alkali-metal and hydrogen ions through the nascent product layer. As hafnium hydrogen phosphate has a layered structure and, accordingly, is characterized by two-dimensional cation diffusion [10], the two-dimensional Jander model is suitable for the determination of the diffusion coefficient (D). In this case, the diffusion coefficient will be determined from the relationship [2, 11] (4) where r0 is the mean particle size, α is the extent of reaction, and τ is time (τ = 0 corresponds to the onset of exchange). Indeed, rate curves in the [1 – (1 – α)0.5]2 – τ coordinates are fitted to straight lines with correlation coefficients of 0.995–0.999. Representative rate curves are displayed in Fig. 7. Dτ r0 2------ 1 1 α––( ) 2,= The diffusion coefficient can be derived from the slope of rate curves in the [1 – (1 – α)0.5]2 – τ linearization coordinates; this slope is D/ Figure 8 shows −RlnD versus inverted temperature (1/T) plots. Unfortunately, rate curves for all alkali cations cannot be obtained in one temperature range because of the above reasons. However, even data compiled in the table make it clear that potassium, rubidium, and cesium cations have very close interdiffusion coefficients, as well as activation energies. For the sodium ion, the activation energy is slightly higher, likely because of its smaller radius: the sodium cation forms stronger bonds, whose dissociation energy is higher. The above-described studies demonstrated the occurrence of solid-phase exchange of the proton in hafnium hydrogen phosphate for alkali metal cations in accordance with the heterogeneous grain model. The phosphate dehydration temperature increases with inreasing cation radius, whereas the onset ionexchange temperature decreases. For sodium and potassium cations, the substitution has two stages and produces MHHf(PO4)2 compounds at the first stage and NASICON-like MHf2(PO4)3 structures at the second. For rubidium cations, the process is one stage and yields Rb2Hf(PO4)2. The maximal activation energy of interdiffusion is observed in H+/Na+ exchange, whereas for potassium, rubidium, and cesium, the activation energies are almost identical.

This work was supported by the program of the Chemistry and Materials Science Department of the Russian Academy of Sciences “Theoretical and Exper imental Investigation of the Nature of Chemical Bond and the Mechanisms of Most Important Chemical Reactions and Processes.
