This short review presents the state-of-the-art knowledge on crystalline, composite and amorphous inorganic solid lithium ion conductors, which are of interest as potential solid electrolytes in lithium batteries and might replace the currently used polymeric lithium ion conductors. The discussion of crystalline Li ion conductors includes perovskite-type Lithium Lanthanum Titanates, NASICON-type, LiSICON- and Thio-LiSICON-type Li ion conductors, as well as garnet-type Li ion conducting oxides. The part on composite Li ion conductors discusses materials containing oxides and mesoporous oxides. In the amorphous Li ion conductor part, mechanical attrition of Li compounds, oxide and sulfide-based glasses as well as LIPON and related systems are presented.

Solid lithium ion conductors continue to attract great interest, especially for application in lithium batteries. Foremost features are a high Li ion conductivity at operating temperature (preferably ambient temperature) and negligible electronic conductivity over the employed range of lithium activity and temperature. Furthermore, a negligibly small grain-boundary resistance is important if polycrystalline, ceramictype materials are used. Other important features are stability against chemical reaction with the electrodes, especially with elemental Li or Lialloy negative electrodes and matching thermal expansion coefficients with both electrodes. Finally, as in all industrial developments, solid state lithium ion conductors must be environmentally benign, non-toxic, nonhygroscopic, low cost materials and their preparation should be easy. Currently, polymeric lithium ion conductors are market-leading. However, most systems are so-called “hybrid”, which means coupling a polymer with a plasticizing organic solvent, and may present the usual drawbacks related to the presence of liquid, i.e. safety concerns, leakage and corrosion, and limitations for miniaturization. In this respect, inorganic solid lithium ion conductors present potential advantages, such as a large electrochemical stability window and thermal stability, which are important safety assets, absence of leakage and pollution, a high resistance to shocks and vibrations, and the possibility of easy miniaturization, especially using thin-film techniques. However, sheet manufacturing techniques, which are necessary for making large-scale batteries, are considered difficult because of hard ceramic materials. Fig. 1 (adapted from Ref. [1]) shows an Arrhenius plot of ionic conductivity of the most important inorganic lithium solid electrolytes. The objective of this short review is to present the current state-of-the-art knowledge of inorganic solid lithium ion conductors, highlighting developments in the field following the most recent literature survey [2].

Currently, the best crystalline inorganic Li ion-conducting solid electrolyte is the perovskite (ABO3)-type lithium lanthanum titanate (LLTO) Li3xLa(2/3) − x□(1/3) − 2xTiO3 (0bxb0.16) [3–6]. This material derives from La(2/3)□(1/3)TiO3, which is a formal end member of ferroelectric PLZT phases [7]. Single crystals show a high ionic conductivity up to 10− 3 S/cm (Ea = 0.3–0.4 eV) at RT for x=0 . 1 1 . The ion conductivity depends on Li ion concentration (Fig. 2 [8]). The crystal structure of tetragonal Li3xLa(2/3 − x)□(1/3 − 2x)TiO3 explains the high lithium ion conductivity of LLTO by the large concentration of Asite vacancies, allowing motion of lithium ions by a vacancy mechanism and through square planar bottleneck between A sites, formed by four O2− ions between two neighboring A sites [9]. A t temperatures below 400 K, the ionic conductivity follows an Arrhenius law with activation energy 0.37 eV, but above 400 K, conductivity can be fitted to a Vogel–Tammann–Fulcher relationship, which might involve tilting of BO6 octahedra [10]. Several problems are encountered with LLTO. High temperature sintering is required for sample preparation and high Li2O losses are observed leading to difficulty in controlling Li ion content and ion conductivity. Furthermore, the ionic conductivity of ceramics is much lower than that of single crystals due to blocking grain boundaries. Finally, electronic conductivity is strongly enhanced due to Ti4+ reduction at the interface with metallic Li, so that LLTO is not useful in combination with very reducing negative electrodes [8]. An excellent review on the structure and properties of LLTO was published very recently by Bohnke [1 1].

The NASICON crystallographic structure NaA2IV(PO4)3 (AIV=G e , T i a n d Zr) was identified in 1968 [12]. The structure can be described as a covalent skeleton [A2P3O12]− constituted of AO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra, which form 3D interconnected channels and two types of interstitial positions (M′ and M″) where conductor cations are distributed. The conductor cations move from one site to another through bottlenecks, the size of which depends on the nature of the skeleton ions and on the carrier concentration in both type of sites (M′ and M″) [13]. Consequently , the structural and electrical properties of NASICON-type compounds vary with the composition of the framework. For example in compounds of general formula LiA′2 −xIV A″xIV(PO4)3, the cell parameters a and c depend on the A′IV and A″IV cation size. The smallest unit cell has been obtained for LiGe2(PO4)3. By substitution of trivalent cations (Al, Cr, Ga, Fe, Sc, In, Lu, Y, or La) for Ti4+ in the octahedral sites, Aono et al. [14] reported much improved Li ion conductivity in ceramics with considerably decreased porosity. Among the Al-doped ceramics, the nominal composition Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) was reported to have the optimum Li ionic conductivity (bulk 3 × 10−3 S·cm−1 at 298 K) [15]. The compound family with general formula Li1 +xTi2 −xMx(PO4)3 (M = Al, Ga, In, Sc) was recently investigated [16]. The substitution of Ti4+ by smaller Al3+ cations reduces unit cell dimensions of the NASICON framework and enhances ionic conductivity by about 3 orders of magnitude (Fig. 3 [16]). However, as for LLTO, these NASICON-type materials are unstable with Li metal due to facile Ti4+ reduction.

LISICON Li14ZnGe4O16 and related systems (Li2 + 2xZn1 − xGeO4) w e r e first described by Bruce and West [1 7,18]. The LISICON framework is related to the γ-Li3PO4 crystal structure. Even in doped compounds (for example γ-Li14.4 V1.6Ge2.4O16), the ionic conductivity remains relatively low (about 10−6 S/cm at RT). Furthermore, LISICON Li14ZnGe4O16 is highly reactive with lithium metal and atmospheric CO2 and the conductivity decreases with time. The Thio-LISICON family was introduced by Kanno and coworkers to improve the Li ion conductivity [19,20]. The replacement of oxide ions by larger and more polarizable sulfide in the framework improved ionic mobility. An important characteristic is the wide range of solid solutions obtained by aliovalent substitutions. The ionic conductivity of the orthorhombic parent compound Li4− 2xZnxGeS4, w h i c h p r e s e n t s a γLi3PO4 crystal structure, is still quite low (3 × 10−7 S/cm at RT); the maximum is observed for x=0 . 0 5 (Fig. 4 [19]). A significant improvement of ion conductivity is observed in the Li2 S–Ga2 S3–GeS2 system: Li4+x −δ Ge1−x +δGaxS4 presents at x= 0.25 a value as high as 6 × 10−5 S/cm at ambient temperature. Conductivity above 10−4 S/cm can be obtained in the system Li4−xGe(Si,P)1−yMyS4, where M is a trivalent or pentavalent cation [21]. The highest value is apparently observed with a composition Li3.25Ge0.25P0.75 S4 [23], but the material is unstable in bulk form. ThioLISICON compounds based on Li silicon sulfides have an even higher ionic conductivity of 6.4 × 10−4 Scm−1 at room temperature for Li3.4Si0.4P0.6 S4 [22].

A new family of Li ion conductors with garnet structure and general formula Li5La3M2O12 (M = Ta, Nb), discovered by Thangadurai and Weppner [24], was found to exhibit pure lithium ionic conductivity and high decomposition voltage (6 V versus Li), promising for application as electrolyte in all-solid-state lithium secondary batteries. The La3+ ions were substituted by low valence ions, such as Ba2+ [25], S r2+ and K+ [26]. A maximum lithium ionic conductivity of about 4 × 10−5 S/cm was obtained at room temperature in barium doped samples, Li6La2BaTa2O12 [25]. T h e T a5+ or Nb5+ ions were substituted by ions such as In3+. T h e lithium ionic conductivity can reach 1.8 × 10−4 S/cm at 323 K in indium doped samples: Li5.5La3Nb1.75In0.25O12 [26]. Slater and coworkers described different substituted garnets Li6ALa2 M2O12 (A = Ca, Sr, Ba) and Li5Ln3Sb2O12 with different trivalent lanthanide cations (Ln = La, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu). The activation energy is higher at low temperature, which indicates defect trapping [27]. The structure and Li ion conductivity of Li5La3Sb2O12 and Li6SrLa2Sb2O12 were studied very recently [28]. C u s s e n [29] showed by neutron diffraction that in Li5La3Ta2O12 lithium ions reside both on tetrahedral sites (24d) and octahedral sites (48 g), but only about 80% 24d sites and 40% 48 g sites are occupied. Wilmer and coworkers indicate a sensitive dependence of the distribution of Li cations among tetrahedral and octahedral sites on the temperature of the final annealing process. This distribution profoundly affects the mobility of Li cations within the garnet-type framework structure. Octahedral-coordinated Li cations could be identified as mobile species, whereas tetrahedral sites seem to act as Li cation traps, rendering tetrahedrally-coordinated Li cations immobile on the time scale of NMR experiments [30].

The importance of ionic conduction at interfaces for Li ion conducting materials has been demonstrated firstly by Liang who, in an epochal paper published in 1973 on composites of LiI and alumina, reported an enhancement of Li ion conductivity by 1–2 orders of magnitude [31]. Maier interpreted this result convincingly by the occurrence of ionic conduction in space charge regions, due to Li ion adsorption on the nucleophilic alumina particle surfaces [32,33]. The Li ion vacancy concentration is enhanced in the space charge regions, which become highly conductive and short-circuit the low conducting LiI bulk above the percolation threshold. Many similar observations can be found in the literature [33,34]. The width of space charge regions is proportional to the Debye length, which is essentially dependent on the bulk charge carrier density. Space charge effects are therefore limited to solids with low bulk carrier concentration (undoped systems) and low temperature. The modelling of percolation in Li ion conductor/insulator composites shows the size dependence of conductivity in a curve of normalized conductivity vs. volume fraction of insulator (Fig. 5a) [35,36]. Two percolation thresholds are observed (Fig. 5b [37]): before the first threshold, space charge regions do not percolate through the sample and after the second threshold, ion conducting particles and space charge regions are isolated inside a matrix of insulator particles. From Fig. 5a, high conductivity can be predicted for nanocomposites. An experimental verification of this prediction was published for ionic conductivity of micro- and nanocrystalline composites in the Li2O– B2O3 and Li2O–Al2O3 systems [38,39].

The composite approach was extended to mesoporous oxides by Maekawa and coworkers [40,41]. Composites composed of synthesized mesoporous Al2O3 and lithium ion conductor LiI were prepared and the pore size was controlled over the 3–15 nm range by the use of various surfactants. [42] A clear advantage is the large surface area of mesoporous oxides. A clear pore size dependence of Li ion conductivity is observed (Fig. 6). The conductivity increases up to 2.6 × 10−4 S/cm at 298 K (for the smallest mesopore size of 4.2 nm), which is about one order of magnitude higher than for dispersed alumina composites. The conductivity maximum is observed around 50–60% of alumina. The activation energy shows no significant composition dependence [41]. The introduction of mesoporous oxides is clearly an interesting option for Li ion conductivity enhancement, but some parasitic proton conduction in mesoporous oxides [43] could be a problem in Li batteries.

Mechanical attrition (e.g. ball milling) was used very recently to improve the ionic conductivity of low conducting lithium compounds. Lithium ionic conductivity of mechanochemically prepared LATP was characterized by significant reduction of grain-boundary resistance [44]. The Li diffusivity in ball-milled LiNbO3 is much higher than in chemically prepared nanocrystalline LiNbO3. The former sample has a large volume fraction of highly disordered interfacial regions, which seem to be responsible for fast Li diffusion and are very similar to an amorphous structure [45]. The mechanical attrition of LiTaO3 [46] creates high defect concentrations and a partially amorphous material. High Li ion conductivity is observed, up to 3 × 10−6 S c m−1 at 450 K (Fig. 7 [46]). The conductivity and activation energy change with ball-milling time indicate a change of conduction mechanism, probably through disordered regions. The temperature stability of a sample milled for long times (16 h) is much superior to that milled for short times (30 min). The tuning of Li ion diffusivity by mechanical attrition is an option to explore further; the long-term stability of this kind of sample must be evaluated.

Given the low conductivity of crystalline Li-alumino-silicates, oxidebased glassy electrolytes have attracted interest for long time. For example, Fig. 8 shows an Arrhenius plot of lithium ionic conductivity in the Li2O + SiO2+A l2O3 system [47]. A typical activation energy around 0.7 eV is observed. However the lithium ion conductivity remains too low to be of real practical interest. Ultraslow ionic Li transport in a commercial aluminosilicate glass ceramic was studied by stimulated-echo nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy [48]. The energy barrier for hopping was 0.61 eV; a comparison with similar energy barriers of glassy spodumene shows that the ion transport is dominated by that in the percolating glassy phase. 6Li spin-alignment echo (SAE) NMR [49] data of LiAlSi2O6 glass in the temperature range from 300 to 400 K. [50] were compared with both 7Li SAE and 7Li spin-lattice relaxation NMR on glassy and polycrystalline β-spodumene [51] as well as dc conductivity measurements. Interestingly, the activation energy of the latter, which are sensitive to long-range Li transport parameters, is in good agreement with that microscopically probed by 6Li SAE NMR [50]. Considering the generally higher conductivities observed in sulphurcontaining systems, sulfide-based glassy electrolytes have also attracted great interest and some quite encouraging results have indeed been found. The well known and characterized fast ion conducting GeS2+L i2 S + LiI glass-forming system [52] was further optimized for higher ionic conductivity and improved thermal and chemical stability required for next generation solid electrolyte applications by doping with Ga2 S3 and La2 S3. Clearly higher Li ion conductivity than in oxide glasses (10−3 S/ cm at 25 °C [53]) were observed together with lower activation energies (around 0.4–0.5 eV), but these glasses are highly hygroscopic, which is problematic for lithium batteries. Finally, quite high conductivities were reported for Li2 S–SiS2 glasses [54] with P2 S5 and LiI and especially with Li4SiO4 (Fig. 1).

LiPON was first described by Bates et al. [55]. In principle, lithium phosphorus oxinitride (LiPON) can be considered a Li ion defective γLi3PO4 solid solution, with typical composition Li2.88PO3.73 N0.14, i o n conductivity σ= 3.3 × 10−6 S/cm at 25 °C and activation energy Ea = 0.54 eV. In thin-film form, it is an important solid electrolyte for all-solid Li ion microbatteries [56]. Levasseur and coworkers studied the influence of RF sputtering parameters in pure N2 gas atmosphere on the properties of LiPON thinfilms around composition Li3.0PO2.0 N1.2. Impedance measurements performed between 25 and 80 °C indicated that ionic conductivity increases with nitrogen incorporation into the glassy structure [57]. T h e conductivity and activation energy can be tuned to a certain extent by varying the nitrogen partial pressure during sputtering (Fig. 9 [57]). Although the ionic conductivity remains moderate, the preparation by sputtering is a major advantage and LiPON is already employed for fabrication of thin-film batteries [58]. An interesting parent compound is the so-called LiSON, with composition Li0.29 S0.28O0.35N0.09 and an ionic conductivity 2 × 10−5 S/ cm [59]. Another glassy system, known as LiPOS (6LiI–4Li3PO4–P2 S5) shows a similar good conductivity, but is unstable in bulk form [60]. A n important advantage of LiPON, LiPOS, and LiSON is their really excellent cyclability, more than 10,000 cycles have been reported. Other systems such as LiBSO (0.3 LiBO2–0.7 Li2SO4) [61] or LiSIPON (Li2.9Si0.45PO1.6N1.3) [62] present lower conductivity and cyclability.

The review of state-of-the-art knowledge on inorganic solid lithium ion conductors (Table 1) shows that conductivity is quite comparable to polymer electrolytes in certain cases, such as LLTO. However, compatibility problems are often encountered with Lithium metal. Nevertheless the improved safety and the possibility of preparation by thin-film techniques are appreciable advantages, so that some inorganic Li ion conductors, such as LiPON phases, are already used in microbatteries. Given the progress achieved in recent years, further investigations are certainly worthwhile.
