This study presents a sodium-ion conductive laminated polymer/ceramicpolymer solid-state electrolyte for the development of room-temperature all-solid-state sodium batteries. At the negative electrode side, a negativeelectrode-benign poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) is used as a polymer matrix into which succinonitrile (SN) is integrated to improve the room-temperature Na+-ion conductivity. At the positive electrode side, a cathode-friendly poly(acrylonitrile) (PAN) serves as a polymer matrix into which a NASICONtype ceramic solid-electrolyte (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) powder is incorporated toward both the enhancement of Na+-ion conductivity and the prevention of Na dendrite from penetrating through the electrolyte membrane. Through a strategical management of composition, the PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 composite and the PEO-SN-NaClO4 polymer deliver a balanced Na+-ion conductivity. Combining the two electrolyte layers, the laminated PEO-SNNaClO4/PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 solid electrolyte provides a Na+-ion conductivity of 1.36 × 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature. With respect to the anodic friendly feature of the PEO-SN-NaClO4 layer and the cathodic friendly feature of the PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 layer, the laminated solid electrolyte presents a stable electrochemical window of 0–4.8 V . Room-temperature all-solid-state sodium batteries fabricated with the laminated solid electrolyte, a Na-metal negative electrode, and a Na2MnFe(CN)6 positive electrode exhibit remarkably stable cyclability.
The increasing societal need for more energy and the reluctance to use conventional fossil fuels are providing a compelling aspiration for exploring and efficiently utilizing sustainable, renewable energy sources, such as solar, wind, tide, and geothermal heat.[1] However, the above renewable energy supplies could only be intermittently harvested and their outputs are usually inconsistent and uncertain. Therefore, the development of appropriate energy-storage technologies is crucial for the integration and efficient utilization of intermittent renewable energy and to make influent energy deliveries as controllable and constant power supplies.[2] Over the past three decades, lithium-ion (Li+-ion) batteries have gained immense success both in technological advancement and commercial accomplishment, especially in powering mobile electronic devices.[3] Nowadays, Li+-ion batteries are penetrating into the electric vehicle market as well.[4] However, the widening market for largescale energy storage poses challenges for the economic sustainability of Li+-ion battery technologies due to the limited abundance of lithium resources on a global scale.[5] Therefore, electrochemical energy storage technologies based on earthly bountiful materials are needed for the advancement of next-generation rechargeable battery systems.[6]
 Sodium, an alkali-metal with electrochemical properties similar to lithium, is naturally abundant and distributed widely on the earth (e.g., sodium exists abundantly in seawater).[7] The standard reduction potential of sodium is −2.71 V versus SHE (standard hydrogen electrode) which is only 0.3 V higher than that of lithium. Therefore, reversible batteries on the basis of a sodium-anode chemistry are regarded as up-and-coming alternatives for largescale energy storage applications, which can provide sustainable and cost merits in contrast to Li+-ion batteries.[8] In addition, both the cell components and the working mechanism of Na+ion batteries are largely similar to Li+-ion systems.[9]
At the current research stage, Na+-ion batteries are mostly developed with nonaqueous liquid electrolytes.[10] Organic solvents can ensure an agreeable environment for the facile transport of Na+-ions but engender an undesired safety issue due to the flammability of organic liquid solutions.[11] With respect to safety, solid-state Na+-ion batteries are preferred as a nextgeneration technology.[12] In contrast to organic liquid electrolytes, solid-state electrolytes usually have multiple advantages in terms of thermal stability, inflammability, and electrochemical durability.[13] In general, solid electrolytes cover three major categories: ceramic (or glass-ceramic) inorganic electrolytes, polymer-based organic electrolytes, and polymer-ceramic composite electrolytes. Ceramic inorganic electrolytes generally possess high ionic conductivity, good chemical/thermal stability, wide electrochemical stability window, and low electronic conductivity.[14] However, they are inelastic and are mainly used for the design of rigid batteries that can functionalize well under tough environments. In contrast, owing to an elastic feature, polymer-based organic electrolytes are generally suitable for flexible battery design with various geometries and can provide simplified and low-cost processing.[15] In addition, the cell assembly with polymer-based electrolytes can minimize a critical issue of electrode–electrolyte interfacial charge transfer since it is easy to create an amenable electrode–electrolyte contact. However, the ionic conductivity of polymer electrolytes is relatively lower than that of ceramic inorganic electrolytes. Combining a ceramic inorganic electrolyte and an organic polymer electrolyte, the resulting polymer-ceramic composite can sometimes take the advantages of both the components.[16] However, at the present developing stage, none of the above three categories of solid electrolytes based on inorganic ceramics, solid polymers, or even polymer-ceramic composites are able to achieve the overall desired properties, in terms of ionic conductivity, electrochemical stability, thermal stability, and mechanical property, for the development of all-solid-state Na+-ion batteries.[17]
Recently, a dual-layer approach has been demonstrated for the development of polymer-based solid electrolytes for lithium batteries.[18] The dual-layer strategy can take advantage of an anode-friendly feature of one layer of a laminated solid electrolyte and a cathode-friendly characteristic of the other layer. In light of these interesting findings in lithium batteries, we present here a deliberate design of a laminated polymer/ ceramic-polymer electrolyte for the advancement of ambient temperature all-solid-state sodium batteries. The laminated approach circumvents both the chemical and electrochemical incompatibilities between the electrodes and the electrolyte. Rational incorporation of a proper polymeric plasticizer and/ or ceramic secondaries into polymeric electrolyte matrices not only enhances the room-temperature Na+-ion conductivity of each electrolyte layer but also tunes the Na+-ion conductivity of the two solid electrolyte layers to a matched level. Furthermore, the addition of a ceramic additive phase into a polymeric matrix helps to inhibit the growth of sodium dendrite. With this approach, all-solid-state sodium cells are demonstrated by employing a high-voltage Prussian-blue Na2MnFe(CN)6 positive electrode at room temperature.
Ionic conductivity, electrochemical stability window, interfacial property, and mechanical property are four critical criteria to be seriously considered for the application of a solid electrolyte in all-solid-state batteries.[19] We have recently reported a ceramic-polymer composite solid-state electrolyte by incorporating a NASICON-type ceramic-based solid electrolyte powder Na3Zr2Si2PO12 into a polymeric matrix of poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO).[20] The resulting PEO-Na3Zr2Si2PO12 composite showed acceptable sodium-ion conductivity at elevated temperatures (≥60 °C) for operating sodium batteries. Of the four critical properties about an ideal solid electrolyte listed above, the PEO-Na3Zr2Si2PO12 composite met the interfacial property and mechanical property criteria. However, the ionic conductivity of this composite electrolyte at room-temperature was fairly poor (2.1 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 30 °C) and the upper-limit electrochemical stability potential (≈4.2 V) was not ideally high enough for the operation of high voltage cathode materials. The ionic transport mechanism of PEO has been well understood.[21] The low ionic conductivity of PEO electrolyte at room-temperature is attributed to its highly crystalline structure. It is generally recognized that the relaxation motion and local segmental of the PEO host are critical factors to offer an efficient ionic transport. Elevating the temperature to a level that is close to the melting point (65 °C) of PEO is one effective way to reduce its crystallinity and thus improving the ionic conductivity. To improve the room-temperature Na+-ion conductivity, in this study, a versatile plasticizer succinonitrile (SN) is integrated into the PEO matrix to reduce its crystallinity. The procedures of synthesizing PEOSN-NaClO4 polymer membranes are as described in the Experimental Section. Figure S1 (Supporting Information) displays a picture of the synthesized PEO-SN-NaClO4 membrane. The amount of sodium salt in the membrane was maintained at a ratio of -CH2-CH2O- group to sodium-ion being 15:1 (i.e., EO:Na+ = 15:1). This ratio of EO to Na+ was determined based on our earlier studies on a high-temperature solid composite electrolyte.[20]
The sodium-ion conductivity of the PEO-SN-NaClO4 membrane (as well as the other electrolyte membranes to be discussed later) was investigated with the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) technique. An in-house designed Swagelok cell was employed for the EIS experiments. Two stainless-steel rods were used as symmetric electrodes and current collectors. The cell configuration is shown in Figure S2 (Supporting Information). For the convenience of cell assembling and handling, the electrolyte membranes for the EIS measurements were prepared with a thickness of 200 µm. The ionic conductivity of the electrolyte membranes was analyzed according to an equivalent circuit as displayed in Figure S3 (Supporting Information) and was calculated with Equation (1), where σ is sodium-ion conductivity, L stands for the thickness of the solid electrolyte, A represents the geometric area, and R is the impedance obtained by fitting the EIS spectra according to the equivalent circuit
The ratio of PEO to SN was determined by considering both the Na+-ion conductivity and the mechanical property of the solid-electrolyte membrane. Figure 1a shows the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy data of a set of PEO-SN-NaClO4 polymeric electrolyte membranes that were fabricated with different ratios of PEO to SN. The Na+-ion conductivity of each membrane calculated based on the data in Figure 1a and the corresponding equivalent circuit (Figure S3, Supporting Information) is presented in Table 1. A PEO-NaClO4 membrane without the plasticizer SN can only provide an ionic conductivity of ≈10−6 S cm−1 at ambient temperature (an EIS profile of a PEO-NaClO4 membrane at room temperature is provided in Figure S4, Supporting Information). When the electrolyte membrane was fabricated with a ratio of PEO to SN being 1.5:1, the Na+-ion conductivity is improved to 1.58 × 10−4 S cm−1 and the mechanical property of the membrane is well maintained. However, the membrane starts to show poor mechanical property when the ratio of PEO to SN is further decreased to 1.2:1. As a result, although a higher content of SN can further improve the ionic conductivity, the ratio of PEO to SN of the PEO-SN-NaClO4 membranes was finally determined to be 1.5:1. Figure 1b–d shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of individual PEO and SN materials, as well as the PEO-SN-NaClO4 membrane. The pattern in Figure 1b shows two characteristic peaks of PEO located at 19.5° and 23.5°,[22] while the characteristic peaks of SN are located at 20.5° and 28.5° in Figure 1c.[23] There are no sharp peaks in Figure 1d, indicating an amorphous feature of the PEO-SN-NaClO4 membrane. The disappearance of crystallinity radically boosts the sodium-ion conductivity of the PEO-SN-NaClO4 membrane. Figure 1e shows a scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the PEO-SN-NaClO4 membrane, which reveals a relatively smooth surface.
As we presented before, the upper-limit electrochemical stability potential of the PEO-based electrolyte was ≈4.2 V (vs Na+/Na).[20] Cells with a PEO-NaX (NaX refers to a sodium salt) polymer electrolyte and a sodium-metal anode could be safely operated by setting a charge cutoff voltage of 4.0 V .[20] However, when a high-voltage cathode is employed for the development of room-temperature sodium cells, the 4.2 V upper-limit potential is not high enough. An electrolyte that can sustain a high oxidation potential is needed to operate cells with high-voltage-cathodes. Poly(acrylonitrile) (PAN) is an ideal oxidation-resistant polymer electrolyte that can sustain an oxidative potential of up to 5.0 V (vs Li+/Li),[18a] but the PAN-based polymers are not compatible with alkali metals.[24] However, if the anode-friendly PEO-SN-NaClO4 polymer electrolyte is combined with a cathode friendly, oxidation-resistant PAN-based electrolyte, the resulting dual layer electrolyte membrane is expected to provide a sufficiently wide electrochemical stability window for the operation of high-voltage sodium batteries. On the basis of this idea, a composite PAN-ceramic electrolyte layer was developed in this study. A NASICON-type ceramic solidelectrolyte (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) nanopowder was incorporated into the PAN matrix to improve the ionic conductivity and suppress sodium dendrites.
The procedures for fabricating composite PANNa3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 electrolyte membranes are detailed in the Experimental Section. Figure S5 (Supporting Information) shows a picture of the synthesized PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 membrane. The as-received Na3Zr2Si2PO12 powder was first ball milled for 50 h to reduce the particle size down to ≈50–200 nm, as seen in the SEM image in Figure 2a. Then, the fine powder was pretreated with isopropanol to improve the dispersibility of particles in the PAN matrix. The membrane was finally fabricated via a slurry casting method. The ratio of the CN group in PAN to the Na+-ion in NaClO4 salt was controlled at 2: 1 (i.e., CN:Na+ = 2:1). This ratio was determined based on a relevant research on PAN-based polymeric solid electrolytes.[25] Figure 2b shows the EIS profiles of a series of PANNa3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 polymer-ceramic membranes that were prepared with different ratios of PAN to Na3Zr2Si2PO12. Table 2 summarizes the Na+-ion conductivity of each membrane calculated from the experimental results in Figure 2b and the equivalent circuit as provided in Figure S3 (Supporting Information). Figures S6 and S7 (Supporting Information) show the EIS profiles of, respectively, a PAN-NaClO4 membrane (without the Na3Zr2Si2PO12 filler) and a Na3Zr2Si2PO12 pellet. At ambient temperature, the PAN-NaClO4 membrane can provide Na+-ion conductivity of ≈6.0 × 10−5 S cm−1. The ionic conductivity of the Na3Zr2Si2PO12 pellet is ≈5.0 × 10−4 S cm−1 (at room temperature). When the content of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 reaches 30 wt%, the Na+-ion conductivity of the PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 membrane is improved to 1.76 × 10−4 S cm−1. Further increase in the content of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 does not help to improve the ionic conductivity significantly. Therefore, the content of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 was finally determined to be 30 wt% for the later study. The ionic conductivity enhancement of polymeric electrolyte by the addition of a ceramic filler has previously been reported.[16b,26] In this study, we have specially pretreated the Na3Zr2Si2PO12 powder to improve the wettability of the particles. Therefore, the interfacial resistance between the Na3Zr2Si2PO12 particle and the PAN matrix is minimized. It should be noted that the ionic conductivity of PAN-based electrolytes may be influenced by the residual organic solvent (e.g., N,N-Dimethylformamide, DMF) within the membrane due to the high boiling point (153 °C) of DMF and the difficulty in thoroughly removing the solvent.[27] The amount of residual DMF in the PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 membrane was analyzed to be 7–10 wt% according to a weight-loss experiment as described in the Experimental Section. Figure 2c presents an XRD pattern of the ball-milled Na3Zr2Si2PO12 powder. For a comparison, a standard pattern of the Na3Zr2Si2PO12 material (JCPDS-33-1313) is provided in Figure 2d. The XRD pattern of the Na3Zr2Si2PO12 powder used in this study matches well with that of a standard NASICON Na3Zr2Si2PO12 material. Figure 2e provides the XRD pattern of a raw PAN material which shows the characteristic peak at 17°.[28] An XRD profile of the PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 composite electrolyte membrane is provided in Figure 2f. The iconic peaks of both the Na3Zr2Si2PO12 and the PAN are clearly discerned, implying that no reaction occurred between Na3Zr2Si2PO12 and PAN during the fabrication of the PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 membranes. Figure 2g displays an SEM image of the composite PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 solid electrolyte membrane. The ceramic Na3Zr2Si2PO12 nanoparticles distribute homogeneously in the PAN matrix, revealing a good dispersibility of the Na3Zr2Si2PO12 nanoparticles.
It can be seen from Tables 1 and 2 that the PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12NaClO4 composite and the Na3Zr2Si2PO12 polymer can provide a similar Na+-ion conductivity at room temperature when an appropriate amount of additives (SN or Na3Zr2Si2PO12) is incorporated into the polymer hosts (PEO or PAN). It is, therefore, expected that a layered PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12NaClO4 electrolyte can deliver a congruent Na+-ion conductivity with each individual layer. The PEO-SN-NaClO4 polymeric layer and the PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 composite layer are both elastic and the adhesive PEO-SN-NaClO4 layer is able to be attached to the PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 composite layer easily.
Figure 3a presents the EIS profile of a layered PEO-SNNaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 laminated solid electrolyte at room temperature. The ratio of PEO to SN in the PEO-SNNaClO4 layer is 1.5:1 when 30 wt% of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 was added into the PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 layer. The laminated electrolyte membrane delivers a room-temperature conductivity of 1.36 × 10−4 S cm−1. Figure 3b presents the Arrhenius profile of the laminated PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 solid electrolyte. With the Arrhenius equation (Equation (2)), the activation energy (Ea) of the laminated solid electrolyte is assessed to be ≈0.33 eV . In Equation (2), σ refers to the sodiumion conductivity of the electrolyte, A is the pre-exponential factor, KB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature
The electrochemical stability window (ESW) of the laminated PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 solid electrolyte was evaluated with an asymmetric cell. The working electrode was a piece of Na foil and the counterpart was a stainless steel (SS) rod, as pictured and schematized in Figure S8 (Supporting Information). Figure 3c presents a linear voltage sweep (LVS) curve of the Na ‖ PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12NaClO4 ‖ SS asymmetric cell. The positive-direction scan starts from 2.5 V and ends at 5.5 V and the negative-direction scan is from 2.5 to 0 V . A broad ESW of 0–≈4.8 V for the laminated membrane is achieved.
Na+-ion transference number of the laminated PEO-SNNaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 solid electrolyte was investigated with a combined AC–DC (alternating current–direct current) technique. The experiments were conducted with the Swagelok cell in a symmetric configuration by employing two sodium-foil electrodes, as schematized in Figure S9 (Supporting Information). Figure 4a shows the current-response profile of a symmetric Na ‖ PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 ‖ Na cell upon applying a DC voltage. AC experiments of the Na ‖ PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 ‖ Na symmetric cell were performed with EIS before and after the DC experiments, and the data are presented in Figure 4b. The Na+ion transference number (tNa+) of the membrane was calculated to be 0.42 according to Equation (3). The voltage applied for the DC experiment is termed as ΔV. I0 represents the initial current response, while Is is the steady-state current. R0 is the initial impedance of the cell and Rs is the steady-state impedance after polarization
Na+-ion transference number of the laminated PEO-SNNaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 solid electrolyte was investigated with a combined AC–DC (alternating current–direct current) technique. The experiments were conducted with the Swagelok cell in a symmetric configuration by employing two sodium-foil electrodes, as schematized in Figure S9 (Supporting Information). Figure 4a shows the current-response profile of a symmetric Na ‖ PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 ‖ Na cell upon applying a DC voltage. AC experiments of the Na ‖ PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 ‖ Na symmetric cell were performed with EIS before and after the DC experiments, and the data are presented in Figure 4b. The Na+ion transference number (tNa+) of the membrane was calculated to be 0.42 according to Equation (3). The voltage applied for the DC experiment is termed as ΔV. I0 represents the initial current response, while Is is the steady-state current. R0 is the initial impedance of the cell and Rs is the steady-state impedance after polarization 
Electrochemical cycling performance of the laminated PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 electrolyte was tested with the symmetric Na ‖ PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 ‖ Na cell (the same configuration as provided in Figure S9, Supporting Information). Figure 4c,d presents the voltage-response profiles of the Na–Na symmetric cell with the laminated PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 membrane under a galvanostatic polarization at an operating current density of ±1.0 mA cm−2. The cell was intermittently charged and discharged for 1 h in each cycle. A control symmetric cell with a common nonaqueous electrolyte was also evaluated to give a direct comparison. Such a symmetric cell is termed as Na ‖ Celgard ‖ Na and the current and voltage-response profiles of this cell under the same polarization conditions (±1.0 mA cm−2 current density and 1 h charge–discharge intermittence) are presented in Figure 4e,f. The cell with the liquid electrolyte shows relatively less voltage polarization than the solid electrolyte cell initially (±90 mV for the liquid-electrolyte cell vs ±110 mV for the solid-electrolyte cell, as compared with Figure 4c,e). However, the voltage gap between charge–discharge for the liquidelectrolyte cell starts to increase after ≈40 cycles (≈80 h of operation) and continuously increases afterward. After ≈100 h, the voltage profile of the liquid-electrolyte cell starts to feature fuzzily, and the voltage fluctuation becomes larger and larger. Such a phenomenon is likely due to the microshort circuit of Na during the continuous striping/plating processes.[29] However, the Na ‖ PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 ‖ Na symmetric cell shows a stable voltage-response profile throughout the 1000 h of charge–discharge. The voltage upon polarization is ≈± 110 mV initially and shrinks down to ≈± 100 mV after ≈20 h. After that, the voltage response of the cell maintains at ± 100 mV constantly during the rest of the operation (Figure 4c,d). The stable voltage-response profile of the solid-electrolyte Na–Na symmetric cell (with the laminated PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 membrane) not only indicates the ability of the laminated membrane to suppress dendrites, but also reveals the exceptionally harmonious interface formed between the sodium electrode and the laminated electrolyte membrane. The dendrite-suppression effect of ceramic fillers in polymer/ceramic composite electrolytes has been reported in previous related research.[30] Generally, the dendrite-suppression effect is believed to be attributed to the ideal mechanical property of the ceramic material. The ceramic filler can also control the Li+-ion flux pathway and the direction of dendrite growth.[31]
With a Na2MnFe(CN)6 cathode (Prussian-blue), the laminated PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 membranes were employed to demonstrate all-solid-state sodium cells. The Na2MnFe(CN)6 material was synthesized according to our previous methods.[32] Preparation details of the Na2MnFe(CN)6 electrodes are interpreted in the Experimental Section. Figure S10 (Supporting Information) shows the SEM image of a Na2MnFe(CN)6 electrode. The Na2MnFe(CN)6 particles with a dimension of ≈500 nm are evenly distributed in the electrode. The XRD pattern of the Na2MnFe(CN)6 electrode presented in Figure S11 (Supporting Information) shows the iconic structure of the Na2MnFe(CN)6 material.[33] The all-solidstate sodium cells were tested in a coin-type configuration with a piece of sodium foil as the anode. As discussed in the previous sections, the laminated electrolyte was strategically managed to have the anode-friendly PEO-SN-NaClO4 layer against the Na-metal negative electrode, while the cathode-friendly PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 layer facing the Na2MnFe(CN)6 cathode. To handle the thin laminated membranes, the cells were assembled in a unique way as detailed in the Experimental Section and as schematized in Figure S12 (Supporting Information). The PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 layer was in situ formed on the Na2MnFe(CN)6 electrode with a thickness of ≈25–30 µm. Then, the PEO-SN-NaClO4 layer (with a thickness of ≈100–120 µm) was attached to the PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12NaClO4 layer. With such a cell-assembly process, the overall thickness of the laminated membrane was ≈125–150 µm. The all-solid-state sodium cell is termed as Na ‖ PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 ‖ PB (PB refers to the Prussian blue).
The electrochemical performances of the all-solid-state Na ‖ PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 ‖ PB cell were comprehensively evaluated at ambient temperature. The data acquired are presented in Figure 5. The rate capability of the cell is presented in Figure 5a with voltage profiles of charge– discharge. Both the specific capacities and C rates were calculated on the basis of the mass of the net Na2MnFe(CN)6 material in the electrode.
A typical charge–discharge profile of a liquid-electrolyte Na ‖ PB cell is provided in Figure S13 (Supporting Information). The discharge profile exhibits two voltage plateaus at ≈3.5 and ≈3.3 V which correspond to, respectively, the reduction of Fe3+ to Fe2+ and the reduction of Mn3+ to Mn2+ in the Na2MnFe(CN)6. The two voltage plateaus at ≈3.45 and ≈3.65 V in the charge curve correlate to, respectively, the oxidations of Mn2+ to Mn3+ and of Fe2+ to Fe3+.[33] When the cell is cycled at a relatively low C rate (e.g., C/20), the charge–discharge profiles also present twovoltage-plateau features (Figure 5a). However, when the cycling rate increases, the distinction of the two plateaus becomes less obvious owing to the low Na+-ion conductivity of the solid-state electrolyte, which could make an overlap of the voltage plateaus.[34] Figure 5b displays a cyclic voltammetry (CV) curve of the Na ‖ PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 ‖ PB cell. The two current waves in the negative-direction scan at ≈3.58 and ≈3.23 V are, respectively, correlated to the reduction of Fe3+ to Fe2+ and Mn3+ to Mn2+. The two positive-directionscan waves are related to the oxidation of Mn2+ to Mn3+ and Fe2+ to Fe3+. Table 3 summarizes the rate capability data of the Na ‖ PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 ‖ PB cell obtained from Figure 5a in terms of average discharge and charge voltages as well as specific discharge and charge capacities of the cathode material at various cycling rates. The all-solid-state cells can provide a reasonably high utilization of the Na2MnFe(CN)6 positive electrode material at ambient temperature. The decent rate capability and the efficient utilization of the positive electrode material implies the electrochemically benign ambiance offered by the laminated PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 composite membrane, i.e., an anodically benign PEO-SN-NaClO4 layer and a catholically benign PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 layer as well as the interracially benign anode/electrolyte/cathode assembly. Figure S14 (Supporting Information) presents an EIS analysis of the Na ‖ PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 ‖ PB cell. Upon analyzing the Nyquist-plot data (Figure S14a, Supporting Information) with a suitable equivalent circuit (Figure S14b, Supporting Information), both the low bulk resistance (RL, ≈40 Ω) and the low charge-transfer resistance (Rct, ≈125 Ω) of the allsolid-state cell are acquired with the laminated PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 electrolyte membrane. So far, the feasibility of operating high-voltage sodium cells with the rationally designed layered composite electrolyte is clear. However, it is theoretically not feasible to operate the high voltage Na/Na2MnFe(CN)6 cells with either the PEO-SN-NaClO4 layer or the PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 layer individually. The PEObased layer is anodic friendly, but it cannot sustain an oxidation potential over 4.0 V (vs Na+/Na). Considering the internal impedance contributed from the cell components, the charge voltage of a Na cell with a PEO-based electrolyte has to be cut off at 3.8 V . In such as case, the utilization of Na2MnFe(CN)6 cathode would be extremely low. On the other hand, the PAN-based layer is cathodic friendly, but it passivates the alkali metals. Therefore, if a cell is assembled with a sodium metal being directly in contact with the PAN layer, it would not operable for a long period of time. The design of a laminated polymer/ceramic-polymer electrolyte can overcome the above issue by taking advantages of each individual layer.
The cycling stability of the Na ‖ PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PANNa3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 ‖ PB all-solid-state cell was evaluated at a charge–discharge rate of C/5. Figure 5c shows the discharge capacity as well as the Coulombic efficiency of over a prolonged cycling period of 200 cycles. The discharge capacity, capacity retention, and capacity fade rate of the cell are summarized in Table 4. Over the 200 cycle testing span, the capacity fades in a low rate of ≈0.08% per cycle and ≈83.3% capacity has been retained after 200 cycles. The Coulombic efficiency of the cell upholds at a constant level of 98.5–99.9% throughout the 200 cycles. The electrochemical performance of an all-solidstate cell is largely influenced by the interfacial properties of electrode/electrolyte and particle/particle in the cathode. For the Na ‖ PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 ‖ PB cell in this research, the interfacial issue between the electrode and the electrolyte is minimized by the elastic property of the polymers. Additionally, the PAN and NaClO4 in the cathode can maintain an amiable interface between the Na2MnFe(CN)6 particles.
We have developed a laminated electrolyte for the advancement of room-temperature all-solid-state sodium cells that allows the use of high-voltage cathodes. The laminated composite electrolyte was designed with an anodic benign PEO-SN-NaClO4 layer against the Na-negative electrode and a cathode-friendly PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 layer facing the cathode. The integration of SN greatly reduces the crystallinity of PEO, thus improves the sodium-ion conductivity of the PEO-SN-NaClO4 electrolyte membrane to a level of 10−4 S cm−1 at ambient temperature. The addition of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 nanoparticles to PAN not only enhances the Na+-ion conductivity, but also helps to inhibit the development of sodium dendrite. The laminated composite electrolyte can offer both a wide electrochemical stability window of 0–4.8 V and a high sodium-ion conductivity of 10−4 S cm−1 at room-temperature. Pairing to a Na2MnFe(CN)6 cathode, all-solid-state sodium batteries with the PEO-SNNaClO4/PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 laminated electrolyte provide remarkably high capacity and cycling stability.
Chemicals and Materials: Materials and chemicals for the synthesis of laminated solid electrolyte include PEO (poly(ethylene oxide), Sigma-Aldrich, with a molecular weight of 1 × 106 g mol−1), PAN (poly(acrylonitrile), Sigma-Aldrich, with a molecular weight of 1.5 × 105 g mol−1), Na3Zr2Si2PO12 powder (provided by 421 Energy LLC, South Korea), succinonitrile (SN, Sigma-Aldrich), sodium perchlorate (NaClO4, Sigma-Aldrich), acetonitrile (ACN, Sigma-Aldrich), and (DMF, Sigma-Aldrich).
Chemicals for the synthesis of Prussian blue type Na2MnFe(CN)6 cathode material include Na4Fe(CN)6 (Sigma-Aldrich), NaCl (Fisher Scientific), and Mn(NO3)2 (Fisher Scientific). Solvents for the preparation of liquid electrolyte include propylene carbonate (PC, SigmaAldrich) and fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC, Sigma-Aldrich). A super-P carbon (Sigma-Aldrich) was used as the conductive matrix for preparing positive electrodes.
Preparation of PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 Composite Membranes: The as-received Na3Zr2Si2PO12 powder was first ball milled for 50 h to render particles with the size of 50–200 nm. To break down the agglomeration of particles, the Na3Zr2Si2PO12 powder was sonicated for 1 h in an isopropanol bath. Then, a certain amount of PAN powder, NaClO4 salt, and Na3Zr2Si2PO12 powder were mixed in a DMF solvent. The molar ratio of the CN group in PAN to the Na+-ion in NaClO4 salt was maintained at 2:1, while the ratio of PAN to Na3Zr2Si2PO12 powder varies depending on the targeted composition of the membrane. The mixture of PAN, Na3Zr2Si2PO12, and NaClO4 (in DMF) was sonicated for 2 h. After continuously stirring the mixture for 24 h, a homogenous slurry formed. To prepare samples for characterization, the slurry was cast in a PTFE dish. For the preparation of coin cells, the slurry was cast onto the Na2MnFe(CN)6 electrode directly. After drying for 24 h in a vacuum oven at 60 °C, the PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 composite membranes were obtained.
Preparation of PEO-SN-NaClO4 Membranes: Certain amounts of PEO and NaClO4 were first mixed in an ACN organic solvent. The molar ratio of the CH2CH2O group in PEO to the sodium ion (Na+) in NaClO4 was targeted at 15:1. Various amounts of SN was then dispersed into the PEO-NaClO4/ACN solution. The mixture was first sonicated for 1 h and then was continuously stirred for overnight. The slurry was finally cast into a PTFE dish followed by a vacuum drying process at 60 °C for 24 h. The synthesized PEO-SN-NaClO4 membrane exhibits an adherent feature, so that it can be pasted onto the PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 composite membrane easily to form a laminated PEO-SN-NaClO4/PANNa3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 membrane.
Synthesis of Na2MnFe(CN)6 Positive Electrode Material: The Na2MnFe(CN)6 material was synthesized through the following procedures. Two solutions were first prepared in parallel. One solution contained 14.0 g of NaCl and 1.42 g of Na4Fe(CN)6 dissolved in 100 mL of deionized (DI) water (solution I). The other solution was prepared by dissolving 30.0 g of Mn(NO3)2 in 50 mL of DI water (solution II). Then, the solution II was slowly added into solution I under continuous stirring. The above procedure resulted in a suspension, which was further aged for 2–3 h. With a common filtration process, the Na2MnFe(CN)6 powder was collected. After being thoroughly washed with DI water, the Na2MnFe(CN)6 powder was dried for 24 h at 120 °C.
Characterization and Analysis: The morphologies of PEO-SN-NaClO4 and PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 membranes as well as the particle size of the Na3Zr2Si2PO12 and Na2MnFe(CN)6 powders were analyzed with a FEI Quanta 650 SEM. XRD analyses of the powder and membrane samples were conducted on a MiniFlex benchtop X-ray diffractometer that employs Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm). The scan rate was 0.04° s−1.
The sodium ion conductivities of the single-layered and multilayered membranes were assessed with EIS. An in-house designed Swagelok cell (Figure S2, Supporting Information) was employed for the EIS experiments. Two stainless steel rods were used as electrode current collectors. The EIS spectra were collected on a Solartron 1287 potentiostat. The frequency was set from 106 to 10−1 Hz and the potential perturbation was ±5 mV
The electrochemically stable window of the PEO-SN-NaClO4/ PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 membrane was analyzed with the same PTFE Swagelok cell as well. However, for this experiment, the cell was assembled with an asymmetric configuration with one sodium foil electrode and a stainless-steel-rod electrode (Figure S8, Supporting Information). On an Arbin BT-2000 battery test station, LVS experiments were conducted. The anodic scan started from 2.5 to 5.5 V (vs Na+/Na) and the cathodic scan started from 2.5 to 0 V (vs Na+/Na). Both the anodic and the cathodic scans were conducted at a rate of 0.05 mV s−1.
The residual DMF in the PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 membrane was analyzed by the weight-loss of the membrane before and after heating to 175 °C and holding for 12 h.
Symmetric Cell Testing: The symmetric Na ‖ PEO-SN-NaClO4 | PANNa3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 ‖ Na cells were assembled by employing two pieces of sodium foil as electrodes. The solid electrolyte was sandwiched in between the two sodium foils and the sandwiched electrodemembrane assembly was hermetically sealed in the Swagelok cell (Figure S9, Supporting Information). Control cells were prepared by sandwiching a piece of liquid-electrolyte-soaked Celgard membrane between the two sodium-foil electrodes. The liquid electrolyte was prepared by dissolving 1.0 m NaClO4 in a solvent mixture of PC/FEC (propylene carbonate/ fluoroethylene carbonate). The volume ratio PC to FEC was 9:1.
All-Solid-State Sodium Cell Assembly and Testing: The positive electrodes were prepared with 60 wt% of Na2MnFe(CN)6 powder, 15 wt% of super-P carbon black, 15 wt% of PAN, and 10 wt% of NaClO4. The above chemicals were dissolved/dispersed into an acetonitrile solvent. After stirring for 24 h, the resulting slurry was cast onto an Al foil. The electrodes were further dried in a vacuum oven for 24 h at 60 °C. The loading of Na2MnFe(CN)6 in the electrodes was 3.0 mg cm−2.
The all-solid-state Na ‖ PEO-SN-NaClO4/PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 ‖ PB cells (PB refers to Prussian blue, Na2MnFe(CN)6) were fabricated and tested with a coin-cell configuration. The cell assembly procedures are briefly given in Figure S12 (Supporting Information). A Na2MnFe(CN)6 positive electrode was first situated in the coin cell case. A slurry of PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4/DMF was coated on the Na2MnFe(CN)6 electrode. After drying under vacuum for 24 h at 60 °C, a layer of PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 film with a thickness of ≈25–30 µm formed on the Na2MnFe(CN)6 electrode. Then, a piece of PEO-SNNaClO4 membrane with a thickness of ≈100–120 µm was attached to the PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 layer. Next, a piece of sodium foil was attached to the PEO-SN-NaClO4 layer. The coin cells were finally sealed in a glovebox.
The electrochemical and cycling performances of the Na ‖ PEOSN-NaClO4/PAN-Na3Zr2Si2PO12-NaClO4 ‖ PB cells were tested with a BT2000 Arbin battery cycler. CV profiles were collected on a VoltaLab potentiostat under a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1.