New sodium-ion conducting glass–ceramics composed of Na1+xAlxGe2−xP3O12(0.3 ≤ x ≤ 1.0) crystalline conducting phase with NASICON-type structure were successfully prepared by heat-treating the parent glass. The products were characterized with DSC, XRD, SEM, FTIR and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy techniques. The results showed that all these compounds were isomorphous with NaGe2P3O12, showing characteristic PO4 vibrational bands. The conductivities of the glass–ceramics were higher than those of the corresponding sintered ceramics and two orders of magnitude higher than the parent glass. Among the series studied, the composition of x = 0.8 exhibits the highest conductivity of ? = 3.8 × 10−4 S/cm at 300 ◦C (Ea = 0.54 eV). In addition, the reasons for the enhancement of the conductivity in glass–ceramics were discussed in view of the microstructure morphology dependent upon the heating conditions.

NASICON-type materials with the general formula AM2(PO4)3, where A is monovalent cation, M is tetravalent cation and P can be partially replaced by Si, have been widely researched during last few years because of their high ionic conductivity [1–4]. The materials are extensively used as solid state electrolytes in electrochemical devices such as SO2 [5] and CO2 sensors [6]. The crystal structure of NASICON-type compounds shows 3D-framework built up of an infinite number of octahedral structural units [MO6][PO4][MO6] connected by PO4 terahedral. The structure is highly versatile and tolerable to substitution on the M, A or phosphorus sites forming a wide variety of isostructural materials. Much attention has been paid to Na1+xM2−xNxP3O12 (M = Ti, Ge or Hf, N = Al, In or Cr) [7–9] and Na3+xZr2−xMxSi2PO12(M = Mg, Yb and Nb) [10–12] with crystalline phase structure. These systems exhibited excellent sodium ionic conductivity in the temperature range of 150–300 ◦C. However, the effects of high porosity and grain boundary, as well as the difficulties in obtaining the desired shapes of the sintered NASICON-type ceramics affected their practical use as solid electrolyte. In order to solve these problems, a lot of efforts have been made. For example, vitrification of these materials has been attempted [13,14]. Recently, Moreno-Real et al. reported a sodium ionic conductivity of the order of 10−6 S/cm at 150 ◦C in the amorphous compounds [13]. It was found that the grain boundary contributions to the total resistance were almost absent. Furthermore, it was demonstrated that NASICON-type materials in the form of glass–ceramics had many advantages over sintered ones in chemical stability and mechanical properties because of their pore-free and small grain size. Moreover, they can be easily manufactured into desired shapes or sizes and possess negligible grain boundary effect [15]. Taking these potential benefits into account, glass–ceramics have become more and more attractive as the solid electrolyte. Lithium ionic conductor in the glass–ceramics system where the crystalline phase essentially consists of NASICON-type structure have also been studied by Fu [16], X u e t a l . [15,17] and Chowdari [18] et al. Satisfactory results were obtained. However, very few researches were dedicated to sodium ionic conductors with NASICON-type structure in the form of glass–ceramics. The present study thus extends the form of glass–ceramics to the Na1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3 system and aims to investigate the effect of the precipitated crystalline phase in the glass matrix on the ionic behavior of Na+. Due to the close ionic radius of Al3+ compared to that of Ge4+, the ionic radius of Al3+ is likely within the tolerability limit of NaGe2(PO4)3 framework. The electrical properties of the Na1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3 system will be described in detail concerning the relations among the heattreatment conditions and the microstructure characteristics.

The parent glass was prepared by a conventional melt-quenching method. Stoichiometric reagent grade chemicals of Na2CO3, Al(OH)3, N H4H2PO4 and GeO2 were used as the precursors. The powders were completely mixed by planetary ball milling using ethanol as the solvent. After being dried, they were heated in alumina crucibles at 300 and 600 ◦C for 2 and 4 h, respectively, in order to decompose the Na2CO3 and NH4H2PO4 completely with the emission of ammonia, carbon dioxide gases and water vapor. Then the mixture was cooled, reground and melted at 1250–1400 ◦C for 1.5 h in a platinum crucible. The melts were rapidly poured onto a preheated stainless steel plate and pressed with another plate, yielding glass plates of 2–4 mm thickness. Finally, the glasses were immediately placed in a furnace at 500 ◦C f o r annealing to relieve the thermal stress [16,19]. The furnace was turned off 2 h later and the samples were cooled naturally in the furnace. Glass–ceramics were prepared by heating the glass plates with a two-step heat treatment on the basis of the observed DSC results. Firstly, the heat treatment was carried out for 2 h at the temperature between the glass transition temperature (Tg) and the crystallization temperature (Tc) to form enough crystal nuclei, and then heated up to the temperature above the Tc to help the crystal growing. The second step was performed at various temperatures (700–950 ◦C) for different periods (1–30 h) to establish the optimum treating conditions. The heat-treatment led to the crystallization that resulted in dense opaque specimens.

Using the fine-powdered glass, Tg and Tc were determined with differential scanning calorimetry instrument (DSC, Netzsch STA 449C, Waldkraiburg, Germany) at a heating rate of 10 K/min with Al2O3 as reference between 30 and 1000 ◦C. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis (Rigaku RAD-C, 12 kW, Tokyo, Japan) at room temperature using Cu K? radiation was used to identify the amorphous nature of the glass samples and the crystalline phases formed in the glass–ceramic samples. XRD patterns were collected between 10 and 80◦ with 0.02◦ step size. The infrared spectra of the samples were recorded in the range of 400–2000 cm−1 on a Fourier-transform infrared spectrometer (FTIR, BRUKER TENSOR 27, Germany) using KBr pellet method. The blocking electrodes were made by sputtering gold on both sides of the glass–ceramics and glass samples in advance. The measurements were carried out by the complex impedance method on a Solartron 1260 impedance analyzer over the frequency range from 0.1 Hz to 1 MHz and in the temperature range of 150–300 ◦C. Ionic conductivity values were calculated with ˛ = d/(R × S), where d denotes the sample thickness, S the area of the electrodes and R the sample resistance corresponding to the total resistance (Rt), the grain resistance (Rg) and the grain boundary resistance (Rgb). The total resistance (Rt = Rg + Rgb) and the grain resistance (Rg) were obtained by the right and left intercept of the semicircle with real axis in the complex impedance spectroscopy, respectively. And the grain boundary resistance (Rgb) was difference between (Rg + Rgb) and Rg. Microstructure of the samples was observed by means of the scanning electron microscopy (EPMA, JXA8100) on the fracture surfaces. All the characterizations of the glass–ceramic samples were carried out directly from the bulk glasses, without any further processing of the devitrified glass.

The flakes of the as-prepared glass were transparent with the thickness of 2–4 mm. It was difficult to obtain high quality glass while the x was over 1.0, and the as-prepared glass–ceramics were fragile when x < 0.3. As found, the DSC profiles were similar for all compositions of x = 0.3–1.0. A DSC profile of the Na1.8Al0.8Ge1.2P3O12 glass is shown in Fig. 1. The small endothermic peak observed on the curve is ascribed to the glass transition temperature (Tg) and the predominant exothermic peak is assigned to the crystallization temperature (Tc). Table 1 summarizes the Tg and Tc values of all the glass. With the increasing of x, the Tg decreased but the Tc remained almost unchangeable. The decrease of Tg can be interpreted as a decreasing interconnection of the glass structure. On all the DSC curves, only one sharp peak was observed for the composition of x = 0.3–1.0 in the temperature range, indicating the formation of a single crystalline phase.

The XRD patterns of Na1+xAlxGe2-x P3O12 (0.3 ≤ x ≤ 1.0) glass– ceramics are shown in Fig. 2. The amorphous nature of the parent glass was confirmed by its diffraction pattern and the formation of crystalline material can be clearly seen. It was observed that in the x range of 0.3–0.8, almost no impurity peak can be detected. The XRD peaks coincided well with the data of JCPDS 33-1245 (NaGe2P3O12), confirming the formation of single crystallization phase with structures indexable to rhombohedral NASICON-type structure. Therefore, it could be inferred that the added Al3+ ions entered the structure of NaGe2P3O12 by replacing Ge4+ ions. However, weak diffraction peaks assigned to AlPO4 began to appear in samples with x > 0.8, indicating the solid solution limit. These results indicated that Na1+xAlxGe2−xP3O12 was the major conductive crystallization phase in all the as-prepared glass–ceramics.

Infrared absorption spectra of Na1+xAlxGe2−x P3O12 (x = 0.3–1.0) glass–ceramics in the range of 2000–400 cm−1 are presented in Fig. 3. Obviously, all the samples had nearly similar absorption bands. In all the spectra, two dominated regions were identified in the range of 1300–400 cm−1 which were generally attributed to the phosphate units. Phosphorous appeared in the form of isolated PO4 units. The bands observed in the region 1300–900 cm−1 and 800–700 cm−1 were ascribed to the intramolecular stretching vibration of the PO4 unit, whereas the bands between 650 and 400 cm−1 be assigned to the intramolecular O–P–O bending vibration [9,20]. Because of a distribution of shorter and longer corner-sharing phosphate PO43− tetrahedral chains, the glass phase showed fewer absorption bands in the range of 750–500 cm−1 compared with the corresponding glass–ceramics [20]. The bands viewed in the region ∼1650 cm−1 in all samples were assigned to the bending vibration mode of free H2O molecule.

Fig. 4 shows the complex impedance plots (Cole–Cole plot) of the glass–ceramics with x = 0.3–1.0, which were prepared by rystallizing the parent glass at 800 ◦C for 18 h. In all the plots, a single semicircle coupled with a linear characteristic Warburg-like spike typically owing to the blocking electrode effect, was clearly observed. The semicircle was interpreted as the parallel combination of a resistance and a capacitance. According to the equation: ωmaxRC = 1, the capacitance calculated therewith was of the order of 10−10 to 10−9 F, a typical value for the grain boundary contribution [21]. Since the spike was inclined to the real axis at about 60◦, it indicated a blocking response of the electrode [4]. The ionic conductivities of the glass–ceramics were calculated from their total resistances (Rt). Fig. 5 presents the total conductivity (?t) o f N a1+xAlxGe2−xP3O12 (x = 0.3–1.0) glass–ceramics as a function of the temperature. It was observed from the figure that the conductivities increased with the temperature. It was due to the increase in the thermally activated drift mobility of ions according to the hopping conduction mechanism. The conductivity data were all found to be linear and well fit the Arrhenius equation: ln?T = lnA − Ea RT where A is the pre-exponential factor, T the absolute temperature, Ea the conductivity activation energy, ? the conductivity and R the gas constant. The results illustrated that there was no structure or phase change for all samples in the temperature range studied, because there were no turning points on the curves. The activation energy (Ea) for the thermally activation hopping process was obtained by linear regression fitting the conductivity data with Arrhenius equation. From the values of slope of the straight lines in Fig. 5, the activation energies (Ea) for mobile ions were calculated.

Fig. 6 demonstrates the variation of the isothermal total ionic conductivity (?t) a t 3 0 0 ◦C and the Ea on the composition of x. I t was observed that the conductivity greatly enhanced along with the increase of x. A maximum conductivity and a lowest Ea were achieved for x = 0.8, and then decreased. The effect of sodium content on the conductivity was significant, because conductivity is a combination of concentration and mobility of these carriers. The Na+ content was subordinately increased with the increase of x. However, the conductivity went through a maximum with x = 0.8. The presence of impurities could be the reason for the decrease of conductivity with further increase of x, owing to the insulative effect of the impurities blocking the conduction path for Na+ ions. As seen in Fig. 2, the impurity of AlPO4 began to present with x > 0.8. The data was superior to that of Ref. [4], in which nominal Na1.4Al0.4Ge1.6P3O12 compound as polycrystalline sintered specimen was synthesized. The improvement in the total ionic conductivities was likely due to a lower porosity and crack in the glass–ceramics. Fig. 7 presents the total conductivity (?t) o f N a1.8Al0.8Ge1.2P3O12 glass–ceramics for different heat-treatment time. The activation energies (Ea) for conduction were calculated and given in Table 2. Fig. 7. Variation of In(?tT) versus 1000/T for the Na1.8Al0.8Ge1.2P3O12 glass–ceramics heat-treated at 800 ◦C for various hours. The best result of 3.8 × 10−4 S/cm (at 300 ◦C) (Ea = 0.54 eV) was obtained when the parent glass was heat-treated at 800 ◦C for 6 h. By contrast, the corresponding values of the parent glass were 7.3 × 10−6 S/cm (at 300 ◦C) and 0.80 eV, respectively. The conductivity of the glass–ceramics was almost two orders of magnitude higher than that of the parent glass. Obviously, the enhancement of the conductivity might be attributed to the formation of the conducting crystalline phase with NASICON-type structure after heat treatment, together with the percolation effect of the remaining matrix glass. As known, glass–ceramics generally consist of small amounts of residual glass and crystalline grains, which are embedded in the glass matrix. Consequently, when the NASICON-type structure formed in the grains, the polycrystalline grains provided suitable channels for the migration of Na+ ions. Furthermore, due to the orientated effect of the NASICON-type grains, the first few atomic layers of matrix glass surrounding the grains perhaps have a near-NASICON structure. Accordingly, the amorphous phase between any two crystalline grains behaved almost like a NASICON phase. As a result, percolation paths were created in the remaining amorphous phase [18]. Therefore, the energy barrier for mobile ions in case of the glass–ceramics was much smaller than that of the parent glass and an enhancement in the ionic conductivity was observed. The Arrhenius plots made on the basis of the ionic conductivity values of total, grain and grain boundary of the glass–ceramics with the composition of Na1.8Al0.8Ge1.2P3O12 are shown in Fig. 8, i n which the geometrical ratios of thickness to surface area for grain were also used for convenience for those of grain boundary because of their undefinable shapes [22]. The grain contributions dominated the total resistance at higher temperatures, while at lower temperatures the electrical conductivity of total bulk (T) is determined by both grain (G) and grain boundary (GB) components. The activation energies (Ea) of the total bulk, grain and grain boundary were 0.54, 0.39 and 0.90 eV, respectively.

Fig. 9 illustrates the fracture surfaces observed by SEM for the Na1.8Al0.8Ge1.2P3O12 glass–ceramics heat-treated under different conditions. For the sake of comparison, the SEM micrograph of the parent glass was also shown. A notable difference in the fracture microstructure was observed. As shown in Fig. 9(a), a typical characteristic of the glass was obvious as black area in the background. When the glass sample was heated at 800 ◦C for 6 h, formation of dense crystalline grains likely with NASICON network structure was noticed in Fig. 9(b). In the samples heated at 900 ◦C, the temperature was so high that melting phenomenon took place, as shown in Fig. 9(c). However, for a treatment period of 24 h, the grains grew further so that some cracks occurred along the grain boundary as shown in Fig. 9(d). It might block the conduction path for Na+ and was responsible for the decrease in the conductivity. The SEM image of the optimized sample shows very dense and well-packed structure without any pores and cracks (Fig. 9(b)). Closer contact favored the migration of Na+ ions at grain boundary and led to a higher conductivity. The favorable microstructure of the glass–ceramics could well explain the lower activation energy and higher conductivity compared with sintered ceramics or parent glasses. SEM observations clearly suggested the correlation between the electrochemical properties and the microstructure of the samples. Namely, the migration of Na ions was favored by the formation of crystalline grains with NASICON-type network structure and dense microstructure.

Sodium ionic conducting glass–ceramics containing Na1+xAlx Ge2−xP3O12 as a major crystalline phase were prepared by heattreating of the parent glass. The glass–ceramics with x = 0.8 exhibited the highest ionic conductivity of 3.8 × 10−4 S/cm at 300 ◦C, which was about two orders of magnitude higher than that of its parent glass. The activation energies for conduction were in the range of 0.54–0.68 eV.
