A N a3V2(PO4)2F3 cathode material for lithium ion batteries was prepared by using a sol–gel method to prepare precursor, and then heat treated the precursor at 650 ◦C based on TG analysis. Transmission electron microscopy showed that the material had a small particle size about 20 nm. The Na3V2(PO4)2F3 particles were embedded in a network of residual carbon. The content of residual carbon was determined to be 8.5 wt.%. This residual carbon enhanced the electronic conductivity of the material, which was measured to be 1.0 × 10−3 S c m−1. The electrochemical insertion mechanism of Na3V2(PO4)2F3 gradually shifted from a predominant Na+ insertion to a Li+ insertion in the initial 10 cycles. The material showed a reversible discharge capacity of 1 17 mAh g−1, with quite good capacity retention. The good electrochemical performance of Na3V2(PO4)2F3 was attributed to its NASICON-type structure, which provided a large ion diffusion coefficient about 7.2 × 10−10 cm2 s−1. The good electrochemical performance of Na3V2(PO4)2F3 provides an example to use sodium-based materials directly as cathode materials for lithium ion batteries.

The industry of lithium ion batteries has developed rapidly since their first commercialization in 1991. Lithium ion batteries have been intensively used in various kinds of portable electronics. They are also considered as important energy storage devices for future hybrid electric vehicles. The conventional lithium ion batteries are normally fabricated using a lithium-based cathode material (such as LiCoO2) and a carbon-based anode material, separated by a nonaqueous liquid electrolyte. It is no doubt that the need for lithium ion batteries will increase rapidly once their using performance has a breakthrough. This will lead to a rapid increase in the consumption of raw materials, not only transitional elements (such as Co and Fe) but also lithium itself. A recent study has estimated that the terrestrial reserves of lithium could be rapidly depleted, considering that large-scale lithium ion batteries require 100–500 times the amount of lithium as portable devices use in the near future [1]. The issue is not insufficient lithium on a global scale, but what fraction can be used and still be economically effective. Therefore, seeking for new cathode materials to reduce the over-lean of mineral resources has been an important task to material scientists. In the quest for new cathode materials, some sodium-based cathode materials have recently emerged as a new choice. A series of sodium fluorophosphates, for example, Na2FePO4F [1], N a3V2(PO4)2F3 [2–4] and NaVPO4F [5,6] have shown to be promising candidates for consideration. Recent works have demonstrated that these cathode materials exhibit similar electrochemical behaviors to conventional lithium-based cathode materials. When using them to fabricate lithium ion batteries, s u c h a s a N a3V2(PO4)2F3/LiPF6/Li cell, sodium ions are irreversibly extracted from the fluorophosphates in the initial charge/discharge cycles, while the subsequent cycles are dominated by reversible Li+ extraction/insertion [3]. Sodium vanadium fluorophosphates, Na3V2(PO4)2F3, was firstly prepared by Meins in 1999 [7]. N a3V2(PO4)2F3 has a tetragonal crystal structure with space group of P42/mnm. This structure is characterized by an extended three-dimensional framework built up from [V2O8F3] bi-octahedral and [PO4] tetrahedral. The [V2O8F3] bi-octahedral is bridged by one fluorine atom, while the sodium ions are statistically distributed in the resultant network. This NASICON-type structure is expected to facile fast ion diffusion. However, as many of phosphate cathode materials, Na3V2(PO4)2F3 has shown a low electronic conductivity due to the separation of vanadium atoms by [PO4] tetrahedral. Preparation of carbon contained phosphate cathode materials has been an effective way to improve the electronic conductivities of these materials. Barker et al. have prepared Na3V2(PO4)2F3 using a two-step process involving the orthorhombic V(III) phosphate, VPO4, as the reaction intermediate [4]. This method requires a complex operation procedure and a long processing time. Moreover, the structure and morphology of VPO4 intermediate are important for the electrochemical properties of the final product. In this study, we introduced a simple sol–gel process to prepare Na3V2(PO4)2F3/carbon composite cathode material. The material prepared by this method showed promising electrochemical performance and could be considered as a cathode material for lithium ion batteries.

Na3V2(PO4)2F3 was prepared using NH4VO3, NaF and NH4H2PO4 as the starting materials. Citric acid (C6H8O7) was employed as both a chelating species and a carbon source, which would reduce the V5+ ions to V3+. For the first step, NaF, NH4VO3 and NH4H2PO4 powders were dissolved in deionized water with a stoichiometric ratio. A saturated citric acid solution was then titrated to the above solution. The molar ratio of citric acid with respect to vanadium ions in the solution was 0.8. This solution was constantly stirred at 80 ◦C to form a uniform sol, followed by drying at 120 ◦C t o obtain a gel precursor. This gel precursor was pre-treated at 300 ◦C i n N2 atmosphere for 4 h. The resultant powder was then pressed into a tablet and heat treated again at 650 ◦C for 8 h in N2 atmosphere. The product was removed from the furnace after cooling to room temperature. Thermogravimetric (TG) analysis on the precursor material was performed on an SDTA851E thermoanalyzer under N2 flow. The measurement was performed between room temperature and 850 ◦C at a heating rate of 10 ◦C/min. The crystal structure of the material was studied by X-ray diffraction on a Rigaku AXS D8 diffractometer with Cu K? radiation. The diffraction data was recorded in the 2? range of 10–80◦ with a scan rate of 3◦/min. The morphology of the material was studied by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Hitachi H-8100IV). For electronic conductivity measurement, the sample was pressed into a tablet with diameter of 8 mm and thickness of 2 mm under 15 MPa, followed by heat treatment at 200 ◦C for 1 h. Both surfaces of the tablet were covered by silver paste. The electronic conductivity measurement was performed on a Keithley 2400 Source Meter by the van der Pauw method [8]. The electrochemical experiment was carried out using a coin battery cell. A metallic lithium foil served as the anode electrode. The cathode electrode was fabricated by blending the Na3V2(PO4)2F3 active material (75 wt.%) with acetylene black conductive additive (10 wt.%) and poly-vinylidenefluoride binder (PVDF, 15 wt.%) dissolved in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP). The slurry was pasted on an Al foil and then dried at 100 ◦C in a vacuum oven for 12 h. The electrode was 8 mm × 8 m m in size and loaded about 3 mg of active material. The cathode and anode electrodes were separated by Celgard 2400 membranes. The electrolyte was a 1-mol L−1 lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6) dissolved in ethylene carbonate (EC) and dimethyl carbonate (DMC) (EC:DMC = 1:1, by v/v ratio). The charge/discharge cycling was performed on a Land® battery tester. In order to study the electrochemical insertion mechanism of Na3V2(PO4)2F3, the battery was disassembled after certain cycles. The Li/V molar ratio of the cathode electrode was analyzed by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (PE®, ICP-AES/1000). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was studied by a ZAHNER®-IM6e electrochemical workstation. The impedance spectra were recorded using an AC voltage of 5 mV in the frequency range from 1 MHz to 1 mHz.

Fig. 1 shows the TG curve of the precursor material. The initial slight weight loss about 2% is attributed to the evaporation of residual water. With the further heating, a big weight loss about 18% appears between 160 and 270 ◦C, which is assigned to the decomposition of NH4VO3 and NH4H2PO4. The third weight loss about 12% appears between 270 and 600 ◦C. This can be attributed to the release of carbon oxides arising from the pyrolysis of citric acid. No significant weight loss is observed above 600 ◦C. Therefore, a heating temperature of 650 ◦C used in this experiment is proper for the preparation of Na3V2(PO4)2F3. Fig. 2 shows the XRD pattern of the as-prepared Na3V2(PO4)2F3 material. All of the diffraction peaks can be indexed well to the single phase of Na3V2(PO4)2F3 with a tetragonal structure. This result is in good agreement with previous reports [4]. The weak and broad diffraction peaks indicates a small coherent domain size of the material. The average coherent domain size is estimated to be 15 nm according to the Deby–Scherrer method. Even some residual carbon was observed in the material according to the following TEM experiment; there are no traces of carbon in the XRD pattern. This implies that the residual carbon in the material is in an amorphous state. The morphology of the material was studied by TEM as shown in Fig. 3. The material is composed of small dark particles which are embedded in a light grey network. The dark region corresponds to the Na3V2(PO4)2F3 particles. The average particle size is estimated to be 20 nm, which fits well to that of XRD analysis. The light grey region can be identified as the residual carbon in the sample. The content of residual carbon was measured to be 8.5 wt.% from gravimetric analysis after dissolution of the material in a hydrochloric solution. The residual carbon prevents the growth of Na3V2(PO4)2F3 particles, which results in a small particle size. On the other hand, this residual carbon also provides good electronic contact between Na3V2(PO4)2F3 particles. As a result, a high electronic conductivity about 1.0 × 10−3 S c m−1 is obtained for the material. Galvanostatic charge/discharge cycling of Na3V2(PO4)2F3 was carried out in the potential region between 3.0 and 4.5 V. The cell was cycled with a current density of 13 mA g−1 which corresponds to a C/10 rate. Fig. 4 shows the typical charge/discharge potential profiles of the material. The first charge profile can be divided into two regions, i.e. 3.0–4.0 V and 4.0–4.5 V. Each region has a specific capacity about 64 mAh g−1, corresponding to one mol of Na+ ions extracted from the material lattice. It is known that there are three different Na positions in the Na3V2(PO4)2F3 structure. Therefore, the above potential regions correspond to Na+ extraction from two different crystallographic sites, respectively. The total charge capacity for the 1st cycle is 127 mAh g−1, which is very close to the theoretical capacity (128 mAh g−1) o f N a3V2(PO4)2F3 in this potential region. The subsequent discharge process displays a very similar potential profile to the first charge, which indicates good electrochemical reversibility of the material. Fig. 5 plots the discharge capacities vs. cycle numbers of the Na3V2(PO4)2F3 material. The material exhibits a reversible discharge capacity of 1 17 mAh g−1 in the 1st cycle, with quite good capacity retention in the following cycles. The potential profiles of the 5th and 10th cycles exhibit very similar shape to that of the 1st cycle. As shown below, the electrochemical insertion mechanism of Na3V2(PO4)2F3 will transform gradually from Na+ insertion to Li+ insertion during the initial several cycles. The similar potential profiles during the whole cycling indicate that Li+ ions replace Na+ ions at the same crystallographic sites, and this replacement does not cause significant changes to the material structure. In order to investigate the electrochemical insertion mechanism of Na3V2(PO4)2F3, ICP analysis was carried out to measure the Li/V molar ratio of the cathode material after certain cycles. The results are summarized in Table 1. It is definite that two moles of Na+ were extracted from Na3V2(PO4)2F3 after the first charge. Therefore, the Li/V ratio at the end of first charge should be zero, which is confirmed by the experimental value listed in Table 1. Subsequently, when the cell was discharged to 4.0 V, one would obtain a Li/V ratio of 0.5 if the insertion mechanism was dominated by Li+. This corresponds to a chemical composition of NaLiV2(PO4)2F3 of the cathode material. However, we obtained an experimental value of 0.38. This implies that a Li+/Na+ mix-insertion mechanism took place during the first discharge. Similarly, a Li/V ratio of 0.69 was obtained instead of the estimated value of 1 at the end of first discharge. With the further cycling, a Li/V ratio of 0.97 was obtained at the end of 10th cycle, which is very close to the estimated value. Based on this, it can be concluded that there is a gradual shift in the insertion mechanism from predominant Na+ insertion to Li+ insertion. Two possible reasons are supposed to explain this insertion mechanism. Firstly, Li+ has a smaller ionic radius than that of Na+. Therefore, they are much easier to insert into the material framework than Na+ ions. On the other hand, unlike Li+ ions, the bigger Na+ ions cannot penetrate the solid electrolyte interfacial (SEI) film on the cathode material once it has formed in the initial cycles. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy was carried out after 1, 10 and 30 cycles. The corresponding Nyquist plots are given in Fig. 6. The very small intercept at the Zreal axis is attributed to the internal resistance of the battery cell. The semi-circle in the high frequency region is due to the resistance of SEI film (Rf); while the other one in the middle frequency region is due to the charge transfer resistance (Rct). The sloping line in the low frequency region corresponds to the diffusion of Li+/Na+ ions in the electrode bulk, namely the Warburg impedance. The SEI resistance and charge transfer resistance after 1, 10 and 30 cycles are obtained by fitting the Nyquist plots using the ZView package. The results are listed in Table 2. It is seen from the table that the SEI film has basically formed during the 1st cycle and changes very little during following cycles. In contrast, the charge transfer resistance is strongly influenced by cycling. During the 1st 10 cycles, the charge transfer resistance increased from 44 to 112 ?, and then increased prominently to 615 ? after 30 cycles. This should be responsible for the relatively fast capacity fading of the material after 10 cycles. Actually, the capacity fading rate is 0.12 mAh g−1 per cycle in the initial 10 cycles, which increases to 0.28 mAh g−1 per cycle in the following cycles. The ion diffusion coefficient of the material after different cycles can be evaluated by the following equation [9]: D = R2T 2 2S2n4F4C2?2 here R is the gas constant, T the absolute temperature, S the surface area of the cathode electrode, n the number of electrons involved in reaction (n = 1), F the Faraday constant, and ? is the Warburg factor which obeys the following relationship: Zreal = Rf + Rct + ?ω−1/2 Fig. 7 displays the linear fitting of Zreal vs. ω−1/2, from which the slope ? can be obtained. Using this value the ion diffusion coeffi cient of the material was calculated and listed in Table 2. The results show that the ion diffusion coefficient of Na3V2(PO4)2F3 is between 2.0 × 10−10 and 7.2 × 10−10 cm2 s−1 in the whole cycling. The diffusion coefficient slightly increased in the 1st 10 cycles. This indicates the gradual change of the insertion mechanism from Na+ insertion to Li+ insertion because Li+ ions have a smaller ionic radius and mass than that of Na+ ions which resulted in a faster ion mobility. On the other hand, the decrease of diffusion coefficient after 10 cycles was probably related with the changes in microstructures of the electrode materials with charge–discharge cycling. The ion diffusion coefficient of Na3V2(PO4)2F3 is much larger than that of olivine LiFePO4. The later has been reported a value about 1.8 × 10−14 cm2 s−1 [10]. The different ion diffusion coefficients between both phosphate materials are related to their structural properties. As for olivine LiFePO4, L i+ ions can only transport in a one-dimensional pathway. While the NASICON-type structure of Na3V2(PO4)2F3 allows Li+ or Na+ ions transport in a much opening framework, which results in a large ion diffusivity.

A N a3V2(PO4)2F3/C composite cathode material has been prepared by a sol–gel method. Citric acid played not only a chelating species but also a carbon source in the preparation. An excessive citric acid produced some residual carbon in the material. This residual carbon prevented the growth of Na3V2(PO4)2F3 particles. On the other hand, the residual carbon provided good electronic contact between material particles, leading to a high electronic conductivity as 1.0 × 10−3 S c m−1. The electrochemical insertion mechanism of Na3V2(PO4)2F3 gradually shifted from predominant Na+ insertion to Li+ insertion in the initial cycles. The material showed a reversible discharge capacity of 1 17 mAh g−1, with quite good capacity retention. The good electrochemical performance of the material was benefited from its NASICON-type structure, which allows fast ion diffusion. Therefore, Na3V2(PO4)2F3 can be considered as a potential cathode material for lithium ion batteries. The use of such sodium-based cathode materials is competitive for industrial purpose because the materials can be prepared at much lower cost than any lithium analogue.

This work was supported by Major State Basic Research Program under grant nos. 2007CB216406 and 2009CB220100. The authors thank the Program for Changjiang Scholar and Innovative Research Team in University (No. IRT0625) and the Program for New Century Excellent Talents for financial supporting.
