NMR studies of 7Li and 31P nuclei are reported in the 150–900 K temperature range for the Li1−xLax/3?2x/3Zr2(PO4)3 NASICON compounds with x = 0.8, 0.7, 0.6 and 0.3. Magic angle spinning (MAS mode) experiments were performed at room temperature on the 7Li and 31P nuclei. The linewidth and the spin lattice relaxation times of these nuclei are studied versus temperature in the static mode. The spectra recorded in the MAS mode show that the 7Li ions occupy three chemical sites, the occupation of which being very sensitive to the x values but not sensitive to the coexistence of the two varieties C ¯1 a n d R¯3c observed at room temperature in compounds with x ? 0.5. On the other hand, the 31P nucleus MAS spectra are very sensitive to lithium content but also to the variety coexistence. T1 measurements were performed in a static mode on the 7Li and 31P nuclei. In all the compounds, the 7Li spin lattice relaxation time exhibits two branches with several minima, indicating the complex dynamics for this ion. One of these minima appears in the same temperature range as the minimum of the 31P nucleus T1, strongly suggesting a cross-relaxation process between these nuclei. T1ρ measurements on 7Li (static mode) allow us to show a slow motion different from the one probed by the T1. T h e analysis of the T1ρ behaviour with temperature and composition allows us to ascribe the motion probed by this time to the oxygen ion motion which monitors the opening and closing of the lithium pathways. A qualitative interpretation of the 7Li T1 results is done; it takes into account the cross-relaxation phenomena between 31P a n d 7Li and quadrupolar fluctuations.

The interest in sodium and lithium ion conductors is due to their uses in electrochemical devices. Among them, the NASICON compounds, with general formula AxM2(XO4)3 [1] have been extensively studied [2–4]. Their structure consists of a three-dimensional network built from MO6 octahedra and XO4 tetrahedra interconnected by oxygen atoms [2]. Recently, we published a complete structural study of the continuous solid solution Li1−xLax/3?2x/3Zr2(PO4)3 (0 ? x ? 1) [5]. This solid solution results from the substitution mechanism Li+ → 1/3La3+ + 2/3?, where ? stands for vacancy. Among these compounds, the x = 0 member L a1/3?2/3Zr2(PO4)3, which crystallizes in a new space group for a NASICON compound (P ¯3) [6], has already been completely characterized by thermal x-ray diffraction, 31P NMR spectroscopy and ionic conductivity measurements [7]. Several methods are available for investigating the physical properties of the materials. Among them nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) presents the advantages of being sensitive to the molecular motion and to providing information on the local arrangement in ordered or disordered material. Dynamical properties are obtained through the relaxation times measurements. The motion induces random fluctuations of the nuclear spin interaction which stimulate the relaxation of the spin system. However, relaxation theory needs a knowledge of the spectral densities of the motion. This step is a difficult one because we have to know the relaxation pathways that have to be modelled. So, good knowledge of the experimental data and a precise analyse of them have to precede the theory. The aim of this paper is then to highlight the dynamical properties of the Li+ ions in the Li1−xLax/3?2x/3Zr2(PO4)3 solid solution by using the 7Li and 31P NMR technique in the temperature range between 150 and 1000 K: the materials under investigation are some of the Li1−xLax/3?2x/3Zr2(PO4)3 members with x = 0.8, 0.7, 0.6 and 0.3 respectively, called hereafter Li0.2, Li0.3, Li0.4 and Li0.7. These experiments take advantage of the presence of the 7Li nucleus, which is the mobile ion, and of the 31P nucleus, which, embedded in its oxygen tetrahedron, participates in the material skeleton and will give information about the Li+ ionic environment. The 17O could be an interesting nucleus because in the structure the oxygen ions connect the PO4 tetrahedra and the ZrO6 octahedra but, owing to its low natural abundance, this nucleus was not studied. Moreover, the high 139La and 138La quadrupolar momentum values prevent any dynamical study of these nuclei. To this aim, this paper includes the presentation and discussion of experimental data, coming from either magic angle spinning (MAS) experiments or obtained with the static mode used in the relaxation times T1, T1ρ and linewidth (T2) studies. After a presentation of the general experimental conditions used, the NMR results are given. The first part of this paper concerns both the structural properties and the dynamical ones (relaxation times) and are presented by dwelling on their general features. The second part of this paper will be devoted to a qualitative discussion of the nuclear magnetic relaxation mechanism.

Li1−xLax/3?2x/3Zr2(PO4)3 (0 ? x ? 1) were synthesized in powder form by the complex polymerizable method as described in previous papers [5–8], using 7Li2CO3, d r i e d La2O3, Z r O C l2·8H2O a n d N H4H2PO4 in stoichiometric ratios. The use of 7Li-enriched carbonate is justified by the high sensitivity of this nucleus in NMR.

The MAS experiments were performed at RT on an Avance DSX300 spectrometer (Bruker) using a standard 4 mm probe and the samples were spun at 10 kHz.

The dynamical properties were studied over a large temperature range 150–1000 K in a static mode using two spectrometers: a Bruker Avance DSX300 for temperatures between 150 and 410 K and a Bruker ADX 300 for temperatures in the range RT–1000 K. The temperature overlap (RT–410 K) between the two experimental set-ups allows us to control the measurement’s goodness. The two spectrometers work at Larmor frequencies ν0 = 121.495 MHz for the 31P nucleus and ν0 = 116.642 MHz for the 7Li one. For temperatures between 150 and 410 K, we used a t90 = 4 μs for the two nuclei. In the case of the 7Li quadrupolar nucleus, this value corresponds to a non-selective excitation in the materials under consideration. The sample, glued on an altuglass holder, is placed into a 5 mm coil. Between 150 K and room temperature (RT) the sample is cooled by a regulated nitrogen flow and between RT and 410 K it is heated with a regulated airflow (±0.1 K ) . For temperatures between RT up to 1000 K, the amplitude of the radio-frequency field for 7Li is ν1 = 15.5 k H z . I t i s imposed by the high temperature NMR probe and corresponds to t90 = 16 μs. This value can lead to a selective regime for our materials, depending on the amplitude of the quadrupolar CQ parameter. The sample is placed in a high purity boron nitride crucible (Grade AX05, carborundum). The airtight fit is obtained with a screw cap. The crucible levitates in an airflow. The sample is heated with a CO2 CW laser (λ = 10.6 μm). A computer monitors its power (15–120 W). The temperature calibration is performed in situ, outside of the magnetic field, with a set-up having the same geometry as the experimental one. The phase transition temperature of the Na3AlF6 sample is used to calibrate the temperature. The temperature is controlled at about ±30 K. In the two sets of experimental set-ups, the NMR probe head is flowed with an air current at room temperature. Longitudinal relaxation times T1 are measured on 7Li in the temperature range 150–900 K by using a saturation pulse sequence. To improve the ratio signal/noise, either 64 or 128 transients were accumulated for 7Li. The 7Li nucleus T1ρ experiments are performed on resonance in the RT–420 K temperature range with the locked radio-frequency field fixed at 62.5 kHz. The 31P spin lattice relaxation time was studied in the RT–420 K temperature range. 7Li is a quadrupolar nucleus (I = 3/2) with a small quadrupolar moment (Q = −0.045 × 10−28 m2). In the presence of some electric field gradient such a nucleus exhibits different transitions: central transition (CT) between +1/2 a n d −1/2 levels and external transitions (±1/2 ↔ ±3/2). 31P i s a spin I = 1/2 nucleus. In order to show some non-exponential behaviour in the magnetization recovery after the saturation comb, the experimental results of the 31P a n d 7Li nuclei are processed in the logarithmic scale at each temperature. In this scale the experimental function Log[(M0 − Mexp(τ ))/M0] (1) makes easy the evidence and the determination of the different T1. Theses values are checked in the linear scale results. This method was particularly helpful in the study of 7Li relaxation:owing to the I = 3/2 eigenvalue of the 7Li nucleus angular momentum, two T1, t w o T2 and two T1ρ are expected with specific ratios in the slow regime (at low temperature) [9–13] i f the relaxation is due to quadrupolar fluctuation. Three T1 can be observed if there is a residual quadrupolar interaction [12]. This number has to be multiplied by the number of different sites. The DMFIT software is used to fit the spectra and gives the linewidths, the peak positions (in Hz or ppm), the percentages and quadrupolar splitting [14]. 31P spectra are referenced from H3PO4 (85%) and 7Li from LiCl. Results are expressed either in Hz or in ppm (X (Hz) = X (ppm) × ν0(MHz)).

Structural investigation of the solid solution Li1−xLax/3?2x/3Zr2(PO4)3 (0 ? x ? 1) has been described in previous papers [5–7]. These studies, carried out on powder x-ray and neutron diffraction data, showed three crystallographic domains related to the NASICON family: 0 ? x ? 0.5, 0.6 ? x ? 0.9 a n d x = 1. For 0 ? x ? 0.5, all the compounds adopt at high temperature the typical NASICON structure (S.G., R¯3cα variety) [15] while at lower temperature, their structure distorts to a triclinic form (S.G. C ¯1, α? variety) as observed for LiZr2(PO4)3 prepared above 1100 ◦C [16]. The reversible phase transition C ¯1 ↔ R¯3c is clearly soft: the two varieties α and α? coexist on a large temperature domain depending on the Li content. Table 1 gives these thermal domains of coexistence for the two forms α and α? and indicates that all the samples are biphased at room temperature for the compositions 0 ? x ? 0.5. For 0.6 ? x ? 0.9, only one variety is observed whatever the temperature (S.G. R¯3). The member x = 1, La1/3?2/3Zr2(PO4)3, p r e s e n t s a t room temperature a trigonal cell (S.G. P ¯3) [6]. At 1000 ◦C, a structural transition P ¯3 → P ¯3c1 is observed due to La3+ ion motion in the network [Zr2(PO4)3]− [7]. It is important to note that, whatever the Li content and despite the use of neutron diffraction, we did not succeed Table 1. Thermal domains of coexistence of the two varieties, triclinic and rhombohedral, for 0.1 ? x ? 0.5. in localizing the Li+ ions in the structure. Nevertheless, refinements carried out at 700 ◦C with Li+ ions in positions proposed by Catti et al [15] for LiZr2(PO4)3 (α variety) lead to better reliability factors for the high lithium content members (0 ? x ? 0.5). This result seems to indicate that Li+ ions occupy effectively this site whatever the members of the solid solution for such compositions. For 0.6 ? x ? 0.9, due to the poor lithium content, the choice of the Catti positions does not ameliorate the reliability factors. Parts of the typical x-ray diffraction patterns obtained for samples belonging to these three crystallographic domains (Li0.7La0.1?0.2Zr2(PO4)3, L i0.2La0.8/3?1.6/3Zr2(PO4)3 and La1/3?2/3Zr2(PO4)3) are given in figure 1: the main difference between these three typical diffractograms is observed at low angles. Projections presented in figure 2 illustrate the different La3+ distributions described in R¯3c, R¯3 a n d P ¯3 space groups. Finally, this study has shown that the substitution mechanism Li+ → 1/3La3+ + 2/3? between LiZr2(PO4)3 and La1/3?2/3Zr2(PO4)3 induced a progressive lowering of symmetry (R¯3c → R¯3 → P ¯3), as shown in table 1, due to the ordering of La3+ ions and vacancies in the [Zr2(PO4)3]− NASICON network: in the R¯3c space group, the La3+ cations and vacancies are located on the same site (6b); in the R¯3 space group, the La3+ and vacancies are located, respectively, on the 3b and 3a sites, while in the P ¯3 space group, four different sites (1a, 1b, 2d and 2d?) are available for La3+ and vacancies (figure 2).

All the NMR interactions are expressed as the products of a spin operator S(2) ?i ,m and a spatial one A(2) ?i ,m which take into account the 7Li neighbouring features at the i site, and the Hamiltonian is [17] where ?i stands for the interaction and X (2)m X (2) (?i )m (X = A or S) is the mth component of the second-order irreducible tensor ¯¯X. 7Li is a quadrupolar nucleus with spin I = 3/2 subjected to chemical shift, dipolar and quadrupolar interactions. This last interaction, characterized by the parameter gives a specific spectrum shape with central and satellite transitions due to the quadrupolar anisotropy eqi ¯¯V (θi, φi) which accounts for the local electric field gradient at the 7Li site (the angles θi and φi identify the direction of the static magnetic field ?B0 in the principal axis system of the electric field gradient tensor). The electric field gradient is defined with its amplitude eqi and its asymmetry parameter ηQi. The 7Li spectra obtained at RT in the MAS mode with a synchronized acquisition are given in figure 3 for the different members studied. Due to this specific acquisition the satellite transitions are not observed. Nevertheless, in the non-synchronized acquisition the satellite transitions are very weak or unobserved at RT. There are two main reasons. The first one concerns the quadrupolar parameter CQ which is very weak either because the Li+ ion is mobile and the quadrupolar interaction is averaged, or the electric field gradient is very weak at the Li+ site (high symmetry). In the second case the quadrupolar parameter CQ is distributed and this disorder broadens the satellite transitions at the first order of the perturbation. So when this distribution is large, the satellite transitions enter in the spectrum baseline (see below and figure 5). The central transition is broadened at the second order and it is generally the lone observable transition. In the case of the x = 0 member (LiZr2(PO4)3) the satellite transitions were clearly observed [18, 19] in the static mode and this could suggest that the motion easily averages the quadrupolar splitting in the non-pure Li phases (x ?= 0). The area under the curve accounting for the lithium magnetization amplitude, the normalized spectra in figure 3, are in agreement with the lithium amounts in the different samples. Furthermore the linewidths increase with the lithium amount. This evolution can be attributed to an increase of the residual dipolar (homoand/or heteronuclear) interaction or of some disorder not averaged by the MAS experiment. Any disorder also leads to a chemical shift and dipolar distributions. The MAS spectra, as reported in figure 3(b), are analysed with three contributions called Li1, Li2 and Li3, the parameters o f w h i c h a r e g i v e n i n t a b l e 2. We observe that the different parameters are sensitive to the composition of the samples. On the well-established basis [20, 21], the line position with the most negative shift can be attributed to the longest Li–O bond as well as to the site with the highest coordination. As the crystallographic studies of the Li1−xLax/3?2x/3Zr2(PO4)3 did not allow us to determine the Li positions in the NASICON structure, it is difficult to attribute the different spectral contributions to any sites in the structure. But we can expect the Catti positions to be the most probable, at least for the Li0.7 member; in the average position the lithium has the same coordination. So the line in the spectra will depend only on the Li–O bond length. In each sample under investigation we can attribute three different chemical environments, called Li1, Li2 and Li3. It is worth noting that no additive contribution to the Li spectrum is observed in Li0.7La0.1O0.2Zr2(PO4)3 in spite of the presence of the two structural varieties (αR¯3c +α?C ¯1). We can also remark that the linewidth in the Li2 site increases with the Li amount while it remains constant in Li1 and oscillates around 0.4 ppm in Li3. The percentage of each contribution to the spectra can be correlated to the Li amount in each environment (last column in table 2). The three lithium site (Li1, Li2, Li3) amounts are increasing when x is decreasing. In the low lithium composition the most occupied site is Li2 while Li1 and Li3 are similarly occupied. Nevertheless, for the high lithium composition the site Li3 becomes largely the most occupied one. Since the first (oxygen) and second (phosphorus) neighbours lead to only one chemical site for the lithium, we need, to understand the origin of the three chemically different lithium sites, to consider the third neighbours which are also the second 31P neighbours: La1, La2, vacancy, Li +. These third neighbours act on the Li–O distance and modify its chemical properties. This means also that these second neighbours could participate (at least indirectly) in the 7Li relaxation mechanisms.

The interest of the phosphorus embedded in its oxygen tetrahedron lies in its sensitivity of the second neighbour as was shown in our previous paper [6, 7]. In the present case its second neighbour can be La3+, L i+ or vacancy. In figure 4 we reported the high resolution (MAS experiment) NMR 31P spectra. The contributions marked with some stars in Li0.3 and Li0.4 (around −5 a n d −40 ppm) are attributed to some impurities (less than 5%). Apart these impurity contributions, the spectra spread between −20 and −30 ppm and change with the lithium amount. These spectra are reconstructed with four (in Li0.2, Li0.3 and Li0.4) or seven lines (in Li0.7), the parameters of which are given in table 3. The same four lines present in all the spectra are broad while the three further ones in Li0.7 (−23.3, −23.8 a n d −24.1 ppm) are narrower. The three additive contributions observed in Li0.7 account for the two structural varieties (αR¯3c + α?C ¯1) present in this sample, but also indicate that in Li0.7 there is phosphorus with more ordered lithium and less disordered ones. In a first step, we consider Li1−xLax/3?2x/3Zr2(PO4)3 with x ? 0.5. In comparison with the x = 1 m e m b e r [6, 7], there is one line more. In these samples, the structural studies have shown that the phosphorus ions were located in only one crystallographic site while four chemical 31P sites were observed. This difference is due to the nature of the phosphorus second neighbours: vacancy, Li+ or La3+ ions. We can reasonably think that the screening of the 31P nucleus decreases from vacancy to the La3+ ions. So line (4) in the high field position (−29 ppm) can be attributed to the 31P with vacancies as second neighbours. The two lines (1) and (2) in the lowest field region (−20 and −23 ppm) have to be attributed to phosphorus with La3+ as second neighbours as was established in the phase La1/3?2/3Zr2(PO4)3. The line (3) around −26 ppm has to be attributed to the 31P with the Li+ ion as second neighbour. This conclusion is corroborated by the following remarks. When the lithium amount decreases, In a second step, we consider the Li0.7 sample. As mentioned above, two phases coexist in this sample, explaining why there are three more narrow lines in its spectrum. The broad lines (2, 4, 6, 7) correspond to the lines in the x ? 0.5 samples described above. The positions of the narrow lines (1, 3, 5) correspond to the ones reported for the triclinic phase by Arbi et al [19] in the pure phase LiZr2(PO4)3. The further lines are narrower because the lithium experiences a weaker disorder than in the other samples with weak lithium amount.

The relaxation times (T1, T2 or T1ρ) of the Zeeman energy bring information about the dynamical properties of the nucleus under consideration. The linewidth (related to T2) and lineshape are also interesting parameters for this purpose. 

The experimental linewidths versus reciprocal temperature for the different samples are given in figure 7. T h e linewidth is also a good indicator of the motion. Out of the rigid lattice rapid regime, it is given by ? ∝ ?0τc, where ?0 is the linewidth in the rigid lattice and τc is the correlation time of the motion. At low temperature (rigid lattice limit), the line broadens when the lithium amount increases. This can perhaps be due to some disorder in the lithium sites but mainly to some changes in the dipolar interactions and in the chemical shift anisotropy. This was also observed in MAS spectra at room temperature. Above 220 K (1000/T = 4.5), the linewidth decreases owing to the correlation time decrease: the motion averages, at least partially, the dipolar interaction but also averages the disorder. At 445 K (1000/T = 3.25) a second regime in the decrease appears at the same temperature as the one at which the xg parameter decreases again. At 1000/T = 2.25 a third linewidth behaviour change is observed corresponding to the decrease of the xg parameter. The dipolar interaction contribution to the lithium linewidth in the rigid lattice limit can be a good indicator in order to obtain information on the Li positions. This contribution is given by the V an Vleck relation [22]:

There are two main reasons for these differences. The first one concerns the position of the lithium; in our calculation we supposed it was an average position determined from the lanthanum one. This calculation shows that this hypothesis is wrong. The other reason could be another contribution to the linewidth due to some chemical shift anisotropy because any disorder in the quadrupolar interaction acts at second order on the central transition. Furthermore, the linewidth at high temperature (rapid regime), which is in the range of the ones obtained in the MAS spectra, prove that the broadening is not due to quadrupolar parameter distribution but due to an interaction which can be averaged both by the coherent rotation in the MAS experiment and the fluctuation. So the linewidth of the central transition is an indicator for the fluctuation amplitudes which average the interaction. So we can understand that in the first step the satellite transitions are not averaged.

So, with the obtained results on the two relaxation rate curves Rf1 and Rs1, we can come to the conclusion that there are six maxima, more or less observable, in the different samples. These maxima appear when the fluctuation correlation time τc is in the range of the inverse of the Larmor frequency: ω0τc ≈ 1. In these experiments the measured correlation time is the same (τc = 1.4 × 10−12 s) for the six peaks but this value is reached at different temperatures corresponding to different τco values and/or different activation energies Ea in the case of an activated motion with τc = τc0e EakT . It is worth noting that the E peak shift toward the high temperature corresponds to an increase of the τc0 parameter and to a decrease of the attempt jump frequency. 

The activation energy obtained from T1 relaxation times data by using a single exponential correlation function is generally much lower than the activation energy obtained by dc-conductivity experiments. This result, generally encountered in conductors, can be ascribed to one or several of the following reasons: (i) NMR is sensitive to dimensionality in contrast to dc conductivity, (ii) different time scales between the two experiments are probed: NMR measurements are performed at 116 MHz while a σdc regime is found below 1 MHz at 300 K and (iii) different length scales are probed: T1 obtained by NMR probes ionic local motion while σdc probes the charge carrier long range one. Nevertheless, T1ρ probes motion in the range probed by σdc. So we expect the activation energy to be the same for T1ρ and σdc. The activation energy values obtained from both T1 and T1ρ do not correspond to the one obtained by σdc. Nevertheless, we found that the highest R1ρ also corresponds to the highest mobility as T1.

The experimental results of the phosphorus relaxation rates R1(31P) are sketched in figure 11 for the limiting samples Li0.3 and Li0.7. Despite of the presence of several sites as observed in the MAS spectra, only one T1 is observed. It remains nearly constant from room temperature to 500 K. This certainly is due to the oxygen screening, the tetrahedron of which remains relatively rigid during its libration motion and prevents any interaction fluctuations. Above 500 K, the slope of this curve becomes more important but, nevertheless it remains weak in the two samples. We can think that the Li+ motion disturbs the oxygen positions and in return act on the dipolar coupling between the lithium and the phosphorus. It is worth noting that the decrease of the 31P linewidth begins when its spin lattice relaxation rate R1 begins to increase. The phosphorus nuclei in Li0.7 clearly evidences a shorter relaxation time and a weaker linewidth than in Li0.3. This figure also shows the importance of the lithium amount in the 31P relaxation process. Keeping in mind that the T1 in the pure lanthanum phase is around 120 s at room temperature, these results show that the 7Li–31P heteronuclear dipolar interaction has to be an important contribution to the phosphorus relaxation and will also influence the 7Li relaxation.

in the pure Li phase LiZr2(PO4)3 only one line is observed in the 7Li NMR spectrum [18, 19]. In the high temperature form (R¯3c), the 7Li signal displays an axial symmetry (ηQ = 0) when in the triclinic C ¯1 form (low temperature); the signal is also reproduced with one quadrupolar line with (η ?= 0). In the rhombohedral form, the static 7Li NMR spectrum displays a narrowing effect associated with an increase of the mobility. In this phase Petit and Sapoval [18] conclude from crystallographic data and linewidth behaviour that the theoretical lithium site splits into six equivalent positions to conserve the D3d symmetry. As a consequence of the Li motion between these six sites an averaged axial symmetry is observed. In the compounds where the Li+ ion is substituted by the La3+ cation, the crystallographic data are better analysed with the lithium ions in the Catti positions (36f) [15]. These positions, which correspond to M3 type sites, are intermediate between M1 and M2 sites and can only be occupied by small cations. This Li localization in the 36f site seems to be confirmed by our second moment calculation. There are six equivalent Catti positions (D3d local symmetry) which are found on two equilateral triangles shifted along the three axes. In the studied systems the 7Li NMR spectra are analysed with three contributions without quadrupolar structure. So the main effect of the substitution is to differentiate the lithium environment, i.e. to differentiate the Catti positions which become non-equivalent. During its local motion (as detected by T1) the lithium jumps between them. Some disorder in these positions and/or a quadrupolar interaction in the order of the inverse of the relaxation time (ωQτc ∼= 1) could explain the non-observation of the satellite transition up to 770 K, as reported in figure 5.

We can summarize the important observations concerning the dynamical properties. Firstly, the three temperature domains observed in the xg parameters versus temperature are also observed in the linewidth curves and in the T1 curves versus temperature. Secondly, the contributions of the two relaxation times observed in 7Li do not correspond either to the ones expected for the pure I = 3/2 quadrupolar spin relaxation or for the different contributions observed at room temperature in the high resolution spectra. Thirdly, six maxima in the spin lattice relaxation rate versus temperature are observed. Five of them (Rs1 curve) A, B, C, D and F seem to not shift and remain at their positions in the different samples while the E peak position oscillates in the range 3.5 ? 1000/T ? 4.5 when the lithium amount changes.

In the first way, in agreement with the other results, we retain that in solids the motion can be anisotropic, giving rise to different correlation functions for the An(t) lattice parameters, defined with different activation energies Ean and different correlation times τc0n. So, in solids a single anisotropic interaction can lead to several maxima in the relaxation rate. In the second way, several types of interaction (chemical shift, quadrupolar, homo and hetero nuclear dipolar) with different dynamics can be implied in the relaxation of the nuclear magnetization. We can also mention the possibility of the broadening of the satellites and central transition to vary in different ways. For example, in the case of a pure quadrupolar relaxation, when the temperature is increasing, the central linewidth begins to increase, then it decreases [12]; at the same time the satellite transition linewidths is continuously increasing. Furthermore, as above, each of these interactions can also exhibit some anisotropic features. In the third way the lithium ion accesses different sites when the temperature is increasing. This hypothesis was already mentioned with the emergence of the satellite transition. Each of these sites is characterized by its own activation energy and, inside the well, the lithium ions oscillate with the same frequency 1/τc0. For example, this is made possible by the oxygen motions which open other pathways when the temperature increases and the lithium accesses new sites. It is very important to note that in this case the dipolar interaction between 7Li and 31P is modified because the average distance d(7Li–31P) is modified. Then, this way could explain why the linewidth in Li0.3 is higher than in Li0.7 when we expect a dipolar 7Li–31P higher in Li0.7 than in Li0.3 (see figure 10). It could also explain that some quadrupolar interaction appears when temperature is increasing from a state in which it was zero (figure 5(b)).

On the one hand, when there is no residual quadrupolar interaction, it is well established for a spin I = 3/2 t h a t two branches with one maximum can be observed in the T1 curves versus temperature [9–13]. In the rapid regime only one relaxation time monitors the relaxation. The same general features are also theoretically determined for T2 and T1ρ. Unfortunately, in solids, it is difficult to observe the two expected relaxation times in the slow regime with the good ratio [23, 25] and only one relaxation time is often observed. This behaviour was generally attributed to spin diffusion effects which modify the nuclear level populations. Furthermore, if the heterodipolar fluctuations are also implied in the relaxation process a second maximum can be observed on the relaxation rate curve. On the other hand, when there is some quadrupolar residual interaction, three branches can be observed on the T1 curve [12] with one maximum if the relaxation mechanism is due to pure quadrupolar fluctuation and two maxima in the other cases (pure homodipolar fluctuations, heteronuclear fluctuations and mixed fluctuations). This second maximum, due to flip-flop terms in the dipolar interaction, appears at low temperature even with a single exponential correlation function (see relation (9)). These flip-flop terms generate crossrelaxation [12, 17, 28]. So our T1(7Li) result analysis takes place in the case of a residual quadrupolar interaction with several interactions that lead to specific behaviours [12].

So our results suggest the following schema in order to explain the complexity of the relaxation process. The multimaximum features could be due to the possibility of the lithium to accede to different sites with different energies with mixed relaxation mechanisms in the case of a residual quadrupolar interaction. So, as is shown by the xg parameter behaviour, it is possible to distinguish two domains: a low temperature one between 150 and 300 K and a high temperature one above 300 K. These two domains are clearly observed in the T1 curves of the Li0.4 and Li0.7 samples. The F and E peaks account for the relaxation in the low temperature domain and the A, B, C and D peaks account for the high temperature one. In the low temperature domain, the relaxation is monitored by the heterodipolar interaction and the cross-relaxation gives two T1. The low temperature domain contribution could be due to the cross-relaxation terms between 7Li and 31P. In the high temperature range accounted by the peaks A, B, C and D the quadrupolar interaction may monitor the relaxation with two T1 in the slow regime and only one T1 in the rapid regime. The failure of the theoretical contribution expected for the S = 3/2 quadrupolar spin may be due to the presence of several interactions in this temperature range. We can note the possible cross-relaxation between 7Li and 139La could also appear in the high temperature range (A, B, C).

The NMR experimental data reported in this paper concerns both the structural aspect and the Li+ dynamics in the Li1−xLax/3?2x/3Zr2(PO4)3 system in order to gain an insight into the ionic motion mechanism. We analysed the general features of the spectra and of the relaxation times T1 and T1ρ of the 7Li nucleus and the T1 of 31P versus temperature. Three 7Li different chemical sites are shown in the MAS spectra, the occupation of which depends on the composition. In the lower lithium concentration compounds, four 31P chemically different sites are observed, one of them corresponding to the lithium as a phosphorus second neighbour, the three other sites being the ones encountered in the lanthanum pure phase La1/3?2/3Zr2(PO4)3. In the high lithium concentration compound, the superposition of the two phases α and α? i s s h o w n i n t h e 31P spectra while it is not observed in the 7Li spectra. Two 7Li spin lattice relaxation times are observed at each temperature in the different compounds. The two T1 branches (versus temperature) show several maxima. These multibranches and multi-maximum features were both analysed in terms of mixed fluctuations in the case of residual quadrupolar interaction with cross-relaxation mechanism. Two T1ρ are observed in Li0.2 and Li0.4 when three T1ρ are shown in Li0.7. Their ratio is related to the spectral contributions. In Li0.2, the two T1ρ clearly exhibit a minimum, leading us to conclude the presence of another motion with characteristic frequency equal to 62.5 kHz around 420 K. This weakly activated motion is different from the one probed by the T1. Furthermore the two or three T1ρ branches mean that there are two or three lithium sites which differ by their fluctuation amplitudes. The rapid motion probed by the T1 is attributed to a motion between Catti sites belonging to the same cage while T1ρ is attributed to a slow motion between sites belonging to different cages and takes into account their neighbourhood; it can also be attributed to polaron effects. This result is very important because it can contribute to the understanding of T1ρ in other compounds [23]. We have also shown that the 31P nucleus relaxation is strongly influenced by the lithium amount. These curves exhibit a maximum in a temperature range in which the short T1 of 7Li also exhibits a maximum and this maximum amplitude strongly depends on the 7Li amount. Furthermore, the 31P T1 value is in the range of the long 7Li T1 component one. These results were analysed as a strong indication for a crossrelaxation process between the lithium and phosphorus. An experiment with a heterodecoupling in which the 31P nucleus is irradiated when the 7Li one is observed could confirm this hypothesis but, unfortunately, the 31P a n d 7Li close frequencies prevent such an experiment with our NMR probe. It is now evident that these experimental results and their preliminary analyses need a deeper theoretical investigation. To go further in the 7Li nucleus T1 spin lattice relaxation investigation, the knowledge of the correlation function for the spin Hamiltonian parameters appears to be the most crucial problem. This knowledge cannot be obtained by neutron diffraction and some modelling steps seem to be necessary. A relaxometry experiment at fixed temperature and variable frequency could differentiate between an intrinsic multipotential well system or a single potential which changes with temperature. Such an experiment would complete the origin of the satellite transitions which merge at high temperature.
