The interest in alternative energy sources grows rapidly and demands improved materials. The cutting-edge investigations focus attention on the development and optimization of solid electrolytes for advanced energy storage. Their chemical and structural stability defines both battery performance and lifetime, yet it is studied poorly even for well-known superionic conductors like NASICON-based compounds. In this work, we studied the Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) stability towards water. Corresponding ceramics were synthesized in pellet form through the solid-state reaction and had been immersed in deionized water for different periods of time with subsequent electrochemical (Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy), structural (Powder X-Ray Diffraction Analysis, Raman spectroscopy, computational modeling), chemical (ceramics — Energy-Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy; mother-solutions — Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry), and morphological (Scanning & Transmission Electron Microscopy) analyzes. Water exposure triggers drastic conductivity losses (64 % for σt) with accompanying lithium elution (exceeds 13 atomic %) and unit cell shrinkage. All these changes reach a plateau after 2 hours of water exposure.
Humanity demands an increase in energy output with the expanding world population. Yet the expansion of traditional energy sources implicates risks to energy sustainability and detriment to the environment. Therefore, the rapid advancement of alternative energy sources such as solar and wind may act as a solution with grid-connected energy storage systems playing a key role.One may expect these systems being able to accumulate the energy generated and to release it in accordance with the demand. Redox-flow batteries are an energy storage concept that offer promise for large scale, low-cost energy storage as a solution. The conventional aqueous redox-flow batteries are affordable but show low energy density that in turn is caused by low working potential (up to 1.5 V due to electrolysis reaction) and low concentrations of redox-active electrolytes. At the same time, hybrid redox-flow batteries with a metallic lithium anode and the use of non-aqueous electrolytes containing redox active moieties can provide higher voltage and higher specific capacity.
 The solid electrolyte that separates liquid catholyte and the metallic lithium anode plays a key role in a hybrid redox-flow battery performance as inefficiencies (polarization losses) are largely dominated by ionic transport across membrane. An appropriate solid electrolyte should provide high selectivity and permeability for Li+ ions only and demonstrate fast ionic transport at ambient temperatures having high electronic resistivity. It should also remain stable within a wide electrochemical window (cell voltage) and be easily fabricated through the facile techniques. Desired solid electrolytes are additionally expected to be affordable and environmentally friendly.The NASICON-family compounds based on the Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 (LATP) chemical composition meet most of the requirements mentioned above and have been tested in the redox-flow prototypes.Therefore, we consider these materials as perspective to be developed and applied in the context as grid energy storage systems.
 Importantly, the chemical composition and crystal structure features of any ion conductive ceramic defines its underlying performance. Even slight structural or chemical changes influence the final function. Therefore, both chemical and structural stability of solid electrolytes dominate the overall battery performance. Evidently, the correct identification of risk factors and detailed understanding of their mechanisms lead the foundation of the successful synthesis and application of solid electrolytes in energy storage devices. The NASICON-based Li-ionic conductor's stability, specifically in the case of LATP, attracts enhanced attention, most of which is focused on its instability towards metallic lithium.Although this perspective material has been studied for more than 40 years, its stability towards simple environmental factors (such as humidity) is still not fully elucidated.
To date, few articles provide details of LATP-based materials stability with regards to environmental exposure (e.g. air and water). In a specific reference the total ionic conductivity σt of Ge-doped LATP ceramics falls significantly after two days of storage in air. Our recent study shows that the pure LATP ceramics degrade after being stored in air and Ar losing about 2/3 and 1/3 of initial conductivity respectively in 100 days. Analyzing the storage conditions, we hypothesized that humidity (which was presented in both atmospheres) is probably the main ionic conductivity influencer, and the Li+-by-H+ substitution was proposed as a possible degradation mechanism. Another study shows, that consequent immersion-drying cycles led to the gradual total and bulk conductivity fading. Nevertheless, authors claim that wet samples (only wiped after a soaking procedure) are characterized by higher conductivity compared to the completely dried ones. This research additionally reports that when exposed to Ar the ionic conductivity of LATP after three days of storage was lower in comparison with storage in air. Authors proposed that moisture absorption is the main reason for the grain boundary conductivity σgb growth, which in its turn increases the total conductivity values. Several studies describe the effect of water solutions exposure where, for instance, Si-doped LATP pellets show various reactivity behavior depending on the solution nature while being claimed to be water-resistant34 as well as pure LATPs.
 Thereby, facing the poor and ambiguous description of LATP water resistance, and having solid reasons to assume water as a critical degradation factor, we carried out a systematic investigation of the influence of liquid water exposure on chemical, structural, morphological, and conductivity parameters. We believe this knowledge is of both fundamental and applied impact: revealing the high water sensitivity, we assume our research to be useful for those who work with LATP-based materials in contact with liquid media, either aqueous or nonaqueous.
The NASICON-based LATP solid electrolyte with the Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 nominal chemical composition was prepared through solid-state reaction. Li2CO3, NH4H2PO4, Al2O3, and TiO2, all reagent-grade, were used as precursors. 5 % excess of Li2CO3 was added for compensation of lithium loss during the synthesis. Al2O3 was preliminary obtained through the decomposition of Al(NO3)3·nH2O (n ≈ 9), carried out through the heating up to 900 °C and calcining for two hours in muffle furnace with vent.
The solid-state synthesis was implemented using the Nabertherm L5/12/P330 muffle furnace and the hydraulic press Carver 4350.L and consisted of two stages.
At the first stage, precursors were mixed and milled manually with an agate mortar. The powder obtained was then put and tramped slightly into the alumina crucible with the burnable separator made of parchment that allows avoiding the chunk stuck (thorough synthesis scheme is given in Supplementary, Section 1). After, crucible was placed into the muffle furnace and heated up to 750 °C for 14 h (holding for 3 h). Finally, the sample was air quenched, cooled naturally and taken off the crucible easily as a self-standing highly porous solid. This stage corresponds mainly to the decomposition of the precursors (ammonium phosphate and lithium carbonate) and to the start of main LATP phase formation.
At the second stage, the sample was crushed and milled manually with an agate mortar. The powder obtained was then mixed with the PEG/acetone solution to gain 3 mass. % of PEG-1500 and milled manually in agate mortar until completely dry.
The fine powder was then pressed into pellets (m = 250 ± 5 mg) using the 1 cm diameter press-form at about 5000 psi. The pellets obtained were subsequently heated up to 850 °C for 11 h (holding for 3 h). The PEG addition improves pressing smoothing pellet release of the pressform, lowering the number of defective pellets (decreasing the material losses), and enhancing the ceramic densification. This stage corresponds to the main LATP phase formation in the form of dense ceramics.
To cover all the objectives mentioned, we carried out two separate and independent series of experiments, each of which had individual aims.
Series 1 — is devoted to the general investigation of the water impact on the basic features of ceramic LATP such as phase and chemical composition, unit cell dimensions, morphology, and conductivity with subsequent analysis of probable relations between these factors. The LATP samples were synthesized in the form of ceramic pellets (in accordance with the Section 2.1.) and then preliminarily separated into three parts denoted in accordance with the analysis applied subsequently (Figure 1):
Reference sample —as-synthesized LATP sample to be used for a starting point (1. on scheme).
EIS part — to be used for Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) characterization (2. on scheme).
XRD part — to be used for the Powder X-Ray Diffraction (PXRD) analyses (3. on scheme).
Each pellet except the reference one had been soaked in an individual pristine plastic vial with 3 mL of deionized water (with the resistance of about 20 MΩ·cm) for the following periods of time: 10 min, 1 h, 2 h, 8 h, and 12 h. The soaking time will be further used to define and discuss the samples of Series 1 (such as 12h-sample; 0hsample — for a reference).
After the soaking, the mother-solution was decanted into the pristine plastic vial for further elemental analysis, which was conducted using Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS). Immediately after the decantation, pellet was wiped with a filter paper and dried in a vacuum oven Labtex LT-VO/20 (2 hours at room temperature RT = 23 °C and under dynamic vacuum). Based on our experience, we conclude such a vacuum drying procedure has a negligibly small impact on the conductivity of as-synthesized LATP ceramics. Therefore, we expect this treatment to dry the wet sample and keep the conductivity achieved. For a representative comparison of the structural, phase, and conductivity data, samples of the EIS and PXRD parts with similar soaking time were treated and analyzed simultaneously under equal conditions (Figure 1). All measurements were carried out with completely dry samples.
Series 2 — is devoted to the thorough analysis of the structural, chemical, and morphological changes of LATP ceramics after being soaked in deionized water for 12 hours. The LATP samples were synthesized in the form of ceramic pellets (in accordance with the Section 2.1.), treated with water exposure and subsequent calcination. Each part of this series represent the sample before and after each treatment step (Figure 1):
Initial — as-synthesized LATP pellet (4. on scheme);
Dried — the Initial ceramics, which had been soaked in deionized water for 12 hours and dried (5. on scheme; all procedures — as described for Series 1);
Calcined — the Dried ceramics, which had been calcined at 850 °C (6. on scheme; 11 h heating, 3 h holding; similar to the final synthesis step given in the Section 2.2.). We suppose the last calcination treatment step to show if the changes caused by water exposure are reversible;
In comparison with the Series 1, which was focused more on the general characterization and trends revealing, Series 2 attempts to monitor the fine changes of crystal structure, shifts in elemental distribution within a grain and on its edges. PXRD patterns of all Series 2 samples were collected up to circa 100 000 counts. The lithium content within initial and treated ceramics was qualitatively evaluated through the Raman spectroscopy. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) observation of Dried sample was enhanced with the following Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy (STEM), Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM), and TEMbased Energy-Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) analysis of a thinned lamella.
To analyze the morphology of ceramics, a SEM and TEM were carried out.
For SEM we used the Jeol JCM 6000, Thermo Scientific Helios G4 PFIB UXe and Thermo Scientific Versa 3D™ DualBeam™ microscopes. The two latter microscopes were additionally used for the element distribution (mapping) and Al:Ti:P ratio estimation through the EDX detectors.
For TEM sample preparation (lamella) we used a focused ion beam technique (FIB) within a dual beam system Thermo Scientific Helios G4 PFIB UXe.
The preliminary characterization was done by STEM detector within the dual beam system at 30 kV. The subsequent characterization was done at FEI Titan Themis Z microscope in High Angle Annular Dark Field (HAADF) mode at 200 kV. The EDX mapping and point analysis were done by Super-X EDX detector at 200 kV and characterized using Thermo Scientific Velox software.
The PXRD patterns were registered using the Bruker D8 Advance (Bragg-Brentano geometry; CuKα1,2 radiation, Ni filter, circular polarization; LynXeye XE detector; 2.5 ° soller slits; 1 mm fixed divergence slit; 30 °/min sample holder rotation; 2θ range from 10 ° to 120 °; 2θ step = 0.01 °; ambient conditions, RT = 23 °C). The PXRD patterns intensities exceed 50 000 counts. Crystal structure of the obtained compounds was refined by the Rietveld method in the R c space group using the JANA 2006 software.The LeBail refinement settings, zero shift, and asymmetry factors were established by the registration, profile and structural analysis of Al2O3 NIST 676a standard, that was executed right before the samples.The Al2O3 refinement results are given in Supplementary, Section 2. As a result, the final LeBail refinement settings were as follows: background — manual in combination with the Chebyshev polynomial with 5 variables; unit cell dimensions a and c; profile — Pseudo-Voigt peak-shape function with GW, LY, LX, anisotropic strain broadening (ASB) — tensor approach accompanied by a Marquart technique mode with 0.001 Fudge factor ; zero-shift (values of the alumina standard were input and fixed); vertical shift — Sycos; asymmetry — by divergence with HpS/L (values of the alumina NIST standard were input and fixed). The LX and ASB parameters were excluded out of refinement in case of negative values. 
The structure refinement parameters were as follows: atomic positions of Al, Ti, P, and O (the starting atomic positions were set in accordance with ; Al and Ti shared a joint position; Li positions were fixed); thermal displacement parameters — harmonic anisotropic approximation for Al and Ti, isotropic approximation for P, O, and Li (fixed for the latter one). Taking into account the PXRD limitations related to the low Al concentration, similar Al3+ and Ti4+ electronic density, and low Li+ electronic density, we decided to keep the ionic occupancies ai fixed for all elements.
For a proper structural analysis of the unit cell dimensions, the zero-shift and HpS/L asymmetry factors were first defined through the preliminary analysis of Al2O3 NIST 676a standard (for more details please see the Supplementary, Section 2). Assuming the approximate similarity of the LATP and Al2O3 ceramics X-Ray absorption coefficients, we applied the profile refinement settings established for the samples analysis. The vertical shift correction Sycos was involved in the general refinement to take the sample preparation features into account: the thin layer of powder was deposited on the sample holder's flat side with no strict height control provided.
Raman spectra were regirtered on RENISAW InVia spectrometer using 50 mW 514.4 nm Ar laser defocused to ~20 µm spot. The signal was acquired with Peltiercooled 1024×568 detector with 2400 l/mm grating, resulting in spectral resolution of ~1 cm-1. Analysis of spectral data was carried out using Wire 3.4 Renishaw software.
The theoretical surface energy estimation in this work is based on density functional theory (DFT) calculations within PBE generalized gradient approximation (GGA). All the calculations were performed using the projected augmented wave (PAW) method, as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP). An energy cutoff was set to 400 eV and the gamma-centered kpoints mesh was generated with a spacing not larger than 0.235 Å-1 along the axes of the reciprocal unit cells. The ion positions were relaxed until the maximum force acting on the atoms became less than 0.01 eV/Å. The input preparation and output processing procedures were automated with the help of SIMAN package.
The basic rectangular simulation cell (Figure A2; Supplementary, Section 3) used for the bulk phase calculations containing 4 formula units of LTP (i.e. LiTi2(PO4)3×4) was obtained by transformation matrix [010; -101; 1-11] from the primitive rhombohedral cell (or [-111; -3-30; 2-21]/3 from hexagonal cell). Its shape and volume as well as the ionic positions were relaxed. The final dimensions of the cell were: 8.68×8.65×12.26 Å. The surface calculations were performed using a slab configuration incorporating a 10 Å wide vacuum region. The slabs were constructed of two basic rectangular cells stacked along the surface of interest. Thus, the slab thickness was no less than 17 Å which was enough to simulate bulk phase between the two opposite surfaces of the slab. The surface energy value was calculated as the difference between the slab cell total energy and the total energy of the same amount of material in a bulk configuration.
Gold electrodes (30 nm thickness; 8 mm diameter) were sputtered on both plane faces of the pellet using the magnetronsputtering machine Quorum Q150T ES and the 8 mm diameter mask.The EIS results were registered43 using a two-electrode cellwith copper electrodes (the EIS registration scheme is given in Supplementary, Section 4). Impedance studies were carried out at a galvanostat/potentiostat Metrohm Autolab (ambient conditions, RT = 23 °C, frequency range 1 MHz - 0.1 Hz, amplitude 10 mV vs Root Mean Square). For each experiment, at least five spectra were recorded and approximation was carried out using the original Metrohm Autolab NOVA software. A quality of data was verified using Kramers-Kronig Relations (Χ2 ~ 10-5 - 10-6). A relative error in conductivity measurement was estimated to be 6 % for the bulk (σb) and grain boundary (σgb) conductivities; 5 % for the total conductivity σt. A relative error values were estimated using approach for indirect measurement taking into account error of Nova approximation and errors of direct measurements of the samples thickness and diameter (Supplementary, Section 5). For further procedure details, please, refer to our recent publications.
The mother solutions were analyzed using the Perkin Elmer ELAN DRC II mass spectrometer with the inductively coupled Ar plasma the ionization of probe. The Certified Reference Materials (as water solutions) used for ICP-MS calibration curves were as follows;
Each calibration solution involved all analyte elements simultaneously: lithium, aluminum, titanium, and phosphorus. ICP-MS calibration curves consist of six points and the concentrations were as follows: 10, 7.5, 5, 2.5, 1, and 0 mg/L for each ion (all calibration curves and the slope angle analyses are given in Supplementary, Section 6; the concentration in calibration solutions was proved using certified multielement NIST standards N9300235 (P, Ti); N9300233 (Li, Al)). Calibration solutions were analyzed twice — prior each Series 1 part (XRD & EIS) — and the average slope was taken for further calculations.
The mother solutions decanted after the LATP soaking were 10 times diluted with deionized water prior to the ICP-MS analysis. We decided to discuss the concentrations of Li, Al, Ti, and P determined in terms of losses to carry out further analysis and conclusions in the most convenient way. Basing on the soaking experiment conditions and the ICP-MS sample preparation procedure, elemental losses vi were determined by the following eq.
Comparing the LATP microstructure of as-sintered ceramics and water-soaked samples, one may observe, that the water exposure leads to visible surface etching and cracking (Supplementary, Section 7). It is seen, that the reference 0h-sample is well crystallized and does not show considerable amorphous incorporations (Supplementary, Section 7). The average grain size of the 0h-sample is ca. 1.5 μm. Analyzing the highly magnified microphotographs (Supplementary, Section 7), it appears that water exposure promotes the formation of nanosized particles that tend to emerge near the grain boundaries.
The elemental composition of the 0h- and 12h-samples were analyzed through EDX as Al:Ti:P ratio established to be 0.28(3):1.75(4):2.95(2) and 0.30(4):1.76(8):2.93(5) correspondingly (for more details see Supplementary, Section 8). Therefore, the Al:Ti:P ratio lays in a good agreement with the nominal values of 0.3:1.7:3 and seems to stay unchanged after the 12-hour water exposure. Due to the features of SEM-based EDX analysis's nature (i.e. the data collection proceeds from the area with a penetration depth of about several microns) we will further consider the Al:Ti:P ratio values mentioned as an overall estimation.
The ICP-MS analysis of all mother-solutions shows, that lithium, aluminum, and phosphorus tend to elute out from the samples (for more details, including calibration curves, please, see Supplementary, Section 6). Figure 2 depicts clearly that elements elution reaches a plateau after more than 2 hours of water exposure.
Notably, samples lose lithium — a charge carrier — preferentially: normalized by 3 phosphorus atoms (for easier comparison with the LATP nominal composition) Li:Al:P ratio of 12h-sample mother-solutions is 6.39(7):0.525(5):3.
The experimental, refined, and differential PXRD patterns, the particular crystallographic data for all the Series 1 samples are given in Supplementary, Section 9. The selected results of Rietveld refinement are presented in Table 1. Based on the EDX Al:Ti:P ratio estimation, the occupancies of all atoms were fixed on the nominal values. It is clearly seen that all samples represent the pure α-NASICON phase. The sharp peak shape identifies that the material obtained is well-crystallized and the crystallites are expected to be micron-sized, which lays in a good agreement with the microscopy results.
In addition to the main phase peaks, weak but wellresolved reflections can be distinguished easily (Supplementary, Section 9). We attribute these reflections to the same main LATP phase and justify their appearance with the residual low-intensity X-Ray irradiation, namely CuKβ and WLα1.
Therefore, based on the SEM, EDX, and PXRD combined results, we may consider the reference 0h-sample as a pure target LATP phase. After the water exposure, samples tend to be contaminated with undefined, nanosized, X-ray amorphous phases. Also, the unit cell shrinks as the soaking time increases: unit cell volume V decreases (losing 0.13% of initial value) and the c dimension shrinkage makes the main impact (Table 1).
As it is seen on the PXRD patterns presented in Supplementary, Section 9, the relative peak intensity changes with soaking time. Unfortunately, these roentgenogram changes cannot be refined fully due to the restrictions mentioned in Section 2.3. Nevertheless, observing no visible initial NASICON phase splitting, and taking into account the SEM and ICP-MS results, one may conclude, that LATP ceramics evidently undergo considerable structural, chemical, and grain changes during water exposure.
Exploring the changes in true density ρtrue (established through the Rietveld refinement), sample's dimensions and masses, we estimated the ceramics porosity and noticed it's growth with the soaking time (from 24.9 % for the reference 0h-sample to 27.6% for 12h-sample; Table 1). This trend agrees with the microcracking and etching observed via SEM. Samples demonstrated about a 3 % mass loss.
As it is shown in Table 1, the ionic conductivity fades drastically after the water exposure. The conductivity losses after 12 hours of soaking are as follows: 64 % for total σt and grain boundary σgb conductivities; 62 % for bulk conductivity σb. Based on the versatile results collected through independent techniques we can consider the conductivity suppression as follows: 1) the grain boundary conductivity σgb decreases because of porosity growth (microcracking) and due to the formation of foreign phases on the grain's surface (nanoparticles); 2) the bulk conductivity σb decreases because of the charge carrier losses and structural changes (unit cell shrinkage). The similarity of the losses trends given in Figure 3 might act as an additional indirect sign of their interrelation.
Some trends can be compared directly due to fundamental reasons: the bulk conductivity has a strong dependency on the charge carrier concentration (if the structural type remains the same which we observe in our case).Comparing the σb and Li-losses trends (Figure 3a) we observe an evident linear correlation (Figure 3b). As discussed before, a long-term LATP degradation experiment carried out previously revealed that the σt and the V losses caused by the LATP storage in ambient conditions are about 75 % and 0.12 % respectively. Therefore, the systematic studies presented here are comparable (and can be considered as equal within the e.s.d. limits). In addition, the conductivity and unit cell volume degradation possess similar behavior for both experimental studies in terms of reaching a limiting degradation plateau. Therefore, one may assume the degradation nature to be similar (fully or partially) in both cases. As a result, the water (in a liquid or vapor form) can be proposed as a key factor that determines the LATP ceramics degradation.
Figures 4a-c depict SEM microphotographs of all samples. The Initial sample (Figure 4a) represents a well-crystallized polycrystalline ceramic with well-defined grains and no visible amorphous contaminations. Similarly to the 12h-sample of Series 1, the Dried sample (Figure 4b) shows lessdefined grain edges and the appearance of spherical nanoparticles, some of which are quite large and achieve several hundred nanometers in diameter. The morphology of Calcined sample (Figure 4c) differs from the Initial one clearly: the grain shape becomes more round with pronounced lattice layers. In comparison with the Dried sample, the Calcined sample possesses fewer contamination nanoparticles and more defined grains. Therefore, one may expect that the additional calcination led to the partial recrystallization of initial grains, which is probably accompanied with structural changes.
Figure 4d represents the STEM image of a Dried sample’s lamella. This image clearly shows that the water-induced nanoparticle nucleation involves not only the outer surface but the whole body of the sample. Apparently, the nanoparticles tend to occupy the intergranular local pores, formed through the initial synthesis on the junction of several grains. It is worth to stress, that the intergranular contacts, which are not affected by these nanoparticles, are barely seen and show no evidence of amorphous interlayer. The area denoted with number 6 was then explored through the TEM-based EDX technique, which allows limiting the depth of EDX data collection area with the lamella's thickness (which in our case is about 200 nm). Therefore, this approach is appropriate for the chemical analysis of the body and edges of particular grains.
Following the results presented in Supplementary, Section 10, the Al:Ti:P atomic ratio for the bulk and edges areas are 0.134(1):1.9(2):3.0(5) and 0.307(4):1.6(1):3.1(6) while the normalized by 3 phosphorus atoms Al:Ti:P ratio of nanoparticles was estimated to be 0.280(5):0.78(4):3.0(7). The significant excess of phosphorus observed in nanoparticles might be associated with lithium ions, invisible in EDX. Assuming the oxidation states of all elements to remain the same, the proportion can then be represented roughly as AlPO4:Ti3(PO4)4:6×Li3PO4. This doesn’t contradict the chemical composition of Series 1 mother solutions established through the ICP-MS approach: solubility of phosphates decreases drastically among the Li-Al-Ti row.Based on the TEM results we conclude that ICPMS results, as well as the mass losses (4.5 % for Dried sample), underestimate the real losses of LATP. Furthermore, a local redistribution of elements explains the similarity of SEM-based EDX results of the Series 1: corresponding values are averaged on the relatively large penetration depth.
Thereby, the water exposure causes the nucleation of nanoparticles, that don't match the initial LATP chemical composition. This process accompanies the shift of initial LATP solid solution towards lower aluminum and lithium content. All these changes suppress the ionic conductivity39,47,48 as it was observed in Series 1.
One may notice the Calcined sample has a bit higher lithium content, but even so, it doesn't achieve the Initial level. Assuming the nanoparticles include lithium compounds, a little growth of lithium content in the Calcined sample might be explained through the recrystallization of grains with partial doping of lithium from the surface.
The behavior of bands between 900 and 1050 cm-1 attracts attention because of high sensibility towards structural disorder.Considering the LATP structure as an highly ordered LTP matrix modified with a small amount of aluminum, we may discuss the aluminum content as a disorder factor.
 In this case, the aluminum losses are expected to lead to the Raman peaks shrinkage. Furthermore, the relative intensity of peaks at the region mentioned can also be considered as a representative factor: it was shown that the intensities of first two bands tend to rise with the Alcontent's growth.It is worth mentioning that the introduction of extra lithium, which can also be discussed as a disorder factor, into the LTP structure has less impact and does not lead to similar changes in relative intensities in this region.
Therefore, observing a little narrowing and relative fading of the first two bands (Figure 5b, bands were normalized in the highest band's intensity and position) we may conclude that the water exposure shifts the initial chemical composition towards lower aluminum content. This conclusion agrees with the TEM-based EDX data interpretation. Again, one may find a little recovery of all characteristics from the Dried sample towards Calcined. Just as in the previous case (with lithium concentration), this might be caused by the recrystallization of grains with the partial involvement of aluminum compounds from the nanoparticles on the grain's surface.
PXRD analysis indicates that all samples of Series 2 represent pure NASICON phase. The experimental, refined, and differential PXRD patterns and the particular crystallographic data of all the Series 2 samples are given in Supplementary, Section 11. Selected results are presented in Table 2.
Initial and Dried samples show similar behavior with the 0h- and 12h-samples of the Series 1: water exposure results in the visible unit cell shrinkage and relative peak intensity changes, namely (104) and (2-13) peaks are overestimated, while (1-12) and (2-24) peaks are underestimated (Figure A13; Supplementary, Section 10). This may happen due to many reasons, including chemical, structural, strain changes, and texturing. Regardless of nature, the impact of these factors is far too strong to be refined within the model chosen. Therefore, we would avoid the discussion of fine crystal structure changes in the Dried sample case due to the lower reliability of refined data. Nevertheless, including computational modeling into our consideration, we attempt to understand the probable nature of such a pattern deformation.
DFT calculations were performed for seven low-index stoichiometric crystal surfaces of LTP: 1 parallel to (1-12) plane, 3 parallel to (104) and 3 parallel to (-1-10). The surfaces were constructed in a such a way, that the [PO4] tetrahedra were preserved intact, as the rapture of strong covalent P-O bonds is improbable. Instead, some of the Ti-O bonds were broken.
The calculation results imply evident correlation between the surface energy and the number of broken Ti-O bonds (Figure A3; Supplementary, Section 3). The presence of such correlation is in agreement with the results obtained for LiFePO455 (in respect to Fe-O bonds). The lowest values of surface energy were predicted for two surfaces: S1 (1-12) incorporating Ti-O5 configurations, average 2.7 unsaturated Ti-O bonds per nm2, ES1 = 0.54 J/m2; S2 (104) incorporating Ti-O4 configurations, average 3.8 unsaturated Ti-O bonds per nm2, ES2 = 0.60 J/m2. The energy values of all the other considered surfaces were calculated to be more than 1 J/m2. Thus, the equilibrium crystal shape (Figure 6a) is close to cubic, includes almost only the two above-mentioned low-energy surfaces and dominated by S1. In order to account for the LATP composition, one Ti atom at each of the opposite surfaces of the considered slabs was replaced by Al atom. However, the Ti/Al substitutions did not change significantly the surface energies and equilibrium crystal shape. Particularly, the energies of both S1 and S2 became slightly lower: ES1 = 0.43 J/m2, ES2 = 0.55 J/m2. That can be rationalized considering that Al atom with 3 valence electrons is more suitable for the low-coordination position than Ti with 4 valence electrons.
 In accordance with the results mentioned, the crystallite's faces are supposed to be formed with (1-12) and (104) planes as is given in Figure 6b. Hence, the relative growth of (1-12) and (2-24) peaks (related to the same family due to the 2-fold difference in the Miller indices) and simultaneous suppression of the (104) one might be caused by the grains reshape through the reduction of the cube edges chamfering (Figure 6b).
Notably, the pattern of the Calcined sample doesn’t possesses such deformations (Figure A14; Supplementary, Section 10), so it was satisfactorily refined. As was shown before, the grains of Calcined sample show the evidence of recrystallization and obtain a more spherical shape. Therefore, referring to the computational representation, one may assume the recovery of cube edges chamfering (Figure 6c) with the following normalization of the distorted peaks. Hence, the PXRD-based results in terms of relative intensity deformation agree with the morphological.
Here we need to mention, that the impact of chemical changes should not be omitted in the fundamental discussion of pattern changes. Following the versatile analyses carried out, we have solid reasons to suppose the compositional changes do occur, especially the lithium losses. Nevertheless, we are very limited to define the final formula changes due to the nature of the analytical techniques available. We suppose the neutron diffraction to be strong support for this purpose. However, at this point, we would like to stress, that the changes of crystallite shape proposed above evidently resolves only one aspect of this issue.
Analyzing the changes in PXRD peaks shape (Figure 7; peaks were normalized in the intensity and position), we observe visible width shrinkage and CuKα1,2 resolution growth in a row from Initial to Dried and Calcined samples (notably that the latter two show the almost similar peak shape). Being a self-standing factor for relative intensity changes, the chemical composition has an impact on another one — the strain factor.
As it was discussed for the Raman results, the Al-content might be considered as a disorder influencer.30 In accordance with the TEM-based EDX and Raman results, one may conclude that water exposure increases the structure order due to the partial aluminum and lithium loss. This might cause such a PXRD peak shape behavior. Recrystallization i.e. changes in crystallite size can also affect the width of PXRD peaks. To evaluate the impact of each factor we carried out an additional Le Bail refinement of all Series 2 samples following the fundamental approach of asymmetry consideration.
Only Lorentzian functions are shown to possess a meaningful impact, therefore the corresponding factors of the crystallite size and strain SizeL and StrainL are given in Table 2. As it is seen, the strain factor falls almost 2-fold after the water exposure and then slightly increases after the following calcination.
At the same time, the crystallite size loses only 10% after water exposure and gains the initial value after subsequent calcination. So the strain factor shows the main impact on the peak's width.
The Initial-to-Dried sample strain fall correlates well with the Raman and TEM-based EDX results and is likely associated with the water-assisted elemental losses. The slight Dried-to-Calcined sample strain growth correlates with the Raman and SEM results and probably caused by the recrystallization of grains and the partial return of elements lost. The final strain is 1.8 times lower than the initial value. Together with the unit cell shrinkage observed, one may expect significant elemental losses.
To investigate fine intrastructural changes we followed the polyhedral analysis as it was described in our previous study.The values of [MO6], [PO4], [Li(1)O6M2], and [Li(2)O6] (where M represents the joint Ti/Al position) polyhedral volumes of Initial and Calcined samples are given in Table 2 — as it was mentioned before, we avoid discussing the Dried sample for this purpose because of the lower experimental/calculated pattern match. According to the data obtained, we conclude the Lipolyhedra undergo the main changes, which are too large to be expected based on the Al:Ti shift only.Due to the multifactorial nature of changes, the interpretation of such Li-polyhedra behavior becomes challenging, but the strong involvement of lithium into the overall changes seems to be evident.
 The current work represents the first detailed investigation of the LATP ceramics stability towards water. Such characteristics as chemical composition, crystal structure, ionic conductivity, and morphology were presented based on the results of the complex analysis that included EIS, PXRD, Raman, SEM, TEM, EDX, ICP-MS, and computational methods. It was shown, that pure LATP ceramics, synthesized successfully through the solid-state approach, and characterized with satisfactory performance (for Series 1: conductivity σt of 2.93·10-4 S/cm; porosity of 24.9 %; grain size of about 1.5 μm) represent a pure α-NASICON phase. Ceramics significantly degrade in contact with deionized water (characterized with resistance of about 20 MΩ·cm) losing 64 % of σt and σgb & 62 % of σb within first two hours of water exposure with subsequent limiting plateau. In addition to the conductivity fading, water exposure evidently leads to: morphological changes — etching, microcracking, formation of spherical nanoparticles; structural changes — unit cell shrinkage, crystallite strain relaxation, intrastructural Li-polyhedra changes, recrystallization (texturing); chemical changes — losses of all elements (irreversible — when dissolved in water,partially reversible — through the nanoparticles formation), redistribution of aluminum within the grain. Subsequent calcination leads to the slight recovery of these characteristics. As a result, we can conclude that the LATP ceramics demonstrate high water sensitivity. Therefore, we may expect this material is not preferable for use in aqueous batteries. Finally, we assume that nonaqueous solutions that are expected to be in direct contact with pure LATP ceramics should have been dried thoroughly while the whole battery device should have been well isolated from the ambient humid atmosphere.