Rechargeable aqueous lithium ion batteries have been developed by using olivine LiMn0.05Ni0.05Fe0.9PO4 as cathode material, Nasicon LiTi2(PO4)3 as anode material, and saturated Li2SO4 solution as electrolyte. The cycling performance and rate capability of these batteries have been investigated. At a current density of 0.2 mA/cm2, the initial discharge capacity of the battery was approximately 103.9 mAh/g, and the potential plateau was located at 0.92 V. The rate capability of aqueous electrolyte was found to be preferable to that of organic electrolyte. Such inexpensive, secure and high rate rechargeable lithium ion battery should have a potential for use in many applications.

The coming global energy crisis is compelling people to find energy alternatives. Likewise, how to improve energy efficiency and to make energy infrastructure more secure and reliable are also important areas of concern. Hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) are significant in addressing the above problems, and much effort has been put into research regarding advanced batteries for HEVs [1–9]. Lithium ion batteries, which are good candidates for such batteries, are an outstanding electrical source and have been commercialized for about 20 years; however, many problems with these batteries still remain. Usually, lithium ion batteries contain flammable organic electrolytes, which tend to easily cause intense smoke or even fire in the case of improper use. Moreover, the cost is too high for making lithium batteries with organic electrolyte in a perfectly dry environment. Therefore, the application of aqueous electrolyte has recently been seen as an attractive alternative, and much attention has been paid to its development [10–15]. Because of the decomposition of water, the most important thing to consider in this development is the selection of cathode and anode active materials. Aqueous cells with LiMn2O4 and VO2 as electrode materials and 5 M LiNO3 in water as the electrolyte were first reported [10,1 1], but the evolution of oxygen at the Li1−xMn2O4 electrode in basic electrolyte presented a problem with this design. Rechargeable lithium ion batteries with aqueous electrolyte have also been constructed with LiNi0.81Co0.19O2 as the cathode material and LiV3O8 as the anode material within 1 M Li2SO4 aqueous electrolyte [12], i n that the comparatively sharp inclining/declining charge/discharge curves show a rapid rise/fall in the limit voltage, which in turn leads to reduced capacities. Otherwise, the electrochemical behavior of lithium intercalation compounds such as LiMnPO4 and LiFePO4 within aqueous electrolyte have been investigated [16–19]. A s a candidate for the cathode material, the low-cost and environmentally benign olivine LiFePO4 is attractive for many reasons, its rare-metal free composition, its larger gravimetric (Ah/g) and volumetric capacities (Ah/cc), its flat charge/discharge voltage profile, and its excellent thermal and chemical stability at both end members, etc. [20]. To improve the conductivity of the material, many strategies have been employed, including carbon coating, metal doping, and novel synthesis methods. The aqueous battery with olivine cathode and Nasicon anode deserves close attention. In this paper, the performances of the aqueous Li-ion battery with doped olivine cathode, LiMn0.05Ni0.05Fe0.9PO4 (3.43 V vs. Li+/Li), and Nasicon anode, LiTi2(PO4)3 (2.5 V vs. Li+/Li) are reported.

The doped olivine LiMn0.05Ni0.05Fe0.9PO4 used as cathode active material in this work was prepared by sol–gel method according to reference [21]. Stoichiometric amounts of ferrous sulfate, manganese acetate, nickel acetate, lithium nitrate, and ammonium dihydrogen phosphate were used as starting materials; citric acid was adopted as a chelating agent. The sol was dried in a vacuum dryer followed by heating at 550 ◦C for 2 h and 850 ◦C for 1 h in Ar to avoid the oxidation of ferrous ion. The LiMn0.05Ni0.05Fe0.9PO4/C was then obtained. In this experiment, the molar ratio of chelating agent to the total metal ion was 1:1, and the molar ratio of (Fe + Mn + Ni):Li:P was 1:1:1. The resulting material was singlephase olivine structure doped with two metals, as was determined by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern. The composite electrodes contained LiMn0.05Ni0.05Fe0.9PO4 as cathode active material (70% by weight), acetylene black (AB, 25% by weight), and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) binder (5% by weight). Any carbothermal treatment was not done for the cathode and anode in this paper. Ti mesh was used as a current collector.

Anode material LiTi2(PO4)3 was obtained by a solid reaction of stoichiometric amounts of lithium carbonate, titanium dioxide, and ammonium dihydrogen phosphate. The starting materials were finely ground and then heated gradually to 1000 ◦C for 45 h in air. The anode electrode was composed of the resulting LiTi2(PO4)3 (70% by weight) mixed with AB (25% by weight) by ball-milling, and with PTFE binder (5% by weight). All the electrode pellets were dried in vacuum before they were assembled into 2032 coin cells with organic electrolyte (1 M LiPF6/EC: DMC = 1:1 vol%) in an Ar glove box, or with aqueous electrolyte (saturated Li2SO4 aq.) in air. The electrode materials were identified via field emission scanning electronic microscopy (FESEM, Hatachi 2100) and X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku, RINT2100HLR/PC).

Fig. 1 shows the XRD pattern of as-synthesized LiMn0.05Ni0.05Fe0.9PO4/C and LiTi2(PO4)3, respectively. In Fig. 1(a), all peaks can be indexed to the olivine structure, orthorhombic cell, Pnma space group (JCPDS 40-1499). The doped material was well-crystallized in the olivine structure of LiFePO4, and there were no detectable impurity phases. In Fig. 1(b), all the observed reflections can be indexed in the rhombohedral crystal system. Fig. 2 presents FESEM images of the resulting LiMn0.05Ni0.05Fe0.9PO4 and LiTi2(PO4)3, respectively. From Fig. 2(a), it can be found that the active particles were surrounded by carbon derived from citric acid, which helps to increase the conductivity of the material, as well as to prevent particle agglomeration when heating at high temperature. The FESEM images of LiTi2(PO4)3 are shown in Fig. 2(b). Because the Nasicon material needs to be calcined at high temperature for a long period, the particle size is very large. In addition, by checking the charge/discharge performance, we found that it has large polarization and capacity decline (not shown here). The low intrinsic electronic conductivity of the threedimensional phosphates always presents this problem. In addition, it has been reported that almost complete reversible insertion of lithium can be obtained by ball-milling LiTi2(PO4)3 with carbon during electrode preparation [22]. After ball-milling with carbon, the particle size of LiTi2(PO4)3 became smaller, and the active materials were dispersed uniformly in carbon (Fig. 2(c)), which helps to counter the low intrinsic electronic conductivity of this material. Due to the decomposition of water, the selection of electrode materials is quite important. Fig. 3 shows the stability windows of water at various pH values, as well as charge/discharge voltages for some general cathode and anode active materials. Outside the range of the stability window for water, oxygen or hydrogen evolution will be generated; in addition, the potential range changes with the pH values, according to Nernst equation. Although 4 V cathodes such as LiMn2O4 or LiNi0.81Co0.19O2 were usually used as cathode in previous papers [10,12,14], the voltage seems to be too high for the aqueous electrolyte. In this paper, we selected olivine LiFePO4 and Nasicon LiTi2(PO4)3 as cathode and anode, respectively, because both of them have the two-phase flat charge/discharge voltages within the stability window for water and they are also environmentally benign materials in themselves. In order to get reference data to compare with aqueous lithium ion batteries, the half cell properties of the each electrode active materials were evaluated in nonaqueous electrolyte, used Li metal as the counter electrode. Fig. 4(a) shows the charge/discharge profile of LiMn0.05Ni0.05Fe0.9PO4, in which the charge and discharge flat plateaus are located at 3.47 V (vs. Li/Li+) and 3.40 V (vs. Li+/Li), respectively. There was no capacity decline from the first to the fifth cycle, which indicates that the as-synthesized LiMn0.05Ni0.05Fe0.9PO4 has basically good cycling performance. In addition, according to the voltage range, we determined that the charge/discharge voltage range in neutral aqueous electrolyte should be 0.3–0.6 V (vs. normal hydrogen electrode, NHE), which is safely within the stability window for water. In this range, no oxygen or hydrogen will be generated. The charge/discharge profile of ball-milled LiTi2(PO4)3 with Li metal as a counter electrode in organic electrolyte is shown in Fig. 4(b). There was irreversible capacity loss from the first discharge to charge, but from the second cycle, there was almost no capacity decrease, which indicates that the method of ball-milling with carbon is effective in improving the charge/discharge performance of LiTi2(PO4)3. In addition, for the discharge/charge equilibrium potentials located at 2.45 V (vs. Li+/Li), and 2.52 V (vs. Li/Li+), respectively, the flat voltage plateaus imply a two-phase mechanism for lithium insertion/deinsertion. The charge/discharge performance of LiMn0.05Ni0.05Fe0.9PO4//LiTi2(PO4)3 within aqueous electrolyte has been determined over a potential range between 0.6 V and 1.2 V, and the capacity calculations were based on the weight of cathode active materials. During charging, the lithium ions were extracted from the LiMn0.05Ni0.05Fe0.9PO4 cathode host, making Li1−xMn0.05Ni0.05Fe0.9PO4, and intercalated into the LiTi2(PO4)3 anode, making Li1+xTi2(PO4)3. During discharge, lithium ions were deintercalated from the anode and intercalated into the cathode. According to the potentials of LiMn0.05Ni0.05Fe0.9PO4 and LiTi2(PO4)3 (vs. Li+/Li), respectively, the cell should have a terminal voltage near 1 V. The charge/discharge profile is shown in Fig. 5. I n the first cycle, the irreversible capacity was large, maybe due to the irreversible capacity of the anode material LiTi2(PO4)3 as shown in Fig. 4(b). If this assumption is not wrong, Li rich Li1+˛Ti2(PO4)3 should be effective to compensate the irreversible capacity. In the second cycles, the cell showed excellent reversibility, and the capacity declines were very small. The charge/discharge equilibrium potential was located at 0.97 V and 0.92 V, respectively. The flat voltage plateaus and small charge/discharge over potential indicate a two-phase mechanism for lithium insertion/deinsertion in neutral aqueous electrolyte. The clear cutoff voltages provide a charge/discharge voltage range that can avoid the decomposition of water.

For LiMn0.05Ni0.05Fe0.9PO4//LiTi2(PO4)3, organic electrolyte is preferable at low current density. From Fig. 6, it can be seen that the LiMn0.05Ni0.05Fe0.9PO4//LiTi2(PO4)3 with organic electrolyte has good cycling performance at a current density of 0.2 mA/cm2, and a discharge capacity of 103.9 mAh/g was obtained. However, with increases in the current density, the advantage of an aqueous electrolyte could be seen. It appears that the rate capability of aqueous electrolyte is superior to that of organic electrolyte. When the current density was higher than 1.0 mA/cm2, the rate capability of organic electrolyte decreased severely, while that of aqueous electrolyte decreased relatively slowly. It is a major drawback for any possible applications when cathode and anode materials both have low electronic conductivity, and many efforts have been made to create systems that work efficiently at high current densities. Our results show that aqueous electrolyte provides a promising means of solving this problem. Fig. 7 shows the cycling performance for LiMn0.05Ni0.05Fe0.9PO4//LiTi2(PO4)3 with saturated Li2SO4 aqueous solution electrolyte. These data were obtained from constant charge/discharge at a current density of 0.2 mA/cm2 over the potential range 0.6–1.2 V. The initial discharge capacity obtained at this condition was 87 mAh/g and it is half of the theoretical achievable cathode capacity. The reversible capacity decreased and the discrepancies between the charge and discharge capacity were not small during the first several cycles. However, from them, the discharge/charge efficiency was gradually recovered up to 98%. Li and Dahn have reported that the discharge capacity of a LiMn2O4//VO2 battery using 5 M LiNO3 solution as electrolyte fades severely after 20 cycles, which they ascribed to the possibility of the decomposition of water and the dissolution of V ion [1 1]. Although further analyses are needed to elucidate the cause of the insufficient cyclability, we have not detected yet any trace of oxygen and hydrogen generation from water and dissolving of metal ions into the electrolyte. In addition, the electrolyte was still colorless and neutral even in the cycled cells.

Aqueous cells have been made using LiMn0.05Ni0.05Fe0.9PO4 as cathode material, LiTi2(PO4)3 as anode material, and saturated Li2SO4 aqueous solution as electrolyte. By controlling the cycle voltage range, no oxygen or hydrogen was generated to destroy the cell. The flat voltage plateaus indicate a two-phase mechanism for lithium insertion/deinsertion. The present results indicate that the rate capability of an aqueous cell is much better than that obtained with organic electrolyte. As such, aqueous lithium ion battery with two-phase cathode/anode electrodes can provide an inexpensive, secure and high rate rechargeable next-generation power sources.
