The application of NASICON-type Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5P3O12 (LAGP) solid electrolyte in lithium (Li) metal batteries has been retarded by its instability towards metallic Li and the poor interfacial compatibility with cathodes. Here we report a durable LAGP-based Li metal battery by employing self-healing polymer electrolytes (SHEs) as Janus interfaces. The SHEs were constructed on both sides of LAGP pellets by in-situ polymerizing functional monomer and crosslinker in ionic liquid-based (anodic side in contact with Li metal) or adiponitrile (AN)based (cathodic side) electrolytes. The as-developed SHEs show flame-retardant, high ionic conductivity (>10-3 S cm-1 at 25 °C), excellent interfacial compatibility with electrodes, and effective inhibition of Li dendrite formation. The LAGP-based Li metal||LiMn2O4 batteries with the SHE interfaces deliver a high reversible capacity with a long cycle.
Rechargeable lithium metal batteries are considered as the ultimate candidate for nextgeneration high-energy-density energy storage devises owing to ultrahigh capacity (3,860 mA h g-1) and lowest redox potential (-3.040 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode) of Li metal anode.1-2 However, when liquid electrolytes containing a large amount of highly flammable and volatile carbonate or ether solvents are employed in Li metal batteries, it triggers serious safety issues such as explosion and fire caused by thermal runaway.3 Moreover, parasitic reactions between liquid electrolytes and highly active Li metal generally lead to the formation of an unstable solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) on the Li anode surface, accompanied with the uncontrollable Li dendrite growth.4-5 This results in short circuits and thermal runaway of batteries accompanied with low Coulombic efficiency.6 In contrast, inorganic solid-state electrolytes are considered to be promising alternatives to traditional liquid electrolytes due to their non-flammable nature and high shear modulus against Li dendrite growth.7-8 Among inorganic solid-state electrolytes, including perovskite, NASICON (Na+ superionic conductor), thio-LISICON (Li+ superionic conductor), garnet, and lithium phosphorous oxinitride (LiPON),9 NASICON-type Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5P3O12 (LAGP) electrolyte is of particular interest due to its high ionic conductivity (>10-4 S cm-1 at 25 °C) and air stability that allows to synthesize it in large scale under air atmosphere.10 However, little progress has been achieved on the successful application of LAGP in Li metal batteries, owing to the interfacial incompatibility between LAGP and metallic Li; when contact with Li, the Ge4+ in LAGP can be irreversibly reduced to Ge2+ (in the form of GeO) and Ge.11-12 These side reaction products accumulating on the Li metal|LAGP interface can block Li ion transport and trigger battery failure.13 Many efforts have been devoted to improve the interfacial stability of LAGP towards Li metal anodes. These include constructing solidliquid hybrid interfaces,14 and employing lithophilic alloys9 or soft polymer electrolytes15-17 as buffer layers, etc. Nevertheless, the introduction of flammable liquid or gel components undoubtedly sacrifices the safety of batteries; while the low ionic conductivities of polymer electrolytes limit the room-temperature operation of batteries. More importantly, the asconstructed interfaces through employing lithophilic alloys or polymer electrolytes can be easily damaged by anodic volume expansion during the repeatable Li plating-stripping processes, resulting in rapid capacity decay.18 The poor interfacial contact between LAGP electrolyte pellets and traditional porous cathodes is another obstacle for LAGP-based Li metal batteries.19 Although introducing LAGP particles into the cathode can increase the contact area, the decrease in areal active material mass loading inevitably reduces the energy density of batteries.
 Self-healing represents an ability to spontaneously recover from mechanical damage through the reconstruction of interrupted interfaces by host-guest interaction, hydrogen bonding, and reversible chemical bonds etc.22 To date, self-healing polymers have been applied as binders23 or polymer electrolytes24-26 in Li batteries, where they can repair electrode|electrolyte interfacial cracks and avoid the pulverization of electrode active materials, thus leading to enhanced electrochemical performance.27 It is expected that employing self-healing polymer electrolytes (SHEs) as interfaces in LAGP-based Li metal batteries can maintain robust and integrated electrode|electrolyte contact during cycling, therefore eliminating Li|LAGP interfacial side reactions. Whereas, it remains an enormous challenge to develop SHEs simultaneously possessing high ionic conductivity and excellent stability with electrodes.
 In this work, for the first time, we report new flame-retardant SHEs as Janus interfaces for LAGP-based Li metal batteries. This anolyte SHE (ASHE) was in-situ synthesized by polymerizing pentaerythritol tetraacrylate (PETEA) crosslinker and 2-(3-(6-methyl-4oxo-1,4-dihydropyrimidin-2-yl)ureido)ethyl methacrylat (UPyMA) monomer in the presence of 0.5 M bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (LiTFSI) in (1-ethyl-3methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (EMITFSI) with 10 wt% ethylene carbonate (EC) electrolytes that promotes the formation of stable SEI on the Li metal surface. Meanwhile, the catholyte SHE (CSHE) was in-situ fabricated by polymerizing the same monomers in the presence of 1 M LiTFSI in adiponitrile (AN) electrolytes that possesses high resistance against electrochemical oxidation. The as-prepared copolymer matrix not only keeps robust electrolyte|electrode interface contacts and enables uniform Li ion diffusion during cycling, but also keeps both ASHEs and CSHEs in a quasi-solid-state without the safety hazard from electrolyte leakage. The asdeveloped SHEs exhibit flame-retardant, high ionic conductivity in a scale of ~ 10-3 S cm-1 at 25 ℃, steady interfacial properties, and homogeneous Li plating/stripping behaviors without dendrite formation. When introduced between LAGP pellet and electrodes , the as-assembled Li metal||LiMn2O4 (LMO) batteries deliver high reversible capacity with a stable cycling performance.
Figure 1A-C show the optimization mechanism of SHE Janus interface layers in Li metal|LAGP| LMO batteries. As shown in Figure 1A, during the Li deposition process in pristine Li metal|LAGP|LMO cell, the poor interfacial contact between Li metal anode and LAGP electrolyte results in an inhomogeneous Li ion flux, that triggers the formation of Li dendrites.28 Furthermore, the high-resistance side products from the reduction reaction between Li and LAGP accumulate on the Li|LAGP interface, which strongly blocks Li ion transport. For the cathode side, the insufficient interfacial contact area between LMO porous cathode and LAGP leads to a huge polarization. As a result, such Li metal|LAGP|LMO cell suffers from rapid battery failure. We constructed anodic gel polymer electrolyte (AGPE) on the Li metal|LAGP interface and cathodic gel polymer electrolyte (CGPE) on the LMO|LAGP interface, respectively. The AGPE was prepared by polymerizing 1.5 wt% PETEA in 0.5 M LiTFSI in EMITFSI + EC anodic liquid electrolyte (ALE). Meanwhile, the CGPE was prepared by polymerizing 1.5 wt% PETEA in 1 M LiTFSI in an AN cathodic liquid electrolyte (CLE). This strategy is expected to effectively tackle the interfacial issues. However, these gel polymer electrolytes (GPEs) as interface layers are easily crushed by the repeated volume change in electrodes during cycling, deteriorating the interfacial contacts and decreasing the battery cycle life (Figure 1B). Intriguingly, in the Li metal|ASHE|LAGP|CSHE|LMO cell, the ASHE and CSHE as Janus interface layers can heal the cracks caused by electrode volume change spontaneously and thus maintain integrated interfacial contacts upon cycling, simultaneously eliminating side reactions between metallic Li and LAGP. Thus, an excellent cycling stability is expected to for the optimized in LAGP-based cells (Figure 1C).
First-principle calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) were employed to elucidate the self-healing mechanism of the SHEs. As shown in Figure 1D, the formation energy of UPyMA-UPyMA clusters has been calculated to be -2.03 eV, which is much more negative than these between UPyMA monomer and PETEA (-0.53 eV), EMITFSI- (-0.97 eV), and AN (-0.88 eV). Consequently, on the crack surfaces of SHEs, the UPyMA units in the polymer chains tend to attract each other, and form abundant intermolecular or intramolecular hydrogen bonds (Figure S1),18 which leads to a fast self-healing ability. Furthermore, the interionic attractive Coulombic forces from the Li salts also benefit the self-healing, which is important to maintain the interfacial contact and ionic conduction in SHEs.
Figure 1. Design and Fabrication of the SHE Janus interfaces for high-performance LAGP-based lithium metal batteries. (A-C) Schematic illustration of the interfacial evolutions in Li|LAGP|LMO batteries without interface layers, with GPEs and SHEs as Janus interface layers during cycling, respectively. (D) Calculated binding energies of the UPyMA monomer with PETEA, EMITFSI-, AN and UPyMA.
The precursor as transparent solutions prepared by dissolving monomer and crosslinker in the ALE and CLE can be polymerized in-situ under ultraviolet (UV) irradiation to form ASHE and CSHE as free-standing gels, respectively (Figure S1). The Fourier transform infrared spectra (FTIR) in Figure 2A confirm the successful monomer polymerization in the SHEs. The peaks at around 1720 cm-1 (C=O stretching), 1251 cm1 and 1163 cm-1 (C-O antisymmetric stretching) , 1470 cm-1 and 1405 cm-1 (CH2 blending), 1634 cm-1 (C=C bonds) emerge in the spectrum of PETEA monomer.6 In addition, the characteristic peak at ~1657 cm-1 is assigned to the N-H stretching of UPyMA monomer.30 After polymerization, the characteristic peaks at about ~1634 cm-1 attributed to the stretching vibration of C=C bonds nearly disappear,6 suggesting a high transition degree of PETEA and UPyMA monomers. Figure 2B shows that the ASHE (upper panels) and CSHE (lower panels) can spontaneously recover within 1 h without other external stimulation after a deep cut at room temperature. In comparison, the GPEs do not show obvious self-healing properties even after 24 h (Figure S2). Owing to such excellent self-fusion characteristics, the SHEs can be applied as robust buffer layers in the LAGP-based Li metal batteries. Li ion transport is another key property to be considered in interfacial engineering. Figure 2C and S3 present the ionic conductivities of the prepared electrolytes from 25 °C to 95 °C. The plots of log σ vs. 1000 T -1 can be well fitted by the Arrhenius equation:
 where σ is the ionic conductivity, κ is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, A is the pre-exponential factor, and Ea is the activation energy for Li ion conduction. The ionic conductivities of ASHE and CSHE are 7.41 × 10-3 S cm-1 and 1.61 × 10-3 S cm-1 at 25 ℃ (Figure S3), respectively, which are slightly lower than those of ALE (7.43 × 10-3 S cm-1) and CLE (1.85 × 10-3 S cm-1) since the polymerized UPyMAPETEA matrix is not ionically conductive. However, the ionic conductivity values of the SHEs are much higher than the bulk conductivity of LAGP electrolyte (2.82 × 10-4 S cm1). The ASHE|LAGP|CSHE composite delivers a high ionic conductivity of 2.75 × 10-3 S cm-1 at 25 ℃, and the Ea value (0.21 eV) is lower than that of LAGP (0.22 eV), indicating that Li ions could rapidly transfer through the SHE interface layers. Furthermore, the SHE|LAGP interfacial ionic conductivities (σint) can be estimated by the following implicit equation:
 where σpol and σcom are the conductivities of the SHE and SHE|LAGP|SHE composite, respectively; Li* is the effective depolarization factor (i. e., 0.0865); and fc is the volume fraction of the inserted LAGP. Given that the ionic conductivities of ASHE|LAGP|ASHE and CSHE|LAGP|CSHE composites are 6.53 × 10-3 S cm-1 and 1.13 × 10-3 S cm-1 at 25 °C, respectively, the interfacial ionic values of ASHE|LAGP and CSHE|LAGP can be calculated to be 6.42× 10-3 S cm-1 and 1.10× 10-3 S cm-1 at 25 °C, respectively. These high interfacial ionic conductivities facilitate fast Li ion transport at the ASHE|LAGP and CSHE|LAGP interfaces.
In the battery configuration of Li metal|ASHE|LAGP|CSHE|LMO, the ionic liquid-based ASHE was applied at the anodic side since the ionic liquid-based electrolytes have a good compatibility with Li metal, but shows relative low resistance against electrochemical oxidation. Meanwhile, the AN-based CSHE was applied at the cathodic side since the nitrile-based electrolytes possess high oxidative stability, but are unstable towards metallic Li.3 Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) was performed to investigate the electrochemical window of the investigated electrolytes. The ASHE starts to oxidize at ~4.3 V vs. Li/Li+, while the CHSE can maintain stability up to ~4.8 V vs. Li/Li+ due to the high electrochemical stability of nitrile materials against oxidation (Figure 2D).32 These values are similar to those of the ALE and CLE (Figure S4). The ASHE|LAGP|CSHE composite exhibits a wide electrochemical window of approximately 4.7 V vs. Li/Li+, which can fulfill the requirement of most cathode materials. Thermo-gravimetric analyses (TGA) under N2 flow further shows that the ASHE and CSHE present negligible weight losses of 2.8 % and 4.1 % at 150 °C, respectively (Figure 2E). Furthermore, they are hardly ignited by flame sources (Figure 2F, middle and right). This is because high content (>85 wt%) of EMITFSI ionic liquid and AN are applied as the plasticizers of ASHE and CSHE, respectively. The EMITFSI is intrinsic nonflammable;30 Meanwhile, the AN is flame-retardant with a high ignition temperature up to 500 ℃.33 In sharp contrast, the 1 M LiPF6 in EC: diethyl carbonate (DEC) liquid electrolyte (widely applied to improve the interface wettability of solid-state batteries)14 starts evaporating rapidly at room temperature owing to the low boiling points of the solvents, and exhibits a crippling weight loss of 50.7 % at 150 °C (Figure 2E and S5) together with a high combustibility (Figure 2F, left). Such superior thermos-stability of SHEs is essential for the safe application of high energy Li metal batteries.
 Symmetric Li||Li cells were cycled at 0.1 mA cm-2 to study the compatibility of Li metal and ASHE interface layers. As shown in Figure 3A, the overpotential of Li|LAGP|Li cells under 0.1 mA cm-2 sharply increases with the cycling time (~ 0.5 V at 8 h) and the cell failed at 134 h, mainly due to the unstable Li plating/stripping and the accumulation of side reaction products with high resistance on the Li|LAGP interface.In contrast, Li|ASHE|LAGP|ASHE|Li cells exhibit a voltage hysteresis without obvious oscillation during the 700 h cycling, and the overpotential (~200 mV) is much lower than the cell employing AGPE without self-healing chain segments as interface layers (rising to 5 V at 475 h, Figure S6). Moreover, the Li|ASHE|LAGP|ASHE|Li cell exhibits a stable voltage hysteresis of ~0.5 V during the 300 h cycling under high current density of 1 mA cm-2 (Figure S7). Furthermore, the ASHE with EC as additive shows a much lower overpotential in Li||Li symmetric cells than that without additive or with triethylene glycol dimethyl ether (TGDME), ethylene glycol dimethyl ether (DME) or fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) as the additive, demonstrating a remarkable interfacial optimization effect of EC (Figure S8). The above results confirm that ASHE benefits a uniform Li deposition on anodes without dendrite formation.
Li||Cu cells were employed to further assess the Coulombic efficiencies of Li plating/stripping processes with and without interface layers. The deposited Li cannot reversibly strip from the Cu substrate in a Li|LAGP|Cu cell (Figure 3B, in insert), mainly because of the loss of LAGP|Cu interfacial contact during the Li stripping process (Figure S9, the Li deposit detaches from the Cu substrate and adheres to the LAGP pellet). Furthermore, as shown in field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images, the Li deposition layer (~20.2 µm, Figure 3D, inset) shows a significantly loose and porous morphology with numerous side products and dead Li in a Li|LAGP|Cu cell (Figure 3D). The surface of Li deposit becomes smoother (Figure S10C) and the thickness decreased to ~7.1 µm after adding the AGPE interface layers (Figure S10D). For comparison, a Li|ASHE|LAGP|ASHE|Cu cell shows an average Coulombic efficiency of 98.96 % (Figure 3B), which is much higher than of the Li|AGPE|LAGP|AGPE|Cu cell (87.95 %, Figure S10A). The corresponding voltage hysteresis of the cell with SHE interface layers is about 30 mV (Figure 3C), dramatically lower than that with GPE interface layers (~115 mV, Figure S10B). The Li deposits smoothly with a morphology of compactly accumulated bulky particles in Li|ASHE|LAGP|ASHE|Cu cell (Figure 3E), and the thickness (~5.1 μm, the inset in Figure 3E) is close to the theoretical value Such a dense Li plating structure in the cell with ASHE interface layers can efficiently diminish the harmful side reactions with electrolyte owing to the reduced surface area, and thus contributing to high Coulombic efficiency with excellent cycling stability.
 In-depth X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were conducted to investigate the SEI components on the cycled Li metal anodes (Figure 4A-D). For the Li|LAGP|Li cell, peaks at approximately 53 eV, 54.5 eV and 55.3 eV appear in the Li 1s spectra, which can be assigned to Li2O, Li2O2 and Li2CO3, respectively (Figure 4B).Furthermore, the Li 1s XPS spectrum of pristine LAGP only presents a single peak at about 55.5 eV (Figure S11A). After cycling, the Ge4+ in LAGP (appearing at ~32.7 eV in the Ge 3d spectrum, Figure S11B) is reduced to Ge (~29.3 eV) and GeO (~30.6 eV, Figure S11D) by Li metal. Meanwhile, new components of Li2O, Li2O2, and Li2CO3 (originating from residual carbon introduced during LAGP preparation) appear in the Li 1s spectrum of LAGP (Figure S11C).This validates that SEI in the Li|LAGP|Li cell mainly consists of inorganic components (i. e., Li2O, Li2O2, and Li2CO3) as the side reaction products between LAGP and Li metal. These SEI components are unevenly deposited on the surface of Li anode (the inset in Figure 4E), which leads to a low Young’s modulus of the SEI (only 475 MPa, Figure 4E). Such low strength SEIs can be easily penetrated by Li dendrites during cycling, which further triggers repeated SEI destruction-reconstruction during cycling associated with interface deterioration.34 When AGPE or ASHE was employed as interface layers in the Li||Li symmetric cells, the side reactions between LAGP and Li metal are inhibited (Figure S11C-D). More importantly, new components of LiF (appearing ~684.7 eV in F 1s, ~55.7 eV in Li 1s and ~29.0 eV spectra in Ge 3d, originating from the decomposition of TFSI- anions,35) and LiCOOR (“R” represents alkyl groups, appearing at ~54.3 eV in Li 1s spectrum) arise in the SEI on Li metal surface (Figure 4C-D and Figure S11D). LiF as the decomposition product of TFSI- anions enables an enhanced robustness of SEI due to its ultra-high mechanical strength.35 Meanwhile, LiCOOR as the reaction product between EC and metallic Li provides sufficient elasticity to the SEI.36 As a result, the Young’s moduli of the SEI from cells using GPE (Figure S12D) and SHE (Figure 4F) are dramatically improved to 1363 and 2549 MPa, respectively. Moreover, the component distribution of ASHE-derived SEI (Figure 4C-D) is more uniform compared with the AGPE-derived SEI (Figure S13)  along the increased sputtering depth, and the surface morphology is smoother (Figure 4F and S12C). Such monolithic, smooth and robust SEI from the ASHE-based Li metal cell leads to homogenous Li stripping-plating without dendrite formation,4 which is further verified by the absence of dead Li from cycled Li|ASHE|LAGP|ASHE|Li cell (Figure S14).
Based on the above analyses, the high suppression effect of ASHE on Li dendrite formation could be elucidated as follows: (i) As the buffer layer between Li metal and LAGP, the ASHE efficiently inhibits side reactions upon cycling; (ii) The self-healing polymer matrix of ASHE not only maintains an integrated Li|ASHE contact during cycling, but also enables a uniform Li ionic flux (owing to the interaction force from the polymer matrix that restricts Li ion movement towards the SEI defects6) and eases the volumetric change upon Li deposition, thus inhibiting any incipient formation of Li dendrites; (iii) The ASHE significantly enhances the robustness and uniformity of SEI on the Li metal surface. Such multi optimizing effects enable the excellent electrochemical performances of ASHE in LAGP-based Li metal batteries.
Li|ASHE|LAGP|CSHE|LMO cells were assembled to assess the electrochemical performances in full cells at room temperature. Figure 5A and S15 show that of the LAGP pellet (~300 μm) is evenly sandwiched with the ASHE and CSHE interface layers (~10 μm). When cycling at 0.1 C, the Li|ASHE|LAGP|CSHE|LMO cell delivered a higher capacity (112.1 mAh g-1, based on the mass of LMO) with lower polarization in the 2nd cycle compared with the Li|LAGP|LMO cell with GPE interface layers (84.4 mAh g-1, Figure S16A) and without interface layers (75.2 mAh g-1, Figure 5B). Moreover, for the cell with SHE interface layers, high Coulombic efficiency (~99.1 %) and improved capacity retention are obtained. The reversible capacity maintains 90.0 mAh g-1 after 120 cycles with capacity retention of 80.3 % (Figure 5C). In contrast, the cells without interface layers present battery failures at about the 40th cycle (Figure 5C), while the reversible capacity of the cell with GPE interface layers is only 23.3 mAh g-1 after 120 cycles (Figure S16B). These results show further evidence of the much smaller interfacial resistance for the cell with the SHEs and less increase after cycling compared with those with GPEs and without interface layers (shown as the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) data in Figure 5D, S16C and S17). This outcome clearly confirmed the robust electrode|SHE contacts and the high interfacial stabilities during cycling. It is noteworthy that the cell using ASHE as the interface layer at the cathode side (i.e. Li|ASHE|LAGP|ASHE|LMO) delivers a low Coulombic efficiency (< 80 %) and low reversible capacity (64.6 mAh g-1 after 30 cycles) upon cycling, which is caused by the low stability of ASHE against electrochemical oxidation (Figure S18). Figure 5E and S19B show the rate performance of a Li|ASHE|LAGP|CSHE|LMO cell from 0.05 to 0.5 C and corresponding charge/discharge curves at ambient temperature, respectively. Figure S19B shows that the charge-discharge potential gaps of the cell with SHEs at various rates are dramatically smaller than those of the cell using GPEs (Figure S16A) or without interface layers (Figure S19A). This suggests that the SHE interface layer can effectively reduce battery polarization. Moreover, the Li|ASHE|LAGP|CSHE|LMO cells deliver specific charge capacities of 127.6, 112.1, 106.2, 103 and 82.1 mA h g-1 at 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and 0.5 C, respectively, which are much higher than the Li|AGPE|LAGP|CGPE|LMO (Figure S16D) and Li|LAGP|LMO (Figure 5E) cells. High capacity retention (~ 98.6 % of the initial value) of the cell with SHEs is obtained when the current density turned back to 0.1 C, demonstrating the high robustness and stability of this battery system (Figure 5E). Such outstanding electrochemical performances are promising for the development of room-temperature LAGP-based Li metal batteries.
  In summary, for the first time, we have developed flame-retardant SHEs as buffer interfaces to solve the interfacial issues in LAGP-based Li metal batteries. These polymer electrolytes were fabricated by in-situ integrating UPyMA-PETEA copolymer matrix with anodic ionic liquid-based and cathodic AN-based electrolytes. The selfhealing polymer framework not only maintains the SHEs in a quasi-solid-state with improved safety, but also keeps integrated interfacial contacts with electrodes against mechanical damage and benefits homogeneous Li ionic fluxes during cycling. The asdeveloped SHEs simultaneously possess flame-retardant, high ionic conductivity (> 10-3 S cm-1 at 25 °C), stable interfacial characteristics, and dendrite-free Li deposition. The Li|LAGP|LMO full cells with ASHE and CSHE Janus interface layers exhibit high reversible capacity with good cycling stability. This work provides new insights for the interfacial engineering of future solid-state Li metal batteries.
 