The CO2 gas sensor, based on the principle of electro-chemistry, was fabricated using the solid-electrolyte Li3PO4 film formed by a thermal evaporator and its sensing performances were studied. Thermal evaporated film was prepared with power of 10A, a working pressure of 10-6mTorr and thickness of 1.2 µm. Then, it was annealed at 800 oC for 2h in air. Li2TiO3+TiO2 and Li2CO3 film were prepared using a screen printing method as the reference and the sensing electrode, respectively. Li3PO4 film showed a much denser structure than bulk-type Li3PO4 in SEM images. The response and recovery characteristics were very good at the higher CO2 concentration and its value was 280 mV and changed to 260 mV in the higher CO2 environment. It was also observed that the sensitivity decreased by 98 % when the CO2 concentration increased from 250 ppm to 5000 ppm. Response time and recovery time were measured to be 5 s and 7 s, respectively. These results showed enough potential for developing a CO2 gas sensor using Li3PO4 film instead of the bulk-type.

The atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2) has been increasing steadily since industrialization. It is well-known that it can severely bring about global effects. The Tokyo protocol, which calls for the reduction of green house gases, was recently effectuated. Therefore, many people have been intensively interested in reduction and detection of air pollution arising from various fields like industry, automobiles, etc, and the development of a cost-effective CO2 sensor has been strongly requested [1-5]. The commonly used CO2 detection system, which uses infrared absorption of CO2 molecules, is complex from a maintenance perspective and is hard to set up. It is necessary to develop inexpensive, compact and reliable CO2 sensors. Among many CO2 sensors, potentiometric devices combining a solid electrolyte with an auxiliary phase of carbonate are eminently suitable for practical applications [5]. Lithium electrolyte based sensors are known to be promising owing to their faster speed and lower water reactive nature of the lithium ion than any other alkali metal [6,7]. However, there is still much need for developing materials and cost-effective processes that work consistently at a low temperature. From other alkali metal-based sensors, alkali ions move from the anode to the cathode in a carbon-dioxide rich atmosphere when they are used as electrolytes in the sensor. The carbonates are formed at the interface between electrode and electrolyte as the acceptor of CO2. In alkali metal carbonates, Li2CO3 is unaffected by water vapor, Na2CO3 absorbs water vapor, and K2CO3 dissolves in water vapor and eventually becomes an aqueous solution at room temperature [8-10]. Until now, most of these sensors have consisted of an Li2CO3 sensing-electrode and an Li2TiO3 reference-electrode, which was formed of planar or stack type and its electrolyte has been mostly bulk type Li3PO4. One of the most important issues with this type is the development of a cost-effective sensor. Instead of the bulk type, therefore, it is necessary to develop electro-chemical CO2 sensors using the film-type, which allow for reduction of material and processing expenses for cost-effective sensors. In this work, an electro-chemical CO2 gas sensor was fabricated with thin film Li3PO4 electrolyte using the thermal evaporation method instead of bulk type Li3PO4 and the film properties as well as sensitivity and long-term reliability of the sensor were characterized for a cost-effective CO2 gas sensor.

Li3PO4 films were prepared using a thermal evaporator onto Al2O3 substrate with 50 mm × 50 mm sizes. The working pressure was 10-6 torr and power was loaded at 10 A with air atmosphere. For the effect of annealing temperature and time, As-deposited films were annealed at 800 oC for 2 h. Grain size and distribution were investigated with a scanning electron microscope (JEOL, JSM-6460LV). Then, a film-type CO2 gas sensor was sequentially fabricated as the structure, shown in Fig. 1, and a process flow, shown in Fig. 2. For fabrication of a CO2 gas sensor, first of all, a Platinum (Pt) heater was prepared for activation of operation temperature in the rear side of alumina substrate. A Pt-heater with 3 μm to 4 μm thickness was screen-printed on a screen of 325 mesh, and then it was sintered at 1200 oC for 1 h. An insulation layer was prepared using a screen printing method and sintered at 950 oC for 1 h. For the precise detection of operation temperature, the resistance temperature detector (RTD) was screen-printed onto the insulation layer and sintered at 900 oC for 1h. After trimming of the heater, Li3PO4 electrolyte with 0.4 μm to 0.5 μm thickness was prepared using a thermal evaporator on the front side of alumina substrate and sintered at 800 oC for 2 h. Gold electrode was coated onto film-electrolyte and thermally treated at 700 oC for 1 h. Sequentially, the reference electrode (Li2TiO3+TiO2 1mol%) was prepared at a thickness of 10 μm and Li2CO3 was screen-printed with a thickness of 10 μm for the preparation of a sensing electrode. Finally, gold-wire was attached for measurement of the sensor and it was aged at 600 oC for 5 h. The electromotive force (EMF) measurements were carried out at a working temperature of 480 oC. The simulated air (80 vol.% N2+20 vol.% O2) from cylinders was used instead of air because of the latter containing CO2 and water vapor. The gas mixture containing 1000 ppm CO2 as the reference gas was also commercially provided. The mixtures containing different CO2 concentrations were prepared by using a flow-meter. Humid gas mixtures were prepared by passing the gases through a water bubbler under a constant temperature. The gases were allowed to flow on the electrodes at a rate of 100 ml/min.

Figure 3 shows plane (a) and cross-sectional (b) SEM images of Li3PO4 films using a thermal evaporator, annealed at 800 oC for 2 h. Thickness of the film was about 0.4 μm to 0.5 μm. It is observed that grain size of as-prepared film was below 1ìm and well-distributed. In comparison to bulk-type Li3PO4, we know that our results have a much denser structure. The ion conductance can not be moved between grain boundaries but directly passes into crystal. Under a somewhat dense-structure, a good-quality sensor can’t be obtained due to ion-diffusion into grain boundaries. From our results, the dense structure without void could be sufficiently obtained for the adoption of electrolyte from the CO2 gas sensor. Figure 4 shows the sensitivity of the CO2 sensor at the operating temperature range of 420 oC to 480 oC. The sensitivity of the sensor increased dramatically up to 450 oC, but saturated at above 450 oC. Generally, the ion-conductance of Li ion is lower than that of Na ion so it is necessary to proceed at a high operation temperature over 400 oC. In this work, the operation-temperature of the sensor was fixed to 480 oC to maintain improvement of sensitivity. The behavior of the electrochemical cell was defined by the equation [11]; E = Eo - RT/nF In p (CO2) (1) Where E is the EMF, Eo the EMF for a given p (CO2) at stan dard conditions, n the number of cell reaction electrons and F the faraday constant. The sensing reaction of the sensor can be denoted by the equations [9] Li2CO3 ⇔ 2Li+ + 2e- + CO2 + ½ O2 (2) On the reference side, 2Li+ + 2e- + TiO2 + ½ O2 ⇔ Li2TiO3 (3) And the overall reaction for the open cell can be expressed as, Li2CO3 + TiO2 ⇔ Li2TiO3 + CO2 (4) Figure 5 shows the characteristics of response and recovery in the CO2 range of 250 ppm to 5000 ppm. The performance of the sensor followed a good Nernstian behavior [12]. In this type of sensor the formation of an interfacial layer between the auxiliary phase and the electrolyte can exert some profound effects on the gas sensing properties [13-16]. The EMF is linearly dependent on the logarithm of CO2 concentration. Also, we know that a good response and recovery of the sensor was steadily shown at 480 oC. However, in the bulk type sensor, there are some problems in the difference of melting points between electrolyte (Li3PO4) and reference electrode (Li2TiO3) so the interface-junctions can’t be improved by sintering. It was also observed that the sensitivity decreased by 98 % when the CO2 concentration increased from 250 ppm to 5000 ppm. This result indicates that the sensitivity of the sensor does not change while the CO2 concentration is maintained constantly. Moreover, the EMF values quickly returned to the initial value as the CO2 concentration went back to its initial value of 250 ppm. Figure 6 shows that the response and recovery characteristics were very good in the range from 250 ppm to 500 ppm. This indicates that the EMF of the sensor was 281 mV and changed to 260 mV at the higher CO2 concentration of 500 ppm, and the response and recovery time 5 s and 7 s, respectively. In the case of the electrochemical sensor, the potential of the reference electrode and sensing electrode was changed to the flow of CO2 gas in a thermodynamic state [12]. Thus, a few factors such as state of electrolyte, the structure of sensor, and properties between interfaces have influenced the long-term reliability when the circuit is open. Assuming that thermal properties of all materials are stable, the lifetime of a sensor can be explained as follows. If the impedance of the module is 100 GΩ and the flow of current by conduction of electrons is 3 × 10-9 A, the quantity of electricity could be about 0.987C. Therefore, the lifetime of a sensor could be obtained by dividing 0.987C by 3 × 10-9 A, resulting in about 10 years.

Figure 7 shows the results for long-term reliability in CO2 sensors and CO2 concentration in everyday use. CO2 concentrations were measured by the reference sensor, the non-dispersive infrared (NDIR) type. Our sensors were tested for 215 days, maintaining 5 volts of power supply. EMF value of initials was 265 mV , but 255 mV of EMF value can be obtained after 215 days. Therefore, the reliability of the electrochemical CO2 sensor based on film-type electrolyte was excellent during the given long-term; almost the same as the CO2 concentration shown in the NDIR type sensor. In our work, Li2TiO3 materials as reference electrode were applied to improve the dependency of humidity because Li2TiO3 has auxiliary phase of alkali-carbonate, displaying good moisture-resistance properties. Also, it didn’t depend on oxygen partial pressure under the exposure in air. We have shown that mass-production can be improved and consumption power can be decreased due to the reduction of sensor size, applying Li3PO4 as a solid-electrolyte in an electrochemical CO2 sensor. These results show the potential for use of the film-type electrolyte and that it can be a cost-effective method for mass-production of CO2 gas sensor.

The electrochemical CO2 gas sensor can be fabricated successfully on the Al2O3 substrate using Li3PO4 thin film formed by thermal evaporator as a solid electrolyte. It was found that the film-type Li3PO4 was much denser than bulktype Li3PO4, shown in SEM images. The response and recovery characteristics were very good at the higher CO2 concentration, which was 280 mV and changed to 260 mV with CO2 concentration. It is observed that the sensitivity decreased by 98 % when the CO2 concentration increased from 250 ppm to 5000 ppm. Response time and recovery time were measured to be 5 s and 7 s, respectively. Finally,the electro-chemical CO2 sensor was evaluated for long-term reliability, resulting in constant EMF of 260 mV for 215 days. These results show the potential for developing a CO2 gas sensor using film-type Li3PO4 as a solid-electrolyte.
