A  potentiometric  sensor  device  based  on  screen-printed  Nasicon  films  was  investigated. 
In order to transfer the promising sensor concept of an open sodium titanate  reference  to  thick  film  technology,  “sodium-rich”  and  “sodium-poor”  formulations  were  compared.  
While  the  “sodium-rich”  composition  was  found  to  react  with  the  ion  conducting  Nasicon  during  thermal  treatment,  the  “sodium-poor”  reference  mixture  was  identified  as  an  appropriate  reference  composition.  
Screen-printed  sensor  devices  were  prepared and tested with respect to CO2 response, reproducibility, and cross-interference of  oxygen.  
Excellent  agreement  with  the  theory  was  observed.  
With  the  integration  of  a  screen-printed heater, sensor elements were operated actively heated in a cold gas stream. 

Due  to  its  strong  impact  as  a  greenhouse  gas,  monitoring  of  CO2  emissions  has  become  crucial.  
Although optical detection of CO2 using infrared radiation is very exact, a more cost-effective method  capable of also working in harsh and dirty environments is needed. 
To meet these requirements, several  potentiometric sensor devices based on electrochemical cells with sodium conducting solid electrolytes  such  as  β‘’-Al2O3  or  Na1+xZr2P3-xSixO12  (Nasicon,  0 £   3)  have  been  investigated  (for  a  detailed  review, cf. ). 
Corresponding to a “type III” electrochemical gas sensor, these sensor devices rely  on the presence of an auxiliary phase such as sodium or barium carbonate, which is deposited at the  working electrode and interacts with CO2. 
As the counter or reference electrode, gold or platinum are often used.
Despite their frequent use, it has to be emphasized that such pure metal electrodes are not  able to provide a thermodynamically well-defined chemical potential of sodium. 
In many of these electrochemical cells, the electrolyte material forms a thin ceramic pellet or tube.  
More  recently,  sensor  designs  based  on  screen-printed  or  dip-coated  ion-conducting  films  have  been reported.   
As a major drawback, the devices relying only on a carbonate auxiliary phase exhibit a pronounced  cross-sensitivity towards oxygen, poor reproducibility between single sensor elements, and poor longterm  stability.  
As  an  alternative  approach,  sodium  titanate  (Na2Ti6O13/Na2Ti3O7)  or  sodium  titanate/titania (Na2Ti6O13/TiO2) mixtures were proposed as a reference system. 
These two  phase  mixture  systems  provided  a  thermodynamically  well-defined  signal  based  on  an  oxygenindependent overall reaction as shown below.    
As  derived  in  detail  in,  the  resulting  electromotive  force  emf  of  these  cells  is  related  to  the chemical potential difference of the sodium ions at the electrodes according to Eq. 3. 
where F denotes the Faraday constant, and is the chemical potential of the sodium ions at the reference and the working electrode, respectively. 
Since  both are  well-defined  within  this  set-up,  the  emf  of  these  cells  was  shown to depend solely on the carbon dioxide partial pressure pCO2 and on the operating temperature  T  of  the  device .
As  a  consequence,  simultaneous  knowledge  of  the  sensor  temperature  and  the  geometry-independent parameter emf enables one to precisely determine pCO2. 
The fact that the emf is  defined thermodynamically also implies the absence of long-term drift effects. 
Since the cells discussed in were prepared from bulky ceramic pellets, their usefulness in realworld applications was limited. 
In particular, homogeneous heating of such cells can only be achieved  in a furnace, and the integration of a temperature sensor to precisely monitor the operating temperature  is not straight-forward. 
It is therefore highly desirable to transfer the present promising sensor concept  to  thick-film  technology,  which  provides  a  basis  for  miniaturization  and  integration  of  further  functionalities such as heater and temperature sensor with a single sensor chip. 
In  this  contribution,  we  report  results  obtained  on  long-term  stable  CO2  sensors  with  a  sodium  titanate reference prepared entirely via a cost-effective screen-printing technique. 
In a detailed study, the most appropriate reference system was identified. 
In addition to the basic sensor characteristics, the  devices were tested with respect to cross-interference of oxygen and long-term stability.    

All ceramic precursor powders were prepared by a conventional mixed-oxide route. 
To obtain the  Nasicon  composition  Na1+xZr2P3-xSixO12  with  x  =  2.2,  Na2CO3  (Merck),  NH4H2PO4  (VWR),  SiO2  (VWR),  and  ZrO2  (AlfaAesar)  were  mixed  in  stoichiometric  amounts  in  a  ball  mill  and  calcined  at  1050 °C for 12 h. 
In the case of the sodium titanate compositions Na2Ti6O13 and Na2Ti3O7, Na2CO3 (p.a., VWR) and  TiO2 (anatase, Sigma Aldrich) served as precursors. 
The corresponding Na2CO3/TiO2 powder mixtures  (molar ratio 1:3 and 1:6, respectively) were mixed for 4 h in a ball mill and then calcined at 900 °C for  6 h.  
Figure 1 presents the XRD patterns of the as-prepared Nasicon, Na2Ti3O7, and Na2Ti6O13 powders  (Philips  PW  3710,  Cu-Kα  radiation,  Bragg-Brentano  geometry).  
While  both  sodium  titanate  compositions  were  found  to  be  phase-pure,  some  impurity  peaks  attributed  to  ZrO2  (symbol  ◊)  and  Na2ZrSi2O7 (symbol □) were observed within the Nasicon.  
Two reference compositions were tested in the present study. 
The “sodium-rich” reference consisted  of a Na2Ti6O13/Na2Ti3O7 (molar ratio: 1:1) mixture, while the “sodium-poor” composition was formed  by mixing Na2Ti6O13 and TiO2 powder with a molar ratio of 1:1. 
An  eutectic  mixture  of  Na2CO3/BaCO3  with  a  molar  ratio  of  1.72:1  served  as  the  auxiliary  carbonate  phase.  
Prior  to  mixing,  both  precursor  powders  [Na2CO3  (p.a.,  VWR)  and  BaCO3  (Selectipur, Merck)] were dried at 450 °C. 
The carbonate mixture was heated at 5 K/min to 720 °C, a  temperature  above  the  melting  point.  
The  melt  was  retrieved  from  the  furnace  and  quenched  onto  a  brass plate. 
The as-obtained material was ground in a mortar. 
In order to prepare screen-printable pastes, each of the as-prepared powders was sieved (< 200 µm) and mixed with a thixotropic organic binder to form a homogeneous paste. 
The  sensor  set-up  is  shown  diagrammatically  in  Figure  2.  
On  top  of  a  bare  alumina  substrate,  a  Nasicon layer was screen-printed and fired at 1050 °C for 5 h. 
Then, either the Na2Ti3O7/ Na2Ti6O13 or  the Na2Ti6O13/TiO2 reference was printed on one side of the Nasicon film and fired at 950 °C for 5 h.  
Two gold grid electrodes were printed according to Figure 2 (firing at 850 °C). 
Finally, the sensitive  Na2CO3/BaCO3 mixture was painted on top of one gold grid and heat treated at 600 °C.     
In  order  to  study  compatibility  between  the  reference  materials  and  the  solid  electrolyte,  XRD  studies were conducted in the 2θ range from 10 ° to 90 °.  
Two samples were prepared by mixing either  0.75 g Na2Ti3O7 with 1 g Nasicon or 0.6 g Na2Ti6O13 with 1 g Nasicon, respectively. 
While one part of  these  mixtures  was  studied  directly  by  XRD,  one  part  was  heat-treated  at  950  °C  for  5  h  using  the  sintering profile of the reference thick films. 
For tests of the sensor performance, a custom-build test bench similar to the one described in for hydrocarbon sensing was used. 
The sensors were inserted into a tube furnace and heated to their  operating temperature either with the furnace or actively via the platinum heater (see below). 
The total  gas  flow  was  adjusted  to  200 sccm/min  with  dry  air  serving  as  the  carrier  gas.  
The  carbon  dioxide  partial pressure was varied in the range of 0.4 mbar to 45 mbar by diluting pure CO2 gas with dry air using  mass  flow  controllers.  
The  actual  CO2  concentration  was  monitored  by  an  FTIR  (Antaris,  ThermoElectron) located downstream the sensor chamber. 
The emf output of the sensor element was  monitored using a digital multimeter (Keithley 2700). 

In an initial test  series,  sensor  samples  with the  sodium-rich  reference  composition  Na2Ti3O7/Na2Ti6O13 were measured. 
In Figure 3, the emf trace at 500 °C upon CO2 exposure is shown  exemplarily.  
The  sensor  device  presented  a  stable  and  perfectly  reversible  response.  
An  additional  variation of the oxygen partial pressure from 0.15 bar to 0.27 bar indicated no cross sensitivity of the  sensor to this gas as expected from the literature. 
To  evaluate  the  sensor  performance,  the  semilogarithmic  representation  emf  =  f  (log(pCO2))  was  used. 
With the slope of this plot, the electron transfer number n of the electrochemical reaction can be  calculated according to the Nernst equation (Eq. 4) 
As known from the cell reactions (1) and (2), the theoretical electron transfer number equals 2. 
With  the present sensor set up, values of 2.14 ± 0.06 (total of 4 specimens, each measured 3 times at 500 °C)  and 2.12 ± 0.06 (total of 4 specimens at 600 °C) were determined. 
In  spite  of  the  promising  sensor  characteristics,  the  thick  film  devices  with  the  sodium-rich  reference presented a much higher emf reading than expected from the thermodynamic calculations and  experimental  results  on  the  pellet-type  sensor  discussed  in .  
In  Figure  4,  this  deviation  between  pellet-type  sensor  (open  symbols)  and  the  corresponding  thick-film  device  measured  in  the  present  study (closed symbols) is presented. 
In this case, the temperature-corrected form of the Nernst equation  (Eq. 4) was used to compare the experimental results directly with the values expected from theory. 
The required temperature-dependent values for E0, i.e. the cell emf at pCO2 = p0 = 1013 mbar, were taken from the literature. 
In a supplementary XRD study, the deviation from the theoretical emf was attributed to a parasitic  reaction  between  the  Nasicon  electrolyte  and  the  Na2Ti3O7  phase.  
Figure  5a  compares  two  XRD  diagrams  obtained  from  a  Nasicon/Na2Ti3O7  powder  mixture  prior  (bottom)  and  after  (top)  heat  treatment at 950 °C, i.e., the sintering temperature of the sodium titanate reference film. 
For the sake of  clarity, only the 2 θ range from 10° to 60° is shown. 
In the X-ray diffractogram of the untreated powder  mixtures,  the  peaks  from  both  the  Nasicon  and  the  titanate  phase  were  identified.  
In  addition,  some  impurity peaks were found, which were attributed to ZrO2 und Na2ZrSi2O7. 
These impurities were also  present in the Nasicon precursor powder (cf. Figure 1). 
The  XRD  pattern  after  thermal  treatment  indicated  a  thermally  activated  reaction  between  the  Nasicon  and  the  titanate.  
The  characteristic  peaks  of  Na2Ti3O7  (symbol  ○  in  the  bottom  figure)  are  almost completely replaced by the sodium-poor Na2Ti6O13 phase (symbol ∆). 
In addition, changes in  the Nasicon pattern are observed, e.g., the double peak at 19° is reduced to one broadened peak. 
This  might be attributed to a compositional and structural change of the sodium ion conductor from Nasicon  to Na4Zr3Si3O12. 
As an additional phase, Na3PO4 is found (symbol □).   
While  the  reactivity  between  Nasicon  and  Na2Ti3O7  is  irrelevant  in  the  case  of  the  separately  sintered  pellets  discussed  in,  it  is  detrimental  for  thick  film  layers  that  are  heat-treated  simultaneously. 
During sintering of the reference electrode, most of the Na2Ti3O7 phase reacts with the  adjacent Nasicon layer. 
Due to the different phase composition of the reference electrode mixture its  sodium  ion  activity  decreases.  
As  a  consequence,  the  emf  value  of  the  cell,  which  is  given  by  the  difference of the chemical potentials of sodium ions at each electrode (Eq. 3), is expected to increase.    
In  contrast  to  Na2Ti3O7,  XRD  studies  on  Nasicon/Na2Ti6O13  mixtures  yielded  no  evidence  for  parasitic reactions at 950 °C. 
Identical XRD patterns were observed prior and after thermal treatment  (Figure  5b;  no  new  peaks,  only  some  minor  changes  in  peak  intensities  appear).  
The  sodium-poor  reference composition Na2Ti6O13/TiO2 was thus identified as a more promising candidate for thick-film  devices.   
Figure 6 exemplarily presents the sensitivity plots of  a  corresponding  sensor  element.  
The  device  was measured several times at three temperatures.
In contrast to the sensor devices discussed above,  the measured emf values (symbols) were found to agree well with the results reported in the literature  (lines).  
Again,  Nernstian  behavior  with  an  electron  transfer  number  of  1.9  was  found.  
The  reproducibility of the measurements is remarkable. 
In Figure 6, one can hardly distinguish the different  runs at 575 °C. 
To  ensure  the  reproducibility  of  the  sensor  concept,  three  sensor  devices  were  prepared  and  measured at various temperatures. 
The results are summarized in Figure 7. 
As before (cf. Figure 4), the  very sensitive representationnwas used, in this case to emphasize the excellent agreement of the thick-film device with theory and  the data on pellet-type sensors. 
Based on these promising results, actively heated devices with the sodium-poor reference material  were prepared. 
For this purpose, a sensor chip was glued on top of a screen-printed platinum heater  using ceramic paste. 
Silver served as a shielding layer to prevent voltage interferences from the heater.  
The  sensor  was  then  mounted  into  a  corresponding  sample  holder  attached  to  a  voltage  source.  
By  monitoring  the  resistance  of  the  platinum  heater  after  previous  calibration,  its  temperature  could  be  controlled in the range from 100 °C to 700 °C. 
Again, operating temperatures of 500 °C and 600 °C  were chosen. 
Figure  8  presents  the  results  of  four  consecutive  measurement  cycles  conducted  on  a  thick-film  sensor  with  the  sodium-poor  reference.  
The  temperature  of  the  device  was  adjusted  to  575  °C  and  exposed to a cold gas stream of 200 sccm/min. 
The carbon dioxide partial pressure pCO2 was varied  stepwise between 0.4 mbar and 45 mbar. 
The spikes that occur consistently between the 13.5 mbar and  the 9 mbar step are an artifact related to the gas dosage system of the test bench. 
In order to access low  pCO2 values, the gas dosage is switched to a dilution line and back again to achieve high pCO2. 
This  switching is accompanied by a pressure surge leading to the observed emf spikes.  
The actively heated  sensor presented a stable and reproducible response, which was insensitive to a variation in the oxygen  partial pressure from 200 mbar (20 % O2) to 10 mbar (1 % O2). 
As shown in the top part of Figure 8,  the sensor characteristics of each measurement cycle coincide. 
The electron transfer number calculated  from the slope of this semilogarithmic plot  equaled  1.94. 
For  comparison,  the  values  expected  from theory were included in Figure 8 as a solid line. 
They were calculated using the Nernst equation (Eq. 4)  with the E0 value estimated from Ref. 

The potentiometric sensor concept with an open sodium titanate reference, which had formerly been  investigated  in  a  ceramic  pellet  set-up,  was  successfully  transferred  to  thick-film  technology.  
After  identifying  the  appropriate  reference  composition,  screen-printed  sensor  devices  were  prepared  and  tested with respect to CO2 response, reproducibility, and cross-interference of oxygen. 
For the thickfilm  sensors  using  a  sodium-poor  reference  formulation,  excellent  agreement  with  the  theory  was  observed. 
After attaching a screen-printed heater, sensor elements were operated actively in a cold gas  stream. 
Future work is directed to further miniaturizing the thick film sensor, i.e., in a hot-plate set-up as  shown in  and . 
In particular, the direct integration of a heating element on one single chip is  envisioned. 


