Subsolidus  sections  in  the  systems  Li   have been studied by X-ray powder diffraction.
The compound Li In(PO  has been synthesized, and .
the nasicon-type solid solution Li  has been found to exist.
These complex phosphates are dimorphic, with the irreversible-transition temNa PO In  and Na PO In 4 3 2 3 2 4 3 920°.
Ionic conductivity has been 820° perature equal to 675 and  measured in some phases in the system.


Alkali-cation conductors, in particular lithiumand sodium-ion  conductors,  are  especially  interesting  on account of the maximum energy gain, which guarantees their future in the production of miniature lithium batteries and traction batteries for electromobiles.
It is, however,  only  in  rare  cases  possible  to  prepare  compounds that possess all of the required properties.
Most of  the  phases  synthesized  have  high  conductivities either  at  relatively  high  temperatures  or  (when  polymorphism  exists)  in  high-temperature  phases.
In  this context,  search  for  new  lithium  or  sodium  superionic materials remains a challenging problem.
Three-dimensional  superionic  conductors  with rhombohedral  frameworks  are  promising  materials for solid-electrolyte applications.
The most efﬁcient representatives  of  this  group  are  sodium  zirconium silicophosphate  Na (NASICON)  and Na , in which ferroelectric and superionic  properties  were  discovered.
Ceramics  made  of these compounds have a record-breaking conductivity at   S/cm).
The creation of efﬁcient superionics  cannot,  however,  be  considered  to  be  a  completely solved problem.
For NASICON, a complicating factor is the complexity of preparing it in the form of  single  crystals;  for  Na ,  this  is  the  high cost  of  scandium.
A  family  of  lithium and  sodiumcontaining  ion  conductors  with  the  general  formula M3  = Sc, Cr, Fe,  or  In,  is  known ;  these  compounds  are  NASICON  derivatives  and  have  framework  architecture.
Apart  from  the  preparative  synthesis  of  these  compounds, 
formation This  work  studies  phase  the    systems  in  order  to  determine  the 4 4 3 preparation parameters for NASICON-related phases.
The starting chemicals used were lithium and sodium monophosphates  (both  of  chemically  pure  grade;  the and H latter prepared by dehydrating Na PO   indium  monophosphate  precipitated  by  NH HPO 4 2 4 (pH 4.5) from a solution of chemically pure indium sulfate .
The precipitate was ﬁltered, dried, and calcined at  .
The X-ray diffraction patterns for the starting chemicals corresponded to the literature data.
EXPERIMENTAL– – Phase formation in the Li  and Na InPO   systems  was  studied  by  X-ray  powder  diffraction.
Test samples were prepared in 2–10 mol % steps, ∼ 1.5   mm compacted  to  disks  8  mm  in  diameter  and  – high,  annealed  at  PO   for  100  h  (system  Li 4for 200 h (system ) or at 800, 900, and  4 – Na ), and then quenched in liquid nitrogen.
The   angle range was  with  0.02   steps.
PROFAN  and  DRON-3  programs were used to digitize X-ray diffraction patterns.
Unit cell parameters were calculated using the GSAS program package with interface EXPGUI, which makes it possible to carry out full-proﬁle Rietveld analysis of a power X-ray diffraction pattern for a  known structure.
Conductivity measurements were performed on a Novocontrol Beta-N impedance meter within the frequency range from 0.1 Hz to 3 MHz and on R5083 and  E7–12  ac  bridges.
The  measurement  cell  was  a quartz  cell  with  platinum  electrodes,  which  were applied  by  consecutive  layer-by-layer  drying  and burning-in  at  577–727°.
The  samples  prepared  by ceramic technology were disks about 1 mm high and 8–10 mm in diameter.
IR spectra were recorded as KBr disks in the rangeRESULTS AND  DISCUSSIONIn  the  system  Li3PO4–InPO4,  two  complex  phosphates were found to form: Li3In(PO4)2 (compound I) and Li3In2(PO4)3 (compound II).
Compound I was prepared by the authors for the ﬁrst time.
The compound  has  not  a  homogeneity  range  within  50  ± 2 mol % InPO4. 
The X-ray powder diffraction pattern for compound I was as in Fig.1.
Complex phosphate II has a NASICON-type structure.
The structure is a 3D framework built of corner-sharing  InO6  octahedra  and  PO4  tetrahedra.
In complex phosphate II, unlike in NASICON occupies  two  partially  populated positions), there is a single position for the lithium atom with the 100% occupancy.
The X-ray diffraction pattern was indexed with reference to the lite-rature data.
The results of indexing are found in Table 1. An extensive homogeneity region up to 80 mol % InPO4 was dis-covered for compound II;

Unit  cell  parameters  (a, b,  and  c)  were  plotted  as functions  of  indium  phosphate  percentage  within  the homogeneity  region  .
The  linearity  of  these plots conﬁrm the existence of solid solution based on compound II.

In  the  system  Na3PO4–InPO4  (800–1000°C),  solid solutions based on the high-temperature sodium monophosphate  phase  (space  group  Fm3m)  were  found  to exist (Fig.3).
The extent of this solid solution was 10–20 mol %  InPO4 regardless of whether samples were quenched in air or furnace-cooled.
The strongest X-ray diffraction lines in the solid solution were indexed assuming an fcc lattice; all lines were, however, indexed on the assumption of orthorhombic crystal system, which indicated a distortion  of  the  cubic  lattice  with  symmetry  lowered  to orthorhombic one.
The results of indexing for the solid solution are listed in Table 2.
Complex  phosphates  Na3In(PO4)2  (compound  III) and Na3In2(PO4)3 (compound IV) exist in the system in the  range  800–900°.
Compound  III  is  dimorphic:  at 675°C, it irreversibly transforms to the high-temperature α phase; above 920°C, it decays to solid solution Na3(1– x)Inx/3PO4 and complex phosphate IV.
The X-ray diffraction pattern for compound III was indexed using the literature data (Table 3); compound III was prepared in the form of the high-temperature phase (space group P21/c).
Complex phosphate IV is also dimorphic, with the irreversible  phase  transition  occurring  at  ∼820°C.
Its high-temperature  α  phase,  which  belongs  to  the NASICON  structure  type  (space  group  R c),  was obtained  in  our  experiments.
The  compound  has  anVIIImol % InPO4Fig.3.
 System Na3PO4–InPO4 (800–1000°C).
insigniﬁcant homogeneity range (65–67 mol % InPO4).
We also obtained the low-temperature β-Na3In2(PO4)3 phase by annealing a stoichiometric blend of the starting components at 750°C for 400 h.
X-ray diffraction patterns for the β and α phases are shown in Fig.
4.In the range 75–85 mol % InPO4, a mixture of the αand β-Na3In2(PO4)3 phases exist; this indicates that the low-temperature β phase is stabilized by indium ions.
Starting with 90 mol % InPO4, α-Na3In2(PO4)3 + InPO4 mixtures exist.
At  1000°C,  Na3In2(PO4)3  is  the  only  compound existing in the system Na3PO4–InPO4, apart from the solid  solution.
Figure  5  show  IR  spectra  for  the  two  compounds discovered in the system Li3PO4–InPO4. The regions of stretching  vibrations  (900–1200  cm–1)  and  bending vibrations (500–700 cm–1) are recognized in the spectra.
Comparison of the spectra shows that these vibrations  are  due  to  different  phases.
The  anion    in compound IV has higher symmetry, which is veriﬁed by  the  existence  of  only  three  stretching-vibration bands.
Band splitting in the spectrum of compound IV is stronger, signifying stronger distortion of the anion 3– PO4.
Figures 6 and 7 show IR spectra for the solid solution  and  the  two  compounds  that  exist  in  the  system Na3PO4–InPO4.  
The  absorption  bands  appear  in  the range up to 1200 cm–1. 
The measured frequencies cor3– respond to the vibration frequencies known for  PO4 groups in alkali phosphates and Group I–III phosphates.
In the frequency range 1200–800°C, a strong broad band  appears  with  a  well-deﬁned  multiplet  character.
In  compound  III,  these vibrations  of  vibrations appear as a band at 950 cm–1. 
Weak splitting of the triply degenerate mode (above 950 cm–1) is indicative of the existence of P–O bonds with rather equalized bond energies.
The bending frequencies lie below 700 cm–1. Bending vibrations appear as a strong band at 572  cm–1  in  the  spectrum  of  the  solid  solution.
The weak band at the instrumental threshold (420 cm–1) canbe assigned to a component of the doubly degenerate 3– PO4 bending mode in   groups.
Thus, we can conclude that  high-symmetry    anions  exist  in  the  solidsolution  structure.
Their  existence  implies  a  random distribution  of  sodium  and  indium  cations  over  the crystal  lattice.
Conductivity  was  measured  for  the  solid  solution samples  Li0.96In2.68(PO4)3  and  Na2.4In0.20PO4.  The  relationship  between  the  ohmic  resistance  and  reactance for the Li0.96In2.68(PO4)3 sample is illustrated by Fig.8.

From this ﬁgure, the ohmic resistance of the sample is R = 38 Ω.
The impedance of the sample can be converted  to  electrical  conductivity  of  the  material  with account for the geometrical sizes of the sample as follows: σ = 1/R × d/S, where d is sample thickness and S  is surface area.
Using d = 0.21 cm and S = πD2/4 = 1.26 cm2, we obtain σ = 0.44 × 10–2 S/cm, which corresponds in the order of magnitude to the ionic conductivity at 300°C of well-known lithium conductors such as  Li3Fe2(PO4)3  and  other  NASICON-isostructural phosphates.
The  conductivity  versus  temperature relationship  was  derived  for  the  solid  solution Na2.4In0.20PO4; the 300°C conductivity is 2.2 × 10–3 S/cm.
The  results  of  our  study  are  as  follows.
The  full interaction  scenario  was  elucidated  for  the  systems formed  by  lithium  (sodium)  and  indium  phosphates.
The  existence  of  previously  known  complex  phosphates  (Li3In2(PO4)3,  Na3In(PO4)2,  and  Na3In2(PO4)3) was  conﬁrmed;  complex  phosphate  Li3In(PO4)2  was synthesized  time.
The feasibility to stabilize the low-temperature  Na3In2(PO4)3  phase  by  indium(III)  ions  was demonstrated.
Two NASICON-related phases exist in the systems studied, namely, the solid solutions Li3(1 – x) In2 + x(PO4)3 and Na3(1 + x)In2 – ı(PO4)3. 
In the solid solutions based on compound  II,  the  conductivity  cation  (Li+)  occupies one, fully populated crystallographic position, whereas in the solid solutions based on compound IV, the con-ductivity  cation  (Na+)  occupies  two  positions,  one being one-third ﬁlled.
Considering this fact in terms of the  conducting  properties  of  the  phases  we  synthesized,  we  ﬁnd  that  sodium-ion  conductors  show  the greatest potential for use.
Vacancies should be generated  in  order  to  improve  the  conductivity  of  lithium NASICON-related phases; 
in  this  case,  the  aliovalent  substitution  scheme  is In3+    3Na+  and  the  number  of  vacant  crystallographic positions is smaller.


