The thermodynamic parameters of ion exchange have been estimated for HZr · O and the  products of its aliovalent doping.
Ion exchange occurs via formation of the  PO O  solid-solution series.
As in the case of ion exchange on layered zirconium phosphate, the interdiffusion coefﬁcient and the major interfacial defect generation processes are considerably affected by the contact-solution pH.

Ion exchange on inorganic sorbents is of signiﬁcant interest due to their high selectivity and chemical stability.
Kinetic and thermodynamic studies of exchange are most signiﬁcant for both applications and approaching some problems in advanced materials science.
Among the inorganic ion-exchange materials, layered hydrogen phosphates of polyvalent elements are some of the most abundant and stable in aqueous solutions .
Ion exchange on some of them was studied in our previous works.
NASICON materials, which have high ion conductivities and hydrolytic and thermal stability, are especially interesting .
The literature  on  the  properties  of  zirconium  hydrogen  is scarce.
PO · H phosphate of composition HZr 2  4 2 2 Clearﬁeld and colleagues were the ﬁrst to synthesize this compound using a hydrothermal process; they described  its  structural  features  and  ion  conductivity.
More recently, we obtained analogous compounds and products of their aliovalent doping with higher degrees of crystallinity using solid-state synthesis followed by ion  exchange .
Aliovalent  doping  of  zirconium hydrogen phosphate with niobium(V) and yttrium(III) cations  generates  vacancies  and  interstitials,  which enhance an increase in the cationic mobility at low temperatures.

The corresponding hydrogen species were prepared by ion exchange in hot nitric acid for 20 days.
Process completion was monitored using a Netzsch TG 209 thermobalance (temperature range, 293–1223 K; heating rate, 10 K/min; sample size, 20–30 mg).
X-ray  powder  diffraction  was  performed  on  a  radiαRigaku D/MAX 2000 diffractometer using Cu ation.
The  products  crystallize  in  a  rhombohedral  phase and  contain  one  water  molecule  per  formula  unit,  as determined  by  X-ray  powder  diffraction  and  thermogravimetry.
The course of ion-exchange reactions was studied as variation in solution pH as described in .
Test samples (0.1 g) were transferred to 0.004 M NaCl solution (25 mL) to avoid possible hydrolysis of exchange products.
Then,  0.095  M  NaOH  solution  (0.2  mL)  was added to each sample with vigorous stirring.
An Expert001-4 pH meter/millivoltmeter was used in potentiometric titration.

Equilibrium  pHs were found by extrapolation of  pH experimental data τ to  inﬁnite  process  time  .
The  activity  coefﬁcients  of hydrogen ions were taken from.
Electron micrographs were obtained on a Leo Supra 50 VP microscope; the accelerating voltage was 5 kV.
Element  distributions  were  studied  by  electron  probe microanalysis  (EPMA)  using  a  Jeol  JSM-840A  scanning electron microscope equipped with a PGT IMIX EPMA unit.
PINUS  et  al.be ﬁrst of all decided whether the exchange mechanism involves a continuous solid-solution series, or it is heterogeneous and occurs via growth of a new phase on the surfaces of ion-exchanger particles.
X-ray diffraction patterns of the starting compounds and exchange products (Fig.2) are indexed in orthorhombic system, as for undoped zirconium hydrogen phosphate mono  hydrate (HZr H O) .
A weak shift of lines PO  is,  however,  observed  in  exchange  products  in  accordance with the change in their unit cell parameters.
This shift provides evidence that the ion exchange occurs via a continuous solid-solution series, as follows:Here, (solid) and (sln) denote the occurrence of a given compound or ion in a solid or solution phase, respectively.
This scheme is, in general, reasonable, because the matrix  built  of  PO   octahedra   tetrahedra  and  ZrO  remains  virtually  unchanged  upon  ion  exchange.
Sodium ions only substitute for oxonium ions in voluminous interstices.
Figure  3  shows  representative  pH  versus  process time  curves.
Equilibration  at  high  sodium-for-proton substitution  levels  is  kinetically  slow  even  after  long exposures of samples in contact with the solution.
If pH measurements are stopped at values differing by more than 0.5 pH units from equilibrium values, the extrapolation results can noticeably deviate from the true values.

The starting zirconium hydrogen phosphate is a heterogeneous crystalline mass.
The product material contains rather small grains, with sizes of 200–500 nm, and µ far coarser grains with sizes on the order of 10–20  m.
Electron  micrographs  change  quite  little  upon  ion exchange.
Figure 1 is an electron micrograph of a sample with an about 50% sodium-for-proton substitution   Zr PO level  (calculated  composition  is  Na ).
EPMA shows that phosphate particles are pro2 gressively enriched in sodium cations.
In order for the interpretation of ion-exchange thermodynamic and kinetic data to be adequate, it should

The  Gibbs  energies  calculated  for  HZr2(PO4)3  · H2O,  and H1.02Zr1.98Y0.02(PO4)3 · H2O test samples with 10% proton substitution levels are 0.0, –9.5, and –1.8 kJ/mol, respectively.
The  H0.98Zr1.98Nb0.02(PO4)3  · H2O  sample has the highest sodium-to-proton substitution selectivity.
In our opinion, this is not a accidental result.
Partial substitutions of pentavalent niobium for tetravalent zirconium result in a greater polarization of linked phosphate anions.
The attendant electron-density redistribution inevitably weakens the valence bond between protons and the oxygen atoms of PO4H groups and, thus, increases their acidity.
A consequence is a decrease in the Gibbs energy for ion-exchange reaction (1).
On the other hand, partial substitutions of tervalent yttrium  for  zirconium,  presumably,  should  cause  an inverse effect.
In the NASICON structure, there are two positions for univalent cations (M1 and M2 interstices surrounded  by  six  and  eight  oxygen  atoms,  respectively).
All M1 positions in the HZr2(PO4)3 · H2O and NaZr2(PO4)3 structures are, however, occupied.
Therefore,  in H1.02Zr1.98Y0.02(PO4)3  · H2O,  in  this  case,  are  incorporated into M2 positions.
The bonding strength of hydrogen ions in these positions should be slightly lower.
The combination of the aforementioned two factors, likely, results in this change in the Gibbs energy of the ionexchange  reaction  in  transfer  from  HZr2(PO4)3 ·  H2O and H1.02Zr1.98Y0.02(PO4)3 · H2O.
hydrogen sodium extra ions The  test  materials  have  3D  NASICON  framework structures,  in  which  diffusion  is  possible  in  three dimensions.
Thus, diffusion coefﬁcients were calculated in terms of a homogeneous model from the Barrer and Boyd relationship for spherical particles :where F is the degree of exchange completion, R is the particle radius of the ion exchanger, D is the diffusion coefﬁcient, and n is an integer.
Mean  grain  sizes  were  determined  from  electron microscopy data.
The interdiffusion of protons from the solid phase and sodium cations from the contact solutions occurs inside a layer of the (H3O1 – xNax)Zr2(PO4)3 solid  solution.
Accordingly,  the  diffusion  coefﬁcients can slightly change with changing hydrogen-ion substitution level.
Calculated  log  diffusion  coefﬁcient  vs.pH  curves for samples with 30% substitution levels are shown in Figs.4a–4c.
The diffusion coefﬁcients are well-deﬁned functions  of  solution  pH,  as  in  layered  zirconium hydrogen phosphate Zr(HPO4)2 · H2O.
This reﬂects the change in the concentrations of various types of defects in the matrix of exchange products on account of theFig.3. pH relaxation after alkali was added to HZr2(PO4)3 · H2O.
Percentage proton substitution: (1) 10, (2) 30, (3) 50, (4) 70, and (5) 100. interaction  of  exchange  products  with  the  solution  at the  solid–liquid  interface .
In  most  cases,  this dependence is expressed by two segments, which can, in good approximation, be ﬁtted to straight lines with slopes approaching +1 and –1 (Figs.4a–4c).

According to , this suggests that the major defect generation scheme isAt high pHs (7–10), the slope of the where HH and   are, respectively, a hydrogen ion and a  hydrogen-site  vacancy  in  the  structure  of  exchange products.
From Eq.(3), the proton vacancy concentration in a solid phase should be proportional to the OH– concentration in a solution, provided quasi-equilibrium defect generation at the interface .
At the same time, at pHs lower than 6.8 the log diffusion  coefﬁcient  versus  pH  plot  reverses  its  slope: d( )/d(pH) = –1 (Figs.4a–4c).
This means that, at low pHs, the majority defect type changes from proton vacancies to interstitials .
The major defect generation process can be represented as(4) In  accordance,  the  interstitial  proton  concentration  is proportional to the hydrogen ion concentration in the solution.
It is noteworthy that, as in layered zirconium hydrogen phosphate, the change of the major defect-formation process here occurs near pH of 6.8–7 and is very close to the equivalence point for neat water.
Interestingly, the highest diffusion coefﬁcients were discovered

At 50% and higher sodium-for-proton substitutions, the  rate  curves  have  considerably  different  character.
The contact-solution pH is higher than 7 even after long exposures.
The ion-exchange rate decreases appreciably,  despite  the  fact  that  the  ion  conductivity  of NaZr2(PO4)3 exceeds that of HZr2(PO4)3 · H2O .
At  high  calculated  doping  levels  (50%  and  higher), lines intrinsic to sodium zirconium phosphate appear in X-ray diffraction patterns.
Most of these lines is overlapped with those for (H3O1 – xNax)Zr2(PO4)3, except for the strongest ones at 2θ = 19.4° and 31.3° (Figs.
2b, 2c).
From  this,  it  seems  adequate  that,  at  high  calculated degrees of exchange, it mainly occurs inside ﬁne particles and on the surfaces of large particles.
Proton carriers  in  NaZr2(PO4)3  in  alkaline  solutions  can  only  be water  molecules  contained  in  lattice  voids.
Exchange products have far a lower degree of hydration as determined by thermal analysis.
For example, a sample with the calculated 50% substitution contains as little as 0.65 water  molecule  per  formula  unit.
Therefore,  the  concentration  of  proton  carriers  and,  consequently,  their diffusion  coefﬁcient  are  extremely  low  in  this  case.
This leads to the incommensurate low proton-diffusion rates in these samples.
It is for this reason that kinetic data for them were not processed.
At the same time, exchange products are not hydrolyzed even upon long exposures to alkali solutions.
The absence of a precipiate after addition of magnesia mixture proves the high hydrolytic stability of the test materials.
In summary, the thermodynamic parameters of ion exchange for HZr2(PO4)3 · H2O and the products of its aliovalent doping have been estimated proceeding from potentiometric titration data.
As in the case of exchange on layered zirconium phosphate (Zr(HPO4)2 · H2O), the interdiffusion  coefﬁcient  and  the  major  interfacial defect  generation  processes  are  considerably  affected by the contact-solution pH.


