The NASICON compound Li0.2Nd0.8/3Zr2(PO4)3, synthesized by a sol–gel process, has been structurally characterized by TEM and powder diffraction (neutron and X-ray).
It crystallizes in the space group R¯3 (No.148): at room temperature, the Nd3+ ions present an ordered distribution in the [Zr2(PO4)3]− network which leads to a doubling of the classical c parameter (a = 8.7160(3) A˚ , c = 46.105(1) A˚ ).
This reversible Above 600 cationic diffusion in a preserved 3D [Zr2(PO4)3]− network is followed through thermal X-ray diffraction.
Ionic conductivity measurements have been undertaken by impedance spectroscopy, while some results concerning the sintering of the NASICON compound are given.

A lot of solid materials exhibit an ionic conductivity comparable to that of liquid electrolytes.
Among those, the NASICON type phosphates with general formula AxM2(PO4)3 have been extensively studied due to the mobility of the A cation in the [M2(PO4)3]− network.
This 3D network is formed from MO6 octahedra sharing corners with PO4 tetrahedra creating thus interconnected interstitial sites through which A cations can diffuse.
The hexagonal resulting structure is especially ﬂexible and allows chemical substitutions giving rise to a large number of NASICON phases.
Among them, those containing monovalent A ions as Li+ and Na+, are well known for their high ionic conductivity.
Recently, Imanaka et al.published works on RE1/3Zr2(PO4)3 they found to be trivalent rare earth ionic conductors.
In search of improving the conduction properties, we synthesized the new mixed monovalent/trivalent series Li1−xNdx/3Zr2(PO4)3 with 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. 
This paper deals with one member of this continuous solid solution, Li0.2Nd0.8/3Zr2(PO4)3 (x = 0.8), which presents an unexpected Nd3+ distribution giving rise to new crystallographic characteristics.
After a complete structural characterization by neutron and thermal X-ray diffraction (TXRD) as well as by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), ionic conductivity measurements have been undertaken by impedance spectroscopy.
Since the total ionic conductivity in such phases is mainly controlled by the grain-boundary conductivity, we present in addition the method used for the sintering of the titled compound.
The results concerning the other members of this new solid solution will be published in a forthcoming paper.

Li0.2Nd0.8/3Zr2(PO4)3 powder was synthesized using the complex polymerizable method previously described.
 The starting components, weighed in stoichiometric ratios, were Nd2O3, ZrOCl2.8H2O, NH4H2PO4 and Li2CO3 with 7Li to reduce the absorption cross section for neutron experiments.
The ◦ C black precursor obtained after calcination of the gel at 350 was ground and two successive annealings were performed, one at C for the same time.
This way 700 led to pure samples with small particles size (Fig.1a) presenting, unfortunately, a low crystallinity.
This crystallinity could however be improved by increasing the annealing temperature but in this case, two impurities ZrP2O7 (PDF 49–1079) and Zr2O(PO4)2 (PDF 01-070-0888) were systematically present in large quantities.
The best compromise was ﬁnally obtained as follows: the powder C was pressed into pellets and introduced directly prepared at 900 C for 5 min, this step being followed in the furnace at 1350 by a room temperature quenching in air.
With such a method, well crystallized powder with particles approximately ten times larger (Fig.1b) was obtained with however very small quantities of ZrP2O7 and/or Zr2O(PO4)2. 
After this step, a long annealing at 500C is applied with a slow cooling down to ensure the thermodynamical equilibrium.
It is this latter sample which was used to make the whole structural analysis, despite the presence of impurities.
CharacterizationThe X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded at room temperature in air with a PANalytical X’pert Pro diffractometer equipped with the X’Celerator detector using the monochromated Cu Ka radiation.
The TXRD were performed C on the same diffractometer equipped with an Anton every 100 Paar HTK 1200 furnace with a delay of 20 min systematically applied before recording diffraction patterns.
The neutron diffraction data were recorded at ILL on D2B, a high resolution powder diffractometer.
The details of all the data collections are given in Table 1. 
The structure reﬁnements were carried out by the Rietveld method, using the Fullprof proﬁle reﬁnement program and the GFOURIER software.
For each diffraction pattern, the peak shape was described by a pseudo-Voigt function and the background level was determined manually.
In addition to the atomic and cell parameters, the scale factor, the zero point and the peak asymmetry were reﬁned.
The TEM study was performed with a JEOL 2010 electron microscope operating at 200 kV and equipped with a side-entry ±30  double tilt specimen holder.
Small crystals were crushed and ultrasonically dispersed in n-butanol and one drop of this suspension was placed on a holey carbon ﬁlm Cu grid, in order to support a random orientation of the crystallites.
The electrical conductivity measurements were carried out with ion-blocking sputtered Pt electrodes in a two-probe cell.
The frequency response Analyser  and the Dielectric Interface were used in the frequency domainfrom 10 MHz to 0.1 Hz.
The measurements were performed in dehydrated N2 atmosphere, in the temperature range from 25 to C.
Before any measurement, linearity and stationarity of the 525 electrochemical system were checked.
An ac voltage of 200 mV was used for every measurement and a waiting time of 25 min was applied to obtain thermal equilibrium of the sample after each C step.

As lithium could have been lost during the ﬁring process, lithium content analysis was performed.
After centrifugation , the 80 solution was analyzed using ﬂame photometry giving the expected content ± 2%, indicating that lithium ion was completely exchanged out and that no loss of lithium occurs during heating.
EDX analysis done on more than 30 crystallites with a KEVEX energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer coupled with a TEM JEOL 2010 has revealed the simultaneous presence of neodymium, zirconium, phosphorus and oxygen and the absence of chlorine.
The analyses for neodymium and zirconium led to 0.12 ≤ [Nd]/[Zr] ≤.
0.14 .
This means that the atomic ratio of our sample exhibits stoichiometric composition within experimental error.
The room temperature XRD pattern of Li0.2Nd0.8/3Zr2(PO4)3 reveals strong (hkl) lines characteristic of a NASICON-type compound (Fig.2a).
However, a careful examination indicates

Vertical bars are related to the calculated Bragg reﬂection positions corresponding from top to bottom to NASICON phase, ZrP2O7 and Zr2O(PO4)2. 
(The inset shows a selected region of the same pattern.
)that this pattern does not correspond neither to those of the two varieties of a-LiZr2(PO4)3 (R¯3c at high temperature,2 and C ¯1 at low temperature1,13) nor to that of Nd1/3Zr2(PO4)3 (P¯3c1).
Moreover, it cannot be indexed with the other cells classically encountered in such compounds.
As no acceptable solution was found by auto-indexing with the program TREOR, we decided to perform a TEM study on several crystallites (Fig.3).
The reconstitution of their reciprocal space led to a larger hexagonalcell with the following parameters a ≈ 8.7 A˚ and c ≈ 46.1 A˚ corresponding to the doubling of the classical c parameter of the NASICON unit cell.
These cell parameters values being not far from the ones usually observed in other NASICON-type compounds, it means that in our compound, the [Zr2(PO4)3]− network is probably preserved and that the doubling of the c parameter can then be due to a special ordering of the A cations in this network.
We also deduced from the systematic absences that the R-as an extinction symbol which is compatible with the centrosymmetric space groups R¯3 (No.148) and R¯3m (No.166) and the corresponding acentric space groups.
We tested then the new super cell deduced from the TEM study and observed that it indexed all the lines of the XRD patterns.
The Rietveld calculations, performed in the R¯3 space group, was realized with an atomic model transposed from the one of La1/3Ti2(PO4)3  for the [M2(PO4)3]− network.
Better convergence of the reﬁnement calculations is reached by using soft-constrained P–O and Zr–O distances.
In addition and as the sample is contaminated by ZrP2O7 and Zr2O(PO4)2, the reﬁnements are performed with a three phases option, the two impurities being handled by the Le Bail method.
When [Zr2(PO4)3]− network atomic positions are reﬁned, Fourier-difference calculations are performed and reveal three possible positions for the Nd3+ cations : sites 3a (0, 0, 0), 3b (0, 0, 1/2) and 6c (0, 0, z) with z close to 0.748. These three sites correspond to the M1 positions described in the R¯3c space group of many NASICON-type phases.
However, further reﬁnements of their occupation factors with global constraint to its nominal value (i.e.3.2 atoms Nd per unit-cell), completely ﬁll the 3a site while the 6c site empties, the remaining Nd3+ ions (0.2) being located in the 3b site.
As neutron diffraction is more sensitive for the location of light atoms such as P and O while the Nd3+ repartition is more accessible by XRD, we tested at this step a complete structural reﬁnement with both the XRD and the neutron diffraction data.
In such conditions and without any soft-constrained distances, the reﬁnement converges quickly towards good reliability factors (Table 1).
Fig.2 shows the corresponding experimental, calculated and difference proﬁles for both X-ray and neutron diffraction patterns.
We tried then to localize the Li+ cations from neutrons data but no residual negative peaks were found on the Fourier difference map.
This can be explained by the low lithium content (2.4 Li per unit cell) and/or by the fact that the Li+ ions may be located in the same cavities as Nd3+ ions, cavities which are partially ﬁlled.
In such case, Nd3+ and Li+ ions are of course not simultaneously present in the same cavity and not located on the same crystallographic site due to their different ionic radii .
So, we did not try to reﬁne mixed Li+/Nd3+ sites and decided to omit the lithium contribution.
Table 1 gathers the ﬁnal cell parameters and the reﬁned proﬁle parameters together with the reliability factors for both X-ray and neutron diffraction data.
The structure of Li0.2Nd0.8/3Zr2(PO4)3, illustrated in Fig.4, can be described from the classical three-dimensional [Zr2(PO4)3]− NASICON-type network.
The atomic distances and valence sums are classical (Tables 3 and 4) which once again proves the potential of working with both X-ray and neutron diffraction data.
A precise examination of the atomic positions (Table 2) for all the atoms of the [Zr2(PO4)3]− network conﬁrms that the doubling of the c parameter is mainly driven by a special Nd3+ distribution which cannot be described in the simple hexagonal cell with c parameter close to 23 A˚ .
As usual, the Nd3+ ions are surrounded by 6 oxygens forming thus antiprism cavities which are created by the framework of the ZrO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra.
The Nd–O distances observed are larger than the sum of the ionic radii 18 for a 6-fold coordinated cation, leading consequently at the same time to an anomalous high thermal factor and a low bond valence sum .
If we consider other structural studies on RE1/3Zr2(PO4)3 14,20 we realize that low bond valence (BV) sums and high thermal factors (Biso) for the RE cations are systematically observed.

situation is due to the size of the O6 cavity which is too large to well accommodate all the RE3+ cations whatever their size.
As usual, the structure obtained by powder diffraction study is an average one which means that these cations can be locally distributed offcenter within this cavity.
This could be checked by high resolution electron microscopy images as we done for La1/3Zr2(PO4)3.21 Unfortunately, our sample undergoes a structural transition under the electron beam preventing the observation of the RT form.
XRD patterns were recorded at various temperatures from RT to C in order to follow a possible diffusion of the Nd3+ cations 1000 in the [Zr2(PO4)3]− network, as observed for the La3+ cations in La1/3Zr2(PO4)3 .
In addition, this will allow us to obtain the thermal expansion coefﬁcients aa and ac.
Fig.5 presents the TXRD C, only subtle modiﬁcations are patterns evolution: below 600 C, the intensity of (hkl) lines with l odd observed, while above 700 ◦ C, these lines completely disappear strongly decreases.
At 1000 allowing us to index all the remaining ones in a simple hexagonal cell with a ≈ 8.75 A˚ and c ≈ 23.9 A˚ with a preserved R mode.
In order to follow the thermal structural evolution of our compound, complete R¯3 structural reﬁnements from XRD data are performed C, we observe a rapid between 600 and 1000 decrease of the 3a site population in favor of the 3b one .
This leads, at 1000 C, to the same occupation rate of these two sites and then consequently to the loss of the c parameter doubling.
At C, the reﬁnements, performed in a simple hexagonal cell and 1000 with soft constrained P–O and Zr–O distances, converge quickly to good reliability factors (Table 1), with a good minimization of the difference between the experimental and the calculated XRD patterns (Fig.7).
Final atomic coordinates, sof and Biso values are gathered in Table 2, while Table 3 presents selected interatomic distances and bond valence sums.
This study also makes it possible to follow the thermal cell parameters evolution from Rietveld pattern reﬁnements (pattern matching mode).
On the whole temperature range, an increase of the a parameter is observed, while the c parameter decreases (Fig.8) with a slight deviation from linearity around 600– C for the two curves.
This deviation can be correlated 700 to the beginning of the Nd3+ movement which starts at this temperature range as seen in Fig.6. 
The cell parameters variation leads to a small volume expansion between RT and 1000 C, as often encountered for NASICON-type compounds crystallizing C: 2V = in the R¯3 space group.
From these evolutions, the expansion coefﬁcients can C from the formula ap be calculated between RT and 1000 (with ap = (1/p) C−1 and ac  (for the calculation, the c parameter has been multiplied by 2 for T ≥ 900After the cooling of the sample, a new Rietveld reﬁnement was performed at room temperature and revealed that the transition is completely reversible with a rapid diffusion of the Nd3+ cations in the [Zr2(PO4)3]− network.
This is in agreement with the observation made on the result of the long annealing performed C: indeed, this step, made to ensure the thermodynamical at 500 equilibrium, brings no modiﬁcation of the XRD pattern revealing that the Nd3+ diffusion process is very fast.
However, despite the great facility of Nd3+ to diffuse, the hexagonal network slowly relaxes, as shown by the cell parameters values obtained at RT after the TXRD study .
In La1/3Zr2(PO4)3, we observed also a diffusion of the two La3+ ions in the cell giving rise to a structural transition from P¯3 to P¯3c1 but a large hysteresis phenomenon was observed and a extremely slow cooling must be applied to the sample to obtain the thermodynamical equilibrium state.
These two different behaviors can be correlated with the size of the RE3+ cation18: the smallest one, Nd3+ (Ri = 0.983 A˚ in a 6-coordinated site) can easily move in the pathways of the [Zr2(PO4)3]− network while the largest La3+ (Ri = 1.032 A˚ in a 6-coordinated site) have more difﬁculty to diffuse.
Finally and as encountered for La1/3Zr2(PO4)3,21 a structural change induced by the electron beam energy is also evidenced for Li0.2Nd0.8/3Zr2(PO4)3. During the observations in the TEM study (SAED), two different sets of (hkl) spots can be considered (Fig.
3a): a ﬁrst set with the strong intensity spots corresponding to the classical small cell (c ≈ 23 A˚ ) and a weaker set clearly associated with the double cell (c ≈ 46 A˚ ).
However, an evolution of the spot intensities can be seen: the spots belonging to the weaker set slowly disappear implying then the progressive loss of the c-parameter doubling.
In good agreement with the TXRD study, the ﬁnal cell belongs clearly to the R mode.
As an example, the Fig.9 shows a SAED pattern at the end of the transformation with a [010] zone axis orientation.
This pattern can be compared to that of the Fig.3a: along the c direction, one spot over two disappeared.
Fig.9 Typical SAED patterns of Li0.2Nd0.8/3Zr2(PO4)3 at the end of the transformation due to the loss of the double c parameter.
Sintering and ionic conductivitySince the total ionic conductivity in such phases is mainly controlled by the grain-boundary conductivity, we need well-sintered materials to perform the impedance spectroscopy measurements.
Unfortunately and due to the low stability of various NASICONtype compounds, a good densiﬁcation is very difﬁcult to obtain.
This has led researchers to use MgO23, TiO2 , LiNO3.25 or ZnO26 as sintering aids for the densiﬁcation.
In most of the cases, these sintering aids are introduced during the synthesis.
We tried then to add these products to our compound but either they were ﬁnally incorporated in the lattice, changing the composition, or the compacity remained too low (65%).
Finally, we succeeded in reducing the porosity from 35 to 15% thanks to the following method : 0.3 g of Li0.2Nd0.8/3Zr2(PO4)3, previously heated at 900 C, was mixed in ethanol at a rotation speed of 300 rpm for 4 h by a ball milling method in zirconium oxide jars with zirconium oxide balls.
The resulting powder was uniaxially pressed with polyvinyl alcohol into a pellet of diameter≈ 5 mm and thickness≈ 2 mm and Fig.8 Evolution of the unit cell parameters versus temperature for Li0.2Nd0.8/3Zr2(PO4)3. 
The pellet was then slowly C min−1) to enable the departure of heated at 500 C) the polyvinyl alcohol, introduced then in a hot furnace (1350 for 5 minutes and rapidly quenched in air.
To control the eventual decomposition of the phase, an XRD pattern of the two sides of the pellet was systematically recorded to select samples containing the least amount of Zr2O(PO4)2 possible.
The electrical properties of Li0.2Nd0.8/3Zr2(PO4)3 have been studied by means of impedance spectroscopy in the temperature C in a dehydrated N2 atmosphere.
Fig.10 range from 25 to 525 shows a typical impedance plot in the Nyquist plane obtained at C.
As expected, the spike at low frequency can be attributed 75 to the electrode polarization (C = 0.5–5 lF) which increases with temperature, conﬁrming the ionic nature of the conductivity.
At high frequency, we can observe two semi-circles corresponding to two different overlapping relaxation processes due to the ionic motion through the grain (bulk, C ≈ 9 × 10−12 F) and through the grain boundaries (C ≈ 2.5 × 10−11 F).
At low C), the data were reﬁned with an equivalent temperature (25–225 electrical model (Fig.10) which represents the two relaxations and the electrode polarization.
The dipolar part of the sample and the electrode polarization were modelled by a constant phase element (CPE), while the conductive part is represented by a resistance R.
From 225 to 525 C the two relaxations can not be separately reﬁned and are modelled by only one resistance.
Fig.11 presents the temperature dependence of the bulk and of the total (bulk + grain boundaries) ion conductivities plotted in an Arrhenius fashion.
The deduced activation energy for the bulk corresponds to Ea = 0.47 eV and the ionic conductivity C temperature to r = 4.90 × 10−6 S cm−1. This Ea at 75 value is lower than the Ln1/3Zr2(PO4)3 ones already published  and slightly higher than the one observed for LiZr2(PO4)3 (0.42 eV).
However, it is difﬁcult to discuss these values since the authors do not precise if the data have been deduced from the bulk or from the total (bulk + grain boundaries) ion conductivities.
Moreover, it has been demonstrated that the way of the synthesis and the thermal history of the sample could inﬂuence the Ea parameter as well as the ionic conductivity values9: the better the crystallinity state is,Fig.10 Complex impedance diagram in the Nyquist plane for Li0.2Nd0.8/3Zr2(PO4)3 recorded in dry N2 at 75 C, with inserted, the equivalent electrical model used for experimental data ﬁtting.
Fig.11 Logarithmic plot of ionic conductivity as a function of reciprocal temperature for Li0.2Nd0.8/3Zr2(PO4)3.the lower the Ea value is with the same conclusion for the ionic conductivity.
Since our Li0.2Nd0.8/3Zr2(PO4)3 sample has not been prepared by the same way that Ln1/3Zr2(PO4)3 or LiZr2(PO4)3, it seems difﬁcult to draw some conclusions.
However, to complete this study and to precise the nature of the ion responsible of the conduction, impedance spectroscopy measurements have been carried out on a Nd1/3Zr2(PO4)3 sample synthesized by us from the same complex polymerizable method.
The impedance plot, in the Nyquist plane obtained at room temperature, exhibits a spike at low frequency (500 lHz) which can be attributed to the electrode polarization conﬁrming the ability of the Nd3+ ions to move in the [Zr2(PO4)3]− network.
In order to determine if the ionic conductivity of Li0.2Nd0.8/3Zr2(PO4)3should be ascribed to Li+ and/or to Nd3+ ions, the same experiment was then performed with, at ﬁrst, lithium electrodes (non blocking Li+ ions electrodes) and with platinum electrodes in the second case (blocking ions electrodes).
The experiments have been undertaken in an Ar atmosphere in a glove box at room temperature.
With lithium electrodes, no polarization is observed meaning that the Nd3+ ions displacement in the network is negligible at this temperature when Li+ ions are present.
In the case of platinum electrodes, a polarization is observed below 10 Hz.
Taking into account all these results, this polarization is probably be due to the Li+ ions movement meaning that the conduction in Li0.2Nd0.8/3Zr2(PO4)3 mainly results from a Li+ ions motion.
ConclusionsThe NASICON compound Li0.2Nd0.8/3Zr2(PO4)3, which is a member of the solid solution Li1−xNdx/3Zr2(PO4)3 (x = 0.8), is synthesized by a complex polymerizable method.
The powder neutron and X-ray diffraction data reveal that the compound crystallizes in a rhombohedral cell with the space group R¯3. 
If the [Zr2(PO4)3]− network remains unchanged compared to classical structure, an unexpected Nd3+ cations distribution is observed at room temperature on the two 3a and 3b sites.
This distribution leads to a doubling of the NASICON unit cell classical c parameter: a = 8.7160(3) A˚ and c = 46.105(1) A˚ ).
As the pure neodymium phase Nd1/3Zr2(PO4)3 presents classical cell (P¯3c1, a ≈ 8.75 A˚ and c ≈ 23.05 A˚ ),14 it means that the doubling of the c parameter is induced by the presence of lithium in the ◦ C structure.

In addition to the complete structural characterization, sintering tests have been performed in order to undertake impedance spectroscopy.
The low decomposition temperature of NASICON compounds, makes difﬁcult to reach a high densiﬁcation of these materials without sintering aids.
However, we succeeded in reducing the porosity to 15% by heating the compound at high temperature for a short C for 5 minutes) and by rapidly quenching it in time (1350 air.
The ionic conductivity performed on such a sample is in good agreement with values obtained on NASICON materials: r = 4.21 × 10−7 S cm−1 at room temperature.
