A miniature CO2gas sensor based on NASICON (sodium super ionic conductor) thick film was fabricated.
The solid-electrolyte NASICON material was synthesized through an inorganic-reagent-based sol-gelmethod.
The resulting materials were characterized by means of X-ray diffraction (XRD) and X-ray photoelectronspectroscopy (XPS).
NASICON paste was coated on a piece of alumina substrate attached to a platinumheater.
Li2CO3–BaCO3binary carbonate in molar ratio 1 : 1.5 was utilized as the sensing electrode.
Within awide range of CO2volume ratio concentration from 500 to 5000 ppm, the output electromotive force (EMF) ofthe sensor followed Nernst equation well at high working temperature.
The response and recovery times were20 and 58 s, respectively.
This miniature CO2 gas sensor possessed extra merits such as low power consumption,miniaturized framework, and easy fabrication.
Co2 is one of the most important gases that couldgreatly influence atmosphere quality and the agriculturalproducts.
Control and monitoring of 2concentrationis important in process control and automationand environmental pollution as well as applications inagricultural and biotechnological fields.
Therefore, varioustypes of compact 2sensor with different workingmethods have been developed in trials .
Among them, the solid-electrolyte-based NASICON 2gas sensor is a promising one for its high sensitivityand selectivity, low cost, compact structure, andshort response and recovery time  .
The chemical composition of NASICON-typematerials is Na1–xZr2SixP3–xO12, and the highest ionicconductivity could be obtained atx= 2.0, namelyNa3Zr2Si2PO12. 
The NASICON ceramics correspondingto Na3Zr2Si2PO12was often used as the fundamentalmaterial for the solid-electrolyte 2gas sensor because of its high conductivity and its optimal electrochemicalcharacteristics .
Compared with the planardevice and tube-type sensor , the miniature 2 gassensor shows advantages of lower power consumption,more miniaturized framework, and easier fabrication.
In this paper, NASICON material was synthesizedby sol-gel process, in which the cheap inorganicreagents such as ZrOCl2.8H2O,NaNO3and(NH4)2HPO4 were used as the major raw materials  .
Modern analysismethods including XRD and XPS were employedto characterize the material.
The miniature 2sensor based on the NASICON solid electrolyte was fabricatedand its sensing properties were investigated.
NASICON precursor with the desired product compositionof Na3Zr2Si2PO12was synthesized by sol-gelmethod.
ZrOCl2.8H2O,(NH4)2HPO4, and Si(C2H5O)4were used as the main reagents.
Firstly, ZrOCl2wasprepared from ZrOCl2through the popular precipitationand redissolving procedure with the aid ofNH3·H2O and HNO3. 
Then, ZrO(NO3)2, NaNO3and(NH4)2HPO4solution was added into the silica gel preparedfrom alcohol solution and Si(C2H5O)4. 
The abovesolution was continuously stirred at70°ëfor more than2 h to form a sol.
During the process of preparation, thepH value of the solution must be controlled strictly.
Thesol changed into xerogel after drying in oven for 10 h at80°.
The resulting gel was pre-sintered at500°for4 h, and then the resulting NASICON precursor powderwas pressed into pellets and sintered again at1000°for 12 h.
The synthesis details could be found in ourprevious publication .
XRD and XPS measurement were used to characterizethe phase structure and the stoichiometric proportionof every element in the resulting materials.
A small alumina pellet attached to a platinum heaterwas used as the substrate for the dip-coated NASICONthick film.
The diameter and thickness of the substrateare 4.0 mm and 0.4 mm, respectively.
After the coatingof the substrate with SiO2, which was used as the insulating layer, a multiple dip-coating and sintering processwas employed for getting a suitable thickness andimproving the film density.
The dip-coating film waspre-sintered at 600°for 1 h before the next coatingwas applied.
Then the final film was sintered at900° for 6 h with resulting good adhesion of the thick film.
Following the preparation of the NASICON thick film,a commercial aurum paste was coated on the both endsof the NASICON film to form two mesh patterns andthen sintered at800° for 20 min.
For the measurementof the EMF, Pt electrodes were attached to the Aumesheswith the aid of Au paste and calcined at800°ëfor another 20 min.
Finally, the sensing electrode ofLi2CO3–BaCO3binary carbonate in molar ratio 1 : 1.5 was prepared on one of the Au-meshes employing theconventional melting and quenching method.
Amongmany others, the Li2CO3–BaCO3binary carbonate systemwas proposed as a sensing electrode material,because Li2CO3 has the lowest affinity to water vaporcompared to the other alkaline metal carbonates  .
The structure of the miniature sensor is shown in Fig.1.
CO2sensing properties of the sensor were measuredby a conventional static mounting method.
The samplegases containing different concentration of CO2 were obtained by diluting pure CO2 gas with synthetic airobtained by mixing pure O2(21%) and N2(79%).
The CO2 concentration varied from 500 to 5000 ppm.
Thesensitivity, response and recovery time and selectivityof the miniature CO2gas sensor were investigated.
Thevalue of EMF of the element was recorded with a TR8652 digital electrometer.
XRD analysis of the resulted material was carriedout with D/max-rA diffractometer (Japan), CuKα, and the range of diffracting angles was10° <θ< 70°.
Thescanning speed was 4°/min and the wavelength of theX-rays was 0.15406 nm.
The XRD patterns shown in Fig.2 indicate that the powders show the presence ofmonoclinic NASICON and traces of ZrO2. 
No otherphase such as SiO2, ZrSiO4. Na3PO12, Na2SiO3 orNa2ZrO2 could be detected in these samples.
The lowfull widths at half maximum (FWHM) of the diffractionpeaks indicate that the crystallization of the NASICONphase is effective under the experimental conditions.
The average grain size was determined fromthe full-width half-maximum of the XRD peak recordedwith a scanning speed of 1/8 degree per minute.
Themean crystallite size was about 30 nm, which was calculatedfrom the Debye–Scherrer equation .
XPS measurements were used to determine theatomic ratio and electrovalence of each element in theNASICON materials, using a VG ESCA LAB MK IIinstrument (England, MgKα, 10 Pa).
Figure 3 depictsthe XPS spectra of NASICON powders, from whichgood Gauss symmetry was clearly observed from eachelement of the NASICON material, indicating that eachelement has one electrovalence only.
(a) is the chart ofNa1s.
The binding energy of Na1s is 1071.3 eV, deducingthe electrovalence of Na being Na+.
(b) is the chartof O1s.
The binding energy of O1s is 531.2 eV, indicatingthe electrovalence of O being O2– and the formula isP or Si .
(c) is the spectra of Zr3d.
The bindingenergy of Zr3d is 183.3 eV, indicating the electrovalenceof Zr being Zr4+.
(d) is the chart of Si2p.
The bindingenergy of Si2p is 102.4 eV, but the normal bindingenergy of Si4+ is 103.4 eV and the one of Si0 is99.15 eV, so the electrovalence of Si of NASICON isless than +4.
 (e) is the spectra of P2p.
The bindingenergy of P2p is 133. 6 eV, indicating the electrovalenceof P being P5+ and the formula is P .
Therefore,the formula of the resulting NASICON that can bededuced from the XPS spectra is Na3.2Zr2.3Si1.8PO12,which is close to Na3Zr2Si2PO12.controlled by the heating current that was passed through the platinum heater.
The relationship betweenthe operating temperature and the EMF is investigated,as shown in Fig.4; the concentration of CO2is 1000 ppm.
It can be seen that the absolute value of the EMF increases as the operating temperature increases from200 to 450°, but a linear relationship is not obtainedas predicted by the Nernst equation.
The equation (1) indicates that the EMF of the sensoris directly proportional to the logarithm of CO2 concentrationwith the slope of 2.303 RT / 2F, which is normallytaken as the theoretical sensitivity.
Figure 5shows the typical EMF response of the sensor in thebulk concentration range from 500 to 5000 ppm, correspondingto different working temperature.
The heatingtemperatures were set in the range of 200–400°.
It canbe seen that the output EMF was linear function of thelogarithm of CO2 concentration at each operating temperature.
The sensitivity of the sensor increases with anincrease of heating temperature, as listed in Table 1.
The number of exchanged electrons (Fig.5) does notcorrespond to the value predicted by the theory (n = 2)at lower working temperature, because the electrochemicalreaction is not sufficiently fast at low temperature.
However, the value of n tends to the theoreticalone with the temperature increasing.
The sensitivity of the sensing element at the heatingtemperature of 400°ë was 66.3 mV per decade.
In comparison with the planar-type and tube-type structureelement, the heating current was decreased by about 100 mA and 60 mA to maintain the same temperatureand a favorable sensitivity, because the planar-type sensoris externally heating and the heat consumption ishigh; in addition, the resistance of the Pt-heater of theminiature sensor (20 ohm) is less than one of the heatingcoils of the tube-type sensor (30 ohm).
It is anadvantageous trend to decrease the power consumptionand meet the practical application in the future.
Figure 6 shows the typical transient response andrecovery time corresponding to the switching the CO2concentrations.
The heating temperature is set at400°.
The response and recovery time relevant to 90%EMF are 20 s and 58 s, respectively.
Not only for arapid concentration change, but also for a slow transformationof CO2 concentration, the sensor with the aboveresponse and recovery time is adequate for the mostapplication in all kinds of fields.
The previous investigation indicated that the kindsand ratios of auxiliary carbonate salt could produce anobvious influence on the resistance to interferencegases.
So the Li2CO3–BaCO3 binary carbonate inmolar ratio 1 : 1.5 was adopted as sensing electrodematerial.
Another important requirement for enhancingthe selectivity is the availability of very accurately controlledpreparation techniques for the sensor material.
In our experiment, the conventional melting andquenching method was employed in the preparing ofthe sensing electrode, the melting temperature is640°.
Figure 7 gives the EMF variation of the sensorat the heating temperature of 400°ë, corresponding tothe exposure to CO, CH4 and SO2, which often co-existwith the target gas of CO2 in practice.
The sensitivitiesof the sensor corresponding to CO2 and interference gases are summarized in Table 2. 
It can be seen that thesensitivities for CO, CH4 and SO2 within the wide rangeof volume ratio concentration from 500 to 5000 ppmare so much smaller than the sensitivity for CO2. 
Inpractice, the concentration of CO, CH4 and SO2 is farsmaller than that CO2, so the results indicated that all these gases produced few disturbances to the detectionof the CO2 concentration.
A miniature  2 gas sensor was fabricated, in whichsol-gel-synthesized NASICON was employed as solid electrolyte material and a small alumina pellet was usedas substrate.
XRD and XPS were employed to characterize NASICON powders.
The effect on the sensitivityfrom the heating temperature was checked in detail.
Theminiature CO2 element with 400°ë heating temperatureshows high  2 sensitivity (66.3 mV/decade), shortresponse and recovery time (20 and 58 s), and acceptableselectivity.
With the realization of miniature structureand lower heating temperature, the power consumptionwas effectively decreased in comparison with the traditionalplanar and tube-type sensors.
