Li-ion electrolyte NASICON type Li2AlZr[-PO4]3 has been prepared by Solid State Reaction method.
Formation of the sample has been confirmed by XRD andTGA–DTA analysis.
Electrical conductivity studies havebeen performed in the frequency range 42 Hz–5 MHzwithin the temperature range 523–623 K using aluminiumas blocking electrodes.
The conductivity has been found tobe 1 · 10–5 S cm–1 at 623 K.
Dielectric spectra show thedecrease in dielectric constant with increase in frequency.
Dielectric loss spectra reveal that dc conduction contributionpredominates in the sample.
Spectroscopic plots ofcomplex modulus suggest the Non-Debye behaviour of theelectrical relaxation within the temperature range studied.
Lithium ion conductors constitute a very important class ofsolid electrolyte in solid state batteries because of the highchemical activity of Li+ ions.
Li-ion conducting NASICONtype compounds have been extensively studied becausethey exhibit unique property such as low sintering temperature,three dimensional framework holding easy conductionpathways resulting in high ionic conductivity.
Lithium titanium phosphate material based on the aboveframework consist of [PO4] tetrahedral connected in corner sharing arrangement with [TiO6] octrahedra .
But theconductivity of this material is not good enough for practicalapplications.
Many researchers reported that the partialsubstitution of Ti4+ with trivalent cations such as In3+, Sc3+,Al3+ etc enhances the conductivity.
Among thesesubstitutions Al3+ substitution provides improvements indensity and sinterability resulting in high Li ion conductivityand air stability of LATP.
It has been postulated thatLithium loss during sintering at high temperatures causes asignificant reduction in the conductivity of undoped LiTi(-PO4)3 as significant weight losses above 1100 C are observedby thermogravimetric analysis.
The Al-dopedmaterials form dense ceramics more readily and are,therefore, less likely to lose Lithia.
The improvement indensification may be associated with extra intergranular lowmelting or glassy phases which can act as fluxes to improvesinterability and conductivity.
The bulk ionic conductivityof LATP was reported to be 7 · 10-4 S cm–1 at 25 C.
But the reduction of Ti4+ to Ti3+ with Li metal restrictstheir use as solid electrolytes in battery applicationsresulting in instability.
Robertson et al.
, reported thatGe and Hf (r = 1 · 10–4 S cm–1 at 25 C) replacement inthe place of Ti results in stability towards lithium but aresignificantly more costly to produce .
Thus in the presentstudy, Ti has been replaced with Zr to form Li2AlZr[PO4]3.Dielectric and modulus analysis have been done to studythe conduction and relaxation mechanism of the sampleusing Impedance analyzer.
The compound Li2AlZr[PO4]3 has been prepared by SolidState Reaction method.
The raw materials used are Li2CO3,(NH4)2HPO4, ZrO2 and Al2O3. One of the raw materials ZrO2 has been prepared by co-precipitation method .
The reagents are taken in stoichiometric ratio and groundusing a mortar and a pestle.
The homogenized powder hasbeen heated to 850 C and kept for 2 h at this temperature.
TGA–DTA measurements has been taken using STA-1500thermal analyzer with a resolution of 0.01 mg.
The mixtureof raw materials has been kept in a crucible and heatedfrom room temperature to 700 C at a rate of 5 C perminute.
X-ray diffractogram (XRD) has been taken toconfirm the formation of samples with desired phase, byusing Philips X-ray diffractometer PW 1830. The resultantsample is crushed into fine powder and spread in a die, towhich a pressure of 4000 kg cm–2 is applied to form pelletwith 1 mm thickness and 1.0 cm diameter.
The pellet hasbeen sintered at 450 C for 2 h.
The dielectric measurementsare performed by placing the pellet in between twoaluminium blocking electrodes within the frequency range42 Hz to 5 MHz from 523 to 623 K using a computercontrolled HIOKI 3532 LCR meter.
Figure 1 shows the TGA–DTA curves of the mixture ofraw materials with heating rate of 5 C per minute fromroom temperature up to 700 C.
TGA curves show threeregions of weight loss.
The thermogravimetric curves ofthe mixtures showed a weight loss over the temperaturerange from ambient to 155 C (Ist region) which correspondsto the elimination of superficial water adsorbed onthe sample.
The second weight loss in the temperaturerange 155–333 C may be attributed to the decompositionof (NH4)2HPO4 with the evolution of NH3. 
The third regioncorresponds to the decomposition of Li2CO3 with a weight loss of about 3%.
At higher temperatures thechemical reaction that take place do not lead to any weightloss, as shown in TGA curve.
In the DTA curve the twoendothermic peaks at 148 and 184 C can be attributed tothe decomposition of (NH4)2HPO4 which melts at 155 Cwith ammonia evolution.
The exothermic effect at 374Ccan be probably related to the decomposition of Li2CO3 toLi2O followed by the formation of the sample.
The X-ray diffraction pattern of the sample has been takenusing X-ray diffractometer with Cu Ka radiation having awavelength of 1.5417 A ° .
The XRD pattern of Li2AlZr[-PO4]3 is shown in Fig.2. 
The three strong intensity peaksat 2h = 23.3749, 20.0917 and 19.6228 indicate the formationof the sample.
Some traces of ZrO2, Al2O3 havebeen observed in the XRD pattern.
Peak at 2h = 13.992corresponding to the secondary phase, Lithium ZirconiumPhosphate (JCPDF 44-0010) has also been observed.
Thusthe pattern reveals the polycrystalline nature of the sample.
The particle size (D) has been estimated using the DebyeScherrer’s formula,The particle size for the sample is in theorder of 38 nm.
This confirms the formation of nanocrystalline phases in the present sample.
In electrical modulus spectra electrode polarization effectsare suppressed and thus it mainly reflects the bulk electricalproperties of the sample.

The low frequency part of the peak indicates thelong-range motion of the mobile ions and the high frequencyside of the peak indicates the confined motion ofthe ions within a potential well.
The amplitude of the peakdoes not remain constant within the temperature rangestudied which reveals the distribution of relaxation time.

The same behaviour has beenobserved by Nobre et al., in the ceramic Na1–xKxNbO3.
This behaviour also suggests that the dielectricrelaxation is activated thermally in which hopping processof charge carriers are dominating.


This smalldifference in the peak frequency is common phenomenaassociated with dispersions in bulk ac conductivity anddielectric permittivity of a non-ideal dispersive conductor.
The width of the peaks of both Z) aregreater than Debye peak (1.14 decades) suggesting the nondebyetype relaxation for all the temperatures.

Relaxation time calculated has been found tobe decreased with increase in temperature (Table 1).
Lithium ion conducting electrolyte Li2AlZr[PO4]3 has beenprepared by Solid State Reaction method and conductivityanalysis has been performed.
TGA–DTA analysis and XRDspectrum confirm the formation of the sample.
The conductivityhas been found to be 1 · 10–5 S cm–1 at 623 K.
The activation energy calculated from the Arrhenius plot hasbeen found to be 0.83 eV.
Dielectric constant decreases withincrease in frequency due to the high periodic reversal of theapplied field.
Dielectric loss spectra show straight lines withslope in the range –0.7 to –0.9 which reveals the contributionof dc conduction mechanism.
The increase of dielectricfunctions with temperature suggests the contribution ofmigration polarization of Li+ ions.
Imaginary part of modulusshows asymmetric peaks with b in the range 0.33–0.61.Relaxation time calculated from the peak frequency hasbeen found to decrease, within the temperature studied.
