Na3V2(PO4)3 is a typical NASICON-structure material that possesses 3D channels for sodium-ion migration. It is considered a promising cathode material for sodium-ion batteries due to its high energy density and thermal stability. However, the low innate conductivity of unmodified Na3V2(PO4)3 has restricted its utilization. In this paper, we prepared a hybrid of Na3V2(PO4)3 and nitrogen/sulfur (N/S) co-doped carbon (NVP-C-NS) as the cathode of a sodium-ion battery via a simple sol-gel method. NVP-C-NS demonstrates excellent sodium storage properties in comparison to the hybrid of unmodified carbon and Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP-C). The discharge capacity of NVP-C-NS reached 115.7 and 98.2 mAh g-1 at 50 and 1000 mA g-1, which were 9.4 mAh g-1 and 63.6 mAh g-1 larger than that exhibited by NVP-C. In addition, NVP-C-NS exhibited high cyclic stability in long-cycling tests. After 500 cycles at 200 mA g-1, NVP-C-NS delivered a discharge capacity of 74.2 mAh g-1 and maintained 83.4% of the initial discharge capacity. The enhanced performance of the NVP-C-NS hybrid is mainly due to the improved electrical conductivity, the formation of surface defects, and improved dispersion. The excellent electrochemical performance of NVP-C-NS indicates that N/S co-doped carbon compositing is a valid and efficient method for raising the performance of Na3V2(PO4)3 electrodes in sodium-ion batteries. 
The burning of fossil fuels produces large amounts of carbon dioxide and harmful gases, creating a green house effect and environmental problems. Apart from finding alternative energy sources and fuels, a key issue is the development of new and effective energy storage systems. A revolution in battery technology has quietly emerged in response to the growing demand for large-scale energy storage systems. In the past few decades, lithium-ion batteries have received much attention as efficient energy storage systems, which can provide long-term cycling capabilities and high energy densities. In addition to being used in portable electronic devices such as mobile phones and notebook computers, they are also used in large equipment such as electric vehicles and smart grids. However, lithium reserves are insufficient to meet the current demand and the resulting high costs have prompted researchers to look for next-generation low-cost batteries. Sodium-ion batteries have attracted great interest from researchers due to their similar physical and chemical properties to lithium-ion batteries. These may be a practical solution with improved economic benefits and easily accessible components. Moreover, the similarity between sodium-ion batteries and lithium-ion batteries has provided research ideas for the development of new electrodes. Due to the large mass and ionic radius of a sodium ion, many of the electrode materials used in lithium-ion batteries exhibit a large volume change and low electrochemical performance when used in sodium-ion batteries. Therefore, it is necessary to find suitable electrode materials that not only have a facile structure for sodium ion transport, but also provide frame stability to cope with the repeated volume change and structural deformation during the sodium ion insertion/extraction process. As cathode materials, various layered transition-metal oxides (such as NaVO2, NaCrO2, NaxCoO2, and NaxMnOy) and polyanionic compounds (such as Na3V2(PO4)3 and NaFePO4) are suitable for sodium-ion insertion/extraction due to the large open channels in their structures. Among them, the basic frame of the NASICON-type Na3V2(PO4)3 is composed of a VO6 octahedron and a PO4 tetrahedron sharing a common angular atom, and the open 3D channel formed between them allows for rapid transport of sodium ions. Moreover, the strong (PO4)3- polyanion network endows Na3V2(PO4)3 with excellent thermal stability. Therefore, Na3V2(PO4)3 is one of the promising materials for cathodes in sodium-ion batteries. Two redox reactions (V4+/V3+ at 3.4 V and V3+/V2+ at 1.6 V, vs. Na/Na+) take place in the Na3V2(PO4)3 electrode. Theoretical specific capacities are reportedly 117.6 and 58.8 mAh g-1, respectively. However, it is difficult for large sodium ions to move in the Na3V2(PO4)3 lattice structure, and they may actually hinder each other’s movement. Severe internal stress produced by insertion of a large amount of sodium ions and poor conductivity lead to structural degradation of Na3V2(PO4)3 and subsequent capacity decay. In response to this deficiency, many improvement strategies have been proposed, including ion doping, unique nano-architecture designs, and introducing conductive agents and carbon coating. Xu et al. prepared V-defect, F-doping Na3V1.98(PO4)2.9F0.3/C composites. The composite delivered an initial discharge capacity of 116.9 mAh g-1 at 0.1 C and presented the highest sodium-ion diffusion coefficient with the value of 3.66×10-13 cm2 s-1. Liang et al. fabricated hierarchical porous Na3V2(PO4)3/N-doped carbon (NVP/C) microsphere by hydrothermal method. NVP/C microsphere demonstrates superior rate performance (99.3 mA h g-1, 100 C) and outstanding cyclic stability (capacity retention: 79.1%, 10000 cycles, 20 C), which are attributed to hierarchical porous micro/nano structure with encapsulation of N-doped carbon. Kim et al.synthesized graphene-supported Na3V2(PO4)3 for the cathode in a sodium-ion battery, which delivered a discharge capacity of 85 mAh g-1 at 10 C. Hu et al. successfully synthesized Na3V2(PO4)3 through a solid-state reaction. A uniform carbon layer of 6 nm was then coated onto the Na3V2(PO4)3 surface. This composite exhibited excellent cyclic properties as a cathode. Xia et al prepared N-doped C-coated Na3V2(PO4)3/CNTs composite. It exhibited excellent electrochemical performances, especially high-rate capability and long cycle life, due to increased Na-ion migration rate and accelerated electron transport. In this study, a composite of N/S co-doped carbon and Na3V2(PO4)3 was created using the sol-gel method. Sol-gel is a simple method for easily preparing nanostructured materials, involving the uniform dispersion of starting materials in a precursor solution. The brief synthesis process is shown in Figure 1. Enhancing particle dispersion and introducing heteroatom-modified carbon can shorten sodium ion channels and improve electrical conductivity, providing faster kinetics for sodium ions and electrons in the Na3V2(PO4)3 electrode. The doping of carbon with N and S heteroatoms can improve the electrical conductivity of the materials, and also form surface defects, accelerating sodium-ion migration. 
The Na3V2(PO4)3-based nanomaterials were prepared using a sol-gel process. In the synthesis step, all raw material reagents were of analytical grade and had not undergone special treatments, such as purification or drying. First, 0.5139 g of NH4VO3, 1.0373 g of NaH2PO4·2H2O, and 0.4237 g of citric acid were added to a beaker containing 60 ml of deionized water. During this process, the beaker was heated in a 40 °C water bath with magnetic stirring. After 3 hours, the temperature was raised to 70 °C and maintained at 70 °C until the deionized water was totally evaporated, leaving a gelatinous substance. It was then dried further in an oven, and ground to obtain a blank precursor. 0.3002 g of CS(NH2)2 was added after the addition of citric acid without change in other steps, and the precursor of the N/S co-doped sample was prepared. The precursor was placed in an argon tube furnace and calcined at 350 °C for 3 hours, and then at 800 °C for 5 hours. After cooling naturally to room temperature, a blank sample and a N/S co-doped sample were obtained by grinding, and labeled as NVP-C and NVP-C-NS, respectively. 
Scanning electronmicroscopy (SEM, JSM-6510LA) was used to observe the surface morphology of the samples. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was conducted with a DX2700 diffractometer (Dandong Haoyuan), equipped with Cu Kα radiation, with a 2θ degree of 10°-90°. The chemical status of the NVP-C-NS surface was studied using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, K-Alpha1063) with Al-Kα radiation. Thermogravimetric analysis of two hybirds was performed in air from ambient temperature to 600 °C. The electrochemical performance of the samples was tested using a two-electrode system. A CR2016-type half-cellwas assembled in a glove box. The working electrode consisted of 70 wt% of active material, 15 wt% of acetylene black, and 15 wt% of polyvinylidene fluoride. The slurry was uniformly mixed with NMP, uniformly coated on aluminum foil, dried at 80 °C, and cut into small pieces (diameter: 14 mm) to form the working electrode. Metal sodium was used as a counter electrode. The membrane was glass fiber with a diameter of 18 mm. The electrolyte was 1 M NaClO4 in ester-based solvent (5% FEC and EC/EMC/DMC 1:1:1 in volume). Charge/discharge tests, using galvanostatic mode, were performed on a Land battery test system (CT2001A) and included a rate test and a cycling test. The mass of the working electrode was in the range of 2.3-2.9 mg, and the current was calculated based on active materials. The cyclic voltammetry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy tests were conducted using a Chenhua electrochemical workstation (CHI760E). The voltage range of the charge and discharge tests, and the cycle test, was 2.3-4.2 V. The frequency of the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy test was 0.01-100000 Hz.Figure 2 displays the detailed crystal-structure information of the NVP-C and NVP-C-NS hybrids, as determined through XRD measurements. XRD patterns of different phases are unique and help to determine the phase purity and crystallinity of materials. The peak position and peak intensity of the two hybrids are basically the same. The two hybrids are both indexed to a NASICON-structured Na3V2(PO4)3 with an R-3c space group (JCPDS No. 053-0018). The diffraction peaks of the two synthesized samples are clear and sharp, indicating that the crystallinity is high. Moreover, no impurity peak appears in the XRD patterns. This shows that the introduced N and S elements do not enter the crystal lattice, and the synthesized materials have a pure crystal form. The morphology of the NVP-C and NVP-C-NS hybrids was determined through SEM and displayed in Figure 3. As expected, the two hybrids consist of many nanostructured particles. However, NVP-C-NS is looser in terms of overall morphology than the blank sample. The agglomeration of NVP-C is more severe compared with NVP-C-NS. The difference in morphology comes from the addition of thiourea in the preparation process. The small nanoparticles and loose structure are beneficial for shortening the sodium-ion diffusion pathway and increasing the contact area between the electrode and the electrolyte. 
Thermogravimetric analysis measurements were performed to determine carbon content in as-prepared hybrids in air atmosphere. The corresponding curves of two hybrids are displayed in Figure 4. From ambient temperature to 300 °C, there is a slight decline resulting from the water removal. The larger decline in 400-500 °C is attributed to the carbon combustion. Accordingly, NVP-C and NVP-C-NS have similar curves, and the results show that the carbon content of two hybrids is estimated to be 5.5%. XPS was conducted to study the elemental composition of the NVP-C-NS surface. The survey spectrum of NVP-C-NS is shown in Figure 5a. As observed, the peaks of P2p, S2p, C1s, N1s, V2p, O1s, and Na1s are detectable in the survey spectrum, and are located at 132, 164, 285, 400, 517, 532, and 1072 eV, respectively. The results demonstrate that NVP-C-NS contains Na, V, P, O, C, N, and S, which is in agreement with the composition of the N/S co-doped carbon/Na3V2(PO4)3 hybrid. Through quantitative analysis, the N and S content of the NVP-C-NS hybrid is determined to be 2.09% and 0.83%. The high-resolution spectra for N2s and S2p and the corresponding results are displayed in Figure 5b and 5c, respectively. Three types of N can be seen in the high-resolution spectra: pyridinic (398.5 eV), pyrrolic (399.9 eV), and quaternary (401.2 eV). As for S2p, the spectra can be divided into two peaks at 163.7 and 164.5 eV, which are ascribed to S2p3/2 and S2p1/2, respectively. The XPS results imply that N and S were successfully introduced onto the carbon. 
Figure 6 compares the rate capability of the two samples. Discharge capacities are noticeably increased for the NVP-C-NS sample. This enhancement is more pronounced at large current densities, as shown in Figure 6a. The NVP-C-NS electrode delivers a discharge capacity of 115.7 mAh g-1, 111.5 mAh g-1, and 98.2 mAh g-1, with current densities of 50, 300, and 1000 mA g-1, respectively. However, the discharge capacity of the NVP-C sample only reaches 106.3, 87.7 and 34.6 mAh g-1 at the same currents. Due to the specific characteristic of NVP-C-NS, the discharge capacity of NVP-C-NS is higher than that of Na3V2(PO4)3/C composite obtained by the solid state method (92 mAh g-1 at 0.5 C, 71 mAh g-1 at 5 C). To compare the rate performances more directly, the charge and discharge profiles are shown in Figure 6b and 6c. The voltage plateaus for the NVP-C-NS sample are consistently better than those of the NVP-C sample, with a flatter plateau shape and a smaller voltage difference. This further illustrates the positive effect of N/S co-doping of carbon on the material's rate performance. There is a little platform in the discharge curve of NVP-C and NVP-C-NS at low current densities such as at 20, 50, and 100 mA g-1, which is ascribed to the structure rearrangement which happens during transfer of Na ion from Na(1) to Na(2) site. The outstanding performance of the NVP-C-NS sample comes from the enhancement of the electrical conductivity due to the introduced carbon. Moreover, N/S co-doping of carbon further improves the electrical conductivity and increases the surface defects. The sodium-ion intercalation/deintercalation behavior of two the hybrids were compared using cyclic voltammetry measurements. Cyclic voltammetry curves of the two samples, collected in a voltage window of 2.3-4.2 V, are displayed in Figure 7. A pair of redox peaks appears at ~3.4 V for both electrodes, which is related to the V3+/V4+ reaction resulting from the intercalation/deintercalation of sodium ions. The NVP-C-NS electrode displays an obvious and sharp peak. The oxidation and reduction peak current densities of the NVP-C-NS electrode reach 321.5 and 204.9 mA g-1, respectively, much larger than that of the NVP-C electrode (oxidation: 124.5 mA g-1, reduction: 97.5 mA g-1). Moreover, the peak potential gap between the oxidation peak and the reduction peak for the NVP-C-NS electrode is 276 mV, which is much lower than the peak potential gap for the NVP-C electrode (930 mV).The increased peak current density and decreased peak potential gap imply that the electrochemical polarization of NVP-C-NS is greatly reduced compared to that of NVP-C. These results suggest that N/S co-doped carbon compositing raises the redox kinetics of intercalation/deintercalation of the sodium ion. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy tests were performed to evaluate the electrode kinetics of the two electrodes. Nyquist plots and ion diffusion performances for two cells are shown in Figure 8. Each plots consists of a straight sloping line at high frequencies and a semicircle at medium frequencies, representing Warburg impedance (Zw) and charge transfer resistance (Rct), respectively. As obtained from the intercept of the plotted curve with the X axis, the NVP-C-NS sample demonstrates smaller ohmic resistance, which results from the N/S doping of carbon. Zw is used to illustrate the diffusivity of sodium ions in the electrode. The slope of the straight line is steeper in the plot than in the NVP-C plot, suggesting that the loose structure of the NVP-C-NS sample allows for sodium ions to diffuse more rapidly, which results from thiourea forming pores in the structure. The diﬀusion coeﬀcient of Na ions can be calculated by Warburg impedance at low-frequency range in EIS spectra. According to the following equation, the Na+ diffusion coefficient is 7.1×10-15 cm2 s−1 and 1.1×10-14 cm2 s−1 for NVP-C and NVP-C-NS, respectively, implying that the sodium ion diffuses faster in NVP-C-NS electrode. Rct, obtained from the diameter of the semicircle portion of each plot, is 241.9 Ω for NVP-C and 1139.3 Ω for NVP-C-NS. The charge transfer resistance of the NVP-C electrode is almost four times higher than that of the NVP-C-NS electrode. The reduced Rct for NVP-C-NS suggests a rapid transfer of charge at the interface between the electrolyte and the electrode, indicating that the kinetics of the reaction are noticeably enhanced. This is because N/S co-doping of carbon can increase surface defects and enhance electrical conductivity. 
Figure 9 shows the cycling performance of the two hybrids for 500 cycles at 200 mA g-1. The initial discharge capacity for NVP-C-NS reaches 89.8mAh g-1, 11.9 mAh g-1 higher than that of NVP-C. In addition, the discharge capacity of NVP-C decreases more rapidly than that of NVP-C-NS. The capacity retention ratios for the NVP-C and NVP-C-NS hybrids are 54.9% and 83.9%, respectively. After 500 cycles, the NVP-C-NS sample maintaines a discharge capacity of 75.4mAh g-1, while NVP-C is only able to maintain 42.8 mAh g-1. A higher capacity retention ratio at relatively high current indicates a significant increase in cycling performance for NVP-C-NS, due to the decreased electrochemical polarization resulting from the N/S co-doping of carbon. 
Figure 10 compares the change in morphology of the NVP-C-NS electrode surface after 50, 300, and 500 cycles. It is clear that there is no significant difference in the surface morphology of the NVP-C-NS electrode after the cycling tests. Even after 500 cycles, the electrode did not display any significant structural deterioration. This indicates that the NVP-C-NS hybrid exhibits high structural stability during a long-term sodium-ion intercalation/deintercalation process, which also supports the excellent cycle performance of NVP-C-NS. 
We synthesized a N/S co-doped carbon/Na3V2(PO4)3 hybrid cathode, for use in a sodium-ion battery, using the sol-gel approach. The physical properties of the hybrids were examined using XRD, SEM, TGA and XPS analysis. The as-prepared hybrids were well-crystallized and contained Na3V2(PO4)3 in its pure phase. The morphology of the NVP-C-NS was looser than that of the blank NVP-C, which come from the introduction of thiourea as a pore former. The NVP-C-NS electrode demonstrated outstanding rate performance. At 50 and 1000 mA g-1, it delivered a discharge capacity of 115.7 and 98.2 mAh g-1, respectively, much larger than that delivered by the blank sample. Furthermore, the NVP-C-NS sample also revealed a long cycling stability (capacity retention: 83.4%, 500 cycles at 200 mA g-1). The superior performance of the NVP-C-NS sample is due to the loose structure resulting from the addition of the pore-forming thiourea, as well as the N/S co-doping of carbon leading to the formation of surface defects and enhancement of electrical conductivity. This work shows that NVP-C-NS is a promising material for electrodes in sodium-ion batteries. 



