Na3V2(PO4)3 suffers from poor performance and cyclability arising from low electronic conductivity. Na3V2(PO4)3 nanosheets have been successfully synthesized by a hydrothermal method and coated with a carbon layer from β-cyclodextrin. The NVP/C nanocomposite shows superior high-rate and ultralong-lifespan performances owning to large number of oxygenous groups from β-cyclodextrin, which are beneficial to a uniform adsorption on the surface of electrode materials. The NVP/C delivers 74 mAh g-1 even after 2000 cycles at a rate of 20 C and an exceptional rate performance (66 mAh g-1at 50 C).
Recently, sodium ion batteries (SIBs) have a strategic significance in reducing cost of battery system and promoting large-scale energy storage [1]. However, the practical application of SIBs still faces many challenges, such as low energy and power density, short cycle life and low temperature performance [2]. Therefore, developing highperformance cathode materials with stable frame structure is crucial for the commercialization of SIBs. Particularly, Na3V2(PO4)3 (marked as NVP) has attracted intensive attention amongst the NASICON-type cathodes, owning to its open framework, stable electrode potential (3.4 V vs Na+/Na), high theoretical energy density (400 Wh kg-1) and excellent thermal stability [3]. Nevertheless, the poor electronic conductivity hinders the electrochemical performance and prevents its practical application.
There are various strategies to solve this problem [4-6]. Among them, carbon coating is the most conventional method to promote the electron transfer by providing unimpeded conductive network among electroactive particles [7-9]. Previous reports have suggested that organic agents should be good carbon sources for hierarchical porous interconnection, such as citric acid, glucose and sucrose [9-11]. However, the uniformity of the coating may affect the electrochemical performance. Herein, we report a facile two-step process for synthesizing NVP nanosheets and coating them with a carbon layer from β-cyclodextrin. The NVP/C nanocomposite exhibits excellent electrochemical performance compared to the bare NVP.
In a typical synthesis, 2 mmol NH4VO3 and 2 mmol H2C2O4 were dropped into 20 mL distilled water by magnetic stirring (solution A). Then, 3 mmol NH4H2PO4 and 3 mmol CH3COONa were dissolved in deionized water to get a transparent solution (solution B). Thereafter, solution B and 2.5 mL ethylene glycol were slowly poured into solution A under continuous stirring, and then the pH of this mixed solution was adjusted to 2 with HNO3. The solvothermal reaction was carried out at 200 °C for 12 h. The precursor was washed with distilled water and ethanol for several times and dried in a vacuum oven overnight. The NVP mixed with 30wt% β-cyclodextrin was ballmilled for 4 h, and then heated at 650 oC for 10 h in Ar(95%)/H2(5%) atmosphere to obtain the NVP/C composite
XRD characterization was performed using an X-ray diffractometer (D8 Advance) with Cu Kα radiation. The morphologies of samples were characterized by a high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEOL-2100). Thermogravimetric (TG) was carried on a Mettler Toledo TGA/SDTA851 thermal analyzer. TG measurement was carried out at a heating rate of 10 °C min-1 in N2. Raman spectrum was obtained by a NEXUS 670 FT-IR Raman spectrometer. The cells were assembled in 2032-type cells in an argon-filled glovebox. The electrolyte was 1 M NaClO4 in a mixture of EC-DEC (1:1 volume) with 2% FEC solution. Galvanostatic charge-discharge measurement were performed on Land CT2001A battery cycler, and the calculation of the capacity is the whole electrode. Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were performed on an Autolab PGSTAT302N workstation.
XRD patterns of NVP and NVP/C are displayed in Fig. 1A. All of the diffraction peaks can be assigned to a rhombohedral unit cell with the R c space group, consistent 3 with JCPDS No. 62-0345 [10]. It is clear that no impurity peaks were observed and the two samples have good crystallization. Fig. 1B shows the morphology of NVP. It exhibits nanoplates-like shape with a size of 1~2 μm. The morphology and the size of NVP/C nanocomposite do not change after calcining at high temperature, but only aggregate more or less (Fig. 1C). It is suggested the presence of carbon layer may prevent the growth of particles. As exhibited in Fig. 1D, a thin amorphous carbon layer with ∼3 nm thickness is well coated on the surfaces of NVP/C and the crystal lattice stripes is 0.43 nm, which corresponds to the (110) plane.
The obtained carbon content in NVP/C is around 11.6 wt.% from the TG analysis, as shown in Fig. 2A. In order to investigate the existence of carbon layer, Raman examination was employed (inset of Fig. 2A). It displays two strong peaks at 1320 and 1590 cm-1, and the ratio of ID/IG is fitted to 1.06, indicating a high degree of graphitization and high electronic conductivity. The bands at 900-1100 cm-1 are also consistent with antisymmetric P-O stretching vibrations in the PO4 group [12]. Moreover, the three small peaks, at 265 cm-1, 386 cm-1 and 539 cm-1 are attributed to the vibration modes of free PO43- ions [13]. The TG analysis and Raman examination of the bare NVP were also done for comparison (Fig. S1). XPS measurement was performed to gain element valence state of NVP/C (Fig. 2B). It is found that two symmetric bands with binding energies of 523.3 and 515.7 eV could be assigned to V 2p1/2 and V 2p3/2 of V3+, respectively.
Fig. 3A shows the typical charge-discharge curves for the initial three cycles of NVP/C at a current rate of 0.2 C between 2 and 4.2 V. It exhibits a voltage plateaus along ∼3.4 V (vs Na+/Na), which is corresponded to the V4+/V3+ redox reaction. The result is also supported by CV curves (Fig. S2). As seen in Fig. 3B, NVP/C nanocomposite shows significant improvement in the electrochemical stability. It remains a relatively high discharge capacity of 92 mAh g-1 (94% of capacity retention) after 200 cycles at a rate of 0.2 C at room temperature, whereas the pristine NVP only exhibits 28 mAh g-1. In addition, the NVP/C also demonstrates a well rate capability at various high rates of discharge from 0.2 C to 50 C (Fig. 3C). It is obvious that NVP/C nanocomposite a superior rate capability at various rates. As the current density increases, the specific capacities of NVP severely decrease, while NVP/C exhibits a much-improved rate capability. Even at a high current density of 50 C, the discharge capacity of NVP/C can still remain 66 mAh g-1. When the current comes back to 0.2 C, approximately 100% of the reversible capacity can be recovered, indicating a high reversibility. More importantly, NVP/C electrode shows ultrastable long-term cyclability (Fig. 3D). To see how well the morphology of NVP and NVP/C can maintain, the electrodes after 70 cycles at 20 C rate are checked by XRD and TEM image (Fig. S3). Compared the XRD and TEM of the cycled NVP and NVP/C, it can be found that the bare NVP showed poor electrochemical performance because of the structure destroy and the pulverization of particles. When the current densities increased to 10 C, the reversible capacity could be still kept at 74 mAh g-1 for 2000 cycles. Even at an extremely high current rate of 20 C, a reversible capacity of 74 mAh g-1 (98% of capacity retention) was retained after 2000 cycles. It might be due to the uneven slurry was bladed on aluminum foil during electrode preparation process and we used two different batteries during the test, resulting in a little different data.
Furthermore, as revealed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, the excellent electrochemical performance of NVP/C is attribute to fast electrode reaction kinetics. In the inset of Fig. 4A, an equivalent circuit is proposed to fit the impedance spectra. The simulated charge transfer resistance (Rct) for NVP/C shows 112 Ω, while that for NVP is 220 Ω, indicating carbon coating is beneficial to improve the charge transfer of Na+ from the electrolyte to active material. The diffusion coefficient of Na+ can be calculated from a straight line at the low frequency region according to the following equations [14]:
Where σ is relative with Zre obtained from the equation:
The linear fitting of Zre vs. ω−1/2 is shown in Fig. 7D. The sodium ion diffusion coefficient is 5.88×10-13 cm2 s-1 of NVP/C, which is higher than NVP (4.42×10-13 cm2 s-1), indicating carbon coating decreases the hindrance for sodium ions diffusion [1517]. The NVP/C using β-cyclodextrin as a carbon source possesses an advantage for electrochemical performance. It should be attributed to the large number of oxygenous groups, leading to a uniform adsorption on NVP, and then produces a uniform electronconductive carbon layer after calcination. Therefore, the fast charge transfer kinetics and the enhanced electronic conductivity impart the excellent rate and cycle performances of NVP/C.
In conclusion, we have successfully synthesized NVP/C nanocomposite by a 10 hydrothermal method and heat treatment, in which β-cyclodextrin was employed as the carbon source. The uniform carbon layer enhances the electronic conductivity and Na+ diffusion coefficient. Therefore, the rate performance and cyclability of NVP/C electrode are significantly improved. The stable and high-rate NVP/C should be a promising candidate as electrode material for sodium ion batteries.