The present work investigates the synthesis and characteristics of Na Super-Ionic Conductor (NASICON)-type Sc3+- and Yb3+-doped Na3Zr2Si2PO12 solid electrolyte for application in solid-state Na-ion batteries. A significant improvement of Na-ion conductivity in Na3Zr2Si2PO12 has been achieved through crystal engineering and microstructure refinement. The presence of monoclinic-ZrO2 impurity phase adversely affecting the Na-ion conductivity is eliminated by using cubic-ZrO2 precursor at the place of monoclinic-ZrO2 in conventional solid-state reaction method. Utilizing cubic-ZrO2 also refined the microstructure with thin and microcracks free grain boundaries. A replacement of 16.5 at.% of Zr4+ by Sc3+ in Na3Zr2Si2PO12 enhances the room-temperature total ionic conductivity from 0.61 mS.cm-1 to 0.96 mS.cm-1. Replacing 11.11 at.% of Sc3+ by Yb3+ further improves the room-temperature ionic conductivity to 1.62 mS.cm-1 which is >2.5 times higher than that of bare Na3Zr2Si2PO12. The strategic approach used to raise the ionic conductivity in the current work can be applied to other materials, paving a way towards realizing high-performance solidelectrolytes for viable and economic Na-ion batteries. A room-temperature conductivity of 1.51 mS.cm-1 for Sc3+/Yb3+-doped Na3Zr2Si2PO12 measured employing Na-metal as electrodes confirms Na-ion conduction. Furthermore, a very low current density (~10-7 A/cm2) in the cyclic-voltammetry profile of Na│solid-electrolyte│Na cell demonstrates the suitability of Sc3+/Yb3+-doped Na3Zr2Si2PO12 as a solid-electrolyte for Na-ion batteries. A detailed analysis of these materials has been performed, and the possible reasons for the conductivity enhancement are discussed.
Recent years have seen increasing concerns over the tremendous rise in the consumption of nonrenewable fossil fuels and their adverse impact on the environment.1 Enormous research attention has been given on developing technology for alternate renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, hydro, etc. However, the intermittent nature of solar and wind sources put a bar over a constant supply of energy. Energy storage devices, e.g. secondary ion batteries, can be a solution by storing the excess energy generated through solar or wind sources.2 Although Li-ion batteries (LIBs) with high volumetric and gravimetric energy densities are the most attractive energy storage devices, the higher cost and limited sources of Li have raised serious concerns over the availability of LIBs.3 As an alternative, Na is a cheap and highly abundant element.4 Na-ion batteries (NIBs) possessing similar electrochemical characteristics as LIBs are considered to be excellent energy storage devices. However, Na is much heavier and larger than Li, which prevent its fast migration during the electrochemical processes impeding the energy density. Nevertheless, the low cost and high abundance of Na make NIBs as a viable option for large-scale electrical energy storage applications.1, 5 Among various batteries, solid-state batteries (SSBs) employing solid electrolytes (SEs) are more favorable for their excellent safety, durability, non-leakage, non-volatility, separator free design, and adaptability to temperature changes.6 SEs are stable over a wider potential window as compared to the liquid organic electrolytes, which makes them particularly useful for electrodes possessing high redox potentials.7-8 However, the poor ionic conductivity and high interfacial resistance between the SE and electrodes have severally limited the development of SSBs.
A wide array of materials including glass-based electrolytes (Na3PS4, Na2Se-Ga2Se3-GeSe2), β/β″aluminas and NASICON (Na Super-Ionic Conductor)-type ceramic electrolytes (Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12, Na3+xSc2SixP3−xO12) have been proposed as SEs for solid-state NIBs.9-15 NASICON-type ceramics, Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (NZSP), firstly proposed by Hong and Goodenough in 1976, are relatively cheap and easy to synthesize possessing ionic conductivity of around 0.4 mS.cm-1 at room temperature (25 °C).14-15 In spite of the favourable open 3D framework type structure, the ionic conductivity of NASICON-based SEs is far behind the ionic conductivity of organic electrolytes. For comparison, one molar solution of NaClO4 in ethylene carbonate renders a conductivity of 10 mS/cm, which is 25 times higher than that of NZSP compound at room temperature.8 Thus, the NASICON compounds require a significant improvement in the ionic conductivity to be used as a durable and sustainable electrolyte in NIBs.
The structure of NASICON materials can be seen as a three-dimensional arrangement of ZrO6 octahedra linked to (Si/P)O4 tetrahedra by corner shared oxygen ions. The NZSP compound with a general formula of Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12 crystallizes in rhombohedral structure (space group 3R C ), except in the range of 1.8 ≤ x ≤ 2.2, where a monoclinic distortion (space group c C / 2 ) exists at room temperature (RT).14 The conduction happens by the migration of Na-ions located in the interstitial sites, through the triangular bottlenecks formed by oxygen-ions. The conductivity of NZSP can be enhanced by (a) increasing the mobile charge carrier concentration, and/or (b) expanding the crystal lattice to facilitate a free pathway for charge migration. Partial substitution of Zr4+ by cations with larger size and lower charge valence is expected to expand the crystal lattice in addition to accommodating excess Na inside the crystal lattice. Both of these phenomena accelerate the Na-ion migration in NZSP,resulting in an enhancement in the ionic conductivity. Though NZSP can accommodate a maximum of 4 Na at./f.u., Na-ion concentration of ~3.3 at./f.u. has been observed to be an optimal value for achieving high ionic conductivity.16 Na-ion concentration beyond 3.3 at./f.u. lowers the number of available vacant sites needed for Na-ion migration and therefore decreases the ionic conductivity. Following which we have kept the Na-ion concentration at 3.33 at./f.u. in our compounds.
Furthermore, the synthesis of dense polycrystalline samples of NZSP demands high-temperature treatments causing the formation of monoclinic (m) ZrO2 rich grain boundaries owing to the partial evaporation of Na and P elements. The impurity of m-ZrO2 inhibits the Na-ion migration and thereby reducing the total ionic conductivity.17 Various efforts have been devoted to inhibit the m-ZrO2 formation and to improve the ionic conductivity of NZSP. A careful selection of Na-excess amount during the synthesis has been shown to produce m-ZrO2 free NZSP.18-19 Narayanan et al.19 suppressed the formation of m-ZrO2 by using 10 wt.% of excess NaNO3 precursor and improved the conductivity of NZSP to 1.13 mS.cm-1 at 20 °C. Sol-gel route, which is proven to be a successful technique for ceramic powders, produces very fine (nanometre size) and reactive particles. Relatively lower calcination and sintering temperatures required for sol-gel route synthesized powders prohibit the Na and P losses and eliminate the formation of m-ZrO2 phase. However, the sol-gel route utilizing nitrate salts is quite expensive as compared to the conventional solid-state reaction for the ceramic powder synthesis.
In the present work, the conventional solid-state reaction (SSR) route suitable for large-scale synthesis, was adopted to prepare various NZSP compounds. Zirconia precursors possessing cubic (c)-phase (instead of m-phase) are used to suppress the formation of m-ZrO2 impurity phase, which is known to adversely affect the ionic conductivity. Sc3+ is chosen as a substitution element for Zr4+ in NZSP and Yb3+ as a co-dopant at the place of Sc3+. Because of the low charge valence, and nearly same ionic size of Sc3+ ( 3 ,VI Scr  = 0.745 Å) and Zr4+ ( 4 ,VI Zrr  = 0.72 Å) 20, the partial substitution of Zr4+ by Sc3+ is expected to generate positive charge deficiency without causing much distortion in the crystal structure. Moreover, this positive charge deficiency is compensated by excess Na-ions inside the unit-cell leading to an increase in the availability of mobile Na-ions, which may improve the ionic conductivity of NZSP.7 A very small isovalent co-doping of relatively larger Yb3+ at the place of Sc3+ has been done to examine the effect of the crystal lattice expansion on the ion
ic conductivity. It is anticipated that the doping of Sc3+ enhances the conductivity by increasing the number of mobile charge carriers (Na-ions) and the co-doping of Yb3+ is expected to further improve the conductivity by expanding the crystal lattice and the triangular bottleneck.16, 21 The obtained powder and pellet samples have been characterized for crystallographic, microstructural and electrical properties, and the results have been analyzed and discussed. This study provides a cost-effective, efficient and viable SSR route for synthesizing m-ZrO2 free NZSP compounds with enhanced conductivity.
by Sc3+ is expected to generate positive charge deficiency without causing much distortion in the crystal structure. Moreover, this positive charge deficiency is compensated by excess Na-ions inside the unit-cell leading to an increase in the availability of mobile Na-ions, which may improve the ionic conductivity of NZSP.7 A very small isovalent co-doping of relatively larger Yb3+ ( 3 ,VI Ybr  = 0.868 Å) at the place of Sc3+ has been done to examine the effect of the crystal lattice expansion on the ionic conductivity. It is anticipated that the doping of Sc3+ enhances the conductivity by increasing the number of mobile charge carriers (Na-ions) and the co-doping of Yb3+ is expected to further improve the conductivity by expanding the crystal lattice and the triangular bottleneck.16, 21 The obtained powder and pellet samples have been characterized for crystallographic, microstructural and electrical properties, and the results have been analyzed and discussed. This study provides a cost-effective, efficient and viable SSR route for synthesizing m-ZrO2 free NZSP compounds with enhanced conductivity. 
Polycrystalline bulk samples of NASICON framework based compounds with a stoichiometry of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (NZSP), Na3.33Zr1.67Sc0.33Si2PO12 (Sc-NZSP) and Na3.33Zr1.67Sc0.29Yb0.04Si2PO12 (YbSc-NZSP) were synthesized via conventional solid-state reaction and pressureless sintering methods. The NZSP sample was prepared by mixing stoichiometric amounts of m-ZrO2 (99% purity) supplied from Samics Research Materials Pvt. Ltd., India, and SiO2 (99.95% purity), Na2CO3 (99.5% purity), and NH4H2PO4 (98% purity) supplied from Alfa Aesar, USA. However, instead of m-ZrO2, cubic-phase containing 9Sc2O3-91ZrO2 (9ScSZ) and 1Yb2O3-8Sc2O3-91ZrO2 (1Yb8ScSZ) compositions were used as the precursor materials to fabricate samples of Sc-NZSP and YbSc-NZSP, respectively. The 9ScSZ and 1Yb8ScSZ powders were prepared by mixing stoichiometric amounts of Sc2O3 (99.9 % purity, Alfa Aesar, USA), Yb2O3 (99.9 % purity, Alfa Aesar, USA) and m-ZrO2 as described elsewhere.22 To synthesize bare and substituted NZSP compounds, the starting raw materials were ball-milled in ethanol with 1-2 drops of ammonium polyacrylate (dispersant) for 24 h using the zirconia ball media. The obtained ceramic slurries were then dried at 120°C overnight in air, and the agglomerates formed after drying were ground using agate mortar and pestle. This was followed by passing the powder through a sieve with the aperture opening of 90 μm to obtain finesized particles. The finely mixed precursors were then calcined at 1100 °C in air atmosphere for 10 h. Two-step calcination was performed with an intermediate grinding to ensure a homogeneous phase formation. The calcined powders were again ball-milled, dried and sieved. The milled powders mixed with 1 wt.% polyvinyl alcohol (binder) were uniaxially pressed in cylindrical steel die of 8 mm diameter to form disk-shaped pellets with the thickness of 2-3 mm. These pellets were subsequently cold isostatically pressed at 300 MPa for 5 min to achieve a uniform density. The green pellets were then sintered at 1250 °C for 5 h in air atmosphere. A thin green pellet (with thickness ~0.3 mm) of the same composition was also placed under the actual pellets as a buffer to prevent any crack formation in the actual pellets during the sintering process. The temperature was kept at 500 °C for 2 h during the heating cycle of sintering to ensure a complete binder burn out.
X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of powders obtained through crushing sintered pellets were recorded at room temperature using a PANalytical X’Pert Powder Diffractometer (Malvern Panalytical Ltd., UK) with Cu-Kα incident radiation in the 2θ range of 10 to 70° and the step size of 0.01°. Relative bulk density of the sintered pellets was determined by the Archimedes immersion method using acetone at room temperature. The best estimate of lattice parameters and the quantitative phase analysis of the samples were performed by the Pawley and Rietveld refinement method using the X’Pert High Score Plus program (Malvern Panalytical Ltd., UK). The microstructure of the samples was analysed by a Field Emission Secondary Electron Microscopy (FESEM, FEI Nova NanoSem-450) with secondary electron (SE) detectors at an acceleration voltage of 20 kV. For the conductivity measurement, the sintered disk-shaped pellets were polished and sputtered coated on both sides with Au, which will serve as an electrode. Impedance spectra (IS) of the samples was measured using the Z-plot software (Scribner Associates Inc., USA) interfaced with frequency response analyser (Solartron 1260 A, UK), over the frequency range from 10 MHz to 1 Hz and an applied amplitude of 50 mV. A furnace equipped with a temperature controller and two thermocouples (one close to the heating element and other next to the sample) was used for the hightemperature impedance data acquisition. The impedance spectrum was also recorded at 0 °C by placing the sample with the specimen holder in an ice-cold water bath. Special care was taken by properly protecting the specimens to absorb any moisture while keeping inside the water bath. The sample with specimen holder was placed inside the evacuated plastic container containing silica gel beads which were used to absorb any remaining moisture. A typical impedance spectrum of an electroded sample at 0 °C consists of three arcs in which the arc present at high (> 1.5 MHz), intermediate (1.5 MHz-11 kHz) and low-frequency range (< 11 kHz) correspond to the intra-grain polarization, grain boundary polarization and electrode polarization, respectively. However, only the grain boundary polarization represents a complete depressed semicircle at 0 °C. The resistance offered by grains and grain boundaries were obtained by fitting the impedance spectrum with an analog electric equivalent circuit having three parallel pairs of resistor-constant phase element connected in series. An inductor L was added in series in the equivalent circuit to account for the inductance arising from the experimental set-up. At higher temperatures (>20 °C), it is not possible to capture a complete grain boundary arc primarily because of the high conductivity of the sample. As a result, the resistances present inside the grains and across the grain boundaries cannot be isolated in these temperatures. The total resistance offered by the polycrystalline sample was then calculated from the high-frequency intercept of the electrode polarization arc with the Z/-axis.
XRD patterns taken on powders obtained through crushing the sintered pellets of NZSP, Sc-NZSP and YbSc-NZSP are shown in Figure 1. The diffraction patterns of all three samples show the characteristic peaks of the NASICON structure. A trace amount of m-ZrO2 with XRD peaks [ 11-1 ] and [111] can be seen in the diffraction pattern of the NZSP sample, while the Sc-NZSP and YbScNZSP samples depict a pure NASICON structure without any detectable m-ZrO2 peaks. The formation of m-ZrO2 impurity is possible owing to the loss of volatile Na and P elements at high temperature during the sintering process.17, 19 Importantly, no diffraction peaks of the m-ZrO2 impurity can be seen in the XRD patterns of the Sc-NZSP and YbSc-NZSP samples. It is clear that replacing the m-ZrO2 precursor with the c-ZrO2 in the form of 9ScSZ and 1Yb8ScSZ leads to the elimination of m-ZrO2 impurity phase in bulk sintered samples. The c-ZrO2 is thought to play a significant role in attaining the m-ZrO2 free Sc-NZSP and YbSc-NZSP samples. It appears that the dissolved Sc3+ cations in ZrO2 prevent the formation of m-ZrO2 at high temperatures as they act a stabilizer for the c-ZrO2 phase. Here, the absence of m-ZrO2 in Sc-NZSP and YbSc-NZSP specimens underlines the advantageous role of c-ZrO2 in preventing the formation of m-ZrO2.
Rietveld refinement of the XRD patterns was performed to determine the unit cell lattice parameters and the phase fraction of rhombohedral (space group C R3 , #167) and monoclinic (space group c C / 2 , #15) phases. The basic crystal structure data for rhombohedral and monoclinic phases were adopted from the standard powder diffraction files PDF#01-078-1237 and PDF#01-073-4080, respectively, (ICDD 2018). The refinement results (with a goodness of fit close to 2) of various samples are shown in Table 1. The bare NZSP turns out to have a monoclinic structure with the lattice parameters of a = 15.645 Å, b = 9.049 Å and c = 9.217 Å, and the lattice volume of 1085.50 Å3. These values of lattice parameters are in agreement with those reported by Ma et al.7, Naqash et al.18 and Narayanan et al.19. The substitution of 16.5 at.% Zr4+ by Sc3+ resulted in the partial phase transformation from the monoclinic to rhombohedral phase. The distinction of monoclinic and rhombohedral phases is a bit difficult as most of the XRD peaks of these phases are very close to each other and therefore overlap. Nevertheless, a distinction can be visualized through the XRD pattern in the 2θ range of 19-20○ where the monoclinic phase possesses four diffraction peaks, whereas the rhombohedral phase shows only two diffraction peaks. A selected region of the XRD pattern shown in Figure 1b depicts that all the diffraction peaks in NZSP coincide with that of the monoclinic phase. The left-peak in Sc-NZSP and YbSc-NZSP at 19.20○ broadens and shift towards higher 2θ angle as compared to that of NZSP, indicating the contribution of both monoclinic and rhombohedral phase in Sc-NZSP and YbSc-NZSP (Figure 1b). This agrees well with the phase fractions obtained from Rietveld refinement (see Table I). Although co-doping of Yb3+ in Sc-NZSP does not produce any significant change in the relative amount of monoclinic and rhombohedral phases, a slight increase in the lattice parameters is observed in YbSc-NZSP when compared to that in Sc-NZSP sample. It has been reported that the Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12 compound exists in the rhombohedral structure at room temperature except in compositions when x is greater than 1.8 and less than 2.2. Within this range of x, the monoclinic distortion exists in the crystal structure. In the present case, the bare NZSP compound with x = 2.0, possesses a monoclinic structure consistent with the previous studies.7 Interestingly, this monoclinic phase partially transforms to the rhombohedral phase at room temperature on Sc3+ substitution for Zr4+. As the difference in the ionic radii of Sc3+ and Zr4+ is only minute (0.025 Å), this transformation can be primarily attributed to the increase in Na+-ion concentration caused by Sc3+ doping.
It can be seen in Table 1, that the lattice volume of monoclinic NZSP decreases from 1085.50 Å3 to 1078 Å3 after Sc3+ substitution, in spite of the slightly larger ionic size of dopant Sc3+ ( 3 ,ScVIr = 0.745 Å) as compared to that of host Zr4+.20 A similar lattice contraction after Sc3+ doping has also been experimentally observed by Ma et al.7, in which case, the lattice volume of the monoclinic phase decreased from 1087 Å3 for bare NZSP to 1079 Å3 after substitution of 20 at.% of Zr4+ by Sc3+. In principle, an expansion of lattice is expected after Sc3+ doping because of the increase in the Na-ion concentration. The work reported by Hong 14 and Tkachev et al.23 indicate that the average bond length of Sc-O (2.081 Å) in Na3Sc2(PO4)3 is lower than that of Zr-O (2.099 Å) in the bare NZSP sample. According to Deng et al.24, the smaller ScO6 group as compared to the ZrO6 group could be the possible reason for the observed decrease in the lattice parameter and lattice volume on Sc3+ substitution. A slight increase in the lattice volume of both monoclinic and rhombohedral phases of YbSc-NZSP as compared to that of the Sc-NZSP (see Table I) can be attributed to the larger ionic size of Yb3+ than that of Sc3+.20
Figure 2 shows the secondary electron SEM images of bare NZSP, Sc-NZSP and YbSc-NZSP samples sintered at 1250 °C for 5 h in air atmosphere. The micrographs depict the formation of well-defined cuboid-shaped grains similar to those observed by Naqash et al.18 and Narayana et al.19. There is some dispersion in the grain size ranging from 0.3 µm to 2.0 µm. All the compositions show similar microstructure with an average grain size of 1.8, 1.2 and 1.0 μm obtained by the lineal-intercept method for NZSP, Sc-NZSP and YbSc-NZSP samples, respectively. The grains are of uniform size with well-defined edges in the case of NZSP, whereas Sc-NZSP and YbSc-NZSP samples consist of a relatively large fraction of small-sized grains (~ 0.5 μm). The slight change in the grain size can be attributed to the difference in sintering temperature of the compounds. Very fine particles visible in Figure 2(b) are basically the particles generated during the polishing of the sample which was not properly cleaned. Initially, a few large cracks were distinctly observed in the dense sintered pellets, and the pellets were found stuck to the dense alumina setters during the sintering process. The formation of these cracks can be attributed to the difference in thermal expansion coefficients of the NZSP-type materials and the alumina setters. These cracks were eliminated by placing a thin green pellet of the same composition (as a buffer layer) under the actual pellet during sintering. The same thermal expansion coefficient of the buffer and actual pellet minimises the thermal stress and hence removed these large-sized cracks.
It has been reported that the micron-sized cracks can form in the NZSP-type materials during the cooling-cycle of sintering owing to the high thermal-expansion anisotropy of the crystal lattice.25-26 A significant number of microcracks along and across the grain boundaries have been observed by Naqash et al.18 in bare and substituted NZSP specimens with a relatively large grain size of around 5 µm. Although the samples in the present work were fabricated using SSR method, they possess quite small grains (~1.5 µm) which may reduce the effect of thermal-expansion by absorbing the stresses in the grain boundaries, thereby suppressing the formation of microcracks.7, 27 In the present work, the microcracks were observed along the grain boundaries only in the bare NZSP sample (marked in Figure 2d). No evidence of microcracks was found in the microstructure of both Sc-NZSP and YbScNZSP samples (see Figure 2e for YbSc-NZSP). The use of c-ZrO2 precursor for the synthesis of ScNZSP and YbSc-NZSP samples may play a crucial role in eliminating the impurity phase and producing very thin grain boundaries.
Sodium-ion conductivities of the bare and substituted NZSP were investigated in the temperature range of 0-160 °C using two-point probe ac impedance spectroscopy. Figure 3 shows the Nyquist plot obtained for bare NZSP, Sc-NZSP and YbSc-NZSP at 0 °C. The impedance data have been normalized with thickness and electrode area of the samples for a better comparison of the resistivity of various specimens. The low temperature of 0 °C was chosen instead of room temperature to distinguish the grain and grain boundary contributions to the total resistivity (ρt). The grain (ρg) and grain boundary (ρgb) resistivity were obtained by fitting the impedance spectra with an analog electric equivalent circuit, as shown in Figure 3(c). Here, L is the inductor used to account for the inductance from the measurement leads and the experimental set-up, and Rg, Rgb and Re correspond to the resistance offered by grains, grain boundaries and electrode, respectively. Further, CPEg, CPEgb and CPEe are the constant phase elements related to grain, grain boundary and electrode, respectively. It is important to note that the impedance of CPE can be expressed using two parameters, i.e. Q and α by the following relationship.
The fitted values of the elements which were used in the electrical circuit to model the electrolyte part of the impedance spectra at 0 °C along with a comparison of the total conductivity (σt) at 0 °C and 25 °C of the tested samples are summarized in Table II. The standard error in the fitted values was below 2%, and variation in the conductivity of various samples was in the range of ±0.03 mS.cm1. The capacitance value of ~10-9 F.cm-1 obtained from the depressed semicircle present in the intermediate-frequency range (1.5 MHz-11 kHz) for all the tested compositions supports the assumption that the concerned arc corresponds to the grain-boundary polarization.28 Further, it is evident that both grain and grain boundary resistivities at 0 °C decrease after Sc3+ and Yb3+ doping in NZSP.
Sc3+ substitution leads to an enhancement in the total conductivity from 0.61 mS.cm-1 for bare NZSP sample to 0.96 mS.cm-1 at 25 °C. A slight co-doping of Yb3+ for Sc3+ further increases the total conductivity to 1.62 mS.cm-1 at 25 °C (see Table II). The room temperature conductivity of bare NZSP is slightly higher than the value reported in the study performed by Fuentes et al.29 (~0.41 mS.cm-1) where the samples were prepared using the conventional SSR method. Moreover, the RT conductivity of Sc- NZSP is nearly the same as that of Y-doped NZSP (~1 mS.cm-1) specimens fabricated via SSR method using c-ZrO2. 29 More importantly, we managed to further enhance the ionic conductivity through slight co-doping of Yb3+ for Sc3+ by 68%, reaching a value of 1.62 mS.cm1 using economic and conventional SSR method. A higher conductivity value of ~2.8 mS.cm-1 at RT for NZSP compound with nearly the same substitution of Zr4+ by Sc3+ has been reported by Ma et al.7 However, a solution-assisted solid-state reaction synthesis route using nitrate salts was employed in this study.
The Na-ion conductivity of YbSc-NZSP was also measured by applying Na electrode layer on both sides of the YbSc-NZSP pellet. The electronic contribution, and any other ionic contribution such as O2-, if there is any, to the conductivity is suppressed in this arrangement, and the obtained conductivity would be only from Na-ions. The room-temperature impedance spectrum for Na│YbScNZSP│Na normalized with the dimensions of YbSc-NZSP pellet is shown in Figure 4. Only two arcs were observed in which the minor high-frequency arc (>435 kHz) corresponds to the grain boundary polarization, while the large low-frequency semi-circle (435 kHz-15 Hz) is related to the electrode polarization. The high-frequency intercept of the electrode arc on the real impedance axis represents the total resistance offered by the grains and grain boundaries of YbSc-NZSP sample. The measured impedance data was fitted with the analog equivalent electrical circuit of L- Ro(Re││CPEe), where Ro corresponds to the ohmic resistance offered by the electrolyte and L is the inductor used to account for the inductance from the measurement leads and the experimental set-up. Re and CPEe are the resistor and constant phase element related to the electrode process. In this way,the total conductivity of 1.51 mS.cm-1 is calculated for the YbSc-NZSP specimen at room temperature, which is nearly same as that obtained with Au electrodes. This confirms that the conductivity values which we report for the NZSP, Sc-NZSP and YbSc-NZSP samples using Au as blocking electrodes are mainly because of the Na-ion conduction. The large electrode resistance evident from the low-frequency semi-circle can be attributed to the poor contact between the Na electrode and the solid electrolyte pellet.
Figure 5 shows the Arrhenius plot for the total conductivity of tested samples in the measured temperature range of 0 to 160 °C. The activation energy (Ea) was determined from the gradient of the linear fit of the Arrhenius plot. The bare NZSP sample shows an Ea value of 0.35 eV, which slightly decreases to 0.33 eV after Sc3+ substitution. The co-doping of Yb3+ for Sc3+ does not reveal any significant change in the Ea value (see Table II). The activation energy of 0.35 eV for bare NZSP is nearly the same as that reported by Fuentes et al.
The inferior conductivity of bare NZSP can be primarily attributed to relatively thick grain boundaries, and a significant number of micron-sized cracks present along the grain boundaries. The secondary phase of m-ZrO2 and thick grain boundaries adversely affect the conductivity by blocking the charge transport. Furthermore, the microcracks impose a longer pathway for the ions to migrate, leading to increased resistance and hence a drop in the conductivity. As shown in Figure 2b, the substitution of Sc3+ for Zr4+ in NZSP produces microcrack free microstructure with finer grains and very thin grain boundaries. Additionally, Sc3+ substitution leads to the stabilization of the rhombohedral phase at room temperature, as the rhombohedral phase fraction of around 50 % is obtained for Sc-NZSP and YbSc-NZSP samples (see Table I). These favourable conditions lead to an enhanced ionic conductivity of Sc-NZSP compound as compared to that of the bare NZSP.
Moreover, by partially substituting tetravalent Zr4+ cations with trivalent Sc3+, the concentration of Na-ions increases which is expected to play an essential role in the conductivity enhancement. In the present study, Na-ion concentration has been increased from 3 to 3.33 at./f.u. by replacing 16.5 at.% of Zr4+ with Sc3+ in Sc-NZSP. Though NZSP can accommodate a maximum of 4 Na at./f.u., Na-ion concentration of ~3.3 at./f.u. was earlier reported to be an optimal value for achieving high conductivity.16 Further increasing the Na concentration lowers the amount of vacant sites necessary for Na-ion migration inside the NASICON lattice.
Since the microstructure of Sc-NZSP and YbSc-NZSP compounds seems to be nearly the same and both compounds are free from the impurity phase of m-ZrO2 with similar Na-ion concentration, there can be two possible reasons for the significant conductivity enhancement (from 0.96 mS.cm-1 to 1.62 mS.cm-1 at 25 °C) seen in YbSc-NZSP sample. First, the substitution of Sc3+ with largersized Yb3+ leads to a crystal lattice expansion of NZSP. Although the co-dopant concentration in the present study is low (11.11 at.% of Sc or 1.87 at.% of Zr+Sc), an appreciable change in the lattice parameters has been observed (see Table 1). In case of rhombohedral NASICON, Na-ion migration occurs through hoping from Na(1) to Na(2) site crossing two triangles T1 and T2 acting as bottlenecks for Na-ions.7, 21 The area of these triangles formed by oxygen-ions is the determining factor for Naion conduction through the NASICON crystal. Figure 6 represents the rhombohedral structure obtained from the Rietveld refinement of the XRD data. Area of triangles T1 and T2 were determined to be 5.16 Å2 and 5.37 Å2, respectively for Sc-NZSP, and 5.55 Å2 and 6.00 Å2, respectively for YbScNZSP. The area of triangles calculated in the present work is in accordance with those reported by Ma et al.7 and Losilla et al. 30. Triangle T1 having a smaller area acts as the bottleneck for Na-ion migration. To be more specific, it is the radius of incircle (r) rather than the area of the triangle which determines the ease of Na-ion migration. The radius of the incircle of triangle T1 for YbSc-NZSP (r = 1.00 Å) was distinctly large as compared to that of Sc-NZSP (0.96 Å) indicating an easier migration of the Na-ions in the YbSc-NZSP lattice.
Second, the Yb3+ co-doping may lower the cationic-ordering leading to an increase in the conductivity. In a recent molecular dynamics simulation studies on NZSP by Roy and Kumar 31, it was reported that the Si4+/P5+ cation ordering has a significant influence on Na-ion transport in NZSP. It was demonstrated that the coulombic interactions of Na+ with the framework cations govern the electrostatic potential energy landscape for conduction and are primarily dependent on the cation arrangement in the lattice.32 The self-diffusion coefficient of Na-ions in the framework with the random cation arrangement is found to be much higher than that in the cation framework with the P5+-rich basal plane.31 In the present work, the 9ScSZ compound possessing cubic-phase has been used as a reactive precursor for the synthesis of Sc-NZSP. It is well known that because of a small size mismatch between Sc3+ and Zr4+, the kinetics related to dopant dissolution in the host ZrO2 matrix is rather slow.33 As a result, the ScSZ samples, especially fabricated through the conventional solidstate reaction method, are prone to contain chemical inhomogeneities with the presence of several Sc3+-rich regions. The thermodynamic driving force to redistribute cations is expected to be larger in Yb3+ co-doped sample because of the larger size of Yb3+.33 Thus, it is suspected that the nonuniform mixing of Sc3+ is lowered and the extent of cation ordering is reduced in YbSc-NZSP sample as compared to that in Sc-NZSP. This may lead to possible smoothening of the potential energy landscape for Na-ion and higher conductivity in the co-doped NZSP sample. Here, the cation ordering appears to be an important feature governing the kinetics of Na-ion conduction in Sc-NZSP. Nevertheless, detailed experimental and theoretical investigations are required to fully understand the interplay between the local interactions and ionic migration, which could be implemented to further enhance the ionic conduction in the system.
In summary, the enhancement in the conductivity of NZSP after Sc substitution is caused by the combined influence of higher Na-ion concentration, the formation of rhombohedral phase and the improvement in the microstructure such as thinner grain boundaries, absence of microcracks and suppression of the m-ZrO2 impurity phase. The further increase in the conductivity of YbSc-NZSP due to Yb co-doping maybe is a result of the expanded crystal lattice and the reduced cation ordering30,31.
In general, the solid electrolytes possess a wider electrochemical window as compared to the organic electrolytes which usually decompose for potentials over 4 V. The electrochemical stability of the YbSc-NZSP solid electrolyte was tested by cyclic voltammetry (CV) technique. Figure 7 shows the CV curve of a cell assembly of Na│YbSc-NZSP│Na measured in a potential range of 0-6 V. It is evident from the CV curve that the current density is quite stable near 0 µA.cm-2 in the most desired potential range of 1-6 V. A slight jump in the current density at around 3 V could be associated with a partial oxidation reaction8; nevertheless, the change in current density is very small (~10-7 µA.cm-2). A comparison of the CV of Na│YbSc-NZSP│Na electrolyte with a typical cell Na3V2(PO4)3-cathode│NZSP-electrolyte│Na-anode presented in the inset of Figure 7. A significantly less current density of the YbSc-NZSP electrolyte as compared to that of the Na3V2(PO4)3 cathode demonstrate the suitability of YbSc-NZSP as an electrolyte. Moreover, the solid electrolytes with wider electrochemical stability window are particularly advantageous as they can be utilized with the electrodes possessing higher redox-potential, beneficial for batteries with high energy density.
The use of cubic ZrO2 (in the form of Sc-stabilized ZrO2) phase at the place of monoclinic ZrO2 as a precursor for the powder synthesis eliminated the ZrO2 impurity phase and formed microcracks free thin grain boundaries in NZSP-based compounds. Substitution of tetravalent Zr4+ by trivalent Sc3+ led to an increase in charge carrier (Na-ion) concentration, which resulted in an enhanced total conductivity of Sc-NZSP (σt ≈ 1 mS.cm-1) compound as compared to that of bare NZSP (σt ≈ 0.6 mS.cm-1). After substitution of 11.11 at.% Yb for Sc, the total conductivity value increased drastically to 1.62 mS.cm-1 which is >2.5 times higher than that of bare NZSP at RT. The positive outcomes obtained from the approach utilized in the present work opens up prospects of further designing the strategies to engineer the structure and to raise the conductivity of NZSP for the highperformance electrolyte in solid-state NIBs.