Potentiometric CO2 sensors were fabricated usinga NASICON (Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12) thick film and auxiliarylayers.
The powder of a precursor of NASICON with highpurity was synthesized using the sol-gel method.
Using theNASICON paste, an electrolyte was prepared on the aluminasubstrate through screen printing and then sintered at 1000◦Cfor 4 h.
In the present study, as new auxiliary phases, a seriesof Na2CO3-CaCO3 system was deposited on the Pt sensingelectrode.
The electromotive force (EMF) values werefound to be linearly dependent on the logarithm of the CO2concentration in the range of 1000–10000 ppm.
The deviceto which Na2CO3-CaCO3 (1:2) was attached showed goodsensing properties at low temperatures.
There has been an increasing need in various fields to monitorand controlCO2 concentration.
TheCO2 emission in ambientair is traditionally determined using the titration technique ina basic solution, infrared adsorption spectroscopy, or thermalconductivity measurement.
These methods are not suitablefor the development of an inexpensive portable setup.
Fromthis point of view, gas sensors allow work in real time andappear to be good alternative analytical instruments.
Most researches concerning the use of NASICON asactive element for gas sensors have been focused on theNa1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 formula, in the composition range of 1.8 < x < 2.4, because in this range, which conductivityshows the largest value .
AcommercialNASICON witha nominal-composition Na3Zr2Si2PO12 has been investigatedas a CO2 electrochemical sensor .
CO2 sensing properties can be upgraded with auxiliaryphases in sensing electrodes, which are binary carbonatesystems such as Na2CO3-BaCO3 and Li2CO3-BaCO3.
The binary systems bring about several advantages such asbetter long-term stability, quick response time, and resistanceto water vapor interruption .
However, studies of Na2CO3-CaCO3 auxiliary phase are not to be performed upto now.
In this paper, the material of NASICON was synthesizedusing the sol-gel method so that a dense and homogeneouselectrolyte could be prepared.
For the products, X-ray diffractionanalysis was performed, and the microstructure of thefilms was observed using a field emission scanning electronmicroscopy (FESEM) to find out the optimum sinteringtemperature of NASICON.
According to the results of thesemethods, attempts to improve the sensor properties by modifyingthe sensing electrode material were performed anddevices that were based on a series of new Na2CO3-CaCO3system were systematically investigated for CO2 sensingcharacteristics.
The NASICON powder was prepared using the sol-gelmethod, starting from the solutions of ZrO(NO3)2·8H2O,NH4H2PO4, and Na2SiO3·9H2O.
The solutions were mixedtogether to form a sol, which was further dehydrated at 80◦Cto form a gel.
The gel was then dried at 120◦C for 8 h to forma fine dry powder, which was then ground and calcined at750◦C for 1 h to eliminate the organic remains.
Afterwards,the calcined material was reground.
The planar sensor design requires the electrolyte to bescreen-printed onto the substrate.
The starting material inthick-film technology is the so-called paste.
The paste wasmade by mixing 20 g of NASICON powder, 15 g of α-terpineol, 8 g of butoxyethoxy ethyl acetate, 4 g of polyethyleneglycol, and 3 g of polyvinyl butylene.
Commerciallyavailable alumina tiles with 50 × 50 mm2 and 0.5 mmin thickness were chosen as the substrate materials.
Eachtile was laser-scribed to allow several individual sensorsto be printed on one substrate.
The NASICON layer wasscreen-printed from a paste.
The Pt electrodes were alsoscreen-printed on the designated regions before and afterthe deposition of the NASICON layer.
The assembly wassintered at 900, 1000 and 1100◦C for 4 h in air, respectively.
After this, a series of auxiliary phases (Na2CO3-CaCO3) wasscreen-printed on the Pt sensing electrode.
The schematic diagramof the sensors is shown in Fig.1. 
To control the operatingtemperatures, a Pt heater was formed on the rear side ofthe alumina substrate by printing the Pt paste.
Pt wires wereused as lead wires and were attached using a silver paste.
Gas-sensing properties were measured in a conventionalgas-flow apparatus by changing the mixing ratio betweenthe parent gas (4% CO2 in an N2 balance) and dry syntheticair.
The operating temperature was controlled by monitoringthe applied voltage and current using the power supply.
Thesensors were exposed to the flow (100 cm3/min) of the requiredsample gases.
The gas mixtures of CO2/air with theCO2 concentration varied from 1000–10000 ppm.
The solid electrolyte thick films were characterized through an FESEM and using an X-ray diffractometer.
The electromotiveforce of the sensors was measured using a voltmeter.
It is important to know the optimum sintering temperature tocrystallize theNASICONwithout a secondary phase.
As seenfrom the FESEM images in Fig.2, the film that was sinteredat 900◦C had a very porous microstructure.
Its densificationwas improved when it was sintered at 1000◦C and 1100◦C.
The porosity of theNASICONmaterialswas too high to guaranteea sensing performance that was adequate for practicalapplications.
That is, the properties of NASICON are suitablefor use in electrochemical devices, provided the ceramicis dense .
From the XRD analysis shown in Fig.3, the resultingmaterials that were sintered at 900◦C, 1000◦C, and 1100◦Cfor 4 h, respectively, were already converted into NASICON.
Compared with the results of the sample sintered at 900 ◦C, the crystallization of the samples sintered at 1000 and1100 ◦C was obviously better.
The experimental results indicatedthat the co-existing ZrO2 phase could be observed whenthe sintering temperature was increased to 1100◦C.
Avoidingtraces of the tetragonal ZrO2, which was the most importantsecond phase that easily appeared in the synthesized NASICON,is a key factor in synthesizing the NASICON phasebecause the additional phase decreases the ion conductivityof NASICON at a low operating temperature.
Throughout this experiment, theNASICON thick film thatwas sintered at 1000◦C was used for the CO2 gas sensor.
The findings of the experiment are consistent with the experimentalresults reported by Shimizu et al.and Miyachi et al..
Four types of sensors were fabricated from NASICON asa solid electrolyte.
A series of Na2CO3-CaCO3 mixtures atthe molar ratio range of 1:0–1:2 was attached to the sensingelectrode.
Figure 4 shows the EMF response to CO2 as afunction of the CO2 concentration at various temperatures.
The EMF variation for each sensor at 470◦C agreed wellwith the theoretical value of 74.0 mV/decade, based on atwo-electron electrochemical reaction.
As the temperaturedecreased, however, the slope tended to deviate from theideal.
Quite noticeably, the deviation could be suppressedvery effectively with Na2CO3-CaCO3 (1:2), which allowed50.2 mV/decade to be kept at temperatures as low as approximately400◦C.
An increase in the amount of CaCO3 at theauxiliary phase is fairly effective for keeping the theoreticalvalue at lower temperatures, whereas an adverse effect occurredwhen the CaCO3 content was insufficient.
The mechanismbehind such improvements is not yet well understood,though.
The sensors of this type possess a hetero-junctionbetween the electrolyte and the auxiliary phase.
It seems thatthe junction should play an important role in CO2 sensingperformance .
It requires further research.
Figure 5 shows the response time of the sensor to whichNa2CO3-CaCO3 (1:2) was attached to determine the CO2concentration.
The response times for 90% saturation wereas short as 12 sec at 420◦C.
A CO2 sensor with an internal heater was fabricated usinga NASICON thick film prepared using the sol-gel method.
The properties of the NASICON thick film were largely dependent on the sintering conditions because of the crystallizationand densification of NASICON.
The optimum sinteringtemperature of NASICON was 1000◦C, which wasdetermined through FESEM and XRD analysis.
The deviceto which Na2CO3-CaCO3 (1:2) was attached showed fairlygood sensing properties at low temperatures.
The responsetime was less than 12 sec at 420◦C.
