The catalytic activity of copper deposited onto a NASICON of composition NaZr2(PO4)3in thedehydration and dehydrogenation of butanol-2 and the acidity of the Cu/NaZr2(PO4)3surface were determinedspectrokinetically by monitoring the formation of dyes by indicator reactions.
Several types of copper-containingacidic sites were identified.
It was demonstrated that the deposition of cooper onto the NASICON surfacemakes it possible to synthesize stable and selective catalysts for butanol-2 dehydrogenation.
Superionic conductors (SICs) with a high conductivityin sodium and lithium ions, NASICON and LISICON,respectively, represent a new class of catalysts,which have attracted considerable attention in recentyears.
The crystalline structure of these compounds hasnanosized conduction channels.
Variation of the compositionof the solid electrolyte without changing itsstructure, through partial replacement of the conductioncations and the cations of the anionic frameworkmakes it possible to vary the electrophysical properties of such systems and their catalytic activity andselectivity .
In complex orthophosphateswere proposed as catalysts of transformations of C1–C4aliphatic alcohols.
The activity of NASICON in dehydrogenationand dehydration of butanol-2 was testedusing sodium–copper–zirconium phosphates as anexample .
The authors of [8] studied how the partial substitutionof copper for sodium in NaZr2(PO4)3(to obtainNa1 – 2xCuxZr2(PO4)3;x= 0, 0.15, 0.25, and 0.35) affectsthe catalytic activity of the phosphate in the dehydrogenationand dehydration of butanol-2. It was demonstratedthat the introduction of copper at the stage ofsynthesis of NaZr2(PO4)3substantially enhances theactivity of the phosphate—the binary phosphate catalyzesonly the dehydration of the alcohol, while the ternary(copper-containing) phosphate is capable of catalyzingdehydrogenation of this compound as well, withthe selectivity being dependent on the copper content.
The catalytic properties of phosphate catalysts ofthe transformations of alcohols are largely determinedby the acidity of the surface, an analysis of which isbased on the use of the adsorption of bases and indicatorreactions .
The concentration of electron-acceptor(Lewis) sites on the surface of catalysts and adsorbentscan be measured using the one-electron oxidationofp-phenylenediamine (PPD) with the formation ofsemiquinone cation-radical SH+, as well as a morecomplex process of catalytic formation of a dye, thefirst and limiting stage of which is the formation of SH+.
At the next stage SH+is oxidized to quinonediimine(QDI), which, in turn, interacts with naphthol toform leucobase (LB) and then a blue dye.
The reducer, N-ethyl-N-β-hydroxyethylp-phenyldiamine,is adsorbed on electron-acceptor copper-containingsites of the surface (the oxidized and reducedforms of the sites are denoted as [Ox] and [Red],respectively).
Depositing an active component onto the surface ofoxides aluminosilicates, and phosphates, it is possibleto obtain a highly dispersed phase with a significant catalyticactivity.
Therefore, it was interesting to study theactivity of cooper ions deposited on an NaZr2(PO4)3support in the same amounts as in Na1 – 2xCuxZr2(PO4)3and to compare the acidic and catalytic properties ofthese two systems.
With this objective in view, we determined the activityof copper deposited on Zr2(PO4)3in the dehydroxylationand dehydration of butanol-2 and analyzed theacidity of the Cu/NaZr2(PO4)3surface by using thespectrokinetic measurements of the formation of dyes.
The experiments were performed with four samples:NaZr2(PO4)3(I, reference) and Cu/NaZr2(PO4)3 with copper contents of (II) 0.15, (III) 0.25, and (IV) 0.35atomic fractions with respect to NaZr2(PO4)3.NaZr2(PO4)3 was prepared using the sol-gel method, soaked in CuCl2aqueous solutions of various concentrationsat 25°C for 8 h, dried at 80°C, and thenannealed sequentially at 200, 400, and 650°C for 2 h ateach temperature.
Sample I was soaked in distilledwater and then was thermally treated in the same wayas samplesII–IV.
The acidity of the surface was controlled spectrokineticallyon a Specord UV-VIS spectrophotometer byusing the indicator reactions of oxidation of the PPDderivative to the cation-radical of semiquinone (SH+) andof catalytic formation of a dye.
The concentrations of thetest molecules were measured at the analytical wavelengthsof SH+(λmax= 518 nm) and D (λmax= 617 nm).
The molar absorption coefficients were 0.3×103(SH+)and 1.3×107(D) l/(mol cm).
To obtain SH+, a 5-mgportion of the catalyst was flushed with 4 ml of a2.38 mmol/l PPD solution.
D was formed by adding tothe PPD solution a 2.31 mmol/l solution ofα-naphtholand then a 0.1 mol/l KOH solution so as to attain pH 9.
The catalytic activity of Cu/NaZr2(PO4)3in thedehydrogenation and dehydration of butanol-2 wasdetermined in the temperature range of 120–380°C byusing a flow reactor and a chromatograph equippedwith a flame-ionization detector (the carrier gas washelium passing at a volumetric flow rate of 1.1 l/h).
Helium was saturated with the alcohol (reagent grade)in a bubbler.
The weight of each catalyst sample was30 mg.
The experimental condition and the instrumentationwere the same as in studying the catalytic activityof Na1– 2xCuxZr2(PO4)3.
Acidic properties of the Cu/NaZr2(PO4)3surfacewere characterized by the rates of the formation of thetest dyes.
The time dependences of the optical densityof the SH+and D solutions at the absorption maxima ofsamplesII–IVare displayed in Fig.
1.
 Note that thedyes were not formed on the copper-free sample.
Ascan be seen, the rates of the heterogeneous formation ofthe dyes increase with the copper content, which meansthat the electron-acceptor properties of the surface aregoverned by copper ions.
At the initial stage, the dyes are formed very rapidly;therefore, the intercept at the ordinate characterizes theinitial reaction rateW0.
The kinetic curves for the formation of SH+(Fig.1a)are nonlinear; therefore, the reaction rates were calculatedfor two segments of the curves,W1andW2. Thissuggests that the formation of SH+occurs on theCu/NaZr2(PO4)3sample surface at three types of acidiccopper-containing sites (Cu2+ and/or Cu+), which differin the rate of producing SH+ and in localization (at thesurface or in the micropores of the NaZr2(PO4)3 support).
At the initial stage, the reaction occurs on Cu+-and then Cu2+-containing sites at the external surface; att > 20 min, it proceeds on Cu2+-containing sites in themicropores of the Zr2(PO4)3 support.
The formation of D involves two types of sites, characterizedby the reaction rates W0 and W1. Sites of thethird type were not identified with the use of the indoanilinedye.
In our opinion, this is associated with sterichindrances to the formation and desorption of bulkydye molecules.
The sensitivity of detection of D is higher than thatof SH+, since the molar absorption coefficients of thesespecies are 0.3 × 103 and 5 × 103 l/(mol cm), respectively.
In addition, the characterization of acidic sitesthrough monitoring the optical absorption of SH+ iscomplicated by a significant adsorption of this species.
The reaction rates and their ratios are given in Table 1.
For the formation of SH+, W0 and W1 increase withthe copper content while W2 remains essentiallyunchanged, an observation that can be explained by thefact that the sites determining the value of W2 arelocated in the micropores of the Zr2(PO4)3 sample.
Forreaction (1), the W1/W2 ratio increases with the copper content xCu.
For the formation of the indoaniline dye,the initial rates W0 and W1 increase with xCu but theW0/W1 ratio decreases in the series xCu = 0.150.25 0.35.
Thus, using the spectrokinetic method in conjunctionwith the indicator reactions of formation of dyescatalyzed by electron-acceptor sites, we were able toidentify three types of acidic sites on Cu/NaZr2(PO4)3.
Two types of sites are located at the external surface ofthe sample, while the third one is inside the sample,presumably in micropores.
Kinetic activity of Cu/NaZr2(PO4)3. 
The catalyticactivity for the same NASICONs, samples I–IV.
Todetermine how the nature of the support affects the catalyticactivity, we prepared a catalyst composed of copperdeposited on a SiO2 (Silochrom S-120) support inan amount of 0.15 atomic fractions (sample V).
Sample I, containing no copper, is capable of catalyzingonly the dehydration of butanol-2. 
The effect oftemperature on the specific rate of formation of thebutenes is shown in Fig.2a (curve 1).
The reactionbecomes detectable at 250°C; at 380°C, the extent ofconversion attains 17%.
For the dehydration on the copper-concerning samples, the specific rate of the formationof the butenes decreases by a factor of 2–3, withsample III (0.25 atomic fractions) exhibiting the highestcatalytic activity.
The samples containing deposited copper (II–V)catalyzed the dehydrogenation of butanol-2. 
The temperaturedependences of the specific rate of the formationof methyl ethyl ketone (MEK) are displayed inFig.2b.
Sample II (with the lowest copper content)proved to be most active in catalyzing the formation ofMEK, with the extent of conversion of the alcoholbeing 28% at 380°C.
Note that when repeatedly used,sample II showed an increase in its catalytic activity; atthe same time, the catalytic activity of samples III andIV remained unchanged.
Sample V exhibited the lowestcatalytic activity of all the samples.
A comparison ofcurves 2 and 5 in Fig.2 shows that the NaZr2(PO4)3support markedly enhances the catalytic activity ofcopper-containing sites.
Using the data of Fig.2, we plotted the specific reactionrate–reciprocal temperature (Arrhenius) dependences(Fig.3); the values of effective activation energyare listed in Table 2.
As can be seen from Fig.3, in contrast to the Arrheniusdependence for the reference sample, those for thesamples with a low copper content exhibit kinks at acertain temperature T*, a behavior indicative of either achange in the mechanism of the reaction or a variationin the heat of adsorption in passing through point T.

This can be accounted for by the formation of anotherform of adsorption of butanol-2.
In , analogous kinks in the Arrhenius dependencesof the reaction rates were observed for the formationof MEK on the Na1 – 2xCuxZr2(PO4)3 (x = 0.15,0.25, and 0.35) catalysts.
In contrast to these catalysts,kinks in the dependence lnn–1/T for the dehydration ofbutanol-2 on the Cu/NaZr2(PO4)3 catalysts are observedfor the samples with high copper content.
As can be seen from Table 2 the activation energyfor the dehydration reaction on the Cu/NaZr2(PO4)3samples is 7–12 times higher than that for the reference(Zr2(PO4)3) sample, a feature indicative of the heat ofadsorption on the copper-containing samples beinglower.
That the activation energy for the reaction on theCu/NaSiO2 sample is high, explains why the activity ofthis catalyst is low.
The existence of the two regionswith different activation energies suggests that, at T* =330–340°C, the crystallographic parameters of the initialphosphate change , as does the energy of activationionic conduction.
The activity of the Cu/NaZr2(PO4)3 samples in catalyzingthe formation of MEK is substantially higherthan that of the Na1 – 2xCuxZr2(PO4)3 sample.
It wasassumed that MEK is predominantly formed on Cu+-containing sites, which possess the higher electronacceptorability compared to Cu2+, as can be judged bytheir reduction potentials, 0.52 V for Cu+ Cu0 and0.34 V Cu2+ Cu0.
 It is the ratio of the contents of Cu+- and Cu2+-containing sites that determines theselectivity of the reaction.
As can be seen from Table 1,the highest value of this ratio, [Cu+]/[Cu2+] ≈ W0/W1,was observed for sample II, a result that explains whythe specific rate of the formation of MEK on it is highercompared to that on the other samples.
Table 3 lists the values of the activation energiesof dehydration and dehydrogenation on theNa1 – 2xCuxZr2(PO4)3 samples.
A comparison of Tables 2 and 3 shows that the activationenergies for the dehydration of butanol-2 on theCu/NaZr2(PO4)3 samples are higher than those on thecorresponding Na1 – 2xCuxZr2(PO4)3 samples, with thelargest difference being observed for the samples withthe lowest copper content.
For the copper-free sample,the activation energy for the dehydration of butanol-2with the formation of butenes is lowest of all the samplestested (14 versus 90 kJ/mol); i.e., the hydrothermaltreatment of Zr2(PO4)3 results in a significant increasein its catalytic activity in the dehydration of butanol-2and, at the same time, suppresses its ability to catalyzethe dehydrogenation of this compound.
Such a mode ofactivation can be attributed to an increase in the content of hydroxyl groups, which are expected to participate inthe process of dehydration .
The highest activity incatalyzing the overall reaction is exhibited by sample II,a sample for which the activation energies of both dehydrationand dehydrogenation are substantially higherthan those observed for the rest of the samples.
This canbe explained by the state of copper, in the form of ionsor clusters, in contrast to larger aggregates characteristicof samples with higher copper contents.
Table 4 compares the specific rates of the formationof MEK on the two types of copper-containing catalysts,Cu/NaZr2(PO4)3 and Na1 – 2xCuxZr2(PO4)3, withthe former being more effective in dehydrogenation(MEK formation).
One can see, that, as the copper contentin the Cu/NaZr2(PO4)3 catalyst increases from 0.15to 0.35, the dehydrogenation-to-dehydration rate ratiodecreases from 4.5 to 1.3–1.4. This observation supportsthe conclusion that, at its low concentrations, thesurface copper exists in a special state.
The values ofnMEK/nBUT are close to those of Table 1 where the valuesof W0/W1 also decrease in the series xCu = 0.150.25 0.35.When the Cu/NaZr2(PO4)3 support is replaced bythe SiO2 one, the activity of copper in catalyzing bothdehydrogenation and dehydration decreases sharplyand the activation energy increases.
This can beexplained by the influence of the support on the state ofthe deposited copper.
