Lithium containing sodium superionic conductors of composition LiSbMPO43 M=Al, Cr, andFe were prepared by solid-state method and were characterized by powder x-ray diffraction andinfrared spectroscopy.
All compounds were found to crystallize in rhombohedral lattice with spacegroup R3¯c.
They show characteristic PO4 vibrational bands.
The dc conductivity and ac impedancestudies of all these samples correlate well in terms of activation energy of conduction Ea.
TheCole-Cole plots do not show any spikes on the lower frequency side, indicating negligible electrodeeffects.
The activation energies obtained from the plots of log dc vs 1/T and log 0 vs 1/T areapproximately the same suggesting conducting species to be mobile lithium ions.
The peak width athalf maximum for modulus plots log f vs M is 1.34 decades for LiSbMPO43 M=Al, Cr, andFe, which is close to 1.14 decades observed for a Debye solid.
The heights of M obtained from theexperimental plots are close to that of Mmax=C0/2C, confirming the Debye nature of thesesamples.
Compounds having high Li+ conductivity have attractedmuch attention due to their potential application as solidelectrolyte in solid-state lithium batteries.
 A lithium batteryis the most promising one due to its high energy densityand negative electrochemical potential.
The energy densityof lithium battery is about ten times higher than that of conventionalnickel-cadmium rechargeable battery.
The commerciallyavailable lithium batteries use liquid electrolyte,which is vulnerable for leakage and corrosion.
This problemcan be addressed by using a solid lithium compound havingsuitable conductivity.
Among the different classes of compoundswith reasonable Li+ conductivity, framework phosphatesbased on sodium superionic conductor NASICONstructure have been exploited for various applications.
Theinterest in NASICON type of compounds stems from the followingproperties: large ionic conductivity, high temperaturestability, low thermal expansion behavior, and large surfacearea.
Compounds with the formula LiM2PO43 with M=Ge, Ti, Sn, Zr, and Hf have been extensively studied fortheir ionic conductivity and thermal expansion behavior.
It is observed that the low conductivity of LiM2PO43 canbe improved by a increasing the lithium content and simultaneouslyreplacing tetravalent M with trivalent M ions suchas Al3+, Fe3+, and Cr Refs.3, 17, 18, 20, and 22–25 or bthe addition of salts such as Li3PO4, Li3BO3, etc.
Forexample, the system Li1+xTi2−xAlxPO43 exhibits a high conductivity710−4 S cm−1 at 25 °C and a low activationenergy Ea=0.2–0.3 eV for x=0.3.19,26,31 Gopalakrishnanand co-workers have investigated lithium-ion conduction ofmixed metal NASICON phases of formula LiMVMIIIPO43,where MV=Nb, Ta, and V and MIII=Al, Cr, and Fe.
Among these compositions, TaVMIII members show a higherconductivity than NbVMIII.
Among TaVMIII containing members,the TaAl compound, LiTaAlPO43, which has thesmallest cell volume 1315 Å3 shows highest total ionicbulk plus grain boundary conductivity  =6.510−7 and1.010−2 S cm−1 at 30 and 350 °C, respectively with lowestEa=0.47 eV.
 Aono et al.recently studied ionic conductivityof Li3−2xCr2−xTaxPO43 systems x=0–1.2.
35 Themaximum conductivity of 8.410−6 S cm−1 at 298 K is obtainedfor Li1.4Cr1.2Ta0.8PO43, and the conductivity ofLiCrTaPO43 is enhanced about three to five times by theaddition of the lithium salt due to the improvement of thesinterability.

The systems havingcomposition LiMVMIIIPO43 MV=Sb, MIII=Al, Cr, andFe are not reported so far.

Powder x-ray diffractogramsare recorded using Philips Xpert analytical x-ray diffactometer.
Nickel filtered Cu K radiation of wavelength1.5406 Å is used.
X-ray diffraction XRD patterns are indexedand lattice parameters are calculated.
Theoretical andexperimental densities are calculated using lattice parametersand physical dimensions, respectively.
Infrared spectra arerecorded in the form of KBr pellets using JASCO FT/IR-5300 spectrometer.
The dc conductivities in the temperature range of30–300 °C are measured using a two-probe method on thesintered pellets coated with silver paint.
A conventionalsample holder and Keithley electrometer 610C are used.
Thecomplex impedance of the sample between inert electrodes ismeasured using AutoLab PGSTAT-30 low frequency impedanceanalyzer in the frequency range from 50 Hz to 5 MHz.
The low frequency impedance analyzer is interfaced to acomputer for automated acquisition of the data at desiredfrequency and temperature.
The powder x-ray diffractograms of all these compoundsare shown in Fig.1.
 It is seen from these figures that allcompositions are of single phase with no detectable impurityand all the patterns are found to be isomorphous lithium andsodium analogs of the same NASICON frameworkreported.
Assuming hexagonal lattice, the unit cell parametersare calculated using least squares fit of powderXRD patterns.
The observed and calculated d spacings forLiSbMPO43 M=Al, Fe, and Cr are presented in Table I.
The lattice parameters thus obtained for all the compoundsare presented in Table II, along with the reported lattice parametersof other similar compositions for a comparison.
The IR spectra of LiSbMPO43 M=Al, Fe, and Cr inthe range of 1600–400 cm−1 are shown in Fig.2. 
All thecompounds exhibit strong absorptions below 1500 cm−1.
Generally the vibrational modes of NASICON phases can beassigned to PO4 tetrahedra internal and external modes andto lattice modes of metal octahedra.
Of these, the bands correspondingto PO4 unit are more prominent than metal octahedra.
The assignments for the observed bands have beenmade based on the predictions of factor group analysis.


The band positions and the corresponding assignmentsare given in Table III for all three compounds.
Theabsence of IR bands in the region of 740–730 cm−1 and wellabove 1200 cm−1 proves the absence of pyrophosphateP2O74− impurity and long phosphate chains,respectively.
 Similar types of spectra are obtained forsodium and lithium analogs.
To improve the fitting, the above equation ismodified by including background conductivity not dependableon temperature.
It may be observed that b values are muchsmaller than the value of 0 at least by three orders.
Thisvariation of b may be attributed to the electrical characteristicsof the differentiating ions present in the samples.
As shown in Fig.3, the variation of log vs 1000/T islinear and all the samples exhibit a single slope in the temperatureregion studied indicating the absence of any phasetransition.
Among the systems investigated, LSFP shows thehighest conductivity =3.1910−4 S cm−1 while LSAP shows lowest conductivity =4.3610−5 S cm−1 at350 °C.
At any given temperature, the conductivity of thesesamples follow the order LSFPLSAPLSCP.
The activationenergies of conduction for all compositions are listed inTable IV along with their dc conductivities at 150 and350 °C.
The activation energies fall in the range of0.4–0.7 eV.
These values compare well with the reportedactivation energies of similar high temperature solidelectrolytes.
The impedance data are obtained for all the samples inthe temperature range of 30–300 °C and in the frequencyrange of 102–106 Hz.
The impedance behaviors of LSAP,LSCP, and LSFP are found to be similar and presented below.
The impedance data for LSFP are represented in Cole-Cole plots of real Z and imaginary Z parts of impedanceFig.4.
 The inverse of peak frequency relaxations time  for dipole relaxation as a function of temperature is shownas log   vs 1000/T in Fig.5. The straight-line variation ofthis graph indicates Debye-like behavior50,51 of dipoles responsiblefor the peak in Z versus frequency plots.
The relaxationtime of dipoles is found to decrease with increase inthe temperature.
The calculated activation energy for relaxationis 0.65 eV.
The complex impedance plots does not show semicirclesup to 50 °C, but as the temperature increases the curvesattain greater curvature and become perfect semicircles atand above 100 °C.
All these plots terminate at the originindicating the absence of series resistance in the equivalentcircuit model of the sample.
All the semicircles start on thereal impedance axis at the lowest frequency.
This impedanceat the lowest frequency is found to decrease with increase inthe temperature.
This behavior of Cole-Cole plots is characteristicof conducting nature of the samples, and hence it maybe concluded that there is no series capacitance in theequivalent circuit representation of the sample.
The radius ofthe semicircles is decreasing with increase of temperaturesindicating the decrease in relaxation time of the relaxing speciesas borne out by frequency explicit plots.
Low frequencyintercepts of these semicircles on real axis give the resistanceof the sample at the temperature of the Cole-Cole plots.
Theconductivity of all the samples is calculated from these interceptsand plotted as a function of inverse of temperatureon semilog scale Fig.6.
The activation energy of conductivityfrom these plots for LSFP is 0.53 eV.
This is observedto be very close to the activation energy of relaxation of0.65 eV within the experimental errors Table IV.
It mayalso be mentioned that the variation of activation energy forac conductivity follows the order LSFPLSCPLSAP,which is the same as that observed for dc activation energy,confirming its dependence on the cell volume and the natureof M atom constituting M2PO43 framework.
The frequency variation of conductivity Fig.7 forLSFP shows two slopes at all the temperatures of the presentmeasurements.
The low frequency and low temperature conductivitycould be because of the intrinsic defects and chargeagglomerations present in the sample.
The variation of slopeof conductivity plots at lower frequency is an indication ofthe presence of such defects.
To understand the electrical microstructure of the pelletsand to find out whether the overall pellet resistances representedthe bulk résistance of the grains or a contribution ofgrain boundary and other external parameters such as electrodeeffects, the experimental data are replotted as theimaginary parts of the impedance Z and electric modulusM against log frequency, as shown in Fig.8. 
The data showsingle peak in both Z and M spectra separated by less thanhalf a decade of frequency.
The peak width at half height isabout 1.30 decades, which is close to 1.14 decades expectedfor the Debye peak.
50,51 The height of M peak at varioustemperatures is found to be in the range of 0.0045–0.0054.
The calculated Mvalues from the above equation are found to be very close tothe observed values Table VIa—VIc confirming theDebye-like behavior of the present lithium NASICONS.
SinceZ and the M peaks are almost coincident and there is noevidence of any additional peaks at lower frequencies in the Z spectrum, the observed results represent bulk conductivities.
Similar impedance and modulus spectroscopy data wereobserved for LSAP and LSCP Table VIa—VIc.
The lithium NASICONS of composition LiSbMP3O12 M=Al, Cr, and Fe crystallize in rhombohedral lattice of NASICONframework.
All these samples show characteristic PO4vibrations.
The activation energies obtained from dc conductivitiesare in the range of 0.5–0.7 eV.
The room temperaturedc conductivity dc and dc conductivity obtained from impedance0 agree well.
The samples LSAP, LSCP, andLSFP show similar ac impedance characteristics with negligiblegrain boundary contribution within the frequency rangestudied.
The activation energies of LSFP obtained from ifrequency explicit log	max versus inverse of temperatureand ii Cole-Cole log fmax versus inverse of temperatureplots are of the same order.
All the Cole-Cole plots terminateat the origin indicating the absence of series resistance in theequivalent circuit model of the sample.
The presence of asingle peak in the plots of both log f vs Z and log f vs Mindicates bulk conductivity and absence of any grain boundarycontribution to impedance.
The height, full width at halfmaximum of the Mmax peak, and near coincidence of theMmax and Zmax peaks in these plots suggest the Debye behaviorof these samples.
