Hot-pressed sintering was employed to prepare the sodium super ionic conductor  ceramics and compare with the sample obtained from normal-press sintering.
The phase formation, density, and conductivity of the hot-press sintered and the normal-press sinteredsamples were investigated in detail.
Results show that the density of NASICON ceramics and the degree ofcrystallization can be improved by hot-press process efficiently.
The density of the sample sintered by normalsintering is obviously lower than that sintered by hot press.
XRD analysis indicates all the hot press sinteredsamples contain mainly monoclinic NASICON and no ZrO2 phase was found.
The ionic conductivity ofnormal-press sintered sample is much lower than that of hot-press sintered sample.
When the composition isclose to Na3ZrzSizP012, the dc conductivities of the hot press sintered samples were in the order ofS-cm-l.
The variation of the ac conductivity with frequency in the high frequency region agrees withthe power law feature of o ( w ) cc w”(0 < n < 1).
NASICON stands for well-known family ofsolid electrolytes of sodium superionic conductorNa, + Zr,Si,P, - O,, , which has attractedmore and more attention for the promising usein solid-state electrochemical devices such asgas sensors, ion sensors and Na-S batteries[ 1 -NASICON were reported to possess theskeleton consisting of ZrO6 octahedra, Po4 tetrahedra,and Si04 tetrahedra, and exhibit a fewcrystalline forms depending on temperature andcomposition .
NASICON is usually synthesizedby two methods (the traditional ceramicroute or a sol-gel method) and the microstructureof samples is usually affected by the preparationmethods . 
The ceramic routerequires higher sintering temperatures leading tosegregation of a resistive monoclinic zirconiasecond phase, following Na and P volatilization.
On the contrary, the fine and reactive solgel powders require lower sintering temperaturesand the obtained materials is more conductiveand homogeneous.
In this study, the NASICON powders withthe composition of Nal +  were prepared by sol-gel synthesisand sintered under the pressure of 20 MPa todevelop NASICON ceramics.
The dependenceof density, microstructure, and the electricalconductivity on the composition of the ceramicswas investigated in detail.

TheNASICON ceramics were prepared by sinteringthe obtained NASICON powdels at loo0 “c for 30min under the pressure of 20 MPa.
In addition tothe hot pressed ceramics, a sample with the compositionof Na3Zr2Si2POlzw as sintered at loo0 “cfor 8 h under normal pressure.
The density of sample was measured usingArchimedes method.
The crystalline phase wasanalyzed through X-ray diffraction ( XRD,Rigaku D/max(3C).
The flat surface of the sinteredtablet was prepared by polishing and thegold paste was used as electrodes on both flatsides of the tablet.
The electrical conductivitywas determined from impedance spectroscopymeasurements with an impedance analyzer (Agilent4294) in frequency band 40 - 110 MHzfrom room temperature to 300 T.
The dc conductivitiesat a certain temperature could becalculated from the impedance plots of the obtainedceramics at the corresponding temperature.
Parallel conductance and capacitancewere measured at room temperature in the frequencyrange of 40 - 110 MHz with the impedanceanalyzer.
The densities of the different samples weremeasured and listed in Table 1. 
The normalpresssintered NASICON ceramic ( x = 2) havethe density of 2. 72 g * cm-3, which is muchlower than that of hot-press sintered ceramic(3.07 g'cm - 3 , very close to the ideal value of3.27 g * cm - 3 ) , indicating that the hot pressedsintering is a helpful method to densifj the NASICONceramics.
Fig.1 gives the XRD curves of sintered NASICON( x = 2) ceramics under normal pressureand 20 MPa pressure.
All the peaks correspondto the monoclinic NASICON phase andno ZrOz phase exists in the hot-press ceramic,while some weak peaks belonging to Zr02 phaseare found for the normal-press sample.
TheXRD curves of all the hot-press samples withdifferent composition are shown in Fig.2. 
It is clear that no ZrO, phase exists in all the hotpressceramic.
The crystalline phases in thesamples are almost the same while the crystallizationdegree of the samples is different.
It isbelieved that the crystallization degree of NASICON( x = 2, 2.2) is better than that of ceramic( x = 1.8) because the XRD peaks of ceramics( x = 2, 2.2) are sharper and narrower thanthose of ceramic ( x = 1 .8) , as shown in Fig.2
The complex impedance plots of the normal-press and hot-press NASICON ceramics( x = 2) at 28 “c are given in Fig.3. 
The grainboundary arc is clearly seen and the bulk contributioncan only be estimated from the highfrequency intercept of the grain boundary arc.
The bulk resistances determined from the complexplots are used to calculate the dc conductivityof the ceramics.
The dc conductivity ofhot-press sample is 2.3 x S-cm, whichis obviously higher than that of normal-presssample, ,indicatingthat the hot-press sintering is helpful to improvethe conductivity of the NASIC ceramic.
The dc conductivities of all the hot-presssamples are also listed in Table 2.
When x =1 .9 - 2.1 the conductivities are in the order of1 x S-cm-’, which is a little higher thanthose of sample( x = 1 .8, 2.2) .
The Arrheniusplots of the NASIC ceramics are shown in Fig.3. 
Table 2 lists theactivation energy of different NASIC ceramicsand results show that the activation energy ofthe ceramics falls down slowly as the sinteringtemperature increases.
It is in concordance withthe ion conductivity because of high ion conductivitycorresponding to low activation energy.
Fig.5 gives the log-/log plot of o ( w ) versusw for the hot-press samples with differentcomposition.
It is shown that the frequency dependentconductivity of the hot-pressed samples with different compositions has the similar featuresas follows: ( 1) The conductivity is foundalmost to be frequency independent in low frequenciesregion and it is equal to dc conductivity(in the plateau region) .
(2) In the high frequencyregion, the variation of conductivity withfrequency is observed to have the power law featureexpressed as O(W)KW"(O< n < I ) .
The dc conductivity is closely related tothe crystalline phase, crystallization degree,and the density of ceramics.
All the hot-pressceramics contain only NASICON phase and noZrO, phase was found.
The hot-press sinteredsample has relatively higher density than thenormal-press sintered sample, resulting in thehigher conductivity of the hot-press ceramics .
The dc conductivities of the hot press sinteredsamples ( x = 1.9 - 2. 1 ) were in the order ofS'cm-', a little higher than those of samples( x = 1.8, 2.2).
In the high frequency region,the variation of ac conductivities with frequencyhave the power law feature expressed ascT( W ) K W " ( O < n < 1).
