The sodium (Na) anode suffers severe interfacial resistance and dendrite issues in classic NASICON-type Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (NZSP) electrolyte, resulting in poor electrochemical performance for solid-state Na metal batteries. There has been little success in reduction of interfacial resistance in recent years. The exact mechanism of this resistance has not been fully understood because of little information at the interface. In this work, we effectively address the large interfacial resistance issue and the metal dendrite problem between Na anode and NZSP by introducing TiO2 film as an active interphase. We employ the quasi-in-situ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to uncover the interphase formation mechanism at the Na/TiO2-NZSP electrolyte interface. Our quasi-in-situ XPS results confirm a formation of sodiated-TiO2 interphase upon the stepwise Na evaporation on the surface of NZSP electrolyte. Further investigation by molten Na contact angle measurement, impedance spectroscopy and DFT calculations demonstrates that the sodiated-TiO2 interphase promotes Na ion transport between Na anode and NZSP electrolyte. Moreover, the electrostatic potential formed at NZSP/NaxTiO2 interface can effectively reduce electronic conductivity at the interface and hence prevent the growth of sodium dendrites. A representative paradigm for interphase design is provided to address the interface contact for developing stable solid-state batteries with high performance.
Solid-state batteries enable use of safer alkali metal anodes yet with a substantial increase in energy density. The use of solid electrolytes leads to better safety because a solid ceramic material replaces the volatile and flammable liquid electrolyte used in conventional Li-ion and Na-ion batteries.With the rapid development of the inorganic solid-state electrolytes in these years, the use of various solid electrolytes has achieved ionic conductivities equalling or even surpassing those of conventional liquid counterparts.To date, various kinds of solid-state electrolytes with high ionic conductivity have been discovered, such as garnet-type,NASICON-type,and sulfide-type electrolytes.It is now generally accepted that solidstate batteries have to be coupled with metallic Li/Na anodes to surpass traditional Li-ion cells in energy density. Despite of the improved ionic conductivities of solid electrolytes, the performances of solid-state metallic Li/Na batteries remains poor. This is mainly due to the high resistance at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces.Most of solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) are reduced by alkali metals and form reaction or passivating layer that may degrade rate capability and reduce capacity.Li/Na dendrite is another critical challenge that causes battery failure.Surface coating the SSE or electrodes with an oxide barrier layer has been necessary to reduce interfacial resistance and prevent dendrite formation.
An active/passivating interface can be engineered by introducing selected elements and/or compounds that react spontaneously with Li/Na metals, forming a permeable interphase which can promote wetting between the Li/Na metals and the SSE. Moreover, a stable interphase layer with high ionic conductivity and suitable electronic conductivity will be formed and can be dynamically retained during charge/discharge.Various coating and deposition methods have been developed to improve wettability and/or chemical stability between SSE and Li/Na metals. For instance, introduction of an ultrathin Al2O3 coating on garnet-like Li7La2.75Ca0.25Zr1.75Nb0.25O12 via atomic layer deposition (ALD) dramatically improves the wettability between the garnet-type SSE with metallic Li.Also, Si, Ge and Au film also can effectively improve the wettability and stability between garnet-type SSE with metallic Li.A passivating interface between SSE with Li/Na can be formed by in-situ heating treatment. For example, formation of a passivating layer which is formed by the reaction of the NASICON-type SSE with the Na metal anode would be able to lower interfacial resistance and successfully suppress unwanted Na dendrite formation.Despite of the above-mentioned progress in achieving highly stable performance of the SSE/alkali metal interface, the detailed mechanism about the reaction of the SSE with the alkali metal remains unclear and it requires in-depth investigation. Experimental investigation of interfacial reactions is difficult to realize as the reaction layers are always amorphous products and only take a small volume fraction of the total solid.Dedicated interface analysis has been developed to detect the reaction layers, which is performed by a combination of thin film deposition and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), using one material as substrate and growing the second material stepwise as a thin overlayer in the high vacuum chamber.This approach has been successfully applied to a range of semiconductor materials, and more recently also to battery materials and their interfaces.
The interface problems of a NASICON/alkali-metal contact over many charge-discharge cycles may be overcome by introduction of a stable interface interstitial interlayer that is wetted by anode and SSE and is a fast ion conductor. TiO2 is an appropriate candidate for Na-ion anode material and it also has been identified by first-principles calculations that they are chemically compatible with most electrodes and SSEs.In this study, we introduce an ultrathin TiO2 coating on NASICON-type Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (NZSP) via atomic layer deposition (ALD), which significantly improves the wetting and stability of NZSP, and leads to a dramatic decrease in interfacial impedance. We use XPS and surface science methodologies to analyze the chemical reaction mechanism of solid-solid interfaces. We also present a concise overview of our XPS results on TiO2-NZSP surface with overlayers of Na metal deposition step by step. Combination of experimental and computation studies are employed to investigate the possible mechanism for the excellent effect of the TiO2 coating on the NZSP/Na interfacial improvement. The interphase not only improves the wettability between NZSP and Na metal, but also promotes Na ion transfer. We highlight the critical need to guide interfacial products with ideal properties for both minimized dendrite growth and stable battery operation, suggesting XPS and surface science route as valuable characterization tools.
Materials synthesis. The solid-state electrolyte NZSP was prepared by a solid-state reaction. The starting stoichiometric raw materials, Na2CO3 (99.99%, Aladdin), ZrO2 (AR, Sinopharm), NH4H2PO4 (≥99.99%, Aladdin), SiO2 (AR, Sinopharm), Isopropanol (≥99.9%, Aladdin) were mixed in a mortar for 3 h. 10% excess Na2CO3 was added to compensate for sodium volatilization during hightemperature synthesis. After that, the mixture was subjected to a two-step heat treatment. The evenly mixed powder was heated at 950℃for 4h, with a temperature ramp-up rate of 5℃min-1. The calcined powders were manually ground using a pestle and mortar, followed by further grounding in a planetary ball mill in isopropanol for 7 h. 0.3 g powder every time was pressed using uniaxial pressing at about 7 MPa to form pellets of about 12 mm diameter and 0.9 mm thickness. Next, calcination of the obtained pellets was performed at 1100 ℃for 12 h with a temperature ramp-up rate of 5℃ min-1. Extra mother powders of the same composition were placed both underneath and on the top of the pellets. At last, both sides of prepared the NZSP pellets were polished to remove the contaminations from top and bottom of each pellet to further ensure that the homogeneous and clean parts of the pellets were used for conductivity measurements and other experiments.
The ALD is a very suitable and effective technology for preparation of a well-proportioned and thin nanofilm. The ultrathin TiO2 layer coating on the NZSP surface with a thickness of 10 ± 2 nm was conducted by a Picosun R-200 ALD system.TiCl4 and H2O were used as the precursors for Ti and O, respectively. Typically, for about 10 nm thickness of TiO2 coating, 40 ALD cycles were performed. The average thickness of TiO2 for each ALD cycle was about 0.2 nm. In this experiment, 40 cycles are estimated as 8 nm, which is agreeable with the following measurement from the TEM image.
Characterization. The interface cross-section samples were prepared by using Scios 2 Hivac Helios (United States). Ion beam current was set as 30 kV, 30 nA for cutting the cross-section of the sample. Ion beam current was set as 30 kV, 0.5 nA/0.1 nA was used to fine cut the sample. All surface and interface experiments were performed in the integrated UHV-cluster Darmstadt Integrated System for Battery Research (DAISY-Bat). The XRD patterns of the as-prepared materials (powder and pelltet) were obtained by an X’pert Pro Powder Diffractometer (PANalytical) with Cu Kα radiation in the range of 2 = 10-80˚. Rietveld refinements were performed using GSAS software with the EXPGUI interface to determine the crystallographic data.The system consists of several preparation chambers and an XPS/UPS analyzer (Phi 5000 Versa Probe) for quasi-in-situ analysis of the samples without breaking ultrahigh vacuum conditions. The base pressure of the system was 5×10-9 mbar. Na film was thermally evaporated stepwise out of a sodium dispenser (SAES Getters, Italy) in a separate chamber (see Figure S8) accessible without breaking vacuum conditions. The base pressure of the chamber was 1×10-10 mbar and the pressure during evaporation was 5×10-7 mbar. XPS tests were conducted using monochromatic Al-Ka radiation (1486.6 eV) with a pass energy of 23.5 eV. The background of the core peaks was subtracted using the Shirley method. The peaks were fitted by using a pseudo-Voigt function.The interface characterizations between Na and TiO2-NZSP were performed by a combination Na deposition stepwise with near-surface XPS analysis. The microstructure of the Na-TiO2-NZSP interface was recorded on a field-emission transmission electron microscope (FETEM, JEOL JEM– 2100F, Japan) equipped with a post-column Gatan imaging filter (GIF, Tridium 863, United States) system working at 200 kV. The EELS were conducted in the JEM-2100F TEM. The surface morphologies of bare NZSP and TiO2-NZSP were characterized using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, Hitachi S-4800, Japan).
Assembly of Na/TiO2-NZSP-TiO2/Na symmetric cells. A thin square Na foil (0.6 × 0.6 cm and 0.1 mm thickness) was put on ALD-TiO2coated NZSP pellets in a glovebox filled with ultrahigh-purity Ar, and then the stacked with a pressure in 2032-coin cell. After that, the assembled Na/TiO2-NZSP-TiO2/Na symmetric cells were heated at 80 ℃in the furnace for 1 h to help the initial contact of metal Na on the TiO2-NZSP surface. SEM was performed for the corresponding samples cross-section obtained by breaking with tweezers. All the assembly of Na/TiO2-NZSP-TiO2/Na symmetric cells were prepared with the same pressure.
Electrochemical tests for NZSP, interface resistance assembly, and solid-state battery. EIS measurement was conducted by using a Biologic multi-channel workstation between 1 MHz and 1 Hz at the amplitude of 50 mV. The NZSP pellets (Φ12 mm × 0.8 mm) for the EIS measurement were sparked Au as the blocking electrode. For the Arrhenius plot, the temperature was raised from 25-80 ℃in a drying oven. The electronic conductivity of the NZSP was evaluated by the DC polarization measurement.The NZSP pellet with coating Au as the blocking electrode was prepared for the DC polarization measurement. The constant voltage (1 V) was held for 40 minutes and the electronic conductivity was calculated from the stabilized current and constant voltage by Ohm’s law. Galvanostatic cycling experiments of Na/TiO2-NZSP-TiO2/Na at a current density of 0.1 mA cm-2 was performed by using Landian battery tester (Wuhan, China). The cathode discs were made outside the glovebox. The conventional NVP slurry was thoroughly mixed with Super P, NaTFSI and PVDF at a mass ratio of 60:20:10:10 in NMP (solvent, N-methyl2-pyrrolidone). The slurry was coated on the surface of NZSP, which has been cleaned through a heat treatment. And then, the Al foil was attached to the slurry-NZSP and putted into a vacuum oven and further dried overnight at 90℃. The loading of NVP cathode was 1.4 mg cm-2. 10 μL high-voltage organic liquid electrolyte was added between NVP cathode and NZSP pellet to wet the composite cathode. The added NaTFSI and liquid organic electrolyte can provide effective conducting pathways for Na ions. After that, the cells were packaged in 2032 coin cell cases and were carried out at 25 ℃ by using Landian battery tester (China). The cut voltages were set as 2.03.8 V with a current density of 0.1 C (1 C = 117 mAh g-1).
DFT calculations. We carried out DFT calculations using the Cambridge Serial Total Energy Package. The exchange-correlation energy was described using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof exchangecorrelation density functional (PBE) within the generalized-gradient approximation (GGA).A 400 eV plane-wave kinetic energy cutoff was chosen. The Brillouin zone was sampled with 6×6×6, 3×3×2, 7×7×2, 5×5×2, and 2×2×1 Monkhorst-Pack grids, respectively, for Na, Na3Zr2Si2PO12, NaTiO2, TiO2 bulk and surfaces calculations. The atomic positions were fully relaxed until a maximum energy difference and residual force on atoms, respectively, converged to 10-5 eV and 0.03 eV Å−1. A 20 Å thick vacuum layer was used to avoid the interaction between top and bottom surfaces.
The NZSP was synthesized, sintered and polished into thin solidelectrolyte pellets. Figure 1a shows the uniform surface morphology with an average grain size of 1 μm and reveals a dense morphology of the NZSP pellet. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the assynthesized NZSP shown in Figure 1b matches that of monoclinic phase (C2/c) Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (highscore 01-084-1200), indicating that the NZSP is pure monoclinic phase without impurities. The refinement result of the NZSP (XRD) demonstrates the crystal structure details, as shown in Figure S1 (ESI). Na-ion conductivity of the NZSP was evaluated by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) with gold block electrodes at 25 ℃. As shown in Figure 1c, the semicircle at medium frequencies is associated with the total resistance of the bulk and grain boundaries of the NZSP, and the lowfrequency tail corresponding to the capacitive of the Na-ion blocking gold electrodes. According to the equivalent circuit, the Na-ion conductivity of the NZSP was 5.3×10-4 S/cm at 25 ℃. The NZSP resistance decreases with increasing testing temperature. The Arrhenius relationship between total Na ion conductivity and temperature is plotted in Figure S2 (ESI). The activation energy of the NZSP is 0.31 eV. The electronic conductivity of the as-prepared NZSP is 0.8 × 10-9 S cm-1, as shown in Figure S3 (ESI). After 60-cycles of TiO2 coated NZSP, there is no obvious colour change on the NZSP surface, as shown in the digital photo (Figure 1d). Compared with SEM image of Figure 1a, the different morphology of the top view presented in Figure 1e is caused by the ALD-TiO2 film. With the ALD coating, the ultrathin TiO2 film was conformally coated on the surface of NZSP with no voids, as show in the TEM cross-section image at the interface of TiO2-NZSP (Figure 1f). As shown in Figure 1h, the elemental mappings of Ti and O are evenly distributed at the interfacial region of TiO2/NZSP. These results confirm that the ALDTiO2 film is coated on the NZSP surface uniformly and TiO2/NZSP interface is stable and compatible. Moreover, there are no voids between ALD-TiO2 and NZSP. To quantify the effect of ALD-TiO2 on the improvement of the Na/NZSP interface, wettability tests were performed and evaluated by molten Na metal. As shown in Figure S4 (ESI), the NZSP sample is quite stable toward sodium metal at 100, 150 and 250 ℃.
This indicates that Na metal has stronger bond strength with itself than with the surface of NZSP pellet. The NZSP surface could be comprised of oxygen anions, due to the polarization of the larger-size oxygen anions and a small amount of Na deficiencies. When the liquid Na approaches the NZSP surface, the valence electrons of the metallic Na atoms will interact repulsively with the negative charges of many oxygen anions existed on the NZSP surface. Consequently, the interactions between the metallic Na atoms and the NZSP surface are extremely weak. On the other hand, a dust-color layer on the surface of TiO2-NZSP was formed when the pellet and Na metal were heated at 100 °C for 5 min (Figure S4, ESI). Moreover, molten Na metal is spread out over the surface of the TiO2-NZSP, which indicates that the reaction layer is completely wetted by both of Na and NZSP. The SEM images in Figure 2c shows that the interlayer forms and conformally coats NZSP with no interfacial voids. It clearly demonstrates that the introduction of TiO2 ultrathin film can not only improve the Na wettability of NZSP, but can also enhance the physical interfacial contact between them. The electrochemical stability and whether Na dendrites form at the NZSP interface were then evaluated in Na/TiO2-NZSP-TiO2/Na symmetric cells by EIS and galvanostatic cycling. As shown in Figure 2d, two distinct arcs were obtained from the symmetric cells of Na/NZSP/Na and Na/TiO2NZSP-TiO2/Na. The Nyquist plots of the symmetric cells indicate the ionic transport in SSE (bulk and grain boundaries) and the charge transfer at the electrolyte/electrode interface. The total impedances for the symmetric Na/NZSP/Na and Na/TiO2-NZSP-TiO2/Na (the thickness of the NZSP is 0.8 mm) are 1588 and 134 Ω cm2, respectively. The EIS impedance curves were fitted based on the equivalent circuits shown in Figure S5 (ESI). For intermediate frequencies, the capacitances are calculated as 5.4×10-8 and 1.3×107 F for Na/NZSP/Na and Na/TiO2-NZSP-TiO2/Na, respectively. The intermediate frequency responses and their capacitances confirm the formation of interphase layer between the NZSP and Na metal.36 The interfacial contact resistance of Na/NZSP and Na/TiO2-NZSP are calculated as 1402 and 101 Ω cm2, respectively. The ALD coating significantly decreases the interfacial resistance, which is attributed to the conformal Na/NZSP contact and the formation of an interphase with high Na-ion conductivity. The aging experiment of the Na/TiO2-NZSP-TiO2/Na cells was carried out at room temperature (23 °C). The impedances of Na/TiO2-NZSP-TiO2/Na cells increase with aging for 100 h (Figure S6, ESI), suggesting that the TiO2-NZSP are chemically unstable upon contact with metal Na. The increase in interfacial impedance is not obvious because the interfacial reactions are likely to be diffusion-controlled.
We further observed the interfacial impedance changes during d.c. Na stripping and plating experiments. As shown in Figure 2f, after first few cycles at a constant current density of 0.1 mA cm-2, the interfacial impedance obviously increases, indicating that the new sodiated TiO2 layer is formed. Moreover, the polarization potential is raised to about 100 mV during the initial several cycles, which corresponds to the insertion of Na into TiO2.As the cycle number increases, the interfacial impedance continues to increase and then gradually becomes constant. It can be attributed to the stable interlayer (NaxTiO2) formed in situ between Na metal and NZSP, and its thickness reaches an equilibrium value. As a result, a new interface of NZSP/NaxTiO2/Na is formed. After formation of the stable interphase, the polarization potential decreases and stabilizes to about 40 mV (0.1 mA cm-2). The Na/TiO2-NZSP-TiO2/Na cell delivers stable Na plating-stripping cycles up to 860 h and stabilizes at about 40 mV, indicating that Na dendrite growth is suppressed during long-term cycling. When we increase the current to 0.2 mAcm-2, the Na/TiO2-NZSP-TiO2/Na cell delivers stable Na platingstripping cycles for up to 750 h (Figure S7, ESI). The polarization potential is raised to about 0.2 V during the initial several cycles, which corresponds to 0.84 Na+ per TiO2 based on the Ti4+/Ti3+ redox couple.cm-2, the Na/TiO2-NZSP-TiO2/Na cell delivers stable Na platingstripping cycles for up to 750 h (Figure S7, ESI). The polarization potential is raised to about 0.2 V during the initial several cycles, which corresponds to 0.84 Na+ per TiO2 based on the Ti4+/Ti3+ redox couple.
 To explore the interaction between Na metal and TiO2-NZSP, DFT calculations were also performed. As shown in Figure S8 and Table S1 (ESI), the binding energy of metallic Na on NZSP is calculated as -1.37 eV nm-2 and the binding energy of metallic Na on TiO2-NZSP is calculated as -14.13 eV nm-2. Compared with the bare NZSP, this strong interface binding improves the wetting of metallic Na on the TiO2 coated NZSP, which is consistent with the results of wetting experiment (Figure 2a and 2b). Moreover, the binding energy of Na metal on a sodiate TiO2 layer was further calculated.38 According to the polarization potential (Figures 2f and S7) during the constant current charge and discharge process, the possible interface product is a structure of 0.84 Na+ per TiO2.The possible composition of the sodiated TiO2 layer is most likely close to NaTiO2 as a representative model. The binding energy of Na metal on the NaTiO2 is -15.03 eV nm-2, which is significantly higher than that between Na and the bare NZSP. This strong interface binding improves the wettability of the Na metal on the TiO2-coated NZSP. The results agree well with the notable decrease of interfacial resistance after ultrathin ALD-TiO2 coating.
In order to investigate the possible chemical compositions of the interphase related to the deposition process and study the chemical reactions leading to interphase formation, all the Na deposition experiments were performed in the Darmstadt (Germany) Integrated System for Battery research (Daisy-Bat) that quasi-in-situ analysis of the samples without breaking the vacuum conditions (Figure S9, ESI).Before the Na deposition experiments, surface impurity of contaminated TiO2-NZSP was removed and cleaned by thermal treatment (Ar + O2 at 450 oC for 2 h). After the thermal treatment, the intensity of the C 1s peak was reduced significantly compared with as-prepared TiO2-NZSP sample (Figure S10, ESI). Figure 3a shows a combination of thin film deposition and XPS measurements, using ALD-TiO2 coated NZSP substrate on which the Na film was grown stepwise as a thin overlayer. When the XPS detects the metal Na characteristic peaks, the Na deposition procedure will be terminated. Figure 3b, c and d show the Zr 3d, Ti 2p, and Na 1s core level spectra from a deposition experiment of a Na/TiO2-NZSP interface. The spectra can be fitted with the possible components and the evolution of the different bonding environments during the Na deposition process. It is also clearly seen that Na deposition in correlated changes in the TiO2 and NZSP, indicating reaction between them. The Ti4+ are gradually reduced to a small amount of Ti3+, shown by the chemical shift of EB = 1.1 eV. For >8 min the Ti3+ line intensity increases rapidly and also the reduction to Ti2+ is observed, indicating that Na induced reduction of the TiO2 into suboxides.29 Na intercalation introduces a reduction of Ti4+O2 and form an interphase of NaxTiO2 at the interfacial region.32 Similar changes in the Zr 3d (NZSP) are also illustrated in detail in Figure 3b. The spectra can be fitted with the Zr3+ at low binding energies after 2 min deposition of Na, indicating that the Zr4+ can also be reduced to suboxides. For 16 min deposition, the Zr3+ line intensity increases and further reduction to Zr2+ is observed with a chemical shift of EB = 1.3 eV. Na intercalation in TiO2 induced changes of the electronic structure of the host TiO2. The NaxTiO2 interphase is a good Na-ion conductor and thus provides effective Na-ion pathway. Figure S11 (ESI) also shows the spectra of O 1s, Si 2p and P 2p core levels as obtained by the Na deposition experiments. As shown in Figure S11 (a), one peak is the O 1s emission of the TiO2 host structure, while the new peak formed at about 530.9 eV comes from a chemically shifted component caused by the formation of surface Na oxide species NaxOy. The Si 2p and P 2p spectra show no obvious change during the Na deposition. In Si 2p and P 2p regions, the Si and P in the NZSP bulk phase has a binding energy of 101.4 and 133.5 eV, respectively.40 Additionally, the valence band onset of the pristine TiO2-NZSP here is located at VBM = 2.7 eV, as shown in Figure S12 (ESI). After the metallic Na deposition steps, the binding energy shift of the Ti4+ component (1.41 eV) is not identical to the valence band maximum (0.82 eV), which is due to the formation of NaxTiO2 interphase. Moreover, the newly generated interface properties of NZSP/NaxTiO2 will be discussed as below.
Figure 4a displays a metallic Na deposition process to achieve a conformal interface on the TiO2-NZSP pellet surface. The TEM sample (the as-prepared sample after 32 min deposition of metallic Na) was prepared by mechanical polishing and then ion milling with focused ion beam (FIB). To prevent damage of the Na/NaxTiO2/NZSP composite layer, Pt and carbon were deposited successively on its surface, as shown in Figure S13 (ESI Figure 4b shows the typical TEM image of the interface of NaxTiO2/NZSP after FIB treatment. As shown in Figure 4d, 4e, and 4f, the elemental mappings of O, Ti, and Na overlap, which demonstrate the elemental compositions of the interphase after the Na deposition on the TiO2-NZSP. Figure 4g shows the typical TEM image of NaxTiO2 layer and the Figure 4h demonstrates the corresponding SAED pattern of the NaxTiO2 layer. The SAED of the NaxTiO2 layer was obtained after Na deposition by thermal evaporation method, which is close to polycrystalline anatase diffraction pattern of reflections. However, its crystallinity is much worse than that of anatase TiO2 layer as shown in Figure S14 (ESI). Based on above-mentioned XPS results (Figure 3), interfacial element mapping results and SAED results, we can confirm that Na intercalate into the anatase TiO2 layer and further convert TiO2 into NaxTiO2 after Na deposition experiment.
We also deduce an energy level alignment diagram, providing information based on the electronic structure at the NZSP/NaxTiO2 interface, as shown in Figure 5. Figure 5a shows the evolution of the surface layer by means of the Na 1s components upon stepwise metallic sodium deposition. The valence offset of the NZSP/NaxTiO2 heterogeneous interface is evaluated by the standard procedures of semiconductor interface/surface physics and the calculated procedures are shown in detail in Figure S15-S17 (ESI). Core levels of Zr4+ components show a coordinated shift to lower binding energies, which we interpret as band bending upwards (0.1 eV), as shown in Figure 5b. The Na intercalation into the NZSP near-surface host structure could clarify the changes in the electronic structure and the energy alignment at the interface. The reduction of Zr4+ at the NZSP/NaxTiO2 interface is most likely due to the changes in local electron concentrations. The local electrostatic potential gradient (Figure 5b) formed at the NZSP/NaxTiO2 interface due to the results of effective migration of Na-ions. Moreover, there is no structural change of the NZSP substrate, especially, intermediate products like Zr-oxides could not be detected. The NaxTiO2 interphase with high ionic conductivities not only leads to a uniform interfacial sodium plating/stripping process during cycling17 but also forms a stable interface with electrostatic potential gradient between NaxTiO2 with NZSP which can effectively prevent NZSP from being further reduced during cycling.
The reactivity-guided and formed interphase between Na metal and NZSP solid state electrolyte in this work can potentially enable a range of high-energy-density Na-ion batteries. As shown in Figure 6a, the full cell adopts TiO2-NZSP, Na metal anode, carbon coated Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP)/Super P/NaTFSI composites cathode. The cathode, comprising of carbon-coated NVP, super P, and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF, binder), was made by conventional slurry coating on the NZSP, and then attached to the Al foil. Figure 6b shows the voltage profile of the first cycle at 0.1 C (1 C = 117 mAh g1). Classic plateaus at 3.4 V in charge and at 3.3 V in discharge validate that the working full cell has a small overpotential (0.1 V). In Figure 6c, the initial charge of TiO2-NZSP cell delivers a capacity of 106.3 mAh g-1 (90% theoretical specific capacity of NVP) at 0.1 C with Coulombic efficiency of 62%. The charge capacity is stabilized around 75 mAh g-1 over 60 cycles, which reveals that the ALD TiO2-NZSP electrolyte has a potential feasibility for application in the solid-state battery system. The capacity decay occurs in the initial several cycles mainly because of the complicated byproducts formed at cathode/NZSP interface. After 9 cycles, the cell shows a stable capacity during the galvanostatic charge and discharge processes. The counterpart of NVP/NZSP/Na cell charge/discharge capacity performance at 0.1 C is shown in Figure S18. The initial charge of NVP/NZSP/Na cell delivers a capacity of 42.5 mAh g-1 (only 36% theoretical specific capacity of NVP) at 0.1 C with Coulombic efficiency of 92%. The charge capacity is stabilized around 31 mAh g-1 over 25 cycles. This reveals that the high interface resistance limits the capacity of the cell. The capacity decay occurs after 25 cycles mainly because of the complicated byproducts formed at the cathode/NZSP interface.
We introduce a TiO2 layer to form an active interphase of NaxTiO2, which effectively solves the interfacial issue between Na metal and NZSP. Ultrathin ALD coating of TiO2 dramatically reduces the interfacial resistance from 1402 to 101 Ω cm2. The electrochemical performances of Na metal solid state battery by using TiO2-NZSP electrolyte demonstrate that ALD-TiO2 coating can address the issue of high interfacial resistance and stability of NZSP coupled with Na metal anode. DFT calculations of the interfacial binding energy and TEM characterizations further indicate that the ALD TiO2 coating on NZSP enables a conformal interface between Na and NZSP. XPS measurement and surface science methodology illustrate the interfacial energy alignment for the interface improvement. The NaxTiO2 interphase with high ionic conductivity not only leads to a uniform interfacial sodium plating/stripping process between NZSP with metallic Na during cycling, but also avoids dendrite formation and short-circuit. To conclude, we provide a crucial guideline for interphase design through a controllable reaction and interfacial analysis to develop practically viable solid-state Na metal batteries.