Crystal frameworks that can accommodate awide range of elements, oxidation states, and stoichiometriesare an important component of solid-statechemistry.
These frameworks allow for unique comparisonsof different metal-cation compositions with identicalatomic arrangements.
The mineral Lyonsite, a-Cu3Fe4ACHTUNGTRENUNG(VO4)6, is emerging as the archetypal frameworkstructure for a large class of materials, similar to knownframeworks such as perovskite, garnet, apatite, andspinel.
The new lyonsite-type oxides Li2.82Hf0.795Mo3O12 and Li3.35Ta0.53Mo3O12, in which hafnium and tantalumretain their highest oxidation states, are presented toadvance the concept of the lyonsite structure as anadaptable framework.
Minerals such as perovskite (CaTiO3), garnets (A3B2-ACHTUNGTRENUNG(SiO4)3), apatites (A5ACHTUNGTRENUNG(BO4)3X), and spinel (MgAl2O4) are the archetypal structures for large numbers of materialswith different chemical compositions within each structuretype.
Each has been reviewed extensively.
Oxide classessuch as these can accommodate a wide variety of metal cat-ACHTUNGTRENUNGions while retaining their unique structure, and are wellstudiedfor various properties afforded by this versatility.
Properties can often be tuned or changed by elemental substitution,and materials with the same structural connectivitycan be studied for different purposes.
A lesser known, butubiquitous structure type with similar adaptive propertiestakes its name from the mineral Lyonsite, a-Cu3Fe4ACHTUNGTRENUNG(VO4)6.
High-oxidationstatecations (+5, +6) occupy the two unique tetrahedrallycoordinated B sites.
The structural connectivity of lyonsitetypeoxides is based on an array of pseudohexagonal oxygenatoms, and built up of isolated BO4 tetrahedra linked byAO6 chains, which can be seen in Figure 1. 
The most uniquefeatures of the structure are the hexagonal tunnels that consist of AO6 polyhedra.
Two sides of the hexagonal tunnelare created by zigzag sheets of edge-sharing A-centeredtrigonal prisms, while the remaining four sides are composedof columns of edge-sharing A-centered octahedra.
Isolated BO4 tetrahedra are joined to the inside of the tunnel, andinfinite chains of face shared AO6 octahedra pass throughthe center of these tunnels.

As illustrated in Table 1,the cation charge has almost no effect on the identity of A,with cations of oxidation state +1 through +4 shown tooccupy the six-coordinate positions.
In this concept article, itis shown that Hf4+ and Ta5+ (a pentavalent cation) canoccupy the A-centered AO6 polyhedra.
It appears thatnearly any cation can be used for this position if it is of suitablesize.
However, charge balance must always be maintained,and A is rarely a single type of cation.
Generally, Ais a combination of two cations of different oxidation statesarranged such that the total composition is charge neutral.
The B site is limited to smaller, highly charged ions that areable to form BO4 tetrahedra.
To date, V5+, Mo6+, and W6+have been found to occupy the B site, and it is likely thatsimilarly sized, highly charged cations (As5+, P5+, Si4+, etc.)will also be found to fill thatposition.
A timeline of thelyonsite structure is listed inTable 2. 
The largest percentage,by a wide margin, of theexisting lyonsite-type compoundsare molybdates.
However, most of the lyonsite type molybdates are still only known from their powder X-ray diffraction patterns.
The only known lyonsite-type molybdate with only onecation in the octahedral/trigonal prismatic positions was oneof the first lyonsite compounds discovered: Cu3.85Mo3O12,discovered in 1971.
This is unusual because the A site isusually occupied by a combination of two cations.
However,Cu3.85Mo3O12 requires the presumption of Cu+, and themonovalent cation is consistent with other lyonsite type molybdates.
While one of the A site cations in lyonsite typemolybdates is always monovalent, the remaining cation isquite flexible.

However, cation vacancies can only be toleratedto a certain extent before any crystal framework will collapse,and the best way for lyonsite-type molybdates to havean average charge of +3/2 on the A site is to incorporate amonovalent cation.
a-Cu3Fe4ACHTUNGTRENUNG(VO4)6 was discoveredin 1987, but no reference was made to the relationshipbetween this new mineral and the large family of molybdates.

It is, indeed, quite remarkable that such differentcompositions could retain the same structure.
Nonetheless,the discovery of the mineral suggested that V5+ could beused in place of Mo6+ for the tetrahedral cation.

Additionally,it is possible that the lyonsite structure was notformed because of the off-cation stoichiometric compositionalrange for the lyonsite-type vanadates.
That is, thereare potentially numerous lyonsite-type vanadates thatsimply have not been discovered owing to the off-stoichiometriccation ratios caused by the aforementioned cation vacancies.

Both compositions lie on the Cu3+1.5xFe4xACHTUNGTRENUNG(VO4)6 phase line,suggesting some off-stoichiometric range of existence forthe lyonsite-type compounds and a transition between thetwo structures somewhere along the tie line.
Similarly,Co3Fe4ACHTUNGTRENUNG(VO4)6 has been described as having the b-Cu3Fe4-ACHTUNGTRENUNG(VO4)6 structure type by comparing powder diffraction patterns.
However, Co4Fe3.33ACHTUNGTRENUNG(VO4)6 has the lyonsite structuretype,and again, both compositions lie on theCo3+1.5xFe4xACHTUNGTRENUNG(VO4)6 phase line.
It is certainly possible thatfurther investigations of other A3+1.5xB4-xACHTUNGTRENUNG(VO4)6 compositionalranges will yield similar results.
As suggested above, the Fe7ACHTUNGTRENUNG(PO4)6 structure type representsanother large class of materials, and could itself bethe focus of new solid-state chemistry.
For a short explanationof how various elemental compositions and structuresare related within the Fe7ACHTUNGTRENUNG(PO4)6 structure type, the reader isreferred to reference .
Perhaps one reason why the Fe7-ACHTUNGTRENUNG(PO4)6 structure is preferred at ambient pressure is becausecation vacancies are necessary to form lyonsite-type vanadateswith a stoichiometric A3B4ACHTUNGTRENUNG(VO4)6 formula, but are notnecessary when the Fe7ACHTUNGTRENUNG(PO4)6 structural framework is used.
The special role of cation vacancies will be discussed in thenext section.
Similar to the vanadates, it is likely that manyphosphates and arsenates will form the lyonsite structurewith some combination of pressure and off-stoichiometriccation ratios.

Interestingly, in reporting Mg2.5VWO8, theauthors reported unsuccessful attempts to substitute otherdivalent cations for Mg2+.
Other stoichiometries within theternary Li2O–MOx–WO3 phase system such as LiMACHTUNGTRENUNG(WO4)2(M=Fe, Ga, Sc, In) and Li2MACHTUNGTRENUNG(WO4)2 (M=Co, Ni, Cu)are known, but the Li2M2ACHTUNGTRENUNG(WO4)3 stoichiometry is unknownfor any element other than magnesium.
More research isneeded to understand the relative stability of the lyonsitecrystalline framework for tungsten versus molybdenum.


This relationship issummarized in Table 3. 
The lyonsite structure is remarkably adaptable, in part,because of the ability to incorporate varying amounts ofcation vacancies.
The percent of A site cation vacancies forvarious stoichiometries are listed in Table 2. 
To understandthe typical positioning of the cation vacancies, a more detailedstructural investigation is helpful.
The structure isformed from isolated tetrahedra linked by octahedra andtrigonal prisms that form zigzag sheets and columns, respectively(see Figure 1).
These sheets and columns share cornersand form hexagonal tunnels.
The connectivity of theAO6 polyhedra that form the hexagonal tunnels is depictedin Figure 2. 
The isolated tetrahedra are joined to the innerwall of the hexagonal tunnels, and infinite chains of facesharedoctahedra (see Figure 3) pass through the center ofthe tunnels.
The cation vacancies are localized on these infinitechains of face-shared octahedra, thereby minimizingthe coulombic repulsions associated with the close partitioningof cations within the infinite chain.

Removing an A cation perturbs not only the cation distribution,but also the oxygen framework.
In fully occupiedlyonsite type structures, each oxygen atom is three-coordinate,bonded twice to an AO6-centered cation and once to aBO4-centered cation.
A vacancy on the face-shared octahedralposition decreases the coordination of the oxygenatoms surrounding the vacancy to two, bonded once to anAO6-centered cation and once to a BO4-centered cation.
The under coordinated oxygen atoms can satisfy bond valenceby displacing toward the higher oxidation state transition-metal cation.
For example, in Mg2.5VMoO8, in which the infinite chains of face-shared octahedra are occupied byMg2+ ions, the crystallographic bond lengths of MoObonds surrounding the vacancies are significantly shorterthan the other tetrahedral bond lengths.
In fact, Ramanspectroscopy revealed that higher order bond interactionsare likely formed.
It would be valuable, then, to synthesize structures withhigher oxidation state metal cations occupying the infinitechains of face-shared octahedra to provide a structural comparison.
The higher oxidation state cation should provide astronger binding interaction between itself and the under coordinatedoxygen.
In addition, high-oxidation-state cationsin this position further promote the concept of lyonsite asan adaptable framework structure.

The crystal structure of Li2.82Hf0.795Mo3O12 is identical toother lyonsite-type compounds and consists of two crystallographicallynon-equivalent mixed Li/Hf octahedral sites andone LiO6 trigonal prismatic position surrounded by twocrystallographically non-equivalent isolated MoO4 tetrahedra(see Figure 4).
Chains of both edge-sharing LiO6 trigonalprisms and edge-sharing MO6 octahedra are linked byisolated MoO4 tetrahedra and form pseudohexagonal tunnelsalong the a axis (see Figure 2).
Infinite columns of facesharing M(2)O6 octahedra pass through the center of thetunnels (see Figure 3), with 38.5% of the positions vacantowing to the coulombic repulsions associated with the closepartitioning of face-shared cations.
All oxygen atoms are three-coordinate (discountingcation vacancies), and each are bound to one molybdenum and two hafnium and/or lithium atoms.
M(1)O6 is joined toLi(3)O6 by sharing corners.
Both Mo(1)O4 and Mo(2)O4 tetrahedraare connected to the M(1)O6 octahedra by sharingcorners, while LiO6 prisms share corners with only theMo(2)O4 tetrahedra.
The structure of Li3.35Ta0.53Mo3O12 is shown in Figure 5.
The connectivity is identical to that of Li2.82Hf0.795Mo3O12 and other lyonsite-type materials.
However, a loss of symmetrythat reduces the space group from Pnma to Pmn21can be attributed to the placement of Ta(1) and Li(9) on distinctpositions in the infinite chains of face-shared octahedradown the center of the hexagonal tunnels.
This cation order,coupled with the cation vacancies on the Li(9) position,probably occurs to minimize the coulombic repulsions thatwould be associated with placing pentavalent cations in suchclose proximity (2.5 I).
This is further illustratedin Figure 6.
A similar symmetry reduction (Pnma!Pmn21) patternand doubling of one lattice constant have been observedpreviously for Li2ZrACHTUNGTRENUNG(MoO4)3. 
One might expect similarlycharged Hf4+ to behave like Zr4+ and adopt the Pmn21space group.
However, Li2.82Hf0.795Mo3O12 retains the highersymmetry space group.
Because Li2.82Hf0.795Mo3O12 is in thehigher symmetry space group, there is no crystallographicordering of the face-shared cations and vacancies.
However,the site occupancy suggests that Hf4+ is most likely alternatingpredominately with vacancies.
It appears that the higheroxidation state cations show a tendency to systematicallyorder themselves down the hexagonal tunnels on the facesharedpositions.
The order places either Li+ or cation vacancieson both sides of the high-oxidation-state cations,which serves to reduce the repulsions that would be associatedwith close partitioning of face-shared cations of suchhigh oxidation states.

This may be expected because all of the vacant positions aremissing Li+ ions.
Both the Hf4+ and Ta5+ site occupancyalong the infinite chains of face-shared octahedra is ~50%.
This corresponds to Hf4+ and Ta5+ ions bordered by either& or Li+, as previously discussed.
Therefore, a Li+ vacancywould leave a very high oxidation state metal cation sharingthe under coordinated oxygen with Mo6+.
The under coordinatedoxygen atom does not need to displace toward theMo6+ in order to maintain its bond valence, as is necessarywhen Mg2+ shares the under coordinated oxygen with Mo6+.
The experimental details of synthesis and X-ray crystallographiccharacterization of Li2.82Hf0.795Mo3O12 andLi3.35Ta0.53Mo3O12 are given in the Supporting Information.
Variations in structure within a particular structural familyare not unusual.
For example, SrTiO3 is cubic while CaTiO3 is orthorhombic, but both exhibit the same connectivityidentical with the perovskite structure.
Similar structural distortionsand variations occur within the lyonsite crystallinelattice.
Although the majority of lyonsite-type oxides are inthe orthorhombic space group Pnma, several structures withthe lyonsite-type connectivity are known with lower symmetry.
The orthorhombic crystal class is generally preserved,and subclasses of the Pnma space group are observed.
The origin of the symmetry reduction is understood forLi2ZrACHTUNGTRENUNG(MoO4)3 and Li3.35Ta0.53ACHTUNGTRENUNG(MoO4)3.
 In Li2ZrACHTUNGTRENUNG(MoO4)3, theface-shared octahedral position is ordered with Zr4+ ions alternatingwith cation vacancies, which results in the doublingof one of the lattice constants and the loss of a mirror plane.
Likewise, Ta5+ ions alternate with Li+ ions in Li3.35Ta0.53-ACHTUNGTRENUNG(MoO4)3. In contrast, it is unclear why the distortion to theP212121 space group occurs.
It has been suggested that a distortionof the trigonal prismatic environment causes the lossof symmetry, although the origin of this distortion is unknown.
Adaptable framework structures can have different propertiesbecause of the varying elemental compositions.
To date,the lyonsite structure type has been investigated for twoproperties: ionic conduction and catalysis.
High electricalconductivity was first observed for Li2Cu2ACHTUNGTRENUNG(MoO4)3 in1981,and a significant effort has since been made to investigatethe conductivity of many of the molybdates.
[The lyonsite structure fits the criteria for NASICON ionconductors owing to the arrangement of the isolated(MO4)n polyanion tetrahedra.
A review of various familiesof AxByACHTUNGTRENUNG(MoO4)z molybdate families discusses the ionic conductionof lyonsite type molybdates.
The lyonsite crystal framework constitutes a large family ofmaterials, spanning a wide range of elements, oxidationstates, and cation stoichiometries similar to other importantstructure types such as perovskite, garnet, apatite, andspinel.
The use of cation vacancies and off-cation stoichiometryby lyonsite-type oxides contributes to this remarkablyadaptive structure type.
The crystal structures of the lyonsitetype molybdates Li2.82Hf0.795Mo3O12 and Li3.35Ta0.53Mo3O12have been determined, and are consistent with other knownlyonsite-type phases.
