The La1/3Zr2(PO4)3 NASICON-type compound (S.G.P¯3 - neutron and X-ray diffraction experiments) is investigated by transmissionelectron microscopy (TEM) technique, selected area electron diffraction (SAED) and high-resolution electron microscopy (HREM), inorder to study locally the lanthanum distribution.
An irreversible structural transformation  is observed,without modification of the atomic content and cell size, as soon as the phase is illuminated by the electron beam.
The progressivedisappearance of the spots which do not check the R conditions on the SAED patterns is clearly shown along two zone axis, [001] and[100].
This transformation implies the displacement of the two La3+ cations in a preserved classical [Zr2(PO4)3] network.
Thisinteresting behavior is in good agreement with the La3+ ionic conductivity observed in La1/3Zr2(PO4)3 .
Toour knowledge, this is the first time that a complete TEM study is done on a NASICON-type phase.

The structure obtained by powder diffraction studycan then be considered as an average structure.
In order toconfirm the local lanthanum distribution, we have undertakena complete TEM study, selected area electrondiffraction (SAED) and high-resolution electron microscopy(HREM), on La1/3Zr2(PO4)3 which has revealed aninteresting behavior.
Oddly, to our knowledge, this is thefirst time that a NASICON-type compound is studied byTEM technique.
The TEM studies, SAED and HREM, are carried outwith a JEOL 2010 electron microscope operating at 200 kVand equipped with a side entry 7301 double-tilt specimenholder.
EDX analysis is done on crystallites with a KEVEXenergy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer coupled with theTEM.


A carefulexamination of the patterns during illumination reveals anevolution of the spots intensity.
In such conditions,additional reconstitutions are tested with less irradiation of the specimen and reveal a transformation of the SAED patterns duringobservation.
Unfortunately, despite our efforts and the lowintensity of the electron beam, this transformation is toofast to allow us to do a reconstitution of the reciprocalspace of the P¯3 form: we just succeeded in making severalpatterns on different particles during the transformation(Figs.
2 and 3).
On Fig.2, corresponding to the [001] zoneaxis (ZA), we can see a progressive disappearance of thespots which do not check the R conditions while the intensity of the others seems unmodified.
As anexample, the white arrows allow to see the transformationof an h k l spot forbidden in an R mode: its intensity isstrongly affected during the four steps presented.
Similarly,the transformation can be followed along the [100] ZA onFig.3, where three successive steps are proposed.


It can be evidenced by digitalizing together thetwo patterns 3a and 3c: the result obtained (Fig.3a+c) isin excellent correlation with the intermediate situation of Fig.3b, leading to a particular extinction condition alongthe c* axis (shown by the circles).
During the transformation, the cell size remains unchangedsince the reciprocal space reconstitutions of thefinal form give a NASICON-type cell and the spotscorresponding to an R mode can be perfectly superposed.
This implies then the preservation of the [Zr2(PO4)3]network.
It can be noted that such a process seems to beirreversible: a crystallite exposed and showing an R modedoes not reveal an inverse transformation even after 1week.
Moreover, this transformation occurs withoutmodification of the atomic content: an EDX analysisperformed at the beginning and at the end of the observation confirms the presence of O, La, Zr and P withpreserved ratios.

Although these groups are never used until now todescribe NASICON-type compounds, this situation is notsurprising since all the atomic coordinates can be easilytransposed from the usual R¯3 space group to P¯3c1.
However, this first form observed in the TEM study ofLa1/3Zr2(PO4)3 is then not the original form (P¯3), whichcarries us to believe that this compound transforms as soonas it is illuminated by the electron beam.
In such conditions, TEM observations imply La3+ displacementsin a preserved network obtained by a small and concertedmotion of all the others atoms (Zr, P and O).

As an example, we can consider the Zr1positions of the Table 2. With the same formalism, it is possible to deduce all thepositional parameters of a complete hypothetical R¯3 modelgiven in Table 3, with the corresponding main interatomicdistances.
These values are in agreement with those usuallyencountered, leading to correct bond valence sums for allthe atoms, except for the La3+ cations which are located intoo large cages.
As noticed above, a similar situation isobserved for La3+ cations in La1/3Ti2(PO4)3 .

The local ordering of La3+ andvacancies in the selected cells of the Fig.
5b is drawnbelow in the case of the domains hypothesis.
During the TEM study (diffraction and high resolution)of the La1/3Zr2(PO4)3 NASICON-type compound of whichthe structure was determined by neutron and X-ray powderdiffraction experiments, we have evidenced an irreversiblestructural change induced by the electron beam energywithout modification of atomic content and cell size.
Thistransformation is followed on SAED patterns along [001]and [100] ZA and reveals a rapid disappearance of the hklspots forbidden in an R mode, while no information on theoriginal mother form P¯3 can be obtained because thecrystallite structure changes as soon as it is illuminated.

HREM image confirms the R¯3 calculated [Zr2(PO4)3]network and excludes a statistic repartition of the twoLa3+ ions over the 3a and 3b available sites.
The ability ofLa3+ ions to move is in good agreement with the ionicconductivity  observed forLa1/3Zr2(PO4)3.
 Thermal X-ray diffraction experimentsshow subtle and slow modifications confirming the La3+displacements with a change of the space group from P¯3 toP¯3c1 at 1000 1C while no transition is revealed by DTAanalysis.
All these results will be published in a next comingpaper.
Finally, since the La3+ is the larger lanthanon ion,it would be very interesting to study the otherRE1/3Zr2(PO4)3 compounds which are also found to betrivalent cationic solid electrolytes.
