Ex situ vibrational spectra are recorded during the first discharge of LiTi2(PO4)3. Spectral changes are consistent with a two-phase model forthe electrochemical insertion of Li+ ions.
Differences in the frequencies and relative intensities of the LiTi2(PO4)3 and Li3Ti2(PO4)3 bands are dueto changes in the effective force constants, dipole moment derivatives, and polarizability derivatives as Li+ is inserted into LiTi2(PO4)3. Theintramolecular PO43− bending modes (ν2 and ν4) are found to be more sensitive to Li+ insertion than the intramolecular PO4 3− stretching modes (ν1and ν3).
This is because ν2 and ν4 are less localized than ν1 or ν3 and are more susceptible to small structural changes in the unit cell.
Furthermore,a band at 487 cm−1 appears in the infrared spectrum of Li3Ti2(PO4)3. This band is assigned as a Li+ ion cage mode and is due to Li+ ions thatoccupy the M(3) and M′(3) sites in the Li3Ti2(PO4)3 structure.
A small degree of band broadening is also detected in the vibrational spectra when Li+ ions are inserted, which might indicate some disordering in the cathode material.
Phosphate-based materials have generated considerableinterest as potential electrode materials for secondary lithiumbatteries.

The cells are dischargedusing the galvanostatic intermittent titration technique(GITT) on an Arbin battery cycler .
Thistechnique entails discharging the cells at a constant currentdensity of 0.1 mA cm−2 until 0.05 Li+ ions per formula unit areinserted into the cathode.
The cell potential is then monitoredduring a 1 h rest step, and the process is repeated until thedesired cathode composition is achieved.
Afterwards, the cellsare disassembled under argon, washed twice with diethyl carbonate,dried overnight, and stored under argon.
Infrared absorption spectra are measured with a Bruker IFS66 v spectrometer equipped with a DTGS detector and KBr orMylar beamsplitters for mid- and far-IR spectroscopy, respectively.
Samples are prepared using standard KBr and CsI pellettechniques.
Raman scattering experiments are conducted on aJobin-Yvon ISA T64000 spectrometer in the triple subtractivemode.
A 532 nm laser (Spectra-Physics Millennia Vs) is focusedonto the surface of the powders through the 80× objective lens ofan Olympus microscope.
All spectra are recorded in a 180°backscattering mode using a CCD detector.



If lithium intercalation proceeded by a single-phasemechanism, the frequencies and intensities of the vibrationalmodes would depend on the concentration of the Li+ ions.
However,in a two-phase model the frequencies of the modes areexpected to be independent of the lithium concentration, but bandintensities would be governed by the amount of each phase presentin the sample.
This behavior is observed in other systems thatexhibit a two-phase mechanism.
For instance, during the two-phasedelithiation of LiFePO4, bands characteristic of LiFePO4 graduallydecrease in intensity at the expense of the FePO4 bands .
The two-phase mechanism for LiTi2(PO4)3 is stronglysupported by the infrared and Raman spectroscopic data.
Asthe parent compound is discharged, bands characteristic of Li3Ti2(PO4)3 appear and gradually replace the LiTi2(PO4)3 bands.
Thisis particularly clear in the ν4 region of the infrared spectra.
Forexample, four ν4 bands are observed in the infrared spectrum ofLiTi2(PO4)3 at 573, 585, 643, and 680 cm−1.
New bands (denotedwith dotted lines in Fig.5) appear at 479, 561, and 600 cm−1 whenthe cells are discharged, but bands characteristic of LiTi2(PO4)3are still discernable in the Li2Ti2(PO4)3 sample (e.g., the585 cm−1 band denoted by the alternating dash-dot line onFig.5).
At this composition, the infrared spectrum is intermediatebetween LiTi2(PO4)3 and Li3Ti2(PO4)3.


Group theoretical methods predict twelve Li+ ion cagemodes at the Brillouin zone center for Li3Ti2(PO4)3, and thesevibrations are distributed among the irreducible representationsof the S6 point group (3Ag+3Eg+3Au+3Eu).
Even thoughsome of the Li+ ion cage modes are Raman active, correspondingbands do not appear in the Raman spectrum of Li3Ti2(PO4)3. 
This is probably because Li+ ion cage modes typicallyhave negligible polarizability derivatives and consequently donot have measurable Raman intensities.
Ex situ vibrational spectra are recorded during the electrochemicalinsertion of Li+ into LiTi2(PO4)3. 
In general, the PO43−bending modes are much more sensitive to the insertion of Li+ions than the stretching modes.
This is particularly evident forthe ν4 modes in the infrared spectrum (Fig.5) and, to a lesserextent, the ν2 modes in the Raman spectrum (Fig.4).
Phosphatebending modes are less localized than the stretching vibrations;thus, they are more susceptible to small structural changes in theunit cell.
The frequencies of the vibrational modes do not dependon the concentration of the Li+ ions in the cathode material.
Instead, Li3Ti2(PO4)3 bands appear and increase in intensity atthe expense of LiTi2(PO4)3 bands.
This type of behavior isindicative of a two-phase mechanism for the electrochemicalinsertion of Li+ into LiTi2(PO4)3. 
Lithium ion cage modes arealso identified in the infrared spectrum of Li3Ti2(PO4)3. Accordingto crystallographic data , all three Li+ ions reside inM(3) and M′(3) sub-sites of the larger M(2) cavities.
Therefore, this band must be due Li+ ions that occupy these sites.
Analogousbands do not appear in the Raman spectrum of Li3Ti2(PO4)3,even though the Li+ ion cage modes are Raman active, becausethese vibrations typically have small polarizability derivatives.
Hence, the Li+ ion cage modes do not produce measurableRaman intensities.
