Amorphous sodium-containing titanium phosphate (sampleTiP), obtained by heating a disordered precursor at 300 ◦Cunder air, electrochemicallyreacts with lithium by means of non-aqueous lithium cells.
Discharge curves of EC/DEC cells in the 3.5–1.5 Vregion, were different to that observedfor NASICON titanium phosphates but the related capacity can be associated to the reduction of Ti4+ to Ti3+.
Another sample, C-TiP, obtainedby using nitrogen atmosphere during the thermal treatment, was able to provide 75% more capacity in this region.
This sample contained carbonbecause of the incomplete pyrolysis of the surfactant present in the precursor.
Carbon is supposed to stay occluded inside the pores consideringthe values of pores surface area, total conductivity and HRTEM measurements.
These titanium phosphates were also tested as negative electrodes.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements suggest that both titanium phosphates are reduced to yield titanium, lithia and phosphorusat 0.0V.
In our opinion, the presence of carbon in C-TiP is the key factor for the enhanced reactivity in the 3.2–1.5V region but is not enough toobtain a good electrochemical performance, in terms of cycling efficiency.
Lithium transition metal phosphates (LTMP) have recentlyfound application in the field of electrochemical energy storage,especially those with olivine or NASICON structures.

Recorded spectra were always fittedusing Gauss–Lorentz curves in order to more accurately determinethe binding energy of the different element core levels.

The electrochemical performance of our samples  was analysedby means of swagelock two electrode and glass three electrodecells.
The working electrode consisted of a stainless-steelgrid on which the cathodic material was pressed.
The cathodewas made of a mixture of active material (85 wt%), graphite(10 wt%) and PTFE (5 wt%) as binding agent.
The mixturewas pressed onto a stainless-steel grid, with a geometric surfacearea of 1 cm2.
 The electrolyte used was 1M LiClO4 inPC or 1M LiPF6 in EC/DEC solvent, as discussed in the text.
For the preliminary tests and the EIS experiments, we used thethree electrode configuration.
The counter electrode was a goldwire directly immersed in the electrolyte solution, close to theworking electrode.
A lithium wire acted as reference electrode.
Cycling tests were carried out with swagelock cells, which useda lithium disk as reference and counter electrode.
Galvanostaticdischarges were performed using a MacPile II (BioLogic)potentiostat connected to an Imac computer.
Working electrodeswere discharged from OCV (close to 3.0 V) until 0.0V versusthe lithium reference electrode.
The discharge–charge rate was28mAg−1. All the tests were carried out at least twice.


The profile of the curves shown bythe four cells looks quite similar.
It consists of three regions: asmooth voltage fading from OCV to 1.0V followed by a pseudoplateauin the 1.0–0.5V region and then, a smooth voltagefading to 0.0V.
The extension of the first voltage region is practicallyindependent of the system and is close to 200 mAh g−1.
The extension of the 1.0–0.5V pseudoplateau was dependenton the electrolyte solvent, being more developed for EC/DECthan for PC, a feature not well understood.
TiP and C-TiP cellsprovide similar capacities for PC solvent, meanwhile C-TiP provides150 mAh g−1 more than TiP in the EC/DEC cell.
In somecases, the total discharge of the cells leads to capacities as highas 1000 mAh g−1, an interesting value for negative electrodepurposes.
In order to choose an adequate electrolyte for our tests, wehave carried out impedance measurements at different states ofcharge.
The data therein discussed are only approximate as theporosity of our samples influences the exact analysis, althoughboth materials show similar textural properties.
The spectra soobtainedand fitted results for the TiP and C-TiP electrodes areshown in Fig.9a and b, respectively.
At the end of the discharge,the spectra suggest that the frequency response of both TiP andC-TiP, in PC based electrolyte, are similar to that of a modifiedRandles equivalent circuit, by using a supplementary parallelresistor–capacitor (R//C) combination.
If we envisage the formationof a surface layer which exhibits lower ionic conductivitythat the liquid electrolyte, we can describe it as a resistor and acapacitor placed in parallel.
The associated resistor characterisesthe lithium ion transport inside the layer while the capacitor representsthe new ionic charge distribution in the surface layer.

From the refinement ofthese impedance diagrams, the resistance of the surface film,Rfilm, can be evaluated, being equal to 600 and 800 for TiPand C-TiP, respectively (the presence of carbon being presum ably responsible for the larger PC degradation at the surfaceof the C-TiP based electrode).
By contrast, the cells built withEC/DEC have lower impedance.
Moreover, at the end of the discharge,one cannot see any distortion in the corresponding EISspectra (only one semicircle at high frequencies), suggestingthat the cells can be modelled by a classical Randles equivalentcircuit.
Surprisingly it seems that no film was formed at the surfaceof the electrodes, in this electrolytic solution, or at least thefilm is not big enough to create a resistor–capacitor responsein the EIS spectra.
Moreover, the fact that C-TiP diagram evenshows a lower global impedance than the carbon-free materialindicates that carbon is not promoting the electrolyte reductionat deep discharge.
Following the EIS experiments we concludedthat EC/DEC was a superior solvent, so we discontinued the useof PC.

First, the regionup to 1.0V and the pseudoplateau at 1.0V were less extenseand another pseudoplateau was developed at 0.6V.
Decreasingthe amount of solvent also decreased at the end of discharge thecapacities, that were below 800 mAh g−1. For C-TiP sample, theeffect is stronger as the percolation of the solvent is hindered bycarbon occluded in the pores.

However, their values inthe third cycle are too small for a practical negative electrode.
Two mesoporous titanium phosphates have been synthesisedin thiswork.
Galvanostatic, total conductivity and electrochemicalimpedance spectroscopy results clearly indicate the presenceof carbon in the sample C-TiP, which seems to increase itsreactivity when compared to TiP.
Microscopy examinations andporosity measurements are consistent with the localisation ofcarbon in the phosphate pores.
The role of carbon in the electrochemicalactivity of our titanium phosphates is controversial.
First of all, being occluded in the pores of C-TiP it makesaccess of solvent difficult and then, limits the electrochemicalprocess.
Secondly, it largely increases the reactivity at highvoltages, beyond the expected reactions involving the Ti4+/Ti3+couple.
Galvanostatic and EIS measurements strongly indicatethat between 1.0 and 0.0V, the reduction of phosphate leadsto Ti, P4 and Li2O, although a possible reaction involving thesolvent cannot be discarded.
In this voltage region, the effectof carbon is not very important.
Several questions arose abouthow carbon enhances the reaction, particularly up to 1.5V.
Weare tempted to relate this effect to the increased conductivity ofC-TiP as compared to TiP.
