Synthetic conditions are determined for the variable-composition phase Na1 – ıNi1 – ıCr1 + ı(MoO4)3(0 ≤ ı ≤ 0.4) with a NASICON structure.
The unit cell parameters of this phase are derived from X-ray powderdiffraction data, and the phase is characterized by IR and Raman spectroscopy.
The oxide phases with a NASICON structure arepromising solid electrolytes since they show a highionic conductivity and a high performance and are environmentallyfriendly.
Some of the NASICON-type phases with partiallyvacant alkali-metal sites possess superionic properties.
The variability of cationic composition within theNASICON structure type allows a directed synthesis of NASICON-typeM1–ıA1–ıR1+ı(MoO4)3 phases with adesired composition.
The NASICON structure is basedon a framework ofA(R)O6octahedra sharing their verticeswith MoO4tetrahedra.
This structure is topologicallyidentical to corundum.
The A(R) atoms arelocated on threefold axes; the MoO4groups, on twofoldaxes.
The stretching frequencyof the MoO4 groups increases by 20–25 cm–1with increasing x (Tables 2, 3), apparently because theenergy of the Mo–O bond increases as the cationicvacancies build up.
The random distribution of the cationsdoes not affect the fundamental features of thespectra, but it causes some widening of the spectrallines.
Furthermore, it reduces the distortion of theMoO4 tetrahedra, thus diminishing the splitting of thetriply degenerate stretching mode.
Since the sodium sublattice vibrations are Ramaninactive,the lines at frequencies below 300 cm–1 aredue to vibrations of the Ni2+ and Cr3+ cations.

The substitution of magnesium forpart of the nickel shifts the 277 cm–1 band to 279 cm–1.
Furthermore, this band is sensitive to molybdenum isotopesubstitution, shifting from 278 to 280 cm–1.
The 190 cm–1 band is primarily due the vibrations ofthe chromium cations.
Note the behavior of the lowestfrequency Raman lines (112–86 cm–1).
These linesshift upon the partial substitution of magnesium fornickel and weaken as the chromium content ofNa1 − ıNi1 – ıCr1 + ı(MoO4)3 is increased up to x = 0.3. Atlarger values of x, they are not observed at all.
TheRaman lines at 112–86 cm–1 are assigned to vibrationsof nickel atoms.
The IR absorption bands appearingbelow 160 cm–1 can be assigned to vibrations of sodiumcations.
Furthermore, the librations of molybdate groupsare reported to show themselves near 150 cm–1 .
The above results suggest that, upon the heterovalentsubstitution Na+ + Ni2+ Cr3+ + , the excesschromium cations in Na1 − ıNi1 – ıCr1 + ı(MoO4)3occupy Ni2+ sites.
The resulting vacancies are located inthe sodium sublattice.
