The first example of a unidimensional zirconium hydroxide fluoride was synthesized under mild solvothermal treatment andcharacterized by X-ray diffraction and thermal techniques.
Monoprotonated ethylenediamine cations reside between the anionic chains.
The material transforms to an unknown layered material at 175 1C, a common occurrence for 1D structures where the chains arearranged in hydrogen-bonded layers and separated by inter layer organoammoniums.
Collapse to the known condensed mineral phaseZr(FO)2.7 occurs at ca.275 1C before finally transforming to the baddeleyite form of ZrO2 at ca.460 1C.
Organic amines have long been used as structuredirectingagents in the solvothermal synthesis of extendedmaterials.

Due to the similarities in X-ray scattering and bonddistances for F and OH, however, elemental analysis was performed to determine the sample’s fluoride content.
The%F was determined to be 23.30%, which is nearly identicalto the theoretical value of 23.42% for the proposedstructure.
Only twopeaks were observed, consistent with a structure thatpossesses two F atoms in equivalent axial positions and athird F atom in the base of the pentagon.

Significant interchain hydrogen bonding interactionsoccur among the H atoms on the hydroxide groups andfluoride groups on neighboring chains (Table 3).
Thechains are charge-balanced by monoprotonated ethylenediaminecations that reside in the interchain voids (Fig.3b).
The cations are disordered with respect to the location ofthe amine group.
Attempts to characterize the degree oftemplate protonation by 13C solid-state NMR were unsuccessful due to severe peak broadening by thestructural fluorine atoms, making it impossible to obtainsuch information from these spectra.
Bond valence sumcalculation of the hydroxide groups on the zirconiums,however, support a monoprotonated form, as does theformula of the compound.

Based on our observed structure, it is likely the inorganicconnectivity was limited to one dimension by the presenceof terminal fluoride groups at both the axial and oneequatorial position.

For thepresent compound, HBF4 acted as fluoride source, and in fact the structure could also be synthesized using anequimolar amount of HF (48wt% aqueous) as fluoridesource.
It is possible that higher dimensional materials maybe possible by introducing a bridging group in some or allof these coordination positions.

Thermogravimetric analysis further supports the structuralinformation obtained by XRD.
The trace (Fig.5)displays several thermal events.
Physisorbed water is likelyresponsible for the weight loss up to ca.160 1C, while themass loss of 14.6% from 160 1C through 200 1Ccorresponds to the loss of ca.
one-third of the template molecules and water from the condensation of the bridginghydroxide groups (theoretical: 15.3%).

In addition, theweight loss plateaus in this region, also implying a stableintermediate.
The crystallinity was unfortunately too lowto determine the structure of this phase, even when thesample was slowly heated to this plateau region.
Note,however, that the material is still open, with the (00l) peaksshifted to only slightly higher angle (Fig.2b).
The next mass loss beginning at 250 1C results fromdecomposition of the remaining organic constituents andloss of some fluoride.
In agreement, the PXRD pattern forthe bulk material heated to 400 1C (Fig.2c) displays nopeak below 201 (2y) and matches the pattern for thecondensed mineral phase Zr(FO)2.7 .
The observed 19.2% mass loss from this step agreeswell with the expected loss of 19.7%.
The transition resultsin a stoichiometric increase in oxygen, likely from theimpure house nitrogen used as flow gas.
This increase is notespecially surprising due to the excellent oxygen-scavengingability of zirconium .
The final transition is to thebaddeleyite form of ZrO2,with TGA confirming the loss of the remaining fluoride(experimental weight loss: 6.5%; theoretical: 6.6%).
In summary, a zirconium hydroxyfluoride chain structurehas been synthesized from an alkoxide precursor.
Initial attempts to use other organic mono- and di-aminesin place of ethylenediamine have yet to yield any novelstructures.
Instead, poorly crystalline ZrO2 has thus farbeen the sole product.
The present structure represents oneof a small class of low dimensionality zirconium-basedmaterials, and is the first 1D zirconium hydroxyfluoridechain.
Thermal data indicate transformation to anunknown layered structure, followed by collapse to acondensed mineral phase.
Open 1D materials may thereforebe a pathway to new 2D and 3D materials.
