A planar miniaturized SO2 sensor based upon a thick film of Ca2+ ion conductor-CaOÆ0.6MgOÆ6Al2O3 (CMA) witha Na2SO4 auxiliary electrode and a Pt/O2 reference electrode was fabricated and tested.
The thick film was fabricatedby screen-printing CMA ink on an alumina substrate and then fired at 1823 K.
The solid electrolyte wasinterfaced with a sodium sulphate auxiliary phase containing Pt paste and the sensor showed a good SO2 response at873–1073 K.
The electromotive force (emf) values obtained were linearly dependent upon the logarithm values ofSO2 concentration in a range of 10–500 ppm.
Both the electrodes were exposed to the same test gas thus eliminatingthe need to separate the electrode chambers.
Solid state electrochemical sensors for SO2 have beenwidely researched.
The other two componentswere added slowly and mixed to ensure completedispersion.
The slurry diluted with additions of acetonewas milled for a further 24 h before being poured into alarge Pyrex basin ready for screen printing.
Commercially available alumina tiles 5050 mm2 andapproximately 0.5 mm thick were chosen as the substratematerial.
Each tile was laser scribed to allowseveral individual sensors to be printed on one large tile.
Screen printing was performed using a DEK 240 tablemounted screen printer.
The thick film was then fired at1823 K for 1 h in order to densify the electrolyte layerbefore attaching the electrodes.
For SO2 sensors, the reference and sensing electrodeswere fabricated by painting commercial Pt paste on thedesignated regions and annealed at 1173 K for 30 min.
A porous film of Pt+Na2SO4 auxiliary electrode wasdeposited on the Pt sensing electrode by painting a pasteof Pt+Na2SO4 followed by melting (at 1173 K) andquenching.
The structure of the sensor is shown inFigure 1.
The SO2 sensorswere tested in controlled conditions at different SO2contents and operating temperatures.
Measurementswere carried out in a conventional gas-flow apparatusequipped with a heating furnace.
Premixed samplegases, which were prepared by diluting a parent gas(5000 ppm SO2 in air/N2), with synthetic air or Ar usinggas blender and were allowed to flow through the quartztube where the sensor was positioned at a controlledflow rate of typically 200 cm3 min)1. The SO2 concentrationin gas mixture was varied from 10 to 500 ppm.
Operating temperatures from 873 to 1073 K wereinvestigated.
The partial pressure of oxygen in the gaswas independently controlled.
Electromotive forces(emfs) were measured with a high impedance electrometer(>1012 ohm) and the data transferred to a PC baseddata collecting system (Pico ADC-16).

Variation ofthe sensor emf with SO2 concentration in the gasmixture at 961 K is presented in Figure 3. 
The relationshipbetween emf and the logarithm value of the partialpressure of SO2 at a fixed PO2 value is found to be linearover the whole concentration range tested.
The slope of the response curve calculated from theexperimental data is 74.5 mV decade)1 at 961 K.
Fromthe slope, using the Nernst equation, the number ofelectron transferred in the electrochemical reactions iscalculated to be 2.5 rather than the proposed 2.0. 
Thisdifference may be partially attributed to the lack of emfstabilization, especially at the low concentration end,thus resulting in a higher slope than predicted.
Figure 4 gives a typical emf response to stepwisedecrease in the O2 concentration from 0.21 atm to about 200 ppm for a planar SO2 sensor at a temperature of 962 K and at PSO2=72 ppm.
The emf of the celldecreased as PO2 was decreased.
Figure 5 presents emf changes with variation of O2 concentration in the gas mixture from 200 ppm to0.21 atm with SO2 fixed at 74 ppm.
The emf linearlyincreased with increased oxygen partial pressure in thefirst part.
The linear equation can be expressed asE=)34.7+546.2PO2. 
At high oxygen partial pressure,the emf values begin to plateau to a constant value.
At agiven SO2 concentration when the oxygen concentrationis low, the conversion rate of SO2 to SO3 is stronglydependent on the oxygen partial pressure.
When theoxygen partial pressure is high, its effect on conversionbecomes weak, which is in agreement with Equation (8).
In order to evaluate the effect of the temperature onemf, the sensor was tested at different fixed temperatures.

The emf responseof the sensor was linear, with positive slope, to thelogarithm of SO2 concentration (logPSO2) at each temperature.
The calculated number of transferred electrons,derived from the Nernstian equation as applied to thebest linear fit, are 2.3, 2.5 and 2.4, at temperatures of937, 961 and 1024 K, respectively.
The deviation oftransferred electron number from two can be explainedby looking at the scatter of data around the fit line.
Ifthe scattered data is ignored, the calculated number oftransferred electrons approaches two.
The scatter maybe related to lack of complete equilibrium between SO2/O2/SO3 on the Pt/Na2SO4 surface and changes in aCaOdue to surface exchange reactions.
Both the bulk and the thick film SO2 sensors based onthe CMA/Na2SO4 system display similar sensing propertieswith respect to response mechanism, responsetime and the influence of O2 partial pressure.
However,for a given gas composition the following differenceshave been observed.
The emf of the thick film sensor islower than those of a bulk sensor; the sensitivity of bulksensor is higher than that of film sensor and the resultswere more scattered with the thick film sensor.
These may be attributed to variations in a CaO in solidelectrolyte film due to surface exchange reactions andchemical reactions between alumina substrate andelectrolyte film during preparation and also to lack of complete equilibrium between SO2/O2/SO3 on the Pt/Na2SO4 surface in film sensor.
CaO  0.6MgO  6Al2O3 thick film solid electrolyte isfabricated by screen printing technology on an aluminasubstrate.
A planar SO2 sensor based on this film with aNa2SO4 auxiliary electrode exhibits a satisfactory performancefor detecting SO2 in the concentration range of10–500 ppm.
The measured emf of the sensor was foundto be a linear function of logarithm of partial pressure ofSO2 over the whole range of concentration at 873–1073 K, although some deviation from Nernstian slopeexists.
