Ionic conductivity and phase transitions of lithium-zirconium phosphates, Li1±XZr2-XMX(PO4)3 (M = Ta, Nb, Y, Sc, In), with NASICON structure were studied using X-ray powderdiffraction, calorimetry, 31P and 7Li NMR and impedance spectroscopy.
Triclinic-rhombohedralphase transition in these materials occurs in a wide temperature range at coexistence of both phases.
Unusual change of LiZr2(PO4)3 lattice parameters with temperature increase was found.
Duringheating of this compound parameter “a” significantly decreases.
The presence of small clusters with different degree of lithium ion ordering, and with differentstructure, respectively, in LiZr2(PO4)3 leads more likely to the coexistence of two phases in a widetemperature range.
A displacement of one ion from position characteristic to the triclinic phase withordered arrangement of ions facilitates analogical move of other ions from its surrounding.
Therefore in LiZr2(PO4)3 structure the clusters with mobile lithium ions are formed.
Thesurrounding of the latest ones forms the structure of rhombohedral phase.
This situation is similar to the formation of domain structure in ferromagnetic.
The higher content of rhombohedral phase atlow temperatures in samples containing an impurity of zirconium pyrophosphate strengthens ourassumption.
In this case a sorption of lithium ions on ZrP2O7/LiZr2(PO4)3 interface leads to theformation of lithium vacancies in a thin layer of LiZr2(PO4)3 near the phase boundary and of clusterswith rhombohedral structure.
Similar results were obtained with the help of NMR 31P in .
However, the presence of rhombohedral phase even at low temperatures was not remarked despitethe fact that intensity of 24ppm line at room temperature is slightly overstated.
It should be noted that during phase transition the original lines of triclinic phase in 31P NMRspectra split into two lines.
On the base of available data we cannot unambiguously determine thecause of this splitting.
However, we can suppose that the components with the smaller chemicalshifts correspond to the phosphorus atoms in triclinic phase, which is in the neighborhood ofrhombohedral phase.
The fact that the lines with the smaller chemical shifts become more intensivewith decrease in triclinic phase content supports in particular our supposition.

However, they shift slightly in the low-temperature range for materials doped by 1% of heterovalentelement (Fig.5c,d).
For materials in which 5% zirconium atoms are substituted for tantalum oryttrium the temperature range of phase transition stretches for about 100 K (Fig.5e,f).
In any case,doping by yttrium ions results in the shift of phase transition temperature by 5–10 K more than fortantalum-doped materials.

The ratio of their integrated intensities coincides with the ratio of amount oftriclinic and rhombohedral phases estimated from 31P spectra.
Thus, 7Li MAS NMR spectra supportthe conclusion about “smooth” phase transition in LiZr2(PO4)3. Temperature increasing leads to thenarrowing of spectrum.
The line width decreases gradually from 0.50 to 0.33 ppm.
Moreover, onspectra obtained at higher temperatures one extra line appears at –1.45 ppm (Fig.
5e).
The first one is caused by the lithium ions of rhombohedral phase.
The position of thesecond line coincides with the shift of the additional line.
It should be noted that in NASICONstructure there are several positions of lithium ions.
In all papers only a part of lithium ions can belocalized in the main position (Li1).
In triclinic phase Catti M.et al.localized lithium ions inanother structural position (Li2).
At the same time, 72% lithium ions in the rhombohedral phase arenot localized at all.
On this basis we can assume that this additional line at –1.45 ppm is determinedby lithium ions in position Li2.DSC-analysis data confirm the presence of the hysteresis loop detected with other techniques.
Peaks on calorimetric curves obtained during heating and cooling treatments are shifted relative toeach other on 10–12 K.
At the same time doping LiZr2(PO4)3 by threevalent elements results in thegreater decrease of the phase transition temperature.
Another interesting feature of these compounds is unusual dependence of LiZr2(PO4)3 latticeparameters on temperature.
During heating LiZr2(PO4)3 parameter “c” of rhombohedral phaseincreases from 22.125±0.003 A at 443 K to 22.392±0.006 A at 873 K (Fig.6a).
At the same timeparameter “a” decreases significantly with temperature from 8.863±0.0009 A to 8.828±0.001 A(Fig.6b).
This is evidenced in particular by a shift of reflexes 104 (2Θ≈19.7) and 110 (2Θ≈20.1) indifferent directions with temperature increasing (Fig.1 c-i).
It should be noted that low coefficientsof thermal expansion are characteristic for a series of materials with NASICON structure.