Electrocatalytic sensors belong to a relatively new group of solid state electrochemical gas sensors.
Its working principleis based on electric current acquisition, while voltage ramp is applied to the sensor.
The current-voltage plot has uniqueshape, which depends on surrounding gas type and its concentration.
Response ofthe electrocatalytic gas sensor containssignificantly more information in comparison with typical amperometric or potentiometric one.
Methods of sensorsresponse analysis, which was employed so far, did not fully utilize this feature.
Moreover, shape of sensor response, incase of some gases or mixtures, is hard to be interpreted with traditional techniques.
In this work more advancedmethods to analyze electrocatalytic gas sensor response, which are based on explorative and confirmative techniques aswell as artificial neural network, are presented.
In this paper typical processing methods of the electrocatalytic gas sensor response were analyzed.
However, thosemethods have limited applicability.
Some shortcomings of those methods are described by example of the sensorresponse obtained in case of the toxic gases.
A new approach to analyzing electrocatalytic gas sensor response ispresented.
This approach assumes usage of whole current-voltage plot as a sensor response indication.
This approachwas combined with principal component analysis and artificial neural network.
Verification was conducted on thesensors response characteristics obtained for toxic gases.
Very promising results were obtained.
Still, presented methods do not allow obtaining quantitative information.
Other methods have to be used in order toextract information not only about gas type, but about its concentration as well.
It is planned to use another multivariateregression methods.
For example, Partial Least Squares Regression (PLS) and Principal Component Regression (PCR)can be used for this purpose.
Successful application ofthose data processing methods allows obtaining multigas sensingsystem based on compact single sensor construction.
