The inferior electronic conductivity of NASICON materials leads to poor cyclability and rate capability, which severely inhibits their extensive development. Therefore, we have developed a onedimensional (1D) hybrid electrode material that combines small NaTi2(PO4)3 nanoparticles (5–50 nm) with a porous carbon matrix using a controllable sol–gel strategy. This unique design enables the electrode to possess good structural stability, superior charge transfer kinetics, and low polarization. The intimate combination between the nanoparticles and the porous carbon matrix can effectively facilitate Na+/e− transfer and accommodate volume variation during cycling. The construction of the new structure presented in this work will extend the applications of the NaTi2(PO4)3 system. Furthermore, the formed hybrid structure has potential to be a universal model for various electrode materials.
Recently, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have been widely used in portable electronic devices and hybrid electric vehicles;meanwhile, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) are undergoing rapid development. Thus, it is necessary to develop electrode materials with high capacity, excellent rate capability, and long cycle life.The working mechanism of SIBs is very similar to that of LIBs. Therefore, a number of methods have mimicked the successful material strategies used for LIBs.In this regard, a series of promising SIB electrode materials have been discovered in the past decade. In terms of anode materials, however, commercialized graphite in LIBs exhibits extremely limited sodium storage properties because Na+ (1.16 Å) has a larger ionic radius than Li+ (0.90 Å), which greatly hinders its reversible insertion into and extraction from the graphite anodes.Meanwhile, the drastic volume changes accompanying the alloying or transition metal compounds lead to structural degradation and thena rapid capacity decay.Therefore, the lack of suitable intercalation anode materials is a huge limitation for advanced SIB systems.
Nowadays, NASICON materials have been widely applied in SIBs because of the open stable 3D framework and nearly unchanged volume during the charge and discharge processes.Among them, NaTi2(PO4)3 has received great attention by virtue of its environmental friendliness and low cost.Nevertheless, the rate capability and cycling stability of NaTi2(PO4)3 are severely limited by the sluggish kinetics of the electrons. However, the electron transport kinetics of NaTi2(PO4)3 has been improved by constructing a composite of nanostructured NaTi2(PO4)3 with conductive carbon (thin carbon coating, loading on CNTs, and graphene wrapping).These studies have doubtlessly reported better NaTi2(PO4)3-based electrode materials. It is noteworthy that the fabrication of 1D nanostructured electrode materials has additional advantages including shortened ion diffusion paths, facile strain relaxation, and large surface-to-volume ratios.However, the NaTi2(PO4)3 particles usually have a large size because of the rapid precipitation between Ti4+ and HPO42−/H2PO4−/PO43−, and the unsatisfactory contact between NaTi2(PO4)3 and the 1D carbon matrix limits the improvement in electrochemical performance.
Fortunately, an electrospinning technique can be feasibly used to fabricate 1D nanostructures, in which the active material and carbon can contact favorably.Therefore, some researchers have reported studies on the NaTi2(PO4)3/C nanofibers. Li et al. synthesized NaTi2(PO4)3/C composite nanofibers, which exhibited a reversible capacity of 97 mA h g−1 at 665 mA g−1 after 500 cycles.Wei et al. prepared NaTi2(PO4)3/C hierarchical porous nanofibers with excellent rate capability.Nevertheless, the specific capacity of the above-mentioned electrode materials is still unsatisfactory due to the large size and poor dispersity of the NaTi2(PO4)3 particles. Meanwhile, the pre-operational control condition (temperature, voltage, humidity, etc.) of the electrospinning technique is tedious. Hence, there is an urgent need to develop a novel technique for constructing well-structured 1D NaTi2(PO4)3/C electrode materials.
Exhilaratingly, we have successfully synthesized Ti-based compound/C hybrids with a 1D nanostructure using a modified sol–gel method.The hybrid electrodes composed of nanosized homodisperse active materials and conductive porous carbon have superior electrochemical performance. In our proof-of-concept study, we legitimately designed and synthesized NaTi2(PO4)3/C hybrid nanotubes by a sol–gel method and a subsequent calcination process, in which nanoparticles (5–50 nm) were uniformly embedded within the porous carbon matrix. The formation process of the hybrid is illustrated in Scheme 1. First, tetrabutyltitanate (TBT) was adsorbed onto the walls of sulfonated polymer nanotubes (SPNTs). Then, the above-mentioned mixture was stirred at 60 °C in an ethanol solution containing Na2CO3 and P2O5 to form a precursor. Finally, 1D hybrids were obtained through post-annealing treatment (denoted as NTP). The NaTi2(PO4)3 nanoparticles are embedded in the porous carbon matrix, which improves the electrical contact. Consequently, NTP delivered the combined advantage of large capacity (129 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 after 150 cycles), high rate performance, and long-term cycling stability (55.5 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1 after 3000 cycles).
All the reagents were AR grade and provided by commercial suppliers. The sulfonated polymer nanotubes (SPNTs) were obtained according to our previously reported method.
First, 70 mg of SPNTs were dispersed in 4 mL of ethanol under ultrasonication for 30 min. Second, tetrabutyltitanate (TBT, 1.7 g) was added to the mixture and stirred for 12 h at an ambient temperature. Third, 8 mL ethanol solution containing Na2CO3 (0.159 g) and P2O5 (0.596 g) was added into the above system and stirred for 6 h at 60 °C. After centrifugation, the residue was carefully collected and wiped with a tissue paper. The obtained precursor was dried in air at 80 °C for 12 h. Finally, the as-synthesized precursor was calcined at 900 °C for 6 h in N2 (heating rate: 5 °C min−1) to obtain NaTi2(PO4)3/C porous hybrid nanotubes (denoted as NTP).
Material characterization and electrochemical tests were carried out according to our previous methods.
The X-ray diffraction pattern of NTP is shown in Fig. 1a; all the characteristic diffraction peaks of the sample can be indexed to well-crystalline NaTi2(PO4)3 with a rhombohedral structure (JCPDS card no. 33-1296). No diffraction peaks attributed to the carbon matrix can be observed because of the amorphous structure.Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of NTP was carried out from 25 to 800 °C in air (Fig. 1b). The weight loss below 300 °C is related to the evaporation of water. The mass loss from 300 to 500 °C can be ascribed to the combustion of the carbon matrix. The percentage of carbon in NTP was estimated to be 18.1%. Fig. 1c displays the N2 adsorption–desorption curves. The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller surface area of NTP was 194.4 m2 g−1. Obviously, NTP possessed a mesoporous structure, and the size distribution ranged from 2 to 30 nm (Fig. 1d). Meanwhile, the larger surface area of NTP resulted from the porous carbon matrix with abundant micropores (1–2 nm) and the perfect 1D hybrid nanostructure.These pores and large surface area will result in superior Na+ transfer from the electrode.
Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) provided details regarding the morphological characteristics of NTP (Fig. 2). Fig. 2a shows the SEM image of NTP, revealing the 1D morphology with a diameter of 100–120 nm. No obvious agglomerated particles were observed. However, the surface of NTP had some bulges. To further identify the clear morphology of the sample, the TEM images of NTP are given in Fig. 2b and c. The hybrid possesses a perfect bamboo-like shape; the lighter and darker colors of the hybrid represent the carbon matrix and NaTi2(PO4)3 nanoparticles, respectively. Obviously, the NaTi2(PO4)3 nanoparticles with different size distributions (5–50 nm) are well embedded in the 1D carbon nanotubes. Meanwhile, the major NaTi2(PO4)3 nanoparticles are halfembedded in the wall of the nanotubes, leading to bulges on the surface of NTP. The formation of the embedded structure can be due to the presence of the Ti-based gel precursor in the walls of SPNTs. In addition, the NaTi2(PO4)3 nanoparticles have uniform dispersion and small size due to the weak precipitation between Ti4+ and HPO42−/H2PO4−/PO43− because the main ingredient of the ionic ethanol solution containing P2O5 can form organic phosphate.
The HRTEM image shown in Fig. 2d indicates the disordered thin layers of carbon around the NaTi2(PO4)3 nanoparticles (darker color). Inside the particles, an indistinct lattice fringe of 0.276 nm is observed, corresponding to the interplanar spacing of the (116) plane for the rhombohedral lattice (Fig. S1†).26 The presence of the 3D carbon matrix not only inhibits the agglomeration but also prevents the growth of the NaTi2(PO4)3 particles. According to the elemental mappings shown in Fig. 2e–h, the C, P, Na, and Ti elements are uniformly distributed in NTP. The SEM image (NTP) of ESD mappings is shown in the ESI (Fig. S2†). The combination of the preparation of dispersive small nanoparticles and the introduction of a 3D carbon matrix with a porous structure greatly shortens the transfer pathway of Na+ and improves the electronic conductivity.
The electrochemical performance of NTP was tested between 0.01 and 3 V. Fig. 3a displays the cyclic voltammetry (CV) profiles of NTP in the initial three cycles at 0.1 mV s−1. The redox pairs at 2.05/2.22 V and 0.35/0.51 V can be assigned to the mutual transformation of Ti4+ → Ti3+ and Ti3+ → Ti2+,respectively, which is consistent with a previous report.An irreversible cathodic peak at about 1.1 V is observed in the first cycle owing to the decomposition of the electrolyte to form a solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer.Compared with most reported NaTi2(PO4)3-based electrodes, NTP shows welldefined peaks and smaller potential interval,which demonstrates the lower polarization. The diffusion/migration barrier of Na+ insertion was reduced due to the porous carbon matrix and the well-dispersed nanoparticles.
The lowest pair at about 0 V is caused by the insertion of Na+ in amorphous carbon.Moreover, the overlap of the subsequent CV curves indicates high reversibility of Na+ in NTP. The typical galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) profiles of the NTP electrode at 0.2 A g−1 are shown in Fig. 3b. Two voltage plateaus at about 2.1 and 0.5 V in the 1st GCD profiles are observed, which are similar to that in the CV profiles. The formed SEI layer is confirmed by the plateau at 1.1 V in the initial GCD profile and the low coulombic efficiency (CE) of 56.7%. After the 2nd cycle, all the GCD profiles are superimposed on each other with a high discharge capacity over 160 mA h g−1. Moreover, a good CE over 97% was obtained after the 10th cycle.
The cycling behaviors of NTP at different current densities are given in Fig. 3c. The electrodes deliver the initial capacities of 357.4, 286.3, and 225.2 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1, 2 A g−1, and 5 A g−1, respectively. After 150 cycles, the electrode retains a high capacity of 129 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1. Notably, it maintains high reversible capacities of 102.1 and 93.7 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 and 5 A g−1 after 150 cycles, respectively, which indicates excellent cycling stability and rate capability. Meanwhile, the results for the coulombic efficiency of the cycled cells under the abovementioned different rates are given in the ESI (Fig. S3†). The rate cycling performance of the NTP electrode was further tested upon increasing the current density from 0.1 A g−1 to 6 A g−1 (Fig. 3d); the electrode delivered a high capacity of 88.5 mA h g−1 at 6 A g−1. When the current density returned to 0.1 A g−1, the reversible capacity rapidly returned to the original value once more, demonstrating its good cycling stability and flexible structure. In addition, to further demonstrate the cycling stability of NTP, the electrode was cycled at 10 A g−1 (Fig. 3e). A long lifespan of 3000 cycles was realized with a high CE of 100% as well as a desirable capacity of 55.5 mA h g−1.
Moreover, NTP exhibited superior electrochemical performance than the NaTi2(PO4)3-based materials tested between 0.01 and 3 V reported in the open literature;this fully demonstrates that the construction of a 1D hybrid structure can be used to promote the electrochemical performance. The aggregation and pulverization of the NaTi2(PO4)3 nanoparticles were effectively prevented, which could accommodate the volume change during the electrochemical reaction and also shorten the diffusion path of Na+ and electrons. Meanwhile, the NaTi2(PO4)3 nanoparticles wrapped with a porous carbon matrix could provide fast electronic and ionic transport. Also, the carbon skeleton improved the electrical conductivity of NTP and further prevented the structure from collapsing during long cycling. In addition, the hierarchical pore structure of NTP increased the surface area between the electrodes and the electrolytes and abundant active sites, which endowed the electrodes with high capacitive contribution.
In summary, we have synthesized 1D porous hybrid nanotubes with the synergistic effect of NaTi2(PO4)3 nanoparticles and porous carbon matrix as a promising electrode for SIBs. This novel architecture endowed the electrode with excellent electrochemical performance in terms of high capacity, excellent rate capability, and long cycle life. In the structure, the ion/electron transfer and structural stability significantly improved during the electrochemical reaction. Also, the small NaTi2(PO4)3 nanoparticles augmented the active sites for Na+. Moreover, owing to the rational combination of the merits of the porous structure and carbon matrix, high electrical conductivity was achieved. The volume expansion during cycling was buffered by the elastic carbon matrix. Thus, besides the attractive electrochemical performance achieved here, this study highlights the importance of the synergistic effect of 1D porous hybrid structures in rechargeable batteries.