Preparation, characterization and electrical properties of new silver nasicons of composition AgTaMP3O12 (M=Al, Ga, In, Cr, Fe and Y)have been investigated.
All compositions crystallize in the rhombohedral nasicon structure and are found to be isomorphous with NbTiP3O12.
The space group of all compositions is R3¯ c except AgTaYP3O12, which crystallizes in R3¯ space group.
All the compounds showcharacteristic PO4 vibrational bands.
DC conductivity studies (by two-probe method) and AC impedance measurements correlate well.
The Cole–Cole plots do not show any spikes on the lower frequency side indicating negligible electrode effects.
The isothermal conductivityobtained from DC (rdc) and AC (r(0)) agrees well.
The activation energies obtained from the plots of log rdc versus 1/T, log r(0) versus 1/T and log s versus 1/T are approximately the same suggesting conducting species to be mobile silver ions.
The peak width at half height for MVV modulus plot is ¨1.34 decades for all samples, which is close to 1.14 decades observed for Debye solid.
The height of MVV obtained fromthe experimental plots are close to that of MVV (max)=C0/2C indicating the Debye nature of the samples.
The room temperature Mo¨ssbauerspectrum of AgTaFeP3O12 suggests paramagnetic nature of this sample.
New silver nasicons of composition AgTaMP3O12(M=Al, Ga, In, Cr, Fe and Y) are prepared and characterizedby IR, powder XRD.
All the samples crystallize inrhombohedral lattice of nasicon framework with R3¯ c spacegroup, while AgTaYP3O12 crystallizes in R3¯ space group.
These samples show characteristic PO4 vibrations.
Theactivation energies obtained from DC conductivities are inthe range 0.4–0.8 eV.
The room temeperature DC conductivity(rdc) and DC conductivity obtained from impedance agree well.
The activation energies of ATAPobtained from (i) frequency explicit log (x)max versusinverse of temperature and (ii) Cole–Cole log fmax versusinverse of temperature plots are of the same order.
All theCole–Cole plots terminate at the origin indicating theabsence of series resistance in the equivalent circuit modelof the sample.
The presence of a single peak in the plots ofboth log f versus ZVV and log f versus MVV indicates bulkconductivity and absence of any grain boundary contributionto impedance.
The height, full width at half maximumof the MVVmax peak and near coincidence of the MVVmax andZVVmax peaks in these plots suggest the Debye behavior ofthis sample.
