A capacitive-type NO2 gas sensor, developed by replacing metal in metal–insulator–semiconductor structure with solid electrolyte as sensing material, was investigated to improve the response and recovery rates and the operating temperature by modifying NaNO2-sensing material. Binary sensing materials of NaNO2–Ca3(PO4)2 and NaNO2–WO3 were tested for auxiliary phase of the device. The Ca3(PO4)2C as compared to WO3-containing phase. On the other hand, containing phase showed a response closer to ideal Nernstian behavior at 140 the WO3-containing phase showed faster response and recovery rates at 160 C, while the response deviated from Nernstian correlation. In order to obtain optimum sensor response, a ternary phase of NaNO2–Ca3(PO4)2–WO3 was used as sensing phase. 
The device with ternary C, as compared to previous devices attached with auxiliary phase was found to show more stable and faster response and recovery rates at 130 binary phases, corresponding Nernstian correlation in the concentration range of 20–500 ppb NO2. Furthermore, the effects of modiﬁcation process on the auxiliary phase were investigated through SEM observation of the surface structures and measurement of ionic conductivity. 
Many kinds of gas sensors using metal oxide semiconductor or solid electrolyte have been reported. In the case of semiconductor gas sensors, the adsorption or reaction of gases on the surface of a semiconducting material induces a gas concentration-dependent change in the electrical resistance of the polycrystalline sensor element fabricated with the oxide. For example, it is well known that the semiconductor gas sensors using SnO2 or WO3 show good sensing properties to inﬂammable gas or NO2, respectively. On the other hand, the potentiometric gas sensors using solid electrolytes exhibit EMF response to target gas in coincidence with Nernst’s equation. We have previously reported NO2 and CO2 potentiometric gas sensors based on coupling aNa+ conductor, NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12), with an auxiliary phase. 
Recently a new type gas sensor obtained by combining a half-cell of a solid electrolyte gas sensor and a ﬁeld effect transistor was reported. It has two apparent advantages over usual solid electrolyte gas sensor, i.e., high input impedance and elimination of the counterelectrode. Such a combination may be noticed as one of struggles to give new type gas sensors.
Metal–insulator–semiconductor(MIS)structure attracts the interest as its capacitance based on surface space charge of semiconductor is sensitively inﬂuenced by effective voltage applied on metal electrode. These devices have been introduced in a wide range of applications. More recently, it has been reported that the capacitive-type gas sensor using MIS structure for which metal electrode has been replaced with solid electrolyte (NaNO2) show fairly good NO2sensing capability at 130–160 C though the response and recovery rates were too long. 
For the potentiometric gas sensor, it has been shown that the sensing properties can be improved signiﬁcantly by using binary auxiliary phases. The binary systems bring several advantages, such as quick response, resistance to disturbance by water vapor, resistance to deliquescence in storage under humid conditions and capability of operation at lower temperatures. Therefore, investigation of the sensing properties of the MIS devices attached with binary or ternary phase attracts interest of the researchers working in this ﬁeld.
In this study, two binary systems, NaNO2–Ca3(PO4)2 and NaNO2–WO3, ternary system, NaNO2– Ca3(PO4)2–WO3, were investigated as auxiliary phase for capacitive-type gas sensor using MIS structure. As a result, the latter system was found to give a promising NO2 sensor if properly attached. This paper aimed at reporting these data as well as the NO2-sensing properties. 
Devices were loaded into the electric furnace and exposed to 10–500 ppb NO2 in a conventional gas ﬂow system. Capacitance–voltage (C–V) properties and variations of voltage at constant capacitance (selected according to the C–V property of each device) were measured in temperature range of 130–160 C to ﬁnd the optimum working conditions.
Ionic conductivities of the auxiliary phases of NaNO2 and NaNO2–Ca3(PO4)2 were measured by means of impedance analyzer (SI 1260 impedance/gain-phase analyzer, Solartron, frequency range: 5× 105 to 1 Hz, AC amplitude: 100 mV) in synthetic air. Each auxiliary phase was formed to be 0.1 mm in thickness on alumina substrate with Au electrode of comb type (90 um in space between electrodes).
A detailed description of device fabrication process was presented in authors' earlier work. Fig. 1 shows the structure of capacitive-type gas sensor used in this study. Capacitors were fabricated on a (1 0 0) p-type silicon substrate (10 ohm cm). Silicon surface was oxidized in a tubular furnace at 900 C for 30 min in dry oxygen resulting in a 25nm thick layer of SiO2. A layer of tantalum pentoxide, 100 nm in thickness, was then sputtered on the surface of SiO2/Si using RF-sputtering in 8× 10 −3 Pa pressure of argon and oxygen, followed by 1-h annealing in oxygen at 600 C. Gold as backside electrode was sputtered on the backside of the samples after eliminating oxide layer of the backside in 5 wt.% HF solution. Auxiliary phase (sensing material) was attached to the surface in the form of a thin layer through melting and quenching process. Gold mesh as top electrode was attached with the auxiliary phase during melting and solidiﬁcation of the material.
Auxiliary phases were prepared through mixing of the pure materials (NaNO2, Ca3(PO4)2 and WO3) in desired ratios, followed by grinding into ﬁne particles. The mixtures were then melted and grinded again, resulting in a ﬁne mixture of the powders. The ﬁne powders obtained were applied to the surface of Ta2O5/SiO2/Si along with attachment of top electrode.
In the case of p-type semiconductor, when negative voltage is applied to silicon substrate, holes as majority carriers diffuse into the bulk of silicon, forming a capacitor near the SiO2/Si interface (inside silicon). Therefore the capacitance changes with applying voltage, and MIS device gives an “S-shape” C–V property as shown in Fig. 2. On the other hand, the deposition of solid electrolyte (auxiliary phase) layer along with metal electrode produces a gas-sensitive half-cell when exposed to the sample gas, imposing a voltage as result of the reaction between the electrode and the auxiliary phase at the interface. In the case of NaNO2 auxiliary phase, NaNO2 provides a Na+ ionic conductor, which participates in the three phase contacts for NO2-sensing reaction as follows.
Based on above phenomena, the capacitive-type gas sensor was provided by replacing metal electrode in MIS structure with a layer of ionic conductor connected to a metal electrode. Fig. 3 shows C–V behavior under exposure to air and air containing 1 ppm NO2 at 140 C. As it can be seen, the device shows the same C–V behavior as an ideal one mentioned in Fig. 2, i.e., the capacitance varies from accumulation to inversion states with decreasing applied voltage, which is a result of the formation of the second capacitor inside silicon wafer as stated before. Obviously, C–V curve is shifted to left (negative voltages) by exposing to NO2 gas. Thus, keeping operating conditions, we can record voltage response of the device to NO2 at constant capacitance. Fig. 4 shows the response transients to stepwise changing of concentration of NO2 for the device with pure NaNO2 auxiliary phase. 
It was found that the device attached with pure NaNO2 auxiliary phase needed a long time for which the 90% response and 90% recovery time s to 500 ppb NO2 were 4 and 95 min, respectively. In addition, the sensor signal was noisy in the recovery transient. As shown in Fig. 5, however, the voltage response showed linearity to the logarithm of NO2 concentration in the range of 10–500 ppb NO2. Considering the Nernstian behavior, the slope of the correlation line, 86.7 mV/decade, nominally corresponds to an electrochemical reaction involving n = 0.99 where n is the number of electrons involved in the electrochemical reaction of NO2. The capacitive-type sensor was found to have a capability for detection of sub-ppm NO2 concentration which is legislated to 40–60 ppb in Japan according to the environmental issues, although the response and recovery times were long.
Nakata et al. reported that NaNO2–Ca3(PO4)2 or NaNO2–WO3 binary auxiliary phase is useful for improvement of the lower detection limit and response and recovery rates in FET-type NO2 sensor. The possibility of getting improved response and recovery rates for capacitive-type sensor using the binary auxiliary phase was, therefore, investigated in this work. Device with NaNO2–Ca3(PO4)2 (9:1 C as shown in molar ratio) showed good response at 140 in Fig. 6. Above 140 C, no stability was found in response behavior and, below the mentioned temperature, the sensor signal (voltage) did not respond with a linear correlation to the logarithm of NO2 concentration. The 90% response and 90% recovery times to 500 ppb NO2 were 4 and 22 min, respectively, indicating that the recovery time was improved by modifying with Ca3(PO4)2. Fig. 7 shows the voltage response as correlated with the concentration of NO2 for the NaNO2–Ca3(PO4)2-attached device. 
The voltage was found to increase linearly with a decrease in logarithm of NO2 concentration in the range of 30–500 ppb. 
The slope of the correlation line, 86.7 mV/decade, corresponds nominally to n = 1.03. However, deviation from the linearity became obvious in the more dilute region of NO2. Lower detection limit of the device, therefore, seems to be about 30 ppb under operating conditions.
Similar test was carried out for the device with NaNO2–WO3 (10:1 in molar ratio) auxiliary phase. Fig. 8 shows the response transients to various concentration of NO2 in air at 160 C. Below this temperature, the device gave some oscillations in both the C–V and the response curves.
The device showed fairly good sensing properties and the times for 90% response and recovery to 500 ppb NO2 were 0.5 and 10 min, respectively. A Nernstian correlation was observed again in this case over the NO2 concentration range of 30–500 ppb, as shown in Fig. 9. The slope, 68.54 mV/decade, gave n = 1.24, which deviated slightly from the Nernstian trend. In the case of NaNO2–WO3 auxiliary phase, it is expected that the gas diffusion through micropores, which are introduced to auxiliary phase by modifying sensing material with WO3, acts as an effective mechanism for faster response and recovery of the device. WO3 particles play a role as electrodes on which NO2 molecules are adsorbed, according to WO3 property as a semiconductor. These expectations seem to be responsible for the quick response. However, the slope of the correlation line should be improved.
Regarding to the above results obtained from binary auxiliary phases, the Ca3(PO4)2-containing phase showed a response closer to ideal Nernstian behavior as compared to WO3-containing phase. On the other hand, the latter auxiliary phase shows a faster response and recovery rates. If a ternary phase of NaNO2–Ca3(PO4)2–WO3 can be used as sensing phase, it seems to have a possibility of getting optimum sensor response, with fast response and recovery rates and ideal Nernstian behavior. Thus the mixture of NaNO2–Ca3(PO4)2–WO3, 87.8:7.2:5 in molar ratio, was applied as an auxiliary phase and tested in measurement of sensor properties. Response transients at 130 C are shown in Fig. 10. As a remarkable difference, the device showed a more stable and faster response and recovery rates as compared to previous devices attached with binary phases. The 90% response and 90% recovery times to 500 ppb NO2 were 1.5 and 8.8 min, respectively. 
Due to such improvement in transient properties, the device showed fairly good correlation of voltage response and NO2 concentration, as shown in Fig. 11. The Nernstian correlation indicates the slope, 79.58 mV/decade, corresponding to n = 1.00 in the concentration range of 20–500 ppb NO2.
Fig. 12 shows the response curves to 500 ppb NO2 for the devices mentioned above. It was found that the recovery transients were improved to be faster by modifying auxiliary phase. Table 1 summarizes the sensing properties for all of devices in this study. Comprehensively judging from the response and recovery rates, lower detection limit and n value, it is considered that the device attached with ternary auxiliary phase shows best sensing properties. To ﬁnd the reason of this property enhancement, the structure of each auxiliary phase was investigated in detail. As a result, a striking difference was disclosed between the auxiliary phases.
An SEM view of the surface of pure NaNO2 is shown in Fig. 13(a). The observed continuous and smooth phase indicates that the diffusion of gas molecules to the interface between Au electrode and NaNO2 is difﬁcult in device operating conditions. On the other hand, modiﬁcation of sensing phase with Ca3(PO4)2 changed the morphology of surface drastically as shown in Fig. 13(b) through forming new grains in the diameter range of 2–10 ␮m and introduction of pores to the structure. Modiﬁcation with WO3 was found to be useful for introducing a ﬁne porous structure, as shown in Fig. 13(c). Finally, the ternary auxiliary phase seems to possess unique structure available for gas diffusion, as shown in Fig. 13(d).
The ionic conductivity of the auxiliary phases of NaNO2 and NaNO2–Ca3(PO4)2 was simply investigated. As shown in Fig. 14, it was found that the ionic conductivity is increased by modifying pure sensing material with Ca3(PO4)2. Such increase in ionic conductivity may contribute greatly to the device operation at lower temperatures.
From the above results, it is considered that the porous structure resulted from modifying auxiliary phase with WO3 and the high ionic conductivity obtained by modifying sensing material with Ca3(PO4)2 may be responsible for the improvement of sensing properties. However, the details should be veriﬁed by further investigations.
Modiﬁcation of NaNO2 auxiliary phase with Ca3(PO4)2 and WO3 can improve the NO2-sensing properties of capacitive-type gas sensor. Addition of Ca3(PO4)2 or WO3 enhances the ionic conductivity or results in formation of micropores in auxiliary phase, respectively, which speed up response and recovery processes effectively. Through this effect, the device attached with NaNO2–Ca3(PO4)2–WO3 ternary auxiliary phase showed that the 90% response and 90% recovery times were reduced to 1.5 and 8.8 min, respectively, and that the response corresponded Nernstian correlation in the concentration range of 20–500 ppb NO2 at C. These results promise a capacitive-type NO2 sensor 130 with improved sensing properties compared to the existing ones.