Although gas sensors have been almost matured in some application ﬁelds, there are a variety of newly emerging markets and potential markets which will be substantiated when gas sensors are innovated sufﬁciently. The importance of materials design in innovating gas sensors are demonstrated by taking semiconductor gas sensors and solid electrolyte gas sensors as examples. In addition, attempts to make the sensor devices more intelligent and more quantitative are also important for further advancements of gas sensor technology. © 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
There are a variety of gas sensors so far developed. Some sensors, such as electrolyte solution based electrochemical sensors and catalytic combustion type ones, were developed a long time ago for professional uses. A real sensor era has started in 1970s during which semiconductor combustible gas sensors, solid electrolyte oxygen sensors and humidity sensors were commercialized for non-professional uses. On the occasion of the ﬁrst IMCS held at Fukuoka, Japan in 1983, major topics of gas sensors were comprised of these gas sensors. In the two decades since, extensive efforts have been compiled not only for advancing these sensors but also for developing various new gas sensors, which have been in great demand to make sure safety, health, amenity, environmental reservation, energy saving and so on. Fig. 1 shows the statistics of the whole sales of the sensors produced in Japan for the year of 1998. 
Large shares are occupied by groups of physical sensors, the group of gas and humidity sensors counting only 1.6% of the whole sales. Unfortunately, these statistics failed to include oxygen sensors for car emission control, which are produced in a massive scale exceeding 10 million sets yearly. The real share of this group should then be considerably larger than that. Even so it is true that the gas sensors markets are still minor. Nevertheless, the importance of gas sensors for our modern society is never so minor, as easily exempliﬁed by the importance of oxygen sensors for automobiles. Gas sensor technology has already grown to be indispensable for various aspects in our life. Yet further advancements of the technology are strongly needed in order to improve sustainability of our society and quality of life. This article aims at contributing to those advancements by describing the author's personal opinions about what has been done and what is yet to be done in this ﬁeld of technology.
The atmospheric air we live in contains numerous kinds of chemical species, natural and artiﬁcial, some of which are vital to our life while many others are harmful more or less. Fig. 2 illustrates the concentration levels of typical gas components concerned. The vital gases like O2 and humidity should be kept at adequate levels in living atmospheres, while hazardous gases should be controlled to be under the designated levels. As for lower hydrocarbons and H2, which are used as fuels, their explosion after leakage into air is a major concern for gas sensors, and 1/10 of lower explosion limit (LEL) for each gas is taken as an alarming level for gas sensors. For toxic gases, offensive odors, volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and other air pollutants, their standards have been legislated by various laws based on the strength of toxicity or offensiveness of each gas in Japan, as indicated by star marks in the ﬁgure. 
The full line shown for each gas indicates the range of concentration safely covered by a commercial gas sensor, while the broken line indicates that reportedly covered in a laboratory test. In the recent two decades, these dilute components in air have emerged as targets for sensory detection, but many of them are left yet to be challenged. Some standards of VOCs such as benzene are seen to be less than 0.1 ppm, far out of reach by the present gas sensors. Current trends in gas sensor technology are described in more detail below.
With a history of more than 3 decades, markets of gas sensors have become almost mature in some ﬁelds such as combustible gas monitoring, oxygen sensing for combustion exhaust control and humidity sensing for amenity of living spaces.
As a matter of course, such mature markets can be a great base for developing new sensors to replace conventional ones. A good example can be picked up in the ﬁeld of combustible gas monitoring. This ﬁeld was ﬁrst opened with semiconductor gas sensors. However, catalytic combustion type gas sensors, which have been popular traditionally in Europe, have been improved to satisfy the requirements of gas alarms for combustible gases including CO in air. Competitions are serious in the ﬁeld of CO gas monitoring where a limiting current type sensor using a proton conducting membrane shown in Fig. 3 has emerged as a second competitor. The last one is an extended version of the mixed potential type sensors for H2 and CO we reported about 15 years ago. This sensor operates at room temperature so that it is favored by some users as a battery-driven, cordless sensor.
There are several emerging markets of gas sensors as well. Fig. 4 illustrates how a domestic house will be equipped with gas sensors in Japan. Various kinds of sensors to monitor CO2, air quality, odors and humidity are in increasing demand for various purposes. For example, a large number of air cleaners equipped with an air-quality sensor are produced yearly to be installed not only in houses but also in car cabins. 
It is noted that most of these applications are concerned with combustible gases at fairly low levels and therefore best met by semiconductor gas sensors. An auto-damper system (ADS) for car ventilation is obtained by coupling two semiconductor gas sensors which respond to hydrocarbons and NOx (NO and NO2), respectively. It opens or closes air inlet depending on whether the outside air is clean or polluted. 
As shown in Fig. 5, production of ADS is increasing year-byyear, exceeding 3 millions in quantity in 2001. Yet another example is given by combination type ﬁre alarms. Traditionally, ﬁre alarms have used a smoke detector or a heat detector. In the event of ﬁre, however, various combustible gases are also produced and those gases, particularly hydrogen, diffuse more rapidly than smoke or heat does. In many cases sensing those gases is useful for earlier detection of ﬁre.
Because of this advantage, a semiconductor gas sensor has been incorporated additionally into the conventional ﬁre alarms. Number of combined type ﬁre alarms is increasing steeply in recent years, as shown in Fig. 6. These examples indicate the high potentiality of gas sensors in our society.
Once a gas sensor (seed) is developed to meet a strong demand from our society (need), a prosperous new market would be created. Numerous examples can be cited for such demands. Car emission control is going to be more and more stringent. Onboard sensors to monitor NOx, hydrocarbons and CO are in strong demands to meet the stringent emission control. The sensors are to be used not only to check the emission levels but also to diagnose the activity of three-way catalysts. 
Onboard sensing of NH3 is also demanded for realizing urea-based selective reduction of NOx. Car coolers are going to change to the ones mediated by CO2 in near future so that CO2 leakage monitoring will be demanded for safety purpose. 
Apart from car-related demands, monitoring of various toxic or offensive compounds indoor and outdoor would become very important for securing health and amenity, as already mentioned. Particularly, sensing of oxygen containing gases such as CO2, NOx and SO2 is badly needed for various applications. In addition, special attention should be directed to the various hazardous gases present in working places. For example, N2O and ethylene oxide gas frequently used in hospitals are beyond sensory detection at present. Various chemical reagents such as NH3, HNO3, HF and PH3 are used in silicon machining factories but the vapors of these reagents or their reaction products in the closed spaces are mostly left as targets of future sensory detection. From a broader viewpoint, we are also requested to think of ubiquitous sensors to implement the development of ubiquitous information technology. All these examples indicate that our goal of the sensor development is still far away.
In order to be used in practice, a gas sensor should fulﬁll many requirements which depend on the purposes, locations and conditions of sensor operation. Among the requirements, primarily important would be sensing performance-related ones (e.g., sensitivity, selectivity and rate of response) and reliability-related ones (e.g., drift, stability and interfering gases). These are all connected with the sensing materials used so that selection and processing of the sensing materials (materials design) have key importance in research and development of gas sensors. The author believes that materials design is a base for new innovative sensors and thus for innovations of gas sensor technology. Here it is tried to demonstrate this for two types of gas sensors.
The gas sensors using n-type oxide semiconductors like SnO2 detect gases from a change in the electrical resistance of a porous sensing body. These sensors are best suited for detecting combustible gases at low concentration levels in view of sensitivity, stability, robustness and so on. Despite the simple working principle, however, the gas sensing mechanism involved is fairly complex. Sensing performances, especially sensitivity, are controlled by three independent factors of receptor function, transducer function and utility, as illustrated in Fig. 7. Receptor function concerns the ability of the oxide surface to interact with the target gas. Chemical properties of the surface oxygen of the oxide itself is responsible for this function in a neat oxide device, but this function can be largely modiﬁed to induce a large change in sensitivity when an additive (noble metals, acidic or basic oxides) is loaded on the oxide surface. 
Transducer function concerns the ability to convert the signal caused by chemical interaction of the oxide surface (work function change) into electrical signal. This function is played by each boundary between grains, to which a double-Schottky barrier model can be applied. The resistance depends on the barrier height and then on the concentration of the target gas. This situation is essentially unchanged with a change in the grain size (diameter, D) of the oxide unless D is kept above a critical value (Dc) which is just equal to twice the thickness (Ls) of surface space charge layer of the oxide. For D smaller than Dc (6 nm for SnO2), sensitivity increases sharply with decreasing D. Since usually Ls is a function of the concentration of electron donors in the bulk oxide, Dc can be changed by doping the base oxide with a foreign oxide. When the oxide is loaded with a foreign additive, the additive can modify Ls as well if it interacts electronically with the oxide. 
In fact such a change in Ls or barrier height explains marked sensitizing effects of certain noble metals like Pd for the sensors of this type. In the case of Pd-loaded SnO2, for example, under exposure to air Pd is oxidized into PdO, which acts a strong acceptor of electrons from SnO2. In this state, each grain of SnO2 is covered with a strongly electron-deﬁcient space charge layer, giving rise to a high resistance. Upon contact to a combustible gas in air, PdO is reduced to Pd which is no longer an electron acceptor, resulting in a sharp drop in the electrical resistance. It is noted that the sensitizing effects come out through coupling a redox change of the additive with a change in its electronic interaction with the oxide grains.
The last factor, utility, concerns the accessibility of inner oxide grains to the target gas. The importance of this factor is made obvious when one considers that the target gas (reducing gas) reacts with the oxide surface on the way of diffusing into the balk of device. If the rate of reaction is too large compared with that of diffusion, the gas molecules cannot access the grains located at inner sites, leaving them un-utilized for gas sensing and thus resulting in a loss in sensor response. The existence of this factor was suspected a fairly long time ago from familiar volcano-shaped correlations between sensor response and operating temperature, but quantitative understanding of it was made possible only recently for thin ﬁlm devices derived from SnO2 sols. 
When a thin ﬁlm with pores of a uniform radius is exposed to a target gas at a concentration of Cs, the relative concentration (C/Cs) inside the ﬁlm can be formulated to be, C/Cs = cos h[1− (x/L)]m/cos h m, by solving a simple diffusion-reaction equation under the steady state conditions. Here, C is the concentration of target gas in the ﬁlm, Cs the concentration of target gas at x = 0, x the distance from the surface, L the ﬁlm thickness and m is a non-dimensional quantity deﬁned by m = L(k/Dk)1/2 where k is rate constant of a ﬁrst order surface reaction and Dk the Knudsen diffusion coefﬁcient. As illustrated in Fig. 8, the depth proﬁles of concentration depend markedly on the magnitude of m. For m < 1, signiﬁcant part of target gas can reach the bottom of the ﬁlm. For m > 3, however, most part of the gas is consumed before arriving at the bottom and at extremely large m only the surface region is accessible to the gas. 
When the increase of sheet conductance at given x is assumed to be proportional to the target gas concentration at that point as a ﬁrst approximation, sensor response of the ﬁlm can be derived easily by integrating the sheet conductance over the ﬁlm. It is noted that the proportionality constant, called sensor response coefﬁcient, used in the assumption is related to the surface reaction and thus steeply increases with increasing temperature. The utility factor, deﬁned as the ratio of the sensor response to that expected under the optimal condition of m = 0, can be formulated to be equal to (1/m)tan h m. As shown in Fig. 9, the utility factor decreases with increasing m so that m should be kept small, or, small L and small k/Dk ratio should be combined to keep the utility factor close to unity. 
Since Dk = (4r/3)(2RT/πM)1/2, where r is pore radius, M the molecular mass of target gas and RT has its usual meaning, the ﬁlm has to have r as large as possible and L as small as possible to obtain higher utility factor. This is in agreement with the experimental result that the responses of SnO2 thin ﬁlms to H2 decreased with increasing L. Further, r is known empirically to be roughly comparable to the size (D) of grains involved so that the utility factor can also be controlled through D. Strikingly sharp dependence of sensor response on the grain (crystallite) size has been observed for H2S, which is seemingly more susceptible to a change in microstructure than H2, as shown in Fig. 10.
It would be of interest to consider how the volcano-shaped correlation between resistance and temperature appears. The sensor response under optimal condition (m = 0) tends to increase with increasing T because the sensor response coefﬁcient increases. The utility factor, on the other hand, goes down with increasing T, eventually approaching to zero at sufﬁciently high T, because the term k/Dk increases sharply to take a very large value at high T. The volcano-shaped correlation results when these phenomena are coupled together, as simulated for different ﬁlm thicknesses in Fig. 11. Apparently the temperature at the response maximum can be taken as a measure to estimate the openness of microstructure. These results indicate how important the microstructure control is for promoting the sensor response of a thin ﬁlm device. For a thick ﬁlm device or a bulk type device, microstructure is more complicated with the presence of secondary particles of grains and macro-pores. 
Nevertheless, almost the same conclusions can be drawn for these devices if L is redeﬁned as the radius of secondary particles involved. More complicated situation prevails for the devices loaded with foreign additives where all of the three independent factors mentioned before should be optimized. Even in such a case, however, the importance of microstructure control remains intact.
For instance, the sensor response to CO for a thick ﬁlm device using Co3O4 (0.5 mass%) loaded SnO2 goes through a fairly sharp maximum on increasing mixing time in a satellite ball mill for the composite prior to screen-printing, as shown in Fig. 12. 
The sensor response after mixing the optimum time is about 1000 to 100 ppm CO, which is almost two orders of magnitude higher than the highest values so far achieved with various devices. As evaluated form the pore size distribution analysis for the powder samples, the volume of pores in the radius range of 10–35 nm increases in the initial mixing time up to 6 h. This suggests that the promotion of sensor response is brought about by the increase of porosity, though the deterioration of sensor response with the later mixing is yet to be investigated. Optimization of higher order structure for a composite system would be one of the most important subjects in the research and development of gas sensors for very dilute components like benzene.
In recent years, one of major topics in solid electrolyte gas sensors has been research and development of type III sensors for which an electrochemical cell made of a typical solid electrolyte like NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12, Na+ conductor) which is attached with an oxyacid salt like Na2CO3 as an auxiliary phase (foreign receptor). The devices of this type were ﬁrst proposed for detection of SO2 and CO2 by the group of Saito and co-workers. For example, the CO2 sensor was constructed as follows. 
Upon exposure to CO2 of partial pressure PCO2, theoretically this cell generates electromotive force (EMF) according to the Nernst’s equation, EMF = E0 + (RT/2F )ln PCO2, when the oxygen partial pressures over the sensing and reference electrodes are the same. Here F is Faraday constant and RT has the usual meaning. E0 is a constant which is determined by chemical activities of Na2O (in NASICON) and Na2CO3. Obviously the sensor forms a galvanic cell (transducer) by combining a CO2-sensitive half-cell (right) with an O2-sensitive one (left). Similarly a sensor for NO2 and SO3 (or SO2) can be formulated easily by replacing NA2CO3 by NaNO3 or Na2SO4, respectively. Although these devices work reasonably well under ideal conditions at elevated operating temperatures, gas-sensing properties become unstable under humid conditions. Because of such weaknesses, none of these sensors have been put in practice, in spite of the intensive research efforts devoted. 
From a viewpoint of practical devices, both of the half-cells should be improved substantially, as described mainly for the case of CO2 sensors below. As for the auxiliary phase used for the gas-sensitive half cell in CO2 sensing devices, we found that binary systems between Na2CO3 and alkaline earth metal carbonate such as Na2CO3–BaCO3 (1:2 in molar ratio) were superior to the neat phase of Na2CO3. When the auxiliary phase was attached to the surface of NASICON disk by a melting-andquenching method, Na2CO3 was found to corrode the NASICON surface very seriously, while the binary systems were far less corrosive. In addition, the binary systems made it possible to obtain a ﬁne, porous layer of auxiliary phase, which was beneﬁcial indeed for quick responses of the devices to CO2. The devices exhibited excellent CO2 sensing performances without being disturbed by humidity under steady operation at elevated temperatures (400–500 C). 
Unfortunately, however, these devices turned out to be totally impractical because the auxiliary phases containing Na2CO3 were too deliquescent at room temperature to survive in humid atmospheres; once kept switched off overnight in humid atmospheres, for example, the devices lost the sensing capability almost completely. Fortunately it was found that Li2CO3, non-deliquescent carbonate, could replace Na2CO3 and that the binary systems including it like Li2CO3–BaCO3 (1:2 in molar ratio) gave excellent CO2 sensing properties at elevated temperature as well as good stability in humid atmospheres at room temperature. Such material design was also essential for developing type III sensors for SO2 and NO2. Gas sensing capabilities of some of type III sensors developed in our laboratory are shown in Fig. 13, together with the solid electrolytes and auxiliary phases used. 
For the SO2 sensor, a ternary system auxiliary phase including SiO2 was useful to improve adhesion of the auxiliary phase to the substrate of magnesia-stabilized zirconia (MSZ). For the NO2 sensor, NaNO2 was found to be a far better auxiliary phase for detecting low concentrations of NO2 than NaNO3. Especially a binary composite NaNO2–Li2CO3 (9:1 in molar ratio) made it possible to extend lower detection limit (LDL) down to 5 ppb or below. It is remarked that each type III sensor exhibits EMF in air (base EMF), which is most probably the response to the concerned target gas dissociated thermally from the auxiliary phase used. Optimization of the auxiliary phase to lower the base EMF is thus a way to improve LDL. It is concluded that the auxiliary phase determines all the important properties to respond the target gas (receptor function).
Improvement of the reference half-cell was found to be also indispensable for the devices using NASICON solid electrolyte. It has been revealed that NASICON is vulnerable to attack by humid air at ambient temperature, eluding out the Na3PO4 impurity present at grain boundaries to be deposited on the surface as shown in Fig. 14. In the presence of CO2, this impurity can act as a source to derive Na2CO3, which provides the reference electrode with CO2 sensing properties and thus deprives the devices of gas sensing capabilities. In addition, it is also possible in the presence of humid air and CO2 that the Na2O component in NASICON reacts with CO2 to result in a decrease in its activity, which is also unfavorable for the reference half-cell. These phenomena are not visible during steady sensor operation at elevate temperature
but become conspicuous as a drift in base EMF or a loss of CO2 sensing properties when the devices are kept at room temperature in humid atmospheres. In order to overcome this problem, the reference half-cell should be improved to be resistant to the change of NASICON surface. In principle, this is achieved by introducing either an oxide ion conductor such as BICUBOX  or a solid reference material such as Na0.6CoO2 (cobalt bronze) between the reference electrode and NASICON to construct a new reference half-cell as follows:
The former material would allow the half cell to be ﬁxed at the potential determined by the partial pressure of oxygen (air reference), while the latter would to that determined by the electrode reaction of the material itself, − xNa0.6CoO2 = xNa0.6−1/xCoO2 + Na+ + e , (solid reference). Actually the latter material turned out to be unstable to the attack by CO2 as it was. 
Fortunately however, it could be stabilized effectively when coated with a layer of an inorganic glass. Both of the above materials were effective in stabilizing the EMF response to CO2 from drifting even after the devices were exposed to humid atmospheres at room temperature. Fig. 15 compares the behavior of the glass-coated Na0.6CoO2 with that of a bare Au reference electrode during a heat cycle test; Temperature was switched between operating temperature (450 C) and room temperature at intervals of one to several days, while, under a ﬁxed concentration of CO2, humidity of the gas ﬂow was altered stepwise at independent intervals as shown. For this test, a three-electrode device was fabricated as also shown and the potential of each electrode was measured relative to the third electrode (Au) which was always exposed to clean synthetic air. It is seen that the potential of the bare Au electrode continued to ﬂoat up and down during the heat-cycle test, reﬂecting the instability of the NASICON surface. 
On the other hand, the potential of the other electrode tended to converge to a steady value after an ageing period in the beginning, conﬁrming its reliability as a reference electrode. From the same ﬁgure, the potential of this electrode is seen to reach the steady value quickly at the heating up stage. Such fast warm-up characteristics are requested especially for applications to non-stationary facilities like cars. It is remarked that the introduction of a solid reference material should be also important for the NO2 sensor using NASICON as well, though this is yet to be veriﬁed. 
Conventionally the sensing electrode for type III CO2 sensors is provided with metals such as Au. When the metal electrode is replaced by an oxide electrode such as indiumtin-oxide (ITO), utterly different CO2 sensing properties are obtained. That is, the device fabricated as shown in Fig. 16 exhibits excellent CO2 sensing performances at room temperature (30 C) in the presence of humidity at 30% and above in relative humidity, as shown in the same ﬁgure. In this device, the same auxiliary phase as used previously is located between NASICON and a porous layer of ITO, while the Au reference electrode is covered with a layer of an inorganic adhesive. The sensing electrode reaction involving CO2 in this case appears to be mediated by adsorbed water on the surface or in the pores of ITO grains. This result suggests the feasibility of room temperature sensors for CO2.
Finally it is pointed out that the reference half cell mentioned above can be replaced by a MISFET chip as a new transducer, as illustrated for the case of NO2 sensing in Fig. 17. The NO2-sensitve half-cell consisting of a NaNO2 based composite and Au electrode is now deposited over the gate area of the device. This device responds to NO2 in air by a change in the threshold voltage of FET and the mechanism and performance of NO2 sensing have been shown to be exactly the same as those of the type III NO2 sensor mentioned above.
Gas sensors are an indispensable interface through which we acquire chemical information out of our surroundings in real time. The information provides a base on which we construct feedback control systems for chemical processes, automatic operation systems for gas-related facilities, alarming systems for gas appliances, security systems to protect workers from chemical hazards, etc. When gas sensors are used collectively as a network, on the other hand, chemical information can be acquired as a function of location and time. The distribution of particular chemicals over an urbane area as well as its change with time, for example, can be mapped in this way. The maps would be useful for diagnosing the quality of atmospheric air in that area or setting forth a countermeasure against air pollutions. 
As a similar example, there has been a plan to diagnose the ﬂow or congestion of vehicles in urbane area by placing along the trafﬁc roads a series of gas sensors which respond to the chemicals emitted from the vehicles. Various gas sensors have been developed and put into practical use in many ﬁelds of applications so far. These achievements are however, rather limited, considering the intrinsic potentiality of gas sensor technology. There are a variety of new or emerging ﬁelds of sensor applications, as mentioned previously. Meeting these needs with advanced or new sensors one by one would lead to new frontiers of gas sensor technology. The followings are personal opinions of the author on what is important for innovations of the technology.
Innovations of sensor devices are no doubt the key to open new frontiers. Here innovations can be conceived in various aspects, i.e., development of a new sensor device capable of detecting a target gas which has so far been out of sensory detection, upgrading the sensitivity of a known device by more than one order of magnitude, extending the lower detection limit to a target gas by more than one order of magnitude, realization of room temperature gas sensors, development of gas sensors compatible with micro-machining, etc. Most of current sensors have been designed based on empirical knowledge rather than materials science. Basic studies to elucidate gas sensing mechanism and key designing factors are necessary to establish a secure base for these innovations. This is especially so for gas sensors using ceramic materials which change their physicochemical properties drastically depending on the way and condition of processing used. 
It seems worth trying to develop ultimate sensors which are extreme in certain features such as sensitivity, selectivity and size, because possibilities and limitations would be made clear in those processes.
In most cases sensor output contains a constant term (air base) which is irrelevant to target gas. When the air base is not stable but tends to shift or drift with time, reliability of gas sensing is undermined. This is serious especially when absolute values of target gas concentration are required. If it is made possible to diagnose or calibrate the shift or drift, gas sensors would ﬁnd a lot of new users in various application ﬁelds. In semiconductor gas sensors, the shift of air base is caused mainly by moisture, while the drift is by a change in physicochemical properties of sensing materials. For gas alarms which detect rather quick increases in target gas concentration, the air base (resistance) is in many cases approximated to be the highest resistance the sensor has experienced during a designated time span (one to several hours) precedent. Unfortunately this approximation cannot always be veriﬁed in general cases. 
It has been proposed to compensate the moisture effect in combustiblegas sensing by referring to a compensation device which is exactly the same as the sensing device (thick ﬁlm type) except for a sheet of glass placed on top in order to make the device sensitive to moisture only. More investigations are requested to elaborate new ways of self-diagnosis and selfcalibration.
Semiconductor gas sensors respond to combustible gases indirectly through their oxidation reactions over the sensing materials used. Generally speaking, the sensor response is a function of two variables, i.e., kind of gas and its concentration so that one cannot determine both variables simultaneously from the output of a single sensor. When plural sensors signiﬁcantly different in gas sensing property are combined, one can obtain information about chemical species. This is well exempliﬁed by an odor analyzer recently commercialized. It adapts two gas sensors (A and B) of which A is more sensitive to light odorants (NH3, H2S, etc.) than to heavy odorants (aromatic compounds, large unsaturated hydrocarbons, etc.) and B shows just opposite sensing properties. The quality and strength of a given odor are evaluated simultaneously by correlating the output of sensor A with that of B, as shown in Fig. 18. It is noteworthy that this kind of information can be acquired by using just a couple of sensors.
Standard instrumental analysis is carried out based on various analytical techniques such as densiﬁcation, extraction and separation of chemical species involved. Some of these techniques can also be combined effectively with gas sensors to construct a hybrid system. For example, a target gas can be captured easily by adsorption if adequate adsorbent is available, while the captured gas can be freed back on heating the adsorbent. In other words, the target gas, even if too dilute, can be concentrated up to a level sufﬁcient for sensory detection by choosing the conditions of adsorption and desorption. Thus a hybrid system using such temperature-modulated adsorption would be useful for detecting very dilute gases, although the sensory data are obtained only intermittently, as illustrated in Fig. 19. It is also possible to combine a gas chromatography technique with a gas sensor. The resulting system would be suited for detecting individual components in gaseous mixtures. 
These new functions are, however, acquired at the cost of the important feature of gas sensors, i.e., providing real time and continuous information.
Gas sensor technology is an indispensable tool to create new technologies and new life-styles which are compatible with sustainable society. Further advancement of it is no doubt desired strongly worldwide. To enhance it, researchers would be requested to pay attention to a few more suggestions. Gas sensor technology is interdisciplinary indeed, so that collaborations among people working in broadly different disciplines, ranging from materials scientists to market developers, would be necessary to open new frontiers. Researchers should be well acquainted with the needs having emerged or newly emerging in industry and society. For this purpose, one should listen to opinions of users and market developers carefully. Importance of carrying out ﬁeld test cannot be overstated when a new sensor device has been developed. 
It is important not only because it conﬁrms the feasibility of the device in practice but also because it is a direct way to demonstrate the potentiality of the new frontier the device aims at opening. Finally, challenging spirit is a backbone of every successful researcher. The author hopes sincerely that gas sensor technology will be innovated to contribute more and more to the society in the future.