The improvement for the deterioration of CO2 sensing properties in lower humidity condition was attempted to a NASICON-based potentiometric CO2 device operative at room temperature. To optimize the sensing electrode, the device was fabricated by using ITO powders with a large speciﬁc surface area and by using a mixture of ITO and basic oxide powders. Although CO2 sensing properties of the device were markedly improved by applying the above ideas in lower humidity condition, it was conﬁrmed that the basic EMF drifts with changing the humidity conditions. Further, to ﬁnd out the appreciate reference electrode material, the thermal and chemical stabilities were examined by XRD measurement for three kinds of oxides such as Li0.62CoO2, Na0.6CoO2 and Li2TiO3. As the results, Na0.6CoO2 and Li2TiO3 were much stabler than Li0.62CoO2 thermally and chemically. It was also found that Li2TiO3 has a poor electric conductivity. 
Therefore, Na0.6CoO2 is the most suitable material for the reference electrode of the NASICON-based device operative at room temperature. 
The measurement and/or control of CO2 concentrations are required in indoor spacing, agriculture ﬁeld and bio-related processes and so on. Several kinds of CO2 sensors such as potentiometric, capacitive, resistive and amperometric types have been proposed up to now. As the CO2 detection of these sensors bases on acid-base reactions, the basic substances such as Li2CO3–BaCO3, NdCoO3, PbO–BaTiO3 and SnO2–La2O3 were adopted as the sensing electrode materials. Those sensors are generally equipped with a heater, because they must be operated at elevated temperature (above 400 C) to advance the electrochemical reaction smoothly. However, the sensors combined with a heater consume a large amount of electrical power and have difﬁculties in downsizing. If a CO2 sensor which operate at room temperature can be realized, the heater can be eliminated from the sensor, so that the sensor can be much smaller and simpler, and operated easily with batteries.
For the past 10 years, NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12)-based potentiometric sensors attached with a metal-oxide sensing electrode have been investigated to develop the solid-state CO2 sensor operative at room temperature. Except that the sensing electrode is composed of metal oxide and carbonate, the electrochemical cell structure of the device is basically identical with a potentiometric CO2 sensor operative at high temperature. The metal oxide applied to the sensing electrode serves to maintain physisorbed water on the surface. We have previously reported that the physisorbed water on the surface of metal oxide behaves just like a solvent and promotes the electrochemical CO2 sensing reaction even at room temperature. However, the device includes the two serious problems that should be improved to practical use. 
The ﬁrst is that the CO2 sensing capability of the device deteriorates signiﬁcantly below 50% relative humidity (RH) at 60 C, because of the decrement of physisorbed water on the metal oxide in lower humidity condition. The second is long-term stability of reference electrode potential ranging over the whole potentiometric-type gas sensors. This problem is closely connected with the electromotive force (EMF) difference between sensing and counter (or reference) electrode potential, where the EMF difference is used as the device output.
In the present study, we tried to improve these failures for the sensing and reference electrodes. To improve the deterioration of CO2 sensitivity in lower humidity condition, two kinds of sensing electrode materials, ITO with a large speciﬁc surface area and basic oxides such as LaFeO3 and La2O3, were used and their validities on the CO2 detection were evaluated. For the reference electrode, three kinds of materials, Li0.62CoO2, Na0.6CoO2 and Li2TiO3, were applied and their thermal and chemical stabilities were compared to each other.
NASICON powders as a solid electrolyte were prepared by a sol–gel technique using Si(OC2H5)4, Zr(OC4H9)4, PO(OC4H9)3 and NaOC2H5. These alkoxides were stoichiometrically dissolved in an ethanol solvent containing HNO3 and allowed to stand about 20 h under stirring. This operation was carried out in a dry N2 atmosphere and the ethanol solvent was kept at 60 C. Then, distilled water was added to the ethanol solution for the hydrolysis. 
The resulting precipitates were dried at 120 C in air for 24 h. After calcined at 750 C in air for 1 h, the precursor powders were compacted into a disk (9 mm in diameter and 1.2 mm thick). The disk was sintered at 1200 C in air for 5 h and polished with a sand paper. ITO (10 at.% Sn-doped In2O3) powders were conventionally prepared from an aqueous mixed solution of InCl3 and SnCl4. The powders were calcined at 900 or 1200 C in air for 2 h. A carbonate was synthesized by calcining a mixture of Li2CO3 and BaCO3 powders (1:2 in molar ratio) at 750 C in air for 10 min. NaxCoO2 (x = 0.6) powders were obtained by calcining a mixture of Co3O4 and Na2O2 powders C in air for 12 h. LaFeO3 pow(2:3 in molar ratio) at 500 ders were prepared from a hetero-nuclear complex method. La[Fe(CN)6]·5H2O powders were synthesized using La(NO3)3·6H2O and K3[Fe(CN)6], followed by calcinations at 800 C in air for 1 h. A mixture of ITO and LaFeO3 or La2O3 powders was mechanically mixed with an agate mortar (in mass ratio).
Two kinds of the NASICON-based devices (gasseparation type and planar-type) were constructed to examine the CO2 sensing properties as shown in Fig. 1. To make a device of gas-separation type, the NASICON disk was ﬁxed on the end of a quartz glass tube (9 mm in diameter) with an inorganic adhesive. The reference electrode was prepared by using Au paste, followed by calcination at 800 C in air for 2 h. On top of it, the sensing electrode was formed by applying ITO powders assisted with Li2CO3–BaCO3 binary carbonC in air ate. Then, the whole assembly was calcined at 500 for 0.5 h. The planar device was also fabricated in the same order, i.e., the deposition of Au or Na0.6CoO2 reference electrode, followed by that of Li2CO3–BaCO3 auxiliary phase and ITO sensing electrode. The reference electrode was covered with a protective layer of the inorganic adhesive. The Au electrode was formed in the same manner, as described above.
The Na0.6CoO2 electrode was prepared from its paste, followed by calcination at 750 C in air for 5 h. The powders were mixed with about the same amount of a-terpineol containing 5 wt.% ethyl cellulose in mass.
Gas sensing properties were measured in a conventional gas-ﬂow apparatus equipped with a heating facility. Sample gases consisting of air, CO2 and H2O were prepared by diluting a parent CO2 gas (1% CO2 in dry synthetic air) with wet and/or dry synthetic air. The wet air was prepared by allowing the dry air to bubble through water. The concentration of CO2 in the sample gas was varied in the range of 250–3000 ppm CO2, while relative humidity (RH) was set in the range of 0–70%. The reference electrode was always exposed to the ﬂow of synthetic dry air for the laminated device. For the planar device, both the sensing and reference electrodes were exposed of course to the sample gas. The rate of gas-ﬂow was ﬁxed at 0.1 dm3/min and the device temperature was changed between 30 and 100 C. The EMF was measured on an electrometer.
To study the thermal stability of reference electrode materials, Li0.62CoO2, Na0.6CoO2 and Li2TiO3, were calcined at 700 C in air for 30 h. On the other hand, the chemical stability was checked with the following two methods: (1) Na0.6CoO2, Li0.62CoO2, and Li2TiO3 were exposed to 1000 ppm CO2 under 50% RH for 7 days at 30 C; (2) the mixture of NASICON powders and reference electrode materials (1:1 in mass ratio) were calcined at 700 C in air for 30 h. Thermal and chemical stabilities for the reference electrode materials were evaluated by means of powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement. X-ray diffraction patterns were recorded with Cu Ka radiation (RINT 1200, Rigaku, sweep rate 2 C/min, 50 kV–30 mA).
Firstly, the CO2 sensing properties of a NASICON-based potentiometric device were investigated. The sensing electrode was constructed with a carbonate auxiliary phase and a metal oxide. As the results, it was found that the device used ITO as the metal oxide exhibits the most excellent CO2 sensing properties among eight kinds of oxides examined. Thus, the relationship between a speciﬁc surface area of ITO powders and gas sensing capability of NASICON-based CO2 sensor was investigated in this study.
Fig. 2 shows the TG curves for ITO powders after treated under the conditions of 300 ppm CO2 and 30% RH at 30 C. TG measurements were carried out in the temperature range of 30–650 C under a dry air-ﬂow and the heating rate was set to 10 C/min. The specific surface areas of ITO powders calcined at 900 and 1200 C in air were estimated to be 26 and 1.5 m2/g from BET measurement, respectively. Although weight loss caused by the dehydration is observed for both ITO powders as shown in Fig. 2, ITO powders calcined at 900 C has a larger weight loss than those calcined at 1200 C. This result suggests that ITO powders prepared at lower temperature keep much more physisorbed water than those prepared at higher temperature. It is expected that ITO powders with a large specific surface area improve CO2 sensing properties of the NASICON-based device in lower humidity condition. Fig. 3 compares CO2 sensing properties of the NASICON-based devices combined with these ITO powders. 
The measurements were carried out under 30–70% RH at 100 C. The device attached with ITO powders calcined at 900 C gave EMF values expected from Nernst’s equation, whereas in the case of ITO powders calcined at 1200 C, the EMF values decreased with lowering relative humidity. Here EMF stands for the increments in EMF on increasing the CO2 concentration from 300 to 3000 ppm. However, it was also conﬁrmed that the basic EMF of the former device drifts by changing the humidity conditions, where the basic EMF is standardized the EMF value to 300 ppm CO2. It is suggested that the instability of the basic EMF is deeply related to the condensed states of water vapor. Therefore, we are now planning to investigate the relationship between the drift of basic EMF and the grain size or porosity of ITO powders, furthermore.
Subsequently, the CO2 sensing behavior of the NASICON-based device occurs from the acid–basic reactions. Thus, the modification effect expected by adding a basic oxide to ITO was investigated. As the basic oxide, LaFeO3 powders prepared from hetero–nuclear complex, La[Fe(CN)6]·5H2O, were applied for the sensing electrode. Bartolomeo et al. also reported an electrochemical NOx sensors based with LaFeO3 as a sensing electrode material.
However, LaFeO3 was unsuitable to the electrode material because of its poor electric conductivity. Thus, the CO2 sensing capability of the mixture of ITO and LaFeO3 powders was examined. ITO powders calcined at 1200 C were used in this experiment.
Fig. 4 indicates EMF of the NASICON-based device to CO2 in the range of 250–2500 ppm at 30 C as a function of relative humidity. EMF stands for the EMF change when CO2 concentration is changed from 250 to 2500 ppm. EMF of the ITO-attached device decreased with lowering the relative humidity, whereas in the case of the LaFeO3-modiﬁed device, EMF was remarkably enhanced in the lower humidity region. The improvement of EMF appeared remarkably with increasing amount of LaFeO3 powders added. Furthermore, the sensing device used La2O3, instead of LaFeO3, was fabricated and its CO2 capability was also tested. The CO2 capability of La2O3-modiﬁed device increased with increasing the amount of La2O3, also like in the case of LaFeO3-modiﬁed one as shown in Fig. 5. It was, however, found that the basic EMF of the NASICON-based devices modiﬁed with basic oxides drifts in the range of dry atmosphere (below 1% RH) to 50% RH as shown in Fig. 6, where the basic EMF is standardized the EMF value to 1000 ppm CO2 at 30 C. 
The basic EMF of each device considerably drifted with increasing amount of basic oxide added. These results cause us to think that La2(CO3)3 is formed on the surface of metal oxides (LaFeO3 and La2O3) and the CO2 sensing reaction is promoted in lower humidity condition. It is well-known that La2(CO3)3 forms hydrates, La2(CO3)3·mH2O (m = 2, 3 and 6) under the presence of water vapor. Therefore, it may be also suspected that the amount of the water of crystallization contained in lanthanum carbonate changes with humidity. As the results, the promoting effect in CO2 sensing and the instability in EMF of the device may appear in lower humidity condition.
The inﬂuence of oxygen on the sensing electrode of potentiometric CO2 sensors operative at high temperature have been reported until now as follows. The EMF values of the
The speciﬁc surface areas of ITO powset to 10 ders calcined at 900 and 1200 C in air were estimated to be 26 and 1.5 m2/g from BET measurement, respectively. Although weight loss caused by the dehydration is observed for both ITO powders as shown in Fig. 2, ITO powders calcined at 900 C has a larger weight loss than those calcined at 1200 C. This result suggests that ITO powders prepared at lower temperature keep much more physisorbed water than those prepared at higher temperature. It is expected that ITO powders with a large speciﬁc surface area improve CO2 sensing properties of the NASICON-based device in lower humidity condition. Fig. 3 compares CO2 sensing properties of the NASICON-based devices combined with these ITO powders. The measurements were carried out under 30–70% RH  at 100 C. 
The device attached with ITO powders calcined  at 900 C gave EMF values expected from Nernst’s equation, whereas in the case of ITO powders calcined at 1200 C, device attached with Li2CO3–BaCO3 systems as an auxiliary phase do not depend on the change in O2 concentration, whereas in the case of the Na2CO3–BaCO3 systems the EMF ones vary with O2 concentration. Therefore, it was investigated the inﬂuence of partial pressure of oxygen on the EMF values for the ITO-attached device (Fig. 1(a)). Sample gases consisting O2, CO2, N2 and H2O were prepared by diluting a parent gases (pure O2 and/or 1% O2 in dry N2), and by allowing the dry N2 to bubble through water. Fig. 7 shows the sensing properties of the ITO-attached device to O2 in the range of 0.01–50 vol.% containing 1000 ppm CO2 under 30% RH at 30 C. Obviously, the EMF values of the device are independent of O2 concentration from the results in Fig. 7. 
The NASICON-based device attached with Au electrode shown in Fig. 1 (c), was also examined to O2 sensing proerties in the same manner. 
The EMF values are linear to the logarithm of O2 concentration with n = 2.7, where n value indicates the number of electrons associated with the electrode reaction of O2. On the counter electrode (Au electrode), allowing for the following electrode reaction, the electron number calculated by Nernstian equation should be indicated n = 4.
However, the electron number was inconsistent with theoretical n value. For this point, furthermore investigation is carried out now.
On the other hand, on another side (metal oxide sensing electrode), EMF response of this device was independent of changing O2 concentration. As previously reported, it was supposed that the O2 involved in sensing reaction were not supplied directly from gas phase for the sensing electrode. This result suggests that the EMF values of the device using Au electrode as a counter electrode change with O2 concentration.
The reference electrode potential of the device conforms to Nernst’s equation and depends on the activity of electrode materials. Thus, it is strongly related with the thermal and chemical stabilities of electrode materials. In the present study, three kinds of oxides, such as Li0.62CoO2, Na0.6CoO2 and Li2TiO3, were examined as reference electrode materials. The stability of these oxides was evaluated from the change of crystal structure with thermal treatment in air. Fig. 8 compares XRD patterns of Li0.62CoO2 powders before and C in air for 30 h. The XRD results inafter calcined at 700 dicated that Li0.62CoO2 contains unknown impurity after being heated in air. In contrast with Li0.62CoO2, the formation of impurity phase with the same thermal treatment was not conﬁrmed for Na0.6CoO2 and Li2TiO3 powders. Especially, Na0.6CoO2 was stable even after calcination at 900 C in air for 30 h. 
The chemical stability of these oxides was testing by exposing the three kinds of oxides to 1000 ppm CO2 under 50% RH for 1 week and by calcining the mixture of NASCION and each powder at 700 C in air for 30 h. 
If an impurity phase is formed at the interface between reference electrode and NASICON and its activity is unstable in the presence of water vapor, the change on the basic EMF of the device seems to be observed. From the XRD measurements, it was elucidated that each oxide has a poor activity with CO2 under 50% RH or with NASICON. However, Li2TiO3 has a poor electric conductivity in the EMF measurement using an electrometer.
The reference electrode was required to be insensitive to CO2 concentration as well as H2O (water vapor) and O2, since the device outputs the EMF difference between sensing and counter (or reference) electrode potential. Therefore, the Na0.6CoO2-attached NASICON device was fabricated and a cross-sensitivity test to disturbing gases including CO2, H2O and O2 was carried out at 30 C. For the cross-sensitivity test to CO2, H2O and O2, the Na0.6CoO2-attached device was fabricated without carbonate in the same way as the gasseparation type shown in Fig. 1(c). The cross-sensitivity tests to H2O and CO2 were performed under 50% RH and in the presence of 1000 ppm CO2, respectively. For the examination to O2, sample gas was prepared by a procedure described in Section 3.1.3. The results of these examinations are summarized in Table 1. The Na0.6CoO2-attached NASICON device was insensitive to CO2, H2O and O2 as listed in Table 1. 
In this device, the CO2 concentration was estimated from the EMF difference between sensing electrode and reference electrode. Accordingly, we concluded that Na0.6CoO2 is most appropriate reference electrode material among the three materials examined, because of its thermal and chemical stabilities, its good electric conductivity and insensitivity to CO2, H2O and O2.
We have attempted to improve the deterioration of CO2 sensing properties in lower humidity condition for the NASICON-based potentiometric CO2 device. The following conclusions can be drawn in the present study:
1. The ITO powders calcined at 900C have a large speciﬁc surface area and maintain much more physisorbed water on the surface, compared with ones calcined at 1200 C. Therefore, CO2 sensing properties of the NASICONbased device constructed with ITO powders calcined at 900 C were drastically improved in lower humidity conditions. However, it was also conﬁrmed that the basic EMF drifts with changing the humidity conditions.
2. By adding a basic oxide (LaFeO3 or La2O3) to ITO powders, EMF of the NASICON-based device in lower humidity condition was largely enhanced. However, the basic EMF of the devices modiﬁed with basic oxides changed in the range of dry atmosphere (below 1% RH) to 50% RH. Thus, the promoting effect in CO2 sensing and the instability in EMF of the device may closely relate with the formation of lanthanum carbonate hydrate, La2(CO3)3·mH2O (m = 2, 3 and 6).
3. The EMF value of the ITO-attached device was independent of O2 concentration, whereas that of Au electrodeattached device was linear to the logarithm of O2 concentration. This suggests that the EMF value of the device using Au electrode as a counter electrode change with O2 concentration.
4. Na0.6CoO2 was an appreciate material as a reference electrode, since Na0.6CoO2 has the most excellent thermal and chemical stabilities among the three kinds of oxides examined. It was found from the cross-sensitivity test that the Na0.6CoO2-attached device as a reference electrode is insensitive to the disturbing gases including CO2, H2O and O2.