A planar type CO2 sensor device using NASICON (Na+ conductor, Na3Zr2Si2PO12) thick ﬁlm was attached with a glass (SiO2:Na2O:B2O3:Al2O3 = 44:20:31:5, in molar ratio)-coated Na0.6CoO2 reference electrode to increase its feasibility under various conditions in practical. The fabricated device proved satisfactory CO2-sensing properties at steady operating temperature (450 C) under dry and humid conditions. In the heat-cycle tests between the operating temperature and room temperature under various humid conditions, the planar device once aged, exhibited quick warm-up characteristics and well-reproducible EMF response to CO2 unless humidity was very high (e.g. 80%). 
A potentiometric device combining NASICON (Na+ conductor, Na3Zr2Si2PO12) with an auxiliary phase of metal carbonate is an attractive candidate for a CO2 sensor in view of simple structure, high selectivity and fast response. In addition, adoption of a planar structure by using a NASICON thick ﬁlm makes it possible to reduce the fabrication cost as well as the device size. The device of this type has usually been attached with an Au counter electrode whose potential depends not only on the partial pressure of O2 (PO2) but also on the activity of Na+ and Na2O of NASICON in the vicinity of the electrode. The potential is thus relevant to the surface chemical state of NASICON. The EMF response of the device to CO2 is stable under continuous operation at elevated temperature (e.g. 360–450 C), but a problem may happen once the device is cooled to room (low) temperature where the NASICON surface is vulnerable to attack by moisture and CO2 to form surface contaminants. 
When sensor operation is restarted at the designated temperature, it may take a long warm-up time for the EMF to recover the original value, depending on the degree of contamination, or it may be totally unable to recover if contamination is too much. In order to overcome this problem, the counter electrode should be made independent of NASICON. For this purpose, we tried to incorporate NaxCoO2 (x = 0.6, Na bronze) material into the counter electrode. As tested with a NASICON disk device, the Na0.6CoO2-attached counter electrode enabled the device to be free from the contamination-induced problem mentioned above provided that the counter electrode was coated with a glass layer. In view of a practical sensor, however, the device using a NASICON disk is not far from a prototype. In this study, we tried to apply the glasscoated Na0.6CoO2 counter electrode to the planar device using a NASICON thick ﬁlm screen-printed on an alumina substrate.
An amorphous precursor of NASICON was prepared by a sol–gel method starting from the alkoxides of constituent elements, i.e. Si(OC2H5)4, Zr(OC4H9)4, PO(OC4H9)3 and NaOC2H5. A stoichiometric mixture of the alkoxides dissolved in ethanol at 60 C was hydrolyzed with a designated amount of water. The resulting xerogel was dried at 120 C for 24 h and, the resulting powder was calcined at 900 C for 5 h to obtain the powder of crystalline NASICON.
The powder of Na0.6CoO2 was prepared by calcining a stoichiometric mixture of Co3O4 and Na2O2 at 500 C for 12 h in an atmosphere. The glass powder of the composition, SiO2:Na2O:B2O3:Al2O3 = 44:20:31:5 in molar ratio, was prepared from a mixture of the components by melting, cooling and crushing. The glass is known to undergo glasstransition and melting at 560 and 800 C, respectively.
Two types (A and B) of planar devices fabricated in this study are shown in Fig. 1 . Device A (unattached with a heater) was used for the measurement of CO2-sensing properties at a constant operating temperature (350–450 C), which was controlled externally by means of an electric furnace. A NASICON thick ﬁlm (30 um thick) was screen-printed on an alumina substrate from a paste dispersing the NASICON powder in ethylene glycol. After drying at 120 C, the Ausensing electrode was also screen-printed (1 um thick) on the designated region of the NASICON thick ﬁlm. The assembly was then heated at 1000 C for 5 h in air for sintering. To prepare the glass-coated Na0.6CoO2 counter electrode, a paste of the Na0.6CoO2 powder dispersant: (alpha-terpineol containing 5 wt.% ethyl cellulose) was ﬁrst applied on the designated area of the NASICON thick ﬁlm and, after drying, the deposit was covered with a paste of glass powder, prior to calcination at 800 C for 30 min. 
Finally, a layer of Li2CO3–BaCO3 (1:2 in molar ratio) auxiliary phase was deposited (about 10 um thick) on the Au-sensing electrode by a melting-and-quenching method.
Device B was the same as device A except for the backside of the alumina substrate, to which another alumina plate deposited with a Pt heater (FIGARO ENGINEERING Inc.) was bonded with an inorganic adhesive. The device was used for heat-cycle tests of the sensing properties where temperature was switched between 25 and 450 C.
Gas sensing experiments were carried out in a conventional gas ﬂow apparatus equipped with a heating facility. A parent gas (2000 ppm CO2 in dry synthetic air) was diluted with synthetic air, to prepare sample gases containing 200–2000 ppm CO2. Humid sample gases in the range of 10–80% relative humidity (RH) were prepared by allowing a designated part of the synthetic air to bubble through water. Heat-cycle tests were carried out between 450 C and room temperature (25 C) by using device B.
Device A was prepared to evaluate the sensing properties of planar type sensor without external effects such as gas temperatures supplied and uniformity of heating area. The response transients of device A to changing CO2 concentration in the range of 200–2000 ppm at 450 C under dry condition are shown in Fig. 2. The transients were sharp, taking less than 25 s for 90% response or recovery. Fig. 3 shows the Nernst’s correlations between EMF response and the logarithm of CO2 concentration at several operating temperatures between 350 and 450 C. The slopes of the correlations coincided with the theoretical ones for n = 2 at 360 C and above, where n is the number of reaction electrons for the electrochemical reduction of CO2. CO2-sensing properties hardly changed after increasing in humid atmospheres, as illustrated in Fig. 3b. 
These properties were almost the same as those of the disk device, conﬁrming that the planar device using glass-coated Na0.6CoO2 counter electrode works well under the steady operating conditions.
As already reported, the disk device using glasscoated NaCoO2 counter electrode showed reliable behavior in heat-cycle tests, i.e., warm-up characteristics and reproducible stationary EMF response at 450 C. In this study, the same heat-cycle tests were applied to a freshly prepared planar device (device B), which is useful for rapid heating and cooling. The temperature of the device was switched between operating temperature (450 C) and room temperature (about 25 C) at intervals of 1–6 days, while humidity of the gas ﬂow was changed up or down at intervals of 2–13 days, as shown in Fig. 4. The concentration of CO2 was kept constant (400 ppm) throughout. Roughly speaking, the EMF response to CO2 at 450 C tended to increase in an initial period of about 15 days before it converged to an almost constant level of about −130 mV. The initial behavior appears to reﬂect an ageing effect of the glass-coated Na0.6CoO2 counter electrode was also observed with the disk device. 
Once aged, the EMF reached the steady value quickly on switching to the operating temperature, assuring rapid warm-up characteristics. If the EMF behavior is inspected more closely, however, an anomaly is noted to happen after exposure to 80% RH at room temperature. The warm-up characteristic starting from 34th day, for example, is seem to be deteriorated signiﬁcantly with a sluggish rise in EMF which continued for more than 1 day. No such behavior has been observed with the disk device reported previously. As observed on SEM, the NASICON thick ﬁlm was not densiﬁed so well as the NASICON disk was, as shown in Fig. 5 . Probably, the presence of pores in the ﬁlm made it more difﬁcult to protect the Na0.6CoO2 electrode from the attack of humidity and CO2 with a glasscoating layer. The anomaly after exposure to very humid atmosphere is likely to be associated with partial corrosion of the solid reference material. 
Therefore, it is suggested that once a sufﬁciently densiﬁed thick ﬁlm is available, the planar device can provide a reliable CO2 sensor with advantages of rapid warm-up characteristics, downsizing and low cost.
The planar type CO2 sensor using glass-coated Na0.6CoO2 counter electrode proved to work excellently at the steady operating temperature under dry and humid conditions. As revealed from heat-cycle tests, a freshly prepared device showed except an ageing effect in the initial period. Once aged, the device acquired quick warm-up characteristics and well-reproducible EMF response at 450 C unless it was kept under very humid atmospheres (80% RH) at room temperature. The deterioration of warm-up characteristics after exposure to very humid atmospheres appeared to result from the incomplete densiﬁcation of the NASICON thick ﬁlm.
