The synthesis of a faujasite-Metglas composite material that can be used in gas-sensing applications is presented. A continuous faujasite film was synthesized on a Metglas magnetoelastic strip using the secondary growth method. The ability of the new composite to remotely sense carbon dioxide in a nitrogen atmosphere at room temperature over a wide range of concentrations is demonstrated by monitoring the changes in the resonance frequency of the strip. The novel sensor combines the electromagnetic properties of the magnetoelastic material with the adsorption properties of the faujasite crystals. Experiments performed over a period of a few months showed that the composite sensor remained fully operational, thus indicating its long-term stability. Furthermore, the present work demonstrates that a zeolite-Metglas composite can be used as a sensor of an analyte in a mixture as long as it adsorbs selectively larger amounts of the particular analyte than other compounds present in the mixture.
Zeolites are porous crystalline aluminosilicate materials constructed from linked TO4 tetrahedra (where T = Al3+ or Si4+) joined through shared oxygen atoms, and forming a three-dimensional framework that defines a regular system of voids and channels of molecular dimensions. They are often called molecular sieves because of their ability to distinguish different molecules due to their size, shape, or polarity. In addition, they are also thermally and chemically stable materials, and thus they can be used in a variety of thermochemical environments. Due to their unique physicochemical properties described above, they have found many applications as catalysts, sorbents, water softeners, etc. Recently, a considerable amount of work has been devoted towards developing novel zeolitebased applications. 
Promising results have already been reported in the literature for the preparation of a) selective membranes for separating gas or liquid mixtures in several streams, b) zeolite-modified electrodes, c) optoelectronic devices, and d) sensors.
Vilaseca et al. synthesized LTA and MFI zeolitic films on the outer surface of semiconductor (Pd-doped SnO2) surfaces. The sensors were able to detect different gas species (CH4, C3H8, etc.) in the presence of various levels of humidity. The zeolitic films acted as molecular sieves, allowing only selected molecules to contact the Pd-doped SnO2 sensor surfaces, which affected the sensors' overall selectivity and sensitivity. MFI and LTA crystals attached to the outer surface of quartz crystal microbalances have correspondingly been used to sense ethanol and humidity.
The work reported here demonstrates the preparation of a carbon dioxide sensor that operates remotely and consists of a faujasite-Metglas composite strip. Faujasite is a large-pore zeolite (~ 7.4 Š), which can be synthesized in a variety of compositions that differ in the silicon to aluminum ratio (i.e., FAU-X has a Si/Al ratio less than 1.5 and FAU-Y has a Si/Al ratio less than 2). A schematic diagram of the faujasite microstructure is shown in Figure 1. Each corner of the framework represents a Si or Al atom and each line a bridging oxygen atom. Faujasite crystals have cages with diameters of approximately 1.3 nm, which are interconnected through openings with sizes of approximately 0.74 nm. Among the numerous zeolite frameworks, faujasite is a promising candidate for the fabrication of composite sensors because of its known ability to adsorb larger amounts of CO2 than other common gases such as N2, O2, and CH4. 
Such a composite combines the faujasite crystal ability to selectively adsorb carbon dioxide molecules with the property of the Metglas magnetoelastic alloy to convert mass loads to a measurable electric signal.
Magnetoelastic materials are usually made of amorphous metallic alloys or composites of rare-earth elements. Most of them have been used the last decade as oscillators, microactuators, filters, and sensors. A time-varying magnetic field induces vibrations to a magnetoelastic strip, resulting in the generation of both magnetic and acoustic flux, which can be detected by an appropriate microphone or pick-up coil. The measured flux passes through a maximum when the strip is vibrating at its resonance frequency, which depends on the strip's physical dimensions and the material's properties. Changes in environmental parameters that alter material properties, such as temperature and humidity, cause a measurable shift in the resonance frequency. It has already been demonstrated that magnetoelastic materials can be used to sense pH, temperature, viscosity, pressure, glucose, and ammonia.
The main goal of the present work is to present a new approach for utilizing zeolite properties in sensing applications. The selected application of CO2 sensing is of paramount practical interest and an active area for further research. Carbon dioxide is a common gas found in nature as well as in commercial applications such as dry ice, fire extinguishers, beverage carbonation, etc. There has been an increasing need for CO2 monitoring over the past decade because of the greenhouse effect, indoor air quality, fire detection, food quality, etc. The most common CO2 sensor is the commercialized IR spectroscopic sensor, which is based on a direct-measurement method: the absorption of IR by CO2 molecules. This sensitive IR sensor is quite expensive and it is sometimes subject to strong interference from water vapor. Other commercially available CO2 sensors are based on techniques such as gas chromatography and electrochemistry. 
There is a significant research effort for the development of new sensors with characteristics suitable for particular applications. Current research is focused on the development of sensors based on electrochemical methods (such as potentiometric, amperometric, and capacitive measurements), on gas spectroscopy of pyroelectric films, on optical properties (i.e., color changes), and on the behavior of ultrathin polymer films deposited on surface acoustical-wave devices. Considerable work has been done with the "NASICON" (Na3Zr2Si2PO12, Na+-ionic conductor) potentiometric device, which shows high selectivity but operates at relatively elevated temperatures of ~ 400 C and suffers from long-term stability issues. In all these sensors, a variety of CO2-reactive layers, such as electrolytes[30] and polymers with unknown long-term properties, have been used.
In the current work, a novel composite material is synthesized, characterized, and used to monitor the concentration of CO2 in N2. The novel sensor combines the properties of zeo-strip surface without the faujasite film is shown in Figure 3a. The SEM images of the hydrothermally treated strip, shown in Figures 3b,c, indicate that all sides of the Metglas strip are covered with the faujasite film and that the composite has a thickness of about 50 um (Fig. 3c). Taking into account that the initial thickness of the Metglas strip was 30 um, the thickness of the zeolite film on each side can be estimated to be approximately 10 um. The latter was also verified by cross-section SEM images taken at a position where the zeolite film has been detached (Fig. 3d). The zeolite polycrystalline film consists of the intergrown crystals layer and of the crystals that precipitated from the synthesis gel (ZF and P, respectively, in Fig. 3d). 
Even though the roughness of the intergrown crystals is of the order of a few micrometers, in the areas where crystals precipitated from the gel the roughness could be significantly higher. Nevertheless, the crucial parameter for the sensing measurements is the total mass of the zeolite film, which is independent of the film roughness and was measured to be 8.9 mg by weighing the sensor before and after the hydrothermal synthesis.
Sensing applications utilize the inherent property of magnetoelastic materials to expand or shrink under the presence of an external alternating magnetic field. In the presence of an alternating current (AC) magnetic field, the Metglas material resonates in a specific frequency f0. The resulting oscillations of the magnetization of the material induce an electromotive force (emf) voltage on a remote coil, which can be easily amplified and measured. For a flat ribbon with length l, density r, elastic Young's modulus E, and Poisson's ratio r, f0 is given by where n is an integer (n = 1, 2, 3, ...). It has been assumed that the ribbon's ends are free to vibrate. Taking into account that the density r is equal to the ribbon's mass m over its volume V, and that in practice the quantities l, E, r, and V remain constant for a rigid sensor, the resonance frequency will depend on the total mass of the sensor. 
As a result, changes in the value of the resonance frequency (usually the first harmonic n = 1 is measured) are a direct measure of changes of the total mass on the sensor, making the magnetoelastic ribbon a sensitive microbalance. A firmly bound film on the Metglas strip, made of a material that can selectively adsorb a specific gas from a mixture, can be used to directly measure the mass of the adsorbed gas, and indirectly the concentration in the gas phase.
Frequency scans showing the composite signal response for 0 % and 100 % CO2 are presented in Figure 4. The observed peak of the signal (voltage) at a specific frequency denotes the resonance frequency of the composite, which was 105.80 kHz when in contact with CO2 and 107.5 kHz when in contact with N2. The former was lower than the latter, which according to Equation 1 indicates a higher adsorption capacity for CO2 than for N2. The presentation and discussion of the experimental results that follow refers to the composite's resonance frequency.
The composite was placed into an alternating CO2/N2 environment to study its dynamic behavior and reproducibility. In Figure 5, the vertical dashed lines represent the times when the gas in the system was cycled. The data clearly demonstrate a cyclic pattern with response times of about 20-30 min, with a good reproducibility for CO2 but with a relative 20 % drift for N2. This drift can be attributed to small temperature variations over the course of the experiment. Preliminary calculations using a Langmuir adsorption isotherm with parameters previously reported in the literature indicate that a 3 C temperature variation can cause a ~ 10 % variation in the mass of the adsorbed N2 but only a ~ 3 % variation in the CO2 adsorbed mass. The different behavior observed for each gas is a result of their different heats of adsorption. Since it takes approximately two minutes to clean up the gas lines, the sensor response time can mainly be attributed to gas molecules transport in and out of the zeolite crystals. 
To test the long-term stability of the sensor, experiments were conducted over periods of few months, and the results were always within the ranges of Figure 5.
A question that needed to be addressed was whether the composite sensor remains active in the presence of water or hydrocarbon molecules. The measurements revealed that even though the sensor deactivates when in contact with a gas stream saturated with water, it is fully functional when in contact with gasses having ~ 2 % relative humidity. Additionally, the cycling of the sensor between CO2 and CH4 environments produced a pattern similar to the CO2 and N2 cycling pattern of Figure 5, with the CO2 data at the same level.
The effect of the CO2 concentration on the resonance frequency of the composite sensor was examined by measurements at nine different gas stream CO2 compositions (0, 12, 25, 38, 51, 61, 70, 85, and 100 %), which are shown in Figure 6. These values lie between the corresponding values of the pure CO2 and N2 compositions, indicating that the composite can be used as a CO2 sensor over the entire range of compositions. The solid line is the best fit to the data according to the equation,  and represents the calibration curve that relates the resonance frequency f with the CO2 concentration (vol.-% in the gas stream) CCO2 . The fitted values of the parameters in Equation 2 are fo = 105.5 kHz, a = 2.0187 kHz, and b = 0.0173. Even though Equation 2 is a very good fit for the data, it is empirical and its parameters lack any physical significance. Despite that fact, it can still be used as the calibration curve for the sensor.
The sensitivity of the sensor as a function of CO2 concentration can be calculated from sensitivity = .
Using the fitted values of a and b, the sensitivity of the sensor at 0 % CO2 is 0.035 kHz per CO2 % (vol) and drops to 0.0062 kHz per CO2 % (vol) at 100 % CO2. Taking into account that the noise of the measurements is ~ 0.01 kHz, the minimum detectable CO2 changes are estimated to be about 0.33 vol.-% CO2. This value can possibly be enhanced by a combination of an improved resonator (hardware) and by increasing the thickness of the zeolite film.
The sensor's resonance frequency changes can be attributed to variations of the total mass (CO2 and N2) adsorbed in the cavities of the faujasite film, which depends on the gas phase concentration. The mass load on the sensor in the presence of N2, can be calculated from Equation 1, which can be rewritten as,  where m is the total mass of the sensor. The value of the constant A= 21.40 kHz g1/2 was calculated from the resonance frequency f0 = 110.07 kHz and the weight mass m0 = 37.8 mg of the composite faujasite-Metglas strip, measured immediately after heat treatment in air at 280 C for several hours. Using Equation 4, the mass load Dm = m - m0 on the composite was calculated for the different CO2 concentration in the gas stream, as shown by the square points in Figure 7. 
These data were compared with theoretical predictions based on the binary gas Langmuir adsorption theory, using, as a first approximation, where mzeolite is the total mass of the deposited zeolite, qs i is the saturation loading of the zeolite crystal in mol of component i per kg of zeolite (i = CO2 or N2), MWi is the molecular weight, bi is the Langmuir constant in Pa-1, and Pi is the partial pressure in Pa. Using the parameters of Table 1 that were found in the literature, different plots of Equation 5 could be drawn as shown by the solid lines in Figure 7.
It is clear from these plots that the mass load that was calculated using the sensor's frequency shifts is in reasonable agreement with the theoretical predictions. The observed deviations were expected and are within the range of deviations observed for the different set of parameters of the theoretical models. Such discrepancies can be attributed to several reasons. Firstly, faujasite is a zeolite framework, which includes crystal structures with different chemical compositions. The parameters shown in Table 1 are estimated from adsorption isotherms on faujasite crystals with different chemical compositions, and therefore different adsorption properties are expected. In addition, two of the five parameter sets in Table 1 were calculated from data at temperatures that differ by up to 10 C; therefore, they should be used only for qualitative comparisons. 
Finally, it has to be pointed out that the last set of parameters in Table 1, contains only the values for the CO2 adsorption; thus, the theoretical prediction was made ignoring the effect of N2 adsorption on the amount of adsorbed gas. Since the adsorbed mass of N2 is much smaller than the mass of CO2, the overall effect of ignoring N2 adsorption, especially at high CO2 concentrations, is minimal. This argument has been confirmed by calculations for the remaining sets of parameters presented in Table 1. Nevertheless, the results shown in Figure 7 clearly indicate that the ability of the faujasite-Metglas composite to sense CO2 in a N2 atmosphere can be attributed to the larger adsorption capacity of faujasite for CO2 than N2. The results presented in this work indicate that the faujasite-Metglas composite has the potential to be used as a sensor of an analyte in a mixture as long as the analyte of interest has a higher adsorption capacity than the other compounds present in the mixture.
In the present report, the preparation of a zeolite-Metglas composite that utilizes the ability of zeolite crystals to selectively adsorb a gas from multicomponent mixtures in sensing applications is presented. The concept is demonstrated through fabrication of a remote carbon dioxide sensor. The SEM images indicate that after the synthesis both sides of the Metglas strip were covered by a zeolite film. The X-ray diffraction pattern of the composite indicated that the film was of faujasite type. Furthermore, the faujasite-Metglas composite was able to repeatedly sense carbon dioxide in a nitrogen stream over the entire range of compositions (0-100 %) as well as in the presence of small amounts of humidity. The calibration curve was obtained by fitting an exponential equation to the measured resonance frequency of nine gas streams with different CO2 compositions. For each composition, the calculated mass of the adsorbed CO2 was in qualitative agreement with theoretical predictions. 
The ability of the composite to sense carbon dioxide has been attributed to the selective adsorption of carbon dioxide over nitrogen in faujasite crystals, as well as in the higher saturation capacity of the crystals for CO2.
A faujasite-type film was synthesized on a 6 mm ” 20 mm ” 30 lm Metglas 2826MB (Fe40Ni38Mo4B18) magnetoelastic strip using the secondary (seeded) growth method. The Metglas strip was purchased from Allied Signal and used as received. Information about the synthesis and preparation of magnetoelastic materials can be found in the literature. Furthermore, a detailed description of the 2826MB alloy properties can be obtained from the manufacturer.
Before hydrothermal treatment, a layer of faujasite crystals (Na-Y, Aldrich) was deposited on both sides of the Metglas strip using a dipcoating technique. The seeded strip was then placed at the bottom of a polypropylene bottle and then was hydrothermally treated at 85 C for six days with a mixture of Na2O/Al2O3/triethanolamine/SiO2/H2O in a molar ratio of 4.17:1.0:10:1.87:460. This molar composition is known to result in nucleation and growth both of Na-X faujasite crystals, as well as of Na-X membranes (Si/Al ratio ~1-1.5). For its preparation, tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS, 98 %, Aldrich) was dissolved in a solution of NaOH and triethanolamine (TEA, 95 %, Aldrich) at room temperature under stirring until a clear mixture was obtained (~2-3 h). At the same time, aluminum foil (Al, 99.8 %, 0.05 mm thick, Aldrich) was dissolved in a NaOH solution, which was then slowly added to the silica mixture under stirring. 
After hydrothermal growth, the membranes were cooled, washed several times with distilled water, and then heat treated in air at 280 C overnight to remove any TEA and humidity from the zeolite pores. Faujasite crystals are known to adsorb humidity and other chemical species from the environment. To remove any adsorbed molecules from the crystals, prior to any measurements, the sensors were kept overnight in contact with a N2 stream.
The zeolite-Metglas composites were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The X-ray patterns were collected on a Siemens D-500 system using Cu Ka radiation. SEM images were obtained using a LEO SUPRA 35V microscope operated at 20 kV in the variable-pressure mode.
All sensing experiments were carried out at room temperature (~ 25 C). The sensor was placed in a 2.5 cm long glass tube open at one end that was mounted horizontally in the interior of the magnetoelastic resonator (SENTECH Corp.) and connected to a gas line through a T-junction. The flow rates and concentrations of CO2 and N2 were adjusted using variable-area rotameters with a built-in control valve (Omega). A schematic of the setup is shown in Figure 8. 
The resonator excited the sensor with a time-varying magnetic field and recorded the induced voltage of the detection coil due to the sensor vibrations. The total mass of carbon dioxide and nitrogen adsorbed in the zeolite pores was determined by monitoring the shift in the resonance frequency of the sensor.
