Solid-electrolyte thick ﬁlm of NASICON (sodium super ionic conductor) was synthesized through an inorganic reagent based sol–gel process. It was prepared onto an alumina tube substrate by dip-coating method, and then followed sintering at high temperature to get NASICON phase. After Pt contact and reference electrodes as well as complex carbonate Li2CO3–BaCO3 auxiliary electrode were attached, a small-volume thick ﬁlm CO2 sensor was obtained. Comparing with traditional planar pellet CO2 sensor, the tube-type sensor possessed extra merits such as high heating efﬁciency, lower power consumption and miniaturized framework. In the paper, some characteristics of the thick ﬁlm CO2 sensor including sensitivity, selectivity, response and recovery time and stability were investigated in emphasis. 
Recently, control or monitor of CO2 concentration has aroused special research attention due to the so-called greenhouse effect on living environment and its application signiﬁcance in many ﬁelds, such as in agriculture, air conditioning, environment, automobile and so on. By now, several types of compact CO2 sensing device with different working principles have been fabricated in trials. Among them, the solid-electrolyte NASICON potentiometric sensor, which gives a sensing signal with the mechanism of electrochemical cell, is becoming quite attractive for its superior performance. The material of auxiliary carbonate electrode is essential for the sensing property of the sensor. In the ﬁrst instance, single carbonate was adopted acting as the auxiliary phase and a serious humidity disturbance plagued a precise measurement on target gas concentration. 
Until binary carbonates being applied, the capability of anti-disturbance again water vapor, as well as the response and recovery properties for the ﬁnal device were improved apparently. However, some shortcomings were still found for the conventional planar device in the miniaturization development, such as the complicated fabrication process, low heating efﬁciency and high power consumption in the case of a novel heater being considered, which probably cause an inconvenience for its wide practical applications.
In this paper, the fabrication of a small-volume thick ﬁlm CO2 sensor and its sensing properties were reported. The heating efﬁciency was obviously improved with the use of a small coil heater traversed into the alumina substrate tube while some favorite sensing properties were also achieved.
NASICON precursor with the desired product components of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 was prepared by a sol–gel method, in which the reagents including ZrOCl2·8H2O, NaNO3, Si(OC2H5)4 and (NH4)2HPO4 were used as the major raw materials. The synthesis details could be found in our previous work. Based on the synthesized NASICON powder material, the tube-type CO2 sensor was fabricated. For realizing the sensor structure shown in Fig. 1, the precursor of NASICON was ﬁrst mixed with ethanol and a suitable amount of ethyl cellulose, and ball-milled into homogeneous paste. Additional ethanol was added to get a low viscous sol-like material so that it could be suitable for conducting a dip-coating process. A small alumina tube substrate was used as the supporter for the dip-coated thick ﬁlm. The outer diameter and length of the substrate tube are 1.2 and 4 mm, respectively. Its wall thickness is 0.2 mm. A multiple dipcoating process was employed for getting a suitable thickness and improving ﬁlm density. 
The dip-coated ﬁlm was naturally dried in ambient atmosphere before next coating was conducted. After being sintered at 1000 C for 8 h, a good adhesion of the thick ﬁlm with alumina tube substrate was got. Following the preparation of NASICON thick ﬁlm, a commercial aurum paste was coated on the two ends of the NASICON ﬁlm to form two mesh patterns and then sintered at 800 C for 10 min.
For the measurement of the output electromotive force (EMF), Pt electrodes were pulled out from the Au-meshes with the aid of Au paste and the second sintering at 800 C. Finally, the auxiliary referencing electrode of Li2CO3–BaCO3 was formed on one of the Au meshes employing the common melting and quenching method.
The working temperature of the CO2 sensor was adjusted by changing the voltage fed on the heater coil. The relationship between operating current and working temperature is shown in Fig. 2. Corresponding to the operating currents of 140, 160 and 200 mA, the operation temperatures were 217, 260 and 345
The CO2 gas sensing measurements were carried out by a gas-ﬂowing system. The sample gas containing different concentrations of CO2 were obtained by diluting pure CO2 gas with artiﬁcial air composed of 25% O2 and 75% N2 in volume ratio. The gas ﬂowing rate was ﬁxed at 100 cm3/min. The output EMF value of the element was recorded with a digital electrometer (Advanced, TR 8652).
Due to the simple structure and the less complicated preparation process, the sensor showed a ﬁne reproducibility. All the fabricated sensors showed a linear EMF response to the target gas of CO2 although a diversion in the sensing performance was also found. The variation in the sensitivity was about 10% for the 20 sensors fabricated in the same batch. It may be caused by the rough control in the thickness of the sensor active layers. Fig. 3 shows the typical EMF response of the sensors corresponded to the auxiliary phase materials of Li2CO3–BaCO3 with different molar ratios. It can be seen that a linear relationship between the EMF response and the logarithm of CO2 concentration hold up well in the whole interest concentration range at each current. At the same operating current, the sensor with carbonate auxiliary phase of Li2CO3–BaCO3 in molar ratio 1:2 exhibited the biggest sensitivity among all the investigated samples. 
The assumption that a structure of hetero-junction existed between NASICON and each auxiliary phase was the conceivable cause of the phenomenon. The calculated sensitivity from the measured results for the four sensors is shown in Table 1. The solid-electrolyte CO2 sensor can be regarded as an electrochemical cell. Its simpliﬁed Nernst equation is shown in following:
The equation indicates the EMF of the sensor is directly proportional to the logarithm of CO2 concentration with the slope of RT/2F, which is normally taken as the theoretical sensitivity. From it, the sensitivities corresponding to different working temperatures can be calculated. When the operating currents are 140, 160 and 200 mA, the theoretical sensitivities are 49, 53 and 62 mV/decade, respectively. Therefore, the experimental result is in general consistent with the theory prediction when the molar ratio of binary carbonate electrode material of Li2CO3–BaCO3 is set at 1:2.
Fig. 4 gives the EMF variation of the sensor at the heating current of 200 mA corresponding to the exposure to some interference gases, which are often co-existed with the target gas of CO2 in practice. The results indicated that all these gases produced obvious disturbance to the detection of CO2 concentration and hence would degrade the sensor performance. Because of the same feature in the additional output signal as demonstrated in Fig. 5, those gases would make the detected CO2 concentration bigger than the real value. The sulphide, for example H2S, would produce ill contact owing to the reaction between sulphide and Au-meshes. It increased the electrode resistance, and in turn depressed the absolute value of EMF output. 
The ﬂammable gases, such as C2H5OH, CH4, CO and H2, would be prone to the selfignition that would bring CO2 and vapor, which would debase the absolute value of EMF. Furthermore, due to the inﬂammation of those ﬂammable gases, the surface temperature of the sense organ would rise sharply, which would inﬂuence on the EMF output of the apparatus. If the sensor is packaged with carbon cap, the disturbance of these gases could be diminished.
Although the sensitivity consistency for the sensors fabricated in the same batch was not high as mentioned above, the dispersion in the response and recovery time was very small when the operating temperature was set at the same level. The evaluation for the same batch of 10 sensors indicated that the maximum dispersion was less than 3 s. Fig. 6 shows the typical transient response and recovery time corresponding to the switching change from dry synthetic air to the sample gas containing 1000 ppm CO2. The heating current is 160 mA. From it, the response and recovery time relevant to 90% EMF are 15 and 28 s, respectively. It is similar to the most type gas sensors that the operating temperature has some inﬂuence on the response and recovery rates. When the heating current was decreased to 140 mA, the response and recovery time was prolonged to 21 and 35 s, respectively. 
Comparing with the situation got at the heating current of 160 mA, the recovery rate could be further accelerated while the response rate would almost keep the same if the operating current were increased. For example, the recovery time was shortened to 20 s and the response time was around 15 s at 200 mA. Not only for a drastic concentration change, but also for the lazy transformation of CO2 concentration, the sensor with the above response and recovery time is smart enough for the most application in all kinds of ﬁelds.
The stability of the sensor was tested as shown in Fig. 7. The concentration of CO2 was maintained at 1000 ppm and the operating current was set at 160 mA. The basic EMF output for the sensor held ﬁne stability within about 1 month. Longer time caused a gradual degradation at the EMF output. Similar situation was also found in the other two tested operation temperatures. Moreover, the sensitivity of long periods was also tracked and investigated. The experiment indicated that the sensor’s sensitivity maintained at a comparative steady value of about 60 mV/decade in 3 months at 200 mA while it descended to about 30 mV/decade in 6 moths and below 10 mV/decade in 1 year. Thus, it can be concluded that the valid life of the thick ﬁlm tube-type sensor is 3–4 months. The increase or decrease in the operation temperature made no obvious improvement in its long-term stability.
A thick ﬁlm tube-type CO2 sensor was fabricated in this work, in which sol–gel synthesized NASICON was employed as solid-electrolyte material and a small-volume alumina tube was used as substrate. The effect on the sensing property from the molar ratio of binary carbonate auxiliary phase of Li2CO3–BaCO3 was checked in detail. The thick ﬁlm sensor with the auxiliary electrode of Li2CO3:BaCO3 ≈ 1:2 exhibited high sensitivity, short response and recovery time and acceptable selectivity. With the realization of small-volume thick-ﬁlm tube structure, the power consumption was effectively decreased in comparison with the corresponding traditional planar bulk sensor. The stability investigation indicated that the kind of sensor could satisfy the application requirement within 3–4 months. In the point of practical application development, it is obvious that the consistency in the sensing performance should be improved and the lifetime should be prolonged further in the following work.