Nominal Na1.4Al0.4M1.6(PO4)3 (M = Ge, Sn, Ti, Hf, Zr) NASICON compounds have been prepared as polycrystalline powders. Rietveld analysis of X-ray and neutron diffraction patterns showed that M = Ge and Sn samples crystallize in the R3 space group (s.g.) and that M = Ti, Hf, Zr compositions crystallize in the R3c s.g. Data analyses indicated that aluminum contents into the main NASICON phases are always smaller than the nominal ones. 27Al, 31P and 23Na magic angle spinning-nuclear magnetic resonance (MAS-NMR) spectroscopies have been used to deduce aluminum contents and local atomic environments. In samples with high aluminum contents, M = Ge, Sn and Ti, electrical conductivity has been deduced from impedance spectroscopy data. The titanium sample incorporates the maximum aluminum content and displays the lowest activation energy, 0.52(1) eV, and the highest conductivity, rT(400 K) = 1.5(3)* 10-5 S cm-1. 
The influence of structural parameters on conductivity values has been analyzed with the bond valence sum method. With this technique, the most probable conduction pathways in Na1+xAlxTi2 x(PO4)3 and Na1+xInxZr2 x(PO4)3 samples have also been deduced. 
NASICON materials have been extensively studied because of the high conductivity shown by some compositions. Original NASICON compounds are solid solutions derived from NaZr2(PO4)3 by partial replacement of P by Si, where Na compensates the negatively charged framework, to give the general formula Na1+xZr2P3-xSixO12 (0<=x<=3). The NASICON structure has a negatively charged 3D-framework, of general formula M2X3O12, where the Na+ cations reside in fully or partially-occupied sites. The framework is built of XO4 tetrahedra linked by corners to MO6 octahedra. Each XO4 tetrahedron shares each corner with one MO6 octahedron and, conversely, each MO6 octahedron shares each corner with a different XO4 group. 
The interstitial voids generated within the network are of two types known as M1 and M2 sites (1:3 multiplicity) in the R3¯c space group. Na ions at the M1 sites are coordinated by a trigonal antiprism of oxygens and at the M2 site has a distorted 8-fold coordination. These sites are connected by bottlenecks generally termed M1M2 bottlenecks. Specific structural details, such as the size of the M1M2 bottleneck, are needed to understand the electrical parameters (ionic conductivities and activation energies) of these samples. Structural information can be obtained either by single-crystal diffraction or by Rietveld analysis of powder diffraction data.
In general, the properties of the NASICON-type Na+ ion conductor compounds strongly depend upon the chemical stoichiometry, the crystal structure and unit cell parameters, that, at the same time, depend on the ionic radii of the cations located in octahedral (M) and tetrahedral (X) sites.
NaM2IV(PO4)3 (MIV= Ti, Zr, Hf, Ge, Sn) samples have been NaM2 widely studied. They are versatile materials that can tolerate a wide range of compositions. Many attempts have been reported on the partial substitution with pentavalent, tetravalent and trivalent cations on the octahedral site. limit depends on the nature and ionic radii of the octahedral cations. In this view, we have previously reported a study of the Na1.4In0.4M1.6(PO4)3 (M = Ti, Sn, Hf, Zr) NASICON compounds. The characterization of this family of compounds was carried out by using several techniques: Xray diffraction, 23Na and 31P MAS-NMR and impedance spectroscopies. A similar multitechnique study, enhanced by employing neutron diffraction data, was undertaken in Na1+xInxZr2 x(PO4)3 (0<=x<=2) NASICON series.
On the other hand, there are few reports of NASICON materials containing Al cations. These works mainly deal with lithium based ionic conductors. In the ceramic synthesis of these materials, AlPO4 type side-compounds can be formed. Phases as berlinite, containing tetrahedral AlO4 groups, are very stable and once formed do not yield the desired material. We have recently reported that the Na1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 (0<=x<=0.9) NASICON series can be stabilized using an adequate synthetic method with very low aluminum side-phase contents.
In the present work, we have analyzed the dependence of mobility of the charge carriers with the structure and geometry of the conduction pathways in nominal Na1.4Al0.4M1.6(PO4)3 (M = Ge, Sn, Ti, Hf, Zr) NASICON compounds. These five samples have been chosen to analyze the influence of the smaller Al3+ cations on the electrical conductivity of NASICON compounds. For that, composition, structure and electrical conductivity have been determined by using: laboratory X-ray and neutron powder diffraction, 27Al, 31P and 23Na MAS-NMR spectroscopies and impedance spectroscopy.
The NASICON phases were prepared from stoichiometric amounts of MO2 (M = Ge, Sn, Ti, Hf, Zr), Na2CO3, r-Al2O3 and (NH4)2HPO4 MO2 (M = Ti, Zr) were synthesized by slow hydrolysis with 1:4 water-to-propanol solution of commercial alkoxides: 97% Ti(OCH(CH3)2)4 and solution of 70% Zr[OCH2CH2CH3]4 in 1-propanol. The resulting white suspensions were centrifuged, washed thoroughly with water and heated at 573 K for 24 h. SnO2 was prepared from commercial SnCl4 by hydrolysis with NH3(aq) to pH 8. The white solid was centrifuged, washed with water to pH 7, and heated at 473 K for 24 h. MO2 (M = Ti, Sn, Zr) solids showed amorphous X-ray powder diffraction profiles. A part of each sample was heated at 1273 K for 12 h to determine the small weight loss due to the residual water, this was taken into account when preparing the stoichiometric reagent mixtures. HfO2 (Aldrich, 98.0%) with microparticle size < 1 Am and GeO2 (Aldrich, 99.998%) was dried at 473 K and used without further treatments.
The synthesis of Na1.4Al0.4M1.6(PO4)3 (M = Ge, Sn, Ti, Hf, Zr) samples has been optimized by the choice of heating temperatures, rates and times. The synthetic procedure used was: (1) the reagents were ground in an agate mortar for 20 min and heated in platinum crucibles at  0.1 K min -1 up to 473 K for 4 h; (2) then, the mixtures were heated up to 573 K for 8 h in order to ensure total decomposition of reagents; (3) after cooling, the samples were ground and homogenized for 30 min in agate bowls of a Pulverisette Fritsch mill working at 200 rpm with reversed rotation each 10 min; (4) the mixtures were pelletized and a second thermal treatment was carried out at 998 K (M = Ge, Ti) and 1373 K (M = Sn, Hf, Zr) for 24 h; after that, (5) M = Ge, Ti samples were ground for another 15 min in the agate mortar, pelletized and heated again at 1073 K for 3 h; (6) finally, after 20 min homogenization in the mill, the samples were heated at 1123 K for 70 h (M = Ge, Ti) and 1373 K for 14 h (M = Sn, Hf, Zr). 
For the sake of comparison, stoichiometric NaM2(PO4)3 (M = Ge, Sn, Ti, Hf, Zr) samples where prepared, as described above for aluminum-doped samples.
All the samples were characterized by laboratory X-ray powder diffraction (LXRPD) at room temperature. The powder patterns were collected on a Siemens D5000 automated diffractometer with (h/2h) Bragg – Brentano geometry using graphite monochromated CuKa1,2 radiation between 19 and 120 (2h) with 0.03 step size counting for 15 s.
Room temperature neutron powder diffraction (NPD) patterns were collected on the HRPT diffractometer[SINQ neutron source at Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland] for M = Ge, Sn, Ti and Hf materials. The samples were loaded in a vanadium can. HRPT was used in the "medium-resolution" mode with a wavelength of ¨ 1.886 A˚ which was selected by the (511) reflection of the vertically-focusing Ge monochromator. To have good statistics, the measuring time was å 8 h per pattern. The 2h angular range analyzed was 5 - 165 [21 - 0.95 A˚ ] with step size. Structural data were deduced from the joint 0.1 LXRPD and NPD Rietveld refinement by using the GSAS suite of programs. In order to measure the overall amorphous content of the germanium-containing NASICON sample was mixed with MgO (20.01 wt.%), prior to the NPD data collection.
Differential thermal analysis data were recorded for all compositions on a Setaram Labsys apparatus. The temperature was varied from room temperature up to 1473 K at a  heating rate of 10 K min-1 with calcinated Al2O3 taken as reference.
27Al, 31P and 23Na MAS-NMR spectra were recorded at room temperature in an MSL 400 Bruker spectrometer working at 104.2, 161.9 and 105.8 MHz, respectively.
Samples were spun at 10 – 12 kHz and spectra taken after p/ 2 pulse irradiations (2 – 6 us). The number of scans was in the range of 40 – 200, and the time between scans was selected between 5 and 60 s, according to the spin-lattice relaxation of the analyzed nuclei. Chemical shifts of NMR signals are given relative to the aqueous solutions AlCl3 (1M), H3PO4 (85 wt.%) and NaCl (1M). The analysis of NMR spectra was carried out with the Winfit (Bruker) software package. Deconvolution used a standard, nonlinear least-squares fitting method. The spinning rate, position, line width, and intensity of components are automatically determined. However, chemical shift anisotropies and quadrupole constants are adjustable parameters that must be determined by trial and error procedures. In particular, an estimation of second-order quadrupole interactions, responsible for the detection of three peaks for Na atoms in M1 site, is necessary before analysis of M2 site occupancy.
Impedance data for M = Ge, Sn, Ti samples were collected on cylindrical pellets (~10 mm of diameter and ~2 mm of depth) obtained by applying an uniaxial pressure of 150 MPa for 1 min in a 10-mm die. The pellets were heated at 1273 K for 3 h (M = Ge), 998 K for 24 h (M = Ti) and 1423 K for 2 h (M = Sn) and quenched to room temperature. The porosities estimated from the pellets mass and geometry were approximately below 10%. Electrodes were made by sputtering gold on opposite pellet faces. The impedance data were collected by using a Hewlett-Packard 4284 impedance analyzer over the frequency range from 20 Hz to 1 MHz with an applied voltage of 0.1 V. Samples were studied at 238 and 248 K and in two more temperature ranges: (i) from 273 to 423 K (at 25 K intervals) and (ii) from 523 to 623 K (at 50 K intervals) in a Novocontrol Quatro Cryosystem. All measurements were done under a dried nitrogen atmosphere. Stabilization time before data acquisition was 40 min. 
Measurement processes were controlled electronically by the winDeta package of programs.
LXRPD data indicated that the main crystalline phase in the five members of this series have NASICON-type structure. M = Ti, Hf, Zr samples crystallize in the R3¯c s.g. and M = Ge, Sn compounds crystallize in the R3¯ s.g. For these two samples, some diffraction peaks [i.e. at 33.9 and (2h) for M = Sn] 40.4 can only be indexed in the maximal non-isomorphic subgroup R3¯. A minor crystalline side-phase, AlPO4 with powder diffraction file (PDF) number 48-0652, was detected in all samples; as well as traces of GeO2 (PDF 83-2474) for M = Ge, SnO2 (PDF 41-1445) for M = Sn and NaAlP2O7 (PDF 84-2483) for M = Ti. Thermal analysis showed the absence of phase transitions and weight losses between room temperature and 1473 K.
NPD patterns have been collected for M = Ge, Sn, Ti and Hf compositions in order to accurately locate the oxygen positions and to verify the Al/M compositions deduced from the NMR data (see below). Thus, joint LXRPD and NPD Rietveld refinements were carried out. The crystal structures of the four nominal NASICON phases, Na1.4Al0.4M1.6(PO4)3 (M = Ge, Sn, Ti, Hf), were refined using the structures of parent compounds NaSn2(PO4)3 R3¯ s.g., inorganic crystal structure database (ICSD) number 72215; NaM2(PO4)3 (M = Ti, ICSD 80426; Zr ICSD 9546) R3¯c s.g. as starting models.
Initially, the nominal Al/M composition was assumed to be randomly distributed at the octahedral site. A full occupancy of the Na(1) site and a partial occupation of Na(2) sites was initially postulated. The common overall parameters, histogram scale factor, background coefficients, unit cell parameters, zero-shift error and pseudoVoigt coefficients corrected for asymmetry were refined. Then, the positional parameters were optimized. After convergence, the Al/M occupation factors were allowed to vary but constrained to full occupancy. The crystal structures of the M = Ti, and Hf samples (R3¯c) have a unique octahedral site but those of the M = Ge, and Sn samples (R3¯) have two different octahedral sites, a and b. There is no evidence of vacancies at the Na(1) site for the four compounds so their occupation factors were fixed to 1.0. The refined occupation factors of Na(2) were freely refined and they converged to values in good agreement with the molar aluminum contents. 
Finally, isotropic temperature factors were freely refined but those of the Na(2) site were fixed to reasonable values, Uiso = 0.03 A˚ 2, due to their fractions of secondary phases were also refined. Temperature factors for the sodium cations were not refined anisotropically due to the insufficient quality of the powder diffraction data.
The four samples have AlPO4 (PDF 48-0652) as sidephase and the refined contents are given in Table 1. M = Ge sample also contains GeO2 0.74(3) wt.%; M = Ti sample also contains NaAlP2O7 2.5(1) wt.%; M = Sn also contains SnO2 0.37(2) wt.%. Final refined unit cell parameters deduced from LXRPD data refinements for Na1.4Al0.4M1.6(PO4)3 and NaM2(PO4)3 (M = Ge, Sn, Ti, Hf, Zr) samples are given in Table 1.
Final Rietveld disagreement factors were good (Table 1), with RF values for NPD lower than 5% for all NASICON phases. Atomic parameters of the R3¯ (M = Ge, Sn) and R3¯c (M = Ti, Hf) phases are given in Tables 2 and 3, respectively. Selected inter-atomic distances and bond angles of M = Ge, Ti, Sn and Hf are given as Supplementary material, Tables I to IV, respectively. As an example of the Rietveld refinements quality, the fits of the LXRPD and NPD data for nominal Na1.4Al0.4Ti1.6(PO4)3 are shown in Figs. 1 and 2, respectively.
Nominal Na1.4Al0.4Ge1.6(PO4)3 sample was mixed with 20.01 wt.% of MgO before the NPD experiment. The results given above in Tables 1 and 2 and Table I (Supplementary material) were obtained by the joint refinement of LXRPD and NPD data by excluding the five peaks of MgO. With the final structural description for the NASICON phase plus the impurities (AlPO4 and GeO2), we carried out a full phase analysis, and the Rietveld refined phase fraction for MgO was 22.7(1) wt.%. There is an overestimation, 2.7 wt.%, because of the presence of an amorphous phase in the NASICON material. This overestimation gives the overall nondiffracting content, 14.8 wt.%, according to the reported conversion formula.
The room temperature 27Al MAS-NMR spectra of the five samples, Fig. 3, are formed by at least two components with their corresponding spinning sidebands (not shown). The bands located close to   -15 ppm correspond to AlO6 environments and the other broader absorptions, with maximum at  ~39 ppm, are due to AlO4 environments. The AlO6 band is mainly due to Al in the octahedral site of the NASICON structure and it undergoes a higher shielding effect (the chemical shifts move to more negative values) as tetravalent cation radii increases, see Fig. 3. In accordance with structural information, there is only one NMR signal in the M = Ti, Hf and Zr phases (R3¯c s.g.). 
In the last two samples, the spectra show also a small shoulder (marked with asterisks) associated with AlO6 environments of amorphous non identified phases. For R3¯ compositions (M = Ge, Sn), there are two non-equivalent octahedral sites that produce two NMR signals. Accordingly, at least two bands can be seen in the M = Sn spectrum (AlO6 region), but they are not so clearly resolved in the analogous region of the M = Ge spectrum, see Fig. 3.
The AlO4 band is mainly due to the AlPO4 phase, detected and quantified by X-ray diffraction (see Table 1). The 27Al MAS-NMR spectra have been quantitatively analyzed, and the overall octahedral and tetrahedral aluminum ratios are given in Table 4. From the overall AlO6 content, and subtracting the contribution of the side-phases, it in the NASICON phase. These values are also given in Table 4 and they are lower than the nominal stoichiometry (x = 0.4).
Room temperature 31P MAS-NMR spectra of the samples, Fig. 4, are formed by a group of bands, one of them considerably more intense than the others. The corresponding spinning sidebands of these components have not been analyzed (not shown). The M = Ti spectrum exhibits a small band at ~-19.7 ppm that corresponds to NaAlP2O7, detected and quantified by X-ray diffraction.
In the NASICON structure, each tetrahedron shares oxygens with four octahedra. On the basis of a random distribution of triand tetravalent cations, five possible environments for P atoms can be envisaged in the Na1.4Al0.4M1.6(PO4)3 phases: P(OM)4, P(OM)3(OAl), P(OM)2(OAl)2, P(OM)(OAl)3 and P(OAl)4. From statistical considerations, the highest detected component must correspond to the first environment, P(OM)4. The variation observed in the position of the P(OM)4 "main" signal in the five samples is associated with differences in the polarizing strength of the tetravalent cation, see Table 5. In general, cations with smaller radii pull the electron density away from oxygen atoms more effectively, leaving the phosphorus atoms more positively charged. This produces a higher shielding effect on the 31P NMR resonance, which explains the more negative riso values observed for (M = Zr, Sn, Ti, Ge). 
For the M = Hf sample, the P(OHf)4 signal is located to a more positive chemical shift value,   -16.9 ppm, than that of the Zr phase, likely due to the role of the f-electrons in the shielding of the phosphorous atom. In order to analyze the chemical shift positions for P(OM)3(OAl), P(OM)2(OAl)2, P(OM)(OAl)3 bands, we speculate that the position of the component associated with the hypothetical "Na3Al2(PO4)3" NASICON compound, should be close to   -20 ppm. Thus, on the basis of the regular separation between components, the mixed environments, P(OM)4-x(OAl)x, can be estimated, see Table 5.
Due to the low aluminum content introduced, see Table 4, three environments have been considered only the first (Table 5). For R3¯c compositions (M = Ti, Hf, Zr), the P(OM)4, P(OM)3(OAl) and P(OM)2(OAl)2 components yield three bands; for R3¯ compositions (M = Ge, Sn), the existence of two non-equivalent octahedral sites multiplies the number of environments, which increases to six: a, P(OM)4, P(OM)3(OAl)a, P(OM)3(OAl)b, P(OM)2(OAl)2 2 and P(OM)2(OAl)a(OAl)b. From the inteP(OM)2(OAl)b grated intensities of the observed 31P MAS-NMR bands, the chemical composition of samples has been determined. In particular, Al/M ratios can be calculated from the expression,  where intensities Ii, with i = 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4, correspond to components with an increasing number of Al atoms. 
From Al/M ratios, the M (2  x) and Al (x) contents of octahedra can be deduced, using the expression:
The obtained aluminum occupancies, Table 5, are lower than the nominal values and close to the contents obtained from the 27Al MAS-NMR spectra analysis, see Table 4.
Fig. 5 shows the room temperature 23Na MAS-NMR spectra of NaTi2(PO4)3 and NaSn2(PO4)3, given as references. The spectrum of NaTi2(PO4)3 (R3¯c, bottom of Fig. 5) is formed by two sharp peaks at  -17.5 and  -38.8 ppm and a shoulder (marked with a solid circle) at  -53 ppm that corresponds to a unique signal produced. This experimental profile is produced by second-order quadrupole effects, related to the interaction of Na with the electric field gradient at sites with axial symmetry (M1 site). The spectrum of NaSn2(PO4)3 (R3¯, top of Fig. 5) is formed by four sharp peaks at   -17.5,   -22,   -34 and   -39 ppm and two shoulders at   -46 and   -52 ppm that correspond to the two expected signals produced by the two non-equivalent M1 sites in the R3¯ s.g.
Fig. 6 shows the room temperature 23Na MAS-NMR spectra for the nominal Na1.4Al0.4M1.6(PO4)3 (M = Ge, Sn, Ti, Hf, Zr) series. The 23Na spectra for M = Ti, Hf, Zr samples correspond to sodium atoms localized at a unique M1 site (R3¯c). On the other hand, the spectra for M = Ge, Sn samples correspond to sodium atoms situated at two different M1 sites of the NASICON structure with R3¯ symmetry. The derived isotropic chemical shifts (riso) and quadrupole constants (CQ) for the five samples are given in Table 6. In the 23Na MAS-NMR spectra of M = Ge, Sn, Hf and Zr samples, there is not a clear signal corresponding to Na(2) cations. However, in the 23Na spectrum for M = Ti contains a shoulder at ~-9 ppm (marked with a triangle in Fig. 6) which has been ascribed to Na(2) cations in agreement with previous reports.
The electrical characterization has only been carried out the materials with the highest aluminum content for (M = Ge, Sn and Ti), and so, with the highest sodium carrier concentrations. Some results from the impedance study of M = Ti are shown in Figs. 7 and 8. These data are typical for the three compositions. The complex impedance plane plot for M = Ti, Fig. 7, shows a very broad arc at room temperature where, at least, two well-resolved components can be distinguished. These components are due to the presence of several contributions to the electrical response of the pellets. At higher temperatures, 473 K (see inset), a well-developed spike can be observed with an associated capacitance of ~ 0.3 uF (20 Hz). Since it is inclined to the ZV axis at = 60 , it indicates a blocking electrode response, therefore, likely, Na+ ions.
A deeper insight into the electrical microstructure of the pellets can be obtained from the spectroscopic plots of the impedance imaginary part, Z'', and the complex electric modulus, M'', vs. logf, see inset in Fig. 8. The Z'' plots show a broad peak with a smooth shoulder at lower frequencies (marked with an asterisk) and the M'' plot a broad peak with an associated capacitance at the maximum very close to that of the Z'' peak. The maxima of both curves are only separated by 0.4 decades in frequency. Hence, these maxima are due to the bulk/intrinsic response of the sample. The in the overall Z'' plot, with an associated shoulder capacitance of 11.4 pF, is very likely due to a grain boundary contribution. Because of the high capacitance of this contribution, it is not readily seen in the MW spectrum, but it is important in the overall pellet impedance response.
To further examine this point, we have plotted the real part of the complex capacitance as a function of frequency for this sample, see Fig. 8. At low frequency and high temperature a blocking electrode effect can be observed. At higher frequencies and lower temperatures, the curves show a clear relaxation from ~10 pF to lower values in the pF range as frequency increases (black highlighted points). This relaxation is attributed to a thick grain boundary at the region of grain – grain contacts. This can not be observed in modulus plots because the modulus scales with the inverse of the capacitance.
Total pellet conductivities, rT, were obtained from the intercept of the spike and/or the arc (low frequency end) on the Z' axis in Nyquist plots. Fig. 9 shows the overall conductivity data plotted as logrT vs. 1000/T for Na1.4Al0.4M1.6(PO4)3 (M = Ge, Sn and Ti). Conductivity data at 400 K and activation energies (Ea) obtained from these representations are listed in Table 7. Activation energies obtained from the non-conventional Arrhenius plot of the frequency of the modulus peak maxima (not shown) are also listed in Table 7. Electrical data for the parent phases and those for In-doped analogous compounds are also given for the sake of comparison.
Aluminum contents in the nominal NASICON Na1.4Al0.4M1.6(PO4)3 (M = Ge, Sn, Ti, Zr, Hf) compounds, derived from three independent techniques are given in Table 8. It can be seen that aluminum contents deduced from the 31P and 23Na MAS-NMR spectra and the joint Rietveld refinements of the NPD and LXRPD data are in good agreement but they are smaller than the expected ones. However, the amount of aluminum in the side crystalline phases (AlPO4 and NaAlP2O7) is lower than that not incorporated in the NASICON phases. In order to understand this fact, we added a weighted crystalline standard, MgO 20.01 wt.%, to the M = Ge sample prior to the NPD data collection. From the overestimation of the refined phase fraction, 2.7(1) wt.%, the non-diffracting (amorphous) content of this sample was 14.8(6) wt.%. 
Hence, the phase composition of the nominal Na1.4Al0.4Ge1.6(PO4)3 sample is Na1.13Al0.13Ge1.87(PO4)3 80.2 wt.%, AlPO4 4.4 wt.%, GeO2 0.6 wt.% and amorphous 14.8 wt.%. So, the excess of sodium and aluminum, not incorporated in the crystalline phases, must form part of the amorphous phase.
The aluminum content is maximum along the studied family for the M = Ti sample, as shown in Table 8. This may be justified because the ionic radius of Ti4+ is the closest to that of Al3+ in the samples with the metals of d-block (M = Ti, Zr and Hf) which have R3¯c symmetry. On the other hand, the samples with metals of p-block (M = Ge and Sn) have R3¯ symmetry which display lower Al3+ aliovalent substitutions.
This conclusion is supported by the analysis of the 27Al NMR spectra, Fig. 3. In addition to the main NASICON peak, there are broad bands in the AlO6 region, close to   -15 ppm, which cannot be justified as arising from the NASICON phases. Furthermore, the large integrated area of the 39 ppm broad band, AlO4 groups, can not only be due to small amounts of detected AlPO4, see Table 1. For instance, nominal Na1.4Al0.4Hf1.6(PO4)3 sample contains only 3.2 wt.% of AlPO4 but the peak at 40 ppm is very large. Hence, the amorphous phase(s) must contain aluminum in both octahedral and tetrahedral environments.
As it was shown in the results section, the Na(1) signal in the 23Na MAS-NMR spectra is formed by a set of three bands in the R3¯c s.g. and two sets of three bands in the R3¯ s.g., see Fig. 6. In all cases, experimental profiles correspond to Na ions located in crystallographic Na1 sites displaying axial symmetry (g = 0). The separation between the maxima for the Na(1) NASICON signals increases as the tetravalent cation radii and more specifically as the Na – O distances decrease. In particular, it can be observed that CQ values are 1800, 1450 and 1100 kHz when M – O distances are near to 2.40 (Ge1b sites), 2.47 (Ge1a, Sn1b and Ti sites) and 2.55 A˚ (Sn1a and Hf sites). This is due to the progressive distortion produced in octahedra, which increases electrical field gradients at occupied sites, when M – O distances and cell edge parameters decrease. The structural study showed that Na cations preferentially occupy Na1 sites and extra sodium incorporated in M2 sites is low except for the titanium sample. 
This is in agreement with the 23Na NMR study, see Fig. 6, where the Na(2) signal was only evident in the M = Ti sample as a shoulder at  -9 ppm. Finally, the presence of sodium into the amorphous phase is readily evident in these spectra as a broad band in 23Na NMR spectra which is spread over a very large chemical shift range.
It is difficult to analyze the evolution of the a, c and V unit cell parameters along the nominal Na1.4Al0.4M1.6(PO4)3 (M = Ge, Ti, Sn, Hf, Zr) series because the aluminum contents of the samples are different. As a general trend,
these parameters (see Table 1) increases in the sequence Ge < Ti < Sn < Hf < Zr, which is in agreement with the variation in the ionic radii of the tetravalent cations. Hence, it seems more appropriated to compare the unit cell parameters of Na1+xAlxM2 x(PO4)3 (M = Ge, Sn, Ti, Hf, Zr) compounds with those of the NaM2(PO4)3 (M = Ge, Sn, Ti, Hf, Zr) pristine materials given in Table 1. The unit cell changes are small and it depends upon the symmetry of the starting material. As the aluminum (and the corresponding sodium to counterbalance the charges) is introduced into the NASICON phase, the unit cell volume increases for M = Ge and Sn (R3¯ s.g.) and decreases for M = Ti, Zr and Hf (R3¯c s.g.), see Table 1. The aliovalent substitution of M(IV) by smaller Al(III) yields the expected M – O average bond distance contraction, see Table 1. 
However, the anisotropic nature of the NASICON structure plus the introduction of the extra sodium do not allow to directly reflect this contraction in the a and c unit cell parameters.
In view of the low incorporation of aluminum into the M = Zr and Hf phases, electrical characterization has only been carried out for M = Ge, Sn and Ti samples. M = Ti composition exhibits higher Na+ conductivity and lower activation energy than M = Ge, and Sn samples, see Fig. 9 and Table 7. However, a direct comparison of the conductivity of these phases cannot be carried out as the aluminum contents in the NASICON phases are not the same. It must be noted that M = Ti samples have the highest aluminum content, Na1.30Al0.30Ti1.70(PO4)3.
Long-range conduction of the ions in the NASICON structure involves hopping between the M1 and M2 sites. As explained in the introduction section, these sites are connected by bottlenecks, generally termed the M1M2 and M2M2 bottlenecks. Taking into account the Na radius, the direct hopping between two M2 sites is not possible because of the small M2M2 bottleneck size. Hence, only M1 – M2 – M1 conduction pathways are relevant in these materials. We have used bond valence calculations to predict the conduction geometry on the basis of the oxygen sublattice for Na1.15Al0.15Sn1.85(PO4)3, Na1+xAlxTi2 x(PO4)3 (x = 0.4 and 0.8) and Na1+xInxZr2 x(PO4)3 (x = 0.8 and 1.6). For these type of studies, the oxygen sublattice must be known accurately and so, structural data derived from Rietveld refinements including NPD data must be used (i.e. LXRPD data analyses are not suitable). 
Structural data for Na1+x InxZr2 x(PO4)3 (x = 0.8 and 1.6) were obtained from. As previously described, bond valence sum U (x,y,z) is calculated for any arbitrary point (x,y,z) of the conduction pathway of the NASICONs taking into account the oxygen sublattice. By moving the arbitrary point (x,y,z) over a grid covering the whole unit cell volume, one can find the probable trajectory for the Na+ ions. This can be done by following the points with lowest U (x,y,z) starting from a specified position (e.g., Na1) and following a certain initial direction (e.g. toward Na2). Then, this direction is not fixed during the path, and the ion is left free to direct itself following the lowest U (x,y,z) way inside a solid angle within an iterative process. We have carried out all calculations using the JUMPITER program. The valence sum for Na+ ion can be plotted versus the distance traveled along, thus, obtaining a plot of U(d) versus d (A˚ ). 
Saddle points of the U(d) function correspond to potential barrier (bottlenecks) encountered by the ion along its trajectory.
Fig. 10(a) shows the U(d) curve for . . .Na1 – Na2. . . conduction paths in Na1.15Al0.15Sn1.85(PO4)3 which crystallizes in R3¯. Fig. 10(b) and (c) show similar U(d) curves for Na 1 + x Al x Ti 2 x (PO 4) 3 (x = 0.4 and 0.8) and Na 1 + x InxZr2 x(PO4)3 (x = 0.8 and 1.6) samples, respectively, which crystallize in R3¯c. It can be noticed that for M = Sn composition (see Fig. 10(a)), there are three crystallographic sites for Na+: two non-equivalent M1 (M1a and M1b) and one M2. These three sodium positions, surrounded by their corresponding oxygens, yield three different valence sum minima. The oxygen environment around M1b is more suitable for sodium cations (lower valence sum) than that around M1a. Furthermore, the U(d) curve identifies the two potential barriers (bottlenecks), M1aM2 and M1bM2, with slightly different valence sums and shapes. The curve U(d) for Na1.13Al0.13Ge1.87(PO4)3 is very similar to that of M = Sn. 
On the other hand, M = Ti and Zr samples show one M1 and one M2 sites (R3¯c s.g.), with a unique potential barrier, M1M2 bottleneck, see Fig. 10(b) and (c). Fig. 10(b) shows that the valence sum bottleneck maximum for TiAl0.8 is higher than that for TiAl0.4, in agreement with the Ea values, 0.55 eV for TiAl0.8 and 0.53 eV for TiAl0.4. This behavior is also observed for the ZrInx samples, where the valence sum at the bottleneck for ZrIn1.6 is higher than that for ZrIn0.8, and Ea value for ZrIn1.6 (0.46 eV) is larger than that of ZrIn0.8 (0.42 eV). When comparing both series, it can be seen that U(d) curves for ZrInx samples are much lower than those for TiAlx and nearer to 1.0 (ideal value for Na+ ion). Again, this fact is in accordance with the lower activation energies and higher conductivity values measured for the ZrInx series. Thus, we can conclude that the sodium conduction pathway size is more appropriate in the Na1+xInxZr2-x(PO4)3 series than in the analogous Na1+x AlxTi2-x(PO4)3 series.
Finally, its worth to note that the activation energy for Na1.15Al0.15Sn1.85(PO4)3 (0.56 eV) is higher than those of the TiAlx and ZrInx series in agreement with the U(d) curves where the bottlenecks have slightly higher valence sums. Furthermore, the valence differences between the maximum and the minimum of the U(d) curves are 0.48 (between M1b and M1bM2 bottleneck), 0.36 and 0.26 valence units for M = Sn, Ti, Zr samples, respectively. This trend is in close agreement with the differences in the measured activation energies for the sodium ion conduction process.
All these considerations have been deduced on the basis that Na1 and Na2 sites are not simultaneously occupied. However, in the samples analyzed Na1 – Na2 electrostatic repulsions must favor dispersion of Na cations in conduction networks. Hence, full occupancy of Na1 sites can not likely be produced. Taken into account that symmetryrelated infinite channels running in different directions are interconnected at M1 sites, a slight decrease of Na1 occupation must improve configurational entropy (cation disorder) in the analyzed compounds. This may explain that activation energy does not to the pristine materials, but ion conductivity increases 2 – 3 orders of magnitude. Similar results were reported for Na1+x InxZr2 x(PO4)3 series. For M = Ge, where unit cell parameters increase in a significant way, activation energy decreases considerably, probably as a consequence of geometrical changes produced in bottlenecks connecting M1 and M2 sites.
Na1.4Al0.4M1.6(PO4)3 (M = Ge, Sn, Ti, Hf, Zr) compothe incorporated aluminum contents into the main NASICON phases are always smaller than the nominal contents used in the preparations. The non-incorporated Al in the crystalline side-phases (f.i. AlPO4) and in an amorphous fraction (likely sodium aluminate and sodium aluminum phosphate). The main NASICON phase have R3¯ symmetry for M = Ge and Sn and R3¯c symmetry for M = Ti, Hf, Zr. Joint NPD and LXRPD data analysis by the Rietveld method has allowed to obtain an accurate these materials. 27Al, description of 31P and 23Na MAS-NMR spectroscopies also shed light over the stoichiometries and local environments of atoms in these samples. The optimum aluminum doping is produced in the M = Ti phase, which displays the lowest activation energy and the maximum conductivity. The analysis of the bond valence sum along different possible trajectories, has shown that the most probable conduction pathway for Na cations is Na1 – Na2 – Na1 in the analyzed compositions.