The NASICON system Na4.7+xTi1.3-x(PO4)3.3 x is synthesized for 0.0<=x<=0.6 and investigated the electrical properties in wide range of frequency and temperature. By means of nonlinear least square fitting of appropriate equivalent circuits, the bulk conductivity is separated from electrode effects. Ac conductivity and permittivity data are analyzed by using conductivity formalism. The dc conductivity and hopping frequency activation energies are found to be in the range of 0.56–0.64 eV. The hopping frequency activation energy is in agreement to the activation energy of dc conductivity. The scaling behavior in ac conductivity is studied and observed that the ion dynamics is independent of temperature and composition. 
Discovery of Na+-superionic conductors (NASICONs) Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12 represents an important improvement in solid electrolyte developments because of their threedimensional framework structure with high ionic conductivity comparable to that of two-dimensional networks, such as h-alumina. The great stability of the tetrahedral oxyanions (PO4)3  gives phosphates a remarkable structural diversity in the case of monophosphates for which the atomic structure results from the Coulomb attraction between independent cations and oxyanions. The AmBn P3O12 is the general formula for phosphate network system, where A is an alkali metal ion and B is one or more ions in tri-, tetraor pentavalent state. The monovalent A ion can easily migrate in the lattice with low activation energy. The general formula AxByP3O12 is also referred to as NASICON, even though the materials do not necessarily contain Na+ ion, and may not have high conductivities at room temperature.
The NASICON-type materials have fascinated much awareness recently, as they facilitate a large scope for preparing number of materials with variation in their constituent metal ions and composition. The NASICON family of materials has also attracted the attention of researcher looking for ion selective electrodes, gas sensor, fuel cell, batteries, etc. In our earlier work, the different NASICON-type materials have been prepared, characterized and observed the conspicuous changes in ionic transport, when changing the constituent B with one or more ions of tri-, tetraor pentavalent state. However, the composition dependence studies have not been performed changing the constituent B’s concentration.
Our present study explores the conductivity and relaxation mechanism in Na4.7+xTi1.3-x(PO4)3.3-x (NTP) system, where composition x varies from 0 to 0.6. The NTP glassy system preparation, characterization, conductivity, dielectric studies, relaxation mechanism, and scaling behavior are not reported comprehensively in the literature so far. We also present the time temperature superposition principle (TTSP) of conductivity spectra at different temperatures for given composition and at arbitrary temperature for different composition of NTP sample.
The NASICON system Na4.7+xTi1.3-x(PO4)3.3-x was prepared from Na2CO3, TiO2, NH4H2PO4, where x varies from 0.0 to 0.6 insteps of 0.1. The calculated amounts of the starting materials of 10 g in single batch were ground to give a homogeneous mixture. The finely ground mixture was then placed in silica crucible and heated slowly in an electrical furnace until the temperature reached to 573 K. The slow heating up to 573 K decomposes the ammonium dihydrogen orthophosphate mixture. 
The mixture was again ground and heated in a silica crucible for ~15 h at temperature 700–900 K without melting the mixture. The batch was heated further to temperatures 1173–1273 K and stirred for 5–10 min to ensure homogeneity. The melt was poured into an aluminum plate and quenched rapidly by pressing with another aluminum plate at room temperature. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was record for all the compounds using Rigaku miniflex X-ray diffractometer with monochromatic Cu Ka radiation of wavelength of k=1.5418 2 at various glancing angles between 5 and 608. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) recorded using Hitachi Model 450. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was  1 using recorded in the wave number range 2000–500 cm ABB BOMEM MB 104 FTIR spectrophotometer by KBr pellet method at room temperature. Differential scanning calorimetry was performed for all the samples on a Mettler Toledo DSC 821e instrument. The temperature was varied from 308 to 798 K at a heating rate of 10 K/min.
The finely ground samples were made into cylindrical pellet of dimension 10 mm in diameter and 2–2.5 mm in thickness pressed at a pressure of 5000 Kg/cm2. The silver paste was pasted to the parallel surface of the pellets. Then the pellets were heat-treated at 373 K during 5 h. Springloaded contacts were made on the pellets with silver plates having leads to the input ports of a commercial available Zentech Automatic component analyzer model 3305. The parallel conductance ( G) and capacitance (C) of the materials were acquired as a function of frequency in the range 20 Hz to 1 MHz at different temperatures.
The XRD results for all the sample composition are listed in Table 1. The composition x=0.5, and 0.6 showed mixed phases (glass and crystalline). The SEM measurement was carried out to study the micro structural aspects for the sample x=0.5 and typical results are shown in Fig. 1(a–c). The SEM plates show a mixture of glassy and crystalline phases. The grains observed in Fig. 1(a) indicate that the possibility for crystallization to occurred. Fig. 1(b) and (c) show magnified view of the same sample.
Fig. 2 shows the FTIR absorption spectra observed for the different NASICON-type vitreous materials. The entire  region down to 400 cm-1 is dominated by the vibrations of the PO4 tetrahedra and these features are same in all samples. Table 1 shows the FTIR absorption bands and their attribution of NASICON-type vitreous samples are assigned to various vibrational contributions of the basic phosphates. The P–O–P bending vibration band is shifting left (in Fig. 2) when increasing the composition x for glassy NTP samples. The pyrophosphate P2O7 group vibration observed in sample x=0.0 only and other samples show no evidence of pyrophosphate P2O7 group vibration. The DSC thermogram was recorded for all the samples and it is shown in Fig. 2(b) at scan rate of 10 K/ min. The endothermic peak and exothermic peaks observed in the DSC correspond to the glass transition (Tg) and crystallization (Tc) respectively for the present amorphous material. 
Glass transition temperatures of all glasses, evaluated from STARe evaluation software version 6.0, are given in Table 2. The T g and Tc of the Na4.7+xTi1.3-x(PO4)3.3-x glass decreases with increasing the x. The exothermic peaks due crystallization occur beyond the temperature range of the instrument for the lower alkali composition (x=0.0 to 0.2).
The real part, Z'(x), and the imaginary part, Z''(x), of the complex impedance Z*(x)=Z'(x) jZ''(x) were calculated as follows: where x=2pf, f being the frequency in hertz, G and C are the measured parallel conductance and capacitance. Impedance spectra of all the samples were examined using Eqs. (1) and (2). Fig. 3(a) and (b) show complex impedance plots for the composition x=0.3 and 0.6 respectively at different temperatures. The lines are the nonlinear least square (NLLS) fits to equivalent circuit elements. Impedance spectra of x=0.3 (Fig. 3(a)) show that there is a depressed semi-circle at high frequency in addition to the spike in the low-frequency region at all temperatures. Similar features in the impedance diagrams are observed for all the NTP system except x=0.6. Impedance spectra of x=0.6 (Fig. 3(b)) show only one depressed semi-circle at all temperatures.
The equivalent circuit elements obtained from NLLS fitting are shown in each figure. (i) (R1Q1) represents the parallel combination of resistance (R1), and constant phase element (Q2) for describing the bulk properties of the samples; (ii) (Q2) is a constant phase element of electrode effects in the low-frequency region The magnitude of the bulk resistance (R1) decreased with temperature. The magnitude of dc conductivity, rdc, is obtained directly from the value of (R1). Fig. 4 presents the dc conductivity of the samples as a function of inverse of temperature. The dc conductivity variation with composition is found to be small except for the composition x=0.6. The big conductivity different between the x=0.6 and other composition is due to presence of two different crystalline phases. For x=0.5, the XRD spectrum confirms the single phase of the crystalline Na(TiO)(PO4) (JCPDS770517). 
However, there are two crystalline phases Na(TiO)(PO4) and NaTiP2O7 (JCPDS-841737) are observed for x=0.6 and the results are shown in Fig. 4(b). In NASICON materials, the dc conductivity changes not do follows any systematic variation with composition.
The increase in dc conductivity with temperature is due to the increase in the thermally activated drift mobility of ions according to hopping conduction mechanism. The activation energy for the thermally activated hopping process was obtained by fitting the dc conductivity data with Arrhenius equation: where rdc is the dc conductivity, r0 is the pre-exponential factor, T is the temperature in K, Er is the dc conductivity activation energy and k is the Boltzmann’s constant. From the slope of the straight line in Fig. 4, the activation energy Er for mobile ion has been calculated for all samples and listed in Table 2.
The measured parallel conductance (G) data were converted with appropriate geometric factor to find the frequency dependent conductivity r(x). Ac conductivity for x=0.3 and x=0.6 of NTP sample is shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b). The conductivity (r(x)) is found to be frequency frequency region (xbxp), independent suggesting that i.e., the ions perform correlated forward–backward motions [27].While the frequency exceeds hopping frequency xp, r(x) law dispersion r(x) ~ xn (where nb1). At very low frequency region, the decrease in conductivity is observed in low-frequency region and it is related to blocking of ions between the electrode and samples (electrode polarisation). This electrode polarisation is also observed in IS analysis. In a power law region, the ac conductivity is much less temperature dependent than the dc conductivity. The ac conductivity behavior is analyzed by using conductivity formalism, i.e., universal power low (UPL):
The conductivity spectra for different temperatures are fitted to Eq. (4) independently for all the samples using NLLS fitting of Levenberg–Marquard method and the parameters rdc, xp, and n are extracted from the analysis. Such fits at different temperatures are shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b) for NTP samples. The measured data are well fitted to Eq. (4) and similarly fittings are obtained for other NTP sample. The frequency exponent dnT is temperature independent for all the samples and is given in Table 2. The universal power law behavior is obeyed for amorphous and also polycrystalline NTP samples. The dc conductivity obtained from impedance spectroscopy by using Boukamp software package and the dc conductivity obtained from UPL agrees well within the experimental error.
Fig. 7 shows the hopping frequency xp versus temperature. The hopping frequency is temperature dependent and it obeys the Arrhenius equation: where x0 is the pre-exponential factor, Ep is the activation energy for hopping frequency and k is Boltzmann's constant. The hopping frequency activation energy Ep is calculated from the slope of the straight lines in Fig. 6 for all
NTP sample. In Table 2, a comparison is made between Ep of hopping frequency and Er of the dc conduction. The activation energy Ep for hopping frequency is in agreement to the activation energy Er of dc conductivity. The variation falls within the experimental error. This indicates that the charge carrier has to overcome the same energy barrier while conducting as well as relaxing.
Subsequently, to examine the correlation between the ac and dc conduction, we followed the Barton, Nakajima, and Namikawa (BNN) relation, where the following equation is to be valid for the most of the ion conducting materials, where p is a numerical constant of order 1, e0 is the free space permittivity, De (=es–el) is the permittivity change from the unrelaxed baseline (el) to fully relaxed level (es) and xp is hopping frequency. Slope of the plot in Fig. 7 is equal to unity and it is given inside the parenthesis in the Fig. 7, implies that the dc and ac conductions are finely correlated and further suggesting that they follow the same mechanisms for different composition of NTP material.
The imaginary part of the complex dielectric permittivity e'' is obtained from Eq. (4) as  while the real part eV is given by; where el is the high-frequency value of e'(x). The measured capacitance (C) data were converted with appropriate geometric factor to find the real part of the dielectric permittivity e'(x) and the results are shown in Fig. 8 for x=0.3 at different temperatures. We have fitted the e'(x) data at different temperatures to Eq. (8) using the n), obtained from the ac magnitudes of n and A=(rdc/xp conductivity analysis. In the high-frequency region, at low temperatures, the well-known non-Debye behavior x(n-1) is observed. However, in the low-frequency region, at high temperatures, the sharp increase is due to the contribution from the charge accumulation at the electrode–sample interface. At high frequencies, due to the high periodic reversal of the field at the interface, the contribution from charge carriers towards the dielectric constant decreases with increasing frequency. 
Hence, e'(x) is found to decrease with increasing frequency.
Ion dynamic process in ionically conducting materials has been subject of deep scientific interest for past few years and also it is a challenging problem. The electrical relaxation process studies in ionic conducting solids are very important. The study of the electrical conducting spectra of disorder solids at different temperatures leads to a scaling law and it is called a time–temperature superposition principl. This means, for a given material, that the conductivity isotherms can be collapsed to a single curve with appropriative scaling of the conductivity and frequency axes. This feature can be expressed by: where F1 is a temperature independent function and xs is temperature-dependent scaling parameter.
Various workers have chosen the frequency scaling parameter xs as: (i) hopping frequency xp for a given sample at different temperatures and different samples at an arbitrary temperature, (ii) rdcT in Summerfield scaling and rdcT/x or rdcT/nc in Roling et al. scaling approach respectively for a given composition at different temperatures and different composition at an arbitrary temperature, where x is mole fraction of mobile ions, and nc is carrier concentration and (iii) rdc/(e0De) in Sidebottom scaling for a given sample at different temperatures and different samples at an arbitrary temperature.
From the literature, conductivity master curve (high degree universality of the conductivity scaling) has been violated by some of the scaling approaches (ii) and (iii), because of the variations in Haven ratio (which indicate the degree of correlation between the successive hops), permittivity and composition.
However, the advantage of using xs=xp is not specifically encircled by the composition range or the type of glasses and also it is automatically take care Haven ratio and permittivity changes.
In the present work, we have scaled the frequency axis by xp and conductivity axis by rdc for a given composition at different temperatures and different compositions at arbitrary temperature. Scaling in conductivity spectra at different temperatures for the samples x=0.3 and 0.6 are shown in Fig. 9(a) and (b). 
We note that the conductivity spectra at different temperatures collapse on a single curve, which implies that the relaxation mechanism is independent of temperature under the conductivity formalism. The scaled conductivity spectra at arbitrary temperature for different composition of NTP sample is shown in Fig 10. We observe that all the spectra superimpose on a single curve, indicating that the ionic relaxation mechanism in NTP sample is independent of the concentration of the charge carrier, i.e., fraction of mobile ions in the composition. Since xp scaling approach automatically accounts for the Haven ratio, permittivity and composition changes, a superior master is obtained. The present scaling approach satisfactorily explains the universal ionic relaxation process in the NTP system at different temperatures and different compositions and it fulfills the TTSP. 
The scaling of the conductivity spectra implies that the relaxation dynamics of charge carrier in NTP sample is independent of composition and temperature.
The NASICON compositions Na4.7+xTi1.3-x(PO4)3.3-x (0.0<=x<=0.6) were prepared. The samples were characterized by using XRD, SEM, FTIR and DSC. The electrical properties of the glasses were studied over wide temperature and frequency ranges. By means of impedance spectroscopy analysis to obtain equivalent circuits, the bulk conductivity is separated from electrode effects. Conductivity formalism is used to evaluate various important parameters, namely dc conductivity, hopping frequency and frequency exponent. The BNN relation confirms that the ac and dc conduction mechanism is successfully correlated. The variation of dielectric permittivity with frequency is attributed to ion diffusion and polarization occurring in the NTP system. The scaling of the relaxation dynamics of charge carrier in NTP sample is independent of composition and temperature.