AgCaCdMg2(PO4)3 and AgCd2Mg2(PO4)3, two new compounds with the alluaudite-type structure, were synthesized by a solid state reaction in air at 750 8C. The X-ray powder diffraction pattern of AgCaCdMg2(PO4)3 indicates the presence of small amounts of (Ca, Mg)3(PO4)2 with the whitlockite structure, as impurity, whereas AgCd2Mg2(PO4)3 is constituted by pure alluaudite. The Rietveld reﬁnements of the X-ray powder diffraction patterns indicate an ordered cationic distribution for AgCd2Mg2(PO4)3, with Ag on A(2)', Cd on A(1) and M(1), and Mg on M(2), whereas a disordered distribution of Cd and Ca between the A(1) and M(1) sites is observed for AgCaCdMg2(PO4)3. The catalytic properties of these compounds has been measured in reaction of butan-2-ol dehydrogenation. In the absence of oxygen, both samples exhibit poor dehydrogenation activity. All samples displayed no dehydration activity. Introduction of oxygen into the feed changed totally the catalytic behavior of the catalysts. 
The production of methyl ethyl ketone increases with time on stream and the reaction temperature. AgCaCdMg2(PO4)3 is more efﬁcient than AgCd2Mg2(PO4)3. 
Several phosphates have been recognized in recent years to have good catalytic activity in various reactions that require acid–base properties or redox sites. In order to increase our knowledge on the catalysis by these materials we have studied several structural families of phosphates such as apatite, olivine and nasicon-type structures. 
The nasicon phosphates of general formula MnM'2(PO4)3 (M = Cu+, Ag+, M0 = Zr4+, Hf4+, n = 0.5, 1) exhibit a three-dimensional structure where [PO4] tetrahedra and [M'O6] octahedra delimit cavities that can host mono and divalent cations. It was found that during a catalytic reaction, the monovalent cations can be reduced and diffuse to the material surface to form metallic particles. Concomitantly, protons conceded by reactants replace the reduced cations in the structure, in order to preserve the electric neutrality of the phosphate. Similar observations and comparable activities have been recorded in the case of phosphates of general formula MTh2(PO4)3 (M = Cu+, Ag+). The structural differences between these two families are probably best pictured by the nature and the morphology of the metallic aggregation formed while the catalyst is 'working'. 
In the case of nasicon-type phosphates, the aggregation leads to formation of ﬁlaments, whereas in the case of MTh2(PO4)3 catalysts, the reduction produces particles with a size around 10 A˚. Other phosphates such as the whitlockite-type materials, with a general formula Ca10.5 xMx(PO4)7 (M = Cu, Fe), have also been studied. When M = Cu2+, these compounds show a catalytic activity in butan-2-ol dehydrogenation that depended on the amount of copper substituted in the phosphate. Characterization of these compounds by spectroscopic techniques showed that the catalytic activity was attributed to the redox properties of Cu2+ ions hosted by Ca sites. These sites are of octahedral symmetry and localized in large cavities where the transition ions have a large mobility.
The alluaudite family of minerals consists of Na–Mn–Fe-bearing phosphates which are known to occur in granitic pegmatites. Moore determined the crystal structure of alluaudite in the monoclinic system with C2/c space group and derived the general structural formula X(2)X(1)M(1)M(2)2(PO4)3 (Z = 4). The structure consists of kinked chains of edge-sharing octahedra stacked parallel to {1 0 1}. These chains are formed by a succession of M(2) octahedral pairs linked by highly distorted M(1) octahedra. Equivalent chains are connected in the b direction by the P(1) and P(2) phosphate tetrahedra to form sheets oriented perpendicular to [0 1 0]. These interconnected sheets produce channels parallel to the c axis, channels which contain the distorted cubic X(1) site and the four-coordinated X(2) site.
The past decade has seen an increasing number of structural studies of synthetic phosphates with the alluaudite structure. The papers mentioned in the literature clearly demonstrate the existence of three cationic sites in the alluaudite structure which were not reported by Moore. These sites are located in the channels, on crystallographic positions which are different from those of X(1) and X(2). Based on detailed structural studies, Hatert et al. proposed a new general formula, [A(2)A(2)'][A(1)A(1)'A(1)''2]M(1)M(2)2[PO4]3, for alluaudite-type compounds.
The existence of channels in the alluaudite structure makes possible its use as an ionic or electronic conductor. Warner et al. synthesized Cu1.35Fe3(PO4)3 and Cu2Mg3(PO4)3, which contain mixed valences of Cu and Fe. Warner and Maier showed that Cu2Mg3(PO4)3 exhibits a mixed Cu+ ionic and electronic conductivity, whereas Daidouh et al. gave evidence of the ionic character of the electronic conductivity of (Ag1-xNax)2Mn2Fe(PO4)3.
The alluaudite-type structure shares similarities with garnet, langbeinite, nasicon and Sc2(WO4)3 structures and might display analogous catalytic behaviour. The present work is devoted to the investigation of the catalytic activity of some compounds belonging to this structure-type, such as AgCaCdMg2(PO4)3 and AgCd2Mg2(PO4)3. These newly synthesized compounds are also structurally characterized. Their catalytic performances will be studied and compared to that of other phosphates using butan-2-ol as the probe reaction. This reaction provides information on the acid–base and redox properties of catalysts, as well as on changes that the catalyst might undergo on stream.
The catalysts have been prepared using a method analogous to that proposed by Antenucci et al. for the synthesis of NaCaCdMg2(PO4)3. Stoichiometric quantities of Ag2SO4, M(NO3)2 (M = Ca, Cd, Mg) and NH4H2PO4 were dissolved in HNO3 (6 M). The resulting mixture was heated under stirring up to 85 8C until the complete evaporation of the solvent. The recovered solids were successively calcined at 300 (12 h), 500 (12 h), 600 (12 h) and ﬁnally at 750 8C (3* 48 h) with intermittent grindings at each temperature. X-ray powder diffraction patterns of the compounds were recorded on a Philips PW-3710 diffractometer using the 1.9373 A˚ Fe Ka radiation. The unit-cell parameters were calculated with the leastsquares reﬁnement program LCLSQ 8.4, from the d-spacings calibrated with Pb(NO3)2 as an internal standard. 
These unit-cell parameters, and the atomic positions reported for NaCaCdMg2(PO4)3, served as starting parameters for the Rietveld reﬁnements which were performed with the DBWS9807 program developed by Young et al. The investigated 2theta range extended from 108 to 1008, the step width was 0.02, and the step time was 15 s. The total number of reﬁned parameters was 50 and 53, with 509 and 510 observed reﬂections, for AgCaCdMg2(PO4)3 and AgCd2Mg2(PO4)3, respectively. The ﬁnal Rietveld plot for AgCd2Mg2(PO4)3 is shown in Fig. 1.
Infrared spectra were recorded with a Nicolet NEXUS spectrometer, from 50 scans with a 2 cm-1 resolution, over the 400–4000 cm-1 region. The samples were prepared by mixing intimately 2 mg of alluaudite-type compounds with KBr, in order to obtain a 150 mg homogeneous pellet which was dried for a few hours at 110 8C. To prevent water contamination, the measurements were performed under a dry-air purge.
The catalytic tests were carried out in U-shaped dynamic micro-reactor operating at atmospheric pressure. The catalyst was sieved to 120 mm and maintained in the reactor between two quartz wool plugs. The butan-2-ol was supplied to the reactor diluted in nitrogen or air at a partial pressure equal to 12.2 *10 3 Pa and a total ﬂow rate of 60 cm3 min -1. Prior to the reaction, 100 mg of the sample were evacuated for 2 h at 450 C under a pure stream of N2. Analysis of the reaction mixture was performed by on-line Varian 3600 chromatograph equipped with FID and catharometer detectors. The reaction products were identiﬁed and separated on 4 m (1/8 in.) stainless-steel columns packed with Carbowax 1500 (15%) on Chromosorb PAW (60/80 mesh) and Porapak Q. The catalyst activity was calculated in terms of percentages of butan-2-ol converted into butenes, methyl ethyl ketone and carbon dioxide when O2 is added to the reaction mixture.
The X-ray powder diffraction pattern of AgCaCdMg2(PO4)3 indicates the presence of small amounts of (Ca, Mg)3(PO4)2 with the whitlockite structure, as impurity, whereas AgCd2Mg2(PO4)3 is constituted by pure alluaudite. The unit-cell parameters, reliability factors, positional parameters, site occupancies, and interatomic distances and angles, deduced from the Rietveld reﬁnements, are given in Tables 1–3, respectively. Both the satisfactory values of Rp, Rwp, RBragg, and S (Table 1), and the mean O–P(1)–O and O–P(2)–O angles (Table 3), which are close to those of an ideal tetrahedron, conﬁrm the reliability of the those of reﬁnements. However, AgCaCdMg2(PO4)3, probably because small amounts of impurities occur in the latter compound. A polyhedral representation of the crystal structure of AgCd2Mg2(PO4)3, projected along the approximate [0 0 1] direction, is shown in Fig. 2.
The crystallographic sites of the alluaudite-like compounds (Table 2) are labeled according to the nomenclature recently proposed by Hatert et al. The morphologies of the coordination polyhedra of M(1) and M(2) are those of distorted octahedra, whereas the morphologies of A(1) and A(2)0 are those of a distorted cube and a gabled disphenoid, respectively. However, if the bond distances longer than 3.0 A˚ are neglected, the morphologies of A(1) and A(2)' become those of a distorted octahedron and of a trigonal prism, respectively. These morphologies are similar to those previously described for NaCaCdMg2(PO4)3. 
The temperature factors were not reﬁned, because they are correlated with the occupancy factors. Consequently, the temperature factors were constrained to the reasonable values 0.5 (Ag, Ca, Cd, Mg, P) and 1.0 (O), which are close to the values obtained by Antenucci et al. and Hatert et al. 
Preliminary reﬁnements were performed assuming an ordered distribution of Ag, Ca, Cd, and Mg on the crystallographic sites of the alluaudite structure, according to the ionic radii of these cations. For AgCd2Mg2(PO4)3, the ﬁnal occupancy factors (Table 2) are in good agreement with this ordered distribution, with Ag on A(2)', Cd on A(1) and M(1), and Mg on M(2). However, preliminary reﬁnements of AgCaCdMg2(PO4)3 indicate a rather low electronic density on M(1) and a high electronic density on A(1), compared to the theoretical values. This behavior is likely related to the presence of Ca on the M(1) site and of Cd on the A(1) site. Consequently, the occupancy factors for the A(1) and M(1) sites were calculated assuming a full occupancy by Ca and Cd.
Another problem arises from the presence of (Ca, Mg)3(PO4)2 as impurity, which produces a lowering of the Ca-content of AgCaCdMg2(PO4)3. For this reason, and because no vacancies were observed on the A(1) site, it was necessary to introduce a small amount of Ag on A(1). This amount, which was ﬁxed to 10%, corresponds approximately to the deﬁcit of Ag observed on the A(2)' crystallographic site (Table 2). The ﬁnal reﬁnement was then performed assuming Ag and vacancies in A(2)', Cd, Ca and Ag in A(1), Ca and Cd in M(1), and Mg in M(2). This partially disordered distribution of Ca and Cd between the A(1) and M(1) sites (Table 2) is probably due to the similar ionic radii of Ca2+ and Cd2+, radii which are 1.00 and 0.95 A˚ , respectively. A similar disordered distribution has already been observed by Antenucci et al. in the alluaudite-like compound NaCaCdMg2(PO4)3.
The infrared spectra of AgCaCdMg2(PO4)3 and AgCd2Mg2(PO4)3, shown in Fig. 3, are typical of an orthophosphate structure. Because the infrared spectra of alluaudites exhibit a complexity which is related to the low symmetry and the large dimensions of the unit-cell, it is difﬁcult to attribute all the individual absorption bands to speciﬁc modes of vibration. Nevertheless, most of the bands can be assigned by comparison with the similar spectra of NaCdIn2(PO4)3 and NaMn(Fe1 xInx)2(PO4)3. According to these authors, the stretching vibrational modes of the PO4 tetrahedra appear in the 1200– 850 cm-1 region, whereas the PO4 bending vibrational modes occur between ca. 400 and 650 cm
Qualitatively, sharp bands are observed for AgCd2Mg2(PO4)3, whereas broader bands are obtained with AgCaCdMg2(PO4)3. This feature conﬁrms the disordered distribution of Ag, Ca, and Cd in AgCaCdMg2(PO4)3, whereas the cationic distribution in AgCd2Mg2(PO4)3 is more ordered.
The results of the experiments performed at 225 C in the absence of oxygen are reported in Fig. 4 which shows that both samples exhibit poor efﬁciency; albeit, the dehydrogenation activity of AgCd2Mg2(PO4)3 is superior to that of AgCaCdMg2(PO4)3. No dehydration activity was observed in these experimental conditions.
The substitution of N2 by air in the reaction mixture produces an improvement of the catalyst performances. Fig. 5 displays the evolution of the dehydrogenation activity of AgCaCdMg2(PO4)3 versus the reaction temperature. The production of methyl ethyl ketone which is the only product of the reaction increases with time on stream and temperature and reaches a stationary state after 1 h. No dehydration activity is observed, whereas the nasicon-type phosphates exhibit an important dehydration activity. This feature probably results from the differences between the alluaudite and nasicon acid–base properties. We have followed the evolution of the production of methyl ethyl ketone for AgCd2Mg2(PO4)3 versus temperature and time on stream (Fig. 6). At all temperatures, the activity decreases slightly at the beginning of the experiment, reaches a maximum after 125 min, then decreases slowly. 
It is important to note the different behavior of these compounds, when we compare their activity at stationary state and different reaction temperatures (Fig. 7). According to this diagram, AgCaCdMg2(PO4)3 is much more efﬁcient than AgCdMg2(PO4)3.
The catalytic behaviour of the alluaudite-type materials can be compared with that of nasicon-type catalysts which were previously investigated in the same probe reaction. Their activity might be attributed to the reduction ability of the Ag+ ions located in the channels of the alluaudite structure and the formation of Ag clusters. These aggregates of silver react with the oxygen of the reaction mixture, in order to form (AgxOy) species which constitute the active sites. Analogous reduction and oxidation processes were observed with the nasicon-type phosphates AgZr2(PO4)3, AgHf2(PO4)3 and AgTh2(PO4)3 using the same probe reaction. The extent of this reduction obviously depends on the structural features of these phosphates. This redox model explains the differences of behavior observed for both catalysts investigated in the present study.
Complementary experiments were performed using a reaction mixture containing alternatively oxygen (Fig. 8). The experiments were undertaken in order to conﬁrm the reversibility of the reduction process of Ag+ ions. The replacement of air and butan-2-ol mixture by N2 and butan-2-ol induces a rapid decrease of the catalytic activity. Oxygen addition to the reaction mixture enhances the catalytic activity. This reversible behavior is similar to that observed with the nasicon-type silver phosphates, for which the reduction of Ag+ to Ag has been previously demonstrated. The active centers are the (AgxOy) species and reaction mechanism is most likely of Mars and van Krevelen type.
The catalysts AgCaCdMg2(PO4)3 and AgCd2Mg2(PO4)3, with the alluaudite-type structure, exhibit similar properties to those of nasicon-type phosphates. The promising catalytic results presented in this paper might probably be attributed to the extreme ﬂexibility of the structure. Moreover, the nasicon-type compounds show essentially acidic properties, while the alluaudite-type phosphates could present acid or basic properties, depending on the nature of the cations introduced in the phosphate framework.