A planar type CO2 gas sensor employing (8 mol% Y2O3) ZrO2 (YSZ) thin ﬁlm on Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (Nasicon) substrate with Na2CO3 as an auxiliary electrode has been fabricated and tested in laboratory environment between 700–900 K. The YSZ thin ﬁlm was fabricated on Nasicon and alumina substrate using radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering. The ﬁlm was examined using SEM and X-ray diffraction (XRD) after treating the Nasicon-YSZ bi-layer structure at 1300 K for 2 h. The results indicate that a crack free YSZ ﬁlm was produced on Nasicon surface that was well bonded to the substrate. The conductivity of sputtered YSZ thin ﬁlm measured by ac-impedance spectroscopy has been found to be higher than that of YSZ pellet by approximately half an order of magniture. The bi-electrolyte planar sensor displays rapid response (t95 ≤ 200 s) to CO2 compared to the tube type sensor (t95 ≤ 700 s) and the measured open circuit voltage of the electrochemical CO2 sensor has been found to be Nernstian at all temperatures.
Combustion of fossil fuels is the major contributor of pollutants including gaseous oxides of carbon, nitrogen and sulphur such as COX (X = 1, 2), NOX (X = 1, 2), SOX (X = 2, 3) and non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOC’s). These gaseous compounds have been known to inﬂict irreversible damage to the ozone layer, quality of life, environment and health. Continuous monitoring and control of CO2 using chemical sensors is important for process control in heavy industries such as power plants, chemical and metallurgical industries, petrol and diesel engine road vehicles (P-DERV), carbonation of concrete, food packaging, and environmental monitoring. CO2 in particular is one of the main green-house gases, so called because it blocks light from re-radiating, thereby causing heat to be trapped which results in the warming up of the atmosphere. CO2 contributes to the global warming by over 50% of the total gases that are responsible for global warming phenomenon.
Oxide ceramics are known to be chemically stable in harsh environments and therefore most of the research work on chemical sensors for more than two decades has been conducted using oxide ceramic materials. Gauthier and Chamberland reported the ﬁrst CO2 sensor using gaseous electrodes and K2CO3 as a solid electrolyte. Since the publication of their research, there has been a large number of investigations using variety of solid electrolyte materials such as alkali metal carbonates, beta-alumina, Nasicon, stabilised-zirconia and Li-ion conducting electrolyte for the development of a CO2 sensor. A variety of reference and auxiliary electrode systems have been used in conjunction with an appropriate solid electrolyte with the aim of improving the response time, selectivity, stability of the sensor signal and manufacturing process. However, in almost all the earlier investigations, the CO2 sensor tested by various group of investigators has been signiﬁcantly bulky. 
Recent reports suggests that a thick and thin ﬁlm gas sensing devices can be more reliable, could exhibit more stable response, will be less expensive to manufacture and can be easily integrated into microelectronic circuitry.
Therefore, in the present investigation we report the design and fabrication of solid state ceramic sensor for sensing CO2 incorporating a bi-electrolyte couple consisting of a thin ﬁlm of (8 mol% Y2O3) ZrO2 (YSZ), an excellent O2− anion conductor, on Na3Zr2Si2PO12 + (Nasicon) substrate, a superionic Na cation conductor, with Na2CO3 as an auxiliary electrode. The sensor has been based on the earlier work of Kale and Jacob and is tested in the laboratory environment between 700 to 900 K. The main advantage of a bi-electrolyte sensor over a mono-electrolyte sensor is that the test gas is in contact with only one of the faces of the Nasicon solid electrolyte and hence there is no possibility of short-circuiting the two electrodes of the sensor. This has been explained in more details elsewhere by Kale et al. for a bi-electrolyte SOX sensor that has been successfully tested by Kale et al. in the laboratory environment over a range of temperature and partial pressure of SO2.
YSZ thin ﬁlm was deposited on alumina and Nasicon substrate using a US-GUN-II radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering unit. Three different target materials such as high density YSZ disk, porous YSZ disk and ﬁne powder of YSZ have been tested for fabricating thin ﬁlm of YSZ. Both, high density YSZ and porous YSZ targets were found to crack during sputtering and hence the powder form of YSZ was used as sputtering target for rest of the investigation. The typical sputtering conditions are given in the Table I.
The thickness of thin ﬁlm was measured by ﬁlm thickness detector, which was mounted in the RF magnetron sputtering unit. The thin ﬁlm of YSZ was sintered at 1300 K for 2 h. The formation of YSZ thin ﬁlm on alumina and Nasicon substrate was conﬁrmed by X-ray diffraction analysis. Cambridge S-250 MK3 equipped with EDX detector, capable of performing energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis, was used to perform microstructural characterisation and elemental analysis. Ionic conductivity of sintered thin ﬁlm of YSZ and dense pellet of YSZ was performed using SI-1260 frequency response analyser and controlled using Zplot software. Platinum electrodes were attached to the surface of YSZ thin ﬁlm by painting Pt-ink (Engelhardt A4731) and ﬁring the surface at 1173 K for 10 min. Pt wires were attached to the two electrodes through the spot welded Pt-gauze.
The CO2 sensor was fabricated by coating Pt electrodes on both sides of the bi-electrolyte couple using Pt-ink (Engelhardt A4731) and ﬁring the structure at 1173 K for 10 min. Pt wires were attached to the two electrodes through the Pt-gauze. An auxiliary electrode consisting of Na2CO3 thick ﬁlm was attached on surface of Nasicon by painting a saturated solution of Na2CO3 and heating the structure at 398 K until dry Na2CO3 was deposited on the Nasicon surface. The ﬁnal structure of the YSZ thin ﬁlm for ac-conductivity measurement and the CO2 sensor is schematically shown in Fig. 1. The CO2 sensor can be schematically written as follows:
According to Kale and Jacob, the anodic reaction at Na2CO3/Nasicon interface is:
And the cathodic reaction at the YSZ/O2 interface is:
Therefore, the reaction at the interface between Nasicon and YSZ is: Interfacial reaction: 2Na2+ + O2− → Na2ONasicon(s) (3)
The partial pressure of oxygen at both the electrodes is equal and therefore, combining reactions (1-3) gives the overall chemical reaction for the CO2 sensor described by cell (I) as follows:
For a Nernstian electrochemical sensor, the emf of the CO2 sensor can be related to the partial pressure of CO2 in the gas mixture according to the equation: where n is the number of electrons participating in the electrode reaction of cell (I), F is the Faraday constant, E is the emf of the CO2 sensor in V and P is the partial pressure of CO2in the gas mixture. Assuming that the thermodynamic activity of Na2CO3 at the auxiliary electrode is unity, and rearranging Equation. 5 gives:
The partial thermodynamic properties of Na2O (HNa2O and SNa2O and GNa2O) in Nasicon solid solution series have been measured employing solid-state electrochemical technique by Kale and Jacob. It can be easily seen that at a ﬁxed temperature and composition of Nasicon solid solution, Equation 6 transforms to: where A and B are constant.
The emf measurements were carried out over a range of temperature between 700 and 900 K. The gas mixtures of CO2 and synthetic air with CO2 concentration varying from 1 to 100% were prepared by mixing CO2 and air using mass-ﬂow controllers. The ﬂow rate of measuring gas was maintained at 100 cm3 min−1. The  open circuit emf of the CO2 sensor was measured using a Keithley 6517A high impedance (>1012 ohm) multi channel digital electrometermeter. A detailed experimental set-up is shown elsewhere.
YSZ thin ﬁlm was deposited on surface of two different substrates, high density Al2O3 and Nasicon (Na3Zr2Si2PO12), under different conditions in order to optimise the deposition conditions to produce crack free thin ﬁlm of YSZ. The optimum conditions required to produce a crack free thin ﬁlm approximately 1.5 µm thick are given in Table I. The thickness of the ﬁlm could be increased up to 6 µm by multiple sputtering. The as sputtered YSZ thin ﬁlm was found to be light yellow in colour. After heat treating the deposited thin ﬁlm of YSZ at more than 1300 K, the YSZ ﬁlm became dense, transparent and the bonding between the ﬁlm and substrate improved signiﬁcantly. The X-ray diffraction pattern of YSZ thin ﬁlm as prepared on alumina substrate is shown in Fig. 2a and after heat treating the ﬁlm at 1300 K for 2 h is shown in the Fig. 2b.
The Fig. 2a and b conﬁrm that the YSZ thin ﬁlm has formed on surface of alumina substrate. The thickness of ﬁlm was found to be approximately 1.5 µm and therefore the diffraction peaks of Al2O3 are seen in the X-ray diffraction pattern of YSZ thin ﬁlm deposited on alumina substrate. The appearance of diffraction peaks of as sputtered YSZ ﬁlm shows that the ﬁlm was crystalline and not amorphous as expected by sputtering at ambient temperature although the peaks are not sharp because of ﬁne grain size (Fig. 2a). After the YSZ ﬁlm was treated at 1300 K for 2 h, the intensity of peak increased and the width of the peak decreased rendering the peaks more sharper (Fig. 2b). The diameter of grains in YSZ thin ﬁlm can be estimated by the broadening of the X-ray peaks as described by Jacob et al.for nano-crystalline MgAl2O4 spinel powders and for nano-crystalline ZnFe2O4 spinel thin ﬁlm by Tanaka et al. using the Scherrer’s equation given as follows:
where D is the average diameter of grain, β is the width of the most intense XRD peak in radians at full width-half maxima, λ is the Cu-Kα wavelength equal to 0.15418 nm and θ is the Bragg angle. Assuming that the YSZ thin ﬁlm deposited by RF-sputtering is stress free, the calculations using Equation 8 gives the average grain diameter of as sputtered YSZ ﬁlm approximately equal to 7 (±5) nm. The average grain diameter in YSZ thin ﬁlm after heat treating at 1300 K for 2 h has been calculated as approximately equal to 12 (±5) nm using Equation 8.
The scanning electron micrographs of YSZ thin ﬁlm on Nasicon substrate after heat treating at 1300 K for 2 h is shown in Figs 3 and 4. It can be seen in Fig. 3a that after the ﬁrst run of sputtering and heat treating the YSZ ﬁlm is not uniformly dense and also it shows wide cracks mainly originating from the areas that have lower mass distribution due to the uneven material ﬂow during the heat treatment process. 
However the cracks could be bridged by multiple sputtering and heat treating sequences as shown in Fig. 3b. The SEM micrograph of a fractured cross section of Nasicon-YSZ thin ﬁlm composite, as seen in Fig. 4, indicates that the YSZ ﬁlm is strongly bonded to Nasicon surface and also that the YSZ thin ﬁlm is crack free. A crack free YSZ thin ﬁlm is an important feature of the bi-electrolyte for designing a CO2sensor. In addition to this, the cross-sectional view of the bi-electrolyte shown in Fig. 4 indicates that there are some disconnected pores across the thickness of the Nasicon substrate. We believe that these pores are formed either due to pull out of grains during the polishing of the cross-section of the bi-electrolyte or they are formed as a result of insufﬁcient densiﬁcation of Nasicon substrate. The porosity of Nasicon substrate was less than 3% and hence the observed porosity may not have any signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the performance of the sensor. 
The elemental composition of YSZ thin ﬁlm determined by EDX analysis was found to be 20.88 at.% of Y and 78.69 at.% Zr which is in excellent agreement with the theoretical composition of 8 mol% Y2O3 stabilised ZrO2.
Acconductivity of YSZ thin ﬁlm and dense pellet has been measured over a range of frequency between 10 Hz to 10 MHz as a function of temperature. Typical complex impedance diagrams of YSZ thin ﬁlm as a function of temperature between 723–923 K are shown in Fig. 5. Similar complex impedance diagrams were obtained for a sintered high density YSZ pellet. The data shown in Fig. 5 was ﬁtted using Z-view software to determine the conductivity of YSZ thin ﬁlm and similar procedure was adopted for the dense pellet as well. 
The logarithm of the conductivity of YSZ thin ﬁlm is plotted as a function of reciprocal of absolute temperature in Fig. 6 in comparison with the conductivity of bulk YSZ pellet. The variation of the logarithm of ionic conductivity with the reciprocal of absolute temperature is in agreement with the Arrhenius equation, σ T = σ ◦ Te(−Ea/kT) −1, where σ is the conductivity in Scm is a preexponential constant, Ea is the activation energy for ionic motion in eV, k is the Boltzman costant and T is the absolute temperature. The activation energy for ionic conduction in YSZ thin ﬁlm has been calculated as 0.98 eV that agrees well with the values ranging between 0.86 and 1.04 eV for YSZ bulk material reported in the literature. It is interesting to note that the conductivity of the YSZ ﬁlm has been found to be greater than that of YSZ pellet by approximately half an order of magnitude over the entire range of temperature as is seen in Fig. 6. 
This is probably because the YSZ thin ﬁlm has grain size approximately 12 (±5) nm whereas the dense pellet has a grain size of approximately 500 nm–1.5 µm and it has been shown that the nano-structured ceramics have improved electrical properties compared to the bulk ceramics.
The response transient of the planar thin ﬁlm sensor for sensing CO2 is shown in Fig. 7, which is similar to that obtained for a tube type CO2 sensor. The response of CO2 sensor in this investigation has been found to be signiﬁcantly rapid compared to the tube type sensor tested by Kale et al. A 95% of the response (t95) of the CO2 sensor tested in this investigation was found to be approximately 200 s compared to 720 s for a tube type CO2 sensor. The variation of the sensor emf with time was also monitored for more than 3 h at a ﬁxed concentration and it was found that the sensor emf remained stable with in ±3 mV of the equilibrium value at all the CO2 concentrations and temperature of measurement. Fig. 7 clearly indicates that the response of the CO2 sensor is reproducible at all the concentrations of CO2 at a ﬁxed temperature.
The variation of the open circuit emf of the CO2 sensor as a function of concentration of CO2 in the gas mixture is shown in Fig. 8 at 800 and 900 K. The variation of emf with the logarithm of the partial pressure of CO2 has been found to be a linear and follows a Nernstian behaviour given by the Equation 7. A least squares regression analysis of the measured data shown in Fig. 8 gives the slope of the linear segment equal to 81.3 and 90.5 mV/decade at 800 and 900 K, respectively. The equivalent number of electrons transferred in the external circuit due to the electrochemical reactions at cathode and anode of cell (I) can be easily calculated from the slope of linear segments in Fig. 8 using Equation 6. The calculated value of 1.95 and 1.97 at 800 and 900 K, respectively is in excellent agreement with the theoretical value of 2 used in Equation 6. 
This clearly suggests that the CO2 sensing measurements performed in the present investigation using a CO2 sensor based on Nasicon/YSZ thin ﬁlm bi-electrolyte are thermodynamically consistent and that the bi-electrolyte CO2 sensor exhibits Nernstian behaviour.
The YSZ thin ﬁlm has been fabricated on Nasicon and Al2O3 substrates by using RF magnetron sputtering and the effect of processing conditions on the microstructure and ionic conductivity have been studied. The results indicate that the ﬁlm is dense, crack-free and strongly bonded to substrate after it is treated at 1300 K for 2 h. The average grain diameter of sintered YSZ thin ﬁlm is found to be 12 (±5) nm. The conductivity of sputtered YSZ thin ﬁlm is approximately half an order of magnitude higher than that of sintered pellet however the activation energy for ionic motion was nearly the same. The response of planar thin ﬁlm type of CO2 gas sensor based on YSZ thin ﬁlm on Nasicon substrate was found to be Nernstian. The 95% of the equilibrium emf value of the CO2 sensor could be attained within approximately 200 s.