Na3Si2Zr1.88Y0.12PO11.94 was for the ﬁrst time synthesised using mechanically activated mixtures of (ZrO2)0.97(Y2O3)0.03, Na3PO4·12H2O and SiO2 aiming to lower the sintering temperature thus improving chemical homogeneity. The best result was obtained with powder mixtures activated in Teﬂon containers with partial amorphisation of the reactants attained after milling for 70 h at a maximum of 300 rpm, without signiﬁcant contamination. The microstructure consists of 300–500 nm agglomerates of smaller grains with size in the range 50–100 nm. Dense, single phase ceramics with submicrometric grain size were obtained from the activated mixture after sintering at 1050 C for 10 h. The ionic conductivity of these ceramics is 2.5 × 10-3 S cm−1 at room temperature, and 0.24 Scm-1 at 300C. These values are higher than those obtained with non-activated solid state reaction samples and amongst the highest reported in the literature.
The Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 solid solutions (NASICON) are well known fast sodium ionic conductors with important electrochemical applications as CO2 sensors or + ion-selective electrodes. The fabrication of homoNa geneous and pure NASICON ceramics is still challenging. The major problem is related to the formation of secondary P-rich amorphous phases which tend to segregate at the grain boundaries with a negative effect on the ionic transport properties. The traditional ceramic route usually implies the use of relatively high sintering temperatures which lead to an increase of the fraction of these amorphous phases and to sodium and phosphorous volatilisation with subsequent precipitation of monoclinic zirconia (mZrO2) crystallites. The aim has been always to obtain very ﬁne and reactive powders in order to keep the sintering temperature as low as possible. The sol–gel method was the ﬁrst valid alternative to the standard ceramic route and is still largely used. 
Recently, the use of reactive tetragonal-zirconia polycrystals (TZP) as zirconium precursor in a conventional high temperature solid-state reaction proved to be a valid approach to decrease the sintering temperature. The main idea behind this approach is the use of a metastable precursor which is further from equilibrium than the mZrO2. This method yields dense ceramics with homogeneous microstructures, relatively small content of mZrO2, non-detectable amorphous phases at the boundaries and a high total conductivity, comparable to that of sol–gel-based ceramics. In spite of the relatively good performance of these materials, they are not phase pure (mZrO2 is still present) and therefore further improvements may be achieved.
In all the reported methods, the solid state reaction is activated by a high temperature treatment, but the use of alternative methods such as the mechanical energy provided in a high energy ball mill may be envisaged. The mechanical energy is used to bring the precursors to a state far from equilibrium, usually amorphous, which then may be brought to the desired chemical constitution by heat treatment. The mechanical activation enhances the reactivity of solids, as well as mixing homogeneity and remarkably lowers the reaction temperature. When the mechanical energy is enough to induce chemical reactions yielding the desired products, the process is known as mechanochemical synthesis. Many different materials have been successfully obtained via mechanical activation or mechanochemical synthesis, including, apart from many metal alloys, perovskite oxides such as LaCrO3, CaTiO3 and LaMnO3, or strontium oxoferrates.
These powders are typically nanocrystalline and are thus particularly suitable to obtain ceramics with nanosized or submicrometric grains which may present some interesting advantages over the normal counterparts. 
The technique is simple, efﬁcient and commercially attractive. It may present however a serious drawback related to contamination from the milling media (container and balls). Prolonged grinding should thus be avoided. The use of polymeric containers represents an alternative approach because although organic contamination can not be avoided, it can be easily removed by thermal treatment.
This work represents an attempt to obtain nanosized NASICON powders by mechanical activation of precursors in a high energy planetary ball mill. Two types of experiments were designed with the intention of either minimise contamination or maximise the activation energy. Some preliminary electrical conductivity results obtained for ceramics with grains of the order of a few hundreds of nanometers (<500 nm) are reported.
The nominal NASICON composition prepared in this work is Na3Si2Zr1.88Y0.12PO11.94. High purity (Tosoh), Na3PO4·12H2O (Merck) (ZrO2)0.97(Y2O3)0.03 and SiO2 (Merck) powders were initially ball milled with zirconia balls in ethanol during 2 h at 20 rotations per minute (rpm). After, the mixture was dried in air at 60 C. Some water molecules of the sodium phosphate are lost during this process and the initial precursor becomes a mixture of Na3PO4·12H2O and Na3PO4·8H2O. The mechanical activation of the precursors was carried out at room temperature without process control agents in two different experimental set-ups. Aiming to keep the level of contamination to a minimum, the reactants were dry grinded in a 100 cm3 inner volume Teﬂon® container using a Restch 400 planetary ball mill operated at 200 and 300 rpm. Considerably higher mechanical energy was obtained in the second set of experiments using a Philips PW 4018 planetary ball mill operated at a constant 500 rpm. 
In this case, the reactants were in 45 cm3 tetragonal zirconia polycrystals (TZP) containers. TZP balls with a diameter of 8 mm were used as grinding medium with a ball to powder weight ratio of 10:1, in both experiments. The grinding was interrupted at regular intervals (each 20 min) during the whole process to remove the powder from the wall of the containers.
At some of these intervals, small amounts of powder were removed for subsequent analysis by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Rigaku Geigerﬂex diffractometer (Cu K␣ radiation, step 0.01 , 5 s/step) in order to identify compositional changes during grinding. The powder mixtures were also analysed in situ at high temperature by XRD (HTXRD) using an X'Pert MPD Philips diffractometer (Cu Ka X-radiation) with a curved graphite monochromator and a ﬁx divergence slit of 1 in a Bragg–Brentano para-focusing optics conﬁguration. This instrument is equipped with a high temperature chamber Anton-Parr GmbH HTK16 containing a Pt heating ﬁlament and a Pt–Pt/Rh(10%) thermocouple. The powder was dispersed in pure ethanol and deposited on the ﬁlament that acts also as sample holder. Intensity data were collected by the step counting method (step 0.05 and time 1 s) in the range 2θ = 10–40  at several temperatures −1. 
The thermogravimetric with a heating rate of 10 K min (TGA) and differential thermal (DTA) analysis of the powders were carried out simultaneously with a constant heating −1 in a SETARAM TG-DTA LabSys instrurate of 5 K min ment. The speciﬁc surface area was measured using a nitrogen adsorption Micromeritics Gemini 2370 BET surface area analyser, based on the Brunauer–Emmitt–Teller method (BET). The microstructure of the powders was evaluated by scanning and transmission electron microscopies (SEM and TEM) using a Hitachi S4100 SEM and a 300 kV Hitachi H-9000 TEM microscopes, both equipped with Rontec energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) detectors that were used to assess the chemical inhomogeneity of the samples. The powders were dispersed in ethanol and placed in a biological glass sample holder for the SEM, or in a perforated Cu greed for TEM. Several selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns were also collected to conﬁrm XRD.
Disk shaped ceramic samples were obtained directly from the ground mixtures without any binder by uniaxially applying 100 MPa in a die with 1 cm in diameter. These samples were placed in a closed Pt crucible and sintered in air with an adequate cycle. The sintering curve was deﬁned upon the TGA-DTA and XRD results. The grain size and general microstructural features of these ceramics were analysed by SEM on both as prepared and polished/thermally etched (at 825 C for 30 min) ceramics. The phase composition was veriﬁed by XRD.
The electrical conductivity was measured in air by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy in the temperature range between 0 and 300 C using a Hewlett Packard 4284A LCR meter. The spectra were collected in the frequency range between 20 Hz and 1 MHz with applied alternate amplitudes of 100 mV. Pt electrodes were previously painted onto the pellet’s surfaces and then ﬁred at 850 C for 30 min to ensure the necessary electrical contacts.




Fig. 1 shows the XRD patterns obtained for non-activated and activated powders during different times. The pattern of the non-activated mixture reveals the presence of mainly the tetragonal zirconia (tZrO2) phase, Na3PO4·8H2O (possibly also Na3PO4·12H2O) and monoclinic (mZrO2) zirconia. Note that mZrO2 is always present in the initial (ZrO2)0.97(Y2O3)0.03 precursor as impurity. The amorphous SiO2 is obviously not detected. The mechanical activation of the precursors for 50 h at 200 rpm leads to marked decrease in the intensity of the tZrO2 reﬂections, which is paired to a slight increase in those corresponding to mZrO2. This suggests that tZrO2 primarily amorphasises and subsequently transforms into the more stable room temperature monoclinic polymorph, probably loosing yttria. The increase of the grinding rotation to 300 rpm for additional 20 h further extended the tZrO2 → mZrO2 phase transition. 
On the other hand, milling is apparently rendering amorphous and/or decomposing the sodium phosphates and leading to the formation of a new phase, Na2HPO4·2H2O. Although the main reﬂections of Na3Si2Zr1.88Y0.12PO11.94 are coincident with the other phases, the diffraction maximum at the characteristic 2θ = 13.67 ◦ for the (2 0 0) reﬂection is absent. The formation of NASICON is thus unlikely.
Similar patterns are obtained for mixtures activated at 500 rpm after 8 h. Again, NASICON is not formed. However, further increase of the activation time (up to 16 h) causes the complete amorphisation of the phosphates. On the other hand, a more pronounced increase of the fraction of mZrO2 is apparent, probably due to the considerably higher milling energy.
The increase of the mZrO2 fraction upon milling raises the issue of contamination. In fact, since the balls are predominantly composed of tZrO2, which usually transforms into mZrO2 during milling, one must not exclude that at least a small part of the mZrO2 formed may actually result from the balls (and less likely the container walls) especially in the case of the 500 rpm experiment.
The SEM (Fig. 2) revealed that the activated powders have a relatively inhomogeneous microstructure consisting of smaller grains with equivalent diameters ranging from about 40 to 200 nm and some larger particles with sizes close to 500 nm. The speciﬁc surface area of these powders was ≈4 m2/g, which is much lower than for powders prepared by sol–gel and certainly reﬂects the existence of agglomerates. Indeed, TEM (Fig. 3A) analysis further showed that the larger particles are actually agglomerates of smaller particles of nanometric size (100 nm or less). Several SAED patterns conﬁrmed that these grains are predominantly amorphous after milling for 70 h. The diffraction spots are probably due to small zirconia crystallites dispersed within the amorphous phase, since single zirconia grains could not be detected.
As noticed above, the mechanical energisation, under the conditions covered in this work, is insufﬁcient to directly produce the desired NASICON phase via mechanochemical reaction 2nd hence a high temperature treatment was necessary. Fig. 4 shows the DTA-TGA curves for both a non-activated and an activated mixture at 200 rpm for 50 h plus 20 h at 300 rpm. The TGA is similar for both cases and shows that the weight losses occur at two temperature ranges. Most of the mass is lost up to ≈140 C and this should be due to water losses associated to the hydrated sodium phosphate phases since a stiff endothermic peak is observed at 100 C in the DTA curves. The lower variation observed for the activated mixture may be due to the release of water molecules associated to the decomposition of Na3PO4·8H2O into Na2HPO4·2H2O caused by milling. C the weight loss rate diminishes considerably Above 150  until about 250 C and then increases again up to ≈300 in the case of the activated mixture. 
The DTA results further indicate that this weight loss is associated to an endothermic reaction (peak at 293 C in the DTA curve), probably due to decomposition of the anhydrous Na2HPO4 (expected to occur at 290 C). Nevertheless, the possibility that some of  the weight loss is due to the decomposition of organic contamination from the container should not be discarded. No weight variations are apparent at temperatures higher than 300 C, but the DTA reveals further differences with two endothermic phenomena occurring in the activated powder at about 750–800 C and ≈1000 C. These are related to crystallisation or formation of new phases, e.g. NASICON.
The powder HTXRD patterns obtained in situ at relevant temperatures for activated and non-activated mixtures are shown in Fig. 5. The behaviour, similar up to 800 C for both the activated and non-activated samples, mainly show the dehydration of the phosphate yielding the anhydrous tri-sodium phosphate Na3PO4. Considerable differences are, however, observed at higher temperatures. The 975 tern of the non-activated sample reveals the presence of Na3ZrSi2O7, probably preceded by formation of sodium silicates (Na3SiO3 or Na2Si2O5) which in turn reacted with the zirconia. The formation of this compound might explain the small endothermic peak at ≈920 C observed in Fig. 4. No crystalline phases in the ternary Na2O–SiO2–P2O5 could be identiﬁed, but their presence in an amorphous state is likely since the liquidus temperature is close to 900 C in the compositional range of interest. 
The onset of the reﬂections of NASICON occurs above this temperature, paired to a signiﬁcant decrease of the tZrO2 peaks and with full reaction of Na3PO4 and Na3ZrSi2O7, which peaks can no longer be identiﬁed. The present results suggest two competitive reactions occurring with zirconium consumption, one leading to the desired NASICON and the other to Na3ZrSi2O7, the latter compound being more stable at lower temperatures. Note that the mZrO2 → tZrO2 phase transition occurs as temperature increases, with full conversion eventually achieved at 975 C
The patterns obtained with the activated powders show that Na2HPO4 crystallises at than 800 C, in agreement with the endothermic heat ﬂux spanning from 700 to 800 C observed in Fig. 4. The Na3ZrSi2O7 peaks are present only in the 1100 C pattern (probably associated to the endothermic peak observed in the DTA curve at approximately 1000 C), which may indicate that the mechanical activation hinders the formation of this silicate. On the other hand, while the intensities of the zirconia reﬂections are lower than those of NASICON when the powders are not mechanically activated, the opposite occurs for the activated powders suggesting the former to be more reactive. It thus seems that the mechanical activation promotes the kinetics of the NASICON formation reaction but has a retarding effect on the crystallisation of Na3ZrSi2O7.
The DTA/TGA and XRD results were used to obtain NASICON ceramics using directly the activated and non-activated precursor mixtures thus avoiding intermediate calcination steps which degrade the sinterability of the powders. The samples were sintered in air using a two steps ◦ cycle, ﬁrstly at 600 C  for 1 h and then at 1000 or 1050 for 10 h, always with a heating rate of 2 K min. Attempts to obtain dense samples from the powders activated at 500 rpm in zirconia pots failed. The NASICON phase could indeed be obtained but signiﬁcant levels of monoclinic zirconia were also present. Therefore, no additional results on these samples are provided in this and the next sections.
Fig. 6 shows XRD results for a NASICON ceramic sample obtained from mechanically activated precursors (200 rpm for 50 h plus 20 h at 300 rpm) sintered at 1050 C for 10 h. Within the detection limit of the diffractometter, the sample is almost single phase with traces of sodium phosphate but without mZrO2. The results now presented conﬁrm the kinetic limitations as the reason for incomplete NASICON formation evidenced by Fig. 5. This result was obtained at 1100 C during a much shorter annealing time (about 15 min). Actually, NASICON can be formed at temperatures as low as 1000 C (Fig. 6), although evidence for incomplete reaction of Na3ZrSi2O7 and Na3PO4 is still present after annealing for 10 h.
If, as shown, the phase composition of ceramics obtained from activated and non-activated precursors is not very different, the microstructure, however, is. Fig. 7 illustrates these differences. The ﬁrst and obvious one is the densiﬁcation. While the non-activated sample shows a considerable level of porosity (Fig. 7A), the activated sample is almost 100% dense (Fig. 7B) with a geometric density of 3.24 g cm-3. To attain such low porosity, the non-activated samples must be sintered at about 1220 C. This means that dense NASICON ceramics may be obtained at temperatures which are 150–200 C lower than those needed for normally prepared materials. The second remarkable difference is the ability to retain in the activated ceramics the small grain size of the powdered precursors. Fig. 7C reveals clear submicrometric microstructure with a bimodal grain size distribution. The smaller grains have a diameter of 100–200 nm while in the larger ones is of the order of 500 nm. 
Typical grains in dense non-activated samples  sintered at 1200 C have an equivalent grain diameter larger than 1 um.
Fig. 8 shows typical impedance spectra at 0 and 25 C of an activated (200 rpm for 50 h plus 20 h at 300 rpm in Teﬂon containers) ceramic sample sintered at 1050 C. Since only part of the grain boundary semi-circle can be identiﬁed, the separation of both grain and grain boundary contributions to the total impedance is not possible at the measuring temperatures covered in this work. Although measurements at temperatures lower than 0 C are fundamental to complete the electrical characterisation of these ceramics, it is nonetheless apparent that the grain boundary contribution is considerably larger than the bulk one. This is in good agreement with the previously reported resistive nature of the grain boundaries.
The impedance plots, however, enable the determination of the total electrical conductivity in a sufﬁciently wide temperature range for a meaningful comparison of the performance of activated and non-activated ceramics. These values are shown in Arrhenius coordinates in Fig. 9. The room temperature conductivity, assumed to be essentially ionic, of the activated sample is 2.5 × 10-3Scm-1 while it increases to 0.24 S cm-1at 300C. These values are considerably higher than those obtained with the non-activated material (open circles in Fig. 9), which are of the order of 1.7×10−3 S cm-1and 0.15 S cm-1 respectively at 25 and 300C.
The activation energy, ≈29 kJ mol −1, indicates similar conduction mechanisms for both ceramics. Whether this improvement is due to a higher degree of chemical homogeneity, or to the modiﬁcation of the nature of the grains or grain boundaries, remains to be clariﬁed.
The conductivity and corresponding activation energy values for the activated ceramics are comparable or even better than those, shown in Fig. 9, reported for ceramics obtained from sol–gel precursors method. Indeed, the dashed line in Fig. 9 represents the, to our knowledge, best conductivity results for Na3Si2Zr2PO12 ceramics C and with considerable larger grain sintered at 1250 size.
The high energy grinding of powdered precursors is a promising route to obtain single phase NASICON-based materials. The advantages over the classical ceramic route appear to be related to a signiﬁcant improvement of the reaction kinetics due to the smaller grain size (<100 nm) of the activated powders and a modiﬁcation of the thermodynamic properties of the reactants. NASICON is only formed at temperatures higher than 1000 C either when mechanically activated or non-activated precursors are used. The best results were obtained from a combination of moderate milling energies (200–300 rpm in a planetary ball mill) using organic (Teﬂon) containers with zirconia balls. Harsher milling conditions (500 rpm), used in an attempt to directly synthesise NASICON via mechanochemical reactions, lead, instead, to an increase of the fraction of monoclinic zirconia in the precursors mixture.
Dense NASICON ceramics may be obtained from uniaxially pressed activated powders sintered at temperatures as low as 1000 C for 10 h. The Na3PO4 impurities present in this sample fully react at 1050 C yielding almost single phase materials. This temperature is 150–200 C lower than the normally needed. Given the rather mild sintering conditions, the small grain size of the precursors is partially retained and the ceramics microstructure consists of smaller 100–200 nm grains side by side with larger ones (500 nm), probably as the result of the agglomerates.In spite of the large grain boundary density, preliminary electrical measurements have shown that the total electrical conductivity measured for these samples (2.5 × 10 C) is higher than for the non-activated samples and comparable to the best values reported up to now for sol–gel-based ceramics.

