The present work examines the problems encountered during the design, construction and testing of a fully computer-controlled system for automatic calibration of ion-selective electrodes (ISEs), based on two data acquisition boards, a home-made fast multifunction potentiostat, two peristaltic pumps and an injection valve. 
With few minor modiﬁcations, the experimental setup allows the using of batch and ﬂow techniques for automatic calibration of ISEs, operated in potentiometric or amperometric mode. For ﬂow measurements, a wall-jet cell (WJC) was designed, built and characterized. Using [Fe(CN)6]3− as standard redox couple, the WJC amperometric response was examined in order to establish the dispersion factor as well as the hydrodynamic regime as a function of the ﬂow rate and cell geometry. Finally, a -selective electrode, based on a commercial NASICON (CERAMATECTM), was used to evaluate the electroanalytical performances of the Na experimental setup for potentiometric and amperometric calibration of ISEs using batch, steady-state ﬂow and ﬂow injection measurements. 
Since the introduction of ion-selective electrodes (ISEs), the great majority of the studies focused on the evaluation of their analytical parameters were performed using batch measurements and scarcely ﬂow conditions. Nevertheless, it is worthy to note that, in order to improve the precision and reproducibility of the measurements, in many modern applications (e.g. HPLC, capillary electrophoresis, stripping or hyphenated methods) controlled ﬂow techniques are widely used. For this reason, a large diversity of ﬂow techniques, such as ﬂow injection analysis (FIA), segmented ﬂow analysis (SFA), sequential injection analysis (SIA), multicommutation ﬂow analysis (MCFA) or multi-syringe ﬂow analysis (MSFA), was developed.
In spite of the advantages offered by ﬂow measurements, their “Achilles’ heel” remains, undoubtedly, the step of standard solutions preparation. Because a representative calibration curve requires a large number of experimental points, the preparation of standard solutions is usually a time-consuming operation and, additionally, it can affect seriously the precision and reproducibility of the measurements. For these reasons, various computer-controlled systems were proposed for automatic preparation of standard solutions, such as: (i) robots able to manipulate, weight and mix different solutions and solid reactants; (ii) systems for SIA incorporating automated burettes, piston pumps, syringe pumps, peristaltic pumps or calibrated diaphragm micro-pumps.
A different approach to prepare standard solutions for ISEs calibration consists in mixing two or more solutions, pumped with different ﬂow rates. Using this principle and a fully rotary valve, it was possible to prepare until eight different standard solutions, delivered with a ﬁxed ﬂow rate.
The electrochemical preparation of metal-ion standard solutions by anodic dissolution was also proposed, but the applicability of this method is limited to a relative small number of chemical species, e.g. transitional metal ion.
ISEs calibration based on transient measurements performed in ﬂow conditions can fail because of the response time and, especially, the overshoot phenomenon. Moreover, it was observed that when the geometry of a ﬂow through electrochemical detector and/or the ﬂow rate are subject of changes, the ISEs analytical parameters could be drastically affected due to corresponding variations of the dispersion coefﬁcient and/or the concentration proﬁle at the electrode surface.
Among the ﬂow through electrochemical detectors, the wall-jet cell (WJC) and the thin layer cell (TLC) are the most used conﬁgurations for ISEs applications. After Yamada and Matsuda had introduced in 1973 the WJ electrode term, several hybrids systems between WJ and TL cells, characterized by a very small distance (less than 1 mm) between inlet nozzle and electrode surface, were reported. Moreover, in the framework of the general miniaturization tendency, microelectrodes were developed and used in ﬂow conditions. Consequently, the identiﬁcation of the hydrodynamic regime existing in the ﬂow through detector becomes a required step in order to assure the experimental reproducibility.
This work presents the design, construction and testing of a fully computer-controlled system for ISEs automatic calibration in different experimental conditions. First, a careful calibration of a variable ﬂow rate peristaltic pump proved that, by addition of known volumes from a standard concentrated solution in a mixing chamber, solutions of known concentrations can be successfully prepared. The precision of this method was evaluated volumetrically, gravimetrically and via pH measurements. The same peristaltic pump injects the calibration solutions in a home-made WJC, operated both in steady-state ﬂow (SSF) and ﬂow injection (FI) modes. Additionally, for a rapid and precise identiﬁcation of the ﬂow regime inside the WJC, the hydrodynamic voltammetry with linear scan of the ﬂow rate was carried out to record the voltammetric response of a standard redox couple ([Fe(CN)6]3− ) at a conventional electrode (graphite or Au).
In order to evaluate the precision and reproducibility of + the computer-controlled system, a NASICON-based Na selective electrode (Na -SE) was used for a comparative examination of the electrode calibration, performed in potentiometric and amperometric mode.
All reagents were of analytical grade (Merck®, Germany). All solutions were prepared using ultra pure water (Milli-RO®4 and Milli-Q®, ρ > 18.3 M ohm cm). In order to investigate the hydrodynamic regime in the WJC and to evaluate the dispersion coefﬁcient of the ﬂow injection system, a 0.5 M KCl solution was used as supporting electrolyte. For Na+ -SE calibration, the supporting electrolyte was a standard 0.1 M BaCl2 solution.
For the WJC calibration, two disc electrodes of Au (φ 1 mm; Goodfellow®, UK) and spectral graphite (SG, φ 3 mm; RW0-RW001, SGL Carbon GmbH®, Germany), mounted with epoxy resin (ARALDITE® Standard, Bostik, France) in polymethyl methacrylate (PMM) electrode bodies, were used. Several identical NASICON-based Na -SE were custom-made by stacking a NASICON pellet (φ 3 mm and 1 mm width) with epoxy resin in an electrode body made from PMM. The NASICON was a commercial material (CERAMATEC®, USA) having the composition corresponding to the stoichiometry Na3Zr2Si2PO12 and the conductivity similar to membranes synthesized in our laboratory. The inner reference electrode of the Na -SE was an Ag wire (φ 0.5 mm, Goodfellow®, UK) electrochemically covered with AgCl and immersed in 0.1 or 1 M NaCl solution. Before use, all Na -SEs were wet polished on ﬁne emery paper (grit 400, 600, 800 and 1200 from MECAPREX®, PRESI, France).
The experimental setup (Fig. 1) includes an IBM compatible PC equipped with two National Instruments® (USA) interface cards. The ﬁrst one is a complex data acquisition board (PCI 6024 E®) with 16 simple (or 8 differential) analog inputs (AI), including: a programmable gain instrumentation ampliﬁer; one fast analog to digital converter (ADC), with 12 bits resolution; two 12 bits fast digital to analog converters (DAC); eight programmable ports for digital input/output (DIO). Setting the ﬁrst board in differential mode, the analog signals supplied by the second board (PC-AO-2DC®) can be used to compensate the baseline of two measured signals, without requiring supplementary differential ampliﬁer stages.
The experimental setup also includes an electrochemical interface (EI), consisting in a low noise fast potentiostat/galvanostat (P/G-stat) with four electrodes, which can be used as a high impedance (1012) voltmeter for potentiometric measurements, too. This home-made electrochemical interface assures a high compatibility with the acquisition data system, allowing a full computer control.
For automatic ISEs calibration and hydrodynamic controlled measurements, the experimental setup was equipped with a home-made control unit designed to drive the ﬂow and concentration control elements (FCCE): two peristaltic pumps; a double three-way valve; an injection valve; a magnetic stirrer. The rotation speed of the ﬁrst peristaltic pump (P1; REGLO Analog MS-2/8®, ISMATEC®, Switzerland) is analog controlled, while the START/STOP function is digital controlled. Three stopper peristaltic pump tubes (Tygon®; 1.02 and 0.38 mm i.d.), ﬁxed in MS/CA Click’n’go cassettes (ISMATEC®, Switzerland), were used.
As the second peristaltic pump (P2), two different models (Mini S1, ISMATEC®, Switzerland, and Alitea-XV®, Sweden) were used with similar results. For FI measurements, two different models of injection valves (IV) were used: a sixport rotary injection valve (Rheodyne, Bioblock® Scientiﬁc, USA) and a linear injection valve (SVA type, Cheminert®, Sweden). In order to switch these valves between injection and sample positions, an electromagnetic actuator (IVA) or a pneumatic one were used, both being electronically controlled.
The main conﬁgurations of the experimental setup are presented in Fig. 2: (i) simple FI measurements (Fig. 2A); (ii) automatic multi-point ﬂow calibration of ISEs performed in steady-state ﬂow (Fig. 2B) or in FI (Fig. 2C). For the last two conﬁgurations, a home-made electromagnetic double threeway valve was used for commuting the electrolyte ﬂows. Additionally, for all automatic multi-point calibration procedures (batch, SSF and FI), a computer-controlled (via the control unit) magnetic stirrer (MS) allows the homogenization of the mixing chamber (MC) content. The sample loops (SL) of different volumes (100–500 ␮L), the dilution loop (DL) and all other connections were made of Teﬂon® tubing (0.5 mm i.d.).
A simple glass beaker of 100 mL volume was used for batch potentiometric measurements. For ﬂow measurements, a WJC similar to that described elsewhere was specially adapted, by placing the compartment of the external reference electrode in the upper part of the cell. In order to minimize the drift due to the diffusion potential, occurring at the liquid junction between the reference and sample solutions, a porous ceramic membrane was used. A small hole (0.5 mm i.d.) drilled in the bottom part of the cell, perpendicular to the electrode surface, was used as sample injector.
A digital pH-meter (model PHM 210, MeterLab Radiometer-Tacussel®, France) equipped with a combined pH electrode (model XC100, Radiometer-Tacussel®, France) was used to monitor (via EI) the pH value in the mixing chamber.
The setup control and the experimental data acquisition were carried out automatically using speciﬁc virtual instruments (VIs) elaborated using LabView® software (National Instruments®, USA). Additional software was developed in order to perform supplementary tasks as: the setup purge, the peristaltic pumps calibration, the FI peak detection, the statistical analysis, and the non-linear experimental data ﬁtting using the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm.
The operator has to introduce from the keyboard the values corresponding to the volume and concentration of the initial standard solution, the concentration of added standard solution and the calibration constants for the peristaltic pump tubes, as well as other speciﬁc parameters (e.g. preconditioning and measurement time for SSF, the sampling time, the number of desired repeated injections for FI, etc.). At the end of each experiment, the data representing the concentrations of the prepared standard solutions and the corresponding ISE responses are saved in a speciﬁc ﬁle format, compatible with speciﬁc software for data treatment, such as MSExcel®, Origin®, SigmaPlot®, etc.
The choice of a REGLO Analog MS-2/8® as variable speed peristaltic pump was based on two major advantages: (i) the driving DC motor is included in a closed control loop, assuring a constant and pressure independent analog speed control; (ii) the combination of the analog speed control and the digital START/STOP control allows very fast changes in the pumping rate, the maximum delay necessary to reach the desired speed being around 50 ms.
The main drawback of using a peristaltic pump for standard solutions preparation consists in the limited lifetime of the ﬂexible tubing. In order to evaluate the inﬂuence of this factor on the precision of standard solutions preparation, several tests were performed. First of all, the dependence between the rotation speed (ω) of the pump head and the applied control voltage (EC, from 1 up to 10 V) was checked and the following linear correlation was found: ω [rpm] = (0.46 ± 0.09) + (16.45 ± 0.02)EC [V], with the correlation coefﬁcient (R) equal to 1 for ﬁve experimental points (N).
Second, in order to evaluate the effect of the tube age on the ﬂow rate, two different Tygon® tubes (1.02 and 0.38 mm i.d.) were tested as received and after 3 h of continuous running with distillate water. In both cases, comparing the parameters of the linear regressions between the measured and programmed ﬂow rates of delivered samples (Table 1), a slope decrease of about 3% was observed after the application of this pre-treatment proposed by the pump manufacturer (runningin period at least 1–3 h, before starting the desired application). Nevertheless, after 2 days of continuous using (about 6 h by day) the ﬂow rates remained relatively stable, showing a decrease less that 1%.
Third, in order to simplify the pump calibration procedure, a polynomial regression was used to ﬁt the correlation between the ﬂow rate and the applied control voltage for all used tubings: where KV is a correction factor, experimentally determined for a given tubing at the maximum ﬂow rate corresponding to EC = 10 V. In this manner, each recalibration of the experimental setup requires only one additional measurement, for the evaluation of KV value. The software uses the KV value to calculate the concentration of the prepared standard solutions.
The ﬁnal test concerning the accuracy and reproducibility of the experimental setup during the preparation of standard solutions consisted in a comparison between the experimental (Vexp) and programmed (Vprog) volumes of added standard solutions (from 22 ␮L to 17 mL). In order to minimize the errors occurring in the evaluation of small volumes, the weight of delivered samples was measured (±0.1 mg precision) and then divided by the solution density. The linear regression equation: [Vexp = (−0.004 ± 0.001) + (1.0040 ± 0.0001)Vprog, with R = 1 and N = 10], proves the high accuracy of the experimental setup.
Recently, it was shown that the potentiometric behavior of ISEs based on solid ionic conductors (NASICON) could be inﬂuenced by the ﬂow proﬁle at the electrode surface during the potential measurements.
In order to identify the hydrodynamic regime in the WJC, the limiting current corresponding to the reduction of a 0.01 M K3[Fe(CN)6] solution at a spectral graphite (SG) electrode was recorded with high acquisition rate −1). The explored ﬂow rates ranged between (200 samples s −1 for different distances (d) between the in1 and 9 mL min let nozzle and electrode surface (from 0.25 to 5 mm). 
All measurements were performed in presence and in absence of a pulsation-dumping element (a silicon tubing of 100 cm length, with 4 mm i.d. and 6 mm o.d.). As can be seen in the inset of Fig. 3, the presence of the dumping element induces a decrease of the current pulsation amplitude (Ia and Ib) and, especially at high ﬂow rates, a decrease of the average values of the limiting currents (IM,a and IM,b), too. For the investigated range of d values, two general conclusions can be formulated: (i) the relative amplitude of the pulsations decreases when the ﬂow rate increases; and (ii) the pulsation-dumping element reduces signiﬁcantly (8–20 times) the relative pulsation amplitude but, simultaneously, it induces an important decrease (until 20%) of the current average value. These ﬁndings could be explained assimilating the pulsation-dumping element to a low-pass ﬁlter with a given time constant and should be carefully considered during the evaluation of the FI dispersion coefﬁcient.
The hydrodynamic regime in WJC was characterized using two different experimental procedures. The ﬁrst one was carried out in a classical manner, recording several hydrodynamic voltammograms for 0.01 M K3[Fe(CN)6] reduction at SG or Au electrodes. The results obtained for different flow rates (from 0.15 to 1.5 mL min−1) and for a ﬁxed inlet ﬂow rates (from 0.15 to 1.5 mL min nozzle to electrode surface distance (2 mm) are presented in −1 was used in order to assure Fig. 4A. A scan rate of 5 mV s a quasi-stationary regime, proved by absence of hysteresis between the direct and reverse potential scans (results not shown). The values of the limiting current were read for a polarization potential of −0.200 V versus the Ag/AgCl, KCl 0.5 M. The identiﬁcation of the ﬂow proﬁle was based on the generalized Levich equation, relating the limiting current (IL, A) to the ﬂow parameters:
where n is the number of transferred electrons, F is the Fara−1), C is the concentration of the elecday constant (A s equiv −1), D is the diffusion coeftrochemical active species (mol L −1), K is a constant depending on the electrolyte ﬁcient (cm2 s viscosity and cell geometry and Vf is the solution ﬂow rate (cm3 s-1)
The value of the ﬂow rate exponent (y) provides important information about the ﬂow regime and was determined from the slope of the linear correlation log(IL) versus log(Vf) (Fig. 4B). For both investigated electrodes, the values obtained for “y” (0.76 for SG, and 0.72 for Au) point out to a wall-jet ﬂow regime, characterized by y = 0.75.
The second experimental procedure exploits the hydrodynamic voltammetry with linear scan of the ﬂow rate (setup presented in Fig. 2A). Thus, maintaining the applied electrode potential at a ﬁxed value (+0.8 V versus Ag/AgCl, KCl 1 M), the limiting current was recorded for different values of the ﬂow rate, obtained via a linear scan of the voltage controlling the rotation speed of the peristaltic pump. −1 from the maximal rotation speed A scan rate of 0.1% s was used in order to assure a quasi-stationary regime, certiﬁed by absence of hysteresis between the direct and reverse voltage scans (results not shown). The hydrodynamic voltammograms, recorded for several combinations of d and Vf values selected at the extremities of the investigated domains (results not shown), conﬁrmed that, in all cases, the applied potential is well placed in the mass transport-controlled region.
Two typical examples of log(IL) versus log(Vf) dependencies, obtained for the SG electrode at different d values (Fig. 5A and B), show that signiﬁcant deviations from the linearity occur for the highest values of d. This fact conﬁrms that the distance between the inlet nozzle and electrode surface is a critical parameter to control the hydrodynamic regime. A simple comparison of the log–log experimental dependencies with reference lines (see the insets), having characteristic slopes for particular hydrodynamic regimes, allows a rapid identiﬁcation of the WJC hydrodynamic regime.
For the same ﬂow rate domain (see Fig. 4B and Fig. 5A), both methods give similar results. As an example, for d = 2 mm, the ﬁrst method gave a “y” value of 0.76 ± 0.04 (R = 0.9995; N = 7), while the second method gave a “y” value of 0.753 ± 0.001 (R = 0.9885; N = 9218).
In the range of low ﬂow rates (Fig. 5A, domain I), combinations between large values of d (>2 mm) and small val−1) are characterized by a diffusion ues of Vf (<0.25 mL min controlled limiting current. In the range of high ﬂow rates (Fig. 5B), a quasi-constant slope (∼0.5) was attained for d −1. In these conditions, the = 2 mm and Vf around 5 mL min hydrodynamic regime corresponds to a laminar ﬂow, parallel to the electrode surface, similar with that existing in the case of a rotating disk electrode. Due to the surface uniform accessibility, characteristic for this hydrodynamic regime, and to an adequate samples throughput, this combination (d = 2 mm −1) was retained for all further measureand Vf = 5 mL min ments performed for ISEs ﬂow calibration.
It is worth to mention that the dispersion coefﬁcient of the experimental system is strongly inﬂuenced by d and Vf values. Additionally, taking into account that ISEs response time is dramatically affected by the solution concentration, their calibration in transient ﬂow conditions may be affected by signiﬁcant errors. Therefore, in order to avoid this kind of errors is necessary to validate FI ISEs calibration using supplementary SSF measurements.
After each programmed addition of concentrated standard solution in the mixing chamber, a controlled volume from the resulting standard solution is send to the WJC and the electrode response is measured and displayed. The computercontrolled system offer three options for saving information related to the performed experiment: (i) a ﬁle with the electrode primary response, presenting the time evolution of the measured signal; (ii) a table containing the concentration values of the prepared standard solutions and the average value of the ISE response (for batch and SSF measurements) or the peak heights (for FI measurements), corresponding to each concentration step; and (iii) a text ﬁle, automatically generated, containing all experimental parameters displayed on the desktop.
A typical example of the electrode primary responses for the Na -SE, recorded in potentiometric and amperometric mode, is presented in Fig. 6. Besides a rapid diagnostic of the electrode functioning, the electrode primary response provides the necessary data for a qualitative estimation of the electrode short-time stability, and quantitative estimations of the response time and signal/noise ratio. For a given concentration, the average value of ISE potential (for batch and SSF measurements) or the peak height (for FI measurements) is used to draw the ISE calibration curve using adequate software. Is worth to mention that this step requires supplementary calculus using additional parameters (e.g. ionic strength, interfering ion concentrations, etc.), as well as a pre-deﬁned concentration dependency (linear or logarithmic).
The experimental setup facility to automatically prepare series of standard solutions, with exponentially or linearly increasing concentration, allows obtaining a uniform distribution of the experimental points on a logarithmic (Fig. 6A, for potentiometric mode) or linear concentration scale (Fig. 6B, for amperometric mode), respectively. The Na activity for all standard solutions was calculated using the Debye–Huckel formalism.
The potentiometric analytical parameters of Na-SE, operated in batch, SSF and FI modes, were evaluated using the IUPAC recommendations as well as a non-linear ﬁtting method based on the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm and the generalized Nernst equation:
where aNa is the Na+ ion activity, aI stands for the interfering ion activity, zI represents the charge of the interfering ion, LD is the limit of detection; all other symbols have the usual signiﬁcation. Depending on experimental conditions, LD or the selectivity term was neglected.
The IUPAC procedure and the non-linear ﬁtting method gave similar results for both SSF and FI potentiometric measurements. FI measurements revealed (Table 2) an apparent over-Nernstian response and a slight increase of LD. It was supposed that this behavior is due to the response time increase, occurring at low concentrations.
As it was previously reported, a linear dependency between the current intensity and the Na concentration was observed in the range of low concentrations (around the potentiometric LD), both for SSF and FI measurements (Fig. 6B). The least square linear ﬁt method was used to evaluate the am-perometric sensitivity. The amperometric LD was calculated for a signal to noise ratio of 3:1. Contrarily to the potentiometric behavior, when the Na -SE is exploited in amperometric mode, the sensitivity and LD are practically the same in SSF and in FI measurements (see Table 2). The apparent differences are due to the inherent FI sample dispersion.
A simple and reliable way to estimate the accuracy of the experimental setup for standard solutions preparation consisted in the using of a conventional pH electrode, inserted in the mixing chamber, for pH monitoring during multiple additions of 0.1 M HCl solution. For all three protocols used for ISEs calibration (batch, SSF or FI), the experimentally recorded pH values were compared with the calculated ones. As can be seen from Fig. 7A and Table 3, for all investigated protocols excellent correlations between the measured and calculated pH values were obtained.
A rapid method to evaluate both the precision and the reproducibility of the experimental setup for standard solutions preparation, within an extended domain of concentrations, uses combinations between the concentrations of the initial and added standard solutions. Thus, in order to emphasize the reproducibility of the calibration setup two series of measurements were performed using the same pairs of the initial and added solutions (Fig. 7B). The superposition of the experimental points within the electrode-working domain, the close values of the slopes corresponding to the linear ranges (Table 4), as well as the strong correlation between the two series of measurements (see the last three columns of Table 4) proved the excellent reproducibility of the standard solutions preparation.
The potentiometric response repeatability of the Na+-SE was checked in FI at five levels of concentration, by performing 10 repetitive injections of NaCl solutions, with different concentrations between 10−4 and 1 M (Fig. 8A). As expected, a statistical analysis of the obtained results (Table 5) revealed that the relative standard deviation (R.S.D., %) decreases significantly with the sample concentration increase. The potentiometric LD for FI measurements (7.7 × 10−4 M) is higher than that observed in batch or SSF measurements (3.8 × 10−4 M), due to the slow Na+-SE response at low Na+ concentrations. Nevertheless, for samples having concentration about 10 times higher than the LD value, the FI technique with NASICON-based Na+-SE represents a very convenient procedure for precise and reproducible potentiometric measurements.
The negative peaks (Fig. 8A) are due to the “overshoot” phenomenon, generated by the strong adsorption of Ba2+ ions (from the supporting electrolyte) at the electrode surface.The amplitude of this undesirable phenomenon decreases with the Na+ concentration increase. In order to perform amperometric measurements, the applied potential was poised at the value corresponding to the Na+-SE equilibrium potential, measured when the supporting electrolyte flows through the WJC. In this way, a stable and close to zero current base line was constantly maintained (see Fig. 8B). However, in the low concentrations range, a significant current drift and the overshoot phenomenon were noticed. Consequently, for 10 repetitive injections of NaCl solutions, with two different concentrations (10−4 and 10−3 M), relatively high R.S.D. values were obtained (Table 6). The comparison between two successive series of repetitive amperometric measurements proves the excellent reproducibility of the computer-controlled system. 
It is worth to mention that, before the second series of amperometric measurements, the electrode surface was polished with emery paper (1200 grit). The two complete series, consisting in 10-recorded peaks, were compared point by point for all experimental points (6200). The correlation parameters are presented in the last two columns of Table 6. The slopes and correlation coefficients values confirm the excellent reproducibility of the experimental setup.
The WJC adapted to our system allowed optimizing the experimental parameters: the ﬂow rate and the distance between the injector and the electrode surface. The presence of a pulsation-dumping element induces a great decrease of the current pulsations observed in the amperometric mode, improving considerably the measurements accuracy.
The hydrodynamic voltammetry with linear scan of the ﬂow rate was successfully used for a fast and accurate depiction of the ﬂow proﬁle in the WJC. Using this cell, it was possible to obtain a hydrodynamic regime corresponding to a laminar parallel ﬂow, allowing a uniform accessible electrode surface.
Several tests, using a commercial pH glass electrode or a home-made NASICON-based Na -SE, proved the ability of our system, equipped with a variable speed peristaltic pump, to prepare large series of standard solutions with an excellent precision and reproducibility. The full electronic control of ﬂow control elements and the high data acquisition speed allow obtaining reproducible results for repetitive as well as for long time measurements.
Finally, it is worth to note that, due the facility to prepare standard solutions with linear and exponential increase of concentration, this setup can be successfully used for automatic calibration of the amperometric biosensors. To validate this feature, a new computer-controlled system was designed using a more accurate data acquisition card with 16 bits resolution (NI 6014, National Instruments®, USA). The work is in progress with very promising results.