Electrical properties of A3TiBVP3O12 (A=Li, K; B'=Zn, Cd) NASICON-type glasses are reported over a frequency range from 42 Hz to 1 MHz and at different temperatures. By means of nonlinear least square fitting of the electrical data to appropriate equivalent circuits, the bulk conductivity is separated from electrode effects. The bulk dc conductivity is Arrhenius activated, with activation energies and pre-exponential factors following the Meyer–Neldel rule. The frequencyand temperature-dependent conductivity spectra of individual glasses can be superimposed by means of the Summerfield scaling. However, the master curves of different glasses do not superimpose. We show that this effect is related to the composition dependence of the many-particle displacement function hR2(t)i. 
The discovery of Na+-superionic conductors (NASICON) Na1+x Zr2Six P3-xO12 represents an important improvement in solid electrolyte developments because of their three-dimensional framework structure with high ionic conductivity comparable to that of two-dimensional networks, such as h-alumina. Later, other researchers introduced the general formula AxByP3O12 for phosphate network systems, where A is an alkali ion and B is a tri-, tetraor pentavalent ion. The monovalent ion A can easily migrate in the lattice and the migration is characterised by a low activation energy. The general formula AxByP3O12 is also referred to as NASICON, even though the materials do not necessarily contain Na+ ion and may not have high conductivities at room temperature.
In recent years, attention has been paid to the electrical conductivity of titanium-based NASICON-type materials.Particularly high room temperature conductivities of   about 10 -3 S/cm have been obtained for crystalline Li1+xAlxTi2-xP3O12 (c-LATP) with x=0.3 and for Li1+xAlxGey Ti2-x-yP3O12 (c-LAGTP) with x=0.5 and y=0.8. Although the bulk conductivities of these materials are amongst the highest value (0.710 -3 S/cm) reported so far, the applicability as solid electrolytes is limited by the large grain boundary impedances. This drawback can be removed by vitrification of NASICON compounds. Glasses show also other advantages over their crystalline counterparts, such as physical isotropy, ease in preparation, better workability, etc. Therefore, it is of interest to vitrify the NASICON compounds and to examine their ionic conductivities.
In literature, the factors that may influence the magnitude of the ionic conductivity in different solid electrolytes have been identified and discussed. These factors include: the concentration of mobile ions, whether or not this concentration is temperature-dependent, the activation energy for conduction and its dependence on structural properties, and the activation entropy. It has often commented that, for a wide range of materials, the magnitudes of the pre-exponential factor, r0, and activation energies, Ea, are linked by a relationship known as the Meyer–Neldel (M–N) rule or compensation law of the form:
where a and b are constants and a is positive. Almond and West have discussed the M–N rule for a variety of solid including the Ag+ ion conducting AgI–Ag electrolytes, oxysalt glasses, the polycrystalline LISICON solid solutions of composition Li2+2xZn1-xGeO4 and various ion exchanged h-aluminas. In particular, the series of substituted h-aluminas does not obey the M–N rule. This is explained by the zero or small negative entropies of activation associated with the interstitialcy mechanism of conduction in these materials. Nowick et al.  examined the M–N rule and concluded that it is not generally valid for families of solid electrolytes. Liu and Angell observed behavior opposite to the M–N rule for different ion concentration of (AgI)x(AgPO3)1-x glasses, implying a negative value of a. Furthermore, Ngai  proposed a possible origin of anti M–N rule for (AgI)x (AgPO3)1-x glasses based on the coupling model.
The frequency and temperature-dependent conductivity spectra of glasses obey generally the time–temperature superposition principle (TTSP) and can be superimposed by applying different scaling formalisms. This means that, for a given material, the conductivity isotherms can be collapsed onto a single curve by appropriate scaling of the conductivity and frequency axis. For various glasses, which is related to a non-Arrhenius behavior of xcr. In the case of these glasses, the quantity hR2icr depends on temperature. This temperature dependence can be described by hR2icr ~Td with d decreasing with increasing alkali content.
The subject of the present paper is the study of electrical properties of different NASICON-type glasses and how these electrical properties change with composition. We present the results of conductivity measurements on A3TiBVP3O12 (A=Li, K and BV=Zn, Cd) glasses together with X-ray powder diffraction (XRPD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC).
The vitreous materials Li3TiZnP3O12 (LTZP), Li3TiCd P3O12 (LTCP), K3TiZnP3O12 (KTZP) and K3TiCdP3O12 (KTCP) were prepared by a solid state reaction from Li2CO3, K2CO3, TiO2, ZnO, CdO and NH4H2PO4. The overall reaction for the formation of LTCP is given by:
The synthetic procedure is as follows: (i) The calculated amounts of the starting materials were ground in an agate mortar for 45 min. (ii) The mixture was placed in silica crucible and slowly heated in an electrical furnace up to 523 K and further heated and held at a temperature of 623 K for 6 h in order to ensure the total decomposition of the reagents. (iii) After cooling the sample to room temperature, the mixture was again ground for 45 min in an agate mortar and heated in a silica crucible for ~16 h at temperatures between 973 and 1073 K without melting the mixtures. (iv) The sample was heated further to temperatures of 1273–1373 K and, after melting, the sample was stirred for a period of 5–10 min to ensure homogeneity. (v) Finally, the melt was poured onto a stainless steel plate and quenched by pressing with another stainless steel plate at room temperature.
XRPD patterns were recorded for all compounds using the Rigaku miniflex X-ray diffractometer with monochromatic Cu Ka radiation of wavelength of k=1.541 A at glancing angles between 5 and 65. FTIR spectra were  1 using recorded in the wave number range 1600–400 cm the Shimadzu FTIR-8700 Fourier transform infrared spectrophotometer. The KBr pellet method was applied and 40  1 resolution were averaged. The density of scans at 4 cm the glass bits free of air bubbles and cracks on visual examination was determined by means of the Archimedes principle, using a 25-cm3 specific gravity bottle with toluene as an inert immersion liquid. The error in the density measurement is within F0.04 gm/cm3. Differential scanning calorimetry was performed for all the samples on a Mettler Toledo DSC 821e instrument. The temperature was varied from 308 to 798 K at a heating rate of 10 K/min.
The samples for electrical conductivity measurements were prepared by cutting the glasses into cylinders with ~10 mm diameter and ~1.5–2.0 mm thickness. Both faces of the samples were ground and polished by using silicon carbide sheet and silicon carbide powder (mesh size 1200) with water as free lubricant. Then, the samples were washed in flowing water. The washed samples were slowly heated up to 423 K and held at this temperature for 1 h to remove the water from the surfaces. Silver paint was pasted on parallel faces of the polished sample and the sample was fixed in a spring-loaded sample holder. Parallel conductance and capacitance were measured using a Hioki 3532-50 LCR Hitester in the frequency range 42 Hz to 1 MHz and in the temperature range from 300 to 470 K. The measurements were carried out in vacuum atmosphere. 
Before the electrical conductivity measurements were started, the samples were heated at 373 K in the sample holder for stabilization of the electrodes, and then the samples were cooled don. After approaching the lowest temperature, at which the conductivity could be measured, the cooling was stopped and subsequently the measurement was started. The temperature and the measurement process were controlled electronically by a Lab-Equip package program, which is a home-made software package.
The amorphous nature of the NASICON-type samples was confirmed by XRPD studies. The XRPD pattern is shown in Fig. 1(a). All the prepared samples were found to be in the amorphous state. Fig. 1(b) shows the FTIR absorption spectra observed for the different NASICONtype glasses. It is clear from Fig. 1(b) that all the samples have almost similar absorption bands and the FTIR absorption maxima are given in Table 1. The bands observed  1 for all the samples are attributed in the region 530–450 cm to the harmonics of P–O–P bending vibrations. The  1 are attributed to the bands traced in the region ~560 cm asymmetric bending vibration modes of O–P–O units. The bands seen in the region 758–700 cm-1  are ascribed to the P–O–P stretching vibration. The bands  1 are assigned to the viewed in the region 931–882 cm PO3 ionic group vibration. The bands in the region 1082–940 cm ionic group vibration. From the densities of the glasses, the molar volumes Vm=M/q were calculated, see Table 1. 
DSC thermograms were recorded for all samples and are shown in Fig. 1(c). The endothermic peaks correspond to the glass transition. The glass transition temperatures (Tg) of all glasses, evaluated from STARe evaluation software version 6.0, are given in Table 1. The glass transition temperatures of the lithium ion containing glasses are lower than those of the potassium ion containing glasses. On the other hand, the presence of Zn2+ in the glass network leads to higher glass transition temperatures as the presence of Cd2+. The exothermic peaks due crystallisation occur beyond the temperature range of the instrument.
The real part, ZV(x), and the imaginary part, ZW(x), of the complex impedance Z*(x)=ZV(x) jZW(x) were calculated as follows: 
Here, G and C are the measured parallel conductance and the capacitance, while x=2pf denotes the angular frequency. Figs. 2 and 3 show the impedance plot for the LTCP and the KTZP glass at different temperatures. The lines are the non-linear least square (NLLS) fits to equivalent circuit elements. For the LTCP system, the impedance diagrams show a depressed semi-circle up to 333 K. In the temperature region from 343 to 373 K, there is a depressed semi-circle at high frequency in addition to the spike in the low-frequency region. In the high temperature region from 383 to 460 K, two depressed semi-circles are observed at low and high frequencies, respectively. Similar features in the impedance diagrams are found for the LTZP system. Impedance spectra of KTZP (Fig. 3) show only one depressed semi-circle at all temperatures. Similar features in the impedance diagrams are observed for the KTCP system.
The equivalent circuit elements obtained from NLLS fitting are shown in each figure. (i) (R1Q1C1) represents the parallel combination of resistance (R1), capacitance (C1) and constant phase element for describing the bulk properties of the samples; (ii) ( Q2) and (R2) are a constant phase element and a resistance, respectively, representing electrode effects in the low frequency region. The magnitude of the bulk resistance (R1) decreased with temperature, ( Q1) increased with temperature and (C1) is in the range 1.8–1.5 pF for KTZP sample. Similar variations for (R1), ( Q1) and (C1) are observed for the other three samples. The LTCP and LTZP samples have additional (R2) and ( Q2) elements. (R2) decreases with increasing temperature and ( Q2) increases with increasing temperature. The magnitude of dc conductivity, rdc, is obtained directly from the value of (R1). The dc conductivities rdc at particular temperatures are given in Table 2.
Fig. 4 shows the dc conductivity of the samples as a function of inverse of temperature. The data can be described by the Arrhenius equation:
where r0 is the pre-exponential factor and Ea denotes the activation energy for the long-range diffusion of the mobile ions. Values of r0 and Ea deduced from the fits are given in Table 1. The pre-exponential factor of the NASICON-type glasses is found to vary by many orders of magnitude. Furthermore, the magnitudes of preit exponential factors increase with increasing activation energies. This is shown in the inset of Fig. 4. The magnitudes of r0 and activation energies, Ea, are linked by the M–N rule (Eq. (1)). The expression for the preexponential factor r0 is derived from the theory of ionic conduction and it is found to be;
where N is the number of lattice sites available for the mobile ions, e is the mobile ion charge, a is the hopping distance, c is the fractional occupancy of the mobile ion sites, c is a dimensionless geometrical factor, x0 is the fundamental vibrational frequency of the mobile ions and S is activation entropy for ion conduction.  All the parameters in the bracket that make up the prefactors in Eq. (5) are unlikely to vary much in the case of NASICON-type glasses. Only the entropy term in Eq. (5) is a possible source of the large variation in the pre-exponential factor.
The dc conductivity of the A3TiB'P3O12 glasses (A=Li, K and B=Cd, Zn) is lower than that of the c-LATP and cLAGTP materials. This is due to (i) the lower average coordination number of Li+ or K+ in the NASICON-type glassy phase; (ii) the lower energy barrier in the case of c-LACP and c-LAGTP compared to the NASICON-type glasses because of the good and regular fit of the channels in the macro-molecular backbone skeleton of the crystalline NASICON structures with the alkali ion.
In Fig. 5(a) and (b), double logarithmic plots of r(x) versus x are shown for the LTCP and KTZP samples at different temperatures. The conductivity is almost independent of frequency in the low-frequency region and is equal to the dc conductivity. Dispersion in conductivity is observed at higher frequencies. The high-temperature conductivity spectra of the Li+ ion conducting materials are characterised by an additional low-frequency dispersion region due to electrode effects. At all temperatures, the transition point from dc conductivity rdc to dispersive conductivity (r(xcr)=2rdc) is marked by a filled circle. The transition points lie on a straight line with a slope 1, i.e., the characteristic angular frequency xcr is activated with same thermally activation energy as the dc conductivity rdc. In Fig. 6, we show a Summerfield scaling plot of conductivity spectra for LTCP and KTZP glasses, i.e., the conductivity axis is scaled by rdc and frequency axis by rdcT. 
The scaled ac conductivity data of both glasses collapse into a single curve. Fig. 7(a) and (b) shows that the individual master curves of the glasses LTZP, LTCP, KTZP and KTCP are similar in shape. However, the master curves are shifted on the scaled frequency axis.
In the following, we show that this effect is related to a composition dependence of the many-particle displacement function hR2(t)i. This function is related to the ionic conductivity, r(x), by
Here, Nv is the number density of the mobile ions and q denotes their charge. Eq. (6) was used to calculate the master plots of the many-particle displacement function for the different NASICON-type glasses, and the results are shown in Fig. 8(a)–(d). It is clear from Fig. 8(a)–(d) that hR2(t)i is a function of (trdcT), independent of temperature. This implies that the position of the hR2(t)i curves on the time scale depends on temperature, while the values at characteristic points of the curves are independent of temperature. In the long time limit, hR2(t)i is proportional to time. 
This time dependence is characteristic of a drandom walkT motion (diffusive motion) of the mobile ions. This corresponds to a frequency-independent conductivity. In the short time limit, the curves are approximated by hR2(t)i ~t1 n, where n lies from 0 to 1. This sublinear time dependence reflects backward correlations in the ion dynamics (subdiffusive dynamics). The crossover times, t*=1/xcr, are marked by filled circle in Fig. 8(a)–(d). The length scale MhR 2icr=MhR 2(t*)i characterises the crossover from the subdiffusive to the diffusive dynamics. MhR2icr varies between 0.46 and 1.11 2 for different NASICON-type glasses, see Fig. 8(a)–(d). Thus, the distances the ions have to cover in order to overcome the forces causing the backward correlations depend strongly on the composition of the glasses. In particular, the Li+ ions have to cover larger distances than the K+ ions. Replacing Zn2+ by Cd2+ in the glass network leads to a slight reduction of MhR2icr.
The NASICON-type glasses with compositions Li3 TiZnP3O12, Li3TiCdP3O12, K3TiZnP3O12 and K3TiCdP3O12 were prepared. The samples were characterized by using XRD, DSC and FTIR. The electrical properties of the glasses were studied over wide temperature and frequency ranges. Strong correlations were found between the activation energy and the pre-exponential factor of the dc conductivity, in agreement with the Meyer–Neldel rule. The individual conductivity spectra of each glass could be superimposed by applying the Summerfield scaling approach. The shift between the master curves in the Summerfield plot is related to the composition dependence of the characteristic distance MhR2icr. In particular, Li+ ions have to cover significantly larger distances in order to overcome the short-time backward correlations than K+ ions.