Various composition of Na1+xSixZr2P3−xO12 (x from 1.6 to 2.4), Y-doped Nasicon (Na1+x+yZr2−yYySixP3−xO12, Na1+xZr2−yYy SixP3−xO12−y, where x = 2, y = 0.12) and Fe-doped Nasicon (Na3Zr2/3Fe4/3P3O12) were prepared by coprecipitating. Differential thermal analysis (DTA), thermogravimetry (TG), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and impedance spectroscopy (IS) were used as experimental techniques.
In order to obtain Nasicon materials free from ZrO2 admixture, the calcination of coprecipitates must be carried out in proper thermal conditions. The results of DTA, TG and XRD measurements allowed us to propose the best calcination conditions (to obtain mainly Nasicon phases – monoclinic or rhombohedral, depending on composition).
Nasicon-type materials exhibit monoclinic to rhombohedral reversible structural transition, at transition temperature depending on composition (x). The inﬂuence of dopants was also studied. The DSC measurements in the temperature range RT–300 C allowed us to determine the temperatures of this structural transition in the case of Na1+xSixZr2P3−xO12, and Y-doped Nasicon. In the case of Fe-doped materials this transition was not detected.
Additionally, the correlation between the composition, microstructure and electrical properties was studied.
Nasicon(Na+ Super Ionic Conductor) is known to show high ionic conductivity and relatively high chemical stability. This material has been proposed for use as a solid electrolyte in solid-state electrochemical devices such as gas sensors, ion sensors and Na–S batteries.
Structure of Na1+xSixZr2P3−xO12 (x = 0–3) can be described as a three-dimensional network of ZrO6 octahedra sharing corners with PO4/SiO4 tetrahedra. The Na ions are located in the interstitial sites in this framework. Ionic conduction takes place when Na moves from one site to another through “bottlenecks” formed by oxygen ions. Moreover, total electrical conductivity strongly depends on density and nature of the grain boundaries. The microstructure of samples is usually affected by the preparation method. Doping can further modify electrical properties of Nasicon materials. For example, the conductivity of yttrium-doped Nasicon is signiﬁcantly higher that of pure stoichiometric (x = 2) compound [7]. The introduction of Fe2+ and Fe3+ in the lattice, results in a mixed electronic–ionic conductivity, thus making possible the use as an electrode material.
The purpose of this work is to optimize the preparation conditions, and to determine thermal, structural and microstructure properties of Nasicon-type materials with different stoichiometry and dopants (Y, Fe), prepared by coprecipitation and solid-state reaction. Composition, dopants and preparation conditions are believed to inﬂuence the structure and microstructure of Nasicon, thus affecting the electrical properties of this material. The preparation of dense, single-phase material with high electrical conductivity is the practical goal of our work.
Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 (x from 1.6 to 2.4), Y-doped (Na1+ x+yZr2−yYySixP3−xO12, Na1+xZr2−yYySixP3−xO12−y, where x = 2, y = 0.12) and Fe-doped Nasicon (Na3Zr2/3 Fe4/3P3O12) were prepared by coprecipitate method. SiO2 (POCh, Poland), NaOH (POCh, Poland), (NH4)2HPO4 (Aldrich), ZrO(NO3)2, Y(NO3)3·6H2O (Aldrich), Fe(NO3)3 ·9H2O (Aldrich) were used as starting materials.
In addition, Nasicon samples with stoichiometric composition (x = 2) were prepared by solid-state reaction of ZrSiO4 (Aldrich) and Na3PO4·12H2O (Aldrich). The sample prepared by solid-state reaction was used as reference for the samples prepared by coprecipitation.
Aqueous inorganic salt solutions of ZrO(NO3)2, NaOH–SiO2, (NH4)2HPO4 for pure, Y(NO3)3 for yttriumdoped and ZrO(NO3)2, NaOH, (NH4)2HPO4 and Fe(NO3)3 for Fe-doped NASICON were used for the coprecipitation. All reagents were mixed together and stirred to form a gel-like solid bulk.
The precipitate was then dried for 24 h at temperature ◦ slowly increasing to 70 C  and for 12 h at 150 . Powders were calcined in two steps: ﬁrst at 750 C for 24 h  (pure and Y-doped NASICON powders) and 600 C for ◦ 24 h (Na3Zr2/3Fe4/3P3O12 powders), second at 900 C for ◦ C for 24 h (pure and Y-doped NASICON pellets) and 700 24 h (Na3Zr2/3Fe4/3P3O12 pellets). Powders were ground for about 5 h in 2-propanol using zirconia grinding balls. Then the dried samples were formed into disks with 13 mm diameter and isostatically pressed at 300 MPa. Pure and Y-doped
Differential thermal analysis (DTA), thermogravimetry (TG) measurements were performed in TA Instruments Derivatograph System, type SDT 2960 in the tempera◦ ture range 20–1000 C/min) under synthetic air atmosphere. Differential scanning calorime(TA Instruments, model DSC 2010) were try (DSC) performed in the temperature range 20–350 C (heatC/min) under synthetic air ﬂow ing or cooling rates 20 (50 cm3/min). All experiments were done in alumina 60 mm3 crucibles.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (JEOL JSM-5400) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) (X’Pert Philips) were used to investigate microstructure and structural properties of prepared samples.
Electrical properties were determined based on ac impedance spectroscopy measurements. Frequency response analyser (FRA) (Solartron, model 1260) coupled with dielectric interface (Solartron, model 1296) were used. Frequency range was 1 Hz–10 MHz, the amplitude of sinusoidal voltage signal was 20 mV. Measurements were done in typical sample holder in synthetic air ﬂow.
The intermediate products and ﬁnal samples (after calcination/sintering) were used for further characterization.
Figs. 1 and 2 show the DTA and TG curves obtained for Nasicon samples with different stoichiometry (x), dopants (Y, Fe) or prepared using different methods (coprecipitation, solid-state reaction). Fig. 3 shows the comparison of X-ray diffraction data obtained for Nasicon samples with x = 2, after calcination at different temperatures.
As can be seen in Fig. 1, the DTA curves obtained for samples with different stoichiometry (x) and yttrium-doped samples exhibit similar behaviour. According to literature data, the group of endoand exo-thermal peaks in the range from 275 to 325 C corresponds to decomposition of NH4NO3 formed as a by-product during the preparation procedure. The broad endo-thermal peak in the temperature range 650–720 C may be attributed to the formation of ZrO2 phase, which is an intermediate product of Nasicon-phase formation. According to XRD data presented in Fig. 3, the calcination of primary gel/coprecipitate at the temperature T = 750 C leads to the formation of nanocrystalline tetragonal ZrO2, and no traces of other phases are observed. Further calcination at T = 900 C leads to the formation of Nasicon phases (tetragonal) with slight admixture of monoclinic ZrO2 phase. The thermal effect of formation of Nasicon phases at higher temperatures was not observed on DTA curves.
The most intensive weight loss can be observed in the range of T = 275–325 C (NH4NO3 removal), and ﬁnishes at about T = 700
In the case of Fe-doped sample the observed DTA and TG behaviour is similar to that described above, suggesting related mechanism of Nasicon-type structure formation in this case. Some apparent differences caused by clearly different chemical composition can be noticed, but detailed discussion is not possible without additional investigations.
During the preparation of Nasicon sample (with x = 2) by solid-state reaction method only one DTA peak at about T =  100 C can be observed, as shown in Fig. 1. It is accompanied by the weight loss, as can be seen in Fig. 2, and can be interpreted in terms of dehydration of Na3PO4·12H2O used as one of starting materials.
Nasicon-type materials may exhibit monoclinic to rhombohedral reversible structural transition. This structural transition can be observed by the modiﬁcation of XRD spectra with temperature, as shown in Fig. 4 (Nasicon sample, x = 2, solid-state reaction, calcination at T = 1150 C). As can be seen, the reﬂex observed for the high-temperature rhombohedral phase (measurement at T = 300 C) split into two reﬂexes of low-temperature monoclinic phase (measurement at T = 25 C). This splitting was not observed for powders calcined at 900
In order to discuss the inﬂuence of stoichiometry (x) the XRD and DSC measurements were performed on samples with different compositions. Fig. 5 shows the XRD data obtained for these samples, prepared by coprecipitation method, C. XRD data calcined at T = 900 concerning the sample prepared by solid-state reaction (x = 2, sintered at T = 1175 C) are also included as a reference. In the case of samples prepared by coprecipitate method ◦ and sintered at T = 1175 C the obtained XRD spectra show the complete crystallisation of Nasicon phases, as shown in Fig. 5 (while the samples after the calcination are not well crystallised). The sample with composition x = 1.6 crystallises in rhombohedral structure, while the other Nasicon samples (x = 2.4, 2.2, 2.0 and 1.8) crystallise in monoclinic structure. There is almost no difference in XRD spectra obtained for these two types of structures, so they are hardly observable in Fig. 5. The difference may be only observed as splitting of selected reﬂexes, as shown in Fig. 4. The XRD spectra obtained for Nasicon sample prepared by solid-state reaction method (x = 2) also indicate the monoclinic phase, with traces of tetragonal ZrSiO4 phase and slight admixture of monoclinic ZrO2 phase. The presence of monoclinic ZrO2 was also detected in samples prepared by coprecipitate method.
The results concerning the phase composition of Nasicon samples with different composition, and prepared at different conditions will be summarised in Table 1, in the next part of this paper.
Fig. 6 shows the DSC curves obtained for Nasicon samples with different stoichiometry, x, prepared by coprecipitation method and sintered at T = 1150 C. Mono-clinic to rhombohedral structural transition is observed for Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 (x from 1.8 to 2.4), but in the case of sample with x = 1.6 this effect does not appear. As can be seen, the transition temperature depends on the composition of samples (x), reaching the highest value for sample with x = 2.
In the case of Y-doped Nasicon powders after calcination at 900 C no differences in XRD data can be detected in comparison to undoped material. The rhombohedral Nasicon structure was found as main phase. Substituting with iron leads to modiﬁcation of the structure, which can be considered as mixture of solid solutions of Na8Fe4(PO4)6, NaZr2(PO4)3 and Na3Fe(III)2(PO4)3 Nasicon-like phases. Also, some rhombohedral Fe2O3 is present.
The following sintering at T = 1175 C of doped Nasicon materials leads to further crystallisation of materials. In the case of yttrium-doped samples the monoclinic Nasicon phase is observed, as in the case of undoped Nasicon (x = 2). Also, the presence of monoclinic ZrO2 can be detected, but the addition of yttrium dopant seems to decrease the intensity of its reﬂexes. In the case of Fe-doped sample no modiﬁcation of XRD spectra can be noticed, comparing to the spectra obtained for the sample calcined at T = 700
Fig. 7 shows the comparison of DSC curves recorded for the yttrium-doped and iron substituted Nasicon samples with the undoped sample with stoichiometric composition (x = 2), sintered at T = 1150 C (in the case of Y-doping) and at T = 800 C (in the case of Fe-doping).
As can be noticed, in the case of yttrium-doped Nasicon pellets the transition temperature decreases comparing to the stoichiometric (x = 2) electrolyte, while in the case of Fedoped Nasicon this structural transition is not observed. The explanation of these results should comply with the hypothesis that the monoclinic to rhombohedral transition can be related to the local lattice distortion caused by Zr4+ ions displacement from its proper sites and formation of addi+ tional Na interstitial positions (mid-Na) between two Zr4+ sites. In case of undoped Nasicon the monoclinic to rhombohedral transition takes place only in limited range of stoichiometry, x (1.8 ≤ x ≤ 2.4 or 1.6 < x < 2.2). The replacement of some Zr atoms by Y or Fe may partially or even completely prevent such distortion thus leading to the change of transition temperature or even disappearance of such transition.
Fig. 8 shows the comparison of SEM microphotographs taken for samples with different composition (dopants) or prepared by different methods. The comparison of images A and B indicate that sample prepared by solid-state reaction exhibits higher density. In case of samples prepared by coprecipitation the introduction of yttria leads to remarkable improvement of the sample (Fig. 8A and F). The microstructure depends on composition, x (Fig. 8A, C and D). The introduction of Fe into Nasicon leads to completely different microstructure of samples. Fe-doped sintered material is highly porous and consists of ﬁne grains (Fig. 8E).
Fig. 9 shows the dependence of total electrical conductivity of the same samples as shown in Fig. 8, measured at room temperature. As can be seen the total electrical conductivity depends on composition, x, and can be correlated with the microstructure of obtained samples (see Fig. 8). The highest electrical conductivity was observed for Nasicon prepared by solid-state reaction method and Y-doped material. Both samples exhibit higher density comparing to the undoped sample prepared by coprecipitation method with x = 2.
The presented results indicate clearly that the higher density of obtained material, the higher electrical conductivity measured at room temperature. Most authors [13–15] observe the highest electrical conductivity in the case of samples with x = 2–2.2, which is in apparent disagreement with our results. It can be explained by different contribution of grain boundaries and bulk conductivities to the total electrical conductivity in different temperature ranges. At lower temperatures (as in our case) the properties of grain boundaries are predominating and the density of samples is the most important factor controlling the total electrical conductivity. At higher temperatures [6,16,17] the bulk conductivity, which is dependent on the composition, is responsible for the total electrical conductivity.
In order to avoid misunderstanding the results concerning electrical conductivity of Fe-doped Nasicon were not shown in Fig. 9 in comparison with other samples. This material is expected to be mixed ionic–electronic conductor (also different type of mobile ions are possible) [9], contrary to the purely ionic Nasicon conductors and thus the absolute vales of total electrical conductivities cannot be compared directly. More detailed studies are under the way, the results will be published later.
The results obtained from DTA, TG and XRD measurements allowed to discuss the reactions taking place during the preparation procedure and thermal and structural properties of obtained products at every stage of preparation.
The DSC measurements in the temperature range RT–300 C allowed us to determine the temperatures of this ◦ C structural transition only for the material sintered at 1150 (case of Na1+xSixZr2P3−xO12), and Y-doped Nasicon. In the case of Fe-doped material this transition was not observed. In order to obtain Nasicon materials free from ZrO2 phase admixture, the calcination of coprecipitates must be done in proper thermal conditions. The obtained results allowed us to optimize the calcination conditions (1175 C for 5 h), where almost pure Nasicon phase (monoclinic or rhombohedral, depending on composition) is obtained.
The results of SEM observations and electrical conductivity measurements allowed us to determine the correlation between the microstructure and the electrical properties of the samples investigated. Namely, the higher density of obtained material, the higher electrical conductivity (measured at room temperature). These results indicate in general that different correlations between composition, dopants and preparation conditions must be taken into account during optimization of material properties.
The case of Nasicon samples doped with Fe is more complex and needs further studies in order to determine the proper preparation conditions leading to its potential application as an electrode material.



