Sodium-ion conducting glass-ceramics are synthesized by crystallization of  (NATP) parent glasses. The thermal characterization of glasses is performed by Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) and allowed to determine the glass transition (Tg) and crystallization (Tx) temperatures. An increase in the Tx - Tg parameter is observed, indicating that the thermal stability of glasses against crystallization and also the glass-forming ability increase with the inclusion of Al2O3. The X-ray results show that the NaTi2(PO4)3 phase is the majority phase after the crystallization of the precursor glasses at Tx/ 30 min. X-ray results also conﬁrm that the limit of solid solution is reached for x ¼ 1.0. Electrical measurements indicate that the addition of aluminum ions promotes a decrease in activation energy resulting in the increment of the total ionic conductivity of glass-ceramics by up to ﬁve orders of magnitude when compared to the free-aluminum sample. The best sodium-conductive glass-ceramic is obtained for x = 1.0 with a total ionic conductivity of  and acti-vation energy of 0.47 eV. Using the impedance data converted to the electric modulus formalism, the contribution of the grain and grain boundary in total ionic conductivity is analyzed. Finally, an increase in the average grain size of the glass-ceramics with the addition of aluminum is also observed, which contributes to the enhancement of overall ionic conductivity.
The growing demand for alternative energy sources has raised interest in the development of renewable and inexpensive storage devices, such as sodium-based ones because of abundant avail-ability, low production cost and low toxicity of sodium. Different materials have been investigated to improve the opera-tion of sodium-ion batteries in relation to operating temperatures and power generation. Thus, materials with a NASICON-type (Na Super Ionic Conductor) AM2(PO4)3 structure, where A is a mono-valent cation and M is a tetravalent cation, are considered good candidates for application as solid electrolytes in sodium batteries due to their high ionic conductivity . The NASICON structure is described as a network with three-dimensional channels formed by the arrangement of MO6 octa-hedra linked by corners to PO4 tetrahedra that allow the movement of charge carrier ions “A” through the structure. It is known that high conductivities (from  at operating tem-peratures) are reached in NASICON materials by aliovalent sub-stitutions with ions of lower valences on M  and/or P-sites. It is also known that these substitutions promote the increase in the concentration of charge carriers to compensate the excess of negative charges, consequently leading to an increase in ionic conductivity.
 (LATP) series is one of the most interesting NASICON compounds, since this family exhibits the highest values of conductivity among lithium ion-conducting systems, reaching  at room temperature. There is a vast body of literature on attempts to improve the properties of this system, either by analyzing conduction phenomena, the inﬂuence of synthesis routes, or microstructure variation due to the inclusion of different elements. [4,6,9]. Although these compounds exhibit high Li+ ionic conductivity, there are very few studies on the sodium-containing analogous series, Na1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 (NATP). One of the few studies on this NASICON series was carried out by Mouahid et al. [10]. The authors obtained NATP ceramics with different amounts of aluminum by solid-state reaction.In their work, it is mentioned that the increase in aluminum content favors ionic conductivity because the number of charge carriers is also increased. However, the authors obtained samples with a porosity of up to 25%. It is known that micro-structure factors, such as porosity and grain boundary character-istics, may decrease the electrical conductivity of the compound, affecting its use as a solid electrolyte. An alternative to reduce the porosity and optimize the ionic conductivity is to synthesize the NATP series by the glass-ceramic route, which consists of the controlled crystallization of a precursor glass. In fact, several studies show that glass-ceramics exhibit low porosity and their microstructure can be also controlled by different crystallization treatments of the precursor glass.
Thus, this article focuses on evaluating the effect of aluminum concentration on the structural, microstructural and electrical properties of the Na1þxAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 system  obtained via glass-ceramic route. Note that this is a larger composition range than that investigated by Mouhaid et al. The structural and microstructural evolution of glass-ceramics with aluminum con-tent was analyzed by X-ray diffraction and scanning electron mi-croscopy (SEM), respectively. The ionic conductivity has been measured by impedance spectroscopy. Using different formalisms to treat the impedance data allowed the separation of grain and grain boundary contributions in the total conductivity of  glass ceramics, with x = 0.0, 0.4, 0.6 and 0.8.
Precursor glasses of  series were obtained by the melt-quenching method in 20 g batches. Sodium carbonate (Na2CO3, Vetec 99.9%), titanium dioxide (TiO2, Aldrich > 99.9%), aluminum oxide (Al2O3, Aldrich 99,99%) and dihydroxy ammonium phosphate ((NH4)2HPO4, Aldrich > 98%) were weighed and mixed in an appropriate proportion (see Table 1) in a rotary ball-mill for 12 h. After homogenization, the powders were heated to 400 C and 700C for 4 h and 2 h, respectively, to promote the decomposition of the Na2CO3 and (NH4)2HPO4 pre-cursor materials. Subsequently, the mixture was heated up to 1450 C and melted for 1 h. The resulting melt was poured and pressed between two aluminum plates to promote a fast cooling process and thus, the formation of vitreous material. All parent glasses were annealed at 40 􀀄C below the glass transition temper-ature (Tg) for 2 h to release thermal stress and then cooled inside the furnace at a very slow cooling rate until room temperature.
X-ray diffraction (XRD) was used to conﬁrm the amorphous nature of glass samples and to determine the crystalline phases of glass-ceramics. The structural characterization was carried out
using a Rigaku Ultima IV X-ray diffractometer and Cu Ka radiation in a2q range of , scan step size of  and an integration time of 0.66 s. The indexing of the crystalline phases in X-ray pat-terns was performed using the Crystallographic Search-Match program database [13]. Posteriorly, the powder patterns were analyzed by Rietveld reﬁnements using the TOPAS-Academic soft-ware version 6 [14] in combination with the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD) [15].
Regarding the electrical characterization, both vitreous and glass-ceramic samples were analyzed by complex impedance spectroscopy using a Novocontrol Alpha Analyzer utilizing a two-point sample holder, in a frequency range of 10 MHz to 0.1 Hz and at a temperature range from 50 Cto300 C. All samples were previously cut in parallelepipedal shape of about 0.8 e 1.2 mm thickness, and area of 0.1 e 0.2 cm2. These samples were polished, and then, gold electrodes were sputtered on their parallel sides.
Except for the free-aluminum composition NATP00 or x = 0.0, vitreous precursor materials were obtained for all investigated compositions (See Table 1). In fact, the liquid corresponding to the NATP00 composition crystallized during cooling. For the NATP04 (x = 0.4) sample, the low viscosity liquid partially crystallized during cooling, allowing a small amount of precursor glass to be obtained. All precursor glasses were transparent and presented a purple tonality, as shown in Fig. 1.Narv􀀁aez-Semanate et al. [9] and Chowdari et al. [16] also observed this purple color in glasses from the lithium-homologous series, Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3. According to Narv􀀁aez-Semanate, the purple tonality is due to the reduction of  Tiþ4 to Tiþ3 during glass melting. Chowdari attributed this behavior to the presence of ammonia, which could act as a reducing agent during the synthesis of glass. However, Narvaez-Semanate et al. obtained a purple glass using P2O5 as a starting material, thus excluding the hypothesis proposed by Chowdari. Fig. 1 shows that the purple color intensity decreases with increasing aluminum content. Since the samples have similar thicknesses around 1 mm, this behavior could be a consequence of the decrease in the con-centration of titanium in the material (Table 1).
The glass transition temperature of NATP precursor glasses, Tg,is indicated as a change in the baseline in the endothermic direction (see Fig. 2-a). The exothermic peak is ascribed to the glass crys-tallization, and the onset temperature, Tx, indicates the beginning of the crystallization process (Fig. 2-b). The presence of a narrow and sharp single peak, except in x ¼ 1.4 (NATP14) composition, is indicative of the formation of a single crystalline phase, as ex-pected. It can also be observed that the crystallization peak is very sharp (except in x ¼ 1.4), indicating that precursor glasses have a great tendency to crystallize due to rapid crystallization kinetics. Table 2 summarizes the Tg and Tx values obtained from DSC curves in Fig. 2.
It can be seen that both the glass transition temperature and the crystallization temperature shift to lower temperatures as the concentration of aluminum increases (see Table 2). Ortiz-Mosquera et al. [11] observed the same tendency of Tg for the homologous glasses containing germanium instead of titanium (Na1þxAlxGe2-x(PO4)3). We recall here that the substitution of titanium by aluminum ion in the Na1þxAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 formula generates an excess of negative charge, which must be compensated by the in-clusion of Naþ ions from sodium oxide (Na2O). Thus, as x increases, both aluminum and sodium ion content increases. The inclusion of sodium oxide leads to the break of PeOeP bonds to allow the introduction of the extra oxygen from the alkali metal oxide, and consequently, the number of non-bridging oxygen increases, thus decreasing Tg.
On the other hand, the parameter Tx - Tg, which indicates the thermal stability of the glass against crystallization and also the glass-forming ability [17], increases when x increases. Therefore, we can infer that the incorporation of aluminum favors the ten-dency for glass formation. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that low percentages of TiO2 favor the glass formability in phos-phate glasses, because the titanium ion forms TieOeP bonds be-tween the phosphate tetrahedra, thus strengthening the glass network [18]. In fact, it was observed experimentally that the tendency for the crystallization of the precursor liquid during the synthesis of the NATP glasses decreased for compositions with higher aluminum content.
The absence of diffraction peaks in the X-ray pattern of x = 0.6 parent glass conﬁrms its amorphous nature (Fig. 3-a). Similar behavior was also evidenced for all other aluminum-containing vitreous samples. The amorphous halo between 20 is typical for phosphate NASICON glasses.
Fig. 3-a also shows the XRD structural evolution of Na1þxAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 glass-ceramic samples as a function of the amount of aluminum. The NaTi2(PO4)3 NASICON phase (ICSD 290798), is observed as the unique phase present in the glass-ceramics in the composition range of . This fact suggests that all Al+3 ions were included in the NASICON structure, replacing Ti+4 and forming a solid solution. However, small peaks of AlPO4 as a sec-ondary phase (ICSD 280308, open ball) are observed in samples with x = 1.2 (NATP12) and 1.4 (NATP14) composition. The Rietveld reﬁnement of the X-ray pattern of these samples reveals that the amount of the secondary phase does not exceed 5 wt % in both cases (see Table 3). The presence of the AlPO4 phase in NASICON compounds, when titanium ions are replaced by aluminum ions, was also reported in previous works . In addition, the spurious phase observed in samples for x = 1.2 indicates that the limit of the solid solution of aluminum is reached for x = 1.0 (NATP10). On the other hand, the shoulder in the near-right of the most intense peak  in the NATP10 sample also corre-sponds to the NASICON phase as analyzed by Rietveld reﬁnement. In fact, this shoulder becomes a peak with the inclusion of more aluminum in the NATP12 and NATP14 samples.
In our previous work [20], we showed from the Rietveld Anal-ysis of samples with  that the partial replacement of titanium by aluminum ions causes the contraction of the NASICON unit cell.Extending the Rietveld analysis to samples with x > 1.0, it can be observed that this trend is maintained although the solid solution limit has already been reached (see Table 3).  As an example, Fig. 3-b shows the result of the Rietveld reﬁnement for x ¼ 1.2 sample. The decrease in the unit cell volume in the Na1þxAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 series is attributed to the difference between the ionic radii from Ti+4 (0.605 Å) and Al+3 ion (0.535 Å). Mouahid et al. [10] also observed a contraction of the cell volume in the same NASICON system ob-tained by solid-state reaction. These authors concluded that the inclusion of aluminum in the MO6 octahedron of the NASICON structure decreases the M 􀀃 O distance along the c-axis, which is reﬂected in the shortening of the “c” parameter, while the “a” parameter remains constant.
SEM micrographs of fractured surfaces of Na1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 glass-ceramics conﬁrm the crystallization of parent glasses (see Fig. 4). All samples exhibit low porosity and uniform microstructure. In addition, it can be observed that the average grain size increases with the addition of aluminum. Samples with x = 0.6 (Fig. 4-a) and x = 0.8 (Fig. 4-b) show the formation of rounded grains with an average size of approximately 300 nm and 500 nm, respectively. Medium-sized grains on the order of microns lose the rounded shape in NATP10 and NATP12 samples (Fig. 4 c-d). Furthermore, the NATP12 sample displays the presence of asym-metric grains with a size between 18 and 20 mm. A zoom in the micrograph of this sample shows that grains are composed of micrometric substructures with a parallelepipedal-shape and right angles. As can be seen in Fig. 4-e, the largest average grain size of the NATP series was reached in the NATP14 glass-ceramic. Cubic grains were obtained in this composition with a size around 20-30.
The complex plane plot of impedance data , also called the Nyquist plot (Fig. 5), of all glass-ceramics under investigation, shows a depressed semicircle at high and medium frequencies. This characteristic indicates a strong overlap of the grain and grain boundary contributions. The grain contribution is seen as a distortion at higher frequencies of the depleted semicircle, except for the NATP00 sample, for which the semicircles of both contri-butions (grain and grain boundary) are well separated. An inclined spike is also observed at low frequencies, which is ascribed to the ion blockage at the electrolyte-electrode interface, thus conﬁrming that the conductivity of the samples is of ionic nature. Nevertheless, for the free-aluminum NATP00 composition (Fig. 5-b), the spike at low frequencies is parallel to the Z0-axis, thus suggesting that the electrode is not blocking.In fact, low values of electronic conduc-tivity have already been observed in the compound NaTi2(PO4)3 by other authors [21,22], which may be the cause of this behavior at low frequencies.
Note that all  and  data in Fig. 5 were corrected by the geometric factor of each sample to allow a comparison between them. Thus, the total resistivity (r) of the sample can be directly known by the intercept at low frequencies of the semicircle to the x-axis. Accordingly, the total ionic conductivity (s) can be calculated through the ratio: .
Conventional Arrhenius plots of conductivity data were ob-tained in the temperature range of 50 - 300 for all glass and glass-ceramic samples, as shown in Fig. 6. In this temperature range, a linear behavior of electrical conductivity is observed. It should be noted that the linear regression of all Arrhenius plots presented a correlation factor (> 0.999), indicating a high degree of precision in the collected data. The activation energy (Ea), the log-arithm of the pre-exponential factor (log s0) and total conductivity at 300 C(300 C) were determined from the linear regression of the data in Fig. 6 using the logarithm form of the Arrhenius equation:
where Ea is the activation energy,  is the pre-exponential term, k and T have their usual meaning, and e is the Euler’s number. The pre-exponential constant, , is related to the ionic charge (Ze, where Z is the ion valence and e, the electron charge), the total concentration of the ions (n), the hopping frequency () and the hopping distance () according to Equation (2) [23,24]:
All values related to the Arrhenius equation are presented in Table 4.
Although the nominal molar concentration of modiﬁer Na2O varies from 17.5 to 30.0, for x varying from 0.4 to 1.4 in this series (see Table 1), the activation energy (Ea) and the total ionic con-ductivity at 300 C(300C) of NATP parent glasses do not present signiﬁcant variations with the increase of x. This is indicative of a concurrent effect of Na2O and Al2O3 oxides in the ionic conductivity of these glasses. While the sodium oxide increases both the con-centration of Na+ charge carrier and non-bridging oxygen, aluminum oxide plays an inverse role creating AleOeP linkages [25]. The calculated pre-exponential factors for the precursor glasses vary from 0.8 to 1.9 and they are consistent with the experimental data found in precursor glasses from other NASICON systems and other ionic conducting glasses .
In relation to the electrical behavior of the glass-ceramics, it is evident that the ionic conductivity increases by up to two orders of magnitude in relation to their respective precursor glasses (see Table 4 and Fig. 6-b).
As expected, the formation of the NASICON phase after heat treatment facilitates the movement of Naþ ions, due to its structure with 3D channels, thus causing a decrease in the activation energy required for ion migration.It can be observed in Fig. 7 that the activation energy values of Na1+þxAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 glass-ceramics decrease signiﬁcantly when aluminum and sodium ions (x) are introduced. Because the pre-exponential factor does not vary signiﬁcantly, the decrease in the activation energy leads to an increase in the ionic conductivity by up to four orders of magnitude when compared to the NATP00 free-aluminum sample. However, it is also noted that the conductivity does not improve for compositions with x > 1.0 (NATP10).   It is possible that the conduction channel size is not suitable for the displacement of Naþ ions for compositions with x > 1.0, i.e., a very narrow channel, which would be a consequence of the contraction of the NASICON unit cell observed and discussed in Section 3.2. This behavior is also re-ﬂected in the increase of activation energy in x = 1.2 and 1.4 samples. In our previous works about Li+  and Na+-ion-conducting NASICON glass-ceramics, it is shown that the AlPO4 phase in low quantities does not affect the ionic conductivity of the material. Thus, it may be argued that, the presence of the AlPO4 phase (around 4 wt % in NATP12 and NATP14) does not signiﬁcantly impair the electrical properties of these two samples.
The Ea and total ionic conductivity values shown in Table 4 for glass-ceramics are in good agreement with the results obtained by Mouahid et al. [10] for the same composition synthesized by solid state reaction, thus indicating that, in the present case, the glass-ceramic route did not promote signiﬁcant changes in the total ionic conductivity of the material.
It is worth mentioning that the addition of aluminum has also been analyzed in the analogous Na1þxAlxGe2-x(PO4)3 (NAGP) glass-ceramic system [11]. The highest ionic conductivity  for this NASICON series was achieved at composition x ¼ 0.8, and is one order of magnitude lower than the conductivity exhibited by the most conductive sample in the present work (see Table 4). The difference between the ionic con-ductivity values of both systems is probably due to the smaller volume of the NAGP series unit cell which is reﬂected in higher activation energy values when compared to that of the titanium-containing series, i.e., the bottleneck through which the sodium ion moves has a more suitable size in the NATP than in the NAGP system.
On the other hand, the increase in average grain size observed in the glass-ceramic samples (see Section 3.3) may also be responsible for the increase in the overall ionic conductivity, since it would reduce the number of grain boundaries (Ngb) according to the expression: (dg is the average grain size and L, the sample thickness).
The Nyquist plots in Fig. 5 (Section 3.4) show that the grain boundary response dominates the total impedance of the sample since the semicircle associated with the grain (in high frequency) is not clearly visible, i.e., it has a lower diameter than the semicircle attributed to the grain boundary. Thus, the modulus formalism (M*) was used to facilitate the visualization and analysis of each one of the contributions (grain and grain boundary) in the material. The electrical modulus, M*, is related to the impedance,
pedance  and modulus as a function of frequency (f), two different Debye peaks can be observed. Each of them empha-sizes different contributions within the material. The Z00 vs. log f plot is dominated by the most resistive contributions within the ma-terial [29,30] since Z00 depends proportionally on the resistance (R) according to Equation (4), which in our case would be the component associated with the grain boundary.
On the other hand, the formalism of the electric modulus emphasizes the contribution of lower capacitance (C), which in our case would correspond to the contribution of the grain, as follows:
Thus, contributions related to the electrode-sample interface and grain boundary are generally not seen in the M00 modulus plot because these both contributions are associated with higher capacitances.
An important feature of the spectroscopic plots is that the  is equal to R/2 and, the maximum  corresponds to 1/2C. Thus, the grain boundary resistivity and the grain capacitance can be calculated from  and , respectively. Because each Debye peak is in turn associated with a relaxation frequency (u = up) according to the expression: up = 1/RC, it is also possible to know the grain-boundary capacitance and the grain resistivity.
It can be noted that the difference in relaxation frequencies between both peaks is around two de-cades in both cases, thus indicating that each peak results from two different electrical responses.
The capacitances at the peak frequency from andwere also calculated and are indicated in Fig. 8aeb. A difference around one order of magnitude is observed between the capaci-tance values associated with each peak for both samples, NATP00 (without aluminum) and NATP08. Similar results (not shown here) were obtained for the compositions x = 0.4 and 0.6. The capacitance values estimated from  (at low frequencies) and M00max (3 to 5  at high frequencies) are in accordance with the capacitance range proposed by Irvine et al. [22], for grain boundary and grain phenomena, respectively. Thus, it can be conﬁrmed that the distortion effect seen at high frequencies in the Nyquist diagram for the samples containing aluminum (Fig. 5-a) is related to the electrical contribution of the grain. Note that, as ex-pected, this distortion effect is not seen at high frequencies in the Z00 spectroscopic plot of the NATP08 sample (Fig. 8-b). However, in the spectroscopic chart of the free-aluminum sample, a shoulder can be observed around 105 Hz in the Z00 plot. This is justiﬁed because the semicircle at high frequencies attributed to the grain is better formed in the Nyquist plot of this same sample (Fig. 5-b) compared to the aluminum-containing sample diagrams.
In relation to the NATP10, NATP12 and NATP14 samples, a dif-ference lower than 0.5 orders of magnitude in the frequency associated with the  and  peaks (not shown here), was observed thus indicating that both peaks result from the same contribution (intrinsic material response), i.e., no individual grain and grain boundary responses could be detected for those samples, thus these results were excluded from the following discussion.
To further conﬁrm the separation of grain and grain boundary in Na1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 glass-ceramics with x = 0.0 to 0.8, impedance data were also converted to the C* formalism (C* = C’ - iC00). This formalism analyzes the losses in the form of energy dissipation and the capacitive behavior of the samples with the application of an alternating current [33]. The complex capacitance, C*, is related to the frequency and impedance, Z*, according to the expression:
The real part of the complex capacitance (C0), as a function of the frequency on a double-logarithmic scale at different temperatures, is plotted for x = 0.0 and 0.8 samples in Fig. 8ced. These graphs show two relaxation processes (plateau) for both compositions at all temperatures. The ﬁrst relaxation process occurring at medium frequencies, between 10 to 103 Hz corresponds to a capacitance around 60 pF, which coincides with the capacitance indicated at the maximum of  vs. f plot (Fig. 8aeb), thus conﬁrming the attribu-tion of this peak to the grain boundary. A second plateau is seen at higher frequencies (105 e 107 Hz) with a capacitance around 3 -5 pF, and it is attributed to the grain contribution since this C value is similar to that calculated from the M00 peak in the spectroscopic plots of Fig. 8aeb. Between those two plateaus, the increase in the C0 value from higher to lower frequencies (104 to 102 Hz) indicates a blocking of Na+ ions, in the intergranular or grain boundary region. Finally, at very low frequencies (< 102 Hz), the increase in the C0 capacitance as frequency decreases is ascribed to the Naþ ions being blocked at the electrolyte-electrode interface.
After conﬁrming the attribution of the grain and grain boundary contributions in Fig. 8aed, the grain () and macroscopic grain boundary () ionic conductivities were calculated from the re-sistivity data associated respectively to and , for x = 0.0 to 0.8 samples. Fig. 8eef shows the Arrhenius plots and Table 5 summarizes the data of activation energy, ionic conductivity and pre-exponential factor for both contributions.
It is worth noting from Fig. 8eef and Table 5 that the ﬁrst addition of aluminum (x ¼ 0.4) leads to a signiﬁcant increase in the ionic conductivity of both the grain and grain boundary. In fact, including aluminum in the NATP system promotes the decrease of grain (Ea-g) and grain boundary (Ea-gb) activation energy as compared to the aluminum-free sample (NATP00) thus, favoring the ionic conductivity in both regions. It can also be noted that the grain boundary dominates the electrical response of the material since its activation energy is higher than that of the grain and particularly, because this value is similar to the activation energy for the total ionic conductivity (see Table 4). For the NATP00 sam-ple, no signiﬁcant differences are observed between these two activation energies (Ea-g and Ea-gb), inferring that the conduction mechanisms are similar in the grain and grain boundary in this sample.
Table 5 also shows that the increase in the grain conductivity is mostly inﬂuenced by an increase in the pre-exponential factor since the activation energy does not change markedly in the aluminum-containing samples. As mentioned previously, since the pre-exponential factor depends on the number of charge carriers, an increase in this value is expected with the gradual inclusion of Naþ ions because of the increase of x (see Equation (2)).
In the case of the intergranular region, beyond the increase in the pre-exponential factor, a small decrease in the activation en-ergy is also observed when x increases. Both parameters contribute to the higher ionic conductivity in the compositions with a larger amount of aluminum (, see Table 5). In both cases (grain and grain boundary), an increase can be observed of up to four orders of magnitude in ionic conductivity with the inclusion of aluminum.
In this study, we have demonstrated the glass-ceramic route as a synthesis method for the Na1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 NASICON series (0.0 < x < 1.4). The experimental data show that adding aluminum to the NaTi2(PO4)3 system favors the formability of the precursor glasses. The crystallization of samples results in the formation of the NASICON phase in the whole investigated composition range. It was also observed that NASICON is the only phase crystallized in compositions with x <= 1.0, thereby demonstrating that the Al-solubility limit is reached when x = 1.0. By complex impedance spectroscopy, it was shown that the inclusion of aluminum in the NASICON structure increased the ionic conductivity by up to ﬁve orders of magnitude when compared to the free-aluminum sample. The highest ionic conductivity was reached in the glass-ceramic with composition x = 1.0. The contributions of grain and grain boundary in the ionic conductivity were separated using the formalism of the electric modulus for x = 0.0 to 0.8. It was noted that the grain boundary dominates the electrical response of the material because it exhibits higher activation energy than the grain. However, an increase in the average grain size of the samples with a higher concentration of aluminum was also observed, which also favors the total ionic conductivity. Finally, it was observed that the increase in charge carriers concentration (Na+) generated by the inclusion of aluminum ions promoted the increase in conductivity in both the grain and grain boundary regions.