An experimental relationship between local structure and electrochemical properties is established for lithium metal phosphates LiMePO4 (Me = Fe, Co, Mn), LiFeP2O7 and Li3Fe2(PO4)3 which crystallise with either the olivine-like or the Nasicon-like structure. Structural features of several lithium metal phosphates are investigated by a local probe such as the FTIR spectroscopy in order to explain the inﬂuence of either PO4 covalent bonds on redox energies. The local cationic arrangement is also discussed with the aid of a molecular vibration model to ﬁgure out the strong covalent bonds within a PO4 complex for glassy Nasicon compounds.
Among the well-known Li-insertion compounds used as positive electrodes in Li-ion batteries, the layered rock-salt systems Li1−xCoO2, framework system Li1−xMn2O4 and the phospho-olivine LiFePO4 structures are now studied extensively. Each of these −1 materials has a speciﬁc capacity higher than 100 mAh g combined with a discharge voltage between 3.4 and 4.8 V versus Li/Li . Another class of iron-containing oxides, namely Li3Fe2(PO4)3 with a Nasicon-like structure presents also interesting electrochemical properties.
The strongly condensed framework of lithium metal phosphates (LMPs) presents different physical and spectroscopic properties according the various polyanionic environments.
Phospho-olivine structure is built from LiO6 and FeO6 octahedra linked to PO4 polyanions whereas FeO6 octahedra share no edges with other polyhedra in Nasicon-like structure. The internal electrostatic ﬁeld changes when the structure does (from orthorhombic LiFePO4 to monoclinic Li3Fe2(PO4)3, for instance), whereas the covalence of the Fe O bond differs with the degree of covalence in the P O bond. Electrochemical results show that the Fe3+ level lies lower in the ordered olivine structure than in the Nasiconlike framework giving a higher voltage versus lithium.
In this work, we study the relationship between local structure and electrochemical properties of various LMP phases: LiFePO4, LiCoPO4, LiMnPO4, LiFeP2O7, and Li3Fe2(PO4)3 which crystallise with either the olivine-like or the Nasicon-like structure. The local cationic arrangement is discussed with the aid of a molecular vibration model to ﬁgure out the strong covalent bonds within a PO4 complex. 
We present here the results obtained from structural characterisation using a local probe such as the Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy in order to explain the inﬂuence of the PO4 covalent bonds on redox energies of LMPs.
Microcrystalline LMP compounds were synthesized by either solid-state reaction or a wet-chemical technique (see Table 1). LiFeP2O7 was prepared by a solution method using LiH2PO4, Fe(NO3)3·9H2O and NH4H2PO4 as precursor materials. In this technique, the pH of the solution was controlled at 4.0. Li3Fe2(PO4)3 was synthesized by the sol–gel method using nitrate precursors. The solvent was evaporated at 120 C in air. The solid dry residue was preheated at 400 C for 12 h in Ar ambient. The glassy Nasicon-like structure samples of Li5V2(PO4)5, Li3Fe2(PO4)3 and Li3Mo(PO4)3 were prepared by the melt-quenching method described below. Appropriate amounts of pre-dried LiNO3 (Aldrich Chemical Company), (NH4)H2PO4 (POCh – Polish Chemicals) and one of the following oxides, depending on composition: V2O5 (ABCR Karlsruhe), Fe2O3 (POCh – Polish Chemicals) or MoO3 (Aldrich Chemical Company) were thoroughly mixed in a mortar.
Alumina crucibles ﬁlled with the powders were placed in an electric furnace, ﬁrst at 750 C for 10 min, and then heated at 950 C for 5 min in air. The molten mixture was rapidly poured out onto stainless-steel plate and immediately covered by the second stainless-steel plate. Resulting samples had an average thickness of 0.7 mm. XRD patterns conﬁrmed the amorphous state of samples under study.
The discharge–charge cycle for the electrode was made in lithium cells with non-aqueous electrolyte. Measurements were carried out using a Macpile potentiostat in the galvanostatic mode in the potential range 5.0–2.0 V at cur−1 (C/12 rate). The lithium anode rent density 7.23 mA g was used as reference electrode by pressing the lithium foil on stainless steel disk. The electrolyte used was 1M LiPF6 salt dissolved in 2:1 EC/DMC solution (Selectipur Merck, Germany).
The crystal chemistry of microcrystalline materials was analyzed from XRD patterns (not shown here). The reﬁned lattice parameters of the materials are seen in Table 1. Lithium orthophosphates LiMePO4 (Me = Fe, Co, Ni) adopt an olivine-related structure, i.e. orthorhombic system with Pnma space group, which consists of a hexagonal closedpacking (hcp) of oxygen atoms with Li cations located in half of the octahedral sites and P5+ cations in 1/8 of tetrahedral sites. This structure may be described as chains (along the c-direction) of edge-sharing MeO6 octahedra which are cross-linked by the PO4 groups forming a three-dimensional (3D) network. Tunnels perpendicular to the [0 1 0] and [0 0 1] directions contain octahedrally coor+ dinated Li cations (along the b-axis), which are mobile in these cavities.
The diphosphate LiFeP2O7, in which the PO4 tetrahedra are linked by bridging oxygen to give P2O7 groups, crystallizes in the monoclinic system (P21 space group). The P2O7 groups are connected to the FeO6 octahedron by sharing two oxygen corners, each belonging to a PO4 unit. This induces a 3D framework in which channels collinear to the [0 0 1] direction are formed and where the lithium ions are located. The Nasicon lattice may be described as a stacking of corner-sharing [Me2P3O18] “lantern” units parallel to the cdirection. Li3Fe2(PO4)3 crystallizes in the orthorhombic system (Pcan space group). The lithium ions fully occupy three distinct crystallographic sites, two of which are in 5-fold coordination, Li(2) and Li(3), whereas Li(1) is in 4-fold coordination [9].
The FTIR spectrum of the LiFeP2O7 compound displays some differences with that of orthophosphates. Vibrational features of the diphosphate are as follows. (i) The lowwavenumber region is quite similar to that recorded for LiFePO4. (ii) The IR stretching bands are shifted toward 4− the high-wavenumber side due to the existence of P2O7 units in C2 site group. (iii) Additional IR bands appear at −1 attributed to the anti-symmetric νas and 763 and 954 cm symmetric νs stretching modes of P O P bridges. (iv) One −1 assigned high-wavenumber IR band is located at 1226 cm to the terminal stretching mode of P2O7 ions. From the data shown in Fig. 1, it is obvious that diphosphate groups are bent in LiFeP2O7 structure as the symmetric and anti-symmetric bridge vibrations are active in infrared. 
The P O P bridge of P2O7 group may be considered as an independently vibrating unit and within the limits of this approximation, its stretching frequencies depend on the value of the bridging θ angle, but also of the force constant of P O bond of the bridge.
Fig. 1 shows the FTIR absorption spectra of LMPs with diphosphate LiFeP2O7, olivine-like LiFePO4, LiCoPO4, LiMnPO4, and Nasicon-like Li3Fe(PO4)3 framework. All these spectra are dominated by the internal vibrations (ν1–ν4) of the PO4 units which involve the displacement of oxygen anions and present frequenatoms of the tetrahedral PO4 cies closely related to those of the free molecule. For LiFePO4 phospho-olivine, these are a singlet (A1) at a frequency ν1 = −1 and two triply 965 cm −1 degenerate (F2) modes, ν3 in the region 1050–1140 cm −1. ν1 and ν3 involve the and ν4 in the range 500–560 cm symmetric and anti-symmetric stretching mode of the P O bonds, whereas ν2 and ν involve mainly O P O symmetric and anti-symmetric bending mode with a small contribution of P vibration [10,11]. 
In a solid, internal modes can split as a consequence of two effects: the site-symmetry effect due to an electric crystal ﬁeld of symmetry lower than tetrahedral acting on the molecule and the correlation effect due to the presence of more than one molecular group in the crystal unit cell. In the far-IR region the external modes occur below 400 cm 3− of the PO4 are recorded. IR bands at 379 and 576 cm contribution, while the band located at 251 cm to the lithium-ion cage mode [12].
Fig. 3 displays the FTIR absorption spectra of both crystalline and glassy Li3Fe2(PO4)3 Nasicon phases. The glass spectrum is approximately the envelope of the crystallized phosphate spectrum. As for other phosphates, internal modes involving the displacement of oxygen atoms of the pseudo-tetrahedral PO4 anions of Li3Fe2(PO4)3 present frequencies closely related to those of the free molecule. The high-frequency band splitting with components observed −1 in the IR spectrum is at 1004, 1023, 1041, 1067 cm the manifestation of a correlation ﬁeld effect due to the coupling of the PO4 vibrators in the unit cell. Lantern units present in the Nasicon phases give rise to infrared bands −1 which are attributed to the in the range 1150–1250 cm stretching vibrations of terminal PO3 units. These bands −1 for Li3Fe2(PO4)3. Both are located at 1181 and 1208 cm these two high-frequency spectral features and the strong −1 are band in the low-wavenumber region at 300–350 cm ﬁngerprints for Nasicon-like structures. 
The FTIR spectrum of Li3Fe2(PO4)3 glass sample displays additional band −1 which is attributed to the P O P centred at 755 cm bonding occurring in the disordered Nasicon phase.
Fig. 4 shows the FTIR absorption spectra of glasses with [Me2(PO4)] framework. Spectrum of Li5V2(PO4)5 glassy compound has the same features than the Li2O–V2O5–P2O5 −1 glass system. The high-frequency band around 1180 cm −1 band due to due to P O stretching along with the 750 cm P O P bending may be considered as evidence for the presence of PO4 pyrophosphate species in the glasses. Similar band was observed in Raman spectra of silver–phosphate glasses containing orthophosphate and pyrophosphate group and in Raman spectra of silver–vanadate glasses containing metavanadate chains. Although the spectra are dominated by vibrational features due to phosphate ions, transition-metal ions also register their presence in the middle region of 400–700 cm-1
A large splitting of the ν3 components of the PO4 group is found for all phospho-olivine phases. This is due to the type of bonding between the oxygen and the Me octahedral cation which has necessarily an inﬂuence on the bonding between oxygen and the tetrahedral cation. In LiMePO4 compounds, every oxygen is bonded to three octahedral cations, either two Fe2+ on sites of C1 symmetry. As a consequence, there is a correlation between the splitting (ν3) and the second ionization potential of the divalent cation as shown in Fig. 2. This result is in agreement with the origin of the splitting: a higher value of the second ionization potential of the octahedral cation MeII implies a stronger interaction with the adjacent P O bond. The most noticeable feature in vibrational patterns is the highest frequencies of the ν3 modes for the nickel phase. Also, the strong covalent bonds within the (PO4)3− complex of LiCoPO4 could explain the difference between redox energies.
Fig. 5a and b show the charge-discharge curve for the orthophosphates LiMePO4 (Me = Fe, Co) with olivinelike framework. The typical two-phase redox reaction, i.e. LiFePO4  1) Li1−xLiFePO4 + xLi , is observed by for LiFePO4 the presence of the plateau at 3.5 V versus Li/Li (Fig. 5a). Combined with discharge voltage between 3.4 and 4.8 V versus Li/Li , LiFePO4 leads to high speciﬁc energy −1. These results are in good agreement with those 150 mAh g reported in the pioneering work of Padhi et al. [2]. LiCoPO4 −1 in shows a plateau at 4.72 V, extending up to 110 mAh g the discharge of the ﬁrst cycle (Fig. 5b). The generation of an appropriately high voltage is due to the presence of the polyanion (PO4)3− with strong Co O covalency which stabilizes the antibonding Co2+ state through an Co-O-P inductive effect.
Fig. 6a and b show the typical discharge-charge curves of Li3Fe2(PO4)3: (a) crystalline powder synthesized by sol–gel and (b) vitreous sample. Complete lithium insertion leads to composition close to Li4.8Fe2(PO4)3 in which the transition metal cation is reduced to Fe2+ . The crystalline phase shows + two well-deﬁned plateaus at 2.85 and 2.70 V versus Li/Li (Fig. 6a). These results are identical to those recently reported by Patoux et al. [15]. The existence of the intermediate phase Li4Fe2(PO4)3 is believed to be due to the lithium-ion insertion into crystallographic site generated by local reduction of the nearest iron positions. This is supported by a close examination of the FTIR spectrum of Li4Fe2(PO4)3 indicating a slight change of the stretching frequency of FeO6 octahedra. From Fig. 6b, it is remarkable that the discharge–charge curves of vitreous Li3Fe2(PO4)3 occur without appearance of voltage plateau. 
This difference usually occurs between crystalline phase and glassy material in which distinct crystallographic sites are not well deﬁned.
The energy of a given redox couple varies from one material to another depending on two main factors: (1) the electrostatic ﬁeld at the cation position and (2) the covalent contribution to the cation–anion bonding. The study of both factors can be properly accomplished on oxides formed by MeO6 octahedra (Me = transition metal cation) linked by tetrahedral polyanions (PO4)3−
Investigations of framework structures built with polyphosphate anions have shown that the choice of the transition metal Me has a signiﬁcant effect on the cell voltage as it is primarily dependent on the redox couple of the metal atom present in the structure. The use of polyanions has shown the lowering Me3+ redox energy to useful levels in lithium cells. Polarization of the electrons of the O2− ions into strong covalent bonding within the PO4 polyanion reduces the covalent bonding to the metal ion, which lowers its redox energy. The stronger the covalent bonding within the polyanion, the higher the voltage versus lithium displayed by the positive electrode.
Since vibrational spectra sensitive to the covalency of phosphate group, it is worthy to study a relationship between the relative energy levels and the covalency bonding in host structures having PO4 anions. The useful estimate of a covalency strength is a parameter, deﬁned by the relationship where ν1 and ν2 are the internal mode wavenumbers of the phosphate anion.
Fig. 7 shows the empirical relationship between covalency bonding factor and cell voltage for several lithium metal phosphates including LiCoPO4, LiFePO4, LiMnPO4, LiFeP2O7, and Li3Fe2(PO4)3. Among the compounds with olivineare 3.55 V for like structure, the cell voltage versus Li/Li LiFePO4 and 4.75 V for LiCoPO4. The cell voltage for LiMnPO4 has been reported to be 4.1 V versus lithium [19]. On the other hand, a cell voltage of 2.9 V is measured for the diphosphate LiFeP2O7 while 2.8 V for the Nasicon-like framework.
Structural properties of several phosphates resembling olivine, pyrophosphate, and Nasicon structure and composition have been examined using XRD and FTIR spectroscopy. The condensation effects seem to have only a limited inﬂuence on the general spectroscopic behaviour because the internal vibrations of the tetrahedral anions exhibit very similar frequencies as those found for the “free” PO4 ions and the P2O7 ions in solution.
Nevertheless, a comparison of the vibrational features shows that the spectral ﬁngerprints can be unambiguously deﬁned for lithium metal phosphates. For LiMePO4 phosphoolivine structures, in the region of the internal modes of the phosphate anion, we identify the symmetric stretch−1 and the triplets ν3 in the ing mode at ␯1 = 965 cm −1. (Me = Ni, Co, Mn, Cu) posregions 1000–1100 cm sess a centrosymmetric structure. The dominant infrared spectral feature of diphosphate LiFeP2O7 is the appearance of the symmetric and anti-symmetric stretching vibration of P O P bridging bonds. The speciﬁc ﬁngerprints of Nasicon-like framework are the infrared bands in the range −1 which are related to lantern units present 1150–1250 cm in the Li3Fe2(PO4)3. An experimental relationship between spectral features of the local structure and electrochemical redox potential has been established for LMPs materials.


