Thin sodium superionic conductor (Nasicon) coatings are deposited on rotating  substrates by co-sputtering in the reactive mode of a Zr-Si and a Na3PO4 target. The influence of  the discharge current and of the target-to-substrate distance is investigated owing to the targeted  N%Zr2S i2PO12 stoichiometry. A thermo-structural analysis shows that the amorphous as-deposited  coating of convenient composition crystallises around 700 ~ in the monoclinic structure.  Electrical measurements performed at room temperature after various annealing treatments indicate a ionic conductivity of about 2.10 -3 S-cm 1, consistent with that of bulk Nasicon.
Superionic inorganic conductors of Na or Li are known to allow ionic conduction properties close to those of polymeric gels at room temperature, which foreshadow numerous applications in captors, micro batteries or catalytic devices with increased lifetime. In particular, Na~+xZr2SixP3_xOt2 compounds present around x = 2 a high ionic conductivity close to 10 3 S.cm-1.
Few papers deal with the deposition of Na3Zr2Si2PO~2 films. They mainly consist in depositing coatings by radiofrequency sputtering or laser ablation of a bulk Na3Zr2Si2POl2 target. Moreover, the chemical composition of the coatings significantly differed from that of the target. Depositing Nasicon (NAtrium Super-Ionic CONductor) thin films of convenient composition reveals of great technological interest for development of systems requiring high ionic conductivity at room temperature. 
In this paper, we investigate de deposition of Na3Zr2SizPO~2 thin films by co-sputtering of a Zr-Si and a Na3PO 4 targets in the presence of a reactive argonoxygen mixture. After a short description of the experimental device, the chemical features of the coatings are presented in relation with the deposition conditions. The structural evolution of a coating with the convenient stoichiometry is then presented as a function of annealing temperature. Finally, ionic conductivity measurements  performed by impedance spectroscopy are discussed as a  function of the annealing temperature.
The coatings are deposited by co-sputtering of a Zr-55 at.%Si target and of a Na3PO4 one in the presence of a reactive argon-oxygen mixture. The reactor is a 40-1itre cylinder pumped down with a turbomolecular suction system allowing a base vacuum of less than 104 Pa before refilling with argon and oxygen at the convenient pressure. The targets, 50 mm in diameter, are parallel to the substrates-holder and are spaced each other from 120 mm. Their distance from the substrates-holder (DT~s) can be modified independently (Fig. 1). The different substrates (stainless steel, Si, Glass slide) are positioned at various distances from the axis of the rotating substratesholder. 
Coating thickness was measured on glass slides using the step method with a Talysurf profilometer allowing an accuracy of about 20-30 rim. The structural features of the coatings were obtained by grazing angle X-ray diffraction (~'k,Co = 0.179 rim) using an Inel diffractometer with an incident angle of 4 ~ . Chemical measurements were realised by Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) on coatings deposited on stainless steel using a Scanning  Electron Microscope (SEM) Phillips XL30 FEG.  Electrical measurements were finally performed byimpedance spectroscopy in co-planar mode (Fig. 2) with a Solartron 1260 spectrometer by varying the frequency from 10 MHz to 1 Hz with steps of 10 points per decades.
The main difficulty in synthesizing Nasicon thin films proceeds from the strongly different atomic numbers of Na, Zr, Si and P. Indeed, the spatial distribution of sputtered particles is more acute for low-Z than for high-Z atoms. Moreover, low-Z elements are more sensitive to the diffusion by argon atoms  during their path toward the substrate (Fig. 3a). Finally, the distribution of sputtered species becomes more and more acute with increasing the sputtering energy, i.e. discharge voltage. Concerning the deposition of a single element from a target on a non-coaxial rotating substrates-holder, it can be shown that for a low target-to-substrate distance, the higher deposition rate is face to the target (Fig. 3b) due to the low dispersion of sputtered atoms. At a critical distance (Dcr), the deposition rate is homogeneous from the axis to a critical diameter of the substrates-holder and decreases over this diameter. 
Over this critical distance, the deposition rate is higher on the axis of the substratesholder and decreases with increasing the distance from this axis. In absence of diffusion by argon, increasing the discharge voltage or sputtering a lower-Z atom increases Dcr.
The deposition conditions of the coatings presented in this study are summarised in Table 1. In all the experiments, the oxygen flow rate is DO2 = 5 sccm and the distance between the Na3PO4 target and the substrates-holder is Dv_s(Na3PO4) = 46 mm. Due to the rather low deposition pressure (0.6 Pa) of this study expected to lower the diffusion by argon of the lower-Z atoms (Na, Si, P), the coatings are dense with a very low defect density (Fig. 4). They also present a rather good transparency, ZrSi ZrSi with a very slight brown coloration. A first exam of the deposition 0.4 270 rate vs. distance from the axis of the 0.4 270 substrates-holder curves presented in Fig. 5 shows the preponderant role of the discharge current dissipated on the Zr-Si target on the deposition rate of the films. With Izr-si = 0.4 A (N1, N2, N3), the average deposition rate is closely 70-80 nm.h -j. It increases around 120-130 nm.h -l for Izr_si = 0.6 A (N4) and reaches about 150 nm-h -1 for Izr-si = 0.7 A (N5). 
A deeper analysis also shows the role of the distance between the Zr-Si target and the substrates-holder on the distribution of the coating thickness: decreasing the target-to-substrate distance increases the deposition rate in the inner area of the substrates-holder. Nevertheless, the relative thickness variation in the range 30-80 mm from the axis of the substrates-holder is in the range 30-35% for most of the coatings.
The chemical measurements realised by EDS are reported in this section following three typical atomic ratios owing to the targeted Na3ZrzSi2PO12 stoichiometry: Na/P, representative of the transfer from the Na3PO4 target. Its theoretical value is 3, Zr/Si, representative of the transfer from the Zr-55 at.%Si target. Its theoretical value is 1, Na/Si, representative of the relative transfer from both targets. Its theoretical value is 1.5. As shown in Fig. 6, decreasing DT_s(Zr-Si) from 146 mm (N1) to 50 mm (N3) increases the Si content into the coatings (Na/Si decreases)which, however, present a strong variation of composition over the edges of the area facing the target. This is attributed to a rather low directivity of the sputtered (Zr)-Si vapour. Increasing the discharge current from 0.4 A (N1, N2, N3) to 0.6 A (N4) leads to better homogeneity of the coating composition and a Na/Si ratio close to the targeted value of 1.5. 
The better composition homogeneity is attributed to a more acute distribution of Si due to the significant increase of the discharge voltage from 270 V to 385 V while increasing the discharge current from 0.4 A to 0.6 A (see Table 1). 
As the sputtering conditions of the Na3PO 4 target are kept constant for all the experiments, the Na/P ratio is also expected to remain constant. Figure 7a shows that this ratio is always close to the theoretical one of 3. The rather higher dispersion of the Na/P ratio for the coatings deposited with 0.6 A (N4) and 0.7 A (N5) is assumed to proceed from a convolution of Zr (Lc0 and P (Kc0 EDS peaks (Fig. 7b) which are expected to more affect P than Zr content measurements.
The evolution of Zr/Si presented in Fig. 8 for the different coatings confirms the influence of the discharge voltage on the relative distribution of atoms with rather different atomic numbers such as Zr and Si. Indeed, as Zr/Si remains quite constant over a wide range of substrates-holder diameter for the coatings deposited with 0.4 A (N1, N2, N3), the coatings deposited with 0.6 A (N4) and 0.7 A (N5) exhibit a significant increase of the Zr content in the inner zones of the substrates-holder which is consistent with a more acute distribution of Si than Zr atoms. Nevertheless, Zr/Si always remains close to the targeted value of 1. 
Within the precision of EDS measurements, coating N4 presents a composition very close to that of the targeted Na3ZrzSizPO~2 compound. As expected, the as deposited coating is amorphous whatever the position of the substrate on the substrates-holder, the single diffraction line observed being relative to the Si substrate. The film crystallisation is investigated for the position D = 60 mm with annealing treatments of one hour performed up to 800 ~ in air (Fig. 9a). The film remains amorphous up to 550 ~ and its crystallisation occurs around 700 ~ Most of the diffraction lines are consistent with the monoclinic variety of Nasicon with some minor lines corresponding to tetragonal zirconia (Fig. 9b). This monoclinic structure is consistent with that of bulk Nasicon for 1.8 < x < 2.2, whereas outside this composition range, bulk Nasicon presents a rhomboedral structure. 
Note that the crystallisation temperature of 700 C for the coating is strongly lower that that observed with bulk material synthesised by SolGel, where a first rhomboedral crystallisation appears around 950 C which then transforms in the monoclinic variety over about 1100 C
Electrical measurements were performed at room temperature after various annealing treatments up to 685 ~ by impedance spectroscopy in coplanar mode on coating N4 deposited on glass (D = 60 mm). The lateral ionic conductivity is deduced from those measurements following the relation d o [10], where d is the width between RxLxe electrodes (0.15 cm), L, the length of electrodes (1.1 cm), e, the coating thickness (825 nm = 0.85.10 -7 cm) and R, the lateral resistance of the fihn. Figure 10a which presents the ionic conductivity as a function of the annealing temperature shows that the higher conductivity of about 2*10 -3 S-cm 1 is obtained with the as-deposited coating. This result is consistent with the expected value for bulk glassy Nasicon. 
Increasing annealing temperature to 200-300 C decreases the ionic conductivity of about one order of magnitude around 1.3.104 S.cm -l, which is assumed to proceed from stress relaxation into the film. Between 400 and 600 C the ionic conductivity slightly increases to 2*10 -~ S.cm q. For higher temperatures, a slight decrease of the ionic conductivity is observed, which corresponds to the apparition of an array of microcracks over the whole coating surface. At the maximum annealing temperature of this study (685） close to the crystallisation temperature determined by XRD analysis of about 700 ~ the ionic conductivity increases with annealing duration. As microcracks disappeared and the glass substrates flowed at such a high temperature, it was not possible to discriminate those effects from that of crystallisation owing to the increase of ionic conductivity measured. Note that relaxation frequencies for all these measurements are between 795 and 630 Hz (Fig. 10b).
Thin Nasicon coatings were deposited on rotating substrates by co-sputtering in the reactive mode of a Zr-Si and a Na3PO 4 target. By adjusting the discharge current and the target-to-substrate distance for each target, coatings with a composition very close to the targeted Na3Zr2Si2PO12 stoichiometry can be synthesised on a rather wide area of the substrates-holder. A thermostructural analysis shows that the amorphous as-deposited coating crystallises around 700 C in the convenient monoclinic structure expected owing to its stoichiometry. Electrical measurements performed by impedance spectroscopy after annealing up to 685 C indicate that the higher ionic conductivity of about 2.10 -3 S-cm -1 is obtained for the as deposited amorphous coating. This value is consistent with that of bulk Nasicon, which foreshadows future interesting applications of reactive sputtering for large-area deposition of superionic conductor coatings.