Electrochemical catalysts were used for environmental applications, such as the clean production of energy from propane and propene combustion, the elimination of VOC's like propene and the NOx abatement All the selected electrochemical catalysts were composed of a Pt film deposited on YSZ, NASICON or CGO. It was found that all these chemical reactions can be electropromoted. Moreover, the reaction rates can be in-situ tuned by applying a polarisation. Furthermore, the selectivity of Pt-based electrochemical catalysts can be modified in order to avoid the formation of pollutant. Finally, EPOC can improve the lifetime of a catalyst by inhibiting its poisoning by carbonaceous species.
One of the main goals of the environmental catalysis is to develop and improve new catalysts for air cleaning. 
Air pollution originating from the automotive traffic and industries is an increasing problem, especially in urban areas. Major challenges are the treatment of gaseous stream from automotives and plants, such as NOx abatement (DeNOx catalysis) as well as low temperature catalytic combustion of traces such as volatil organic compounds (VOC's). The production of clean energy is also a crucial point and one of the most promising solution is the catalytic combustion of hydrocarbons without formation of pollutants (NOx, VOC's, unburned hydrocarbons ...). The development of alternative catalysts for these environmental applications presents several objectives, the most important one is to reduce or remove the use of noble metals, due to their excessive cost which makes necessary stages of recovery and recycling. 
Another key point is to improve the life time of the catalysts under operating conditions. To achieve these goals, an alternative way is the development of a new generation of catalysts which are called electrochemical catalysts. This paper is a review of recent progress on electrochemical promotion carried out in our three laboratories. Electrochemical catalysts are composed of a thin porous layer of an electronically conducing active phase in contact with a dense substrate of a solid electrolyte, which is an ionic conductor. This kind of catalysts is able to implement the concept of electrochemical promotion of catalysis (EPOC). EPOC or Non-faradaic Electrochemical Modification of Catalytic Activity (NEMCA) effect, discovered and developed by C. Vayenas et al, is an innovative concept which can be used to modify both the activity and the selectivity of a catalyst. 
This process is based on the control, by an applied potential, of the work function due to electrochemical pumping of ions between a solid electrolyte and the surface of a porous catalyst. The main advantage of EPOC is that the observed enhancement of the activity is much higher than that predicted by the Faraday law. Therefore, EPOC is a non-faradaic process and requires low currents or potentials. 
The NEMCA effect has been observed for a wide range of reactions in the presence of metals such as Pt, Pd, Ag or Rh in contact to a solid electrolyte. Electrochemical promotion was also evidenced on oxides such as IrO 2 [3], RuO 2 [4] and La08Sr02Co0sFe0203 [5] for the alkene (ethylene or propylene) combustion. The solid electrolyte may be 02- conductor (YSZ (Y203-stabilized ZrO2)) [6-8], Na + conductor (["Al2O3 or Na3ZrzSi2PO12), H + conductors (CaZr09In0 iO3 or Nation), F conductors (CaF2), mixed ionic-electronic conductors (TiO2, and CeO2). Most of the electropromoted reactions cited in the literature are devoted to environmental applications such as catalytic combustion of light hydrocarbons (clean production of energy), catalytic elimination of VOC's or selective catalytic reduction (SCR) of NOx by hydrocarbons. The objective of this paper is to demonstrate the interest of the electrochemical catalysts for environmental applications by describing different exaples of their potentialities. 
All the investigated electrochemical catalysts contain platinum as the active phase. We selected this noble metal because this catalyst is one the most frequently used in the environmental catalysis. The idea was to show that, according to the nature of the solid electrolyte and the polarisation level, the activity and the selectivity of a porous Pt film can be drastically modified. Different interesting aspects of the electrochemical promotion will be described such as: the improvement of the activity for eliminating a pollutant at lower temperatures, then leading to the increase of the catalyst lifetime and a reducing of the cost process, the enhancement of the selectivity to avoid the formation of a pollutant during a catalytic process, the enhancement of the catalyst lifetime, and finally, the possibility of in-situ tuning the catalytic performance. This behaviour is important when the activity must be controlled during the chemical process.
First example reports the activity of an electrochemical catalyst which was implemented in a tubular reactor made from a YSZ tube. Details of the reactor were given in a previous study. 
Two symmetrical Pt electrodes were deposited onto opposite sides of the YSZ tube with a geometrical area of 24 cm 2. The working electrode, which is also the catalyst, was coated on the outer surface and was exposed to the reactive mixture. On the other hand the counter-electrode was deposited on the inner surface of the YSZ tube and was only exposed to air. Both Pt electrodes were prepared from Pt platinum paste (Engelhard-Clal 6926) and annealed at 800 ~ for 12 hours in air. Therefore, the size of the Pt particles was very large, of the order of 1 ~tm. The Pt dispersion was estimated from H2 adsorption mad was found to be 1.5%. At 400 ~ a reactive mixture containing propane and oxygen, in a stoichiometric ratio, was introduced in the tubular reactor. Propane is one of the main components of liquid petroleum gas (LPG). Therefore, the deep oxidation of propane is an important reaction for energy production. As shown in Fig. 1, polarizations were applied between the catalyst and the counterelectrode. 
After applying a positive current of +5 mA (Fig. 1), propane conversion strongly increased from 35% to 85%. The catalytic activity became steady after more than 3 hours of polarization. When the current was stopped, the propane conversion slowly decreased back to its initial value. The Faradaic efficiency, A, was found to be 52, meaning that the increase of the catalytic rate is 52 times higher than that predicted by the Faraday law. 
This demonstrates that the electrochemical promotion can significantly improve the propane conversion, in a reversible manner. A negative current of -5 mA was also applied at 400 C.This negative polarization induces a decrease of the conversion from 36% to 27%. The conversion remained constant after 2 hours of polarization. When the current was stopped, we observed a slow and gradual increase of the conversion back to its initial value. This catalytic activity modification was also nonFaradaic since A was found to be equal to 10. These experiments demonstrate that propane combustion on the Pt/YSZ system can be electrochemically modified according to electrophobic NEMCA behaviour. This result is in good agreement with results reported in our previous study. 
In this second example, Pt film was deposited onto a pellet of gadolinia-doped ceria (CGO) electrolyte. Powder of Ce0 ,C-do 203 was prepared by the oxalate co-precipition method from nitrates and annealed at 500 ~ for 5 hours and then sintered at 1400 ~ for 2 hours. Pt film was deposited from a paste (Engelhard-Clal 6926) on one side of the CGO pellet whereas gold counter and references were coated on the opposite side. After annealing at 800 ~ for 2 hours, the Pt film contained 1.5 mg of Pt per cm 2. Catalytic activity of the Pt/CGO electrochemical catalyst for the propene deep oxidation under lean-bum conditions (C3H6/O2:2000 ppm / 5%) was measured in a specific quartz reactor described in a previous study. Propene is more reactive than propane and then is oxidised on Pt at lower temperatures. Therefore, we selected CGO as the solid electrolyte because this material exhibits similar ionic conductivity than YSZ but at lower temperature. 
At 228 C propene combustion can be electropromoted by applying a negative current (Fig. 2). When a negative current of -10 btA was applied, the propene conversion increased from 3.25% to 3.65%. The Faradaic efficiency was found to be -170. On the other hand, a positive polarisation had no effect on the activity. 
These electrophilic NEMCA behaviours are similar to those observed with Pt/YSZ electrochemical catalyst, but carried out at temperature about 100 C lower. This result shows that electrochemical promotion can be implemented at low temperatures for enhancing the activity by using appropriate solid electrolyte.
The non-faradaic electrochemical modification of catalytic activity (NEMCA) was investigated in selective catalytic reduction (SCR) of NO by propene on Pt films deposited on NASICON, a Na + conducting solid electrolyte. This study was carried out under lean-burn conditions. The use of NASICON allows to work at quite low temperatures (about 300 C compatible with the treatment of automotive exhausts. The Na3Zr2Si2PO12 solid electrolyte was prepared by the sol-gel method. At 295 ~ the conversions of NO and C3H6 are 11% and 13%, respectively and the selectivity to N 2 is 41%.
Figure 3 shows the variation of the steady-state rate enhancement ratios for reaction products (CO2, N2 and N20 which is a greenhouse gas) with respect to the overpotential AVwR at 295 C Each point was obtained by fixing the potential until the current vanished and stabilized to a value lower than 1 pA. The application of low overpotentials (either positive or negative) does considerably modify the catalytic properties of Pt. The propene conversion can be lowered by a factor of 3 by positive overpotentials and increased by 1.7 by negative ones. 
Simultaneously, negative overpotentials significantly increase the rate of NO removal whereas negative ones decrease it. The reaction rate is significantly controlled via voltage application. The most important point is that applying a low overpotential through the Pt/NASICON interface allows to improve considerably the selectivity towards nitrogen (Fig. 4). Negative overpotentials, below -100 mV, enhance the selectivity to N2 from 41% to 61% by promoting the N 2 production. 
Surprisingly, application of positive overpotentials in the range from +50 to +200 mV, thus decreasing the sodium coverage, strongly decreases the N20 production and simultaneously increases that of N2. At 295 ~ potential of-200 mV drastically enhances the selectivity to harmless N2 from 41% to 73%. In the same time the propene conversion drops from 13 % to 3%. This example indicates that the electrochemical promotion can modify the selectivity of a catalyst in order to decrease the production of a pollutant such as N20.
Electrochemical promotion can also be used for avoiding poisoning of a catalyst. One of the most usual origins of catalyst contamination is the formation of coke. For instance, the combustion of olefins in stoichiometric conditions often generates carbon deposition on the catalytic active sites. Propene deep oxidation in stoichiometric conditions was implemented on the Pt/CGO electrochemical catalyst which was already described in paragraph 2. At 300 C we observed a gradual decrease of the propene conversion with time, probably due to carbon deposition (Fig. 5). This deactivation was not stopped by the application of a positive current. On the other hand, a negative current of -100 gA strongly enhanced the conversion from 4.2% to 7%, in a non-faradaic manner (A = -110). When the current stopped, the activity dropped. The most important result is that, a treatment of the electrochemical catalyst under pure oxygen for 10 minutes restores the initial activity at around 7.5% of conversion. 
This confirms that the catalyst is poisoned by carbonaceous species. After this decontamination treatment, the stoichiometric reactive mixture was again introduced on the electrochemical catalyst and, at the same time, a negative polarisation of -100 C A was applied. Under these operating conditions, we did not observe a deterioration of the activity. This indicates that the negative polarisation has the same beneficial effect as pure oxygen and enables to maintain the propene conversion constant. This result also confirms that EPOC is not a classical electrochemical oxidation. Indeed, carbonaceous species can not be oxidised by a cathodic polarisation but only by an anodic one. The polarisation affects the strength of the chemical bonds between platinum and the adsorbates. A negative current weakens the chemical bond between Pt and the olefin which is an electron-donor and then inhibits the formation of carbonaceous species. 
These results demonstrate that EPOC can improve the lifetime of a catalyst by inhibiting its poisoning by carbonaceous species.
The purpose of this example was to investigate the electrochemical promotion of propene combustion on Pt/NASICON with a large oxygen excess (for VOC's abatement). The electrochemical catalyst we used was similar to that described in paragraph 3 for NOx abatment. Cyclic voltammogramms were recorded at 300 ~ at 1 mV/s between VwR = -1 V and +1 V. Figure 6 shows the variation of the propene conversion as a function of the applied potential during 10 cycles. We observed that the propene conversion can be in-situ controlled, between 10% and 35%, by the polarisation. Moreover, the reproducibility between the cycles wasquite good. In spite of the speed rate of the potential variation, a given value of the potential still corresponds to the same level of conversion. These observed modifications of the catalytic activity are linked to the migration of Na + ions between the catalyst surface and the electrolyte as described in a previous paper. 
Another example concerns the catalytic activity of electrochemical catalysts composed of a thin sputterdeposited film of Pt interfaced with YSZ. The thickness of the Pt film was only 120 nm. NEMCA behaviour was investigated for propene combustion in stoichiometric conditions by applying positive and negative overpotentials between -2.1 V to +2 V steps of 0.1 V at 400 C (Fig. 7). The effect of the polarisation is very significant since the propane conversion lies from about 45 % to 84 % depending of the value of the applied potential. These experiments show that it is possible to insitu tune the catalytic activity of the Pt film in a very rapid and reversible manner.
This paper summarized recent progress of our three laboratories on the use of electrochemical catalysts for environmental applications. All the selected electrochemical catalysts were composed of a film of Pt deposited on YSZ, NASICON or CGO. Various environmental applications were investigated, such as the clean production of energy from propane or propene combustion (stoichiometric conditions), the elimination of VOC's like propene (oxygen-rich conditions) and the NOx abatement. It was found that all these chemical reactions can be electropromoted and that the reaction rates can be in-situ tuned by applying a polarisation. The concept of electrochemical promotion can improve the activity and the selectivity. Moreover, EPOC can enhance the lifetime of a catalyst by inhibiting its poisoning by carbonaceous species.