Open CO2 sensors work in a differential mode and the response must only depend on the CO2 pressure. To obtain a more stable response, the O2 reference electrode consists of a material which can exchange oxygen with gas and sodium ions (Na+) with the NASICON membrane. Such an electrode is composed of a mixture of sodium titanates Na2Ti3O7–Na2Ti6O13 and La1−xSrxMnO3 (LSM). This latter compound is added to improve the oxygen electrode reaction. The sensing electrode is composed of gold and a mixture of sodium and barium carbonates (Na2CO3 and BaCO3). Different compositions of the two electrodes are investigated in a large range of CO2 pressure. Sensors with a weight composition of carbonates about 3:1 in sodium and barium for the sensing electrode show a nernstian response in the 385–668 C temperature range. In this range, the experimental slopes are about 90% of the theoretical value. Below 385 C, a logarithmic function of the CO2 pressure ◦ is still observed but deviations from the Nernst behaviour occur. 
A thermodynamic approach based on the standard potential E point of view reveals a good agreement between theory and experiments.
With the increasing gas pollution in the atmosphere (SOx, NOx, CO and CO2), a monitoring and controling system is becoming more and more important. In this ﬁeld, many studies were investigated on solid state potentiometric sensors. In the case of CO2 pollution, the ﬁrst device based on K2CO3 electrolyte and carbonates as sensing electrode was proposed by Gauthier et al. Several types of CO2 sensors used carbonate phase with solid electrolyte like ␤-alumina or NASICON. In the literature, it was proposed to replace Na2CO3 by a carbonate systems such 10 as Na2CO3–MeCO3,6–9 Li2CO3 or Li2CO3–MeCO3 (Me = Ba, Ca, Sr. . .). These changes improved the stability and the resistance of water effect on the sensor. NASICON electrolyte have been chosen for its high Na+ conductivity allowing fast Na+ exchange at the interfaces.
A sensor needs a constant reference electrode, so many devices were tested in chemical cell with two different gas compositions at the reference (air) and sensing (air + CO2) electrodes. Holzinger et al. proposed a mixture of materials for the reference electrode: Na2Ti3O7–Na2Ti6O13 or Na2Ti6O13–TiO2 which were sensitive to O2. These materials allowed the fabrication of “open sensors” without separation gas between the reference and the sensing electrodes. Many investigations were performed to improve the sensor stability, for example Pasierb et al. have studied the effect of the composition of such materials and Ramirez et al. added La1−xSrxMnO3 (LSM) for its well known catalytic properties towards the oxygen reaction. However, the mechanism between the different interfaces is not very well understood: Kida et al. observed an interfacial corrosion layer (Li2ZrO3) between NASICON and the lithium carbonate layer.
In this paper, sensors based on NASICON are studied in large ranges of temperature and CO2 pressure. The inﬂuence of the electrode composition was approached on the Na2Ti3O7–Na2Ti6O13|NASICON| Na2CO3–BaCO3 electrochemical cell.
The NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) was prepared by sol–gel method as described elsewhere. The powder obtained was heat-treated at 750 C to eliminate the solvent. Pellet with 1 cm diameter was pressed uniaxially at 100 MPa and isostastically at 300 MPa and then sintered at 1000 C for 2 h. A X-ray diffraction pattern conﬁrmed the NASICON phase.
Na2Ti3O7–Na2Ti6O13 was also prepared by sol–gel reaction as described by Ramirez et al. This preparation led to a powder of sodium titanates with different mass compositions. This powder was sintered at 800 C for 4 h and the structures were conﬁrmed by X-ray diffraction pattern.
The mixture of carbonates Na2CO3–BaCO3 was prepared by mixing the two powders in the good proportion, heating above the melting point, cooling down and milling.
Different deposition methods for the electrodes were investigated
1.Painting: an ink was realized by mixing the sodium titanates and LSM (1:1 in mass), terpineol, polyvinylpyrrolidon (PVP) and polyvinylbutanal (PVB) for the reference electrode. The same preparation was made for the sensing materials with a mixture of sodium and barium carbonates and gold paint (1:1 in mass). Firstly, the reference electrode ink was deposited on one side of the NASICON pellet and sintered at 800 C during 2 h. Secondly, the sensing electrode ink was pasted on the other side and ﬁred at 750 C during 1 h.
2. Melting: the powder of carbonates was deposited on one side of the pellet upon a gold grid by the melting and quenching method. The reference electrode was formed with the painting method described in (1).
3. Screen-printing (realised at “Ecole des Mines de SaintEtienne” with M. Pijolat and M. Viricelle): in this case, both electrodes were deposited by screen-printing method in the same mass ratios than in (1). The reference was sintered at 800 C and on the other side of the pellet, the sensing electrode was sintered at 750 C. Then, a gold grid was screen-printed on the carbonate layer and ﬁred at 750
The CO2 sensors investigated in this work are deﬁned by the following electrochemical cell
The tests with painted and melted electrodes in the ranges 380–700 C and 250–2400 ppm of CO2 gave responses close to the theoretical slope, unfortunately short life times were observed (about 10 days). Moreover, the melting method did not lead to good reproducibility on elaboration of several sensors.
Best results were obtained with the screen-printed method. This could be due to a good control of the electrode thickness. Several compositions of reference and sensing electrodes were tested. We have observed generally long life times. In the present paper, only the best results were presented which were obtained with the composition 55:45 in mass for the sodium titanates and 3:1 for the carbonates. The measurements of EMF versus log (PCO2 ) are plotted in Fig. 1. This ﬁgure shows straight lines with slopes in good agreement with the Nernst equation for the temperature above 485 C. Below this temperature, slope is deviating from the theoretical one, curves are always straight lines but sub-nernstian slopes appear. Experimental values (slopes, E and n) are reported in the Table 1.
Fig. 2 illustrates the inﬂuence of oxygen pressure at a constant CO2 pressure for two temperatures (385 C). According to the electrochemical reaction cell (Eq. (4)), no signiﬁcant effect of O2 pressure must be observed on the EMF. Our results are in good agreement for the highest temperature and in all the tested range of O2 pressure. Only a shift of 30 mV of EMF is observed at low temperature, like Holzinger et al.15 showed in their work using ␤-alumina and pure Na2CO3. Such shifts could be due to different kinetics of O2 reaction at both electrodes.
Fig. 3 shows the transient response of this sensor. In this case, a good reproducibility of the EMF is observed for the CO2 pressure cycle. The response time is about a few minutes.
The standard potential E calculated from Eq. (4) are plotted in Fig. 4 as a function of the temperature. Theoretical values were calculated from differents thermodynamical databases16–18 according to Eq. (5) and are plotted in Fig. 4. As can be seen, the E values of this sensor are close to the thermodynamical values, more especially those extracted ◦ from Fact-web database.18 A slight discrepancy between E calculated from the databases is due to the uncertainties on the formation free enthalpies for each component which are relatively high compared to the ﬁnal values.
In comparison with the sub-nernstian previous results on similar devices,19 the present deposition method seems to improve signiﬁcantly the response of open sensors using a binary carbonate system (Na2CO3–BaCO3). In our case, the ◦ slope is nernstian and the E values correspond to the thermodynamical ones.
In this work, several deposition methods were investigated. All sensors were linear versus the logarithm of CO2 pressure and in good agreement with the theory. The screen-printing process improved the control of the deposition and the life time of sensors. The sensors were tested in a range 385–668 C and in a large range of CO2 pressure. At high temperature, no signiﬁcant effect of the O2 pressure was observed, according to the theory. For the composition of sodium titanates 55:45 in mass, the standard potential E is in good agreement with the thermodynamical values.
