A model is proposed for ionic and superionic conduction in the α, β, and γ phases of theNa3Sc2(PO4)3 compound. This model accounts not only for the conducting properties of the aforementionedphases but also for their structural and kinetic parameters. Within the kinetic approach to the description of theelectrical conduction in the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 compound, it is established that the ionic conduction in the α dielectric phase is governed by the localization and delocalization of ions in deep potential wells and that hoppingsbetween the wells are caused by the interaction of ions with phonons. The superionic conduction in the β andγ phases is associated both with the increase in the contribution of the ion delocalization in potential wells dueto a decrease in their depth and with the decrease in the contribution of the ion localization. These contributionsare responsible for the flight mechanism of conduction in the superionic phases. 
The contribution of each conducting channel to the total conduction is taken into account through the relaxation time of charge carriers. Theestimated relaxation times are close to the values determined from the data on the conducting and dielectriccharacteristics of the α, β, and γ phases of the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 compound.
Superionic conductors have found wide application as elements in systems for data processing and as power sources. This has stimulated extensive investigations into the physical properties of superionic conductors of different structural types with the aim of elucidating the mechanism responsible for superionic conduction.
As present, there is a wealth of information on the structural parameters and the conducting and dielectric properties of the superionic conductor Na3Sc2(PO4)3 and its analogs Na3M2(PO4)3 (M = Fe, Cr) belonging to the NASICON family [3–11]. However, the mechanism of superionic conduction in compounds of this family is still not clearly understood. In this respect, the search for adequate tools for studying the nature of this phenomenon is an important problem. The purpose of the present work was to construct a kinetic model that would be entirely appropriate for describing both ionic and superionic conduction in phosphate compounds with a rhombohedral crystal lattice of the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 type.
The ionic conductivity of the α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 dielectric phase increases initially by two orders of magnitude upon the transition to the β superionic phase and then, again, by two orders of magnitude upon the transition to the γ superionic phase. As a result of two reversible phase transitions at Tα → β = 339 K and Tβ → γ = 439 K, the conductivity of this compound reaches an extremely high value of 2.5 × 10–2 (Ω cm)–1 at T = 570 K. The conducting properties and the structural characteristics of sodium scandium phosphate can be described within an energy model that accounts for the specific features of the occupation of small-sized (A) and large-sized (B) holes by compensating cations in the crystal lattice. According to Kalinin et al., the potential relief of a conducting channel revealed for the {[Sc2(PO4)3]3–}3∞ rhombohedral crystal lattice in the α, β, and γ phases of the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 compound can be schematically drawn as profiles of one-dimensional conducting channels. 
Note that, to a regular alternation of the A and B holes in the crystal lattice, there corresponds an alternation of the A shallow and B deep wells in the potential relief (Fig. 1). The ferroelectric properties and the low conductivity of the α- Na3Sc2(PO4)3 phase can be associated with the fact that the {[Sc2(PO4)3]3–}3∞ mobile rhombohedral crystal lattice is characterized by monoclinic distortions responsible for the nonuniform occupation of B holes by sodium cations with an asymmetric double-well potential [11]. In this case, sodium cations involved in the formation of random sodium dipoles can also serve as charge carriers in the presence of an external electric field. 
The most appropriate potential relief of the conducting channel, with due regard for the available data on the structure and conduction of the α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 phase, is depicted in Fig. 1a. It can be seen from this figure that the condensation of conduction cations at the bottom of deep potential wells and the high potential barriers in the conducting channel between the A and B holes of the crystal lattice provide conditions typical of the hopping conduction mechanism, as is the case in the majority of dielectric materials. Within the semicrystalline approach underlying our analysis of the ionic conduction, the motion of ions is accompanied by their interaction with phonons. In particular, this interaction results in the localization of ions in potential wells with their subsequent escape from these wells. The well depth should be small enough for an ion absorbing a thermal phonon to escape from the well. 
From this standpoint, the conduction in the α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 phase can be treated as a migration of sodium ions along the conducting channel that is attended by the ion–phonon interaction leading to the absorption and emission of phonons by ions. Certainly, not any interaction of an ion with a phonon results in the localization of this ion in a hole or its escape from the hole. Nonetheless, it is these processes that are characteristic of the conduction in the α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 phase. 
This conduction will be referred to as the hopping conduction by analogy with the hopping conduction of electrons in semiconductors. However, in the case of electrons acting as charge carriers in semiconductors, hoppings occur through electron tunneling from one state to another state. The term “hopping conduction mechanism” is used to describe the electron hopping. In the case of ionic conduction, the probability of tunneling an ion from one well to another well is very low and hoppings occur according to the classical scenario: an ion localized in a well absorbs a phonon with an energy no less than the well depth, escapes from the well, and moves freely to a collision, after which the ion emits a phonon and is localized in another well. Thus, in our case, the above term is only a convenient name for a specific ion motion. The ion–phonon interaction can be illustrated by the scheme depicted in Fig. 2. 
Let us assume that a sodium ion with momentum pB and energy εB, which is located at the bottom of the B potential well, executes hopping from this well due to the absorption of a phonon with momentum q and energy ω, as is shown in Fig. 2a. The changes in the momentum pB -> p and the energy εB εp of the interacting ion obey the laws of conservation of momentum and energy. Upon absorption of the phonon with momentum q and energy ω, we have 
For an ion with energy εp and momentum p to pass into the B well, the ion must emit a portion of the energy. In this case, we can write the relationships, which describe the process inverse with respect to theprocess corresponding to expressions (1a) and (1b). 
Relationships similar to expressions (1a), (1b), (2a), and (2b) can also be written for A wells. We can assume that there occur the transitions A–A, B–B, and A–B between the wells. However, it should be taken into account that not just any interaction with the phonon will correspond to a process [described by relationships (2a) and (2b)] resulting in localization of the ionin the A well. 
In the channel associated with the A wells, the escape of the ion from one well and its localization in another well can be separated by many collisions until one of these collisions with the phonon will coincide with the process corresponding to relationships (2a) and (2b). Note that the A well with the localized ion should not necessarily be adjacent to the B well from which this ion has escaped. Therefore, the localization and delocalization of ions in A and B wells are random processes. For a further analysis, it is important to emphasize that, between two sequential localization events in the channels associated with the A–A, B–B, and A–B wells, the ion can experience many collisions with phonons. It should also be emphasized that ions involved in the current form a nondegenerate gas. Moreover, we should note that the number of ions in a free state due to hoppings initiated by phonons is important rather than the type of wells between which the ion executes hoppings.
Unlike the α phase of the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 compound, the conduction mechanism in the β and γ superionic phases changes as a result of structural transformations upon the phase transition and thus provides an anomalously high conductivity. The α β phase transition leads to an almost complete disappearance of monoclinic distortions of the crystal lattice. This results in a lowering of the potential relief of the conducting channel in the β-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 phase, the destruction ofrandom sodium dipoles, and a more uniform occupation of A and B holes by sodium cations (Fig. 1b).
According to, three-fourths of sodium ions occupy the B wells and only one-fourth of the ions occupy the A wells. In Fig. 1b, superstructure distorpB + q = p, εB + ω ε p = , p p = B + q ε p = εB + ω, tions in the β-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 phase are represented by ordered states of sodium cations in B holes of the crystal lattice. It should be noted that sodium cations located in the B deep wells, as before, can participate in the hopping conduction, and a decrease in the barrier height favors this process. However, the energy depth of the A shallow wells is close to zero due to the disappearance of monoclinic distortions. As a result, the probability of transition of these cations to a free state due to the phonon absorption increases considerably.
Furthermore, since the A wells almost disappear, the flight length between two sequential localization events in the B wells increases and a decrease in the depth of the B wells apparently leads to a decrease in the localization time. Therefore, the conduction in the β phase in the electric field proceeds through a mechanism that can be called the flight mechanism. This conducting channel is absent in the α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 phase. Most likely, it is this flight mechanism that is responsible for the increase in the conductivity by two orders of magnitude upon the α β phase transition.
A further jump in the conductivity upon transition from the β phase to the γ-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 phase can be associated with the complete disappearance of monoclinic distortions in the crystal structure. This results in a new decrease in the potential barrier height and provides a regular relief of the conducting channel and a uniform occupation of A and B holes by all sodium cations (see Fig. 1c). 
The ratio between the concentrations of sodium cations occupying the A and B wells in the γ phase remains identical to that in the β-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 phase. In this case, as in the β-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 phase, the conduction can proceed according to both the hopping (for sodium ions in the B wells) and flight (for sodium ions in the A wells) mechanisms. It should be noted that, in both cases, the efficiency of the conduction mechanism in the γ phase substantially increases (i) as a result of the decrease in the height of the potential barrier between the A and B wells and the disappearance of ordered states for hopping conduction and (ii) due to the decrease in the depth of the A wells for flight conduction. Consequently, the conduction in superionic conductors of this type occurs through the hopping and flight mechanisms. It is not ruled out that the conduction in other superionic conductors can proceed by a similar mechanism. 
This is confirmed by the data presented in for the α-AgI compound, according to which the ratio between the flight time τf  and the residence time τs of silver ions in potential wells is of the order of unity. However, in order to reveal the contribution of each mechanism to the total superionic conduction, it is necessary to analyze the kinetic and conduction parameters.
Now, we turn from the aforementioned qualitative analysis to the kinetic description. As is known, a system can be described by kinetic equations when it is a stochastic system. Undeniably, the system of ions under investigation is stochastic because, first, it is a many-particle system and, second, ions of this system interact with thermal phonons whose distribution obeys the Bose–Einstein statistics. 
In an external electric field, the mean velocity of directed motion of charged carriers is often considerably lower than their thermal velocity at reasonable temperatures. However, such a ratio between the directed and thermal velocities is not a necessary requirement for the applicability of the stochastic approach, but if this ratio holds true, we are always dealing with a stochastic system. As was noted above, the hopping mechanism of ionic conduction follows the classical scenario, according to which ions appear to be in wells through collision of free ions with phonons rather than through tunneling, as is the case with electrons in semiconductors. Let us consider the kinetic equation with due regard for the drift of conduction ions and their collisions with phonons in the external electric field E; that is,
where f ≡ f(r, p, t) is the distribution function of conduction ions and Ic(p) is the ion–phonon collision integral. The collision integral will be written under the following assumptions.
(i) Conduction ions with each other are ignored, because their density is two or three orders of magnitude lower than the density of lattice ions.
(ii) It is assumed that conduction ions obey the classical statistics. This is justified taking into account their mass. 
(iii) The interaction of conduction ions with other particles of the crystal lattice is considered in terms of the interaction between ions and phonons that are governed by quantum statistics. It is important to note that, as will be shown below, disregarding the collisions between conduction ion leads to a linear collision integral. It should also be noted that the conduction in the given case is provided by free ions. The collision integral is determined by the balance of conduction ions in a phase volume element dpdr in the vicinity of the point (p, r): (1) ions enter this volume from the A and B wells upon absorption of the corresponding phonons and upon interaction with phonons of other phase volumes, and (2) ions leave this volume upon emission of phonons either to be localized in the A and B wells or to pass into other phase volumes.
Here, Z(pA, q; p), Z(pB, q; p), and Z(p', q; p) are the coefficients proportional to the probabilities of entering the phase volume element dpdr in the vicinity of the point (p, r) upon absorption of phonons with momentum q and energy ω by an ion with momentum pA and energy εA in the A well, an ion with momentum pB and energy εB in the B well, and a free ion with momentum p' and energy εp' , respectively; W(p; pA, q), W(p; pB, q), and W(p; p', q) are the probabilities of leaving the phase volume element dpdr in the vicinity of the point (p, r) upon emission of phonons with momentum q and energy ω and localization of an ion with momentum pA and energy εA in the A well, localization of an ion with momentum pB and energy εB in the B well, and transition of an ion to the free state with momentum p' and energy εp' , respectively; NA and NB are the numbers of A and B wells per unit volume, respectively; 
and n(q) is treated as an equilibrium function by assuming that the current motion of ions is a weak perturbation of the system. In relationship (4), the δ functions imply the conservation of energy in the corresponding interaction processes. Hereafter, for simplicity, we will consider the stationary, spatially homogeneous case. 
In the collision integral (4), the first, third, and fifth terms are associated with the transfer of the ions to the phase volume element dpdr in the vicinity of the point (p, r) due to the phonon absorption from the A well, well, and other phase volume elements, respectively. 
The second, fourth, and sixth terms describe the escape of ions due to the emission of phonons from the above phase volume element to the A well, B well, and other phase volume elements, respectively. The characteristic feature of the collision integral (4) is that it is linear with respect to the ion distribution function f(p). This is explained by ignoring the direct interaction of conduction ions with each other. The interaction between conduction ions occurs through their interaction with phonons. By combining the terms independent of the distribution function f(p) and proportional to this function in relationship (4), the collision integral can be rewritten in the following form:
It is evident that the quantities τA, τB, and τp'  have the meaning of the corresponding relaxation times in the case when there is, for example, only the channel associated with the A wells without the other two channels, etc. Then, as can been easily seen, the total relaxation time τ is defined by the relationship
Hence, it follows that the total relaxation time is governed by the shortest time among the relaxation times τA, τB, and τp' . It is clear that all three phases (α, β, and γ phases) of the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 compound are characterized by the hierarchy of the relaxation times τp'  < τA < τB. For the α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 phase in which the A and B wells are sufficiently deep, the total relaxation time τ is determined by the relaxation time τp'. However, the ion concentration ni  is governed only by the conducting channels associated with the A and B wells. The equation for the concentration ni  of conduction ions can be written in the form
This relaxation time is close to the relaxation time τ = 1.7 × 10–5 s obtained from the dielectric measurements.
Consequently, the relaxation times for the α and β phases of the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 compound differ by two orders of magnitude. This difference can be explained by both the decrease in the contribution of the ion localization in the A wells and the decrease in the depth of the B wells in the β-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 phase. Therefore, we can make the inference that the relaxation processes associated with the interaction in the p' channel are steady-state processes.
Since the hierarchy between the relaxation times τA and τB is obvious (τA < τB), estimate (21) corresponds to the relaxation time τA. From the viewpoint of the conduction mechanism in the β-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 phase, we can argue that the flight mechanism is initiated by the considerable decrease in the depth of the A wells. 
In the γ superionic phase of the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 compound, the depth of the A and B wells becomes even smaller as compared to the β phase, the localization of sodium cations in the A wells is insignificant, and the relaxation process associated with the channel of B wells proceeds when the processes governed by the other two channels are in equilibrium. At T = 570 K, we have the conductivity σγ = 2.5 × 10–2 (Ω cm)–1 and the relaxation time
Most likely, this is the relaxation time τB. In the γ superionic phase of the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 compound, the flight mechanism of conduction becomes even more efficient. It is evident that a similar mechanism of conduction should be observed in sodium iron and sodium chromium phosphates, whose composition, properties, and structure are similar to those of the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 compound.