Conductivity dispersion, electric modulus and their scaling are studied for Na3M2P3O12 orthophosphate (M2=Fe2, TiCd, TiZn) glassy and crystallized glassy materials in the frequency range 20 Hz to 1 MHz at different temperatures (T). The power law and the stretched exponential approaches are used to analyze dispersion data. The DC conductivity sDC of crystallized glass is found to be greater than that of the parent glass. The conductivity scaling is studied with different scaling parameters like hopping frequency op; the Summerﬁeld scaling parameter sDCT and modiﬁed the Summerﬁeld scaling parameter sDCT=T a; where a shows the temperature dependence. Ngai’s correlation is also observed between power-law exponent n and stretched exponent b: r 2004 Elsevier B.V. 
In 1976, Hong and co-workers reported that the Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12, crystalline (0<=x<=3) is the best sodiumion conductor. 
Later, researchers introduced the general formula, AxMyP3O12, for the phosphate network system, where A is an alkali ion and M is one or more ions in tri, state. 
The AxMyP3O12 system is often referred to as NASICON (acronym for Na-Super Ionic Conductors) . The NASICON-type materials have been tested in high-power batteries (sodium–sulphur cell), ion-selective electrodes, sensors and also as a candidate for the matrix to immobilize certain types of nuclear waste.
Recently, conspicuous changes in ion transport were observed in NASICON-type orthophosphate materials, by changing the metal ions or compositions or by crystallizing the glass. the presence of grain boundaries Normally, in crystallized glasses decreases conductivity.
However, in the case of NASICON materials, the conductivity is less in the glassy materials compared to the crystallized glass of the corresponding materials earlier work, we have investigated different NASICON-type glassy and polycrystalline materials and observed conspicuous changes in ionic transports for different constituents M with one or more ions in tri, tetra, pentavalent state and also for different compositions. However, the conductivity dispersion and scaling studies in the ion-conducting NASICON-type orthophosphate materials (i) Na3TiCdP3O12, (ii) Na3TiZnP3O12, and (iii) Na3Fe2P3O12 in the glassy and crystallized glasses are not reported comparatively in the literature.
The method of synthesis of the glassy samples Na3Fe2P3O12 (NFP), Na3TiCdP3O12 (NTCP), and Na3TiZnP3O12 (NTZP) has been described in our earlier work [11]. A part of the samples was crystallized by sintering at 973 K for 24 h. The powder X-ray diffractograms (XRD) of the sintered samples show the polycrystalline nature. As-prepared and crystallized powder samples were made into cylindrical pellets at a pressure of 5000 kg/cm2. 
The crystallized glassy pellets were designated as NFP24, NTCP24, and NTZP24 and the parent glassy pellets were designated as NFP0, NTCP0, and NTZP0 for Na3Fe2P3O12, Na3TiCdP3O12, and Na3TiZnP3O12, respectively. The electrical conductivity measurements were carried out by sandwiching the pellet between two silver electrodes. Parallel conductance Gp and capacitance Cp were measured at different temperatures from 373 to 573 K in the frequency range from 20 Hz to 1 MHz by using a Zentech automatic component analyzer model 3305.
The conductivity spectra throw light on the the mobile ions. Typical hopping motion of the conductivity of frequency dependence of NFP0 and NTCP24 at various temperatures is shown in Figs. 1 and 2, respectively. These spectra reﬂect the hopping motions of the sodium ions. The conductivity is found to be frequency independent at low frequencies and it implies that the sodium ions perform uncorrelated random hopping motions leading to a macroscopic transport or DC conductivity. In the high-frequency region, the conductivity increases and it indicates that the ions perform correlated forward–backward hopping motions [20]. The low-frequency conductivity plateau length is found to increase with temperature. The full conductivity spectrum shows that the dynamic conductivity is less temperature dependent in the high-frequency region.
The method of synthesis of the glassy samples Na3Fe2P3O12 (NFP), Na3TiCdP3O12 (NTCP), and Na3TiZnP3O12 (NTZP) has been described in our earlier work [11]. A part of the samples was crystallized by sintering at 973 K for 24 h. The powder X-ray diffractograms the sintered samples show the polycrystalline nature. As-prepared and crystallized powder samples were made into cylindrical pellets at a pressure of 5000 kg/cm2. The crystallized glassy pellets were designated as NFP24, NTCP24, and NTZP24 and the parent glassy pellets were designated as NFP0, NTCP0, and NTZP0 for Na3Fe2P3O12, Na3TiCdP3O12, and Na3TiZnP3O12, respectively. The electrical conductivity measurements were carried out by sandwiching the pellet between two silver electrodes. Parallel conductance Gp and capacitance Cp were measured at different temperatures from 373 to 573 K in the frequency range from 20 Hz to 1 MHz by using a Zentech automatic component analyzer model 3305.
Ion-dynamic process in ion-conducting materials has been the subject of deep scientiﬁc interest for the past few years and is also a challenging problem [28]. The AC conductivity is a direct evidence for the ion dynamic process in solids. The study of the conductivity spectra in disordered solids at different temperatures leads to a scaling law and it is called the time–temperature superposition principle (TTSP) [28]. This means, for a given material, the conductivity isotherms can be collapsed into a single curve with appropriate scaling of the conductivity and frequency axis. This feature can be expressed by sðoÞ=sDC ¼ Fðo=ocÞ; where F is a temperature-independent function and oc is a temperature-dependent characteristic frequency. Various workers have considered DC conductivity sDC as a scaling factor for the AC conductivity axis and the characteristic frequency oc as a scaling parameter for the frequency axis.
We have studied the AC conductivity scaling by choosing the characteristic frequency oc like op; sDCT, and sDCT/Ta. The scaled conductivity spectra are shown in Fig. 5 for typical NFP0, NTCP24 and NTZP24, respectively, where the scaled by sDC, and the conductivity axis frequency axis by op: The scaled AC conductivity data collapsed into a single curve, and it implies that the conductivity dispersion (relaxation mechanism) is independent of temperature under the the characteristic frequency oc as choice of hopping frequency op:
The Summerﬁeld scaling approach has the advantage of using oc ¼ sDCT; where sDC and T are directly available quantities [36]. Figs. 6(a) and (b) show the scaled conductivity spectra of the Summerﬁeld-scaling approach for the NFP0, NTZP24 and NTCP24 samples, respectively. For the NFP0 and the NTZP24 samples, the scaled conductivity spectra collapse into a single curve. But in the case of NTCP24 sample, the scaled conductivity spectra are not superimposed into a single curve in the dispersed region. We do not have a well-deﬁned physical interpretation for the deviation of the NTCP24 sample, but it may be well-associated with the following explanations.
Roling and co-workers have also observed a similar deviation in the Summerﬁeld scaling and they correlate the deviation of the Summerﬁeld scaling to the non-Arrhenius behavior in the hopping frequency [39]. In the present case, the NTCP24 obeyed Arrhenius behavior and also observed the deviation in the Summerﬁeld scaling. It may be due to the fact that Ea is not equal to Ep as shown in Table 1.
Recently, several researchers have presented the the advantages and qualitative assessment of beneﬁts of modulus peak analysis [40–42] and also criticized the misleading behavior of the frequency dependence of electric modulus [43–45]. In the present paper, we have compared the modulus peak frequency with the conductivity hopping frequency for typical NFP0 glass and NTZP24 crystallized glassy sample. is based on the concept of electrical modulus MðoÞ; which is deﬁned as the reciprocal of the complex dielectric permittivity
A systematic investigation has been carried out on AC conductivity, dielectric behavior using power law, AC conductivity scaling, and electrical modulus of NASICON-type glasses Na3Fe2P3O12, Na3TiCdP3O12, and Na3TiZnP3O12 and the corresponding crystallized NASICON-type glasses. The DC conductivity of crystallized glasses is found to be greater than the parent glasses of NASICONtype materials. The dynamic conductivity of both glasses and crystallized glasses show a power law. The hopping frequency is used as AC conductivity scaling parameter and the conductivity spectra are superimposed into a master curve when scaled by the hopping frequency. The Summerﬁeld scaling parameter sDCT is also investigated for all the samples. 
In the case of the NTCP24 sample the Summerﬁeld scaling failed due to the difference in the value of Ea and Ep. Deviation from the Summerﬁeld scaling for the NTCP24 sample is characterized by Baranovskii et al., by using sDCT/Ta as the scaling parameter where a is positive and temperature dependent. Ngai’s correlation between n and b is obeyed in the case of NFP0 sample.