The Li intercalation potential of LiMPO4 and LiMSiO4 compounds with M = Fe, Mn, Co and Ni is computed with the GGA + U method. It is found that this approach is considerably more accurate than standard LDA or GGA methods. The calculated potentials for LiFePO4, LiMnPO4 and LiCoPO4 agree to within 0.1 V with experimental results. The LiNiPO4 potential is predicted to be above 5 V. The potentials of the silicate materials are all found to be rather high, but LiFeSiO4 and LiCoSiO4 have negligible volume change upon Li extraction. Ó 2004 Elsevier B.V.
First principle computations have shown to be relevant for predicting many of the properties of Li-insertion materials used as electrodes in rechargeable Li batteries [1–9]. One of the critical properties for a Li intercalation material is the potential at which Li can be removed and inserted. While a high potential increases the energy density of the material, if this potential is too high, Li can not be practically removed and side reactions such as electrolyte breakdown, can occur in the cell. A low potential can also lead to moisture sensitivity of the electrode material. Hence, knowledge of the thermodynamic potential is one crucial aspect when determining whether new materials can be used as cathode materials in rechargeable lithium batteries. In this communication, we predict the potential of LiNiPO4, LiMnSiO4, LiFeSiO4, LiCoSiO4 and LiNiSiO4 in the olivine structure using the highly accurate GGA + U method.
The electrochemical activity of LiFePO4 [10] and Li3V2(PO4)3 [11–14] has spawned considerable interest in materials with poly-anion groups, as they may be considerably more stable than close-packed oxides at the end of charging. Currently, LiFePO4 and Li3V2(PO4)3 are of commercial interest, though the rather low potential of LiFePO4 gives it too low an energy density to compete with layered oxides in applications where volumetric or gravimetric energy density is most important. In this communication we use ab-initio computations to predict the potential of other phosphates and silicates in the olivine structure. While ab-initio methods have previously been used to predict the potential of insertion electrodes, we use a more accurate quantum mechanical approach in this work, allowing us to predict the insertion potentials within 0.1–0.2 V. We ﬁnd that of the compounds investigated, LiFePO4 actually has the lowest potential. 
Among the phosphate compounds, the potential of LiNiPO4 is found to be too high to be of practical interest. LiMnSiO4, LiFeSiO4, LiCoSiO4 and LiNiSiO4 also have high potentials, with only the Mn and Fe material just below 5 V.
where G is the Gibbs free energy of the compound. Typically, the equilibrium Li potential in insertion materials LixHost varies with composition x. The above equation gives the average of the equilibrium potential between the compositions x2 and x1. While it is possible to study the detailed variation of the potential with composition [5], the average potential usually contains enough information to decide whether a material is of practical use in rechargeable Li batteries. Typically, the free energies can be replaced by the ground state energies with very little error [1]. Hence, to determine an average intercalation potential the energy of only three compounds need to be determined: Lix1Host, Lix2Host and metallic Li.
In almost all previous ab-initio studies these energies have been determined with standard Density Functional Theory (DFT) in either the Local Density Approximation (LDA) or Generalized Gradient Approximation (GGA). It is found that typically, these methods underestimate the potential, with errors ranging from 0.25 to more than 1 V [15]. There is some recent evidence that cancellation of the self-interaction in methods such as LDA + U corrects this error and can lead to much better voltage predictions [16,17,8]. This seems to be particularly important in phosphate materials, where due to a strong localization of the metal d-orbitals the LDA and GGA errors are rather large.
The LDA + U method (or GGA + U when GGA is used, or DFT + U in general) was invented to more accurately treat strongly correlated materials, such as transition metal or rare earth compounds [18–20]. The concept of DFT + U is to treat the localized d-states by explicit many-body theory, while retaining the regular DFT Hamiltonian (LDA or GGA) for the other more delocalized states. The d-part of the Hamiltonian is treated with standard Hubbard models. The eﬀect of this hybrid Hamiltonian is to modify the electron potential within the transition metal or rare earth atom radii from the LDA/GGA by an amount proportional to the U parameter in this model. Compared to GGA, there is little additional computational cost in the GGA + U method, making it an eﬃcient way to study transition metal compounds. The Hubbard model for the d-states penalizes partial occupancy of d-orbitals, which has been found to be critical for the prediction of phase stability in LiFePO4 [16]. 
More details on the implementation of the DFT + U method can be found in [16,17].
For each M = Fe, Mn, Co and Ni the energy of the LiMPO4, MPO4, LiMSiO4 and MSiO4 structures have been computed. All structures were fully relaxed (cell shapes as well as internal coordinates) so as to get the structural parameters that give the lowest energy. We calculated the total energies with GGA (PBE) [21] and GGA + U, with the projector-augmented wave (PAW) method [22] as implemented in the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) [23,24]. The use of GGA over LDA has previously been shown to be essential for correctly reproducing magnetic interactions and possible Jahn–Teller distortions [3]. We chose an energy cut-oﬀ of 500 eV and appropriate k-point mesh so that the total ground state energy is converged to within 3 meV per formula unit. Magnetic conﬁguration and ordering is important for determining properties of transition metal compounds. 
Each ion was initialized in different magnetic conﬁgurations (non-spin polarized, low spin, high spin) in the electronic convergence iterations to get the lowest energy electronic structure conﬁguration. We have found that initialization in the high spin conﬁguration was suﬃcient in most of the materials studied. The ordering of the magnetic spin on the ions, i.e. ferromagnetic (FM), antiferromagnetic (AFM) or more complicated orderings, can result in a diﬀerence in the total energy of the order 10–60 meV per formula unit. In the phosphates, the spin ordering was initialized as AFM, based on the neutron-diﬀraction results on several LiMPO4 compounds [25–27]. In the silicates FM ordering was used due to lack of experimental information. 
The values of U were determined through a recently developed linear response method that is fully consistent with the deﬁnition of the LDA + U Hamiltonian [28], making our approach for the potential calculations fully ab-initio. For each system, U was calculated for the oxidized and reduced ion, and the voltage was taken as the average obtained with both U values.
Table 1 shows the values of U obtained for each olivine phosphate compound, the lattice parameters of the fully relaxed conﬁgurations, the magnetic moments per transition metal ion and the average intercalation potential. For comparison, standard GGA results as well as more accurate GGA + U results are shown. Experimental values are shown where available. Results for the silicates are shown in Table 2. The U values which are a measure of the electron–electron interaction on the transition-metal site show a general increase with increased valence state. This may reﬂect the lack of screening as the number of d-electrons is reduced. Only for Mn3+/ Mn4+ and Ni3+/Ni4+ in the silicate systems is the trend opposite.
The potentials are plotted in Fig. 1. As found in previous systems [1], the Li extraction potential generally increases as one goes to the right in the 3d-metal series. The minimum in potential for LiFePO4 is a notable exception and is related to the particular electron structure of Fe3+ (see below). The excellent agreement between the calculated and experimental voltage for LiFePO4, LiMnPO4 and LiCoPO4 is a validation of our approach. The GGA + U signiﬁcantly improves upon the pure GGA approach (U = 0), conﬁrming earlier work [16,17,8]. Whereas in GGA errors of 1 V are not uncommon, the largest error for the three systems for which GGA + U can be compared to experiments is less than 0.1 V. We believe that this improvement is due to the cancellation of the self-interaction on the dorbitals in GGA + U. In standard LDA/GGA electron self-interaction places the occupied d-levels too high and therefore the oxidation potential too low, which leads to a systematic underestimation of the Li extraction potential [1]. For LiNiPO4 no experimental result is known. We predict a Li intercalation potential of 5.1 for LiNiPO4 which is close to, or above the maximum potential that can be tolerated by Li electrolytes, explaining why delithiation of LiNiPO4 may not have been observed.
In the silicate, LiMnSiO4, no closed shell is destroyed. The diﬀerence between the phosphate and silicate potentials decreases for the later transition metals Co and Ni. This could reﬂect an increased participation of the anion group at these high potentials [1,33]. At high levels of oxidation, rehybridization shifts occur in the transition-metal ligand bond in order to diminish the eﬀect of changing the valence on the transition metal site. Such shifts have been previously observed with computational methods in LiCoO2 [1,34] and NaCoO2 [35] and experimentally in LiCoO2 [36].
Fig. 2. GGA + U predicted unit cell volume in A˚ 3 for olivine phosphates and silicates, respectively. For phosphates experimental volume is also shown where available. For numbers see Tables 1 and 2.
The active redox couple in LiMSiO4 materials (M3+/ M4+) is one valence state higher than in the phosphates. Hence, on the basis of the higher valence redox couple, one would expect the potentials in the silicates to be higher than those in the phosphates. In addition, the anion group can also aﬀect the potential through its hybridization with the transition metal [1,29,30]. Our results conﬁrm that the potential of the silicate olivines (Fig. 1) is indeed substantially higher than for the corresponding phosphate olivines. The only potentials predicted to be below 5 V are those of LiMnSiO4 (4.8 V) and LiFeSiO4 (4.9 V). The Li extraction for LiCoSiO4 and LiNiSiO4 is above 5 V and likely too high to be of any practical value. The potential diﬀerences between the phosphates and silicates are not constant and reﬂect the electronic structure of the transition metal ions. For Co and Ni, the potential of the silicate and phosphate is almost the same, while for Mn and Fe it is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. 
The large increase in going from LiFePO4 to LiFeSiO4 is due to the stable shell structure of Fe3+. With ﬁve d-electrons in high spin state, Fe3+ forms a half-closed shell. Oxidation of Fe2+ (in LiFePO4) forms this closed shell and hence the potential is low, while oxidation of Fe3+ (in LiFeSiO4) to Fe4+ destroys this stable electronic conﬁguration. As a result, the Li extraction potential in LiFeSiO4 is 1.5 V higher than in the phosphate. This diﬀerence is much less for the Mn compounds. For LiMnPO4 we calculate a potential of 4.04 V, in good agreement with the potential measured in Li(Fe,Mn)PO4 mixtures [31] and in LiMnPO4 [32]. The calculated potential in LiMnSiO4 (4.87 V) is higher by only 0.8 V than in LiMnPO4. Li extraction from LiMnPO4 destroys the formation of the closed shell in Mn2+ to make Mn3+. 
The GGA + U method predicts Li voltages with remarkably good accuracy in phosphate olivines, in contrast to previously standard ab-initio approaches. As U, the electron–electron interaction on the d-orbitals can be determined from ab-initio linear response theory [28], the GGA + U approach is still fully ﬁrst principles, and does not require any experimental input to make predictions about these materials.
We have used this new method to obtain information on LiNiPO4 and on olivine silicates, for which no experimental information is available. We ﬁnd that all these materials have high Li extraction potentials, with LiMnSiO4 the lowest potential at about 4.8 V. While they have very high extraction potentials, LiFeSiO4 and LiCoSiO4 are attractive due to their very low volume change with Li removal. Li extraction from LiFeSiO4 may be thermodynamically possible (4.9 V) at the limit of current electrolytes.
Assuming these silicates can be synthesized in the olivine structures, a signiﬁcant limitation may be their electronic conductivity. In LiFePO4 electron transport is a signiﬁcant limitation to high power rate, which can only be overcome by particle coating methods [37,38] or doping [39]. It is not yet clear whether similar methods are applicable to silicates.


