This work describes the synthesis of a new polyanion material, Li2Co2(MoO4)3, belonging to the NASICON family. A low-temperature soft-combustion method using glycine as a soft-combustion fuel was adopted to obtain single-phase powders of the new material at a temperature as low as 300 C. Li2Co2(MoO4)3 was found to crystallize in an orthorhombic structure (space group Pmmm) with lattice parameters a = 17.584(7) Å, b = 10.464(4) Å and c = 5.102(9) Å. The electronic state of each element present in the new material was conﬁrmed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic analysis. The powders were analyzed using inductively coupled plasma emission spectroscopy. The microstructural analysis revealed that the particles (5–10 ␮m) have a rather columnar shape. The electrochemistry redox + behavior of the new material was studied, for the ﬁrst time, and the material as positive electrode was found to exhibit topotactic Li extraction/insertion in lithium-containing test cells. © 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Although the rechargeable Li-ion technology has been commercialized more than a decade ago, the research trend in today’s lithium-ion batteries is to improve the working voltage (energy density) and capacity to cope with power hunger devices. The needs of power demands obviously require investigation of new electrode materials. In this context, the search for new cathode materials is inevitable and various types of new materials are being investigated [1–4]. A step ahead in new materials development is an interesting class of polyanion-based NASICON framework-type lithiated transition metal oxides that show a tremendous potential for use in rechargeable lithium batteries. Recently, the development of transition metal compounds having the ordered olivine and/or modiﬁed olivines or the rhombohedral NASICON structure containing the polyanion (PO4)3− has been reported [5]. 
The open three-dimensional (3D) crystal structure in these framework-type compounds facilitates easy diffusion of smaller alkali cations like lithium. A large number of lithium-containing compounds incorporating polyanions such as olivine-type  6) = transition metal and X = P, Mo, W, S) LiM  6) = Ti, Fe, V and X and NASICON-type LixM = P, As, Mo, W, S) have been reported [6–12]. Despite their inherent insulating nature (low electronic conductivity) [13,14], tremendous interest has been shown to understand + the Li insertion/extraction behavior of these materials because of their potential application in new-generation lithium batteries. On the other hand, lithium insertion properties of non-lithiated phases of Fe2(XO4)3 (X = Mo, W and S), and Ni2(MoO4)3 have been studied [6–8,15]. Gaubicher et al. [2] and Anderssson et al. [12] have investigated the effect of insertion of additional lithium into Li3V2(PO4)3 and Li3Fe2(PO4)3. 
Nevertheless, according to our knowledge,  6) lithium extraction/insertion from and into Li2M 2(XO4)3  6) = Mn, Ni and Co and X = Mo and W] lithiated phases [M has not been studied so far. Likewise, NASICON-type com3− pounds incorporating polyanions such as SO4 , AsO4 have not been explored in the context of their high-voltage behavior as cathodes for lithium batteries. However, the high-voltage redox properties of olivine-type LiCoPO4 and VOPO4 polyanion materials have been reported [16,17].
The product was examined by employing a JEOL (model JDX 8030) X-ray diffractometer equipped with a diffracted beam monochromator (Cu K␣ radiation). The diffraction patterns were recorded at room temperature in the range 2θ = 0–60 . Peak locations and intensities were determined by a least-squares method and a reﬁnement analysis was used to calculate the unit cells.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS) analysis was carried out to identify the electronic state of various elements (Li, Co, Mo and O) present in the new material Li2Co2(MoO4)3 by using an Axis Ultra Imaging X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (Kratos Analytical, Shimadzu). The base pressure of the sample chamber in the spectrometer −9 Torr. All binding energies were corwas lower than 10 rected with the carbon (1s) line at 284.5 eV. The stoichiometric composition of lithium, cobalt and molybdenum in the new material was determined using an inductively coupled plasma spectrometer (ICP, SPS 1500, Seiko Instruments, Japan) after dissolving the powder samples in HCl. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis was employed to obtain the grain size and morphology characteristics of the synthesized powders using Cambridge Instruments (Stereo scan S200).
A two-electrode cell made up of Teﬂon housing (2450 coin type) with stainless steel current collectors was used.
Fig. 2 shows the polyhedral crystal structure of Li2Co2(MoO4)3 as determined by the CrystalDesigner® software. The determination of the crystal structure of Li2Co2(MoO4)3 revealed a three-dimensional framework consisting of metal-oxygen octahedra and trigonal prisms (where Li and Co reside) which are interconnected by MoO4 tetrahedra. The hexagonal motif of Mo tetrahedra around Co octahedra joined by their faces is clearly seen in Fig. 2. Lithium atoms may occupy sites between or within the layers. The open framework may allow Li ions to easily move topotactically in and out of the structure.
The phase purity and structure of the synthesized product were examined by using X-ray diffraction (XRD). The material was annealed at 500 and 600 C with a soak time of 4 h in order to optimize the phase purity. Fig. 3 shows the XRD pattern of Li2Co2(MoO4)3. At 500 C, the XRD pattern exhibits impurity peaks (Fig. 3a). However, such impurity peaks were found to disappear upon annealing at 600 C (Fig. 3b). Moreover, it was clear from the diffractogram that the peaks are reﬁned and become sharper resulting in decreased crystallite size of the product. This is one of the favorable attributes for the effective utilization of Li2Co2(MoO4)3 positive-electrode active powders. In the C, it was observed that case of the product annealed at 600 the XRD peak positions are in good agreement with the crystallographic data previously reported (PDF #31-0716), indicating the formation of a well crystalline single-phase structure.
The above formula gives dc = 54.8 nm for the sample annealed at 600C for 4 h.
The electronic state of different elements present in the new material Li2Co2(MoO4)3 was conﬁrmed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Fig. 4 shows the XPS emission spectra of Co (2p3/2), Mo (3d5/2), O (1s) and Li (1s). 
The Li (1s) spectrum observed near 56 eV is shown in Fig. 4a. There were two chemically different cobalt species present in the spectrum. One peak at 780.4 eV was associated with a broad satellite peak with a slightly different binding energy (782.4 eV) (Fig. 4b). In this, the former peak is attributed to divalent cobalt (Co2+ (2p3/2)) and the existence of the latter is probably due to surface oxidation of the cobalt species. The binding energy position of the Mo (3d5/2) peak was 233 eV as indicated in Fig. 4c. Only one Mo chemical species was detected, e.g. (MoO4)2− and attributed to Mo6+ . The O (1s) data for Li2Co2(MoO4)3 showed a single lattice site, with the main binding energy peak at 531 eV (Fig. 4d). Recently, we have reported the XPS results for the isostructural counterpart Li2Ni2(MoO4)3 and the present observations are in good agreement with our previous report [19].
The experimental atomic ratio of 1.9/2.03/3/12.01 corresponding to Li/Co/Mo/O was obtained for the framework-type polyanion material as deduced from inductively coupled plasma (ICP) analysis. Accordingly, the experimental (real) chemical formula that may be written based on the above atomic composition as Li1.9Co2.03Mo3O12.01 which is somewhat different from the nominal (ideal) composition of Li2Co2(MoO4)3. The amount of oxygen was deduced by subtraction of all the metal weights of cations from the sample weight. However, the slight compositional deviation was attributed to the experimental error (within 3%).
The particle size distribution, shape and morphology characteristics were analyzed using SEM analysis and the obtained micrograph is shown in Fig. 5. The formation of loosely agglomerated particles (5–10 ␮m) with rather columnar shape (ﬁber-like shape) are evident. But, the diameter of the ﬁber-like particles is within submicrometer range.
Although a deﬁnite cause for this columnar shape is not known, we presume that it may be due to soft-combustion of glycine upon spontaneous ignition, in turn induces the progressive phase formation reaction leading to the ﬁnal product formation. When compared to similar compositions made using the other low-temperature solution methods, glycine-nitrate soft-combustion produced powders had a greater compositional uniformity, lower residual carbon levels and smaller particles. It indeed shows the uniqueness of this synthesis process.
The electrochemical behavior of Li2Co2(MoO4)3 was examined as positive-electrode material employing both galvanostatic and potentiostatic conditions. The material annealed at 600 C for 4 h was taken for the present investigation due to obvious reasons. The as-prepared test cells were allowed to equilibrate inside the glove box before the stable open circuit voltage was obtained.
Fig. 8 presents multiple charge/discharge curves of Li2Co2(MoO4)3//Li cell cycled between 4.9 and 1.5 V. The amount of lithium extracted/inserted remained same as ≈1 Li + per formula unit for the rest of the cycles studied yielding the same charge and discharge capacities (≈45 mAh g −1). It is interesting to note that there was no discernible change in the shape of the charge and discharge proﬁles upon repeated cycling. This is a good indication of the structural integrity of the electrode material being retained during extended cycling. The quantitative amount + of Li extraction/insertion is considerably lower in the case of Li2Co2(MoO4)3 when compared to its analogous compound, Li2Ni2(MoO4)3 [18,19]. It is revealed from these observations that the nickel containing polyanion compound is found to be superior in terms of capacity than its cobalt counterpart despite their similar structural environment.
Further work is in progress to investigate the extended cycling characteristics and to improve the electrochemical behavior of the new material and the results will be reported elsewhere.
A new NASICON-type framework structure compound, Li2Co2(MoO4)3, was described in this work, for the ﬁrst time. The above NASICON compound is orthorhombic (space group Pnma) at room temperature. XPS analysis conﬁrmed the electronic valence states of the elements present in the stoichiometric formula unit as Li2 O4)3. The chemical stoichiometry of the material was estimated as Li1.9Co2.03Mo3O12.01. The redox behavior of the transition elements (Co2+ and Mo6+ ) present in the new material was demonstrated by slow-scan cyclic voltammograms + in relation to the Li extraction/insertion behavior of the new polyanion compound studied in the present work. It is suggested that it may be of interest to further explore this material as a positive-electrode material for lithium batteries. Although it offers a limited discharge capacity of ≈55 mAh g −1 (4.9–1.5 V potential window), it may be of interest to further explore this material as a positive-electrode material for lithium batteries.