The existing solid electrolytes for lithium ion batteries suffer from low total ionic conductivity, which restricts its usefulness for the lithium-ion battery technology. Among them, the NASICON-based mate-rials, such as Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) exhibit low total ionic conductivity due to highly resistant grain boundary phase. One of the possible approaches to efﬁciently enhance their total ionic conductivity is the formation of a composite material. Herein, the Li2.9B0.9S0.1O3.1 glass, called LBSO hereafter, was chosen as an additive material to improve the ionic properties of the ceramic Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 base material. The properties of this Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3exLi2.9B0.9S0.1O3.1 (0 􀀁 x 􀀁 0.3) system have been studied by means of high temperature X-ray diffractometry (HTXRD), 7Li, 11B, 27Al and 31P magic angle spinning nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MAS NMR), thermogravimetry (TG), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), impedance spectroscopy (IS) and density methods. We show here that the introduction of the foreign LBSO phase enhances their electric properties. This study reveals several interesting correlations between the apparent density, the microstructure, the composition, the sintering temperature and the ionic conductivity. Moreover, the electrical properties of the composites will be discussed in the terms of the brick-layer model (BLM). The highest value of stot ¼ 1.5 􀀂 10􀀃4 Scm􀀃1 has been obtained for LATP e0.1LBSO material sintered at 800 C.
The application of solid lithium ion electrolytes in the Li-ion battery (LIB) technology could offer many improvements related to safety, lifetime, speciﬁc power and energy. It is believed that all-solid-state Li-ion batteries (ASSLIB) may beneﬁt from improved mechanical and thermal properties. Another advantage for the usage of solid electrolytes is their wider electrochemical window. It enables enhancing the power density of the batteries via applica-tion of new high-voltage (>5 V) cathode materials [1e4]. The main criterion so that a material can be used as a solid electrolyte in the LIB technology is a high value of lithium ion conductivity exceeding 10􀀃4 S∙cm􀀃1 [1e5]. Unfortunately, most of the materials which fulﬁll this condition suffer from poor chemical stability against moisture. Among them, we can distinguish the glasses based on i2S[1e4]. On the other hand, the second group of materials, formed from the metal oxides exhibit high chemical stability, but their total ionic conductivity is relatively low . Therefore, a major research direction is to ﬁnd materials which are stable against moisture, while satisfying the conductivity criterion.
Within the oxide-based group of materials, one of the promising candidate is lithium titanium phosphate (LTP) with a chemical formula e LiTi2(PO4)3 [6e13]. It crystallizes in NASICON-type structure with rhombohedral symmetry and belongs to R-3c space group. A number of its favorable properties, i.e. good thermal, electrochemical and mechanical stability as well as non-ﬂammability, are of high interest for the ASSLIB technology. The bulk region of the LTP exhibits high lithium ion conductivity in the range of  at room temperature, depending on a processing method [6e13]. However, for the use of this material as solid electrolyte, not only the bulk conductivity but the total ionic conductivity should be taken into account. It has been already re-ported that the total ionic conductivity for polycrystalline or ceramic LTP is relatively low, ca.  at room temperature, due to a highly resistant grain boundary phase [6e13]. For this purpose, many efforts were made to improve the electric properties of the lithium titanium phosphate. One of the most efﬁcient and commonly used strategy for enhancing the total conductivity of the LiTi2(PO4)3 material consists in substituting a fraction of Ti4þ ions by Al3þ ones. The composition , where x = 0.3, called LATP hereafter, received much attention as it exhibits the best ionic properties among the NASICON-based family. Nevertheless, a discrepancy between the bulk and total conductivities has been observed and the total ionic conductivity notably depends on the preparation protocol. Apart from the conventional solid state reaction followed by sintering, LATP may be obtained via melt-quenching and sol-gel methods yielding the total conductivity as high as 10􀀃3 S∙cm􀀃1 at room temperature . Even though both methods are efﬁcient and reliable, they present certain disadvantages. First one requires high temperatures for melting the substrates, which exceed 1300 􀀄C, while the latter one focuses on synthesis based on highly expensive reagents, which prevents its industrial use.
On the other hand, as concerns the preparation of the ceramic material using conventional solid-state reaction method, the total ionic conductivity is signiﬁcantly lower and ranges from  to  at room temperature. Therefore, to obtain highly conductive material, another approach has been proposed. It is based on the addition of some foreign phase into the base matrix in order to lower the grain boundary resistance.
The essential role of the foreign phase to enhance the total ionic conductivity of the parent base matrix has been studied for many different materials. Usually, the solid electrolyte materials are formed as ceramics, which require heat treatment at high tem-peratures. Hence, one of the best additive materials is supposed to be a glass with relatively low melting point. During sintering, glass should transform into a liquid phase, which can efﬁciently both cover the grains and ﬁll the pores. The glass might also facilitate sintering process, and as a result, leads to lower processing tem-perature for the ceramic composite. One of the most popular glass used as an additive material seems to be Li3BO3, denoted later as LBO, due to its low glass transition and melting temperatures. N. C. Rosero-Navarro et al. [31,32] studied the composites based on garnet-type material and formed in the system Li7La3ZrxM1-xO12 -Li3BO3. They reported that the value of ionic con-ductivity of ceramic Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO) sintered at 900 ℃ is relatively low, ca.. On the other hand, when that material is sintered at 1200 C, it exhibits a signiﬁcantly higher conductivity . It has been found that LBO glass could play an essential role in lowering the sintering temperature (to 900 􀀄C), while maintaining good ionic properties. They explained that such good values of total ionic conductivity could be ascribed to the densiﬁcation process, which takes place during the sintering of composite.
In our previous works, we investigated the impact of glassy Li3BO3 or Li2.9B0.9S0.1O3.1 (LBSO) additives into the LTP base matrix and we reported a signiﬁcant improvement of the total ionic conductivity (by at least three orders of magnitude). Furthermore, N. Sharma et al. [30] also reported that LTP-based composite, to which 60Li2SO4e40LiPO3 glass is added, exhibits an increase in the total ionic conductivity by more than one order of magnitude in comparison to ceramic LTP. Authors propose that lithium ions present in the glassy phase may play an important role in the enhancement of grain boundary conductivity. In Ref. [25], T. Hupfer presented the results of the composite formed in the system of LATPeLiTiOPO4. They also reported that the introduction of foreign phase into the LATP base matrix might be an efﬁcient way to lower the sintering temperature and to increase the density of the ma-terial, yielding improved electric properties of the material.
The polycrystalline Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 was obtained by means of solid-state reaction method. Reagentegrade chemicals, Li2CO3 (Sigma Aldrich), NH4H2PO4 (POCh), anatase TiO2 (Sigma Aldrich) and Al2O3 (Sigma Aldrich), were weighted in stoichiometric amounts, ground with a mortar and pestle and synthesized in an alumina crucible at 900 􀀄C for 10 h to yield the ﬁnal LATP com-pound. Li2.9B0.9S0.1O3.1 glass was obtained via the standard meltequenching method. Stoichiometric amounts of reagents: Li2CO3 (Sigma Aldrich), H3BO3 (POCh) and Li2SO4 (Sigma Aldrich) were weighted, ground with a mortar and pestle, placed in an alumina crucible and annealed at 1100 􀀄C for 15 min. The molten mixture of reagents was then quenched between two stainless steel plates. Next, the obtained glassy plates were ball-milled with rotation speed of 400 rpm for 1 h in a planetary mill Fritsch Pul-verisette 7. Subsequently, the obtained LBSO powder was added in stoichiometric amounts to as-prepared LATP material in molar ratio varying from 10 to 30%. Both powders were ballemilled in ethanol at 400 rpm for 1 h, dried and pelletized under uniaxial 10 MPa pressure. Finally, pellets of 6 mm in diameter and ca. 2 mm thick, were then formed and sintered at 700, 800 or 900 C for 2 h.
The phase composition of the as-synthesized materials and composite powders were examined by means of X-ray diffraction method. Data were collected in the 2q range of 10􀀄e90 with 0.05 step and a count rate of 0.5 s at each step with CuKa line by means of Philips X’Pert Pro diffractometer. Additionally, temperature dependent XRD (HTXRD) was performed using Anton Paar HTK1200 oven in the temperature 30-900 range.
The thermal stability of the composites was determined by thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) using TA Instruments Q600 calorimeter to register the mass loss and the temperature differ-ence (with respect to the refence alumina crucible) during heating at the constant rate of  under air ﬂow in the temper-ature range from 50 to 900 􀀄C. The measurements were performed at a heating rate of  on powdered samples of  mg each.
The apparent density of the composites was determined using Archimedes method with isobutanol as an immersion liquid. The accuracy of this method was estimated as ca. 1%. The microstruc-ture of freshly fractured pellets was investigated by means of scanning electron microscopy (SEM) employing Raith eLINE plus.
For impedance spectroscopy measurements, both bases of the as-formed pellets were polished and covered with graphite as electrodes. Impedance investigations were carried out employing Solatron 1260 frequency analyzer in a frequency range from  Hz in the temperature range from 30 to 100 C, both during heating and cooling runs.
MAS NMR spectra were acquired on a 400 MHz Bruker Avance II NMR spectrometer equipped with a 4 mm HXY probe used in double resonance mode. The 7Li, 27Al and 31P NMR spectra were acquired at room temperature (RT) and a MAS frequency of 10 kHz using single-pulse experiments with pulse lengths of 1.0, 1.0 and 2.5 ms, radiofrequency (rf) nutation frequencies of 115, 60 and 50 kHz, respectively. The 7Li, 27Al and 31P NMR spectra result from the averaging of 512, 128, 8 transients using relaxation delays of 0.3, 1 or 20 s. The 11B NMR spectra were acquired on a 800 MHz Bruker Avance NEO NMR spectrometer equipped with a 3.2 mm XY probe free of boron background. The 11B NMR spectra were collected at room temperature and a MAS frequency of 20 kHz using single-pulse experiments with a pulse length of 1.55 ms and an rf nuta-tion frequency of 40 kHz. The 11B NMR spectra resulted from averaging 1024 transients with a relaxation delay of 0.2 s. The 7Li, 27Al, 31P and 11B isotropic chemical shifts were referenced to 1 mol L LiCl, 1 mol  AlCl3, 85 wt% H3PO4 aqueous solutions and neat (C2H5)2O,BF3 employing NaBH4 solid () as a secondary reference. The NMR spectra were simulated using dmﬁt software [34]. The 31P and 27Al NMR spectra were simulated assuming Gaussian lineshapes and considering only the isotropic shifts, whereas the 7Li NMR spectra were simulated assuming Lorentzian lineshapes for all bands and considering isotropic chemical shift and quadrupolar interaction. The 11B NMR signals of BO3 and BO4 sites were simulated as the sum of Gaussian and Lorentzian lineshapes.
The X-ray diffraction patterns of the as-prepared polycrystalline LATP and a composite containing 0.2 mol of Li2.9B0.9S0.1O3.1 glass (before and after sintering at 900 C for 2 h) are shown in Fig. 1. For LATP powder, the position and relative intensities of the main re-ﬂections agree well with the NASICON-like compounds with R-3c symmetry group (ICDD 00-035-0754). We observe some additional weak reﬂections at 2q angles equal to 20.6 and 26.3, which are ascribed to TiO2 anatase and AlPO4 berlinite phases. The non-sintered composite shows the same pattern proﬁle as LATP. The XRD pattern for LATPe0.2LBSO composite sintered at 900 C consists mainly of the lines attributed to LATP. However after sintering of composite, additional re-ﬂections appeared at  and . They were identiﬁed as LiTiPO5 and Li4P2O7 phases. As evidenced by HTXRD studies, the most pro-nounced changes in phase composition could be observed above 700 􀀄C. At that temperature, peaks related to TiO2 and AlPO4 phases start to fade out while those attributed to the LiTiPO5 and Li4P2O7 appear. HTXRD results might suggest that at high temperatures the secondary phases TiO2 and AlPO4 phases are prone to react with either LATP or glass component, yielding the formation of new compounds LiTiPO5 and Li4P2O7. 
Thermogravimetry investigations of the non-sintered compos-ites, depicted in Fig. 2, reveal the loss of mass of ca. 3 wt% for all LATPeLBSO compositions under study. Such a loss proceeds up to 350 C. Most probably, it is the result of the evaporation of moisture and residual ethanol adsorbed on grain boundaries. Above 350 C practically no further loss in mass is detected.
No thermal events are discernible on DTA thermograms as the LATP-LBSO composites are heated up to 900 􀀄C. It seems to be the consequence of the low glass content which is below the calorim-eter’s sensitivity threshold. As for the LBSO glass, it exhibits the glass transition at Tg , two crystallization peaks at  and at  and the melting point at . More detailed discussion on the LBSO thermal prop-erties can be found in Ref. [27]. It is worth mentioning that the estimation of the melting point is crucial for this study, because it deﬁnes the lowest possible temperature at which the LATP-LBSO composites may be sintered. It is assumed that above that tem-perature, as the glass melts, the liquid phase efﬁciently ﬁlls in the pores of the LATP ceramics and facilitates its grain growth.
The SEM images of freshly fractured pellets for LATP sintered at 900 C(Fig. 3A) and composites with 0.1 mol of LBSO heat-treated at 700 C(Figs. 3B), 800 C(Figs. 3C) and 900 C(Fig. 3D) were analyzed in order to investigate the impact of LBSO additive on their microstructure. For sintered LATP, two grain fractions can be easily discerned, one of typical grain sizes of  and other ones with a few micrometers in size. Some voids, microcracks and grain boundaries are also visible (Fig. 3A). LATPe0.1LBSO composite sintered at 700 C(Fig. 3B) exhibits similar grain size distribution but a higher porosity than LATP ceramic. As for a composite sin-tered at 800 C(Fig. 3C), the microstructure is more compact with slightly bigger grains. They are more densely packed and exhibit a lower concentration of pores. The sintering at 900C(Fig. 3D) re-sults in large LATP grains of ca. 4 mm in size. Moreover, in this case the ceramics’ porosity is also considerably reduced.
Apparent density values (Table 1) determined by Archimedes method for LATP and LATPeLBSO vary in the narrow range of 2.66e2.77 g∙cm1. The collected data suggests that the sintering of the LATP in the presence of LBSO densiﬁes the material but the LBSO content in the composite has only marginal inﬂuence on the apparent density values. The most compact samples were obtained when heat-treated at 800 C and 900 C which is consistent with the reduced porosity observed in SEM images.
MAS NMR studies were carried out on the LATP base material (non-sintered and sintered at 900 C) and LATPe0.3LBSO com-posite (non-sintered and sintered at 900 C).
Al MAS NMR spectrum (Fig. 4) for the non-sintered LATP material consist of the three main peaks located at 15, 13 and 40 ppm. They were attributed to the hexa- (AlO6), penta- (AlO5) and tetra-coordinated (AlO4) aluminum sites, respectively . As AlO6 sites are characteristic for aluminum coor-dination in the NASICON structure, then it is concluded that 15 ppm line could be associated with the LATP phase. AlO4 signals are assigned to AlPO4 material, which is also observed by XRD . The AlO5 resonance is produced by a glassy phase containing Al3þ ions. After sintering at 900 C, the intensity of the AlO6 resonance increased, while that of AlO5 resonance is strongly reduced. The intensity of the peak at 40 ppm ascribed to AlO4 sites in AlPO4 remains the same. The deconvolution of the 27Al spectrum shows the presence of an additional AlO4 peak at 31 ppm, which can be associated with some glassy phase containing aluminum ions. The integrated intensity of this peak is lower than that of AlO5 signal in non-sintered LATP. That observation may indicate that during sintering of LATP, ions migrate from the glassy or disordered phases containing AlO5 sites to the LATP structure and occupy their hexa-coordinated sites.
For the non-sintered LATP-LBSO composite, the relative inte-grated intensities of the lines at 15, 13 and 40 ppm do not signiﬁcantly change when compared to the non-sintered LATP material.  However, we observe an additional peak located at 57 ppm. It seems likely that this resonance is due to the 27Al nuclei in LBSO that migrated from an alumina crucible during the melting step of the glass preparation process.. Conversely the sintering of composite at 900 􀀄C drastically modiﬁes the 27Al spectrum. The lines ascribed to AlO4 and AlO5 disappear and only the AlO6 signal of LATP remains. Hence, it may be concluded that during the sin-tering of LATPeLBSO composites, aluminum ions are transferred from AlPO4, glassy phase containing Al3+ ions and LBSO glass to the LATP. We assume that during this transformation, Al3+ ions sub-stitute Ti4+ ions in the LATP structure. At the same time, Li+ ions must also diffuse into LATP and occupy its cation vacancies so that the material remains electrically neutral. Furthermore, the pre-sented MAS NMR data show that during heat-treatment of LATPeLBSO systems, no foreign (amorphous as well as crystalline) phases containing Al3+ ions are formed.
Fig. 5 presents the P MAS NMR spectrum of LATP, which is dominated by an asymmetrically broadened signal with a maximum at . This signal can be simulated as the sum of three Gaussian lines with isotropic chemical shifts of 27.7,27.0 and 26.3 ppm, which according to the literature, may correspond to different structural units of LATP phase: P(OTi)4, P(OTi)3(OAl)1 and P(OTi)2(OAl)2, respectively [6,8,13]. Moreover, two weak lines at  and  are observed. The ﬁrst one was assigned to 31P nuclei in berlinite. The resonance at 18.8 ppm can be
assigned to Q03 sites [P(OAl)3O] present in the glassy phase con-taining AlO5 sites.
After sintering, the integrated intensity of P(OTi)4 decreases, whereas those of P(OTi)3(OAl)1 and P(OTi)2(OAl)2 remain the same and the signal of P(OTi)1(OAl)3 sites appears at . The intensity of the 31P berlinite signal also slightly increases. Furthermore, the resonance of Q03 sites disappears, while we observe a new peak at . As this shift corresponds to [P(OTi)3O] envi-ronment and this phase is not detected by XRD, it may be produced by a glassy titanophosphate phase [38]. These results are consistent with the 27Al data. During sintering, the glassy phase containing AlO5 sites decomposes and the Al3þ ions replace some of the Ti4þ ions in LATP. The released Ti4þ ions diffuse outside of LATP particles, where they form glassy titanophosphate phase with phosphate ions.
Fig. 5 also presents the deconvoluted spectra for the composite before and after sintering at 900 C. No signiﬁcant difference between the spectra of non-sintered LATP and composite is observed. However, the 31P spectrum of sintered LATPeLBSO signiﬁcantly differs from that of sintered LATP. First of all, three additional lines are observed at 9.8,5.8 and 9.8 ppm and are ascribed to 31P nuclei in some crystalline phosphates, including LiTiPO5,Li4P2O7 (also observed by XRD) or/and Li3PO4 phases [39]. Secondly, as already noticed for sintered LATP, the integrated in-tensity of P(OTi)4 signal decreases and the signal of P(OTi)1(OAl)3 sites appears. An additional peak at assigned to P(OAl)4 is also detected. The presence of this peak and the larger relative integrated intensity of P(OTi)1(OAl)3 sites for sintered composite than for sintered LATP indicate a larger substitution of Ti4+ ions by Al3+ ones in the case of the sintered composite. This higher amount of defects in LATP explains the broadening of the P(OTi)4(OAl) resonances with  in the sintered composite. Lastly, the peak at  ppm assigned to glassy titanophosphate phase is more intense for the sintered composite than the sintered LATP. These results are consistent with the 27Al NMR data, which indi-cated the decomposition of the berlinite during the sintering of the composite. This decomposition results in the release of a larger amount of Al3þ ions, a larger substitution of Ti4+ ions by Al3+ ones and the diffusion outside of LATP particles of a larger amount of Ti4þ ions, which reacts at the grain surface with PO34 ions to form LiTiPO5, Li4P2O7 and Li3PO4 phases as well as amorphous titano-phosphate phase.
The deconvoluted 7Li MAS NMR spectra for the as-prepared and sintered neat LATP is presented on Fig. 6. The former exhibits two overlapping lines at 1 and 0.8 ppm, with quadrupolar coupling constant (CQ) equal to 38 and 71 kHz. They could be assigned to the Li1 and Li3 sites in NASICON crystal structure, respectively. The relative integrated intensities of the lines indicates that the occupancies of Li1 and Li3 sites by Li atoms are approximately equal. After sintering, the CQ value of both 7Li sites decreases to 27 and 54 kHz for Li1 and Li3, respectively. The observed decrease may be related to the partial substitution of Ti4+ ions by Al3+ ions. The sintering also produces a broadening of the 7Li NMR signal, which results from the distribution of local environments produced by the substitution. In addition, the relative integrated intensity of Li3 site increases, which indicates that this site becomes the preferred one for Liþ ions. For the composite, an additional peak at 1.8 ppm was observed and assigned to LBSO. Apart from that peak, the 7Li NMR spectra of LATP and composite are similar.
Fig. 7 presents the 11B MAS NMR spectra for the composites before and after sintering. The spectrum for non-sintered com-posite consist of two Gaussian lines located at 16.1 and 0.8 ppm, which are ascribed to BO3 and BO4 sites, respectively. For the non-sintered material, the integrated intensity of the BO3 site is larger than that of BO4. Hence, the BO3 units are more abundant than the BO4 ones. From the composition of the LBSO glass and the molar fractions of BO3 and BO4 sites, we can determine by imposing the condition of charge neutrality that the BO3 and BO4 sites consist of [BO3]3 and [B(OB)2O2]3 environments respectively. BO3 and BO4 sites bonded to S atoms are not observed in the LBSO glass before sintering. After sintering, the integrated intensity of BO4 signal become larger than that of BO3. Hence, the BO4 units become more abundant than the BO3 ones. For LBSO glass, it has been shown that the amount of BO4 units increases for increasing x(S) and decreasing ratio between the mole fractions of Li and B atoms, x(Li)/x(B), provided x(Li)/x(B) remains greater than 0.5. 
he electric properties of the materials under study were determined by means of impedance spectroscopy method and their results are presented in Figs. 8 and 9. The obtained impedance data collected at 30 C are shown on Nyquist plots (Fig. 8) for two typical exemplary cases: LATP sintered at 900 C(Fig. 8A) and LATPe0.1LBSO annealed at 700 C(Fig. 8B). The Nyquist plot for LATP base material consists of almost regular semicircle followed by a spur at lower frequencies. A more accurate analysis allows discerning another small semicircle at higher frequencies. There-fore, it may be concluded that the electrical properties of LATP could be modelled by an electrical circuit composed of two loops connected in series, each containing a resistor R shunted by a constant phase element CPE. This type of equivalent circuit is typical for materials, in which ionic transport takes place through two different phases: grain interior (at higher frequencies) and grain boundaries (at lower frequencies).
The apparent conductivity of each component could be derived using the formula s  L/(R·A), where L and A stand for sample thickness and electrode area, respectively. The resistance R is given by the intersection point of the arc with Re Z axis. From the spectra, it is clearly visible that the resistance of the grain boundary region is much higher than that for the bulk. As a consequence its impact on the overall electrical properties of the material is predominant. Given the total resistance Rtot  Rgr þ Rgb and geometrical factor L/A, the total conductivity stot for ceramic LATP can be determined as.
The addition of LBSO glass into the LATP base matrix with subsequent sintering deﬁnitely enhanced its total ionic conduc-tivity (Fig. 8B). The Nyquist plots for the sintered LATPeLBSO composites exhibit two semicircles followed by a spur. The values of the estimated apparent conductivity (stot) are listed in Table 2. More detailed analysis of these results reveals some interesting correlations: (i) for the composites, stot slightly decreases with higher LBSO content, regardless of sintering temperature, (ii) sin-tering at 800 C yields composites with the highest grain as well as total conductivity values for each composition.
The temperature dependent impedance spectroscopy results show for all composites, the total ionic conductivity fulﬁlls Arrhe-nius dependence, regardless sintering temperature and composi-tion (Fig. 9). Table 2 lists the values of bulk Egr and total Etot activation energy. It was noticed that for the LATPeLBSO compos-ites, Etot and Egr vary in the narrow range from 0.38 to 0.41 eV and 0.29e0.31 eV, respectively. The lowest value of Etot was obtained for materials sintered at least at 800 C. It is worth mentioning that these results are consistent with the values reported in the litera-ture, which vary in a comparable range for both Egr (0.29 [9], 0.28[8], 0.22 eV [12]) and Etot (0.38 [9], 0.36 [8] and 0.3 eV [12]).
The ionic properties of LATPeLBSO composites may be analyzed in terms of the brick layer model (BLM) , where the ceramic material is represented as a system of adjacent cubes of size D, each coated with a thin layer of thickness d. Assuming that cubes correspond to LATP grains and the thin layer between them to the grain boundary region, the total conductivity, stot could be expressed as follows where, a  d/D and, sgr and sgb denote the true grain and grain boundary conductivity values but not the apparent ones, deter-mined by means of impedance spectroscopy. If the resistivity of the grain boundary region is much higher than the resistivity of the bulk, i.e. , then the formula can be simpliﬁed into:
In that case, stot z sgb and the grain boundary conductivity becomes the limiting factor for the overall electric properties. Ceramic LATP as well as nonesintered composite meet that crite-rion, with . Thus, the presence of some poorly conducting phases, such as berlinite and some glassy aluminophosphate phase, located between LATP grain reduces the conductivity of non-sintered LATP. As for sintered LATP, it exhibits better electrical properties, probably due to decomposition of disordered phase, while berlinite is still present. Finally, the addition of LBSO followed by sintering results in the decomposition of all highly resistant phases at grain boundaries, including both AlPO4 and glassy alu-minophosphate phase. These phases are replaced by lithium ion conducting phases, such as LiTiPO5,Li4P2O7 and Li3PO4. For that reason, the grain boundary conductivity signiﬁcantly increases.
On the basis of the BLM and Eqs. (1)e(3), we suggest that at least two factors can provoke the enhancement of total ionic conduc-tivity in LATPeLBSO composites. The ﬁrst factor is related to the microstructure of the material, i.e. the size of the grains and the thickness of grain boundary layer. The second factor is the con-ductivity of the grain boundary phases. Both factors can affect the total conductivity simultaneously as the sintering process not only promotes the grain growth but also triggers changes in phase composition of grains and grain boundary region. Particularly, NMR studies show that the as-prepared LATP contains not only the NASICON-like phase, but also some amounts of by-products. Hence, the concentration of Al3þ ions in NASICON phase should be lower than expected. The sintering of the as-prepared LATP allows the synthesis process to continue, yielding grains with the chemical formula closer to the assumed one. During sintering, many simul-taneous processes also occur, including the decomposition of inter-grain phases with subsequent release of aluminium ions, the sub-stitution of Ti4þ by Al3þ ions in the NASICON crystal lattice and the reaction of the released Ti4þ atoms with the decomposition by-products resulting in formation of new phases at grain boundaries.
The impact of other phases on total ionic conductivity could be clearly visible considering different sintering temperatures and compositions. It is worth reminding that composites under study exhibit nearly the same values of grain and total activation energy. The values of total ionic conductivity for a given composition is the lowest at 700 C and decreases with increasing LBSO content, whereas for a given composition, the changes in total ionic conductivity are barely noticeable after sintering at 800 or 900 C. Considering these results in terms of BLM model and SEM in-vestigations, it may be concluded that the value of total ionic conductivity (for a given composition) increases most probably due to the grain growth, indicating that a(800 or 900 C) < a(700C), but the variation of conductivity with LBSO content strongly sug-gests that limiting the amount of foreign phases in the composite is essential to obtain a good ceramic lithium ion conductor.
The study on the impact of glassy additive on the structural and electrical properties of the Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3exLi2.9B0.9S0.1O3.1  system, clearly shows that the formation of composite followed by the appropriate heat treatment is an efﬁcient way to obtain a highly conducting solid electrolyte for lithium ion batteries. For the system under study, three processes are identiﬁed as probably responsible for the enhancement of total ionic conduc-tivity: (i) the growth of grains, (ii) the decomposition of berlinite and amorphous aluminophosphate phases at the grain boundaries and (iii) the formation of some lithium conducting phosphates in the presence of Li2.9B0.9S0.1O3.1 glass. Among composites under study, the best conducting one, LATPe0.1LBSO sintered at 800 C, exhibits stot  at room temperature, almost one order of magnitude higher than ceramic LATP. The ease of preparation as well as good electrical properties of LATP-LBSO compos-ites are the main factors advocating for their application as solid electrolytes in the all solid lithium ion battery technology. Their performance in prototype electrochemical cells will be the subject of our further study.