In this paper, YSZ-based mixed potential SO2 sensor with ZnGa2O4 and Pt electrodes was developed and the effect of the continuous testing and aging process on the sensing characteristics was discussed. The results showed that with this process the response of the sensor to SO2 performed an opposite direction to that in the sensor’s initial state. The reason might be that the PtS produced at the Pt electrode increased the electrochemical catalytic activity of the Pt electrode, leading to the mixed potential of the Pt electrode higher than that of the ZnGa2O4 electrode. XPS and EDS results proved that a lot of Pt2+ and S2− were produced at Pt electrode after this process. Moreover, vulcanized sensor also performed similar sensing properties to the above aging sensor, which indicated that the produced PtS should be the reason that the sensor performed reverse deflection on sensing properties. In addition, the sensor after sulfuration can detect 0.05−500 ppm SO2 with the sensitivity being 5 mV/decade to 0.05−1 ppm and 41 mV/decade to 1−500 ppm. The sensor also had a reliable stability during the continuous measurement.
Recently, with the acceleration of industrialization, sulfur dioxide (SO2) has performed an important role, being used in many products, such as pesticides, artificial fibers and dyes. However, SO2 is also a typical toxic gas, when exposed to 1–3 ppm SO2, most people feel unwell, and when the sulfur dioxide concentration is over 400 ppm (Kumara et al., 2017; Das et al., 2008a; Liang et al., 2008; Palimar et al., 2016; Min and Choi, 2003a; Wang and Kumar, 2003; Zhang et al., 2019a; Das et al., 2008b), people develop ulcer and pulmonary edema that can lead to suffocation or even death. Moreover, SO2 will make a synergistic effect with soot in the atmosphere. When the concentration of sulfur dioxide in the atmosphere is over 0.21 ppm and the concentration of soot is higher than 0.3 mg/L, the incidence of respiratory diseases will increase, and the condition of the patients with chronic diseases will rapidly deteriorate. SO2 is also regarded as a kind of cancerogens by WHO's international agency for research on cancer (Li et al., 2015; Yao et al., 2015). In addition, because fossil fuel like coal or oil usually contains sulfur element, a lot of SO2 is produced in the burning process. And SO2 can be oxidized to H2SO4 in the condition of O2 and water (2SO2 + O2 + 2H2O = 2H2SO4), which is one of the most important causes of acid rain (Min and Choi, 2003b; Das et al., 2008c; Worrell and Liu, 1984; Imanaka et al., 1987; Wang and Kumar, 2005; Suganuma et al., 1999). In this case, an effective method should be developed to estimate the SO2 percent conversion and monitor SO2 concentrations in the environment. Due to the harsh application environment (high temperature, high humidity and multiple gases coexist) and wide detection range required (the SO2 concentration is often over 100 ppm in industrial process and below 5 ppm in indoor concentration) (Zhang et al., 2019b; Tyagi et al., 2014; Tong et al., 2018), the detection method is required to have low and high enough detection limit, high humidity resistance and reliable stability
Sulfur dioxide concentration detection in harsh environment is still a challenge because the present technology is based on large-scale instrument such as gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy (GC/MS) and differential mobility spectroscopy (DMS), which is expensive and can’t monitor in real time. Over the past twenty years, gas sensor with low cost and the ability of in-situ measurement has been used to SO2 detection (Tyagi et al., 2014; Tong et al., 2018). Zhang et al. used titanium dioxide to developed a series of semiconductor-type SO2 sensors, which performed high sensing properties and wide detection range (Zhang et al., 2019c, d; Zhang et al., 2017, 2018; Zhang et al., 2019e). Besides, due to high sensing performance, reliable stability and acceptable humidity resistance, the mixed potential sensor based on solid state was expected to achieve the real-time detection in harsh environment (Izu et al., 2011; Guan et al., 2014a; Wang et al., 2016; Miura et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2018a; Liang et al., 2017; Fujio et al., 2012). This type sensor conformed to the mixed potential theory, which was discovered and established in the 1980s. It was found that when measured the sample gas excluding oxygen, the measured response was not in agreement with the estimated value using Nernst equation. In this case, researchers called it non-Nernst potential sensor or mixed potential sensor (Izu et al., 2011; Miura et al., 2014). In comparison with the semiconductor oxide gas sensor (SOS), this type sensor is more suitable for the sulfur dioxide detection (the environment for SO2 detection is often at high temperature of over 500 °C. However, the operating temperature of SOS is in the range of 20−300 °C). Hence, researchers have developed a series of solid states and sensing electrodes to fabricate SO2 gas sensor. For example, Y. shimizu (Souda and Shimizu, 2003) had used MS (MS: M = Ni, Cu, Zn, Cd, Pb) and Ag2S as sensing electrodes and Na5DySi4O12 (NaDyCON) as solid electrolyte to fabricate mixed potential SO2 gas sensors. The sensor based on CdS sensing electrode gave the highest response to 100 ppm SO2. Ma et al. used Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (Nasicon) as solid electrolyte and LaxSm1-xFeO3 as sensing electrode to fabricate sub-ppb SO2 gas sensor, which could even detect low level SO2 of 5 ppb-5 ppm. However, Nasicon can absorb water in air, hence the humidity had a considerable effect on the sensing properties (Ma et al., 2018). Recently, YSZ (yttria-stabilized zirconia)-based sensor with reliable stability and acceptable humidity resistance, was regarded as a better choice to fabricate SO2 gas sensor. Our group had used MnNb2O6 sensing electrode to develop YSZ-based SO2 gas sensor for detection to low-concentration SO2. However, this type sensor can only detect 0.05−5 ppm SO2. To relative high concentration, the response did not increase and even decreased. Besides, the stability of this sensor was still a problem. During the 15 days’ test, the response decreased approximately 30 % (Liu et al., 2017). Hence, it is necessary to develop wide-detection-range YSZ-based SO2 sensor and improve the stability of the sensor.
In this paper, YSZ-based mixed potential SO2 sensor with Pt and ZnGa2O4 electrode was fabricated. We indicated the effect of the continuous testing and aging process on the sensing performance. Specifically, we discussed the phenomenon that the sensor after this process performed reversed sensing performance to SO2 in comparison with that in sensor’s the initial state and put forward a reasonable explanation first.
We used a hydrothermal method to synthesize the ZnGa2O4 electrode materials. Zn(CH3COO)2 and GaCl3 were used to provide zinc source and gallium source, trisodium citrate was used as surface active agent and HNO3 used to control the pH of the solution. All of materials were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd and of analytic grade without further purification. Firstly, 0.25 mmol Zn (CH3COO)2·2H2O and 0.5 mmol GaCl3 was added into 40 mL deionized water and stirred for 30 min. to make them completely dissolved. Secondly, 1.5 mmol trisodium citrate was added into the solution (Ga3+ + Zn2+ : Cit3− = 1 : 2). And the HNO3 was added into the above solution until the pH of the solution reaching 4. Thirdly, the obtained solution was transferred to a 100 mL autoclave, sealed, and heated at 180 °C for 12 h, When the autoclave naturally cooled to the room temperature, the products were collected by centrifugation, and washed five times with ethanol and deionized water. Finally, the dried powder was annealed at 800 °C for 2 h to get the electrode material ZnGa2O4.
Crystal structures and phase composition of the powders were characterized by X-ray powder diffraction on a Rigaku wide-angle X-ray diffractometer (D/max rA, using Cu Kα radiation at wave length = 0.1541 nm) in the angular range of 2θ = 10-80°. The morphologies and micro-structures of the sintered electrodes were examined with Hitachi JSM-7500 F FEG-SEM operating at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV. The Thermo ESCALAB250 spectrometer equipped with an Al-K ray source was used to perform X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements.
The sensor was fabricated utilizing 8 mol% Y2O3-doped YSZ plate (2 mm × 2 mm square, 0.3 mm thick, provided by Anpeisheng Corp. China). The structure and photo of the sensor we fabricated were shown in Fig. 1. A Pt heater and a linear DC Power Supply (Gwinstek GPD3303S) were used to provide required heat to regulate the operating temperature of the sensor.
We used a static gas distribution method for the measurements of gas sensing characteristics. The Pt heater was used to maintain the operating temperature at 650 °C. The different concentrations of SO2 were prepared by diluting the feed gas (100 ppm and 1 % SO2 balanced by N2) with air. When measuring, the sensor was placed in a 1 L chamber with full of air. The voltage signal of the sensor in this environment was denoted as Vair. Next, a certain concentration of SO2 was injected into another 1 L chamber with air and during this process, we can get a certain concentration SO2 which we expect. After the voltage signal reaching a nearly steady value, the voltage signal of the sensor in this environment was denoted as VSO2. Finally, the sensor was transferred into the chamber with full of air and began to recover. The sensing performances of the device were investigated with a digital electrometer (Rigol Technologies, Inc, DM3054, China). The ZnGa2O4 electrode was connected to the instrument's positive electrode and the Pt electrode was connected to the instrument's negative electrode. When the sensor was exposed to air with the sample gas at a certain concentration, the electrometer had a series of voltage signals because of the difference of the electric potential between the ZnGa2O4 electrode (ZE) and the Pt electrode (PE). The sensitivity (ΔV) of the sensor at one electrode was given by ΔVxe=VSO2-Vair. In this case, the response of the sensor was given by ΔV=ΔVZE-ΔVPE (He et al., 2019; Hao et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2016, 2018b).
The compositions and crystalline phases of the synthetic material were investigated by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns. Fig. 2(a) shows the XRD patterns of the as-obtained electrode materials. Without sintering, the peaks of the material were unobvious. However, by sintering at 800 °C for 2 h, all of the locations and relative intensity of the diffraction peaks corresponded well to the literature result (JCPDS#78548), which indicated that the as-prepared electrode material ZnGa2O4 was a spinel-type structure with high purity and almost no phase of impurity. SEM image in Fig. 2(b) shows the micro-structure of the electrode material ZnGa2O4. Most of the as-obtained products performed a monodisperse nanosphere structure and the particle’s size was approximately 120 nm. The electrode material ZnGa2O4 was almost of no-aggregation although sintered at high temperature, which ensured the electrodes of different sensors had a consistent structure and benefited to improve the reproducibility of the sensor.
Fig. 3 shows the response and recovery transients of the sensor during continuous testing and aging process. From the Fig. 3, it was observed that when the sensor exposed to the relative high concentration SO2 with air, the response direction was opposite to that exposing to low concentration SO2 with air. In Fig. 3(a), on the 1th day, the direction of the response went down in the range of 0.05−2 ppm SO2. However, when exposing to 5 ppm SO2, the response of the sensor was decreased and the direction finally went up with the continuous increase of SO2 concentration as shown; On the 5th day the direction of the sensor’s responses were downwards in the range of 0.05−1 ppm SO2, while the response of the device to 2 ppm SO2 was below the response to 1 ppm SO2 and the direction of the sensor’s response was upward when exposing to over 2 ppm SO2 as shown in Fig. 3(b); On the 10th day, the sensor performed reversed sensing characteristics when the SO2 concentration increased over 1 ppm as canbe seen Fig. 3(c), which indicated that with the last of the aging time, the critical SO2 concentration in response to reverse deflection decreased continuously and at last, the responses of the sensor to all SO2 concentrations were opposite as shown in Fig. 3(d). According to our early work (Liu et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019), almost all of the YSZ-based SO2 sensor can not work in high SO2 concentration atmosphere. In general, we considered that when the concentration of SO2 exceeded a certain range, the number of active site at the three phase boundary (TPB) was not enough to make all of SO2 gas molecule participate in the electrochemical reaction, which caused the responses of the sensor could not change with the continuous increase of SO2 concentration (Wang et al., 2019; Hao et al., 2018). However, this reason can’t explain the opposite response direction in this work. Hence, in this work, we paid the most attention to finding an appropriate explanation for this phenomenon.
The sensor we fabricated conforms to the mixed potential mechanism, which can be regard as a electrochemical cell:
When the sensor exposed to the SO2 with air, the following three reactions would occur at both electrodes. The diffusion reaction occurred in the process that the SO2 gas went through the electrode layer. The degree of this reaction depended on the catalytic activity of the electrode materials to SO2. In this process, the SO2 concentration reaching TPB decreased. At TPB (three phase boundary), the cathodic and anodic electrochemical reaction occurred and when the rates of cathodic and anodic reactions achieved a dynamic balance at the interface of YSZ/ ZnGa2O4 and YSZ/Pt, a mixed potential would be established and the potential difference between the ZE and the PE was received and regarded as the sensing signal of the sensor (ΔV=ΔVZE ΔVPE). The degree of the electrochemical reactions depended on the electrochemical catalytic activity of the electrode materials to SO2 and determined the strength of electrochemical signal we received (Guan et al., 2014b; Breedon and Miura, 2013; Lu et al., 1997; Miura et al., 2004). The reactions were given as following:
In the light of the above reaction, SO2 performed a property of reducing gas. Therefore, if we assumed the VPE = 0 (means that almost no response at Pt-electrode), the direction of response should go down and the ΔV (ΔV=ΔVZE-ΔVPE) should be a negative value. However, in our work, when measuring relative high SO2 concentration, the ΔV were positive values. We speculated that the Pt electrode played a great role in this phenomenon. Maybe there were some interesting changes at Pt electrode during the continuous testing and aging process and made the response at Pt electrode increase. According to the literature (He et al., 2013), SO2 can be absorbed by Pt electrode and finally converted to PtS. He et al. used YSZ/Pt ceramic membrane to separate oxygen and sulphur dioxide at high temperature and demonstrated that the SO2 can be deposited to the Pt electrode and convert to PtS. Hence, we considered that PtS was produced during the test and deposited to the electrode surface. The EDS images of the ZnGa2O4 electrode after continuous testing and aging process were shown in Fig. 4, and the EDS images of Pt electrode before and after this process were shown in Fig. 5. It was obvious that after the test and aging process, the ZnGa2O4 electrode had no deposition of sulfur element as shown in Fig. 4. However in Fig. 5, it can be seen that a lot of sulfur element was deposited to the Pt electrode surface. The atomic ratio of Pt to S tested by EDS was 67:33 after testing and aging for 20 days as shown in Table. 1, which was much more than that on the initial day. Furthermore, Xray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used to identify the existence of S2−. The result of the Pt electrode after continuous testing and aging process was exhibited in Fig. 6. In this picture, the signals of Pt and S could be clearly observed. As the S spectrum illustrated in Fig. 6(b), the characteristic peak located at 162.79 eV was assigned to S2−, which indicated that S2− existed at the Pt electrode. The Pt spectrum was shown in Fig. 6(c). Two peaks were observed in this picture and the characteristic peaks located at 73.79 eV and 70.50 eV were assigned to Pt2+ and Pt respectively, which illustrated that there were a lot of Pt changed into PtS. As for Metal-mono sulfides (MS), Y. shimizu (Liang et al., 2017) had used them (MS: M = Ni, Cu, Zn, Cd, Pb) and Ag2S as sensing electrodes and Na5DySi4O12 (NaDyCON) as solid electrolyte to fabricate mixed potential SO2 gas sensors. The sensor based on CdS sensing electrode gave the highest response to 100 ppm SO2, which indicated that metal-sulfide was a good choice as sensing electrode to fabricate mixed potential SO2 gas sensor. Besides, as can be seen in Figs. S1 and S2 of the supporting information, the XPS and XRD of the ZnGa2O4 electrode before and after continuous testing and aging process also showed that there was almost no change at the ZnGa2O4 electrode after continuous testing and aging process. Hence, we considered that the PtS produced after the continuous testing and aging process might have a high electrochemical catalytic activity to SO2. Above all, the reason of the phenomenon shown in Fig. 3 could be explained as following:
In this part, we used a conceptual graphs to clearly exhibit the reason for the change of the sensing performance of the sensor during continuous testing and aging process as shown in Fig. 7. At beginning, Pt-electrode almost had no sulfur element, which corresponded to the left of Fig. 7. when measuring lower concentration SO2, the diffusion rate is a slow value. In this case, Due to the Pt’s high catalytic activity to SO2, almost all of SO2 react with Pt electrode and changed to PtS, which adhere to the Pt electrode surface. This process could be proven by the XPS and EDS test as shown in Figs. 5 and 6. This process sharply decreased the SO2 concentration reaching TPB of PE, and then caused the ΔVPE approaching 0. On the other hand, ZnGa2O4 electrode had a response to SO2 and according to the mixed potential mechanism, the ΔVZE should be a negative value (Souda and Shimizu, 2003; Ma et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2016). However when measuring higher SO2 concentration, a number of Pt has changed to PtS in the process of testing low concentration SO2 as shown in Fig. 7, which decreased the contact area of Pt electrode and SO2, and then decreased the catalytic activity to SO2. Besides, due to the relative high SO2 concentration, the diffusion rate increased and the consumption caused by reaction decreased further. In this case, more SO2 could reach TPB and participate in the electrochemical reaction. According to the Y. shimizu’s work (Souda and Shimizu, 2003), most of metal mono-sulfides performed a high electrochemical catalytic activity to SO2, hence, we speculated that the mono-sulfides PtS also has a high electrochemical catalytic activity to SO2. In this case, because of the much higher electrochemical catalytic activity of PtS at PE to SO2 than that of ZnGa2O4, the response at PE was much higher than that at ZE, and the PE was connected to the instrument's negative electrode. Hence, when continuously tested higher concentration SO2, the reversed response characteristics occurred and if we continuously increase SO2 concentration, the response of the sensor (ΔV) should be a positive value. With continuous testing and aging, more and more sulfur element was deposited to the Pt electrode and the critical concentration deceased, which corresponded to the middle of Fig. 7. Finally, all of the ΔV were changed to the positive values as shown in the right of Fig. 7. As can be seen in this figure, all of the response of the sensor in the range of 0.05−10 ppm SO2 were positive value in the 20th day as we expected. In order to identify this explanation, we made an extra new sensor based on the same Pt and ZnGa2O4 electrodes. We used 100 ppm SO2 to vulcanize the sensor for 24 h. We called this process as sulfuration. The response and recovery transients of the sensor to different SO2 concentrations in the initial state and after sulfuration were shown in Fig. 8. Without sulfuration, the sensor performed similar sensing characteristics to the result in the left of Fig. 7. However, after sulfuration for 24 hs, all of the ΔV were changed to positive values in the range of 0.2−10 ppm SO2, which corresponded to the right part of Fig. 7 and further identified that the produced PtS was a decisive reason for reversed response characteristics.
The response and recovery transients of the sensor to different SO2 concentrations was shown in Fig. 9(a). On the basis of this figure, the relationship between the logarithm of SO2 concentration and the response of the sensor with continuous aging and testing for 30 days was exhibited in Fig. 9(b), which indicated that the relationship between the ΔV and the logarithm of SO2 concentration was piecewise linear and the sensitivities to 0.05−1 ppm and 1−500 ppm SO2 were 5 mV/ decade and 41 mV/decade, respectively. Furthermore, the detection range of the present device was 50 ppb-500 ppm, which was almost the widest detection range in comparison that in the other works as shown in Table. 2 and met the majority of the measurement requirements. Fig. 9(c) shows the continuous response and recovery transient of the sensor after continuous testing and aging for 20 days. As shown in Fig. 9(c), during the six tests, the sensor performed similar response and recovery performances to whether 1 ppm SO2 or 10 ppm SO2, which indicated that the sensor we fabricated had a reliable stability to continuous measurement for both high SO2 concentration and low SO2 concentration. Fig. 10(a) shows the response and recovery transient of the sensor after continuous testing and aging process to 10 ppm SO2 at 20 %, 40 %, 60 %, 80 % and 98 % relative humidity (RH). The change amplitudes of the response for the sensor were about -6.7%–16.7% to 10 ppm SO2 as shown in Fig. 10(b). The sensor we fabricated can be applied in environments with low precision requirements. If the requirement of precision is very high, we can use a humidity compensation device to correct the humidity variation through negative feedback. We have also investigated the stability of the sensor after sulfidation process. Fig. 11 shows the long-term stability of the present device, and the volatility of the response (ΔVs) was given by the following formula:
 Where ΔVn and ΔV0 respectively were the response values of the sensor on the nth respectively. As exhibited in Fig.11, the response of the sensor to 10 ppm SO2 had decreased approximately 20 %. According to the tendency of response decay, we can speculate that the response will decrease over 40 % when continuously test for 30 day. This is when we need to replace a new device. However, due to the low cost of the sensor we fabricated. It is acceptable for the requirement of practical measurement to replace one device per month. We can use a compensation device to correct the response volatility caused by continuous measurement.
In conclusion, YSZ-based mixed potential sensor with ZnGa2O4 and Pt electrodes was developed for the SO2 detection. The effects of longterm aging and continuous test on various properties of the electrode materials had been investigated and characterized. Some interesting phenomenon were found that when the sensor exposed to the relative high concentration SO2 with air, the response direction was opposite to that exposing to low concentration SO2 with air. Moreover, with the last of the testing time, the responses of the sensor to all concentration SO2 were opposite to that in the original state. We considered that the PtS was produced during the testing and aging process, which effectively increased the degree of the electrochemical reaction occurred at TPB, and then increase the response at Pt electrode. The EDS and XPS also exhibited that a lot of Pt and S were produced at Pt electrode after continuous testing and aging process. Moreover, vulcanized sensor also performed similar sensing properties to the sensor with continuous testing and aging process, which indicated that the produced PtS should be the reason for that the sensor performed sensing performances in an opposite direction. In addition, the sensor had a wide detection range to SO2 of 0.05 ppm–500 ppm, the sensitivities of the sensor were 5 mV/decade to 0.05−1 ppm and 41 mV/decade to 1−500 ppm. The sensor we fabricated also had a good repeatability. However, with the continuous aging, the response had decreased approximately 20 % for 10 days. Therefore, Future investigation will be focused on heightening the stability of the sensor.
 