The present paper is devoted to the preparation of an ultraﬁltration ceramic membrane. Thin NASICON–ZnAl2O4-based layers have then been synthesized by slip-casting on an alumina macroporous support from Na3Zr2Si2PO12, i.e. NASICON (Na-Super Ionic CONductor) and ZnAl2O4 sols. The electrical properties of the active layers and of its precursors were carried out from the streaming potential measurements across the membrane during the ﬁltration process and from the determination of the electrophoretic mobilities of the powders precursors of the phases. The ﬁltration performances of the NASICON–ZnAl2O4-based material towards different electrolytes were determined by the measurement of the ionic rejection rate. It has then been proved that the ﬁltering properties of the membranes are governed by the electrostatic interactions at the solution–membrane interface. Salt rejection rates of 90% were measured against CaCl2 or NaSO4. 
A correlation was established between the streaming potential across the membrane and the ﬁltration properties.
The ﬁltration properties of nanoﬁltration and low-ultraﬁltration ceramic or polymer membranes depend mainly on the electric interactions between the ﬁltered species and the membrane surface [1–3].
NASICON-type materials are cationic conductor compounds of high charge density made up of a covalent anionic framework where sodium cations move from one conductive site to another, passing through bottlenecks [4]. It has recently been proved that such ceramic compounds, which present an isoelectric point around pH 2, could lead to high salt rejection rates in nanoand ultraﬁltration processes, especially for divalent anion salts and relatively concentrated solutions [5]. 
Presently, the preparation of pure NASICON-type layers, for example in view of their use in the ﬁeld of the ionic separation, is not resolved because of the difﬁculty to obtain ﬁlms without cracks [6–9]. To avoid the problem of this drawback, we have recently focused our attention on the preparation of a ceramic membrane based on the mixing of NASICON–SPINEL, i.e. Na3Zr2Si2PO12–ZnAl2O4, to correlate the rejection properties of the active material with its physicochemical characteristics.
In this work, we have prepared a membrane with a Na3Zr2Si2PO12/ZnAl2O4 initial molar ratio of 80/20. The determination of the electrophoretic mobility of the powder precursor of the membrane was carried out and the streaming potential variations across the membrane were determined during the ﬁltration process and correlated to the ﬁltration results.
To prepare NASICON–ZnAl2O4-based membrane, NASICON and ZnAl2O4 stable sols were used, prepared by the sol–gel route described by Mouazer et al. [10] and Shimizu et al. [11]. NASICON sols were obtained from aqueous solutions of Zr(NO3)2, NH4H2PO4, Na2SiO3·9H2O and citric acid as ligand for Zr(IV) complexation, in a ratio 2/1/2/6 −1 was ob[11]. A stable NASICON sol at 0.045 mol L tained. The ZnAl2O4 sol was prepared from a suspension of Al2O3·H2O powder (Condea Pural SB) that was peptized by a nitric acid solution (molar ratio [HNO3]/[Al2O3] = 4.8) and a Zn(NO3)2·6H2O solution. A stable ZnAl2O4 sol at −1 was then obtained. To determine the effect 0.0455 mol L of the NASICON sol on the physicochemical characterization of the ﬁnal powder, different mixed sols S50, S75 and S80 were synthesized by addition of the two former sols in the correct ratio (Table 1). 
A part of the S50, S75 and S80 sols, dried at 100 C to obtain powders named P50, P75 and P80, respectively, were used for the electrophoretic mobility determination.
The membrane named M80 using sol S80 was prepared after adding hexamethyl cellulose (HEC) solution at 2% in the mixed sol. After stirring, the sol is then deposited on the inner surface of a support in ␣-alumina (0.2 ␮m pore diameter) by slip-casting for 2 h. The membrane was obtained after drying at 180 C was then applied.
The powders P50, P75 and P80 were characterized by zetametry (Coulter Delsa 440) and nitrogen adsorption (BET method) (ASAP 2010, Micromeritics). X-ray diffractometry was carried out on a INEL-CPS-120. The membrane M80, obtained from the S80 sol was characterized by scanning microscopy (Hitachi S-4500) and mercury porosimetry (Autopore II, Micromeritics).
Filtration and streaming potential measurements were car−3 ried out on different electrolytes at concentrations from 10 −1, using pure analytical grade salts and highly to 10 puriﬁed water (resistivity: 18 M cm). The pH was ﬁxed by adding minute quantities of concentrated solutions prepared from NaOH or HCl (pure analytical grade).
Fig. 1 represents a schema of the ﬁltration plant equipped with a 15 cm length tubular membrane (ﬁltering area 26 cm2) indicated in the ﬁgure. The concentration of the ﬁltered solutions in the feed and in the permeate were determined by ionic chromatography (Dionex DX 100 and QIC). Streaming potential was measured using our laboratory prepared pilot plant, equipped with two Ag–AgCl electrodes. The potential difference was measured between the central electrode on the feed side and the external electrode on the permeate side.
The speciﬁc area measurements were determined by means of nitrogen adsorption–desorption experiments according to the BET method. For the pure NASICON powder, −1) a low speciﬁc area was observed (approximately 17 m2 g for temperatures lower than 500 C (Fig. 2). The speciﬁc area decreases quickly with the increase of the temperature ◦ to reach a very low value at 1000 C. In the case of the mixed powders, for temperatures lower than 700 C, it was noted that the speciﬁc area increases with the concentration of ZnAl2O4 powder in the mixture. The values determined for the P50, P75 and P80 powders, at 500 C, are 70, 60 −1, respectively, and a high decrease occurs and 50 m2 g for higher temperatures. In fact, as for the pure NASICON powder, the speciﬁc area decreases as the temperature increases and the sintering of the ceramic compounds is observed at temperatures above 1000 C. 
Therefore, to keep a sufﬁcient porosity for the NASICON-based membranes, it was necessary to ﬁre the material at a temperature lower than 700 C. Then, the pore size reported in Table 2 for the different powders ﬁred at 650 C are similar (from 3 to 4.5 nm) whatever the powder composition.
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) characterization of such powders and membranes have been presented previously by Mouzer et al. [9,10]. Nevertheless the XRD patterns of the P80 powder at 650 and 1000 C are given in Fig. 3. At 650 C, the material was not crystallized but was organized. C, the diffractogram showed a well crystallized At 1000 multiphases NASICON–ZrO2 structure. 
Moreover, for the preparation of ceramic ﬁltration membranes the choice of the thermal treatment is vital because of the dependence of the pore volume with the ﬁring temperature. This point is particularly true for NASICON materials which crystallize for temperatures higher than 1000 C and for which the speciﬁc area decreases strongly above 650 C. For membrane preparations, a ﬁring temperature of 650 C was chosen, at the beginning of crystallization to prevent the decrease of the speciﬁc area and the pore volume.
It was noted that the ZnAl2O4 phase is not identiﬁed on the patterns and that the ZrO2 phase is often present as a parasite phase on NASICON-based materials [9].
The electrophoretic measurements were performed using powders P50, P75 and P80 ﬁred at 650 C. The electrophoretic mobilities were determined as a function of the −1, reported in Fig. 4 and the values pH, in NaCl 10 of the isoelectric point (IEP) as a function of the amount of NASICON precursor are shown in Table 3. According to the IEP of the pure NASICON powder (IEP: 2) and of the pure ZnAl2O4 powder (IEP: 10), intermediate values of IEP equal to 5.5, 5 and 4.5 were observed for the powders P50, P75 and P80, respectively. It was also noted that the presence of the NASICON precursor in the blended powders decreases the IEP and seems to increase the electrophoretic mobility values, in alkaline conditions, compared to the pure ZnAl2O4 phase (Fig. 4).
In order to better understand the membrane ﬁltering properties, prepared further, towards electrolyte solutions, the P80 powder electrophoretic mobility, which depends on the material charge, was followed under different conditions (acidity, nature and concentration of the salt). For pH lower than 4 and for all the electrolytes (concentration: −1), the electrophoretic mobility of the P80 sam10 ple was positive (Fig. 5). Moreover, the high electrophoretic mobility value measured with NaCl and Na2SO4 solutions in alkaline conditions indicates the membrane was negatively charged and a high rejection rate should be observed, especially for the Na2SO4 salt. The IEP value of 4.5, by the NaCl solution (Table 3) indicates a positive or a negative charge for the material surface at a pH lower or higher than 4.5, respectively. For Na2SO4, the IEP is also around 4.5 (Fig. 5). When CaCl2 solutions are used the IEP value is 5. 
The effect of the divalent Ca2+ cation adsorption is also observed which leads to lower values of the electrophoretic mobility for basic conditions. 
In the case of CaSO4 salt, previous effects appear and a very low electrophoretic mobility at high pH values due to the speciﬁc adsorption of the divalent Ca2+ions is observed.
The pore size of the membrane (ﬁring temperature 650 C) measured by mercury porosimetry is centered on 8 nm (Fig. 6). This value is in agreement with the measurements performed by the BET method on the P80 powder (Table 2).
The morphology of the membrane was characterized by SEM, which indicated the thickness of the active layer to be 400 nm (Fig. 7).
The variations of the salt rejection rate depended mainly on the salt nature and on the pH of the ﬁltered solution (Fig. 8). However, they are not always in agreement with the previously observed mobility of the powder (Fig. 5).
Highest rejection rates were observed for Na2SO4 in an alkaline pH (Fig. 8b) and for CaCl2 in an acidic medium (Fig. 8c). This behavior is characteristic of the existence of strong interactions between the charged surface of the membrane and the electrical charge of the divalent ion: in basic conditions strong repulsions between the negatively charged membrane and the divalent sulfate anion and in acidic ones, between the positively charged membrane and the divalent calcium cation.
For the NaCl solution (Fig. 8a) the rejection rate of the + salt with an acidic pH is due to the repulsion between Na and the positive charge of the membrane. After minimal rejection, the rejection rate increases again at a pH higher than 7 due to the interaction between Cl and the membrane which is now negatively charged. However, a zero rejection rate is not observed at a pH of 4.5, where the electrophoretic mobility is equal to zero.
The rejection rates of CaSO4 solutions are always low, for all pH values. Here, the SO4 ions are adsorbed in abundance. This phenomenon leads to the decreasing of the membrane surface charge and to the ﬁltration performances. The electrophoretic mobility is not always a relevant parameter to characterize the electrokinetic properties of the membrane, i.e. in the case of the ﬁltration of Na2SO4 and NaCl where a shift between the zero rejection rate and the IEP value was observed.
This phenomenon is explained by the fact that the electrical charge deduced from the electrophoretic mobility of material powder is often different from the real electrical charge of the membrane. To avoid this drawback, other experimental determinations have to be used to obtain the real charge by the dynamic ﬁltration conditions. Amongst these methods, the streaming potential measurement across the membrane was considered and leads to more signiﬁcant results for the charge determination. Results are presented in Section 3.2.2 of this paper.
The concentration effects on the rejection rate for different pH are shown in Fig. 9. The ﬁltration test results of Na2SO4 and NaCl solutions at −1 are indicated in Fig. 9a and b, 10 respectively. 
For the Na2SO4 solution in alkaline medium, a notable rejection rate decreasing from 80% to 15% at a pH of 9.5 was observed (Fig. 9a). In acidic conditions sulfate adsorption leads to a decrease in the surface charge even at −1), where the concentration low concentrations (10 effect is less noticeable. In the case of NaCl electrolyte, no speciﬁc adsorption takes place, however, a decrease of the rejection rates was observed with concentration at all pH values (Fig. 9b), due to the screening of the surface charge by the counter ions which leads to a greater decrease by the effective charge of the material as the electrolyte concentration increases. The relative interactions between surface charges and ions then decrease, with an increase in the salt concentrations and the efﬁciency of the nanoﬁltration membranes falls considerably. 
However, despite the decrease −1, the reobserved for salts at concentrations of 10 jection rates against Na2SO4 and NaCl are around 10–15% in alkaline medium which is higher than those generally recorded with classical membranes. Using an amphoteric membrane based on a mixture TiO2/ZnAl2O4 the literature reports, in the case of tap water (ionic strength 1.5 × 10 −2, Mg2+ = 5 × 10 −3 M) or tap water after dilution of factor 5, a rejection rate of Mg2+ and Ca2+ equal to 0 [12]. The signiﬁcant results obtained in this study are certainly due to the presence of the NASICON precursor in the mixed membranes that consequently presents a higher charge density than usual amphoteric ceramic membranes based on TiO2, ZrO2, or Al2O3.
The streaming potential across a charged membrane is deﬁned by the slope of the electric potential variation versus the pressure applied across the membrane (SP = φ/P). The origin of the electric potential is a displacement of electrical charges inside the pore when a pressure is applied. For a positively charged membrane, the cation is strongly ﬁxed on the material at the origin of the diffuse electrochemical layer and then if a pressure is applied, the electroneutrality of the system is modiﬁed by the transport of anions. The latter creates an electric potential which stops the anion ﬂux at equilibrium. This measured potential is the sum of three contributions: the diffusion and the Donnan potentials which depend on the electrolyte concentration and the streaming potential depending on the applied pressure.
The streaming potential (SP) across the membrane is linked to the membrane charge and the zeta potential ζ by the Helmholtz–Smoluchowski relation: 
The Helmholtz–Smoluchowski relation does not take into account that the conductivity inside pores (λpores) may exceed the conductivity of the bulk solution (λ0) in the case of small pore size due to the surface conductivity (λs). In this case, λ0 in (1) has to be replaced by λpores with λpores = λ0 + 2Gs/a where Gs and a are the surface conductance and the effective pore radius (m), respectively [13–15]. However, whatever the pore size, the SP value always depends qualitatively on the surface charge of the membrane in dynamic ﬁltering conditions.
With the aim to compare both methods to evaluate the surface charge, the SP for the different ﬁltered solutions was determined. Fig. 10 indicates the potential variation φ between both sides of the membrane versus the applied pressure P during the NaCl solution ﬁltration at a pH of 4.5. The curve presents two characteristic parts, the ﬁrst one is not linear whereas the second part is linear with a slope of 3.8 (±0.2) mV bar −1. This latter part is the SP whereas the non-linear part is due to the diffusional contribution obtained at a low pressure. Using NaCl solutions at a concentration of −1 and a pH of 4.5 (Fig. 10), from 5 bar, the dif10 fusion potential is low compared to the pressure contribution to the global electric potential, here the linear relation φ versus P exists only from a pressure higher than this value. The streaming potential measurements in dynamic conditions at different pH values during the ﬁltration of each electrolyte by means of the synthesized membrane are indicated in Fig. 11. 
The different SP measurements performed conﬁrm that the SP values depend on the pH of the ﬁltered solutions. With NaCl solutions the IEP is recorded at 7–7.5, this IEP value is different from the one determined from electrophoretic mobility. However, according to the SP determination the membrane is then positively charged below this pH and negatively charged at a basic pH, these results are in agreement with the rejection rate observed in Fig. 8a. In the case of Na2SO4 solutions, the streaming potential is weakly positive at a pH below 5.8, this behavior is due to the high SO4 adsorption at the material surface which decreases the membrane charge at these pH values. The membrane is negatively charged above pH 5.8 and the absolute streaming potential value increases strongly with 2− the pH. This explains the strong rejection between SO4 anions and the membrane surface (Fig. 8b). 
Concerning the CaCl2 solution, according to the SP variation, the membrane seems to be positively charged below a pH of 4 and beyond a pH of 6. Therefore indicating Ca2+ is strongly adsorbed at the membrane surface at this pH range and the IEP value will be around a pH of 5 corresponding to a zero rejection rate. In the presence of CaSO4 the IEP is around 4–5, but the low SP value traduces a low surface charge that is in agreement with the low rejection rate obtained with this electrolyte (Fig. 8d). Summarized in Table 4 the SP measured across the M80 membrane is quite well correlated with the salt rejections for this membrane in the pH range studied. This conﬁrms the SP is a more pertinent parameter in relation with the surface charge of the membrane as the electrophoretic mobility measured on the powder material.
Ultraﬁltration ceramic membranes prepared from NASICON and ZnAl2O4 sols synthesized by the sol–gel process have been successfully obtained by slip-casting on macroporous tubular alumina supports. The thickness of the layer was determined at approximately 400 nm and the average pore diameter of the membrane 8 nm for an initial molar ratio NASICON/ZnAl2O4 equal to 80/20.
The behavior of the membrane towards the ﬁltration −3 of electrolytic solutions, through concentrations of 10 −1, has proved the electrostatic interactions to 10 membrane–solution is the main parameter which governs the salt rejection process. By the determination of the electrophoretic mobility of the powders precursors of the material and by the measurements of the streaming potential across the membrane during the process, it was shown that the membrane charge is highly dependant on the nature, the concentration and the pH of the ﬁltered electrolyte. Moreover, the streaming potential across the membrane and the ionic rejection rate, i.e. the ﬁltering properties of the membrane, are well correlated in the case of the synthesized material. The streaming potential being proportional to the zeta potential of the surface (Helmholtz–Smoluchowski relation) and then to the membrane surface charge, the control of the ﬁltration properties by electrical interactions is well evident. 
In these conditions, salt rejection rates of 90% was obtained for the treatment of CaCl2 in acidic conditions and Na2SO4 in basic conditions. In the case of the CaCl2 solution the strong electrical repulsion between the divalent Ca2+ cation and the positively charged membrane in acidic conditions, leads to high performances in ﬁltration. For the Na2SO4 solution, the same effect is observed due to the strong repulsions between the sulfate ions and the negatively charged membrane in basic medium.
