Possible  formula  types  of  orthophosphate  octahedron–tetrahedron  frameworks  } ] ) (PO {[ T 3 3 4 2 (where   are elements in identical or different oxidation states +1, +2, +3, +4, and +5) have been calculated T 2 and described. The data on the structure and properties of well-known phosphates with mixed frameworks of such a type containing elements in the oxidation state +5 are systematized. Most are crystallized in the structure ) (PO  (NZP). For these phosphates, the relative differences in the radii of framework-forming cattype NaZr 4 2 3 ions do not exceed 0.6. It is shown that NZP-like compounds with the expected structure and speciﬁed properties can be modeled by phosphates with electrically neutral frameworks. The model predictions were justiﬁed by synthesis and crystallographic investigations of niobium phosphates with biand trivalent elements. 
The theoretically predicted formulas of an octahe— n (PO ) ] 3 4 2  = 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 are presented by the comdron–tetrahedron mixed framework of the  type for  positions listed in Table 1. The principles of their formation are based on the following assumptions:
It can be seen from Table 1 that, of all the possible formula  types  of  orthorhombic  frameworks,  the  most numerous ones are those that contain elements in the +5 oxidation state (separated by a bold line in the upper part of the table). The rest (under the line) contain elements in the oxidation state +4, in most cases.
Phosphates and other compounds of tetravalent elements with tetrahedral XO4 anions, having a framework structure of the {[T2(XO4)3]n—}3¥  type, have been investigated intensively over the last two decades. The number of such publications stands at several hundred and increases every year, although the formula types have not been investigated equally thoroughly. Another situation is observed for phosphates containing pentavalent elements. Although  they  are  represented  by  a  signiﬁcantly larger number of theoretically possible formula types,  the  number  of  investigated  objects  is  substantially smaller. It is noteworthy that some of these phosphates  are  absent  in  the  list  of  known  ones  because either their formation is impossible due to steric hindrances or the synthesis methods used do not make it possible to overcome kinetic hindrances.
The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  generalize  the available  data  on  the  phosphates  of  pentavalent  elements with the {[T2( 144)O4)3]n—}3¥  motif, perform a comparative  analysis  of  their  crystal–chemical  properties, and,  based  on  the  results  of  this  analysis  for  known phosphates, “build” phosphates of a new composition with an expected structure and properties. A search for new materials with properties of practical importance (superconducting, catalytic, semiconducting, luminescent,  and  so  on),  speciﬁcally  in  the  “structure–property–composition” context, makes it possible to avoid uncertainties typical of empirical synthesis by carrying out this synthesis purposefully.
The composition and structural data for the known phosphates containing pentavalent elements are listed in Table 2. 
Among  the  phosphates  with  electrically  neutral frameworks (n = 0), the compounds T VT IV(PO4)3 (T V = Nb,  Sb,  Ta;  T IV  =  Nb,  Zr,  Ti,  V,  Ge  [4—12]  and V T 1/2 (PO4)3 (T III = Cr, Sb, Nd, Eu, Bi; T V = Nb, Sb, T 3/2 Ta)  are  being  studied  [13–16].  When  a  polyhedral framework is charged (n > 0), compensating cations are present  in  interframework  cages.  
The data in Table 2 indicate that, of all the possible formula  types  of  frameworks  containing  pentavalent elements (Table 1), only ﬁve have been implemented to date; i.e., wide ranges of compositions remain unstudied. The available data on the known phosphates allow us to make some generalizations concerning their crystal–chemical properties.
Although the compounds studied have various cationic  compositions,  only  three  structure  types  have been implemented: NaZr2(PO4)3 (NZP or NASICON) (I), Sc2(WO4)3 (SW) (II), and Bi1/2Sb3/2(PO4)3 (BiSb) (III).
Most  studied  phosphates  have  a  type-I  structure, including those with different values of n: from 0 to 1. Space groups with rhombohedral symmetry   and  are typical of them. In these phosphates, the relaR3 tive differences in the sizes of framework-forming cations do not exceed 0.2 Å, and their charges differ from each other by no more than a factor of two (Table 2). These  data  conﬁrm  the  conception  of  wide  isomorphism of phases of rhombohedral type—structural analogs  of  NaZr2(PO4)3  (which  has  been  experimentally established  previously  [2,  34]),  supplementing  the known isomorphous series with phosphates of pentavalent elements: niobium, antimony, and tantalum.
Some antimony and niobium phosphates (n = 0 or 2) (Table 2) are crystallized in the structure type of scandium tungstate (type II) of orthorhombic (sp. gr. Pbcn) and monoclinic (sp. gr. P21/n) modiﬁcations. A lower (in comparison with rhombohedral) structural symmetry was also noted for zirconium phosphates and their chemical  analogs  in  the  case  of  the  incorporation  of small cations (for example, Li+, Mg2+, or ions of d elements) into interframework cages [35]. 
One of the main factors determining the formation of  a  particular  structural  modiﬁcation  (from  among those  under  consideration)  is  stereochemical.  Such  a correlation between the type of phosphate structure and the relative difference in the ionic radii of frameworkforming cations is shown in Fig. 1. The NZP and SW structures are implemented if 0 £  0.59 and, in this case, T’ and T’’ cations are statistically distributed over equivalent framework positions L. When the difference in the radii of T’ and T’’ cations is in the range from 0.58 to 0.72, a structural modiﬁcation of type III is formed that is characterized by a differentiated occupation of two framework positions of different structure types. 
On the basis of the above comparative analysis of the  crystal–chemical  data  on  the  phases  studied,  one can predict implementation of a particular structure for other  (yet  to  be  implemented)  compounds  with  other combinations of cations in the +5 oxidation state with cations in other oxidation states, estimating the relative differences in the radii of these cations.
It can be seen from Table 2 that two types of structures—NZP and SW—are implemented most often in phosphates  with  frameworks  of  the  {[T2( 144)O4)3]n—}3¥ type. The similarity of the NZP and SW structure types has been noted in the literature [16]. It is often difﬁcult to distinguish their monoclinically distorted modiﬁcations on the basis of powder X-ray diffraction patterns [36]. The geometrical basis of the NZP structure type (I)  is  the  structure  of  iron  sulphate  Fe2(SO4)3  with  a rhombohedral modiﬁcation (Fig. 2a), whereas the basis of the SW structure type (II) is the orthorhombic modiﬁcation Fe2(SO4)3 (Fig. 2b). Comparing them (Fig. 2) shows  that,  in  the  rhombohedral  phase,  the  building units  (two  octahedra  linked  with  three  tetrahedra  by shared  oxygen  atoms  at  vertices)  are  located  strictly parallel to the hexagonal axis c, whereas, in the monoclinic phase, they are rotated with respect to each other. 
The Bi1/2Sb3/2(PO4)3 (III) structure is characterized by  another  framework  of  the  {[T2( 144)O4)3]n—}3¥   type (Fig.  3).  Octahedrically  coordinated  T  cations  are located in chains of two types oriented parallel to the c axis. One of these chains corresponds to the threefold axis  (i.e.,  is  similar  to  the  NZP  structure),  while  the other passes through the center of the hexagonal cell or equivalent positions. Thus, the number of second-type
The phosphates listed in Table 2 are being studied in view of their possible applications as functional materials.
A framework built of multiply charged T cations rigidly bound in TO6 polyhedra is only insigniﬁcantly distorted  upon  heating.  This  framework  rigidity  is responsible for the high thermal stability and low thermal expansion of the phosphates under consideration. (ii)  The  T2(PO4)3  framework  is  of  mixed  cation– anion type: TO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra that share vertices are differently aligned in space, depending on the  structure  type  in  which  the  compound  is  crystallized. However, TO6 octahedra are isolated from each other in space. This structural feature is of importance for applications of such materials as catalysts, because the  possibility  of  structural  isolation  of  catalytically active fragments from each other (octahedra with catalytically active cations alternate with catalytically inert tetrahedral groups) enhances the selectivity of catalysts [6]. 
The isolation of TO6 polyhedra, and, hence, the sufﬁciently large T–T distance in the T2(PO4)3 structure are also important for laser materials, since compounds of this type have a relation between the main characteristics of phosphors (the lifetime of an excited state and the quantum yield) that is optimal for practical use [37]. (iii)  The  degree  of  occupation  of  interframework positions M1 and M2 affects ionic conductivity and thermal expansion.
The  presence  and  number  of  vacancies  play  an important  role  in  predicting  the  thermomechanical properties of the aforementioned compounds. It is well known  that,  with  an  increase  in  the  number  of  interframework vacancies to the maximum value n = 4, the axial strains in a rhombohedral structure are reduced. For  example,  phosphates  with  frameworks  of  the T VT IV(PO4)3  type  are  known  to  have  low  expansion (a  10–6 K–1) upon heating (all the 4M positions are unoccupied) [8].
In the ﬁrst part of this study, based on the general crystal–chemical  formula  of  the  compounds  with  the structural motif T2(PO4)3, all the theoretically possible formula compositions were calculated, and that some of them are implemented in practice was conﬁrmed by the data in the literature. 
This part of the study expands and  supplements  the  experience  in  crystal–chemical prediction of the composition, structure, and properties of phosphates of pentavalent elements obtained to date. Among the aforementioned variety of formula types of frameworks (Table 1), there is a particular group of materials  with  electrically  neutral  frameworks,  which do  not  call  for  cations  to  compensate  the  framework charge.
In  order  to  justify  this  prediction,  we  investigated the  phosphates  of  the  (PO4)3  [38,  39]  and III T 3/2 (PO4)3 types (T II = Mg, Mn, Co, Ni; T III = Al, T 1/2 Cr,  Fe;  T V  =  Nb).  The  phosphates  were  synthesized
The investigations  of  the  Mg1/3Nb5/3(PO4)3, Mn1/3Nb5/3(PO4)3, Co1/3Nb5/3(PO4)3, Ni1/3Nb5/3(PO4)3, Al1/2Nb3/2(PO4)3,  and Fe1/2Nb3/2(PO4)3  phosphates  that  we  performed  and described in [38, 39] showed that all these compounds are synthesized in a single phase and crystallized in the NZP structure type.
The unit-cell parameters a and c are listed in Table 3, along with differences in the radii D r/rmin (D r = |r(T II) — r(T V)| or |r(T III) — r(T V)|) for framework-forming cations. The  values  of  the  differences  in  the  radii  are  in agreement  with  the  established  range  of  implementation of the NZP structure type (Fig. 1).
It is well known that the properties of compounds with an expected composition and structure can also be predicted  in  accordance  with  the  basic  principle  of materials science: composition–structure–property.
One property of practical importance that is generally  typical  of  NZP  phosphates  is  their  low  thermal expansion in a wide temperature range. Small deformations of the NZP structure upon heating are due to the presence of rigidly bound TO6 and XO4 polyhedra in its framework and depend on the number of unoccupied M cages. With an increase in the number of unoccupied positions,  temperature-induced  deformations  tend  to decrease [41]. The known phosphates with a very low [42], thermal  Zr2(PO4)3 (T III = La, Gd) Sr0.5Zr2(PO4)3 [43, 44],  [45], Sr0.25Nb0.5Zr1.5(PO4)3 [44], and ZrNb(PO4)3 [7, 8, 46]—have  partially  occupied  or  completely  unoccupied M positions. Therefore, very little thermal expansion should also be expected for NZP-type phosphates with a formula composition corresponding to an electrically neutral framework; i.e., when n = 0 and all the M positions are unoccupied.
Thus, the results obtained justify the crystal–chemical  predictions  concerning  not  only  the  composition and structure but, also, the properties of niobium phosphates and extend the possibilities of developing new materials.
That phosphates of tetravalent and pentavalent elements have a similar structure was revealed: structure type NaZr2(PO4)3 is most common for both.
On the basis of analysis of available data and the results  of  our  experiments,  a  correlation  between  the structure type of phosphates and the relative difference in  the  ionic  radii  of  framework-forming  cations  is established.  For  NZP-like  phosphates,  this  parameter should not exceed 0.6.
The  possibility  of  modeling  compounds  with expected  structures  and  speciﬁed  properties  is  shown and veriﬁed by an example of niobium phosphates. 
New  niobium  phosphates  with  electrically  neutral and frameworks  III Nb3/2(PO4)3 types (T II = Mg, Mn, Co, Ni; T III = Al, T 1/2 Cr,  Fe)  were  synthesized,  and  their  crystallographic properties  and  thermal-expansion  parameters  were determined.
The  results  obtained  conﬁrm  the  predictions  for composition, structure, and properties that were made for  the  compounds  under  consideration  and  expand possibilities of developing materials with expected and controlled properties on the basis of crystal–chemical data.
