The  chemical  transformations  involved  in  the  synthesis  of  the  NASICON-type  compound ) (PO  were studied by thermogravimetry and x-ray diffraction. The results demonstrate that, during heat LiZr 2 4 3 treatment of a 3Zr(HPO  + ZrO CO O + Li  mixture, the formation of the NASICON phase begins at )  · 2H 2 3 2 2 2 4 600 C. Further heating, however, leads to the concurrent formation of zirconium diphosphate and uncontrolled lithium losses because of the high volatility of Li compounds. A well-crystallized, high-conductivity NASI) (PO  can only obtained by a two-step procedure. C. Phase-pure LiZr CON phase is formed only above 1100 4 2 3
The 3 4 2 phase stable at room temperature has a triclinic structure.  On  heating,  it  transforms  into  a  rhombohedral  sug(PO ) phase. The ionic conductivity data for LiZr 3 4 2 gest  that  the  order–disorder  transition  between  these C [5]. The cation arrangement in phases occurs near 40 the  high-temperature  (rhombohedral)  phase  is  markedly less ordered [7, 8]. Partial heterovalent substitution of pentaor trivalent cations for zirconium, accompanied by the formation of cation vacancies or interstitials, increases the mobility of lithium ions and reduces the temperature of the triclinic-to-rhombohedral phase transition.  The  strongest  effect  was  reported  for  niobium substitution for zirconium [6].
The  purpose  of  this  work  was  to  investigate  the in transformations  involved  chemical  and  phase   synthesis. 
During  heat  treatment,  the  weight  of  the  starting mixture  gradually  decreases  (Fig.  1,  curves  ),  in several, poorly resolved steps.
The  total  weight  loss  is,  however,  markedly  smaller than the calculated one. The most likely explanation is that the reaction began in the starting mixture during grinding.
The  removal  of  the  last  water  molecules  (OH groups) is accompanied by a concurrent reaction in the range 700–950 C. As a result, the XRD pattern shows a new set of reﬂections, corresponding to cubic zirconium diphosphate (Fig. 2, scan  ). The intensity of the peaks from this phase gradually decreases during further  heating,  while  the NASICON-type  phase  increases,  and  its  structural perfection improves. Note that zirconium diphosphate was  used  in  a  number  of  studies  as  the  starting reagent, instead of acid zirconium phosphate. Its reactivity  is,  however,  considerably  lower,  and  wellformed NASICON-type crystals can only be obtained C. At room temperature, the transition to above 1100 the triclinic phase occurs (Fig. 2, scan ). To obtain phase-pure  LiZr ,  long-term  high-temperature heat  treatment  is  necessary.  For  example,  even  after calcination at 1100 or 1200 C for 1 h the product contains a signiﬁcant amount of zirconium diphosphate. 
Note  that  long-term  heat  treatment  at  these  high temperatures may lead to lithium losses because of the high volatility of Li compounds. For this reason, even 24 h of calcination is insufﬁcient for obtaining singlephase material (Fig. 3, scan  ). Under such conditions, zirconium  diphosphate  is  also  the  major  impurity phase. To prevent uncontrolled lithium losses, we used the  the  mixture was ﬁred )  · H O + Li CO  + ZrO 3Zr(HPO 2 3 2 2 2 4 C for 6 h. The product was reground and pressed at 700 at  4  GPa  into  disk-shaped  samples,  which  were  then placed in a crucible and packed with a similar powder mixture containing 10% excess Li. Calcining such sam) (PO C  for  24  h,  we  obtained  LiZr ples  at  1200 3 4 2 whose XRD pattern (Fig. 3, scan  ) was identical to that 2  [7]. At the same time, the XRD reported by Catti  pattern also showed poorly discernible reﬂections from the rhombohedral phase, just as in an earlier study [6].
The present results indicate that the formation of LiZr2(PO4)3  is  accompanied  by  different  concurrent processes, such as the formation of zirconium diphosphate  and  uncontrolled  lithium  losses.  Phase-pure LiZr2(PO4)3  was  only  obtained  by  a  two-step  procedure.
This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for  Basic  Research  (grant  no.  03-03-32439)  and  the Russian Academy  of  Sciences  through  the  integrated program  New  Principles  and  Methods  of  the  Design and Controlled Synthesis of Substances with Tailored Properties.