NASICON-type Na3Si2Zr1.88Y0.12PO11.94 and Na3.2Si2.2Zr1.88Y0.12P0.8O11.94 ceramics were obtained by a standard ceramic route. The structural and microstructural analysis of materials processed under diﬀerent conditions suggested that the amount of Naand P-rich liquid phases formed during the high temperature sintering is smaller for Na3.2Si2.2Zr1.88Y0.12P0.8O11.94. Indeed, samples of this composition showed a considerably worse sinterability. Total conductivity values obtained as a function of the humidity content show no evidence for protonic conduction in NASICON between 373 and 473 K. Results obtained at lower temperatures are not conclusive due to the signiﬁcant degradation of the electrolyte/electrode interfaces and surfaces in wet atmospheres.
After the ﬁrst reports on fast sodium transport in Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12 solid solutions,1,2 materials of this family called NASICON found important electrochemical applications, such as CO2 sensors3,4 and Na+ ion-selective electrodes.5,6 Na+ conduction in NASICON is enabled by interstitials formed in a lattice consisting of ZrO6 octahedra linked to SiO4 or PO4 tetrahedra by corner shared oxygens.7 It has been known that the electrical performance of NASICON materials is severely compromised by their instability in contact with water, either liquid or vapour.8 12 The ﬁrst attempts to understand this problem, based on the study of powdered samples suspended in aqueous solutions, 3  showed that the reaction occurs with Na+ and PO4 leaching from the NASICON whereas the pH of the solution increases.8,9 
This was interpreted as the result of the dissolution of Na3PO4 existing as a glassy phase at the grain boundaries and the incorporation of hydronium ions into the material leading to the formation of the so-called hydronium NASICON.13 Later, an impedance spectroscopy study of dense NASICON ceramics previously exposed to water at 333 K conﬁrmed that the reaction process is primarily located at the grain boundaries.11 A large increase of the amplitude of the grain boundary impedance was observed for samples reacted for more than ca. 200 h whereas microstructural analysis revealed small grains of a second phase covering the NASICON grains. Complementary X-ray diﬀraction patterns collected on powdered samples suggested that the composition of these small grains is similar to that of hydronium NASICON. 
Although it is not known if the stability of NASICON varies with composition, results obtained with a humidity sensor based on P-free NASICON materials suggests that a higher Na:P ratio may lead to an improved stability of NASICON in contact with water.
The fully hydronium-exchanged NASICON is known to be a fairly good protonic conductor.12 The facility to which the ionic exchange between Na+ and hydronium ions can occur drew our attention to the possible existence of protonic conduction in NASICON, albeit the possible degradation of the material. These are the central themes of the present study.
Phase composition and lattice parameters of the synthesized powders and dense ceramics were determined by X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) using a Rigaku Geigerﬂex instrument (CuKa radiation, step 0.01, 5 s/step). The microstructure of the ceramics, polished and then thermally etched at 1373 K for 0.5 h, was evaluated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). It is noteworthy that a detailed study of the nature and composition of grain boundaries (e.g. by transmission electron microscopy) failed due to the instability of the material under the beam.
The electrical properties of ceramic samples were characterised by impedance spectroscopy using a Hewlett Packard 4284A LCR meter working in the frequency range from 20 to 106 Hz and with a 100 mV alternate signal. The spectra were collected at 298–473 K in diﬀerent atmospheres, including dry air and wet air. In the latter case, the humidity content in the surrounding atmosphere was varied by bubbling air through liquid water at TW=298, 323 and 343 K, which should correspond to approximately 3, 12 and 31 kPa of water vapour pressure, respectively assuming equilibration between gas and liquid phases. The measurements were carried out on a day base with a ﬁxed TW value while the temperature of the sample, TS, was increased from ca. 298 to 473 K (Fig. 1). After every modiﬁcation of TW, the sample was cooled down to room temperature and left over night (ca. 10 h) in dry air. The samples were equilibrated until steady-state conductivity values were attained. 
A thermocouple was placed as close as possible to the sample to obtain accurate temperature
Selected SEM micrographs typical for the studied ceramics are presented in Fig. 2. It can be seen that the highest densiﬁcation is achieved for the x=2.0 ceramics sintered at 1493 K during 40 h (NTZP20-D). The materials with x=2.2 (NTZP22-D and NTZP22-P) exhibit a considerably larger number of pores, although sintered at higher temperatures (Table 1). The worse sinterability of NTZP22 composition has been previously reported8 and may be explained by formation of a lower amount of liquid phase which is known to have an important role on the densiﬁcation of NASICON ceramics. This liquid is thought to have a composition similar to Na3PO4.9 Thus, the higher Na:P ratio for NTZP22 is apparently resulting in smaller amount of liquid that hinders densiﬁcation, when compared to materials with Na:P=3:1. This is not surprising, since the Na2O–SiO2–P2O5 system phase diagrams show that the liquidus temperature decreases when increasing the fraction of P2O5.15
The analysis of NTZP20 samples etched at temperatures close to the sintering temperature (1458 K) revealed the presence of segregated zirconia grains appearing in lighter grey tonality (Fig. 3). Since these grains were not observed in the NTZP samples etched at 1373 K (Fig. 2A and B), it is reasonable to assume that zirconia is originally dispersed in the aforementioned liquid phase and precipitates during the high temperature etching. Contrary to NTZP20, Zr-enriched grains could not be observed in any of the analysed NTZP22 samples. The presence of signiﬁcant fractions of monoclinic ZrO2 (mZrO2) in NTZP22 is, however, very likely if one compares the theoretical density predicted from XRD (ca. 3.28 gcm 3) with the measured geometrical density (3.22 gcm 3). Such high value of geometrical density (corresponding to about 98% densiﬁcation) is not compatible with the apparent larger porosity of the samples evidenced by SEM (Fig. 2D). 
Due to relatively high density of mZrO2 (5.41 gcm 3) with respect to NASICON, and assuming simple mixture rules, the presence of 5 w.% of mZrO2 in a hypothetic 90% pure dense NASICON sample would appear as a enhancement in density from about 2.95 to 3.22 gcm 3. 
Moreover, the larger densities found for NTZP20 suggest higher fraction of mZrO2 for this composition (Table 1).
In fact, the powder XRD patterns (Fig. 4) collected from ground ceramics show that not only NTZP20 but also NTZP22 is a mixture of NASICON and mZrO2 as a second phase (arrowed peaks). Taking into account the diﬀraction intensities, the results further suggest that the fraction of mZrO2 is higher for the NTZP20 samples, in agreement with the aforementioned deviation in reported densities. The same holds for the samples sintered at higher temperature, NTZP20-P and NTZP22D. All patterns reveal the monoclinic symmetry of the NASICON lattice (space group C2/c) with unit cell parameters nearly independent of composition, in good agreement with previous work.6
Fig. 5 shows impedance spectra of NASICON ceramics collected under diﬀerent humidity conditions at 373 and 473 K. As expected for these relatively high temperatures and in this frequency range, the spectra reveal solely a pure ohmic resistance ascribed to the ceramic, Rt, and a capacitive tail due to the electrode process. While the values of Rt are only slightly aﬀected by humidity, the electrode response clearly deviates from the capacitive behaviour expected for blocking Pt, air electrodes which is observed in dry air. 
Moreover, the eﬀect of humidity is clearly more pronounced in the samples with higher porosity (NTZP22-D), in which a Warburg-like impedance is apparent at low frequency, and may be seen as a clear indication of the onset of some humidity-dependent process at the NASICON/Pt interface. The results, however, do not allow inferring any clear trend. Attempts to model the electrode response assuming diﬀerent transmission line models suitable to account for variable capacitances were unsuccessful. This seems a rather complex problem and certainly implies the realisation of further experimental evidence obtained in future dedicated work. The evolution of the total resistance is, however, considerably more simple providing signiﬁcant information.
The Rt values, taken as the high frequency intercept of the spectra, were thus used to obtain estimates of the total conductivity, stot, in diﬀerent temperature and humidity conditions. These values are shown in Fig. 6 using Arrhenius coordinates. It can be seen that the lowest stot value was obtained with NTZP22-D, probably due to higher porosity (Fig. 2). It can also be seen that stot decreases with increasing humidity at 423 and 473 K, while it decreases at 373 K. The latter eﬀect is more pronounced for the porous NTZP22-P sample, suggesting that condensation of water vapour in the pores of both the ceramics and on the Pt electrodes may actually inﬂuence the electrode surface area as well as provide an alternative conductivity pathway along the continuous ceramics pores network. In fact, due to the adopted experimental procedure where samples are kept at room temperature while air humidity is increased, saturation of the gas phase occurs at temperatures higher than the ﬁrst electrical measurements. 
In these conditions, water condensation is inevitable. Only above 373 K the sample temperature is always high enough to prevent condensation. However, even at 373 K, a deviation of 1–2 K between the sample temperature and the thermocouple reading is enough to allow for water condensation.
The release of combined and condensed water during the subsequent measurements at 423 and 473 K will probably favour additional degradation of the NASICON/Pt interface and the apparent decrease of stot during condensation. A signiﬁcant deterioration of the electrodes was indeed observed in all samples. This eﬀect may be even stronger if secondary Na3PO4 phases are present at the grain boundaries or at the electrolyte/ Pt electrode interface. It is well know that the tri-sodium phosphate easily forms hydrated (penta-, octaor dodeca-hydrate) compounds at temperatures lower than about 323 K. Therefore, the temperature and pH2O cycling may induce signiﬁcant volume changes hence modifying the morphology of the interface. Possible errors in the estimation of small Rt values, typically of the order of 20 and 10   at 423 and 473 K, may also play a role, since, in these circumstances, the electrode impedance is comparatively much larger. 
This is particularly important in the cases where the real axis is not intercepted at high frequency (Fig. 5B) or the inductance due to the furnace electrical resistance clearly aﬀects the spectra (Fig. 5A).
All in all, it may be concluded that the conductivity of NASICON is essentially independent of the water vapour pressure for the three ceramics, with an activation enthalpy of about 30 to 34 kJ/mol indicating that the conduction mechanism is the same in all materials, and under diﬀerent moisture conditions. Notice that the activation enthalpy reported for NASICONs is close to 30 kJ/mol.
The experimental diﬃculties referred to in the previous section are a natural consequence of the instability of NASICON phases in contact with water, either liquid or vapour.8 12 The eﬀect of water condensation is particularly evident in the room temperature impedance spectra. The examples obtained with the NTZP20-P samples shown in Fig. 7 were selected to illustrate this eﬀect. The spectra obtained under dry air have the expected shape consisting of a pure ohmic resistance due to the bulk impedance, a single slightly depressed semi-circle, which can be ascribed to the grain boundary impedance, and, at the expected capacitive tale due to the Na+-blocking NASICONjPt, air interface. It can be seen that the amplitude of the grain boundary semicircle increases immediately after the ﬁrst contact with the saturated atmosphere and decreases upon further increase of the saturation temperature and corresponding water condensation on the sample at lower temperatures. 
The eﬀect of humidity in the electrode process is even stronger, showing an additional signiﬁcantly depressed semicircle that clearly deviates from the capacitive behaviour observed in dry air. Moreover, the initial spectra obtained with fresh sample and electrodes could not be obtained on subsequent measurements in dry air (Fig. 8, spectra b and c). These were approximately recovered only after trodes and its dependence on humidity. 
Such processes may include the dissolution of amorphous material from the grain boundaries causing the deterioration of the NASICON/Pt electrode contact and the increase of the grain boundary impedance. Formation of the so called hydronium-NASICON13 demands considerably larger reaction times,11,12 and seems unlikely in this case. It is perhaps interesting to note that previously reported non-blocking electrodes in Pt/NASICON/Pt cells16,17 may thus be related to the presence of water at the ceramic and metal electrode surfaces, or at the ceramic/electrode interfaces. Although still a possibility, the existence of protonic conduction at temperatures lower than 373 K remains diﬃcult to conﬁrm. In fact, and as for higher temperatures, the values of total conductivity are similar for all samples whereas the activation enthalpies estimated from room temperature up to 473 K all fall in the same range estimated between 273 and 473 K.
NASICON-type powders with nominal composition Na3Si2Zr1.88Y0.12PO11.94 and Na3.2Si2.2Zr1.88Y0.12P0.8O11.94 were prepared by a standard solid-state synthesis route using a reactive zirconia precursor. These powders were used to obtain ceramic samples with diﬀerent microstructures. X-ray diﬀraction and scanning electron microscopy analysis of materials processed under different conditions suggested that the amount of Naand P-rich liquid phases formed during the high temperature sintering is smaller for Na3.2Si2.2Zr1.88Y0.12P0.8O11.94. Indeed, samples of this composition showed a considerably worse sinterability.
In spite of the diﬃculties experienced during the conductivity measurements in wet atmospheres, results obtained at temperatures between 373 and 473 K show no evidence for protonic conduction in NASICON. Results obtained at lower temperatures were not conclusive to this respect perhaps due the instability of the material and the electrodes in contact with condensed water.