A NASICON thin ﬁlm (2000–2500 Å) as main layer of the device was formed on N/O/N ﬁlm using magnetron sputtering system. In order to simplify the device process, both the heater and lower electrode were formed on the same plane. And carbonate thin ﬁlm as a sensing layer was formed on the upper electrode by sputtering sodium–barium carbonate target (Na2CO3:BaCO3 = 1:1.7 molar ratio). The area of the sensing layer was 0.55 mm × 0.4 mm and that of total device was 3.2 mm × 4.5 mm. The study of NASICON thin ﬁlm conductivity was carried out using AC impedance spectroscopy. The properties of NASICON thin ﬁlm for various temperatures were investigated. The NASICON thin ﬁlm showed a higher ionic conductivity (0.43 S/cm) compared to that of bulk NASICON material. The Nernst’s slope of 57 mV per decade for CO2 concentrations from 1000 to 10,000 ppm was obtained at operating temperature of 400 C. C. 
As results, it is supposed that the fabricated sensor could be The power consumption of the fabricated sensor was about 52 mW at 400 applied for monitoring CO2 gas in environment. © 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Recently, carbon dioxide level in air has been increased considerably due to continuous damage to the environment and the increased use of fossil fuels. Accordingly, it has been become an important task to monitor and control the carbon dioxide which causes both green house effect and possibility of respiratory organ disease. Until now, many works have been carried out to develop solid state carbon dioxide gas sensors focused on high sensitivity and stability [1,2]. Among them, the study on solid electrolyte carbon dioxide sensors drew high interest in terms of compactness and sensitivity. The material for solid electrolyte sensor are fast ionic conductors which can be applied to many electrochemical devices such as inter-connector of Na/S batteries, timers, and others.
NASICON, which has composition range of Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 (0 ≤ x ≤ 3.0) [3] is well known basic material for carbon dioxide sensing. The sodium ions are located in the interstitial space of a rigid skeleton with ZrO6 octahedra linked by corner to (P, Si)O4 tetrahedra and occupy several kinds of sites. It is known that it exhibits maximum conductivity when x = 2 [4].
Until now, most of solid electrolyte CO2 sensing devices were in the form of bulk or thick ﬁlm type. These types provide high electrolyte resistance which leads to great ohmic losses and low current yields and so on. In this study, to improve these drawbacks, we attempted to prepare thin ﬁlm micro solid electrolyte CO2 sensors using RF magnetron sputtering technique and MEMS process. The micro sensor showed good sensitivity to CO2 gas (the observed Nernst slope of 57 mV per decade) and therefore it can be applied for monitoring CO2 gas in air with relatively low power consumption.
Fig. 1 shows the schematic process of Na ion conductive thin ﬁlm target for magnetron sputtering. The starting materials are Na2CO3 (Shringe Pure Chem) as a feedstock of Na, ZrO2 (Junsei), SiO2 (Junsei) and NH4H2PO4 (Sigma) etc. Weighted starting materials were mixed in an alumina mortar and calcined at 600 C for 5 h in air. The calcined mixture and binder were wet-milled using zirconia balls for 24 h and dried in air. Then the dried powder was pressed at 4 MPa for 10 min into disc with 2 inch diameter. The densiﬁed disc was sintered at 1150 C for 50 h to get target for RF magnetron sputtering.
A silicon substrate with area of 3.2 mm × 4.5 mm and thickness of 610–630 ␮m was used for the thin ﬁlm micro CO2 sensor. The substrate was etched from the back side to form a diaphragm with area of 1.5 mm × 1.0 mm for planar type micro device. On the top of diaphragm, a Pt heater, a pair of electrodes and Na ion conductive thin ﬁlm (0.73 mm × 0.53 mm) were formed. Fig. 2 shows schematic process for micro carbon dioxide sensor. On a p-type (1 0 0) silicon wafer having the resistivity of 5–8  cm, N/O/N insulation layer (Si3N4 (1500 Å), SiO2 (3000 Å) and Si3N4 (1500 Å)) was formed by using low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) and atmosphere pressure chemical vapor deposition (APCVD). The stress-relieved dielectric layer was used as a diaphragm (front side) as well as a passivation layer (backside) during etching process. 
The fabricated target by the above process have been analyzed using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). In this work, various base material mixtures with different composition ratios were used to get high conductivity solid electrolyte ﬁlms. Fig. 4 shows XPS spectra of Na ion conductive thin ﬁlm. Table 1 is comparing the sputtering source composition of x = 2.0 and composition of sputtered ﬁlms by XPS. Fig. 5 shows SEM photographs of Na ionic conductive thin ﬁlm at various sintering temperatures. Fig. 6 is SEM photographs of carbonate material at various sintering temperatures by RF magnetron sputtering method.
The electrical properties of Na ion conductive thin ﬁlms were investigated by electro-chemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis. The measurements were carried out using impedance analyzer (HP4192A) by two probe method in the frequency range of 5–13 MHz [5–7]. The data were obtained by serial communication using GPIB board. Using LabVIEW program, the results obtained from the data were displayed in graph and the complex impedance analyzed using Z plot program.
Fig. 7 shows the complex impedance plot of Na ion conductive thin ﬁlm at various temperatures. The resistances Fig. 4. XPS spectra of Na ion conductive thin ﬁlm.
As shown in this ﬁgure, the relationship between the conductivity and temperature is in good agreement with Arrhenius relationship. 
From the results of this ﬁgure, We could obtain the activation energy of 0.55 eV, which is considerable high in comparison with compared with that of bulk type ionic conductor.
Fig. 9 shows the EMF responses of micro sensor for different operating temperatures in the CO2 concentration ranged from 1000 to 10,000 ppm. As shown in this ﬁgure, the EMF responses were almost perfectly linear to the logarithm of CO2 concentration. The slope of Nerstian relation at the operating temperature of 400 C is 57 mV per decade which is in good agreement with a two-electron reaction of CO2 as follows, [8] applicable for monitoring CO2 in air as a low power and good sensitivity device.
Here, E is EMF value of sensor in CO2 ambient, EO a constant, F the Faraday constant, T the temperature (K) and PCO2 is partial pressure of CO2, respectively. And the power consumption of the device at the operating temperature of 400 C was just 52 mW which is considerably lower than of bulk type device.
Pt/Na ion conductor thin ﬁlm/Pt/carbonate (Na2CO3: BaCO3 = 1:1.7 mol) system micro CO2 sensors were prepared and their electrical and sensing characteristics have been investigated.
The thin ﬁlm micro carbon dioxide sensor obtained by using silicon process combined with MEMS technology. A NASICON thin ﬁlm (2000–2500 Å) as main layer of the micro device was formed on N/O/N stress relief insulation layer using magnetron sputtering system. Both the heater and lower electrode were formed on the same plane to simplify the device process. The area of the sensing layer was just 0.55 mm × 0.4 mm and total area of the device was 3.2 mm × 4.5 mm. The NASICON thin ﬁlm showed relatively high ionic conductivity (0.43 S/cm) compared to that of bulk device. The Nernst slope of 57 V per decade for CO2 concentration from 1000 ppm to 10,000 ppm was obtained at the operating temperature of 400 C. The power consumption of the micro CO2 sensor was just 52 mV at 400 C. 
