This paper presents our success in synthesizing a new framework type LixNi2(MoO4)3 (0 V x V 4) polyanion compound by adopting a novel aqueous soft-combustion process. The annealed powders exhibited a single-phase structure as confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and were characterized by electrochemical techniques in order to elucidate the suitability of this new material as positive electrode material in rechargeable lithium-containing batteries. The morphology of the heated product was found to be composed of soft agglomerates embedded by submicrometre spherical grains. The electrode-active character of the new material was examined in a two-electrode configuration employing a Li+ non-aqueous electrolyte environment. Slow scan cyclic voltammetry (SSCV) revealed the redox property of the material between the voltage window 3.5 and 1.5 V. Galvanostatic tests exhibited a well discernible discharge – charge profile with a reversible capacity of 170 mA h/g over the potential window of 3.5 – 1.5 V.
Among the available energy storage technologies, lithium-ion batteries with long cycle life, high energy density, low self-discharge rate and environmentally friendly electrode materials have occupied a place of pride in fulfilling the demands of the modern society for a variety of consumer electronic gadgets such as cellular phones, note book computers, camcorders, cardless power tools and future EVs and HEVs (hybrid electric vehicles) [1]. In order to obtain better performance in terms of safety, capacity, cost, etc., when compared to the presently used cathode materials, newer materials are being investigated. Recent developments have resulted in promising discoveries and/or improvements paved better and improved prospects for lithium-ion batteries [2 – 6].
In addition to the above, in the context of improving the operating voltage and discharge capacity, oxides with poly-anions having three-dimensional open framework structures have attracted a great deal of attention [7,8]. The polyanion materials having NASICON-type structure were extensively studied as solid electrolytes in the past [9,10]. However, recently, they have emerged as an interesting class of electrode materials for battery applications. Because of the open three-dimensional crystal structure that allows easy diffusion of smaller alkali cations like lithium, many of them have been found to have potential applications as cathodes in lithium batteries. A series of lithium containing compounds incorporating larger polyanions based on olivine type LixMVXO4 (MV= transition metal and X = P, Mo, W, S) and NASICON structure type LixMV2(XO4)3 (MV= Ti, Fe, V and X = P, As, Mo, W, S) have been reported [11 – 20].
Amongst the systems which are intriguing in the rechargeable lithium ion technology, molybdenum(VI) compounds remain of significant potential as cathode materials due to the existence of Mo6 +/Mo4 + redox couple which can offer two electron transfer during electrochemical reaction. The latter reaction is very attractive for the development of batteries with high capacity and consequently, with high energy density. Manthiram and Goodenough [11,12] and Reiff et al. [13] studied lithium insertion properties of Fe2(XO4)3 (X = Mo, W and S), nonlithiated phases. They insertion/extraction of Li+ into and from reported that LixFe2(XO4)3 is topotactic for 0 V x V 2 and that the insertion of lithium was found to be limited to two Li+/formula unit. Beyond this extent, it was found to give rise to disproportionation of the framework. 
Later, it was known that lithiated phase Li3Fe2(PO4)3 could accommodate five additional lithium ions [14] and, following this, Andersson et al. [17] and Gaubicher et al. [18] investigated the effect of insertion of more lithium into Li3Fe2(PO4)3. Nevertheless, according to the best of our knowledge, lithium insertion/ extraction into and from MV(XO4)3 [MV= Mn, Ni and Co and X = Mo and W] nonlithiated phases has never been studied so far. Quite recently, we have discovered the high voltage redox behavior of lithiated phase of Li2Ni2(MoO4)3 [19].
It is now explicitly understood that the open framework compounds belonging to the family of polyanion with a general formula, MV2(XO4)3 (MV= transition metal) might favor the topotactic insertion/extraction of Li+ within the framework [11,21]. In the present work, we investigated a new polyanion material, Ni2(MoO4)3 belonging to the above polyanion family in the context of electrochemical Li+ insertion/extraction. This paper describes the first investigation report on the synthesis, structure and electrochemical (redox) characteristics of ultrafine powders of Ni2(MoO4)3.
The formation of Ni2(MoO4)3 framework compound was accomplished through a soft-combustion low temperature synthesis technique namely, glycine-nitrate method, the details of which were previously described by us [2]. Nickel nitrate and hexa-ammonium heptamolybdate (Aldrich, USA) were dissolved in triple distilled water in appropriate stoichiometric ratio. The total solution was then mixed with an aqueous glycine that acted as a soft combustion agent (fuel). The stoichiometric composition of glycine was taken to be twice the molar fraction of the starting materials. Green colored solution thus obtained was heated to boiling at about 100 jC, resulting in a dark green color paste-like substance and heated further at 250 jC. As a result, combustible gases such as N2O, NH3 and CO2 were liberated, yielding brown powder (precursor). 
As the process of heating continued, exothermic decomposition began due to the heat disintegration reaction of glycine accompanied by the evolution of volatile combustible gases eventually yielding a voluminous mass called as-prepared product. Fig. 1 shows the sequential synthesis procedure adopted to obtain the as-prepared product.
The as-prepared product was further annealed at 600 jC in the presence of oxygen atmosphere to obtain high phase purity of the final product. The color of the final product was pale green.
The phase identification through structure analysis of the new material was carried out by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using CuKa radiation (k = 1.540562 A˚ , RINT-2500 V, Rigaku) at 50 kV/100 mA. Crystalline silicon powder was used as an internal reference for the measurement of the lattice parameter. The diffraction patterns were recorded at room temperature in the range 10 – 80j (2h) in steps of 0.5j. For the present investigation, 2h value is limited to 35j.
The grain size and morphology characteristics of the synthesized powders were obtained by means of scanning electron microscopic (SEM) analysis using Cambridge Instruments (Stereo scan S200).
Lithium intercalation/deintercalation properties of Ni2(MoO4)3 were examined using potentiostatic and galvanostatic electrochemical techniques. The slow scan cyclic voltammetry (SSCV) experiment was performed in a two-electrode cell made up of Teflon housing using the basic electrochemical system (BES, Perkin Elmer, PARC model, USA) equipped with PowerCVR software. Cycle tests were conducted using a multichannel Arbin battery tester (Arbin instruments BT2000, USA) equipped with MITSPRO software.
The test cells were composed of a composite cathode (working electrode) and lithium metal anode (FMC, USA) as both counter and reference electrode. Composite cathodes (as positive electrode) were fabricated by mixing the Ni2(MoO4)3 synthesized powders, black carbon and PTFE binder in a weight ratio of 80:15:5. A microporous membrane (CelgardR 2400) soaked in a standard non-aqueous Li+ electrolyte mixture solution (1 M LiPF6 in EC + DMC, LP30, Merck) was used as a separator.
The test cells incorporating the above components were fabricated inside a glove box filled with high purity dry argon (99.999%). Cells were assembled following the procedure previously described by us [2]. Galvanostatic charge/discharge cycle tests were conducted in a two-electrode Teflon cell (similar to 2450 coin type) in a half-cell configuration.
Fig. 2 presents the X-ray diffraction pattern of Ni2(MoO4)3 annealed at 600 jC in oxygen atmosphere the (90 ml/min). It peaks were refined and sharp and there was no difference found either in peak position or intensity between the two samples annealed for 4 h (sample A) and 7 h (sample B) indicating the formation of well crystalline structure. As the diffraction pattern is similar for both the samples, we have chosen sample A for further investigation because lower annealing time is always preferred in order to obtain smaller grain size and increased surface area.
The peaks were indexed using a least-square refinement method.
The particle size distribution, shape and morphology features were studied using SEM analysis. Fig. 3 exhibits the morphology and grain size distribution of the synthesized powder annealed at 600 jC. The submicronic spherical grains are evident with almost uniform particle size. The soft agglomeration exhibits the pore free distribution of the spherical grains.
The electrochemical behavior of LixNi2(MoO4)3 were analyzed under galvanostatic and potentiostatic conditions. The as-prepared test cells were allowed to equilibrate until a stable value of open circuit voltage (OCV) was reached.
During the first discharge from OCV, the reduction of Ni3 +/Ni2 + was observed at about 2.6 V and as the reduction process continues down to 1.5 V (minimum cut off voltage studied), two other broad cathodic peaks were observed at f 2.1 and 1.7 V, presumably due to the reduction of Mo6 + (to its lower oxidation states). During the first charge after discharge, two well-resolved weak anodic peaks were evident at around 2.6 and 2.7 V. These anodic oxidation peaks were attributed to the oxidation of Mo back to it higher oxidation state (6+ state). Nickel oxidation (Ni2 +/Ni3 +) was observed at about 3.1 V. The CV results corroborate with the results of galvanostatic charge/discharge test (Figs. 5 and 6). The shift in the redox potential of the transition metals Ni2 + and Mo6 + is associated with the presence of polyanion (MoO4)2   in the host framework structure. 
The latter effect was reported by Nanjundaswamy et al. [22] who studied the effect of NASICON-related framework compounds such as M2(SO4)3 and LixM2(PO4)3 (M = transition metal) in the context of how changing the polyanion group shifts the redox potentials of the M cations and the influence on Li+ ion insertion rate and cyclability of a displacive phase transition of the host between lithiated and delithiated end members.
Fig. 5 presents the galvanostatic discharge – charge curves of the half-cell LixNi2(MoO4)3/Li between 1.6 and 3.5 V at low current densities: 1.42 mA/g (discharge) and 5.7 mA/g (charge). During testing, the cell was first discharged to insert lithium into the cathode material, and then charged to extract lithium ions.
It was observed that the first discharge curve from OCV (3.4 V) exhibited a sloping plateau beginning at about 2.7 V, which extends with a decreasing trend up to f 2.3 V vs. Li+/Li. This behavior is consistent with the first reduction peak in the CV studies and is controlled by the reduction process of nickel. Two well discernible plateaus were observed at about 2.1 and 1.7 V, which are consistent with molybdenum reduction (Fig. 4).
During the first discharge process of lithium insertion down to 1.6 V, f 4 Li+ could be inserted corresponding to a discharge capacity of f 170 mA h/g as shown clearly in Fig. 6. 
In order to accommodate lithium ions into the host framework structure and to preserve the electrical neutrality, vacant sites could be created in the open framework structure. It should be recalled that creation of vacancies during electrochemical cations structures.
During the first charge (extraction), three Li+ per formula unit could be extracted up to 3.5 V with a charge capacity of f 135 mA h/g leaving the formula unit LiNi2Mo3O12. The sloping plateau like behavior is seen during the charge sequence and the same trend is repeated for the subsequent cycle explaining the structural integrity of the material. During the subsequent discharge, 3.4 Li+ could be inserted with a discharge capacity of 154 mA h/g and in the following charge, 3.8 Li+ could be extracted from the framework leading to a capacity of 170 mA h/g.
The above results prove that the new material exhibits 3 V kind of profile and may be of interest in developing 3 V class Li-ion batteries. Further work is in progress to examine the extended cycling characteristics and the results will be published elsewhere.
XRD reveals a single-phase structure and SEM reveals the submicrometre grains embedded by a soft aggregate morphology. Electrochemical reversibility was demonstrated by means of SSCV and Galvanostatic cycle test. The material offers a reversible capacity of 170 mA h/g between the potential window 3.5 and 1.6 V. Further work is in progress to study the cycling stability of this new polyanion framework structures, LixM2 (MoO4)3 (where M = Ni, Co and Mn) and will be reported elsewhere.
