A new lithiated NASICON-type polyanion material, Li2Ni2(MoO4)3 was synthesized for the first time by means of a low temperature approach involving glycine as a mild combustion agent. The synthesized product, Li2Ni2(MoO4)3, was found to crystallize in an orthorhombic structure (space group Pmcn) with cell parameters a = 10.424(4) A˚ , b = 17.525(1) A˚ and c = 5.074(3) A˚ . The electronic state of each element present in the new material was confirmed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS) analysis. The metals content present in the new material was analyzed using inductively coupled plasma emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES). Fiber-like submicrometre grains were evident from scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis of the annealed powders. The electrochemical performance of the new material was examined in a half-cell configuration against lithium metal employing a conventional Li+ non-aqueous electrolyte. 
Slow scan cyclic voltammetry (SSCV) revealed the electrochemical reversibility of the material between the potential window of 4.9 V (charge cutoff) and 1.5 V (discharge cutoff). Reversible extraction/insertion of Li+ from and into the framework structure delivered a reversible capacity of f 115 mA h/g (4.9 – 1.5-V window) after the first charge/discharge cycle. D 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Because of the tremendous increase in number of power hunger mobile electronic devices, appropriate power sources are required to fulfill their portable power demands [1]. Among the available rechargeable power source technologies, lithium-ion batteries are becoming increasingly preferred power source of choice for the above applications due to their high energy density compared to other rechargeable systems known. Insertion materials made up of transition metal oxides with either spinel structure (3-D Li+ motion) or layered structure (2-D Li+ motion) have generated great interest as positive electrodes (cathode) in these advanced power sources through their high working voltage vs. Li+/ Li. These transition metal oxides have redox couple that accepts/donates electron for charge compensation for inserted/extracted Li+ ions reversibly through oxidation – reduction (redox) reaction.
Lithium battery industries are looking for suitable lithium storage electrodes that could exhibit high operating voltage/ specific capacity. As a result, there is a growing demand for new and/or improved electrode materials. Vanadium, cobalt, nickel and manganese-based transition metal oxides have been examined for rechargeable lithium battery applications in the past [2 – 5]. In view of cost, capacity, safety and environmentally benign, the search for newer cathode materials, superior to LiCoO2 widely being used at present, is still an on-going task and a variety of new materials are being investigated in this context [6 – 10].
Among the oxides, polyanions having 3-D open-framework structures are of much interest even though these materials intrinsically possess poor electronic conductivity which is considered to be the main drawback of using these polyanion compounds as lithium ion-storage electrodes for rechargeable batteries [11]. Several new ‘‘polyanion’’ materials belonging to olivine-type LixMVXO4 (MV= Transition metal) and NASICON structure-type LixMV2(XO4)3 (MV= Ti, Fe, V and X = P, As, Mo, W, S) have been reported [12 – 22]. Recently, these materials have received much attention to understand the reversible insertion/extraction behavior of Li+, despite their inherent insulating nature (poor electronic conductivity). 
Nevertheless, according to the best of our knowledge, polyanion compounds incorporating 3d group transition metals such as Mn, Ni and Co have not been studied as ion-storage electrodes so far. Similarly, NASICON-type compounds possessing polyanions such as SO4 have never been investigated in the context of high voltage positive electrodes (cathodes) for lithium batteries.
Synthesis of Li2Ni2(MoO4)3 was accomplished by means of a combined glycine – nitrate aqueous solution method via a simple soft-combustion approach previously reported by us [5,6]. Aqueous solutions containing nitrates of lithium and nickel together with aqueous hexa-ammonium heptamolybdate (Aldrich, USA) were homogeneously mixed in a predetermined stoichiometry of Li/Ni/Mo (1:1:1.5) and then were mixed with an aqueous glycine solution (amino acetic acid) which acted as a mild combustion agent (fuel). In the mixture solution, the stoichiometric composition of glycine was taken to be twice the molar fraction of the starting materials (fuel/oxidizer ratio). Green colored solution thus obtained was heated to boiling at about 100 jC, resulting in a dark green color paste-like substance upon evaporating the water. The resulting pastelike substance was further heated at 250 jC. 
Due to heat disintegration reaction of glycine and other organic compounds, the spontaneous exothermic decomposition reaction occurred resulting in voluminous pale-brown plumy powders (precursor) the so-called as-prepared product. Fig. 1 shows the sequential synthesis procedure to obtain the asprepared product. Annealing of the as-prepared product at various temperatures (500, 600 and 700 jC) for 4 h in air as well as in oxygen atmosphere resulted in brilliant yellow color fine powders of Li2Ni2(MoO4)3.
The product annealed at various temperatures was examined by employing a JEOL (model JDX 8030) Xray diffractometer equipped with a diffracted beam monochromator (Cu Ka radiation, k = 1.5406 A˚ ). The diffraction patterns were recorded at room temperature in the range 5 – 60j (2h) in steps of 0.5j. The cell parameters were calculated and refined by a least-squares analysis of the 2h values.
The information regarding the weight loss and phase formation temperature of the recovered precursor during the synthesis of Li2Ni2(MoO4)3 was obtained by means of simultaneous differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and thermo-gravimetric analysis (TG) in the temperature range from room temperature up to 600 jC using a Netzch analyzer (model STA 409 PG/PC) with a ramp rate of 5 jC/min.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS) analysis was carried out to identify the electronic state of various elements (Li, Ni, Mo and O) present in the new material Li2Ni2(MoO4)3 by using an Axis Ultra Imaging X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (Kratos analytical, Shimadzu). The base pressure of the sample chamber in the spectrom  9 Torr. All binding energies were eter was lower than 10 corrected with the carbon 1s line at 284.5 eV.
The stoichiometric composition of lithium, nickel and molybdenum in the new material was determined by using an inductively coupled plasma spectrometer (ICP, SPS 1500, Seiko Instruments, Japan) after dissolving the powder samples in HCl. The grain size and morphology characteristics of the synthesized powders were obtained by means of SEM analysis using Cambridge Instruments (Stereo scan S200).
Both potentiostatic and galvanostatic electrochemical techniques were used to analyze the redox properties of Li2Ni2(MoO4)3. The slow scan cyclic voltammetry (SSCV) experiment was performed in a two-electrode cell made up of Teflon housing with SS current collectors using a basic electrochemical system (BAS, Perkin Elmer, PARC model, USA) equipped with PowerCVR software. The test cells were composed of a composite cathode (working electrode) and lithium metal anode (FMC, USA) as both counter and reference electrode.
Composite cathodes (as positive electrode) were fabricated by mixing the Li2Ni2(MoO4)3 synthesized powders, carbon black and PTFE binder in a weight ratio of 80:15:5. The mixture was kneaded in mortar and pestle (agate type), rolled into thin sheets of around 100 Am thick, and cut into circular electrodes of 3.14-cm2 area and pressed onto an aluminum expanded grid mesh current collector. A microporous CelgardR membrane soaked in a standard nonaqueous Li+ electrolyte mixture solution (1M LiPF6 in EC + DMC, LP30, Merck) was used as a separator.
The test cells incorporating the above components were fabricated inside a glove box filled with high purity dry argon (99.999%) following the procedure previously described by us [5,6]. Galvanostatic charge/discharge cycle tests were conducted in a two-electrode Teflon cell (2450 coin type) in a half-cell configuration. Cycle tests were conducted using an Arbin battery tester (Arbin instruments BT2000, USA) equipped with MITSPRO software.
Fig. 2 shows the polyhedral crystal structure of Li2Ni2 (MoO4)3 as determined by the CrystalDesignerR software. Determination of the crystal structure of Li2Ni2(MoO4)3 revealed a three-dimensional framework consisting of metal – oxygen octahedra and trigonal prisms (where Li and Ni reside) which are interconnected by MoO4 tetrahedra. The hexagonal motif of Mo tetrahedra around Ni octahedra joined by their faces is clearly seen in Fig. 2. Lithium atoms may occupy sites between or within the layers. The open framework may allow Li+ ions to easily move topotactically in and out of the structure.
Fig. 3 shows the simultaneous TG – DSC thermal scans of the precursor complex from which the phase formation temperature of the material Li2Ni2(MoO4)3 was evaluated. DSC curve displays an endothermic peak and three exo-thermic peaks, which are associated with weight losses in TG curve. A small endotherm occurring at f 137 jC together with a slight weight loss of 2.97% is attributable to the superficial water loss due to the hygroscopic nature of the precursor complex. As the process of heating continues, a sharp exothermic transformation appeared at f 157 jC accompanied by a monotonic weight loss (39.82%) presumably due to the liberation of ammonia. The peaks centered at f 355 and f 434 jC with the corresponding weight losses of 5.56% and 9.49%, respectively, are attributed to the decomposition of two nitrates with the liberation of N2O.
As seen from TG thermal scan, the weight loss terminated at around 500 jC indicating the completion of the phase formation reaction.
The phase purity and the structure of the synthesized product were examined by using X-ray diffraction technique. In order to optimize the phase purity, the material was annealed at 500, 600 and 700 jC for 4 h and their corresponding XRD patterns are presented in Fig. 4. In Fig. 4a, the diffractogram corresponding to the product annealed at 500 jC/4 h exhibits some impurity peaks and these impurity peaks were found to disappear upon annealing at 600 and 700 jC (Fig. 4b and c). The peaks were found to grow in intensity showing the sharp diffraction features as the annealing temperature increases indicating the high order of crystallinity with much reduced crystallites. In the case of the product annealed at 600 jC, it was observed that the XRD peak positions are in good agreement with the preliminary crystallographic data previously reported (JCPDS #70-0452) indicating the formation of a well crystalline single-phase structure.
Li2Ni2(MoO4)3 was indexed in an orthorhombic structure with space group Pmcn. The cell parameters were determined using a refinement program (ICSD using POWD   12++) [32] and calculated to be a = 10.424(4) A˚ , b = 17.525(1) A˚ and c = 5.074(3) A˚ . As for the Li2Ni2(MoO4)3, no crystal structure information is available to the best of our knowledge except the one available in JCPDS Ref. #70-0452. However, the latter pattern is non-indexed.
The crystallite size dc (coherent length of the crystal lattice) was approximated from the X-ray line width, w, at full width at half maximum (FWHM) according to the Scherrer formula, dc = 0.9k/wcosh where k is the X-ray wavelength (1.5406 A˚ ) and h is the diffraction angle. The above formula gives dc = 56 nm for the sample annealed at 600 jC/4 h/O2.
Fig. 5 shows an expanded view of the differences in the peak positions of the chosen region with high intensity peaks (19 – 31j/2h angle) between the samples annealed in ambient air (sample A) and in oxygen atmosphere (sample B). A closer look at the diffractograms (Fig. 5) clearly reveals a slight but noticeable peak shift toward low 2h regions for the sample B with respect to sample A, which is obviously a result of the heat treatment for the sample B in the presence of oxygen atmosphere. The peak shift is an indication of the volume change of the crystal lattice, which would probably facilitate the easy Li+ extraction/ insertion kinetics thereby improving the rate capability and the discharge capacity compared to the one annealed in ambient air.
The electronic state of different elements present in the material Li2Ni2(MoO4)3 was confirmed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The Li (1s), Ni (2p3/2), Mo (3d5/2), and O (1s) XPS emission spectra are shown in Fig. 6. The Li 1s spectrum observed near 56 eV is shown in Fig. 6a. As for the nickel, there were two chemically different nickel species present in the XPS spectrum. That is, the peak at 855.961 eV was associated with a broad satellite peak with a slightly different binding energy (857.82 eV) (Fig. 6b). In this, the former peak is attributed to divalent nickel (Ni2 + 2p3/2) which is in good agreement with the binding energy values of Ni2 + in NiMoO4 [33] and the existence of the latter is probably due to surface oxidation of the nickel species. The binding energy position of the Mo (3d5/2) peak was 232.8 eV as depicted in Fig. 6c. Only one Mo chemical species was detected, e.g (MoO4)n   and is easily attributed to Mo6 +. 
Similar binding energies (232.5 eV) were obtained for Mo (3d5/2) in nickel molybdate (Ni2 +Mo6 +O4) [33] and MoO3 (3d5/2) [34]. The O (1s) data for Li2Ni2(MoO4)3 showed a single lattice site, with the main binding energy peak at 530 eV (Fig. 6d).
The particle size distribution, shape and morphology features were studied using the scanning electron microscopic (SEM) analysis. The scanning electron micrograph for the polycrystalline powders is exhibited in Fig. 7. It reveals the formation of fiber-like grains with controlled grain growth and morphology. It is clear from the micro-graph that the grains are loosely agglomerated, well connected with one another and the average size of the grains is within the submicrometre range.
In order to understand the electrochemical behavior of the new material, Li/Li2Ni2(MoO4)3 half cells were tested under galvanostatic and potentiostatic conditions. The material annealed at 600 jC/O2/4 h was taken for this investigation for obvious reasons. The as-prepared test cells were allowed to equilibrate until a stable value of the open circuit voltage (OCV) was reached.
Fig. 8 presents the slow scan cyclic voltammogram of Li2Ni2(MoO4)3 composite electrode vs. Li/Li + between 4.9 V (charge cutoff) and 1.5 V (discharge cutoff) (scan rate: 0.1 mV/s). The CV profile demonstrates the electrochemical reversibility of the new material and exhibits oxidation and reduction peaks corresponding to the two transition metal ions Ni2 + and Mo6 +.
During the first anodic scan, a weak current response was observed at about 4.4 V (inset in Fig. 8) indicating the first oxidation of Ni2 +/Ni3 + for the sample annealed in the oxygen atmosphere. During the first cathodic scan, the reduction of Ni3 + was observed as a single peak at f 3.2 V indicating the reduction process corresponding to Ni3 +/Ni2 +. 
The shift in the redox potential of Ni3 +/Ni2 + is associated with the presence of polyanion (MoO4)2   in the host framework structure. The latter effect was first reported by Nanjundaswamy et al. [27] who studied the effect of NASICON-related framework compounds such as M2(SO4)3 and LixM2(PO4)3 (M = transition metal) in the context of how a change in the polyanion group shifts the redox potentials of the M cations and the influence on the Li+ insertion rate and cyclability of end member phase transitions of the lithiated and delithiated phases. As the reduction process continues down to 1.5 V (minimum cut off voltage studied), two peaks were evident at about 2.6 and 1.9 V, presumably due to the reduction of Mo6 + (to its lower oxidation states). 
They were found to superimpose as a single broad peak during subsequent cycles suggesting the slow and steady dynamics of Li+ diffusion into the active material which is consistent with the result of galvanostatic discharge curves as shown in Fig. 9. Upon further cycling, a single broad anodic peak was observed at f 2.6 V which may be attributed to the Mo oxidation, followed by a high voltage peak at 4.34 V which is attributed to the oxidation of Ni2 +/Ni3 +. It is interesting to note that the broad anodic peak corresponding to the Mo6 + oxidation remains unaltered in terms of height and position upon repeated cycling suggesting the charge stability of the material at low voltage.
Interestingly, only two cathodic peaks were observed at about 3.2 V (Ni3 +/Ni2 + reduction) and 2.0 V (Mo reduction) during the second and subsequent cathodic scans as the cell was being cycled. However, the cathodic peak height (current profile) gradually decreases at about 2.0 V.
Fig. 9 shows the typical galvanostatic charge – discharge curves of the half-cell Li2Ni2(MoO4)3/Li between 4.9 and 1.5 V at low current densities: 2.5 mA/g (charge) and 1.25 mA/g (discharge). The number of Li+ participating in the reaction was calculated from the amount of electrical charges spent as a function of elapsed time on the test. During testing, the cell was first charged to extract lithium from the cathode material, and then discharged to insert lithium ions.
It was observed that the first charge curve from the open circuit voltage (2.8 V) exhibited a plateau with an onset at about 4.6 V, which extends steadily with an increasing trend up to 4.9 V vs. Li+/Li. During the first charge process of lithium extraction, one Li+ per formula unit could be extracted as shown clearly in Fig. 9. It is reasonable to expect at the end of the first extraction process that the stoichiometric composition at the positive electrode side 2+/3 +(Mo6 +O4)3 in order to compensate the could be LiNi2 charge neutrality in the host framework. During the first discharge, 2.6 Li+ per formula unit could be reversibly inserted down to 1.5 V with a discharge capacity of f 125 mA/g. Interestingly, a flat voltage was evident at around 1.6 V, and at the end of the first charge/discharge cycle terminating at 1.5 V (discharge cutoff), the practical composition was expected to be Li3 + xNi2(MoO4)3 (where x = 0.6). 
The plateau profile at about 1.5 V with a transient potential decrease from 1.7 V during the insertion process seems to be based on the reduction of Mo6 + to its lower oxidation states. Even though the compound exhibited a good high voltage charge profile during the first lithium extraction with a capacity of 45 mA h/g at 4.9 V vs. Li+/Li, the discharge profile demonstrated poor reduction kinetics during the beginning of discharge (insertion) between 4.9 and 3.0 V. Though the discharge curve appears to be flat and exhibited two-step discernible plateau profiles up to 2.5 V, the electrochemical insertion was limited to 0.25 lithium per formula unit between 4.9 and 2.5 V vs. Li+/Li. This poor rate kinetics could probably be due to the inherent structural limitation as well as poor electronic conductivity, which is common for polyanion materials reported so far [11]. Further work is in progress to improve the lattice electronic conductivity of the polyanion materials and will be reported elsewhere.
The low temperature soft-combustion synthesis and the structural and electrochemical properties of the new NASICON-type framework structure Li2Ni2(MoO4)3 were described here for the first time. The structure of the new material was determined by X-ray powder diffraction technique using the least squares refinement analysis and the cell parameters were calculated to be a = 10.424(4) A˚ , b = 17.525(1) A˚ and c = 5.074(3) A˚ (an orthorhombic structure with a space group Pmcn). XPS analysis showed the electronic valence states of the elements as Li+Ni2 + (Mo6 +O2   4)3. ICP revealed the actual chemical stoichiometry of the material as Li1.97Ni1.95Mo3O12. Electrochemical reversibility was demonstrated by means of SSCV. The cathodic behavior of Li2Ni2(MoO4)3//Li upon the first extraction process delivered 45 mA h/g at 4.9 V vs. Li/Li+ corresponding to the removal of one Li+ per formula unit while the reversible insertion process offered a specific capacity of f 115 mA h/g (4.9 – 1.5 V potential window).
