New trivalent praseodymium ion (Pr3+) conducting solid electrolyte composites, (PrxZr1−x)4/(4−x)Nb(PO4)3 (0.05 ≤ x ≤ 0.3) + NbPO5, were successfully developed by selecting the NASICON type structure as the mother structure candidate. The 94 ± 5% praseodymium ion in the composites was identiﬁed to hold the trivalent state by effective magnetic moment measurements and the pure Pr3+ ion conduction in the composite solid was demonstrated both by ac conductivity measurements in various oxygen partial pressures and by dc electrolytes.
Solid electrolyte is one of functional materials in which single ion species migrates in solids and various kinds of solid electrolytes have been extensively studied. The number of conducting cation species in solids reported drastically reduces with increasing their oxidation state because the ion conducting properties in solids are strongly dependent upon their valence state. In the case for high valent cation, the strong electrostatic interaction appears between the conducting cation and surrounding anions which comprising the crystal lattice. Therefore, the crystal structure should be strictly selected for realizing such a high valent cation conduction in solids.
In order to realize a pure trivalent ion migration in solids, surroundings which can lower the above mentioned strong electrostatic interaction is greatly requested in addition to realizing the suitable lattice structure. Furthermore, it is necessary for preparing the pure trivalent cation conducting solid electrolytes to use the starting materials without including any lower valent cation than trivalent state. While the -alumina single crystals (M3+ = transition metal M3+ ions [1–3] and rare earth ions [1–9]) where monovalent Na were exchanged for trivalent cation species by ion-exchange method, have been reported as trivalent ion conductors since 1983, the investigation of the trivalent ion conduction is only by the electrical conductivity measurements and the residual + Na ion conduction in addition to the trivalent ion migration cannot be excluded for the solid electrolytes prepared by the ion-exchange techniques [9]. 
As pure trivalent cation conductors developed with above mentioned concept, the M2(WO4)3 (M = Al, Sc, Y, Er–Lu) tungstate [10–14] with the quasi-layered Sc2(WO4)3 type structure and R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 (R = Sc, Y, Eu–Lu) [15–19] with the three dimensional NASICON (NASICON is the + Na super ionic conductor, which is a tailored solid electrolyte) type structure have been reported. However, the trivalent ion conductivities of the Sc2(WO4)3 type and the NASICON type solid electrolytes were still low in comparison with those of monoor divalent ion conductors. Furthermore, the conducting trivalent ion species in these solids were limited to Al3+ and some rare earth ions with small ionic radius. In the case for tungstate series, the solids with large sized rare earth ion (La–Ho) hold Eu2(WO4)3 type structure with monoclinic symmetry [20], showing insulating properties. For R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 type solids, the solid with large rare earth ion species cannot be obtained due to the decomposition of the phosphates. 
The great enhancement of the trivalent ion conductivity applicable for the practical application and the increase of the number of the conducting ion species are greatly expected from the commercially and academically view points.
As described above, since it is necessary for pure trivalent cation conducting solid electrolytes to select the stable trivalent cation species without showing any valence change, the solid electrolytes whose conducting ion species are cerium or praseodymium ion, have not been reported because these ions hold both trivalent and tetravalent state in addition to their large ionic size. While Na -alumina prepared by ion-exchange method has been reported [6,7], the effect of residual Na ion (>3%) conduction and the valence of Pr ion in the solid were not investigated at all and, therefore, /Pr3+ + -alumina cannot be grouped as pure Pr3+ the Na ion conducting solid electrolytes. For the purpose of realizing the cerium or praseodymium ion conducting solid electrolytes without showing the valence change of these ions, the selection of the structure is greatly important. Here, we focused on the phosphates with NASICON type structure because Ce3+ ions generally exist stably in phosphates. 
As a result, we successfully developed a novel high cerium ion conducting solid electrolyte, (CexZr1−x)4/(4−x)Nb(PO4)3 the valence change of cerium ion in the oxygen partial pressure range −5 and 105 Pa, by selecting the NASICON of between 10 type ZrNb(PO4)3 [22] as the mother phase. However, the cerium ion conducting solid electrolyte is easily reduced in a reducing atmosphere (lower than PO2 In this article, we developed the pure trivalent praseodymium ion (Pr3+ ) conducting (PrxZr1−x)4/(4−x)Nb(PO4)3 (0.05 ≤ x ≤ 0.3) + NbPO5 solid electrolyte composite in order to realize simultaneously both a high ion conductivity and a higher stability at a reducing atmosphere compared with those of (CexZr1−x)4/(4−x)Nb(PO4)3, and the Pr3+ conducting properties in the solid electrolyte composite were investigated in details.
Deposit at the cathodic surface after dc electrolysis 14.4 12.6 11.0 62.0
New pure trivalent praseodymium ion (Pr3+ ) conducting solid electrolyte composites, (PrxZr1−x)4/(4−x)Nb(PO4)3 (0.05 ≤ x ≤ 0.3) + NbPO5, were developed by strictly selecting the NASICON type ZrNb(PO4)3 phosphate as the mother phase. By intentionally changing the conducting ion species from Zr4+ and by introducing three kinds of high valent cation species such as Zr4+ , Nb5+ , and P5+ as the constituent of the solid, a high Pr3+ conductivity was successfully realized, and the highest Pr3+ ion conductivity was obtained for the (Pr0.1Zr0.9)40/39Nb(PO4)3 + NbPO5 composite. Since the (PrxZr1−x)4/(4−x)Nb(PO4)3 (0.05 ≤ x ≤ 0.3) + NbPO5 composite shows the pure high trivalent Pr3+ ion conducting characteristics in a wide oxygen par−13 to 105 Pa), the applications tial pressure region (PO2: 10 for the devices such as chemical sensors and ion-selective electrode are greatly expected.

