
Thus, in a CO2 sensor with NASICON as solid electrolyte the sodium activity prevailing at the measuring electrode is outside the ionic domain of the electrolyte. This is in apparent contradiction to most of the literature reports on the behavior of such gas sensors, but conﬁrms previous ﬁndings on the extent of the electronic conductivity in Na–beta-alumina under comparable conditions.
NASICON is known to be a sodium ion conductor that is as good as Na–beta-alumina regarding the suitability for its employment as solid electrolyte. This is conﬁrmed by lots of examples of application, e.g. in potentiometric gas sensors [1–5]. In view of the previously gained knowledge about the electronic conduction properties of Na–beta-alumina [6–14] it must be expected that NASICON behaves similarly. In other words, the behavior of NASICON in e.g. a solid state CO2 sensor could be affected by a noticeable impact of electronic conduction through the electrolyte. Up to the present there has been no apparent indication for that in the literature.
The situation is, however, more complex insofar as under certain conditions the phenomenon of electronic conduction may exhibit properties that apparently hide the implications of that phenomenon. This is at least known from previous studies on Na–beta-alumina [6,11,13]. Therefore, and in order to check the general relevance of the knowledge about the electronic conduction of Na–beta-alumina, the present study has been undertaken which is aiming at the quantitative determination of the p-electronic conduction parameter a⊕ under the conditions prevailing in a solid state CO2 sensor.
In Eq. (4) Ni and Fe as well as NiO and FeO, respectively, must be considered to be equal reaction partners which results in a mixed potential.
It is known from the literature [16–20] that NASICON just like Na–beta-alumina establishes a certain sodium oxide activity which can be described by the following equilibrium: Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12  2) Na1+x−yZr2SixP3−xO12−y/2 electrode reaction: 2Na + zNiO(borate glass) + (1 − z) FeO(borate glass)  1) Na2O(NASICON) + zNi(alloy) + (1 − z)Fe(alloy) (7) with z either being equal to 0 or 1. By means of Eq. (7), a 3) is deﬁned as follows: 
The solid electrolyte, a NASICON-type compound with the nominal composition Na3Si2Zr1.88Y0.12PO11.94 was obtained via a conventional ceramic route from solid state reaction of (ZrO2)0.97(Y2O3)0.03 (Tosoh), Na3PO4·12H2O (Merck) and SiO2 (Merck). The precursors were mixed for 2 h in a planetary ball-mill inside a Teﬂon container with ethanol and zirconia balls. This mixture was subsequently dried at 60 C for 8 h in a closed Pt crucible to avoid contamination. At this stage, the material was single phase with an X-ray diffraction pattern which can be indexed as the Na3Zr2Si2PO12 rhombohedral R3c space group (JCPDS-ICDD card ﬁle 84–1199). 
The use of a reactive zirconium precursor such as tetragonal (ZrO2)0.97(Y2O3)0.03 instead of pure monoclinic ZrO2 signiﬁcantly decreases the sintering temperature yielding denser ceramics with homogeneous microstructures, apparently free of amorphous phases and an overall higher electrical conductivity [21,22].
The solid electrolyte, in the form of a pellet (10 mm in diameter; 2 mm thickness), was encapsulated into a FeNi48 crucible (Krupp VDM GmbH) by means of a special solder glass [23]. The glass acts as a solvent for the oxides formed at the surface of the metallic crucible and establishes an intimate contact between the solid electrolyte and the crucible. Simultaneously the glass separates the reference electrode side of the electrolyte from the gas in the ambience.
The measuring electrode was made by isostatic pressing (625 MPa, 1 min) of Na2CO3 powder (Merck) to a pellet of about 10 mm in diameter and a thickness of 1–2 mm. Within the pellet, gold wires were randomly distributed which ensured an electrical resistance of less than 1  through the pellet.
The cell setup is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. A spring loaded alumina disc ﬁtted with gas channels served to press a gold net against the Na2CO3 pellet. The cell was kept in a heated quartz glass sample holder whose temperature was maintained constant by an electronic controller (Eurotherm 902S) within ±0.5 K. The sample holder compartment was ﬂushed with CO2–O2–(Ar) gas mixtures of known compositions and a constant ﬂow rate of 2 l/h. The gas compositions were established by successively diluting premixed CO2–O2–(Ar) gas mixtures with pure Ar (impurity less than 10 ppm) using calibrated mass ﬂow controllers (FC 2900, Tylan General Corp.). The premixed gases had the compositions:
The voltage signal was recorded by means of a high impedance electrometer (Keithley 614, Keithley Instr. Inc.).
In Fig. 2 the voltage of cell (I) is plotted as a function of the sodium activity of the measuring electrode for T = 560 C. Throughout the measurements the sodium activity was adjusted by alternately rising and decreasing the O2 and CO2 partial pressure of the gas atmosphere under isothermal conditions. At least in the high and medium temperature region there was no apparent inﬂuence of the direction of the activity variation on the cell signal. Regardless of the temperature, the voltage was recorded not until its value had reached a steady-state level for several hours. Thus, the minimum period of time between two measuring points was 24 h. It becomes evident from Fig. 2 that similar to previous observations on Na–beta-alumina under the same conditions [13], a non-linear plot is obtained. Considering the trend, the voltage qualitatively follows Nernst’s law (Eq. (10)) implying that it increases with decreasing sodium chemical potential of the measuring electrode. 
However, the slope of the U versus log a 3) 3) Na curve deviates from that according to Nernst’s law (dashed line in Fig. 2). The deviation is comparatively small in the region of high sodium activities, it becomes much higher with decreasing a 3) 3) Na. Finally, the curve leads into a section that is totally insensitive to changes of the sodium activity of the measuring electrode. Qualitatively the same applies to other temperatures out of the interval covered (300–620 C) which is exemplarily demonstrated by Fig. 3 for T = 360 Based on Eq. (9) and on the experimental data points from the U versus log a 3) 3) Na plots, a⊕ can be quantitatively determined by means of a non-linear regression procedure. As described in [13], the sodium activity a 3) Na of the reference electrode need not be known as a prerequisite for this procedure. 
By means of the numerical values for a⊕ obtained from the regression analysis, the experimental data points of the U versus log a 3) 3) Na plots can be described satisfactorily which is demonstrated by the solid lines through these points (Figs. 2 and 3). In view of Eq. (9), the bending of the U versus log a 3) 3) Na curves proves to be due to the rising contribution of the constant parameter a⊕ to the numerator of the logarithmic term as a 3) 3) Na decreases exponentially from the right to the left end of the abscissa of the U versus log a 3) 3) Na plots (Figs. 2 and 3). In other words, the voltage of cell (I) to an increasing extent becomes internally short-circuited due to electronic conduction within the electrolyte.
As a consequence, the curve slope changes and becomes comparatively ﬂatter. Quantitatively, the temperature dependence can be expressed as follows:
In the low temperature region the shape of the curve is obviously determined by additional phenomena that are superimposed on the effect of partial electronic conduction. Therefore, the data appear to be not reliable in this region. It can be assumed that the temperature dependence of a⊕ reC. As mains to be controlled by Eq. (11a) even below 380 a reason for the particular low temperature behavior it is e.g. conceivable that the establishment of the steady-state level of the voltage takes too much time and so this level might not be reached completely during a normal measuring run. This interpretation is in accordance with the observation that, as indicated above, with decreasing temperature the U versus log a 3) 3) Na plots increasingly differ from each other depending on whether the sodium activity is increased or decreased.
Another phenomenon that could falsify the ﬁndings on a⊕ is the voltage decay at the electrodes. Being the consequence of the ionic transference due to the internal electronic short-circuit, the electrode polarization is always superimposed on the voltage drop inside the electrolyte. The extent of this impact might become larger as the temperature goes down. Moreover, the electrode polarization may play a role as falsifying factor within the entire temperature region. The effect can hardly be evaluated quantitatively which is why it is neglected here in the determination of a⊕. For this simpliﬁcation, allowance must be made that the true a⊕ values could be smaller than the ones deﬁned according to Eq. (11a) and (11b). Regardless of the uncertainty in respect of the numerical a⊕ data, the prevalence of electronic transference through the cell in question is beyond any doubt. 
This has to do with the fact that, as a necessary prerequisite for the occurrence of electrode polarization, a ﬁnite electronic short-circuit in the electrolyte must exist [13]. Of course, such a consideration requires that any external load of the cell is excluded which may be regarded as fulﬁlled in the measurements.
As revealed by Fig. 5, the present results on a⊕ are slightly above those for Na–beta-alumina and altogether close to the upper limit of the sodium activity interval covered by the measuring electrode of cell (I). That means, the chemical potential of that electrode which is identical with the conditions in a potentiometric solid state CO2 sensor is outside the ionic domain of NASICON. In other words, NASICON becomes a predominant mixed ionic-electronic conductor when used as solid electrolyte in such a sensor. Thus, NASICON is similar to Na–beta-alumina or even worse considering the suitibility as solid electrolyte. Note that this conclusion must be considered in the context of the particular property of a⊕ according to which the magnitude of that parameter may adapt to the surrounding conditions. As a consequence, the impact of the partial electronic short-circuit on the behavior of the sensor may appear as less intensive although permanently present.
It must be mentioned that the ﬁndings on a⊕ as described above could be considered in retrospect as a kind of justiﬁcation for the simplifying assumption about negligible electrode polarization in the determination of a⊕. Since the a⊕ values differ from each other implying that the total amount of internal load of cell (I) will be different depending on whether NASICON or Na–beta-alumina is used as electrolyte, the impact of electrode polarization, if any, is expected to be different as well. Under these conditions, the identity of the temperature dependence of a⊕, as observed for NASICON and Na–beta-alumina, would be highly incidental if electrode polarization really had a noticeable effect.
The present results on the p-electronic conduction parameter a⊕ obtained by potentiometric measurements demonstrate that NASICON, similar to Na–beta-alumina, becomes electronically conductive under the conditions prevailing in a solid state CO2 sensor with sodium carbonate being the gas sensitive layer of the measuring electrode. The a⊕ values describe two sections of straight lines in a log a⊕ versus 1/T diagram with two different slopes from which one is identical with the temperature dependence of the measuring electrode potential. Thus, the peculiar property has been proven again that a⊕ is not a constant but adapts to the chemical potential in the surroundings of the solid electrolyte. This indicates the general relevance of the underlying phenomenon.