A reduced temperature route is explored for the preparation of ceramics with NASICON composition. The procedure includes sol-gel synthesis, Sample Controlled Thermal Analysis of the precursor powders and hotpressing the powders under 0.3 GPa and at temperatures between 600 and 900 C. It is shown that ceramics with densities around 90% can be obtained by this route. Electrical conductivity values and activation energies are determined and discussed.
NASICON is a well-known crystalline sodium ion conductor with a composition Na1+x Zr2Six P3−x O12 (0 < x < 3) [1] that is especially used in electrochemical sensors for liquid [2] and gaseous environments [3, 4]. The NASICON structure is formed by ZrO6 octahedra, connected by SiO4 or PO4 tetrahedra. The sodium ions occupy two different sites in the crystal lattice: one formula unit is ﬁxed and the excess sodium ions (x) are at interstitial sites, where they possess a large mobility in the 3D channels of the NASICON structure. The large interstitial cation concentration and their high mobility induce an important ionic conductivity even at relatively low temperatures. For example ◦ −1S/cm are at 300 obtained. [5]
The loss of sodium often leads to the appearance of ZrO2 as a second phase. Sol-gel techniques [6, 7] have been investigated to improve phase purity and sinter ability. [8] However, obtaining dense, ﬁne-grained NASICON is impossible with any of the reported processing methods. Our aim is trying to achieve the fabrication of dense, nano-sized NASICON materials to investigate the effect of grain size on the electrical properties of a Na ion conductor. In the present work, we explore a “nano-route”, based on low temperature processing steps only. This procedure includes sol-gel synthesis of precursors, thermal treatment at reduced temperature to eliminate solvent and volatile components, densiﬁcation to ceramics by hot-pressing, and, ﬁnally, assessment of the electrical properties of the obtained materials.
Precursor composition Na3Zr2Si2PO12 were prepared by a sol-gel technique described by Shimizu et al. [7] High purity reagents nominal (Aldrich) were used without further puriﬁcation: 0.69 g NH4H2PO4, 4.5 g ZrO(NO3)2 · 8H2O and an excess of 1.46 g Na2SiO3 were dissolved in water and stirred at room temperature for 2 hours. The pH was then adjusted to 3 by adding HNO3 and the solution ◦ heated to 60 C for 3 hours. 
The viscous gel was ﬁnally ◦ C during 12 hours. dried at 110 parameter, here the pressure of evolved gases, constant. The procedure was described in detail elsewhere [9, 10]. The residual pressure above the sample was maintained at 1 Pa until a ﬁnal temperature of 600 C was reached. The quantity of sample used was about 0.1 g. The totality of the gaseous decomposition products was monitored by quadrupole mass spectrometry (VC quadrupole).
The hot-press used was a prototype (Cyberstar, Grenoble, France), which was described elsewhere [11].
The precursor powder treated by SCTA was introduced in pure alumina dies and pressed under 0.3 GPa. The heating rate was 5 K/min until the plateau temperature was reached where the sample was kept 2 hours. Three plateau temperatures were investigated: 600, 750, and 900 C. The evolution of density could be monitored in situ by dilatometry.
The structure of the samples was investigated at all preparation stages by usual characterization techniques: X-ray diffraction (D5000 diffractometer, Siemens) and Scanning Electron Microscopy (Philips XL30 ESEM and Cambridge instruments S90). The density of the samples was determined from mass and geometrical dimensions and using Archimedes’ technique. The electrical properties were measured by Impedance Spectroscopy (EG&G, model 6310) in the frequency and 105 Hz under pure range between 10 argon.
Figure 1 shows the evolution of the sample mass during SCTA. One can notice several steps, where the mass loss is particularly large. 
The mass loss below 200 C can be attributed to the removal of more or less strongly bound water molecules, adsorbed or constitutional, whereas be◦ tween 200 and 600 C NO evolution, due to the decomposition of nitrates, is predominant. This can be concluded from the simultaneous increase of the traces for NO, N and O fragments. The removal of volatile components is essentially complete at 600 C, where a total mass loss of more than 40% of the initial mass is observed. The X-ray diffraction pattern of the sample after removal of volatile components is shown in Fig. 2: the broad diffraction line around the NASICON reﬂection indicates an amorphous phase, without major amounts of crystalline compounds. The microstructure observed by Scanning Electron Microscopy is presented in Fig. 3. Small agglomerated particles with a mean particle size of about 60 nm are visible. This is in contrast with materials prepared at this temperature by traditional thermal methods where signiﬁcant crystallization occurs. 
The fact that this material prepared via SCTA is amorphous has important implications with respect to the following treatment with the hot press.
The amorphous structure is less conductive and presents higher activation energy, indicating less favorable conditions for ionic motion in this phase. However, the lower processing temperature might be advantageous for large scale preparation of materials for sensor applications.

