Neutron incoherent scattering measurements were performed on (H3O)Zr2(PO4)3 Nasicon by the quasi-elastic spectrometer IN13 (ILL, Grenoble), to characterize the slow proton dynamics of the H3O+ ion in this compound. Both quasi-elastic and elastic data were collected at temperatures above and below the order-disorder phase transition (Tc ) 177 K). Quasi-elastic contributions with peak full widths at half-maximum of 12 and 33  237)eV (corresponding to proton jumping times of 110 and 40 ps) were determined at 150 and 200 K, respectively. This supports a confined proton motion both above (faster) and below (slower) the transition temperature, consistent with the full and partial disorder of the hydronium ion found in the high-T rhombohedral and low-T monoclinic phase, respectively, by previous neutron diffraction experiments. Results of the elastic scans vs momentum transfer and temperature are analyzed and discussed.
Nasicon systems, with the simplest composition AM2(PO4)3, are well-known for the high mobility therein usually shown by the alkali atoms A, leading to possible applications as solid electrolytes and cathode intercalation materials in electrochemical devices. In particular, the crystal structure of lithium phases such as LiZr2(PO4)3 was thoroughly investigated by neutron diffraction, so as to clarify the complex order-disorder of Li atoms and its relation with the polymorphism and ion conduction properties of this material.1,2 Substitutions of A with ammonium or hydrogen ions were early attempted, producing among others the phase (H3O)Zr2(PO4)3: this showed an electrical conductivity increasing from 5  2) 10-7 to 5  2) 10-5 ¿-1 cm-1 in the thermal range 40-160  176) C, before dehydration occurred.3 This conductivity is low for direct applications as proton conductors, but by bonding and pelletizing techniques, a patented product based on hydronium Nasicon, Hyceram, could be prepared and characterized.4 
Besides, there is a clear interest in elucidating the structural and dynamical behavior of H atoms in this phase, to suggest atomistic mechanisms for the process of proton transfer in ionic conductivity.
The presence of the H3O+ molecular unit (hydronium ion) in the structure of hydrogenated Nasicon was proved by neutron diffraction,5,6 thus showing (H3O)Zr2(PO4)3 to be one of the very few solid compounds where this ionic molecular species has been observed. Other examples well characterized by neutron diffraction refer to H3O+ in zeolitic frameworks.7,8 On the other hand, the hydronium ion is quite common in liquid acidic water solutions and is likely to play an important role in complex biological systems, but of course, it is more difficult to characterize structurally and dynamically because of the absence of long-range order. Further, by the recent neutron diffraction study of (H3O)Zr2(PO4)3 an order-disorder phase transition was discovered6 at Tc ) 177 K, relating the rhom-† INFM.
As several alternative hydrogen sites are present in (H3O)Zr2(PO4)3, this relatively simple system is also a good prototype for studying the proton dynamics in a multiple potential well. Such dynamical effects in simple crystalline compounds can be very relevant for other fields, too, where a much more complex arrangement of hydrogen bonds exist, like the large and complicated molecules important for biophysics. Indeed, the occupancy distribution of the various hydrogen sites may be static, according to a domain pattern configuration of the crystal, and transitions between different patterns (equivalent to movements of domain walls) would be switched by an external perturbation, like the sample temperature. On the other hand, the hydrogen distribution observed in the average disordered structure can be due to a dynamic process, and in this case the protons would not occupy the same site all the time. 
The coherent elastic (diffraction) experiment is not able to discriminate between these two different explanations of disorder, so that other neutron scattering techniques have to be employed to probe directly the dynamical behavior of hydrogen atoms.
Other very interesting and subtle aspects of proton dynamics have been recently revealed, by neutron scattering experiments, in the prototype crystalline system KHCO3, where multiple sites could be available for the H atoms.9,10 Indeed, in that case an ordered configuration was detected, but parallely the new phenomenon of macroscopic quantum coherence was claimed to be present. This would be related to the fermion behavior of protons and to the ensuing antisymmetric character of their vibrational wave function and would affect both the dynamics and the statics of hydrogen atoms, as they are probed in neutron scattering experiments. A complex behavior of neutron Compton scattering is also observed in KH2PO4 and attributed to quantum tunneling.11 There are thus a number of fundamental studies in progress on the dynamics of protons in simple crystalline systems, which presently make this topic a relevant one in the field of solid-state research.
Therefore, we started an investigation of the slow hydrogen dynamics in (H3O)Zr2(PO4)3 by quasi-elastic and elastic incoherent neutron scattering, with the aim of extracting all possible information about the nature of the proton motion below and above the order-disorder transition temperature, so as to throw light onto the real character of disorder of the hydronium ion in this compound.
The strong incoherent scattering cross section of the proton makes the incoherent neutron scattering a very powerful mean to follow the dynamics of single protons in hydrogen containing systems. As the probe used has a strictly local character, the dynamical behavior seen is quite uncoupled from crystal longrange order effects. The motion of hydrogen between equivalent sites in NASICON can be expected to be rather slow and in the range of several tenths of a picosecond. Therefore, an investigation of such a slow proton dynamics needs high-resolution inelastic neutron scattering experiments in the microelectronvolts (quasi-elastic) energy range. Further, due to the small bond lengths of hydrogen atoms, an extended momentum transfer range should be explored in reciprocal space, to have sensitivity to the motion of protons across short distances of the order of 1 Å. 
The spectrometer IN13, installed at the High Flux Reactor of the Institut Laue Langevin (Grenoble, France), was found to be very well suited for this investigation because the energy resolution is 9  237)eV and a wavevector Q transfer up to 5.3 Å-1 is available, with a resolution of about 0.2 Å-1.
Two different experiments were performed. The first one was a quasi-elastic experiment, where the final neutron energy was held fixed and the incoming energy was varied in an energy window from -25 to +25  237)eV. As the quasi-elastic experiment is very time-consuming, this investigation had to be limited to two temperature values (150 and 200 K) below and above the order-disorder phase transition, respectively. The second experiment was carried out in the elastic configuration, to collect the intensity of the nominally elastically scattered neutrons as a function of the wavevector transfer Q. The elastic scans were performed in a temperature range from 20 to 270 K. In both experiments the sample, which was in the form of a very fine powder,6 was contained in the space between two thin coaxial aluminum cylinders with radii 20 and 19 mm. 
In this way the sample geometry was optimized for collecting the scattered neutrons in all directions with minimum difference in the scattering geometry, still having a small sample thickness (1 mm); further, the sample was immersed in the full incoming neutron beam. The sample density, after slightly pressing the powder, was about one-third that of the bulk sample.
The collected data were first corrected for incident flux, cell scattering and self-shielding, and they were eventually normalized with respect to results obtained for a vanadium sample, which was used as a standard isotropic elastic scatterer. No multiple scattering correction was applied, as the scattering power of the present sample turned out to be rather small.
The present quasi-elastic results can be analyzed in terms of two components according to the following equation:
where Q and  15) are the momentum and energy transfers and R( 15)) is the instrument energy resolution function as determined from the vanadium scan. In eq 1 the fitting intensity Ifit(Q, 15)) is assumed to be contributed by the sum of an elastic ( 15) ) 0) and an inelastic component, and in the limit of the present experimental resolution, it can be expressed as
The experimental elastic intensity at fixed Q shows, as a function of temperature, a smooth decreasing trend at T , Tc, but on approaching the transition temperature, it drops suddenly. Of course a nonnegligible fraction of the intensity decrease should come from the hydrogen Debye-Waller factor exp[2W(Q)], which is quite high due to the small hydrogen mass.6 Therefore, we corrected the temperature dependence of the elastic intensity by an appropriate Debye-Waller factor derived from the data themselves. To obtain the temperature dependence of W(Q), a simple Debye model was used with TD ) 200 K. Considering the experimental errors, the resulting W(Q) value is in agreement with that one can derive from the diffraction experiment of ref 6. The so corrected data show a substantially constant trend up to about 150 K, followed by an abrupt decrease up to 180 K and again a constant trend at higher temperature. 
The same behavior is observed qualitatively for all Q values included in the experiment; therefore, at first the data were averaged over all the momentum transfer range and then analyzed.
To enhance the trend in the neighborhood of Tc, we defined the following normalized quantity:
where ILT and IHT are the Debye-Waller corrected intensities at low and high temperature, respectively, in the regions far from Tc, where there is almost no T dependence. The function S(T) is a sort of order parameter of the transition as observed by means of elastic scattering, and it is plotted in Figure 4. Therein the trend of S(T) is also compared to that of the monoclinic unit-cell edge a derived from the diffraction measurements versus T,6 and a strong similarity is apparent. The jump of S(T) observed at about 175 K agrees nicely with the four parameters W(Q), ae(Q), aqe(Q), and ¡(Q). In Figure 3 we report the half-widths ¡(Q) at 150 and 200 K as functions of the momentum transfer Q. To improve the statistics, the detectors were binned in groups of six. However, this binning does not affect the quality of the fitting, as the width ¡ of the quasi-elastic term is almost independent of Q, as apparent from Figure 3.
At the lower temperature (150 K), the diffraction results6 indicate that the system is in a partially ordered state, with two of the three protons located in well-defined sites, but that some residual disorder affects the third proton of the hydronium ion. Indeed, a finite quasi-elastic contribution with a width significantly exceeding that of the instrument resolution appears clearly from the present incoherent scattering data. This demonstrates that there is a residual proton dynamics with a half-width at half-maximum of 5.8 ( 0.5  237)eV, consistent with the possible flipping motion of one of the three protons between two sites suggested by the diffraction experiment. At the higher temperature (200 K) a much faster proton dynamics is observed, due to the larger width of 16.5 ( 1.0  237)eV; this would correspond to the umbrella-like inversion of the hydronium ion, giving rise to the extensive disorder present in the HT phase.
Therefore, such results suggest the order-disorder transition is probably connected to the proton dynamics. At low temperature and with slow proton fluctuations, the system would tend to order the protons according to a fixed configuration of the H3O+ ion, except for a possible residual flipping motion of one H atom. On increasing temperature, the much faster proton motion would introduce an extensive disorder with six equivalently populated proton sites. The temperature dependence of the quasi-elastic width, on the basis of the two data at 150 and 200 K, is compatible with an Arrhenius trend with activation energy of 55 meV (see below). Measurements at many more temperature values would be needed, of course, to establish the Arrhenius behavior of ¡(T) unambiguously.
As the width of the quasi-elastic peak is not Q dependent either below or above Tc, the proton dynamics should be confined in both cases. The mean residence time between subsequent jumps of the proton in its confined potential well is thus simply  244) ) p/¡, and values of 110 ( 10 and 40 ( 3 ps are derived for  244) at 150 and 200 K, respectively. Long-range diffusion of the proton should therefore be excluded on the basis of the present data. Indeed, such a process would produce a peak half-width behavior of type:
An approximate analysis of the data of eq 4 can be performed in terms of the width of the quasi-elastic process and the width of the resolution function. By convoluting a Lorentzian quasielastic peak with a rectangular approximation of the energy resolution function in an elastic window scan, the following analytic relationship is obtained:
On the basis of all results obtained, the complex disorder of the hydronium ion in (H3O)Zr2(PO4)3 is shown to have a dynamical character, leading to the following conclusions. First, the monoclinic structure of the LT phase is characterized by a distribution of the H atoms, which cannot be completely static, as a proton dynamics slower than 100 ps is still present. Therefore, the residual disorder observed in the diffraction study,6 with one of the three H atoms of the hydronium ion distributed over two sites with 2/3 and 1/3 probabilities, is proved to have an important dynamical component. Further, the proton motion is clearly shown to be localized by the absence of any Q dependence of the width of the quasi-elastic peak. The space range of this dynamics could be fully determined by exploring larger Q values, so as to confirm or not that only two sites are involved in the motion, as the site-to-site distances would be different according to the number of sites. 
A very detailed temperature scan would also be needed, to discriminate between two possible origins of the motion: either a classical thermally activated jump between different sites, with an Arrhenius-like T dependence of the quasi-elastic peak width, or a quantum-mechanical tunneling, which can be observed at low temperature only with negligible thermal dependence.
The second conclusion concerns the behavior of the HT disordered phase. In this case the proton dynamics is much faster, and it becomes faster and faster on increasing the temperature. The experimental energy range of this hightemperature motion is in perfect agreement with the interpretation of the motion as a classical jump between occupied and empty sites around the oxygen atom of the H3O+ ion. Therefore, the motion we have observed has no relationship with a diffusion-like proton transport, which would occur on a different time and distance scale. This confirms, on a direct dynamical basis, the mechanism proposed in the previous study6 for proton mobility in (H3O)Zr2(PO4)3 Nasicon, which relies on thermally activated hopping with no diffusion processes.
