Currently investigated typical potentiometric gas sensor + consists of solid electrolyte (for example Nasicon, Na ␤-alumina) as well as sensing and reference electrodes attached from both sides of the solid electrolyte. One of the important problems in the development of such sensing devices, leading to the future commercial application, is the long-term stability of the sensor signal. Among principal sensor properties such as sensitivity, selectivity or response time, the lifetime (long-term stability of signal) of gas sensor is one of the most important factor determining the practical use of such devices. In general, it is required that any gas sensing device should exhibit stable and reproducible signal for the period of at least 2–3 years (17 000–26 000 h).
The successful attempts to improve the sensor performance by modiﬁcation of the sensing electrode material were described for the ﬁrst time in [1,2]. It was found that sensors based on binary carbonates M2CO3–M CO3 (where M and M denote alkaline metal and alkaline-earth metal, respectively), exhibit much better long-term stability comparing to sensors build on simple carbonates. Among many others the Li2CO3−BaCO3 binary carbonate system was proposed as a sensing electrode material, because of the lowest afﬁnity to water vapor of Li2CO3 comparing to the other alkaline metal carbonates [1]. The stable behavior of potentiometric sensor was also observed in case of eutectic phase of Li:K:Na carbonates used as an auxiliary electrode material [3].
Another progress in improvement of sensor stability and performance was made by exact deﬁnition of reference electrode potential [4–6]. The use of two phase systems of Na2Ti6O13–TiO2, Na2Ti3O7–Na2Ti6O13, Na2SnO3–SnO2 [4,5] or LiCoO2–Co3O4 [6] allowed to obtain sensors with stable signal, where no shift of EMF value was observed during several weeks. The long-term stability of sensors was found to be dependent not only on electrode composition. The geometry of sensor, thermal treatment history, the presence of water vapor also affects the long-term stability. For example, in paper [7] the inﬂuence of the carbonate sensing electrode thickness on the performance of sensor was determined. The sensors with the thick layer of carbonate exhibited much better stability comparing to the thin ﬁlm based sensors. In paper [8] the inﬂuence of heat treatment on sensor stability was described. It was found that the stability of sensor might be improved by periodic heating-up above normal working temperature. 
The inﬂuence of water vapor on the performance and long-term stability of CO2 sensors was the subject of several papers. An interesting prototype sensor with internal zeolytic ﬁlter sieve, stable for the period of 2 years (in dry atmosphere) was described in [9]. If this sensor was tested in the humid atmosphere, the EMF values decreased but the EMF difference between 350 ppm level and the measured level of CO2 pressure was unchanged. Important details concerning the mechanism of water vapor interaction with sensor materials are presented in [10]. The most recent papers [11,12] describe the inﬂuence of use of different oxide materials (Bi2Me0.1V0.9O5.35 [11] or La1−xSrxMnO3 [12]) on performance of sensors in humid atmosphere. Another promising approach to improve the stability of constructed sensors seems to be the combined use of two solid electrolytes [13,14].
Although many works have reported sensor instability, the basic knowledge concerning the observed inﬂuence of sensor structure and composition on observed variations of the sensing signal with time is still incomplete. The purpose of this work was to investigate the long-term stability of Nasicon based CO2 potentiometric gas sensors. In particularly the inﬂuence of following effects on long-term stability were studied: (i) Composition of reference electrode. (ii) Composition of sensing electrode. (iii) Reactivity of electrode materials with solid electrolyte.
Five types of sensors (named N1–N5) were fabricated from sodium ion conductor Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (Nasicon) as a solid electrolyte, Pt and Na–Ti–O two phase material (Na2Ti6O13–TiO2 or Na2Ti6O13–Na2Ti3O7) as a reference electrode and (Li-Ba)CO3 or (Na-Ba)CO3 fused carbonate as a sensing electrode material. In case of one of sensors (N1) only Pt ﬁlm was applied to form the reference electrode. The details concerning the sensors composition is given in Table 1.
The sensor experiments were carried out in a conventional gas ﬂow apparatus. Different concentrations of carbon dioxide (in the range from 500 to 12,600 ppm of CO2) at the sensing electrode side were obtained using the CO2 + synthetic air mixture (21 vol.% O2–79 vol.% N2, H2O below 2 ppm) containing 12,600 ppm of CO2 and synthetic air. These two gases were combined together with different ratios using the MKS ﬂow controllers regulated by computer. The reference electrode of the sensor device was always exposed to synthetic air (CO2 below 1 ppm, H2O below 2 ppm). The ﬂow rate of gas mixtures was kept at constant level of 60 cm3/min at both sides of the cell. The electromotive force, EMF, of the sensors was measured by HP34401A multimeter with high input impedance (above 10 G) and the analog scanner, controlled by the computer. Each cell was measured at different temperatures (at isothermal conditions) in the range from 570 to 800 K. 
The typical isothermal measurement procedure consisted of several cycles when the carbon dioxide
CO2 partial pressure was kept for 30 min then changed to the next value. After reaching the highest partial CO2 pressure applied (12,600 ppm CO2), the same cycle was repeated for decreasing values of p(CO2) and then again for increasing values. After several cycles (about 24 h) the temperature was changed to the next value, and the procedure repeated. Also, the measurement at every temperature was repeated several times to obtain data concerning the long-term stability and repeatability of the investigated cell.
Additionally, Differential Thermal Analysis, DTA, Thermogravimetry, TG (TA INSTRUMENTS Derivatograph System, type SDT 2960), X-ray Diffraction, XRD (SEIFERT XRD-7 Diffractometer with Cu K␣ ﬁltered radiation) and Scanning Electron Microscopy, SEM (JEOL JSM-5400) techniques were used in order to assist the discussion of the obtained results.
Fig. 1 shows the electromotive force, EMF, as a function of time, measured for cells N1–N5 for temperature (T = 773 K) and carbon dioxide partial concentration (p(CO2) = 12,600 ppm) which were the highest values applied. The xaxis values represent the time when the measured cell was exposed to CO2 pressure at elevated temperatures.
Basing on presented results the investigated cells can be classiﬁed into two groups: 1. Sensors where the apparent degradation can be noticed, revealed by the continuous decrease of EMF absolute value with time (cells N1 and N2), these changes are not reversible.
As can be noticed, the composition of reference electrode inﬂuences the long-term stability of constructed sensors. The unreproducible EMF signals in case of N1 and N2 indicate that their reference electrodes do not maintain constant potential. The measured EMF signal in case of N2 sensor approaches the EMF value found for N3 sensor, reaching the same level after certain time (4 weeks). Since both sensors differs only on the composition of the reference electrode, such behavior may indicates on gradually modiﬁcation (improving) of the reference electrode of the sensor N2 (for example by local formation of Na2Ti3O7).
In order to determine the mechanism of observed sensors degradation during the long-term exploitation the obtained results were ﬁtted using Nernst-type equation, given by where EMF is the electromotive force, E0 the standard electromotive force, T the temperature, R the universal gas constant, F the Faraday constant, n the number of electrons, p(CO2) the carbon dioxide partial pressure, and the evolution of E0(T) and n values in time were determined. As an example, the comparison of E0(T) values and number of electrons, n, determined for cells N2 (irreversible drift) and N4 (reversible drift) are given in Figs. 2 and 3, respectively.
In case of N2 cell the decrease of E0 absolute value (Fig. 2) accompanied with the increase of n parameter (Fig. 3) with time can be observed. 
The decrease of E0 absolute values with time suggests the composition changes of the materials used for sensing or reference electrode during long-term measurements at elevated temperatures. From the other hand the increase of n values with time may suggest the change of the type of reactions taking place at the sensing electrode. More likely explanation of the increase of n values is the change of electrical properties of solid electrolyte. Namely, continuous change of transference numbers of different ions (and electrons) can affect the measured value of EMF, by the change of both n and E0 values.
Also, one can notice that the obtained values of n parameter are the non-integer numbers, as also found by other authors and the investigated cells must be rather treated as a “quasi-Nerstian”. The possible explanation and discussion of this observation is given in our paper concerning cell working mechanism [15].
Both E0 absolute value (Fig. 2) and n parameter (Fig. 3) are much more stable with time than in case of N4 cell than that of N2 cell. However, at higher temperature (773 K) the slight decrease of absolute E0 value and the increase of n parameter with time can be noticed, while at lower temperature (723 K) the backward tendency is present. These observations are discussed further in detail.
Another aspect is the inﬂuence of Li ions used in sensing electrode material apart from Na ions present in Nasicon and reference electrode materials on the sensor long-term stability. The very similar behavior of N4 and N5 cells (in dry air atmosphere) suggests that lithium and sodium ions can be considered as almost the same component.
Finally, no effect of lithium activity at sensing electrode on stability of EMF was observed (cell N3, N4, Fig. 1).
The term “sensor memory” can be explained by the example results given in Figs. 4–9. These ﬁgures show the dependence of electromotive force, EMF, on time (Figs. 4, 6, and 8) and on log p(CO2) (Figs. 5, 7, and 9) measured at different temperatures (673, 748, 773 K) for the cell N4. In case of T = 673 K the continuous drift (increase) of EMF absolute value with time can be observed (Figs. 4 and 5), while in case of T = 773 K the opposite effect has been taking place; the decrease of absolute EMF with time (Figs. 8 and 9) can be noticed. It must be mentioned that before measurement at 673 K the cell was kept at higher temperature (T = 773 K), while before the measurement at 773 K the cell was kept at lower temperature (T = 673 K). The drifts observed at 673 K and at 773 K were found to be reversible with temperature, they can be seen in Fig. 1 as ﬂuctuations of EMF values of N3–N5 cells (see Section 2). 
The measurement made at intermediate temperature (T = 748 K) has given the results where no drift effect was observed (Figs. 6 and 7). The behavior described above was also observed for cells N3 and N5.
The reversibility of drift direction with temperature observed in case of N3, N4 and N5 cells suggests that the drift of EMF is correlated with slow diffusion-controlled process. In order to affect the electromotive force, such a process (or a few processes taking place simultaneously) should lead + to the changes of the electrode material composition (Na , + Li , Na2O and Li2O activities) or to the changes of electrical properties of solid electrolyte (transference numbers of different ions and electrons) and solid electrolyte-sensing electrode interface. These three cases can lead to uncontrolled changes of sensor signal and will be discussed below.
One of the possible processes leading to the changes of + Na ions activity in the sensing electrode material might be the decomposition of carbonates to the appropriate oxides and carbon dioxide [5,16]. Basing on thermodynamic data the stability ranges of both lithium and barium carbonates were calculated, these results are shown in Fig. 10.
The region above the lines corresponds to the stability region of the appropriate carbonate, the region below corresponds to the stability region of the corresponding oxide. The hatched rectangle area covers the range of carbon dioxide pressure and temperature range used in our experiments. As can be seen, the decomposition of carbonates is not possible at the used temperature and carbon dioxide pressure ranges, and the observed reversible EMF drift (“memory effect”) as well as the irreversible degradation of the cells cannot be explained by the carbonate decomposition–formation reversible reactions.
The chemical reaction between Nasicon and the Li-Ba carbonate—the sensing electrode material might be the probable reason of observed drift effects of sensor signal. + One of the suitable explanations is the diffusion of Li or Ba2+ ions into Nasicon material accompanied with the formation of Li2ZrO3, Na2ZrO3 or BaZrO3 corrosion layer at the interface. The simpliﬁed approach assumes the reaction between the ZrO2 phase present in the Nasicon material and the carbonates leading to the formation of zirconates. Basing on thermodynamic data the stability ranges of the appropriate carbonates and zirconates were calculated, these results are shown in Fig. 11. The region above the lines corresponds to the stability region of the appropriate carbonates, the region below corresponds to the stability region of the corresponding zirconates. The hatched rectangle area covers the range of carbon dioxide pressure and temperature range used in our measurements. 
As can be seen, depending on the temperature and carbon dioxide pressure, the measurements were made in the range where both carbonates are stable (below 600 K), both zirconates are stable (at 800 K) or, mostly, where lithium carbonate was stable and the reaction between barium carbonate and ZrO2 was possible. 
The observed reversible change of drift direction of N4 cell (see Figs. 4–9) was present in the range from 673 K (EMF drifted towards lower values) to 773 K (EMF drifted towards higher values). Basing on the data presented in Fig. 11 the observed dependence of EMF drift direction corresponds roughly to the change from lithium carbonate stability region (673 K) to lithium zirconate stability region (but only for lower p(CO2) pressures). At 748 K, where the N4 cell exhibit stable EMF signal, the stability region (Li2CO3 or Li2ZrO3) depends on actual p(CO2) pressure.
The observed agreement between the thermodynamic data and the N4 cell behavior must be treated with limited conﬁdence. Basing on the data presented in Fig. 11, one should expect at 748 K the dependence of drift direction on pCO2 pressure, which was not observed in our case. There was any drift at 748 K at low and high pCO2 pressures (see Figs. 6 and 7). Also, it must be remembered that data concerning pure Li2CO3, BaCO3 and ZrO2 phases were taken for calculations. Another aspect to be taken into account is the kinetics of the proposed processes.
Fig. 10. Calculated stability ranges of carbonates and corresponding oxides.
Fig. 11. Calculated stability ranges of carbonates and corresponding zirconates.
In order to evaluate the possibility of chemical reaction in investigated systems thermal behavior of Li2CO3, BaCO3, ZrO2 and Nasicon powder mixtures were studied in several DTA and TG measurements, the results are presented in Figs. 12–15, for BaCO3–ZrO2, Li2CO3–ZrO2, Li2CO3:BaCO3–ZrO2 and Li2CO3:BaCO3–Nasicon powder mixtures, respectively.
In order to investigate the mechanism of reaction between Nasicon and Li2CO3:BaCO3 in the sensors working temperature range the heating-cooling DTA experiments were performed, the results are shown in Fig. 16. As can be seen, the reversible and reproducible process can be detected at the temperature of about T = 740 K. The observed endoand exothermal peaks may be attributed to melting-solidiﬁcation process, indicating that the reaction starts in the presence of liquid phase. 
Moreover, the temperature of observed process correlates well with the optimal working temperature of sensors (T = 748 K, see Figs. 6 and 7) In our opinion the formation (at T = 748 K) of liquid phase with high ionic conductivity at the sensing electrode-solid electrolyte interface leads to the better charge exchange at this interface and thus better sensor performance, namely long-term stability at this temperature. In order to verify this hypothesis further studies involving impedance spectroscopy and other techniques are under the way, the results will be published later.
Fig. 17 shows the SEM image of Li2CO3:BaCO3–Nasicon interface after heat treatment at 820 K for 12 h. As can be seen, the reaction zone between Nasicon (lower part) and Li2CO3:BaCO3 (upper part) can be noticed. According to the XRD results obtained for the Li2CO3:BaCO3– Nasicon powder mixtures after heat treatment the reaction product may be attributed to the appearance of BaZrO3 phase.
Long-term stability of Nasicon based potentiometric CO2 sensors with different electrode compositions were investigated. Different behavior was observed depending on electrode composition and temperature. Sensors can be divided in two groups: unstable sensors with irreversible drift of measured signal, and stable sensors with slight reversible ﬂuctuations of measured signal. The unstable behavior may be explained in terms of continuous change of transference numbers of different ions (and electrons) leading to the change of both n and E0 values and ﬁnally measured EMF. The change of transference numbers may be attributed to the reaction between carbonate and Nasicon. It was also found that the composition of reference electrode inﬂuences the long-term stability of constructed sensors. From the other hand, no effect of lithium activity at sensing electrode on stability of EMF can be noticed. 
In case of stable sensors the ﬂuctuations of measured EMF (reversible with temperature) may be associated with the formation liquid phase at the Nasicon–carbonate interface at temperature of about T = 740 K. The obtained results allow to propose the best composition and working temperature of the stable sensor where no degradation and drift effects are observed.
