A CO2 gas sensor using Nasicon interfaced Na-β-alumina solid electrolyte pellets with BaCO3–Na2CO3 (weight ratio 44:56) as the auxiliary phase has shown that the measured emf in CO2–air atmosphere is consistent with Nernstian law. In this paper further work has been carried out to investigate cross-sensitivity to humidity, O2, NO2 and SO2. Results have shown that humidity and oxygen have no signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the sensor performance. At a concentration less than 100 ppm, NO2 does not affect the sensor signal. The CO2 sensor can resist any effects from SO2 only up to a concentration of 1.7 ppm. The sensing ability is greatly limited by Na2SO4 formation on the sensing auxiliary electrode and/or the surface of the electrolytes when SO2 gas is present with CO2.
Over the last three decades, potentiometric CO2 sensors based on solid electrolyte for continuously detecting CO2 have been widely developed in order to meet demands in industrial production and environmental monitoring [1–3]. Great progress has been achieved in recent years in development of practical CO2 sensors arising from the following steps: (1) Na+ conductors (Na-β-alumina or Nasicon) [4–8] have replaced carbonate salts as solid electrolytes (SE) [1]; (2) solid materials have been used as reference materials instead of CO2 gaseous reference [1–8]; (3) the cell construction has changed from a sealed reference electrode to a open reference conﬁguration [6–12]. In order to solve the outstanding problems of long-term stability and O2 interference, one method is to adopt an open reference electrode structure, thus make the sensing electrode and reference electrode exposed to the same test gas. 
In order to realize this design, three conﬁgurations of CO2 sensors have been developed, namely planar-type CO2 sensors based on a single electrolyte [7, 8], CO2 sensors with a open reference electrode [9] and CO2 sensors based on interfacing two electrolytes [10–17].
With sodium ion conductors such as Nasicon or Na-βalumina, the active auxiliary phase commonly used is Na2CO3. Because of the inherent instability of Na2CO3 in contact with the SE, it easily decomposes into Na2O and CO2, often during fabrication involving a high temperature annealing step during which the Na2CO3 auxiliary electrode can readily decompose. This decomposition is driven by the low activity of Na2O in the solid electrolyte phase of Nasicon or Na-βalumina and is enhanced when Na2CO3 is in contact with the solid electrolytes at elevated temperatures. When sensors are fabricated by applying Na2CO3 by melting followed by quenching the auxiliary phase is prone to decomposition. A rich Na2O or Na2O2 phase may be formed on the interface and, as a result, CO2 sensor response performance will deviate from Nernstian law [6]. 
This problem has been countered in our previous investigations [18, 19] by taking the following measures: application of the auxiliary phase at low temperature; using Na2CO3–BaCO3 mixture as auxiliary electrode (thus minimizing Na2O activity in the auxiliary electrode) and using a SE with a high Na2O activity as electrolyte (e.g., Na-β-alumina is preferred to Nasicon for this reason). The activity of Na2O in Na β-alumina can be maximized by choosing a composition rich in soda (Na2O.5.5Al2O3).
Knowledge of cross-sensitivity is vital for a practical CO2 sensor, in order to be able to quantify the effects of other gases commonly present in an exhaust gas. The inﬂuence of gases such as H2O, NO2, SO2 and CH4 on a CO2 sensor has been reported in the literature [2, 4, 20, 21]. According to Yao, a binary carbonate auxiliary electrode, such as Na2CO3–BaCO3, can minimize the effect of humidity during operation [21]. CO2 sensors are not affected by NO2 gas at concentrations up to 100 ppm [2], because nitrate salts are not very stable when the operating temperatures are relatively high. The highly stable sulfate salts make SOx a serious interference gas due to its reaction with carbonates and the electrolytes [22]. Our previous work has shown that a CO2 sensor designed by interfacing two Na+ conductors, Nasicon and Na-β-alumina, with a Na2CO3/BaCO3 auxiliary on the side of Na-β-alumina and Pt on the Nasicon surface displayed excellent performance in a CO2–air atmosphere [18]. 
In this paper further work on cross-sensitivity to other gases such as H2O, O2, NO2 and SO2 is considered.
Nasicon powder was prepared using reagent grades of sodium carbonate, silica, zirconia and ammonium dihydrogen phosphate as starting materials. These powders were mixed and ball-milled, and then calcined at 443 K for 12 h and at 1173 K for 6 h. The resulting powder was pelletized (13 mm in diameter, 1 mm in thickness) and sintered at 1503 K for 24 h in air.
Na-β-Al2O3 was prepared by mixing reagent grades of Al2O3 and Na2CO3 in a molar ratio of 5.5:1 and calcined at 1173 K for 4 h. Then the powder was made into pellets (10 mm in diameter, 1 mm in thickness) and then sintered at 1923 K for 0.5 h in air. Finally, Nasicon and Na-β-Al2O3 discs were attached by diffusion sintering at 1523 K.
After sintering the two solid electrolytes together, the counter and the sensing electrodes were fabricated by placing platinum coils on the two exposed surfaces of the pellets which were then coated with platinum ink and then annealed at 1173 K for 30 min. The active auxiliary references Na2CO3/BaCO3 (weight ratio 44:56), sensitive to CO2, were introduced by painting a saturated aqueous solution of Na2CO3/BaCO3 on the Na-β-alumina surface followed by drying at 373 K. Figure 1 presents a cross-sectional schematic view of the CO2 sensor.
The CO2 sensors were tested at 623 to 923 K, at varying CO2 concentrations in the range of 600 ppm to 100%. The different CO2 concentrations were introduced into the system using a Signal 850 series gas blender. Synthetic air with a constant O2 concentration of 0.21 vol% has been used as carrier gas (except for the study of oxygen partial pressure dependence of the sensor emfs where pure Ar was used). The moisture interference was tested by bubbling the gas mixtures through a water bath maintained at 30 C and comparing the emf values with the same gas mixture in the dry state. Cross-sensitivity tests for NO2 and SO2 were carried out by introducing different amounts into the CO2 gas mixture with the help of a digital gas blender. A computer was connected through a high resolution data logger (Pico ADEC-16) in order to collect and store experimental data.
The relationship between E and the temperature for a given CO2 partial pressure should be a straight line, which has been conﬁrmed by the experimental data plotted in ﬁgure 3.
Cross-sensitivity tests have been carried out with the following gases: H2O, O2, NO2 and SO2. Experimental data for the inﬂuence of NO2 and SO2 are analysed with respect to thermodynamic calculations for the potentially interfering reactions that may take place.
Figure 4 shows the emf results for a CO2 sensor in humid conditions and compared to emf values in a dry gas. The emfs are affected only within a margin of ±20 mV. The lower the amount of CO2 in the mixture is, the bigger the emf value difference is between the dry and the wet gas. The deviation can be ascribed to formation of NaOH and NaHCO3 on the Na2CO3 and BaCO3 surface layer [26]. The presence of NaOH and NaHCO3 can interfere with the electrode reaction on the sensing electrode and alter the activity of Na2CO3 in the auxiliary electrode. The observed emf can arise as a mixed potential from several reactions. Once water vapour was removed, the emf values gradually returned to the values obtained before introduction of water vapour, suggesting that the reaction between NaOH or NaHCO3 and the gaseous phase to form Na2CO3 is reversible. It must be noted that the stability of NaOH and NaHCO3 with respect to Na2CO3 is enhanced, at lower temperatures, at higher PH2O values and at lower PCO2values. 
The effect of humidity, although not absent, is considered not too serious.
The postulated detection mechanism has clearly shown that although oxygen is involved in both electrode reactions, the PO2 pressure term does not appear in the overall reaction, which implies that the sensor emf values should be independent of oxygen partial pressure in the gas phase, because both electrodes were exposed to an identical gas mixture. The emf output variation with the oxygen content in the mixture gas where the CO2 concentrations are ﬁxed at two different values of 2300 ppm and 80 099 ppm is presented in ﬁgure 5. It can be seen that irrespective of the oxygen content, the emf output remains constant within ±10 mV, showing that interference from oxygen is not very signiﬁcant.
Figure 6 shows the 3.2.3. NO2 effect on CO2 detection. results of the emf measurement for a CO2 sensor with different contents of NO2 present with CO2 at a selected temperature of 824 K. According to the experimental results one can note that the presence of NO2 at levels <187 ppm in the test gas with CO2 had negligible inﬂuence on the emf. 
If O2 content is ﬁxed at 0.21 atm at a selected temperature of 824 K, the condition for the stability of the auxiliary electrode in an NO2 containing atmosphere can be evaluated based on the thermodynamic data of compounds involved and the results are presented in ﬁgure 8. When CO2 content is low and NO2 content high, NaNO3 will be easily formed. For example, when NO2 content is >1000 ppm, for CO2 content less than 10 000 ppm, the formation of NaNO3 is thermodynamically favoured.
These calculations are carried out assuming that aNa2CO3 and aNaNO3 are unity (pure substances). Any relative variations in these values as a result of their dissolution in the NaNO3–Na2CO3–BaCO3 system will alter the boundary. The experimental observation that even at 187 ppm NO2, especially when CO2 is <10 000 ppm, there is a small but deﬁnite cross-sensitivity to NO2, suggests that the boundary is shifted upwards.
Because NaNO3 is relatively unstable at high temperature, NaNO3 can decompose in the absence of NO2, thus on removal of NO2 the emf values of the sensor may return to the original values.
SO2 effect on CO2 detection. Another important 3.2.4. pollutant that frequently appears in the emitted gas is SO2.
The CO2 sensor based on sodium ion conductors Nasicon interfaced Na-β-Al2O3 was fabricated and tested. The device with an open reference system shows fairly good CO2-sensing properties. The emf values of the sensor are independent of PO2in the gas and only marginally affected by humidity. CO2 sensing is affected by NO2 and SO2 when the contaminating gas reaches a certain level of concentration. The emf shifts can be seen as regular and may offer an opportunity for coping with cross-sensitivity through the use of pattern recognition widely used in the development of semiconducting metal oxide gas sensors.
