The inﬂuence of the sodium-ions in SnO2/NASICON (Na super ionic conductor) admixtures on the selectivity and sensitivity of metal oxide gas sensors was studied. NASICON (Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12, 0 ≤ x ≤ 3) was chosen as a model substance in which the content of sodium ions can be varied in the range 0 ≤ x ≤ 3. For that purpose SnO2 powder was prepared and mixed in a volume ratio of 8:2 with NASICON powder, screen printed and sintered to obtain a gas sensitive thick ﬁlm composite. A drastic improvement of the sensitivity to R–OH, R–CHO and R–COOH ending molecules and a reduction of the sensitivity to molecules like CO, H2, NH3, propane, propene, 2-propanol and propanone was observed in comparison to pure SnO2. This effect is clearly pronounced with increasing concentration of the sodium ions in the NASICON structure. 
For comparison, admixtures with the anionic conductor yttrium stabilized zirconia (YSZ) and with the typical isolator Al2O3 showed equal or also higher sensitivities to the most tested substances compared to pure SnO2 but no pronounced selectivity. A preliminary model is presented which explains the unusual gas sensitivity of SnO2/NASICON composites to some individual gas components by speciﬁc molecular interactions at the NASICON-surface and by sensitivity ampliﬁcation due to − e.
Tin oxide gas sensors are well-known as highly attractive sensor devices due to their particular high gas sensitivity to many substances. However, their poor gas selectivity is a severe shortcoming which was tried to overcome by different approaches. First, according to the state of the art, tin dioxide with ﬁne distributed catalysts (e.g. Pt, Pd [1,2]), admixtures with diverse metal oxide (MeO) additives (e.g. La2O3, CuO, ZnO, In2O3 [3–5]) or doped SnO2 layers with aliovalent ions [6] are used to favor special gas reactions and speciﬁc sensitivities. This selectivity may be due to the effect of electronic interactions at the interface SnO2/additive which may inﬂuence the individual gas surface processes.
Second, the discriminating inﬂuence of the operation temperature on the sensitivities is used. It is generally accepted, that the gas surface reactions can be described roughly by a combination of three processes [7]. Adsorption of the gas molecules, surface chemical reactions with adsorbed oxygen states (O ) [8] and desorption of the reaction products. The rates of these surface processes are speciﬁc for individual reaction processes and strongly affected by the temperature. This behavior can be utilized to favor speciﬁc gas reactions, i.e. to reduce the cross-sensitivity to interfering gas components. One method to gain improved analytical quality is, to operate sensor arrays with elements at different individual temperatures and to analyze the conductance (Gi(T)) numerically by pattern recognition methods for gas component identiﬁcation [9–11]. Alternatively, a sensor array may be operated with a temperature gradient over the chip [12]. 
However, the sensitivity-pattern G(T) resulting from the latter strategy may have reduced molecular speciﬁcity due to the limited temperature range realizable on a single chip.
The third approach for selectivity enhancement and extraction of gas identiﬁcation capabilities was published elsewhere [13]. By periodic variation of the sensor operation temperature in a nearly triangular shape and simultaneous sampling of the conductance, additional information of the gas speciﬁc dynamic surface processes is reﬂected in the resulting conductance-over-time-proﬁles (CTP). Moreover, the obtained sensitivities are signiﬁcantly higher compared to the signals obtained by isothermal operation mode [14]. Consequently, in many cases it is possible to identify gas components and to determine the concentrations with only one sensor element by numerical analysis of CTP data [15]. 
From these results it is assumed that the dynamic variation of the temperature of several metal oxide layers with different additives on one chip, may offer attractive possibilities for enhancement of the molecular identiﬁcation capabilities which will be useful in future to realize new high quality ﬁeld applications of these gas sensor devices.
To study ﬁrst experimental hints on sensitivity enhancing effects by solid electrolyte additives [16,17] more systematically, one-chip four-fold sensor arrays were investigated to compare the sensitivity properties of different composite layers with the pure SnO2 layer as a reference. The sensors were measured at periodic, dynamic temperature and also at constant operation temperature. Two different sensor arrays are discussed. The ﬁrst with the additives of Al2O3, YSZ and NASICON x = 2.2 and the second with different additives NASICON x = 0, x = 2.2 and x = 3.
For fabrication of the thick-ﬁlm sensor arrays, pure tin oxide and tin oxide with ﬁve different additives were applied as very ﬁne powders. The SnO2 and the three NASICON components were prepared in a sol–gel route, the alumina (MZS-1, Martinswerk) and the yttrium oxide stabilized zirconia (TZ-8YS, TOSOH) are commercial powders, respectively.
For the SnO2 sol–gel preparation, pure SnCl4 was dropped slowly in deionized water. The obtained sol was transformed into a gel by adding ammonia solution [20]. After aging [21], the gel was washed several times with deionized water and ethanol to reduce the measured concentration of the chloride ions. The gel was shortly stirred, dried and ground for 6 h at −1 by ball milling in zirconia vessels, pre-sintered 200 min ◦ at 450 C for 5 h to get SnO2 and then ground again. Three different NASICON powders (x = 0, 2.2 and 3) were prepared by another sol–gel route [22]. The starting materials NaOH and (NH4)H2PO4 were dissolved in hot water (80 C). The components Zr(OC3H7)4 and Si(OC2H5)4 were mixed in ethanol and dropped slowly into the prepared aqueous solution under inert atmosphere. The molar ratio of the components were calculated, respectively to get the ﬁnal structure of NASICON x = 0, 2.2 and 3. 
The obtained gels were ground with n-hexane in a ball mill, dried and calcined at temperatures between 950 and 1150 C. After grinding again, the powders were characterized by XRD, BET and particle size distribution.
All self prepared and commercial powders were analyzed by XRD and the particle size was calculated from the full width half maximum (FWHM) of the XRD-peaks by the Debye–Scherrer equation [23]
As an independent method to the XRD-measurement, the BET surface area of the powders was measured and a maximum particle size value was calculated assuming a simple model of spheres with smooth surfaces. Thirdly, the particle size distribution was measured by a laser diffraction method (Coulter LS 230 particle size analyzer). All results are summarized in Figs. 1a and b. The primary particle sizes of the powders, calculated by BET and XRD (Fig. 1b) are much smaller than the corresponding particle size distribution obtained by the laser diffraction method (Fig. 1a). This disagreement may be explained by a signiﬁcant tendency of agglomerate-formation which would result in bigger particles as observed in Fig. 1a. 
The difference in grain size determination seems to be mostly pronounced for SnO2 −1 where the size calculated from the BET-value (56 m2 g −1 after sintering after pre-sintering at 450 C) and the XRD-value (Fig. 1b) agree very well but at 750 show great discrepancy to the corresponding particle size distribution determined with the Coulter analyzer (Fig. 1a). For comparison, the BET-values of the YSZ-powders, the Al2O3-powder and the NASICON-powders are 5.9, 3.5, −1 (x = 2.2) and 3.1 m2 g −1 5.2 m2 g (x = 3), respectively. These results indicate that the SnO2 grain size may be 5–10 times smaller compared to the particle sizes of the additives, although, this is not observed by the Coulter analyses.
To verify that the powder mixtures (SnO2/additive, 80/20%) remain in two separate phases even after the sintering process, the XRD spectra of the SnO2/NASICON x = 2.2 composite (pre-sintered at 450 C (SnO2) and at C (NASICON), respectively) were recorded before 1150 and after sintering at T = 750 C (Fig. 1c). The spectra may be representative for the other composites and conﬁrm that no additional material phase is observed after sintering.
For preparation of the gas sensitive layers, pure SnO2 and powder mixtures (80/20, v/v) of SnO2/NASICON (x = 0, 2.2, 3), SnO2/YSZ and SnO2/Al2O3, respectively, were dispersed well in ethanol supported by ultrasonic treatment. After adding an organic carrier, a paste was prepared by −1 in agate vessels. stirring the dispersion for 1.5 h at 120 min Four-fold sensor-elements were fabricated by sputtering micro-structured, inter-digital thin-ﬁlm gold-electrodes on alumina substrates at ﬁrst (Fig. 2). The pastes were screen-printed on the electrode combs, dried and ﬁred in air at 500 C for 20 min to improve the mechanical stability of the layers by a sintering process.
To get preliminary information about the reproducibility of the produced gas sensitive layers, two equal four-fold sensor elements were bonded on a ceramic plate with gold contacts. The setup was implemented in an externally heated quartz-glass tube together with a protected thermocouple. −1 were adjusted with a computer Gas ﬂows of 200 ml min controlled gas mixing setup. The conductance of the layers was measured in Dc-mode using a Keithley 2000 meter and a multiplexer. To obtain comparable polarization-effects (if signiﬁcantly generated at all), the sampling of the layers was limited to 1 s each period of measurement (12 s). A sketch of the setup is shown in Fig. 3.
Preliminary conductance-tests [14] had demonstrated advanced sensitivity SNR with increasing proportions of NASICON in SnO2 (>40 vol.%) on one hand, but reduced basic conductance and hence lower signal-to noise ratio at the other. Now, new composites were prepared as listed in Table 1. The SNRi as calculated when the sensor element was exposed to 400 ppm 1-propanol deliver some remarkable results (Fig. 4c). At higher temperatures at about 400–450 C all sensor layers show similar SNRi. Notable differences were found at intermediate temperatures 180–345 C (heating) and at 325–160 C (cooling) mostly pronounced for the SnO2/NASICON layer. This indicates very speciﬁc surface reactions in the presence of different additives. Every composite layer shows higher SNRi compared to the pure tin dioxide. But most impressive is the SNRi value of up to 500 for the SnO2/NASICON layer at intermediate temperatures. 
The sensitivity behavior to several substances like CO, H2, NH3, alcohol etc., was investigated in screening tests at a concentration of 400 ppm each in synthetic air (50% rH). The results are given in Fig. 5 as a time-average of the related normalized response rSNR calculated according to formula rSNR = S∗ NRi is the SNR-value of a composite layer sampled at step i during a temperature-variation period when a gas component is applied in synthetic air. SSnO2 is the corresponding value NRi measured on pure SnO2.
The investigation of the inﬂuence of the ionic conductivity and the Na -content of NASICON on the gas sensitivity behavior of the composite is the central aim of this work. In Fig. 7 the Na C (4-wire measurement, 80 Hz, at pressed and sintered NASICON blocks) is plotted together with literature data as a function of the x-value. With increasing x, i.e. with increasing + Na ) increases by several orders of magnitude to a maximum at x ≈ 2 and then falls down by + approximately two orders of magnitude to the σ(Na )-value rich component (x = 3). The gas sensitivity + of the Na tests of a sensor array with four different sensitive layers of pure SnO2 and SnO2/NASICON composites as noted in Table 2 yielded surprising results plotted in Fig. 8a. The response of the SnO2/NASICON x = 3 composite is drastically higher than that of the SnO2/NASICON x = 2.2 and 0 in the presence of 1-propanol. However, NASICON x = 3 shows more than two decades lower Na conductivity than NASICON x = 2.2 (Fig. 7).
Also measurements at constant operation temperature (250 C) were done to compare the sensitivities of different composites exposed to 1-propanol in the concentration range 0 ≤ c ≤ 3700 ppm (Fig. 10). The data conﬁrm that the NASICON additive with highest Na -content gives the best response. However, comparison of these data at c = 400 ppm with the data in Fig. 8a demonstrates that the SNRi measured in the constant operation temperature mode is much lower compared to the values found by operation in the periodic temperature variation mode. This may be a general sensitivity-enhancement-effect observed under non-steady state operations.
Additional insight, how the sensitivity to 1-propanol is inﬂuenced by different NASICON additives is given in Fig. 11. The diagram shows only the last two of several hours operation at synthetic air 50% rH and the response to a gas step to 400 ppm 1-propanol. 
Composite layers presence of 400 ppm 1-propanol. These results explain the huge SNRi observed (Fig. 8a) and the huge sensitivity plotted in Fig. 10.
The XRD-spectra (Fig. 1c) indicate that SnO2 grains and NASICON grains form SnO2/NASICON composites with two separated phases. The electronic conductivity of these composites was found to be even smaller as compared to a SnO2/Al2O3-composite of the same vol.% ratio (Table 3). These results suggest an even more reduced electron state density in the surface near electron depletion layer of the adjacent SnO2 grain when the additive grain is NASICON compared to an isolating additive (Al2O3). This may be interpreted by e charge interactions across the SnO2/NASICON interface which may be the reason for further reduction of the electron state density which should be correlated with an increase Debye length LD of the electron depletion layer according to the relation [8].
This model is visualized in Fig. 12a. It is supported by the conductivity measured on different SnO2/NASICON gas sensitive composites (Fig. 11). Exposed to synthetic air (50% + rH) the composite with the highest Na -content in the structure (x = 3) shows the lowest conductance G, i.e. the most pronounced surface electron depletion layer of the adjacent SnO2 grains. This means, according to these results, that the well-known model of electron trapping by adsorbed oxygen − + O2 ↔ O2 (e ) [8] has to be expanded by additional electron localization effects at the interface with NASICON − + grains due to e interactions as visualized in a simple model in Fig. 12b. Of course, this may be rather speculative because it is not based on microscopic electrical measurements of the SnO2/NASICON interface but it could explain the enormous reduction of the electronic conductance compared to pure SnO2 and even to SnO2/Al2O3 composites.
The different SnO2/NASICON layers showed for some special gas components sensitivities which are signiﬁcantly + related to the Na -content of the NASICON phase of the composite (Fig. 9c). In the presence of different alcohol compounds, aldehydes or organic acids in synthetic air, the molecules may react with the oxygen surface states in the usual way [8] but may additionally interact with the Na -ions of the NASICON structure by surface processes (Fig. 12c). The dramatic conductance change in the presence of molecules ending with –OH, –CHO or –OOH could be due to a coupling of surface interactions of these molecules with the mobile sodium ions by surface processes in com− petition to the e interaction at the NASICON/SnO2 interface. 
Both processes in combination, direct reaction with the oxygen surface states and indirect inﬂuence on the − e interaction is believed to result in the observed ampliﬁcation of the sensitivity behavior compared to pure SnO2 (Fig. 9) which is mostly pronounced with the NASICON additive of highest Na
An alternative explanation for sensitivity enhancement, could give the combination of catalytic effects at the NASICON grains with surface processes at the SnO2 grains. Previous catalytic reactions at NASICON may produce additional crack products of the initial gas components. These fragments, may diffuse to the O2 -surface states at the SnO2 grains and have additional inﬂuence on the surface depletion layer. First hints for the catalytic behavior of NASICON were already found by investigation of reaction rates of 1-propanol and 2-propanol in air at different temperatures [24].
In this work several solid ionic conductors were studied as additives in tin dioxide sensitive layers due to their inﬂuence on the gas sensitivity. All admixtures reduced the conductivity compared to the pure SnO2 layers, especially the SnO2/NASICON (x = 3) composites. Similar CTP shapes indicate that probably no speciﬁc surface reactions are induced by YSZ and Al2O3 additives and therefore no special beneﬁt for substance identiﬁcation is expected by application of these composites. In contrast, the CTP of SnO2/NASICON composites are clearly distinguished and correspondingly indicate different gas reaction processes. In the periodic temperature operation mode the peak sensitivity of the SnO2/NASICON (x = 3)-composite when exposed to 400 ppm 1-propanol was observed to be almost 10-times higher compared to pure SnO2 and the sensitivity was still four-times higher compared to the corresponding value when the sensitive layers are operated in the constant temperature mode. 
In the presence of 2-propanol, however, no signiﬁcant sensitivity enhancement was measured. This offers the possibility of 1-propanol discrimination from 2-propanol by these composites. A partly drastic sensitivity enhancement of the SnO2/NASICON composites to all VOCs ending with an –OH, –CHO or organic acid reaction group was found. It is explained by an expanded gas sensitivity model. Individual molecules may not only react with the O2 -SnO2 surface states but may additionally interact at the surface of the NASICON grain. At the actual state of research, this interpretation may be rather speculative because the details of the underlying (catalyzed) surface gas reaction processes are still a matter of further studies.
