The structure of the NASICON-like phase Li2.5V2(PO4)3 has been determined by X-ray and neutron powder diffraction, demonstrating that it crystallizes in the space group P21/n (a ) 8.5539(4) Å; b ) 8.6099(4) Å; c ) 11.9825(5) Å;  226) ) 90.002(7)°). Combined studies using 6,7Li MAS NMR, EPR, and ac impedance spectroscopy show that this pseudo-orthorhombic lattice represents a room-temperature analogue of the high-temperature orthorhombic phase  231)-Li3Sc2(PO4)3. Lithium disorder over partially vacant sites leads to enhanced ion mobility. EPR spectroscopy confirms the presence of localized V4+ in the lattice, whose short-range order with V3+ gives rise to five resolvable Li shifts in the 6,7Li MAS NMR spectrum. These shifts can be rationalized by consideration of the Fermi-contact interactions arising from the difference between V3+ and V4+ coupling in the three lithium sites.
Lithium transition metal phosphates are promising candidates as positive electrode materials in Li-ion batteries. Those of interest possess an Mx(PO4)y framework that houses interstitial Li+ ions. Extraction of lithium from the latticesequivalent to charging the cellsis simultaneous with oxidation of the transition metal element in the framework to preserve charge balance. Important is that the reinsertion reaction be highly reversible. Many phosphates are suitable candidates in this respect, although various factors can limit the reversibility including deleterious side reactions. Nonetheless, phosphates usually exhibit excellent stability on long-term cycling by comparison to lithium metal oxides, and essentially no loss of oxygen from the framework or reactivity with the electrolyte.1 These are all important characteristics for the positive electrode. Some of the best-known phosphates are related to the fast-ion conducting NASICON (sodium silicon ionic conductor). 
This nonredox active zirconium silicophosphate, once extensively studied as an electrolyte in sodium-sulfur cells, accommodates highly mobile sodium cations in its cavities.2 Subsequent studies incorporated a redox-active element in the framework; hence, the resultant materials were investigated as electrodes in rechargeable Na cells owing to their mixed ionic/ electronic properties.3 Transport of electrons within the lattice, however, was found to be slow as the materials were very poor electronic conductors.4
The sodium transition metal phosphates Na3M2(PO4)3 (M ) Ti, V, Cr, and Fe) are isostructural with rhombohedral NASICON;5 however, there is a monoclinic modification which has a slightly different structure. The two differ in the way that the metal octahedra and phosphate/silicate tetrahedra are linked, and in the location of the alkali sites. The density of the rhombohedral phase is slightly less than that of the monoclinic, implying less mobility of the cations in the pristine phase.6 However, mobility varies with the nature/ number of the sites occupied in the lattice, which can change with lithium extraction or insertion as a result of re-ordering. Hence, the monoclinic lithium vanadium phosphate phase shows better electrochemical properties7 than the rhombohedral. The experiences a kinetic limitation on re-insertion of Li due to structural changes incurred on lithium extraction.8 
The rhombohedral lithium phases are not accessible by direct reaction since the sodium phases are the more thermodynamically stable. They must be prepared by ion exchange.8,9 Conversely, the monoclinic lithium-containing phases
Among these monoclinic A3M2(PO4)3 phases, the first studied in detail were M ) Sc and Fe. Single-crystal investigations10 have been reported, along with reversible lithium insertion into the Fe phase, accompanied by insertion/reduction of the Fe3+ to Fe2+.11 The sites for lithium insertion in this lattice, which accommodates up to five lithium ions, were identified by neutron diffraction measurements.12 Lithium extraction is not possible, owing to the exceptionally high potential Fe3+ f Fe4+ couple, making it less desirable as a Li-ion cathode. Ideally, the positive electrode acts as the reservoir for Li ions in the cell as the anode (carbon) is lithium-free. The most interesting phase, vis-a-vis electrochemical storage devices, Li3V2(PO4)3, has been examined only recently. The structure of the room-temperature R-phase was reported first based on powder data13 and later confirmed by single-crystal investigation.14 
Like the analogous iron phase, the lattice transforms to a  226)-phase (monoclinic) at 393 K and to an orthorhombic superionic  231)-phase at 453 K.15 The first report of the electrochemical properties of the R-phase showed that two Li ions could be reversibly extracted from the lattice.7 More recently, Saidi et al.16 and Huang et al.14 demonstrated that all three Li can be reversibly cycled, leading to a promising reversible capacity close to theoretical (200 mA 226)h/g). In the latter work, the encapsulation of the phosphate crystallites in a carbon matrix enables this to take place even at relatively fast rates.
In these reports, the rich complexity of the electrochemical curve on oxidation and reduction of Li3V2(PO4)3 has been noted. The nature of the numerous two-phase transitions on oxidation are due to Li re-ordering within an essentially static V2(PO4)3 framework, as shown by both accurate first-principles calculations17 and our neutron/X-ray diffraction studies coupled with solidstate 7Li NMR spectroscopy.18 Remarkably good agreement in the location of the lithium sites was achieved between these two studies. In addition, our experiments revealed the existence of charge ordering on the vanadium sites in the phase formed by extraction of one lithium from Li3V+3 2(PO4)3. Li2V2(PO4)3 contains columns of ordered V4+/V3+, demonstrating that the electrons are pinned on the V3+ (on both diffraction and NMR time scales). 
The electrochemical curve also showed the existence of a phase at x ) 2.5 midway between the starting phase, x ) 3.0, and the charge-ordered phase, x ) 2.0, but its structure was not identified. The very small voltage jump signaled by its formation indicated that it is similar in energy to the phases on either side. Hence, we expect it has a similar structuresbut one that is intermediate between the two other phases, with partial occupancy of some sites. The computational study also predicted the existence of this phase, although the authors were unable to identify the exact arrangement of the lithium sites. In this paper, we present a combined neutron/X-ray diffraction, solid-state 6,7Li MAS NMR/EPR spectroscopic, and ac impedance study that collectively show that this phase is qualitatively similar in nature to the high-temperature superionic  231)-phase of Li3Sc2(PO4)3.
Sample Preparation. Microcrystalline R-Li3V2(PO4)3 was prepared by mixing stoichiometric amounts of Li2CO3 (Aldrich, 99.99%), V2O5 (99.6%), and NH4H2PO4 (99.99%). The mixture was heated at 300 °C for 3 h, reground, and fired at 850 °C for 12 h under a flow of 7% H2/N2. The 6Li-enriched sample for the 6Li MAS NMR study was prepared using 6Li2CO3 as the lithium source. Chemical oxidation/reduction methods were used to obtain bulk quantity samples for neutron diffraction measurements. The x ) 2.75, 2.5, 2.25, and 2.0 compositions were prepared by stoichiometric chemical oxidation of R-Li3V2(PO4)3 with 1 M NOBF4 in acetonitrile for 24 h in an Ar-filled glovebox to reach the desired lithium content. The products in each case were filtered and washed with acetonitrile three times to remove remaining salts. 
To ensure the materials were of the correct stoichiometry, their open-circuit voltage was measured vs Li+/Li. A short oxidation or reduction step (¢x (Li)  24) 0.1) revealed the presence of the desired singlephase composition through examination of the change in slope of the voltage-composition curve. The samples obtained were structurally similar to those obtained electrochemically, as proven by the identical X-ray diffraction patterns recorded for selected samples. The delithiated material Li2.5V2(PO4)3 was also subjected to chemical analysis to confirm the Li/V ratio. Powder Neutron Diffraction. About 2 g of Li2.5V2(PO4)3 was loaded in a vanadium can in an Ar-filled glovebox. Neutron diffraction was performed on the D2B high-resolution diffractometer at the Institut Laue-Langevin (ILL), Grenoble ( 236) ) 1.5940 Å). The data set was collected at 300 K for 12 h over the range 2ı ) 10-160°, using a step size of 0.05°.
Powder X-ray Diffraction. Samples were measured on a Siemens D500 powder diffractometer ( 236) ) 1.5406 Å) in the range 2ı ) 10-100° at a count rate of 19 s per step of 0.02°. Le Bail full pattern matching was employed to confirm the space group prior to Rietveld refinement and determine initial unit cell parameters.20
The voltage difference between the two plateaus that span the single phase, Li2.5V2(PO4)3 (LVP2.5), is smaller however (0.09V), indicating that LVP2.5 represents a small thermodynamic perturbation in the curve. Although the material can be extracted from the electrochemical cell, a sample was isolated (without complications of binder or carbon) by accurate stoichiometric chemical oxidation of LVP3.0. The preparation of large quantities for physical study is enabled by this method. Its X-ray diffraction pattern is shown in Figure 3a. Fullpattern matching (Le Bail fitting) of LVP2.5 was carried out to determine the best space group for this cell, as the P21/n monoclinic phases that lie on either side are close to pseudo-orthorhombic ( 226) angles of 90.6° and 90.2°). The sample contained an impurity of the second phase, x ) 2.0, as indicated by the X-ray data and from the NMR spectrum (see below). Its addition to the pattern resulted in an improvement of the fit. 
The presence of this more oxidized phase is due to a small excess of the oxidizing agent used to prepare x ) 2.5 from the x ) 3.0 phase. Control of the stoichiometry of this phase was more difficult than for any of the others, as it sits on a very small voltage step on the electrochemical curve. Thus, even a tiny deviation from stoichiometry can lead to formation of a second phase.22
Electrochemistry Measurements. Electrochemical cells were constructed using a Swagelok design, utilizing 1 M LiPF6/ EC-DMC (Merck) as the electrolyte. Cathodes comprised Li3V2(PO4)3 Super S (MMM) and PVDF binder with the weight ratio 80:15:5. Cells were assembled in a glovebox under Ar with O2 and H2O lower than 5 ppm. Samples were examined in the galvanostatic mode with a current equivalent to a C/10 rate.
The neutron diffraction pattern of D-Li2.5V2(PO4)3 is shown in Figure 3b. This sample also contained a small impurity of the second phase, x ) 2.0. Its addition to the pattern resulted in a small improvement of the Le Bail fit to yield good agreement factors (ł2 ) 1.75; Rwp ) 2.97%). A reasonable structural solution for Li2.5V2(PO4)3 was found by Rietveld analysis using interpolated fractional coordinates between x ) 2.0 and x ) 3.0 phases as a starting point, in the space group P21/n. The V(1) and V(2) positions were fixed from XRD refinement, as the neutron scattering length is close to zero. Fourier mapping was employed to locate the lithium sites after refinement of the framework in the absence of lithium. Initially, two sites were readily identified, Li(1) and Li(2), which were similar to the sites in the D3.0 phase. 
After these were introduced into the structure, and their fractional coordinates were refined, an additional site was located (Li(3)) that was assumed to be partially occupied. As the initial refinement consistently yielded occupancy values for Li(1) at 1.0 (which is reasonable as the site is fully occupied in two phases on either side), the refinement was completed using a constraint where n(Li(2) + Li(3)) ) 1.5. The refinement converged to the values shown in Table 1. As shown in the table, and in Figure 3b, a good agreement was achieved between the experimental and calculated neutron diffraction patterns, with very good reliability factors (Rwp ) 5.21%; ł2 ) 6.00). The fraction of the x ) 2.0 phase was refined to 26%. All Li sites (Li(1) fully occupied and Li(2) and Li(3) partially occupied) give satisfactory Li-O bond lengths (Table 2). The refined neutron parameters (a ) 8.5539(4) Å, b ) 8.6099(4) Å, c ) 11.9825(5) Å, and  226) ) 90.002(7)°) are very close to those of the Le Bail X-ray refinement. 
We note that the neutron  226) angle is 90° within experimental error, whereas the X-ray value was 90.15°. We ascribe this small discrepancy to the lower resolution of the neutron diffraction experiment.
The V2(PO4)3 framework is extremely similar to that in the parent phase, x ) 3.0. The host lattice is composed of interconnected corner-shared P-O tetrahedra and V-O octahedra, forming a 3D framework shown in Figure 2b. The phosphate tetrahedra have typical average P-O bond lengths of 1.54 Å. The average V(1)-O and V(2)-O bond distances in the slightly distorted vanadium octahedra are 1.969 and 1.998 Å, respectively (Table 2). Thus, V(1)-O is slightly more contracted compared to the starting phase, Li3V2(PO4)3 (2.005 Å), but the change in V(2)-O is negligible. Although the framework is essentially the same as that in the previous phase, the three Li sites account for a halfway situation vis-a-vis the two adjacent members. The site that remains almost fixed in occupancy and position is Li(1), which is also fully occupied in both x ) 3 and x ) 2 phases (see next section). 
The site shifts slightly between these three phases, but the coordination environment remains essentially the same. Li(2), almost fully occupied, also occupies a similar position as in the x ) 3.0 phase, but is slightly shifted closer to the location of Li(2) in x ) 2.0. Li(3) has a location similar to that in the x ) 3.0 phase, but is only half occupied. Constraining the occupation of Li(2) + Li(3) ) 1.5 provided the most satisfactory agreement factors, but it is difficult to determine whether the occupancy ratio of Li(2) and Li(3) is 1:0.5 or 0.9:0.6. Using a model with a constraint for Li(2):Li(3) of 1:0.5 did not improve the fit significantly. Allowing the Li(n) atomic displacement parameters to vary independently led to an even lower occupation of Li(2), and correspondingly lower for Li(1). 
If the hyperfine features correspond to long-range charge ordering, a true unit cell with reduced symmetry would be required since the P21/n cell contains only two unique vanadium sites. Various symmetry solutions exist. First, there are three possible subgroups of the space group P21/n with reduced symmetry on the vanadium sites: Pc, P21, and P1h. Second, within each subgroup, the V(1) and V(2) sites are split into two, to yield four vanadium sites that we will call V(1), V(1s), V(2), and V(2s). In these cells, because V(1) is the site that is oxidized in forming LVP2.0, we assume that either V(1) or V(1s) is oxidized in LVP2.5. The P1h model shown in Figure 5 demonstrates one possibility of charge ordering in the cell, although clearly other models are possible.
A Le Bail fit of the X-ray pattern to both a Pc and P21 cell yielded good agreement factors, similar to the P21/n cell. However, attempts to carry out a Rietveld refinement of the neutron diffraction data on the structure in any of the very low symmetry P21/n subgroups failed to converge satisfactorily, either due to limitations of the data or due to the ordering being short range in nature. Long-range order may be perturbed by the many different ways in which the V4+ can be accommodated within the lattice. Irrespective of whether the ordering is long or short range in nature, the model above will further help to explain the origin of NMR shifts in Li2.5V2(PO4)3 described in the following section.
The five isotropic NMR peaks of LVP2.5 can be explained by the hyperfine (or Fermi-contact shift) interaction.24 A “shift” of the 6,7Li NMR lines (compared to the reference at 0 ppm) arises from partial transfer of electron density from the Vn+ t2g-like orbitals to the Li 2s orbital. For n < 5, it gives rise to a positive spindensity, and hence positive shift. This has been quantified to some degree in other materials such as LiMn2O4 25 and LiMPO4 (M ) Fe, Mn, Co, Ni).26 The Fermi contact shift can also be a very sensitive probe of local bonding effects. In rhombohedral Li3Ti2(PO4)3, for example, it was shown that partial occupation of two sites (M3 and M¢ 3) in the lattice led not to two, but multiple 7Li NMR signals (>7) due to the next-nearest-neighbor effect arising from the vacant and occupied sites surrounding those two sites.27 
Since the Fermi contact shift is dependent on the number of d-electrons and the nature of the orbital overlap-interaction, the Li-O-V bond lengths and bond angles determine the exact magnitude of the shift. Importantly, since here there is a 3:1 ratio of V3+(d2) to V4+(d1) we expect the two vanadium sites to give rise to different Fermi contact terms, and hence different isotropic shifts.
The precise ordering of the vanadium valence with respect to the Li sites makes the analysis more complex, however. Figure 8 shows the Li environments in one of the proposed space groups, P1h. The V(1) atom shown in cyan represents V4+. V(1s), V(2), and V(2s) are shown in gray, indicating V3+; the symbol “s” represents a pseudo-symmetric site as described above. In the case of Li(1) or Li(1s), there is only one possible contact shift, as these form a chain: V(1s)3+-Li(1s)-V(1)4+-Li(1)V(1s)3+. For Li(2), the vanadium atoms V(1)4+, V(2)3+, and V(2s)3+ adjacent to it are different from the Li(2s) atom, where V(1s), V(2s), and V(2) are all 3+. This results in two different shifts for Li(2) and Li(2s). Similarly, Li3 has contact with V(1)4+, V(2)3+, and V(2s)3+. This is different from Li(3s), which is bonded to three 3+ cations, V(1s)3+, V(2)3+, and V(2s)3+. Therefore, in total, five distinct contact shifts would result, consistent with the experimental NMR results. 
This could arise from either oxidation of V(1) or V(1s). We can rule out oxidation of V(2) or V(2s) since only four contact shifts would result in that case. Partial occupancy of the Li(2) and Li(3) sites may also have an influence on the area of the isotropic shifts, as shown by the integration results for the 7Li spectrum. The area percentages for the 188, 121, 51, 27, and -9 ppm peaks are 13.4, 20.2, 20.2, 19.5, and 26.7%, respectively. The exact assignment of these five shifts is difficult without DFT calculations. We note that consideration of the other two space groups (Pc and P21) also gives rise to five shifts by a similar argument, although the arrangement of the V4+ in these lattices is slightly different. (2) Conductivity and Relationship to Other Phases. The ac impedance spectra of LixV2(PO4)3 phases are shown in Figure 9. 
The behavior of Li2.5V2(PO4)3, however, is unique. It possesses the highest ionic conductivity (more than an order of magnititude) by comparison to the fully lithiated phase. This can be explained by the partial vacancy distribution on the Li(2) and Li(3) sites, a property that is shared by the other members of the fast-ion conductors in this family. This includes the well-known superionic material  231)-Li3Sc2(PO4)3, whose lithium ion occupation is compared to that of pseudo-orthorhombic Li2.5V2(PO4)3 in Scheme 1. Both lattices share similar lithium site populations, namely, full occupancy of Li(1) and partial occupancy of Li(2) and Li(3). In the scandium framework, this disorder over the two lithium sites leads to enhanced mobility. Comparison of the conductivities of LPV2.5 and the  231)scandium phase is difficult since the latter is stable only at high temperatures and reverts to the R-phase on cooling to ambient temperature. 
