A solid-state potentiometric hydrogen gas sensor based on hydronium Nasicon, a hydrogen ion conducting solid electrolyte, is described. The device incorporates a patented silver-based reference electrode and a palladium working electrode. The sensor is robust, simple, fast, and capable of detecting hydrogen concentrations from at least 0.01 to 100%, a range of four orders of magnitude, in oxidizing and non-oxidizing atmospheres. The room temperature response characteristics of the sensor are reported.
Many industrialized countries are becoming increasingly aware of factors that affect climate change, and of particular concern are increased emission of greenhouse gases. This issue, along with the inevitable depletion of fossil fuel reserves has resulted in a renewed interest in alternative and renewable energy sources. Fuel cells have recently seen an upsurge in interest for possible use in transportation and stationary power generation. Fuel cells are electrochemical devices that convert chemical energy directly into electrical energy, which when operated on pure hydrogen emit no greenhouse gases, the only waste product being pure water. The use of hydrogen as fuel for fuel cells, however, raises many safety issues; consequently detection of potentially hazardous concentrations of hydrogen gas in both commercial and residential environments is receiving increased attention.
Several solid-state hydrogen gas sensors exploiting the ionic conduction of solid electrolytes have been reported [1–9]. This type of gas sensor has several advantages: the generated current or voltage can be easily measured with very high precision and since the potentials generated by these devices are independent of dimensions the sensor size can be tailored for any application. Hydrogen gas sensors are currently used extensively in a variety of areas, including aerospace and other industrial applications [10–13]. The use of hydrogen to power fuel cells for transportation and power generation applications will further increase the demand for cheap, simple, reliable and low-cost hydrogen gas sensors. In an earlier publication [1], a potentiometric hydrogen sensor based on hydronium Nasicon was described. That sensor had a novel reference electrode that allowed it to operate without a standard reference gas [14]. That sensor used a platinum working electrode and was unable to measure hydrogen in air. 
Although, a previous publication did, however, report that a solid-state protonic conductor-based sensor, using a sputtered platinum working electrode, was able to detect hydrogen in air, albeit, over a limited range of hydrogen partial pressures [15]. In order to overcome this limitation in the present sensor, it was modiﬁed by changing the working electrode; the results of this modiﬁcation on sensor performance are presented in this paper.
A bonded hydronium Nasicon disc (HyceramTM, a CANMET trade mark for a series of phosphate bonded hydronium ion conductors) was prepared as described previously [16]. The dried discs were parallel lapped with 120 grit abrasive paper, cleaned in 2-propanol, and dried. A silver nitrate solution in distilled water was applied to one side of the discs. The discs were dried for approximately 24 h, allowing the silver nitrate to diffuse into the discs thus forming a silver-Hyceram salt at and near the surface of the discs. The dry, silver nitrate treated surfaces were then covered with a commercially available electrically conducting silver-loaded epoxy resin [17]. A silver wire lead was attached with the same silver epoxy resin. The system was then cured at room temperature for 24 h. The maximum working temperature of the silver epoxy is 100 C and consequently, environments exceeding this temperature may compromise the functionality of the reference electrode. 
The expected lifetime of the silver epoxy is not known, but sensors in our laboratory are still functional 1 year after fabrication.
After curing, the untreated side of the electrolyte discs was slurry coated with a layer of palladium metal powder, using an organic medium (Engelhard A2466 Medium), and allowed to dry at room temperature for 24 h. A silver wire lead was attached to the dried palladium surface using the conducting silver epoxy resin.
Measurement of the cell emf was made with a Keithley 619 electrometer, which was interfaced through an IEEE-488 device to a personal computer. The data were collected for equilibrium potentials and response times to equilibrium, as a function of hydrogen partial pressure. High purity dry hydrogen, hydrogen–nitrogen and hydrogen–air gas mixtures containing 0.01, 0.1, 1 and 10% hydrogen, at a ﬂow rate of 200 cm3 min−1, were used for the measurements.
The sensor was ﬂushed with air prior to the introduction of each new hydrogen gas mixture.
The ﬁgure shows that the sensor response is extremely rapid for hydrogen concentrations between 1 and 100%. The response time is typically less than 10 s to achieve a signal level of 90%. As the concentration of hydrogen is lowered, however, the response time becomes longer. This is likely due to the presence of adsorbed oxygen on the working electrode surface, which has to be removed by the reaction with the sparsely available hydrogen in the system; only then the hydrogen equilibrium at the palladium electrode can be reached. Fig. 1b shows the sensor’s response for prolonged periods of time. The ﬁgure shows that the sensor output for hydrogen concentrations above 1% reaches equilibrium values very quickly and is very stable. 
The response time for the palladium-based sensor, while fast, is however, not as short as that for a sensor that uses a platinum working electrode [1].
A plot of the equilibrium output voltage of the sensor versus the logarithm of the hydrogen partial pressure yielded a calibration curve (Fig. 2); the sensor response is linear over an extremely wide range of hydrogen partial pressures. A nonlinear least squares ﬁt (NLLSF) to the data yielded a slope of 53 mV, while the Nernst equation predicts a value of 29 mV. Fig. 1b, however, clearly shows that the sensor output had not reached equilibrium for hydrogen concentrations of 0.01 and 0.1%. If these data points are discarded, a NLLSF to the data yields a value of 25 mV for the slope, in reasonable agreement with the theoretically predicted value. The linear response of the device thus allows one to determine the concentration of hydrogen in an unknown gas mixture by simply measuring the emf of the sensor. The emf values measured for a certain concentration of hydrogen did show some variation from sensor to sensor even though they were fabricated and tested under identical conditions. 
The variation was, however, less than ±10% on a set of 10 sensors. All sensors tested did, however, show comparable response times.
A solid-state hydrogen ion conducting solid electrolytebased hydrogen sensor, which has very fast response time and sensitivity over a wide range of hydrogen concentrations has been described. The sensor uses a palladium working electrode which allows it to sense hydrogen in air. The simple, robust construction of the sensor and its performance characteristics should allow the sensor to be used in applications where hydrogen gas is used, especially fuel cell vehicles and stationary power generation units.