A sol–gel process based primarily on inorganic reagents as raw material was employed to synthesize the solid-electrolyte material of NASICON. The synthesizing process and the resulted material were characterized by means of TG, DTA, XRD and FT-IR. The results C within 8 h without the detectable appearance of ZrO2 phase. indicated that the sintering reaction could be completed at around 900 Furthermore, the resulted solid-electrolyte was used as the basic material for the fabrication of a planar-type CO2. The measurements showed that the output electromotive force (EMF) followed Nernst equation well in CO2 volume concentration ranging from 0.01% to 0.1% and its response and recovery time was less than 15 and 28 s, respectively. In order to enhance the resistance from other gases such as sulﬁde, H2, CH4, CO, humidity and so on, a noble metal doped active carbon cap was utilized in package, its ﬁltering effect was investigated as well.
Control or measurement of CO2 concentration is often critical in many ﬁelds, such as in agriculture, air conditioning, biological technology and medical services. Therefore, various methods have been developed for the fabrication of reliable and compact CO2 sensor [1], of which the solid-electrolyte CO2 sensor is a promising one for its high sensitivity, high resistance to water, short response time and small volume [2,3].
The solid-electrolyte materials used in the preparation of potentiometric CO2 sensor include LaF3, MgO-stabilized ZrO2 and NASICON (Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12). As NASICON with component x of 2.0 possesses high ion conductivity at low temperature, it is most often utilized as the fundamental material for the solid-electrolyte CO2 sensor [2]. However, the high temperature solid-phase synthesis procedure which normally takes as long as 24 h and must be annealed at the temperature of above 1200 C is inconvenient for its practical application [4,5]. The newly developed metal-organic sol–gel procedure has overcome the problems, but the raw material is noble and thus limited to be widely applied [6–8].
In this paper, NASICON with x of 2.0 was synthesized by a developed sol–gel process, in which normal cheap reagents such as ZrOCl2, NaNO3, Si(C2H5O)4 and (NH4)2HPO4 were used as the raw materials. Modern analysis methods such as DTA–TG, XRD, FT-IR were employed to characterize the synthesizing procedure and the calcined material. Based on the resulted material, a small volume planar-type CO2 was fabricated and its CO2 sensing properties were investigated. In addition, the ﬁltering effect of active carbon cap used in the element package was also checked for the sake of enhancing the resistance capability to other gases.
In the synthesis of solid-electrolyte material of NASICON, ZrOCl2, NaNO3, (NH4)2HPO4 and Si(C2H5O)4 were used as the main reagents. After the ion of Cl was removed from ZrOCl2 solution by common precipitating and resolving procedure with the aids of NH3·H2O and HNO3, it was mixed with NaNO3 and the alcohol solution of silicon organic compound to form a transparent solution. Having been of platinum coil was added as an inner heater. The pellet was sintered at 1000 C for 5 h so as to be densiﬁed. Next, a thick Pt ﬁlm was covered on one surface of the pellet by coating H2PtCl6 solution on it and was followed by calciC for another 20 min, then a Pt lead was atnating at 900 tached with the Pt ﬁlm by Pt paste and sintered at 900 C for another 20 min. On the other surface of the pellet, the carbonate auxiliary phase of BaCO3–Li2CO3 mixture (molar ratio 2:1) was formed in the way of melting and quenching and an Au mesh connected to an Au lead was also covered on this side. 
An active carbon cap was used in package to improve the resistance to interference gases.
CO2 sensing properties were measured in a conventional gas following system. A quartz tube was utilized, through which the sample gases ﬂow on. The CO2 sensor with an inner heater was put inside the tube. The sample gases with different concentration of CO2, CH4, CO and so on were obtained by diluting pure gases with synthetic air. The interference from humidity was conducted by letting the synthetic air bubble through a water-containing chamber. Different relative humidity of the sample gas was realized by varying the chamber temperature. A humidity sensor fabricated in our laboratory was used to measure the relative humidity [9]. The output EMF value of the sensor was recorded with a digital electrometer (advanced, TR 8652).
The TG and DTA results shown in Fig. 2 indicate that the weight loss process of the NASICON gel could be completed below 600 C, and the solid state crystallizing reaction could be ﬁnished at about 900 C. Thus, the sintering temperature was carried out in the temperature range of 800–1000 C and the sintering time was set as 8 h.
In order to conﬁrm the function of Si(OC2H5)4 in NASICON precursor synthesis, silica xerogel was also prepared. After Si(OC2H5)4 was mixed with water and alcohol, the mixed solution was processed to get the ﬁnal silica xerogel with the similar procedure used in the synthesis of NASICON precursor.
The structure and the packaging method of CO2 element fabricated in the experiment are shown in Fig. 1. 
The sol–gel state formed in the synthesis process is presumably due to the generation of silica alcogels, resulting from hydrolysis and polycondensation of solvent diluted Si(OC2H5)4 in the presence of acid catalyst. The chemical reactions could be described as given further.
With the formation of silica alcogel, the other components were ﬁnely dispersed in the silica network. The realization of NASICON crystallization at lower temperature can be attributed to the uniform distribution of the components in the sol–gel process, and the solid-phase reaction can be ﬁnished through short distance diffusion at mild sintering temperature.
As indicated in [2,10], the CO2 element with composite carbonate auxiliary phase possesses high resistance to humidity inﬂuence. Therefore, the binary carbonate of BaTiO3–Li2CO3 was still chosen as the material for the preparation of the auxiliary phase electrode. The CO2 sensing property is shown in Fig. 5, in which the heating currents were set in the range of 250–290 mA. It can be seen that the output EMF was linear to the logarithm of CO2 concentration in the volume concentration ranged from 0.01% to 0.1%. Corresponding to the heating current of 250, 270 and 290 mA, the output EMF value were 66, 72 and 76 mV, respectively. The surface temperature of the element in this heating current range is between 400 and 500 C, which was measured with a Pt resistance. Theoretically, the element can be regarded as an electrochemical cell. 
The humidity inﬂuence on the CO2 sensing property was shown in Fig. 6. It can be seen that a serious change in the EMF value took place with the increase of relative humidity for the element without active carbon cap, while it decreased below 2 mV for that packaged with active carbon cap.
The biggest discrepancy for the element without active carbon cap was observed around 30% RH while it decreased to a low level in the high humidity region. It may be related to the solubility of carbonate electrode in water and the following reactions, which are most possible when the presence of residual moisture in the gas atmosphere was taken into account [12].
In the condition of low relative humidity, reaction (6) at the counter electrode side seemed to be more important in comparison with reaction (7) due to the higher stability of NASICON in moisture atmosphere comparing with carbonate salt. Thus, the output EMF could be written as follows:
Eq. (8) indicates that the output voltage will increase with increasing the atmosphere humidity. On the other hand, with the relative humidity in atmosphere rising, reaction (5) will gradually become saturated ascribing to its limited reactivity and the relatively low solubility of the employed carbonate. On the contrary, the occurrence possibility of reaction (7) will increase instead of reaction (6) [13]. If reaction (7) is regarded as the unique reaction at counter electrode, it could be infered that humidity would make no inﬂuence on the sensing performance from the Nernst equation based on reaction (5) and (7). In normal situation, reaction (6) and (7) took place simultaneously. The possibility increase of reaction (7) with increasing relative humidity leads to a gradual decrease of discrepancy. The observed humidity inﬂuence was mostly determined by the competition of reaction (6) and (7) at counter electrode side. 
Obviously, the carbonate solubility could make some effect on the proceeding of reaction (5). Therefore, the solubility increase of carbonate auxiliary electrode material will lead the discrepancy peak shift to higher humidity region.
Fig. 7 gave the EMF variation for the packaged and the unpackaged elements when they are exposed in the atmosphere with 0.1% CO2 and other co-existed gases. The co-existed H2S and SO2 will cause the EMF value decrease, while the gases of CO, H2, ethyl alcohol, CH4, NH3, C4H10 and so on will produce an additional voltage due to the change of surface temperature or the burning of inﬂammable gases into CO2 on the surface.
The responding and recovering properties with and without carbon cap were shown in Table 1. It was deﬁned as the time of 63.2% output voltage change corresponding to the switching change of CO2 concentration from 0.01% to 0.1%. It can be seen that the responding and recovering time for the element with carbon cap was much longer than that without carbon cap when the heating current were set at the same value. It implies that an additional diffusion time was needed to balance the CO2 concentration between the inside and the outside of the packaging cap. We hope that the responding time could be shortened by carefully selecting the thickness of carbon layer and the type of carbon powder.
Solid-electrolyte of NASICON was synthesized by a new sol–gel process, in which normal reagents were used as raw material instead of the metal organic. TG, DTA, XRD and FT-IR were employed to characterize the resulted products. The results indicate that the solid reaction could be ﬁnished after being annealed at 900 C for 8 h without the appearance of the other phases. The CO2 element based on the resulted NASICON shows high CO2 sensitivity and short responding time. The inﬂuence from the co-existed gases such as 0.01% methane, 0.01% alcohol, 0.01% CO and humidity could be reduced by the use of active carbon cap in package while the problem of sensitivity decreasing and response time prolonging need to be solved in the future research work.