Spark plasma sintering (SPS) method was used to obtain dense NASICON ceramics with a high-electrical conductivity, which was compared with conventional solid-state sintering. The fully dense NASICON was achieved at a relatively lowsintering temperature of 1100°C, whereas the apparent density of the specimen prepared by conventional sintering was 74% of the theoretical density. The highest conductivity of 1.8 ⴛ 10ⴚ3 Scmⴚ1 at 25°C, which is comparable to the best value reported, was achieved using the SPS process. Considering the phase, density, and microstructure, it appears that there is more room for improved conductivity by controlling the amount of monoclinic zirconia and the resistive grainboundary glass phase.
NASICON is a well-known sodium superionic conductor with the general formula Na1⫹xZr2SixP3⫺xO12 (0 ⬍ x ⬍ 3). Its highest ionic conductivity is observed in the monoclinic structure obtained for x ⬇ 2.1,2 It has been proposed as a solid electrolyte for applications such as gas sensors,3– 6 ion selective electrodes,7 and sodium-sulfur batteries.8 However, the poor sinterability and low phase purity limits its practical applications. Particularly, in conventional sintering, high temperature solid-state reactions lead to the volatilization of Na2O and P2O5 and the resultant segregation of zirconia at the grain boundary, which causes a decrease in the ionic conductivity.9 Several attempts have been made to improve the phase purity and sinterability, including sol– gel synthesis,10 –13 new compositions,6,14 and yttria-doping.15
Spark plasma sintering (SPS) is a newly developed sintering technology that makes use of microscopic electrical discharges between the particles under pressure and allows a quick densification to almost the theoretical density.16,17 The enhanced densification by SPS has been observed in several metallic, ceramic, and multi-layer systems, especially in difficult-to-sinter materials such as SiC–Al2O3,18 PMM-Pt,19 and LTP.20 In addition, a relatively low sintering temperature with a minimal grain growth in SPS has been applied to fabricate nanostructured materials.18,21 In this study, SPS was used to prepare dense NASICON ceramics to improve their conductivity, and the phase, microstructure, and conductivity of the SPS specimens were compared with those prepared by conventional solid-state sintering.
The NASICON compounds were obtained from a solid-state reaction of the reagent grade chemicals, Na2CO3, ZrO2, SiO2, and NH4H2PO4. Two types of NASICON were prepared: a stoichiometric composition (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) and 5Na5P (5 mol% excess of sodium and phosphorus). The raw materials were mixed in ethanol, ball milled for 24 h, and then dried in an oven for 24 h. The dried mixtures were calcined at 1150°C for 5 h and then ground.
For conventional sintering (CS), the powders were uniaxially pressed into pellets of 10 mm diameter and then cold isostatically pressed at 100 MPa. Sintering was conducted at 1220°C for 14 h.22 For SPS, ⬃1.5–2.0 g of the powders were placed into a 10-mm graphite die and an electric current of 1000 A was applied under a pressure of ⬃62 MPa. The heating rate was 100°C/min. The sintering temperature ranged from 900-1200°C for up to 30 min, and the temperature was monitored by an optical pyrometer focused on the graphite die surface. After holding for a predetermined time, the electric current was stopped and the pressure was released.
The phases of the powder and sintered specimens were measured by X-ray diffraction (XRD), and the microstructure of the fractured surfaces was examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The apparent density of the sintered specimen was measured by the Archimedes method using ethanol.
For the electrical conductivity measurement, platinum electrodes were screen printed with platinum paste on both sides of the NASICON pellets and heat-treated at 800°C for 1 h. The impedance measurements were performed using an impedance/gainphase analyzer (Model No. SI 1260, Solartron, Farnborough, UK), and data acquisition was made over the frequency range 10 Hz to 10 MHz at intervals of 10 points per decade with an applied voltage of 100 mV.
The XRD patterns for the calcined powder and sintered pellets are shown in Fig. 1. A well-crystallized NASICON powder was obtained after calcination at 1150°C for 5 h with the presence of monoclinic ZrO2 (Fig. 1(a)). The conventional sintering at 1220°C for 14 h produced an almost single-phase NASICON ceramics (Fig. 1(b)). The peak intensity for ZrO2 was reduced after conventional sintering, which suggests that the solid-state reaction during calcination appeared to be incomplete. It has often been reported that ZrO2 segregation is difficult to avoid in a conventional solid-state reaction, which requires a high-sintering temperature.9,15,22 In contrast to conventional sintering, the specimens prepared by SPS exhibited a more intense ZrO2 peak, and the ZrO2 peak intensity increased with increasing SPS temperature (Fig. 1(c)). The dominant existence of ZrO2 in SPS is believed to be caused by sodium and phosphorus volatilization in a vacuum leading to ZrO2 segregation. 
Indeed, the addition of excess sodium and phosphorus resulted in a significant reduction in the ZrO2 content after SPS, as shown in Fig. 1(d).
Figure 3 shows SEM micrographs of the fracture surfaces for the sintered pellets. The conventionally sintered specimen has a porous microstructure consistent with an apparent density of 74% (Fig. 3(a)). Whereas there were big pores, the matrix grains are relatively dense, which might have originated from the hard agglomerates in the calcined powder. SPS removed most of the larger pores and resulted in a rather homogeneous microstructure. For the stoichiometric composition, the specimen showed a fully densified microstructure, even at 1100°C, and a smaller grain size than that of conventionally sintered samples (Fig. 3(b)). 
Figure 4(a) shows the typical Nyquist plot (imaginary versus real impedance) of NASICON ceramics (stoichiometric, SPS, 900°C for 30 min) measured at 25°C. The frequency increased from right to left along the impedance curve and three distinct regions were evident.
Therefore, there is still room for improving the NASICON conductivity by controlling the density, grain size, and the amount of ZrO2 and glass phase.
The effect of spark plasma sintering (SPS) on the densification of NASICON ceramics was investigated. Fully dense NASICON ceramics were obtained by SPS ⬎1100°C, and the highest conductivity was found to be 1.8 ⫻ 10⫺3 Scm⫺1 at 25°C. The formation of a monoclinic ZrO2 phase from the sodium and phosphorus volatilization during SPS could be suppressed by adding a 5 mol% excess of sodium and phosphorus. However, this produced more of a resistive glass phase at the grain boundary, compensating for the decreasing effect of the ZrO2 content, which resulted in similar conductivities.
In SPS, the total conductivity increased with increasing sintering temperature. Considering the limited grain growth in SPS, the enhanced conductivity can be attributed primarily to the increase in the sample density. A maximum conductivity of 1.8 ⫻ 10⫺3 Scm⫺1 was found for the stoichiometric composition sintered at 1200°C. This conductivity is comparable to the best value reported in the literature (2.0 ⫻ 10⫺3 Scm⫺1).9,15 The 5Na䡠5P composition had a slightly lower conductivity than the stoichiometric composition at the same sintering temperature, which is caused by the lower density and the liquid phase leading to more a resistive grain boundary. Surprisingly, the conductivity of the conventionally sintered specimen was relatively high (5.2 ⫻ 10⫺4 Scm⫺1) despite its very low density of 74%.

