We report on the ﬁrst synthesis of a new NASICON framework Li2Ni2(MoO4) 3 and on the investigation of its electrochemical behavior upon Li extraction coupled with structural analysis. Li2Ni2(MoO4) 3 was synthesized by a novel soft-combustion approach involving glycine as a combustion agent and the product was found to crystallize in an orthorhombic structure ~space group Pmcn! with lattice parameters a 5 10.424(4) Å, b 5 17.525(1) Å, and c 5 5.074(3) Å. Reversible extraction and insertion of lithium from and into the framework structure delivered a reversible capacity of ;115 mAh/g ~4.9-1.5 V window! after the ﬁrst charge/discharge cycle.
Long life, low cost, and environmentally friendly batteries are required to meet the demands of the modern society for a variety of consumer electronic gadgets and future electric vehicles ~Evs! and hybrid electric vehicles ~HEVs!.1 Lithium-ion batteries are becoming increasingly preferred power sources for the above applications due to their high energy density compared to other rechargeable systems. Considering the most advanced and available rechargeable battery technologies, lithium-ion batteries using insertion materials as electrodes have the prerequisites to meet the above demands. Transition metal oxides with either spinel structure or layered structure have generated great interest as insertion cathodes ~positive electrodes! in these advanced power sources through their high working voltage vs. Li/Li1. 
These oxides have redox couple that accepts/donates electrons that compensate charge for inserted/ extracted lithium ions and in many of these oxides, a large portion of lithium can be inserted/extracted reversibly through redox reaction. Vanadium, cobalt, nickel and manganese based oxides have been examined for rechargeable lithium battery applications in the past.2-5 In view of cost, capacity, safety, and environmental friendliness, the search for new cathode materials, superior to LiCoO2 widely being used at present, is still an on-going task and a variety of materials are being investigated in this context.6-11
In view of ﬁnding new and/or alternative cathode materials, oxides with polyanions having open framework structure are of much interest. New cathode materials based on olivine type LiM8XO4 ~M8 5 transition metal! type LixM82(XO4) 3 ~M8 5 Ti, Fe, V and X 5 P, As, Mo, W, S! polyanion compounds have been reported.12-17 Recently, the above materials have attracted a great deal of attention in the context of examreversible insertion behavior of Li1, despite their ining their inherent insulating nature ~low electronic conductivity!.15,18 In the fundamental view, considerable interests have been shown to understand the properties of such materials and to improve their electrochemical performance. According to our best knowledge, lithium extraction/insertion in 3d transition metals such as Mn, Ni, and Co incorporating molybdate and tungstate polyanions have never been explored so far.
Figure 1 describes polyhedral structure of the new material, Li2Ni2(MoO4) 3 , which is made of layers of corner shared NiO6 octahedra and MoO4 tetrahedra. Each oxygen atom is bonded to one Mo and one Ni atoms. Oxygen atoms shared between NiO6 octahedra of one layer and MoO4 tetrahedra of an adjacent layer interconnect the layers in the framework. The hexagonal motif of Mo tetrahedra around Ni octahedra joined by their faces is clearly seen in Fig. 1. Lithium atoms may occupy sites between or within the layers. In Li2Ni2(MoO4) 3 , the topotactic extraction/insertion of Li1 could be made possible due to the presence of large voids between M-X-O @M 5 Ni and X 5 Mo] layers as well as the presence of easily reducible cations.20
According to our knowledge, the NASICON related framework 32, structure compounds possessing polyanions such as SO4 22 were never reported before as high AsO4 voltage positive electrodes ~as cathodes! in lithium cells. Recently, however, Amine et al.21 and Kerr et al.22 reported the high voltage redox properties of the olivine type LiCoPO4 and «-VOPO4 polyanion materials. Goodenough et al.12,23,24 studied the NASICON type polyanions in their delithiated phases such as Fe(SO4) 3 , Fe(PO4) 3 , and Cr2(SO4) 3 .
The present work was hypothetically derived from the information that the open framework structure corresponding to M2(XO4) 3 (M 5 transition metal) is expected to favor the electrochemical insertion and extraction of Li1.12,25 With the aim of examining the properties of open framework type lithiated polyanion materials as positive electrode for use in lithium batteries, we investigated a new family of lithium rich polyanion materials, namely Li2M2(MoO4) 3 @M 5 Ni, Co, Mn and Fe#. This paper presents a preliminary note on the synthesis and electrochemical lithium extraction/insertion behavior ~redox! of Li2Ni2(MoO4) 3 as positive electrode in lithiumcontaining cells.
The latter substance was then allowed to decompose at around 250°C. During the process of decomposition, combustible gases such as NOx , NH3 , and CO2 were liberated, which ultimately gave rise to pale brown powders, referred to as the precursor. Further, as the process continued, the volatile combustible gases ignited as a result of the exothermic decomposition of glycine, yielding a voluminous black mass, and subsequently turned pale green powders, the so-called as-prepared product. The latter product was further annealed at 600°C in the presence of ambient air and oxygen atmosphere to obtain the high phase purity of the ﬁnal product.
The crystallographic properties of annealed samples were characterized with a D-5000 Siemens X-ray diffractometer using nickel-ﬁltered Cu Ka radiation (l 5 1.5406 Å). The diffraction patterns were recorded at room temperature in the range 5-60° ~2u! in steps of 0.5°. The lattice parameters were calculated and reﬁned by a least-squares analysis of the 2u values.
Chemical analysis (ICP) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM).—The content of lithium, nickel, and molybdenum in the new material was determined using inductively coupled plasma spectrometer ~ICP, SPS 1500, Seiko Instruments, Japan! after dissolving the powder samples in HCl. The grain size and morphology features of the synthesized powders were observed by means of SEM ~JSM-5200, JEOL, Japan!.
Phase analysis (XRD).—The phase purity and structure of the synthesized material were examined using X-ray diffraction. The diffractogram of the material annealed at 500°C exhibited impurity peaks ~not shown!. However, such impurity peaks disappear upon annealing at 600°C/4h. The diffractograms of the above product reveal the formation of a highly crystalline phase of the material. It is evident that the crystallinity was increased at 600°C/4h as exempliﬁed by the sharp diffraction peaks presumably due to the smaller crystallite size of the product. The peak positions were indexed using the least-square reﬁnement method and the pattern was found to be identical with the crystallographic data previously reported ~JCPDS no. 70-0452! indicating the formation of well crystalline single-phase structure. Li2Ni2(MoO4) 3 was indexed in an orthorhombic structure with space group Pmcn. 
An expanded view of the differences in the peak positions of the chosen region with high intensity peaks ~19-31°/2u angle! of the samples annealed in ambient air ~sample A! as well as oxygen atmosphere ~sample B! is depicted in Fig. 2. A closer look at Fig. 2 reveals a slight shift in peak positions toward low angle ~2u! region for sample B with respect to sample A, which may be attributed to the better reﬁnement of the host structure as a result of oxygen ﬂow during annealing. The peak shift is an indication of the volume change of the crystal lattice, which would facilitate the easy extraction/insertion of lithium ion kinetics thereby improving the rate capability and increasing the discharge capacity of the material as discussed later.
Figure 3 exhibits the electron microscopic images obtained on the polycrystalline powders ~annealed at 600°C!. 
It is clear from the micrograph that the grains are loosely agglomerated, well connected with one another and the size of the grains is within submicrometer range.
In order to understand the electrochemical behavior of Li2Ni2(MoO4) 3 , lithium batteries with Li2Ni2(MoO4) 3 as positive electrode were tested under galvanostatic and potentiostatic conditions. The material annealed at 600°C in the presence of oxygen was taken for investigation.
The fabricated cells were allowed to equilibrate in argon atmosphere ~inside the glove box! until a stable value of open circuit voltage ~OCV! was reached.
During the ﬁrst anodic scan, a weak anodic current was observed at about 4.4 V ~inset in Fig. 4! indicating the ﬁrst oxidation of Ni21/Ni31 for the sample annealed in oxygen atmosphere. During the initial cathodic scan, the reduction of Ni31 was observed as a single peak at ;3.2 V indicating the reduction process corresponding to Ni31/Ni21. The shift in the redox potential of Ni31/Ni21 is associated with the presence of polyanion (MoO4) 22 in the host framework structure. The latter effect was ﬁrst reported by Nanjundaswamy et al. who studied the effect of NASICON-related framework compounds such as M2(SO4) 3 and LixM2(PO4) 3 (M 5 transition metal! in the context of how changing the polyanion group shifts the redox potentials of the M cations and the inﬂuence on Li1 ion insertion rate and cyclability of a displacive phase transition of the host between lithiated and delithiated end members.23 
As the reduction process continues down to 1.5 V ~minimum cut off voltage studied!, two peaks were evident at ;2.6 and 1.9 V, presumably due to the reduction of Mo61 ~to its lower oxidation states! and these two cathodic peaks superimposed yielding a single broadened peak in the subsequent cycles suggesting the slow and steady dynamics of Li1 diffusion into the active material which is consistent with the result of galvanostatic discharge curves as shown in Fig. 5. Upon further cycling, only one broadened anodic peak was observed at ;2.6 V which may be attributed to the Mo oxidation, together with a high voltage peak at 4.34 V which is attributed to oxidation of Ni21/Ni31. It is interesting to note that the broad anodic peak corresponding to Mo61 oxidation remains unaltered in terms of height and position upon repeated cycling suggesting the charge stability of the material at low voltage.
Interestingly, only two cathodic peaks were observed at about 3.2 V (Ni31/Ni21 reduction! and 2.0 V ~Mo reduction! during the second and subsequent cathodic scans as the cell was being cycled. However, the cathodic peak height ~current proﬁle! gradually decreases at about 2.0 V ~corresponding to Mo atom!. These results are supported by the progressive change in the shape of charge/ discharge curves ~Fig. 6! obtained by means of constant current charge/discharge tests.
It is interesting to note that at the end of second charge at 4.9 V vs. lithium, 2.9 Li atoms per formula ~the corresponding composition was Li3.6Ni2(MoO4) 3) was extracted leaving a composition of Li0.7Ni2(MoO4) 3 . Upon second discharge, as the reinsertion of Li1 begins, it is likely that the Li0.7Ni2(MoO4) 3 phase at the core grows back, so the particles retain the form of the initial parent phase at the end of the discharge at 1.5 V where the total discharge capacity ~extraction! of ;81 mAh/g ~amounting to 1.85 lithium atoms per formula! was achieved corresponding to a composition of Li2.55Ni2(MoO4) 3 . Note that at the end of second discharge ~second cycle!, unlike the ﬁrst discharge curve, only a small ﬂat proﬁle was observed. The variation in the amount of lithium inserted could be explained based on the geometric size relation between the Li1 and the framework that limits the amount of inserted Li1 into the voids. 
Further work is in progress to study the extended cycling characteristics and to improve the electrochemical behavior of this material and will be published elsewhere.
We described the soft-combustion synthesis of a new NASICON-type framework structure compound, Li2Ni2(MoO4) 3 and examined the lithium ion extraction/insertion characteristics in lithium-containing test cells as positive electrode ~cathode! over a wide potential window ~4.9-1.5 V! for the ﬁrst time. Electrochemical reversibility was demonstrated by means of SSCV and galvanostatic charge/discharge tests. As for the galvanostatic tests, the ﬁrst lithium extraction process delivered 45 mAh/g corresponding to one Li1 per formula unit while the reversible insertion process offered a speciﬁc capacity of ;115 mAh/g ~4.9-1.5 V window!. The structural similarity between the lithium rich phase @Li2Ni2(MoO4) 3# and the end member composition within the framework facilitated lithium extraction/insertion process. Further work is centered on the cycling stability of this new family of polyanion framework structures, Li2M2(MoO4) 3 ~where M 5 Ni, Co, Mn, and Fe! and will be reported elsewhere.
It is reasonable to expect at the end of ﬁrst extraction process that the stoichiometric composition at the positive electrode side could be 21/31(Mo61O4) 3 in order to compensate the charge balance in LiNi2 the host framework. Even though the compound exhibited a good high voltage charge proﬁle during the ﬁrst lithium extraction with a capacity of 45 mAh/g, the discharge proﬁle demonstrated poor reduction kinetics during the beginning of discharge ~insertion! between 4.9-3.0 V. The high voltage proﬁle of the frameworktype Li2Ni2(MoO4) 3 as positive electrode obtained in the electrochemical extraction/insertion process of lithium is shown in Fig. 5. Though the discharge curve appears to be ﬂat and exhibited twostep discernible plateau proﬁles up to 2.5 V, the electrochemical insertion was limited to 0.25 lithium per formula unit between 4.9 and 2.5 V vs. Li/Li1 as shown in Fig. 5. 
In alkali cation polyanion materials for instance, NASICON-type structures, possess fundamentally poor electronic conductivity, which is not desirable for electrode application in lithium batteries.13 Because, the new material, Li2Ni2(MoO4) 3 being reported is also belonging to the above polyanionic family, the poor rate capability in the present case may presumably be attributed to the low electronic conductivity of the new material. Efforts are underway to improve the electronic conductivity of Li2Ni2(MoO4) 3 and will be reported elsewhere. In addition, the poor rate kinetics could probably be due to the inherent structural limitation, which is common for polyanion materials reported so far.
Typical galvanostatic multiple charge/discharge curves ~two cycle! of Li2Ni2(MoO4) 3 //Li cell cycled between 4.9 and 1.5 V ~from OCV! is shown in Fig. 6. It is interesting to note that the initial charge curve ~ﬁrst oxidation from OCV! is signiﬁcantly different from the subsequent ones. The charge curves after the ﬁrst charge/discharge ~extraction/insertion! cycle exhibited two step voltage proﬁles corresponding to the oxidation of two transition metals, Mo and Ni. That is, during the second charge, the voltage proﬁle with respect to the amount of lithium extraction ~oxidative removal! up to 4.9 V ~charge cutoff voltage vs. lithium!, demonstrates well discernible two step plateaus; the ﬁrst one is observable between 1.5 and 3.0 V vs. lithium corresponding to ;1 Li atom per formula and the second step extends from 3.0-4.9 V with a smooth plateau proﬁle beginning at 4.2 V as shown in Fig. 6, yielding a speciﬁc charge capacity of 125 mAh/g. 
During the subsequent discharge, 2.6 Li1 per formula unit could be reversibly inserted down to 1.5 V with a discharge capacity of ;115 mAh/g. Interestingly, a ﬂat voltage proﬁle was evident at around 1.6 V, and at the end of ﬁrst charge/ discharge cycle terminating at 1.5 V ~discharge cutoff! where the practical composition was expected to be Li31xNi2(MoO4) 3 ~where x 5 0.6). The plateau proﬁle at about 1.5 V with a transient potential decreased from 1.7 V during the insertion process seems to be based on the reduction of Mo61.
