The non-Nernstian behavior of zirconia-based electrochemical NOx and CO sensors with various semiconducting oxides as sensing electrodes was extensively studied in the temperature range 450-700°C. Both pellets and tape-cast layers of yttriastabilized zirconia were used for the fabrication of the sensors. It was found that the gas-sensing mechanism of the sensors cannot be explained always by the mixed potential theory. When semiconducting oxides are used as sensing electrodes, the semiconductor sensing mechanism and the adsorption-desorption behavior of the different oxides dominate the sensor response if both metal and oxide are exposed to the same environment.
Strict norms on pollution control are being enforced worldwide, especially for what concerns emissions of vehicles.1 To satisfy the new standards on automobile emissions, the on-board diagnostic ~OBD! system has been introduced to control the main pollutants, such as NOx , hydrocarbons ~HCs!, and CO. The OBD is a complex, closed-loop system to continuously monitor pollutant concentrations in exhausts. At present, it consists of two solid-state oxygen sensors ~lambda sensors!: one placed upstream of the three-way catalytic converter ~to control the fuel/air ratio!, the second one located downstream in the exhaust to control, through an electronic unit, the efﬁciency of the catalytic converter. The availability of new, reliable, and fast NOx , HCs, and CO solid-state sensors will allow a direct and precise analysis of the pollutants easily integrable in the OBD system. 
The on-line detection of pollutants in internal combustion engine ~ICE! exhaust gases is a challenging task. Solid-state gas sensors developed to directly measure the concentrations of gases in the exhaust manifold of an ICE could be, in fact, easily used as a feedback element in engine control systems. Moreover, NOx sensors are required to control de-NOx systems in diesel engines and for fuel-lean applications in gasoline engines.
Solid-state electrochemical sensors with metal oxide auxiliary phases seem to be the most suitable for applications at high temperatures and in harsh environments. The main limitation for their substitution for the well-established lambda probe is that none of the reported sensors show, to our knowledge, performance that would be suitable for real applications, that is, high speed and high operation stability in harsh environments.
Solid electrolyte-based electrochemical devices combined with an auxiliary phase have been widely studied as sensors for the detection of oxide gases such as CO2 , NO, NO2 , and SO2 , and various combinations of solid electrolytes and oxyacid salts have been exploited.2 Most of the equilibrium-potential NOx sensors use nitrites or nitrates as auxiliary phases in combination with Na1 ionic conductor.3-5 The main limitation of this kind of sensor is the lack of thermal and chemical stability due to the low melting point of the commonly used auxiliary phases.6 Substitution of the auxiliary phase of the electrochemical sensors with a metal oxide has been proposed recently as a new approach to improve the performance of NOx sensors at high temperatures.7-9 The same approach has been proposed also for the development of similar sensors for the detection of other gases.10,11
It is well known that potentiometric oxygen sensors based on stabilized zirconia with Pt electrodes generate an electromotive force ~emf! according to the Nernst equation. The measured emf value deviates from equilibrium when a reducing gas coexists with oxygen at the sensing electrode. Fleming12 ﬁrst introduced the concept of mixed potential to explain the anomalous emf of the oxygen sensor when the working electrode was exposed to CO in the presence of air, and interpreted the deviation from Nernstian behavior as due to the simultaneous occurrence at the electrode of a cathodic reduction of oxygen and an anodic oxidation of the reducing gas.
The generation of an anomalous emf in yttria-stabilized zirconia ~YSZ!-based sensors when exposing the working electrode to a reducing atmosphere opened the investigation on mixed potential sensors for detection of different gases. Gas sensing using mixed potential devices started more than two decades ago. Shimizu et al.13 investigated YSZ-based tubular sensors with Pt or Pd electrodes for the detection of combustible gases in 1978. In their study they attributed the observed anomalous emf value to the decrease of the oxygen partial pressure at the working electrode due to the catalytic activity of Pt ~Pd!. Also, Okamoto et al.14 and Li et al.15 observed a nonideal emf in a YSZ-based sensor when the working Pt electrode was exposed to CO and air. However, the response of these sensors was not very large at temperatures higher than 500°C and their selectivity at lower temperatures was poor. 
The reason was that Pt is a good oxidation catalyst and at high temperatures reducing gases can be completely oxidized before reaching the three-phaseboundary, while at low temperatures the main limitation was due to the low YSZ conductivity.16
To overcome these problems, other metals or metal alloys have been investigated with the result of improving sensitivity and selectivity at higher temperatures. For example, Vogel et al.17 have found a better response to CO and H2 up to 550°C by using Pt/Au alloys. Hibino et al.18 found that a YSZ-based sensor with a Au electrode develops at 600°C an elevated mixed potential. Mukundan et al.19 found a higher mixed potential in a YSZ-based sensor by replacing the Pt electrode with a Au electrode; they also observed stability problems in the sensor at 600°C.
Because most of the stability problems of mixed potential sensors are due to the change in the morphology of the noble metal, a further step in the improvement of the performance of these sensors was the substitution of the noble metals with metal oxides that have better thermal and chemical stability. This allowed not only an increase in the operating temperature of the sensors, but also the study to be enlarged to include different target gases. It was found that the mixed potential is strongly dependant on the electrode material because of catalytic and kinetics factors.
Several reports are available on solid-electrolyte-based sensors ~Pt, Au, etc.! and oxide electrodes for combined with metal 7-9,11,20-30 and CO/HCs31-33 detection. Different types of solid NOx electrolytes such as NASICON,7,8,11,28 YSZ,9,21-28,31,32 and ceria,33 have been tested in the electrochemical sensors and combined with many types of semiconducting oxides, WO3 ,20,23,25,29 perovskite oxides ~ferrites27,28 and cobaltites32!, and spinel.22,24 The majority of the sensors used a conﬁguration with measurement of the potential between two different electrodes exposed to different gas atmospheres, the oxide being exposed to gas and the metal electrode to air. The authors of this paper, instead, report the sensing performance for devices wholly exposed to the gas environment.27-29
According to many authors,21,26,30-33 the sensing mechanism of electrochemical sensors based on coupling a solid electrolyte with semiconducting oxides can be explained using the ‘‘mixed potential’’ theory. The mixed potential mechanism was claimed both for 21,26,30 and CO/HCs31-33 gas sensors based on similar electroNOx chemical cells. Mixed potential theory has also been proposed to explain the working features of single-chamber solid oxide fuel cells with both electrodes exposed to the same gas atmosphere.31,34,35
The mixed potential mechanism can ﬁt well the performance of sensors with different metallic electrodes. However, when semiconducting oxides are used as sensing electrodes other phenomena have to be considered, such as the surface morphology, the electrocatalytic activity, the adsorption-desorption behavior of the electrodes, etc. This led other authors to a different explanation of the sensing mechanism, especially in the case of NOx sensors, because of the complexity of the reactions occurring between NO and NO2 with air at high temperatures.36 Another gas-sensing mechanism proposed has been named ‘‘differential electrode equilibria.’’ 36 Differential electrode equilibria is a more general concept to explain the NOx sensitivity that is due not only to electrochemical reactions, but also to different electrocatalytic activity and/or sorption-desorption behavior of the two electrodes. 
The authors of this paper have found that the differential electrode equilibria concept might better explain the sensing mechanism of their sensors,29 though some questions remain.
The aim of this paper is to investigate the sensing mechanism of ~p-type!, and YSZ-based sensors with WO3 LaxSr1 2 xFeO3 semiconducting oxides as sensing electrode. The sensors were prepared using pellets or thick layers of YSZ to get devices in ‘‘bulk’’ and ‘‘planar form,’’ respectively. The electrochemical response ~emf and amperometric measurements! of the sensors was studied in the temperature range between 450 and 700°C in the presence of NO2 and CO in air ~20-1000 ppm!. The inﬂuence of the grain size of the oxides used for the sensing electrodes on the gas response was also investigated. All sensors were wholly exposed to the same atmosphere, without using reference air. In this way, the variations of oxygen concentration can be the same at both electrodes and their inﬂuence might be compensated between the electrodes. To get to the sensing mechanism of the sensors some electrochemical measurements were also performed exposing the reference electrode to air.
Sensing experiments were carried out in a conventional gas-ﬂow apparatus equipped with a controlled heating facility. The sensors were alternatively exposed to air and NO2 or CO ~20-1000 ppm in air! at the total ﬂow rate of 100 mL/min in the temperature range between 450 and 700°C. EMF measurements were performed between the two electrodes of the sensors using a digital electrometer. During the emf measurements, the electrode with the oxide coating was always kept at the positive terminal of the electrometer and both electrodes were exposed to the same gas environment. Amperometric measurements were performed by applying a constant dc voltage of 1 1 or21 V to the sensing electrode and measuring the current ﬂowing between the electrodes by switching between air and oxidizing or reducing atmospheres.
SEM observations were performed on different oxide thick ﬁlms deposited on a Pt electrode. WO3 thick ﬁlms showed a porous structure made of grains of submicrometric dimension of about 200-250 nm.38 The LaFeO3 observations were in agreement with what has been previously reported for these perovskite-type oxides.37 The thick ﬁlms prepared with powder calcined at 700°C was highly porous and consisted of large grains 2-10 mm in size. Each of these grains was made of soft agglomerates of homogeneous nanometric particles of 50-100 nm in size. The LaFeO3 thick ﬁlms obtained with powder calcined at 900°C showed an increase in size of the nanosized grains to about 200 nm.28 The grain size of the thick ﬁlms prepared with La0.8Sr0.2FeO3 powder decomposed at 700°C was smaller than 50 nm, as shown in Fig. 1. 
Sensing performance of bulk sensors.—Figure 3 shows the typical NO2 response of Pt/YSZ/Pt/WO3 bulk sensor at 600°C. EMF changed quickly upon switching from air to various NO2 concentrations in air. At 600°C steady-state values were observed at all measured gas concentrations. The response ~at 90% of saturation emf value! and recovery times were 40 s and 2 min, respectively. From the linear correlation between the emf saturation values and the logarithm of gas concentration at different operating temperatures, it is shown that the EMF response decreased at all different gas concentrations with increasing operating temperature. The largest sensitivity ~18.8 mV/dec! was found at 600°C. At temperatures below 600°C, the sensing responses were unstable and did not show a linear correlation with log NO2 concentrations.
Figure 4 shows that in the presence of various CO concentrations the emf response of Pt/YSZ/Pt/WO3 bulk sensors decreased and reached negative values, unlike the NO2 response ~always keeping the WO3 side at the positive terminal of the electrometer!. At 600°C the emf values at any given concentration were smaller than those measured in the presence of NO2 . However, the sensitivity at 600°C was 215 mV/dec, comparable to NO2 sensitivity at the same temperature. CO cross sensitivity might be reduced when Pt electrodes were replaced with Au.38
Figure 5 shows the sensing response at 400 and 450°C of the Pt/YSZ/Pt/LaFeO3 sensors, with the LaFeO3 powder calcined at 700°C. EMF changed quickly upon switching from air to 75 ppm NO2 and steady-state values were observed. At the higher temperature the stability of the response was improved and the response time became faster. The response of the Pt/YSZ/Pt/LaFeO3 sensor was 64 mV at 400°C and 26 mV at 450°C. The response of the same sensor, at 400°C, obtained using the LaFeO3 powders calcined at 900°C was investigated and compared to the response at the same operating temperature of the sensor obtained using LaFeO3 powders calcined at 700°C. A sharp decrease in emf response ~about 6 mV! was observed for the sensor prepared using the powder calcined at 900°C, which can be explained by an increase in the grain size as observed by SEM analysis.28
Figure 6 shows the results of the amperometric measurements at 450°C of the Pt/YSZ/Pt/LaFeO3 sensor when a constant dc voltage of 1 and 21 V was applied to the LaFeO3 electrode cycling air and 300 ppm of NO2 in air. When applying 1 1 V~2 1 V! a fast increase ~decrease! in the current was observed upon exposure to NO2 . The response time was less than 30 s both for direct and reverse polarization.
For WO3-based planar sensors at ﬁxed temperature ~550-700°C!, positive emf values were measured at various NO2 concentrations and negative emf values at various CO concentrations, as already observed for the bulk sensors. The response was stable and reproducible; at 600°C, where the best sensitivity was observed, the emf magnitude was 17.8 and 19.4 mV upon exposure to 1000 ppm of NO2 and CO, respectively. The response ~20 s! and recovery ~40 s! times were quite fast for both gases. A linear correlation was observed between the emf values and the NO2 and CO concentrations in logarithmic scale ~Fig. 7!.
The emf response of LaFeO3and La0.8Sr0.2FeO3-based planar sensors went in opposite directions with respect to the WO3-based planar sensors response: negative emf values upon NO2 exposure, positive values upon CO exposure. Figures 8 and 9 show the emf response of LaFeO3-based sensors to NO2 and CO. It must be stressed that this behavior was not observed for the bulk sensors prepared with the same oxide.
These ﬁndings were conﬁrmed also with the other p-type oxide. Figures 10 and 11 show the emf response of La0.8Sr0.2FeO3-based planar sensors to NO2 and CO at 550 and 600°C. At a given gas concentration, the emf values of La0.8Sr0.2FeO3-based sensors decreased with increasing operating temperature. At 550°C the emf magnitude at 1000 ppm of NO2 in air was about 30 mV, while the emf value at the same concentration of CO was only 5 mV. The La0.8Sr0.2FeO3-based sensors showed a reduced cross-sensitivity to CO in comparison to WO3 and LaFeO3-based sensors, especially at 550°C.
This is probably because this oxide is a mixed ionic-electronic conductor; probably oxygen ions adsorbed on the surface can migrate inside the grains and a reduced number of adsorbed oxygen ions are available for the reaction with CO. NO2 adsorbs competitively with O2 and its sensitivity is not affected by the ionic conduction of the oxide. For both perovskite oxide-based sensors the best sensitivity was observed at 550°C, as obtained from the slope of the linear ﬁt of the emf response curves.
Figure 12 shows the dependence of emf of WO3-based sensors and La0.8Sr0.2FeO3-based planar sensors vs. the log of NO2 and CO concentrations in air at different temperatures in order to emphasize the opposite behavior of WO3and La0.8Sr0.2FeO3-based planar sensors in the presence of the same oxidizing or reducing gas. In contrast, the bulk sensors showed the same sign of the emf response when exposed to the same gas irrespective of the type of semiconducting oxide.
Figure 13 shows the emf of La0.8Sr0.2FeO3-based planar sensors with powders decomposed at 700°C at various NO2 concentrations measured of La0.8Sr0.2FeO3-based sensors prepared with powders heated to 900°C for 4 h, measured at 100 ppm NO2 at 450°C. Upon increasing the oxide grain size, the response became small, slow, and unstable. Thus, the grain size of the sensing electrode strongly affects sensor performance. This ﬁnding conﬁrms what has been previously reported also for LaFeO3-based sensors.28
According to several authors,21,29,32,39 the electrochemical reactions occurring for mixed potential-type sensors at the three-phase boundary between solid electrolyte, electrode, and gas, can be expressed as follows.
In the case of our sensors where both electrodes are exposed to the same gas environment, both reactions take place at both electrodes, though Reactions 1 and 3 prevail at the sensing electrode and Reactions 2 and 4 at the metal electrode side. The number of oxygen ions the Pt/YSZ and YSZ/Pt/(WO3 ,LaFeO3) interfaces is different and can be strongly inﬂuenced by the electrode material, its surface morphology, and its electrocatalytic activity. The porous layer of semiconducting oxide enhances the adsorption of gas molecules and hence highly promotes Reaction 1 and 3 upon exposure of NO2 and CO, respectively. The number of oxygen ions is larger at the Pt/YSZ/(WO3 ,LaFeO3) interface in the presence of NO2 atmosphere, while the number of oxygen ions is larger at the YSZ/Pt interface in the presence of CO. This fact can explain why the emf response was in opposite directions to NO2 ~oxidizing gas! and CO ~reducing gas!. 
The electrochemical explanation, known as mixed potential theory, is thus in agreement with the emf results of bulk sensors.
A different polarity was observed in the amperometric measurements. Upon applied potential, the generated oxygen species are pumped through YSZ and give rise to a current through the solid electrolyte. Under positive bias, the increase in the current, observed in the polarization measurements upon NO2 exposure, can be related to the decrease in the resistance at the electrolyte/oxide electrode interface due to an increase in the number of oxygen ions accumulated at the LaFeO3 /Pt/YSZ interface and available for conduction. Under negative bias, the oxygen ions are moved from the higher to lower O22 accumulation region ~metal electrode side! and hence, the negative current ﬂow decreases as shown in the amperometric measurements. Upon CO exposure, the situation was just the opposite. 
From potentiometric measurements on bulk sensors, it is clearly shown that the sensing reactions, Reactions 1 and 3, mainly take place at the semiconducting oxide electrodes. The amperometric measurements on the same sensors are consistent with the fact that WO3 is an n-type semiconductor and LaFeO3 is a p-type semiconductor. Moreover, it must be remembered that a different response was observed for the planar sensors. A question about the sensing mechanism arises: Is it always mixed potential?
Considering the results obtained from the emf measurements on p-type planar sensors, the answer is clearly no. In fact, those emf measurements cannot be explained by the occurrence of the electrochemical reactions at the three-phase boundary ~solid electrolyte/ electrode/gas!, as obtained in the case of bulk sensors. In particular, the electrochemical reaction that should mainly happen at the oxide sensing electrode, Reaction 1, as in the case of bulk sensors, cannot explain the negative emf values of p-type semiconducting oxidebased sensors in the presence of NO2 gas. This fact is probably due to the electrodes design: two close ﬁnger-electrodes exposed to the same gas atmosphere. 
Another possible support to this explanation is the sizedependent response of the electrodes. From one side, a decrease in grain size can induce an increase in triple-phase boundary surface, which leads to an improvement in the electrochemical reactions and decrease in the overpotential, but on the other side an increase in the oxide-speciﬁc surface area increases the chemisorption sites and interaction with gases. Reducing the grain size at the nanometer level improving performance of semiconducting-type gas sensors based on oxides.40 Moreover, recently X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy ~XPS! measurements performed on LaFeO3-based sensors after testing in NO2 have shown the presence of nitrogen stably adsorbed on the oxide surface.41
YSZ-based sensors with oxide electrodes both in planar and bulk form are promising candidates for pollutant detection at high temperatures, up to 700°C. The sensors show fast and stable response without the use of reference air. The sensor response is strongly affected by the grain size of the powder used for the preparation of the sensing electrode.
The sensing mechanism of oxide-based sensors cannot always be explained by mixed potential theory. The emf response can also be due to the different electrocatalytic activity and/or chemical sorption-desorption behavior of the electrodes ~differential electrode equilibria!.
Our ﬁndings on planar-type sensors suggest that due to the electrode design ~close ﬁnger-electrodes exposed to the same gas atmosphere!, the electrochemical reactions take place at the same rate at both electrodes; thus, the change in resistance due to chemical adsorption of gases on the semiconducting oxide surface is predominant. The mixed potential theory can be fully claimed only in the case of oxide-based sensors when reference air is used.

