The construction and sensing performance of solid-state potentiometric NOx sensors using a natrium superionic conductor ~NASICON! as solid electrolyte are reported. Dense ceramic pellets with a pure NASICON crystal phase were produced by a solid-state reaction method using a modiﬁed procedure. The NASICON surface on the Pt sensing electrode side was modiﬁed with a NaNO3 layer as an auxiliary phase using a melting-quenching method. By the same method, the other surface of the NASICON was modiﬁed with an AgCl layer and was connected with an Ag wire as a reference electrode. An air/Pt quasi-reference electrode was fabricated by exposing the Pt black attached NASICON surface to the ambient. Both sensor devices using air/Pt and Ag/AgCl reference electrodes were investigated for NOx sensing. The two sensor designs exhibited Nernstian behavior, fast response, stability, and reproducibility. 
The Ag/AgCl reference electrode provides an all-solid-state design for the sensor device without the need for a reference gas with ﬁxed composition or a hermetic seal separating the reference electrode from the sample gas. A NOx sensing mechanism is discussed.
Nitrogen oxides ~primarily NO and NO2 , abbr. NOx) exhausted from high-temperature combustion processes are major air pollutants. Rugged and reliable gas sensors capable of detecting NOx in harsh environments are at present in high demand for pollution monitoring and control. Ceramic electrochemical gas sensors are promising for this purpose due to their good sensitivity and selectivity, fast response, relatively simple structure, and the potential to operate in harsh environments. Both potentiometric and amperometric yttria-stabilized zirconia ~YSZ! solid electrolyte oxygen sensors with reliable sensing performance have been used widely for air/fuel ratio control in internal combustion engines to optimize engine performance and reduce polluting emissions.1 This success has encouraged research into solid ionic conductor ~SIC! based gas sensors for the detection of many other gases at elevated temperatures. 
Two distinct approaches for potentiometric gas sensors using SICs have emerged over the last 10 years: mixed-potential gas sensors2-10 and surface-modiﬁed solid electrolyte gas sensors.11-18 The two types of sensors can be differentiated because the latter one exhibits a thermodynamically controlled equilibrium sensor response while the former exhibits a catalytically or kinetically controlled steady-state sensor response. Both sensor designs are SIC-based potentiometric devices and can be compared to the yttria-stabilized zirconia ~YSZ! oxygen sensor structure in which either the sensing electrode or the surface of the SIC is chemically modiﬁed. The mixed-potential gas sensor is based on the difference in catalytic activities for the oxidation of the targeted gas under the same conditions between sensing and reference electrodes that are made from different materials. 
The reference electrode that exhibits a low catalytic activity toward the target gas provides a near constant electrode potential under various concentrations of analyte. These sensors may be regarded as metal-oxide-modiﬁed solid electrolyte sensors because mostly transition metal oxides have been investigated as sensing electrode materials. There is a wide selection of metal oxide or mixed metal oxide materials as the electrode materials and their catalytic oxidation properties to the target analyte is of prime importance. The catalytic properties of the metal oxide electrode play an important role in not only sensitivity but also selectivity to the target gas. The sensitivity, deﬁned as the slope of the electromotive force ~emf! vs. log @conc.# plot, is commonly unpredictable, sub-Nernstian, and sometimes nonlinear for this sensor structure. Improvement of reproducibility and sensitivity of this sensor structure are main challenges to further development at this time. 
Mixed potential gas sensors have shown promise for the measurement of many reducing gases, including H2 , CO, NO, and hydrocarbons.
The surface-modiﬁed solid electrolyte gas sensor response is based on the reaction of a coating placed on the solid electrolyte touching the sensing electrode. This auxiliary phase is typically prepared from metal salt in which the anion establishes a reversible redox reaction with the analyte molecules to be detected. In this sensor design, both sensitivity and selectivity are provided by the nature of the auxiliary phase similar to ‘‘electrodes of the second kind’’ in aqueous electrochemistry. So far various combinations of SICs and auxiliary phases have been investigated for gas sensing. For example, a NaNO3/natrium superionic conductor ~NASICON! system can be used for NO2 sensing because the nitrate ion intro2 5 NO2 1 1/2O2 1 e2 duces the surface redox reaction of NO3 into the system and the potential is NO2 concentration dependent, as predicted by the Nernst a Na2CO3 /NASICON system, CO2 can be measured.13-16 
This approach has led to the development of solid electrolyte gas sensors 17,18 measurement with the use of several for NOx , CO2 , and SOx conventional ceramic solid electrolytes including YSZ, b-alumina, or NASICON.
In the present work, a new solid-state reference electrode is investigated for use with a NASICON solid Na1 ion conductor to construct potentiometric sensors for NOx sensing with an NaNO3 auxiliary phase. This work compares two kinds of reference electrodes ~REs!, speciﬁcally the air/Pt and the newly designed Ag/AgCl electrodes. 
For cell 1, a reference gas with constant composition is required and the reference needs to be isolated from the test gas. For cell 2, the Ag/AgCl solid RE does not require isolation from the reference gas, and this simpliﬁes the sensor device and can lead to a major decrease in the size of the device as well as expand applications.
Three similar electrochemical cell designs based on a NASICON solid electrolyte are illustrated in Fig. 1. 
If the device is used in a gas phase, it can be used to measure O2 partial pressure because the activity of the Na1 ion can be regarded as a constant in the NASICON phase or at the interface. Such NASICON-based devices for measuring Na1 or the dissolved O2 19-21 in a solution as well as the O2 partial pressure in gas phase22,23 have been reported. The need that remains, however, is understanding of this device at the molecular level such that it will allow isolation and identiﬁcation of the molecular basis for stability and selectivity. These advances enable us to realize sensors that are stable over time and responsive only to the desired analyte in the real and often-complex sample matrices encountered during sensing.
The dense NASICON disks about 1 mm thick and 10 mm diam were polished with a ﬁne sandpaper for constructing sensor devices, and several samples were then ground into ﬁne power for XRD to conﬁrm the formation of a highly pure Na3Zr2Si2PO12 phase without free zirconia crystal phase ~Fig. 2!. For a better adhesion of the auxiliary phase, the NASICON disk surface was abraded gently using a coarse 120 grade sandpaper to form some visible scratches.
Two designs of sensor devices, B and C, using different reference electrodes of air/Pt and Ag/AgCl were fabricated, respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 1B and C. The NASICON disk was 10 mm diam and 1 mm thick and was ﬁxed at one end of a glass tube @6 mm outside diameter ~o.d.!# with an inorganic adhesive ~Fig. 3!. The Pt black was pasted onto the surface of the disk inside the tube, on which a Pt wire was connected to make the air/Pt reference electrode ~quasi-reference electrode! that was open to the atmosphere. The sensing electrode was fabricated by applying Pt mesh on the outside surface of the disk. It was covered with a layer of NaNO3 by dipping the outside surface of the NASICON disk into a molten NaNO3 bath and rapidly quenching in air.
In order to make a solid Ag/AgCl reference sensor ~Fig. 1C!, the NASICON disk was polished into a solid bar (3 3 5 3 0.5 mm) using sandpaper. A 0.25 mm diam Pt wire was wound around the end of the bar and a 0.25 mm Ag wire was wound around the other end. To prepare the NaNO3 coat, about 10 g NaNO3 powder was placed in an alumina crucible and carefully melted over a gas burner. The Pt-wire connected end of the NASICON bar was dipped into the NaNO3 melt and quenched in air. As a result, a NaNO3 layer about 0.1 mm thick was coated onto the surface. Similarly, AgCl was coated on the Ag wire. In the experiment, special care was taken to conﬁne the two coatings to the ends of the bar of NASICON so that the middle area of NASICON was kept clean and uncoated. The AgCl salt is not a good electronic or ionic conductor and the impedance of the prepared device can be very high. To increase the AgCl layer conductivity, the AgCl melt was kept in liquid state over a burner for about 1 h prior to the coating. 
This heating produced some Ag in the melt because of partial decomposition of AgCl. After cooling, the melt was light brown due to the presence of metallic Ag. After coating, a glassy state of AgCl is formed and the adhesion to the NASICON surface is very strong. The photos of the fabricated unsymmetrical sensor devices are shown in Fig. 4. The sensor with no insulation over the reference electrode is used for the sensor feasibility study reported here.
NOx sensing measurements were carried out in a gas-ﬂow apparatus. The sensors were positioned in a quartz glass tube inside a tube furnace to control the sensors at the desired temperature. A thermocouple was placed near the sensor to measure and control the temperature. The measurements were performed at a ﬁxed temperature of 180 or 200°C. The gas composition and ﬂow rate were controlled using a gas blender ~Custom Sensor Solutions, Naperville, IL!. Air and NO2 or NO sample gas with various concentrations in air alternately ﬂowed over the sensors. The total gas ﬂow rate was kept constant at 100 cm3/min with a constant oxygen concentration of 21%. The potential between the sensing and reference electrodes was measured and recorded by a digital multimeter and an HP data acquisition unit ~HP34970A! interfaced to a desktop PC computer.
The NO2 sensing characteristics of the air-referenced device @Pt,NaNO3 /NASICON/Pt# were investigated at 180°C and Fig. 5 shows typical response transients from switching on and off various NO2 concentrations between 2 and 50 ppm in air. Each concentration was tested twice. The sensor response time to 90% of full emf is about 20 s and the recovery occurs in about 1 min. Figure 6 illustrates the Nernstian plot of emf vs. log@NO2# and has a slope of 89.9 mV/dec that agrees with the theoretical value for one-electron reduction of NO2 at 180°C. Figure 7 shows the NO2 response stability. The sensor was tested by cycling the gas between air and 100 ppm NO2 many times at 200°C over an extended time period. The sensor showed a stable air base line and NO2 response, indicating that this sensor design can work well for NO2 sensing, and the air reference electrode provides a sufﬁciently stable reference potential in this solid-state potentiometric sensor as it does elsewhere in simple air matrices. 
However, air or other gasreferenced sensors have limitations in deployment because of the requirement for a gas ﬂow with constant composition over the reference electrode, and a reliable isolation of the reference electrode from the sample gas is required in order to obtain results like those reported here.
The NOx sensors with the design ~Fig. 1C! were investigated at 200°C, and Fig. 8 illustrates typical potential responses to switching on and off various NO2 concentrations between 40 and 1000 ppm for two devices ~here named device CI and CII!. The two identically made sensors were tested at the same time under the same conditions for comparison. Similar response times and magnitudes are observed ~Fig. 8! to each other and to the air/Pt referenced sensor. The responses with the solid reference electrode are stable, reproducible, with very low noise. The 90% response time was about 20 s and the two sensors’ emfs were different by 27 mV in synthetic air. There are several interfacial potentials developed in this sensor design, and variations from sensor to sensor as a result of the preparative process can explain such a difference. However, stable and reversible potential responses at concentrations as high as 1000 ppm NO2 were observed. 
These results support our hypothesis that the AgCl-coated Ag wire remains at a constant potential even in high concentrations of NO2 and at 200°C, and can serve as a stable reference electrode. It also implies that the Ag1 activity is a constant in the solid AgCl phase and the AgCl/NASICON interface potential is stable.
The Ag1 in NASICON has diffused from the AgCl/NASICON interface during sensor preparation at high temperature. Ag1 ion often exhibits reasonable mobility in many salts or glass materials. The activity of Ag1 in the auxiliary phase ~AgCl! is very important to the relative and absolute emfs produced by the sensor. If the activity of the Ag1 is too high, the Ag1 moves into the NASICON phase and reacts with NASICON and is reduced to metallic Ag ~deep black in color!. The NASICON then becomes an electronic conductor, eventually shorting the SE and RE and reducing the sensor lifetime. In our experiment, we used AgCl auxiliary phase to lower the Ag1 activity and limit the movement of Ag1 into the NASICON phase. 
Figure 9 is a plot of the dependence of emf on the logarithm of NO2 or NO concentration at 200°C for the two sensors ~CI and CII!. Both devices exhibited identical behavior and the Nernst slope was 94 mV/dec, agreeing with the theoretical value for a one-electron reduction of NO2 or NO at 200°C. For each sensor, the potential response magnitude for NO2 was higher than that for NO by approximately 25 mV.
When AgCl is used, the Ag1 activity can be decreased. On a molecular level, we can describe the NO2 sensing process as: NO2(g) reacts and obtains an electron from the sensing 2 on the NaNO3 surface ~Eq. 13!, and a Na1 electrode to form a NO3 ion in the NASICON phase ~fast Na1 conductor! migrates into the NaNO3 ~Eq. 17! to balance the negative charge produced by Eq. 13. At the same time, Ag1 in AgCl phase moves to NASICON ~Eq. 18! to balance the charge change caused by Na1 moving out. Consequently, an Ag atom in the Ag wire is oxidized to form Ag1 ~Eq. 15! at the Ag/AgCl boundary to maintain electric neutrality. In an amperometric mode we observe the charge ﬂow as a current as the electron moves from the Ag wire to the Pt wire to accommodate the chemical reaction. 
Under open-circuit conditions, i.e., potentiometric mode where zero current is observed between Pt and Ag wires, the electrons from the Pt wire ~Eq. 11! and the electrons in the Ag wire ~Eq. 15! build up on the wires until the free energy of the electron is exactly the free energy difference between the chemical reactions from which they emanate. That is, the electrical energy is equal to the chemical energy at equilibrium and this is the deﬁnition of the equilibrium condition for this electrochemical cell, and the Nernst potential ~the concentration dependence of the electric potential! is observed. 
This work describes the electrochemistry of NASICON solid electrolyte gas sensors including recent novel improvements in preparative processes as well as electrode design to enhance performance. The principles here can be extended to other auxiliary phases that establish known but different surface electrochemical reactions on solid electrolytes and can help formulate a model for predictable analytical responses. The auxiliary phases and sensor preparative methods have profound effects on the analytical characteristics of the resulting sensor devices. The new solid reference electrode that is reported results in a more rugged and simple design NOx sensor with sensitivity at the ppm level, rapid response time, and no need to hermetically isolate the reference electrode from the gas sample.