A new material, Li2Co2(MoO4)3, belonging to NASICON type polyanion family was synthesized by means of a low temperature soft-combustion method using glycine as a soft combustion fuel. The annealed product, LizCoz(MoO4) 3, was found to exhibit a single phase structure as confLrmed by XRD and crystallized in an orthorhombic structure (space group Pnma) with lattice parameters a = 5.086(1) A, b = 10.484(2) A and c = 17.606(2) ,~. The electronic state of each element present in the new material was confirmed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS) analysis. The stoichiometry of the synthesized product was determined by the metal analysis using inductively coupled plasma (ICP-AES) technique. The microstructural analysis by means of SEM revealed cylindrical fiber-like grains. Electrochemistry of the new material was demonstrated by extraction/insertion process of Li + in lithium batteries. 
Galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles revealed a reversible discharge capacity of - 55 mAh/g over the potential window of 4.9 - 1.5 V.
Although the rechargeable Li-Ion technology has been commercialized more than a decade ago, the research trend in today's lithium-ion batteries is to improve the working voltage (Energy density) and capacity to cope with power hunger devices. The needs of power demands obviously require investigation of new electrode materials. In this context, the search for new cathode materials is inevitable and various types of new materials are being investigated [1- 4]. 
A step ahead in new materials development is an interesting class of polyanion based NASICON framework type lithiated transition metal oxides that show tremendous potential for use in rechargeable lithium batteries. Recent report in the above category is the development of transition metal compounds having the ordered olivine and/or modified olivines or the rhombohedral NASICON structure containing the polyanion, (PO4) 3- [5]. The open threedimensional crystal structure in these framework type compounds facilitates easy diffusion of smaller alkali cations like lithium. Large number of lithium containing compounds incorporating polyanions such as olivine type LiM'XO 4 (M' = transition metal and X = P, Mo, W, S) and NASICON type LixM'2(XO4) 3 (M' = Ti, Fe, V and X = P, As, Mo, W, S) have been reported [6-12]. 
Despite their inherent insulating nature (low electronic conductivity) [13,14], tremendous interest has been shown to understand the Li § insertion/extraction behavior of these materials because of their potential application in new generation lithium batteries.
On the other hand, lithium insertion properties of nonlithiatd phases of Fe2(XO4) 3 (X -- Mo, W and S), andNi2(MoO4) 3 have been studied [6-8,15]. Gaubicher et al. [2] and Andersson et al. [12] have investigated the effect of insertion of additional lithium into Li3V2(PO4) 3 and Li3Fe2(PO4) 3. Nevertheless, according to our knowledge, lithium extraction/insertion from and into Li2M2'(XO4) 3. [M' = Mn, Ni and Co and X = Mo and W] lithiated phases has not been studied so far. Likewise, NASICON type compounds incorporating polyanions such as SO4 2-, PO4 3-, AsO4 2-, MoO4 2- and WO4 2- have not been explored in the context of their high voltage behavior as cathodes for lithium batteries. However, the high voltage redox properties of olivine-type LiCoPOa and E-VOPOa polyanion materials have been reported [ 16,17]. Recently, we have discovered the high voltage redox behavior of lithiated phase of LizNiz(MoO4) 3 with discharge capacity of- 115 mAh/g [18,19]. 
Thus, it is revealed now that the open framework type polyanion family of compounds with a general formula, Li2M'z(XO4)3 (M' = Transition metal) indeed exemplifies the topotactic extraction/insertion of Li + within the framework [6,20]. In the present work, we have identified yet another lithiated polyanion material namely, Li2Co2(MoO4) 3 belonging to the above polyanion family and studied its electrochemical Li § extraction/insertion kinetics. This paper presents a report on the investigation of the synthesis, structural and electrochemical (redox) characteristics of low temperature derived Li2Co2(MoO4)3.
Ultrafine blue powders of Li2Co2(MoO4) 3 were obtained upon annealing the as-prepared product at 500 ~ and 600 ~ in ambient air. Figure 1 presents the simultaneous thermograms (TG/DSC) of the metal-organic precursor. As shown in Fig. 1, as the precursor was heated in the TG/DSC furnace, a large exothermic peak occurs at about 162 ~ which is attributed to the removal of water/NH 3. The weight change corresponding to the above reaction was noticed up to 250 ~ with about 35% weight loss. As the process of heating continues, two discernible exothermic reactions were noticed presumably due to total heat disintegration of glycine followed by the decomposition of remaining organic moieties which occurs at about 440 ~ (removal of N20/CO2) beyond which an insignificant amount of enthalpy change was noticed (about 0.45%) up to 600 ~ indicating the completion of reaction at about 400 ~ Our definition of soft-combustion is thus verified by observing a mild combustion reaction evident from the DSC thermogram.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS) analysis was carried out to identify the electronic state of various elements (Li, Co, Mo and O) present in the new material Li2Co2(MoO4) 3 by using Axis Ultra Imaging X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (Kratos analytical, Shimadzu). The base pressure of the sample chamber in the spectrometer was lower than 10 -9 Torr. All binding energies were corrected with the carbon is line at 284.5 eV. The stoichiometric composition of lithium, cobalt and molybdenum in the new material Li2Co2(MoO4) 3 was determined using inductively coupled plasma spectrometer (ICP, SPS 1500, Seiko Instruments, Japan) after dissolving the powder samples in HC1. 
SEM analysis was employed to obtain the grain size and morphology characteristics of the synthesized powders using Cambridge Instruments (Stereo scan $200). Electrochemical techniques (potentiostatic and galvanostatic) were used to investigate the high voltage redox properties of Li2Co2(MoO4)3. Basic electrochemical system (BAS, Perkin Elmer, PARC model, USA) equipped with PowerCV | software was used to perform the slow scan cyclic voltammetry (SSCV) experiment. Galvanostatic charge/discharge cycle tests were conducted using an Arbin battery tester (Arbin instruments BT2000, USA) (8-channel unit) equipped with MITSPRO software 
A two-electrode cell made up of Teflon housing (2450 coin type) with SS current collectors was used for fabrication of test cells comprising a composite cathode (working electrode) and thin lithium metal foil anode (FMC, USA) as both counter and reference electrode. Li2Co2(MoO4) 3 synthesized powders, black carbon and PTFE binder were mixed in a weight ratio of 80:15:5 to fabricate composite cathodes (as positive electrode) and the mixture was kneaded in mortar and pestle (agate type), rolled 79 into thin sheets of around 100 gm thick, and cut into circular electrodes of 3.14 cm 2 area and pressed onto aluminum expanded grid mesh current collector. The separator was made up of a microporous Celgard | 2400 membrane soaked in a standard non-aqueous Li + electrolyte mixture solution (1 M LiPF 6 in EC + DMC, LP30, Merck). The test cells incorporating the above components were fabricated inside a glove box filled with high purity dry argon (99.999%). 
Figure 2 shows the polyhedral crystal structure of Li2Co2(MoO4) 3 as determined by the CrystalDesigner | software. Determination of crystal structure of Li2Co2(MoO4)3 revealed a three-dimensional framework consisting of metal-oxygen octahedra and trigonal prisms (where Li and Co reside) which are inter-connected by MoO4 tetrahedra. The hexagonal motif of Mo tetrahedra around Co octahedrajoined by their faces is clearly seen in Fig. 2. Lithium atoms may occupy sites between or within the layers. The open framework may allow Li + ions to easily move topotactically in and out of the structure.
The phase purity and structure of the synthesized product were examined using X-ray diffraction technique. The material was annealed at 500 ~ and 600 ~ with a soak time of 4 h in order to optimize the phase purity. Figure 3 shows X-ray diffraction pattern of Li2Co2(MoO4) 3. At 500 ~ the diffractogram of the material exhibited impurity peaks (Fig. 3a). However, impurity peaks were found to disappear upon annealing at 600 ~ (Fig. 3b). Moreover, it is clear from the diffractogram that the peaks are refined and become sharper resulting in decreased crystallite size of the product. This is one of the favorable attributes for the effective utilization ofLi2Co2(MoO4)3 positive electrode active powders. 
In the case of the product annealed at 600 ~ it was observed that the XRD peak positions are in good agreement with the crystallographic data previously reported (PDF # 31-0716) indicating the formation of well crystalline singlephase structure. Li2Co2(MoO4) 3 was indexed in an orthorhombic structure with a space group Pnma. The lattice parameters were refined using a refinement program (ICSD using POWD - 12++) and calculated to be a = 5.086(1) ~., b = 10.484(2) ~ and c = 17.606(2) A. The crystallite size dc (coherent length of the crystal lattice) was approximated from the Xray line width, w (FWHM) according to the Scherrer formula: dc = 0.9X/wcos0 (1) where )~ is the X-ray wavelength (1.5406 ~) and 0 is the diffraction angle. The above formula gives d,. = 54.8 nm for the sample annealed at 600 ~ h. 3.2. XPS Analysis. The electronic state of different elements present in the new material Li2Co2(Mo4)3 was confirmed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). 
Figure 4 exhibits the XPS emission spectra of Co (2p3/2), Mo (3ds/2), O (ls) and Li (ls). The Li ls spectrum observed near 56 eV is shown in Fig. 4a. There were two chemically different cobalt species present in the spectrum.
One peak at 780.423 eV was associated with a broad satellite peak with a slightly different binding energy (782.366 eV) (Fig. 4b). In this, the former peak is attributed to divalent cobalt (Co 2+ 2p3/2) and the existence ofthe latter is probably due to surface oxidation of cobalt species. The binding energy position of the Mo (3ds/z) peak was 233 eV as indicated in Fig. 4c. Only one Mo chemical species was detected, e.g (MoO4) n- and attributed to Mo 6+. The O (ls) data for Li2Co2(MoO4)3 showed a single lattice site, with the main binding energy peak at 531 eV (Fig. 4d). Recently, we have reported the XPS results for the isostructural counterpart Li2Ni2(MoO4) 3 and the present observations are in good agreement with our previous report [19].
The experimental atomic ratio of 1.9/2.03/3/12.01 corresponding to Li/Co/Mo/O was obtained for the framework-type polyanion material as deduced from ICP analysis. Accordingly, the experimental (real) chemical formula that may be written based on the above atomic composition as Lil.9Coz.03Mo3O12.01 which is somewhat different from the nominal (ideal) composition of Li2Co2(MoO4)3. The amount of oxygen was deduced by subtraction of all the metal weights of cations from the sample weight. However, the slight compositional deviation was attributed to the experimental error (within 3%).
The particle size distribution, shape and morphology characteristics were analyzed using scanning electron microscopic (SEM) analysis. The scanning electron micrograph for the polycrystalline powders of Li2Co2(MoO4) 3 is shown in Fig. 5. As shown in Fig. 5, the formation of fiber-like loosely agglomerated submicrometre rods are evident.
The slow scan cyclic voltammogram of Li2Co2(MoO4) 3 composite electrode at a scan rate of 0.1 mV/s vs. Li/Li + between 4.9 V (charge cutoff) and 1.5 V (discharge cutoff) is shown in Fig. 6. The electrochemical reversibility of the new material is exemplified well in CV profile and the current vs. voltage profile exhibits anodic (oxidation) and cathodic (reduction) peaks corresponding to Co 2+ and Mo 6§ activities. The first oxidation of Co2+/Co3§ was observed at - 4.3 V as clearly indicated (inset in Fig. 6) during the first anodic scan from OCV. During the cathodic scan after first oxidation, the reduction of Co 3§ was observed as a single peak at about 3.1 V corresponding to Co3+/Co 2+ reduction process. The presence of polyanion MoO4 2- in the host framework structure shifts the redox potential of C03§ 
The influence of polyanion in shifting the redox potential of the transition metal ion during electrochemical extraction/ insertion of lithium was first reported by Nanjundaswamy et al. [22] who studied the effect of NASICON-related framework compounds such as M2(504) 3 and LixM2(PO4) 3 (M = transition metal) and explained how changing the polyanion group shifts the redox potentials of the M cations and its influence on Li + ion insertion rate and cyclability of a displacive phase transition of the host between lithiated and delithiated end members. Upon continuing the discharge process down to 1.5 V (minimum cut off voltage studied),two peaks were evident at about 2.6 V and 2 V, presumably due to the reduction of Mo 6+ (to its lower oxidation states). In the subsequent cycles, these two peaks merged with each other and appeared as a single broadened peak at - 2 V indicating the slow and steady diffusion of Li § into the active material. 
Further, when the cell was charged from 1.5 V to 4.9 V, two oxidation peaks at about 2.6 V and 4.3 V were observed, the former one may be attributed to the oxidation of Mo and the latter one is attributed to Co2+/Co 3+ oxidation. 
Only two reduction peaks at about 3.1 V (Co3+/Co 2§ reduction) and 2.0 V (Mo reduction) were observed during the second and subsequent discharge as the cell was being cycled. A new NASICON type framework structure compound, Li2Co2(MoO4) 3, was described in this work for the first time as a positive electrode material for lithium batteries. The above NASICON compound is orthorhombic (space group Pnma) at room temperature. XPS analysis confirmed the electronic valence states of the elements present in the stoichiometric formula unit as Li2+Co22+(M06+O4)3 . The chemical stoichiometry of the material was estimated by ICP as Lil.9Coz.03Mo3O12.01. Redox behavior of transition elements (Co 2+ and Mo 6+) present in the new material LizCoz(MoO4)3 was demonstrated by slow scan cyclic voltammograms in relation to Li § extraction/insertion behavior of the new polyanion compound studied in the present work. 
The electrochemical lithium insertion reaction delivered a discharge capacity of-55 mAh/g (4.9-1.5 V potential window). Work is underway to enhancing the useable capacity of the new material and will be reported elsewhere.
