A solid-state amperometric CO2 sensor was prepared by combining a NASICON (Na+ conductor, Na3Zr2Si2PO12) with a porous Na2CO3 auxiliary layer deposited on a sensing electrode. The current between sensing and counter electrodes as a function of CO2 concentration was approximately linear in the range of 200–2000 ppm at 400 C. The device could be operated stably during the test period (60 days). The sensing characteristics and long-term stability were discussed in the light of the sensing mechanism.
The detection of the CO2 concentration is becoming increasingly important for monitoring the indoor quality as well as global greenhouse gas emissions. Various types of cost-eﬀective sensors have been investigated in an eﬀort to replace the infrared spectroscopic CO2 sensor.1 3 Among them, the potentiometric-type sensor, which consists of a Na+ conductor, metal carbonate and a reference electrode, is attractive because it exhibits a satisfactory EMF (electromotive force) over a wide range of CO2 concentrations.4 6
However, the seal of the reference electrode4 or the attachment of the Na+containing reference electrode material6 is important in order to avoid drift in the potentiometric signal. Moreover, the sensor EMF is known to decrease after being exposed to a humid atmosphere at low temperatures.7,8 This paper reports a compact and drift-free amperometric CO2 sensing device using NASICON (Na+ conductor, Na3Zr2Si2PO12) and a porous Na2CO3 layer coated on the sensing electrode, which requires neither gas sealing nor a Na+-reference electrode. The sensing characteristics and long-term stability are discussed in relationship with sensing mechanism.
The CO2 concentration was controlled by changing the mixing ratio between the parent gas (0.2% CO2 in air balance) and dry synthetic air. At the sensing temperature (400 C), the current decayed for approximately 1 min after applying the voltage, and the subsequent voltage variation required approximately 30 s to saturate the signal. Therefore, the sensor signal was measured with varying CO2 concentration 5 min after applying the voltage and the I-V characteristics were attained by measuring the current 1 min after each successive increase in voltage.
Fig. 2 shows the response transient and sensor characteristics measured by varying the CO2 concentration between 200 and 2000 ppm at 400 C with an applied voltage of 0.1 V. 
The current increased with increasing O2 concentration and the signal increment was 0.4 nA per 1% increase in oxygen. It is approximately 1/130 of the signal change when the CO2 concentration varied from 200 to 2000 ppm, which suggests that the present sensor could be used as CO2 sensor for monitoring the indoor air quality without a signiﬁcant inﬂuence from O2 concentration.
The I-V characteristics were examined with varying CO2 concentrations although they are not shown in this paper. No distinct limiting current plateau was found and a negative current was found at 0 V. This means that a limitation in CO2 diﬀusion via the porous Na2CO3 layer is not the main reason for the CO2dependent amperometric signal although CO2 is necessary for sensing. The net current at 0.1 V was largely negative at lower CO2 concentrations and increased to slightly positive with increasing CO2 concentrations upto 2000 ppm. Moreover, the zero-current point decreased to the lower CO2 concentration with increasing external electric ﬁeld. It means that the amperometric signal of the present sensor is the result of competition between the Na+ migration by diﬀerences in the Na+ activity and that by the external electric ﬁeld. A schematic diagram of the sensing mechanism is shown in Fig. 3. 
Na+ ions are known to migrate towards a reference electrode according to the following reactions when the air without CO2 and H2O vapor was provided to the gas-sealed reference electrode.4 
Therefore, the Na+ migrates from the sensing electrode (SE) to the counter electrode (CE). (see the arrow 1 in Fig. 3) On the other hand, the external electric ﬁeld moves Na+ toward the SE. (see arrow 2) Therefore, a net negative current (see arrow 3) is observed at low CO2 concentrations because Na+ migration by the difference in the Na+ activity is dominant compared to that caused by the external ﬁeld. However, at high CO2 concentrations, a smaller amount of Na+ migrates toward the CE (arrow 10) because the reverse reaction of (1) dominates. Therefore, the net current approaches zero and becomes positive with increasing CO2 concentration because the external ﬁeld eﬀect is identical.
In order to conform the existence of a corrosion layer, the Na2CO3-covered NASICON without Pt electrodes was placed in the ﬂow of the synthetic air containing humidity (3.5 kPa H2O) at 50 C for 3 days. An approximately 10 mm thick layer was observed between the Na2CO3 and the NASICON, which was identiﬁed as Na2ZrO3 by electron probe micro analysis. The corrosion layer similar to BaZrO3 shows that the SE potential in this study is also relatively stable.
Kida et al.9 investigated the stability of the NASICON-based CO2 sensor against humidity by monitoring the potentials of the SE and CE after both electrodes had been exposed to a humid atmosphere at low temperatures. They reported that the SE potential covered with a Li2CO3–BaCO3 auxiliary phase was stable despite the long exposure to the humid atmosphere. In contrast, the CE potential changed to a large extent and gradually recovered to its original value by sensor operation at 450 C. The stable SE potential was attributed to the formation of a corrosion layer (BaZrO3) between the auxiliary phase and the NASICON, which protects the NASICON from further attack by water vapor. On the other hand, the change in the CE potential was explained in terms of Na3PO4 formation during the exposure to humidity.
Generally, a potentiometric sensor using a Na2CO3 auxiliary phase keeps the Na+ activity at the reference electrode constant by ﬂowing dry air. However, the reaction at the CE in this study might include H2O vapor and CO2 because the electrode was not sealed.9 The following equation illustrates this reaction. 
Besides the above reaction, various other reactions between Na2O, NaOH, NaHCO3, and Na2CO3 are possible. This usually results in a drift in the sensor signal. Sadaoka et al.10 reported that NaHCO3 forms between the NaOH and CO2 and decomposes above 300 C into Na2CO3. This means that NaHCO3 and Na2CO3 are the most feasible deposits that can be formed in the CE at low and high temperatures, respectively. Because these phases will form more easily at the negative current, the increase in the current level from negative to zero or positive is desirable in order to retard the formation of NaHCO3 and Na2CO3 at the CE. In this respect, the application of external electric ﬁeld opposite to the Na+ activity gradient might be the reason for the stable sensing character. to investigate the above possibility, a PtjNASICONjPt cell without an auxiliary phase was prepared and the current at 0.1 V was measured.
A compact amperometric CO2 sensor was prepared by coating a porous Na2CO3 auxiliary layer on a PtjNASICONjPt cell. The current at 0.1 V between the sensing and counter electrode was largely negative at low CO2 concentrations and linearly increased with increasing CO2 concentration from 200 to 2000 ppm. The current was interpreted as a competition between Na+ migration by the diﬀerence in the Na+ activity and that by the external electric ﬁeld. Therefore, the long-term stability during the test period (60 days) was attributed to the retardation of NaHCO3 or Na2CO3 formation by applying the electric ﬁeld.
The current was slightly positive and constant over 3 days. On the 4th day, the NaHCO3 and Na2CO3 layers were coated using their aqueous solutions on the (+) electrode and the sensing characters were subsequently measured. The abrupt increase in the current was attributed to the increase in the Na+ activity by the formation of NaHCO3 and Na2CO3 layers. The current values decreased gradually by successive operations at 0.1 V and recovered to approximately their initial value 3 days after being coated. This shows that the formation of NaHCO3 or Na2CO3 layers can be inhibited or the formed layers can be decomposed by applying an external electric ﬁeld.
The Na2CO3 layer is less stable to water vapor than 4 and binary carbonate layers such as BaCO3–Na2CO3 Li2CO3–CaCO3.11 The long-term stability of the present sensor despite employing a Na2CO3 layer suggests that a further improvement in the sensor stability is possible. Finally, the retardation of NaHCO3 or Na2CO3 formation and the decomposition of a formed layer are expected to be tuned by controlling the external electric ﬁeld.

