NASICON powders with the composition of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 were synthesized by using a sol – gel method. In the course of synthesis, a different material of oxalic acid was used to modify the synthesis process. The resulted precursors were sintered at the temperatures ranging from 700 to 1000 jC to get NASIOCN powders. X-ray diffractometer (XRD), IR and Raman spectra were employed to characterize the sintered products. Also, the ionic conductivity measurement conducted in the temperatures of 150 – 300 jC was used to evaluate their electronic properties. Furthermore, CO2 sensor was prepared based on the pressed NASICON bulk. The relationship between its EMF response and the target gas concentration was checked. The experiment results showed that the NASICON material sintered at 900 jC possessed better properties in comparison with those sintered at other temperatures.
Food industry, domestic and environmental applications need the development in sensors for the analysis of CO2 [1,2]. Solid-electrolyte sensors seem to be very promising in this respect due to their low cost of production and high performance in selectivity and sensitivity. NASICON has been proposed as an eligible solid-electrolyte material for the preparation of all-solid-state electrochemical cells. It is well known that NASICON has a three-dimensional framework structure and possesses a high Na+ ionic conductivity [3]. The ceramic properties also make it suitable for its application in electrochemical devices. The general formula of NAISON could be written as Na1 + x Zr2SixP3   xO12. By now, most of the studies concerning this application have been concentrated on the composition range 1.8 < v < 2.4, because a high ionic conductivity could be obtained in this range [4 – 6]. 
Especially, NASICON with nominal composition Na3Si2Zr2PO12 has been emphasized for the preparation of CO2 electrochemical sensor [7,8].In the synthesis of NASICON, a high sintering temperature would volatilize the component of phosphorus. A debased sintering temperature seems to be advantageous for obtaining a desired composition. Recently, our research work revealed that well-crystallized NASICON material with x = 2.2 could be prepared by modifying a sol – gel route with oxalic acid and setting the sintering temperature at 900 jC. This study deals with the conditions of the new sol – gel process and the properties of the resulted NASICON products.
NASICON powders were synthesized through a sol – gel process, which was shown in Fig. 1. ZrOCl28H2O was dissolved in water to form a 0.13 M solution. 0.1 M NH4OH was added to the above solution with drop by drop under stirring it at 80 jC. The complete precipitation of ZrO(OH)2 was realized by controlling the pH value of the solution above 7.2. After Cl was centrifugally flushed away, the purified ZrO(OH)2 was dissolved in an aqueous solution of oxalic acid. The solution was stirred for 30 min to get a clear phase of ZrO(OOCCOOH)2. The silica sol was prepared in a molar proportion [H2O]/[C2H5OH]/[Si(OC2H5)4] = 0.717:0.717:1 and added to the previous solution. Finally, a suitable portion of aqueous solution of (NH4)2HPO4 was quickly added. A milky sol was formed in this way. The gel was obtained by drying it at 80 jC. The precursor were ballmilled into fine powder and sintered at 700 – 1000 jC for 8 h.
The phase evolution and structure of the samples were characterized by X-ray diffractometer (XRD, Cu ka1), IR absorption spectra and Raman spectra after they were sintered at different temperatures. The ionic conductivity was measured with an impedance analyzer using Au electrodes at 150 – 300 jC. The relationships between the EMF response and the CO2 gas concentration for the gas sensors prepared by using the samples were measured.
Fig. 2 shows the XRD result of the powders sintered at various temperatures. The patterns indicated that the crystallization process was initiated around 700 – 800 jC. At the temperatures, only broad peaks ascribed to the formation of NASICON phase were observed. When the sintering temperature was further elevated to 900 jC, an integrated monoclinic structure was presented and small peaks attributed to the presence of tetragonal zirconia were also found. With rising the sintering temperature from 700 to 900 jC, the intensities of the peaks were increased implying an improvement in crystallinity. When the sintering temperature was further increased to 1000 jC, the intensities of the peaks decreased.
The electrical conductivity of the NASICON sintered bodies was evaluated by Ac impedance spectroscopy, which, in general, allowed distinguishing the bulk resistance from its grain boundary impedance for polycrystalline electrolyte. Fig. 5 shows the temperature dependence of the conductivity. The effects from the bulk and the grain boundary were included in this total conductivity. The highest conductivity was obtained for the sample sintered at 900 jC. It is known that the conductivity of NASICON degraded with a decrease in lattice constants. It is related to the decrement of the runnel size that is essential to the migration of Na+ in the frame structure of NASICON [8]. It is obvious that the powders sintered at 900 jC have the best framework structure.
Fig. 6 shows the relationship between the EMF response and the CO2 gas concentration for the gas sensors prepared with the synthesized NASICON bulks. 
For the sensor with NAISOCN sintered at 900 jC, the measured sensitivity of 68.4 mV/decade was fairly in agreement with the theoretical value of 74.0 mV/decade based on a two-electron electrochemical reaction [11]. In the case of the sensor using other powders sintered at 700, 800 and 1000 jC, the sensitivity were 52.1, 56.9 and 63.2 mV/decade, respectively.
NASICON precursor was synthesized by a modified sol – gel method, and it was further sintered at 700, 800, 900 and 1000 jC to get it crystallized. 
The properties of the samples were characterized by the analysis methods of XRD, IR and Raman spectra as well as conductivity measurement. The samples sintered at 900 jC showed a higher conductivity, and the CO2 sensor prepared with the NASIOCN bulk exhibited a good sensitivity.

