An amperometric CO2 sensor was fabricated using a Pt|NASICON (Na conductor, Na3Zr2Si2PO12)|Pt cell and a porous Na2CO3–BaCO3 (1:1.7 in molar ratio) auxiliary layer. The sensor with the Na2CO3–BaCO3 layer showed a faster response than that with the Na2CO3 layer, and the sensor signal was barely inﬂuenced by the humidity. When operated in an amperometric mode with an applied external electric ﬁeld, the sensor could detect the CO2 concentration stably and precisely without the need for a reference gas or a reference electrode material, and the sensor signal was constant for extended test periods (60 days). The sensing mechanism and the long-term stability is discussed in terms of the amperometric operation of the sensor.
The CO2 concentration is a good indicator of the indoor air quality, and the ground-level CO2 concentration needs to be measured precisely in order to monitor global warming [1–4]. Several designs for a cost-effective CO2 sensor in order to replace the commercialized infrared spectroscopic CO2 sensor have been suggested [5–16]. Among them, the + potentiometric-type sensor that consists of a Na ) conductor, a metal carbonate auxiliary phase and a reference electrode (RE) is promising because it shows a satisfactory EMF (electromotive force) over a wide CO2 concentration range [11–16]. The NASICON-based potentiometric CO2 sensor attached with In2O3 electrode is also under investigation due to its potential for the room temperature operation [17,18].
In order to commercialize the electrochemical CO2 sensor, minimizing the signal drift is crucial. The EMF of a + potentiometric sensor is the result of the Na activity difference between a CO2-sensitive sensing electrode (SE) and a CO2-insensitive counter electrode (CE). As the sensor ages in air, Na -ions migrate spontaneously from the SE toward the CE, which forms various Na-containing deposits by a reaction with the humidity, O2 and CO2. This makes it difﬁcult to deﬁne the Na activity at the CE, which is a major reason for the signal drift [19,20]. There have been two different approaches to ﬁx the Na activity at the CE. One is the placement of the CE in the reference gas such as CO2-free air [1–4], which requires tight gas sealing between the SE and CE. The other is the attachment of a two-phase mixture to the CE, which ﬁxes the Na -ion activity thermodynamically [21,22].
Compared to potentiometric sensor, amperometric sensor is more advantageous for the linear and reliable sensing within a narrow concentration regime. In this respect, the NASICON-based amperometric NOx sensor was reported as a potential alternative of the potentiometric NOx sensor [23–25]. The authors [26] also suggested that a Pt|NASICON(Na conductor, Na3Zr2Si2PO12)|Pt cell, whose SE is covered with a porous Na2CO3 auxiliary layer, can be operated fairly stably as CO2 sensor when operated in an amperometric mode with an external electric ﬁeld. Main advantage of amperometric operation was the simple + sensor structure without gas sealing or Na -RE materials. However, the detailed sensing mechanism and the reason for the long-term stability remains unclear. Furthermore, a binary carbonate such as Na2CO3–BaCO3 is known to be more stable against humidity than Na2CO3 [27] and the sensor employing binary carbonate reportedly exhibits a faster sensing response than that employing Na2CO3 [28–30]. 
Therefore, in this study, an amperometric CO2 sensor was fabricated by combining a porous Na2CO3–BaCO3 layer and Pt|NASICON|Pt cell and the sensing characteristics were studied. The main focus was placed upon elucidating the sensing mechanism and the reason for the long-term stability when the sensor is operated in an amperometric mode.
The NASICON powder was prepared by calcining a powder mixture of reagent-grade Na2CO3, SiO2, ZrO2 and NH4HPO4 at 1125 C for 11 h. After ball milling the powder for 24 h using ethyl alcohol, the dried powder was compacted into a disc at 60 MPa and sintered at 1220 C for 14 h. A Pt paste was applied to both sides of the NASICON, and Pt wires were attached. A porous Na2CO3–BaCO3 (1:1.7 in molar ratio) layer was formed via the partial melting of a thin Na2CO3–BaCO3 powder compact on the Pt|NASICON|Pt cell using a propane torch, as shown in Fig. 1.
The CO2 concentration was controlled by changing the mixing ratio between the parent gas (0.2% CO2 in air balance) and dry synthetic air. At the sensing temperature (400 C), the ﬁrst application of the external voltage (0.1 V) on the sensor decayed the current for approximately 20 min and then saturated it. Afterward, the subsequent voltage variation required approximately 30 s to saturate the current signal. Therefore, the measurement of the sensor signal with varying CO2 concentrations was begun 20 min after applying the voltage, and the I–V characteristics were attained by measuring the current 1 min after each successive increase in voltage.
In order to investigate the effect of humidity on the sensing behavior, the sensing characteristics were examined in both dry and wet atmospheres. A wet atmosphere was prepared by allowing air to bubble through water at ∼20 ◦ C. ◦ For the long-term stability, the sensing behavior at 400 C was repetitively measured at an interval of 3–5 days for up to 60 days. Between measurements, the sensor was aged in indoor air at 25 C until the next measurement.
Fig. 2 shows the response transient of the sensor at C with different CO2 concentrations ranging from 200 to 2000 ppm at the applied voltage of 0.1 V. The current decayed during the initial 20 min (regime (I)) and then saturated. During the decay of the current (regime (I)), the signal transient showed a sloped shape (see transient A). However, after an initial 20 min, the sensor showed a good CO2 sensing behavior and the current level was reproducible after repetitive measurements. The 90% response time of the present sensor was ∼16 s, which was signiﬁcantly shorter than the 24 s of the previous amperometric CO2 sensor with a porous Na2CO3 auxiliary phase [26]. Fig. 3 shows the sensor signal as a function of the CO2 concentration in dry and wet atmospheres (20 C in dew point). The current was approximately proportional to the logarithm of the CO2 concentration although the data at low CO2 concentration (the dotted part in line) showed a little deviation. 
The presence of humidity had little effect on the amperometric signal. Miura et al. [28–30] reported that in the NASICON-based potentiometric sensor, the employment of Na2CO3–BaCO3 auxiliary phase instead of BaCO3 is effective in improving both response time and water vapor resistance. 
According to their report, the difference between EMF in dry and wet atmospheres decreased as increasing BaCO3 content and vanished near the composition of Na2CO3–BaCO3 (1:1.7 in molar ratio). The shortening of response time and approximately identical sensor signals in dry and wet atmospheres in the present sensor can be understood in the same light.
The I–V characteristics were determined and the results were given in Fig. 4. Note that the I–V characteristics in Fig. 4(a) were measured after applying 0.1 V to the sensor for longer than 20 min i.e. after saturating the current level (in the region (II) of Fig. 2). Once the current was saturated by the applied external voltage, the I–V characteristics did not change further as long as the sensor operated at 400 C. The current level was largely negative in the absence of an electric ﬁeld, which increased with increasing applied voltage. The curves moved upward as the CO2 concentration increased, which indicates that the current level in the ﬁxed voltage can be used as a CO2 sensing signal.
In order to check for sensor degradation, the I–V characteristics and sensing behaviors were repetitively measured at 400 C at an interval of 3–5 days for 60 days. Between the measurements, the sensor was exposed to humid indoor air (RH 50–80%) containing CO2 (200–2000 ppm) at room temperature for 2–3 days in the absence of an electric ﬁeld. The I–V characteristics were changed to Fig. 4(b) by aging the sensor in an indoor atmosphere. The current increment with increasing CO2 concentration became small and the external voltage causes the positive current signal decrease from ∼0.18 to ∼0.12 V. However, by applying 0.1 V for >20 min at 400 C, the I–V characteristics had completely recovered to Fig. 4(a). The I–V characteristics after saturating the current by the applied electric ﬁeld (in region (II) of Fig. 2) was always identical even after the sensor operation for longer than 60 days. Fig. 5 shows the amperometric signals at 200 and 2000 ppm CO2 for 60 days, which were measured in region (II) of Fig. 2. 
It can be seen that the sensor signals were stable over the test period except for the ﬁrst day.
In a conventional limiting-current type gas sensor, a current plateau emanating from the limited diffusion of gas species toward the SE should be found. However, no distinct current plateau was observed, as shown in Fig. 4. Furthermore, there was a subtle negative current even in the absence of an electric ﬁeld and the amperometric signal increased with both the CO2 concentration and external voltage. This implies that the amperometric signal of the present sensor is the competition between Na migration as a result of the difference in Na activity and that by the external electric ﬁeld.
In order to investigate the effect of the electric ﬁeld on the Na-containing deposit at the CE, the variation in the amperometric signals was checked with the application of an electric ﬁeld. For this, the current level of a bare Pt|NASICON|Pt cell at 0.1 V was measured for 3 days (Fig. 7). The current level was slightly positive and constant. After 4th day, the NaHCO3 and Na2CO3 layers were coated using their aqueous solutions on the (+) electrode. The current increased abruptly as a result of the increase + in Na activity. After applying the electric ﬁeld (0.1 V), it decreased gradually and recovered to approximately the starting value after 7 days. This shows that the formation of NaHCO3 or Na2CO3 layers can be inhibited or the formed layer can be decomposed by applying the opposite electric ﬁeld. Ono et al. [25] investigated Na-containing deposit in NASICON-based amperometric NO2 sensor using chronopotentiometry. 
They reported that the Na-containing deposit formed during the sensor operation was electrochemically decomposed by the application of electric ﬁeld. The initial current decay from the largely positive value in region (I) of Fig. 2 and the subsequent current saturation constant regardless of the CO2 concentration (see arrows 2  8) and 2 in Fig. 6). 
The drift of the sensing characteristics immediately after aging the sensor in an indoor atmosphere (region (I) in + Figs. 2 and 4(b)) should be understood in terms of the Na activity in SE and CE. Kida et al. [31] reported that aging of the NASICON-based potentiometric CO2 sensor using a Li2CO3–BaCO3 auxiliary phase under a highly humid at+ mosphere (50 activity at the C in dew point) shifts the Na + CE by segregating Na3PO4 while the Na activity at the + SE remains constant. The stability of the Na activity at the SE was attributed to the stable corrosion layer (BaZrO3) between the auxiliary phase and NASICON, which protects NASICON from water vapor attack. Indeed, a thin corrosion layer (NaZrO3 layer) approximately 1–2 ␮m thick was also observed from the line-proﬁle analysis of energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) when the present sensor was aged in humid conditions for 3 days (50 C in dew point). 
A similar result was obtained in the previous sensor [21] using NASICON and Na2CO3 although the layer thickness (∼10 ␮m) was different. This strongly suggests that the sensor signal drifts does not result from the SE but from the CE.
Generally, the potentiometric sensor using a metal carbonate auxiliary phase keeps a constant Na activity at the RE either by ﬂowing dry air or attaching the RE material. However, the present sensor has neither gas sealing between the SE and the CE nor an RE material. Thereby, the exposure of the sensor in an atmospheric condition at room temperature will result in the spontaneous migration of Na -ions toward the CE because the Na activity at the SE is higher than that at the CE. The migrated Na -ions to the CE might form NaHCO3, and Na2CO3 by a reaction with H2O vapor and CO2. Various other reactions between Na2O, NaHCO3, can be understood in terms of the decomposition of the Na-containing deposit at the CE by applying the opposite electric ﬁeld although the identiﬁcation of the Na-containing deposit needs a detailed chronopotentiometric study.
In order to determine the optimum current level for reliable sensing, the stability of several sensors was tested with various external electric ﬁelds. The sensor operating near a zero current shows a stable sensing character but the sensing characteristics drifted to a large extent when the sensor operated far from a zero current. This is probably due to the formation of a Na-containing deposit at the CE at a highly negative current and the deterioration of the NASICON layer near the CE at highly positive current. This suggests that the operation of the sensor in an amperometric mode by applying an external electric ﬁeld opposite to the spontaneous Na migration is a promising way to achieve sensor stability, and that tuning the amperometric signal near zero is desirable.
The equation shows that the current is proportional to the logarithm of the CO2 concentration. The slope between current and ln PCO2 was calculated as 0.033 using the ionic −1) and the conductivity of NASICON at 400 shape factor of electrode (area/distance = 0.785 cm). The current data in Fig. 3 was plotted again as a function of ln PCO2 to ﬁnd the slope. The slope determined from the high CO2 concentration (solid line part in Fig. 3) was 0.031, which coincided well with the calculated value. The little deviation at low CO2 concentration might emanate from the slight variation of Na activity although the details should be studied further. The equation also suggests that, in order to tune the current near zero for stable sensing, the detection range of the CO2 concentration should be taken into account when determining the optimum external voltage. For example, a higher electric ﬁeld will be necessary for detecting low CO2 concentrations.
An amperometric CO2 sensor was prepared by coating a porous Na2CO3–BaCO3 (1.0:1.7 in molar ratio) auxiliary layer on a Pt|NASICON|Pt cell. The amperometric signal could be attributed to competition between Na migration by the difference in Na activity and that by the external electric ﬁeld. The sensor could be operated reproducibly and stably for an extended test period (60 days) without a reference gas or an RE material. This can be attributed to the minimization of Na-containing deposit formation and/or decomposition of the formed Na-containing phase at the CE, which results from the applied electric ﬁeld opposite to the spontaneous Na migration toward the CE. Tuning the current near zero was an important criterion for the stability of the sensor, and the optimum operation voltage could be determined by considering the detection range of the CO2 concentration.
