NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12)—based electrochemical devices, constructed in a gas-separation type or planar type, were attached with a Li2CO3-BaCO3 (1:2 in molar ratio) auxiliary phase to investigate their CO2 sensing properties under ambient conditions. The devices were found to be far more resistant to the disturbance by a change in relative humidity (RH) than those using Na2CO3 or NaHCO3 auxiliary phase. The EMF was correlated linearly with the logarithm of CO2 concentration in the range of 0.03–50% CO2 at 30◦C, and the linear correlation shifted up or down only slightly with a change in RH between 30 and 90%. For a change in operating temperature, the CO2 sensing capability was kept almost the same at 45◦C, while it was deteriorated signiﬁcantly at 60 and 75◦C, especially in the lower RH range. Applicability of a cobalt oxide bronze (Na0.6CoO2) as a solid reference electrode for the planar type device was also investigated. 
The devices using the bronze reference electrode exhibited the CO2 sensing capability as good as those using the Au reference electrode did. In addition, the bronze electrode was found to much improve the reproducibility of the EMF to a ﬁxed concentration of CO2 among devices. 
There has been an increasing demand for the measurement and/or control of CO2 for conditioning indoor spaces and green houses as well as for monitoring respiration-related bio-functions. Among the solid-state CO2 sensors so far reported [1–7], those + NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12, Na conductor)-based potentiometric devices which are attached with a Li2CO3-BaCO3 (or CaCO3) binary carbonate auxiliary phase and gold electrodes appear to be most promis◦ ing for CO2 sensing at elevated temperature (400 C and above) [7]. On the other hand, the possibility of potentiometric CO2 sensing at room temperature was ﬁrst reported by Bredikhin et al. [8], who fabricated a NASICON device attached with a SnO2 sensing electrode. Similar devices were also reported by other researchers [9–12]. 
The CO2 sensor operative at room or ambient temperature is attractive in practice from a standpoint of saving the electric power consumption and downsizing the device. From this recognition, we started investigations on the CO2 sensor of this type.
We have focused attention to the kinds of metal oxides useful for the sensing electrode, the auxiliary phase involved and the relevance of the CO2 sensing capability with the coexistent water vapor. As for the sensing electrode materials, several semiconducting oxides other than SnO2, such as In2O3, ZnO and Co3O4, have also been found to give the CO2 sensing capability at room temperature. It seems that electrical conductivity is the most important property of the sensing electrode oxides, since indium-tin oxide (ITO) appears to be the most promising among the tested oxides [13]. The devices fabricated in the initial works were unattached with any auxiliary phases, which should be indispensable for the CO2 sensor of this type. It was found, however, that NaHCO3 and/or Na2CO3 were formed spontaneously as auxiliary phases from Na3PO4 impurity of NASICON in a humid atmosphere containing CO2 [13, 14]. 
If NASICON was synthesized through a sol-gel method, the Na3PO4 impurity was reduced in content so that the spontaneous formation of metal carbonates became more difﬁcult. Even in this case, however, the CO2 sensing capability could be attained easily when NHCO3 or Na2CO3 was introduced externally [15]. The presence of water vapor was shown to be also indispensable for the CO2 sensing capability [13, 14]. Unfortunately, however, the Nernst’s correlation between EMF and CO2 concentration for these devices shifted up or down rather extensively with a change in relative humidity (RH). We found that such dependence on RH could be reduced effectively by introducing Li2CO3 in place of NaHCO3 or Na2CO3. In particular, a binary carbonate auxiliary phase of Li2CO3BaCO3 (1:2 in molar ratio) was most effective, making the CO2 sensing performance almost independent of RH over the range of 30–70% RH [16].
This paper aims at reporting in more detail the CO2 sensing properties of NASICON devices attached with Li2CO3-BaCO3 (1:2) auxiliary phase under various conditions in RH and operating temperature. It is also concerned with the applicability of a cobalt oxide bronze (Na0.6CoO2) as a solid reference electrode for a planar type device.
NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) as an Na -ionic conductor was prepared by a sol-gel method [17]. The powder ◦ C of it was compacted into a disk and sintered at 1200 for 5 h in air. The disk was then polished with a sand paper into the geometry of 9 mm in diameter and 1.2 mm in thickness. By using the NASICON disks thus obtained, two types of devices were constructed as schematically drawn in Fig. 1. Gas-separation type (a) was fabricated to test the basic sensing properties to CO2, while planar type (b) was to explore practical CO2 sensors. The carbonate mainly used was Li2CO3-BaCO3 (1:2 in molar ratio). To prepare it, the mixture of Li2CO3 and BaCO3 ◦ was calcined at 750 C for 10 min and the resulting partially molten system was cooled and pulverized in an agate mortar. ITO (10 at.% Sn-doped In2O3) was prepared from an aqueous mixed solution of InCl3 and SnCl4 through hydrolysis and calcination in a conven◦ C tional way. 
The calcination was carried out at 1200 for 2 h in air to obtain coarse particles of ITO (grain size 0.5–1 µm). NaX CoO2 (X = 0.6) was obtained by calcining a mixture of Co3O4 and Na2O (2:3 in molar ◦ C for 12 h in air. To be applied on the ratio) at 500 NASICON surface, these powder samples were converted into a paste by mixing with about the same mass of an α-terpineol-ethyl cellulose (5 wt%) dispersant.
For the gas-separation type devices, the NASICON disk was ﬁxed on the end of a quartz glass tube (9 mm in diameter) with an inorganic adhesive. The Au reference electrode was attached in advance on the inside surface of the disk by applying a gold paste together with a ◦ C for 2 h in gold lead, followed by calcination at 800 air. On the outer surface of the disk, the carbonate paste and the ITO paste (with an inbedded gold mesh) were applied about 100 µm thick each in succession, and the C for 30 min in whole assembly was calcined at 500 air.
The planar devices were also fabricated in the same order, i.e., the deposition of Au or NaX CoO2 reference electrode, followed by that of Li2CO3-BaCO3 auxiliary phase and ITO sensing electrode. The calcination conditions were also the same as those used for the gas-separation type devices. Finally, the reference electrode was covered with a protective layer (about 300 µm thick) of inorganic adhesive (Aron Ceramic C, TOAGOSEI. cc Japan) and kept at room temperature overnight for drying.
Gas sensing properties were measured in a conventional gas-ﬂow apparatus equipped with a heating facility. Sample gases consisting of air, CO2 and water vapor were prepared by diluting a parent CO2 gas (pure CO2 or 1 vol% CO2 in dry synthetic air) with wet and/or dry synthetic air. The wet air was prepared by allowing dry C. The synthetic air to bubble through water kept at 25 concentration of CO2 in the sample gas was varied in the range of 0.03% (300 ppm)–50% CO2, while relative C. humidity (RH) was set in the range of 10–90% at 25 The sample gas was let to ﬂow at a rate of 100 cm3 −1 over the device kept at an operation temperamin ◦ C. For the gas-separation type ture between 30 and 75 devices, the reference electrode (Au) was always exposed to dry synthetic air. The EMF was measured on an electrometer (ADVANTEST TR8652).
The large EMF shifts in the former two devices are likely to be attributed to the instability of Na2CO3 or NaHCO3. 
The planar devices attached with Li2CO3-BaCO3 (1:2) auxiliary phase and Au reference electrode were tested for CO2 sensing properties under various conditions. The ﬁrst test was carried out for the adoptability to a wider range of CO2 concentration. Fig. 5 shows the EMF response to CO2 in the range of 0.03% (300 ppm)– ◦ C under humidity conditions of 50, 70 and 50% at 30 90% RH. The data ﬁt Nernst’s equation well with n equal to 2 under each RH condition. The Nernst correlations under the three RH conditions were fairly close to each other, with mutual deviations remaining within ±3 mV in EMF to a ﬁxed concentration of CO2. This means that the device can be used for approximate monitoring of CO2 under three humid conditions, although the RH dependence should be calibrated for more precise monitoring.
The second test was carried for CO2 sensing capability at more elevated temperatures. Fig. 6 shows the EMF vs. CO2 concentration correlations under 30, 50 C. The CO2 sensing and 70% RH at 30, 45, 60 or 75 ◦ C (b) was almost the same as that at capability at 45 C (a), though n tended to be somewhat larger than 30 2, especially under the lower RH conditions. This tenC where n = 2.3–2.5, dency became conspicuous at 60 indicating a considerable deterioration of the CO2 sensing capability (c). The deterioration became serious at C where n = 2.7–5.9. It has been reported [14– 75 16] that the CO2 sensing capability is achieved only in the presence of physisorbed water at the CO2 sensing interface. The decrease of the amount of physisorbed water is supposedly responsible for the deterioration of the CO2 sensing capability at the higher operating temperatures.
The planer devices tested above were attached with gold reference electrode covered with protective layer of inorganic adhesive. The gold electrode has been supposed + + participate in the electrochemical reaction, 2Na − = Na2O (in NASICON). Its potential 1/2O2 + 2e is thus determined by the partial pressure of O2 (thus air-reference electrode), beside the other factors. This means that the protective layer covering it should not be gas-tight to the diffusion of oxygen. On the other hand, the surface of the NASICON is vulnerable to chemical attacks by CO2 and moisture, eventually leading to the formation of Na2CO3 and/or NaHCO3, as stated earlier. If such surface changes take place at the gold/NASICON interface, the gold electrode no longer works as a stable reference. This means that the protective layer should be gas-tight to CO2. It is not always easy to fabricate such a protective layer which is permeable to O2 but not permeable to CO2. 
The gold electrode covered with the protective layer, fabricated in the present study, was stable for a short term (weeks), but an apprehension remained about the stability for longterm. This apprehension can be eliminated if a solid reference electrode is available.
Solid reference electrodes for solid electrolyte devices have so far been provided with mixed metal oxides such as NaX CoO2 [8, 9], LiCoO2 [18] or Na2Ti6O13 [19]. The ﬁrst oxide, often called cobalt oxide bronze, is actually composed of a group of suboxides varying in X. In the present study, NaX CoO2 (X = 0.6) was tested as a solid reference electrode. 
A merit of using NaX CoO2 reference electrode was recognized in the reproducibility of the EMF among the fabricated devices. For example, the EMF to 300 ppm CO2 (base EMF) was 75, 82 and 108 mV among three devices using NaX CoO2 reference electrode, whereas it scattered between 62 and 186 mV among those using Au reference electrode. As stated before, the potential of Au reference electrode is affected by the surface contamination of NASICON. It seems that the surface contamination induced during the fabrication of the NASICON devices can be an origin of the large scattering of the base EMF among the devices. In contrast, the potential of NaX CoO2 reference electrode is determined by the electrochemical property of NaX CoO2, independent of the chemical state of NASICON surface. This appears to give the reduced scattering of the base EMF.
NASICON devices attached with Li2CO3-BaCO3 (1:2 in molar ratio) auxiliary phase, ITO sensing electrode and Au or NaX CoO2 (X = 0.6) reference electrode were investigated for CO2 sensing properties under ambient conditions. The following conclusions can be drawn from the present study.
1. The selection of auxiliary phase materials is important for stabilizing the EMF response to CO2 from drifting with a change in relative humidity (RH). The most stable device given by Li2CO3-BaCO3 auxiliary phase hardly suffers from serious disturbances over the RH range of 30–90% at 30
2. The same device shows fairly excellent sensing ◦ properties to 0.03–50% CO2 at 30 C. The CO2 sensC, but is ing capability remains almost the same at 45 deteriorated at 60 and 75 3. NaX CoO2 (X = 0.6) can be used as a solid reference electrode of planar type devices. Use of NaX CoO2 is effective in reducing the scattering of the EMF response to CO2 among devices, as compared with the case of Au reference electrode.

