Three types of planar solid-state sensors for measuring NO2 in a gas mixture has been designed and tested in the laboratory under controlled atmosphere between 573–723 K. The concentration of NO2 in the gas mixture was in the range of 0–500 ppm with the balance gas consisting of air. The three types of NO2 gas sensors that have been tested in this investigation can be schematically represented as follows.
In sensor (I) the two solid electrolyte disks were attached by diffusion bonding at elevated temperature whereas in sensor (II) the (8 mol% Y2O3–ZrO2) YSZ thin ﬁlm was deposited on (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) NASICON disk by radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering technique. The measured open circuit electromotive force (Emf) of each sensor was found to attain stable value at all the concentrations of NO2 in the gas mixture and also varied linearly as a function of the logarithm of the partial pressure of NO2 in the gas mixture. The time required to reach 90% of the stable emf at a ﬁxed concentration of NO2 and at a constant temperature was found to be 30–40 min for sensor (I) and approximately 2–3 min for sensor (II) and (III). 
Combustion of fossil fuels is the main source of atmospheric pollutants such as NOX (X = 1, 2), SOX (X = 2, 3) and CO2. Continuous monitoring and control of atmospheric pollutants using chemical sensor will be extremely useful for a continuous process control and emission monitoring in the industries using oil ﬁred burners, diesel engine road vehicles (DERV), petrol fuelled automobiles and also to the environmental agencies for the development of novel pollution management strategies and policies for the improvement of the quality of environment and health.
According to recent statistics, 2 million tons of NOX was sent into the atmosphere by diesel and petrol fuelled automobiles in Germany in 1986 [1]. Similarly, about 70% of the 2.06 million tons of NOX emitted in the UK in 1996 was produced by automobiles and power generating industries [2]. In order to control the ever increasing emission of NOX by fuel combustion, it is necessary to design more efﬁcient processes and more greener power generation technologies. In order to achieve this it is necessary to design reliable and robust chemical sensors for in-line monitoring of the emissions from combustion processes.
Several types of NOX sensors such as the resistive or conductive type sensors using semiconductors [3–5] or metal phthalocyanines [6], and electrochemical sensors using solid electrolytes [7–17] have been investigated by different research groups in various parts of the world. Among the various types of NOX sensors, the electrochemical sensors using solid electrolytes are of high sensitivity, high selectivity and simple construction, so these sensors are promising. Gauthier and Chamberland [7] have reported that a solid electrolyte sensor using Ba(NO3)2 + 1%AgCl could respond to NO2 (5–500 ppm in air) at 754 K. Recently, NOX sensors combining β/β 3) 3) -alumina and nasicon with NaNO3 or NaNO2 were reported to operate at around 423–523 K [8, 12, 16]. Based on these investigations it can be inferred that the choice of the auxiliary electrode materials and design of the sensor are important factors for a reliable sensor response. 
For example, NO2 sensing characteristics can be much improved by the use of an auxiliary electrode made from a binary salt system such as NaNO3 Ba(NO3)2, NaNO2 Li2CO3 and NaNO2 Na2CO3, and the device using NaNO2 Li2CO3 [12] has an ability to detect NO2 concentrations as low as ppb level in air between 423– 523 K. However, there are structural issues such as size, geometry i.e., planar or tube type, porous or fully dense electrode and/or electrolyte, etc, issues related to the chemical stability of electrodes, electrolytes and auxiliary electrode material, response time and stability of the sensor signal in testing environments that need to be carefully looked into for successfully developing a practical NOX sensors. In order to understand the effect of some of the issues on response time and stability of sensor signal, we have tested three different types of planar sensors for measuring NO2 in a gas mixture synthesised in a laboratory environment.
Fine powder of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (nasicon) solid electrolyte was prepared by direct solid-state reaction [18, 19]. High purity ﬁne powders of anhydrous sodium carbonate (Na2CO3), zirconium dioxide (ZrO2), silicon dioxide (SiO2) and ammonium di-hydrogen phosphate (NH4H2PO4) obtained from Aldrich Chemical Co. (UK) were used as starting materials. They were weighed according to the required molar ratio and ground in a zirconia ball mill under acetone. The slurry was dried between 330 to 350 K for 6 h, calcined at 483 K for 5 h to decompose NH4H2PO4, and further calcined at 1173 K for 6 h to decompose Na2CO3 in ambient atmosphere. Two stage calcinations were found to be essential to give enough time for the binary oxides to react and form single phase Na3Zr2Si2PO12. Formation of a single phase Nasicon was conﬁrmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) procedure using Cu Kα as a radiation and the XRD pattern of single phase Na3Zr2Si2PO12 is shown in Fig. 1. 
After the ﬁnal calcination step, the mixture was ball milled again to produce ﬁne powders of Nasicon in the range of 5–10 µm.
The solid electrolyte couple for sensor (II) was made as follows. The Nasicon powder was isostatically pressed into pellets of 10 mm in diameter and 1 mm thick at a pressure of 400 MPa and then sintered at 1503 K for 4 h in air inside a platinum crucible covered with a platinum lid to prevent any change in composition of Nasicon pellet as a result of volatilisation of Na2O at elevated temperature during sintering. The tempera−1 ture of the furnace was ramped at the rate of 3 K min while heating and cooling. The sintered pellet of Nasicon was polished in stages down to 1 µm surface ﬁnish in a water free medium in order to prevent hydration of the surface of Nasicon pellet during polishing and washed with absolute alcohol. A thin ﬁlm of (8 mol% Y2O3)-ZrO2 (YSZ) approximately 6 µm thick was deposited on one of the polished surface of Nasicon pellet by multiple radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering [20] using US Gun II (Film Product Company, USA) equipment. 
During the RF sputtering of YSZ powder, obtained from Tosho Co. (Japan), on Nasicon pellet the working gas was 99% pure argon, gas pressure was 0.67 Pa, RF power was 300 W, substrate temperature was maintained at 298 K and the distance between the target and Nasicon substrate was 14 cm. The Pt electrodes were coated on the two surfaces of the bielectrolyte couple as described earlier. The sensing electrode of sensor (II) consisting of Ba(NO3)2 NaNO3 eutectic powder in 4:1 ratio was mixed with an organic liquid binder and coated on the Nasicon surface of the bielectrolyte compact using a paint brush.
Sensor (III) was fabricated from a 250 µm thick high density YSZ disk produced by isostatically pressing ﬁne powder at 400 MPa followed by sintering the compact at 1823 K for 2 h. The microstructure of the sintered disk is shown in Fig. 2. The Au-Pd and Pt electrodes of sensor (III) were sputter coated using a vacuum sputtering technique in argon atmosphere at ambient temperature and a pressure of 1.33 Pa. Pt wires having 127 µm diameter were attached to the two electrodes of each type of sensor by using an Engelhardt A4731 Pt-ink.
The emf of the three types of NO2 sensors (I)–(III) was measured at a ﬁxed temperature over a range of concentrations of NO2 between 0–500 ppm using a Keithley 6517A high impedance (≥1012 ) multi-channel digital electrometer. The gas mixture of NO2 and air with different NO2 concentrations was prepared by mixing air and 500 ppm NO2 + air using computer controlled mass-ﬂow controllers. A total ﬂow rate of measuring −1. Sufﬁcient care gas was maintained at 100 cm3 min was taken to convert any NO present in the gas mixture into NO2 by passing over a granular catalyst supported on alumina spheres of approximately 1–2 mm diameter. The response of the sensor at a ﬁxed temperature was recorded on a personal computer using a commercial software provided by Keithley Instruments. A schematic diagram of the experimental set-up is presented in Fig. 3.
Sensor (I) was tested at 573 K between 0 and 500 ppm of NO2. The response of sensor (I) at 573 K is shown in Fig. 4. The noise in the measured signal was found to be less than 1% of the value of the open circuit emf at any given time during the measurements. The 90% of the stable value of the emf was reached within 30 min after the change of concentration of NO2 in the gas mixture however for the concentrations of NO2 between 250 ppm and 500 ppm the time required for attaining 90% of the stable emf value was around 40 min. It can be seen in Fig. 4 that sensor (I) responded to change in concentration of NO2 almost instantaneously and the emf of the sensor was found to be stable up to 1000 min. The measured emf of sensor (I) was found to vary linearly as a function of the concentration of NO2 in the gas mixture at 573 K as shown in Fig. 5. It is believed that the sensing mechanism of sensor (I) can be described according to the following set of electrode or interfacial reactions [18, 21]. 
At a ﬁxed temperature of measurement and, for a ﬁxed composition of the sensing electrode and Nasicon solid solution the emf of sensor (I) in which the gas composition at the two electrodes is identical will be dependent only on the concentration of NO2 in the gas mixture. Therefore, it can be easily shown that the emf of sensor (I) can be given by the following expression.
In Equation 5, E is a constant determined by the factors such as the activity of Na2O in Nasicon, activity of NaNO3 in the sensing electrode, standard Gibbs’ energy change for Reaction 4, temperature of measurement, the universal gas constant, the Faraday constant and the number electrons participating in the electrode reactions. From Equation 5 it can be inferred that at a constant temperature the measured open circuit voltage of NO2 sensor (I) should vary linearly as a function of the partial pressure of NO2 in the gas mixture and the slope of the linear segment should be equal to 0.1T , where T is the temperature in Kelvin. 
The slope of the linear segment given by Equation 6 is in good agreement with the theoretical value of 57.3 for a two-electron process.
Similar measurements were carried out on sensor (II) in a gas mixture containing NO2 at 673 K and at 723 K. A typical response of the sensor (II) at 723 K is shown in Fig. 6a and b and similar response was obtained at 673 K too. Sensor (II) was found to respond more rapidly to change in concentration of NO2 in the gas mixture compared to sensor (I). The noise in the measured signal was found to be less than 1% of the value of the open circuit emf at any given time during the measurements. The sensor was found to reach 90% of the stable value of the open circuit emf at a ﬁxed NO2 concentration and at a ﬁxed temperature in less than 2 min. This may be due to the considerable reduction of the diffusion distance because of the use of a thin ﬁlm of YSZ in sensor (II) compared to a thick porous disk in sensor (I) suggesting that the thin ﬁlm sensor would respond more rapidly compared to a thick ﬁlm sensor. 
It can be seen in Fig. 6a that the sensor (II) responded instantly to change in concentration of NO2 in the gas mixture from nought to 90 ppm whereas the recovery of the sensor to the original emf in air was slightly sluggish. This is probably due to the slow rate of removal of NO2 from the sensor testing apparatus after cutting off the supply of NO2 to the sensor (II). The response of sensor (II) to the change in concentration of NO2 in the gas mixture was found to be considerably rapid when the concentration of NO2 in the gas mixture was changed from 450 ppm down to 90 ppm and back up to 450 ppm as seen in Fig. 6b. The variation of the measured emf of sensor (II) as a function of the concentration of NO2 in the gas mixture at 673 K and 723 K is shown in Figs 7 and 8 respectively. A least squares regression analysis of the measured emf of sensor (II) at 673 K and at 723 K, respectively, gives below.
The slope of the linear segments shown in Figs 7 and in 8 are in excellent agreement with the theoretical values, 67.3 and 72.3, calculated using Equation 5.
Sensor (III) was tested at 688 K in a ﬂowing gas mixture consisting of air and varying concentrations of NO2. A typical response of the sensor (III) to change in concentration of NO2 in the gas mixture is shown in Fig. 9. The noise in the measured signal was found to be less than 1% of the value of the open circuit emf at any given time during the measurements. Sensor (III) was found to respond almost instantly to changes in the concentration of NO2 in the gas mixture. The sensor was found to reach a 90% of the stable value of the open circuit emf at a ﬁxed temperature and concentration of NO2 within 2 min. Again the rapid response of sensor (III) compared to sensor (I) is probably due to the use of 250 micrometer high density disk of YSZ instead of a sintered pellet. The behaviour of sensor (III) can be explained based on the mixed potential generated as a result of the following electrode reactions.
This clearly suggests that the measured emf of sensor (III) varies linearly as a function of the concentration of NO2 in the gas mixture.
Three types of sensors, two potentiometric sensors based on a bi-electrolyte couple and a mixed potential sensor based on oxide ion-conducting ceramic membrane have been successfully fabricated and tested in air + NO2 gas mixture to determine their sensing behaviour for NO2 in the gas mixture at different temperatures. All the three types of planar sensors have been found to respond instantly to the change in NO2 concentration in the gas mixture however the response of sensor (II) and (III) was found to be signiﬁcantly rapid ( 2–3 min) compared to that of sensor (I) (30–40 min). This may be due to signiﬁcantly small diffusion distance for mobile ions in the solid electrolytes of sensor (II) and (III) compared to sensor (I). Therefore, it can be concluded that a thin ﬁlm sensor is likely to respond more rapidly compared to a thick ﬁlm sensor. The measured emf of each sensor was found to vary linearly as a function of the logarithm of NO2 concentration in the gas mixture. 
In order to use this type of sensors in the automobile exhaust system, we plan to investigate the response of the NO2 sensors in the gas mixtures containing other gases that are usually present in the automobile exhaust emissions.
