A Nasicon (sodium super ion conductor) CO2 gas sensor with a new structure is developed for monitoring CO2 levels in the atmospheric air. In addition to the sensing and reference electrodes of a conventional Nasicon sensor, an auxiliary electrode, referred to as the base electrode, is provided with the new structure. The principle of CO2 detection is the same as that of a conventional Nasicon sensor, but the durability is greatly improved by using a nonaqueous carbonate as the sensing material. Characterization has also revealed that the output voltage at the base electrode is closely correlated with the drift at the sensing electrode and is available for the drift compensation.
An increase in energy consumption quickly deteriorates the environmental conditions of the earth. The global warming, acid rains, and atmospheric air pollution due to exhausts are the typical phenomena. Under such circumstances, continuous assessment of air quality in the living and working environments is legislated for human comfort and safety. The gases whose levels should be monitored include carbon monoxide (CO), carbon dioxide (CO ), and dust. The work described in this paper is concerned with the CO measurement.
A well-acknowledged method for detecting the CO concentration in the atmospheric air is to measure the absorption of the light in the 4.2m band due to CO molecules. Such a nondispersive infrared (NDIR) gas detector allows a high-accuracy measurement [1], [2], but is too expensive to prevail. For continuous monitoring of the CO level in schools, hospitals, offices, and homes, much cheaper sensors are desired. To respond to such a request, SnO -based sensors are developed [3], [4]. Much effort has been devoted to increase the sensitivity and selectivity, but the accurate measurement is still difficult due to the large dependence on temperature [5]. Another candidate for a low-cost CO sensor is the solid electrolyte sensor based on the sodium super ion conductor (Nasicon) [6]–[8]. The Nasicon CO sensor has such distinct features as the high sensitivity at low concentration and the high gas-selectivity [9]–[11], but the drift and the durability in the course of time bottleneck the practical applications. 
To resolve these issues, a new structure is exploited. The new structure uses such nonaqueous carbonates as Li CO and CaCO to improve the durability, and an additional electrode is provided to compensate the drift. In the following, the fabrication process and the performances of the Nasicon sensor will be described.
The pellet is scribed into dies with pellet. The pellet is sintered at 1 100 C. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the sintered pellet is shown in Fig. 2. This measured pattern agrees well with that in JCPDS file 35-412, confirming that the Nasicon of the monoclinic structure is synthesized successfully by the sol-gel process shown in Fig. 1. 3 mm dimension. The thickness is 0.5 mm. Fig. 3 shows the structure of the Nasicon CO sensor. Different from a conventional two-electrode structure composed of the sensing and reference electrodes, an auxiliary electrode, referred to hereafter as the base electrode, is provided. All the electrodes are formed by Au screen-printed. The Nasicon barrier is provided between the sensing and base electrodes to prevent the carbonate from diffusing toward the base electrode. The barrier height is 0.2 mm. The carbonates used are Li CO and its compounds.
The principle of CO detection is the same as that of the two-electrode device: The CO gas reacts with the carbonate at the sensing electrode, to produce cations and electrons. An interfacial layer of Na CO is deduced to be formed by Li CO and ions exchange cations with Na atoms at the the Nasicon, and Li ions then drift toward the reference elecinterfacial layer. Na trode, to generate the electromotive force (EMF) with the reference electrode being the positive polarity. The electrons produced by the reaction between CO gas and the carbonate, on the other hand, flow through an external circuit to the reference electrode, to generate the voltage which balances the EMF by the cations. The electrochemical reactions involved in the electrodes are described as follows.
To enhance the sensitivity, the sensor is heated up to an optimal temperature by the Pt heater deposited onto a ceramic substrate. The operating conditions are listed in Table I.
The impedances of the Nasicon sensor were measured and plotted by the swept frequency method using a network analyzer. The finest frequency step was 0.1 Hz. Fig. 4(a) shows the impedance locus between the sensing and reference electrodes C. The locus can be decomposed into a measured at semi-circle and an arc.
In addition to the durability, the drift in the EMF is another factor that limits the measurement accuracy. Fig. 11 shows the output voltage changes at the sensing and base electrodes during 45 days. The sensor was placed in a closed room. The CO gas concentration depends on the number of persons present in the room. The high concentration starting from 35th day is due to a gas stove used to warm the room. The stove humidified the room and dew was observed on a window glass. The voltage at the sensing electrode changes with CO concentration, while the voltage at the base electrode drifts independently of the CO concentration. To exploit the drift mechanism and the compensation method, the three-electrode Nasicon sensor is exposed to the atmospheric air in a vacant room. The CO concentration is about 380 ppm and is kept constant. Fig. 12 shows the voltages at the sensing and base electrodes thus measured. It can be seen that there exists a close relation between the drifts on the two voltages. 

