LiTi2(PO4)3 with a Na superionic conductor (NASICON)-type structure is prepared by a two-step solid-state reaction. X-ray diffraction (XRD) conﬁrms that the LiTi2(PO4)3 compound has a NASICON structure, i.e. rhombohedral (space group: R3c). It is found that lithium can be electrochemically inserted into the LiTi2(PO4)3 structure, with a maximum intake of 5.2 mol of lithium per mole of LiTi2(PO4)3 com−1. The pound, and that [PO4] tetrahedra can participate in the redox reaction. This corresponds to a lithium-storage capacity of 360 mAh g kinetic parameters of lithium insertion in LiTi2(PO4)3 NASICON are determined by means of ac impedance technique. The charge-transfer resistance (RCT) and exchange current density (i0) are invariable regardless of the state of lithium insertion. This is associated with the unique structure characteristics of the NASICON skeleton. By contrast, the diffusion coefﬁcient, DLi of lithium varies with the state of lithium insertion. 
The value of DLi is in the range 1.4 × 10 −1, which is much higher than for other intercalation materials. 
The Na superionic conductor (NASICON) materials are good ionic conductors when serving as solid-state electrolytes. The crystal structure of NASICON AxM2(XO4)3 consists of a network in which MO6 octahedra share all their corners with XO4 tetrahedra, and XO4 tetrahedra, share all three corners with MO6 octahedra. The interstitials and conduction channels are generated along the c-axis direction, in which alkali metal ions (Na ) occupy the interstitial sites. Consequently, the alkali metal ions can move easily along the conduction channels [1–8].
The NASICON structure AxM2(XO4)3 can be chemically versatile. It can be stabilized with K in the A position, transition-metal cations in the M position, and P, Si or Mo in the XO4 polyanions. Therefore, NASICON materials can be used not only as solid-state electrolytes, but also as lithium-storage materials in rechargeable lithium batteries, based on their structural characteristics [9–11]. The operation of Li-ion batteries relies on the diffusion of Li ions in the cathode and anode hosts. Therefore, if a material host has good ionic conductivity, it will be very suitable as an electrode material for Li-ion batteries. The rate capacity of such batteries depends strongly on the diffusion of Li ions. In this investigation, LiTi2(PO4)3 has been synthesized and its electrochemical properties were investigated.
The raw materials Li2CO3 (ACS reagent, Aldrich), TiO2 (99.9%) and (NH4)·H2PO4 (ACS reagent, Aldrich) were thoroughly mixed with pestle and mortar. The resulting mixtures were then pressed into pellets and pre-calcined at 900 C for 12 h to decompose Li2CO3 and (NH4)H2PO4. The pellets were then reground and ﬁred at 1250 C for 24 h. The overall reaction is as follows: 0.5Li2CO3 + 2TiO2 + 3(NH4)H2PO4 → LiTi2(PO4)3 + 3NH3 + 4.5H2O + 0.5CO2 (1) The synthesized LiTi2(PO4)3 powders were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Philips PW 1010 X-ray diffractometer with Cu K␣ radiation.
To determine the kinetic process of lithium insertion in the LiTi2(PO4)3 compound, ac impedance measurements were performed on a LiTi2(PO4)3 electrode in different states of discharge (SoD). The measurements were performed with an EG&G Princeton Applied Research Electrochemical Impedance Analyser (Model 6310). The test cell for ac impedance measurements consisted of three electrodes with lithium as counter electrode and reference electrode. The ac amplitude was 5 mV and the frequency range was 65 kHz to 1 mHz.
LiTi2(PO4)3 has a rhombohedral (space group: R3c) structure with an open three-dimensional framework of TiO6 octahedra sharing all corners with PO4 tetrahedra and vice versa. Li ions occupy the interstitial spaces, either 18e or 6b sites. The XRD pattern of LiTi2(PO4)3 is shown in Fig. 1. All diffraction lines are indexed based on a rhombohedral structure with a space group of R3c. The lattice constants are calculated to be a = 8.5105 Å and c = 20.8645 Å using a least-squares method for 25 diffraction lines. The calculated parameters of the unit cell are in good agreement with the literature value [12]. No XRD peaks correspond to the reagents or other impurity phases.
Therefore, it is proposed that [PO4] tetrahedra possibly also take part in the redox reaction to accept and donate electrons when lithium ions intercalate and de-intercalate in the LiTi2(PO4)3 structure. At this stage, here is no direct physical evidence to conﬁrm this proposal, but some support for the proposal is provided from studies by Ceder and coworkers [15,16] which indicate that oxygen atoms, rather than transition-metal ions, function as electron acceptors upon insertion of Li into metal-oxides and metal-dichalcogenides. Also, data from Li nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements also demonstrated that there is signiﬁcant oxygen participation during the insertion of Li in TCO glass [17]. The situation for Li insertion in LiTi2(PO4)3 NASICON is similar.
A quasi-open-circuit potential (OCV) versus composition curve was obtained by the galvanostatic intermittent titration technique (GITT). The Li|LiTi2(PO4)3 cell was discharged to a desired value of x in Li1+xTi2(PO4)3 at a constant cur−2 and then relaxed for 2 h. The rent density of 20 ␮A cm ﬁnal voltage of the cell was recorded as the OCV for that composition. The variation of OCVs versus inserted lithium composition x in the Li1+xTi2(PO4)3 electrode is shown in Fig. 3. The maximum inserted Li is still about 5.2 mol per mole of Li1+xTi2(PO4)3 even under quasi-equilibrium discharging condition.
The rate of capacity decay is related to the voltage range of cycling. Therefore, the cycling performance can be improved by limiting the voltage range of charge and discharge. Li|LiTi2(PO4)3 cells were cycled in a voltage range 0.25–1.2 V. Surprisingly, the cells displayed excellent capacity retention (as shown in Fig. 4). During the ﬁrst cycle, approximately by 80% of the initial inserted lithium is reversibly extracted during the ﬁrst charge. After the ﬁrst cycle, the reversibility of the electrode was much better than that cycled between 0 and 2.5 V.
The kinetic process of lithium insertion into LiTi2(PO4)3 NASICON can be determined by ac impedance measurements. These were performed on the LiTi2(PO4)3 electrode at different SoDs. The impedance spectra are presented in Fig. 5, from which the RCT and exchange current density (i0 = RT/nFRCT) can be deduced. One semicircle is observed for the LiTi2(PO4)3 electrode in the OCV state (no Li insertion). After Li intercalation, two semicircle are observed. The ﬁrst semicircle is generally considered to contribute to the charge-transfer process and double-layer capacitance. The second semicircle is caused by a surface layer formed on the electrode, which is found on the carbonaceous electrode. The surface layer is formed when discharging the electrode below a potential of ∼0.8 V versus + Li/Li due to the decomposition of the organic electrolyte. This has been conﬁrmed by FTIR [18]. When Li insertion reaches x > 2 (E ≤ 0.2 V versus Li/Li ), however, the second semicircle disappears as shown in Fig. 5(c). 
This may be due to damage of the surface layer at low potential. The ac impedance spectra for SoDs of x = 2.6 and x = 5.2
The kinetics for reaction (2) above are limited by Li diffusion in the host materials. The lithium diffusion coefﬁcient, DLi, in the LiTi2(PO4)3 electrode can be calculated from the following formula which is based on a semi-inﬁnite boundary condition.
The lithium insertion properties of LiTi2(PO4)3 NASICON have been investigated. A maximum of about 5.2 mol Li-ions can be electrochemically intercalated per mole of LiTi2(PO4)3 structure. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy demonstrates that the Li diffusion coefﬁcients in LiTi2(PO4)3 are very high. This is considered to be related to the NASICON structure with interstitials and conducting channels. The exploration of NASICON materials could provide new electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries.