Monoclinic lithium vanadium phosphate, R-Li3V2(PO4)3, is a highly promising material proposed as a cathode for lithium-ion batteries. It possesses both good ion mobility and high lithium capacity because of its ability to reversibly extract all three lithium ions from the lattice. Here, using a combination of neutron diffraction and 7Li MAS NMR studies, we are able to correlate the structural features in the series of singlephase materials Li3-yV2(PO4)3 with the electrochemical voltage-composition profile. A combination of charge ordering on the vanadium sites and lithium ordering/disordering among lattice sites is responsible for the features in the electrochemical curve, including the observed hysteresis. Importantly, this work highlights the importance of ion-ion interactions in determining phase transitions in these materials.
The advent of new crystalline lattices capable of reversible lithium intercalation is of perpetual in solid-state materials chemistry. These materials also find use as electrodes in lithium-ion energy storage devices.1 The field, however, remains plagued by the inability to implement materials that can compete with the highly successful LiCoO2, despite its detriments including high cost which prohibit its use in largescale devices. A tremendous resurgence of interest has been displayed in lithium metal phosphates, sparked by recent reports of the promising characteristics of LiFePO4,2 LiMnPO4,3 Li3V2(PO4)3,4 and related compounds.5 These materials contain both mobile Li cations and redox-active metal sites shrouded within a rigid phosphate network. By comparison to lithium metal oxides, they display remarkable electrochemical and thermal stability, and comparable energy density.6 
The iron phosphate is an inexpensive, relatively high capacity material that may find a niche in hybrid electric vehicles,7 whereas reversible extraction of all three lithium ions from the monoclinic vanadium phosphate at slow,8 and even at very fast rates,9 results in the highest energy density metal phosphate reported to date. Fewer breakthroughs have been reported in understanding the factors governing their electrochemical response. Fundamentally, these materials present many questions that relate to the transport of electrons and lithium ions within the lattice. Even more intriguing is the origin of two-phase transitions that signal compositional changes during the redox processes that accompany electrochemical lithium extraction/insertion within the material. Often the fully lithiated and delithiated frameworks that span a phase transition are very similar, raising the question of why solid solution behavior is not observed. 
Such questions have impact on the vanadium phosphate under study here, as well as other metal phosphates that display similar two-phase behavior such as LiFePO4. The understanding of such physical phenomena is critical to the search for new materials, as well as improvements in the current ones.
The title material, Li3V2(PO4)3, exists in two different phases: the thermodynamically more stable monoclinic form10 and the rhombohedral or NASICON phase that is only accessible Via ion-exchange of the corresponding sodium phase.11 The two materials display very different voltage-composition curves as a result of their structural differences. The latter displays one plateau resulting from a two-phase transition between the compositions Li3V2(PO4)3 and Li1V2(PO4)3.12 This corresponds to extraction of two Li from a single tetrahedrally coordinated site and displacement of the remaining Li to another site. The monoclinic phase, where all three Li are mobile, exhibits a particularly complex series of two-phase transitions on lithium extraction, followed by a solid solution regime on lithium reinsertion.9 On the subsequent extraction curve, the cycle is repeated. 
Our preliminary report, concerned with lithium extraction, demonstrated that the underlying physical phenomena that give rise to the two-phase transitions involve lithium reordering.13 Here, we describe the subtle interplay between structure and electrochemical properties in the full electrochemical curve on oxidation (Li extraction) and reduction (Li insertion). We reveal the unusual hysteresis observed between extraction and reinsertion of lithium into this structure results from disruption of vanadium charge ordering in the fully delithiated phase. This leads to solid solution behavior on lithium reinsertion. Our findings have implications for understanding charge transport in these materials, and in developing other metal phosphates that display solid solution behavior.
Powder Neutron Diffraction. About 2 g of each sample was loaded in a vanadium can in an Ar-filled glovebox. Initial neutron diffraction experiments were carried out on the C2 diffractometer at the Chalk River Laboratories, Ottawa, Canada ( 236) ) 1.3291 Å). Subsequent studies were performed on the D2B high-resolution diffractometer at the Institut Laue-Langevin (ILL), Grenoble ( 236) ) 1.5940 Å); data were collected from 6 to 12 h over the range 2ı ) 10-160 176) , with a step size of 0.05 176) . The latter data sets were used for the final structural refinements except for x ) 3.
Powder X-ray Diffraction. Samples were measured on a Siemens D500 powder diffractometer ( 236) ) 1.5405Å) from 2ı ) 10-100 176) at a count rate of 10 s per step of 0.02 176) .
LeBail Pattern Matching and Rietveld Refinement. Refinements were performed using GSAS software.15 The cell parameters of each delithiated phase were first determined by LeBail pattern matching. Subsequent Rietveld refinement analysis was carried out initially using fractional coordinates from our single-crystal Li3V2(PO4)3 analysis.9 Scale factor, zero point, lattice parameters, atomic positions, and thermal factors were iteratively refined (see Supporting Information for details). The vanadium positions were based on an initial combined X-ray and neutron refinement and were kept fixed during the final stages of the neutron refinement. The X-ray data were not included at this stage as the refinement was improved without it. The thermal parameter for vanadium was kept fixed during the refinement, and thermal factor constraints were applied to P, O, and Li atoms separately.
The local Li environments are also distinguishable by 7Li MAS NMR (Figure 3). The spectrum of Li3V2(PO4)3 displays three well-resolved isotropic chemical shifts at 103, 52, and 17 ppm (Figure 3a) corresponding to the three crystallographic Li sites. The remainder of the peaks represent spinning sidebands resulting from the quadrupolar interaction due to the electric field gradient’s nonspherical symmetry at the Li nucleus. Integration of the peak area of the isotropic bands (including its sidebands)16 yielded a ratio of exactly 1:1:1, in accord with the crystal structure. By comparison, the rhombohedral phase of Li3V2(PO4)3 with the same stoichiometry containing only one unique tetrahedral Li site displays a single line at an average of these values, 85 ppm.11
The shift of the 7Li NMR lines (as compared to the reference at 0 ppm) arises from the well-known hyperfine interaction or Fermi contact shift.23 Partial transfer of electron density from the V3+ t2g-like orbitals to the Li 2s orbital gives rise to a positive spin density and hence a positive shift. This has been quantified 24 and LiMPO4 (M to some degree in other materials: LiMn2O4 ) Fe, Mn, Co, Ni).25 The Fermi contact shift is dependent on the number of d-electrons (all d2 in Li3V2(PO4)3) and the nature of the orbital overlap-interaction; hence, the Li-O-V bond lengths and bond angles determine the exact magnitude of the shift. These effects can be quite subtle, as was demonstrated in rhombohedral Li3Ti2(PO4)3.26 Understanding how these parameters will affect the NMR shift in monoclinic-Li3V2(PO4)3, where the three Li ions all possess very different Lin-O-V(1,2) linkages; varying Li-O-V bond angles (from 74 176) to 110 176) ) and Li-O bond lengths (see Table 3), is challenging. 
Although it is tempting to correlate the NMR shifts with the crystallographic sites at this stage, calculations of the Fermi-contact shift interaction (currently underway) are necessary to quantify the effects.
The electrochemical curve shows the existence of a phase at x ) 2.5 midway between x ) 2.0 and x ) 3.0 (Figure 1, inset). Because it sits on a very small voltage step on the electrochemical curve, this phase is clearly similar in energy to those on either side and hence would have an intermediate structure. In accord, a LeBail fit of the neutron diffraction (and X-ray) pattern gave lattice parameters midway between the two other phases. Subsequent Rietveld analysis coupled with 7Li NMR data shows that the framework is very similar to the neighboring x ) 3 and x ) 2 phases, with the Li1 site being common to all three structures and fully occupied. The Li2 and Li3 sites are similar to those in Li3V2(PO4)3 but are partially occupied. A full description of the structure solution and 7Li NMR spectrum for this material, which is complex because of the presence of the Li site vacancies and multiple vanadium valencies, will be reported elsewhere.27
Full-pattern matching confirmed the material was single phase. A preliminary structural refinement of the X-ray powder pattern for Li2V2(PO4)3 revealed that the best agreement was obtained in the space group P21/n. Using the XRD data, we refined the V2(PO4)3 framework to locate the V positions which were then fixed, and refinement proceeded with the neutron diffraction data. The Fourier difference map unequivocally revealed that residual nuclear densities remain at two sites, representing the locations of Li1 and Li2. All other major contour regions can be related to Li1 and Li2 sites by nonspecial 4e positions of the P21/n space group. The Li-ion positions found were used as input for the Rietveld refinement, and the atomic coordinates and occupation factors were refined. Convergence was achieved for occupancy factors close to 1:1 that converged to these values in the absence of any constraints. 
Although the cell possesses pseudosymmetry close to that of an orthorhombic cell, the attempt to refine the cell in an orthorhombic (Pbna) space group resulted in higher convergence values. As is shown in Figure 4a and Table 1, an excellent final agreement was obtained between the experimental and calculated neutron diffraction patterns (Rwp ) 4.83%).
The framework shown in Figure 2b-i is very similar to the previous two phases in terms of connectivity. The phosphate tetrahedra are slightly distorted with typical average P-O bond lengths. The environments for the slightly distorted vanadium oxygen octahedra, however, are significantly different for V(1) and V(2). The average V(2)-O bond length of 1.99 Å, typical of a V3+-O bond and very similar to that in the starting phase, Li3V2(PO4)3, results in a calculated vanadium valence of +3.1 (see Table 2). By comparison, the shorter average V(1)-O length (1.91 Å) is characteristic of V4+-O, with a calculated valence of +4.3. This charge ordering of the vanadium ions, as was communicated in our prior report,13 is depicted in Figure 5. The V4+(V3+)-O octahedra form “columns” of either V3+ or V4+ running along the b-axis, with the columns ordered as V3+/V4+ in the (010) plane. 
We note that, although a few inorganic vanadium V4+/V5+ phosphates appear to exhibit valence ordering,28 this is the first time it has been observed in an electrochemically active phosphate, although evidence for it has been previously sought.29 It is tempting to ascribe its existence here to the fact that V(1) and V(2) are distinguishable in the starting phase. These two ions, however, must be distinct because of the monoclinic lattice symmetry, although their difference in coordination environment is not statistically significant within the limits of the single-crystal analysis (Vide supra).9 Irrespective of its origin, the presence of charge ordering is highly important to charge transport within the framework. The existence of ordered valence states in Li2V2(PO4)3 proves that the electrons are pinned on a long (NMR) time scale (see below) as well as on a short (XRD) time scale.
Examination of the changes in the Li coordination environment shows that the five-coordinate site Li3 in Li3V2(PO4)3, which is the highest energy site based on bond-sum calculations,30 is extracted on oxidation. Two sites remain. One, Li1, is essentially unaltered in location and geometry as compared to the pseudotetrahedral Li1 site in Li3V2(PO4)3. The other site which we call Li2b, as it is related to “Li2” in the starting phase, becomes a tetrahedral site which is very similar to Li1 (Figure 2b-ii). Not only do Li1 and Li2b have the same geometry and average Li-O bond length (Table 3), but they are pseudosymmetry sites. They would be identical if the lattice were orthorhombic. The average Li-O bond distance of 1.97 Å is the same for both sites (see Table 3). We were gratified to see first-principles calculations19 also predict the population of these two sites; however, the orthorhombic symmetry of their lattice results in complete equivalency of the two Li ions.
The slightly shifted Li2c site results in one isotropic chemical shift at 138 ppm in the 7Li NMR spectrum (Figure 3c). As the previous argument suggests that a Li-O-Vd1 interaction should give rise to a shift of about 77 ppm, clearly the additional fifth oxygen interaction that now provides a mechanism of electron density transfer from V(1) (or geometrical changes at the Li site) must be responsible for an additional positive contribution. An additional feature of the D-LiV2(PO4)3 spectrum is the line broadening which may originate from local Li disorder as suggested in LiFePO4.32
The significant differences in the XRD patterns of these two materials (Figure 1) were even more apparent by neutron diffraction. The pattern and refinement for R-LiV2(PO4)3 is shown in Figure 4d. The initial LeBail fit converged with good statistics (Rwp ) 2.28 with a ł2 ) 1.747), revealing that the c-axis in the reinserted phase (11.37 Å) is contracted as compared to the fully deinserted phase (11.65 Å). The framework atomic coordinates from the D-LiV2(PO4)3 model were used as a starting point for the Rietveld refinement. A separate trial starting with V2(PO4)3 produced similar results. 
Fourier mapping revealed that the same sole site (Li2c) was not occupied as the D (x ) 1) phase. The two sites that were located (see Figure 4 caption for details) were symmetry related to both Li1 and Li2b in the D-Li2V2(PO4)3 phase, and refinement was carried out with partial occupation of these sites. As the presence of one Li dispersed in two sites as a solid solution made structure solution more difficult than the other compositions, bond restraints were applied in the early stages to avoid unreasonably short Li-O bond distances. These were relaxed as the refinement progressed. 
A schematic diagram which illustrates the changes in the lattice valence and site population is presented in Scheme 1. Starting with the D(x ) 2) phase, the vanadium charge ordering is coupled with the lithium site ordering as was previously noted. On extraction of a lithium ion, one site is preferentially emptied due to the V4+-Li+ cation repulsion. Hence, at D(x ) 1), the ordering on the lithium sites remains, although the vanadium ions are all the same valence. Full extraction of the lithium and oxidation of the lattice to a V4+/5+ state results in a different lattice, in which no charge ordering is exhibited (Scheme 1, left). Thus, reinsertion of Li yields disorder over two sites in the absence of vanadium charge ordering. The latter effectively gives rise to more than one specific site for Li reinsertion, and hence both sites are statistically populated, resulting in a solid solution regime. 
The low degree of Li+ incorporation distributed over two sites, and the low population of variable vanadium valence states, screen any possible forces that could drive ordering. Beyond x ) 1.25, however, ordering is reestablished due to the additional contributions to the lattice potential formed from the incorporation of both Li+ and reduced vanadium. Thus twophase behavior is reasserted. This “disorder-order” transition is thus driven by changes in the lattice stoichiometry and metastable lattice energy effects. It is interesting to recall that since both stoichiometries D-Li1V2(PO4)3 and R-Li1V2(PO4)3 must have the same free energy, the formation of one versus the other on the oxidation and reduction curve is governed by kinetics.
Electron ordering plays a major role in electron transport and is a critical factor for any electrode material. The existence of ordered valence states in Li2V2(PO4)3 demonstrates the electrons are pinned on both long and short time scales. This may also be true for the other single-phase compositions where direct evidence cannot be obtained. Each plateau in the V versus x curve corresponds to a two-phase transition involving the reorganization of electrons and Li ions within the lattice. The structures spanning the phase transition are energetically different, governed by the site potential of the Li+ ion and interaction with the Vn+ ions in the lattice.
Our results suggest that Li-site ordering and the electron ordering are inextricably coupled, resulting in paired electron/ ion transport in the deinsertion regime. The solid solution regime on reinsertion (from x ) 0 to x ) 2.0) appears to be a consequence of the mixed V4+/V5+ state in V2(PO4)3 formed X-ray patterns of these two phases (Figure 1c,g) are also identical, confirming that the same global structure is reached at x ) 2.0. However, NMR can reveal subtle structural differences as it is a very sensitive probe of the local 7Li environment.
We assign the peak at 134 ppm (Figure 7) to “Li2c” in the neutron diffraction analysis (i.e., Li2c-O-V(d1) on the basis of its line-shape similarity, coordination environment (Figure 2c, e-ii), and shift value, to Li2D in D-Li1V2(PO4)3 (at 138 ppm, Figure 3c). The progressive modification in the NMR shift from 134 to 143 ppm results from the subtle framework transformations in the solid solution regime. These reconfigure the Li2c site to an environment that is the same as the Li2b site in D-Li2V2(PO4)3 (“D(x ) 2”)), just as the Li2b site in D(x ) 2) transforms to the Li2c site in D(x )1) in the opposite direction on deinsertion. Accompanying the shift from five-coordinate to tetrahedral environment in moving from R1.0 to R2.0 is the reduction of the vanadium site from V4+ to V3+. Note that the 75 ppm shift remains almost constant (shifting to 77 ppm); it is assigned to the Li1* site. This site becomes Li1 (Li1-O-V(1)d1) at the end of the solid solution regime as the site contracts upon framework alteration.
The minor shift contributions at 182 and 166 ppm showed a strong decrease from x ) 0.5 to 1.0, which suggests the signals are either from mixed V4+/V5+ contact shifts (i.e., a Li that is bonded to both V4+ and V5+) or from vacancy effects as noted above. The shifts at 92 and 32 ppm generally contribute less on complete emptying of the lattice, which does not display charge ordering. Therefore, lithium insertion results in disorder (in the absence of Vn+ ordering to drive Li+ ordering) until sufficient Li+ repopulation and vanadium reduction occur. At the composition Li2V2(PO4)3 which signals the reappearance of two-phase behavior in the reinsertion curve, strong forces based on a combination of Vn+-Vn+ and Vn+-Li+ interactions constrain the V3+/4+ ordering within the lattice.
Our findings explain the complex steps displayed in the voltage versus composition curves of Li3-xV2(PO4)3 and are also directly relevant to other materials. In particular, they bear on the principle of using valence substitution to drive the formation of solid solution regimes. For example, the solid solution  231)-phase of Li3V2(PO4)3, normally only accessible above 450 K, is stabilized at room temperature by the addition of a M4+ dopant such as Zr4+ to form Li3-x(V1-xZrx)2(PO4)3. In the context of our study, it is apparent that the higher-valent dopants raise the energy of the fully charge-ordered Li2V2(PO4)3 on lithium extraction, and hence disordered population of the Li+ sites results. The establishment of solid solution regimes is important to the practical implementation of these phosphates as electrode materials. This inhibits jumps in the voltagecomposition curve which are problematic for device applications. 
Second, energy loss/kinetic impediment via hysteresis from phase boundary migration is minimized. It is also interesting to speculate on the driving force for the lack of a solid solution in LixFePO4 either on oxidation or on reduction. The existence of a well-defined phase transition between LiFePO4 and FePO4 is undoubtedly in part due to size differences between Fe2+ and Fe3+ that also cause a 7% change in volume between the two phases. Nonetheless, lattice interactions between Li+-Fe2+ that are weaker for Li+-Fe3+ (no ligand field stabilization energy) would also be contributing factors that could raise the energy of the solid solution phase.
