A small volume tube-type CO2 sensor was fabricated, which was based on the solid electrolyte material of NASICON prepared by using inorganic salt as raw material. As a sol–gel process was employed, the synthesizing temperature and time were reduced to 800 8C and 8 h, respectively. The resulted NASICON was characterized by XRD, IR, TEM and ion conductivity measurement. Within a wide range of CO2 volume ratio concentration from 100 to 10,000 ppm, the output electromotive force (EMF) of the sensor followed Nernst equation well, and its response and recovery time were less than 15 and 28 s, respectively. The experiments indicated that there was little inﬂuence on the sensor characteristics from water vapor, CH4 and CO, which could be attributed to the choice of the suitable binary carbonate electrode and the use of the active carbon cap in package.
CO2 is one of the most important gases that could produce an essential inﬂuence on the atmosphere quality and the agricultural products. It has caused much attention from many researchers to control the sendoff amount of CO2 into atmosphere or monitor the build-up CO2 concentration in the global range or in a located site. As the cheap and compact kind of CO2 sensor could be expected to play an efﬁcient role in the practical application, its research and development has been receiving much interest during recent years [1–4].
The solid electrolyte CO2 sensor based on NASICON is normally regarded as one of the main developing trends because of some promising properties, such as high sensitivity, moderate operating temperature, short response time and good resistance to humidity. In order to improve the performance of the kind of sensor, some efforts now are still being put on the exploration about the synthesis of NASICON material with high purity in phase at lower reacting temperature and the suitable element structure with low power consumption [5–9]. It these is obvious that all researches will be advantageous to prompt the commercialization development of the solid electrolyte CO2 sensor.
In this paper, the material of NASICON was synthesized by a developed sol–gel process, in which some inorganic reagents and tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) were used as raw materials. The resulted materials were characterized by XRD, IR, TEM and impedance spectrum (IS). Based on the synthesized NASICON material, a small volume tube-type CO2 sensor was fabricated and its gas sensing properties were in turn investigated.
The NASICON precursor sol solution was prepared from the stoichiometric mixture of the reagents of ZrO(NO3)2, NaNO3, Si(C2H5O)4 and (NH4)2HPO4. ZrO(NO3)2 was prepared from ZrOCl2 through the popular precipitating and resolving procedure with the aid of NH3H2O and HNO3. For preparing a relatively stable and transparent solution, the reagents of ZrO(NO3)2 and NaNO3 were ﬁrst dissolved in water. Then, the alcohol solution of Si(C2H5O)4 was added. After stirring for 20 min at room temperature, (NH4)2HPO4 was added. The above solution was continuously stirred at 70 8C for more 2 h, and then aged at room temperature for 1 h to form a sol. After being dried in oven for 3 h at 100 8C, the sol changed into xerogel. The resulted gel was pre-sintered at 500 8C for 30 min, and then pressed into bulk sample and sintered again at the temperature of 800–1000 8C for 8 h. XRD, IR, TEM and IS measurement were used to characterize the phase structure and the electrical properties of the ﬁnal products. 
For the IS analysis, a pellet sample coated with silver electrodes on its both surfaces was prepared. Its diameter and thickness were 7.0 and 1.7 mm, respectively. The IS measurement was conducted by a ZL5 Smart LCR Meter (Shanghai, China) with available frequency ranging from 5 Hz to 1 MHz.
In the case of fabricating tube-type CO2 sensor, the above NASICON bulk already sintered at high temperature was remashed and ball-milled into ﬁne powders, and hot-pressed into a small volume tube at the temperature of 300 8C to avoid the occurrence of much distortion during the sintering. The green tube was sintered at 1000 8C for 5 h to make it densiﬁed. The wall thickness of the resulted tube was 0.3 mm. The outer diameter and the length were 1.4 and 5 mm, respectively. For the side of contact electrode, a thick Pt ﬁlm was covered on one side of the tube outer surface by painting H2PtCl6 solution on it and following a sintering process at 900 8C for 20 min. A Pt lead was pulled out from the Pt ﬁlm with the use of Pt paste and followed sintering at 900 8C for 20 min. For the side of sensing electrode, the auxiliary phase of BaCO3–Li2CO3 carbonate mixture and an Au mesh attached with another Pt lead were in sequence stacked on the other side of the outer surface by melting and quenching method. 
In order to heat the element to operable temperature, a small heater coil penetrated through the tube was used. For improving the resistance to interference gases, an active carbon cap-doped with some noble metal was used in package.
CO2 sensing properties were measured in a conventional static mounting method. The sample gases containing different concentration of CO2, and certain concentration of CH4 or CO were obtained by diluting pure gases with synthetic air. The inﬂuence from 60% relative humidity (RH) was conducted by the adoption of the humid synthetic air, which bubbled through the water chamber maintained at certain temperature. A humidity sensor, fabricated in our laboratory, was used to monitor the relative humidity of the sample gas [10]. The electromotive force (EMF) output from the sensor was recorded with a digital electrometer (Advanced, TR 8652).
It was known that ZrO2 is the most important second phase easily appearing in the synthesized NASICON [6–8]. As the additional phase will decrease the ion conductivity of NASICON at low operating temperature, the development of the synthesis method to avoid its appearance is preferred for the sake of improving the performance of the solid electrolyte NASICON based sensing device. From the XRD results shown in Fig. 1, the precursor materials sintered at the temperature of 800, 900 and 1000 8C for 8 h were already converted into NASICON. The trace of tetragonal ZrO2 could be recognized in the sample sintered at 800 8C while it diminished with further elevating the sintering temperature to 900 8C. In comparison with the result of the sample sintered at 800 8C, the crystallinity of the samples sintered at 900 and 1000 8C were obviously improved. 
Furthermore, the experimental results indicated that the co-existed ZrO2 phase could be obviously observed again when the sintering temperature was further increased to 1100 C. Therefore, controlling the sintering temperature is a key factor to avoid the existence of ZrO2 in the ﬁnal NASICON phase.
NASICON phase could be further investigated by FTIR analysis, which is shown in Fig. 2. The absorption bands  1 for all samples are seen in the region around 560 cm caused by the asymmetric bending vibration modes of O–P–  1 are O units. The bands viewed in the region 890–920 cm attributed to the P–O–P bending vibration. The bands  1 indicate the presence observed in the region 1051–940 cm of PO4 ionic group vibration. The observed bands in the region 1130 cm  1 may be assigned to the PO( ) ionic  1 for vibration. The bands seen in the region above 1660 cm all samples are traced to the free H2O molecules bending and hydroxyl-stretching vibration modes. 
The less absorption  1 indicates the absence of ZrO2. Comparing around 470 cm with that of the sample sintered at 800 8C, the absorption bands of P–O–P units and PO4 ionic groups for the sample sintered at 900 or 1000 8C are shifted to the short wavenumber direction, which indicated that the crystallinity was intensiﬁed when the sintering temperature was increased from 800 to 900 8C or 1000 8C. 
The impedance spectrum of the NASICON material synthesized at different temperatures is shown in Fig. 3. The operating temperature is 350 8C, which is around the practical operating temperature of the CO2 sensor. Within the utilized frequency range, only the grain boundary arc is clearly seen and the bulk contribution can only be estimated from the high frequency intercept of the grain boundary arc. The major differences between these materials suggest that the sharp decrease in resistance with increasing sintering temperature be mostly due to the grain boundary contribution because all high frequency intercepts of the grain boundary arcs are highly close to each other. The decrease of grain boundary resistance is obviously related to the densiﬁcation of the pressed bulk. 
The densities of the sintered pellets are compared with the theoretical density calculated from the room temperature structure of the compound, 3.27 g/cm3. For the samples sintered at 800, 900 and 1000 8C, the values up to 89, 91, 94% were reached, respectively. TEM results indicated that the grain size is about 25 nm for the sample sintered at 1000 8C. The small grain size caused inferior densiﬁcation and poor grain boundary contact inside the sintered bulk. Therefore, the grain boundary resistance could be expected to decrease further when higher dense material is available. This is now being explored. The best ion conductivity in this  1 corrework calculated from the IS results is 0.20 S cm sponding to the sample sintered at 1000 8C, which is still  1 [11]. much lower than the reference result of 0.36 S cm A suitable structure for CO2 sensor should possess some favorable features, for example, high heating efﬁciency, low power consumption, ease for mass production, simple fabricating process, etc. 
The conventional planar-type CO2 sensor already exhibited some advantages such as high sensitivity, short response time, relatively simple fabricating process and so on [5,12]. However, the operating power and the heating efﬁciency are still unstable and thus cannot satisfy the requirement for realizing a ﬁne reproducibility in sensing properties. For the sake of taking a try to solve the problem, a tube-type sensor, as illustrated in Fig. 4, was designed and fabricated in this work. The CO2 sensing property in the volumetric concentration range from 100 to 10,000 ppm, corresponding to different heating current is shown in Fig. 5. The sensitivities of the sensing element at the heating current of 140, 160 and 200 mA are 23, 61 and 72 mV per decade, respectively. And the measurement about the surface temperature using a small volume thermocouple showed that the surface temperature resulted from the above heating current were about 260, 340 and 450 8C, respectively. 
The sensitivities ﬁtted with the theoretical Nernst slope well except for the situation when the operating temperature was set at about 260 8C, which is related to the ion conductivity change with operating temperature. At low temperature, the movements of the conducting ions are difﬁcult relative to the situation at high temperature, and the contribution from electrons for charge transference would be comparable with that from conducting ions. Thus, the ideal high temperature behavior of the solid electrolyte material will degrade when the operating temperature is out of its optimum range. In comparison with the planar-type structure element, about 40 mA of the heating current was decreased for heating it to similar working temperature to maintain a favorable sensitivity. Meanwhile, a satisfactory uniformity in sensing properties for the same batches was obtained. It is an advantageous trend to meet the requirement of mass production and practical application in the future.
The response and recovery time is deﬁned as the time when 90% voltage signal change occurred, and it is corresponded to the switch change of CO2 concentration between 100 and 1000 ppm. When the operating current was set at 200 mA, the response and recovery times are 15 and 25 s, respectively. As listed in Table 1, the time was prolonged with decreasing operating current. Considering the safety in the natural of the target gas, the present results could satisfy the requirements for most applications.
The previous investigation indicated that the kinds of auxiliary carbonate salt could produce obvious inﬂuence on the property of resistance to humidity and other interference gases [13]. Based on the results, the auxiliary phase of BaCO3–Li2CO3 carbonate mixture was adopted as sensing electrode material. However, the careful choice of the carbonate auxiliary electrode material has not completely eliminated the interference from the popular co-existing gases, such as CO, CH4, humidity, etc. In order to enhance the resistance to interference gases, a noble metal-doped carbon cap was utilized to package the CO2 element in this work. The cap effects on the sensing properties were summarized in Table 2. There are some potential voltage shifts ascribed to the co-existing gases such as CO, CH4 and humidity for the element without the packaged cap. It could be attributed to the fact that the inﬂammable gases of carbon monoxide and methane would be burned and converted into CO2 at the hot surface of the sensor. 
The mechanism of humidity inﬂuence was usually regarded to be relevant to the reaction between the NASICON material and water [14]. The active carbon cap could make an obvious effect in decreasing or even completely eliminating the inﬂuences from these testing gases in the concentration range utilized in this work. The expectable disadvantage is the increase of the sensing time due to the gas diffusion barrier of the carbon powder ﬁlled in the cap, which prolonged the time for the sample gas to get its balance concentration inside the package cap. We hope that the property could be improved by dedicatedly choosing the dense and thickness ﬁlling of the carbon powder layer and the suitable doping noble metals. Now this work is now being performed.
Solid electrolyte material of NASICON was synthesized by a sol–gel process, in which inorganic reagents were used as the main raw materials. XRD, IR, TEM and IS measurements indicated that the material could be prepared at relatively low temperature of 800 8C, and the conductivity was increased with increasing sintering temperature. However, in order to satisfy the applying requirements in the preparation of CO2 sensor, the sintering temperature of 1000 8C is more favorable for providing the NASICON bulk with a high density and a low impedance. The measurement on the CO2 sensing properties of the sensor indicated that the small volume tube-type structure exhibited reasonable sensitivity, short response and recovery time as well as a good characteristic uniformity while the operating heating current was decreased comparing with planar-type structure. The active carbon cap utilized in package could improve the resistance to some gases such as humidity, CO and CH4. 
The problem of the prolonged response time that was caused by the package cap is expected to solve it in the further research work.
