Electrochemical CO2 sensors were fabricated with NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) disks containing different levels of Na3PO4. The marked differences of the effect of aging in humid condition revealed that the auxiliary phase (NaHCO3 and/or Na2CO3) was formed spontaneously from the Na3PO4 impurity of NASICON in the presence of water vapor and CO2. Even when the auxiliary phase was formed or intentionally added, CO2 sensing properties were easily lost completely under exposure to dry atmosphere, indicating active involvement of water vapor in the CO2 sensing electrode reactions. EMF versus CO2 concentration correlations usually tended to shift up with increasing relative humidity. Remarkably, this shift was reduced effectively by introducing Li2CO3 as an auxiliary phase, suggesting that the shift originates from the instability of NaHCO3 and/or Na2CO3 in humid atmosphere.
There has been increasing demand for monitoring and control of CO2 concentration in ofﬁces, homes, agricultural ﬁelds, bio-related processes and so on. A NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12)-based potentiometric device attached with an alkaline metal carbonate or binary carbonate (type III sensor) has been shown to exhibit good CO2 sensing properties at elevated temperature (400 8C or above) [1–8]. When attached with a metal oxide (SnO2 or In2O3) instead of carbonate by the sensing electrode, on the other hand, the same device has been shown to exhibit CO2 sensing properties at room temperature [9–14]. From a practical viewpoint, sensor operation at room temperature is quite attractive since it facilitates the diminishing electric power consumption and downsizing the sensor device by the elimination of a heater. However, this type of CO2 sensor has been far from being well understood. A major question is why the CO2 sensitivity is available for the device unattached with a carbonate auxiliary phase. 
It is question as well why the CO2 sensitivity is brought forth at room temperature. It is felt that the key to solve these questions is possessed by water vapor, which is adsorbed easily on the device at room temperature. For example, it has been reported that upon exposure of a NASICON disk to humid atmosphere at low temperature, trace impurities of NASICON are soaked out at the surface. It is thus possible that some sort of carbonate auxiliary phase (NaHCO3 and/or Na2CO3) is formed spontaneously at the interface between metal oxide and NASICON from the impurities of NASICON and that as a result the sensor device (metal oxide/auxiliary phase/NASICON) has CO2 sensitivity. From this standpoint, we tried to make it clear how water vapor (or humidity) affects the appearance of the CO2 sensing capability as well as the CO2 sensing properties themselves. It turned out that water vapor in fact plays signiﬁcant roles, both positive and negative, in this type of CO2 sensor.
This paper aims at describing the roles of water vapor thus perused as well as an attempt to eliminate the disturbance by water vapor with a Li2CO3-modiﬁed device.
The disk was then ﬁxed on the end of a quartz glass tube (9 mm in diameter) with an inorganic adhesive.
For a ‘type B’ device, the ITO powder was applied on the disk together with an Au mesh, followed by calcination at 800 8C for 2 h. For a ‘type C’ device, a paste of Li2CO3 prepared by mixing it with a-terpineol containing 5 wt.% ethyl cellulose, was applied on the NASICON disk and dried at 120 8C for 30 min, then the ITO paste was applied together with gold mesh to cover the Li2CO3 layer, calcined at 500 8C for 30 min.
Gas sensing properties were measured in a conventional gas ﬂow apparatus equipped with a heating facility. Sample gases consisting of air, CO2 and water vapor were prepared by diluting a parent CO2 gas (1% CO2 in dry synthetic air) with wet and/or dry synthetic air. The wet air was prepared by bubbling through liquid water. By keeping the reference electrode (inside) always exposed to synthetic dry air, the concentration of CO2 and relative humidity over the sensing electrode were varied in the ranges of 300–3000 ppm and 30–70% relative humidity (RH), respectively. The rate of  1 while the device temperature gas was ﬁxed at 0.1 dm3 min was varied between 30 and 100 C. The EMF was measured on an electrometer (ADVANTEST TR8652).
To investigate the reaction between ITO and Li2CO3 by calcinating, the calcinated mixture were identiﬁed by means of X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis.
To fabricate a device of ‘type A’ gold paste was applied on the upper side of the NASICON disk together with an Au mesh and calcined at 800 8C for 2 h. On top of it, the In2O3 powder was applied as a paste and calcined at 750 8C for 2 h.
In order to conﬁrm the above estimation, devices of ‘type A’ were fabricated with three kinds of NASICON disks A, B and C, which were different in contaminations by Na3PO4. Disks A and C were prepared through a solid-state reaction and a sol–gel route, respectively. Disk B was prepared from disk A in the same by tracing it in hot water at 90 8C for 1 h.
It is easy to prove that the presence of water vapor is essential for stable response of the present devices to CO2. The device using disk A works well at 30% RH without any aging treat as just mentioned. The EMF response at this stage was linear to the logarithm of CO2 concentration with the slope corresponding to n ¼ 2 as shown by correlation (a) in Fig. 3, where n stands for the number of electrons associated with the electrode reaction of CO2. When the device was then exposed to dry air, the device lost the CO2 sensitivity gradually to reach the correlation (b) after 10 days. The sensitivity was recovered again. As shown by correlation (c), immediately after the gas ﬂow was switched to humidiﬁed one controlled to 30% RH, although new correlation lay above the original correlation (a). This means that even in the presence of a proper auxiliary phase, the CO2 sensing capability shows up only when water vapor coexistent. 
It is concluded that water vapor seems to take important part in the CO2 sensing reaction as its second roles.
Besides the important effects just mentioned, water vapor was found to exert an adverse effect as well on the present CO2 sensor. This effect shows up as a shift of the correlation between EMF and CO2 concentration with a change in RH.
It has been reported that the contamination levels greatly differ among the three disks, being in the order of disk A @ disk C > disk B as reported in reference [17]. Each of the fabricated devices was examined for its initial CO2 sensing ability in 30% RH. In case of the sensing ability was not sufﬁcient, the device was kept under exposure to ﬂow of air containing ﬁxed concentrations of CO2 and water vapor, for a designated time before the CO2 sensing ability was checked again (aging).
Fig. 2 shows the CO2 sensing properties of the respective devices at 30% RH at the initial stage as well as after the aging treatments under the indicated conditions of CO2 and RH at 30 8C. The device using disk A started working well as a CO2 sensor from the beginning, as seen from sharp response in EMF to changing CO2 concentration step arise (curve a). The device using disk B, however, failed to show reasonable response to CO2 at the beginning (curve b) as well as after the aging under the conditions of 30% RH and 300 ppm CO2 for 15 days (curve c). The device using disk C showed intermediate behavior, i.e. the CO2 sensing properties were very poor at the beginning (curve d), but fairly excellent properties were attained after the aging under the conditions of 70% RH and 3000 ppm CO2 for 30 h (curve e). Such behavior is well consistent with the contamination levels of the three disks. For disk A, the carbonate auxiliary phase had been formed already before the initial test was carried out. 
For disk C, the auxiliary phase was formed during the aging treatment, while it was hardly formed sufﬁciently during the aging treatment. These results conﬁrm that some sorts of auxiliary phase are formed spontaneously before or during the aging treatment, although the ease of its formation depends on the contamination levels of NASICON disks and the aging conditions used. At the same time, it is also to reduce amount of adsorbed water vapor on the sensing oxide electrode for sensing reactions.
The device using disk B could not show reasonable CO2 sensing capability even after the aging treatment (Fig. 2). To this particular device, an aqueous solution of NaHCO3 was dropped over the layer of In2O3, followed by drying in the aim of introducing a NaHCO3 auxiliary phase intentionally at the interface between NASICON and In2O3. Fig. 6 shows the CO2 sensing properties of the resulting NaHCO3-modiﬁed device. The device as obtained worked excellently, as seen form correlation (a). The device of the Nernstian correlation lead to n ¼ 1:1, to be compared with n ¼ 2:0 or 1.9 (in Figs. 5 and 7) for the unmodiﬁed device. After exposure to dry atmosphere for 150 h, the CO2 sensing capability was lost completely (correlation b), while it was restored but to a different value (1.5) of n after the aging under 30% RH for 12 h (c). 
In ‘type A’ devices attached with In2O3, porous Au made from Au paste, was also attached as a sensing electrode to cover the poor electronic conductivity of In2O3 at room temperature. The resulting complication of gas sensing interfaces might have given unfavorable effects on the devices. To make the sensing electrode simpler in structure, ‘type B’ device was fabricated by replacing In2O3 by ITO (Fig. 1b). Owning to high electronic conductivity of ITO, this device gave stable EMF by imbedding an Au mesh (0.07 mm in a diameter) as an electric collector. Fig. 7 shows the EMF response to CO2 at 30 8C. Under a given RH, a stable Nerstian correlation was obtained, though the value of n tended to be slightly larger than the result of Fig. 3a (n ¼ 1:9 or 2). The deviation from 2 may be acceptable for aging time. The correlation shifted up will increase RH from 30 to 70%, indicating that the device still suffered from a disturbance.
The shift of base EMF with increasing RH seems to be associated with the instability of the auxiliary phase involved. From this standpoint, a discrete layer of Li2CO3 solid-state reaction forming LiInO2 took place 600 8C and above. To avoid this reaction, calcination was carried out at 500 8C for the device. Fig. 9 shows the EMF response to CO2 under 30% RH for thus prepared device. The Nerstian correlations with n ¼ 1:7 and 2.1 were obtained at 30 and 60 8C, respectively, whereas the CO2 sensitivity was lost seriously at 100 8C. The values of n fairly close to n ¼ 2 at the lower temperatures are consistent with the overall electrode reaction: 2Liþ þ CO2 þ ð1=2ÞO2 þ 2e  ¼ Li2CO3. Remarkably, the base EMF at each temperature was very stable on changing humidity, as shown in Fig. 10. Unlike in Na2O–H2O–CO2 system, neither hydrates nor bicarbonate are formed in Li2O–H2O–CO2 system. Such stability of Li2CO3 seems to be responsible for the stability of base EMF against humidity changes. 
However, more investigations are needed to conﬁrm this.
Water vapor inﬂuences on the room temperature type CO2 sensor in three ways, i.e. promoting spontaneous formation of NaHCO3 and/or Na2CO3 as an auxiliary phase, participating in the CO2 sensing electrode reactions, and causing the relative humidity dependent shift of base EMF. CO2 sensing properties can be much improved by externally incorporating auxiliary materials such as NaHCO3 and Li2CO3. Particularly, the incorporation of Li2CO3 is effective in stabilizing the EMF against relative humidity changes, suggesting that the observed phenomenon is associated with the instability of NaHCO3 and/or Na2CO3. The use of ITO is also effective in improving CO2 sensing properties through simpliﬁcation of the gas sensing interface.
