The condition of screen-printing paste was explored to densify a thick ﬁlm of Na conductor, Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (NASICON) deposited on an alumina substrate. A fair well-densiﬁed NASICON thick ﬁlm was found to be obtained from a paste consisting of NASICON powder and ethylene glycol dispersant by screen-printing and calcination at 1000 8C. The resulting planar sensor showed good CO2 sensing capability even under humid conditions, although the emf tended to shift upward with increasing relative humidity. In order to reduce the disturbance by humidity, applicability of an oxide-ionic conductor of Bi2Me0.1V0.9O5.35 as a counter electrode material was examined. The oxideincorporated devices, of both disk type and planar, exhibited stable CO2 sensing properties under dry as well as humid conditions. In addition, the dependence of emf on RH could be reduced considerably with the oxide-incorporated devices. 
It was found, however, that the RH dependence of emf originates from both of the sensing and counter electrodes so that the RH dependence of both electrodes should be tackled with to eliminate the RH dependence of the devices.
A compact carbon dioxide (CO2) sensor has been in great demand for the measurement and/or control of CO2 in indoor atmospheres and bioactive systems. Among various types of CO2 sensors so far reported [1–3], the potentiometric type for which a Na conductor, Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (NASICON)-based electrochemical cell is attached with a carbonate auxiliary phase such as Li2CO3-BaCO3 appears very promising [4–6], but the fabricated devices have remained prototype yet in structure by the use of a discrete disk of NASICON. A planar structure would be more advantageous from a standpoint of fabrication cost and device size. Recently we reported a planar device, for which a NASICON thick ﬁlm was screen-printed on an alumina substrate [7]. The device showed fairly good CO2 sensing properties under dry conditions but the sensing capability was fatally disturbed under humid conditions. 
It is likely that, due to poor densiﬁcation of the NASICON thick ﬁlm, the carbonate used as the auxiliary phase diffused through pores of the ﬁlm up to the counter electrode under humid conditions. 
To overcome this problem, it seems necessary either to densify the ﬁlm sufﬁciently or to introduce a new counter electrode system that works as an oxygen-sensitive electrode even in the presence of carbonate [8]. As an attempt in the former approach, previously we incorporated glass-forming components (SiO2:Na2O:B2O3:Al2O3 ¼ 64:21:10:5 in molar ratio) to the ﬁlm. The resulting NASICON/glass composite ﬁlm was densiﬁed well and gave good CO2 sensing capability even under humid conditions. However the slopes of the Nernstian correlations were slightly less steep than the theoretical one. This situation motivated us to try again to ﬁnd out a way to densify a monolithic NASICON thick ﬁlm. In addition, as an attempt in the latter approach, we investigated the applicability of a Bi–V based mixed oxide, Bi2Cu0.1V0.9O5.35, which belongs to a new class of oxide-ionic conductors, as a counter electrode material. This paper aims at describing the results of these approaches.
The powder of NASICON or its precursor was prepared by a sol–gel method starting from the alkoxides of constituent elements [9,10], i.e. Si(OC2H5)4, Zr(OC4H9)4, PO(OC4H9)3 and NaOC2H5. The alkoxides were dissolved in the ethanol solvent containing a designated amount of HNO3 (catalyst for hydrolysis) to the stoichiometric compositions of NASICON at 60 8C under dry N2 ﬂow and kept standing for about 20 h under stirring. A designated amount of distilled water was then added for hydrolysis (sol–gel process). The resulting xerogel was dried at 120 8C for 24 h and calcined at 900 8C for 5 h or 750 8C for 1 h to obtain the powder of crystalline NASICON or its amorphous precursor, respectively.
The powder of Bi2Cu0.1V0.9O5.35 was prepared from the constituent metal oxides (Bi2O3, V2O5 and CuO) through solid-state reactions [11–13]. Desired amounts of the metal oxides were mixed thoroughly in an attrition mill in the presence of ethanol solvent followed by drying at 120 8C for 5 h. The mixture was ﬁrst calcined preliminarily at 650 8C for 15 h and then, after being ground in an agate mortar, calcined ﬁnally at 750 8C for 5 h to obtain the product.
Two kinds of planar devices were fabricated. The ﬁrst one was the same in structure as used previously. A NASICON thick ﬁlm (30 mm thick) on an alumina substrate was in contact with the sensing (top) and counter (bottom) electrodes (Au), as shown in Fig. 1(a), where the sensing electrode was covered with an auxiliary phase layer of Li2CO3-BaCO3 (1:2 in molar ratio). The NASICON layer was screen-printing from a paste made of the NASICON powder and a dispersant selected among a-terpineol þ ethyl cellulose, ethylene glycol, polyethylene glycol and glycerin. The electrodes (1 mm thick) were also screen-printed on the designated regions before and after the deposition of the NASICON layer. The optimal sintering condition was decided by X-ray diffraction (Rigaku RINT 2100) with Cu Ka radiation. 
The whole assembly was then calcinated for 5 h in air at a designated temperature in the range 900–1200 8C, before a layer of Li2CO3-BaCO3 auxiliary phase was deposited (about 10 mm thick) on the Au sensing electrode by a meltingand-quenching method.
The other kind of planar device was fabricated as shown in Fig. 1(b), in order to incorporate Bi2Cu0.1V0.9O5.35 as a counter electrode material. The structure was the same as the ﬁrst one except that the counter electrode was attached on top of the NASICON layer. In this case, the counter electrode was prepared from the Bi2Cu0.1V0.9O5.35 powder by followed by calcination at 840 8C for screen-printing, 15 min.
A prototype device using a disk of NASICON, shown in Fig. 1(c), was also fabricated in order to investigate basic properties of the Bi2Cu0.1V0.9O5.35 based-counter electrode. The NASICON disk, 8 mm in diameter and 1 mm thick, was prepared from the NASICON precursor as reported elsewhere [14]. On top of it, an Au sensing electrode and a layer of Bi2Cu0.1V0.9O5.35 (counter electrode) were deposited by applying the respective pastes and calcining 840 8C for 15 min. The carbonate layer on the sensing electrode was deposited afterward by melting-and-quenching. The disk was ﬁxed on the end of a quartz glass tube (6 mm in diameter) with an inorganic adhesive. As a reference electrode, platinum paste was applied on the reverse side of the disk.
It was examined how the kind of dispersant used for the screen-printing paste affect the morphology of the resulting NASICON thick ﬁlm. Fig. 2 shows SEM images (top-view) of the NASICON thick ﬁlms prepared by using various kinds of dispersants. Evidently polyethylene glycol and glycerin (a and b) gave very porous ﬁlm even after calcination at 1000 8C, whereas a-terpineol þ ethyl cellulose and ethylene glycol (c and d) gave fairly well-densiﬁed ﬁlms. In the latter cases, however, when a-terpineol þ ethyl cellulose was used, large pores were observed in the ﬁlm as shown in Fig. 2(e), although there were no such pores with ethylene glycol (Fig. 2(f)). In this way, ethylene glycol dispersant was judged to be most desirable for densiﬁying the NASICON ﬁlm. These results were concerned with the ﬁlms prepared from the NASICON powder. 
It is remarked that when the NASICON precursor was screen printed as done previously, a number of cracks were formed in the ﬁlm after calcination at 1000 8C, even when ethylene glycol dispersant was used. These cracks seem to appear when the volume of ﬁlm shrinks largely with the conversion of the amorphous precursor into crystalline NASICON.
Fig. 3 shows the XRD patterns of NASICON thick ﬁlms screen printed by using ethylene glycol dispersant and calcined at the indicated temperatures for 5 h. The ﬁlms calcined at 900 or 1000 8C consisted of pure-NASICON phase, while ZrO2 as the decomposition product of it appeared after calcination at 1100 8C and became dominant at 1200 8C. Based on these results, the calcination temperature was set to 1000 8C hereafter.
Unlike the porous NASICON thick ﬁlm prepared previously, the present NASICON thick ﬁlm, when incorporated in the planar device (Fig. 1(a)), gave good CO2 sensing capability even under humid conditions. Fig. 4 shows the emf response to various concentrations of CO2 at 50% RH. The Nernst’s slopes gave n ¼ 2 in coincidence with the theory at 400 and 450 8C, where n is the number of electrons associated with the electrochemical reaction of CO2. At 500 8C, however, n deviated from 2 rather signiﬁcantly. It is suspected that the amount of auxiliary phase (Li2CO3-BaCO3) effectively inserted between the Au electrode and the NASICON surface in the present device may be insufﬁcient to stand sensor operation at such high temperature. Fig. 5 shows the response transients to changes in CO2 concentration in the range of 100– 1000 ppm at 450 8C under humid conditions (50% RH). The transients were sufﬁciently sharp with the 90% response times of less than 40 s.
Despite the recovery of the CO2 sensing capability under humid conditions, the above device was found not to be completely free from the disturbance by water vapor. That is, the emf to a ﬁxed concentration of CO2 showed slight dependence on RH, as shown in Fig. 6. The emf increased by 11 mV with increasing RH from 10 to 80%. As reported previously, the corresponding change of emf remained within 3 mV for the well-densiﬁed ﬁlm of NASICON/glass composite. It is suspected that the present ﬁlm still has small pinholes, through which water vapor diffuses to the counter electrode to induce an unfavorable effect. It follows that making the counter electrode independent of such a disturbance would be important for practical devices.
In the present type device, the counter electrode potential is assumed to be determined by the partial pressure of oxygen in the atmosphere. However, the Au counter electrode is attached directly on the NASICON surface, so that its potential is vulnerable to a change in surface composition or contaminants. It has been reported that stabilized zirconia works well as a stable counter electrode material, in the present type of CO2 sensing device [15]. This material is rather difﬁcult to handle for the present device because of too high sintering temperature. Comparatively, Bi2Cu0.1V0.9O5.35 is a good oxide-ionic conductor with relatively low melting point (850 8C). This material was thus chosen for the counter electrode in the present study. Basic properties of the Bi2Cu0.1V0.9O5.35 counter electrode were tested with the prototype device using a disk of NASICON (Fig. 1(c)). Fig. 7 show the emf response to CO2 as a function of CO2 concentration under dry and humid conditions. 
The device worked fairly well under dry conditions at 400, 450 and 500 8C, although n slightly deviated from 2. The CO2 sensing capability remained almost intact under 50% RH, except for the case of operation at 400 8C where n deviated largely from 2 from an unknown reason. As seen from these correlations, the emf to a ﬁxed concentration of CO2 tends to shift upward with a change from dry to 50% RH. This shift is conﬁrmed more quantitively in Fig. 8, where the emf to 100 ppm CO2 is correlated with RH (correlation (a)). The increment of emf on increasing RH from 10 to 80% was 6.9 mV, which was smaller than the case (11 mV) of the previous device (Fig. 6).
As just mentioned, incorporation of the Bi2Cu0.1V0.9O5.35 counter electrode reduced the emf dependence of RH, but could not eliminate it completely. It is thus important to know how the dependence showed up. For this purpose, the potentials of sensing and counter electrodes were measured versus the Pt reference electrode respectively (Fig. 1(c)) under various RH conditions.
A screen-printing paste made of NASICON powder and ethylene glycol dispersant was found to give a monolithic thick ﬁlm of NASICON densiﬁed fairly well after calcination at 1000 8C. The planar device using this ﬁlm showed good CO2 sensing properties even under humid conditions, although the emf was slightly inﬂuenced by a change in RH. An oxide-ionic conductor of Bi2Cu0.1V0.9O5.35 could be successfully incorporated as a counter electrode material. The Bi2Cu0.1V0.9O5.35-attached devices showed very stable CO2 sensing performance under dry and humid conditions, with reduced dependence of emf on RH.