ABSTRACT: We present a multi-layer approach to design a laminated dual-polymer/polymer-ceramic composite electrolyte (LDPPCCE) for high-voltage all-solid-state lithium batteries. An anode friendly poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) serves as a matrix to face the Li-metal anode. To enhance the room-temperature Li+ion conductivity, succinonitrile (SN) is incorporated into the PEO. At the cathode side, an oxidation tolerant poly(acrylonitrile) (PAN) matrix is employed. To enhance the ionic conductivity and suppress lithium dendrite, NASICON-type lithium aluminum titanium phosphate (Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3, LATP) powder is integrated into the PAN. The PEO-SN dual-polymer and the PANLATP composite deliver a matched ionic conductivity. Uniting the two electrolyte layers, the resulting elastic LDPPCCE exhibits an ionic conductivity of 1.31×10-4 S cm-1 at ambient temperature with an electrochemical stability window of 0–5 V. All-solidstate lithium cells, fabricated with the LDPPCCE electrolyte, high-capacity/high-voltage LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 cathode, and lithium-metal anode exhibit exceptional electrochemical performance with a long cycle life.
Lithium-ion batteries have experienced a sequence of splendid success over the past 30 years in terms of fundamental research, technological development, and commercialization.They are now playing a paramount role in our daily life as a principle option to power modern electronics such as smartphones and laptops.Li+-ion batteries are also a key technology for the widespread adoption of electric vehicles toward minimizing CO2 or other harmful emissions.Aiming to set the world free from the reliance on fossil fuels and to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions, exploration and utilization of renewable resources are continuously evolving on a global scale.However, renewable energies, such as solar and wind, are intermittent and the electricity produced with them need to be appropriately stored with reliable, low-cost, long-life energy-storage systems.For this purpose, Li+-ion batteries are one of the most promising technologies as well.Traditional Li+-ion batteries are generally operated with nonaqueous electrolytes and the positive and negative electrodes are separated with a porous polymer separator.19 However, the use of nonaqueous electrolyte poses a safety issue due to the flammable nature of organic solvents.On the other hand, the inhomogeneous nucleation of lithium at the anode during the chargedischarge processes results in the formation and growth of lithium dendrites which may cause a short-circuit of the cell.
The increasing demand for safe, high-energy-density storage systems are provoking the community to pursue all-solid-state Libased batteries with a solid-state electrolyte and a Li-metal anode.Li+-ion conductive polymers and Li+-ion conductive ceramics are the two major classes of solid electrolytes that have prevalently been pursued for many years.Ceramic-based solid electrolytes generally possess good thermal stability and an ideal dendrite-suppression capability, but their mechanical property is poor.Furthermore, the hard surface of a ceramic solid electrolyte makes it difficult to maintain a good interface between the solid electrolyte and a solid electrode, thus inducing high interfacial impedance.With good mechanical property and an elastic feature, polymer electrolytes generally have better interfacial compatibility with solid electrodes.To take advantages of both the ceramic and polymeric electrolytes, research on the development of polymer/ceramic composite electrolytes has started to attract more and more attention in recent years.When designing a polymer/ceramic composite electrolyte, the ionic conductivity and chemical/electrochemical stability of each component are to be primarily considered. However, a dilemma always exists regardless of ceramic or polymeric electrolytes. Some solid electrolytes are highly conductive but are not compatible with Limetal anode. One example is the technically well developed NASICON-type ceramic solid electrolyte, lithium aluminum titanium phosphate (Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3, LATP).As for the polymer solid electrolytes, a single polymeric matrix is usually not able to fulfil all the demanding properties. For example, a poly(acrylonitrile) (PAN) solid electrolyte can provide a Li+-ion conductivity of 10-4 S cm-1 at room temperature.39 However, the PAN solid polymer undergoes serious passivation when it contacts Li metal.A poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) solid electrolyte is stable with Li-metal anode, but its room-temperature conductivity is low.Furthermore, the oxidation potential of PEO-based polymer electrolytes is relatively low, which makes them not able to sustain high-voltage cathode materials.A promising approach to broaden the electrochemical window of polymeric electrolytes is to design a multilayered solid polymer with Janus features.
We herein present a multi-layer approach to design a laminated dual-polymer/polymer-ceramic composite electrolyte (LDPPCCE) for high-voltage all-solid-state lithium batteries with an oxidation-resistant PAN/LATP composite layer against the cathode and an anode-friendly succinonitrile (SN) incorporated PEO layer facing the Li-metal anode. A Bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)amine lithium salt (LiTFSI) is also added to each layer. The resulting LDPPCCE shows both high ionic conductivity and wide electrochemical stability window. All-solid-state Li cells are demonstrated with a high-capacity, high-voltage LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 (NCM 811) cathode.
The PAN-LATP-LiTFSI composite electrolyte was prepared with a slurry casting method, as detailed in the Supporting Information. The LATP powder shows the iconic NASICON structure as reflected by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern in Figure 1a and b. It took about 48 h of continuous ball milling to obtain a fine LATP powder as indicated by the scanning electron microscope (SEM) images provided in Figure 1c and Figure S1. After a 48-hour ball milling, the particle size of LATP powder is ca. 50 nm to ca. 200 nm (Figure 1c). Further ball milling did not provide significant reduction in the particle size (Figure S1b).
Figure 1d and e show the XRD patterns of a PAN membrane and a PAN-LATP-LiTFSI composite membrane. The peak located at 17° in Figure 1d is the characteristic peak of PAN.The XRD pattern of the PAN-LATP-LiTFSI composite membrane exhibits characteristic peaks of both the PAN polymer and the LATP ceramic (Figure 1e), revealing a good chemical compatibility between the two components (no reaction occurred between PAN and LATP). Figure 1f shows an SEM image of the PANLATP-LiTFSI composite membrane in which it can be observed that the LATP particles are finely disseminated into the PAN matrix.
The PEO-SN-LiTFSI dual-polymer membrane was prepared with a typical casting method, as detailed in the Supporting Information. Figure 1g, h, and i present the XRD patterns of PEO matrix, SN material, and the synthesized PEO-SN-LiTFSI dualpolymer membrane. The PEO membrane exhibits two characteristic peaks located at 19.5° and 23.5° (Figure 1g).The raw SN material shows its characteristic peak at 20.5° and 28.5° (Figure 1h).However, the PEO-SN-LiTFSI dual-polymer membrane exhibits an amorphous feature (Figure 1i), indicating that the incorporation of SN efficaciously decreased the crystallinity of the PEO matrix and greatly increase the amorphous content in the PEO host polymer.The PEO-SN-LiTFSI dual-polymer membrane shows a smooth feature under microscope (Figure 1j).
As mentioned before, the laminated dual-polymer/polymerceramic composite electrolyte (LDPPCCE) was designed with the PEO-SN-LiTFSI dual-polymer layer facing the Li-metal anode and with the PAN-LATP-LiTFSI composite layer facing the cathode, as schematized in Figure 1k. All-solid-state Li cells were fabricated with thin LDPPCCE electrolyte; the cell assembly will be described in the Supporting Information. To facilitate the characterization, thick membranes were prepared. Both the PEO-SNLiTFSI dual-polymer layer and the PAN-LATP-LiTFSI layer are elastic. The PEO-SN-LiTFSI dual-polymer is adhesive and can be easily adhered to the PAN-LATP-LiTFSI composite layer. Figure 1l shows the cross-section SEM image of the LDPPCCE membrane and PEO-SN-LiTFSI/PAN-LATP-LiTFSI in which a compact interface of the two layers can be observed.
The ionic conductivity of the PEO-SN-LiTFSI/PAN-LATPLiTFSI LDPPCCE membrane, as well as its each individual layer, was systematically studied with electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) at 25 oC. For the convenience of handling, individual layers of the membrane were fabricated with a thickness of 200 µm. The relevant experiments were performed with a Swagelok symmetric cell by employing two stainless-steel (SS) electrodes as detailed in the Supporting Information and as schematized in Figure S2a and b. The ionic conductivity of electrolyte membranes is calculated according to Eq. (1), where σ represents the ionic conductivity of the membrane, L is the thickness of the membrane, A presents the area of the membrane, and R is the resistance acquired through simulating the EIS data with an equivalent circuit as shown in Figure S2c.
For the PEO-SN-LiTFSI dual-polymer, the ratio of EO to Li+ (–CH2–CH2O- group : Li+-ion) was maintained at 4 : 1. This ratio was assessed based on a phase-diagram and a conductivity investigation of a PEOR-LiCF3SO3 polymer electrolyte.Figure 2a shows the Nyquist plots of a series of PEO-SN-LiTFSI dualpolymer membranes, which were prepared with various contents of SN. The ionic conductivity of PEO-SN-LiTFSI dual-polymers derived from the EIS data in Figure 2a is summarized in Table 1. A Nyquist plot of a PEO-LiTFSI polymer without the SN incorporation is shown in Figure S3. Without the addition of SN, the conductivity of a PEO-LiTFSI polymer is ~10-6 S cm-1 at room temperature. With the SN additive, the ionic conductivity is enhanced to 1.19 × 10-4S cm-1 when the ratio of PEO to SN is 1.5:1. The ionic conductivity can be further improved by increasing the content of SN (e.g., PEO : SN = 1.25 : 1), but the mechanical property of the membrane becomes poor. Therefore, considering both the ionic conductivity and the mechanical property, the PEOSN-LiTFSI dual-polymer was prepared with a PEO to SN ratio of 1.5 : 1 for the later studies.
Figure S4 presents EIS Nyquist plots of a PAN-LiTFSI polymer electrolyte and an LATP ceramic electrolyte. The molar ratio of –C≡N- to Li+-ion (CN : Li+) in the PAN-LiTFSI membrane was maintained at 2 : 1, according to a previous research on PAN-based polymer electrolytes.Without the addition of LATP powder, the PAN-LiTFSI polymer can provide an ionic conductivity of 5.26 × 10-5 S cm-1. In contrast, the LATP delivers a high conductivity of 1.9 × 10-4 S cm-1. Figure 2b shows the Nyquist plots of a series of PAN-LATP-LiTFSI composite membranes with various contents of LATP. As observed in Figure 2b, the conductivity of the PAN-LATP-LiTFSI composite membranes increases with the addition of LATP powder and reaches a maximum value with 30% of LATP powder. After that, the conductivity ceases to increase, as summarized in Table 2. Of note here is that the ionic conductivity of PAN-based polymer electrolyte is sometimes highly impacted by the residue DMF solvent in the membrane.Due to its relatively high boiling point (153 oC), DMF is usually difficult to be completely removed from the PANbased solid electrolytes.54 The amount of residual DMF in the PAN-LATP-LiTFSI membrane in this study was estimated to be 6 – 8 wt.% based on a weight-loss experiment around 150 oC as described in the Supporting Information.
Comparison of the data in Tables 1 and 2, it is observed that the PEO-SN-LiTFSI dual-polymer and the PAN-LATP-LiTFSI composite can deliver a matched ionic conductivity if they are prepared with a proper content of additive in their host polymer matrices. Therefore, if integrating a layer of PEO-SN-LiTFSI dual-polymer with a layer of PAN-LATP-LiTFSI composite, the resulting laminated electrolyte is expected to provide a similar ionic conductivity to each of a single layer. Figure 2c shows the EIS Nyquist plot of a laminated PEO-SN-LiTFSI | PAN-LATPLiTFSI electrolyte membrane (with a ratio of PEO : SN = 1.5 : 1 in the PEO-SN-LiTFSI and 30 wt.% of LATP in the PAN-LATPLiTFSI). As expected, the LDPPCCE membrane provides a conductivity of 1.31 × 10-4 S cm-1. An Arrhenius plot of the PEO-SNLiTFSI | PAN-LATP-LiTFSI LDPPCCE membrane is provided in Figure 2d. It is estimated that the activation energy (Ea) of the LDPPCCE membrane is ca. 0.32 eV according to Eq. 2 (Arrhenius equation) below. In the equation, σ is the ionic conductivity, A is the pre-exponential factor, and T represents the temperature (in Kelvin). Herein, we would like to make an additional note that the Arrhenius equation is generally more applicable to calculate the activation energy of ceramic solid electrolytes, while the Vogel−Tammann−Fulcher (VTF) equation is more suitable for polymeric electrolytes.55 In this study, the solid electrolyte is a polymer-ceramic composite and the Arrhenius equation is still applicable in a way.56 We will conduct a more detailed modeling study in the future to compare the use of Arrhenius equation and VTF equation for the composite electrolyte, especially the layered composite electrolyte.
Figure S5 in the Supporting Information presents the current response curve (Figure S5a) of a DC polarization experiment and the EIS experimental results (Figure S5b, before and after the polarization) of a symmetric Li ǁ PEO-SN-LiTFSI/PAN-LATPLiTFSI ǁ Li cell. Based on the results in Figure S5 and according to equation 3, Li+-ion transference number (tLi+) of the PEO-SNLiTFSI | PAN-LATP-LiTFSI LDPPCCE membrane is estimated to be 0.33. In eq. 3, ΔV is the voltage applied to the symmetric Li ǁ PEO-SN-LiTFSI/PAN-LATP-LiTFSI ǁ Li cell. The initial current is defined as I0, while Is is the steady-state current after the cell is polarized. Similarly, R0 is the initial impedance of the cell before polarization and Rs is the steady-state impedance of the cell after the polarization.
Apart from the ionic conductivity, the electrochemical stability window of a solid electrolyte is a compulsory property that needs to be considered for the development of high-voltage lithium batteries. It has been widely recognized that PEO-based solid polymers are not able to sustain a high oxidation potential (the oxidation process normally commences at 4.25 V, vs. Li+/Li).56 PAN-based polymer electrolytes exhibits poor stability with Li metal.Therefore, either the PAN-based or the PEO-based polymers are not able to individually enable a lithium battery with a Li-metal anode and a high-voltage cathode. Electrochemical stability window of the PEO-SN-LiTFSI | PAN-LATP-LiTFSI LDPPCCE membrane was investigated with a linear voltage sweep (LSV) experiment as detailed in the Supporting Information and with an asymmetric cell as schematized in Figure S6. Figure 3a shows the LVS profile of the PEO-SN-LiTFSI | PANLATP-LiTFSI LDPPCCE membrane. It can be observed that a broad electrochemical stability window, 0 – ca. 5.0 V, is achieved with the rationally designed LDPPCCE approach.
Voltage and current profiles of a galvanostatic experiment for a symmetric Li ǁ PEO-SN-LiTFSI | PAN-LATP-LiTFSI ǁ Li cell (as schematized in Figure S7) are presented in Figure 3b (Figure 3c is a zoom-in section of Figure 3b). The operating current density is 1.0 mA cm-2 and the area of the lithium- metal electrode is 1.13 cm-2. The cell is alternatively charged for one hour and discharged for one-hour in each cycle. Therefore, the areal capacity of lithium stripping-plating in each cycle is 1.0 mAh cm-2. For a comparison, a symmetric cell with a regular liquid electrolyte and a Celgard separator (Li ǁ Liquid electrolyte/Celgard ǁ Li cell) was also tested under the same applied current density, as presented in Figure 3d (Figure 3e is a zoom-in section of Figure 3d). The liquid-electrolyte cell exhibits a relatively large voltage polarization which continuously increases as well. Furthermore, the voltage profile intensely fluctuates during cycling, implying the possibly occurrence of micro-short circuit during the strip/deposition of Li (Figure 3d). In contrast, the Li ǁ PEO-SN-LiTFSI | PAN-LATP-LiTFSI ǁ Li cell exhibits a smooth voltage profile with relatively less polarization. The voltage response is ca. +120 mV for up to 1,000 hours of continuous operation (Figure 3b), indicating a steady and decent ionic environment inside the LDPPCCE electrolyte membrane and highlighting a fabulous interfacial compatibility.
All-solid-state lithium cells were demonstrated and evaluated with a Li-metal anode, a high-voltage LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 cathode (NCM 811), and the PEO-SN-LiTFSI | PAN-LATP-LiTFSI LDPPCCE membrane. The loading of active NCM in the cathode was 3.0 - 4.0 mg cm-2. The cell is termed as Li ǁ PEO-SN-LiTFSI | PAN-LATP-LiTFSI ǁ NCM (811). The NCM (811) material was synthesized according to our previous method and as detailed in the Supporting Information.An SEM image and an XRD pattern of the synthesized NCM (811) powder are, respectively, provided in Figure S8 and Figure S9. The assembly procedures for the coin cells are described in the Supporting Information and as schematized in Figure S10. Specially, the PEO-SN-LiTFSI layer faces the Li anode while the PAN-LATP-LiTFSI layer faces the NCM (811) cathode. Figure S11a shows the EIS Nyquist plot of a Li ǁ PEO-SN-LiTFSI | PAN-LATP-LiTFSI ǁ NCM (811) cell. After fitting the data according to the equivalent circuit provided in Figure S11b, the bulk resistance (RL) and the charge-transfer resistance (Rct) are, respectively, ~ 45 Ω and ~ 120 Ω. The low impedance of the cell is attributed to the exceptional interfacial property offered by the elastic LDPPCCE electrolyte. The cycling performances of the cells were tested at ambient temperature. Figure 4a presents the rate capability of the Li ǁ PEO-SN-LiTFSI | PAN-LATP-LiTFSI ǁ NCM (811) cell. The C-rates and specific capacities were determined based on the weight of NCM (811) cathode. The Li ǁ PEO-SN-LiTFSI | PAN-LATP-LiTFSI ǁ NCM (811) cell shows charge-discharge profiles similar to the liquidelectrolyte Li ǁ NCM (811) cells.Distinct discharge plateaus can be clearly seen when the cell is cycled at relatively low rates (e.g., C/20 and C/10). However, the charge profiles do not show distinct plateaus, likely due to the relatively low ionic conductivity of the solid electrolyte (in contrast to liquid electrolytes) that makes the plateaus overlap each other.59 The average charge/discharge voltages, as well as the specific chargedischarge capacities, of the Li ǁ PEO-SN-LiTFSI | PAN-LATPLiTFSI ǁ NCM (811) cells at various C-rates are compiled in Table 3; the data are based on the charge-discharge profiles in Figure 4a.). The good rate capability and the high capacity of the active NMC cathode reveals the excellent electrochemical environment provided by the PEO-SN-LiTFSI | PAN-LATP-LiTFSI LDPPCCE electrolyte ̶ the high reduction-resistant property at the anode side and the high oxidation-resistant property at the cathode side as well as the stable interfacial property among the cathode-electrolyte-anode. It should be noted here that a portion of PAN-LATP-LiTFSI in the NCM cathode is necessary to provide an ionic environment in the cathode. Figure S12 shows the charge-discharge profiles of a Li ǁ PEO-SN-LiTFSI | PAN-LATPLiTFSI ǁ NCM (811) cell in which the NCM electrode was prepared with NCM, carbon matrix, and binder (as detailed in the Supporting Information) but without any ingredients of PAN-LATP-LiTFSI. In such a case, the cell shows relatively low specific capacity as well as large voltage polarization.
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) profiles of a Li ǁ PEO-SNLiTFSI | PAN-LATP-LiTFSI ǁ NCM (811) cell are displayed in Figure 4b. The current intensities of both the cathodic and the anodic peaks do not shrink with the continuous cycling. Also, it is observable that the peak potential of either the anodic wave or the cathodic wave does not shift with the prolonged cycling. All these CV features and characters imply the stable electrochemical performances of each cell component, both the electrodes and the LDPPCCE electrolyte as well as their interfaces. The long-term cycling performance of the Li ǁ PEO-SN-LiTFSI | PAN-LATP-LiTFSI ǁ NCM (811) cell is presented in Figure 4c in terms of the discharge capacity and Coulombic efficiency as a function of cycle number. The cell was cycled at a rate of C/5. Within the 300-testing cycle span, the cell exhibits stable cycling performance. The fade rate in the discharge capacity is ca. 0.03% per cycle. Upon 300 continuous cycles, the capacity retention is ca. 91% (from 175 to 159 mA h g-1). The cell upholds a stable Coulombic efficiency throughout the 300 cycles at a level of 98.8% - 100%. 
Although the Li ǁ PEO-SN-LiTFSI | PAN-LATP-LiTFSI ǁ NCM (811) cell showed remarkable electrochemical performances as presented in Figure 4, we would like to make a couple of notes about the laminated composite solid electrolyte. The stability of succinonitrile (SN) with lithium metal has been recognized as a concern when using SN-based electrolyte for the development of lithium batteries.In this study, the PEO-SN layer of the composite electrolyte was prepared with a relatively low content of SN (the ratio of PEO to SN was 1.5 : 1) and the cells were not operated at super high current densities. For example, the long-term cycling performance of the Li ǁ PEO-SN-LiTFSI | PAN-LATPLiTFSI ǁ NCM (811) cell was evaluated at a current density of ca. 0.18 mA cm-2 (since the cell was not prepared with a high-loading cathode). Therefore, the instability issue of SN with lithium metal was not that serious. However, if the content of SN is further increased in the PEO-SN layer or in the case that the cells are operated at high current densities, the instability of SN must be considered and examined. Meanwhile, the relevant strategies toward the improvement of the stability of SN are necessary to be explored, which will be our future efforts. Another note we would like to make is that there may be a possibility that the polymer material in one layer diffuses into the other layer of a laminated electrolyte during electrochemical cycling. Such a possible diffusion circumstance may have either a negative or a positive impact to the layered composite electrolyte. We are actually not sure if there is a PEO-diffusion or a PAN-diffusion problem in the laminated composite solid electrolyte in this study. However, it would be an interesting study in the future for the development of “layered” composite electrolytes, not only for the PEO-SN/PAN-LATP system in this study but also for any other laminated solid electrolytes having a “Januscomposition” feature.
In summary, a laminated dual-polymer/polymer-ceramic composite electrolyte (LDPPCCE) has been rationally designed for the advancement of high-voltage all-solid-state lithium batteries. A PEO-SN-LiTFSI dual-polymer layer with a reductionresistant feature ensures a stable interface at the Li-metal anode side. Meanwhile, an oxidation resistant PAN-LATP-LiTFSI polymer-ceramic composite facing the cathode enables the use of high-capacity and high-voltage cathodes. In the PEO-SN-LiTFSI dual-polymer layer, the room-temperature conductivity of the PEO is greatly improved by the incorporation of SN as a plasticizer. The integration of LATP ceramic into the PAN polymer not only improves the ionic conductivity of PAN but also suppresses the growth of Li dendrite. The use of an anode compatible PEOSN-LiTFSI dual-polymer also avoids the incompatible issue between the Li-metal and LATP or between the Li-metal and PAN. The resulting PEO-SN-LiTFSI | PAN-LATP-LiTFSI LDPPCCE membrane exhibits a high ionic conductivity at room-temperature and presents a broad electrochemical stability window of 0 – 5 V. Pairing with a high-voltage NCM (811) cathode, all-solid-state Li ǁ PEO-SN-LiTFSI | PAN-LATP-LiTFSI ǁ NCM (811) cells present remarkable high-capacity and stable cycling performances.