Na2ZnP2O7HCl single crystals were synthesised by hydrothermal technique and characterised by X-ray diffraction method. The compound crystallises in tetragonal system with space group P41212 and cell parameters a ¼ 7:687ð5Þ A˚ , c ¼ 20:529ð1Þ A˚ , Z ¼ 8, having tunnel type of cavities in the structure. DTA study indicates that this compound is thermally fairly stable.
There is a growing interest in the growth and characterisation of various phosphates with the beginning of their applications as laser materials [1,2]. However, the study of phosphates has become more popular particularly, after the development of NASICON groups of fast ionic conductors [3–5]. These materials are important three-dimensional solid electrolytes with high ionic conductivities, which are almost equal to that of Na b-alumina [6]. Manifold variations by suitable substitutions to these compounds have led to the development of many new solid electrolytes [7–11]. Subsequently, NASICON related compounds also have simple stoichiometry composition and relatively high ionic conductivities. These are popularly known as NASICON Analogues [12–16]. However, all these compounds, whether NASICON or its analogues, have only triorthophosphate end members and their structures are directly related to Na3Sc2P3O12 [3]. 
We have also reported ionic conductivity in the condensed phosphate radicals viz., pyrophosphates [17–21]. These condensed phosphates are much easier to obtain in the form of single crystals by hydrothermal technique. In this paper, we report a new pyrophosphate compound, whose structure seems to be ideal for ion transportation.
Na2ZnP2O7HCl crystals were synthesised by hydrothermal method. The growth of phosphates by hydrothermal technique is relatively new. In general, there are very few reports on the growth of phosphates by this method [22,23]. The use of hydrothermal method is quite complicated for these compounds, because of the highly corrosive and volatile nature of phosphorus at higher temperatures. In fact, the hydrothermal growth methodology for pure phosphates is yet to be understood precisely [22]. The present experiments were carried out in Morey type autoclaves provided with Teﬂon liners in the temperature and pressure ranges of 225–270 C and 60–100 bar, respectively [23]. The crystallisation was carried out by spontaneous nucleation and the rate of nucleation was controlled through programmed rate of heating. The starting material zinc chloride was taken in a Teﬂon liner and 85% H3PO4 was poured into it. 
The alkaline component of the starting material was taken in the form of molar solution having a deﬁnite molarity which acts as a mineralizer. The crystals of Na2ZnP2O7HCl are obtained through the following conditions.
The crystals obtained were of good quality with sizes ranging from 0.2 to 2 mm. Twinning is almost absent. They have well developed morphology with sub-vitreous lustre.
DTA study was carried out for Na2ZnP2O7HCl using DTA/ETA instrument (Model 021, NAL, India). The spectrum shows phase transitions at 361 and 593 C (Fig. 1) indicating that this compound has moderate thermal stability compared to other sodium transitional pyrophosphates [29].
The ﬁnal positional coordinates of all the atoms, thermal parameters, bond distances and bond angles are given in Tables 2–4. The bond distances and bond angles are in good agreement with the standard values. Fig. 3 represents the ORTEP [27,28] of the molecules with thermal ellipsoids at 50% probability. The structure does not have hydrogen bonds. The packing of the molecules along c-axis (Fig. 4) shows cavities with Na and HCl inside it. Similar tunnel cavities are observed along the other axes also (see Figs. 5 and 6). These type of tunnel cavities are congenial for hopping of ions through them [20,21]. Preliminary impedance spectroscopy results are encouraging. 