The non-faradaic electrochemical modiﬁcation of catalytic activity (NEMCA) was investigated in selective catalytic reduction (SCR) + conducting solid electrolyte. This study was carried out under lean-burn of NO by propene on Pt ﬁlms deposited on NASICON, a Na conditions. In such a system, electrochemical promotion is shown to strongly enhance both the catalytic activity and the selectivity to N2. Such an improvement can be obtained using low overpotentials, applying −100 mV to the Pt catalyst-electrode enhances the selectivity to N2 from 41 to 61%. The use of NASICON allows work to be done at quite low temperatures (about 300 C) compatible with the treatment of automotive exhausts.
Pollution from automotive trafﬁc is an increasing problem, especially in urban areas. Nitrogen oxides (NO and NO2) are among the main pollutants resulting from the internal combustion process. The catalytic posttreatment of emitted nitrogen oxides is efﬁcient only in the case of gasoline vehicles which are operated near the stoichiometric air/fuel ratio. Classical three-way catalytic converters (TWC) are simultaneously able to reduce NOx into nitrogen and to oxidize carbon monoxide and unburned hydrocarbons into CO2. Under oxygen-rich conditions, such as those encountered in exhaust of diesel or lean-burn engines, NOx reduction into nitrogen cannot be achieved by TWC since the reductants are primarily oxidized by O2 in excess. However, future legislation, such as EURO 4 standards in Europe, that will be active from 2005, makes necessary the posttreatment of exhaust gases for NOx abatement. 
The selective catalytic reduction (SCR) of NOx by hydrocarbons seems to be a good candidate, especially when supported platinum is used as the catalyst. This catalyst allows high and durable NOx conversion in real diesel exhaust, especially at low temperaC) corresponding to those of tures (between 200 and 350 such an engine working in an urban cycle [1–3]. Furthermore, supported platinum catalysts are resistant to poisoning by steam or SO2 present in the exhaust stream and exhibit a good thermal stability. However, the major drawback of platinum-based catalysts is that the majority of NO is reduced to N2O [1–3], a greenhouse effect gas, rather than being reduced to harmless N2. The present work was initiated to determine if electrochemical promotion could be a solution to SCR of nitrogen oxides in lean-burn engine exhausts. 
The non-faradaic electrochemical modiﬁcation of catalytic activity (NEMCA) or electrochemical promotion of catalysis (EPOC), discovered and developed by Vayenas et al. [4–6], is an innovative concept which can be used to in situ control of the catalytic performances. This process is based on the control, by an applied potential, of the work function due to electrochemical pumping of ions between a solid electrolyte and the surface of a porous catalyst. The NEMCA effect has been observed for a wide range of reactions in the presence of metals such as Pt, Pd, Ag, and Rh in contact with a solid electrolyte, which was generally either an O2− conductor like YSZ (Y2O3-stabilized ZrO2) [7–9] or + conductor like β -Al2O3 [10,11]. 
Various recent studa Na ions [12–16] have explored the utility of EP to promote the nitric oxide reduction by propene in the presence of oxygen. Most of them report the use of rhodium catalysts associated -Al2O3. These papers show that the catalytic to YSZ or β activity and also the selectivity of the Rh catalyst-electrode C can be highly promoted upon varybetween 350 and 430 ing its potential. However, in the presence of an excess of oxygen, the promotion efﬁciency drastically decreases.  5) 5) -Al2O3 [14], negative overpotentials, Moreover, by using β + to the surface of the Rh ﬁlm, result in i.e., pumping of Na a marked activity loss at 350 C. 
The authors proposed that this deactivation may be attributed to three additional effects, including strong alkali-metal inhibition of propene adsorption, excessive formation of Na2O, and essentially oxidation of Rh to Rh2O3. Using a Rh/YSZ system, Foti et al. [13] C under a refound that a simple heating from 300 to 400 active mixture containing 1000 ppm C3H6, 1000 ppm NO and 5000 ppm O2 results in a drop of the catalytic activity due to oxidation of the Rh surface. Their results show that a positive current (i = +5 µA) enhances the catalytic ◦ C. activity but not the selectivity toward nitrogen at 300 Williams et al. [16] have recently investigated a bimetallic Rh–Ag ﬁlm deposited on YSZ under lean-burn conditions, i.e., C3H6/NO/O2; 1000 ppm/1000 ppm/5%. Their results indicate that positive overpotentials promote the catalytic activity and the selectivity to nitrogen. At 386 C, the selectivity to N2 signiﬁcantly increases from 28 to 55% upon an applied overpotential of +100 mV. 
The authors explain that the presence of Ag improves resistance to oxidation of the rhodium surface. We [15] have used EP to promote the reduction of NO by propene in the presence of oxygen over Pt deposited on YSZ. We found that, when using a stoichiometric mixture, i.e., C3H6/NO/O2; 2000 ppm/2000 ppm/1%, a negative current signiﬁcantly increases the NO and C3H6 conversions but not the selectivity to N2. The promotional effect has been related to the propene oxidation and then occurs in a temperature domain ranging from the beginning of C3H6 oxidation to its total oxidation, i.e., between 310 and 370 C. Under lean-burn conditions, we did not observe any electrochemical promotion.
Furthermore, and at a relatively low temperature (295 we used low values of overpotentials in order to preserve the operation life of the electrolytic cell.
The Na3Zr2Si2PO12 solid electrolyte was prepared by the sol-gel method [18]. The precursors were tetraethoxysilane (Ventron, 99%) and zirconium (IV) butoxide (Aldrich, 80 wt% solution in 1-butanol) mixed in butanol (Aldrich, 99%), NaOH (Fluka, 98%), and NH4H2PO4 (Fluka, > 99%) mixed in water. Samples of high density were obtained by isostatic pressing and sintering at 1000 C for 8 h. A Pt catalyst porous ﬁlm was deposited from a paste (Engelhard-Clal 6926) in order to fully cover one side of the NASICON pellet (17 mm in diameter and 1.1 mm C, the Pt ﬁlm contained thick). After annealing at 820 3 mg Pt/cm2 for a thickness of 3 µm. Gold counter and reference electrodes were deposited onto the opposite side of the electrolyte disc.
The catalytic activity measurements of Pt ﬁlm deposited on NASICON were carried out within a speciﬁc quartz reactor, as described in a previous study [19]. The reaction gases were mixtures of C3H6 (Air Liquide, 7710± 230 ppm C3H6 in He), O2 (Air Liquide, 99.99% purity), NO (Air Liquide, 7970 ± 160 ppm NO in He), and helium (Air Liquide, 99.999% purity) which was used as the vector gas. The gas composition was controlled by mass ﬂow controllers (Brooks, with accuracy better than 1%). In the following, the gas composition will be expressed in parts per million or percentages. The reactive mixture contains 2000 ppm of NO, 2000 ppm of propene, and 5% of oxygen. The overall gas ﬂow rate was kept constant at −1). Gas analysis was performed by two 10 L h chromatographs, one (Intersmat, IGC 120 MB) equipped with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD) and the other (Intersmat, IGC 120 FL) with a ﬂame ionization detector (FID). 
The nitrogen oxides (NO and NO2) were analyzed by an on-line chemiluminescence NOx analyzer (Cosma, TOPAZE 3000). Prior to the catalytic activity measurements, the sample was pretreated in H2 at 300 C for 1 h in order to reduce platinum and to obtain a reference state.
The C3H6 conversion was calculated as C3H6 conversion= 100PCO2 /(PCO2 (5) where PCO2 and PC3H6 are the partial pressure of CO2 and C3H6 in the outlet gas, respectively. The NO conversion is deﬁned as the percentage conversion of NO to N2 and N2O on a N-atom basis. We also calculate the production of N2, N2O, and NO2, which is deﬁned as the percentage of NO converted to these products. The selectivity to N2 is deﬁned as Selectivity to N2 = 100PN2/(PN2 (6) where PN2 and PN2O are the partial pressure of N2 and N2O in the outlet gas, respectively. The three electrodes, W (catalyst electrode or working electrode), R (reference), and CE (counterelectrode) were connected to a potentiostatgalvanostat Voltalab 80 (Radiometer Analytical). The catalyst potential VWR was measured between the working electrode (Pt) and an Au electrode which may be considered as a pseudoreference (R) since its potential does not vary signiﬁcantly with the composition of the gaseous mixture, as checked by blank experiments. 
The catalytic behaviors of the platinum ﬁlm deposited on NASICON are plotted in Fig. 1. The propene oxidation (1) is strongly temperature dependent increasing from 10 to C. The overall NO conversion 80% between 286 and 330 versus temperature passes through a maximum of 18% C. The production of N2 (2) reaches 6.4% at at 319 C. The 302 operating temperature window, deﬁned as the full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the NO conversion, of the C, in the range Pt/NASICON system can be estimated to 60 290–350 C. This domain corresponds to that of the strong increase of the hydrocarbon oxidation rate. The production of NO2 (4) starts when the N2O production begins to decrease and the propene conversion reaches its maximum. In the operating temperature window, the selectivity to N2 drops from 41 to 20–25% after the temperature of the maximal N2 production, i.e., 302 C, temperature of the maximum NO conversion, the selectivity to N2 is only 24%. 
This catalytic behavior is similar to that reported in the literature for platinum coated on YSZ [15] with a shift of 30 C down to lower temperatures for the activation of propene and a more extended operating temperature window. Let us note that, even at 400 C, the propene conversion is not total. This is certainly due to the speciﬁc geometry of the cell which implies that a small part of the reactive mixture is not in contact with platinum. In addition, compared to a powdered catalyst [1–3], the reactive mixture did not ﬂow through the catalyst bed but just licked the Pt ﬁlm.
Our results emphasize that the application of negative overpotentials through the Pt/NASICON interface leads to a signiﬁcant enhancement of the selectivity toward nitrogen. Furthermore, the rates of NO reduction and hydrocarbon oxidation considerably increase. These results have been obtained under a gaseous mixture, which simulates the exhaust of a lean-burn engine and at a relatively low temperature. Furthermore, the necessary low values of the applied potentials preserve the operation life of the electrolytic cell. Such results, leading to high selectivity to N2 in O2-rich conditions, were never reported in the literature by -Al2O3 using a Na system, Williams et al. [14] observe similar promotional effects on the catalyst activity and selectivity upon negative polarizations, but, when increasing the oxygen amount (C3H6/NO/O2, 1/1/2%), the promotion efﬁciency drastically decreases. According to the authors, this is mainly due to the oxidation of Rh into Rh2O3 which is not catalytically active. 
From this speciﬁc point of view, the advantage of Pt is that the formation of such a bulky noncatalytically active oxide can be ruled out [20]. Williams et al. [16] have recently investigated a Ag-doped Rh ﬁlm in order to improve resistance to oxidation of the rhodium. Deposited on YSZ, under lean-burn conditions, an applied overpotential of +100 mV can enhance the selectivity to N2 from 28 to 55% C. When using platinum deposited on YSZ [15], we at 386 did not observe any electrochemical promotion under leanburn conditions. However, Pt is active at lower temperatures than Rh for the SCR of NO by propene [21]. Deposited on an alumina powdered support, Pt is active between 250 and C, 300 the ionic conductivity of YSZ could be not sufﬁcient and the O2− spillover between YSZ and Pt too slow. In the present study, the ionic conductivity of NASICON is larger than that of YSZ. Moreover, we observe a promotional effect on the NO conversion even when the C3H6 conversion is maximal and does not vary upon polarization. On the contrary, with the Pt/YSZ system, the electrochemical promotion has been related to the propene activation. One can think that the nature of ionic species has a great importance.
In order to explain the electrochemically induced modiﬁcations in activity and selectivity of Pt, it is necessary to consider the competitive adsorption between the three reactants. In C3H6/NO/O2 reactive mixture, several studies [22–25] have suggested that, as long as C3H6 is not completely oxidized, the Pt surface is predominantly covered by propene or propene-derived carbonaceous species while the oxygen coverage remains low. Concerning the NO reduction, the initiating step is the NO adsorption and dissociation on Pt sites, followed by the combination of adsorbed NO and N to form either N2 or N2O. Burch and Watling [23] showed that the presence of O2 is necessary to create propene-free sites on Pt where NO can be adsorbed.
We may rationalize the promotional phenomena observed with a Pt/NASICON system on the basis of the electrode work function modiﬁcation upon applied overpotentials. Studies of Vayenas et al. [5,6] have established that a change in the electrode overpotential VWR results in a modiﬁcation of the work function eΦ of the gas-exposed surface of the porous catalyst-electrode ﬁlm: (eΦ) = eVWR. (7) The theoretical validity of the Eq. (7) has been discussed in the literature and conﬁrmed by experimental results [26–30]. This relationship suffers from some deviations and seems restricted to the cases where outer potential (Ψ ) variations can be neglected. This is generally agreed to be achieved when moderate overpotentials are applied, low lateral interactions exist between surface ions, and surface diffusion of ionic species is fast. 
The variation of the Pt work function (WF) alters the strength of the chemical bonds between the metal and the adsorbates and then modiﬁes the competitive adsorptions between the reactants.
A decrease of the Pt WF induced by a negative polarization increases the electronic density of Pt and there is a ions from the electrolyte onto concomitant spillover of Na the Pt surface. The WF decrease weakens the Pt chemical bonds with electron-donor adsorbates, such as C3H6, and strengthens those with electron-acceptor ones, such as O2 and NO [31]. This leads to an increase of oxygen and nitric oxide coverages. Taking into account that the Pt surface is poisoned by propene, the effect of the polarization is to promote C3H6 oxidation and NO reduction, as observed experimentally. The presence of Na on Pt acts the same way since it is known to enhance the NO and O adsorption on Pt [32,33]. Furthermore, it promotes the NO dissociation [11,34] which is necessary to increase the selectivity to N2. Our experiments have shown that the selectivity to N2 increases from a negative potential of −100 mV.
The Pt WF may be increased by applying anodic overpotentials which induce a positive charge on the metal. This ions positive charge is compensated by electropumping Na away from Pt. The decrease of the Pt electronic density weakens the Pt–O and Pt–NO bonds and strengthens the Pt–C3H6 one. Then, the oxygen coverage on Pt, which was initially low, becomes negligible. The Pt surface is nearly fully occupied by propene-derived species and NO. This surface state is similar to that in the absence of gaseous O2. This leads to the signiﬁcant decrease of C3H6 and NO conversions that we observed in this study. If one consider that adsorbed NO, NO(a), is in equilibrium with adsorbed O(a) and N(a) (8) resulting from the NO dissociation, then the low oxygen coverage induced by positive polarizations, enhances NO dissociation and consequently the selectivity to N2, NO(a)  1) N(a) + O(a).
Some interesting results have been reported in the literature by adding alkalis to conventional highly dispersed platinum on γ -Al2O3. Most of these studies have been carried out with low concentrations of oxygen, near to the stoichiometric point [35], or in absence of oxygen [25,33]. Konsolakis et al. [35] have shown that the catalytic activity and selectivity of alumina-supported catalysts for the reduction of NO by propene were strongly promoted by alkali metals. At the stoichiometric point, the addition of Na signiﬁcantly increases the selectivity to N2. Under lean-burn conditions, Tanaka et al. [36] have shown that the addition of small amounts of Na (0.1 wt%) did not change the catalytic properties of Pt-supported SiO2 catalysts. Under lean-burn conditions, Burch and Watling [37] have shown that the addition of K (2.42 wt%), Cs (7.25 wt%), and Ba (7.93 wt%) to Pt/Al2O3 catalysts (1 wt% of Pt) did not improve the catalytic performance as the selectivity to N2, and even decreased the NOx conversion. 
These studies seem to indicate that the dissociation of NO is not enhanced under leanburn conditions to the same extent as reported by Konsolakis et al. [35] at the stoichiometric point. Electrochemical promotion (EP) provides an in situ control of the promoter concentration at the surface of the working electrode–metal catalyst by varying the applied potential. One may control reversibly the metal coverage by alkali ions. Furthermore, the total amount of sodium, which is pumped out from the electrolyte structure, interacts with the catalyst. An electrochemical double layer between Naδ+ is established over the whole gas-exposed catalyst surface. The + ions supplied to the Pt catalyst is controlled amount of Na by the Faraday law. On the contrary, in the case of highly dispersed metal catalysts on an oxide support such as alumina or silica, a large part of chemically added sodium is in contact with the support only and not to the catalytically active ions can move easily in the 3 dimenphase. 
In addition, Na sions in the structure of NASICON. Moreover, the chemical addition of alkalis to a well-dispersed Pt-supported catalyst can decrease the Pt dispersion by decreasing the number of exchange sites during the procedure of Pt impregnation. This decrease of the Pt dispersion could explain the decrease of the NOx conversion observed in the Ref. [37]. In our study, the amount of electrochemically provided Na is low since we applied low values of potentials and currents. Based on the Faraday law, one can estimate the molar ratio of Pt to Na of 100:1 despite 1:10 in the Ref. [37].
This study clearly demonstrates that electrochemical promotion can strongly enhance the catalytic activity and the selectivity to N2 of Pt interfaced with NASICON for the NO reduction by propene under lean-burn conditions. Negative overpotentials, below −100 mV, which lead to a Na supply to Pt surface, enhance the selectivity to N2 from ◦ C, 41 to 61%. These results have been obtained below 300 a relatively low temperature compatible with the treatment of automotive exhausts. Furthermore, the necessarily low values of the applied potentials preserve the operation life of the electrolytic cell and are compatible with an use in personal vehicles. Finally, coupling catalysis to electrochemistry by using the Pt/NASICON system could be an efﬁcient solution for the selective catalytic reduction of nitrogen oxides in lean-burn engine exhausts, even if additional research is necessary.