In the goal to obtain high rejection rate of anions in electrolyte solutions and to filter concentrated solutions, the sol/ gel route was used to prepare ceramic membranes using the Nasicon (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) material, which presents a high charge density. Confronted to the difficulties to synthesise a Nasicon membrane by slipcasting, we have used mixed Nasicon/ZnAl2O4 sols of different compositions to prepare the membranes. The first filtration test results are in agreement with the measurements of the electrophoretic mobility of the material powders.
The preparation of various ultra or nanofiltration ceramic membranes by sol gel route is widely described in the literature [1,2]. The selectivity of these membranes towards the filtration of electrolytes is controlled mainly by the steric and electric interactions between the filtered species and the membrane surface. For the electrolyte solutes filtration, the membrane performances in term of rejection depend on the filtered salts. We have focused here our attention to prepare ceramic membranes, which are able to present high ionic species rejection. 
The powder of the Nasicon/ZnAl2O4 mixtures was prepared by a sol/gel method at room temperature according to the method described by Shimizu et al. [6], we have just used the citric acid instead of the tartaric acid to improve the sol stability. The aqueous solution of ZrO(NO3)2; NH4H2PO4; Na2SiO3 ×/ 9H2O and the citric acid in a ratio of 2/1/2/6 with a Na excess was prepared [7]. We obtained a Nasicon stable sol at 0.045 M. The ZnAl2O4 stable sol was then prepared according to the method described by Elmarraki et al. [8,9]. A suspension of Al2O3 ×/ H2O powder (Condea Pural SB) in deionised water is peptised by a nitric acid solution (the molar ratio [HNO3]/ [Al2O3] is 4.8). A zinc nitrate solution prepared from Zn(NO3)2 ×/ 6H2O and concentrated HNO3 was then added to the peptised alumina to obtain a 0.0455 mol l1 stable sol.
The mixed sols of Nasicon/ZnAl2O4 were prepared by addition of the two sols in the correct ratio to obtain the exact composition, the final sol is then dried at 100 8C and fired at different temperatures. The material powders were characterised by the classical methods: (X-Ray diffracto. . .zetametry). The electrophoretic metry, BET, mobility of the particles in suspension was measured by means of a Coulter Delsa 440 device, the current was fixed at 0.1 mA and the frequency at 250 Hz.
The different membranes (50/50 and 75/25) were prepared from the previous sols after adding of a hexamethyl cellulose (HEC) solution at 2% to the final sol. After stirring, the sol is then deposited on the inner surface of a support tube in alumina by slipcasting for 2 h. The support tubes used were in g alumina, they were treated at 1200 8C for 1 h to open the porosity up to 200 nm, during the the g temperature treatment of alumina is changed to a alumina. 
The layer has been fired at 650 8C for 2 h to obtain the membrane.
In the Nasicon/ZnAl2O4 powders, the characteristic XRD peak of Nasicon structure (Fig. 1) have been observed only for Nasicon percent higher than 60%, nevertheless an impurity phase of monoclinic and tetragonal zirconia was observed, the ZrO2 impurity phase is also present in pure Nasicon material.
The powders of pure Nasicon and two mixtures Nasicon/ZnAl2O4 (Table 1) were analysed to obtain the specific area. The BET specific area of the different Nasicon/ZrAl2O4 powder decrease hardly as the firing temperature increases. Table 1 shows that the pore diameter is centred on 4 nm for the 50/50 powders obtained from the mixtures fired at 650 8C. The average specific area of the material is around 6 m2 g1 at this temperature,
The two membranes prepared were characterised after firing at 650 8C. The SEM crosssection view of the membrane 75/25 shows the thickness of the membrane is about 200 nm (Fig. 2). The pore size of the membrane 50/50 and 75/25 measured by mercury porosimetry is, respectively, centred on 4 and 7 nm. For example, the pore size repartition are given for the membrane 75/25 on Fig. 3.
The dynamic characterisations of the membranes confirm these data. The measured fluxes through the membranes depend on the Nasicon membrane composition and the water permeability increases from 11 l h1 m2 bar1 for the membrane 50/50 to 30 l h1 m2 bar1 for the membrane 75/25. This is a probe of the increase of the pore size of membranes, nevertheless these high fluxes may be also due to the low thickness of the filtering layer.
The cut-off of the membrane 50/50 measured from the rejection of uncharged molecules of polyethylene glycol is about 6000 Da whereas it is higher for the 75/25 membrane because the pore diameter of this membrane is more important.
We have characterised the membranes towards the filtration of four classical electrolyte solutions, NaCl; Na2SO4, CaCl2, CaSO4 at a concentration fixed at 103 M for different pH between 2 and 10. The measurements of the rejection rates were performed at a pressure of 5 bar after the stabilisation of the flux and of the rejection rate value for 1 h. The rejection rates observed using the Nasicon 75/25 membrane are plotted on Fig. 4a/d, they depend mainly on the salt nature and on the pH of the filtered solution. The rejection obtained are rather high for CaCl2 in acid medium and for Na2SO4 for basic medium. This behaviour is characteristic of the existence of strong interactions between the electric charge of the divalent ion and the surface charge of the membrane. The evolution of the electrophoretic mobility of a suspension of material powder in the considered
In the case of CaCl2, electrolyte are in agreement with the rejection rates observed. the highest rejection is obtained for low pH and then it decreases as the pH increases. On the contrary, the best rejection observed for Na2SO4 at high pH corresponds to the strong interactions developed between the negative membrane and the divalent SO4 2 anion. The case of the rejection of NaCl versus pH is also in good agreement with the electrophoretic mobilities of the powder, the rejection is close to 0 at the isoelectric point of the filtering layer where the material in not charged. The rejection of this salt is controlled by the exclusion of Na at low pH whereas the exclusion of Cl is responsible of the high rejection observed for the pH higher than the pH of the isoelectric point. The rejection rates of CaSO4 seem to follow also the evolution of the powder electrophoretic mobilities, they are more important in acid medium and reach 0 for the high pH values where the membrane seems uncharged.
The filtering properties of the membranes based on Nasicon/ZnAl2O4 mixtures are in agreement with the electrophoretic mobility measurement of the material powders. For the 75% Nasicon membrane tested, the rejection rate of electrolytes depends strongly on the pH of the filtered solution. The filtration of concentrate solutions need to prepare membrane with higher composition in Nasicon to improve the surface charge density of the membrane which is responsible of the ion rejections. Such membranes, which contain more than 80% in Nasicon will be tested soon.