A solid-state electrochemical sensor for measuring SOX in a gas mixture has been designed by incorporating Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (Nasicon) and (8 mol% Y2O3)-ZrO2 (YSZ) as a solid electrolyte couple. The solid electrolyte couple consisted of 2-mm-thick sintered disk of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 and a thin film of (8 mol% Y2O3) ZrO2 approximately 6 Am thick. YSZ thin film on Nasicon disk was prepared by multiple radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering technique. The sensor employs Na2SO4 as an auxiliary or sensing electrode that is in contact with Nasicon. The SO2 present in the gas mixture is converted to SO3 by passing over heated Pt-catalyst. The sensor has been successfully tested in the laboratory environment. At a fixed concentration of 1000 ppm SO2, the electromotive force (emf) of the sensor was found to vary nonlinearly as a function of temperature between 823 and 1123 K. 
However, at a fixed temperature of 973 and 1023 K, the measured emf of the sensor was found to vary linearly as a function of the logarithm of concentration of SOX in the gas mixture between 100 and 3000 ppm. In the current sensor design, both electrodes are exposed to the same test gas eliminating the need for isolating the electrode compartments. 
Hydrogen chloride (HCl), ammonia (NH3), methane (CH4) and non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOC) and subsequent precipitation of acidic species can have devastating effects on the quality of life, environment and health. Fuel combustion is the major contributor of pollutants including SOX, NOX and CO2. Continuous monitoring and control of atmospheric pollutants using chemical sensor will also be useful to the power plants, metallurgical industries, sulphuric acid plants, diesel engine road vehicles (DERV), and also to the Environmental Agencies for the development of novel Waste and Pollution Management strategies and policies for the improvement of the quality of environment and, health and life.
As a result of the importance of measuring and controlling SOX emission from automobiles, fuel combustion processes, smelting processes, chemical industries and acid plants, there has been a large amount of literature published on design and testing of ceramic sensors for the measurement of SOX since late 1970s. Most of the ceramic SOX sensors that are designed and tested are based on either solid electrolytes or simple and complex metal oxides. The sensors based on solid electrolytes have a relatively more complex design but can be reliable and selective to SOX gas; however, the sensors based on metal oxides have simple design but can suffer from interference with other gaseous species having similar chemical and physical properties. Therefore, much of the research work since 1970s has been directed towards the development of electrochemical SOX sensor [1 – 23], primarily based on the early research work by Gauthier et al. [1 – 3]. 
In almost all the designs of SOX sensor investigated so far with the exception of that investigated by Slater et al. [18], it has been necessary to isolate the reference electrode from the measuring or sensing electrode which essentially complicates the design aspects of an electrochemical sensor compared to the metal oxide sensor. However, electrochemical gas sensors with open electrode systems have been researched into by Maier et al. [24 – 26] for sensing CO2 gas. They used a biphasic mixture of Na2SnO3 + SnO2, Na2Ti6O13 + TiO2 and Na2Ti3O7 + Na2Ti6O13 as the in conjunction with Na-hWreference electrodes, Al2O3 as a Na+-ion conducting solid electrolyte, to fix the chemical potential of Na2O at constant temperature and CO2/O2 ratios. The same electrode systems have not been employed so far for designing an SOX sensor. 
In our opinion, the reason for not employing the above-mentioned biphasic sodium reference electrodes in SOX sensor is based on the relative chemical potential of Na2O in the reference and auxiliary electrode systems. 
Hence, in order to simplify the design of a solidstate electrochemical SOX sensor while retaining the advantages of an electrochemical sensor, we have investigated the planar type SOX sensor based on a thick/thin solid bi-electrolyte couple consisting of a thin film of (8 mol% Y2O3)-ZrO2 that is a well-known O2   ion conductor [29] on a thick and dense Na3Zr2 is a well-known Na+ ion Si2PO12 substrate that conductor [30]. The three main advantages of this design are that (1) the presence (8 mol% Y2O3)-ZrO2 prevents the chemical formation of Na2SO4 at the reference electrode surface of Nasicon solid electrolyte, (2) it is not necessary to isolate the reference electrode from the sensing electrode and (3) the planar sensor has a simple geometrical construction for mass fabrication.
Fine powder of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 solid electrolyte was prepared by direct solid-state reaction [30,31]. High-purity fine powders of anhydrous sodium carbonate (Na2CO3), zirconium dioxide (ZrO2), silicon dioxide (SiO2) and ammonium di-hydrogen phosphate (NH4H2PO4) obtained from Aldrich Chemical (UK) were used as starting materials without further purification. They were weighed according to the required molar ratio and ground in a zirconia ball mill under acetone. The slurry was dried between 330 and 350 K for 6 h which was further calcined at 483 K for 5 h to decompose NH4H2PO4, and then at 1173 K for 6 h to decompose Na2CO3 in ambient atmosphere. Two-stage calcinations were found to be essential to give enough time for the binary oxides to react and form single phase Na3Zr2Si2PO12. Formation of a single phase Nasicon was confirmed by Xray diffraction procedure using Cu-Ka as a radiation. After the final calcination step, the mixture was ball milled again to fine powders. 
The Nasicon powder was isostatically pressed into pellets of 10 mm in diameter and 2 – 3 mm thick at a pressure of 400 MPa and then sintered at 1503 K for 4 h in air inside a platinum crucible covered with a platinum lid to minimise the possibility of any change in composition of Nasicon pellet as a result of volatilisation of Na2O at elevated temperature during sintering. The temperature of the furnace was ramped at the rate of   1 while heating and cooling. The sintered 3 K min pellet of Nasicon was polished in stages down to 1Am surface finish in a water-free medium in order to prevent hydration of the surface of Nasicon pellet during polishing and washed with absolute alcohol. A thin film of (8 mol% Y2O3)-ZrO2 approximately 6 Am thick was deposited on one of the polished surface of Nasicon pellet by multiple radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering [32]. 
During the RF sputtering of YSZ powder, obtained from Tosho (Japan), on Nasicon pellet the working gas was 99% pure argon, gas pressure was 0.67 Pa, RF power was 300 W, substrate temperature was maintained at 298 K and the distance between the target and Nasicon substrate was 14 cm. Platinum electrodes were coated on the outer surface of the bielectrolyte couple by sputtering technique using high-purity Pt-target at ambient temperature. The assembly was subsequently cured at 1123 K for 60 min in order to improve adhesion of platinum electrode to the ceramic electrolyte surface. A thick film of Na2SO4 was deposited on the surface of Nasicon film by coating Na2SO4 paste made by dispersing fine powder of anhydrous Na2SO4 in organic solvent. The Na2SO4 coating was cured at 1023 K for 5 h in order to improve adhesion of the coating to Nasicon surface. A schematic diagram of the SOX sensor is shown in Fig. 1.
The solid-state electrochemical cell, representing the SOX sensor, used in this investigation is identical to the cell.
The emf of the sensor was measured using a 1012 V) multiKeithley 6517A high impedance ( channel digital electrometer. In the first instance, the emf of the sensor was measured over a temperature range between 823 and 1123 K at a fixed concentration of 1000 ppm SO2 in air. Further, the emf of the sensor was also measured at 973 and 1023 K as a function of concentration of SO2 between 100 and 3000 ppm. The gas mixture of SO2 and air with different SO2 concentrations was prepared by mixing air and 3000 ppm SO2 + air using computer-controlled mass-flow controllers. A total flow rate of measuring   1. The SO2 in the gas was maintained at 100 cm3 min inlet gas mixture is converted to SO3 by passing through a heated ceramic honeycomb Pt catalyst prior to admitting into the testing chamber housing the sensor. 
The sensor was found to respond rapidly and reproducibly to change in temperature and concentration of SO2 in the gas mixture at temperatures above 950 K whereas the response of the sensor was sluggish below 950 K. A schematic diagram of experimental set-up is presented in Fig. 2.
The variation of the measured emf of SOX sensor tested in SO2 + air gas mixture containing 1000 ppm SO2 is shown in Fig. 3 as a function of temperature between 823 and 1123 K. The time required for the emf of the sensor to reach 90% of the stable value at each temperature was found to be between 10 and 20 min. The response time was shorter at temperatures above 1000 K, which progressively became longer at lower temperatures of measurement. The variation of the measured emf of the sensor at 973 K and at 1023 K is shown as a function of the logarithm of the concentration of SO2 in the gas mixture in Figs. 4 and 5, respectively. In each case, the response time was less than 10 min; however, the time taken for the sensor emf to reach stable value was slightly longer when the concentration of SO2 in the gas mixture was changed from higher to lower compared to that from lower to higher as noticed earlier in the investigation of CO2 sensor [33] and NO2 sensor [34]. 
After reaching a steady-state value at a fixed temperature and SO2 concentration, the emf of the sensor was found to vary by less than F 1.5% of the steady-state value over a period in excess of 10 h.
Based on the present investigation, the following conclusions have been drawn: (1) A planar SOX gas sensor using 2-mm-thick Nasicon pellet coated with a 6-Am-thick YSZ thin film bi-electrolytes couple with Na2SO4 auxiliary electrode has been successfully tested in the laboratory environment. (2) The use of YSZ thin film prevents the formation of Na2SO4 at the reference electrode thereby avoiding short-circuiting of the electrochemical sensor during the prolonged exposure to SOX containing gas mixture at elevated temperature. The experimental results have shown that the variation of emf of the sensor as a function of a the partial pressure of SO2 is logarithm of Nernstian. (3) The present design shows that it is possible to design an SOX sensor without needing to isolate the two electrode compartments from each other. Since both electrodes are exposed to the same gas mixtures, the sensor response is independent of the oxygen partial pressure at the two electrodes. 
The present design provides a further scope of miniaturising the sensor. Areas such as long-term stability of sensor response, enhancing the response rate and reproducibility need to be further improved.