This paper presents a combined computational and experimental study of the structural and electrochemical properties of monoclinic LixM2(PO4)3 (with a focus on M ¼ V). The voltage curve for x ¼ 0–3 Li is measured experimentally and calculated. Features of the voltage curve are understood as emerging from site energetics, Li ordering, and redox couples. These features are found to be largely independent of alloying and a simple additive model is proposed to analyze the voltage curve for different cation substitutions. The model is shown to be very useful for understanding experimental results for a number of substituted compounds.
Phosphates form a class of potentially very interesting positive electrode materials for rechargeable Li batteries. Many phosphates form structures similar to the NASICON fast Na conductor [1]. In this structure, SiO4 groups link metal-oxygen octahedra in a three-dimensional network. NASICON-like phosphates generally have better electronic conductivity than silicates but also allow rapid conduction of alkali cations. In addition, the phosphates are extremely stable, even for changes in alkali-to-metal ratios larger than 1. This has offered the prospect of inexpensive, safe, and stable positive electrode materials.
There has been extensive work characterizing NASICONlike phosphates and demonstrating that they can be used as intercalation compounds [2–9]. It was recently shown that three Li could be extracted from Li3V2(PO4)3 [10,11]. The reversible cycling of all Li from Li3V2(PO4)3 would correspond to a theoretical capacity of 197 mAh/g. Considering the very good stability of these materials and the voltage range of operation, this performance suggests these compounds could make commercially useful positive electrode materials.
In this paper we use a combination of experimental and computational methods to characterize the structure and electrochemical properties of LixM2(PO4)3 phosphates (with a focus on M ¼ V) with the monoclinic structure. By combining experimental results with the results of ﬁrstprinciples computations we are able to show how the voltage curve features can be traced back to the crystallographic and electronic structure. This understanding leads to a heuristic model to predict the potential curve for a variety of metalsubstituted phosphates. A more detailed discussion of this work can be found in [12]. Many of the issues discussed in this paper have recently been investigated experimentally by Yin et al. [13]. Unfortunately, the work by Yin et al. was published after the ﬁnal version of this manuscript had been accepted, so they are not discussed further here.
The monoclinic lithium vanadium phosphate was prepared by mixing stoichiometric amounts of NH4H2PO4, V2O5 and Li2CO3 (Alfa-Aesar, Ward Hill, MA). The mixture was initially heated to 300 8C in air for 4 h to allow H2O and NH3 to evolve. The resulting product was then ground, pelletized and heated to 850 8C under a stream of pure hydrogen for 8 h in a sealed tube furnace. Once the furnace had cooled to room temperature, the pellet was crushed and prepared for electrode processing. Equivalent monoclinic compounds, based on mixtures of V/Ti, V/Cr, and V/Al couples were prepared in the same manner where the vanadium was partially replaced by an alternative metal oxide. Powder X-ray diffraction was used to conﬁrm that the material was a highly crystalline phase with no detectable impurities.
Li3V2(PO4)3 electrodes were prepared by mixing with a conductive carbon, Super P (Erachem, Belgium), and a binder, PVDF-HFP copolymer (Kynar 2801, Alfatochem). The electrode constituents were mixed into a slurry with acetone to achieve homogeneity. The resulting slurry was coated onto a glass plate using a doctor blade. After the acetone had evaporated, the resulting electrode composition was 80:10:10 of active material, carbon and binder respectively. The electrode was then dried and transferred into an argon-ﬁlled glove box for cell assembly. The electrode was cut into a 0.75 in. diameter disc and placed on top of an aluminum foil current collector. Glass ﬁber separator was placed between the Li3V2(PO4)3 positive electrode and lithium metal, pressed onto a copper current collector, as the anode. The electrolyte used consisted of a 1M solution of LiPF6 in a mixture 2:1 by weight of ethylene carbonate (EC) and dimethyl carbonate (DMC), (Grant-Ferro, Louisiana). 
Voltage traces were collected using the electrochemical voltage spectroscopy (EVS) technique [14,15]. The conditions chosen for the cell cycling were voltage limits between þ 3.0 and 4.2 V (versus Li/Li ), voltage step sizes of 10 mV and critical current density <100 mA/cm2. These conditions were chosen so as to maintain the system close to thermodynamic equilibrium throughout the discharge/charge cycle. As such, the voltage proﬁle should provide a close approximation to the open cell voltage (OCV)–composition relationship.
All calculations were performed in the local density approximation (LDA) to density functional theory as implemented in the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP) [16,17]. The nuclei and core electrons were represented with ultra-soft pseudo-potentials and all structures were fully relaxed with respect to internal and external cell parameters and atomic positions, unless explicitly stated. The wave functions were expanded in plane waves with kinetic energy below 405 eV and Brillouin zone integration of the band structure was performed at the gamma point. The calculations were ferromagnetically spin-polarized. This is an approximation, since most oxide systems are antiferromagnetic. However, the metal atoms in these materials are quite far apart, and our calculations and previous experiments [18] suggest that magnetic interactions are fairly weak in these systems.
In order to study the voltage curve for the monoclinic structure it is necessary to identify potential alkali cation sites. The monoclinic structure of AxM2(PO4)3 contains lantern unit motifs at angles to each other, which makes the locations of the A cations difﬁcult to describe. A schematic picture is shown in Fig. 1. Some of the most extensive monoclinic structural information comes from the study of Li3Fe2(PO4)3 by Bykov et al. [19] and we will make use of these results to establish potential Li locations. The Li3Fe2(PO4)3 structure undergoes two phase changes upon heating. The three phases are designated, in order of appearance with increasing temperature, by a, b, and g. They have symmetry groups P21/n (space group number 14) for a and b, and Pbcn (space group number 60) for g. There are three symmetry inequivalent sites occupied in each phase, which we will label with 1, 2, or 3. 
Viewed from the P21/n space group the gamma sites split into two groups, which we will label A and B. This gives a total of 12 potential sites, a1–3, b1–3, g1–3A, and g1–3B.
Fortunately, a careful examination of these sites shows that many have very similar environments and can be considered equivalent. It can be shown that there are really only four distinct Li sites: g1A, g2A, g3A, and a3. Some basic characteristics of the Li sites based on experimental data, including the site equivalences, are shown in Table 1.
The experimental open circuit voltage curve for LixV2(PO4)3 is shown in Fig. 2. We have calculated the T ¼ 0 voltage curve from ﬁrst-principles, using standard methods [20], and it is also shown in Fig. 2. The calculated voltages have been shifted by an overall constant (þ1.75 V) to match the experimental value at x ¼ 3 (the origin of this overall voltage error is not known). The experimental results have been scaled so that the total removed capacity corresponds to 3 Li.
The calculated curve reproduces the main features of the experimental charge curve. In particular, the steps at x ¼ 2:5, 2, and 1. There are a number of other small steps in the calculated curve which do not seem to appear in the experiments. These steps are fairly weak, and may be absent in the experiments because they are washed out by thermal effects at room temperature. The extra steps may also be due to errors in the calculation methods, most likely the local density approximation. The calculations can be used to determine the origin of the three main features of the experimental charge curve. In the following, all results refer to the LixV2(PO4)3 material unless otherwise stated.
The site energies for isolated Li, relative to the g1 site energy, are shown in Table 2. The results indicate that the g1 position is the most stable site for both V and Fe. These stable sites are tetrahedrally coordinated with oxygen (see Table 1), which we believe is key to their high stability. While there is no experimental information concerning site occupations at low lithium concentration for these materials, our results are consistent with the experimental ﬁnding that the tetrahedral g1 sites are fully occupied in the gamma phase of Li3Fe2(PO4)3 [19]. At x ¼ 1 our calculations suggest that the Li occupy the tetrahedral a1 sites (see Section 4). This is consistent with the occupation of a sites in the low-temperature Li3Fe2(PO4)3 alpha phase as well as the stability of tetrahedral sites seen in Table 2. With only a1 sites occupied the structure is monoclinic. 
Although there may be some Li ordering effect at this concentration, the most obvious cause of the step in voltage is that the redox couple for V changes from 3þ/4þ to 4þ/5þ. At x ¼ 2 our calculations suggest that all the tetrahedral g1 sites are ﬁlled. This creates a very stable structure that has orthorhombic symmetry. It is the stability of these fully occupied tetrahedral sites that creates the large step seen at x ¼ 2. At x ¼ 2:5 our calculations ﬁnd a signiﬁcant ordering tendency in the Li, giving rise to the step at this composition. The exact nature of the ordered phase was not determined but calculations suggest that it has ﬁlled g1 sites, with extra Li occupying the g2 and g3 sites. This would make the x ¼ 2:5 ordering more like the x ¼ 2 structure with added Li than the x ¼ 3 structure with missing Li. The calculated voltage step at x ¼ 2 is about 2.5 larger than the experimentally measured value. 
The previous analysis allows us to understand and approximately predict the OCV curve for all materials with the monoclinic NASICON-like structure, for any chemistry on the transition metal site. The shape of the OCV curve is determined by the sum of the energy for Li removal and the energy for oxidation of the transition metal(s). Li ordering and site selection will always impose features at x ¼ 2.5 (30 mAh/g) and x ¼ 2 (60 mAh/g). These are respectively due to ordering and to a switch between Li removal from non-tetrahedral sites to tetrahedral sites.
Neither Cr nor Al is active, so the remaining curves b–d are all produced solely by V activity. These voltage curves are therefore similar to pure V, except truncated in proportion to the amount of V remaining. In Fig. 3b and c there is a small plateau near 4 V at the end of charge. We believe that this corresponds to the removal of Li from tetrahedral sites with the V3þ redox couple. Perhaps some of the non-tetrahedral Li cannot be removed because it is in regions with low V content.
We have combined computational and experimental results to understand the voltage curve in monoclinic structures. We have focused on the LixV2(PO4)3 material but many of the results have been shown to apply to the monoclinic structure in general. The distinctive features in the charge curve were identiﬁed to be due to Li ordering (x ¼ 2:5), Li site energetics (and Li–Li interactions) (x ¼ 2), and redox couple (x ¼ 1).
The step due to the redox couple change will occur at different stages of the charge curve depending on the speciﬁc metal content.
These underlying mechanisms largely explain the shape and features of a number of doped V compounds. The Li energetics and electron energies operate almost independently and the OCV curve is shaped by the sum of the two effects. We also ﬁnd that the transition metals do not interact strongly when mixed in the NASICON-like materials and that the voltage of the redox couples in substituted compounds is similar to that in the pure materials. This is consistent with the large separation of the metal cations.
Although we have focused on V, the qualitative aspects of the features of the OCV curve should apply to other chemistries, as they arise from the geometry of the materials and the redox states of the metals. Identifying general characteristics in these materials is particularly important since many substitutions of both metal cations, intercalated cations, and anion units are possible. The features and their origins that we have identiﬁed can provide guidance for future investigations into this large class of promising materials.
