A commercial NASICON pellet was tested for Na-selective electrode in batch as well as in ﬂow conditions, using two different hydrodynamic regimes: steady state and ﬂow injection. The optimal hydrodynamic conditions to operate a homemade ﬂow-trough cell (of wall-jet type) were established by performing amperometric measurements at a graphite electrode with the ferro/ferricyanide redox couple. þ Among the investigated supporting electrolytes (BaCl2, CaCl2, TEBA, TEAC, TRIS and HEPES), used for batch electrode calibration to Na , together with a low limit of detection (9:2  0:5  10 5 M). A comparison between the þ TEAC showed the smallest interference versus Na þ main analytical parameters (sensitivity, limit of detection and selectivity versus Li ) observed for batch, steady state ﬂow (SSF) and ﬂow injection (FI) measurements showed that: (i) no signiﬁcant differences were observed between batch and SSF conditions; 
(ii) in FI mode the sensitivity was higher, the limit of detection was slightly increased and, in the presence of BaCl2, the selectivity for the proton interference was improved. 
Ion selective electrodes (ISE) are attractive tools for ion analysis because they are less expensive than the usual analytical instruments and moreover they are generally very easy in using. Such sensors can be introduced in batch measurements, in more or less voluminous samples, but also in ﬂow systems, for example in ﬂow injection analysis (FIA) set-up for micro-volumes of samples [1]. The logarithmic response law of such sensors is well adapted for very large ranges of concentration and the responses are sufﬁciently fast for the use in dynamic systems.
The response time of ISE is due in great part to the exchange properties at the interface between the membrane and the analysed solution, and also to the conduction properties. In this ﬁeld, the use of super ionic conductors as selective membranes was proposed in the 1980s [2], for example the use of NAtrium Super Ionic CONductor (NASICON) for sodium analysis. The chemical composition of such compound is Na1þxZr2SixP3 xO12 [3]. Other compositions were also tested for lithium analysis [4]. Such materials are ceramics and the optimisation of the composition allows to improve the selectivity properties by adjustment of the lattice parameters which have a direct inﬂuence on the size of the conduction sites and so on the selectivity [4]. Because  1 at room their conductivity is high (about 10 temperature), the membranes can be sufﬁciently thick to be incorporated without restriction in speciﬁc cells. 
Their hardness properties are also a great advantage for speciﬁc uses and they can be relatively easily machined for special shapes.
Bartroli et al. [5] have incorporated a NASICON based ISE in FIA system for microanalysis in a tubular set-up and several internal reference solid-state systems were tested. Subnernstian responses in the usual range of concentration were observed (about 44 mV by decade) and the value of the limit of detection (LD), or the lower limit of the linear response (LLLR), in the ﬂow injection system was higher than in batch measurements (about one order of magnitude). Such phenomena were obtained with a good reproducibility but were not very well explained.
Other experiments were realised using the same tubular cell but with a lithium solid-state ionic conductor as sensitive membrane [6]. The responses were nernstian, with a LD very close to that observed in steady state measurements.
Such results were attributed to the very fast responses of the lithium membrane. The potentiometric selectivity coefﬁcient versus sodium ion was improved and such phenomenon was explained by the slow response to sodium ion compared to the lithium one. It appears clearly that the characteristics of such ISE membrane are different in steady state responses than in transient measurements.
More recently, a ﬂow injection system based on a wall-jet cell was also used with a NASICON membrane [7]. The slope was slightly improved (about 50 mV by decade) but the LLLR and LD were approximately identical to those observed in batch measurements.
The NASICON ceramic corresponding to Na3Zr2Si2PO12 was used because of its highest conductivity and its optimal electrochemical characteristics for obtaining a Na -SE [8]. Such a compound can be synthesised by sol gel route in the laboratory [9], but for the present work we have chosen a membrane manufactured by an industrial way (Ceramatec -SE applications for everyone. Because the synthesis way is unknown, it was necessary to verify the composition by X-ray diffraction using a Cu Ka radiation diffractometer (Siemens 500 ). The obtained pattern was identical with that given in literature for this composition of NASICON. Moreover, the conductivity of the sample was measured by impedance spectroscopy and it was found equal to 7:6  10 4 S cm  1 at room temperature, with an activation energy of 0:36  0:01 eV (correlation factor ¼ 0.993 for 21 experimental points). These values are in good agreement with the literature data [8,9]. 
The sample was machined with diamond tools to obtain a disk pellet (3 mm in diameter and 1 mm in thickness), which was ﬁxed -SE is shown on in the Na Fig. 1. The surface of the disk was polished before each series of measurements.For batch measurements, the Na
An IBM compatible PC, equipped with two interface cards (PCI-6024E and PC-AO-2DC, National Instruments ), was used for data acquisition and to control the peristaltic pumps, the magnetic stirrer and the valves. A multi-function electrochemical interface (high impedance voltmeter, potentiostat/galvanostat) was designed and constructed for performing the electrochemical measurements.
In order to optimise the response of the ﬂow-through cell, a 0.01 M solution of potassium ferricyanide in 0.5 M KCl was used to characterise the hydrodynamic regime by performing amperometric measurements. The basic idea was that the amperometric response of the ﬂow-through cell will be controlled by the mass transfer if the redox system is a very fast one, as it is the case of the ferri/ ferocynaide redox couple on various electrode materials.
The method consisted to measure the limiting current (Ilim) when the potential of the working electrode (a spectral graphite disc electrode; 3 mm diameter) was ﬁxed at  0.2 V versus Ag/AgCl/1 M KCl reference electrode. For a ﬂowtrough electrochemical cell the Ilim value depends on the ﬂow conditions as well as on the experimental set-up characteristics, i.e. the ﬂow rate (Vf), the distance between the working electrode and the inlet-nozzle (d), the length and the diameter of the tubing, the size of the sample and dilution loops etc. [10–13]. Given that the investigated cell was one of a wall-jet type, Vf and d play a major role in establishing the hydrodynamic regime at the electrode surface. All the details of this study are given elsewhere [14], and here are presented only the main conclusions. Thus, for the investigated setup, if d was smaller than 0.5 mm, a turbulent ﬂow  
1. For regime was obtained for Vf higher than 1 ml min higher values of d, the ﬂow rate increase induced the change of the ﬂow regime from a typical wall-jet one to a turbulent one, passing through a laminar regime.
The same experimental strategy and the same modality to -SE analyse the experimental data were applied to the Na calibration in FI mode. For both investigated supporting electrolytes, and irrespective of the hydrodynamic regime (i.e. for any explored combination of d and Vf), the electrode sensitivity was higher than the nernstian value and the LDs were higher than their corresponding values found in SSF mode (results not shown). Additionally, irrespective of the pair of d and Vf values, the LDs found for TEAC (1:5  10 4 < LDTEAC < 5:7  10 4 M) were lower than those obtained for BaCl2 (4  10 4 < LDBaCl2 < 6:7 10 4 M). Contrarily, the sensitivity values calculated for TEAC (63 < STEAC < 78:5 mV per decade) were higher than those measured for BaCl2 (58 < SBaCl2 < 69 mV per decade). It is worth mentioning that all LDs were corrected for the dispersion factor corresponding to the particular experimental conditions.
In the case of FI measurements, an explanation for the electrode sensitivities higher than the nernstian one should include, additionally to the inﬂuence of the mass transport rate and the non-uniformity of the concentration proﬁle at the electrode surface, invoked for SSF mode, the effect of the contact time between the sample solution and the electrode. Similarly to SSF measurements, TEAC showed better results than BaCl2 concerning the LD, especially for lower ﬂow rates. Additionally, in the presence of TEAC as supporting electrolyte the electrode sensitivities were higher than those found for BaCl2 and they were more sensitive to the ﬂow rate increase, too.
As can be seen form Table 7, a signiﬁcant difference between the values of the selectivity coefﬁcients evaluated in FI mode and those found in SSF and batch measurements was observed for all three investigated cations, when the FAPI method was used with TEAC as supporting electrolyte. Such a difference was not observed if the FAII method was used. This discrepancy is due to an over-estimation of the selectivity coefﬁcients, induced by the well known phenomenon of fast potential overshoots accompanying the ISE response, when a step of the interfering ion concentration is produced in the presence of a constant activity of primary ion [20]. This behaviour was observed in the presence of TEAC as supporting electrolyte, because its adsorption ability on the electrode surface is certainly higher than for BaCl2. These results show clearly that the adsorption/ desorption model is more adapted to the NASICON membrane, in TEAC as supporting electrolyte, than the segmented model (see [20]).
It is interesting to note that using TEAC as supporting þ electrolyte, the LD value of the Na -SE decreased signiﬁcantly (about four times, irrespective of the ﬂow conditions) in comparison with its value for BaCl2. This behaviour should be related to the TEAC lower interference, already evidenced (Fig. 3).
NASICON membrane exhibits analytical properties well suited for Na analysis, when inserted in batch or ﬂow-through cells. It has similar electrical and analytical characteristics to the NASICON membrane prepared in laboratory, for example by sol–gel route.
For a laminar ﬂow regime, the sensitivity and the limit of detection corresponding to the investigated Na -SE were approximately the same in batch and in SSF measurements. The peculiar behaviour observed for the Na -SE in FI measurements (i.e. the over-nernstian sensitivities) was explained as the result of four parameter contribution: the mass transport rate, the concentration proﬁle at the electrode surface, the sample dispersion and the contact time between the sample and the electrode surface. The optimisation of the ﬂow parameters allowed improving the Na -SE sensitivity in FI measurements compared to the previous results [5,7]. The choice of the supporting electrolyte has a great þ importance on the Na -SE analytical parameters. Our results proved that it could inﬂuence simultaneously and in an opposing manners, the level of the background signal as well as the electrode response time and its selectivity. 