Two Li1+xAlxGeyTi2-x-y(PO4)3 (0.2 e x e 0.8; y ) 0.8, 1.0) solid solutions have been prepared as polycrystalline powders. These compounds crystallize in the NASICON-type structure, R3hc space group, and the crystal structures have been characterized by the Rietveld method with laboratory X-ray powder diffraction data. The cell parameters evolution along the two series agrees with the substitution of larger Ti4+ by smaller Ge4+ and Al3+ cations. The electrical properties have been characterized by an impedance study. Bulk conductivity values at room temperature are close to 10-3 S 226)cm-1 with low activation energies ( 25)0.35 eV). The trajectories of the Li+ cations have been simulated from the bond valence sum calculation. Structural keys, which justify the high ionic conductivity and the low activation energy, are discussed.
All-solid-state lithium batteries have a very important market due to their unmatchable properties of high potential (Ered° ) -3.024 V), very light weight, and hence, very high energy-density storage properties. Thus, there is an intense research effort in threedimensional Li-based solid electrolytes for all solid lithium batteries. Li analogues of NASICON-type materials are promising candidates as electrolytes in these cells if the conductivity at room temperature is enhanced. There are many reports dealing with NASICON-type Li+ ion conductor materials.1-3 The original NASICONs are solid solutions derived from NaZr2P3O12 by partial replacement of P by Si, with Na excess to balance the negatively charged framework, to yield the general formula Na1+xZr2P3-xSixO12 (0 e x e 3).4,5 The NASICON structure has a negatively charged 3D framework, of general formula M2X3O12, within which the Na+ cations reside in fully or partially occupied sites. 
The framework is built of XO4 tetrahedra linked by corners to MO6 octahedra. Each XO4 tetrahedron shares each corner with one MO6 octahedron and, conversely, each MO6 octahedron shares each corner with a different XO4 group. The interstitial voids generated within the network are of two types known as M1 and M2 sites (1:3 multiplicity). 
The M1 site is coordinated by a trigonal antiprism of oxygens and the M2 site has a distorted 8-fold coordination. The large charge-compensating Na+ cations are located in these two positions. In general, the properties of the NASICON-type Li+ ion conductor compounds strongly depend on the chemical stoichiometry and the thermal treatment. IV(PO4)3 (MIV ) Ti, Zr, Hf, Ge, Sn) systems have LiM2 been widely studied.1-3,6-11 For M ) Zr, Hf, Sn compositions, a triclinic phase has been reported at low temperature12-14 and for M ) Ti, Ge, the compounds are rhombohedral at all reported temperatures.15,16 The M ) Ti system is probably the most studied system because the smaller size of the Ti4+ cations makes the size of the sites in the channels more appropriate for lithium cations. The ionic conductivity of LiTi2(PO4)3 ( 24)10-6 S 226)cm-1 at RT) may be increased, at least 2 orders of magnitude, by partial substitution of Ti4+ by trivalent cations such as Al, Ga, In, Ti, Sc, Y, La, Cr, Fe.17-27 
Activated TiO2 was prepared by slow hydrolysis of commercial Ti(OCH(CH3)2)4 with 1:4 water-to-propanol solution. The resulting white suspension was centrifuged, washed thoroughly with water, and heated at 300 °C for 24 h. Part of this sample was heated at 1000 °C to determine the small weight loss due to the residual water. This was taken into account when preparing the stoichiometric reagent mixture.
The synthesis of Li1+xAlxGeyTi2-x-y(PO4)3 samples has been optimized by studying the choice of reagents and heating temperatures, rates, and times. The final synthetic procedure was as follows: (1) The reagents were ground in an agate mortar for 20 min. (2) The mixtures were heated in platinum crucibles at 0.1 °C 226)min-1 up to 200 °C and held at that temperature for 4 h. (3) Then, the mixtures were heated to 350 °C and held at that temperature for 8 h to ensure total decomposition of reagents. (4) After cooling, the sample was ground for 30 min in agate bowls in a Pulverizette Fritsch mill at 200 rpm with reverse rotation every 10 min. (5) The mixtures were pelletized and a second thermal treatment was carried out at 950 °C for 45 min. (6) Finally, the samples were ground for another 15 min in the mortar, pelletized, and heated again at 950 °C for 12 h. 
Eight Li1+xAlxGeyTi2-x-y(PO4)3 samples were prepared for 0.2 e x e 0.8 and y ) 0.8, 1.0, and they were divided into two series, which are labeled hereafter AlxGe0.8 and AlxGe1.0, respectively.
XRPD patterns were collected on a Siemens D5000 automated diffractometer with (ı/2ı) BraggBrentano geometry using graphite monochromated Cu KR1,2 radiation. XRPD patterns were recorded between 10° and 50° (2ı) to follow the chemical reactions. Patterns were collected between 14° and 125° (2ı) with 0.03° step size for 14 s (counting time) to refine the crystal structures by the Rietveld method.31 Impedance Data. Impedance data were collected on cylindrical pellets ( 24)5 mm in diameter and  24)1.2 mm in depth) obtained by applying uniaxial pressure of 150 MPa for 1 min in a 5 mm die. The pellets were heated at 1050 °C for 1 h and quenched to room temperature. Electrodes were made by sputtering of gold on opposite pellet faces. The impedance data were collected using a Hewlett-Packard 4284 impedance analyzer over the frequency range from 20 Hz to 1 MHz. 
The samples were studied in two temperature ranges: (i) from 153 to 223 K (at 10 K intervals) and (ii) from 273 to 523 K (at 50 K intervals) in a Novocontrol Quatro Cryosystem. All measurements were done with the pellets under a dried nitrogen atmosphere. Stabilization time before each data acquisition was 40 min where the maximum temperature variation was 0.1 °C. Measurement processes were controlled electronically by the Windeta package of programs.32
Initial XRPD data indicated that all members of these series are crystalline phases, with the rhombohedral R3hc NASICON-type structure. A minor side phase was detected in all samples, AlPO4 (PDF 71-1043). For x g 0.4, another polymorph phase appears, AlPO4 (PDF 48-0652), and the intensities of its reflections increase as Al content increases. However, there is no structural data in the literature for this phase, so it was not possible to quantify it by X-ray diffraction using the Rietveld method. These results are similar for both series, AlxGe0.8 and AlxGe1.0.
The aim of this work is to synthesize new NASICONtype Li+ ion conductor materials with higher aluminum content, which increases the charge carrier number, and to relate the structural features to their ionic conductivities. We report the synthesis and characterization of Li1+xAlxGeyTi2-x-y(PO4)3 (0.2 e x e 0.8; 0.8 e y e 1.0) materials. We have chosen these cations because of the relative similarity of the ionic radii, which may yield the most appropriate tunnel size for Li+ cation mobility in the 3D NASICON structure. Moreover, we reduced Ti content and, consequently, the possibility of electronic conductivity, which is inherent to a Ti4+ f Ti3+ reduction.
Final Rietveld figures of merit were good (Table 1) with RF ranging between 1.26 and 3.36%. Final refined unit cell parameters are given in Table 1 and atomic parameters in Table 2. To correlate the structure and electrical properties, it is important to determine the bottlenecks shapes and sizes. Selected M1M2 and M2M2 bottlenecks to oxygen distances are given in Table 3. Bond distances and angles are given in the Supporting Information as Tables 1 and 2, respectively. As an example of the Rietveld refinement quality, the fit to the X-ray pattern for Al0.4Ge1.0 is shown in Figure 1. The main peaks of the unfitted impurity, AlPO4 (PDF 48-0652), are marked with an asterisk.
The porosity of the pellets, determined from the masses and geometry, ranges between 11 and 23%. Representative impedance data for one composition, Al0.4Ge1.0, at two temperatures are shown as impedance complex plane plots in Figure 2; similar plots were obtained for all compositions. At high temperatures, a well-developed spike can be observed with an associated capacitance of  24)0.34  237)F (20 Hz). Since it is inclined to the Z¢ axis at  25)70-80°, it indicates a blocking electrode response; therefore, the conducting species must be ionic, that is, Li+ ions. The total pellet conductivity,  243)T, is obtained from the intercept of the spike and/or the arc (low-frequency end) on the Z¢ axis. At lower temperatures, that is, 223 K, a very broad arc is observed and, at least, two well-resolved components can be distinguished. These components are due to the presence of several contributions to the electrical response of the pellets.
Figure 3 shows the imaginary part of the modulus at different temperatures for the same sample on a doublelogarithmic scale. At low temperatures, M¢ ¢ spectra have well-defined maxima showing clear power law behavior at both sides of the peaks. The M¢ ¢ maximum associated capacitance ( 25)4 pF) is bulk characteristic. However, at higher temperatures, M¢ ¢ peaks show clear shoulders on the low-frequency side with associated capacitance of  25)260 pF. At this point, it is interesting to analyze Z¢ ¢ / M¢ ¢ vs log f plots for the same impedance data (see inset Figure 3). A large separation between two maxima can be seen (more than 3 orders of magnitude in frequency).
The crystal structure of the eight phases, AlxGe0.8 and AlxGe1.0 (x ) 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8), were refined by the Rietveld method31 using the GSAS suit of programs.33 The structure of Na1.2Al0.2Ti1.8(PO4)3 was used as the starting model.34 The Al/Ge/Ti fractions were fixed to the nominal stoichiometry because it is not possible to refine three occupation factors in the same site with a unique diffraction data set. Hence, the occupation factors of the Li2 site were also fixed to the nominal values. First, the common overall parameters, histogram scale factor, background coefficients, unit-cell parameters, zero-shift, error, and pseudo-Voigt coefficients were refined. Then, the positional parameters were optimized. An overall isotropic thermal parameter was refined for all atoms for each NASICON composition. The Al/Ge/Ti compositions were assumed to be randomly distributed in the octahedral site. The weight fraction of AlPO4 (PDF 71-1043) was also refined and it was not higher than 3.3% w/w for any composition.
The unit cell a and c parameters decrease steadily along each series, consistently with the variation in the ionic radii.36 The ionic radii of Al3+ and Ge4+ are very close (0.535 and 0.530 Å, respectively) and smaller than that of Ti4+ (0.605 Å). The volume contraction with Al for each series is due to the aliovalent replacement of larger Ti4+ for smaller Al3+ within the NASICON framework; see Table 1. Consistently, the analogous samples with higher germanium contents have smaller unit cell volumes due to the isovalent replacement of Ti4+ by smaller Ge4+; see Table 1. The Rietveld study shows that the average metal-oxygen bond distances decrease with the aluminum content (see Table 1 in the Supporting Information), as expected for the progressive incorporation of this element to the NASICON framework. The evolution of the cell parameters and the average metal-oxygen bond distances along the two series confirms the formation of the solid solutions with compositions quite similar to the nominal ones. 
To accurately determine the Li positions, a neutron powder diffraction study is required.
The electrical microstructure of the samples is complex; a thin constriction region between adjacent grains dominates overall conductivities. Nevertheless, the temperature and composition dependence of the bulk response can be obtained readily from the impedance plane plots.
The main objective of this work is to correlate the structural characteristics, deduced from Rietveld study, with the ionic conductivity, obtained from the impedance analysis. Most authors agree that structural features are the key for explaining the conduction mechanism, but also the number of ionic carriers and their distribution over the different sites are factors likely affecting conductivity.37 Long-range conduction of the ions in the NASICON structure involves hopping between M1 and M2 sites. These sites are joined by bottlenecks, generally termed the M1M2 bottleneck. Symmetry-related infinite channels running in different directions are interconnected at the M1 site. However, it has recently been suggested that the conduction pathway in NASICONs may also be  226) 226) 226)M2-M2 226) 226) 226) depending upon the composition of the series and their corresponding crystal structures.38 If Li can move directly through M2 sites, then the high Li mobility in these two new series would be justified.
There is not a clear correlation between the AlPO4 contents determined from the Rietveld study and the grain boundary contribution to the resistivities determined from the impedance study. Some insights into the similarities and differences between the bulk and thin grain boundary regions are obtained from a comparison of the frequency at the maximum of M¢ ¢ , ¢ and Z¢ fmax, versus 1000/T (Arrhenius plots). Two samples, representatives of the behavior of the series, are shown in Figure 6. Log fmax[M¢ ¢ ] data occur at 3 or more orders of magnitude higher than corresponding log fmax[Z¢ ¢ ] data but are essentially parallel for the temperatures ¢ data were obtained. The over which both M¢ ¢ and Z¢ parallel behavior of the M¢ ¢ , Z¢ ¢ plots shows that the conduction mechanism and the nature of the material is essentially the same in the bulk and thin boundary regions of the samples. 
Two rhombohedral NASICON-type Li+ ion conductor solid solutions have been prepared and their structures have been determined by the Rietveld method. The impedance study has allowed us to separate the bulk and thin grain boundary contributions. These solids are very good Li ionic conductors with bulk conductivities ranging between 2 and 7  2) 10-4 S 226)cm-1 at room temperature. Their conductivities have been correlated with structural parameters and the bottleneck positions have been determined from a bond valence sum study of the probable lithium trajectories.
