A comparative in situ X-ray diffraction ~XRD! study of phase transitions and volume variations that occur during lithium extraction from the rhombohedral and monoclinic forms of Li3V2(PO4) 3 is presented. For this purpose, a new in situ XRD cell conﬁguration was designed that enabled us to extract lithium at high voltages ~up to 4.65 V vs. Li! without cell deterioration. A thin ﬁlm of aluminum was deposited onto the surface of a beryllium window as a protective layer to avoid direct electronic contact with the positive electrode. Lithium extraction from NaSICON Li3V2(PO4) 3 ~R-3, c/a 5 2.709) led to NaSICON LiV2(PO4) 3 ~R-3c, c/a 5 2.427) isotypical with LiTi2(PO4) 3 in a single two-phase process. Monoclinic Li3V2(PO4) 3 showed a much more complicated series of four successive two-phase transitions on Li extraction to Li0.1V2(PO4) 3 between 3.4 and 4.6 V vs. Li. 
Each pattern of the intermediate compositions was fully indexed in the monoclinic space group P2 1 /n, with a unit-cell contraction of DV/V 5 26.8% between Li3V2(PO4) 3 and LiV2(PO4) 3 and a slight increase upon further oxidation to Li0.1V2(PO4) 3 . Despite these numerous phase transitions and non-negligible volume changes, the monoclinic Li3V2(PO4) 3 system is structurally highly reversible.
One of the major problems related to the electrochemical stability of lithium battery electrode materials concerns phase transitions and volumetric expansion occurring during lithium insertion or extraction. In situ X-ray diffraction （XRD） techniques are nowadays largely used in many laboratories with all kinds of in situ cells hardware, such as coin cells and swagelok.1 These cells are generally built around a beryllium window behind which the active material to be studied is deposited. However, due to beryllium oxidation at ;4 V, these experimental conﬁgurations were limited to negative or low potential positive electrode materials. In order to overcome this problem, different solutions were tested such as assembling the cell in a reverse manner so as to avoid electrical contact between the positive electrode material and Be.2 Another alternative consisted of introducing a space between the Be window and the electrochemically active part.
Plastic Li-ion technology combined with a synchrotron source is a nice alternative, but the limited access and high cost of such experiments do not enable routine measurements. This was an incentive for us to design an in-house in situ XRD experiments that might investigate positive electrode materials up to 5 V vs. Li.
In the field of high potential (>4 V) positive electrode materials, phosphate structures operating on the V31/V41 couple have recently gained much interest since good cycling properties at high scan regimes have been reported.6 Among them, the two forms of Li3V2(PO4)3 ~monoclinic and rhombohedral! are particularly interesting as they operate between 3.5 and 4.7 V vs. Li. Both structures have the lantern unit V2(PO4)3 in common but differ in the 3-D connectivity between these units, which generates easier Li diffusion within the NaSICON form ~see, for instance, comparative studies for isostructural Li3Fe2(PO4)3 in Ref. 7 and 8!. The potentialcomposition curves of these two compounds are very different. 
Lithium extraction from NaSICON B-Li3V2(PO4)3 is characterized by a two-phase process involving two lithium ions at 3.76 V vs. Li. Lithium extraction from monoclinic A-Li3V2(PO4)3 occurs as three successive plateaus at 3.59, 3.67, and 4.06 V vs. Li~V31/V41) followed by a more complex phenomenon located at 4.5 V (V41/V51). The peculiar shape of the electrochemical curve on subsequent discharge suggested some possible structural reorganization on oxidation at 4.5 V.
In this paper, we focus on a comparative in situ XRD study of phase transitions and volumetric expansions/contractions that occur during lithium extraction from the monoclinic and rhombohedral forms of Li3V2(PO4) 3 . For this purpose, a new in situ XRD cell conﬁguration was designed that enabled us to extract and insert lithium at high voltages without cell deterioration.
Monoclinic A-Li3V2(PO4)3 can be prepared by direct ceramic synthesis whereas NASICON B-Li3V2(PO4)3 can only be obtained through Na1 ↔ Li1 ion exchange from Na3V2(PO4)3 . 
To obtain small particles of A3V2(PO4)3 (A5Li,Na) ~to compensate for the low electronic conductivity of such materials!, we developed a lowtemperature route using LiH2PO4 ~or NaH2PO4), NH4H2PO4 , and NH4VO3 dissolved in stoichiometric proportions in aqueous solution. Concentrations of 0.2 mol L21 were used as NH4VO3 is onlyslightly soluble in water. The use of a V51-containing precursor implies that the annealing of the resulting precipitate, once the water and the volatile species have evaporated, should be done under a reducing atmosphere to yield V31-containing A3V2(PO4)3 . By annealing under a flow of N2 /H2 ~10% H2), pure A3V2(PO4)3 ~A5Li or Na! powders were obtained at 923 K. Ion exchange was performed as described elsewhere.10 Elementary analysis indicated that less than 1% of Na still remained in the structure. Note that ion exchange in molten LiNO3 ~at ;573 K, usually more effective for complete exchange! is not appropriate in this case as oxidation of V31 takes place.
As we showed in previous papers, optimal electrochemical activity of polyanionic structures ~poor electronic conductors! may be obtained through careful composite electrode preparations by means of ballmilling. We used a Spex 8000 ballmiller that generates energetic shocks between powders and stainless steel balls. Typical loadings were 200 mg of active material 140 mg of acetylene black. We determined the optimal ballmilling time (under air) to be of 20 min in this case.
The cells used for in situ XRD measurements were assembled in an argon-filled dry box with Li metal as the negative electrode, and a Whatman GF/D borosilicate glass fiber sheet saturated witha1M LiPF6 in ethylene carbonate ~EC! and dimethyl carbonate (DMC) ~1:1 in weight! as the electrolyte. The positive electrodes were prepared by directly depositing a few milligrams of powder behind the modified beryllium window of the cell. In situ XRD patterns were recorded with a Scintag diffractometer operating in Bragg-Brentano geometry with a Cu Ka radiation. The cell was connected to a Mac-Pile system operating in galvanostatic intermittent titration techniques ~GITT! mode ~after 1 h of charge or discharge at C/10 regime, a resting period of 1.5 h was imposed in order to record XRD patterns close to equilibrium!
Due to the high voltage of the electrochemical processes investigated here, the Be window of the in situ cell had been previously coated with Al to avoid its oxidation above 4 V vs. Li. This idea originated from the fact that aluminum or stainless-steel collectors at the positive side, stable until 4.7–5 V, are commonly used in standard cell configurations. The thin protective layer ~;5 mm! of aluminum between the Be surface and the active material was deposited by magneton rf sputtering of Al onto Be. Prior to the sputtering sequence, the Be surface had been polished within a specially designed glove box to prevent Be and/or BeO exposure. This new window was then mounted on an Amatucci-type cell described in Ref. 3. Cyclic voltametry between this new Be-Al collector and lithium showed no oxidation until 4.5 V, contrary to a pure Be collector. This is further exemplified by the data obtained during lithium extraction from B-Li3V2(PO4)3 
Lithium extraction from rhombohedral B-Li3V2(PO4)3.—As already mentioned in Ref., complete Na1 ↔ Li1 ion exchange from B-Na3V2(PO4)3 led to B-Li3V2(PO4)3 with a NaSICON framework. The XRD pattern of B-Li3V2(PO4)3 is fully indexed with lattice parameters a 5 8.309(1) Å and c 5 22.508(1) Å in the space group R-3 (c/a 5 2.709). For partially exchanged samples, the value of c/a is systematically smaller.
Despite the different shapes of the electrochemical data on subsequent discharge ~Fig. 3!, the system is highly reversible, even after having completely extracted lithium out of the structure. As depicted in the derivative curves of potentiodynamic data of Fig. 3, the electrochemical process at 4.35 V on charge is hidden on discharge within the wider process at ;4.1 V. From the experimental electrochemical data and from our in situ XRD patterns as well, we can suggest with confidence that some kind of complicated mixing between a solid solution process and a two-phase reaction is involved on discharge between Li0.1V2(PO4)3 and Li2V2(PO4)3 . The overall reversibility of the cell is demonstrated by the XRD patterns recorded in situ during discharge for Li2V2(PO4)3 and Li3V2(PO4)3 ~Fig. 7! which are very much similar to those of the same compositions recorded during the first charge.
We demonstrate in this paper that in-house in situ XRD may be used as a routine way for investigating complicated electrochemical systems operating at voltages vs. Li that normally degrade the commonly used Be windows. 
Our invention of an Al coating at the surface of the Be window allowed the investigation for the first time the complicated series of phase transitions occurring during the extraction/insertion of lithium from/into the promising positive electrode materials Li3V2(PO4)3 . XRD in situ data demonstrated for the first time that NaSICON B-LiV2(PO4)3 is isotypical with B-LiTi2(PO4)3 , i.e., crystallizes in the space group R3¯c with occupation of the M~1! site by Li. Despite much less straightforward crystallographic arrangements, we were able to follow the four successive two-phase transitions that occur when extracting lithium from monoclinic A-Li3V2(PO4)3 to A-Li0.1V2(PO4)3 . We demonstrated that these transitions were highly reversible despite nonnegligible volume changes. 
As far as investigations of the reversibility of the electrochemical reaction is concerned, in house in situ XRD provides an extremely useful insight into the working electrode: one- or two-phase reactions, unit-cell contraction, or dilatation etc. A complete determination of the exact mechanism ~lithium sites emptied first, vanadium site to be oxidized first, ...! requires additional techniques such as ex situ neutron diffraction and nuclear magnetic resonance of intermediate compositions.