A complete study of NASICON sol stability was performed in the goal to deposit a thin layer of the material on the surface of porous ceramic support. Stable sol with low colloidal particle size was obtained only by using citric acid to complex the zirconium ions and to prevent the zirconyle phosphate precipitation. The NASICON layer is then deposited by slipcasting on an a alumina support and sintered at high temperature.
Over the last 20 years, much work has been devoted to NASICON [1,2], a solid ionic conductor of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 formula. This ceramic has been particularly studied in view of electrochemical applications, such as solid electrolyte in batteries or sensitive membranes for the potentiometric or amperometric detection of alkaline cations [3/5]. Its high ionic conductivity allows applications in devices at room temperature, which is rather seldom in the case of a mineral solid electrolyte.
Different techniques have been used to obtain this material. Many studies concern the elaboration of dense NASICON from powders pressed and sintered [6,7]. This technique permits to obtain thick autosupported membranes devoted to the electrochemical detection. The major disadvantage of this technique results from the thickness of final materials, which are too important for applications requiring the elaboration of thin layers.
The high charge density of the NASICON covalent skeleton could lead to the preparation of nano and/or ultra filtration membranes of high performance. This use in filtration of electrolytes solution needs the production of microporous thin layers [8]. Actually, NASICON thin layers are elaborated mainly by physical processes, such as pulsed laser or laser ablation [9,10]. Attempts of chemical deposit by sol-gel route have also been mentioned [11,12], but need a control of the stability of the NASICON sols. Recently, Shimizu et al. [13] proposed to use hydroxyacids to stabilise NASICON sols. These films deposited on alumina substrate have been obtained by spin coating with a sol stabilised with tartaric acid. Based on these observations, we present in this work, the results which concern the prevision of the best conditions to obtain stable NASICON sols in relation to the nature of present species in the experimental conditions. 
The stable sols obtained will be used to deposit a NASICON layer by slipcasting at the surface of a macroporous a alumina support tube.
NASICON sols were prepared by sol-gel route using aqueous solutions of ZrO(NO3)2,x H2O; NH4H2PO4; Na2SiO3,9H2O in stoechiometric ratio and hydroxyacids (citric acid and tartaric acid) as ligand for ZrIV complexation. The colloidal particles size in the sol was measured using a light scattering device Sematech† (spectrogoniometer SEM 633). The NASICON material was characterised by X-ray diffractometry (XRD) (INELCPS-120). The deposit tests of NASICON layers were carried out on support tubes in porous a alumina (200 nm pores diameter), the inner side of the support tube was filled with the NASICON sol after clogging the support tube at one extremity. The time contact depends on the sol viscosity. After deposit, the tube is emptied and left at ambient temperature. The layer is fired at 600 8C for consolidation and then characterized by scanning electronic microscopy (Streoscan† 260 traditional).
Sol-gel route is a convenient way to obtain ceramic layers with very narrow microporosity [14]. Nevertheless, to prepare such a membrane, the starting sol must be sufficiently stable to prevent colloid aggregation. The use of the destabilization route of a colloidal solution to prepare the NASICON sol is difficult because of zirconium phosphate or zirconyl phosphate precipitation, which appears as soon as the zirconium precursor and the phosphoric precursor are added. This effect simply results in the very weak solubility of zirconium and zirconyl phosphates. To remedy at this drawback and to prevent the precipitation, it is necessary to increase the apparent solubility of zirconium or zirconyl phosphates. 
We can strongly complex either the ZrO2, Zr4 or HPO4 2 ions to decrease their concentrations, then if the ZrO2 concentrations are sufficiently low, and HPO4 the apparent solubility product will not be reached and the phosphate precipitation stopped, this effect will permit to NASICON colloidal particle to grow. 
The use of zirconium chelating agents, especially acetyl aceton, formic acid and lactic acid, is reported in the literature by Ahmad et al. [15] who talk about the difficulty to obtain a stable sol in organic environment from zirconyl alkoxides. More recently, Shimizu et al. [13] also showed that the use of hydroxyacids (citric, tartaric, lactic and malic acids) as chelating agents leads to the obtention of stable sols which allow the depositing of a thin layer on an alumina support. The best results have been obtained in the case of the use of citric and tartaric acids as complexing agents. Unfortunately, these promising works do not take into account the reasons for the failures or the success in the preparation of stable sols. Based on Shimizu et al. study and to synthesize NASICON layers to prepare ultra and/or nanofiltration membranes, we developed a more quantitative approach of the observed phenomena to propose a methodology to choose the chelating agents.
The balance-sheet of the presented compounds may be set-up from the knowledge of species susceptible to exist in solution in the experimental conditions. 
The last relation Eq. (17) clearly shows that log SZr depends on the total concentration PT of phosphates and on aP and aZr. The expression of aZr shows that it depends on the total concentration LT of hydroxyacids and on the pH. Consequently, it is then possible to choose the conditions to obtain the precipitation or no of the zirconyl or zirconium phosphates drawing the solubility curves in various conditions of concentration for the chelating agent. We have transfered on Figs. 1/4 the results obtained in presence of citric acid considering the ZrOHPO4 precipitation. 
Several sols of NASICON have been prepared and the repartition of particles size analysed by light scattering. The composition of the studied sols and the resulting particles size are gathered in Table 2.
The high opacity of sol I, where citric acid has been substituted by nitric acid, is characteristic of a sol which is not stable. Even in a very acidic environment, the formation of the zirconyl phosphate precipitate could not be avoided. We can show in Figs. 1 and 2 that the zirconium solubility is high when the formation of zirconium complexes takes place. As the nitric acid is not a complexing acid, no complexation of the ZrO2 occurs and the zirconyl phosphate precipitates.
In the case of sols II, prepared with citric acid (Zr/LT/2/6) at pH 0.8, no suspension is visually observed and the colloidal particles size, measured by light scattering, is :/300 nm. The sol is very stable and no variation of the particle size has been observed for several days. The influence of the acid concentration has been studied on sols II for different Zr/LT ratio. Fig. 5 clearly shows that the particles size depends on the Zr/LT ratio. The lower size of the particles is obtained for the lower Zr/LT ratio. The presence of the citrate ligand adsorbed at the particle surface prevents the growth of larger particles which lead to the flocculation of ZrIV phosphates, in these conditions the sol obtained is stabilized and then the preferential evolution to colloidal NASICON particles will be possible.
The sol III is more concentrated than the previous sols, its behaviour shows that an increase of the phosphate concentration leads to a destabilization of the sol, which is due to the aggregation of ZrOHPO4 particles in the sol. This effect is in agreement with Fig. 4 which shows the influence of the phosphate concentration on the ZrIV solubility. In this case, the particle size will be also affected by the phosphate concentration in the sol. For the sol IV which has the same composition in phosphate and zirconium as the sol III but is more concentrated in citric acid, the solubility of the precursors increases and we observe again a decrease of the particles size (Fig. 6) and a stabilization of the sol. This is in a good agreement with the data of Figs. 3 and 4 which show that high citric acid concentrations prevent the precipitation of zirconyl phosphate.
Most of these observations on the real sols may be correlated to the previsions made from the knowledge of the equilibria involving the precursors used. However, we see a limitation in the quantitative previsions because we are not able to take into account all the species formed due to a lack of information concerning the equilibrium constants. On the other hand, the previsions are realised from constants often determined in diluted solutions, in the case of studied solutions, the relatively high concentrations used can introduce gaps. However, the experimental variation of the zirconium solubility as a function of the main parameters (concentrations of reactives, pH) are quite in good agreement with the diagrams simulated from the equilibrium constants of the literature.
The tartaric acid effects on the stability of NASICON sols have not been studied in detail. Nevertheless, this type of sols is less stable that the citric acid based sols. This effect is probably linked to the lower stability of the formed complexes. However, the stability of the sols can be reached by increasing sufficiently the concentration of tartaric acid. This tendency is in agreement with the previsions made from the diagrams of Figs. 7 and 8 established for the zirconium/phosphate/ tartaric acid system. Moreover, experiments clearly show that to solubilize a given concentration of zirconium in presence of a given phosphate concentration, we must necessary use a tartaric acid concentration higher than the citric acid one.
Several tests of NASICON layers preparation have been carried out from different stable sols (sols II and IV). The sol is deposited by slipcasting on the inner part of a porous support tube in a alumina, after deposit the support tube is then dried, and treated according to different temperature conditions. The layer formation was not observed with the sol II whatever are the slipcasting and calcination conditions, probably either the viscosity or the mineral concentration in the sol are too low. The increase of the sol viscosity has been obtained by adding polyvinyl alcohol (APV) in the sol in the proportions indicated in Table 2. The deposit of the layer was not found yet; then we increased the amount of mineral matter and performed the experiment with sol IV (Table 2). Finally, the best conditions to obtain the layer was found for a slipcasting time of 20 min, a drying of 30 min and a flash firing at 600 8C for 2 h. 
The XRD analysis confirms that the material deposited was amorphous NASICON but some XRD pics revel also the presence of ZrO2. Fig. 9 shows an increase of the firing temperature to 1000 8C is favourable to the NASICON cristallisation but the specific area of the material then dramatically falls and the layer prepared is not enough porous for filtration application. The morphology of the layer can be observed on Fig. 10, its thickness is :/400 nm for a slipcasting time of 20 min. The surface quality of the support is not regular and we observe small cracks on the film, which is unfortunately not thick enough to absorb the support irregularities. Attempts to increase the thickness of the layer by increasing the slipcasting duration have not yet produced satisfying results.
It seems so that the obtention of NASICON layer may be realisable only in drastic conditions and need to control the physicochemical properties of the sol (viscosity, temperature), the slipcasting conditions (duration. . .) and the drying and calcination programs (temperature, duration, heating rates or flash calcination). These further investigations are in progress to obtain a good reproducibility for the prepared layer.
We attempted to propose a methodology based on the knowledge of the solution precursor properties to obtain stable sols of NASICON. The stability of NASICON sols mainly depends on the proportions of both different precursors (zirconium and phosphate), on the pH conditions and on the concentration of chelating agents (hydroxyacids). The preparation of stable sols is proved by the repartition of colloidal particle size. Because of the high stability of complexes between ZrIV and citric acid, the obtained sols are more stable and have been used to elaborate NASICON layers deposited on a alumina support tubes. The surface quality of the obtained layers is satisfying for the preparation of their thickness is limited to 400 nm to avoid cracks. The NASICON membrane prepared will be now tested for the filtration of electrolytes solutions.
