The ionic conduction of mono-, di-, and trivalent ions in solids is popular in solid state science and the next target ion species to migrate in solids are tetravalent ions. Here, a tetravalent cation conductor which shows high conductivity, comparable to the conductivity range of the representative divalent oxide anion conductors, was artiﬁcially designed by strictly selecting the constituent elements and the structure. The tetravalent ion conducting solid electrolyte proposed here shows considerable high ion conductivity and promising applications, such as in rechargeable batteries and chemical sensors for global environmental monitoring, are greatly expected.
Ion conduction in solids is popular with monovalent species such as alkaline metal cations and divalent species such as alkaline earth cations [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] and oxide anions [6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. Recently, for multivalent ions higher than the divalent state, trivalent [11, 12, 13] and tetravalent cations [14] have been reported. However, the ion conductivity for cations higher than divalent state is appreciably below the practical application range. In this paper, a tetravalent cation conductor, whose ion conductivity is comparable to the conductivity region of divalent oxide anion conductors, was artiﬁcially designed by strictly selecting the structure and the constituent elements of the solid.
The target ion to conduct in solids is the tetravalent cation, and the ion migration in the structure is greatly inﬂuenced by the electrostatic interaction between the mobile tetravalent ion and the anions surrounding the tetravalent ion. For the purpose of reducing the interaction as much as possible to make tetravalent cations migrate in solids, the pathway for the tetravalent ion needs to have enough space for ion conduction and the space should be located three dimensionally. The NASICON (Na+ ion Super Ionic CONductors) type and also the b-Fe2(SO4)3 type structures (the latter slightly distorted from the NASICON structure), with a rhombohedral and a monoclinic symmetry, respectively, hold the three-dimensional network ion pathway which has been shown to be one of the suitable structures for multivalent ion conduction for divalent [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] and trivalent [13] cations.
The second issue to keep in mind is to properly choose the constituent elements. The higher the valency of the ion species in the structure, the stronger the electrostatic interaction appears between the cations and anions. For the purpose of realizing such surroundings so as to release the conducting cation to migrate smoother, a higher electrostatic interaction between the lattice forming cations and anions is necessary compared with the interaction between the mobile cations and the anions. Furthermore, since the mobile ion species is in a tetravalent state, the inclusion of lower valent cations than the tetravalent state must be excluded. The needs mentioned above mean that the solid should contain those elements whose valency state is pentavalent or higher. Also, the solid electrolytes should be stable enough in various atmospheres so as to prevent the reduction of the constituent elements which cause electronic conduction. 
From a stability point of view, candidate compounds are the oxide-based series whose stability has been already guaranteed.
In our previous letter [15], the tetravalent ion Zr4+ was selected as the target ion species to conduct and, as the lattice forming cations, the pentavalent ions of P5+ as well as Nb5+ were chosen to form a stable oxide solid, and we reported an extraordinary high Zr4+ ion conduction in zirconium niobium phosphate [ZrNb(PO4)3]. In this paper, two NASICON-type solid electrolytes [ZrM(PO4)3, M=Nb or Ta] are prepared and the Zr4+ ion conducting characteristics in the solids are investigated in detail.
Zirconium oxide (99.9%), diammonium hydrogenphosphate (99.99%), and niobium oxide (99.9%) or tantalum oxide (99.9%) were mixed in a stoichiometric ratio. The mixture was ﬁrstly heated at 1000 °C for 12 h and then at 1250 °C for 12 h in air. The resulting zirconium niobium or tantalum phosphates were made into pellets and the pellets were sintered at 1250 °C for 12 h in air.
X-ray powder diﬀraction analysis (Mac Science M18XHF diffractometer) was carried out using Cu-Ka radiation. Electrical conductivity was measured by both a.c. and d.c. methods with two platinum electrodes in the temperature range between 300 and 800 °C. The a.c. conductivity measurements were performed by an a.c. complex impedance method in the frequency region from 5 Hz to 13 MHz with a Hewlett Packard precision LCR meter (4192A). Before the a.c. conductivity measurements, pre-electrolysis treatment (700 °C, 3 V, 3 days in air) was conducted several times to remove the lower valent cation species [typically alkaline metal ion species such as Na+ and K+ were identiﬁed by electron probe microanalysis (EPMA)], which may appear in the starting materials as impurities and which may interfere with the conductivity characteristics. The termination of the electrolysis was assured by using the same conductivity value before and after the pre-electrolysis.
The polarization measurements were done by passing the d.c. current (1 lA) between the two platinum electrodes sandwiching the sample pellet and the voltage generated was monitored as a function of time in oxygen [P(O2): 105 Pa] and in nitrogen (P(O2): 50 Pa). The Pt dense electrode pellet was prepared by arc-melting platinum wire as a ball shape, which was then cut into a pellet shape. The oxygen pressure from 10–15.6 to 10–11 Pa and from 10–11 to 105 Pa were controlled by mixing CO-CO2 and air (oxygen)-N2 in an appropriate ratio, respectively. A wet air atmosphere from 0.6 to 20 vol% was prepared by applying water vapor saturated air between 0 and 60 °C. The d.c. electrolysis was performed for the pre-electrolyzed pellet at 700 °C and 3 V for 21 days in air. The cathodic surface of the pellets was examined by a scanning electron microscope (SEM, S-800, Hitachi) and by electron probe microanalysis (EPMA-1500, Shimadzu) after the electrolysis.
The X-ray powder diﬀraction patterns for ZrNb(PO4)3 and ZrTa(PO4)3 are presented in Fig. 1 , together with the data for NaZr2(PO4)3, which has a typical threedimensional NASICON-type structure. The three peak proﬁles ﬁt well and it was clear that both ZrNb(PO4)3 (hexagonal, lattice constants a=0.87 nm, c=2.24 nm) lattice constants a= and ZrTa(PO4)3 0.87 nm, c=2.23 nm) possess exactly the NASICONtype structure (a very small amount of secondary peaks identiﬁed as NbPO5 were also observed).
Identiﬁcation of the macroscopic tetravalent Zr4+ ion migration was performed by the procedure described below. The electrical conductivity dependences on the oxygen pressure were measured for ZrNb(PO4)3, as shown in Fig. 2. The conductivity kept almost constant over a wide pressure region from 10–11 Pa to 105 Pa, indicating that the predominant migrating species is neither a hole nor an electron but an ion. At the oxygen pressure region below 10–11 Pa, the conductivity increases with the decrease of the pressure, showing the electronic conduction appearance in the ZrNb(PO4)3 solid electrolyte.
In addition, the time dependences of the d.c. to a.c. conductivity ratio (rdc/rac) were monitored to investigate the polarizing behavior in both nitrogen [P(O2): 50 Pa] and oxygen [P(O2): 105 Pa] atmospheres; the results are presented in Fig. 3. Because an abrupt decrease in the ratio was similarly observed in both atmospheres, the oxide ion is excluded as the conducting candidate in the zirconium niobium phosphate solid, as described elsewhere [11, 12].
The d.c. polarization data in various wet atmospheres are listed in Table 1. For a water vapor content from 0 to 20 vol%, similar high polarization behavior was observed. In addition, similar polarization measurements were conducted by changing the operating temperature (Table 2) and a considerable high polarizing phenomenon was likewise obtained. 
The tetravalent Zr4+ ion conducting solid electrolyte, which shows a comparable ion conductivity to the trivalent ion conductor Sc2(WO4)3 and also to the O2– ion conductor series, was successfully obtained for the ZrNb(PO4)3 polycrystal. The considerable higher Zr4+ ion conduction was realized by strictly selecting the structure which possesses a three-dimensional ion pathway such as the NASICON type and also choosing the constituent elements which have the valency state higher than the migrating ion valency in the tetravalent state.
