A solid-state amperometric CO2 sensor was fabricated by combining a Li‡-ion conductor (Li2CO3±Li3PO4±Al2O3) with a porous layer and a Li2CO3 auxiliary layer deposited on sensing and counter electrodes, respectively. The Li‡-ion pumping current increased linearly with increasing CO2 concentration ranging from 200 to 2000 ppm at 400 8C and the 90% response time was approximately 55 s. This sensor was able to reliably detect a small change in the CO2 concentration. 
Recently, detecting the CO2 concentration in air has become increasingly important in order to monitor the global warming gas levels and to control the indoor air quality [1]. For cost-effective CO2 sensing, various types of the compact sensors have been investigated [2±9]. Among these, the potentiometric-type sensor, which consists of a solid electrolyte, metal carbonate and a reference electrode [5±10] is attractive because it exhibits a satisfactory electromotive force (emf) dependence over a wide range of CO2 concentrations. However, when linear and reliable sensing within a narrow concentration regime is required, an amperometric CO2 sensor is more advantageous. In this viewpoint, the solid-state amperometric NOx sensor [11] has been reported as a potential alternative of the potentiometric NOx sensor [12]. Nevertheless, there is a paucity of work on the solid-state amperometric CO2 sensors in the literature. 
In this study, an amperometric CO2 sensor based on Li2CO3± Li3PO4±Al2O3 and Li2CO3 was fabricated and its sensing characteristics were examined.
Two types of devices were fabricated and their schematic structures are shown in Fig. 1. In both devices, a Pt paste was applied on both sides of the electrolyte and Pt wires were attached to them. In device (A) (Fig. 1a), the counter electrode was further coated with inorganic adhesives. In device (B), the sensing and counter electrodes were coated with inorganic adhesive and dense Li2CO3 layer, respectively (Fig. 1b).
The CO2 concentration was controlled by changing the mixing ratio between a parent gas (0.2% CO2 or 2% CO2 in air balance) and dry synthetic air. At the sensing temperature (400 8C), the Li‡-ion pumping current decayed for approximately 3 min after applying the voltage and the subsequent voltage variation required approximately 50 s to saturate the signal. Thus, the sensor signal was measured with varying CO2 concentration 5 min after applying the voltage and the I±V characteristics were attained by measuring the current 1 min after each successive increase in voltage.
Fig. 2 shows the response transient of device (A) measured with altering the CO2 concentration between 200 and reactions were considered.
Sensing electrode : 2Li‡ ‡ CO2 ‡ 1 Counter electrode : Li2CO3 ! 2Li‡ ‡ CO2 ‡ 1 Although the sensor that operated at 0.1 V showed a relatively stable sensing character, the cell resistance gradually increased and the bonding between the electrode and electrolyte had signi®cantly deteriorated with time. It indicates the formation and decomposition of Li2CO3 at the cathode and anode, respectively, inducing a con®guration change in the electrode/electrolyte interface.
Device (B) was designed and characterized in order to improve sensor stability. The inorganic adhesive layer strongly attaches the sensing electrode to the electrolyte and acts as the gas diffusion barrier. The dense Li2CO3 layer on the anode provides the Li‡-ion source for pumping. Fig. 3 shows the static and dynamic sensing characteristics of device (B) at the operation voltage of 0.1 V. The Li‡-ion pumping current was proportional to the CO2 concentration ranging from 200 to 2000 ppm, which demonstrated the possibility of linear and reliable sensing within a narrow concentration regime. The 90% response time was approximately 55 s.
In order to determine the optimum sensor temperature, the sensing characteristics were examined at various temperatures. The sensor signal below 350 8C was small compared to that at 400 8C and ¯uctuated with time even at 0.1 V operation. This was consistent with the reported operation temperature of sensor using Li2CO3±Li3PO4±Al2O3 as an electrolyte and Au as a sensing electrode [13]. The weak and ¯uctuated signal at low temperatures might be attributed to the dif®cult chemical reaction of CO2 on the surface of the sensing electrode or to the low conductivity of the solid electrolyte.
Li‡ ion will be determined by the diffusion of CO2 and O2. Considering abundant O2 concentration (air level) compared to CO2 concentration (200±2000 ppm), the CO2 diffusion will dominate the reaction, which might result in the liming current. However, the gas leak through a large pore or crack will result in not the limiting current plateau but the straight line at least in the low voltage regime. Therefore, the total I±V characteristics could be understood as the sum of the limiting current through a small pore and Li‡ pumping current proportional to the applied voltage near the large pore or crack. The current increase with CO2 concentration in the sloped curve shape and the non-zero current value at the zero CO2 concentration can be understood in this viewpoint.
Another factor should be considered is the current in the absence of external electric ®eld. Compared to the device (A), device (B) has a dense Li2CO3 layer. This can establish the emf across the two electrodes. The current at V ˆ 0 showed very small positive value although it was not given in the ®gure. This says that the potentiometric contribution, although it is not large, should be taken into account in device (B).
A solid-state amperometric CO2 sensor was fabricated using Li‡-ion conducting cell. The sensor operation at 0.2 V resulted in a drift of the reference signal with time, while that at 0.1 V did not. The Li‡-ion pumping current was proportional to the CO2 concentration ranging from 200 to 2000 ppm, which suggests that this amperometric sensor may be used for linear and reliable CO2 sensing. A slow increase in cell resistance was found as the sensor aged, which might emanate from the detaching Pt electrode related to the formation or decomposition of Li2CO3. The coating of an inorganic adhesive layer and Li2CO3 layer on the sensing and counter electrode, respectively, was an effective approach to improve the sensor stability.