Potentiometric CO2 sensors in open devices with NASICON as solid electrolyte were tested in the temperature range 150 –   6 and 0.1 atm in air. The sensors were built with sodium titanate and 500 jC and at partial pressures between 10 La1   xSrXMnO3 F d (LSM) mixtures as oxygen reference electrode and Na2CO3 – BaCO3 or Na2CO3 – SrCO3 mixed with gold as measuring electrodes. The CO2 electrode reaction is based on an electrochemical mechanism with a fast electron transfer and an adsorption – diffusion phenomenon. In sensor devices, the system with Na2CO3 – BaCO3 deviates from Nernst law in all the pressure ranges whatever the device (pellet or coplanar devices) is. The system with Na2CO3 – SrCO3 obeys a Nernst behaviour for the highest CO2 pressures. The observed responses are very fast. A discussion is engaged to explain the subnernstian behaviour from the thermodynamic stability of Na2CO3 and a mixed voltage phenomenon.
Measurements of CO2 are of increasing importance regarding applications such as process control and automation, applications in biology and environment (pollution control), combustion processes, air conditioners, farming, brewing in beer and wine cellars [1,2]. The CO2 emission in ambient air is traditionally determined by titration technique in a basic solution, infrared adsorption spectroscopy or thermal conductivity measurement. These methods are not well suitable for the development of inexpensive portable setup. From this point of view, gas sensors allow to work in real time and then appear as good alternatives of analytical instruments.
Among the various methods for sensing carbon dioxide, electrochemical methods are promising because their output is an electrical signal related directly to the chemical information (concentration, activity, partial pressure). Electrochemical sensors are generally classified according to the transducing methods, for example the changes of conductivity or capacity and amperometric or potentiometric measurements. The electrical signals of potentiometric sensors are simple to measure and they are generally stable and reliable when they obey a thermodynamic law of equilibrium.
The first CO2 potentiometric sensor was developed by Severinghaus et al. [3]. It was based on a pH glass electrode measuring an acid – base equilibrium in a carbonate aqueous solution through a waterproof membrane porous to the gas. Gauthier and Chamberland [4] were the first to use a solid ionic conductor (K2CO3) based on a second kind reaction for the detection of CO2. Their work opened a new way in the field of solid sensor devices which is now very developed.
In order to extend the abilities of potentiometric gas sensors using solid electrolytes in which no ion of the gas component is mobile, an auxiliary gas-sensitive layer is added onto the electrolyte surface. For the detection of CO2, the working principle is then based on a carbonate/electrode system in thermodynamic equilibrium with the gas. In this field, Maruyama et al. [5] proposed a potentiometric CO2 gas sensor using NASICON as solid electrolyte. Such sensors are of particular interest due to the simplicity of the mechanism of CO2 detection [6,7]. NASICON has the general composition Na1 + xZr2SixP3   xO12. It is a three-dimensional Na+-conductor with high ionic conductivity comparable to h-alumina. The highest ionic conductivities are obtained for 1.8 V x V 2.4 [8].
Several reference electrodes were proposed. For example, Liu and Weppner [9] have used metallic sodium on hU-alumina but such closed devices are not easy to make and they are sensitive to oxygen. Sealing the measuring gas chamber from a reference part is difficult and produces disadvantages for the miniaturisation. Maier et al. [10] proposed a simple electrochemical cell with a mixture of two sodium oxides as oxygen reference electrode allowing the use of sensors in an uniform atmosphere. Such a device improves the compactness of sensors. The aim of our work is to use sodium titanates as reference electrode materials similar to the systems proposed by Holzinger et al. [11]. To restrict the use of noble metals and to improve the electrode reaction, we introduce a mixed conductive oxide, such as La1   xSrXMnO3 F d (named LSM), as an added phase in the reference electrode [12]. Two kinds of auxiliary carbonate phases were also compared for the CO2 sensing electrode.
The measuring electrode was made of either Na2CO3 and BaCO3 or Na2CO3 and SrCO3, together mixed with gold metal paste. The titanate composition selected for the reference electrode (named Ti3) was a mixture of Na2Ti3O7 – Na2Ti6O13 allowing reversible exchanges of oxygen with the gas and of sodium with NASICON. LSM was added to improve the oxygen electrode reaction as described elsewhere [12]. The two working cells can be described by following.
The oxygen does not appear in the EMF total cell reaction because it is involved in both electrode reactions and is thus cancelled. It is very important to note that such a relation is based on a constant activity of Na2CO3 (stable phase). Moreover, the oxide electrode must be thermodynamically stable with respect to CO2 and the electrode must be sensitive only to O2. For example, Holzinger et al. [13] have shown that the Na2Ti3O7 – Na2Ti6O13 mixtures are stable at temperatures higher than 500 jC whatever the CO2 pressure is in the usual range (lower than 0.1 bar). At the Gibbs function corresponding to the reaction (5) can become negative; the stability depends on the partial pressure of CO2 and so the formation of Na2CO3 can occur at the reference electrode with consequences on the response of sensors.
NASICON ceramics were synthesised by a sol – gel method [14] but other processes can also be used [15,16]. NASICON pellets were sized 6 mm in diameter and 3 mm in thickness. The chemical composition of the samples was verified by XRD. We obtained Na2.8Zr2Si1.8P2.2O12.
As mentioned previously, La1   xSrxMnO3 F d (x = 0.8) and Na2Ti3O7 – Na2Ti6O13 were used as reference electrode materials. Their synthesis and characterization are given elsewhere [12,17]. The measuring electrode was prepared from Na2CO3 – BaCO3 (dried at 120 jC and in weight ratio of 3:1) and Na2CO3 – SrCO3 (weight ratio 3:1) mixed with Au in weight ratio of 1:1. A screen-printing method was performed using the following mixtures (in wt.%): 30% oxide, 10% NASICON, 30% ethanol, 27% a-terpineol, 1.5% polyvinyl pyrrolidon, 1.5% polyvinyl butyral to produce a high viscosity solution. The sintering temperature of LSM + Ti3 layers was 950 jC during 2 h and 750 jC during 1 h for the Au – carbonate electrodes.
For the first studies, sintered pellets of NASICON were used. Reference and measuring electrodes were deposited by screen-printing technique on each surface of the NASICON pellet as shown in Fig. 1a. Coplanar sensors were also constructed by screenprinting technique using the same materials as described above. The thick layers were deposited on alumina substrate of size 15 10 0.635 mm (Fig. 1b).
The sensors were tested in an alumina cell into which the gas was injected in the vicinity of the sensor. CO2 was diluted by synthetic dry air in a ratio adjusted by mass flow controllers. The rate flows were   1. Voltmeters Tacussel Aries 20000R with 2 or 3 l h
A comparison of impedance plots obtained in synthetic pure air, in argon and in an atmosphere with 5.05% CO2 in air is shown in Fig. 2 in the high frequency range. We can observe (Fig. 2b) a loop at high frequencies (characteristic frequency about a few MHz) which depends on the partial pressures (O2 and CO2). Such orders of magnitude of the characteristic frequency ( fj) correspond to those of usual material properties. For example the two capacitances, about   11 F, are similar to the values 10 obtained for bulk and grain boundaries in ionic conductors. An estimation of the global conductivity, for a thickness of about 100 Am, leads to a value of about   1 at 200 jC. Such a conductivity does not 10 correspond to the NASICON pellet [8,14]. The dielectric constant would be about 10 to 20. This loop could be due in great part to the electrical properties of the carbonate materials in which a small quantity of NASICON is introduced.
At high temperatures, the loop of the impedance plot measured in the high frequency range becomes very small and the part of the diagram due to the materials cannot be distinguished. A difference is observed between the diagrams obtained at low frequencies in pure air and in a mixture of air and CO2 (Fig. 3). 
This point is corroborated by the capacitance values of a few microfarads, which correspond to usual electrochemical double layer capacitances for an electrode area of about 1 cm2.
The shape of the plot is identical, down to frequen  2 Hz (not plotted in Fig. 3). We cies as low as 10 expect that there is a slow oxygen diffusion process through the carbonate layer (which is not an oxygen conductor).
We can conclude that the system is controlled by an electron transfer process characterized by a relaxation time lower than 1 s (about 1 ms at high temperature, cf. Fig. 3) and a limiting adsorption – diffusion phenomenon which can be characterized at low frequency. The comparison of the dots on the straight lines at a given frequency for pure air (Fig. 3) and CO2 diluted in air (Fig. 4) shows the CO2 diffusion being faster than that of oxygen.
The EMF measurements were performed between 150 and 500 jC and a partial pressure of CO2 between   6 and 0.1 atm. The lifetime of the sensors did not 10 exceed a few weeks due to a deterioration of the electrodes. For the future, a study should be necessary to optimise the screen-printing process but for the present work the lifetime was sufficient to make some essential observations. So it was observed that the responses for symmetric and coplanar devices were very fast (less than 1 s, including the time for the gas flowing to the working cell) perhaps due to an optimised positioning of the gas inlet near the sensor in the cell. The results obtained with the sensor using BaCO3based carbonates as measuring electrode are shown in Fig. 5. We can see that the dots are positioned on straight lines within the whole PCO2 range, especially at low temperatures (150 and 200 jC). 
The CO2 gas sensor was also miniaturised using a coplanar configuration (Fig. 1b). The results with this new device were found qualitatively similar to those obtained with the previous pellet sensor. An identical pseudo-Nernstian behaviour was observed but in this case the experimental numbers of transferred electrons were higher than the preceding ones (n is close to 5 in this case and so the correction factor is about 0.4). The   1 atm characteristic values in the range 10 are quoted in Fig. 6 and Table 2.
This device was based on a mixture of Na2CO3 – SrCO3 – Au used as measuring electrode. This mixture was prepared by the same screen-printing method and tested using the same equipment array. As with our other devices the responses were very fast (1 s). We have obtained a linear behaviour for a working temperature from 300 to 500 jC and for a CO2 partial   1 atm, as shown in Fig. 7. The pressure of 10 electron transfer number (see Table 3) is close to 2, essentially at the lowest temperature. We can observe   3 a discontinuity for partial pressures lower than 10 the use of Na2CO3 – SrCO3 atm. It appears that improves the Nernstian behaviour of the sensor, but further investigations should be necessary to confirm this point and to explain the discontinuity of the slope.
The subnernstian response is a basic problem. It can be mentioned that such a behaviour was also obtained by several authors but were not extensively discussed. The deviation from the Nernst law cannot be due to our oxygen reference electrode because we have tested it in eventual formation of Na2CO3 at the reference electrode can slightly modify the ratio of the compounds in the mixture Ti3, without alteration of their activities if they are two separated phases, but it cannot explain the subnernstian behaviour of our cell.
If the activity of Na2O is constant (it is an academic hypothesis) the relations (12) and (13) show, because the Na2CO3 activity is not constant, that the EMF could be independent of the partial pressure of CO2. Of course, such a hypothesis is a limit case, but it demonstrates clearly that the response can be subnernstian. If the activity of Na2O is not constant, any value of the slope can be obtained.
All the previous discussion was made in the framework of the Na2O hypothesis. A similar discussion could be made with another hypothesis to explain the response of the NASICON to oxygen. For example, we have proposed elsewhere [17] other possibilities involving grain boundary phases with a change of stoichiometry of the NASICON. Unfortunately, because the thermodynamic data of these hypothetical phases are not known, only a discussion with Na2O is possible.
This phenomenon could be more pronounced on thin layer devices because the samples are not very dense and so the grain boundaries can play a major effect, especially if Na2CO3 is dissolved in BaCO3. This is in agreement with our results (Table 2) and those obtained by Leonhard [22]. Kida et al. [23] have observed for instance a slope relatively close to the theoretical value (about 2.2) with a thin layer device in a range of CO2 pressure of about 100 – 3000 ppm.
From a general point of view, we can remark that the best agreements with the Nernst law seem to be obtained when Na2CO3 is a pure phase [10,11,24].
From our impedance results, the reduction (for example reaction (15)) appears slower than the oxidation (Eq. 14). A schematic illustration is given in Fig. 8 for which the overvoltage is strong for the reduction reaction (curve b). Then the mixed voltage will be fixed close to the Nernst voltage corresponding to the equilibrium of the reaction (14). When the CO2 pressure is increasing, the Eth voltage corresponding to the equilibrium (Eq. 14) obeys the Nernst law (origin of the curves a1 and a2, Fig. 8). The overvoltage due to the electron transfer and the diffusion effect of the electro-active species must be decreasing when the CO2 pressure is increasing, according to the usual performances of electrochemical systems (curves a1 and a2). As shown in Fig. 8, the variation of the mixed voltage is then subnernstian.
This schematic view is given for a constant oxygen pressure but if it is not constant, a similar effect should be observed if curve b is only transferred by a vertical translation. Of course if the electron transfer is a very fast electrochemical process, curve a is flat and so DEmixed is very close to DEth.
Of course if there is a voltage inversion for the reactions (14) and (15) (due to a change of the Gibbs function vs. the reactions are reversed and the response becomes over-Nernstian. Because the values of the voltages depend on the phases of the used materials, it is difficult to propose a universal explanation.
Some results are plotted in Fig. 9. The n value is about 2.3 at 405 jC and lower at 300 jC, close to the theoretical value. Nevertheless, the response is not linear and an S-shape is observed, essentially at 405 jC. These first results must be considered cautiously but they show clearly that a lot of investigations remains to be done in this field.
The choice of the carbonate materials is also a determining factor. For example with our results of the Na2CO3 – SrCO3 electrodes, the slope approaches the theoretical value. This mixture could be more stable, but the experimental results in this field are not sufficiently numerous to reinforce this assumption. We can also mention that a good agreement with the theoretical value was observed in the literature when a lithium conductor is used with a Li2CO3-based electrode (without BaCO3) because this carbonate is stable under humidity [28]. Yamazoe and Miura [2] have also obtained, for example, a more ideal slope using Li2CO3 – CaCO3 mixtures on NASICON electrolyte, although the equilibrium at the interface was not very well defined.
The CO2 electrode reaction obeys a mixed mechanism: a charge transfer with a relaxation time of   3 s at high temperatures and a slower about 10 chemical process probably due to an adsorption (relaxation time about 1 s) and diffusion phenomena. The responses of the sensor devices are linear vs. the logarithm of the CO2 partial pressure in the range   6 atm and at low temperatures (down to 10 150 jC). Nevertheless, we have observed a deviation from the theoretical law. The use of strontium carbonate could be an improvement, but the sensibility range is narrower and the results need to be confirmed. We think the subnernstian behaviour is due to the instability of Na2CO3 in contact with NASICON materials, perhaps in relation with the grain boundary phases. 
