A planar miniaturised CO2 sensor based on thick films of Nasicon (Na+ conductor, Na3Zr2Si2PO12) electrolyte has been developed. The thick film was fabricated by screen printing Nasicon paste on an alumina substrate and then firing at 1543 K. scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis shows that the films achieved good densification, although reactions occur between Nasicon and alumina substrate, so conductivity of the thick film is lower than that of bulk Nasicon. The sensors interfaced with a binary carbonate auxiliary phase (Na2CO3 – BaCO3) applied as a slurry at 373 K showed good CO2 sensing properties at 673 – 873 K. The electromotive force (emf) values obtained were linearly dependent upon the logarithm of CO2 concentration over a wide range (6 ppm – 100%). The slopes of emf versus logPCO2 agreed well with the Nernstian slopes based on two electrons electrode reactions.
CO2 monitoring and control is of increasing importance in environmental pollution and process control and automation as well as applications in agricultural and biotechnological fields. A great deal of research work has been performed to develop solid state CO2 sensors that are reliable, inexpensive and compact. In particular, all-solid potentiometric CO2 sensors using solid state electrolytes [1 – 6] have drawn wide attention because of their low cost, simple structure and potentially excellent sensing performance.
An all-solid state potentiometric CO2 sensors based on Ag2SO4 – Na2CO3 electrolyte and Ag reference was reported in 1977 [1]. A concentration cell of CO2 based on a metal carbonate (K2CO3) solid electrolyte was proposed by Cote et al. [7]. However, because a metal carbonate is difficult to sinter and has a low conductivity, an alternative approach was suggested, in which the sensors were based on Na+ ionic conductor (Na3Zr2Si2PO12 or Na-h-alumina) with a metal carbonate as the auxiliary phase [8]. The sensor performance can further be improved by selecting an auxiliary phase based on mixed carbonates, such as, Na2CO3 – BaCO3 or Li2CO3 – BaCO3 to minimise any interference from moisture [9 – 11].
Despite progress in research, there are no reliable potentiometric CO2 sensors commercially available. Some reasons are a lack of long-term stability and technological difficulties, partially resulting from the necessity of encapsulation especially using gas reference. Moreover, sensor response to CO2 was found to be a function of concentration of coexistent O2. That is, the devices can work as a CO2 sensors only when the O2 concentration is fixed or known. It was found that these problems could partially be overcome with a planar-type CO2 sensor [3,8,12 – 14]. Moreover, a planar structure using a Nasicon thick film or thin film would further help to decrease the fabrication cost as well as the size of the device and increase stability and reliability and more easily to be integrated into microdevices and some initial trials have been made [3,15,16].
In this paper, a more detailed investigation was performed on preparation and characterization of Nasicon thick film by screen printing on alumina substrate. The CO2 sensors were fabricated based on Nasicon thick film with Na2CO3 – BaCO3 as auxiliary electrode.
Nasicon powder was prepared using precursors of sodium carbonate, silica, zirconia and ammonium dihydrogen phosphate. These powders were ballmilled in acetone for a total of 24 h. The powder slurry was dried and then placed in an alumina crucible and calcined for 12 h at 443 K and for 6 h at 1173 K. The calcined powder was returned to the ball mill and re-milled for a further 24 h. The slurry was then dried and re-sieved. The planar sensor design requires the electrolyte to be screen-printed on to the substrate and fired in situ. A screen printing formulation was developed. The ink formulation was made up by mixing 50 g Nasicon powder, 6.6 g ethylcellulose, 2.9 g furoric acid and 50 g butylcarbitol acetate. The powder and butylcarbitol acetate were mixed together to form a slurry. The other two components were added slowly and mixed to ensure complete dispersion. The slurry diluted with additions of acetone was milled for a further 24 h before being poured into a large Pyrex basin ready for screen printing.
Commercially available alumina tiles 50 by 50 mm2 and approximately 0.5 mm thick was chosen as the substrate material. Each tile was laser scribed to allow several individual sensors to be printed on one large tile.
Screen printing was performed using a DEK 240 table mounted screen printer. The thick film was then fired at 1543 K for 1 h to densify the electrolyte layer before the electrodes were attached. The solid electrolyte thick films were characterized by impedance spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive analysis (EDAX).
For CO2 sensors, the counter and sensing electrodes were fabricated by painting commercial Pt paste on the designated regions and annealed at 1173 K for 30 min. A porous film of Na2CO3/BaCO3 (weight ratio 44:56) auxiliary electrode was deposited on the Pt sensing electrode by painting saturated solution of Na2CO3/BaCO3 and drying at 373 K. The structure of the sensor is shown in Fig. 1.
The CO2 sensors were tested in controlled conditions at different CO2 concentrations, and subjected to variation in operating temperatures and partial pressures of O2. Measurements were carried out in a conventional gas-flow apparatus equipped with a heating facility. The sensors were exposed to the flow (100 cm3/min) of required sample gases which were prepared by diluting a parent gas (1% CO2 in Ar or pure CO2), with synthetic air or Ar using gas blender. The gas mixtures of CO2/air with CO2 concentration varied from 6 ppm to 100%. The electromotive force (emf) of the sensors were measured in the 673 – 873 K temperature range with a digital electrometer and transferred to a computer-based data collecting system.
The Nasicon thick films were studied by SEM and EDAX. Fig. 2 shows the SEM image of the cross-section. The film was dense and approximately 30 Am thick. Nasicon film tightly bonds to alumina substrate and extensive reactions have taken place. The Nasicon film consists of predominantly two phases, which were analysed by EDAX. The white phase in Fig. 2 is nearly pure ZrO2, while composition of the matrix is Nasicon-like, containing significant concentration aluminium (Fig. 2, Table 1) and the grains are surrounded by glassy phase. The effect of adding Al2O3 to Nasicon on compositional and phase changes is discussed elsewhere [20].
The conductivity of the above Nasicon thick film was measured using impedance spectroscopy. The measuring cell structure is shown in Fig. 3, which was fabricated to resemble the sensor design, so it can reflect real time electrical property during sensing. The relationship between total conductivity of film and temperature is shown in Fig. 4. The film conductivity is lower than that of bulk Nasicon of composition Na3Zr2Si2PO12, for example, the conductivity of the above thick film is only 0.032 S/cm at 1000 K in comparison with that of a Nasicon pellet at 0.398 S/cm [17]. 
The response transients of the present device were sharp over the temperature range of 673 – 873 K. Fig. 5 shows the typical emf response to stepwise increase in the CO2 concentration from 0 through 100% for a planar thin film sensor at 815 and 863 K. Response time to achieve 90% of the emf value was 40 – 70 s. The response was rapid, continuous and reproducible. The recovery on switching off CO2 was somewhat slower, but still rapid enough for application.
A given sensor was tested at different temperatures for fixed values of PCO2 and the results are shown in Fig. 7. As predicted by the Nernst equation, a linear relationship is obtained. In order to check the reproducibility of different sensors under the same experimental conditions, three sensors were tested at temperature of 864 K for CO2 composition varying from ppm to 1% in 21% O2 diluent (with the rest being Argon). The results are presented in Fig. 8. The theoretical Nernstian value for the slope at 864 K is   85.8 mV/decade, while the experimental values are   73.5,   77.7, and   81.3 mV/decade. If the Nernst Eq. (4) is rewritten as emf = A + BlogPCO2 , the values of A for the three sensors also show variation from 866.5 to 901.5 mV. This has confirmed the previous suggestion [19] that each sensor must be calibrated for practical application. 
In the previous work using tubular Nasicon containing the auxiliary phase, which was melted inside the tube, emfs in the 873 – 973 K range were constantly lower than the calculated values. This was ascribed to dissolution of Na2O from the Na2CO3 into the Nasicon due to the decomposition of Na2CO3 at the Nasicon – auxiliary phase interface. In this work, using thick film of Nasicon on alumina substrate, the emfs are much higher and follow Nernstian type of behaviour with the slopes corresponding fairly close to the calculated values. The fact that Al2O3 has dissolved into the Nasicon accompanied by ZrO2 precipitation during sintering is assumed to have altered the activity of Na2O in Nasicon. Quite surprisingly, this has led to better performance of the sensors.
According to the mechanism proposed in Section 1, oxygen pressure in gas mixture should not interfere with the sensor response. Experimentally, it was found that the emf is not dependent on the pressure of oxygen in the gas mixture. Fig. 9 shows emf output change with oxygen pressure variation at constant CO2 concentration. A typical sensor exposed to CO2 gas from 500 ppm to 100% with pure Ar or 21% O2 as diluent was tested. The result is shown in Fig. 10. The same result was obtained although two diluent gases contain quite different O2 partial pressure. This is a great advantage for the sensor to be applied to an environment where oxygen pressure is subject to a considerable variation.
Thick films of Nasicon on alumina substrate can be fabricated by screen printing. Nasicon bonds well to substrate and is densified well by sintering at 1543 K. Some reactions have taken place on the interface between Nasicon film and the Al2O3 substrate. As the result, conductivity of Nasicon film is lower that than of bulk Nasicon.
A planar device using the Nasicon thick film with Na2CO3 – BaCO3 auxiliary phase shows fairly good CO2-sensing properties. The response is rapid, continuous, stable and reproducible for a given sensor. The Nernst experimental slopes match well with the theoretical ones in the range from several ppm to 100% CO2 concentration. O2 content does not affect sensor emf, making the use of sensor suitable in applications where oxygen may vary continuously.
