Currently, NASICON-type LiZr2(PO4)3 (LZP)-related materials are attracting attention as solid electrolytes. There are experimental reports that Li-ion conductivity can be improved by doping a small amount of Ca or Y into stoichiometric LZP. In previous studies, doping with only one element having a narrow search space has been attempted, and thus, further improvement of the Li-ion conductivity is conceivable by using multi-element doping. When multi-element doping is attempted, because the search space becomes enormous, it is necessary to evaluate the Li-ion conductivity using a low-cost method. Here, force-field molecular dynamics using a bond valence force field (BVFF) approach was performed to evaluate the Li-ion conductivity. We confirmed that the Li-ion conductivity of stoichiometric LZP derived from BVFF (6.2 × 10−6 S/cm) has good agreement with the first principle calculation result (5.0×10−6 S/cm). Our results suggest that the Liion conductivity can be further improved by simultaneously doping LZP with Ca and Y [6.1×10−5 S/cm, Li35/32Ca1/32Y1/32Zr31/16(PO4)3]. In addition, Bayesian optimization, which is an informatics approach, was performed using exhaustively computed conduction property datasets in order to validate efficient materials search. The averages for Bayesian optimization over 1000 trials show that the optimal composition can be found about seven times faster than by random search.
In recent years, Li-ion batteries (LIBs) have been widely used in small electronic devices, such as laptop computers and smartphones.In addition, the demand for LIBs is increasing for large-scale applications, such as electric vehicles.There is a concern with increase in the size of LIBs regarding safety. Currently, LIBs use flammable organic electrolytes, which can ignite and explode.This problem can be solved by replacing the flammable organic electrolyte with nonflammable Li-ion conductive ceramics, called solid electrolytes.
There are reports of high Li-ion conductivity (10−2 S/cm) in sulfide-based materials, such as Li10GeP2S12 (LGPS).However, sulfides tend to react with water to generate hydrogen sulfide. Therefore, the use of oxides, which have high chemical stability, is desirable from a safety viewpoint. However, oxides have lower ionic conductivity than sulfides. Therefore, an oxide having a high Li-ion conductivity is currently required.
Na super ionic conductor (NASICON)-type solid electrolytes are currently attracting attention as oxide materials having a high Li-ion conductivity.NASICON-type solid electrolytes have a polyanion vertex-sharing structure with large voids that allow carriers, such as Li+ to pass through the structure. Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) has been reported as the NASICON-type solid electrolyte material having the maximum Li-ion conductivity (10−3 S/cm).However, LATP reacts easily with the Li metal around 2.5V vs Li+/Li because Ti4+ is easily reduced to Ti3+; therefore, a narrow potential window is a problem for practical use.
Given this situation, Li et al. proposed a NASICON-type oxide material, LiZr2(PO4)3 (LZP), as a solid electrolyte and reported the stable operation of an all-solid-state battery system even using LZP electrolytes and a Li metal negative electrode.Using the Li metal as a negative electrode leads to a dramatic increase in LIB capacity, and thus, the cruising distance of the electric vehicle can be substantially increased. LZP forms a stable solid electrolyte interface (SEI) consisting of Li3P and Li8ZrO6, and there is no redox reaction with metal Li.However, the Li-ion conductivity of stoichiometric LZP (on the order of 10−6 to 10−5 S/cm at room temperature) is not sufficiently high in comparison to the currently used Li-ion batteries (10−2 S/cm). At present, various substitutions are being tried with the aim of improving the Li-ion conductivity. As a result of these efforts, a significant improvement of Li-ion conductivity (on the order of 10−4 S/cm) has been achieved by doping with Ca or Y. Therefore, the LZP-based materials have the potential to satisfy the requirement for both high Li-ion conductivity and high chemical stability against the Li metal. For practical use, however, further improvement of the Li-ion conductivity is needed. The key for achieving this lies in modifying the doping ratio and increasing the number of doping elements. In the LZP system, doping with a small amount of Ca increases the Li-ion concentration and hopping probability, which leads to an increase in the Li-ion conductivity. Excessive Ca doping, however, leads to a decrease in the Li-ion conductivity because Li+ is trapped around Ca2+.Improving the Li-ion conductivity by doping has been tried experimentally but for the most part has been limited to one-element doping having a small search space. In this study, we extend the search space by doping with two elements (Ca and Y). As it is expensive to evaluate the Li-ion conductivity of a complex composition experimentally, we evaluate the Li-ion conductivity using a calculation method. Many first-principles molecular dynamics calculations have been reported for evaluating the ionic conductivity, owing to its reliability.However, the technique is computationally demanding, particularly for the exhaustive search of multi-doping samples. Thus, an approach combining materials simulation and informatics, i.e., materials informatics, is attractive to reduce the total computational cost and time and to effectively optimize the doping conditions.For example, density functional theory (DFT)-derived Li-ion conduction properties have been predicted by machine learning regression techniques using crystal structure datasets.Furthermore, we introduce a machine-learning approach called Bayesian Optimization (BO) for reducing the number of force-field molecular dynamics (FFMD) computations. As a proof-of-concept, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the BO approach by checking how fast it can find the optimal composition of our current target material, which had been already obtained by exhaustive computations for verification purpose. In this study, we attempt to demonstrate the effective optimization of doping conditions by using a materialssimulation-and-informatics approach. LZP co-doped with both Ca and Y, Li1+2x+yCaxYyZr2−x−y(PO4)3, is targeted in this study, as single-doping with Ca and Y ions is known to improve the Liion conductivity as mentioned above. To evaluate the performance of informatics-aided optimization, Li+ conduction properties for a total of 169 compositions are exhaustively calculated, applying a fast force-field molecular dynamics (FFMD) approach using the bond valence force field (BVFF) instead of a First-Principles molecular dynamics (FPMD) approach. Besides, the BO approach is applied to measure its efficiency for optimizing the best composition. In this paper, as a proof-of-concept, we first conducted the exhaustive FFMD computations of the current target material for all the 169 compositions and identified the truly optimal one. Then, we investigated how efficient BO can find the optimal composition, respectively, i.e., we selectively conducted the FFMD computations among the 169 candidate compositions by following the suggestions from BO under the hypothetical assumption that we have not completed the exhaustive computations yet. The compositional search space, in the present study, is only 169 compositions so that exhaustive FFMD computations are possible within a reasonable time. On the other hand, the use of high-quality FPMD, the experimental measurement or increase of a search space by the addition of dopants make exhaustive search rather harsh in terms of the computational cost and time expense. In this respect, the Bayesian optimization approach is attractive since the technique may reduce significantly the number of the sampling compositions.
The molecular dynamics (MD) calculation is a method for obtaining the motion of atoms by solving the equation of motion. In this study, the force acting on each atom was obtained using BVFF, proposed by Adams and colleagues.The potential acting between ions having different signs (e.g., Li–O, Zr–O, and P–O) is expressed using the Morse-type potential, defined as
where D0 is the dissociation energy, Rmin is the equilibrium distance, α is the bond softness, and R is the bond distance. The force acting between ions having the same sign (e.g., Li–Li, Li–Zr, Li– P) is expressed by multiplying the Coulomb potential by the error function
where q is an effective charge, R is a bond distance, and ρ is the screening factor. The force field (FF) parameters are taken from the table in the paper by Adams and Rao.The Coulomb potentials acting between Li and Ca and between Li and Y were set to ρ = 1.5, and the potentials acting between other pairs were set to ρ = 2. Both pair potentials are truncated at a cutoff radius Rc with a smoothing treatment [˜E(R) =E(R)−E(Rc)−(R−Rc)E′(R)∣R=Rc] in order to avoid discontinuities of potential energy and force, and the cutoff value was set to 5 Å for both the Morse and Coulomb potentials. The force-field molecular dynamics (FFMD) and structural relaxation calculation were performed using the Nagoya Atomistic-Simulation Package (NAP).To perform the FFMD calculation, a large supercell of the LZP (2304 atoms) was used. We considered 169 compositions of Li1+2x+yCaxYyZr2−x−y(PO4)3 (LCYZP) (x, y = 0–3/8 in increments of 1/32). Configurational arrangements of Li/vacancy at 6b or 18e sites and of Ca/Y/Zr at 12c sites were determined by considering 100 random structures. All 100 structures were relaxed, and the most stable structure was used for FFMD. (Calculation summary is tabulated in Supporting Table S1 in the supplementary material.) The time step was set to 1 fs, and FFMD calculations were performed in the NVT canonical ensemble using Langevin dynamics.  We performed the FFMD calculations at 773–1173 K for 1 ns. From our FFMD calculations, the mean square displacements (MSDs) of all elements were calculated. The Li-ion conductivity at room temperature (300 K) and the activation energy for Li-ion diffusion were calculated from Arrhenius plots of the diffusion coefficients.
Bayesian optimization was performed with the aim of demonstrating high-speed search for the optimal composition. We used a common Bayesian optimization library (COMBO) for this. In order to learn from previous observation results, a Gaussian process was used. A fundamental feature of Gaussian processes is that the uncertainty of the prediction is also evaluated as the prediction variance. Using the predictions and variances, the acquisition function is calculated using an expected improvement (EI) strategy, and the next candidate is selected by considering the score of the acquisition function.
Table 1 lists the lattice parameters for the relaxed state of LZP, derived from structure relaxation by first-principles (FP) calculations and BVFF calculations. The lattice parameters calculated by BVFF and those calculated by FP differ from each other by no more than 5.5%.
To perform the FFMD calculation, a supercell of LCYZP was constructed, containing 2304 atoms. The lattice vectors asc, bsc, and csc in the supercell correspond to linear combinations of lattice vectors ap, bp, and cp in a primitive cell with a rhombohedral structure,
where the supercell matrix Msc is expressed as follows:
Figure 1 shows the MSDs of all atoms in LZP at 1173 K. From Fig. 1, we can confirm that only Li+ was conducted and that the other atoms were in thermal oscillation in FFMD. Figure 2 shows the path of Li+ diffusion in FPMD (a) and FFMD (b); the 6b sites are shown in blue. We can confirm that in the FFMD simulation, Li+ was conducted through the 18e site, which is an intermediate site, as in the case of the FPMD simulation. Figure 3 shows the Arrhenius plots of the diffusion coefficients as calculated by FPMD and by FFMD. (The plots derived from FPMD is rather scattered due to the smaller number of ions in the cell and shorter simulation time than FFMD settings.) The coefficients were extracted through a simple linear fitting with the following expression:
where n, D, and t represent the dimensionality of Li-ion diffusion, the Li-ion diffusion coefficient, and time, respectively. The Li-ion conductivity is estimated by the Nernst–Einstein relationship,
where R, T, z, F, and c represent the gas constant, temperature, ionic valence, Faraday constant, and ionic concentration, respectively. The Arrhenius plot obtained by FFMD is almost the same as that for FPMD. The activation energies obtained from these Arrhenius plots were 0.43 eV and 0.40 eV for FPMD and FFMD, respectively, and the Li-ion conductivities were 5.0 × 10−6 S/cm and 6.2 × 10−6 S/cm, respectively.
Figure 4 shows heat maps of FFMD-derived Li-ion conductivity (a), activation energy (b), and lattice volume (c) of LCYZP at 300 K. Figure 4(a) shows that LCYZP maximizes the Li-ion conductivity in Li35/32Ca1/32Y1/32Zr31/16(PO4)3. Figure 4(b) suggests in addition that the activation energy is minimized in the above composition. Accordingly, the best performance in terms of ionic conduction of Li+ can be obtained by the co-doping of 1/32 mol Ca and 1/32 mol Y ions into LZP (x=y=1/32). The observed ionic conductivity at room temperature and migration energy are 6.1 × 10−5 S cm−1 and 0.33 eV, respectively.
Figures 4(c) and 5 show the heat map of the LCYZP lattice volume and the relationship between the amount of excess Li and the lattice volume. The lattice volume was specifically reduced with the same composition doped with small amounts of Ca and Y. This suggests that doping with small amounts of Ca and Y (2x+y<0.1) tends to reduce the cell volume, whereas a further increase in the molar amounts of Ca and Y ions (x>1/32, y>1/32) causes expansion of the lattice. As the composition that provides the best ionic conductivity and that with the smallest cell volume agree at x = y = 1/32, the shrinkage of the cell volume may play an important role in improving ion conduction performance. According to our previous study, the relatively high ionic conductivity of Li in the NASICON-type LZP family is due to a chained pushing-out mechanism, wherein a repulsive Coulomb interaction between neighboring Li ions pushes one Li ion to another Li site and causes another pushing-out.
The shrinkage of the cell enhances the repulsive interaction between neighboring Li ions, resulting in the enhanced ion conductivity observed at x = y = 1/32. In addition, the point defects of CaZr ′′ arising from Ca doping cause an effect by which interstitial Li ions are trapped because of the different signs of two defects, though Ca doping creates mobile interstitial Li ions.It may be that Y doping causes a smaller trapping effect than Ca doping because of the difference in their nominal charges. In summary, several factors, including the number of interstitial Li ions, cell volume, and the trapping of doping ions, have complex effects, and a composition co-doped with Ca and Y displayed the best ionic conductivity.
As mentioned above, the optimization of the ionic conductivity by conventional trial-and-error search would be difficult for a co-doped system owing to the complexity of the rules. Although we evaluated the ion conduction properties exhaustively for the entire compositional range by fast FFMD calculations, the exhaustive strategy is not always a good option when we use more computationally demanding methods, such as FPMD and/or experimental search. Thus, we, instead, used a Bayesian optimization approach to demonstrate and confirm the validity of a faster and more effective search for the optimal composition using exhaustively evaluated FFMDderived conductivities as mentioned in the introduction section. Figure 6 shows a comparison of the average Li-ion conductivity (a) and a comparison of correct answer rates (b) between random search and Bayesian search for the Li-ion conductivity at 300 K, showing the average of 1000 runs for each sampling approach. Two types of the descriptor set were used: set 1, compositions x and y in Li1+2x+yCaxYyZr2−x−y(PO4)3; and set 2, compositions x, y, and cell volumes. Figure 6(a) indicates that the compositions can be searched with high efficiency to find the optimum by performing Bayesian optimization, as the best ionic conductivities among the observed samples in the Bayesian optimization approach are always higher than those by random search at any number of observations. In addition, the inclusion of the cell volume in the descriptor set (set 2) improves the search performance. As cell volumes can be obtained by structure relaxation, which requires much less computational resource than MD, the addition of proper descriptors may be beneficial for the further improvement of search efficiency. Figure 6(b) indicates that Bayesian optimization can search for the optimal composition with a probability of 90% simply by examining about 40 (descriptor set 1) or 20 (set 2) structures among 169 compositions and that it is possible to search for the optimal composition about 3.8 (set 1) or 7.6 (set 2) times faster than the random search approach.
Optimization of the composition for Li-ion conductivity in Li1+2x+yCaxYyZr2−x−y(PO4)3 compounds (among a total of 169 compositions) by exhaustive search using fast FFMD techniques was attempted in this study. Dopants of Ca and Y ions were introduced into the cell in order to increase the number of interstitial Li ions as carriers. The best ionic conductivity was observed for the Ca and Y co-doped composition of x = y = 1/32. Numerous factors such as the number of interstitial Li ions, the trapping of migrating ions around doped ions, and repulsive interactions between interstitial Li ions may contribute to the Li-ion conduction properties. Therefore, a reasonable determination of the optimal composition would seem to be difficult unless an exhaustive approach is used. Attempts were made to apply a BO scheme for 169 compositions and MD-derived conductivity data to verify the potential efficiency of the scheme, and 40 samplings were sufficient to find the best conductivity with a probability of 90%. Therefore, BO can save approximately 20% of the total computational resources compared with the exhaustive search. Moreover, the addition of appropriate descriptors accelerates the optimization. In this study, with the inclusion of the cell volume,which can be obtained by a fast cell-relaxation calculation, only 20 samplings were required to optimize for the best conductivity with a probability of 90%. Accordingly, the BO scheme is beneficial for speeding up the search for the optimal composition and reducing the research and development resources needed. When more complex systems are to be considered such as a triple-ion-doped system, this technique is even more attractive.