A new SO2 gas sensor based upon a magnesium ion conducting solid electrolyte MgZr4(PO4)6 (MZP) and a Na2SO4 auxiliary electrode has been fabricated and tested. Electromotive force (emf) results with variation in the SO2 and the O2 partial pressures at various temperatures from 873 to 1023 K are presented. The results have shown that the response to SO2 is rapid and the measured emf of the sensor is found to vary linearly as a function of the logarithm of the partial pressure of SO2. As MZP does not react with SO2, both electrodes of the sensor can be exposed to the same atmosphere containing SO2 and thus there is neither any need for sealing the electrode compartment nor using any semi-permeable membranes.
SO2 is a major air pollutant from power plants, metallurgical processes and acid plants. The conventional analysis methods of SO2 include solution-absorbing and electrochemical analysis and spectroscopy, but these analyses are carried out at room temperature, take a long time and are non-continuous, so it is difficult to apply these methods to production control and in situ environmental monitoring. There is an increasing need for reliable, selective and continuously detecting SO2 sensors. It is anticipated that sensors based on solid electrolytes will fulfil these requirements.
The electromotive force (emf) values of these cells were essentially consistent with those theoretically calculated using the Nernst equation within a certain SO2 partial pressure range.
However, sulphates suffer from poor sinterability, phase transitions with large volume change, which cause cracks and pores in the electrolyte during preparation or operation. In order to avoid these problems, more practical devices were prepared by using Na ion conductors such as Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (Nasicon) and Nab-Al2O3. They exhibit much higher ionic conductivity than sulphates and can be easily sintered and show no phase transformation with volume change in the wide temperature range. Saito and co-workers first prepared a SO2 sensor based on a Nasicon electrolyte.
The sensor has been further modified to measure SO2 by providing a Pt/alumina catalyst for in situ catalysis of SO2 oxidation with O2 in the atmosphere to an equilibrium concentration of SO3 at high temperature. Thus for measuring SO2, a knowledge of PO2 in the test gas becomes necessary [16].
Recently a thin film SO2 sensor was developed by using a mixed sulphate of Na2SO4/BaSO4/Ag2SO4 film as the electrolyte with metal Ag as the reference [17]. Both the electrodes of the sensor were exposed to the same atmosphere during operation. The response was fairly fast, but can be used only at low temperatures due to the low melting point of the sulphate mixture. Another SO2 sensor [18] which also does not need any sealing has been constructed using the oxygen ion conductor YSZ and a silver sulphate based salt as the auxiliary phase along with a silver sensing electrode and a Pt/O2 reference electrode. The sensor has been reported to work in a wide temperature range with fast responses. However, in sensors using silver as a reference material, depletion of silver in an SO2 atmosphere can result in short lifetime.
MgZr4(PO4)6 is a magnesium ion conductor which was introduced by Ikeda et al. [19] and later successfully used to develop CO2 sensors [20,21].
In this work, a new SO2 sensor was fabricated and tested by using a divalent cationic Mg2 conductor MgZr4(PO4)6 with Na2SO4 as the auxiliary electrode. The response properties and the working mechanism of this sensor are reported below.
MgZr4(PO4)6 powder was prepared using conventional solid reaction method [17] precursors of magnesium oxide, zirconia and ammonium dihydrogen phosphate. These powders were mixed according to the required ratio and ball-milled in acetone for a total of 24 h. The powder slurry was dried and then placed in an alumina crucible and calcined for 4 h at 483 K and for 6 h at 1173 K in air. After milling and drying, pellets 15 mm in diameter and 2 mm thick were prepared, and then the pellets surrounded with powder of the same composition were sintered in an alumina crucible at 1623 K for 24 h.
The construction of the sensor device is shown in Fig. 1. Pt ink electrodes were coated on both sides of the sintered MgZr4(PO4)6 pellet and then were fired at 1173 K for 10 min. A Pt wire lead was fixed on the Pt electrodes by firing. As the sensing material, a porous film of Na2SO4 was attached to one of surfaces of MgZr4(PO4)6 by coating with Na2SO4 paste and sintering at 1173 K for 5 h. Since the sensor is expected to respond to SO3, for SO2 measurement the SO2 must be converted into SO3. In order to obtain an in situ conversion of SO2 to SO3, alumina pellets containing 1% Pt are used as a catalyst, adjacent to the auxiliary Na2SO4 electrode in the gas path.
The SO2 sensors were tested under controlled conditions at different SO2 concentrations, and subjected to variation in operating temperature and partial pressure of O2. Measurements were carried out in a conventional gas-flow apparatus equipped with a heating facility. 
According to the mechanism proposed above in Section 2, oxygen in the gas mixture, which is involved in electrode reactions should not interfere with the sensor response to SO3, but it affects SO2 conversion to SO3, so it affects the emf indirectly. Fig. 4 shows the emf output change with the logarithm of the SO2 content when the oxygen partial pressure in the gas mixture varies from several tens of ppm to 21%.
Only by measuring the a MgO in MZP, by an alterit be possible to comment on native method, will whether the emf dependence upon log PSO2 is determined by either Eq. (14) or Eq. (16). The possibility of inter-dissolution between Na2SO4 and MgSO4 should also be considered. It is suggested that in order to stabilise MgSO4 in contact with MZP, the use of Na2SO4 as an auxiliary phase is essential.

