A cerium ion conducting solid electrolyte, (CexZr1 x)4/4 xNb(PO4)3, was successfully realized with the NASICON-type structure which possesses a three-dimensional network, especially suitable for bulky ion migration. The cerium ion conductivity exceeds approximately one order of magnitude in comparison to that of the rare-earth ion conducting R2(WO4)3 and R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 (R=Sc, Y, Eu–Lu) series and the value is in the range between typical oxide anion conductors of yttria stabilized zirconia (YSZ) and calcia stabilized zirconia (CSZ). Since cerium ion has been demonstrated to be another migrating ion species in solid electrolyte ﬁeld, a promising application for various functional materials is greatly expected. 
Solid electrolytes are one of functional materials where only ion species conducts in solids as an electric charge carrier, and they are greatly expected to be applied in various ﬁelds such as rechargeable batteries and speciﬁc gas sensing unique tools, etc. In the solid electrolyte ﬁeld, a number of monovalent and divalent ions have been extensively known to conduct in solids [1,2]. In contrast, in the case for trivalent ions, electrical conductivity measurements (for example [3–5]) were mainly studied with b00-alumina where monovalent Na+ ions are ionically exchanged by trivalent cation species. However, in their cases, the residual Na+ ion conduction also occurs with the trivalent ion conduction and the ion-exchanged b00-alumina series is not categorized as pure trivalent ion conducting solid electrolytes. 
Therefore, up to 1995, the macroscopic conducting ion species have been limited only to the low valent (monoor divalent) ions and it has been believed to be only these two groups that show pure ion conducting characteristics with single ion species from the view point of electrostatic interaction between the conducting ion and the surrounding counter ions [2].
In order to realize a higher valent ion migration in solids, the surroundings which reduce the above-mentioned strong electrostatic interaction in addition to realize the suitable lattice structure for the trivalent ion migration, are strongly requested. For the purpose of overcoming above-described two key points, a light was shed on the trivalent ion species that stably hold the trivalent state and also on twoor threedimensional framework suitable for bulky trivalent ion conduction. Among various trivalent ions, the rareearth ions including Sc and Y are selected as the candidates due to their high stability in the valency state. Since 1995, the M2(WO4)3 (M=Al, Sc, Y, Er-Lu) tungstate series with Sc2(WO4)3-type structure has been developed and their trivalent M3+ ion conducting properties were extensively investigated (for example [6–8]). 
The M2(WO4)3 series has a quasi-two-dimensional open layered structure and M3+ ions migrate between the layers. After the discovery of the M2(WO4)3 (M=Al, Sc, Y, Er–Lu) tungstate series, another series of R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 (R=Sc, Y, Eu-Lu) with the NASICONtype structure (NASICON is the Na+ super ionic conductor, which is a tailored solid electrolyte series and has a three-dimensional network structure suitable for ion migration) has also been demonstrated to be suitable R3+ ion conductors [9–11]. Among rareearth elements including Sc and Y, many rare-earth ion species have been clariﬁed to ionically migrate in solids. However, cerium ion conductors have not been realized yet.
In this paper, for the purpose of obtaining the cerium ion conducting solid electrolyte, the solid was strictly selected from a view point of attaining an open threedimensional network structure of the NASICON-type structure. Furthermore, as the constituent high valent ions, Nb5+ was also chosen in addition to tetravalent Zr4+ and pentavalent P5+ ions in R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 to further reduce the electrostatic interaction between the migrating cerium ion and the counter oxide anions and to realize appropriate surroundings for high valent cerium ion conduction in the NASICON-type structure.
The XRD patterns of the (CexZr1 x)4/4 xNb(PO4)3 series are shown in Fig. 1 with the pattern of a typical compound (NaZr2(PO4)3) holding the NASICON-type structure. The (CexZr1 x)4/4 xNb(PO4)3 series were found to hold the single phase of the NASICON-type structure with hexagonal symmetry in the range 0oxp0:1: The samples with the x content higher than 0.1, were in two-phase mixture of the NASICON phase with NbPO5. From these results, it becomes clear that the solid solution limit in (CexZr1 x)4/4 xNb(PO4)3 is identiﬁed to be around x ¼ 0:1: In addition, from the measurement of effective magnetic moment of the sample by the SQUID method, 90% of the cerium was found to exist in the trivalent Ce3+ state in it.
For the purpose of exactly identifying the conducting cation species among cerium, zirconium, niobium, phosphorous solid electrolyte, a dc electrolysis (3 V at 7001C for 100 h in air) was carried out to enforce the target migrating ion species to conduct inside the solid and deposit on the phosphate solid surface where the phosphate solid electrolyte is in contact with the cathodic Pt electrode. Before the electrolysis, the decomposition voltage of (Ce0.1Zr0.9)40/39Nb(PO4)3 was determined to be ca. 1.2 V from the current–voltage measurement and the applied voltage was set intentionally higher than that of the decomposition voltage of 1.2 V to supply the conducting cation species from the anodic to the cathodic side (details of the experiment are reported in Refs. [7,8]).
Fig. 4 shows the SEM photograph of the representative deposit appeared at the cathodic surface of (Ce0.1Zr0.9)40/39Nb(PO4)3 after dc electrolysis. The deposit was clearly observed, while any deposition was not recognized on the counter anodic surface. The EPMA spot measurements were conducted for representative three spots of the deposit on the cathodic surface and the results are tabulated in Table 1. Among four elements in the (Ce0.1Zr0.9)40/39Nb(PO4)3 solid electrolyte, an outstanding increase was observed only for cerium. This result clearly indicates the fact that cerium cation species formed at the interface between the anodic solid surface and the anodic Pt electrode migrates inside the (Ce0.1Zr0.9)40/39Nb(PO4)3 solid electrolyte and deposits at the interface between the cathodic solid surface and the cathodic Pt electrode.
Since no electronic conduction was observed by both ac conductivity measurements in various PO2 atmosphere and the polarization behavior, the lower valent Ce3+ was thought to be the only conducting ion species while the Ce4+ ion seemed to function as the constituent of the framework by the strong electrostatic interaction with oxide anions.