A planar bielectrolyte type of CO2 gas sensor based on Nasicon and Na±b-alumina solid electrolyte pellets with BaCO3±Na2CO3 (weight ratio 44:56) as the auxiliary phase was fabricated. The sensor had good response to CO2 over a wide range covering 6 ppm to 100%. The Nasicon/Pt interface was sensitive to oxygen, while auxiliary phase applied at low temperature on the sodium rich Na±b-alumina was stable against decomposition. In this mode, both electrodes are exposed to the same test gas eliminating the need for a separate reference compartment and O2 concentration does not affect cell EMF. Interface between Nasicon and Na±b-alumina was studied by SEM and EDAX. Diffusion bonding between the two solid electrolytes results in phase change, which affects the electrical properties of electrolyte system. 
In recent years, devices for continuously detecting CO2 have been in demand for environmental monitoring. Among the various methods for detecting carbon dioxide, solid-state electrochemical methods are the most promising. In particularly, all-solid potentiometric CO2 sensors based on solid-state electrolytes have drawn much attention because of their reliability, selectivity, compactness, low cost, simple structure, high sensing performances and compatibility with microelectronics. Therefore, a considerable amount of research work has been carried out for developing CO2 sensors [1±6]. Many potentiometric CO2 sensors are based on Na‡ or Li‡ conductors using solids or gaseous reference electrodes. In these examples, two conditions must be met. Firstly, the electrolyte must be dense enough to prevent gas from permeating through; secondly, good encapsulation must be realised between the sensing and the reference electrode compartment. 
Normally, the sensors are operated at high and frequently varying temperatures, which makes it more dif®cult to maintain a good sealing for long time. Moreover, sensor response to CO2 is found to be a function of concentration of O2, which is invariably present. In order to overcome problems of sealing and O2 interference many research works have been done which can be divided into three types.
Planar-type CO2 sensors based on a single electrolyte [7± 10]. The sensors can be expressed as: O2, CO2, Pt|Na‡(Li‡) conductors| Na2CO3, Pt, CO2, O2. In this case, only a single electrolyte, Na‡ or Li‡ conductor was used. Na2O or Li2O activity on one side of electrolyte ®xed by the electrolyte composition and temperature serves as the reference electrode. The second interface containing the auxiliary phase is used as the sensing electrode. Both electrodes were exposed to same atmosphere, so O2 partial pressure is identical and therefore no O2 interference and sealing problems exist. 2. CO2 sensors with open reference electrodes [11±14]: a typical cell of the kind of sensors can be described as: O2, CO2, Au, Na2SnO3, SnO2|Na‡ conductors| Na2CO3, Au, CO2, O2. In this cell, the activity of Na2O of the reference electrode (left-hand side) is fixed by the two phases mixture. The sodium activity in Na2O is fixed by the partial pressure of O2 in the test gas. 
As the two phases mixture is open to the same atmosphere as the sensing electrode, they can be used only when the reference materials are chemically stable against CO2. Most compounds based on Na2O can react with CO2 at elevated temperature making the sensor stable only for short duration. CO2 sensors based on interfacing two electrolytes [15±22]. As an extension of the auxiliary phase method, sensors can be developed by interfacing two or more electrolytes. 
For example, oxygen ion conductor (YSZ) sodium ion conductor (Nasicon) junction can be used to develop a CO2 sensor. These sensors do not require separation of working and reference compartments and oxygen is self-cancelling.
Because of the inherent instability of Na2CO3, it easily decomposes at high temperature, that is, Na2CO3 ˆ Na2O‡ CO2 ‡ …1=2†O2. Since the activity of Na2O in Nasicon is very low, the Na2CO3 auxiliary electrode is not thermodynamically stable when melting it on Nasicon surface at high temperature (>melting point of Na2CO3 1157 K) during preparation of auxiliary electrode. Rich Na2O or Na2O2 phase may be formed on the interface, which completely changes the interfacial property. As a result, CO2 sensor response performance will be affected. If auxiliary phase is prepared at low temperature, because Na2CO3 decomposition reaction does not take place, the problem can be overcome. This has been veri®ed in our work [6]. 
Furthermore, if the Na2O activity in electrolyte that is in contact with Na2CO3 auxiliary phase is higher than in Nasicon and Na2CO3 auxiliary electrode is prepared at low temperature, the possibility of Na2CO3 decomposition and reaction between Na2CO3 and electrolyte is greatly minimised and the performance of sensors will be improved. According to a recent work by Vandecruys et al. [23], the Na2O activity in Na2O5.5Al2O3 is 3  10 11 at 923 K which is four orders of magnitude higher than that in Nasicon (3  10 15) at same temperature. Therefore, the use of Na2O5.5Al2O3 may result in greater stability of the interface between electrolyte and Na2CO3. On this basis, a novel CO2 sensor is designed by interfacing two Na‡ conductors, Nasicon and Na±b-alumina with Na2CO3/BaCO3 auxiliary on the side of Na±b-alumina and Pt onto Nasicon surface, as Nasicon/Pt interface is shown to be sensitive to PO2
Nasicon powder was prepared using sodium carbonate, silica, zirconia and ammonium dihydrogen phosphate as starting materials. These powders were ball-milled in acetone for a total of 24 h. After the slurry was dried, the powder was calcined in an alumina crucible for 12 h at 443 K and for 6 h at 1173 K. The calcined powder was re-milled for a further 24 h. The resulting powder was pelletised (13 mm in diameter, 1 mm in thickness) and sintered at 1503 K for 24 h in air. Finally, Nasicon pellets with a nominal composition of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 were obtained.
Na±b-Al2O3 was prepared by mixing Al2O3 and Na2CO3 in a molar ratio of 5.5:1. The powder mixture was ballmilled in acetone for a total of 24 h. The powder slurry was dried and then placed in an alumina crucible and calcined for 4 h at 1173 K. After being reground and dried, the powder was made into pellets (10 mm in diameter, 1 mm in thickness) and then sintered at 1923 K for 0.5 h in air. 
The samples were investigated by several analytical methods. The cross-section of interface between Nasicon and Na±b-Al2O3 was analysed by SEM (JSM-5800LV) and EDAX (Noran Voyager system). The conductivity of the bielectrolyte Na±b-Al2O3 interfaced with Nasicon was measured by complex impedance spectroscopy (Schlumberger SI-1260) in the frequency range 1 Hz and 1 MHz at 573± 873 K.
Fig. 1 presents the cross-sectional schematic view of CO2 sensor. After sintering the two solid electrolytes, the counter and the sensing electrodes were fabricated by painting commercial Pt paste on the two exposed surfaces of the pellets and annealed at 1173 K for 30 min. The Na2CO3/ BaCO3 (weight ratio 44:56) was used as auxiliary electrode which was deposited on the Pt-sensing electrode of Na±bAl2O3 side by painting a saturated solution of Na2CO3/ BaCO3 and drying at 373 K.
The CO2 sensors were tested in controlled conditions at different CO2 concentrations, and the effect of operating temperature and partial pressure of O2 were also determined. Measurements were carried out on a gas-¯ow apparatus equipped with a heating furnace. The sensors were exposed to the ¯ow (100 cm3/min) of required sample gases. The different sample gases were prepared by diluting a parent gas (1% CO2 in Ar or pure CO2), with synthetic air or Ar using a gas blender with CO2 concentration varying from ppm levels to 100%. The sensors were investigated in 673± 873 K temperature ranges. Electromotive forces (emfs) were measured with a high impedance electrometer (>1012 O) and the data transferred to a PC-based data collecting system (Pico ADC-16).
Fig. 5 shows the typical responses of emf to stepwise increase in the CO2 concentration from 0 to 1,000,000 ppm (100%) in temperature range from 673 to 873 K. When CO2 concentration was changed, emfs reached a steady-state value in 50±70 s. The response was rapid and continuous. Fig. 6 shows the relationship between response time and temperature. The relationship between response time and temperature is useful for expressing the reaction rate on the electrode. The response time consists of both reaction time and the exchange time for the test gas. The former depends on the temperature and CO2 concentration and the latter on volume of test chamber and ¯ow rate of test gas. On ®xing other conditions, increasing temperature can only shorten time of electrode reaction. 
From Fig. 6, the response time de®ned as the time to obtain a 90% response ®rstly becomes shorter with temperature increasing, but when temperature is higher than 860 K, response time does not change any more and may reach the time required for gas exchange. The typical response time is 50±70 s in the operating temperature when CO2 was varied from 973 to 1886 ppm. The recovery on switching off CO2 was somewhat slower.
Detection range is an important property of a sensor which was investigated experimentally by covering a wide range of CO2 concentrations from 6 ppm to 100%. A good linear relationship was obtained in the entire range (Fig. 8).
For a given CO2 sensor, the temperature effect on emf also was tested in ®xed CO2 contents and the results are shown in Fig. 10. As expected by Eq. (5), the relationship between temperature and emf is linear for each ®xed value of CO2 content.

