Electrochemical sensors based on yttria-stabilized zirconia ~YSZ! with WO3 as a sensing electrode were fabricated using either Pt or Au electrodes. The sensors were studied in the temperature range 500-700°C in the presence of different concentrations ~300-1000 ppm! of NO2 and CO in air. The response to NO2 was very stable with fast response time ~within 20 s!. The best sensitivity was observed at 600 and 650°C using Pt and Au electrodes, respectively. At all temperatures investigated a cross sensitivity to CO gas was also noticed. The response to CO was decreased using Au electrodes. The role played by WO3 as a sensing electrode was investigated.
The environmental concerns have challenged scientists to develop suitable and reliable sensors to detect pollutants such as NOx , CO, HCs, etc. Strict norms on pollution control are being enforced worldwide, especially for emissions of vehicles.1 The automotive industry urgently needs rugged and reliable sensors to monitor and decrease the level of pollutants (NOx and CO/HCs) in the exhaust emissions at elevated temperatures. Solid-state electrochemical sensors with metal oxide auxiliary phase seem to be the most suitable in such environments.2-7 Several reports are available on solidelectrolytes-based sensors combined with metal ~Pt, Au, etc.! and oxide electrodes for NOx ,7-14 CO/HCs15,16 detection. 
Miura and coworkers have been working for a long time on electrochemical sensors for the detection of NOx .7-12,14 In a recent paper11 they reported WO3 as a suitable auxiliary oxide for selective detection of NOx in the range 500-700°C. Some of the authors of this paper17 have used LaFeO3 coupled with yttria-stabilized zirconia ~YSZ! and sodium silicon conductor ~NASICON! electrolytes and obtained stable and fast responses to NO2 at 400 and 450°C. Brosha et al.18 have studied LaCoO3 and La0.8Sr0.2CoO32d perovskite oxide electrodes in zirconia-based sensors for the detection of CO/HCs at 600-700°C. Recently, Me´nil et al.19 have reviewed the actual trends of these kinds of sensors. They claimed that the major issues concerning the selectivity and the long-term stability are yet to be overcome for high-temperature sensors. This fact drives scientists to search for new materials, to improve the device fabrication techniques, and to investigate the sensing mechanism.
According to many authors12,15,16,20 the sensing mechanism of electrochemical sensors based on coupling a solid electrolyte with semiconducting oxides, can be explained using a mixed potential theory. The mixed potential mechanism was claimed both for 15,16,18 gas sensors based on similar electroNOx chemical cells. However, a different explanation of the NOx sensing mechanism has been proposed and named the different electrode equilibria.21 Different electrode equilibria is a more general concept to explain the NOx sensitivity that is due not only to electrochemical reactions, but also to different electrocatalytic activity and/or sorption-desorption behavior of the two electrodes.17,22 The same theory has also been proposed to explain the working feature of single-chamber solid oxide fuel cells with electrodes exposed to the same gas atmosphere.23-25
Given this background, in this work we report a study on YSZbased sensors with WO3 as the sensing electrode, wholly exposed to the same atmosphere. The reference electrode is thus not separated, and this fact highly simpliﬁes the sensor design. Moreover, the variations of oxygen concentration can be the same at both electrodes, and their inﬂuence might be compensated between the electrodes.
WO3 has been selected because of its very good performance in semiconductor NO2 sensors.26,27 As already stated, the good sensing properties to NO and NO2 were also observed for WO3 coupled with half open YSZ tubes.11 Thus, selective NO2 detection is expected using this oxide as an auxiliary phase.
The electrochemical response of these sensors was studied in the temperature range between 550 and 700°C in the presence of NO2 and CO in air ~300-1000 ppm!. The electromotive force ~EMF! was found to be stable, fast, and reproducible. By replacing the Pt electrodes with Au, a better NO2 selectivity with respect to CO was observed. In order to investigate the role played by WO3 in the NO2 and CO sensitivity, the EMF response of the Pt/YSZ/Pt symmetrical electrochemical cell is also reported. It was found that the WO3 auxiliary electrode enhances the EMF response remarkably. Polarization curves and amperometric measurements were also performed to better understand the sensing mechanism.
Sensing experiments were carried out in a conventional gas-ﬂow apparatus equipped with a controlled heating facility. The sensor environment was alternatively exposed to air and NO2 or CO ~3001000 ppm in air! at the total ﬂow rate of 100 mL/min in the temperature range between 550 and 700°C. EMF measurements were performed between the two electrodes of the sensors using a digital electrometer. During the EMF measurements, the electrode with the WO3 coating was always kept at the positive terminal of the electrometer and both the electrodes were exposed to the same gas environment. At 600°C, EMF measurements were also performed on the symmetrical electrochemical cell Pt/YSZ/Pt upon exposure to air and CO or NO2 .
Figure 1 shows the scanning electron micrograph ~SEM! of the WO3 thick ﬁlm deposited on Pt electrode. The ﬁlm was highly porous and consisted of homogeneous micrometric particles of dimensions in the range 0.5-1 mm. The porous microstructure of the WO3 layer enhances the adsorption of gas molecules and hence promotes the gas sensitivity.
Figure 2 shows the typical NO2 response of Pt/YSZ/Pt/WO3 sensor at 600°C. The EMF changed quickly upon switching from air to different NO2 concentrations in air. At 600°C steady-state values were observed at all measured gas concentrations. The response ~at 90% of saturation EMF value! and recovery times were 40 s and 2 min, respectively. Figure 3 shows the linear correlation between the EMF saturation values and the logarithm of the gas concentration at different operating temperatures. Increasing the temperature, the EMF response decreased at all different gas concentrations. The largest sensitivity ~18.8 mV/decade! was found at 600°C. At temperatures below 600°C, the sensing responses were unstable and did not show a linear correlation with log NO2 concentrations.
Figure 4 shows that, in the presence of various CO concentrations, the EMF response of Pt/YSZ/Pt/WO3 sensors decreased and reached negative values, unlike the NO2 response ~always keeping the WO3 side at the positive terminal of the electrometer!. At 600°C the EMF values at any given concentration were smaller than those measured in the presence of NO2 . However the sensitivity at 600°C was 215 mV/decade, comparable to NO2 sensitivity at the same temperature.
An attempt to decrease the CO cross sensitivity was successful when Pt electrodes were replaced with Au. Figures 5a and b show the EMF response at 650°C of Au/YSZ/Au/WO3 sensors at different NO2 and CO concentrations, respectively. Upon NO2 exposure, a good response was observed with a sensitivity of 17.3 mV/decade. The response and recovery time were 3 and 7 min, respectively. Below 650°C the NO2 response was very slow, although the response magnitude was large. At all different CO concentrations, the EMF values were very low ~about 24.0 mV/decade at 1000 ppm of CO in air! and the response and the recovery times were very long ~4 and 15 min, respectively!. In comparison to Pt/YSZ/Pt/WO3 sensors, at 650°C the CO sensitivity of the Au/YSZ/Au/WO3 sensors dropped from 2 7 to24 mV/decade, as shown in Fig. 6.
Upon applied potential, the generated oxygen species are pumped through YSZ and give rise to a current through the solid electrolyte. As reported in a previous paper,22 upon exposure to NO2 electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements showed an increase in the resistance at the interface between the electrolyte and the oxide electrode. Under a positive bias, the decrease in the current, observed in the polarization measurements upon NO2 exposure, can be related to the increase in the resistance at the electrolyte/oxide electrode interface due to an increase in the number of oxygen ions accumulated at the WO3(Pt,Au)/YSZ interface. Under a negative bias, the oxygen ions are moved from the higher to lower O22 accumulation region ~metal electrode side!, and hence the negative current ﬂow increases as shown in the amperometric measurements. Upon CO exposure, the situation is just the opposite. 
Under positive bias voltage, the current ﬂow increases because the O22 carriers are moved toward a lower electrolyte/electrode barrier. The polarization and amperometric measurements conﬁrmed that the (Au)Pt/YSZ/Pt(Au)/WO3 sensors show an opposite behavior in presence of oxidizing and reducing gas atmosphere.
Both from potentiometric and amperometric measurements, it is clearly shown that the sensing Reactions 1 and 3 mainly take place at the WO3 electrodes and the electric responses are consistent with the fact that WO3 is an n-type semiconductor; upon applied potential the current decreases in the presence of NO2 and increases in the presence of CO.
YSZ-based electrochemical sensors with a WO3 auxiliary oxide electrode and Pt or Au electrodes were found to show stable and fast responses in the temperature range 600-700°C in the presence of NO2 . The sensors were exposed to the same atmospheric environment. The high operating temperatures make these sensors suitable for automotive applications. The use of Au electrodes instead of Pt lowers the response to CO, improving the selectivity of the sensors. The role of WO3 as an auxiliary electrode was established as crucial in the sensing mechanism of gases.
