Solid-state potentiometric CO2 sensors were fabricated using Na + conductor (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) as a solid electrolyte, Li2CO3 – BaCO3 fused carbonate with different compositions as a sensing electrode and the Na2Ti6O13 – Na2Ti3O7 or TiO2 – Na2Ti6O13 two phase systems as a reference electrode. The measured electromotive force of the investigated cells was found to be linear with the logarithm of CO2 partial pressure in the range 100 – 12 600 ppm of CO2 and in the temperature range 300 – 500 jC. The response time was ca. 40 – 120 s. The sensors exhibited reproducible signal during short-time experiments ( < 24 h). However, the unstable behaviour was observed during long-time measurements (several weeks) in case of some sensors, and it was found to be sensor composition dependent. A sensing mechanism is proposed on the basis of the sensing characteristics obtained. The possible explanation of the observed long-time instability of investigated sensors is also given.
In recent years, there have been increasing need for high-performance gas sensors for the detection and monitoring of various gases produced during combustion processes, such as SOx, NOx, CO2 or CO. The solid-state potentiometric devices seem to be the most promising sensors because of their low cost, short response time, good selectivity and quantitative characteristics. The results presented in the literature indicate that one of the main disadvantages of the proposed electrochemical sensors for SOx, NOx or CO2 is the signal instability during the long-time use [1].
It is well known that CO2 sensors build in with the sensing electrode based on the mixture of alkali carbonate with alkaline earth carbonate exhibit much better stability than that based on single carbonate. The possible explanation of such behaviour is the better stability of the binary carbonate against the water vapour [2 – 6].
The improvement of sensor stability can be also achieved by the proper definition of the reference electrode. The reference electrode material should reach the constant potential, which is controlled by Na + activity. The constant Na + activity at the reference electrode may be achieved by fixing both Na2O and oxygen activity [7]. Among many proposed systems, Na2Ti6O13 – Na2Ti3O7 and TiO2 – Na2Ti6O13 two-phase materials seem to be the best choice for fixing constant activity of Na2O [8]. On the other hand, controlling concentration of oxygen in the surrounding gas atmosphere enables to keep constant oxygen activity at reference electrode. The use of such a system allows also to construct the planar sensor, with no need of gas separated reference electrode in a wide range of temperature and carbon dioxide partial pressure [8].
Although many efforts have been done to improve the sensor stability it is important to note that most of them were based on empirical methods. The explanation of the sensing mechanism, as well as the understanding of solid state reactions taking places in the proposed cells are still the most important problems to be solved. Such a general approach is still lacking and this makes the optimization of the sensor design a very difficult task.
The aim of this work was to investigate the influence of the electrode material composition on the working mechanism and long-time stability of carbon dioxide solid-state potentiometric sensor based on the (Li – Ba)CO3jNasiconj(Na – Ti – O) electrochemical cells.
Three (Li – Ba)CO3jNasiconj(Na – Ti – O) sensors with different electrode material composition were prepared (cells A, B and C). The composition of prepared cells is given in Table 1.
The Na3Zr2Si2PO12 powder was prepared by sol – gel method, as described elsewhere [9]. The obtained powder was formed using pellet die (75 MPa), then isostatically pressed at 250 MPa and sintered at 1250 jC for 24 h. This material crystallised in the monoclinic structure with usual slight admixture of ZrO2 phase, as derived from X-ray diffraction patterns. This is in agreement with the results reported elsewhere [9]. The obtained pellets had a 94 – 96% of theoretical density (3.26 g/cm3).
The reference electrode materials were prepared from the TiO2 (anatase, supplied by Cookson Technology Centre, UK) and the Na2CO3 (Sigma-Aldrich) powders, by solid-state reaction method. The appropriate amounts of starting powders were mixed, pressed in pellet die and calcined at either 850 or 1050 jC, to obtain Na2Ti6O13 – Na2Ti3O7 or TiO2 – Na2Ti6O13 mixtures, respectively. After crushing and milling the material, the obtained powder was mixed with the organic binder and used for the formation of reference electrodes of the sensors. According to Xray measurements, the prepared materials were found to be two-phase mixtures of Na2Ti6O13 – Na2Ti3O7 or TiO2 – Na2Ti6O13. These results are in agreement with the data and phase diagram [10].
The Li2CO3 – BaCO3 fused carbonates were prepared by dry mixing of appropriate amounts of Li2CO3 and BaCO3 single carbonates, heating above the melting temperature, cooling down and milling the obtained material in agate mortar. The properties of such fused carbonates were studied earlier in detail [11].
The procedure of sensors preparation consisted of several steps. Firstly, one side of polished Nasicon pellet was covered with Pt paste and the platinum mesh was attached. After firing at 900 jC, the reference electrode material paste was applied and fired at 930 and 820 jC, for Na2Ti6O13 – Na2Ti3O7 or TiO2 – Na2Ti6O13 materials, respectively. Such prepared pellets were attached to Al2O3 tube using the ceramic binder (CERAMBOND 569) to allow the separation of both electrode compartments during the measurements. Finally, the sensing electrode material was dry pressed at the top of Nasicon pellet and heated above melting point of the carbonate [11]. After cooling down, the silver paste (Leitsilber 200) was placed at the top of sensing electrode material (carbonate) to form the metallic connection.
The observed discrepancy of the parameter n from theoretical value may be explained by ‘‘non-ideal behaviour’’ of either sensing electrode or solid electrolyte.
The electromotive force (EMF) of the prepared cells was measured as a function of temperature (300 – 500 jC), CO2 partial pressure (10 – 1260 Pa) and time, in the cell holder shown in Fig. 1. The construction of this cell holder allowed applying different gas mixtures at the both sides of the cell. The gas mixtures with different compositions were obtained by mixing the artificial air with mixture of artificial air   12 600 ppm of CO2, using MKS flow controllers. The EMF and the temperature were measured using Hewlett-Packard HP 34401A multimeter, connected to the multiplexer. The experimental setup was fully computer controlled and allowed the continuous long-time measurements. During the measurements, constant oxygen activity was kept at both electrodes.
A long-time drift of electromotive force (EMF) was observed during the experiments carried out for several weeks. Fig 4 shows the comparison of longtime stability of investigated cells under the operating conditions 500 jC and 12 600 ppm CO2. As can be seen, a different behaviour, depending on the cell composition, was observed. In case of cell A, the irreversible change of electromotive force was observed. On the contrary, in case of cells B and C, no such behaviour was found, only the reversible fluctuations of electromotive force, EMF, were detected. It was found that the variation with time of E0 was responsible for the total changes of EMF, whereas the parameter n remained the same. 
In this work, the results concerning the (Li – Ba)CO3jNasiconj(Na – Ti – O) potentiometric CO2 sensors has been described. The sensors exhibited reproducible signal during short-time experiments ( < 24 h). The measured electromotive force of the investigated cells was found to be linear with the logarithm of CO2 partial pressure in the range 100 – 12 600 ppm of CO2 and in the temperature range 300 – 500 jC. The response time was relatively short (below 60 s), the sensors exhibited very good signal stability in the presence of water vapour.
However, in case of some sensors unstable behaviour was observed during long-time measurements (several weeks). It was found that the variation with time of E0 was responsible for the total changes of EMF, whereas the parameter n remained the same. This suggests the unchanged sensing electrode reactions accompanied with the modification of electrode materials composition. The sensor instability was found to be dependent on composition electrode materials. This result leads to the general conclusion that the improvement of the long-time stability of the sensor may be possible by careful selection of the electrode materials composition.