Development of a sensor where both electrodes are exposed to the same gas offers simple design with no need for a separate reference gas with a complicated sealing system. Such sensors are still in research stage. The NASICON electrolyte, which has high ionic conductivity at the temperature of the exhaust gas mixture, allows such sensors to work without a heater, making a simple and miniaturised construction technique. Using two asymmetric electrodes, where each electrode has a different catalytic activity at a given temperature, can result in an era f, which is a function of partial pressure of NO. A NASICON sensor with SmFe03 as a sensing electrode and Au as an oxygen electrode was calibrated as a NO sensor and tested in oxidising atmosphere in simulated exhaust gases. The sensor responded quickly with reproducible emfvalues.
A sensor where both electrodes are exposed to the same gas offers simple design without the need for a separate reference gas and complicated sealing. When two identical type of electrodes in a solid electrolyte sensor are exposed to the same gas composition, the emf is zero, because the conditions on both sides of the cell are equal. If the electrodes are different from each other, i.e. each of them has a different catalytic activity, such that the reactions on both sides are different then an emfwould be detected. In order to test the response of different electrodes a simple cell design with asymmetric electrodes were used. Even at relatively low temperature of 560 K, SmFeO3 is assumed to catalyse with respect to NO oxidation, whereas Au is inactive. By also making a dense coating of Au, diffusion of NO to the NASICON surface is excluded and thus promoting further asymmetry. 
The perovskite oxicbs have been reported to work well as thick film semiconductor NOz sensors [1,2]. NASICON based electrochemical sensors with Au-Pd oxygen electrode and rate earth semiconducting perovskite oxides as sensing electrodes was used in an oxidising atmosphere [3,4] combining the advantages of the solid electrolytes and the perovskite oxides. The emf response was logarithmically dependent on NO2 concentration.
In the present study a tubular sensor, where both electrodes are exposed to the same gas atmosphere was tested for 
NO gas detection in a simulated exhaust conditions. NASICON solid electrolyte tube contained the sensing electrode SmFeO3 and outside the tube was sputtered gold, which acts as an oxygen electrode, allowing only O2 to pass through and reada the electrolyte surface [5]. The sensor was heated to the working temperature by the hot gases. The emfwas calibrated as a function of the NO concentration in the gas mixture.
The solid electrolyte NASICON was prepared by a conventional ball-milling technique, as presented schematically in Fig. 2 and the reactions are described in eq. (1). In this method NazCO3, Zr02, SiO 2 and NH4H2PO a were used as raw materials and comprises wet mixing, two steps of calcination at 443 K overnight and at 1423 K for 5 hours, followed by 24 to 48 hours milling to break the agglomerates, and addition of a polymer binder polyvinyl butyral, vinyl alcohol, vinyl acetate copolymer
The oxygen electrode was prepared by sputtering in Edwards S150B Sputter Coater. The thickness of the electrode was controlled by the sputtering time. The gold electrode on the surface of NASICON (Fig. 7) with thickness = 10 ~tm was used in the experiments. A closer look at the coating as shown in Fig. 8, reveals a dense structure, essential for its use as a semi-permeable membrane.
Two oxygen concentrations were tested (0.01 atm and 0.05 alan) with diluent nitrogen. The range of NO concentrations used was 50 to 1000 ppm. The emf reading sample interval was set at 10 seconds. The stabilization criterion for the monitored signal was set at 1% deviation during 10 seconds and data was automatically recorded using PC based data logger.
The experimental data for the experiment with pO 2 = 0.01 arm are shown in Figs. 10 and 11. The sensor gives a reasonably quick and stable response to the change in the concentration of the test gas composition. The emf values reached for the same concentration of NO are similar regardless of the approach (fi'om low to high concentration or in the opposite direction). On the basis of the above experimental data the calibration equations were derived and plotted in Fig. 12. At each fixed oxygen concentration the emf values increased with the increase of the NO concentration. The emf is a logarithmic function of NO concentration with a positive slope. The calculated number of electrons for the electrochemical reaction is 2 when pO 2 was 0.01 atm and 3 when pO2 was 0.05 atm.
Therefore, it can be expected that at a given pO2 value, the electrode potential will increase as NO concentration increases. The slope in the emfversus log (pNO) graph will be determined by the polarization curves on a selected catalytic material at a specified temperature. Miura [11] also observed that emf change is in the opposite direction with increasing NO, in the gas phase. In the current work, at the relatively low temperature, where SmFeO3 can promote the formation of NO:, the presence of both NO and NO2 can produce a complex effect on the mixed potential model. Wachsman [12] has suggested the possibility of substantial change in the gaseous concentration in contact with perovskite electrodes, thus leading to a more complex outcome. As shown in Figs. 12 and 13, emf is suppressed when pO2 is increased from 0.01 to 0.05 atm at any given pNO value. Higher pO2 is expected to result in a higher pNO2, and thus act in opposition to NO sensitivity.
A simplified NASICON sensor with SmFeO3 as a sensing electrode and Au as an oxygen electrode was calibrated as a NO sensor and tested in oxidising atmosphere in simulated exhaust conditions. The sensor responded quickly with reproducible emf values in the tested NO range (50-1000 ppm). Sensor response was found to be dependent of pO2. The mixed potential theory is a plausible model to explain the sensor response. Further complication to the response can be attributed to the semiconducting SmFeO 3 sensing electrode. 
Further work on design of the planar NASICON sensor with SmFeO3 sensing electrode and Au oxygen electrode for the working conditions of the exhaust gas can lead to a cheap NO~ sensor. The NASICON electrolyte, which has high ionic conductivity at the temperature of the exhaust gas mixture, allows those sensors to work without a heater, making simple and miniaturised construction techniques therefore possible.