Potentiometric CO 2 sensors based on the Na + conducting solid electrolyte Nasicon have been investigated. The sensor arrangement may be described as chemical sensor of type III, (-) Pt(or Au), Nao.9CoO 2 I Nasicon I Na2CO 3, Pt(or Au) (+), with Nao.9CoO 2 as reference electrode and Na2CO 3 as auxiliary or sensing electrode. It is shown that major problems are related to the magnitude of the voltage and long-term stability of this type of sensor. The measured EMFs are generally reduced compared to the values calculated from literature data of standard Gibbs energies of formation. This observation is ascribed to reactions at the interfaces and competing surface reactions. The interfacial processes may occur at both electrolyte / sensing and electrolyte / reference electrode, and represent charged capacitors. It has also been observed that the slope of the measured EMF as a function of the CO 2 partial pressure is reversed in some cases. 
This phenomenon may be related to the possible reduction of NazO which is dissolved in Nasicon during the formation of Na2CO3 upon an increase of the CO2 partial pressure.
For many other applications, there are no similarly suitable solid anion conductors available for species such as CO32-, 8042- or NO 3- for detecting CO 2, SO x and NO~ gases, respectively. For this purpose, an electrochemical gas sensor has been constructed by employing a solid electrolyte with a solid intermediate layer, which equilibrates with the detecting gas and is thus sensitive to this gas. The principle of this type III sensor has been described by Weppner [ 1] as surface modification of solid electrolytes. H6tzel [2] studied different types of sensors for C12, NO 2 and CO 2 using Ag ยง conductors such as AgI or Na*-conductors such as Na-ff'- alumina with appropriate gas sensitive layers such as AgC1, AgNO 3, NaNO 3 or Na2COy
Since then, much work has been published on type m sensors. Yamazoe et al. [3-5] used a binary carbonate auxiliary phase such as Na2CO3-BaCO 3 as sensing electrode. Kumar [6] proposed devices based on combinations of two or more solid electrolytes, such as an oxide ion conductor (yttria-stabilized ZrO2) with a sodium ion conductor (Na-B"-alumina or Nasicon). Various reference electrodes have also been proposed, such as defined gases [7], Ag [8], Au2Na [9], Na2Ti6013 with TiO 2 or Na2Ti307 [10], and Na0.8CoO1. 9 [11].
The concept of surface modification of solid electrolytes for gas sensors has been discussed by Weppner [12,13], The gas equilibrates with a mixed, predominantly electronically conducting compound. A solid electrolyte is employed as a probe for one of the components. The surface modification directs the cell reaction in such a way that both the gas and the electroactive component get involved, although the electroactive component is different from the gas. The essential feature of a galvanic cell is the voltage drop across the interface of the surface modifying layer and the solid ionic conductor, which compensates the tendency of the diffusion of ions from the material of higher chemical potential of the ionic and electronic species to the second material of lower values. 
The electrostatic potential drop is generated by the differences of the chemical potentials of both the mobile ions and the electrons. Figure 1 shows the schematic arrangement of type III sensors.
Nasicon of the composition Na32Zr2Si2.2Po.sOt2 has been prepared by the chemical sol-gel method by hydrolysis and condensation of an alcoholic solution of Zr(OC3H7) a and Si(OC2H5) 4 together with an aqueous solution of NaOH and NHaH2PO 4 [14]. For the preparation of Nao.9CoO2, an appropriate mixture of the starting materials Na202 (Merck, 95+%) and Co30 ~ (Fluka, > 71% Co) was heated in an A1203 crucible at 900 ~ for 24 h with a heating and cooling rate of 2 ~ Na2CO 3 could also be used instead of Na202. The composition of the sodium cobalt bronze was verified through ICP measurements, by measuring the Na/Co ratio [11]. Three different materials have been used as sensing electrode: pure Na_~CO~, a mixture of LieCO3, Na2CO3 + VO2 and a mixture of Na2CO3 with Au-Paste. 
The addition of VO~ and Au should reduce the melting point and increase the electronic conductivity of Na2CO> Pure gas sensitive Na2CO3 was applied either by painting a paste of Na2CO 3 suspended in isopropanol or by direct melting onto the surface of Nasicon. For the composite electrode, 4l wt.% Na2CO3, 55 wt.% Li2CO~ and 4 wt.% VO2 were mixed and molten at 600 ~ The resulting melt was ground after cooling and the powders were then pasted with isopropanol. The Au-Na~_CO3 electrode was prepared by mixing 60 wt.% Na2CO3 and 40 wt.% Au-paste (Demetron Leitgold M 8000). Figure 2 shows the schematic construction of the sensor.
Equation (4) assumes that the take-up of electrons by the sodium ions and the reaction with both CO2 and 02 occur simultaneously in one process. If that is not the case and, as an example, in a first step sodium is being reduced or reacts only with oxygen to form sodium oxide and subsequently the sodium carbonate is being formed by conventional chemical reaction, the last step does not involve a redox process and is not seen by the EMF. The voltage is smaller than expected and the energy of the chemical reaction is converted into heat. 
However, the situation changes when a substantial amount of sodium carbonate has already been formed at the triple-phase boundary. In this case, the sodium activity at the interface, i.e. of the sodium carbonate is being measured. This quantity is being influenced by the activities of oxygen and CO, in the gas phase and thus is a measure of the partial pressures of the two gases. It is, however, necessary that the sodium carbonate equilibrates with both gases, which requires the motion of at least two species, e.g., sodium and oxide ions. While sodium appears to be sufficiently mobile, this is much less the case for oxygen and thermodynamic equilibrium may not be achieved, which results in a deviation of the EMF from the value given in eq. (4).
Some main results are presented in the following figures and will be discussed in detail in the following: Figure 3 shows the EMFs of the sensor construction presented in Fig. 2a with pure Na2CO 3 electrode, which was prepared by painting a Na2CO 3 paste onto the surface of the Nasicon electrolyte. The measured cell voltage showed positive values as predicted by eq. (4) and the slopes of the lines indicated two-electron process. However, the measured values were lower than the ones calculated from eq. (4) using thermodynamic data. After an operation of 4 days at 400 ~ the sensor showed a reverse of the slope. Deterioration of the porous Na2CO 3 layer was observed. For the following experiments, new electrode materials were prepmed.
Sensors of the type shown in Fig, 2b were prepared using a Li2CO3+Na2CO3+VO2 sensing electrode. The partial pressure of CO 2 was cycled between 100 ppm and 1000 ppm. The temperature of the sensors was controlled by applying a constant voltage to the integrated Pt-heater on the back of the sensor. Results are presented in Figs. 4, 5 and 6, The sensor showed reproducible results during all cycling tests. However, different sensors prepared by apparently identical methods showed different values of the cell voltages. 
Long-term tests were carried out on two different sensors in the laboratory environment. Both sensors showed stable cell voltages over extended periods time of more than 60 days. The fluctuation of the sensor signals corresponded to the day-night cycles accompanied with air circulation in the laboratory.
This reaction represents an increase in the sodium activity and corresponds to a negative slope. It has to be assumed, however, that the electrolyte does not take up oxygen from the gas which should result in a re-oxidation of sodium. Such a behavior may be possible since oxygen is not readily mobile in this compound. 
In some cases, Steudel [17] has even observed a negative slope for the electrochemical cell (I) when a pasted porous NazCO 3 layer was used as the measuring electrode. It is obvious that both the reference and the measuring electrode play an important role for the generation of the cell's EMF. The EMF E determined by eq. (4) represents a thermodynamic equilibrium value which is based on the most energetically favorable reactions. The thermodynamic equilibrium is often not established due to kinetic restrictions. The requirement that Na ยง ions from the electrolyte, electrons from the electronic lead, CO2 from the gas phase and oxygen from a dissociated oxygen molecule react with each other in a single reaction is often not fulfilled. A simplified view is described in Fig. 8.
Furthermore, Nasicon, though being a good sodium ion conductor, is a complex multi-component system. Many intermediate compounds such as Na-zirconates, Na-silicates, Na-phosphates, Na-oxides, Si-oxides, etc. with a wide range of stoichiometry may be formed at the two interfaces electrolyte I electrode. The amounts of the intermediate products may be very small, maybe even not detectable by XRD-measurements. Nevertheless, once an intermediate compound involving the electrons from the electronic lead is formed at the interface, this compound contributes to the cell voltage. If the formed intermediate compound is electrically non-conducting, it has the property of a capacitor with a dielectric constant, which influences the measured cell voltage and provides a parallel shift of the voltage. 
In addition, the reference electrode of the sensors shown schematically in Figs. 2a and 2b was sealed with glass based on sodium silicates. Either this glass material or the reaction products of the glass with Na0.9CoO 2 or with Nasicon may act as reference electrode. The paste of Na0.gCoO 2 reference electrode was made by the addition of glass agent (Schott 8422). The Na0.9CoO 2 and in this way the sodium activity of the reference electrode would be reduced and thus, the measured EMF may deviate from the values calculated using pure Na0.gCoO 2 data.
From the above discussions, it is concluded that both reference and sensing electrodes play important roles for the determination of the sensor EMF. Both electrodes should be mixed electronically and ionically conducting materials. A sealed reference electrode with a defined constant sodium activity should be used. Sensors with Au-N~CO 3 electrode showed good long-term stability. For further investigations, more attention should be paid to interfacial phenomena. Good contacts between the different materials are mandatory. Other systems, which ave less complex than Nasicon, such as LiSiPO (Li4SiO 4 + Li3PO4), can be suitable candidates for further improved CO~ sensors.