As for the electrolyte, we do have a large number of inorganic solids exhibiting high lithium ion conductivity,4,5 but commercial lithium batteries at present make use of organic liquid/polymer-based electrolytes,1,6 for technological reasons. Current research effort is directed toward ﬁnding better materials in terms of cost, energy density and safety for all the three constituents of a lithium battery.1,6 In the search for lithium battery materials, metal oxides exhibiting high lithium mobility offer attractive opportunities.
High lithium mobility manifests itself in several measureable ways,7 conductivity and ion exchange. While the relationship between diffusion and ionic conductivity in inorganic solids is well established through the Nernst–Einstein relation (conductivity, s ~ Ne2D/kT, where D is the diffusion coefﬁcient of the conducting ion and N its number per unit volume), the relationship between ionic conductivity and ion exchange is not as straightforward. England et al.,8 who investigated the problem of ion exchange in inorganic oxides, point out the details: while ionic ion conduction involves single ion diffusion coefﬁcients, exchange depends on interdiffusion coefﬁcients, involving both the in-coming and out-going ions. Also, the crystal structure plays a crucial role in deﬁning migration pathways. The kinetic (activation) barriers for both processes may not be the same. 
Therefore, a fast ion-conducting solid does not necessarily undergo fast ion exchange.9 For example, NASICON (Na3Zr2PSi2O12) which is a well-known fast sodium ion conductor, does not undergo facile ion exchange; it requires forcing conditions for ion exchange with other monovalent is not cations. Similarly, a facile ion-exchange material necessarily a fast is LiTi2(PO4)3, where Li1/H1 exchange is facile, but conductivity is poor.
The work of England et al.8 has shown that ion exchange is quite a widespread phenomenon among several inorganic solids, considerable exchange occurring within reasonable time limits, even when diffusion coefﬁcients are small (D # 10211 cm2 sec21). Also, ion exchange does not necessarily require defects/nonstoichiometry; stoichiometric solids could exhibit fast exchange of one of its constituents. Following this pioneering work, ion exchange has not only become one of the soft-chemical (chimie douce) routes10 for synthesis of metastable solids that are otherwise inaccessible, but also a convenient and useful technique to probe the mobility of ions through solids in general,9 particularly lithium ions in metal oxides, providing valuable complementary information in the search for new materials exhibiting fast ion conduction as well as reversible insertion/extraction of lithium. 
Over the years, we in Bangalore have investigated the mobility of lithium in several oxide systems through ion exchange and ionic conductivity, as well as redox insertion/extraction reactions.
A large number of oxides of the general formula AMO2 and A2MO3 (A ~ Li/Na; M ~ transition metal) crystallize in rocksalt-related superstructures.11 Among them, a-NaFeO2 is a prototypical structure (Fig. 1) that is adopted by several LiMO2 (M ~ V, Cr, Co, Ni) oxides.12 The structure consists of a cubic close-packed (CCP) array of anions, wherein A and M atoms occupy alternate (111) cation planes. Shannon et al.13 were probably the ﬁrst to report an ion exchange with this structure. They synthesized delafossite (Fig. 2) oxides, PdMO2 and AgMO2 (M ~ Cr, Co, Rh), from LiMO2 phases via the following ion-exchange reactions.
Working with a-NaCrO2 (a-NaFeO2 structure), England et al.8 have shown that facile Na1/Li1 as well as Na1/H1 exchange occurs in this material topochemically. Subsequently, the work of Poeppelmeier and Kipp14a and Dronskowski14b on the Li1/ H1 exchange in LiAlO2 clearly established the role of structure in ion exchange. This oxide crystallizes in three different structures, a, b and c, of which only the a-form, which has the a-NaFeO2 structure, undergoes Li1/H1 exchange in molten benzoic acid. The band c-forms, where both Li and Al are tetrahedrally coordinated (Fig. 3), do not exhibit similar ion exchange. Interestingly, other rocksalt superstructures, for example, a-, band c-LiFeO2, which do not have a layered arrangement of cations,12 do not show facile ion exchange.
The correlation between ion exchange and redox insertion/ extraction of lithium in the a-NaFeO2 structure is clear. 
The work of England et al.8 has shown that the Li1 ion is unique, having a considerable mobility in close-packed oxide lattices, unlike other alkali metal cations, which require more open-channel/layered structures for their mobility. A Li1 mobility corresponding to D # 1027–1028 cm2 s21 appears to be common in several close-packed oxides.8 A dramatic illustration of the high mobility of Li1 in hexagonal closepacked (HCP) oxide structures is provided by the work of Rice and Jackel31 on Li1/H1 exchange in LiNbO3 and LiTaO3. Both these oxides undergo smooth Li1/H1 exchange in hot aqueous acids (for example, 9 M H2SO4, 125 uC, 8 h; to give HNbO3 this exchange is that during the reaction, the HCP anion array of LiMO3 (M ~ Nb, Ta) is transformed into a cubic ReO3-like array without breaking the M–O bonds (Fig. 4). 
The mechanism, as was ﬁrst pointed out by Megaw,32 involves a simple twisting of the octahedral framework along the hexagonal c axis of LiMO3 (the [111] direction for the ReO3 structure) so as to change the M–O–M bond angle from 157 to 180u. The fact that the same transformation occurs in reverse with ReO3 on reductive insertion of lithium33 to give LiReO3 again underscores the close relationship between Li1/H1 exchange and redox insertion/deinsertion of lithium. Considering that the anion array of the rutile structure is only slightly distorted from the ideal HCP array,34 it is not surprising that the trirutile oxides LiNbWO6 and LiTaWO6 also undergo a similar Li1/H1 exchange35 in hot 9–13 M H2SO4. Here, the mechanism36 likely involves transformation of the tetragonal close-packed array of anions of the rutile structure to a HCP array, followed by a rearrangement of cations to give a LiNbO3-like structure for LiMWO6 (M ~ Nb/Ta) that eventually converts to ReO3-like HMWO6.
Although the spinel (AB2O4) structure (space group Fd3m) [Fig. 1(d)] is not exactly a superstructure of rocksalt, it has the same CCP array of anions as in rocksalt. The B2O4 framework of edge-shared octahedra (16d and 32e sites) provides an interstitial space of interconnected octahedral (16c) and tetrahedral (8b) empty sites. The empty octahedra and tetrahedra are interconnected with one another through common faces and edges to provide 3D diffusion pathways for Li1 ion diffusion.2 Chemical diffusion coefﬁcients are in the month) for the Li1/H1 exchange and the product, HSbO3, retains the parent HCP array.38 More interestingly, trirutile39,40 LiMWO6 and the related LiMMoO6 (M ~ Nb, Ta) undergo a smooth topotactic Li1/H1 exchange in dilute (2 M) HNO3 at room temperature, layered oxides HMWO6?H2O and HMMoO6?H2O, which retain the parent rutile structure (Fig. 5). The exchange reveals a fast 2D mobility of Li1 in this structure, which is supported by diffusion coefﬁcient measurements.
The high Li1 mobility coupled with the strong Brønsted acidity of HMWO6 has been exploited to synthesize polyaniline–HMWO6 nanocomposites that exhibit electrochemical lithium insertion.41
In this brief survey of metal oxides containing mobile lithium, we have made an attempt to provide a chemical perspective on the topic, bringing out the relationships between crystal structure and properties associated with mobile lithium. Ionic redox insertion/deinsertion and ion exchange are the common measurable properties that depend on lithium ion mobility. Among them, ion exchange is a convenient property to study, and gives valuable information on lithium mobility. While facile lithium ion exchange does not automatically guarantee a high ionic conductivity or redox insertion/deinsertion of lithium, it provides useful insights into structure and bonding requirement for high lithium mobility in a solid. Thus, high lithium mobility is found in both close-packed and open-framework structures. Within the close-packed structures, speciﬁc cation orderings seem to favor high mobility. 
For example, among the several rocksalt-based oxide superstructures, the a-NaFeO2 structure, consisting of alternate (111) layers of monovalent and trivalent cations in a CCP anion array, appears to be the most favored arrangement for high lithium mobility, both under ion-exchange (e.g. a-LiAlO2) and redox conditions (e.g. LiCoO2). The spinel structure, containing an interconnected interstitial space of empty octahedral and tetrahedral sites, is another close-packed structure where high lithium mobility, both under ion-exchange and redox conditions, is found, as revealed by the work on LiMn2O4 and related spinel oxides. Among the HCP-related structures, both LiNbO3/LiTaO3 and ordered trirutile phases, such as LiNbWO6, exhibit high lithium mobility, although the related LiSbO3 and LiSbWO6 revealed by Li1/H1 exchange show poor mobility, as experiments, highlighting the effect of the difference in bonding between d10 Sb51 and d0 Nb51/Ta51 on lithium mobility. 
Redox lithium mobility in the HCP-based olivine oxide LiFePO4 makes it an attractive positive material for the next generation of lithium batteries. The high lithium mobility in the HCP-based LISICON oxides in ionic conductivity and ion-exchange studies suggests the possibility of developing new positive electrode materials based on this structure. The perovskite structure also favors high lithium mobility, as exempliﬁed by (Li,La)TiO3 and our recent work on LiA1.65%0.35B1.3B’1.7O9 (A ~ Sr, Ca; B ~ Ti, Zr; B’ ~ Nb, Ta), but further work is required to understand the factors involved. Among the framework oxides, NASICON (Na3Zr2PSi2O12) that remains unique as a structure supports high lithium mobility under ion-exchange, ionic conductivity and redox insertion/deinsertion experiments. We hope that this survey will prove useful in the ongoing search for new materials exhibiting high lithium ion mobility for battery applications.