Lithium magnesium molybdates of the general formula Li222xMg21x(MoO4)3, for 0 ¡ x ¡ 0.3, have been synthesized and their structure and lithium ion conductivity investigated. Determination of crystal structure of one of the members, Li2Mg2(MoO4)3, has revealed a three-dimensional framework consisting of metal–oxygen octahedra and trigonal prisms (where Li and Mg reside) which are interconnected by MoO4 tetrahedra. Although the framework is three-dimensional, lithium-ion conductivity appears to be restricted to the onedimensional channels formed by interconnected trigonal prisms. Isotypic molybdates, Li3M(MoO4)3 (M ~ Cr, Fe), where lithium ions occupy exclusively the trigonal prismatic channels, exhibit a higher lithium ion conductivity than Li222xMg21x(MoO4)3, lending support to the idea that the conductivity is one-dimensional in these materials. 7Li NMR spectral data are consistent with this interpretation.
Metal oxides containing mobile lithium ions are important materials as electrodes and electrolytes for lithium batteries.1,2 The mobility of the lithium ion in solids manifests itself in the following measureable properties: ionic conductivity/diffusion, redox insertion/deinsertion and ion exchange. While insertion/ deinsertion of lithium under electrochemical redox conditions determines the practical use of a solid as an electrode,3 a high lithium ion conductivity is important for the development of electrolyte materials for lithium batteries.4 A high mobility of lithium occurs both in anion close packed metal oxides (e.g. LiCoO2 and LiMn2O4 spinels) as well as in open framework oxides. NASICON (Na3Zr2PSi2O12) is a well-known example of the latter,5 whose framework, consisting of interconnected metal–oxygen octahedra and tetrahedra, is known to support a high mobility for lithium giving rise to fast lithium ion conduction (e.g. Li11xTi22xAlx(PO4)3 and LiTaAl(PO4)3)6,7 as well as lithium (e.g. Li2NaV2(PO4)3).
7Li NMR spectra were acquired on a DSX 500 Bruker spectrometer equipped with a 4 mm MAS probe head from Bruker. The 7Li resonating frequency was 194.32 MHz and all chemical shifts are referenced to a LiCl solid sample (or saturated solution in water). Sample were spun at about 10 kHz, and large spectral excitation conditions, in single pulse mode, were used with small pulse length (usually 1 ms) and large RF ﬁeld (y100 kHz). Analysis of spectra was carried out with Winﬁt software.18
Lithium ion conductivities were measured on sintered pellets coated with gold paste (cured at 600 uC for 6 h) using a HP4194A Impedance/Gain-Phase Analyzer over the frequency range 100 Hz–15 MHz in the temperature range 30–600 uC in air. For each sample, measurement was made for both heating and cooling cycles. Samples were equilibrated at constant temperature for about 1 hour prior to each impedance measurement.
Reaction of Li2CO3, MgO and MoO3 in the solid state around 575–600 uC yielded a new molybdate different from Li2MoO4 and MgMoO4. We could grow single crystals of the new molybdate from the constituents, as described in the Experimental section. The atomic microprobe analysis of single crystals of the new molybdate showed the Mg:Mo ratio to be 2:3. Independent lithium analysis using ﬂame photometry showed the presence of two lithium atoms per formula unit corresponding to the formula Li2Mg2(MoO4)3.
We determined the crystal structure of the molybdate from single crystal X-ray diffraction data. The ﬁnal cycle of reﬁnement of the structure of Li2Mg2(MoO4)3 resulted in residuals of R ~ 0.0308 and Rw ~ 0.0240. Final values of positional parameters are given in Table 2. A list of selected bond distances and bond valence sums19,20 is given in Table 3. The interplanar distances and intensities calculated from the structure using the program POWDERCELL21 are in agreement with the observed interplanar spacings and intensities. These data will be deposited with ICDD.
7Li NMR spectra of Li222xMg21x(MoO4)3 (x ~ 0 and 0.3) compounds were recorded. They both exhibit a central line and spinning side bands due to the ﬁrst order quadrupolar interaction (Fig. 3). However, a close inspection of the central line shows that it is not symmetrical. The order of magnitude of the quadrupolar interaction can be evaluated by the ﬁrst order spinning sideband. It leads to NuQ in the range of 30 to 50 kHz and precludes that the line shape of the central line can be due to the second order quadrupolar interaction effect. Therefore, the line shape must be related to several sites.
Considering that both the line width and the quadrupolar interaction strongly depend on the site symmetry, we can suggest that component 1, with the smallest set of line width, NuQ and Li content, corresponds to the M(2) 4c site located on a mirror plane. With the largest NuQ value, component 3 could be assigned to M(1), an 8d site with the lowest symmetry. Therefore, component 2 would correspond to the M(3) site, in fair agreement with its Li content which is the largest for x ~ 0 and shows the most important decrease when x increases. The much larger line width of component 2 with respect to components 1 and 3 could be a consequence of the higher mobility of Li-ions in the M(3) sites. As a matter of fact, if the jump frequency of Li1 is of the same order of magnitude as the Larmor frequency, a signiﬁcant line broadening is expected.
An examination of the framework structure (Fig. 1) for possible pathways for lithium ion migration reveals that although the framework is three-dimensional, lithium ion mobility would be restricted mainly to the one-dimensional channels formed by alternating cation-occupied and vacant trigonal prisms [M(3) site] (Fig. 1d). One could visualize migration of lithium from an occupied trigonal prism to the neighboring vacant prism through the rectangular windows that are common between them. Dimensions of the rectangular window (y3.95 6 y 4.00 A˚ ) would easily permit such a migration of lithium. A similar pathway does not exist for the migration of lithium ions at the octahedral M(1) and M(2) sites. Having rationalized that lithium ion conduction in these materials is most likely restricted to trigonal prismatic chains along the a direction (Fig. 1d), we expected that the presence of divalent cations at this site would impede the motion of lithium and therefore decrease the lithium ion conductivity. 
Lithium magnesium molybdates of the formula Li222xMg21x(MoO4)3 (0 ¡ x ¡ 0.3), possessing a novel framework consisting of interconnected octahedra, trigonal prisms and MoO4 tetrahedra, have been investigated for lithium ion conduction. 