Li atoms can be inserted electrochemically into the vacant sites in the host framework structure of hexagonal Cr0.5Nb1.5(PO4)3 (an analog of Nasicon). Intercalation of lithium into this compound is achieved electrochemically at room temperature. The compound, Cr0.5Nb1.5(PO4)3, is used as a cathode of a secondary battery without any lithium initially present in the starting material. The performance of this material is discussed in view of its discharge. XRD, SEM and ESCA spectral studies are carried out on electrode surfaces before and after the insertion/ extraction reactions and the results are presented.
Secondary lithium batteries using lithium intercalation compounds as the cathode and lithium metal as the anode have been studied intensively this last decade. The cathode of a secondary lithium battery is a host compound into/from which the working Li‡ ion of the electrolyte can be inserted/ extracted reversibly as a guest species over a large solubility range. However, it has been demonstrated that this type of battery (lithium metal as anode) is unlikely to reach commercialization because of safety problems. To solve this problem, a safe approach to rechargeable lithium batteries is to replace lithium metal with a lithium intercalation compound, hence referred to as a lithium-ion battery [1,2]. This was developed by Sony Energetic Inc., in 1990 [3]. The cathode materials suitable for Li-ion batteries are layered compounds are LiCoO2 [3], LiNiO2 [4], and LiNi1 yCoyO2 [5]. 
Considering the high cost of Co and Ni, recently, the three-dimensional LiMn2O4 spinel phase has also been studied extensively as a cathode for Li-ion batteries. However, the cathode material must be such that it is easy to intercalate and de-intercalate lithium ions during the discharge and charge processes. This limits the use of layered and spinel structures as cathode material.
The removal of Li from the layered Li1 xMO2 oxides larger x relative to the renders them unstable at displacement of M cations to the Li layers [5].
On the other hand, the spinel framework has no degrees of freedom for opening the interstitial space of the closely packed oxide ion array in which Li‡ ions move, so the Li1‡x[Mn2]O4 cathode is limited to low-power applications [6].
Therefore, there is a motivation to identify an alternative framework host having a somewhat open interstitial space and, at the same time, an appropriate voltage using an inexpensive and environmentally friendly transition metal. Host are that has recently been explored NASICON-type compounds, many of which are good ionic conductors. Many have been found to have potential applications as cathode materials, because their crystal structures have a three-dimensional framework that allows Li ions to diffuse easily [7]. In this regard, Yoshida et al. [7] recently investigated the use of lithium transition metal phosphate as a cathode material. In this study, we explored NZP (NaZr2P3O12) phases with a general formula A1‡M2 4‡P3O12 possessing a hexagonal symmetry for the potential use as a cathode material without any lithium present in the A-site initially. 
The NZP structure is versatile in that chemical substitution by a variety of elements, is possible at Na, Zr and P sites giving rise to an isostructural phase, including a vacancy at the A-site, and leading to the formation of Cr0.5Nb1.5(PO4)3, transition metal phosphate, without any lithium initially. In this work, we show that Li has been inserted electrochemically into the vacant A-site in the NZP phase at room temperature [8]. Understanding the structure and composition of this material upon lithium insertion is important in view of its potential application as a battery electrode for the development of rechargeable Li batteries. This compound may be used as a cathode for a secondary battery, without containing any lithium in its structure, and this may be considered to environmentally friendly and safer than the lithium containing counterparts. 
The objective of this work is to elucidate the transition metal phosphate as a cathode for lithium secondary batteries and its role during discharge and charge processes. Preliminary results of characterization, including cycling life, SEM as well as XPS measurements, are presented.
The transition metal phosphate Cr0.5Nb1.5(PO4)3 was prepared by solid-state reaction in air. Starting materials were Cr2O3 (99.9%), Nb2O5 (99.9%) and NH4H2PO4 powder. The stoichiometric mixture was mixed thoroughly in a mortar and heated at 200 8C for 12 h to drive off NH3, H2O and other gaseous products. The mixture was then heated at 600 8C for 5 h and at 930 8C for 12 h with intermittent grinding. Phase identi®cation and evaluation of lattice parameters of the product were carried out by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) using Cu Ka radiation. Electrochemical performance was evaluated with cylindrical test cells. The procedures for the fabrication and the measurement of lithium rechargeable cells are almost the same as those described elsewhere [8]. The electrode active materials were mixed with 15 wt.% of acetylene black and with 10 wt.% of PVDF, and then pressed (wt.%: weight percent). The mixture was ground and then pressed into a disk with a diameter of 10 mm at 78 MPa. 
The thickness of each disk was 1 mm and the weight was about 60 mg. Each disk was dried at 80 8C for 30 min. An electrochemical testing cell was constructed with the disk as the cathode, the lithium foil as the anode, and filter paper as the separator. The electrolyte was 1 M LiClO4 in EC/PC, 3:1 vol. (Tomiyama Chemicals; EC: ethylene carbonate, PC: propylene carbonate). Cell performance was evaluated galvanostatically at a current density of 0.25 mA/cm2 with the aid of charge±discharge unit (Hokuto Denko HJ-201B). The cells were ®rst discharged and then charged at constant current density between the potential limit of 1.5 V for discharge and 3.2 V for charge. All electrochemical measurements were carried out in a glove box ®lled with argon at room temperature. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (JEOL, JPS-9000 SX, Shimadzu) using Mg Ka radiation was used to analyze the chemical binding energy of the sample. We have used a 285.0 eV value for the C 1s signal of hydrocarbons for charge referencing spectra. 
The surface of the electrodes was observed with a scanning electron microscope (JEOL T220A, Nihon Denshi).
The X-ray diffraction pattern of Cr0.5Nb1.5(PO4)3 prepared by solid-state reaction in air at 930 8C is shown in Fig. 1a. The lattice parameters of the compound matched with those of the hexagonally structured TiNb(PO4)3 powder diffraction file (JCPDS) 25-0984. The data reveal that the sample is a multiphase compound with chromium phosphate and niobium phosphate as impurities. Unless the preparation temperatures are optimized, impurity phases are always formed. Although the compound is a multiphase one, interestingly, the intercalation still occurs and shows high discharge capacity as shown in this paper. The phases are stable on exposure to air and moisture at room temperature. Longterm exposure, however, leads to surface oxidation and hence the compounds are stored in a desicator. The electrochemical behavior of the sample that is exposed moisture shows a capacity loss of 25%; however, the structure remains unaltered.
To understand the intermediate intercalation process, electrochemical cycling with relaxation periods was performed. The open-circuit voltage curve of an electrochemical cell provides information of the behavior of the cell under the condition of zero current ¯ow. The open-circuit voltage of the Li|Cr0.5Nb1.5(PO4)3 cell for 0  x  2:3 as a function of x in the Fig. 3 was measured as follows: the cell was ®rst discharged to a desired x (x ˆ 0:2) and then left on open circuit (zero current ¯ow) for 2 h. The ®nal cell voltage was recorded as the open-circuit voltage for that composition. Theoretically, after the relaxation step, the cell voltage had to reach the original open-circuit voltage value [11]. The observed discrepancy in the electrochemical behavior is due to the short relaxation time especially at the lower cut-off voltage, indicating a low intercalation speed. The X-ray diffraction patterns in Fig. 1b and c were obtained following Li‡ insertion and extraction, respectively. 
The X-ray diffraction pattern of the lithiated compound (Fig. 1b) supports the contention that electrochemical lithiation is involved during the intercalation process. The X-ray diffraction pattern after lithiation is very similar to that initially observed before lithiation except for a limited structure expansion that is revealed by the shift of the peaks to smaller angles. The parent phase h k l re¯ections are retained for all the samples (before Li insertion, after Li insertion/extraction), indicating that hexagonal symmetry is retained. In NZP and related phases, the 3D-linked interstitial space is occupied by alkali A ions [12]. The interstitial space contains two different sites for A ions: type I sites situated between two ZrO6 octahedra along the c-axis with a distorted octahedral coordination, and type II sites located between endless columns with a trigonal prismatic coordination [13]. 
In NZP and related phases the type I sites are either partially or completely filled and the type II sites are empty. From Table 1, it is understood that the lattice parameter along the a-axis increases upon lithium insertion and decreases upon extraction. This is expected if Li-ions occupy type II sites [13]. Moreover, the lattice parameter along the c-axis decreases upon lithium insertion and increases upon extraction, which may be due to the size of the transition metal ion Nb5‡/4‡ upon reduction (while discharging) and Nb4‡/5‡ upon oxidation (while charging), respectively. Hence, the c-axis is in¯uenced by the size of the cation at a type I site and the a-axis depends on the Li content at a type II site. Indeed, the X-ray diffraction
