Multinuclear NMR spectroscopy and mass spectrometry have been used to monitor the sol-gel syntheses of heterometallic ceramics. Hydrolytic and non-hydrolytic sol-gel procedures have been used for the synthesis of NASICON, Na3Zr2Si2PO12. In the hydrolytic process the precursors were slowly gelated under exposure to atmospheric moisture. 1D and 2D NMR measurement allowed to follow the advancement of the reaction and determine the degree of polymerization. In the non-hydrolytic process the spectroscopic analysis allowed to establish the reaction mechanism and to optimize the synthetic conditions. After thermal treatments a very high quality NASICON phase has been obtained as shown by XRD. Three different procedures have been used with the aim of preparing thin ﬁlms of β-Al2TiO5 by hydrolysis of alkoxides of the two metals in acidic condition with or without 2,4-pentanedione (acac) as a chelating agent. Both NMR and MS indicated as the best synthesis the one carried out without acac. 
XRD patterns of the ﬁlms obtained conﬁrmed the results of the spectroscopic analysis.
Synthetic procedures for the preparation of ceramic materials have gone a long way from “simple” precipitation reactions. The use of more complex “wet” chemistry processes has highly improved the quality of samples allowing to achieve good size control, narrow size distribution and good crystallinity [1–3]. Conventional sol-gel routes involve hydrolysis and condensation of metal alkoxides in controlled pH conditions. Homogeneity at molecular level is however hard to achieve in the preparation of heterometallic oxides since very different reaction rates can be observed for each precursor. The problem maybe overcome by following non-hydrolytic procedures consisting of condensation reactions between different functionalities bound to different metal centers [4] thus modulating the reactivity of the various precursors.
Once the synthetic strategy is designed, it becomes very important to develop methods to control the preparative conditions by the identiﬁcation of reaction intermediates and products.
Among the numerous techniques available, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is probably the most powerful tool accessible to obtain information on the structure and physico-chemical properties of molecules. The observation of conventional nuclei (such 1H, 13C, 31P) gives information on the organic residues present in the precursors solution. Furthermore many nuclei have at least one magnetically active isotope (23Na, 27Al, 51V, 47,49Ti, just to mention a few) that can be detected by NMR so that information on the inorganic residues can also be achieved. Mass spectrometry can also be of aid even when the molecular peak cannot be observed, since analysis of the fragmentation pattern of the high molecular weight inorganic or organometallic polymers formed in the syntheses can give information on the structure examined [5, 6].
The application of such spectroscopic techniques to the preparation of heterometallic ceramics will be discussed. Two representative examples among the exposing to atmospheric moisture a butanolic solution of Zr(On-Pr)4, Si(OEt)4, OP(On-Bu)3 and NaOt-Bu. The 1H NMR spectrum obtained by sequential addition of the reactants results in the sum of the spectra of the individual components. At variance with such observation the 1H NMR spectrum of NAP shows the lack of the resonances due to the methyl group of the ethoxide at 1.24 ppm and to the methyl groups of the tbutoxide at 1.27 ppm. This suggests that both Si(OEt)4 and NaO-tBu have been completely reacted during the sol preparation and that the resulting alcohols have been distilled by vacuum evaporating the sample.
Resolution of the complex multiplet pattern has been achieved by 2D-NMR. The 1H J-resolved spectrum of NaP, (Fig. 1(a)) shows the high ﬁeld region of the spectrum. The absence of a quartet-triplet pattern due to ethoxide conﬁrms that Si(OEt)4 has been completely reacted. The coupling pattern observed together with the relative intensity of the resonances (total intensity AB= 3, C-E= 4, F-H= 2, I-Q= 2) suggests the presence of only butoxide in agreement with the expected high reactivity of zirconium propoxide. This observation is conﬁrmed by the DQF COSY spectrum of NAP (Fig. 1(b)) where no cross peaks are observed between systems studied in our laboratory have been chosen: NASICON and β-Al2TiO5.
Solvents for non-hydrolytic reactions were dried as described in the literature [7]. All other reagents (Aldrich) were reagent grade and were used with no further puriﬁcation.
The hydrolytic synthesis of NASICON was carried out as previously described [8]. For the non-hydrolytic synthesis OP(Ot-Bu)3 (0.35 g, 1.3 mmol) was dissolved, under N2, in CH3CN (20 ml). SiCl4 was added and the solution reﬂuxed for 48 h. After cooling to RT, Zr(On-Bu)4 (0.7 ml, 2.6 mmol) was added and the solution kept stirring for 2 h. A solution of NaNO3 (0.33 g, 3.9 ml) and 18-crown-6 ether (2.05 g, 7.8 mmol) in CH3CN (50 ml) was added and the ﬁnal solution was kept stirring for 2 h.
Samples for NMR and MS measurements were prepared as previously described [6, 8].
Syntheses A and C for the preparation of β-Al2TiO5 were carried out as reported [5]. Synthesis B was carried out as follows: Al(Os-Bu)3 (1.6 ml, 6.3 mmol) was added to a solution of 2,4-pentanedione (acac, 0.65 ml, 6.3 mmol) in EtOH (20 ml). The solution was reﬂuxed for 1 h, then cooled to RT. Ti(On-Bu)4 (1.1 ml 3.2 mmol) and HNO3 (1N, 0.06 ml) were added and the resulting sol was stirred at RT for 1 h. Films were prepared as described [5].
Thermal treatments, NMR, MS and XRD measurements were carried out as reported [5, 6, 8].
We have studied both hydrolytic [8] and nonhydrolytic [6, 13] methods to obtain a material with optimal characteristics.
The XRD pattern of the precursor calcinated at C showed the presence of the NASICON struc1200 ture with very small amounts of tetragonal zirconia. The slow hydrolysis process allows a good polymerization of the precursors and reduces separation of phase other than NASICON.
Non-Hydrolytic Procedures. Although the slow hydrolysis process leads to a good quality material, it is complex to control water addition. Different nonhydrolytic synthetic procedures have been then investigated [6, 13].
The combined analysis of the 2D spectra allows to establish that the numerous resonances observed in the 1H NMR spectrum of NAP arise by butoxide groups in different chemical and/or magnetic environments.
The presence of different environments is even more evident in the proton decoupled 13C spectrum of NAP. The expansion of the chemical shift range in the 13C spectrum allows to distinguish more easily the different forms present. Figure 2(a) shows the 13C spectrum of NAP aged for 1 month while trace b shows the spectrum of NAP aged for 5 months. No resonances are observed at the chemical shift values of ethoxide, propoxide and t-butoxide groups conﬁrming that the original Si, Zr and Na alkoxides are not present anymore.
The presence only of butoxide groups can be explained either with the complete reactions of the original Na, Si and Zr alkoxides and the presence only of phosphorous bound butoxide groups in the structure of NAP or with the occurrence of transesteriﬁcation reactions with butyl alcohol used as reaction solvent. The 13P NMR spectrum of NAP shows however a single resonance at−0.96 ppm and also the observation of a single resonance splitted by 13C-13P coupling in the 13C spectrum indicate that the P atoms exist in a single environment, i.e. that of unreacted OP(On-Bu)3.
In the 13C spectra of NAP the -OCH2 resonance of OP(On-Bu)3 can be used as an internal standard to evaluate the advancement of the reaction. The yield in polymeric species was calculated to be 63% after 1 month and 78% after 5 months.
Addition of Zr(Ot-Bu)4 generates the spectrum shown in Fig. 3(b). New resonances are present between 0 and −2 ppm accounting for 90% of the total intensity of the spectrum indicating a high degree of advancement of the reaction. Resonances are shifted upﬁeld as expected for a Zr-containing polymer because of the metal electropositive character. The 13C spectrum of the mixture shows numerous broad resonances between 67 and 73 ppm, assigned to -OCH2 and tertiary carbon atoms of the residue alkoxide chains. The presence of numerous resonances, their large linewidth, and the sol-gel transition observed after 24 h, are indicative of an extended polymeric network. The preparation has been completed by adding NaOt-Bu. The XRD pattern of the powder obtained heating the precursor to ◦ 900 C for 2 h shows that the NASICON phase is accompanied only by a small peak of tetragonal zirconia generated by the extremely reactive Zr(Ot-Bu)4. 
The high homogeneity and reactivity observed in solution is however reﬂected by an improvement in the quality of the material. The result can be further improved by using OP(Ot-Bu)3 to increase the reactivity of the P source, Zr(On-Bu)4 to decrease reactivity of Zr source and by adding sodium as a solution of 1:2 complex of NaNO3, non basic and non nucleophilic, with a crown ether. This allows a more intimate mixing of all the reactants prior to the sol-gel transition. This ﬁnal optimized synthesis leads, after calcination to 900 C, to a pure NASICON phase as shown by the XRD diffraction pattern of the powder prepared (Fig. 4).
Aluminum titanate is a ceramic material characterized by low average thermal expansion, good thermal shock resistance and thermal conductivity. It is conventionally formed by a solid state reaction between crystalline rutile TiO2 and α-Al2O3 at temperatures larger than the eutectoid temperature (1280 C) [13]. We have investigated three different sol-gel syntheses to prepare β-Al2TiO5 thin ﬁlms at temperatures lower than the eutectoid one.
Sol precursors have been prepared by reacting in acidic conditions the two metal alkoxides as such (synthesis C) or in the presence of 2,4-pentanedione (acac) as a chelating agent (syntheses A and B).
The addition of acac to an ethanolic solution of Ti(On-Bu)4 generates the formation of Ti(OnBu)2(acac)2 identiﬁed by the resonances of the quaternary carbon atoms bound to the chelating oxygen atoms (δ = 196, 188) and by the resonances of the oleﬁnic ( CH) carbon at 101 ppm. No evidence for ligand exchange due to the solvent has been observed [5].
Al(O-sBu)3 also reacts in EtOH with acac to give Al(acac)3, Al(OEt)3 and 2-BuOH. Substitution of sbutoxy by ethoxy groups seems to be complete as indicated by the very small linewidth of the resonances due to 2-butanol.
Mixing of the two sols and addition of nitric acid generates sol A whose 13C NMR spectrum is shown in Fig. 5(a). The broadness of the resonances indicates an extensive degree of polymerization. No dissociation of acac occurs during the formation of the sol as shown by the lack of the resonance due to C O of free acac at 202.9 ppm. Acetylacetone is then coordinated to the two metals in the polymer in different coordination environments as shown by the several resonances observed for the carbonyl groups between 186 and 194 ppm.
If acac is used only to chelate the most reactive species, aluminum ethoxide, the resulting sol B leads to the 13C NMR spectrum shown in Fig. 5(b). No resonances can be attributed to alkoxidic residues bound to the metals and only the peaks due to free alcohols and to Al(acac)3 are present.
To investigate the structure of sol C, prepared without acac, the 13C NMR spectra of Al(O-sBu)3 and Ti(On-Bu)4, dissolved in EtOH, than dried and redissolved in dichloromethane have been examined. While Ti(On-Bu)4 is unaffected by such procedure, a complete ligand exchange reaction has been evidentiated in the case of Al(O-sBu)3 that reacts to give 2-BuOH and Al(OEt)3, as shown by the presence of two resonances (58.5 and 18.3 ppm).
The spectrum has been compared with those of solgel derived pure Al2O3 and TiO2. The most relevant peaks of the titania mass spectrum were observed at 81 and 162 m/z corresponding to monomeric and dimeric titania. The molecular peak, Al2O3, was also observed in the spectrum of alumina.
To verify that the peak due to β-Al2TiO5 was not generated by recombination reaction in the spectrometer, the spectrum of a 1:1 mechanical mixture of Al2O3 and TiO2 was recorded. Such spectrum resulted to be simply the sum of those of the two oxides and did not contain the pattern present in the spectrum of sample derived from synthesis C. The presence of coordinated species, evidentiated by NMR, after hydrolysis in syntheses A and B might subtract some of the reactants to the polymerization process thus leading, after thermal treatments, to unwanted alumina anr titania.
The XRD patterns of the ﬁlms reﬂected the spectroscopic analysis and showed that in the ﬁlms derived from synthesis C a metastable phase of β-Al2TiO5 crystallizes around 700 C directly from the amorphous phase. At higher annealing temperatures TiO2 rutile and anatase are also detected but β-Al2TiO5 does not decompose, up to 1200 C. The ﬁlms synthesized without using chelating agents in the precursor sol show a longer thermal stability. It was thus possible to obtain a metastable compound such as β-Al2TiO5 by sol-gel processing exploiting the high homogeneity obtained already in the sols.
