Thermal expansion of niobium phosphates, new representatives of the family of structural analogs of [NaZr2(PO4)3], was studied. These compounds possess high thermomechanical stability because of the unique ability of their structure to expand!contract along different crystallographic directions under thermal treatment.
Thermal expansion of a material is an important characteristic determining its behavior under conditions of multiple abrupt changes in temperature (thermal shock). Crystalline substances, including ceramics with low and ultralow expansion, and particularly those with low anisotropy of thermal expansion, are characterized by high thermomechanical stability.
The family of phosphates, structural analogs of NaZr2(PO4)3 (NZP, Nasicon), known from the 1980s, is unique in behavior of its representatives under heating. Their structure is characterized by expansion! contraction along different crystallographic directions, which leads to low average thermal expansion for most of them. Moreover, the ability of their structure to incorporate strongly diverse cations (with oxidation state in the range from +1 to +5) because of the broad isomorphism ensures formation of a large number of compounds and solid solutions with controllable properties, including thermal properties. Therefore, phosphates of the NZP family are of indubitable interest for materials science specialists.
The structure of NaZr2(PO4)3 and its analogs [1], which can be regarded as a derivative of the structure of iron sulfate Fe2(SO4)3 [2, 3], is formed by a tetrahedral-octahedral framework of the [T2(PO4)3]n! type, composed of PO4 and TO6 groups sharing common oxygen vertices, where T stands for elements in various oxidation states, and n is the framework charge. Cations are connected in the framework by strong covalent bonds, and it is this factor that ultimately determines its small deformations under heating.
Various cations, compensating the negative charge n of the framework, may occupy positions of two types, M1 and M2, in framework voids. The general crystal-chemical formula of the compounds, which takes into account is described as (M1)(M2)3[T2(PO4)3].
Apparently, cations in the oxidation state +5 (TV) are involved in formation of any framework of this kind.
A study of thermal decomposition of phosphates with the above composition established that all the compounds studied are characterized by nearly zero thermal expansion with nearly zero expansion anisotropy along different crystallographic directions [6 !8, 14].
The set of the already synthesized and studied phosphates described by the above formula series is rather limited. At the same time, it should be kept in mind that the compositions proposed cannot be always obtained. The possible limiting factors are chemical and crystal-chemical features of frameworkforming cations.
This study was aimed to synthesize phosphates of the general formula TII 5/3(PO4)3 with TII = Mg, Co, Ni and TV = Nb and analyze their thermal expansion. There are no published data on phosphates of such composition. With account of the nature of cations (their radii, charges, electronegativities) and the formation of an electrically neutral framework (n = 0), anticipated in view of the stoichiometry chosen, it would be expected that the new compounds have structure with trigonal crystal system (rhombohedral unit cell) and nearly zero thermal expansion.
Phosphates of niobium(V) and bivalent metals of the type B1/3Nb5/3(PO4)3, where B = Mg, Co, Ni, were synthesized by the solid-phase method. As starting reactants served MgO, CaCO3, Sr(NO3)2, CoCl2  6H2O, Ni(NO3)2  6H2O, (NH4)2HPO4, and Nb2O5. The synthesis included several stages. A mechanical mixture of reactants taken in stoichiometric amounts was ground in an agate mortar and kept at 450C for 4 h. Then the mixture was subjected to isothermal treatment at 600, 800, 900, 1000, and 1100C for 24 ! 60 h with intermediate dispersion in each stage.
The phosphates obtained were studied by IR spectroscopy, X-ray phase analysis, electron-microprobe analysis, and high-temperature X-ray diffraction analysis.
The microprobe analysis was made on a Camebax instrument with a Link AN-10 000 energy-dispersive detector, with the ZAF-correction technique used to calculate compositions. The accuracy with which the composition of samples was determined was 2.5 mol %.
X-ray diffraction patterns of powder samples were recorded on a DRON-3.0 diffractometer with filtered CuK= radiation ( = 1.54078 )) in the range of angles 2G 10!80. The angle measurement error did not exceed 0.015. This led to an error in lattice parameters equal to 0.005 and 0.01 ) along the a and c axes, respectively.
The behavior of the phosphates under heating was studied by powder high-temperature X-ray diffraction analysis on a DRON-3M diffractometer with a GPVT1500 high-temperature attachment in filtered CoK= radiation ( = 1.78892 )) [15]. The samples were heated at an average rate of 10 deg min!1. Reflections were recorded in the temperature range 20 !800C with a temperature step of 200C. The temperature was measured with a Pt!Pt/Rh thermocouple, whose readings were verified by simultaneous measurement of lattice parameters of a reference substance (Al2O3). The axial coefficients =a and =c were calculated by a procedure based on the least-squares method [16]. It follows from the results of X-ray diffraction analysis that individual phases are obtained for all the niobium(V) phosphates studied. According to the results of electron-microprobe analysis, these samples are homogeneous and have compositions close to the theoretical composition corresponding to the formula B1/3Nb5/3(PO4)3. 
Their X-ray diffraction patterns are similar in positions and relative intensities of diffraction peaks. As regards the distribution of vibration frequencies, the IR spectra (Fig. 1) are also closely similar and indicate that the compounds under study are orthophosphates.
The diffraction patterns were indexed with the use of an analog, NbTi(PO4)3, which is characterized by rhombohedral symmetry [17] and belongs to the structural type of NaZr2(PO4)3 (NZP) (Table 1).
The results of X-ray diffraction analysis are in good agreement with IR data. The spectral pattern characteristic of NZP phases is similar to that of the substances containing tetraand pentavalent elements, e.g., TaV(PO4)3 [10].
The unit cell parameters calculated for the phosphates B1/3Nb5/3(PO4)3 (B = Mg, Co, Ni) (Table 2) are close and vary only slightly within the range from 8.657 to 8.642 ) for a and 22.08 to 22.11 ) for c. The double phosphates of niobium(V) and bivalent metals Mg, Co, and Ni, characterized by the above techniques, were studied under heating. First, the thermal limits of existence of the compounds obtained were found. It was established that, having formed at 600C as crystalline phases, they retained their composition and structure up to 900C. Raising the temperature led to decomposition of the NZP phosphates, with the high-temperature modification =-NbOPO4 (space group P4/n) [18] becoming the predominant phase.
Changes in the structure of the phosphates under thermal treatment in the range from room temperature to 800C were judged from the linear thermal expansion coefficients =a = ,a /(a,T) and =c = ,c /(c,T). The coefficients =a and =c, calculated from X-ray diffraction data, are listed in Table 3.
As expected, the phosphates under study, having an electrically neutral little expand upon heating. The experimentally determined crystallographic parameters a and c vary only slightly within the temperature range studied. The structure exhibits anisotropy of thermal expansion: contraction along the a-axis (=a < 0) and expansion along the c-axis (=c > 0), which is characteristic, as already mentioned, of the family of NZP phosphates. The differences in =a and =c values in the series of Mg!Co!Ni phosphates are insignificant, although a certain decrease in contraction along the a-axis and increase in expansion along the c-axis are observed for the Co1/3Nb5/3(PO4)3 phosphate, compared with its Mg and Ni analogs. Also, the unit cell parameters a and c at different temperatures were calculated from data furnished by high-temperature X-ray diffraction analysis (Fig. 2). 
A tendency is observed for the parameter a of the hexagonal unit cell in the phosphates B1/3Nb5/3(PO4)3, (B = Mg, Co, Ni) to decrease and the parameter c to increase with increasing temperature. Such a behavior is commonly characteristic of phosphates with NZP structure. Apparently, the crystallographic parameters a and c change only slightly upon heating.
The average thermal expansion was calculated for the phosphates studied (Table 3). These compounds show either insignificant average thermal expansion, or contraction (=av < 0). Apparently, the results of the study supplement published data on phosphates exhibiting low thermal expansion, which are represented now by a small number of compounds. The list includes NbM(PO4)3, where M = Ti, Zr, Sn, Hf [6, 7, 14].
The unique ability of materials based on phosphates with NZP structure to exhibit virtually zero expansion upon heating may be luckily combined with such properties as high hydrothermal stability and radiation hardness, capacity for forming, high strength and hardness of ceramics prepared on their base, environmental stability, etc. The properties listed above are of value for materials for space and laser technologies, petrochemistry and other fields of chemistry, development of catalysts and catalyst supports, neutron-absorbing ceramics, hard tool ceramics, refractory composites, and other functional materials.
Thermal expansion of new compounds, belonging to the class of orthophosphates with framework structure, was studied. Phosphates of niobium(V) and bivalent metals Mg, Co, and Ni, of the type B1/3Nb5/3(PO4)3, supplemented the family of structural analogs of NaZr2(PO4)3 (NZP or Nasicon), which are characterized by low or ultralow thermal expansion and the resulting stability to thermal shocks. It was shown that the low value of the average thermal expansion coefficient, =av  10!6!10!7 deg!1, is due, as in the case of all phosphates of similar structure, to expansion!contraction along different crystallographic axes.
