New tetravalent cation conductors of zirconium or hafnium niobium phosphate, MNb(PO4)3 (M = Zr, Hf) with NASICON (Na + Ion Super Ionic CONductors) type structure, which show the high ion conductivity among the tetravalent ion conducting solids, were synthesized. The MNb(PO4)3 was designed by strictly selecting the structure and the comprising elements and the conductivity reaches the region of the representative divalent oxide anion conductor series. Since the MNb(PO4)3 solids possess a considerable high ion conducting behavior, promising applications such as chemical sensors for environmental gas detection and rechargeable batteries are highly expected.
The conducting ion species in solid electrolytes is, generally, limited to only single ion species without showing any electron or hole conduction. Because of this unique characteristic, some solid electrolytes have been already commercialized as the sensing elements in biomedical and industrial applications. Many investigations have been undertaken and large number of solid electrolytes showing mono[1 – 3], di[4 – 11], and trivalent reported. \
In general, the ionic mobility in solid electrolytes strongly depends on the valency. Therefore, the tetravalent cations have been regarded as an extremely poor-conducting species in solid electrolytes, due to the high electrostatic interaction between the tetravalent ion and the anion species surrounding the tetravalent ion.
The NASICON (Na + Ion Super Ionic CONductors) type structure with a rhombohedral symmetry is one of appropriate structures for multivalent ion migration such as divalent [4 – 7] and trivalent [14] cations by forming the three-dimensional network ion pathway. In order to make the mobile cation migrate smoother, one of the direction is to realize the higher electrostatic interaction between the lattice forming pellets and the pellets were sintered at 1250 jC for 12 h in air. The compound, HfNb(PO4)3, was synthesized by heating a stoichiometric mixture of Nb2O5, Hf(SO4)2 and (NH4)2HPO4 in air at 1200 jC for 12 h. The obtained powder was sintered at 1300 jC for 12 h. The formation of the solid electrolyte was confirmed by the X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) analysis (M18XHF, Mac Science). The XRD data were obtained by a step scanning method in the 2h range from 10j to 70j with a step width of 0.04j using Cu-Ka radiation. 
Electrical conductivity was measured by an ac and a dc method, using the sintered MNb(PO4)3 ceramic with two platinum electrodes. The ac conductivity measurements were carried out by an ac complex impedance method with Hewlett Packard precision LCR meter (4192 A).
Before the conductivity measurements, preelectrolyses were carried out several times to remove the lower valent cation species compared with the mobile cations and anions compared to the interaction between the mobile cations and the anions. Furthermore, the ion species conduct in solids is in a tetravalent state; the inclusion of lower valent cations than tetravalent must be excluded in order to avoid the lower valent ion migration in solids. Therefore, the solid should be composed of the elements that stably hold the pentavalent state or higher and also the solid should be so stable in various atmospheres as to prevent ions that results in an electronic conduction. From the abovedescribed stability point of view, the candidates are the oxide-based series such as phosphates. Since ion migrates in the solid electrolytes, it is necessary to consider the electronegativity and the ionicity of the migrating cations. 
As the conducting ion species is in the tetravalent valency state, it is better to choose the cation whose electronegativity is lower; in other words, whose ionicity is higher. The electronegativities of Hf 4 + and Zr4 + are as small as 1.3 and 1.33, the Hf 4 + and Zr4 + respectively, cations hold relatively higher ionicity compared with others listed in Table 1.
In this study, the phosphate-based compounds with Zr4 + or Hf 4 + were prepared and Nb5 + ion was also mixed with the phosphate for the purpose of realizing the NASICON type structure. The phosphates with M4 + (M = Zr4 + , Hf 4 + ) and Nb5 + , MNb(PO4)3 were selected here.
Zirconium oxide, diammonium hydrogenphosphate, and niobium oxide were mixed in a stoichiometric ratio. The mixture was firstly heated at 1000 jC for 12 h and then at 1250 jC for 12 h in air. The resulting zirconium oxide phosphate was made into the peak angles of HfNb(PO4)3 shift to higher compared with ZrNb(PO4)3 because the ionic radius of Hf 4 + (0.085 nm (six-coordinate) [15]) is smaller than that of Zr4 + (0.086 nm (six-coordinate) [15]). It becomes clear from these phenomena that MNb(PO4)3 (M = Zr, Hf) also possess the NASICON type structure, which holds a suitable three-dimensional ionic migration pathway.
Fig. 1 shows the temperature dependencies of the electrical conductivity for HfNb(PO4)3 and tetravalent Zr4 + ion conductors of Zr2O(PO4)2 [16] and ZrNb (PO4)3 (the macroscopic Hf 4 + ion migration is demonstrated as mentioned below). Zr2O(PO4)2, which is demonstrated to be the first tetravalent cation conductor, possesses an orthorombic symmetry. However, the Zr4 + ion conductivity in Zr2O(PO4)2 is lower than   1 at 800 jC. The conductivities of the 10 present HfNb(PO4)3 solid at 400 and 800 jC are approximately 300 and 66 times higher than those of Zr2O(PO4)2, respectively. Furthermore, the tetravalent Hf 4 + ion conductivity is twice as high as that of ZrNb(PO4)3 with the same NASICON type structure as expected from the migrating cation’s ionicity point of view (the electronegativity is the lowest for Hf(1.3)) and the conductivity value of HfNb(PO4)3 is the highest among the tetravalent cation conductors. 
The activation energies (Ea) derived from the log(rT) vs. 1/T relationship are 59.0 and 55.1 kJ/mol, respectively, for HfNb(PO4)3 and ZrNb(PO4)3. This clearly suggests that a similar ion pathway is obtained in the same NASICON type structure. 
Target ion species are mainly alkaline metal cations, which are well-known conducting species in solids. The preelectrolysis was terminated after ensuring the equivalent conductivity value before and after the electrolysis (in reality, there appears no difference before and after the preelectrolysis treatment, maybe due to the application of high purity starting materials higher than 99.99%). After every preelectrolysis, both surfaces were polished to remove the conducting ion species that might have been deposited. 
The oxygen   11 Pa were pressure from 4 to 105 Pa and at 10 regulated by mixing Air – N2 in a proper ratio or by using CO2 gas. The polarization measurements were conducted by passing the dc current (1 AA) between the two Pt electrodes sandwiching the pellet and the voltage was measured as a function of time in oxygen ( PO2: 105 Pa) and in helium ( PO2: 4 Pa). Wet air atmosphere (3.1 vol.%) was obtained by using a water vapor saturated air at 25 jC. The dc electrolysis was performed for the preelectrolyzed sample at 700 jC, by applying a dc voltage of 3 V for 21 days in air. The analysis of the cathodic surface of the sample was conducted by electron probe microanalysis (EPMA1500, Shimadzu) after the electrolysis.
For the purpose of directly identifying the migrating cation species, the dc electrolysis was carried out by sandwiching the HfNb(PO4)3 pellet between two platinum electrodes as a similar manner as reported in our previous papers [12 – 14]. From the preliminary electrolysis experiment, the decomposition voltage of the sample was identified to be ca. 1.8 V. The higher voltage in comparison to the decomposition voltage was applied so as to supply the migrating cation species at the anode and the macroscopic cation migration can proceed continuously. After the electrolysis, the deposits were clearly observed by mapping the cathodic surface with EPMA and the Hf ratio in Hf/(Hf + Nb + P) greatly increased from 20 to 86 mol%, while any such an increase was not observed for Nb and P. In contrast, on the anodic surface of the electrolyte, any deposition was not observed at all.
Furthermore, from the cross-sectional line analysis of the electrolyzed pellet (in Fig. 4), a considerable Hf segregation was explicitly recognized near the cathodic surface as shown as a shaded area, while any such a phenomenon was not observed for Nb and P, suggesting that the predominant migrating species is only Hf 4 + cation. The results described above clearly indicate that Hf 4 + migrates in the HfNb(PO4)3 bulk by the electrolysis and deposits on the cathodic surface. Similar results were observed in polarization, dc electrolysis analyses and also in the conductivity measurements at various oxygen pressures for ZrNb (PO4)3.
New tetravalent cation conductors with NASICON type structure, zirconium or hafnium niobium phosphate (MNb(PO4)3(M = Zr, Hf)), showing the high ion conductivity, were successfully synthesized. Among the MNb(PO4)3 (M = Zr, Hf) series, the tetravalent Hf 4 + ion, which shows the highest ionicity among the tetravalent ions and hold the valency state stably, was chosen as the optimum conducting ion species in the NASICON type structure and the highest tetravalent ion conduction among the tetravalent ion conducting solids, was achieved with HfNb(PO4)3. The tetravalent Hf 4 + ion conductivity is as high as the typical O2   ion conductor series and this accelerates the promising applications such as the component of the environmental gas monitoring element and rechargeable batteries.
