Trivalent cation conducting solid electrolytes with NASICON type structure, R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 (R = Rare Earths), were synthesized by a ball milling method and trivalent R3 + cation conducting properties were investigated. The trivalent ion conductivity of R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 was enhanced ca. three times compared to the samples prepared by a conventional sol – gel method due to the improvement of the crystallinity of the solids. The macroscopic Sc3 + cation conducting behavior in Sc1/3 Zr2(PO4)3, which shows the highest trivalent ion conductivity in R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 series, was directly demonstrated by a dc electrolysis method.
In the solid state ionics field, the cations having higher valence state than trivalent state have been considered to be poor migrants in solids because of their strong electrostatic interactions with surrounding anions comprising the framework of the structure, while mono or divalent ions are well known to conduct in solids. In 1995, M2(WO4)3 tungstates (M = Al, Sc, Y, Er – Lu) [1 – 7] holding the Sc2(WO4)3 type structure have been directly demonstrated to be ion conducting solid electrolytes. In the trivalent Sc2(WO4)3 type structure, a hexavalent tungsten ion, W6 + , bonds strongly to oxide anions by forming WO4 unit, and the electrostatic interaction between the mobile trivalent cation and surrounding oxide anions is considerably reduced. Furthermore, M2(WO4)3 holds a quasi-layered structure and has a large tunnel size, which makes the trivalent ion migrate smoothly. However, M2(WO4)3 has two disadvantages. 
One is that W6 + cation which contributes to the realization of the trivalent cation migration in solids might be reduced to lower valence state not only in a reducing atmosphere but also by reacting with metals in contact, resulting in an appearance of electronic conduction which greatly deteriorates ionic conducting characteristics. The other is that the relative density of these tungstates is too low to utilize for practical applications.
Trivalent cation conductors are greatly expected for utilizing the electrical applications such as rechargeable battery and gas sensor [8,9] from the view point of chemical stability of M3 + cation in comparison with the well-studied alkaline cation such Na + and Li +.
Recently, R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 (R = Rare Earths) with NASICON type structure [10] prepared by a sol – gel method were clearly demonstrated to be new trivalent R3 + cationic conductors [11 – 13]. The R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 has both a high chemical stability and a high relative density compared to the Sc2(WO4)3 type trivalent cation conductors. However, the conductivity of the samples prepared by a sol – gel method was lower than that for Sc2(WO4)3 because of their low crystallinity. In order to enhance the conductivities of R1/3 Zr2(PO4)3 solid electrolytes, it is considerably effective to improve the crystallinity and to create the wellordered three-dimensional conducting pathway in the R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 grains. However, the crystallization (ca. 800 jC) and the decomposition temperatures (ca. 900 jC) of the samples prepared by a sol – gel method are very close, and the improvement of the crystallinity seemed to be difficult by the conventional sol – gel method. 
In addition, by the procedure of conventional solid – state reaction only by mixing the starting materials with a mortar, R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 solid electrolytes cannot be obtained because the sample easily decomposes to RPO4 and ZrP2O7 at relatively low temperature (ca. 900 jC).
In this paper, R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 series were prepared by a solid – state reaction with a ball milling method, which can mix starting materials with a strong force and make the powder form a metastable amorphous phase to obtain the samples with a high crystallinity even at low temperature mentioned above, and the macroscopic trivalent conducting properties were investigated.
Reagent grade of R2O3 (99.9%), ZrO(NO3)22H2O (99%), and (NH4)2HPO4 (99.9%) were mixed in an agent pot at a rotation speed of 300 rpm for 12 h. After ensuring the resulting powder to be an amorphous state by the XRD measurement, the powder obtained was made into pellet (10 mm in diameter) and sintered on an alumina plate at between 850 and 950 jC for 12 h in air. 
Thermogravimetric and differential thermal analysis measurements (DTG-50H, Shimadzu) were performed up to 1200 jC at a heating rate of 5 jC/min. The platinum-sputtered layer was formed on both center surfaces of the sintered pellets in order to obtain a good contact with the electrode. The ac conductivity of the samples was measured by sandwiching the sample between two Pt electrodes at temperatures between 300 and 600 jC in a frequency range from 20 Hz to 1 MHz by using LCR meter (8284A, Hewlett Packard). The dc conductivity was obtained by the calculation from the voltage, the applied current, the surface area and the thickness of the sample. For the purpose of identifying the charge carrier in Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3, the dc electrolysis was performed with two platinum plates as the blocking electrode by applying a voltage of 3 V for 150 h at 750 jC in air. After the electrolysis, SEM (SEM, S800, HITACHI) observation and EPMA (EPMA1500, Shimadzu) were carried out for the cathodic surface of the electrolyzed sample.
The samples prepared by a ball milling method were confirmed to hold the NASICON type structure similar to the case for the samples obtained by a sol – gel method from the XRD measurements. Fig. 1 shows the XRD patterns of Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3, which were obtained by a ball milling method, before and after sintering at 850 jC with a corresponding pattern of the sample prepared by a sol – gel method. The sample prepared by the ball milling method was in an amorphous state before heating because the powder was mechanically milled with a strong force. After sintering at 850 jC, the sample crystallized and its crystallinity was found to be greatly improved in comparison with that of the sample obtained by the conventional sol – gel method. 
In addition, the decomposition and the crystallization temperatures of the sample with a ball milling method found to increase to ca. 950 jC and to reduce to ca. 750 jC, respectively, compared to the case for the sample prepared by a sol – gel method (the decomposition temperature: 900 jC, the crystallizing temperature: 800 jC). 
The Sc1/3 Zr2(PO4)3 solid electrolyte cannot be obtained only by mixing the stating materials with a mortar and then heating, and if the heating temperature is raised up to 950 jC, the sample decomposes to ScPO4 and ZrP2O7. The ball milling method is the preparation process through the amorphous state of the metastable phase and the energy level of the state is expected to be higher than that of the starting mixture. Therefore, the activation energy necessary for the reaction from the metastable phase to the product is appreciably lower compared to the case from the mixture of starting materials, and the crystallization is expected to occur easily at lower temperature (ca. 750 jC) compared to the case for the sample prepared by the sol – gel method (ca. 800 jC).
The temperature dependencies of the electrical conductivity for Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3, which shows the highest conductivity among the R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 series, prepared by ball milling and sol – gel methods were shown in Fig. 2 with the corresponding data of Sc2(WO4)3 which is reported to show the highest trivalent ion conductivity among the M2(WO4)3 tungstates. The conductivity of the sample prepared by a ball milling method is 2.91  10   5 S cm   1 which is 3.2 times as high as that of the sample prepared by a conventional sol – gel method (9.07  10   6 S cm   1) and the conductivity reaches the comparable value to Sc2(WO4)3 (3.74  10   1) at 600 jC. 
The R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 solid with NASICON type structure was prepared by a ball milling method with an aim of enhancing the trivalent cation conductivity. The conductivity of R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 increased about three times and the activation energy for ion conduction was reduced in comparison with that of the sample prepared by a conventional sol – gel method, and the conductivity of Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 at 600 jC reaches the close value of Sc2(WO4)3, which shows the highest conductivity in the tungstate solid electrolyte series. Since the sample is prepared through the metastable amorphous phase and forms the wellordered three-dimensional conducting pathway, both the enhancement of the conductivity and reduction of the activation energy for trivalent cation conduction are successfully achieved. 
The preparation process through the ball milling method is one of great advantageous ways not only in preparing the materials that are difficult to obtain by a conventional solid – state reaction but also in enhancing the crystallinity of grains remarkably.