NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) has been prepared by a sol-gel route. The progress of the reaction in the liquid has been monitored by means of 31P NMR spectroscopy. The dependence of phase formation and sintering behaviour of ﬁlms and powders on sol-gel reactions and heat treatments was investigated. X-ray diﬀraction measurements showed the formation of monoclinic NASICON phase from 800 C for powders and from 900 C for ﬁlms together with free ZrO2. An almost pure NASICON phase was observed in powders calcined at 1000 C. Sintered pellets showed densities up to 98% of theoretical value. The microstructure of the samples was analysed by scanning electron microscopy.
Sodium superionic conductors (NASICON) are solid solutions of sodium zirconium phosphate and sodium zirconium silicate. NASICON compounds have a general formula Na1+xZr2SixP3 xO12 with 0 < x < 3 and are among the best tridimensional ionic conductors. They can be used in many electrochemical devices, such as sensors and batteries. For mass production at low cost, or to miniaturize such electrochemical devices, it is necessary to produce solid electrolytes as thin ﬁlms. In fact for the realization of eﬃcient devices it is necessary to produce thin electrolytes in order to obtain high current densities between the electrode surfaces.
After the ﬁrst study by Hong1 many attempts were made for producing glass phases and ZrO2 free NASICON ceramics both by solid state reaction and wet chemical synthesis.2 5
It has been demonstrated that sol-gel technique can oﬀer a good alternative synthesis route for NASICON powders and a convenient way for deposition of NASICON thin ﬁlms. Yoldas and Lloyd6 developed an all alkoxides sol-gel synthesis for producing zirconia free rhombohedral NASICON at room temperature. Since then many studied have been reported on alkoxides solgel synthesis of NASICON. Perthuis and Colomban7 sintered rhombohedral NASICON discs at temperature lower than 1100 C and high dense (higher than 95%) discs of monoclinic NASICON (containing ZrO2 contamination) at temperature higher than 1100 C. Høj and Engell8 studied the formations of glass phases for diﬀerent compositions of NASICON. Gasmi et al.9 investigated the eﬀect of hydrolysis and the role of complexing reagent on the crystallization and sinterability of NASICON. 
The eﬀect of the hydrolysis on the NASICON structure was also investigated by Di Vona et al.10 Sol-gel synthesis of NASICON powders from aqueous solution11 or using citrates12 were also reported. NASICON thin ﬁlms have already been synthesized by sol-gel through hydrolysis and condensation of alkoxides,13 or using a aqueous complex precursor.14 Control of the sol-gel reactions is however very diﬃcult in a complex system such as NASICON in which four different precursors with diﬀerent hydrolysis and condensations rates are involved. A non-hydrolytic route, in which, for examples, metal alkoxides and chlorides react together, avoids the problems connected with the diﬀerent hydrolysis rates of conventional sol-gel process, allowing a better structural homogeneity of the sol.15 Recently Di Vona et all.16 demonstrated that the non-hydrolytic route can be successfully applied to the synthesis of NASICON powders.
In this work we report the synthesis and the characterization of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 thin ﬁlms and powders obtained through the reaction of alkoxides and chlorides. The progress of the reaction in the liquid has been monitored by means of 31P NMR spectroscopy and the structural thermal evolution of both ﬁlms and powders was investigated.
NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) powders and ﬁlms were synthesized by the sol-gel method. Tetraethoxysilan (Si(OEt)4), zirconium (IV) butoxide (80 wt.% in butanol) (Zr(OBu)4), sodium ethoxide (NaOEt), phosphorous pentachloride (PCl5) (Aldrich), zirconium tetrachloride (ZrCl4) (Fluka) and absolute ethanol (Ashland Chemical) were used. Each step of the sol preparation was conducted at room temperature.
NMR spectra were recorded on a Bru¨ ker AM 400 spectrometer. 31P chemical shifts are given in ppm from external H3PO4 (85% w/w).
Thin ﬁlms, powders and pellets were analyzed by X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) using a Philips diﬀractometer with a glancing angle conﬁguration. CuKa, operating at 40 KV and 50 mA, was used as the radiation source. The average crystallite size was calculated from the Scherrer equation after ﬁtting the experimental proﬁles using the method described in Ref. 17.
The microstructure and chemical composition of sintered pellets and ﬁlms were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray detector.
The density of sintered pellets was measured by the Archimedes principle in distillate water at room temperature. A dilatometric study was conducted on sintered samples with a heating rate of 2 C/min. The dilatometer was calibrated using a known a-alumina polycrystalline standard.
The progress of the reaction has been monitored by means of 31P NMR spectroscopy. Fig. 2a shows the spectrum of sol S1. The chemical shift values observed indicate that the phosphorous atoms are present in four-co-ordinated compounds containing P–O double bonds and not as a simple ﬁve co-ordinated species since these latter are characterized by very large negative shifts (ca.  70 ppm).18 The presence of numerous broad resonances indicate that the P atom is present in diﬀerent environments. The chemical shifts values are consistent with the formation of species containing the –(P–O–Zr)– unit.16 The formation of such units might be due to the reaction of PCl5 with Zr(OBu)4 through the following non-hydrolytic reaction.
The large line-width of the resonances is consistent with the formation of a polymeric network but does not allow to observe any 1H–31P J coupling that would give indications on the presence and/or nature of alkoxy groups directly bound to phosphorous.
In solution S2, in order to promote a non hydrolytic reaction, TEOS and ZrCl4 were allowed to react before adding EtOH.
The addition of sol S2 to sol S1 does not cause substantial variations of the spectrum. Any reaction occurring between the two precursors solutions must then occur far away from the phosphorous center.
When NaOEt is added to the reaction mixture the 31P spectrum recorded shows a dramatic change (Fig. 2b). The sharp resonances observed, the lack of any J coupling and the chemical shift values measured are consistent with the formation of phosphate ions with diﬀerent degrees of protonation. In the very basic solution obtained the presence of traces of water originating from the atmosphere are suﬃcient to initiate hydrolysis of the precursors.
In order to clarify the eﬀect of calcination temperature, TG–DTA measurements were carried out for a xerogel powder obtained from the slowly dried solution. As shown in Fig. 3, large mass losses of the sample were temperatures between 50 and 500 C, observed at accompanied by an endothermic peak around 150– 200 C due to the evaporation of physiosorbed water or residual solvent and an exothermic peak between 350– 500 C due to the removal of a residual organic group.
The XRD spectra of the sintered ceramic showed the presence of NASICON and traces of monoclinic ZrO2. The densities of the sintered pellets are compared with the theoretical density calculated from the room temperature structure of the compound, 3.27 g/cm3. Values up to 98% of theoretical was reached. Fig. 5 shows the microstructure of the sintered NASICON that consists of very ﬁne (less than 5 mm) cubic grains, in agreement with the results reported on other sol-gel processed powders.7 Instead, larger grains were obtained using solid state reactions.3
It is well known that the drying during the sol-gel ﬁlm deposition is very fast leading to a diﬀerent structural evolution of ﬁlms respect to powders obtained from the xerogel, explaining the observed diﬀerences in the structural thermal evolution between the NASICON powders and ﬁlms.
A new sol-gel synthesis of NASICON powders and ﬁlms were developed through the reaction of alkoxides with chlorides like in a non-hydrolytic process. Monoclinic Na3Zr2Si2PO12 powders were obtained at 900 C. Well sintered (densities up to 98%) NASICON pellets containing only traces of monoclinic ZrO2 were obtained at 1150 C. NASICON ﬁlms deposited on silicon or alumina were obtained at 1000 C. Films contain also ZrO2 and Na2Zr– Si2O7 phases and decompose at 1200 C. The formation of the Na2ZrSi2O7 phase was attributed to the phosphorous evaporation during the deposition process.
The good results obtained for powders indicate that a better control of the sol-gel chemistry for inhibiting the phosphorous volatilization during the ﬁlm deposition, will improve the composition of the NASICON layer.
