NASICON (AmBnP3O12)-type phosphate glasses are examined for the physical and optical properties. A novel technique, frequency domain interferometry, has been employed to measure refractive indices over the transparency region for these glasses. From the refractive index variation, we estimated various linear and nonlinear parameters. Overall studies suggest that the replacement of constituent metal ion in the structure of NASICON, from Al3+ to Ti4+, invariably led to a significant change in the optical properties.
Optical properties of phosphate glass show many favorable features for their use in optical devices because of their excellent transparency and good mechanical and thermal stability. They act as good hosts for large concentrations of dopant rare earth ions with good homogeneity and commercial rare earth lasers with phosphate glass hosts are already available [1]. These glasses also find applications in ultrafast switches and laser-induced gratings as well [2]. NASICON-type phosphate glasses (acronym for the crystalline Na-superionic conductor, based on Na1+x Zr2P3 xSixO12) [3] are of special interest for the following reasons. These glasses have the chemical composition AmBnP3O12 where A is an alkali or alkaline earth metal ion and B is one or more metal ions in tri, tetra or pentavalent state [4]. Thus, these glasses have scope for preparation with large variations in their constituent metal ions and compositions. 
Consequently, introduction of metal ions with variable valencies enabling desired changes in their thermal, electrical and optical properties is possible. Some works on the optical properties of phosphate glasses have been recently reported from our laboratory and elsewhere [5 – 7].
Though glasses have played a prominent role in linear optics, the present decade is witnessing renewed interest in realizing the potential application of glass for nonlinear optical devices [8 – 13]. 
The present glass – crystalline transformation [14,15]. However, a systematic study on the optical properties of phosphate glasses has not been reported so far. In general, the refractive index dispersion need to be investigated as it plays a significant role in optical communication and also in designing devices for spectral dispersion. letter comprises the physical and optical properties of a new set of ternary phosphate glasses based on the formula AmBnP3O12. The related physical properties of these glasses viz., density (q), activation energy for crystallisation (Ea), refractive index (n), reflection loss (R), molar refractivity (Rm), molar volume (Vm), polarisability (am), dielectric constant (e), absorption edge or optical band gap (Eopt) and Urbach energy (DE) are presented.
Refractive indices over the visible region are measured by a new technique of spectral interferometry [16,17]. From wavelength-dependent refractive index measurements, we obtained Abbe number (md), third-order nonlinear coefficients (v3), average excitation energy for electronic transition (E0) and dispersion energy parameter (Ed). The success of such measurements for insight into nonlinear optical properties is highlighted.
The NASICON-type glass samples were prepared in batches of 10 g by regular melt quenching method reported elsewhere [6]. Optical quality samples were obtained by subsequent polishing. The glasses are Na4AlZnP3O12 (NAZP), K4AlZnP3O12 (KAZP), Na4AlCdP3O12 (NACP), Na4AlCaP3O12 (NACAP), Na3TiZnP3O12 (NTZP), K3TiZnP3O12 (KTZP) and Na3TiCdP3O12 (NTCP).
The absorption spectra were recorded on a JASCO 7800 UV – VIS spectrophotometer. Refractive index measurements were carried out by three methods: (1) Abbe refractometer at 590 nm using sodium vapor lamp, (2) Brewster method at 633 nm using He – Ne laser and a diode detector and (3) frequency domain interferometry using white light (350 – 750 nm). Densities were measured by Archimedes principle using toluene as immersion liquid. Differential scanning calorimetric (DSC) studies were carried out using a Perkin Elmer DSC-IV unit.
The refractive index dispersion in the visible region is measured by frequency domain interferometry. When a dispersive medium is introduced into one of the arms of the white light interferometer with path difference between the two arms slightly larger than the coherence length of the white light used, we observe interference pattern in the spectral domain. Frequency of modulation changes corresponding to the dispersive nature of the medium. A schematic diagram of the experimental setup used is given in Fig. 1. A detailed description on the setup could be interference law found in Ref. [17]. 
In general, the densities of these phosphate glasses are much less than the oxide glasses [17,19] suggesting that these glasses are formed by less dense network. The activation energy for crystallisation (Ea) obtained for these glasses from the DSC analysis are low compared to other phosphate glasses [7], due to high thermal stability with regard to crystallisation. These glasses are found to undergo crystallisation at around 400 jC.
The absorption spectra for the glasses under study are given in Fig. 3. For all the glasses, a strong absorption is observed for wavelengths below 400 nm and the edge of the absorption shows larger red shift for Ti-containing glasses. The edge of the absorption is studied for absorption edge (Eopt) and Urbach energies (DE), treating the glass as a indirect band gap material. Details on the calculation of Eopt and DE are discussed elsewhere [5]. The values of Eopt and DE are reproduced in Table 1.
Refractive index dispersion in the wavelength region of 350 – 750 nm for five of these glasses is measured using frequency domain interferometry. The refractive index values obtained by Abbe and Brewster methods are used for obtaining unambiguous values of refractive index and thickness from the calculations. Fig. 2 is an illustration of the experimental recordings of the spectral interference patterns and corresponding theoretical fits for NACP and NTZP glasses. The optical dispersion constants (A1, A2 and A3) derived from these fits for those glasses under study are further used to evaluate the refractive indices over the entire visible region (Fig. 4A). Over the region, the refractive index follows the trend NTCP>NTZP>NAZP> NACP>NACAP. It is evident from the plots that the Ti-based glasses show significant variation than the other glasses. 
In general, the bond polarisability, particularly in the presence of highly polarisable transition metal ions like Ti4+, dominates the linear and nonlinear optical properties of multicomponent glasses [8,17]. In other words, the polarisability of dominant cation shows direct proportionality to the refractive index. For instance, Al3+ ion has much lower polarisability (0.054 A˚ 3) than tetravalent titanium (0.184 A˚ 3) and accordingly refractive index [18,23]. The reason for significantly larger polarisability of Ti4+ ion is due to the empty d orbitals and the presence of lone pair of electrons in the anion contributions [8].
The parameter E0 is directly related to the optical band gap, an estimate of which is obtained from the absorption edge of the absorption spectrum. Much lower E0 values obtained for the Tibased glasses are in accordance with the large red shift in the edge of the absorption spectra for Tibased glasses (Fig. 3). On the other hand, Ed values are related to the nearest neighbor cation coordination, anion valency, ionicity and effective number of dispersion electrons [32,33]. The low Ed values observed for these glasses indicate strong ionic environment for the central metal ions. Particularly NTZP and NTCP glasses give rise to much lower values indicating highly ionic environment comparable to those of crystalline fluorides [32], while the largest Ed value observed for NACAP glass is due to the preference of high coordination number 8 exhibited by Ca2+ compared to 6 or 4 shown by other metal ions present in other glasses. 
It will be of interest to note that the replacement of Al3+ with Ti4+ drastically decreases the Ed values. The strong preference of 4 coordination for titanium can account for the observation. These E0 and Ed values together are of much use in obtaining the material contribution to the important parameters such as group delay and information bandwidths in optical fiber waveguides [31].
An attempt was made to measure the nonlinear optical susceptibility (v3) for these glasses using Z scan and degenerate four wave mixing (DFWM) using a nanosecond Nd – YAG laser at 532 nm. We could not observe any appreciable result; maybe because the values are much lower than the standard sample,  13 esu). However, it is possible to predict CS2 (c10 the nonlinear parameters from the data of refractive index dispersion with a close accuracy to the experimental data. 