The enhancement of tetravalent Hf4+ ion conduction was successfully realized by partially substituting the phosphorous (P) site in the NASICON-type HfNb(PO4)3 solid electrolyte with pentavalent vanadium cation to intentionally expand the crystal lattice size to make the Hf4+ ion migration easier. The V doping enhances the Hf4+ ion conductivity twice as high as that of pure HfNb(PO4)3. Here, the ratio of conducting ion size/crystal lattice volume has been demonstrated to be a suitable factor to design the optimization of the individual ion conduction in the NASICON-type structure.
First tetravalent cation conductor was reported in 2000 with the Zr2O(PO4)2 solid [1]. However, the ion conductivity was as low as 9.0210  1 even at 600 jC and the ion-conducting characteristics were far from the practical application region. By selecting the solid electrolyte structure which is suitable for ion migration in the solid, the NASICON-type structure has been focused and the ZrNb(PO4)3 solid with the NASICON structure was found to show as high Zr4+ ion-conducting behavior as 4.6110  1 even at 600 jC in 2001 [2]. For the purpose of enhancing the tetravalent ion-conducting characteristics, another Hf4+ ion-conducting solid was also prepared with the NASICON-type structure and the ion conductivity of HfNb(PO4)3 was found to show twice as high ion conductivity as that of ZrNb(PO4)3 [3]. 
Since there appears an electrostatic interaction between the conducting ion and the lattice constituent counter ions and the interaction becomes stronger with the increase of the migrating ion valency, it is one crucial point to select the suitable lattice size for the individual mobile ion species, especially for higher valent conducting ion species. In our previous letter, we reported that the ratio of conducting ion size/crystal lattice volume, hereafter abbreviates as the A ratio, becomes an appropriate factor to simulate the optimization of the trivalent cation conduction in the NASICON lattice [4]. From the A ratio simulation, it was clarified that the decrease in the A ratio contributes greatly to enhancing the ion-conducting characteristics such ion species as trivalent ion in comparison to lower valent migrating ions. 
In order to improve the above described tetravalent Hf4+ cation-conducting behavior in the HfNb(PO4)3 solid electrolyte, the decrease in the A ratio, that is, the enlargement of the lattice size was intentionally designed here, since the conducting ion is fixed as tetravalent Hf4+ ion.
In this letter, the expansion of the NASICON-type HfNb(PO4)3 lattice was realized by substituting the P5+ site in HfNb(PO4)3 with V5+ and the improvement of the Hf4+ ion-conducting behavior was demonstrated as designed.
The compound, V-doped HfNb(PO4)3 was synthesized by heating a proper mixture of Nb2O5, HfO2, V2O5, and (NH4)2HPO4 in air at 1100 jC for 12 h. The obtained powder was sintered at 1200 jC for 12 h. The formation of the solid solution was confirmed by the X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) analysis (M18XHF, Mac Science). The XRD data were collected by a step scanning method in the 2h range from 10j to 70j with a step width of 0.04j using Cu-Ka radiation. Electrical conductivity was measured by an ac and a dc method, using the sintered V-doped HfNb(PO4)3 ceramics with two platinum electrodes. The ac conductivity measurements were carried out by an ac complex impedance method with Hewlett Packard precision LCR meter (4192A). The oxygen  11 Pa were pressures from 102 to 105 Pa and at 10 regulated by mixing Air – N2 in a proper ratio or by using CO2 gas. 
The polarization measurements were conducted by passing the dc current (1 AA) between the two Pt electrodes sandwiching the sintered pellet and the voltage was monitored as a function of time in oxygen (PO2: 105 Pa) and in helium (PO2: 4 Pa). The polarization experiment was also carried out in the wet air atmosphere (3.1 vol.%) obtained by using a water vapor saturated air at 25 jC. The dc electrolysis was performed for the V-doped HfNb(PO4)3 solid solution pellet at 600 jC by applying a dc voltage of 3 V for 14 days in air. The analysis of the cathodic surface of the sample was conducted by electron probe microanalysis (EPMA-1500, Shimadzu) after the electrolysis.
The V content dependencies of the V-doped HfNb(PO4)3 solid solutions on the total electrical conductivity and the ion transference number are presented in Fig. 2. With the increase of the V content in the solid solution, the conductivity increases monotonously. Among the V-doped HfNb(PO4)3 solid solutions, the ion transference number of higher than 0.99 was realized for the 5 and 8 mol% V-doped HfNb(PO4)3. From the results mentioned above, the most suitable candidate for the Hf 4+ ion-conducting solid solution electrolyte among the V-doped HfNb(PO4)3 solid solution series, is clarified to be 8 mol% V-doped HfNb(PO4)3. Any conductivity change was not observed by the variation of the oxygen pressure from  11 Pa for the 8 mol% V-doped 102 to 105 Pa and at 10 HfNb(PO4)3. 
In addition, an abrupt polarization behavior was recognized in oxygen, helium and also in wet air atmosphere, suggesting neither oxide anion nor proton conduction appear in the V-doped HfNb(PO4)3 solid solution as demonstrated in our previous paper [3].
Fig. 3 presents the temperature dependencies of the Hf4+ ion conductivity (the Hf4+ ion conduction in the 8 mol% V doped HfNb(PO4)3 is demonstrated below.) of the 8 mol% V-doped HfNb(PO4)3 (.) (the A ratio: 1.73510  3) with the data of tetravalent ion conductors of ZrNb(PO4)3 (n) [2] (the A ratio: 1.805  3) and HfNb(PO4)3 (D) [3] (the A ratio: 1.741 10  3) reported previously and the divalent oxide 10 anion conductors of stabilized zirconias such as YSZ (—) [6] and CSZ ( – – ) [6]. The ion conductivity of pure HfNb(PO4)3 increases two times as high as that of pure ZrNb(PO4)3 and the V doping in HfNb(PO4)3 further enhances the ion conductivity approximately twice. The conductivity increases in the order from ZrNb(PO4)3, HfNb(PO4)3 to 8 mol% V-doped HfNb(PO4)3. The A ratio decrease in the same order and it becomes clear that the enhancement of the Hf4+ ion conductivity was successfully realized as simulated from the A ratio point of view.
For the purpose of improving the Hf4+ ion-conducting properties in the NASICON-type HfNb(PO4)3 solid electrolyte, the expansion of the crystal lattice size was examined by replacing the P5+ site in HfNb(PO4)3 for the larger V5+ ion. The expansion results in the decrease in the A ratio of conducting ion size/crystal lattice volume and as a result, the enhancement of the Hf4+ ion conductivity was intentionally realized as proposed. Since the higher the mobile ion valency is, the higher the electrostatic interaction between the mobile ion and the lattice constituent counter ions becomes. Therefore, the A ratio would be one of the suitable factors to design new NASICON-type solid electrolytes, especially for multivalent ion conductors, which show optimum ionconducting characteristics in the structure.