The crystallization conditions of some binary and ternary phosphates of the system Li2O – BaO – P2O5 from high temperature solutions have been investigated. It has been found that the range where spontaneous crystallization occurs at temperatures below 1200 jC is very restricted. Solutions with initial oxide concentrations of 10 – 55 mol% for Li2O, 15 – 45 mol% for BaO and 25 – 60 mol% for P2O5 have proved to be interesting for the practice of flux growth. The crystallization regions of binary (Li3PO4, LiPO3 and BaP2O7) and ternary (LiBaPO4 and Li2BaP2O7) phosphates have been established. Analysis of the experimental data on the crystallization region of Li2BaP2O7 has permitted determining the optimum composition of the high-temperature solution. Bulk single crystals of this compound have been grown for the first time. The IR spectrum of Li2BaP2O7 has been recorded.
In recent years, the interest of researchers in ternary orthoand pyrophosphates containing alkaline metals along with various other metals has increased considerably. This is due, above all, to the possibility of using these compounds in single and polycrystalline form as nonlinear optical materials [1], solid electrolytes [2 – 4], ionic conductors [5 – 10], battery electrodes [11,12], sensors for detection of NOx in atmospheric environment [13], etc.
Until very recently, it was only the ternary orthophosphate LiBaPO4 that was known to exist in the Li2O – BaO – P2O5 system. It was synthesized for the first time in 1962 by Wanmaker and Spier [14] who used a solid state reaction. They also studied the luminescent properties of this compound activated with Cu2 + ions. More recently, Paques-Ledent [15] found the structure of LiBaPO4 to have orthorhombic symmetry similarly to LiKSO4 (space group Pna21). According to Boutinaud et al. [16], however, during progressive heating, this low-temperature form undergoes a phase transition at 150 – 220 jC. A hightemperature polymorph with a hexagonal tridymite type structure has been isolated after rapid quenching in air from 900 jC. These authors have established stabilization of the hexagonal form on replacement of the lithium by monovalent copper, lithium barium orthophosphate being an appropriate matrix by means of which better understanding of the luminescent properties of Cu + ions in insulators can be achieved. 
In a recent paper [17], one of the authors reported the preparation of a new ternary phase in the Li2O – BaO – P2O5 system: lithium barium pyrophosphate, Li2BaP2O7. It crystallizes in the monoclinic system (space group C2/c). The same paper contains information from a preliminary study of the ionic conductivity of pure and Co-doped Li2BaP2O7 based on results of impedance measurements on polycrystalline sintered samples. However, due to the absence of single crystals of a sufficient size, it was not possible to determine the ionic conductivity along the three axes of the monoclinic cell. These crystals are also needed for the reliable characterization of a series of other important properties of the new compound. For that reason, the present study was performed. It was mainly aimed at finding growth conditions of Li2BaP2 O7 single crystals with appropriate sizes. 
The method chosen was crystallization from high-temperature solutions (flux growth) because preliminary experiments showed incongruent melting of the compound, so that crystallization from its own melt was to be very difficult.
The high-temperature solutions of the system Li2O – BaO – P2O5 were prepared with the use of analytical reagent purity Li2CO3, BaCO3 and NH4H2 PO4.
The experiments on the determination of the concentration and temperature regions of crystallization of the phases in the system were carried out in a vertical tubular furnace with a resistance wound Kanthal A1 heater, the temperature being regulated with a precision of F 0.5 jC by a Eurotherm controller. The solutions were prepared in platinum crucibles with a diameter of 30 mm and a height of 35 mm.
Portions of the initial reagents taken in the desired ratio were introduced into the platinum crucible after preliminary intimate mixing. Each portion was decomposed until the carbonates of lithium and barium and NH4H2PO4 were transformed into oxides. The temperature and duration of the dissociation proved strongly dependent on the initial composition of the mixture and varied between 700 and 1100 jC and between 2 h and 30 min, respectively. The end of the decomposition was evidenced by the fact that no more gas bubbles were formed. After decomposition of the last portion of the initial mixture, the solution obtained was homogenized for 12 h at a temperature dependent on the composition and varying within the limits of 800 and 1200 jC. The solutions thus prepared were transparent and transformed into colourless glass after rapid cooling. The amounts of the solutions used were 30 – 40 g, which ensured the presence in the crucible of a layer with a thickness of about 20 mm.
To determine the temperature of spontaneous crystallization of a given phase from the homogeneous solution, a platinum rod was immersed in the centre of the crucible and then the temperature was lowered every 2 h by 20 jC until crystals appeared on the rod. These crystals were used as seeds, and on the basis of their behaviour (growth or dissolution), it was possible to establish whether a given solution was supersaturated or unsaturated. Thus, varying the temperature for each solution composition, it was possible to find the temperature at which no visible growth or dissolution of crystals might be expected. This is the temperature of solution saturation which is assumed to be the temperature of spontaneous crystallization, Tn, of a given composition, the error of determination being dependent on the step of temperature change. During the final stage of the procedure, the error of Tn determination for each composition is found to be F 5 jC.
The experiments revealed the trend of the solutions of the Li2O – BaO – P2O5 system to supercooling. Some compositions exhibited a difference of the order of 80 – 100 jC between the temperature at which crystals appeared and the temperature of spontaneous crystallization determined as described above.
On the basis of the results obtained during the determination of the crystallization region of Li2Ba P2O7, an optimum composition of the high-temperature solution was chosen and used for growing single crystals of this substance. The growth experiments were carried out in the same furnace, in crucibles of the same sizes and using the same solutions, prepared and homogenized as described above. The crystals were grown on seeds obtained by spontaneous crystallization and immersed in the centre of the solution surface, the c-axis of the seed being perpendicular to the surface. The temperature distribution achieved in the solution hindered the rapid growth of the crystals in radial direction. This was possible using axial and radial temperature differences of the order of 5 and 3 jC, respectively. The growth process of the Li2BaP2 O7 crystals lasted 5 days at a solution cooling rate of 0.2 jC/h and a seed rotation rate of 30 rev/min. 
When the process ended, the crystal obtained was cooled to room temperature in the space immediately above the solution with a rate of 30 jC/h.
The main method used for determining the nature of the crystallized phase was X-ray powder diffraction (XRD). The XRD patterns were recorded with a DRON-3 instrument using filtered CuKa radiation and scintillation registration.
Inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) was applied to the determination of the Li, Ba and P contents in the crystals obtained. The measurements were performed by a Jobin Yvon system with a 1-m Czerny – Turner monochromator and a 27-MHz ICP. A special analysis method comprising crystal dissolution, choice of suitable analysis lines for each analyte and establishing the interference of various elements was developed. The detailed description of the procedure is given in Ref. [18].
The IR spectra were recorded by a conventional KBr technique with a Brucker IFS25 FTIR spectrometer (400 – 4000 cm
According to the experiments performed, the region of the ternary system Li2O – BaO – P2O5 where crystals may be grown at a temperature of spontaneous crystallization below 1200 jC is very restricted. For instance, in all cases when the content of Li2O is larger than 55 mol%, the crystallization proceeds at Tn>1200 jC, a significant volatility and a trend to creeping of the solutions being observed. The same is valid for the solutions containing more than 45 mol% BaO. The solutions with more than 60 mol% P2O5 are low-temperature ones but have a high viscosity and show a pronounced trend to vitrification. Thus, it has been found that solutions of the above ternary oxide system where the initial oxide concentrations vary between 10 and 55 mol% for Li2O, 15 and 45 mol% for BaO, and 25 and 60 mol% for P2O5 are interesting for the practice of crystal growth. Fig. 1 shows that within these concentration ranges, there are seven distinct regions. 
The substances crystallizing in regions 1, 6 and 4 are binary lithium orthophosphate (Li3PO4), lithium metaphosphate (LiPO3) and barium pyrophosphate (Ba2P2O7), respectively. In region 7, the system exhibits a clear trend to glass formation and all attempts to achieve crystallization in this regions by both slow cooling with a rate of less than 1 jC/h and drastic initiation of crystal growth centres proved unsuccessful.
In regions 2, 3 and 5, ternary phosphates crystallize. Region 3 is the LiBaPO4 orthophosphate, which has been known for a long time. In region 5, the new pyrophosphate, Li2BaP2O7, crystallizes. We have not yet succeeded in establishing the exact composition and structure of the ternary phosphate of lithium and barium crystallizing in region 2. This will be the subject of further studies on the Li2O – BaO – P2O5 system.
As can be seen in Fig. 1, Li2BaP2O7, which is the subject of the present communication, crystallizes from high-temperature solutions when they contain 28 – 46 mol% Li2O, 10 – 30 mol% BaO and 30 – 50 mol% P2O5. The crystallization temperature of lithium barium pyrophosphate ranges from 580 to 870 jC. The point 5Vin the figure, which corresponds to stoichiometric Li2BaP2O7 (Li2O/BaO/P2O5 = 1:1:1), is beyond the crystallization region of the compound, which is an indication that it melts incongruently. This is in agreement with the results of the preliminary studies. In other words, if we cool a solution containing the three oxides in a molar ratio of 1:1:1, the LiBaPO4 orthophosphate should be the first to crystallize followed by the unknown ternary phosphate of region 2 and only when the solution composition reaches the boundary between regions 2 and 5, crystallization of Li2BaP2O7 would begin. 
Pure crystals of this pyrophosphate can be obtained from solutions with compositions of region 5, i.e. from compositions which always contain Li2O and P2O5 in excess of the stoichiometric amount.
The experimental data also permit determining the concentration ranges of Li2BaP2O7 during crystallization from high-temperature solutions with the chosen compositions. For points a, b, c, d and e, the values are of the order of 1, 6, 13, 11 and 10 mol%, respectively. Obviously, in this case, again, the first two solutions are more unsuitable than the remaining ones. One more reason for which one cannot recommend growing crystals from these solutions is the too high temperature coefficient of supersaturation (0.1 g/ g degree for solution a and 0.086 g/g degree for solution b. With solutions c, d and e, the values are 0.054, 0.037 and 0.034 g/g degree.
When the solution compositions change in the direction from a to e, the P2O5 concentration in them increases, which presupposes an increase in viscosity. This is observed indeed. With solutions having d and especially e compositions, homogenization is very slow, the crystal growth is hindered and a trend to glass formation appears. In fact, the point that corresponds to composition e is in immediate vicinity of the glass formation region 7 (Fig. 1).
The above considerations permit the conclusion that solution c is most appropriate for growing Li2BaP2O7 single crystals. In fact, this is a solution of Li2BaP2O7 in LiPO3 whose initial composition is about 78 mol% Li2BaP2O7 and 22 mol% LiPO3. This solution was used in the experiments on single crystal growth by the flux method and under the conditions described in Section 2.2. Fig. 3 shows a crystal obtained under these conditions. The photograph in Fig. 4 presents the appearance of dendrite growth when the solution cooling rate exceeds 0.3 jC/h.
The most important result of the present investigation is that a suitable method and appropriate conditions have been found for the growth of bulk single crystals of Li2BaP2O7, the recently synthesized new double pyrophosphate of lithium and barium. Since the compound melts incongruently, the growth was performed by crystallization at moderate temperatures from a flux. The absence of other substances besides Li2O, BaO and P2O3, which are the binary constituents of Li2BaP2O7, favours the formation of crystals without foreign impurities.
