Ion migration in solids has been well known for the ion species such as mono-, divalent cations and anions. In contrast, for trivalent ions, it has been commonly accepted that the ion species whose valency is higher than trivalent state are extremely poor conductors in solids. Some papers have reported that Ln -b0-alumina [1–7], b-LaNbO [8] and LaA O [9] are trivalent ion conductors. However, neither direct nor quantitative demonstration has been carried out. In 1995, a direct demonstration of trivalent 31Sc cation conduction in solids has been successfully realized by choosing the constituent structure such as a quasi two-dimensional one [10]. The higher the valency of the conducting cation is, the interaction between the cation and surrounding anions becomes. 
For the purpose of reducing the interaction between the mobile trivalent ion and the anion species surrounding the trivalent ion as much as possible, the pathway for the trivalent ion needs to possess enough space to migrate at least, twodimensionally, preferentially, to be located three dimensionally. In addition, to release the migrating cation to conduct smoother, higher electrostatic interaction between the lattice forming cations and anions is needed compared with the interaction between the mobile trivalent cations and the anions. Furthermore, the inclusion of lower valent cations than the trivalent state should be eliminated because monoor divalent cations can easily conduct in solids for the objective trivalent cations. The needs described above indicate that the solid should contain the elements which can stably hold the tetravalent state or higher.
Recently, we have succeeded in developing the (R5Al, In, Sc, Y, Er–Lu) solid electrolytes R (WO ) 4 3 type structure, showing with the orthorhombic Sc (WO ) 4 3 ion conduction in solids [11–16]. The a pure trivalent Sc (WO ) type series possesses a quasi-layered structure 4 3 and holds a large pathway where trivalent ion can conduct smoothly. In the structure, tungsten ion (W ) bonds strongly to surrounding four oxide anions to constitute a WO tetrahedron unit and a considerable reduction of the electrostatic interaction between trivalent ions and O anions was successfully realized. In a similar manner, we have also developed a new type of trivalent rare earth ion conducting solid electrolyte based on phosphate [17].
Electrical conductivity was measured by an a.c. and a d.c. method, using the sintered sample pellet with two platinum electrodes in the temperature range between 200 and 600 8C. The a.c. conductivity measurement was carried out by an a.c. complex impedance method in the frequency range from 20 Hz to 1 MHz by using the Precision LCR meter (8284A, Hewlett-Packard).
