Three new potassium rare-earth/titanium phosphate structures, K2ErTi(PO4)3 (KErTP), K2YbTi(PO4)3 (KYbTP) and K2YTi(PO4)3 (KYTP), are presented, all of which are characterized by single-crystal X-ray diffraction studies. In addition, a fourth structure, K2CrTi(PO4)3 (KCrTP), has been reinvestigated. All structures are isostructural to the langbeinite-type structure and result from changes made to the growth constituents in high-temperature ¯ux-growth experiments intended to give structurally modi®ed potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP). The two crystallographically independent octahedra sites (site symmetry 3) have a mixed Ti/M (M = Er, Yb, Y or Cr) population, although the rare-earth metals favour one site while chromium favours the other. An alternative approach for the description of the channels and cation cages in langbeinite and related structures is given using [M5X6O39] units. The framework of langbeinite is compared with that of nasicon using these alternative building units. 
Phosphate langbeinites form a small group of compounds where most of those that are structurally characterized contain titanium. The structure of Na2MTi(PO4)3 (M = Fe, Cr) has been determined by Isasi & Daidouh (2000) from powderstructures of KTi2(PO4)3, diffraction data, while K2Ti2(PO4)3 and K1+xTi2-yAly(PO4)3 (Masse et al., 1972; Leclaire et al., 1989; Slobodyanik et al., 1991) have been determined from single-crystal data. Powder-diffraction studies indicate that K2CrTi(PO4)3, A2MTi(PO4)3 (A = K, Rb, Tl; M = Cr, Fe) and K2TiV(PO4)3 have a langbeinite-type structure (Boudjada & Perret, 1977; Perret & Boudjada, 1979; Rangan & Gopalakrishnan, 1994). These monophosphates can be summarized as having the general chemical formula AxM2(PO4)3. 
The bonding characteristics of KErTP, KYbTP, KYTP and KCrTP are structurally investigated. A new model for describing the cavities and channels in langbeinite and langbeinite-related structures is presented. Building units of [M5X6O39] are used as a complement to the smaller [M2X3O18] building blocks. The structures of langbeinite and nasicon are compared with each other using the new building unit.
KYTP was crystallized from 9.5 g of the start mixture and 0.5 g of Y2O3, resulting in a Ti4+/Y3+ ratio of 2.6:1. KYbTP was crystallized in the same way from 9.5 g of the start mixture and 1.0 g of Yb2O3, resulting in a Ti4+/Yb3+ ratio of 2.3:1. The KErTP crystallization was obtained from a 10 g mixture of TiO2, KH2PO4, K2HPO4 and ErCl3 1)6H2O in a molar ratio of 1:3:2:0.3, giving a Ti4+/Er3+ ratio of 3.3:1. All batches were carefully mixed and thereafter slowly heated to 1273 K over a four-day period, in order to obtain a homogeneous melt. The melts were kept at 1273 K for 60 h and ®nally cooled to 1023 K at 1.4 K h 255)1. Experimental details for KCrTP can be found in Norberg et al. (2000).
All crystals were easily recovered by dissolving the ¯ux in hot water. The KYTP batch produced 0.9 g of crystalline material, with a large number of tetrahedrally shaped crystals of about 2 mm in size. The KYbTP batch gave 1.5 g of crystalline material including some large crystals (1±2 mm) of irregular shape and a large number of small crystals with perfect tetrahedral shape. The KErTP batch gave 1.0 g of crystalline material with a pinkish colour that was due to crystallized ErPO4. A small number of the crystals had a tetrahedral shape, indicating that they were of the langbeinitetype structure. All crystals in the KYTP, KYbTP and KErTP batch were colourless and free from ¯ux residues. It should also be noted that the addition of MCl3 1)xH2O (M = Pr, Nd and Sm) to a KTP growth ¯ux produced rare-earth phosphates but no langbeinite crystals.
Energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis (electro-scan S4±8DV equipped with a Link eX1 EDX system) was used to verify the atomic content of the structurally determined crystals. Crystals from the X-ray diffraction experiment and random crystals from the growth batches were analysed. All measurements indicated a Ti/M (M = Er, Yb, Y or Cr) ratio close to 1:1 and a K/P ratio of 2:3, as was expected for K1+xMxTi2 255)x(PO4)3 crystals with x = 1.
Supplementary data for this paper are available from the IUCr electronic archives (Reference: OS0095). Services for accessing these data are described at the back of the journal.
The structure of KErTP was determined by direct methods in the SHELXS97 program (Sheldrick, 1997). All further least-square re®nements were performed using the Xtal3.71 software package (Hall et al., 2000). The MÐO bond distances of 2.026 (7)±2.109 (9) AÊ indicated a mixed population of Ti and Er at both crystallographically independent octahedron sites (the combined effective radius of TiIV and O is 2.01 AÊ ; Shannon, 1976). It was not possible to separate Ti and Er in two atomic positions at the respective octahedron site. The atomic position and anisotropic displacement parameters of Ti and Er were therefore constrained to be identical at each atomic site, and the site occupancy was set at 1.00.
The potassium population parameter was set to re®ne freely in the initial phase of the least-square re®nement, since the general chemical formula of KErTP is K1+xErxTi2 255)x(PO4)3. The total cation population was restricted to 2.00 because of the structure of the langbeinite framework. The occupancy parameter at both cation sites ended up close to 1.00 and was therefore ®xed at 1.00 in the ®nal re®nement. The total occupancies of Ti and Er were ®xed at 1.00, as both the cation population parameter and the EDX measurement indicated a Ti/Er ratio of 1:1. An isotropic extinction parameter (Zachariasen, 1967) was re®ned using Larson's implementation (Larson, 1970). About 15% of the re¯ections were affected by extinction with a maximum correction of y = 0.88 for the 0 1 3 re¯ection (the observed structure factor is Fobs = yFkin, where Fkin is the kinematic value of the structure factor). The re®ned Flack (1983) parameter of 0.04 (3) indicates that the crystals used for the data collection were of single domain.
KYbTP was refined in the same way as KErTP using the same initial coordinates. As the isotropic extinction parameter re®ned to zero, it was excluded in the final refinement. The refined Flack parameter of 0.00 (3) indicates that the crystal was of single domain.
The atomic positions in KYTP are inverted compared with those of KErTP, and the small crystal used in the data collection showed no extinction. The Flack parameter refined to  255)0.10 (5), and it is clear from both twin refinements, using domains of different polarity and separate refinement of the inverted structure, that the absolute configuration has been determined.
The atomic fractional coordinates, occupation and displacement parameters for K2ErTi(PO4)3, K2YbTi(PO4)3 and K2YTi(PO4)3 are listed in the supplementary material.
The three-dimensional framework in the langbeinite-type structure consists of MO6 octahedra and XO4 tetrahedra and allows for cations to be located in large structural cages. The complex cubic structure is built from isolated XO4 tetrahedra, sharing each corner with a MO6 octahedron. All MO6 octahedra are separated from each other and no electron delocalization can occur between them. Furthermore, the structure's framework is described on the basis of small building blocks. These building blocks are composed of two MO6 octahedra linked together by three XO4 tetrahedra to give rod-shaped blocks of [M2X3O18]. The stacking of these building blocks is not intuitive since it is a complex procedure. Fig. 1(a) illustrates how each of the three XO4 tetrahedra in the building block connects to two other building blocks. The stacking of building blocks can also be described with rods as illustrated in Fig. 1(b). 
A bond between individual rods indicates that the connected MO6 octahedra are close to each other and bridged together by two XO4 tetrahedra.
All large cations (e.g. K+, Rb+ etc.) are trapped in cages formed by the three-dimensional framework. The two crystallographically independent cation sites are located in the same cation cage and are within bonding distance of 18 O atoms (nine each). These O atoms are part of seven MO6 octahedra connected together by XO4 tetrahedra, forming an enclosed cage as shown in Fig. 2. The cation separation in the cage is approximately 3.9 AÊ .
In the usual description of the langbeinite structure with [M2X3O18] blocks, there is a tendency to overlook the existence of two different kinds of bridging between neighbouring MO6 octahedra. The shortest bridging distance is inherent in the [M2X3O18] building block and is formed by three XO4 tetrahedra between two octahedra with planes facing each other. 
A slightly longer bridging distance is the result of two bridging tetrahedra between octahedra with their edges opposite each other. The difference in bridging distance between these two is approximately 0.3 AÊ .
As a complement to the commonly used building block [M2X3O18], an alternative building unit is proposed. The main purpose of this new unit is to visualize the cages and channels formed in langbeinite and related structures. This new building unit contains five MO6 octahedra and six XO4 tetrahedra (see Fig. 3). However, this new unit shares polyhedra with neighbouring units. The commonly used building block shares O atoms in the usual fashion, but not polyhedra. The new approach simpli®es the comparison of langbeinite and nasicon, which have the same general formula (see Fig. 4). The nasicon structure allows for fast ion conductivity, and Fig. 4 shows the structure of langbeinite and nasicon using the alternative polyhedra instead of MO6 octahedra and XO4 tetrahedra. The zigzag pattern of the cations in the nasicon channels is clearly visible, and the channels themselves are easily observed. This approach to depicting cation cages etc. might be appropriate for other structures.
The structures of KErTP, KYbTP, KYTP and KCrTP are isostructural and belong to the langbeinite-type structure described in the previous section. The three rare-earth/titanium-based langbeinite structures, i.e. K2MTi(PO4)3 (M = Er, Yb, Y), are similar when it comes to bond distances, volume and distortion of the M/TiO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra, thermal-displacement parameters etc., but in some respects KCrTP differs substantially from the others. All signi®cant bond distances in the structurally characterized phosphate langbeinites are given in Table 2.
All of the new synthetic langbeinites with a rare-earth metal and titanium mixed at the same atomic sites have enlarged thermal-displacement parameters, especially for the O atoms. The thermal-displacement parameters of the O atoms for KErTP, KYbTP and KYTP are about ®ve times as large as those of the O atoms in KCrTP (see supplementary material). This has to be attributed to the larger ionic radii of the rareearth metals compared with that of titanium: the sum of the effective ionic radii of TiIV and O is 2.01 AÊ while that of MIII and O (MIII = Er, Yb or Y) is approximately 2.29 AÊ . In reality, the O atoms are randomly disordered at multiple sites centred at the determined atomic position. This is in order to elongate the bond distance between the rare-earth metals and neighbouring O atoms. The Ti atoms inside the octahedra are possibly at the upper limit of the bond distance between Ti and O. 
As expected, the thermal-displacement parameters for the O atoms in KYbTP are somewhat smaller than for KErTP and KYTP, since the effective ionic radius of ytterbium is slightly smaller than that of the other two rare-earth metals. The volume of the M/TiO6 octahedra is at the upper limit in terms of accommodating the Ti atoms. This is con®rmed by the fact that neither praseodymium, neodymium or samarium resulted in langbeinite crystals when added to the growth ¯ux. The cation radii of these rare-earth metals are slightly larger than those of erbium, ytterbium and yttrium (Shannon, 1976). This small increase of approximately 0.05±0.09 AÊ appears to eliminate the possibility of langbeinite crystallization.

