Dimethyl ether (DME) is used as a raw material in the chemical industry for the manufacture of acetic acid [1], olefins [2], and fuel [3]. Moreover, DME is thought to be a promising diesel fuel [4–6] for internal combustion engines and has a cetane number from 55 to 60 [7]. In addition, DME has the advantages of high oxidation resistance and low toxic exhaust concentration [8–10].
DME is most frequently prepared using the methanol dehydration process:
The dehydration is accompanied by side reactions, including methanol thermolysis (2) and carbon dioxide formation as a result of steam reforming according to schemes (3) and (4):
The lack of C–C bonds in DME molecules is responsible for the relatively low temperatures of methanol conversion compared to ethanol and other alcohols [11, 12].
DME is most frequently synthesized using solid heterogeneous catalysts because they are easier to separate and regenerate. A number of solid acid catalysts for this process have been reported [12–19].
Noteworthy among them are zeolite ZSM-5 and γ-Al2O3, which ensure high selectivity and high conversion of raw materials and are relatively cheap. The main drawback to these materials is their low activity (A = 0.9–3.0 mmol/(h g) at 300°C [20]), which has stimulated a search for new catalysts for methanol reforming.
In the last quarter of the 20th century, framework phosphates with the NaZr2(PO4)3 (NZP/NASICON) and Sc2(WO4)3 (SW) structures were shown to exhibit catalytic activity for a number of catalytic processes [21–32]. These structures are similar in the arrangement of their framework-forming polyhedra: octahedra and phosphate tetrahedra share oxygen corners but differ in the arrangement of the polyhedra in the framework. Such compounds can be represented by the general formula (DO4)3, where A is an alkali, alkaline-earth, or d-transition metal; B is a metal in the oxidation state 3+; C is a metal in the oxidation state 4+; D is a polyvalent element (P, Si, V, or S); and the coefficients x, y, and z lie in the range 0 ≤ x(y, z) ≤ 2.0, depending on the stoichiometry of the compound. The A, B, C, and D sites can be occupied by a variety of cations, which makes it possible to widely vary the composition of the phosphates, thereby varying the number and strength of Lewis and Bronsted acid centers and redox centers. This feature, in combination with the thermal stability of the framework phosphates, makes them potentially attractive catalysts for the dehydrogenation and dehydration of alcohols and the synthesis of some organic substances [33].
Studies of alcohol reforming have demonstrated catalytic activity of framework phosphates not only in acid–base reactions (dehydration) [20, 26, 28, 29, 32] but also in redox conversions (dehydrogenation) [27, 28, 30, 31]. Some catalysts with the NZP and SW structures were used to produce hydrogen from methanol [34,35], in particular in membrane catalysis processes [36, 37].
In this paper, we report a study of M0.5(1 + x)FexZr2 – x(PO4)3 (M = Mn, Cu, Ni; 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.5) framework phosphates and their catalytic activity for methanol dehydration processes.
Abstract—M0.5(1 + x)FexZr2 – x(PO4)3 (M = Ni, Cu, Mn; 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.5) phosphates have been studied as catalysts for methanol conversion in the temperature range 200–450°C. The results demonstrate that the most active and selective catalysts among these materials are Ni0.5Zr2(PO4)3 and Cu0.65Fe0.3Zr1.7(PO4)3. The dimethyl ether yield on the synthesized materials is comparable to that on available commercial catalysts.
The preparation of M0.5(1 + x)FexZr2 – x(PO4)3(M = Ni, Cu; x = 0, 0.3, 0.5) phosphates by the Pechini process was described elsewhere.
The starting reagents used were aqueous solutions of NiSO4 ⋅ 7H2O (99.0%, Reachem), CuCl2 (prepared by dissolving CuO (99.0%, Reachem) in hydrochloric acid), Fe(NO3)3 (98.0%, Reachem), ZrOCl2 ⋅ 8H2O (99.0%, Reachem), and NH4H2PO4 (99.0%, Reachem). Ethylene glycol (EG) (98.0%, Reachem) acts as a promoter for ensuring weak interactions between particles, whereas citric acid (CA) (99.0%, Reachem) exhibits a chelate effect.
For synthesis by the Pechini process, EG and an aqueous NH4H2PO4 solution were slowly added to aqueous solutions of the nickel, copper, iron, and zirconium salts in stoichiometric ratios. The freshly prepared gels were dried at 90°C and then annealed at 350°C for 5 h and at 600, 650, and 700°C for at least 48 h in each step. After each anneal, the material was comminuted to accelerate solid-state reactions. The use of EG and CA made it possible to obtain the desired product at lower temperatures in comparison with a conventional sol–gel process.
Sol–gel synthesis in an alkaline medium was used to prepare Mn0.5(1 + x)FexZr2 – x(PO4)3 (x = 0, 0.1, 0.3) phosphates. Samples obtained at high pH values,9–10, had better crystallinity than did the phosphates prepared in an acid medium (pH 2). Aqueous solutions of manganese (Mn(CH3COO)2 ⋅ 4H2O) (99.5%, ACROS Organics), iron, and zirconium were mixed together in stoichiometric ratios, and then an ammonium dihydrogen phosphate solution was added to the mixture. The desired level of pH in the final mixture was reached by adding NH3 (99.5%, Reachem). The resultant gels were dried at 90°C and annealed in an airfree atmosphere at 600, 650, 670, and 700°C for at least 48 h at each temperature.
The phase composition of the samples thus prepared was determined by X-ray diffraction on a Shimadzu XRD-6000 diffractometer (30 kV, 30 mA, angular range 2θ = 10°–60°) using CuKα radiation (λ = 1.54178 Å).
Micrographs of the mixed phosphates were obtained on a JEOL JSM-7600F field emission (Schottky cathode) scanning electron microscope (SEM). The microscope was equipped with an Oxford Instruments X-Max 80 (Premium) energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer system with a semiconductor silicon drift detector.
The specific surface area and porosity of the catalysts were determined by low-temperature nitrogen capillary adsorption measurements with a Micromeritics ASAP-2020N porosimeter. Before the measurements, the samples were degassed at 350°C for 1 h.
The methanol conversion reaction was studied using a tube reactor (length, 21.5 cm; effective diameter, 0.9 cm). Hydrogen and argon flows were controlled by mass flow controllers, and the reaction temperature was monitored with thermocouples placed along the outer surface of the reactor.
The catalyst (0.3 g) was mixed with granulated quartz (size range 1–3 mm) and placed between two layers of pure quartz. Prior to catalytic tests, the samples were activated in a flowing H2 (5%)/Ar mixture (20 cm3/min) at 350°C for 3 h. The catalysts were tested in the temperature range 200–450°C with argon as a carrier gas (flow rate of 20 cm3/min). Methanol vapor cooled to 2°C was mixed with argon and introduced into the reactor. The gaseous reaction products were analyzed on an LHM 8MD gas chromatograph using a thermal conductivity detector, helium carrier gas, and a column packed with Porapak T. Carbon(II) and carbon(IV) oxides were analyzed on the same chromatograph using a column packed with activated carbon. Hydrogen concentration was determined on a Chrom-4 chromatograph (Ar carrier gas) equipped with a thermal conductivity detector and zeolite column (CaA Zeosorb stationary phase).
Methanol conversion Xi (vol %), selectivity Si(vol %), and product yield Y were assessed using the following relations:
where ϕ0 is the initial methanol concentration, ϕ1 is the final methanol concentration, and ϕi is the concentration of the ith reforming product (DME, H2, CO, or CO2).
X-ray diffraction data for the M0.5(1 + x)FexZr2 – x(PO4)3(M = Ni, Cu; x = 0, 0.3, 0.5; M = Mn; x = 0, 0.1, 0.3) materials (Fig. 1) indicate that the samples were single-phase and crystallized in the Sc2(WO4)3 structure. The X-ray diffraction patterns of the phosphates could be indexed in monoclinic symmetry (sp. gr. P21/n).
According to the electron microscopy results, the synthesized materials consisted of agglomerates 0.1 to 10 μm in size. X-ray microanalysis showed that the samples were homogeneous and that their compositions corresponded to the intended ones. The specific surface area of the samples ranged from 16 (for Cu0.65Fe0.3Zr2(PO4)3) to 83 m2/g (for Mn0.55Fe0.1Zr1.9(PO4)3) (Table 1). Fe3+ substitution for Zr4+ led to agglomeration of the particles in the materials. This can be accounted for by the decrease in the melting point of the phosphates on Fe substitution, which improved their sinterability.
For all of the catalysts studied, the major conversion product was DME. At high temperatures, we also observed the formation of CO, CO2, and H2. The highest methanol conversion (up to 95%) was achieved using Ni0.5Zr2(PO4)3, whereas the most efficient catalyst (X ~ 60%) was the manganese-containing material (Fig. 2). It is worth noting that the DME selectivity of all the catalysts was lower at high temperatures (Fig. 3). This was accompanied by an increase in the rates of the methanol dehydration and steam reforming processes according to Eqs. (2)–(4). The hydrogen yield of the process under study was compared to the DME yield, using the copper-containing catalysts (x = 0 and 0.3) as examples (Fig. 4). With increasing temperature, the DME yield decreases and the hydrogen concentration in the conversion products rises as a result of reactions (2)–(4). 
In addition, we observe an increase in hydrogen concentration on the addition of Fe, capable of catalyzing redox processes, to the composition of the catalyst.
For all of the catalysts, the carbon monoxide concentration was low. Besides DME and hydrogen, only carbon dioxide was released in noticeable amounts. The reason for this is that, beginning at rather low temperatures, the methanol dehydration process (reaction (1)) ensures a water vapor concentration high enough for methanol reforming processes (reaction (3)).
The selectivity of all the catalysts for reaction (1) decreases systematically as a result of partial iron substitution for zirconium. The likely reason for this is that heterogeneous substitution of iron cations for zirconium improves the activity of the catalysts for dehydrogenation processes. The high selectivity of the nickel- and copper-containing materials at low temperatures also significantly decreases at high temperatures as a result of active side processes. The manganese-containing catalysts have an even lower selectivity over the entire temperature range studied. This is due to the activity of these transition metals for the redox processes underlying methanol dehydrogenation and methanol steam conversion.
The synthesized catalysts based on nickel zirconium and copper zirconium phosphates are competitive with commercial catalysts for methanol conversion. In particular, they are superior in catalytic activity to previously reported oxide and phosphate catalysts and are only inferior to zeolite H-ZSM-5. Their selectivity is slightly surpassed only by that of aluminosilicate and aluminophosphate systems.
Zirconium(IV) d-transition metal (Ni, Cu, and Mn) phosphate catalysts have been prepared by sol– gel synthesis and the Pechini process. All of the materials studied have been shown to exhibit high catalytic activity for dehydration of methanol to dimethyl ether. The highest methanol conversion and DME selectivity have been obtained on the Ni0.5Zr2(PO4)3 and Cu0.65Fe0.3Zr1.7(PO4)3 phosphates. They are comparable in these parameters to the best catalysts described in the literature.