Synthesis and Crystal Chemical Characteristics of the Structure of  Phosphates

Double phosphates of zirconium and metals with an oxidation degree of +2 of the composition  = Mg, Ca, Mn, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Sr, Cd, and Ba) are synthesized and characterized by X-ray M diffraction methods and IR spectroscopy. The crystal structures of all the compounds are based on three-dimen2+ -tetrahedra and  sional frameworks of corner-sharing PO , 4 2+  cations octahedrally coordinated with oxygen atoms form rhombohedral structures (space group Sr 2+ R3 -cations are monoclinic (space group   com) (PO Zr 3 4 2 pounds with a common structural motif but different symmetries are discussed.  © 2002 MAIK “Nauka/Interperiodica”.2+ , Zn , and Mn ). The effect of various structure-forming factors on the  / M n 0.5 1, and Ba ), whereas phosphates with small tetrahedrally coordinated Mg

-octahedra. Phosphates with large  ZrO6

Systematic  studies  of  the  crystal  chemistry  of groups  of  compounds  that  have  a  common  sign  (or common signs) are necessary for establishing the regularities of their formation and understanding the relation  between  their  structures  and  properties  and  the analysis of the possible synthesis of compounds with new structure types.

. Depending on the charge of  Phosphates with a common structural motif but with -tetrahedra  and different  symmetries,  in  which  PO 4 — p   frame-octahedra  form  mixed  (PO ) {[ O ] } L L 3 3 4 2 6 works, are formed at the stoichiometric ratios   : P = L  and the condition 2 : 3 L providing  phosphate  electroneutrality,  the  cavities  of their frameworks can be ﬁlled with cations of considerably different sizes and oxidation degrees ranging from +1  to  +4  without  considerable  changes  in  the  framework geometry.

These phosphates are characterized by the existence of  stable  individual  groupings  (“lanterns”)  consisting of two  -octahedra connected by three bridging P-tetraL hedra along the ring and a small cavity in the shape of a trigonal prism between the octahedra that cannot be ﬁlled with cations (Fig. 1). The chemical bonds inside these  groupings  (Fig.  1a)  are  much  stronger  than  the bonds formed by these groupings with one another and with cations ﬁlling the cavities of the framework and participating  in  the  compound  formation.  Therefore, the above stable structural fragments can change their mutual spatial orientation under the effect of isoand heterovalent substitutions of cations located in the positions inside the framework and in the cavities between the  and P-polyhedra and also under the effect of varL

ious external factors such as temperature and pressure. The speciﬁc features of each structure type are determined by the packings of these groupings.

In  widespread  rhombohedral  frameworks,  these structure-forming  fragments  build  columns  along  the 3 -axes (Fig. 1b). In many instances, the symmetry of   frameworks  can  be the  compounds  with  lowered to orthorhombic or even monoclinic (Fig. 1c). Theoretically, a monoclinic unit cell (sp. gr.  ) can be obtained from a rhombohedral one (in the hexagonal setting) by its slight deformation [1], and, therefore, the monoclinic structural motif can have columns similar to those singled out in rhombohedral frameworks. The symmetry relations between the large variety of phos— p   frameworks phate  structures  with  (PO ) ] } {[ L 3 4 2 3 were established in our earlier study [2].

At  present,  the  best  studied  phosphates  are  phosphates  with  mixed  frameworks  of  the  compositions II I  = Ge, Ti, Zr,  (where   is an alkali metal,  E E (PO ) L L 3 4 2 I I  = Li, Na, and E3 Sn, and Hf) and  E (PO )  L 3  4 2  = Sc, Cr, Fe, and In) [3–8]. Quite a large number of L II E0.5 studies are dedicated to the compounds  ) (PO L 3 4 2 II   is  either  an  alkali  earth  or  3 (where  -transition E d metal, and   = Ti or Zr) [9–13]. However, the structural L studies of the latter compounds were usually reduced to obtaining  diffraction  patterns.  Neither  their  space groups nor the character of the distribution of cations with an oxidation degree of +2 have been deﬁnitevely established. The information on the vibration spectra of II E0.5 phosphates  is  also  quite  scarce. At  the

same time, depending on the symmetry, the compounds characterized by similar structural motifs can give different vibration spectra. The use of factor-group analysis allows one to determine the number of active vibrations of anion groupings on the Raman-scattering and IR spectra and explain the differences in the vibration spectra  associated  with  different  chemical  compositions and crystal symmetries. ,  where  Zr (PO ) 3 4 2

Below, we generalize the X-ray diffraction and IR spectroscopy data for a series of phosphates with the   =  Mg,  Ca,  Mn, composition  Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Sr, Cd, and Ba. We also perform factor-tetrahedra in the group analysis on vibrations of   144) 142) 4 structures of the compounds with   frame[ (PO ) ] L 3 3 4 2 works  described  by  different  space  groups.  Based  on the experimental data obtained and consideration of the known data, we discuss the inﬂuence of various structure-forming  factors  on  the  speciﬁc  characteristics  of M

The  synthesis  of )3  phosphates  perZr (PO 4 2 formed by the sol–gel method was described in detail in our earlier publications [12, 13]. The starting materials were  reagent-grade  M(NO3)2  ·  xH2O  or  MCl2  ·  yH2O, ZrOCl2 · 8H2O, and H3PO4. Electron probe analysis (a Camebax  microprobe)  showed  that  the  samples  were homogeneous, their compositions were close to the theoretical ones calculated by the formula M0.5Zr2(PO4)3, and they contained no noticeable amounts of any isomorphous impurities.

The X-ray diffraction analysis of the samples was made  on  a  DRON-3M  diffractometer  (ﬁltered  CuKa and CoKa  radiations, scanning rate 1 deg/min) at room temperature. The lattice parameters of the compounds synthesized  were  determined  from  their  indexed  diffraction patterns in the range of 2q  angles 8¡–50¡ and then were reﬁned by the least squares method. In those cases where the analysis of the systematic absences of reﬂections  did  not  allow  the  unique  establishment  of space  groups,  the  spectroscopic  data  were  also  analyzed.

The  absorption  spectra  of  the  samples  (ﬁnely  dispersed  ﬁlms  on  KBr  substrates)  were  recorded  on  a Specord  75  IR  spectrophotometer  in  the  frequency range 1800–400 cm–1.

Compounds  of  various  compositions  based  on  the [L2(PO4)3]3¥   frameworks  are  crystallized  in  several space  groups— ,  ,  R32,  Pbca,  Pbcn,  Bb(Cc),

Fig.  1.  Mixed  [L2(PO4)3]3¥   framework.  (a)  Schematic depiction of a lantern and lantern packing in (b) the rhombohedral framework and (c) its monoclinic modiﬁcation.

, and P213 [2]. Double phosphates of C2/c, P21/n,  zirconium and elements with an oxidation degree of +2 are crystallized either in the rhombohedral (sp. gr.  ) R3 or monoclinic (sp. gr. P21/n) systems. Since the PO4tetrahedra in the structures of these phosphates are distorted to different degrees, one can expect the formation of different types of absorption bands active in the IR range of vibration spectra.

In the vibration spectrum of an isolated PO4-ion (the Td  symmetry),  four  bands  are  possible—a  fully  symmetric A1 band (n 1, n s, symmetric stretching vibration of  a  P–O  bond),  the  degenerate  E  band  (n 2, d s  is  the symmetric deformation vibration of a P–O bond), and two  threefold  degenerate  F2  vibrations  (n 3,  n as  is  the asymmetric stretching vibration and n 4, d as is the asymmetric  deformation  vibration  of  a  P–O  bond).  Of  all

PET 213)KOV  et  al.

Note: RS and IR indicate the bands in the Raman scattering and IR spectra, respectively, allowed by the selection rules.

Table 2.  Indexing of the diffraction patterns of M0.5Zr2(PO4)3 compounds with M = Cd, Ca, Sr, and Ba (d, Å; I/I0 %)

these vibrations, only the n 3 and n 4 vibrations are active in the IR range. Using the method of dividing the vibrations  of  a  complex  ion  in  a  crystal  into  internal  and external  vibrations,  we  performed  the  group-factor analysis  of  vibrations  of  an  orthophosphorus  tetrahedron in the compounds described by the sp. gr.   and P21/n. The positional symmetry of a complex PO4-ion is lowered down to C1 in both rhombohedral and monoclinic structures (phosphorous atoms are located in the general position). Then, the vibration n 1 (A) becomes active  and  the  n 2  (2A),  n 3,  and  n 4  (3A)  vibrations become nondegenerate. The transition from the representation of the positional symmetry group of a tetrahedron,  C1,  to  the  factor-group  representations  of  the space groups C3i ( ) and C2h (P21/n) is illustrated by Table 1.

In  centrosymmetric  crystals,  the  alternative  selection rule for internal vibrations of a complex ion is preserved—vibrations symmetric with respect to the inversion center (the g vibrations) are active in the Raman spectrum but are inactive in the IR spectrum. Thus, the IR spectra of rhombohedral phosphates can have two bands  of  symmetric  stretching  vibrations n 1  (Au,  Eu), four  bands  of  symmetric  deformation  vibrations n 2 (2Au, 2Eu), and six bands of asymmetric stretching and six bands of asymmetric deformation vibrations n 3 and n 4 (3Au, 3Eu). The unit cell of phosphates described by the sp. gr.   has only one independent phosphorus position, 18f (at Z = 6, the unit cell contains 18 P atoms, the multiplicity of the position with the symmetry C1 is 18).  The  monoclinic  unit  cell  described  by  the  sp. gr. P21/n with Z = 4 contains 12 P atoms. The multiplicity of the general position is 4; the unit cell has three independent phosphorus positions. Thus, the selection rules for the monoclinic compounds allow the formation of much more bands in the IR spectra—three n 1 (3Au) bands, six n 2 (6Au) bands, and nine n 3 and nine n 4 (9Au) bands.

The X-ray phase analysis [12–14] showed the complex interactions between the components of the reactive mixtures, with the phase composition being essentially dependent on the temperature and the nature of divalent  cations.  The  individual  M0.5Zr2(PO4)3  compounds were formed in the temperature range from 730 to 1150¡ 145).

The  interplanar  spacings  in  double  phosphates  of zirconium and alkali earth elements of the composition M0.5Zr2(PO4)3  and  also  in  Cd0.5Zr2(PO4)3  are  listed  in Table 2, their crystallographic characteristics are indicated in Table 3.

Indexing of diffraction patterns from M0.5Zr2(PO4)3 polycrystals (M = Cd, Ca, Sr, and Ba) shows their struc-

tural  analogy.  The  absences  of  the  reﬂections  of  the type h — k + l = 3n unambiguously indicate the R-lattice. In the structures with a rhombohedral mixed framework (Fig. 1b), the lanterns are “beaded” onto the threefold inversion axes and occupy all the vertices of an elementary rhombohedron and also the position in its center; i.e., the rhombohedral unit cell includes two such lanterns—the  initial  one  and  the  second  one  (in  the rhombohedron center) inverted with respect to the initial one. It also connects six lanterns at the unit-cell vertices, thus forming a continuous anionic framework.

The framework has two types of cavities in the proportion 1 : 3. In the columns extended along the c-axis, octahedral cavities of the M1 type are formed between the two neighboring lanterns. Neighboring columns are connected  by  single  PO4-tetrahedra  and,  thus,  create M2-type cavities of an irregular shape with c.n. 8.

The  precision  analysis  of  Cd0.5Zr2(PO4)3  [15]  and Ca0.5Zr2(PO4)3 [11] structures based on the corresponding powder diffraction data showed that Cd2+ and Ca2+ cations  are  orderly  distributed  over  the  octahedra beaded onto threefold axes and occupy half of all the M1 cavities, while the M2 cavities are empty. The average  lengths  of  the  Cd–O  and  Ca–O  bonds  coincide within the error and are equal to 2.47 Å. The average distances  in  independent  Zr-octahedra  are  2.03  and 2.05  Å  for  Cd0.5Zr2(PO4)3  and  2.06  and  2.08  Å  for Ca0.5Zr2(PO4)3.  The  P–O  bond  lengths  in  orthophosphorus  tetrahedra  range  within  1.52–1.57  Å  for  cadmium-containing  compound  and  within  1.52–1.54  Å for calcium-containing one.

It  can  be  seen  from  Table  3  that  in  the  series  of M0.5Zr2(PO4)3 compounds with M = Cd, Ca, Sr, and Ba, the  a-parameter  decreases  and  the  c-parameter increases with an increase in the radius of the M cation, whereas the unit-cell volume increases with it. These tendencies in the behavior of the unit-cell parameters can be interpreted as follows. Since M cations occupy the positions inside the columns between two faces of the  neighboring  ZrO6-octahedra  located  along  the c-axis (Fig. 1b), the introduction of a larger M-cation increases the c-parameter. This is accompanied by the correlated  rotation  of  zirconium  octahedra  and  phosphorus  tetrahedra  connecting  the  parallel  columns, which,  in  turn,  decreases  the  intercolumnar  distances and, thus, also the a-parameter. Slight deformation of the  structure  (without  any  pronounced  change  of  the initial  motif)  is  possible  because  of  the  existence  of large voids at a level of each Zr, P-lantern in the framework and along the 

Figure  2  shows  the  IR-spectra  of  zirconium  phosphates with large divalent Cd, Ca, Sr, and Ba cations. The bands in the range 1250–1000 cm–1 are attributed to asymmetric stretching vibrations n 3 of a PO4 ion. The intense  high-frequency  bands  at  1250–1170  cm–1  are explained by the fact that, at large P–O–Zr bond angles, the  electron  density  of  small  polarized  considerably

PET 213)KOV  et  al.

charged  Zr4+-ions  is  partly  localized  on  a  P–O  bond, which results in high values of the force constants of this bond [16].This range has ﬁve (Cd, Sr, and Ba) or six  (Ca)  bands  allowed  by  the  selection  rules.  The bands in the range 1000–950 cm–1 are attributed to the symmetric  n 1  vibrations,  which  are  represented  by  a broadened  band  with  a  shoulder. With  an  increase  in cation size, the asymmetric stretching bands are shifted toward lower frequencies, and the symmetric stretching vibrations,  in  the  opposite  direction. As  a  result,  the bands at 1025 cm–1 in the spectra of Srand Ba-containing phases are incompletely resolved and show a shoul-

All the bands of symmetric vibrations of a PO4-tetrahedron in the M0.5Zr2(PO4)3 phosphates with M = Cd, Ca, Sr, and Ba are intense and well resolved (Fig. 2). The spectrum in this range differs from the spectra of zirconium and alkali metal phosphates of the compositions EZr2(PO4)3 with E = Na, K, Rb, and Cs, which are crystallized in the sp. gr.   [17], where the stretching vibrations are represented by only one broad band with  some  slightly  distinguished  maxima  [18].  The well  resolved  bands  conﬁrm  a  high  degree  of  atomic order in the structure. Indeed, Cd atoms are located in the 3b positions in the layers (sp. gr.  ), whereas the 3a positions remain empty [15]. Based on the analogy of the spectra, one can state that in alkali-earth zirconium phosphates, the Ca, Sr, and Ba atoms occupy the layers of M1 cavities in the structure.

The  interplanar  spacings  in  Mg0.5Zr2(PO4)3  are listed in Table 4, while those for M0.5Zr2(PO4)3 phosphates with M = Mn, Co, Ni, Cu, and Zn were indicated in our earlier publication [13]. These compounds containing small cations with an oxidation degree of +2 are crystallized in the sp. gr. P21/n (Table 3). The similarity of their chemical formulas, the closeness of the lattice parameters and unit-cell volumes, and the same symmetry indicate the common basis for the formation of their crystal structures and lead to the assumption that they are isostructural. Knowledge of the Ni0.5Zr2(PO4)3 phosphate  structure  [19]  allows  us  to  state  that  the structures of the M0.5Zr2(PO4)3 compounds (M = Mg, Mn, Co, Ni, Cu, and Zn) are established quite reliably. The P unit cells of these structures are monoclinically distorted with respect to their R cells (Fig. 1). The

Table 4.  Indexing of the diffraction patterns of Mg0.5Zr2(PO4)3 (d, Å; I/I0, %)

main building elements of the framework (lanterns) are located along the [102] and [ ] directions playing the role of quasi-threefold axes. As a result, the Zr-octahedra of two neighboring groupings form strongly distorted tetrahedral voids occupied by small cations. The M-ions occupy their positions with a probability of 0.5. The cation–oxygen distances in the Ni2+-tetrahedra in  monoclinic  Ni0.5Zr2(PO4)3  phosphate  range  from 1.89 to 2.26 Å, with the average distance being 2.11 Å [19].  The  average  Ni–O  distance  in  polyhedra  of  the Ni0.5Zr2(PO4)3  phosphate  is  considerably  longer  than that predicted from the sum of the ionic radii rIV(Ni) + rIV(O) = 0.55 + 1.36 = 1.91 (Å) [20]. This indicates that the non-structure-forming Ni site can be occupied by cations with a somewhat larger size and an oxidation degree  of  +2,  such  as  Mg,  Cu,  Co,  Zn,  and  Mn. The average distances in each of the independent Zn octahedra of the Ni0.5Zr2(PO4)3 phosphate are equal to 2.08 Å. The average P–O lengths in the tetrahedra of this phosphate are 1.50, 1.51, and 1.53 Å.

In the range of n 3 vibrations, the IR-spectra of these compounds  (Fig.  3)  have  either  all  the  nine  bands allowed  by  the  selection  rules  (the  Ni,  Zn  phases)  or have from six to seven bands (the Mg-, Co-, Cu-, and Mn-containing phases). In the range of n 1 vibrations, all three allowed bands are formed in all the phases except

for  the  Mn-containing  ones,  where  only  one  band  is formed. The spectra of n 4 vibrations have only six or seven  of  the  nine  possible  bands.  The  n 2  vibrations recorded  by  a  spectrophotometer  are  represented  by two bands. The somewhat different form of the IR spectrum of Mn0.5Zr2(PO4)3 phosphate seems to be caused by a larger Mn-ion which “pushes apart” the tetrahedral positions  of  their  location,  which,  in  turn,  affects  the vibrations of phosphorus tetrahedra.

The above analysis of the vibrations in the related structures of double orthophosphates of Zr and the elements with an oxidation degree of +2 described by different  space  groups  shows  that  the  IR  spectra  of  the phases with large and small cations differ in the character, number, and types of their bands both in the stretching and deformation regions.

the  synthesized  compounds  with {[Zr2(PO4)3]—}3¥   frameworks  containing  Cd,  alkali earth elements, Mg, and 3d elements have similar structures but different arrangements of cations with an oxidation degree of +2 located in the framework voids. The structures of these phosphates can be divided into two groups  (Table  5)—zirconium  phosphates  with  small cations (Ni, Cu, Mg, Co, Zn, and Mn) described by the sp. gr. P21/n with d-elements and Mg occupying the tetrahedral  voids  and  phosphates  with  orthorhombic

Fig. 3. IR spectra of M0.5Zr2(PO4)3 orthophosphates crysthe  monoclinic  system  (sp.  gr.  P21/n)): tallized  (1) Mg0.5Zr2(PO4)3, (2) Ni0.5Zr2(PO4)3, (3) Co0.5Zr2(PO4)3, and (4)  (6) Mn0.5Zr2(PO4)3.

structures (sp. gr.  cations characterized by an octahedral environment.

However, the size of the M-cation is not the only factor  determining  the  formation  of  a  certain  structure type. Thus, the Cu0.5Zr2(PO4)3 phosphate has a stable rhombohedral  structure  at  temperatures  higher  than 520 176) C  [21].  According  to  the  DTA  data,  with  an increase  temperature,  Mg0.5Zr2(PO4)3  and Zn0.5Zr2(PO4)3 phosphates undergo a phase transition at 670 176) C [22]. The established phase transitions accompanied by the change of the symmetry are associated with the transformation of the crystal structure due to the 

Table 5.  Morphotropic  series  of  phosphates  of  zirconium and divalent elements M0.5Zr2(PO4)3

Radius of M, Å C.n. M 2+ Space group changes in the temperature. These reconstructive transitions are accompanied by the change in the coordination number of an M cation from 4 to 6, with the preservation of the main islandlike structural groupings— lanterns.  In  terms  of  structure,  the  polymorphism  of M0.5Zr2(PO4)3  phosphates  with  M  =  Mg,  Cu,  and  Zn seems to be associated with the easy deformability of the oxygen environment and unstable coordination of cations with an oxidation degree of +2, a rather ﬂexible construction built by Zrand Pcoordination polyhedra (connected  only  via  their  vertices),  and  also  with  a more uniform distribution of the stresses arising at large amplitudes of atomic vibrations among various bonds. Thr different temperatures of these phase transitions are determined by the electronic structure and the stereochemical characteristics of the M-cation.

The phenomenon of the high ﬂexibility and stability of the [L2(PO4)3]3¥  framework readily accommodating various  combinations  of  cations  and  variations  in  the temperature and pressure seems to result from the combination  of  two  competing  structure-forming  factors. The ﬁrst one is associated with the existence of relatively  rigid  octahedral–tetrahedral  fragments  (lanterns); the second, with the tendency to a more uniform spatial  distribution  of  tetrahedral  phosphorus  anions and cations that have different charges in the cationic and anionic parts of the structure, which is dictated by the requirement of the local valence balance. These two factors  manifest  themselves  especially  clearly  at  the ends  of  the  series  of  compounds  with  [L2(PO4)3]3¥ frameworks, which include the cations in the order of the change in their ionic radii when the composition of the anionic part (framework) of their structure is constant.

In the morphotropic series of zirconium phosphates of divalent elements, M0.5Zr2(PO4)3 (Table 5), the part of  the  series  with  small  M2+-cations  (in  comparison with  Zr4+-ions  participating  in  the  formation  of  the anionic  {[Zr2(PO4)3]—}3¥   framework),  the  main  structure-forming factor is the mixed octahedral–tetrahedral framework accommodating a smaller cation. In the part of the series with large Cd2+-, Ca2+-, Sr2+-, and Ba2+-cations, the atomic arrangement is determined mainly by the geometric factor—if the radius of a highly charged cation  (Zr4+)  is  much  less  than  the  radius  of  a  less charged  ion  (M2+),  the  general  arrangement  of  these cations and tetrahedral oxo anions results in the “pushing-apart  effect”  of  large  MO6  octahedra,  which changes the structure geometry. The phase transitions in these compounds are accompanied by the rotation of PO4 tetrahedra and some changes in the oxygen environment of M atoms, while the general features of the structure architecture are preserved.