Constant-pressure, constant-temperature variable-shape simulation cell Monte Carlo and microcanonical ensemble molecular dynamics simulation of superionic conducting rhombohedral phase of Nasicon, Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12, 0 ≤ x ≤ 3, at a temperature of 600 K is reported.
Changes in structure, conductivity, hop path, site occupancies, bond lengths of framework atoms with composition are discussed.
Average Na(1)-O distance shows a peak at x = 2, while Na(2)-O distance shows a monotonic increase.
Sum of the sodium occupancies at Na(1) and mid-Na sites adds up to a constant value of one which supports the conclusion of Boilot et al. based on X-ray diffraction.
Occupancy of Na(1) site attains a minimum at x = 2. The predominant conduction channel (which carries more than 90% of the sodium ions) is found to be the one connecting Na(1)-mid-Na-Na(2).
Density contours for sodium, depicting this conduction channel, are reported.
Free energy profile along the conduction channel suggests that entropy contribution cannot be neglected.
The mid-Na site is not associated with a free energy minimum.
It is possible to synthesize a series of materials of the general formula Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12 with 0 ≤ x ≤ 3 and that the material Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (the composition with x = 2) is an excellent ionic conductor.
The conductivity of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 above 443 K was found to be comparable to that of Na-<nUm>-alumina, with many an advantage in practical applications as a fast ion conductor.
A particularly interesting aspect of Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12 is that as the composition, x, increases the conductivity initially increases, by many orders of magnitude, up to an x ≈ 2. Beyond this it decreases showing an anomalous peak near x = 2.
This anomalous variation in conductivity with composition is associated with a similar anomalous variation of the c-axis of the rhombohedral unit cell.
The structure (R3hc) of Nasicons may be described as consisting of corner-sharing PO4/SiO4 tetrahedra and ZrO6 octahedra interconnected to give rise to a three-dimensional network through which the alkali ions can move. Each octahedron is connected to six tetrahedra and each tetrahedron is connected to four octahedra.
Bond angles in Nasicons may play an important role in the changes observed in both structure and conductivity with composition.
The O-Zr-O, O-Si-O, and O-P-O are the angles within the polyhedra and are expected to be more stiff, while Zr-O-Si and Zr-O-P are the angles between polyhedra whose flexibility is important for rotation of polyhedra which have been found to play an important role in structural and other property variations with composition.
It is well-known in the literature that the substitution of the larger Si ion in place of P ions and associated incorporation of counterions (Na+), as x increases from 0 to 3, gives rise to an anomalous increase in the c parameter of the rhombohedral cell while the a parameter increases monotonically.
It is interesting that the composition where the maximum of the c parameter is observed coincides with the maximum in the conductivity in these materials.
Overall it is seen that the geometry of the polyhedra (octahedra and tetrahedra) as well as the angles between the polyhedral units are reproduced well.
The lattice parameters and their variation with composition are also in agreement with the X-ray diffraction results available in the literature suggesting that the potential is able to successfully reproduce the structure.