Different NASICON systems with general formula Am Bn P3O12 were prepared by melt quenching method, where A/Na, and B/Cu, Al, Fe, FeCd. The prepared compounds were characterized by X-ray diffraction, and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. The electrical conductivity measurements were made on the different NASICON materials as a function of frequency (20 Hz to 1 MHz) at different temperatures. The bulk conductivity was obtained from the impedance analysis. The dc conductivity activation energies are found to be in the range 0.40/1.53 eV. The conductivity and dielectric spectra show the power low feature. The framework of the Almond /West conductivity formalism is applied to discuss the ac conductivity and determined the dc conductivity sdc, hopping frequency vp, and dimensionless frequency exponent n . The conductivity master curves for the conductivity spectra are obtained by scaling the frequency by (i) vp and (ii) sdcT , where T is temperature in Kelvin. Both types of scaling show same conductivity master curves. # 2002 Published by Elsevier Science B.V.

Keywords: NASICON systems; Impedance; Activation energy; Dielectric constant; AC conductivity; Conductivity scaling

NASICON stands for well-known family of solid electrolytes of sodium superionic conductor Na1x Zr2Six P3x O12 (0B/x B/3) with highest ionic conductivity for x/2 [1/3]. This family of materials has attracted the attention of researchers looking for ion-selective electrodes or gas sensor devices [1,4]. NASICON type materials have fascinated much awareness in recent past, as they facilitate a large scope for preparing number of materials with variation in their constituent metal ions and composition [5,6]. These materials have the general formula Am Bn P3O12 where A is an alkali or alkaline earth metal ion and B is one or more metal ions in tri, tetra or pentavalent state [7]. Constituent metal ion or composition variation in these materials has shown conspicuous changes in ionic transport and optical properties [2,3,6/10].

In the literature the different Am Bn P3O12 type materials were studied with A/Na, Li, K and B/Fe, Ti,

Ga, V, Ge, Zr, Al, Nb, AlCd, TiZn, TiCd, etc. [6/10]. These NASICON materials have 3(PO4)3 phosphate tetrahedral units. The phosphate tetrahedral units 3(PO4)3 have to equilibrate in the melts by adding A as an alkali ion and B as one or more ions in tri, tetra or pentavelant states, like [6]

In the present work, we have chosen the following in which, NFP, NAP, NCP having high molar ratio of alkali ion content and the NFCP having two transition metal ions. These systems preparation and electrical studies are not reported in the literature so far. The NFP, NAP, NCP, and NFCP materials were prepared, characterized and electrical conductivity studies were carried out using Zentech Automatic compound Analy-

The NASICON compounds Na5Cu2P3O12 (NCP), Na6AlP3O12 (NFP), Na4FeCdP3O12 (NFCP) were synthesized using the reagents Na2CO3 (SRL), CuO (Qualigens), Al2O3 (SDF), Fe2O3 (SDF), CdO (SDF), NH4H2PO4 (SDF). The calculated amounts of the starting materials of 10 g in single batch were ground to give a homogeneous mixture. The finely ground mixture was then placed in silica crucible and heated slowly in an electrical furnace until the temperature reached to 573 K. The slow heating up to 573 K decomposes the ammonium dihydrogen orthophosphate mixture. The mixture was again ground and heated in a silica crucible for /14 h at temperature range 800/1000 K without melting the mixtures. The batch was then heated further to temperatures of 1273/1373 K and stirred for 5/10 min to ensure homogeneity. The melt was poured into a stainless steel plate and quenched rapidly by pressing with another stainless steel plate at room temperature. The quenched samples ground finely and they were used for XRD, IR, and electrical conductivity studies.

The XRD spectrum of all the samples shows peaks and these peaks confirmed the polycrystalline nature. Fig. 1 shows the FTIR absorption spectra for the four different NASICON polycrystalline samples. The vibra3 ionic group vibration, O/P/O tion modes of PO4 asymmetric and harmonic bending vibration, P/O/P stretching vibration, (P/O) ionic vibration and free H2O molecule bending vibration of different NASICON samples were assigned and the results are shown in Table 1.

software package [12,13]. The depressed semi-circle in the high frequency region indicates the characteristics of parallel combination of bulk resistance and constant phase element of the NASICON samples [14]. As temperature is increased the enhancement of conductivity is seen by the reduction of the diameter of the circular arc. At high temperatures, the impedance plots have an inclined straight line at the low frequency region and it is attributed to the electrode polarization [15].

The bulk resistances, together with sample dimension were used to determine the dc conductivity of the different NASICON samples. The dc conductivity s (0) is temperature dependent and it is shown in Fig. 3 for all the systems. The NFCP and NFP samples, the dc conductivity slightly greater than the Na5ZrP3O12 (NZP) sample around 473 K [8]. The temperature variation of conductivity is found to obey the Arrhenius behavior of the form

where s0 is the pre-exponential of the dc conductivity, T is the absolute temperature, Es is the dc conductivity activation energy and k is the Boltzmann’s constant. From the slopes of the plot the activation energy Es for mobile ion has been calculated for different NASICON samples and listed in Table 2. The NFCP low temperature dc conductivity is deviates from linearity and it is explained in Section 3.4 along with Arrhenius behavior

Fig. 2. (a /c) Complex impedance plots the Na5Cu2P3O12, Na6AlP3O12 and Na4FeCdP3O12 systems at various temperatures respectively. The different symbol represents the experimental values and the ﬁtted values are represented by stars (*).

Fig. 3. log(s (0)) vs. 1000/T plot for different NASICON systems.
C.R. Mariappan, G. Govindaraj / Materials Science and Engineering B94 (2002) 82 /88

Table 2 Name of system with their dc conductivity activation energy Es

Activation energy Es (eV) (9/0.03)

of hopping frequency. We found that the activation energy of the NCP and NFCP systems is lower than the NFP, NAP and also NZP [8]. The NCP and NFCP polycrystalline samples, the activation energies are low compared to different Am Bn P3O12 glassy systems, where A/Li, Na or K and B/Fe, Ga, Ti, Ge, V or Nb [6].

The measured parallel conductance (G ) and capacitance (C ) data were used to calculate the real o ?(v ) and imaginary o ??(v ) parts of the complex dielectric constant o *(v )/o ?(v )/jo ??(v ) o?(v) Cd=A o??(v) Gd=Avo0 where A is the electrode area, d is the thickness of the sample, o0/8.856/1014 F cm1 is the permittivity of the free space.

Fig. 4(a) and (b) respectively, show the log/log plots of o ?(v ) versus v and o ??(v ) versus v for the NCP. The observed variation in o ? and o ?? with frequency is ascribed to the formation of a space charge region at the electrode and sample interface, which is familiarly known as v (n1) variation or the non-Debye type of behavior, where the space charge regions with respect to frequency is explained in terms of ion diffusion [15]. The low frequency region is attributed to the contribution of charge accumulation at the interface. At high frequencies, due to high periodic reversal of the field at the interface, the contribution of charge carriers (ions) towards the dielectric constant decreases with increasing frequency. Hence, o ? decreases with increasing frequency.

The frequency dependent conductivity s (v ) was calculated using the following standard relation where the symbols have their usual meaning.

Fig. 6. Arrhenius plot of log(vH) vs. 1000/T for Na5Cu2P3O12 system.

where sdc is the frequency independent dc conductivity, vH is the hopping frequency of the charge carriers and n is the dimensionless frequency exponent. Eq. (10) is called framework of Almond/West conductivity formalism [17,18]. Eq. (10) is used to fit the ac conductivity of measured data. In the fitting procedure, sdc, vH, and n were varied simultaneously to get the best fits. The parameters obtained by fitting to Eq. (10) are tabulated in Table 3 for NCP, NFCP compounds. In Fig. 5(a) and (b) the different symbols represents the experimental ac conductivity data at different temperatures and the continuous lines fitted to Eq. (10). The sdc values agreed with those dc conductivity s (0) determined from the complex impedance plots.

The hopping frequency, vH, is temperature dependent for NFCP sample and it is fitted to the Arrhenius equation vH  va exp(Ev=kT)

where va is the pre-exponential factor of the hopping
The observed frequency dependent conductivity is also in general agreement with the prediction of the jump relaxation model [19,20]. According to this model at low frequencies (v 0/0) an ion can jump from one site to its neighboring vacant site successfully contributing to dc conductivity. At high frequencies the probability for the ion to jump back to its initial site increases due to short time periods available. The high probability for the correlated forward/backward hopping at high frequencies together with the relaxation of the dynamic cage potential is responsible for the high frequency dispersion [19,20].

3.5. Ac conductivity scaling behavior

Scaling is an important feature in any data evaluation program. The study of the conductivity spectra of several materials at different temperatures leads to a scaling law, which results in a time/temperature superposition [21/28]. The ability to scale different data sets so as to collapse all to one common curve indicates that to the process can be separated into a common physical

mechanism modified only by thermodynamics scales [23]. Different authors have studied several materials [22,25] for scaling studies with various parameters [21,23/26] to scale the frequency axis. Here, we have applied two scaling approach to the ac conductivity spectra of the different NASICON materials.

In first case, the ac conductivity axis is scaled with respect to sdc and frequency axis with respect to vH [25,26] s(6)  sdc

and in the second case, the ac conductivity axis is scaled with respect to sdc and frequency axis with respect to sdcT [23,27] s(6)  sdc

Fig. 7(a) and (b) show superposed master curves for the conductivity spectra of NCP and NFCP systems respectively obtained by using Eq. (12). The conductivity spectra collapse into a single master curve, which
type of temperature.

This indicates that the relaxation mechanism is found to be temperature independent under conductivity formalism. Even though both NCP and NFCP samples show temperature dependent frequency exponent n when fitted to the Eq. (10), the conductivity master curve shows temperature independent. However, when the conductivity master curve Eq. (12) is fitted to Eq. (12a) provides the master curve exponent n, which is independent of the scaling behavior has been explained in some oxide systems [25] by effective-medium theory [28]. The different symbols in Fig. 7(a) and (b) represent the scaled conductivity data at different temperature and continuous line is fitted to the Eq. (12a). The value of conductivity master curve frequency exponent n is found to be 0.62 and 0.65 for NCP and NFCP, respectively. The second scaling approach is carried out by using Eq. (13). Fig. 8(a) and (b) show conductivity master curve of the NCP and NFCP systems respectively. The conductivity spectra are merged into a single master curve. The different symbols represent the scaled conductivity data at different temperatures and continuous line is fitted to the Eq. (13a). The conductivity master curve frequency exponent n is found to be 0.62 and 0.65 for NCP and NFCP, respectively. The dimensionless conductivity master curve is deviated at low frequency region due to the electrode effect. The perfect overlap of the conductivity curve for all the

Different NASICON systems were prepared and the compounds were found to be polycrystalline. The 3, O/P/O, P/O/P, possible vibration modes of PO4 (P/O)() and free H2O molecule of the different NASICON polycrystalline materials were identified by FTIR spectra. The bulk conductivity of the systems was obtained from the impedance analysis. The dc conductivity activation energies are found to be in the range 0.40/1.53 eV for the different NASICON samples. The variation of dielectric constant with frequency is attributed to ion diffusion and polarization occurring in the NASICON sample. The observed different behaviors at different regions in an isothermal representation of frequency dependent conductivity of different NASICON samples were ascribed to: (1) electrode effect (at low frequency); (2) dc conductivity (the plateau); (3) power law behavior (high frequency region). The power law regime of the ac conductivity is much less temperature dependent than the dc conductivity. The framework of Almond/West conductivity formalism is used to analyze the ac conductivity data. The conductivity master curves were obtained when each ac conductivity data scaled by sdc and when each frequency is scaled by vH and by sdcT . The master curves frequency exponent n/0.62, 0.65 obtained for the Na5Cu2P3O12 and Na4FeCdP3O12 materials, respectively. The two type of scaling have conductivity master curve.
