We investigated the effect of cell temperature on the electrochemical reaction behavior of LiFePO4. We evaluated its electrochemical characteristics by using cyclic voltammetry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Both the electron transfer activity and the lithium ion diffusion rate in the LiFePO4 electrode increased as we increased the operating temperature. The apparent activation energy for the lithium diffusion was more than twice that for charge transfer. This result supports the idea that the large discharge capacity of LiFePO4 at elevated temperatures is mainly caused by the high lithium diffusion rate in the LiFePO4 particles, which makes it possible to utilize more material near the center of the particles. We also evaluated the thermal stability of LiFePO4 by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). Charged LiFePO4 in contact with an electrolyte solution exhibited no obvious endothermic or exothermic reaction below 340 jC. This means that LiFePO4 has higher thermal stability than such other cathode materials as LiCoO2, LiNiO2 and LiMn2O4. D 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
The demand for high energy density rechargeable batteries for portable electronic devices, electric vehicle systems and dispersed-type energy storage systems has promoted the development of lithium ion batteries. Many kinds of material have been investigated as the cathode material for lithium ion batteries [1]. This is because the performance and cost of the

We prepared the LiFePO4 by firing a stoichiometric mixture of Fe(COO)22H2O, (NH4)2HPO4 and LiOHH2O in an argon atmosphere. First, we heated a mixture of these materials at 350 jC for 5 h to decompose them. The mixture was then ground and pressed into pellets. We fired the pellets at 675 jC for 24 h and cooled them to 70 jC for 14 h. We evaluated the charge – discharge characteristics of the material by using coin-type cells (Type 2320) with a lithium  3 (M) of LiPF6 in ethymetal anode and 1 mol dm lene carbonate/dimethyl carbonate (1:1 in volume) electrolyte. The separator we used was a Celgard 3501 microporous membrane. The cathode electrode was made in the following way. We mixed the LiFePO4 powder with acetylene black and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) with a weight ratio of 70:25:5. We then rolled the mixture into a 0.6-mm-thick sheet and cut it into pellets. We assembled the cell in a dry air atmosphere, where the dew point of the air was below   50 jC. We cycled the cells galvanostatically between 3.0 and 4.0 V at a constant current of 0.5 mAcm  2 by using the potentio-galvanostat (biologic MacPile II).

We also characterized the electrochemical properties by using a three-electrode cell. We prepared the

working electrode by putting a cathode pellet (6 mm f) between two pieces of titanium mesh and pressing softly. A lithium metal sheet and a lithium fragment were used counter and reference electrode, respectively. The electrolyte was the same as that of the coin-type cell. We measured the cyclic voltammogram by using a potentio-galvanostat (biologic MacPile II). We started the potential scanning from a rest potential of about 3.4 V vs. Li/Li+ in the anodic direction. The potential was swept between 4.2 and 2.8 V or 4.2 and 0.7 V. EIS was measured with a frequency response analyzer (Solatron 1260) interfaced with a potentiogalvanostat (Solatron 1287) controlled by a personal computer. The sinusoidal excitation voltage applied to the cells was 10 mV rms with a frequency range of  1 Hz. We analyzed the impebetween 105 and 10 dance data to evaluate the equivalent circuit parameters by using a parameter fitting program (Scribner Associates, Zplot for Windows). Both electrochemical measurements were performed in a dry air atmosphere.

We monitored the thermal stability of the material from 100 to 400 jC by DSC (Rigaku thermoflex TG8110). One sample was charged in the coin type cell to 4.0 V at 60 jC with a constant current of 0.1 mAcm  2. Another sample was charged in the same way as the first charged sample and then discharged to 3.0 V at 60 jC with the same current. After charging or discharging the cell, we removed the cathode pellets from the cell and cut into fragments containing about 1 mg of LiFePO4. The fragments were put into sealed stainless steel pans with the fresh electrolyte. The ramping rate was 10 jCmin

It has already been reported that the reversible capacity of LiFePO4 increases at an elevated temperature by reason of the high Li diffusion rate in the LiFePO4 particles [10 – 13]. Fig. 1 shows charge and discharge curves of the Li/LiFePO4 cells at the 2nd cycle. Each pair curves was measured at 20, 40 and 60 jC. The discharge capacity increased as the measuring temperature increased from 114 mA hg  1 (at 20 jC)  1 (at 60 jC). A flat charge – discharge to 133 mA h g profile over a large range indicates that the redox reaction of the LiFePO4 proceeds as a two-phase

The cell temperature also affected the current dependence of the capacity. Fig. 2 shows the effect of the discharge current on the cell discharge capacity measured at 20, 40 and 60 jC, respectively. The measurement was carried out after 10 charge– discharge cycles. At 20 jC, the capacity decreased abruptly while the discharge current increased and the capacity at 5 mAcm  2 became about 20% of that at 0.5 mAcm  2. By contrast, the capacity decrease with increasing current became gentle as the temperature rose. At 60 jC, the capacity at 5 mAcm  2 was about 70% of that at 0.5 mAcm  2 This result also supports the idea that the large discharge capacity of LiFePO4 observed at elevated temperatures is caused by the high lithium diffusion rate in LiFePO4.

We investigated the influence of the cell temperature on the diffusion rate of the lithium in LiFePO4 by using cycle voltammetry. Fig. 3 shows a cyclic voltammogram of LiFePO4 measured at 20 jC. The pair of peaks, consisting of an anodic and a cathodic peak, observed around 3.4 V vs. Li/Li+ corresponded to the two-phase charge – discharge reaction of the Fe2+ / Fe3+redox couple. We supposed that the cathodic peak seen around 0.7 V vs. Li/Li+represented the reduction of Fe2+to Fe0. This voltammogram indicated that only one electrochemical reaction, corresponding to the peak pair shown around 3.4 V vs. Li/Li + , occurred

Fig. 1. Charge and discharge curves of the Li/LiFePO4 cells at the 2nd cycle, measured at 20, 40 and 60 jC and with a current of 0.5 mAcm

reaction. The length of the plateau, which extended when the temperature was elevated, determined the cell capacity. By contrast, the voltage difference between the charge and discharge curves in the plateau region changed little as the temperature increased. This voltage difference related to the voltage drop caused by solution resistance. Therefore, a change in the solution

Fig. 2. The effect of the discharge current on the cell discharge capacity measured at 20, 40 and 60 jC after 10 charge – discharge cycles.

Fig. 3. A cyclic voltammogram of LiFePO4 measured at 20 jC and 50 AVs

during the charge and discharge of the LiFePO4. Fig. 4 shows the effect of the potential scanning rate on the cycle voltammograms measured at 0.01, 0.02 and 0.05 mVs  1. Although the wave shape of the anodic and cathodic peak was almost symmetrical, the potential separation between the two peaks increased as the scanning rate increased. Since the potential separation between the two peaks is independent of scan rate for a nernstian (reversible) system [15], this result means that the Fe2+ /Fe3+ redox reaction is a quasi-nernstian (quasi-reversible) system. Fig. 5 shows relationship between the potential and the electricity with which the electrode was charged during the first anodic potential scanning. The electricity was calculated by integrating the anodic current observed in the first anodic scan for the voltammetry with the time from the moment the potential scanning was started to the time the scanning reached the potential. The total electricity during the first anodic scanning was about 135 mA hg  1, and this corresponds to 80% of the theoretical capacity. This means that the bulk of the LiFePO4 particles reacted during the measurement of the anodic voltammogram peak. Fig. 6 shows the relationship between the peak current and the square root of the scan rate, v0.5, for the anodic peak observe around 3. 4 V vs. Li/ Li+ measured at 10, 20, 30, and 40 jC, respectively. The peak current is proportional to v0.5 and extrapolated to its origin regardless of the measured temper-

Fig. 4. The effect of voltammograms at 10, 20 and 50 AV s

Fig. 5. The relationship between the potential and the electricity calculated by integrating the anodic current observed in the first anodic scan of the voltammetry from the initial to the potential.

ature. If the absorbed species or only the materials at the surface of the LiFePO4 particles contribute to the reaction, the peak current should be proportional to the scan rate. Therefore, this means that the anodic peak of the voltammogram at 3.6 V vs. Li/Li+ is related to the reaction of the diffusing species. We used the relationship between ip and v0.5 to estimate the diffusion coefficient of the lithium ions in the cathode materials

Fig. 6. The relationship between the anodic peak current of the cyclic voltammogram and the square root of the scan rate, v0.5, measured at 10, 20, 30 and 40 jC.

Fig. 7. An Arrhenius plot of the square of the inclination angle of the extrapolated line shown in Fig. 6.

Fig. 8. The influence of the cell temperature on the Nyquist plot of LiFePO4, measured at 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50 jC.

The H value defined by the equation (3) is proportional to the D. The Arrhenius plot of H is shown in Fig. 7. Good linearity was observed and the apparent activation energy of the lithium diffusion was calculated to be 39 kJ mol

 1 from the slope of the plot.

We also investigated the influence of the cell temperature on the charge transfer of the LiFePO4 redox reaction with the EIS. Fig. 8 shows the influence of the cell temperature on the Nyquist plot of LiFePO4. The

[16 – 18]. For a quasi-reversible reaction, the peak current ip is represented as: ip ¼ 0:4463nFAC

where n is electrons per molecule oxidized, F is the Faraday constant, A is the surface area, C is the concentration, R is the gas constant, T is temperature, D is the diffusion coefficient of lithium ions and K(K,a) indicates the degree of irreversibility [15]. Ordinarily, K(K,a) is dependent on the v, and ip is not proportional to v0.5 for a quasi-reversible reaction. However, the ip values were completely proportional to v0.5 as shown in Fig. 6. We assume that K(K,a) can be treated as a constant in our scan rate measurement range because the scan rate was relatively low and the rate range was narrow. The inclination angle of the extrapolated lines h shown in Fig. 6 is represented from Eq. (1) as:   h ¼ 0:4463nFAC

We define H as: H ¼ Th2 ¼ B2D:

Fig. 9. A comparison of the measured Nyquist plot and the calculated values (shown by the line) with the equivalent circuit shown in the figure.

M. Takahashi et al. / Solid State Ionics 148 (2002) 283–289

than half that for the lithium diffusion obtained from the plot shown in Fig. 7. This result indicates that the influence of the cell temperature on the lithium diffusion process is larger than that of the charge transfer for the lithium extraction reaction of the LiFePO4 electrode. We confirmed that the effect of the cell temperature on the cell capacity and the current dependence of the capacity results mainly from the enhancement of the lithium diffusion at elevated temperatures.

The thermal stability of the charged and discharged states of the LiFePO4 in contact with the electrolyte solution is shown in the DSC curves of Fig. 11. For the fully charged state, we observed a small exothermic peak at about 360 jC. This temperature is higher than that reported by Yamada et al. [14]. The total heat flow value of 288 Jg  1 is about twice the value they reported. The difference in the electrolyte composition may affect the decomposition temperature and the heat flow. For the discharged state, there was no obvious heat evolution up to 400 jC. Discharging caused the exothermic peak observed for the charged sample to disappear. The DSC results indicate that the thermal stability of LiFePO4 is much better than that of other cathode materials such as LiNiO2, LiCoO2 and LiMn2O4 [23].

Fig. 10. An Arrhenius plot of i0 obtained from the Nyquist plots shown in Fig. 9.

high-frequency limit shifted in the negative direction on the real axis as the temperature increased. This means that the ohmic resistance, mainly the solution resistance of the electrolyte, decreased with increasing the cell temperature. All plots exhibit a depressed semicircle in the high frequency region, which is attributed to the charge-transfer process. We fitted these impedance data with the equivalent circuit shown in the inset of Fig. 9 to estimate the charge transfer resistance Rct. As shown in Fig. 9, the calculated values fit well to the measured values. This equivalent circuit was obtained by substituting the double layer capacitance of the Randles equivalent circuit [19] to the constant phase angle element (CPE). The CPE is commonly used to describe the depressed semicircle that results from a porous electrode [20 – 22]. The exchange current i0 was obtained from Rct by using equation [15]:


Although we have no means of comparing the absolute value of i0 with those of other materials because we did not obtain the surface area of the LiFePO4 electrode, we are able to evaluate the temperature dependence of i0 by using these values. The Arrhenius plot of i0 is shown in Fig. 10. Good linearity was also observed. The apparent activation energy of the charge transfer calculated  1. This value is less from the angle of the plot is 15 kJ mol

Fig. 11. The DSC curves of the charged and discharged states after charging the LiFePO4 in contact with the electrolyte solution in a sealed pan.

The cell temperature affected both the charge and discharge capacity of the LiFePO4 electrode and the current dependence of the capacity. We examined the effect of temperature on the activity of the lithium diffusion process and charge transfer process in the LiFePO4 redox reaction. The lithium diffusion process was more affected by temperature than the electron transfer process. We confirmed that the increase in the LiFePO4 capacity as the cell temperature rose was caused mainly by the increasing lithium diffusion rate. DSC measurement revealed no obvious heat evolution for the charged LiFePO4 with the electrolyte solution below 340 jC. We concluded that the thermal stability of LiFePO4 is much better than that of such other cathode materials as LiNiO2, LiCoO2 and LiMn2O4.
