Sodium-ion technology is a reliable alternative to  lithium-ion for large-scale energy storage because of the abundance of sodium  sources and low cost. In this work we report about a simple fabrication of self-standing electrodes based on electrospun carbon nanofiber (CNF)  loaded with Na3V2(PO4)3 with NASICON framework, which is a promising cathode material that has shown good electrochemical performance  when its electrical conductivity is enhanced by a conductive medium. The proposed method is simple, low cost, potentially scalable to fabricate  and  load  cathode  support  with  active  materials.  The  electrochemical  tests  confirmed  the  stable  cycling  performances  and  the  high  C-rate  capability of the NVP-CNFs composites, with hundreds of cycles without major degradation of performances. Our work demonstrates that stable,  self-supported, long-term performing NIB electrodes, ready to use without addition of any performance enhancer, can be obtained by using fast  and cost-efficient procedures suitable to be scaled-up at an industrial level. 
Due  to  their  high  energy  density  and  low  weight,  lithium-ion  batteries  (LIB)  are  used  as  energy  storage  devices  in  portable  electronics  and  in  electric  mobility  for  e-bikes,  electric  cars,  electric wheelchairs and modern hybrid vehicles. [1,2] The current  Li-ion  insertion/intercalation  materials as anodes and cathodes, is well established. During the  past years the energy density, cycle stability and safety of LIBs  were  improved  in  small  evolutionary  steps.[3,4]  Although  all  the  potential  benefits  that  have  been  achieved  using  Li-ion  technology,  there  are  further  studies  that  have  explored  the  relationship between the availability of lithium resources and the  likely  future  EV  demand.  Most  have  concluded  that  in  the  most  optimistic EV markets the demand could not be covered by lithium  availability.[5,6] Depletion of lithium availability and an increase in  costs production create a necessity to explore alternativesto LIBs  to solve the increasing demand for energy storage. There are few  potential technologies yet to be developed that can overcome all  the  technical  challenges  of  the  Li-ion  technology,  among  them  electrochemistries  based  on  magnesium,  zinc,  aluminium  and  sodium have gained interest [7,8].   Sodium-ion battery (Na-ion, NIB) is a promising alternative to LIB  thanks to the abundance, the wide distribution, and the low cost  of sodium and related raw materials.[9] Lately, active materials for  positive and negative electrodes in SIBs have been the subject of  much research and tremendous effort in developing cells showing  high electrochemical performance. On the cathode side, the most  investigated and promising active materials can be grouped into  two  families:  layered  metal  oxides  (LMOs)  and  polyanionic materials  (phosphates,  fluoro-phosphate,  silicates,  etc.)[10,12].  LMOs like NaMnO2 or NaFe0.5Mn0.5O2 show specific capacity up  to  200  mAh  g–1  and  operating  potential  3V.  The  most  remarkable feature is the low cost, abundance and environmental  compatibility  of  precursors.  Yet,  they  are  highly  sensitive  to  moisture  and  are  reported  to  suffer  from  poor  cycle  life  due  to  lattice  deformation  during  intercalation/deintercalation.  Among  polyanion  systems,  Na  ion  super  ionic  conductor  (NASICON)  materials,  like  Na3V2(PO4)3,  Na3Ti2(PO4)3  and  NaV(PO4)F,  are  characterized by high ionic conductivity (> 1 mS cm-1), structural  stability, specific capacity up to 180 mAh g–1 and voltages up to  3.4  V[13].  As  a  drawback,  the  very  low  electronic  conductivity  forces  the  use  of  conductive  fillers  or  conductive  electrode  supports.[13, 14]  Carbon nanofibers (CNF) have been widely used in preparation  of  electrodes,  mainly  as  conductive  fillers,[15,16]  anodic  active  materials[17,18]  and  conductive  supports  for  cathodic  active  materials[19-21]  due  to  their  high  electronic  conductivity  and  mechanical properties. In fact, one dimensional (1D) nanofibers  possess  a  unique  structure that  provides  an  enhanced  surfaceto-volume  ratio,  short  transport  length  for  ionic  transport  and  efficient electron transport along the longitudinal direction. They  can  be  produced  via  CVD  techniques  or  standard  polymeric  manufacturing processes, such as spinning and electrospinning,  starting from a carbon precursor solution.[22]   CNF may yield to self-standing conductive supports thus lowering  the cost and the weight of batteries avoiding the use of metallic  current collectors. Electrospinning is a versatile, easily scalable, inert  atmosphere  at efficient  and  low-cost  technique  that  has  been  broadly  used  recently to produce CNF with diameter ranging from 1 µm to 100  nm.[23,24] Frequently used polymers yielding high quality CNF are  polyacrilonitrile  (PAN),  polyimide  (PI),  polyvinylidene  fluoride  (PVdF)  and  polyvinyalcohol  (PVA).  PAN  is  frequently  used  to  produce  CNF  with  high  carbon yield.  After  spinning,  PAN  fibers  are first thermally stabilized in air between 200/300 °C and then  pyrolyzed  temperature  between  800/1500 °C to remove non-carbon atoms.   The high electrical conductivity (up to 1000 S cm-1) and the porous  interconnected  structure  of  electrospun  non-woven  CNF  are  features  that  well  match  the  requirements  of  an  ideal  battery  electrode, offering low internal resistance and allowing electrolyte  diffusion  for  the  complete  usage  of  the  active  material.  Active  materials  suffering  from  low  electronic  conductivity  and  limited  cycle  life  when  used  in  slurry-based  electrodes  are  reported  to  achieve better performances in terms of higher C rate, enhanced  long-term  cycling  ability  and  higher  Coulombic  efficiency  if  combined  with  proper  conductive  supports.  [16,19-21,25]  Carbonsupported Na3V2(PO4)3/C has been the ceter of much research  and interesting synthesis procedures and electrochemical results  have been recently published.[26-28] Different carbon sources were  also considered such as carbon nanospheres, carbon nanotubes  and graphite nanosheets.[29]  Electrospinning was employed to get  NVP/C  nanofibers,  for  example  by  the  co-spinning  method   obtaining  CNFs  embedding  NVP.[30,31]  All  those  works  show  remarkable cycling results of Na3V2(PO4)3/C nanocomposites by using  traditionally  made  electrodes  based  on  a  classical  metal  current collector onto which a  slurry was spread. To the best of  our  knowledge,  very  little  has  been  published  about  laboratory  made  electrospun  CNFs  where  NVP  is  successively  loaded,  proposing  self-standing  electrodes  and  developing  a  general  method easy to scale-up and adaptable to different materials and  cells.   This is actually the aim of the present work, where CNF mats of  different  thicknesses  were  produced  byelectrospinning  and  morphological/compositional  characterization  was  performed.  Stabilization and carbonization of the CNF mat are investigated in  detail  to  prove  the  reproducibility  of  the  method  and  find  useful  correlation  between  the  process  parameters  and  the  CNF  mat  morphology.  The  cathodic  active  material  Na3V2(PO4)3  (NVP),  was  chosen  due  to  the  remarkable  increase  in  cycle  life  performance when used in a conductive porous support.[20] NVP  is directly loaded into the CNF support by dip coating and through  vacuum  filtration  system,  two  low-cost  and  readily  scalable  techniques, which leads to a self-supported cathode ready to use  without,  in  principle,  any  current  collector  support  and/or  the  addition  of  any  conductivity  enhancer,  thus  in  turn  resulting  in  higher  energy  density  at cell  level.  Electrochemical tests  on  the  self-supported  NVP/CNF  cathode  are  conducted  at  ambient  temperature  in laboratory-scale  Na  metal  cell  setup,  which  provide high specific capacity upon prolonged cycling, confirming  for  the  first  time  the  highly  promising  characteristics  of  such  a  simple, low-cost, easily scalable electrode setup.  
The experimental set-up of the electrospinning system used for the preparation of the CNF mats is shown in Fig. 1a. A PAN polymeric  solution was fed through the needle at a constant and controlled rate, forming a pendant droplet at the needle tip. Charges were induced  on the droplet surface by the electric field. When charges repulsion overcame solution surface tension, a jet was formed, protruding  from the needle tip towards the collector. Jet stretching and solvent evaporation resulted in the reduction of the fiber diameter.  




The  thermal  annealing  step  at  900  °C  in  reducing  atmosphere  yielded  the  final  conductive  supporting  carbon  matrix.  A  typical  CNF sample cut in disk is shown in Figure 3a together with the  SEM image of its cross section (Figure 3b). The carbonized mats  presented good mechanical stability and were easy to handle and  punch  with  a  12  mm  hand  puncher.  The  Raman  spectra  of  the  CNF  after  stabilization  and  after  carbonization  are  shown  in  Figure 3c. The typical D and G bands of carbon[37-39] were clearly  visible for both the samples. The presence of an intense D band  was  expected  due  to  the  entirely  amorphous  phase  of  PAN  in  spun fibers whereas the G band arises for the emerging graphiticlike structure after stabilization. 



After carbonization there was a decreasing of the ID/IG ratio from  2.76 to 1.85, which suggests a partial reordering in polycrystalline  domains  of  the  original  amorphous  phase.  This  partial  graphitic  structure could favour the electrical conductivity of the fibers thus  providing  an  optimal  conducting  support  for  the  electrochemical  reactions  during  the  cell  functioning.  The  measured  transversal  and longitudinal conductivity were 13(2) mS cm-1 and 423(4) mS  cm-1, respectively.  The  tenfold  lower  value  of  t  compared  to  l  was  probably  caused  by  the  reduced  contact  among  the  fiber  sheets along the transversal cross section of the mat, resulting in  a higher impedance path. Longitudinal conductivity could instead  be  favoured  by  the  high  interconnection  of  fibers  along  the  stacked planes.    NVP/CNF electrode characterisation 
The NVP solution was used to prepare CNFs/NVP by dip-coating  similarly  to  what  previously  reported  by  Yu  et  al.[19]  where  commercial  CNFs  were  impregnated  with  a  precursor  solution 
The XRD pattern of an NVP/CNF sample thermally treated in Ar  atmosphere at 800 °C for 8 h is shown in Figure 4d. It showed the  peaks  associated  with  the  rhombohedral  lattice  of  NVP  (as  detailed in Figure SI-5) together with peaks of carbon at 27° and  45° 2θ degrees, respectively, as previously reported also by other  authors.[20] This sample was specifically prepared to confirm that  the NVP precursor paste, showing only amorphous peaks at the  XRD analysis, could effectively be annealed after loading to get  crystalline  NVP  particles  on  the  carbon  nanofibers.  A  sample  treated  at  the  same  temperature  for  2  h  did  not  show  any  crystalline  phase  in  the  XRD  pattern.  TEM  was  also  used  to  investigate  the  crystallinity,  fiber  morphology  of  the  NVP/CNF  samples,  and  the  NVP  distribution  on  the  carbon  support.  NVP  particles were observed along the carbon nanofibers (Figure 5a)  with  an  amorphous  core  (Figure  5b)  coexisting  wit small  polycrystalline regions (Figure 5c and close-up) for the presence  of graphitic domains, thus confirming the Raman results.  Some tests were performed to assess the electrochemical activity  of  the  NVP/CNF  sample  as  cathode  for  Na-ion  cells.  NVP  has  been  interesting  electrochemical behaviour and theoretical capacity (117 mAh g-1).  Anyway,  limited  research  has  been  carried  out  on  NVP/CNF  composites  [14,15,19,31]  that  might  be  an  appropriate  strategy  to  overcome the poor electronic conductivity of this NASICON-type  material  that  makes  the  theoretical  capacity  hardly  achievable.  The cyclic voltammetry results are shown in Figure 6.  


The  SEM  images  and  EDX  analysis  of  a  representative NVP/CNF sample are shown in Figure 4a-c. The  images  and  analysis  revealed  a  not  perfectly  homogeneous  distribution of the NVP nanoparticles on the fiber since the active  material was found in higher concentration on one side of the CNF  mat.  



First, the EDX analysis confirmed the chemical composition and  the  homogeneous  carbon  distribution  along  the  cross  section.  Then, it revealed that vanadium and phosphorous were present  only  in  traces  as  an  effect  of  the  loading  method.  This  phenomenon  was  probably  due  to  the  orientation  of  the  carbon  support  during  the  drying  step  since  some  differences  were  observed  in  horizontally  or  vertically  dried  samples.  Anyway,  it  was  possible  to  establish  on  thicker  samples  that  the  active  material particles can cover an area, which is 100 m in thickness,  so  that  it  was  decided  to  proceed  with  the  electrochemical  characterization of 70 m thick samples.  




A classical three-electrode cell with Na metal as counter electrode  and  the  reference  electrodes  was  used  for  this  test.  The  active  material loading (2 mg cm–2) of the self-standing electrodes tested  in  Na  half-cells  was  obtained  by  dip-coating.  The  theoretical  capacity of such cells corresponded to 220 Ah cm-2. Well defined,  sharp redox peaks were detected both in oxidation and reduction  due to the V3+/ V4+ redox couple corresponding to the intercalation  and deintercalation of Na+ ions in the NVP crystal structure. Two  reaction  sites  are  related  to  those  peaks  and  specifically  the  crystalline site M2 (18e) (that is Na2) is linked to the oxidation and  reduction  peaks  detected  in  the  CV  plot  at  3.46  and  3.30  V  vs.  Na+/Na,  respectively.[40]  The  separation  between  those  peaks  corresponds just to 55 mV, a very small value showing the good  kinetic behaviour of the fiber supported electrode. A peak fitting  was  also  carried  out  to  get  some  more  information  about  the in  order to  explore capacity of the material; by integrating the area of the peak at 3.46  V,  a  total  capacity  of  265  Ah  cm-2  was  obtained.  The  cell  was  discharged  up  the  second  electrochemically active region at low voltage. Sharp redox peaks  were observed at about 1.60 V in good agreement with previous  studies.[39]  This  reaction  potential  was  attributed  to  the  V3+/V2+  redox couple, associated to a storage capacity of about 50 mAh  g-1 for which the NVP properties as anode were also evaluated.  Other small peaks that can be seen in the CV plot could originate  from some structural reorganization related to the change of ion  occupations, since various possibilities for the occupation of the  interstitial sites have been proposed from both experimental and  computational studies.[40,42]  





The  galvanostatic  cycling  test  gave  results  in  line  with  the  CV  peak fitting for the first cycle as can be seen from the plot in Figure  7a. After 70 cycles, the capacity was stable around 200Ah cm-2  with  an  efficiency  of  95  %  (Figure  7b)  which  is lower  than  what  was often reported for other NVP-based electrodes. This might be  ascribed  to  the  inherent  characteristics  of  the  carbon  support,  which resulted only partially graphitized after the annealing step;  moreover, it is noteworthy that the electrodes did not include any  conductive  additive  as  normally  found  in  literature,  which  could  help in improving the round-trip efficiency.     



The  discharge  profiles  at  different  C-rates  from  0.1  to  10C  are  shown in Figure 7c. Before each discharge, the cell was charged  at 0.1C. The differences among the curves are evident in the 3.20  to  3.50  V  voltage  region  and  are  related  to  three  contributions,  namely  ohmic  potential  (IR)  drop,  activation  polarization  and  concentration polarization. EIS was carried out at different SOCs  (state  of  charge).  The  equivalent  circuit  used  to  explain  the  spectra (inset in Figure 7d) is RS (REDLCPEEDL) (RCTCPEDL) CPEW where RS is the electrolyte resistance, (REDLCPEEDL) is a parallel  between  the  resistance  and  the  capacitance  associated  to  the  passivation layer, (RCTCPEDL) is a parallel between the electrical  resistance  associated  with  charge  transfer  processes  and  the  double  layer  capacitance,  finally  CPEW  is  associated  with  diffusion phenomena. The first spectrum recorded at SOC0, had  the  100th  cycle  similar  shape  compared  approximately after two weeks of cycling. An obvious difference the  one  at is in the low frequency diffusional tail associated to CPEW, which  is  related  to  a  different  diffusion  process  in  the  cycled  cell  compared with the fresh one since the equilibrium condition of the  fresh cell is not governed by the insertion reaction. Degradation  of the electrolyte and continuous changes in the SEI layer could  be responsible for a decreasing of the diffusion coefficient, which  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  slope  on  the  Nyquist  plot.  The  totally charged cell showed a completely different EIS spectrum,  as  expected.  Two  different  depressed  semicircles  could  be  identified which are explained according to previously developed  models  [43-45].  The  SOC100  measurement  was  taken  when  the  charge was stopped and after some time for system equilibration.  The potential dropped naturally from 3.5 to 3.37 V vs. Na+/Na and  the  EIS  spectrum  was  recorded.  As  reported  previously,[45]  the  REDL  shows  a  dependence  on  the  potential  with  a  marked  difference between fresh and cycled cells. The additional medium  frequency arc, which is not seen for the fresh cell, is ascribed to  the charge transfer process. RCT is obtained fitting the data (see  Figure SI-6) and is quite similar for the fresh cell and the cycled  for ten cycles (about 36 ), instead it almost doubled (61 ) after  100 cycles. This marked difference in RCT after the galvanostatic  cycling  can  be  attributed  to  structural  rearrangements  in  the  material  and  to  an  increasing  range  of  disorder  in  the  active  material  particles  that  underwent  continuous  volume  changes  during cycling. The behaviour of CNFs should also be considered,  including the contact interface around particles. RCT was relatively  low  over  the  course  of  100  cycles  which  could  suggest  a  good  conductive  network.  However,  further  experiments  would  be  necessary  to  confirm  this  initial  interpretation  in  which  possible  artefactsdue  to  the  cell  configuration  might  lead  to  erroneous  conclusions. It is still to clarify whether the reaction starts from the  outer or from the inner part of the electrode since the CNFs are  quite  resistive  (10-2  S  cm-1)  compared  with  typical  values  for  diffusion of about 104 S cm-1. The cell was disassembled after the  cycling and the cathode analysed with SEM to get some further  information  on  the  morphology  of  the  SEI  layer  (Figure  SI-7).  Many pores of the CNF appeared clogged due to the presence of  a very thick SEI layer, which led to a higher capacitance when the  cell was fully discharged. However, an amount of pores was still  open,  which  accounts  for  the  good  cycling  behaviour  at  high  C  rate  and  the  electrochemical  performances.  A  second  method  for  producing  NVP/CNF  in  the  form  of  selfstanding cathodes was developed, consisting in filtering the NVP  precursor solution directly on the carbon nanofibers mat by means  of Buchner filtration. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, so far,  no works have been presented which have studied this process  for NIB. This preliminary exploration was conducted to test faster  processes possibly offering a better control on the active material  loading and profile deposition. This is a very simple and frequently  used technique in chemical labs that might enable the preparation  of electrodes in a fast and cheap way. The thickness of the mat  used  for  this  method  was  50  µm,  in  order  to  favour  a  homogeneous  distribution  of  the  NVP  precursor  among  the  nanofibers. In the SEM images recorded after filtration (see Figure  SI-8)  the  NVP  particles  are  clearly  visible.  The  active  material  distribution  profile  had  a  peak  at  the  surface  of  the  mat  but  the  NVP particles were observed also in the bulk. This result suggests  that filtration could be an effective way to better control the loading  with  respect  to  dip  coating.  Currently,  preliminary  results  have  showed  the  NVP  crystallization  step  needs  more  investigation.  This  procedure  required  a  different  annealing the  observed  stability that process in order to optimize the CNF mat, which was not ideal for  obtaining crystalline NVP. The XRD diffractogram recorded on the  annealed  sample  did  not  show  the  typical  peaks  related  to  the  crystalline  NVP  phase  (Figure  SI-9).  In  any  case,  some  electrochemical  test  and  mainly  the  CV  results  indicated  the  presence  of  likely  amorphous  NVP  with  the  oxidation  peak  recorded  at  3.40  V  vs.  Na+/Na.  The  easiness  in  controlling  the  active material particle loading motivates further research in this  direction. 




NVP/CNF  composite  electrodes  were  prepared  starting  from  electrospun  carbon  nanofibers.  Electrospun  CNF  were  initially  produced and stabilization and carbonization of the CNF mat were  investigated in detail to optimize the process parameters and the  CNF mat morphology.  NVP  is  a  promising  NASICON  type  cathode  material  for  Na-ion  technology. To fully take advantage of the energy capacity of this  material and concurrently reach an improved design of the whole  cell, we suggest an alternative  approach, which is favourable in  improving  the  transport  properties  of  the  electrode.  NVP/CNF  self-standing electrodes were prepared by dip-coating or Büchner  filtration  which  were  considered  as  straightforward  loading  methods.  The  electrochemical  tests  confirmed  the  good  cycling  performances  and  the  high  C-rate  capability  of  the  NVP-CNFs  composite: more than 200 cycles have been performed, without  major degradation of performances.  We proposed a simple, low cost, potentially scalable process to  fabricate  and  load  cathode  support  with  active  materials.  The  general concept behind the CNF support and loading procedure  is  not  linked  to  any  specific  material  and  any  other  active  compound  than  NVP,  appropriately  prepared,  can  possibly  be  processed in the same way. Overall, the results here presented  demonstrate  that  stable,  self-supported,  long-term  performing  electrodes,  ready  to  use  without  addition  of  any  performance  enhancer,  are  obtained  by  using  fast  and  low  cost  procedures  suitable to be scaled-up at an industrial level, because of energy  and time saving preparation, thus enlightening that these kinds of  materials are interesting candidates for future applications in next  generation 3D-lithium-based microbatteries. 
The  nanofiber  membranes  were  prepared  through  an  electrospinning procedure. Polyacrylonitrile (PAN, Mw = 150,000, Aldrich) was dispersed in N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMAc, Aldrich) and magnetic stirred for 36 h at 60 °C. The concentration of the solution was fixed at 8 wt% as reported by  Lee et al.[32] The polymeric solution was fed through a blunt-tipped syringe needle (Ø = 0.8 mm, stainless steel) by means of an infusion syringe pump (Harvard  Apparatus PHD Ultra), at constant flow rate of 1.5 mL h−1, while applying a 14 kV DC voltage. The syringe was connected to the needle with PTFE connectors and PTFE pipe. The distance between the needle and collector (grounded, static stainless-steel collector covered with Al foil) was 15 cm. 




The apparatus was placed inside a plexiglass box to control environmental parameters.  Humidity  level  was  regulated  using  nitrogen  flow  inside  the box and monitored with a Sensirion humidity sensor. A digital camera was used  to  monitor  the  spinning  process.  The  relative  humidity  and  the 2400 Source Meter; Keithley 2000 Multimeter for voltage measurement). environmental temperature were 35 % and 23 °C, respectively.  
The electrospun mats were stabilized in air, in a Thermo Scientific Heraeus laboratory. Mean value  and  standard  deviation  were  evaluated over  five oven by a multi-step process including three temperature ramps and dwell samples (MATLAB). time: 100 °C for 30 min, then 200 °C for 30 min, and lastly 260 °C for 120 min.  Carbonization was performed at 900 °C for 2 h under Ar flow at a  heating rate of 5 °C min-1.[25] 
Cathode active material Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) synthesis Cell assembly and electrochemical measurements 



Three-electrode Swagelok type cells were assembled in an Ar-filled glove box (MBraun UNILab, H2O and O2 < 0.1 ppm). The NVP/CNF self-standing electrodes  were  tested  as  cathodes  in  lab-scale  Na  cells  with  Na  metal 
The NVP cathode material was synthesised through coprecipitation.
After 12 h of magnetic stirring  at  50  °C,  sodium  acetate  (ACS  reagent  99  %,  Aldrich)  and poly(ethylene carbonate). The NVP active material content in the electrode  was about 2.0 mg cm-2. ammonium  phosphate  (ACS  reagent  99  %,  Honeywell)  solutions  in 
All  electrochemical  measurements  were  performed  with  a  Gamry stoichiometric amount were added slowly to the previous dark blue solution. 
After 6 h of stirring at 80 °C, the liquid precursor was evaporated, and a green paste deposited. The paste was completely dried in oven at 120 °C for 2 h and kept in a drier until further use. 
Two procedures, namely dip coating and Buchner filtration, were used to load the active material particles on the produced CNF mat.  For the dip coating, small pieces of about 3 cm2 of the carbonized fibres were immersed in 4 mL of the NVP precursor solution described just above and left to stand for 12 h. After soaking, the fibres were dried in an air oven (Thermo  Scientific  Heraeus)  at  120  °C  for  2  h.  Before  assembling  the electrochemical  cell,  in  Ar  atmosphere for 8  h at  800  °C  with heating  rate  5  °C min-1  to  obtain the  NVP/CNF  sample  was  annealed crystalline NVP phase.  
In the second loading procedure, the CNF mat was used as filtering paper in a Buchner filtration system. NVP precursor solution was dropped on the CNF  mat  and  vacuum  filtered.  Vacuum  was  removed  after  few  minutes and the CNF mat was dried in an air oven. The sample was annealed for  2 h at 800 °C with heating rate 5 °C min-1 in Ar atmosphere to crystallize the NVP.  


Electrochemical  Impedance  Spectroscopy  (EIS)  was  performed  in  the frequency range from 1 Hz to 100 kHz with a sinusoidal signal of 10 mV. 
