In the last few decades, there has been much interest in finding new solids with high ionic conductivity for applications of solid state batteries, fuel cells, sensor, etc. Several glasses have been shown to have high ionic conductivity and are referred to as superionic conducting glasses [1,2]. Among the glass formers, the phosphates are the best glass former and

have been widely investigated [3 – 6]. The general formula of phosphate network systems is AmBnP3O12, where A is an alkali metal ion and B is one or more ions in tri-, tetraor pentavalent state [7,8]. The monovalent A ions can easily migrate in the lattice with low activation energy. This family of phosphate network systems is often referred to as ‘NASICONs’ (acronym for ‘Na’ super ionic conductors) [8]. There are new structural families found in the NASICONs systems [9]. The NASICON (Na1 + xZr2SixP3   xO12, 0 < x < 3) systems have three-dimensional framework structures and have high ionic conductivity (x = 2, f 0.2 mhos at 573 K) comparable to that of twodimensional networks, such as b-aluminas [10 – 12]. A number of phosphate network-based NASICON

In the present work, NASICON type materials AmBnP3O12 are studied, where A is an alkali metal ion (Na + ), B is one or more ions in tri-, tetraor pentavalent state (Al, Ti, AlCd, TiCd, TiZn). The NASICON type materials (1) Na3TiZnP3O12, (2) Na3 TiCdP3O12, (3) Na4AlCdZnP3O12, (4) Na3Al2P3O12, (5) Na5TiP3O12 and (6) Na6AlP3O12 were prepared and characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). The electrical conductivity measurements were carried out on the prepared materials using ac impedance analyzer at different temperatures. The frequency-dependent conductivity and the permittivity were used for the characterization of the ion dynamics in these materials.

The measured ac conductivity, rac(x), is generally expressed as [13]: racðxÞ ¼ rdc þ rVðxÞ

where rdc is dc conductivity and x is an angular frequency. The frequency-dependent conductivity, rV(x), results from the contribution of localized ionic hops, i.e., quasi-bounded charges that can be understood as dipolar reorientation processes. The essential physical background for the ac conductivity (Eq. (1)) has been discussed by several authors [14 – 16]. It is valid for wide range of crystalline as well as for amorphous materials [17,18].

The ac conductivity of the prepared samples was analyzed using the modified form of Eq. (1) in Section 3. The scaling behavior in ac conductivity is studied for the prepared samples and observed the time – temperature superposition principle.

The NASICON compounds Na3TiZnP3O12, Na3 TiCdP3O12, Na4AlCdP3O12, Na3Al2P3O12, Na5TiP3 O12 and Na6AlP3O12 were synthesized using the reagents Na2CO3(SRL), TiO2(SDF), CdO(SDF), ZnO (Rambaxy), Al2O3(SDF) and NH4H2PO4(SDF). The calculated amounts of the starting materials of 10 g in single batch were ground to give a homogeneous

mixture. The finely ground mixture was then placed in silica crucible and heated slowly in an electrical furnace until the temperature reached to 573 K. The slow heating up to 573 K decomposes the ammonium dihydrogen orthophosphate mixture. The mixture was again ground and heated in a silica crucible for 14 h at temperature range 800 – 1000 K without melting the mixtures. The batch was heated further to temperatures of 1273 – 1373 K and stirred for 5 – 10 min to ensure homogeneity. The melts were poured into a stainless steel plate and quenched rapidly by pressing with another stainless steel plate at room temperature.

XRD spectra were recorded for all the compounds using the Rigaku miniflex X-ray diffractometer with monochromatic Cu Ka radiation of wavelength of k = 1.541 A˚ at various glancing angles between 5° and 65°. FTIR spectra were recorded in the wave   1 using ABB BOMEM number range 3000 – 500 cm MB 104 FTIR spectrophotometer by KBr pellet method at room temperature and 40 scans at 4   1 resolution were averaged. The DSC measurecm ments were carried out using a Perkin-Elmer DSC-IV unit with a heating rate of 30 K/min.

The density of the glass bits free of air bubbles and crack on visual examination was determined by the Archimedes’ principle. The density of the glass samples was obtained using a 25-cm3 specific gravity measurement and toluene as the inert immersion liquid. The density is obtained from the relation:

where q is the density of the sample, Wa is the weight of the sample in air, Wl is the weight of the sample fully immersed in liquid and ql is the density of the liquid used. The error in the density of measurement is within F 0.04 g/cm3. The molar volumes were calculated as Vm = M/q, where M is the corresponding molecular weight of the samples.

The finely ground samples were made into cylindrical pellet of dimension 10 mm diameter and 2.5 mm thickness pressed at a pressure of 5000 kg/cm2. Then, the pellets were sintered 373 K at 2 h. The sintered pellets were used for electrical conductivity measurements. The electrical conductivity studies were carried out by sandwiching these pellets between

two silver electrodes. Parallel conductance and capacitance were measured at different temperature in the frequency range from 20 Hz to 100 kHz using Zentech Automatic compound Analyzer Model 3305.

The amorphous nature of the samples was confirmed by XRD studies. All the prepared compounds were found to be in amorphous nature except Na6AlP3O12 system. The results are shown in Fig. 1. The compound Na6AlP3O12 was found to be in polycrystalline nature. Crystalline nature of the compounds Na4AlCdP3O12 and Na3TiCdP3O12 was studied by sintering. The XRD spectra of these

The measured parallel conductance and capacitance data were converted with appropriate geometric factor to find the ac conductivity r(x) in conventional   1) and dielectric permittivity eV(x), resunits (S cm pectively. Ac conductivity curves for different NASICON type compounds are shown in Figs. 5 and 6. It is clear from Figs. 5 and 6 that the conductivity spectra have power law features. The power law behavior is analyzed using Jonscher’s universal power law equation, and then Eq. (1) may be rewritten as [25]: rðxÞ ¼ rdc þ Axn,

where n is the frequency exponent in the range 0 < n < 1. Both rdc and A are thermally activated quantities. The rdc = Kxp is the frequency-independent dc conductivity and K is the constant of proportionality defined as [26]: K ¼ ðNe2a2=kTÞmcð1   cÞ,

where m is the geometrical factor which include correlated factor, c is the concentration of mobile ions on N equivalent lattice sites per unit volume, a is the hopping distance, e is the electronic charge, T is the absolute temperature and k is the Boltzmann’s constant. The diagrams of r(x) versus angular frequency in log – log scale are shown in Figs. 5 and 6 at different temperatures. The ac conductivity spectra in Figs. 5 and 6 have the following features: The conductivity is almost found to be frequency-independent in low frequencies region and it is equal to bulk conductivity (in the plateau region). In the high frequency region, the power law feature r(x)~xn is observed. The power law regime of the ac conductivity is much less temperature-dependent than the dc conductivity. At low temperatures, the conductivity data are found to be scattered at low frequencies owing to the high resistance of the samples. At high temperatures, the conductivity data are showing dispersion at low frequencies due to electrode polarization. The universal power law behavior obeys in both the glasses and polycrystalline NASICON materials. The parameters rdc, A and n have been extracted by fitting the measured data using Eq. (3). Levenberg – Marquardt method of nonlinear least square fitting was used to extract the parameters rdc, A and

n. The fitted parameters are tabulated for different samples and are given in Tables 1 and 2. In Figs. 5 and 6, the points represent the experimental ac conductivity data and the continuous line represents the fitted values by using Eq. (3). The dc conductivity was temperature-dependent and was found to obey the Arrhenius form: rdcT ¼ rð0Þexpð Es=kTÞ,

where r(0) is the pre-exponential factor of the dc conductivity and Es is the activation energy for the mobile ions. The hopping rate, xp, is the frequency at which r(x) = 2rdc and is also obtained from the universal law: xp ¼ ðrdc=AÞ1=n,

where xp and n are material-dependent. xp is temperature-dependent [17] and is fitted to the Arrhenius equation: xp ¼ x0expð Ew=kTÞ,

where x0 is the pre-exponent factor of the hopping rate and Ew is the activation energy for hopping rate. to the The inverse of the hopping rate is equal

relaxation time. Fig. 7(a) and (b) shows log10rdcT versus 1000/T and log10xp versus 1000/T, respectively; the continuous line is fitted line to Arrhenius equation.

Activation energies Es and Ew were determined using Arrhenius equation by linear regression. The activation energies Es and Ew of the various NASICON samples were tabulated in Table 3. The activation energy Es for dc conductivity is found to close to activation energy Ew for hopping. This indicates that the charge carrier has to over come the same energy barrier while conducting as well as while relaxing [27]. The different samples’ molecular weight, density, molar volume and dc conductivity at 423 K were obtained and are shown in Table 4.

The real part of dielectric permittivity for the different NASICON type glasses is measured as a function of frequency at different temperatures. The results are shown in Fig. 8 by plotting eV as a function of frequency, x, for the glasses Na3TiZnP3O12, Na3TiCdP3O12 and Na4AlCdP3O12 at different temperatures. The real part of dielectric permittivity eV(x) substantially rises at low frequency as shown in Fig. 8. This is due to an additional consequence of free charge carrier, which is the artifact of electrode polar-

ion conductors by interpreting the frequency-dependent features in their electric and dielectric response. The conductivity representation is a suitable tool for comparing the ion dynamics of the different materials [28].

Scaling is an important feature in any data evaluation program. The study of conductivity spectra of several materials at different temperatures leads to a scaling law, r(x)/rdc = F(x/xc), where xc is arbitrary determined characteristic frequency. This is called time – temperature superposition principle (TTSP) [28 – 34]. The ability to scale different data sets so as to collapse all to one common curve indicates that the process can be separated into a common physical mechanism modified only by thermodynamics scales [28]. Different authors have studied the scaling in several materials [29,33] by scaling the frequency axis with various parameters [28 – 34]. Here, we have applied a scaling approach using the hopping frequency, xp, as characteristic frequency to scale the frequency axis and the dc conductivity as the scaling parameter for the con-

In the last few years, researchers struggle to understand the dynamics of the mobile ions in solid

Different NASICON type materials were prepared and the glassy nature of the systems was confirmed by recording the X-ray diffractogram. Crystalline nature of the glasses was identified after the thermal treatment. The phosphate network vibration of the samples was observed by FTIR spectra. The glasses transition temperature is found to be above 573 K for all the glasses. The Jonscher’s power law was used to analyze ac conductivity data and determined the dc conductivity, hopping rate and frequency exponent. The observed three dispersion regions in the conductivity spectra were attributed to: (1) electrode polarization at low frequency; (2) frequency-independent (the plateau); and (3) power law behavior (high frequency region). The variation of dielectric constant with frequency is ascribed to the contribution of charge carriers and electrode polarization occurring in the NASICON type materials. The ac conductivity master curve was obtained for the NASICON type compounds when scaled vertically by rdc and horizontally by xp.
