A novel cation-selective ceramic-polymer composite membrane was recently proposed for electromembrane systems used in the separation and regeneration of chemicals.1 For example, processes such as electrolysis and bipolar membrane electrodialysis employing composite cation-selective membranes could be used to recover sodium hydroxide and sulfuric acid from the sodium sulfate byproduct generated by chlorine dioxide generators in kraft pulp mills.2 To be economically attractive, an electromembrane system must display high energy efﬁciency and require minimal maintenance during an extended, useful lifetime. The selectivity of a membrane is a key property for achieving these goals because it acts on two levels: ~i! the selectivity of the membrane for Na1 ions over H1 ions directly affects the current efﬁciency, and ~ii! the selectivity for Na1 over multivalent ions delays fouling and increases the lifetime of the membrane. Fouling occurs through the formation of insoluble hydroxide salts inside the membrane thereby increasing the electrical resistance of the membrane, and requiring its premature replacement.

At present, electromembrane systems primarily use ion-selective membranes which are entirely polymeric. Two desirable features of polymer membranes are their low electrical resistance and their mechanical ﬂexibility. Their drawbacks are that their selectivity to alkali metal ions declines with increasing acid concentration in the feed compartment2,3 and that they degrade at high temperatures. Sodium-selective ceramic membranes provide enhanced current efﬁciencies and can operate at high temperatures without being damaged.4 However, the thickness required for self-supporting ceramic membranes leads to high resistance and increases the energy consumption to unacceptable levels.

Production of composite membranes.—Cation-selective ﬂuorocarbon polymeric membranes ~Pall Corporation, NY! were used as substrates for the ceramic deposition ~Table I!. A small piece of silicon wafer covered by a silicon nitride ﬁlm was coated alongside the polymeric substrate to serve as a reference for ceramic ﬁlm thickness measurements. The ceramic thin ﬁlms were deposited by PLD or by rf magnetron sputtering from bulk NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) targets. To prevent severe degradation of the polymeric membrane, the ceramic ﬁlms were deposited at room temperature with no subsequent annealing. The resulting thin ﬁlms were amorphous with NASICON-like composition.6 The NASICON target fabrication method and the experimental setup for PLD were described elsewhere.6,7 The beam of an excimer laser ~KrF, 248 nm! was focused on the rotating NASICON target to an elliptic spot size of 2.2 mm2. The energy density was adjusted to 0.6 J/cm2 at a laser repetition rate of 30 Hz. RF magnetron sputtering was performed at 75 W under 0.67 Pa ~5 mTorr! argon pressure. For the thickness study, two series of ceramic ﬁlms ranging from 40 to 450 nm in thickness were deposited on R-4010 membranes using the two deposition techniques. For other experiments, the ceramic ﬁlm thickness was in the range determined to be optimal from the results of the thickness study, 70-100 nm.

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy ~XPS! was performed on a VG Escalab MKII, calibrated with the Ag 3d5/2 line at 2368.3 eV. Nonmonochromatized Mg Ka ~1256.3 eV! radiation from a dual anode was used as the X-ray source. The source was generally operated at 15 kV, 20 mA, and was sometimes used at 12 kV, 10 mA to prevent radiation damage to the polymeric membrane. Relative atomic compositions were calculated from low resolution survey scans using the

Thickness study.—The performance of the composite membrane in the electrolytic splitting of sodium sulfate into sodium hydroxide and sulfuric acid was assessed using a hexagonal stack cell ~HSC! ~Graver-Aqualytics, NJ!. This cell allows operation under industrially representative hydrodynamic conditions. A simpliﬁed schematic of an electrolysis cell is presented in Fig. 1 to illustrate the process. In the actual HSC, the distance between the electrodes is small ~4 mm!. The membrane is sandwiched between two mesh-like spacers designed to maximize contact of the solutions with the membranes. The width of the two compartments was 1 mm and the membrane area was 27 cm2. The platinum electrodes were 5.3 cm2 area disks. A peristaltic pump provided circulation of the solutions inside the cell at a ﬂow rate of about 100 mL/min, which corresponded to a linear velocity inside the cell of around 4 cm/s. The current density was maintained at 150 mA/cm2. The anolyte was a solution 1 M in Na2SO4 and 0.7 N in H2SO4 and the catholyte wa s a 1 M NaOH solution. The HSC was run in a simulated feed-and-bleed mode at room temperature ~22°C!, that is, the volume of the electrolyte compartments was sufﬁciently large to avoid signiﬁcant changes in concentrations over time. The acid and base concentrations were determined using titration. Current efﬁciency is deﬁned as the fraction of the current consumed for the generation of useful chemicals, NaOH in this case. The base current efﬁciency ~BCE! is the ratio of the number of equivalents of Na1 ions transferred across the membrane and converted to NaOH, divided by the theoretical ~Faraday’s law!

number of equivalents of Na1 transferred and converted to NaOH for a known charge passed between the two electrodes.

Durability study.—The long-term performance of the composite membrane was evaluated using a two-compartment Plexiglas cell with a working membrane area of 1 cm2. The electrolytes and the applied current density were the same as described above. In this cell, the exposed area of the membrane was not compressed between spacers and the linear velocity of solutions in the cell was only 0.02 cm/s. The membrane was positioned with the ceramic ﬁlm facing the catholyte. Sampling and concentration adjustments were performed weekly for a period of 284 days.

Operation under increased temperature and anolyte concentration.—In order to simulate industrially realistic conditions, some electrolysis experiments were performed using the HSC with an anolyte concentration of 1.5 M Na2SO4, maintained at 55°C. The feed compartment was run in the batch mode while the base compartment was in a simulated feed and bleed mode.

Evaluation of alternative membrane substrates.—As the membrane supplier discontinued production of R-4010 during our study, other cation-selective membranes from the same supplier were evaluated as substitutes for R-4010. The membranes had the same ion-exchange groups but differed in thickness and roughness. Table I outlines the principal characteristics of these membranes. A polytetraﬂuoethylene ~PTFE! membrane ~no ion exchange groups! from Electrosynthesis Inc., was also evaluated to ascertain that the ceramic thin ﬁlm does confer selectivity to such a membrane. The thickness of the ceramic layer on the PTFE membrane was 80 nm. For this set of experiments, the HSC was run at 55°C with an initial anolyte concentration of 1.5 M Na2SO4 and the concentration of H1 ions was allowed to increase freely during operation ~batch mode!. The starting concentration of the catholyte was 1 M NaOH. The rest of the operating parameters remained the same as for the thickness study.

Characterization of as-deposited ceramic ﬁlms.—The asdeposited ceramic ﬁlms and the R-4010 polymeric substrate material were examined by SEM and XPS. SEM micrographs showed that the polymeric substrate had pores which averaged 0.01 mm2 in area and were randomly distributed ~Fig. 2a!. The polymer also displayed some smooth texturing on a larger scale. The as-deposited ﬁlms showed good overall coverage of the substrate, masking the pores completely, but followed the texture of the polymer deposition by PLD ~Fig. 2b! and deposition by sputtering ~Fig. 2c!. The measured rms microroughness of the polymer was ;83 nm, setting a threshold thickness at which thin ﬁlms could ﬁll the local topography. The impact of this is discussed in the Electrochemical evaluation section. Very few ﬁlm surface defects were present, and these were in the form of pinholes. The samples deposited by PLD appeared rougher

The ceramic ﬁlms deposited were amorphous, as was expected from their deposition energy density ,1 J/cm2 and the low substrate temperature.6 Evaluation of the chemical composition of the ﬁlms by XPS showed good transfer of stoichiometry from the target to the sample by either PLD or sputtering. Table II presents the relative atomic compositions of typical ceramic ﬁlms deposited on polymeric membranes by both techniques as well as the measured surface composition of the target. The ceramic thin ﬁlms deposited on the cation-selective membranes were depleted in sodium at the surface and enriched in Na at the ﬁlm/substrate interface. The origin of this effect is discussed in an earlier publication.6 Aside from this, the ceramic composition did not vary signiﬁcantly with the thickness of the deposited ﬁlms.

It is well known that amorphous NASICON materials are not as good ionic conductors as their crystalline counterparts,10,11 but for this application the ceramic could not be made crystalline with an annealing cycle because the polymer membrane would severely degrade above 70°C. Since the ceramic ﬁlms used were very thin, the total resistance of the membrane and hence the energy requirements of the cell remained largely unchanged. The key property is the selectivity of the membrane for Na1 over H1, which is one of the main determinants of current efﬁciency. Selectivity measurements performed in a chloride environment12,13 have shown that the selectivity of crystalline NASICON for Na1 over H1 is not as good as compared to its selectivity over K1, Li1, or Ca21, but that the Na1/H1 selectivity is better than other cation-selective materials. If the selectivity of the composite membrane is higher than that of the polymer alone, there will be an improvement in current efﬁciency. In a previous publication,5 we have demonstrated that the sodium ion conductivity and the Na1/H1 selectivity of NASICON-like amorphous thin ﬁlms are sufﬁcient to improve current efﬁciency. The conduction mechanism of sodium ions in this material remains to be fully explained and is beyond the objectives of the present study.

Electrochemical evaluation.—The effect of the ceramic thickness and deposition technique on the base current efﬁciency is shown in Fig. 3. Membranes deposited by sputtering and PLD did not show a signiﬁcant difference in BCE for a given thickness. Both curves showed a maximum BCE around 70-100 nm and then the BCE steadily declined until it reached a plateau at about 44%. This result indicates that the slight enrichment in phosphorous of the sputtered ceramic as compared to the PLD ﬁlm did not produce a signiﬁcant difference in the selectivity of the ceramic. Thus, the ceramic ﬁlms produced by both techniques can be considered equivalent in terms of sodium selectivity. The optimal range of ceramic ﬁlm thickness is of the same order as the microroughness of the polymer membrane. Outside the optimal range, the BCE drops either due to lack of coverage of the substrate or because of mechanical failure of the ceramic, as is detailed below. When there was insufﬁcient coverage of the substrate by the ceramic, as for the ﬁlms thinner than 70 nm, the BCE was characteristic of the uncoated

Figure 3. Effect of ceramic thickness and deposition technique on base current efﬁciency.

membrane and not of the ceramic. Figure 4a gives an example of insufﬁcient coverage of the polymeric membrane by the ceramic ﬁlm where some pores from the substrate were left exposed after deposition allowing ions to go through the membrane without interacting with the ceramic during electrolysis. Deﬁcient coverage of the substrate was also conﬁrmed by the detection of ﬂuorinated carbon groups by XPS.

For ﬁlms thicker than the optimal range, the drop in BCE could be attributed to a decrease of ceramic selectivity beyond a threshold thickness, to localized surface defects, or to localized failure of the ceramic causing exposition of the underlying polymer. The last hypothesis was conﬁrmed after microscopic observation of the composite membranes after electrolysis. Portions of the membrane where the ceramic coating was absent represented areas where H1 ions could cross to the catholyte compartment at higher ﬂuxes because the polymer was not as Na1/H1 selective as the ceramic. This decreased the total Na1 ions transferred and thus the BCE, but did not completely eliminate the beneﬁcial effect of the sodiumselective ceramic ﬁlm. Figures 4 and 5 display selected SEM micrographs obtained after electrolysis of PLD-deposited and sputterdeposited ceramic ﬁlms, respectively. SEM observation after electrolysis experiments revealed that cracks had formed in the coating and that new pinholes with smooth edges had been created, as illustrated in Fig. 4. Quantiﬁcation of the micrographs using image analysis was attempted, but was difﬁcult due to the minimal contrast between the coating and the substrate of some samples. It was estimated that the average pinhole size was sufﬁciently large to allow transfer. The high BCE values were observed for the ﬁlms which had defects occupying less than 1% of the surface area examined, and the maximum BCE was obtained for the sample for which no defects could be seen by scanning electron microscopy ~Fig. 5a!. If the surface defects occupied more than 1% of the total area, then a drop in BCE from the maximum was observed, although the BCE

Figure 8. Na2SO4 salt-splitting base current efﬁciency for uncoated and ceramic-coated R-4010 membranes at room temperature. Initial anolyte concentration: 1 or 1.5 M Na2SO4 ; initial catholyte concentration: 1 M NaOH. The feed compartment was run in the batch mode while the base compartment was in a simulated feed and bleed mode.

catholyte compartment. The improved performance of the membranes for 1.5 M Na2SO4 anolyte concentration can be explained by the increased buffering capacity of the solution, which reduces the transport of H1 ions through the membrane. This is further indicated by the membrane shifting to the acidic state at a higher titratable H1 concentration. The presence of the ceramic thin ﬁlm increased the BCE of the uncoated membrane proportionally more at 1.5 M than at 1 M, with the anolyte compartment run in the batch mode. This is an advantage for industrial applications.

The BCE increased upon heating the anolyte solution to 55°C. Comparing the BCE values at 0.7 N acid, the BCE was about 20% higher at 55°C than at 22°C for both the composite membrane and the uncoated polymer ~Table IV!. The 20% increase in BCE is comparable to the increase in the ratio of equivalent ionic conductivity of Na1/free H1. For example, at 25°C this ratio is 6.88 and becomes 5.67 at 50°C.14 The composite membrane still showed an improvement of about 11% ~at 0.7 N acid! over the uncoated polymer, which is comparable to the improvement at room temperature for the same anolyte concentration. The increase in temperature brings an increase in the ratio of equivalent ionic conductivity of Na1/free H1 in solution, but does not signiﬁcantly affect the ratio of Na1/H1 selectivity of the ceramic and the polymer membrane.

Other polymeric membrane substrates.—In order to compare the performance of the different membranes, values of the BCE at 0.7 N H1 concentration interpolated from the regression line of the acidic state region were examined. The importance of full surface coverage by the sodium-selective ceramic ﬁlm is shown again by these results. The performance of the uncoated membranes ranked from best to worst, BCM.RF.R-4010.Ionclad and the coated membranes ranked as R-4010.RF.Ionclad.BCM. The largest improvement of BCE provided by the ceramic thin ﬁlm is on R-4010 followed by Ionclad. These two membranes are the most similar of the set in terms of electrical properties and surface roughness ~Fig. 9!. The performance of the RF-4010 was only improved by about 4%, typical of an incompletely covered substrate. The macroroughness cre-

Table IV. Base current efﬁciency  132)BCE 133) at 0.7 N titratable H concentration for uncoated R-4010 and ceramic 213)R-4010 composite membranes for 1.5 M Na2SO4 anolyte concentration.

Figure 9. SEM micrographs of other polymeric membranes: ~a! Ionclad 4010, ~b! BCM 4010 ~c! RF-4010, ~d! RF-4010 ~low magniﬁcation!.

ated by the glass ﬁber reinforcement mesh probably explains the difﬁculty of obtaining complete surface coverage. The poor performance of the coated BCM 4010 membrane is related to depositioninduced degradation of its properties. The surface of the BCM 4010 membrane was very rough and porous, requiring a thick ceramic ﬁlm to provide full surface coverage. The extended deposition times required to deposit such thick ﬁlms caused melting of the polymer and degraded the performance of the membrane.

The results of the salt-splitting experiments using a PTFE membrane substrate are shown in Fig. 10. The relatively large porosity of the membrane ~30-60 mm!, allowing osmotic transport across the membrane, as well as the absence of ion-exchange groups in the membrane made it very difﬁcult to perform the test and explained the very low BCE obtained. It is clear that the deposition of a ceramic layer increased the BCE signiﬁcantly, it conferred Na1/H1 selectivity to the PTFE membrane, even though the absolute value is too low to be of practical interest.

The Na1/H1 selectivity of a polymeric cation-exchange membrane can be enhanced by the deposition of a NASICON-like ceramic thin ﬁlm on its surface. Optimal current efﬁciencies for the production of sodium hydroxide from sodium sulfate in an electrolysis cell were obtained when the ceramic layer thickness on R-4010 polymeric membranes was in the 70-100 nm range, and ﬁlm defects ~i.e., cracks, pinholes! occupied less than 1% of the surface. In terms of current efﬁciency, the ceramic thin ﬁlms deposited by pulsed laser deposition and rf magnetron sputtering performed similarly under

Figure 10. Salt-splitting performance of PTFE and ceramic-coated PTFE.

Downloaded on 2015-06-07 to IP address. Redistribution subject to ECS terms of use (see ) unless CC License in place (see abstract).  

Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 149 ~1! D21-D26 ~2002!

the electrolysis conditions investigated, although the PLD-deposited ﬁlms appeared to degrade less ~physically and chemically! during electrolysis than the sputtered ﬁlms. An increase in temperature or anolyte concentration improved the performance of the electrolysis cell, but only the increase in Na2SO4 concentration increased the difference in Na1/H1 selectivity between the composite and the polymer membrane. Of the four polymeric membranes evaluated, R-4010 was the most suitable substrate for this application.
