The enhancement of trivalent ion conductivity in NASICON type solid electrolytes S. TAMURA, N. IMANAKA∗, G. ADACHI Department of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Osaka University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan E-mail: imanaka@chem.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp

Solid electrolyte is one of functional materials in which only single ion species can migrate in solids and is expected to be utilized for various applications such as rechargeable batteries and gas sensors etc. As the conducting ion species in solid electrolytes, the cations having higher valency than trivalent state have been considered to be extremely poor migrants because of the strong electrostatic interaction between the conducting cation and the surrounding anions comprising the framework of the structure, while monoor divalent ions are well known to migrate in solids. For the realization of such a trivalent cation conduction in solids, the cation whose valency is higher than tetravalent state is necessary to effectively reduce the above mentioned strong electrostatic interaction between mobile trivalent cations and the anions in addition to a large migrating pathway for ion conduction in the structure. In 1995, M2(WO4)3 tungstates (M= Al, Sc, Y, Er– Lu) [1–7] holding the Sc2(WO4)3 type structure have been clearly demonstrated to be trivalent ion conducting solid electrolytes. The M2(WO4)3 contains hexavalent W6+ cation and holds a quasi-layered structure which is one of the suitable structures for ion conduction. However, there remains two serious disadvantage in M2(WO4)3 solid electrolytes. One is that the W6+ cation might be reduced to lower valency state not only by reacting with metals by contact but also in a reducing atmosphere, resulting in an appearance of electronic conduction which makes the ionic conducting characteristics deteriorate greatly. The other is that the relative density of these tungstate series is too low to apply practically. (R= rare earths) with NASICON type structure prepared by a sol-gel method were demonstrated to be new trivalent R3+ cationic conductors [8–10]. While the R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 has both a high chemical stability and a high relative density compared to the M2(WO4)3 solid electrolytes, the conductivity of the samples prepared by a sol-gel method was considerably lower than that for Sc2(WO4)3 because of their low crystallinity. In order to enhance the conductivities of the R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 solid electrolytes, it is considerably effective to improve the crystallinity and to create the well-ordered ion conducting pathway in the R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 grains. However, the crystallizaC) and the decomposition temperature tion (ca. 800

Author to whom all correspondences should be addressed. C 7) 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers

C) of R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 prepared by a sol-gel (ca. 900 method are very close, and the improvement of the low crystallinity seems to be difﬁcult by a conventional solgel method. In addition, it is very difﬁcult to obtain the Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 solid electrolyte only by mixing the stating materials with a mortar and then heating by a conventional solid-state reaction because the energy for the solid-state reaction cannot be supplied enough by mixing with a mortar, and if the temperature is raised C, the sample decomposes to ScPO4 and up to 950 ZrP2O7.

In this letter, R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 series were prepared by applying a ball milling method, which can mix the starting powder with a strong force and make the powder form an amorphous phase by applying a high mechanical energy to realize a high crystallization of the R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 series. The R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 samples were prepared from high purity R2O3 (99.9%), ZrO(NO3)2 · 2H2O (99%), and (NH4)2HPO4 (99.9%). The powder was mixed in an agent pot at a rotation speed of 300 rpm for 12 h. After checking the resulting powder to be an amorphous state by the X-ray powder diffraction meter (M18XHF, Mac Science), the powder obtained was made into pellets (10 mm in diameter) and sintered at temperatures beC for 12 h in air. TG-DTA measuretween 850 and 950 ments (DTG–50H, Shimadzu Co. Ltd.) of the milled C at a heating powder were carried out up to 1200 rate, 5

The platinum-sputtered layer was formed on both center surfaces of the sintered pellets in order to obtain a good contact with the electrode. The ac conductivity of the samples was measured by sandwiching the sample between two Pt electrodes at temperatures between 300 C in a frequency range from 20 Hz to 1 MHz and 600 by using LCR meter (8284A, Hewlett Packard).

The R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 prepared by a ball milling method were found to hold the NASICON type structure similar to the case for the samples obtained by a conventional sol-gel method from the XRD measurements. Fig. 1 shows the XRD patterns of Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3, which was obtained by a ball milling method, before and after sinC with a corresponding pattern of the tering at 850 sample prepared by a conventional sol-gel method. The sample prepared by the ball milling method was in an amorphous state before heating because the powder
Figure 1 The powder XRD patterns of Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 obtained by a ball milling method (a) before and (b) after sintering at 850 C, and (c) the sample obtained by a conventional sol-gel method and sintered at 850

was mechanically milled with a strong force. After C, the sample crystallized and its crysheating at 580 tallinity was found to be greatly improved in comparison with that of the phosphate obtained by the sol-gel method. In addition, from TG–DTA measurement, the decomposition and the crystallization temperatures of the sample with a ball milling method was C and to reduce found to increase to approximately 950 C, respectively, compared to the case for the ca. 750 sample prepared by a sol-gel method (the decomposiC, the crystallizing temperature: tion temperature: 900 C). As a result, the temperature range where the 800 phosphate stably holds the crystalline NASICON type C. structure is successfully expanded from 100 to 200 By modifying the preparation method from sol-gel to ball milling method, a high mechanical energy appears during the milling process that produces the amorphous state of the mixture whose energy level is higher than that of the starting powder. Therefore, the energy necessary for the reaction to form the objective crystalline phase from the amorphous state is considerably smaller than that from the procedure through a sol-gel method, resulting in a reduction of the crystallizing temperature. In addition, the sample seems to be considerably stable due to the well-ordered structure and the decomposition temperature increased, and a highly crystallized sample were successfully obtained. The temperature dependencies of the Sc3+ ion conductivity for Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 (The Sc3+ ion conduction in the sample is demonstrated by similar methods to the case for the sample prepared by a conventional solgel method. [8]) which shows the highest conductivity among the R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 series, prepared by ball milling and sol-gel methods, were shown in Fig. 2 with the corresponding data of Sc2(WO4)3 which is reported to show the highest trivalent ion conductivity among the M2(WO4)3 tungstate series. The conductivity of Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 prepared by a ball milling method was 2.91× 10 ◦ −1 at 600 C which was 3.2 times as high as that of the sample prepared by a −6 S· cm conventional sol-gel method (9.07× 10 −1 at C) and the conductivity reaches the comparable 600 −5 S· cm C (3.74× 10 −1). value to Sc2(WO4)3 at 600 Furthermore, the activation energy for ion conduction of Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 prepared by a ball milling method was 59.5 kJ· mol −1, which was lower than that for the 2124

Figure 2 Temperature dependencies of the Sc3+ ion conductivity for Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 prepared by a ball milling method (䊊) and by a conventional sol-gel method (䊉), and Sc2(WO4)3 (broken line).

sample prepared by a sol-gel method (67.8 kJ· mol −1). The relative density (99.9%) and the Vickers hardness (ca. 300 Hv) of the sintered sample prepared by a ball milling method are almost equivalent to those of the sample prepared by a sol-gel method, and both phosphates hold a considerably high sinterability. The improvement of the crystallinity of the sample results in a preferable ordering of the conducting pathway in the grain (not by the improvement of the grain boundary caused by the sample sinterability) and enhances the conductivity and reduces the activation energy of Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3. The trivalent ion conductivities of R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 (R= Sc, Y, Er, Tm, Lu) prepared ◦ C were also measured and the ion conductivities at 600 and the activation energies for the R3+ ion conduction in R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 were listed in Table I with the corresponding data for the samples obtained by a conventional sol-gel method. The conductivities of all samples prepared by a ball milling method enhance ca. 3 times as high as that of the samples obtained by a sol-gel method, and the activation energies reduce similar to the case for the Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 sample.

In conclusion, the sample preparation using the ball milling method is one of advantageous ways of using the metastable amorphous state of the starting materials for the preparation of the samples whose thermal

T A B L E I The R3+ C and the activation energy for R1/3Zr2(PO4)3 prepared by a ball milling and sol-gel methods
stability is not high enough at elevated temperatures. Since the preparation by the ball milling method can be completed with a considerable low energy, the milling method is suitable for the preparation at relatively low temperatures. In addition, the present ball milling method has a great merit in obtaining samples which can not be synthesized in a highly crystallized state by a conventional solid-state reaction method.

