In this work, we present the results of X-ray diffraction, IR and Raman spectroscopy measurements of Li2CO3±BaCO3 system in a whole range of composition. The investigated samples were prepared by melting and cooling down of the powder mixtures, and their properties were compared to the samples before melting (physical mixtures of powders). XRD results of fused carbonates showed that there are only two phases present: monoclinic Li2CO3 and orthorhombic BaCO3, and there is no shift in XRD re¯ex position. It indicates that barium and lithium carbonates do not form substitution solid solutions. However, the changes of some XRD re¯ex intensities were observed, suggesting the formation of diluted interstitial solid solutions or microstructure modi®cation after melting. In order to determine the structure and microstructure modi®cation after heat treatment the IR and Raman spectroscopic measurements were performed. The obtained results suggest the formation of additional amorphous phase in fused carbonates. q 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Barium and lithium carbonates; IR and Raman spectra

The studies of phase diagram and the properties of binary carbonate systems were the subject of several papers involving the following binary carbonates: Li± Ca [1,2], Na±Ba [3], Na±Ca [2], K±Ca [1±4]. Such carbonates have recently become the attractive materials for solid electrochemical carbon dioxide (CO2) gas sensor applications [5±10]. Currently investigated typical potentiometric gas sensor consists of solid electrolyte (for example, NASICON, Na b-alumina), sensing and reference electrodes attached from both sides of solid electrolyte. One of the important
problems in the development of such sensing devices, leading in the future to commercial application, is the long-time stability of the sensor signal. The stability of the sensor signal during long-time exploitation may be in¯uenced by many factors. Among them, the structure, microstructure and composition changes of the sensing electrode material at elevated temperatures seem to be the most crucial one. In recent years many efforts have been done to overcome the problem of sensor instability, for example, by modi®cation of the sensing electrode material. It was found that sensors based on binary carbonates M2CO3±M0CO3 (where M and M0 denote alkaline metal and alkaline-earth metal, respectively), exhibit much better long-time stability compared to sensors built on simple carbonates [5,6]. The Li2CO3±BaCO3 binary carbonate system was also proposed as a sensing
reagents of A.C.S. reagent grade) used as starting materials were dried to constant mass at 2008C (4738K). The fused carbonates were prepared by dry mixing of appropriate amounts of Li2CO3 and BaCO3 and one-axis cold pressing in a pellet die (75 MPa). Prepared pellets were then heated (10 K/min) above the melting temperature (TM) and cooled (10 K/min). The melting temperature was derived from DTA measurements, as described elsewhere [11]. Obtained carbonates were crushed in an agate mortar to the form of ®ne powder, and stored over silica gel in dessicator together with the physical mixtures with the same composition as the fused carbonates, until used for further measurements.

The structural properties of Li2CO3±BaCO3 fused carbonates, as well as physical mixtures, were determined based on X-ray diffraction, IR and Raman spectroscopy measurements. X-ray diffraction measurements were done using SEIFERT XRD-7 diffractometer with CuKa ®ltered radiation in 2u range from 10 to 608 in steps of 0.058. Infrared spectra were collected using FTIR spectrometer BIORAD, type FTS 60V, using standard KBr pellet technique. The Raman spectra were obtained using FTS 6000 Bio Rad with FT Raman (NdYAG Spectra Physics T10106 4c laser).

Fig. 1 shows the examples of X-ray diffraction patterns obtained for fused carbonates with different composition. Together with these data, the XRD patterns for pure BaCO3 and Li2CO3 are given for comparison. All re¯exes observed for Li2CO3± BaCO3 fused carbonates were identi®ed as either BaCO3 or Li2CO3 phases. No shift in re¯ex positions was observed. These results suggest that lithium and barium carbonates do not form substituted solid solutions within whole range of composition. Such a conclusion seems to be justi®ed taking into account the differences in crystal structures (Li2CO3 Ð monoionic radii (Li1 clinic, BaCO3 Ð orthorhombic), 59 pm, Ba21 136 pm) and valences of both ions. It should be mentioned that one exception was found; the low-intensity re¯ex at 2u ˆ 40:68 observed for the

Fig. 1. X-ray diffraction patterns for Li2CO3±BaCO3 fused carbonates with different composition (molar ratio). The XRD patterns obtained for pure Li2CO3 and BaCO3 powders are given as a reference. The arrows indicate the re¯ex intensity changes, discussed in Section 3.

electrode material, because of the lowest af®nity to water vapor of Li2CO3 among other alkaline metal carbonates [5]. However, the papers concerning the general properties of Li2CO3±BaCO3 system are rather limited.

The purpose of this work was to investigate the structural properties of Li2CO3±BaCO3 binary carbonate system in detail, using vibrational spectroscopy. The possibility of the formation of interstitial solid solutions or the additional amorphous phase after heat treatment were the major reasons for choosing this material for detailed investigations. Both these factors seem to be of great importance from the point of view of sensor stability.

Two types of Li2CO3±BaCO3 samples were prepared: physical mixtures of powders and fused carbonates (after heat treatment). 
Li2CO3±BaCO3 sample with the 1:3 composition (molar ratio). This re¯ex cannot be identi®ed as any known phase in the Li±Ba±C±O system, but its presence suggests that the fused carbonate cannot be treated as a simple two phase material (or physical mixture) and some modi®cation of the structure takes place after heat the changes of relative intensities of some re¯exes can be observed. Namely, in the case of Li2CO3±BaCO3 sample with 1:3 composition the intensity of the re¯ex …2uASTM ˆ coming from (122) plane of BaCO3 41:988† increase considerably compared to the relative intensity of the sample before heat treatment. The increase of relative intensity can also be observed for the Li2CO3±BaCO3 sample with a molar ratio of 1:1, for the re¯ex from (311) plane of BaCO3 …2uˆ 46:758†: This observation suggests the changes of microstructure of the samples after heat treatment.

The other possible explanation is the formation of very diluted interstitial solid solution of lithium in BaCO3 lattice leading to the change of XRD patterns derived from BaCO3. Both the hypotheses will be discussed in more detail later, in relation with the presented IR and Raman results.

P. Pasierb et al. / Journal of Molecular Structure 596 (2001) 151±156857 cm21 (due to the bending out of plane vibrations), at 1449 cm21 (connected with the asymmetric stretching vibrations), at 694 cm21 (due to the bending in plane vibrations) and at 1059 cm21 (due to the symmetric stretching vibrations). The bands at 1059 cm21 (due to the symmetric stretching vibrations), at 1508 and 1421 cm21 (due to the asymmetric stretching vibrations) and at 694 cm21 (connected with the bending in plane vibrations) are present in the Raman spectra.

The IR spectrum of lithium carbonate shows four mentioned bands corresponding to internal vibrations of isolated anion. The twofold degeneracy of the normal modes n3 (asymmetric stretching vibrations) and n4 (bending in plane vibrations) is removed due to the decrease of symmetry of crystal lattice lithium carbonate in relation to the symmetry of ideal anion CO22 3 . The double band corresponding to asymmetric stretching n3 vibrations is observed at 1503 and 1437 cm21. The weak bands at 748 and 712 cm21 due to bending in-plane vibrations can also be observed. Also, the stretching n1 vibration becomes active, giving rise to a small band at 1088 cm21. The bending n2 vibration gives a sharp band at 863 cm21. The bands observed on the IR spectra at 509 and 422 cm21 can be attributed to quasi-lattice vibrations. The most characteristic band on the Raman spectrum of lithium carbonate is the one at 1088 cm21 due to symmetric stretching vibrations. The small bands at 1458, 748 and 712 cm21 are also present.

In the IR spectra, both the carbonates studied give ¯at characteristics within 4000±1600 cm21 (not shown in the ®gures). It suggests the absence of OH2 anions and molecules of water in their crystal structure. Additionally, in Raman spectra of both the studied carbonates the additional bands due to lattice vibrations were observed for the wavenumbers lower than 400 cm21 (not shown in the ®gures).

Figs. 4 and 5 show, respectively, the IR and Raman spectra recorded for physical mixture (PM) and fused carbonate (FC) on example of 1:1 (molar ratio) Li2CO3±BaCO3 sample. The comparison of spectra recorded for Li2CO3±BaCO3 before (PM Ð physical mixtures) and after heat treatment (FC Ð fused carbonate) indicates the microstructure modi®cation after heat treatment. In the case of IR spectra, the shape modi®cation of the band in the region of 1600±1300 cm21 can be


Fig. 4. IR spectra collected for the Li2CO3±BaCO3 samples with 1:1 composition (molar ratio): PM Ð physical mixture of powders, FC Ð fused carbonate (heat treated at maximum temperature 723 K).

Fig. 5. Raman spectra collected for the Li2CO3±BaCO3 samples with 1:1 composition (molar ratio): PM Ð physical mixture of powders, FC Ð fused carbonate (heat treated at maximum temperature 723 K).

observed. The band broadens, and additional bands appear on the part corresponding to higher wavenumbers. This effect is characteristic to differentiation in C±O bond lengths in the CO22 anion. The structural changes during calcination are also observed as changes of band intensities, especially in the case of Raman spectra, where the intensity of the band at about 1059 cm21 coming from BaCO3 increases after heat treatment in comparison to the analogous band coming from Li2CO3. Moreover, in the case of fused carbonate the wide band development at about 1000 cm21 can be observed in Raman spectra, suggesting the formation of amorphous phase after heat treatment. Described behavior was observed for the all investigated samples.

The comparisons of IR as well as of Raman spectra of fused carbonate samples with different chemical composition are shown in Figs. 6 and 7, respectively. On the IR spectra, the gradual development of the band at about 694 cm21 with increase of barium carbonate amount is shown. On the Raman spectra the intensity of wide band at about 1000 cm21, attributed to the amorphous phase, increase with the Li2CO3 content. It should also be mentioned that the positions of band maximum does not depend on the sample composition.

If the amorphous phase exists, as proposed above, its chemical composition does not have to be the same as that of remaining crystalline phase. It means that the crystalline phase can be enriched in one of the components (namely, BaCO3), compared to the starting composition of physical mixture. Such a conclusion is in agreement with the results presented above, where the changes of re¯ex (X-ray diffraction patterns) and band intensities (Raman spectra) were observed and discussed.

This result has a great importance from the point of view of application of fused Li2CO3±BaCO3 carbonate in preparation of electrochemical sensing devices. According to Miura [16], where the results concerning the reproducibility of sensing devices were presented among others, and the Na2CO3± BaCO3 electrode materials with the same chemical composition but with different microstructure can give the different absolute values of sensor signal. It allows us to hypothesise that the possible reason of sensor instability during the long-time exploitation at elevated temperatures is the devitri®cation process of

Fig. 6. IR spectra collected for Li2CO3±BaCO3 fused carbonates with different chemical composition.

Fig. 7. Raman spectra collected for Li2CO3±BaCO3 fused carbonates with different chemical composition.
