An interionic potential to investigate Li ion motion in the rigid framework of PO4 tetrahedra and ZrO6 octahedra of LiZr2(PO4)3sa Nasicon-type superionic conductorshas been developed by fitting to the low-temperature X-ray structure and conductivity data at 700 K. A molecular dynamics simulation employing this potential function has been carried out. A detailed analysis of the molecular dynamics trajectories suggests that the proposed interionic potential can predict properties of the LiZr2(PO4)3 in good agreement with known X-ray, NMR, calorimetric, conductivity, and other data. The transition from normal to superionic conductor takes place between 550 and 600 K and is accompanied by a peak in the constant volume specific heat, suggestive of a higher order transition as well as migration of Li ions from crystallographic 6b (site 1) to 18e (site 2) position. The activation energy and path of migration of Li ions from site 1 to 2 are in good agreement with experiment. Density contours surrounding sites 1 and 2, which reveal the exact geometry of the void space around these sites, are in excellent qualitative agreement with thermal ellipsoid parameters obtained from X-ray diffraction. The frequency of vibration of Li ion in the two sites are found to depend strongly on the geometry of the void space at these sites dictated by the potential energy surface.

The super ionic conductors (SICs) find enormous industrial applications as solid electrolytes in solid-state batteries, sensors, displays, and super capacitors. SICs with Nasicon [NaZr2(PO4)3] type frameworks in general have the added advantage of high melting points and excellent thermal stability. As a result there has been extensive search for better and better SICs with a Nasicon-type framework. LiZr2(PO4)3 (Li123) in particular is an important material of the above said category. This material finds application in high energy-density storage batteries due to its lightweight and the high reduction potential of lithium. The first report on the synthesis and structural characterization of Li123 is by Hong.1 It was soon followed by detailed structural, conductivity,2,3 and calorimetric studies.4 The calorimetric studies reveal interesting phase transitions in Li123. The compound stabilizes in a monoclinic structure at room temperature in C2/c space group.4,5 On heating, around 298333 K it undergoes a first-order transition (T1) to a rhombohedral structure (space group R3hc). Later experimental studies brought out several complex polymorphism exhibited by Li123.6,7 These recent neutron diffraction studies claim that the low-temperature phase (indexed in monoclinic space group by Petit et al.4,5) is more correctly a triclinic structure with C1h space group. This phase is often referred as the R¢ -phase and the corresponding high temperature R3hc structure as the R-phase. Apart from the Rand R¢ -phases, Li123 are found to stabilize in two other polymorphs,  226)¢ and  226)-phases.5-7 The low-

However, the Li ions begin to migrate to the 18e positions (site 2) of the R3hc space group,4,9 leading to a normal conductor to SIC transition. Petit et al.4 classify this as a higher order transition.

Experimental results and their interpretation of the Li123 system are complicated, since results by different research groups often are at variance with each other. The precise properties of the Li123 depend crucially on the method of preparation, thermal history, rate of cooling, etc. There are differences in the exact structure and conductivity as well as the mechanism of the Li transport that have not been resolved as yet.2-8

The present study attempts to model Li123 in terms of an intermolecular potential function between Li and the framework atoms. A new potential has been proposed on the basis of the X-ray structure of the R-phase (R3hc structure of the Li123) and

the conductivity of the SIC-phase. This potential is then employed to carry out a detailed MD study of the R-Li123 phase at different temperatures in the range 400-950 K. The results of the MD simulation are then analyzed to obtain structural, transport, and other relevant properties. The normal conductor to SIC transition is also investigated. The mechanism of transport of Li obtained from MD are compared with the experimentally obtained results.

An accurate interionic potential function is a prerequisite for a detailed MD study of Li123. A detailed search for such a potential in the literature for the Nasicon class of systems did not yield any. There are, however, MD and related studies on other ionic systems and SICs such as CaF2,10 R-AgI,11 Ag2Se,12 Ag2S,13 R-Ag2Te,14 and SrCl2 15 among others. We have adopted here an interionic potential that has the same functional form as those employed in these studies:

The adjustable parameters in the above potential are charges on various ions (qX), the strength of the repulsive term (AX-Y), the size of the ions ( 243)X), and finally the polarizabilities (RX), where X or Y ) Li, Zr, P, or O. The  243)X were fixed at the values given in ref 16. The structure of Li123 as reported in the work of Petit et al.4 with all Li ions at site 1 was used in all optimizations. An initial choice of parameters Ł ) {q, A, R} were refined iteratively by minimizing the sum of squares of the forces:

where Fh i is the force on the ith ion due to the others, and N is the total number of ions (all framework ions as well as all Li ions) in a unit cell of Li123 (N ) 108). An initial guess for q, A, and R was made, and this was refined by simultaneously modifying the values within a small neighborhood (-Łmax/2, Łmax/2): Ł¢ ) Ł + (x 1/2)Łmax, where x is a random number such that 0 < x < 1, subject to the constraints that qLi g 0.3jej and  229) Nqi ) 0. The new choice Ł¢ was accepted if it led to a decrease in the function given in eq 2. This procedure led to a sufficiently small value for S (0.038 eV2/Å2).

It may be noted that this procedure yielded a set of optimized parameters of the potential function for every of the ion pairs (including the framework ions). However, carrying out a full scale MD calculation with the use of these potential parameters provides for far too many degrees of freedom and may not simulate all properties correctly. The most interesting aspect of the Li123 is the fast transport of Li ions especially the normal conductor to SIC transition. The fact that this is not a firstorder transition suggests that the lattice parameters and framework undergo no drastic change during this transition. It has also been observed that the framework and the lattice parameters undergo little change when the cation is replaced by another.1 It is clear that the framework is relatively more rigid1 and it seems therefore possible to simulate the transition realistically, even within a rigid framework approximation. We have done this since it saves considerable computational time and effort. As we shall see, this turns out to be not a poor approximation.

Molecular dynamics simulations have been carried out in the microcanonical ensemble by integrating the equations of motion of Li ions while all other ions were kept fixed at the same initially chosen position, that obtained from X-ray diffraction studies of Petit et al.4 The system is comprised of 3  2) 3  2) 1 or 9 unit cells comprising 972 ions (108 Zr, 162 P and 648 O ions) in R3hc space group with 54 mobile Li ions on which all simulations have been carried out. Lattice parameters used are a ) b ) 8.847 Å and c ) 22.24 Å and R )  226) ) 90 176) and  231) ) 120 176) .4 Periodic boundary conditions have been employed. The Ewald summation technique suitably modified for noncubic simulation cells has been used to compute the Coulomb interactions.17

Runs have been carried out at several temperatures in the range 400-940 K. The velocity Verlet algorithm has been used for integration.18 A time step close to 5 fs yielded good conservation in total energy. An equilibration of about 50 ps is followed by a run of 600 ps duration, during which time properties were computed. A few runs of 1200 ps have also been made. Positions, velocities, and potential energies were stored every 100 fs for computing properties of interest unless stated otherwise.

A. Structure. The radial distribution functions (rdfs) of Li-X (where X ) Li, P, or O) are shown in Figure 1a-c, at various temperatures in the range of 400-800 K. Below 550 K there are only two distinct peaks in the Li-Li rdf. In contrast, above 550 K more peaks are seen not only in the Li-Li rdf but also in other rdfs. Above 550 K the observed rdfs show features of delocalization. Also shown are vertical lines corresponding to peak positions of Li(1)-X and Li(2)-X, where Li(1) and Li(2) are the Li ions located at sites 1 and 2, respectively. Sites 1 and 2 are those observed by Petit et al. in their X-ray study.4 It is seen from Figure 1 that at low temperatures (below 550 K) only site 1 is occupied by Li ions, whereas above 550 K both sites 1 and 2 are occupied. These results are in excellent agreement with the findings obtained from X-ray study.4 The rdfs below 550 K are characterized by sharp well-defined peaks. Above 550 K the peaks are broad and often overlap one another. All rdfs exhibit this localized to delocalized (or order-disorder) transition. Note that the Li, which begin to populate site 2,

Figure 1. Li-X (X ) Li, P, O) radial distribution functions at various temperatures for LiZr2(PO4)3 obtained from microcanonical ensemble molecular dynamics simulations. The vertical lines shown are those corresponding to the X-ray structure without regard to intensity. Distinction is made between Li ions in sites 1 and 2 to enable identification of the various peaks. (a) Li-Li, (b) Li-P, and (c) LiO. At 795 K, Li(1)-Li(1), Li(1)-Li(2), and Li(2)-Li(2) curves have been computed separately from the MD simulation and are shown in part a. For Li-X, X ) P and O, rdf Li(1)-X and Li(2)-X are also shown separately at 795 K in parts b and c.

approach closer to the P-atoms above 550 K. Experimental evidence for the closer approach of Li to P above 550 K was earlier obtained by Petit et al. in their NMR study. From Figure 1a it is clear that neighboring sites Li(1) and Li(2), which are at a distance of 3.3 Å, are never occupied simultaneously. The Li-Li interaction was found to be always positive and dominated by the Coulomb term. These observations suggest that Li-Li correlations might be playing an important role in the Li transport in the system. Boilot et al.19 in a detailed study of the relationship between structure and conduction in Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12 concluded that Na-Na interactions are responsible for the maximum in conductivity at x ) 2, rather than the geometry of the network.

Figure 1 also shows Li(1)-X and Li(2)-X in addition to Li-X for T ) 795 K. The assignment of peaks to Li(1) and Li(2) is evident from these results. It is clear that the new peaks that appear above 550 K are due to the occupancy of site 2 by Li.

B. Transition to SIC. Figure 2 shows a plot of the potential energy (U) at various temperatures. Here, the potential energy is given by

where X ) Zr, P, and O, NLi is the number of Li ions, and N is the total number of ions. Also shown is the specific heat at

Figure 2. The (a) average interionic energy Æ Uæ (see eq 3) and (b) the heat capacity CV of LiZr2(PO4)3 at various temperatures.

constant volume (CV) computed directly from the simulation using the expression18

where kB is Boltzmann’s constant and Æ  228)K2æ ) (Æ K2æ Æ Kæ 2)/ Æ Kæ 2, K being the instantaneous total kinetic energy. Note that in addition to the main peak at around 680 K in the specific heat there is at least one small peak at around 640 K, suggesting that there are more than one small transition. However, specific heat being a second-order quantity, it cannot be accurately determined and some ambiguity exists whether the normal conductor to SIC transition occurs at just one temperature or over a range of temperatures. From the figures it is clear that the transition is not first-order. It appears to be a second-order, probably  236)-transition. The transition to SIC is associated with occupation of site 2 by Li ions. The energy of Li ion in site 1 is -4.3438 eV as compared to -4.2682 eV in site 2. It may be noted that for certain Nasicon structures, site 2 may have a lower energy than site 1. In particular, for the Na3.2Zr1.8Si1.4P1.6O12 system, site 2 is lower in energy than site 1 by about 0.06 eV.20 These were calculated in the following fashion: site 1 energies are those of Li at 6b positions. There are six 6b positions and an equal number of Li ions per unit cell. Computing the energy of Li in site 2 is more difficult, since it is not possible to obtain the interaction energy of one Li ion, because the system would not satisfy the charge neutrality condition. The exact energy would also depend on the arrangement of ions among the various available sites. Therefore, for the energy associated with Li(2) (Li ion in site 2), we computed the 18C6 combinations (6 ions among 18 site 2 positions within a unit cell) and the lowest energy of 18C6 combinations has been taken as the energy associated with Li(2). The increase of the Li(2) energy arises from (as compared to Li(1)) the larger Li-Li repulsion (due to the decrease in the Li-Li distance from 6.5 to 5 Å). This results in a sharp rise in the total energy near 550 K, leading to a peak in the specific heat CV. Thus, it is seen that this transition is

Figure 3. Variation of conductivity calculated from expression 4; log( 243)T) (¿-1 cm1 K) vs 1000/T K-1 over the temperature range 400-940 K: MD ()), experimental results of Barj et al.3 (0), and Petit et al.4 (O). The best-fit line for MD is shown.

driven by the occupancy of site 2 by Li and the increased LiLi repulsion. The latter is also, at least partially, responsible for the increased conductivity. These results are in good agreement with experiment, where the transition is observed as a broad and extended one in the NMR studies.4

Figure 3 shows a plot of log( 243)T) against 1/T, where  243) is the conductivity. The conductivity was obtained from the selfdiffusivity from the Nernst-Einstein equation21

where n is the number density of Li ions, e is the electronic charge, kB is Boltzmann’s constant, and D is the self-diffusivity at temperature T.

Self-diffusivity was calculated from the slope of the mean square displacement-time plot. Also shown in the conductivity plot (see Figure 3) are the results from two sets of experiments reported by Barj et al.3 and Petit et al.4 Our results are closer to those of Barj et al. This is expected, since we employed their data in deriving the potential parameters. At low temperatures, the MD method is unable to probe the system for sufficiently long durations, and therefore, it is not possible to obtain the conductivity. However, it is evident from the plot that at lower temperatures the expected change in slope will be seen. Different experimental groups have obtained rather different values for  243), depending upon the synthesis route and the thermal history of the sample. In view of these differences in the experimentally derived conductivities by various groups, the values obtained from the MD seem reasonable. The slope of this plot above the T2 transition yielded an activation energy of 0.39 eV. This may be compared with the value of 0.44 eV obtained by Petit et al.4 from a plot of ionic conductivity for Li123 at high temperatures. Sudreau et al.5 have obtained a value of 0.42 eV from the conductivity above T2. Both these investigations find the expected change of slope in the conductivity plot around the transition temperature, although the transition temperature appears to occur at a somewhat lower temperature in the latter work.

Figure 4. The Li population in site 1 (0) and site 2 (O) at various temperatures in the range 400-940 K.

Figure 5. The contours showing Li ion density within 0.8 Å around sites 1 and 2 at  24)940 K, in different planes (xy-, xz-planes), plotted with the density increasing with the depth of the shade.

Figure 4 shows a plot of the occupation of sites 1 and 2 at various temperatures. It is evident that below 550 K site 2 is unpopulated. At 550 K, sites 2 and 1 are equally populated, but at higher temperature, the population of site 2 is higher than 0.6.

Figure 5 shows the contours of density within a radius of 0.8 Å around sites 1 and 2, in two different planes (aband ac-plane). These plots may be compared with the thermal ellipsoid plots of Li ion in sites 1 and 2 obtained from X-ray diffraction. Petit et al. found that the crystal structure suggested that Li ions are localized in Li(1) sites and that thermal ellipsoids are highly anisotropic. This is exactly what is seen in Figure 5. The amplitude is larger in the ab-plane than in the ac-plane. The smallest amplitude is along the c-axis. For site 2, the ellipsoid has a larger amplitude in the ac-plane than in the ab-
Lithium Ion Motion in LiZr2(PO4)3 TABLE 2: Residence Time and Hop Time between Sites of Type 1-1, 1-2, and 2-2 Obtained from MD Study at Various Temperaturesa

