JournSolid electrolytes are functional materials in which only ion migrates with charge carrying in solids and some of them are applied for various electrical applications, e.g. lithium batteries for heart pacemakers, sensing devices etc. Although many kind of ions are well known to migrate in solids, those ions were limited to monovalent and divalent state because of the strong electrostatic interaction between conducting ion species and surrounding constituents of the lattice. The conductivity of monovalent ion is, in general, higher than that of divalent ion. Among the monovalent 1 cationic conductors, alkali metal ions such as Na were especially well known for their high ionic conduction in solid electrolytes such as NASICON-type and b-/ b0alumina-type so far, and some of them are called super ionic conductors. All solid electrolytes mentioned above have the structure which holds comparatively large conducting pathway in those structure. For trivalent cation species, the migration in solids had been believed to be greatly difﬁcult because of strong electrostatic interaction with surrounding anions. Ln -b0-alumina [1–7], bLaNbO [8] and LaA O [9] had been claimed to be trivalent ion conductors. However, any trivalent ion migration in these materials has not been directly and quantitatively demonstrated yet at all.

(R: Al, Sc, Y, Lu–Er) solid electrolytes with the Sc (WO ) type structure have been 4 3 reported as pure trivalent cationic conductors [10–16]. The structure is the quasi-layered and contains hexavalent tungsten ion, W , which is strongly bonded to surrounding oxide anions resulting in reducing the electrostatic interaction between trivalent R cation and oxide anions. Furthermore, since the valence states of all cations in the structure are higher than three, no monovalent or divalent cation conduction appears and the R conduction in the R (WO ) was directly demonstrated by a dc electrolysis. 4 3 61 However, cation which contributes for the trivalent cation migration in solids might be reduced to lower valence state in a reducing atmosphere.

NASICON-type structure as the candidate, and selected the trivalent rare earth ions as the migrating cation species.

(R: Sc, Eu, Gd, Er, Lu) was prepared by a sol–gel method from high purity of R O (99.9%), ZrO(NO ) ?2H O (99.95%) and (NH ) HPO (.99.99%) as the starting materials. R O and ZrO(NO ) ?2H O were separately dissolved in nitric acid solution (3 N), then mixed together. The 3% (NH ) HPO solution was dropped into the mixed nitric acid solution afterwards. After precipitations (the color was white except for the Er system (light pink)) were obtained, the solution was heated at 758C for 24 h, then water in the solution was vaporized by heating at 1308C for 6 h. The dried precipitant was heated at 3008C for 6 h and the powder obtained was pelletized and sintered at 8508C for 24 h. Pt electrodes were sputtered on both center surfaces of the sample pellet. The ac conductivity of the sample was measured by a complex impedance method using the Precision LCR meter (8284A, Hewlett Packard) in the frequency range from 20 Hz to 1 MHz at the temperature range between 350 and 6008C in air atmosphere. The dc conductivity measurement of the sample was carried out by monitoring the voltage generated by passing the constant current of 0.1 mA in the sample, and the polarization behavior was investigated as the time dependence of the s /s ratio. Here, s and s denotes dc conductivity and ac conductivity, respectively. The oxygen partial pressure dependencies of the electrical conductivity were measured in the oxygen pressure range between 10 and 10 Pa. The oxygen–air gas concentration cell was fabricated with Sc Zr (PO ) , and the electromotive force (EMF) was measured at the temperature from 650 to 8508C. The dc electrolysis of the Sc Zr (PO ) pellet was performed by applying a dc voltage of 3 V at 7008C for 400 h for the purpose of identifying the conducting species, and the investigation of the cathodic surface of the sample after electrolysis was carried out by SEM (SEM, S-800, Hitachi) and EPMA (EPMA-1500, Shimadzu).

(R: Sc, Eu, Gd, Er, Lu) prepared were found to possess the NASICON-type structure with hexagonal symmetry from the XRD measurements. Fig. 1 shows the R radius dependencies of aand c-axes, and lattice volume calculated for the prepared R Zr (PO ) . 4 3 As R cation radius increases, a-axis decreases and c-axis

Fig. 1. The R radius dependencies of the lattice parameters (a-, c-axis) and the lattice volume for R Zr (PO ) . 4 3

increases monotonously, and the lattice volume was found to increase.

For monovalent Lion conductor with the NASICONtype structure, the existence of the most appropriate lattice size for Li ion conduction has been clariﬁed by Aono et al. [18] and they reported the detail of the relationship ion size and the lattice volume of between the Li LISICON (Li super ionic conductor) with the NASICON(M5Ge, Ti, Hf) with type structure. Among LiM (PO ) 4 3 solid electhe NASICON-type structure, the LiTi (PO ) 4 3 trolyte is veriﬁed to be the suitable lattice size for Li ion conduction. An optimum ratio of the conducting ion size to the lattice volume in the NASICON-type structure is calculated to be ca. 2.33310

for LiTi (PO ) .

S. Tamura et al. / Journal of Alloys and Compounds 323–324(2001)540–544

Fig. 2. The W ratio variation of R Zr (PO ) with the corresponding datum of LiTi (PO ) . The W ratio represents the trivalent cation size to lattice volume ratio.

(2.333 smaller W ratio of 1.97310 ) which is lined as a broken line in Fig. 2, among 10 R Zr (PO ) , the highest conductivity is expected for 1 / 3 31Sc

radius dependencies of the electrical conductivity for the R Zr (PO ) at 6008C is shown in Fig. 3. As expected from the W ratio variation of R Zr (PO ) , the conductivity monotonously increased ion size, and the Sc Zr (PO ) with reducing the R 4 3 2 21 showed the highest conductivity of 1.06310 S?cm . The conductivity is comparable to that of Sc (WO ) -type

Fig. 3. The R radius dependencies of the electrical conductivities for R Zr (PO ) at 6008C.

Fig. 4. Oxygen partial pressure dependencies of the ac conductivity for Sc Zr (PO ) at 7008C.

solid electrolyte series described in a previous communication [19]. Although we tried to prepare the Al Zr (PO ) 4 3 which is expected to have smaller W ratio than the the sample obtained was a two phase Sc Zr (PO ) , 4 3 mixture of AlPO and ZrP O because the Al radius is too small to hold the NASICON-type structure, so that the Sc Zr (PO ) was found to possess the highest conductivity among the R Zr (PO ) with NASICON-type structure.

Fig. 4 depicts the oxygen partial pressure dependence of the ac conductivity for the Sc Zr (PO ) at 7008C. No meaningful deviation of the conductivity was observed for the whole oxygen pressure region measured, which indicates that the predominant charge carrier is only ion and

Fig. 5. The EMF value obtained for the oxygen–air gas concentration cell fabricated with the Sc Zr (PO ) solid electrolyte at the tempera4 3 ture between 650 and 8508C. The solid line indicates the theoretical EMF calculated from the Nernst equation.

solid electrolyte is chemically stable enough in addition to holding the high ion conductivity comparable to that of the Sc (WO ) -type trivalent cationic conductors, the utilization for various electrical devices applicable from in oxidizing to reducing atmosphere is greatly expected.


