The structure of compound consists of a [FeMn2(PO4)3]2~ framework, that is built up by chains of edge-sharing MnO6}MnO6}FeO6 octahedra, running along the [101] direction. The chains are linked together via the common corners of phosphate tetrahedra to form sheets parallel to the ab plane. The projection of one sheet along [001] is shown in Fig. 1. Adjacent sheets are also connected through PO4 tetrahedra (upper corners, Fig. 1) and the constituents are related by a 21-screw axis, parallel to the b-axis, thus giving rise to an open framework with two di!erent kinds of channels running along the c-axis. The channels are occupied by the silver cations within an eightfold coordination (14, 15) which suggest an ionic mobility in the compound.

This paper deals with the X-ray and neutron structure re"nement, the MoK ssbauer study, and the magnetic behavior of the new Ag2FeMn2(PO4)3 compound.
Powder samples of composition Ag2FeMn2(PO4)3 were prepared by solid state reactions methods, starting from AgNO3, and (NH4)2HPO4 weighed in stochiometric quantities. The starting reactants were well mixed, ground in an agate mortar, and heated at 723 K for a time su$cient to cause evolution of gaseous substances (NOx, H2O, NH3, CO2). The product was then progressively calcined between 873 and 1173 K with intervening by mixing and grinding until no change was detected by X-ray di!raction.

The variation of 1/s M (Fig. 5) shows that the sample displays a Curie}Weiss law behavior between 19 to 300 K. A "t of "C/(„!h) the data to the Curie}Weiss equation s M yielded the constants: C"12.61 g K mol~1, h"!45.52 K. From the Curie constant, the paramagnetic moment for this material was k"10.04 k B, which agrees well with the expected value of 10.25 k B for two Mn2‘ cations and one Fe3‘ cation in high-spin states. The negative value of h together with the continuous M with decreasing „ indicate an antiferromagAt low temperature, the inverse susceptibility data deviate from the Curie}Weiss linear variation and a slight in„ versus temperature graph (Fig. crease is observed in the s M 6) that reaches a maximum at 19 K. This fact can suggest the presence of a magnetic phase transition at the critical temperature „

increase of s netism behavior for this compound.

The "eld dependence of magnetization carried out on this sample at di!erent "xed temperatures is shown in Fig. 7. Above „ N (at 25 K) the straight line con"rms the predominance of the paramagnetic behavior. However, below „ N (at 10 and 2 K), nonlinearity was clearly observed, suggesting the presence of a small ferromagnetic contribution. It appears that the antiferromagnetic spin alignment is disrupted, and such a behavior can be interpreted as a result of ferromagnetic canting or of a weak ferromagnetic contribution.
