The form of the discharge curve and the effective discharge capacity is found to depend on the mode of cathode preparation: two plateaus one clear at ;2.80 V and one less distinct at ;2.65 V vs. LirLi , corresponding to ca. 1.5–1.6 inserted lithium ions during the first cycle, are seen after more extreme grinding; milder treatment gave only the 2.8 V plateau and ca. 1.1 inserted lithium ions. Mossbauer spectra for the more extensively ground material show the Fe environments in R-Li Fe PO to be highly symmetric; only a very narrow doublet with small quadrupolar splitting is observed, and the two crystallographically independent Fe-atoms cannot be distinguished. As lithium insertion proceeds, two doublets average intensity ratio 1.5:1 appear, which can be assigned to two Fe sites. The average intensity ratio of 1.5:1 suggests that the extra lithium ions occupy sites closer to one of the Fe-atoms. q 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

NASICON-type materials were earlier studied exthey later tensively as emerged, however, as interesting electrode materials x in the lithium-polymer battery concept 3,4 . A series of lithium-containing compounds incorporating large polyanions, XO3y for XsS, P and As, have recently been investigated 5–13 ; most notably, the

The similarities between the R-Li Fe PO Fe PO frameworks in the ac-plane are clear. The different crystal symmetries are due mainly to differ. ent alkali cation distributions within the Fe PO2 4 3 the framework lithium atoms occupy one 18f-site and the iron atoms occupy two symmetry-independent 6c-sites. It has been shown that ca. two extra lithium ions w 11 . The can be inserted to form Li insertion occurs in one continuous step, 0 -x -1.8, giving rise to a plateau at around 2.8 V. The Fe PO framework appears to remain intact under x lithium insertion 24 .

Mossbauer spectroscopy has been used to study changes of oxidation state and iron coordination in . compounds, NASICON-type 3 4 3 w w x . 25,26 , Fe MoO 29,30 and 4 3 w . Ba FeNb PO 31 . Mossbauer spectroscopy has 4 3 also been used frequently in studying electrochemical phenomena, not least in the above compounds. Results have been presented for lithium-inserted w 32 . The insertion process in LiFePO Fe MoO 4

Fig. 1. The structure of a a-Na Fe PO , monoclinic and b R-Li Fe PO . Note the similar connectivity within the Fe PO framework.

During the discharge, Mossbauer measurements were performed on half-cells. Prior to each measurement, the cells were disconnected from the potentiostat and allowed to equilibrate at open circuit voltage OCV for ca. 4 h.

Cathodes were made by spreading a mix of RŽ Li Fe PO , Shawinigan Black SB carbon powŽ der and EPDM rubber binder ratios 80:15:5 in . cyclohexane ball-milled for 1 h onto an Al-foil current collector coated with a suspension of fine carbon particles in an organic binder case A . To evaluate the effect of ball-milling the slurry, some cathodes were prepared with a shorter milling time Ž 20 min and using a lower speed case B . The R-Li Fe PO loading on the current collector was 6–7 mgrcm2. The electrodes were dried overnight at 808C and cut into 3.1-cm2 discs; the electrodes were again dried at 1208C in vacuum. The cell assembly was carried out in an Ar-filled glovebox -3 ppm H O and O , in which the cathode was laminated against a glass-wool separator soaked in electrolyte and pressed onto a lithium-foil counter electrode, to give half-cells of type -Li liq. el. Li Fe PO ). The laminates were packed in polymer-coated aluminium bags, evacuated and sealed to give so-called ‘coffee-bag’ type cells. The liquid electrolyte used in ECrDMC 2:1 was 1 M LiBF 4 Ž Selectipur

The cell chargerdischarge was controlled by a MacPilee potentiostat. The cells were discharged potentiostatically in 5 mV steps; the voltage was changed when the current had decreased below ;

Ž Fig. 3. Mossbauer spectra for Li Fe PO measured at differ3q x 2 Ž . ent stages in the first discharge case A . The numbers correspond to the x-values based on charge passed.

Fig. 2 a shows discharge curves during the first cycle potentiostatic mode . The well-ground material exhibits two features: a longer, flat plateau at around 2.8 V, followed by a shorter, more sloping plateau around 2.60–2.65 V. It was possible to insert ca. 1.5–1.6 Li rformula unit based on the charge passed through the cell . The corresponding d xrdV curve is plotted in Fig. 2 b ; two peaks are observed around 2.80 V and 2.65 V. A smaller peak could also be distinguished at 2.70 V. These results com-

The in situ Mossbauer spectra recorded for the well-ground material case A at the different stages of the discharge are shown in Fig. 3. For the charged sample CS the hyperfine parameter is 0.437 mmrs and D E is 0.141 mmrs, when fitted to one doublet; these are values representative of a Fe3q ion. As discharge proceeds, two new components appear which we attribute to Fe2q. Parameters obtained from the fitting procedure are given in the Fe3q Table 1. In the final fitting procedure, centroid shift was fixed to the average fitted value of

Fig. 4. The amount of lithium inserted in each step; obtained by curve fitting the Mossbauer peaks vs. the amount of lithium based on charge passed . The solid line is the least-squares fit to the data-points.

The development of the sum of the intensities of the two Fe2q components as lithium insertion proceeds is plotted vs. x based on charge passed in Fig. 4. The total amount of Fe2q at the end of the discharge according to Mossbauer is ;80%, compared to ;70% from the electrochemical measurements.

Our electrochemical results support the recent study of Genkina et al. 22 that the electrochemical behaviour of R-Li Fe PO is more complex than was earlier thought to be the case 7 . This is also confirmed by our Mossbauer study. The inconsistencies in the Fe2q parameters derive mainly from the fitting procedure because of strongly overlapping resonance lines. From the electric quadrupole split-

ting result, it is clear that the addition of Li-ions to the R-Li Fe PO structure influences the local structure around the Fe3q ions. The two Fe sites show different D E splitting for Fe2q; probably because the extra electrons occupy the energy levels differently for the two Fe3q ions. The higher Fe2q content derived from Mossbauer spectroscopy, compared to the electrochemical values, can indicate a Ž small error in measuring x in the intercalation of lithium ions. This could be due to the presence of some electrochemically non-active phase in the material, leading to an underestimate of the charge passed.

These results demonstrate the usefulness of the ¨ Mossbauer technique for evaluating the electrochemical process in Fe-based systems and for deriving the amount of lithium inserted on the assumption that the f-factors for the Fe3q and Fe2q ions are similar or that their values are known . The average value . found for the I Fe ratio 1.5:1 implies that there is a slight preference for one of the Fe ions to be reduced before the other again assuming the recoil-free factors for the two Fe2q sites to be the same . This implies, in turn, that the extra lithium ions are located somewhat closer to one of the Fe ions in the RLi

