NASICON-type compounds with the nominal formula, Na Si Zr Y PO , were prepared by a typical ceramic route with different microstructures. The samples were fired in the temperature range 1190–12358C with sintering periods between 2 and 80 h. Results showed a significant influence of the processing conditions on the microstructure, affecting both grain and grain boundaries. Electrical conductivity was mainly controlled by the grain boundary contribution, which is strongly dependent on the grain size and density of grain boundaries. A maximum conductivity value of about 2.7 =10y3 S cmy1 at room temperature was obtained with samples sintered at 12208C for 40 h. q 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

NASICON stands for a well known family of Naq super ionic conductors with the general formula Ž 0 -x -3 , firstly suggested Na as solid electrolyte material for Naq ion-based batteries. Recently, this family of materials has attracted the attention of researchers looking for ion-selective electrodes or gas sensor devices 1,2 , and a NASICON-based commercial CO sensor has already been w x proposed 3 .

Corresponding author. Ceramics and Glass Engineering Department, UIMC, University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal. Tel.: q351-234-370-263; fax: q351-234-425-300. . E-mail address: framos@cv.ua.pt F.M. Figueiredo .

close to 2 4–7 . Most of these studies assess the relation between composition, structure and electrical conductivity, and the higher values of conductivity appear related to a monoclinic symmetry when x is between 1.8 and 2.2. For other values, the structural change to rhombohedral symmetry is associated to a decrease in conductivity. Impedance spectroscopy, used to separate grain from grain boundary impedances, showed that the grain boundary contribution is often the major contribution to the overall w x impedance 7 .

NASICON is usually synthesized by two methods: the traditional ceramic route or a sol–gel method. The ceramic route requires higher sintering temperatures leading to segregation of a resistive monoclinic zirconia second phase, following Na and P volatilization 8 . A liquid phase is often found along the grain boundaries which also results in the deterioration of

On the contrary, the fine and reactive sol–gel powders, requiring lower sintering temperatures, result in more conductive and hox mogeneous materials 9,10 .

Previous work 11 showed that good materials can also be obtained from a traditional ceramic route using reactive zirconia precursors. The favorable reaction kinetics at low temperatures allows lower sintering temperatures than usually required for the ceramic route. These materials were dense, with small content of monoclinic zirconia, with homogenous microstructures and without any vestiges of liquid phase. Overall, a high electrical conductivity and a significant abatement of the grain boundary x impedance was observed 12 .

This result suggested that further improvements could still be achieved by optimizing the microstructure. The increase of the grain size and, therefore, the reduction of the density of grain boundaries should result in lower grain boundary impedances. The aim of the present work is to investigate the effects of the sintering conditions on the microstruc-

ture and corresponding relationships with the electrical properties.

One NASICON-type compound with the nominal formula Na Zr Y Si PO was obtained from Ž . solid state reaction of ZrO Tosoh , . Na PO .12H O Merck and SiO Merck . The zirconia-based precursor was selected for being a highly reactive powder, with small grain size -1 .mm . Powders were ball-milled in ethanol with zirconia balls, dried in a stove at 608C, and calcined in air at 11008C for 8 h in a closed Pt crucible to prevent contamination. The calcined powders were ball-milled again for 2 h and uniaxially pressed 98 .MPa into disk-shaped pellets. A first series of samples was sintered in air during 10 h for different temperatures between 11908C and 12358C, while a second series of samples was sintered at 12208C for 2, 10, 40 and 80 h. Phase composition of both calcined powders and sintered pellets was verified by

X-ray diffraction XRD using Cu radiation. Microstructural aspects were studied by scanning electron microscopy SEM , based on observation of previously polished and thermally etched 10 min at 11008C samples. The density was estimated from the samples’ weight and geometry.

the electrical conductivity was determined from impedance spectroscopy measurements Ž Hewlett Packard 4284A LCR between 08C and 1508C, in the frequency range 20 Hz–1 MHz. Pt electrodes were previously painted onto the pellets surface and heat-treated at 7008C for 30 min, to provide the necessary electrical contacts.

SEM micrographs of samples sintered at 12208C for different periods of time are shown in Fig. 3. The increase in sintering time also results in increasing average grain size Table 1 , with formation of a liquid phase along the grain boundaries. The liquid phase, clearly identified in the sample sintered for 80 h and probably present in other samples, should have an important role in the sintering behavior of these materials at temperatures close to 12208C. Densification and grain growth are probably associated to a liquid phase assisted sintering process. This assumption is consistent with the fact that all samples sintered for more than 2 h present similar densities . Ž Table 1 .

zirconia grains could not be observed, although expected from XRD. As suggested by some authors w x4,7 , zirconia could be dispersed along the grain boundaries, possibly in a liquid phase. Further work by transmission electron microscopy is in progress to clarify the structural nature of the grain boundaries.

The values of r remain almost independent at low temperatures and increase slightly at high sintering temperatures. In the low temperature range, the initial decrease in r could be ascribed to decrease in grain boundary density, resulting from both increasing sample density and grain size. Increasing sintering temperature results in the segregation of a resistive liquid phase, leading to more resistive grain boundaries. If, as expected, the composition of the liquid phase is different from the grain, the grain composition would become different from the nominal one. The fact that zirconia is present as a second phase suggests that the material is becoming Zr-deficient, and these compositions w x appear to be less conductive 7 .

Fig. 4. Impedance spectra of materials processed in different sintering conditions: a samples sintered at different temperatures for 10 h, and b samples sintered at 12208C for different periods of time.

high frequency intercept of the grain boundary arc. Simple inspection of the spectra, shown in Fig. 4, suggests that the major differences between these materials are mostly due to the grain boundary contribution as all high frequency intercepts of the grain boundary arcs are close to each other. A significant increase of the grain boundary impedance is observed in the samples sintered under extreme condi. tions of temperature 12308C and time 80 h .

These general observations result obviously from the dependence of the estimated bulk r and grain boundary r resistivities at 08C on the sintering temperature shown in Fig. 5a. This figure shows that r is particularly sensitive to the sintering temperagb ture going through a minimum at temperatures close to 12108C, and with a sharp increase at higher

Fig. 5. Dependence of grain r and grain boundary r gb resistivities at 08C: a samples sintered at different temperatures for 10 h, and b samples sintered at 12208C for different periods of time.

A perfectly equivalent behavior is found when analyzing the effect of the sintering time on bulk and grain boundary transport properties Fig. 5b . Note that SEM analysis of the sample sintered for 80 h Ž Fig. 3 indeed reveals the presence of liquid phase along the grain boundaries. Also, changes in sample . density and grain size with sintering time Table 1 support the above mentioned explanation. Nevertheless, it is essential to improve the knowledge of the structural and compositional characteristics of the grain boundary in order to fully understand the sintering behavior and the electrical properties of these materials.

The best conductivity values were found for samy1 ples sintered at 12208C for 40 h 2.7 =10 at f278C and are better than some of the best y1 Ž values reported in the literature 1 =10 w is still open from 2,8 . Room for improvement exploitation of other experimental conditions, e.g. sintering at 12108C for longer periods of time.

The activation energy Table 2 for total conductivity was estimated from Arrhenius plots shown in Fig. 6. The effect of sintering temperature is negligible Fig. 6a and values were found to be reasonably close to each other in the range from 0.31 to 0.35 x eV, in good agreement with literature data 2,8 . However, Fig. 6b clearly shows that the activation energy decreases with increasing sintering time. This seems to a consequence of the formation of a liquid phase along the grain boundaries, particularly evident in the sample sintered for 80 h SEM micrograph of Fig. 3 . In this case, the activation energy drops to about 0.26 eV.

Fig. 6. Temperature dependence of total conductivity: a samples sintered at different temperatures for 10 h, and b samples sintered at 12208C for different periods of time.

Table 2 Bulk, grain boundary and total conductivities at room temperature of the different NASICON-based materials NASICON-type materials with nominal composition, Na Si Zr Y PO , can be obtained starting from a tetragonal zirconia-based precursor, following a traditional ceramic route. The electrical properties are comparable to the best materials mentioned in the literature, usually processed by a sol–gel technique.

The total electrical conductivity strongly depends on density and nature of the grain boundaries. Proper combination of sintering temperature and sintering time yields large grain size and reduces the grain boundaries density.

The sintering behavior is likely to involve a liquid phase assisted process, as suggested by the formation of large quantities of a resistive liquid phase along the grain boundaries. A better knowledge of the nature of the grain boundaries and of the sintering mechanism is essential to optimize the processing conditions and, therefore, the electrical properties.
