Electrical Conductivity Dispersion in Co-Doped NASICON Samples

It was reported in the previous paper [1] that in two NASICON compounds, whose chemical composition is given by the formula Na1+xZr2SixP3––xO12, one with x = 1.5 and the other with x = 2.0, dispersion of the electrical conductivity was observed. In both cases the frequency dependence of the conductivity obeys the power law formula s(w) = s0 + Kwn [2–7], where s0 is the direct current conductivity and K is a temperature dependent coefficient. The physical background for the power law was discussed by several authors [2–5]. It is valid for wide range of crystalline as well as for amorphous materials [6–8].

For temperatures below 450 K, i.e. below the temperature of phase transformation of the NASICON compound, the exponent n was found to be temperature independent and equal to 0.43 and 0.70 for x = 1.5 and 2.0, respectively [1].

It is known that doping NASICON with CoO improves its physical properties: the value of microhardness becomes up to 60% higher than for undoped samples, doped samples are resistant to thermal cycling around the temperature of phase transformation and their degradation due to the influence of humidity is significantly lowered [9]. Simultaneously the electrical conductivity at temperatures exceeding 580 K is as high as that for undoped samples of the same sodium content [9].

In this paper the investigations of the frequency dependence of electrical conductivity of Co-doped NASICON samples is reported.

The NASICON compound of composition Na1+xZr2SixP3––xO12 (x = 2.0) doped with 0.5 mol% CoO was synthesized by solid state reaction of mechanically mixed powders. The details of synthesis were described previously [1, 5]. After synthesis material was ground and milled down to micrometer grain size. Pellets of cylindrical shape (10 mm diameter, 2–4 mm thick) were formed by uniaxial pressing and then subjected to isostatic pressure of around 300 MPa. They were next slowly heated to the sintering temperature 1200 C and sintered for 5 h. The sintering temperature for 0.5 mol% Codoped samples was about 30 K lower than for undoped material [9]. The density of the samples after sintering was equal to 93–94% of the X-ray density, which for x = 2.0 compound is 3.27 g/cm3. The mean value of microhardness measured on polished surfaces of the samples was (719  23)  107 N/m2.

The impedance measurements in the frequency range 0.7 MHz–1.2 GHz were conducted in air by a coaxial impedance spectrometer. The sample was placed between two pieces of the inner conductor of the coaxial line and transmittance coefficient Tx of this section of the line was measured at different frequencies and temperatures. The equivalent circuit of the high frequency section of the experimental set-up is shown in Fig. 1. p-type symmetrical four-pole represents the investigated sample in a coaxial line [10]. The incident and reflected waves in the planes 2–2 and 3–3 are designated as a1, a2 and b1, b2, respectively. The complex impedance of Zx element of the four-pole may be expressed by the complex capacitance of the gap in the inner conductor filled by the sample as

where CS is the complex capacitance of a sample, C0S is the geometrical capacitance of a sample with e = 1, i.e. C0S = e0S/d, where S and d are area and thickness of the sample under investigation, e0 – the dielectric constant of free space, C0 – the capacitance of the gap of length d in the central line in the absence of the sample.

Fig. 1. Equivalent circuit of the high frequency section of the experimental set-up. Zosc and ZL are impedance of the oscillator and the load, respectively; A1, A2 – couplers, l1, l2 – transmission lines

The calibration of the system was performed by three measurements of the transmission coefficients of line T = Ut /Ui, one with shorted gap and the other two with the gap loaded with samples of known capacitance and very low dielectric loss. The impedance of the investigated sample was calculated from the measured transmission coefficient Tx of the line with inserted sample according to the formula

where and C01, C02 are geometrical capacitance of the samples used for calibration, C1 and C2 are capacitance of the samples used for the calibration. Parameters A1 and A2 are equal to where T0, T1 and T2 are the transmission coefficients measured with shorted circuit and with the calibration samples of capacitance C1 and C2, respectively.

In the frequency range 0.7–1250 MHz calibration and measurements are performed by means of computerized system for a set of 64 fixed frequencies. Primary processing of data and plotting of frequency dependence of impedance, admittance, dielectric permittivity or electric modulus are performed in real time.

Samples for electrical measurements were prepared in the form of a disc of 3.5 mm dia-meter and 1.5 mm height. Platinum electrodes were sputtered on both faces of the sample.

The impedance diagrams for Co-doped samples taken in the temperature range below 500 K consist of two semicircles (Fig. 2). With the increase of temperature the high

The temperature dependence of the intragrain conductivity sb = l/(RbS) of Co-doped samples is represented in Arrhenius type coordinates by two straight line segments separated by an intermediate region corresponding to the temperature range in which the structure transformation of NASICON takes place (Fig. 4). The activation energy of intragrain conductivity has values of 0.313 and 0.173 eV at low and high temperature, respectively. For cobalt doped samples the bulk conductivity increases in the vicinity of temperature of phase transformation more rapidly than for undoped samples of the

At temperatures above 450 K determination of the Pb element is not possible. At lower temperatures the high frequency semicircle in the complex admittance diagrams was quite well defined and could be adequately fitted by the equivalent circuit of Fig. 3 which allowed the determination of Pb. The dispersion of the bulk conductivity was investigated in the range of temperature corresponding to the low temperature segment of the Arrhenius plot of the bulk conductivity sb (see Fig. 4).

It was determined by means of nonlinear least squares fitting of the equivalent circuit impedance to the results of measurements that the exponent n in the formula Y = Yb (jw)n , describing the admittance of the constant phase element Pb did not vary significantly with temperature. The final analysis was performed assuming a constant value of n equal to 0.76 for the range of temperature from 300 to 450 K.

The real part of that admittance corresponding to the ac conductivity may thus be written as Y0(w) = 1/Rb + Yb cos (np/2) wn .

This expression is equivalent to the formula frequently used in the description of the conductivity dispersion [4],

The diagrams of sb vs. frequency, n = w/2p, in log–log scale (Fig. 5) in fact contain a plateau at some value of s0 and a straight line with positive slope n at higher frequencies, representing the ac part of conductivity. The decrease of the conductivity observed at low frequencies is related to blocking of ion transport at the grain boundaries.

When the parameters of equation (7) are determined for each temperature, the characteristic frequency of the onset of the frequency dependent conductivity wp could be calculated [6] from the formula

The onset frequency wp is often interpreted as a jump frequency of mobile ions at a given temperature [6, 7]. The temperature dependence of the wp for the investigated samples is plotted together with the (sbT) in Arrhenius type coordinates in Fig. 6. It can be seen that the activation energies for both are equal within experimental error, indicating that the concentration of mobile ions is approximately constant in the temperature range from 300 to around 450 K. It is shown in Fig. 7 that the value of the ratio (sbT/wp) is nearly constant – it rises only 10% with increasing temperature in the temperature range 300–450 K. Comparing the present result and the results obtained previously for the undoped material of the same stoichiometry x = 2.0 [1], it may be stated that the constancy of the (sbT/wp) ratio was better evi-

Taking the values of n and Edc obtained for the investigated samples, the expected value of Eac for the Co-doped NASICON is 0.075 eV. In order to confirm that relation the values of admittance Yb of the CPE element Pb (scaled by the geometrical factor sac = Pbl/S) were plotted in the Arrhenius coordinates (Fig. 8) and a reasonably close value of (0.077  0.009) eV for the activation energy was obtained.

The same approach as that used for the analysis of the frequency and temperature dependence of the bulk material was also applied to the elements of the equivalent circuit which represents the grain boundaries: Pgb and Rgb in Fig. 3. Temperature dependence of the grain boundary electrical conductivity is represented in Arrhenius plot by a single straight line in the whole range of temperature (Fig. 9) with activation energy equal to 0.434 eV. It should be noted that there is no change in the shape of temperature dependence of grain boundary conductivity in temperature range where NASICON undergoes the phase transformation. For comparison the onset frequency of the frequency dependent part of

The dispersion of electrical conductivity found in both pure and Co-doped NASICON samples obey the dependence s(w) = s0 + Kwn. The value of the exponent n, being constant in a wide range of temperature, seems to be related to composition of the ionic conductor. The obtained value of activation energy of the ac part of conductivity constitutes the fraction of the activation energy of the dc conductivity being in good agreement with the theory of frequency dependent ionic conductivity. Similar dispersion of electrical conductivity is found also for grain boundaries but this dispersion is observed also at temperature above the phase transformation of the bulk material in opposite to the dispersion of the bulk conductivity – the phase transition does not influence the electrical behavior of grain boundaries.

