In this work, the stability of NASICON in contact with water was studied by impedance spectroscopy, structural and microstructural analyses, using both dense and powder samples. Impedance spectroscopy data showed a significant decrease in ionic conductivity of dense pellets when exposed to water for more than 300 h. While both grain and grain boundary resistivities increased, the major contribution and changes in the overall impedance spectra were due to changes in the grain boundary arc. Based on complementary microstructural analysis, small grains of a second phase were found covering large grains of NASICON. The composition of these small grains is believed to be similar to that of hydronium NASICON, identified by XRD after the reaction of NASICON powder with water. q 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

NASICON is a well-known family of solid electrolytes with high sodium ionic conductivity and Zr Si P O , with 0 -x general formula Na 3 1,2 . The highest ionic conductivity is obtained when xf2 3 . The application of these materials as solid electrolytes to replace the conventional baluminas in NarS batteries was initially suggested. However, NASICON-based cells are not stable in contact with molten Na electrodes 4 . Recently, possible application of NASICON in Na or CO x sensors was demonstrated 5,6 .

In early research on NASICON-type materials, the stability in contact with moisture or aqueous solutions was suggested to be one of the advantages of this solid electrolyte over the traditional b-alumina sodium conductors. However, it was later found to the contrary that NASICON reacts with water regardless of composition or processing route 7 . During this reaction, the pH of water increases suggesting ionic exchange between H Oq ions from the solution and Naq ions from NASICON. The formation of hydronium NASICON, resulting from the exchange of H Oq for Naq in acid solutions, was in fact observed at room temperature 8 . The dissolution of secondary amorphous phases existing in NASICON e.g. Na PO was also proposed as responsible for Na

w x release into solution 9 .

It is commonly observed that both pH and Na tend towards a limiting value after a period of time ranging from 20 to 200 min, depending on composition. There is no data available for longer periods of reaction. In addition, all studies were conducted on NASICON powders. Thus, the effect of reaction on the electrical conductivity or microstructure of dense materials is still unknown. These issues will be the central subject of study in the present work.

A NASICON-type compound with nominal composition Na Zr Y Si PO was obtained by solid . state Tosoh , . Na PO P12H O Merck and SiO Merck . The use of this finely grained yttria-doped precursor was found effective for the development of regular microstructures at sintering temperatures lower than those usually required when using pure zirconia as a precursor. Phase purity in this case was also higher x than when using undoped zirconia 10–12 . Ž in ethanol with zirconia balls , dried in a stove 608C and calcined in air at 11008C for 8 h. Ball-milling and drying were repeated to obtain finely grained and reactive powders, which were uniaxially pressed 98 .MPa into disks with about 1.5 mm thickness and 1 cm diameter. Dense pellets were obtained after sintering in air at 12308C for 10 h. Powder calcination and pellet sintering were conducted in a closed Pt crucible. Some of the sintered pellets were then . reduced to powder typical grain size of about 1 mm for the reactivity tests.

However, one alternative explanation is the formation of amorphous phases along the grain boundaries, with thickness below the detection limit of SEM 13 . This assumption is coherent with impedance spectroscopy results, to be reported at a later stage. A detailed description of materials preparation, microstructures and electrical properties x can be found in Refs. 10–12 .

The reactivity of NASICON with water was tested by immersion in distilled water 10 ml , at 608C, of powder and dense samples. The reaction time ranged from 0 to 650 h. The phase composition of reacted powders was evaluated by XRD after immersion in . freshly distilled water, and drying 608C .

Dense samples were polished before the deposition of Pt-porous electrodes, used for electrical measurements. Consolidation of the Pt electrodes was obtained after firing at 6008C for 30 min. Electrical measurements were performed by impedance spectroscopy V s0.5 V from 20 to 10 Hz Hewlett Packard 4284A LCR meter at temperatures ranging from 08C to 1508C. The electrode deposition procedure was repeated after every period of reaction with freshly distilled water. This procedure was adopted after the identification of electrode degradation peeling off as a consequence of prolonged treatment in water. Changes in the underlying electrolyte layer rather than in the electrode material are likely explanations for this observation. Post-mortem analysis of the samples was carried out by SEM and XRD.

Fig. 1 shows selected XRD patterns of NASICON powders obtained after reaction with water for different periods of time. Traces of monoclinic zirconia were identified in all cases, but the most obvious and interesting feature of these patterns is the onset of new peaks after 140 h of contact with water. The sequence of patterns also shows that increasing the reaction time leads to a simultaneous increase in the intensity of new peaks and decrease in the intensity of NASICON peaks. This fact is an obvious indication that a new phase is being performed, with consumption of NASICON. Reactivity tests per-

Unfortunately, it was impossible to determine the nature of the small grains either by chemical EDS or structural XRD analyses. As these small grains were not detected in fresh samples Fig. .2A , the assumption of formation of hydronium NASICON seems reasonable.

Other differences between these two samples are density and mechanical resistance, properties significantly better in the fresh sample. The latter observation is based on a simple qualitative evaluation of the performance of samples while being handled, showing a significant tendency for mechanical failure under light pressure after long exposure to water.

The new peaks correspond to a protonically exchanged NASICON resulting from incorporation of H Oq ions from water. The hydronium NASICON is structurally similar to the original material, with the same rhombohedral crystal structure, but presenting a slight contraction along the a axis and a larger w x c lattice parameter 8 .

Previous reactivity studies indicated that Naq leaching from the material was due to the presence of amorphous Na PO 9 or sodium silicophosphate w x7 rather than from the bulk electrolyte grains. However, these studies were carried out for relatively short periods of time hundreds of minutes when formation of new phases is incipient. A small equilibrium constant for the NaqrH Oq exchange reacx tion was suggested by Gulens et al. 14 .

The presence of small grains covering large NASICON grains could be identified by SEM during observation of NASICON pellets attacked for 540 h

Fig. 2. SEM micrographs of NASICON pellets obtained before Ž A and after B reaction with water for 540 h. Small grains of a second phase covering the larger NASICON grains are clearly identified.

These facts suggest a preferential location of the second phase along the grain boundaries. In fact, either by dissolution in water during early stages of reaction or by formation of new products as the reaction of NASICON grains with water must progress from outside inwards , the interfacial region between grains is believed to suffer the most relevant changes during reaction with water. These changes are believed to have a considerable effect on the electrical properties, as discussed in Section 3.2.

Impedance spectroscopy allows the separation of the grain boundary contribution to the total impedance of the material from the bulk contribution, the latter estimated from the high frequency intercept of the grain boundary arc. Simple inspection of the impedance spectra of materials exposed to water for different periods of time Fig. 3 suggests that the major differences between these materials are mostly due to the grain boundary contribution, as all high frequency intercepts of the grain boundary arcs are close to each other. Although in a smaller scale, the reaction with water also affects the grain impedance, as discussed in the following paragraphs. Grain r and grain boundary r resistivities, obtained from the impedance spectra, are plotted in

Fig. 3. Impedance spectra of dense samples obtained at 08C after reaction with water for different periods of time.

Fig. 4. Bulk and grain boundary resistivities obtained from the impedance spectra of Fig. 3.

Fig. 4 as a function of time of reaction. Data suggest the existence of different trends for low 0 and 140 . h and high 300 and 540 h reaction times. Constant r and a small decrease in r characterize the g behavior at short reaction times. When the sample is attacked for long periods, both r and r increase, slightly in the case of r , but by one order of g magnitude in the case of r .gb gb

The slight decrease in r at low reaction times could be related to the formation of conductive grain boundaries after the initial moments of reaction of the resistive amorphous phases present in the fresh material, as previously suggested 7,9 . Accordingly, the grain is not affected and r remains nearly unchanged. After the amorphous phase is fully disthe NaqrH Oq exchange solved or transformed, will now occur with the NASICON itself forming hydronium NASICON. The formation of hydronium NASICON on the outer surface of NASICON grains may then result in the collapse of the structure and subsequent deterioration of electrical properties. The increase of the bulk resistivity could thus be ascribed either to leaching of Naq ions from NASICON with resulting decrease in charge carrier concentration in the electrolyte material, or to a loss of percolation between grains, also appearing in impedance spectra as an apparent loss in conductivity.

. The temperature dependence of total ionic conduction is shown in Fig. 5. The conductivity remains nearly unchanged after reaction during 140 h, slightly decreases after 300 h and drops by one order of magnitude in the sample attacked during 540 h.

The long-term stability of NASICON-type materials in contact with aqueous solutions, or even moisture, is questionable. Hydronium NASICON is the product of reaction at 608C of NASICON with water, as confirmed by XRD of attacked NASICON powders. Impedance spectroscopy performed with dense samples showed a significant decrease in ionic conductivity after more than 300 h of reaction. Although both grain and grain boundary resistivities increase, the major contribution to the overall impedance is related to the changes in the grain interfaces either by loss of percolation or formation of new and more resistive products. Small grains of a new phase covering large grains of NASICON were indeed found by SEM, in agreement with this conclusion. The composition of these small grains should be similar to that of the hydronium NASICON, but analytical constraints prevented this positive identification. Lastly, degradation of mechanical properties of sintered pellets after long exposure to water is coherent with both formation of new phases and removal of glassy phases usually present in the grain boundaries, a further evidence of the limited practical applicability of these materials in such circumstances.
