The discovery of NASICON (Na SuperIonic CONductor) materials1,2 was an important ﬁnding in the solid electrolytes ﬁeld as they provide a three-dimensional network that encloses channels where superionic conductivity may occur. The original NASICONSs were solid solutions derived from NaZr2P3O12 by partial replacement of P by Si with Na excess to balance the negatively charged framework to yield the general formula Na1zxZr2P32xSixO12 (0¡x¡3). Since then, a large number of related materials has been synthesised, mainly phosphates. Related series are obtained by partial substitution of tetravalent MIV cations by trivalent MIII ones to yield Na1zxMIV

On the other hand, Li cells have a very important market due (Eu~ to their unmatchable properties of high potential 23.024 V), their very lightweight nature and, hence, very high energy-density storage properties. There is an intense research effort in the area of three-dimensional Li-based solid electrolytes for all solid lithium batteries. NASICON type materials with Li cations in the channels are candidates as electrolytes in these cells if the conductivity properties at room temperature are enhanced. LiM2(PO4)3 (M~Ge, Ti, Sn, Zr, Hf) are known with the M~Ti system probably the most studied.6 The small size of the Ti4z cations makes the size of the sites in the channels more appropriate for lithium cations. The ionic conductivity of LiTi2(PO4)3 (y1026 S cm21 at RT) may be increased, by at least two orders of magnitude, upon partial substitution of Ti4z by trivalent cations such as Al, Ga, In, Ti, Sc, Y, La, Cr or Fe.7–17 The increase of ionic conductivity is due to a higher charge carrier number but is also due to a lower porosity of the pellets. The conductivities for Li1zxTi22xAlx(PO4)3 materials can be as high as 1023 S cm21 at RT.16 The ionic radius of Al3z is likely to lie within the tolerability limit of the NASICON framework. The maximum amount of Ti4z that can be replaced for Al3z, with the concomitant insertion of Liz to balance the charges, is 0.4 per formula unit.10,17

In this paper, we report the synthesis, crystal structures and ionic conductivities of lithium derivatives of the LiTi2(PO4)3 family by partial substitution of Ti4z by Al3z. The starting materials18 were Na1zxTi22xAlx(PO4)3 and the Naz by Liz ion exchange reaction was carried out with molten LiNO3 in an attempt to increase the maximum amount of lithium in the NASICON structures [up to Na1.9Ti1.1Al0.9(PO4)3]. However, we show that the ion exchange reaction is not complete and that the presence of Naz cations in the structure strongly decreases the ionic conductivity.

Li1zxTi22xAlx(PO4)3 samples were prepared by reaction of Na1zxTi22xAlx(PO4)3 (Na1zx) with a large excess of molten LiNO3. The synthesis of the Na1zx series has been reported.18 Mixtures of Na1zx (x~0.6, 0.8 and 0.9)zn LiNO3 with ny40 were heated for 2 h at 300 uC, then cooled, washed with water

The XRD patterns were recorded in the range 2h 12–50u for indexing purposes and to follow the chemical reactions. Patterns were collected in the range 2h 14–125u with 0.03u step size for 14 s (counting time) in order to reﬁne the crystal structures by the Rietveld method.19

contents were determined from atomic emission spectroscopy and the alkali metal contents are given in Table 1. It should be noted that the lithium content due to an impurity phase, Li3PO4, quantiﬁed by the Rietveld method (see below), has been taken into account and the lithium contents given in Table 1 are those in the NASICON phases. The sodium contents, given in Table 1, are calculated to balance the charges. Unfortunately, the exchange ratios are of the order of 50% and sodium is still present to an appreciable degree in the NASICON samples as conﬁrmed by the structural study by the Rietveld method. Thermal studies did not show any mass loss between room temperature and 800 uC. DTA data did not show any structural transition on heating but melting was observed above ca. 800 uC.

Ion exchange by reﬂuxing was also tested following the procedure giving in ref. 21. Na1zx pristine samples were reﬂuxed with LiCl in n-hexanol (Na : Li molar ratio 1 : 20) for four days. However, the Na/Li exchanged ratios were lower than those obtained from molten LiNO3. Hence, these samples were not characterised further.

Thermogravimetric and differential thermal analyses (TG– DTA) were performed for all compositions on a Rigaku Thermoﬂex TG8110 apparatus. The temperature was varied from RT up to 900 uC at a heating rate of 10 K min21 with calcined Al2O3 as reference.

Ionic conductivity

Complex admittance was measured using a Hewlett Packard 4284A LCR meter, in the frequency range 20 Hz–1 MHz, at various temperatures. The data acquisition was computer controlled, using the IEEE 488 standard. The samples were cylindrical pellets 10 mm in diameter and 1.5 mm thick, on whose faces silver colloidal paint was deposited. The pressure was 100 MPa and the sintering conditions of the pellets were 725 uC for 12 h. Higher temperatures led to the thermal decomposition of the samples giving mainly AlPO4. Measurements were conducted under an N2 ﬂow to ensure an inert atmosphere. The pellet densities were determined from their masses and volumes. The relative densities of the pellets (compaction degree) were calculated taking into account the crystallographic densities.

The NASICON materials exhibit cation exchange properties. This allows new phases to be obtained by high temperature ion exchange20 with molten LiNO3 or AgNO3 or alternatively by reﬂuxing with a dissolved lithium salt.21 The ion exchange reaction described in the experimental section was planned to extend the maximum lithium content in this NASICON series. Na1zxTi22xAlx(PO4)3 (xv1.0) can be easily prepared by direct solid state synthesis.18 However, Li1zxTi22xAlx(PO4)3 (xw0.5) can not be directly prepared.10,17 Thus, ion exchange is attempted to prepare solids with composition Li1zxTi22xAlx(PO4)3 (0.5vxv0.9). Our synthetic study has revealed that the second ion exchange reaction did not improve the exchange ratio. Hence, no further cycles were attempted. The lithium

Initial XRD data indicated that the three LiNa1zx samples were crystalline with structures belonging to the R3¯c NASICON-type. A small amount of lithium orthophosphate, Li3PO4, was also detected in the samples. The crystal structures were reﬁned from XRD data by the Rietveld method with the GSAS suite of programs22 using the R3¯c structures of Na1zx pristine samples as starting models.

The nominal Ti/Al compositions were randomly distributed in the octahedral site. Full occupancy of the Li(1) site at (000) (6b Wyckoff notation) and excess lithium located in the Li(2) site at (0.6 0 J) (18e) was initially postulated. The common overall parameters, histogram scale factor, background coefﬁcients, unit-cell parameters, zero-shift error and pseudoVoigt coefﬁcients were reﬁned. Once the patterns were reﬁned to low R-values, the remaining sodium atoms were located in the structure. To do so, two constrained reﬁnements to force the electroneutrality with Na at the M1 and M2 sites, respectively, were carried out. Na at the M2 site converged to zero but the presence of sodium at the M1 site reduced the R-factors notably. Hence, the occupation factors of Li(2) site were also ﬁxed to the nominal values and the fractions of Na and Li at M1 were reﬁned constrained to full occupancy. Isotropic temperature factors for each site were reﬁned but those of the M1 and M2 sites were ﬁxed to reasonable values, Uiso~0.025 A˚ 2. The unit cell parameters and the R-agreement Rietveld factors are given in Table 1. The weight fractions of the side-phase, Li3PO4, are also given in Table 1. The reﬁned positional and thermal atomic parameters are given in Table 2. Reﬁned bond distances are given in Table 3 and the bond angles are given as ESI.{ The Rietveld plot for the sample (LiNa)1.6Ti1.4Al0.6(PO4)3 is shown in Fig. 1 as an example of the ﬁt in this series.

The unit cell variations along the LiNa1zx series are given in Fig. 2. The cell variations of the pristine materials, Na1zx series,18 and pure low lithium content Li1zxTi22xAlx(PO4)3 series23 are also shown in Fig. 2. The values of the cell parameters and their variation for LiNa1zx conﬁrm the Rietveld results. Lithium enters in the M2 sites which decreases the length of the a-axis. However, the c-axis is much more sensitive

The experimental results indicate clear blocking phenomena at grain boundaries and electrode ionic conductors. Fig. 3 shows complex impedance plots for a representative sample at two temperatures. At high temperatures, well developed spikes, characteristic of blocking electrodes, can be observed at low frequencies. Fig. 3 also shows the associated capacitance of the lowest frequency at 469 K for the LiNa1.8 sample (0.1 mF). At lower temperatures, a depressed/ deformed semicircle is observed. The deformation may be related to the presence of a second semicircle at lower frequencies due to the partial blocking (constriction effect) of the grain boundaries. To further examine this point Fig. 4 shows the real part of the complex capacitance (C’) as a function of frequency for the same sample. A pronounced increase can be observed at low frequency which is associated with charge pile up at the blocking silver electrodes. The high temperature capacitance shows a small degree of saturation towards values in the 100 nF range. At higher frequencies a clear relaxation is observed from values of 10 pF to a high frequency value in the pF range. This relaxation, most likely, results from the constriction effect at grain boundaries, and can be modelled in terms of the series association of two parallel circuits: one corresponding to the grain boundary region and the other to

Fig. 1 Observed, calculated and difference laboratory X-ray diffraction patterns for (Li,Na)1.6Ti1.4Al0.6(PO4)3.
Fig. 2 Variation of lattice parameters for the LiNa1zx series. Values for the Na1zx and Li1zx series are also given, see text.

the bulk response. The clear grain boundary contribution probably arises from the relatively low pellet density (see Table 4), however its capacitance contribution only exceeds the bulk value by one order of magnitude, and its resistance is also within the same order of magnitude as the bulk contribution. This indicates a relatively good connectivity between grains, which probably results from small amounts of Li3PO4 impurity phase acting as an intergrain binder.

Fig. 5 shows modulus data at different temperatures for the same composition on a double-logarithmic scale. Well deﬁned maxima can be observed showing clear power law behaviour at both sides of the peak. Since the electric modulus scales with the inverse of the capacitance, the high capacitance contributions due to blocking or constriction effects are obscured in this representation, and the modulus peak can be used to describe the bulk contribution to the electrical conductivity relaxation. A deeper insight into the electrical microstructure of the pellets can be obtained from the spectroscopic plots of the imaginary impedance contribution, Z@, and the complex electric modulus, M@. A selected plot for LiNa1.8 at 334 K is shown as the inset in Fig. 5. The maxima of both curves are

Fig. 4 Real part of the complex capacitance vs. frequency at several selected temperatures for LiNa1.8.

only separated by about one decade in frequency. This small separation again points to a relatively good grain connectivity. Fig. 6 shows conductivity data in the frequency range 20 Hz– 1 MHz at several temperatures for the same composition. The frequency dependence of the real part of the conductivity shows a low-frequency plateau and a crossover to a power-law dependence at high frequencies. This well-known behaviour, characteristic of ion hopping, can be described according to a complex conductivity s*(v) of the form s*(v)~sdc[1z(iv/ vp)n] where sdc is the dc conductivity, vp is a crossover frequency, and the exponent n is related to the degree of correlation among moving ions. Values around 0.6 were typically obtained being quite similar for the three samples. Although no clear grain boundary contribution is observed in these plots, it is important to remark that conductivity values obtained from the low frequency conductivity plateaus can be inﬂuenced by the grain boundary contribution, and thus the bulk conductivity obtained from admittance curve ﬁtting can be only taken as approximate.

Fig. 7 shows bulk conductivity plots, obtained from the above ﬁtting, against the inverse of temperature for the LiNa1zx series. Related data for the pristine series Na1zx are given for comparison. Bulk conductivities at 400 K and the activation energies were obtained from the Arrhenius representations and are listed in Table 4. A straightforward method to check if these activation energies are truly associated to the bulk contribution is to use the frequency of the modulus peaks, fmax. As shown above, the modulus is not inﬂuenced by the grain boundary contribution, and since the peak frequency scales as the bulk conductivity over the bulk permittivity (s/e), provided the bulk capacitance is temperature independent, fmax is equally activated as the conductivity. The inset of Fig. 7 shows the Arrhenius representation of the log fmax for the three samples. Activation energies obtained from both Arrhenius plots (sbulk and log fmax) agree within ¡0.02 eV. This supports that the conductivity values obtained from the conductivity ﬁts are good estimates of the bulk contribution. Conductivities and activation energies do not change appreciably along this series. It is worthwhile to note that this method is usually quite

The Li1zxAlxTi22x(PO4)3 series with NASICON structure is one of the most appropriate systems to accommodate Li cations because of the small size of the AlO6 octahedra. This has been highlighted by many authors, however, the direct synthesis of this series with x¢0.4 leads invariably to AlPO4 as a side-phase with berlinite or trydimite structures.8,11,17 On the other hand, we have shown that the direct synthesis of Na1zxAlxTi22x(PO4)3 is possible up to x¡0.9.18 This NASICON series has a suitable negative charged framework, with the aluminium already incorporated in the network, to accommodate lithium in the M1 and M2 sites. The objective of this study was to extend the lithium content that can be

Furthermore, our idea was to carry out the ion exchange reactions at much lower temperatures than those of the direct synthesis, in order to prevent the formation of AlPO4.

However, the ion exchange reactions are not complete. The sodium at the M1 site is not fully exchanged since the Li/Na ratio in this site was quite low. If the only Liz diffusion pathway is M1–M2, then, it is difﬁcult to rationalize the very high lithium ratio at the M2 site and the quite low Li ratio at the M1 site. However, it has been recently suggested26 that the conduction pathway in NASICONS may be …M1–M2–M1… or …M2–M2… depending upon the composition of the series and their corresponding crystal structures. If Li can move across the M2 sites, then these sites may be fully exchanged whereas sodium, which is quite well coordinated in the M1 site, is not so exchanged.

Several factors can contribute to the lower conductivities and slightly higher activation energies of the studied LiNa1zx series when compared to the pure-sodium pristine materials, Na1zx. It is of note that Na1.9 has a bulk conductivity two orders of magnitude higher than LiNa1.9, see Fig. 6, despite having the same vacancy content.

Since the occupancy of sodium at the M1 sites is high this makes the conductivity due to the lithium cations highly difﬁcult across M1–M2 bottlenecks; Naz may block lithium diffusion along the M1–M2 pathway. This may be related to the mixed alkali effect studied mainly in glasses. It has been repeatedly reported that a pronounced reduction in conductivity is observed in oxide glasses with two or more different types of alkali components when compared to the analogous single-alkali glasses.27,28 It is noteworthy that in the present samples, the M1 oxygen environment is appropriate for Naz cations but is too large for Liz cations, see Table 3.

Lithium at the M2 site should be situated off-centre in the M2 cavity close to the bottleneck to optimise the oxygen bond distances. They are also likely displaced to minimise the Naz(1)–Liz(2) interactions. The low scattering factor of Liz cations rules out their precise location. The observed cation conﬁguration is more shielded with lower repulsion between monovalent charge carriers which makes the ion hopping energetically unfavoured.

Two selected samples of Na1zx series are also given for comparison. The inset shows the Arrhenius variation of log fmax from the complex modulus.

the values of conductivity and activation energy can not be directly compared to those of the pristine materials where M1– M2 hopping is favoured.

On the other hand, if Naz is the main charge carrier, then, lithium will partially block their mobility. A Li and Na NMR study is in progress to elucidate the nature of the charge carrier in these solids.

Na1zxAlxTi22x(PO4)3 has been lithium exchanged using molten LiNO3 to prepare Li1zxAlxTi22x(PO4)3 materials with high lithium content. Unfortunately, the ion exchange reactions are not complete and the ﬁnal solids have variable sodium contents at the M1 site. The crystal structures of these solids have been characterised by Rietveld studies and the electrical properties have been characterised by an impedance study. The LiNa1zx NASICONs have lower dc conductivities and higher activation energies than the pure sodium analogues. This may result from ion pathway blocking as a result of different mobilities of the two conducting species and might be an indication of a mixed alkali effect in inorganic materials, which, to the best of our knowledge, has never been observed. Further work will be devoted in the future to clarify this issue.

