NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) has been prepared by a nonhydrolytic route reacting OP(OBu)3, SiCl4, Zr(Ot-Bu)4, and NaOt-Bu in acetonitrile. The progress of the reaction was monitored by measuring 31P and 13C NMR spectra in the liquid phase and mass spectra of the reaction mixture. The spectroscopic analysis allowed optimization of the synthetic conditions. The thermal decomposition behavior of the precursor was studied by simultaneous thermogravimetric and differential thermal analysis. The NASICON precursor was heated to selected temperatures, and the resulting powders were analyzed by X-ray diffraction to check the formation of the NASICON phase. The powder obtained at 900 °C was almost pure, showing only traces of free zirconia.

NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) is a solid electrolyte with very high Na+ ionic conductivity,1 suitable for use in electrochemical gas sensors.2 Its conventional preparation through solid-state reactions leads to a material in which the NASICON phase is accompanied by a glassy phase and dissolved zirconia.3,4 Several sol-gel routes have been developed to produce a pure phase.5-8 Control of the preparative conditions is, however, hard to achieve in a complex system such as NASICON involving four different species. By following an all-alkoxides route, we obtained satisfactory results with respect to the elimination of undesired free zirconia, but the time for the synthesis was very long because it was necessary to slowly react the precursors with atmospheric moisture to avoid problems connected with the different hydrolysis rates of the precursors.9

Nonhydrolytic processes are very attractive alternative methods for the synthesis of multicomponent oxides.10 Condensation reactions between different functionalities bound to different metal centers permit modulation of the reactivity of the various precursors, thus avoiding the problems connected with the control of different hydrolysis rates in conventional sol-gel preparations. Thus, for instance, metal halides can be reacted with metal alkoxides with elimination of alkyl halides. Among the advantages of such reactions is the

volatility of byproducts that can be easily eliminated from the reaction mixture. The choice of solvent is almost unlimited in nonhydrolytic syntheses, so that reaction temperature and medium polarity can be varied to optimize the process.

In a preliminary paper, we have reported some new nonhydrolytic routes for the synthesis of NASICON.11 The reactions have been monitored by means of heteronuclear NMR spectroscopy which has proved to be a powerful tool for the analysis of material precursors. Because the properties of materials are certainly related to their preparation methods, it is very important to control the synthetic procedures by means of rapid and easy measurements of some physicochemical characteristic of the precursors. The presence of nuclei which are routinely observed in NMR, such as 13C and 31P, make NASICON a very nice example where NMR in solution can be used to monitor the synthesis.

Different procedures have been considered, such as changing the precursors (alkyl derivatives, halides, alkoxides), their addition order, and the reaction solvent. The most promising results, in terms of homogeneous reactivity and characteristics of the final material obtained after thermal treatments of the precursors, have been obtained by using silicon halides with phosphorus, zirconium, and sodium alkoxides.

NASICON was prepared as follows: Tributyl phosphate (OP(OBu)3, 0.36 mL, 1.3 mmol) was dissolved in anhydrous12 CH3CN (20 mL). Silicon tetrachloride (SiCl4, 0.30 mL, 2.6 mmol) was added, and the solution was refluxed for 48 h. After the solution was cooled to 0 °C, zirconium(IV) tert-butoxide (Zr(Ot-Bu)4, 1.0 g, 2.6 mmol) was added. The solution was slowly warmed to room temperature and kept stirring for 6 days. The preparation was completed by adding sodium tertbutoxide (NaOt-Bu, 0.37 g, 3.9 mmol) and leaving the mixture stirring at room temperature for 24 h. Sol-gel transition was observed after this period. The solvent was vacuum evaporated, and the residue was dried at 120 °C for 15 h and then comminuted in a ball mill.

Samples for NMR measurements were prepared following the above-described procedure, scaling the amount of the reagents in order to have a total volume of 2.7 mL and adding 0.3 mL of CD3CN.

NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker AM 400 spectrometer. 13C chemical shifts are given in ppm from tetramethylsilane (TMS) and are referenced against solvent signals. 31P chemical shifts are given in ppm from external H3PO4 (85% w/w).

Direct inlet mass spectra (electronic impact EI, 70 eV, source 200 °C, final probe temperature 400 °C) were recorded on a VG Quattro spectrometer.

The thermal decomposition behavior of the precursor was studied by simultaneous thermogravimetric and differential thermal analysis (TG/DTA, model STA 409, Netzsch) with a heating rate of 10 K/min in air.

The NASICON precursor was heated at selected temperatures in the range from 600 to 900 °C for 2 h with a heating rate of 5 K/min. The phase evolution was investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis using Cu KR radiation.

Phosphorus atomic charge was calculated on the optimized geometries obtained by semiempirical methods (PM3) using the Hyperchem program.13 Geometric optimizations were terminated when the energy difference among successive iterations was lower than 4.18 10-3 kJ/mol. Starting from PM3 geometries, we performed single-point ab initio computations using the Gaussian 98 system of programs.14

The reaction between metal alkoxides and metal chlorides is likely to occur through a mechanism that produces charge separation in the transition state:

Thus, the use of tertiary reaction centers and solvents with high dielectric constants should lower the energy of the transition state favoring the formation of products.

Figure 2. Least-squares fit of 31P chemical shifts (ppm) of NASICON precursor solution [OP(OBu)3 + SiCl4] vs calculated P atomic charge.

the shifts are dominated by the presence of siliconbound chlorides. Among the different factors that contribute to 31P NMR chemical shifts, it is well-known that within a series of structurally similar compounds an increase in atomic charge on the P atom leads to a decrease in shielding.17 A theoretical approach based on ab initio calculations with the RHF/LanL2Dz18,19 basis set was used to determine the phosphorus atomic charge, calculated by Mulliken population analysis (MPA) for the series of compounds OP(OBu)3, OP(OBu)2(OSiCl3), OP(OBu)(OSiCl3)2, and OP(OSiCl3)3. Atomic charges are not quantum mechanical observables, and methods for their calculation are necessarily arbitrary. Therefore, it is not their absolute values that should be considered but only their variation within the series. Figure 2 shows the correlation obtained between the measured 31P chemical shifts and the calculated charges. The good correlation obtained (r2 ) 0.962) supports the formation of the proposed structures.

Zirconium was then added to the reaction mixture as Zr(Ot-Bu)4. A tertiary alkoxide was chosen to favor the formation of carbocationic species and hence the condensation reaction. The 31P spectrum of the final mixture (Figure 1c) shows new resonances between 0 and -2 ppm which account for 90% of the total intensity of the spectrum, indicating a high degree of advancement of the reaction. Resonances are now shifted upfield as expected for a Zr-containing polymer because of the metal electropositive character. Again, no solution NMR data have been reported for similar species. However, in solid-state 31P magic-angle spinning NMR most of the structures with phosphates linked to zirconium and silicon atoms give rise to shielded resonances, the chemical shift being more negative when a higher number of Si and Zr atoms are bound to the P-O unit.5 Figure 3 shows the 13C spectrum of the reaction mixture. Together with the resonances of the residual alkoxide chains, those due to alkyl chlorides can be identified in the spectrum (n-BuCl:  228) ) 13.3, 20.24, 34.9, 45.5; t-BuCl:  228) ) 34.2, 67.9), confirming that the

The reaction will further proceed through condensation of other SiClx units with butoxide groups bound to the different oligomers initially formed.

The group of resonances observed between 67 and 73 ppm are due to -OCH2 and tertiary carbon atoms of the residual alkoxide chains. These carbon atoms are the closest to the reaction centers, and their chemical shift values are the most sensitive to structural variations. The presence of numerous resonances, their rather large line width and the sol-gel transition observed after 24 h are indicative of an extended polymeric network with numerous coordination environments.9

The progress of the reaction was also analyzed by mass spectrometry. Although it is seldom applied in materials chemistry, we have successfully used such a technique in a previous study on ceramic precursors.20 Analysis of the fragmentation pattern can in fact give important information even when the molecular peak cannot be observed.

In the mass spectrum of OP(OBu)3, the molecular peak (267 m/z) and a peak at 211 m/z resulting from loss of a butyl group can be identified (relative intensity 4:1). The same peaks are present in the spectrum of the residue obtained by rotary evaporation of the mixture prepared by reacting OP(OBu)3 and SiCl4 for 48 h, but their relative intensity is reversed (1:4), indicating that at least one butyl group was substituted by silicon. The peaks in the range 308-316 m/z can be attributed to a species containing a -SiCl2 moiety bound to the 211 m/z fragment. Figure 4 shows the spectrum of the residue obtained by evaporating the reaction mixture after addition of Zr(Ot-Bu)4. The peaks between 308 and 316 m/z are still present, but additional peaks around 454 m/z can be observed where -OZr (Ot-Bu) substitutes a chlorine atom.

The mass spectrometry results confirmed the NMR analysis of the reaction progress. The spectrum of a mechanical mixture of the three precursors was recorded, and the result was only the sum of the three individual spectra, thus verifying that the fragmentation pattern observed for the NASICON precursor did not derive from recombination reactions in the spectrometer.

Sodium ions are not expected to become part of the polymeric network; thus, the preparation was completed by adding NaOt-Bu.5

The formation of NASICON was checked by performing XRD analysis that confirmed that crystalline NASICON was observed after heating the powder at 800 °C. In the XRD pattern of the precursor heated to 900

This study has shown that the nonhydrolytic sol-gel route can be a very convenient method for the preparation of a complex heterometallic oxide such as NASICON. The synthesis developed improved the homogeneity of the precursors and avoided the separation of unreacted zirconia or the long reaction time involved in previously studied hydrolytic sol-gel preparations. Homogeneity and complete reactivity in solution can be evidentiated by means of routine spectroscopic methods. The use of NMR spectroscopy in solution allows in fact step-by-step monitoring of the progress of the reaction, and such a technique appears to be a reliable method to predict the quality of the final material.

The information thus gained allows design of the optimal synthetic strategy, the value of which does reflect in the final material characteristic.