Crystallography Reports, Vol. 46, No. 1, 2001, pp. 69–74. Translated from Kristallograﬁya, Vol. 46, No. 1, 2001, pp. 76–81. Original Russian Text Copyright © 2001 by Pet’kov, Dorokhova, Orlova.

Abstract—The general principles of the structural organization for the existing types of orthophosphates with the {[L2(PO4)3]p—}3¥  frameworks, where L is an octahedrally coordinated ion, are discussed. Representing these frameworks by double LP6-octahedra, it is possible to ﬁnd out the related structures and analyze their symmetry relation. © 2001 MAIK “Nauka/Interperiodica”.

Several review papers are devoted to the synthesis and  properties  of  phosphates  with  such  frameworks [2 4]. Nevertheless, the general mechanisms responsible  for  their  architecture  have  not  been  adequately described. Therefore,  it  is  important  to  ﬁnd  a  uniﬁed approach for the analysis of their architecture to be able to understand the relation between the chemical composition, structure, and properties of these compounds important for fundamental research and to perform the purposeful  “design”  and  synthesis  of  novel  materials with special and important functions for various practical applications.

The  present  study  was  undertaken  to  establish  the principles  underlying  the  structural  organization  of phosphates  with    frameworks  and  to analyze  the  symmetric  relation  between  these  structures on the bases of numerous experimental data.

Depending on the choice of main building units, the structures of orthophosphates with the  3 frameworks can be described by a number of ways and be compared with other close structure types.

The relation between different structural modiﬁcations of phosphates can be most clearly demonstrated by  representing  their  mixed    frameworks by  -octahedra. The transformation from the 6 conventional  representation  of  the  building  units  of -octaheO such frameworks by the fragments of (two  L 6 dra connected a PO -tetrahedron) to the fragments of 4 two octahedra with   atoms in their centers and phosL phorus atoms at the vertices is illustrated in Fig. 1. Such a description allows one to reveal the relation between the structures with mixed frameworks and the corundum (Al O 2

The next group of compounds (Fig. 2c) is characterized by the somewhat different frameworks also related to the initial corundum-like motif. In the initial corundum-like motif, one can single out blocks (volume layers, Fig. 2a) retaining two translations of initial R lattice.

The Li2TiIn(PO4)3 structure (sp. gr. Pbca) “inherits” from  the  symmetry  elements  of  the  sp.  gr.  R c  only clino-planes n alternating with the planes c of the glid-

For the Sc2(MoO4)3 (2 in Fig. 2) structure, one can use  two  different  approaches—either  to  single  out  a thin layer with the above orientation inheriting the clinoplane  n  of  the  initial  corundum  motif  into  cy  or  to “cut” from the structure a thick layer formed in the pre-

The  framework  of  the  Li3In2(PO4)3  structure (Fig. 2c,  panel  3)  is  similar  to  the  previous  one,  but owing to a slight violation of the P21/n symmetry, only the symmetry elements of the sp. gr. Pbcn are inherited, not those of the sp. gr. R c.3

The frameworks of langbeinite and, especially, garnet are built quite differently. In the garnet structure, the mixed  framework  obeys  the  different  principle:  individual (and not double) LO6-octahedra are combined. Using the data of the analysis and taking into account that the size of PO4-tetrahedra prevents the orthophosphates from stabilizing the cubic garnet-type structure, this structure is not considered here. Such a structure

Figure 3 shows a diagram illustrating the symmetric relation  between  the  phosphates  structures  discussed above. The space group of corundum, R c, is placed in the center. Above it, those space groups of phosphates which completely or with slight distortions inherit the corundum framework are located. These groups are the subgroups  of  the  initial  group.  Below  the  center,  the space groups of phosphates with the frameworks consisting  of  the  fragments  of  the  original  corundum framework are located. Langbeinite and garnet are not included into the diagram, since there is no direct transition between their symmetries and the structural characteristic of the phosphates under study.

The orthophosphate structures related by symmetry have much in common, since they are characterized by the structural invariant consisting of two P-tetrahedra forming a ring with two L-octahedra and also by a large secondary circular structural unit formed by two octahedra and three tetrahedra. In these structure types, stable  individual  groups  form  columns  parallel  to  the threefold  (or  quasi-threefold)  axes.  This  explains  the widespread  occurrence  of  hexagonal  (trigonal)  and pseudohexagonal  structures with  the  [L2(PO4)3]  frameworks.  The  most  important consequence from the different spatial arrangements of the Land P-based polyhedra observed in different variants of the mixed framework is the different numbers and shapes of the voids arising in this framework.

The structure of NaZr2(PO4)3-type with the symmetry highest of all the compounds under study provides good  possibilities  for  incorporation  of  metal  cations [3, 20–24]. The enhanced stability of the rhombohedral network  with  the  maximum  number  of  the  cationic positions  is  a  result  of  optimum  ﬁlling  of  the  crystal space with octahedra and tetrahedra and also small uniformly distributed framework voids. The analysis of the number  of  polyhedra  and  their  environment  demonstrates  that  the  crystallochemical  formula  of  the NaZr2(PO4)3  structure  type  should  be  written  as (M1)(M2)3[L2(PO4)]3. The L position can be populated with the same cations having the oxidation degree +4 or +3.  The  number  of  individual  phases  considerably increases because of the ability of different cations to occupy simultaneously the L positions. The oxidation degrees of cations can be the same (+3 or +4) or different (for example, +1 and +4, +2 and +3, +3 and +4, +4 and  +5).  The  substitution  of  atoms  in  the  centers  of LO6-octahedra causes the change in the negative charge of the framework, which is compensated by occupancy of  the  positions  M1  and  M2.  These  positions  can  be ﬁlled  with  cations  with  an  oxidation  degree  ranging from +1 to +4. The occupancy of these positions varies from zero to unity. The structure type discussed illustrates an important property of the mixed-type frameworks,  namely,  their  plasticity  combined  with  a  high strength, which favors the existence of a large variety of possible ions that can substitute the ions occupying the cationic  positions  without  destroying  or  drastically rearranging the original motif.

Depending on the set of cations and their distribution  over  the  framework  positions,  the  ideal  trigonal unit cell can be distorted into the orthorhombic or monoclinic cells. The high-symmetry cell is characteristic of  the  compounds  with  the  ﬁlled  M1  position.  This group of structures includes, for example, orthophosphates  Au3Zr2(PO4)3,  where  A  are  alkali  metals,  H+, Cu+, Ag+,  Hg+,  and  Tl+.  Phosphates  with  the  general formula B0.5u3Zr2(PO4)3, where B = Ca, Sr, and Ba, are

In conclusion, we should like to emphasize that the general  architecture  of  the  framework  is  stable  irrespectively  of  complete  or  partial  occupancy  or  even empty  positions  outside  the  structure-forming  framework. This stability provides the opportunity of modeling and synthesizing novel compounds by forming and occupying vacancies and by substituting central atoms of the octahedra and tetrahedra. The relation between the structure types of the framework-based orthophosphates gives a clear indication to possible formation of large series of substitutional solid solutions. This opens new vistas for modifying one-phase phosphate materials with the aim to change their useful parameters.

