Journal of Solid State Chemistry 156, 154}160 (2001) doi:10.1006/jssc.2000.8975, available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

Considering only the structure of oxygen lattice and employing bond valence equations, the conduction geometry and the activation energy of Na1 motion in Nasicons are modeled. This is performed by calculating the valence sum m(x, y, z) for a grid of points inside the oxygen lattice, then by following with iterative procedures the pathway with lowest relative m(x, y, z) values, starting from a speci5ed position and initial direction. After a certain trajectory the Na1 ion will reach a second position in the lattice, which will usually correspond to a known crystallographic position. Di4erent rhombohedral and monoclinic Nasicons are examined, enabling us to verify some the ionic movement. Structural parameters governing conduction are described, based on the distortions of real structures from an idealized (archetype) Nasicon structure, in turn modeled by bond valence equations. ( 2001 Academic Press

Since Hong and Goodenough et al. (1,2) discovered Nasicon (Na superionic conductor) materials, great interest has been devoted by many researches to investigating the properties of structure, crystal chemistry, and fast ionic conductivity. The three-dimensional framework of such a structure is constituted by robust connection of ZrO6 octahedra and (Si, P)O4 tetrahedra sharing corner oxygens. Every two octahedra there are three tetrahedra present. This framework generates in its interior the conductive pathways responsible for the superior Na‘ mobility. The complete substitution of P for Si in the tetrahedral sites allows the formation of a solid solution series. This is expressed by the well known notation Na(1‘x)Zr2Si(x)P(3~x)O12 with 04x43. The symmetry of the di!erent terms is rhombohedral (s.g., R-3c) except for a certain range (1.6(x(2.4) where the samples display monoclinic symmetry (s.g., C2/c) at room temperature, with a transition to rhombohedral symmetry near 1703C (3). A second substitution mechanism, Na for Zr in the octahedral sites, was evidenced later (4, 5). This makes it possible to form a second mixed crystal series with stoichiometry Na3Zr(2~x@4)Si(2~x)P(1‘x)O12 (0(x(1.67)

with rhombohedral symmetry, except for a short monoclinic range (0(x(0.33). This series shows constant Na content and the charge imbalance due to the Na}Zr substitution is compensated by a contemporary Si}P substitution on tetrahedral sites. Kohler et al. (6) examined the di!usion path in a high-temperature single crystal with composition close to the term of this series with x+0.75. They pointed out that anisotropy and magnitude of the temperature factors are both extremely high and on this basis a joint probability density function was proposed to describe the conduction path.

Most authors agree that structural features are the key to explaining the conduction mechanism, but also the number of ionic carriers and their distribution over the di!erent sites are factors likely a!ecting conductivity (7). Up to now, modeling Na site occupancies and Na‘ conduction mechanisms has been attempted by empirical correlation with structural factors. Some authors found correlation with unit-cell parameters a0 and c0, or with unit cell volume. More recently, other geometrical factors were scrutined, like the size of the bottlenecks which connect di!erent Na sites in the structure (8) or the occupation of intermediate Na positions in the conduction channel (called mid-Na) (9).

The conduction pathway among the di!erent Na positions of the rhombohedral Nasicon has been long debated. When TranQui et al., (8) determined the crystal structure of Na4Zr2Si3O12 they proposed one conduction path between Na1 and Na2 and a second from Na2 to neighboring Na2. The latter was held more important because of the wider channel opening involved. Kohler et al., in their investigation (6) on a Zr-de"cient composition (Na3.1Zr1.78Si1.21 P1.76 O12) found the path from Na1 to Na2 be energetically more probable on the basis of the Fourier transform of temperature factors. Subramanian et al. investigated di!erent scandium-substituted Nasicons and concluded that the Na2}Na2 pathway is more likely in the rhombohedral phase (10). Recently Losilla et al. (11) examined the series of Nasicons Na1.4M1.6In0.4PO12 (M"Ti, Sn, Hf, Zr) and evidenced that two bottlenecks a!ect the Na mobility from Na1 to Na2 positions, excluding direct connection between Na2 and Na2 positions.

The lowest activation energies for ionic conduction are reported for the monoclinic phase (x+2) (3), however, ionic pathways are still not de"ned and only inferred from similarity to the rhombohedral phase.

Before modeling the conduction in di!erent Nasicons, we wish to describe an idealized structure (archetype), and therein the conduction path will be evidenced. We show that real structures derive there from by small rotations/deformations of bonds, which in turn in#uence conduction paths and energy barriers for ionic movement.

The archetype structure consists of a close packed structure, in which all the distances between contacting oxygen ions are kept equal. Therefore we suppose that all oxygen ions are hard spheres with equal radius and then we construct idealized coordination polyhedra around Zr and (Si, P). As second step we arrange the polyhedra in the most symmetric and close-packed manner.

If our idealized picture is described in the R-3c space group, it can be geometrically shown that coordination polyhedra are regular and all the contacting oxygen atoms are at the same distance (i.e., the O}O distance will be twice the O ionic radius, which is kept constant for all oxygen atoms #d) and O2 at (1 in the structure) if O1 is placed at (1 6, 12). The d parameter can be unambiguously determined if 1 6, 1 we consider that (in the R-3c space group) the in"nite ribbons along c are shifted by symmetry by (#1 3, #2 3) and (#2 3), and moreover by translation. The oxygen atoms of the primitive ribbon (0, 0, 0) must therefore

contact the oxygen atoms of the symmetry equivalent ribbons forming the regular coordination tetrahedra (Si, P)O4. In our idealized model these tetrahedra must be constituted by four contacting hard spheres and therefore the tetrahedra become regular. This makes it possible to calculate the d parameter and in turn the a0, c0 parameters of the idealized rhombohedral cell. If r0 indicates the oxygen radius, one obtains

Finally, the radius r0 of the oxygen atoms can be predicted using bond valence equations (12}14), by minimizing at the same time the di!erences between the valence sum around any atom and its atomic valence (Valence Sum Rule) and the valence sum around any close loop in the bond graph (Equal Valence Rule).

This paper explores the use of bond valence equations (12}14) in order to predict the conduction geometry and mechanism both for monoclinic and rhombohedral Nasicons on the basis of the structural descriptions of oxygen lattice of the phase. Oxygen network carries a negative charge and contains interstices into which the mobile Na‘ cations are placed for charge balance. Bond valence rules are hence used to map the bond valence sum m(x, y, z) that a Na‘ ion would have if placed on an arbitrary point (x, y, z) of these interstices (14). Points in this valence map corresponding to the valence of the ion (in this case 1) are energetically proper sites for it, a higher value representing a too small cavity, therefore with higher repulsive potential energy. Values smaller than one correspond to a large cavity, in which the ion has an anomalously high thermal factor. In these large interstices the sodium atoms have su$cient room and they are statistically distributed o!center within this space.

By moving the arbitrary point (x, y, z) over a grid covering the whole unit cell volume one can "nd the probable trajectory for the Na‘ ions. This can be done by following the points with lower m(x, y, z) starting from a speci"ed position (e.g., Na1) and following a certain initial direction (e.g., toward Na2). Then this direction is not "xed during the path, and the ion is left free to direct itself following the lowest m(x, y, z) inside a solid angle with an iterative process. This simulates the e!ect of an external electrical force acting on the ion. After a certain trajectory, the ion quite easily reaches a second position in the lattice, which corresponds usually to a known crystallographic position

for Na‘ ions. The valence sum for Na‘ ion can be plotted versus the distance (d) traveled along, thus obtaining a plot of m(d) versus d(A_ ). Saddle points of the m(d) function correspond to potential barrier (bottlenecks) encountered by the ion along its trajectory. The analysis of the m(d) curves makes it possible to "nd the conduction hindrances (bottlenecks) to the ions movement for each Nasicon structure (where the O(1) and O(2) positions are known) and hence to relate this to the electrical characteristics of the materials.

For sake of clarity this treatment is divided in four parts, (i) idealized Nasicon structure (ii) rhombohedral Nasicons of the series Na(1‘x)Zr2Si(x)P(3~x)O12 (04x43) (iii) miscellaneous Nasicons with rhombohedral symmetry x"2.05). (iv) monoclinic Nasicon Na(1‘x)Zr2Si(x)P(3~x)O12 (with

Idealized Nasicon Structure

Neighboring Na1}Na2 and Na2}Na2 distances are geometrically equal to 3.782 and 4.932 A_ respectively; the real path traveled by the ion can be modeled by imposing that Na‘ ions follow the lowest m(x, y, z) trajectory from the starting position to the arriving one (Na1}Na2 in Fig. 2a and Na2}Na2 in Fig. 2b). The corresponding m(d) plots are shown in Fig. 3. The bottleneck for the trajectory Na1}Na2 corresponds to one face of the Na1 octahedron, while for the way Na2}Na2 this corresponds to the passage throughout a distorted triangle which builds one of the faces of the Na2 polyhedron.

Na2 path becomes straighter, while simultaneously its saddle point decreases. On the contrary, the Na2}Na2 path changes than Na1}Na2 (Fig. 4). It displays now two saddle points of nearly the same height with a depression in between. The Na2}Na2 path shows therefore two VUmax, very close to the VUmax of the Na1}Na2 path. By considering the Na2}Na2 path is longer and displays two that maxima, we can say that the Na1}Na2 path is more probable. The #ex near 1.2+1.3 A_ along the conduction path Na1}Na2 corresponds to the mid-Na position pointed out by Boilot (9).

correlations can be drawn. First between VUmax along the Na1}Na2 conduction path (values of the saddle points) and the logarithm of electrical conductivity ()cm at 3003C) and the second between the same VUmax and the two rotation angles e and /. Both relationships are linear, as shown in Fig. 6. This makes it possible to predict the conductivity on the basis of structural values only, in particular the two rotation angles. These angles seem to be the fundamental structural feature in#uencing the ionic conductivity along this series. It is noteworthy to remark that the term having x"2 corresponds to the highest conductivity, and to the highest values of rotation angles e and /.

It is interesting to note that, although the shapes of the conduction paths Na1}Na2 and Na2}Na2 remain nearly unchanged, the height of the curves in terms of VU vary notably along the series as shown in Fig. 5. Two interesting

Miscellaneous Nasicons with Rhombohedral Symmetry

Substituted Nasicon compositions have been examined from the point of view of structure and ionic conduction.

FIG. 3. m(d) curves for Na1}Na2 and Na2}Na2 conduction path in idealized structure. The Na2}Na2 path has a lower VUmax value and the results are more probale.

Recently, rhombohedral compositions Na1.5Me1.5In0.5P3 O12 (Me"Ti, Sn, Hf, Zr) have been examined (11). Subramanian et al. examined substituted Nasicons, in which zirconium is substituted by scandium in the octahedral sites,

the charge imbalance being compensated by substitution of Si by P substitution (10). On the basis of the reported structural data the Na1}Na2 path results are clearly more probable (Fig. 8); from the calculated trajectories the VUmax values are compared with the activation energies for ionic conduction which have been experimentally found for the same phases.

Fig. 7 shows a well interpolated linear relationship between these parameters for di!erent substitutions. Moreover, the shape of the m(d) curves (Fig. 8) for Na1.5Zr1.5In0.5 P3O12 con"rms the two bottlenecks along the conduction path, as recently reported (11). The second bottleneck likely a!ects activation energy, as it can be estimated from its higher VUmax, in accordance with the results of Losilla et al. (11). The shape of m(d) curves indicates that these

FIG. 6. Rotation angles in sexagesimal degrees e (top), / (center), and resistivity (bottom), versus VUmax for Nasicons of the rhombohedral series Na(1‘x)Zr2P(3~x)Si(x)O12. Linear interpolations are shown.

FIG. 8. m(d) curves for Na1}Na2 and Na2}Na2 conduction paths for

FIG. 9. m(d) curves for di!erent conduction paths in monoclinic

results are peculiar to the above series and are not directly extensible to other Nasicons.

Monoclinic Nasicon Na(1#x)Zr2Si(x)P(3!x)O12

(with x"2.05) In the monoclinic Nasicons (s.g., C2/c) the Na2 position of the rhombohedral structure is splitted into two positions, Na2 and Na3 (17). According to Boilot et al. (9), the Na2 position is fully occupied while the Na3 site is nearly half empty and strongly displaced along the conduction channel toward the Na1 position. The monoclinic unit cell contains four Na2 positions, which are completely occupied. Na1(4]) and Na3(8]) positions are only partial occupied (3). It has been already noted (3) that the fully occupation of

the Na2 position tends to inhibit ionic movement. The full occupancy of Na2 position is con"rmed by its valence sum near strongly underbonded (0.556 VU), while the Na3 position has an intermediate value of 0.890. The di$culty in Na1}Na2 movement is fully con"rmed by valence analysis which yields a VUmax of 1.28 along this path. In the monoclinic structure there are, however, two nonequivalent Na1}Na3 paths, both of them having much lower valence values. The "rst of these two paths has a VUmax of 0.984, the second displays a very broad relative maximum, lower than the starting value of 0.984. The m(d) function in this case smoothly decreases from 0.890 to 0.556 VU. As a consequence, along both Na1}Na3 paths, Na‘ ions move without reaching at any point a valence sum higher or equal to 1, as shown in Fig. 9, a fact that can explain the exceptionally high conduction of the monoclinic material. The connectivity along the network is preserved, by the fact that between two Na1 positions two channels (Na1}Na3}Na1) are active and the third (Na1}Na2}Na1) is not, as depicted in Fig. 10.

Valence bond analysis has been successfully applied to model ionic pathways and conductivity in di!erent Nasicon structures. The description of the Nasicon archetype allows us to show that rotation angles e and / of O(1), O(2) triangles from ideal positions are the main geometrical feature in#uencing Na‘ mobility in rhombohedral Nasicons of the series Na(1‘x)Zr2Si(x)P(3~x)O12 (04x43). For this Nasicon family as well as for miscellaneous Nasicons with rhombohedral symmetry the calculated ionic trajectories and the VUmax values well compare with resistivities and activation energies for ionic conduction which have been experimentally found for the same phases. The exceptionally high ionic conductivity for monoclinic Nasicon Na(1‘x)Zr2Si(x)P(3~x)O12 (24x42.25) has been explained by Na1}Na3 paths, where Na‘ ions move without reaching at any point a valence sum higher or equal to 1. The connectivity along the network is preserved by the fact that channels (Na1}Na3}Na1) are active and the third (Na1}Na2}Na1) is inactive.

FIG. 10. Projection onto the ab plane of conduction connectivity for inhibited, while monoclinic Nasicon. Na1}Na2}Na1 path results Na1}Na3}Na1 are strongly enhanced.