Abstract. Sol-gel processed NASICON-type with new compositions in the Na3Zr2¡.x=4/Si2¡x P1Cx O12 system showed an improved sinterability with an increase in the x value. This is attributed to liquid phase sintering. This dense electrolyte system is suitable for the application as gas sensors. The CO2 gas sensors using highly dense x D 0:667 (sample B) and x D 1:333 (sample C) samples show a stable EMF response in dry atmosphere which is very close to the theoretical value. Although a lower sensitivity and slower response were obtained in humid CO2 gas, the sensor performance recovered after switching from humid gas to dry gas.

The three dimensional NASICON structure designed by Goodenough et al. [1] gave rise to a valuable improvement in the development of solid electrolytes. NASICON structures possess a high ionic conductivity which is suitable for their use in electrochemical devices. One of the most desirable application is in potentiometric CO2 gas sensors, needed for the increasing problem of global warming [2]. The NASICON with the formula Na3Zr2Si2PO12 has been applied for CO2 gas sensors. However, its sinterability is not fully satisfactory even for the samples sintered at high temper-

Results about the use as electrochemical CO2 sensors C powders in of pellets prepared by sintering at 1100 the Na3Zr2¡.x=4/Si2¡x P1Cx O12 series, with x D 0 (the usual NASICON composition), 0.667, and 1.333, are here reported. The change of EMF values for the CO2 gas sensors using as electrolyte the dense samples of the new NASICON compositions was investigated in dry

and wet gases using a variable ﬂow rate of the test gas, in order to check the stability of the new NASICON compositions for sensing performance.

NASICON-type materials in the Na3Zr2¡.x=4/Si2¡x P1Cx O12 system, with x D 0 (the standard NASICON composition, used as reference), 0.667, and 1.333, were prepared. From now on they will be labeled samples A, B, and C, respectively.

The powders were prepared using a mixed organicinorganic sol-gel technique. A measured volume of tetraethylortosilicate (TEOS) was added to ethanol and distilled water in order to have a TEOS : EtOH : water molar ratio of 1 : 10 : 4. The mixture was stirred for 30 minutes adjusting the pH at about 1–1.5 with the addition of a 1 M solution of HNO3. Stoichiometric quantities of NaNO3 and ZrO(NO3)2 were dissolved in water and added to the previous solution under stirring until a clear phase was obtained. After that, a suitable portion of (NH4)2HPO4 aqueous solution was quickly added, always under stirring. A gelatinous precipitate appeared, which after about half an hour of stirring was – C in an oven and then calcined in air for dried at 105 – C. The powders were then ground 30 minutes at 500 in a planetary mill for 4 hours in absolute ethanol to obtain a narrow particle size distribution, lower than 5 mm, as controlled by laser granulometry. The powders were uniaxially (150 MPa) and then isostatically C (200 MPa) pressed into pellets and sintered at 1100 for 6 hours.

The pellets were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Cu Kﬁ radiation), and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Au electrodes were deposited by sputtering on both sides of the electrical conductivity measurements. The electrical conductivity was determined using a.c. impedance spectroscopy measurements, in the frequency range 100 Hz–10 MHz.

The sensor probes were prepared according to a procedure reported elsewhere [4]. A platinum electrode was painted onto both surfaces of the NASICON disk C. The disk was ﬁxed at the and then heated to 800 end of an alumina tube with an inorganic adhesive. The electrode on the pellet inside the tube acted as a reference electrode. To obtain a porous Na2CO3 layer on the measuring platinum electrode, a saturated Na2CO3 solution was dropped on the outer face of the plat– C. The as-prepared inum electrode and then dried at 80

element was set in a quartz chamber. A standard gas of artiﬁcial air (CO2 < 2 ppm and H2O < 10 ppm), without or with CO2 at 10, 100, 1000, and 10000 ppm, was introduced at a ﬂow rate varying between 20 and 200 ml/min in contact with the sensing electrode side. For the reference electrode, air was introduced at 100 ml/min. Humidiﬁcation of the test gas was achieved by – C. allowing the test gas to bubble through water at 30

C was very porous, as conﬁrmed by SEM observations, and its density was 75% of the theoretical density. The density was improved by an increase in the x value; the B and C samples showed more than 90% of the theoretical value. Their SEM observation clearly showed the presence of a glassy phase, which indicates that NASICON underwent a liquid phase sintering [3].

The electrical conductivity of the NASICON sintered bodies is reported in Fig. 1, which shows the

The total conductivity of the bulk and the grain boundary is plotted in this ﬁgure. Although the sample A was very porous, its conductivity was close to that for B samples. The high sinterability of B samples is effective in enhancing the conductivity. The conductivity would be decreased with a decrease in the lattice constants because of a migration. The decrement of the tunnel size for Na balancing of these effects resulted in close conductivity values for A and B. For the sample C, the conductivity is lower and the activation energy for ion migration is higher than those for the A and B samples. The smaller tunnel size strongly inﬂuenced the conductivity of the sample C.

These NASICON pellets were tested for application in CO2 gas sensor; for the sensor using sample A, the EMFs were close to zero due to the high porosity of this sample that allowed the gas to ﬂow through the electrolyte from the measuring to the reference electrode. In the case of the sensor using dense B or C electrolyte, good results were obtained. Figure 2 shows the EMF re– C using NASICON C. sponse in dry atmosphere at 465 The EMF changed quickly with changes of the CO2 gas concentration and steady state values were observed. The insert in the Fig. 2 shows the CO2 concentration dependence of EMF calculated from these data. A good linear relationship was found between the EMF and logarithm of the CO2 concentration, except for the

Figure 2. The CO2 sensing response in dry atmosphere at 465 C for Na2CO3,Pt/NASICON C/Pt. The insert shows the relationship between the EMF and the CO2 concentration.

Figure 3. The CO2 sensing response in humid atmosphere at 465 C for Na2CO3,Pt/NASICON C/Pt. The insert shows the relationship between the EMF and the CO2 concentration.

EMF value at 10 ppm. Therefore, the slope was calculated cosidering the CO2 concentration range from 100 ppm to 10000 ppm. The calculated value was 73.0 mV/decade, in close agreement with the theoretical value, 73.2 mV/decade, calculated by a two-electron electrochemical reaction. This highly dense solid electrolyte showed good performance as a CO2 gas sensor. Figure 3 shows the inﬂuence of humidity on the CO2 – sensing characteristics at 465 C of the same sample. The EMF response in humid conditions was slower than that in dry ambient. The EMF values at the higher CO2 gas concentration region in humid air were in agreement with the values measured in dry conditions, but they were considerably lower for the lower CO2 concentrations. The insert in the Fig. 3 shows the CO2 concentration dependence of EMF. Again, deviation from linearity was observed for the EMF value at 10 ppm CO2. In humid CO2 gas, the slope decreased to 65.5 mV/decade.

Figure 4 shows the relationship between the 90% response time (R) and the reciprocal of the ﬂow rate – C. The gas was changed from (1=F) in dry gas at 465 highto low-CO2 concentration. This R¡1=F relation is very useful to evaluate the reaction at the measuring electrode [5, 6]. When the response time is limited only by gas exchange in the test chamber, the 90% response time is proportional to the reciprocal ﬂow rate and does not depend on the gas concentration. In this

Figure 4. The relationship between the 90% response time and the – reciprocal of the ﬂow rate for dry CO2 gas at 465 C. The CO2 gas concentrations in ppm are shown in the ﬁgure.

case, the gas exchange time should be zero at 1=F D 0 (i.e., F D 1). In the concentration range above 100 ppm, the response time is proportional to 1=F. The response time is primarily controlled by the exchange time of the test gas. However, the EMFs below 100 ppm deviated from those obtained in the high-concentration region. When the concentration decreased from 10 ppm to air (<2 ppm), the 90% response time extrapolated to inﬁnite ﬂow rate (1=F D 0) is about 250 sec. This ﬁnding suggests the occurrence of a side reaction at the measuring electrode that inﬂuences the EMF response for low CO2 gas concentrations. The partial formation of sodium oxides such as Na2O and Na2O2 is the most likely explanation for the decrease in the EMF. This behaviour might be attributed to Na2CO3 decomposition to Na2O and CO2 gas on the Pt electrode. The Na2CO3 recombination reaction would not be favoured at a lower CO2 concentration and lower CO2 ﬂow rate.

In Fig. 5, the correlation between the 90% response time and reciprocal ﬂow rate under humid conditions at – C is plotted. The response time was considerably 465 longer in humid air than in dry atmosphere, and it does not approach to zero at 1=F D 0 even for high CO2 concentrations. Also in this case the partial formation of sodium oxides can explain the decrease in the EMF and O2¡ [6]. This is due to the reaction between Na

Figure 5. The relationship between the 90% response time and the – reciprocal of the ﬂow rate for humid CO2 gas at 465 C. The CO2 gas concentrations in ppm are shown in the ﬁgure.

ions obtained by the dissociation of Na2CO3 and H2O. It is expected that the Na2Ox /Na2CO3 ratio increases with decreasing the CO2 concentration and increasing the H2O concentration.

After switching from humid gas to dry gas, the lower sensitivity and slower response caused by humidiﬁcation recovered to the initial state. The humidity affects the EMF because of the Na2Ox formation at the electrode and, thus, the solid electrolyte itself was not damaged by humidity. From these results, one can conclude that this new NASICON series prepared by solgel method is very stable against humid conditions and suitable for use as CO2 gas sensors.

