In  this  study,  we  synthesize  glass-ceramics  of  the  new  Na1+xGe2(SiO4)x(PO4)3-x  NASICON  (Na-Super  Ionic  Conductor)  series  to  evaluate  the  effect  of  Si4+/P5+ substitution on structural, microstructural, and electrical properties of the NaGe2(PO4)3 system. From X-ray diffraction, the presence of the NASICON phase is confirmed in all glass-ceramics.  An  expansion  of  the  unit  cell  volume  suggesting  an  increase  in  the bottleneck of the NASICON structure is also observed. Impedance spectroscopy allowed the  separation  of  grain  and  grain  boundary  contributions.  


We  observe  that  the  grain conductivity is higher than the specific grain boundary conductivity in all the investigated compositions. The Si4+/P5+ substitution causes an enhancement of about two and  three  orders  of  magnitude  in  grain  and  specific  grain  boundary  conductivity, respectively. This behavior is attributable to the introduction of new charge carriers (Na+) in  the  NASICON  structure  and  a  decrease  in  activation  energy.  Finally,  the  lowest activation energy of grain (0.586 eV) is observed in the x = 0.6 sample, which indicates the  easiest  displacement  of  ions  in  the  investigated  series,  suggesting  that  this composition presents the most suitable bottleneck size for (Na+) sodium ion conduction.

NASICON-type materials (Na-Super Ionic Conductor) are known due to their high ionic conductivity with values between 10-4 to 10-1 S.cm-1 at 300  °C in the case of Na+ ionic conductors, favored by their three-dimensional structure displaying interconnected conduction channels in which sodium (Na+) ions can move easily with low activation energy for ionic conductivity 1–4. The general molecular formula of these materials may be represented by Na1+2w+x−y+zM(II)wM(III)xM(V)yM(IV)2−w−x−y(SiO4)z(PO4)3−z, where M is a pentavalent, tetravalent or trivalent cation such as: M = Nb5+, Ti4+, Ge4+, Sn4+ ,Sc3+, Hf3+ 1. The NASICON compounds can be synthesized in a wide range of compositions since their structure accepts isoand aliovalent substitutions in the position of M ion 5,6. 

Moreover,  P5+  can  be  substituted  by  Si4+  4,7–9.  All  these  aliovalent  substitutions  are performed to increase the number of charge carriers by balancing the total charge of the compound  and,  therefore,  also  improve  ionic  conductivity.  Thus,  the  sodium  ion-conducting  NASICON  series  in  which  the  P5+  ions  are  replaced  by  Si4+  such  as: 250°) and Na3+xSc3SixP3-xO12 (6.9 × 10-4 S.cm-1 at 25 °C)  stand out because they exhibit significantly high ionic conductivities 4,8,9. 


Among  the  possible  synthesis  processes  of  NASICON  compounds,  the  glass-ceramic  route,  which  consists  of  the  controlled  crystallization  of  a  precursor  glass, presents the advantage of allowing the microstructure control of the samples by applying different  crystallization  heat  treatments  to  the  parent  glass.  Thus,  materials  with  low porosity  and  thus  optimized  electrical  properties  may  be  obtained  5–7.  An  interesting system for synthesizing NASICON glass-ceramics is the NaGe2(PO4)3 (NGP) since its precursor glass (Na2O-GeO2-P2O5) exhibits two glass-former oxides in its composition, GeO2, and P2O5. The NASICON crystalline structure obtained after crystallization heat treatment is rhombohedral and consists of PO4 tetrahedra linked to GeO6 octahedra.

In  our  previous  work  6,  we  obtained  glass-ceramics  from  the  NGP  system  by replacing the Ge4+ ions by Al3+, thus forming the Na1+x AlxGe2-x(PO4)3 (NAGP) series. An increase in total ionic conductivity of two orders of magnitude (from 10-6 to 10-4 S.cm-1, at 300 °C) was evidenced due to the inclusion of aluminum and a consequent increase in sodium ion concentration. Different Ge4+ substitutions by aliovalent ions (Ga3+ and Y3+) in the NGP compound have also been reported  11. However, it is noteworthy that the substitution  of  P5+  ion,  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  was  never  performed  in  the NaGe2(PO4)3 system. Therefore, to evaluate the effect of Si4+/P5+ substitution on the ionic conductivity  of  the  NGP  system,  we  synthesized  the  glass-ceramics  of  the  new Na1+xGe2(SiO4)x(PO4)3-x  (NGSP)  series.  Electrical  conductivity  was  measured  by impedance  spectroscopy,  which  allowed  the  separation  of  grain  and  grain  boundary contributions.


The  Na1+xGe2(SiO4)x(PO4)3-x  (NGSP)  (0  ≤  x  ≤  1.0)  precursor  glasses    were synthesized  by  melting  the  adequate  quantities  of  reagent  grade  chemicals  such  as Na2CO3 (Vetec, 99.5%), GeO2 (Aldrich, 99.9%), SiO2 (Zetasil, 99%) and (NH4)2HPO4 (Aldrich, 98%). The nominal composition of glasses is listed in Table 1. Initially, the powders were weighed and mixed using a rotary jar mill for 12 h. Subsequently, the mixed powders were placed in a platinum crucible and heated up to 700 °C for 1 h in a tubular electrical furnace to release the ammonia (NH3), carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O) from the starting reagents. Finally, batches of 20 g were melted at 1250 to 1280 °C for 30 min, and the resultant melt was poured and splat-cooled between two steel plates. The transparent  glasses  were  annealed  at  a  temperature  40  °C  lower  than  Tg  (Tg,  glass transition temperature) for 2 h to release the thermal stresses and then cooled down slowly to room temperature. 

To obtain the glass-ceramic samples, the precursor glasses were crystallized for 3h at their respective crystallization temperature (Tx), which was determined from thermal characterization  by  differential  scanning  calorimetry  (DSC).  The  crystallized  samples exhibited an opaque white appearance.

Glassy samples were analyzed by Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC-Netzsch 404)  to  find  out  the  glass  transition  (Tg)  and  crystallization  (Tx)  temperature.  The measurements were performed using a platinum crucible in the temperature range from 30 to 1000 °C with a heating rate of 10 °C/min in air atmosphere. 


The experimental density values of the NGSP precursor glasses (ρglass) and single-phase glass-ceramics (ρgc) were obtained by the Archimedes’ principle, using a Mettler-Toledo  AX-204 analytical  lab  balance  and  water  as  fluid.  The  ρglass  and  ρgc  were calculated  from  the  average  of  seven  measurements  performed  for  each  composition, which also allowed to calculate the standard deviation.

Microstructure  of  the  Na1+xGe2(SiO4)x(PO4)3-x  (0  ≤  x  ≤  0.8)  glass-ceramics  was observed by means of a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEMPhillips XL30 FEG) on fractured surfaces. 



From the DSC thermograms of the different Na1+xGe2(SiO4)x(PO4)3-x parent glasses, two thermal events were identified. The first one is an inflection of the base-line in the endothermic direction and corresponds to the glass transition temperature (Tg) while the second  is  an  exothermic  peak  and  indicates  the  crystallization  of  the  glasses.  The crystallization temperature (Tx) is taken at the onset of the crystallization peak.  Figure 2-a  shows  the  DSC  curve  for  x  =  0.4  as  an  example,  and  Table  1  summarizes  the characteristic temperatures of all synthesized parent glasses. 

The  DSC  thermogram  of  Figure  2-a  shows  a  sharp  crystallization  peak,  which indicates  an  easy  crystallization  of  the  glass.  Moreover,  high  stability  against crystallization  was  observed  for  the  x  =  1.0  glass,  since  an  exothermic  peak  for  this composition was not observed. For this reason, glass ceramics were not attempted to be obtained from the glass with this composition.



X-ray  diffraction  patterns  (Figure  3)  confirmed  the  amorphous  nature  of Na1+xGe2(SiO4)x(PO4)3-x  parent  glasses  and  their  successful  crystallization  after  heat treatment  performed  at  their  respective  Tx  during  3h.  XRD  patterns  also  show  the formation of the NaGe2(PO4)3 NASICON-type structure (space group R  ICSD File card No. 164019) as the majority phase in all investigated glass-ceramics. 



According to Table 2 and Figure 4-a, a single-phase glass-ceramic was obtained with 100 % of the desired NASICON phase for x = 0.0 and 0.2 compositions. For samples with x ≥ 0.4, X-ray results show the formation of SiO2 and GeO2 in low quantities. Nieto-Muñoz et al. 7 suggest that the presence of secondary phases in glass-ceramics indicates the  non-stoichiometry  of  parent  glasses.  However,  it  is  important  to  mention  that  the NASICON  phase  is  present  in  amounts  greater  than  87  %  in  the  whole  range  of compositions analyzed in this work.

On the other hand, the increase in the unit cell volume of the NASICON structure illustrated in Figure 4-b is directly attributed to the increase in the lattice constant “a”. 

Furthermore, the unit cell expansion is a consequence of the introduction of larger Si4+ ion (0.26 Å) compared to P5+ (0.17 Å) 7,8,18,19. It is worth mentioning that for samples with x ≥ 0.4, despite the presence of SiO2 as a secondary phase, the volume of the NASICON structure keeps increasing. This behavior suggests that some part of the Si4+ ions are still being  incorporated  into  the  NaGe2(PO4)3  phase,  replacing  P5+.  Since  the  size  of  the bottleneck is related to the unit cell volume of NASICON structure 1,2, it can be suggested that the inclusion of silicon in the NGSP system also increases the size of the bottleneck, through which sodium ions migrate. Similar behavior was reported in Na1+yTi2SiyP3-yO12 glass-ceramics for x ≤ 0.8 7.




On the other hand, in samples for x ≥ 0.6, some sub-grains within the grains are observed (orange squares marked in inset of  x = 0.6 and 0.8 micrographs).  EDS mapping of the x = 0.6 sample (not shown here) reveals a homogeneous distribution of Na, Ge, O and P in the whole sample area, including the sub-grains. Therefore, it may be suggested that these sub-grains correspond to the NASICON phase. For x = 0.8, some spherical particles  are  observed  within  the  grains  (purple  circles,  inset  of  micrograph).  EDS mapping of this sample shows that those particles are rich in silicon (see Figure 5). Nieto-Muñoz et al.  7 also observed similar spherical particles in homologous glass-ceramics containing  titanium  instead  of  germanium.  The  authors  confirmed  that  these  particles appeared during the glass synthesis as a result of the tendency for liquid-liquid phase separation in the parent glasses. Thus, it can be suggested that the silicon-rich particles observed in the mapping of the x = 0.8 sample correspond to vitreous silica. Additionally, the micrograph of this sample with higher silicon content (x = 0.8) shows the presence of micro-cracks. The formation of micro-cracks is common in glass-ceramics since, duringthe crystallization process tensile stresses are generated between the crystal and the glass matrix due to the difference between its thermal expansion coefficients 20. This feature will be recalled in the discussion of the ionic conductivity results.