A NASICON based amperometric sensor was designed for the detection of total NOx (NO 1 NO ) in air. To make the device sensitive to both NO and NO, the sensing electrode (Au) was covered with NO oxidation catalysts. With the sensing electrode potential ﬁxed at 2 150 mV vs. reference electrode (Au), the device attached with double catalyst layers of WO3 and Pt(0.5 wt%)-loaded SiO produced current response proportional to the concentration of NO or NO up to 1 ppm at 1508C. In addition, the proportionality constants (sensitivity) were almost the same to NO and NO . The current responses were barely affected by the coexistence of CO or H O.

Nitrogen oxides (NOx: NO and NO ) are typical air-pollutants which cause acid rain and photochemical smog. Their concentrations in the atmospheric air are currently measured by using analytical instruments based on chemical the Saltzman method, but those instruments are rather expensive and large. Thus, inexpensive compact sensors are highly needed for monitoring environmental NOx. NOx is emitted into environments mostly as NO from combustion furnaces and automobile engines, and after emission, the NO is gradually converted to NO , a thermodynamically

luminescence or more stable form at room temperature. The concentration and composition of atmospheric NOx are variable, depending on the location, time and weather conditions of the environmental site concerned. For example, NO usually surpasses NO in urban areas where there are many NOx emission sources. Several potentiometric devices to detect NO or NO have been proposed: the conventional concentration type [1–3] or unconventional types using a metal salt auxiliary phase [4–6] or metal oxide electrodes [7–11]. Noticeably, the device using an NaNO -based auxiliary phase could detect as dilute as 5 ppb NO in air [6]. Various amperometric devices have also been proposed [12–24], aimed at obtaining more precise concentration data for NO or NO. However, it was not possible to detect sub-ppm NOx in air amperometrically until we recently reported a device using NASICON (Na -super-

The sensor device was fabricated by using a disk (9 mm 3 0.7 mm ) of NASICON (Na Zr Si PO ), as shown in Fig. 1. The NASICON disk was prepared from a powder mixture of ZrSiO and Na PO , as reported elsewhere [23–26]. A commercial gold paste (Tanaka Matthey, TR 114G) was applied on both sides of the disk, as a sensing, counter or reference electrode, as indicated, followed by annealing at 7008C for 30 min. The thickness of

paste aqueous each Au electrode was ca. 10 mm. The Au counter electrode was covered with a layer of NaNO (ca. 200 mm thick). This assembly was exactly the same as the amperometric NO sensor previously reported [25,26]. To obtain the device attached with a single catalyst layer, WO was deposited on the sensing electrode of (NH ) W O ? 5H O was applied on the sensing electrode and heated at 6008C for 5 h to form a WO3 layer (ca. 50 mm thick). In order to fabricate the device attached with double catalyst layers, the WO3 layer was stacked with a second catalyst layer (ca. 300 mm thick) of Pt(0.5 wt%)-loaded SiO : the 2 second catalyst powder was mixed with a-terpineol and ethyl cellulose, and the resulting paste was applied on the WO layer, followed by calcining at 6008C for 5 h. The Au reference electrode was coated gastight with an inorganic adhesive.

Gas sensing experiments were performed in a conventional gas ﬂow apparatus equipped with a heating facility. Sample gases containing NO and/ or NO in air were allowed to ﬂow over the sensor device at a rate of 100 cm min at 1508C. The sensing electrode was polarized at 2 150 mV relative to the Au reference electrode by using a potentiostat (Hokuto Denko, HA-301). The electric current ﬂowing between the sensing and counter electrodes was measured as a sensing signal unless otherwise noted.

The response current to NO (or NO) of the device attached with a layer of WO was measured under a constant sensing-electrode potential of 2 150 mV at 1508C. Fig. 2 shows the response current as a function of NO (or NO) concentration in air. The response current was almost proportional to the NO (or NO) concentration up to 1 ppm. As also shown in the ﬁgure, the response was reversible and rapid to each gas. The 90% response or recovery time was about 1 min for 1 ppm NO (or NO).

However, the sensitivity (slope) to NO was smaller than that to NO . This indicates that the catalytic conversion of NO to NO was not completed over the WO layer.

Fig. 3. Polarization curves of the device attached with a double layer of WO and 0.5 wt% Pt-loaded SiO in air and in the sample gases containing various concentrations of NO or NO at 1508C.

Fig. 4. Dependence of response current to NO or NO concentration in air for the device attached with a double layer of WO and 0.5 wt% Pt-loaded SiO (2150 mV, 1508C).

response or recovery, as also indicated in Fig. 4. These results assure that the double catalyst layers function well for converting NO to NO . 2

Fig. 5 compares the response current to NO and NO (0.1 ppm each) among the four devices, unattached or attached with WO and/or Pt–SiO 2 catalysts. The catalyst-free device was sensitive to NO only, as previously reported [25,26]. The device attached with WO gave a larger response current to

Fig. 6. Response currents to sample gases containing 0.5 ppm NOx with various NO /NO compositions. (2150 mV, 1508C).

Fig. 5. Response current to NO or NO for four devices unattached or attached with catalyst layers of WO and/or Pt(0.5 wt%)–SiO . (2150 mV, 1508C).

NO than the catalyst-free device did. This suggests that WO not only acts as a catalyst but also plays the role of a semiconductor electrode for the electrochemical reaction of NO . The response current to NO also increased with the attachment of WO but remained smaller than that to NO . This indicates that the catalytic activity for the conversion of NO to NO is fairly large but still not sufﬁcient. The device attached with Pt–SiO only, on the other hand, gave a very modest response current to both NO and NO. Only the device attached with double catalyst layers gave almost the same sensitivity to NO and NO, though the response current to NO or NO was rather small as shown. It is thus concluded that Pt–SiO , though effective for the catalytic oxidation of NO, was rather harmful with respect to the sensitivity to NO or NO . The suppression of sensitivity may simply be related to the porosity of the Pt–SiO layer, but this remains to be veriﬁed.

The device attached with double catalyst layers was subjected to further performance tests. Fig. 6 shows the response current to a series of sample gases containing 0.5 ppm NOx at different NO / NO2 ratios. It the response stays almost constant in spite of the different NO /NO ratios. It

is seen that was also conﬁrmed that the response current (crosssensitivities) to 100 ppm CO, 1000 ppm CO or 2.50 vol.% H O was much lower than that to 1 ppm NO 2 (or NO), as shown in Fig. 7. The response to 0.5 ppm NO (or NO) was barely disturbed even when the concentration of coexistent CO or H O was changed fairly extensively, as shown in Fig. 8. Furthermore, the current response to 0.5 ppm NO or

Fig. 7. Cross-sensitivities to various gases at 1508C for the device attached with double layers of WO and 0.5 wt% Pt-loaded SiO . 2

The limiting current of the present device is considered to appear through the following electrode reactions. Sensing electrode: Na 1 NO 1 e ﬁ NaNO

Fig. 10 shows a schematic model for total NOx sensing. At the sensing electrode polarized at 2150 mV, reaction (1) takes place upon exposure to NO .2 This reaction produces NaNO , while the reverse reaction (2) takes place at the counter electrode. This situation creates sodium ions that migrate through the NASICON disk from the counter electrode to the sensing electrode, giving rise to the response current. The response to NO can be explained in the same way, provided that NO is converted to NO efﬁciently in the catalyst layers. The porous layers of catalysts and electrode may serve as a gas diffusion barrier which brings about the limiting current that is linear to the NOx concentration.

Fig. 10. Schematic sensing model for the amperometric NOx sensor.

Fig. 8. Stability of the response current to NO or NO on changes in the concentration of coexistent CO (400–1000 ppm) or H O (0.52–2.1 vol.%). (2150 mV, 1508C).

independent of the oxygen conNO was almost centration in the tested range from 0 to 21 vol.%, as shown in Fig. 9. With such sensing characteristics, the present device appears to be promising as a total NOx sensor for actual environmental applications.
An amperometric total NOx sensor was obtained by applying double layers of NO oxidation catalyst, WO and Pt(0.5 wt%)-loaded SiO , over the sensing Au electrode. The response current was linear to the concentration of NO and NO and was almost the same to both, in the concentration range from 0 to 1 ppm at 1508C at a sensing electrode potential of 2150 mV vs. the Au reference electrode. The NO 2 sensing mechanism seems to involve electrochemical formation and decomposition of NaNO at the sensing and counter electrode, respectively. The porous layers of catalysts and electrode may work as a gas diffusion barrier. Although the cross-sensitivities to S-containing species and halides for the sensor has not been examined so far, the device may meet actual environmental monitoring applications, with minor cross-sensitivity to CO , water vapor and oxygen.