Lithium ion conducting glass–ceramics composed of the crystalline conducting phase LiM (PO ) 4 3

Keywords: Lithium ion conducting glass–ceramics; Glass–ceramics; Ion conduction

In recent years, extensive studies have been carried out on lithium-ion conducting glasses in view of their potential application as solid electrolytes in electrochemical devices such as high energy density batteries. While oxide-based glasses are known to exhibit relatively lower conductivity (s| 10 28 S cm at 300 K), materials such as crystalline Li N3 [1] and glassy SiS –P S –Li S–LiI [2] are found to exhibit a rather high conductivity (s| 10 21 at 300 K). Applications of these materials as solid electrolytes are usually marred by the fact that they cannot be fabricated easily and possess poor chemical stability.

It is known that NASICON (Na Zr Si PO ) is a good three-dimensional sodium ion conductor [3]. The parent compound of NASICON has the chemical formula, NaZr P O (NZP). The lithium-analogue of NZP, Li M M P O is replaced by M 5 Ti, Ge or Hf and M9 5 Al or Fe have been found to exhibit excellent lithium-ion conductivity in the range of 2–8 3 10 S cm at 298 K [3]. However, grain boundary effects and difﬁculties in obtaining a dense ceramic product precluded their use as solid electrolytes. Vitriﬁcation of the above polycrystalline electrolytes has also been tried in attempts to eliminate grain boundaries but the process resulted in a destruction of the NZP structure and conductivities were found to be less than 10

Glass–ceramics is another category of materials, which may be of great potential as solid electrolytes. The advantages of the glass–ceramics compared to the sintered polycrystalline materials are that they can be made more easily into the desired shape and size, have dense microstructure and possess negligible grain boundary effects. Glass–ceramics are also known to exhibit good chemical stability. Hosono et al. [4,5] and recently Fu [6–9] have succeeded in obtaining fast lithium-ion conductors in the glass–ceramic system (s| 10 S cm at 300 K) where the ceramic (crystalline) phase essentially consists of NZP structure. These materials have great rechargeable potential as solid electrolytes lithium-ion batteries. And so, immense practical signiﬁcance to develop and study this type of fast ion conducting materials.

The synthesis and characterization of the glass– ceramics in the system Li O–Al O –MO –P O 5 (M 5 Ti and Ge) are reported in the present investigation. The reason for studying these two systems is that although LiTi P O with the NASICON structure has been widely used as a host compound for lithium ion migration, Ti may not be as stable as Ge in the presence of Li. So, the compound LiGe P O of NASICON structure might be a better material as compared to LiTi P O for battery purposes. The main objective is to study the effect of precipitating conductive crystalline phases from the glasses in this system. In addition to that, various other properties of the glasses and glass–ceramics

are also determined and correlated to the changes in the glass structure.

The glass samples were analyzed using the DSC technique (Shimadzu DSC-50) to determine the glass transition temperature (T ) and the crystallization temperature (T ). Samples were encapsulated in platinum pans and scanned at a heating rate of 108C min . The glass samples were then subjected to heat treatment for 12 h at 7508C for Ge-based system and 9508C for Ti-based system in order to convert them into glass–ceramics. XRD analysis at room temperature of the glass–ceramic phases was carried out by means of a Philips PW1710 diffractometer, with an X-ray source consisting of CrKa radiation of wavelength 2.2909 A.

XPS studies were carried out on the as-prepared, stress annealed glasses and glass–ceramics using a VG Scientiﬁc ESCALAB MK II spectrometer with MgK X-ray source (hn5 1253.6 eV) and with the electron energy analyzer set at a constant pass energy of 20 eV. The samples used were in the form of pulverized ﬁne powder. The powder was spread evenly onto a double-sided adhesive tape which had been mounted onto a standard sample holding stub. The binding energies were referenced to the C 1s peak (E 5 284.6 eV) to account for the charging effects resulting from the presence of the adventitious hydrocarbon on the sample surfaces. All the spectra were ﬁtted using a computer software. The binding energies obtained were accurate to 60.1 eV. For conductivity measurements, gold coatings of about 1000 A in thickness were vapour-deposited on both sides of the bulk sintered pellets of size 13 mm in diameter and 1 mm thick. The pellets were 22 obtained by applying a pressure of about 7 tons cm for about 10 min using a hand press. The pellets were then placed under vacuum in an electrical furnace controlled by a Eurotherm temperature controller having an accuracy of 618C. The ac response of the sample ranging from 0.1 Hz to 10 MHz at various temperatures was then measured by means of a Solartron 1255 frequency response analyzer and a Solartron 1286 electrochemical interface. The measurements were controlled by a microcomputer running the EISDATA program. The impedance data, that were obtained, were subsequently analyzed using the companion program EISCALC, which allows an equivalent circuit to be constructed and ﬁtted to the data using a modiﬁed Marquardts algorithm.

Upon melting and immediate quenching, the asprepared glasses of the Li O–Al O –TiO –P O 5 system were transparent and bluish–violet in colour. With annealing in air at 5508C for about 2 h, the glass pieces start to lose their colour to become colourless. And after subjecting the annealed glass to heat-treatment at 9508C for 12 h, the glass–ceramics obtained were whitish and opaque. For the Li O–2

Al O –GeO –P O system, the as-prepared and annealed glasses obtained are colourless and transparent in nature. Upon heat-treatment, it becomes whitish and opaque.

The XRD patterns for the as-prepared and annealed glasses for the two systems are similar in that they are devoid of any sharp peaks due to long-range ordering. However, the XRD patterns of the glass– ceramics clearly show the diffraction peaks due to the viz Li Al M P O . Fig. 1 shows a typical XRD pattern observed for Li O–Al O –GeO –P O system. There are also some peaks due to the crystalline AlPO phase, as observed by Fu [7]. The hexagonal lattice parameters of the LiGe (PO ) crystalline 4 3 phase were obtained by the LSQ (least squares) ﬁtting of the high angle diffraction peak positions. The aand c-parameters for the LiGe (PO ) crystalline phase were determined to be 8.16560.002 A and 20.85160.005 A respectively. These values compared well those reported in literature for the sintered LiGe (PO ) (a 5 8.250 A and c 5 20.460 4 3 A) [10]. This suggests structural modiﬁcations which 41 may be resulting from the replacement of the Ge ions by the Al ions in the LiGe (PO ) phase, giving rise to the lithium-analogue of NASICON, viz Li Al Ge P O [7]. From the DSC data, the glass transition (T ) and the crystallization temperatures (T ) of the annealed glasses were determined to be 474 and 5788C respectively. These values are about 768C lower than those observed by Fu [7]. This may be due to different annealing conditions. the hexagonal the LiTi (PO ) crystalline phase were determined to be 8.45260.002 A and 20.82260.002 A respectively. These values are smaller than those reported in literature for the sintered LiTi (PO ) (a 5 8.512 A 4 3 and c 5 20.858 A) [11], suggesting structural modiﬁcations, just as in other system. T and T for this system of annealed glasses were determined to be 601 and 6448C respectively. These values are about 508C lower than those observed by Fu [6]. This can

Fig. 1. XRD pattern of the (a) glass and (b) glass–ceramics in the Li O–Al O –GeO –P O system.

The binding energies of the Li 1s, O 1s, P 2p, Al 2p, Ti 2p and Ge 3d core level electrons for the Li O–Al O –MO –P O (M 5 Ti and Ge) system are determined from the respective XPS spectra and are listed in Table 1. The binding energy of the Li 1s

the samples in the two systems remains for all constant around 55.0 eV. The slight variations in the binding energies of the Al 2p for all the samples in the two systems have been attributed to the changes in the next nearest neighbours of the cation. No signiﬁcant variations have been observed for the binding energies of the P 2p core level electrons. From literature, the binding energies of Li 1s in Li O, Al 2p in Al O and P 2p in P O are 55.6 eV, 74.3 eV and 135.3 eV respectively [12–14]. These

Table 1 XPS core level binding energies of various elements in (a) as-prepared glass, (b) annealed glass and (c) glass–ceramics in Li O–Al O – MO –P O (M 5 Ti and Ge) systems, values are in eV

values are slightly different from those presently obtained and can be attributed to the different environment of the metal ions. As XPS only give information on the nature of the atom’s immediate neighbours and surroundings, it is natural that the values of BEs differ for various compounds of the same metal atom.

The one at a lower binding energy (BE) is associated with Ti in a lower oxidation state (3 1 ), as the Ti 2p 3 / 2 binding energy of titanium in Ti O is known to be around 457.2 eV [15]. The peak at higher BE (459.8

and 2p eV) is associated with the Ti state. Furthermore, from the spectra of the as-prepared glass, it can also be observed that the relative amount of Ti ions is 41 greater than that of the amount of Ti ions. The existence of Ti in the as-prepared glasses can be attributed to the starting material NH H PO . Upon heating at 7008C, NH H PO gives off ammonia gas which acts as a reducing agent and hence reduces the Ti . Thus, it can be concluded that colour of the as-prepared glasses is due to the abundance of the Ti present in the glass.

As mentioned earlier, there is a physically observable change in colour of the glass as it is annealed. It starts to lose colour to become colourless when completely annealed. From the XPS spectra (Fig. 3), it can be observed that the amount of Ti is present 31 in greater abundance than that of the Ti . And since Ti is known to be colourless, the colour change of the glasses during the annealing process can be attributed to the oxidation of Ti . This is

The Ge 3d XPS spectrum of the Li O–Al O – GeO –P O glasses that have undergone heat-treatment to give glass–ceramics, is similar to that of the completely annealed glasses. There is not much observable change between the two spectra in the sense that both spectra consist essentially of only one peak. For the heat-treated glass, the observed binding energy of the Ge 3d level of 33.1 eV is approximately 0.6 eV larger than that reported for the GeO2 compound. This discrepancy arises due to the fact
that Ge is in octahedral coordination in the glass– ceramics whereas Ge adopts a tetrahedral coordination in GeO compound.

This result suggests that the Ge–O bonds in the Li Al Ge crystalline conducting phase possessing NASICON structure are more ionic in character as compared to other compounds in which 41Ge is co-ordinated by oxygen. The ionicity of the 41Ge –O bonds also increases as the system is transformed from a glass to glass–ceramics. This can be seen from the gradual increase of the binding energy of the Ge 3d level from a value of 32.3 eV (as-prepared glass) to 32.7 eV (stress annealed glass) and then ﬁnally to 33.1 eV (heat-treated glass) upon heat-treatment.

contributions. The O 1s spectrum for the Li O–2 Al O –TiO –P O glass–ceramics is illustrated in Fig. 4. The high energy component is attributed to bridging oxygen (BO) atoms, whilst the low energy component is attributed to non-bridging oxygen (NBO) atoms. The fact that the O 1s spectra for the as-prepared and annealed glasses can be deconvoluted into two distinct contributions is understandable since it is characteristic of a glass to possess BO and NBO atoms. However, the fact that the O 1s spectrum for glasses that have undergone heat-treatment also shows two very distinct contributions means that the glass–ceramics consists essentially of crystalline phases dispersed in a glassy matrix, and is not totally crystalline.

It is obvious that the conductivity of the glass– ceramics in the Li O–Al O –MO –P O systems is about four to ﬁve orders of magnitude higher than that of the mother glass. The value of ionic conductivity observed by Fu [6,7] the glass– ceramics in the Li O–Al O –TiO –P O system and Li O–Al O –GeO –P O system was 1.3 3 10 S cm respectively. From the data in Table 2, it can be seen that s for LAGP is in excellent agreement with the values of Fu [6,7] whereas for LATP our value is slightly lower. Presence of signiﬁcant amount of AlPO impurity could be the reason for the discrepancy.

From the correlation of XRD patterns obtained and conductivity data, it is clear that the enhancement in conductivity must be attributed to the precipitation of the Li Al M (PO ) conducting crystalline phase within the glassy matrix during the heat-treatment process. The precipitation of the conducting phase is also accompanied by a decrease in the activation energy. To account for the latter, the effect of the structural changes brought about by the 31Al ions substitution in LiTi (PO ) needs to be examined ﬁrst.

solid electrolyte in the all-solid state Li-ion rechargeable battery. The fabrication and testing of these electrochemical cells is in progress.

XPS spectra and gold-coating the samples, respectively.

Glass–ceramic phases of Li Al M (PO ) 4 3 where x 5 0.3 for M 5 Ti and x 5 0.4 for M 5 Ge are from Li O–Al O –MO –P O 5 (M 5 Ti and Ge) glasses. T was found to be 6018C and 4748C for the M 5 Ti and Ge glass systems whereas the crystallization temperature, T are 6448C and 5788C respectively. The O 1s XPS spectra for all the glasses and glass–ceramics are attributed to the non-bridging (NBO) and bridging oxygen (BO) atoms. The Ti 2p spectra are considered to be due to Ti –O bonds are found to be highly ionic in character as compared to corresponding bonds in TiO and GeO . The glass– 2 ceramics exhibit s S cm (M 5 303 K 24 Ti) and 3.99 3 10 S cm (M 5 Ge) which is four to ﬁve orders of magnitude higher than the glassy phases.

