A new trivalent cation conducting solid electrolyte with the NASICON-type structure, Sc Zr (PO ) , was synthesized 4 3 by a sol–gel method and trivalent cation conducting properties were investigated. The trivalent ion conductivity of Sc Zr (PO ) was comparable to those of the trivalent ion conducting tungstates with the Sc (WO ) -type structure and its conductivity at 6008C is 1.06 3 10 cation migration in Sc Zr (PO ) was directly demonstrated by a dc electrolysis. 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

S cm , which is 2.5 times as high as that of Al (WO )

In the solid state ionics ﬁeld, the cations having higher valence state than two have been considered to be poor migrants in solids because of their strong electrostatic interactions with surrounding anions comprising the framework of the structure, while mono or divalent ions are well known to conduct in solids. Recently, tungstates, R (WO ) (R 5 Al, Sc, 4 3 Y, Er–Lu) [1–7], holding the Sc (WO ) -type structure, have been directly demonstrated to be trivalent ion conducting solid electrolytes. In the Sc (WO ) 4 3 type structure, a hexavalent tungsten ion, W , bonds strongly to oxide anions by forming WO unit, and the electrostatic interaction between the mobile trivalent cation and surrounding oxide anions is

considerably reduced. Furthermore, the Sc (WO ) 4 3 type structure is quasi-layered structure and has a large sized tunnel, which makes the trivalent ion migrate. However, tungsten ion is easily reduced not only by reducing atmosphere but also reacting with metals, resulting in an appearance of electronic conduction which greatly deteriorates ionic conducting characteristics.

For the purpose of realizing trivalent ion conducting solid electrolytes stable and applicable for such a reducing atmosphere, it is necessary to implement higher valency cations which are very difﬁcult to be reduced and lower the electrostatic interaction between the conducting trivalent cations and surrounding anions. In addition, the candidate solids for this purpose had better possess a large sized pathway for the mobile ion conduction.

super ionic conductor)-type structure [8] was chosen which contains Zr and P . Therefore, NASICON-type structure is more appropriate for trivalent cation migration in solids in comparison to the Sc (WO ) -type structure.

Sc Zr (PO ) was prepared by a sol–gel method, using high purity Sc O (99.9%), ZrOCl ? 8H O (99.95%) and NH H PO (99%) as starting materials. Sc O and ZrOCl ? 8H O were separately dissolved in 3 N nitric acid solution, and mixed together afterwards. The NH H PO solution (3%) was dropped into the mixed HNO solution. After obtaining white precipitations, the solution was heated at 758C for 24 h, then water in the solution was vaporized at 1308C for 8 h. After the dried precipitant was heated at 3008C for 24 h, the resulting white powder was pelletized and sintered at 8508C for 24 h, since Sc Zr (PO ) decomposes to Zr P O and ScPO at around 9008C. The ac conductivity measurement of the samples was performed by a complex impedance method using the Precision LCR meter (Hewlett Packard) in the frequency range between 20 Hz and 1 MHz at the temperature range from 350 to 6008C in air. The polarization behavior and oxygen pressure dependencies of the ac conductivity were measured for the purpose of investigating the electronic and oxide anionic conduction contributions to the total electrical conductivity. The electrolysis of the sample pellet was carried out by applying a dc voltage of 3 V at 7508C for 400 h in order to identify the conducting species in the Sc Zr (PO ) 4 3

solid electrolyte.

From the X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) measurements, Sc Zr (PO ) was found to hold the

Fig. 1. Temperature dependencies of the electrical conductivity for Sc Zr (PO ) (—) and 4 3 1 / 3 2 Al (WO ) (-), which show the highest and the lowest trivalent 4 3 ion conductivity in the Sc (WO ) -type tungstate solid electrolyte series.

(d) with those of Sc (WO ) 4 3

Fig. 1 shows the temperature dependence of the electrical conductivities for Sc Zr (PO ) with those of Al (WO ) and Sc (WO ) , which have the lowest and the highest trivalent ion conductivity in the Sc (WO ) -type tungstate solid electrolytes. Sc Zr (PO ) holds a comparable conductivity to the tungstate series and its conductivity at 6008C was S cm , which is 2.5 times higher than 1.06 3 10 that of Al (WO ) S cm ). For the 4 3 purpose of investigating the electronic conducting contribution to the total electrical conductivity, the oxygen pressure dependencies of the conductivity for Sc Zr (PO ) were measured and the conductivity was found to be constant in the oxygen pressure as wide as between 10 and 10 Pa. The result indicates that neither electron nor hole conduction appears in the Sc Zr (PO ) solid electrolyte. In 4 3 addition, from the time dependencies of the dc to ac conductivity ratio, an abrupt decrease of the ratio 5 was similarly observed in both oxygen ( pO : 10 Pa) and helium ( pO : 4 Pa) atmospheres. This observation strongly means that oxide anions are not conducting species in Sc Zr (PO ) as similarly 4 3

A new solid electrolyte, Sc Zr (PO ) , was synthesized by a sol–gel method and the conducting ion species in the electrolyte was clearly demonstrated to be Sc ion conductivity comparable to that of the Sc (WO ) 4 3 type tungstate solid electrolyte series. Since the solid electrolyte is based on phosSc Zr (PO ) 4 3 phate, containing Zr in addition to the mobile Sc ion, the solid electrolyte can be applicable even in a reducing conditions where hexavalent tungsten ions are easily reduced. The feature menabove tioned conducting of Sc Zr (PO ) solid electrolyte greatly contributes 4 3 to realizing the practical applications such as rechargeable batteries and various types of chemical sensors.
