High-resolution powder neutron diffraction data have been collected T 5 423 K on the rhombohedral a phase of LiZr (PO ) (HRPD, ISIS Facility, UK). By Rietveld reﬁnement analysis (space group R3c; Z56; a58.85493(3), 4 3 c522.1440(1) A) and Fourier difference maps, lithium was found to be disordered over six positions related by 3 symmetry in the large M9 hole of the NASICON structure with centre at 0 0 0. The ﬁnal agreement indexes are R 50.0352, wR 50.0436, R(F )50.1289 for 46 reﬁned parameters. Li shows a very distorted tetrahedral coordination, with ,Li–O. 5 2.27 A; this result, together with the large number of empty sites available for hopping, due to disorder, accounts for the high 1Li mobility in the a phase. The order–disorder nature of the a–a9 phase transition of LiZr (PO ) is discussed, and 4 3 structural relations between NASICON and corundum a-Al O are pointed out. 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

lithium-based NASICON-type ionic conductors have still to be clariﬁed, unlike the corresponding sodium compounds which are much better known in this respect [1]. This is mainly due to the poor X-ray scattering power of lithium, and to difﬁculties in producing single crystals with controlled and reproducible Li content [2]. In order to provide a better understanding of the structural basis of the lithium mobility

mechanisms in such materials, an investigation of these phases has been undertaken by high-resolution neutron powder diffraction. This technique has proved to be very suitable for locating lithium atoms and elucidating their surroundings in the structure of the present systems.

When synthesized by solid state reaction at 1473 is stable at room temperature in the K, LiZr (PO ) 4 3] triclinic C1 modiﬁcation, which was formerly believed to be monoclinic C2/c [3]. This phase was called by us a9 and its structure was determined by neutron diffraction in the previous part of this research [4], proving to be a distortion of the rhombohedral R3c ideal NASICON structure (a phase). Similar triclinic structures were recently

Further aims of the present work are investigating the nature of transition of LiZr (PO ) , which might be of order–disorder type, and accounting on structural grounds for the jump of ionic conductivity which is associated with it. The a phase has a conductivity of about 10 S cm close to room temperature [8], and of 0.03 S cm at 750 K [9]; such values are larger than those of the isostructural NaZr (PO ) compound, which are 4 3 about 5310 S cm at the correand 5310 sponding temperatures [10]. On the other hand, s 5 5310 S cm at room temperature for the a9 phase [8], so that a sudden drop of lithium mobility occurs with the aﬁ a9 transformation which needs to be interpreted.

The same sample of LiZr (PO ) used in the room temperature study of the a9 phase [4] was employed here. Neutron diffraction data were collected at T5 423 K on the time-of-ﬂight High Resolution Powder Diffractometer (HRPD) at the ISIS spallation pulsed source, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory (Chilton, UK). The 2 cm sample was contained in a vanadium can under vacuum, heated by a surrounding furnace. By use of the back-scattering counter bank at 2u5168.38, a full intensity proﬁle (4161 data) was recorded in the d range 0.7–2.5 A (12 h) with maximum resolution of Dd/dł4310 , and a preliminary data reduction was performed, including merging of outputs from single counters in the bank

and correction for detector efﬁciency as a function of neutron wavelength. Rietveld reﬁnements were carried out by the GSAS computer package [11]. The background intensity was modelled by a Chebyshev polynomial of ﬁrst kind with 10 coefﬁcients, and the peak shape by a convolution of a pseudo-Voigt function (linear combination of Gaussian and Lorentzian components, with s and g half-widths, respectively: sample contribution) with two back-to-back exponentials (instrumental and moderator contributions) [12]. Linear dependences of the s and g parameters on d , g5 . The mixing coefﬁcient and the full width of g d 1 hkl the pseudo-Voigt function depend on s and g according to equations given in Ref [13].

were assumed: s5 s d

The crystal structure was reﬁned by starting from the ideal NASICON atomic coordinates [2], with exclusion of Li, and using isotropic displacement factors: convergence was attained at R 50.041. The Li atom was then located by Fourier difference maps in general position 36f neighbouring the M9 site at 0 0 0. A statistical occupation factor of 1/6 is required, in order to have six lithium atoms per unit-cell according to Z56 and to the chemical formula. At this stage Li was included in the reﬁnement, letting its occupancy vary and introducing anisotropic displacement the Zr, P and O atoms. Convergence was attained to the agreement indexes given in Table 1, with values of the unit-cell constants and of the atomic coordinates and isotropic or equivalent thermal parameters reported in Tables 1 and 2, respectively. The experimental, calculated and difference proﬁles are shown in Fig. 1.

Neutron diffraction on a-LiZr (PO ) 4 3 at 423 K has shown that Li is not located at the centre of the

M. Catti, S. Stramare / Solid State Ionics 136–137(2000)489–494

M9 cavity with octahedral coordination, as reported in the previous X-ray diffraction study [2], but is disordered over six tetrahedrally coordinated positions surrounding the M9 site and related by the sixfold 3 local symmetry of the site itself. This is shown in Figs. 2–4, displaying different views of the disordered Li positions in the NASICON structure. The Li site in a-LiZr (PO ) is related to the so4 3 called ‘mid-Na’ position in Na Zr PO (SiO ) lo4 2 cated at 0.0236, 0.2042, 0.0227 [14]; however, in the latter case the site is more displaced along the z direction, so as to bridge between the M9 and M0 holes also occupied by Na [15]. Locally, only one out of the six lithium positions may be occupied. The tetrahedral environment of Li is very distorted, both for Li–O distances and for O–Li–O angles (Table 3). In particular, the average Li–O bond length is signiﬁcantly larger than in the case of the a9 phase (2.27 against 2.09 A). This indicates that the crystalchemical conﬁguration of lithium in the a phase is not very stable, giving a structural justiﬁcation for the high mobility of the Li ion in the high-temperature modiﬁcation.

The overall occupancy of 0.12 of the Li site (Table 2) should be multiplied by 6 to obtain the local occupation fraction of 0.72. There is thus a second level of lithium disorder in the a phase, similar to what was observed in the low temperature modiﬁcation a9, where the Li1 site showed an occupation fraction of 0.71. However, in that case a secondary Li2 site could be detected, accounting fully for the ideal stoichiometry of the compound, while in the present case this was not possible. We the reason of the small missing Li believe that density is related to the large mobility at this ion in the superionic a phase. temperature of the Li

As discussed in the previous paper [4], the triclinic a9 phase is a distortion of the rhombohedral a phase. The latter one shows the ideal NASICON framework of PO tetrahedra and ZrO octahedra sharing corners, which is isotypic with that of a-Al O (corundum), insofar as only the centres of coordination polyhedra are considered. Zr and P atoms in NASICON have exactly the same positions as Al and O atoms in corundum, respectively. The M9 cavities in NASICON correspond to the empty octahedral sites (1/3 of the total) in the hexagonal close-packed layer of Al atoms (2/ 3 of the total) in corundum. The reversible a–a9 transition occurring at about 330 K has a ferroelastic character, because the a9 space group (C1) is a subgroup of the a one (R3c), and the corresponding lattice has also a lower symmetry. There correspondence between the atomic coordinates in the a9 triclinic unit-cell and those in the a hexagonal cell, taking into account however that the latter has a triple volume than the former one. The transformation between the two sets of coordinates is: x 5H (x 21/4)1( y 21/4)2z /3, y 5 2(x 21/4)1 H ( y 21/4)1z /3, the Li1 coordinates of the a9 phase [4] transform into 0.110, 0.433, 0.137 in the a reference, and by applying one of the R3c symmetry operations they turn into 0.010, 0.234, 0.030, which are directly comparable with those of Li in the asymmetric unit of the a phase given in Table 2. The Li1 site is even closer to the ‘mid-Na’ position of Na Zr PO (SiO ) , so that the pair of Li1 and Li2 positions in the a9 structure are really half-way between the large M9 and M0 cavities of the NASICON framework.

The reversible, ferroelastic a–a9 phase transition of LiZr (PO ) has an order–disorder character. In the rhombohedral a phase, structurally related to corundum a-Al O , Li is disordered over six positions located in the large M9 holes of the NASICON framework and close to the ‘mid-Na’ sites of the Na Zr PO (SiO ) structure. The very distorted 4 2 tetrahedral coordination of lithium, coupled with the large number of empty sites available for jumping, explains the high mobility of Li observed in this phase. On the other hand, in the triclinic a9 phase lithium orders in pairs of centrosymmetrically-related sites which are located in only half of the M9 cavities. This reduces the number of suitable sites for thermally activated hopping severely, accounting for the loss of lithium mobility which occurs in the low temperature modiﬁcation.

