conductor, Na Zr Si PO ) with a series of Li CO –CaCO 3 auxiliary phases were investigated for CO sensing properties as well as hetero-junction structure involved. It was revealed that an addition of proper amount of CaCO to Li CO auxiliary phase was effective for improving CO sensing capability at lower temperatures; Li CO –CaCO (1:2) allowed normal operation down to 3508C, while Li CO did down to 4008C. The analysis of fractured surfaces by means of an electron-probe micro-analyzer (EPMA) and SEM indicated the formation of an interfacial layer between NASICON and carbonates, the thickness and structure of which depended on the carbonate composition used. As revealed by X-ray diffraction analysis, CaZrO was formed between NASICON and Li CO –CaCO 3 (1:2), suggesting its relevance to the lower temperature sensing capability. 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

Carbon dioxide sensing has become important for room-air monitoring, green house conditioning, and various measurements of breath and bio-related activities. Among several types of CO sensor so far reported [1–5], potentiometric devices combining a solid electrolyte with an auxiliary phase of carbonate is eminently suited for practical applications. This type of CO sensor was reported ﬁrstly by Maruyama et al. [6], who combined a NASICON

(Na conductor, Na Zr Si PO )-based cell with a Na CO auxiliary phase. Recently we have shown that sensor properties can be upgraded by replacing Na CO with a binary carbonate system such as Na CO –BaCO and Li CO –BaCO [7–9]. The binary systems bring about several advantages such as quick response, resistance to disturbance by water vapor, resistance to deliquescence in storage under humid conditions and capability of operation at lower temperature such as 3508C.

However, the mechanism of such improvements has not yet been understood well. The sensors of this type possess a hetero-junction between the electrolyte (NASICON) and the auxiliary phase (carbonate). the junction should play an

important role in CO sensing performance and its improvement. In this paper the devices combining NASICON with a series of Li CO –CaCO binary carbonates were investigated for CO sensing properties and the hetero-junction involved to evaluate the role of interfacial structure in this type device.

A schematic drawing of the sensor device is shown in Fig. 1. A gold mesh (sensing electrode) was mechanically pressed on a NASICON disk, 8 mm in diameter and 0.7 mm thick. On top of it, a small quantity of metal carbonate (Li CO or Li CO –CaCO ) powder was placed. The assembly was heated up to 7008C (for Li CO ) or 9508C (for Li CO –CaCO ) for 5 min and subsequently cooled down to room temperature, to obtain a layer of the carbonate phase coated on the gold mesh and NASICON surface through the melting and solidifying processes. The reference electrode (Pt black and Pt mesh) was formed on the other surface of the disk. The disk was ﬁxed on the end of a quartz glass tube (6 mm in diameter) with an inorganic adhesive. Measurements of CO sensing properties were carried out in a conventional gas-ﬂow apparatus equipped with a heating facility. The electromotive force (EMF) of the device was measured with an electrometer (ADVANTEST TR8652) in the temperature range 270–5008C under a total gas ﬂow rate 21 of 0.1 dm min . investigate

A series of Li CO –CaCO binary mixtures at molar ratios in the range 1:0–1:2 were attached to the NASICON-based cell. Resulting devices were examined for CO sensing properties in the temperature range 270–5008C. Fig. 2 shows the dependence of the EMF response on CO concentration (100– 2000 ppm) at several the four selected devices with Li CO :CaCO molar ratios of 1:0 (a), 1:0.5 (b), 1:1 (c), 1:2 (d). In the case of the device attached with pure Li CO (a), the EMF was linear to the logarithm of the CO concentration at 5008C, its slope being consistent with the two-electron reduction of CO (n 5 2 where n is the apparent number of reaction electrons). As temperatures lowered, however, the slope tended to deviate from the ideal one, i.e. n 5 2 at 4008C, 2.4 at 3508C, and so on. This tendency was even more conspicuous with the 1:0.5 or 1:1 mixture of Li CO –CaCO ((b) and (c)), where n deviated largely from 2.0 already at 4008C. Quite noticeably, the deviation could be suppressed very effectively with Li CO –CaCO 3 (1:2 (d)), which allowed to keep n 5 2 at temperatures down to approximately 3508C.

As suggested above, a major inﬂuence of the auxiliary phase composition appeared in the behavior of n at lower temperatures. To indicate this more clearly, the number of reaction electrons (n) at each temperature is plotted against the Li CO –CaCO 3 composition in Fig. 3. It is seen that n takes an ideal

value of 2 at 5008C irrespective of the auxiliary phase compositions. As temperature lowers, n tends to increase from 2, with its behavior strongly depending on the compositions. Excessive addition of CaCO to the auxiliary phase (1:2 in molar ratio) is fairly effective for keeping n close to 2.0 at lower temperatures, while an adverse effect comes out when CaCO content is insufﬁcient.

between NASICON and each auxiliary phase was investigated the device in detail. A cross-sectional view of attached with Li CO is shown in Fig. 4. Sandwiched between NASICON and Li CO , a thin corrosion layer about 2 mm thick was obviously observed. As revealed by EPMA analyses of spots B

and C (Fig. 4(b)), the corrosion layer had a composition different from NASICON, i.e. lean in Na content. A cross-sectional view for the case of Li CO –CaCO (1:0.5) is shown in Fig. 5. The border between NASICON and carbonate regions was unclear. In addition, Zr, Na, Si and P, which are components of NASICON, were present in the carbonate region. As revealed by EPMA analysis (Fig. 5(b)), obviously NASICON and the carbonate reacted with each other fairly extensively during the heating-treatment (9508C) carried out for the coating process; particularly Ca penetrated into and reacted with NASICON deep inside. The occurrence of corrosion in such a vast area seems to be an origin of the deterioration of the CO sensing ability of the sensor attached with Li CO –CaCO (1:0.5 and 1:1). For comparison, the interfacial structure of the device attached with Li CO –CaCO (1:2) is shown

in Fig. 6. Unlike the case of Li CO –CaCO (1:0.5), corrosion is conﬁrmed in a restricted area, about 30 mm wide along the border between NASICON and the carbonate. The corrosion layer included Si, Zr (P) and Ca. These observations indicate that a corrosion layer is formed through a chemical reaction between NASICON and the carbonate. It seems that the corrosion layer determine the CO2 sensing capability at lower temperature.

To identify the compounds formed in the corrosion layer, powder mixtures of NASICON and carbonates at designated compositions were heattreated at 700 or 9508C for 1 h. XRD patterns of the resulting mixtures are given in Fig. 7. When the carbonate was pure Li CO , formation of a small amount of Li ZrO was conﬁrmed, indicating a partial reaction between NASICON and Li CO . 3 The corrosion layer in this case (Fig. 4) is thus considered to be Li ZrO . In the case of Li CO – CaCO mixtures, on the other hand CaZrO was a major product, Li ZrO being hardly visible. Thus the corrosion layer observed in this case (Figs. 5 and 6), should consist mainly of CaZrO . Comparison of the XRD peak intensities of NASICON and its reaction compounds (CaZrO and Na Zr(PO ) ) 4 2

Fig. 4. SEM photograph (a) and EPMA analyses (b) of selected points on fractured surface for Li CO /NASICON.

indicates that the reaction of NASICON is most extensive for Li CO –CaCO (1:0.5 and 1:1). This means that the decomposition of NASICON is inhibited when the amount of CaCO becomes too excessive. This tendency is in agreement with that of the corrosion layer thickness previously observed (Figs. 5 and 6). the reaction of NASICON with the carbonates take place in steps; it ﬁrst reacts with Li CO to form Li ZrO , which then

Fig. 5. SEM photograph (a) and EPMA analyses (b) of selected points for Li CO –CaCO (1:0.5)/ on NASICON.

Fig. 6. SEM photograph (a) and EPMA analyses (b) of selected points on fractured surface for Li CO –CaCO (1:2)/NASICON.

reacts with CaCO to form CaZrO . It was conﬁrmed separately that the reactivity of CaCO to3 NASICON is rather low.

For the device attached with Li CO –CaCO , the corrosion layer is considered to be Li ZrO (for Li CO auxiliary phase) or CaZrO (for Li CO – CaCO (1:2)).

The formation of interfacial layer of Li ZrO or CaZrO can exert profound effects on the gas sensing properties of the device. It alters the electrode potentials of (A) and (B) to that of (A9) and (B9), respectively. It is possible that (A9) dominates over in the temperature range where (B) dominates over (A). Then the device would be given better capability of temperature operation. However, this cannot explain well the dependence of lower temperature sensing capability on the compositions of Li CO –CaCO auxiliary phases. It is considered that the thickness of the interfacial layer is also important, because it provides a path for the ionic conduction. The thickness was about 2 mm (Li ZrO ) or 30 mm (CaZrO ) for Li CO or 3 Li CO –CaCO (1:2) auxiliary phase, respectively, while it was much more extensive for the other composition. large ionic conductance of the interfacial layer may contribute to the lower temperature capability of the device attached with Li CO or Li CO –CaCO . 3

is thus possible that

The CO sensing properties and hetero-junction structure of the NASICON-based devices vary rather extensively with the composition of Li CO –CaCO 3 phases used. When pure Li CO was used, a thin layer assumed to be Li ZrO was formed at the interface between NASICON and carbonate. When Li CO –CaCO (1:2) was used, the formation of CaZrO layer (30 mm thick) inside NASICON was observed. Surprisingly, the corrosion area containing CaZrO increased extensively with decreasing CaCO content. The formation of fairly well deﬁned CaZrO layer is considered to give the best lower-temperature CO sensing capability to the device using Li CO –CaCO (1:2).

