Relative 31P MAS NMR peak intensities of the five detected signals, attributed to the environments [P(OZr)4-n(OIn)n(n)0-4)], are close to those expected for a random distribution of octahedral cations.
Combined NPD and XRPD Rietveld studies showed that the occupation of M2 sites by the extra Na+ cations produces a slight distortion of the structure.
Low temperatures freeze Na mobilities and permit the assignment of the resulting NMR bands to Na+ in the M1 and M2 sites.
The mobility of Na at room temperature increases with the Na content.
For samples with x < 0.8, Na ions are relatively localized; however, for x >= 0.8, Na mobility increases, yielding a unique signal in the 23Na NMR spectra.
The increase of Na mobility causes spatial disorder at the M1 site as deduced from the variable-temperature NPD study.
At low temperatures, the activation energies do not change significantly.
So, the observed increase in bulk conductivity by 2 orders of magnitude in the low-temperature regime is ascribed to an increase of mobile carrier, Na+, concentration.
NASICON materials have been extensively studied because of the high conductivity shown by some compositions.
The original NASICONs were solid solutions derived from NaZr2P3O12 by partial replacement of P by Si with Na excess to balance the negatively charged framework to yield the general formula Na1+xZr2P3-xSixO12 (0 < x < 3).
The NASICON structure has a negatively charged 3D framework, of general formula M2X3O12, within which the Na+ cations reside, in full or partially occupied sites.
From variable-temperature 23Na NMR data for Na1+xZr2-xInx(PO4)3 (not MAS), it was also possible to characterize sodium mobility.
We showed that for the phases Na1.4M1.6In0.4(PO4)3 (M = Ti, Sn, Zr, Hf) the sizes of the bottlenecks between M1 and M2 sites correlate with ion conductivity.
Initial XRPD data indicated that the members of this series for x < 1.8 are crystalline single phases which have the rhombohedral R3hc NASICON-type structure.
In the NASICON structure, each tetrahedron shares oxygens with four octahedra, two in the same M2(PO4)3 unit and two in adjacent units.
The position of the 31P MAS NMR peaks depends on the polarizing strength of cations that share oxygens with the PO4 tetrahedra.
The peaks occur at increasingly negative chemical shifts as the number of Zr neighbors increases.
The low-temperature 23Na MAS NMR study has confirmed the existence of sodium mobility for all compositions at room temperature and the mobility increases considerably for x > 0.8.
At lower temperatures, some defect clustering or local ordering of the mobile ions occurs, leading to an increase in the activation energy for conduction.
The variable-temperature NPD study shows the development of a strong cation spatial disorder at the M1 site over the temperature range where the curvature is observed.
Both phenomena are likely related as the relative destabilization of Na at M1 with temperature is probably responsible for decreasing the activation energy.
The Na M1 sublattice 'melting' decreases the activation energy as the relative destabilization of that site is essential for ionic conductivity.
Lowtemperature 23Na MAS NMR spectra show low sodium mobilities, allowing the assignment of the two detected signals to Na cations at the M1 and M2 sites.
At room temperatures, Na mobility increases with Na content.