Large coal-ﬁred and oil-ﬁred utilities are under heavy pressure to reduce both sulfur oxide (SOx) and nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions [1,2]. Sulfur is a principal organic impurity in fossil fuels [3]. The interest in sulfur recovery and in monitoring of SOx emissions continues to remain high because it is market-driven by stringent government regulations [4]. While the industry is still deciding on the best method to reduce emissions and to monitor SOx concentrations, a recent development in SOx/O2 solid state sensors promises hope for a better way to simultaneously monitor both SOx and O2 concentrations in the stack.

In various combustion processes SOx volume measurements must be referenced to some oxygen concentration in the ﬂue gas to be meaningful. Because the oxygen level indicates how much the ﬂue gas sample has been diluted with air, it is meaningless to report the measured SOx concentration unless the oxygen content is given. The higher the excess air in the combustion gas the greater the energy or fuel loss. However, the excess of oxygen by itself is an index of excess air ratio, and not an index of combustion quantity or completeness of combustion.

Therefore, a combination of both O2 and SOx measurements would provide the best technical approach to the control of efﬁciency of the coal-ﬁred and oil-ﬁred utilities.

The zirconia (ZrO2) solid electrolyte sensor is one of the most common and accepted sensors for excess oxygen measurement [5,6]. The sensor operates at a temperature range from 6508C up to 16008C [6]. Major advances in this sensor are required in terms of low cost, selectivity, high sensitivity, durability and reliability. The possibility of determining other gas constituents besides oxygen using sensors with oxide-ion-conducting electrolytes arises from the thermodynamic equilibria that are set up with oxygen in the gas phase or between particles in the gas phase and the solid electrolyte. However, for oxygenic gases such as SOx, NOx and carbon dioxide (CO2) with more complex molecular structures, this type of practical ZrO2-based sensors is hardly available. Using an auxiliary phase, which is sensitive to one of the measuring oxygenic gases, is very attractive way for the practical development of the electrochemical solid state sensors. Furthermore, the combination of zirconia electrolyte with on auxiliary phase through the heterojunction formed in between can mitigate many difﬁculties encountered with use of oxyanion salts alone as an electrochemical cell. Recent breakthrough in the development of this kind of sensors [7] provides an opportunity to measure very low concentrations with high

sensitivity and selectivity. Moreover, these ZrO2-based sensors do not require speciﬁc reference gases with ﬁxed concentrations of measuring gases, which are expensive and impractical. Most of them use air as a reference gas. Table 1 illustrates the performance of these newly developed gas sensors.

Potentiometric ZrO2-based gas sensors are based on the determination of electromotive force (EMF) of solid state galvanic cell. A simple relationship can be derived between the EMF and the gas phase composition that remains in contact with one or both cell electrodes.

The simplest electrochemical gas sensor is an oxygen conductive cell that allows the determination of oxygen partial pressure. The basic components of this cell include yttria-stabilized zirconia, as a solid electrolyte, and Pt electrodes (Fig. 1): p 133)O2 134)1; Pt=ZrO2–Y2O3=Pt; p 133)O2 134)2

Recently, the majority of metal sulfates, e.g. K2SO4 [9], Na2SO4 [10,11], Li2SO4 [12,13], Ag2SO4 [14–16], Li2SO4– CaSO4 [17,18], Na(Ag)–b00 -alumina [19–23] and NASICON (Na2Zr2Si3PO12) [24,25] were investigated as solid electrolytes in SOx sensors. These sensors repeatedly

The starting high purity (99.9 wt%) materials were BaSO4, K2SO4, SiO2 and ZrO2. The spectroscopically pure Y2O3, with an average grain sizes ,1 mm, was selected as a sintering aid. Both sulfates and zirconia were weighed and well mixed in a ball mill and separately sintered into two electrochemical cells. The combustion dual SOx/O2 sensor, consisting of two electrochemical cells 1 and 2 (Fig. 2), was assembled into the probe. Both cells were positioned at the end of an elongated alumina or MgAl2O4 spinel tube which was exposed to the furnace atmosphere. Electrochemical cell 1 measures the excess of O2 in a combustion gas stream and electrochemical cell 2 measures the SOx concentration in a combustion gas. The outer sensor dimensions are: i.d. 5 mm, o.d. 8 mm. The length of the sensor can be varied from 100 up to 1300 mm. The four-bore tube inside the sensor typically has a diameter of about 4.5 mm with each of the four bores being typically 1.1 mm in diameter. Three of the bores are provided with wiring (the inner current conductor and the thermocouple wires) that extends through the bores. The other bore provides a passageway for reference O2 atmosphere which is usually air. A built-in K-type thermocouple was used for tests. Usually, the corrosion of platinum electrodes of the sensor occurs when the SOx is presenting in combustion gas [30,31]. To overcome these corrosion problems, the inner and external surfaces of the electrochemical cell 1 and external surface of electrochemical cell 2 were coated with Au.

The melting point of two-phase metal sulfates is about 11508C. Use of Au in this sensor limits the maximum temperature to 10508C. One of the advantages of the above-mentioned sensor is that it can be used either for SOx or for simultaneous SOx and O2 measurements. The sensor needs only two current conductors for SOx measurements and it could be employed for some practical application even without a protective metal sheath. In the case of SOx/O2 measurements, the dual sensor needs three current conductors. Therefore, it is essential to assemble this sensor into the probe using a metal sheath as one of the current conductors. In a dual SOx/O2 sensor the combustion gas contacts the measuring electrode 3 of the electrochemical cell 1 and the measuring electrode 4 of the electrochemical cell 2. The reference electrode 5 is a common electrode for both cells 1 and 2 and is contacted by a reference gas of known O2 concentration. Due to the differences in O2 and SOx partial pressures of the gas contacting each electrode, EMF are established between the electrodes 3 and 5 and between electrodes 4 and 5. Measurement of the EMF between electrodes 3 and 5 enable the O2 concentration of the combustion gas to be calculated. Similarly, measurement of the EMF between electrodes 4 and 5 enable the SOx concentration of the combustion gas to be determined. Thus, the simultaneous measurement both O2 and

Fig. 2. Cross-sectional view of SOx/O2 probe assembly based on dual sulfur oxides and oxygen solid electrolyte sensor: (1) oxygen electrochemical cell; (2) SOx electrochemical cell; (3), (4) measuring electrodes; (5) reference electrode; (6) stainless steel protective sheath; (7) ceramic diffusion element.

responded well to SOx, but they appeared to suffer from sluggish responses and from the chemical instability of the solid electrolytes in atmospheres containing SOx. Furthermore, all sensors reported to date require an independent determination of in order to calculate the concentration of SO3.

More recently it has been found that the stabilized ZrO2 tube coated with a Li2SO4–CaSO4–SiO2 can be utilized as an SOx sensor with a reasonably good response and a stable output [26,27]. However, both the chemical and mechanical stability of these sensors proved faulty during protracted tests. Furthermore, these sensors have a restricted working temperature range from 600 to 8008C and are still far away from industry’s demand for a reliable sensor.

However, a dual SOx/O2 solid state sensor with auxiliary phase sensitive to SOx [29] can avoid many problems associated with SOx sensors based on pure metal sulfates. The sensor is a composite of barium sulfate, potassium sulfate and silica in conjunction with a ZrO2-based solid electrolyte. This sensor has two electrochemical cells. The ﬁrst of these cells provides a signal proportional to the SOx concentration in the stack. The second cell measures the excess of oxygen in combustion ﬂue gas. The sensor has a wide range of industrial applications. The dual SOx/O2 solid electrolyte sensor has no moving parts to break down and it is not subject to the interfering absorptions so characteristic of the harsh and corrosive stack environment. The main advantage of this device is that it provides EMF signals which are linearly proportional to both partial pressures of O2 and SOx. Even for well-instrumentated industrial power plant facilities with multiple gas detectors, it would be advantageous to have a single instrument to monitor SOx and oxygen. This sensor would also be useful for monitoring the abovementioned gases at incineration facilities which have a complex mix of household and industrial wastes. Therefore, this paper focuses on the performance of a dual SOx/O2 sensor.

SOx levels enable the efﬁciency of combustion to be optimized.

The probe based on the dual SOx/O2 sensor includes MA 253 (Sandvik Australia Pty. Ltd.) stainless steel protective sheath 6 and ceramic diffusion element 7. The ceramic diffusion element 7 is used for ﬁltration of the combustion gas from ash, soot and other particles which are common in coalor oil-ﬁred furnaces and kilns. The reduction in corrosion rate at industrial applications apparently can be achieved because the low amount of excess air did not permit oxidation of vanadium and sulfur to their highest states of oxidation and thus prevented formation of the most corrosive oil-ash compounds. Low-temperature corrosion can also be virtually eliminated by maintaining excess air at 0.1–2% [32].

Standard digital multimeters 179 TRMS with an accuracy of ^0.1 mV and with an input impedance R . 1010 Vwere used for EMF measurements of both the electrochemical cells and the thermocouple.

The SOx level is dependent upon the burner conditions, the fuel and the type of desulfurization process. For most fuels, burners and loads, optimum combustion is obtained when fuel gas concentrations of SOx are in the range of 10– 200 ppm [33]. These current ﬁring conditions include the type of fuel or fuels being burned, degree of burner fouling, imbalance of fuel or imbalance of air between burners, etc. If the control of combustion efﬁciency by the dual SOx probe is able to measure the SOx concentration from approximately 10 up to 10,000 ppm and to maintain approximately 100–200 ppm of SOx for industrial applications, the deviations from expected air/fuel ratio will indicate any needed operator attention, such as cleaning burners, adjusting fuel temperature, adjusting air distribution registers, etc.

Thus all following tests were targeted on the abovementioned SOx level and were made for measurement of SOx concentration from 18 up to 10,000 ppm and for the measurement of excess O2 from 0.1 up to 4 vol%.

Three sensors were prepared for the trial. SOx-sensing properties were measured in a laboratory furnace with conventional ﬂow systems in the temperature range of 600–10008C. Sample gas mixtures containing SO2 at varying levels under a constant nitrogen concentration of 99.9% were prepared by diluting a parent gas (10,000 ppm SO2 in N2) with dry nitrogen. Oxygen in ambient air (20.9 vol%) was used as a reference gas. To investigate the dependence of EMF on O2 concentration, sample gases containing different O2 concentrations under a ﬁxed concentration of SO2 (18 ppm) were prepared by mixing the parent SO2 gas (diluted in N2) with O2 and N2. The sample gases were also mixed with CO2, NO or NO2 for cross-sensitivity tests. Each sample gas was allowed to ﬂow over the sensor at a rate of 100 cm3/min. The ﬂow rate of the reference gas was also 100 cm3/min.

To determine the EMF–temperature relationship at various SO2 partial pressures, the probe was initially heated to a temperature between 650 and 9508C at different SO2

concentrations. Data were recorded during several heating and cooling cycles at approximately 258C temperature intervals. To establish a relationship between the cross-sensitivity of the sensor to different combustible gases, the probe was heated to 7208C. The furnace atmosphere was changed by switching the solenoid valve to the sample gases contained NOx or CO2. These measurements were made at one or more temperatures between 18 and 1000 ppm of SOx. Some response rate measurements were also made in order to determine the response and recovery time of the sensor to the changes of the SOx concentrations. A simple step change in sulfur dioxide concentration was used for this purpose. The change in the EMF signal as a function of time was recorded on a chart recorder. To establish a relationship between the aging process and the characteristics of electrochemical cells, the sensor was taken to the highest measurement temperature, left for 30 days and cooled to the desired temperature. The sensor was also used in extended-life tests.

The O2-sensing properties of yttria stabilized zirconia electrolyte are well known and were not a subject of this investigation. The SO2-sensing properties of the potentiometric sensor using yttria stabilized zirconia electrolyte and a composition of BaSO4–K2SO4–SiO2 were examined. The sensor detected SO2 concentration within a range of 18 to 10,000 ppm. Fig. 3 shows that the output EMF of ZrO2based dual sensor as a function of SO2 concentration (Fig. 3a) and working temperature (Fig. 3b). The full line represents ideal (Nernstian) behavior. The lack of accurately prepared standard-gas mixtures has limited the inlet SO2 concentration down to 18 ppm. Therefore, the minimum SO2 concentration limits for reliable operation of the sensor have not been established yet. However, previous research [34] appears to indicate that the lower SO2 concentration limit for reliable measurements is set by the thermodynamic decomposition of BaSO4–K2SO4–SiO2 composite, which is around 1023 ppm SO2 in air at 6508C. The upper limit is more difﬁcult to estimate, because the lifetime of this composite depends upon kinetic factors which vary with cell design. However, it appears that the sensor lifetime in atmospheres having high SOx concentrations is related to the ease or difﬁculty of transporting SO2 and/or SO3 from the gas mixture to the metal particles embedded in the twophase electrolyte [35]. Analysis of the sensing properties of both the above-mentioned sensor and similar SOx sensors, which employed the magnesia-stabilized zirconia as a solid electrolyte and either Li2SO4–CaSO4–SiO2 [26] or Li2SO4– MgO [27] auxiliary phases for SOx measurement, show that they have a different sensitivity. Yan [27] concluded that the yttria stabilized zirconia-based electrolytes with auxiliary

composition of the metal sulfates have a poor sensing performance and are not suitable for the development of SOx sensors. However, the results of this investigation do not support Yan’s results. The sensor based on yttria stabilized zirconia electrolyte and a composition of BaSO4– K2SO4–SiO2, provides higher stable EMF output and has a good sensing performance. Fig. 3 shows that the dual sensor has a higher EMF output and can accurately work within wider temperature range than the sensors previously described [26,27]. To achieve these results in the present investigation, the SOx electrochemical cell was speciﬁcally designed to provide the maximum surface area of contact between the ZrO2 and the metal sulfates [29].

Typical response and recovery times of the abovementioned dual SOx/O2 sensor with BaSO4–K2SO4–SiO2 auxiliary phase at different temperatures are shown in Fig.

From an industrial point of view, the cross-sensitivity to different combustible gases is another important problem. Fig. 5 shows cross-sensitivity effects of SOx sensor, operating at 7208C, produced by the presence of CO2 (<13 vol%), and NO2 (<1000 ppm). The working temperature and concentrations of the gases were similar to industrial conditions. Fortunately, many of the hydrocarbons or related reducing species that are present in the combustion gas in high concentrations (CO, CH4, CO2, etc.) do not increase the Au work function very much in their interaction with the surface [36]. As clearly shown in this ﬁgure, the EMF of the sensor is unaffected during the tests by the co-existence of CO2 (10 ppm, 9%). The inﬂuence of the carbon dioxide on the output EMF began measurable only when the CO2

concentrations were more than 9.5% (Fig. 5a). However, the change in the output signal of the sensor was not significant and remained within 3% of the EMF values. The results of these tests also show that in the presence of NO2, the EMF of the sensor did not change during the whole test period at the different SO2 concentrations (Fig. 5b). Therefore, it appears that the dual sensor is unaffected by the presence of CO2 and NOx in the gas mixture and can be used for SOx detection in the exhaust gases from burners or industrial furnaces.

The increase in electrical resistivity of solid electrolytes (aging) as a result of long time annealing at a temperature of < 10008C has an inﬂuence on the major characteristics of the electrochemical sensor. The accuracy and stability of the sensor may be effected during the high temperature measurements as a result of aging. The results of

Fig. 6. Conductivities of yttria stabilized zirconia and two-phase sulfate electrolytes of the dual SOx/O2 sensor at 10008C in air versus time of annealing at 10008C: (X) yttria stabilized zirconia with 8% molar of Y2O3; (B) yttria stabilized zirconia with 10% molar of Y2O3; (V) yttria stabilized zirconia and a combination of BaSO4–K2SO4–SiO2.

experimental investigations of ZrO2-based solid electrolytes [37] indicate that the aging kinetics has a different nature for singleand two-phase polycrystalline electrolytes. Moreover, it is dependent upon which stabilizing oxide (Y2O3, MgO, Yb2O3, Sc2O3, etc.) was selected for the preparation of ZrO2 electrolyte. It is also dependent upon the molar percentage rate between solid electrolyte and stabilizing oxide. For example, ZrO2–Sc2O3 electrolytes show higher rate of ageing than ZrO2–Y2O3 electrolytes [37].

The increase in electrical resistivity of yttria stabilized zirconia is attributed to segregation of an yttria-rich layer near the grain boundaries and triple points electrode–electetragonal phase of ZrO2 at trolyte-gas, temperature above 9508C and retention of this metastable phase along with the stabilized ﬂuorite phase on cooling to lower temperature as well as ordered domains forming within the disordered ﬂuorite phase. Since ZrO2 electrolyte is a part of the SOx measuring electrochemical cell in the dual SOx/O2 sensor, it was important to investigate the aging processes for both the SOx and O2 electrochemical cells. Fig. 6 shows a typical time dependent change of the conductivity for yttria stabilized zirconia with 8 and 10 mol% of Y2O3 and two-phase sulfate electrolyte of the dual SOx/O2 sensor at 10008C. In industrial applications the lower the resistivity of the probe the greater the electrode contact area in the assembly. For example, a value below 15 kV at temperatures above 8208C is acceptable for a ZrO2 probe [38]. A higher ﬁgure usually indicates a problem. Therefore, an impedance measurement has been one of the most common methods of probe testing in industry for years. In our investigation ZrO2-based solid electrolytes with 8 and 10 mol% of Y2O3 were annealed for 30 days at 10008C. As shown in

Fig. 6, the major drop in conductivity occurred during the ﬁrst 5 days of experiment for the yttria stabilized zirconia with 8 mol% of yttria. 10 mol% of yttria was found to be less affected by the annealing at high temperature. Fig. 7 shows the results of the conductivity measurements for the electrolytes with different content of yttria before and after annealing. The results of present investigation independently supported the fact that the aging process does not occur before 10008C in these electrolytes with a concentration of the stabilizing additive Y2O3 of 10 mol% [39]. Furthermore, the present investigations of the aging process have shown that after annealing of ZrO2 electrolytes, the level of conductivity for yttria stabilized zirconia with 10 mol% of yttria is higher than the level of conductivity for that with 8 mol% of yttria. With a lower than 10 mol% concentration of Y2O3 the cubic solid solution gradually breaks up into two-phases, thus leading to a drop in its electrical conductivity [40]. Consequently ZrO2 electrolytes containing 10 mol% of Y2O3 have been used in the SOx measuring electrochemical cell of the newly designed dual SOx/O2 sensor [29].

The investigation of the aging of the two-phase sulfate electrolyte was also studied. Changes in the conductivity of this cell are also shown in Fig. 6. It is noted that the intensity of the aging processes for the SOx measuring electrochemical cell is less than for a ZrO2-based O2 measuring electrochemical cell. This suggests that a two-phase sulfate glass is partially formed in the fabricating process. However, it is considered that the role of the sulfates as K1 and Ba21 conductors is very important. The main cause of aging of solid electrolytes in the two-phase region appears to be the precipitation and growth of the second low-conductive

The life of the probe is very important for both practical and economic reasons. A further consideration for electrochemical devices based on ionic conductors is that conductivity of the solid electrolyte should be unaffected by the dual SOx/O2 prolonged heat sensor was used in extended-life tests [34,36]. The results for one of these long-term tests (120 days), in which the SO2 concentration in the gas at temperature of 7498C was changed after every 20–30 days, are shown in Fig. 8. The

With a catalyst, the cell potential is established by the equilibrium pressure of SO3, which can be related to the inlet SO2 pressures using Eq. (6), where K is the equilibrium constant for reaction (5)  133)7 134) 1 PSO3 If the electrical current ﬂows through a sulfate-electrolyte cell, the half-cell reaction at the gas electrode–electrolyte interface is the equilibration of the SO3 in the gas with the SO22 4 SO3 1 1 2

ion in the electrolyte

The reference electrode and the stabilized ZrO2 conﬁrm a well-known O2-sensitive half-cell reaction for both electrochemical cells (3) and (4): O2 1 2e2 $ O22 1 2 The cell reaction for electrochemical cell (4) is obtained by combining the half-cells through a heterojunction between the O22 conductor and the K1 conductors (Fig. 9). To achieve an electrochemical chain for the heterojunction, one must assume the formation of an interfacial compound, which contains both conducting ions of K1 and O22. Presumably, a mixed oxide derived from K2O, BaO, ZrO2 and Y2O3, expressed as K212xY3yZrzO3, provide an ionic bridge between the two half-cells by means of the following reaction:  133)11 134) 2K1 1 O22 1 K2xY3yZrzO2 $ K212xY3yZrzO3 and thus completes an electrochemical chain for the SOxmeasuring electrochemical cell (4) as described below.

The superscripts m, r and i represent the measuring electrode, the reference electrode and the interfacial compound. The electrochemical potential of the conducting ions should be constant throughout the conducting regions at equilibrium [27], i.e. K1m  136) m0  133)15 134) m0

Fig. 9. Model of the heterojunction of electrochemical chain for yttria stabilized zirconia-based electrolyte attached with K2SO4–BaSO4–SiO2.

measured EMF were within ^5 mV of the calculated values, which are shown in parentheses. The measured values appear to be stable even at the end of a 120 day test. No phase transition was observed in the sulfate composite electrochemical cell as the SO2 concentration was changed from 18 to 10,000 ppm during the test. After such long-term tests, the other probe components showed chemical or mechanical degradation no observable which would limit the probe’s life. It would appear the dual solid electrolyte SOx/O2 sensor has a that high level of reliability, good SO2-sensing properties and selectivity over a long period of time and long-term chemical stability.

Thus the difference between the electrochemical potential of electrons for both measuring and reference electrodes can be expressed as  133)mi E  136) 1 2F 1 RT 4F

In Eq. (16) PSO3and PO2 are partial pressures of SO3 and O2, m0 SO3 is the standard chemical potential of SO3, R is the gas constant, F is Faraday’s constant and T is temperature (K). The term in parenthesis of Eq. (16) is the standard Gibbs free-energy change (DG0) of the reaction  133)17 134) K2SO4 1 K2xY3yZrzO2  136) K212xY3yZrzO3 1 SO3: The ﬁrst term of Eq. (16) is thus constant (E0) allowing to express EMF of the cell (4) as: E  136) E0 1 RT 4F

This equation shows that the EMF is contributed to, not only by the two gas electrodes, but also by the thermodynamic properties of the interfacial compound. In case when Pr O2 and Pm O2 are constant, Eq. (18) is simpliﬁed to E  136) E 0 0 1 RT 2F

Thus EMF is linear to the logarithm of inlet SO2 concentration with the gradient corresponding to n  136) 2: The theoretical results given above were in excellent agreement with the experimental results.

A number of very important lessons were learnt from this series of trials. Firstly, the two electrochemical cells can be connected electrochemically in one solid electrolyte sensor through an interfacing compound formed in between. The interfacing compound is estimated to be a mixed oxide containing K2O, ZrO2 and Y2O3. The EMF dependence of the SO3 electrode on PSO2 andPO2 is essentially the same as that reported for a metal sulfate membrane-based SO2 sensor [27].

Secondly, it was essential to protect the measuring electrodes of both cells from dust or soot using a porous ceramic ﬁlter and it was also essential to develop a probe design that allowed ash or soot to be burnt off the ﬁlter during continuous operation. One of the major advantages of this SOx/O2 sensor is that the sensor’s design allows the reference ambient air to be common for both SOx and O2 measuring electrochemical alternative calibration of the setpoints for both electrochemical cells to be made without an addition analysis.

feature provides cells. 

To achieve an accurate and simultaneous measurement of the SOx emissions and oxygen level in the combustion gas stream, the dual SOx/O2 “in situ” solid electrolyte sensor, based on stabilized ZrO2 and a composition of two-phase metal sulfates with silica, has been designed and developed. From practical experience of using solid electrolyte sensors for O2 trim control and maintenance, it can be seen that the control of air/fuel ratio by measuring oxygen and the control of effectiveness of combustion by measuring SOx can be a very effective way of reducing fuel costs while improving furnace performance. Improvements can be made in general quality of the process due to decreased ﬂuctuations in the O2 partial pressure and temperature and steadier waste gas composition. Attention to probe care can maintain the repeatability of measurements and hopefully extend probe life. The results of this investigation suggest that by utilizing a single probe the beneﬁts of both the oxygen measuring electrochemical cell and the SOx measuring electrochemical cell can be combined. This would provide a better control of combustion atmospheres, especially those where assumptions regarding sulfur oxides levels do not always hold true.

Although a large number of oxygen and sulfur dioxide probes have been separately installed for monitoring O2 and SOx in combustion gas, the installation of a dual SOx/O2 probe in control loops can provide a better and a more effective way towards fuel saving and efﬁciency.

