Sodium super ionic conductor NASICON and low thermal expansion behavior 5–9 , w x related sodium zirconium phosphate NaZr P O2 3 .NZP and niobium titanium phosphate NbTiP O3  14) 12 are well studied 1–6 due to their important properx  14) .  14) . ties of i ii fast ionic conductivity 2 and iii high temperature stability 2 . They are used as heat exchangers and mirror blanks for space technology, catalyst supports, high temperature fuel cells, possible host for radioactive waste and as humidity and gas sensors w 10–15 . Their general formula is AMM P O where ‘A’ can be alkali, alkaline earth or Cu2q ion, M and MX can be tri-, tetraor pentavalent transition metal ion. The structure is characterized by corner sharing of PO tetrahedra with MO and M O octahedra

The three dimensionally linked interstitial space can accommodate ions as Hq or as large as Csq. This space can also remain vacant as in NbTiP O 18 . The structure is flexible for substitution at A, M or MX sites, giving rise to a large number of closely related compounds. Among the NASICONs, copper NASICONs are relatively less investigated 19–22 . In this paper, we report the preparation, characterization, electron spin resonance  14) ESR and photo acoustic PA studies of Cu -0.5 . NbAlP O CNP and HNbAlP O HNP .

Density of CNP was experimentally determined using xylene as the immersion liquid. Powder X-ray diffractograms were recorded on Siemens D-4000 using CuK radiation ls1.5406 A . The unit cell parameters are derived by using a computer programme by giving the d and hkl values as input parameters.

Room temperature ESR spectra were recorded on a JEOL PE-3X X-band spectrometer equipped with a 100 kHz field modulation unit. DPPH was used as standard. The powder ESR spectrum of CNP was simulated using a computer programme 23 . The ‘‘g’’, ‘‘a’’ and line width are given as input parameters. Room temperature emission spectra were recorded by Hitachi-3010 spectrofluorometer.

PA spectra were recorded on an extensively modified OAS-400 PA spectrometer EDT Research, London . The light beam from a 300-W xenon lamp was intensity-modulated using a continuously variable mechanical chopper HMS 222, NY operating at a chopping frequency of 40 Hz. The signals were recorded using a B and K 4165 microphone Bruel and Kjaer, Naerum, Denmark coupled to a power supply B and K 2804 . The sensitivity of the microphone was 50 mVrPa. The signal was processed through a preamplifier EG and G 113; Princeton Applied Research, Princeton, NJ and a lock-in analyzer EG and G 7620. Normalization of the spectra to constant intensity was achieved by using the PA spectrum of carbon black.

Powder XRD of CNP was found to be free from impurities. is found to be isomorphous with x NbTiP O 18 . All the d-lines are indexed and the unit cell parameters are evaluated using a computer

programme. The observed and calculated d-values are given in Table 1. The unit cell parameters are shown in Table 2 along with the unit cell parameters of related systems. The powder XRD of HNP was found to be similar to that of CNP, except for the intensities. The reflections of various hkl planes of HNP were less intense than CNP Fig. 1 . All the d-lines are indexed and the unit cell parameters are derived Tables 1 and 2 . From Table 2, it is clear that the unit cell parameters of CNP and HNP are very close to each other. Since both Cu2q and Hq occupy the channels, the basic skeleton remains the same and, hence, the ‘‘a’’ and ‘‘c’’ parameters are close to each other. The observed change in the intensities may be due to the difference in the number of electrons present in Cu2q and Hq.

In copper NASICON type phosphates, Cuq2 ion occupy the channels 21 . In reducing with hydrogen,  14) . CNP can give rise to i H Cu I NbAlP O or  14) .ii HNbAl PO or a mixture of both. The samples reduced at 4008C and 5508C were subjected to fluorescence measurement by exciting at 287 nm. No

Room temperature X-band powder ESR spectrum of CNP and its reduced product at 4008C and 5508C are shown in Fig. 2. The ESR spectrum of CNP is characterized by a broad unresolved band at lower magnetic field and a sharp one on the higher field side Fig. 2a . This spectrum is similar to that of Cu Ti P O 20,21 .The g values are derived and shown in Table 3. Since g )g , the unpaired H electron is in d 2 2, which corresponds to the Jahn–Teller distortion involving an elongated octahedral configuration around Cu2q ion. Similar rex sults were obtained for other related systems 20,21 . The room temperature powder ESR spectrum of CNP is simulated using a computer programme Fig. .2b . The ESR spectrum of the sample of reduced product at 4008C was found to be identical to that of CNP, except for the intensities Fig. 2c . The com-

The PA spectra of CNP and HNP are recorded in the range 210–800 nm Fig. 3 . The PA spectrum of CNP consists of broad band around 250–400 nm and of another broad band above 600 nm Fig. 3a . PA spectrum of HNP is characterized by a broad band around 300–450 nm. No band is observed above 600 . nm Fig. 3b .

