The X-ray excited luminescent emissions of samples of Nasicon (NASuper-Ionic-CONductor) compounds of different stoichiometries were recorded vs. wavelength in the 280 to 560 nm range. The spectra show main peaks near 300 nm, with wavelengths and intensities depending on the sodium content of samples. These peaks are ascribed to radiative recombinations of electron-hole pairs trapped by Frenkel defects caused by the displacement of sodium ions in lacunar sites. Analysis of the recorded spectra highlights the effect of stoichiometry on ionic conductivity. © 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

Nasicon compounds are characterized by an anionic framework of SiO4 and PO4 tetrahedra linked by shared oxygen ions to ZrO6octahedra [1,2]. The anionic negative charge is balanced by Na1 ions that partially occupy sites constituted by wide octahedral cavities in the lattice structure. As a consequence, the Nasicon lattice holds an amount of Na1 lacunae that depends on the actual Nasicon stoichiometry: Na11x[ ]4 –xZr2SixP32xO12 ([ ] standing for a Na1 lacuna). X-ray diffractography has shown that two kinds of Na1 ion sites exist in the Nasicon lattice, that is, Na(1) and Na(2) sites, coordinated by six and eight oxygen ions, respectively [1]. Table 1 gives data on the lengths and diameters of channels separating these sites. The smallest separation, 3.5 Å, corresponds to channel C1, while the largest diameter,

The displacement of sodium ions in nearest lacunae, that is originates Frenkel defects [3,4] which localize in the lattice pairs of opposite sign charges. Indeed, the removal of Na1 ions leaves negative lattice vacancies, and the placement of Na1 ions in lacunae yields positive interstitials. Since this process does not entail a lattice deformation, the energy involved is quite low, so that a large number of these defects forms when samples are crystallized at high temperature from the amorphous material. (Thermodynamics shows that density f of Frenkel defects is related to the defect formation energy wF by f 5 =N/N9exp(2wF/2kT), where N and N9 stand for the densities of cation and interstitial sites, respectively [3].) When crystals are activated at room temperature by X-rays, the electrons and holes injected into conduction and valence bands become trapped by the opposite sign charges. More precisely, a Na1 ion vacancy captures a hole and an interstitial Na1 ion captures an electron. The ensuing radiative recombinations originate a radioluminescent (RL) emission. Due to the presence of a high density of defects, vacancies and interstitials lie at short distances, so the vacancy-interstitial separation r frequently assumes its lowest value, that is, the length of the channel separating Na1 ion sites. Since these lengths are no more than a few Å, as can be seen in Table 1, recombinations are expected to take place through the Prener–Williams tunnel mechanism [5,6]. Consequently, the energy of the emitted photon is related to separation r by

(2) where EG stands for the forbidden energy gap, EA (acceptor binding energy) for the height of the hole level above the valence band, ED (donor binding energy) for the depth of the electron level below the conduction band, and e for the dielectric constant [7]. The transition probability of this emission is

(3) since electrons are trapped by the Na1 ions in essentially hydrogen-like states. Here RD means the half Bohr radius of the trapped electron states. Eqs. (2) and (3) actually rule RL spectra.

Keeping this state of affairs in mind, we decided to perform experiments on the RL emission of Nasicon samples with different stoichiometries. Indeed, the actual separations r

The RL spectra of samples (a), (b), and (c) are shown in Figs. 1, 2, and 3, respectively. In all spectra the main peak is the one with the lowest wavelength. It is followed by minor peaks of decreasing heights for increasing wavelengths. The main peaks of samples (a) and (c) are found at the same wavelength of 315 nm, while that of sample (b) is found at 329 nm. The heights of these peaks are somewhat different. In particular, the height of the 329 nm peak of sample (b) is more than 10 times smaller than that of the 315 nm peak of sample (a). After the main peak, a still notable peak at 377 nm is present in the sample (b) spectrum. It reappears at 376 nm in the sample (c) spectrum and is merely marked as an inﬂection point in the spectrum of sample (a). The relevant data are reported in Table 2. No signiﬁcant RL emission was detected in the spectral range above 540 nm.

Fig. 1. Radioluminescent light intensity (photons/nm) of sample (a) (x 5 0) recorded at room temperature vs. wavelength.

The precision of these data is attested to by the good reproducibility of wavelengths of peaks common to different spectra. Besides the 377 and 376 nm peaks of samples (b) and (c), a third peak is present at 438, 441, and 438 nm in the spectra of samples (a), (b), and (c), respectively (see Figs. 1, 2, and 3). A fourth peak is found at 476 nm in the spectra of samples (a) and (c). It reappears in the spectrum of sample (b), with a different wavelength of 486 nm. This large (10 nm) displacement is ascribed to its broadness, which prevents an accurate aiming of the maximum. As for the ﬁfth and last peak, it is found at 537, 539, and 537 nm in the spectra of samples (a), (b), and (c), respectively.

We precede our arguments on RL by noting that previous investigations on Nasicon spectrally resolved, thermally stimulated luminescence showed emissions above 500 nm, while no emission was detected in the 300 nm region [10,11]. Therefore, the recorded RL spectra are to be ascribed to defects unable to trap electron-hole pairs steadily. Actually, Frenkel defects with small vacancy-interstitial separations fulﬁll this requirement.

On this basis, the recorded RL spectra can be interpreted as follows: In Nasicon samples, a distribution of Frenkel defects with different vacancy–interstitial separations r is present. Consequently, as ensues from Eq. (2), the greatest photon energy, that is, the least wavelength, corresponds to the least r. At the same time, it follows from Eq. (3) that emission probability, and, consequently, peak height, is the greatest. As separations r increase,

Fig. 2. Radioluminescent light intensity (photons/nm) of sample (b) (x 5 2) recorded at room temperature vs. wavelength.

wavelengths also increase, while emission probabilities decrease exponentially. Taking into account the different Na1 sites present in the Nasicon lattice (see Table 1), it is obvious that the 315 nm least wavelength peak of samples (a) and (c) can be ascribed to recombinations of electrons and holes trapped by Frenkel defects with a least vacancy–interstitial separation of 3.50 Å, corresponding to channels C1. In the same way, the 329 nm peak of sample (b) can be ascribed to recombinations of electrons and holes trapped with a separation of 4.72 Å, corresponding to channels C2. This assumption is substantiated by the fact that the height of the 329 nm peak is only 8% of that of the 315 nm peak (see Table 2). Indeed, according to Eq. (3), a smaller recombination probability corresponds to the increased separation. As for the height of the 315 nm peak of sample (c), which is 63% of that of sample (a) (Table 2), it is to be considered that, owing to the stoichiometry Na11x, sample (c) (x 5 3) contains 4 times more sodium atoms than sample (a) (x 5 0) within a cell of the same size. The greater density of sample (c) originates a greater attenuation of X-rays, thus reducing sample excitation and RL yield.

Identiﬁcation of defects originating the peaks of decreasing heights present in the recorded spectra poses some questions. First, to apply Eq. (2), we must know the real value of the dielectric constant. But, within distances of a few Å, this value is not the same as in the bulk material. Another point concerns the energies of acceptor and donor levels. Energy ED of the

Fig. 3. Radioluminescent light intensity (photons/nm) of sample (c) (x 5 3) recorded at room temperature vs. wavelength.

donor level is expected to be nearly the same whether sodium is placed in site Na(1) or Na(2). It essentially coincides with sodium 3-s state energy. On the contrary, energy EA of the acceptor level is expected to depend on the actual sodium vacancy site, owing to the different structures of the Na(1) and Na(2) sites. Therefore, to investigate the high wavelength RL emission would require theoretical probing of these matters. We point out, in this connection, that the Frenkel defects with separation r 5 3.50 Å might be considered in order to explain not only the 315 nm peak, but also the 377 nm peak, by assuming that they originate from sodium vacancies placed in sites Na(1) or Na(2), respectively.

In conclusion, the recorded RL spectra indicate that sample (b) is characterized by Frenkel defects with a donor–acceptor separation larger than that of samples (a) and (c) thereby identiﬁed with the 4.72 Å separation of channel C2. The 2.05 Å diameter of this channel clearly exceeds that of channels C1 and C3 (see Table 1). What is more, the C2 channel diameter exceeds the 1.9 Å diameter of the sodium ions as well. Consequently, sodium ions are allowed to move easily through the lattice when an electric ﬁeld is applied. This fact explains why with just the Na3[ ]2Zr2Si2PO12 (x 5 2) stoichiometry of sample (b) we have a maximum of ionic conductivity which exceeds by one order of magnitude the conductivity of samples (a) and (c).
