Lithium ion conducting solids is a topic of great interest because of their potential application as electrolytes in lithium batteries. In particular, lithium compounds with NASICON ~Na superionic conductors! structure and formula IV~PO4!3 have been extensively studied for their good LiM 2 ionic conductivity.1–14 The ideal framework of NASICONtype materials15–17 is rhombohedral with space group R3¯ c and is built up by M 2~PO4!3 units @Fig. 1~a!#. A pair of M O6 octahedra is arranged with opposite triangular faces approximately parallel to each other and oriented perpendicularly to the c axis of the structure. Three PO4 tetrahedra, which have one edge approximately parallel to the c axis, bridge the parallel faces of the two octahedra of M 2(PO4!3 units. Tetrahedral oxygens involved in edges oriented perpendicularly to the c axis, form part of octahedra of two adjacent units. In the NASICON structure, lithium can occupy two different sites: ~i! M 1 sites, surrounded by six oxygens and located at inversion centers and ~ii! M 2 sites, with an irregular tenfold oxygen coordination and disposed symmetrically around the threefold axis of the structure. Both sites have different multiplicity ~1:3! and alternate along the conduction channels, forming a three-dimensional network @Fig. 1~b!#.

The sample was prepared by calcination of a stoichiometric mixture of Li2O, ~NH4!2H~PO4!3 and HfO2 at increas-

FIG. 2. MAS 31P NMR spectra recorded at T523 and 223 °C. In the insets of the ﬁgure, the central component of these spectra are displayed.

A more detailed description of the sample preparation is reported elsewhere.13 31P and 7Li NMR spectra, recorded in static and MAS conditions, were obtained at different temperatures between 22 and 243 °C by using a B-VT 1000/SU07 unit in a MSL 400 Bruker spectrometer. The frequencies used for 31P and 7Li spectra were 161.96 and 155.45 MHz. Spectra were taken after p/2 pulse irradiation. A time interval between successive scans in the range 2–30 sec was chosen, depending on the spin-lattice relaxation times of the two nuclei at each temperature. The number of accumulations was in the range 10–200. The 7Li and 31P chemical shift values are given relative to 1 M LiCl and 85% H3PO4 aqueous solutions, respectively. The ﬁtting of NMR spectra was carried out with the Bruker WINFIT program,26 which computes the intensities of the spinning sidebands with the Herzfeld and Berger method.27 With this program, the spinning rate and the position, linewidth and intensity of the components were determined with a standard nonlinear least square method. However, the anisotropy and asymmetry parameters, which characterize nuclear interactions, have to be determined by a trial and error procedure. Once, the experimental envelope was ﬁtted, the sum of intensities of sidebands of components was calculated by numerical integration.

FIG. 3. Static 7Li NMR spectra recorded at T523 and 223 °C. To highlight the pattern of the satellite transitions, the scale of the y axis has been multiplied by the indicated factors. In the insets of the ﬁgure, the central component of the MAS 7Li NMR spectra, recorded at the same tempe rature, are displayed.

31P MAS NMR spectrum of compound LiHf2~PO4!3, recorded at 223 °C, is shown in Fig. 2. Three central lines and their corresponding spinning sidebands, spaced at ;6 ppm ~spinning rate expressed in ppm!, are observed. As the chemical environment of all phosphorus atoms is the same, P~OHf !4, the observed components correspond to three nonequivalent crystallographic sites. Integration of the sidebands of the three components, according to the procedure described in the experimental section, gave intensities proportional to 1:1:1, indicating that the three sites have the same multiplicity. The intensity of the three central lines detected at 223 °C decreases during sample heating ~around 0 °C! and a new line, with the same position that one of previous components, is detected ~inset of Fig. 2!. At room temperature, the 31P MAS spectrum displays the single component, characteristic of the rhombohedral symmetry ~one crystallographic site!.

From analysis of the spinning side bands pattern of 31P MAS-NMR spectra, the isotropic chemical shift (siso), TABLE I. Chemical shift tensor values ~siso , Ds, hcs! and quadrupole coupling parameters (C Q ,hQ)

Atomic positions determined from the neutron diffraction study22 have been used to analyze the structural changes produced at the phase transition. For that, we have described the

triclinic lattice in terms of a pseudorhombohedral coordinate system, at which the pseudoternary axis of the structure coincides with the (103) T triclinic direction. In this analysis, it has been considered the effect of the reduction of symmetry on the number of independent crystallographic positions. Thus, for instance, the two oxygens of the rhombohedral phase ~O1 and O2! give 12 different types of oxygens in the triclinic phase.

In Table II the geometry and relative orientation of octahedra HfO6 are given. It can be seen that signiﬁcant modiﬁcations are produced in the internal geometry of octahedra ~distances Hf-O, O-O, and angles O-Hf-O! during the phase transition. In the rhombohedral phase, these octahedra can be considered as constituted by two equilateral triangles, normal to the ternary axis, with edges almost parallel each other. From Table II, it can be seen that the equilateral triangles become scalene and the O-Hf-O bonds angles change in the triclinic phase. However, the most signiﬁcant change observed concern the inclination of octahedra with respect to the pseudoternary axis. In particular, the inclination of the two bases of octahedra are different ~b1 and b2 angles! in the triclinic phase.

Now we will analyze the modiﬁcations produced at tetrahedra PO4. It can be seen ~Table III! that modiﬁcations produced in the internal geometry of tetrahedra ~distances P-O and angles O-P-O! are less important that in octahedra. However, a signiﬁcant change is observed in angles which deﬁne the orientation of tetrahedra, i.e., the angle subtended by the O1-O1 edge, initially parallel to the ternary axis (a1) and that deﬁned by the O2-O2 edge, initially disposed at planes perpendicular to this axis (a2). These angles are close to zero in the rhombohedral phase and higher in the triclinic phase. In the triclinic phase, the orientation and geometry of the P1 and P2 tetrahedra are relatively similar each other but different from the P3 tetrahedron.

On the other hand, the analysis of the angles Hf-O-P ~Table III! shows appreciable modiﬁcations on Hf-O1-P angles, constituting basic units, and angles Hf-O2-P, relating adjacent structural units, when going from rhombohedral to triclinic phase. Thus, the internal Hf-O1-P angles constituting the basic lanterns, near 158° in the rhombohedral phase, are spread over a broad range ~138°–170°! and the external Hf-O2-P angles, near 142° in the rhombohedral phase, are dispersed over 133°–160° in the triclinic phase.

Although structural changes produced in the Nasicon’s framework are not very large, they are signiﬁcant enough to IV~PO4!3 be analyzed by NMR. In ﬁrst approximation, in LiM 2 compounds, the isotropic chemical shift (siso) of 31P signal is given by the polarizing strength of the M IV cation.25 However, for a given compound, siso depend on the relative disposition of contiguous polyhedra. An empirical relation frequently used to explain chemical shift values is29

From the whole analysis it can be concluded that the phase transition produces distortions on polyhedra and affects considerably their relative disposition in the NASICON framework. This effect is visualised in Fig. 4 and will be important to explain the lithium location.

Lithium atoms can occupy different positions in the NASICON framework ~M 1 , M 2 , and midway sites!, however, little information can be obtained by x-ray diffraction this point. On the other hand, LiGe2~PO4!3, 31 about LiTi2~PO4!3, 32 and LiHf2~PO4!3 ~Ref. 22! compounds have been studied by neutron diffraction. From the study of the rhombohedral compounds a preferential occupation of M 1 sites was deduced in M IV5Ge and Ti, however, in the triclinic phases of LiHf2~PO4!3, LiZr2~PO4!3, and LiSn2~PO4!3, midway sites M 1 /M 2 ~hatched circles in Fig. 4! seem to be occupied. 7Li NMR spectroscopy was used in a previous work25 to analyze structural characteristics of sites occupied by lithium. In particular, in the rhombohedral compounds occupation of M 1 sites was deduced, however, in the triclinic phases some doubts remained concerning the type of sites occupied by lithium. In the present work, structural data obtained recently on the triclinic phase of LiHf2~PO4!3 will allow us to clarify this point.

In the triclinic phase of LiHf2~PO4!3, the 7Li static NMR spectrum recorded at 223 °C can be ﬁtted with a unique quadrupole pattern and the central component of the 7Li MAS-NMR spectrum is formed by a single narrow line. Both observations suggest that lithium occupies a unique site in the triclinic phase of LiHf2~PO4!3.

If it is assumed that the broadening of the central line of 7Li NMR spectra is mainly due to dipole interactions, an

Based on this fact, the analysis of Dˆ 2 values cannot discriminate by itself on the lithium occupation of these two sites.

C Q measures the deviation of the structural environment from the cubic symmetry and hQ , the deviation from the axial symmetry.

Assuming that compounds are predominantly ionic, the components of the EFG tensor can be calculated on the basis of a point charge model through the expression

FIG. 4. Structure of the rhombohedral ~a! and triclinic ~b! phases of LiHf2~PO4!3. In these structures, the orientation of octahedra and tetrahedra are clearly different. In the triclinic phase, hatched circles correspond to midway sites occupied by lithium, and white and black circles are M 1 and M 2 sites.

analysis of the linewidth can be used to deduce the positions occupied by lithium in the triclinic phase ~in absence of ionic mobility!. For that, the second moment (Dˆ 2) of the central transition of the spectrum, recorded at low temperature in static conditions, has been compared with values calculated for the different positions of lithium in the Nasicon structure, by using the Van Vleck’s expression for a rigid lattice;35

The ﬁrst term accounts for dipole interactions between like spins and the second one for unlike spins. gI and gS are the gyromagnetic ratios for I and S spins and r jk is the distance between interacting spins. The sum on k extends over all nuclei that interact with the reference nucleus j.

A comparison of the experimental value of Dˆ 2 and the calculated ones is given in Table V. It can be seen that Li-P dipole interaction is much more important than Li-Li interaction, whatever site lithium occupies. The calculated values for the two nonequivalent M 1 sites of the triclinic phase are much lower than the experimental one. However, the calculated values for the three nonequivalent M 2 sites and for the midway M 1-M 2 site deduced from neutron diffraction data22 are similar each other and closer to the experimental one.

where eZ k is the electric charge of the kth ion. The principal components of the EFG tensor are obtained by diagonalizing the matrix V i j , and C Q and hQ with Eqs. ~4!. Although hQ can be calculated directly from the EFG tensor, calculation of C Q requires an estimate of the Sternheimer shielding g‘ factor36,37 @C Q5e 2Q(12g‘)V zz /h#, which accounts for distortions induced in the core electrons of the ion by the quadrupole ﬁeld of the nucleus and by the external ﬁeld gradients. For Li1,g‘ can be assumed to be 0.3.25,38,39 The summation indicated in Eq. ~6! is performed numerically in a Cartesian coordinate system. It was found that convergence in V i j calculations, with errors less than 2%, can be obtained if all ions within a radius of 30 Å are considered.

The EFG tensor can be expressed as a sum of the contributions corresponding to each sublattice:

On these bases, the EFG tensor was calculated for the three types of sites available for lithium in the triclinic phase of LiHf2~PO4!3 ~M 1 ,M 2 , and midway M 1 /M 2!. In general, V is not diagonal, therefore, diagonalization of V tensor was a previous step to evaluate the principal components for each charge set considered. C Q values obtained using nominal charges values are, for all the positions, much higher than the experimental one, indicating that the structural framework has a partial covalent character and that a net reduction of the atoms charge is produced.

In order to calculate more realistic C Q values, two assumptions were made: ﬁrst, a fully ionized lithium is considered (Z Li511) and, secondly, the effective charges for all types of oxygen are assumed to be equal. Both suppositions

function of the effective charge assigned to Hf and P, is given. In the same ﬁgure, it is also shown the region that ﬁt simultaneously experimental C Q and hQ values. Taking the charge values deduced, the quadrupole coupling parameters associated with M 1 and M 2 sites were also estimated ~Table VI!. It can be seen that the three M 2 sites have C Q values higher than those deduced for M 1 sites, but still lower than that deduced for midway M 1 /M 2 sites. On the contrary, h value of the midway M 1 /M 2 sites is lower than M 2 sites and much lower than value of M 1 sites.

On the other hand, it has been proposed the existence of two triangular bottlenecks, relating M 1 and M 2 sites, that limit lithium mobility in NASICON compounds.40–42 In particular, triangles T 1(O2O2O1) and T 2(O2O2O2), see Fig. 6, are bottlenecks that lithium diffusion in conduction channels ﬂM 1-M 2-M 1ﬂ . An analysis of the geometry of these windows in the two phases of LiHf2~PO4!3 has shown that in the triclinic phase, triangles T2 are formed by sides with lengths of 2.69, 4.12, and 4.33 Å but T1 windows must be considered four-sided poligones, with distances 2.69, 3.28, 3.17, and 2.39 Å. This coordination is produced by the approxi-

FIG. 5. Dependence of the calculated ~a! C Q and ~b! hvalues on the effective charge of P and Hf atoms for the midway M 1-M 2 site in the triclinic phase of LiHf2~PO4!3. ~c! Charge values that reproduce experimental C Q and hvalues.

seem to be reasonable and not very restrictive in our analysis. Taking into account these hypotheses and the condition of electrical neutrality, the only free parameters are Z Hf and Z p in Eq. ~7!. An analysis of C Q and hQ values as a function of the charge assigned to hafnium and phosphorus atoms showed that only the localization of lithium at the midway position M 1 /M 2 reproduce experimental values with charge values having physical meaning. Moreover, these charge values ~2,Z P,2.5 and 2.5,Z hf,3.5! are very close to those deduced in previous calculations25 for the rhombohedral LiGe2~PO4!3 and LiTi2~PO4!3 compounds. In Fig. 5, a plot of C Q and hQ values, calculated for midway M 1-M 2 sites as a

In order to analyze the lithium location at particular sites of the rhombohedral phase, we have calculated the quadrupole coupling C Q constants for the three structural sites ~Table VI!. In all cases, the calculated values differ from the experimental one. As the lithium mobility is important in this phase, an exchange of lithium between different sites must be operating and, therefore, the observed C Q value should correspond to the average of values of sites occupied by lithium during its movement. On the basis of a fast exchange between M 1 , M 2, and midway M 1-M 2 sites, C Q values would be given by the expression

where P 1 , P 2 , and P 12 are the occupation probability of 12 (2) , and C Q M 1 , M 2 , and midway M 1-M 2 sites, C Q

FIG. 6. Schematic view of T 1 and T 2 windows connecting M 1 ~white circles! and M 2 ~black circles! sites in the triclinic phase of LiHf2~PO4!3. Hatched circles correspond to the midway sites occupied by lithium. The solid lines show the lithium coordination in this phase. See the text for a more detailed discussion of the ﬁgure.

are the quadrupole coupling constant associated to each site, and the factor 3 takes into account the different multiplicity of structural sites. Assuming a maximum delocalization of lithium ions between all sites (P 15P 25P 125 1 7 ), the value obtained with expression ~8! is C Q’100 kHz, that is quite close to the experimental one ~118 kHz!. The difference observed between experimental and calculated values could correspond to a slight preference of lithium to reside at M 2 sites in the rhombohedral phase. Moreover, as M 2 and midway sites are disposed symmetrically around the ternary axis of the structure, the fast exchange between these sites gives a hQ value near zero. The equal occupation of equivalent sites around the ternary axis, produced during lithium motion, is compatible with the ideal rhombohedral R3¯ c symmetry of Nasicon compounds, and explains that lithium location was not possible to be deduced by diffraction methods.22

In this work, a detailed analysis of the distortions produced at the triclinic-rhombohedral phase transition of LiHf2~PO4!3 has been carried out. In particular, it has been shown that the phase transition produces considerable distortions of polyhedra, affecting, without breaking bonds, the relative disposition of tetrahedra PO4 and octahedra HfO6 in the NASICON framework.

Moreover, the use of NMR spectroscopy was particularly suitable to study characteristics of the structural sites occupied by lithium in the NASICON structure. Thus, the 7Li NMR study of the triclinic ~low temperature! phase of LiHf2~PO4!3 has conﬁrmed the positions proposed previously by neutron diffraction for lithium ions, which are located between M 1 and M 2 sites of the NASICON structure. The preference for midway sites compared to M 1 and M 2 positions has been explained on the basis of a much better lithium coordination. In these positions, oxygens constituting

STRUCTURAL CHANGES AT THE TRICLINIC. . .

lithium coordination deﬁne an irregular almost planar foursided window that limits severely lithium mobility in the NASICON structure.

In the rhombohedral ~high-temperature! phase, structural changes produced in the covalent framework produces an increase on Li-O distances at the midway M 1-M 2 sites that makes uncomfortable lithium coordination. This produces a dramatic increase on the lithium mobility that is responsible for the abrupt increase of ionic conductivity and the strong reduction of the activation energy detected at the phase transition.20 In the rhombohedral phase, spectral features of

the 7Li NMR signal are intermediate between those of the three structural sites. Obtained results have been interpreted on the basis of a fast exchange between three sites, that explains difﬁculties to localize Li ions in the rhombohedral phase by diffractometric techniques.