A novel processing technique for the preparation of Na super ionic conductor (NASICON: Na Zr Si PO ) thin ﬁlms have been developed using an aqueous complex precursor derived from hydroxyacid-added aqueous solutions of allinorganic materials. Spinnable viscous gel was obtained from a tartaric acid (TA)-added aqueous solution after holding the temperature at 28C for 7 days. NASICON thin ﬁlms could be fabricated onto alumina substrates by spin-coating the TA-based viscous gel, drying at 1508C, and sintering at 10008C for 3 h. 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

Sodium super ionic conductor with an NASICONtype structure (Na Zr Si P O , 0 # x # 3) is known to show high ionic conductivity and relatively high chemical stability. The NASICON electrolyte has been proposed for use as a solid electrolyte in all-solid-state electrochemical cells such as gas sensors [1], ion sensors [2,3] and Na–S batteries. Thinﬁlm materials of the solid electrolyte are very promising in the ﬁelds of chemical sensors or display devices for their advantages in their performance, miniaturization, and accumulation. So far, dry pro-

cess of R.F. sputtering [4], laser ablation [5] and pulsed laser deposition methods [6], as well as wet chemical processes with the sol–gel route [7–10] or screen printing methods [11], have been introduced in the production of NASICON thin and/or thick ﬁlms. Dry processes or the sol–gel routes using metal alkoxides are promising for the preparation of thin ﬁlms; however, they still have disadvantages in terms of cost and ease of handling. Recently, we found that well-crystallized and relatively high-purity NASICON powders and sintered discs could be prepared by a far simpler sol–gel process starting from aqueous solutions of all-inorganic materials at relatively low temperatures between 850 and 10008C [12,13]. In further investigations, it was revealed that NASICON thin ﬁlms could be synthesized at relatively low temperatures by modifying this sol–gel route using hydroxyacid. This study deals with the

NASICON (Na Zr Si PO ) thin ﬁlms were synthesized by the sol–gel method with a complex precursor method using aqueous all-inorganic salt and hydroxyacid (citric acid [14,15] (CA), tartaric acid (TA), malic acid (MA), lactic acid (LA)) solutions, as shown in Fig. 1. Aqueous solutions of ZrO(NO ) 8H O, NH H PO , Na SiO 9H O, and hydroxyacid (2:1:2:3 in molar ratio for CA-, TA-, MA-systems, and 2:1:2:6 in molar ratio for LAsystem, Na excess stoichiometric composition [12]) were mixed together to form a sol, which was then aged at 28C for several days. The obtained viscous gels were spin-coated (2000 rev./min, 30 s) onto alumina or quartz substrates (20 3 30 3 2 mm ),

a viscosity analyzer dried at 1508C, and ﬁnally sintered at 10008C for 3 h. The obtained gels were characterized with a laser diffraction particle size analyzer (Shimadzu Ltd.: SALD-2000A), (Yamaichi denki: Viscomate VM-1A), and a spectrometer (Shimadzu Ltd.: UV-200). To prepare NASICON powders, the sol was dried at 1208C for 12 h to form a ﬁne xerogel powder, which was then ground and calcined at 7508C for 1 h. The calcined material was reground and ﬁnally calcined at 10008C for 3 h. The products were characterized by X-ray diffractometry (XRD) (Shimadzu Ltd.: XD-D1), and thermogravimetric (TG)-differential (DTA) (Seiko Instruments Inc.: TG-DTA 200). The surface morphology was observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (JEOL Ltd.: JSM-6320F). The ionic conductivity was measured with an impedance analyzer (Hewlett Packard: HP-4800A, 5–500 kHz) using Au electrodes at 150–3008C.

A mixed aqueous solution of all-inorganic materials, a precursor for preparing NASICON discs, did not provide sufﬁcient viscosity for the fabrication of NASICON thin or thick ﬁlms by spin-coating or dip-coating methods. In further investigation, it was revealed that the addition of hydroxyacid produced drastic physical changes in the mixed aqueous solution, and the use of tartaric acid made it possible to fabricate a spinnable viscous gel. Fig. 2 shows the stability of the change in transmittance with time at 28C for various aqueous solutions with various hydroxyacids added. The MAand LA-added solutions produced a large amount of deposit after 2 days. On the other hand, the CA-added solution retained its stability for more than 20 days; however the solution did not have sufﬁcient viscosity for the spin-coating required to prepare NASICON thin ﬁlms. In contrast, it was found that the TA-based solution gelled gradually and formed a good coating gel with sufﬁcient viscosity as well as particle size after aging for over 7 days. The effect of additives in the solution is not yet clear, however it seems to originate from the combination and conformation of

In order to clarify the appropriate calcination temperature at which to synthesize the NASICON ﬁlm, TG–DTA measurements were carried out for a xerogel powder which was obtained from the TA-based coating solution after it was dried at 1208C for 12 h. As shown in Fig. 4, large and small mass losses of the sample were observed with increasing temperature between 100 and 5008C, and between 500 and 10508C, respectively. The exothermic peak at 3008C, and the endothermic peak at 9508C in the DTA curve are ascribed to the decomposition of the starting materials with an organic precursor, and the evaporation of oxidized carbon from the decomposed organic compounds, respectively.

Fig. 5 shows the XRD pattern of NASICON powder prepared from the xerogel powder after it was calcined at 10008C for 3 h. Well-crystallized and almost-single-phase hexagonal Na Zr Si PO powder was synthesized with this method at a calcination temperature as low as 10008C.

A small amount of the SiO impurity phase was observed in the NASICON ﬁlm on an alumina substrate, however a relatively pure hexagonal NASICON phase could be observed on both substrates. On the other hand, an impurity phase of monoclinic zirconia was observed for the NASICON thin ﬁlm prepared on an alumina substrate with 50 coatings and sintered at 10008C for 3 h with ﬁve repetitions, but relatively well-crystallized NASICON phase was also observed, as shown in Fig. 7. It seems that the ZrO impurity phase is produced over a long time (3 3 5 h) with repeated (ﬁve times) heat treatments at 10008C.

SEM observation revealed that the surface was relatively smooth and the ﬁlm thickness after 10 coatings was about 0.2 mm, as shown in Fig. 8.

The exact value of the ionic conductivity of the NASICON thin ﬁlm with 10 coatings could not be obtained, because of the difﬁculty in measuring the ﬁlm dimensions. However, it could be measured for the ﬁlm with 50 coatings. The ionic conductivity of the NASICON thin ﬁlm with 50 coatings prepared on an alumina substrate is shown in Fig. 9. Conductivity of approximately 7.6 3 10 at 2008C was obtained, although it was about one order smaller than that of sintered discs [13]. The activation energy of 0.29 eV was slightly larger than that for NASICON discs. The reason for this is not yet clear, however it seems to be related to the effect of the impurity phase of monoclinic zirconia in the NASICON thin ﬁlm prepared with 50 coatings.

However the prepared NASICON thin ﬁlm was still rather high and its conductivity was reported NASICON thin or thick ﬁlms.

A novel processing technique for the preparation of NASICON solid electrolyte thin ﬁlms have been developed by using a gel derived from a tartaric acid (TA)-added aqueous solution after holding the temperature at 28C for 7 days.