Solid-state electrochemical sensor devices combined with sodium super ionic conductor NASICON: Na discs and Pb–Ru-based pyrochlore-type oxide electrodes have been developed for the detection of NO and NO in the range 10–1000 ppm at 4008C. Sensor devices fitted with pyrochlore-type oxide electrodes showed good EMF responses to the sample gases containing NO or NO . EMFs were almost linear to the logarithm of NO or NO concentration, while the value and slope of the EMF responses were changed drastically, depending on the electrode materials. Among the devices tested, the one attached to Pb Ru V O electrode gave the best response performance to NO and NO , i.e., the 90% response time to 500 ppm NO or 110 ppm NO was as short as 30s or 1 min, respectively. q 2000 Elsevier Science S.A. All rights reserved.

The need for reliable, inexpensive and compact nitrogen oxides NO : NO and NO sensors for the protection of global environment has been increasing. Solid electrolyte sensors using sodium nitrite 1,2 or nitrate-based binary systems 3 were reported to show high sensitivity to NO as well as NO . However, they still have problems for chemical andror thermal stability. Recently, it was reported that the use of metal oxide electrodes, such as Cr O 4 and CdMn O 5 , instead of conventional metal salts for the auxiliary phase of solid electrolyte NO sensor seems to bring about better sensing performance to NO andror NO as well as stability at higher temperatures. In our previous study 6 , it was seen that the NO sensor element attached with Pb Ru O system showed higher sensitivity to NO than that to NO and seemed like an attractive electrode material. Here, we have further investigated the sensing performance of the A or B site-substituted Pb–Ru-based pyrochlore-type oxides as an electrode for the solid electrolyte NO sensor. It has turned out that the devices with Pb Ru V O sensing performance both to NO and NO at 4008C.

Pyrochlore-type oxides Pb x B O : A s Bi, Sn; B sV, Pb; x, ys0–0.75 were prepared by a co-precipitation method 6,7 . X-ray diffraction analysis  14) XRD: JDX-3500K, JEOL revealed that the powders obtained with this method showed well-crystallized and almost single-phase pyrochlore-type oxides.

The sensor devices were almost the same as already reported 4,6 . Powders of the prepared pyrochlore-type oxides were kneaded with a small portion of turpentine oil, and a paste thus obtained was painted onto the surface of the NASICON Na Zr Si PO disc, which was prepared by a sol–gel method 8 , dried and finally sintered at 5008C for 1 h to form a layer of oxide as a sensing electrode. A reference Pt electrode attached on the inside surface of the NASICON disc was always exposed to static atmospheric air. NO -sensing experiments were carried out in a flow apparatus with a heating facility at 4008C. Sample gases containing NO or NO were prepared from each parent gas, i.e., NO diluted with nitrogen or NO diluted with a dry synthetic air N qO gas mix-

Fig. 1 shows sensing performance to NO of the device attached to Pb Ru V O electrode. The element showed rather quick response to NO, i.e., the 90% response time from air to 50 y1000 ppm NO in N was as short as 30 s at 4008C. The EMF response was linear to the logarithm of NO concentration log P between 50 and 1000 ppm with negative slope of y25 mVrdecade at 4008C.

Table 1 summarizes the NO-sensing performance for the all sensor elements tested. Most of the elements, except the Pb Bi Ru O -based one, showed rather good sensing performance to NO. The EMF responses were . linear to the logarithm of NO concentration log PNO

between 50 and 1000 ppm with negative slopes between y13 and y86 mVrdecade for the all elements except the Pb Sn Ru O -based one, which showed a positive slope of q18 mVrdecade. Although the element using Pb Ru O showed rather slow response to NO, i.e., the 90% response of ca. 15min, the elements using the A or B site-substituted Pb–Ru-based pyrochlore-type oxides gave fast response, and the Pb Ru V O -based one had the best sensing performance to NO.

It was further found that the prepared sensor devices could also respond to NO diluted in air at the examined concentration range between 20 and 200 ppm at 4008C. Fig. 2 shows sensing performance to NO of the device electrode at 4008C. The attached to Pb Ru V O device responded rather well to switching from dry synthetic air to the sample gas containing NO . The 90% response time to 110 ppm NO was as short as 1 min. The EMF change was linear to the logarithm of NO concen-

Table 1 Sensing performance to NO and NO of various sensor elements using Pb–Ru-based electrodes at 4008C D E NO sE at 505 ppm in N yE , D E NO sE at 110 ppm in air yE , os sovershoot, 90% response time: 500 ppm NO, 110 ppm NO . Electrode material

Solid electrolyte NO sensor using NASICON and pyrochlore-type oxide of Pb Ru V O electrode was found to exhibit good performance for the potentiometric sensing of NO as well as NO at 4008C. The EMF responses were linear to the logarithm of NO or NO2 concentration. A mixed potential should be considered for the sensing mechanism.

