Graded coatings with a corrosion-resistant glass composition protecting the metal and surface silica contents as low as 53 wt.-% were successfully fabricated. Also, layers containing as much as 50 wt.-% of synthetic hydroxyapatite were prepared with no appreciable degradation of the HA. The preliminary adhesion tests indicate a strong glass/metal bond, while at the same time the coatings form apatite on their surfaces when tested in vitro. The multilayer coating approach used in this work provides an exciting prospect for engineering new implant coatings.

The glasses were fabricated following a conventional procedure described elsewhere [14], and their thermal properties were evaluated by dilatometry. The coatings were prepared using a standard enameling technique in which glass or glass/HA suspensions in ethanol (particle size <20 mm) were sequentially deposited on Ti6Al4V plates (99 % purity, 15´

In recent years, global warming caused by CO2 gas emission has become a very serious problem, and the effective suppression of CO2 generated in various industries is urgently required. In order to effectively reduce the amount of CO2 gas emitted into the atmosphere, on-site monitoring and control of CO2 generated from each emitting site are required. To accomplish this target, commonly used methods such as infrared spectroscopy are not suitable because of the large size of the set-up. Therefore, compact sensors that can be installed at every site are required. Until now, semiconducting[1–3] and solid electrolyte[4–9] materials have been proposed for use in compact CO2 sensors. However, with the sensors using semiconductors, the influence of gas species other than CO2 can not be avoided, since their detecting mechanism is based on gas adsorption on the semiconductor’s surface. In contrast, solid electrolyte sensors, in general, have the unique characteristic that only one ion species can migrate in the solid. Solid electrolytes are used for various practical applications such as oxygen gas sensors, based on yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ), and heart pacemakers, etc. Recently, a CO2 sensor composed of a Li+-conducting solid electrolyte and YSZ with Li2CO3 as an auxiliary electrode was reported.[8,9] The CO2 concentration was measured by the electromotive force (EMF) output, which depends strongly on the activity of the Li2O formed at the interface between the Li+ ion conductor and

Department of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering Osaka University 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871 (Japan) E-mail: adachi@chem.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp

Li2O is very unstable and once cracks appear in the sensor cell, Li2O reacts with water vapor and CO2 in the detecting atmosphere to form LiOH and Li2CO3, resulting in a considerable deviation in the sensor output. In order to overcome this critical problem, a new type of CO2 sensor using electrolyte (Sc2(WO4)3) for the Li+ ion conductor was proposed.[10] The Sc2(WO4)3 electrolyte has the merit of possessing the highest trivalent ion conductivity among the tungstate solid electrolytes with Sc2(WO4)3 type structure.[11–17] The sensor output based on the Sc2(WO4)3 electrolyte is very stable because the EMF depends on the activity of the oxide Sc2O3 formed at the interface between Sc2(WO4)3 and YSZ. However, the hexavalent tungsten ion existing in Sc2(WO4)3 is easily reduced to a lower valent state in a reducing atmosphere. As a result electrical conduction appears and seriously deteriorates the sensing characteristics. Furthermore, since the sinterability (the degree of compressibility, i.e., the degree that corresponds to the relative density of the pellets) of the Sc2(WO4)3 electrolyte is appreciably low, Li2CO3 is used, as the auxiliary electrode permeates into the Sc2(WO4)3 grain boundaries and the permeation makes the Sc2(WO4)3 fragile and weakens the mechanical strength of the pellets. In the worst case, Li2CO3 reaches the interface between Sc2(WO4)3 and YSZ, and the cell cannot work as a sensing tool. In order to fabricate a compact CO2 sensor with a high sensitivity and good long-term stability, a solid electrolyte with a high chemical stability and also, at the same time, a high mechanical strength is required.

In this communication, we selected the newly developed trivalent Sc3+-conducting solid electrolyte with Nasicontype structure[18] as a candidate for use as a solid electrolyte in a CO2 sensor. The material was chosen from the perspective of its chemical stability and mechanical strength. The sensor set-up is illustrated in Figure 1. The electrolyte is Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3, which is a chemically stable compound of phosphate with zirconium, and a good sensing performance is demonstrated.

chemical stable but also physical stable, that is, a reasonably high sinterability is also required. Table 1 shows the Vickers hardness, the relative density, and the conductivity at 600  30)C of Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3, with the corresponding data for

The Vickers hardness and the relative density of Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 were 293 Hv and 99.9 %, and the hardness than that of Sc2(WO4)3. The was 7.3 times higher Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 shows considerably higher sinterability than the Sc2(WO4)3 (relative density: 89 %), although the conductivity is reduced to about one third. The lower conductivity is not a problem for CO2 sensing because the present sensor detects gas concentration by monitoring the potentiometric signal of the sensor output and the current passing through the sensor element is low. After the experiment for CO2 detection, no change was observed on the Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 surface where it was kept in contact with Li2CO3, while Sc2(WO4)3 became ductile and many cracks appeared on the Sc2(WO4)3 surface, easily observable at a glance. This phenomenon clearly indicates that the auxiliary electrode did not penetrate into the solid electrolyte due to the considerably higher relative density of the Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3. In addition, Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 is a chemically stable compound of phosphate with zirconium, so any electrical conduction that results in the electrical short-circuit of solids would not be expected to appear even in a reducing atmosphere. Therefore, Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 is thought to be a much more suitable solid electrolyte for a CO2 sensor compared with Sc2(WO4)3, from the point of view of both chemical stability and mechanical strength. Furthermore, since the sensor fabricated with the Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 solid electrolyte forms a very stable oxide (Sc2O3) at the interface between Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 and YSZ, as described below, the sensor based on Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 is expected to show a stable sensor output.

The following reactions are expected to occur at the detecting electrode, the interface between the detecting electrode and Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 (interface I), the interface between Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 and YSZ (interface II), and at the reference electrode.

Practical gas sensors should have a high sensing performance, including high sensitivity and high selectivity, together with physical stability. In addition, the sensor should also be chemically stable so it is able to operate in conditions where the atmosphere changes from oxidizing to reducing and vice versa. The solid electrolytes should be not only

As the base electrolyte, auxiliary electrode, and the LiZr2(PO4)3 formed at the interface between those two are supposed to be in their thermodynamically standard salts, the activities aSc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 are unity. Furthermore, the oxygen partial pressure at the detecting electrode (O2¢) is exactly equal to that at the reference electrode (O2²) because the present sensor cell is inserted in the same atmosphere, as shown in Figure 1. Thus, the Nernst equation is written as:

In Equation 6, (aSc2O3) is constant due to the high stability of Sc2O3 at the operating temperature of 550  30)C, and Equation 6 can be simplified as:

Figure 2 depicts a typical sensor response curve in a dry atmosphere. The time taken to reach 90 % response was less than 1 min, and the sensor output showed a continuously reversible response. The measured EMF variation with the CO2 concentration is plotted as a function of the logarithm of the CO2 partial pressure in Figure 3, with the slope calculated from Equation 7. The sensor output obtained by changing the CO2 concentration has a linear relationship, and the n value obtained from the EMF slope is 2.05, which almost obeys the Nernst Equation 7. For the

Fig. 2. A typical sensor response curve of the CO2 sensor at 550  30)C. a) 1–5 % CO2; b) 200 –2000 ppm CO2.

Fig. 3. The relation between the sensor output and the logarithm of the CO2 concentration at 550  30)C.

purpose of using the present sensor in an actual detecting site, a stable sensor output is very important. In the case of a sensor fabricated with a Li+ ion conductor, the EMF shifts,[19] especially after a week of operation, because the EMF strongly depends on the activity of the oxide, Li2O, and the activity changes easily in the first stage. In contrast, the sensor based on Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 does not show any significant EMF deviation. The reason for the high initial stability is due to the stability of the compound formed at the interface between the trivalent cation conducting solid electrolyte and YSZ, that is, Sc2O3.

Since other gas species such as nitrogen oxide (NOx) and H2O coexist and the oxygen concentration continuously changes in an emitted gas atmosphere, a highly selective CO2 sensor is required. The effect of coexistence on CO2 sensing was investigated over a 12 h period by changing the concentration of coexistent gases. No interference by the coexisting NOx and H2O (0–500 ppm and 0–20 vol.-%, respectively), or by the oxygen content (0–40 vol.-%), was observed, even if the coexistent gas content was drastically changed, indicating that the sensor element is highly stable and the present sensor also possesses a high selectivity as well as a high sensitivity.

the compact sensor based on Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 and YSZ solid electrolytes with the Li2CO3 auxiliary electrode was found to show not only a high sensitivity, but also a high selectivity for CO2 sensing with a rapid and reproducible response. Because Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 has both a high chemical stability and a high mechanical strength, the present sensor is expected to be a promising CO2 sensor, useful in a variety of conditions such as from a reducing to an oxidizing atmosphere and also with temperature variations.

 After obtaining a white precipitate, the solution was heated at 75  30)C for 24 h, then water was vaporized at 130  30)C for 8 h. The dried precipitate was heated at 300  30)C for 24 h and the powder obtained was pelletized and sintered at 850  30)C for 24 h. Yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) was prepared by a conventional solid-state reaction from reagent grade Y2O3 (99.9 %) and ZrO2 (99.9 %). After mixing ZrO2 and Y2O3 in a molar ratio of 9:1 in a mortar, the mixed powder was heated twice for 6 h at 1600  30)C. The obtained powder was pelletized and sintered at 1600  30)C for 12 h.

The characterization of Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 and YSZ was done by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) using Cu Ka radiation (M18XHF, Mac Science). The XRD data were collected by a step scanning method for the 2y range from 10 30) to 70 30) with a step width of 0.04 30) and a scan speed of 10 30)/min. The Vickers hardness of sintered pellets of Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 and Sc2(WO4)3 was measured by using the microhardness tester (HMV-2, Shimadzu).

On the center surface (diameter: 6.2 mm) of the pellets, a Pt layer was sputtered as the electrodes. Two solid electrolytes were fixed by an inorganic adhesive agent (Sumiceram-17D, Asahi). The platinum and gold net were attached to the pellets as the reference and the detecting electrode, respectively. Pt and Au wire were utilized as the leads. By heating the sensor element at 650  30)C for 12 h in air with 5 vol.-% CO2, Li2CO3 was formed from LiOCH3, which was attached to the Sc1/3Zr2(PO4)3 surface. EMF measurements were performed at 550  30)C with the CO2 concentration ranging from 200 to 2000 ppm and from 1 to 5 %, which was regulated by mixing air with 1 vol.-% CO2 diluted with N2 or air with pure CO2, respectively. The EMF measurements were also made in an atmosphere where NO (0–500 ppm), NO2 (0–500 ppm), or O2 (0–40 %) exist with the CO2 concentration at 1 %. The CO2 sensing characteristics were also studied in an air atmosphere where water vapor (4.2, 10, 20 vol.-%) exists.

Self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) have attracted much attention due to their versatile application prospects.[1–3] Monolayers of long-chain alkanethiols on gold surfaces are by far the best studied systems. Since the two-dimensional order of SAMs results from intermolecular interactions, SAMs with aromatics incorporated in the alkyl chain are of particular interest because of the steric and electronic influences of the aromatics on the layer structure and ordering. Packing and order of azobenzene-functionalized alkanethiol SAMs, for example, are found to be dominated by the anisotropic space requirements and interactions of the azobenzene moiety.[4] Crystalline-packed and -oriented SAMs,[5] as well as more liquid-like ones,[6,7] have been observed using aryl-terminated alkanethiols. The influence of the position of the aromatic group incorporated into the self-organizing compound has also been discussed.[8,9]

In order to investigate the influence of aromatic rings in different positions of the layer on the orientation and packing of SAMs, we describe here the monolayer formation not only of the terminally aryl-substituted eicosanethiols, 1, and eicosylthiophenol, 2, but also of the novel class of oligo(arylalkyl) thiols, 3, with alternating alkylene and aryl groups (Scheme 1).

The synthesis of the alkanethiols 1–3 has already been published.[10] Now we report on the formation of self-assembled monolayers of these thiols on gold and their characterization by X-ray photoelectron (XPS) and FTIR spectroscopy as well as by contact angle measurements.

、
