Solid-state electrochemical sensor devices combined with sodium super ionic conductor NASICON: Na

discs and perovskite-type oxide electrodes have been developed for the detection of CO in the range of 100–2000 ppm. Among the various sensor devices tested, Co-based perovskite-type oxide electrodes were found to show excellent sensing properties to CO at 200–3008C. Especially, NdCoO and La Ba CoO -based elements showed the best CO sensing properties, i.e., the sensor response EMF was almost linear to the logarithm of CO concentration in the range between 100 and 2000 ppm, the response time to 500 ppm CO was as short as 1–2 min. An open-reference electrode type sensor element, which fitted with NdCoO and La Pb CoO for sensing and reference electrodes, respectively, showed excellent CO sensing properties and hardly affected with oxygen partial pressure. q 2000 Elsevier Science S.A. All rights reserved.

There have been increasing needs for all-solid-state CO sensors which are reliable, inexpensive, and compact, from the recent deepening concern about the emissions of CO from the global warming issue as well as from the growing needs of CO monitoring in various fields and the control of CO in various technologies. So far, many kinds of compact CO sensors using various materials, such as solid electrolyte 1–4 , mixed oxide capacitors 5 , polymers with carbonate solution 6 and so on, have been investigated. Among them, solid electrolyte-type CO sensors are of particular interest from the viewpoint of lowcost, high-sensitivity, high-selectivity and simple-element structure. Recently, it has been reported that the use of metal oxide electrodes, such as SnO with Sb, V 7 or In O 8 , instead of conventional metal carbonate for the auxiliary phase of solid electrolyte CO sensors, seems to bring about better sensing performance at wide operation temperature as well as chemical andror thermal stability. Especially, NASICON-based devices seem to be the most promising sensor material from the viewpoint of high conductivity at lower temperature and high chemical stability of NASICON as a solid electrolyte. In our previous study, it was also revealed that La-based perovskite-type oxides have worked as a sensing electrode for NASICONw x based solid electrolyte CO sensor 9 .

In this paper, we have investigated the sensing properties of various perovskite-type oxides as an electrode for the solid electrolyte CO sensor. As a result, it was turned out that Co-based perovskite-type oxide-based device showed excellent sensing properties to CO at 200–3008C. It was further found that an open-reference electrode type w 4,10 CO sensor device fitted with different kinds of electrodes could be fabricated.

A BO : LnsLa, Pr, Nd, Sm, Gd, AXsCa, Sr, Ba, Ce, Pb, BsCr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni; xs0–0.4 and commercial metal-oxides NiO and Co O : 4 Kishida Chemical were used as the electrode material. Perovskite-type oxides were prepared by an amorphous malate precursor AMP method 11 . The precursors pre-

Fig. 2 shows CO sensing properties of the device  14) Type A attached with LaCoO electrode at various temperature. The device showed rather good and reversible EMF responses to CO at the temperatures between 1008C and 4008C, as shown in Fig. 2 a . The each response was rather quick and the 90% response time was within 1–5 min for the each temperature. The highest change of EMF of the LaCoO -based device was observed at 3008C. The EMF responses were linear to the logarithm of CO concentration log P between 100 and 2000 ppm with the slopes of 11–33 mVrdecade between 1008C and 4008C, as shown in Fig. 2 b . Most of the devices fitted with perovskite-type oxide electrodes showed highest sensitivities at 3008C. In some cases, such as the devices fitted with NdCoO and SmCoO showed different temperature dependence, i.e., the highest slope for EMF vs. log PCO 2 was seen at 2008C. In the further investigations, it was also found that the devices fitted with LaMnO or NdCoO 3 the low temperature of also showed CO responses at 308C, although the slopes for EMF vs. log P were as CO 2 low as q13 or q16 mVrdecade, respectively.

Fig. 2. Sensing performance to CO of the device attached with LaCoO 3 electrode at various temperature Type A . a Response transient to 300 ppm CO , b D E vs. log P

Fig. 1. Schematic diagrams of solid electrolyte CO sensor devices using perovskite-type oxide electrode. a Closed-reference electrode type Type . A , b open-reference electrode type Type B .

pared from malic acid and the nitrates of constituent metal were heated at 6508C for 2 h in an ambient atmosphere. X-ray diffraction analysis XRD: JDX-3500K, JEOL revealed that the oxides thus prepared showed well-crystallized and almost single-phase perovskite-type oxides.

Fig. 1 shows schematic diagrams of CO sensor devices using perovskite-type oxide electrodes with a conventional closed-reference electrode type Type A or an open-refer. ence electrode type Type B . NASICON Na Zr Si PO 12 discs were prepared by a sol–gel method using aqueous solution 12 . A paste prepared with oxides and turpentine oil was painted onto the surface of the NASICON disc, and dried and sintered at 5008C for 1 h to form a layer of oxide electrode as a sensing or a reference electrode. For the device of Type A, a reference Pt electrode attached on the inside surface of the NASICON disc was always exposed to static atmospheric air. For the device of Type B, on the other hand, both sensing and reference electrodes were exposed to the same gas mixture.

CO sensing experiments were carried out in a conventional flow apparatus equipped with a heating facility at 30–4008C. Sample gases containing CO was prepared from a parent gas, i.e., CO diluted with a dry synthetic air N qO gas mixture , by mixing it with the air. The  14) sensor response, EMF, was measured with a digital elec-

Co, Ni showed rather high accuracy slope and sensitivity .D E . In the LaBO systems, the electrode with BsCo  14) showed the highest performance. The stability of the sensor response was also dependent on the kind of electrode materials, and it was found that the order for the stability was Bs CosNi excellent )Mn good 4Fe poor . . Thus, the Co-based perovskite-type oxide seems the most promising material for the sensing electrode of the CO2 sensor.

Table 1 summarizes the CO sensing performance for the all sensor devices tested. Most of the devices showed rather good sensing performance to CO .2

The EMF responses were linear to the logarithm of CO2 concentration log P between 100 and 2000 ppm with slopes between 24 and 42 mVrdecade. Among the various sensor elements tested, those using Ln–Co–O systems showed better sensing properties to CO . NdCoO , and La Ba CoO -based devices showed the best results. On the other hand, it was also revealed that the NiOand the La Pb CoO -based elements showed no response to CO at 3008C.

2 The reason for the dependence of the sensor response properties on the electrode material was not clear yet, but it seems to come from the electro-catalytic activity andror sorption–desorption behavior of the reaction gases to the perovskite-type oxide electrodes used. Further investigation is now in progress.

As the oxide electrode-based solid electrolyte device seems to affect with oxygen partial pressure, oxygen sensing properties of the devices were investigated. Fig. 4
For the most of the sensor devices tested, the slope of the line for D E vs. increased with increasing operating temperature, like the case for the LaCoO -based device, as shown in Fig. 2 b . Thus, the sensing mechanism seems not to come from the conventional Nernst’ type but probably the mixed potential one w x13 . However, the sensing mechanisms of the present electrochemical device still need further investigations.

Hereafter, operating temperature was mainly fixed at

As it is well known that the properties of perovskite-type oxides was largely dependent on the kind of B-site metal cation in LaBO system, the effects of B-site cation in 3 lanthanum-based LaBO ,3 La Ca BoO ; BsCr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni on CO sensing 2 properties were further investigated. Fig. 3 shows the effects of B-site cation on CO sensing properties in the La– Ca –B–O systems. Although, BsCr system showed no CO response, the other devices showed CO responses with different values of the slope and the EMF change. In the La Ca BO systems, the electrodes with BsFe,

oxides .

It was further found that all sensor devices tested responded to oxygen and most of the sensor devices except the NiO-based one showed almost the same EMF response properties to oxygen, i.e., EMF responses were linear to the logarithm of oxygen concentration with a slope of ca. 30 mVrdecade, while the NiO-based device showed a slope of ca. 60 mVrdecade at 3008C. The slopes of ca. 30 or 60 mVrdecade for most of the perovskite-type oxides or NiO, respectively, should be considered Nernst’s type and they mean ns4 or 2, respectively, where n is number of electrons involved in the electrode reaction. In these cases, the electrode reactions of Eq. 1 or 2 could be considered. O q4eys2O2y 1 14) . O q2eys2Oy 2 14) . Fig. 5 shows EMF response behavior to oxygen or carbon dioxide of the various sensor devices attached with some

Fig. 5. EMF response behavior to oxygen or CO of the sensor devices . attached with various perovskite-type oxide electrodes at 3008C Type A .

Fig. 6. Sensing performance to CO or O of the open-reference elec2 tr o d e B : d e v ic e . NdCoO NASICON La Pb CoO . 3

oxide electrodes at 3008C. Most of the devices have almost the same slope for the detection of O as well as CO , this means that the CO sensor attached with oxide easily affected with oxygen partial pressure. On the other hand, NiOand La Pb CoO -based devices, which have less CO sensitivity, also showed oxygen sensitivities with different slopes.

As shown in the above section, La Pb CoO electrode has no CO sensitivity, while it shows good oxygen response of almost the same sensitivity of the other perovskite-type oxides which have high CO sensitivity, such as La Ca CoO , NdCoO , and so on. This unique performance of La Pb CoO electrode could be applicable as a reference electrode of an open-reference electrode type sensor device. Thus, we prepared a sensor device of Type B, which combinines NdCoO and La Pb CoO for sensing and reference electrodes, respectively. The NdCoO and La Pb CoO electrodes have high and poor sensitivity to CO , respectively, while they have almost the same sensing performance to oxygen. Fig. 6 shows CO and O sensing properties of the open-reference electrode type sensor device at 3008C. The sensor still has rather good CO sensing properties, while the sensor hardly affected with oxygen partial pressure, as expected.

Solid electrolyte CO sensor devices using NASICON and perovskite-type oxides of Ln–Co–O-based electrodes were found to exhibit good performance for the potentiometric sensing of CO at 200–3008C. The EMF responses were linear to the logarithm of CO concentration. A

Y. Shimizu, N. YamashitarSensors and Actuators B 64 2000 102–106

mixed potential should be considered for the sensing mechanism. An open-reference electrode type sensor element, which was fitted with NdCoO and La Pb CoO 3 for sensing and reference electrodes, respectively, showed excellent CO sensing properties and hardly affected with oxygen partial pressure.