As  the  competitive  cathode  material  of  sodium-ion  batteries  (SIBs), P2-type Na0.67Ni0.33Mn0.67O2 (NMO) possesses high theoretical specific capacity and high operating voltage. However, it suffers from severe capacity fading caused by the unfavorable  P2−O2  phase  transition  during  charge/discharge  cycling  process. 

Moreover,  the  HF  formed  by  the  reaction  of  electrolyte  salts  with  trace  water molecules causes the voltage decay of NMO. Herein, the dual-modification strategy of  Mg  substitution  for  transition  metal  in  bulk  structure  and  NaTi2(PO4)3  surface coating  layer  is  designed  to  solve  above  defects.  It  has  been  found  that  Mg substitution  can  stabilize  the  bulk  structure  and  enlarge  the  slab-spacing,  while  the NASICON-type NaTi2(PO4)3 coating layer can stabilize the interface, prevent the HF impact  and  facilitate  the  Na+  migration  at  the  cathode-electrolyte  interface. 

Additionally,  the  combination  of  Mg  substitution  and  NaTi2(PO4)3  coating  can restrain particle crack and exfoliation. The results show that the as-prepared material by dual-modification technology exhibits excellent cycling stability (77.4% capacity retention after 200 cycles at a rate of 1 C) and good rate performance (106.8 mAh g−1 at a rate of 5 C).


With  the  rapid  consumption  of  fossil  fuels  and  increasing  attention  to  serious environmental issues, it is critical to develop renewable clean energy. However, the development  of  the  renewable  clean  energy,  such  as  water  energy,  solar  energy, geothermal energy, and wind energy, are usually limited by geography and season [1]. 

Therefore,  the  energy  storage  technology  is  of  great  significance  to  take  full advantage of renewable clean energy. Among all energy storage technologies, due to the highly natural abundant and wide geographical distribution of sodium resources, the  low-cost  sodium-ion  batteries  (SIBs)  have  received  widespread  attention  in  the field of large-scale energy storage [2-5].

In general, the electrode materials are the most important components of SIBs, and they determine the energy density, cyclic life and rate capability of the SIBs. So far,  the  anode  materials  of  SIBs  such  as  carbon  materials,  alloying  materials  and chemical  conversion  reaction  materials  have  been  extensively  studied  [6-9].  These anode  materials  can  basically  meet  the  requirements  of  commercial  application  of SIBs.  However,  although  the  cathode  materials  of  SIBs  are  the  similar  to  those  of lithium ion batteries (LIBs) and have been widely researched, their electrochemical 

Based  on  the  arrangement  of  the  transition-metal  layer  and  the  coordination environment of sodium ions, the layered oxide cathode materials are usually classified into two categories: O3-type and P2-type [16]. In general, P2-type materials exhibit better cycle performance and rate capability due to their stable and open framework. 

In addition, P2-type materials are less sensitive to moisture than O3-type materials. 

Specially,  P2-type  Na0.67Ni0.33Mn0.67O2  (NMO)  can  display  a  high  capacity  of  161 mAh g-1 with a high average voltage of about 3.7 V in view of the Ni2+/Ni4+ redox couple [17-20]. However, the P2-type NMO suffers from rapid capacity fading during charge/discharge  process.  To  improve  the  capacity  retention  of  NMO,  cation substitution  is  a  common  and  effective  strategy  [21-23].  For  instance,  Wu  et  al. substituted  some  of  the  Ni2+  ions  with  Zn2+  in  P2-type  NMO  materials  and  the Zn-substituted  P2-type  material  showed  the  improved  capacity  retention  duo  to  the suppression  of  the  unfavorable  P2-O2  phase  transition  [24].  Moreover,  surface coating has been confirmed to be another promising strategy for improve the cyclic stability of materials. For example, Liu et al. reported that Al2O3 surface coating can significantly improve the electrochemical properties of the P2-type NMO material by suppressing  the  particles  exfoliation  and  the  adverse  side  reaction  with  electrolyte [25]. Besides, metal fluoride and metal phosphate have also been used as a surface coating layer in P2-type cathode material [26, 27]. However, above coating layers are not good Na-ion conductors, and thus lead to the sluggish Na+ reaction kinetics at the interface between the active material and electrolyte. 

Generally speaking, an ideal coating material can both protect the bulk material and  accelerate  the  Na+  diffusion.  The  NASICON-type  materials  possess  stable  and open  three-dimensional  crystal  framework,  in  which  sodium  ions  can  rapidly intercalate/deintercalate [28, 29]. In this context, as one of NASICON-type materials, NaTi2(PO4)3  can  facilitate  Na+  mobility  during  the  charge/discharge  processes. 

Besides,  NaTi2(PO4)3  also  shows  the  advantages  of  environmental  friendliness  and low cost [30, 31]. Therefore, the NaTi2(PO4)3 is considered a very promising coating material for the cathode materials of SIBs.

Regarding  the  modification  of  layered  oxide  cathode  for  SIBs,  various  studies from our group have been reported in recent years [32-35]. Herein, to simultaneously stabilize the  bulk  structure  and  modify  surface  of the  P2-type  NMO,  a dual-modification strategy via bulk Mg substitution and NaTi2(PO4)3 surface coating has  been  designed.  The  Mg  substituted  Na0.67Ni0.28Mg0.05Mn0.67O2  (NMMO)  is synthesized through method and Na0.67Ni0.28Mg0.05Mn0.67O2 (NMMO@NTP) is further finished through a wet coating method. More importantly, the NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP) is the first time used as a coating material in the cathode materials of SIBs. Moreover, the effects of Mg substitution and NTP coating on the morphology, structure and electrochemical performances of the NMMO@NTP materials were systematically studied and discussed in detail.


The P2-type layered Na0.67Ni0.33Mn0.67O2 (NMO) and Na0.67Ni0.28Mg0.05Mn0.67O2 (NMMO)  samples  were  prepared  via  a typical  sol–gel  method.  Typically, stoichiometric  ratio  of  sodium  acetate,  magnesium  acetate  tetrahydrate,  manganous acetate  and  nickel acetate  tetrahydrate  without  further  treatment  were  firstly dissolved  in  50  ml  deionized  water  under  continuous  stirring  for  30  min  to  obtain solution A. In order to compensate for the sodium evaporation during calcination, an excess of approximately 5 mol% sodium acetate was added. A certain amount of citric acid  monohydrate  was  dispersed  to  other  50  ml  deionized  water  under  continuous stirring  for  30  min  to  obtain  solution  B.  Then,  solution  A  was  slowly  added  to solution B. After that, the solution was continuously stirred at 80 ℃ to evaporate the solvent and the obtained viscous gel was further dried at 120 °C in vacuum for 12 h. 

The resulting gel was ground into powder and sintered at 450 °C for 6 hours in the air. 

After cooling down to room temperature, the obtained amorphous powder was ground again, and then calcined at 900 °C for 12 h in the air to obtain final target samples.



The synthesis of NaTi2(PO4)3-coated Na0.67Ni0.28Mg0.05Mn0.67O2 (NMMO@NTP) sample: C16H36O4Ti and 1 g as-prepared NMMO powder were firstly dispersed 50 mL anhydrous ethanol in turn under continuous stirring at room temperature. NH4H2PO4 and CH3COONa were added to 10 ml of deionized water. The designed amount of NaTi2(PO4)3 was 3 wt % of the NMMO powder. After stirring for 1 h, the aqueous solution is slowly dripped into the alcohol mixture. The resulting mixture was stirred continuously at 60 ℃ to evaporate the solvent and further dried at 80 ℃ overnight.  After that, the dried powder was ground and then heated at 700 ℃ for 3 h in the air to obtain the NMMO@NTP sample.



To fabricate cathode electrodes, 80 wt % synthesized active material, 10 wt % super  P  and  10  wt  %  polyvinylidene  fluoride  (PVDF)  were  mixed  in  N-methyl pyrrolidone  (NMP)  solution.  The  as-prepared  slurry  was  coated  onto  Al  foil  and further dried at 80 °C overnight in a vacuum drying oven. The loading weight of the electrode was about 2.5 mg cm-2. The CR2025 coin-type cells were fabricated in an Ar-filled glovebox (H2O < 0.1ppm, O2< 0.1 ppm) with sodium metal as the counter electrode.  The  cell  separator  was  glass  fiber  (Whatman/GFA)  and  the  electrolyte solution  was  1  M  NaPF6  in  propylene  carbonate  with  5%  fluoroethylene  carbonate (PC: FEC, 95:5 in volume). The half cells were charged and discharged in a voltage range of 2.5-4.3 V on battery test system (NEWARE). The Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves  were  acquired  from  2.5  V  to  4.3  V  by  an  electrochemical  workstation (CHI660E, Shanghai) at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. And AC-impedance measurements were  tested  by  the  electrochemical  workstation  (CHI660E,  Shanghai)  with  an  AC amplitude of 10 mV in the frequency range of 0.01 Hz and 1 MHz. Regarding the GITT measurement, the Coin-type cells were cycled at 0.1 C for an interval τ of 10 min. After that, the coins were static at open circuit voltage for 1 h to keep the voltage to the Es value.


To further verify the formation of the NTP coating layer and explore the effects of  modification  on  the  surface  chemistry  of  the  material,  the  oxidation  state information  of  each  element  on  the  surface  for  NMO,  NMMO,  and  NMMO@NTP samples was obtained by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Figure 3a shows the survey spectrum of NMMO@NTP sample, the peaks of P 2p, C 1s, O 1s, Ti 2p, Mn  2p, Ni  2p, Na  1s  and Mg  1s  can  be clearly observed  without  impurity  binding energy  peaks  of  extra  element.  As  shown  in  Figure  3b,  the  Mg  1s  peak  of NMMO@NTP sample is located at 1303.1 eV, indicating that the valence state of Mg is  divalent  [40].  As  shown  in  Figure  3c,  the  P  2p  binding  energy  peak  of NMMO@NTP sample is 132.7 eV. In addition, the Ti 2p spectrum of NMMO@NTP displays  two  binding  energy  peaks  at  458.0  and  463.6  eV,  corresponding  to  the  Ti 2p3/2  and  Ti  2p1/2  spin–orbital  splitting  photoelectrons,  respectively  (Figure  3d).  It confirms the tetravalency of Ti element in the NMMO@NTP [31]. The Ni 2p spectra and corresponding fitted profiles for NMO, NMMO and NMMO@NTP are exhibited in Figure 3e, the Ni 2p spectrum of NMO displays four characteristic peaks. The Ni 2p3/2 peak is located at 854.4 eV with a satellite peak at 860.8 eV, and the Ni 2p1/2 binding energy peak is 871.6 eV with a corresponding satellite peak at 878.4 eV. The formation of satellite peaks in the Ni 2p spectra is caused by multi-electron excitation, and the Ni 2p spectrum of NMO indicates that valence state of Ni is divalent in the NMO [24, 40]. Moreover, the Ni 2p spectra of NMMO and NMMO@NTP present the similar characteristic peaks with the similar binding energy. As shown in Figure 3f, the  Mn  2p  spectra  of  NMO,  NMMO  and  NMMO@NTP  display  two  characteristic peaks at about 641.8 eV and 653.4 eV, corresponding to the Mn 2p3/2 and Mn 2p1/2, respectively. It means that the Mn exists as Mn4+ in three samples [22, 25]. The Ni 2p and Mn 2p spectra for three samples reveal that Mg substitution or NTP coating does not  change  the  oxidation  states  of  Ni2+  and  Mn4+.  The  Figure  3g  shows  the  Na  1s spectra  of  NMO,  NMMO  and  NMMO@NTP.  The  Na  1s  spectra  of  NMO  and NMMO exhibit a characteristic peak at 1070.4 eV, which is consistent with previous report [34]. Besides, the Na 1s peak of NMMO@NTP shows a higher binding energy of 1071.1 eV with a larger area. It may be ascribed to the formation of NTP on the surface  of  NMMO  and  the  introduction  of  additional  sodium  source  during  the coating  process.  In  addition,  the  O1s  spectra  and  corresponding  fitted  profiles  for NMO, NMMO and NMMO@NTP are illustrated in Figure 3h. The O 1s spectra of NMO and NMMO show two peaks at about 528.9 and 531.0 eV, corresponding to the peaks of lattice oxygen and the surface oxygen species, respectively [35]. The O 1s spectrum  of  NMMO@NTP  shows  that  the  binding  energy  of  the  NMMO@NTP  is changed after NTP coating, it may be caused by the PO3and Ti-O bonds in the NTP. 

More importantly, the O 1s spectrum of NMMO@NTP displays an additional peak at 533.2 eV which belongs to the P=O peak [41]. Combined with the XRD, FTIR, SEM and XPS results, it is verified the finish of Mg-substituted NMMO bulk material and the formation of NTP surface coating layer.


It can be noticed that the NMMO electrode displays higher coulombic  efficiency  than  NMO.  The  increase  in  coulombic  efficiency  may  be attributed  to  the  inhibition  of  P2-O2  phase  transition  by  Mg  substitution  [40]. 

Especially,  the  NMMO@NTP  electrode  shows  highest  coulombic  efficiency.  It indicates that the NTP coating layer can inhibit the generation of irreversible capacity and improve further the coulombic efficiency. In addition, as shown in Figure 4d, the NMO electrode shows severe capacity fading in the next two cycles, which is mainly attributed to the unfavorable P2-O2 phase transition in high-voltage regions and the side reaction of the material surface with the electrolyte [27]. Furthermore, the NMO electrode  also  shows  voltage  decay.  The  voltage  decay  may  be  caused  by  the dissolution of transition metal ions. According to Equations (1-2), the salt (NaPF6) in the electrolyte decomposes into PF5 during cycling, the water in the electrolyte reacts with PF5 to form HF and accelerates the decomposition of the salt. The contact of HF acid with the surface of the active material will lead to the dissolution of transition metal ions. Importantly, as shown in Figure 4e and f, the capacity fading and voltage delay of NMO is improved after Mg substitution and NTP coating. It indicates that Mg substitution and NTP coating are beneficial to improve the cycle performance of the NMMO. 

The  rate  capabilities  of  NMO,  NMMO  and  NMMO@NTP  were  characterized from  0.1  to  5  C  and  then  back  to  0.1  C  in  the  voltage  of  2.5−4.3  V.  As  shown  in Figure 5a, NMO, NMMO and NMMO@NTP electrodes display a discharge capacity of 33.6, 88.2 and 106.8 mAh g-1 at 5 C, respectively. When the current density returns to 0.1 C, NMO, NMMO and NMMO@NTP electrodes deliver a discharge capacity of 90.1,  112.7  and  120.8  mAh  g-1,  corresponding  to  60.7%,  86.4%  and  91.7%  of  the initial  capacities,  respectively.  Apparently,  the  excellent  rate  performance  of NMMO@NTP  electrode  can  benefit  from  the  Mg-substituted  bulk  and  the  surface NASICON-structured NTP coating layer. The bulk Mg substitution can enlarge the slab-spacing,  and  the  NTP  coating  layer  possesses  high  Na-ion  conductivity  and “zero‐stress”  framework.  It  can  facilitate  ionic  mobility  and  stabilize  the  interface between  NMMO@NTP  electrode  and  electrolyte.  Therefore,  the  NMMO@NTP electrode shows outstanding rate capability. 

The cyclic performances of three samples were evaluated in the voltage range of 2.5-4.3 V after a pre-activation process (cycle 3 times at a rate of 0.1C). Figure 5b presents the cyclic stabilities of NMO, NMMO and NMMO@NTP electrodes at a rate of 0.2 C. The NMO electrode shows a discharge capacity of 55.6 mAh g-1 with a poor capacity  retention  of  41.5  %  after  100  cycles.  By  comparison,  the  NMMO  and NMMO@NTP  electrodes  show  a  discharge  capacity  of  82.3  and  103.9  mAh  g-1, which corresponds to the capacity retention of 63.8 % and 80.4%, respectively. To further  investigate  the  cycling  behaviors  of  three  electrodes,  the  charge-discharge curves of three electrodes at a rate of 0.2 C are shown in Figure 5c-e. Just like the charge-discharge  curves  at  0.1  C,  NMO  electrode  displays  a  rapid  capacity degradation and voltage delay. This phenomenon is improved in NMMO electrode. 

Surprisingly, the charge/discharge curve of NMMO@NTP electrode still shows high discharge capacity  and  clearly  charge/discharge  platform  after 100  cycles.  It  means that NTP coating layer plays a critical role in inhabiting capacity fading and voltage delay.  To  more  clearly  analyze  the  voltage  decay  of  the  three  electrodes,  the histogram  and  cycle  diagram  of  the  midpoint  voltage  for  NMO,  NMMO,  and NMMO@NTP electrodes at rate of 0.2 C are shown in Figure 5f and g, respectively. 

The NMO, NMMO, and NMMO@NTP electrodes show the similar initial midpoint voltage. However, after 100 cycles, the NMO, NMMO, and NMMO@NTP electrodes exhibit a midpoint voltage of 3.25, 3.41 and 3.57 V, corresponding the 88.8%, 93.3%, and 97.3% of the initial midpoint voltage, respectively. Moreover, it can be clearly seen that NMO experienced very severe voltage decay in the first 20 cycles. Being similar  to  the  cyclic  stabilities  of  three  materials  at  1C,  the  above  charge/discharge profiles show the quicker voltage decay of NMO electrode than other two electrodes. 


Figure 5h is the charge/discharge profiles of NMMO@NTP electrode. It can be seen that  NMMO@NTP  electrode  exhibits  good  capacity  retention  and  distinct charge/discharge  platform  at  1C.  As  shown  in  Figure  5i,  NMO,  NMMO  and NMMO@NTP  electrodes  exhibit  an  initial  discharge  capacity  of  102.2,  115.1  and 124.6 mAh g-1, respectively. In the next 80 cycles, the NMO electrode displays rapid capacity degradation. The discharge capacity of NMO electrode is only 20.2 mAh g-1 with  capacity  retention  of  19.7%.  By  contrast,  the  NMMO  and  NMMO@NTP electrodes show a discharge capacity of 68.9 and 96.6 mAh g-1, which correspond to 59.8% and 77.4% of the initial capacity, respectively. In addition, Figure 5j presents the cycling performances and Coulombic efficiency of the NMMO@NTP electrode at 5 C. The NMMO@NTP electrode shows a discharge capacity of 63.8 mA h g-1 with a capacity retention of 63.8% after 300 cycles. Furthermore, the Coulombic efficiency is relatively stable (average Coulomb efficiency = 99.3%).

To  explore  the  action  mechanism  of  Mg  substitution  and  NTP  coating  layer, Figure  6a-c  are  the  SEM  images  of  NMO,  NMMO,  and  NMMO@NTP  electrodes charged to 4.3 V. It can be seen that the NMO electrode shows severe particle crack and exfoliation even only charged to 4.3V. It can be ascribed to the drastic volume shrinkage from the P2-O2 phase transition during charging process [27, 43]. However, no  obvious  particle  crack  and  exfoliation  phenomenon  are  observed  for  NMMO electrode.  It  indicates  that  Mg  substitution  inhibits  the  P2-O2  phase  transition  and reduces  the  degree  of  volume  shrinkage.  Besides,  the  particles  of  NMMO@NTP electrode  can  keep  more  complete  morphology  than  one  of  NMMO  electrode. 

Therefore,  it  proves  further  that  the  NTP  coating  layer  can  also  inhibit  the  particle crack  and  exfoliation.  This  may  benefit  from  the  “zero-stress”  framework  of  the NASICON-type  NTP.  In  order  to  explore  the  effects  of  modification  on  structure stability of materials, Figure 6d-f further exhibits the SEM images of NMO, NMMO and  NMMO@NTP  electrodes  after  150  cycles  at  0.2  C.  It  can  be  found  that  the particles  of  the  NMMO  and  NMMO@NTP  maintain  still  good  integrity,  especially for NMMO@NTP electrode. 

Based on the above experimental results and comparison for the electrochemical performances  and  SEM  images  of  three  electrodes,  Figure  6g  and  h  schematically explain the reasons of NMO electrode failure and the modification mechanism of both Mg  substitution  and  NTP  coating  layer.  As  for  NMO,  the  drastic  volume  change caused  by  phase  transition  induces  the  particles  separation  and  exfoliation,  which results in a high electron and Na+ diffusion resistance and thus brings about the quick capacity  fading  for  NMO  electrode.  In  addition,  the  generation  of  massive  cracks expands the contact area of the particles with HF, which accelerates the dissolution of the transition metal ions. It may accelerate the rapid voltage decay for NMO electrode. 

On  the  contrary,  for  the  NMMO@NTP,  the  bulk  Mg  substitution  can  reduce  the volume contraction of particles by suppressing the P2-O2 phase transition [40], which can  stabilize  bulk  structure  and  suppress  particles  separation  and  exfoliation. 


The  electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)  and  galvanostatic intermittent  titration  technique  (GITT)  were  further  used  to  verify  the  mechanism discussed  above.  The  impedance  spectra  of  NMO,  NMMO  and  NMMO@NTP electrodes after 3 cycles at 0.1C are shown in Figure 7a. The Nyquist plots of three electrodes  show  a  semicircle  in  the  high-frequency  area  and  a  slope  line  in  the low-frequency  area.  The  intercept  between  semicircle  and  the  real  axis  (Z') corresponds  to  the  uncompensated  ohmic  resistance  (Rs).  The  diameter  of  the semicircle approximately represents the value of the charge transfer resistance (Rct) straight and the line slope represents Warburg impedance (Zw) assigned to the Na+ diffusion  in  the  bulk  material.  The  NMO,  NMMO  and  NMMO@NTP  electrodes show Rct value of 320.5, 248.7 and 190 Ω, respectively. Apparently, it indicates that Mg substitution and NTP coating accelerate Na+ migration and improve Na+ reaction kinetics. Figure 7b presents the impedance spectra of three electrodes after 100 cycles at 0.2 C. The Rct value of NMO, NMMO and NMMO@NTP electrodes is 1187, 657.5 and 250.3 Ω. Obviously, Mg substitution and NTP coating can effectively inhibit the growth of Rct. Particularly, the NMMO@NTP displays the lowest Rct both in the fresh cells and after cycled cells. It indicates that the NTP coating layer can facilitate the Na+ diffusion and stabilize the electrode/electrolyte interface. 

The  GITT  were  carried  out  to  obtain  the  Na+  diffusion  coefficients  (DNa+)  of NMO and NMMO@NTP. The DNa+ is calculated by the following equation under the assumption of Fick’s second law.


The  dual-modification  strategy  for  P2-type  Na0.67Ni0.33Mn0.67O2  by  means  of  Mg substitution  for  transition  metal  in  bulk  structure  and  NaTi2(PO4)3  surface  coating layer  was  proposed  and  realized  in  this  study.  Mg  substitution  can  enlarge  the slab-spacing,  promote  the  Na+  diffusion  and  reduce  the  volume  contraction  of particles  through  suppressing  the  P2-O2  phase  transition.  It  guarantees  effectively stable bulk structure stability and suppresses the particles crack and exfoliation during charge/discharge  processes.  The  NASICON-structured  NTP  coating  layer  can decrease interface impedance  and facilitate the  Na+  diffusion the electrode/electrolyte  interface.  In  addition,  the  NTP  coating  layer  can  also  suppress voltage  decay  and  improve  particle  integrity  by  isolating  the  HF  attack.  Therefore, NMMO@NTP exhibits an outstanding cyclic performance (77.4% capacity retention after 200 cycles at 1 C) and rate capability (106.8 mAh g−1 at 5 C mA g-1). Therefore, this  work  provides  a significant  exploration for the  development  and commercialization of high-performance cathode materials of SIBs. 