Interest in ceramic solid electrolytes has led to an extensive search for new ionic conductive materials. One of the most well-known examples is the sodium conductor, NASICON (Na1CxZr2SixP3¡xO12), one of the intermediate solid solutions between Na4Zr2(SiO4)3 and NaZr2(PO4)3 (NZP). Since Goodenough et al. [1] ﬁrst reported the high conductivity of that compound, much work has been devoted to synthesis of analogous compounds. Especially, the synthesis and electric characterization of NZP-type compounds, MIMII2(PO4)3 (MI, alkali metal; MII, tetravalent transition metal) has been investigated [2–4]. NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP) has a NZP-type crystal structure belonging to the space group R3c. It consists of a three-dimensional network made up of TiO6-octahedra sharing the corners of PO4-tetrahedra. This crystal structure is one of the most suitable structures for cation conduction [5, 6]. It is recognized that preparation of solid solutions between NTP and other similar compounds with lower-oxidation state tetrahedral units, for example BO5¡ 4 , results in a material with a higher concentration of conductive cations and thus higher electric conductivity.

When applying these cation-conducting materials to sensors [7], solid-cell type electrodes and other electrode devices, it is necessary to prepare well sintered ceramics. The hydrothermal method is well known as a suitable method for preparing ﬁne powder materials, and for easily preparing a wide range of compounds with various chemical species, especially in solid solution. In this letter, we report the hydrothermal synthesis of boron-substituted NTP and the electrical properties of the sintered materials.

The starting material for the hydrothermal reaction was prepared by the following coprecipitation method. TiCl4 was added with stirring to distilled water cooled by ice. The resulting yellow TiCl4 aqueous solution was combined with a solution of NH3, resulting in a thick yellowish-white precipitate. The semipermeable white gel, Ti(OH)4, was obtained by washing with distilled, deionized water and air drying. For the autogenously hydrothermal reaction, the gel-like Ti(OH)4, 85% H3PO4, H3BO3 and NaOH aqueous solutions were put into a Teﬂon lined mini-autoclave with capacity of 30 cm3. The ratio of these materials were controlled with constant Na concentration in the reaction vessel. The autoclave was heated in an electric furnace for 5 h C. After air cooling the vessel, at temperature of 250 the powdered white product was recovered by ﬁltration, washed with distilled, deionized water and dried in a

The crystalline products were identiﬁed by means of X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) using a RIGAKU RAD-2C with monochromated Cu-Kﬁ radiation. Chemical analysis of the elements Na, Ti and P was performed on the acid solution of the powder sample with an ICP, SEIKOELECTRON SPS7000A. The mass of the water of hydration was estimated from a thermogravimetric analysis that was carried out on a Mac Science TG-DTA 2000 ¡1 from room temperature at a heating rate of 10 C. The scanning electron microscopic obserto 1000 vations were made using a HITACHI S-530, for Pt evapositioned samples. Fine powder samples were calcined C for 6 h. Electric conductivity was measured at 1000 on the sintered-pellet samples using evaporated gold electrodes. Complex impedance was measured using an LCR meter (HP4284A) in a frequency range from C. 20 Hz to 1 MHz, at temperatures from 200 Fig. 1 shows the XRD patterns of the hydrothermally synthesized samples. The nature of the crystalline phases in the products was shown to depend upon the ratio of P to B in the starting materials. On as-prepared samples, a pure single phase with the NTP structure was

obtained at ratios of P : B between 9 : 1 and 7 : 3. On the C, other hand, after sintering at high temperature, 1000 for 3 h, an NTP-type single phase without impurities was obtained at a ratio of 6 : 4 as shown in Fig. 2. TGDTA measurements indicate that the sample with a P : B ratio of 6 : 4 in the starting materials had an endotherC and an exothermic mic mass decrease at about 100 C. The ﬁrst enpeak with no mass change at about 830 dothermic change seems to be due to loss of absorbed water resulting from the hydrothermal synthesis. The second exothermic one is thought to be a solid-state reaction between NTP and another coexisting phase. The NTP-type single phase produced by calcination at high temperature was the result of this reaction. TG-DTA and ICP measurement showed that the powder sample prepared hydrothermally with a P : B ratio of 6 : 4 in the starting materials had the chemical composition, Na2:2Ti2B0:6P2:4O12¢0.97H2O. The lattice parameters, a and c, and cell volume, V , of the sintered samples belonging to a hexagonal system are shown in Fig. 3. Both the a-parameter and lattice volume increased and the c-parameter decreased with increasing P : B to 6 : 4. Solid-solution type materials were considered to be formed below the 6 : 4 value because the lattice parameters changed continuously with the ratio of the chemical species. This indicates a change of lattice parameters to conform to the size of a new tetrahedral unit, BO4.

Arrhenius plots of the conductivity of the sintered samples determined by the complex impedance method are shown in Fig. 4. The logarithm of the conductivity changed linearly versus 1=T over a wide range of temperatures. The conductivity increased and the activation energy decreased with the substitution of boron C for phosphorous. In this case, enrichment with Na enhanced the conductivity because of an increase in the concentration of charge carriers. A similar correlation between electric conductivity and composition has been reported for other NASICON-related compounds

Figure 3 The (A) lattice parameters a and c, and (B) cell volume V , of the sintered samples belonging to a hexagonal system.

Figure 4 Arrhenius plots of the electric conductivity of the sintered samples determined by the complex impedance method.

Structural properties are also important factors in determining electric conductivities. The larger cell-volumes in these NASICON-type structures with a higher P : B ratio is a result of the different ionic radii of P5C and may cause to decrease the activation energy of ionic migration in these crystal structures.

and B3C

In the present work, the NASICON-type solid solution Na1C2xTi2BxP3¡xO12 was obtained as a ﬁne powder by a hydrothermal method. For this material, increases in the cation content of the chemical composition, the lattice parameter a-value and the cell volume seemed to cause higher ionic conductivity.

