An alkaline silicate sol–gel approach has been established for the preparation of NASICON sodium super ionic conductor . The prepared NASICON is characterized and used as the solid electrolyte and the base for an amperometric carbon dioxide sensor. An auxiliary electrolyte, a binary carbonate eutectic, is employed in this development. The fabrication and evaluation results of the sensor prototype are presented. Issues and future advancement of this sensor are also discussed. q 2000 Elsevier Science S.A. All rights reserved.

Detection of carbon dioxide at low concentration levels, e.g., ppm, is often accomplished using gas chromatography or an infrared absorption detector 1 . While these methods are highly reliable, the complexity of instrumentation and its elaborate operation prohibit in situ and point sensing of carbon dioxide. Electrochemical methods for CO detection have been used and these methods can be categorized as potentiometric, amperometric, capacitive 2 and conductive types of operation.

Electrochemical CO sensors are commercially available. Most of these sensors operate in the conductive and potentiometric mode 3–6 . A conductive type sensor is usually fair in terms of its selectivity, whereas a potentiometric sensor intrinsically has low sensitivity. Amperometric sensors, in principle, can offer good sensitivity and selectivity and is the preferred mode of operation.

For an amperometric sensor, a good ionic conductive electrolyte Zr Si x . P O , a sodium super ion conductor, is reported to be 3yx a good ionic conductive material even at a relatively low temperature 200–3008C , and a conductivity of 10 to 10y2 Scmy1 at 3008C for NASICON has been reported w x7 . Methods for preparation of NASICON have been

In our laboratory, the process of preparing NASICON by the sol–gel technique has been experimentally established. Characterization of the prepared NASICON has been undertaken with special interest in using NASICON for electrochemical sensor development. Specifically, a solid state voltammetric CO sensor prototype has been constructed using NASICON as the solid electrolyte as well as the substrate for sensor construction. The fabrication and preliminary evaluation of the sensor operation are presented in this manuscript, and the limitation of this system and its future modifications are also discussed.

The alcohol gel obtained was dried at room temperature . for 5–15 h resulting in fine white color powders xerogels . treatment The xerogels were then subjected to thermal prior to be die pressed and sintered. In an oven, the NASICON powder was gradually heated from room temperature to 7808C at a heating rate of 208Crmin. After reaching 7808C, the oven temperature was held at 7808C for an hour. At the end of the hour, the oven was allowed to gradually cool down to room temperature. The formed NASICON disk was then used as the substrate for construction of the CO sensor. The effects of the thermal treatment will be discussed later.

Amperometric sensors for the detection of CO using sodium ion contained solid electrolyte have been proposed. In these sensors, the electrochemical reactions can be described as: 2Naqq1r2 O qCO q2ey Na O ™2Na qO q2e y Na O qCO ™Na CO q1r2 O

working electrode counter electrode overall cell reaction

In this configuration, the presence of sodium carbonate or sodium oxide in equilibrium with CO is needed for this voltammetric sensor. Thus, an auxiliary electrolyte, such as Na CO may be used 6 . In our study, sodium carbonate and barium carbonate eutectic was used as the

The ratio of 1-heptanol to TEOS solution is a 5 to 1 by volume. This formula was empirically developed in our laboratory and the resulting mixture in paste form was suitable for thick-film printing and providing good adhesion to the NASICON base. The whole sensor prototype was then heated in a furnace at 7008C for about 2 min, and the prototype was then cooled at a rate of 308Crmin to 608C then to ambient temperature. Platinum or nickel wires were used as lead wires and were attached onto the bonding pads with a conductive adhesive PYRO-DUCT 598, AREMCO Products followed by a series of curing processes. Finally, adhesive  14) Ceramabond 503 or 516, AREMCO Products was applied over the bonding pads providing protective insulating coverage.

an insulating ceramic

The thermal treatment of the NASICON powders directly affected the final properties of the NASICON disk. During the thermal treatment, the xerogel underwent dehydration, aggregation and formation of the amorphous compound and crystal. In the dehydration process normally at temperature below 3008C , the specific area of the particle increased due to dehydration and dissociation of the metal in compounding 500–6008C and organic compounds, . crystallization 700–8008C , the specific area decreased due to formation of amorphous compound and particle aggregation. The size of the particle diameter reached about 0.5 mm after a 2-h thermal treatment.

In our studies, various thermal treatments on the diepressed NASICON disks were evaluated. The thermal treatment directly affected the volumetric shrinkage as well as the physical integrity of the disks. Empirically, we found that the NASICON disk heated at 7808C for 60 min then gradually cooled down to ambient temperature performed best. This thermal treatment resulted in a physically, very strong disk with a smooth, glossy surface, and a 20% shrinkage in the disk volume. This thermal treatment was adopted in our investigation.

The sintered NASICON disks were examined using XRD and SEM analyses as well as AC impedance measurement. Fig. 3a shows a typical XRD analysis of a prepared NASICON. The analysis, compared to the standard XRD file, showed the dominant phase of the sol–gel prepared disk was NASICON with a trace of zirconia  14) ZrO . Other possible phases such as SiO , ZrSiO , 4 Na PO , Na SiO and Na ZrO were examined against the compound references, and were not found in our prepared samples. Fig. 3b is the scanning electron microscoping of a NASICON sample. The SEM analyses showed the homogeneity of the microstructure of the NASICON. The size of the grain was in the range of 0.15–0.3 mm compared well with those reported in literature of 0.2–0.25 mm.

The polarization behaviors of the NASICON electrolyte were assessed with the AC impedance technique. Both surfaces of a NASICON disk were covered with platinum film formed by thick-film silk screening or thin film ion beam coating technique. Evaluation of the disk was carried out in a tube furnace at 3008C. The complex resistance was determined over a frequency range from 5 to 1 =10 5 Hz with an AC amplitude of 5 mV.

impedance plot for the equivalent circuit is given in Fig. 4b with equations for obtaining circuit parameters. Fig. 5 shows the admittance plot of a NASICON disk xs2.2 based on experimental measurements. Calcula 14) tion gives an ionic conductivity in a range of 10y3 Scmy1 for the NASICON prepared. This is a reasonably good conductive solid electrolyte for amperometric sensor applications. The profile of the admittance plot of Fig. 5 verifies the proposed equivalent circuit model proposed in Fig. 4a.

Fig. 6 shows a typical cyclic voltammogram obtained in this study. The sensor was kept at 4508C and the gas flow rate was maintained at 100 lrmin. Carbon dioxide concentrations at 1000 ppm, 1.0%, 2.5% and 5.0% were used in this evaluation. The voltage scan rate was 50 mVrs, and the potential window was y1.8 to q1.2 V. The peak current measured at approximately q0.85 V showed a

Three major polarization components might exist in this < Pt NASICON Pt system. They are: 1 an electrode polarization characterized by a double layer capacitance and charge transfer resistance for the overall electrode reaction at the platinum and NASICON interface; 2 a capacitive–resistive electrolyte polarization in the bulk of the NASICON, and 3 a pure ohmic electrolyte polarization within the grains of the NASICON. Equivalent circuit representation of the polarization behavior of this system is  14) shown in Fig. 4a. A typical admittance reciprocal of

In conclusion, the detailed steps of a sol–gel process in the preparation of NASICON xerogel have been experimentally established. Excellent quality of the NASICON particles is obtained, and the effects of thermal treatment on the properties of NASICON have also been evaluated. An amperometric thick-film CO sensor using a carbonate auxiliary electrolyte has been fabricated on a NASICON

