Catalytic activity of porous CuTi2(PO4)3 glass-ceramics for the oxidation of propene to acrolein was found to be increased by a “post-crystallization heating” of the mother (dense) glass-ceramic. Porous glass-ceramics were prepared by a controlled volume-crystallization of the mother glass (dense glass-ceramics), followed by acid leaching. The speciﬁc surface areas were decreased monotonically with increasing post-crystallization heating temperature, while the conversion of propene on the porous glass-ceramic reached maximum (;80 mol%) for the specimen submitted to a post-crystallization temperature of ;800°C. The catalytic activity of the as-prepared porous glass-ceramics is discussed in terms of their microstructure. © 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

CuTi2(PO4)3 is one of the basic members of the NASICON family with a three-dimensional network structure which is composed of PO4 tetrahedra sharing their corners with

MO6 octahedra (M; tetravalent cation such as Zr41, Ti41, and Sn41) [1– 4]. Some reports [3– 6] have been published on the crystal structure and the properties of CuTi2(PO4)3. CuTi2(PO4)3 has been proposed [7] as a heterogeneous catalyst, because the crystal structure is not destroyed by the redox reaction of copper ions. Recently, we reported [8,9] a method for production of a porous glass-ceramic with a skeleton of NASICON-type CuTi2(PO4)3 by utilizing spinodal-type phase separation in glass. So far, using this process, the homologous NASICON-type porous Ca0.5Ti2(PO4)3, Li11xTi22xAlx(PO4)3, and NaTi2(PO4)3 have been prepared for use in, for example, immobilized enzymes, humidity sensors, and bacteriostatic materials [10]. The porous glass-ceramic CuTi2(PO4)3 has a speciﬁc surface area of ;45 m2/g [9], whereas the surface area of CuTi2(PO4)3 prepared by using a conventional method is ;1 m2/g. Porous CuTi2(PO4)3 ceramics [9] have been prepared by leaching a volumecrystallized 50CuOz20TiO2 z30P2O5 (mol%) glass with dilute H2SO4. The volume-crystallized glass consisted of CuTi2(PO4)3 and Cu3(PO4)2. The porosity and the mean pore diameter of the porous glass-ceramic were approximately 40 vol% and 20 nm, respectively. In general, catalytic reactions take place at active sites on the surface [11]. It is well known that the speciﬁc activity of active phase in a supported catalyst depends directly on its intrinsic activity and on its speciﬁc surface area [12].

Oudet et al. [13] reported that CuTi2(PO4)3 shows an interesting catalytic activity in the oxidation of propene to acrolein. CuTi2(PO4)3 crystals can be obtained as powders by ﬁring raw materials; CuTi2(PO4)3 thus obtained has a relatively small surface area of ;1 m2/g. This glass-ceramic process has excellent advantages, viz., the precipitation and the growth of the active crystal in the body can be controlled by reheating conditions of glass and porous materials with a large speciﬁc surface area can be obtained.

The preparation of glass with a nominal composition of 50CuOz20TiO2 z30P2O5 (mol%) was reported earlier [9]. Glass specimens (;1 mm thick) were heated from room temperature to 520°C and maintained at that temperature for 20 h for nucleation. Subsequently, the specimens were heated at 550°C for 12 h and then at 590°C for 12 h for crystal growth. These heating temperatures were determined by differential thermal analysis (DTA) of the base glass. The resulting dense glass-ceramics were reheated in air between 600 and 900°C for 30 min. Hereafter, this procedure will be called post-crystallization heating. The crystallized specimens were leached with 0.5N H2SO4 at room temperature for 3 days to obtain porous glass-ceramics.

Speciﬁc surface area and pore size distribution of the resulting porous ceramics were examined by the measurement of N2 adsorption and desorption isotherms (BET method, Quantachrome NOVA-1000) and by mercury porosimetry (Micromeritics Pore-Sizer-9320),

The catalytic efﬁciency of the porous glass-ceramic was evaluated by conversions (mol%) of propene into acrolein in a continuous-ﬂow system under atmospheric pressure. The porous glass-ceramic was pulverized and then sieved to ,32 mm grain size. The powders were pressed uniaxially at ;100 MPa to form rod-like specimens (2 mm in diameter 3 ;5 mm in length). The specimens (0.1 g) were placed in a U-shaped Pyrex tube (inner diameter 5 5 mm) heated at 400°C. The reactant mixture gas consisting of propene and air (propene: air 5 3:7) ﬂowed into the reactor at the rate of 10 mL/min. The reaction products were analyzed on line, with a gas chromatograph (Yanaco G2800) equipped with ﬂame ionization detector (FID) and fused silica capillary chromatographic column (Quadrex Polyethyene Gycol 20M, 0.53 mm 3 25 m).

Fig. 1 shows SEM photos of fracture faces of the porous glass-ceramics prepared by acid leaching of the dense glass-ceramics submitted to the post-crystallization heating at various temperatures (denoted as Tph). Fig. 1 shows that interconnected numerous pores are distributed throughout the volume of the specimens. The porous glass-ceramic derived via post5 600°C (Fig. 1a) had a very ﬁne pore structure. As Tph crystallization heating at Tph increased, the particles of the skeleton become spherical (Fig. 1b). The skeleton at about 5 800°C (Fig. 1c) consisted of ﬁne primary particles (diameter ; 100 nm) and then at Tph

Fig. 2. (a) Pore size distributions and (b) BET surface area and catalytic activity of the porous glass-ceramic as a function of post-crystallization heating temperature, Tph, of the mother (dense) glass-ceramic. Conversion is estimated at the steady state after 3 hours reaction.

5 900°C (Fig. 1d) the particles were developed. The porous structure of the glassTph ceramics was inﬂuenced strongly by Tph. The main phase of the porous glass-ceramics was identiﬁed as CuTi2(PO4)3 crystal by powder X-ray (Cu Ka) diffraction (XRD) analysis, 5 900°C showed the precipitation of a-Cu2P2O7 as a although only the sample of Tph by-product.

Fig. 2a shows the pore size distribution of the porous glass-ceramics. The distribution is close to logarithmic Gaussian in shape and the width is rather narrow. The average pore diameters could be changed from 15 nm at 600°C to 210 nm at 900°C. Fig. 2b shows BET

Fig. 3. Conversion to acrolein on porous glass-ceramics after the experiment for 3 h as a function of postcrystallization heating temperature, Tph. Normalized conversion denotes the conversion per unit speciﬁc surface area.

surface area and conversion to acrolein in porous glass-ceramics as a function of postcrystallization heating temperature, Tph. The speciﬁc surface area decreased almost linearly 5 900°C. The large with Tph: the area at Tph speciﬁc surface area and the narrow pore size distribution suggest that the phase separation occurs by spinodal decomposition prior to crystallization.

All samples showed the conversion of propene into acrolein (Fig. 2b), and the by-products that are able to be detected by gas chromatography equipped with FID were not observed. Carbonization was not observed on the surfaces of the samples. The conversion was estimated at the steady state after 3 h reaction on the porous glass-ceramics as a function of 5 800°C showed the highest value of ;80 mol%, which Tph. The conversion of sample Tph 5 600°C, despite the monotonical decrease was about 2 times greater than that of sample Tph in the speciﬁc surface area along with the increase of Tph.

To clarify the catalytic activity, the conversion of propene into acrolein per unit speciﬁc surface area (denoted by “normalized conversion”) is plotted in Fig. 3. The normalized 5 600 –700°C; whereas, in the temperature conversion was not improved in the range of Tph range of 700 – 850°C, it increased strikingly with increasing Tph. Normalized conversion of 5 850°C showed the highest value of ;9 mol% m22zg, which was propene in sample Tph about 10 times greater than that without post-crystallization heating. Oudet et al. [13] reported that the active sites of the catalytic reaction were due to the Cu–Cu2O microdomains, which were produced by reoxidizing in copper(I) ions at around apertures of the tunnels of the NASICON framework. The Cu–Cu2O microdomains are well known [13] to be active and selective in the catalytic oxidation of propene to acrolein. The high catalytic 5 750 – 850°C may be explained as being effected by the activity in the samples of Tph increase in the number of active sites originated from the development of CuTi2(PO4)3 primary particles. Well-crystallized CuTi2(PO4)3 particles have been reported [13] to have excellent ordering and tunnels of the Cu1 conduction channels in the NASICON structure.

Although the speciﬁc surface area decreased with increasing Tph, the surfaces of the samples . 750°C could have exhibited the optimal distribution of Cu–Cu2O microdomains. of Tph 5 900°C was low, probably due to its small speciﬁc surface The conversion of sample Tph area (5 3.2 m2/g) (Fig. 2b) and formation of a large amount of a-Cu2P2O7, which is probably not active.

In summary, the proposed glass-ceramic process has great advantages in the preparation of catalysts. Porous materials with large speciﬁc surface area can be obtained by utilizing spinodal-type phase separation in glass. It was found that the catalytic activity in the conversion of propene to acrolein is increased remarkably when the mother (dense) glassceramic is heated at about Tph

5 850°C before being acid-leached.
