Phase formation, sintering behavior, and electrical characteristics of NASICON compounds

The dependence of phase formation, sintering behavior, and electrical characteristics of Sodium Superionic Conductor (NASICON) compounds on sintering temperature, time, and cooling process was investigated. In the von Alpen-type composition Na3:2Zr1:3Si2:2P0:8O10:5, ZrO2 second phase is in thermal equilibrium with crystalline NASICON and liquid phase above 1320 –C, and when cooled through 1260–1320 –C, the crystalline NASICON was formed by reaction between the ZrO2 second phase and the liquid phase. Maximum relative densities of 96 and 91% were obtained for compositions Na3Zr2Si2PO12 and Na3:2Zr1:3Si2:2P0:8O10:5, respectively. For these compositions, the maximum ionic conductivity and the minimum migration barrier height were 0.45 ohm¡1 cm¡1 and 0.07 eV, respectively. The migration barrier height of the high temperature form (space group: R3c) is about 30–40% of that of the low temperature form (space group: C2/c). Ionic conductivity increases with increasing sinterability, and a considerably large amount of glass phase in Na3:2Zr1:3Si2:2P0:8O10:5 ceramics signiﬁcantly lowers ionic conductivity above the transition temperature. C 176) 1999 KluwerAcademicPublishers

1. Introduction Sodium superionic conductor (NASICON) has attracted scientiﬁc and technological attention for the last decade, especially in view of its technical applications in energy-related or environmental ﬁelds [1, 2]. This is mainly due to its promising electrical properties suitable for gas sensors and energy storage systems [3–7]. Various battery systems have been developed to provide propulsion energy for electric vehicles or to store excessive electrical energy of power plants to supply it when necessary. Na-S batteries, having high energy storage capacity and power compared with other battery systems, have been regarded as one of the potential candidates for such applications [3]. In order to be used as solid electrolytes for the Na-S battery system, the electrolytes should have high ionic conductivity, chemical stability with liquid electrodes, high mechanical strength and resistivity against degradation after operation [8–10].

NASICON has some useful and unique characteristics such as low sintering temperature, three dimensional framework, and considerably good ionic conductivity compared to other solid electrolytes particularly ﬂ-alumina [8, 9]. Though ﬂ-alumina has attracted much attention for the application as solid electrolytes in the Na-S battery system since it was developed by

Weber et al, it has a layer structure, and as a result exhibits anisotropic characteristics in thermal expansion and electrical conductivity, causing mechanical failure after operation for a few hours [11–13].

NASICON with a chemical formula of Na1CxZr2 SixP3¡xO12 (0 < x < 3) was ﬁrst reported by Hong et al. The skeleton of this compound consists of ZrO6 octahedra, PO4 tetrahedra, and SiO4 tetrahedra, and this compound has been reported to exhibit a few crystalline forms depending on temperature and composition (x), and most sintered NASICON contain certain amount of ZrO2 second phases [14–16]. Unfortunately, the ZrO2 has a monoclinic/tetragonal phase C, below the usual sintering temtransition at 1100 peratures of the NASICON compounds [17]. The monoclinic/rhombohedral phase transition of crystalline NASICON around 200 C causes a dilatometric anomaly unfavorable for applications [18–21]. As a way of overcoming such technical problems, various compositional modiﬁcations have been reported by von Alpen, H. Kohler, S. Fujitsu et al. to improve its microstructure and physical properties [17, 18, 22, 23]. The von Alpen-type NASICON is of a ZrO2 deﬁcient form of the Hong’s NASICON with a general formula of Na1CxZr2¡x=3SixP3¡xO12¡2x=3, containing little ZrO2 second phase [17]. However, the correlation of

Current address: Dept. of electrical communication engineering, Tohoku Univ., Tohoku, Japan. Author to whom all correspondence should be addressed. C 176) 1999 Kluwer Academic Publishers

crystalline NASICON phase formation, sintering behavior, and electrical conductivity of the compounds with synthesis techniques and sintering parameters has been rarely reported [24–29].

In this study, we try to elucidate the effect of sintering temperature, time and cooling processes on the formation of phases like the ZrO2 and the crystalline NASICON, sintering behavior, and electrical characteristics for two NASICON compositions of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 and Na3:2Zr1:3Si2:2P0:8O10:5. These compositions are one of the Hong-, and von Alpen-type NASICON, respectively, and, in this paper, referred to as Hand A-type composition, respectively. Complex impedance analysis was used to measure the electrical C conductivity of the compounds. Migration loss of Na ions was observed at a few MHz, and ionic conductivity was determined in a frequency-insensitive dcconductive region below the loss frequency [30, 31]. The conductivity was measured at various temperatures K, and migration barrier heights were debelow 300 termined from the variation of conductivity with temperature.

2. Experimental 2.1. Calcination and sintering Starting materials used in the preparation of NASICON compounds were highly pure Na2CO3 (Aldrich Chemical Co., 99%), Na3PO412H2O (Kanto Chemical Co., extra pure), ZrO2 (Aldrich Chemical Co., 99%), and SiO2 (Hayashi Chemical Co., Guaranteed reagent). C for 12 h, and then These materials were dried at 120 mixed in a polyethylene jar for 2 h according to the stoichiometric ratio for Hand A-type compositions. ZrO2 balls and ethanol were used as mixing agents and mixing media, respectively. NASICON phase formation was examined for the – C by X-ray diffracmixtures calcined at 1000 tometry (XRD), and based on these results, appropriate calcination conditions for Hand A-type composition C for 10 h, respectively [29]. The were 1150 and 1250 calcined powders were ball-milled for 30 h, and the dried powders were pressed into tablets under a pressure of 1000 kg/cm2.

To investigate the effect of sintering temperature, the C for pressed tablets were sintered from 1160 to 1360 1 h on platinum foil in air atmosphere. Fig. 1 shows the various sintering and cooling procedures. To analyze the sintering mechanism, the pressed tablets of – C Hand A-type composition were sintered at 1280 for 1–16 h, and at 1300 C for 0.5–4 h, respectively.

tablets were prepared by polishing with successively ﬁner grades of Al2O3 powders followed by diamond pastes down to 1 micrometer. Silver paste was applied as electrodes on both ﬂat sides of the tablets. Conductivities were measured with an impedance/gain-phase analyzer (HP 4194A) in a frequency range of 102 to 4£ 106 from room temperature to 300 C. A simple electrically heated furnace was employed. Nitrogen gas was circulated inside the furnace and the temperature was measured with chromel-alumel thermocouples in contact with the electrode. A schematic of the measurement system is shown in Fig. 2.

3. Results and discussions 3.1. NASICON phase formation XRD curves in Fig. 3 were obtained from A-type samC ples, sintered at 1200, 1260, 1300, 1320 and 1360 for 1 h, respectively, and then air-quenched to room temperature. All the peaks correspond to either monoclinic NASICON or ZrO2 phases. The ZrO2 peaks are indicated with arrows. Spectra (b) and (c) consist of only the crystalline NASICON. However, spectra (d) C and (e) show that the samples sintered above 1320 contain certain amount of ZrO2 second phase. As all the samples were made by air quench after sintering, it is believed that considerable amount of ZrO2 is in thermal equilibrium with the crystalline NASICON at 1340

In order to investigate the formation of the crystalline NASICON as well as the existence of the ZrO2 phase when cooled through 1260–1300 C, two different cooling paths were employed. First, in samples sinC for 1 h and then furnace-cooled to tered at 1340 C, followed by air quench to room temperature, 1260 the amount of ZrO2 second phase decreases signiﬁcantly as shown in Fig. 4d. This indicates that a peritectic type reaction between the crystalline NASICON and the ZrO2 occured around 1320 C as shown in the reaction equation below.
Figure 2 Schematic representation for the conductivity measurement system.

Figure 4 XRD patterns of the samples sintered at 1340 C for 1 h. These samples were (a) furnace-cooled to room temperature, (b) air quenched to room temperature, (c) cooled to 1260 C/h followed by air quench, and (d) furnace-cooled to 1260 C followed by air quench, respectively.

ZrO2 second phase C liquid phase heating crystalline NASICON – C for 1 h and Second, in samples sintered at 1340 – then cooled to 1260 C/h), followed C very slowly (at 1 by air quench to room temperature (Fig. 4c), considerable amount of the ZrO2 second phase was present, contrary to our expectation.

In Fig. 5 are shown the SEM micrographs of the samC, and then air-quenched to R.T., ples sintered at 1340 C/h folfurnace-cooled to R.T., cooled to 1260 lowed by air quench to R.T., respectively. The general microstructure of the sintered NASICON has been described earlier [24]. The bright, grey, and dark regions in Fig. 5a can be attributed to the ZrO2 second phase, the crystalline NASICON, and the glass phase, respectively. As shown in Fig. 5b, no ZrO2 is present in the furnace-cooled samples. This seems to be in good agreement with XRD results in Fig. 4a. The crystalline NASICON present in the air-quenched samples exhibits a considerably sharp interface with the glass phase, whereas in the furnace-cooled samples the interface between the crystalline NASICON and the glass phase
Figure 5 Scanning electron micrographs. The samples were sintered at 1340 R.T., and (c) cooled at 1 correspond to the ZrO2, crystalline NASICON, and glass phases, respectively.

C for 1 h, and then (a) air-quenched to R.T., (b) furnace-cooled to C followed by air quench to R.T., respectively. In micrograph (a), bright (E), grey (F), and dark (G) regions

is less clearly seen. During the furnace-cooling process, the ZrO2 phase, stable at 1340 C, interacts with the liquid phase to produce the crystalline NASICON. The amount of the crystalline NASICON increased at the expense of the liquid phase during the furnacecooling process, and consequently the bulk density of the samples would increase.

A large number of ZrO2 grains is observed locally near the surface of the sintered bodies (Fig. 5c), preC/h. The grains seem to pared with a cooling rate of 1 be the source of the prominent ZrO2 peaks in Fig. 4c. EDS results were obtained from a region between the surface (M) and a line denoted with the letter N, and an inner region of the sample, respectively. As is shown in Fig. 6, the amount of Na near the surface region was less than that of the inner region. This deviation from the appropriate chemical formula appears to lead to the absence of crystalline NASICON near the surface, whereas ZrO2 grains and liquid phase coexist.

In cooling below the congruent point, the total volume of the ZrO2 second phase would decrease with time for the phase is unstable thermodynamically. Therefore C slow-cooling in a temperature range of 1260–1320 would be favorable to minimize the amount of the ZrO2 second phase in sintered NASICON. But increasing cooling time through the temperature range resulted in a decrease in the amount of Na in the sintered bodies. This appears to occur mainly near the surface region. Such a deviation in composition from that of the starting materials prevents the formation of crystalline

Figure 6 Energy dispersive spectra for the samples shown in Fig. 5c. Spectra (a) and (b) were obtained from a region near surface and an inner region, respectively. Letters m and n denote the ratios of NaKﬁ/SiKﬁ, and ZrL ﬁ/SiKﬁ, respectively.
Figure 7 Bulk density of the samples as a function of sintering temperature. The samples were sintered at each temperature for 1 h.

NASICON. This indicates that cooling rate should not be too slow to lose sodium near surface excessively.

3.2. Sintering behavior 3.2.1. Effectofsinteringtemperature Fig. 7 shows the density of samples with Hand A-type composition sintered at each temperature for 1 h. The density of H-, and A-type samples increases with raisC, respectively, ing temperature up to 1280 and 1320 and the samples were extensively melted above these temperatures. Maximum density for A-type samples is higher than that for H-type samples. In particular, A-type samples have higher melting temperature than H-type samples. These phenomena are believed to occur mainly because A-type samples contain less P (or more Si) than H-type samples [13]. The lower value of the density for H-type samples than for A-type samples in the temperature range can be attributed to the relevant sintering mechanism, and this will be mentioned in the following section.

3.2.2. Effectofsinteringtime Shown in Fig. 8 is the density of samples with Hand C, reA-type composition sintered at 1280 and 1300 spectively for up to 18 h. The density of H-type samples reaches its maximum value after 10 h-sintering, and then exhibits little change with time. On the other hand, the maximum density of A-type samples was obtained after 2-h sintering, indicating that densiﬁcation of A-type samples was achieved much faster than H-type samples. However, the maximum density of A-type samples is lower than that of H-type samples. Phase diagram of Na2O-ZrO2-SiO2-P2O5 relevant to NASICON compounds indicates that a few eutectic re-

actions between 2 or 3 phases may produce some liquid phase with a composition of corresponding sites at relevant liquidus lines in a temperature range from 900 to 1200 C [32]. In the calcination process of A-type composition, so-called “hard powder cakes” were produced, while very few of such cakes were observed in the calcined H-type powders. This indicates that much more liquid phases were produced in A-type composition during calcination process than in H-type composition. As a result, more liquid phase is involved in sintering process for A-type than for H-type samples. The densiﬁcation requires much shorter time in A-type composition than in H-type composition. On the other hand, Such liquid phases remain as a glass phase in the sintered bodies after cooling process. Consequently the relative density of H-type samples is higher than A-type samples. The resultant microstructural features are strongly related with the difference in the electrical characteristics of the two different type samples.

3.3. Electrical characteristics A frequency range of 102 to 4£ 106 Hz was used to measure the ionic conductivity of the sintered NASICON. The dc conductivity was taken as the value of the frequency independent plateau in the  190) f plot [30, 31]. At various conductivity measurement C in temperatures between room temperature and 300 this investigation, a part of this plateau was observed within the range of experimental frequencies, and dc conductivity at each temperature could be determined from relevant plots. In Fig. 9, a frequency independent C region is clearly seen on the curve obtained at 40 C for 8 h. from a H-type sample sintered at 1280 The measured conductivities were ploted over a wide
Figure 8 Relative density of the samples as a function of sintering time. The samples with (a) H-type composition and (b) A-type composition were sintered at 1280

temperature range so that Arrhenius equation could be applicable.

Fig. 10a shows the ionic conductivity measured in a C for temperature range from room temperature to 300 C for 1–16 h, and at H-type samples sintered at 1280 C for 1 h, respectively. Fig. 10b shows the ionic 1260 conductivity in the same measuring temperature range C for 0.5–4 h. for A-type samples sintered at 1300 Based on the temperature dependency of the ionic conions ductivity, the migration barrier heights for Na

were obtained from the slopes in the corresponding log  190) T vs. 1=T plots. In both of the two different type samples (H-, and A-type), a signiﬁcant change in the migration barrier height occurs at about 200 C. This change seems to be related with the structural change between monoclininc (C2=c) and rhombohedral (R3c) crystal systems, and is far from the second-order transition suggested by a few research groups [18–21].

