Al, P and Li NMR measurements have been performed on lithium conducting ceramics based on the LiTi (PO ) 4 3 structure with Al, V and Nb metal ions substituted for either Ti or P within the framework NASICON structure. The Al magic angle spinning NMR measurements have revealed that, although Al is intended to substitute for octahedral Ti sites, additional substitution into tetrahedral environments (presumably phosphorous sites) occurs with increasing amount of Al addition. This in substitution Li Al Ti , whereas similar niobium additions (in place of vanadium) appear to stiﬂe tetrahedral substitution. Li static NMR spectra reveal quadrupolar structure with C approximately 42 kHz, largely independent of substitution. Measurement of the Li central transition linewidth at room temperature reveals a relatively mobile lithium species (300–900 Hz) with linewidth tending to decrease with Al substitution and increase with increasing V or Nb. This new structural information is discussed in the context of ionic conduction in these ceramics. 

Solid state lithium ion conductors are being extensively investigated in the hope of developing materials with high ionic conductivity, good electrochemi-

Such materials would have many applications in energy storage and other electrochemical devices. Lithium ion conducting ceramics and glasses have the advantage over, for example, polymer based systems, in that the conduction can be solely attributed to the lithium species. In addition, high room temperature conductivities (up to 1 3 10 S/cm) have been reported in several cases [1–3]. One such class of materials are those based on LiM (PO ) [4] where, 4 3 for example, M 5 Ti, Ge, Zr. Further substitutions, (PO ) where M 5 as in for example Li M Ti 22x Al, Sc [5,6] and Li Al Ti (MO ) 4 y

All of these compounds have a NASICON type structure, consisting of MO tetrahedra and M9O octahedra linked through bridging oxygens. This results in a system of three dimensional ‘channels’ in which the Li ions reside. It has been previously stated [4] that the ionic conductivity can be altered by controlling the channel sizes via one or more of the above substitutions since, although the overall crystal symmetry remains the same, the lattice dimensions depend on the size of the structural cations [4].

improvements in conductivity (both bulk and grain boundary) have been observed when Al is substituted into the parent LiTi (PO ) (LTP) 4 3 lattice. This has previously been explained by the fact that the sintering of the pellets becomes signiﬁcantly easier on substitution, resulting in a reduction of porosity from nearly 40 to only 4%. Gromov et al. [7] have suggested that the addition of vanadium and/or niobium to the LATP structure also results in conductivity enhancements. The changes in macroscopic properties such as conductivity and density have not been well correlated to microstructural changes upon substitution. Only X-ray diffraction analyses have been reported and these show that the long range order is unaffected in most cases and only the cell lattice parameters change upon substitution.

Detailed descriptions of the material preparation are given elsewhere (see for example Ref. [9]). In brief, appropriate ratios of (NH ) HPO , TiO , 2 Li CO , Al O and V O or Nb O were combined and heat treated appropriately to produce the desired ceramics. Complete reaction was conﬁrmed via XRD analysis.

NMR experiments were conducted using a 7.1 T superconducting magnet and a modiﬁed Bruker CXP 300 spectrometer operated by a Tecmag interface. Spectra were recorded at 116.615, 121.47 and 78.45 MHz for Li, P and Al, respectively. Room temperature static and MAS spectra were acquired. For the MAS spectra the sample was enclosed in a 4 mm zirconia rotor spinning at a maximum speed of 14 kHz. Typical rf pulses of 4.3, 2 and 0.6 ms were used for Li, P and Al, respectively. Shifts were externally referenced to [Al(H O) ] in aqueous 6 Al(NO ) and 85% H PO . 4

Given that aluminium substitution was intended for the titanium atoms, the presence of tetrahedrally coordinated aluminium suggests that some phosphorous is being replaced instead of titanium. This will have two effects – the resultant material is unlikely to be stoichiometric, with several octahedral site vacancies needed to maintain electrical neutrality and some small fraction of phosphorous must be expelled from the overall LATP structure. This is discussed in greater detail below.

31P MAS NMR spectra are shown in Fig. 3 as a function of aluminium content at a constant vanadium content of 0.1. The unsubstituted LTP structure is also included for comparison and shows the presence of more than one phosphorous site. This is unusual since crystallographic evidence in the parent NASICON structure [11] suggests only a single phosphorous site. The NMR evidence here suggests the possibility of at least three closely associated sites (only slight differences in chemical shifts are seen) which are likely to be due to tetrahedral bond distortions in the phosphorous site leading to slightly

Upon addition of aluminium, broadening is seen to occur which is consistent with Al substitution resulting in the presence of P–O–Al interactions and the likely distortion of the –O–P bond from a perfect tetrahedral angle. When vanadium is present, a further small resonance is observed at approximately 2 25 ppm. This is assigned to P–O–V type phosphorous since vanadium is signiﬁcantly different in its electronegativity from P or Al. Our other work has conﬁrmed that the intensity of this peak depends on vanadium content [12]. In the series of samples which do not contain vanadium, as aluminium content increases the peaks broaden in exactly the same manner as those shown in Fig. 3. However, the integrated intensities for this series suggest that the content of phosphorous is decreasing with increasing aluminium. The integrated intensities are shown in Fig. 4 for samples with and without vanadium as a function of aluminium content. The effect of decreasing phosphorous intensity is not as signiﬁcant when vanadium is present.

Numbers are in P NMR experiments presented above conﬁrm the interpretations inferred from the Al data above. The broadening and asymmetry of the P resonance is consistent with the presence of Al and the decrease in the integrated intensity with aluminium substitution agrees with the idea that Alt substitution requires loss of some phosphorous. Since no other P peaks were evident it is suggested that the excess phosphorous may occur as a glassy phase in the intergranular regions (e.g. P O or Li PO ). This is also consistent with the increasing ease of sinterability of the ceramics and an increasing grain boundary conductivity [5].

indicate a quadrupolar coupling constant, C , of approximately 42 kHz, consistent with prior results for LTP at room temperature [13]. The sharpness of these satellite transitions appears to be dependent on the substitution of vanadium and aluminium as well as extent of processing, consistent with some distribution of (efg) experienced by individual lithium ions. Substitution does not, however, appear to have a major effect on the magnitude of the efg, as seen in Fig. 6, where only the addition of aluminium appears to cause a very slight but steady increase in C (from 42 to 43.2 kHz). Previous investigation of Li in LTP have suggested that this value of C corresponds to lithium being present predominantly in the A1 site in the NASICON structure; that is, the site in which lithium ions are coordinated by six oxygens in a tetrahedral arrangement and in which the efg is relatively symmetric, as compared with the A2 site [13]. The slight increase in C upon addition of aluminium may be a result of some Al substitution as well as contraction of the overall cell volume.

Since ionic conductivity is due to high lithium ion mobility, the correlation between Li linewidth and conductivity was examined by measuring the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the central Li

Fig. 5. Li static NMR spectra for Li Al Ti Li Al Ti order satellites with C | 42 kHz.and showing central transition and ﬁrst

An example of the Li static NMR spectra obtained in this work is presented in Fig. 5. All spectra have a similar appearance with a relatively narrow central transition. The ﬁrst order satellite transitions

Fig. 6. The ﬁrst order quadrupolar coupling constant C for Li as a function of increasing Al, V or Nb substitution in Li Al Ti Li Al Ti

Fig. 7. Li full width at half maximum (FWHM) central transition linewidths in Li Al Ti Li Al Ti 1.7 1.7 (VO ) (PO ) (as discussed by A.B. Best et al. [9]) differ in the maximum sintering temperatures. The discrepancy observed here for the 7Li linewidths suggests some differences in the local structure, for a nominally identical stoichiometry, as a result of the differing processing routes.

as a function of Al, V or Nb content. The Aono and Nairn methods for the preparation of Li Al Ti

transition as a function of composition. Fig. 7 indicates changes in FWHM for Li as a function of Al, V and Nb content. It can be seen that aluminium substitution causes a slight decrease in linewidth whilst both vanadium and niobium result in increased linewidths.

To the ﬁrst order, Li central transition linewidths are governed by two effects (i) the strength of the dipole–dipole interaction and (ii) the lithium ion mobility which can effectively average these interactions. Therefore, since FWHM increases with increasing vanadium and niobium, this implies either that the lithium ion mobility is decreasing (which should correlate with a decrease in conductivity) or the strength of the dipole–dipole interaction that (most likely Li–P [13]) is increasing. The latter effect may occur if the effective Li–P distance is decreased. This can either occur because the tunnel size is decreased, as would be the case if the overall cell volume is decreased due to substitution of smaller atoms (e.g. Al for Ti), or because an increase in the tunnel size (as may occur for V and Nb substitutions) causes the lithium ion to skew towards one of the O–P interactions rather than remaining in

the centre of the tunnel. This latter effect, however, could also be expected to decrease the lithium ion mobility since the Li–O interaction would be stronger.

Previous work has suggested that substitution of aluminium in the LTP structure increases conductivity, which is consistent with the Li FWHM trend, although the latter changes are only small. Vanadium and niobium substitutions to LATP have also been suggested to enhance ionic conductivity [7], although this is not conﬁrmed by our recent work [9]. The increased Li linewidths certainly do not correlate with an enhancement in bulk ionic conductivity.

Multinuclear solid state NMR experiments have shown that signiﬁcant microstructural changes take place in the lithium ion conductor, LTP, upon substitution with ions such as Al , V and Nb . It has been shown that addition of aluminium to LTP results in some tetrahedrally coordinated aluminium (in contrast to the expected octahedral substitution).
M. Forsyth et al. / Solid State Ionics 124(1999)213–219

This probably leads to non-stoichiometric compounds due to the presence of octahedral cation vacancies and the expulsion of some phosphorous containing compound. The lack of any evidence for such a compound in the P NMR suggests this may be a glassy phase or some volatile phase that was lost during the preparation and processing. The notion of a glassy phase is favored since this would enhance the sinterability of the ceramic and lead to higher grain boundary conductivities, as has indeed been observed. Li NMR does not show any distinct correlation between linewidths (attributed to lithium ion motion) and previously reported conductivity data.
