Recently, a different type of cation-selective membrane based on ceramic materials was reported for sodium salt splitting.7-10 These ceramic membranes are based on NASICON sodium-ion conducting ceramics  previously  developed  to  be  used  as  solid  electrolytes  in

Electromembrane  processes  such  as  electrolysis  and  bipolar membrane electrodialysis can be employed in the recovery of valuable  chemicals  from  waste  streams. These  technologies  have  been proposed  as  useful  unit  operations  for  assisting  kraft  pulp  mills achieve system closure with respect to the process elements, sodium and sulfur.1 For instance, one of the applications proposed in the literature is the recovery of sodium hydroxide and sulfuric acid from sodium sulfate, a by-product of chlorine dioxide generators.2-5

The simplest electromembrane process, electrolysis, is illustrated in Fig. 1. A unit cell consists of two electrode compartments separated  by  a  cation-selective  membrane.  One  compartment, the anolyte, is  usually  filled  with  a  salt-containing  solution  while  the other compartment, the catholyte, is filled with water containing a low  concentration  of  electrolyte  to  ensure  the  conductivity  of  the solution.  When  an  electric  field  is  applied  between  the  two  electrodes, alkali  metal  ions  are  driven  toward  the  cathode  while  the anions migrate toward the anode. Electroneutrality is maintained by the decomposition of water at the electrode surfaces forming oxygen gas and protons at the anode and hydrogen gas and hydroxide anions at the cathode. Once the alkali metal ions from the anolyte cross the cation-selective  membrane, represented  in  Fig.  1  by  a  circled  plus sign, they combine with the hydroxide ions produced at the cathode to form the corresponding base in the catholyte. The migrating alkali metal ions in the anolyte are replaced by the protons produced at the anode thereby forming the corresponding acid of the salt that was originally placed in this compartment.

In  such  systems, the  performance  of  a  membrane  is  evaluated through the measurement of the current efficiency for the production of  sodium  hydroxide  and  the  voltage  drop  across  the  membrane. Current  efficiency  is  defined  as  the  portion  of  the  current  that  is being  consumed  in  useful  work  (to  make  the  desired  products). Operationally, it is defined as the ratio of the actual over the theoretical chemical (acid or base) production rate as calculated according to Faraday’s law. The current efficiency in electrolytic systems incorporating polymeric membranes is limited by their low selectivity for sodium over hydrogen ions. Another limitation related to selec-

To address this problem, we deposited this ceramic material on a suitable substrate in the form of a thin film using pulsed laser deposition (PLD). This technique employs a target of NASICON synthesized by conventional methods and placed facing a substrate. A laser beam is then focused on the target. The high energy density of the laser induces an evaporative explosion with ejection of material from the target, normal to its surface. The deposition can be performed on any  substrate  facing  the  target  without  any  prier  treatment.  It  has been demonstrated that thin films of NASICON having the same stoichiometry as the target can be deposited by this technique.16 In the latter study, a SiO2/Si substrate was used. Recently, we reported the deposition  of  NASICON thin  films  on  cation-selective  polymeric membranes.17-19 The objective here was to prepare composite membranes which combine the low electrical resistance and high mechanical  flexibility  of  polymeric  membranes  with  the  selectivity  and resistance to fouling and to aggressive media of ceramic membranes. This  paper  discusses  the  evaluation  of  composite  membranes made  of  NASICON ceramic  deposited  on  Raipore  (RAI)  4010 cation-selective membranes. The composite membranes, designated as RAI-N, were incorporated in electrolytic cells used for the production of sodium hydroxide and sulfuric acid from sodium sulfate. The performance of the composite membrane is compared with the polymeric base membrane under similar operational conditions.

Synthesis  of  the  NASICON target.—The  NASICON target  was prepared by mixing powders of Na3PO4 and ZrSiO4 in the required stoichiometric  ratio.  The  mixture  was  then  ground, pressed  at 500 bar, and sintered at high temperature (12008C) for 6 h.

Deposition of NASICON by pulsed laser deposition (PLD).—A NASICON target was installed facing a polymeric membrane substrate in the deposition chamber. A laser beam was focused on the target at various energy densities (from 0.7 to 2 J/cm2). The focused high  energy  caused  the  ejection  of  material  from  the  target  which deposited on the polymeric substrate. The deposition rate of material depended on the energy density of the laser beam. Typical rates ranged from 2 3 1023 to 0.03 nm/ pulse. The resulting thin films exhibited low roughness as verified by atomic force microscopy, except for a small number of fine particles, <0.1 mm, on the surface.16 Typically, the thickness of the ceramic layer was roughly 120 nm.

Electrochemical cells.—Two types of electrolysis cells were used in  this  work.  The  first  (cell  A), a  hexagonal  cell  was  supplied  by Graver-Aqualytics. Current efficiency measurements were conducted using this cell, which can be operated under hydrodynamic conditions representative of industrial-scale systems. The width of the two electrode  compartments  was  1  mm  and  the  membrane  surface  27 cm2. The electrodes were platinum disks having an area of 5.3 cm2. The circulation of the solutions inside the cell was assured using a peristaltic pump. A flow rate of approximately 0.1 L/min was used, corresponding to a linear velocity inside the cell of about 4 cm/s.

A second, modular, two-compartment Plexiglas cell (cell B) was used for preliminary evaluation of membrane selectivity, resistance to fouling and durability. Each compartment contained approximately  13  mL  of  solution, continuously  recirculated  with  a  peristaltic pump. The  working  area  of  the  membrane  and  the  platinum  electrodes was 1 cm2. The distance between the electrodes and the membrane was 4 cm. The flow rate was 4.8 mL/min corresponding to a linear velocity of 0.02 cm/s.

Current efficiency measurements.—The current efficiency for the production of sodium hydroxide from sodium sulfate was measured using cell A incorporating the composite membrane or the RAI base membrane.  The  ceramic  layer  of  the  composite  membrane  faced either the cathode or the anode. The orientation of the ceramic layer is specifically mentioned for each type of experiment since, as  determined later in the text, this parameter is of importance. The initial compositions  of  the  anolyte  and  catholyte  in  typical  electrolysis experiments were 1 M in Na2SO4 and 1 M in NaOH, respectively. The  concentration  should  be  higher  for  accurate  simulation  of  the conditions  used  in  industrial  systems, but  a  higher  temperature  of operation  would  also  be  required  since  from  an  industrial  point  of view, the  ohmic  resistance  of  the  system  is  lowered  with  a  higher temperature. The anolyte was operated either in a batch or a simulated feed-and-bleed mode, while the catholyte was always operated in a simulated feed-and-bleed mode (water was added to the catholyte to maintain the concentration constant). When the anolyte was operated in a batch mode in cell A, the initial concentration of sodium sulfate in the anolyte was closer to saturation, at 1.5 M, in order to simulate more accurately the conditions used industrially (see results in Fig. 2). The simulated feed-and-bleed mode for the anolyte was performed using a large volume of solution to avoid having significant changes in the acidity of the anolyte during the experiment. In this case, the anolyte was maintained at 0.7 N in sulfuric acid and 1 M in sodium sulfate. The current density applied was 150 mA/cm2 of electrode area. The voltage drop across the cell was monitored during the experiment. The concentrations of base and acid in the two compartments were measured using the titration technique.

Selectivity of the membrane for Na1 over K1.—To evaluate the selectivity of the membrane for sodium over potassium ions, an electrolysis experiment was conducted using cell B in which the anolyte contained 0.5 N Na2SO4 and 0.5 N K2SO4. The catholyte was 1 M in NaOH. The current density applied was 150 mA/cm2. The membrane  was  oriented  so  that  the  ceramic  layer  faced  the  anolyte. Chemical analysis of the anolyte was conducted periodically to evaluate the K1/Na1 ratio.

Fouling  experiments.—The  composition  of  the  anolyte  and  the catholyte  were  the  same  as  for  the  current  efficiency  experiments except  that  a  certain  amount  of  fouling  agent  was  added  to  the

Figure 2. Base current efficiency curves of RAI polymeric membrane and RAI-N  composite  membrane  for  Na2SO4 splitting.  I 5 150  mA/cm2. Anolyte: 1.5 M Na2SO4; catholyte: 1 M NaOH.

The fouling experiments were conducted using cell B. For the experiment with iron, sufficient ferrous sulfate was added to the anolyte  to  obtain  a  concentration  of  iron  ions  of  101  ppm.  In  the experiment  involving  calcium, sufficient  CaSO4 was  added  to  the anolyte to obtain an initial concentration of calcium ion of 50 ppm. During the experiment, calcium sulfate was added to the solution to accelerate the fouling process. In the fouling experiment involving the magnesium ions, the anolyte initially contained 200 ppm of magnesium ion, added as magnesium sulfate. The current density applied to all systems was 150 mA/cm2. The membrane was oriented so that the ceramic layer faced the anolyte.

In  all  fouling  experiments, the  alkalinity  of  the  catholyte  was adjusted  periodically  to  maintain  alkalinity  of  0.95-1.05  N.  In  the case of iron and calcium, the neutralization of the anolyte was conducted to a value of 0.6 N acid. The anolyte was neutralized to an acid concentration of 0.3 N during the magnesium experiment. The reason for this specific value of acidity is explained later.

Membrane durability.—Cell B incorporating a composite membrane was operated in a simulated feed-and-bleed mode in which the acidity and alkalinity were periodically adjusted to their initial values  using  sodium  hydroxide  and  sulfuric  acid, respectively.  The durability  experiment  was  conducted  by  maintaining  an  anolyte composition of 1 M Na2SO4 and 0.7 N H2SO4 and a catholyte composition of 1 M NaOH. The membrane was oriented with the ceramic layer facing the catholyte or the anolyte. The current density used was 150 mA/cm2. During these experiments, the voltage drop across the cell and the base current efficiency for the production of sodium hydroxide served as an indication of the state of the membrane.

Current efficiency.—In the preliminary experiments, we employed cell B to compare the performance of the composite membrane with the base RAI polymeric membrane.17,18 Even though the results obtained demonstrated a clear improvement in the current efficiency for the production of base for the cell incorporating the composite, as compared to the polymeric membrane, the geometry of the cell and the conditions under which it was operated do not reflect industrial-scale systems. In particular, the distance between the electrodes and the membrane was too large. In addition, the linear flows along the membrane and the electrodes were too low. For these reasons we reevaluated these membranes using a more appropriate cell, cell A, as described in the experimental section.

Figure 2 compares the base current efficiency for the production of sodium hydroxide from sodium sulfate in electrolysis cell A incorporating  (a)  a  RAI-N  composite  membrane  with  the  ceramic  layer (120 nm) facing the cathode, and (b) a RAI base membrane. In these experiments, the  anolyte  was  operated  in  the  batch  mode  and  the catholyte in a simulated feed-and-bleed mode (see Experimental). As seen in Fig. 2, the current efficiency for the production of base is similar for both the composite membrane and the RAI cation-selective membrane up to an anolyte acidity of 0.7 N titratable H1. At higher acidity, from  0.7  to  1.2  N, the  current  efficiency  of  the  composite membrane is superior to the one associated for the RAI base membrane.  In  Fig.  2, the  current  efficiency  of  the  composite  membrane declines with increasing acidity in the anolyte at a lower rate compared to the polymeric membrane. This suggests that the selectivity of the membranes to sodium over hydrogen ions declines with increasing acidity in the feed solution. This behavior is consistent with results obtained by Sujita et al.8 which show that, under the influence of an electric field, sodium ions in NASICON can be replaced by hydronium ions and a loss of selectivity occurs for the composite membrane. The current efficiency of the two membranes changes with the acidity  of  the  anolyte  according  to  the  model  proposed  by  Jörissen  and Simmrock6 where the membrane shifts from an alkaline to an acidic state during the salt splitting process. The alkaline state is characterized by a quasi-constant current efficiency at low acidity. In the acidic state the current efficiency decreases in a linear fashion with the acid-

ity. In Fig. 2, the alkaline state is observed up to a concentration of 0.2 N for the polymeric membrane and up to 0.35 N for the composite membrane. In the acidic state, the selectivity of the composite membrane declines at a slower rate compared to the polymeric membrane indicating an improvement of selectivity for the composite.

The cells using the composite membrane showed a similar voltage drop (about 5 V) compared to the one using the unmodified RAI membrane. The ceramic film is thin enough so that its contribution to the membrane overall electrical resistance is very small compared to that of the polymer (,1%). Thus, in this respect, the modification of  the  polymeric  membrane  by  the  deposition  of  the  thin  ceramic film does not have a negative impact on energy consumption.

Table I compares the current efficiency, voltage drop, and energy consumption for the production of sodium hydroxide from sodium sulfate  in  an  electrolysis  cell, cell A, incorporating: (a)  an  RAI-N composite  membrane  with  the  ceramic  layer  (112  nm)  facing  the anode, (b)  an  RAI-N  composite  membrane  with  the  ceramic  layer (112 nm) facing the cathode, (c) an RAI base membrane, and (d) a Nafion 417 membrane used in other work.4 In these experiments, the anolyte  and  the  catholyte  were  operated  in  a  simulated  feed-andbleed mode (see Experimental). The values reported in the table represent an average of 8 to 11 measurements each. The voltage drop measured  was  the  same  for  all  RAI-based  systems, demonstrating again that the deposition of a ceramic thin film and its orientation do not affect the electrical resistance of the polymeric membrane. The current  efficiency  of  the  composite  membrane  in  both  orientations was superior compared to that of the unmodified membrane. The best results were obtained with the RAI-N membrane oriented with the ceramic  layer  facing  the  catholyte  (46.2%  improvement  in  current efficiency). The other orientation of the composite membrane resulted  in  a  10.1%  improvement  in  current  efficiency  compared  to  the unmodified  RAI  membrane.  The  reduced  current  efficiency  in  the latter case appears to be due to the ceramic layer of the composite membrane being attacked and partially solubilized by sulfuric acid. When compared to the Nafion 417 membrane, one can see that the composite  membrane  with  the  ceramic  layer  oriented  toward  the catholyte shows a comparable efficiency. A 78% current efficiency for the production of sodium hydroxide from sodium sulfate was reported  using  the  Nafion  417  membrane4 compared  to  70%  for  the ceramic-polymer  composite  membrane  facing  the  cathode  under similar conditions. When one compares the current efficiency of the membranes, RAI and composite, operated in either the batch or the feed-and-bleed mode, a different value is obtained. This difference between the two values can be explained by the different conditions of exposure to acidity during the experiments. In the batch mode, the acidity builds up gradually. At low acidity, the current efficiency is at its maximum and slowly decreases with the acidity increasing. The average efficiency determined at each acidity level is then strongly influenced by the initial values calculated at low acidity. When the system is operated in the feed-and-bleed mode, the acidity level is held  constant  throughout  the  experiment. The  current  efficiency  in this case is more appropriate for the calculation of the energy consumption, since industrial systems are usually operated in this mode.

As a result of the improvement in current efficiency, the energy consumption was improved with the deposition of the NASICON thin film on RAI. When the ceramic layer faced the catholyte, the energy required to produce sodium hydroxide was 4.70 kWh/kg, an improvement of 34.1% compared to the RAI membrane. A higher energy consumption was cited for a freestanding RE-NASICON membrane10 at a lower current density (<100 mA/cm2). This means that a high electrode and membrane area would be required to achieve the same production  rate  as  in  our  system  or, alternatively  a  freestanding  membrane having a thickness less than 1 mm would have to be fabricated to achieve the same objective. In addition, it was reported that freestanding NASICON membranes are attacked and degraded by sulfuric acid starting at a concentration of about 0.25 N.8 The same problem  was  encountered  with  our  membranes  when  the  ceramic  layer faced the anolyte. The cell incorporating an RAI-N membrane with the ceramic layer facing the anode had an energy requirement of 6.0 kWh/kg of NaOH representing a modest improvement of 15.8% compared to the unmodified RAI membrane. It appears that approximately 40% of the ceramic material is dissolved when the membrane is exposed to sulfuric acid.18 After the initial loss, the amount of NASICON remaining  on  the  membrane  stayed  constant  suggesting  that only some soluble phase existing in the ceramic was attacked. When a  second  batch  electrolysis  experiment  was  performed  with  a  composite  membrane  which  had  been  previously  used, the  current  efficiency for the production of sodium hydroxide was lower in the case of  an  RAI-N  membrane  with  the  ceramic  layer  facing  the  anolyte. These results can be explained by the longer exposure to an acid concentration sufficient to attack the ceramic. We found that this problem can  be  addressed  by  orienting  the  ceramic  layer  of  the  composite membrane toward the catholyte since NASICON is much more chemically  stable  under  alkaline  conditions.  Another  parameter, which affects  the  current  efficiency, is  the  thickness  of  the  ceramic  layer. Results on this are presented elsewhere.20

Selectivity for sodium over potassium.—To study the selectivity of the composite membrane for sodium over potassium ions, an electrolysis experiment was conducted with a modified and unmodified membranes in which the anolyte was filled with sodium and potassium sulfate at a 1:1 molar ratio. The sodium and potassium levels in the  anolyte  were  analyzed  periodically.  The  concentration  of  both ions in the anolyte decreased during the experiment since they were transferred from the anolyte to the catholyte. Figure 3 presents the change in the K1/Na1 molar ratio in the anolyte over the course of the experiment. A molar ratio of 1 would suggest that both ions are transferred at the same rate while a ratio higher than 1 would indicate that sodium ions travel through the membrane at a faster rate than potassium ions. Finally, if the ratio was smaller than 1, it would sug-

Figure 3. Variation of K1/Na1 ratio in the anolyte during the electrolysis of 1:1  Na2SO4/K2SO4 mixture  for  RAI  and  RAI-N  membranes.  I 5 150 mA/cm2. Initial anolyte concentration: 0.5 N of each salt; catholyte: 1 M NaOH.

gest that potassium ions are transferred preferentially to sodium ions. The molar ratio obtained during the experiment is mostly below 1 for both membranes. This result is not surprising in the case of the RAI polymeric membrane since conventional cation-selective membranes demonstrate a 2:1 preference for potassium over sodium ions.21,22 A similar  selectivity  was  obtained  for  the  composite  membrane.  The ionic  mobility  in  dilute  solution  of  potassium  ions  is  greater  than sodium ions, 7.62 3 1024 vs. 5.19 3 1024 cm2 s21 V21. 21 Consequently, potassium ions arrive at the surface of the membrane more rapidly and are able to be transferred preferentially to sodium ions to the catholyte. The mobility of potassium ions across a cation-selective membrane such as Nafion is also higher than that of sodium ions, 4.3 3 1026 vs. 3.24 3 1026 cm2 s21 V21. 22 Our results are consistent  with  previous  reports  demonstrating  that  potassium  ions  were able to cross a freestanding NASICON-based membrane at an appreciable rate compared to sodium ions under the influence of an electric field.9,10

Resistance  of  the  composite  membrane  to  fouling.—Cationselective membranes tend to foul when multivalent metal ions such as  those  of  iron, magnesium, and  calcium  are  present  in  solution. The fouling of a cation-selective membrane occurs as a result of the precipitation of insoluble hydroxide salts of the multivalent cations inside the membrane.6 The fouling is reflected by an increase in the voltage drop across the membrane and the overall cell potential. In three  separate  experiments, iron, calcium, and  magnesium  were added to the anolyte, in exaggerated quantities compared to what is found in most pulp and paper industrial effluents, during the electrolysis of sodium sulfate, in order to study the resistance to fouling of the composite membrane. Experiments with the RAI membrane were conducted in parallel for comparison. The results of the fouling experiment involving iron are presented in Table II. In these preliminary experiments, the ceramic layer of the RAI-N membrane faced the anolyte.

In  order  to  study  the  effect  of  ferric  ion  on  the  fouling  of  the membrane, 101 ppm of ferric ion were added to the anolyte in the ferric sulfate form. In these experiments, the RAI membrane fouled after 4 days of continuous operation in the batch mode. A reddishbrown film formed on its surface, facing the anolyte. The layer thickened  with  time  and  eventually  expanded  through  the  membrane resulting in fouling. In this case, pretreatment of the solution would be needed to operate with this membrane. On the other hand, the cell incorporating  the  composite  membrane  was  continuously  operated for 25 days without the membrane being fouled. A film similar to that  observed  for  the  RAI  membrane  formed  at  the  surface  of  the composite membrane in the beginning of the experiment. However, the thickness of this film increased to a certain point, beyond which it stopped expanding. Evidence for this is provided by the fact that the  concentration  of  iron  in  the  anolyte  initially  declined  to  42  to 45 ppm (film formation) but then remained the same for the duration of the experiment (Table II). It appears that the ceramic layer blocked the penetration of ferric ions into the polymeric membrane, preventing its fouling. This conclusion is supported by the fact that no ferric ions were detected in the catholyte in the duration of the experiment (Table II). The formation of a hydroxide or oxide film on the surface of the membrane facing the anolyte at the beginning of the experiment  can  be  explained  through  a  model  for  cation-selective membranes developed by Jörissen and Simmrock.6 According to this model, at high sodium hydroxide concentrations in the catholyte and low concentrations of acid in the anolyte, the cation-selective membrane is in the alkaline state. This is because, under these conditions, the flux of hydroxide ions back-diffusing from the catholyte to the anolyte under the influence of the electric field exceeds the flux of hydrogen  ions  crossing  the  membrane  from  the  anolyte  to  the catholyte. As a result of this situation, the cation-selective membrane is  in  the  alkaline  state  through  its  entire  thickness  and  an  alkaline boundary layer is developed on the anolyte side of the membrane. Therefore, multivalent metal ions such those of iron for which the solubility  product  constants  of  their  hydroxide  are  relatively  low have a very high chance of precipitating out in the boundary layer. Since ferric hydroxide (Ksp 5 2.64 3 10239), and in particular ferric oxide are not very soluble, they remained on the surface of the membrane even when the anolyte became acidic. The model for the alkaline state of a membrane seems also to apply to ceramic-based membranes  for  which  the  back-diffusion  of  hydroxide  ions  was reported to be possible.10

When the membranes were exposed to calcium or magnesium, neither  membrane  fouled.  However, during  the  experiment  using magnesium, a white cloudy precipitate was formed on the anolyte side of the membranes in the beginning of the experiment while the anolyte was still neutral or slightly acidic. This precipitate was obviously  magnesium  hydroxide.  This  observation  suggested  that  the cation-selective membranes were in the alkaline state.6 Consequently, magnesium ions precipitated as insoluble hydroxide salts at the anolyte-membrane interface. As the acidity built up, the membranes shifted  from  the  alkaline  to  the  acidic  state  and  the  magnesium hydroxide  dissolved.  At  0.3  N  acid, we  observed  that  the  white cloudy precipitate disappeared completely in the case of both membranes, modified  and  unmodified.  Unfortunately  membranes  with the ceramic facing the catholyte do not prevent fouling.

Water transport across the composite membrane.—Water transport  is  an  important  parameter  for  electromembrane  systems.  The amount of water transferred with the cation is reflected in the concentration  transport  number.  This  number  is  the  percentage  by weight of the cation transferred relative to the total weight, cation plus water, of material transferred. A water balance was carried out for all electrolysis experiments conducted. The average concentration  transport  number  obtained  was  found  to  be  between  10  and 15%. This number is similar to the concentration transport number obtained for the RAI membrane alone. This corresponds to the transfer of 4-8 mol of water per mol of sodium. This compares well with the number of water molecules in the hydration sphere of sodium. The ceramic layer does not affect the water transport properties of the  membrane.  This  suggests  that  NASICON is  able  to  allow  the passage of water molecules and/or hydrated ions. These results are in line with the observation that some rare-earth based NASICON freestanding membranes expand by 0.7% because of the hydration of the silicate backbone.10

Durability of the composite membrane.—A study of the durability  of  the  composite  membrane  with  the  ceramic  layer  facing  the catholyte was conducted using cell B. In this experiment, the anolyte was 0.7 N in sulfuric acid and 1 M in sodium sulfate. The anolyte was maintained at 1 M sodium hydroxide. The acidity and alkalinity were periodically adjusted to these levels by neutralization. Figure 4 presents the current efficiency vs. time over the course of the durability experiment. As seen in this figure, the current efficiency declined  from  70  to  56%  over  the  first  300  h  and  subsequently

Figure 4. Variation of the base current efficiency for RAI-N composite membrane with time during the durability experiment in sodium sulfate splitting with the ceramic layer facing the catholyte. I 5 150 mA/cm2. Anolyte: 0.7 N H2SO4 and 1 M Na2SO4; catholyte: 1 M NaOH.

remained  relatively  constant  over  the  remaining  1900  h. A  similar experiment with the ceramic layer facing the anode was performed (not shown). In the latter experiment, the current efficiency dropped continuously to reach an approximate value of 34% within 200 h. As previously  discussed, this  is  likely  to  be  due  to  the  partial  solubilization of the ceramic layer by acid.

Using  PLD, a  new  composite  cation-selective  membrane  was prepared by depositing a sodium-ion selective ceramic thin film on a  polymeric  cation-selective  membrane.  The  resulting  membrane showed  an  improved  current  efficiency  for  sodium  hydroxide  and sulfuric acid production from sodium sulfate and a remarkable resistance to fouling by iron compared to the unmodified polymer membrane. The ceramic layer of the composite membrane did not affect the water transport properties of the base polymeric membrane or its selectivity to potassium over sodium. The lower electrical resistance of the composite membrane compared to freestanding ceramic membranes resulted in lower energy requirements for the production of sodium hydroxide and sulfuric acid from sodium sulfate.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) for the financial support  provided  under  a  Strategic  Grant.  J.  Ing  and  J.  Tessier  from Paprican are acknowledged for their work on chemical analysis. The authors would also like to thank D. Trigylidas for some of the initial electroseparation experiments as an undergraduate summer student. Dr. Lyne Cormier and Dr. Fuyuan Ma are specially acknowledged for their work in the continuation of this project.

The École Polytechnique de Montréal assisted in meeting the publication

costs of this article.