The release of protons and copper ions from microporous glass-ceramics, with a skeleton of Nasicon-type copper titanium phosphate crystal, into aqueous solution was investigated. When the materials were soaked in a solution containing Na1 ions, protons and copper ions were released gradually. Initially, the release proceeded with the exchange of H1 ions in the crystal for Na1 ions in the solution. The amounts released could be controlled effectively by doping the Nasicon-type crystal with Ca21 ions. The glass-ceramics showed excellent bacteriostatic activity. These glass-ceramics are novel materials that can automatically control the release of bacteriostatic and fungistatic ions in response to the amount of Na1 ions in the environment. © 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd

Our group prepared a series of microporous glass-ceramics composed of a functional phosphate crystal skeleton by conducting controlled crystallization and subsequent chemical leaching with acid [1]. These glass-ceramics have well-controlled continuous pores and may be formed into any desired shape and dimension. Recently, a porous glass-ceramic with a

skeleton of Nasicon-type cupric titanium phosphate CuTi4(PO4)6 (denoted as CuIITP) [2], showing high catalytic activities in the dehydrogenation or dehydration of 2-propanol, was prepared successfully [3]. We suggest that Cu21 ions and protons introduced during the acid-leaching process are located in the sites of the conduction channels. The glass-ceramic has a large speciﬁc surface area of 50 –70 m2/g and an average pore radius of 10 –20 nm. Although CuTi4(PO4)6 ceramics can be prepared by a conventional sintering method, the resulting ceramics have a relatively small surface area (1–2 m2/g) [4].

It is known that some silveror copper-bearing materials have bacteriostatic and fungistatic functions [5]. Bacteriostatic materials such as zeolites, calcium phosphates, silica gels, or clay minerals bearing Ag1 ions have recently been used commercially [6]. Although these materials have relatively wide spectra of bacteriostaticity, copper ions show greater effectiveness than silver ions against some fungi [7]. Protons are also effective in bacteriostatic and fungistatic functions [8]. Since these functions are closely related to the concentrations of such ions around the surface of the specimens, a large surface area is considered one of the most important factors in developing materials with strong bacteriostatic and fungistatic properties. Microporous glass-ceramic CuIITP therefore meets the above requirements. Na1 ions are inevitable in an environment in which bacteria or fungi grow. If protons or copper ions can be released in response to the presence of Na1 ions, then glass-ceramic CuIITP may be applicable as a novel bacteriostatic and fungistatic material with the capacity to adapt to its environment. The release of excessive ions, however, may shorten the life of the materials and contaminate the environment. In the present work, the release behavior of the ions from microporous glass-ceramic CuIITP into aqueous solution was examined. The amount of ions released was found to be restricted drastically by doping the Nasicon-type crystal CuIITP with Ca21 ions.

z30P2O5 (x 5 0, 1.5, A nominal mol% composition of the glass (50 2 x)CuOzxCaOz20TiO2 and 2.5) was prepared by using raw materials made from regent-grade chemicals (Kishida Chemical, Osaka), such as CuO (99.0%), CaCO3 (99.0%), TiO2 (99.0%), and H3PO4 (85% liquid). The batch was prepared by the procedure described in our previous work [9] and melted in an alumina crucible at 1250°C for 1 h in air. The melt was poured onto a stainless steel plate and pressed quickly using an iron plate under a continuous blowing of nitrogen gas to cool it, resulting in the formation of a glass plate of ’2 mm thickness. The resulting glass was successively heated at 510 –520°C for 20 h for nucleation, at 540 –560°C for 12 h for crystal growth, and at 570 –590°C for 12 h for development of microstructure. The heating temperatures were determined by differential thermal analysis (DTA). Subsequently, the glass-ceramic was leached with 1 N HCl aq. at room temperature for 3 days to obtain the porous material.

Crystalline phases were identiﬁed by powder X-ray (Cu Ka) diffraction (XRD). The speciﬁc surface area was examined by a BET method. The microstructure of the specimens was examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), incorporating X-ray microanalysis using energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS).

After 0.5 g of the porous glass-ceramics was soaked in 50 mL of distilled water (DW) or 0.1 M NaCl aq. and shaken for a given time at room temperature, the amounts of copper,

phosphorus, titanium, and calcium ions released to the solution were determined by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES).

The bacteriostatic effectiveness of the glass-ceramics against Escherichia coli (IFO 3301) was evaluated by following the previously reported procedure [10], using a shake ﬂask test method. A bacteria cell suspension was prepared by adding 104 cells/mL bacteria into a phosphate buffer solution containing Na1 ions (PBS; NaH2PO4 0.7 g/L, Na2HPO4 2 g/L, and NaCl, 5 g/L). The pulverized sample (240 – 420 mm in size) of 0.005 wt% was added into the suspension in a ﬂask. After shaking the ﬂask for 20 h at room temperature, the suspension was diluted with PBS until the bacteria concentration became 101;103 cells/mL. The suspensions were transferred to a soybean casein digest (SCD) culture medium. After the suspensions were incubated at 36°C for 24 h, the number of living bacterial cells was counted.

The dense glass-ceramics before HCl leaching consisted of CuTi2(PO4)3 (denoted as CuITP) and Cu3(PO4)2 crystals, whose surfaces were covered by a thin layer of CuO (’5 mm) [3,9]. HCl leaching dissolved Cu3(PO4)2 and CuO crystals selectively, leaving a Nasicon-type phase skeleton. We believe that the leaching also dissolves a glassy phase in the dense glass-ceramics almost completely. In XRD patterns of the porous glass-ceramics, all peaks were assigned to CuIITP, and no changes were found in the pattern attributable to doping with CaO. EDS spectra of the porous glass-ceramics showed that calcium is included in the CuIITP skeleton. It is suggested that Ca21 ions are located in the sites of the conduction channels of the Nasicon-type crystal. The HCl leaching reportedly converts the CuITP skeleton crystal into a CuIITP one by oxidizing copper ions after Cu1 ions in the glassceramics are exchanged for H1 ions in the HCl aq. [3]. Therefore, Cu21, H1, and Ca21 ions are located in the conduction channels of the porous glass-ceramics CuIITP in the present work. Their speciﬁc surface areas and average pore radii were 50 – 60 m2/g and ’20 nm, respectively, and the area and radius were not inﬂuenced by the CaO content in the experimental range.

Figure 1(a) shows the amounts of copper and phosphorus ions released into 0.1 M NaCl aq. from the porous glass-ceramics, while Figure 1(b) shows the pH values of the solution. The amount of copper ions released increased with increasing soaking time, as did that of phosphorus ions. These amounts were reduced dramatically, however, by doping the Nasicon-type crystal with Ca21 ions. The amount of copper ions released from the porous glass-ceramic derived from the mother glass with a composition of x 5 1.5 in (50 2 x)CuOz z30P2O5 was smaller by ’1/3, and that of x 5 2.5 was an order of magnitude xCaOz20TiO2 smaller than that of x 5 0. The behavior of phosphorus ions in terms of release was similar to that of copper ions. The concentrations of titanium and calcium ions dissolved in the solution were below the analytical limit of ,0.01 mequiv/g. On the other hand, when the porous glass-ceramics were soaked in DW, almost no ions were dissolved. As shown in Figure 1(b), the pH of the NaCl solution decreased quickly after the glass-ceramics were introduced. A large amount of H1 ions was thought to be dissolved from the glass-ceramics. It was found that ions tend to dissolve from the porous glass-ceramics in the presence of Na1 ions.

(a) Amounts of copper and phosphorus ions released into 0.1 M NaCl aq. (50 mL) from the porous glass-ceramics, and (b) pH values of the solution. Cu and P values in parentheses indicate the released Cu21 and P51 ions, respectively. x 5 0, 1.5, and 2.5 correspond to the glass-ceramics derived from the mother glass with a composition of (50 2 x)CuOzxCaOz 20TiO2

Figure 2 shows EDS spectra for the calcium-free porous glass-ceramic before and after soaking in 0.1 M NaCl aq. The sodium peak in the EDS spectrum appeared right after the soaking. Almost no changes were found in the peak intensities of elements in the CuIITP crystal. The aluminum came from the alumina crucible in which the mother glass was melted. Since no peaks corresponding to aluminum-containing compounds are seen in the XRD pattern of the glass-ceramic, the aluminum is believed to be included in the Nasicon-type CuIITP crystal.

Although the mechanism for the dissolution of ions from the glass-ceramics is under investigation, it is proposed to be as follows. When glass-ceramics are soaked in Na1-ioncontaining solution, the Na1 ions are exchanged for H1 ions, which are considered to reside in some conduction channels of the Nasicon-type CuIITP crystal. High mobility H1 ions are dissolved out of the glass-ceramics by ionic exchange. These dissolved H1 ions, however,

may chemically erode the surface of the materials, causing the gradual release of copper and phosphorus ions. Since the solubility of titanium ions is very low in the solution, they may be condensed to form related phases or be precipitated as the phases in the solution. The mobility of Ca21 ions with large ionic radii is very low [11]. When Ca21 ions are included in the CuIITP crystal, this seems to decrease the diffusion the H1 ions, leading to a reduction in the rate of exchange of H1 ions for Na1 ions. As a result, the dissolution of copper ions appears to be restricted.

The efﬁciency of porous glass-ceramics against Escherichia coli was examined. The number of living bacterial cells in suspension containing alumina as their negative control material was counted to be ’1.6 3 105, while the numbers in suspensions containing the porous glass-ceramic derived from the glass with x 5 0 and 1.5 were determined to be ,1; for x 5 2.5, that number dropped to 0.1 3 105. The excellent bacteriostatic activity of these glass-ceramics was conﬁrmed. This activity is the result of the dissolution of H1 and Cu21 ions. Porous glass-ceramics CuIITP are smart materials that can automatically control the release of H1 and Cu21 ions in response to Na1 ions in the environment.
