A new potentiometric hydrogen gas sensor based on hydronium Nasicon, a hydrogen ion conducting solid electrolyte, is described. The device incorporates a silver-based reference electrode, which eliminates the need for a standard reference gas. The sensor is simple, fast, and capable of detecting hydrogen concentrations from at least 0.01% to 100%, a range of four orders of magnitude, in the absence of oxygen or other oxidizing agents. The room temperature performance characteristics of the sensor are reported. q 1999 Elsevier Science S.A. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Hydrogen; Sensor; Solid electrolyte; Potentiometric

Detection of potentially hazardous gases in both commercial and residential environments is of every increasing concern. Gas sensors exploiting the ionic conduction of solid electrolytes can be used to detect a variety of chemical species. These devices may be operated either in the current amperometric or voltage potentiometric mode w x1 . The advantages of solid electrolyte based gas sensors are that the generated current or voltage can be easily measured with very high precision. Also, the potentials generated by these devices are independent of dimensions, thus allowing miniaturization.

scribed. This sensor, however, required a reference gas of known hydrogen partial pressure for its reference electrode for reliable hydrogen concentration measurements. Also, the two sides of the sensor element had to be separated from one another through gas-tight seals. The present work was undertaken in order to eliminate the need for a standard reference gas for the sensor and to decrease its response time by developing a new reference electrode. The results are presented in this paper.

Hydrogen gas sensors are already used extensively in a variety of areas, including aerospace and other industrial applications 2–5 . The use of hydrogen may become more prevalent in everyday life if hydrogen fuel cells become more readily available in transportation and power generation. Consequently, the demand for cheap, simple and reliable hydrogen gas sensors will increase. Recently, a number of hydrogen gas sensors exploiting the ionic conx duction of solid electrolytes have been reported 6–14 .w

A bonded hydrogen ion conducting solid electrolyte disc based on hydronium Nasicon, a Hycerame a CANMET trade mark for a series of phosphate bonded hydronium ion conductors was prepared as described previously w x15 . The dried disc was parallel lapped with 120 grit abrasive paper, cleaned in 2-propanol, and dried. A 25% solution of silver nitrate in distilled water was applied to one side of the disc. The disc was set aside for approximately 24 h, during which period the silver nitrate diffused into the disc and formed a silver–Hyceram salt at and near the surface of the disc. The ion exchange process may be represented by the equation: H–HyceramqAgNO “Ag–HyceramqHNO . T w

The overall cell reaction may be represented as: nature, the Hyceram being a solid-state protonic acid. The main electrochemical reactions taking place in the cell are: 1r2H “Hqqey 2 14) . at the anode; HqqAg–Hyceram“AgqqH–Hyceram 3 14) . at the interface between the Hyceram and the silver–Hyceram, and Agqqey“Ag at the cathode. 1r2H qAg–Hyceram“Ag qH–Hyceram. 5 14) . The emf generated when the cell anode is exposed to atmospheres containing hydrogen, assuming that the concentration of all the species other than H are constant, may be represented by the equation: Eskq 2.303RTrnF log  14) . . 6 where E is the cell emf in volts V , k is a constant representing the emf at the reference electrode, R is the gas constant, 8.3143 Jr mol K , T is the absolute temperature, n is the number of electrons involved in the electrochemical process 1 , F is the Faraday’s constant, 86 487 Crmol, pH is the partial pressure of hydrogen atm at the platinum electroderHyceram interface. The above equation may be rewritten as: Eskq 2.303RTr2 nF log pH  14) . 7 and substitution for the various constants yields a value of 0.02957 V for the Nernstian slope at 258C.

After curing, the untreated side of the electrolyte disc was covered with a thin coating of Engelhard A-4338 platinum ink and allowed to dry at room temperature for 24 h. A silver wire lead was attached to the dried platinum surface using the conducting silver epoxy resin. A schematic of the hydrogen sensor cell is shown in Fig. 1.

Measurement of the cell emf was made with a Keithley 619 electrometer, which was interfaced through an IEEE488 device to a personal computer. The data were collected for equilibrium potentials and response times to equilibrium, as a function of hydrogen partial pressure. High purity dry hydrogen and hydrogen–nitrogen gas mixtures containing 0.01%, 0.1%, 1% and 10% hydrogen, at a flow rate of 50 cm3rmin, were used for the measurements.

This may be considered analogous to the well known hydrogen–silver chloride cell 17 , except for its solid-state

represent the actual data points. Prior to the introduction of a new hydrogen gas mixture, the sensor was flushed with air, to bring its emf back to the baseline level. Fig. 2 shows that the sensor response is extremely rapid for hydrogen concentrations between 1% and 100%. The response time is typically on the order of 5 s or less to achieve a signal level of 90%. As the concentrations of hydrogen is lowered, the response time increases because the adsorbed oxygen on the platinum surface has to be removed by the reaction with the sparsely available hydrogen, before the hydrogen equilibrium at the platinum electrode can be reached. Sensors kept in air for prolonged periods without exposure to hydrogen had slow response to hydrogen due to the surface state of the Pt electrode 2 . The original fast response was however, recovered after a few exposures to hydrogen.

The response time of the sensor to various concentrations of hydrogen in nitrogen, after equilibrating it in a hydrogen–nitrogen gas atmosphere without exposure to air in between is demonstrated in Fig. 3. Between 1% and 100% hydrogen, the response time is in the order of seconds in both high and low directions. However, at lower concentrations, going in the low direction, the equilibrium is reached at longer times.

A plot of the equilibrium output voltage of the sensor vs. the logarithm of the hydrogen partial pressure yielded a calibration curve for the sensor Fig. 4 which was linear, as predicted by the Nernst equation. All the various prototypes tested had slopes ranging from 0.025 to 0.03 V, in good agreement with the theoretical value. The linear response of the device thus allows one to determine the concentration of hydrogen in an unknown gas mixture by simply measuring the emf of the sensor. The emf values

Fig. 4. Equilibrium emf of the sensor vs. the logarithm of the hydrogen partial pressure.

measured for a certain concentration of hydrogen, were however, not the same from cell to cell, although they were fabricated and tested under identical conditions. The variation was about "10% on a set of eight cells. All eight cells did, however, show comparable response times as shown in Fig. 2.

The equilibrium output voltage of the sensor vs. the logarithm of the hydrogen partial pressure measured over a period of 5 days is shown in Fig. 5. Fig. 5 clearly shows that the response of the sensor is very reproducible. The variation in equilibrium emf of the sensor was less than 5%.

Fig. 3. Response time of the sensor to various concentrations of hydrogen in nitrogen after equilibrating it in a hydrogen–nitrogen gas atmosphere .  14) without exposure to air in between .

Fig. 5. Variation of equilibrium emf of the sensor vs. the logarithm of the hydrogen partial pressure with time.

The sensor output was diminished when exposed to hydrogen mixtures containing oxygen. This behaviour can be ascribed to the catalytic combination of hydrogen and oxygen at the surface of the Pt electrode. Consequently, the sensor performance is less than ideal in oxidizing gas mixtures. Also, the exothermic nature of the hydrogen– oxygen combination causes the temperature of the cell to rise, resulting in the dehydration of the electrolyte, thereby changing its characteristics. A temperature of 1008C places an upper limit on the workable temperature range of the device, including the stability of the epoxy resin. The outputs of individual sensors were constant, for hydrogen concentrations F10%, for long periods of time, exceeding 24 h. The fluctuation in equilibrium emf was less than 5% over this time period. The sensor output, however, started to decrease after approximately 1 h, when exposed to 100% hydrogen. This behaviour may be due to a partial dehydration of the solid electrolyte as a consequence of the heat generated at the Pt catalyst by adsorption of hydrogen, or by its reaction with any small amount of oxygen present in the gas. At present, this degradation of the sensor is not fully understood and requires further investigation.

It has been reported that silver electrodes are unsatisfactory as reference electrodes in hydrogen sensors based on a hydrogen ion conducting zirconium phosphate solid electrolyte 6 . However, that work apparently did not use the AgrAg-salt equilibrium electrode system described in the present study. The application of silver nitrate solution to the surface of the Hyceram and the subsequent over-coating with silver epoxy resin utilized in this work produce an electrode whose output is steady and reproducible. In addition, the application of the silver epoxy resin serves to encapsulate the Ag electrode from hydrogen gas, so that no further separation of the two sides of the sensor by gas-tight seals is required. Also, no reference gas is required on the reference electrode side of the sensor, unlike for the previous version of this sensor 14 . It was found, however, that the application of silver epoxy resin alone, without the silver nitrate treatment, did not produce a satisfactory reference electrode, in agreement with previous findings w x6 .

A hydrogen ion conducting solid electrolyte based hydrogen sensor, which is very fast and sensitive over a wide range of hydrogen concentrations in a non-oxidizing gas mixture, has been described. The potentiometric device incorporates a AgrAg-salt based reference electrode which eliminates the need for a reference gas and eliminates the need for isolation of the two sides of the sensor from each

other. The simple, robust construction of the sensor and its performance characteristics should allow the sensor to be utilized in many hydrogen gas sensing applications.

