Recent developments in the synthesis and application of the sodium ion conducting polycrystalline Nasicon ceramics allow for selective removal of sodium from aqueous wastes at ambient temperatures by electrochemical salt splitting. In the presence of an applied electric ﬁeld, sodium ions are transported through the Nasicon structure. The size and electroneutrality constraints allow for selective transport of sodium ions, and exclude other monovalent, divalent and trivalent ions present in the impure reactants from migrating through the membrane. The sodium transport eYciency for generating pure NaOH from nitrate and sulfate industrial wastes is greater than 90%. These ceramic membranes provide the added beneﬁt of very low parasitic losses due to absence of fouling by precipitants. Electro-osmotic transport of H2O through the membrane which is common to polymeric membrane technology is also not observed. While the initial electrochemical evaluation of the ceramic membranes showed high sodium selectivity over other metal cations, the need for improvements in sodium conductivity, long term stability, and durability in strong acid was identiﬁed. A new series of Nasicon compositions have shown considerable improvements in properties and exhibit the potential for large-scale, industrial applications. © 1999 Elsevier Science B.V.

The use of sodium conducing b◊-alumina ceramic [1] was extensively studied in the 1970s as an electrolyte in sodium–sulfur batteries. The production of ﬁne-grained sodium b◊-alumina which exhibits sodium conductivities of 0.1 S cm−1 at 300°C is among the earliest investigations of electrochemical technologies at Ceramatec. As a result of the instabilities of b◊-alumina against moisture, the development eVort was concentrated on the

sodium-ion ceramics, Na3Zr2P3O12 (NZP) and Na5RESi4O12, originally known as sodium super-ionic conductors [2] (or Nasicon or RE-Nasicon for the rare-earth silicates). They possess nearly as high a conductivity and have the advantage of exhibiting three-dimensional transport of sodium ions. However, the stability of Nasicon materials against molten sodium was found to be inadequate for sodium–sulfur battery application. Based on the early work by Miller and coworkers [3], Ceramatec started the investigation of Nasicon family of materials for use in aqueous applications.

Sodium conducting electrolytes have technological importance in various industrial applications. For example, the organic membrane electrolytes are commercially used in the chlor–alkali industry to generate chlorine and caustic NaOH. However, in such applications the incoming sodium chloride feed has only ppm level of impurities. In the case of industrial byproduct streams containing sodium salts, the most commonly used organic membrane, perﬂuoro-sulfonic-acid-based NaﬁonA, is not selective to a speciﬁc cation, and therefore transports protons and other cations from the impure reactants. Certain cations can precipitate during migration though the membrane if pH gradient exists. Precipitation of solids in the membrane causes fouling, and loss of conductivity [4]. Another application of critical importance is the separation of sodium from radioactive waste stored in the Department of Energy (DOE) waste tanks. Removal of non-radioactive sodium is beneﬁcial in lowering the weight and disposal cost of the waste. During the separation of Na+ and Cs+ by electrodialysis with a NaﬁonA 417 membrane [5], cesium ions transported faster than sodium ions. Since the radioactive wastes are comprised of radioisotopes of cesium and strontium, the organic membranes will not provide any advantage in separation of sodium from radionuclides.

Nasicon ceramic membranes demonstrate a distinct advantage over polymeric membranes in the treatment of impure byproducts from industrial processes. Since the conductivity of Nasicon [6,7] and RE-Nasicon [8] is attributable to the hopping

of Na+ ions on vacancies through the lattice with a single mobile ionic species [Fig. 1(a)], they act as a sodium selective electrolyte. The oxygenshared and corner-linked polyhedra, provides the structural stability towards chemical and physical degradation. The sodium conducting channels in the (e.g., etc.), owing to electroneuions

AlO−2 , PO3−4 ( K+, Cs+, Ag+, Rb+, etc.) and divalent and rality constraints and larger monovalent

Based on the discussions above, Nasicon membranes oVer signiﬁcant beneﬁts over the polymer membrane in the separation of sodium from aqueous solutions of sodium salts. Ceramatec has undertaken the development of materials compositions, membrane fabrication, characterization, and electrochemical testing under conditions suitable for end-use applications under various DOE co-funded programs.

Nasicon ceramics are being investigated for use as electrolytes for recycling of waste sodium sulfate salt-cake produced in the pulp and paper industries, particularly in bleached paper mills [9]. The economics of this process will become increasingly beneﬁcial as environmental regulations become more stringent. Currently, in the United States,

about 800 000 tons year−1 of sodium sulfate are produce 550 000 tons year−1 of caustic soda for use in the bleach process and 675 000 tons yearsewered or landﬁlled. Recycling of this waste can

of sulfuric acid for chlorine dioxide production and pH adjustment in the mill. The electrolysis of aqueous solution of sodium sulfate using a Nasicon based ceramic membrane to give sulfuric acid and sodium hydroxide is carried out according to the overall reaction given by: 2Na2SO4+6H2O=2H2SO4+4NaOH

Long-term test results show excellent stability in conductivity of RE-Nasicon membranes in caustic solutions. However, initial results show that the conductivity of RE-Nasicon membranes degrades quickly due to corrosion in acidic solutions. In order to reduce the degradation in the acidic medium, a RE-Nasicon membrane with a porous coating (10 mm) of an acid resistant sodium com-

position (s25°C=10−5S cm−1), was tested in an electrochemical cell for over 1000 h in a batch mode with a pH 0.2 anolyte solution containing 1 M sodium sulfate. The catholyte was 1 M NaOH. The coated layer provided mechanical support to bulk RE-Nasicon membrane from degradation, but ultimately the membrane was chemically attacked after 1000 h of performance from ion-

exchange induced corrosion. The sodium transport eYciency (<60%), and conductivity of the Dy-Nasicon fell rapidly during the course of the test. Thus, further development of materials composition and/or coating was identiﬁed as a developmental issue.

Chemical acidulation of soap requires the use of high-grade sulfuric acid and disposal of an increasingly unwanted by-product, sodium sulfate. Electrochemical acidulation of black liquor soap to tall oil and an acidiﬁed aqueous phase was generated with the Dy-Nasicon membrane (3 cm2 surface area) [9]. The process involves separation of sodium ions from the black liquor soap by transport through the ceramic membrane. The cell was operated at 4 V and current density of

Wastes from nuclear defense materials production are dominated by sodium based salts. Approximately 1 billion liters of radioactive wastes are stored in tanks at Hanford, Savannah River, and Oak Ridge. These wastes consist mainly of sodium salts contaminated by aluminum, radioactive cesium, sodium hydroxide from the neutralization of acidic waste streams. Therefore, selective removal of sodium from these wastes with ion conducting Nasicon membranes provides a dual beneﬁt: waste disposal volumes are diminished, and valuable chemicals (NaOH) are made in the process that can be used on-site. This greatly reduces the volume and the disposal cost of the radioactive waste.

A simulated (non-radioactive) waste containing sodium hydroxide, sodium nitrate, sodium nitrite, and sodium aluminate was neutralized by sodium removal using a RE-Nasicon membrane. A single membrane electrochemical cell using Dy-Nasicon was tested using a Hanford waste simulant anolyte feed. Sodium transport eYciency of the ceramic membranes was determined and the endurance

A new series of Nasicon compositions were synthesized to enhance the ionic conductivity and electrochemical stability to ion-exchange induced corrosion. The ionic conductivity of the new Nasicon series was determined by linear sweep voltammetry (LSV ) using a four-electrode potentiostat (Solartron SI 1286 Electrochemical Interface) and two reference saturated-calomel electrodes (SCE). The reference electrodes were placed in custom-designed Luggin capillaries whose tips touched the membrane on each side. Two outlets of the potentiostat were connected to the reference electrodes, the other two outlets connected to the anode and cathode of the electrochemical cell. The voltage sweep rate and the voltage drop across the

membrane were limited to 30 mV s−1 and 2 V,

The measurements were carried out at temperatures ranging from 22 to 65°C compatible with the temperature range of the intended aqueous applications. The results are shown in Fig. 3, in which Nasicon compositions are designated as NASD, NASE and NASG. The literature data reported by Shannon et al. [12] are also shown for comparison. Fig. 3 demonstrates that the new Nasicon series have considerably higher ionic conductivity values. For example, the NASG composition has a conductivity more than one order of magnitude higher than that for Dy-Nasicon [8,12].

Fig. 2. Long-term testing of the single Dy-Nasicon membrane.

Fig. 3. The sodium ionic conductivity of the new Nasicon series measured by the LSV technique.

The chemical durability of new membrane series was analyzed in the absence of electrical ﬁeld in caustic solution. Dense membranes of NASD, NASE, and NASG, were immersed in 1.5 M NaOH solution and tested at 40°C. The membranes were periodically taken out of solution, washed and the weight was monitored. The results of this test, shown in Fig. 4, indicate that the membranes are very stable in caustic, and the weight loss is less than 0.1% per 1000 h of testing. This test was performed for a duration of 150 days.

Tests were conducted using a single membrane cell conﬁguration to determine membrane lifetime, sodium transport eYciency and the conductivity of the NASD, NASE and NASG compositions. The NASD membrane cell (1.4 mm thick) was operated in batch mode in NaOH solution, with fresh solution periodically replacing the replenished anolyte. The cell was continuously operated at 4.5 V and 40°C for 5000 h. Fig. 5 shows the test result, where the sodium ionic current is compared to the total current. The sodium transport eYciency achieved is very high (>90%) and remains

The results are shown in Fig. 6, in which the sodium current density is compared with total current density. High sodium current eYciency (90%) was observed again which remained constant during the 1000 h of testing. The total applied voltage in this test was unusually high (8 V ) because of the cell design where the electrodes were positioned far away from the membrane. The steady state conductivity of the NASG membrane during the test, based on the voltage measurement

across the membrane, was 2×10−2 S cm−1. The sodium mass balance of anolyte and the catholyte of these performance characteristics clearly demonstrate the potential for recycling sodium from nuclear waste streams.

Prior tests on Dy-Nascicon membrane did not show any radiation damage upon exposure to relatively large amounts of radiation. To further demonstrate the applicability of these membranes, a scaVold containing eight NASD membranes, with a total area of 25 cm2, as well as a scaVold containing 58 membranes with a total area of 820 cm2 were constructed for bench scale testing. Both scaVolds were tested at Westinghouse Savannah River Technology Center (SRTC ). Hobbs [13] recently completed the electrochemical separation of caustic from actual radioactive waste from their treatment plant with both NaﬁonA and the smaller NASD scaVold. High electrical eYciencies were observed with the scaVolded NASD membranes with negligible H2O transport in comparison to the NaﬁonA membrane. Moreover, no 137Cs was transported from the anolyte to the catholyte validating the NASD membrane to be Na ion selective. In contrast, in a NaﬁonA cell, ≥60% of 137Cs migrated from the anolyte into the catholyte. The ceramic membrane was also very stable in low-level gamma irradiation in comparison to the NaﬁonA membranes. Over the time frame of the tests, neither membrane exhibited radiation damage as would be expected due to short duration of tests.

Signiﬁcant advances in ceramic Nasicon membranes have been made. Beneﬁts in applications for separation of sodium from industrial and nuclear wastes at moderate temperatures have been clearly demonstrated. The new series of Nasicon membranes developed at Ceramatec posses high ionic

(2×10−2 S cm−1 at 50°C ). Independent tests at SRTC demonstrate separation of Na from radionuclides at high conversion eYciencies. The NASD membranes were tolerant to low level gamma irradia-conductivity

selectivity

Fig. 6. The electrochemical performance of NASD100 in caustic, at 4.5 V. in this experiment did not show any loss of sodium. During the course of this test, Al(OH )3 precipitated in the anolyte when the pH of the solution dropped below 12. This, however, did not inﬂuence the performance of membrane.

NaOH anolyte, at 400 mA cm−2, and 50°C. The results are shown in Fig. 7, in which the sodium current remains higher than 90% of the total current despite the higher current density. This test indicated that the membrane resistance can be signiﬁcantly reduced by reducing its thickness. Overall bulk resistance of the membrane is further reduced by increasing electrolyte temperature. All

Salt splitting of acidic wastes from the paper and pulp industry into high-value chemicals such as NaOH and H2SO4, and the acidulation of black liquor soap are potential applications for Nasicon membranes for recycling of industrial wastes into value added products.

In comparison to RE-Nasicon, which showed chemical degradation, and loss of sodium transport eYciency (measured as the ratio of cell current due to sodium transport to the total current through the system) in acidic and caustic wastes, the new Nasicon series (NASD, NASG) show excellent stability. Cells with these membranes operated successfully in excess of 5000 h at very high sodium transport eYciency (>90%) and at moderate current densities below 50 mA cm−2. The sodium transport eYciency of higher than 90% was also of 400 mA cm−2. The NASD and NASG memachieved with a NASG cell at high current densities

branes are also resistant to fouling in caustic and acidic precipitants and have shown no evidence of multivalent commonly observed with the NaﬁonA membranes.

anion migration