The rechargeable magnesium ion batteries (MIBs) are ideal candidates to replace  currently  commercialized  high  energy  density  lithium  ion  batteries  (LIBs) owing  to  their  cost  effective  and  environmentally  friendly  nature.  However,  bad performance  of  MIBs  is  a  big  challenge  for  researchers.  In  this  review,  we  have critically discussed the state-of-the-art research activities made for the development of Mg-ion  battery  electrolytes  and  cathode  materials  with  fast  magnesiation  kinetics. 

Emphasizing  the  chemical  structures  of  both  organic  and  inorganic  electrolytes  and their  compatibilities  with  different  cathode  materials,  the  kinetic  properties  of electrochemical  reactions  for  achieving  optimized  energy  and  power  densities,  are critically reviewed. To tackle the large polarizations of MIBs, the latest and emerging hybrid ion electrochemistries such  as Mg-Li, Mg-Na,  aqueous  rechargeable Mg-Na, and Mg-Zn hybrid ion batteries, are highlighted to elaborate the merits and challenges of each electrolyte and nanostructured cathodes. The cathode materials covered in this review include various kinds of inorganic materials (i.e. metal oxides, metal sulfides), organic polymers, Prussian blue analogous and NASICON-type Li/Na cathodes with high  working  potentials.  At  the  end,  this  review  discuss  comprehensive  future research strategies for exploring new cathodes with high working voltages for MIBs.



The  rechargeable  lithium  ion  batteries  (LIBs),  lead  acid  batteries  (LAB),  and Supercapacitors  are  widely  used  as  energy  storage  devices  in  portable  electronic devices, and smart electrical grids 1. Among these devices, LIBs are widely used since 1991  owing  to  their  high  energy  densities  to  meet  the  ever-increasing  demands  of electric  vehicles,  hybrid  electric  vehicles2-3.  While  developing  the  energy  storage devices i.e. batteries, the primary challenge is to produce cost effective and potentially safe  technologies.  Although  LIBs  are  commercialized  and  dominating  the  current market  for  the  efficient  storage  of  electrical  energy  in  the  form  of  chemical  energy, however, the dendrite formations of lithium anode and high costs are big obstacles, which restrict their use. Several attempts have been made to avoid dendrite formation by introducing new electrolyte strategies 4. A significant advancement is obtained by adding several additives i.e. chlorosilanes, chlorophosphines, and chloroboranes, into LIBs electrolytes. These additives react with lithium anode surface; create a protective layer  on  the  lithium  anode,  which  ultimately  results  in  stabilized  LIBs  cycling. 

However, such strategies are complex and only limited to experimental research and still failed on industrial scale. Thus, considerable efforts have been made to develop alternative  energy  storage  systems,  which  are  potentially  safe  and  free  of  dendrite Secondary  cell  technology  is  highly  competitive  at  present  owing  to  high-energy storage demands for electrical triggered portable devices. In this regard, rechargeable batteries including sodium, potassium, and magnesium ion batteries have emerged as ideal  candidate  to  replace  lithium-ion  technology.  Among  these  technologies,  the rechargeable  magnesium  ion  batteries  (MIBs)  are  potentially  safe,  thus  research  in this area has been accelerated in recent years. The MIB technology is most promising owing to high natural resources of alkaline earth metal magnesium, which may led to cheaper electrode materials (104 times that of lithium metal). The metal magnesium is more stable in atmosphere due to its high melting point (660˚C) than lithium metal, thus leads to potentially safe technology 7. MIB also offers two electrons during redox reactions, a divalent ion (Mg2+) with a comparatively small ionic radius of 86 pm led to  a  theoretical  volumetric  capacity  of  3833  mAh/cm3,  which  is  almost  double compared with that for lithium 8. Besides, the magnesium is lightest structural metal on  earth  crust  with  a  density  of  1.74g/cm3,  thus  may  reduce  the  overall  weight  of energy storage devices. Lastly, MIBs are advantageous over LIBs due to the dendrite free cycling at magnesium metal anodes.   




Aurbach et al. proposed the first rechargeable magnesium ion battery system using tetrahydrofuran  (THF)  based  magnesium  organochloro  aluminate  electrolyte  and magnesium  molybdenum  sulfide  cathodes.  A  practical  energy  density  of  60  Wh/Kg was  delivered  by  MIB  with  good  capacity  retention  for  more  than  2000  cycles. 

Despite  ground-breaking  work  of  Aurbach  et  al.  9  and  positive  aspects  of  MIBs  (as described  above),  the  research  on  magnesium  based  energy  storage  system  has  not kept pace with that of lithium-ion system. This is because magnesium ion technology is facing major roadblocks i.e. lack of compatible electrolytes, cathode materials, and current collectors. 

To develop magnesium ion batteries, considerable research has been carried out since 200010.  The  chemical  scientists  have  focused  on  preparations  of  new  organic  and inorganic  based  electrolytes,  synthesis  of  organic  and  inorganic  based  cathode materials  for  magnesium  ion’s  accommodation,  and  current  collectors11.  The underachieving  performance  of  magnesium  ion  batteries  was  improved  by  lowering the  polarizations  and  increasing  the  ionic  conductivities  of  electrolytes.  In  addition, attempts  were  made  to  bypass  the  sluggish  magnesium  ion  transportations  by introducing the lithium or sodium ions inside the magnesium electrolytes, commonly known  as  hybrid  ion  batteries12-13.  Both  aqueous  and  non-aqueous  rechargeable magnesium based hybrid ion batteries were investigated at different temperatures (low, high, and room temperatures)14. Thus, numerous scientific attempts have been made in  past  years  to  eradicate  the  root  causes  for  low  performing  MIBs  and  make  them commercially viable energy storage devices. These efforts must be summarized with respect  to  standpoints  of  designs,  electrolytes,  electrodes,  and  final  performance  of MIBs. Thus, an up to date review  focusing the  Mg based hybrid ion batteries, with emphasis on recent development in electrolytes and cathodes is urgently required. 

The  objective  of  this  review  is  to  summarize  and  discuss  key  challenges  faced  by MIBs,  to  provide  recent  the  advancements  made  in  the  field  of  electrolytes,  and  to discuss  the  cathode  materials  for  the  development  of  rechargeable  magnesium  ion batteries.  We  will  also  highlight  the  recent  progress  on  the  magnesium-lithium  and magnesium-sodium  hybrid  ion  batteries,  their  electrolytes,  voltage  limits  and compatibilities  of  possible  cathode  materials.  At  the  end,  recent  progress  in rechargeable  aqueous  magnesium-sodium  and  magnesium-zinc  hybrid  ion  batteries and their electrolytes will be involved in discussion. Thus, present review will give a clear perspective of magnesium based energy storage system, the important questions raised  as  well  as  next  experimental  and  theoretical  footsteps  to  develop  the  highly reversible magnesium ion batteries.   


Rechargeable magnesium ion batteries (MIBs) are considered as ideal alternatives of lithium  ion  batteries  (LIBs)  for  the  next  generation  battery  technology  owing  to 5-times higher volumetric capacity (3832 mAhcm-3) of magnesium anode compared with commercialized LIB graphite anodes (777 mAhcm-3), cost effective, and dendrite free cycling10, 15. Unfortunately, aforementioned advantages of MIBs are only possible if highly efficient electrolytes and host cathodes are available. The chemical scientist of MIB field must understand that chemical behavior of magnesium ion is different from lithium ion. This section will shed light on recent challenges faced by MIBs.   


One  of  the  most  important  component  of  MIB  is  magnesium  metal  anode  and  its compatibility with magnesium electrolyte is essential to achieve the good Coulombic efficiency and cycle life during deposition and dissolution of magnesium ions. Unlike lithium  anodes,  the  presence  of  small  amount  of  water,  carbonates,  or  magnesium perchlorate  salts  in  the  conventional  electrolytes  will  result  in  formation  of passivation layer on the surface of magnesium anode, which leads to poor cycle life and Coulombic efficiency of battery  16. Aurbach et al.  9 and his coworkers proposed the  first  tetrahydrofuran  (THF)  based  magnesium  organochloroaluminate  electrolyte complex,  which  exhibited  the  formation  of  permeable  layer  on  anode  surface, however  the  capacity  of  was  not  enough  high  to  compete  the  LIBs  (Figure  1).  The passivation  challenge  of  magnesium  anode  has  impetuses  the  development  of  new magnesium salt based electrolytes that can deposit/dissolute the magnesium reversibly, and will be discussed in next section.   

The development of MIBs is also restricted by the limited anodic stability of available magnesium  electrolytes.  The  Grignard  based  electrolytes  such  as  ethyl-magnesium bromide  and  butyl-magnesium  chloride,  have  anodic  stabilities  around  1.3V  verses magnesium, which is big obstacle for development of high voltage rechargeable MIBs. 

Owing to low anodic stabilities of magnesium electrolytes, the choice of host cathode materials  is  also  restricted.  Literature  review  revealed  that  numerous  efforts  were carried  out  to  develop  several  new  electrolytes  (such  as  Mg(AlH4)2,  MgBr2, Mg(BH4)2, Mg(B(C4H9)4)2, and Mg(AlCl2BuEt)2 etc.), however until today maximum  anodic  stability  of  MIB  electrolytes  is  still  far  from  practical  limits14, 17-18.  The  low voltage of MIB is also attributed to the small potential difference between Mg redox couple and its cathodes.   



The current collector is an important component of batteries, which deliver the current to  external  circuits.  The  highly  reversible  magnesium  organohaloaluminates containing magnesium dimer cation (Mg2(µ-Cl)3·6THF)+, are corrosive in nature, thus restrict the use of common metal current collectors such as aluminum, nickel, copper, steel  etc. in  magnesium  batteries19.  Therefore, the  use  of  magnesium organohaloaluminates-based electrolytes requires alternative current collectors such as graphite, and carbon paper etc. Recently, extensive characterization and mechanistic studies  of  newly  developed  chlorine  free  and  ether  based  electrolytes  revealed  that these electrolytes are non-corrosive, however their electrochemical performance is not enough good.


Another obstacle in development of MIBs is limited availability of highly reversible cathode  materials.  Since  2000,  several  cathodes  have  been  explored  for  MIBs  with adequate  operating  voltage  and  reaction  kinetics.  These  cathodes  includes  transition metal oxides, sulfides, organic compounds, and metallic particles10. Unfortunately, the reversibility  of  magnesium  ion is  very  slow  owing  to  its  divalent  nature  and  due  to formation  of  magnesium  oxide  film  on  cathode  surface,  which  reduces  the  Mg2+ diffusions,  thus  leads  to  poor  electrochemical  performance  of  MIB23.  Furthermore, large columbic interactions between host materials and magnesium ions results in low reversible  capacities24.  To  overcome  these  issues,  several  approaches  (synthesizing highly  porous  materials,  introducing  inorganic  additives,  and  preparing  efficient electrolytes) have been employed recently, which will be discussed in next sections.   


The  electrolytes  with  high  compatibility  and  ionic  conductivity  are  acquired  to achieve high electrochemical performance. Unlike LIBs, MIBs electrolytes with high ionic conductivity are not easily available where complete reversibility of magnesium ion  is  possible.  Initial  works  revealed  that  magnesium  salt  Mg(ClO4)2  have  been extensively used in different solvents including proplylene carbonate, acetonitrile, and N,N-Dimethylformamide as an electrolyte for MIBs 16, 25-26 However, ClO4 and BF4anions react with magnesium anode and form a passive layer, which leads to capacity fading. Several reviews were conducted to summarize the background and history of electrolytes for MIBs8, 10, 23. Herein we will discuss recently developed electrolytes for magnesium-ion battery systems. Recently, several attempts were made to synthesize the electrolyte capable of Mg2+ deposition and dissolutions. For example, R.E. Doe et al. 27 reported an inorganic type electrolyte, where magnesium can be electrodeposited effectively. They claimed that MgCl2 and AlCl3 revealed the electrochemical stability up  to  3  V  when  used  in  1,2-dimethoxyethane,  tetrahydrofuran  and  tetraglyme.  The electrolyte is formed as a result of acid-base reactions (like Grignard-based complexes) and  gives  rise  to  the  production  of  Mg  cation  is  MgCl+  and  Mg2Cl3+. 


It was found that precursor ratios influence the electrochemical performance of these electrolytes.  For  example,  when  concentrations  of  AlEtCl2  is  increased,  then  both electrolyte’s  ionic  conductivity  and  current  density  (for  Mg  deposition)  increases. Furthermore, it was observed that lowering the AlEtCl2 concentrations (i.e. 0.4molar) revealed  almost  same  over  potential  with  a  Coulombic  efficiency  of  95%.  Whereas increasing  the  AlEtCl2  concentrations  (i.e.  0.6  molar)  revealed  high  over  potential  with a Coulombic efficiency of 85% as shown in Table 2 29. 

Although anodic stability of chloride-based magnesium electrolytes is high, however their corrosive nature for metal current collector hinder their use. To handle this issue, R. Mohtadi et al.  22 proposed a new design concept containing boron cluster anions [CB11H12].  This  type  of  magnesium  salt  exhibits  good  oxidative  stability,  is compatible  with  metal  magnesium,  and  is  non-corrosive.  The  Mg(CB11H12)2-tetraglyme (MMC/G4) electrolyte is an ideal electrolyte, which can be used for coin cells  having  high  voltage  cathodes.  While  developing  this  electrolyte  system,  they attempt  to  replace  the  Cl¯  by  [1-(1,7-C2B10H11)]¯ and  as  C  atom  contains  more  of localized negative charge, thus Mg(C2B10H11)2 complex can be expected.   

When  Mg(CB11H12)2-tetraglyme  and  Mg(CB11H12)2-triglyme  were  analyzed  against platinum  electrode  using  cyclic  voltammetry, the  both  electrolytes  exhibit electro-deposition and dissolution of magnesium.  Low over potentials, high CE (%) confirmed their compatibility with magnesium anode 31. The Coulombic efficiency of Mg(CB11H12)2-tetraglyme was close to 99.9% even when cell was cycled till potential window of 3.6V as shown in Figure 2(d-e).   





The  Magnesocene-based  magnesium  battery  electrolytes  were  reported  by  M. Wachtler  et  al.  33.  These  electrolytes  contain  magnesocene,  MgCp2  dissolved  in tetrahydrofuran  and  can  produce  magnesium  electroplating  with  small  value  of over-potentials. However, the anodic stability of these electrolytes were limited to 1.5 and  1.8V  at  platinum  and  stainless  steel  respectively,  against  the  magnesium  metal anode. This halide-free electrolyte is very stable for low voltage cathodes. H. Kim et al. 34 and their coworkers proposed Mg(ClO4)2-based electrolytes in tetramethylsilane (TMS) mixed solvents. They found that vanadium oxide based cathode exhibits high capacity  fading  in  acetonitrile  solvents,  which  is  due  to  formation  of  product  as  a result of electrolyte reactions, and thus charge transfer resistance increases. Contrary, Mg(ClO4)2  dissolved  in  tetramethylsilane  and  ethyl  acetate  complex  revealed  high capacity retentions. This is because ethyl acetate strongly reacts with magnesium ions and  thus  ionic  conductivity  keep  increasing,  which  results  in  low  capacity  loss. 

Furthermore,  the  density  functional  theory  was  used  to  explore  the  fluorinated alkoxide-based  electrolytes,  where  reaction  between  alcohols  and  ethylmagnesium chloride result in formation of intermediate product such as fluoroalkoxy-magnesium chloride.  This  intermediate  product  reacts  with  AlCl3  to  produce  electrolyte  with anodic  stability  of  about  3.2V  verses  magnesium.  These  electrolytes  are  compatible with Mo6S8 and exhibit the ionic conductivity of 3.5mS/cm 35. 

Non-corrosive  electrolyte  based  on  hybrid  mixtures  of  ionic  liquid  (IL)  along  with dipropylene glycol dimethylether (DPGDME) or acetonitrile (ACN) was investigated by  E.S.  Takeuchi  et  al.  36.  They  used  the  magnesium  salt  i.e.  magnesium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (Mg(TFSI)2) and tested their electrochemistry with Mg0.07V2O5  or  Mg0.15Na0.02MnO2-0.7H2O  (Mg-MnO2)  cathodes  in  three  electrode system.  It  was  found  that  co-solvent  additive  exhibits  decay  in  conductivities  even though the glyme have good capabilities with Mg2+ ions. However, by optimizing the potential  windows,  the  co-solvent  hybrid  electrolytes  demonstrated  high  ionic conductivities  and  lowest  value  of  impedances  with  Mg  doped  manganese  and vanadium  oxides.  In  addition,  these  electrolytes  beneficial  because  of  their non-corrosive nature but low oxidative stabilities were observed. 

To achieve the high Coulombic efficiency, conductivity, and voltage stability another attempt  was  made  by  J.  T.  Herb  et  al.  32  and  his  co-workers,  where fluoroalkoxyalu-minate-based electrolytes were investigated (Figure 2(f)). As reported earlier, lithium electrolytes revealed high electrochemical stabilities when used these anions. The lithium aluminum hexa-fluoro-isopropoxide LiAl(HFIP)4 is prepared by  reaction of LiAlH4 with HFIP  37. Using same strategy, the magnesiumfluoroalkoxide was combined with a Lewis acidic aluminum alkoxide to produce electrolytes that can reversibly deposit magnesium. The cyclic voltammetry revealed that Mg passivation was not observed even after hundreds cycles. Furthermore, they observed that initial Coulombic  efficiency  was  ca.  58%,  however  increased  to  a  value  of  99.3%  with repeated cycling. This is because first passivation layer formed on magnesium anode was  broken  during  recycling  process  38.  Due  to  presence  of  electron-withdrawing groups on fluoroalkoxyaluminate anion, a high anodic stability can be obtained. For example, the anodic stability of >4.6 V vs Li/Li+ was observed on glassy carbon by LiAl(HFIP)4  in  DME  39.  However,  both  gold  and  glassy  carbon  electrodes  react  around 3.5V vs. Mg/Mg2+ in DME, and all this depends on oxidation threshold of the solvents.

Non-Grignard and Lewis acid-free magnesium ion battery electrolytes were reported by  S.J.  Kang  et  al.  21  and  his  coworkers,  where  magnesium  chloride  salts  were blended in a mixture of dipropyl sulfone (DPSO) and tetrahydrofuran (THF) (1/1, v/v). 

The  DPSO-THF  based  electrolyte  possesses  [Mg(DPSO)6]2+  complex,  which  act  as  cation  and  opposite  two  anions  complexes  are  [MgCl3(THF)]¯ .  The  resulted electrolyte  solution  exhibits  excellent  compatibility  with  Chevrel  phase  cathode (Mo6S8)  and  is  stable  until  3.0V  verses  magnesium.  Furthermore,  the  ionic  conductivity of 1.1 mScm-1 and coulombic efficiency of > 90% were achieved. 




Generally,  ionic  liquids  possess  excellent  ionic  conductivity,  chemical  and  thermal stabilities, and are potentially safe due to their non-volatile behaviors. Thus, these can be used as functional liquids or electrolyte additives in different kind of battery (i.e. lithium  ion  battery)  electrolytes20,  41.  Similarly,  the  ionic  liquids  have  also  been employed in magnesium ion electrolytes to boost up the ionic conductivities, which ultimately speed up the electrochemical activity and anodic stabilities. 


For example, Fichtner  et  al.  42  used  ionic  liquids  in  magnesium-sulfur  battery  electrolytes  to improve  the  oxidative  stabilities  and  minimize  the  formation  of  polysulfide. 




Inspired  by  advantages  of  rechargeable  magnesium  ion  batteries,  several  attempts have  been  made  to  synthesize  the  compatible  cathode  materials  with  desire  of  high reversibility for Mg2+ ion, high energy density, good cycle life and inexpensive nature. 

The chemical researchers have focused on synthesis of inorganic materials (transition metal compounds), Prussian blue, and organic cathodes for magnesium ion batteries. 

The extensive amount of magnesium battery cathodes has been discussed in previous review10. Thus, herein we will make discussion on recently synthesized cathodes for magnesium ion batteries that have not been debated in previous review. 



Inorganic  cathodes  include  transition  metal  compounds  such  as  transition  metal oxides etc. Among transition metal oxides, the manganese oxides have  been widely explored for rechargeable batteries because of their high natural abundance on earth crust, low cost, high stability and environmental benignity47-48. The Mn3O4, which is isostructural to Co3O4, exhibits good electrochemistries as anode materials. However, the literature  review  revealed  that  electrochemical  performance  of  the  manganese  oxide based magnesium ion batteries is still unsatisfactory10. Recently, L. Wang et al. 49 and his coworkers made successful attempt to the design Mn3O4 nanoparticles decorated graphene for rechargeable magnesium ion batteries. Firstly, Mn3O4 nanoparticles with  7-10 nm size were synthesized using previous report  50. At the same time, graphene oxide  suspension  was  prepared  by  Hummer’s  method51.  Then,  both  materials  were reacted the  form  of  suspensions to  prepare  Mn3O4-graphene  composite. 

Furthermore,  another  sample  of  Mn3O4-graphene  composite  was  synthesized  using in-situ  method.  The  preparation  of  all-phenyl-complex  (APC)  electrolyte  complex was  carried  out  by  reacting  the  PhMgCl  and  AlCl3  in  tetrahydrofuran.  The electrochemical  performance  of  Mn3O4-graphene  composite  revealed  the  high  reversible capacity of 220 mAhg−1 at the current density of 15.4 mAg−1, excellent rate performance  (80 mAhg−1  at  1.54 Ag−1),  and  good  cycle  life  for  about  700  cycles without  capacity  fading  (Figure  5  (a-d)).  These  results  were  much  better  than previously  reported  Mn3O4  nanoparticles  for  magnesium  ion  batteries50.  The  main reason  for  improvement  in  the  electrochemical  properties  of  Mn3O4-graphene composite  was  attributed  to  high  surface  area  and  large  amount  of  function  groups (provided by  graphene oxide), which made the composite as an ideal host for guest ion storage. 

Generally,  synthesis  of  a  compatible  and  three  dimensional  electrode  materials  for magnesium ion batteries is a grand challenge for researchers. Recently, S. Tao et al. 47 made  a  successful  attempt  to  fabricate  the  unique  tetragonal-spinel  MgMn2O4 (T-MgMn2O4) hollow spheres using solvothermal and solid phase reaction approach, and used them as electrode materials in magnesium ion batteries. The 3D hollow spheres with average diameters of one micron, exhibited the specific capacity of 261.5 mAhg−1 at the current  density  of  100  mAg−1,  when  1.0  molar  solution  of  MgSO4  was  used  as  an  electrolyte. The excellent specific capacity delivered by MgMn2O4 revealed that Mg2+ can reversible  intercalate  into/from  host  cathode.  Furthermore,  the  synthesized  cathode exhibited high rate performance (103 mAhg−1 at 300 mAg−1) and excellent cycle life (99% capacity  retention)  (Figure  5  (e-f)).  These  results  indicated  that  although  good electrochemical  performance  was  achieved,  however,  poor  electrical  and  electronic conductivity of MgMn2O4 cathodes extremely influences the diffusion of guest Mg2+ ions, and this will result in limited rate performance. Generally, electrical conductivity of  cathode  materials  can  be  improved  by  using  carbon  nanotubes,  carbon  fibers  or graphene  templates52-53.  This  means  that  surface  of  MgMn2O4  cathode  can  be modified using these carbon templates. To take full advantage of MgMn2O4, G. Liu et  al.54  used  sol-gel  technique  to  fabricate  MgMn2O4  and  MgMn2O4-rGO  (reduced graphene oxide) composite for aqueous magnesium ion batteries. Experimental results revealed that presence of highly conductive rGO optimized the interfacial properties of MgMn2O4 and facilitated the fast electron transfer and magnesium ion diffusion. It was  found  that  pristine  MgMn2O4  cathode  exhibited  the  specific  capacity  of  about  131.4  mAhg−1  at  the  current  density  of  50  mAg−1.  On  the  other  hand, MgMn2O4-rGO  composite cathode exhibited higher value of specific capacity  (211.8 mAhg−1) at the same  current  density  (Figure  5  (g-i)).  The  improved  electrochemical  performance  was attributed to the complete insertion and extraction of Mg2+ ions into/from MgMn2O4-rGO cathode as indicated by voltage plateaus and higher coefficient of diffusions (7.12 × 10−10 cm2s−1 and 1.03 × 10−8 cm2s−1 for MgMn2O4 and MgMn2O4-rGO, respectively) 54.  






 

The literature review of manganese oxide based magnesium ion batteries revealed the significant  improvement  in  specific  capacity  at  low  current  density  and  conversion reactions were observed49, 54-55. Although, these reports provide useful insights on the host  materials  but the  reversibility  and  working  voltages  need  substantial improvements.  Similar  to  manganese  oxides,  the  vanadium  oxides  with  different phases,  morphologies,  and  structures  have  been  extensively  used  for  rechargeable batteries56. Among vanadium oxides, the vanadium pentoxide (V2O5) have emerged as  a  new  class  of  cathode  material  for  magnesium  ion  batteries10.  The  crystal  V2O5 comprises  of  layered  polyhedral,  which  is  very  beneficial  for  guest  metal  ion transportation during redox reactions. Furthermore, the V2O5 exhibit the open circuit voltage  of  about  2.66V,  which  is  highly  required  to  improve  the  energy  density  of rechargeable metal ion batteries.   



Despite  of  high  open  circuit  voltage,  the  use  of  V2O5  is  limited  due  to  its  poor  electrical  conductivity  and  unstable  structure.  Recently,  Y.  Cheng  et  al.58  tried  to improve  the  electrical  conductivity  of  V2O5  by  preparing  the  dispersion  of  V2O5 nanoclusters on porous carbon framework. The carbon framework with high porosity was  synthesized  through  protocol  with  resorcinol  and  formaldehyde  as  precursors (RFC)  59.  The  vanadium  (V)  trisisopropoxide  in  cyclohexane  (10%)  solution  was processed with RFC templates using ambient hydrolysis deposition 60. As synthesized porous carbon supported V2O5 nanocluster composite (RFC/V2O5) was employed as cathode  material rechargeable  magnesium ion  batteries  using  0.2  M [Mg2(µ-Cl)2(DME)4][AlCl4]2-DME  electrolytes.  The  electrochemical  testing  showed  that RFC/V2O5 composite exhibited the specific capacity of about 225 mAhg−1 at the  current density of 40 mAg−1 with a working voltage of 1.8V. These values are higher than that  of  Chevrel  phase  Mo6S8  (115  mAhg−1  and  1.10V)  9  and  pristine  RFC  cathode.  In addition,  excellent  rate  performance  and  good  cycle  stabilities  were  achieved. The exceptional improvement in electrochemistry of composite was attributed to the unique combination of highly conductive carbon and highly active cathode materials, and these results suggest that synthesized composite exhibit molecular storage mechanism.   

Water  doped  vanadium  oxide  (V2O5·nH2O)  has  been  considered  as  potential  cathode material because it consist of two layers of 2D V2O5 polyhedron sheets, thus may provide large  interlayer  spacing  for  the  guest  ion  transportations61.  Furthermore,  variety  of oxidation  states  of  V2O5·nH2O  and  its  nano  size,  hold  the  potential  to  facilitate  shorter diffusion  length  and  improve  the  electrode-electrolyte  contact  area,  which  leads  to  high 



Furthermore,  it  was  noticed  that  for  high  current  rates  the  pseudocapactive  storage  of lithium ions in TiO2-B is more favorable as compared to anatase titanium oxides, where solid-state diffusion causes poor rate performance. Thus, bronze titanium oxide (TiO2-B) are more effective to store multivalent and bigger ions via capacitive behaviors, and are ideal  candidates  for  rechargeable  magnesium  ion  batteries.  Motivated  by  advantages  of bronze  phase,  Y.  Meng  et  al.  71  synthesized  the  TiO2-B  nanowires  using  hydrothermal method. These nanowires were used as cathode material in rechargeable magnesium ion batteries using all-phenyl-complex (0.4 M (PhMgCl)2 AlCl3-tetrahydrofuran) electrolytes.  The resultant battery revealed excellent capacity to store Mg2+ ions (121 mAhg−1 at 0.05C), impressive  rate  performance  at  high  current  rates  (50C),  and  good  cycle  life  with  a capacity-fading rate of 0.08% per cycle. 


The impressive improvement in rate  performance  of  TiO2-BǁAPC/THFǁMg  cell  was  attributed  to  capacitive  storage  of  Mg2+ ions on bronze titanium oxide surface71. Redox-active organic material is another kind of capable alternative cathode material for rechargeable metal ion batteries. The main advantages of organic material includes lightweight, high flexibility, low cost, good sustainability and environmental friendly nature47, 72.  Furthermore,  the  organic  materials  can  operate  at  high  current  densities compared with the inorganic materials (metal oxides, sulfides, etc.) in magnesium ion batteries.  This  is  because  such  materials  possess  reduced  columbic  interactions between  host  cathode  and  guest  magnesium  ions,  thus  more  flexible  ions transportation is possible. The charge delocalization is possible because of resonance stability, and rotational capability of bonds leads to local electro-neutrality as well as facile charge redistributions73. These characteristics result in high rate performance by rapid  transportation  of  guest  ions  during  redox  reactions,  and  make  the  organic materials as ideal cathode materials for energy storage devices. In addition, the high flexibility of the organic compounds facilitate the assembly of stretchy and wearable electronic devices, which are urgently required. 

Despite promising aspects, the organic electrodes also possess some weaknesses for their  use  in  rechargeable  metal  ion  batteries.  For  example,  the  low  electrical conductivity of organic electrodes affects the rate performances and thus leads to low power  density  of  secondary  batteries.  To  improve  the  electrical  conductivity  of organic  compounds,  carbonaceous  additives  such  as  carbon  nanotubes,  carbon  nano fibers,  etc.  can  play  critical  role  owing  to  their  ultra-high  electrical  conductivities compared with organic compounds74-75. However, unlike simple mechanical blending (of  inorganic  material  and  carbonaceous  material),  one  must  carefully  consider  the key  features  of  organic  materials  such  as  solvent,  solution  processability,  solubility and  compatibility,  to  achieve  the  good  chemical  bonding  between  organic  and carbonaceous  material76-78.  Unfortunately,  the  good  solubility  is  not  virtuous  for organic  based  rechargeable  batteries  because  of  their  structural  decomposition  upon cycling,  which  results  in  poor  cycle  life79.  To  be  soluble  or  not,  is  still  a  grand challenge  for  material  researchers  to  design  the  organic  cathodes  for  rechargeable batteries and it naturally discourages them to utilize the organic cathodes.   

Among  organic  polymers,  the  polypyrrole  (PPy)  has  fascinated  great  research attention  because  of  its  environmentally  sustainability  80.  Recently,  X,  Zhao  et  al. made successful attempt to synthesize the polypyrrole composite doped with chloride ions  (PPyCl)  for  rechargeable  magnesium  ion  batteries.  Furthermore,  the  electrical conductivity of organic compound was boosted by incorporation of highly conductive carbon  nanotubes  (CNTs)  using  ice  bath  and  argon  atmosphere.  The  experimental result  confirmed  that  nanocomposite  PPyCl/CNTs  possesses  improved  surface  area and uniform distribution of CNTs inside the organic matrix. It was noticed that PPyCl particles  were  coated  uniformly  onto  the  surface  of  CNTs  through  the  hydrogen bonding  and  without  agglomerations  as  shown  in  Figure  8  (a-c).  The  resultant PPyCl/CNTs nanocomposite was used as cathode materials in magnesium ion battery using  an  organic  solution  of  Mg(HMDS)2-AlCl3-MgCl2-tetraglyme  synthesized  by  Zhao’s  et  al.42  method.  When  battery  was  charged  and  discharged  between  0.4  and 2.8V, the pristine PPyCl exhibited very low reversible capacity (10 mAhg−1).



Similarly,  B.  Pan  et  al.85  and  his  coworkers  attempted to  utilize the  2, 5-Dimethoxy-1,4-Benzoquinone  (DMBQ)  as  Organic  Cathode  in  rechargeable magnesium  ion  batteries.  Two  kind  of  electrolytes  were  investigated  with  DMBQ cathode. Firstly, magnesium bis (triﬂuoromethylsulfonyl)imide (Mg(TFSI)2) dissolved in dimethoxyethane (DME) along with MgCl2 were tested, which showed the specific  capacity of 230 mAhg−1 at 0.2C with a discharge potential of 2.1V verses magnesium anode.  These  results  were  much  better  than  previously  reported  organic  cathode materials for magnesium ion batteries 84, 86. On contrary, the DMBQ cathode showed very  limited  specific  capacity  (100 mAhg−1  at  1.0C)  with  a  large  value  of  over potentials,  when  using salt  dissolved Mg(TFSI)2-DGM)  as  an  electrolyte.  Unfortunately,  in  both  electrolytes  very  poor capacity retentions were achieved. Thus, further research was needed to stabilize the cycle life of organic cathode based magnesium ion batteries. 

Recently, B. Pan et al. 47 and his coworkers made similar approach by exploring two new kinds of anthraquinone-base polymers for rechargeable magnesium ion batteries. 



These  new  cathode  materials  were  2,  6-polyanthraquinone  (26PAQ)  and  1, 4-polyanthraquinone  (14PAQ).  For  comparison,  1,  5-poly  (anthraquinonylsulfide) (PAQS)  was  used  as  reference  cathode  materials.  The  chemical  structures  of  all organic  materials  are  presented  in  Figure  9  (a).  The  anthraquinone-based  polymers (PAQS,  26PAQ  and  14PAQ)  were  synthesized  using  previous  reports87-88.  After characterizations,  the  cathodes  were  cycled  in  magnesium  ion  batteries  using  0.3M Mg(HMDS)2 4MgCl2/THF electrolyte between 0.5 to 2.5V at different current rates. Unlike  previous  studies  on  organic  based  magnesium  ion  batteries,  they  choose  the tetrahydrofuran  (THF)  solvent.  Experimental  results  revealed  that  organic  cathode PAQS  exhibited  the  specific  capacity  of  about  98 mAhg−1  at  the  current  density  of 112 mAg−1. However, when cathode was cycled for 100 cycles, fast capacity loss was observed like in case of inorganic cathodes (Figure 9 (b)). Interestingly, the columbic efficiency was increased from 88% to 99% during first 100 cycles.   

Although,  PAQS  cathode  exhibited  poor  cycle  life,  but  excellent  electrochemical reversibly proved it as an ideal material for magnesium ion batteries. Therefore, Pan et  al.  47  developed  the  modified  forms  of  PAQS  to  improve  the  dissolution  of anthraquinone  polymer.  The  electrochemistries  of  26PAQ  cathode  revealed  a maximum specific capacity of about 122 mAhg−1 at the current density of 130 mAg−1, slightly  higher  than  that  of  PAQS  cathode.  The  cycle  life  and  rate  performance  of 26PAQ cathode showed significant improvement, where the capacity retention of 82% after  100  cycle  and  capacity  of  40  mAhg−1  at  5C  were  retained.  Once  again,  the organic cathode exhibited stable voltage platforms and working voltage of about 1.7V. 

The third cathode 14PAQ was found to exhibit the best performance. The maximum specific capacities of 160 and 50 mAhg−1 were observed at the current densities of 0.5 and 5C, respectively. Furthermore, the capacity retention of about 89% was achieved even after 1000 cycles (Figure 9 (c-h)). The main reason for excellent electrochemical performance  of  26PAQ  and  14PAQ  cathodes  were  due  to  their  limited  solubility  in THF solvent and structural difference contributes toward the long-term cycle stability. 

In  addition,  the  redox  active  quinonyl  moieties  in  14PAQ  enable  the  rotational flexibility,  thus  leads  to  better  structural  stability  compared  with  26PAQ.  Also,  the presence of two adjacent carbonyl (C=O) groups stabilize the guest magnesium ions via chelating effect and similar phenomenon was observed in lithium ion batteries 89. 

Prussian blue analogous (PBA) is a three-dimensional framework with zeolitic feature, and it has drawn significant research attention for non-aqueous rechargeable lithium, sodium, and potassium ion batteries95. Furthermore, the derivatives of PBA are also receiving significant research interest because of their low cost, non-toxic nature, easy synthesis,  and  high  theoretical  capacity96.  Like  other  batteries,  PBA  was  also investigated  as  cathode  materials  for  rechargeable  magnesium  ion  batteries  in  both aqueous and non-aqueous electrolytes.   Y. Mizuno et al.97 firstly proposed the intercalation and de-intercalation of magnesium ion  in  a  bimetallic  PBA  (CuFe-PBA)  in  an  aqueous  electrolyte.  The  synthesis  of CuFe-PBA  was  carried  out  through  a  precipitation  method  using  hydrated  copper sulfate and K3Fe(CN)6 salts. The highly crystalline CuFe-PBA particles were tested as cathode material in 1.0 M Mg(NO3)2 aqueous solution with Ag/AgCl in 3.0 M NaCl as  reference  electrode.  The  experimental  results  revealed  that  CuFe-PBA  cathode exhibited the maximum reversible capacity of 50 mAhg−1 at the current density of 0.1 Ag−1 when testing between 0.1 to 1.0 V. When current rate was increased from 0.1 to 1.0  Ag−1,  the  capacity  was  reduced  to  37 mAhg−1,  revealing  the  excellent  rate capability  of  CuFe-PBA  (Figure  11  (a-c)).  The  impressive  rate  performance  of  cell was  attributed  to  the  fast  insertion  and  extraction  of  magnesium  ions  in  CuFe-PBA channels  as  confirmed  by  the  voltage  plateaus  and  ex-situ  Mossbauer  spectra, Cu-K-edge spectra, and x-ray diffraction.   


Inspired  from  the  above-discussed  works,  L.  Chen  et  al.106  explored  the  usage  of nickel  hexacyanoferrate  (cathode  for  magnesium  ion  intercalation-deintercalation against  an  organic  polyimide  anode  (PI).  Unlike,  previously  reported  MIBs13,  this kind  of  battery  was  free  of  magnesium  deposition/dissolution  owing  to  absence  of metal  anode.  The  synthesis  of  organic  anode  polyimide  was  carried  out  by  reacting the 1,4,5,8naphthalenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (NTCDA) and ethylene diamine (EDA)  under  reflux  in  the  solvent  of  N-methylpyrrolidone  (NMP),  followed  by washing, drying, and heating in N2 atmosphere. The electrochemical characterizations of PI was tested using active carbon and Ag/AgCl electrodes as counter and reference electrodes  respectively,  in  1  M  MgSO4-H2O  electrolyte.  The  experimental  results  revealed  that  PI  anode  exhibited  the  specific  capacity  of  140  mAhg−1  at  1.0Ag−1 current  density  when  cycling  between  potential  windows  of  0  to  -0.8V.  When  the current density was increased to 10 Ag−1, the cell still exhibited the specific capacity of  about  78  mAhg−1,  thus  confirming  the  best  rate  performance.  These  results confirmed  that  PI  electrode  have  capability  to  store  aqueous  alkali  ions  i.e.  Mg2+. 


Furthermore,  the  PI  electrode  exhibited  high  capacity  retentions  (90%)  for  2000 cycles, which is better than conventional intercalation cathodes.   


For  synthesis  of  Prussian  blue  nickel  hexacyanoferrate  (PBN)  and  copper hexacyanoferrate  (PBC),  co-precipitation  method  was  used  107.  The  nitrate  salts  of copper  or  nickel  were  dissolved  in  water  (with  different  molar  concentrations)  and then  slowly  added  into  sodium  ferrocyanide  solutions  to  attain  the  desired  PBN  or PBC  nanoparticles.  Since  Prussian  blue  nickel  hexacyanoferrate  (PBN)  has  shown excellent  capability  to  store  both  mono  and  divalent  metal  cations  in  its thus  PBN  was  selected  for  electrochemical characterizations. 


Inspired  from  the  capabilities  of  both  PBN  cathode  and  PI  anode,  full  battery  was assembled  and  tested  using  galvanostatic  charge-discharge  process  between  the potential windows of 0 to 1.5V. The full battery exhibited the specific capacity of 38 mAhg−1 at 0.2Ag−1 current density. At 1Ag−1 current rate, the specific capacity of 33 mAhg−1 was obtained, which is almost equivalent to the theoretical energy density of the active material (Figure 12 (c-d)). Furthermore, the battery exhibited capacitor like behavior, where only 21 seconds were needed to charge and discharge the battery at the  current  density  of  10  Ag−1.  




The  performance  of  rechargeable  magnesium  ion  batteries  (MIBs)  depends  on  high voltage and compatible electrolytes. As discussed above, significant research attempts were made to develop highly compatible electrolytes with fast Mg2+ ion intercalation capabilities  in  host  cathode  materials.


To take full advantage of dendrite free cycling of MIB system and bypass the sluggish Mg2+  ion  transportation  in  host  materials,  hybrid  ion  strategy  has  been  applied  in recent years 12. In hybrid ion batteries, fast Li+, Na+ or other metal ion intercalations, can  replace  the  sluggish  Mg2+  ion  intercalation.  In  hybrid  ion  batteries,  Mg2+  ion’s deposition/dissolution  occurs  at  Mg  metal  anode,  while  fast  Li+  or  Na+  ions  are diffused/extracted  into/from  host  cathode  materials,  thus  high  reversible  capacities can be achieved (Figure 13). 


Since magnesium ions deposit and dissolute very smoothly at magnesium metal anode  in  magnesium  ion  batteries  and  no  dendrite  structures  are  formed.  Thus employing  magnesium  anodes  in  hybrid  ion  batteries  will  give  the  same advantage because lithium or sodium metal will not be deposited onto magnesium anode and resultant hybrid battery exhibits high capacity retentions and excellent safety features13.   

The strong interactions between Mg2+ ion and host cathodes causes the sluggish kinetics of Mg2+ ion diffusion inside the cathode materials. This problem can be overcome by the hybrid ion batteries, which bypass the sluggish kinetics of Mg2+ ion.  During  redox  reactions,  the  anode  side  is  dominated  by  the  deposition  and dissolution  of  Mg2+  ions12.  The  cathode  side  of  hybrid  battery  is  dominated  by fast diffusion and extraction of Li+ or Na+ ions owing to their small size. Thus, fast  reaction  kinetics  at  both  anode  and  cathode  result  in  excellent  rate performance, compared with pristine magnesium ion batteries.   



The  standard  reduction  potential  of  Li+  ion  is  lower  than  that  of  Mg2+,  thus  may exhibit the  higher  voltages.  The  synergetic  effect  of  both  Li+  and  Mg2+  ions  can  be crafted  carefully  to  exploit  the  advantages  of  hybrid  ion  systems.  Recently,  several works  presented  Li+/Mg2+  hybrid  ions  strategies  and  attempted  to  examine  the insertion chemistries of Li+ ions at cathode, while insuring the electroplating of Mg2+ ions at metal anodes without occurrence of side reactions.   



After successful employment of Mo6S8, transition metal dichalcogenide such as MoS2  was  also  tried  for  Li+/Mg2+  hybrid  ions  batteries.  In  MoS2,  molybdenum  and  sulfur atoms are covalently bonded to form horizontal sheets and these sheets are stacked by van der Waals attractions. The week nature of van der Waals forces accommodate the intercalation of guest ions in-between the sheets, thus may results in high capacities.  Inspired  from  fruitful  properties  of  MoS2,  Y.  Ju  et  al.  114  synthesized  MoS2  nanoflowers by hydrothermal technique. MoS2 cathode was cycled in Li+/Mg2+ hybrid electrolytes  (0.4M  APC-xLiCl;  x=0.4,  0.7,  1.0M).  It  was  noticed  that  insertion  of Mg2+  ions  into  MoS2  cathode  was  quite  difficult  owing  to  large  polarization  of  the  Mg2+ cations. This is because activation energy for Mg2+ diffusion inside the cathode is 2.61 eV, which is much higher than that of Li+ ions (typically 0.49 eV). However, when using hybrid electrolytes, the working potential of battery decreased from open circuit potential to lower potentials and Li+ ions were intercalated into MoS2 cathode  along with small amount of Mg2+. As a result, high discharge capacity of 243 mAhg-1 at  the  0.1  C  was  achieved,  whereas  cell  revealed  capacity  decay  owing  to  delicate structures of MoS2 nanoflowers 114. To further proceed usage of hybrid ion techniques,  X.  Fan  et  al.  115  and  his  coworkers  employed  APC-LiCl  electrolytes  with  a freestanding  MoS2-Graphene  composite.  Synthesized  cathode  enabled  the  fast  intercalations  of  both  Li+  and  Mg2+  ions  and  displayed  a  specific  capacity  of  about 300  mAhg-1  at  a  current  density  of  20  mAg-1  in  a  hybrid  cell  and  corresponds  to energy density of about 316.9 Whkg-1. 




Herein,  they  used  LiBF4  as  inorganic  additive  inside  PhMgCl-AlCl3  complex  to  prepare Mg2+/ Li+ hybrid ion electrolyte. Without addition of LiBF4 salt, no cathodic  peaks was observed, which confirmed that, it is hard for Mg2+ ion to intercalate inside the  LiFePO4  cathode.  When  hybrid  electrolyte  was  used,  the  battery  exhibited  a  specific capacity of 124 mAhg-1 with a stable plateau at about 2.6 V vs. Mg/Mg2+ as shown  in  Figure  17  (a).  The  columbic  efficiency  was  not  good,  which  could  be attributed to lower stability of electrolyte due to reaction of (BF4)¯  with PhMgCl (to  form B(Ph4)¯ . The possible reactions at cathode can be written as FePO4 + Li+ + e→  LiFePO4. Y. Shao et al. 134 synthesized the bismuth nanotubes (Bi-NTs) for hybrid ion batteries.  Two  kinds  of  Bi-NTs  were  synthesized  using  hydrothermal  method (nano/micro).  They  used  relatively  stable  and  non-corrosive  electrolytes  containing 0.1M  Mg(BH4)2-1.5M  LiBH4-diglyme.  These  electrolytes  possess  limited  potential window of about 0.01-1.6 V, however can be used in Cu, Al, and Ti current collectors 135. The Bi-NTs based Mg2+/ Li+ hybrid batteries exhibited impressive capacities, i.e. 360  mAhg-1  with  excellent  rate  and  cycle  capabilities.  Both  kind  of  Bi-Tubes exhibited stable plateaus during charging and discharging process as shown in Figure 17 (b-c). The possible reaction mechanism or Bi-Mg alloying reaction at Bi-cathode can  be  written  as  2Bi  +  3Mg2+  +  6e →  Mg3Bi2.  It  was  found  that  nanotubes  were fully  magnisiated  while  large  particles  (microspheres)  are  partially  magnisiated, which is consistent with high electrochemical properties of Bi-NTs. To further insure the potential of synthesized Bi cathodes, full cell was also tested using Mo6S8 cathode, Bi-anode,  and  two  kinds  (1.  0.1M  Mg(BH4)2-1.5M  LiBH4-diglyme,  2.  0.4  M Mg(TFSI)2-diglyme) of electrolytes as shown in Figure 17 (d). The resulted batteries revealed comparable reversible capacity and good cycle life.     



Limited  abundance  of  lithium  on  earth  crust  is  inspiring  scientist  to  look  for alternative metal ion batteries  143. Among these  batteries, sodium ion battery  (SIBs) have also emerged as an ideal candidate owing to it high availability and low cost of sodium precursors144-145. Until today, several cathode materials have been successfully synthesized  with  high  reversible  capacities146-148.  Like  lithium  cathodes,  sodium cathodes can also be employed along with MIBs in the form of Mg2+/Na+ hybrid ion batteries.  The  working  principle  of  Mg2+/Na+  hybrid  battery  similar  to  that  of Mg2+/Li+ hybrid battery, where Na+ ions are intercalated or de-intercalated at positive electrode (sodium cathode) during discharging or charging process. On the other hand, Mg2+ plating/stripping occurs at negative electrode (Mg anode) 109. 

For the first time, M. Walter et al. 149 and his coworkers presented a Mg2+/Na+ hybrid ion  electrolyte  to  fully  exploit  the  advantage  of  magnesium  anode  and  a  shift  from lithium additives to sodium additives. The main challenge for this hybrid system was, commonly  used  organo-metallic  reagents  and  inorganic  compounds  are  unable  to dissolve  sodium  salts  or  even  sometimes  results  in  formation  of  insoluble  sodium chloride  products27,  150-151. the  Grignard  compounds  such  as all-phenyl-complex  in  THF  solvents  are  not  attractive  owing  of  their  corrosive  and pyrophoric natures 152. Like Mg-Li dual salts 135, in a 3-electrode system the oxidative capabilities  of  NaBH4  (2M)  and  Mg(BH4)2  (0.2M)  in  diglyme  verses  Mg2+/Mg  is  limited  to  about  2.3V.  M.  Walter  et  al  149  claimed  that  potential  difference  between sodium  and  magnesium  electrodes  is  around  0.35  V  if  polarization  effects  are assumed to be zero. It means that if electrolyte stability limit is 2 V verses Mg2+/Mg, then  chosen  cathode  material’s  standard  potential  should  be  less  than  2.35  V  verses Na+/Na.  


With this  assumption, the iron  sulfide  FeS2  cathode  meets the proof-of-concept of Mg2+/Na+ hybrid battery, and was used by M. Walter et al. 149. As shown in Figure 19 (a-d), the FeS2 cathode based Mg2+/Na+ hybrid battery revealed  excellent rate performance (225 mAhg-1 at 200 mAg-1), columbic efficiency (99.8%) and energy density (210 Whkg-1). The hybrid battery exhibited the working voltage of around 1.1 V, and energy density is comparable to LIBs and twice that of Mo6S8 based MIBs. In the same work, effect of FeS2 synthesis routes i.e. wet colloidal, ball milling, and coarse grindings, was investigated in dual-salts.   

The  FeS2  cathode  exhibited  poor  cycle  stability  (decreased  to  150  mAhg-1  after  40  cycles),  thus  efficient  cathodes  compatible  with  Mg2+/Na+  hybrid  ion  batteries  were highly desired. To  resolve this issue, X.  Bian  et al.  153 attempted to employ layered titanium disulfide (TiS2) for Mg2+/Na+ hybrid ion battery using NaBH4 and Mg(BH4)2 in  diglyme  based  electrolytes.  Titanium  disulfide  (TiS2)  possesses  unique  properties including  2-D  framework  and  sulfur  atoms  layers  containing  Ti  ions  sandwiched between  them154.  Owing  to  existence  of  weak  van  der  Waals  attractions  between sulfur layers, TiS2 can easily accommodate different guest cations i.e. Mg2+ 155, Na+  156-157, and Li+ 158, in the interlayer spacing. As discussed above, the anodic stability of Mg2+/Li+  hybrid  electrolyte  is  lower  compared  with  pure  Mg2+  electrolytes;  similar phenomenon should take place for Mg2+/Na+ hybrid electrolytes 117. Interestingly, the potential  window  of  NaBH4  and  Mg(BH4)2  in  diglyme  was  suitable  for  redox potential of titanium disulfide. It was noticed that Mg(BH4)2 in diglyme is compatible  for non-inert collectors owing to its slight ionic nature  159. When NaBH4 was added into  Mg(BH4)2/diglyme,  the  ionic  conductivity  of  dual  salt  electrolyte  was  boosted. 

More  importantly,  unlike  THF  the  diglyme  is  non-volatile  and  safe  solvent.  Thus, TiS2ǁNaBH4+Mg(BH4)2ǁMg half-cell displayed a stable voltage plateau at about 1.15  V  and  maximum  reversible  capacity  of  about  200  mAhg-1  at  0.1  C.  The  battery exhibited good rate performance, excellent energy  and power density (4058 WKg-1 at 20 C). The resulted values were higher than previous reports 160. Owing to non-corrosive nature of used electrolytes, the oxidation of electrolyte solutions were suppressed and thus impressive capacity retentions were achieved even after 20,000 cycles as show in Figure 19 (e-h).   


Above  discussed  hybrid  ion  batteries  exhibited  the  working  voltage  less  than  1.5  V verses  Mg,  thus  energy  density  of  these  batteries  does  not  meet  the  commercial standards.  The  high  voltage  cathodes  with  compatible  and  stable  electrolytes  are urgent  need  of  time.  A  breakthrough  by  carried  out  by  Y.  Li  et  al.  109  and  his coworkers,  when  they  synthesized  Na3V2(PO4)3  cathode  with  shrinkage-expansion  behavior and this cathode were employed in Mg2+/Na+ hybrid electrolytes verses Mg anode.  Carbon  coated  NASICON  framework  of  Na3V2(PO4)3  with  large  interstitial  spacing for insertion and extraction of Na+ were synthesized via sol-gel  method  161. 



The synthesized cathode exhibit a capacity of about 107 mAhg-1 when used in pristine sodium  ion  battery  162.  For  achieving  high  energy  density  or  stable  cycling,  the selection  of  electrolyte  constituents  is  very  critical.  In  their  work,  a  new  kind  of hybrid electrolyte  was  developed for  Mg2+/Na+  hybrid ion  batteries. 

Magnesium-chloro-dimer  complex  electrolyte  possesses  high  anodic  stability  i.e. around 3.4 V verses Mg  29. The magnesium electrolyte with molar concentration of 0.2M  (Mg2(µ-Cl)2][AlCl4]2)  was  prepared  in  dimethoxythane  (DME)  solvent.  The  pristine magnesium electrolyte exhibited a specific capacity of about 7 mAhg-1, which confirmed that strong columbic interaction exist between Mg2+ ions and Na3V2(PO4)3 cathode.  However,  when  inorganic  additives  (NaAlCl4)  with  molar  concentration  of 0.5M  was  added  into  Mg2(µ-Cl)2][AlCl4]2  complex,  the  hybrid  battery  exhibited impressive improvement in capacity and more interestingly the working potential of about  2.6  V  verses  Mg  anode  as  shown  in  Figure  20.  During  discharge,  the Na3V2(PO4)3  cathode  is  dominated  by  Na+  ions  insertions.  At  the  same  time,  the  anode (Mg) reacts with [AlCl4] ¯  anions to produce [Mg2Cl2]2+ cations and aluminum  trichlorides (AlCl3). This is because [AlCl4] ¯  may easily lose chloride ions compared  with MgCl+. Since there is no free chloride ions, thus no NaCl formation was traced, which is the main advantage of this kind of hybrid salts. 


Firstly 0.5 M Mg(TFSI)2  (magnesium  bis-(trifluoromethanesulfonimide))  salt  was  dissolved  in DME  (1,2-dimethoxyethane)  and  used  as  electrolyte  solution.  Unlike  previous Mg2+/Na+  hybrid  electrolytes  109,  the  Na+  ions  was  extracted  from  Na3V2(PO4)3 cathode material during charge/discharge process. As shown in Figure 20 (g), during electrochemical  reaction,  anodic  peak  at  1.8  V  verses  Mg2+/Mg  was  attributed  to conversion of  V3+ to V4+ and extraction of sodium located in Na3V2(PO4)3 cathode. 

Same phenomenon was observed in sodium ion batteries in previous studies carrying NASICON type materials  166. Whereas, two cathodic peaks were observed owing to reduction of V and diffusion of sodium/magnesium inside the cathode. The changes in peak intensities confirmed the structural changes in cathodes as shown in Table 3. The galvanostatic  performance  revealed  three  voltage  plateaus  during  charging  and discharging process; a capacity of about 108 mAhg-1 was achieved, which was equal to that of sodium ion cells (Figure 20 (h))166-167. The life cycle of cell showed rapid decrease  in  capacity  owing  to  replacement  of  sodium  with  magnesium.  However,  a stable capacity (60 mAhg-1 at 10 mAg-1 current density) was preserved between 60 to 140  cycles  (Figure  20  (i)).  Their  work  proved  that  NASICON  framework  is  also capable of magnesium accommodation and partial replacement of Na by Mg is a nice example of soft chemistry during redox reactions.   


As shown in Figure 22  (a), the NTP based Mg2+/Na+ hybrid ion battery exhibited a reversible capacity of about 133 mAhg-1 at 1 C with a stable voltage plateau at about 1.40  V  verses  Mg2+/Mg  during  cycling  between  0.5  to  1.8  V.  Since,  higher concentrations  of  NaAlCl4  may  result  in  high  electrochemical  properties  owing  to  large  amount  of  Na+  ions  transported  into  cathode.  Therefore,  effect  of  NaAlCl4 contents (0.1, 0.2, 0.3, and 0.4 M) was explored at 0.5 C (not shown), which revealed that 0.4 M is optimum value and with further raise in NaAlCl4 amount, the viscosity  increases, which slow down the Na+ ions transportation speeds. The rate performance of  hybrid  battery revealed  the  specific  capacities  of  125 and  60  mAhg-1  at  1.0  and  10  C,  respectively.  Interestingly,  the  voltage  plateaus remains  distinct  even  at  10  C  current  rates,  which  confirmed  the  compatibilities  of cathode, anode, and dual salts. Additionally, cycle stabilities at 1.0 and 5 C further  support  the  advantage  of  employed  strategy.  In  addition, galvanostatic intermittent titration analysis and diffusivity at different discharge states were examined to support the electrochemical discussions (Figure 22 (f-h)).   

Firstly, R.Y. Wang et  al.  102 synthesized the PBA (nickel hexacyanoferrate (NiHCF)) nanoparticles for Mg-ion batteries. The NiHCF  based  MIBs  exhibited  specific  capacities  of  about  50mAhg-1  at  C/5,  which showed  sharp  decay  in  capacity.  Interestingly,  when  20  mM  Ni2+  were  added  to the  capacity  retentions  were improved  significantly.  The  main disadvantage of NiHCF based MIB was its low specific capacity and working voltage. 

Later on during hybrid ion batteries developments, H. Dong et al. 175 employed Berlin green  (BG, FeFe(CN)6)  cathode to  fabricate Mg2+/Na+ hybrid ion battery containing 0.2M[Mg2Cl2][AlCl4]2-DME-0.4MNaAlCl4 solvents. The hybrid electrolyte exhibited  anodic  stability  of  about  3.2V  verses  Mg2+/Mg  and  revealed  a  specific  capacity  of about 143 mAhg-1, which remained stable for 50 cycles as shown in Figure 23 (c-h). 

Compared  with  pristine  MIBs  102,  hybrid  ion  battery  exhibited  both  higher  working voltage  (2.2V)  as  well  as  specific  capacities.  This  is  because  highly  reversible  Na+ ions present in hybrid electrolyte are intercalated at FeFe(CN)6 to form NaxFeFe(CN)6  and Mg2+ ions (in the form of [Mg2Cl2]2+ dimer cations) are deposited at metal Mg  anode.  Furthermore,  from  XRD  analysis  they  revealed  that  Na+  intercalation  inside FeFe(CN)6 framework may results in rotation of FeN6 and FeC6. This maintains the  straight  CN¯  legends,  stabilize  the  Na+  displacement  along  [111]  direction  towards more negative FeN6 sites 175.   


Compared to non-aqueous metal ion batteries, the aqueous metal ion batteries are safe and nonflammable owing to usage of water-based electrolytes 183. Furthermore, most of  the  chemical  used  in  aqueous  metal  ion  batteries  are  less  poisonous  and environmental friendly.  The working mechanism such as insertion and extraction of aqueous  metal  ion  batteries  is  similar  to  that  of  metal  ion  batteries,  where electrochemically  active  metal  ions  in  electrolytes  moves  back  and  forth  between anode and cathodes. Literature review exposed that aqueous rechargeable lithium ion batteries have been widely used along with LiNO3 or Li2SO4 salts and LiMn2O4  184,  LiCoO2 185 MnO2 186 or LiV3O8 187electrodes. Unfortunately, these batteries exhibited obvious  capacity  fading,  which  is  a  grand  challenge  in  their  development.  Some attempts  were  made  to  improve  the  capacity  retentions  by  controlling  the  pH  value and  eliminating  dissolved  oxygen  in  the  aqueous  electrolyte  188.  However,  these strategies affect the cost of final battery and practice of toxic  Li(TFSI) salt restricts their use on industrial scale.   

Aqueous  rechargeable  magnesium-based  batteries  have  emerged  as  ideal  alternative options  owing their  advantages  over  aqueous lithium ion  batteries. 

Magnesium-based  aqueous  hybrid ion  batteries  are  environmental  friendly, inexpensive,  sustainable  and  possess  high  theoretical  capacities.  For  example,  the co-existence  of  magnesium  and  sodium  ions  does  not  interfere  with  each  other  in Mg-Na  hybrid  ion  batteries.  Thus,  Mg-Na  hybrid  battery  exhibits  high  capacity retentions  (>99%)  and  rate  performance  (high  energy  density)189.  Similarly,  the Mg-Zn  hybrid  ion  battery  is  also  free  of  side  reactions  during  electrochemical reactions.  Combining  the  high  energy  densities  of  magnesium  (3833  mAh/cm3)  and zinc (5855 mAh/cm3) with mild aqueous electrolytes could results in Mg-Zn hybrid battery  with  high  energy  density  and  excellent  cycle  life190-191.  In  addition,  the inexpensive  nature  of  zinc  accompanied  with  its  capability  to  work  in  water  based aqueous solutions makes the Mg-Zn hybrid battery a promising candidate for energy storage  systems.  In  short,  main  advantages  of  aqueous  hybrid  ion  batteries  over aqueous lithium ion batteries are given below.   

Generally, high energy density is difficult to attain using single ion (lithium ion) aqueous electrolytes owing to their limited potential windows. However, aqueous hybrid ion batteries can realize this because the choice of electrodes is very wide.   

Low  natural  abundance  of  lithium  in  the  earth  crust  make  it  expensive  for development  of  large-scale  energy  storage  devices.  However,  constructing aqueous hybrid ion batteries will replace the lithium use (fully or partially)), thus cheaper large-scale energy storage devices can be produced.   

The  polyvalent  ions  faces  strong  columbic  interactions  from  host  cathodes, thus lead to sluggish reaction kinetics. However, aqueous hybrid ion batteries can  overcome  this  problem,  by  implementing  the  monovalent  metal  ion insertion/extraction  cathode  materials  with  multivalent  metal  anodes.  Thus, resulted  aqueous  hybrid  ion  battery  may  exhibit  improved  electrochemical Until today, various aqueous rechargeable metal and hybrid ions have been reported and  their  types  depends  on  composition  of  electrolytes,  anodes,  and  cathodes192. 

However,  herein  we  will  discuss  only  aqueous  rechargeable  magnesium-based hybrid-ion Batteries such as Mg-Na and Mg-Zn etc.   


Aqueous rechargeable batteries have emerged as ideal candidates owing to their low cost, absence of electrode volume expansion, and high reversible capacities183, 193-195. 

Like pristine aqueous Al, Li, or Zn-Ion batteries, aqueous Mg2+ and Na+ hybrid ion batteries have also been reported in recent years. Recently X. Cao et al. 189 reported an aqueous  Mg-Na  hybrid  battery  comprising  Mn3O4  cathode,  NaTi2(PO4)3 anode,  and sulfate  based  electrolytes.  Firstly  both  electrodes  (Mn3O4  and  NaTi2(PO4)3)  were fabricated via sol-gel method and then their electrochemical performance were tested in  half  as  well  as  full  cells.  The  electrochemical  performance  of  individual  Mn3O4 cathode in 2 molar MgSO4, 1.0 molar Na2SO4 and their hybrid electrolytes revealed  specific  capacities  of  160,  115,  and  140  mAhg-1,  respectively.  All  three  batteries showed a stable voltage plateaus between 0.3-0.5 V. Similarly, these electrolytes were employed  with  NaTi2(PO4)3  anodes.  Finally,  full  cell  performance  was  evaluated  in Mg-Na hybrid electrolyte (2M MgSO4 + 1.0M Na2SO4) as shown in Figure 24. The  aqueous hybrid battery exhibited excellent rate performance i.e. 106 and 40 mAhg-1 at 1.0  and  20  C  respectively.  Furthermore,  battery  revealed  an  extraordinary  cycle  life with  a  capacity  retention  of  100%  even  after  1000  cycles.  The  resulted  energy densities of 39 Wh.kg-1 at 96 W.kg-1 were delivered by battery, which are equivalent to conventional lead-acid batteries196-198.   

Z. Liu et al. 199 reported a similar work, where MnO2 cathode was employed instead of Mn3O4 against NaTi2(PO4)3 in a 3-electrode system. However, it was noticed thatelectrochemical  capability  of  individual  2M  MgSO4  electrolyte  was  almost  equal  to  that  of  2M  MgSO4+1.0M  Na2SO4  hybrid  electrolytes.  Like  Cao’s  189  work,  sodium ions  were  easily  intercalated  into  NaTi2(PO4)3  (voltage  range  -1.0  to  0.5  V  verses SCE). On the other hand, magnesium ions were unable to diffuse into NaTi2(PO4)3 as  confirmed by low capacity. Interestingly, MnO2 cathode may accommodate both Mg2+  and  Na+  with  a  working  potential  range  of  -0.1  to  0.8  V  verses  SCE  and  high reversible  capacity  was  achieved.  The  resulted  aqueous  Mg-Na  hybrid  battery exhibited a reversible capacity of 100 mAhg-1, voltage window of 1.4 V and excellent cycle life.   


Post lithium ion technology also includes several new aqueous rechargeable systems such  as  Magnesium-Sodium189,  199,  Zinc-Aluminum  200,  and  Zinc  ion  batteries.     

Inspired  from  these  strategies,  V.  Soundharrajan  et  al.  201  employed  MgMn2O4 cathode  in  an  aqueous  rechargeable  Mg-Zn  hybrid  battery.  The  hybrid  ion  batteries comprising  zinc  have  several  advantages  owing  to  their  high  natural  abundance (which  makes  its  cheaper),  non-toxic,  suitable  specific  energy,  chemical  stability  in aqueous medium, and excellent electrochemistries of zinc metal190-191. These unique properties  of  metal  zinc  make  the  rechargeable  aqueous  metal  batteries  (RAMBs) highly capable for energy storage devices 202.   

Recent  advances  in  RAMBs  revealed  that  spinel  ZnMn2O4  cathode  displayed reversible  intercalation  of  Zn  ions  and  thus  exhibited  a  specific  capacity  of  150 mAhg-1  at  the  current  density  of  50  mAhg-1  with  excellent  cycle  life  i.e.  capacity retention was 94% for 500 cycles  203. However, when same metal oxide (MgMn2O4  cathode)  was  employed  for  MIBs,  the  Mg2+  ions  could  not  reversible  intercalated owing to its large size, and aqueous MIBs exhibited poor cycle life 204. To resolve this issue,  V.  Soundharrajan  et  al.  201  combined  Mg  and  Zn  systems  in  the  presence  of ZnSO4, MgSO4, and MnSO4 based electrolytes. Crystalline nano-size MgMn2O4 was prepared by pyro synthesis method and was used as cathode, whereas Zn metal was used as anode. The CV analysis of aqueous battery in 1M “MgSO4 + ZnSO4” + 0.1M MnSO4  (MZM)  in  a  voltage  range  of  0.5-1.9  V  revealed  periodic  activation  of  electrode materials  205. These results indicated the stepwise electrochemical coegress of Mg2+/Zn2+ ions, which are in good agreement with previous spinal based electrodes for rechargeable  aqueous metal batteries  203. Furthermore, they also investigated the role  of  MnSO4  salt  inside  the  hybrid  electrolytes.  It  was  found  that  during electrochemical  cycling  Mn  is  detached  from  MgMn2O4,  thus  capacity  decays. 

However, the electrolytes containing MnSO4 salt showed superior properties because  Jahn-Teller distortion was suppressed and lead to fast Mg2+/Zn2+ ion co-intercalations. 


Finally, optimized electrolytes were used and aqueous Mg-Zn hybrid ion battery was tested for rate and cycle performances as shown in Figure 25. Rate test revealed the highest  capacities  of  247  and  58  mAhg-1  at  50  and  2400  mAg-1,  respectively indicating  the  excellent  structural  stability  of  cathode.  For  cycle  life,  firstly  battery was cycled at current density of 50 mAg-1 for few cycles to achieve full activation of electrode materials. After that current density was increased to 500 mAg-1 and kept for 500 cycles. It was noticed that battery revealed 100% Columbic efficiency and 80% capacity  retention,  which  indicated  that  synthesized  cathode  materials  were  highly stable even at high current rates. The Mg-Zn hybrid system revealed a specific energy of 370 Wh.Kg-1, which was lower than conventional ZIBs, but their work laid a new foundation of hybrid system.   


Recently synthesized electrolyte solutions are not good enough to make MIBs commercialized. Extensively used Grignard-based complexes, which exhibits excellent  cycling  properties  are  corrosive  in  nature  and  exhibits  limited working  potentials.  Recently,  several  scientists  explored  the  non-corrosive electrolyte solutions such fluoroalkoxyalu-minate,  and  dipropyl  sulfone  (DPSO)  based  electrolytes  in different  solvents.  Newly  developed  electrolytes  have  their  own  limitations such as positive electrode compatibility or working potentials. Thus, in future we must explore electrolyte solutions, which possess both high anodic stability as  well  as  high  compatibility  with  commonly  available  positive  electrode materials. Special attentions should be given to chemical compositions of salts and  in-situ  studies  needed  to  be  carried  out  to  understand  the  depth  of electrochemical reactions.   

Although  several  inorganic  cathodes  have  been  reported  for  MIBs,  however reported  cathodes  exhibited  either  low  working  voltage  or  insufficient capacities.  Among  these  cathodes,  vanadium  oxide  based  cathodes  exhibited the  highest  values  of  both  capacity  and  working  voltage  against  Mg  metal anode. Similarly, organic polymer based cathodes have also been reported for MIBs.  However,  their  investigations  are  on  initial  stages.  To  date,  14PAQ, 26PAQ, and P(NDI2OD-T2) polymers have shown excellent capacity to store magnesium ions, with working voltage and capacities almost equivalent to that of  inorganic  cathodes  in  MIBs.  Furthermore,  Prussian  blue  analogous nanoparticles have also shown capability for magnesium ion storage, however PBA  are  restricted  owing  to  their  solubility  in  electrolytes  and  poor  rate performance. Therefore, further research should be conducted to improve the capability of these cathodes to achieve high specific energy for practical use.     

Addition  of  inorganic  additives  such  as  lithium,  sodium,  or  zinc  salts  into magnesium  electrolyte  solutions  is  best  way  to  (1)  bypass  the  sluggish transportation  of  Mg2+  ions,  (2)  achieve  dendrite  free  cycling  at  magnesium anode,  and  (3)  boost  electrochemistries  by  selecting  any  kind  of  cathode materials including conventional LIBs, SIBs or ZIBs cathodes.   

Among  hybrid  ion  batteries,  Mg-Li  hybrid  ion  batteries  have  been  widely investigated to improve the both cycle life and specific capacities. These kind of  batteries  comprises  of  conventional  magnesium  electrolytes  with  lithium salt  additives  (for  example  LiCl,  LiBH4,  or  LiBF4).  To  date, the LiFePO4ǁAPC-LiCl-THFǁMg  hybrid  ion  battery  have  shown  the  excellent working  potential  and  cycle  life.  On  the  other  hand,  vanadium  oxide  based hybrid  ion  batteries  revealed  highest  values  of  capacities  but  cycle  life  of battery  was  very  poor.  Another,  emerging  aspect  of  MLIBs  is  their  low temperature  applications.  Until  today,  MLIB  batteries  with  APC-LiCl-THF electrolyte have capability to work at the temperature of -40 °C, which makes the MLIBs as ideal alternatives of LIBs for low temperature applications. Thus, by  considering  the  technical  issues  of  MLIBs,  further  research  should  be conducted  to  achieve  maximum  specific  energy  at  both  room  and  low 

The Mg-Na hybrid ion batteries (MSIBs) have also emerged as post-Li ion and post-Mg-Li hybrid ion batteries. The Mg-Na hybrid ion batteries comprises of magnesium electrolyte  with sodium salt additives (such as NaBH4, NaAlCl4, or Na2SO4), and conventional sodium cathode. Literature review revealed that there  are  numerous  reports  on  MSIBs,  however  working  potential  and capacities were not significant Recently reported Na3V2(PO4)3ǁMg2(µ-Cl)2:[AlCl4]2:NaAlCl4-DMEǁMg  has  shown  the  highest value of working potential (2.60V), making it an ideal MSIBs system. Further research  is  needed  to  explore  new  cathodes  and  potential  capabilities  of MSIBs at elevated temperatures.     

Like non-aqueous hybrid ion batteries, the aqueous hybrid ion batteries have also  been  reported  in  literature.  For  example,  Mg-Na  aqueous  hybrid  ion battery comprising of NaTi2(PO4)3 cathode, MnO2 anode and MgSO4+Na2SO4 hybrid  electrolyte  exhibited  the  excellent  working  potential  (1.4V),  specific capacity  and  cycle  life.  These  electrochemical  properties  are  higher  than pristine  aqueous  magnesium  ion  batteries.  Thus,  further  studies  should  be conducted to explore this field.   

Similar to aqueous Mg-Na hybrid ion batteries, the aqueous Mg-Zn hybrid ion batteries  have  also  shown  significant  potential  in  terms  of  electrochemical behaviors.  The  reported  aqueous  Mg-Zn  hybrid  ion  battery  with  MgMn2O4 cathode,  zinc  anode  and  MgSO4-ZnSO4-MnSO4  electrolyte  exhibited  the excellent  reversible  capacities  both  at  low  and  high  current  rates  with  a specific  energy  of  370  Wh.Kg-1,  which  is  higher  than  specific  energy  of pristine magnesium ion batteries. In future, more research must be conducted to explore the new MZIB systems with higher specific energies for practical 

It was noted that adding inorganic additives into magnesium electrolytes have reduced the anodic stabilities of hybrid solutions. In future, researchers should pay  attention  to  retain  the  anodic  stabilities  while  adding  different  kind  of inorganic  additives.  The  selection  of  both  solute  and  solvents  should  be critically  investigated  before  synthesis  of  hybrid  ion  solutions.  Furthermore, in-situ  characterizations  should  be  carried  out  to  understand  the  reasons  for reduction of anodic stabilities. It could be expected that the solution of these disputes may lead MIBs towards commercialization in near future.   

An interesting aspect of magnesium ion system is their capability to work at wide temperature ranges (-40°C to +55°C). Unlike LIBs, the magnesium ion systems  are  ideal  energy  storage  systems  for  low  temperature  applications. 

Therefore,  it  is  strongly  recommend  to  explore  properties  of  magnesium  ion system at low temperatures. Based on their potentials magnesium ion systems are ideal energy storage devices for cold atmospheres applications.   

The  commercialization  of  Li-ion  batteries  technology  is  a  greatest  success  of electrochemistry in recent decades, which have become necessary for our daily life. 

Li-ion  batteries  are  extensively  used  in  devices  including  power  banks,  laptops, cellphones, computers and electric vehicles. However, Li-ion technology has reached to  its  theoretical  limits.  Owing  to  ever-increasing  demands  of  high  energy  density, potentially safe, and cost effective batteries, post-lithium ion technology i.e. Mg-ion battery has emerged as an ideal alternative and considerable progress has been made in  this  field.  This  review  has  summarized  the  recent  progress  made  in  the  field  of Mg-ion battery electrolytes, focusing on chemical structures, stabilities, activities, and solubility  of  magnesium  salts,  chemistry  of  solvents,  and  their  anodic  stabilities. 

Furthermore,  chlorine  free,  non-corrosive,  organic  and  inorganic  electrolytes  were also  discussed  in  details.  The  newly  developed  organic/inorganic  electrolytes  have been  discussed  along  with  different  positive  electrode  materials  (organic  and inorganic). Literature review revealed that only few electrolytes and positive electrode materials  were  able  to  deliver  high  specific  capacities  and  cycle  life.  Unlike  other reviews  articles,  this  study  has  especially  focused  on  recently  developed  alternative strategies  to  overcome  the  problem  of  sluggish  transportation  of  Mg2+  ions.  To  be precise,  Mg-Li,  Mg-Na,  aqueous  Mg-Na,  and  aqueous  Mg-Zn  hybrid  ion  batteries, which may bypass the sluggish transportation of Mg2+ ions, were critically discussed. 

Most  significant  issues  of  hybrid  ion  batteries  such  as  electrolyte  developments, inorganic additives of Li, Na, or Zn salts, effect of additives on working potentials of hybrid battery, compatibilities of positive electrode materials with hybrid electrolytes, selection  of  electrodes,  undergoing  electrochemical  reactions  and  electrochemical performance  (i.e.  cell  potentials,  rate  performance,  cycle  life,  and  cut-off  voltages) were  deeply  studied.  It  was  noticed  that  use  of  common  transition  metal  oxides  as positive electrode in hybrid ion batteries often led to side reactions at high voltages, which  resulted  in  poor  cycle  life.  However,  the  hybrid  ion  batteries  containing commercial sodium or lithium cathodes are very helpful to boost the reaction kinetics, which  resulted  in  high  energy  and  power  densities  along  with  dendrite  free  cycling owing to the presence of magnesium anodes.   

In conclusion, rechargeable Mg-ion batteries are still at a developing stage compared with  Li-ion  batteries.  During  last  decade,  attempts  were  made  to  solve  the  kinetic limitations  of  positive  electrode  materials  and  their  capability  to  accommodate  the Mg2+ ions. Fortunately, several new strategies are successfully developed to boost the electrochemistry  of  Mg-ion  technology  in  recent  five  years,  which  were  critically discussed  in  this  review.  We  expect  that  this  review  will  inspire  the  researchers  to make more efforts for the development of rechargeable magnesium ion batteries as an ideal post-lithium technology.