
Safe and high-energy-density all solid-state lithium metal batteries (ASSLMBs) are great in  demand  for  future  electrical  vehicle  and  grid  energy  storage.  The  compatibility  of  electrode-electrolyte  interface  is  a  critical  factor  influencing  the  electrochemical  performance  of  ASSLMBs.  Herein,  we  propose  a  plastic  super-conductive  carrier  to  deter  untoward  reaction  between  Li  anode  and  Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3  (LAGP)  electrolyte  by  in-situ  solidifying  succinonitrile-based  plastic  interlayer  with  Li6.4La3Zr2Al0.24O12  (LLZAO)  nanowires  (l-SN).  The  method of in-situ solidification promises the low interfacial resistance. The l-SN interlayer can not  only  act  as  a  physical  obstacle  to  isolate  LAGP  pellet  from  Li  metal,  but  also  provide  three-dimensional  ion  channels  to  regulate  the  transfer  of  Li  ions,  delivering  an  uniform  Li  ion  distribution for dendrite-free Li deposition. The Li|l-SN|LAGP|l-SN|Li symmetric cell can stably  cycle  for  240  h  without  short  circuit  at  room  temperature  (R.T).  This  approach  enables  a  high  specific  capacity  of  152.5  mAh  g−1  at  0.1  C  for  Li|l-SN|LAGP|l-SN|LiFePO4  cells  at  R.T.  Furthermore,  the  integrated  ASSLMBs  show  excellent  cyclic  stability  at  40  °C  with  an  initial  discharge  capacity  of  168.4  mAh  g−1  at  0.5  C  and  retention  of  93.17%  after  100  cycles.  The  super-ionic property at the interface makes excellent rate performance of ASSLMBs at 40 °C. This  strategy  is  facile  and  efficient  in  promising  safe  and  outstanding  ASSLMBs  and  also  has  some  referential values for other unstable electrolyte interface beyond LAGP. 


All-solid-state Li metal batteries (ASSLMBs) are being considered as excellent candidates for the state-of-the-art rechargeable lithium batteries. To date, the current lithium-ion  batteries  (LIBs)  system  not  only  suffers  from  its  limits  of  energy  and power densities, but also faces serious safe issues triggered by liquid electrolyte. Thus, the strategy of applying ASSLMBs is believed to be an ideal  choice  for  the  aforementioned  challenges.  Unfortunately,  the  inferior  wetting property    and  significant  interfacial  reactions  are  the  key  scientific  issues  which result  in  the  huge  interfacial  resistance  at  the  interface  between  the  electrodes  and electrolyte,  further  to  worsen  battery  performances,  thus  restricting  its  commercial application of ASSLMBs. 

To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  the  interface  issues  are  critical  for  the  rate performance and cycle stability of ASSLMBs. Harsh physical contact and low ionic transport  of  Li+  at  the  interface  can  result  in  the  huge  interfacial  resistance,  which limits  their  critical  current  density.  Moreover,  the  interfacial  compatibility  is responsible  for  the  cycling  life,  stricken  from  the  side  reaction  between  solid electrolyte and electrode materials. To address the existing issues, extensive attempts have been devoted over the past years. On one hand, to moderate the challenges at the rigid solid-solid interface, various strategies, including dropping of liquid electrolyte (LE) [2], introduction of soft layer (i.g., gel interlayer) [3, 4] and heating of Li metal [5]  were  made.  In  addition,  the  interfacial  resistance  could  be  decreased  by  in-situ alloy  reaction  [6-10],  polymerized  process  [11],  conversion  reaction  [12]  or  other reactions  [13,  14].  However,  the  lithium  dendrite  formation,  origination  from  the inhomogeneous lithium deposition and poor ionic conductivity at the interface, is very difficult to address. Finding appropriate butter layers at the interface between ceramic electrolyte  and  electrodes  is  still  significant  task  to  achieve  the  application  of Solid  electrolyte  is  the  key  component  in  the  ASSLMBs.  


Among  various inorganic  solid  electrolytes,  NASICON-type  solid  electrolytes  attract  significant interest  stem  from  super  stability  in  air,  favorable  ionic  conductivity,  wide  electrochemical  window  (up  to  6  V)  [15].  Besides  the  limit  of  rigid solid-solid  interface,  the  most  obstacles  for  LAGP  (Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5P3O12)  are  the triggered reduction reaction against Li anode [16]. The reductive products are harmful to  the  transport  of  lithium  ions,  contributing  to  the  ever  increasing  interfacial resistance. Until now, only a few attempts were proposed to ameliorate the interfacial issues (i.e., interfacial ionic transportation) between LAGP and Li anode. Zhou et al. [7] proposed a simple idea that protected the LAGP from being reduced by sputtering an  amorphous  Ge  thin  film,  which  effectively  suppressed  the  side  reaction  and enhanced  the  wettability  of  pellet  surface.  Recently,  the  sandwich  structures  with gel-polymer electrolyte were adopted to separate the LAGP electrolyte and Li metal, which enabled the low interfacial resistance and performance improvement of cells to some extent [3, 11]. Nevertheless, the gel-polymer system presented weak mechanical property  and  low  ionic  conductivity  at  room  temperature  (R.T).    Perfect  modified interlayer  among  ceramic  electrolyte  and  electrodes  is  urgent  for  the  impressive electrochemical performance of LAGP-based ASSLMBs at R.T.     

Herein, we report a plastic super-conductive barricade designed for the sandwich structure of LAGP-based ASSLMBs at R.T. The plastic interlayer was developed by in-situ  solidification  of  LiTFSI-doped  succinonitrile.  The  interlayer  with  LLZAO (Li6.4La3Zr2Al0.24O12)  nanowires  (NWs)  is  denoted  as  l-SN  while  without  LLZAO NWs  denoted  as  d-SN.  SN-based  materials  possess  good  thermal  stability  and nonflammability,  which  could  be  considered  as  a  safe  electrolyte.  Significantly,  the introduction  of  LLZAO  NWs  can  increase  the  ionic  conductivity  and  mechanical strength of the interlayer, attributing to the construction of the three-dimensional ionic conductive framework [17]. The skilled design exhibits several advantages, including low interfacial resistance, super-conductivity, and high interfacial stability and free of lithium dendrite at the interface. As a proof of concept, the ASSLMBs integrated with LiFePO4  cathode  and  Li  anode  by  the  l-SN  based  interlayer  exhibit  a  high  specific capacity of 152.5 mAh g−1 at 0.1 C at R.T and excellent cyclic stability at 40 °C with an initial discharge capacity of 168.4 mAh g−1 at 0.5 C with retention of 93.17% after 100  cycles.  Our  study  provides  a  new  avenue  for  developing  the  stable  and compatible interface for high performance ASSLMBs. 


The LLZAO ceramic NWs were synthesized by electrospinning technique from sol-gel  precursors  [17-19].  LiNO3  (99.0%),  La(NO3)3·6H2O  (99.99%,  metal  basis), and  ZrO(NO3)2·6H2O  (99.99%,  metal  basis)  (purchased  from  Macklin)  with stoichiometric  ratio  dissolved  in  a  solution  containing  a  mixture  of  acetic  acid, N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF),  and polyvinylypyrrolidone as the polymer carrier. The precursors were stirred for 12 h at R.T. 10% excess LiNO3 was used to compensate for losses by volatilization during calcination and  Al(NO3)3·9H2O  (99.0%)  was  aimed  to  obtain  doped  samples  with  a  nominal composition  of  Li6.28La3Zr2Al0.24O12.  The  as-spun  NWs  were  collected  with  the electrospinning  voltage  of  20  kV  while  maintained  the  distance  of  15  cm  between needle and drum collector. The prepared NWs was pre-oxided at 280 °C for 2 h in air and calcined at 800 °C for 2 h in air at a heating rate of 1.0 °C min−1.   

To obtain the plastic material, SN was first melted at 70 °C and various amounts of FEC was added to the mixture. Next, when the optimum content was found, different mol.% of LiTFSI  was  introduced  for  improving  the  conductivity.  After  that,  the  plastic conductive material was prepared by mixing 5 wt.% of LLZAO NWs with the above mixture  and  then  stirred  solution  in  Ar-filled  glove  box  with  O2  and  H2O concentrations lower than 0.01 ppm for 4h. 

X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  patterns  of  LAGP  pellet,  LLZAO  NWs,  o-SN,  d-SN, l-SN  plastic  materials  were  performed  on  a  Riguka  D/max  2500/PC  diffractometer (Riga Corp., Japan) using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å) in an angular range of 10°–70°  (2θ).  Scanning  electron  microscopy  (SEM)  was  conducted  on  a  field  emission scanning  electron  microscope  (FE-SEM,  HITACHI  SU8010,  Japan).  The  Raman spectra  were  recorded  with  a  Raman  spectrometer  (LabRAM  HR  Evolution).The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out on a PHI 5000 VersaProbe  1) spectrometer using monochromatic Al K(alpha) X-ray source. A commercial Atomic Force Microscope (AFM, Bruker Icon) mounted on top of a suspended marble in an argon-filled glove box, was determined to measure the lithium deposition morphology. 

The cycled Li metal and LAGP electrolyte were washed three times by using acetone reagent before further testing. 


Electrochemical properties of plastic conductive interlayer (PCI) were evaluated with CR2032 coin cells assembled in an argon-filled glovebox (H2O, O2 <0.01 ppm).

Electrochemical  impedance  spectroscopy  (EIS)  was  performed  on  a  VMP-300 workstation with frequency range from 7 MHz to 0.01 Hz with an amplitude of 10 mV. 

Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) tests were conducted from open circuit potential to 6 V vs Li/Li+ by the same workstation at a scan rate of 1 mV/s. 

Symmetric Li cell was assembled by sandwiching LAGP pellet between two thin rolled lithium sheets placed on the two stainless steel poles. It is noteworthy that 10 µL  of  plastic  conductive  materials  or  10  µL  of  LE  was  dropped  on  lithium  sheet  at 70  °C  before  assembling.  The  whole  assemble  process  was  packaged  on  Heating mixer. After that, the integrated battery was then sealed in the CR2032 coin cell and cooled  to  R.T.  The  symmetric  Li  cells  were  used  to  research  for  the  interfacial resistance  and  polarization  under  different  current  density.  The  ASSLMBs  with Li|l-SN|LAGP|l-SN|LiFePO4  was  assembled  by  the  identical  method.  The  only difference  was  that  10  uL  of  plastic  conductive  materials  was  added  toward  the cathode.  The  cycling  performance  of  ASSLMBs  at  40  °C  was  acquired  0.5  C  with voltage range from 2.8 to 4.0 V. The rate performances were obtained from 0.1 C to 1C and 0.1 C to 5 C at R.T and 40 °C, respectively. The cut-off voltages were also set from 2.4 V to 4.0 V. All electrochemical tests mentioned above were realized by the Land 2001A battery testing system. 

The chemical compatibility between LAGP and SN-based materials was further investigated.  As  revealed  in  Fig.  S6a  (Supporting  information),  the  characteristic peaks  of  Raman  spectroscopy  are  unchanged  after  submerging  LAGP  in  both  l-SN and  d-SN  based  materials  for  24  h.  In  addition,  XRD  tests  were  also  detected  to evaluate  the  phase  stability  of  LAGP  in  SN-based  materials.  No  new  peaks  are  found  in  the  XRD  patterns  of  LAGP.  Thus,  the chemical compatibility between LAGP and SN-based interlayers are confirmed. 


To  reveal  the  chemical  stability  of  interfaces  between  Li  anode  and  different interfacial  layers,  EIS  tests  of  different  systems  with  various  time  intervals  in  the incubator (25 °C) were investigated, as shown in Figs. 3a-d. It is acknowledged that LAGP is unstable when  contact with  Li metal, suffering  from the  reduction of high valence  state  germanium  (Ge4+)  in  LAGP  [31].  The  change  in  interface  impedance can  illustrate  the  effectiveness  of  the  interlayer  on  deterring  the  untoward  reaction. 

The total resistance of Li|LAGP|Li cells is initially about 2.5 kΩ, which is assigned to the poor contact between solid-solid interfaces. Moreover, the interfacial impedance increases rapidly with the elapsed time when Li metal contacts directly with LAGP, i.e. increasing  to  almost  35  kΩ  after  240  h.  The  reasonable  explanation  is  the formation  of  mixed  (ionic/electronic)  conducting  interphase  (MCI)  film,  which contributes  to  the  sustained  reaction  between  Li  metal  and  LAGP  resulting  in  the detrimental  contact  loss  [16].  Interestingly,  even  the  introduction  of  LE  decreases significantly  the  interfacial  resistance  (from  2.5  kΩ  to  250  Ω).  


The  unexpected reaction is not hindered completely. The continuously increased interfacial resistance suggests the side reactions are still proceeding, as depicted in Fig. 3b. The interfacial issue cannot be solved basically by adding of LE in unstable LAGP systems. When the LAGP pellet is protected by SN-based plastic materials, the interfacial resistances of Li|l-SN|LAGP|l-SN|Li and Li|d-SN|LAGP|d-SN|Li cells are about 125Ω and 200Ω,  respectively.  The  low  interfacial  resistances  illustrate  the  feasibility  of  SN-based plastic  interlayer  on  Li  metal  surface  by  in-situ  solidification  and  deformable  SN materials  can  make  face-to-face  contact.  However, the total impedance  of Li|d-SN|LAGP|d-SN|Li  cell  is  inclined  to  increase  (almost  1500  Ω)  after  240  h without LLZAO NWs (Fig. 3c). In addition, the stable interfacial behaviors with time verify the chemical compatibility of d-SN and l-SN interlayers toward to Li.  In  contrast,  the  total  resistance  of  Li|l-SN|LAGP|l-SN|Li cell is below 500 Ω after 240 h, implying that LLZAO NWs may play a critical role in preventing the side reactions and forming stable interface. 

The  marked  areas  in  the  red  circle  show  the  microstructure  of LLZAO NWs. While, as shown in Figs. S8b and f, some side reaction products are observed on both the surface of Li metal and LAGP pellet with the d-SN interlayer, but  the  corrosion  degree  is  slight  when  compared  to  the  Li|LAGP|Li  and Li|LE|LAGP|LE|Li systems. Thick product layers are observed on other two systems without SN-based materials, according with above results of EIS tests. To gain deep insight  into  the  interface  changes  in  these  symmetric  cells,  XPS  spectra  of  the electrolyte  surface  under  different  conditions  were  carried  out  (Figs.  S8  i-l).  A  new peak  forms  at  about  29.2  eV  in  the  Ge  3d  lines  except  for  the  l-SN  system,  which implies  the  probable  occurrence  of  reductive  reaction  (Ge4+  →  Gex+)  in  other  three systems.  The  XPS  results  in  Fig.  S9  (supporting  information)  also  prove  that  the formation of SEI due to addition of FEC at the surface of Li anode. These results further suggest the existence of stable and compatible interface, attributing to the reasonable barricade by LLZAO NWs. 


The interface stability of LAGP electrolyte and Li anode with various interlayer materials  was  further  analyzed  by  a  galvanostatic  cycling  experiment  on  symmetric Li|Li cells that were repeatedly charged and discharged for 2 h with a constant current density of 0.05 and 0.1 mA cm−2 at R.T. The voltage-time profiles were recorded with different interlayer materials, as shown in Fig. 4a. For the cell without any interlayer (Li|LAGP|Li cell), the voltage polarization rapidly increases at 0.05 mA cm−2 and the cell  becomes  open  circuit  after  cycling  74  h  protected  by  cutoff  voltage.  This phenomenon  is  probably  stricken  to  the  poor  physical  contact  by  undesirable  side products and the volume expansion of Li anode [32]. The drop of 10 µL LE improves the poor contact to some degree, but micro short circuit is still found after cycling 90 h at 0.1 mA cm-2, attributing to the formation of lithium dendrite and dead lithium. 

Under  the  same  conditions,  for  the  symmetric  cell  with  d-SN  plastic  interlayer,  the cycling life extends to about 120 h before failure. Obviously, the drop of d-SN plastic material on Li anode cannot promise effectively the perfect contact and total barricade for  LAGP  pellet,  from  which  the  week  contact  induced  by  the  easily  deformed property of SN-based materials can be inferred. Thus, the untoward reaction between Li  anode  and  LAPG  electrolyte  cannot  be  hindered  completely.  Encouragingly,  the symmetric  cell  for  Li|l-SN|LAGP|l-SN|Li  presents  distinctively  smaller  hysteresis voltage and  a  stable  voltage  profile  for  nearly  240  h,  indicating  a  stable  and  compatible interface  constructed.  The  excellent  ionic  conductivity  of  l-SN  based  interlayer guarantees the uniform Li deposition/dissolution process. In addition, it is clearly to see that the stable value of Rb indicates LAGP electrolyte can maintain the good ionic transformation during cycling process (as shown in Fig. S10 and Table S1, Supporting information). The interfacial resistance (Rct) becomes smaller and then almost keeps constant with the evolution of cycling process, further suggesting the stable interface are well constructed. It can be inferred that the introduction of LLZAO NWs in the interlayer  can  act  as  both  the  physical  barricade  and  three-dimensional  ionic conductive  channels,  resulting  in  the  superficial  stable  interface.

The surface morphologies of Li anode and LAGP pellet were captured to support this hypothesis,  as  shown  in  Figs.  S11a  and  e  (Supporting  information).  A  dense  and smooth surface on Li metal and almost no dead lithium on the LAPG pellet suggest the  uniform  Li  deposition/dissolution  process.  On  the  contrary,  obvious  cracks  by volume change of electrode or thick but loose dead lithium are found on the Li metal or  LAGP  in  other  three  interlayer  systems  (Figs.  S11b-d  and  f-h).  To  elucidate  the effect of different interlayers on preventing LAPG electrolyte from side reacting with Li anode, we carried out XPS test on the surfaces of post-cycled pellet, as seen in Fig. S12 (Supporting information). It is well known that the N atom of SN has a strong affinity with the Li-metal [20]. When Li anode is sandwiched by d-SN interlayer, the inclusion  of  FEC  is  decomposed,  which  does  not  hamper  the  reaction  between  Li metal and LAPG, as shown in Fig. S12f. The new peak at 29.2 eV appearing in the Ge 3d  lines  also  verifies  this  result.  To  be  delightful,  the  l-SN  based  interlayer significantly  protects  LAGP  electrolyte  from  Li  anode  as  a  sturdy  barricade, consistent with aforementioned electrochemical results. 

To  further  demonstrate  the  advantages  of  this  interlayer,  the  ASSLMBs  with Li|LAGP|LiFePO4  were  integrated  and  the  electrochemical  performance  of  the  full cells at R.T is shown in Figs. 4b-e. To improve the compatibility of LAGP toward the cathodic  side  and  form  inner  ionic  channels  in  the  cathode,  10  µL  of  l-SN  mixture were  dropped  onto  the  interface  of  the  LAGP|LiFePO4  cathode.  EIS  results  of ASSLMBs are shown in Fig. 4b. The resistances of l-SN, d-SN based cells are about 471 and 640 Ω, separately, which promise the normally working of cells at R.T. The semicircle  at  the  highest  frequency  portion  represents  the  resistance  of  LAGP electrolyte, while the middle semicircle is corresponding to the interfacial resistance between  interlayer  and  electrolyte.  In  addition,  the  last  semicircle  at  low  frequency portion reflects the interfacial resistance between interlayer and electrodes [11]. 


The rate  capability  of  the  Li|l-SN|LAGP|l-SN|LiFePO4  cell  and  its  corresponding charge/discharge  curves  are  shown  in  Figs.  4d  and  c,  separately.  Notably,  the  l-SN based ASSLMBs exhibits a discharge capacity of 158.2 mAh g-1 at 0.1 C, 153.3 mAh g-1 at 0.2 C, 136.4 mAh g-1 at 0.5 C, 110 mAh g-1 at 1 C. When the current density comes back to 0.1 C, the cell has a tremendously stable coulombic efficiency of 99.5 ± 0.5%, which suggests a favorable interfacial compatibility and outstanding Li ionic lithiation/delithiation capability among LAGP electrolyte and electrodes. Nevertheless, the cells based on d-SN interlayer present the discharge  capacity  of  10  mAh  g-1  at  1  C  and  the  cells  with  10  µL  of  LE  has  an unstable  and  poor  coulombic  efficiency  even  at  0.1C. These results indicate the critical role of LLZAO NWs in transferring lithium ions due to the construction of three dimensional ionic channels. 

Stemming from the excellent interfacial properties, the electrochemical performance is  excellent  at  high the  charge/discharge  curves  of Li|l-SN|LAGP|l-SN|LiFePO4  cell  after  different  cycles  are  depicted  in  Fig.  4e.  It  is clearly seen that the over potential of about 100 mV remains unchanged at 0.1 C after different cycles, further to elabrate the capability of outstanding ionic immigration at the interface and hindering the side reaction against Li anode.     


The  electrochemical  property  of  aforementioned  symmetric  cells  have  proved that the special effect of LLZAO NWs in the super-conductive barricades toward Li anode. To verify the function of LLZAO NWs between cathode and electrolyte, the integrated and Li|d-SN|LAGP|d-SN|LiFePO4 cells) were tested for the rate and cycling performance at 40 °C. Dropping a little mount of l-SN based materials toward cathode could help constructing three dimensional ionic channels in bulk of cathode and highly reducing the interfacial resistance, especially at high temperature. The plastic property of SN also  relieves  the  effect  of  electrode  volume  expansion/contraction.  Figs.  6a  and  b present the rate performance and corresponding charge-discharge curves from 0.1 C to  5  C,  respectively.  The  specific  capacities  of  Li|l-SN|LAGP|l-SN|LiFePO4  are  all above 160 mAh g-1 at low rate (from 0.1 C to 2 C). Furthermore, the cell presents the specific  capacity  of  145.7  mAh  g-1  at  5  C,  suggesting  the  outstanding  ionic conductivity  in  the  interface  at  40  °C.  However,  the  capacity  of  d-SN  based  cells decays rapidly to be 4.6 mAh g-1 at 1 C and almost have 0 mAh g-1 at higher current density, as shown in Fig. 6b. In addition, when the current density was returned to 0.1 C,  the  cell  exhibits  the  successive  capacity  deterioration  and  unpleasing  Coulombic efficiency,  which  means  the  growth  of  lithium  dendrite  resulting  in  the  damage  of interface and the lithium ions cannot reversibly insert/ extract through the interface. 

The cycling performances of ASSLMBs with l-SN and d-SN interlayer are shown in Fig. 6c. It can be seen that the cell (with l-SN interlayer) presents the specific capacity of 156.9 mAh g-1 at 0.5 C with a retention rate of 93.17 % after 100 cycles. To the contrary, the capacity of d-SN based cell rapidly declines after 60 cycles. Meanwhile, the resistances of post-cycled cells with or without LLZAO NWs are about 800 Ω and 16000  Ω,  respectively  (Figs.  6d  and  e).  To  further  analyze  the  failure  mechanism, SEM images on top surface of LiFePO4|LAGP interface after cycled were analyzed, as shown in Figs. 6f and g. Even both continuous ionic channels are formed in two cell  systems;  the  introduction  of  LLZAO  NWs  can  further  provide  the  three dimensional  ionic  framework,  enhanced  mechanical  property  of  interlayer  and guarantee the  rapid ion transportation in  bulk  during the  cycling.  Plastic super-conductive interlayer with LLZAO NWs by in-situ solidification promises the impressive electrochemical performance of ASSLMBs. 

In this work, we propose a plastic super-conductive barricade between Li anode and  LAGP  electrolyte  by  in-situ  solidification.  The  key  role  of  LLZAO  NWs  is highlighted at the interface from follow aspects: strengthened mechanical property of interlayer, super-ionic conduction at the interface, avoiding the reduction of LAGP by Li  anode  and  free  of  lithium  dendrite  at  the  interphase.  The  impedance  plots  and discharge/charge  profiles  show  the  low-resistance,  super-conductive  and  compatible interface  of  LAGP  electrolyte  toward  Li  anode.  Thus,  the  introduction  of  the  l-SN based interlayer  promises the  ASSLMBs  (Li|l-SN|LAGP|l-SN|LiFePO4)  with excellent electrochemical performances. The easy deformation of SN plastic materials also  relieves  the  volume  change  of  electrodes.  Superior  rate  behavior  and  increased critical  current  density  of  ASSLMBs  are  obtained.  This  work  elaborates  the super-conductive and compatible interface is crucial to the ASSLMBs, especially for the creditable conductivity at the interface. 