The Li M Hf(M 5 Cr, Fe, Bi) systems have been studied and single phases have been isolated for M 5 Cr and Fe. The samples have been characterized by X-ray powder diffraction, diffuse reﬂectance and impedance spectroscopy. There is a reconstructive transition between rombohedral NASICON and orthorhombic Sc (WO ) -type structures as a function of x, at very low values, 0.2 and 0.1 for Cr and Fe, respectively. For the Cr series, a further subtle structural change has been observed for x values higher than 1.7. These phases have the Sc (WO ) -type framework, but the symmetry is orthorhombic Pcnb at low values of x and monoclinic P2 /n at high values. The structural changes are discussed on the basis of the sizes of the cavities left by the two frameworks and the lithium order/disorder in these voids. These materials are ionic conductors and their electrical behaviours are also discussed.

Keywords: NASICON-related materials; Scandium wolframate; Li ionic conductors

Since the discovery of fast Naion transport properties in the NASICON system [1,2], numerous studies on related phosphates have been carried out. Phosphates with the general formula A M (PO ) 4 3 consist in a [M (PO ) ] framework built up by 4 3 corner-sharing MO octahedra and PO tetrahedra. In such frameworks, each octahedron is surrounded with six tetrahedra and each tetrahedron is connected

to four octahedra. A given stoichiometry may crystallize in several structure types such as Garnet [3], NASICON [1,2], Langbeinite [4] and Sc (WO ) 4 3 [5], these being not simple distortions of each other. The structure adopted by A M (PO ) seems to 4 3 depend on the size of the A and M cations and the value of x. For example, NaM (PO ) adopts a 4 3 IV NASICON-type structure and K M M (PO ) has Langbeinite-type structure [6].

The highest symmetry is orthorhombic, space group Pcan. Primitive monoclinic symmetry also occurs (s.g. P2 /n) being pseudo-orthorhombic. A complete description of these structures (NASICON, SW, Garnet, Langbeinite, Bi Sb (PO ) ) and the relationship between the unit cell symmetries and parameters values has been already reported [7–10]. The values of the unit cell parameters are sometimes very similar and the way to distinguish between NASICON and SW structures from powder diffraction data was smartly discussed [7].

On the other hand, materials based on this stoichiometry (with Li cations) are promising candidates as solid electrolytes if the conductivity properties at room temperature general, LiM (PO ) (M 5 Ge, Ti, Sn, Zr and Hf) com4 3 pounds crystallize in the NASICON structure and they are moderate lithium ion conductors with quite different lithium mobility for different M(IV) cations [11–14]. An outstanding case is LiZr (PO ) as it 4 3 may crystallize in the NASICON or SW structures depending upon the synthetic temperature [15]. The conductivity may be increased by partial substitution of M by trivalent cations as Al, Ga, In, Ti, Sc, Y, La, Cr, Fe [12,16,17]. The reason for this conductivity improvement is mainly due to a much lower porosity of the pellets. Most works have been carried out in the zirconium and titanium systems and there are very few studies on M 5 Sn and Hf. To our knowledge, Aono et al. have carried out the only study about electrical properties and crystal structure of solid electrolytes based on LiHf (PO ) [18]. 4 3 These authors suggested a NASICON-type structure for Li M Hf (M 5 Cr, Fe, Sc, In, Lu, Y) series, although the samples were poorly characterized and sometimes multiphases.

LiHf (PO ) crystallizes in the NASICON structure and it undergoes a topotactic and reversible phase transition at low temperature that was characterized by variable temperature neutron powder diffraction [19]. In this work, we have continued our studies on Li-containing NASICON materials. We have extended the study to the Li M Hf (PO ) 4 3 (M 5 Cr, Fe, Bi) systems. The samples have been characterized by X-ray powder diffraction, diffuse reﬂectance and impedance spectroscopy.

(M 5 Cr, Fe, Bi) compositions were prepared by conventional solid-state reaction. Stoichiometric quantities of Li CO , HfO , 2 (NH ) HPO and M O synthesized as described below, were ground and heated in a Pt crucible to give the following overall reaction:

Cr O was obtained by thermal decomposition of (NH ) Cr O . Fe O was prepared by calcination at 4008C of iron acetohydroxide. This precursor was prepared and NH CH COO (OAc :Fe molar ratio of 2.7) in water. NH aq. (25% w/w) was then added to obtain a pHł9. After reaction, the brown solid was separated by centrifugation, washed with deionized water up to a pHł7.5, and air-dried. Bi O (Panreac, 99.5%), Li CO (Probus, 99.5%) and HfO (Aldrich, 99.8%, microparticle size ,1 mm) were dried at 2008C and used without treatment; (NH ) HPO (Panreac, 98%) was used as supplied. The starting compounds were thoroughly mixed and ground together with acetone in an agate mortar for one hour and heated at 0.58C?min to 4008C and left at that temperature for one day to release gases (NH , H O and CO ). To avoid or minimize the formation of by-products (LiMP O with M5Cr, Fe and unreacted M O or HfO ), the samples were heated at 0.58C?min with intermediate regrindings (with acetone for 30 min every 1508C) up to the ﬁnal temperatures which depend upon the M metal. T max for Bi, Fe and Cr were 750, 950 and 11008C, respectively. These temperatures were maintained for 2 to 4 days until no changes were observed in the X-ray powder patterns.

X-ray powder diffraction patterns were recorded at room temperature on a Siemens D5000 automated

diffractometer using graphite-monochromated CuKa radiation. The XRD patterns were autoindexed using the TREOR90 program [20]. A high resolution synchrotron powder pattern for Li Fe Hf (PO ) was collected on the diffractometer of BM16 line of ESRF (Grenoble, France). The sample, loaded in a borosilicate glass capillary f50.5 mm, was rotated during data collection (l5 0.39989(2) A). Data from the nine detectors were normalized and summed up to 0.0038 step size with local software. The powder pattern was reﬁned by the Rietveld method [21] with the PC version of GSAS [22] that has a pseudo-Voigt peak shape function [23] with the asymmetry correction included [24].

The M/ Hf, M/ P and Hf/P molar ratios were checked by Analytical Electron Microscopy (AEM) using a Philips CM 200 Supertwin-DX4 with an electron probe microanalyzer Edax (Si–Li detector). The detector system has an ultra-thin window resulting in a resolution of 149 eV. Samples for the electron microscopy study were prepared as follows: a small amount was ground in an agate mortar and dispersed in absolute ethanol, several drops of the resultant suspension were deposited onto a carbon ﬁlm supported on a nylon grid. HfP O and LiMP O (M5Cr, Fe) were used as standards for the AEM study. The results in several selected microcrystals were in agreement with the nominal stoichiometries. To determine if lithium was lost in the synthetic conditions, the samples (ł50 mg) were dissolved in aqueous 40% w /w HF acid at ł608C and the lithium contents were determined by emission atomic spectroscopy in an air/acetylene ﬂame. K was added, K/Li ratio: 1000 /1, to avoid lithium ionization. The experimental bulk lithium content of the samples were in the range 95–98% of the theoretical lithium amount deduced from the nominal chemical formula.

Thermogravimetric and differential thermal analyses (TG–DTA) was performed for all materials on a

Rigaku Thermoﬂex TG 8110 apparatus from room temperature to 11008C at a heating rate of 108C/min with calcined Al O as standard reference.

The diffuse–reﬂectance spectra, UV–VIS, were obtained on a Shimadzu UV-3100 spectrophotometer using an integrating sphere coated with BaSO and the same substance as reference blank.

Pellets of 10 mm of diameter and a thickness of 1–2 mm were prepared for conductivity measurements, by pressing ﬁne powder at 200 MPa at room temperature. The pellets were sintered at 950– 11008C for 2 h in order to increase their mechanical strength. Electrodes were made by coating opposite pellet faces with platinum lac and dried by heating at 2008C. Conductivity was determined by a.c. impedance measurements from 20 Hz to 1 MHz using a Hewlett-Packard 4284A impedance analyzer at 208C intervals on a heating cycle from 100 to 6008C in dry argon.

Under the above reported synthetic conditions, series are multiphases. Four Li phases can be detected in these powder patterns: Li P O , LiPO , BiPO and HfO . As direct ceramic synthesis was unsuccessful, two other synthetic approaches were tested: (i) Low-temperature ion exchange reaction between A Bi Hf (PO ) 4 3 (A5Na, K) with LiNO at 2008C. (ii) Using an excess of lithium salts (LiPO , Li CO and LiCl) at the synthetic temperature, ł7508C. All synthetic attempts were fruitless as multiphases were invariably obtained. Moreover, A Bi Hf (A5 Na, K) starting phases were not attained as single phase, but a mixture of AHf (PO ) (A5Na, K) and 4 3 BiPO was obtained. Only for x51 and A5K, K BiHf(PO ) , could a single phase be obtained. This material has a Langbeinite-type structure and its study is out of the scope of this work. Although Li (PO ) system seems to be not stable, Berul et al. [25] have reported the synthesis of Li Bi (PO ) . 4 3

crystalline samples are stable at high temperatures, and thermal studies did not show any mass loss between room temperature and 11008C. DTA data did not show any clear structural transition on heating.

Chromium samples can be obtained at higher temperatures (11008C) than those for iron samples (9508C) due to the higher thermal stability. Melting temperatures of the solid solutions were determined approximately from the visual appearance of a little amount of sample heated isothermally in 208C steps. It could be determined that the melting points of the Cr–Hf series take place above 12008C whereas for Fe–Hf, series occur around 10008C.

A detailed study of X-ray diffraction patterns of Li (PO ) , shows that the solid solution is not continuous in the overall compositional range. At the lowest composition (x50.1), all reﬂections can cell (NASICON). For x50.3 the sample is biphasic as a mixture of NASICON and SW-type phases is obtained. Rich chromium compositions (x$0.5) form a orthorhombic solid solution that crystallizes in the SW-type structure. X-ray powder diffraction patterns of single phase samples at room temperature have been autoindexed giving orthorhombic solutions (space group, Pcnb, Table 1). For the x51.7 material, there is splitting of selected diffraction peaks indicating a monoclinic symmetry. The powder

diffraction pattern of this sample was further studied by ﬁtting the data with GSAS program by the Le Bail method (no structural model is needed). The Rietveld reﬁned monoclinic unit cell parameters (space group P2 /n) are also reported in Table 1.

series, the x50.1 composition is a biphase. This sample contains mainly NASICON material with a small amount of SW-type compound. For 0.3#x#1.5, the compositions are single phases with orthorhombic symmetry similar to that of chromium compounds (Table 2). For compositions higher than 1.5, the samples melted at the synthetic temperatures and it was not possible to obtain single phases. Lower synthetic temperatures (to avoid fusion) make a thermal treatment for several weeks necessary, and then the LiFeP O2 7 phase appears. So, it can be concluded that Fe–Hf solid solution is more difﬁcult to prepare than the Cr–Hf one.

Lattice parameters as a function of composition for both series are shown in Fig. 1 (unit cell edges) and Fig. 2 (volumes). The unit cell parameters a, b, c and the cell volume decrease linearly with x following the Vegard’s law. This diminution is more pronounced in the Cr–Hf series than in the Fe–Hf series, as can be seen in the slope of the lines. These results are consistent with the values of the effective ionic radius, as Cr (r5 ˚ 0.645 A) radii are smaller than that of Hf (r50.71 ˚ A) [26].

The 3d conﬁguration of Cr has a F fundamental state with the ﬁrst P excited state. It can be predicted three spin allowed transitions: n : A (F)ﬁ T (F), n : 2 A (F)ﬁ T (P) which appear at 670, 468 and 300 nm respectively. These bands have been detected in all materials, although n band appears occasionally overlapped with the 3 typical charger transfer band of LiHf (PO ) . There are some sharp peaks in the n band due to well known Ruby lines, which are spin forbidden transitions from A (F) fundamental state to the doublet states [ T (G), E (G)] of the free ion G state. When chromium content increases the intensities of the band rise too.

Fe–Hf materials show electronic spectra with bands of very low intensity corresponding to forbidden transition between states with different multip-

the cell volume vs. composition for Fig. 2. Variation of series, M5Cr (m), Fe ('). Cell volume of (PO ) Li M Hf 4 3 from reference [19] (d). Extrapolated volumes (x5 LiHf (PO ) 4 3 0) of Cr (n) and Fe (.) samples for a hypothetical SW structure.

licities. According to the high spin d conﬁguration, the fundamental term is A (S) and the observed transitions correspond to: n : A (S)ﬁ T (G), n : 2 A (S)ﬁ A (G), E (G) which appear at 700, 515 and 428 nm respectively. Due to the higher oxidant power of the Fe(III) in comparison with Hf(IV), Lﬁ M charger transfer bands are found near the visible region. So, around 200–400 nm, the charger transfer bands Oﬁ Hf (261 nm) and Oﬁ Fe (322 nm) are situated.

 have shown a similar structural behavior for Li (0#x#2) related series where changes in the crystal structures as a function of x were observed. LiTi (PO ) is 4 3 rhombohedral with the NASICON structure but Li Ti (PO ) are orthorhombic with SW-related structures. The maximum value for x, to maintain the NASICON structure, can be estimated as 0.40 from Fig. 2 of reference [29]. In the related system, Li Sc (PO ) , x50.4 was the limit for the existence of the NASICON structure [12]. For Li Cr (PO ) , x50.8 was the limit for the NASICON solid solution [30]. Although in these two works, the impurity phases were not identiﬁed, the presence of related stoichiometry with SW structure and higher lithium content is very likely. Our research does not support the work of Aono et al. [18] where it was suggested that a NASICON rhombohedral structure for the whole Li M Hf (M5Cr, Fe, Sc, In, Lu, Y) series (0#x#0.4). For M5Cr and Fe, the existence limits for the NASICON solid solution is much narrower as previously described (x50.2 for Cr and x50.1 for Fe). Cr Hf

(PO ) with x50.0 and 0.1, have volumes of 1487.54 and 1476.1 A respectively, and crystallizes in the NASICON-type structure. To compare the unit cell volumes to those of the SW series, it is necessary to renormalize it to a same Z value (34/6). The resulting volumes, 991.70 and 984.1 A , are much bigger than those obtained by 3 extrapolation from Fig. 2, 961.9 A and 957.8 A , assuming that this composition can crystallize with a SW-type structure. This is a clue toward understanding the origin of the transition between structure types.

Based on our results, and those previously reported, it can be suggested that the key parameter to understanding the structural change from NASICON to SW, with increasing lithium content, is the size of the cages in both structures. NASICON materials have two sites M1 and M2 of different sizes and multiplicities. The M1 site (one per formula) is coordinated by a trigonal antiprism of oxygens with six Li–O bond distances, 2.46 A for M5Hf (and

Fig. 3. Diffuse reﬂectance spectra of Li M Hf (PO ) system: (a) x50; (b) M5Cr, x50.7; (c) M5Cr, x51.3; (d) M5Fe, x51.3.

slightly dependent upon the tetravalent metal cation) and assuming that lithium is located at the center of the M1 cavity. The M2 site (three per formula) has a distorted 8-fold coordination with even larger distances to the neighbouring oxygens 232.41 A, 23 2.46 A, 232.68 A and 233.02 A for M5Hf. These bond distances are clearly too long for lithium to satisfy its valence. However, the SW structure has three effective sites for lithiums with smaller oxygen cages. SW Li Fe Hf (PO ) compound, the Li environment is four-fold coordinated with distances: Li(1)–O 23 1.78 A and 232.16 A, 3 and Li(2)–O 2.05 A, 2.15 ˚ A, 232.28 A [27]. For materials with this Li M (PO ) and high lithium content, SW structure is preferred because the lithiums can fulﬁl their valence more efﬁciently. The limit for the solid solution depends on both the tetravalent and the trivalent metals being usually between x50.2 and x50.5. This behaviour is clearly seen in Fig. 2 as an abrupt volume decrease with the change between the NASICON and the SW-type structures.
Fig. 4. A.C. impedance data for Li Fe Hf spectroscopic plots (b).

(PO ) presented in the complex impedance plane (a, c, d) and as impedance and modulus

E.R. Losilla et al. / Solid State Ionics 112(1998)53–62

from a cubic cell with ał12.5 A) means that a wrong cell can be derived if not all observables in the pattern (peaks and shoulders) are taken into account. Furthermore, the presence of low intensity SW peaks can be misinterpreted as a monoclinic distortion of the rhombohedral NASICON unit cell.

in Arrhenius format in Fig. 5. Each data set shows a similar temperature dependence, with an essentially linear region over the temperature range as would be expected from thermal analysis where no phase transitions were detected.

Activation energies and conductivity values were

Typical a.c. impedance results for one composition, Li Fe Hf (PO ) , are shown in Fig. 4. These data are typical for all compositions. The results show that the pellet is an ionic conductor studied between blocking electrodes. The complex impedance plane representation at 1088C points out a distorted high frequency semicircle of capacitance 24 pF and a little low frequency spike (Fig. 4a). A spectroscopic plot for the same data of the imaginary parts of the impedance, Z0, and the complex electric modulus, M0, against log frequency (Fig. 4b) shows a well-deﬁned single peak for the complex impedance. The M0 peak occurs at frequencies .10 Hz and is not fully seen in the spectra, however, the M0 plots show evidence of a shoulder peak at lower frequency at approximately the same position as the Z0 peak maximum. The capacitance value associated with Z0 maxima (C524 pF) is a typical value for a grain boundary phenomenon, so, the semicircle shown in Fig. 4a corresponds mainly to the grain boundary impedance.

With increasing temperature, the pellet conductivity rises and the features of the a.c. response are displaced to higher frequencies. Complex impedance plane plots are shown for two higher temperatures in Fig. 4c–d. At the highest displayed temperature, the spike shows evidence of overlapping with an additional semicircle; this semicircle may be associated with a reaction at the electrode–electrolyte interface or with a highly resistive grain boundary or surface layer. The value of the capacitance associated (6 nF) is typical of a double layer capacitance.

So, it was not possible to accurately separate the bulk resistance values from the total resistance due to the poorly resolved nature of the semicircles. Thus, only total conductivities have been reported. Conductivity data for various compositions are presented

Fig. 5. Conductivity Arrhenius plots for Li M Hf M5Cr, (b) M5Fe.

Table 3 Conductivity data of Li M Hf

E.R. Losilla et al. / Solid State Ionics 112(1998)53–62

Porosity (%)

Porosity (%)

extracted from the Arrhenius plot and they are listed in Table 3. It is evident that conductivities increase with the substitution of M for Hf in the SW solid solution. Conductivity values are slightly higher for iron compounds than for chromium materials. Activation energies are in the range 44.38 to 59.82 kJ/mol and do not show a clear trend in the solid solution probably due to the dominant effect of the grain boundary. For x50.1 (M5Cr), the conductivity is higher than those of other members of the series because the structure is NASICON instead of SW.

