
NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP) anode with NASICON structure presents broad prospects for aqueous lithium ion battery. Nevertheless, its intrinsic poor conductivity and structure stability in aqueous solution restrict performance of materials. Herein, we used dopamine hydrochloride to fabricate N-doped carbon encapsulated NaTi2(PO4)3 nanosphere via in situ dopamine polymerization under diﬀerent solution environments. Composites show obvious improvement on electrochemical performance compared with NTP. Additionally, utilization of Tris-buﬀer solution endows N-doped carbon encapsulated NaTi2(PO4)3 nanosphere with superior performance to those of composites acquired in other solution environments. Among all samples obtained in Tris-buﬀer, N-doped carbon encapsulated NaTi2(PO4)3 nanosphere with proper carbon layer shows superb electrochemical performance with discharge capacities of 127.5, 113.8, and 90.9 mA h g−1 at 0.2, 3.0, and 15C, respectively. Superb property may be due to the unique nanosphere structure. Nanospheres with better dispersion can shorten migration path of Li ions. Encapsulation of N-doped carbon layer improves stability in aqueous electrolyte and ameliorates electronic conductivity of materials. N doping enhances hydrophilicity and electronic conductivity, and also forms lots of defects on carbon layer, which contributes to Li ion intercalation/deintercalation. This work reveals that the combination of nanosphere and N-doped carbon layer oﬀers a promising method to raise electrochemical performances of NaTi2(PO4)3.

Manufacturing energy storage system to reduce the environmental pollution and energy shortage is meaningful for progress of human society [1–8]. Lithium ion battery as renewable power source has been widely used in various electronic devices owing to the advantages of low self-discharge, wide operating temperature range, and high energy density [9–18]. Commercial lithium ion battery uses ﬂammable and toxic organic solvents as electrolyte, which exists safety hazard. This would restrict its further applications [19–22]. Aqueous lithium ion battery using aqueous electrolyte can solve safety problem of organic system. And it has been as new-type green energy owing to environfriendliness, high ionic conductivity, and so on [23–27]. mental

However, aqueous lithium ion battery shows poor electrochemical performance due to that the electrode materials were dissolved in aqueous electrolyte. As for cathodes, they show outstanding electrochemical stability in aqueous solution. However, anode performance is relatively poor [28,29]. As reported, carbon coating can protect materials from corrosion of electrolyte, improving the stability of materials in aqueous solution [30]. However, suitable carbon coating can obtain optimum results. It will not play a protective role, if carbon layer is too thin. And it will restrict the eﬃcient transport of ions, when carbon layer is too thick [31,32].

Recently, composites with NASICON structure have been considered as attractive anodes for lithium ion battery [33,34]. NASICON-type composite has internal large pore channels, which conduces to ion

The morphology of sample was examined with S-4800 scanning electron microscope (SEM, Japan) and JEOL JEM-2100 F transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) mapping images and EDX spectrum of samples were collected via SEM. X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) pattern was recorded on D/MAX2500PC diffractometer (Rigaku, Japan) with Cu-Kα X-ray radiation. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measure was carried out on K-Alpha 1063 spectrometer. N2 adsorption and desorption isotherms and BrurauerEmmerr-Teller (BET) surface areas were recorded on speciﬁc surface area analyzer (3H-2000PM1, Beijing, China). Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of sample was performed by thermal analyzer STA 449 F3 made from Germany in the range of 25–800 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 under air atmosphere. Contact angle goniometer (JC2001, Shanghai) was carried out on graphite plate covered with samples to investigate its hydrophilic performance.

Preparation of NaTi2(PO4)3 nanosphere. First, 0.6043 g of Ti (OC4H9)4 was dispersed in 34.8 mL of ethanol under stirring. 0.1422 g of CH3COONa was dispersed to 5.2 mL of phosphoric acid solution (85 wt%) under ultrasonication. Then, abovementioned two mixtures were blended under stirring, and the acquired solution was transferred into 50 mL of Teﬂon vessel for reaction at 160 °C for 3 h. After that, system was cooled to room temperature, and white NaTi2(PO4)3 nanosphere precursor was acquired via centrifuging, washing with ethanol, and drying. Finally, NaTi2(PO4)3 nanosphere precursor was

Electrode slurry was obtained vis mixing active materials (cathode/ anode), acetylene black, and polytetraﬂuoroethylene in an 8:1:1 wt ratio. Then, slurry was pasted on steel mesh (diameter: 14 mm), and dried at 80 °C (10 h). CR2016-type coin cell consists of cathode (LiMn2O4), anodes (NTP, NCN-NH3-30, NCN-Tris-30, NCN-Tris-60, and NCN-Tris-90), saturated Li2SO4 solution, and glass ﬁber as membrane. And it was applied for electrochemical measure (cathode/anode mass ratio: ~2:1). The galvanostatic charged and discharged results were collected on battery testing system (CT2001A, LANHE) in a voltage

The morphologies of NTP, NCN-NH3-30, and NCN-Tris-30 were investigated by SEM. As shown in Fig. 2, all samples consist of nanostructured spheres, inheriting the structure of precursor (Fig. S1). NTP shows severe agglutination coming from calcination process, and NCNNH3-30 demonstrates slight agglomeration. However, NCN-Tris-30 shows uniformly dispersed nanospheres, revealing that NaTi2(PO4)3

In summary, we have successfully synthesized N-doped carbon encapsulated NaTi2(PO4)3 nanosphere via in situ dopamine polymerization under diﬀerent solution environments followed by calcination. In all samples, NCN-Tris-60 with unique structural feature reveals the best electrochemical properties as anode for aqueous lithium ion battery. Discharge capacities for NCN-Tris-60 are 127.5, 113.8, and 90.9 mA h g−1 at 0.2, 3.0, and 15C, separately. Superb property is mainly due to the unique nanosphere structure holding N-doped carbon layer with proper thickness, which can accelerate ion and electron migration. The work shows that NCN-Tris-60 nanosphere is hopeful electrode materials