
As  for  the  defect  content  of the  Nasicon  lattice,  it  is  to  be  pOinted  out  that  in  the  presence  of unoccupied  sites  displacements  of  N a +  ions  require  low-energy  cost  and,  therefore,  represent the main source  of defects  in these materials [3],  On the  contrary,  displacements  of  the  other  ions,  whose  sublattice  is  devoid  of  lacunae,  require  high  energy cost  so  that  the  content  of associated  defects  is  not  expected  to  be significant,  However,  charged defects in the anionic  framework may arise from  disorder of the P+s  and  Si + 4  ion  distributions,  which  originates  an  excess  of  positive  or  negative  charges  within  the  initially  neutral  cells,  All  defects  considered  above  were  found  in  phases 

with  y= 0,  that  is,  with  Zr  sites  fully  occupied [3,4].  Recently [5],  new  Nasicon  compositions  were  prepared  having  zirconium  underoccupation  and  therefore  zirconium  lacunae  in  the  octahedral  sites  (y> 0),  whilst  the  sodium  content  was  kept  equal to three per unit formula  (x =  3). With these new phases, which are characterized  by two  types  of lacunae  (Na  and  Zr)  in  the  framework,  thermoluminescence  (TL)  and  radioluminescence  (RL)  experiments were carried out. 

Samples  a,  band  c  with  (x,  y,  z)  compositions  (3,0.083,  1.333),  (3,0.25,2)  and  the  (3,0.333,2.333),  preliminary  formation  of  an  amorphous  xerogel,  and  then  treated  at  1200°C  for  one  hour.  Details  on  this  technique  are  reported  elsewhere [5].  Crystallization  was  assessed  by  XRD,  DT A  and  TG  analyses.  Samples  thus  prepared  were  irradiated  for  one hour at room temperature by soft X-rays  (Cu,  Ka)  so as to achieve saturation of TL  yields.  Their  TL  emissions  were  recorded  in  standardized  conditions  for  temperatures  rising  from  300 K  to  680 K  and  within  the  spectral  range  from  380 nm  to  720 nm,  utilizing  an  apparatus  operating  under  a  vacuum [6].  Warming  speed  was  1 K S-I.  RL  spectra  were  recorded  within  the  spectral  range  from  375  to  730 nm  during  sample  irradiation at room temperature with soft X-rays  (Cu,  Ka). 

technique  by 

Figures 1,  2 and 3 show,  by means of contours, the TL emissions of samples a,  band  c,  respectively.  The sample-a emission  presents a  broad band with maximum at  520 nm  along  the  wavelength  axis  and  a  narrow  peak  at  470 K  along  the  temperature  axis.  Sample  b  shows  an  emission  at  470 K  and  590 nm  accompanied  by a  shoulder  at about  460 K  and  500 nm.  Sample  c  shows  an  emission  at  470 K  and  about  590 nm  with  a 

Temperature  (K) 

Fig.  1.  Contour plot of sample-a thermoluminescence emission. 

Temperature  (K) 

Fig.  2.  Contour plot of sample-b thermoluminescence emission. 

Temperature  (K) 

Fig.  3.  Contour plot of sample-c thermoluminescence emission. 

Fig.  5.  Radioluminescent spectra of sample  b  (solid  line)  and  its fitting  curves  (dashed  lines). 

TL  emission.  The  TL spectra of samples  a,  band  c are  all  characterized  by  emissions  taking  place  at  temperatures  near  470 K.  As  for  wavelengths,  the  broad  unresolved  band  with  maximum  at  520 nm,  which  characterizes  the  TL  spectrum  of  sample  a  (see  fig.  1),  can  likely  be  ascribed  to  the  overlapping  of  500 nm  and  590 nm  emissions shown  in  the TL spectra of samples  band  c  (see  figs.  2 and  3,  respectively).  These emissions are also  present in RL spectra of all samples  (see figs.  4,  5 and 6).  The  590 nm TL emission had  previously been found  with the sample of composition  (3,0,  1),  but not with samples of compositions  (4,0,0)  and  (1,0,3)  [4].  It is  to be noted that Si+ 4  and  p+s  ions  are  simultaneously  present  only  when  z,,=  0  and  z,,=  3.  Thus,  590 nm  emission  was  ascribed  to  recombination  of carriers  in  defects  originated  by exchanges  between  Si+ 4  and  p+s  ions  belonging  to  different  cells.  The  TL  emission  near  500 nm  was  not  detected  in  samples  with  y= 0,  that  is,  those  with  full  Zr+ 4  ion  content [4].  Therefore,  this  emission,  shown in samples a,  band  c with y,,= 0,  can be ascribed to the  deficiency  of  Zr+ 4  ions  that  characterizes  these  samples.  To  explain  this  point,  the  lattice  is  to  be  envisaged  as  an  ensemble  of  cells,  a  number  of  which  are  partially  lacking in Zr+ 4  ions  [5].  Disorder within  the Zr sublattice  of an ideal  lattice  containing  only  neutral  cells  modifies  charge  distribution  in  such  a  way  that  point  defects  of  opposite  charge  are  originated.  Thus,  cells  containing  an  excess  of  lacunae  assume  a  negative  charge  and  behave  as  hole  traps.  The  conclusion  follows  that  the  500 nm  emission  is  originated  by  the  recombination  between  electrons  of the  conduction  band  with  holes  trapped  by  Zr+ 4  vacancies.  It  can  be  observed,  in  this  connection,  that  the 

mechanism  of  recombination  between  free  holes  and  trapped  electrons  appears  possible  as well.  However,  knowledge  of the real recombination  process is  not relevant  here,  since,  in  any case,  the presence of defects is  revealed. 

As  for  the  nature  of the  electron  traps,  we  recall  that  a  glow  peak  at  400 K  was  previously  observed  in  the  TL  map  of the  sample  with  (1,  0,  3)  composition  for  which  p+s -Si+4  ion-exchange  defects  are  not  possible [4].  Therefore,  this  glow  peak  was  ascribed  to  the  displaced  N a +  ions  which  act  as  electron  traps.  These  traps  are  to  be  assumed  as  being responsible for  the  470 K  glow  peak as well,  since glow  temperature  shows a  certain degree of variability according to the actual sample composition.  As for  the  electron  traps  originated  by  the  excess  of  Zr+ 4 ions,  it  is  likely  that  they  have  thermal ionization energies so  high as not to be detectable in the temperature range of  possible  TL  experiments.  On  the  contrary,  the  positive  defects  originated  by  the  exchange  of  p+s  and  Si+ 4  perhaps  behave  as  real  electron  traps  active  at  lower  temperatures. 

the intensity prefactor  /0,  the difference A A c  can be substituted with A A 0,  where A 0  stands  for  the  initial  wavelength  of the  RL  spectral  range.  The  remaining  emissions  were  fitted  by  Gaussian  curves.  Although  this  latter  assumption  entails  some  arbitrariness,  the  results  obtained  are  quite  adequate.  The  fitting  curves  are shown  in  figs.  4,  5 and 6 by means of dashed lines.  The relevant data are given in table 1.  For the  Gaussian  curves,  the  list  of  symbols  is  as  follows:  A 1,  A 2  the  wavelengths  of emission  maxima  (nm),  /1,  /2,  the  emission  maxima  intensities  (arbitrary  units)  and  a 1,  a 2  the  /0  represents  emission  intensity  HWHMs  (nm).  As  for  the  exponential  functions,  (arbitrary units)  at 375 nm. 

One of the most important features of ionic  conduction concerns the paths of moving  ions  allowed  by  the  lattice.  Ionic  conduction  takes  place  by jumps  through  channels  joining  two  adjacent  sites  of  the  anionic  framework.  Actually,  the  allowed  paths  are  expected  to  cross  one  or  two  kinds  of  sites.  Since  displacements  of  sodium  ions  are  subjected  to  the  same  lattice  constraints  as  ionic  conduction,  it  is  interesting  to  evaluate  separations  Rc  for  samples  a,  band  c.  For  this  purpose,  we  follow  the  procedure  of ref.  [3]  where  Rc  was  calculated  by  means  of the  experimental  values  of  the  characteristic  length  A.  According  to  data  of  ref.  [3],  the  characteristic  length  relative  to  the  most  conductive  phase  (3,  2,  1)  is  Ao  =  55  nm,  corresponding  to  the  smallest separation allowed  by the lattice,  that is,  Rco  =  3.5 A.  In order to  eliminate the  unknown  parameters  A c  and  E,  these  were  assumed  to  have  a  common  value  for  all  phases  considered.  In  this  way,  from  the  relationship  Rc  =  Rco Ao / A,  it  follows  that  Rc ==  5 A for  sample  a  and  Rc  ==  5.6 A for  samples  band  c.  Taking into  account  the  ap  proximations  utilized,  these  Rc  values  are  compatible  with  the  XRD  distance  4.7 A  between  the  nearest  Na(2)  sites [1].  This  means  that  ion  displacements  follow  a  path  crossing N a(2)  sites. 

