Pulsed laser deposition PLD has been used to prepare two types of superionic ceramic thin films:

 14) . i NASICON Na . superionic conductor the mixed electronic and oxygen conductors  14) La LSM for the cathode in solid oxide fuel cells. NASICON thin films have good ionic conductivity with resistivities between 3 =10 3 and 5 =10 4 V cm at room temperature and they have low surface particle densities depending upon the deposition conditions. When NASICON is deposited on polymeric Raipore membranes frequently employed forNa selectivity, the composite membranes show a significant increase of current efficiency of 23% for the production of sodium hydroxide from sodium sulfate using electrolysis. For LSM, very smooth and dense thin films are produced by PLD with the perovskite structure after an anneal at 9508C. q 1998 Elsevier Science B.V.

for a Na ion selective membrane and .

Keywords: Pulsed laser deposition; Ceramic thin films; Na superionic conductor

Zr Si P O , where x varies between 0 Na w and 3 1,2 , and the mixed electronic and oxygen with As conductors of the family La Ba, Ca, Sr, BsCr, Fe, Mn, Co, where 0 -x -1 w 3–7 . Until recently, all electrochemical devices using these solid ionic conductors were made either  14) from bulk material or thick films)

Electrochemical devices are used in a variety of applications in the biological, medical, chemical, pulp and paper and other industries. Superionic ceramic conductors are used for their high ionic conductivity in many of these devices such as membranes, solid oxide fuel cells or gas sensors. Examples of these materials are NASICON Na superionic . composition conductor ,

ceramics of 0.1 mm . In order to obtain high current densities, it is necessary to produce thin components, reducing the resistance. Furthermore, in some applications like oxygen sensors, integration of these devices requires that the sensing materials be in the form of thin films. How-

to produce by ever, such thin films are difficult conventional the inherent problem of maintaining exact stoichiometry. Even sputtering deposition leads to a significant loss of some volatile elements such as Na and P from NASICON thin films L. Pouliot, A. Lecours, R. Izquierdo, D. Ivanov, A. Yelon, J.F. Currie, unpublished . As their conductivity and stability is strongly dependent upon the composition, good control of film stoichiometry is very important. Due to the intrinsic advantage of being able to transfer the stoichiometry from the target, pulsed laser deposition  14) PLD 8 has been successfully used to deposit these x thin films by our group 9,10 and by others 11,12 . In this paper, we present recent results on the production of these thin films and their applications in electrochemistry.

The PLD system has been described previously w x . 9 . Very briefly, an excimer laser 248 nm, 30 Hz beam is focused to a 1 =2 mm2 ellipse, giving an energy density of 0.28 to 2 Jrcm2 at the target. The target-to-substrate distance can be varied from 4 to 10.5 cm and the operating pressure, from vacuum  14) y6 10 Torr to a partial O pressure of 0.3 Torr. The area of deposition was varied from 3 =3 to 7 =7 cm2.

Film compositions were measured by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy XPS . The film thicknesses were measured using a Dektak profilometer in order to obtain the average growth rates. The crystallography of the deposited films was evaluated using X-ray diffraction XRD . The morphology was studied by scanning electron microscopy SEM and by . atomic force microscopy AFM .

Bulk NASICON is a solid solution of NaZr PO2
and 3. It has a high ionic conductivity which depends w x upon the value of x, and is maximal for xf2 2 . The targets were prepared from a mixture of ZrSiO4 and Na PO P12H O powders, pressed at 500 bars and sintered at 12008C for at least 6 h. Films were deposited on Si, SiO rSi and Si N rSi substrates as well as on a polymeric substrates such as Raipore R-4010 to form an ion selective composite membrane. Deposition rates ranging from 0.002 to 0.03 nmrpulse were obtained with a target-to-substrate distance of 5.5 cm and energy densities ranging from 0.7 to 2 Jrcm2. Depending on laser fluences and target used, NASICON thin films deposited on all types of substrates, have low particle density of dimensions -0.1 mm, and low roughness as measured by AFM. The compositions of the target and films deposited on Si and Si N rSi are the same within a few percent for a substrate temperature varying from 25 and 5008C 9 . However, composition of films deposited at room temperature onto Raipore substrates show very small or even zero Na content at the surface of the films. In Table 1, we show the composition of the target as well as of NASICON films deposited on Si N rSi and Raipore substrates, placed side-by-side in the processing chamber. Since Na is present in the film deposited on the Si N rSi substrate, we exclude the formation of volatile compounds as the cause of the Na depletion. After the deposition of the first few monolayers, further deposition takes place onto a ceramic in both cases. Thus, we do not expect that a sticking coefficient difference could explain the Na depletion for thick films. When the Raipore membrane was modified by dipping it into a Na SO solution for a few hours

before the deposition, Na depletion was substantially reduced or not observed at all. We, therefore, suppose that Na diffusion into the polymer is the cause of depletion from the ceramic. Similar behavior is observed when NASICON films are deposited on SiO rSi substrates. In this case, elastic recoil detection ERD measurements show that Na concentration increases in the interior of the ceramic film. Despite the Na depletion, these composite membranes show excellent electrochemical behavior as we shall show below.

Resistivity measurements were performed using impedance spectroscopy 9 . Resistivity at room temperature is between 3 =10 3 and 5 =10 4 V cm, depending upon the deposition conditions. From resistance measurements between 30 and 4008C, the activation energy was found to be between 0.33 and 0.5 eV, increasing with increasing resistivity. These values are in good agreement with those obtained on a pellet having the same composition as the target. However, the measured resistivities are slightly greater than the best reported values for bulk crystalline NASICON, 1 =10 V cm 2 and for bulk x amorphous NASICON 2 =10 V cm 13 .

Based on our XRD measurements, deposition at room temperature leads to a predominantly amorphous phase at lower fluences below about 1.0 Jrcm and to microcrystalline materials at higher fluences )1.5 Jrcm . Crystalline thin films are produced using a rapid thermal anneal at temperature not exceeding 9008C, to prevent stoichiometry variations.

Efficiency and DC polarization measurements were performed using a cell consisting of two Pt covered electrodes, two electrolyte compartments and a 1 cm2 cation selective membrane separating these compartments 10,16 . The current efficiency of the composite membrane was measured from the production of NaOH from the electrolysis of sodium sulfate. When a voltage is applied between the two electrodes, the sodium ions migrate through the membrane towards the negative electrode. The initial concentrations of Na SO in the anolyte compartment and NaOH in the catholyte compartment were both 1 M. The performance of the membranes was evaluated by measuring the current efficiency for the production of sodium hydroxide from sodium sulfate using electrolysis. This is defined as the ratio of the actual quantity of base equivalent produced to the expected quantity calculated using Faraday’s law, from the current density applied: I =tsn =F where I is the current density, is the duration of the application of the current density, n is the number of equivalents expected and F the Faraday constant  14) . Results in Table 2 show that the 96 486 C mol cumulative efficiency at high concentrations increases from 56% for the Raipore membrane to 69% for the composite membrane, representing a 23% improvement from the initial characteristics. The

Table 2 Efficiency and lifetime results of ion selective NASICON composite membranes for salt splitting

Polymeric membrane alone

. Efficiency no iron Lifetime accelerated test with 275 ppm . of ferrous sulfate

No iron was present in the base cumulative current efficiency experiment.

M. Meunier et al.rApplied Surface Science 127–129 1998 466–470

increase of efficiency is due to the fact the composite membrane is more selective against Hq ions than the Raipore membrane 10,16 . The level of membrane performance was maintained for over 100 days of continuous operation, confirming its durability.

The life of a membrane can also be influenced by its resistance to fouling agents such as iron, calcium and magnesium. The fouling process occurs through the precipitation of the hydroxide salts of these agents inside the membrane when they cross and encounter a relatively high concentration of hydroxide on the catholitic side of the membrane. To compare the resistance of each membrane to fouling, we performed an accelerated test in the same electrolysis cell, but with the anolyte charged with 275 ppm of ferrous sulfate, leading to a much larger iron concentration than typically encountered. After only 4 days of operation, the Raipore membrane failed. In contrast, the composite membrane functioned for 26 days in the same conditions, and was still operating when the experiment was terminated. Thus, development of these composite membrane represents a very x promising technological advance 15 .

4. PLD of mixed electronic and oxygen superionic ) conductor LSM

Mixed electronic and ionic conductors with the perovskite structure such as ABO AsBa, Ca, Sr, La, etc., and BsCr, Fe, Ti, Mn, Co, etc. have a relatively high electronic conductivity and a high oxygen diffusion coefficient, because they can tolerate a high oxygen deficiency 3–7 . For the application in solid oxide fuel cells SOFC , one composiwith xs0.5 tion of this family is La  14) LSM which has the advantage of having a thermal

expansion coefficient similar to the one of the solid electrolyte ZrO –Y O , thus preventing mechanical failure at operating temperatures )8008C. LSM is one of the best materials for the cathode electrode in SOFCs.

The LSM targets were prepared by a modified glycine-nitrate process 17,18 whereby solutions of the nitrate salts are mixed into the required ratios and a gel is made by combining with glycine and by concentrating the final solution. This gel is then combusted to give a powder of the final desired oxide composition. The targets, with xs0.5, were isostatically pressed into pellets and brought close to full theoretical density by sintering in pure oxygen at ;15008C. LSM particulate-free, dense, films can be deposited at 2 Jrcm2 in our PLD system on various substrates such as Al O and Si N rSi at growth rate of 0.01 nmrpulse. This gives an average growth rate of 1 mmrh at 30 Hz. From our XPS analysis shown in Table 3, compositions of the as-deposited films are almost identical to the target composition and for anneals below 9508C. However, film degradation occurs in anneals at 12008C for 2 h because of a solid state reaction with the alumina substrate. From our XRD measurements, films are amorphous after deposition at room temperature and become crystalline with the perovskite structure after annealing at 9508C for 2 h. Conductivity measurements in air further indicate that the films are very stable and results are very reproducible up to 8508C and become unstable at 9508C. At 8508C, the absolute conductivity is 100 V cm slightly lower than the x bulk value of 300 V cm at this temperature 19 , probably due to the surface roughness of our alumina substrates. Characterization of these films are in progress and their applications in solid oxide fuel cells or as O membranes are under study.

High quality NASICON and LSM thin films can be deposited by PLD. Efficient composite ion selective membrane can be fabricated by depositing a thin film of NASICON by PLD on a Raipore membrane.

