Materials with NASICON structure are in general good ion conductors due to the presence of channels in which several ions such as Li+, Na+, and Ag+ can move easily.1,2 The relatively high ionic conductivity (10-4-10-6 ¿-1 cm-1 at room temperature) and the negligible electronic conductivity are such that some of these materials are considered usable as solid electrolytes in lithium batteries. The NASICON framework is built up of MO6 (M ) Ge4+, Ti4+, Sc3+, ...) octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra sharing corners.3 Two positions for the mobile ions can be distinguished:2,4,5 one (M1) in an elongated octahedral oxygen environment at the intersection of three conduction channels, and the other (M2) in an 8-10 oxygen environment at each bend of the conduction channels. A scheme of the conduction channels including the two sites, M1 (open circles) and M2 (closed circles), which are arranged in an alternating manner, is shown in Figure 1, top. The bottleneck between both sites for the rhombohedral R3hc symmetry is formed of three oxygen atoms whose centers make up an isosceles triangle (Figure 1, bottom). Six isosceles triangles which are the lateral faces of the oxygen antiprism around the M1 site are shown in Figure 1, bottom. In the absence of motion lithium is preferentially placed on M1 sites for rhombohedral phases of composition LiM2(PO4)3, where M ) Ge, Ti, and Hf.6-8

The ionic conductivity due to movement of Li+ ions inside the channels seems to depend on the lattice parameters, whose values can be changed by choosing different chemical composition.9-14 It has been observed that ionic conductivity is higher for materials with longer lattice parameters, and this fact has motivated preparation of NASICON compounds with larger octahedral cations. Despite the general agreement that Li+ ion conduction can be improved in this way, controversy still remains about the underlying causes responsible for such improvement. The size of the cavities in which Li+ resides, the size of the bottleneck, the strength of the Li-lattice oxygen bonds, and the increase in the number of Li+ ions are some of

Figure 1. Top: Schematic representation of the conduction channels (thick lines) in the NASICON structure. The two sites for Li+ ions are represented as follows: M1 by open circles, and M2 by closed circles. Bottom: Environment of the M1 site, and bottlenecks between M1 and M2 sites. Oxygen atoms are represented by the largest spheres, the M1 and M2 sites are represented by open and closed small spheres, respectively.

the factors invoked to account for the increase in ionic conductivity.

Another cause responsible for significant variations in Li+ ion conduction is the phase transition observed in some compounds of NASICON structure. As an example, the ionic conductivity of LiHf2(PO4)3 increases by 3 orders of magnitude when the triclinically distorted low-temperature phase is transformed into the rhombohedral R3hc high-temperature phase.15

The aim of this work is to show that a relationship exists between the size of the bottleneck between the M1 and M2 sites and the activation energy involved in the motion of Li+ ions along the conduction channels. A comparative study on NASICON materials, all of them with the same R3hc space group but different composition (LiMM¢ (PO4)3; M,M¢ ) Ge, Ti, Sn, Hf), has consequently been undertaken.

Samples of composition LiM2(PO4)3, M ) Ge, Ti, Sn, Hf, were prepared on the basis of a procedure described elsewhere.16 Stoichiometric mixtures of Li2CO3, (NH4)2HPO4, and the selected MO2, M ) Ge, Ti, Sn, Hf, were calcined at increasing temperatures in the range 180-1200  176) C. The thermal treatments were cumulative, and the starting mixture was heated in each case at least at five different temperatures: 180, 300, 600, 800, and 1000-1200  176) C. After each treatment the mixture was checked at room temperature by X-ray diffraction (PW-1710 Philips diffractometer with Cu KR radiation). The products were considered pure phases when the characteristic X-ray peaks of the reagents and/or intermediate compounds such as pyrophosphates were not detected. Samples of composition LiGeTi(PO4)3, LiGe0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3, and LiTiHf(PO4)3 were also prepared by the same procedure, two oxides in the adequate proportion being used. In all cases the final product was a white powder sample.

Electrical measurements were carried out by the complex impedance method in the frequency range 10-1-105 Hz on a 1174 Solartron frequency response analyzer coupled to a 1286 Solartron electrochemical interface. In some cases the measurements were carried out in the frequency range 10-107 Hz by using a 1260 Solartron impedance/gain-phase analyzer. The powder samples were pelletized and sintered at high temperature (1000-1200  176) C); then, gold electrodes were deposited on the two faces of the pellets by vacuum evaporation. The impedance measurements were carried out in the range 20-200  176) C, while the pellet was at steady temperature under nitrogen flow.

Two plateaus, at low and high frequencies, associated with dc conductivities are observed. They differ at least by 1 order of magnitude and are ascribed as follows: the plateau at low

Figure 2. Top: Impedance plot obtained at 80  176) C on a pellet of LiGe2(PO4)3 previously sintered at 1000  176) C. The inset shows the highfrequency arc in an expanded scale. Bottom: The real part of the conductivity vs angular frequency at different temperatures. The experimental data recorded at 60 and 100  176) C are fitted to the expression 1/ 243)¢ ) 1/ 243)¢ gi stand for the grain-boundary and grain-interior conductivities, respectively. For these conductivities we adopted the form  243)dc + A 246)n.

frequency to the grain-boundary dc conductivity, and that at high frequency to the grain-interior dc conductivity. Two dispersive regimes of the form  246)n, at low and high frequencies, are also observed. The experimental data fit the expression

The temperature dependence of the grain-interior dc conductivity is shown in Figure 3. The dc values were obtained on pellets which had been cold pressed and sintered at 1000-1200  176) C. The density of the pellets was 80-95% of the density deduced from the unit cell volumes. The dc conductivity for the LiSn2(PO4)3 sample is not included because a sintered pellet could not be prepared; the electrical measurements were done on a pellet of the composite formed of LiSn2(PO4)3 and Teflon.19 The experimental data shown in Figure 3 fit the Arrhenius equation

where  243)0, E, and k are the pre-exponential factor, activation energy, and Boltzmann constant, respectively. The activation energy changes with chemical composition decreasing from 0.60

where the superscripts p and c stand for prescribed and calculated distances, wj is the weight assigned to the jth distance, and summation is extended over all crystallographically independent distances. The quality of a solution can be assessed with the R-type index

To check the validity of the DLS method for the NASICON structure, we have also applied this method to compositions whose structures are well refined, and we have compared the values deduced from DLS with those obtained from the refined structures.

Once the sides of the isosceles triangle were calculated from the refined and/or simulated structures, the radius of the circumscribed circumference was determined. This radius is taken hereafter as a measure of the bottleneck size, insofar as this distance minus the oxygen radius is the radius of the biggest sphere that can go through the bottleneck. The bottleneck size estimated for several compositions and the hexagonal lattice parameters used are outlined in Table 1. It is observed that the bottleneck size deduced from DLS-simulated structures is 1-3% larger than that deduced from refined structures; this can be due to the fact that only the covalent framework was considered in DLS calculations, while the real structures have Li+ in the

Figure 3. Plots of grain-interior dc conductivity vs 1000/T for the compositions LiGe2(PO4)3 (O, Ge2), LiGeTi(PO4)3 (¢, GeTi), LiGe0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3 (0, Ge0.5Ti1.5), LiTi2(PO4)3 (3, Ti2), LiTiHf(PO4)3 (], TiHf), and LiHf2(PO4)3 (O, Hf2). The full lines are the best fits to the expression  243) )  243)0 exp(-E/kT).

It is worth mentioning that the dc conductivity reported in this paper concerns exclusively the grain-interior response of samples of rhombohedral R3hc symmetry. The dc conductivity at room temperature for LiTi2(PO4)3 and LiHf2(PO4)3 found by us (Figure 3) is almost coincident with the bulk values reported by some authors for the two rhombohedral phases.14 However, a discrepancy exists for the values and the trend observed by other authors,9,12 who reported higher conductivity for LiTi2(PO4)3 than for LiHf2(PO4)3. We have no explanation for it, although in these cases the dc conductivity measured seems to be the overall conductivity of the pellets, and the data would be affected by a significant contribution of grain-boundary dc conductivity. Values of dc conductivity differing by more than 1 order of magnitude and activation energies ranging 0.320.48 eV had been reported for the rhombohedral LiHf2(PO4)3 phase, the differences found being accounted for by the relative contribution of grain-interior and grain-boundary dc conductivity to the overall dc conductivity.

Bottleneck Size. The M1 site for Li+ is surrounded by six oxygens in an antiprism (Figure 1, bottom), the site coinciding with the Wyckoff position 6b in the space group R3hc. Two kinds of faces can be distinguished: (i) the top and bottom faces, which are equilateral triangles, and (ii) the lateral faces, which are isosceles triangles. According to the model usually accepted for ionic conduction in the NASICON structure that Li+ ions are moving along the conduction channels by hopping between the M1 and M2 sites, these ions should move through the lateral faces of the antiprism which, hence, operate as bottlenecks.

The sides of the isosceles triangles can be easily calculated from the oxygen coordinates and the lattice parameters when the crystal structure is known in detail,7,21 i.e. for LiGe2(PO4)3 and LiHf2(PO4)3. In the case of LiTi2(PO4)3 we have used the lattice parameters obtained from the powder X-ray pattern12 and the coordinates reported6 for Li1+xTi2-xInx(PO4)3, x ) 0.12; this method assumes that the coordinates of the atoms have the same values in both structures because of the similar chemical composition of the two samples. For the other compositions, whose structures have not been refined yet, we have simulated their structures through DLS (distance least squares) calculations.22,23 This method requires the lattice parameters and topology of the structure to be known; the symmetry operations are introduced as relations between specific atoms for which

Figure 4. Activation energy (E) as deduced from grain-interior dc conductivity vs bottleneck size between M1 and M2 sites as estimated from refined structures (closed circles) and DLS-simulated structures (open circles) for the compositions LiGe2(PO4)3 (Ge2), LiGeTi(PO4)3 (GeTi), LiGe0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3 (Ge0.5Ti1.5), LiTi2(PO4)3 (Ti2), LiSn2(PO4)3 (Sn2), LiTiHf(PO4)3 (TiHf), and LiHf2(PO4)3 (Hf2). The dashed line is drawn to guide the eye. Vertical error bars are plotted.

M1 site, whose attraction on the oxygen anions tends to shrink the antiprism, thereby reducing the size of its lateral faces. The bottleneck size calculated from both refined and simulated structures becomes larger for longer lattice parameters.

Bottleneck Size-Activation Energy. Activation energy as deduced from electrical measurements vs bottleneck size as calculated from refined and simulated structures is shown in Figure 4. A steep decrease in activation energy, from 0.60 to 0.33 eV, for increasing bottleneck size between 1.90 and 2.04 Å is observed. Above 2.04 Å the activation energy decreases slightly, being almost constant. Then, there are two regimes clearly differentiated. Taking into account that the activation energy gives a measure of the hindrance in the movement of Li+ ions along the conduction channels, we interpret the two observed regimes as follows: the size of the bottleneck is less than that of Li+ ion in the first regime and larger in the second one. By assuming an oxygen radius of 1.40 Å, the subtraction of this value from that of the bottleneck crossover (2.04 Å) leads to a Li+ radius of 0.64 Å, which can be considered as the effective ionic radius for Li+ in the NASICON compounds analyzed. The value 0.64 Å for Li+ is intermediate between the effective ionic radius reported29 for a tetrahedral oxygen environment (0.59 Å) and for an octahedral oxygen environment (0.76 Å).

The activation energy in the second regime (0.33-0.35 eV) would be due to Li+-lattice interaction. In fact, this value is the compositions close to that Li3Sc2-xAlx(PO4)3, x ) 0.4-0.6, which show also a NASICON structure but higher lithium content. The study of this point, however, will be the subject of further research.

Conclusions

The activation energy involved in the movement of Li+ ions along the conduction channels of the NASICON framework is a parameter that includes at least two effects: one strongly dependent on the size of bottleneck between M1 and M2 sites, and the other related to lithium-lattice and/or lithium-lithium interactions.


