Mechanism of low thermal expansion in the cation-ordered Nasicon structure

David A. Woodcock,a Philip Lightfoot*a and Clemens Ritterb a School of Chemistry, University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews, Fife, UK KY16 9ST  b Institut Laue Langevin BP 156, 38042, Grenoble Cedex 9, France 

Variable  temperature  neutron  powder  diffraction  data  are used to pinpoint the mechanism of low thermal expansivity in  the  Nasicon-related  material  Sr0.5Ti2(PO4)3;  this  behaviour  is  contrasted  with  that  of  the  parent  phase  NaTi2(PO4)3.

There  has  recently  been  considerable  interest  in  materials displaying  the  remarkable  property  of  negative,  or  very  low, thermal  expansivity.  New  materials  displaying  this  property include ZrP22xVxO7 1 and ZrW2O8,2 but by far the most widely studied types have been the Nasicon or NZP family, based on the  NaZr2(PO4)3 structure.3–5 The  NZP  structure  is  a  threedimensional  lattice  consisting  of  vertex-linked  TiO6 and  PO4 polyhedra,  with  the  large  Na  cation  occupying  interstitial trigonal prismatic (MI) sites spaced at intervals along the c-axis (Fig.  1).  NaZr2(PO4)3 itself  crystallises  in  space  group  R3c, having  only  one  crystallographically  distinct  Na  site.  A  wide variety  of  adaptations  may  be  made  to  the  basic  NZP stoichiometry by substitutions at all three non-oxygen sites. One such series is M0.5Ti2(PO4)3, where M is a divalent cation (Ca,

Fig. 1 Portion of the ideal NZP structure showing packing of polyhedral units along the c-axis. In Sr0.5Ti2(PO4)3 the MIa site (0,0,0) is fully occupied while the MIb site (0,0,1/2) is vacant. The parameter D refers to the O···O distance along the c-axis.

Sr, Ba). The Ca and Sr compounds adopt the lower symmetry Rł3 space group owing to alternate ordering of M and vacancy along  the  c-axis,  leading  to  crystallographically  distinct  MIa and MIb sites. Measurements of lattice parameter evolution vs. temperature, by X-ray powder diffraction, have shown that, in general, the thermal expansivity behaviour of the R3c and R3 families  is  different,  with  the  former  showing  a  positive coefficient  of  the  c-axis  expansivity  (ac)  and  a  negative coefficient of the a-axis expansivity (aa), while the situation for the R3 family is reversed.5,6 Although a very elegant general model has been proposed to describe the thermal behaviour of these  materials,  in  terms  of  cooperative  rotations  of  linked polyhedra,7,8 the specific issue of the contrasting behaviour of the  R3c and  R3  series  has  not  been  satisfactorily  addressed. Here,  we  show  that  this  behaviour  is  directly  related  to  the cation-vacancy ordering, and is due to the compressibility of the vacant site along the c-axis.

Samples  were  prepared  from  stoichiometric  quantities  of TiO2, (NH4)2HPO4 and Na2CO3 or SrCO3. Thoroughly ground mixtures were preheated at 200 °C, followed by subsequent heat treatments  at  600,  900  and  1000  °C  with  intermediate regrinding. For the Sr sample a final treatment at 1200 °C was required.  Neutron  diffraction  data  were  collected  on  the  high flux  diffractometer  D1B  at  the  ILL,  Grenoble,  using  a wavelength of 2.522 Å and a fixed detector bank covering 80° in 2q. In order to determine the thermal evolution of the lattice parameters,  a  series  of  123  short  (ca.  10  min)  scans  was collected over the range 25  <  T <  835 °C. These scans were refined  with  the  cyclic  version  of  the  refinement  program FULLPROF9 using the result for a run at a given temperature as input file for the following run with slightly higher temperature. Runs  at  selected  temperatures  were  then  chosen  for  detailed structural analysis. Rietveld refinement was carried out using the GSAS package.10 The starting model for the refinement of the  Sr0.5Ti2(PO4)3 structure  was  taken  from  Senbhagaraman et al.11A  typical  refinement  consisted  of  17  structural  para-

Fig. 2 Thermal evolution of lattice parameters for (a) NaTi2(PO4)3 and (b) Sr0.5Ti2(PO4)3

Published on 01 January 1998. Downloaded on 30/01/2014 16:38:06. View Article Online / Journal Homepage / Table of Contents for this issueeters  in  turn  result  in  the  cooperative  polyhedral  rotations described by earlier workers, and lead to the expansivities along the a-axis. A full analysis of these effects will be the subject of a  later  paper,  but  the  fundamental  explanation  of  the  c-axis expansivity lies simply in the relative expansion/contraction of the  occupied  and  vacant  MI  sites.  The  anomaly  previously observed  in  the  case  of  Ca0.5Zr2(PO4)3,  which  shows  the behaviour of an R3c structure rather than an R3 structure13 lies in the fact that in that case both the Ca site and the vacancy site expand  with  temperature,  resulting  in  a  net  expansion  of  the c-axis. Apparently the smaller vacancy site in that case (ca. 4.1 Å at 25 °C) is not as compressible as the vacancy site in the present  phase.  A  diffraction  experiment  cannot  differentiate whether the unusual behaviour of the Sr phase is due to cationordering  per  se or  merely  the  presence  of  equal  numbers  of filled and vacant MI sites. However, it is interesting to note that a larger value of ac =  1.37 3 1026 °C21 has been reported for Ba0.5Ti2(PO4)3,  which  crystallises  in  the  disordered  R3c structure  type.6 A  comparative,  detailed  neutron  diffraction study  of  the  Sr  and  Ba  materials  is  therefore  currently  in progress.

We  would  like  to  thank  the  EPSRC  for  the  provision  of  a studentship  to  D.  A.  W.,  and  Mr  C.  J.  Milne  for  help  in collecting the neutron diffraction data.

