The electrochemical behavior of  the  lithium / V2(SO4)3  system has  been  studied with  XRD  observation of  the  intercalatioddeintercalation induced  structural changes. Experiments have  been  performed  on  the  NASICON  type  rhombohehl form. The  use  of  very  slow  staircase  potentidynamic  cycling  made  able to show  that the first  reduction  occurs  in  two  steps  very  close  in  energy and that the system experiences an  irreversible structural change if  this  reduction is driven to the second  step, below  2.59V  vs  Lio-Li+. Then,  after  a  specific first oxidation step at 2.8 V, the system can be  cycled reversibly through  two redox levels at 2.63 V and 2.59 V. 

Rechargeable lithium batteries appear as the best power sources for future  portable electronic devices since they possess high energy and power density. In  this way extensive research have been undertaken since twenty years especially  on oxide type materials [I].  Recently, an alternative to oxide compounds was investigated by Goodenough et  al.[273]. It was shown that the family of materials with general formula  LiXM2(XO4)3 (M = transition element; X = S, P, As) present very interesting  electrochemical behaviors towards lithium intercalationdeintercalation.  Moreover, these works demonstrated the influence of the ionicity of the chemical  bonds between transition elements and oxygen anions. The more ionic these  bonds the lower the corres  onding redox couple energy and thus the higher the 
Rhombohedral V2(S04)3 can be prepared by  digesting V203 with refluxing  sulphuric acid141. However the Vz(SO4)3 used in this study was obtained from  the reduction of vanadium pentaoxide with sulphur in stoichiometric amount, in  concentrated sulphuric acid at 160 "C for 8 hours[5]. The resulting yellow powder  is then washed with water and dried under vacuum at 160 "C overnight. It was  controlled by  X-ray diffraction to be the rhombohedral form (JCPDS card No  42-0231). Li2V2(SO4)3 have been obtained by chemically lithiation of V2(S04)3  using an excess of  n-butyllithium.  Electrochemical intercalation studies were performed in a very slow stepwise  potentidynamic mode mainly, using a MacPile-I1 system (Bio-Logic, Claix.  France). In this mode the potential scan usually was *lOmV  per few hours and,  for time saving, with possible curtailing of the potential level durdtion once the  redox current is lower than a preset value (here given in equivalent galvanostatic  regime). Measurements were performed on Swagelok type cells[a, with Li  metal  as the negative electrode and  1M LiC104 in anhydrous pmpylene carbonate as the  electrolyte. Composite positive electrodes were made of  5 %w polyvinylidene  fluoride (PVDF) and various amounts (25 or 45 %w) of  acetylene black (4N,  from Strem Chemicals) as electronic binder, put in suspension in  cyclopentanone. The mixture was deposited on a stainless steel disk and then  dried under vacuum at 80 "C.  X-ray diffraction studies of the intercalated material were performed at different  levels of the first electrochemical cycle :reduction or oxidation were performed up  to a given potential and then the potential was maintained until the current was  close to zero, which corresponds to a quite well equilibrated sample. Owing to  the moisture sensitivity of the lithiated compounds, X-ray patterns were recorded  on samples taken from the cells and placed in an airtight holder closed with a  Kapton window. 


V2(SO4)3 crystallizes either in rhombohedrdl (R-3) or monoclinic (P211c)  structural types, isostructural with Fe2(S04)3[7. However the monoclinic form  could not be obtained pure and was always mixed with the rhombohedra1 one. In  the rhombohedral form the two different VO6 octahedra are connected via corner  sharing to six SO4 tetrahedra which share themselves each of  their vertices with a  V06 unit. This ordering of polyhedra leads to a three dimensional network with  interconnected channels where lithium can migrate. Three different  crystallographic sites, MI', M1" (six fold coordinated) and the larger M2 sites  (height fold coordinated), are present in this structure, allowing the intercalation  of  up to 4 alkali cations per formula unit, from a steric point of  view. The two  M1' and MI" sites, almost energetically equivalent, account for 114 of the  available sites. In the case of the isostructural Nasicon type phosphate with  showed that for A = Li and x =  general formula AxM2(W4)3, recent studies t8v9]  1, the lithium cations reside in the MI sites. In fact, the small size and hence the  rather polarizing character of Li+, make it more stable in M1 sites which are  smaller than M2 sites. Moreover the MI' and MI" sites can be filled without any  lithium in nearest neighbour position whereas lithium in M 2  sites could have 2 of  them in M1' or M1" separated by distances close to 3.2 A. 


In figure I  is shown a typical voltammogram, obtained for the first three cycles  from a stepwise potentidynamic cycling within a 3.6V to 2.0V window (for  clarity of the figure the potential window was limited to 3.0 V 2.4 V). It  appears that the reductiodintercalation  occurs in two steps, denoted "A" and "B"  whatever the cycle, whereas the oxidatioddeintercalation is basically different on  the first cycle from what it is on  the following ones : upon first oxidation a single  large peak is observed from 2.8V (el), which is drastically smaller upon  second oxidation (C2) at the benefit of a new oxidation step beginning close to  2.6 V. As we will show later on, this new step is in fact composed of two peaks  B'and A', to be associated to the B and A reduction peaks respectively, the A'  peak appearing as a shoulder on the high side of B'. 


characteristic of two-phase processes I 1 O , l 1 l  with equilibrium potential given by  the potential at which they initiate, close to 2.64 and 2.59V respectively. This is  clearly seen on the shapes of the chmnoamperometric responses reported on  Fig.2 (left) for the A l  and B1 steps : the reduction current increases slightly  when stepping from 2.64 to 2.63 V and very significantly at the next step to 2.62  V, whereas the time dependance of the current during these potential levels  departs from a diffusion controlled process (Fick's law). This is the signature of  crossing the characteristic potential of a two-phase equilibrium just above 2.63 V,  the kinetics of the redox process beeing governed by that of the phase  transformation[l0l. In the same way the B reduction peak also has the shape of a  phase transformation driven pmess, with a characteristic equilibrium potential  close to 2.595 V. Surprisingly the first oxidation step occurs at 2.8 V only, again  with a shape characteristic of a two-phase process (label C).  On the second cycle, both A and B reduction steps appear smaller than on  first reduction, but with the same relative amplitudes as to each other. Then on  second oxidation a new step is observed, initiating at about 2.60V, whereas the  previous C' step appears drasticaly smaller than on first cycle. On further cycling  this C step tends to disappear in the same time as the oxidation peak beginning at  2.60 V narrows with appearance of a shoulder on its high potential side around  2.65 V. This led us to associate that oxidation step to the B reduction one and the  shoulder to the A step. This was confirmed by cycling a cell with limitation of the  reduction potential to 2.60 V, as reported on Fig. 2 (right). After completion of  the reduction at this level the cell was set in open circuit relaxation for 10 hours  before going on an oxidation sweep. Within that time the potential went close to  2.63 V with a large oxidation current immediately at the oxidizing 2.64V level.  This agrees with an equilibrium potential very close to 2.63 V. Thus the shoulder  observed on the B' peak in the voltammogram is to be associated to the A  reduction step. Moreover the only oxidation step then is that at 2.64 V,  associated to the A1 reduction; there is no C' oxidation step at 2.8 V. This 2.8 V  oxidation step is observed only one time, once a reduction has been driven down  to the B level, below 2.60 V.  It should be noticed that the A step could not be isolated and characterized in  galvanostatic experiment : we observed 2.59 V as open circuit equilibrium  potential in galvanostatic intermittent experiments performed at C/20 regime. The  A step is in fact so close to the B step, that unless the galvanostatic experiment is  performed at very low regime with a potential limitation at 2.60 V, the B  reduction step is always reached and it is its characteristic equilibrium potential  which is measured. 


FIGURE 1 : Voltammogram obtained from potentiodynamic cycling of  V2(S04)3 vs Li metal with *lo mV / 1.5 h potential steps and curtailing  condition of the potential level duration equivalent to a C/lO00 regime.  (See Color Plate I). 

From  the  surface of  the  voltamogram  peaks  it  appears  that  the  first  reduction  involves  1.9 Li  per formula unit for the A1 + B1 steps, which  agrees  with  the  reduction of the two vanadium from V3+ to V2+. 

FIGURE 2. Left : chronoamperograms of the A1 and B1 reduction steps of  fig.1, showing the specific behaviour of the current when crossing the two-phase  equilibria at about 2.635 V and 2.595 V respectively. Right :  chronoamperometric responses in a stepwise cycling (&OmV/2h,  C/8W  minimum regime) limited at 2.60 V on reduction, and with a 10h open circuit  relaxation before oxidation (see Color Plate I I  1.  Although this amount decreases upon cycling, the relative amplitude of the A to  the A+B reduction steps is rather constant, equaling 0.25,0.23 and 0.22  respectively from the first to the third reduction (theses results were found to be  reproducible on several cells). 

lines of  the pristine material with a small shift toward low angles only, suggesting  that @z is crystallographically close to the starting Vz(SO4)3. In this condition, the  C1' process occuring during the first cycle, could account for the oxidation of  the  phase @ I ,  whereas then after, the phase % is oxidized at lower potential upon B'  remaining after completion of the second reduction  and A' processes (traces of  are at the origin of the C2' process).  reversible through two redox levels which are very close in potential and both  show a two-phase behavior, although only the second one apparently can be  associated to a reversible structural change of the host. This behavior agrees with  that of a "type 11, pseudo two-phase compounds" according to the classification of  intercalation compounds proposed by  M. Armand"  '1. 

Thus after the first electrochemical cycling the system appears to be 

CONCLUSION 

The electrochemical behavior of the LiN2(S0&  system appears much more  complex that can be inferred from previously published works, performed in  galvanostatic mode only, from which it looked like a simple two-phase system[Jl.  The use of very slow stepwise potentiodynamic cycling, gave evidence for a  specific behavior on the first cycle with reduction in two steps at 2.63 and 2.59 V,  with  1 to 4 relative CapacitiesJeading to the intercalation of 2 Li per formula unit  and a single first oxidatioddeintercalation step wcuring at 2.8 V only. Then iifter  the system cycles reversibly through the two steps observed on the first reduction,  always with the 1 to 4 relative capacities. From XRD studies at various level of  the reductiodoxidation cycles, it was shown that the first reduction and the  forthcoming ones lead to different cristallographic phases, whereas the first step  of the reduction seems not to be related to noticeable structural changes.  Understanding the specific behavior of this system on the first cycle call for  accurate structural studies which are planned using in-situ XRD with synchroton  radiation source. Moreover expected neutron diffraction studies for different  lithium compositions will help to investigate the way the site filling occurs. 
