Ion selective  membranes  are  used in various applications  in the biological,  medical, chemical, pulp  and paper, and  other industries. A major use  is in electrolysis and  bipolar membrane  electrodialysis cells for  splitting salts  into their  component  acid  and  base.'  Polymeric  or  ceramic  membranes  can  be  used,  each  one  having  its advantages and drawbacks.  Large area polymeric  membranes  can be  manufactured  and  used  to  build  leak-free  systems.  However, these  polymeric  membranes  present  problems  of  selectivity  and fouling,  which  reduce  efficiency and  life.  Ceramic  membranes  do not present  these  problems but,  because of the thickness necessary for  mechanical  stability, they  usually  have  high  resistance.  It is clearly advantageous  to combine the two  types of material  in a composite  membrane  which  may  have  the  advantages  of  both. One way  to  do  this is  to deposit  a thin  film of  ceramic on  a polymeric  membrane.  The  polymeric  membrane  may  be  any  of  the existing ion  selective  materials  such  as  Nafion® or Raipore®.  An appropriate candidate  for the  ceramic  material  for Na salt splitting is  NASICON.  NASICON  is  a ceramic  formed  by a solid  solution of  NaZr2(PO4 )3 and  Na4Zr2(SiO4)3 of  average  composition Nal+ Zr2SixP3 xO1 2, where  x varies between  0 and 3. As  indicated by  its  name,  NASICON  has  a  high  ionic  conductivity  which depends  on  the  value  of x, and  is maximal  for  x  2.2  Relatively thick  NASICON  films (>25  «Lm)  have been  used  as sodium  selective  membranes  for  sodium  sulfate splitting.3 However  the  use  of thin  films (<1 


Because  of  their complex  stoichiometry,  it is difficult  to  deposit NASICON  thin films by conventional  evaporation or sputtering techniques. Thin films of  NASICON  have been  deposited using the  solgel  technique.4 However,  this  process  requires  high  temperature annealing  (>700°C)  which  makes  it  unsuitable  for  deposition  on polymers.  Recently pulsed  laser deposition  (PLD)  has emerged  as a more  suitable technique for  deposition  of ceramics  with  complex stoichiometry, such as high  Tc superconducting  oxides.6 This  technique  is suitable for the deposition  of superionic ceramics  as well.7

In PLD  the  optical  beam  of a pulsed  laser is focused at the  surface of  a target of the  material  which  we  wish  to deposit  as a thin film. The very high  energy density  impinging on  the target induces an  evaporative  explosion, with  ejection,  normal  to the  surface,  of material from the target. Because of the  extremely high rate of temperature  elevation, this  process  leads  to  a congruent evaporation of the  target. If we place  a substrate facing the target, deposition  of a thin film  occurs.  Deposition can be  performed in vacuum  or using a reactive  gas  atmosphere. The experimental  setup used  here  has been  described  in detail elsewhere.7 Briefly, the  laser  beam from  a KrF  excimer  laser  (X = 248 nm)  was focused on an elliptic spot  with an  area of 1 to 2 mm2. The  energy density incident on  the  target was controlled  by attenuating the incoming  laser beam. The laser repetition  rate was 30 Hz.

The target-to-sample distance  was  varied from  5.5 to  10.5 cm,  and samples were  at room  temperature.

NASICON  targets  were  prepared  from  a mixture  of ZrSiO4 and Na3PO4 · 12H 20  powders,  pressed  at  500  bar  and  sintered  at 1200°C  for at  least 6 h. Deposition  was  done  on  Raipore  R-4010 cation-selective polymeric membranes. The  area of the  membrane was varied from 3 x 3 to 7 x 7 cm2. Some deposits were made on Si3N4/Si  substrates to allow  electrical  measurement  up  to  400°C. Film  composition  was  measured  by  x-ray  photoelectron  spectroscopy  (XPS).  The film  thickness was  measured  using  a Dektak profilometer. The  crystallography of the  deposited films was evaluated  using x-ray diffraction (XRD).  The morphology was  studied by scanning  electron  microscopy  (SEM).  Electrical  characterization was  carried  out  using  ac  and  dc  methods.  Resistivity  measurements were  performed  by  ac impedance  using  a  lock-in  amplifier coupled with  a  potentiostat-galvanostat. The  frequency range  was from  0.01  Hz  to  100  kHz. The  measurements  were  done  between two  platinum  electrodes,  1.5  x 6 mm  spaced  by 1.5  mm,  deposited by  magnetron  sputtering. The resistivity was  evaluated  from the high  frequency  intercept  of  the  real-axis  in  the  Nyquist  plot. Efficiency  and  dc polarization  measurements  were  made  in a cell consisting  of  two  Pt  covered  electrodes,  two  electrolyte  compartments,  and  a  1 cm2 cation selective  membrane  separating  these compartments.  The current efficiency of  the  composite  membrane was  measured  from  the  production  of  NaOH from  the  electrolysis of sodium  sulfate. When  a voltage  is applied between  the two electrodes, the  sodium  ions migrate  through  the membrane  toward the negative  electrode.  The  initial  concentration  of  Na2SO4 in  the anolyte compartment  was  1 M. NaOH was present in the  catholyte compartment  with  an  initial  concentration  of  1 M.  The  acid  and base  concentrations  in the  catholyte  and  anolyte  compartments were  measured  by titration  during the  experiment. Results and  Discussion

A  main  advantage  of  PLD  is  its ability  to transfer  stoichiometry from target to substrate,  even for complex  materials.  However,  this is not always the case. Even  if the evaporation  is congruent, the difference in sticking  coefficients from  different  species, and  the  formation  of volatile  compounds  during  the flight from  target  to  substrate  may lead to  nonstoichiometric  deposition.' We  have  reported  that target  stoichiometry  is preserved  when NASICON  compounds  are deposited  on Si or  Si3N4/Si  substrates.7 However,  XPS  measurements  of the composition  of films  deposited on  Raipore  substrates show very small or even zero Na content

Table  I. Composition  of  the surface  of NASICON  thin films deposited  on:  Raipore  fresh membrane,  Raipore  membrane

which was  dipped  in a Na2SO4 solution, and  Si3N4ISi.

at the surface of the films. In Table I we show the composition of NASICON films deposited on Si3N4/Si and Raipore substrates placed side-by-side in the processing chamber. Since Na is present in the film deposited on the Si3N4/Si substrate, we exclude the formation of volatile compounds as the cause of the Na depletion. After the deposition of the first few monolayers, further deposition takes place on a ceramic in both cases. Thus, we do not expect that the sticking coefficient difference could explain the Na depletion for thick films. When the Raipore membrane is dipped into a Na2SO4 solution for a few hours, the composition of the Raipore surface is greatly modified. If the deposition is done on such a modified membrane the Na depletion is largely reduced (see Table I). Therefore, we suppose that Na diffusion into the polymer is the cause of depletion of Na from the ceramic deposited on a fresh Raipore membrane. Similar behavior is observed when NASICON films are deposited on Si02/Si substrates. In this case, elastic recoil detection (ERD) measurements show that Na concentration increases in the interior of the ceramic film. Despite the Na depletion, the ceramic film-lRaipore composite membranes, show excellent behavior as we show below.

The deposition rate may vary widely with various deposition parameters such as energy density, target to substrate distance, etc. Deposition rates ranging from 2 x 1O to 0.03 nm/pulse were obtained with a target-to-substrate distance of 5.5 cm and energy densities ranging from 0.7 to 2 J/cm2. This range is determined by the choice of deposition parameters, and does not represent the limits of deposition rates. Using a repetition rate of 30 Hz, the deposition of 100 nm, chosen as an appropriate thickness for the fabrication of a membrane, takes from 2 to 30 mm, depending on deposition conditions. This value compares well with other techniques such as sputtering.

The energy density also has a major influence on the surface morphology of the deposited films. In Fig. 1, we show a micrograph of the surface of a NASICON film deposited on a Raipore membrane at 0.72 J/cm2. The surface is relatively smooth, with a small number of particles. For films deposited at higher energy density the number of particles and their size increase. An example of this is shown in Fig. 2, where the NASICON film was deposited at 1.5 J/cm2. The presence of particles can lead to the formation of pinholes which reduce the efficiency of the composite membrane. However, their relative area is small and, as seen later, they do not preclude the good operation of the composite membrane.

XRD measurements were undertaken to study the crystallographic state of the deposited films. Films deposited at medium and low energy density (below —1.0 J/cm2) are amorphous as shown by the absence of characteristic peaks in XRD spectra (Fig. 3b). At higher energy density (1.6 J/cm2), XRD measurements show that the films are partially crystalline (Fig. 3c) and in a NASICON phase as shown by the comparison with the spectrum of the NASICON target (Fig. 3a).

Resistivity measurements were performed using impedance spectroscopy. Resistivity at room temperature is between 3 x 1 o and 5 x io n cm, depending on the deposition conditions. From resistance measurements between 30 and 400°C, the activation

Fig. 2. Micrograph of a NASICON thin film deposited at

energy was between 0.33 and 0.5 eV, increasing with increasing resistivity. The measured resistivities are greater than the best reported values for bulk crystalline NASICON, 1 x 1 o n cm 2 and for bulk amorphous NASICON 2 x 10 ui cm.9

The performance of the membranes was evaluated by measuring the current efficiency for the production of sodium hydroxide from sodium sulfate using electrolysis. This is defined as the ratio of the actual quantity of base equivalent produced to the expected quantity calculated using Faraday's law, from the current density applied: It = /Fwhere I is the current density, t is the duration of the application of the current density, I, is the number of equivalents expected, and Fthe Faraday constant (96,485 C mol-1).

Figure 4 shows the cumulative current efficiencies of a composite membrane, and of a Raipore membrane. The composite membrane was made by depositing a 300 nm thick NASICON film at 1.4 J/cm2 energy density on a fresh Raipore surface. The base cumulative current efficiency is the ratio of the number of moles of base produced over the total number of moles of electrons that crossed the cell since the beginning of the experiment. The cumulative current efficiency at high concentration is 56% for the Raipore membrane and 69% for the composite membrane. This 13% increase of the cumulative current efficiency represents a 23% improvement from the initial characteristics.

To help understand the origin of this improvement we measured the dc resistance of the Raipore and the composite membranes in two different solutions, in a 32% H2S04 solution, where conduction is essentially due to H° ions passing through the membrane, and a 10% NaOH solution, where Na are the conducting ions. The

Fig. 1. Micrograph of a NASICON thin film deposited at

Fig. 3 XRD spectra of: (a) NASICON target, and thin films deposited at: (b) low energy density (0.4 J/cm2) and (c) high energy density (1.6 J/cm2).

Fig.  4.  Cumulative  current  efficiency  of  Raipore  and  composite  membranes  as  a function  of  acid  concentration.  The composite  membrane  was made  by depositing a 300  nm  thick NASICON  film at  1.4  J/cm2 energy  density on  a fresh  Raipore surface.

total  resistance  of the  composite  membrane  is higher  in both solutions. This  is to be expected,  since in the composite  membrane  the resistance  of the  NASICON  is in series with  the  resistance  of the Raipore.  However, the  increase of resistance  for the H+ ions, 6.7  f, is higher  than  for  the  Na+ ions,  5.0  . The  increase  of  efficiency seems to  be because  the  composite  membrane  is more  selective against H+ ions than the  Raipore membrane.  Another  indication of this is the  transfer  of water from  the  catholyte  side to  the  anolyte O+ ions, side of  the cell.  As  this transport  is due to  transport of  H3 less  water  should  be transferred  by the  composite  membrane.  In the  same  conditions,  after  90  h of  operation,  28  ml  of  water  are transferred  when  using  the  Raipore  membrane  and  only 23 when using the  composite  membrane.  This indicates  once  more  a better selectivity against  H30 +, 

transport  for the  composite membrane.

The durability of  the  membrane  is another  important criterion  in the evaluation of the  performance  of the  composite  membrane. We have  measured  the  dissolution  of  thin  films  of  NASICON  in acid (stability  in acid  has  been  reported  to  be  a problem''"),  and  the long-term  operation  of  the  composite  membranes.  The  scratch test12 was  used  to  evaluate the  adhesion  of the  NASICON  film  to the  polymeric  membrane.  Quantitative  analysis could  not  be  performed because  the polymer  shows  cohesive failure before  delamination  takes place.  However,  we  may  conclude that  the  adhesion is good.  In the  dissolution  experiment,  a thin  film  of  NASICON deposited  on  Si3N4/Si  was  placed  in a  high  concentration  sulfuric acid solution. After 1 week, 40%  of the  thickness of  NASICON  was lost,  but after  2 weeks  no  further decrease  was  observed.  Finally, a  membrane  was  subjected  to  over  80 days  of  continuous  operation in an electrolysis cell. No decrease of efficiency was observed. This  confirms  the  durability  of  the  composite  membrane  (longer tests  are  in progress).

The  life of a  membrane  can  also be influenced  by  its  resistance to fouling  agents such as  iron,  calcium, and  magnesium. The  foul-

ing  process  occurs through  the  precipitation  of the  hydroxide  salts of these agents inside the  membrane  when these  ions cross  it and encounter  a  relatively  high  concentration  of  hydroxide  on  the catholyte side of the  membrane. To compare  the resistance of each membrane  to fouling,  measurements  were  performed  in the  same electrolysis cell,  but  the anolyte  was  charged with  275 ppm  of ferrous  sulfate. After only 4 days of operation, the  Raipore  membrane failed.  In contrast, the  composite  membrane  functioned for 26 days in  the  same  conditions,  and was  still functioning  when  the  experiment was  terminated.  More complete  results on  this and  on membrane  selectivity will be  reported  elsewhere. '3

Conclusion

NASICON  thin  films  can  be  deposited  by  PLD.  The  deposited films  are  good  ionic  conductors.  Composite  ion  selective  membrane  can  be  fabricated  by  depositing  at thin  film  of  NASICON  by PLD on  a Raipore  membrane.  This  composite  membrane  has better efficiency and  resistance to fouling than the  Raipore membrane. Thus,  this represents  a promising technological  development.'4

