Cross-linked poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) networks were proposed as internal reference systems for Na  27) and Li  27) ion selective electrodes with NASICON type ceramics as the sensitive membrane and for pH electrodes. The cross-linking signiﬁcantly improves the bulk ionic conductivity of the polymers at room temperature as well as the interfacial electrical properties. It increases the long term stability of the all-solid-state electrode. © 1997 Elsevier Science S.A.

Keywords: Poly(ethylene oxide) networks; Ion selective electrodes; NASICON type ceramics

In recent years, there has been considerable interest in the design and development of ‘all-solid-state’ ion selective electrodes [1–3]. The main advantages of these sensors would be the possibility of miniaturization, the robustness, the ability of operating in all positions and the good stability after a heat treatment (T\100°C).

The different types of solid state internal reference systems have been reviewed by Nikolskii and Materova [4]. Several polymers exhibiting a mixed electronic-ionic conductivity have been used as the intermediate layer between the ion selective membrane and the metallic contact [3]. As early as 1988 [5], ionic conductive polymers based on poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) have been proposed to replace liquid ionic solutions as the internal reference system in ion-selective electrodes (ISE). Polymers of compositions PEO8– NaI–AgI0.25 and PEO8–NaI–CuI0.25 were proposed as the ionic bridge in a Na  27) ion sensor and a pH electrode. The formation of iodide complexes was suggested [5]. A buffered acid system based on imidazole

was also proposed to ﬁx the value of the isothermal pH point at about seven [6]. Recently, the bulk ionic conductivity and interfacial properties of this type of internal reference systems have been studied as a function of the temperature and the composition of the polymer (PEOx–NaI–AgI0.25) [7]. NASICON type ceramics [8] were used as the sensitive membrane [9–12]. Recrystallization of the PEO, at temperature lower than 60°C, was found to drastically enhance the bulk ionic resistivity of the polymer as well as the interfacial resistances [7]. An hysteresis phenomenon on the emf response was also evidenced when the temperature was lowered to room temperature after a heat treatment. It was tentatively ascribed to the PEO recrystallization process.

In the present paper, we propose to use a crosslinked network of PEO, which should demonstrate low crystallinity at room temperature, in order to improve the performance of the PEO based internal reference system. PEO based networks can be built up from polyurethane linkage of a PEO triol [13]. The bulk ionic conductivity of PEO networks containing NaI (respectively, LiI) and AgI as well as the kinetics of the alkali ion and silver exchange are examined. The results are compared with those obtained on the PEO polymers [7]. Some tests of emf stability and calibration curves are also reported for a sodium ion selective electrode and a pH electrode.

with alkali metal and silver ions is presented in Fig. 1. An Arrhenius behavior is observed. The activation energy is slightly dependent on the nature of the alkali salt. It is of the order of 0.6 eV. The best conductivity is obtained for the lithium salt. For comparison, the conductivity of a Na salt–PEO polymer of the same composition is indicated. In the high temperature domain, the conductivity of the PEO–salt polymer is higher than that of the cross-linked PEO–salt system. At temperatures lower than 60°C (melting point of the PEO), no sharp transition is observed on the conductivity curve of the PEO based network. The DSC analysis, between  28)100 and 150°C, conﬁrms that no recrystallization of the polymer is evidenced as expected from the cross-linking of the polymer. No endothermic peak near the melting point of the PEO is noticed on the DSC traces of the cross-linked polymers. At room temperature, cross-linking of the PEO signiﬁcantly enhances the ionic conductivity (10 28) 6–10  28) 5 Scm  28) 1 instead of 10 28) 8– 10 28) 7 Scm 28) 1 for the PEO salt complex).

The silver resistance deduced from the impedance diagram at different temperatures is represented in Fig. 2. An Arrhenius behavior is observed.

The polymer electrolyte networks were prepared from PEO triol of molecular weight 3000. Di-isocyanatohexane was used as the cross-linking agent. Sn-dibutyl dilorate was used as the catalyst. Stoichiometric amounts of polymer and salts were dissolved in dichloromethane. The compositions PEO14–XI–(AgI)0.25 with X 30)Li or Na were prepared. The cross-linking reaction was made in air, at 40°C, during 24 h. Thin ﬁlms of the order of 300 mm in thickness were obtained by evaporating the solvant. DSC analyses were performed between  28)100 and 150°C, with a Netzsch DSC STA 309. The sample was heated at 10° min 28) 1. The DSC traces were recorded during the ﬁrst heating cycle.

The NASICON ceramics were synthesized by the sol-gel process as described in [11]. Their density was greater than 95% of the theoretical density. The composition Li1.6Ge1.4Al0.6(PO4)3 [14] was used to test the lithium ion exchange at the Li salt–polymer:ceramics interface. The composition Na3Zr2Si2PO12 was used to test the sodium ion exchange at the Na salt–polymer:ceramics interface. The room temperature conductivity of the ceramics was equal to 10 28) 3 Scm  28) 1 for the sodium based NASICON and 10 28) 4 Scm 28) 1 for the lithium based NASICON. The surface of the NASICON samples was polished with abrasive paper and diamond paste before it was contacted with the polymer.

The pH electrode membranes were provided by Radiometer Analytical SA. The glass tube were ﬁlled with the solution of the polymer which was then dried in air at 40°C, over 24 h.

The conductivity and interfacial properties were studied by impedance spectroscopy. The experimental cells and equipment are described in detail in [7]. The silver: polymer interface was studied with a two electrode symmetrical cell. The polymer was sandwiched between two ﬂat silver electrodes. The cell was kept under mechanical pressure. The NASICON:polymer interface was studied with a four electrode cell. The NASICON pellet was contacted on both sides with the polymer. Impedance measurements were carried out with a Solartron 1250 frequency response analyzer coupled to a 1186 electrochemical interface. They were performed in potentiostatic mode around the equilibrium potential, in the frequency range 65 KHz to 0.01 Hz. Typical impedance diagrams are described in [7]. The polymer conductivity and interfacial resistances were deduced from those diagrams as indicated in [7].

The stability and calibration curves were rather determined with the pH electrodes which are more extensively used. Classical pH sensitive membranes are made of silica doped with different oxide such as lithium oxide or sodium oxide to improve the conductivity. It is interesting to use the present polymers as the internal reference system of a pH electrode because the common alkali ions present in the polymer and the membrane will ensure the reversibility of the electrochemical chain. Solid-state-pH electrodes using cross-linked PEO based polymers as the internal reference system were assembled. The emf drift, at the steady state, was low whatever the alkali salt. Typicaly, the drift was of the order of 0.06 mVh  28) 1 over 20 days. This value was similar to that obtained with the PEO–salt systems [5]. A typical calibration curve is presented in Fig. 4. The slope of the E(pH) curves was found to be equal to 58 mV pH 28) 1 unit, at room temperature, in the pH range 1–11. Small variations were observed for pH higher than 12. They can be attributed to the membrane.

In some speciﬁc applications (biomedical or food industry), it may be necessary for the electrode to have a heat treatment or to operate at higher temperature. As already emphasized [5,7], the calibration curve of an all-solid-state-electrode using a PEO–salt system as the internal reference system may change after a heat treatment. This was tentatively ascribed to the recrystallization of the polymer. For this reason, the recovery of the emf after a heat treatment was tested on solid state pH electrodes using cross-linked PEO networks as the internal reference system. The electrode was immersed in

Fig. 3. Arrhenius plot of the NASICON:polymer interfacial resistance.  6), Li salt-crosslinked PEO;  147), Na salt-crosslinked PEO;  14), Na salt–PEO.

Fig. 2. Arrhenius plot of the silver:polymer interfacial resistance.  6), Li salt-crosslinked PEO;  147), Na salt-crosslinked PEO;  14), Na salt– PEO.

The nature of the alkali salt (XI) has little effect on the silver:polymer interfacial resistance. Comparison with the results obtained with a PEO–salt complex indicates that the cross-linking has little effect on the silver reaction at temperature higher than 60°C. At room temperature, the interfacial resistance is of the order of 104–105 Vcm2. It is lower than that obtained without cross-linking of the polymer.

3.3. Kinetics of the alkali ion exchange

PEO with X 30)Li or Na

The kinetics of the alkali ion exchange was studied on the NASICON ceramics because the bulk and interfacial processes can be separated more easily than with a pH glass membrane. The alkali ion exchange can be represented by: NASICONUX  27) X 27) The interfacial resistance of the NASICON:polymer interface is reported on Fig. 3. At temperatures higher than 60°C, the interfacial resistance is slightly dependent on the nature of the polymer electrolyte. At room temperature, the PEO based networks show the lowest interfacial resistance (typically, 105 Vcm2 for the Li  27) exchange at the polymer:ceramic interface).

3.4. Emf measurements

Na-ISEs with NASICON as the sensitive membrane and a Na salt-cross-linked PEO polymer as the internal reference system were assembled. They were found to operate properly.
C. Gondran et al. :Sensors and Actuators B 44 (1997) 554–558 C. Gondran et al. :Sensors and Actuators B 44 (1997) 554–558

or Na) systems at room temperature as well as the kinetics of the silver electrode and the alkali ion exchange. These polymers are suitable for use as the internal ionic contact in all-solid-state-ion sensitive electrodes based on glass and NASICON membranes. The electrode drift is very low because the interfacial potentials of the electrochemical cell are well deﬁned. The Na salt based polymer show long term stability, good adhesion properties on pH glass as well as on NASICON ceramics and can operate properly after a heat treatment. The adhesion of the Li salt based system on the glass electrode after a thermal treatment is rather poor. Some additives are required to create chemical bounds between the glass and the polymer.

As expected, the cross-linking signiﬁcantly improves the electrical conductivity of the PEO–AgI–XI (X 30)Li
