NASICON was prepared using a high-temperature solid state method with Na2CO3, SiO2, ZrO2, and (NH4)2HPO4 powders.20) A schematic of the NASICON-based sensor is displayed in Fig. 1. The sensor was fabricated by screenprinting Pt pasted onto one side of the plate to form a sensing electrode (SE) and a reference electrode (RE). The platinum wire was bonded to the two electrodes with the same platinum paste, and then heated for 2 h at 800°C. Next, the PTC (Forrester Heat Flow Systems Manufacturing Co., Ltd.) ceramic sheets were bonded to the other side of the substrate using an inorganic binder (HR-8767, Huirui Electronic Co., Ltd.), and the PTC ceramic was connected with a 12 V multi-layer battery through wires.

The P25 [TiO2, 20% rutile phase, 80% anatase phase, Evonik Degussa (China) Co., Ltd.] layer was screenprinted on the SE, followed by calcinating at 600°C for 2 h.

The crystal and phase identiﬁcations of the products were achieved using X-ray diﬀraction (XRD Rigaku Miniﬂex 600, Japan) with a monochromatized source of Cu K¡ radiation (­ = 0.15405 nm) at 1.6 kW (40 kV, 40 mA) with a step of 0.02°/s. After polishing, the morphology and microstructure were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM Hitachi S-4100, Japan). Test gas mixtures containing diﬀerent concentrations of NO2 were prepared by diluting the NO2 (500 ppm in N2) with O2 (21%) and N2 (79%). The total ﬂow rate was ﬁxed at 100 cm3/min, which was controlled using computer-controlled gas mass ﬂow controllers. The voltage between the two electrodes was measured using a digital multimeter (34972 A multimeter, Agilent, USA) and the results obtained were registered with a computer connected to an electrometer. When the sensitivity of the sensor was deﬁned as the slope of the working curve, a linear relationship was demonstrated between ¦V and the logarithm of the NO2 concentration.

In addition, the selectivity is also an important evaluation criterion of the sensor. Hence, as a contrast, we chose the response value of the present sensor toward three other interfering gases at 100 ppm. As observed from Fig. 6(d), the NO, NH3 and CO2 contents do make very little inﬂuence on the EMF of the sensor, and the response value of the sensor to NO2 is much higher than those of any other interfering gases, including NO at 250°C. Thus, the sensor exhibits a rather high selectivity toward NO2.

Furthermore, the heating methods of the existing sensors and reported devices are compared, as tabulated in Table 2. Most provide a temperature environment for the sensor through a tubular furnace. The others generate heat by feeding the resistance wire with electricity, which requires additional temperature measuring devices. However, we creatively used PTC ceramic sheets powered by 12-V multi-batteries as the heating source. The temperature can be stabilised at 250°C with temperature ﬂuctuations of less than 10°C.

Due to the serious volatilization of phosphate radical at high temperature, we adopted the method of adding excessive (NH4)2HPO4 to prepare the impurity free NASICON, results in perfect response to NO2 gas of the sensor. Table 3 shows the comparison between the results obtained herein and those reported previously. The prepared sensor, based on P25 SE with unique heating model, is found to have good comprehensive performances but in the most concise structure.

Using PTC ceramic as the heating source, a selfthermostatic potential NO2 gas sensor based on NASICON was successfully prepared. A simple and small combination of a dry cell and a thin PTC plate of the same size as the solid electrolyte substrate to be attached was used to replace an ordinary complex heating and temperature control system, supplying eﬃcient and reliable essential working conditions for the sensor. Gas sensing studies reveal that such sensors exhibit the best response at 250°C, and achieve a high NO2 sensitivity (84.60 mV/decade) toward 5­150 ppm NO2. Meanwhile, a response time of 37 s and a recovery time of 44 s toward 10 ppm NO2 gas at 250°C were shown. In addition, the self-thermostatic potential NO2 gas sensor also exhibits good repeatability and longterm stability for 14 days, with excellent selectivity to NO2 in the presence of interference gases such as NO, CO2, and NH3. Beneﬁtting from such a feasible heating mode, moreportable gas sensors are expected to be fabricated for various gas sensing applications, as long as suitable PTC materials are selected to maintain the required temperatures for certain solid electrolytes.