High microwave susceptibility of NaH2PO4·2H2O has been discovered. This hydrated acid phosphate of sodium can be heated upto 1000 K or more when exposed to 2.45 GHz microwaves. Using this, a novel microwave-assisted preparation of a number of important crystalline and glassy materials with NASICON-type chemistry has been accomplished in less than 8 min which is only a fraction of the time required for conventional synthetic procedures. The present single-shot approach to the preparation of phosphates is attractive in terms of its simplicity, rapidity, and general applicability. A ‘‘step-ladder’’ heating mechanism has been proposed to account for the high microwave absorbing ability of NaH2PO4·2H2O.   1997 Academic Press


NASICON is the acronym for sodium (Na) super ion conductor, a class of complex crystalline materials based on NaZr(PO) (NZP), exhibiting high Na> ion conductivity (1). We use this term to describe a family of phosphates, both in crystalline and glassy states, of the general chemical formula AVBW(PO) (A is an alkali ion, B is a tritetraor pentavalent element), the chemistry of which is similar to the original NASICON compound NZP. The covalent network skeleton of NASICONs is remarkably stable toward temperature and chemical substitution (2, 3). It is suggested that they are likely to be very useful for nuclear waste disposal since heavier radioactive elements can be loaded in their structure (4) by substitution. NASICONs are also important for their ‘‘net zero thermal expansion’’ behavior (5). It has been found that some NASICON-type chemical compositions (with the general formula AVBWPO) can be vitriﬁed, and several studies have reported on the result-

However, the procedures presently available for the preparation of both crystalline and glassy NASICON materials are tedious and involved. For example, crystalline NZP itself has been synthesized using a two-step furnace heating for 28 h and with intermediate grinding (8). The time required for the preparation of NaFe(PO) is about 16—20 h (9). Even the NASICON glass preparation necessitates a step-wise heating schedule and requires at least 12 to 15 h (10).

Microwave irradiation has recently been used for the synthesis of inorganic materials. The microwave route to synthesis oﬀers several advantages over conventional methods, the foremost of which are the very short time scales required for the preparation and the selectivity in energy transfer from the microwave ﬁeld (11). Reaction yields and structural uniformity of products have been reported to be better than in traditional methods (12—18). A critical requirement in using microwaves is the coupling of (at least one of ) the reactants to the microwave ﬁeld in order to initiate and drive the microwave assisted reactions. In this context, a number of oxides (VO, CuO, NiO, WO, MnO, ZrO, silica gel, etc.) and a few halides (AgI, CuI) are found to be good microwave susceptors (19, 20). Carbon powder (both amorphous and graphitic forms) absorbs microwaves eﬃciently and heats up rapidly (21—23). Several mineral compounds (CuFeS, FeO, PbS, etc.) are also known to be good microwave absorbers (24). However, several hydrated salts which couple to microwaves initially become microwave inert after the dehydration step. To date, no good room-temperature microwave-absorbing phosphate susceptor has been reported. Therefore, preparation of phosphate-based materials which require high temperatures of reaction has not been possible using microwaves. In this paper we report for the ﬁrst time the unique microwave-absorbing ability of a hydrated phosphate namely NaHPO·2HO (NHP) and describe a simple and fast procedure for the synthesis of some crystalline and glassy phosphates with NASICON chemistry.

A number of phosphates, some of them containing water of hydration, have been tested for their microwave-absorbing abilities. In a typical experiment, 5—10 g of the salt powders taken in a silica crucible is exposed to microwaves (for about 5—10 min) inside a domestic microwave oven (Batliboy, Eddy operating at 2.45 GHz and with several power level settings up to a maximum of 980 W). Table 1 lists some of the phosphates subjected to microwave irradiation and the observations made. The temperature of the material under microwave irradiation is measured intermittently using a Pt/Rh thermocouple as described earlier (19, 22). The weight-loss measurements have been carried out using a Sartorius balance (accuracy"10\ g). To get more insight into the microwave coupling characteristics of NaHPO·2HO, the decomposition of NaHPO·2HO was examined using thermogravimetry (TGA: Heating rate; 10 K/min, in air ambient) and diﬀerential thermal analysis (DTA: CAHN Instruments, CA).

microwave irradiation and copious bubbling of the material is seen. The eﬀervescence is observed in two regimes (ﬁrst after 30 s; second after 80 s) following which the sample becomes red hot (within 3 min). After 7 min, the irradiation was terminated and the samples were allowed to cool inside the oven. The products were characterized using a Philips X-ray diﬀractometer (Model PW 1050/70). Several NASICON-type glassy materials of the general formula NaVBWPO (where B"Ga, V, Nb) have also been prepared using the same microwave heating technique. Starting materials included NaCO, GaO, VO, and NbO in addition to NaHPO·2HO. Batch weight of 5—10 g of appropriate amounts of starting materials were thoroughly mixed and irradiated with microwaves in clean silica crucibles. The duration of exposure was just about 5—7 min. Good melts were found to form within 5 min and were stirred once or twice in between to ensure homogenization. Melts were quenched between polished stainless steel plates. Disks of quenched samples so obtained were conﬁrmed to be amorphous by X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) and glassy by diﬀerential scanning calorimetry (DSC). The preparation conditions and the observed glass transition temperatures („ 103)) are given in Table 2. However, it may be noted that among the initial glass forming mixtures, VO was also found to be a good microwave susceptor in addition to NaHPO·2HO.

Appropriate amounts of starting materials were therefore thoroughly mixed (batch weight"7—10 g) and exposed to microwave radiation. The mixture melts partially during

Table 1 lists some of the alkali phosphates and their behavior under microwave irradiation. It is evident that though most of the hydrates absorb microwaves to begin

Microwave Susceptibility of Diﬀerent Compounds Examined?

The third water fully leaves after 125 s and the material is melted within 150 s. The weight loss observed corresponds to 3HO molecules.

No weight loss, no red hotness and no melting observed, i.e., not a good microwave susceptor.

Weight loss observed. Found dehydrated. But no further microwave absorption

noticed after 2 min. No melting or red hotness seen.

No microwave absorption. No weight loss and no melting. No weight loss and no melting. Not a good microwave susceptor. Weight loss observed. Found dehydrated. A porous product obtained. But no

melting or red hotness observed even after 6 min.

Found dehydrated. Weight loss observed. A rubbery product seen.

But no further absorption or melting of the material seen.

Only in the case of NaHPO·2HO does microwave absorption continue to occur even after dehydration and anhydrous NaHPO heats to high temperatures. The material melts and turns red hot. The melt could be quenched and transparent NaPO glass („ 103)"550 K) was obtained. The time—temperature proﬁle of NaHPO·2HO during microwave heating is given in Fig. 1a. It clearly indicates a rapid initial increase of temperature followed by a level-oﬀ region. Weight-loss measurements were also carried out as a function of microwave exposure time and the results are shown in Fig. 1b. Dehydration appears to take place in two steps; The ﬁrst step which apparently starts within 30 s of exposure (appearance of bubbles) is completed within 50—60 s (when the eﬀervescence stops temporarily). This may correspond to the removal of 2 HO molecules in the formula (see below). The second stage begins around 80 s and lasts up to 120—130 s. This stage corresponds to the removal of one more HO molecule from the structure resulting from a condensation reaction. The time and temperatures corresponding to the removal of these water molecules are marked (points 1 and 2) in Fig. 1a. The microwave exposure time required for the melting—as observed visually—of the dehydrated sample (point 3) is also indicated by an arrow in Fig. 1a.

The two stages of weight loss can be correlated to the respective temperatures of decomposition since the time axis is common to both Figs. 1a and 1b. Thus, loss of two water molecules of hydration can be interpreted to occur around 410 K and the loss of the additional water molecule from condensation (acid phosphatePmetaphosphate) around 560 K in microwave experiments. This is corrobor-

(a) The temperature proﬁle of NaHPO·2HO as a function of microwave exposure time and (b) the weight loss observed as a function of exposure time. Lines are drawn as a guide to the eye.

ated by TGA/DTA measurements shown in Fig. 2. The TGA results conﬁrm the two-step dehydration procedure at temperatures 382 and 471 K (points 1 and 2 in TGA curve), respectively. Incidence of these transitions are conﬁrmed by DTA also (points b and c, respectively). The ﬁrst endothermic peak in DTA (point a) is due to melting of NaHPO · 2HO which occurs at +333 K without any loss of water. The melting point of the dehydrated product is found to be 612 K (point d in the DTA thermogram). We consider the temperatures obtained from microwave heating experiments as erroneous because of our inability to monitor the temperatures or any other suitable property continuously during irradiation. It is partly a manifestation of the very rapid heating process also.

either due to increased dielectric loss or due to the nearness of a dielectric anomaly. This material then continues to be heated even further where upon in the third stage the chemically bound water (-H and -OH groups) in the structure of NaHPO is eliminated by condensation. Anhydrous NaPO melt is formed as a result. Molten NaPO is itself a fair microwave absorber at this temperature (+820 K). However, like other molten salt systems (19) NaPO melt also reaches a temperature at which the microwave coupling is just suﬃcient to maintain a constant temperature. No signiﬁcant escalation of temperature is observed above this point. It would be worth mentioning here that powders of neither pure NaPO crystals nor NaPO glass is found to be a microwave absorber at laboratory temperature. However, a hot NaPO melt (melted using an electric furnace) was found to absorb microwaves when exposed and to reach the same ﬂat temperature regime in the microwave oven. Thus, there are four essential stages in the microwave heating; (i) NaHPO · 2HO crystalsPhydrate melt, (ii) hydrate meltPanhydrous NaHPO, (iii) anhydrous Pstable NaHPO high temperature melt of NaPO. These stages and their order are so critical the microwave heating of NaHPO · 2HO that they suggest a ‘‘step-ladder’’ heating mechanism.


The same step-ladder mechanism does not seem to operate in other hydrated salts (NaPO · 12HO, NaBO · 10HO, NaBO · 4HO, ZnSO · 7HO, NiCO · 2HO, and (NH)MoO · 4HO) which we investigated for comparison and included in Table 1. The microwave absorbtion ceases after the stage of dehydration in these hydrates. Even among phosphates the diﬀerences in the microwave response is noteworthy. When there is no water of crystallization present (e.g., KHPO and (NH)HPO), the material

is not heated to high enough temperature by microwaves and condensation—dehydration does not occur. In the case of NaHPO · 2HO which has similar water molecules of crystallization as NaHPO · 2HO, microwave irradiation (even 10 min exposure) does not raise the temperature of the sample and no dehydration occurs. This profound diﬀerence in the behavior of the two hydrated sodium acid phosphates is noteworthy. We suggest that it is due to an enhanced barrier to rotation of HO molecules in disodium salt compared to dihydrogen salt. Such barrier-increasing eﬀects are known in solution chemistry where eﬀect of ionic substitutions on rotational barriers have been studied (25). The increase in barrier height can be visualized to be caused by the substitution of the H> ion in H-bonded structure by a Na> ion which leads to a geometrically tight-packed structure. This results in increased energy of excitation of the rotational degree of freedom and makes it unfavorable for transfer of energy from microwave ﬁeld (energy mismatch). Such an argument implies that the energy transfer from microwave ﬁeld to the rotational modes in these hydrates occurs through a resonance phenomenon. Absence of microwave absorption in other phosphates not having water of crystallization in the structure can also be due to the absence of a rotational mode of matching energy.

We have thus identiﬁed the uniquely eﬀective microwave coupling and the step-ladder heating mechanism in NaHPO · 2HO and we now discuss the preparation of several NASICON materials. First, two important crystalline compounds of the NASICON family have been synthesized. Figure 3 gives the X-ray diﬀractograms of the microwave-prepared crystalline NASICONs (NaZr(PO) and NaFe(PO)). The good crystallinity and the phase purity are evident. The calculated lattice parameters of the product NASICONs match well with the literature data (see

FIG. 3. X-ray diﬀractograms of the microwave-prepared crystalline

Table 2). Also, the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the initial X-ray peaks have been measured as 0.20° in the case of (022) reﬂection of microwave prepared NFP which is the highest intensity peak. Other peaks had similar FWHM values. This result agrees well with the same data of the conventionally prepared (using ceramic method) NaFe (PO) compound (9). The microwave-assisted preparation of the above crystalline phosphates required less than 8 min which is only a fraction of the time required in conventional methods. Also, the present method does not necessitate intermediate grinding and hence is a single-shot process. In a microwave-assisted reaction, since the crucible is not heated directly and only the reactants (at least one of them) couple to microwaves, contamination by the crucible material is virtually completely eliminated (19, 26, 27). The rapidity of the microwave heating method also minimizes the loss of components from the reaction mixture (which normally occurs during prolonged heating of the material).

Various NASICON-type glasses were also prepared using NaHPO · 2HO as a component of the batch mixtures. They are listed in Table 2 along with the measured glass transition temperature („ 103)). The „ 103) values agree well with the reported data (given in parentheses) (9). The infrared spectroscopic investigations on a gallium-containing glass (NGP) (measurements were conducted on a pellet made by using KBr and the sample powders and vibrational bands were observed at 1170, 1060, 980, 665, 550, 480, and 340 cm\) conﬁrmed the high quality of the resulting glass

FIG. 4. Time—temperature proﬁle of the NGP glass composition un-

der microwave irradiation.

(9). The time—temperature proﬁle during the microwave preparation of the NGP glass composition is shown in Fig. 4. This shows a sharp initial rise of temperature and then a levelling-oﬀ region, indicating features of autotemperature-control, which we discussed in an earlier publication (19).


Thus, a microwave method of preparing crystalline and glassy NASICONs has been found to be possible by the discovery of the unique microwave coupling behavior of NaHPO · 2HO. The method is found to be simple, fast, and quite general.
