Incorporation of PEO based Na+ ion polymer electrolyte in Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (NZSP) NASICON results into novel hybrid composite formation with high ionic conductivity of ~ 10-4 Ω-1cm-1 at room  temperature.  Thus  compositions  63NZSP-37(PEO1-xNaIx)  for  x  =  0.03-0.13  have  been prepared.  The  ionic  transport  mechanism  investigated  using  impedance  and  X-ray  absorption near edge structure spectroscopy suggests decoupling of Na+ ions from the polymer matrix, and significant  role  of  NASICON  crystallites  in  providing  pathways  for  ionic  conduction. 

Compositions with large salt content exhibit reversible conductivity-temperature cycles at least upto  100oC.  The  best  conducting  composite  (x  =  0.13)  exhibits  appreciable  electrochemical stability window of 4.64 V vs Na/Na+.


Sodium ion conductivity in solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs) has been a subject of interest for last three decades. Due to similar chemical insertion properties with those of Li+ ions, Na+ ion-SPEs  have  been  widely  studied  as  an  alternative  for  all-solid-state  devices.

In  the  present  work,  we  report  a  novel  fast  ionic  system  based  on  Na+  ion  salt,  PEO  and  a NASICON  viz.  Na3Zr2Si2PO12.    In  such  a  composite,  the  polymer  electrolyte  occupies  space between  the  NASICON  grains.  Thus  the  electrical  and  electrochemical  properties  of  the composites  have  been  examined  in  view  of  their  applications  in  energy  storage  devices.  A correlation  between  the  conductivity  and  hybrid  structure  synthesized  using  “polymer  in ceramic” approach has been attempted.



The Na3Zr2Si2PO12 crystallites were prepared by solid state reaction route as describe elsewhere [9]. Their nanoparticles [6] of approximate size of ~ 30 nm were prepared using planetary ball mill (Fritsch Pulverisette P6). The hybrid polymer composites of 63NZSP-37(PEO1-xNaIx) where x = 0.03, 0.7, 0.11 and 0.13, were prepared by mixing these nanocrystallites in an appropriate weight ratio with Na+ ion rich polymer matrix prepared by solution casting. The obtained hybrid polymer-NASICON  slurry  was  dried  in  vacuum,  pelletized  and  annealed  at  40oC  prior  to X-ray diffraction, FESEM, XANES, impedance spectroscopy, DSC and cyclic voltammetry were performed to investigate structural and electrical properties of the composites. 


Nyquist  plots  and  corresponding  fitted  spectrum  using  combination  of  resistances  (R)  and constant phase elements (CPE) for composite with x = 0.03 (inset) and 0.13 are shown in Fig.1a. 

As evident, the plots exhibit dissimilar nature for these low and high salt content samples. For composite with x = 0.03, a single depressed semicircle is observed followed by a spike at lower frequencies. No separate contribution of the phases is evident here, thus R1 is attributed to total resistance of composite. However, for sample with x = 0.13, the semicircle appears to be shifted away  from  origin.  This  readily  suggests  two  different  electrical  transport  mechanisms represented by two models (inset). Resistance R1, thus, can be attributed to bulk transport (Rb) whereas,  R2  to  a  relatively  poor  conducting  region,  may  be  the  grain-grain  interface,  where polymer’s presence is likely. Thus, R2 may be assigned to polymer-grain boundary interfacial properties (RPGB). Similarly, Nyquist plots for the composites with x = 0.07 and 0.11 are given in supplementary figures (Fig.S1a and b).  Exact determination of conductivities of different phases (corresponding to Rb and RPGB) and their temperature dependence is rather tricky due to limited frequency range. However, safely the total conductivity is obtained from low frequency intercept with the inclined line. 


To  understand  the  role  of  polymer  matrix  in  enhancing  the  ionic  conductivity,  local  structure around  ether  Oxygen  of  backbone  chains  (-CH2-CH2-O-)n  was  studied  using  synchrotron radiation.  Fig.2b  shows  normalized  XANES  spectra  for  oxygen  K-edge.  The  main  edge/white line  energy (Eo) values corresponding to 1s→ continuum state were obtained  from  the  peak  derivative  [8].  Such  a  transition  is  known  to  be  sensitive  to  chemical charge state of the element. The inset of Fig.2b also shows an interesting trend of the K-edge energy (Eo) values with salt content. As the salt content increases, the Eo initially shows a jump followed  by  an  apparent  saturation.  It  may  be  emphasized  here  that  salt  addition  leads  to  a gradual decrease in O/Na ratio. Since more Na+ ions are available for oxygen, thus it was also expected [8] that their accumulation about ether oxygen would be leading to gradual increase in Eo. Instead one observes no variation Eo value in a wide composition range. This trend of Eo may be associated with a tendency of decoupling of Na+ ions from the ether oxygen of PEO matrix. 

Such  decoupling  may  enhance  the  mobile  Na+  ion  concentration  near  the  polymer-NZSP interface. Decoupled ions, in presence of electric field may find pathways either from (i)NZSP nanocrystallites, or (ii) from the surface states of NZSP through polymer-NZSP interface. FESEM images of composites with x = 0.03 and 0.13 are shown in Fig. 2c and d. As apparent for lower salt content, polymer is apparently seen surrounding the nano-grains of NZSP. For large salt content when the polymer is in small amount, grains are more closely packed. In both the cases composites appear homogeneous. Fig.S3 (supplementary) shows EDS image that suggests an even distribution of various elements viz.  Na, C, Si, P and Zr with no agglomeration or phase Ionic  transport  number  for  the  composite  with  x  =  0.13,  obtained  using  Hebb-Wagner polarization was found to be 0.94 (Fig.S4, supplementary).

The CV studies on symmetric cells of type SS|63NZSP_37(PEO0.87NaI0.13)|SS are also shown in the  inset  of  Fig.3  that  exhibits  electrochemical  stability  of  ~  ±  2V. 

High ionic conductivity at room temperature of   10-4 Ω-1cm-1 in a novel hybrid solid polymer-NASICON  composite  has  been  achieved  for  a  composition  63  wt%  of  Na3Zr2Si2PO12.  The hybrid composites were found to be predominately ionic in nature. Most conducting composition (x = 0.13) found to be exhibiting least activation energy, comparable to that of NZSP bulk. The decoupling  of  Na+  ions  from  polymer  matrix  possibly  play  important  role  in  conductivity enhancement. Moreover, the composite electrolyte exhibits an electrochemical stability window of 4.64 V vs Na/Na+. This composite could be a potential electrolyte for sodium based all-solid-state devices. 