Lithium ion conducting solids is a topic of growing interest because of their potential application as electrolytes in lithium batteries. In particular, lithium compounds with NASICON 共acronym for Na superionic conductors兲 structure and formula LiM 2共PO4兲3 M IV⫽Ge, Ti, Sn, and Hf, have been ionic conductivity.1–14 The ideal framework of NASICON-type materials,15–17 shown in Fig. 1共a兲, is built up by M 2共PO4兲3 units. A pair of M O6 octahedra are arranged with opposed triangular faces approximately parallel to each other and oriented perpendicularly to the c axis of the structure. The corners of this pair of faces are bridged by three PO4 tetrahedra, which have one edge approximately parallel to the c axis and the opposed one normal to this axis. Oxygens involved in the second edge form part of octahedra of two adjacent M 2共PO4兲3 units. NASICON compounds have generally a rhombohedral lattice and belong to the space group R3¯c, as is the case of M ⫽Ge, Ti; however, some of them as M ⫽Zr, Sn, and Hf, exhibit structural distortions that reduce ideal symmetry.12,18–21 These distortions can be eliminated by heating the sample above the corresponding phase transition temperature in each of these compounds.

Samples were prepared by calcination at increasing temperatures in the range 850–1600 °C of stoichiometric mixtures of Li2O, (NH4兲2H共PO4兲3, and M O2, where M ⫽Ti, Ge, Sn, and Hf. A more detailed description of the sample preparation is given elsewhere.9,12,24,25

31P and 7Li NMR spectra, recorded in static and magic angle spinning 共MAS兲 conditions, were obtained at different temperatures between 25 and ⫺100 °C by using a B-VT 1000/SU07 unit adapted to an MSL 400 Bruker spectrometer. In this study, 7Li spectra were recorded at temperatures for which lithium mobility is absent. For the sake of comparison, data of previously published 31P spectra taken above the phase transition temperature12,21 are included in this work. The frequency used for 31P and 7Li spectra was 161.96 and 155.5 MHz, respectively. Spectra were taken after ␲/2 pulse irradiation. A time interval between successive scans in the range 2–30 s was chosen, depending on the spin-lattice relaxation times of nuclei at the analyzed temperatures. The number of accumulations was in the range 10–200. The 7Li and 31P chemical shifts values are given relative to 1M LiCl and 85% H3PO4 aqueous solution, respectively.

FIG. 1. Schematic representation of 共a兲 NASICON framework; 共b兲 conduction channels connecting both types of structural sites for lithium: M 2 共closed circles兲 and M 1 共open circles兲 sites.

The ﬁtting of NMR spectra was carried out with the Bruker WINFIT program,26 which computes the intensities of the sideband pattern of MAS spectra by the Herzfeld and Berger method.27 With this program, the position, linewidth, and intensity of components are determined with a standard nonlinear least square method. However, the anisotropies and asymmetry parameters, which characterize nuclear interactions in static and MAS spectra have to be determined by a trial and error procedure.

The principal axes are labeled according to the following convention:

In general, the interaction of the quadrupole moment of lithium with the electric ﬁeld gradient 共EFG兲 at the nuclear site produces transitions (1/2!3/2,⫺3/2!⫺1/2) with respect to the central transition (⫺1/2!1/2). 28 In powder samples, the broadening of the 7Li central line is generally dominated by dipolar interactions and the pattern of satellite lines is governed by the ﬁrst-order quadrupole interaction. 7Li NMR static spectra of our compounds are shown in Fig. 4: quadrupole patterns of the compounds with lower symmetry are very different from those of the rhombohedral compounds and cover a wider frequency range. From analysis of these patterns, the quad-

FIG. 3. 31P MAS NMR spectra of the samples obtained at a spinning rate of v r⬇1000 Hz. Recording temperatures are the same as those of spectra in Fig. 2. Insets display the central components of 31P MAS spectra of the compounds with M IV⫽Sn, Hf.

STRUCTURAL CHANGES IN THE COMPOUNDS . . .

TABLE II. Line position of the central component, second moment (⌬␼ 2), and quadrupole parameters 共C Q and ␩Q兲 deduced from 7Li static and MAS NMR spectra.


FIG. 4. 7Li static NMR spectra recorded at 270 K for Ge, 167 K for Ti, 273 K for Sn, and 250 K for Hf. It should be noted the different scale in M IV⫽Sn, Hf spectra with respect to that of the other samples.

rupole coupling constant (C Q) and the asymmetry parameter (␩Q), has been determined. However, static spectra of samples with high C Q and ␩Q are difﬁcult to record properly and, hence, the analysis of MAS-NMR spectra is more convenient in these cases.

In Fig. 5, 7Li MAS spectra of three representative cases, recorded at the same temperature as the static ones, are shown. Central and satellite transitions are modulated by the spinning sidebands, but the powder pattern of static spectra is clearly reproduced. The MAS spectrum of LiTi2共PO4兲3 is similar to that of LiGe2共PO4兲3 and is not included in the ﬁgure. C Q and ␩Q values obtained by ﬁtting of MAS spectra coincide with those determined from static spectra and are listed in Table II. It is interesting to remark that C Q values determined in low symmetry LiSn2共PO4兲3 and LiHf2共PO4兲3 phases are considerably higher than those of rhombohedral

FIG. 5. 7Li MAS NMR spectra of Ge, Sn, and Hf compounds at the same temperatures than those of Fig. 4. Spinning rate (v r ⬇2000 Hz) and X axis scale of spectra of Sn and Hf members are double than those used for Ge compound. Insets shows the central component at an expanded scale.

In the insets of Fig. 5 the central line of 7Li MAS spectra are displayed. In all cases, a single line was observed, whose position changes towards more negative values when going from low-symmetry to rhombohedral compounds 共Table II兲. The position of these lines is mainly given by the isotropic chemical shift, although some inﬂuence of second-order quadrupole interaction could be present. The shift associated with this effect has been estimated through the expression31

It has been reported previously33 that compounds with general formula AM 2(PO4) 3 , where A is an alkali element and M a tetravalent cation 共NZP structure兲, suffer an expansion of the a and c lattice parameters in rhombohedral phases when the M size increases. If the lattice parameters of LiGe2共PO4兲3 共Ref. 22兲 and LiTi2共PO4兲3 共Ref. 23兲, together with those of the high-temperature phases of LiSn2共PO4兲3 共Refs. 9, 12, and 20兲 and LiHf2共PO4兲3 共Refs. 2 and 13兲 are considered, this trend is conﬁrmed. This fact seems reasonable as P and M atoms contributes to built up the framework of these compounds.

On the other hand,

it was observed in the original NASICON system 关Na1⫹xZr2SixP3⫺xO12 (0⬍x⬍3)兴 共Refs. 16 and 17兲 that compositions with maximum cell volume (1.6⬍x⬍2.2) exhibited structural distortions at room temperature that lowered their symmetry. This observation seems to be conﬁrmed in LiM2共PO4兲3 compounds, where the presence of three components in 31P MAS spectra 共Fig. 3兲 is only detected in samples with largest tetravalent cations (M ⫽Sn,Hf). This fact is associated with the loss of the threefold and twofold axes of R3¯c space group, which produces the differentiation of three crystallographic phosphorus sites. In agreement with these observations, XRD patterns of low symmetry LiSn2共PO4兲3 and LiHf2共PO4兲3 phases were previously indexed on the basis of monoclinic12,20 and triclinic21 lattices, respectively. Heating the samples above the phase transition produces the elimination of the three components and the detection of a single line in 31P MAS NMR spectra. Therefore, structural distortions can be eliminated by increasing the sample temperature, which produces the recovering of the rhombohedral lattice, in the same way as distorted Na1⫹xZr2SixP3⫺xO12 (1.6⬍x⬍2.2). 34

reported

In order to analyze the inﬂuence of the tetravalent cation on the structure of LiM 2(PO4) 3 compounds, we will discuss ﬁrst distortions of the structural network and, then, positions occupied by lithium ions in each compound.

A. Inﬂuence of the tetravalent cation

on the structural distortions

The increase of the size of the tetravalent cations produces variations on the isotropic chemical shift (␴iso) and the anisotropy 共⌬␴兲 values of the 31P NMR components. In order to analyze these effects, ␴iso and 兩⌬␴兩 have been plotted versus the inverse of the effective ionic radius of the tetravalent cation (1/R) 关Fig. 6共a兲兴. Radii values have been taken from Shannon and Prewitt’s classical reference.35 As the three lines observed in 31P MAS spectra of low temperature LiSn2共PO4兲3 and LiHf2共PO4兲3 phases exhibit very close ␴iso and ⌬␴ values, the average values of these parameters have only been considered. Averaged ␴iso values of the lowsymmetry LiSn2共PO4兲3 and LiHf2共PO4兲3 phases are very close to those observed in rhombohedral phases of the same compounds. From analysis of ␴iso values of the different compounds, it is observed that isotropic chemical shift increases very signiﬁcantly when the size of M IV decreases 关Fig. 6共a兲兴. These ﬁndings are reasonable, as 1/R represents a measure of the polarizing strength of M IV cations. In general,

FIG. 6. Plot of 共a兲 the isotropic chemical shift, ␴iso 共⽧兲; the absolute value of anisotropy, 兩⌬␴兩 共䊏兲; and 共b兲 the principal values of the chemical shift tensor ␴11 共䉱兲, ␴22 共夝兲, ␴33 共䊉兲 versus the inverse of the effective ionic radius of the M IV cation. Open symbols stand for values corresponding to rhombohedral LiSn2共PO4兲3 and LiHf2共PO4兲3 phases. Lines are only a guide to show variations in the rhombohedral phases.

cations with larger 1/R pulls more effectively the electron density away from oxygen atoms, leaving phosphorus atoms more positively charged. This fact produces a lower antishielding effect on 31P NMR resonance, which explains the more negative ␴iso values experimentally observed.

In order to study tetrahedra distortions, ␩cs and ⌬␴values have been analyzed. In all cases, ␩cs values are important, indicating that the tetrahedra are not perfectly regular. As ␩cs represents deviation from the axial symmetry in the nucleus neighborhood, deduced values agree with the point symmetry of the tetrahedral site in the rhombohedral 共2兲 or low-symmetry 共1兲 phases. On the other hand, 兩⌬␴兩 values, which measure the anisotropy degree of the chemical shift interaction, are in the lower limit of 兩⌬␴兩 range obtained for PO4 tetrahedra in ortophosphates,36 indicating that tetrahedral distortions are not very important in these compounds. If 兩⌬␴兩 value is plotted as a function of 1/R 关Fig. 6共a兲兴, it is observed that in the rhombohedral phases it changes much less than ␴iso ; however, it increases considerably in the low symmetry phases with respect to the rhombohedral ones. From these facts, it can be concluded that tetrahedral geometry is not very affected by the size of M IV cation in the rhombohedral phases; however, it changes appreciably in the

STRUCTURAL CHANGES IN THE COMPOUNDS . . .

TABLE III. Experimental and calculated second moments corresponding to lithium occupying the M 1 and M 2 sites. Experimental values were deduced from the central transition of 7Li NMR static spectra. ) were calculated with expression 共5兲 of the text. Relative Li-Li and Li-P contributions (⌬␼ Distances Li-P and Li-Li were calculated by using a rhombohedral lattice in all the cases 共see the text兲.

1. Calculation of second moment  132)⌬␼2 133)

The existence of a single line in the low temperature 7Li MAS spectra of all the samples, shown in the insets of Fig. 5, indicates that lithium occupies only one type of site in each compound. If it is remembered that the broadening of the central line of 7Li static spectra in our samples is mainly due to dipolar interactions, the study of linewidth could be used to analyze the environment of lithium in these compounds. To that end, the experimental second moment (⌬␼ 2) of the central line in 7Li static spectra can be compared with those deduced from the Van Vleck’s expression for a rigid lattice in powder samples:37

The ﬁrst term accounts for dipolar interactions between like spins and the second one between unlike spins. ␥I and ␥S are the gyromagnetic ratios for the I and S spins and r jk is the distance between interacting spins.

The most important contributions to the second moment of 7Li NMR line in these compounds are the Li-Li and Li-P dipolar interactions, because of the low magnetic moments of the other elements in these compounds. In order to calculate the interatomic distances Li-Li and Li-P in the rhombohedral phases of LiGe2共PO4兲3 and LiTi2共PO4兲3, lattice parameters and relative atomic positions are taken from Refs. 23 and 22 respectively. In the low symmetry phases of LiSn2共PO4兲3 and LiHf2共PO4兲3, lattice parameters are available but, unfortunately, atomic coordinates have not been reported yet. Therefore, in order to estimate the interatomic distances in these compounds, the relative atomic coordinates for the rhombohedral LiTi2共PO4兲3 were used. This procedures assumes that interatomic distances in the lowsymmetry phases do not change very much with respect to rhombohedral ones, what it has been conﬁrmed in the Na1⫹xZr2SixP2⫺xO12 (x⫽1.6,2.0) compounds.34

Second moments estimated for lithium ions occupying the M 1 and M 2 sites, are shown in Table III. In this table, distances between lithium atoms and nearest lithium and phosphorus neighbors are given for each site. It can be seen that Li-P dipolar interaction is much important than Li-Li one, irrespective of the site lithium ions occupy. If the experimental ⌬␼ 2 value of each compound is compared with calculated ⌬␼ 2, a good agreement is obtained for lithium occupying the M 1 sites in LiGe2共PO4兲3 and LiTi2共PO4兲3. Deduced occupation of M 1 sites by lithium in rhombohedral phases supports neutron diffraction results previously reported.22,23 In the case of LiSn2共PO4兲3 and LiHf2共PO4兲3, experimental ⌬␼ 2 values are very similar to those calculated for lithium occupying M 2 sites.

The fact that lithium ions occupy the same type of site in the LiSn2共PO4兲3 and LiHf2共PO4兲3 is also supported by the very close ␴iso values deduced from 7Li MAS spectra of these compounds. These values are slightly but signiﬁcantly different rhombohedral LiGe2共PO4兲3 and LiTi2共PO4兲3, which are again very close to each other. All these observations suggest that, in absence of mobility, lithium ions occupy different sites in the rhombohedral 共M 1 sites兲 and in the monoclinic/triclinic 共M 2 sites兲 compounds.

from those

O1 and O2 sublattices are constituted by the oxygens forming the horizontal and vertical edges of PO4 tetrahedra, respectively.

Rhombohedral phases. In our calculation, the same lattice parameters and atomic coordinates than those used in the previous section have been taken. In this analysis, calculations carried out on the rhombohedral LiGe2共PO4兲3 and LiTi2共PO4兲3 will be presented ﬁrst. By explicit calculation of V i j at M 1 site of LiGe2共PO4兲3, it is obtained

From simple inspection of this expression, some interesting features can be deduced. The principal contribution to the EFG at M 1 site is due to the O2 and Ge sublattices and contribution of the other lithium ions is negligible. Moreover, as all matrices are almost diagonal, the resulting EFG tensor is diagonal. Therefore, the c direction of the unit cell is the Z axis of the principal axis system 共PAS兲 associated with the quadrupole interaction in M 1 sites. It is also found that, whichever effective charge of each atom is chosen, ␩Q is equal to zero. However the V zz principal component of the EFG tensor depends on the effective charges of the atoms through the expression

If the EFG tensor at M 1 sites of LiTi2共PO4兲3 is now calculated, similar results are obtained. Experimental ␩Q values

from 7Li NMR spectra

In this case, Vញ is not diagonal. From this fact, diagonalization of Vញ tensor is a previous step in the evaluation of the principal components for each charge set. If values of quadrupole parameters associated to M 2 sites are calculated, by using the same hypothesis as in the previous cases, it is found that the local symmetry at M 2 site is not axial (␩Q⫽0) and that the magnitude of the quadrupole interaction (C Q) is much higher than that at M 1 site. The reasonably good agreement obtained between calculated and experimental values suggests that lithium ions occupy preferentially M 2 sites in the low temperature LiHf2共PO4兲3 and LiSn2共PO4兲3 phases, supporting again conclusions obtained from the ⌬␼ 2 analysis. However, a structural reﬁnement of these phases 共not available at present兲 would be interesting to reproduce more accurately experimental C Q and ␩Q values of low temperature LiHf2共PO4兲3 and LiSn2共PO4兲3 phases, and to explain the observed differences in both compounds.


The increase of the tetravalent cation M IV size in the family LiM 2共PO4兲3 共M IV⫽Ge, Ti, Sn, and Hf兲 produces an expansion of the unit cell that is responsible for the structural distortions of the NASICON framework, lowering the ideal R3¯c symmetry in the M IV⫽Sn and Hf members. These structural distortions produce the differentiation of three nonequivalent crystallographically phosphorus sites, detected in 31P MAS NMR spectra. By heating the low-symmetry phases, the onset of a phase transition produces the recovering of the usual rhombohedral lattice of NASICON compounds.

From analysis of CSA interactions deduced from 31P NMR signal, it has been shown that isotropic chemical shift values depend strongly on the polarizing strength of the tetravalent cation. Moreover, it has been observed that PO4 tetrahedra distortions are much higher in the low symmetry phases than in the rhombohedral ones. However, the distortions of the tetrahedral geometry in the rhombohedral phases are not much affected by the cation size.

Finally, from analysis of 7Li NMR spectra it has been shown that, in absence of ionic mobility, lithium occupies different structural positions in the analyzed compounds. LiGe2共PO4兲3 and sites M 1 LiTi2共PO4兲3, low temperature LiSn2共PO4兲3 共monoclinic兲 and LiHf2共PO4兲3 共triclinic兲 phases.


