The triclinic nature of the low-temperature modiﬁcation of LiSn2(PO4)3, heretofore considered as monoclinic, has been proved by detailed indexing of its X-ray diﬀraction powder pattern. The triclinic character of most low-temperature 2 (PO4)3 is tentatively polymorphs of NASICON-type LiMeIV hypothesized, from this evidence and additional indications.   1997 Academic Press

The compound LiSn(PO) is dimorphic:

it has a high-temperature form (1—3), isostructural with the rhombohedral, R3 c, NASICON aristotype (4—6), and a lowtemperature, low-symmetry modiﬁcation, stable in pure form at room temperature. The two phases coexist in the ranges 100—150°C and 60—10°C, and they transform into each other through a ﬁrst-order phase transition showing a hysteresis cycle in temperature (3).

The low-temperature phase was characterized as rhombohedral, diﬀerent from the NASICON type, but several lines in the powder X-ray diﬀraction pattern, among them some prominent ones, were left unindexed (2). The phase was subsequently identiﬁed as monoclinic, independently by two research groups (7—8), on the basis of very similar monoclinic C-cells, in terms of which the whole powder pattern could be accounted for. The lattice parameters were (7) a"14.666(8), b"8.430(3), c"8.911(5) A> , ♢"123.15(3)°, and (8) a"14.6656(7), b"8.4052(4), c"8.8933(4) A> , ♢" 122.986(4)°. These sets of parameters only diﬀer from one another by about 0.2%, once they are corrected for diﬀerences in the assumed values for the wavelength, and are almost identical when their speciﬁed errors are taken into account. Systematic absences (8), hkl, h#k"2n; h0l, l"2n, indicated space groups Cc and C2/c, both subgroups of, R3 c, as possible; space group Cc was chosen as the most likely on the basis of NMR evidence, namely the presence of three P equally intense lines and two equal Sn lines,

From the above, we felt compelled to reexamine lowtemperature LiSn(PO) under conditions of enhanced resolution. To this end, we measured a new diﬀractometer trace for 12°42♫470° in a Philips X’pert diﬀractometer, ﬁtted with a Ge(111) incident beam monochromator of the  radiation (♮" Johansson symmetric type, using CuK♡ 1.5405981 A> ). Previous data indicated that strain-free, wellcrystallized materials could give around 0.06° for FWHM, using moderate values of the equatorial divergence. The data were therefore taken with a 0.5° divergence slit, an antiscatter slit of 1°, a receiving slit of 0.01°, and a set of Soller slits with an axial divergence of +1.1° in the diffracted beam path. The usual ♫/2♫ mode was used, and intensity was counted at steps of 0.02° for 10 s. The ﬂat sample was spun around its normal at about 2 Hz. A second trace was obtained under the same conditions and reduced 2♫ domain, with a small amount of NIST Si standard (a" 5.430940 A> for the wavelength quoted above) intermixed with the sample material for calibration purposes. Peak positions were determined by hand, with the help of the

FIG. 1. Room temperature X-ray diﬀraction powder pattern of LiSn(PO). The insets, each covering an angular domain of 1° in 2♫, correspond to splittings from parent reﬂections 110, 024, 300, 220; they are drawn with an arbitrary common intensity scale, but the ﬁrst two have been shrunk by about 20% in intensity, for clarity.

diﬀractometer standard software. The trace obtained is in Fig. 1.

The indexing was carried out by trial and error, starting from the group of three peaks at 2♫ around 29°, deriving from 024, which were assigned Miller indices 400, 2 22, and 222 ; the ﬁrst orders of these were consequently indexed. Next, we looked for splitting of 110 at around 2♫+21°, as this reﬂection is also overlap-free and should give rise to 020, 3 11, 311 . The reﬂection was clearly split into three peaks (see inset in Fig. 1). At this point we had six independent equations to determine the six independent lattice parameters in the triclinic system. The remaining reﬂections were added in small groups, performing least squares calculations to constantly reﬁne the initial parameters. For each family of reﬂections coming from each measurable reﬂection in the pattern of the rhombohedral parent phase, care was exercised that all members could be accounted for, either as clearly resolved peaks (see two more instances of resolved pairs in the insets of Fig. 1), or if unresolved, by assigning the same observed value to several predicted reﬂections which were expected to be of about equal intensity. Whenever the last case occurred, the unit weight assigned in all reﬁnements to uniquely resolved reﬂections was split among the various reﬂections sharing the same observed value. A number of weak observations that could not be indexed under the above requisites were satisfactorily assigned once the reﬂections derived from R3 c space group extinctions were allowed in the indexing; all of them are weak and are duly marked in Table 1, where the indexed pattern is shown.

where the ﬁrst value quoted for each index has been calculated by reckoning only those reﬂections derived from

X-Ray Powder Diﬀraction Pattern for Triclinic Low Temperature LiSn2(PO4)3


Note. Miller indices with subscript C refer to the C-centered cell; those with subscript N refer to the Niggli cell. ? Shoulder of previous reﬂection. @ Barely resolved doublet. A Shoulder of following reﬂection. B Complex shoulder of following reﬂection. C Parent reﬂection in R3 c is a space group extinction.

nonforbidden reﬂections in the parent R3 c structure; the second value (in parentheses) has been calculated for a general triclinic lattice. The expression in parentheses following each M value contains the average error in sin♫ and the expected number of reﬂections in the appropriate domain for each of the two situations referred to above.

We have

therefore proved that

room-temperature LiSn(PO) is indeed triclinic, although the deviation from C-lattice monoclinic is quite small. Moreover, from our NMR observations (8), mentioned above, we can conclude that the space group must be C1 (P1 if referred to a conventional cell), since the number of crystallographically independent P and Sn atoms coincides with the number of NMR lines observed; there would be twice as many lines if the group were C1. We have also a preliminary qualiﬁcation of low-temperature LiHf(PO) as also triclinic (9), and our old data on room temperature LiZr(PO) show also, when looked at with the beneﬁt of hindsight, the telltale splitting of 024, albeit not as clearly as that in the pattern of low-temperature LiHf(PO). It may well be that all low-temperature forms in NASICON-type LiMe'4  (PO) orthophosphates are triclinic rather than monoclinic, as they have customarily been considered. We cannot advance anything of the sort for Na compounds; there are several well-reﬁned structures (14—17) them monoclinic, so the triclinic distortion we observe could be a characteristic trait of Li compounds exclusively.

for these, all of

