
Although Li-ion batteries have received tremendous success in electronic and portable devices, the high price of lithium due to its limited and unequally distributed resources (Figure 1A) may hinder its further application in novel large-scale electrochemical energy storages systems (EESs) (Choi and Aurbach, 2016; Hwang et al., 2017; Vaalma et al., 2018). The rapid development of renewable energy sources such as wind energy, solar energy, and tide energy requires more cost-eﬃcient and highly reliable large-scale EESs. SIBs have been widely considered as promising candidates for next-generation low-cost energy storage devices due to the almost unlimited resources of sodium (Li et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2019b,c). Due to the large atomic radius of Na (0.97 Å for Na+ and only 0.68 Å for Li+), however, hurdles that hinder the further applications of SIBs are mainly found in their sluggish sodium diﬀusion kinetics and large volume expansion, which are both critical parameters for revolutionary power density performance that can meet the real needs of power grids and large-scale EESs (Dai et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2019a). Therefore, it is important to explore novel cathode materials for SIBs with improved Na kinetics. From the solid-state diﬀusion perspective, the dimensions of diﬀusion pathways are the extremely important factors determining the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of Na+ as well as the diﬀusion energy barriers. For facile and rapid ionic transportation, the cathode materials that possess three-dimensional (3D) Na+ migration pathways accompanied by low diﬀusion energy barriers are promising for building the high-power density SIBs (You et al., 2016; Chen S. et al., 2017). To this end, two emerging groups of Prussian blue analogs (PBAs) and sodium superionic conductor (NASICON)-type materials are recently

Both sodium and potassium possess suﬃciently high redox potentials that an appropriate energy density can be secured. The role of water in ionic conductivity is still an open question for all researchers. A paddlewheel mechanism was previously proposed, in which the alkali metal ions move through channels and vacancies (Wessells et al., 2011). Coordinated water is beneﬁcial to facilitate ion migration, while zeolitic water has a negative inﬂuence, obstructing improvement of ionic conductivity. Both computational and experimental insights into the eﬀects of the presence of water in PBAs are urgently needed.

One promising approach is to synthesize and optimize the Na-rich phase, Prussian white. When M2 is Mn and M1 is Fe in NaxM2[M1(CN)6]y·nH2O (0 ≤ x ≤ 2, 0 ≤ y ≤ 1), a higher content of Na can be achieved. The valence of Fe is +2, however, and it is vulnerable to being oxidized to +3, so an inert atmosphere is required during both fabrication and centrifugal separation processes. By facile sodium citrate added precipitation method, Na-rich monoclinic phase NaxMnFe(CN)6 was successfully synthesized by Shen et al. (2018). Uniform microsize cuboid particles were obtained, and all the involved elements were uniformly distributed (Figures 2A–C). The high reversible capacity of 133.1 mAh g−1 was obtained, and satisfactory rate performance was achieved from 0.1 C to 10 C (1 C = 150 mA g−1), as shown in Figures 2D,E. The uniform cuboid particle morphology provides extra convenience for fast ion diﬀusion apart from the original 3D pathways. In recent years, rhombohedral PBAs have been receiving more and more attention, since the concentration of coordinated water can be reduced due to the rhombohedral lattice symmetry, which is particularly favorable for the Na-rich phases. A zero-strain nickel hexacyanoferrate (NiHCF) was introduced by Ji et al. (2016) using a simple coprecipitation method. It delivered a high operation voltage, good cycling performance, and superior C-rate capability. They found that the unexpected high operation voltage was mainly attributable to the asymmetric residence of Na+ ions along with the low charge density around Fe2+. Diﬀerent charge density analyses indicated that the Na+ tend to stay ions exactly in the center of (Figure 2F), while for rhombohedral-structured NiHCF (r-NiHCF), the Na+ ions prefer to asymmetrically stay at N-coordinated corners (Figure 2G). Also the Na-N distance in r-NiHCF is shorter than that in c-NiHCF. Dramatic electron polarization round N atoms occurs, leading to a charge redistribution between adjacent Ni2+ and Fe2+ ions. Therefore, the operation voltage of r-NiHCF is slightly higher than that of c-NiHCF. This phenomenon also facilitates fast sodium diﬀusion with excellent C-rate performances. In addition, the open-channel 3D diﬀusion pathways can guarantee satisfactory low-temperature performance. You et al. synthesized the Na2FeFe(CN)6 materials with carbon nanotubes (CNT) to achieve potential low-temperature properties (You et al., 2016). The well-decorated CNT network provides excellent electrical contact with the current collector. In addition, they performed interstitial channels a DFT study and found that the evenly distributed enriched 24d sites can provide uniform 3D Na+ diﬀusion and feasible diﬀusion pathways, as shown in Figures 2H,I. There, PBAs are ideal candidates for low-temperature SIBs (Song et al., 2015; Peng et al., 2018). Further exploration should be focused on the inherent relationship between the crystal structure and the vacancies and water, and how these factors inﬂuence the sodium diﬀusion under various circumstances also needs to be urgently understood in detail.

The polyanionic-type cathode materials are one of the important branches among all the kinds of available electrodes for SIBs. Their merits are obvious and distinctive, such as outstanding cycling stability, high safety, and suitable operating voltages (Lu et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2020). Most of the polyanionic compounds consist of the corneror edge-sharing MO6 (M = transition metal) octahedra with connected XO4 (X = P, S, Si, etc.) tetrahedra. This unique structure can provide suﬃcient stability and ionicity around the MO6 octahedra, and, in turn, the ionic conductivity can be sustained within its 3D framework (Guo et al., 2017). Their sturdy framework can also render only small or even tiny volume shrinkage during cycling, since the topotactic reaction mechanism is dominant. Most of the polyanionic compounds are thermally stable due to their non-ﬂammable nature (Ni et al., 2017). Also, polyanionic compounds normally possess high initial cycle Coulombic eﬃciency (ICE), which is an important parameter when making full cells. Nevertheless, most of the polyanionic compounds suﬀer from inherent low electronic conductivity, and therefore a well-decorated carbon coating and network are essential for their C-rate performance. According to the previous report, the majority of polyanionic composites possess oneor two-dimensional (1D or 2D) sodium diﬀusion pathways (Kim et al., 2013, 2015; Chen M. et al., 2017; Panigrahi et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018; Fang et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2019). The low-dimensional sodium diﬀusion pathways cannot guarantee satisfactory C-rate capabilities, especially in low temperature environments. Therefore, it is necessary to highlight those polyanionic compounds that possess unique 3D sodium diﬀusion pathways that are conducive toward real applications of SIBs and relevant energy storage devices. One class of these polyanionic composites comprises the sodium superionic conductor (NASICON)-type materials. Due to their high ionic conductivities, the NASICON-type materials also have been investigated as solid-state electrolytes (Li et al., 2018; Lu et al., 2018). Numerous papers have reported various NASICON-type materials, including both cathodes and anodes for SIB devices (Bui et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2017; Gao et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2018; Wang E. et al., 2018). Recently, we have introduced a new Fe-based polyanionic compound, Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7), which can be classiﬁed as a new NASICON-type material (Chen et al., 2019a). With the help of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) as the complexing agent in a sol-gel approach, the

The ultimate goal for advanced sodium ion battery devices has never changed, that they should be thoroughly competitivefor PBAs, as mentioned above, with the lithium ion battery in energy density, power density, and lower overall manufacturing cost (Tang et al., 2017, 2018; Zhang et al., 2017, 2019; Guo et al., 2020). For fullcell sodium ion battery devices, the emphasis always falls on the cathode parts, since they possess key parameters such as high enough operation voltages, large theoretical capacity, and most of all, acceptable high-rate capability. Materials with 3D sodium diﬀusion pathways are a promising branch among all the reported ones, and their distinctive physical and chemical properties deserve more integrated investigations and a deeper and more comprehensive understanding. Both the PBAs and the polyanionic compounds with 3D sodium diﬀusion pathways have shown outstanding fast kinetics, leading to superior C-rate performance at various current densities. Further investigations are suggested to be focused on the improvements of their intrinsic kinetic properties as well as mass-production issues. Speciﬁcally, the structurekinetics-performance relationship is subject to the inﬂuence of each crystallographic component: binary carbonand nitrogencoordinated transition metal ions, the density distribution of electronic states at each sodium site, and the vacancies created by either zeolitic water or coordinated water. When dealing with the speciﬁc concerns about the actual Na+ diﬀusion channels and ionic conductivity, the bond length between carbon and carbon-coordinated transition metal elements is one of the key parameters for channel size, which, in turn, aﬀects the ionic conductivity. The content of vacancies also has a strong inﬂuence on the Na+ diﬀusion channels and ionic conductivity. The appropriate amount of vacancies will provide extra channels for Na+ diﬀusion without cracking the local crystal structure. Nevertheless, how these parameters quantitatively inﬂuence the ionic conductivity as well as the crystal stability is still poorly understood. Another important issue that should not be neglected is the electronic conductivity. Up until now, only a few papers have focused on improving electronic conductivity directly by using the generalized gradient approximation with the Hubbard correction (GGA + U) method. Experimentally speaking, the electronic conductivity is strongly correlated with all the factors mentioned above and needs to be determined in an equational relationship. In the case of polyanionic compounds, the electronic conductivity is the most troublesome problem, and a well-designed carbon coating and carbon network are necessary even when the materials have high ionic conductivities. Therefore, how to maintain the delicate carbon network in a large-scale manufacturing procedure is a critical issue for the real application of polyanionic composites. Unlike the PBAs, only some of the reported materials possess 3D sodium diﬀusion pathways, although almost all the polyanionic compounds have open 3D frameworks. Compared to the PBAs, the activation energy barriers of these polyanionic compounds are slightly higher. Heteroatom doping can be considered as an eﬀective approach to alter the pristine electron state density distributions around both MO6 octahedra and XO4 tetrahedra, which, in turn, may lower the charge barriers around each sodium site. The transition metal migration is also poorly understood to date [such as for Na4M3(PO4)2(P2O7) (M = Fe, Mn, etc.)], and how the phenomenon aﬀects the related ion diﬀusion pathways and ionic conductivity should be determined in the future. It is also important to continuously discover more novel polyanionic cathode materials with 3D sodium diﬀusion pathways that have higher capacity and operation voltages. Besides, another important research direction is that how to combine both the PBAs and polyanions with the solid-state electrolyte properly so that their unique 3D diﬀusion properties can be more signiﬁcantly magniﬁed.