Cathodes with high cycling stability and rate capability are required for ambient temperature sodium ion  batteries in renewable energy storage application. Na 3V2(PO4)3 is an attractive cathode material with excellent electrochemical stability and fast ion diffusion coefficient within the 3D NASICON structure. Nevertheless, the practical  application  of  Na3V2(PO4)3  is  seriously  hindered  by  its  intrinsically  poor  electronic  conductivity.  Herein,  solvent  evaporation method is presented to obtain the nitrogen-doped carbon coated Na3V2(PO4)3 cathode material, delivering  enhanced  electrochemical  performances.  N-Doped  carbon  layer  coating  serves  as  a highly  conducting pathway,  and  creates numerous extrinsic defects and active sites, which can facilitate the storage and diffusion of Na +. Moreover,  the N-doped  carbon  layer  can provide  a  stable  framework  to  accommodate the  agglomeration of  the  electrode upon  electrode  cycling.  N-Doped  carbon  coated  Na3V2(PO4)3(NC-NVP)  exhibits  excellent  long  cycling  life  and  superior  rate performances than bare Na3V2(PO4)3 without carbon coating. NC-NVP delivers a stable capacity of 95.9 mA·h/g  after  500  cycles  at 1  C  rate,  which  corresponds  to high  capacity  retention(94.6%)  with  respect to  the initial  capacity(101.4 mA·h/g). Over 91.3% of the initial capacity is retained after 500 cycles at 5 C, and the capacity can reach 85 mA·h/g at 30 C rate.


Renewable energies, such as wind and solar are produced intermittently, which makes the power supply of the grid unstable.  Large-scale  energy  storage  systems(ESSs)  are  particularly important  for  the  scaled-up  utilization  of  renewable  energy  technologies[1―6].  Battery  systems  are  considered  to have  high  value opportunities when applied to energy storage systems  as  long  as  low  cost  is  available[7―11].  Consequently,  sodium  ion  batteries(SIBs) have been widely studied[12―20], considering the  large  abundance  of  the  applied  Na  materials  and  the  similar rocking-chair  procedure  to  lithium-ion  batteries(LIBs). 

However, one crucial obstacle limiting the commercialization  of  Na3V2(PO4)3  is  its  poor  intrinsic  electronic  conductivity[34,35],  which  suppresses  its  practical  application  in  SIBs.  Therefore,  great  efforts  have  been  attempted  to  improve  the electrochemical performances. The construction of NVP/carbon composites  has  been  demonstrated  as  an  effective  strategy  to improve  the  electronic  conductivity  and  electrochemical  performance[29].  A  Na3V2(PO4)3  sample  coated  uniformly  with  a  layer  of  6  nm  carbon  has  been  successfully  synthesized  by  a  one-step  solid  state  reaction[36]. Moreover, nitrogen-doped  carbon  has  been  affirmed  effective  as  the  solution  for  poor  electronically  conductive  electrode  materials[37,38].  For  example, Shan  et  al.[39]  reported  a  free-standing  MoS2-graphene      composite  films  consisting  of  N-doped  graphene  and  ultrathin  honeycomb-like  MoS2  exhibiting  great  rate  capability  and  excellent  cycling  performance  in  lithium-ion  batteries.  Both  exspectra  were  recorded  on  an  FTIR  spectrophotometer(Jasco,  FT/IR-4100, Japan) in the frequency range of 500―2000 cm‒1  with  KBr  pellet.  X-Ray  photoelectron  spectra(XPS)  were  ob-tained  on  an  ESCALAB  250Xi  spectrometer  with  Mg  Kα  raperiment and theory demonstrated that the nitrogen-doped cardiation. Raman spectra were detected using a Renishaw INVIA bon  coating  can  significantly  improve  the  electrode  electronic Raman  microscope  with  a  laser  wavelength  of  514  nm.  The conductivity and electrode/electrolyte interface stability,  which are  extremely  conducive  the  electrochemical  performance[40,41].  Although  continuous  progresses  have  been  made  in  recent  years,  developing  a  facile  and  simple  synthesis  procedure for producing high-rate and long-life Na3V2(PO4)3 with  well-defined architectures is challenging. this carbon-coated  Na3V2(PO4)3(NC-NVP)  electrode  material  was  prepared  by  employing  glucosamine  as  the  nitrogen  and  carbon  source  through  solvent  evaporation  method.  Na3V2(PO4)3  was  coated  by a homogeneous carbon layer with nitrogen doping to form a composite,  in  which  the  carbon  nanosheets  serve  as  a  highly conducting pathway facilitating electron and ion transport, also a buffer layer to accommodate volume changes during the electrochemical  cycling;  thus,  improving  stability  and  reversibility  of the Na3V2(PO4)3 cathode.   


Ammonium  metavanadate(NH4VO3),  sodium  dihydrogen  acid, oxalic phosphate N,N-dimethylformamide(DMF),  glucosamine  hydrochloride  and  glucose(C6H12O6)  were  obtained  from  Sinopharm  Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Deionized water(Millopore) with a resistivity of 18 MΩ·cm was employed throughout the experiments. 


All  the  reagents  used  in  the  experiments  were  obtained from  commercial  sources  as  guaranteed-grade  reagents  and used  without  further  puriﬁcation.  A  molar  ratio(2:3:2:0.5)  of  ammonium  metavanadate(NH4VO3),  sodium  dihydrogen  phosphate  dihydrate(NaH2PO4·2H2O),  oxalic  acid  and  glucosamine  was  dissolved  in  water/DMF  to  obtain  a homogeneous solution.  Then,  the  solutions  were  mixed  under  stirring  and heating  at  75  °C  until  the  full  evaporation  of  water  and  DMF, leaving a fluffy powder. Then the dried powder was calcined in a  tube  furnace  at  350  °C  for  3  h,  then  annealed  at  800  °C  for    8 h under an Ar/H2 atmosphere to achieve the NC-NVP material.  When  employing  glucose  instead  of  glucosamine,  the  product  prepared  was  named  as  C-NVP.  Additionally,  the  pure  Na3V2(PO4)3  without  carbon  coating(donated  as  NVP)  was  prepared  through  the  same  experimental  steps  of  NC-NVP composites without adding of glucosamine. 

The samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction,  field-emission scanning  electron  microscopy(FESEM,  JSM-7001F)  with  an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer(EDS), transmission electron  microscopy(TEM,  JEM-200CX)  and  high-resolution transmission electron microscopy(HRTEM, JEOL-2100). FTIR carbon  content  was  determined  by  thermogravimetric  analysis(TGA)  on  an  STA2500  system  under  N2  atmosphere  with  a  temperature ramp of 10 °C/min. The direct current sheet resistance  measurements  of  samples  were  carried  out  with  the four-probe method using an SZT-2C(TongChuang, China). 


The working electrodes were consist of 70.0%(mass  fraction)  of  active  material,  15.0%(mass  fraction)  of  acetylene black(conductivity  agent),  and  15.0%(mass  fraction)  of  polyvinylidene difluoride(PVDF, binder). Metallic sodium was used as  the  reference  electrode.  All  cell  related  procedures  were  operated in an Ar-filled glove box. The electrolyte was NaClO4  in  propylene  carbonate  and  fluoroethylene  carbonate  additive(volume ratio of 95:5). Electrochemical measurements were performed  on  a  LAND-CT2001C  test  system.  Cyclic  voltammograms  were  conducted  on  a  Multi  Autolab  M204  instruments.


For investigating  the  crystal  structure  and phase  purity  of NVP, C-NVP and NC-NVP, X-ray diffraction(XRD) was investigated. All three samples exhibit high crystallinity. In Fig.1(A), the  XRD  pattern  of  the  resulting  samples  exhibits  the  same  diffraction  peaks,  which  can  be  well  indexed  to  R3 c  space  group  and  in  good  agreement  with  NASICON-type(JCPDS  Card No. 53-0018)[42,43]. Additionally, no peaks originated from  carbon  were  found  in  C-NVP  and  NC-NVP  samples,  suggesting  that  both  carbon  decomposed  from  glucose  and  the N-doped  carbon  derived  from  glucosamine  are  amorphous. 

 


Moreover,  the  corresponding  charge/discharge  profiles  of NVP  particles.  Furthermore,  to  investigate  the  impact  of C-NVP  and  NC-NVP  composite  electrodes  from  1  C  to  30  C N-doped  carbon  coating,  the  electrochemical  measurement are shown in Fig.6(C) and (D), respectively. It is worth noting between the samples were conducted in depth. 


Nevertheless,  at  the highest  C-rates,  NVP  exhibits  a much  more  severe  increase  of the voltage hysteresis than C-NVP and NC-NVP. The superior electrochemical  performance  of  this  N-doped  carbon  coated  Na3V2(PO4)3  cathode  material  can  be  attributed  to  the  follo wing  reasons:  the  electronic  conductivity  is  improved  by  the 

N-doped  carbon  layer,  and  the  carbon  layer  creates  numerous  defects  and  active  sites,  which  are  favorable  to  ultrafast  Na+  diffusion and electron transport. 


More importantly, our NC-NVP electrode can achieve a long cycling life for 2000 cycles under an ultrahigh rate of 50 C with a capacity retention over 65.7%[Fig.8(C)]. The Coulombic efficiency  of  the  NC-NVP  cathode  maintains  almost  100%  during cycling, hinting that the Na+ insertion/extraction process  is highly reversible. 

To further probe the relationship between electrochemical  performance  and  electrode  kinetics  for  both  Na3V2(PO4)3  cathodes,  impedance  Nyquist  plots  were  conducted  in  the  frequency  range  of  0.01―105  Hz  on  fresh  cells[Fig.9(A)].  All  curves are composed of a semicircle in the high frequency and a  slanted  line  in  the  low  frequency,  indicating  that  charge transfer and diffusion of sodium ions effect the electrochemical process.  To  further  dissect  the  content  of  impedance  spectra, the  EIS  spectra  are  fitted  with  the  equivalent  circuit  model,  as  displayed  in  the  inset  of  Fig.9(A).  Rs  is  the  electrolyte  resistance,  and  CPE  represents  the  double  layer  capacitance  and  capacity  of  the  surface  layer.  Rct  is  the  charge  transfer  resistance.  Warburg  element(Wo)  is  believed  to  be  related  to  the  diffusion behavior at low frequencies. The simulated data from the equivalent circuitmodel well fit the impedance data for NVP, C-NVP  and  NC-NVP  samples.  The  EIS  parameters  of  three electrodes obtained from the fitting are listed in Table 2. As we  can  see  in  Table  2,  Rcts, of  C-NVP(258.4  Ω)  and  NVP(4936.1  Ω) are much higher than that of NC-NVP electrode(1472.3 Ω), which  confirms  that  the  N-doped  carbon  coating  could  effectively  increase  the  electron  conductivity  of  Na3V2(PO4)3   

To  further  investigate  the  electrochemical  intercalation behavior of Na ion, cyclic voltammetry(CV) was conducted in the potential range of 2.0―3.9 V with scanning rates of 0.1, 0.3, 0.5  and  0.9  mV/s[Fig.10(A)],  oxidation  peaks  and  corresponding reduction peaks can be obtained, of which oxidation peaks located at 3.45, 3.50, 3.56 and 3.59 V and corresponding reduc-tion peaks are 3.31, 3.29, 3.26 and 3.24 V at various scanning rates,  respectively.  The  intense  oxidation  and  reduction  peaks present  the  normal  reversibility  of  this  phase  transforming  between  Na3V2(PO4)3/NaV2(PO4)3,  which  matches  well  with  the  initial charge/discharge profiles. As the scan rates increase, the oxidation  peak  shifts  to  a  higher  potential  and  the  reduction peak decreases to lower potential, indicating that larger polari-zation  happens  at  higher  scanning  rates.  Simultaneously,  the intensities of oxidation and reduction peaks increase along with the  increasing  scan  rates.  Fig.10(A)  shows  the  corresponding  relationship between the peak current(Ip) and the square root of  the  scanning  rate(v1/2).  It  is  obvious  that  the  Ip  and  v1/2  values  meet  with  a  linear  relationship,  predicting  that  the  ions  diffu-sion controls electrode reaction. The apparent  diffusion coefficients  of  Na+  are  calculated  according  to  the  classic  Randles-Sevcik equation[54]: of which Ip is the peak current, n stands for the number of electrons  involved  in  the  half-reaction  for  the  redox  couple,  A means the contact area between the electrolyte and electrode, D  denotes  the  Na+  ion  diffusion  coefficient,  c  comes  from  the  concentration of Na+, and v is the voltage scanning rate. Based on  Eq.(3),  from  the  slope  of  the  lines  calculated,  the  diffusion  coefficient  Danodic(positive)(3.23×10−13  cm2/s),  and  the  diffusion  coefficient  Dcathodic(negative)(1.34×10−13  cm2/s)  were  determined. The relative value is in line with the sodium ion coef-ficient  obtained  from  EIS  measurement.  Additionally,  both methods  show  the  same  direction  that  the  NC-NVP  electrode has an enhanced diffusion coefficient. 