
All-solid-state  battery  is  potentially  for  the  next  generation  lithium  ion  battery.  In  all-solid-state battery, the solid electrolyte plays the most important role. However, the nanoscale electrochemical properties of the solid electrolyte are not well understood yet. In this study, by  using  Scanning  Probe  Microscopy  (SPM)  based  techniques,  including  Atomic  Force Microscopy  (AFM)  and  Electrochemical  Strain  Microscopy  (ESM),  the  electrochemical deformation  within  grains  and  grain  boundaries  in  the  NASICON-structured  (sodium  (Na) Super  Ionic  CONductor)  Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3  (LAGP)  solid  electrolyte  is  studied  at  the nanoscale first time. The different electrochemical responses at grains and grain boundaries of the LAGP solid electrolyte are observed clearly due to different lithium ion conductivities insides the grains and along the grain boundaries. These results provide the new insights on the nanoscale electrochemical mechanisms and development of the solid electrolyte materials. 

In current information-rich society, energy storage devices such as batteries are essential components.  Large-scale  batteries  are  usually  used  for  stationary  applications  and  the technologies  have  been  maturely  developed.[1]  However,  portable  energy  storage technologies have still developing in order to meet the increasing demand of miniature sized electronic devices such as handphone, laptops, digital cameras, and even for electric vehicles in terms of power and energy density. Among all portable energy storage devices, lithium ion batteries (LIBs) are currently used as the most common power source, due to relatively high energy density and good cyclability.

Current LIBs are mainly based on liquid electrolytes due to their high ionic conductivity. 

The liquid electrolytes are solutions of organic solvents, such as EC (ethyl carbonate), DMC (dimethyl carbonate) and DEC (diethyl carbonate) as well as their mixtures with a Li salt like LiPF6. These organic solvents are flammable and explosive, which are the major concerns on the safety  issue in the development of  LIBs. Moreover, the  electrochemical window of the organic-based liquid electrolytes is usually in the range of 1 V to 4.5 V, hence some cathode materials with high operation voltage cannot be used. This restricts the improvement of the energy density of LIBs. The other type of liquid electrolytes is ionic liquids, which are more thermally  and  electrochemically  stable.  However,  the  performance  of  the  ionic  liquids  is affected  significantly  by  the  temperature  due  to  high  sensitivity  of  the  viscosity  to  the temperature.[3,  4]  To  avoid  these  disadvantages  of  the  liquid  electrolytes,  solid  electrolytes, especially non-flammable inorganic ceramic  electrolytes, have been developed and become good  candidates  for the  next generation  LIBs. The solid electrolytes possess not only wide electrochemical window but also good thermal stability, which can prevent the risk of the fire hazards and explosions.[5] However, compared to liquid electrolytes, the main disadvantage of  the  solid  electrolyte  is  the  relatively  low  ionic  conductivity  (~10-4  S/cm)  at  room temperature,  comparing  with  the  high  ionic  conductivity  of  the  currently  used  liquid electrolytes.[6]  Moreover,  the  resistance  at  the  interfaces  between  solid electrolyte and electrodes (solid/solid interface) is usually higher than that between the liquid electrolyte  and  electrodes  (liquid/solid  interface),  and  this  can  lead  to  poor  performance  of LIBs with the solid electrolytes.

Currently, four types of inorganic solid electrolytes have been intensively investigated, including: 1) superionic conducting sulfides, 2) perovskite-type oxides, 3) garnet-type oxides, and 4) NASICON-type (sodium (Na) Super Ionic CONductor) glass ceramics. Among all of these  four  types  of  solid  electrolytes,  NASICON-type  materials  show  relatively  high  ionic conductivity at room temperature.[9, 10] Li1+xAlxGe2-x(PO4)3(LAGP), as one of the NASICON-type  ceramics, has been expected to be the solid electrolyte for the next generation LIBs due to its high ionic conductivity and wide electrochemical window as well as the high thermal stability.[11, 12] Generally-speaking, the ionic conduction in ceramic material is composed of two components, one is the conduction inside the grain (grain conductivity, σg), and the other is  the  conduction  at  the  grain  boundary  (grain  boundary  conductivity,  σgb).[18,19]  The  total conductivity  which  determines  the  performance  of  the  solid  electrolyte  can  be  affected  by both  grain  and  grain  boundary  conductivities.  Comparing  with  the  grain  conductivity,  the grain boundary conductivity of the LAGP has been considered to two or three orders lower.[12] 


The  LAGP  with  glass-ceramic  structure  has  been  studied  by  several  traditional characterization  techniques,  such  as  XRD  (X-ray  diffraction),  NMR  (Nuclear  Magnetic Resonance),  SEM  (Scanning  Electron  Microscope)  and  EIS  (Electrochemical  Impedance spectroscopy).  Generally-speaking,  XRD,  NMR  and  SEM  can  provide  the  structure information  of  the  material,  while  EIS  measures  the  electric  properties  of  the  material.[13] 

However, all of these techniques cannot be used to investigate the nanoscale properties of the solid electrolyte. In order to study the local properties of the solid electrolytes, especially, the differences  between  the  grains  and  grain  boundaries  conductivities  or  electrochemical performance, SPM (Scanning Probe Microscope)-based technique can be applied.   

Electrochemical  Strain  Spectroscopy  (ESM)  is  one  of  the  advanced  SPM-based techniques  developed  in  2010.[14]  This  technique  has  been  used  to  study  the  diffusion  and electrochemical  deformation  of  the  cathode  materials  used  for  LIBs,  in  which  the electrochemical  strain  of  cathode  materials  under  external  bias  was  characterized.[14-16] 

However,  this  method  has  been  rarely  applied  to  characterize  the  electrochemical performance of the solid electrolytes.

In this study, the SPM-based techniques are applied to investigate local electrochemical deformation  of  the  LAGP  under  external  bias,  especially  the  differences  between  the deformations at grains and grain boundaries on the nanoscale. The results clearly show the electrochemical strain is induced by applied bias through  accumulation of lithium ions and formation of the vacancies. In addition, at the grain boundary, the strain induced by the bias is found to be larger than that in the grains. Furthermore, the strain is much lower than that of the electrode materials which are characterized by SPM under the same conditions. 

The  LAGP  sample  was  prepared  following  the  procedures  in  the  literature.[13] Li2CO3, Al2O3, GeO2, NH4H2PO4 were ball-milled in ethanol for overnight. Furthermore, 10 mol % excess Li2CO3 was added to compensate for Li evaporation during the heating process.  Then, the  milled  powder  was  heated  at  380  °C  for  2  h  to  decompose  the  ammonia  and  remove volatile  components.  The  mixture  was  ground  by  an  agate  mortar  and  pestle.  The  ground powder was put into a platinum crucible and melted at 1350 °C for 2 h. The melt was poured onto  a  stainless  steel  plate,  which  was  preheated  at  500  °C.  After  solidification,  the  cast sheets were annealed at 500 °C for 2 h to release the thermal stress. Finally, the pre-anneal sheets were crystallized at 950 °C for 16 h with a heating rate at 3 °C/min. The preparation procedures were exactly the same as those described in the previous work,[13] therefore, the structure of this sample should be the same as that described before.[13] As the preparation of glass-ceramic  LAGP  was  through  melt-quench  and  crystallization,  the  sample  was  first quenched  to  obtain  the  sample  with  glassy  phase  and  then  heated  to  a  relative  high temperature to achieve recrystallization. Figure 7 in the reference [13] has clearly illustrated the  recrystallized  grains  grew  within  the  glassy  phase  matrix,  while  the  sample  showed porous structure.[13]  

The surface roughness of the as-prepared sample was too large to meet the requirement for  SPM  measurement  due  to  these  processes.  Therefore,  the  surface  of  the  sample  was polished by sandpapers. As the topography features were damaged during the polishing, the polished  sample  was  then  thermally  etched  at  950  °C  for  5  minutes  in  order  to  view  the features of grain and grain boundary.  

Crystal  structure  of  the  sample  was  characterized  by  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  (XRD-6000, Shimadzu, Japan) with Cu kα radiation and Bragg-Brentano geometry. The scan was performed in a scan range of 2θ = 20 to 60o with a step of 0.02o and scan rate of 1o/min. The XRD pattern (Figure S1, Supplementary information (SI)) shows the dominant phase in the sample  is  LiGe2(PO4)3  with  rhombohedral  structure.  A  small  amount  of  GeO2  was  also Standard  diffraction  peaks  for  LAGP  is  not  available.  Hence,  LiGe2(PO4)3  peaks  are used to assign LAGP, as the LAGP and LiGe2(PO4)3 possess the same crystal structure and Al-contained  phases  are  not  detected  in  the  sample.  Therefore,  dominant  phase  can  be assigned to LAGP. The formation of secondary  phase such as GeO2 is almost inevitable in this study as shown in XRD pattern. However, it is not easy to use AFM to distinguish the secondary phase. The purpose of this paper is therefore to clarify the differences between the phenomena in grain and grain-boundary in the LAGP solid electrolyte. The influence of the secondary phase is not discussed here. 


Surface  morphology  of  the  sample  was  observed  by  Scanning  Electron  Microscope (SEM, JEOL-6010 PLUS/LV, JEOL, Japan). Thin layer of Au was sputtered on the sample surface  to  provide  electronic  conductivity  to  the  sample  to  eliminate  the  charge  effect  and then  obtain  better  quality  of  images.  The  SEM  images  (Figure  S2,  SI)  shows  the  surface morphology  of  the  sample  after  the  thermal  etching.  A  square  shape  of  the  polycrystalline grains could be clearly observed in the whole surface of the sample. In addition, the edges of the grains were very sharp, indicating the sample was highly crystallized. 


In  this  study,  the  ESM  study  is  conducted  on  an  commercial  SPM  system  (MFP-3D, Asylum  research,  Oxford  Instruments,  CA,  USA),  the  experiments  were  conducted  in  a closed cell with argon  gas (purity of 99.9991%,  with an oxygen content  of <0.01 ppm and water content<0.02 ppm) environment to protect the sample from surface contamination by gas  adsorption,  especially  moisture,  oxygen  and  carbon  dioxide.  Moreover,  during  the experiment, as high voltage was applied, both the sample and tip might be burned if oxygen is present, hence, the experiments was conducted in the argon environment.  

The probes used in the experiments were Si probes coated by Platinum for conductive measurements  (AC  240  PP,  OPUS,  Bulgaria)  with  a  spring  constant  2  N/m  and  resonance frequency  of  70  kHz.  The  probe  is  calibrated  before  the  experiment  to  ensure  that  spring constant  and  resonance  frequency  was  within  manufacturer’s  specification  ranges.  The calibration procedure includes three steps. First step is to correct for virtual deflection effects in  the  AFM  hardware.  Second  step  is  to  calibrate  the  relationship  between  cantilever deflection  and  vertical  cantilever  motion.  The  last  step  is  to  withdraw  tip  and  perform  a thermal  to  determine  the  cantilever’s  resonant  frequency,  and  an  algorithm  computes  the spring constant using the equi-partition theorem. 

There  are  several  possible  parasitics  effects  in  the  experiments.  Firstly,  the  Vegards effect depends on the AC frequency, therefore the frequency of the AC voltage used in the experiment  was  kept  at  the  contact  resonance  between  the  probe  and  the  sample  which  is about  270  kHz.  DART  (dual  AC  resonance  tracking)  mode  was  used  to  track  the  contact resonance frequency during the scanning. The effects of frequency on Vegards strain are not discussed  in  this  study.    In  addition,  the  main  effect  is  from  static  electric  charges,  hence during  the  experiments,  the  sample  is  grounded  to  remove  these  static  charges.  However, simple  grounding  of  a  sample  may  not  immediately  remove  all  static  charges,  as  the  solid electrolyte is pure ionic conductor and poor electric conductor. Generally-speaking, it is not easy to remove all the static charges efficiently during the ESM scanning when tip is biased. 

Therefore,  we  first  conduct  a  control  experiment  to  study  the  relative  contribution  of  the electrostatic force in the ESM signal of the solid electrolyte. 


It  is  clear  that  these  four  curves  are  similar,  implying  the  responses  of  these  four different points are almost the same, so the results can represent the general responses of the sample. Taking Figure 2(a) as an example, at the minimum point N, the electrostatic force is zero since the DC bias equals to the surface potential here, thus the amplitude AN is the real ESM  amplitude  of  the  sample.[22]  At  point  M,  the  applied  DC  bias  is  0  V,  which  is  the scanning  condition  for  all  the  ESM  images,  so  AM  represents  the  practical  experimental amplitude  in  the  ESM  measurement.  The  difference  δ  between  AM  and  AN  approximately reflects the contribution from electrostatic force. Even though the effect of electrostatic force cannot be completely eliminated in all of the cases, the ratio δ/AM is very small, which means that  the  real  ESM  amplitude  does  play  a  dominate  role  in  the  ESM  measurements  of  the sample.  Therefore,  it  is  believed  that  the  ESM  results  in  this  work  are  governed  by  the electrochemical Vegard strain while the effect of electrostatic force can be neglected. 

The samples are then scanned by the ESM mode. Figures 3(a) and 3(b) show topography and  electrochemical  strain  of  the  LAGP  solid  electrolyte,  respectively.  It  is  clear  that  the electrochemical strain at grain boundaries is larger than that within the grain. A line analysis is performed to show the relationship between topography and electrochemical strain in detail (Figure  3c).  The  topography  curve  changes  gradually  from  left  to  right  along  the  line, forming a valley which corresponds to the grain boundary. Contrary, the strain curve shows different features with three clear regions: in regions 1 at the left side and 3 at the right side, which  are  grains  of  the  LAGP,  the  electrochemical  strain  is  low  and  almost  constant;  in region 2, which corresponds to the grain boundary, the electrochemical strain is also low and constant at the left and right sides. At the middle of the region 2, a sharp peak appears, which corresponding to the surrounding glass phase.  

One possibility for the high electrochemical strain appearing in the glass phase may be due to the topographic cross talk, i.e., due to the lower position of the grain boundary rather than the intrinsic properties of the glass phase. To determine whether it is due to the effects of cross-talk with the topographic information, another area with high roughness is scanned, and the  result  is  shown  in  Figure  S3  (SI).  The  line  analysis  is  also  performed  to  illustrate  the appearance of the topography and electrochemical strain. It is clear that there is a low valley region between the coordinate 3 m m and 6 m m in the topography image. However, there were still  several  positions  with  higher  electrochemical  strain  signals  within  this  valley  region. 

Moreover, two lines in Figure S3(c) (SI) show the topography and electrochemical strain are not negatively correlated. Therefore, it is believed that the high electrochemical strain at the grain boundary is induced by the external bias from the probe and it is intrinsic property of the glass phases in LAGP.  

The  chemical  potential  between  the  grain  and  glass  phases  are  different  but  their  values cannot  be  determined  from  current  experiments.  However,  the  difference  should  be  small because  both  phases  have  similar  compositions.  Moreover,  these  two  phases  are  directly contacted each other and co-exist stably in the sample. Therefore, if we assume the chemical  potential of the grain and glass phase are approximately the same, i.e., assuming  ߟ௚௥௔௜௡ ≈ ߟ௚௟௔௦௦ for simplification purposes. The diffusion coefficient with glass phase Dglass is then 6.7  times  higher  than  the  diffusion  coefficient  within  the  grain  Dgrain  according  to  equation  2.

Hence, it is believed that the diffusion of the lithium ions in the glass phase is much faster than that within the grains. Comparing to the crystal phase, there are much more defects in glass phase, such as vacancies embedded in the glass phases due to the quenching processes, which  can  provide  the  diffusion  path  for  lithium  ions.  Therefore,  the  lithium  ions  should diffuse more easily in the glass phase than that within the grains.   

As the redistribution of the lithium ions in the sample causes the electrochemical strain, the observed different electrochemical strains in the grain boundary and in the grain indicate that the local lithium ion concentration in the grain boundary is different from that within the grains. However, it is still not clear that the large strain in the grain boundary is caused by accumulation  of  lithium  ions  or  lack  of  lithium  ions.  To  further  study  the  relationship between  electrochemical  strain  and  lithium  ion  concentration,  poling  experiments  are therefore conducted.  


Hence, the large electrochemical strain at the grain boundaries can be attributed to the accumulation of lithium ions (Figure 3). The inhomogeneous lithium ion concentration under the external bias may be caused by the different diffusion characteristics of the lithium ion at grain  and  grain  boundary,  in  other  words,  the  different  lithium  ion  diffusivities.  Therefore, the accumulation of lithium ions at the grain boundaries implies the low ionic conductivity at the grain boundaries, which agree with the EIS results.

In the earlier discussion, we have calculated the ratio of the diffusion coefficients of the grain and glass phase, this ratio indicates that the diffusion of lithium ion in glass phase is much faster than that within the grain. However, it is also found that the ionic conductivity at the grain boundary is lower than that within grains by EIS measurements. This discrepancy is caused  by  the  oversimplifications  of  the  grain  boundary  structure  in  the  earlier  analysis. 

Generally-speaking, in most of polycrystalline materials, the grain boundary is a very small region with several angstroms between two adjacent grains. However, in this glass-ceramic type of solid electrolyte, there are glass phases surrounding the grains. Therefore, there are interfacial  region  between  the  grain  and  the  glass  phase,  in  which  has  certain  thickness. 

Therefore,  there  are  four  possible  diffusion  paths  for  lithium  ions  diffusing.  Pg represents the lithium ions diffused within the grain and Pgb2 represents the lithium ions only diffused within the glass phase. Previous calculation estimated their ratio. However, there are still  two  more  lithium  ion  diffusion  paths:  from  the  grain  to  the  grain  boundary  (Pgb1)  and from the grain boundary to the grain (Pgb3). The total resistance of the grain boundary region should include the resistance of path Pgb1, Pgb2 and Pgb3. In paths Pgb1 and Pgb3, the interfaces play  a  key  role  even  though  the  scale  of  the  interfaces  are  too  small  to  be  characterized. 


On  the  other  hand,  although  the  same  behavior  is  observed  in  the negative bias in the process II, the strain is almost constant and independent of the applied bias  if  it  is  positive.  In  the  process  I,  positive  bias  is  applied  first  (Figure  7a).  Hence, positively  charged  lithium  ions  are  pushed  away  from  the  contact  point  and  vacancies  are formed under the probe. By increasing the applied bias from +10 V to +30 V, more vacancies are created under the probe, which induces larger strain. Then, the external bias is changed into  negative,  in  which  will  attract  lithium  ions.  The  increasing  bias  from  -10  V  to  -30  V attracts more and more lithium ions at the vicinity of the probe and the accumulation of the ions provokes the larger strain. 


In this work, the electrochemical strain in LAGP solid electrolyte is studied using ESM and SS-ESM techniques. The electrochemical strain is uniformly distributed on the surface of LAGP  solid  electrolyte,  where  the  grain  boundaries  reveals  larger  strain  than  that  within grains due to the low ionic conductivity at the grain boundary areas. The ESM results clearly show accumulation of lithium ions and formation of vacancies under the probe  at negative and positive biases, respectively, leading to the induced electrochemical strains. Additionally, the hysteresis loop caused by the accumulation of lithium ions and formation of vacancies is observed in SS-ESM. It is found that the average electrochemical strain of LAGP is about 6 pm within the grains and around 15 pm at grain boundary, while that of electrode materials are ~ 3 pm.[23, 24] Therefore, in an all-solid-state battery, an interface between the electrode and solid electrolyte may be unstable in long term of charge and discharge cycles due to the difference  of  the  electrochemical  strain  between  solid  electrolyte  and  electrode  materials. 

Furthermore,  the  LAGP  solid  electrolyte  itself  may  be  unstable  because  of  the  strain mismatch  between  the  grain  and  grain  boundary.  For  long-term  operation  of  the  all-solid-state battery, a mechanism release and/or absorption of the mismatched strain is needed. 

The  ESM  and  SS-ESM  are  employed  to  investigate  the  electrochemical  strain  of  the LAGP  solid  electrolyte  under  the  external  bias.  ESM  images  clearly  illustrate  the  different responses  between  grain  and  grain  boundaries.  The  grain  boundary  reveals  higher electrochemical strain due to the accumulation of lithium ions, which is consistent with the low  ionic  conductivity  of  the  grain  boundary  in  the  previous  reports.  The  SS-ESM  loop shows  the  DC  poling  effects  on  LAGP  solid  electrolyte.  Positive  DC  bias  decreases  the electrochemical  strain  due  to  a  formation  of  lithium  vacancies,  while  negative  DC  bias increases  the  electrochemical  strain  by  accumulation  of  lithium  ions.  The  hysteresis phenomenon  is  also  clearly  observed  because  of  the  accumulation  of  lithium  ions  and formation of lithium vacancies under the ESM probe.