Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have been carried out on fast ion conducting LiMIV 2(PO4)3,  where MIV= Zr, Hf, Sn and Ti, having the NASICON structure. The structural parameters as well as variation in  Li+ conductivity across the series are in good qualitative agreement with earlier experimental reports. The salient  feature of the present study is that it reveals a very interesting dynamical correlation between the mobile Li+ ions  and  the  [MIV 2(PO4)3] framework.  It  is  demonstrated  that  this  correlated  motion  contributes  significantly  in  facilitating Li+ transport in the matrix.

Development of all-solid-state batteries, which employs solid  electrolytes  in  place  of  conventional  liquid/gel  electrolytes,  have gained significant scientific attention over the last couple  of  decades.  All-solid-state  batteries  are  arguably  the  ideal  candidates for the next generation secondary-portable power  sources, as it scores in terms of energy density, safety, and are  generally  environmentally  benign,  over  the  liquid/gel-based  batteries currently available in the market. However, realizing  commercially  all-solid-state  batteries,  relies  on  solid  electrolytes  having  high  ionic  conductivity  (with  negligible  electronic  contribution),  good  chemical  the  electrode/electrolyte interface. The decades of scientific search  have  led  to  the  synthesis  of  materials,  having  high  ionic  conductivities  comparable  liquid/gel  counterparts.  Recent  reviews1-7  highlight  some  of  these  promising solids, spread over a few structural-families, such as  (Argyrodite),9-10  Li10GeP2S12  Li6.55La3Zr2Ga0.15O12  Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3  (NASICON-type),14 Li0.34La0.51TiO2.4 (Perovskites).15-16

One among the most promising family of inorganic materials  for  solid  electrolytes  are  NASICONs  (Na-Superionic  Conductor),  Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12  (0  ≤  x  ≤  3).  Since  their  inception by Hong and Goodenough et. al. in 1976,17-18 these  materials  have  been  extensively  studied,  also  for  numerous  other  technological  applications,  such  as,  gas  sensors,  low  thermal expansive materials, nuclear-waste disposal materials,  etc. These solids exhibits three dimensional ionic conduction  and  offer  high  thermal  stability,  good  chemical  stability  (in  most  environments),  and  low  thermal  expansion,  which  are  very useful qualities in practical applications. The polyhedral  framework  structure,  consisting  of  corner  shared  (Si/P)O4  tetrahedra and ZrO6 octahedra, permits a wide range of cationic  substitution.19    Exploiting  this  property,  numerous  solid  solutions  having  NASICON-type  structure  have  been  synthesized and characterized over the last four decades. The  Li/Na containing NASICONs have been particularly attractive as  solid  electrolytes  for  development  of  all-solid-state  batteries. 

Some  of  the  major  challenges  in  developing  all-solid-state  battery  employing  NASICON-type  solid  electrolytes  have  been  their  high  interfacial  resistance,  poor  stability  against  Li/Na-metal  (typically  used  as  in  Li/Nabatteries),24  and  low  room-temperature  ionic  conductivity.  However, more recently certain compositions such as, Li1+xTi2xAlxP3O12, where 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.67 are found to have the desirable  degree of stability against Li/Na-metal with an improvement in  ionic conductivity.14,  25-27 In an alternate approach, Lalère et.  al. 28 have recently reported the fabrication of an all-NASICON  battery  to  electrode/electrolyte  interfaces,  promises  a  new  direction  in  realizing all-solid-state batteries. 

The advancements  in  this  direction  calls  for  a  multi-faceted  approach  wherein  the  experimental  strategies  exploit  the  atomic-scale  insights  on  factors  governing  ion  transport,  derived  approaches.  Computational  approaches  such  as,  molecular  dynamics  simulations, have provided a great deal dearth of atomic-scale  information  related  to  the  mechanism  of  ion  transport  in  a  variety  of  matrices.29-37  A  recent  review  by  Åvall  et  al.  has  covered  the  modeling  and  simulation  studies  on  solid  electrolytes quite comprehensively.38

The present article details molecular dynamics (MD) study of  LiMIV 2(PO4)3,  where  MIV  is  Zr,  Hf,  Sn  or  Ti,  which  is  a  promising class of Li+ ion conductor in the NASICON-family  of solid electrolytes. The study examines the role of structural  and  dynamical  correlations,  between  the  mobile  ion  and  the  host lattice, on ion transport.

The  isobaric-isothermal  (NPT)  as  well  as  microcanonical  (NVE) molecular dynamics (MD) simulation has been carried out  (using  LAMMPS)39  employing  the  Vashishta-Rahman  form of the interatomic potential,40

The initial positions of the ions are taken from the XRD-studies  on LiZr2(PO4)3 by Petit et al.44 The initial cell parameters for  the NPT-MD are chosen as a=b=8.847Å and c=22.24Å, and  α=β=90° and γ=120°, as reported experimentally,44 for all the  LiMIV 2(PO4)3 systems investigated. The simulation super cell  consists of 3×3×1 unit cells, of rhombohedral (R c) symmetry,  involving a total 972 atoms (54 Li, 108 MIV, 162 P and 648 O).  Simulations on LiZr2(PO4)3 employing larger supercell of  5×  5×2  unit  cells  (consisting  5400  atoms)  showed  excellent  convergence  of  structural  and  dynamical  properties,  confirming the adequacy of the system size. Periodic boundary  conditions are imposed to eliminate the surface effect. Starting  from the above mentioned cell parameters, 6 ns long NPT-MD  simulations are performed for all four compositions. An initial  2  ns  were  dedicated  for  equilibration  additionally,  during  which  the  atomic  positions  as  well  as  the  lattice  parameters  relax to thermodynamic equilibrium. 

Further,  in  order  to  demonstrate  the  role  of  framework  flexibility on ion transport, 20 ns long microcanonical (NVE-MD) simulations are carried out at 1000K on LiZr2(PO4)3 with  a frozen-in framework, that is, treating only Li+ to have their  degrees  of  freedom.  The  three  natural  choices  of  the  rigid,  frozen-in, frameworks considered are, a) the ideal (symmetryimposed)  structure  with  experimental  lattice  parameters  as  reported  by  Petit  et  al.,44  b)  ideal  (symmetry-imposed)  structure,  but  with  the  lattice  parameters  relaxed  (based  on  their average from a well equilibrated NPT-MD simulations at  1000K), c) an instantaneous framework structure (taken from  a well equilibrated NPT-MD simulations at 1000K, with the  dynamical  distortions  of  frozen-in).  Comparison  of  ion  transport  in  these  frozen-in  frameworks  against  the  dynamical  framework  demonstrates  the  role  of  framework flexibility on ion transport. 

To  validate  the  proposed  interatomic  function,  structural  parameters, such as, the bond lengths, lattice parameters, radial  distribution  functions,  etc.  computed  from  the  present  MD structure  are  shown  for  MIV=Zr  case  (as  brown  bars)  for  comparison. The stability of the framework structure, in all the  four cases, are evident from the correspondence between the  dynamic radial distribution functions with the static one. The  broadening of the peaks in the dynamical rdf are due to the  thermal  vibration  of  the  framework  atoms  about  their  equilibrium  position.  The  reduction  in  MIV-O  bond  lengths to be unity. Previously reported experimental reports25, 45, 48, 50  are  also  included  in  the  plot.  It  shall  be  noted  that  our  simulation  could  not  probe  for  Li+  transport  at  lower  temperatures as over the length of the typical MD simulations  (6 ns, in the present study) the Li-ions hardly make a successful  jump to a nearby favorable site, on an average, leading to poor  statistics in the estimation of self-diffusivity. A contradicting  nature of trend in the conductivities for MIV=Sn, Ti systems  between our simulation and available experimental reports25, 50  is  obvious  from  the  Arrhenius  plot  (Figure  5).  Due  to  the  unavailability of other experimental reports on the Sn-system,  we could not investigate this further.  

Having  confirmed  the  structural  stability  of  the  simulated  systems,  the  dynamical  properties  related  to  the  Li  ion  transport  are  examined.  

As seen in Figure 4 the Li+ diffusion is found to increases with  the  unit  cell  dimension,  and  is  significantly  higher  in  LiZr2(PO4)3 compared to LiTi2(PO4)3. This observation is in  qualitative agreement with Martinez-Juarez et al.48 There are  some contradictions about this trend in the existing literature.   Some  experimental  studies  have  reported  higher  Li  conductivity for MIV=Ti, and attributed the behavior to an 

A series of classical molecular dynamics simulations in the  isothermal-isobaric  ensemble  (NPT-MD)  is  carried  on  LiMIV 2(PO4)3,  where  MIV=Zr,  Hf,  Sn  and  Ti,  primarily  to  investigate  the  Li+  motion  in  these  systems.  It  is  noted  that  with the decrease in the ionic radii of the MIV-ion the  a and c  –lattice  parameters  of  the  rhombohedral  cell  decreases  monotonically,  in  agreement  with  experimental  reports.  The  decrease  in  lattice  parameter  results  in  a  contraction  of  the  geometrical  bottlenecks  ion  migration,  previously  identified  based  X-ray  diffraction  studies.  The  activation  energy  for  conduction  increases  as  the  size  of  MIV-ion  decreases, and consequently the Li+ diffusivity drops.

Analysis of the potential energy landscape, however suggest  that the rate-determining microscopic energy barrier for Li+  migration do not correspond to the proposed bottlenecks, rather  at  the  18e  Li  sites  of  the  rhombohedral  structure.  This  prompted a closer examination of the proposed bottlenecks, to  find  that  the  triangular  arrangement  of  oxygens  forming  the  bottlenecks  are  very  sensitive  to  an  approaching  Li+.  Depending  on  the  distance  to  the  approaching  Li+  ion,  the  bottlenecks  dynamically  shrinks  or  opens-up  (around  their  respective statistically averaged dimensions in all of the MIV  substituted  systems).  This  helps  the  Li-O  interaction favorably. Thus, the oxygens, despite being part of  a  strong  covalently  bonded  (P5+O2-MIV+)  framework,  is  sensitive  to  the  Li+  motion.  Hence,  it  is  concluded  that  ion  transport  in  these  solids  involves  correlated  motion  of  the  mobile species with the framework. 
