Therefore, this paper proposes a method based on the combination of the two-phase Wiener model and an extreme learning machine (ELM). The two-phase Wiener model is used to derive the mathematical expression of the remaining useful life (RUL), and the ELM is implemented to adaptively detect the changing point. Based on the Poisson distribution, the distribution of the changing time is derived as a gamma distribution.
The methods used to obtain the RUL of a lithium-ion battery can be divided into three categories: Physical models; data-driven models; and hybrid models [5]. To build a physical model for LiB, we must know the internal electrochemical process of LiB. However, due to the complex structure of LiB, it is difficult to observe its internal electrochemical process [6]. Therefore, it is better to use a data-driven model to obtain the RUL of LiB. There are two types of data-driven models: Machine learning techniques and stochastic techniques.
Hossain et al. [7] proposed a method that uses a timedelay neural network (TDNN) to estimate the state of charge (SOC) of LiB. Furthermore, Wu et al. [8] provided a method that combines a feed forward neural network (FFNN) with importance sampling to predict the RUL of LiB. Additionally, Ren et al. [9] and Chemali et al. [10] used the deep learning approach to extract features of LiB and then predicted the RUL of LiBs based on these features. Because the weights of the neural network in references [7–10] are adjusted via continuous iteration, if many data are used, the time complexity will be sufficiently high, leading to a decrease in the accuracy of the RUL prediction.
Additionally, Ma et al. [14] proposed a multilayer ELM whose initial weights were obtained by the heuristic Kalman algorithm (HKA) to predict the RUL of the LiB. However, with the addition of a hidden layer, their method will be more difficult to train than the neural network proposed in [14]. Therefore, Ma et al. [15] presented a model called the broad learning extreme learning machine (BL-ELM) to improve the ELM precision.
There are three common stochastic processes (the gamma process (GP), inverse Gaussian process (IGP), and Wiener process (WP)), which are typically used in stochastic techniques. Peng et al. [17] and Chen et al. [18] presented a method based on IGPto describe the degradation of a device. Furthermore, Wu et al. [19] used the GP to predict the RUL of LiB. However, the IGP and GP can only depict a monotonous degradation trajectory [20]. Therefore, the IGP and GP will not be useful if any non-monotonous portion exists.
However, regardless of whether it is monotonous, the WP performance will not change, and thus, it is better to use the WP to predict the RUL of LiB. Li et al. [21] and Tang et al. [22] presented a linear Wiener process model (LWPM) to predict the RUL of LiB and provided a method of updating parameters online to describe the differences between individuals.
The TPWPM can mitigate the drawbacks of the LWPM; however, the changing point detection of the TPWPM is not as good in these methods. Zhang [20] used the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) to estimate the changing time without any prior knowledge; thus, the changing time detection of Zhang’s method had a low accuracy. Additionally, the distribution of the changing time in TPWPM was not explained clearly in [20]. Wang [24,25] and Kong [26]determined the changing time by Bayesian theory and the expectation-maximization algorithm, respectively; however, they did not consider the randomness of the changing.
In this paper, we primarily focus on the changing point detection of TPWPMs. We combine the ELM with the TPWPM and propose a method called ELM-TPWPM to monitor the changing point adaptively in the degradation trajectory of LiB. First, the distribution of the changing time is inferred by the Poisson distribution. Then, we obtain the health index (HI) of LiB based on the one-step prediction by ELM. Therefore, we can determine the degradation phase using the HI. Then, we can update the RUL prediction of the TPWPM adaptively based on the identified degradation phase.
In this section, we estimate the parameter of TPWPM by combining offline estimation with online estimation. Specifically, the ELM is used during online estimation to monitor the arrival of changing points in real time, which can decrease the error caused by the offline estimation.
To determine the number of input dimensions and hidden nodes in the ELM, we performed experiments with different numbers of input dimensions and hidden nodes, and used the relative error of changing time estimation (RECTE) to evaluate them.
This paper primarily considers the changing point detection and RUL prediction of the two-phase Wiener process model (TPWPM) for LiBs. We used ELM to construct the HI of a LiB and detect the changing point of the LiB by the HI. Then, based on the concept of FPT, we obtained the PDF of the RUL of the LiB and determined its formula. Finally, we investigated numerical and practical cases to determine the theoretical and practical results of the proposed method. Based on a comparison with other methods, the higher accuracy of the proposed method has been demonstrated. The error of our method for detecting the changing point is about 4% and the mean prediction error of RUL in the second phase is improved from 4.39 cycles to 1.61 cycles.
