The development of high-performance electrode materials is of great significance for  the next generation room temperature sodium-ion batteries. In this work, a new Na  super-ionic conductor (NASICON) negative electrode, AgTi2(PO4)3, is prepared by a  facile solid-state reaction and employed as sodium storage material for the first time. In  situ  X-ray  diffraction  during  battery  operation  reveals  an  electrochemically  Ag  nanoparticle coating mechanism upon sodiation, facilitating the electron transfer in the  complex.  In  addition,  two  steps  of  highly  reversible  biphasic  transformation  are  observed.  As  a  result,  a  reversible  capacity  of  214.9  mA  h  g-1  can  be  achieved,  corresponding to the insertion/extraction of nearly four sodium ions. The AgTi2(PO4)3  electrode also demonstrates better kinetic properties than bare NaTi2(PO4)3 material.  Such an “in situ” decorating method can open up a new direction for the design of  NASICON-structured materials.

With the increasing concern on the depletion of fossil fuels, clean energy development  has been widely recognized as an effective solution to anthropogenic environmental  degradation. As an advanced energy storage facility, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have  attracted much attention for decades due to their high power and energy density as well  as the long cycle life.1,2 However, the ever-increasing demand for lithium ultimately  pushed up the price of lithium compounds, challenging their application especially in  large-scale  energy  storage.  Sharing  the  same  “rocking-chair”  operation  mechanism  with LIBs, sodium ion batteries (SIBs) can be an ideal alternative to LIBs thanks to the  natural abundance of sodium (2.36 wt. % on earth). However, as the radius of sodium  ions is larger than that of lithium ions (1.06 Å for Na+ and 0.76 Å for Li+), searching  appropriate host materials for the larger sodium ions is the primary challenge for the  commercialization for room-temperature SIBs.3,4,5

Research into negative electrode materials focuses on carbon-based materials,6,7,8  sodium-based  alloys,9,10  intercalation-type  compounds,  11-13  and  transition  metal  sulfides/selenides.14,15 Among them, Na super-ionic conductor (NASICON) structured  compounds  derived  from  polyanionic  compound  family  are  of  significant  interest  because of the three-dimensional open framework built by M(M’)O6 octahedra and PO4  tetrahedra sharing corner, which gives rise to plenty of interstitial channels, providing  high ionic mobility with trivial volume changes.16,17 Besides, the existence of a strong  covalent P-O bond guarantees the intrinsic thermal safety even at a high charge state.  These features make NASICON-type materials promising electrode material for largescale  long-life  SIBs,  despite  the  weight  penalty.  Particularly,  NaTi2(PO4)3,  as  a  nontoxic  and  low-cost  negative  electrode  material  for  SIBs  has  been  heavily  investigated due to the relatively high reversible capacity provided by Ti4+/Ti3+ and  Ti3+/Ti2+  redox  couples  running  at  safe  voltage  (2.15  V  and  0.4  V  vs.  Na+/Na,  respectively).18-20  Nevertheless,  the  insulating  nature  of  the  polyanionic  materials  is  likely to result in sluggish kinetic properties, making it hard to achieve their theoretical  capacities. To address these drawbacks, a large number of special treatments have been 

Among successfully  performed  them,  nanomanufacturing strategy combined with “hybrid-composite design” by introducing  high  electronic  conductive  carbonaceous  materials  coating  turns  out  to  be  the  most  well-accepted method.21-23 For instance, Xu et al. developed carbon-coated hierarchical  NaTi2(PO4)3  mesoporous  microflowers  as  anode  for  SIBs,  where  the  mesoporous  structure and carbon skeleton can facilitate the transportation for both Na+ and electrons,  leading to an outstanding rate capability.24

On  the  other  hand,  the  flexible  atomic  arrangement  at  A,  M  and  M’  sites  of  AxMM’(PO4)3 compounds provide versatile possibilities towards cation substitution for  the given structure, which is beneficial for materials design and optimization. To date,  discoveries on NASICON-structured phosphate materials for sodium storage have been  expanded from NaTi2(PO4)3, Na3V2(PO4)3 26 and bipolar compounds  such  Na3MnTi(PO4)3,30  Na1.5Fe0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3,27  Na4MnV(PO4)3 31,32 etc., where the sodium storage behavior was successfully tuned by  the features of different metal elements. In our previous work on an “A” site substitution  example, KTi2(PO4)3, a K+/Na+ ion exchange process was observed during the initial  sodiation  process33.  In  this  scenario,  we  assume  that  introducing  atoms  with  high  electronic conductivity into the structure can effectively accelerate the electron transfer  by virtue of a possible “in situ” conductive particle coating during the electrochemical  ion exchange process. To the best of our knowledge, for transition metal oxide negative  35 and Ag2MoO7,36 such in situ coating behavior  materials such as LiCuVO4,34 Cu3V2O8 has  been  observed  during  battery  operation,  which  facilitated  high  electronic  conductivity. However, it has not hitherto been observed in NASICON-type electrodes.  In fact, the feasibility of Ag+/Na+ ion exchange in a NASICON-type compound has  been widely used to make Ag-conducting ceramics from Na-based compositions.37-39 

Herein,  in  this  work,  we  propose  a  novel  NASICON-type  titanium-based  polyanionic material, AgTi2(PO4)3, produced by a facile solid-state reaction as negative  electrode materials for SIBs. The ion-exchange process during the initial cycle can be  employed as an effective way to make up the insulating property of NASICON-type electrodes.  The  electrochemical  properties  of  AgTi2(PO4)3  were  comprehensively  studied. Besides, the sodium storage mechanism has been investigated utilizing in situ  X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique combined with ex situ high resolution transmission  electron microscopy (HRTEM) characterization. The results demonstrate that the in situ  composite  of  Ag  nanoparticles  have  successfully  constructed  a  highly  conductive  network, which is beneficial for electron transport. Our study provides a new, timesaving  way  to  decorate  the  NASICON-structured  material.  Our  finding  may  also  provide insight into the designs on the new negative materials for rechargeable SIBs in  the future.

Material Preparation. AgTi2(PO4)3 was synthesized by the solid-state reaction. In a  typical synthesis procedure, stoichiometric amounts of AgNO3, TiO2 and NH4H2PO4  were homogeneously mixed in a molar ratio of 1: 2: 3 in an agate mortar for 1 hour.  Then the AgTi2(PO4)3 powder can be acquired after heat treatments in two steps: at 450  °C for 5 h and then 900 °C for 24 h in ambient atmosphere with intermediate grinding.  For  comparison,  NaTi2(PO4)3  was  also  synthesized  by  the  solid-state  reaction.  Typically, Na2CO3, TiO2 and NH4H2PO4 with molar ratio of 1: 4: 6 were mixed in the  agate mortar. Subsequently, the mixture was treated at 350 °C for 5 h and then annealed  at 800 °C for 48 h, with intermediate grinding.

Material Characterization: XRD patterns were recorded using a RigaKu D/max-2550  diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. Rietveld refinement was conducted to analyze the  crystal structure and confirm the phase purity. The morphology was investigated using  a  field  emission  scanning  electron  microscope  (FESEM,  JEOL  JSM-6700F).  Transmission  electron  microscopy  (TEM),  HRTEM  and  selected  area  electron  diffraction  pattern  (SAED)  were  obtained  on  a  JEM  2200FS  with  an  accelerating  voltage of 200 kV.

Measurements  of  Electrochemical  Performances:  The  working  electrodes  were  prepared by coating the slurry of active material AgTi2(PO4)3, (or NaTi2(PO4)3 in the control  experiment),  super  P,  and  carboxyl  methylated  cellulose  (CMC)  binder  dissolved  in  de-ionized  water  in  a  weight  ratio  of  7:  2:  1,  on  a  copper  foil  current  conductor. After the solvent got evaporated, the electrode films were dried in a vacuum  oven at 60 °C for 12 h, and then divided into 0.8×0.8 cm2 squares. The electrochemical  properties of the electrode were evaluated in the 2032-type coin cells with sodium metal  as both counter and reference electrode. The cells were all assembled in an argon-filled  glovebox. 1 M NaClO4 in a mixture of ethylene carbonate (EC)/propylene carbonate  (PC, 1: 1 by volume) and 5% fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) acted as the electrolyte,  and  the  separator  of  the  cells  was  the  glass  fiber  filter  (Whatman  GF/C).  The  galvanostatic charge/discharge test was performed on a Land-2001 A (Wuhan, China)  automatic  battery  tester.  Cyclic  voltammetry  (CV)  and  electrochemical  impedance  spectroscopy (EIS) were performed on a VSP multichannel potentiostatic-galvanostatic  system (Bio-Logic SAS, France).

In Situ X-Ray Diffraction Measurement: In situ XRD patterns for the AgTi2(PO4)3  electrode material during the initial two cycles were collected by a Bruker D8 Advance  Diffractometer at 2θ values ranging from 18° to 40°, with a scanning rate of 2° min-1.  The current rate we used for the galvanostatic charging-discharging was 20 mA g-1.  Standard XRD patterns of different sodiation products are generated by a Diamond  software using the reported cif. files of different structures.40,41

Physical Properties of the Material. The crystal structure of AgTi2(PO4)3 was studied  by XRD and Rietveld refinement, as presented in Figure 1. All of the diffraction peaks  can be indexed assuming a rhombohedral symmetry, with a space group of R-3c. The  corresponding Rietveld refinement result suggests a monophasic nature of the material  with no impurity phase detected, and the sharp diffraction peaks indicates a high degree  of crystallinity. The refined lattice parameters are a (b) = 8.4792 Å and c = 22.1664 Å  (the detailed crystallographic data can be found in the Supporting Information, Table  S1),  respectively.  According  to  the  refinement  results,  AgTi2(PO4)3  features  typical  NASICON structure, as shown in the inset of Figure 1, which is composed of isolated 

TiO6  octahedra  and  PO4  tetrahedra  through  corner  bridging,  forming  a  3D  open  framework, in favor of facile Na+ migration. 

In summary, we used a facile solid-state reaction to prepare a potential NASICON-type  negative material, AgTi2(PO4)3, for sodium ion storage. In situ XRD analysis and ex  situ TEM results reveal that AgTi2(PO4)3 experiences an ion exchange process during  the initial discharge process to form the conductive Ag particles. As a result of the in  situ coating mechanism, the bulk electrode without any carbonaceous material coating  demonstrates a reversible capacity of 214.9 mA h g-1 with an effective utilization of  nearly  4  Na+  insertion/extraction,  as  well  as  decent  cycling  performance  and  rate  capability. EIS studies also suggest a much better kinetic behavior resulting from the in  situ formed Ag network. Our results provide insights into the design of NASICON-type  materials for next generation SIBs. 
