Superior lithium storage performance of hierarchical N-doped carbon encapsulated NaTi2(PO4)3 microﬂower Zhen Jianga, Yuehua Lia, Chao Hana, Zhangxing Hea,b,∗, Wenjin Mac, Wei Menga, Yingqiao Jianga, Lei Daia,b,∗∗, Ling Wanga,b,∗∗∗ a School of Chemical Engineering, North China University of Science and Technology, Tangshan, 063009, China b Hebei Province Key Laboratory of Photocatalytic and Electrocatalytic Materials for Environment, North China University of Science and Technology, Tangshan, 063009, China c Department of Material Science and Engineering, Monash University, Melbourne, 3800, Australia

Na-superionic conductor (NASICON) structured NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP) as anode shows broad prospect in aqueous lithium ion battery. However, inherent low electrical conductivity of NaTi2(PO4)3 remains a pivotal issue to be resolved. Herein, we report N-doped carbon encapsulated NaTi2(PO4)3 microﬂower (NTP-CN) as anode for aqueous lithium ion battery, which is prepared via solvothermal way. NTP-CN with unique structural feature displays superb electrochemical performances. It delivers the discharge capacities of 131.2, 110.1, and 84.3 mAh g−1 at 0.2, 3.0, and 15 C, respectively, 38.8, 33.8, and 51.1 mAh g−1 higher than these of pristine NTP. NTP-CN also shows remarkable cycling stability at 6 C after 1000 cycles (capacity retention: 88.8%), superior to NTP (70.7%). The outstanding properties of NTP-CN may be due to that microﬂower structure can increase touching area between electrolyte and electrode, and carbon coating for electrode improves stability in aqueous electrolyte and ameliorates electrical conductivity. Moreover, nitrogen doping can further enhance hydrophilicity and conductivity of the sample, and also form lots of defects on electrode surface, which is beneﬁcial for the intercalation/deintercalation of Li ions. This work reveals that the combination of microﬂower structure and Ndoped carbon layer oﬀers a promising method to improve electrochemical performances of NaTi2(PO4)3.

Energy storage technologies have played crucial role in the development of a sustainable power system [1–6]. Rechargeable battery and electric vehicle are gradually developed to achieve a green sustainable community and low carbon society [7,8]. Lithium ion battery is acceptable energy reserve equipment owing to its superiorities, for example high energy density and long cycle life [9–16]. And it has a wide range of applications in various electric vehicles [17–22]. However, the conﬁguration of conventional lithium ion battery involves in organic electrolyte that shows poor ionic conductivity, costliness, ﬂammability, and explosiveness [23–28]. This has further limited the application range of lithium ion battery. Aqueous lithium ion battery as fresh kind of secondary battery displays diﬀerent characteristics compared with traditional organic-electrolyte lithium ion battery [29]: (1) The hydrous electrolyte has higher ionic conductivity than that of organic electrolyte. (2) The assembly condition is simple, and the cost is greatly reduced. (3) Aqueous lithium ion battery demonstrates high security and environmental friendliness. However, some electrode materials may be dissolved in aqueous lithium ion battery which uses aqueous solution as electrolyte. The carbon coating treatment of the materials can solve above problem, and it can also improve the conductivity of samples [30,31].


Performance of cathode and anode can inﬂuence the electrochemical performance of aqueous lithium ion battery to a large extent [32]. At present, research on cathode materials has been quite mature [33]. And the research on anode is relatively tortuous and slow. In recent years, composite with an open framework NASICON structure has attracted people's attention [34], and it has shown great applying prospect in aqueous lithium ion battery [35]. NaTi2(PO4)3 as representative of NASICON structure materials has large pore channels, which can oﬀer high ionic mobility for Li ions [36]. Wang et al [37].

N-doped carbon encapsulated NaTi2(PO4)3 microﬂower was readied via easy solvothermal method followed by calcination, as shown in Fig. 1a. Firstly, 0.6946 mL of Ti(OC4H9)4 was dispersed in ethylene glycol (20 mL) combined with stirring for 0.5 h. Then, 0.1 mol L−1 of glucose and NaH2PO4·2H2O solution was conﬁgured, respectively, and 0.1800 g of urea was dissolved in 10 mL of ethylene glycol. After that, 10 mL of NaH2PO4·2H2O, 0.123 mL of concentrated H3PO4, and 10 mL of glucose solution were added to Ti(OC4H9)4 solution in succession. After vigorous stirring for 1 h, the transparent mixed solution was transferred in a 50 mL of Teﬂon vessel, and was kept at 180 °C for 18 h. When system was cooled to room temperature, the obtained product was poured into a beaker. The prepared urea solution was added dropwise to abovementioned beaker, then dried at 120 °C to obtain the precursor. Precursor without urea was obtained with the same way. In addition, precursor without urea and carbon source (replacing 10 mL of glucose solution with 10 mL of deionized water) was also acquired for comparison with the same way. Finally, all precursors were preheated for 2 h at 350 °C, then were calcined for 4 h at 700 °C at a heating rate of 2 °C min−1 under conservation of Ar atmosphere, and corresponding samples were named as NTP, NTP-C, and NTP-CN, respectively.

Scanning electron microscope (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectra (EDS) element mappings images were collected by S-4800 microscope (Japan). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) characterization was conducted on JEOL JEM-2100F TEM. All X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) results were acquired by D/MAX2500PC (Rigaku, Japan) diffractometer with Cu-Kα X-ray source. Carbon content of the composites was detected by thermal analyzer STA 449 F3 of Germany. X-ray photoelectron spectrum (XPS) test was executed using Al-Ka radiation

CR2016 coin-type cell was assembled to study electrochemical properties of N-doped carbon encapsulated samples. Prepared sample was used as anode, LiMn2O4 was used as cathode (cathode/anode mass ratio: 2:1), glass ﬁber was used as separator membrane, and saturated Li2SO4 solution was used as electrolyte. Electrode used to examine electrochemical property was readied by following step. 80 wt% active materials (cathode or anode), 10 wt% polytetraﬂuoroethylene, 10 wt% acetylene black were fully mixed, and were pressed on 14 mm (diameter) steel mesh, then were dried for 8 h at 80 °C.

Galvanostatic charge-discharge data were recorded on CT2001A battery testing system in a voltage window of 0.1–1.85 V. Cyclic voltammetry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy spectra (frequency range: 105-10−2 Hz) were recorded on CHI660E electrochemical workstation (Chenhua Instruments, Shanghai). Before electrochemical impedance spectroscopy tests, cell was activated for 5 cycles at 0.2 C and was charged at constant voltage (1.6 V) for 2 h.

Microstructure and morphology for NTP, NTP-C, and NTP-CN samples were characterized by SEM, and the results are displayed in Fig. 2a–f. As seen, all samples consist of numerous intercrossed nanosheets. Carbon coated samples have better ﬂower-type due to the carbon layer supporting compared with NTP. Additionally, NTP-CN shows similar ﬂower-type to NTP-C, indicating that nitrogen doping has no eﬀect on the pattern. Moreover, NTP and NTP-C samples well inherit microﬂower structure of precursors (Fig. S1), respectively. This indicates that there is no signiﬁcant structural collapse after annealing in Ar atmosphere. EDS element mappings images and EDS spectrum are shown in Fig. 2g–i. As seen, Na, Ti, P, O, C, and N are dispersed on NTPCN microﬂower. EDS spectrum shows the peaks of the corresponding elements, and no extra peak is seen. This conﬁrms the element constitution on NTP-CN surface. And it is proved that there are no existence of C and N on NTP surface (Figs. S2 and S3).

NTP, which indicates that carbon coating and related nitrogen doping can improve electrochemical property of electrode. For example, redox peak current densities of NTP-CN at about 1.6 V are 0.36 and 0.33 A g−1, respectively, much larger than those of NTP (0.21 and 0.15 A g−1). This is possibly due to that carbon coating improves conductivity and the stability of the sample in aqueous electrolyte, and nitrogen doping results in the formation of surface defects on carbon layers and the further improvement of conductivity for composite.

To further explore eﬀect of N-doped carbon layer on electrochemical performance of electrodes, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy tests of NTP, NTP-C, and NTP-CN were carried out. Fig. 7 presents Nyquist plots and corresponding electrical equivalent circuit, and Table 1 shows impedance parameters of all samples. Nyquist plots consist of semicircle and straight line. Intercept at Z’ axis corresponds to ohmic resistance (Rs, at high frequency) standing for resistance of electrolyte and electrode. As seen, smaller Rs (1.156 Ω) for NTP-CN compared with NTP (4.16 Ω) reveals that N-doped carbon layer can improve the electrical conductivity of electrode. Semicircle represents charge transfer resistance (Rct, at middle frequency), and slope line corresponds to Warburg impedance (Zw, at low frequency) [53]. As shown, NTP-C illustrates smaller Rct (43.15 Ω) compared with NTP (64.19 Ω), illustrating that carbon coating can enhance the electrochemical kinetics. Rct of NTP-CN decreases by 15.18 Ω compared with NTP-C. It may be due to the rapid charge transfer and forming defects on carbon layer by nitrogen doping [49].


Charge-discharge tests of NTP, NTP-C, and NTP-CN samples were carried out at 6 C for 1000 cycles to investigate the eﬀect of N-doped carbon layer on cycling performance for samples, and result is shown in Fig. 8a. As displayed, carbon coated samples show higher discharge capacity and capacity retention than that of sample without carbon coating. It is possibly owing to that carbon coating can protect the electrode from dissolving by electrolyte and improve conductivity of composites, resulting in superb stability in aqueous electrolyte. Besides, N-doped carbon encapsulated sample demonstrates high discharge capacity even after 1000 cycles. For instance, NTP-CN delivers the maximum discharge capacity of 88.9 mAh g−1, 22.1 mAh g−1 higher than that of NTP. And NTP-CN shows superior cycling stability with discharge capacity reservation of 88.8% after 1000 cycles, 18.1% largerthan that of NTP. This may be due to high-quality carbon layer having proper thickness and nitrogen doping. Fig. 8b demonstrates coulombic eﬃciency for all samples. As seen, all samples are kept at high coulombic eﬃciency, closing to 100%. This indicates that cells are assembled well with low self-discharge, slight oxygen and hydrogen

In summary, NaTi2(PO4)3 microﬂower encapsulated by N-doped carbon layer as anode for aqueous lithium ion battery was synthesized by solvothermal way followed calcination treatment.