The stability of the LiCoPO4 electrode material in contact with a NASICON-type lithium ion conducting solid electrolyte having the composition Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) and a wide range of electrochemical stability has been studied for the first time. We have found the optimal temperature at which there is no reaction between the starting components of the composites and they retain their chemical and thermal stability. Cosintering a mechanical mixture of synthesized single-phase LiCoPO4 and LAGP powders with a submicron particle size at 750°C, we have obtained a stable LiCoPO4/LAGP two-phase composite whose room-temperature electrical conductivity is three orders of magnitude higher than that of the lithium  cobalt  double  phosphate.  Composites  based  on  LiCoPO4  and  the  LAGP  ionic  conductor  can  be regarded as promising cathode materials for all-solid-state lithium ion batteries.

In recent years, a great deal of attention has been paid to studies of a new class of cathode materials for lithium ion batteries (LIBs): lithium transition metal orthophosphates  with  the  general  formula  LiMPO4 (M = Fe, Mn, Co, or Ni) and olivine structure [1]. The lithium cobalt phosphate LiCoPO4 has attracted increased interest owing to its high theoretical specific capacity (167 mAh/g) and high redox potential (4.8 V vs.  Li+/Li).  In  connection  with  this,  LiCoPO4  is thought to be a promising 5-V electrode material for high-power LIBs [2]. A serious drawback to LiCoPO4 is  its  low  electronic  conductivity  and,  more  importantly, its low ionic conductivity (at a level of 10–10 to 10–8 S/cm), which leads to unsatisfactory cyclability at high charge–discharge rates [3, 4]. Cathode materials can be modified by heterogeneous doping [5] or via the  preparation  of  two-phase  materials  using  highly conductive solid electrolytes for improving ion transport  [6].  In  this  context,  there  is  interest  in  NASICON-type  solid  electrolytes,  which  do  not  decompose at a high potential and can be used in solid-state cells with LiCoPO4. They possess properties necessary for  the  fabrication  of  all-solid-state  batteries:  high room-temperature  ionic  conductivity,  thermal  and chemical stability, and good resistance to atmospheric attack [7, 8]. The use of solid electrolytes instead of highly  inflammable  liquid  organic  electrolytes  will make it possible to improve the reliability, electrochemical stability, cyclability, and energy density of all-solidstate rechargeable LIBs. Understanding interface evolution during cosintering of lithium-conducting solid electrolytes and active electrode materials is of key importance in designing all-solid-state LIBs [9].


One difficulty in the fabrication of all-solid-state LIBs is to produce a stable ion-conducting solid electrolyte/electrode  material  interface.  Heat  treatment such as sintering, hot pressing, or spark plasma sintering for improving interfacial contact can initiate undesirable chemical reactions between the electrode and electrolyte, leading to the formation of nonconducting phases [10]. Thus, chemical stability or chemical compatibility of a solid electrolyte with electrode materials is an extremely important characteristic.

Oxide cathode materials (LiCoO2, LiMn2O4, and LiMn0.5Ni0.5O2) degrade in contact with a solid electrolyte  having  the  composition  Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) and a NASICON structure, forming electrochemically inactive impurity phases, which block ion transport.  Phosphate  electrode  materials  (LiFePO4, LiCoPO4,  LiMn0.5Fe0.5PO4,  and  Li3V2(PO4)3)  are much more stable in contact with LATP [11, 12]. To make  an  improved  LiCoPO4–LATP  electrical  contact, Okumura et al. [13] used spark plasma sintering(SPS). According to X-ray diffraction data, LiCoPO4 does not decompose in contact with LATP during the SPS  process.  Our  group  proposed  a  process  for  the preparation of a LiCoPO4-based composite material modified with the LATP solid electrolyte. The process consists in impregnating LiCoPO4 powders with a saturated  LATP  precursor  solution,  followed  by  drying and sintering at 700°C, resulting in the formation of a two-phase composite [14]. The ionic conductivity of the  LiCoPO4/LATP  composite  far  exceeds  that  of unmodified lithium cobalt phosphate.

Compared  to  LATP,  the  Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) solid electrolyte, isostructural with it, offers a wide  electrochemical  stability  range  (up  to  6  V  vs. Li+/Li)  and  low  ceramic  sintering  temperature (~850°C) [15, 16]. In recent work, Liu et al. [16] studied  the  chemical  and  phase  stability  of  LAGP  with three types of cathode material (LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2, LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4, and Li3V2(PO4)3) in the temperature range  500–700°C.  As  would  be  expected,  the  oxide cathode materials were found to be unstable in contact with LAGP. There are limited published data on the stability of the LAGP solid electrolyte in contact with phosphate electrode materials [17–20] and no data on LiCoPO4/LAGP  composites.  Delaizir  et  al.  [17] investigated  the  effect  of  the  composition  of  LiFePO4/LAGP and Li3V2(PO4)3/LAGP composite electrodes  on  the  electrochemical  performance  of  allsolid-state LiFePO4/LAGP/Li3V2(PO4)3 elements, in which LAGP solid electrolyte particles were accommodated  in  a  matrix  of  the  active  materials  of  both electrodes  (LiFePO4  and  Li3V2(PO4)3).  The  optimal LAGP electrolyte content was 60% [18].

The objectives of this work were to assess the stability of the lithium cobalt double phosphate LiCoPO4 in contact with the LAGP solid electrolyte and examine the feasibility of obtaining modified LiCoPO4-based electrode  materials  with  high  ionic  conductivity  for use in all-solid-state LIBs.

Single-phase LAGP powders (free from nonconducting GeP2O7 and GeO2 impurities) were prepared using  a  liquid  precursor  [21,  22].  As  a  water-soluble germanium-containing  component,  we  prepared  a germano-oxalic  acid,  H2[Ge(C2O4)3],  by  dissolving hexagonal GeO2 (Russian Federation Technical Standard OST 48-21-72) in a concentrated H2C2O4 solution. The existence of the [Gе(С2О4)3]2– complex ion, in which the germanium ion is in octahedral coordination  with  three  oxalate  groups,  was  reported  by Tananaev and Avduevskaya [23]. To the resultant stable H2[Ge(C2O4)3] germano-oxalic acid solution were added  stoichiometric  amounts  of  aqueous  LiNO3  ⋅ 3H2O, Al(NO3)3 ⋅ 9H2O, and (NH4)2HPO4 solutions. The solution thus prepared (density of 1.15 g/cm3 and concentration of 38–40 g/L in terms of LAGP) was heated in an MIMP-3P programmable muffle furnace at a rate of 10°C/min. In the course of evaporation, the resultant syrup-like solution decomposed at a temperature of 300°C to give a foamy mass, which was due to  the  decomposition  of  the  nitrates  and  oxalates. After evaporation at 280–300°C, the IR spectrum of the LAGP precursor was free of absorption bands at 1736 and 1401 cm–1, corresponding to stretching vibrations of the oxalate ion, which can be interpreted as evidence  for  the  decomposition  of  the  germanium oxalate  complex  and  the  formation  of  germanium oxide in a highly reactive state. Subsequent solid-state reaction  led  to  the  formation  of  LAGP  as  a  desired product at a temperature of 650°C in one step, without reaction  intermediates.  Thus,  the  procedure  used  to prepare  the  starting  mixture,  in  which  all  starting chemicals were in solution and a joined true solution was prepared, had a significant effect on the mechanism of subsequent solid-state reaction. One advantage  of  the  synthesis  of  a  lithium  aluminum  germanium phosphate is that, after the decomposition of the oxalate complex, GeO2 is formed in an active amorphous state.

Phase-pure  LiCoPO4  powders  with  the  stoichiometric composition were prepared by a sol–gel process using aqueous solutions [24]. In a CoHPO4 ⋅ aq hydrated precursor, the protons of the hydrogen phosphate ion have increased mobility and can be replaced by lithium ions to give LiCoPO4 ⋅ aq. Heat treatment of the hydrated cobalt lithium phosphate leads to its dehydration and the formation of amorphous powder at temperatures in the range 200–300°C. Further, at a temperature from 505 to 535°C LiCoPO4 crystallization reaches completion.

The chemical composition of LAGP and the composites was determined by inductively coupled plasma atomic  emission  spectroscopy  using  an  ICPE  9000 spectrometer (Shimadzu, Japan). Samples for analysis were prepared by decomposition in a mixture of acids (HNO3, HF, and H2SO4). Similar chemical compositions  of  different  batches  of  LAGP  indicate  that  the synthesis procedure used ensures reproducible results (Table 1).

The phase composition of the LAGP powders and modified electrode materials was determined by X-ray diffraction on an XRD-6000 Shimadzu diffractometer (CuKα radiation, graphite monochromator). Intensity data were collected in the angular range 2θ = 10°–80° at  a  scan  rate  of  2°/min.  X-ray  diffraction  patterns were analyzed using the ICDD PDF-2 database.

The electrical conductivity of the LAGP solid electrolyte  and  LiCoPO4/LAGP  composites  was  determined by impedance spectroscopy. Impedance Z(ω) is commonly defined as an overall resistance of a cell to an ac current at a given frequency and is represented by a complex number, which is graphically imaged in

We have  examined  the  stability  of  the  LiCoPO4 cathode  material  during  heating  in  contact  with  the LAGP solid electrolyte having high Li+ ion conductivity  and  found  the  optimal  temperature  (750°C)  at which there is no reaction between the starting components  and  they  retain  their  chemical  and  thermal stability.

It has been shown that, cosintering a mechanical mixture of starting powders at a temperature of 750°C, one can obtain composite electrode materials whose ionic  conductivity  reaches  2.6  ×  10–5  S/cm  (at  an LAGP ionic conductor content of 60%).