Ab-initio  molecular  dynamics  (MD)  simulations  and  NMR  GIPAW calculations have been used to analyze the coordination and  mobility of Li ions in LiTi2(PO4)3 (rhombohedral), LiZr2(PO4)3 (triclinic)  and  LiZr2(PO4)3  (rhombohedral)  phases.  Significant  discrepancies  between  static  calculations  of  7Li  quadrupolar  parameters  and  experimental values were observed. We demonstrate the dynamical  origin  of  such  disagreement  by  incorporating  in  the  calculations  thermal vibrations and local motion of atoms via MD simulations. For  LiTi2(PO4)3,  the  quadrupolar  constant  associated  with  Li  ions  grows  with  temperature  because  the  local  symmetry  of  the  system  decreases,  while  for  the  Zr  phases,  the  quadrupolar  constant  decreases  because  thermal  vibrations  reduce  the  anisotropy  of  the  interaction. Finally, MD yields for both Zr phases Li distributions that  compare well with disorder reported by diffraction studies. 


LiR2(PO4)3  compounds  with  NASICON  (Na  SuperIonic  CONductors)  structure  have  been  extensively  studied  as  electrodes  and  electrolyte  materials  in  Li  batteries.[1]  Chemical  stability  and  Li  mobility  are  high  in  these  compounds,  making  them  good  candidates  for  solid  electrolytes  in  all-solid-state  batteries  (ASSB).[2]  Research  in  energy  storage  batteries  has recently deserved the concession of the chemistry Nobel prize to  A. Yoshino. M. S. Whittingham and J.B. Goodenough. 


The  rhombohedral  LiR2(PO4)3  compounds  (R-3c  S.G.)  with  NASICON  structure  are  formed  by  R2(PO4)3 lanterns  that  share  oxygen atoms with neighboring ones, building three-dimensional  networks.[3]  In  such  networks,  M1  and  M2  sites  alternate  along  conduction  channels.  In rhombohedral  Ge  or  Ti  phases,  Li  ions  are six-fold coordinated at octahedral M1 sites[4] (Figure 1a). The  incorporation of bigger R cations (Sn, Zr or Hf) stabilizes crystal  structures with triclinic C-1 symmetry. In these phases, half of the  cavities  are  occupied  by  two  Li  ions,  while  the  other  half  of  the  cavities  are  empty.  In  triclinic  structures,  PO4  tilting  favors  distorted  four-fold  coordination  of  Li  ions  at  M12  sites  near  triangular bottlenecks that connect M1 and M2 cavities[5]. In the  triclinic  structure  of  LiZr2(PO4)3  reported  by  Catti  et  al.[5c],  some  disorder  was  detected,  as  the  Li  ions  are  located  at  two  inequivalent sites with occupancies of 0.71 and 0.29 (Figure 1c).  Both sites have a symmetrical replica inside the same cavity. 

Heating  LiZr2(PO4)3  samples  at  323  K  causes  a  phase  transition from triclinic to rhombohedral[5c, 6]. In the rhombohedral  NASICON  structure,  Li  ions  show  disorder  over  six  equivalent  crystallographic  sites  with  occupancy  1/6  (Figure  1b).  In  this  phase  Li ions are  again located near triangular bottlenecks that  connect M1 and M2 cavities. 

Conduction  pathways  and  long-range  Li/Na  mobility  in  NASICON  compounds  have  been  studied  using  the  nudged  elastic  band  method.[9]  Ab-initio[10]  and  classical[11]  molecular dynamics  (MD)  methods  also  have  been  applied  in  a  few  cases  to  study  Li  diffusion  in  NASICON  electrolytes  with  different compositions to the ones considered in this work. 

Since  the  calculated  quadrupolar  7Li  MAS-NMR  parameters  for  these  static  structures  differ  considerably  from  the  experimental  values,  we  use  MD  to  incorporate  dynamical  effects due to Li mobility to the calculations, which restores the  agreement between theory and experiment. 

Due  to  the  narrow  7Li  chemical  shift  range  and  the  similarity between structures of the studied compounds, local  motions are not expected to cause significant variations on the  isotropic  chemical  shift  values.  However,  the  quadrupolar  interaction  is  very  sensitive  to  the  distribution  of  charges  around the targeted nucleus and it is expected to be affected  by dynamical effects. Consequently, we will focus this work on  quadrupolar  interaction.  Static  7Li  spectra  and  fittings  of  LiTi2(PO4)3  and  LiZr2(PO4)3  phases  at  high  and  low  temperatures are shown in Figure 3. The accuracy achieved  in the simulations discards the possibility of important disorder  or secondary phases in the samples. Experimental values for  the quadrupolar constants and the asymmetry parameters are  summarized in Table 1. 

The distance between the Li ions and their six nearest O  atoms is 2.10 Å for the R-3c model displaying the smallest cell  parameters (optTi303) and 2.13 Å for the structures optTiAatiq and  optTi448. These values are close to the sum of the ionic radii of  Li  and  O  atoms  (2.16  Å),  which  justifies  the  six-fold  coordination for lithium ions in this phase. 

Low Temperature (LT) Zr phase. In the structural model  reported by Catti et al.[5c] for LiZr2(PO4)3 at room temperature,  Li ions are located at two sites with occupancies of 0.71 and  0.29. To carry out the geometry optimization of this structure, only the Li site with the highest occupancy was considered to  host the Li ion. In the resulting optimized ground state structure  (optZrCatti99),  Li  ions  are  shifted  0.085  Å  from  the  reported  site[5c]. The maximum atomic forces diminish from 5.3 eV/Å in  the model without optimization to <0.01 eV/Å after optimization.  Li  distances  to  the  four  nearest  O  atoms  were  in  the  range  1.98–2.27 Å, suggesting a planar four-fold coordination. The  best fit plane of the four coordinated O atoms has a maximum  deviation  of  0.15  Å  and  the  distance  from  the  Li  ion  to  this  plane  is  0.25  Å.7Li  quadrupolar  parameters  obtained  for  the  optimized LT Zr phase (optZrCatti99) are summarized in Table 1.  The calculated CQ value is -249 kHz, its absolute value is 34%  larger  than  the  experimental  one  (186  kHz),  while  the  calculated asymmetry parameter agrees with the experimental  one. The second largest axis of the EFG ellipsoid points to the  nearest O atom, which is located at less than 2 Å from the Li  atom, and its largest axis points to a point between the other  Li atom of the cavity and the further Zr atom. 


High  Temperature  (HT)  Zr  phase.  In  the  LiZr2(PO4)3  rhombohedral phase reported by Catti et al.[13], Li-O distances  would be 2.50 Å if Li ions were located at M1 sites (Figure 4b).  In  contrast,  if  Li  ions  move  towards  any  of  the  six  triangular  windows  related  by  –3  axes  their  coordination  number  will  lower  and  three  Li–O  distances  will  become  shorter.  In  the  reported structure[13] Li ions are disordered over six equivalent  positions near the triangular windows that connect M1 and M2  cavities (Figure 1b). The Li–O distances to the three nearest  O atoms of the cavity are 1.92, 2.43 and 2.45 Å. An O atom  outside the cavity is located at 2.29 Å, suggesting a four-fold  coordination.  To  perform  the  structural  optimization,  the  symmetry of the system was reduced from R-3c to P1 and one  out of six Li sites in each cavity was chosen to host the Li ion  (Figure 4a). Since our model has two cavities and depending  on the choice of Li site to be occupied, six inequivalent models  were built. These models have  maximum  atom forces in the  range  1.68–2.79  eV/Å.  After  the  geometry  optimization,  the  maximum atom forces are <0.01 eV/Å and the final energy of  the  considered  models  (ensemble  optZrCatti00)  remains  in  a  narrow range of 0.03 eV·mol-1. Small differences detected in  energy  calculations  indicate  that,  although  the  position  of  Li  ions  can  be  affected  by  Li  ions  in  the  neighbor  cavities,  all  proposed  Li  configurations  are  accessible  at  room  temperature. The optimized structures locate all Li ions at 2.02.1 Å from the three O atoms forming the nearest window of  the M1 cavity. 

To  check  the  effect  of  thermal  motions  on  the  7Li  NMR  parameters,  ab-initio  molecular  dynamics  simulations  were performed (See movies in the SI). For all the studied phases  P-O bonds display distances with a Gaussian type distribution  centered at 1.54-1.55 Å and with a full width at half height of  0.08-0.09  Å.  Zr-O  and  Ti-O  bonds  display  a  distance  distribution centered at 2.06 and 1.92 Å, respectively, with full  widths at half height of 0.16-0.18 Å. On the other hand, Li-O  bonds  display  a  more  complex  behavior  that  is  explained  in  detail in next paragraphs for each phase. 


Ti phase. Two trajectories of 5 ps were calculated at 300  K  and  other  two  at  450  K,  taking  as  starting  models  the  optimized structures  optTi303 and  optTi448. Movies showing one  trajectory at each temperature can be found in the SI. Lithium  ions  have  a  larger  mobility  and  explore  larger  volumes  than  other atoms. The shape of such volume is an oblate ellipsoid,  with its minor axis oriented along the R-3 axis direction of the  NASICON  structure.  Figures  5a  and  5b  show  the  superposition of 250 frames taken every 20 fs from trajectories  calculated  at  300  K  and  at  450  K.  The  disorder  observed  at  450 K is clearly higher than at 300 K. 

Figure  5d  shows  the  occupancy  density  of  Li  ion  at  increasing  distances  from  the  centroid  of  the  six  O  atoms  forming the M1 cavity. The distribution of distances is wider for  450 K than for 300 K, and  its maximum moves further away  from the center of the cavity with temperature (see section S2  of SI for a deeper discussion). At 300 K, Figure 5d shows that  the probability of finding Li ions at a maximum distance of 0.43  Å is 90%, while at 450 K only 70% of probability is within that  range. The maximum of occupancy density also displaces: at  300  K it is 0.25 Å, while at  450 K it is 0.33 Å. At 450 K, the  separation  between  the  most  distant  Li  positions  is  1.9  Å.  Figure  5e  shows  that  distances  between  the  Li  ions  and  the  six nearest O atoms are in the range between 1.75 and 2.90  Å for 300 K and in the range between 1.70 and 3.50 Å for 450  K (the most frequent distances being in the range 2.1-2.3 Å in  both cases). 


Single snapshots of any of the studied trajectories usually  show  a  maximum  atomic  deviation  of  0.5  Å  from  ideal  R-3c  symmetry positions. This deviation is mainly related to Li ions.  The  maximum  atomic  deviation  of  the  framework  in  each  frame  of  the  trajectory  is  usually  larger  than  0.2  Å  at  300  K.  Calculating  the  average  positions  of  atoms  for  different 

Analyzing the evolution of all Li ions involved in the three  trajectories  we  find  that  the  mean  residence  time  at  one  window is 190 fs (53 jumps, on average, occur in 10 ps). Most  of the jumps take place between neighboring windows, but if  the Li ion approaches the centroid of the cavity, the jump can  occur between more distant windows. For all the trajectories  studied,  the  six  windows  around  M1  sites  were  visited  by  Li  ions,  but  the  sum  of  residence  times  in  each  of  them  is  not  homogeneous,  it  differs  by  as  much  as  a  factor  two  in  the  simulated intervals. For the trajectory shown in Figure 8, the Li  ion spends as much as 268 fs in window 2 and only 107 fs in  window  6. We  expect  that  for longer  simulation  times, these  differences will be attenuated, as the probability of finding the  Li ion near any of them is equivalent. Due to the computational  effort needed to perform this type of ab-initio simulations, we  have not calculated longer trajectories that would decrease the  dispersion  of  calculated  values,  but  should  not  significantly  affect  the  averages  themselves,  since  convergence  of  average  CQ  values  is  already  obtained  for  10  ps  trajectories  (See convergence study in S4 of SI). The occupancy density  of Li ions at a certain distance of the  six nearest O atoms is  represented  in  Figure  5e.  The  sharp  maximum  for  the  three  nearest ones is at 2.05 Å, while for the rest of the O atoms the  graph shows a wider distribution of distances centered at 3.1  Å.  The  most  distant  positions  occupied  by  the  same  Li  ion  during this simulation are 4.4 Å away from each other. Figure  5d  shows  that  Li  ions  in  the  Ti  phase  remain  close  to  the  centroid  of  the  M1  cavity,  while  for  the  HT  Zr  phase  the  probability  of  finding  the  Li  ions  at  this  centroid  is  scarce.  Having its wide maximum centered at 1 Å away from this site.  The best way to describe the cloud of Li ions with discrete Li  sites  would  be  the  use  of  six  symmetry-equivalent  positions  near the windows connecting M1 and M2 cavities as it is done  in the reported diffraction model. 

We have investigated atom deviations from nominal R-3c  positions in one of the trajectories of HT Zr phase. Structures  generated  averaging  atom  positions  after  1  ps  and  10  ps  simulation times give deviations from 0.5 to 0.33 Å considering  Li  ions  and  deviations  from  0.18  to  0.04  Å  if  Li  ions  are  not  included. These values are clearly higher than the ones found  for  the  Ti  phase  at  comparable  simulation  times.  In  the  Ti  phase,  averaging  over  1  ps  provide  deviations  from  R-3c  symmetry comparable to the ones found for the HT Zr phase  for 10 ps. The total simulated span calculated in this study is  not enough to obtain an average structure that complies well  with the symmetry obtained by diffraction in this phase, but it  describes quite well the Li confined motion in the M1 cavity of  the NASICON structure. 

Summarizing the results obtained by MD simulations, we  observe  a  tendency  for  Li  to  coordinate  with  O  atoms  with  distances shorter than 2.3 Å. For small M1 cavities (Ti phase)  this means positions near the centroid of the cavity, while for  bigger  cavities  (HT  Zr  phase)  this  means  positions  near  the  centroids of triangular windows. No Li jumps between cavities  were observed at the temperature and simulation times used  in  this  work.  However,  simulations  obtained  are  useful  to evaluate the effect of dynamics on the quadrupolar interaction,  as we prove in the next section. 

If  the  residence  time  of  a  given  nucleus  at  different  structural sites is much shorter than the time required for NMR  detection  (1/ω0),  the  observed  quadrupolar  interaction  will  correspond to the averaged electrical field gradient felt by that  nucleus  during  acquisition  time  (ms  range).  As  motions  observed in previous simulations are fast with respect to NMR  time  scale,  the  prediction  of  7Li  quadrupolar  CQ  and  ηQ  constants requires the averaging of the electric field gradient  felt by the Li ions through the calculated trajectories. As a word  of caution, we notice that our dynamics simulations only cover  a few ps, while experimental NMR averaging involves longer  times. Therefore, we assume a fair sampling is obtained in the  ps  range,  and  the  system  will  merely  be  revisiting  similar  configurations at longer times. 

Li(A)  and  Li(B)  (first  trajectory)  and  Li(C)  and  Li  (D)  (second  trajectory).  Columns  labeled  symm.  av.  show  results  obtained  after  symmetry  averaging.  Numbers  in  bold  face  compare  experimental  and  calculated  average values. 

Calculated  quadrupolar  constants  considering  MD  are  higher than those obtained from static ground state structures  (47 vs 19 and 66 vs 21 for 300 and 450 K, respectively). It is  shown that vibrations of the framework and motion of Li ions  in  M1  cavities  have  the  global  effect  of  lowering  the  local 

For the Ti phase, Li ions move near M1 sites, while for the LT  Zr phase they wander near M12 sites and for the HT Zr phase  they  exchange  between  M12  sites  within  the  same  cavity.  Simulations  tell  us  that  Li  ions  tend  to  be  coordinated  to  O  atoms at distances shorter than 2.3 Å. Trajectories calculated  for HT and LT Zr phases justify the Li disorder found in neutron  diffraction studies: the clouds of Li ions can be represented by  a small number of partially occupied Li sites with large thermal  factors.  Our theory  and  experiment  and  provide  a  physical  explanation  for  the  apparent  disagreement  with  static  calculations:  averaging  dynamical effects are crucial to get correct values for CQ and  ηQ. Atom vibrations and Li mobility cause a decrease in the 7Li  CQ in phases where Li ions are located at low symmetry sites  (HT  and  LT  Zr  phases).  On  the  contrary,  MD  simulations  predict an increment of 7Li CQ with temperature in the Ti phase,  where Li ions occupy a high symmetry site. Comparing static  and dynamical calculations we find a decrease in CQ of 18%  (LT  Zr  phase).  Such  a  difference  is  larger  than  any  results  reported  in  previous  works  analyzing  dynamical  effects  on  quadrupolar  parameters.[8,  17]  Moreover,  in  the  systems  previously studied no increment in the CQ was found, while we  reproduce  for  the  Ti  phase  the  experimentally  observed  increment in CQ of more than 100 % at 300 K and more than  200  %  at  450  K.  In  the  case  of  the  HT  Zr  phase,  MD simulations  not  only  predict  a  considerable  decrease  in  CQ  (from 19 % to 38 % depending on the starting model used in  MD  simulation),  but simultaneously  explain  a  drastic change  in  the  ηQ  value:  from  about  1  for static structures  to  about  0  due to the dynamics of the system.  

Although it has been reported long-range Li motion above  330  K  on  the  Ti  phase[14],  our  simulations  show  that  at  the  considered temperatures the main dynamical effects on the 7Li  quadrupolar  interaction  are  caused  by  the  confined  thermal  motion  of  Li  ions,  which  is  more  ubiquitous  and  likely  than  jumps between cavities. 

Synthesis  and  characterization.  LiTi2(PO4)3  and  LiZr2(PO4)3  compounds were prepared following the reported method.[5c, 14] X-ray  diffraction (XRD) was used to assess purity of prepared compositions.  XRD patterns were recorded with the Cu KR radiation (λ ) 1.5405981  Å) in the temperature range 303-698 K, using a high temperature AP  HTK10  camera  adapted  to  a  PW  1050/25  Phillips  diffractometer.  Powder XRD patterns were collected in the 10-70° 2θ range with a step  size of 0.02° and a counting time of 0.1 s/step. The Fullprof program[18]  was used to determine unit cell parameters of prepared samples.  7Li  MAS  NMR  spectra  were  recorded  in  a  AVANCE  400  Bruker  spectrometer (9.4 T) at 155.50 MHz. Spectra were obtained after π/2  pulse irradiation (3.5 µs) with a recycling time of 15 s. The number of  scans was 8-400. The fitting of the NMR spectra was carried out with  the Dmfit software[19] The fitting of spectra was performed by trial and  error procedures. Mean errors on CQ and η parameters were below 3  kHz and 0.1 respectively. 

Theoretical Formalism and Simulations. Calculations were carried  out  using  Density  Functional  Theory  (DFT)[20]  as  implemented  in  CASTEP[21] (Materials Studio Suite 2017R2). The formalism employs  the gauge including projector augmented wave (GIPAW)[22] algorithm,  enabling  the  reconstruction  of  the  all-electron  wave  function  in  the  presence  of  a  magnetic  interactions  were  described  by  ultrasoft  pseudopotentials[23]  and  the  Generalized  Gradient Approximation (GGA) PBE[24] functional was used. Geometry  optimizations were performed with a kinetic energy cutoff of 1200 eV  and a Monkhorst–Pack[25] k-point grid spacing of 0.04 Å-1. Optimization  of atomic coordinates were pursued until energy difference, maximum  atomic  force  and  maximum  atomic  displacement  fell  below  5  ×  10-6  eV/atom,  1  ×  10-2  eV/Å  and  5  ×  10-4  Å  tolerances,  respectively.  For  GIPAW  quadrupolar  parameter  calculations,  integrals  over  the  Brillouin zone were performed using a k-point grid spacing of 0.07 Å-1.  Wavefunctions were expanded in planewaves with kinetic energy up  to  a  cutoff  energy  of  1400  eV,  which  was  found  enough  to  get  converged  CQ  values.  Li  mobility  was  investigated  with  BornOppenheimer molecular dynamics simulations (BOMD)[26] in the NVE  ensemble.[27]  The  microcanonical  is  the  appropriate  ensemble  for  a  problem where the number of particles and the volume is fixed and at  the same time it provides a simple way to keep track of the effect of  rounding errors while integrating the equations of motion by monitoring  the conservation of the energy. CASTEP[21] has been used to perform  these  simulations,  with  the  following  parameters:  an  integration  time  step of 1 × 10-15 s, ‘on the fly’ pseudopotentials, an energy cutoff for  plane  waves  of  600  eV,  and  a  Monkhorst–Pack  grid  with  a  k-point  spacing of 0.07 Å-1. The extended Lagrangian formulation was used[28].  Two trajectories of 5 × 10-12 s were calculated for the Ti phase at 300  and 450 K, two more trajectories of 5 × 10-12 s were calculated for the  LT Zr phase and three trajectories of 10 × 10-12 s were calculated for  the HT Zr phase. The initial 200 fs, involved in the equilibration of the  system,  were  disregarded.  To  perform  the  averaging  of  quadrupolar  interactions,  snapshots  were  extracted  every  20  ×  10-15  s.  GIPAW 

NMR  calculations  were  performed  on  every  selected  snapshot  and  each  component  of  the  EFG  tensor  was  averaged  to  obtain  the  average  tensor.  From  this  average  tensor,  the  quadrupolar  constant  and the asymmetry parameter were obtained by matrix diagonalization,  according to the expressions [1]. 