The NASICON system LAGP  (Li1+xAlxGe2−x  (PO4)3 was studied, which is a candidate material for solid state electrolytes. LAGP substrates with different compositions (x = 0.3–0.7) were prepared using a melt quenching route with subsequent heat  treatment. In order to develop a better understanding of the relationships between  the structure and the ionic as well as the thermal conductivity, respectively, the samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction. The ionic conductivity was measured  using impedance spectroscopy while the thermal diffusivity and the specific heat  were  determined  by  Laser  Flash  technique  and  differential  scanning  calorimetry,  respectively. Additionally, thermal analysis was performed in order to evaluate the  thermal stability a higher temperatures and, also to identify the optimum temperature range of the thermal post-processing. The measured values of the ionic conductivities were in the range of  10−4 Ω−1·cm−1 to  10−3 Ω−1·cm−1 at room temperature,  but exhibited an increasing behavior as a function of temperature reaching a level of  the order  10−2 Ω−1·  cm−1 above 200 °C. The thermal conductivity varies only slowly  as a function of temperature but its level depends on the composition. The apparent  specific  heat  depends  also  on  the  composition  and  exhibits  enthalpy  changes  due to phase transitions at higher temperatures for LAGP samples with x > 0.5. The  compositional  dependencies  of  the  ionic  and  thermal  transport  properties  are  not  simply correlated. However, the compound with the highest Li-doping level shows  the highest ionic conductivity but the lowest thermal conductivity, while the lowest doping level is associated with highest thermal conductivity but the lowest ionic  conductivity.

Within the current state of development, liquid electrolytes are utilized in Li-ion  batteries for energy storage with high capacity and power density. These organic  liquids serving as the solvents for Li salts are not thermally stable and tend to  degrade at higher temperatures. Most of these liquids are flammable which can be  an important security issue in high power battery systems. With regard to security  and stability, ceramic solid electrolytes offer a number of advantageous properties. Even at higher temperatures they are very stable and do not degrade, and  therefore reduce the efforts of a sophisticated thermal management in All-SolidState battery systems.

The  lithium  aluminum  germanium  phosphate  (LAGP,   Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3)  (x = 0.3–0.7)) superionic conductor is one of the candidates for a solid electrolyte  in  Li-ion  batteries.  The  ceramic  ionic  conductor  is  stable  in  air,  in  water  and  at  high  potentials,  respectively.  The  ionic  conductivity  exhibits  a  broad  maximum of σIon ≈ 10−4 Ω−1·cm−1 to  10−3 Ω−1·cm−1 [1–3] in the compositional  range  of  x = 0.3–0.7.  LAGP  shows  a  NaSICON  structure  (Sodium  (Na+)  Super  Ionic  Conductor)  with  space  group  R  ̄3  c  (#167).  It  consists  of  corner  sharing   MO6-octahedra  (with  M = Ge,  Al)  and   PO4-tetrahedra  [4–6].  In  the  un-doped   LiGe2(PO4)3 (LGP) crystals the Li-ions completely occupy a lattice site between  two   GeO6-octahedra  (Wyckoff  position  6b).  By  aliovalent  substitution  of  Ge  with Al, the  Al3+ ions partially occupy the  Ge4+ site (Wyckoff position 12c). In  order to compensate the additional charges, the excess  Li+ is located at sites with  higher energy (Wyckoff position 18e). Lithium ion conduction occurs via hopping between the two sites for which the partial occupation is crucial since it also  lowers the activation energy for the  Li+ migration. Simulation studies show that  in  LiTi2(PO4)3, which also exhibits the NASICON structure, there are diffusion  paths along the c-axis due to its lower activation energy for ion migration [7–9]. Although there are numerous studies on the ionic transport in Li-conducting  solid electrolytes, the thermophysical properties have been studied only in a small  number of publications. Particularly, the thermal transport behavior and the specific heat of LAGP have not been investigated up to now. However, these properties might give additional insights in the physics of superionic conductors.

In the present study, the heat capacity, thermal conductivity and ionic conductivity of LAGP with different compositions were studied. In order to relate these properties to the details of the structure, hot stage XRD was carried out up to 900 °C,  which allows us to follow the structural changes due to the heat treatment procedure.

LAGP glasses were prepared using the melt-quench-route, which has been successfully proved in former studies [6, 10].  Li2CO3 (Fluka, 99.0 %),  Al2O3 (SigmaAldrich,  98.5  %),   P2O5  (Analar  Normapur,  99.1  %)  and   GeO2  (Alfa  Aesar, 99.98 %) were used as the starting materials for the glass fabrication. A stoichiometric mixture of these powders was heated up to 1450 °C with a heating rate of  5 °C·min−1 in an  Al2O3 crucible and held at that temperature for 10–15 min. The  melt was quenched and pressed between two steel plates at room temperature to  form a glass disc.

The  chemical  composition  of  the  prepared  glass  was  analyzed  by  inductively  coupled  plasma  optical  emission  spectrometry  (ICP-OES,  Optima  4300  DV,  Perkin-Elmer).  The  oxygen  content  was  measured  using  Carrier  Gas  Hot  Extraction  (CGHE, TC 600, Leco Co.).

The glass transition Tg and the crystallization temperature Tc, respectively, were determined with a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC 404, Netzsch).

Hot stage XRD was carried out to reveal possible structural changes of the LAGP  at elevated temperatures. X-ray powder diffractograms were taken in the temperature  range from 630 °C to 900 °C.

The specific heat was measured using the standard three-step procedure [11] in  the DSC (DSC 404, Netzsch for the temperature range 150 °C to 900 °C and DSC  204 Netzsch for the temperature range − 25 °C to 150 °C).

The ionic conductivity of glass–ceramics samples was determined by recording  impedance spectra in the frequency range 100 Hz up to 5 MHz using a LCR meter  (Sourcetronic  2826)  and  by  evaluating  the  complex  impedance  with  a  matched  Equivalent Circuit Modell (ECM) in order to extract resistivity values. The principles of these measurements were explained elsewhere [12, 13].

The thermal diffusivity was measured as a function of temperature up to 800 °C  using a Laser Flash device (LFA 427, Netzsch). The thermal conductivity was calculated using the data of the specific heat and density, respectively.

The chemical composition of the different glass batches is shown in Table 1. The  differences of the LAGP batches are mainly determined by the varying lithium concentration within the range between x = 0.3–0.7, namely a glass with low Li content   Li1.31Al0.42Ge1.52P3O12.1, with medium Li content  Li1.55Al0.52Ge1.36P3O12.0, and with  high Li content  Li1.71Al0.53Ge1.36P3O11.9. The  thermal  behavior  of  the  as-quenched  glass  samples  during  heat  treatment  measured by the DSC is shown in Fig. 1. The DSC traces reflect the glass transition  as  well  as  the  crystallization  temperatures,  respectively.  Obviously,  the  glass  transition  and  the  crystallization  temperature,  respectively,  decrease  with 

In this work, we have studied the ionic and the thermal transport properties of LAGP  with different compositions. The specific heat capacity and the thermal conductivity,  respectively, were measured for the first time within this NASICON system. The apparent heat capacity scales with the doping level and depends therefore on the Li content.  Phase transitions could also be observed in the specific heat data, but only for doping  levels which are equal of larger than x = 0.5. Although the ionic conductivity increases  strongly with the Li content and with increasing temperature, the thermal conductivity  decreases at higher doping level and varies only slowly with the temperature.