
Nowadays, with the rapid development of portable electronics and hybrid or the demand of highperformance, cost-effective and sustainable energy storage systems is ever-growing [1e3]. Although lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have achieved great success and occupied the emerging energy storage market because of high energy density, long cycle life and high capacity. Due to the uneven distribution of lithium resources[15,16]. Variable vanadium valence (3

frame structure which is connected by [VO5F] octahedron and [PO4] tetrahedron, provides a convenient channel for rapid insertion/ þ extraction of Na ) and ﬂexible crystal structure make it exhibit higher voltage and reversible capacity [17]. However, low electron conductivity and low sodium ion diffusivity are common problems to most metal phosphate cathode materials, which hinders further practical applications [18e21].

It is known that introducing carbon materials is an economic and effective to overcome the inferior electronic conductivity. For instance, Liu et. al. [22] synthesized an uniform Na3V2(PO4)2F3 nanoparticles via a sol-gel method with a CNT coating and potassium doping, which exhibited excellent cycle performance with a high speciﬁc capacity of 120 mAh/g a rate of 1 C. Chen et. al. [23] reported a Na3V2(PO4)2O2F@rGO 3D-sandwiched nanostructure. It delivered a speciﬁc discharge capacity of 83.6 mAh/g at 5 C. Kumar et. al. [24] combined Na3V2(PO4)2O2F with multi-walled carbon nanotubes and it showed a stable capacity of 98 mAh/g at 0.1 C after 120 cycles. Mai et. al. [25] integrated the high ﬂexible graphene sheets with Na3V2(PO4)2O2F which displayed high speciﬁc capacity (127.2 mAh/g at 1 C). However, introducing carbon materials brings some negative consequences, such as the poor thermal resistance, the weak binding to cathode materials and the low tap density. In order to overcome these shortcomings, introducing low cost and good stability transition metal oxide metal oxides to improve the electrochemical properties of the electrode materials has become a promising strategy [26e28]. Niu and his colleagues successfully coated MoOx on the surface of lithium-rich material via in situ hydrolysis deposition and found lower oxidation state MoOx þ endow the material with high Li conductivity and excellent electronic conductivity resulting in better electrochemical performance [29]. Du et. al. proved the nano-SnO2 coating layer containing oxygen vacancies is revealed to facilitate the transfer of high valence state oxygen through the coating layer and be responsible for the promoted activation of Li2MnO3 [30]. However, there are few reports on the modiﬁcation of cathode materials for sodium ion batteries by coating an oxygen-containing metal oxide.

In this paper, we synthesized Na3V2O2(PO4)2F with different morphologies by hydrothermal synthesis using four different organic solvents. It is found that sheet-like Na3V2O2(PO4)2F showed better electrochemical performance by electrochemical tests. At the same time, we use sol-gel method combined with high temperature calcination to coat different contents of TiO2 containing oxygen defects on the surface of the sheet-like Na3V2O2(PO4)2F material.

The electrode performance of as-prepared Na3V2O2(PO4)2F@TiO2-x materials were investigated and the results demonstrated that the Na3V2O2(PO4)2F@TiO2-x composite with about 3 wt% TiO2-x shows the best electrochemical properties.

In summary, we successfully prepared four different morphologies of NVOPF as electrode material for sodium ion batteries using four different organic solvents. It was found that the sheet-like structure is more favorable for the transport of ions and electrons, thereby exhibiting better cycle performance and rate performance.