Superior stability and safety are key promises attributed to all-solid-state batteries (ASSBs) containing solidstate electrolyte (SSE) compared to their conventional counterparts utilizing liquid electrolyte. To unleash the full potential of ASSBs, SSE materials that are stable when in contact with the low and high potential electrodes are required. The electrochemical stability window is conveniently used to assess the SSE– electrode interface stability. In the present work, we review the most important methods to compute the SSE stability window. Our analysis reveals that the stoichiometry stability method represents a bridge between the HOMO–LUMO method and the phase stability method (grand canonical phase diagram). Moreover, we provide computational implementations of these methods for SSE material screening. We compare their results for the relevant Liand Na-SSE materials LGPS, LIPON, LLZO, LLTO, LATP, LISICON, and NASICON, and we discuss their relation to published experimental stability windows.

Solid-state electrolyte (SSE) materials, i.e. materials that provide ionic but no electronic conductivity, are key components of allsolid-state batteries (ASSBs), which are considered as promising candidates for next generation Liand Na-ion batteries. State-ofthe-art Li-ion batteries are based on liquid organic electrolytes, which are ammable and furthermore thermodynamically unstable against the low-potential electrode, e.g. metallic Li. Their operation is possible only because of the formation of a passivating layer between the electrode and the liquid electrolyte, termed the “solid electrolyte interphase”§ (SEI).1,2 In comparison to liquid electrolytes, many SSE materials oﬀer superior stability against reduction and oxidation. Nevertheless, only few SSE materials provide true thermodynamic stability aIBM Research – Zurich, S¨aumerstrasse 4, CH-8803 R¨uschlikon, Switzerland. E-mail: tobias.binninger.science@gmx.de bTheory and Simulation of Materials, ´Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale de Lausanne, CH1015 Lausanne, Switzerland † Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Derivation of Nernst equation; simple model for stoichiometry stability window; extended model for stoichiometry stability window; comparison of Ewald vs. DFT energies. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta09401f ‡ Contributed equally to this work. § Strictly speaking, the original term was chosen to denote the solid “phase” of the passivating layer with a certain ionic conductivity, i.e. a “solid electrolyte phase” in between the electrode and the liquid electrolyte. Nowadays, however, also the term “solid–electrolyte interface” is commonly used for SEI, i.e. the layer at the “interface” between the solid electrode and the liquid electrolyte. The use of the abbreviation SEI allows to neglect these subtle diﬀerences in terminology.


Therefore, interfacial stability between the electrode and the solid-state electrolyte is a focus topic in current ASSB research.5,6 For many SSE materials, a passivating interphase layer forms between the metallic low-potential electrode and the SSE,3,5–7 which consists of SSE decomposition products, similar to the SEI layer in liquid electrolyte Li-ion cells. Although such a “metal–solid electrolyte interphase (MSEI) layer”7 can render an ASSB meta-stable due to passivation and also provide a certain ionic conductivity to sustain battery operation, the battery performance will be deteriorated because of the reduced ionic conductivity of the interphase layer. The same conclusion holds for passivating interphase layers between SSE and high-potential electrode.4 Thus, for ASSBs to unfold their full potential, stability of the SSE against both electrodes is desirable to avoid the formation of interphase layers.


The interface stability properties of an SSE material in contact with an electrode are best described by its electroto “electrochemical chemical stability window. We refer stability” as the stability of an SSE material against reactions that contain transfer of atoms of the mobile species, e.g. Lior Naatoms. It must be emphasized that only the transfer of neutral atoms represents an SSE instability. In contrast, the transfer of mobile species ions, e.g. Li+ or Na+, across the electrode–SSE interface is part of the normal battery operation and it does not alter the SSE composition or structure.

This denition of “electrochemical stability” comprises both potential-driven SSE instability processes in a closed-circuit cell and direct reactions between SSE and electrodes under exchange of mobile species atoms that can also proceed in anopen-circuit cell. In fact, both types of processes are equivalent: in an electrochemical process, the electrode represents an electron reservoir and electron transfer occurs across the electrode–electrolyte interface. If only electrons are transferred, the build-up of charge quickly stops the process. Thus, for an instability reaction to proceed, charge neutrality must be preserved i.e. the electronic charge transfer must be compensated by the movement of mobile ions to/from the instability reaction interface (RI), cf. Fig. 1. In a closed-circuit electrochemical cell, Fig. 1a, the compensating ions are supplied to interface RI through the SSE by the counter-reaction at the opposite electrode CE. However, in an ASSB the electro-active electrode materials are also ion reservoirs. Therefore, the compensating ions for the instability reaction can also be provided in an open-circuit ASSB from electrode E itself across the same electrode–SSE interface RI as the electrons. The combination of electron and ion transfer represents a transfer of neutral mobile atoms between electrode and SSE, Fig. 1b.

The rst method considers reactions of type (1) in the limit of small x where the only product is the same SSE phase with a changed stoichiometry of the mobile species. Therefore, we will refer to this method as “stoichiometry stability method”. Such processes are similar to Li-insertion or Li-extraction reactions in electro-active electrode materials. Whereas in the latter case such reactions are part of the required function, for an SSE they represent an instability. This method was applied to compute the Li-insertion potentials of various garnet-type LiSSE materials,11 the Li-insertion and Li-extraction potentials of LGPS,12 and the Na-extraction potentials of various Na-SSE materials.13 A similar defect chemistry-derived perspective on SSE stability was adopted to investigate the instability of Li4P2S6 SSE against metallic Li.14 Although this type of instability reaction is sometimes referred to as “topochemical” or “topotactic”, we believe that this terminology must be used with care, because, strictly speaking, the latter terms denote an insertion reaction “that results in signicant structural modications to the host”, as dened by IUPAC.15 In contrast, apart from some local relaxation, the SSE structure is usually considered unchanged when computing the insertion/extraction potentials of mobile species by lling/generating vacancies within the SSE host structure.

On the contrary, the “phase stability method” considers reactions of type (1) that result in major decomposition of the SSE phase into several diﬀerent product phases. This is typically done by constructing the grand canonical phase diagram of the SSE and identifying the critical values of the mobile species chemical potential that dene the limiting SSE reduction and oxidation potentials.3,10,16 Because the phase stability method takes into account a set of instability reactions that is disjoint from the stoichiometry stability method, the corresponding stability windows are complementary in the sense that the overall electrochemical stability window of an SSE material is the intersection of the stoichiometry stability window and the phase stability window. It was observed that the phase stability window is generally narrower than the stoichiometry stability window,13 so that the overall stability window is determined by the former. In contrast to the HOMO–LUMO method, both the stoichiometry stability method and the phase stability method yield a reliable absolute position of the electrochemical stability window w.r.t. a reference electrode potential.

In the present work, we analyse the relation between the diﬀerent methods with a focus on the stoichiometry stability method. We provide computational implementations in an open-source repository17 and we compare the results for a set of relevant Liand Na-SSE materials.

Methodology In the following, we indicate with A ¼ Li, Na, ., the mobile species within an SSE material. We rst discuss the stoichiometry stability method, then its connection with the HOMO– LUMO method, and nally the phase stability method.

Stoichiometry stability window We denote as AnM the stable composition for a unit cell of an SSE material, where the meaning of “stable” is further specied below. As explained in the Introduction, the stoichiometry stability method considers A-insertion/extraction reactions to/ from the SSE structure, where 3 is small compared to n. The critical diﬀerence between these instability processes and the transfer of A+ ions during normal battery operation is the fact that the former change the SSE stoichiometry and the oxidation state of certain species in the M-matrix. They represent redox-reactions between SSE and the respective electrode material: SSE reduction (5) and SSE oxidation (6).

Monte Carlo sampling. An eﬃcient sampling method is required to nd the congurational ground-state energies, because a complete sampling of all congurations is not possible, and because the energies can vary signicantly between diﬀerent congurations. We use a Monte Carlo sampling algorithm based on purely electrostatic Ewald energies to identify a number of candidate congurations for the congurational ground-state. A random initial distribution of Aatoms over the available A-sites is generated according to the occupancies dened in the SSE material crystallographic le. Every Monte Carlo step consists of swapping a randomly chosen A-atom to an unoccupied A-site. The swap is accepted according to the Metropolis criterion with a probability p ¼ min(1, exp( DE/(kBT))), where DE is the Ewald energy diﬀerence of the swap, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature chosen. The corresponding Ewald energies are computed from the formal charges of each species given in the crystallographic le using the pymatgen Python module.24 The Monte Carlo process runs until equilibration is reached.

We then use the nal congurations of approximately 30 independent Monte Carlo runs to compute their density functional theory (DFT) energies including structural relaxation. Finally, the minimum of the relaxed DFT energies is determined. The entire process is performed separately for the three compositions ANM, AN+1M, and AN1M to determine Emin AN M, Emin ANþ1M, and Emin

The sampling method is based on the assumption that congurations with minimum DFT energies also have electrostatic Ewald energies close to the minimum, which has also been used by other authors.10 To further verify this assumption, we plot Ewald energies vs. DFT energies in ESI Fig. S2† for the SSE materials LGPS, LIPON, LLZO, LLTO, LATP, LISICON, and NASICON. For each of the compositions AN1M, ANM, and AN+1M, we selected 100 random congurations. A linear correlation is observed in most cases. Typical slopes of the order of 2– 5 indicate the dielectric screening properties of the materials, which are neglected in Ewald energies. Based on the slopes and the scattering of the energy–energy plots, we chose a temperature of 5000 K for the Monte Carlo runs.

DFT details. DFT computations were performed using the Quantum ESPRESSO soware package.25 The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) of the exchange–correlation functional in PBE form26 was used along with pseudopotentials from the SSSP eﬃciency library.27,28 We chose the double of the cutoﬀ values suggested by SSSP for wavefunctions and density. Because of the usage of supercells, k-point sampling was restricted to the G-point. The convergence of the results was conrmed by certain computations using a 2  2  2 kpoint mesh. If possible, the magnetization, i.e. the population diﬀerence Dn between upand down-spin, was allowed to relax. In case of failure, it was xed at Dn ¼ 0 for ANM (closed-shell) and at Dn ¼ 1 for AN1M (single unpaired electron). We further used Marzari–Vanderbilt smearing29 with 0.005 Ry.

We also tested the inuence of hybrid functionals using HSE06 (ref. 30) with an exact exchange fraction of 0.25 together with SG15 ONCV pseudopotentials.31,32 We used a wavefunction cutoﬀ of 100 Ry for LATP and LLTO, and 60 Ry for LLZO (because of its very large cell). The density cutoﬀ was four times the wavefunction cutoﬀ.

Stoichiometry stability window and HOMO–LUMO method The SSE stoichiometry stability window is determined by the discontinuity in the chemical potential of neutral A at the stable stoichiometry. This discontinuity originates from the electronic HOMO–LUMO gap (or band gap). Therefore, a very close relation exists between the stoichiometry stability method and the HOMO–LUMO method. In fact, the chemical potential of neutral A in the SSE phase, cf. eqn (10), is equal to the sum of e  and A+ chemical potentials, dz ¼ vG

The electrochemical stability of an SSE material against major decomposition of the SSE phase is typically assessed by computing its A-grand canonical phase diagram.3,10,16 The electro-active material of the electrode represents an Areservoir. The corresponding A-chemical potential mA is xed by the electrode potential F via the relation F (mA mA A)/ e, which is analogous to eqn (9), with the A-metal reference chemical potential mA A.


We analysed the relation between three diﬀerent methods to compute the electrochemical stability window of solid-state electrolytes, namely the HOMO–LUMO method, the phase stability method, and the stoichiometry stability method. Interestingly, the latter method represents a link between the former two. The width of the stoichiometry stability window is equal to the fundamental gap of the SSE. Whereas the phase stability method takes into account the equilibrium potentials of SSE phase decomposition reactions, the stoichiometry stability method considers the insertion and extraction of single A-atoms (A ¼ Li, Na) into/from the intact SSE structure. Because these sets of instability reactions are disjoint, the corresponding phase and stoichiometry stability windows are complementary. We further provided computational implementations of the methods and we compared the results for the relevant Liand Na-SSE materials LGPS, LIPON, LLZO, LLTO, LATP, LISICON, and NASICON. In most cases, the phase stability window is stricter than the stoichiometry stability window, but we also found exceptions to that rule.