Recently, solid-state lithium batteries (SSLBs) have been considered an ideal  solution for the practical application of lithium (Li) metal batteries owing to  the excellent safety features of solid-state electrolytes (SSEs). Among various  SSEs, Na superionic conductor (NASICON)-type Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 (LATP)  holds great potential for its high ionic conductivity, low costs, and high  stability. However, LATP tends to be reduced by metallic Li upon contact,  posing a major challenge. Herein, a novel coating strategy is proposed  to form a nanocomposite protecting layer on Li metal within 30 s. Such a  protecting layer not only acts as an artificial solid-electrolyte interface to  conduct Li ion transportation that remains stable after repeated cycling  but also effectively precludes the interfacial reaction between Li and LATP  by inhibiting the interfacial electron transfer. As a result, the Li/LATP/Li  symmetric cells exhibit excellent cycling stability for over 300 h of continuous  Li plating/stripping. The assembled full-cell using coated Li also shows high  capacity retention after 500 cycles. Overall, this study demonstrates a facile  and transferable method to reduce the reactivity of Li metal anode toward  solid electrolytes with relatively high reduction potentials.

With  the  ever-increasing  demand  for  energy  storage  system,  next-generation  battery  systems  with  higher  energy  densities  are desirable to replace traditional lithium-ion batteries (LIBs).[1]  Due  to  its  high  theoretical  capacity  (3860  mAh  g−1)  as  well  as  low  redox  potential  (−3.04  V  vs  standard  hydrogen  electrode),  lithium (Li) metal is considered the ideal anode material for the  next-generation battery.[2] However, the practical use of Li metal  anode in organic liquid electrolyte is hindered by several issues  such as low coulombic efficiency and unstable solid-electrolyte  interface  (SEI).[3]  Moreover,  safety  issues  related  to  the  high 

Recently,  solid-state  lithium  batteries  (SSLBs)  have  been  extensively  studied  owing  to  the  excellent  safety  features  of  solid-state  electrolytes  (SSEs).  Moreover,  it  is  widely  believed  that  dendrite  problem  can be solved in SSLBs due to the enough  mechanical  strength  of  SSEs.[7–10]  Thus,  combining  SSEs  with  Li  metal  anode  is  promising  to  deliver  high  safety  and  high  energy  density.  Among  various  SSEs,  Na  superionic  conductor  (NASICON)type  Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3  (LATP)  with  high  room-temperature  ionic  conductivity,  low  costs  and  high  stability  in  ambient  environment  are  considered  one  of  the  most  promising  solid  electrolytes.[11,12]  These  properties  exhibit  huge  application  potentials  in  next-generation  Li  metal  batteries  (e.g.,  Li–O2  battery).[13,14]  However,  several  disadvantages  have  limited  the  wide  application  of  LATP  such  as  the  large  grain  boundary  resistance  as  well  as  the  Li  loss during high-temperature sintering.[15,16] More importantly,  due to the high reducibility of metallic Li, Li metal anode tends  to  irreversibly  react  with  LATP  directly.[17]  As  a  result,  severe  side  reactions  between  LATP  and  Li  metal  still  remain  a  critical  challenge  where  Ti4+  in  LATP  is  prone  to  be  reduced  into  Ti3+  by  Li  metal  upon  physical  contact.  The  impurity  phases  and  cracks  resulted  from  the  reduction  reaction  of  LATP  will  lead to large interfacial resistance and eventually results in the  failure  of  battery.[18–20]  To  improve  the  stability  of  NASICONtype SSEs against Li metal, intermediate layers including Ge,[21]  crosslinked  poly(ethylene  glycol)  methyl  ether  acrylate,[22]  atomic-layer deposited Al2O3,[23] and boron nitride film[24] have  been  previously  utilized  at  the  interface  between  SSEs  and  Li  metal  foil.  Alternatively,  composite  solid  electrolytes  such  as  poly(ethylene  oxide),  polyacrylonitrile,  and  poly(vinylidene  fluoride-co-hexefluoropropylene)  have  also  been  reported  by  mixing  LATP  with  solid  polymer  electrolytes.[25–30]  Although  both  reported  strategies  could  effectively  mitigate  the  surface  reduction reaction by avoiding direct contact between LATP and  metallic Li, most techniques either require complex preparation  process or compromise the energy density.

It  has  been  widely  reported  that  metal  fluorides  (e.g.,  LiF)  play a crucial role in forming a stable SEI layer.

The  coating  process  is  illustrated  in  Figure  2a:  first,  a  few  drops  of  reaction  solution  containing  LiBF4  and  Mg(ClO4)2  in  dimethoxy  ethane  (DME)  are  casted  on  the  Li  metal  foil;  then  the  surface  of  Li  foil  turns  dark  immediately;  after  30  s,  the  foil  is  washed  by  DME  solvent  and  dried  for  use.  The  whole  preparation takes less than 2 min, which is highly efficient for  large-scale  production.  The  cross-sectional  scanning  electron  microscopy  (SEM)  image  of  the  coated  Li  in  Figure  2b  shows  that  the  thickness  of  the  coating  layer  is  ≈400  nm.  However,  by  examining  the  coated  Li  using  X-ray  diffractometer  (XRD),  no  extra  peak  other  than  metallic  Li  can  be  found  (shown  in  Figure  S1,  Supporting  Information).  This  may  be  due  to  that  the  coating  layer  is  too  thin  to  be  detected  by  XRD.  To  determine  the  chemical  compositions  of  the  coating  layer,  a  small  amount of Li was employed to react with a large excess amount  of reaction solution and the resulted solid product was collected  for  characterization.  From  the  XRD  pattern  in  Figure  2c,  it  can be seen that all metallic Li has fully reacted, forming LiF,  MgF2, and B2O3. This composition matches well with the X-ray  photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data exhibited in Figure 2d,e  (other  elements  are  presented  in  Figure  S2,  Supporting  Information), where Mg mainly exists as MgF2 and B mainly exists  − residue. It is interesting  as B2O3 with a small amount of BF4that  both  LiBF4  and  Mg(ClO4)2  solutions  are  relatively  stable  with Li metal whereas the mixed solution reacts violently with  Li within seconds. It is speculated that these two salts have synergic  reactions  with  Li  metal;  however,  the  chemistry  behind  the reactions is still unclear.


The  cycling  stability  of  coated  Li  is  first  tested  in  Li-symmetric  cells  using  ether-based  liquid  electrolyte  consisting  of 1.0  m lithium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (LiFSI) in DME. The  voltage profiles of Li-symmetric cells using bare Li and coated  Li  are  compared  in  Figure  S3  in  the  Supporting  Information.  Under a current density of 1 mA cm−2, the voltage polarization  of  the  cell  using  bare  Li  increases  gradually  with  time,  suggesting  a  continuously  increasing  cell  resistance.  This  can  be  attributed  to  the  unstable  SEI  formed  on  the  Li  anode  which  results in accumulation of SEI as well as continuous consumption  of  electrolyte.  The  voltage  spikes  after  650  h  of  cycling,  indicating  a  sudden  deterioration  of  cell.  Under  the  same  testing condition, the cell with coated Li exhibits stable voltage  profiles  for  650  h  of  cycling  despite  that  the  initial  polarization  is  higher  than  the  cell  with  bare  Li,  which  is  due  to  the  initial  higher  charge  transfer  resistance  (RCT)  as  evidenced  in  Figure S4 in the Supporting Information. In addition, as shown  in Figure S5 in the Supporting Information, the coated Li maintained stable under a much higher areal capacity of 3 mAh cm−2  for  over  100  h.  Although  the  slightly  impeded  Li-ion  transfer  across the coating layer might be the origin of higher RCT value,  the  significantly  improved  cycling  stability  indicates  a  wellpreserved integrity of SEI in the presence of the coating layer.  Moreover, from the XPS data (Figure 2f,g) of the coated Li after  100 cycles (washed by DME before XPS measurement), it can  be  concluded  that  the  coating  layer  is  able  to  endure  repeated  Li plating and stripping. In addition, the XPS data of C and F  (Figure S6, Supporting Information) also show that the organic  SEI  component  on  Li  surface  barely  changed  after  cycling,  which further confirms the robust feature of the coating layer.  By quantitatively analyzing the peak areas, it can be also found  − decreases from roughly 32%  that the proportion of residue BF4 (31.6%  of  B  and  32.1%  of  F)  to ≈11%  (10.8%  of  B  and  11.7% of F) after cycling, which can be due to that BF4 the electrolyte during repeated reaction.

As  shown  in  Figure  S7  in  the  Supporting  Information,  the  ionic  conductivity  of  the  prepared  LATP  pallet  at  room  temperature  is  measured  to  be  2.35  ×  10−4  S  cm−1,  which  is  in  good  agreement  with  literature  values  (ranging  from  8  ×  10−5  to  6  ×  10−4  S  cm−1).[31]  To  evaluate  the  chemical  stability  of  LATP  toward  coated  Li,  Li  symmetric  cells  are  assembled  where  an  LATP  pellet  is  sandwiched  between  two  Li  anodes.  It  should  be  noted  that  due  to  the  large  impedances  between  solid-solid  interfaces,  a  minimum  amount  (5  µL)  of  liquid electrolyte  was  added  on  each  side  of  LATP  pellet  to  wet  the  interface  so  that  high-temperature  sintering  can  be  avoided.  First,  the  electrochemical  impedance  spectra  (EIS)  of  the  cells  are measured every 20 h after cell fabrication. From the Nyquist  plot  in  Figure  3a,  it  can  be  seen  that  in  the  presence  of  bare  Li, both the resistance of the bulk electrolyte RE (presented by  the  starting  point  the  semicircle  in  the  Nyquist  plot)  and  the  interfacial  impedance  RInt  (presented  by  the  semicircle  in  the  Nyquist  plot)  increase  drastically  with  time.  This  result  suggests  that  the  reaction  between  Li  and  LATP  not  only  forms  a  layer  of  decomposition  product  with  growing  thickness 

However, by replacing bare Li  with the coated Li, the value of RE and RInt shown in Figure 3b  only  increased  by  29  and  117  Ω,  respectively.  In  addition,  as  shown in Figure 3c,d, it can be clearly observed that after 100 h,  the surface of LATP contacted with Li turns black whereas the  color  of  LATP  contacted  with  coated  Li  remains  unchanged.  Moreover,  the  XPS  results  also  confirm  that  Ti4+  at  the  interface is reduced to Ti3+ by the bare Li; whereas this phenomenon  cannot be observed for LATP contacted with the coated Li. All  evidences above strongly indicate suppressed reaction between  LATP and coated Li, hence a more stable interface.

Galvanostatic  cycling  of  Li  symmetric  cells  is  carried  out  to  further test the interfacial stability between LATP and coated Li.  The voltage profiles in Figure 4a clearly show that under a current  density  of  0.13  mA  cm−2,  the  voltage  polarization  of  the  Li/LATP/Li cell increases rapidly with cycles, which is in good  accordance  with  the  exacerbated  interface.  In  sharp  contrast,  the  voltage  profiles  of  the  cell  using  coated  Li  remain  stable  even  after  300  h  of  cycling.  The  change  impedance  spectra  with cycling (shown in Figure 4b,c) also indicate the huge difference  between  two  cells.  The  interfacial  stability  is  further demonstrated by testing the cell under a much higher current  density (0.39 mA cm−2) and areal capacity (0.39 mAh cm−2), it  is  shown  in  Figure  4d  that  the  voltage  profiles  remain  stable  after  cycling  for  75  h.  It  is  also  found  that  the  compactness  of  coating  layer  also  plays  an  important  role  in  the  interfacial  stability  between  Li  and  LATP.  As  shown  in  Figure  S8  in  the  Supporting  Information,  the  color  changes  indicate  that  the  increasing amount of solution added to react with Li promotes  the thickness and compactness of the coating layer, hence the  more stable Li/LATP interface.

For  a  better  understanding  of  the  protecting  mechanism  of  the coating layer, its impact on electronic conductivity is evaluated via a potentiostatic method. By applying a constant external  positive voltage (0.1 V) over a stainless steel (SS)/Li cell where  two metals are directly contacted, a current contributed by electrons can be obtained. As shown in Figure S9 in the Supporting  Information,  electronic  currents  for  SS/Li  and  SS/coated  Li  are the current 8 × 10−2 and 3 × 10−5 A respectively, indicating  that  the  electronic  conductivity  of  the  cell  is  over  2000  times  lower with the coating. Therefore, the key effect of the coating  layer  on  stabilizing  Li/LATP  interface  can  be  attributed  to  the  inhibited electron transfer as illustrated in Figure 1.

To  evaluate  the  feasibility  of  this  coating  approach  in  a  practical  system,  LFP  full  cells  are  further  fabricated  for  long-term cycling at the rate of 1.5 C. As shown in Figure 5a,  for  the  LFP/LATP/Li  cell,  the  initial  specific  capacity  is  150  mAh  g−1.  Then  the  specific  capacity  of  cell  rapidly  decreases as the cycle increases, the specific capacities of 50th  cycle  and  100th  cycle  are  69  and  11  mAh  g−1  corresponding  to a capacity retention of 45.5% and 7.4% respectively. From  the  previous  results,  it  can  be  inferred  that  the  failure  of  LFP/LATP/Li cell is attributed to the increased internal resistance caused by the reduction reaction between Li anode and  LATP.  By  contrast,  as  shown  in  Figure  5b,  despite  the  relatively low initial specific capacity of 130 mAh g−1, the capacity  of 17th cycle increases to 145 mAh g−1 after activation. More  importantly, the specific capacities for 100th and 500th cycle  are  136  and  127  mAh  g−1  respectively,  indicating  that  full  cell  using  coated  Li  as  anode  shows  superior  stability  for 500  cycles.  From  the  cycling  performance  demonstrated  in  Figure 5c, it can also be seen that the coulombic efficiency of  LFP/LATP/Li cell fluctuates with cycling whereas the cell with  coated Li shows much more consistent coulombic efficiency.  From  the  gradually  increasing  impedance  in  Figure  S10  in  the Supporting Information, it is speculated that the capacity  fading for the cell using coated Li could be due to the depletion of liquid electrolyte as well as gradual degradation of the  protective layer during prolonged cycling, which further leads  to voltage polarization as shown in Figure 5c. The improved  cycling  performance  in  full  cells  further  confirms  the  stabilizing  effect  of  the  coating  layer  on  the  interface  between  Li  and SSEs.


In  this  study,  a  novel  coating  strategy  for  Li  anode  is  proposed  to  quickly  form  an  artificial  nanocomposite  protecting  layer  which  consists  of  LiF,  MgF2,  and  B2O3,  and  serves  as  an  artificial  SEI  that  remains  stable  after  repeated  cycling  in 

Preparation  of  Coated  Li:  LiBF4  (98%,  Acros)  and  Mg(ClO4)2  (anhydrous,  Aladdin)  are  dissolved  in  1,2-dimethoxyethane  (DME,  99.5%, Aladdin) with concentrations of 0.8 and 0.2 mol L−1, respectively.  100 µL of the solution was then casted on Li metal foil with thickness of  0.6 mm to react for 30 s. The reacted Li foil was then washed by DME  and dried under vacuum for 12 h before use.

Preparation of LATP Pellet: The solid electrolyte LATP was synthesized  via  a  conventional  solid-state  reaction  method.  The  starting  materials  LiOH.H2O  (98%,  Aladdin),  Al2O3  (AR,  Aladdin),  NH4H2PO4  (99%,  Aladdin), and TiO2 (99.99%, Aladdin) were mixed by ball milling using  a ZrO2 jar and balls for 10 h at a speed rate of 350 rpm. After mixing,  the mixture was sintered at 850 °C for 6 h. The ball milling was repeated  after sintering process. And the obtained powder with a weight of 0.4 g  was  pressed  into  pellet  using  a  12.2  mm  diameter  die  and  sintered  at  950 °C for 6 h. The resulting pellets were polished to about 1 mm thick  with sand paper.

LFP Electrode Preparation: LFP cathode material is mixed with carbon  black and PVdF in N-methyl pyrrolidone at a mass ratio of 7:2:1 which  was then coated on an Al foil, followed by drying at 80 °C. Then the LFP cathode was cut into pellets with a diameter of 10 mm. The pellets were  further  dried  at  80  °C  under  vacuum  overnight. 


The  structural  characterization  was  performed  by  a  Bruker  D8  Advance  powder  XRD  with  2θ  in  the  range  of  10°–70°  with  a  step  size  of  0.05°.  Morphology  study and element distribution were performed using a scanning electron  microscopy  with  energy  dispersive  spectrometer  (SEM,  Zeiss  SUPRA55),  XPS  (ESCALab220I-XL)  was  conducted  to  measure  the  chemical  properties.  Symmetric  cells  assembled  by  stacking  LATP  between  two  Li  foils  in  a  Swagelok  cell.  EIS  were  collected  by  an  electrochemical  workstation  (1400  cell  test  system,  Solartron)  in  the  frequency  range  from 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz with 5 mV amplitude at room temperature. The  lithium  plating/stripping  test  was  carried  out  by  galvanostatic  cycling  with an automatic galvanostatic charge–discharge unit (Maccor, MC-16  Battery Test System) at room temperature. The cells were assembled in  a glove box in Ar atmosphere. For better interfacial contact, a minimum  amount (5 µL) of liquid electrolyte (1 mol LiFSI in DME) was added on  each side of LATP pellet. To make sure the added liquid electrolyte was  strictly separated by the solid electrolyte, the LATP pellet was surrounded  by  a  polyimide  film,  where  a  hole  with  the  size  of  LATP  pellet  is  cut  (shown  in  Figure  S11  in  the  Supporting  Information).  The  pressure  between  electrode  and  LATP  pallet  is  ≈800  kg  cm−2.  The  performance  of cells was also carried out by galvanostatic cycling with an automatic  galvanostatic  charge–discharge  unit  (Maccor,  MC-16  Battery  Test  System)  at  room  temperature.  The  LFP  full  cells  were  characterized  by  galvanostatic cycling at 1.5 C with a voltage range between 2.5 and 3.9 V  versus Li/Li+.