In recent years, there has been an upsurge in the study of novel and alternative energy storage devices beyond lithium-based systems due to the  exponential increase in price of lithium. Sodium (Na) metal-based batteries  can be a possible alternative to lithium-based batteries due to the similar  electrochemical voltage of Na and Li together with the thousand times higher  natural abundance of Na compared to Li. Though two different kinds of  Na–O2 batteries have been studied specifically based on electrolytes until  now, very recently, a hybrid Na–air cell has shown distinctive advantage over  nonaqueous cell systems. Hybrid Na–air batteries provide a fundamental  advantage due to the formation of highly soluble discharge product (sodium  hydroxide) which leads to low overpotentials for charge and discharge  processes, high electrical energy efficiency, and good cyclic stability. Herein,  the current status and challenges associated with hybrid Na–air batteries are  reported. Also, a brief description of nonaqueous Na–O2 batteries and its  close competition with hybrid Na–air batteries are provided.

LIBs have huge applications  in  all  portable  electronic  gadgets,  electric  and  hybrid  electric  vehicles  and  grid-scale  energy  storage  systems.[4]  But  its large-scale production for grid application  is  uncertain  since  there  is  a  controversial  debate  about  lithium  availability  and cost because battery industry requires  almost  50%  of  the  available  resources  of  lithium.[5f] Additionally, limited Li-ion conductivity  in  aprotic  electrolytes  and  poor  safety  may  also  cause  problems  for  its  large-scale  utilization.  Those  drawbacks  motivate  researchers  to  find  new  energy  storage  technologies  alternative  to  LIBs  among  which  rechargeable  metal–air  batteries emerge as a new promising class of  electrical storage (Figure 1).


Globally, energy and environmental issues are rife and prominent.[1]  Currently,  the  world  is  dealing  with  two  great  tasks:  forthcoming  reduction  of  hydrocarbon  fuel  resources  aggravated by an increasing demand for energy due to the population  and  economic  growths.[1c,2]  In  efforts  to  address  those  problems,  the  penetration  of  solar  conversion  technologies  is  the  crucial target; which is today limited by the absence of a cheap  battery technology. In that context, rechargeable batteries have  been extensively studied for more efficient and environmentally  benign  energy-storage  systems.[3]  Among  all  myriad  rechargeable battery systems, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are considered  the  most  promising  technology  for  energy  storage  applications and also as a key system to build low-carbon, sustainable 

Mikhail Vagin started his  research career in the field  of applied electrochemistry  in 1997 at the Chemistry  Faculty of M.V. Lomonosov  Moscow State University as  an undergraduate student  (start 1997; 1998 M.Sc.;  2002 Ph.D.) and ended in  2010 as a full-time senior  researcher. Then, he worked  as a postdoctoral researcher in Ireland (2010–2012, Dundalk Institute of Technology  and Institute of Technology Tallaght Dublin). He joined  Linköping University as a postdoctoral researcher in 2012.  He became a docent in physical chemistry in 2019. His  main scientific interests are focused on the mechanism and the device-oriented aspects of electrocatalysis.

Xavier Crispin obtained his  Ph.D. in 2000 with Prof.  J. L. Brédas (University of  Mons, Belgium). He completed postdoc training at  Linköping University with  Prof. W. R. Salaneck, on  photoelectron spectroscopy  techniques. In 2004, Xavier  joined the Laboratory of  Organic Electronics headed  by Prof. M. Berggren and developed activities in organic electronic devices. Since  2013, he is a professor (Linköping University, Sweden)  and leads research activities on organic energy materials.  He is a scientific advisor of Ligna Energy AB developing  organic batteries and AB DIMA Services installing solar  power in Africa.


Among  the  group  I  and  II  elements,  sodium  metal-based  battery technology has emerged as a potential alternative to lithium-based  batteries  owing  to  its  similar  electrochemical  properties,  high  natural  abundance  (sixth  most  abundant  element  in  earth  crusts,  Table  1),  and  its  standard  reduction  potential  (−2.71 V vs SHE) is 230 mV above to lithium (−3.04 V vs SHE)  which  enables  cell  to  produce  large  potential  and  thus  store  a  lot  of  energy.  Moreover,  its  comparatively  high  electronegativity in combination with low atomic weight can provide high  specific capacity up to ≈1200 mAh g−1 which can offer economically  viable  solution  compared  to  Li  (3860  mAh  g−1)  in  many  applications.[14]  The  combination  of  metallic  sodium  as  one  reactant  for  the  battery  with  the  inexhaustible  source  such  as  oxygen  as  the  other  reactant  at  the  cathode  is  the  basic  concept  of  the  so-called  Na–O2  battery.  The  natural  abundance  of  both reactants is a prerequisite for the realization of large-scale  and  high-energy  rechargeable  batteries  with  many  possible  applications  including  the  most  challenging  for  grid-based  technologies.[6c,15] Although, Li–O2 batteries exhibit the highest  specific energy, they encounter major issues related to the low  electrical energy efficiency (due to large charge/discharge overpotentials  >1  V),  insoluble  discharge  products,  and  complex  side  reactions.[16]  Contrary  to  Li–O2  battery,  Na–O2  batteries  display  a  better  electrical  energy  efficiency  with  pure  carbon  cathode and the discharge product, which is metal superoxide,  is  more  stable  when  the  anode  is  metallic  sodium.[14a,16b,17]  In  further  advancement,  two  different  kinds  of  Na–O2  batteries  were  designed  with  the  main  difference  lying  in  the  types  of  electrolytes  used,  i.e.,  either  nonaqueous  electrolytes  or  the  combination  of  an  organic  and  aqueous  electrolytes  separated  by a membrane in an hybrid architecture for the cell.

In  recent  years,  mainly  two  different  types  of  sodium  metalbased  air  battery  systems  have  been  studied,  namely,  nonaqueous  (often  termed  as  Na–O2  battery)  and  hybrid  batteries  (often termed as Na–air battery). The use of O2 and air simply  means the sources used for oxygen supply. In nonaqueous Na– O2  battery  usually  pure  oxygen  is  supplied  whereas  in  hybrid  cells,  air  works  as  oxygen  source.  The  cell  structure  of  both  types  has  a  slightly  different  design  and  performance  as  illustrated  in  Figure  2  and  Table  2.  A  typical,  nonaqueous  Na–O2  battery  is  built  up  by  the  combination  of  metallic  sodium  as  negative electrode and highly porous electrode as gas diffusion  electrode (commonly known as electrocatalyst or air cathode).[6c]  These two electrodes are separated by polymeric separator and  immersed  in  an  organic  electrolyte  (Figure  2a).  On  the  other 

A typical aprotic alkali metal–air battery (Li and Na based) and  its  working  principle  are  illustrated  in  Figure  3a.[6c]  Indeed,  Li  and  Na  have  quite  close  chemical  reaction  properties,  however,  their  reactivity  toward  oxygen  is  enormously  different.[18]  Li  forms  unstable  lithium  superoxide  (LiO2)  whereas,  Na  can  form  the  stable  NaO2  when  reacting  with  oxygen  during  the  discharge in a metal–O2 cell. Therefore, during discharge in a  nonaqueous Na–O2 cell, there is a strong competition between  the  formation  of  NaO2  and  Na2O2.  Thermodynamically,  the formation  of  Na2O2  is  favorable  (E0  (Na2O2)  =  2.33  V  vs  E0  (NaO2) = 2.27 V), however, the synthetic path leading to NaO2  involves  only  one  electron  transfer  per  formula  unit  which  makes it kinetically preferred in comparison to the two-electron  transfer toward Na2O2 formation (Figure 3b).


Certainly,  there  have  been  tremendous  efforts  to  identify  the  discharge  product  in  nonaqueous  Na–O2  battery,  but  there has not been any conclusive evidence for any of the discharge  product  yet.  Some  reports  suggest  formation  of  NaO2  as  a  sole  discharge  product  whereas,  the  Na2O2  was  also  found  as  discharge  product  in  some  studies.[19]  In  a  seminal  study  published  by  Bender  et  al.,  the  authors  estimated  the  free  enthalpy  of  formation  (ΔG)  for  Na2O2  (−449.7  kJ  mol−1)  and  NaO2  (−437.5  kJ  mol−1),  and  found  that  there  is  only  −12.2 kJ mol−1 difference between the two discharge products.  Since  this  difference  is  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  a  hydrogen-bond,  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  claim  with  certainty  the  thermodynamically  preferred  discharge  product.[19d]  It  was  also demonstrated that crystallite size also affects the formation  of  discharge  product  due  to  competition  between  surface  and  bulk energies.[15] Kang et al. showed that Na2O2 is more stable  in bulk phase; while NaO2 was found stable at nanoscale level  where surface effects dominate. Moreover, the design of the cell  also  affects  the  formation  of  the  discharge  product  as  investigated  by  Bi  et  al.  The  authors  observed  NaO2-based  discharge  product when the cell was built up with stainless-steel chamber,  however,  Na2O2  was  created  when  a  glass  chamber  cell  was  used;  while  the  rest  of  the  conditions  such  as  anode,  cathode,  and electrolyte remain the same.[20] Since the thermal conductivity  of  glass  (0.8  W  m−1  K−1)  is  much  lower  than  stainlesssteel (50 W m−1 K−1), the heat transfer from the reaction site to  the chamber could be lead to various temperature distribution  affecting the kinetics. But another origin could be that peroxidebased  discharge  product  usually  forms  when  there  is  water  in  the system which might come from air or the decomposition of  electrolyte. However, the authors concluded their case it might  be due to the leakage in vacuum-grease-sealed glass chamber.[20] In  nonaqueous  Na–O2  battery  systems,  considerable  efforts  have  also  been  given  to  understand  and  characterize  the  discharge  product  growth  and  chemical  composition  by  various  imaging  and  spectroscopic  techniques.[6c,21]  NaO2  on  a  discharged  electrode  was  confirmed  as  product  using  Raman  spectroscopy  by  Adelhelm's  group.[6c]  Typically,  NaO2  exhibits  a  Raman  band  at  1156  cm−1,  Na2O2  has  two  Raman  bands  in  range of 700–825 cm−1 whereas, the Raman band at ≈225 cm−1  is ascribed to Na2O. Ex situ Raman spectra of discharged electrode  showed  clear  bands  corresponding  to  NaO2;  which  was  also  confirmed  using  ex  situ  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD).  Initially,  ex  situ  techniques  were  utilized  to  recognize  the  discharge  products  and  their  morphology,  however,  those  methods  are  not  ideal  for  such  sensitive  discharge  products  that  might  get  contaminated  from  the  atmosphere.  Therefore,  to  understand  charge–discharge  reaction  mechanism  of  aprotic  Na–O2  cell,  in  situ  characterization  techniques  are  highly  desirable.  Wang  et  al.  have  used  CoO/CoP  heterostructured  nanosheets  as  bifunctional  electrocatalyst  to  catalyze  the  charge–discharge  reaction. Further, they utilized in situ XRD to recognize the discharge product. The authors found Na2O2·2H2O as the major  product  while  NaOH  and  Na2CO3  diffractogram  peaks  were 

Soft X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), an effective tool to  get information related to electronic and chemical structure of  products by probing states near Fermi level, was also employed  in  operando  by  Xueliang's  group.[23]  The  two  most  common  discharge  products  (NaO2  and  Na2O2)  in  Na–O2  cell  have  different electronic configuration as presented in Figure 4c which  helps to understand the formation and degradation of discharge  product.[24] O K-edge XAS can be recorded by exciting O 1s electron  to  unoccupied  orbital  states  of  O  2p  such  as π*  and σ*  2−) does not have π*  antibonding states.[25] Peroxide species (O2 transition because it has a completely filled π* orbital therefore,  exhibits no associated XAS peak. However, superoxide species  (O2−)  has  partially  filled π*  orbital  which  allows  transition  of  electron  to π*  orbital  and  thus  shows  a  corresponding  transition peak at 532 eV (Figure 4d).[23] XAS also shows a broad peak  at  536  eV  which  can  be  ascribed  to  the  transition  of  electrons  to σ* antibonding state.[23,25a,26] The X-ray absorption near edge  structure  (XANES)  was  also  carried  out  by  Landa-Medrano  et al. to understand the discharged state of Na–O2 cell and concluded  that  discharged  product  is  composed  from  both  NaO2  and Na2O2.[21e] Further, authors also confirmed the distribution  of  NaO2,  Na2O2,  and  organic  side  products  (OSPs)  using  soft  X-ray  transmission  microscopy  (TXM)  which  also  supported  the  XANES  data.  Analysis  of  spatial  distribution  of  NaO2  and  Na2O2  on  cubical-shaped  discharged  product  showed  uniform  distribution of both NaO2 and Na2O2, however, OSP were distributed at the edges of cubes.

In  addition  to  TXM,  in  situ  transmission  electron  microscopy  (TEM)  and  in  situ  Raman  imaging  techniques  are  also employed  to  study  the  charge–discharge  mechanism  in  Na– O2  cells.[21a–c]  Kwak  et  al.  built  a  solid  state  Na–O2  nanobattery  using  Na  metal  as  anode,  carbon  nanotube  (CNT)  as  air  electrode, and Na2O as solid electrolyte which was synthesized  on  the  surface  of  metallic  Na  for  in  situ  analysis  of  reaction  mechanism.[21a] During discharge of cell (Figure 4e), formation  and  growth  of  NaO2  can  be  easily  seen  with  time  using  time  resolved  in  situ  TEM.  The  nucleation  of  NaO2  starts  as  soon  as  the  discharge  process  begins  and  after  48  s,  the  agglomeration  of  new  formed  nuclei  occurs  on  the  initial  nucleation  site. Interestingly, the decomposition and shrinkage of the discharge  product  was  observed  on  charging  the  cell  (Figure  4f).  However,  some  traces  of  discharge  product  on  electrode  surface  remained  and  are  associated  with  the  higher  overpotentials  during  charging  of  the  Na–O2  cells.  Recently,  Sun  et  al.  studied extensively the charge mechanism of Na–O2 cell using  Raman  spectroscopy,  energy  dispersive  X-ray  analysis,  and  XAS.[21f] Raman spectra of partially charged state of CNT-PAN  (polyacrylonitrile)-based air electrode did not show any feature  related  to  NaO2,  however,  two  new  Raman  bands  at  1080  and  1036 cm−1 were observed related to Na2CO3 and Na2O2·2H2O,  respectively.[27]  Raman  mapping  suggested  that  Na2CO3  was  mostly  distributed  at  the  outer  surface  of  crystals  whereas,  Na2O2·2H2O  was  found  at  the  inner  surface  of  crystal  which  was  also  reported  by  Landa-Medrano  et  al.[21e]  XAS  studies  of  discharged  NCNT-PAN-based  air  electrode  displayed  three  absorptions  at  532,  532.9,  and  534.4  eV  ascribed  to  NaO2,  Na2O2, and Na2CO3, respectively. Upon charging the same electrode,  it  was  observed  that  the  absorption  peak  corresponding  to Na2O2 first increases (in partial charged electrode) and then  reduced (on fully charged condition). On other hand, XAS peak  related  to  Na2CO3  continuously  grows  and  features  related  to  NaO2 diminish with charging. It was also observed that major  portion of Na2CO3 remained undecomposed even when the cell  was charged up to 4.5 V. The carbonate-based remnant, formed  by  reaction  of  sodium  ions  with  electrolyte,  can  be  possible  origin of high overpotentials during charging of cell.

These  various  ex  situ  and  in  situ  studies  provide  in-depth  insight about charge and discharge mechanism in nonaqueous  Na–O2  cell.  Although,  NaO2  has  been  broadly  accepted  as  major  discharge  product,  yet,  some  authors  also  reported  the 


Additionally, the use of organic electrolytes also has concerns for toxicity, flammability, economic, and  environmental impact. Most of nonaqueous Na–O2 cell studies  employed pure and dry O2 rather than air to prevent undesired  parasitic  reactions  related  to  the  components  of  ambient  air  such  as  water,  CO2,  CO,  and  N2.  One  possible  strategy  could  be use of oxygen diffusion membrane that can selectively allow  O2 from air while avoiding diffusion of the other components,  as the case for aprotic Li–O2 batteries.[5c,29] However, inclusion  of  oxygen  diffusion  membrane  in  a  cell  will  impede  its  high  rate  applications  because  water  vapor  can  permeate  through  any membrane.[30] Either way whether use of pure and dry O2  or  incorporation  of  oxygen  diffusion  membrane  will  certainly  increase the cost of the aprotic Na–O2 cell.

To  address  the  issues  related  with  undecomposed  discharge  products,  poor  round  trip  efficiency  and  cost  associated  with  organic  electrolytes,  mixed  electrolyte  systems  have  been  proposed.  The  mixed  electrolyte,  commonly  known  as  hybrid  electrolyte,  implies  a  separation  of  the  electrolytes  into  two  compartments  in  the  cell  with  a  solid  electrolyte  membrane  blocking  oxygen  and  water  diffusion  but  transporting  cations.  The membrane separates the nonaqueous electrolyte as anolyte  and  an  aqueous  electrolyte  as  catholyte  (cell  design  is  already  explained).[31]  The  use  of  an  aqueous  electrolyte  on  the  gas  diffusion  electrode  enables  the  discharge  product  to  be  the  soluble  sodium  hydroxide  (4Na(s)  +  O2  +  2H2O  →  4NaOH).  The aqueous electrolyte also conveniently allows the source of  oxygen  to  be  air  in  contrast  to  the  nonaqueous  Na–O2  battery  which  requires  supply  of  pure  oxygen  because  of  side  products  generated  by  water  vapor  in  air.[31]  The  energy  density  of  an hybrid Na–air battery is not as high as hybrid Li–air battery  (Table 3) but there are various other advantages associated with  this system. In addition to the low price of sodium and the use  of  cost-effective  material  as  current  collectors,[32]  the  essential  advantage  lies  in  the  higher  ionic  conductivities  of  Na+  ions  compared to Li+ ions in organic,[33] aqueous, and solid electrolytes which is due to the higher mobility of Na+ ions in electrolyte solution.[34] Since, Li+ ion has higher Lewis acidity than Na+  ions  hence,  there  exist  higher  Coulombic  interaction  between  Li+  cations  and  negatively  charged  species  thereby  leading  to  lower  ionic  mobility.[35]  Additionally,  the  solubility  of  sodium  hydroxide in water is higher than lithium hydroxide which also  helps improving the specific energy of the cell.[34b]

Alike aprotic Na–O2 cell, NaOH is the only discharge product  reported  to  date  in  hybrid  Na–air  cell,  which  is  a  soluble  discharge  product.  Though,  there  does  not  exist  any  direct  study  in literature on discharge product of cell, post analysis scanning 

A  solid  electrolyte  membrane  separates  the  metallic  Na  compartment  dipped  in  an  organic  electrolyte  with  the  aqueous  compartment to improve the safety in the hybrid Na–air cells.  The  solid  electrolyte  membrane  should  not  only  block  the  oxygen  diffusion  and  promote  the  transport  Na+  cations,  as  found in polyelectrolyte membranes (e.g., Nafion); but additionally,  blocks  even  the  diffusion  of  water  from  one  to  the  other  compartment (which is not the case in Nafion). Thus, it would  be fair to say that the solid electrolyte membrane is a very crucial  component  of  the  cell.  In  most  of  the  studies  related  to  hybrid  Na–air  battery,  NASICON  was  used  as  solid  electrolyte  membrane  to  separate  aqueous  and  nonaqueous  compartments. The abbreviation NASICON arises as NA from sodium  (Na),  S  from  super,  I  from  ionic,  and  CON  from  conductor;  which typically refers to a family of solid ceramics with general  formula Na1−xZr2P3−xSixO12 (0 ≤ x ≤ 3).[38] NASICON was first  synthesized by Hong[39] and Goodenough et al.[34g] in 1976. The  transport of ions is caused by hopping of Na+ ions among interstitial sites of the NASICON crystal lattice.[38] The resulting Na+  ion conductivity reaches on the order of 10−3 S cm−1; which is  comparable to liquid electrolytes. NASICON can be synthesized  by different synthetic methods such as solid state chemical synthetic  route,  sol–gel  route,  hydrothermal  method,  combustion  method,  and  spark  plasma  sintering  methods.[40]  Generally,  NASICON crystallizes in rhombohedral structure for all compositions except (1.8 ≤ x ≤ 2.2) where it crystalizes in monoclinic  polymorphs. The conductivity of NASICON is higher for monoclinic crystal lattice (x = 2). The performance of hybrid Na–air  battery in terms of overpotential gap, power density, and cyclic  stability will certainly depend on the stability and ionic conductivity of NASICON in alkaline and acidic medium. NASICONbased materials are known to be stable in moist environment,  however,  they  tend  to  form  hydronium  on  the  surface  of  NASICON by ion exchange when hot water is used.[41] There is  no direct study on the stability of NASICON in alkali electrolyte  but after carefully inspecting the literature, NASICON appeared  durable.[36,42]  Liang  and  Hayashi  synthesized  NASICON  with  an ionic conductivity of 1.3 × 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature  and  immersed  the  NASICON  film  in  1  m  NaOH  and  organic 

Scheme illustrating various essential components of hybrid Na–air cell with their advantages and disadvantages.

The  ceramic film showed no change or deterioration in morphology  in 1  m NaOH and 1  m NaClO4 in ethylene carbonate/dimethyl  carbonate (EC/DMC) up to two days. However, the authors did  not carry out any spectroscopic study to investigate the change  in crystal phase or chemical bonding. Later, Khan et al. carried  out  NASICON's  stability  test  by  performing  its  XRD  before  and  after  galvanostatic  charge–discharge  cycles  and  found  no  changes  in  phase  of  NASICON.[36,43]  Additionally,  Park  et  al.  investigated  the  stability  test  of  NASICON  in  highly  concentrated alkali electrolyte (5 m NaOH) solution while using it as a  separator in rechargeable Na/Ni battery.[5e] Authors carried out  750  cycles  charge–discharge  of  cell  and  then  performed  SEM  and  XRD  to  examine  any  changes  in  morphology  and  chemical  composition  of  NASICON  in  5  m  NaOH.  No  significant  change  in  morphology  (Figure  6a,b)  and  diffraction  pattern  (Figure 6c) was observed before and after 750 cycles. Moreover,  Kang  et  al.  showed  the  vulnerability  of  NASICON  films  when  exposed to highly acidic solution (0.1 m HCl) (Figure 6d).[44] At  low pH solutions, oxide dissolution and ion exchange between  Na+ and H+ occur and destabilize NASICON.[45] NASICON is a  good  choice  for  separator  as  solid  electrolyte  in  hybrid  Na–air  cells, yet it has limitations for charging cells at higher current  densities due to its limited ionic conductivity. Also, an interfacial  layer  can  be  formed  between  the  organic  electrolyte  and  NASICON  which  enhances  the  overall  resistance  of  the  electrolyte  and  total  internal  resistance  of  cell.  To  understand  the details of the process associated with NASICON requires more  in-depth  investigations;  for  that  purpose,  operando  spectroscopic methods will give powerful insight.


Like in other battery systems, the anode also plays an important  role  in  optimizing  the  performance  of  the  hybrid  Na–air  cell.  Metallic  Na  is  more  chemically  reactive  and  undergoes  easier  orientation  growth  than  metallic  Li  and  thus,  the  growth  of  Na  dendrites  are  quite  substantial  during  the  cycle  of  plating  and dissolution of Na associated with charge and discharge of  the  hybrid  Na–air  cell.[46]  These  dendrites  can  reduce  the  performance  of  the  cell  and  lead  to  serious  safety  concerns.  The  dendritic growth in hybrid Na–air cell can be overcome either  by enabling the formation of stable solid electrolyte interphase  (SEI)  layer  on  the  Na  anode  or  by  strategically  designing  the  metallic Na anode. In most of the study reported so far metallic  sodium has been used as anode.

Liang  et  al.  reported  a  modified  approach  and  uses  liquid  anode  to  tackle  the  Na  dendritic  growth  issue.[47]  The  metallic  sodium  was  dissolved  in  to  mixed  organic  solvents  (biphenyl  and ethers) to provide an negatively charged biphenyl balanced  by sodium cation with both electronic and ionic conductivities  of  the  order  of  10−3  S  cm−1.  This  sodium-based  liquid  anode  was  separated  from  the  air  electrode  by  the  solid  electrolyte 

The  cell  exhibited  lowest  overpotential  gap  (0.14  V),  high  round  trip  efficiency  (95.3%),  39  mW  cm−2  of  maximum  power  density,  and  exceptional  cyclic stability. This outstanding performance of cell was attributed to the high ionic and decent electronic conductivity of the 

Hybrid Na–air batteries are built up with two different electrolytes  namely,  organic  and  aqueous  electrolytes.  Sodium-based  salts such as NaCF3SO3, NaClO4, etc., are dissolved in organic  solvents such as tetra ethylene glycol dimethyl ether (TEGDME)  and EC/DMC and used as anolyte. The organic electrolytes are  involved in the formation of SEI at anode which should allow  deposition and stripping of Na+ ions. SEI forms mainly due to  the decomposition of organic electrolytes at lower potential on  anode and electrolyte interface.[49] SEI is crucial for the protection of anode as it restricts transfer of electron from anode to   electrolyte  only  allows  the  passage  of  Na+  ions  to  and  from  the  anode.  Thus,  an  ideal  SEI  should  be  electronic  insulator  and  ionic  conductor.[49b]  Moreover,  SEI  should  be  stable  so  it  also could prevent the dendritic growth of Na. There is no any  focused  study  for  SEI  formation  using  different  combination 

The  assembled  hybrid  Na–air  cell,  as  shown  in  Figure  8,  based  on  0.1  m  H3PO4  +  0.1  m  Na2SO4  as  catholyte  exhibited  maximum  of  34.9  mW  cm−2  power  density  and  896  mAh  g−1  of discharge capacity with 0.3 V of overall overpotential gap. In  acidic electrolyte systems, due to instability of NASICON at low  pH,  weak  acids  become  an  obvious  choice  but  with  the  drawback  of  low  ionic  conductivity.  Therefore,  it  always  required  to  add  a  salt  in  weak  acids  to  improve  the  conductivity  of  electrolyte.

In  rechargeable  metal–air  batteries,  a  perfect  air  electrode  should have several essential features: i) a highly porous structure (material should be mesoporous, pore size varies from 2 to   50  nm)  to  promote  the  diffusion  of  air  and  electrolyte.  But  microporous materials with pore sizes up to 2 nm would block the  diffusion  of  molecular  oxygen;  thus  not  able  to  access  the  catalytically  active  sites;[50]  ii)  a  high  electrical  conductivity;  iii)  a bifunctional activity, i.e., the capability to catalyze the charge  (associated  with  OER)  and  discharge  (associated  with  ORR)  reactions,  helps  to  improve  energy  efficiency,  cyclic  stability,  and  reduces  the  overpotentials.  Nonetheless,  the  design  and  fabrication  of  bifunctional  electrocatalyst  constitute  a  challenging  research  area.[51]  In  this  view,  major  endeavors  were  dedicated  into  the  synthesis  and  fabrication  of  appropriate  air  electrodes  to  lower  the  polarization  of  hybrid  Na–air  cell  and  thus  enhance  the  energy  density,  electrical  energy  efficiency,  and cyclic stability.


Hybrid  Na–air  battery  was  first  demonstrated  by  Hayashi  et  al.  using  NASICON  as  a  ceramic  separator  in  a  seminal  study  published  in  mid-2013.[34b]  Since,  then  there  has  been  continuous growth in this area and various attempts have been  made to improve the performance of hybrid Na–air battery by  using different nanostructured air electrodes. Though Hayashi  et  al.  did  not  study  the  rechargeability  of  hybrid  Na–air  cells,  they  systematically  studied  how  to  improve  the  cell  performance  and  lower  down  the  resistance.[34b]  Typical  hybrid  Na– air cells contain different kinds of interfacial resistances at Na  metal/organic electrolyte, organic electrolyte/ceramic separator,  ceramic separator/aqueous electrolyte, and aqueous electrolyte/ air  cathode  interfaces.  The  total  cell  resistance,  which  eventually  lowers  the  power  density,  was  reduced  more  than  half  (from 440 to 210 Ω) when appropriate concentration of electrolytes, optimized thickness of NASICON, and highly porous and  conducting  air  electrode  were  used.[34b]  Subsequently,  authors  achieved  more  than  twice  power  density  ≈10  mW  cm−2  per  effective  area  of  ceramic  separator  with  Pd-catalyzed  graphite  plate  as  air  cathode.  Later,  the  same  group  reported  a  high  energy  density  hybrid  Na–air  cell  using  Mn3O4  catalysts  on  porous carbon electrode as air cathode.[42] Nevertheless, authors  did  not  investigate  the  rechargeability  of  hybrid  Na–air  cell,  but they achieved maximum of 21 mW cm−2 power density at  room  temperature  which  was  the  highest  value  ever  reported  for alkali metal–air cells. In late 2015, Hashimoto and Hayashi  used  nanoporous  gold  as  air  electrode  and  carried  out  a  comparative  study  using  aqueous  and  nonaqueous  electrolytes.[52]  The authors used the same cell configuration except the catholyte  and  found  that  the  cell  with  aqueous  electrolyte  is  robust  and displayed low overpotential gap (0.6 V for both charge and  discharge),  low  resistance,  and  enormously  improved  power  density (from 1.4 to 12.4 mW cm−2) and cyclic stability.

At the  same  time,  Sahgong  et  al.  have  demonstrated  the  rechargeability  of  hybrid  Na–air  cell  using  Pt/C  as  air  electrode.[53]  Herein,  the  air  electrode  was  designed  by  preparing  the slurry through the mixing of catalyst Pt/C with binder polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP)  followed  by  its  coating  on  a  carbon  paper.  Using  Pt/C  as  air  electrode, the authors achieved 84.3% of energy efficiency and  investigated the rechargeability of cell up to 18 cycles. However,  the use of noble metal-based air electrode is not promising due  to their booming cost. Next, Cheon et al. synthesized graphitic  nanoshell/mesoporous carbon nanohybrids (GNS/MC) as efficient  bifunctional  air  electrode  for  hybrid  Na–air  battery.[37]  GNS/MC  was  synthesized  by  solid  state  nanocasting  method  using  SBA-15  silica  as  a  template  which  showed  exceptional  catalytic  activity  and  durability  for  ORR  and  OER  in  alkaline  medium.  The  high  electrocatalytic  performance  of  the  GNS/ MC  was  attributed  to  the  contributions  of  residual  transition  metal  (Ni  and  Fe)  entities,  nitrogen-doped  defect-rich  graphitic  nanoshells,  and  the  high  specific  surface  area  of  the  mesoporous  structure.  After  systematically  investigating  electrocatalysts, the authors fabricated a hybrid Na–air cell (scheme  was  presented  in  Figure  9a;  Figure  9b  is  the  digital  image  of  battery)  which  showed  better  overpotential  gap  of  115  mV  than a cell made with Pt/C (179 mV) and Ir/C (364 mV) as air  electrodes  (Figure  9c).  Furthermore,  the  authors  also  achieved  a  maximum  of  78.2  mW  g−1  in  power  density  at  60  mA  g−1  in  current  density.  The  rechargeability  of  hybrid  cell  using 

GNS/MC  as  air  electrode  was  examined  up  to  10  cycles.  The  observed  galvanostatic  charge–discharge  profile  as  presented  in  Figure  9d  did  not  show  any  significant  change  in  overpotential gap. Though GNS/MC showed lowest overpotential gap  (0.115  V),  yet  the  synthesis  method  is  too  complicated  which  cannot be employed for large-scale production of the material.

In  the  quest  of  cost-effective  air  electrodes,  Senthilkumar  et  al.  explored  the  possibility  to  use  cobalt  phosphate  as  efficient  bifunctional  air  electrode.[54]  The  authors  synthesized  cobalt  phosphate  by  simple  precipitation  followed  by  calcination  method  and  functionalize  a  carbon  paper  electrode.  The  bifunctional  electrocatalytic  activity  for  ORR  and  OER  was  evaluated  in  alkali  electrolyte  by  rotating  ring-disk  electrode  (RRDE)  method.  The  electron  transfer  number  associated  with  ORR  was  calculated  to  be  ≈3.9  close  to  4  which  suggests  that  ORR  occurred  through  a  four-electron  transfer  pathway,  thus  avoiding  the  formation  of  hydrogen  peroxide.  The  electrocatalytic  activity  is  associated  with  the  formation  of di μ-oxo bridge within cobalt phosphate. The hybrid Na–air  cell  using  cobalt  phosphate  as  air  electrode  displays  an  overpotential  gap  of  0.23  V  at  0.01  mA  cm−2.  The  hybrid  Na–air  cell  showed  stability  up  50  cycles  at  very  low  current  density  far from practical applications. Like in this last study, a typical  design  found  in  the  literature  for  air  electrodes  include  the  coating  of  microporous  carbon  electrodes  with  a  catalyst  layer  composed  of  electroactive  (nano)particles  bound  together  with  a  polymeric  binder.[55]  Typically,  polymeric  binders,  such  as 

PVDF, are used to enhance the physical integrity of the coating  and  avoid  delamination  with  the  electrode  substrate.  There  are  several  drawbacks  of  using  polymeric  binders:  First,  their  electrical  insulating  character  leads  to  the  formation  of  a  barrier for the transport of electrons between the carbon electrode  and  the  electroactive  particles;  and  for  the  transport  of  ions  between the electrolyte and the electroactive particles. Second,  some  polymer  binders  such  as  PVDF  was  readily  attacked  by  −)  formed  as  intermediate  discharge  product  superoxide  (O2 that leads the formation of fluorinated salt (NaF) and hydrogen  peroxide  hence  limits  the  discharge  capacity  of  the  battery.[56]  Finally, the use of binder increases the total weight of the electrode and also requires an additional step to mix and combine  the  materials  during  the  electrode  preparation  process.[55]  In  that  context,  there  is  a  motivation  to  find  new  strategies  to  avoid those polymeric binders. Khan et al. have grown α-MnO2  nanowires  on  reduced  graphene  oxide  (rGO)  coated  carbon  paper  and  used  this  binder  free  electrode  as  air  electrode  for  hybrid Na–air battery.[36] This binder-free electrode preparation  involves coating of porous rGO on carbon microfiber followed  by growth of α-MnO2 nanowires on top of rGO coated carbon  paper  as  shown  in  Figure  10.  Generally,  MnO2  crystallizes  in  different phases, namely, α, β, and γ, and among them α-MnO2  was  found  to  have  superior  electrocatalytic  activity  than  other  phases.[57] When MnO2 crystallizes in α-phase, it tends to form  2  ×  2  tunnel  structures  formed  by  edge-sharing  MnO6  and  corner sharing MnO6 octahedra. These tunnel structures due to  their size can accommodate positive ions to balance the negative charges during the electrocatalytic activity process. In this  case,  MnO2  nanowires  crystallize  in  the  α-phase  and  display  good electrocatalytic activity in alkaline solutions. The resulting  hybrid  Na–air  cell  displayed  0.7  V  of  overall  overpotential  gap  at a current density of 15 mA g−1 when charged and discharged  up  to  25  h  each.  Interestingly,  it  was  observed  that  urchinshaped  α-MnO2  on  rGO  coated  carbon  paper  showed  better  performance  than  flake-shaped  MnO2  on  rGO  coated  carbon  paper.  The  urchin-shaped  MnO2  formed  V-shaped  structures  with  highly  exposed  active  sites  which  allow  an  enhanced  diffusion and contact of the electrolyte to the air electrode, and an  efficient  transportation  of  Na+  ions  and  electrons.  Hence,  the  morphology of the electroactive layer affects greatly the performance of the hybrid Na–air cell.

In another study, Khan et al. explored the possibility of using  3D SnS2 as air electrode for hybrid Na–air cell.[60] On galvanostatic  charge–discharge  3D  SnS2  displayed  0.45  V  discharge  overpotential  whereas,  0.07  V  charge  potential  which  leads  to  0.52  V  overall  overpotential  gap  and  83%  electrical  energy  efficiency.  The  vertically  grown  and  self-assembled  ultrathin  3D  SnS2  nanosheets  of  nanopetals  displayed  maximum  of  300 mW g−1 power density and rechargeability up to 40 cycles.  Various  other  materials  such  as  Ni  nanoparticles,[61]  bismuth  rhodium  oxide,[62]  Bi2Ru2O7,[63]  MOF-derived  carbon,[31]  [64]  hollow  double  walled  Mn2O3  nanocubes,[65]  and  Tl2Rh2O7, single crystalline Tl2Ru2O7 nanoparticles[66] were also employed  as air electrodes and studied systematically to improve the performance  of  hybrid  Na–air  cells  (Table  4).  Kim  et  al.  synthesized  phosphate  functionalized  Bi2Rh2O6.8  as  pyrochlore  oxide  and use it as a bifunctional air electrode for hybrid Na–air batteries.[62]  The  synthesized  material  displayed  the  lowest  potential  gap  (170  mV)  between  ORR  and  OER.  This  performance  was attributed to the improvement in surface chemical activity  due to the functionalization with phosphate ions. In functionalized P-Bi2Rh2O6.8 due to lower Pauling electronegativity χr of P  (χr = 2.19) compared to O (χr = 3.44), the OPO(OH)2 surface  groups  promote  a  fast-redox  kinetics  at  the  Bi  and  Rh  centers  during ORR and OER processes (Figure 12). Authors proposed  as “Therefore, oxidation of the Rh and Bi ions in P-Bi2Rh2O6.8  was  easily  achieved  because  less  energy  is  required  to  extract  electrons  during  the  ORR  and  OER,  resulting  in  the  fast 

The prepared material integrated in the air electrode  leads to a cell with 0.17 V overpotential gap and 181.2 mW g−1  power density at 120 mA g−1 current density.

All  in  all,  there  has  been  significant  research  effort  to  find  suitable  air  electrode  for  hybrid  Na–air  cells.  Despite  clear  improvements  of  the  performance  of  the  batteries,  they  still  lack  cyclic  stability  to  become  commercially  viable.  Moreover,  the power density is limited, and this is mainly due to the poor  OER electrocatalytic activity at the air electrode.

As  described  in  this  progress  report,  there  is  a  strong  competition  between  the  two  key  sodium  battery  technologies:  nonaqueous  Na–O2  and  hybrid  Na–air  batteries.  Nonaqueous  Na–O2 batteries are safer than hybrid Na–air due to the usage  of organic electrolyte as anolyte and catholyte. Indeed, the reaction  of  water  with  metal  sodium  can  be  explosive.  However,  the use of an organic electrolyte leads to a nonconductive and  insoluble  discharge  product  that  deposits  in  the  pores  of  the  air  electrode  and  progressively  covers  the  active  reaction  sites  and  blocks  the  O2  diffusion  pathway.  This  detrimental  process  increases  the  overpotentials  specifically  during  charging,  which is accompanied by a reduction of the power density and  worsens  the  cyclic  stability.  In  addition,  organic  electrolytes  are more expensive, flammable, and with a certain level of toxicity. Most of nonaqueous Na–O2 cell required usage of either  pure and dry oxygen or oxygen diffusion membrane which will  also increase the cost of the cell. However, the research in the  area  of  hybrid  Na–air  battery  is  gaining  momentum  since  its  first  reports  in  2013.  The  hybrid  Na–air  cell  uses  less  organic electrolyte  and  consumes  air  as  oxygen  source  thereby  immediately  reducing  the  cost,  in  contrast  to  aprotic  Na–O2  cell.  In  mixed  electrolyte  system  (aqueous  electrolyte  and  aprotic  electrolyte), the formed discharge product is soluble in water thus  diminishing  the  clogging  and  electronic  conductivity  issues  related  to  organic  electrolytes.  Unlike  nonaqueous  Na–O2  battery,  hybrid  Na–air  battery  offers  several  advantages  such  as  low  overpotential,  high  energy  efficiency,  low  electrode  polarization,  good  cyclic  stability,  and  use  of  ambient  air  as  source  of  oxygen.  Though  hybrid  Na–air  batteries  offer  potential  solution  to  nonaqueous  Na–O2,  yet  some  challenges  remain  which needs to be investigated and optimized for future practical  applications.  NASICON,  the  solid  electrolyte  membrane,  is  an  essential  component  in  hybrid  Na–air  battery.  However,  the  interfacial  chemistry  between  the  organic  electrolyte  and  NASICON  is  not  known  yet  but  need  to  be  understood  and 
