Thin NASICON-type Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 solid electrolyte membrane is successfully fabricated through tape-casting. A high density of 3.28 g cm−3 of the membrane with a porosity of 4.5% has been achieved when it is sintered at 900°C for 11 h. The membrane shows a comparative ionic conductivity with that of the glass-ceramic pellets. The total ionic conductivity of the present membrane is 2.62 × 10–4 S cm−1 at room temperature, and it maintains a stable conductivity of 1.3 × 10–4 S cm−1 in a 0.5 M LiOH and 0.5 M Li3PO4 buﬀer solution, which can fully aﬀord the requirements of the membrane used in lithium–air batteries.

High-density thin LAGP membrane with comparative ionic conductivity has been successfully prepared by tape-casting, which can fully aﬀord the essential requirements of using in Li–air battery.

The concept of Li–air battery has attracted a lot of attention because of capacity. Diﬀerent from the traditional Li-ion batteries that rely on intercalation chemistry, the capacity of energy storage of the Li–air battery is based on the reaction between Li ion and O2, which can provide a speciﬁc energy 5–10 times larger than those of other batteries [1–3]. Traditional Li–air batteries use organic electrolytes as a medium to transport Li ions between Li metal anode and oxygen cathode as shown in Figure 1(a). However, as the air contains moistures, which will

damage the organic electrolyte, dried air is necessary during Li–air batteries’ operation. Moreover, the formation of Li2O2 and Li2O on the surface of the porous carbon cathode will also clog the channels so that to block oxygen pass [4].

To solve this issue, the second generation of Li–air batteries named hybrid Li–air batteries have been developed, in which a solid electrolyte membrane is used as the separator to separate the organic electrolyte from the aqueous electrolyte [5]. As shown in Figure 1(b), the hybrid Li–air battery is usually composed of an Li metal anode in an organic electrolyte, a

The LAGP powder was prepared by a melt-quench method. In the melt-quench process, the precursors of Li2CO3 (Aldrich), Al2O3 (Aldrich), GeO2 (Alfa Aesar), and NH4H2PO4 (Aldrich) were mixed in the stoichiometric ratio. During processing, 10% Li2CO3 was added to compensate the Li loss. The mixture was milled with ethyl alcohol using a Maxstech ball milling machine in Teﬂon jar using ZrO2 balls at 150 r/min for 24 h. The powder was then dried and preheated at 380° C for 2 h to remove ammonia, carbon dioxide, and water vapour. Then, the precursor powder was ground again followed by melting at 1350°C for 2 h with a heating rate of 5°C/min. The melt slurry was then poured into a home-designed rolling machine to achieve a fast cooling rate. Subsequently, the glass sheets were crystallised at 825°C for 8 h, and ﬁnally, the crystallised glass sheets were milled into LAGP powder by a high-energy ball milling machine (SPEX CertiPrep 800 Mixer/Mill) using iron balls.

The crystallised LAGP powder (8 wt.%) was mixed with organic solvent (40 wt.% of ethanol and 40 wt.% of toluene), plasticiser (2 wt.% of butyl benzyl phthalate and 2 wt.% of polyethylene glycol), and binder (8 wt.% of polyvinyl butyral) by high-energy ball milling machine using iron balls for 1 h. The LAGP powder slurry was then tape-cast on the Teﬂon ﬁlm to obtain a green sheet. The blade height was controlled at 1 mm, and the velocity of the blade was 20 mm/s. After drying for 15 min, the green sheets were peeled oﬀ by knife and cut into round pieces with a diameter of 15 mm by a puncher. Two pieces were laminated and pressed uniaxially at 150°C to form a green compact. The sheets were heated at 600°C for 2 h to burn out the binder and sintered at diﬀerent parameters with a heating rate 5°C/min.

Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and diﬀerential thermal analysis (DTA) of the tape-cast green sheets were conducted from room temperature to 1000°C at a heating rate of 5°C/min in air using a NETZSCH STA 409C/CD. The crystal structure of the samples was analysed using an X-ray diﬀractometer (Shimazu XRD-7000) with a Cu radiation and Bragg–Brentano geometry. The 2θ rang was from 10° to 80° with a step of 0.02° and a scanning speed of 2°/min. The inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES) (Optima 5300DV) was used to analyse the chemical composition of lithium, aluminium, germanium, and phosphorus of the prepared sample. The sample was digested using hydrogen ﬂuoride (HF) and top up to 10 ml with H2O. Precipitates were collected for analysis of ICP-OES. The element quantitation analyses of carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen were conducted by Elementar vario MICRO cube. A FESEM Hitachi S-4300 operating at 15 kV was used to observe morphologies of processed samples. Before scanning electron microscope (SEM) characterisation, all the

The bulk density of the samples was measured using the Archimedes method in which deionised water was used as the immersion medium. The weight of the water was measured using a digital balance and measured again after immersing the pellet into the water. For the chemical stability measurement, the LAGP membranes were immersed in a 0.5 M LiOH and 0.5 M Li3PO4 solution at room temperature to test their stability. The membranes were washed with distilled water and dried in a vacuum oven before ionic conductivity measurement. The ionic conductivity was measured by a Solartron impedance analyser 1470E cell test system in the frequency range of 10 MHz to 1 Hz. The samples for the impedance measurement were sputtered with gold layer on both surfaces. The impedance proﬁles were analysed using a nonlinear instant ﬁt program in the Z-View software.