Electrochemical activity of the argyrodite lPSC The  electrochemical  stability,  especially  for  thiophosphate  solid  electrolytes, was shown to be significantly lower than initially exp ected10,17,19–22,  where  the  consequential  decomposition  reactions  have had a large impact on the ASSB performance11,21–25. To investigate the electrochemical stability and the role of electrochemical  reactions in solid electrolytes, the argyrodite LPSC, introduced by  Deiseroth et al.26, is employed both as active material and solid electrolyte in ASSBs. To induce oxidation and reduction reactions of the  solid electrolyte, carbon black and carbon nanofibres are mixed in  with the LPSC. The mixture is referred to as the LPSC-C electrode  (for  details  see  Methods).  To  study  the  oxidation  and  reduction  independently, while at the same time preventing the redox activity  of the decomposition products from interfering with the decomposition itself, individual cells are prepared for the first oxidation and  for the first reduction. An In|LPSC|LPSC-C battery is cycled galvanostatically starting with oxidation, and a Li-In|LPSC|LPSC-C battery starting with reduction, the resulting voltage curves of which  are shown in Fig. 1a,b. Unless otherwise specified, all voltages are  expressed versus the Li/Li+ potential. The large partially reversible 

specific capacities demonstrate that LPSC can undergo severe oxidation and reduction reactions, and the low columbic efficiencies of  70% and 40% on first oxidation and reduction, respectively, suggest  the formation of a significant number of decomposition products.  The decreasing capacity of the initial cycles (Supplementary Fig. 1)  indicates  that  these  decomposition  reactions  increase  the  impedance. However, on extended cycling, the reversible capacity remains  relatively  constant,  which  could  indicate  that  the  decomposition  products are able to deliver reversible electrochemical activity, as  already suggested for LPSC by Auvergnot et al.27 and worked out in  detail by Tan et al.25. Since LPSC can undergo both oxidation and  reduction reactions, it can be used to assemble a one-material battery, similar to what was reported for the Li10GeP2S12 solid electrolyte, for which the combination of decomposition products at the  cathode and anode provided the reversible redox16. During the first  charge, the activity appears to set in at around 1.25 V, which is a  direct indication of the practical electrochemical stability window.  To  evaluate  the  practical  electrochemical  stability  window  more  accurately,  the  differential  capacity  is  determined  from  the  first  charge of the In|LPSC|LPSC-C battery and from the first discharge 


Aiming  for  a  better  understanding  and  prediction  of  practical  electrochemical  stability  windows,  and  correlation  with  solid  electrolyte  redox  activity,  we  evaluate  the  formation  energies  of all possible Li-vacancy configurations at different compositions of  argyrodite LixPS5Cl, within a (charge-neutral) single unit cell, similar to how the energetics of electrode materials are evaluated28. This  appears to be a realistic approach considering that the solid electrolyte is in contact with the conductive additives in a cathodic mixture, and therefore the solid electrolyte can function as an electrode  material being oxidized and reduced.

The resulting formation energies of the argyrodite LixPS5Cl as  a function of Li composition are shown in Fig. 2a, where the convex hull connects the most stable configurations. On oxidation and  reduction of LPSC, the most stable compositions are Li4PS5Cl and 

Additionally, DFT-based molecular dynamics (MD) simulations  are performed on the delithiated (Li4PS5Cl) and lithiated (Li11PS5Cl)  phases, showing that the Li4PS5Cl and Li11PS5Cl compositions are  extremely  unstable,  having  very  low  activation  barriers  towards  decomposition (Extended Data Fig. 1). This supports the presently  proposed indirect decomposition reaction, through the facile oxidation and reduction of the argyrodite, thus via the unstable Li4PS5Cl  and Li11PS5Cl phases, towards the stable decomposition products.

To  monitor  the  structural  changes  of  the  LPSC-C  electrodes,  XRD measurements were performed at different stages during the  cycling (following the same cycling strategy as in Fig. 1a,b) of both  the In|LPSC|LPSC-C and Li-In|LPSC|LPSC-C batteries as shown in  Fig. 3. During the oxidation (delithiation) of the LPSC-C electrode  to 3.63 V, the LPSC peak positions shift (Fig. 3a), corresponding to a  decrease in the average cubic lattice parameter from 9.87 Å to 9.76 Å.  This can be attributed to the partial delithiation of the LPSC phase,  consistent with the lattice volume changes predicted by DFT for the  compositional range 6 ≥ x ≥ 4 for LixPS5Cl (Supplementary Fig. 3).  Interestingly, several argyrodite compositions between Li4PS5Cl and  Li11PS5Cl are located slightly above the convex hull (only 7.5 meV 

The second phase (orange line) remains at the position representing  the delithiated argyrodite phases, the amount of which appears to  grow on cycling, indicating an increasing amount of oxidized argyrodite phases are formed on cycling. The total amount of crystalline argyrodite decreases as indicated by the increasing background  that appears over cycling, indicating the concomitant formation of  amorphous sulfide and phosphorous sulfide decomposition products. During the first reduction (lithiation) of the LPSC-C electrode  to 0.63 V, the XRD patterns (Fig. 3b) do not display an obvious peak  shift,  as  would  be  expected  for  the  lithiated  phases  of  argyrodite  (Supplementary Fig. 3). A growing peak at around 27° reflects the  formation of the Li2S phase, consistent with the predicted decomposition reaction of lithiated (reduced) argyrodite (Li11PS5Cl → P + 5  Li2S + LiCl). The amount of the Li2S phase that is formed increases  dramatically as a function of cycle number, also indicating the continuous decomposition of the argyrodite for low potential cycling.

Complementary to the XRD measurements, solid-state 6Li and  31P  magic  angle  spinning  (MAS)  NMR  measurements  are  performed to analyse the decomposition products formed on cycling.  For pristine argyrodite, the 31P resonance at 85 ppm, shown in Fig.  4a,d, can be assigned to the P environment in the PS4 tetrahedral  units33.  After  the  first  oxidation  (delithiation)  to  3.63 V  of  the  LPSC-C  electrode,  an  additional  shoulder  is  observed  at  95 ppm  (Fig. 4b), which can be assigned to the  31P environment of P2S7 4−  species34–36.  This  indicates  the  formation  of  S–S  bonds  between  PS4  tetrahedral  units  (P–S–S–P),  which  undergoes  a  disproportionation reaction leading to the formation of P2S7 4− and S0, with  P–S–P bridging polyhedra20. On first oxidation, the 6Li NMR spectrum (Extended Data Fig. 2b) shows the formation of an additional  shoulder at around −1.1 ppm consistent with the formation of LiCl  (ref.  37).  This  supports  the  decomposition  products  observed  by  XPS23,27, in line with the MD simulations that indicate the bonding of S to PS4 units. Note that the oxidation to Li3PS4, S and LiCl  is proposed at 2.24 V, via the intermediate formation of Li4PS5Cl,  whereas at around 2.9 V the oxidation towards P2S7 −4 and S0 can be  expected (Fig. 2b), all due to the S/S−2 redox, represented by the first  and second oxidation peaks of the differential capacity (Fig. 1d).   The  line  broadening  of  the  31P  and  6Li  resonances  of  LPSC  may  originate  from  a  distribution  in  bond  angles  and  Li-deficient  phases observed with XRD (Fig. 3a). After a full cycle that is first  oxidation to 3.63 V followed by reduction to 0.63 V, the intensity of  the amount of P2S7 4− decreases, whereas in the 6Li NMR spectrum  a new Li environment appears at 0.44 ppm, which can be assigned  to Li3PS4 (Extended Data Fig. 2c,d). This indicates that the P–S–P  bridges connecting the PS4 units, forming on oxidation, break on  reduction transforming them back to isolated PS4 units, similar to  what was reported for the Li3PS4 electrolyte20,21,38.

On the  first  reduction  (lithiation)  to  0.63 V  of  the  LPSC-C  electrode,  a  new  31P  environment  appears  at −220 ppm  (Fig.  4e),  which  can  be  assigned  to  Li3P  (Fig.  4f).  The  6Li  NMR  spectrum  (Extended  Data  Fig.  2f)  shows  the  appearance  of  a  Li  chemical  environment very similar to that of Li in the argyrodite. Although  the 6Li chemical shift of this environment is close to that of Li2PS3  (Supplementary Fig. 4), the associated phosphorus environment at  109 ppm is not observed in Fig. 4e. We suggest that this Li environment may represent disordered lithiated argyrodite phases, which  are suggested to form as metastable phases, occurring just above the  convex hull in Fig. 2a. Also, an additional peak appears at 2.3 ppm  in the 6Li spectrum (Extended Data Fig. 2f), which can be assigned  to the formation of Li2S, consistent with the XRD pattern in Fig. 3b.  After a full cycle that is first reduction to 0.63 V followed by oxidation to 1.63 V, Li3P disappears (Supplementary Fig. 5), indicating that in this voltage range phosphorous is redox active, reversibly  transforming Li3PS4 to Li3P. The observed formation of Li3P and Li2S  in the LPSC-C electrodes reduced to 0.63 V is consistent with XPS  observations showing the formation of Li3P, Li2S and LiCl species at 

The  proposed  indirect  oxidative  and  reductive  decomposition  mechanism of the argyrodite LPSC solid electrolyte, via the unstable Li4PS5Cl (S/S2− redox) and unstable Li11PS5Cl (P/P5+ redox), is  schematically shown in Fig. 5. Both the redox activity of the solid  electrolyte and of the decomposition products are responsible for  the observed cycling capacity at the anodic and cathodic potentials.  In ASSBs this implies that both contributions of the solid electrolyte  will add to the cycling capacity based on the active electrode materials and the specified potential ranges. Moreover, the poor ionic conductivity of the decomposition products, especially S, Li2S and LiCl,  as well as the change in volume can be expected to be responsible for  the large increase in interfacial resistance on cycling22,39,40. In addition to the observed decomposition reactions, specific active materials can result in additional decomposition reactions, for instance  Ni3S4  on  cycling  LPSC  in  combination  with  a  LiNi0.6Co0.2Mn0.2O2  cathode (Supplementary Fig. 6).

To  support  the  general  nature  of  the  indirect  decomposition  mechanism,  the  Li  insertion/extraction  potentials  are  also  determined computationally and experimentally for two different families of solid electrolytes, that is, garnet LLZO and NASICON LAGP,  as shown in Fig. 6. For LLZO, the predicted and measured oxidation are both located just above 3.5 V, which is significantly larger  than the direct decomposition at 2.91 V towards the predicted stable decomposition products Li2O2, La2O3 and Li6Zr2O7 (ref. 14). For  LAGP, the predicted and measured oxidation occur close to 2.31 V,  which is lower than direct decomposition at 2.70 V based on the  stability of the predicted decomposition products Ge, GeO2, Li4P2O7  and AlPO4 (ref.  14). These results support the hypothesis that the  proposed  indirect,  kinetically  favourable  decomposition,  via  the  (de)lithiation  of  the  solid  electrolyte,  is  a  general  mechanism,  in  practice widening the solid electrolyte stability window.

As solid electrolytes are designed for high ionic conductivity, the  activation  energies  for  oxidation  and  reduction  reactions,  associated with delithiation and lithiation respectively, can be expected  to  be  small.  The  resulting  metastable  solid  electrolyte  compositions  provide  a  kinetically  facile  reaction  intermediate,  providing an indirect pathway towards the more stable solid electrolyte.