
Due to the fossil fuel consumption and the increased pressure in  environmental issues, thedevelopment of sustainable and clean  energy  storage  systems  have  recently  been  attracted  everincreasingattentions  [1-5].  Among  the  alternatives,  lithium-ion  batteries (LIBs) have gainedgreat success in the field of portable  devices  and  large-scale  stationary  energy  storage.However,  thescarcity  of  lithium  reserves  and  constantly  rising  prices  of  lithium will restrict Li-ion batteries to adapt the explosive market  demands  in  the  future  [6-8].  By  contrast,  sodium-ion  batteries  (SIBs)  have  been  recognized  as  promising  energy  storage  substitutes  to  lithium-ion  batteries  for  EESapplications,  owning  to the wide geographic distribution and lowcost of Na resources  [9-11]. In  addition,  sodium  has  asimilar  intercalation  chemistry  to  lithium  as  well.  Although  SIBs  have  a  series  of  self-evident  merits, sodium has a larger ionicradius (1.02 Å) than that of Li+  ions  (0.76  Å),  which  leads  to  the  slightly  lower  energy  density  and more difficult insertion-extraction of Na+ [12, 13]. It is necessary,  thus,  to  explore  suitable  host  electrode  materials  with  larger  tunnel structure and ion diffusion channel. 

Electrochemical  impedancespectroscopy  (EIS)  was  carried  out to further explain the improved electrochemical performance  of  cycling,  NVP@C/MWCNTs and NVP@C electrodes firstly exhibited the  similar  charge-transferimpedance  and  sodium-ion  diffusion  (Figure  S8).  Then,  Figure  5a  presentsthe  Nyquist  plots  and  equivalent  circuit  of  NVP@C/MWCNTs  and  NVP@C  electrodesafter  200  cycles  at  1  C.  A  semicircle  in  the  high  frequencyregion  and  astraight  line  in  the  low-frequency  region  were  exhibited  the  Nyquist  plots  of  both  samples,  corresponding  to  the  charge-transfer  resistance  (Rct)  and  the  the  Warburg 

The  ortho-di-sodium  salts  of  tetrahydroxyquinone  (o-Na2C6H2O6)  was  preparedaccording to  the literature reported  [35]: 50% sodium carbonate  (Na2CO3) was added dropwise in 5 mL portion of inositol (C6H6O6, AR)till  the  permanent  yellow  color  appearing.  Then  6  mL  more  of  sodiumcarbonate  was  added  quickly.  The  dark  purple  crystals  were  separated  and  washed  byethanol  and  deionized  water  several  times.  Finally, the as-obtained powders were dried in vacuum oven at 90°C for  overnight. 

The  XRD  data  were  collected  on  a  Bruker  D8  advance  diffractometer  with Cu Kα radiation at a step size of 0.02. The 2θ range is from 10 to  80°. Raman spectrum was characterized on a LanRanHR spectrometer  equipped with a 532 nm laser source. SEM images of these composites  were  obtained  by  Nova  NanoSEM  430.  The  carbon  content  of  the  sampleswas  characterizedby  a  STA-449-F3  Thermal  Analyzer  (NETZSCH, Germany) under an air flow from 25℃to 800℃witha heating  rate  of  10  ℃  min-1.The  energy-dispersive  X-ray  (EDX)  analysis  was  performed  using  the  EDX  system  attached  to  the  electron  microscopy.  Transmission  electron  microscope  (TEM)  and  high-resolution  transmission  electron  microscope  (HRTEM)  were  performed  to  further  analyze the morphology and structure of products. BET surface areas of  the  samples  were  performed  on  ASAP  2460  Surface  Area  and  Porosimetry instrument by adsorption of nitrogen at 77 K. 

The  2032  coin-type  simulated  cells  were  assembled  in  an  argon-filled  glove box.  The  NVP@C/MWCNTs electrodes  were fabricated by  active  material (80 wt %), carbon black (10 wt %) as a conductive additive, and  polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF, 10 wt %) as the binder scattered in Nmethylpyrrolidone  (NMP).  The  o-Na2C6H2O6  electrodes  were  fabricated  by active material (50 wt %), Super P (40 wt %) as a conductive additive,  and polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF, 10 wt %) as the binder scattered in  N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP). Then, the membranes were dried at 120 °C  to remove the solvent. 1 M NaClO4 in ethyl carbonate (EC) and dimethyl  carbonate (DMC) with a volumetric ratio of 1:1 with 5 wt % additive FEC  (Fluoroethylene carbonate) was used as the electrolyte, and a glass fiber  separator  (Whatman,  GF/B)  was  used  as  the  separator.  The  constant  current were conducted by using a battery analyzer (Neware, Shenzhen,  China).  Cyclic  voltammetry  (CV)  measurements  and  electrochemical  impedance  electrochemical  impedance  (EIS)  were  performed  on  an  electrochemical  workstation  (Autolab  PGSTAT  302).  CV  tests  were  the  range  of  2.0  to  4.0  V  (vs.  Na/Na+)  for  carried  out  within  NVP@C/MWCNTs and 1.0 to 3.0 V (vs. Na/Na+) for o-Na2C6H2O6at the  scan of 0.2 mV s-1, respectively. EIS were recorded ranging from 0.01Hz  to 100 KHz. 