A novel desalination seawater battery (DSWB) has been developed by adapting the design of a rechargeable seawater battery, which operates for both seawater desalination and energy storage. The DSWB system has a unique architecture composed of two subsystems used for desalination and salination during charging and discharging, respectively. A higher energy density (4010 Wh/kg) can be achieved at high nominal cell potential (EO = 3.46 V, pH 8.4) in the DSWB system throughout the charging (desalination) process which is much larger than those of any reported desalination battery system (< 78 Wh/kg and < 1.25 V). In addition, the system provides a compartment for desalination, which is independent from the salination (discharging) process, en-abling the salination process to be carried out without renewing the seawater for every step, which enables the proposed system to achieve high levels of seawater desalination (up to 84%). The results affirm that further optimization of the cell system will facilitate economical and practical desalination battery applications with high energy density.   
Water shortages are one of the most serious challenges that need to be resolved [1]. More than 67% of the world's population experience severe water shortages [2]. In order to alleviate the stress on water supplies, the recovery of fresh water from earth-abundant seawater using desalination technology has emerged as a promising solution [3]. In fact, several desalination methods including seawater reverse os-mosis (SWRO) and thermal processes have been developed over the last century, which successfully provides additional freshwater to commu-nities [4–8]. However, the main drawbacks of desalination technology are high energy consumption and environmental pollution (when fossil fuels are used) [6,9,10]. Recently, electrochemical desalination process such as capacitive deionization (CDI) and a desalination battery has gained considerable research attention because they can overcome the current issues [11–22]. Compared to conventional desalination methods (e.g., RO, thermal distillation), the principle of electrochemical desalination is entirely different and advantageous. These novel technologies are beneficial since they produce desalinated water with minimal energy input by recovering the input energy required for charging the system during the electrochemical reaction [11,20]. In fact, previous studies on CDI and a desalination battery have shown that they require a lower amount of energy [11,14,19,23]. However, a CDI process possesses limited salt adsorption capacity (SAC) since it operates based on non- Faradaic reaction with lower charge capacity [24]. CDI, therefore, has been verified as an inadequate system for seawater desalination while it can still be utilized for treating brackish water [24]. On the other hand, the larger SAC of a desalination battery derived by the higher charge capacity of Faradaic reaction is rather suitable for the seawater desa-lination [12,14,15,19]. Moreover, this bifunctional system facilitates the increased use of renewable energy sources in seawater desalination technology [15]. In this regard, it has significant environmental im-plications in which the battery uses clean energy in the conventional desalination system [25]. In principle, the Na- and Cl-electrodes in a desalination battery store Na+ and Cl− ions, respectively, during the desalination process to produce desalinated water via a electrochemical redox reaction (Fig. S1, Desalination step) [11]. However, due to their nature, the elec-trodes in the battery have a limited electrical and ion-adsorption capacity. Therefore, the electrodes need to be refreshed after the de-salination process by releasing ions from the electrodes via a salination process in order to recycle them, while producing saline water (Fig. S1, Salination step) [11]. After desalinated water is produced during the charging process of the battery, the electrodes are saturated with ions, and the desalinated water is then removed and replaced with fresh seawater. The electrodes are then immersed in fresh seawater and re-lease the ions to recover their capacity for the next desalination step during the discharging process. Another limitation is the lower energy density (< 78 Wh/kg) [14] of desalination batteries than that of conventional batteries (e.g., LIBs, 250–590 Wh/kg) [26,27]. This can be attributed to the intrinsically low capacity (< 86 mAh/g) [12] and low working voltage (< 1.25 V) [14] of their electrodes. The electrodes in the battery are required to be chemically stable against water and electrochemically inert toward the H2 evolution reactions (HER) and O2 evolution reactions (OER). Due to these requirements, only Ag and Bi as the Cl-storage electrode [12–15,17,19] and a few aqueous Na electrode candidates as the Na- storage electrode [28] have been reported for the construction of de-salination batteries. However, the redox reaction of these coupled electrodes can exhibit voltages of < 1.23 V, which is the theoretical potential gap between HER and OER [11]. Furthermore, the aqueous Na electrodes identified to date exhibit low electrical capacities (< 119 mAh/g) [12,13,15], which reduce the nominal capacity of the full cell, thereby inducing low salt adsorption capacity (< 136 mg/g). There-fore, the desalination batteries reported to date exhibit low energy density due to their low working potential and low electrical storage capacity. 
Herein, we report a novel system design and use of a desalination seawater battery (DSWB) whose structural design was adapted from that of a previously studied rechargeable seawater battery upon the introduction of a polymeric anion exchange membrane (AEM) [29,30]. The seawater battery utilizes abundant seawater as catholyte in an open-structured seawater compartment. Our battery uses a Na super ionic conductor (NASICON) ceramic membrane to physically isolate the Na metal anode from seawater and the atmosphere, enabling Na+ ion transport between the seawater catholyte and Na metal anode. As shown in Fig. 1, the DSWB system is divided into three sections con-sisting of two seawater catholyte compartments for charging and dis-charging, and an anode compartment for Na metal collection. The AEM isolates the seawater for charging into two subsections, one with a current collector and the other for desalination. Upon charging, Na+ and Cl– ions in the desalination compartment are transported in op-posite sections to produce desalted water. During the discharging pro-cess of the DSWB, the Na metal in the anode is oxidized into Na+ ions, which are released into the seawater catholyte compartment during discharging. This provides an independent space for seawater desali-nation during the charging process, whose salinity is not influenced during the salination process, unlike in other desalination batteries. On top of the Na/Na+ redox reaction, reversible O2 evolution/reduction reactions occur at the two different positive electrodes via the decom-position of abundant seawater as counter reactions. As a result, the system can theoretically produce desalted water without any loss of energy via these reversible redox reactions. Furthermore, using these coupled reactions, the system can achieve a higher nominal cell po-tential (EO = 3.46 V, pH 8.4) and theoretical electrical storage capacity (1160 mAh/g), inducing a high theoretical energy density (4010 Wh/ kg) and a high theoretical salt adsorption capacity (~2520 mg/g) than previously reported desalination batteries. In this study, we report our investigation on the feasible operation of the desalination battery with seawater catholyte for desalting sea-water by constructing DSWB system based on the conceptual design. We demonstrated that the unique architecture ensures the separated compartments for charge and discharge process preventing the inter-ference between salination and desalination. This specialty of DSWB enables the continuous production of desalted water unlike other de-salination batteries to date. In addition, we also evaluated its perfor-mance for seawater desalination and energy storage, suggesting direc-tions for further optimization. We believe that our study opens a new window toward practical applications of energy efficient desalination seawater batteries. 
A coin-type cell anode, which is equivalent to the anode compart-ment, was assembled in an argon-filled glove box (O2 and H2O < 1 mg/ L) based on our previous study [31]. Seven components are required to assemble the coin-type cell. A NASICON membrane (Na3Zr2Si2PO12; Ce &Chem Co. Ltd., Republic of Korea) with a diameter of 16 mm and thickness of 1 mm was attached to a round upper cap and placed on the top of the coin cell. Tetraethylene glycol dimethylether (TEGDME, Sigma Aldrich) was used as the solvent to prepare a 1.0 M NaCF3SO3 (Sigma Aldrich) organic electrolyte, which was injected into the coin- type cell. A spacer made of stainless steel and activated carbon fiber (∅ = 16 mm; CNF Co. Ltd., Republic of Korea) coated with Na metal (119 mg) [32] was used as the electrode and pushed tightly toward the upper cap by a spring. A polyethylene (PE; Celgard Co. Ltd., USA) se-parator was placed between the NASICON ceramic membrane and electrode to prevent direct contact between them. Prior to using the coin-type cell anode, a 1 h resting period was required to achieve equilibrium.Seawater was simulated by dissolving 38 g of sea salt (Shinan Co. Ltd., Republic of Korea) in 1 L of deionized water (Table S1). This can reduce external factors, such as divalent ions and other organic and inorganic substances, which can cause inconsistencies commonly ob-served when using real seawater. The seawater compartments for both charging and discharging were filled using 200 mL of simulated sea-water as the catholyte with a 3 × 3 cm2 piece of carbon felt (CNF Co. Ltd., Republic of Korea) used as the current collector. The carbon felt was prepared upon heating at 500 °C under 1 atm of pressure for 4 h to thermally oxidize the surface of carbon fiber, which increased its hy-drophilicity. The charging and discharging processes were conducted using two different zigs. One is divided into three compartments (Fig. S2) and the other into two compartments [31]. Both zigs have a capacity of 200 mL and were filled with seawater, and a coin-shaped socket was used to insert the coin-type cells. The only difference be-tween the two zigs was the additional compartment surrounded by the NASICON ceramic membrane at one side and the AEM (ASV, SELEM-ION™, AGC Engineering Co., Ltd., Japan) on the other side. The AEM was tightly inserted to block the space at the opposite side of the NA-SICON ceramic membrane forming a 3.4 mL chamber where the sea-water for desalination was added. Only the coin-type cell anode was disassembled from the three-compartment zig after the charging pro-cess, which was reassembled with the two-compartment zig during the discharging process. The di-compartment zig has a hole, which enables the seawater to flow with the assistance of a water motor. All electrochemical tests were carried out at room temperature (~25 °C). Cyclic voltammograms (CVs) were controlled by a potentio-stat unit (Biologic, VSP-300) using a three-electrode cell equipped with carbon felt as the working electrode, Pt wire as the counter electrode, and Ag/AgCl saturated in 3 M KCl aqueous solution. CV curves were recorded at a scan rate of 10 mV·s–1. The battery performance during galvanostatic charging and discharging was confirmed using a battery cycler (WBCS3000, WonAtech Co. LTD., Republic of Korea). The ap-plied current density and power are characterized by dividing them by the effective area of NASICON (1.54 cm2). 
The ionic components in each sample of saline water were analyzed using ion chromatography (Dionex ICS 3000 for both cations and an-ions). The salinity of each sample of saline water was measured using a salinometer (CAS Salt-free 1000, CAS Co. Ltd., Republic of Korea). The elemental distribution was examined using energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS, Bruker Xflash 6130). The concentrations of total chlorine and free chlorine formed after the charging process were measured using a pocket chlorine photometer (HF Scientific™, USA). The rugged dissolved oxygen (RDO) concentration in the water was monitored using a bench top multi-meter (ORION STAR A216, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Gravimetric analysis was conducted using an analytical balance (Adventurer®, OHAUS Co. LTD., USA). 
The basic design of the seawater desalination battery is illustrated in  Fig. 1. The entire system consists of two main systems. One system is assigned to the charging process and the other is allocated to the dis-charging process. The two systems are physically divided by a NA-SICON ceramic membrane encompassing Na metal. The two systems are electrochemically connected via a Na+ ion pathway using the Na+/ Na redox reaction. The ceramic membrane facilitates the transport of Na+ ions and blocks the inflow of water into the anode compartment (AC) from the outer environment. In order to complement the poor ion transport between the solid membrane and solid electrode, the re-maining space in the AC is filled with an organic electrolyte. An anion exchange membrane (AEM) physically separates the seawater in the charging system into two sections, one with a carbon electrode termed as the seawater catholyte compartment for charging (SCCC) and one without the electrode, which is called the desalination compartment (DC), where desalination takes place. Upon charging, which corresponds to the desalination process, the seawater battery stores electrical energy at the AC in the form of the chemical bonds in Na metal via the reduction of the Na+ ions extracted from seawater in the DC according to Eq. (1). In this regard, the ceramic membrane plays a crucial role to prevent the Na metal from actively reacting with seawater. Meanwhile, the OER occurs via the decom-position of water on the active sites of the electrode inside the SCCC according to Eq. (2). As a result, the overall nominal cell charging voltage can be defined as 3.46 V. Along with this reaction, Cl− ions are displaced from the DC to the SCCC through the AEM. The movement of both types of ions in opposite directions keeps the charge balance in their respective compartments. For example, if the AC is given one electron from the SCCC, then one Cl− ion and one Na+ ion will be supplied from the DC to the SCCC and AC, respectively. Therefore, charge vacancies in each compartment are compensated by the inflow of ions. After all, both Cl− and Na+ ions are attracted toward the catholyte and anode, respectively, which removes theses ions from the DC. 
The Na metal collected in the AC is oxidized into Na+ ions upon discharging according to the reverse electrochemical reaction of Eq. (1). The oxidized ions are transported through the NASICON ceramic membrane into the SCCD, which is equivalent to the salination process. The O2 reduction reaction (ORR) occurs on the carbon electrode im-mersed in the SCCD as a counter reaction to the Na oxidation reaction at the AC according to the reverse reaction of Eq. (2). Consequently, the nominal cell discharging voltage can be defined as 3.46 V, which is identical to the charging potential due to its reversibility, although the OER and ORR occur in different compartments. Due to the utilization of abundant seawater, both reactions in the SCCC and SCCD can be sustained without limiting their capacity unlike in other conventional desalination batteries. Overall, the seawater in the SCCC, which is continuously getting acidic throughout the charging process is then sustainably supplied to the SCCD to be neutralized upon the discharging process. The pH of the outer environment, accordingly, is not affected by the whole process of the system. Furthermore, the system architecture is designed to differentiate the compartments used for desalination and salination. This facilitates the flexible operation of the desalination battery since the salination process does not influence the salinity of the compartment used for the desalination process unlike in other batteries, where the water needs to be exchanged after each process. 
In principle, the OER can be observed during the electrolysis of seawater, which is designed to occur in the SCCC. However, other side reactions accompanying the reduction of the ionic components found in seawater, such as Cl− or SO42−, should be investigated (Table S1) [33]. As shown in Fig. 2(a), cyclic voltammograms (CVs) recorded at a scan rate of 10 mV·s-1 were obtained in an undivided three-electrode cell using a heated carbon felt as the working electrode, an Ag/AgCl re-ference electrode, and Pt wire as the counter electrode. 0.5 M Na2SO4 and 0.5 M NaCl aqueous solutions were examined to identify the pos-sible reduction peaks observed in the CVs obtained in the presence of Cl− or SO42− ions, which account for > 95% of the anions found in seawater. From the CV obtained using 0.5 M Na2SO4, one oxidation peak without a reduction peak was observed due to the sluggish kinetics of the ORR. As a result, the absence of the following reduction peak de-monstrates that the oxidation peak can be attributed to the OER. On the other hand, the CV obtained using 0.5 M NaCl displays one oxidation peak with one reduction peak. The reduction peak originates from the reduction of oxidized chlorine species according to Eqs. (3)–(5). 
The oxidized chlorine agents were identified by measuring the concentration of total chlorine (TC) during the CV process when the voltage reached 1.9 V vs Ag/AgCl. The TC includes all oxidized chlorine species such as ClO−(aq), HOCl(aq), Cl2(aq) and other chloramines. In fact, the concentration of TC did not change during the CV obtained using 0.5 M Na2SO4 from its initial value (0.02 mg/L). As a result, the oxidation peak observed in the 0.5 M NaCl aqueous solution corre-sponds to the overlapping peaks of the chlorine evolution reaction (CER) and OER. In the same manner, the CV obtained using seawater can be inter-preted as the CV obtained using 0.5 M NaCl because they display si-milar curves. In other words, both the OER and CER can be observed during the oxidation of seawater with the CER competing with the OER as a side reaction. In fact, the simultaneous occurrence of both reactions is feasible due to the large overpotential of the OER, although the theoretical potential of the OER is relatively smaller than that of the CER [34,35]. 
Subsequently, we constructed a full-cell charging system containing the SCCC, DC, and AC using a carbon felt electrode, AEM, and ceramic membrane after investigating the half-cell performance of carbon felt as a current collector in the OER of seawater. To elucidate the OER during the charging process, we examined the dissolved oxygen concentration in the SCCC during the process (Fig. 3(b)). Atmospheric oxygen is dissolved into the SCCC. Therefore, we purged argon into the seawater at a constant flow rate (1.7 L/h) in order to offset the effect of oxygen provided from the air. The rugged dissolved oxygen (RDO) electrode detects the dissolved oxygen formed at the surface of the carbon felt electrode in the SCCC. The RDO concentration decreased during the first resting period for 10 h because of the effect of purging argon into the SCCC. During the galvanostatic charging process at 0.6 mA (0.39 mA/cm2), the voltage plateaued at 4.25 V vs Na+/Na, while the RDO concentration gradually increased. This can be attributed to the OER and the generated oxygen being dissolved into the water during the charging process. Along with the OER, the CER was also discovered as a competitive reaction at an operational cell voltage of > 4.0 V vs Na+/Na (Fig. S3). Nevertheless, the major reaction was found to be the OER according to the relatively small amount of TC formed during the charging process (Fig. S4). The relatively high cell voltage plateaued at 4.25 V compared to the theo-retical potential (3.45 V), which was attributed to the large over-potential of the OER as well as the additional resistive compartment for desalination. The additional components for desalination added to the conventional seawater battery system such as an AEM and seawater to be desalinated may account for the resistance of the DSWB system.
Current collectors suitable for the OER, such as Pt or RuO2, may be applied to alleviate the high activation energy of the reaction to further optimize the DSWB by reducing its resistivity [36]. Moreover, DC op-timization can be carried out by utilizing an AEM and ceramic mem-brane with high ionic conductivity or reducing the volume between two membranes filled with seawater [14]. Meanwhile, the desalination process was performed in the DC be-tween the AEM and ceramic membrane. The concentrations of both the Na+ and Cl− ions were reduced as shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b). We observed a slight increase in the voltage after it plateaued at 4.25 V vs Na+/Na due to the increased polarization in the system. This was at-tributed to the gradual reduction in the conductivity of the seawater in the DC observed during the desalination process. The Faradaic efficiency (FE) of the desalination process for the re-moval of Na+ and Cl− ions was examined by comparing the charge passed during the desalination process and the actual change in both ions, which can be defined using Eq. (6). where zi is the valence state of the ion, F is the Faraday constant, nI and nF are the initial and final number of moles of the ions in the solution, and Q is the total charge passed during the process [11,12]. The results show a FE of ~70% for the removal of Cl− ions and ~80% for the removal of Na+ ions. This revealed that ion crossover into the DC im-pedes the desalination process or the charges were dissipated by the resistance of the other components in the cell. The FE can also be potentially improved in a manner similar to that discussed for reducing the cell resistivity by optimizing the membranes with improved ionic conductivity or modifying the system design. Fig. 3(c) shows that Na metal was deposited on the stainless-steel substrate due to the reduction of the Na+ ions transferred from the DC and deposited inside the AC during the desalination process. We carried out the galvanostatic charging process for 20 mAh without using a carbon fiber substrate, which was placed onto the stainless steel sub-strate in order to clarify the elemental analysis of the Na metal formed using energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The change in the atomic ratio and surface shows that the stainless-steel substrate com-posed of iron and chromium was fully covered with a metallic sub-stance composed of Na. The remaining ratios for the atomic compo-nents were attributed to the NaCF3SO3 salt in the electrolyte. As a result, we investigated the OER as an anodic reaction on the carbon fiber electrode as well as the reduction of Na+ ions into Na metal as a cathodic reaction in the AC. This agreed with the actual plateaued voltage (4.25 V vs Na+/Na) formed via Eqs. (1) and (2), although the actual voltage was slightly higher than the theoretical value due to polarization as a result of the high overpotential of the OER and the DC, which provide additional resistance. We also demonstrated the movement of Cl− ions from the DC into the SCCC by comparing the initial and final concentration of Cl− ions in the SCCC after galvanostatic charging for 20 mAh, as shown in  Fig. 3(d). To clarify the obvious change in the Cl− ion concentration, deionized water was used in the SCCC instead of seawater. Indeed, the results showed that the Cl− ions were transferred from the DC into the SCCC, which contained no Cl− ions at the beginning of the charging process. 
The cell voltage changes as a function of the capacity after galva-nostatic charging for 20 mAh are shown in Fig. 4. The desalination process was performed until it dramatically increased to 4.5 V vs Na +/Na for safe cell operation. We observed that the salinity of the DC, which was initially 33,460 mg/L of total dissolved solid (TDS) was reduced to 7740 mg/L of TDS, which was equivalent to 77% seawater desalination. Among the 25,820 mg/L of removed TDS, 96% was at-tributed to Na+ and Cl− ions. The cell was therefore capable of carrying out the desalination of seawater to as low as 7740 mg/L of TDS by selectively removing the Na+ and Cl− ions. Below 7740 mg/L of TDS, the conductivity of the DC (and therefore the entire cell) becomes too low for efficient operation with the current as high as 0.6 mA (0.39 mA/cm2). However, it turned out that the lower the operational current, the lower the final TDS although the overall treating time was prolonged [Fig. S5]. Moreover, overall time for desalination can further be re-duced while removing more amount (up to 84% of removal) of salts throughout the “Step current charging mode” although the produced water is still yet to be drinkable [Fig. S6]. As a result, after the first stage of desalination with the current system, a second stage of desalination is still required to produce fresh water which has a salinity of < 500 mg/L of TDS [37]. This can be achieved using brackish water RO or capacitive deionization systems for economical second-pass desalination, thereby producing potable water. For further economical application of the device as the first stage of a desalination process, the supply of electricity to operate the second stage of desalination can be provided from the battery, which was stored during the charging process. Thus, DSWB will not only store the energy for the second stage of desalination (e.g. RO) but alleviate the energy burden of the whole process [38]. Furthermore, the combination of previously developed desalination technologies such as SWRO, Brackish water RO, MSF, and MED with the desalination battery can expand battery application with renewable energy whose unreliable energy supply can be stabilized upon integration with the energy storage system [25,39,40]. 
The reduced Na+ ions formed during the desalination process should be emitted through the oxidation of the metal during the dis-charging process, which is equivalent to the salination process in the current system. In principle, the ORR can be observed during the electrolysis of seawater, which is designed to occur in the SCCD as a counter reaction to the Na oxidation reaction. In addition, we postulated that the ORR was a cathodic reaction during the discharging process since it is the reverse reaction of the OER, which is the anodic reaction that occurs during the charging process, and therefore has the same theoretical electrochemical potential. The feasibility of the carbon felt electrode as a current collector for the ORR was evaluated using the CVs obtained using seawater purged with different gases (Fig. 5(a)). The CVs were obtained at a scan rate of 10 mV·s-1 in an undivided three-electrode cell using carbon felt as the working electrode, an Ag/AgCl reference electrode, and Pt wire as the counter electrode. We used three different conditions purging with argon, air, and oxygen to foster the specific conditions with different RDO concentrations. From the CVs, the reduction peaks whose onset potentials were at ~− 1.2 V vs Ag/AgCl were noticeable as the dis-solved oxygen inside the seawater was accumulated. This revealed that the electrochemical reduction reaction was taking place consuming oxygen with water on the surface of the working electrode according to the reverse reaction of Eq. (2). The reduction peaks following the ORR can be attributed to the HER due to the electrolysis of seawater [34]. This is plausible because a slight peak was observed even though argon was purged to dissipate the supply of oxygen. 
We constructed a full-cell discharging system containing the AC and SCCD with the ceramic membrane and carbon felt electrode as a current collector for the ORR using seawater. The AC was previously charged by reducing the Na+ ions supplied from the DC into metal during the desalination process. Fig. 5(b) shows the galvanostatic discharging process at 0.6 mA (0.39 mA/cm2) current observed under the two different environments containing dissolved oxygen formed by purging argon or air into the seawater. Purging air into the SCCD, the concentration of dissolved oxygen in the seawater compartment remained constant at 9.1 mg/L, which is equivalent to the resting concentration without artificial treatment. Therefore, purging air into the water is effective for sustaining the concentration of dissolved oxygen nearby the electrode, which is consumed upon the discharging process. It also simulates the outer environment of the ocean water with waves that facilitate the circulation of oxygen. Meanwhile, the voltage plateaued at ~2.8 V vs Na+/Na, which may be attributed to the ORR due to the circulation of oxygen from the atmosphere [41]. On the other hand, the concentration of RDO was saturated at 0.7 mg/L when purged with argon to deplete the oxygen dissolved in the seawater. This cell displayed the lowest voltage plateau at ~1.7 V vs Na/Na+, which may correspond to the HER potential, compared to the cell purged with air. Briefly, the cell performance was enhanced by the air purged into the seawater, which induced a higher cell potential for the ORR rather than the HER. To elucidate the performance of the battery as an energy generator, we examined the power of the cell system, as shown in Fig. 5(c). The result shows that a peak power of 9.15 mW (5.94 mW/cm2) was achieved when providing air into the seawater in order to maintain a stabilized concentration of RDO. The key to the discharging process is not only utilizing the stored energy, but to carry out the salination process by emitting the Na+ ions previously absorbed during the desalination process. Therefore, we investigated the emission of Na from the AC to the SCCD using gravi-metric analysis, as shown in Fig. 5(d). Beforehand, we arranged the AC, which was charged over 40 mAh during the desalination process to plate the Na onto the carbonaceous substrate, as shown in Fig. 5(e). During the discharging process for salination, the mass of the Na metal plated on the carbonaceous substrate decreases. Indeed, the theoretical mass reduction equivalent to 10 mAh of discharge capacity was 8.574 mg, which can be detected using the balance with mg units. Meanwhile, the coin cell of the AC decapped after every 10 mAh of discharge capacity showed a gradual decrease in the Na metal loading due to the salination process.(Fig. 5(e)–(h)) As expected, we demonstrated the occurrence of the ORR during the discharging process as well as the oxidation of Na metal into Na+ ions. This was in agreement with the real voltage plateau of 2.8 V vs Na+/Na formed by the reverse of the electrochemical reaction shown in Eqs. (1) and (2). However, a discrepancy still exists between the actual voltage and the theoretical potential derived using the full cell composed of the half-cell reactions in Eqs. (1) and (2) because of the high overpotential of the ORR or other resistance in the cell components such as the ceramic membrane. We will find further solutions for optimization by developing a ceramic membrane with higher conductivity or substituting the current col-lector with the ORR optimized electrodes reported to date, such as Pt, RuO2, and other carbonaceous electrodes [36,42]. 
The successive charging and discharging results are summarized in  Fig. 6. Unlike other conventional desalination batteries, the salination process did not affect the salinity of the desalination compartment where the salinity decreased during the desalination process. This was enabled by the novel system architecture, which differs from conven-tional desalination batteries. It was also attributed to the unique properties of the system adopting seawater as the an infinite catholyte for the electrochemical reactions. The system with distinctive design, therefore, is capable of sustainable desalination process without ex-changing water every process. Further optimization and development of DSWB (e.g. the design of anode compartment with both-sided NA-SICON encompassing Na metal) will promise the simultaneous opera-tion of both charge and discharge process, which shortens the time for the whole process [43]. On one hand, the adoption of seawater is beneficial in terms of its huge capacity to treat water or to store energy since the source for the electrochemical reactions is supplied from nature. However, the slug-gish kinetics observed in the electrochemical reactions, such as the OER and ORR derived by the electrolysis of seawater, lead to the extensive dissipation of energy during the successive charging and discharging. For further development, the electrochemistry community has recently shown increasing interest in catalysts to promote the OER or ORR for further applications [44–46]. In this regard, the charge and discharge voltage gap of nearly 1.6 V is equivalent to the specific energy consumption (SEC), 21.3 kWh/m3 (equivalent to 37.3 kT/ion in energy per ion removal unit) [Fig. S7]. The energy consumption of the system can further approach to the thermodynamic minimum by reducing the resistance of cell components such as solid electrolyte and AEM or minimizing the polarization of OER/ORR [Fig. S8] [47]. However, we have made a major step forward in desalination battery technology by adopting Na metal as the electrode, which has previously restricted the increase in the total capacity of conventional desalination batteries. Fig. 7 shows a comparative energy density diagram displaying some of the desalination batteries recently studied. Our novel desalination battery prepared using a combination of the Na metal anode and air electrode not only provides a high theoretical energy density for storing electrical energy, but also acts as an economical desalination device with a large capacity to remove salt from seawater. 
We have demonstrated the successful fabrication of a desalination battery using Na metal as a practical and feasible Na-storage electrode and oxygen dissolved in seawater as an economical and abundant counter electrode utilizing two ion selective membranes. Upon the desalination process equivalent to charging the battery, it adopts the OER as an anodic reaction and Na metal formation as a cathodic re-action. We discovered Na+ ions inside the DC are transported through the NASICON ceramic membrane into the AC, and the Cl− ions move toward the SCCC through the AEM. The system shows excellent desalination performance by removing salt up to 84% of the initial TDS of seawater. Further optimization of the system will complement draw-backs such as the resistance or Faradaic inefficiency for desalination. The discharging process, which corresponds to the salination process, can successfully return the stored energy through the electrolysis of water by reducing oxygen, while simultaneously releasing the oxidized Na+ ions through the ceramic membrane. Due to the unique structure of the system, successive operation of the charge and discharge processes which is coupled with the desalination and salination processes respectively, never disrupts the salinity of the DC. Moreover, the combination of the Na metal anode as a Na-electrode and the air counter electrode provides incomparably high energy density as well as a maximum amount of desalination with high salt adsorption capacity. Accordingly, DSWB shows the feasibility of large-scale utilization with considering the effect of its large energy density on efficient space utilization and remarkable desalting performance. Further development to promote the energy efficiency can be achieved by applying catalysts to the electrodes or introducing high performance electrodes for selective reactions (i.e. the OER or ORR). Overall, this novel and economical desalination battery with a unique geometry will provide a feasible way for seawater desalination with further optimization of the system components. 


