
Glass and glass-ceramic NASICON-type electrolytes of Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 composition were obtained by melt quenching and glass crystallization, respectively. The stability of the solid electrolytes to molten metallic Li was studied by immersing the samples and holding them at 230 °C for 72 h. Li|glass|Li and Li|glass-ceramics|Li electrochemical cells were assembled and their resistance was measured by impedance spectroscopy at 200 °C for 9 days. It was established that, unlike the glass, the glass-ceramics did not change in its phase composition and molecular structure after the tests. It is shown that Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 glass-ceramics is chemically stable in contact with metallic Li.

Nowadays lithium-ion and lithium batteries are the most popular power sources both for portable electronics and in large-scale applications [1]. Commercially produced lithium-ion batteries use liquid or gel polymer electrolytes which have a number of disadvantages: ﬂammability, thermal instability and a potential dendrite formation [1–3]. In this regard, solid electrolytes that have a high Li-ion conductivity (not lower than 10−4 S/cm at temperatures close to ambient), low porosity and stability in contact with electrode materials look very promising. found among NASICON-structured conductors with the general formula LiM2(PO4)3, where M = Ti, Ge, Zr, Hf or Sn [1,4]. For example, one compound of this class Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 has a total conductivity of 7 129)10−4 S/cm at room temperature, but conductors based on lithium titanium phosphate are not stable in contact with Li anode [4]. On the other hand, Aldoped lithium germanium phosphates, the system Li1+хAlхGe2−х(PO4)3, are stable versus metallic Li and have a high Liion conductivity [5,6]. When Ge4+ is partially replaced by Al3+, the conductivity increases by 3–4 orders of magnitude at room temperature, in which case the region of existence of solid solutions is 0.1 ≤ х ≤ 0.6 [5]. Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 composition (LAGP for short) is reported to have the highest conductivity [7]. However, during a ceramic electrolyte synthesis one cannot avoid the problem of Li penetration into the electrolyte through interconnected pores and grain boundaries accompanied by dendrite growth, and, as a result, a short

circuit, which was demonstrated for ceramics based on Li7La3Zr2O12 [8]. The mechanism of this phenomenon has not as yet been fully determined, but one of the key factors here may be the nature of lithium diﬀusion along the grain boundaries of the ceramics and Li precipitation in the intergranular region [9]. A technologically simple way of overcoming this drawback is synthesizing glass-ceramic electrolytes by crystallization of monolithic glass. An advantage of conductors based on phosphate systems is the possibility of the formation of an amorphous phase, from which one can derive a high-conductivity NASICONstructured glass-ceramics, in particular, LAGP. Besides, glass-ceramics has not only a dense microstructure, but also a higher mechanical strength and a lower grain-boundary resistance in comparison with ceramics of analogous composition. However, literature data about the stability of the high-conductivity LAGP electrolyte in contact with metallic lithium are contradictory [6,10], and there are no data regarding the stability of the parent glass.

The present paper reports the synthesis of glass and high-density glass-ceramics Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 with a high Li-ion conductivity and the study of chemical and kinetic compatibility of the obtained solid electrolytes with molten metallic lithium for high-energy Li batteries.

Glass of 19.75Li2O–6.17Al2O3–37.04GeO2–37.04P2O5 composition (LAGP for short) was synthesized by melt quenching. Li2CO3 (>99.4%), Al2O3 (>99.9%), GeO2 (>99.9%) and NH4H2PO4 (≥98.0%) are usedas the starting materials. The components were thoroughly mixed together and heated stepwise up to 500 °C to remove volatile substances. Then the resulting mixture was melted in a Pt crucible at 1450 °C for 1 h. The melt was quenched between preheated steel plates. The procedure yielded transparent colorless parallel-sided plates without any impurities. The samples were annealed at 500 °C during 0.5 h to relieve thermal stresses.

Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 glass-ceramics was obtained by glass crystallization. For this purpose, the glass samples were ground on both sides and then crystallized at 820 °C for 8 h in a muﬄe furnace at the rate of 3 °C/min. After crystallization, the samples were slowly cooled down to room temperature in the furnace. As a result, glass-ceramic samples become white.

The amorphous structure of the original glass and the phase composition of the obtained glass-ceramics were determined by X-ray diffraction method (XRD) with a Rigaku D/MAX-2200VL/PC diffractometer (Rigaku, Japan) over a 2θ range of 10–60° at room temperature. The collected data were processed with the FULLPROF program using ICDD PDF-2 database.

The microstructure of glass-ceramics and glass samples before and after electrochemical experiments were studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a TESCAN MIRA 3 LMU (TESCAN, Czech Republic). The local microstructure was determined by means of energy dispersive X-ray microanalysis.

The stability of the starting glass and the LAGP glass-ceramics in contact with metallic lithium was determined using two methods: 1) by holding the samples in molten Li with no current applied; 2) electrochemically using Li|solid electrolyte|Li cells at 200 °C for 9 days in the atmosphere of Ar (extra pure grade).

To study the stability of the obtained solid electrolytes, the samples were immersed in molten metallic Li and kept at 230 °C for 72 h. Then the samples were taken from the melt and puriﬁed from lithium. Degradation of the samples surface and volume was studied using the XRD and SEM methods. The change in molecular structure was also investigated by Raman spectroscopy using a Raman spectrometer U 1000 (Renishaw, England). The Raman spectra were collected by an Arion laser with a wavelength of 532 nm and a power of 40 mW at a scanning angle of 90°. The Raman spectra were recorded in the static and extended modes in the range of 1200−50 cm−1 with spectral resolution of 1 cm−1.

To evaluate the degradation of the electrolyte functional properties before and after holding it in molten Li resistance measurements were conducted by impedance spectroscopy in a two-probe cell with silver metal electrodes over the frequency range of 0.025–1000 kHz in air using potentiostats/galvanostat Р-5Х (Ellins, Russia). Not only the values of resistance at certain temperatures were compared, but also the general appearance of temperature dependences of Li-ion conductivity of the solid electrolytes over a 19–140 °C temperature range. For this purpose, the samples were previously cleaned from residual Li and an Ag-based alloy was sputtered on both ends of the samples to form electrodes.

Li|glass LAGP|Li and Li|glass ceramics LAGP|Li symmetric cells were assembled in a dry argon box M-BROWN (H2O concentration < 1 ppm). Metallic Li was rolled to the foil with thickness ~150 μm. Electrodes were cut out from the Li foil in the circle form (diameter ~4 mm) in order to avoid the lithium occurrence along the end face of the solid electrolyte sample. The obtained electrodes were pressed by rolling to both polished surfaces of the sample.

The electrical resistance of the studied cells was measured by the complex impedance method using a P-5X galvanostat equipped with FRA24 impedance module (Elins, Russia) in Ar atmosphere at 200 °C for 9 days. Before the each resistance measurement, the lithium | electrolyte interface was electrochemically updated on both sides by a potential diﬀerence sweep with speed 10 mV/s for 5–10 cycles (provided a mandatory current response). To establish the presence of electrolyte the cells were interaction products with the anode material,

The ﬁrst task was to estimate the glass stability versus molten lithium. Glass samples were exposed in contact with lithium pellets at 200 °C for 9 days in cells providing no lithium leakage under melting. SEM picture of the initial glass is shown in Fig. 1a. It can be seen that the glass microstructure is homogeneous without interspersed crystalline phases. After exposure pellets in contact with lithium at 200 °C for 9 days, the glass volume was penetrated by dendrites of newly formed phase, as shown in Fig. 1b and с. As initial glass has no signiﬁcant amount of pores, newly formed phase can not be lithium leaked through glass volume. The results of impedance spectroscopy for the samples also show no short circuit (see Section 3.3). The only way of dendrites nature is the products of chemical reaction between lithium and glass at 200 °C. According to the maps of the element distribution of aluminum, germanium, phosphorus, and oxygen (Fig. 1d), the composition of the newly formed phase does not diﬀer signiﬁcantly from the glass composition. This may be due to the fact that this phase is enriched in lithium, which can not be evaluated by energy dispersive Xray microanalysis.

It can be assumed that the parent glass and the product phase have diﬀerent densities, which leads to the formation of gaps in the glass volume. However, these gaps are wide enough to allow lithium leaking. As lithium ﬁlls the gap the new interface between Li and glass forms allowing the reaction expand deeper in the glass volume. Finally the glass penetrates with product phase and the reaction stops when there is not enough lithium. The sample holds its integrity in the cell but it splits up at cell disassembling in the contact area with lithium. To conﬁrm the glass instability several samples were exposed in Li melt at 230 °C for 72 h. It was found that the samples completely dissolved in molten Li after experiment, no precipitate was either found. Obviously the products of glass reaction with lithium can be dissolved in Li melt.

The obtained glass-ceramics has a NASICON-type structure (Fig. 2) and possesses a high Li-ion conductivity, which was determined by impedance spectroscopy, and is characterized by a dense microstructure. Fig. 2 shows the XRD patterns for the as-cast glass and glassceramics of compound Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3. The XRD pattern of the glass looks like a halo without any diﬀraction peaks, which conﬁrms its amorphous nature. The XRD pattern of the LAGP glass-ceramics have peaks corresponding to the conducting phase LiGe2(PO4)3 with space group R-3c and the impurity phase GeO2, Fig. 2. It is known that a for Al3+ ions partial (ri = 0,535 Å) with almost similar ionic radii yields solid solutions Li1+xAlxGe2–x(PO4)3 in the interval of 0.1 ≤ х ≤ 0.6 [11–13]. As previously reported [14], the GeO2 impurity phase was always contained in the LAGP glass-ceramics at the crystallization above 578 °C. However, a low content of this impurity does not have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the electrical conductivity of the solid electrolyte, which is (3.9 ± 0.1) 129)10−4 S/cm at 25 °C.

Glass of Li2O–Al2O3–GeO2–P2O5 system is not stable in contact with molten metallic lithium. The reaction between glass and lithium gives the product that splits up glass samples. The product might be further fully dissolved in larger amounts of Li melt. A high-conductivity electrolyte Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 with a dense microstructure was obtained by glass crystallization from the glass mentioned above. Glass-ceramics samples possess good stability versus molten lithium in contrast with initial glass. It was shown that the phase composition and molecular structure of the glass-ceramics does not change after a contact with molten lithium. It was established that the resistance values of Li/glassceramics LAGP/Li cell though are high enough does not change signiﬁcantly in time. Glass-ceramics of LAGP can be used as a solid electrolyte in lowand medium-temperature Li power sources with appropriate enhancement of interface behavior and resistance lowering.