The work presents the investigations of Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3-xLiF Li-ion conducting ceramics with 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.3 by means of X-ray diﬀractometry (XRD), 7Li, 19F, 27Al and 31P Magic Angle Spinning Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (MAS NMR) spectroscopy, thermogravimetry (TG), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), impedance spectroscopy (IS) and density method. It has been shown that the total ionic conductivity of both as-prepared and ceramic Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 is low due to a grain boundary phase exhibiting high electrical resistance. This phase consists mainly of berlinite crystalline phase as well as some amorphous phase containing Al3+ ions. The electrically resistant phases of the grain boundary decompose during sintering with LiF additive. The processes leading to microstructure changes and their eﬀect on the ionic properties of the materials are discussed in the frame of the brick layer model (BLM). The highest total ionic conductivity at room temperature was measured for LATP-0.1LiF ceramic sintered at 800 °C and was equal to σtot = 1.1 × 10−4 S cm−1.

Solid lithium ion electrolytes are interesting materials for the Li-ion battery technology (LIB). When applied, they oﬀer not only improved mechanical and thermal properties of the batteries but also possibility to use new high-voltage (> 5 V) cathode materials in these devices [1–4]. The principal criterion to classify a lithium ion conductor as applicable for the LIB’s technology is the value of the total ionic conductivity at room temperature, which should exceed 10−4 S cm−1 [1–4]. Unfortunately, most of the materials, which fulﬁlls this conductivity condition suﬀers from poor chemical stability in the presence of moisture. The glasses based on Li2S suﬀer from such limitation [2,4]. On the other hand, the materials demonstrating a high chemical stability, e.g. lithium ion conducting ceramic materials based on metal oxides, exhibit poor total ionic conductivity. Various attempts have been made to obtain a solid electrolyte, which combines both high lithium ion conductivity and high chemical stability against moisture [2,4]. One of the possible approaches consists in modifying the abovementioned ceramic materials based on metal oxides to improve their ionic conductivity. Their low total ionic conductivity mainly results from the grain boundary with high electric resistance surrounding highly conducting grains. Thus, to obtain a good solid electrolyte, it is necessary to modify the grain boundary in such a way that its resistance is reduced signiﬁcantly.

Within the ceramic materials based on metal oxides, which are considered as the candidates for the modiﬁcation of their grain boundaries, lithium titanium phosphate (LTP) with the chemical formula LiTi2(PO4)3 seems to be promising [5–12]. The compound crystallizes in a NASICON-type structure with rhombohedral symmetry of R-3c space group. The bulk (grain) conductivity of LTP is in the range of 10−6-10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature [5–12]. The derived compounds, in which some of Ti4+ ions in the crystal structure are substituted by Al3+, show even higher ion conductivity. Among these compounds, the Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 with x = 0.3, called LATP hereafter, received much attention, as it exhibits the best ionic properties in the NASICON-based family [5–18]. The LATP materials obtained via melt-quenching or sol-gel method exhibit total ionic conductivity up to 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature [19–23].

Although the modiﬁcation of the starting material should obviously be made at the technology stage of the synthesis or sintering, the issue how to do it eﬃciently is still under discussion. In the literature, it has been reported that the sintering in the presence of an additional foreign phase can improve the ionic properties [17,24–31]. N. C. Rosero-Navarro et al. investigated the addition of Li3BO3 to garnet type materials and showed that this addition increased the total ionic conductivity of the formed composites [24]. They also noticed the densiﬁcation of the ceramic materials after sintering at 900 °C. Furthermore, H. Aono et al. observed an improvement of the total ionic conductivity of the studied LiTi2(PO4)3-Li3BO3 and LiTi2(PO4)3-Li3PO4 composites in comparison to the pristine LiTi2(PO4)3 material [25]. Besides, in our previous works related to LTP-based composites, to which Li3BO3 or Li2.9B0.9S0.1O3.1 glass have been added, we observed a signiﬁcant enhancement of the total ionic conductivity by almost four orders of magnitude with respect to ceramic LiTi2(PO4)3 [26,27]. T. Hupfer et al. studied the LATP based composite with the addition of diﬀerent amounts of LiTiOPO4 [28]. They reported that the secondary phase lowered the sintering temperatures. Moreover, the assistance of the foreign phases caused densiﬁcation of the studied materials. It also aﬀected the total ionic conductivity of the composite. N. Kyono et al. [17] presented that even the addition of an insulating phase in an appropriate amount followed by sintering improved the total ionic conductivity of NASICON-family material.

Among various sintering additives, lithium ﬂuoride appears to be an interesting and eﬀective one [29–31]. B. Xu et al. investigated the perovskite-type ceramics with the chemical formula Li3/8Sr7/16Hf1/ 4Ta3/4O3 (LSHTO) [29]. The authors observed that LiF additive increased the total ionic conductivity of LSHTO by about 1.5 times with respect to the starting material, yielding a conductivity of 3.3 × 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature. L. Xiong et al. reported another approach to enhance the ionic properties of lithium titanium phosphate using lithium ﬂuoride additive [30]. Instead of sintering the as-prepared material with LiF, the additive was added to substrates before the synthesis process. They observed a signiﬁcant enhancement of total ionic conductivity, which was ascribed to the changes in the microstructure, i.e. bigger and better compacted grains. In ref. [31], we described the LTP-LiF composite family and measured a total ionic conductivity enhanced by three orders of magnitude with respect to LTP. Although all the literature reports unanimously emphasize the importance of LiF additive to increase total ionic conductivity, detailed explanations are still lacking. This work aims at better understanding the role of LiF additive and sintering temperature in the improvement of the total ionic conductivity of the Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3-LiF composites. For this purpose, we decided to investigate not only LATP-LiF ceramic composites sintered at 700, 800 and 900 °C but also the asreceived LATP powder and LATP ceramics after sintering at 700, 800 and 900 °C, which were considered as reference materials. These materials were investigated using: high temperature X-ray diﬀractometry (HTXRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), 7Li, 19F, 27Al and 31P magic angle spinning nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MAS NMR), thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) and density method. We paid attention to correlations among the results obtained by the means of the methods used for characterization of the studied materials.

The polycrystalline Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 was obtained by the means of solid-state reaction method. Starting reagents Li2CO3 (Sigma Aldrich), NH4H2PO4 (POCh), TiO2 (Sigma Aldrich) and Al2O3 (Sigma Aldrich) were weighted in stoichiometric amounts, then mixed with a mortar and pestle. The ground mixture was annealed at 900 °C for 10 h to obtain the ﬁnal compound. In the next stage of preparation of composites, a ball-milling technique was employed for mixing the asprepared LATP powder with LiF taken in molar ratio varying from 10 to 30 mol%. Both powders, immersed in ethanol, were ball-milled with rotation speed of 400 rpm for 1 h using a planetary ball-mill Fritsch Pulverisette 7. The obtained powder, after drying, was pressed under uniaxial 10 MPa pressure to form pellets 6 mm in diameter and ca. 2 mm thick. Finally, they were sintered at 700, 800 or 900 °C for 2 h. The X-ray diﬀraction method employing Philips X‘Pert Pro (Cu Kα) was used for examination of the quality of both the as-synthesized and composite powdered products. Temperature dependent XRD (HTXRD) was performed using Anton Paar HTK-1200 Oven in the temperature 30–900 °C range. Data were collected in the range of 10°–90° with 0.05° step and a count rate of 0.5 s at each step.

Thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) was carried out on the powdered composites using TA Instruments Q600 to observe mass loss during heating under air ﬂow in temperature range of 30–900 °C. The measurements were performed with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 on samples of ca. 20 mg each. The investigation aimed at determining the thermal stability of the composites.

The apparent density of the composites was determined using Archimedes method with isobutanol as an immersion liquid. We estimated the accuracy of the used method as ca. 1%. The microstructure was investigated by means of SEM employing Raith eLINE plus. For the SEM imaging, always freshly fractured pellets were used.

For electric measurements, both bases of the as-formed pellets were, at ﬁrst, polished and then covered with graphite as electrodes. Impedance investigations were carried out employing Solatron 1260 frequency analyzer in a frequency range of 10−1-107 Hz. Impedance data were collected in the temperature range from 30 to 100 °C, both during heating and cooling runs.MAS NMR spectra were acquired on a 400 MHz Bruker Avance II NMR spectrometer equipped with a 4 mm HXY probe used in double resonance mode. The NMR spectra were acquired at room temperature (RT) at the MAS frequency of 10 kHz. Single-pulse experiments were performed with pulse lengths of 1.0 μs for 7Li, 1.0 μs for 27Al and 2.5 μs for 31P. Radiofrequency (rf) nutation frequencies were equal to 115 kHz for 7Li, 60 kHz for 27Al and 50 kHz for 31P. The 7Li, 27Al and 31P NMR spectra result from the averaging of 512, 128, 8 transients using relaxation delays of 0.3, 1.0 or 20 s. The 19F NMR spectra were acquired at room temperature and a MAS frequency of 30 kHz using single-pulse experiments with a pulse length of 2.8 μs and an rf nutation frequency of 89 kHz. The 19F NMR spectrum resulted from averaging 144 transients with a relaxation delay of 10 s. The 7Li, 27Al and 31P chemical shifts were referenced to 1 mol.L−1 LiCl, 1 mol.L−1 AlCl3 and 85 wt% H3PO4 aqueous solutions. The 19F chemical shifts were referenced to CFCl3 using the resonance of CaF2 (−108.6 ppm) as secondary reference. The NMR spectra were simulated using dmﬁt software [32]. The 31P and 27Al NMR spectra were simulated assuming Gaussian lineshapes and considering only the isotropic shifts, whereas the 7Li NMR spectra were simulated assuming Lorentzian lineshapes for all bands and considering isotropic chemical shift and quadrupolar interaction.

The 27Al MAS NMR spectra (Fig. 5) for the non-sintered as-prepared LATP show three peaks at −15, 13 and 40 ppm assigned to the hexa(AlO6), penta(AlO5) and tetra-coordinated (AlO4) aluminium sites, respectively [7,12,18,23]. NASICON structure contains AlO6 sites and therefore the −15 ppm line was assigned to LATP. The 40 and 13 ppm resonances were assigned to some amorphous or strongly disordered phase containing aluminum, which was detected by the XRD [12,23]. The MAS NMR spectrum of the LATP after sintering at 900 °C shows the same lines. However, the sintering modiﬁes their relative integrated intensity (see Table S1). The sintering enhances the relative intensity of NASICON, whereas the relative intensity of the signal resonating at 13 ppm is reduced. Conversely the relative integrated intensity of the line at 40 ppm remains practically unchanged. An additional weak peak at 31 ppm is observed. It was assigned to the berlinite [7,12,18,23,35]. The 27Al MAS NMR spectra for the non-sintered LATP and non-sintered LATP-0.3LiF are similar. The three 27Al sites exhibit comparable integrated intensities in both samples. The NMR spectrum of LATP-0.3LiF changes substantially after sintering at 800 °C. Only the peak of NASICON structure is visible. This observation clearly indicates that the annealed LATP-0.3LiF is practically free from foreign phases containing Al3+ ions.

In summary, the 27Al MAS NMR investigation indicate that the asprepared material contains, besides LATP and berlinite phases, which have been observed by XRD, some amorphous or highly disordered phase or phases containing aluminum ions, which were not detected by XRD. Annealing at high temperature promotes chemical processes causing destruction of impurity phases accompanied with the transfer of aluminum ions to the crystal lattice of LATP. However, the sintering were observed when temperature reached 700 °C. The diﬀraction peaks related to AlPO4 phase faded out and simultaneously those attributed to the LiTiPO5 and Li4P2O7 appeared. The results suggested that at high temperatures the AlPO4 phase reacted with the LATP and resulted in the formation of new compounds, including LiTiPO5 and Li4P2O7 crystalline phases.

The thermal gravimetric (TG) results of the studied composites are presented in Fig. 2. Between RT and about 500 °C, for all the investigated materials with diﬀerent LiF molar ratios, mass loss occurs, whereas above 500 °C there is no signiﬁcant mass loss. The mass loss from RT to about 200 °C stems from the evaporation of the moisture and residual ethanol adsorbed on the surface of the grains. At higher temperatures, the decomposition of LiF and the associated release of the ﬂuorinated compound produces additional mass loss.

In the summary, in the as-prepared LATP, only P(OTi)4-x(OAl)x (x = 0, 1 and 2) coordinations are observed and the P(OTi)4 signal dominates. After sintering of both LATP or LATP-LiF, the relative amount of the P(OTi)4 site decreases, while the P(OTi)1(OAl)3 sites are

CT of 7Li NMR spectra under MAS conditions of LATP non-sintered and sintered at 900 °C as well as LATP-03LiF non-sintered and sintered at 800 °C. The experimental and simulated spectra are displayed as black and red lines, respectively. The simulated spectra are the sum of distinct lineshapes displayed as orange and green lines. The diﬀerent sites of LATP are labeled Li1 and Li3. The spectra of the four samples are displayed with identical intensity scales.

Additionally, in the case of sintered LATP-LiF material, P(OAl)4 coordination is detected. The relative amounts of P(OTi)4-x(OAl)x (x = 1 and 2) remain unchanged during the sintering (see Table S2). As a result, the amount of Al3+ ions in the sintered LATP is higher than that in the as-prepared one. Furthermore, the concentration of Al3+ ions in the LATP phase is the highest after sintering in the presence of LiF. The result is consistent with the 27Al MAS NMR observations that indicate the decomposition of the foreign phases containing aluminum ions and the diﬀusion of the released Al3+ ions into the crystal structure of LATP, where they replace Ti4+ ions in the crystal lattice.

The results of the impedance spectroscopy investigations for LATP sintered at 900 °C and LATP-0.2LiF annealed at 800 °C are shown in Fig. 8 in the Nyquist plot representation. The data have been collected for the materials kept at 30 °C. The geometries of the samples used in this investigation were similar. The selected impedance plots exhibit typical and characteristic shapes for the studied materials. The Nyquist plot for the ceramic LATP forms a single, almost regular, large semicircle, followed by a spur. Besides that, another, small semicircle can be observed at high frequencies. The plot for the LATP-0.2LiF is representative for the sintered LATP-LiF composite family. It also consists of two semicircles however, the low frequency one is much smaller than that of the LATP ceramic.

The electrical properties of the LATP and derived composites could be modeled via an electrical equivalent circuit approach. An impedance plot, that consists of two separate semicircles is typical for the materials in which ion transport occurs in two diﬀerent media. In the case of the studied materials, the ions move through the bulk (grains) and inter grain phase (grain boundary). Thus, the corresponding equivalent circuit consists of two resistors: Rgr and Rgb, representing the bulk and grain boundary resistances, respectively. Each resistor is shunted by a constant phase element (CPE). The two resistors are connected in series in the ﬁnal equivalent circuit. The values of the resistors can be determined from the impedance plot. The intersection point of the low frequency semicircle with Re Z axis determines the total resistance Rtot = Rgr + Rgb value, whereas a similar intersection, but taken for the high frequency semicircle, gives Rgr. The knowledge of the geometry of the studied samples allows determination of the values of apparent conductivity, which we refer to as conductivity hereafter. The apparent grain, grain boundary and total conductivity values were obtained using the following formula σ = L/(R·A), where L and A stand for a thickness and electrode area of the sample respectively. The determined value of the total ionic conductivity of the ceramic LATP sintered at 900 °C is ca. 4.7 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 30 °C. Note that such value is too low for the LIB applications. As seen in Table 2, for materials containing 0.1 or 0.2 mol of LiF and sintered at 800 °C, the measured total ion conductivity can be enhanced up to 1.1 × 10−4 S cm−1. Temperature dependent impedance spectroscopy shows that for all materials under study, the total conductivity exhibits an Arrhenius dependence (Fig. 9). The estimated values of the activation energy of the total conductivity for various sintering temperatures and LiF contents are reported in the Table 2. As seen in Table 2, the composites sintered at 800 °C exhibit the highest total ion conductivities. The σtot value reaches 1.1 × 10−4 S cm−1 for LATP-0.1LiF and LATP-0.2LiF, and is 0.7 × 10−4 S cm−1 for

Hence, the total ion conductivity is proportional to σgb and the proportionality factor (in brackets) depends only on the geometry of the cubes modelling the microstructure. Such situation is encountered for the as-prepared and sintered LATP as well as non-sintered LATP-LiF composites, for which σgr > 10σgb.

These results are consistent with XRD and NMR data. These techniques demonstrated that the as-prepared LATP and non-sintered composite contain not only LATP but also poorly ion conductive phases, such as berlinite and some amorphous phase containing Al3+ ions. These foreign phases embedded in the LATP grains form a highly resistant medium, which is detected and identiﬁed by the means of impedance spectroscopy method as a grain boundary. A sintering without LiF addition causes the densiﬁcation of the material and the decomposition of the amorphous phase but leaves AlPO4 phase unaltered. Therefore, the total ion conductivity of the sintered LATP ceramic remains low, even if it is much higher than that of the as-prepared nonsintered LATP pellets.

Hence, the BLM predicts that the total electric conductivity of the ceramic composed of large grains is proportional to the conductivity of a grain. The proportionality factor depends on both the geometry of the microstructure (parameter α) and conductivity ratio σgr/σgb. It increases when the real conductivity of grain boundary increases. If ασgr/ σgb < < 1, i.e. the grains are large and the real conductivities of grains and grain boundary are comparable, the total conductivity of the ceramic approaches the conductivity of the grains.

All these processes promoted grain growth. The temperature aﬀects these processes. At 700 °C, the substitution process of Ti4+ by aluminum ion and the modiﬁcation of the grain boundary were not fully completed. Therefore, the activation energies of grain ion conductivity were higher than for the composites sintered at higher temperatures and the conductivity of the grain boundary remains relatively low (see Table 2). At 900 °C, the chemical modiﬁcations of the grain and boundary were completed. However, the mechanical stress inside the very large grains caused microcracks, which we observed on the SEM images. As a result, although the activation energies of the grain conductivity for the materials sintered at 800 °C and 900 °C were identical, the total conductivities after sintering at 900 °C were lower than those of materials sintered at 800 °C. Considering this result in the frame of the BLM, in particular referring to the Eq. (3) and inequality ασgr/σgb < < 1, and taking into account evidences of the SEM investigations indicating α(800 °C) < α(900 °C), one can conclude that σgb(800 °C) > σgb(900 °C). So, sintering at temperatures 900 °C, in fact, causes the real ionic conductivity of grain boundary to be decreased compared to that of the materials sintered at 800 °C. Various values for the activation energy of the total or grain ion conductivity have been reported in the literature [7,8,11,13–15,18–20,22,23,25]. In the light of our experimental evidences, we think that the discrepancies in the values of activation energy determined and reported by various researchers resulted from diﬀerences in grain size and grain boundary due to the use of distinct processes to prepare them. We believe that diﬀerent preparation protocol, especially long-time ball-milling, higher pressure used for formation of the pellets or prolonged sintering at higher temperatures might be the reason of various values of the ionic conductivity among many research papers. Further enhancement of electric properties is an important issue and it still under investigation to obtain materials characterized by the ionic conductivity exceeding 10−3 S cm−1.

The work presents the characterization of the ceramics formed in the system of Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3-xLiF with 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.3. The total ion conductivity of the as-prepared polycrystalline Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 is low due to presence of berlinite and amorphous phases containing aluminum with low electrical conductivities. Sintering at high temperature (700–900 °C) modiﬁes the phase composition of the grain boundary and decomposes the amorphous phase but not the berlinite. Therefore, the Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 ceramics still exhibit poor total ion conductivity reaching a value 4.7 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 30 °C. Sintering of the Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 with LiF additive causes three processes, each of which enhances the total ion conductivity: the growth of grains, the decomposition of amorphous or strongly disordered and AlPO4 phases in grain boundary, accompanied by the formation of some lithium conducting phosphates. The best conducting material, LATP-0.1LiF sintered at 800 °C, exhibits σtot = 1.1 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 30 °C. The studied materials are interesting as a potential candidates for application as solid electrolytes in lithium ion battery technology.