NASICON-structure Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) is a potential cathode for sodium ion battery, which however needs nano-crystallization to improve its rate performance. On the other hand, most practical electrodes are fabricated through slurry printing process, which needs to control the particle size to avoid the falling of the composite. Herein, for practical high-loading electrode fabrication, the micro-nano architecture, i.e. the micro particle plus nano channels inside, is suggested in this paper. The micro-nano information about NVP is obtained through Ga+ focused ion beam-scanning electron microscopy to reconstruct the 3D model of a single NVP particle, fully exhibiting the continuous nano channels inside the micro sphere. The as-obtained NVP/C sample in the micro size exhibits remarkable enhanced rate performance of 106, 104, 101, 96, 89, 70 and 44 mAh g-1 at rates of 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100 and 200 C respectively, compared to the control sample in the nano size with the capacity of 106, 103, 85, 77 and 60 mAh g-1 at 2, 5, 10, 20 and 50 C respectively, meanwhile maintaining good adhesion towards Al foil and electrochemical performance at the areal loading of 10 mg cm-2. 

With the ever-increasing demands for energy storage system, lithium ion batteries (LIBs) have been confronted by the high cost and limited lithium sources, especially in the field of large-scale energy storage.

Among various cathode materials[1, 2, 5-12] for SIBs, NASICON type Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) is one of the most promising candidates because of its stable structure with relatively fast Na+ diffusion kinetics.[13-16] Nevertheless, NVP suffers from inferior rate capability because of the intrinsic disadvantage of poor electronic conductivity. Among the possible strategies focusing such problems, nano-crystallization and carbon coating of NVP proves to be effective due to the successful construction of relatively short electron and ion channels, which is crucial for the increase of the composite ionic and electronic conductivity.[17] However, most practical electrodes are fabricated through slurry printing process, which needs to control the particle size to avoid the falling of the composite.[18, 19] Combining the requirement of particle size in the micro range and supreme rate performance of nanomaterial, the micro-nano architecture,[20-23] i.e. the micro particle plus nano channels inside, is suggested in this paper. More specifically, the aim of building such micro architecture is to fill the channels with electrolyte and dispersed with conductive carbon to simultaneously enhance the ion and electron transport kinetics. 


This could be perfectly solved by the complete dissolution of the element resources, which are distributed evenly in the molecular level, followed by the drying of the solution. Then, the second part is the confinement of particle size, which could be controlled by precursor size. 

Based on the solution-mixing process in the first step, we determined spray-drying technique as the precursor-formation process, which guarantees the droplet of solution,[27, 28] followed by the micro precursor powder remaining. The last aspect is about nano-channel constructing. In view of the fact that gas evolution would create pores in the material,[29] some organic acid is added into the solution undergoing the same spray-drying process. The organic acid is expected to decompose with gas releasing meanwhile forming the nano channels and leaving some conductive carbon across the channel. 

In a typical synthesis, 23.4 g NH4VO3 (99%, Aladdin), 36.6 g NaH2PO4 (99%, Macklin) and 21.0 g  citric  acid  (99%,  Sinopharm)  were  dissolved  into  300  mL  distilled  water,  which corresponds to the industry production scale (at least 10 g product per 100 mL solution) with 15g spherical NVP electrode material per 100 mL solution. The control sample (B-NVP/C) was prepared using the same materials  (23.4  g  NH4VO3,  36.6  g  NaH2PO4  and  21.0  g  citric  acid)  ball-milled  (Suzhou VGREEN Nano-scale bead mill, VB0.3Q) at the ball-to-powder weight ratio of 8:1 in 300 mL ethanol at 2000 rpm for 30 min followed by the same annealing process. 


X-ray diffraction (XRD, X-Pert3 Powder, PANalytical) patterns were recorded with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5416 Å) at the 2 θ range of 10° to 60°. The carbon content was determined by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA, Q600 SDT, TA Instruments). The specific surface area (BET) was  measured  by  nitrogen  adsorption-desorption  at  −196  °C  (ASAP  2020,  MICROMETER). 

The  morphological  and  microstructural  characterizations  were  assessed  by  scanning  electron microscopy.  Transmission  electron  microscopy and  energy  dispersive  X-ray  spectrometry measurements were performed after sectioning of NVP/C on an ultrathin microtome (Ultracut). 



Some disks (11 mm in diameter) were tailored from the dried Al foil and then rolled as the electrodes while the high-loading ones (loading of 10 mg cm-2) were prepared undergoing the same procedure except the ratio of active material, carbon black and PVDF was changed to 90, 5 and 5 wt%, respectively. In sodium half cells, sodium metal was used as the anode, a 1.0 mol L-1 solution of NaClO4 in propylene carbonate (PC, Energy Chemical) with 5 vol% fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC, Energy Chemical) as electrolyte and glass fiber (GF/F, Whatman) as the separator. The galvanostatic charge-discharge tests were carried out at a voltage window of 2.0–4.0 V on a battery test system (LAND CT2001A).

The preparing process and a schematic illustration for the holey sphere is shown in Fig. 1 with detailed synthesis processes provided in the experimental section. In short, three materials (NaH2PO4, NH4VO3 and citric acid) were dissolved in deionized water to form a dark blue solution which was then spray-dried to obtain orange precursor powder followed by annealing in N2 at 750 °C to get the final product (denoted as NVP/C). The control sample (denoted as B-NVP/C) is prepared by the conventional ball-milling technique, followed by the same annealing Schematic illustration for the synthesis and the holey sphere of NVP/C. 

The organic component in the precursor would transform into carbon during the annealing process. According to Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) results, the carbon contents of NVP/C and  B-NVP/C  are  2.0  wt%  and  1.7  wt%  respectively  (Fig.  S1).  The  reason  for  relatively  low carbon  content  of  B-NVP/C  is  probably  due  to  the  fact  that  NVP/C  precursor  has  achieved  a higher level of dispersion of materials (atomic scale dispersion in solution for NVP/C compared to nano scale dispersion  in solid for B-NVP/C), which causes B-NVP/C precursor to consume more reductants for NVP formation and leaves less carbon in the sample in an inert atmosphere. 

The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images show the spherical NVP/C structure in Fig. 2c with several micrometers comparing to the irregular particles for B-NVP/C in Fig. 2b. According to  the  size  statistics  analysis  as  shown  in  Fig.  S2,  the  average  particle  size  of  NVP/C  and  B-NVP/C  are  2.55  and  0.28  µm,  respectively.  The  sphere  structure,  which  is  successfully constructed  through  careful  optimizing  of  spray  condition,  is  helpful  for  structure  resistance towards  volume  shrinkage/expansion.  Accidentally,  the  holey  nature  of  NVP/C  is  proved through  a  broken  sphere,  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  2d.  In  addition,  the  nitrogen  (N2)  adsorption–desorption measurement (Fig. S3 &S4) yields Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) area of 44.4 m2 g-1  for  NVP/C  and  29.2  m2  g-1  for  B-NVP/C  which  is  another  proof  for  the  holey  structure  of NVP/C,  which  would  enlarge  the  contact  area  between  material  and  electrolyte  owing  to  the filling of pores with electrolyte, which is believed to facilitate sodium ion transport. 



Here,  we  have  drawn  a  figure  (Fig.  S5)  to  illustrate  why  these  two  preparation  techniques would  generate  different  products,  i.e.  the  atomic  level  dispersion  of  the  material  and  the confinement of the precursor. In the spray-drying technique, all materials have been completely dissolved  followed  by  the  spray  process  forming  a  droplet  to  guarantee  the  boundary  of  the particle. Therefore, in the annealing process, all materials could completely react to form a single crystal.

On the other hand, in the ball-milling technique, all the materials were just evenly crushed and mixed at nano scale. In the following annealing process, NVP phase would form but those nano NVP particles would also be coated with carbon preventing the further growth of the material. 



For  NVP/C,  the  distinct  charge  and  discharge  voltage  plateau  at  around  3.4  V corresponds to the redox pair of V3+/V4+, which is consistent with the cyclic voltammetry (CV) curve in Fig. S6. On the other hand, the control sample exhibits a slight voltage drop in a later discharging stage, in accord with a split of the cathodic peak (Fig. S6), which could be attributed to the structural rearrangements arising from sodium ion transport from Na1 site to Na2 site. 

We  assume  that  improved  ionic  and  electronic  conductivity  of  NVP/C  could  guarantee relatively faster sodium kinetics, meanwhile reduce the tendency of Na1-Na2 move. The poorer ionic  and  electronic  conductivity  of  B-NVP/C,  on  the  other  hand,  could  be  proved  through electrochemical  impedance  spectroscopy  (EIS)  measurements  (Fig.  S7).


In  summary,  the  micro-nano  Na3V2(PO4)3  architectures  is  constructed  through  spray-drying process  with  its  architecture  characterized  through  Ga+  focused  ion  beam-scanning  electron microscopy and reconstruction of the 3D model, fully exhibiting the continuous nano channels inside the sphere. The as-obtained NVP/C sample in the micro size exhibits remarkable enhanced rate performance of 106, 104, 101, 96, 89, 70 and 44 mAh g-1 at rates of 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100 and 200 C respectively, compared to the control sample in the nano size with the capacity of 106, 103, 85, 77 and 60 mAh g-1 at 2, 5, 10, 20 and 50 C respectively, meanwhile maintaining good adhesion towards Al foil and electrochemical performance at the areal loading of 10 mg  cm-2. 

We  believe  that  such  micro-nano  architecture  design  is  not  only  applicable  for  developing practical cathodes of SIBs but also referential for building other energy storage material systems, especially those demanding high power density. 