With the development of the economy and living standard, environmental issues receive widespread attention. Due to the advancement of industrial civilization, the types and quantities of gas emissions continue to increase, causing great harm to the environment [1,2]. Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are one of the primary gas emissions, and have some eﬀect on the health of people [3,4]. Acetone is the simplest saturated ketone and could dissolve a lot of insoluble substances, and because of this advantage, it is one of the most common used chemical reagents and widely used in the ﬁeld of industries (such as coatings, adhesives, medicines, etc.) and laboratories [5]. However, the easily diﬀused characteristic of acetone vapor and the ﬂash point (−20 °C) increase the probability of explosion and ﬂash ﬁre. Therefore, it is very important to carry out strict security management during the using progress of acetone. In addition, exposure or inhalation of acetone poses a great threat to the human body. When the acetone concentration is less than 500 ppm, the toxicity of inhaling acetone is relatively low. In the range of 500–1000 ppm acetone, people's nose and throat may feel uncomfortable. When the concentration reaches 1000 ppm or more, Symptoms of headache and dizziness appear one after another. When the concentration further reaches 2000–10,000 ppm, drowsiness, nausea, paralysis, and even death may occur. Besides, long-term exposure and acetone atmosphere can also cause damage to the eyes, nose and central nervous system [6,7]. Therefore, the detection of acetone in the atmosphere and working environment is of signiﬁcant importance for ensuring industrial safety and protecting people's health.

Currently, test methods for acetone mainly rely on large analytical instruments, such as gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy (GC/MS), proton transfer reaction-mass spectroscopy (PTR-MS). These methods usually require a large space to be placed and cannot be carried around. When testing the concentration of acetone, they are costly and need professional operations, moreover, the test results cannot be presented in real time [8–10]. Hence, high-performance acetone gas sensor has been widely studied. It has the characteristics of simple structure, low price, high sensitivity, fast response and could realize online monitor. Acetone sensor has become a hot research topic in the ﬁeld of gas sensors. Among various gas sensors, solid electrolyte type acetone sensors cause widespread concern due to their excellent gas sensitivity, it has better accuracy and stability than other sensors. This kind of sensor generally consists of three parts: solid electrolyte, sensitive electrode (SE) and reference electrode (RE). The selection of solid electrolyte is particularly important. In the reported solid electrolyte type mixed potential gas sensor, because of the good ionic conductivity, yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) and Na+ fast ion conductor (NASICON)

Speciﬁc preparation process was as follows: ﬁrstly, prepare nitrate solutions in line with the molar ratio. The molar ratio of metal cations La to Cu (or Co) to Mn was 2:1:1, and the molar ratio of CA to all the metal cations was 1:1. According to the molar ratio, a certain amount of La(NO3)3·6H2O, Co(NO3)2·6H2O (or Cu(NO3)2·3H2O) and Mn(NO3)2·4H2O were weighted and dissolved in deionized water. Secondly, preparation of the gel. CA solution was dropwise added into the mixed nitrate solution with continuous stirring under 80 °C. After 1 h, a small amount of ethylene glycol was added to the solution, and then continue to stir at 90 °C until the wet gel was formed. Then, the wet gel was placed in an 80 °C electric vacuum drying oven and dry thoroughly to form amorphous polymeric precursors. Finally, the precursors were sintered in muﬄe furnace at 900 °C for 2 h to prepare La2CoMnO6 and La2CuMnO6 sensing materials.

Crystal structure of the as-synthesized powders was measured in the range of 20–80° by the Rigaku wide-angle X-ray diﬀractometer (D/max rA, using Cu K radiation at wave length = 0.1541 nm), and the surface morphology of the samples was observed by Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) using a JEOL JSM-7500F microscope with an accelerating voltage of 5 kV.

Because of the good reliability, static testing method has become a conventional method in the ﬁeld of sensor testing, therefore, we used this method to explore the sensing characteristics of the sensors [28,29]. Constant current of the sensor was supplied by a linear DC power (Gwinstek GPD-3303S), the heating plate can convert the current into heating temperature required by the sensor. Electromotive force (V) between SE and RE was measured by Digital Multimeter (Fluke 8808A), and recorded by the computer attached to Fluke 8808A at the same time. Sensors were ﬁrst putted in a closed container ﬁlled with air. And the electromotive force was the response of the sensor to air (Vair) when it reaches a steady state. Diﬀerent concentrations of test gas were obtained by diluting a certain concentration of acetone vapor with air (the static liquid gas distribution method) [11]. The volume of acetone

XRD patterns of La2CoMnO6 and La2CuMnO6 were shown in Fig. 2. Diﬀraction peaks of La2CoMnO6 matched well with the corresponding standard cards ICSD#98240, and the double perovskite phase is entirely formed with P121/n1 space group. Main characteristic peaks from the XRD patterns of La2CoMnO6 and La2CuMnO6 were basically the same, which indicated that the crystal system and space group as well as the unit cell parameters for these two kinds of double perovskite oxides were consistent with each other.

It can be seen that, both sensing materials showed loose and porous structure, which is beneﬁcial to the diﬀusion of gas molecules in sensing material. The particle size and pore size of La2CuMnO6 was obviously larger than that of La2CoMnO6. Larger pore size could accelerate the diﬀusion process, decrease the consumption of gas molecules, so that more gas molecules could reach to the reaction ﬁeld of electrochemical redox reaction.

However, in the diﬀusion progress of acetone, a fraction of acetone may react with O2 and reaction (3) occurred, and this reaction may lead to a little decrease of the acetone at TPB. Therefore, the sensitivity of the sensor was decided by the degree of electrochemical reactions (1) and (2) and oxidation reaction (3). Electrochemical catalytic activity of sensing material as well as the concentration of acetone participated in the electrochemical reaction at TPB inﬂuenced the reaction rate of these two electrochemical reactions. Microstructure of materials (porosity, etc.) could aﬀect the concentration of acetone involved in the oxidation reaction (3) during the diﬀusion process, further aﬀecting the amount of acetone reaching TPB. When sensing material has larger particle size and pore size, the consumption of acetone in the diﬀusion progress would be decreased. Just as shown in Fig. 3, La2CuMnO6 has a larger particle size and pore size compared with La2CoMnO6, so, in terms of sensor-Cu, more acetone could participate in the electrochemical reactions took place in TPB. In order to judge the electrochemical catalytic activity of La2CuMnO6 and La2CoMnO6, polarization curves for sensor-Cu and sensor-Co in air and 100 ppm acetone were measured and displayed in Fig. 5(a). From which we can see that the slope of the polarization curves for sensor-Cu was obviously large than that of sensor-Co, which means that La2CuMnO6 has a higher electrochemical catalytic activity towards acetone. Combine these two factors, sensorCu exhibited a better response to acetone than sensor-Co. In addition, mixed potential values could be estimated from the intersection of cathodic and anodic polarization curves as reported in literatures [30]. Fig. 5(b) depicted the polarization curves of sensor-Cu in 100 ppm, 300 ppm, 500 ppm, 800 ppm acetone and air. The cathodic polarization curve was obtained in air and drew in the diagram after the direction of the current reversed, and the anodic polarization curve was obtained by subtracting in air from in sample gas (100 ppm acetone + air). Comparison of the mixed potential estimated values and potential diﬀerence values observed by experiments for sensor-Cu to diﬀerent concentration of acetone were listed in Table 1. The mixed potential estimated values were closely to the observed values, which indicated that the sensor conformed to the mixed potential mechanism [31].

We tested the response transient curve of sensor-Cu towards different concentrations of acetone，as shown in Fig. 6(a). The sensor has state and distinctive responses towards diﬀerent concentrations of acetone. The low detection limit of the sensor was 10 ppm, and the response value was −1.6 mV. Besides, the device was capable of detecting up to 1000 ppm acetone with the response of −98.7 mV. Fig. 6(b) depicted the response and recovery curves of the sensor to 50 and 500 ppm acetone. The typical 90% response and recovery time of sensor-Cu to 50 ppm acetone were both 13 s, to 500 ppm were 3 s and 13 s, which were quite short in acetone sensors reported before. The dependence of ΔV on the concentration of acetone was displayed in Fig. 6(c), and there was a linear relationship between ΔV and the logarithm of acetone concentration and the sensitivity was −49.3 mV/ decade. Comparisons of the sensing performance of sensor-Cu and those

The stability of gas sensor determines whether the sensor could be used in practical applications. Hence, we test the repeatability, humidity stability and long-term stability of sensor-Cu, and the results were shown in Fig. 7(a–c). 8 consecutive tests of the sensor to 50 ppm acetone were measured, response and recovery curves of these 8 tests were depicted in Fig. 7(a). The values in the error curve were calculated by the following formula: ΔVr = [(ΔVn − ΔV0) / ΔV0 × 100%], where

La2CoMnO6 and La2CuMnO6 sensing materials were synthesized successfully using sol-gel method, through the XRD and SEM patterns, the structure and morphology of these two materials were analyzed, and the particle size and pore size of La2CuMnO6 was larger than that of La2CoMnO6, which was beneﬁt for the diﬀuse of gas in sensing materials. Ce0.8Gd0.2O1.95-based mixed potential type acetone sensor attached with La2CoMnO6 and La2CuMnO6 were fabricated and the sensing performance indicated that La2CuMnO6 was more sensitive to acetone than La2CoMnO6, which depended on not only the larger particle size and pore size, but also the higher electrochemical catalytic activity of La2CuMnO6. The sensor using La2CuMnO6 could detect 10–1000 ppm acetone at 590 °C, with the sensitivity of −49.3 mV/ decade. The sensor has a fast response and recovery time towards acetone. In addition, it also displayed excellent repeatability, acceptable humidity stability and good long-term stability. In general, La2CuMnO6 could be used as a potential material to fabricate mixed potential type acetone sensors for the rapid detection of acetone.
