Here, we report hybrid solid polymer electrolytes (HSPE) obtained by rapid, truly solvent-free, thus scalable preparation process. HSPE composition is very simple: a LiTFSI added poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) polymer super Li+ ion conducting ceramic. matrix encompassing NASICON-type Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) Homogeneous, self-standing, mechanically robust solid electrolyte ﬁlms are obtained by simply mixing in “one pot” and hot pressing the solid mixture of dry powders at moderate temperature. Noteworthy, unlike several other super ionic conductors used for composite electrolytes, LAGP is relatively stable in air atmosphere and can be processed in a dry-room, which is more favorable, cheap and scalable than Ar-ﬁlled dry glove box for industrial fabrication of safe lithium batteries. The proper, homogeneous mixing of LAGP powder, PEO and LiTFSI leads to HSPE with interesting electrochemical behavior in lab-scale lithium cells, especially under high current regimes, and even at ambient temperature. HSPE-based cells outperform the PEO-LiTFSI-based counterpart, in terms of speciﬁc capacity output (about 70% of the theoretical value retained at very high 2C rate), limited fading and excellent Coulombic eﬃciency (>99.5%) even at low rate. Interfacial stability issues remain to be solved, chieﬂy linked to the reactivity of LAGP in contact with lithium metal, but results here proposed represent a step further toward truly all-solid-state batteries conceived for high energy/power technologies, assuring safety and performance in a wide range of operating conditions.

Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are the most eﬃcient and popular electrochemical storage devices in the market, powering daily the large majority of our smart, portable electronic devices [1–3]. However, their limitations in terms of energy density, safety, cost and primary resources still hinder the complete transition toward truly electriﬁed, battery-powered systems [4–6]. Great eﬀorts are now being made by the scientiﬁc community to improve electrodes’ capacity, optimize their active surface and lower their costs, not only in LIBs, but also in advancing, alternative storage technologies, such as lithium metal, sodium-ion, lithium-air and lithium-sulfur cells [7–10]. Nonetheless, innovation in the ﬁeld must pair mandatorily with the progressive evolution of suitable electrolytes, which determine energy/power density, operational stability, durability, and, chieﬂy, safety of the batteries [11,12].

Safer, cheap and, eventually, super-thin batteries shapeable in diﬀerent geometries can be fabricated by the use of all-solid-state electrolytes (solid polymer electrolytes, SPE), instead of liquid ones [13], the latter being ﬂammable and requiring the presence of a solid separator to avoid short-circuiting. A large part of industrially mature quasi-solid and solid electrolytes so far are based on cheap polymer matrices, such as poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) and poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) (PVdF) [14–16], even if other macromolecular structures (with and without single-ion conducting features) have been proposed and are under intensive investigation by research groups worldwide, including polycarbonates, polymethacrylates, polyurethanes, etc. [17–20].

More recently, crystalline inorganic super-ionic conducting solid electrolytes have drawn much attention thanks to their intrinsic advantages in terms of electrochemical and thermal stability, together with very high ionic mobility at ambient temperature [21–23]. As a matter of fact, these materials provide ionic conductivities in the range of 10−4−10−2 S cm−1 at 25 °C, much higher than that of common SPE (rarely exceeding 10−5 S cm−1) and competing with non-aqueous liquid counterparts [24]. In addition, they are single-ion conductors with a lithium transference number usually close to 1, which is important for high power outputs. Materials under study in LIBs include: perovskite lithium lanthanum titanate Li0.05–3xLa0.5+xTiO3 (LLTO) [25], garnettype Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO) [26–29] and NASICON-type oxides such as Li1+xAlxM2−x(PO4)3 (where M = Ge, Ti or Zr) [30–33]. Among them, besides possessing high ionic conductivity at room temperature (about 7 × 10−4 S cm−1), NASICON-type materials are stable under ambient atmosphere as well as in the presence of water and atmospheric moisture [34].

Germanium-based Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) is a promising candidate as solid electrolyte; it can easily be scaled-up with the existing industrial processes at a competitive price, its synthesis does not require inert atmosphere as it is less prone to phase transitions, diﬀerently from sensitive garnet-type LLZO [35]. With respect to its titanium-based (LATP) counterpart [36], LAGP shows lower ionic conductivity, but is expected to be more chemically stable toward lithium metal; indeed, Ticontaining solid electrolytes are well-known to undergo the Ti4+ to Ti3+ reduction upon contact with lithium, that leads to an electronic and ionic mixed conductive interface (MCI), often causing cell instability [37]. Conversely, Ge-containing materials, comprising the LAGP phase are often reported in the literature to be rather stable [38], even if the Ge4+ to Gex+ has been described by Hartmann et al. [37] by using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, which means that their direct contact with Li metal should be carefully avoided [39]. Due to their intrinsic nature, NASICON-type materials are brittle and suﬀer from high grain boundary resistance and poor interfacial contact. All these issues can be overcome by developing organic-inorganic composite (hybrid) electrolytes that couple a solid mixture of polymeric and ceramic materials, where the softness and elasticity of the polymer matrix ensures an easy manufacturing and buﬀers volume changes occurring during cell operation, while maintaining the intimate contact between cell components [40]. The hybrid solution should also mitigate the instability in contact with the lithium metal electrode [39].

For these reasons, PEO/LAGP hybrid materials have drawn popularity in the last few years, and some studies have reported their simple fabrication and favorable electrochemical behavior [24]. In a ﬁrst attempt, PEO was used as an additive (5 wt% or less) to bind the solid electrolyte ceramic particles in a LAGP pellet, concurrently ameliorating its mechanical properties and integrity upon operation [41]. Dendrite-free cells were also fabricated by adding P(EO)yLiTFSI [42] or a glassy layer [43] as a buﬀer between sintered inorganic LAGP and lithium metal; enhanced electrochemical properties were demonstrated in lithium cells with improved eﬃciency. LAGP/PEO hybrid ﬁlms with a LAGP content from 0 to 90 wt% were successfully prepared by Jung et al. [44,45] by solution casting of LAGP, PEO and LiClO4; the most performing electrolyte in terms of capacity retention in a LiFePO4/Li cell was loaded with 60 wt% of ceramic and showed ionic conductivity of 8 × 10−6 S cm−1 and stable interfacial resistance vs. lithium metal. By adding the plastic crystal succinonitrile (SN), the authors improved both the ionic conductivity and the cycling behavior of the electrolyte, due to a more stable and eﬃcient SEI (Solid Electrolyte Interface) layer formed. With a similar method, Zhao et al. [46,47] investigated the eﬀect of LAGP particles size and morphology in hybrid electrolytes and demonstrated that, at the same LAGP content, smaller particle size results in higher conductivity (6.76 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 60 °C with 20 wt% LAGP), thanks to the PEO amorphization. By incorporating a similar composite electrolyte in the LiFePO4 cathode slurry [36], the lithium cell showed stable operation with minimized interfacial resistance.

In this work, truly all-solid-state, hybrid polymer/ceramic electrolytes (hybrid solid polymer electrolyte, HSPE) were formulated combining various amounts of LAGP dry powder in a PEO/LiTFSI dry polymer mixture, by a rapid, simple, solvent-free preparation procedure setup to be readily scalable on a large-scale at an industrial level (e.g., by common extrusion). As stated before, LAGP powder is not sensitive to air/moisture, which renders it easily processable in a common dry room (not under the inert atmosphere of a dry glove box) to get HSPEs, which are then dried for electrochemical testing. HSPE-based cells outperform the SPE (PEO-LiTFSI) based counterparts, in terms of speciﬁc capacity output, limited fading and excellent Coulombic eﬃciency even at low current regime. To the best of our knowledge, this work represents the ﬁrst example of a solvent-free process, rapid and scalable, without sintering steps to PEO/LAGP based HSPEs, and opens up promising prospects in the development of all-solid-state energy storage devices.

Polyethylene oxide (PEO, average Mw: 150,000, dried under valithium bis(tricuum at ﬂuoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI, battery grade, dried under vacuum at 120 °C for 24 h before use) were obtained from Sigma Aldrich and Solvionic, respectively. LAGP ceramic powder was purchased from Toshima (Japan), with three populations having 0.6, 1.5 and 28 μm particle size (according to the supplier).

Dry LiTFSI and LAGP powders were thoroughly mixed at ambient laboratory temperature, and then PEO was added to the mixture and ground in an agate mortar. The mixed powders were then heated at 80 °C and gently blended until a soft paste was obtained; it was then formed into a homogeneous, truly solid ﬁlm by hot-pressing at 80 °C at 15 bar between two non-tacky sulfurized paper sheets, to allow an easy peeling at ambient temperature, separated by a spacer to control the ﬁnal thickness at about 200 µm. All preparation steps were carried out in a dry room with a relative humidity of less than 2% (20 °C, 10 m2; Soimar, Italy). This procedure yielded white, homogeneous, selfstanding and mechanically robust solid HSPE membranes, which were dried under vacuum at 50 °C for 24 h and stored in an Ar-ﬁlled dry glove box (Jacomex GP2 Concept, O2 < 5 ppm, H2O < 1 ppm) for further characterization.

For comparison purposes, HSPEs were compared with LAGP-free P (EO)yLiTFSI SPEs (where y corresponds to the EO:Li molar ratio), which were obtained by the same, rapid, solvent-free preparation procedure.

The thermal stability of the diﬀerent solid electrolytes under study was evaluated by thermo-gravimetrical analysis (TGA) in the temperature range between 40 and 700 °C under N2 ﬂux at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 on a TG 209 F1 Libra® instrument from Netzsch.

Diﬀerential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was carried out under N2 atmosphere with a DSC 204 F1 Phoenix (Netzsch) instrument equipped with a low temperature probe. Specimens were placed in aluminum pans, cooled from ambient temperature down to −80 °C and, then, heated at 10 °C min−1 up to 90 °C. After the ﬁrst heating cycle, the samples were cooled again to −80 °C (−10 °C min−1) and re-heated

The glass transition temperature (Tg) was taken at the onset of the curve (the half-height point of the heat ﬂow variation).

Ionic conductivity was measured by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis in symmetric ECC-Std test cells by EL-CELL (Germany), assembled inside the dry glove box. Each electrolyte sample was placed between two stainless steel discs separated by a ring spacer to perfectly maintain sample diameter and thickness (internal diameter = 14 mm and thickness = 200 µm), thus conﬁrming results reproducibility. EIS spectra were recorded on a Bio-Logic VMP3 multichannel potentiostat with an A.C. potential of 10 mV in the frequency range between 600 kHz and 1 Hz. Before measurements, cells were kept at 80 °C overnight and, then, the temperature was stabilized at 25 °C in an environmentally controlled simulation chamber (BINDER MK-53, ΔT ± 1 °C) for a precise temperature control. The ionic conductivity was measured between 25 and 80 °C, after at least 2 h stabilization at each of the testing temperatures to allow cells reaching the thermal equilibrium. The electrolyte bulk resistance was taken at the lowest value of –Im(Z) of the Nyquist plot (see Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Material), representing the right side of the high-frequency half semicircle due to the parallel combination of the bulk resistance and the geometric capacitance. The ionic conductivity (σ, S cm−1) was calculated based on the following equation (Eq. (1)): σ where Rb is the bulk resistance, and L and A are the thickness and area of the studied sample, respectively.

Lithium transport number was measured in symmetric Li/electrolyte/Li cells, assembled by sandwiching the electrolyte sample under study between two lithium metal electrode discs (diameter = 18 mm), again a ring spacer was used to have precise control over diameter and thickness of the electrolyte. Before measurements, the cells were stored under open circuit conditions in the climatic chamber at 80 °C for 24 h. The cell resistance was monitored by EIS and the measurement started only when the interface was stabilized. A constant potential of 20 mV was applied for 5 h and the resulting current was measured. To have a precise control over the initial current, the instrument measured one point every 0.2 s for the ﬁrst 10 s and, then, every 1 s for the remaining test time. EIS spectra were acquired immediately before and after the chronoamperometry (10 mV, frequency range from 600 kHz to 0.1 Hz). Interfacial properties were assessed in Li/electrolyte/Li cells assembled with the same conﬁguration described above, and lithium plating/stripping was carried out at 60 °C at a constant current density of ± 0.2 mA cm−2 for 1 h per cycle.

The electrochemical stability window was evaluated at 60 °C by cyclic voltammetry (CV), to assess the eventual interface passivation after several cycles; the limits toward both cathodic and anodic potential values were obtained separately by scanning the cell potential from the OCV (open circuit potential) down toward −0.3 vs. Li+/Li and, then, upward to 2.5 V vs. Li+/Li (cathodic stability window) and from the OCV toward 5.0 V vs. Li+/Li and, then, downward to 2.5 V vs. Li+/Li (anodic stability window). Cu metal foil and carbon black coated Al foil were used as the working electrodes for cathodic and anodic scans, respectively, with Li metal discs as both the counter and the reference electrodes. All-solid-state lab-scale Li metal cells comprised the solid electrolyte under study sandwiched between a Li metal anode (200 μm, Chemetall, now Albemarle) and a LiFePO4 (LFP) composite cathode, both of them cut into disks of 2.54 cm2 area; the assembly was then placed in a ECC Std test cell in the LFP/electrolyte/Li conﬁguration. Galvanostatic charge and discharge cycling was carried out on an ARBIN BT2000 battery tester, at diﬀerent current regimes (from C/10 to 2C) over the potential limits of 2.5 and 4 V vs. Li+/Li. Composite LFP cathodes were prepared by standard doctor blading, on an Al current collector foil, of a slurry of LFP (Clariant-LP2), conductive carbon (Shawinigan Black AB50, Chevron Corp) and PVdF (Mw = 534,000, Sigma Aldrich) in the 70:20:10 weight ratio and dissolved in N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP, Sigma Aldrich). After drying overnight, electrodes were cut into disks and vacuum dried at 120 °C for 24 h before assembly in the test cells inside the dry glove box.


Several studies in the literature report about the eﬀect of salt concentration in PEO-LiTFSI mixtures (P(EO)yLiTFSI, with y = EO:Li molar ratio ranging from 2 to 50) [48–52] and the PEO molecular weight (typically ranging from 1 to 100 kg mol−1) [53], as the main factors inﬂuencing the ionic transport and mechanical properties of SPEs.

In our experiments, PEO molecular weight was kept constant at 150 kg mol−1. Due to the plasticizing role of the salt in the polymer [49], we experienced that mechanical integrity deteriorated when increasing LiTFSI content, and samples were not self-standing at ambient temperature for y values lower than ≈15. As a consequence, LAGP-free samples, namely P(EO)15LiTFSI and P(EO)20LiTFSI, were used as platforms in this work, and also used as reference polymer electrolytes for comparison purposes. For a similar reason, LAGP content was limited to 60%, so as to obtain the optimal compromise between ionic mobility, electrochemical and mechanical properties; indeed, a higher amount resulted in brittle and very tough HSPE precursor pastes, being hard to get in the form of a homogeneous, self-standing ﬁlm and which cannot retain their mechanical integrity upon testing.

HSPE and SPE (200 µm thick) under study were homogeneous and self-standing, as shown in Fig. 1. The addition of LAGP increased the opacity and the overall density of the materials. Compared to the LAGPfree P(EO)15LiTFSI sample, LA series of HSPE were more robust and more easy to handle at ambient conditions, while keeping rather unchanged their mechanical integrity, elasticity and partial ﬂexibility.

Thermal degradation behavior of the HSPE samples, measured by TGA experiments, is shown in Fig. 2a. The faint weight loss below 100 °C is easily attributed to the removal of moisture that was absorbed during the preparation and loading of test samples. No further weight loss was observed until the irreversible decomposition starting at much higher temperatures. Thermal degradation, arbitrarily ﬁxed when weight loss exceeded 10%, decreased with LAGP content increase in the samples. In LAGP-free P(EO)15LiTFSI, degradation started at about 350 °C, while in LA-20, LA-40 and LA-60 degradation temperature was gradually reduced to 291, and 270–274 °C, respectively. This ﬁrst weight loss is ascribed to the thermal degradation of PEO matrix and the decrease of the temperature underlined the modiﬁcation of the crystalline phase occurring in the polymer when inorganic nanoparticles were introduced, as it will also be conﬁrmed by DSC measurements shown in the followings. As compared to classic salt-inpolymers, viz. PEO and lithium salt (LiX), the presence of ceramic particles, such as Al2O3 or ZrO2, delays the degradation process by a shielding phenomenon [54,55]. This extended degradation is generally attributed to the intercalation and exfoliation of the macromolecular chains in the presence of ceramic particles. Such interactions induce strong barrier eﬀect preventing the polymer matrix from the thermal degradation [56]. However, in the present case, the interaction between the polymer chains that may lead to the exfoliation or intercalation may not occur, likely due to the large size of the ceramic particles. Moreover, the impurities that may be present at the surface of the ceramic particles (e.g., the precursors like lithium carbonate or ammonium dihydrogen phosphate) may catalyze the decomposition of the polymer chain in the presence of absorbed moisture from the polymer or from the environment. Above 400 °C, a second weight loss was detected, corresponding to LiTFSI salt degradation. The residual sample weight was found to be directly proportional to the ceramic phase introduced in the initial formulation, as a proof of the thermal and chemical stability of LAGP compound under the whole testing temperature.

Considering that LA-60 has much higher mechanical robustness than bare PEO-LiTFSI based SPE, also encompassing a higher amount of lithium salt without losing its mechanical integrity, this is a remarkably high ionic conductivity value for a truly solid hybrid electrolyte at ambient temperature, even more appreciable if one considers the rapid, simple, ecofriendly and scalable preparation procedure if compared to conventional solution-casting all-solid-state electrolyte processing. The impedance responses, recorded on symmetrical two electrode cells, exhibit a faint half-semicircle at high frequencies, particularly at lower temperatures <40 °C (see Fig. S1 in Supplementary Material) for the LA-40 sample (representative for all the samples prepared), suggesting phase separation likely due to hardening of the polymer matrix. At T ≥ 40 °C, the impedance proﬁles are basically linear straight-lines, accounting for the homogeneous nature of the electrolyte mixtures. It is important to note that the ionic transport mechanism likely varies depending on the composition (in particular, lithium path in hybrid ceramic/PEO species is still not fully understood, and work is in progress in our laboratories to shed light on this). Above 55 °C, PEO was in the melted state (as also shown by the DSC measurements) and pure P (EO)15LiTFSI electrolyte (LA-0) conductivity was higher than the HSPE counterparts. In this condition, chain motion is much more favorable without LAGP powder and ions ﬁnd a much faster path through the full amorphous polymer matrix. However, at 80 °C we did not observe an obvious trend of the conductivity as a function of the LAGP quantity in the electrolyte. In these conditions, lithium transport may preferentially occur through PEO chains rather than through LAGP [51].


To provide more insights on the lithium transport mechanism in the HSPE under study, we made an attempt to calculate the lithium transport number by combined electrochemical analysis. The chronoamperometric measurement [62,63] consists in applying a constant potential in a Li/Li symmetric cell until all diﬀusive phenomena reach the steady state. Immediately before (time 0) and after (steady-state) the chronoamperometry, EIS analysis is performed to assess the interfacial resistances of the system. This technique considers a simpliﬁed electrolyte with completely dissociated lithium ions and is normally applied to P(EO)yLiTFSI electrolytes when EO:Li is higher than 30, or to very diluted electrolytic solutions. In the present case, lithium salt is more concentrated in the solid electrolyte and ionic or neutral complexes are likely to be formed and may aﬀect the result [62]. However, at 80 °C we obtained rather reproducible results made on three diﬀerent replicas for each of the HSPE compositions. Their evolution with LAGP content is plotted in Fig. S2 in Supplementary Material. To calculate lithium transport number values, we used two diﬀerent equations: the Bruce and Vincent (BV) equation (Eq. (2)) that measures the ratio between the initial current and the steady state current, corrected with the contribution of the electrolyte bulk resistance and the charge transfer resistance at the interfaces, and the equation (Eq. (3)) proposed by Watanabe et al. [64], which is comparable to Eq. (2) considering that there are not undesired side-reactions during the experiment. The advantage of Eq. (3) is that it is unnecessary to measure the value of I0, which depends upon the parameters of both the measurement and the instrument (since it is correlated to the acquisition precision at time 0).

In both cases, ΔV is the applied DC potential (in V), I0 and Iss refer to the current ﬂowing through the cell (in A) when the potential is applied at t0 and when steady state is reached, respectively. Rb and Rct are the values of the bulk and the charge transfer resistance of the cell, measured by EIS immediately before (Rb,0, Rct,0) and after (Rb,ss, Rct,ss) the potential is applied. If the system is at the equilibrium before the experiment starts (temperature and chemical interfaces), the resistance values are quasi-unchanged (especially Rb). Otherwise, the measurement must be repeated. LAGP is a single-ion conductor where the only conducting species is Li+, and lithium transport number is therefore close to 1. In P(EO)yLiTFSI samples, transport number is usually reported to be in the range of 0.15–0.45, depending on the preparation process and the salt concentration [65]. In our experiments, LAGP-free samples showed a transport number equal to 0.21 (calculated by the BV method, slightly higher if calculated by the Watanabe equation), which is in accordance with the literature [15–17,49]. This transport number slightly increased with the LAGP content, although the eﬀect was rather limited. This conﬁrmed the previous hypothesis: at temperatures above PEO melting lithium transport chieﬂy occurs through the polymeric phase. Noteworthy, the LiTFSI content in LA-60 (12 wt%) is more than three times lower than that of the LAGP-free SPE (39 wt%), but transport number is not aﬀected in the corresponding electrolytes, likely evidencing a role of LAGP in the ionic transport in the HSPE samples. Fig. 4 shows the electrochemical stability window of sample LA-60 evaluated in terms of cycling voltammetry (CV) in Li/LA-60/Cu cell toward cathodic potential values (cathodic stability window up to −0.3 V vs. Li+/Li, Fig. 4a) and in Li/LA-60/Carbon black cell toward anodic potential values (anodic stability window up to 5.0 V vs. Li+/Li, Fig. 4b) at 60 °C. Above 4.5 V vs. Li+/Li, the oxidation of some of the electrolyte components took place. In our series of HSPE electrolytes, PEO stability toward anodic potential is still the limiting factor, which was actually enhanced slightly by the addition of LAGP. Indeed, PEObased polymer electrolytes are typically stable up to 4.1–4.2 V vs. Li+/ Li [15–17]. Noteworthy, the degradation observed for our system was very small (with a current density below 10−6 A cm−2 at 0.1 mV s−1) and the interface seemed to be passivated after the ﬁrst cycle up to 5.0 V vs. Li+/Li, as conﬁrmed by the absence of detectable reactions in the successive cycles. This latter, positive eﬀect is important to guarantee a relative stability if high potential electrodes are used without any further passivating additives. The cathodic stability window is typical for a PEO–LiTFSI electrolyte and no straightforward eﬀect due to

The compatibility (interfacial stability) of the electrolytes vs. lithium metal was evaluated in symmetric Li/electrolyte/Li cells by means of lithium plating and stripping experiments under a current density of 0.2 mA cm−2 for 1 h at 60 °C. The value and the stability of the recorded overpotential account for the electrolyte/lithium metal interfaces, and are indeed rather limited. It is known from the literature that NASICON-like electrolytes are reactive in contact with lithium [37–39]. In fact, in-situ XPS measurements already showed that high valence state germanium in LAGP spontaneously reduced in contact with lithium metal (Ge4+ → GeX+) and formed a mixed conducting interface (MCI) with both ionic and electronic conduction [37]. Generally, lithium protection is fundamental to allow stable operation with LAGP-based electrolytes. In our present work, we used bare lithium metal electrodes, without any protective layers, and the resulting lithium plating and stripping experiments are shown in Fig. 5, which compares the results of LA-60 (representative for the series of HSPE under study) and P(EO)15LiTFSI SPE. A higher amount of LAGP (LA-40 and LA-60 samples) in the solid electrolytes resulted in substantial overpotential decrease during cycling, which likely accounts for continuous enhancement of the interfacial contact between the electron conductor (Li metal) and the ion conductor (PEO-LAGP framework). This is also evident in the plating/stripping test of LA-40 sample and the corresponding EIS spectra recorded every 10 plating and stripping cycles (20 h), shown in Fig. S4 in Supplementary Material, where the signiﬁcant charge transfer resistance decrease is clearly evident, while the high frequency resistance (RHF) concurrently remains unchanged. After 40 h, RHF decreased signiﬁcantly, which could be an indication of MCI formation. The good performance upon prolonged cycling is associated with an excellent Coulombic eﬃciency [66], which is fundamental to guarantee remarkable cycling performance in real cell conﬁguration. After about 60 h of consecutive cycling, the overpotential of the Li metal electrode in the symmetric LA-60 based cell is smaller than that of the Li metal in the LAGP-free P(EO)15LiTFSI based cell; it is likely ascribed to the improved ionic transport of the NASICON-type superionic conductor and the HSPE separating electrolyte ﬁlm.

Unfortunately, after 80–90 h, the cell failed gradually, as if it was degraded by multiple micro-short circuits, which means that the Li metal electrode in the solid-state HSPE-based cell is not free from dendritic lithium formation and/or surface reactivity issues. This result is consistent with what reported in the literature on NASICON-structured electrolytes, where cell failure was also observed after about 80 h in contact with non-treated lithium metal electrode [67]. Indeed, several studies conﬁrmed the type of decomposition products, such as Li2O, Li2O2, and Li2CO3 when Li metal is exposed to LAGP particles. According to Chung et al. [68], the formation of lithium oxides at SEI layer can be accumulated, thus forming a thick layer. This Li2O formation requires [O], which may be coming from the ceramic particles or even the polymer itself. This might lead to several complications at the surface resulting in a poor interface, cracks formation and/or limited dendrite resistance. Here, unfortunately, the presence of a prevalent PEO polymer phase was apparently not enough to passivate the lithium metal electrode, thus avoiding surface reactivity with LAGP. Various studies tackle this instability issue in the literature, introducing for example an inert buﬀer layer (conductive glass, polymer electrolyte [69,70], ALD thin layer, artiﬁcial SEI [71], etc.) or a polymer-in-salt composite to avoid degradation, but this is not the purpose of this paper. In our present experiments, in order to eﬀectively understand the interfacial stability upon prolonged cycling, we did not protected the lithium metal and, clearly, results still need to be properly optimized in terms of dendritic Li formation, but preliminary data are encouraging if one considers the solvent-free, cheap and scalable fabrication procedure of the HSPE.

In this respect, the following section demonstrates galvanostatic cycling successfully carried out for over 1200 h (approximately, 50 days) in an all-solid-state LFP-HSPE cell with a lithium metal anode.

First, constant current (galvanostatic) cycling was performed at 80 °C and diﬀerent current rates (from C/10 to 2C), so as to understand the eﬀect of LAGP in the polymer electrolytes. At this temperature, ionic conductivity of LAGP-free SPE and LA-60 HSPE are very similar; nonetheless, Fig. 6a shows a clear enhancement of the speciﬁc capacity during cycling for the lithium cells assembled with the LAGP-based HSPE. Initial three cycles for each cell were carried out at low C/10 rate, approximately 4 × 10−5 A cm−2 (given an active material mass for LiFePO4 of ≈2.0 mg cm−2). All of the HSPE-based cells demonstrated a very high initial speciﬁc capacity output in the range of 140 (LA-20) to 166 (LA60) mAh g−1, accounting for both the compatibility and suitability of the proposed hybrid electrolytes to operate with composite LFP cathodes and, more importantly, the good interpenetration/wetting of the electrolyte with the electrode. It is ascribed to the softening of the organic phase at 80 °C, which provides an optimal interfacial contact

The potential vs. time proﬁles extracted from galvanostatic cycling test of LFP/LA-60/Li cell, shown in Fig. 6b,c, are neat and display a very ﬂat conversion plateau, typical of LFP cathode, with small overpotential. Even at high 1C rate, the plateau is still clearly visible and ﬂat, with limited overpotential for a truly solid Li metal cell. Interestingly, the rate capability was eﬀectively enhanced by the use of hybrid electrolyte encompassing LAGP. In particular, LA-60, laden with 60 wt % of LAGP powder, delivered the highest speciﬁc capacity in the excess of 125 mAh g−1 at high 2C rate after 50 charge/discharge cycles, with excellent Coulombic eﬃciency exceeding 99.8%. At the same current regime, LA-40 and LA-20 based cells provided 91 and 71 mAh g−1, respectively. Conversely, LAGP-free cells based on bare PEO-LiTFSI demonstrated much lower speciﬁc capacity outputs, particularly at high current rates, which is another indication of the enhanced ion transport assured by LAGP. the comparison between two P (EO)yLiTFSI mixtures, with EO:Li = 15 and 20, highlights that a higher LiTFSI content in the SPE guarantees slightly better performances at higher current regimes, whereas a lower salt concentration causes a sudden drop to zero in the capacity above 1C regime. This eﬀect was ascribed to the plasticizing eﬀect of the salt and to the more eﬃcient ion hopping between the polymer chains, as reported in the literature for super concentrated polymer electrolytes or polymer-in-salt systems [72]. After 50 cycles, all of the cells (except the one assembled with P (EO)20LiTFSI SPE) did not experience any abnormal drift upon cycling at high current densities, as conﬁrmed by the full restoring of the capacity when the current was decreased back to C/10, thus accounting for the structural stability and mechanical integrity of the electrode/ electrolyte materials upon cycling. The electrochemical behavior of HSPE-based cells is even more remarkable if one considers that the active material loading in the composite cathode is rather high for a truly solid cell, which accounts for a high current density ﬂowing in the cell and through the electrolyte particularly at high 2C rate; in addition, one must consider that lab-scale Li metal cells in this work were assembled by standard sandwiching of electrodes and solid electrolyte and no electrolyte precursor (ionic conductor) was used to bind the active material particles, being out of the scope of the present work as it will limit the clear investigation of the HSPE properties.

Constant current charge/discharge cycling was carried out at different temperatures, from 80 °C down to ambient laboratory temperature (≈25 °C), to test the capability of the HSPE under study to work in standard battery operational conditions. Li metal cells were assembled with the LA-60 electrolyte, which demonstrated the best performance at 80 °C. Fig. 6d shows the potential vs. speciﬁc capacity proﬁles of the LFP/LA-60/Li cell at diﬀerent temperatures and C/10 rate. The cell provided speciﬁc capacity values near the theoretical value at both 80 and 60 °C, in the excess of 100 mAh g−1 at 40 °C, and demonstrated proper operation with a clearly visible ﬂat discharge plateau and about 45 mAh g−1 even at 25 °C, with an overpotential limited to about 0.25 V and high eﬃciency, which is remarkable for a truly solid hybrid polymer/ceramic electrolyte; once more, it accounts for the favorable electrochemical performance enhancement by the use of LAGP in the polymer matrix, which cannot be only ascribed to the plasticizing eﬀect by the ceramic, but accounts for an improved – and not yet properly understood – transport mechanism in both organic and inorganic phases of the hybrid. On the contrary, as expected, SPE-based cells with standard P(EO)15LiTFSI electrolyte did not provide any electrochemical response below 55 °C, viz. the PEO melting temperature because of the immobilized lithium ions in the crystalline phase. The above detailed results demonstrate that, by the use of hybrid polymer/ceramic electrolytes and the proper optimization of their composition, truly allsolid-state lithium metal cells can operate with stable performance and high eﬃciency in a wide temperature range, even down to ambient conditions; further intensive work as well as proper optimization is needed, but here we have shown advancement toward fabrication of a practical and functional all-solid-state energy storage system at higher energy density and lower cost of production.

Eﬃcient hybrid solid polymer/ceramic electrolytes have been presented in this work, which were prepared by a rapid and, for the ﬁrst time, truly solvent-free preparation process in “one pot”. PEO-LiTFSI and LAGP were easily mixed and hot pressed at moderate temperature in a dry room, thus opening to an easily up scalable approach for Libased battery solid-state electrolytes.


Hybrid electrolytes containing 60 wt% of LAGP displayed the best ionic conductivity (1.6 × 10−5 S cm−1) at low temperature, one order of magnitude higher than LAGP-free PEO-LiTFSI samples. The addition of LAGP enhanced the electrochemical stability window and transport characteristics of the materials. Truly interesting electrochemical performances in solid state lithium cells were obtained, especially under high current regimes (70% of the theoretical speciﬁc capacity at 2C and 80 °C), with limited fading and excellent Coulombic eﬃciency (>99.5%) even at low rate. The LAGP-based cell was also cycled down to 25 °C at C/10 and still demonstrated stable cycling with the typical ﬂat proﬁle of LiFePO4; conversely, LAGP-free electrolytes were not able to operate reversibly below the PEO melting temperature (i.e., 55 °C). Interfacial stability issues remain to be solved, chieﬂy linked to the reactivity of LAGP in contact with lithium metal, which we are trying to address now in our labs, but results here proposed represent a step further toward truly all-solid-state batteries conceived for high energy/ power technologies, assuring safety and performance in a wide range of operating conditions.