NASICON  type  material  Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12  is  considered  as  an  ideal  option  of solid-state electrolyte (SSE) material for solid-state Na batteries (SSNBs). However, the ionic conductivity of the material essentially needs to be further improved. Herein, a new strategy is proposed to enhance the ionic conductivity of NASICON material by  adding  NaF  into  the  precursor,  improving  the  ionic  conductivity  of  classical Na3Zr2Si2PO12 from 4.5×10−4 S cm-1 to 1.7×10−3 S cm-1 at 25 ˚C with an activation energy  of  0.28  eV.  Furthermore,  both  qualitative  and  quantitative  analysis  are conducted  by  employing  XRD,  XPS,  SEM,  and  solid-state  NMR  techniques  to investigate  the  long-range  and  local  structures  as  well  as  compositions  for  the prepared Na3Zr2Si2PO12-xNaF materials.

It is revealed that with the addition of NaF into the precursor, the monoclinic phase of NASICON grains gradually transforms into rhombohedral phase with in-situ formed a ‘binder-like’ glassy phase around them, indicating NaF plays an important role in the modification  of  grain  boundary  and  the  improvement  of  the  ionic  conductivity. 

Moreover,  the  strategy  is  also  applied  to  other  NASICON  system,  achieving  the optimum conductivity of 3.6×10−3 S cm-1 at 25 ˚C with an activation energy of 0.25 eV for the Na3.2Zr2Si2.2P0.8O12-0.5NaF, which is the highest ionic conductivity among previously reported NASICON-based materials. More importantly, our work provides a  simple  and  low-cost  approach  to  prepare  high  ionic  conducting  NASICON materials.


Restricted  by  the  flammable  organic  electrolytes,  the  conventional  lithium-ion batteries suffer from an intrinsic limited electrochemical window and safety issues.[1] 

Recently,  solid-state  batteries  (SSBs)  have  been  extensively  developed  because  of their high safety and long cycle life.[2] Combined with the huge abundance and low cost  of  sodium  resources,  there  emerges  large  interest  in  promising  solid-state  Na batteries  (SSNBs),  especially  in  the  large-scale  applications  of  grid  energy  storage Similar  to  the  solid-state  Li  batteries  (SSLBs),  replacing  the  liquid  organic electrolyte with solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) is the key issue to design SSNBs.[6-7] 

As  the  crucial  component  of  SSBs,  SSEs  should  possess  high  ionic  conductivity, excellent  thermal  and  electrochemical  stability,  as  well  as  good  interfacial compatibility  with  cathode  and  anode  materials.[8-12]  The  reported  Na-based  SSEs mainly include the following three types: Na-β”-Al2O3, NASICON, and glass-ceramic  sulfides.


However, the  extensive  application  of  Na-β”-Al2O3  and glass-ceramic  sulfides  is  hindered  by  the  problem  of  the  high  sintering  temperature and poor compatibility with electrode materials, respectively.[3, 5, 15-16] By contrast, the NASICON  exhibits  more  potentialities  in  the  application  because  of  the  high  ionic conductivity and air-stability.


NASICON type materials Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12 were first designed and reported by  Hong and Goodenough in 1976, showing an ionic conductivity higher than 10-1 S/cm at 300˚C (x=2).[18-19] In NASICON structure, PO4 or SiO4 tetrahedral shares corners with ZrO6 octahedral, which can crystallize in a rhombohedral structure (space group c),  showing  excellent  ionic  conductivity.  A  monoclinic  distortion  (space  group C2/c) is observed when x value is in the range of 1.8 ≤ x ≤ 2.2 at low temperature, and the ionic conductivity of classical Na3Zr2Si2PO12 is at the magnitude of 10-4 S/cm  at 25 ˚C.[18] Many efforts have been made to further improve the ionic conductivity and Hfand Sc-substitution have shown some success.[20-21] Unfortunately the scarce reserves and extremely high cost of these elements limit their large-scale application. 


Recent  work  has  shown  that  the  ionic  conductivity  could  be  improved  to  be  above 10-3 S cm-1 at room temperature with the divalent or trivalent doping in Zr site, such as Mg2+and La3+.[22-25] Even it is realized that Mg2+ and La3+ couldn’t be really doped into Zr site with the phosphate impurities appearing in all previous reports, however, this  strategy  is  indeed  effective  and  could  provide  guidance  to  improve  the  ionic conductivity of NASICON materials. Considering that the rhombohedral phase(R-3shows  a  lower  activation  energy  and  higher  bulk  ionic  conductivity  than  those  of monoclinic  phase  (C2/c)[23],  modifying  the  grain  boundary  of  rhombohedral  phase with a second phase to form composite electrolytes may be an attractive approach to improve  the  total  ionic  conductivity  of  NASICON  type  materials.  In  addition,  the samples with particularly high ionic conductivity reported in those reports are always synthesized  via  liquid  phase  process,  such  as  solution-assisted  solid-state[21]  and sol-gel  methods[23],  which  are  difficult  to  scale  up.[23,  26]  Therefore,  it  is  really necessary to develop a simple strategy to synthesize NASICON materials with high ionic conductivity for the application of SSNBs. 

Herein,  we  propose  a  simple  strategy  to  improve  the  ionic  conductivity  of  the Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12  by  adding  NaF  into  the  precursor  to  obtain  a  glass-ceramic composite electrolyte via traditional solid-state reaction. 


NASICON-based  materials,  proving  the  generalization  and  effectiveness  of  this strategy.  Considering  the  low-cost  of  NaF  precursor  and  the  simple  solid-state calcination method, we believe the glass-ceramic composite electrolyte will become a promising large-scale synthetic SSE to realize the practical SSNB applications. 


The  Na3Zr2Si2PO12-xNaF  glass-ceramic  composite  electrolytes  are  synthesized via a solid-state method. For the preparation of NASICON materials, Na and P excess are usually mentioned since light elements are easily to volatile at the high ceramic sintering  temperatures  above  1100  ˚C.  It  has  been  reported  that  adding  10  at.  % Na-excess  could  give  rise  to  the  total  ionic  conductivity  and  affect  the  Na  ion diffusion  in  NASICON  materials.[27]  However,  the  decomposition  of  the  excess Na2CO3 precursor at high temperature will cause a decrease in the density of ceramic sheets,  as  shown  in  Fig.  S1.  In  this  work,  the  Na-contained  compound  is  expected  to influence  the  formation  of  NASICON  electrolyte  during  the  high  temperature  sintering process  (1150   3))  and  NaF  is  the  most  stable  among  the  common  Na-salts.  Therefore, based on the 10 at. % Na-excess with high ionic conductivity samples, we further add NaF into the precursor for adjusting the sodium content. The Si/P proportion increases in  order  to  match  the  changes  in  NASICON  phase,  thus  the  superfluous  P  may  be in-situ  formed  as  the  second  phase  to  modify  the  grain  boundary.  Compared  with Na2CO3,  the  addition  of  NaF  into  the  precursor  does  not  decrease  the  density  of ceramic sheets obviously, as shown in Fig. S2, producing the materials with excellent ionic conductivity. 

The XRD patterns shown in the Fig. 1a display the crystalline structures of the materials. In has been known that NASICON materials Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12 can form two  phases,  rhombohedral  (R-3c)  phase  and  monoclinic  (C2/c)  (1.8≤x≤2.2)  phase (Fig.  S3).The  monoclinic  phase  can  be  regarded  as  a  rotational  distortion  of rhombohedral phase at low temperature, with the former has higher activation energy than the latter (0.37 vs. 0.26 eV).[28] And this phase transition is mainly affected by the change of the Si/P proportion at room temperature.

Na3Zr2Si2PO12-xNaF materials. As shown in Fig. S7, the content of Na element in the composite  electrolyte  is  basically  the  same  with  the  adding  quantity  in  precursors, indicating the Na content has impact on the adjustment of Si/P proportion. However, the content of impurity phases of ZrO2 and Na3PO4 also increases with the addition of NaF, among which theZrO2 has been proved to be detrimental to the improvement of  the ionic conductivity.[29] 

The  ionic  conductivities  of  the  as-prepared  Na3Zr2Si2PO12-xNaF composite electrolytes were calculated by employing the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) coupled with gold electrodes at temperatures ranging from 25 to 95  ˚C  (Fig.  S8),  and  the  resulting  Arrhenius  behaviors  are  summarized  in  Fig.2a. 

Furthermore, the activation energies were calculated via Arrhenius equation based on the  fitting  slope  of  Arrhenius  plots.  Fig.  2b  shows  the  ionic  conductivities  at  25  ˚C and  the  activation  energies  of  composite  electrolytes,  showing  that  an  optimum conductivity  of  1.7  ×  10−3  S  cm-1  at  25  ˚C  with  an  activation  energy  of  0.28  eV  is achieved for the Na3Zr2Si2PO12-0.7NaF.

The  potential  window  is  also  an  important  property  of  solid-state  electrolytes, especially  the  oxidation  potential,  which  limits  the  choice  of  cathode  material.  Very recently,  theoretical  calculation  results  show  the  potential  window  of  Na3Zr2Si2PO12  is about 3.6 V in thermodynamics [30], which is much lower than the reported experimental value of 5 V by Goodenough et.al.[31]. To explore the influence of NaF complex on the oxidation  potential,  Linear  Scan  Voltammetry  (LSV)  was  used  to  measure  the Na3Zr2Si2PO12  and  Na3Zr2Si2PO12-0.7NaF,  as  shown  in  Fig.  S9.  The  composite electrolyte shows higher oxidation potential and scarcely no current up to 4.2 V, which meets  up  with  most  cathode  materials  for  Na-ion  batteries. 

To  further  explore  the  mechanism  of  the  ionic  conductivity  enhancement, scanning  electron  microscope  (SEM)  was  used  to  observe  the  cross  section  of  the sintered  ceramic  sheet  firstly.  Fig.  3a  shows  that  the  ceramic  sheet  is  composed  of angular  grain  and  ‘binder-like’  amorphous  glassy  material.  The  ‘binder-like’  glassy material in-situ generated around the grains increases with the increasing amount of NaF, producing a glass-ceramic composite electrolyte, as shown in Fig. 3b and Fig. 3c. 

However, too much NaF causes some porosity, as shown in Fig. 3d, which reduces the  density  of  ceramic  sheets  and  may  also  be  the  reason  of  the  decreased  ionic conductivity in Fig. 2b. 

XPS  and  solid-state  NMR  techniques  were  further  employed  to  obtain  a  more comprehensive understanding of the surface and bulk structure of the materials. Fig. 4 shows the Na 1s, P 2p, Si 2p and F1s XPS spectra collected from powder samples of the  Na3Zr2Si2PO12-xNaF  (x  =  0.1,  0.4,  0.7,  1.0)  composites.  Considering  that  the glassy  phase  surrounds  the  grains  and  XPS  is  surface-sensitive,  the  information  of glassy phase could be reflected by the XPS analysis. To be noted, argon etching was also applied to treat the samples to get more information at different depths. 

The red, green,  and  blue  lines  indicate  the  XPS  spectra  with  argon  etching  for  0s,  100s,  and 200s, respectively. According to the Na 1s and P 2p XPS spectra (Fig. 4a and 4b) of the materials, the amount of the Na and P elements decreases with the etching time, revealing  that  the  Na  and  P  contents  on  the  surface  of  the  materials  are  relatively higher.  The  internal  Na  content  increases  with  more  NaF  adding,  which  conforms with the XRD and ICP data. Moreover, the binding energy of P element changes after argon etching, indicating that the addition of NaF results in a composite in which the structure and composition differ between the surface and interior. Additionally, both of  two  peaks  at  132.8  eV  and  133.9  eV  in  P  2p  XPS  spectra  belong  to  the  P-O bonding,  which  is  supposed  from  the  ‘binder-like’  glassy  phosphate  and  the crystalline state NASICON material, respectively, indicating the glassy phosphate is on the surface and surrounds NASICON particles. Further combined with XRD and SEM results, it is assumed that the increased Si/P proportion with the addition of NaF induces superfluous P element to in-situ form glassy phosphate, which combines with NASICON grains to constitute a glass-ceramic composite material. As shown in Fig. 4c, Si 2p XPS spectra show the similar result that the binding energy of Si element changes  after  argon  etching.  Similar  to  the  generation  of  zirconia,  part  of  the NASICON  materials  decompose  during  the  high  temperature  sintering  process  and the amorphous SiO2 may also exist in glassy material. Furthermore, F 1s XPS spectra are also obtained to explore the effect of the F element. As shown in Fig. 4d, there is a modest NaF signal and the weak F signal does not change with the ratio of NaF added, verifying  the  previous  speculation  that  the  fluorine  mainly  volatilizes  at  high temperature  and  only  tiny  amount  exists  in  the  glassy  phase.  The  results  are accordance with 19F NMR spectra (Fig. S11), which shows two weak peaks assigning to the P-F and Si-F, respectively. Combined with Zr 3d XPS spectra (Fig. S12), which shows no change in binding energy, the glassy phase can be denoted as Na-Si-P-O-F. 

In  addition,  as  shown  in  Fig.  S13,  the  composition  of  glassy  material  is  also influenced  by  the  addition  of  NaF  content  and  the  small  amount  of  F  element  may have a positive effect on enhancement of ionic conductivity. 

To  get  more  information,  particularly  regarding  the  change  in  glassy  phase contents  with  NaF  content,  solid-state  31P  NMR  was  used  to  provide  a  quantitative analysis  for  the  composite  composition.  In  Fig.5a,  three  peaks  are  observed  from solid-state  31P  NMR  spectra,  indicating  the  material  is  multi-component  or multi-structure.  In  terms  of  phosphate,  the  peak  will  be  below  0  ppm  in  31P  NMR spectra if high valence cation (Zr4+) exists in the structure, on the contrary, the peak exceeding  0  ppm  indicates  that  the  cations  are  all  low  valence  (Na+,  H+).[32-33] 

Therefore,  the  peak  located  at  -11  ppm  can  be  attributed  to  the  phosphate  in NASICON  material  and  the  peak  located  at  13.5  ppm  corresponds  to  the  Na3PO4, which has been reported in the earlier literature and proved in Fig. 1a. The peak at 7 ppm  displayed  a  broader  half-peak  width  has  not  been  well  understood  before.  In combination with XRD data, which shows only three crystalline phases including P elements (rhombohedral and monoclinic phase of NASICON and Na3PO4), the 7 ppm may  be  assigned  to  the  generated  amorphous  glassy  phosphate.  Additionally,  the resonance signal of NASICON structure gradually shifts to the lower field with more NaF  content,  which  is  in  good  agreement  with  the  increase  of  Si/P  proportion.[30] 

Furthermore,  the  peak  areas  of  three  peaks  in  the  31P  NMR  spectra  were  integrated and quantitatively analyzed, as shown in Fig. 5b. It clearly shows that the content of P element in NASICON phase decreases with increasing amount of NaF. Within limits (Na3Zr2Si2PO12-xNaF,  x<0.6),  the  residual  P  element  transforms  into  glassy phosphate  to  composite  with  NASICON  particles  and  to  form  glass-ceramic composite electrolytes.  


Moreover, the  pure Na3Zr2Si2PO12 with 10 at% Na-excess based on Na2CO3 also shows a certain amount of glassy phosphate, which verifies that the generation of glassy material is caused by the  increase  of  Na  content.  It  also  explains  the  reason  that  Na-excess  NASICON material  shows  higher  ionic  conductivity.  [27, 34]  For  a  more  obvious  comparison,  we synthesize the Na3Zr2Si2PO12 sample without Na-excess and the SEM image, P 2p XPS and  31P  NMR  results  are  shown  in  Fig.  S14.  The  SEM  image  demonstrates  almost  no amorphous glassy material and the XPS and NMR results further confirm that there is no glassy phase at the grain boundary and in the bulk respectively, which indicates that the formation of glassy phase is caused by Na-excess.   

Overall, compared with Na2CO3 precursor, which is easy to decompose directly and causes some porosity to reduce the density of ceramic sheets, the addition of NaF could  further  increase  the  Na  content  of  NASICON  material  without  affecting  the density of ceramic sheets obviously. The Si/P proportion increases in order to match the change in NASICON phase, thus the superfluous P may in-situ form the  glassy phase around NASICON grains. Compared with the pure NASICON material, which generates  ZrO2  at  the  grain  boundary  to  sacrifice  the  ionic  conductivity  during  the high temperature sintering process, the glassy material modifies the ionic conduction at  the  grain  boundary  of  NASICON  particles,  producing  the  composite  electrolyte with excellent ionic conductivity. 

In  order  to  reveal  the  versatility  and  effectiveness  of  this  strategy,  the 

NASICON-type  material  Na3.2Zr2Si2.2P0.8O12  is  also  optimized  with  NaF.  The  optimum conductivity of 3.6×10−3 S cm-1 at 25 ˚C with an activation energy of 0.25 eV is achieved for theNa3.2Zr2Si2.2P0.8O12-0.5NaF, as shown in Fig. 6a,  proving that the  simple  strategy  is  effective  for  NASICON-type  material.  Fig.  6b  summarizes various  Na-ion  solid-state  electrolytes,  including  both  oxides  and  sulfides.[6]  As shown in Fig. 6b, the ionic conductivity of Na3.2Zr2Si2.2P0.8O12-0.5NaF is higher than that of previously reported NASICON-based materials, even better than many sulfides. 

Considering the low-cost of NaF precursor and the simple solid-state reaction process, the materials Na3.2Zr2Si2.2P0.8O12-0.5NaF will be a good option of SSEs for SSSBs. 

In  summary,  we  propose  a  new  strategy  to  enhance  the  ionic  conductivity  of NASICON-type  materials  by  adding  NaF  into  the  precursor  to  in-situ  form  a glass-ceramic composite electrolyte. XRD pattern displays that the phase of resulting materials  changes  from  monoclinic  phase  (C2/c)  to  the  rhombohedral  (R-3c)  phase gradually with the increase of NaF content. SEM images show a ‘binder-like’ glassy phase around the NASICON grains. XPS and ss-NMR further confirm the formation of  Na-Si-P-O-F  glassy  phase  qualitatively  and  quantitatively,  revealing the component and content of glassy material is impacted by the addition of NaF into the precursor. Combined with ICP analysis, the Si/P ratio and the glassy material content are  adjusted  by  the  Na  element  and  it  is  shown  that  excessive  Na  will  cause  the formation of Na3PO4 to decreases the ionic conductivity. The optimized conductivity  of 3.6 × 10−3 S cm-1 at 25 ˚C with an activation energy of 0.25 eV is achieved for the Na3.2Zr2Si2.2P0.8O12-0.5NaF,  which  is  the  highest  ionic  conductivity  among  the reported  NASICON-based  materials  and  meets  the  demands  of  SSE  material  for SSSBs. These exciting results shed light on scalable producing Na-based SSE to realize the SSNBs applications. 


NASICON  type glass-ceramic  composite  materials  Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12-yNaF  were  synthesized  and sintered  into  ceramic  pellets  with  traditional  solid  phase  method.  Briefly,Na2CO3 (99%, Alfa Aesar), SiO2 (99%,Alfa Aesar), ZrO2(99%, Alfa Aesar), NH4H2PO4 (99%, Alfa  Aesar)  and  NaF  (99%,  Alfa  Aesar)  were  well  mixed  in  a  stoichiometric  ratio with  10  at%  excess  of  Na2CO3  and  5  at%  excess  of  NH4H2PO4,  then  pressed  and calcined  at  1000  °C  for  12  h  in  air.  The  pellets  were  then  crushed  and  ground sufficiently,  and  the  obtained  mixture  powder  was  pressed  into  pellets  again  and followed  by  a  high-temperature  sintering  process  at  1150  °C  for  24  h  in  platinum crucible.  The  final  ceramic  pellets  are  about  1.8-2.0mm  thick  and  10.0-10.5  mm  in Characterizations of material properties: The crystal structures were identified by using a RigakuUltima IV X-ray Diffractometer (Rigaku Corporation, Japan) equipped with Cu Ka radiation (λ=1.5405 Å) and operated at 40 kV and 30 mA with a scanning rate of 2° per min over the range of 10~70°(2Ɵ). A Hitachi S-4800 scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to check the morphology of cross section ceramic pellet. 

Electrochemical  impedance  spectroscopy  (EIS)  measurements  were  conducted  at  a Solartron electrochemical station with the frequency range from 1 M to 100 m Hz and an Alternating Current (AC) amplitude of 10 mV.  Ionic conductivity measurements were performed by sputtering a thin gold layer on both surfaces of ceramic pellet to form  a  good  contact  and  the  coated  layer  is  acted  as  electrode.  The  temperature dependence  conductivity  was  measured  in  the  same  way  at  several  specific temperatures ranging from -60 to 105 ˚C. For conductivity test at each temperature, the samples were allowed to equilibrate for 2 h prior to measurements. The activation energy was calculated based on Arrhenius equation (formula 1 and 2).The slope of the  linear  lnσT-1/T  was  fitting  by  the  software  Origin  and  R  was  Molar  gas  constant  (8.314). 


X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) were collected at room temperature with an XPS  spectrometer  (Thermo  Scientific  ESCALAB  250Xi)  using  monochromic  AlKa radiation. Ar+ etching was conducted at an argon partial pressure of <10-8. All spectra were  calibrated  with  the  C1s  photoemission  peak  at  284.8  eV  to  correct  for  the charging  effect.  The  NMR  experiments  were  performed  with  a  Bruker400  MHz AVANCE III HD spectrometer at Larmor frequencies of 376.6 MHz for 19F and 162.0 MH  for  31P,  respectively.  The  chemical  shifts  of  19Fand  31P  are  referenced  to  LiF (-204  ppm)  and  1M  H3PO4  aqueous  solution  (0  ppm),  respectively.  The  19FMAS NMR spectra were acquired using Hahn-echo pulse (π/2τ-πτ) with π/2 pulse length of 1.9 us and recycle delay of 60 s at a spinning frequency of 50 kHz. And the  31P MAS NMR spectra were acquired using single pulse with the recycle delay of 60 s at a  spinning  frequency  of  12  kHz.  OPTIMA  7000DV  inductively  coupled  plasma atomic  emission  spectroscopy  (ICP-AES)  analysis  (PekinElmer,  USA)  was  used  to characterize the content of Na and Zr in composite materials.
