Insertion of binary LiCl-P2O5 glass between Li+ NASICON crystallites and its effect on controlling inter-grain transport Neelakshi Sharma, Anshuman Dalvi⁎ Department of Physics, BITS, Pilani, RJ 333031, India

Li+ ion conducting glass-ceramic composites have been prepared from fine flakes of ion conducting binary oxide glass i.e. 2LiCl-P2O5 (LCPO) and nanograins of LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) using milling assisted synthesis route. The effect of variation of glass content and composition in the composite has been systematically investigated. Milling and heat treatment during glass-ceramic formation do not lead to any decomposition or formation of a new phase. As suggested by XRD, DSC and conductivity-temperature cycles, LCPO remains in glassy state in the composite. The tiny glassy flakes are seen to be homogenously embedded in between the LTP crystallites as confirmed by FESEM. The bulk (σbulk) and grain boundary (σGB) conductivity values have been found to be ~4 × 10−5 Ω−1 cm−1 and ~8 × 10−6 Ω−1 cm−1 at 100 °C for the glass-ceramic with 20(60LCPO)-80(LTP-18h) which are significantly higher than those of pristine LTP pellets prepared under similar sintering conditions. Ionic mobility measurements suggest that mobile Li+ ion concentration existing in glassy phase at the grain boundaries contribute significantly to inter grain transport. These glass-ceramics have been found to be thermally stable up to a temperature of ~300 °C. Cyclic voltammetry measurements obtained at 100 °C suggest good stability under different electrode configurations.

All-solid-state lithium ion batteries (ASSBs) are being widely considered as energy storage devices because of their high energy and power densities [1–3]. In this respect, various Li+ ion conductors with high ionic conductivity have attracted attention recently for their applications in ASSBs [4–6]. Out of these, NASICON structured LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) exhibits a phenomenally high bulk conductivity of the order of 10−4 Ω−1 cm−1 [7,8]. Even though Li+-NASICON consists of a network of 3D pathways for conduction of Li+ ions [7], the direct use of LTP is still limited owing to its high grain boundary impedance [9–11]. Various groups have tried to enhance the total conductivity of LTP by tailoring (i) bulk structure or (ii) inter grain transport. Interestingly, partial substitution of trivalent ion (for Ti4+) is one method by which conductivity of LTP can be enhanced. Incorporation of several trivalent cations, e.g. Al3+, Ga3+, Cr3+ in a nominal composition of LTP have led to rise in the total conductivity [12–14]. In another approach, ionic conductivity has also been enhanced by using Li+ ion compounds as additives, like LiI, LiF and LiNO3, at the grain-grain interface [15,16]. Recently, it has been reported that addition of metal oxides in the LTP matrix, such as GeO2, TiO2, and Al2O3, also leads to conductivity enhancement [17]. The conductivity rise is mainly attributed to high densification that leads to a decrease in activation energy of ionic transport at grain boundaries. Due to their dense microstructure leading to high conductivity,

glass-ceramics based on LTP crystallites have also drawn attention [18,19]. For example, Fu [20] prepared glass-ceramics by precipitating Li+ NASICON compound Li1+xAlxTi2x(PO4)3 in Li2O-Al2O3-TiO2-P2O5 glassy system which exhibited a conductivity of 10−3 Ω−1 cm−1 at room temperature. prepared Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3-xLi2O Li+ ion conducting glass-ceramics that exhibited a bulk and total conductivity of the order of 1.18 × 10−3 and 7.25 × 10−4 Ω−1 cm−1 at room temperature, respectively. In another work, synthesized NASICON-type structure (Li1+x+yAlxCryGe2−x−y(PO4)3, x + y = 0.5) with high conductivity using melt-quenching method and converted to glass–ceramics through heat synthesized Li1+xCrx(GeyTi1−y)2−x(PO4)3 (LCGTP) system by melt-quenching route followed by crystallization and it exhibited a conductivity of 6.65 × 10−5 Ω−1 cm−1 at room temperature. Despite several advancements in preparation of Li+ NASICON glassceramics, the control over amount and size of the precipitated crystallites and cumbersome synthesis route makes it difficult to ensure homogeneity and uniformity in these crystallites [7]. Recently we proposed a novel mechanical milling assisted synthesis route where the nanograins/flakes of fast ionic glass namely, (Li2SO4)x-(LiPO3)100-x (x = 30–60 mol%) (LSLP) were externally dispersed in nanocrystallites of LTP [24,25]. The mixture was subsequently ball milled, pelletized and sintered at various temperatures above the LSLP melting point. The resultant composite yielded in enhanced total ionic conductivity to an

FESEM images of fractured surface of 20(60LCPO)-80(LTP-18h) pellet is shown at different magnifications in Fig. 2. The LTP crystallites exhibit a square texture of grain size ~30–50 nm as also observed by Hupfer et al. [36] in a LTP analogue Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3. Further the glassy phase is also evident in the matrix. EDS mapping for fractured surface of 20(60LCPO)-80(LTP-18h) is shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b). With the aid of energy dispersive spectroscopy, elemental distribution (qualitative) corresponding to P, Ti, Cl and O has been shown here. Since LTP is present in large amount, P and Ti are seen to be dense and evenly distributed. The presence of the element chlorine in the glass-ceramic is greatly acknowledged as 60LCPO glass is homogeneously spread between the LTP grains.

DSC thermograms for 60LCPO glass and 20(60LCPO)-80(LTP-18h) (best conducting composite as revealed later) have been shown in Fig. 4(a). Apparently for 60LCPO glass, a glass transition (Tg) is seen near 310 °C followed by massive crystallization of LiPO3, Li3PO4 and Li4P2O7 content in the range of 400–500 °C. Besides, the crystallization

Impedance spectroscopy technique was used to understand the Li+ ion conduction at the bulk and across the grain boundary of these composites. Nyquist plots and conductivity isotherms have been obtained in a wide frequency range from 4 Hz to 5 MHz. At the outset, Nyquist plots at a normalized scale for three of the compositions, viz. 20(60LCPO)-80(LTP-18h), 15(60LCPO)-85(LTP-18h) and 10(60LCPO)-90(LTP-18h) at 100 °C have been shown in Fig. 5(a). Here, the salt content in glass (2LiCl)x-(P2O5)100-x has been fixed to x = 60 mol%. The capacitance values corresponding to low and high frequency semicircles have been obtained from the respective semicircles of the Nyquist plots [24,39] and reported in Table 1. If one considers bulk and grain boundary processes to be modeled as parallel combination of a resistance and capacitance, then the characteristic relaxation time τ (RC) for each process may be calculated from the relation:

In order to study the electrochemical behavior, cyclic voltammetry has been performed to examine the potential of LTP based glass-ceramic under different electrode configurations. Cyclic voltammetry scans (100 °C) have been shown in Fig. 10 for 20(60LCPO)-80(LTP-18h) at 100 °C sandwiched between electrodes in symmetric (C|glass-ceramic|C, (C|glass-ceramic|LiCoO2) configurations. These scans have been performed at 50 mV/s in a range of ± 3 V and have been shown for 1st, 5th and 10th cycle. As observed for 10 cycles, the samples with Ag electrodes exhibit an electrochemical stability window of ± 1 V, with a slight variation in the value of current as observed in the hysteresis. On the other hand, with graphite electrodes, the electrochemical stability is wider ranging up till ± 2 V. A hysteresis loop is again evident without any abrupt change in the current for this system. This could be possibly due to intercalation process in graphite. In Fig. 10(c), the samples have been sandwiched LiCoO2-graphite as electrodes so as to realize Li+ ion battery configuration. Interestingly, the electrochemical stability window is found to be ± 2 V which implies its stability under battery conditions and a two way intercalation process in graphite as well as LiCoO2. No oxidation or reduction peaks are observed because the cells have not been charged prior to CV. In the inset, Nyquist plots for these cells havealso been shown before and after CV scans. For all these samples, only a small change in resistance is evident due to interfacial polarization after performing CV scans. Thus, it can be inferred that with (i) proper engineering of electrodes and (ii) thin glass-ceramic electrode, these glassceramics can be realized into a ASSB suitable for operations at ambient temperatures. 4. Conclusions

Preliminary investigations on LTP-glass-ceramics based on binary Li+ ion oxide glass reveal interesting results. Binary glass insertion in LTP matrix leads to glass-ceramic composite formation where LCPO remains in completely glassy phase. By incorporation of glassy phase in the matrix, high mobile Li+ ion concentration can be accommodated in between the LTP grains. Glass content and salt content in the glass both significantly influence the electrical transport. The glass-ceramic pellet formation is dense and compact. Distribution of glassy phase in LTP is even. The LCPO glassy system is a good choice for composite formation, as it does not crystallize significantly even during slow cooling. CV scans suggest a good intercalation for graphite and LiCoO2 electrodes that may be attributed to high mobile Li+ ion concentration in the composites. 