The eﬀects of Mn substitution on the structural and magnetic properties of the NASICON-type Na3 −Fe x2 Mn (PO ) 4 3 solid solution with x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, have been investigated by means of X-ray diﬀraction, magnetization, ac-magnetic susceptibility and Mössbauer spectroscopy measurements in the temperature range of 1.7 K ⩽ ⩽T 300 K. Rietveld analysis of room-temperature X-ray diﬀraction patterns indicates that the alloys are single-phase solid solution compositions, crystallizing in a monoclinic with C/2c space group. The Mnsubstitution not only expands the unit-cell volume but also gives rise to increasing 6 octahedral distortion. The magnetic data reveal the Mn-substituted compounds undergoing multiple phase transitions at ∼T K. We argue that the ﬁrst transition from the paramagnetic to a canted antiferromagnetic N1 state is due to magnetic Fe ions, while the second transition is associated with the antiferromagnetic sub-lattice the magnetic Mn moments. An analysis of the critical behaviour based on the temperature dependence of the hyperﬁne ﬁelds implies that the increasing Mn content modiﬁes the nature of magnetic interactions, from 3DIsing to tri-critical mean ﬁeld criticality.

In the last 20 years, rechargeable lithium ion batteries (LIBs) have been widely used as a high performance energy storage devices for various commercial electronic appliances, such as portable smart devices, robots, pacemakers and electric vehicles. This is essentially due to advantages in terms of high energy capacity, volume density, long cycle life and low self-discharge [1,2]. Nowadays, the large-scale demand for Li would force one to consider the growing price of Li resources because of the low abundance of Li in the Earth’s crust. Therefore, there is a great and urgent need to ﬁnd some alternatives for LIBs which will be based on more abundant elements. One of the most promising alternatives to LIBs are sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) [3]. Compared with Li, Na has quite similar physical and chemical properties, and at the same time is very abundant and low cost. Due to the fact that Na atom is relatively heavier and larger, and has less-reducing potential than Li one, the gravimetric and volumetric densities of SIB would not exceed those of its Li analogue. However, the application potential of Na-ion batteries is expected to be competitive with LIB systems in terms of kinetic criteria [4,5,2]. Moreover, in some cases, SIBs have even beenshown better electrochemical performance than LIBs [6]. The sodium super ion conductors (NASICON) have been considered as promising electrode materials for stable SIBs owing to their open 3D framework feature, high ionic conductivity, and a small volume change (phase related) during the sodium intercalation/deintercalation processes [7,8]. As an example, Na Fe (PO ) 4 3 has been subjected to investigating from almost four decades [9]. It should be pointed out, the crystal structure of this compound was examined for a long time basing on the structures reported for Na M (PO ) 4 3 (M = Ti, Sc). In NASICON-framework, the structure is formed by the so-called lantern units of cornersharing PO4 tetrahedra and MO6 octahedra. These units are assembled into a three-dimensional framework that deﬁnes M(1) (one position per f.u.) and M(2) (three positions per f.u.) interstitial sites in the rhombohedral form that are usually ﬁlled (fully or partially) by mobile Na ions. Due to multiple possibilities for the occupancy of the interstitial sites, the Na M (PO ) 4 3 compounds are diversely described as monoclinic C2/c [10], monoclinic Cc [11,12], monoclinic C2, Cm, C2/m [13], and rhombohedral R-3c [14,15]. Recently, Kabbour et al. investigated the structure of Na Ti (PO ) 4 3 by single crystal X-ray diﬀraction [16]. The authors proposed space group P-1 implying fully ordered

The Na3(x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and 0.4) samples were synthesized using conventional solid state reaction method. All reactants: CH3COONa (anhydrous, 99%, POCH), FePO4 dihydrate (Fe 29%, Sigma–Aldrich), NH4H2PO4 (99%, POCH) and MnCO3 (anhydrous, 99.9%, Chempur) were grinded in a mortar and then milled in a high energy Spex SamplePrep 8000 M ball mill in propanol for 30 min. The obtained slurry was dried at 80°C for 6 h in air and next the powder was formed into pellets and heated at 600°C for 10 h under ﬂowing synthetic air.

XRD patterns of prepared samples were collected at room temperature by a X’Pert PRO diﬀractometer with CuKα radiation for the 2θ range of 10°–120°. The XRD data was analysed with the Rietveld reﬁnement method using FullProf software [23]. ac-magnetic susceptibility and magnetization from 1.7 K to 300 K in applied magnetic ﬁelds H up to 70 kOe were measured using a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer (Quantum Design MPMS XL7).The ac susceptibility measurements were conducted by applying an ac-ﬁeld amplitude of Hac = 3.5 Oe with a frequency of f = 500 Hz. The presented values of the magnetization and magnetic susceptibility have an uncertainty of less than 5%.

The 57Fe Mössbauer spectra were recorded in transmission geometry with a conventional constant-acceleration spectrometer, using a 57Co-in-Rh standard source with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 0.24 mm/s. Sample temperature in the range of 1.7 K–300 K was controlled using a variable-temperature insert in an Oxford Instruments Spectromag cryostat with an accuracy of ±1 K. The obtained TMS spectra were analysed using a least-squares ﬁtting procedure which allows to determine the Mössbauer spectra parameters such as isomer shift (IS), quadrupole splitting/shift (QS), hyperﬁne magnetic ﬁeld (B), absorption spectral areas (C) and spectral linewidths (Γ). All the IS values presented in this paper are related to the α-Fe standard at room temperature.

The reﬁned lattice parameters (a, b, c) and unit-cell volume (V) as function of the Mn content in the Na3 4 3 alloys are plotted x in Fig. 2. Our lattice parameters for Na Fe (PO ) 4 3 are in good agreement with those given by Masquelier et al. [18], but by less than∼0.5% diﬀer to those recently published by Liu et al. [24].

The temperature dependences of inverse magnetic susceptibility −χ 1 measured for Na3 4 3 (x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4) samples in a ﬁeld of 1 kOe are presented in Fig. 4. The overall behaviour of χ T( ) data obtained for Na Fe (PO ) 4 3 compound is in good agreement with earlier measurements [9,19]. As one can see, this compound undergoes a magnetic transition at 46.5(5) K. Above 150 K, the susceptibility obeyed the Curie-Weiss law for antiferromagnetic exchange: χ T ( (1) with the magnetic eﬀective moment μeff = 6.1(6) μB per Fe atom and the Curie-Weiss temperature θN = −17(2) K. In Eq. (1), NFe is the number of magnetic Fe ions per mole and kB is the Boltzmann constant. In the case of Mn-doped samples, the measured χ T( ) data reveals that all these compounds are also antiferromagnets. The values of μeff and θN derived from the χ T( ) data are listed in Table 2. As one can notice, the estimated μeff value for Na Fe (PO ) 4 3 compound is close to the theoretical value of the eﬀective magnetic moment of free ions, which

Looking at the table, we perceive that each central M atom is surrounded by two sorts of ligands. The ﬁrst sort consists of two oxygen −dM L (denoted by boldface), yielding atoms unveiling weak change in d d − − Δ /M L Fe L 0.3% only. The second sort with four oxygen remaining d − atoms discloses relatively bigger alteration with Fe L up to 0.5%. 

The room temperature 57Fe TMS spectra of Na3x2Mn(PO)43 (x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4) samples are presented in Fig. 8. As we are seeing, all recorded spectra could be ﬁtted well using one paramagnetic doublet. The Mössbauer parameter values derived from the ﬁtting procedure (Table 3) are typical for high-spin ferric iron in an octahedral oxygen surrounding (FeO6) [30]. These results indicate that Fe atoms in studied compounds are in paramagnetic states at room temperature and suggest a similar local environment (electronic and crystallographic) around each Mössbauer probe. Moreover, the lack of additional components in TMS spectra obtained for Mn-doped samples gives clear evidence that Mn atoms were successfully substituted into the Fe sites. These ﬁndings are in good agreement with XRD and SQUID results described above as well as with previous TMS data [9,31]. However, the values of QS and Γ parameters given in Table 3 show a trend of

The temperature dependence of the magnetization together with its temperature derivative (Fig. 5) as well as the ac-susceptibility data (Fig. 6) allow us to determine the magnetic transition temperatures in the studied materials. Using M T( data, the magnetic transition temperatures, TN1 and TN2, can be deduced from the position of M-maxima and corresponding minima of dM dT/ curves. As can be observed, Fig. 5 for x = 0.0 and 0.1 samples exhibits only one antiferromagnetic transition at TN1 = 46.5(5) K, while for higher Mn concentration the obtained results reveal the development of the second magnetic transition at TN2 = 43.0(5) K. This interesting ﬁnding gives clear evidence that substitution of Mn ions into Fe sites in “lantern units” changes the magnetic properties of Na3 4 3 compounds. In particular, the appearance of two antiferromagnetic transitions suggests the existence of two magnetic sub-lattices. The ﬁrst sublattice, with TN1 = 46.5(5) K, is observed in all studied samples thus it

In general, the quadrupole interaction is connected with an electric ﬁeld gradient (EFG) generated by uneven charge distribution within the Mössbauer nucleus [32]. Therefore, in the case of studied compounds, higher values of QS (Fe Mn )O are presumably related to the increased distortion of the 6 octahedra. A broadening of the spectral lines in several Fe-T systems (T = Re, Os, Mo and Cr) has previously interpreted in terms of the local (Fe Mn )O lattice distortion [33]. The enlarged distortion of the 6 octahedra may cause a narrow distribution of QS and IS values, which should be observed, in TMS spectra, as a slightly broadened absorption lines. Finally, it is worth noting that the QS values obtained for Mnsubstituted samples evince that the investigated compounds adopt the α phase at room temperature. Our result diﬀers to that reported by Yatskin et al. [20], who suggested that Na3.4Fe1.6Mn (PO ) 4 3 possesses the γ structure at room temperature. Taking into account that the QS value determined for γ phase is much smaller and close to 0.2 mm/s [31], the presence of this phase in studied compounds is not anticipated.

In the next step, the low-temperature TMS measurements have been and Na3Fe1.6 conducted Mn (PO ) 4 3. 

The physical properties of NASICON-type Na343 compounds, with x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, have been studied by XRD, SQUID and TMS techniques. As it was shown the substitution of Fe atoms by Mn modiﬁes signiﬁcantly the structural and magnetic properties of the alloys. First of all, the obtained data give clear evidence that both Fe as well as Mn ions are located only in octahedral coordination and are in the high spin state. However, with increasing the Mn content, the 6 octahedra get a distortion owing to the Jahn–Teller eﬀect of the Mn ions. As a result, in addition to antiferromagnetic phase transition at TN1 = 46.5 K, the Mn-substituted alloys undergo a second antiferromagnetic magnetic transition at TN2 = 43 K.