Ge-doped LiTi2(PO4)3 has been synthesized by a conventional solid-state reaction. Compounds LiM (PO4)3  with  LTP-type  structure  present  a  different  behaviour  depending  on  nature  of  M(IV).  For M(IV) = Ti and Ge, the structure shows the space group R3c, whereas for M(IV) = Ge the space group is R3. Differences in behaviour of LiTi2(PO4)3–LiGe2(PO4)3 solid solutions are discussed in relation to the composition. Their structures LiTi2 – xGex(PO4)3 (0 ≤ x < 2) were determined from X-ray powder diffraction method (XRD) using Rietveld analysis. A sharp change in the lattice parameter a is observed between the compositions with x = 1. The lattice parameter c increases as the Ge content increases in the whole range of composition. The space group R3c becomes R3 for the composition with x > 1. The SEM micrographs of the samples show relative porous microstructures due to the effect of the substitution.

The  NASICON  (Na  Super  Ionic  CONductors)type materials are good ionic conductors when serving as solid electrolytes for Li-ion batteries. Lithium titanium  phosphate  LiTi2(PO4)3  with  NASICON-type structure  has  been  well  known  as  a  solid  electrolyte material  for  Li-ion  batteries  [1–5].  This  ceramic structure is known as high ionic conducting materials and is therefore potential solid electrolyte that could be used in batteries with high energy density ranging from  portable  electronic  devices  such  as  laptop  and calculators to electrical vehicles [1, 6, 7]. Properties of any materials generally depend on its purity and composition  [8].  Several  researchers  synthesized  NASICON-type  systems  [9]  by  conventional  solid  state method which required high temperatures [1, 10]. The conventional  method  of  heating  the  stoichiometric amounts  of  reactants  at  high  temperatures  leads  to inhomogeneity, impurities, defects, and large dispersion  of  the  particle  size  [11–14].  The  NASICON structure [15] is built up of corner-sharing BO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra leading to a framework of B2P3O12 formulas with interconnected channels where cations  can  be  inserted  in  two  types  of  sites  usually noted M1 at 6b (0, 0, 0) and M2 at 18e (2/3, 0, 1/4) Wyckoff positions (Fig. 1). The great flexibility of this solid study  of structure allows large chemical substitutions [16] and makes  it  possible  that  the  sites  M1  and  M2  may  be empty as in Nb2(PO4)3 [17], partially occupied as in [18–20]  or  completely  full  as  in  Na4Zr2(SiO4)3  [21]. solutions  NaTi2(PO4)3– The  NaGe2(PO4)3 was carried out by Carrasco et al. [22], who observed a phase transition, as a function of the degree of substitution of Ge. In this paper, we report the  structural  characterisation  of  the  phases  in  the solid solution LiTi2 – xGex(PO4)3 (0 ≤ x < 2) using the powder X-ray diffraction and the Rietveld refinements and their microstructures using Scanning Electronic Microscopy. A comparative study is carried out with the phases of the Na analogue to explain the evolution of the NASICON compounds lattice parameters and the phase transition with the nature of the substituted cations.

Syntheses  of  LiTi2 – xGex(PO4)3  (x  =  0,  0.2–1.8) were carried out using conventional solid state reaction  techniques.  First,  stoichiometric  mixtures  of Li2CO3, (NH4)2HPO4, TiO2, and GeO2 were heated at 673 K for 6 h in order to decompose the ammonium phosphate  and  the  lithium  carbonate.  Structure  drawings  were  prepared using the Ballistic software [24]. The surface morphologies of the pellets were observed with scanning electron microscopy on a PHILIPS XL 30 apparatus.

The  unit-cell  parameters  determination  was obtained  by  full  pattern  decomposition  according  to the Le Bail method. The structural refinements were carried out with a polynomial function for the background, pseudo-Voigt function for the peak shape; the other refined parameters include scale factor, lattice parameters, atomic coordinates, and isotropic thermal parameters. The Ti and TiN cations were assumed to be  randomly  distributed  over  the  same  crystallographic  site,  with  the  respective  occupancies  corresponding to the nominal composition. Details of all the final structural models over the composition range are given in Table 1. For example, the final Rietveld plot for the composition x = 1 is presented in Fig. 2.

The X-ray diffraction patterns were recorded at room temperature with a D8Advance Diffractometer of Bruker AXS (CuKα radiation) equipped with a curved graphite monochromator in the secondary beam. The data were collected in the 4°–100° (2θ) range by steps of 0.02° and a counting time of 16 s per step. 

The  variation  of  the  a  lattice  parameter  of LiTi2 ‒ xGex(PO4)3 with the composition shows a clear change between compositions of x varying between 0 ≤ x < 1 and 1 < x < 2. This change divides the solid solutions into two parts, one rich in Ti(IV), x ≤ 1, with the behavior  the  compound NaTi2(PO4)3, and another part rich in Ge(IV), x > 1, with  the  behaviour  similar  to  that  of  the  compound NaGe2(PO4)3  [22].  This  change  does  not  take  place with the lattice parameter c, which decreases its value as the Ge(IV) content increases in both parts of the lattice  series. 

the  deconvolution  of  the  X-ray  diffraction  pattern, correspond very well to those calculated by the indexing  method,  which  implies  a  least-squares adjustment  to  from  the  positions  of  the  peaks.  The results obtained by the Rietveld method confirm that, on  the  one  hand,  the  behaviour  of  the  compound LiTiGe(PO4)3  is  similar  to  that  of  the  compound NaTi2(PO4)3 with similar distances and angles and, on the  other  hand,  the  Ti(IV)  and  Ge(IV)  atoms  are  randomly distributed on the same crystallographic position. The [Ti/Ge]O6 octahedra were contracted with respect to the TiO6 octahedra because of the slightly lower  Ge(IV)  ion  radius  (0.53  Å)  than  that  of  Ti(IV) (0.61 Å). In the compositions where x varies as 0 ≤ x ≤ 1,  the  site  M1  is  fully  occupied  while  the  site  M2  is empty.  The  space  group  R3c  is  here  preserved throughout the composition range. 

domain  1  <  x  <  2  the  M1  and  M2  sites  are  partially occupied, a phase transition is then observed towards the space group R3. An almost linear decrease in the parameters  a  and  c  is  noted  Fig. 3.  The  decrease  in interatomic distances in Ti/GeO6 octahedra (Table 2) is related to the decrease in the average cationic size of this substitution. The P–O distances (Table 2) are in good  agreement  with  those  generally  observed  in NASICON.  Li–O  bonds  (Table  2)  also  decreased slightly; the same evolution has been observed in other structures of NASICON, as pointed out, in particular, Miguel A. Paris et al. [25]. The details of NASICON structures have been discussed by some authors [26– 29].  In  conclusion,  LiTi2 – xGex(PO4)3  at  x  =  0–2 compositions  have  two  interrelated  structures,  one with R3c symmetry for Ti(IV) rich compositions (0 ≤ x < 1) and the other with R3 symmetry for compositions rich in Ge(IV) (1 < x < 2). SEM micrographs show

The presence of porosity is usual in such materials [30] and their densification requires hot pressure  sintering.  In  conclusion,  the  compositions LiTi2 – xGex(PO4)3  at  x =  0–2  have  two  interrelated structures, one with R3c symmetry for compositions rich in Ti(IV) (0 ≤ x < 1) and the other with R3 symmetry for compositions rich in Ge(IV) (1 < x < 2).

The  structural  study  of  LiTi2 – xGex(PO4)3  solid solution present a phase transition. For 0 ≤ x < 2 compositions, two interdependent structures are observed, one with R3c symmetry for compositions rich in Ti(IV) (0 ≤ x < 1) and the other with R3 symmetry for rich compositions  Ge(IV)  (1  <  x  <  2).