
Al/Y-substituted NASICON solid electrolytes are promising for novel solid state batteries. The solid solutions  Na1+2xAlxYxZr2-2x(PO4)3 and Na3+2xAlxYxZr2-2x(SiO4)2(PO4) (NAYZSiPx)  that  crystallize  in  this  structure  are  characterized  by  depth-sensitive  indentation 

technique  to  determine  their  micro-mechanical  properties.  NAYZPx  is  rhombohedral,  whereas 

NAYZSiPx  changes  from  monoclinic  to  rhombohedral  phase  depending  on  substitutional  level 

and temperature. For rhombohedral NAYZPx elastic moduli are in the range ~ 72 to 82 GPa and 

hardness values are in the range ~ 4.8 to 5.8 GPa, whereas for NAYZSiPx the elastic moduli are 

with  the  range  ~  72  to  88  GPa  and  hardness  ~  5.6  to  7.6  GPa,  respectively.  The  fracture 

toughness values for both systems, as determined by Vickers indentation, are rather independent 

of the applied load being with the range 1.30 to 1.58 MPa·m0.5. Cracks typically show a mixed 

intergranular/transgranular crack mode.  

Structural  stability  and  ionic  conductivity  makes  NASICON  (Na+  Super  Ionic  Conductor) 

materials  promising  for  the  application  as  solid  electrolytes  for  solid-state  sodium  batteries. 

Originally the system Na1+xZr2P3−xSixO12 (0  ≤ x  ≤ 3) has a minimum  Na+-ion resistivity of  ≤ 5 

Ω·cm at 300 °C, which is similar as that of the conventional sodium-ion conductor  β″-alumina  [1,2]. The crystal structure is rhombohedral ( 1)3 3) 4)) and tends, depending on composition, towards  a monoclinic distortion. There are several studies on synthesis, substitution and conductivity in 

literature (e.g. [3-6]); however, very few reports deal with the mechanical properties [7,8].

In  addition  to  high  ionic  conductivity,  a  solid  electrolyte  should  exhibit  necessary  mechanical 

reliability.  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  gain  more  knowledge  on  mechanical  performance  to 

warrant safety and reliability. It has been reported that Na-S batteries with β/β″-alumina revealed 

failure due to Na filaments that have propagated through the solid electrolyte [9-11]. In fact, the 

fracture  toughness  is  a  crucial  parameter  for  crack  growth  and  hence  potentially  for  short-

circuiting in solid-state batteries [12,13].

The indentation is a frequently used method to derive fracture toughness values, which requires 

only a small materials’ volume and simple specimens’ preparation. Cracks are induced by a sharp 

stylus, mostly Vickers or Berkovich type, and the length of the resultant cracks that are induced 

above a critical load is measured. For the fracture toughness calculation, due to the relationship to 

elastic and plastic volume, knowledge of elastic modulus and hardness is a prerequisite [14-15]. 

Furthermore, the elastic modulus is also a very important parameter when designing a solid-state 

battery  [16-22].  The  solid  electrolytes  should  deform  elastically  and  accommodate  internal 

stresses and should be able to assure a good electrode/electrolyte interface [23].  

Thus, the purpose of this study is the determination of the mechanical properties of NASICON 

solid  electrolyte  with  double  substitution  of  Zr4+  with  Al3+  and  Y3+  [24].  Elastic  modulus, 

hardness and fracture toughness are determined via indentation testing as function of the applied 

load, and potential correlations with substitution level and microstructural features are discussed.  


The  NASICON  solid  solutions  Na1+2xAlxYxZr2-2x(PO4)3  (NAYZPx,  0  ≤  x  ≤  0.25)  and 

Na3+2xAlxYxZr2-2x(SiO4)2(PO4) (NAYZSiPx, 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.3) were prepared using the Pechini method 

[5]. The obtained gels were fired at 600 °C for 3 h and amorphous precursors were formed and 

calcined  at  800  °C  for  12  h.  The  calcined  powders  were  milled  and  pressed  into  pellets.  The 

NAYZPx pellets were sintered at 1200 °C for 10 h in air, whereas the NAZYSiPx samples were 

exposed to a two-step sintering process, first at 1200 °C for 0.5 h and then at 1150 °C for 5 h in 

air.  More  details  of  synthesis  can  be  found  in  [24].  The  relative  density  of  the  specimens  was within the range 85 to 93%.

Phase purity of the sintered specimens was controlled by X-ray diffraction. Rietveld refinement 

was  performed  to  calculate  the  lattice  parameters  [24].  The  microstructure  was  characterized 

using  cross-sections  by  field  emission  scanning  electron  microscopy  (FE-SEM;  Zeiss  Merlin). 

The grain size distribution was determined using the software AnalySIS Pro based on the circular 

intercept segment mode. Electrical conductivity was measured using an impedance spectroscopy 

system  (Biologic,  VMP300)  from  -30  °C  to  100  °C  in  the  frequency  range  4  MHz  to  300  Hz 

using sputtered gold as blocking electrodes.

The  indentation  method  was  used  to  evaluate  hardness  (H),  elastic  modulus  (E)  and  fracture 

toughness (KIC). Cross-sections of pellets were embedded in epoxy resin and finely polished via 

alumina suspension. A matrix of 5 × 5 indentation imprints was performed for each load. H and E 

values based on Oliver-Pharr procedure [25] were obtained as function of the applied loads, i.e. at 

50 mN, 100 mN and 1000 mN, using a Fischer HC100 machine with a Vickers diamond tip, see 

also [26,27]. Poisson’s ratio for all compositions was assumed to be 0.27 [7].

The  fracture  toughness,  KIC,  was  derived  from  the  cracks  induced  from  the  corners  of 

indentations after loading to 1 N, 2.94 N, 4.9 N and 9.81 N. The dependence of cracks lengths 

and hence fracture toughness on the load was checked. Due to the load limitations, the Fischer 

HC100 machine  was  used only for 1 N, while for higher loads a  Micromet, Buehler  Ltd.,  was 

employed. KIC was derived on the basis of a Palmqvist crack system, since it was observed that 

crack  lengths  (l)  and  half-diagonals  (a)  were  in  the  range  0.25  ≤  5)  6)⁄ ≤  2.5. 

From the X-ray diffraction patterns it was identified that the NAYZPx are in rhombohedral phase  with  space  group   1)3 3) 4),  and  some  minor  secondary  phase  content  (YPO4,  AlPO4,  ZrO2)  for  x  being in the range of 0 to 0.15 and x equal to 0.25. In case of the sample with x = 0.20 the amount 

of YPO4 is unusual high, about 10 wt.%, and in case of x > 0.25 a continuous increase in YPO4 

and  Na3Y2(PO4)3  with  increasing  x  indicates  that  the  solid  solution  is  at  its  limit  [24].  For 

NAYZSiPx  a  monoclinic  structure  was  found  in  the  range  0  ≤  x  ≤  0.1  and  a  transition  to  a 

rhombohedral phase for 0.2 < x < 0.3, with a small amount of monoclinic ZrO2 detected in all 

compositions. Table 1 summarizes space group, lattice parameters and ionic conductivity (s ) at 

room temperature for all samples, where ahex and chex are the hexagonal lattice constants and ar is 

the rhombohedral lattice constant. 

The  microstructures  are  rather  homogeneous  with  small 

grain sizes, consistent and as expected for such powders obtained via the Pechini method. 

Figure  1 SEM  images  of  polished  cross-section  of  different  NAYZPx  and  NAYZSiPx. 

Granular  micro-cracks  appear  for  non  Si-substituted  compositions  NAYZPx  as  indicated 

by arrows. White ZrO2 and grey YPO4 secondary phases are also visible. The dark region 

between the grains is glassy phase. 