Stabilization of 4.5 V Cr4+/Cr3+ redox reaction in NASICON-type  Na3Cr2(PO4)3 by Ti substitution  Kosuke Kawai, a Daisuke Asakura,b Shin-ichi Nishimura,ab and Atsuo Yamada*ab 

Development  of  high-voltage  cathode  materials  composed  of  abundant  metals  for  rechargeable  batteries  is  a  crucial  task  to  realize  higher  energy  density  in  the  large-scale  electrical  energy  storages. Here we report a durable Cr4+/Cr3+ redox reaction at 4.5 V  vs.  Na/Na+  in  NASICON-type  Na2CrTi(PO4)3  (NCTP).  An  unstable  Cr4+/Cr3+ redox in Na3Cr2(PO4)3 is successfully stabilized by the Ti  substitution  to  Cr.  Charge/discharge  mechanism  of  NCTP  was  studied  by  powder  X-ray  diffraction  and  soft  X-ray  absorption  spectroscopy. 

Electrical  energy  storage  is  expected  to  be  an  ubiquitous  technology in modern society, and nowadays its application is  extending  to  electric  vehicles  or  large-scale  stationary  power  sources.1,2  Given  sustainable  supply,  sodium-ion  battery  employing abundant resources is a possible alternative for the  lithium-ion  battery.3,4  However,  electrochemical  current  potential of sodium metal plating is higher than that of lithium  by  0.33  V,  which  requires  higher  working  potential  at  the  cathode side.  While  approaching  to  4  V  operation  is  hard  in  layered  compounds,  numerous  polyanionic  compounds  have  been  discovered  as  4  V-class  cathode  materials  for  the  sodium-ion  battery.5,6  However,  most  of  them  rely  on  non-abundant  elements,  Co  and  Ni.7-9  To  put  the  sodium-ion  battery  into  ubiquitous  use,  the  material  design  based  on  the  earth  abundant  elements  is  necessary.  Following  a  report  on  Li3xCr2(PO4)3 by Herklotz et al.10, we have recently tested a sodium  analogue  Na3-xCr2(PO4)3  (NCP),  which  exhibited  reversible  electrochemical  sodium  intercalation  with  a  Cr4+/Cr3+  redox  reaction  at  4.5  V  vs.  Na/Na+.11  However,  the  electrochemical 

The spectra measured in TEY mode demonstrated  a similar behavior but was less remarkable compared to that in  the IPFY mode (Fig. S3). There were no signals relating to the  hexavalent  chromium  Cr(VI)  species,  characterized  by  a  distinctive peak at higher energy than that for Cr3+ by ca. 3 eV,  even by the surface-sensitive TEY mode at any charge/discharge  states.31  These  results  suggest  that  the  oxidation  state  of  chromium  in  the  bulk  varied  between  +3  and  +4  upon  charging/discharging.  Ex-situ  O K-edge  XAS  shown  in  Fig.  S4  exhibits  their  synchronized  changes  with  the  Cr  L2,3-edge  spectra,  possibly  reflecting  an  enhancement  of  the  ligand  to  metal charge-transfer as a result of oxidation from Cr3+(d3) to  Cr4+(d2) by (1) shortened Cr-O distance and enhanced Cr 3d-O  2p hybridization and (2) hole generation on the t2g orbital of  chromium.32-35 In contrast to these systematic changes of the 

For more deeper understanding, we simulated Cr and Ti L2,3edge XAS based in the CTM theory for evaluating the electronic  states.  The  simulated  spectra  for  Cr3+  and  Ti4+  were  in  good  agreement with the measured spectra for the pristine states as  shown in Fig. 5 (b) and Fig. S6, respectively. The CTM calculation  for the Cr4+ can reproduce a difference spectrum obtained from  scaled  spectra  for  the  full-discharged  and  full-charged  states  (Fig. 5 (c) and Fig. S7). These results support that the Cr4+/Cr3+  redox  couple  dominates  the  high-voltage  reaction  in  Na2xCrTi(PO4)3 and formation the toxic Cr(VI) species does not form  in this system.  In the material designing process, we expected an effect of Ti4+  as  an  alleviator  for  the  structural  distortions  upon  Na+  uptake/removal.