Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) is prepared through co-precipitation and sintered at various temperatures (650 ~ 900°C). Impurity formation is aﬀected by the sintering temperature. Although impurity formation is observed in all the samples, it becomes more prominent at high sintering temperatures. The crystallinity of LAGP increased with the sintering temperature as evidenced by SEM observations, which show that the edges of the grains become sharper with increases in the sintering temperature. However, the formation of pores is also observed in the pellets sintered at 850°C and 900°C. As a result, the highest Li ion conductivity (7.8 × 10−5 S cm−1) is obtained when the sintering temperature is 800°C due to the high crystallinity of LAGP and absence of pore formation. This conductivity value is comparable to previously reported values and LAGP synthesis temperature is 400°C lower than required by the melt-quenching method. The co-precipitation method is a promising method for the preparation of LAGP solid electrolytes at low temperatures.

All-solid-state batteries with nonﬂammable ceramic electrolytes are expected to solve the safety issues of current commercial Li batteries [1–4]. Na superionic conductor (NASICON)-type oxide-based solid electrolytes [5,6] as well as perovskite-type [7,8] and garnettype [9,10] solid electrolytes are considered to be promising solid electrolytes due to their reasonably high Li ion conductivity. LATP (Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3) with the NASICON structure which can be formed by partial substitution of Al3+ for Ti4+ in LiTi2(PO4)3 exhibits especially high Li ion conductivity in the order of ~10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature [11,12]. We have investigated the preparation of LATP solid electrolytes using the co-precipitation method. Co-precipitation can be deﬁned as simultaneous precipitation of a normally soluble component with a macrocomponent from the same solution by the formation of mixed crystals through adsorption and occlusion of mechanical entrapment [13]. We found that the sintering temperature could be reduced by 150°C using the co-precipitation method and that PO4 sources largely inﬂuenced the properties of LATP [14–16].

It is also well known, however, that LATP-based materials react with Li metal at around 2.5 V vs. Li+/Li due to Ti4+/Ti3+ reduction [17], restricting the selection of negative electrodes for all-solid-state batteries with the LATP solid electrolytes. In the same NASICON group, Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) has a wider electrochemical window because Ge4+ is more diﬃcult to reduce than Ti4+. LAGP also possesses a high Li ion conductivity of 3.38 × 10−4 S cm−1 [18]. So far, LAGP solid electrolytes have been prepared using the meltquenching [19–22], solid-state reaction [23,24], and solgel [25] methods. The co-precipitation method makes the materials react uniformly at the molecular level and oﬀers lower polycrystallinesynthesized temperatures and shorter sintering times. These lower synthesized temperatures and shorter sintering times enable a reduction in process costs for LAGP production. The co-precipitation method has not, however, been applied to the preparation of LAGP solid electrolytes, yet.

In this study, the co-precipitation method was applied for the preparation of LAGP solid electrolytes. The LAGP solid electrolyte was successfully prepared through the co-precipitation method, and its conductivity was comparable to the reported values.

LAGP solid electrolyte was prepared by the coprecipitation method. Li2C2O4 and Al(NO3)3∙9H2O were dissolved in deionized water and the solution was heated at 80°C. Ten percent excess amount of Li was added to compensate the evaporation of Li during heat treatment. NH4HCO3 solution was dropped into the solution under vigorous stirring to obtain a cothe co-precipitation had dried, precipitation. After

The as-prepared and milled powders and the sintered pellets were subjected to X-ray diﬀraction (XRD, Rigaku Ultima-IV) measurement using Cu Kα radiation to identify their crystal phases. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL, JSM-6300LA) was used to observe the morphologies of the powders and the pellet crosssections.

The Li ion conductivity was measured by the AC impedance method. Both surfaces of the sintered pellets were polished to obtain ﬂat surfaces and to control their thickness. Prior to measurement, Au was sputtered onto both sides of the pellet to prepare Li blocking electrodes and to ensure electrical contact

The AC impedance data were collected at ±10mV of voltage signals in the frequency range of 100∼1 MHz using a (HIOKI Chemical Impedance Meter 3352–80). Measurement was performed at 30°C.

In both cases, a broad peak was observed at 2θ = 20° to 40° and the absence of any clear diﬀraction peak due to the amorphous nature of the samples was conﬁrmed. SEM images of as-prepared powders before and after ball-milling are depicted in Figure 2. Before ball-milling, particles with about 500 nm ~ 1 μm were aggregated to form secondary particles whose diameters were about 10 μm. After ball-milling, the particle size was reduced to ~100 nm. The ball-milling process eﬀectively reduced the particle size, leading to easy sintering in the next process.

Ball-milling power was supplied for pellet preparation. Figure 3 displays XRD patterns of LAGP pellets sintered at various temperatures. Compared with the standard peaks of LiGe2(PO4)3 with the rhombohedral NASICON structure (PDF 80–1922), most of the peaks can be assigned to LAGP, however, small impurities were also observed (Figure 4(a–c)). After sintering at 650°C, AlPO4 formation was conﬁrmed by a shoulder peak at 2θ = 21.77°. This AlPO4 formation was observed in all the samples. With increases in the sintering temperature, further impurities were formed. After sintering at 700°C, a peak of Li4Ge5O12 was conﬁrmed. This peak was also observed in samples sintered at 750°C, however, it disappeared after sintering at 800°C. Peaks attributed to GeO2 were conﬁrmed with sintering at 750°C and the peaks became more intense with increases in the sintering temperature.

Small pores (<1 μm) were distributed throughout the whole pellet. On the contrary, pore formation was rarely observed in pellets sintered at below 850°C.

The relative densities of LAGP pelltes sintered at various temperatures are tabulated in Table 1. The relative density increased with the sintering temperature up to 800°C due to the enhancement of the

With further increases in the sintering temperature, the relative density declined because of pore formation.

The Li ion conductivity of LAGP pellets sintered at various temperatures was measured by the electrochemical impedance method. Complex impedance plots of the samples are depicted in Figure 6. In all the spectra, a semicircle and a tail were observed in the highand low-frequency ranges, respectively. This characteristic proﬁle of the impedance plot often appears in ceramics that are ion conductive in nature [26,27]. The intercepts of the semicircles in the highand low-frequency ranges are assigned to the inner crystal (bulk) and total (inner crystal and grain boundary) impedances, respectively. The estimated bulk (σb), grain-boundary (σgb) and total (σtotal) conductivity values are tabulated in Table 2 and summarized in Figure 7. Bulk conductivity increased with the sintering temperature, reached the maximum at 800°C (1.0 × 10−3 S cm−1) and then decreased. The same behavior was observed for grain-boundary conductivity. As a result, the highest total conductivity (7.8 × 10−5 S cm−1) was obtained in pellets sintered at 800°C.

The preparation of LAGP solid electrolytes through coprecipitation was studied. The sintering temperature strongly ion conductivity.

Impurities are thought to block Li ion migration, resulting in a reduction in Li ion conductivity (increase in resistance). A high concentration of the impurities is therefore another possible reason for the decrease in Li ion conductivity at high sintering temperatures.

The highest bulk and total Li ion conductivity of LAGP prepared through co-precipitation were 1.0 × 10−3 and 7.8 × 10−5 S cm−1, respectively, obtained at 800°C. 

This study veriﬁed that the sintering temperature inﬂuences the Li ion conductivity of LAGP solid electrolytes prepared through co-precipitation. It also showed that the co-precipitation method can reduce the sintering temperature compared with that of the conventional melt-quenching and sol-gel methods. The co-precipitation method is thus a good choice for the preparation of LAGP solid electrolytes at low temperatures.

LAGP solid electrolytes were prepared through coprecipitation and sintered at various temperatures (650 ~ 900°C). Impurity formation was inﬂuenced by Impurities were observed in all the samples, but they became more prominent at high sintering temperatures. Crosssections of morphology of sintered pellets clearly showed increases in crystallinity with increases in the sintering temperature. However, pore formation was also observed in LAGP pellets sintered at 850°C and 900°C. As a result, the highest Li ion conductivity (7.8 × 10−5 S cm−1) was obtained when the sintering temperature was 800°C due to the high crystallinity of LAGP and absence of pore formation. This conductivity to previously

The co-precipitation method is thus a promising method for the preparation of LAGP solid electrolytes at low temperatures.