Given the extensive efforts focused on protecting the environment, eco-friendly 

cathode materials are prerequisite for development of Na-ion battery technology. Such 

materials  should  contain  abundant  and  inexpensive  elements.  In  the  paper,  we  present 

NASICON-Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3  (y=0,  0.1,  0.2,  0.3,  0.4)  cathode  materials,  which  meet 

these  requirements.  Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3  compounds  were  prepared  via  a  solid-state 

reaction  at  600oC,  which  allowed  to  obtain  powders  with  submicron  particles.  The 

presence of manganese in the iron sublattice inhibits phase transitions, which occurs at 

~95oC and ~145oC in Na3Fe2(PO4)3, changing the monoclinic structure to rhombohedral 

and  affecting  the  structural  and  transport  properties.  The  chemical  stability  of  Na3Fe2-

yMny(PO4)3 was thus  higher than that of Na3Fe2(PO4)3, and it also  exhibited enhanced 

structural,  transport  and  electrochemical  properties.  The  observed  correlation  between 

chemical composition and electrochemical properties proved the ability to precisely tune 

the  crystal  structure  of  NASICONs,  allowing  cathode  materials  with  more  desirable 

properties to be designed. 


Given  the  continuously  growing  demand  for  Li-ion  batteries  (LiBs)  and  the 

associated depletion contraction of global lithium reserved 1,2, alternative energy storage 

technologies are being urgently sought. As a consequence, intensive research on materials 

that can be used in Na-ion Batteries (NiBs) is being resumed. This type of batteries bears 

a  strong  resemblance  to  LiBs  in    terms  of  physical  and  electrochemical  properties. 

Recently,  along  with  the  broadly  investigated  layered  sodium  oxides  3–7,  three-

dimensional polyanionic structures, such as phosphates 8–29, have been of great interest 

on  account  of  their  properties,  notably  thermal  and  chemical  stability  (a  resulting  of 

covalent  bonding  in  PO43 anion  units).  Due  to  the  contemporary  issues  related  to 

environmental pollution, new energy storage technologies must not only cheap, but also 

environment-friendly. In this regard, iron phosphates are among the safest materials that 

can  be  applied  in  NiBs,  as  they  consist  of  ecologically  inert  and  abundant  elements. 

Numerous  reports  have  recently  been  published  on  sodium  iron  phosphates,  including 

NASICON materials 8,9,18–28, alluaudites 10–13,29, olivines 14–17 , or other three-dimensional 

structures  30–32.  Of  all  such  materials,  NASICON  structures  with  the  general  formula 

Na3M2(PO4)3  (M  =  3d  metal)  seem  to  be  particularly  promising  cathode  materials  for 

NiBs. This is especially true of Na3V2(PO4)3, interestingly, is also considered as an anode 

material 28. Compared to triphylite-NaFePO4 (an electrochemically active type of olivine 

structure),  which  may  be  obtained  via  a  complex  multi-step  process  involving  the chemical  delithiation  of  LiFePO4  and  electrochemical  sodiation  14,33–35,  NASICON-

Na3Fe2(PO4)3 is obtained via a relatively simple solid-state synthesis 20,36.  

NASICON-Na3M2(PO4)3  materials  with  various  3d  metals  in  the  M  sublattice 

were investigated at the end of the 1980s by de la Rochére 8,37 and later by Lyubutin 38 

and  Belkhiria  36.  Two  reversible  phase  transitions  were  discovered  upon  heating  of 

Na3M2(PO4)3:  one  from  the  distorted  C2/c  α-phase  through  to  the  interim  β-phase  at 

~95oC, and the another at ~145oC to the R-3c γ-phase. In the low-temperature monoclinic-

Na3Fe2(PO4)3 structure, sodium Na(1), Na(2) and Na(3) positions are occupied. During 

the phase transition to the high-temperature rhombohedral structure, the sodium from the 

Na(1)  positions  are  gradually  transferred  to  Na(2)  positions,  causing  the  relaxation  of 

monoclinic distortion.8 Research conducted by Masquelier and co-workers 24 revealed the 

presence of a superstructure in Na3Fe2(PO4)3 (and also in isostructural Na3Ti2(PO4)3) at 

room temperature. Several crystal models of the superstructure were proposed including 

unit cells with Cc 39–41 and C2/c 8,9,18,19,38 symmetry, with the latter being larger equivalent 

of the usual C2/c unit cell.  

In this paper, Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3 NASICON materials with different content of 

manganese substituted in the iron sublattice were proposed as cathode materials for Na-

ion  batteries.  Manganese  substitution  had  already  been  reported  in  other  three-

dimensional structures, such as alluaudites  42, or triphylites  14,43 but, to the best of our 

knowledge,  only  two  papers  that  confirm  formation  of  NASICON-Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3 

have  been  published  thus  far  44,45.  The  present  paper  describes  a  facile  solid-state 

synthesis method used to obtain Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3 materials and an investigation of the 

structural, microstructural and thermal properties for y=0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4. The impact of  manganese  substitution  impact  on  the  phase  transitions  and  transport  properties  in 

Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3 materials is discussed extensively.  

A solid state reaction was employed for the synthesis of Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3 (y=0, 

0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4) samples. The starting materials were CH3COONa (anhydrous, <99%, 

POCH),  FePO4  dihydrate  (Fe  29%,  Sigma-Aldrich),  NH4H2PO4  (99%,  POCH)  and 

MnCO3 (anhydrous, 99.9%, Chempur). The substrates were ball-milled in a high-energy 

Spex SamplePrep 8000M mill in propan-2-ol for 30 min, and then dried for 6h in air at 

80oC. The obtained homogeneous powders were pressed into disk-shaped pellets with a 

diameter of 13mm using uniaxial press, and heated at 600oC for 10 h under a continuous 

flow of synthetic air. 

The crystal structure of the synthesized samples was investigated by means of X-

ray  powder  diffraction  at  ambient  and  high-temperatures  (RT-XRD  and  HT-XRD, 

respectively) using a PANalytical Empyrean diffractometer with Cu Kα monochromatic 

radiation (0.15418 nm) additionally equipped with a HT-XRD Anton Paar HTK 1200N 

oven-chamber. Unit cell parameters were determined according to the Rietveld method 

as implemented in the GSAS software with the EXPGUI interface 46,47. The morphology 

of the Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3 samples was examined using an SEM/BSE technique combined 

with EDS analysis using the FEI Nova NanoSEM 200 scanning electron microscope. In 

addition, laser diffraction was employed to determine the particle size distribution, with 

the Mastersizer 3000 analyzer and distilled water as a dispersant.  

X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were carried out using a 

VSW spectrometer with Al Kα radiation (hν = 1486.6 eV). The XPS data were analyzed using  the  XPSPEAK  4.1  software  provided  by  Raymund  W.M.  Kwok  (Chinese 

The  57Fe  transmission  Mössbauer  spectroscopy  (TMS)  was  applied  in  order  to 

analyze the oxidation state of iron. The TMS spectra were collected using a spectrometer 

equipped with a 57Co-in-Rh standard source with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) 

In order to investigate the thermal properties of the samples, differential scanning 

calorimetry (DSC) and thermogravimetric (TGA) measurements were carried out using 

the NETZSCH Pegasus® 404 F3 and TA Instruments Q5000IR, respectively.  

The total electrical conductivity was measured over the temperature range of in 

30 – 160°C for the disk-shaped pellets, via electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, with 

the  Probostat  holder  (NorECs,  Norway)  used  in  combination  with  the  Solartron  1260 

frequency  response  analyzer.  The  data  were  collected  over  the  range  from  0.1  Hz  to 

1 MHz range and then analyzed with the ZView software 50.  

Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3  cathodes  were  composed  of  75wt.%  of  active  material, 

20wt.%  of  conductive  carbon  black  (Alfa  Aesar,  99.99%)  and  5wt.%  polyvinylidene 

fluoride  (PVDF,  Sigma-Aldrich,  99.9%)  as  a  binder.  N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone  (NMP, 

Sigma-Aldrich, 99.5%) was added as a solvent. The slurry was mixed for 12 hours, then 

spread on Al foil and dried in Heraeus® VT6025 vacuum dryer at 70oC. The as-prepared 

cathode  materials  were  used  to  assemble  the  CR2032  coin  cells  with  metallic  sodium 

(sticks,  Alfa  Aesar,  99.9%)  as  an  anode  and  1M  NaPF6  (Sigma-Aldrich,  99.99%)  in ethylene  carbonate  (EC,  Sigma-Aldrich  99%)  with  diethyl  carbonate  (DEC,  Sigma-

Aldrich, 99%) at a 1:1 volume ratio as an electrolyte. The initial electrochemical tests of 

the  assembled  cells  included  cyclic  charging/discharging  under  various  current  loads 

(C/10, C/5, C/2, 1C and 2C), performed using the KEST k32k amperostat/galvanostat. 

The  XRD  measurements  of  the  prepared  NASICON-Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3  (y=0, 

0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4) samples were carried out over the 10o-110o range. An initial analysis of 

the obtained patterns (Fig. 1) indicates that all of the materials crystallize in a NASICON-

type structure, however, an unidentified contamination was observed, manifesting itself 

by in the presence of small reflections near the 33o 2θ angle, which had also been reported 

by Rajagopalan et al. 39. Although the available literature reports 36,39,44 show that similar 

materials  form  the  NASICON  group  may  synthesize  in  pure  form,  the  required 

temperatures are higher than 750oC. It should be noted that the discussed materials are 

intended for use as cathodes in Na-ion battery technology and high temperature treatment 

may  cause  unintended  grain  coarsening.  Applying  the  relatively  low  temperature  of 

synthesis  (600oC)  allows  undesirable  grain  size  growth  to  be  avoided,  which  should 

subsequently yield improved electrochemical performance. 

As reported previously 23,24,27,37,38, Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3 material is characterized by 

the  following  types  of  unit  cells:  an  α-monoclinic  cell  with  C2/c  symmetry  at  lower 

temperatures, a β-intermediate cell at moderate temperatures, and a γ-rhombohedral with 

R-3c  symmetry  at  high  temperatures.  All  of  the  patterns  collected  in  the  present  work 

were  refined  with  both  C2/c  and  R-3m  type  cells;  however,  only  refinement  with  the 

monoclinic  cell  allowed  for  proper  refinement  of  some  of  the  features  present  in  the 

diffraction patterns. Firstly, the presence of the small (110) reflection at ca. 12.5° 2θ (Fig. 

1a), which relative intensity decays with increasing manganese content, and for y=0.4 it 

can  hardly  be  observed.  Secondly,  substantial  changes  in  the  intensities  that  can  be 

observed at 32° 2θ has been explained only when fractional positions of oxygen ions have 

been refined, indicating rotations of PO4 and Fe(Mn)O6 coordination polyhedrons. It is 

important  that  additional  refinement  of  fractional  positions  and  site  occupancies  for 

sodium ions have not influenced significantly relative intensities of reflections at 2θ≈32°. 

This  indicates  that  all  of  the  obtained  Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3  materials  crystallize  in  a 

NASICON  structure  with  monoclinic  symmetry  rather  than  the  rhombohedral  one. 

However,  the  extent  of  monoclinic  distortion  seems  to  decrease  with  increasing 

manganese content. 

The monoclinic unit cell parameters of the discussed materials  are presented in 

Fig. 1b. The obtained values are consistent with those previously reported in the literature 

37. For increased manganese content in the samples (y), an increase in parameters b and c 

is observed. For the a parameter no significant changes are observed, except in the case 

of y=0.4, for which the value is significantly higher than for the rest of the series. For the 

β angle, an initial decrease is observed, but the tendency changes for y=0.3. The decrease 

in  the  β  angle  values  for  y<0.3  indicates  reduced  monoclinic  distortion,  which  is 

consistent with the diminishing low angle reflection (Fig. 1a). A more detailed analysis 

of the monoclinic distortion evolution with sample composition is presented in the next 

section, which concerns high-temperature XRD measurements (HT-XRD). 

In order to investigate the evolution of the crystal structure of NASICON-Na3Fe2-

yMny(PO4)3  with  temperature  as  a  function  of  manganese  content  DSC  and  HT-XRD 

measurements were performed.  

The  results  of    DSC  measurements  (Fig.  2)  indicate  two  phase  transitions 

occurring at ca. 95oC and 145oC for Na3Fe2(PO4)3, which is consistent with prior literature 

38.  Declining  peaks  were  observed  for  the  samples  with  Mn  substitution  in  the  iron 

sublattice.  The  observed  thermal  effects  might  be  attributed  to  polymorphic  phase 

transitions  in  the  studied  materials.  Fig.  S1a  and  Fig.  S2a  present  the  evolution  of  the 

(110)  reflection  discussed  for  room-temperature  XRD  patterns.  The  reflection  is  most 

noticeable for y=0, and its relative intensity diminishes both with increased manganese 

content and the temperature. In Fig. S1b and Fig. S2b, changes that occur in a group of 

reflections located between 19.5 and 21° are shown: (202̅) and (111) at lower 2θ values; 

(311̅) and (020) at higher 2θ values. For y=0, the increase in temperature is accompanied 

by a pronounced splitting of their positions,  with a simultaneous slight decrease of the 

relative intensity of lower angle reflections. A similar tendency is observed for the other 

materials, for which, however, the relative intensity of the higher angle reflections also 

seems to diminish with increasing manganese content at each temperature. 

The performed DSC measurements as well as both RT-XRD and HT-XRD results 

strongly  suggest  that  manganese  addition  tends  to  mitigate  monoclinic  distortion.  To 

validate this hypothesis, a detailed Rietveld analysis was performed. However, to evaluate 

the results, certain numerical criteria for what  constitutes a phase transition need to be 

introduced first. 

As previously mentioned, the analyzed materials might be described as having a 

monoclinic  cell  with  C2/c  symmetry  and  rhombohedral  cell  with  R-3c.  However,  the 

latter can be considered a special case of the first one, which means that the R-3c cell 

might be described as a C2/c cell with specific parameters. The relations between the two 

unit cells for perfect rhombohedral symmetry are as follows: aM = √3 ∙ aR, bM = aR, 3 ∙

cM ∙ sinβM⁡= cR and βM ≈ 124.6°,⁡where aM, bM, cM and βM are the parameters of the 

monoclinic cell, and aR and cR represent the parameters of the rhombohedral one. Given 

these  dependences,  the  criteria  for  the  phase  transition  can  be  are  formulated:  (1)  any 

deviation of the aM/bM ratio from the value of √3 indicates distortion within the aMbM 

planes; (2) any deviation of βM from the value of 124.6 indicates distortion in a direction 

orthogonal to the aMbM planes. Based on these criteria, all HT-XRD patterns were refined 

using the monoclinic cell.

The evolution of the βM parameter of the monoclinic cell is shown in Fig. 3a. For 

all the samples, the βM angle tends to the value of 124.6° at highest temperatures, which 

is the value required for perfect rhombohedral symmetry in the analyzed NASICON-type 

materials. The most pronounced changes are observed for y=0 and y=1 samples. Over the 

same temperature range, a significant drop in the aM/bM ratio is also observed (Fig. 3b) 

for all samples except the one for which y=0.4.  

The horizontal lines indicate the values of the angle and 

the aM/bM ratio required for perfect rhombohedral symmetry. Monoclinic distortion 

decrease both with increase of the temperature and manganese content y, except of the 

y=0.4 sample, which shows different properties from all other of the samples. 

The  observed  changes  in  cell  parameters  indicate  that  all  samples  except 

Na3Fe1.6Mn0.4(PO4)3 undergo a phase transition, resulting in increased cell symmetry. 

The evolution of the crystal structure of the material for which y=0.4 requires a 

separate discussion. The results of the performed analysis show that the properties for this 

material differ substantially from those of the others of samples. Although the absence of 

the (110) reflection  (Fig. S1a and Fig. S2a) may  suggest  rhombohedral  symmetry, the 

high value of the βM angle (Fig. 3a) and the aM/bM ratio (Fig. 3b) shows that monoclinic 

distortion  is  actually  the  most  pronounced  in  the  case  of  this  sample.  The  lack  of  low 

angle reflection results from specific atomic fractional positions within the monoclinic 

cell, and not from the values of cell parameters per se. This result is consistent with the 

Mössbauer studies, which are presented in another section of the text, but it contradicts 

the  findings  presented  in  work  44,  the  authors  of  which  had  suggested  that 

Na3.4Fe1.6Mn0.4(PO4)3  exhibits  rhombohedral  symmetry  (the  γ  phase)  at  room 

temperature. It must be noted that synthesis attempts had been made to obtain materials 

with  manganese  content  higher  than  that  corresponding  to  y=0.4,  but  they  resulted  in 

failure, since multi-phase samples were obtained. Apparently, in the conditions applied during the synthesis, the material with y=0.4 material is near the end of the substitution 

range and this may result in its peculiar properties.  

The described structural phenomena might be correlated with the presented DSC 

results (Fig. 2). The most pronounced DSC peaks were recorded for y=0 and y=0.1, in 

the  case  of  which  the  strongest  deviations  from  the  linear  character  of  βM  angle  was 

observed (Fig. 3a). On the other hand, it seems that there is no relation with the aM/bM 

ratio (Fig. 3b) and the DSC results. Altogether, this suggests that the observed thermal 

effects  are  related  exclusively  to  structural  monoclinic  distortion  in  the  direction 

orthogonal to the aMbM planes. 

The  above-presented  analysis  shows  that  none  of  the  materials  achieves 

rhombohedral symmetry (the γ phase), regardless of the chemical composition and the 

temperature,  and  that  the  low  temperature  phase  transition  is  highly  anisotropic. 

Nevertheless, important conclusions can be drawn with regard to the application of the 

studied  NASICON-Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3  materials  as  cathodes in  Na-ion  battery technology.  It  is  generally  accepted  39  that  higher  symmetry  in  NASICON  materials 

results in higher ionic conductivity. Below 75oC, which is the temperature at which the 

observed phase transition starts to occur, the materials for which y=0.2 and y=0.3 exhibit 

almost  perfect  rhombohedral  symmetry  within  aMbM  planes  (Fig.  3b)  and  the  least 

pronounced monoclinic  distortion in  the direction orthogonal  to  the planes (the lowest 

values of βM angle in C2/c, Fig. 3a). Consequently, the highest symmetry in the operating 

temperature  range  of  Na-ion  batteries  and  thus  the  best  transport  properties  might  be 

expected for  y=0.2  and  y=0.3. The statement is  supported by the determined  transport 

properties presented in section 3.4. 

The electrochemical properties of cathode materials for Na-ion batteries are highly 

dependent  on  grain  size  and  their  morphology.  To  investigate  the  morphology  of  the 

synthesized samples SEM/EDS analysis was conducted on Na3FeyMn2-y(PO4)3  powders, 

which were obtained by  grinding of the sintered pellets using a mortar and pestle. The 

resulting images are presented in Fig. 4 and Fig. S5 and the histograms of the grain size 

distributions are shown in Fig. S6. The relatively low temperature of synthesis allowed 

relatively  small  and  uniform  grains  with  a  diameter  between  200  nm  and  2  μm  to  be 

obtained, with the most frequent grain size of ca. 500 nm. The grains were round-shaped 

and had a tendency to agglomerate. The EDS spectra revealed an uniform distribution of 

all expected chemical elements, however, reliable quantitative analysis was not possible 

due to  morphological  effects.  Additionally, presence  of  a small  amount of carbon was 

observed  in  the  EDS  spectra,  which  could  be  explained  as  resulting  from  the  carbon 

adhesive tape used to fix the powder under the samples.

In order to evaluate the tendency to agglomerate observed in the SEM images of 

the prepared powders, particle size distribution in the as-synthesized Na3FeyMn2-y(PO4)3 

powder samples was investigated using laser scattering. The results are presented in Fig. 

5 and Table S1. The observed particle size distributions were composed of two distinct 

regimes:  relatively  narrow  maximum  in  the  0.4  –  1.5  μm  range,  plausibly  linked  with 

primary particles and a much broader feature in the range 1.5 – ca. 100 μm composed of 

several  close  to  each  other  maxima.  The  later  maxima  can  be  coupled  with  secondary 

agglomerates.  It  seems  that  manganese  substitution,  especially  in  the  high  substitution 

level  (y=0.4),  caused  a  reduction  in  the  number  of  larger  particles,  suggesting  that manganese substitution can result in  lower agglomeration, which can be beneficial  for 

functional properties as a cathode material. 


For all samples from the Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3 (y=0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4) group, 57Fe 

TMS spectra were recorded (Fig. 6) and fitted using one paramagnetic doublet. Table S2. 

lists the Mössbauer parameter values, which indicate the occurrence of ferric iron (Fe3+) 

in an octahedral oxygen surrounding (FeO6) 51. It must be noted that no additional peaks 

in  TMS  spectra  were  observed,  which  confirms  the  successful  substitution  with 

manganese  atoms  in  iron  sublattice.  These  observations  are  in  good  agreement  with 

previously published results 38,52. It can be noticed that the QS (quadrupole splitting) and 

Γ  (spectra  linewidth)  values  increase  with  manganese  content,  which  is  probably associated with the increasing distortion of the FeO6 octahedra stemming from changes 

in interatomic distances. The local distortion in FeO6 octahedra may also be associated 

with the slightly broadened absorption lines observed in the TMS spectra for y>0.1. The 

QS  values  of  Mn-substituted  samples  contribute  to  the  α  phase  (C2/c  space  group)  at  

room temperature, which is also confirmed by the structural analysis. 

Low  intensity manganese peaks were detected in the survey XPS spectra for Mn-substituted samples, 

which was in line with expectations. In the Na 1s spectra (Fig. S8c), there are two peaks 

corresponding to sodium atoms in two different crystallographic positions. Due to spin-

orbit coupling, the Fe 2p spectra (Fig. S8d) were refined with two component lines: 2p3/2 

and 2p1/2, as well as the satellite lines associated with them. As seen in the Fig. S8d, the 

peaks that originate from Fe 2p3/2 occur at ca. 712 eV and are narrower than 2p1/2 peaks 

(occurring at ~725 eV), which was previously studied 53–55. Further analysis indicated that 

the binding energies of the 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 peaks in all of the samples represent the Fe3+ 

valence  state,  which  corresponds  to  the  results  of  the  conducted  Mössbauer 

measurements.  For  the  Mn-doped  samples  two  spectral  lines  are  observed:  an  Mn  2p 

doublet similar to that observed for Fe and a weak Mn 3s photoelectron line (Fig. 7a and 

b). The values of binding energy measured for Mn 2p1/2 and Mn 2p3/2 (ca. 652 eV and 

641  eV,  respectively)  indicate  the  manganese  oxidation  state  of  3+.  Due  to  the  small 

concentration  of  manganese  in  Na3Fe1.8Mn0.2(PO4)3,  the  Mn  3s  photoelectron  line  is 

indistinct, however, it is clearly visible for Na3Fe1.6Mn0.4(PO4)3 sample. In both cases the 

splitting of the Mn 3s peak is observed, due to the coupled 3d valence band. The growth 

of manganese concentration in the structure contributes to an increase in the magnitude 

of  Mn  3s  peak  splitting  (ΔE3s)  56,57.  The  values  of  ΔE3s  are  5.1  and  5.7  for 

Na3Fe1.8Mn0.2(PO4)3 and Na3Fe1.6Mn0.4(PO4)3, respectively. These values could indicate 

that manganese exhibits mixed 2+/3+ valence. Due to the fact that the Mössbauer studies 

revealed only the presence of Fe3+ in all of the samples, the Mn3+ oxidation state was also 

expected.  The  presence  of  Mn2+  might  be  attributed  to  a  charge  compensation  effect resulting  from  the  small  excess  of  sodium,  used  during  the  synthesis  to  prevent 

evaporation,  hence  the  composition  of  the  studied  NASICON  samples  may  be  written 

schematically as Na3+xFe2-y2+(PO4)3, where x is the content of Mn2+, which 

is  equal  to  the  excess  of  sodium.  The  exact  sodium  amount  (3+x)  was  calculated  for 

selected samples based on Mn2+ content determined from iodometric titration method, as 

described in previous papers 49,58–60. The results, listed in Table 1, confirm the hypothesis 

concerning the presence of Mn2+ in studied samples.  


The  electrochemical impedance  spectra  of  Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3  and the corresponding  equivalent  circuit  are  presented  in  Fig.  8a.  It  must  be  noted  that 

(R1CPE1)CPE2 is  the  basic  model,  which  was  then  modified  depending  on  semi-circle 

shape. The spectrum shape for Na3Fe2(PO4)3 is consistent with that reported in another 

works 61,62 and indicates that transport in NASICON materials is thermally activated and 

mediated  by  bulk  and  grain  boundaries.  Fig.  8b  shows  the  temperature  dependence  of 

total  electrical  conductivity  of  Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3  in  an  Arrhenius  plot.  For  y=0  and 

y=0.1,  the  phase  transition  discussed  in  earlier  sections  divides  the  temperature 

dependence into two ranges with two different activation energies (inset): low(LT) and 

high-temperature  (HT)  regions.  However,  the  phase  transition  is  less  noticeable  for 

Na3Fe1.9Mn0.1(PO4)3  and  it  finally  decays  with  higher  manganese  content,  which 

corresponds to the data presented in section 3.1.2 and the structural results. The values of 

electrical conductivity at room temperature and activation energies are presented in Table 

Due  to  potential  application  in  sodium-ion  batteries,  which  operate  at 

temperatures <75oC, the activation energies listed for y=0 and y=0.1 are those specific to 

the  LT  region.  The  highest  total  electrical  conductivity  (9.5·10-7  and  4.3·10-7  S·cm-1, 

respectively)  and    subsequently  the  lowest  activation  energies  (0.36  and  0.44eV, 

respectively)  were  determined  for  y=0.2  and  y=0.3. This  hypothesis  was 

proved by the above-discussed total electrical conductivity studies. 

The  charge/discharge  curves  (Fig.  9b)  for  Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3  system  indicate 

high  reversibility  of  deintercalation/intercalation  processes,  which  is  one  of  the  key 

factors for Na-ion application. The combination of discharge capacities as a function of 

the  cycle  number  for  all  cells  is  depicted  in  Fig.  9a.  A  significant  improvement  in 

electrochemical performance is visible for Na3Fe1.8Mn0.2(PO4)3 and Na3Fe1.7Mn0.3(PO4)3 

as compared to Na3Fe2(PO4)3, whereas for other compositions deterioration is observed. 

The presented electrochemical properties clearly correlate with the findings of transport 

analysis and the calculated activation energies, which are the lowest for y=0.2 and y=0.3 and  high  for  y=0,  y=0.1  and  y=0.4.  Moreover,  the  transport  and  the  electrochemical 

analyses are in excellent agreement with the structural analysis presented in section 3.1.2. 

For  y=0.2  and  y=0.3 the  smallest distortion  below 75oC was observed both within the 

aMbM planes, as well as in the orthogonal direction. This is a solid confirmation of the 

stated hypothesis that a reduction in monoclinic distortion should have a positive impact 

on the electrochemical performance of NASICON-Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3 materials. 

NASICON-Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3  (y=0,  0.1,  0.2,  0.3,  0.4)  materials  were 

successfully synthesized and evaluated as potential cathode materials for Na-ion batteries. 

Due  to  the  relatively  low  synthesis  temperature  (600oC),  the  obtained  materials  are 

composed  of  submicron  grains  with  agglomerates  slightly  exceeding  1μm  in  diameter 

which is desirable for good electrochemical performance. Structural analysis showed that 

all  investigated  materials  crystallize  in  monoclinic  symmetry  (C2/c)  and  undergo  two 

polymorphic  transitions  resulting  in  reduced  monoclinic  distortion.  The  smallest 

distortion  below  75oC  was  observed  for  y=0.2  and  y=0.3,  i.e.  the  samples  that  also 

exhibited the best transport properties of all studied materials. The conducted chemical 

analysis showed that the oxidation state of Fe is  3+ in all samples, whereas the oxidation 

state of Mn ions is mostly 3+, with a small contribution of Mn2+ resulting from a slight 

excess  of  sodium. 

The presented analysis provides strong arguments in favor of the thesis that the 

degree  of  monoclinic  distortion  is  a  crucial  factor  with  regard  to  the  electrochemical 

performance of NASICON-Na3Fe2-yMny(PO4)3 cathode materials. It also shows that the 

precise modification of the chemical  composition  makes it possible to  tune the crystal 

structure  and  subsequently  design  cheap  and  environmentally  friendly  iron-based 

NASICON-type materials that are suitable for future application in Na-ion batteries.  