P2-type Na0.65[Mn0.70Ni0.16Co0.14]O2 (NMNCO) is a promising cathode material for sodium-ion batteries (SIBs). However, NMNCO faces challenges of inferior rate capability and cycling stability owing to its poor structural stability induced by the P2-O2 phase transition during high voltage charging. In order to improve the performance of NMNCO, surface modification has been identified as one of the most effective approaches. Among various surface modifiers, NASICON-type NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP) attracts tremendous attention due to its three-dimensional structure with open framework of large interstitial spaces. Nevertheless, the fundamental understanding of the effect of NTP surface modification on the electrochemical performance is still lacking and needs to be further investigated. Here, NMNCO is successfully modified with NTP (NMNCO@NTP) via a wet chemical method. Particularly, the effect of NTP surface modification on the electrochemical performance is unraveled by a combination of in-situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique, ex-situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis and first-principles calculations. When evaluated as a cathode material for SIBs, the NMNCO@NTP composite can deliver a high reversible capacity of 105.1 mA h g-1 with a capacity retention of 84.3% after 500 cycles at 5 C, suggesting significantly improved rate capability and cycling stability. The results revealed that the NTP surface coating and doping can effectively suppress the structural change of NMNCO during sodiation/desodiation process, leading to a highly structural reversibility. In addition, NTP coating layer with exceptional ion conductivity can effectively restrain gradual encroachment, and guarantee stable phase interfaces.
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have been widely used in electric vehicles and portable electronic devices such as cellphones, laptops, and digital cameras, leading to the demand for lithium rising sharply and a shortage of lithium source. Sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) share the same operating principles as LIBs and have been identified as the most attractive alternative for LIBs for large-scale application owing to the abundance and low cost of sodium source. As the important component of SIBs, cathode materials severely hinder the development of SIBs. Therefore, it’s very important for SIBs to develop cathode materials with good cycling stability, high capacity and operating potential. Among most of the cathode materials, such as layered oxides, olivines, NASICONs and organic compounds etc., layered P2-type manganese-based oxide materials have been extensively investigated due to the abundance of manganese and high capacity with P2-type framework. Specially, P2-type Na0.7MnO2 is one of the most extensively studied cathode materials with a high capacity of ∼160 mA h g-1 for SIBs. Nevertheless, the inferior cycling performance induced by the poor structural stability and the obtained capacity still remain major challenges in terms of the practical application of P2-type Na0.7MnO2. Some researchers prepared Nax[Mn0.70Ni0.16Co0.14]O2 (x≤2/3) (NMNCO) through replacing manganese in P2-type Na0.7MnO2 with nickel and cobalt to increase the discharge capacity and enhance the cycling stability. However, the improved electrochemical performance still cannot satisfy the requirements for practical applications. 
It is well-known that when P2-type NMNCO is charged at low sodium contents (>4.2 V), the gliding of TMO2 slabs will occur because of electrostatic repulsion between two adjacent TMO2 layers. And it makes a structural change from prismatic to octahedral sites, causing a large volume contraction of NMNCO. The structural instability results in gradual capacity fading during cycling. The unsatisfied rate performance is also related to the kinetic limitation from the gliding of TMO2 sheet. Moreover, the Jahn-Teller distortion of Mn(III) are harmful to capacity retention, so a protective layer is also needed to inhibit manganese dissolution. Therefore, it is necessary to explore suitable strategy to further improve the performance of NMNCO. Previous studies in LIBs have suggested that ion doping and surface coating can both significantly improve the electrochemical performance of the typical layered LiNixMnyCozO2 cathode. The cationic doping is an effective strategy to stabilize the crystal structure and minimize the capacity fade. In addition, surface coating is widely used to avoid the direct contact between electrode and electrolyte, enhancing rate capability and cycling stability. Simply, when the surface modification layer can not only serve as coating layer, but also dope into the bulk material, it will be a more convenient and effective way. Zhang et al. reported a facile method to modify Na0.7MnO2 with P2-Na0.7Ni0.33Mn0.67O2 and achieved a stable coating layer and Ni doping at the same time. Therefore, with the aim to effectively solve the above problems of NMNCO, the combination of ion doping and surface coating may be a good idea to enhance the electrochemical performance.
However, there still exists obstructions to entirely express the capabilities of NMNCO, since most of the surface modification layers are electrochemically inactive component. Additionally, some surface modification layers with low electronic and sodium ions conductivity compromise the rate performance of NMNCO, because they will block sodium ions and charge transport channels on NMNCO surface. Thus, choosing a surface modification layer with electrochemical activity is necessary to improve its electrochemical performance. NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP) has a three-dimensional structure with open framework of large interstitial spaces, allowing the quick extraction/insertion of sodium ions. Herein, NMNCO is successfully modified with NTP by a facile wet chemical method. Importantly, Ti4+ions that occupy the Na+ sites in the sodium layers can serve as “pillars” to stabilize the layered structure when charging at high voltage. Moreover, the large tetrahedral PO43− polyanions that replace O2- anions are capable to enlarge the sodium layers and closely bond with the transition metals to stabilize the structure. The strategy of NTP surface coating and doping can not only effectively suppress the structural change of NMNCO during sodiation/desodiation process, but also restrain gradual encroachment and guarantee stable phase interfaces, leading to a highly structural reversibility. The effects of NTP surface modification on the electrochemical performance of NMNCO are discussed through a combination of experiments and first-principles calculations.
All reagents in this study are of analytical grade and used without further puriﬁcation. Pristine Na0.65[Mn0.70Ni0.16Co0.14]O2 samples (NMNCO) were prepared by a citric acid assisted sol-gel method. A stoichiometric amount of sodium acetate (with a 5% excess of sodium), nickel acetate, cobalt acetate, manganese acetate were dissolved in deionized water and stirred for 30 minutes to form a transparent and homogeneous solution. Then citric acid (stoichiometric ratio of 1:1 with transition metal) was added into above solution and maintained at 80 °C with magnetic stirring to obtain a wet sol. The wet sol was dried at 120 °C for more than 24 h to get dry gels. Finally, the resulting gels were grounded and calcined at 450 °C for 6 h to decompose the organic component and acetate, followed by calcination at 950 °C for 15 h in air atmosphere to obtain the final samples. 
Firstly, 2.0 g pristine NMNCO was uniformly dispersed in 20 mL absolute ethanol to obtain a suspension. Then a certain amount of tetrabutyl titanate was added into above suspension and stirred for 1 h according to the NTP content of 1, 3, 5 wt.%, which were denoted as NMNCO@NTP-1, NMNCO@NTP-3, NMNCO@NTP-5, respectively. Meanwhile, stoichiometric sodium carbonate and ammonium dihydrogen phosphate were dissolved in 10 mL deionized water under magnetic stirring for 1 h, and then added into the above NMNCO/tetrabutyl titanate ethanol solution drop by drop and maintained at 80 °C with magnetic stirring until the solution is evaporated. Finally, the dried precipitate was calcined at 700 °C for 5 h in air to obtain NMNCO@NTP composites. As-prepared materials must be stored in glove box to stay away from H2O and CO2.
The crystalline structure of the samples was detected by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker D8 advance) with Cu Kα radiation in the 2θ range from 10° to 70°. Morphologies of the samples were studied by a field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Hitachi S-4800) and Transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEM-2010, JEOL, 200 kV). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Thermo Scientiﬁc K-Alpha) measurements were conducted to examine the chemical binding state. The atomic ratios of the elements were conﬁrmed by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS, PerkinElmer Optima 8300). The surface area of the materials was determined by Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) method (Micromeritics ASAP 2020) with nitrogen as adsorption/desorption gas. 
The electrochemical performance of as-prepared materials was evaluated using CR2032 coin cells. 80 wt.% as-prepared materials, 10 wt.% acetylene black and 10 wt.% polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) were grounded uniformly and then dispersed in N-methy pyrrolidone (NMP) solvent to form a slurry. The slurry was cast on the aluminum foil and dried at 80 °C under vacuum for 12 h, and the average loading of active material was ~1.5 mg cm−2. The cells were assembled in a glove box filled with Ar atmosphere by applying sodium foil as anode and counter electrodes, and glass fiber as separator. A 1:1 volumetric ratio mixture of ethylene carbonate (EC) and dimethyl carbonate (DMC) with 5% FEC containing 1 M NaClO4 was utilized as the electrolyte. Galvanostatic charge and discharge tests used LAND battery testing system (Wuhan, China) in the voltage range of 1.5-4.3 V vs. Na/Na+, and the current density of 1 C is 240 mA g-1. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) were carried out on CHI660E workstation at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s-1. Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were analyzed in the frequency range from 0.01 Hz to 100 kHz on CHI660E workstation.
The geometry optimization and electronic properties of Nax[Mn0.70Ni0.16Co0.14]O2 and PO43-, Ti4+ mixed crystal structures were calculated under the theory of density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP). The projector augmented wave (PAW) potentials are used as pseudopotentials to describe the interactions between valence electrons and ions. The Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) functional of generalized gradient approximation (GGA) was used to describe the exchange-correlation of valence electrons. The GGA+U method was adopted to address the localization of d-orbitals in Mn, Co, and Ni ions, with U values of 3.9, 3.4, and 6.0 eV, respectively. The optimization simulations were performed using a conjugate gradient algorithm with a force tolerance of 0.01 eV/Å, with kinetic energy cutoff set as 500 eV under a Gamma k-point sampling of 3 × 3 × 3. The other Nax[Mn0.70Ni0.16Co0.14]O2 structures with varies Na content was calculated by adding or subtracting Na atoms from the Na0.65[Mn0.70Ni0.16Co0.14]O2 crystalline lattice accordingly and repeat lattice optimization processes until convergence achieved. Five states were created between the first (Na1 position) and final (Na2 position) images of a single Na+ diffusion event from Na1 to Na2. During the NEB calculation, lattice parameters and atoms located at cell boundaries were fixed.
A simple and effective coating method is proposed in this paper, which can be used for practical industrial applications. Fig. 1A illustrates the formation process of NMNCO@NTP materials (see Experimental Section). Firstly, the raw materials were mixed uniformly under magnetic stirring and heating to get the precursors. Subsequently, the precursors were calcined in air to obtain pristine NMNCO. Then the surface of as-prepared NMNCO powder was modified with NTP through a facile wet chemical deposition approach and calcination process. Moreover, Table S1 summarizes the atomic ratios of the elements, and the result coincides well with the expected compositions. As illustrated in Fig. S2, thin layer of NTP is uniformly coated on the surface of NMNCO, which can serve as a protection layer to prevent the NMNCO cathodes from being corroded by the organic electrolytes. Besides, a certain content of NTP is doped into the NMNCO surface and forms as a thin layer of NMNCO-NTP solid solution (transition layer), which can effectively stabilize the NMNCO crystal structure and suppress P2-O2 phase transition. The structure and morphology of pristine NMNCO and NMNCO@NTP materials will be studied to fully understand the effects of NTP surface modification on NMNCO materials during cycling.
Fig. 1B shows the XRD patterns of pristine NMNCO and NMNCO@NTP materials (NMNCO@NTP-1, NMNCO@NTP-3, NMNCO@NTP-5). The XRD patterns of samples exhibit similar diffraction peaks which belong to a hexagonal P2-structure with space group P63/mmc (No. 194). No impurity peak is found in the diffraction patterns, suggesting that NTP modification cannot change the layered structure of NMNCO. The (002) peak is related to the thickness of TMO2 layer and d-spacing of the Na+ diffusion layer. For NMNCO@NTP materials, the diffraction peaks (002) shift to lower 2θ with the increase of NTP content, suggesting the incorporation of NTP into NMNCO. Further analysis of XRD data was carried out by the Rietveld refinement method. Fig. S3 shows the refined diffraction patterns of pristine NMNCO and NMNCO@NTP materials, and the detailed structure information is summarized in Table S2 and S3. The thickness of TMO2 layer and d-spacing of the Na+ diffusion layer are also obtained from the Rietveld refinement. With an increase of NTP content, d-spacing of the Na+ diffusion layer increases while the thickness of TMO2 decreases. It is interesting that the ion radius of Ti4+ (0.61 Å) is smaller than that of Na+ (1.02 Å), but the d-spacing of Na+ diffusion layer increases, which may be derived from the increase of electrostatic repulsion between TMO6 octahedron with the introduction of PO43-. And the strong bonding of PO43-polyanions to transition metal cations shrinks the thickness of the transition metal layer and thus enhances stability of the crystal structure.
To indicate the presence of NTP on the NMNCO surface, the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out and shown in Fig. S4. For pristine NMNCO, the existence of Ni2+, Co3+, Mn4+ can be certified by the Ni (2p3/2 and 2p1/2), Co (2p3/2 and 2p1/2), Mn (2p3/2 and 2p1/2) main peaks at 853.98 and 871.68 eV, 779.28 and 794.28 eV, 642.18 and 653.48 eV, respectively. The valence results of the transition metal ions are also consistent with the previous reports. Similar to pristine NMNCO, the Ni, Mn, Co binding energy peaks of NMNCO@NTP materials do not change much. However, the intensities of the Mn 2p, Co 2p and Ni 2p peaks weaken as the amount of NTP coating increases, originating from thicker coating NTP layer. Evidently, the Ti 2p core level can be observed for NMNCO@NTP samples (457.78 and 463.68 eV), which illustrates the valence of Ti is +4. Meanwhile, the Ti 2p peaks become stronger as the content of NTP increases (Fig. S4E). Additionally, the O 1s peak can be observed for the samples. As given in Fig. S4F, for pristine NMNCO, the O 1s peak at 528.98 eV attributes to the lattice oxygen, and another peak at 530.48 eV belongs to the surface impurities. After surface modification, the O1s peak intensity at 528.98 eV weakens when the NTP content increases, whereas the intensity peak at 530.48 eV becomes stronger. It suggests that more oxygenated chemicals from NTP exist in the surface of NMNCO@NTP samples. Through above the phenomenon, it can be inferred that NTP is homogenously coated on NMNCO particles surface.
The microstructure of pristine NMNCO and NMNCO@NTP-3 materials are shown in Fig. 2, and both samples exhibit a plate-like shape with a thickness of about 300 nm. Pristine NMNCO shows smoother surface, while small dense particles can be observed on the surface of NMNCO@NTP-3 materials, which might be ascribed to the NTP coating (Fig. 2A-B). The pore size distribution and specific surface area of pristine NMNCO and NMNCO@NTP-3 are shown in Fig. S5. As seen in the pore size distribution curve, the average pore size of pristine NMNCO and NMNCO@NTP-3 samples is 9.19, and 15.2 nm, respectively, suggesting the existence of mesoporous in the as-prepared materials. Besides, the nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms show that the specific surface area of pristine NMNCO and NMNCO@NTP-3 is 4.401 and 6.876 m2 g-1, respectively. Therefore, the result infers that the specific surface area can slightly increase after NTP modification, which is beneficial for the sodium storage. As displayed in the HRTEM images, pristine NMNCO presents a smooth and clean surface, and a lattice spacing of 0.57 nm is found in Fig. S6B, which corresponds to interplanar spacing of (002) for NMNCO. In contrast, unintermittent nano-particles are observed on the surface of NMNCO@NTP-3 materials. The HRTEM images exhibit a contrast in the core and shell regions (Fig. 2E), which suggests that the formation of NMNCO@NTP structure. The HRTEM analysis demonstrates that the inner core have a lattice spacing of 0.57 nm, corresponding to interplanar spacing of (002) for NMNCO (Fig. 2F). The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern also displays the interplanar spacing of (002), (004) and (106) planes, respectively. This result agrees well with the P63/mmc structure. Meanwhile, there is a thin layer with lattice distortions between NMNCO and NTP, suggesting a little NTP is doped into the bulk NMNCO material. The EDS mapping also shows a uniform distribution of Ti and P on the surface of NMNCO@NTP-3 materials (Fig. 2G). Besides, EDX of NMNCO@NTP-3 is demonstrated in Fig. S7 to confirm the content of NTP. This observation further indicates that the NTP is successfully coated on the surface of NMNCO. However, Fig S8 shows that the surface of NMNCO@NTP-1 is not completely coated by 1% NTP, and the thickness of NTP coating layer becomes much thicker for NMNCO@NTP-5 (Fig. S8B2), resulting in the sluggish kinetics of reaction. The content of NTP was further determined by ICP-MS, and the result is listed in Table S1. Based on the above materials characterization, the effect of NTP surface modification on electrochemical performance was studied below. Fig. S9 shows the CV curves of pristine NMNCO and NMNCO@NTP materials at scanning rate of 0.1 mV s-1 between 1.5 and 4.3 V. For pristine NMNCO, the reversible anodic/cathodic peaks at 4.3/4.135 V, 3.727/3.607 V and 2.292/1.844 V are involved in the reactions of Ni2+/Ni4+, Co3+/Co4+ and Mn3+/Mn4+ redox couples, respectively. In order to illustrate the reaction mechanisms between electrode materials and sodium ions, ex-situ XPS analysis of NMNCO@NTP-3 material is performed in Fig. S10 to analyze the oxidation states of Mn, Ni and Co during Na+ deintercalation/intercalation processes . As mentioned above, the location of the 2p main peaks illustrates the existence of Mn4+, Ni2+ and Co3+. When charged to 4.3 V, the binding energy of Mn 2p3/2 barely changes, indicating that the manganese ions maintain a quadrivalent oxidation state. While, the binding energy of Ni 2p3/2 and Co 2p3/2 shifts to higher energy values (854.80 and 780.35 eV), indicating that Ni2+ and Co3+ are oxidized to Ni4+ and Co4+, respectively. When discharged to 1.5 V, the binding energy of Mn 2p3/2 shifts to lower energy value (641.78 eV), which means that Mn4+ is reduced to Mn3+. And the binding energy of Ni 2p3/2 and Co 2p3/2 return to the original region, suggesting Ni4+ and Co4+ are reduced to Ni2+ and Co3+, respectively. All the samples exhibit similar profiles in the initial CV curves. It is noted that potential intervals (∆V) between oxidation and reduction peaks for NMNCO@NTP materials are smaller than that of pristine NMNCO, indicating a decreased polarization after NTP surface modification. Besides, the peak intensity of pristine NMNCO gradually decreases as the cycle number increases, suggesting poor electrochemical reversibility. This may ascribe from the gliding of TMO2 slabs that occurs at lower sodium contents (>4.2 V). As a result, the two-phase transformation reaction leads to the quick fading of the peak intensity with subsequent cycles in the pristine NMNCO system. In contrast, for NMNCO@NTP samples, the CV curves are almost overlapped in the subsequent cycling.
In order to investigate the effect of NTP surface modification on the structural change of NMNCO during Na+ (de)intercalation, in-situ XRD measurement was carried out and shown in Fig. 3. Fig. 3A exhibits that (002) and (004) peaks of pristine NMNCO slightly move to lower angle when charged from 2.5 to 4.1 V, indicating expansion of interlayer spacing during desodiation process. In contrast, the (100) peak shifts to a higher angle, resulting from the decrease of TM–TM distance within the TMO2 slabs. The oxidation of transition metals reduces the ion radius, resulting in the contraction of the ab plane, but it still remains the P2 structure. This suggests a solid-solution behavior before reaching the voltage plateau at ∼4.1 V. When charged above 4.1 V, (002), (004) and (100) peaks move to higher angle accompanied by the peak weakening and broadening, which represents a phase transition from P2 to O2 phase and the formation of coexisting region of biphase. Apparently, when the pristine NMNCO electrode is charged to 4.3 V, new Bragg peak appears at 20.1 which belongs to the O2-characteristic peaks. The TMO2 slabs glide and then form octahedral sites at low sodium contents (>4.2 V), which induces the formation of a new O2-type phase with stacking faults and a unique oxygen packing. Most peaks can recover to the original position during discharge process, indicating that the phase evolution is reversible. The structure evolution of NMNCO@NTP-3 is similar to pristine NMNCO. The diffraction peaks also continuously change, and finally come back to origin positions reversibly during Na+ (de)intercalation (Fig. 3B). In contrast, the variations of diffraction peak positions for NMNCO@NTP-3 composite are greatly smaller than that of pristine NMNCO (Fig. 3C), which suggests that the diffraction peaks corresponding to P2 phase are maintained. Moreover, the O2-characteristic peaks cannot be observed in the NMNCO@NTP-3. Meanwhile, the lattice volume of each scan number for pristine NMNCO and NMNCO@NTP-3 composite were refined by Rietveld method and shown in Fig. S11. For pristine NMNCO, the lattice volume decreases during desodiation process. The volume change within the P2 single phase is 2.3%, while the lattice volume change from P2 to O2 phase reaches 14.2%. A large volumetric contraction is caused by the structural change from the gliding of the TMO2 sheets as the extraction of Na+, resulting in the deterioration of cycle stability. While, for NMNCO@NTP-3 composite, the volumetric contraction is only caused by the P2 single phase. When voltage reaches to 4.3 V, the overall lattice volumetric contraction for P2 phase is 2.2%, which is much lower than that of pristine NMNCO. The result indicates that the incorporation of NTP into the NMNCO surface can efficiently suppress the lattice volumetric contraction and subsequently improve the structure stability upon Na+ (de)intercalation. Ti4+ may act as a pillar to prevent the gliding of the TMO2 sheets. Correspondingly, PO43− polyanions with high electronegativity can replace the oxygen sites, which can be closely boned with the transition metals and stabilize the structure. 
The reaction mechanism of pristine NMNCO and NMNCO@NTP-3 was also studied by ex-situ TEM (Fig. 3D-E). The variation of d-spacing of (002) during charge-discharge process was supported by the HRTEM measurement. For pristine NMNCO, when charged to 4.1 V, the interplanar spacing increases from 0.571 to 0.592 nm, which is larger than that of the pristine (002) plane, increasing by 3.5% than the original state. As charged to 4.3 V, the d-spacing of 0.412 nm is observed, which corresponds to (002') plane of O2 phase. While discharged from 4.3 to 1.5 V, the interplanar spacing is recovered to 0.572 nm, approaching to the standard (002) plane. This suggests that the phase transition between P2 and O2 phase occurs in NMNCO during charging-discharging process and fits well with the in-situ XRD results. However, the ex-situ TEM of NMNCO@NTP-3 shows that it can maintain its P2 structure even charged to high voltage. As shown in Fig. 3E1-E2, d-spacing of (002) steadily increases to 0.590 nm when charged to 4.1 V. Though it decreases to 0.588 nm when charge to 4.3 V, there is no (002') plane of O2 phase in HRTEM, which means that it still maintain its P2 structure. And it finally recovers to 0.572 nm when discharged to 1.5 V. Therefore, ex-situ TEM further confirms that the P2-O2 phase transition is efficiently suppressed by the modification of NTP.
Fig. 4A shows the initial charge/discharge curves of pristine NMNCO and NMNCO@NTP samples at 0.1 C.Pristine NMNCO shows a series of charge/discharge plateaus, which is attributed to the redox couples and phase transformations during sodiation/desodiation process . While, for NMNCO@NTP, the shape evolution of charge and discharge profiles becomes smoother, which indicates that NTP substitution is conducive to induce desodiation of different modes, detour Na+/vacancy ordering of the P2-type NMNCO. It is also confirmed by the charge/discharge profiles of these samples at 0.1 C in first three cycles (Fig. S12). In addition, pristine NMNCO sample exhibits an initial discharge capacity of 161.1 mA h g−1, while NMNCO@NTP-1, NMNCO@NTP-3 and NMNCO@NTP-5 samples show excellent performance with discharge capacity of 195.2, 206.7 and 187.6 mA h g−1, respectively. The results suggest that NTP surface modification can improve the capacity owing to the increased ion conductivity. The rate performance is crucial for the practical application of SIBs, and it was carried out at various rates in range of 1.5-4.3 V as shown in Fig. 4B. Pristine NMNCO shows specific discharge capacity of 161.1, 140.2, 117.7, 89.4, 68.4 and 25.1 mA h g-1 at 0.1, 0.5, 1, 2, 5 and 10 C, respectively. In contrast, the rate performance of NMNCO@NTP materials is better than that of pristine NMNCO. For example, NMNCO@NTP-3 sample delivers higher capacity of 206.8, 185.5, 166.7, 135.7, 105.1 and 83 mA h g-1 at 0.1, 0.5, 1, 2, 5 and 10 C, respectively. The excellent rate capability of NMNCO@NTP derives from the following two aspects: first, NASICON-type NTP has exceptional ion conductivity from three-dimensional structure with open framework of large interstitial spaces. Second, a certain amount of NTP doping can enlarge d-spacing of the sodium-ion diffusion layer, which can reduce the migration barrier and enhance the diffusion coefficient of the Na+. As shown in the Fig. 4C and Fig. S13, cyclic voltammetry of the samples at different scanning rates between 1.5-4.3 V has been carried out to study the electrochemical reaction kinetic. The potential intervals (∆V) between the corresponding anodic and cathodic peaks increase as the increase of scanning rate, which is caused by the electrochemical polarization at high rates. However, the potential intervals (∆V) of NMNCO@NTP-3 are much lower than that of pristine NMNCO. All of these results are consistent with the aforementioned rate performance.Fig. 4D-E presents the cycling performance of the samples at rate of 1 C and 5 C. The reversible capacity of pristine NMNCO is only 50.2 mA h g-1 after 100 cycles at 1 C, with the capacity retention of 42.8%. Meanwhile, pristine NMNCO delivers reversible capacity of 12.2 mA h g-1 after 500 cycles at high rate of 5 C, which is equal to 21.2% capacity retention. However, the cycling stability of NMNCO@NTP samples is better than that of pristine NMNCO. The NMNCO@NTP-1, NMNCO@NTP-3 and NMNCO@NTP-5 exhibit higher capacity retention of 70.1%, 88.3% and 81.2% after 100 cycles at 1 C, respectively. Even at a high rate of 5 C, the NMNCO@NTP-1, NMNCO@NTP-3 and NMNCO@NTP-5 still have capacity retention of 38.2%, 84.3% and 70.3%, respectively. Above results prove that NTP surface modification can effectively improve the cycling performance. 
To evaluate the application feasibility of NMNCO@NTP-3, the full cell was fabricated by using NMNCO@NTP-3 or pristine NMNCO as cathode, and NTP@C as anode, respectively. The electrochemical performance of the full-cell system has been demonstrated in Fig. S14, and the cycle performance and potential profiles of NTP@C anode in a half-cell are shown in Fig. S15. Without pre-sodiation, this full cell can charge/discharge with high initial coulombic efficiency of ~86%. Compared with pristine NMNCO, NMNCO@NTP-3 delivers high speciﬁc capacity of 108.5 mA h g-1 at 1 C, and the capacity retention after 100 cycles is 76.4%, showing higher specific capacity and better cycling stability. The preliminary full cell performance proves that NMNCO@NTP-3 is a promising cathode candidate in practical applications.
The microstructure of pristine NMNCO and NMNCO@NTP samples after extensively cycled has been analyzed in Fig. S16. As seen in Fig. S16A1-A3, pristine NMNCO suffers severe damage during cycling because of the side reaction between electrodes and organic electrolyte. Furthermore, the gliding of the TMO2 sheets will induce a structural change, resulting in larger volumetric contraction. However, the microstructure of NMNCO@NTP samples changes barely after long cycling. Furthermore, TEM images after cycling have been analyzed in Fig. S17. The disordered (amorphous) domains can be found in pristine NMNCO, while no obvious change is found in NMNCO@NTP-3 after cycling, which proves that NTP modification can efficiently protect the NMNCO crystal structure by suppressing P2-O2 phase transition, thus improving long-term cycling stability of the NMNCO materials.
To further investigate the maintenance of the structure during constant Na+ (de)intercalation, the crystal structural changes and the variation of lattice parameter c during the extraction of Na+ were also simulated by first-principles calculation as shown in Fig. 5A-B and Fig. S19A. When the content of Na+ varies from 1 to 0.33 mol, the lattice parameter c of NxMNCO@NTP cathode gradually increases from 10.88 to 11.42 Å because of the formation of vacancies at Na sites that increases the electrostatic repulsion between two adjacent TMO2 layers. In addition, it still maintains the P2 structure even at low Na content (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.22). It can be seen that the lattice parameter c of NxMNCO@NTP cathode increases firstly and then remain relatively stable, suggesting the suppression of P2-O2 phase transition. As a comparison, pristine NxMNCO experiences the similar variation trend when the Na content changes from 1 to 0.33 mol, where the lattice parameter c increases from 10.73 to 11.52 Å as shown in Fig. S19 A. However, when sodium ion is further deintercalated (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.22), a dramatic decrease of the lattice parameter c can be observed, which indicates the structure of the NxMNCO cathode changes from prismatic to octahedral sites because of the gliding of the TMO2 sheets. 
In order to figure out the reason for better rate capability after NTP modification, we studied the diffusion of Na+ in the interlayer using first-principles calculation with the nudged elastic band (NEB) method. Fig. 5C-D and Fig. S19B present the Na+ diffusion path (Na1-Na2-Na1) and the corresponding calculated activation barrier energy of pristine NMCNO and NMNCO@NTP materials. The activation barrier energy of NMNCO@NTP is around 510 meV, which is much lower that of NMNCO (∼827 meV). The results indicate that NTP modification can facilitate the diffusion of Na+ and thus present the more outstanding rate capability.
The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) provides further evidence for the impact of NTP surface modification on cycling stability and rate capability, as shown in Fig. S20. As summarized in Table S4, for pristine NMNCO, the ohmic resistance (RΩ) and charge transfer resistance (Rct) are larger than that of NMNCO@NTP samples. NMNCO@NTP-3 shows smallest ohmic resistance (RΩ) and charge transfer resistance (Rct) of 1.8 Ω and 172.3 Ω, respectively. Meanwhile, the DNa+ of NMNCO@NTP samples are much higher than that of pristine NMNCO. The results are consistent with rate performance of as-prepared materials, resulting from the increased kinetic process by NTP surface modification. Fig. S20B-E exhibit the Nyquist plots of pristine NMNCO and NMNCO@NTP samples after cycling at 5 C. The sodium diffusion coefficients of the samples after different cycles are also calculated and listed in Table S5. As seen in Table S5, the values of RΩ and Rct for pristine NMNCO increase continuously during cycling. Especially, the value of Rct for pristine NMNCO reaches 1312 Ω after 500 cycles which is more than threefold of the initial Rct values. Meanwhile, the DNa+ value of pristine NMNCO decreases from 1.38×10−11 to 0.38×10−11 cm2 s−1 after 500 cycles. However, the resistance of NMNCO@NTP samples (include RΩ and Rct) do not vary much as the cycle progresses, which are lower than that of pristine NMNCO. Moreover, NMNCO@NTP samples have higher DNa+ value than that of pristine NMNCO during cycling, suggesting that NTP surface modification can keep the stability of resistance and Na+ diffusion coefficients. This case clearly shows that NTP surface modification can minimize the unwanted side reaction and suppress the structural change during cycling, and thus stabilize the structure.
In summary, nanoscale NTP with exceptional ion conductivity has been successfully modified on the surface of P2-type NMNCO. The differences in phase transition and reaction mechanism between pristine NMNCO and NMNCO@NTP materials are proved by in-situ XRD, ex-situ TEM and first-principles calculations. The NTP coating layer with three-dimensional structure can prevent NMNCO from being corroded by the organic electrolyte, and facilitate Na+ transfer on NMNCO surface. Meanwhile, the incorporation of NTP into NMNCO can effectively enlarge d-spacing of the sodium-ion diffusion layer, and suppress the P2-O2 phase transition and volumetric change during charge/discharge process. Therefore, NTP surface modification has a significant effect on the improvement of NMNCO. The NMNCO@NTP-3 shows an initial discharge capacity of 206.8 mA h g-1 and 83 mA h g-1 at 0.1 C and 10 C, respectively. Furthermore, it demonstrates prominent capacity retention of 84.3% after 500 cycles at 5 C. These results provide a newly insight into designing better P2-type manganese-based oxide cathode materials for large-scale application of SIBs with excellent performance.





























