Solvent-free ceramic/polymer hybrid electrolytes integrating two different ceramic electrolytes, Ge4+ or Ti4+ phosphates, are prepared and their electrochemical behavior is analyzed for both lithium-ion and lithium-air batteries (LIB and LAB). Li(Al, Ge)2(PO4)3 can be a more effective lithium conducting phosphate composition for a hybrid electrolyte that delivers an enhanced ionic conductivity (~0.364 mS cm−1 at 30 oC), high discharge capacity and stable cycle retention. The enhanced electrochemical behavior is likely due to the densely packed grain boundary structure between inorganic particles and suppression of lithium reduction with the help of Ge4+. The proposed compositional design of a solvent-free hybrid electrolyte will be a competitive one, which possessed a stable electrochemical behavior both in conventional LIBs and in LABs without any interfacial control during the cell assembly i.e., soaking liquid electrolytes and/or additional interlayer components.
Solid-state rechargeable batteries are inevitable for up-coming power sustainable devices, conserving high energy density with light, safe, and long-term stable operation. Thus, novel materials based on cost-effective procedures, especially in solid-state electrolytes, play a key role in their commercial maturity and mass production.[1,2] The on-going rechargeable Li-ion batteries (LIBs) employ non-aqueous, volatile and flammable liquid electrolytes in which corrosive Li-salt solvates a toxic organic solvent and results in significant safety issues. The high vapor pressure of the corresponding liquid electrolytes is of little concern for most practical LIB systems because they are nearly hermetical sealed, while an exception is the Li-air battery (LAB) in which the oxygen is accessed via the air permeable porous cathodes. The on-going rechargeable Li-ion batteries (LIBs) employ non-aqueous, volatile, and flammable liquid electrolytes in which corrosive Li-salt solvates a toxic organic solvent and results in significant safety issues. The high vapor pressure of the corresponding liquid electrolytes is of little concern for most practical LIB systems because they are nearly hermetical sealed, while an exception is the Li-air battery (LAB) in which the oxygen is accessed via the air-permeable porous cathodes. To promote the commercialization of the high energy driven LABs, a solid electrolyte with high Li+ conductivity and less volatile state is strongly recommended. Moreover, a major challenge of LABs is to develop a stable electrolyte not only to suppress solvent evaporation but also to protect lithium metal and resist attack by reactive oxygen radicals formed at the porous cathodes. To address these safety issues and to implement the characteristic cell configurations, only the solid-state electrolytes with high ionic conductivity and solvent-free free-standing films are strongly needed.[3-5] Generally, two major groups of solid-state electrolytes are presented: inorganics and polymers.[6-9] Inorganic compounds, like phosphates and oxides, have a high transference number (tion~1.0) with Li+ ion conductivity of around 10−4 S cm-1 (@ RT), while they are naturally hard and brittle, thus leads to additional interfacial resistance within the side electrodes. On the other hand, however, polymers are flexible enough even with exhibiting low conductivity of <10−4 S cm-1. To overcome the drawbacks of the given single phase-based electrolytes, ceramic/polymer hybrid electrolytes have been promisingly suggested .[10-13] Many studies have reported the hybrid electrolytes of polymer electrolytes with ceramics; the total Li+ conductivity is varying with the polymer/ceramic ratio which is particularly important controlling the overall electrolyte/electrode interfacial conditions.[14-16] Within the different ceramic/polymer ratio in hybrid electrolytes, there can be various conduction paths for Li+ ions, such as via a homogeneous matrix (polymer or ceramic), interfaces, or a combination of the two. Moreover, the degree of polymerization and (re-)crystallization for the polymer matrix are substantially different in the composition and concentration of incorporated fillers (i.e., ceramic) from what we considered in the hybrid electrolytes, which does not fully guarantee the solid-state phase for the realization of “real” all-solid-state batteries. The semi-interpenetrating network (semi-IPN) solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) effectively trapped the organic solution and was prepared by in-situ radical polymerization and was even mixed with ceramics. Our results demonstrate that the pouch type LIBs, which were assembled with the given solid electrolytes, exhibited stable capacity retention, even under stress-applied conditions; thus we propose their feasibility for the commercially available flexible Li rechargeable battery.[17] Nevertheless, the formation of solvent-free ceramic/polymer hybrid electrolytes followed by room-temperature driven electrochemical reactions might be desirable for the “real” solid-state rechargeable battery systems, which are not widely investigated. 
NASICON structured LiMe2(PO4)3 (Me = Ti4+, Ge4+, Zr4+, etc) compounds are suggested one of the promising Li+ ion conductors exhibit a Li+ conductivity as high as 10-3 S cm-1 with a wide potential window up to ~ 6 V. It is well known that the doping with aliovalent ions, Al3+ or Sr2+, improve the ionic conductivity and the reactivity against lithium metal.[18-21] However, only limited works have been done using the semi-IPN SPE/phosphate hybrid electrolytes for the comparative Li rechargeable battery systems, LIBs, and LABs. In this study, we synthesized Al3+doped LiTi2(PO4)3 and LiGe2(PO4)3 compounds via solution chemistry followed by mixing with in-situ thermal cross-linking semi-IPN SPE. The resultant hybrid electrolyte overcoated on the separator was a free-standing film, which possessed a stable electrochemical reactions even at room temperature condition compared to a conventional ether-based liquid electrolytes both in conventional LIBs and in LABs without any interfacial control during the cell assembly i.e., soaking liquid electrolytes and/or additional interlayer components. 
Two lithium phosphates were synthesized using the sol-gel process following the previous reports.[19-21] For Li(Al,Ti)2(PO4)3, stoichiometric amounts of lithium acetate (Li(C2H3O)·2H2O, Sigma Aldrich, 98%), aluminum chloride (AlCl3·6H2O, High Purity Chemicals, 99.9%) were dissolved in a solvent, 2-Methoxyethanol (C3H8O8, Sigma Aldrich, 99.8%). Then, polyethylene glycol (PEG, Sigma Aldrich, Mw 200), titanium butoxide (Ti(OC4H9)4, Sigma Aldrich, 97%), and phosphoric acid (85%) were slowly added and stirred. The mixture solution was heated in a microwave-assisted reactor then the brownish-colored powders were obtained and then dried at 120 °C in a vacuum. Finally, the particles were annealed at 525 °C for 5 h under 5% H2/N2. Germanium ethoxide (Ge(OC2H5)4, Sigma Aldrich, 99.95%) and ammonium phosphate monobasic (NH4H2PO4, Sigma Aldrich, 99.99%) were used for the synthesis of Li(Al,Ge)2(PO4)3 compounds in a way similar to the sol-gel reaction. For SPEs, the Li salt, bis(trifluoromethane) sulfonimide lithium salt (LiTFSI, Sigma Aldrich), dissolved poly(ethylene glycol) dimethyl ether (PEGDME, Sigma Aldrich, Mn ~500) was thoroughly mixed with the proper amount of a bisphenol A ethoxylate diacrylate (Mn, ~688) and tert-butyl peroxyneodecanoate solution for 30 min under dry condition. 
A proper amount of phosphates and SPE (generally, 5:3 weight ratio) were mixed using an agate mortar and over coated onto the separator and then heated at 100 °C for 3 h in a vacuum. Detailed experimental procedures and sample images are presented in supporting information as shown in Fig. S1. The fabrication of cathodes was as follows: 1) For LIBs, LiFePO4 powder was thoroughly mixed with PEGDME, PVdF and LiTFSI using N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone as a solvent to form a slurry, and then the as-prepared slurry was coated on Al foil and dried at 120 °C in a vacuum. 2) For LABs, we prepared air-permeable carbon nanofiber (CNF) paper using the electrospinning method. In a typical process, a proper amount of terephthalic acid (TPA) and polyacrylonitrile (PAN) was dissolved in dimethylformamide (DMF) and the mixture solution was stirred at 60 oC overnight to form a viscous solution. Then, the solution was introduced into a syringe, which was connected to a high-voltage power supply. All the electrospinning process was performed with a 0.5 mL h-1 flow rate at + 10 kV. The electrospun nanofiber mat was collected on an Al foil and dried in a vacuum for several hours at room temperature. The electrospun nanofiber mat was then thermally treated for stabilization and carbonization. Briefly, the electrospun nanofiber mat was heated to 280 °C with a heating rate of 3 °C min-1 and held for 4 h in air using a furnace for stabilization. Then, the sample was further heated to 1200 °C with a heating rate of 5 °C min-1 and held for 2 h under an N2 atmosphere for carbonization. Fig. S2 shows a SEM and photograph images of the corresponding CNF paper with a self-supporting mechanical strength and bend-free shape retention under arbitrary applied stresses. 
The crystal structure for the phosphate compounds was analyzed by a powder X-ray diffractometer (XRD, Rigaku D/Max-2200V) equipped with Cu Kα source. The detailed unit cell and structural parameters of as-prepared samples were obtained from Rietveld refinement using the General Structure Analysis System (GSAS) program based on the synchrotron diffraction data collected from radiation source with wavelength of 1.5225 Å in range of 10° ≤ 2θ ≤ 80°, with a step of 0.01°, at Pohang Accelerator Laboratory (PAL), South Korea. The corresponding particle size and morphology were measured by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Tescan Mira 3 LMU FEG). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (K-Alpha Thermo SCIENTIFIC) was used to evaluate the chemical composition of the phosphates. 
The Li+ conductivity was measured by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) graph using an electrochemical impedance analyzer (IM6, Zahner Elekrik, Germany). The cell is composed of sus/electrolyte/sus blocking type and the temperature range was 15-75 °C with the frequency variable from 1 Hz to 1 MHz. The charge/discharge behavior was tested by a TOSCAT-3100U tester (TOYO, Ltd.) with a voltage window of 2.75-4.2 V (vs. Li/Li+) via a 2032-coin cell with the structure cathode/electrolyte/Li-metal. For LABs, the coin cell structure was similar to LIBs, while carbon paper with open-mesh structure was used. Finally, to evaluate the flexible battery electrolytes, a pouch type cell with a size of 3 x 4 cm2 was fabricated with a cathode/electrolyte/Li-metal by a lamination process. The layer-by-layer stacked pouch cell was enclosed and then vacuum-sealed. To evaluate the interfacial electrochemical stability and polarization of between Li metal and composite electrolytes were tested lithium symmetric cell. The given pouch cell was tested by connecting LED lights in an intentionally flat and folding state. The thermal stability of the pouch cell was studied at different temperatures as well.  
The crystal structure of the sol-gel derived lithium phosphates was analyzed by powder XRD (Fig. 1). Even though about 15 at% of Ti4+/Ge4+ ions were substituted by Al3+ ions with slightly mismatched ionic radii (0.064 nm, 0.044 nm and 0.057 nm, respectively), the XRD peaks matched the pure NASICON structured LiGe2(PO4)3 (JCPDS 080-1922) and LiTi2(PO4)3 (JCPDS 072-6140) compounds.[22] Rather broad diffraction peaks for the given NASICON compounds denotes the formation of a crystalline structure after annealing at 525 oC, which was a much lower thermal budget for the conventional solid-state reactions accompanied by impurity phases like as AlPO4 and Li2TiO3.[18,19]  Rietveld refinement of as-prepared samples was conducted using synchrotron diffraction data and the obtained patterns of doped samples were shown in Fig. 2. The profile R-factors, Rwp were 3.96, 3.75 and 3.12% while the goodness-of-fit parameters (χ2) were 2.28, 2.19 and 2.45 for pure, Al-doped LiTi2(PO4)3 and LiGe2(PO4)3, respectively. No impurity phase, irrespective of Al3+ compound could be detected. The lattice parameters of and structural information were summarized in Table. 1~6. Accordingly, no significant change of unit cell parameters of doped samples compared to pure sample could be observed which is in accordance to the similarity in ionic radii of Al3+, Ge4+ and Ti4+. In detail, because ionic radius as 0.39 Å of Al3+ is equal to that of Ge4+ and slightly smaller than that of Ti4+ (0.42 Å) at coordination number of 4 and their oxidation states are similar, Al3+ could replace in the Ge4+/Ti4+ site without create any mismatching in lattice parameter or impurity phase.
The chemical composition of the Al3+ doped Li(Ti,Ge)2(PO4)3 was verified by XPS. Fig. S3 shows the spectra of Al 2p, Ti 2p and Ge 2p for the given samples. The binding energy for the corresponding metal ions is matched to the previous works, while the atomic ratio is slightly different from the theoretical chemical composition i.e., Li1.5Al0.3Ge1.7(PO4)3 and Li1.5Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3, respectively. The microstructure of the powders was obtained from solution chemistry followed by annealing using SEM (Fig. 3). By comparing the micrographs of the different compositions of Li(Al,Ge)2(PO4)3 and Li(Al,Ti)2(PO4)3 it can be seen, that the size, morphology, and porosity are substantially different. For Ti4+-based compound the slightly aggregated spherical particles <150 nm are present, while there is a faceted grain morphology with a submicron scale size for Ge4+-based compound. Considering the grain morphology and the resultant microstructures, obtaining a homogeneous crystalline microstructure with negligible porosity leads to the high densities close to the theoretical values for a Li(Al,Ge)2(PO4)3 based hybrid electrolyte. Gradual change to a facet grain boundary-oriented morphology was similarly reported for phosphates on which the grain growth controlled by the interfacial reaction.[23-26]  
The ionic conductivity, σ, of the hybrid electrolytes was determined within a temperature range from 15 to 75 oC. Fig. 4 presents the resultant σ–1/T dependence as an Arrhenius plot for the two hybrid electrolytes. The ionic conductivity was obtained using the relation between the electrolyte thickness, the active area and the measured resistance which was determined by the high frequency intercept of the Nyquist plot as shown in Fig. S4. The data were collected upon heating followed by consecutively cooling scans since the hysteresis of the conductivity values of polymer-incorporated hybrid electrolytes are normally changed with the thermal budget during the measurement. The σ value of the Li(Al,Ge)2(PO4)3-based electrolytes is 3.64 x 10-4 S cm-1 at room temperature (cooling scan), which is two times higher than the LATP-based hybrid electrolyte, 1.78 x 10-4 S cm-1. A hysteresis of the conductivity between 15 and 75 oC, with higher conductivities at the cooling stage compared to that of with heating, clearly shows the low recrystallization rate of the polymer matrix within the hybrid electrolytes. It is somewhat interesting that there are higher values for the Li(Al,Ge)2(PO4)3-based hybrid electrolyte within the whole temperature range compared to the bulk conductivity; Ti-based lithium phosphate (~10-4 S cm-1) is higher than the Ge-based one (~10-5 S cm-1).[18,19] This behavior is due to the effective volume fraction of amorphous phase polymer chains, which, in turn, support the ion movement with the help of the densely packed grain boundary microstructure of Li(Al,Ge)2(PO4)3 compounds. Moreover, it has moderate activation energies of ~0.12 eV for the overall temperature range, which is in the range of the reported ones for polyethylene oxide-phosphate systems.[28] Certainly, the ionic conductivity in the cooling scan might not be useful from a practical point of view. Nevertheless, it shows that the hybrid electrolytes that we tested offer the highest conductivity values in the cooling stage for both phosphates-based electrolytes. Thus, the proper selection of the ceramic/polymer species followed by tuning the relative concentration dominates the whole property of the given hybrid electrolytes. Even the Li+ conduction mechanism is still not fully clarified within the various hybrid electrolyte systems, the optimized ceramic-polymer interface conditions offering highly conductive Li+ charge transfer. 
Fig. 5(a) shows the C-rate behavior for the corresponding hybrid electrolytes measured at room temperature. The reversible capacity of Li(Al,Ge)2(PO4)3-based composites is as high as 135, 80 and 30 mA h g-1 at 0.1, 0.2, and 0.5 C, which can be returned to 120 mA h g-1 at 0.1 C. On the other hand, the stability of rate performances for Li(Al,Ti)2(PO4)3-based composite cells is rather poor, while they have much higher capacity values at various current rates. Thus, compared with Li(Al,Ti)2(PO4)3-based hybrid electrolytes, the cell with Ge4+- based hybrid electrolyte has more stable capacity retention with cycles, which stems from the effectively increased Li conductivity of the ceramic/polymer hybrid, in which inorganic fillers can prevent the recrystallization of SPE effectively as shown in Fig. 4. The suppression of the reduced activity of lithium metal by Ge4+ ions rather than Ti4+ ions is also available to explain the enhanced cycling performance with various current conditions that we found using semi-IPN SPE/phosphate hybrid electrolytes following the previous works.[28,29] The galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles at the initial stages measured at 0.1 C are summarized in Fig. S5. Although the given cells exhibit relatively low capacity values of ~ 120 mA h g-1 with increased polarization voltages of ~ 0.4 V compared to that of the quasi-solid state semi-IPN SPE electrolyte systems, they undergo successive electrochemical reactions with coulombic efficiency of ≥ 97% overall cyclic reactions. The long term electrochemical stability of the phosphate-based hybrid electrolyte against the Li metal was analyzed by a galvanostatic cycling experiment in the symmetrical cell. As shown in Fig. 5(b), the cell with Li(Al,Ge)2(PO4)3-based hybrid electrolyte exhibits stable polarization voltage of ~0.5 V during 500 h, while the cell with Li(Al,Ti)2(PO4)3-based hybrid electrolyte is extremely higher voltage even under initial cycle stages finally ended up. Among a series of ceramic electrolytes, Li(Al,Ge)2(PO4)3 possesses high Li+ conductivity and favorable chemical stability against lithium, considered as a promising candidate for solid-state Li-based batteries. Hence the Ge4+-based hybrid electrolyte is more stable under the galvanostatic stripping-plating with Li-metal than Ti4+-based hybrid electrolyte. 
The corresponding electrochemical impedance spectroscopy results, Fig. 5(c) and Fig. S6, are similar to the Li stripping-plating data; the impedance values of Ge4+-based hybrid electrolyte is decreased within the initial stages and then increased with cycles, while the resistances are gradually increased with cycles for the Ti4+-based one. These results indicate that the former electrolyte has a small interface resistance in the cell and cycles relatively more stable than the latter one, Ti4+-based hybrid electrolyte. Generally, the solid-state electrolyte-based cells presented a large polarization voltage and inferior cycle behavior in comparison to that of liquid electrolyte-based cells, which induced by the limited physical contact with the occurrence of additional interfacial resistances between electrodes and solid electrolytes as well as the moderate ionic conductivity of the given electrolytes at room temperature.[1,30,31] They are known as the crucial factors constraining the ideal electrochemical behavior for the realization of all-solid-state LIBs. To the best of our knowledge, solid-state cells employing two different phosphates-based hybrid electrolytes with compositional change have not been reported so far. To check these results, an all-solid-state pouch type LIB cell was fabricated as shown in Fig. 6. As the working temperature gradually increased from room temperature to 50, finally reaching 80 °C, the LEDs stably lit up. The corresponding cells were tested in an intentionally folding and double folding state as well as a strain-free flat condition, and they still lit the LEDs in red with stable discharge capacity retention and negligible capacity fading as shown in Fig. S7. It indicates that the phosphates mixed with in-situ thermal cross-linking semi-IPN hybrid electrolytes facilitated its potential for use in flexible and light-weight energy storage devices. As mentioned earlier, a major challenge of the LABs is to develop air-stable electrolyte systems, which eliminate the use of volatile organic solvents and protect lithium metal and resist the attack by reactive oxygen radicals formed at the porous cathodes. To address these safety issues and to implement the characteristic cell configurations, the solid-state electrolytes with high ionic conductivity and solvent-free/free-standing films are strongly needed. Thus, finally, we fabricated LABs using the given hybrid electrolytes, and we discuss the feasibility of the solid-state electrolytes other than the conventional LIBs (Fig. 7).  
It can be seen that the typical non-aqueous LABs assembled with a porous carbon nanofiber-based cathode and ether-based electrolyte can stably operate for more than 70 cycles at 200 mA g-1, while the polarization voltage (i.e., the plateau voltage of charge state) is gradually increased, which causes desiccation of the liquid electrolyte and battery “death”. Interestingly, as shown in Fig. 7(a) and Fig. S8, the charge/discharge profiles for the LABs with the given hybrid electrolytes record a stable long-life cycling performance (up to 100 cycles), which is achieved with negligible decay for the solid-state battery. Moreover, SEM analysis was finally conducted to visualize the electrochemical reaction followed by nucleation and morphological evolution of the discharge product, Li2O2, given by the composite electrolytes. Fig. 8 exhibits SEM images of the CNF at discharge and charge states, respectively, corresponding to the dots that mark in galvanostatic charge-discharge curves. Relatively small toroidal shaped Li2O2 (sub-micrometer scale) sparsely covered on the entire CNF surface when the cell was discharged to 1000 mA h gc-1 (Fig. 8(b)). Then, those discharge products were mostly decomposed and some side products were remained on the cathode surface as shown in Fig. 8(c). Note that the surface image of the CNF cathode before the cyclic reaction is denoted, Fig. 8(a). These results are quite different when using the conventional liquid electrolyte, LiTFSI dissolved DME-based system, in which the toroidal particles with a diameter of < 1um entirely covered the CNF surface.[32] There might be the degree of difference in an immersion of solid-state electrolyte compared to the liquid electrolyte, while the overall electrochemical behavior is comparable to the liquid state one. The striking differences in the Li2O2 nucleation and growth exhibited by using the given semi-IPN hybrid electrolytes will be further studied like the in-situ DEMS analysis. 
In summary, to develop high capacity solid-state rechargeable batteries, we designed and prepared a hybrid electrolyte that integrated semi-IPN SPE with a ceramic electrolyte, Al3+ , or Ge4+ doped LiTi2(PO4)3; it offered stable electrochemical reaction with flexibility in both LIBs and LABs. Sub-micron Al3+ or Ge4+ doped LiTi2(PO4)3 particles synthesized by the solution chemistry presented the characteristic morphology and agglomeration with different doping ions. The hybrid electrolyte with Al3+ doped LiGe2(PO4)3 exhibited enhanced electrochemical behavior with closely packed particles that led to lowering the grain boundary resistance as well as the Li protective layer because Ge4+ is more stable against Li metal. The given hybrid electrolytes exhibited increased ionic conductivity of 3.64 x 10-4 S cm-1 at room temperature, which was two times higher than the Li(Al,Ti)2(PO4)3-basedhybrid electrolyte and high capacity retention with stable capacity fading at high current density. Moreover, the LAB cell employing the corresponding hybrid electrolyte as a protection layer for Li metal exhibited a stable cycle life under a limited capacity mode of 1000 mA h g-1 without detrimental over potential change within the reversible charge/discharge cyclic reactions, which was superior to the conventional ether-based liquid electrolyte systems. Considering of the stability under the air ambient procedures, cost-effectiveness and electrochemically stable in contact with Li metal, the given Li(Al,Ge)2(PO4)3 incorporated ceramic/polymer hybrid electrolyte is appealing, which can be an alternative electrolyte for all-solid-sate Li rechargeable batteries. Thus, we developed free-standing type solid-state electrolytes that were fully activated in both LIB and LAB cells excluding any additional procedures to activate the electrolyte/electrodes interfacial conditions, which sheds light on the developing “real” solid-state Li rechargeable batteries. 



















