Problems of the dipole ordering and ionic conductivity of Na3Sc2(PO4)3 polycrystal that has three polymorphic phases—α, β, and γ—are studied. The features of the α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 crystal structure and the dipole ordering and relaxation polarization in the α and β phases are specified. The origin of the dipole ordering in the α phase and the partial dipole disordering in the β-Na3Sc2(PO4)3, as well as the high ionic conductivity in the β and γ phases of the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 polycrystal are associated with phase transformations α → β, β → γ  that  result  in  structural  changes  of  the  rhombohedral  {[Sc2(PO4)3]3–}3∞  crystalline  framework.  A model  explaining  the  emergence  of  the  dipole  ordering  and  the  ionic  conductivity  phenomena  in Na3Sc2(PO4) is proposed.


The  compound  Na3Sc2(PO4)3,  the  isostructural analog  of  Na3Cr2(PO4)3  in  the  NASICON  family, possesses a low ionic conductivity in the low-temperature α phase and a high ionic conductivity in the hightemperature β and γ phases [1].

Despite the fact that the crystalline structure and properties  of  the  Na3Sc2(PO4)3  sodium–scandium double  phosphate  were  extensively  studied  by  scientists [2–12], they did not reach common ground concerning  the  problems  related  to  the  description  of phase transition temperatures, structural and conductivity  parameters  of  this  compound,  as  well  as  the problems of interpretation of the dipole ordering. In this regard, the further study of features of the dielectric  properties  and  electric  conductivities  of Na3Sc2(PO4)3  origin  is  quite  actual.  Crystals  with rhombohedral {[M2(PO4)3]3–}3∞ frameworks belonging to the NASICON family have already been widely used as structural materials for current sources [13].

The purpose of this paper is to establish the interrelations between structural features with the emergence of dipole ordering, ionic and superionic states in different polymorphic modifications of Na3Sc2(PO4)3. 

The  solid  state  synthesis  was  applied  within  the ceramic  processing  the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 polycrystals from the mixture of initial chemical  agents  3Na2СO3  +  2Sc2O3  +  6NH4H2PO4 taken in stoichiometric ratios, and using the two-stage annealing. At the first stage, the annealing was carried out at 870 K, at the second stage, the temperature was 970  K,  and  the  additional  homogenizing  grindings were added. The time of the samples annealing was 8 h at each stage of the solid state synthesis.

The  phase  state  and  the  structural  parameters  of polycrystalline samples of Na3Sc2(PO4)3 were examined by the X-ray diffraction powder method using the DRON-3 diffractometer (CuKα radiation).

The  nonlinear  optical  properties  of the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 polycrystal were determined using the second  optical  harmonic  generation  (SHG)  method of the neodymium laser radiation.

The  conductive  and  dielectric  properties  were determined using well sintered samples (with the density  96%  of  the  theoretical  value)  by  the  method  of impedance  spectroscopy  using  the  BM-507  impedance meter in the temperature interval of 293–573 K and the frequency range of 5–5 × 105 Hz. The dielectric  characteristics  of  the  samples  were  studied  by NOGAI et al.


The  synthesized  Na3Sc2(PO4)3  polycrystals  were white color pellets, 15 mm in diameter and 1 mm in thickness.

It was established by the X-ray measurements that the  prepared  samples  were  in  a  one-phase  state. According to [2], this α phase compound had a monoclinic structure typical for the space group (sp. gr.) Bb with parameters a = 16.10 Å, b = 9.109 Å, c = 8.928 Å, and  γ  =  127.15°.  In  this  paper,  it  was  found  that,  at ambient  temperature,  the  unit  cell  of  the  α  phase Na3Sc2(PO4)3 polycrystal had a monoclinic structure with the parameters: a = 16.090 Å, b = 9.076 Å, c = 8.956  Å,  γ  =  126.95°.  The  structural  parameters obtained by us for the α phase Na3Sc2(PO4)3 are close to the structural data presented in [2].



For the α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 phase, the value  of  ionic  conductivity  is  2  ×  10–5  (Ω   cm)–1  at 293 K, and the activation energy reaches 0.52 eV.

The considerable increase in the conductivity 2.4 × 10–3 (Ω  сm)–1 at T = 373 K, and the decrease in the activation  energy  to  0.36  eV  at  the  phase  transition α → β can be associated with the structural changes in the  β-Na3Sc2(PO4)3  crystalline  that accompany this transition [2–7, 14]. Most likely, the phase transition Tα → β promotes a partial removal of a monoclinic  distortion  of  the  crystalline  framework and  an  increase  in  concentration  of  mobile  sodium ions capable to participate in the conductivity of the crystal.


Despite the fact that the activation energy is high enough  for  the  β-Na3Sc2(PO4)3,  the  considerable surge  of  conductivity  (the  conductivity  increases  by more than an order of magnitude) and the decrease in the activation energy from 0.52 to 0.36 eV at the phase transition  α  →  β  allows  speaking  about  a  pseudosuperionic character of the conductivity.

The further increase in temperature promotes the next phase transformation at Tβ → γ = 439 K (the transition temperature was determined in the same way as in the previous case) and, accordingly, to even greater increase of the polycrystal conductivity (up to 2.5 × 10–2 (Ω  сm)–1 at 573 K), and the decrease in the activation energy to 0.22 eV, which can be attributed to the complete removal of monoclinic deformations of the crystalline framework as a result of the β → γ phase transition.  The  conductivity  of  the  γ-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 polycrystal can be considered purely superionic.

The  results  of  investigation  of  the  temperature dependence of the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 polycrystal conductivity  were  obtained  based  on  the  results  that  were quite accurate and reproducible.


The  obtained  experimental  data  were  adequately handled (see σT(T) in Fig. 2) to determine the parameters  of  the  ion  transport  and  phase  transition  temperatures of sodium-scandium phosphate, which are presented in Table 1.

As follows from the data presented in Table 1, the low-temperature α phase of the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 polycrystal  can  be  referred  to  the  dielectrics,  since  it  is characterized by low conductivity, 2 × 10–5 (Ω  cm)–1 at 293 K, and high activation energy, 0.52 eV.

The  experimental  data  obtained  above,  and  the results of [15], where it was reported about the presence of domains on the surface of the α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 crystal, and their vanishing during the α → β phase transition allow classifying this phase as ferroelectric.

The  investigation  of  the  temperature  dependence of dielectric permittivity ε(T) in the frequency range 5–5 × 105 Hz has revealed that the low-temperature phase  α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3  is  completely  dipole-ordered within the temperature range up to 320 K, since the action  of  the  external  electric  field  and  temperature does not modify the variable ε of the curve ε(T). At the further rise in the temperature, the polarization manifestations  in  the  polycrystal  were  indefinite,  especially  in  the  region  of  phase  transition  Tα → β  suppressed  by  other  effects  (for  example,  “slow  processes” of the ionic conductivity type).

With  the  purpose  to  exclude  the  “slow  process” influence on the polarization processes in the sample, the temperature dependence of the dielectric permittivity ε(T) was measured on super-high frequencies. In particular, in Fig. 3, the temperature dependence ε(T) for  the  Na3Sc2(PO4)3  polycrystalline  sample  on  the frequency of measuring field 2 GHz is presented.

Note that alongside the increase in the dielectric permittivity there is a clearly seen anomaly in the curve ε(T) corresponding to the region of phase transition Tα → β  =  339  K.  According  to  the  Curie–Weiss  law, peaks (surges) in the temperature curve ε(T) are characteristic of typical ferroelectric materials in the region of phase transitions (TC); but the anomaly registered by us in the form of a “step” in the curve ε(T) allows classifying the Tα → β transition as a nonintrinsic ferroelec-

According to [5], in the low-temperature phase αNa3Sc2(PO4)3,  only  the  B  cavities  are  occupied  by sodium  atoms;  moreover,  sodium  atoms  are  located almost at the centers of one third of the B cavity, while in the remaining two thirds of the cavity, the sodium atoms are shifted by 0.39, 1.64, 0.75, and 2.11 Å apart from the centers towards one of the A cavities, which results in formation of two positions: B1–B2 or C1– C2, that are statistically occupied by sodium cations with  the  multiplicities  differing  1.7  times.  It  is  not excluded that this order of filling the anionic crystalline framework with sodium cations induces the generation of a spontaneously polarized state with formation of sodium dipole systems in the crystal, which are ordered according to the sp. gr. Bb.

In the case of α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 [2, 3, 5], the statistical sodium dipoles were formed due to a nonuniform occupation by of sodium cations of the B cavities in the crystalline  framework  caused  by  splitting  of  sodium positions Na2 into two unequal parts. Most likely, the occurrence of the sodium dipoles causes the shift of the total positive charge center (sodium cations compensators) relative to the center of the B cavity of the crystalline framework. On the other hand, the negative  charge  center  should  be  formed  by  the  anionic {[Sc2(PO4)3]P–}3∞ crystalline framework at the center of the B cavity.

As a result, it is possible to speak about a “separation” of the centers of positive and negative charges relative to the center of the B cavity in the crystalline framework,  which  is  equivalent  to  forming  virtual “sodium dipoles” (in other words, statistical sodium dipoles) in the crystal.

These concepts agree with the experimental results (the crystal noncentrosymmetricity at T = 293 K, its conductive and dielectric properties), obtained for the α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 polycrystal.

The  deep  potential  well  model  with  two  equilibrium states or Flerich relaxator (Fig. 7a) are applicable to the systems whose relaxation on a microscale can be described  by  Eq.  (4).  Based  on  this  model  and  the model  proposed  for  the  α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3  dielectric phase in [2, 6], and the data on studying the conductive and dielectric properties and structural parameters of the α and β-Na3Sc2(PO4)3, the model of twominimum  potential  profile  along  the  conductivity channel (Fig. 7) can be proposed. Note that the depth of the potential profile (energetic characteristic) in the model for the α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 is larger (see Fig. 7a) than in the case of β-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 (see Fig. 7b), due to the difference in the level of structural distortions of the crystalline framework.

In the case of α phase, the uncompensated statistical sodium dipoles (see Fig. 7a) can be the relaxators for  the  relaxation  polarization,  while  in  the  case  of β-Na3Sc2(PO4)3,  both  disordered  sodium  ions  (see Fig.  7b)  and  compensated  statistical  sodium  dipoles can  be  the  relaxators  (taking  into  consideration  the superstructural distortions revealed in this phase). In Fig. 7b, there is a schematic layout of a compensated sodium  dipole  that  is  formed  of  two  anti-parallel


Transition  into  the  β  phase  is  accompanied  by  a partial  destruction  of  statistical  sodium  dipoles  in β-Na3Sc2(PO4)3, as evidenced by the high ionic conductivity, the surge in the curve of conductivity as a function of temperature (see Fig. 1), and the obtained dielectric and structural parameters. Note  that  β-Na3Sc2(PO4)3  has  a  rhombohedral structure [2, 5]. All results of the studies of the structure and thermal relaxation processes agree quite well with the supposition that both the “free” sodium ions and the compensated sodium dipoles can be the relaxators. For γ-Na3Sc2(PO4)3, the maxima of the dielectric loss tangent are shifted towards the higher frequency region and reach beyond the limits of the frequency range of our studies. Apparently, the relaxation polarization  process  for  the  γ-Na3Sc2(PO4)3  is  shifted toward the higher frequencies region. It is quite logical to attribute the occurrence of such polarization processes to the fast oscillations of disordered sodium ions in the γ-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 crystalline framework exposed to the external electric field. The enhancement of fast polarization processes at transition to the rhombohedral γ-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 phase with sp. gr.   can be associated with the maximum increase in the symmetry of the rhombohedral crystalline framework and the total disordering of compensated statistical sodium dipoles. The high mobility and uniform distribution of sodium ions over the A and B cavities  of  the  rhombohedral  crystalline  framework create  all  conditions  for  fast  polarization  processes under the action of the high-frequency electric field.

The obtained data on crucial modifications of electrophysical  properties  during  the  phase  transformations and the corresponding structural modifications of  the α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3  crystalline  framework  within the small temperature range (T = 293–573 K) allow speaking about an exclusive “elasticity” of the crystalline framework of this type.

In order to most clearly demonstrate the modifications of electrophysical properties of the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 depending  on  the  phase  states  (α,  β,  and  γ),  the refined  crystallochemical  model  shown  in  Fig.  8  is proposed (based on the model described in [5]).

The distribution of sodium atoms over the A and B cavities of the crystalline framework for the α, β, and γ phases of Na3Sc2(PO4)3 can be presented schematically as it is shown in Fig. 8. The A cavities of the crystal can be vacant or statistically occupied by sodium atoms, and the B cavities are occupied either statistically with ordering, or in the form of statistical sodium dipoles, or uniformly occupied by sodium cations.

The vacant A cavities are shown in Fig. 8 by a light circle inscribed in a square and enumerated by position 1, and the ordered states and uncompensated sta-

However,  it  is  necessary  to  underline  that  the α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3  polycrystal  is  a  nonintrinsic  ferroelectric  (it  is  shown  by  the  upper  line  in  Table  2). According to this model, the α-Na3Sc2(PO4)3 is characterized by both the ordered (positions 3 in Fig. 8) and  the  dipole-ordered  states  in  the  B  cavity  of  the crystalline  framework  (positions  4  and  5  in  Fig.  8). Meanwhile, the A cavities are completely vacant.

Concerning the β-Na3Sc2(PO4)3, it is quite logical to suppose that some of B cavities will be occupied by free sodium cations in the form shown by positions 2, and by compensated statistical sodium dipoles that are enumerated in position 5 (see Fig. 8).

During the phase transitions α → β, β → γ in the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 polycrystal, there are acts of consecutive  increase  in  symmetry  of  the  polycrystal,  which result  in  destruction  of  both  the  ordered  and  the dipole-ordered states, and promote the more uniform statistical distribution of sodium cations over the A and B  cavities  of  the  crystalline  framework,  as  shown  in Fig. 8 for the γ-Na3Sc2(PO4)3.