Low-band gap conjugated polymers with donor−acceptor (D− A) structures have emerged as second near-infrared (NIR-II) ﬂuorescence probes for biological imaging. However, how to control the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) to maintain the low band gap and improve the NIR-II ﬂuorescence intensity is an urgent issue. Here, the quinoid polymers have been developed to eﬀectively regulate the ICT for brighter NIR-II ﬂuorescence signals. Thiophene repeat chain units of diﬀerent lengths (T, 2T, and 3T) were utilized to link with electron-withdrawing ester-substituted thieno[3,4b]thiophene (TT) to alter the density of the electron-withdrawing side groups for controlling the ICT. By increasing the thiophene chain length from TT-T to TT-3T, the density of the electron-withdrawing groups decreased and the ICT was weakened. In the case of NIR absorption and NIR-II emission, weakened ICT leads to brighter NIR-II ﬂuorescence. After the preparation of the water-soluble quinoid polymer probes (CPs), TT-3T CPs with weak ICT exhibited the brightest NIR-II ﬂuorescent signals among the three quinoid polymer probes. Several NIR-II biomedical imaging applications, including in vivo cell tracking, blood vascular system images, and lymphatic drainage mapping, show that the TT3T CP-based nanoprobe had excellent characteristics of long-term stability and high NIR-II spatial resolutions in vivo. KEYWORDS: intramolecular charge transfer, quinoid polymers, electron-withdrawing groups, enhanced NIR-II ﬂuorescence, NIR-II Imaging

Currently, optical ﬂuorescence imaging has been widely used in the exploration of biological research and biological applications such as cell inﬂammatory arthritis detection, early cancer diagnosis, and intraoperative tumor imaging.1−3 In particular, ﬂuorescence imaging in the second near-infrared window (NIR-II, 1000−1700 nm) has proven to precede the traditional ﬂuorescent imaging in the visible light spectrum or the ﬁrst NIR window (NIR-I, 650−900 nm). NIR-II ﬂuorescent imaging allows high signal-to-background ratio (SBR), with excellent resolution of the anatomic structures, because of its intrinsic advantages of negligible light scattering from tissues.4,5 In addition to their enormous potential in medicine, the development of novel NIR-II ﬂuorophore probes with improvedimaging applications has greatly properties for biomedical increased the possibility to apply NIR-II imaging technologies into clinical medicine.

Currently, for eﬃcient NIR-II imaging, several classes of including single-walled carbon nanotubes,6,7 nanomaterials, semiconducting quantum dots,8−10 rare earth materials,11,12 small organic molecules,13−19 and conjugated polymers,20−22 have been developed. Nevertheless, inorganic nanomaterials have potential toxicity in vivo,23,24 and small organic molecules suﬀer from poor processability and photostability,25−27 which


Herein, we conveniently modiﬁed the density of the electronwithdrawing side groups on quinoid polymers with suitable ICT for brighter NIR-II ﬂuorescence signals. To control the density of the electron-withdrawing side groups, we systematically introduced thiophene repeat chain units of diﬀerent lengths (thiophene, bithiophene, and terthiophene) to copolymerize with an ester-substituted thieno[3,4-b]thiophene (TT) and obtained three quinoid polymers (TT-T, TT-2T, and TT-3T). With extending the length of the thiophene repeat chain units, the ICT of the quinoid polymers with dilute electronwithdrawing groups would be conveniently weakened. Furthermore, the quinoid polymers were eﬀectively enhanced by the weakened ICT. After the formation of PEGylated quinoid polymer nanoparticles, water-soluble NIR-II probes, TT-2T CPs and TT-3T CPs with dilute electron-withdrawing groups on their polymeric backbones exhibited over 64 and 94%, respectively, stronger NIR-II emission than that of the TT-T CPs. In addition, the most promising quinoid polymer probe, the TT-3T CPs, was applied to an eﬃcient NIR-II imaging under physiological conditions. Noninvasive in vivo cell tracking using the TT-3T CPs manifested great long-term stability in live mice.

The synthetic procedures of all polymers were performed under nitrogen atmosphere. All commercial chemical agents were put into material further puriﬁcation. Tris(dibenzylideneacetone)dipalladium(0), 2-bromo-2-methylpropanoyl bromide, and triphenylphosphine were purchased from J&K Scientiﬁc Ltd. Pluronic F-127 was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Co. Additionally, 4,6-dibromo-thieno[3,4-b]thiophene-2-carboxylic acid dodecyl ester, 2,5-bis-trimethylstannanyl-thiophene, 5,5′-bis-trimethylstannyl-2,2-bithiophene, and 2,2:5′,2″-terthiophene-5,5″bis-trimethylstannane were ordered from SunaTech Inc. Spectral Characterizations. UV−vis absorption spectra of the conjugated polymers was determined by a Shimadzu UV-3600 Plus spectrophotometer over the range of 500−1100 nm at 25 °C. The NIRII emission spectrum of the conjugated polymers over the range of 900−1400 nm was determined using NIR-II spectroscopy (Fluorolog 3) equipped with an InGaAs detector excited by an 808 nm laser (RMPC lasers). After acquisition of the raw emission data, the ﬂuorescence spectrum was further corrected on the basis of the detector sensitivity proﬁle.

The Settings of the NIR-II Fluorescence Imaging System. The NIR-II ﬂuorescence images were recorded by a small animal NIR-II imaging system (Wuhan Grand-imaging Technology Co., Ltd) equipped with a thermoelectrically cooled two-dimensional InGaAs camera (Princeton Instruments) excited by an 808 nm laser (40 mW cm−2). Besides, the ﬂuorescence was detected using a 50 mm camera lens equipped with various ﬁlters (such as 980, 1064, and 1320 nm longpass ﬁlters) as required.

Cell Lines and Cell Culture. KeyGen Biotech Co. Ltd supplied us a line, 4T1, and human oral murine breast adenocarcinoma cell squamous cell carcinoma cell line, HSC3. 4T1 and HSC3 cells were both incubated in complete Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle medium (DMEM), a cell culture medium which contained 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) at 37 °C under a 5% CO2 atmosphere.

Cellular Uptake and Cytotoxicity Study of the TT-3T CPs. To investigate the cellular uptake of the NPs, six-well plates were used to culture 4T1 breast cancer cells for 24 h. Every dish contained around 1 × 105 cells. After the removal of the medium and washing with phosphate-buﬀered saline (PBS), the culture medium of the 4T1 cells turns into a 0.1 mg mL−1 solution of the TT-3T CPs in which cells were cultured for diﬀerent time intervals (1, 6, and 12 h). After being washed twice with 1× PBS buﬀer to remove excess TT-3T CPs, the cellular uptake of the TT-3T CPs was determined based on the NIR-II signals intensity by an InGaAs array equipped with a 1064 nm long-pass ﬁlter. The in vitro cytotoxicity of the TT-3T CPs was conﬁrmed through 3(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) analysis of the 4T1 and HSC3 cells. Ninety-six-well plates were used to culture the 4T1 and HSC3 cells at a concentration of 4 × 104 cells per well with DMEM (containing 10% FBS) at 37 °C. After 24 h of incubation, TT-3T CPs solution was further co-cultured with the cells for additional 48 h at diﬀerent concentrations. Then, the cells in each well were washed with PBS twice, and 0.2 mg mL−1 solution of MTT (100 μL) was injected into every well and allowed to soak for another 4 h at 37 °C. After the removal of the MTT solution, every well was injected with 150 μL of dimethyl sulfoxide. All the precipitates were dissolved through shaking the plate for 15 min at 25 °C. We utilized a PowerWave XS/XS2 microplate spectrophotometer to measure the absorption intensity at 490 nm. Finally, the ratio of the absorption intensity of MTT in the treated sample wells to that of the controlled cells was determined as the cell viability.

Animal Experiments. All small animal measurements were performed on the basis of the NIH guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals (NIH publication no. 85-23 Rev. 1985) and approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of Simcere Bio Tech Corp., Ltd. Shanghai Laboratory Animal Center, Chinese Academy of Science


TT units are commonly utilized to stabilize the quinoid structure and decrease the band gap of conjugated polymers. Thus, we introduced an ester-substituted TT into the formulation of new NIR-II conjugated polymers. The formation of the TT-based quinoid polymers with diﬀerent densities of the prequinoid monomer (TT) are described in Figure 1a. These three TT-based quinoid conjugated polymer derivatives, TT-T, TT-2T, and TT-3T, were formed by copolymerization between TT and three diﬀerent thiophene repeat chain monomers, including thiophene (T), bithiophene (2T), and terthiophene (3T) via Stille polymerization as illustrated in the Supporting Information. The formation of the three polymers was determined by 1H NMR and gel permeation chromatography (GPC); detailed results are given in the Supporting Information. The three polymers exhibited a number-average molecular weight (Mn) of 29.0−58.0 kDa via GPC. The three polymers could be dissolved in common organic solvents including toluene and tetrahydrofuran (THF).

To predict the photophysical properties of the three polymers, the HOMOs and lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMOs) of TT-based quinoid polymer analogues (to reduce the computational costs, the alkyl side chains were substituted

The absorption of the TT-based quinoid polymers was measured in THF (Figure 2a). The diﬀerent densities of the electron-withdrawing ester groups used in this work modulated the broadened absorption at 500−1000 nm of the quinoid polymers dissolved in THF. As summarized in Table S3, TT-T, with the highest density of electron-withdrawing estersubstituted TT units, illustrated a red shift of the absorption peak at 787 nm in THF. TT-2T and TT-3T with dilute electronwithdrawing esters exhibited a blue shift in their absorption spectrum compared with the TT-T quinoid polymers (Figure 2a). Furthermore, in accordance with previous studies,28,45 the low electron-withdrawing ester density on the quinoid polymers drove the absorption peaks to shorter wavelengths because of the weak ICT. The NIR-II ﬂuorescence spectra of 0.01 mg mL−1 solution of the quinoid polymers in THF were conﬁrmed ranging from 900 to 1400 nm under an 808 nm laser excitation. The NIR-II emission spectra of the TT-based quinoid polymers were very close in THF (Figure 2b). Speciﬁcally, the main emission peaks of the three quinoid conjugated polymers were located around

Preparation and Characterization of the Nanoparticles. The quinoid conjugated polymers were encapsulated into a PEGylated amphiphilic triblock copolymer (Pluronic F127) via a nanoprecipitation method to prepare the conjugated polymer nanoparticle-based water-soluble NIR-II nanoprobes. The three quinoid conjugated polymers nanoparticles (CPs) had similar spherical morphologies, with an average size of approximately 51−70 nm as revealed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Figure S9a). In addition, dynamic light scattering (DLS) indicated that the three nanoparticles ⟩) of 44−55 possessed the average hydrodynamic radius (⟨Rh nm in water (Figure S9b). The NPs of the three quinoid conjugated polymers in water (0.01 mg mL−1) exhibited a similar absorption and ﬂuorescence spectra as those of TT-T, TT-2T, and TT-3T in the organic solutions (Figure 3a,b). In contrast to the quinoid conjugated polymers in the organic solutions, the absorption peak of the three nanoparticles changed slightly (Table S4) by the aggregating nature of the hydrophobic conjugated polymers in nanoparticles. The ﬂuorescence intensities of the three nanoparticles at the same concentration were lower in water compared to the quinoid conjugated polymers in organic

In accordance with these results, a number of previous studies in a conjugated polymer nanoprobe domain have demonstrated that the ﬂuorescence of nanoparticles with rigid structural backbones can be quenched by the aggregation of conjugated polymers in nanoparticles and the high polarity of water.34,48 Furthermore, the TT-T CPs had the largest red shift of the absorption peak (812 nm) and lowest emission peak (1108 nm) among the three nanoparticles, whereas the TT-3T CPs, which had weak ICT, had the highest NIR-II emission peak at 1070 nm. The ﬂuorescence intensity of the TT-2T CPs was more than 64% greater than that of TT-T CPs, whereas the ﬂuorescence intensity of TT-3T CPs was more than 94% higher than that of TT-T CPs. These results were reﬂected in the spectral variations among the PEGylated nanoparticles, which exhibited the same trends as those of the three conjugated polymers in organic solutions and was not inﬂuenced by the aggregation of the conjugated polymers in the nanoparticles. Moreover, we compared the NIR-II ﬂuorescence signals of the three nanoparticles with various ﬁlters (1000−1400 nm, Figure 3c). The results indicated that the NIR-II signals of the TT-3T CPs were stronger than those of the TT-2T CPs and TT-T CPs for each ﬁlter. All these data revealed that the quiniod polymers with decreasing ICT eﬀect from the TT-T CPs to the TT-3T CPs could enhance the NIR-II ﬂuorescence in accordance with the variation in the emission of the quiniod polymers in organic solutions.

In addition, we compared the ﬂuorescence signals of the TT3T CPs with the reported NIR-II conjugated polymer probes [pDA-poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) and PDFT1032]. The NIRII signal of the TT-3T CPs was visibly increased by 45 and 100% over those of pDA-PEG and PDFT1032, respectively, at the same concentration and with the 1064 nm LP ﬁlter (Figure S10). According to a reported method, the ﬂuorescence quantum yields (QY) of TT-3T CPs in water are determined as 1.75% against the reference ﬂuorophore (IR1061) with a known QY of 1.7%49 in dichloromethane solution.13,26 These results indicated that the TT-3T CPs with weakened ICT were much more favorable for the eﬃcient NIR-II biological imaging owing to less tissue scattering of the ﬂuorescence at longer wavelength.4 As illustrated in Figure 3d,e, the NIR-II ﬂuorescence images and quantiﬁed ﬂuorescent intensity of the TT-3T CPs in the chicken breast tissue at diﬀerent depths (0, 1,4, 6, and 8 mm) were acquired. The results indicated that the tissue penetration for NIR-II imaging with the TT-3T CPs exhibited a high penetration depth up to ∼6 mm. Together, these data suggested that the TT-3T CPs has the potential to be used as an excellent NIR-II ﬂuorescence agent for further imaging applications.

For further in vivo applications, DLS indicated a similar hydrodynamic radius of TT-3T CPs in PBS, FBS, and DMEM solutions of approximately 67−73 nm (Figure S12a), allowing for retention in some diseased tissues such as tumors with nanoparticle sizes of 20−200 nm.50 The photostability of the TT-3T CPs was also excellent in PBS, DMEM, and FBS, which was reﬂected by their negligible ﬂuorescence variation under a continuous 808 nm laser excitation for 1 h (Figure S12b,c).

In Vitro and in Vivo Cytotoxicity Assay and Biodistribution. The potential in vitro cytotoxicity of the TT-3T CPs was measured using the MTT assay against 4T1 and HSC3 cells. As shown in Figure S13, with diﬀerent dosages of TT-3T CPs ranging from 3.3 to 100 μg mL−1, the cell viability of both cell lines was above 90% after 48 h of culture, demonstrating its good biocompatibility. Healthy Balb/c mice (n = 3) were i.v. injected with TT-3T CPs (2 mg mL−1, 150 μL) to assess the in vivo detailed physiological toxicology. The normal hematology parameters including white blood cells, red blood cells, hematocrit, hemoglobin (HGB), platelets, mean corpuscular HGB concentration, mean corpuscular volume, and mean corpuscular HGB were measured (Figure S14), and the data showed no meaningful changes for TT-3T CP-treated groups in these indicators over a period of 30 d in comparison with the values of the untreated group. The standard blood biochemical indexes including aspartate aminotransferase (AST), blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and alanine ALT were also examined (Figure S14). No signiﬁcant hepatic and renal disorders in the TT-3T CPs-treated group were found after 14 and 30 days. These results demonstrate that the TT-3T CPs induced no signiﬁcant inﬂammation or infection and no obvious hepatic and renal disorders in the treated group. Furthermore, to characterize the corresponding histological changes in the heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, and brain, we collected and sliced them for H&E staining at 14 and 30 days post-injection (Figure S14). No signiﬁcant acute or chronic pathological toxicity was found during the treatment time for the treated mice, indicating that no

Noninvasive cell tracking in live animals by ﬂuorescent probes for a long time can oﬀer valuable biological information regarding cellular processes and biomedical engineering.51,52 Considering the photostability and deep-tissue imaging properties of the TT-3T CPs, we explored their in vitro cellular uptake and in vivo cell tracing toward 4T1 cells. After incubation with a 0.1 mg mL−1 solution of the TT-3T CPs, the NIR-II ﬂuorescence intensity of 4T1 breast cancer cells was obtained at designated time intervals (Figure 4a). With the cellular uptake of TT-3T CPs, the NIR-II ﬂuorescence intensity of 4T1 breast cancer cells increased and reached a maximum at 12 h. Therefore, 1 × 106 4T1 cells after incubation with a 0.1 mg mL−1 solution of the TT-3T CPs for 12 h were subcutaneously injected into the armpit of mice. As depicted in Figure 4b, the injected region could be clearly distinguished through bright NIR-II ﬂuorescence at 1 h (0 days) and even 10 days postinjection. Furthermore, in contrast to 0 days post-injection (3.41 ± 0.30), the quantiﬁed NIR-II SBRs in the injected region was 2.04 ± 0.24 at 10 days post-injection (Figure S16). These data clearly manifest the great long-term stability of the TT-3T CPs in live mice, which is important for physiological imaging.

NIR-II Imaging of Blood Vascular System. As shown in Figure 5a, the images of the abdominal vascular system of healthy mice (n = 3) were obtained after intravenous injection of TT-3T CPs (2 mg mL−1, 150 μL) with an InGaAs camera excited by an 808 nm laser (40 mW cm−2). The major blood vascular system of the mouse abdomen was clearly discriminated from the surrounding tissue over a long time ranging from 5 min to 3 h after tail vein injection of the TT-3T CPs. Even at 5 min, the branches of the blood vessels of the healthy nude mice were able to be unambiguously identiﬁed from the surrounding tissue. This illustrated the good optical spatial resolution characteristic of the TT-3T CPs for medical imaging applications. After 5 h, the NIR-II signal and image resolution of the mice blood vessels declined dramatically while a stronger ﬂuorescent signal appeared in the liver and spleen region because of elimination of the TT-3T CPs through reticuloendothelial systems.53 These results were similar with the time-dependent NIR-II ﬂuorescence intensity variations in the blood extracted from the TT-3T CP-treated mice (Figure 5b). As observed in Figure 5c−f, the vessel width of mice hind limb images obtained using TT-3T CPs in NIR-II window was 0.61 mm, whereas the vessel width of the same vessel images was not able to be obtained using ICG. Similarly, the vessel width of mice cerebrovascular images using TT-3T CPs in NIR-II window was 0.82 mm, whereas the vessel width analysis of blood vessel in the same region imaged by ICG failed (Figure 5g−j). It was noted that the spatial contrast and resolution of images by TT-3T CPs was higher than ICG in high-magniﬁcation vascular system imaging because of the decreased scattering of NIR-II light.4

NIR-II Imaging of Lymphatic System. To visualize the lymphatic system, especially the threadlike lymphatic vessels, magnifying NIR-II images of mice limbs were obtained at the diﬀerent time intervals after intramuscular injection of TT-3T CPs (0.1 mg mL−1, 50 μL) into the paw of the healthy Balb/c mice (Figure 6a−d). It is very clear that the circulation of the TT-3T CPs from the injection section to the popliteal lymph

In summary, we conveniently synthesized three TT-based quinoid polymers (TT-T, TT-2T, and TT-3T) with thiophene repeat chain units of diﬀerent lengths for eﬃcient NIR-II imaging by eﬀective control of the ICT eﬀect under the guarantee of the low band gap characters. From TT-T to TT-3T with decreasing density of the electron-withdrawing side chains, the ICT eﬀects of the quinoid polymers were weakened, resulting in stronger NIR-II emission. After the formation of the PEGylated quinoid conjugated polymer NPs, TT-2T CPs and TT-3T CPs with weak ICT retained their intense NIR-II ﬂuorescence, which exceeded 64 and 94% over the NIR-II emission of the TT-T CPs in water. Compared with reported NIR-II conjugated polymer probes pDA-PEG and PDFT1032, the promising TT-3T CPs exhibited a greater than 45 and 100% stronger NIR-II signal, respectively, with the 1064 nm LP ﬁlters. Moreover, good stability of the TT-3T CPs was demonstrated through NIR-II images of in vivo cell tracking. The excellent in vivo NIR-II imaging quality of TT-3T CPs was veriﬁed by images of the blood vascular system and lymphatic drainage. Thus, eﬀective modulation of the ICT eﬀect in quinoid polymers enabled excellent NIR-II imaging characteristics. Furthermore, under the premise of balancing the low band gap and the strong NIR-II emission in quinoid polymers, our “dilute electronwithdrawing side chains” strategy to weaken the ICT to produce bright ﬂuorescence signals provided a convenient and eﬀective approach for design of high-performance NIR-II conjugated polymer probes.