
A  NASICON-type  Na3Fe2(PO4)3  material  has  been  investigated  as  a  low-cost  and  high-rate  anode material for aqueous Na-ion batteries. When paired with a Prussian  white analogue of Na2Mn[Fe(CN)6], the aqueous Na-ion full cell holds great promise  for  energy  storage  due  to  the  promising  cell  performance  and  the  employment  of  Earth-abundant Fe and Mn elements.  

Aqueous  sodium-ion  batteries  are  attractive  battery  alternatives  for stationary  energy  storage  due  to  their  inherently  low  cost  and  high  safety.  

The development of advanced electrode materials with excellent performance and low cost is  crucial  for  the  success  of  aqueous  Na-ion  batteries.  Albeit  the  high  capacity  and stable cycling of the leading anode of NaTi2(PO4)3, the high price of titanium element and  the  low  Na-insertion  potential  close  to  the  hydrogen  evolution  reaction  may plague  its  application.  Here  we  introduced  a  NASICON-type  Na3Fe2(PO4)3  as  a promising  anode  alternative  for  aqueous  Na-ion  batteries.  Synchrotron  X-ray diffraction and spectroscopy confirm its phase and atomic structure. Electrochemical characterization  and  X-ray  photoelectron  spectroscopy  reveal  the  reversible  Na+ insertion in Na3Fe2(PO4)3 due to the Fe3+/Fe2+ redox couple, which renders a specific  capacity of ~60 mAh  g-1 and excellent cycling of 1000 cycles at 10C rate. A Super high rate of 100C was also achieved for this anode with a capacity retention of 61% after 1000 cycles. In addition, the Na3Fe2(PO4)3 anode is paired with a Prussian white analogue of Na2Mn[Fe(CN)6] into a full cell, exhibiting promising cell performance and  material  sustainability.  Our  work  underlines  the  importance  of  fabricating aqueous  batteries  on  the  basis  of  the  Earth-abundant,  cost-effective,  and  non-toxic 



Lithium-ion  batteries  have  dominated  the  portable  electronics  and  electric vehicles  markets  and  are  now  penetrating  to  the  grid-scale  energy  storage  [1,  2]. 

However, the scare lithium (Li) reserve on Earth and the employment of flammable electrolytes  impose  a  great  cost  and  safety  concern.  To  better  integrate  the renewable-but-intermittent  energy  into  electric  grids,  it  is  indispensable  to  develop more cost-effective and sustainable battery technology. Recently, aqueous sodium-ion batteries have been emerging as an appealing alternative for stationary energy storage, due to the earth-abundant sodium (Na) resource and the intrinsically safe, inexpensive, and green aqueous electrolytes [3, 4]. 


Akin  to  Li-ion  batteries,  the  development  of  advanced  electrode  materials  with low cost is of paramount importance for aqueous Na-ion batteries. 
Particularly, there is a growing consensus in the battery community to develop iron or manganese-based electrode  materials  [5-8],  considering  their  significant  advantages  of  low  cost,  high abundance, and non-toxicity. 

To date, tremendous success has been achieved on the Fe/Mn-based cathode materials, where  a plethora of host frameworks such as metal oxides (Na0.44MnO2) [9], phosphates (NaFePO4, Na2FeP2O7, Na3MnTi(PO4)3) [10-12], and Prussian blue analogues (Na2Fe[Fe(CN)6]) [13] have shown excellent Na-storage performance in aqueous electrolytes. By contrast, less progress has been made on the anode  side.  Among  a  handful  of  alternatives,  the  NaTi2(PO4)3  represents  a  leading anode  material  owing  to  its  two-Na  storage  capacity  of  ~132  mAh  g-1  and  low potential of -0.60 V  vs. SHE (standard hydrogen electrode) on basis of the Ti4+/Ti3+ redox couple [14-16]. Additionally, its open and robust structure renders a promising rate and cycling performance. Nonetheless, the Na+ insertion potential is lower than the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) potential of water at a neutral state (-0.41 V vs. SHE),  which  may  cause  the  water  decomposition  and  bring  safety  concerns  during extended  cycling.  Besides,  the  high  price  and  moderate  reserve  of  the  titanium element  also  hampers  its  large-scale  application.  Therefore,  it  is  crucial  to  develop alternative anode materials with excellent performance and material sustainability.   

As a matter of fact, the attractive metrics of NaTi2(PO4)3 are originated from its unique  NASICON  (Na  Super  Ionic  Conductors)  structure.  NASICON  materials exhibit a nominal formula of AxMy(PO4)3, where A and M stands for alkali metal and transition metal atoms respectively [17-19]. The corner sharing of the MO6 octahedra and  PO4  tetrahedra  constitutes  the  “lantern  unit”  which  shows  a  three-dimensional framework  with  interconnected  channels  to  facilitate  the  fast  and  durable  Na+ diffusion  [20-21].  More  importantly,  it  is  feasible  to  tune  the  M  sites  to  tailor  the physiochemical  properties  such  as  ionic  conductivities  and  insertion  potentials.  One example is from Lavela et al. who investigated the impact of iron substitution on the Na-insertion  performance  in  Na1+xTi2-xFex(PO4)3  compounds  [22].  Besides  Fe substitution, it is viable to study the Fe-based NASICON Na3Fe2(PO4)3 material. Xia et  al.  reported  that  this  compound  exhibited  a  flat  discharge  plateau  at  ~2.5  V  vs. 

Na+/Na due to the Fe3+/Fe2+ redox, which is 0.4 V higher than NaTi2(PO4)3 [23]. Dou et  al.  activated  the  Fe3+/Fe4+  redox  in  Na3Fe2(PO4)3  by  conducting  carbon  coating, which results in a higher capacity of ~109 mAh g-1 [24]. These studies demonstrated the reversible Na+ insertion in Na3Fe2(PO4)3; however, the reversible Na+ insertion in the safe, green, and sustainable aqueous systems is yet to be investigated.   

Herein,  for  the  first  time,  we  reported  Na3Fe2(PO4)3  as  an  alternative  anode material  for  aqueous  Na-ion  batteries.  Electrochemical  characterization  shows  that Na3Fe2(PO4)3 delivers a reversible capacity of ~60 mAh g-1 and a moderate potential of -0.25 V vs. Ag/AgCl due to the Fe3+/Fe2+ redox. 

Additionally, the open and robust NASICON  structure  facilitates  an  excellent  rate  performance  of  100  C  and satisfactory cycling of 1000 cycles. Both cyclic voltammetry and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements revealed the change of Fe oxidation states due to the  (de)insertion  of  Na  ions.  The  Na3Fe2(PO4)3  material  is  further  paired  with  a Fe/Mn-based  Prussian  white  analogue  as  a  sustainable  full  cell,  which  exhibits  a promising  cycling  performance  for  700  cycles.  Our  results  demonstrated  new opportunities  in  using  NASICON  and  other  new  types  of  similar  materials  for next-generation aqueous Na-ion batteries. 


Na3Fe2(PO4)3 was synthesized by citric acid assisted sol-gel method [25]. Firstly, Fe(NO3)3•9H2O,  NaNO3,  and  NH4H2PO4  was  mixed  in  a  stoichiometric  ratio  and solved in deionized water. And then, excessive citric acid, which is about 50% more than  the  stoichiometric  amount  of  each  metal  (pH=3),  was  slowly  added  into  the mixed  solution  with  stirring  on  the  hotplate.  After  evaporation  of  the  solvent,  the precursor was sintered twice at 650 °C for 12 h, and the target products were obtained. 

Na2Mn[Fe(CN)6]  was  synthesized  by  a  facile  precipitation  method  according  to  the literature [26]. 


The phase identification and the refinement of lattice parameters for the samples were performed by synchrotron X-ray diffraction (XRD), power XRD patterns were collected  at  experimental  station  13-BM-C  of  APS.  The  X-ray  beam  was monochromatic  with  a  Si  (311)  crystal  to  28.6keV  (0.434  Å)  with  1eV  bandwidth. 

Scanning  electron  microscopy  (SEM)  images  Scanning  electron  microscopy  (SEM) images of as-prepared Na3Fe2(PO4)3 particles were collected at Center for Nanoscale Materials  of  Argonne  National  Laboratory  using  a  field  emission  SEM  (Hitachi S-4700-II)  at  15  kV.  TEM  experiments  were  performed  at  200keV  on  a  FEI  Titan 80-300 ST has a CEOS Cc/Cs corrector on the imaging side of the column to correct both spherical and chromatic aberrations. STEM experiments were performed also at 200keV  on  a  FEI  Talos  F200X  TEM/STEM  with  a  X-FEG  (field-emission  gun), specialized in high-resolution STEM imaging.The XPS measurements were carried out  on  PHI-5600  with  Mg  Kα  radiation  (hν  =  1253.6  eV).  X-ray  absorption spectroscopy  (XAS)  was  performed  at  beamline  5BM-D,  Advanced  Photon  Source (APS) of Argonne National Laboratory (ANL). The ion chamber was used to collect the Fe transmission signal. The XAS data was analyzed with Athena to substrate the pre-edge  background  by  linearly  fitting  and  post-edge  background  by  using  a cubic-spline fit procedure. The background subtracted XAS data was normalized by the height of absorption edge. The normalized data can be separated into two parts for analysis:  XANES  (oxidization  state)  and  EXAFS  (local  structure).  For  quantitative analysis of EXAFS, Artemis was carried out. The scattering paths were selected from the crystal structure of Na3Fe2(PO4)3 which is generated from XRD refinement. 


In  summary,  we  demonstrated  the  NASICON-type  Na3Fe2(PO4)3  material  as  a cost-effective  and  sustainable  electrode  material  for  aqueous  Na-ion  batteries. Electrochemical  characterizations,  XPS,  and  ex  situ  XRD  reveal  the  reversible  Na+ insertion  in  the  Na3Fe2(PO4)3  structure  due  to  the  Fe3+/Fe2+  redox  couple.  We  also reported  a  sustainable  Na-ion  full  cell  based  on  the  Na3Fe2(PO4)3  anode  and Na2Mn[Fe(CN)6]  cathode,  which  shows  a  promising  charge/discharge  and  cycling performance.  The  study  here  highlights  the  direction  of  developing  next  generation aqueous batteries that only employ Earth-abundant and cost-effective elements. 