High lithium-ion conducting solid electrolyte thin ﬁlm of Li1.4Al0.4Ge0.2Ti1.4(PO4)3-TiO2 for aqueous lithium secondary batteries Fan Baia,b,⁎, Xuefu Shanga, Daisuke Morib, Sou Taminatob, Mitsuhiro Matsumotob, Shinya Watanabeb, Yasuo Takedab, Osamu Yamamotob, Hiroyoshi Nemoric, Masaya Nomurac, Nobuyuki Imanishib a Department of Physics, Faculty of Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China b Graduate School of Engineering, Mie University, Tsu, Mie 514-8507, Japan c Suzuki Motor Corporation, Group 2, Component Engineering Department, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka 432-8611, Japan

The water-impermeable solid electrolyte is the key part to aqueous lithium secondary battery design at it serves as both separator and lithium-ion conducting pass way between the lithium metal anode and the aqueous electrolyte. Up to now, NASICON-type doped LiTi2(PO4)3 solid lithium-ion conductors have been proved to be stable in an aqueous solution with a high content of lithium ions, but its relatively low robustness and high resistance is still a barrier towards fabricating high performance battery. Herein, a Li1.4Al0.4Ge0.2Ti1.4(PO4)3 (LAGTP)-10 wt% TiO2 composite with a greatly reduced 90 μm thickness was managed by the route of tape casting. The lithium-ion conductivity, bending strength and water penetration of the ﬁlm were systematically investigated in this study. The electrical conduction of the ﬁlm was 8.70 × 10−4 S cm−1 and the mechanical bending strength of the ﬁlm was improved more than three times to 200 N mm−2 measured at ambient temperature. Water impermeable function was realized by coupling a small amount of ca. 2 wt% epoxy resin into the open pores of the ﬁlm. Finally, the assembled Li/Li(FSO2)2N in glyme/LAGTP-10 wt% TiO2-epoxy resin/10 M LiCl-1.5 M LiOH/MnO2, air cell presented a reduced total areal resistance to around 240 Ω cm2 at 25 °C and was successfully cycled at 1.0 mA cm−2 in air.

Rechargeable lithium-air secondary batteries are promising power sources for electrical vehicles (EVs), because they have a far higher theoretical energy density and lower material cost [1–3]. Among these batteries, aqueous lithium-air batteries are more attractive because they have fewer troubles to the non-aqueous lithium-air counterparts, such as electrolyte instability by the reaction products and contamination of the lithium anode with water in air [4]. In the battery structure, lithium-ion conducting solid electrolytes functioned with water impermeability are critical because they provide protection to lithium metal anode from the aqueous electrolyte. Moreover, recent papers from both Goodenough et al. and Imanishi el al. addressed new types of aqueous lithium-metal system depending on sandwiched structure of a water-stable lithium-ion conducting solid electrolyte, a lithium metal 4− redox electrolyte [5], or anode and an aqueous Fe(CN)6 saturated MCl2 (M = Ni and Co)-LiCl solution [6,7].


The purpose to design highly lithium ion conductive solid electrolytes has been numerous in the last few decades [8]. For instance, the highest is 2.5 × 10−2 S cm−1 for Li9.54Si1.76P1.44S11.7Cl0.3 [9]. However, sulﬁde based solid lithium-ion conductors are unstable in contact with water and therefore not suitable for aqueous lithium-secondary batteries. Among the various types of lithium-ion conducting solid electrolytes, the NASICON-type doped LiTi2(PO4)3 solid electrolytes are promising candidates for aqueous lithium batteries as they exhibit good stability in high lithium-ion concentrated aqueous solutions [10] and relatively high lithium-ion conductivity at room temperature [11].

One of the earliest papers about doped LiTi2(PO4)3 is by Aono et al. [11], as they found the enhanced lithium-ion conductivity of 7 × 10−4 S cm−1 by Al and Sc doped Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 and Li1.3Sc0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3. Since then, there have been many studies to improve the lithium-ion conductivity of the NASICON-type solid lithiumion conductors. Lee et al. [12] presented an enhanced lithium-ion


Although great improvements have been achieved for NASICONtype solid electrolytes, the conductivities are still at least one order lower than conventional non-aqueous electrolytes used in lithium-ion batteries. And this related higher resistance would cause additional energy loss in actual batteries. Parallel to reduce the contribution of the solid electrolyte separator in the aqueous lithium cell to the cell resistance by improving conductivity, the thickness of the solid electrolyte should also be an important factor to concern. However, the fragility nature of solid electrolyte ceramic often hinders this realization. To the best of our knowledge, the thickness of NASICON-type solid electrolyte in assembled aqueous lithium-air batteries are still more than 150 μm [15,16]. In addition, it should be noted that the thickness of solid electrolyte is also an important factor in the battery energy density because it accounts for a large part of the total weight. Utilizing the model of the energy density calculation for a lithium-air battery without packaging as a function of the areal speciﬁc capacity by Park et al. [17], the speciﬁc energy density of 400 Wh kg−1 at the areal speciﬁc capacity of 20 mAh cm−2 for the aqueous lithium-air battery with 300 μm thick LAGTP increases to 660 Wh kg−1 for that with 100 μm thick LAGTP considering a density of 2.95 g/cm3 (Fig. S1).

In all, NASICON-type solid electrolyte separator with reduced thickness, water-impermeability and high conductivity is a key issue to develop higher speciﬁc energy and power density aqueous lithium secondary battery. In this study, we managed to make an approach to thinner LAGTP by enhancing its mechanical strength with TiO2 and tape casting technique. Both electric and mechanical performances of the solid electrolytes are investigated and the performance of a lithiumair cell prepared with the thin ﬁlm solid electrolyte is discussed.


The route of LAGTP powders preparation can be summarized by two-step solid-state reaction method as reported in our previous paper with slight modiﬁcations [13,18]. The typical preparation route is as follows: analytical grade Li2CO3, TiO2, Al2O3, NH4H2PO4 (Nacalai Tesque Japan) and GeO2 powder (Sigma Aldrich) were added to isopropanol of Li1.4Al0.4Ge0.2Ti1.4(PO4)3 and sealed in a zirconia vessel for 2 h ball milling at a speed of 400 rpm (Fritsch Pulverisette 7). The mixture was transferred into an oven at 80 °C for 3 h and then 200 °C for 12 h to totally evaporate solvent before meshed and sintered at 600 °C for 5 h to remove CO2, NH3 and H2O. The obtained powder was again ball-milled for additional 5 h and heated at 800 °C for 4 h to obtain reﬁned LAGTP powder.



The slurry for tape-casting ﬁlms was prepared as follows. 3.6 g of the as-prepared LAGTP powder was mixed with 10 wt% TiO2 (Kojundo Chemicals, Japan; 2 μm particle size), and 0.1 g Menhaden ﬁsh oil (Sigma Aldrich) and ball-milled in toluene and ethanol mixed solvent with a weight ratio of 1:1 for 24 h. Afterwards, reasonable amount of butvar B-98 (Sigma Aldrich) and benzyl-butyl-phthalate (Wako Chemical Japan) were added to the slurry as binder and plasticizer and ball-milled at low speed to get a homogeneous slurry for tape cast. The slurry was debubbled in a planetary vacuum mixer (THINKY, Japan) before casting on a silicone coated polyethylene substrate using homemade two doctor blade apparatus. The as-prepared green tapecast sheets were immediately transferred into fridge and stored at 4 °C to slow the dry process of as-prepared ﬁlms. Then the green tape-castsheet was punched into round pieces with a typical diameter of 20 mm and the thickness is about 40 μm each piece. To prepare actual green sheet for battery use, several pieces were then isostatically pressed together at 150 MPa and 80 °C for 30 min. The sheets were sintered at 500 °C to remove organic additives and then at 950 °C for a dense structure on Au sheets in an air atmosphere.

The solid electrolyte with epoxy composite were made by dipping into a tetrahydrofuran solution containing of 0.05 M 1,3-phenylene diamine (Sigma-Aldrich) and 2,2-bis(4-glycidyloxy-phenyl)propane (Sigma Aldrich) and polymerized at 170 °C for 24 h. The absorption amount of epoxy resin was estimated from the weight change by thermogravimetric analysis (Rigaku Thermo-Plus TG8128).

The aqueous lithium-air test cell was a laminate-type cell, as reported in our previous paper [19]. From the anode side of the cell was lithium metal with a thickness of around 200 μm (Honjo Metal, Japan), an organic buﬀer layer of 4.5 M lithium bis(ﬂuorosulfonyl)imide (LiFSI) in ethylene glycol dimethyl ether (DME) and as-prepared 90 μm thick LAGTP-10 wt% TiO2-epoxy solid electrolyte. The air cathode consisted of activated MnO2 (Japan Metal and Chemicals, Japan), conductive Ketjen black (Akzo Noble) and polytetraﬂuoroethylene (PTFE) in a weight ratio of 4:76:20, while the aqueous electrolyte was made from the mixture of 10 M LiCl with 1.5 M LiOH. The contact areas of the lithium electrode and solid electrolyte with the buﬀer electrolyte were 1.0 cm2, and that of the air electrode with the aqueous electrolyte was 1.7 cm2. The applied charge and discharge current was depending on the area of lithium electrode. The phases of the LAGTP-10 wt% TiO2 composite were measured by X-ray diﬀraction analysis (XRD; Bruker D8) with Cu Kα radiation in the 2θ range from 10 to 90°, together with Rietveld reﬁnement by attached TOPAS 4.2 software. The morphology of the sintered ﬁlms were characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM; Hitachi S4800) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). The electrical conductivities of the sintered ﬁlms (ca. 7 mm diameter and ca. 0.1 mm thick) were measured by the impedance spectra of sandwichtype Au/LAGTP/Au (Solartron 1260) within the frequency range from 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz at biased voltage of 10 mV. The 3-point bending strength of the ﬁlms was measured by cutting them into bars and measured by a material tester (Shimadzu Ez-SX-500 N). Water penetration tests were conducted by an H-type cell with a sandwiched structure of saturated aqueous LiCl solution, solid electrolyte and distilled water. The water permeation rate through the ﬁlm was estimated from the change of the chloride concentration in the distilled water over time using a chloride meter (Kasahara Chemical Instruments, Japan).


Thermal analysis of the tape cast green sheet in Fig. S3 showed a weight decrease up to 450 °C and then no change of weight. Therefore, the solvent, binder and plasticizer in the green sheets were decomposed at 500 °C for 5 h and then sintered at 950 °C for densiﬁcation. Both sintering temperature and period were selected to obtain the highest lithium-ion conductivity of the ﬁlm before sample characterization. The obtained LAGTP-10 wt% TiO2 ﬁlm had no cracks, as shown in Fig. 2 (a) and (b), but small pores was observed. The grain size was in a range of

A 90 μm thick LAGTP-10 wt% TiO2 lithium-ion conducting solid electrolyte was fabricated using the tape-casting method. The thin ﬁlm with around 2 wt% epoxy resin was conﬁrmed to be water-