
Enhanced ionic conductivity of novel composite polymer electrolytes with Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 NASICON-type fast ion conductor powders Zhiyan Kou, Chang Miao, Zhiyan Wang, Ping Mei, Yan Zhang, Xuemin Yan, Yu Jiang, Wei Xiao⁎


NASICON-type fast ion conductor powders Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) are prepared by spray-drying and sintering processes conﬁrmed by XRD and SEM analyses. Novel poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride-hexaﬂuoropylene) (P (VDF-HFP))-based composite polymer electrolytes (CPEs) doped with various amounts of LATP particles are fabricated via classical inverse-phase method. As a result, the as-prepared CPE-5 membrane can present excellent physicochemical properties when the doped amount is maintained at 5% vs. polymer matrix, in which the interfacial impedance value can rapidly stabilize at 472 Ω and the thermal decomposition temperature can be up to 430 °C, respectively. In particularly, the ionic conductivity can be as high as 3.943 mS cm−1 at 25 °C. In addition, the assembled LiCoO2/CPE-5/Li coin cell can deliver a discharge speciﬁc capacity of 145.4 mAh g−1 at 1.0 C with 96.93% capacity retention ratio after 25 cycles. These outstanding properties can promote the CPE-5 to be a candidate electrolyte to improve the performance of lithium ion batteries.


The development and application of secondary storage devices is faster and faster in the ﬁeld of the renewable clean energy, because they can convert electric energy into chemical energy eﬀectively and realize stable storage easily [1–5]. Among them, lithium ion batteries (LIBs) are getting more attention from researchers because of their wide working voltage range, long cycle life and no memory eﬀect, which are widely used in hybrid electric vehicles and aerospaces [6–10]. However, due to the poor thermal stability, ﬂammability and electrolyte leakage, the application of LIBs is now greatly limited in practice [11–14]. Although the gel polymer electrolytes (GPEs) with appropriate liquid electrolytes are explored to circumvent the disadvantages successfully and present high ionic conductivity at 25 °C, the plasticized polymer matrix cannot integrality maintain the original shape of the electrolytes during the manufacturing processes [14–17]. It is proved to be a feasible method to prepare composite polymer electrolytes (CPEs) by doping inorganic particles into the polymer matrix to balance between the integrality and the improved ionic conductivity of the electrolytes, in which the doped particles are generally divided into three kinds, including TiO2, ZrO2 and SiO2 inert ﬁllers, Li3N, LiAlO3 and LiAgI5 active ﬁllers and fast ion conductor powders [18–22]. LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) powders and their derivatives, belonging to NASIONtype fast ion conductor, attract more and more attention due to theirinterconnecting channellow cost, abundant source, good stability to air and water and high ionic conductivity [16,23,24]. The structure of LTP crystal unit is consist of TiO6 octahedron and PO4 tetrahedron, forming a three-dimensional that is very conducive to the transfer of lithium ions. Meanwhile, partial replacement of trivalent cations (Al3+, Fe3+ and Y3+, etc.) can remarkably improve ionic conductivity [25–28]. As is reported, partial replacing Ti4+ with Al3+ in LTP crystal lattice to form Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) can improve the ionic conductivity by increasing the carrier concentration and enhance strengthen the structure of the system by restraining the oxidation of Ti4+ [29,30]. In the present work, NASION-type LATP powders are prepared with spray-drying and sintering processes and the superior performance CPEs doped with LATP powders are fabricated by inversephase method, in which the eﬀect of the doped amount vs. polymer matrix on the physicochemical and battery properties have been investigated.


Appropriate stoichiometric ratio of Ti(OC4H9)4, Al(NO3)·9H2O, LiNO3·H2O and H3PO4 are sequentially added into the mixture of water and ethanol (1:1, v/v) in the presence of citric acid used as the


Firstly, diﬀerent contents (0, 3, 5 and 8% vs. polymer matrix) of the fast ion conductor LATP and polymer matrix poly (vinylidene ﬂuoridehexaﬂuoropylene) (P(VDF-HFP)) (Atoﬁna, Kynar Flex, 12 wt% HFP) powders are added to N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) solution to obtain the homogeneous casting solution after being magnetically stirred for 2 h at 40 °C, in which the ratio of P(VDF-HFP) to DMF is 1:4. Secondly, the CPE membranes can be prepared after drying the wet membranes at 60 °C for overnight, in which the wet membranes are fabricated by casting the solution on the glass plate with a 120 μm thick doctor blade and performing phase inversion in deionized water at 25 °C for 12 h. The desirable CPEs doped with various contents of LATP powders can be deﬁnitively fabricated by soaking the CPE membranes into 1.0 M LiPF6-EMC/EC/DMC (1:1:1, v/v/v, Guotai Huarong New Chemical Materials Co., Ltd.) for 1 h, and they are named as CPE-x (x denotes the doped content) in the mentioned below for convenience.


The crystallinity of the as-prepared LATP powders and as-fabricated CPEs is analyzed by an X-ray diﬀraction (XRD, Empyrean) in the 2θ range from 10 to 60°. The surface morphology of the LATP powders and as-fabricated CPEs is characterized by a scanning electron microscope (SEM, MIRA3 TESCAN). The thermal stability of the as-fabricated CPE-x membranes is evaluated by a thermal analyzer (TGA, LBSYSEVO) in an argon atmosphere over the range of 50–600 °C with a calcining rate of 10 K min−1. The liquid uptake ratio is estimated by the following Eq. (1), in which W1 and W2 are the weight of the as-fabricated CPE-x membrane before and after immersion in the electrolytes, and A refers to the liquid uptake ratio, respectively.

The XRD patterns of the as-prepared LATP fast ion conductor powders are displayed in Fig. 1(A). It is clearly found that the diﬀraction peaks of the LATP powders correspond with the NASICON structural LiTi2(PO4)3 phase conﬁrmed by the JCPDS#35-0754, which indicates that the synthesized LATP powders have the same structure and may possess excellent ions transferring property. It can be worth noting that the new and weak peak appearing at around 22.8° can be ascribed to the impurity AlPO4 during the high-temperature calcination process, which can be also detected and conﬁrmed to have little inﬂuence on the targeted material in other groups' work [13,18,31]. The morphology of the as-prepared LATP powders is demonstrated in Fig. 1(B), in which the particles with about 4 μm in diameter disperse uniformly with porous morphology. The porous and monodispersed particles may be beneﬁcial to promote the performance of the battery when the powders are employed to fabricate the CPEs by entrapping more liquid electrolytes and providing more transfer passageways for lithium ions. Fig. 1(C) displays the particle size distribution plots of the LATP powders, which shows a good normal distribution curves and provides solid evidences for the SEM analyses.

The XRD patterns of the as-fabricated CPEs doped with various amounts of LATP powders are presented in Fig. 2. It is accurately seen that the diﬀraction peaks appear at 18.7, 20.3 and 39.8°, which represent the characteristic diﬀraction peaks of the P(VDF-HFP) polymer matrix. The intensity of those peaks gets weaker and weaker when the added content of LATP powders increases from 3% to 5%, and the peak at 39.8° disappears when the added amount reaches up to 8%, which show that adding LATP powders into the polymer matrix could increase amorphous regions for lithium ions transfer by lowering the crystallinity of the CPEs. It can be noted that the intensity of the peaks at 25.3 and 32.8° characterized by LATP powders gets stronger when further adding more inorganic particles into the polymer matrix, which can


The CPEs doped with the NASICON-type fastion conductor Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) powders prepared by spray-drying and sintering methods are successfully fabricated by inverse-phase andimmersion processes. The CPE-5 can present improved thermostability, ionic conductivity and interfacial performance when the doped amount of the LATP powders maintains at 5% vs. polymer matrix, and the assembled LiCoO2/CPE-5/Li battery also delivers outstanding cycling and high-rate charge-discharge properties. These results show that the CPE5 can become a promising electrolyte material to replace traditional liquid electrolytes.