In  the  search  for  new  materials  to  be  used  as  solid  electrolytes,  this  paper  discusses  the substitution  of  phosphorus  with  silicon  in  the  NaTi2(PO4)3  NASICON  (Na-Super  Ionic  Conductor) compound, giving rise to the Na1+yTi2SiyP3-yO12 series. In fact, the substitution of  P+5  for  Si+4  enables  the  increase  in  the  Na+  charger  carrier  concentration.  The  solid  electrolytes  are  synthetized  by  the  glass-ceramic  route,  which  consists  in  the  controlled crystallization of a precursor glass subjected to specific heat treatment. Experimental results indicate  that  precursor  glasses  are  successfully  crystallized  in  compositions  containing  y  ≤ 1.2. X-ray diffraction patterns show the formation of NASICON phase in the Na1+yTi2SiyP3yO12  glass-ceramics  for  y  ≤  0.8.  However,  with  further  addition  of  silicon,  the  major  crystalline  phase  obtained  the  electrical the  Na(TiO)(PO4)  phase.  Surprisingly, characterization  reveals  that  the  y  =  1.0  sample,  whose  main  phase  is  the  non-NASICON 

Na(TiO)(PO4),  exhibits  the  lowest  activation  energy  (0.31  eV)  and  the  highest  ionic  conductivity  of  1.0  ×  10-4  S.cm-1  at  room  temperature  and  1.7  ×  10-2  S.cm-1  at  300  °C.  Rietveld  refinement  and  electrical  conductivity  results  suggest  that  the  increased  ionic  conductivity  in  the  Na(TiO)(PO4)  phase  is  due  to  the  inclusion  of  some  Si+4  ions  in  its  structure, thus forming a new and highly Na(TiO)((Si)PO4) conductive phase.  


Environmental  problems  and  the  depletion  of  natural  resources  are  among  the  main reasons for increasing interest in the search for new, alternative, cheap, eco-friendly energy sources  [1–3].    Over  the  past  decade,  lithium  ion  batteries  (LIBs)  have  become  the  market leader  for  energy  storage  in  portable  devices  due  to  the  highly  attractive  combination  of lithium-ion properties, such as: a) the very negative redox potential, and hence, high voltage of  lithium-based  cells,  b)  low  atomic  weight,  which  allows  for  devices  of  high  volumetric energy density, and c) small ionic radius, enabling its rapid diffusion into solids, which is a significant  advantage  in  the  development  of  all  solid-state  devices.  However,  the  use  of lithium in stationary energy storage devices is unfeasible, given the high extraction costs and the  limited  accessibility  to  this  element,  whose  deposits  are  frequently  located  in environmentally  protected  areas  [3–5].  In  this  context,  several  studies  in  recent  years  have reported that alkali metal sodium-based batteries constitute an excellent alternative for energy storage. Because sodium is a widely available chemical element, its production and extraction are  inexpensive.  Moreover,  the  toxicity  of  sodium  is  low,  and  its  electrochemical  redox potential  is  similar  to  that  of  lithium.    These  characteristics  make  this  element  a  promising option for the development of future energy storage devices [5–8]. 

The two most readily available types of sodium  ion batteries on the market today  are ZEBRA  and  Na/S  [9].  However,  despite  their  use  in  electric  cars  and  other  devices,  they present problems such as flammability and corrosivity, which, combined with high operating temperatures,  cause  degradation  of  the  cell  components.  One  of  the  most  feasible  ways  to solve  these  problems  is  to  optimize  the  solid  electrolyte  properties,  thereby  lowering  the working  temperature  of  sodium  batteries  [3,10–12].  Many  solid  materials  are  known  to  be sodium  conductors.  One  of  the  most  promising  and  interesting  solid  materials  are  those  belonging  to  the  NASICON  (Na-Sodium  Super  Ionic  Conductor)  family.  The  high  ionic  conductivity exhibited by these materials (between 10-4 and 10-2 S.cm-1 at room temperature  [9,13,14]),  as  well  as  their  ready  acceptance  of  different  ions  in  their  structure,  leading  to solid solutions with enhanced ionic conductivity, has generated great interest in their use as solid  electrolytes  in  sodium-ion  batteries.  The  molecular  formula  of  these  materials  is  AxM2(XO4)3,where A is usually a monovalent cation (Na+, Li+, K+), M is a tetravalent cation  such us Ti+4, Ge+4, or Sn+4, and X may be P+5 or Si+4 [9,15–17].  The NASICON structure can  be described  as an arrangement of MO6 octahedra linked by  corners to  XO4 tetrahedra that  produce a three-dimensional M2(XO4)3 arrangement with channels through which A ions can  move  very  easily,  leading  to  very  high  ionic  conductivities  in  the  case  of  some  specific compositions  with  low  activation  energy  [6,18,19].  The  wide  range  of  compositional variations  of  the  NASICON  family  allows  for  partial  or  total  replacement  of  the  A,  M  or  Si+4/P+5  ions,  making  them  interesting  materials  for  investigations  about  the  influence  of  different elements in their ionic conductivity [9,20]. 

The  various  NASICON  materials  described  in  the  literature  include  the  NaTi2(PO4)3  (NTP)  compound  and  related  solid  solutions.  Few  descriptions  are  available  of  the  substitution of P5+ with Si4+ in this system. In fact, Tsuji et al. [21] synthesized materials of  this system by solid state reaction, substituting phosphorus ions with silicon ions to form the 

Na1+yTi2SiyP3-yO12  (NTSP)  series.  The  authors  made  substitutions  of  y  =  0.0,  1.0  and  1.5.  However, they only succeeded in obtaining a single phase NASICON type compound in the sample  without  silicon  (NTP).  In  addition,  these  authors  reported  that  X-ray  diffraction (XRD)  patterns  of  their  NTSP  materials  with  y  =  1.0  and  1.5  revealed,  together  with  the NASICON  crystalline  phase,  the  presence  of  TiO2  and  SiO2.  Kishioka  et  al.  [22],  in  turn,  from  parent  glasses  with  3Na2O.67TiO2.30P2O5  and  synthesized  glass-ceramics  3Na2O.72TiO2.25P2O5 compositions and a content of 5 mol % of SiO2. The precursor glasses  were crystallized in a single-step heat treatment of 30 hours at temperatures varying from 800 to  1000°C.  XRD  patterns  revealed  the  formation  of  the  NASICON  phase  in  both compositions after the heat treatments. Kishioka et al. also suggested the formation of a solid  solution with the inclusion of silicon ion (Si+4) in the NTP system. These authors also found  peaks of secondary phases such as TiO2, TiP2O7, and (TiO)2P2O7. Tsuji et al. and Kishioka et  al.  obtained  the  NASICON  phase  but  provided  no  data  on  the  ionic  conductivity  of  these interesting materials. 

In our search for possible candidates for solid electrolytes that are conductive by sodium ions, we synthesized and optimized the NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP) NASICON system via the glassceramic route. Many authors have shown that one of the advantages of the glass-ceramic route over classical methods of ceramic processing is that it reduces the final porosity and allows for microstructural control by suitable thermal treatments, which can contribute for improving the  ionic  conductivity  of  the  material  [14,20,23].  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  known  that  the inclusion  of  aliovalent  ions  of  lower  valences  than  those  ions  who  forms  the  NASICON  skeleton structure, i.e, in our case, P5+ and Ti4+ ions, can enhance its conductivity, because the  introduction of those ions generates an excess of negative charge that must be compensated by  increasing  the  number  of  sodium  ions,  which  means  an  increase  in  the  concentration  of charge  carriers,  and  thus,  in  the  ionic  conductivity.  In  this  context,  to  improve  the  ionic  conductivity of the NTP material, silica was added to substitute P+5 ions with Si+4 ions, thus the  Na1+yTi2SiyP3-yO12  (NTSP)  series.  In forming  Na1+yTi2SiyP3-yO12 (0.0 £ =  0.0  to  3.0  and  characterized  by  thermal  analysis.  Glass-ceramics  were  obtained  by  single  3.0) composition were obtained in the compositional range of y this  work,  precursor  glasses  of thermal  treatment  at  their  respective  crystallization  temperature.  XRD  and  Rietveld refinement  revealed  that  the  NASICON  phase  was  obtained  as  major  phase  in  the  glass-ceramics  up  to  the  y  =  0.8  composition.  However,  the  Na(TiO)(PO4)  crystalline  compound  was observed as major phase in compositions with higher silicon contents, y = 1.0 and 1.2. 

Impedance spectroscopy results indicate that the ionic conductivity of the samples containing NASICON phase increased by up to four orders of magnitude in response to the addition of silicon when compared with the original silicon-free NTP system. Surprisingly, in this work, the highest ionic  conductivity was  achieved by the NTSP10 (y = 1.0) sample, in which the non-NASICON Na(TiO)(PO4) crystalline compound was the major crystalline phase. Lastly,  the glass-ceramics microstructures revealed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) are also discussed in light of their different silicon contents. 


The  parent  glasses  of  NTSP  glass-ceramics  were  obtained  in  batches  of  20  g  by  the conventional  melt  quenching  method.  This  method  consists  of  melting  the  precursor  raw materials  and  then  cooling  the  resulting  liquid.  To  increase  the  cooling  rate,  the  liquid  was splat-cooled,  i.e.,  pressed  between  two  metal  plates,  resulting  in  a  vitreous  material. 

Stoichiometric amounts of sodium carbonate (Na2CO3, Vetec 99.9%), titanium dioxide (TiO2,  Aldrich > 99.9%), dihydroxy ammonium phosphate ((NH4)2HPO4, Aldrich > 98%) and silica  dioxide  (SiO2,  Zetasil2  >  99%)  were  used  as  starting  materials.  The  powders  were  homogenized  in  a  rotary  ball  mill  with  alumina  balls  for  12  hours,  after  which  they  were placed  in  a  platinum  crucible  and  heated  for  6  hours  to  temperatures  ranging  from  400  to 700°C  to  remove  volatile  compounds  (CO2,  NH3,  H2O)  from  the  Na2CO3  and  (NH4)2HPO4  raw materials. The mixture was then heated to temperatures of 1400 to 1500°C for 30 min. 

The  different  precursor  glasses  were  annealed  at  a  temperature  below  their  glass  transition temperature  (Tg)  (thermal  characterization  given  below),  i.e.,  Tg   40°C,  for  two  hours  to  relieve possible thermal stresses. 



The  characteristic temperatures  of  precursor  glasses,  such  as  glass transition temperature  (Tg)  and  crystallization  temperature  (Tx),  were  determined  by  differential  scanning  calorimetry  (DSC)  using  platinum  crucibles  in  an  air  atmosphere  and  applying  a heating rate of 10 °C/min in a temperature range of 30 to 1000°C. 

To obtain NTSP glass-ceramics, small pieces of each precursor glass were subjected to single-step heat treatments carried out at the onset of the DSC crystallization peak (Table 1) for 30 min.  In a single-step heat treatment, the nuclei generated during the glass synthesis, or more precisely, during the cooling of the liquid glass, grow to the size of crystals. These heat treatments were performed in a tubular electric furnace with temperature control and stability. 

The  amorphous  nature  of  the  glass  samples  and  the  crystalline  phases  of  the  NTSP glass-ceramics were respectively confirmed and determined by XRD, using a Rigaku Ultima IV X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation, operating in the 2θ range of 10° to 80° with an  integration time of 0.6 s and a scan step size of 0.02°. In some cases, the XRD procedure was performed  with  a  0.02°  step  size  and  0.1  s  integration  time  to  allow  for  refinement  of  the crystal structures. The crystalline phases were identified using the Crystallographica Search-Match software [24], and the Rietveld analysis was performed using Topas-Academic version 6  [25]  with  crystallographic  information  framework  (CIF)  files  from  the  Inorganic  Crystal Structure Database (ICSD) [26].  

For the electrical conductivity measurements, the glass-ceramic samples were sanded to ensure flat parallel surfaces.  Gold electrodes were then sputtered on both surfaces. Electrical measurements were taken by impedance spectroscopy at temperatures of 50 to 300°C, in the frequency  range  of  1  MHz  to  0.01  Hz,  using  a  Novocontrol  Alpha  Analyzer  –  a  high-performance  frequency  analyzer,  coupled  to  a  Novotherm  furnace  whose  temperature  is adjustable with a precision of ± 0.1 °C. The WinFit software was used for data acquisition. 

The  glass-ceramic  microstructures  were  examined  on  the  fracture  surfaces  of  sample using  a  scanning  electron  microscope  (SEM)  equipped  with  an  EDS  (energy  dispersive spectroscopy) detector with a beam voltage of 10 to 25 kV. 



The  thermograms  in  Figure  1-a  also  show  a  small  peak  in  the  endothermic  direction after  the  crystallization peak.  All  the  parent  glasses  of  the  NTSP  system  showed  this  small peak  around  850  °C,  which  cannot  be  ascribed  to  the  final  melting  temperature  that  varied around 1400 to 1500 °C, according to our experimental melting conditions. During our heat-treatments  experiments,  it  was  found  that  vitreous  samples  heated  close  to  850°C  were bonded to the crucible. This may be attributed to the onset of melting of the crystalline phase. 

In  fact,  similar  endothermic  peaks  were  observed  in  thermograms  of  both  Li2O·SiO2  –  CaO·SiO2 [27] and Na2O·2CaO·3SiO2 glasses [28]. The authors explained that the beginning of  this  endothermic  peak  corresponds  to  the  solidus  temperature  of  the  phase  diagram,  in which the first liquid of the melting appears. 

A silica-free NTP glass could not be obtained, probably because of the high percentage of  titanium  oxide  (TiO2),  which  is  not  a  glass-former  (see  Table  1).  Therefore,  the  characteristic  glass  transition  (Tg)  and  crystallization  (Tx)  temperatures  could  not  be  determined,  since  the  melted  material  devitrified  during  its  cooling  process.  However, conductivity  measurements  and  structural  characterization  of  the  crystallized  NTP  samples were  taken  to  underpin  the  discussion  about  the  effects  of  adding  silicon  to  NTSP  glass-


Results  similar  to  those depicted  in  Figure  2  were  obtained  for  all  the  other  parent  glasses. 

The formation of a characteristic amorphous halo is evidenced in the range of 15° < 2θ < 40°, which  shifts  to  higher  angles  in  response  to  increased  silicon  content.  Note  the  absence  of diffraction peaks that would indicate the formation of crystalline phases. This confirms that all the NTSP compositions under investigation were successfully vitrified. 

These  patterns indicate that the heat treatments applied to the glass compositions containing y £  0.8  led to the formation of the NASICON crystalline phase (ICSD 1530649) as the major phase. 

However, the pattern of the NTSP06 sample also reveal some traces of crystalline phases such as Na4(TiO)(PO4)2 (ICSD 74566) and TiO2 (ICSD 9009086) which are indicative of a limit of  the NASICON solid solution. This also suggests that the precursor glasses of composition y ≥ 0.6 are non-stoichiometric, i.e., there are no crystals with identical composition to that of the parent glass. The NTSP08 sample shows peaks of the same crystalline phases as the NTSP06 sample,  plus  a  small  amount  of  Na(TiO)(PO4)  (ICSD  1535856)  phase.  An  amorphous  halo around 2θ = 25° in compositions containing y > 1.4 is present, indicating that a residual glassy phase still remains. This suggests that the heat treatments applied to those compositions did not crystallize the material completely. On the other hand, the absence of crystallization peak in DSC thermograms (Figure 1-a) of parent glasses with higher silicon content (y = 2.5 and 3.0) indicate that those glasses cannot crystallize under heat treatment conditions. 


For further discussion about the glass-ceramic microstructure (section 3.3), it should be noted that the diffractograms of NTSP glass-ceramics (Figure 3-a) show no peaks associated with  crystalline  SiO2,  or  with  any  compound  containing  silica.  The  only  exception  is  the  NTSP10  composition,  since  the  Rietveld  analysis  (Figure  3-b)  showed  a  very  small  peak attributed to SiO2. 



As  can  be  seen  in  Figure  6-e,  the  precursor  glass  also  contained  spherical  particles before any heat treatment was applied. These aggregates consist mainly of silica and oxygen, according  to  the  EDS  analysis  (see  Figure  6-f),  indicating  that  non  crystalline  silica  was formed in the glass synthesis, during the cooling of the melt, which underwent liquid-liquid phase  separation.  This  type  of  microstructure  was  also  identified  by  Oliveira  et  al.  [36]  in glasses  containing  SiO2  and  P2O5.  These  authors  stated  that  vitreous  silica  particles  are  formed in the  glass forming process, as the liquid cools, because  a constant decrease in the temperature  increases  the  viscosity  of  silica,  thus  preventing  it  from  diffusing  through  the liquid. This finding is relevant in the context of our research, since it suggests that part of the added silicon does not substitute the phosphorus in the investigated glass-ceramics. 


The  Nyquist  diagram  of  NTSP  glass-ceramics  (Figure  7-a)  shows  two  different responses.  The  first  is  a  semicircle  formed  in  the  region  of  high  and  medium  frequencies, which is associated with the intrinsic material response. The second phenomenon is the sloped line  in  the  low-frequency  region,  which  represents  the  blocking  of  ions  at  the  electrode-sample interface. This straight line is characteristic of ionic conductive materials. As can be seen  in  the  complex  impedance  plots,  the  grain  and  grain  boundary  response  could  not  be identified  because  of  the  presence  of  a  single  semicircle.  On  the  other  hand,  the  total resistivity of the samples can be read at the intersection of the semicircle with the real axis in the low-frequency region. Also, increasing the amount of silicon in the NTSP system causes a decrease  in  the  total  resistivity  of  compositions  up  to  y  =  1.0  (NTSP10).  However,  the (NTSP12)  composition  clearly  showed  an  increase  in  the  resistivity  value.  All  the  Nyquist plots recorded in the 50 to 300°C temperature range showed a similar format.

On  the  other  hand,  the  high  ionic  conductivity  of  NTSP10  and  NTSP12  samples  was unexpected, in view of the formation of Na(TiO)(PO4) phase as the major crystalline phase  instead  of  the  NASICON  phase.  As  can  be  seen  in  Figure  7-c  and  Table  3,  the  ionic conductivity of the NTSP10 glass-ceramic was one order of magnitude higher than that of the samples whose major crystalline phase was NASICON.  

The Na(TiO)PO4 crystalline phase present in the NTSP10 and NTPS12 glass-ceramics  is  homologous  to  the  K(TiO)PO4  (KTP)  phase,  which  present  high  K+  ionic  conductivity  [32,38]. It is worth mentioning that, although the structure of KTP materials is composed of 

TiO6  octahedra  and  PO4  tetrahedra,  which  makes  it  similar  to  the  NASICON  structure,  its  ionic conductivity is anisotropic, probably due to an asymmetry of the TiO6 octahedra, and it  is therefore considered quasi-one-dimensional along the c-axis, remaining in the order of 10-6  to 10-8 S.cm-1 at room temperature [32,38].  


In  the  present  study,  except  for  the  silicon-free  composition,  precursor  glasses  were  obtained  in  the  whole  range  of  P+5/Si+4  substitution  in  the  Na1+yTi2SiyP3-yO12  series.  Glassceramics  were  obtained  in  the  compositional  range  of  y  =  0.0  to  2.0.  SEM  micrographs revealed  the  presence  of  silica  rich  spherical  particles  in  both  the  glass-ceramics  and  their parent  glasses  for  y  <  2.0  compositions.  

The  Rietveld  analysis  revealed  that,  after  heat-treatment  of  the  material  at  the crystallization  onset  temperature  (Tx),  the  major  phase  obtained  in  the  compositions  containing up to y = 0.8 was the NASICON phase. Conversely, this analysis indicated that the major  crystalline  phase  obtained  in  the  compositions  containing  y  =  1.0  and  1.2  was Na(TiO)(PO4). As for electrical behavior, impedance spectroscopy analysis indicated that the  ionic conductivity of samples containing NASICON phase (y < 1.0) increased by up to four orders  of  magnitude  in  response  to  the  addition  of  silicon  when  compared  to  the  samples without  silicon,  i.e.,  those  containing  NaTi2(PO4)3.  This  can  be  attributed  not  only  to  the  increase in charge carrier concentration (sodium ions) but also, and mainly, to the expansion of the NASICON-structured unit cell. Interestingly, the higher silicon contents (y = 1.0 and 1.2)  resulted  in  glass-ceramics  whose  main  crystalline  phase  was  the  non-NASICON Na(TiO)(PO4).  Surprisingly,  these  glass-ceramics  exhibited  lower  activation  energy  and higher  ionic  conductivity  than  those  with  NASICON  structure.  In  fact,  the  y  =  1.0  sample showed the lowest activation energy (0.31 eV) and the highest total ionic conductivity (1.7 ×  10-2 S.cm-1 at 300 °C and 1.0 × 10-4 S.cm-1 at room temperature). This high ionic conductivity  is  attributed  to  the  substitution  of  phosphorus  ions  with  silicon  ions  in  the  Na(TiO)(PO4)  crystalline  phase.  This  assumption  is  based  on  the  lattice  parameters  and  electrical characterization  of  the  silicon-free  Na(TiO)PO4  compound,  which  indicated  that  its  ionic  conductivity is lower than that of the NTSP10 sample (y = 1.0). In conclusion, we can state that we have developed a new sodium conductive glass-ceramic whose conductivity makes it suitable for application as solid electrolyte. 