High-conductivity NASICON-type solid electrolytes of Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 composition have been obtained through glass crystallization. Thermal behavior of the precursor glass has been investigated; glass transition and crystallization temperatures have been determined by DSC. The influence of glass crystallization temperature (750, 800, 820, and 850 °C) on the phase composition, microstructure, molecular structure, and ionic conductivity of Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 glass-ceramics has been studied. It was found that −1 at 25 °C) is 820 °C. the optimum crystallization temperature for obtaining an electrolyte with the highest conductivity (0.39 mS cm


Nowadays, lithium-ion batteries are the most popular energy storage systems for a wide range of portable electronics. 

The mix was heated stepwise up to 500 °C to remove volatile components; the resulting mixture was then melted in a Pt crucible at 1450 °C for 1 h. The melt was quenched between preheated steel plates. The procedure yielded transparent colorless parallel-sided plates without any impurities. The samples were annealed at 500 °C during 0.5 h to relieve thermal stresses, then polished on both sides and crystallized at different temperatures (750, 800, 820, and 850 °C) for 8 h in −1. The glass was an electric furnace at the rate of 3 °C min −1 to obtain the large crystallized at the heating rate of 3 °C min nuclei concentration and to design the compact microstructure, which significantly impacts the electric conductivity. We also compare the obtained results of transport properties with the literature data under similar conditions. After crystallization, the samples were slowly cooled down to room temperature in the furnace. In appearance, the samples were white.

The amorphous structure of the original glass and the phase composition of the obtained glass-ceramics were determined by X-ray diffraction method (XRD) with a Rigaku D/MAX2200VL/PC diffractometer (Rigaku, Japan) over a 2θ range of 10–60° at room temperature. The collected data were processed with the FULLPROF program.

The morphology, grain size, and compactness of glassceramic electrolytes were studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a TESCAN MIRA 3 LMU (TESCAN, Czech Republic). The local microstructure was determined by means of energy dispersive X-ray microanalysis.

The density of the samples was estimated by the pycnometer method at 25 °C with isopropyl alcohol as the immersion medium.

Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was performed by means of a thermal analyzer STA 449 F1 Jupiter (NETZSCH, −1 in Pt crucibles Germany) at the rate of 3, 10, and 15 °C min with lids over a 35–900 °C temperature range at the expulsion rate of 20 mL min−1 in air atmosphere.

The electrical resistance of the samples was measured by the electrochemical impedance method in a two-probe cell with silver metal electrodes over the frequency range of 0.025–1000 kHz in air using potentiostats/galvanostats AUTOLAB PGSTAT302N (Metrohm, the Netherlands) and Р-5Х (Ellins, Russia). The results collected with the help of AUTOLAB PGSTAT302N were processed using Nova program. The impedance spectra were obtained over a 20–170 °C temperature range. The samples were coated with gallium– silver paste or gold-sputtered to form electrodes.

The molecular structure of the electrolytes was studied using a Raman spectrometer U 1000 (Renishaw, England). The Raman spectra were collected by an Ar-ion laser with a wavelength of 532 nm and a power of 40 mW at a scanning angle of 90°. The Raman spectra were recorded in the static −1 with specand extended modes in the range of 4000–50 cm tral resolution of 1 cm

The X-ray powder diffraction patterns of the as-cast glass and glass-ceramic electrolytes crystallized at 625, 750, 800, 820, and 850 °C are shown in Fig. 1. The XRD pattern of the glass looks like a halo without any diffraction peaks, which confirms its amorphous nature. All the XRD patterns of the LAGP glass-ceramics have peaks corresponding to the conducting phase LiGe2(PO4)3 (JCPDS 80–1924) and also the GeO2 impurity phase (JCPDS 83–2474) at heat treatment above 750 °C. According to the XRD results, a peak of 100% intensity corresponding to the GeO2 impurity phase overlaps with the peak of the LiGe2(PO4)3 main phase (Fig. 1). Parameters a and c and the unit cell volume for LAGP glass-ceramics were determined from the least-square fit of the (hkl) and 2θ values and are listed in Table 1. They are in good agreement with the literature data for LiGe2(PO4)3 and confirm the NASICON-type structure of the crystalline phase [18, 27, 28]. It should be noted that the c parameter depends not only on the composition of Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3 electrolyte [18, 29], but also on the crystallization temperature of the glass, passing through the maximum value at 800 °C (Table 1). Our data are confirmed in the work [29], which studies in situ structural transitions during the crystallization

The obtained LAGP electrolytes are indexed as a hexagonal structure with a space group R-3c, which correlates with the works [18, 20, 30]. It is known that a partial substitution of Ge4+ ions (ri = 0.53 Å) for Al3+ ions (ri = 0.535 Å) with almost similar ionic radii [30, 31] yields solid solutions Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3 in the interval of 0.1 ≤ х ≤ 0.6; in which case, the phase composition of the obtained materials does not change [20, 22]. It is noteworthy that some authors ascribe the reflections corresponding to impurity phases to the main LAGP phase [18, 23], and in the works [24, 25], it is said that AlPO4 is the impurity phase. However, in the work [27], the appearance of the impurity phase GeO2 is observed at glass crystallization above 750 °C, and AlPO4 appears at a higher temperature (950 °C). According to our XRD data, the obtained glassceramics at heat treatment above 750 °C consists of the main LAGP phase and the GeO2 impurity phase. To identify additional phases, we performed microanalysis of the elements using SEM micrographs and studied the Raman spectra of various segments of the sample.

Synthesizing a conductor with a dense and uniform microstructure is necessary for achieving a high Li-ion conductivity and increasing the mechanical strength of the electrolyte [20, 32]. Grain size and shape, grain size distribution, the character of grain boundaries, and the structure of pores—all of these are important parameters for an electrolyte membrane in a LIB. To determine the correlation between the conditions of the heat treatment of the glass and the solid electrolytes microstructure, we took SEM micrographs of the surface and

cross-section of the glass-ceramic samples crystallized at different temperatures for 8 h (Figs. 2, 3, and4 ). The obtained solid electrolytes have the ceramic microstructure consisting of separate square crystals (grains) of different size, divided by boundary layers. According to SEM results, the size of the ceramic grain and areas of grain contact grows with the increase of temperature. Thus, mean grain size at 750 °C is ~ 200 nm (Fig. 2a), at 800 °C–350 nm (Fig. 2b), and at 850 °C– 500 nm (Fig. 2c). This tendency coincides with the results reported in the work [28]. As shown, the microstructure of LAGP glass-ceramics is very sensitive to the crystallization temperature.

As distinct from polycrystalline ceramics, glass-ceramics obtained by thermal treatment of monolithic glass should have the rather compact microstructure [3, 20]. Indeed, Fig. 2a–c demonstrates that the microstructure of all the obtained samples is well-formed and consists of densely packed crystallites of different sizes. Heat treatment leads to the formation of crystallites regular in shape (Figs. 2, 3, and 4). Most of the crystallites in the glass-ceramics correspond to the LAGP phase in their elemental composition, which was established by element analysis of local microstructure (Table 2 and Fig. 3с). However, there are also inclusions of GeO2. Since local microanalysis was performed on some segments, spectra 1, 2, and 3 covered the area with ceramic grains of the main phase, which corresponded to the LAGP composition, that is why the spectra correspond to a combination of GeO2 and LAGP phases (Table 2).

SEM images of cross-sectional profiles and EDS spectrum of the LAGP glass-ceramics crystallized at 820 °C are shown in Fig. 4a, b. The map of distribution for the elements of aluminum, germanium, phosphorus, and oxygen (EDAX) on the cross-section sample (Fig. 4c) confirms the presence of a small amount of GeO2 crystals which white in color.

Though the micrographs indicate a considerable densification of the microstructure, there is still some residual porosity as seen on Fig. 3.

The growth of grain boundary conductivity (σgb) with rising crystallization temperature up to 820 °C is related to increased number of grain–grain contacts (see BMicrostructure evolution of the LAGP glass ceramics with crystallization temperature growth^) and the increase in the density of the −3 (heat treatment at 750 °C) to samples from 2.93 g cm −3 (heat treatment at 820 °C) (Table 4). A further 3.38 g cm increase in crystallization temperature up to 850 °C leads to the formation of cracks in the material due to strains between the ceramic grains, and also to decreasing density −3) and increased porosity of the samples, which (3.09 g cm adversely affects conductivity (Table 4).

The activation energy for conduction (Ea) of solid electrolytes was calculated from the temperature dependences of total conductivity according to the Arrhenius equation: σtot ¼ Aexp − Еa kbTwhere A is pre-exponential factor, kb is Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature.

The activation energy for conduction of the starting −1, and it drops at the heat treatglass is 83.9 ± 0.9 kJ mol ment of the glass (Table 4). The drop in Ea at transition from glass to glass-ceramics is related to a decrease in the energy barriers for a mobile Li+ cation. It was found that Ea of electrolytes depends on crystallization temperature. −1 for the The minimum value of Ea is 33.5 ± 0.4 kJ mol samples crystallized at 820 °C, which corresponds to the total conductivity results (Table 4). The obtained Ea values are close to the values for glass-ceramics of analogous composition reported in the works [27, 42]. Thus, the energy barrier that Li+ in the LAGP structure should overcome is at its minimum when the crystallization temperature is 820 °C, which correlates with the results of XRD and Raman spectroscopy.

Glass-ceramic electrolytes Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) were synthesized by thermal treatment at 750, 800, 820, and 850 °C. The phase composition of the samples and structural changes in LAGP with the crystallization temperature were studied by XRD, SEM, and Raman spectroscopy. It was determined that the solid electrolytes consist of the main phase with NASICON-type structure and the impurity phase GeO2. It was established that the LAGP unit cell volume calculated from X-ray powder diffraction patterns depends on the glass crystallization temperature and passes through the maximum at 820 °C. The evolution of the samples microstructure with crystallization temperature growth was studied by SEM, and its correlation with transport properties was established. Li-ion conductivity was studied by impedance spectroscopy. The bulk (σbulk) and grain-boundary (σgb) components of conductivity were determined at room temperature in order to investigate how the bulk and grain boundaries affect ion transport. It turned out that both components of conductivity depend on the crystallization temperature and achieve their maximum at 820 °C. The increase in σbulk is related to structural changes that results in the grown of Li+ migration channels. The increase in σgb is explained by increased number of grain–grain contacts and the rising electrolyte density. It was established that a higher crystallization temperature (850 °C) adversely affects ion transport in LAGP glass-ceramics due to anIonicsincrease in impurity phases, the growth of microcracks, and rising porosity of the samples. Thus, it was ascertained that the optimum crystallization temperature for achieving a high conductivity of LAGP glass-ceramics is 820 °C. In the present paper, we report a solid electrolyte with a low porosity and −1 at 25 °C which high Li-ion conductivity − 0.39 mS cm meets the demands to the conducting membranes of Li-ion and Li-metal batteries and, therefore, holds a great promise for all-solid-state batteries.