Arsenate phosphates NaZr2(AsO4)x(PO4)3 – x are synthesized by the sol–gel method with subsequent annealing at 1123 K. Thus obtained specimens are investigated using X-ray diffraction analysis, IR and impedance spectroscopy. In the NaZr2(AsO4)x(PO4)3 – x system, continuous solid solution (0 ≤ x ≤ 3) with NaZr2(PO4)3 (NASICON) structure forms. According to the impedance spectroscopy data, an increase of the content of arsenic in the NaZr2(AsO4)x(PO4)3 – x system leads to an increase of the sodium-ionic conductivity; for NaZr2(AsO4)3, it reaches 8 × 10–5 S/cm at 773 K. At the same time, the activation energy of conductivity of this material (50 ± 1 kJ/mol) appears to be twice lower than the activation energy of conductivity of NaZr2(PO4)3 (100 ± 1 kJ/mol).

The  idea  of  developing  lithium-ion  batteries  was proposed  less  than  half  a  century  ago.  However,  at present,  the  life  of  a  modern  person  is  impossible without  these  devices.  Due  to  their  high  specific energy and reliability, they have become indispensable for  the  power  supply  of  almost  all  portable  devices [1, 2].  In  recent  years,  alternative  energetics,  which favorably differs in the environmental safety, has been rapidly  expanding.  First  of  all,  we  are  talking  about solar  batteries  and  wind  generators  [3].  However, power generation by the alternative power sources is inevitably associated with failure periods, which leads to  the  need  of  application  of  energy  storage  systems [4, 5]. When it comes to the introduction of such systems into the global energetics, the possibilities of lithium-ion batteries are questioned due to a high cost of lithium and its limited resources [6, 7]. In this connection, the researchers are faced with the task of developing  efficient  high-capacity  sodium-ion  batteries and materials for them [8–15].

As  for  the  electrolytes,  most  of  the  works  are devoted to the use of solutions of sodium salts in the aprotic solvents [16–19]. At the same time, considerable attention is paid to the development of sodiumconducting solid electrolytes for creating highly reliable  all-solid-state  batteries  [20–25].  The  literature presents the studies on the conductivity of sodium ionsin  the  compounds  and  solid  solutions  based  on  the NASICON framework structure [26, 27]. The highest conductivity can be achieved with heterovalent replacement  of  phosphorus  by  silicon  (Na3Zr2(SiO4)2PO4), which is accompanied by an increase of sodium concentration in the interstices [28].

The ionic conductivity is determined by the product  of  the  carrier  concentration  and  their  mobility. 

To  prepare  NaZr2(AsO4)x(PO4)3 – x  (0  ≤  x  ≤  3) specimens,  stoichiometric  amounts  of  1  M  aqueous solutions of sodium chloride and zirconium oxychloride  ZrOCl2  are  merged  with  permanent  stirring  at room  temperature.  Then,  a  solution  of  arsenic  and phosphoric acids is added with stirring. The solution of arsenic acid is prepared from elemental arsenic, by dissolving it with heating in the solution of nitric and hydrochloric acids taken in the 1 : 1 ratio (by volume). The  resulting  gel  is  dried  at  90°C,  heated,  and  held sequentially  at  270,  600,  and  850°C  for  12–24  h  at each stage. Staged heating is alternated with dispersion in  order  to  provide  the  homogenization  of  the  mixtures. After annealing at 600°C, the powders are mixed with  zinc  oxide  (0.75  wt  %),  which  promotes  an increase in the rate of interaction between solid-phase reagents due to sintering [33], compacted and further annealed.

The chemical composition and homogeneity of the specimens  are  monitored  with  a  JEOL  JSM-7600F scanning electron microscope with a thermofield electron gun (the Schottky cathode). The microscope is equipped  with  a  system  for  microanalysis:  an OXFORD  X-Max  80  (Premium)  energy  dispersive spectrometer  with  a  semiconductor  silicon-drift detector. The elemental composition of the specimens is determined to an accuracy of 2 mol %.

The X-ray diffraction patterns of the specimens are measured with a Shimadzu XRD-6000 diffractometer (CuKα radiation, λ = 1.54178 Å, the angle range 2θ = 10°–50°, the scan step is 0.02°, the recording rate is 1 degree/min). The X-ray diffraction analysis is used to determine the phase composition of the specimens in the course of their preparation after each stage of annealing and to control the products for the singlephase composition.

The  ionic  conductivity  is  measured  using  an IPU-62 ac bridge in the frequency range of 10 Hz to 2 MHz using cylindrical compacted tablets (R = 5 mm, h = 2 mm) with platinum electrodes in the temperature  range  of  323  to  1033  K.

According  to  the  XRD  data,  at  a  temperature  of 850°C,  single-phase NaZr2(AsO4)x(PO4)3–x  specimens  with  NASICON structure is observed. The X-ray diffraction patterns of arsenate phosphates reveal gradual shift of diffraction peaks with increasing x (Fig. 1). Based on the X-ray diffraction patterns, the unit cell parameters are calculated for all specimens of the system. An increase of the content of arsenic atom, which is larger than phosphorus atom, leads to the monotonic increase of the unit cell parameters. This is the evidence for the formation of continuous series of substitution solid solutions (Fig. 2). The deviations of the dependences of the unit cell parameters from the Vegard rule are due to the relaxation of structure framework with the gradual substitution of arsenic for phosphorus.

The ionic conductivity of NaZr2(AsO4)x(PO4)3 – x solid solution in the temperature range of 423 to 773 K varies in accordance with the Arrhenius law (Fig. 4). 

The work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic  Research,  project  no.  18-29-12063.  We  used  the equipment  of  Center  for  Collective  Use  of  Physical Research  Methods,  Institute  of  General  and  Inorganic Chemistry,  Russian  Academy  of  Sciences.  The  Center  is supported by the State assignment for Institute of General and Inorganic Chemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences in the field of fundamental research.