Sodium-based energy storage devices hold great promises as the alternative to the existing lithium-ion battery owing to its  abundant resources with potential low cost, whereas, the sluggish kinetic property and unsatisfied cycle stability are two  major issues limiting their practical applications. Herein, we propose the dominated pseudocapacitive contribution in the  new NASICON-type Na2CrTi(PO4)3@C material, which delivers a high reversible capacity over 220 mA h g-1 at 0.1 C rate,  superior rate performance with specific capacity of 110 mA h g-1 at 20 C and an ultralong cyclic stability over 2,0000 cycles.  A strong enhanced pseudocapacitive contribution is observed by quantitatively analysing CV profiles at various sweep rates,  well explaining the origin of superior rate capability. Structural evolution is also comprehensively investigated by in-situ Xray diffraction technology, suggestive of a solid-solution transition during Na+ reversible insertion/extraction. Moreover,  sodium-based battery-supercapacitor hybrid device is constructed, demonstrating high energy and power densities as well  as a long lifespan. The findings obtained in this study not only provide a practicable route to realize superior performance  for Na+ storage, but also offer a versatile anode for the promising sodium-based energy storage devices.

With the environmental contamination and overconsumption of fossil fuels, exploration  of advanced energy storage technologies for renewable energy  storage  is  more  urgent  than  ever[1,2].  After  nearly  thirty  years’  development, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have become the most  mature technology and are popularly used in the various portable  electronic devices[3,4]. However, the limited resource of lithium as  well as its uneven distribution in the earth’s crust could inevitably  increase the costs of LIBs, especially when being sizably used in  the  electric  vehicles  or  smart  grid.  This  situation  has  spurred  considerable  research  on  sodium-ion  batteries  (SIBs)  [5-8]  that  promises an analogical “rocking-chair” mechanism and abundant  resource as well as the uniform level of distribution. Despite the  great achievement of SIBs in recent years, there remains a great  challenge to exploit suitable host materials since both the ionic  radius (1.02 Å) and atomic weight (22.99 g mol-1) of Na+ are larger  and heavier than Li+ ions (radius: 0.76 Å and atomic weight : 6.94  g mol-1). 

The crystal structure of Na2CrTi(PO4)3@C was studied through Xray diffraction (XRD) using a Bruker D8 Advance Diffractometer,  which was also applied to collecting the in-situ XRD patterns for  the first two cycles at 2θ values ranging from 18° to 38° with a  scanning  rate  of  4°  min−1.  A  field  emission  scanning  electron  microscope  (JEOL  JSM-6700F)  and  TEM  (FEI  Tecnai  G2  F20  STWIN)  was  used  to  study  the  morphologies  and  microscopic  crystal structure of Na2CrTi(PO4)3@C samples. The content and  graphitization degree of the carbon was investigated through an  SDT Q600 TGA performed from room temperature to 700 °C at a  ramp rate of 10 °C min-1 with an air flow rate of 50 mL min-1 and  Renishaw inVia Raman microscope with Ar-ion laser excitation (λ  =  514.5  nm).  Nitrogen  adsorption-desorption  isotherms  were  measured at 77 K using a Kubo X1000 instrument (Beijing Builder  Electronic Technology, China). Specific surface area calculations  were  made  using  the  Brunauer-Emmett-Teller  (BET)  method.  Pore-size  distribution  (PSD)  curves  were  calculated  from  the  isotherm using the Barrett-Joyner-Halenda (BJH) algorithm. X-ray  photoelectron  spectroscopy  (XPS)  was  performed  on  a  VG  scientific  ESCALAB  250  spectrometer.  Cr  K-edge  and  Ti  K-edge  XANES spectra were measured at the beamline BL14W1 of the  Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility. Electrochemical Measurements To  fabricate  the  Na2CrTi(PO4)3@C  anode,  a  mixed  slurry  of  Na2CrTi(PO4)3@C,  super  P  and  carboxyl  methylated  cellulose  binder dissolved in water at a weight ratio of 7:2:1 was coated on  the surface of copper foil current collector. For preparing active  carbon  cathode,  a  mixture  of  active  carbon  and  carboxyl  methylated cellulose binder dissolved in water at a weight ratio  of  9:1  was  coated  on  the  surface  of  aluminium  foil  current  collector. All the electrode films were dried in a vacuum oven at  60  °C  for  12  h  and  then  cut  into  0.8×0.8  cm2  squares.  The  electrochemical  performance  of  Na2CrTi(PO4)3@C  anodes  was  assessed  in  half  2032-type  coin  cells,  which  employed  sodiummetal as counter electrode, 1 M NaClO4 in a mixture of ethylene  carbonate (EC)/propylene carbonate (PC, 1:1 by volume) and 5%  fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) as electrolyte, glass fiber filters  (Whatman GF/C) as separators, and assembled inside an Ar filled  glovebox.  The  sodium-based  battery-supercapacitor  hybrid  devices were packaged via the same way as that of the half cells  unless replacing the sodium-metal by active carbon (AC) cathodes  in the weight ratio 3:1 for AC: Na2CrTi(PO4)3@C. The loading mass  of Na2CrTi(PO4)3@C anodes were around 1.75 to 2.2 mg cm-2. It  was  worth  mentioning  that  all  the  electrodes  suffered  an  activated  process  before  they  were  assembled  into  2032-type  coin cells. A Land-2001A (Wuhan, China) automatic battery tester  was  used  the  galvanostatic  charge/discharge  performance of all the above cells. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and  galvanostatic  intermittent  titration  technique  (GITT)  were  performed  on  a  VSP  multichannel  potentiostatic-galvanostatic  system (Bio-Logic SAS, France).

The  crystal  structure  and  phase  purity  of  as-prepared  Na2CrTi(PO4)3  were  investigated  by  powder  X-ray  diffraction (XRD). As shown in Figure 1b, all the diffraction peaks  can be indexed assuming a rhombohedral unit cell with the space  group  of  R-3c.  Rietveld  refined  lattice  parameters  are  a  =  8.5440(8)  Å  and  c  =  21.7986(7)  Å,  similar  to  those  values  of  Na3MnTi(PO4)3 [20,21].  All  the  atomic  positions and the schematic crystal structure are given in Table S1  and  Figure  1a,  respectively.  Both  chromium  and  titanium  ions  occupy the same center of oxygen octahedrons randomly, due to  the  similar  ionic  radii  of  Cr3+  (1.82  Å)  and  Ti4+  (2.0  Å).  The  octahedral [CrO6]/[TiO6] share all their corners with tetrahedral  [PO4] to form the lantern-like repeating unit of [CrTi(PO4)3], which  stacks  along  the  [001]  direction  to  construct  basic  NASICON  structure. The EDX spectrum (Figure S1, supporting information)  reveals that only the peaks of Na, Cr, Ti, P, O and C are identified  without any other impurity and the atomic ratios of Na, Cr, Ti, and  P are calculated as 2.0(2): 1.0(9): 1.2(7): 3.0(8), consistent with  the  designed  stoichiometric  atomic  ratio.  Furthermore,  Raman  and  Fourier  transform  infrared  (FTIR)  spectrum  of  the  asprepared Na2CrTi(PO4)3@C are recorded and analyzed to provide  information on various chemical bonds or functional groups of  Na2CrTi(PO4)3@C  (Figure  S2).  The  as-prepared  sample  exhibits  some bands located before 700 cm-1 (Figure S2a), corresponding  to  the  Raman  fingerprint  characteristics  of  Na2CrTi(PO4)3.  The  bands located at around 620 cm-1, 584 cm-1, 450 cm-1 and 330 cm1 can be corresponded to the stretching vibrations of the PO4 and  external  modes  of  the  PO4  tetrahedral,  respectively,  while  the  bands at 650 cm-1, 560 cm-1, 430 cm-1 and 310 cm-1 arise from  stretching vibrations of [TiO6]/[CrO6] octahedral[41]. FTIR analysis  (Figure  S2b)  provides  similar  information  of  various  chemical  bonds in the as-prepared Na2CrTi(PO4)3.

Furthermore, X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) and Xray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) spectra (Figure 6) are  collected  to  monitor  the  oxidation  states  of  Ti  and  Cr  and  their  corresponding  charge.  As  shown  in  Figure  S14,  Both  the  XPS  spectrum  show  a  two-peak  feature  with  typical  bind  energies  of  tetravalent titanium and trivalent chromium. The XANES spectrum  of Cr K-edge shows a negative shift to lower energy during the initial  discharge to 0.01 V by ca. 0.33 eV (inside of Figure 6a), indicate of a  reducing oxidation state of Cr. The similar phenomenon occurs in  the case of Ti K-edge XANES (Figure 6b), which also shifts to lower energy side by ca. 1.1 eV. Upon the initial charge to 3.0 V, both the  Cr K-edge XANES spectra and Ti K-edge XANES spectra are nearly  coincident with the pristine ones. All these results strongly suggest  both Cr and Ti would contribute to the charge compensation during  Na+ insertion and extraction.

Inspired  by  the  superior  rate  capability  of  Na2CrTi(PO4)3@C  anode,  a  battery-supercapacitor  hybrid  device  is  constructed by employing battery-type anode (Na2CrTi(PO4)3) and  capacitive  cathode  (Active  Carbon,  AC,  with  high  surface  area  of  1973  m2  g-1,  shown  in  Figure  S15)  with  the  objective  high 

In addition, our BSHD delivers a capacity retention of 77% after  1500 cycles at a high current density of 4 A g-1 (Figure 7d), indicative  of great potential in the application of large-scale energy storage.

In  summary, we prepared  a  new  NASICON-structured  Na2CrTi(PO4)3@C material and studied its Na+ storage behaviors as  the  anode  material  for  sodium-ion  batteries  for  the  first  time.  Benefiting  from  the  robust  NASICON  structure  and  dominated  pseudocapacitive  contribution,  the  Na2CrTi(PO4)3@C  anode  delivered a superior rate performance (110 mA h g-1 at 20 C) and an  ultralong  cyclic  stability  over  2,0000  cycles  at  20  C.  The  phase  transition  process  of  Na2CrTi(PO4)3  during  Na+  reversible  insertion/extraction  is  confirmed  as  a  solid-solution  transition  accompanied  by  the  stepwise  redox  behavior.  Moreover,  we  extend  the  practical  application  of  Na2CrTi(PO4)3@C  anodes  to  construct  a  sodium-based  battery-supercapacitor  hybrid  device  showing high power and energy densities.