Noble-metal-free bifunctional electrocatalysts are indispensable to realize low-cost and energy efficient rechargeable metal-air batteries. In addition, power density, energy density and cycle  life  of  these  metal-air  batteries  can  be  improved  further  by  utilizing  the  fast  faradaic reactions of metal ions in the catalyst layer together with oxygen evolution/reduction reactions for the charge storage. In this work, we propose mixed metal phosphates of nickel and cobalt, NixCo3-x(PO4)2  (x=0,1,1.5,2  and  3)  as  multifunctional  air-cathodes  exhibiting  bifunctional electrocatalytic  activity  and  reversible  metal  redox  reaction  (M3+/2+,  M  =  Ni  and  Co).  Sub-micron  sized  NixCo3-x(PO4)2  particles  were  synthesized  by  a  solution  combustion  synthesis technique with urea acting as fuel. Electrocatalytic activity towards oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in 0.1 M NaOH were systematically tuned by varying  the  Ni  to  Co  ratio.  The  synthesized  NixCo3-x(PO4)2  with  x=1.5  (NCP11)  showed superior  bifunctional  catalytic  activity  compared  to  other  samples.  Moreover,  the  catalyst material delivered a specific capacity of ~110 mAh g-1 by the redox reactions of its metal sites. 

Hybrid  Na-air  battery  fabricated  using  NCP11  catalyst  loaded  air-cathode  exhibited  low overpotential, stable cycling performance and round-trip energy efficiency exceeding 78 % in 0.1 M NaOH aqueous electrolyte.



To realize gigawatt scale sustainable energy storage in the 21st century, various post Li-ion battery technologies are widely being explored. One such futuristic storage technology is rechargeable  metal-air  batteries.1-3  In  pursuit  of  metal-air  batteries,  Li-air  batteries  have attracted  primary  attention  owing their  very  high theoretical  energy  density (5200  Wh  kg-1).  Nevertheless,  their  practical  application  is  hindered  by  low  elemental abundance of Li, poor cyclic stability and high operational overpotential.4-6 On the other hand, sodium-air (Na-air) batteries have emerged as promising alternatives to Li-air batteries due to high natural abundance of Na, low-cost and environmental-friendliness.6,7 Additionally, there are  several  advantages  associated  with  sodium-air  batteries  such  as  low  overpotential  and enhanced power density stemming from superior ionic conductivity of NASICON class of solid electrolytes (e.g. Na3Zr2Si2PO12) and high solubility of by-products formed during discharge .

In general, sodium-air batteries can be broadly divided into two principal categories based on  cell  design  and  electrolyte  type:  non-aqueous  and  hybrid  (aqueous)  batteries.6  There  are several reports available in the literature on non-aqueous Na-air batteries.7 However, in  non-aqueous  systems,  the  discharge  products  such  as  Na2O2  and  Na2O  are  insoluble  in  the electrolyte and they gradually clog the pores of the air electrode thereby resulting in poor power density,  diminished  cycling  stability  and  large  overpotential.7,8  To  avoid  such  issues,  it  is recommended to use aqueous electrolyte at the cathode side by protecting reactive Na anode using  a  solid  electrolyte.  Non-aqueous  electrolyte  can  then  be  included  between  the  solid electrolyte and the negative electrode. Off late, there are several reports showing the merits of hybrid  sodium-air  batteries  in  comparison  to  non-aqueous  storage  systems.  These  merits include  reduced  overpotential,  enhanced  rate  capability,  high  energy  efficiency  and  better power density.10,11 Despite these advantages, there are only few reports on hybrid Na-air batteryemploying noble metal catalysts in the air electrodes.11-13 The noble metal catalysts help to overcome  the  torpid  kinetics  of  both  the  oxygen  reduction  reaction  (ORR)  and  oxygen evolution  reaction  (OER)  at  the  air  electrode.  However,  cost  and  poor  abundance  of  noble metals make such batteries prohibitively expensive and unsuitable for large scale applications. 

It  provides  impetus  to  develop  stable  and  highly  active  noble  metal  free  bifunctional electrocatalysts capable of operating in aqueous electrolytes with air acting as the sole dioxygen source. There are several nickel based catalysts available in the literature for the OER.14,15 


Similarly, cobalt based catalytic materials are well explored for the ORR activity. Hence, it  is  anticipated  that  the  mixed  metal  catalysts  comprising  of  both  nickel  and  cobalt  metal centres can exhibit both ORR and OER activity at moderate overpotential. Recent reports by Nocera et al. on the electrocatalysis of OER suggest that the phosphate moiety is crucial for the  high  catalytic  activity  and  stability.18,19  Thus,  by  judiciously  incorporating  the  desirable properties of nickel, cobalt and phosphate in a single material, it is possible to design a highly durable  and  active  bifunctional  electrocatalyst  for  the  air  electrode,  which  would  enable  to obtain superior capacity, excellent (round-trip) energy efficiency and durable cycling in hybrid rechargeable sodium-air batteries.

Here, we present the preparation of sub-micron sized particles of NixCo3-x(PO4)2 (x = 0, 1, 1.5, 2 and 3) by facile combustion synthesis route and their electrocatalytic activity towards OER  and  ORR  in  aqueous  alkaline  electrolyte.  The  catalyst  with  optimized  composition, namely,  Ni1.5Co1.5(PO4)2  (NCP11)  exhibited  higher  bifunctional  catalytic  activity  than  Pt/C catalyst  and  monometallic  phosphates  [Co3(PO4)2  and  Ni3(PO4)2].  Therefore,  the  NCP11 material was tested as bifunctional electrocatalyst at the air electrode of a rechargeable hybrid sodium-air battery. Interestingly the catalyst itself delivered a specific capacity of ~110 mAh g-1  by  the  redox  reactions  of  its  metal  sites.  The  battery  also  exhibited  relatively  low overpotential (0.78 V), over 78% (round trip) energy efficiency and stable cycling performance up to 50 cycles at a current density of 10  3)A cm-2.

NixCo3-x(PO4)2  materials  of  different  composition  were  prepared  using  solution combustion  synthesis.20,21  Nickel  nitrate  hexahydrate  [Ni(NO3)2.6H2O],  cobalt  nitrate hexahydrate  [Co(NO3)2.6H2O],  ammonium  dihydrogen  phosphate  (NH4H2PO4)  and  urea (NH2CONH2) precursors were used as oxidants and fuel, respectively. In a typical synthesis of Ni1.5Co1.5(PO4)2, Ni(NO3)2.6H2O (4.36 g), Co(NO3)2.6H2O (4.37 g), NH4H2PO4 (2.30 g) and urea (1.80 g) precursors were dissolved in 20 mL distilled water with steady magnetic stirring to obtain a homogenous solution. The resulting solution was placed on hot plate at 200 LC for complete dehydration. The remaining solid was transferred to a muffle furnace and was heat-treated at 300 LC for 10 minutes leading to the decomposition with gradual release of gaseous species. The foamy product so formed was collected and ground well in an agate mortar and pestle. The resulting powder was further calcined at 800 LC for 5 h in air.

A similar procedure was  performed  for  the  synthesis  of  NixCo3-x(PO4)2  (x=  0,  1,  1.5,  2  and  3).  The  synthesized samples were named as CP, NCP12, NCP11, NCP21 and NP corresponding to x=0, 1, 1.5, 2 and 3, respectively.

The electrode slurry was prepared by mixing the catalyst material (NCP), conductive carbon black Super-P (TIMCAL) and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF, Sigma Aldrich) in 8:1:1 (w/w/w) ratio. The slurry was coated on circular discs of teflon treated Toray carbon fibre paper (area: 2 cm2) and was dried at 100 oC for 12 h in vacuum. A thin ceramic pellet of NASICON-type  Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (thickness  =  0.8  mm,  area  =  2  cm2)  was  used  as  the  solid  electrolyte. 

Na3Zr2Si2PO12 layer  separated  aqueous  and  non-aqueous  electrolyte  compartments  while allowing Na+ ions to pass through without mixing two electrolytes. The reported value of ionic conductivity of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 is > 7  4) 10-4 S cm-1.22 Sodium (Na) metal anode was attached with  a  Ni  mesh  and  a  long  Ni  tab  was  used  for  the  electrical  connection.  The  anode compartment was filled with organic electrolyte of 1 M NaClO4 in propylene carbonate (PC, Sigma Aldrich) and was tightly sealed with NASICON. In the air electrode compartment, 0.1 M  NaOH  was  used  as  the  electrolyte. 

Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was carried out with a PerkinElmer (STA 6000) unit in the temperature window of 25 150)900 oC (heating rate = 5 oC/min) in static air. The powder X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  patterns  were  collected  using  the  PANalytical  QR 22) 9) 7) 11)  Pro diffractometer having a  30) 15)9ST source  31)U = 1.5404 ¯) operating at 40 kV and 30 mA. Rietveld refinement was performed by GSAS program with the EXPGUI front-end. The morphology of the  synthesized  materials  was  captured  by  scanning  electron  microscopy  (SEM)  and  the particles  were  further  analysed  with  an  FEI  Tecnai  T20  U-Twin  transmission  electron microscope (TEM) operating at 200 kV. Raman spectroscopy was performed using a LabRAM HR (Horiba Jobin Yvon) having a 532 nm (green) laser source. XPS analysis was carried out by a Kratos Axis Ultra DLD with an incident monochromated X-ray beam from the Al target (accelerating voltage = 13 kV, emission current = 9 mA). Shift corrections were performed using  carbon  reference  (binding  energy  =  284.6  eV).  The  electrochemical  properties  were studied using a CH Instruments CHI7001E electrochemical workstation in a three-electrode cell configuration with mercury/mercuric oxide (Hg/HgO, 0.1 M KOH) reference electrode, a rotating  disk  electrode  (RDE)  or  rotating  ring  disk  electrode  (RRDE)  loaded  with  various catalysts acting as the working electrode and 0.1 M NaOH electrolyte (at 25 oC). All potential values  were  converted  to  the  reversible  hydrogen  electrode  (RHE)  scale.  Linear  sweep voltammograms (LSV) were obtained at a scan rate of 10 mV s-1. In case of Tafel plot, iR compensation was applied to account for the potential drop between the working and reference electrodes due to solution resistance.

Sub-micron sized NCP particles were prepared by combustion method taking nitrate precursors  as oxidants and  urea  as  fuel.  The combustion synthesis  technique  involves  short reaction time and possible formation of nanoparticles.20,21  Themogravimetric analysis (TGA) curve  for  mixed  precursors  of  Ni3(PO4)2  is  shown  in  Fig.S1  (Electronic  supporting information). It shows two weight loss processes: the first weight loss between 100 and 200 C is due to removal of water molecules, and corresponding endothermic peak is observed at 180 C. The second weight loss is due to the exothermic combustion reactions involving emission of CO2 and NO2 gases. The exothermic peak centred at ~ 300 oC stem from combustion process. 

After that, there is no significant weight loss which demonstrates the stable product formation. 

However,  cobalt  phosphate  forms  hydrated  structure  up  to  700  oC.  Hence,  the  combustion synthesized foamy powders were calcined at 800 oC for 5h to get fully dehydrated phase. 

The electrocatalytic activity of the synthesized NixCo3-x(PO4)2 samples towards OER and ORR were studied in an aqueous 0.1 M NaOH (Fig. 5 and 6) electrolyte. In general, OER is the primary charging reaction in the air electrode of metal-air batteries. However, reaction is kinetically sluggish due to the involvement of multi-electron steps with several intermediates.

Therefore,  OER  usually  requires  large  overpotential,  which necessitates  the  use  of  highly  active  catalysts.  Catalyst  helps  to  reduce  the  required overpotential and thus improve voltaic and round trip efficiency of the battery. Catalyst should also be stable in the electrolyte under harsh oxidative potential of OER to provide sufficient battery life time. It is reported the adsorption/desorption energies of the reaction intermediates largely determine the OER kinetic overpotentials.30 Ideal catalyst has optimum binding energy for the intermediates, which is neither too strong nor too week, resulting in a volcano-shape correlation between activity and binding energy.30 Doping of foreign metal ions is a generally used strategy to finely tune the electronic properties, morphologies and adsorption energies to improve the OER kinetics.31 Hence, it is anticipated that the bimetallic catalyst with optimum metal  ion  ratio  can  offer  high  electronic  conductivity,  surface  area,  ideal  value  for  the adsorption  energy  etc.,  which  will  result  in  high  OER  activity.  In  the  present  study,  cobalt phosphate  (CP)  material  shows  the  least  OER  catalytic  activity  with  493  mV  overpotential (overpotential, Z = E-1.23 V where E is the applied potential for the specified current density) for 4.8 mA cm-2 current density (Fig. 5a, Table S2). Nickel phosphate shows slightly higher activity and requires 26 mV less overpotential for the same current. 

It is to be noted that the overpotential for 10 mA cm-2 is the generally used standard for comparing the OER performance of different catalysts.30,31 However, in the present study a current density of 4.8 mA cm-2 is used since mono-metallic phosphate catalysts (NP and CP) are unable to deliver 10 mA cm-2 in the selected potential region. The NCP11 catalysts has Tafel slope of 73 mV dec-1 for the OER (Fig. 5b) which is close to the reported values for the OER on nickel and cobalt based catalysts.32,33 Also, NCP11 catalyst shows higher OER activity than Pt/C (Fig. S6a) and doesn 146)t show any sign of degradation during constant potential electrolysis for 10,000 s (Fig. S6b). As suggested by the XPS data (Fig. 4), nickel and cobalt exist in +2 oxidation state in the as-synthesized NCP material. However, during the anodic sweep, the metal centers undergo oxidation as evidenced by the diffusion controlled current peak prior to OER in the voltammogram. Thus, it is anticipated that the coexistence of Co3+ and Ni3+ in the bimetallic phosphate  promote  the  rate  limiting  step  in  the  multi-step  OER  process.  Phosphate  plays  a crucial  role  of  stabilizing  the  catalytic  centres  by  its  framework  relative  to  the  less  stable environment of MO6 octahedra in the oxide based catalysts.19 A better accommodation of the Jahn-teller distortion is anticipated in the presence of flexible phosphate moiety compared to rigid oxide frame work. In order to investigate the bifunctional property, catalysts were also tested for the ORR on a rotating disk electrode (RDE) by linear potential sweep voltammetry at a scan rate of   10 mV s\& at 1600 rpm (Fig. 6a). The ORR limiting current follows the order NCP12>NCP11=CP>NCP21=NP. The best ORR catalyst NCP12 provides a limiting current of -2.75 mA cm-2 whereas it is -1.8 and -1.5 mA cm-2 for the CP and NP, respectively. 

On the other  hand,  NCP11  shows  reasonable  activity  towards  ORR  also.  In  order  to  achieve  high coulombic and voltaic efficiency in the air battery systems, it is necessary to use the catalyst material  that  has  reasonable  activity  towards  both  ORR  and  OER.  Thus,  for  the  best compromise between ORR and OER activities, NCP11 catalyst was used for the hybrid Na-air battery testing (vide infra).

Noble-metal-free  mixed  metal  phosphate,  NixCo3-x(PO4)2  (NCP),  was  tested  as  a bifunctional electrocatalyst for the air electrode in rechargeable hybrid sodium-air battery. The highly  crystalline  sub-micron  sized  NCP  particles  were  prepared  by  a  simple  solution combustion synthesis route employing urea as fuel. Electrocatalytic activity towards OER and ORR of NixCo3-x(PO4)2 materials were systematically investigated at different Ni to Co ratios. NCP11 catalyst with Ni2+ and Co2+ in 1:1 ratio exhibited high electrocatalytic activity towards both OER and ORR in 0.1 M NaOH electrolyte. The NCP11 was further explored as a potential bifunctional catalyst for the air electrode in a hybrid aqueous sodium-air battery. The fabricated sodium-air battery delivered low overpotential for the charge-discharge process with round trip energy efficiency exceeding 78 % and stable cycling performance up to 50 cycles. Moreover, NCP11 material contributed a specific capacity of ~110 mAh g-1 by the redox reactions of its metal  sites.  Mixed  metal  phosphates  of  nickel  and  cobalt  are  thus  proposed  as  robust  air-cathodes to design efficient hybrid Na-air batteries. 

It is emphasized that the present study monitored the performance of the battery only for 50 cycles and long term stability test over several thousands of cycles needs to be verified for potential use in commercial batteries. The present work will inspire fundamental research on synthesis and application of various types of mixed metal phosphates of low-cost metals (preferably Fe or Mn) as multifunctional air electrodes. Nevertheless, it is also necessary to address issues associated with Na anode and electrolytes for the successful commercialization of hybrid Na-air batteries.36 It includes high reactivity of Na anode with electrolyte, formation of unstable SEI, Na dendritic growth damaging the solid electrolyte that separates aqueous and non-aqueous electrolytes, severe water evaporation and carbonization of alkaline electrolyte in the cathode compartment. It may pave way for economic hybrid Na-air batteries. 
