NASICON-based gas sensor utilizing MMnO3 (M: Gd, Sm, La) sensing electrode for triethylamine detection Yueying Zhang, Ce Ma, Xinyu Yang, Yang Song, Xishuang Liang⁎, Xu Zhao, Yilin Wang, Yuan Gao, Fengmin Liu, Fangmeng Liu, Peng Sun, Geyu Lu⁎

In this work, the mixed-potential-type gas sensor based on NASICON solid electrolyte and MMnO3 (M: Gd, Sm, La) sensing electrode (SE) was developed and fabricated aiming at the low-concentration triethylamine (TEA) detection. The research point of the fabricated sensors mainly concentrated on the eﬀect of diﬀerent A-site elements in MMnO3-SE (M: Gd, Sm, La) on TEA sensing characteristics. The result reveals that the highest response value (−217.5 mV) towards 50 ppm TEA was observed for the device utilizing SmMnO3-SE. The highest electrochemical catalytic activity of the fabricated sensors attached with SmMnO3-SE was further authenticated by the polarization curve measurement. Moreover, the response value displays a segmentally linear relationship with TEA concentrations and the logarithm of TEA concentrations, and the slopes are −49 mV/ppm and −105 mV/decade at the ranges of 0.05–0.5 ppm and 1–50 ppm TEA, respectively. The device could also produce an acceptable response value (−5.6 mV) towards 50 ppb TEA. Moreover, it also displays good repeatability and selectivity, along with steady response signals towards 5 ppm and 50 ppm TEA for 15 days and 1 ppm TEA at diﬀerent humidity levels.


As air pollution gradually becomes a serious problem, the attention for VOC detection is increasing day by day. Triethylamine (TEA), as a common VOC contaminant, has been widely applied in chemical industrial manufacturing covering polymerization reaction, high energy fuels, preservatives, and so on [1–3]. However, TEA is also a volatile, ﬂammable and poisonous gaseous organic amine. These characteristics mean that TEA can easily cause dangerous accidents to human beings and the natural environment, especially when it is not being monitored. Once TEA mixes with air, conﬂagration occurring at the chemical factory is possible, increasing the potential risk of forming a ﬂammable gas mixture [4]. Aside from that, the frequent industrial exposure to TEA also imposes bad eﬀects on human health due to its toxicity and acrimony. There have been animal experiments conﬁrming that TEA can result in the adverse eﬀect, including inﬂammation of the throat eye irritation and asthma [5,6]. Long-term inhalation or exposure can even induce abnormal embryos. Moreover, TEA has been considered to be a possible carcinogen [7]. Although the detriment of TEA on human health and the natural environment has been researched, the present industrial demand for TEA is still rising, and this also potentially leads to more severe TEA leakage. The annual TEA emissions into the atmosphere in the United States alone has been estimated at 851 tons/ year. However, the permissible long-time TEA exposure concentration is 1 ppm in natural environments, and the threshold limit value (TLV) established by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) is 10 ppm [8,9]. In order to prevent the presence of these human health hazards, a fast online detection method which can conveniently monitor TEA at low concentrations is urgently needed. There have been several reported detection methods, including chromatography and colorimetric methods [10,11], conducting polymer sensors [12,13], and cataluminescence gas sensors [14]. However, expensive prices and time-consuming operations restrict practical application on TEA detection. In contrast, the solid state electrolyte gas sensor has been acknowledged for its portability, cost-eﬀective performance and superior gas characteristics. Among all solid electrolytes, the sodium super ionic conductor (NASICON) has been extensively investigated and developed for conductivity at 200 °C–500 °C. 

Therefore, in order to avoid serious TEA damage to living environment and human health, this study focuses on the NASICONbased TEA sensor aiming at low-concentration monitoring.

Currently, the sensors based on NASICON have been developed with a low detection limit for hazardous gases including SO2 [20], H2S [21] and Cl2 [22]. In our previous work [23], we have prepared the NASICON-based gas sensor utilizing SmCrO3-SE for TEA detection. However, the low detection limit of the sensor is only 2 ppm with the response value (-6 mV). This detection limit seems to be insuﬃcient for low-concentration TEA monitoring. Moreover, the sensor attached to SmCrO3-SE doesn’t exhibit good cross-sensitivities in the low concentration condition. Hence, we tried to promote the sensing properties of the NASICON-based gas sensor toward TEA via the application of new sensing materials.

According to the mixed potential model, the prepared sensing material with good electrocatalytic activity can achieve the intensiﬁcation of the sensing characteristic [24,25]. Therefore, in terms of the NASICON-based sensor, developing suitable sensing material is considered to be eﬀective in the highly sensitive detection of TEA. In the present work, the research focus for the NASICON-based gas sensor would be concentrated on choosing the perovskite-type composite oxide MMnO3 (M: Gd, Sm, La) as the sensing electrode (SE). For the mixed-potential gas sensor, it has been illustrated that the diﬀerent A-site elements of the perovskite-type sensing material usually have a remarkable eﬀect on the sensing characteristic in the previous literature [26,27]. Rare earth manganite MMnO3, as a common perovskite material, has been prepared by solid-state [28] and wet chemical methods [29], and this kind of composite oxide has been widely investigated for its unusual magneto resistance and catalytic properties [28,30–34]. However, there still has not been relative literature about its application for TEA detection. Herein, we prepared a series of manganates (GdMnO3, SmMnO3, LaMnO3.) by the sol-gel method and fabricated the NASICONbased sensor utilizing MMnO3-SE aiming at low-concentration detection. The present sensor attached with SmMnO3 achieves high response value (-217.5 mV) towards 50 ppm TEA and the low detection limit can even reach 50 ppb with an acceptable response value (-5.6 mV). Moreover, it also exhibits good short-term repeatability, acceptable humidity stability, 15 days’ long-term stability, and excellent selectivity towards other hazard gases.


All the reagents were analytical-grade purity (Beijing Chemicals Co. Ltd.) and used as received without any further puriﬁcation in this experiment.

SmMnO3 composite oxide was prepared by a facile sol-gel method. The raw material participating in the preparation procedure consisted of samarium nitrate hexahydrate (Sm(NO3)3·6H2O), manganese nitrate tetrahydrate (Mn(NO3)2·4H2O), and citric acid (CA). First, two kinds of nitrates were successively dissolved in the deionized water according to the certain molar ratio (n(Mn3+): n(Sm3+) = 1:1), and the obtained solution was consistently stirred until all the solid particles disappeared. After that, the prepared CA solution was added into the nitrate solution, and the obtained mixture was stirred and heated in the water bath at 80 °C until the mixed solution totally turned into a brown gel. The gel subsequently remained dried up overnight. After the xerogel precursor was sintered at 800 °C for 2 h, SmMnO3 powder was ﬁnally obtained. In addition, MMnO3 (M = La and Gd) sensing materials were also prepared according to the same method and condition. NASICON electrolyte from ZrO(NO3)2·8H2O, NaNO3, (NH4)2HPO4 and Si(C2H5O)4 was synthesized by the sol-gel method and calcined at 900 °C for 9 h according to the previous reports [35].

The elementary composition and crystal phase of sensing material MMnO3 (M: Gd, Sm, La) were analyzed by Rigaku wide-angle X-ray powder diﬀraction (XRD, D/max rA, using Cu Kα radiation at wave length =0.1541 nm) at 20°-80°. Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, JEOL JSM-7500 F, with an accelerating voltage of 15 kV) was used to observe the grain size and morphology of the samples. Thermogravimetric analysis and diﬀerential scanning calorimeter analysis (TG-DSC) were carried out using a NETZSCH STA 449F3 simultaneous thermogravimetric analyzer in air from 50 to 1000 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C /min.

The schematic of the fabricated sensor is displayed in Fig. 1, whose fabrication process is brieﬂy described as follows. First, the NASICON slurry was coated on the surface of an alumina ceramic tube (length 6 mm, inner diameter 0.8 mm, outer diameter 1.2 mm), and then sintered at 900 °C for 6 h. Next, Au electrodes and the Pt wires, which were respectively used as the reference electrode and lead wires, were attached to an alumina tube coated with a uniform NASICON slurry (about 0.5 mm). Then, the tube was calcined at 800 °C for 30 min. After covering one end of the annular Au electrode with a MMnO3 paste, the well-coated tube was sintered at 600 °C for 4 h. Finally, the heater Ni-Cr alloy coil is inserted into the alumina tube, and the operating temperature is controlled by adjusting the heating current. The gas sensing properties were measured according to a conventional static method [36]. The whole measurement condition was in an environment with a stable temperature and humidity (26 °C, 30% RH). Diﬀerent concentrations of target gases were prepared by the static liquid gas distribution method. According to this method, a certain amount of TEA in a microsyringe was injected into a chamber via a special airlock. The TEA gas vapor was uniformly distributed throughout the chamber by the actuated ventilators, and the target gases were ﬁnally obtained. When the sensor was exposed to air or TEA, a series of voltage signals appeared and were then collected by a digital electrometer (Rigol. DM3054). The results were recorded in a computer connected to the digital electrometer. Electrochemical impendence curves were meainterface and impedance/gain phase sured by an electrochemical nitrate. The following evident mass loss occurred at 420 °C, which corresponds to the exothermic behavior of the residual organic components decomposing. When the calcination temperature is above 420 °C, the few changes of the SmMnO3 precursor weight are observed. These tiny changes can be attributed to the desorption of the residual hydroxyl group and gradual crystallization growth of the pure phase [37,38]. According to the abovementioned TG-DSC analysis, the calcination temperature was at the range of 400–1000 °C, and the XRD pattern measurement of the obtained SmMnO3 calcined at diﬀerent temperatures (400 °C–1000 °C) is presented in Fig. 2(b). Evidently, the diﬀraction peak intensity of the obtained material SmMnO3 was in accordance with the tendency of the TG-DSC curves. The products sintered at 400 °C and 600 °C barely display any distinct peaks. This signiﬁes that SmMnO3 has not yet formed good crystalline nature below 600 °C. The sharp peaks of SmMnO3 calcined at 800 °C and 1000 °C are observed, and the obtained peak intensities display the upward tendency with the increased calcination temperature. The sharper peaks are on behalf of the better crystalline at the higher temperature, which is also in accordance with the present TG-DSC curves. All the diﬀraction peaks of the prepared products above 800 °C are indexed as perovskite with orthorhombic structure, and matches well with the JCPDS PDF No. 25-747. Furthermore, the other two perovskites LaMnO3 and GdMnO3 calcined at 800 °C are in accordance with JCPDS PDFs (#32-484 and #25-337) exhibited in Fig. 2(c). No other additional impurity phases are observed for three products, illustrating single pure perovskite-type oxide.

The grain sizes and surface microstructures of the sensing materials MMnO3 (M: Gd, Sm, La) sintered at 800 °C are shown in Fig. 3. As seen in the enlarged partial SEM image, both SmMnO3 and LaMnO3 show a more uniform morphology than GdMnO3. However, they all have a common phenomenon of particle aggregation and porous structure. SmMnO3 seems to be the loosest and most porous compared to the other two. In order to further study the diﬀerences in the morphology of the three materials, the speciﬁc surface area is analyzed by the N2 adsorption-desorption isotherm test. As shown in Table 1, The BET surface areas of GdMnO3, SmMnO3 and LaMnO3 are 10.0, 15.0, and 6.8 m2/g, respectively. The maximum speciﬁc surface area of SmMnO3 results from the loosest and most porous structure, which is in agreement with the analysis of Fig. 3. The porous channel of the sensing material is thought of as an inﬂuential merit on the sensing characteristic, since the target gas can exhibit a faster diﬀusion rate and then promote the associated electrochemical reaction [39].

In order to compare the eﬀect of diﬀerent M3+ ions in MMnO3 on the sensing characteristic, the sensors attached with MMnO3 (M: Gd, Sm, La) were measured towards 50 ppm TEA and the result is exhibited in Fig. 4(a). The sensor utilizing SmMnO3-SE displays the highest response value (−217.5 mV) among three kinds of sensors. Hence, more attention is put into the further sensing characteristic of the sensor attached with SmMnO3-SE.

Based on the mixed potential model veriﬁed by the previous reports [16,20,40–43], the present sensor attached with SmMnO3-SE can be considered as an electrochemical cell when it was exposed to TEA:

When the sensor was in the TEA atmosphere, two following electrochemical reactions (1) and (2) took place at the same time and consequently formed a local cell at SE. When the reaction rates are equal to each other, the sensing electrode potential is regarded as the mixed potential. The response signals were calculated by the diﬀerence values between the sensing electrode potential and the reference electrode potential. Anodic reaction: 2(C2H5)3N + 39Na2O → N2 + 78Na+ + 12CO2 + 15H2O + 78e− (1) Cathodic reaction: 78Na+ + 78e− + 39/2O2 → 39Na2O (in NASICON)


The response value of present sensor is signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the operation temperature. Hence, the sensor attached with SmMnO3-SE was measured towards 50 ppm TEA at diﬀerent temperatures in Fig. 5. During the entire temperature change, the response value of the sensor ﬁrst displayed an increasing tendency until 325 °C. The highest response value (−217.5 mV) was obtained at 325 °C, and after that, the diminishing trend was observed. The reason that the response value of the sensor exhibited this inverted volcano-shape tendency is stated in the next section of this work. It is essential to ensure a suﬃcient energy supply and target gas amount to achieve a smooth electrochemical reaction process. Although there was a considerable amount of TEA gas molecules adhering the surface of the sensing electrode at a relatively low temperature (< 325 °C), the temperature at this time is insuﬃcient to assure a high kinetics process of smooth electrochemical reactions at the given activation energy. Only a small amount of TEA can participate in the reaction. This condition restricted the related electrochemical reaction degree and resulted in a low response value. However, as the operation temperature increased, more energy was provided for reactions (1) and (2), and the reaction rate was accelerated. The reaction degree was also deepened, and these two points contributed to the increased response value until 325 °C. When the operation temperature was beyond 325 °C, the reduced response value was observed. The two factors are responsible for this are the physical gas desorption and the chemical oxidation process. The excessive temperature expedited the TEA gas desorption process, and the gas desorption process gradually took up the dominant position instead of the gas adhering process. Although enough activation energy has been ensured, the gas quantity taking part in the reaction was less than the amount at 325 °C. This condition would be aggravated at the higher temperature, resulting in the decreased response value. Besides that, the higher operating temperature can induce a more violent TEA chemical oxidation reaction in the gas diﬀusion process. The gas loss from this process is also responsible for the diminished electrochemical reactions. Therefore, 325 °C was thought to be the optimal operation temperature and all of the upcoming sensing property measurements would be operated at 325 °C for the fabricated sensor attached with SmMnO3-SE.

In order to investigate the more detailed sensing performance, the response and recovery transient for the present sensor attached with SmMnO3-SE toward diﬀerent concentrations (0.05–50 ppm) of TEA were measured, as shown in Fig. 6(a). To be accurate, the exposure time during every testing condition should remain identical, including time

This work [23] exposed to air. As the target gas concentrations increases, the response and recovery rates are consistently stable. The response value of the sensor towards 50 ppm TEA is as large as -217.5 mV. Furthermore, according to the inset of Fig. 6(a), the low detection limit (50 ppb) was observed with an acceptable response value (-5.6 mV). The response time and recovery time test are shown in the Fig. 6(b). In the response test for diﬀerent concentrations of triethylamine, the time for placing the sensor in TEA was ﬁxed at 2 min. And the sensor signal of the last second during the sensor’s placement in triethylamine is deﬁned as the response value. Response time is the time the sensor reaches 90% of the response value. The recovery time is the time from 90% of the sensor's response value to its initial value. As is exhibited in Fig. 6(b), it could be seen that 90% response and recovery times of the sensor towards 2 ppm TEA are approximately 36 s and 21 s when the ones are 33 s and 43 s towards 5 ppm TEA, respectively. As the TEA concentration increases, the response time decreases when the recovery time exhibits the crosscurrent. Table 2 displays a TEA sensing performance contrast between the sensor in this work and other TEA sensors reported in the previous literature. It is obvious that the present sensor exhibits a relatively low detection limit, and the contrast also indicates that the fabricated sensor utilizing SmMnO3-SE displays a promising prospect in the low-concentration TEA detection. Meanwhile, the dependence of ΔV on TEA concentrations at 325 °C is shown in Fig. 6(c). The response values (ΔV) of the sensor and TEA concentrations are piecewise linear functions, which are linear correlation and logarithmic linear correlation respectively. The sensitivity is −49 mV/ppm at the range of 0.050.5 ppm and -105 mV/decade at the range of 1–50 ppm, respectively. The linear relationship between ΔV and the logarithm of TEA concentration has been veriﬁed to be in accordance with the mixed potential model [44–46]. The piecewise linear relationship was also reported by Garzon et al [47]. As previously mentioned, the amount of target gas participating in the reaction is an important factor aﬀecting the sensing properties. Although the loose structure of the sensing electrode material allows the target gas to pass easily during the gas diﬀusion process, gas concentration loss always exists. When the sensor is exposed to the low concentration (0.05–0.5 ppm) of TEA, the anodic reaction may be restricted by mass transport of TEA, yielding a linear relationship between TEA concentrations and mix potential. However, when the testing concentration becomes much higher, the anodic reaction is no longer restricted by mass transport of TEA. In this case, the response signal is limited by the reaction rate, yielding a logarithmic linear relationship between TEA concentrations and mix potential, which is in accordance with the obtained experiment result.

Additionally, selectivity is also an important evaluation criterion for the present mixed-potential sensor. As a contrast, we chose the response value of the present sensor towards eight other interfering gases at both 50 ppm and 5 ppm. As observed in Fig. 7(a), the fabricated sensor displays a much higher response value towards TEA compared with other interfering gases at the same concentration. The contrast also exhibits the excellent selectivity of the fabricated sensor even at a relatively low concentration. In order to explain the reason that the sensor displays the excellent selectivity, complex impedance curves were performed towards diﬀerent sample gases, including air, the target gas TEA and other interfering gases in Fig. 7(b). According to the reported literature [48,49], the larger semicircle at the lower frequency (0.1 Hz) is usually on behalf of the interfacial resistance which is related to the electrochemical catalytic activity of the sensing material. The curve at the higher frequency is considered to be SmMnO3 bulk resistance (containing NASICON resistance), as shown in the inset of Fig. 7(b). The larger semicircle size changes in diﬀerent testing gases when the resistance at high frequencies is almost constant. Furthermore, when the sensor is exposed to both 5 ppm and 50 ppm TEA, the curve at the lower frequency is decreased compared with the interfacial resistance in other interfering gases. The size sequence of the obtained larger semicircle is in accordance with the response value order in Fig. 7(a). To further diﬀerentiate which electrochemical polarization is contributing to differential impedance and sensing performance, a frequency Vs. Zimg. (Bode curve) was shown in Fig. 7(c). It is observed that the imaginary part of the impedance is substantially the same in the high frequency range and signiﬁcantly diﬀerent in the low frequency range, indicating that diﬀerential impedance and sensing performance could result from the interfacial polarization of SE / NASICON interface or diﬀusionlimited reactions [58]. Triethylamine has a better diﬀusion rate and a faster electrochemical catalytic reaction than other gases, so the sensor has the lowest interfacial impedance when testing triethylamine. The diversity of the complex impedance curves indicates the diﬀerent electrochemical catalytic activity intensities of the sensing material SmMnO3 towards the measured gases. The coincidence between the electrochemical impedance curves and the response values also explains that the strongest electrochemical catalytic activity towards TEA lead to the highest response value for the present sensor.

To explore the practical application of the device, the stability of the sensor attached with SmMnO3-SE was also measured at both short time and long term, as shown in Fig. 8. Fig. 8(a) exhibits the repeatable response-recovery transient of the present sensor towards diﬀerent concentrations (5 ppm and 50 ppm) of TEA. In ﬁve continuous testing cycles, the response value change is small, and the maximum number of error rates ΔVe (ΔVe is calculated as the equation ΔVe = (ΔVn – ΔV0)/ ΔV0, where ΔVn is the response value of the sensor at the nth testing cycle and ΔV0 is the initial value.) are only 5% towards 5 ppm TEA and -4.1% towards 50 ppm TEA. The small change displays the good repeatability at either 5 ppm or 50 ppm TEA. Additionally, the long-term stability of the sensor is tested for 15 days, as shown in Fig. 8(b). During the whole long-term testing period, the response value of the sensor attached with SmMnO3-SE kept in an approximate accordance towards diﬀerent concentrations of TEA, and change rate ΔVc of the response value (ΔVc is calculated as the equation ΔVc = (ΔVn – ΔV0)/ΔV0, where ΔVn is the response value of the sensor at the nth day and ΔV0 is the response value at the ﬁrst day.) is below 15% all the time. The observed slight change illustrates the good long-term consistency of the sensor during 15 days. The eﬀect of humidity on sensing performance was tested in Fig. 8(c). The sensor's responses to 1 ppm TEA keep almost unchanged at diﬀerent humidities and the maximum value of ΔVh (ΔVh is calculated as the equation ΔVh = (ΔVn – ΔV0)/ΔV0, where ΔVn is the response value of the sensor under the nth test humidity and ΔV0 is the initial value at RH 30%.) is only 10%, demonstrating that the sensor has acceptable stability at diﬀerent humidity levels. To sum everything up, the sensor utilizing SmMnO3-SE displays good stability at both shorttime repeatability and long-term stability during 15 days, which was also shown at diﬀerent humidity levels.

The sensing material MMnO3 (M: Gd, Sm, La) was prepared by the sol-gel method and three kinds of sensors utilizing MMnO3 were fabricated and measured to investigate the eﬀect of diﬀerent M3+ ions in MMnO3 on the sensing properties. The experiment results have revealed that the sensor attached with SmMnO3-SE displays the strongest electrochemical catalytic activity which has been veriﬁed by the polarization curves. The sensor also displays the largest response value towards