
The synthesis and thermoresponsive behaviour of high purity CuTi2(PO4)3 (CTP) was examined while heating in air and nitrogen at atmospheric pressure. It is known that a spontaneous redox reaction involving the Cu+ − crystal structure converts the CTP phase to the related cations that are contained in the Ti2(PO4)3 Cu0.5Ti2(PO4)3 (CTP2) phase when heated in air. However, the extent of this reaction and the eﬀect that it has on the CTP crystal structure has not been established. Using in situ powder X-ray diﬀraction it was found that during − crystal lattice results in the growth of a CuO heating in air, the migration of Cu+ cations out of the Ti2(PO4)3 − crystal lattice, quanphase. To quantify the extent of the migration of the Cu+ cations out of the Ti2(PO4)3 titative phase analysis was used to show that the redox reaction converts the CTP phase to the CTP2 phase in the temperature region from 450 to 530 °C. When increasing the temperature above 530 °C it was found that the CTP phase was spontaneously regenerated forming a high temperature form of the parent CTP phase. Previously heattreated CTP samples were subjected to further heat treatments and produced diﬀerent quantitative phase behaviour when compared to a fresh CTP sample. Most signiﬁcantly it was found that the CTP2 phase was prevalent over a broader temperature range. Comparison of the high temperature and parent CTP phases showed diﬀerences between the Cu+ site occupancies. Further heat treatment under nitrogen suppressed the redox reaction and stabilized the CTP phase. This allowed the calculation of the coeﬃcients of thermal expansion (CTE) of CTP across a broad temperature range (30–900 °C). Analysis of the CTP lattice constants via Parametric Rietveld reﬁnement showed that the compound exhibited moderate thermal expansion up to 900 °C.

The CuA2(PO4)3 (A = Ti4+, Zr4+, Sn4+ & Hf4+) phases are part of a large family of structurally related compounds known by the acronyms Nasicon (sodium superionic conductor) or NZP (sodium zirconium phosphate) and in either case is so named for the parent compound, NaZr2(PO4)3 [1–5]. Nasicon's have been shown to possess several industrially useful properties, including fast ion conduction and low thermal expansion [6–10]. Previous studies carried out on certain members of this structural family have also shown promise for use as solid acid catalysts [11]. Additionally, Nasicon derivatives have also been used for the sequestration of alkali waste and radioactive elements [12,13]. This work deals speciﬁcally with a copper and titanium containing analogue of the NZP family, CuTi2(PO4)3 (CTP). The crystal structure and electronic properties of CTP as well as that of the analogous CuZr2(PO4)3, CuSn2(PO4)3 and CuHf2(PO4)3 phases have previously been reported [14–18].

Previous studies of CTP dealt with its synthesis, structural and electrochemical characterizations. Initially, the crystal structure of CTP was determined using powder X-ray (PXRD) and neutron diﬀraction data [14,15]. The physico-chemical properties of CTP have previously been studied and it was found to be useful as a catalyst for selective oxidation reactions and as the active material in sensor devices [15,19–21]. The crystal structure of CTP was ﬁrst proposed following a comparison of d-spacing data of CTP with those of NaTi2(PO4)3 [14]. This work was followed by a more detailed crystallographic study of its crystal structure using neutron diﬀraction data [15]. Like NaTi2(PO4)3, CTP is composed of PO4 tetrahedra that corner share O2– anions with neighbouring TiO6 octahedra to produce a rigid three-dimensional − framework. Interstitial cations within the framework can Ti2(PO4)3 occupy two distinct, distorted octahedral voids usually designated as the M1 and M2 sites. From crystal structure projections it is understood that these voids exist between the triangular faces of neighbouring TiO6 octahedra and extend along the (001) or “c” lattice constant. Within the NaTi2(PO4)3 crystal structure, the Na+ cations exclusively occupy either the M1 or M2 site while the Cu+ contained within the CTP phase are randomly distributed about either the M1 or the M2 site. CTP is known to conduct Cu+ cations at elevated temperatures [22]. When

The copper in the CTP2 phase exists as Cu2+ and as such CTP2 is stable and does not have a charge imbalance. Furthermore, crystal ﬁeld theory, electron paramagnetic resonance and magnetic data showed that the CTP2 phase undergoes a co-operative Jahn-Teller distortion near 550 °C [15]. Due to their framework structure, these compounds could prove useful as active catalysts for oxidative dehydrogenation reactions and are possibly also catalytically active for other mild oxidation processes. Unit cell projections of the crystal structures of the CTP and CTP2 phases (Fig. 1) show the diﬀerent arrangements of the Cu+ and Cu2+ cations contained within each respective crystal structure. The change from CTP to CTP2 occurs because of the migration of − crystal framework to the surface of the parCu+ from the Ti2(PO4)3 ticle. The migration of Cu+ from the crystal does not signiﬁcantly alter − framework. The total loss of symmetry changes the the Ti2(PO4)3 assigned space group symmetry from R-3c to R-3 [23]. Thermogravimetric analysis of the related CuSn2(PO4)3 phase has shown that the mass gain and mass loss that occurs as a result of the oxidation and − crystal framework is consistent migration of Cu+ out of the Ti2(PO4)3 with this phase transition [17].

It was previously shown that the ionic radii of the cations occupying the M1 or M2 sites of the framework share an inverse relationship with the “a” and “b” lattice constant while they correlate directly with that of the “c” lattice constant. Accordingly, the activation energy that is required for cations to migrate randomly between the M1 and M2 sites is dictated by the size of the voids between these sites. These are known as bottleneck sites (Fig. 1b and c) and must be large enough so as to not impede cation mobility [14]. For example, using the original Nasicon crystal structure it was shown that an increase in the “c” lattice constant of the Nasicon crystal structure enlarges the bottleneck sites within the framework. This is accompanied by a commensurate decrease in the “a” and “b” lattice constants and this correlates positively with an increase in its ionic conductivity [3,4]. It was believed that changes in the lattice constants enhance the repulsion between neighbouring Na+ ions when the M1 and M2 sites are closer together, which leads to an increase in cation mobility and accordingly an increase in ionic conductivity. More rigid metal phosphate frameworks are thought to enhance the ionic character of the bonds between the cations in the voids and the framework [5,24].

The Cu+ cations contained in the Ti2(PO4)3−crystal framework of the CTP phase are randomly distributed between the M1 and M2 void − crystal framework when heated sites and migrate out of the Ti2(PO4)3 [25]. To our knowledge no in situ quantitative phase analyses or evaluation of the crystal structure of the CTP phase during reaction 1 have been reported. Since both CTP and CTP2 are possible candidates for use as solid-state electrolytes, sensor materials, and oxidation catalysts, and since all these applications rely on the compound functioning at speciﬁc temperatures or in speciﬁc temperature ranges to varying degrees, the extent and exact nature of the phase transformations needs to be established to determine the eﬀective temperature stability ranges of these phases. Furthermore, it also needs to be determined if the phase transition, which is induced by a redox reaction, can be suppressed or altogether removed as this would enable calculation of the coeﬃcients − crystal fraof thermal expansion (CTE) of the unaltered Ti2(PO4)3 mework and its interaction with the Cu+ cations over a broader temperature range.

We report here the results of in situ powder (PXRD) and synchrotron (SXRD) X-ray diﬀraction studies of reaction 1 of the CTP phase under air and nitrogen atmosphere. Since sample purity is of the utmost importance complementary characterization data was also collected on the CTP phase. To this extent, the results of these experiments including the phase quantiﬁcation and structural analysis of the CTP phase carried out via the Rietveld method are reported.


Crystalline CTP powder was synthesized via the solid-state reaction of TiO2 (Rutile, 204730 Sigma-Aldrich), Cu2O (566,284, Aldrich) and TiP2O7. The TiP2O7 precursor was prepared via solid-state reaction and was previously reported [26]. The reaction of these compounds to form the product is shown by reaction 2. TiP O 3


The synthesis of CTP progresses through the formation of CuO from the region from 300 °C–700 °C. Thereafter, the CTP phase begins to crystallize as the reagents are consumed. At 900 °C the diﬀraction pattern of the sample was almost exclusively representative of the CTP phase. Quantitative phase analysis carried out on diﬀraction patterns collected at selected temperatures are listed in Table 1.

The initital mass of sample based on 1 g of TiP2O7 and the corresponding stoichiometric quantitites of TiO2 (0.12 g) and Cu2O (0.215 g) produced a percentage mass fraction for each phase of 74.91, 8.99 and 16.11 respectively. The quantitatve phase data listed in Table 1 showed that the percentage phase contribution of the TiP2O7, TiO2 and Cu2O phases diﬀer from what was expected by −2.64%, +1.21% and +1.42% respectively which was deemed acceptable. As the reaction progressed we observed the complete decomposition of Cu2O to CuO. No metallic copper was observed in the diﬀraction patterns at any stage of the reaction. With further heating the CTP phase begins to form while a second reaction between the CuO, TiO2 and TiP2O7 phases produced an intermediate Cu2P2O7 phase. The data suggested that these are likely reaction pathways (reactions 3 to 5). TiP O 3

A comparison of the lattice constants of CTP obtained from the Rietveld and Pawley reﬁnement results of the PXRD and SXRD respectively, as well as literature value are shown in Table 2. The data contained in Table 2 shows that a reasonable quality Rietveld reﬁnement of the laboratory PXRD data was obtained. However, the poor quality of the PXRD data highlighted the need for SXRD data.

The consequent Rietveld reﬁnement of the SXRD data produced a poor ﬁt. This was likely due to sample inhomogeneity coupled with the smaller X-ray spot sizes typically used by powder diﬀraction beamlines at synchrotron sources. The resulting Rietveld reﬁnement of the SXRD data showed noticeable intensity diﬀerences between the observed data and the calculated diﬀraction pattern. Since our interest in later studies was to monitor the changes in the lattice constants with temperature, a Pawley reﬁnement was done to improve the quality of the ﬁt and to extract lattice constants with greater accuracy. From Table 2 it can be seen that the lattice constants calculated from the Pawley reﬁnement of the SXRD data are similar to within 0.12% to that of the PXRD and literature reported data [25]. The lattice constants obtained from the SXRD Pawley reﬁnement (Fig. 4) were therefore used as starting points for the CTP phase in the Rietveld reﬁnements of the in situ PXRD data. The elemental and phase composition of the CTP product was further established by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and solid state 31P MAS NMR spectroscopy (Fig. 5). Elemental analysis was performed on a FEI Tecnai T12 TEM operating at 120 kV and equipped with an EDAX EDS probe (Fig. 5a). Samples were ﬁrst dispersed in ethanol and then loaded onto carbon grids for analysis. Solid state 31P MAS NMR spectra were obtained using a BRUKER AVANCE III spectrometer operating at 7 T and employing a double resonance MAS probe. The spectrometer frequency was set at 20 MHz with a spectral resolution of ± 3 Hz (Fig. 5b).

The EDS analysis showed that the material contained no elemental impurities while the 31P MAS NMR spectrum showed a single chemical shift along with spinning side bands. The chemical shift observed in the 31P MAS NMR experiment is consistent with the single tetrahedral PO4 environment expected of the rhombohedral (R3c) CTP crystal structure [27]. This was evidence that the preparation of a high purity sample of the CTP phase was achieved. The sample was thus deemed suitable for use in further studies particularly of its redox behaviour using in situ PXRD.


The temperature dependent redox behaviour of the CTP phase was studied in situ using the powder diﬀractometer conﬁguration described earlier. The atmospheric and temperature conditions employed for these measurements are shown in Table 3.

Three experiments were conducted. For experiment 1 (1: Redox “fresh sample”) a fresh sample of ﬁne powdered CTP was heated in air to study the redox behaviour of the phase and quantify the previously observed solid to solid phase transitions in the temperature range from 280 to 650 °C. Once this experiment had concluded, the CTP sample was recovered as a porous pellet which was pulverized to a ﬁne powder to create the sample used for experiment 2. For experiment 2 (2: Redox “treated sample”) the recovered powder sample of CTP was reloaded in the reactor and reheated in air from 30 to 900 °C. Finally, for experiment 3 (3: Inert “fresh sample”) a second fresh sample of CTP was

With further heating the Cu2P2O7 phase reacts with the remaining TiP2O7 and the bulk of the TiO2 to produce CTP with a minor TiO2 impurity. The Rietveld reﬁnement of the diﬀractogram of the product obtained at 900 °C is shown in Fig. 3.

The data obtained from the Rietveld reﬁnement showed that reaction 2 produced CTP with a minor (2%) TiO2 (rutile) impurity. Neither the TiP2O7 nor Cu2O reagents were observed in the diﬀraction pattern of the product. In addition to the PXRD data, synchrotron X-ray diffraction (SXRD) data was collected on the CTP sample. Synchrotron measurements were carried out at the XPD beamline of the LNLS synchrotron facility. Measurements were conducted using a custom-built furnace operating in reﬂection mode geometry using a beam energy of 7.5 KeV and a Mythen strip detector (Fig. 4). The complete dataset is included in the link provided in the “Data Availability” section below.


Additional complementary characterization data was also collected, and this includes: 1. Thermogravimetric analyses (TGA) analogous to experiments 1 & 3 which were performed using a PerkinElmer TGA 7 thermogravimetric analyser employing a heating rate of 10 °C·min−1 for both experiments (air and nitrogen atmosphere); and (2) variable temperature solid state 31P MAS NMR collected in air on the NMR instrument conﬁguration described earlier.


For all PXRD and SXRD data presented here, the crystalline phase identiﬁcation was done using DIFFRAC.EVA (Version 2. Release 2014) using the ICDD PDF2 database (Release 2016). Phase quantiﬁcation was done using the Rietveld method as implemented in Bruker AXS TOPAS software (Version 5, 2014). NMR data processing was done using Bruker TopSpin® software (Version TS3.5pl5, 2016). The parametric Rietveld reﬁnement approach was employed for lattice constant calculations [31].

The starting composition of the CTP sample was taken from the Rietveld reﬁnement presented in Fig. 3 which indicated that the sample contained the desired CTP phase in addition to a 2% TiO2 impurity. Following on from this the in situ PXRD data of reaction 1 as carried out on the CTP sample (experiment 1) are shown in Fig. 6. The oxidation of CTP to CTP2 was ﬁrst observed at 330 °C and was evident from the evolution of additional reﬂections from 5 to 15 2θ. This oxidation reaction occurred gradually up to 510 °C where the diﬀraction pattern was observed to be almost exclusively representative of the CTP2 phase. The variable temperature 31P SS NMR data showed a single chemical shift (Fig. 7). As the temperature was increased this single chemical shift sharply moved to a lower frequency. With further increase in temperature a gradual drift was observed in the signal. These changes in the data were due to reaction 1 and showed that the symmetry of the CTP phase changed when it oxidized to the CTP2 phase. The data also suggested that the reaction ran to completion with the total conversion of the CTP phase achieved. This seemed to suggest that the CTP and CTP2 phases do not co-exist at high temperature.

The Rietveld reﬁnement of the diﬀraction pattern collected at 510 °C (Fig. 8) showed that the material contained a mixture of the CTP2, CuO, and TiO2 phases. The data suggest that the TiO2 phase was


The thermograms of CTP collected during heating in air and nitrogen are shown in Fig. 10. The mass increase observed from 450 to 550 °C during heating in air is consistent with the oxidation of metallic − crystal lattice to form CuO copper that migrated from the Ti2(PO4)3 on the surface of the crystals. The mass gain that is observed is slight and is much less than that observed when the sample was studied using in situ PXRD. The spontaneous mass loss further supported the reduc− crystal tion of CuO to Cu+ which was re-acquired by the Ti2(PO4)3 lattice to form the high temperature form of the CTP phase.

The TGA experiment was repeated under nitrogen atmosphere and the CTP sample showed a diﬀerent trend to when it was heated in air. When heated in air the CTP sample showed slight but continuous mass loss indicative of the onset of partial sample decomposition. This experiment was repeated several times on diﬀerent CTP samples and a similar eﬀect was observed. Analogous in situ PXRD experiments were carried out (experiment 1 & 2) under air and nitrogen atmosphere. In support of the observations made from the TGA data, when CTP was heated under nitrogen the eﬀects of the redox reaction in the diﬀraction data were no longer observed (Fig. 11).

Experiments 1 & 2 showed that the redox reaction changed the − framework from R-3c to R-3. The data symmetry of the Ti2(PO4)3 shown in Fig. 11 also indicated that in the absence of the redox reaction − framework remained unchanged. Instead, the data the Ti2(PO4)3 showed a steady drift towards higher 2θ positions for the (104), (110) and (113) reﬂections which was most likely due to the thermal ex− framework. The long-range temperature pansion of the Ti2(PO4)3 − framework when heated in nitrogen allowed stability of the Ti2(PO4)3 for the calculation of the lattice constants of the CTP phase and accordingly the coeﬃcients of thermal expansion of the CTP phase over a broader temperature range. For this purpose, the parametric Rietveld reﬁnement approach was adopted, and the lattice constants of the CTP phase were obtained as a function of temperature (Fig. 12).

The changes in the “a” and “b” lattice constants have an eﬀective range of 0.01 Å. Therefore, the changes in these lattice constants are statistically insigniﬁcant. While the data suggests that negative thermal expansion is observed at low temperature we also see regions of positive thermal expansion at high temperature. The overall thermal expansion is small and positive but since it is negligible, the overall thermal expansion observed over the entire temperature range along the “a” and “b” lattice constants appeared to be zero or close to zero. The “c” lattice constant showed near linear positive thermal expansion throughout the entire temperature range. The thermal expansion exhibited by the CTP phase is similar to what is expected of a Nasicon type


The relative phase abundances obtained during the redox reaction of the treated sample showed that the conversion of CTP to CTP2 occurs but does not run to completion. Throughout the measurement the sample contained both the CTP and CTP2 phases. The relative phase abundance of the CTP2 phase reaches a maximum of 91% and CuO reaches a maximum of 8.8%. With further heating, the high temperature form of the CTP phase was again produced at temperatures above 600 °C.

However, since heating under nitrogen restricts Cu+ cation mobility the changes observed with the “a”/“b” lattice constants are diﬀerent to what has been reported for other Nasicon phases. The lack of mobility of the Cu+ cations does not increase the size of the bottleneck sites between the M1 and M2 void sites and as a result instead of exhibiting negative thermal expansion, near zero thermal expansion is observed with these lattice parameters. The “c” lattice parameter largely appears unaﬀected by the lack of Cu+ mobility.

The temperature dependence of the lattice parameters showed that CTP undergoes non-linear thermal expansion. Therefore, the thermal expansion coeﬃcients, α = (a-a0/a0(t-t0), were calculated for each unique lattice constant and split over several discreet approximately linear ranges [32]. The average thermal expansion coeﬃcients, β = (2 αa/b + αc)/3, showed that lattice expansion dominated lattice contraction (Table 5). From the data contained in Table 5 it is evident that the CTP phase exhibited an overall volumetric coeﬃcient of thermal expansion (β) of 4.130 ppm.°C−1 and exhibits intermediate thermal expansion [24].

The data presented in this study conﬁrmed that the CTP phase undergoes a reversible phase change to the related CTP2 phase at high temperature due to a redox reaction in the presence of oxygen.