Interfaces between alkali metal solid state electrolytes and aqueous solutions are often unstable. In particular, the use of β/β″ alumina superionic conductors is generally limited to conditions absent of liquid water due to their well-known sensitivity to water vapor. However, the degradation mechanism upon exposure to aqueous solutions is not well understood. Using impedance spectroscopy, infrared spectroscopy, and chemical analysis, we studied the mechanism of ionic impedance rise for K+-ion-conducting, polycrystalline K-β″ alumina membranes in room temperature aqueous solutions. By using a non-blocking Fe2+/Fe3+ couple in a symmetric aqueous impedance cell with different concentrations of LiOH, NaOH, KOH, CsOH, and KBr, we find that the rate of resistance rise of the membrane is highly dependent on the pH and K+ concentration in the solution. We find the rate decreases from ~50–200 Ω cm2 h−1 in neutral pH solutions to ~0.1–1 Ω cm2 h−1 in alkaline solutions or solutions with high K+ concentrations. Characterization results are consistent with ion exchange of K+ for hydrated protons as the mechanism of resistance rise.


The use of solid electrolytes in aqueous solutions is not common in devices today due to the significant challenge of maintaining their stability. Further, understanding the interface between ceramic solid electrolytes and aqueous solutions could result in the development of new electrochemical devices such as sensors, ion pumps, and energy storage devices. This interface is particularly important for alkali-air secondary batteries, where water is sometimes used on the positive electrode to dissolve large amounts of alkali hydroxides [1]. When exposed to water, solid electrolytes undergo many chemical interactions, such as ion exchange, dissolution, and surface reactions, which are briefly reviewed here. One of the most common interactions is the exchange of the alkali-metal ions in the solid with protons from the such as Li7La3Zr2O12, Li+ exchanges with protons without changing the crystal structure or lattice parameters of the ceramic [2]. When NASICONstructured Na3Zr1.88Y0.12Si2PO12 is immersed in water, hydronium ions slowly exchange with Na+, forming a new phase with a larger lattice constant, and lower ionic conductivity [3]. Beyond ion exchange, many studies find evidence of chemical reactions between water and the host lattice or impurity phases. For example, Li0.44La0.52TiO3 and Li1+x+yAlxTi2−xSiyP3−yO12 have been reported to dissolve in acidic and alkaline solutions, respectively [4,5]. For NASICON (Na superionic conductor), dissolution of impurity phases, such as amorphous phases at grain boundaries [6–8] was observed. Both ion exchange andsome Li+-ion-conducting ceramics, solution.

SEM was conducted with an FEI XL30 Sirion (5 keV). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were taken with an FEI Tecnai G2 F20 X-TWIN (200 keV). TEM samples were prepared by mechanical grinding to 20 μm thickness followed by 1 h of Ar ion milling with a Gatan PIPs II at 5 keV and 5° incident beam angle. To examine bulk reactions between K-β″ alumina and water, XRD (Bruker D8-Advanced, Cu Kα X-rays) and Rietveld refinement (TOPAS) were carried out. Four phases were assumed: K-β″ alumina (ICSD 200993, with Li in place of the Mg dopant), K-β alumina (ICSD 298), tetragonal ZrO2 (ICSD 66781), and monoclinic ZrO2 (ICSD 26488). To gain insight into chemical reactions taking place between the membrane and water, powders of K-β″ alumina were immersed in water and the solution composition measured using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES). A Thermo Scientific ICAP 6300 Duo View Spectrometer was used for the ICP-OES measurements. The concentration of K+ dissolved in the solution was measured as a function of time and normalized by surface area based on SEM images of K-β″ powders. pH was measured using a Mettler Toledo FiveEasy Plus pH meter with LE422 pH electrode in a three-neck glass flask, bubbled with N2 through a rubber septum and stirred to ensure atmospheric CO2 did not affect the measurement. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy in attenuated total reflectance mode (ATR-FTIR) was used to examine water content in the membrane. A polished K-β″ alumina disk was exposed to DI water for various lengths of time, removed and blown dry with N2. Subsequently, FTIR-ATR measurements were taken with a diamond ATR element using a single bounce of the IR beam at a 45° incident angle. Finally, atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were taken with an Asylum Research Cypher AFM; a K-β″ membrane was first imaged after being polished and thermally etched at 1200 °C for 1 h to reveal the grain structure, and then imaged again after the sample was immersed in 5% acetic acid for 330 h.

The ionic resistance of a membrane is the most important figure of merit for a solid electrolyte, which was measured for K-β″ alumina in a symmetric cell using EIS as described above. Fig. 2B shows a Nyquist plot for a pristine membrane. The high frequency intercept with the real axis corresponds to the sum of the aqueous solution resistance and the intragrain resistance of the K-β″ alumina, labeled as Rg + Rs. We attribute the high frequency arc with a characteristic frequency of ~102 kHz to the grain boundary of pristine β alumina, with a resistance of Rgb. We also measured the impedance of membranes with Au blocking electrodes, which is shown in Fig. 2C. We observed a similar impedance response at ~102 kHz using these blocking electrodes. However, the data in Fig. 2C also show another arc at slightly lower frequencies. This feature is attributable to the contact between the gold blocking electrodes and the sample. This low frequency arc is not attributable to the membrane because others have noted that the low


We now discuss the possible mechanisms for impedance degradation of K-β″ alumina membranes in aqueous solutions. We will discuss three categories of possible degradation mechanisms (Fig. 7): (A) ion exchange between K+ in the solid and hydrated protons in the liquid; (B) chemical reactions or dissolution of grain boundary phases such as KAlO2-type phases, or phases containing impurity elements; (C) formation of liquid/solid interphase, such as AlOOH from the reaction of the oxide with water, or carbonates from dissolved CO2. We first discuss mechanism (A), ion exchange, which we believe is the most likely cause of degradation.

In this work, we have reported the stability of K-β″ alumina in aqueous solutions. By using a Fe2+/Fe3+ electrochemical couple in a symmetric impedance cell, we are able to measure the K+ ion transport across K-β″ alumina membranes at room temperature. Our results indicate by 50–200 Ω cm2 h−1 in water at neutral pH but increases by only ~0.1–1 Ω cm2 h−1 in solutions of high concentration K+ or pH around 11–12. Material characterization reveals that this behavior is likely due to a sub-diffusion-limited ion exchange reaction occurring between K+ in the solid and hydrated protons in solution. We note that the degradation mechanism for K-β″ alumina in aqueous solutions could be different than the Na+ and Li+ analogs.