The preparation of solid electrolyte ceramic membranes is the object of intense study for  its  fundamental  parts  in  the  development  of  all  solid-state  batteries  and  improved  battery  separators.  In  this  work,  the  procurement  of  large  area  solid  electrolyte  ceramic  thick  film  membranes of the Li-NASICON Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) composition is attempted. Through the  use of LATP powders from a sol–gel reaction, a slurry is formulated and tape casted. The green  tapes are sintered using two sintering times. In both cases, ceramic thick films of a 5.5 × 5.5 cm2 area  and ≈250 µm average thickness were obtained. The characterization indicated almost pure phase  samples with a  bi-modal microstructure composed of large and smaller grains, being larger for  longer sintering time. The samples are porous and brittle, presenting very high “bulk” conductivity  but lower total direct current (DC) one, as compared with the commercial Li-NASICON (OHARA)  thick  films  with  a  similar  area.  The  larger  the  grains,  the  poorer  the  total  conductivity  and  the  mechanical properties of the thick-films. The formation of poorly adhering grain boundaries as the  grain size grows is responsible for the worsened properties. A better control of the microstructure  is mandatory.   


Because of their high energy performance, lithium-ion batteries are nowadays widely used for  storage  power  generation  and  uninterruptible  power  supply  (UPS)  systems  [1,2].  The  use  of  Li-conducting  organic  liquid  and/or  polymer  electrolytes,  in  the  present  battery  technology,  prevents the fabrication of completely safe devices as a result of low thermal stability. The use of an  inorganic solid instead of a liquid/polymer electrolyte will significantly improve the safety of the  lithium-ion battery, also extending its life by reducing the degradation processes [3–5]. The rather  poor  temperature  stability  of  Li-batteries  based  on  organic  electrolytes  prevents  the  use  of  these  devices in harsh environments where temperatures can rise above 100 °C. This limitation can be  overcome by using ionic liquids, but the reduced ionic conductivity is deleterious for the output  power of the battery. The preparation of all solid-state batteries (ASSBs) can be of interest for their use in a wider temperature and pressure range that the current liquid electrolyte-based batteries  (LEEBs) cannot cover. 

Another  interesting  niche  of  application  of  ASSBs  is  the  result  of  the  progressive  miniaturization  of  electronic  components.  An  increasing  demand  for  micro-sized  power  sources  incites the research of thin or thick films, so as to avoid the use of liquid electrolytes and to confine  the batteries in a defined space (integrated batteries). Smart cards, implanted medical devices, micro  electro-mechanical systems, memory blocks, sensors, transducers, and especially military equipment  are potential consumers of ASSBs film batteries [6–8]. Besides the implementation of ASSBs, the use  of full dense solid electrolytes ceramic membranes as separators in liquid electrolyte-based batteries  to prevent any short circuit caused by the growth of dendrites is an important application [9]. These  dense  ceramic  electrolyte  membranes  can  be  also  used  as  separators  in  metal–air  batteries,  protecting the anodic compartment from the ambient [10]. However, there are many drawbacks that  limit their implementation. The first one is the relatively low ionic conductivity of the solid, which is  usually one order of magnitude lower than that of their liquid electrolyte counterparts. But the main  challenge to be faced is the procurement of electrochemically active solid electrodes/solid electrolyte  interfaces.  To  accomplish  this  challenge,  inter-diffusion  must  be  avoided  as  much  as  possible.  Another  drawback  is  the  mechanical  fatigue  produced  on  the  interfaces  during  insertion  de-insertion processes. 

In  ASSBs  solid  electrode/electrolyte,  the  interfacial  area  is  small,  as  contacts  are  limited.  In  comparison  with  conventional  secondary  batteries,  the  diffusion  path  lengths  for  the  electron  draining at the current collectors, and for the Li insertion, are much larger. The length reduction of  the diffusion path is fundamental for fast electrochemical kinetics and high power [11]. The thin film  battery ASSBs concept was proposed to solve this problem. Different designs have been made to  increase the interfacial area. ASSBs based on thin film materials presented high charge and discharge  rates, comparable to liquid electrolyte Li batteries, but the total energy stored remains poor [12,13].  The active mass of the electrodes must be increased, as this is proportional to the stored energy.  Thick  films  with  thicknesses  in  the  range  of  10–100  µm  can  be  a  solution.  They  will  provide  increased  energy  and  enough  power.  Novel  ASSB  designs  are  needed  in  order  to  reduce  the  diffusion  path  length  of  the  ions  and  electrons.  Moreover,  the  strain  effects  due  to  the  insertion/de-insertion of Li must be minimized to increase battery durability. This minimization will  require  important  changes  in  battery  designs  [14].  Electrolyte  supported  large  area  ASSB  architecture can be a solution. It allows for flexible electrode design to minimize the strain effects,  reduce  the  diffusion  path,  and  balance  the  electrode  mass  between  the  anode  and  cathode.  Two  main different configurations of supported ASSBs can be foreseen. The first one with the anode and  cathode at different sides of the electrolyte, and the second one with electrodes disposed at the same  side of the electrolyte (inter-digital electrode configuration). A self-supported electrolyte thick-film  with a high enough mechanical strength is mandatory for the first configuration. In the second one, a  supported solid electrolyte layer on a refractory mechanically resistant substrate can be used. The  procurement  of  planar  large  area  electrolyte  thick  films  is  of  main  importance  for  both  ASSB  configurations.  Among  the  different  families  of  high  conductivity  Li  solid  electrolytes,  Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3  with  a  NASICON  structure  is  a  good  candidate  for  ASSBs,  because  of  its  high lithium conductivity (σbulk ∼10−3 S·cm−1 at RT), chemical resistance, and mechanical stability [15–19]. 

These materials are widely studied in the form of ceramics and glass ceramics. Studies on thick-films  ceramics are still scarce. The sulfide-based solid electrolytes presented larger Li conductivities, but  are difficult to handle in a regular atmosphere compared to the same, but oxide-based. 

For the procurement of solid electrolyte thick films with a thickness larger than 10 µm, tape  casting  or  screen-printing  methods  are  more  appropriate  [20].  For  the  application,  the  thick  film  must be dense. The presence of pores and cracks in the ceramic films produce a negative impact on  the electrical and mechanical properties of  the films. It is necessary to find  ways to  produce full  dense thick films [21,22]. 

The aim of this work is the preparation of self-standing thick-films of Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 with a  high  Li  conductivity,  to  be  used  as  support  for  all  solid-state  Li  batteries.  The  structure,  phase homogeneity,  and  microstructure  of  prepared  thick  films  have  been  investigated  by  XRD,  NMR,  confocal micro-Raman, and SEM  techniques. Impedance spectroscopy (IS) in a wide temperature  and frequency range was used to extract the “total” and “bulk” direct current (DC) conductivity of  the  thick  film  samples  prepared.  A  mechano-elastic  characterization  of  the  thick  films  was  also  performed, as high mechanical properties are needed to be used as support. The results obtained  have been discussed and compared with those reported in other samples of a similar composition,  especially the OHARA Li-NASICON glass-ceramic (OHGC), which is a commercial large area Li  solid electrolyte that is available. 



In the LATPT1 and LATPT2 samples, the 31P MAS-NMR spectra show a broad and asymmetric  component at ~−27 ppm, ascribed to the formation of the LATP NASICON phase (Figure 5a, all of  the  lines).  Small  components  at  −10  and  −20  ppm  were  ascribed  to  the  secondary  LiTiPO5  and  LiAlP2O7 phases [26]. In the commercial OHARA sample, the small non-resolved component at −30  ppm was associated with the AlPO4 orthophosphate (line A in Figure 5b). 


Large area self-supported Li-NASICON thick films can be prepared by tape casting the slurries  prepared  with  Li-NASICON  powder  obtained  from  the  sol–gel  powders.  The  crystallization  temperature of the powder was 800 °C and the sintering was done at 900 °C in order to produce  materials with a very small quantity of crystalline secondary phases. A small quantity of LiTiPO5  was found by XRD. In the commercial OHGC sample, a large quantity of AlPO4 was detected, which  was not present  in the LATP thick films. The  NMR characterization of the  samples, found  other  small quantities of secondary phases like LiAlP2O7 and LiTiPO5 in the LATP thick film samples. 

On the other hand, the microstructure of our samples is similar to that of bulk ceramics, with a  typical bi-modal grain distribution [30], but with a larger porosity. The average grain size is much  larger  than  the  one  found  in  the  commercial  sample,  where  the  sizes  are  sub-micrometric  [31].  Another important difference in the microstructure, especially in the LATPT2 one, is that the facets  of the large Li-NASICON crystals are clearly visible, in both the surface and in the fresh fracture   

micrographs.  This  feature  is  related  with  the  easy  breaking  of  the  ceramic  through  the  grain  boundaries instead of through the intra-grain fracture. The larger crystals grow, but do not sinter  with the neighbor ones, producing a poor attached interface in these samples at temperature and  time-used in treatments. The poor sintering among the large grains joined to the large porosity can  be  responsible  of  the  low  Young’s  modulus  of  the  prepared  thick  films,  as  well  as  their  brittle  behavior. From the observed microstructure large grain boundary, impedance can be expected for  the prepared thick films. Moreover, the grain size growth can be deleterious for the conductivity  property,  as  it  surpasses  the  critical  size  for  the  micro-cracks  formation  as  a  result  of  the  strong  dilatation anisotropy of the Li-NASICON [32]. The absence of AlPO4 as a secondary phase justifies  large  grain  growths  detected  in  the  thick  films  samples  from  the  sol–gel  powders,  as  this  phase  prevents grain growth in LATP NASICON [33]. 

The NMR characterization allowed for the quantification of the Al and Li incorporation in the  LATP NASICON phase. The LATP x = 0.3 phase is almost stoichiometric (x = 0.34), showing a good  quality in the prepared LATP crystallites of thick-films. The information about the Li+ dynamics in  the samples indicates enhanced dynamics for the OHGC sample, as it presented a narrower central  line  and  reduced  quadrupolar  interaction.  This  result  is  not  in  agreement  with  the  conductivity  results,  which  indicate  a  better  conductivity  in  the  LATPT2  sample.  The  complexity  of  the  Li+  conductivity mechanism in Li-NASICON that implies a diffusion path along M1–M3–M1 sites with  different residence times at different sites means that this simplified analysis of the line is not strictly  valid. The changes on the residence time of two sites explain the increment of quadrupolar constants  with temperature [34]. 

The  mechanical  properties  of  an  electrolyte  thick-film  must  be  high  for  the  development  of  large-area ASSBs or Li–air batteries. The results of the Young’s modulus of the prepared thick-films  are quite poor, compared with the OHGC commercial film. In the best case, LATPT1 is three times  lower,  increasing  losses  and  dissipation  effects  at  grain  boundaries,  making  the  material  more  viscous-elastic. LATPT2 presented the poorest mechanical properties. This drop of the mechanical  properties can be related to the microstructure and the nature of the grain boundaries. Large grains  imply that samples are prone to develop micro-cracking [32] and poor sintering. This effect, joined  with a rather large porosity of samples, can be the reason for the low Young’s modulus and the  important  brittleness  of  the  sample  providing  a  poor  mechanical  performance  of  prepared  thick-films. 

The ionic conductivity is also affected by the sample’s microstructure. The LATPT2 samples  showed the highest “bulk” ionic conductivity, resulting in a good crystallization and stoichiometry,  with a rather small quantity of secondary phases. The obtained value, 7 × 10−3 Ω−1·cm−1 (measured at  RT), is remarkable, displaying a very low activation energy of 0.22 eV. The conductivity measured in  the micro-crystals of the LATP of the same composition is 5 × 10−3 Ω−1·cm1 at RT, and no activation  energy value is given. [35] Poor sintering, large porosity, and the presence of micro-cracks strongly  reduces the “overall” DC Li conductivity. At 195 K, the difference between the “bulk” and the grain  boundary  values  is  three  orders  of  magnitude.  The  LATPT1  shows  the  same  problems,  but  in  a  lower degree. 

The  existence  of  secondary  phases  can  also  be  behind  the  increase  in  the  ceramic  total  resistivity. In the phase analysis of our samples, a secondary phase of LiTiPO5 was found, as well as  small quantities of LiAlP2O7 and rutile. This main secondary phase is much less Li conducting (1.1 ×  10−5 Ω−1·cm−1 at 400 °C, Ea = 1 eV) [36] than LATP. If this secondary phase is accumulated at the grain  boundaries, it can be, to some extent, responsible for their strong blocking behavior. To observe the  distribution  of  the  secondary  phases  in  the  sample,  the  confocal  Raman  technique  is  a  powerful  technique.  From  the  compositional  map  of  the  LATPT1  thick-film  sample  (Figure  4c),  an  even  distribution  of  this  and  the  other  secondary  phases  is  observed.  The  Raman  spectrum  of  the  unknown phase does not match with that of the LiAlP2O7 one (the main Raman bands of this phase  are  around  669  nm−1,  and  713  nm−1,  because  of  the  υ  P–O–P  and  vs  P–O–P  modes)  [37].  This  secondary phase can be sub-micrometer in size, and thus out of the confocal Raman sensitivity. 

As the secondary phases observed in the confocal RAMAN sweep are evenly distributed in the  thick film, their Li+ and electronic conductivities are well below those of the LATP, and the quantity  is not enough to give a percolated path through the sample; the influence of them in the overall Li conductivity is to reduce the volume fraction of the LATP phase, and reduce the grain boundary  area.  Both  effects  produce  a  reduction  in  the  “bulk”  conductivity  as  well  as  in  the  total  DC  conductivity, but in a lower extent than if they would be arranged in series with the LATP grains.  Maybe the LiAlP2O7 secondary phase, which is not observed in the RAMAN spectroscopy, could be  accumulated at the grain boundaries. The conductivity of this phase is 8.8 × 10−6 Ω−1·cm−1 at 330 °C,  just  three  orders  of  magnitude  lower  than  the  “bulk”  one  [37].  With  this  conductivity,  the  distribution  of  this  phase  at  the  grain  boundaries  cannot  explain  the  increase  in  the  blocking  behavior. 

As the main difference between the LATPT1 and LATPT2 samples is the change of grain size,  the quantity of the grain boundaries must be smaller for the LATPT2 sample, and the reduction in  the  total  DC  conductivity,  which  is  as  a  result  of  the  increase  in  the  blocking  effect  of  the  grain  boundaries, must be because of the worse grain boundaries in this sample. This statement is also  supported by the reduction of the Young’s modulus of this sample in comparison with the LATPT1  one.  A  larger  sintering  time  increases  the  grain  size,  but  produces  worse  grain  boundaries.  This  effect  can  be  related  to  some  thermodynamic  instability  of  the  Li-NASICON  phase  at  these  temperatures,  added  to  the  presence  of  microcracking  at  the  grain  boundaries.  The  in  depth  explanation of the origin of this effect is not in the scope of this work. 

From our results, it can be concluded that, in pure phase LATP thick-films. the increase in grain  size is deleterious for the functional properties. The large porosity joined with the bad quality of the  interfaces between the large grains produced this effect. In fact, the OHGC thick film sample was  designed  to  avoid  the  grain  growth  and  the  formation  of  LATP/LATP  grain  boundaries.  The  fabrication  of  the  OHGC  sample  implies  high  temperatures  to  melt  the  mixture,  and  then  the  re-crystallization  step  (700  °C),  to  a  specified  extent.  It  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  heating  the  OHGC sample at temperatures larger than 700 °C increased re-crystallization and reduced the total  DC Li conductivity; this is a limitation for its application in ASSBs. 

In order to produce large area ceramic LATP thick films, the use of sintering aids is mandatory,  as well as some additives that could reduce the grain growth. For this last aim, the use of a small  volume of AlPO4 to reduce grain size, as proposed in the literature [33], could be a solution. Another  way, which is totally different, is the use of spark plasma sintering (SPS), as it gives a higher density  and smaller grain size; however, this is not a good choice for large area samples. 


The Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 solid-state electrolyte powder was synthesized by a sol–gel method. The  raw materials used were LiNO3 (purity >97.0%; J.T. Baker Chemical Co, Phillipsburg, NJ, USA) City,  Country),  Al(NO3)3  9H2O  (98%;  Alfa  Aesar,  Ward  Hill,  MA,  USA),  NH4H2PO4  (purity  >98%;  Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and Titanium(IV) isopropoxide (98%; Sigma-Aldrich). Titanium  (IV) isopropoxide was added to the de-ionized water while stirring. Titanium hydroxide precipitate  was  formed  immediately.  The  precipitate  was  filtered  and  washed.  The  washed  precipitate  was  transferred to an empty beaker, and de-ionized water was added into the beaker. Nitric acid (65%,  Aldrich) was then added to the titanium hydroxide precipitation with water. When a clear TiO2 and  nitrate solution was formed, citric acid monohydrate (99%, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) was added  into the solution to stabilize it. LiNO3 and Al(NO3)3 9H2O added into the TiO2 and nitrate solution  while stirring. After the salts were dissolved, NH4H2PO4 was then added to the solution and a sol  was immediately formed. The gel was dried at 80 °C for 24 h and calcined at 600 °C for 4 h. The  calcined powder was milled in ethanol with zirconia balls for 24 h, and pressing into pellets. The  pressed  pellets  were  sintered  at  800  °C.  The  pellets  were  milled  again  and  sieved  through  a  200  mesh. 


The LATP powder and binder (B73305 Ferro Corp., San Marcos, CA, USA; solute PVB, solvent  Ethanol + Toluene) in 62.5:37.5 wt % proportions were mixed by ball milling in a Teflon bottle with  zircona balls for 24 h. The mix was de-foamed in an oven at 70 °C for one hour. Then, it was ball  milled again for 12–16 h. The recipient with the slurry was introduced into a vacuum chamber for  4–6 min for degassing. The slurry was tape casted using a commercial lab-size tape casting machine  (uni99  from  Huan-Yang  CO.  LTD.)  using  a  blade  separation  of  1  mm  at  a  speed  of  2  cm/s.  The  formed  tape  was  dried  at  40  °C  and  cut  into  pieces  of  60  ×  60  mm,  and  the  final  sintering  was  performed at 900 °C with a LATP powder bed during 4 h LATPT1 and 12 h LATPT2. 


X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  patterns  were  recorded  at  room  temperature  using  a  Bruker  D8  Advance  diffractometer  (40  kV  and  30  mA,  Bruker  AXS,  Karlsruhe,  Germany),  using  the  Cu  Kα  radiation. The XRD patterns were recorded in the 10–70° range. The angular step was 0.04°, and the  counting  time/step  was  0.5  s.  The  crystalline  phases  were  identified  using  the  data  of  the  International Centre for Diffraction Data (ICDD). 

The  thick  films  compositional  homogeneity  was  also  tested  by  using  the  confocal  Raman  microscope (Witec alpha-300R, WITec GmbH, Ulm, Germany), using a 532 nm excitation laser and a  100×  objective  lens  (NA  =  0.9).  The  incident  laser  power  was  0.5  mW.  The  optical  diffraction  resolution in the confocal Raman apparatus microscope was limited to ~200 nm laterally and ~500  nm vertically. The resolution achieved in the recorded Raman spectra was 0.02 cm−1. The sample was  mounted on a piece-driven scan platform, displaying a 4 nm lateral and 0.5 nm vertical positional  accuracy. The collected spectra were analyzed by using the Witec Control Plus Software. 

The  27Al,  7Li,  and  31P  MAS-NMR  spectra  were  recorded  with  an  AVANCE-400  Bruker  spectrometer  (9.4  T  magnetic  field).  The  frequencies  used  were  104.26,  155.45,  and  161.97  MHz,  respectively.  The  spectra  were  recorded  after  a  π/2  irradiation  (2.0  µs  pulses  for  aluminum  and  lithium, and 4.0 µs for phosphorus) with the MAS technique (rotation of samples at 10 kHz around  an axis inclined 54°44′, with respect to the external magnetic field). The number of scans was chosen  in the range of 100–800. The position of the NMR components was referred to as 1 M AlCl3, 1 M LiCl,  and 85% H3PO4 aqueous solutions. The spectral deconvolutions (position, linewidths, and intensities  of components) were obtained with the commercial DMFIT (D. Massiot software, NMR @ CEMHTI  CNRS UPR3079, Orléans, France). 

The cross-section and plan-view micrographs of the crystalline oxide films were obtained using  Scanning  Electron  Microscopy  SEM  (Phenom™  G2  pro  SEM  5  kV;  Eindhoven,  Holland).  The  porosity of the thick films was calculated from the binarization of the plane view SEM images using  the image processing software MIP 45 (Digital Imaging Systems Ltd. Buckinghamshire, UK) 

The  electrical  properties  of  the  thick  films  were  measured  on  planar  capacitors  by  the  de-metallization of the opposite face of the samples with Au paste (Dupont 8216), and sintered at 800  °C 2 h. The metalized capacitors were mounted in a broad temperature cryostat Janis VPF-700 to  perform impedance spectroscopy (IS) measurements as a function of the temperature (77–575 K) in  the frequency range of 20 Hz–1 MHz, using an Agilent LCR E4192A apparatus (Santa Clara,  CA,  USA). Higher frequency measurements were performed in an ultrabroad frequency range from 1  Hz  to  10  GHz,  and  temperatures  up  to  800  K  [38].  Two  methods  were  combined,  namely:  a  conventional two-electrode method [39] and a coaxial line method [40]. A sample voltage of 100 mV  at a low frequency range and incident wave power of −10 to 0 dBm in the coaxial line was applied.  All of the measurements provided up to 16 frequency points per octave, and were carried out in  atmospheric  air.  The  temperature  stability  during  the  measurements  was  around  0.4  K,  and  the  speed of change was 2–3 deg/min. The films were measured in in-plane configuration, the samples  of 1.5 mm length were prepared, and Pt electrodes were fired at 800 °C. 

For the mechano-elastic characterization of the prepared samples at room temperature, samples  with dimensions 6 × 2.5 mm2 were prepared from the large thick film samples, and were mounted in  a triple point  bending sample holder coupled to  a dynamic mechanical analyzer DMA 7 (Perkin   

Large area, 5.5 × 5.5 cm2, high purity thick film membranes of a Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 Li-NASICON  solid electrolyte has been prepared at 900 °C by tape casting slurries formed with powders obtained  from the sol–gel method. The larger the sintering time used to prepare the thick-film membranes, the  larger the grain size in the sample. The increased grain size increases the “bulk” Li conductivity,  reaching values larger than 10−3 Ω−1·cm−1, but this is detrimental for the total Li conductivity, and  reduced the mechanical strength of the membrane. This reduction in functional properties is related  to the formation of poor grain boundaries, which worsen on increasing the grain size. In order to  increase  the  total  Li  conductivity  and  the  mechanical  strength,  a  reduction  of  the  grain  size,  procurement of enhanced grain boundaries, and lower porosity are mandatory. To obtain this goal, a  possible strategy to be studied is the use of additives to reduce grain size, and sintering aids in the  slurry’s formulation.  Author Contributions. conceptualization, K.Z.F, R.J., and E.K.; methodology, J.S., L.C., E.K., and K.Z.F.; formal  analysis,  I.S.,  A.K.,  S.Y.T.,  and  A.A.C.;  investigation,  S.M.C,  M.R.L,  and  A.K.;  resources,  S.Y.T.  and  S.M.C.;  writing (original draft preparation), R.J.; writing (review and editing), all of the authors.  Funding:  This  research  was  funded  by  the  Spanish  Ministry  of  Science,  Innovation,  and  Universities,  PCIN-2017-110, in the frame of the M-Era-net 2016 program, by a grant (S-M-ERA.NET-17-1) from the Research  Council of Lithuania, and by the project MOST 106-2923-M-006-002-MY3. Project MAT2016-78362-C4-2R is also  acknowledged.  Acknowledgments: Our acknowledged to Dr. J. F. Bartolomé from the ICMM (CSIC, Madrid) for his helpful  support in the microstructure study.  Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 