In  this  study,  synthesis  of  NASICON  powder  by  coprecipitation  and  sol-gel  processes  is described and  effect  of  process  conditions  and  calcination  temperature  on  crystallinity  is investigated. X-ray diffraction patterns show that the coprecipitation method leads to formation of NASICON pure phase with a negligible zirconia content and so the powder derived thorough coprecipitation  is  used  for  sintering.  Sintering  is  carried  out  in  two  methods.  In  conventional method, NASICON pellets are sintered at different temperatures and holding time. Results reveal that the pellet sintered at 1000 ˚C for 10 h yields better electrochemical properties. Spark plasma sintering was also performed which results the highest conductivity of 1.7 × 10-3 S cm-1 between all samples at 25ºC. 


NASICON(Na Super Ionic Conductor) stands for Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12 (0<x<3) formulation that is considered  as  a  Na-conductor  material[1].  In  recent  years,  NASICON  has  been  used  for applications such as all solid state batteries[2] and CO2 sensors[3]. In these devices, NASICON conductivity plays an important role in suitable performance. In general, there is a relationship between  electrical  conductivity,  composition  and  structure[4].  It  has  been  proved  that  when 1.8<x<2.4  the  monoclinic  structure  is  predominant  and  higher  values  of  conductivity  are obtained [5]. Also the ionic conductivity of NASICON has a strong dependence on density[6]. 

One  of  the  most  critical  challenges  in  preparing  NASICON  is  synthesizing  pure  monoclinic phase without detrimental ZrO2 and amorphous phases. In fact, ZrO2 is a barrier against Na+ ion movement and decreases the overall ion conductivity of the electrolyte[7]. moreover, amorphous phase  changes  the  nominal  composition  leading  to  lower  conductivity  and  stability  of  the NASICON[8,  9].  To  avoid  formation  of  these  detrimental  phases,  it  is  important  to  control synthesis  and  sintering  processes.  NASICON  is  usually  synthesized  by  two  methods,  i.e.  solid state and wet chemical methods. In solid state synthesis, powder reactivity is lower than powder synthesized  by  wet  chemical  methods.  Lower  reactivity  needs  higher  temperature  for  sintering that  consequently  reduces  volatile  P  and  Na  elements;  therefore,  remained  free  ZrO2  is formed[10,  11].  In  addition,  high  temperature  sintering  develops  amorphous  phase  that deteriorates  NASICON  composition.  However,  achieving  a  pure  phase  in  the  wet  chemical processes also requires precise controlling of the synthesis method[12, 13].  

Ignaszak  et  al.[14]  prepared  NASICON  materials  with  different  Na  concentrations  via coprecipitation method and in all cases free ZrO2 was present as a second phase. Bell et al.[15] reported  high  free  zirconia  content  in  NASICON  synthesized  by  sol-gel  method.  They  argued that  unexpected  formation  of  ZrO2  is  likely  related  to  the  size  dependence  of  metastable nanocrystalline  tetragonal  zirconia  that  formed  during  decomposition  of  the  zirconium-acetylacetonate  precursor.  Yang  et  al.[16]  considered  two  chemical  methods  with  different  Si precursors.  Although  powder  synthesized  by  alkali  precursor  had  higher  conductivity  than powder  synthesized  by  alkoxide  precursor,  but  ZrO2  was  still  present  as  a  trace  phase.  Qiu  et al.[7]  observed  that  ZrO2  is  recognized  in  the  sample  sintered  at  800  ˚C,  while  it  disappeared with elevating the sintering temperature to 900 ˚C. However, when the sintering temperature was further increased to 1100 ˚C, ZrO2 phase was observed again. Kida et al.[17] screen printed thick film  of  NASICON  on  alumina  substrate  by  sol-gel  precursor.  Calcination  at  temperatures between 800-1000 ˚C resulted low densification while free ZrO2 disappeared. On the other hand, calcination  at temperatures  between  1000-1200˚C led to  high  densification  whereas decomposition of NASICON caused ZrO2 formation.  

Recently,  spark  plasma  sintering  (SPS)  have  been  widely  used  for  fabrication  of  fully  dense materials such as metals, ceramics and composites[18]. SPS allows sintering to be carried out at lower  temperatures  than  conventional  methods[19,  20].  Furthermore,  rapid  heating  and  shorter soaking time prevents grain growth and particle coarsening during sintering[20].  

In  this  paper,  NASICON  nano  powder  was  synthesized  through  coprecipitation  and  sol-gel methods  and  these  processes  evaluated  deeply. Finally,  density,  microstructure  and  conductivity  of  SPS specimen were compared with those of samples prepared by conventional sintering.  


NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) powder was prepared by sol-gel and coprecipitation processes using Si(OC2H5)4(Merck),  ethanol(Merck),  1-propanol(Merck)  and  deionized  water  as  starting materials.  In  sol-gel  method,  firstly  zirconium  tetra  propoxide  was  diluted  with  1-propanol. 

Then,  NaOH,  NH4H2PO4  and  TEOS  were  stirred  with  ethanol  for  2  h  at  50  ˚C  separately  and were  respectively  added  to  zirconium  solution  to  form  a  clear  sol.  Subsequently,  a  mixture  of water in ethanol was dripped into the clear sol and caused gelation after 24 h (Fig. 1a). It should be pointed out that in order to avoid a non-homogeneous gelation due to local concentration of water in solution, water was diluted with ethanol. The resulted gel was dried at 100 ˚C for 2 h.  


In coprecipitation method, NaOH pellets and NH4H2PO4 were stirred with deionized water for 1h at 70 ˚C at concentrations of 3 mol L-1 and 1 mol L-1, respectively. These aqueous solutions were mixed for 30 min at 70 ˚C (solution 1). Then, zirconium tetra propoxide was diluted with 1-propanol (solution 2). Next, solution 1 was dripped into solution 2 and white precipitates were observed immediately. This step was performed slowly (5 h) under rigorous stirring condition to avoid  coagulation.  This  is  because  strong  reactivity  of  Zr(OC3H7)4  with  water  leads  to  fast hydrolysis  of  alkoxide  so  that  intense  increase  of  precipitates  caused  by  hydrolysis  results  in coagulation  of  the  sol.  Subsequently,  TEOS  (Si(OC2H5)4)  was  stirred  with  ethanol  for  30  min and  was  added  to  previous  suspension.  After  24  h  stirring  at  70  ˚C,  the  final  suspension  was dried at 100 ˚C for 2 h (Fig. 1b).  

Finally, the dried gel and the coprecipitated powder were calcined at temperature range of 500-1000 ºC for 2 h (heating rate:10 ˚C min-1). 


The  powders  were  sintered  in  two  procedures,  i.e.  conventional  sintering  and  SPS.  In conventional  sintering,  calcined  powder  was  formed  into  pellets  with  10  mm  diameter  by uniaxial pressing at 200 MPa. The pellets were eventually sintered at 1150 ˚C,1200 ˚C and 1250˚C. In all cases, the samples were heat-treated up to 800 ˚C for 1 h with a heating rate of 10 ˚C min-1 and then up to sintering temperature during 3 h with a heating rate of 1 ˚C min-1. Also a sample prepared by as-synthesized powder was sintered for 10 h at 1000 ˚C with a same heating rate.  In  SPS  method,  the  as-synthesized  powder  was  placed  into  a  10  mm  diameter  graphite mold.  Sintering  process  was  performed  at  pulsed  direct  electric  current  between  1000  A  and 3500 A with 2 ms on and 12 ms off time under pressure of 45 MPa (Easy Fashion SPS-20T-10). 

The sintering temperature was 1000 ˚C for up to 5 min soaking time with a 100 ˚C min-1 heating rate.  The  temperature  was  measured  by  a  K-type  thermocouple  through  a  small  hole  in  the graphite mold surface. 

Crystallinity  temperature  was  determined  by  simultaneous  differential  thermal  analysis  (DTA) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) using a STA-BAHR-1640 and a 10 ˚C min-1 heating rate. 

Powders  and  sintered  pellets  were  characterized  by  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  with  a  Philips PW3710 diffractometer at 40kV using Cu Kα1 radiation.  

Fourier  transform  infrared  radiation  (FTIR)  spectra  were  recorded  with  a  Perkin  Elmer  RX1 spectrometer. For  this  purpose,  the  powders  were  mixed  with  KBr  in  a  1:99  weight  ratio.  The microstructure of the powders and the pellets was observed by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM),  using  a TE-SCAN-MIRA3.  To  prepare FESEM  specimens,  the  surfaces of  the  samples  sintered  by  conventional  method  were  polished  and  thermally  etched  at  50  ˚C lower  than  the  sintering  temperature  for  30  min.  For  the  SPS  specimen,  cross  section  was prepared and observed, because thermal etching could cause particle size enlargement.   

Densification  of  the  pellets  was  measured  via  the  standard  Archimedes  method  using  distilled water as immersion liquid.  

For  electrical  conductivity  measurement,  gold  electrodes  were  sputtered  on  both  sides  of  the pellets.  The  conducting  properties  were  evaluated  using  ac  two-probe  impedance  spectroscopy (IS) in temperature range of 25-200 ˚C and 0.1-106 Hz frequency range. The complex impedance spectra were analyzed using commercially available Z-View software. 


The  difference  of  behavior  can  be  explained  by  high  reactivity  of  zirconium  alkoxide  with water[21].  In  sol-gel  synthesis,  water  was  added  to  solution  of  zirconium  alkoxide,  NaOH, TEOS,  NH4H2PO4  and  ethanol.  High  reactivity  of  zirconium  alkoxide  induces  fast  hydrolysis and condensation rate[22, 23] that in turn, can segregates zirconium oxide from the solution. On the  other  hand,  in  coprecipitation  method,  a  solution  of  NaOH  and  NH4H2PO4  was  added  to zirconium alkoxide under rigorous stirring for a long time. This procedure allows Zr4+ ions to be surrounded by other elements and so a good homogeneity achieves that can be the main reason for avoiding ZrO2 segregation. In fact, mixing order and consequently solution homogeneity has a significant effect on synthesis of pure phase[24]. 

A  more  detailed  comparison  between  aforementioned  methods  indicates  that  crystallinity  and purity of coprecipitated powder is more than those observed for powder synthesized by sol-gel process (Fig. 3). 

It is observed that the absorption bands ionic group vibration are shifted to shorter wave number amounts for powders calcined in higher temperatures that means crystallinity has been intensified[7]. 

TG/DTA  diagrams  of  synthesized  powders  are  shown  in  Fig.  5.  An  endothermic  peak  can  be seen  in  the  range  of  40-200  ºC  that  may  arise  because  of  the  loss  of  water  and  organic compounds.  For  sol-gel  synthesized  powder,  weight  loss  is  about  25  %,  while  coprecipiated powder undergoes about 20 % weight loss. Also, endothermic peak for coprecipitation process is deeper. This difference may be related to excess water amount in coprecipitation process. There is no important weight loss after this stage. The second stage is a broad exothermic peak in the range of 200-500 ºC that can be associated with reorganization of the precursor material to form the  amorphous  NASICON  framework[26].  

Furthermore,  coprecipitated  powder  shows  a  broad endothermic peak in 728 ºC that starts around 570 ºC and may be related to the NASICON phase formation  that  indicates  a  good  accordance  with  XRD  results.  The  lack  of  this  peak  in  sol-gel process is probably due to weaker crystallinity in powder as seen in XRD results (Fig. 3). 


The variations of punch displacement and temperature versus sintering time for sample sintered by SPS method are given in Fig. 8. The punch displacement shows that densification occurs in two  steps.  First  step  is  related  to  gas  removal  and  particles  rearrangement  between  2-10  min which  is  followed  by  a  gradual  punch  displacement.  Second  stage  occurs  at  800-1000  ºC between  10-15  min  that  corresponds  to  an  abrupt  punch  displacement  where  the  sintering phenomenon  includes  neck  growth.  Density  measurement  showed  that  the  specimen  was  fully dense without any porosity. 

XRD  result  of  the  SPS  specimen  shows  that  NASICON  is  fully  crystallized  although  there  is some  free  monoclinic  ZrO2  (Fig.  9).  Unexpected  formation  of  ZrO2  at  such  a  low  sintering temperature (1000 ºC) arises from presence of vacuum in SPS method. In fact, in SPS method, Na  and  P  vapors  are  exhausted  as  the  chamber  is  vacuum;  hence,  extensive  vaporization  is continued  which  reduces  the  amounts  of  Na  and  P,  causing  segregation  of  ZrO2.  On  the  other hand,  in  conventional  sintering  (at  1000  ºC),  there  is  a  saturated  vapor  pressure  of  Na  and  P elements  above  the  specimen  that  prevents  further  vaporization  and  the  stability  of  the NASICON compound is maintained.   


In  this  work  solid  electrolyte  material  of  NASICON  was  synthesized  by  sol-gel  and coprecipitation  methods.  Results  indicated  that  coprecipitated  powder  had  more  purity  and crystallinity.  The  coprecipitated  powders  were  sintered  by  conventional  and  SPS  methods.  As compared to conventional sintering, the SPS method leads to lower sintering temperature, short time, higher density and nano particle size.  