In this study, Li1.5Al0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3 (LATP) solid electrolyte is prepared through co-precipitation using Li3PO4 and Li2C2O4 salts. The co-precipitates are heated at 800°C to obtain precursor powders. The precursor powders are then ball-milled to reduce the particle size to prepare dense LATP pellets. Li salts signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the morphology and crystallinity of the precursor powders. The precursor powder prepared from Li3PO4 possesses a smaller particle size and lower crystallinity of LATP compared with Li2C2O4. The soft, low-crystallinity powder from Li3PO4 is easily crushed by the ball-milling. The average particle size is reduced to 30 nm, while the average size of particles from Li2C2O4 is 120 nm after the ball-milling. The small particle size promotes sintering of LATP pellets. As a result, LATP pellets prepared from Li3PO4 show higher Li ion conductivity than those from Li2C2O4 due to their high sinterability and large grain size (low grain-boundary resistance). The Li ion conductivity is 2.0 × 10−4 S cm−1 after sintering at 1050°C for 6 h. It is concluded that the Li source used to form the coprecipitate greatly inﬂuences the properties of sintered LATP pellet. The Li source is one key to obtain LATP with high Li ion conductivity.

In today’s advanced information society, storage devices such as batteries are key components [1]. Among the various types of batteries, rechargeable Li ion batteries have been used as the energy source for a variety of electronic devices, especially small devices such as laptop computers, mobile phones, and digital cameras due to their high energy density. Recently, many groups have tried the application of the Li ion batteries as an energy source for electric vehicles. However, ﬂammable organic electrolytes have sometimes caused serious safety issues, including ﬁre hazards and leakage. In the development of large-scale Li ion batteries for electric vehicles, the safety issues are of much greater concern. The all-solid-state battery is composed of nonﬂammable solid electrolyte that solves the safety issues. Na super (NASICON)-type oxide-based solid electrolytes [2,3] as well as perovskite-type [4,5] and garnet-type [6,7] solid electrolytes are considered to be promising solid electrolytes due to their reasonably high Li ion conductivity. Especially, LATP (Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3) with the NASICON structure which can be formed by partial substitution of Al3+ for Ti4+ in LiTi2(PO4)3 exhibits high Li ion conductivity in the order of ~10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature [8,9]. With the co-precipitation method, the materials react uniformly at the molecular level. It is also the advantages of lower polycrystalline-synthesized temperature and ionic conductor shorter sintering time. Lowering the synthesized temperature and shortening the sintering time help to reduce processing cost for LATP production. We have researched preparation of LATP solid electrolyte through use of a co-precipitate and have found that the sintering temperature could be reduced by 150°C using the co-precipitation method and that PO4 sources greatly inﬂuenced properties of LATP [10–12]. Therefore, it is thought that the salts used to form co-precipitation aﬀect the properties of the LATP solid electrolyte.

In this paper, we report the preparation of the LATP solid electrolyte through co-precipitates using Li3PO4 and Li2C2O4 as lithium source. Li3PO4 provided precursor powder with smaller grain size than that of L2C2O4 and well-sintered pellets. Consequently, the LATP solid electrolyte prepared from Li3PO4 showed higher Li ion conductivity.

The as-prepared and ball-milled powders, and the sintered pellets were subjected to X-ray diﬀraction (XRD, Rigaku Ultima-IV) measurement using Cu kα radiation to identify their crystal phases. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL, JSM-6300LA) was used to observe the morphologies of the powders and the pellet cross-sections.

The Li ion conductivity was measured by the AC impedance method. Both surfaces of the sintered pellets were polished to obtain ﬂat surfaces and to control the thicknesses before measuring the Li ion conductivity. Prior to measurement, Au was sputtered onto both sides of the pellets to prepare Li blocking electrodes and to ensure an electrical contact between the pellets and Cu current collectors. The AC impedance data were collected at ±10 mV of the voltage signal in a frequency range of 100 ~ 1 MHz using a chemical impedance meter (HIOKI Chemical Impedance Meter 3352–80). The measurement was performed at 30 ~ 100°C.


The milled powder was used to prepare sintered pellets. The powder was pressed using a stainless die with 20 mm diameter and sintered at 1000 ~ 1100°C for 6 h. XRD patterns of the sintered pellets are shown in Figure 5. In the sintered pellets formed from precursor powder obtained from Li2C2O4 (Pellet-Li2C2O4), although most diﬀraction peaks matched the LTP standard peaks (PDF 82–1998) formation was also conﬁrmed after sintering

In this study, LATP solid electrolyte was prepared through co-precipitation using Li3PO4 and Li2C2O4 salts. The coprecipitation was prepared using Li3PO4 and Li2C2O4 and then heated at 800°C to prepare the precursor powders. It was found that Li salts aﬀected the properties of the precursor powders. The particles in the precursor powder from Li3PO4 were smaller in size and lower in crystallinity than those from Li2C2O4. The mechanism for forming small particles with low crystallinity from Li3PO4 is not yet clear. While the co-precipitation was forming, H3PO4 (or NH4PO4) and H2C2O4 (or (NH4)2C2 O4) were produced in Li3PO4 and Li2C2O4 solutions, respectively. These species would inﬂuence the coprecipitation and crystal growth of LATP in the following heating processes.

After ball-milling, the particle sizes of both precursor powders were reduced, but the powder from Li3PO4 was crushed more fully to a smaller size than that from Li2C2 O4. This would be due to the low crystallinity of the powder from Li3PO4 after heating at 800°C. A soft amorphous powder would be easily crushed by ball-milling. Therefore, smaller particles could be obtained in the powder from Li3PO4 after ball-milling.

The ball-milled precursor powders were supplied for pellet preparation and sintered at 1000 ~ 1100°C. It should be noted that impurity formation was aﬀected by the precursor powders. In Pellet-Li2C2 O4, the formation of LiTiOPO4 was conﬁrmed after sintering at 1000°C, but the LiTiOPO4 disappeared after sintering at 1050°C and 1100°C. Contrary, with Pellet-Li3PO4, although impurity formation was not conﬁrmed after sintering at 1000°C and 1050°C, AlPO4 was formed when the sintering temperature increased to 1100°C. This AlPO4 impurity was also observed in other groups [17–19].

The highest Li ion conductivity appeared after sintering at 1050°C independent of Li salts. SEM showed smallgrains with low crystallinity and pore formation after sintering at 1000°C and 1100°C, respectively, in both cases. The small, low-crystallinity grains possess low Li ion conductivity. Davaasuren et. al. reported that crystallinity is a key factor inﬂuencing the bulk ionic conductivity [20]. Therefore, it is thought that the low bulk conductivity in the samples sintered at 1000°C was due to low crystallinity of LATP. On the other hand, Li evaporation is inevitable during high-temperature sintering. Li evaporation causes a reduction of the carrier concentration (Li ions) in solid electrolytes, resulting in lowering of the Li ion conductivity [21]. Thus, the lower bulk conductivities of the sample sintered at 1100°C would be caused by the Li evaporation.

The density of the samples also signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the total conductivity [20]. Pores lead to high grain-boundary impedance, decreasing the total conductivity [22,23]. The densest pellets were obtained after sintering at 1050°C in both cases (Table 2). At 1000°C sintering, the sintering process did not proceed suﬃciently due to the low sintering temperature. On the other hand, shrinkage of grains occurred with rapid crystallization when sintering was performed at 1100°C, resulting in pore formation and leading to low-density pellets. It is consequently thought that the highest Li ion conductivity appeared after sintering at 1050°C.

Additionally, XRD results (Figure 5) revealed impurity formation after sintering at 1000°C and 1100°C in the Pellet-Li2C2O4 and Pellet-Li3PO4, respectively. This impurity formation is considered another reason for the low Li ion conductivity of the LATP pellets after sintering at 1000°C and 1100°C.

Compared with Pellet-Li2C2O4, Pellet-Li3PO4 possessed higher Li ion conductivity after sintering at 1050°C. Additionally, the activation energy of the total conductivity of Pellet-Li3PO4 was lower than that of Pellet-Li2C2O4. In SEM (Figure 6), Pellet-Li3 PO4 showed larger grains. The grain sizes were 14.8 and 38.1 μm in Pellet-Li2C2O4 and Pellet-Li3PO4, respectively (Table 1). The formation of the large grains would be caused by the small particle size of the precursor powder. Small particles possess high surface energy, leading to the rapid growth of grains and improved sinterability during sintering [24]. Therefore, high conductivity and low activation energy of Pellet-Li3PO4 would be caused by the high crystallinity of LATP and its low grainboundary resistance due to the large size of LATP grains.

Li3PO4 provided soft,low-crystallinity precursor particles, which could be easily crushed and reduced in particle size by ball-milling. Due to the small particles, the sintered pellets possessed large grains with high crystallinity, resulting in high Li ion conductivity. It is concluded that the Li source for co-precipitate formation greatly inﬂuences the properties of sintered LATP pellets. The Li source is one of the keys to obtain LATP with high Li ion conductivity.


In this study, LATP solid electrolyte was prepared through co-precipitation using Li3PO4 and Li2C2O4 salts. The co-precipitates were heated at 800°C to prepare the precursor powders. The particles in the precursor powder from Li3PO4 were smaller than those from Li2C2O4. XRD results showed moreover that the precursor powder from Li3PO4 had a low crystallinity. The soft, low-crystallinity powder was crushed eﬃciently by ball-milling and small particles were easily obtained. The small precursor particles promoted sintering in the LATP pellet preparation. As a result, well-sintered LATP pellets with large grains were obtained by sintering the precursor powder from Li3PO4 due to the high surface energy of the small particles. The large grains improved the crystallinity of LATP and reduced the grain-boundary resistance, resulting in high Li ion conductivity and low activation energy. Therefore, the LATP pellets from Li3PO4 showed higher Li ion conductivity and lower activation energy than those from Li2C2O4. The highest total Li ion conductivity of LATP pellets from Li3PO4 was 2.0 × 10−4 S cm−1 and the activation energy was 0.28 eV.