Furthermore, single crystal perovskite-type oxides conductivity up to 10 −3 S cm−1 LLTO show a high ionic (Eα = 0.3–0.4 eV) at room temperature for x = 0.11 depending on the Li-ion concentration, but Li-ions will diﬀuse rapidly into the material at more negative potentials than −1.7 V vs. Li/Li+, causing it a mixed (lithium ions and electrons) conductor [18]. Recently, the garnet-type Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO) electrolytes are attracting much attention since they have high ionic conductivity than 10−4 S cm−1, chemically stable to lithium metal and coupled with a wide electrochemical window above 5 V [29]. However, the garnet LLZO has diﬃculty in synthesis and fabrication because it will react with water and carbon dioxides in air to form LiOH and Li2CO3, which would form an insulate layer and prevent the diﬀusion of Li-ion [20]. Among these SSEs, LATP is more stable against moist air than LLZO owing to the strong P-O bonds in the structure [15]. It has high ionic conductivity higher than 10−4 S cm−1 together with excellent chemical stability against humidity, which make the LATP a hot point of research for lithium batteries.

However, the LATP is unstable in contact with the Li metal due to the reduction reaction of Li with Ti4+ [30], leading to the performance degradation of lithium batteries. In order to avoid the severe parasitic reactions between LATP solid electrolyte and lithium metal, a buﬀer layer must be introduced on the surface of the LATP [31,32]. Considering practical uses, surface coating is an eﬀective strategy to improve the electrochemical stability of LATP against the attack of lithium-metal anode. The coating of conductive materials such as ZnO [35], MgO [36], Al2O3 [37] and AZO [38,39] have been extensively studied in organic photovoltaic (OPV) and electron transport layers (ETLs), which help to promote electron extraction [39]. Besides their application in OPVs and ETLs, they have also been reported to be used as buﬀer layers in lithium batteries due to their eﬀects of physical protection and chemical inertnesss [40]. Wang et al. [35] have demonstrated a nanoscale ZnO surface coating by atomic layer deposition to solve the interface problem of garnet solid electrolyte in solid-state lithium metal batteries. Han and coworkers [41] have reported that an ultrathin Al2O3 coating on garnet-like Li7La2.75Ca0.25Zr1.75Nb0.25O12 via atomic layer deposition dramatically improves the wetting stability of garnet SSE and leads to a signiﬁcant decrease in interfacial impedance from 1710 Ω⋅cm2 to 1 Ω cm2. Yu et al. [42] have proposed that surface modiﬁcation of LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 by AZO can signiﬁcantly improve the capability at elevated temperature. For all these studies, it is more desirable to introduce a buﬀer layer to protect LATP electrolytes from immediately contacting with lithium-metal anode.

In this study, we applied the AZO coating on the surface of LATP electrolyte by magnetron sputtering method to increase the electrochemical stability of the LATP electrolyte against the attack of lithiummetal anode. The use of ZnO coating is also one choice. However, pure ZnO is a wide-bandgap semiconductor material with the intrinsic resistivity higher than 106 Ω cm [33]. Aluminum doping was shown to be an eﬀective approach to reduce the resistivity to 10−4 Ω⋅cm level [34]. Thus the AZO coating on LATP electrolyte would acts both as a buﬀer layer and a Li-ion conductor layer in ASSLMBs. The symmetric cells using the AZO coated LATP as the electrolytes showed extremely long cycling time (nearly 1000 h) due to the excellent suppression of lithium dendrites. An all-solid-state Li/LiFePO4 battery with AZO coated LATP as the solid electrolyte showed good cyclability and a high columbic eﬃciency over 50 charge/discharge cycles. We believe that the surface modiﬁcation method of LATP electrolyte is a promising strategy for future ASSLMBs designs.

Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) was synthesized at 800 °C with the addition of 1.0 wt% LiBO2 through liquid phase sintering, which has been reported in our previous work [23]. Finally, the diameter and thickness of the LATP pellets were 8 mm and about 0.5 mm, respectively. Since the LATP electrolyte is unstable against Li, Al2O3-doped ZnO (AZO) was deposited on the polished surface of LATP pellets by RF magnetron sputtering. The deposition process of AZO were carried out in Ar (10 Pa) at room temperature for 20 min.

For interface resistance measurement, Swagelok-type cell was used with a two-electrode architecture to obtain the impedance spectra. Generally, the size of the pellets was approximately 0.5 mm in thickness and 8 mm in diameter. Both sides of pellets were coated with lithium foil with the diameter of 6 mm to avoid possible short circuit. The measurements were range of 1 × 107 Hz–0.1 Hz in Solartron frequency analyzer (1260–1296).

To prepare the cathode of an all-solid-state Li/LiFePO4 battery, the LiFePO4 cathode was fabricated by mixing active material LiFePO4, conductive carbon black (Super P), cross-linked polyethylene oxide (PEO), and LiTFSI (bistriﬂuoromethanesulfonimide lithium salt) in a weight ratio of 60:12:20:8. The mixed sample was ground in a mortar, followed by dissolving in dimethyl ﬂuoride (DMF) and stiring overnight. Finally, the obtained black slurry was spread onto a carboncoated aluminum foil with the active material loading as 2.83 mg/cm2 for the preparation of cathode electrode. The ﬁlm was dried rigorously in a vacuum at 75 °C for 24 h before it was transferred to an argon-ﬁlled glove box. The Li/LiFePO4 ASSLMBs were assembled with the AZO coated LATP electrolyte sandwiched between lithium metal anodes and LiFePO4 cathodes. Likewise, Li symmetric cells were prepared.

Galvanostatic charge-discharge measurements of Li/AZO coated LATP/LiFePO4 cells were performed at 60 °C in a LAND-CT2016A battery test system at 0.1 C in a voltage range of 1–3 V. Li plating/stripping cycling was performed by using Li/AZO coated LATP/Li symmetric cells at a current density of 100μ A⋅cm−2 at 60 °C and the interval for each plating/stripping process was 3 h.

X-ray diﬀraction analysis (XRD) was performed on a Rigaku RINT200 advanced X-ray diﬀractometer equipped with Cu Kα radiation at a rate of 1°/min in a range from 10° to 80° at ambient temperature. Microstructure observation and elemental distribution of the LATP electrolytes were conducted by ﬁeld emission scanning electron microscope (Megellan 400,FEI) equipped with an energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) system on the cross sections. The distributions of elements in grains and grain boundaries were determined by energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) equipped with SEM. The morphology and the surface component of as-cycled lithium metal were detected as follows: the cycled lithium symmetric cell was disassembled carefully and the lithium foil was took out from the battery in the argon-ﬁlled glove box. Then, the sample was transferred to the SEM equipment in a sealed bottle ﬁlled with argon without exposed to the air.

The electrochemical stability of the electrolytes is essential for the safety of all-solid-state lithium ion batteries, and the cyclic voltammetry (CV) is a powerful tool to evaluate the electrochemical stability. Fig. 4a shows the CV curves of the AZO coated LATP electrolytes in the Li/AZO coated LATP/stainless steel (SS) cell at room temperature. No obvious oxidation peak is observed in the positive scan until 5.0 V, indicating that the AZO coated LATP electrolytes have quite good electrochemical stability. In the negative scan, the LATP experienced two rather blunt peaks at about 1.0 V and 3.0 V. This can be ascribed to the slow kinetics of the lithium plating and stripping curves in the solid electrolyte. In comparison with the second and third cycles, it can be seen that the cyclic voltammetry curve was basically repeating, indicating a good electrochemical stability of the AZO coated LATP electrolytes in the subsequent charge-discharge cycles. The CV results prove that the AZO coated LATP electrolytes can possibly be used in most of ASSLMBs.

To further investigate whether the AZO coated electrolyte is eﬀective in suppressing lithium dendrites, a lithium symmetric cell in which the AZO coated LATP was sandwiched between two lithium foils was fabricated. The electrochemical impendence spectroscopy (EIS) behavior of a Li/AZO coated LATP/Li cell with and without AZO coating is shown in Fig. 4b. The interfacial impedances were calculated from the values on the real axis of the semicircle of the Nyquist plot at low frequency. The data of the interfacial impedances between the lithium anode and the LATP electrolytes without and with AZO coating at 60 °C is 1.04 × 104 and 3.65 × 105 Ω cm2, respectively. However, it can be seen clearly that the interfacial resistance of the Li/AZO coated LATP is higher than that Li/LATP. The increase in interfacial resistance can be likely ascribed to the integrated impedance of lithium at the additional interfaces from AZO coated LATP. Besides, Ti4+ in the LATP will react with the lithium metal and activate the interface layer, so lower the interfacial resistance also.

The safety of ASSLMBs largely depends on the dendrite suppression performance of the electrolytes. If there is no lithium dendrite growth during the lithium plating and stripping cycles, the voltage will gradually stabilize over time, which will be shown in the voltage proﬁle. If the lithium dendrite grows and even causes short batteries, the batteries will become “dead” and the voltage will drop suddenly to zero. It can be a criterion to estimate if there is the growth of lithium dendrites. The electrochemical performance of a symmetric cell Li/AZO coated LATP/ Li cycled at the current density of 100 μA cm−2 at 60 °C is shown in Fig. 5a. It can be seen from the voltage proﬁle during the lithium stripping−plating cycles that the voltage slowly decreases from about 0.7 V to 0.4 V for extremely long times of over 960 h and remains stable throughout all cycles. Moreover, the insert diagram shows the stable voltage gap in 700–800 cycles during the lithium plating and stripping process, which proves the excellent lithium dendrite suppression performance of the AZO coated LATP electrolytes.

In summary, we successfully prepared a thin and uniform AZO coating by magnetron sputtering method on the surface of LATP electrolytes for the application in ASSLMBs. With the presence of AZO coating, the LATP electrolytes showed excellent lithium dendrite suppression performance and electrochemical stability improvement against the lithium-metal anode. The AZO coated LATP electrolytes also enabled the symmetric Li/AZO coated LATP/Li cell to keep stability for 960 h, due to their excellent performance in suppressing lithium dendrites. The Li/LiFePO4 battery with AZO coated LATP as the solid electrolyte showed excellent capacity for suppressing the lithium dendrites and good capacity reversibility for 50 charge/discharge cycles. Therefore, our work oﬀers a new idea and method for surface modiﬁcation of the LATP electrolytes, which is hopeful to facilitate the application in ASSLMBs in the future.
