
Redox flow batteries have considerable advantages of system scalability  and operation flexibility over other battery technologies, which makes them  promising for large-scale energy storage application. However, they suffer  from low energy density and consequently relatively high cost for a nominal  energy output. Redox targeting–based flow batteries are employed by incorporating solid energy storage materials in the tank and present energy density  far beyond the solubility limit of the electrolytes. The success of this concept  relies on paring suitable redox mediators with solid materials for facilitated  reaction kinetics and lean electrolyte composition. Here, a redox targetingbased flow battery system using the NASICON-type Na3V2(PO4)3 as a  capacity booster for both the catholyte and anolyte is reported. With 10-methylphenothiazine as the cathodic redox mediator and 9-fluorenone as anodic  redox mediator, an all-organic single molecule redox targeting–based flow  battery is developed. The anodic and cathodic capacity are 3 and 17 times  higher than the solubility limit of respective electrolyte, with which a full cell  can achieve an energy density up to 88 Wh L−1. The reaction mechanism is  scrutinized by operando and in-situ X-ray and UV–vis absorption spectroscopy. The reaction kinetics are analysed in terms of Butler–Volmer formalism.

To take the advantage of high energy density of solid materials  while  without  coating  them  on  electrode  sheets,  redox  targeting  concept  has  been  introduced  and  demonstrated  in  a  variety  of  systems.[22]  The  redox-mediated  process  elegantly  decouples  energy  storage  in  solid  materials  from  power  generation  on  electrodes,  meanwhile  the  use  of  solid  materials  breaks  the  solubility  limit  of  redox  species  and  consequently  enhances the volumetric capacity. Thus, by loading solid energy  storage materials in the tanks, the energy density of RFBs can  be  boosted  without  sacrificing  the  merits  of  flow  battery.[23–25]  Despite  the  drastically  enhanced  energy  density,  the  first-generation  redox  targeting-based  RFBs  which  employed  multiple  redox  species  have  relatively  low  voltage  efficiency  resulting  from the potential difference of the redox molecules.

Recently, a second-generation redox targeting-based flow battery  system  based  on  single  molecule  redox  targeting  (SMRT)  reaction  has  been  proposed  to  mitigate  the  aforementioned  free energy loss.[26,27] The SMRT reaction, driven by Nernstianpotential difference, enables a much simplified electrolyte composition  and  improved  voltage  efficiency.  The  success  of  this  concept relies on paring suitable redox mediator with the solid  material,  both  of  which  should  share  identical  potential.  The  previous work employs Li+ ion as the charge balancing carrier,  whereas  the  lithium  element  is  considered  to  be  “expensive”  for  future  large-scale  energy  storage  given  the  limited  abundance  and  that  it  is  rapidly  consumed  by  Li-ion  batteries  for  portable devices and electric vehicles.[28,29] In addition, the relatively sluggish kinetics between the Li+ ion host materials and  mediator  impedes  its  power  performance.  Thus,  it  is  worthy  of  investigating  other  low-cost  systems  with  better  kinetics and uncover the mechanism underlying the kinetics of SMRT  reaction.

The  sodium  ion  battery,  attributed  to  the  abundance  of  easily  accessible  sodium  sources,  is  considered  as  a  cost effective  alternative.  Herein,  with  the  NASICON-type  Na3V2(PO4)3  (NVP)  both  as  the  anodic  and  cathodic  energy  storage  materials,  an  all-organic  redox  targeting-based  redox  flow  sodium  battery  is  presented,  which  operates  on  SMRT  reactions  in  both  battery  compartments.  A  faster  SMRT  reaction  is  expected  due  to  the  good  ionic  conductivity  of  Na3V2(PO4)3.  By  operando  X-ray  absorption  near  edge  structure (XANES) and in-situ UV–vis measurements, the detailed  mechanism  is  revealed  to  illuminate  the  path  of  achieving  high power capability.


As  illustrated  in  Figure  1A,  the  operation  of  the  SMRT-based  flow battery involves two reactions on each side: 1) the electrode  reaction  of  redox  mediator  in  the  cell  stack,  from  which  electricity  is  produced  at  a  potential  determined  by  the  respective  redox  mediator,  and  2)  the  SMRT  reaction  between  the  redox  mediator  and  solid  material  in  the  reservoir,  from  which  the  stored  chemical  energy  is  released  from  the  solid  material  for  subsequent  power  generation  in  the  cell. 

During  the  charging  process,  Na+  ions  would  move  from  cathodic  to  the  anodic  compartment  for  charge  balancing  and  ion  conservation.  Therefore,  before  the  SMRT  reaction  happens,  the  [Na+]  would  keep  decreasing  in  cathodic  side  and  keep  increasing  in  anodic  side,  which  helps  to  gain  more  ∆E  in each sides. Given that the concentration of molecules is low  (0.1 m) compared to the supporting salts (1 m), the conductivity  is  supposed  to  be  unaffected.  When  SMRT  reaction  started,  the  [Na+]  would  keep  unchanged  as  long  as  the  SMRT  reaction  in  the  tank  keeps  pace  with  the  reaction  of  mediators  on  the  electrodes  until  the  end  of  charging.  Conversely,  during  the discharging process, more Na+ ions are accumulated in the  catholyte until ∆E is enough to drive the SMRT reaction for discharging. [Na+] then becomes unchanged.

Generally,  different  solid  materials  are  required  to  build  a  full cell. Benefit from the multivalence of vanadium, NVP  exhibits the ability as both the cathode (117 mAh g−1 at 3.40 V  vs Na) and anode (58.5 mAh g−1 at 1.63 V vs Na) to further simplify the system (see the CV curves in Figure 1B), the reaction  of  which  corresponds  to  the  valence  change  of  two  V3+  to  V4+  and  one  V3+  to  V2+,  respectively.[31,32]  In  terms  of  the  reported  crystal  structure  (ICSD  #248 140[33])  of  NVP,  the  above  redox  reactions correspond to a concentration of the V-redox sites of  around  14.7  m  for  the  cathodic  side  and  7.4  m  for  the  anodic  side  (see  the  Supporting  Information  for  details).  Ideally,  to  O realize  SMRT  reaction  in  both  directions,  E   should  RM equal to 0. Therefore, the potential of redox mediators is ought  to be identical to the solid material. Apart from molecular engineering and searching for new molecules, altering the solvation  environment  with  different  solvents  is  another  effective  way  in  nonaqueous  system  to  manipulate  the  equilibrium  redox  potential.[27,34]

For the cathodic side, 10-methylphenothiazine (MPTZ), with  a robust aromatic core that can readily be oxidized to its radical  cation state, is chosen to demonstrate the SMRT reaction with  NVP (V3+↔V4+). MPTZ is a well-studied redox shuttle molecule  for  overcharge  protection  in  Li-ion  batteries,[35]  for  which  the  first  oxidation  is  highly  stable  and  reversible  while  the  formation  of  radical  dication  in  the  second  oxidation  is  found  to  be  detrimental  to  the  molecule  stability.  Recently,  MPTZ  has  been applied as mediator for Li-O2 battery and as active material  in  a  semisolid  flow  battery.[36]  For  nonaqueous  redox  flow  batteries,  various  phenothiazine  derivatives  have  also  been  reported among which the highest solubility is 0.5  m achieved  with N-[2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl]phenothiazine (MEEPT).[37–39]  After  screening  the  potential  of  MPTZ  in  different  solvents,  propylene  carbonate  (PC)  is  found  to  provide  the  most  suitable solvation environment, where MPTZ shows a potential at  3.39 V (vs Na/Na+) (Figure 1B), nearly the same to NVP.

For  the  anodic  side,  9-fluorenone  (FL),  which  has  been  benchmarked  as  an  anolyte  molecule  for  high  energy  density  nonaqueous  RFB,[19,40]  is  selected  to  target  the  one-electron  sodiation  reaction  of  NVP  (V3+↔V2+).  As  shown  in  Figure  1B  and Figure S1 of the Supporting Information, the equilibrium potential  of  FL  is  adjusted  to  be  the  same  to  that  of  NVP  by  adopting  a  G4/DMSO  mixed  solvents.  The  anodic  side  SMRT  reaction is

Two half-cells were first fabricated in a glove box with sodium  metal as the counter electrode to evaluate the utilization of solid  material at each side. As shown in Figure 2A, the voltage profiles  of each half-cell show elongated voltage plateaus, which is a direct  proof  of  the  SMRT  reactions  between  MPTZ  and  NVP  in  the  cathodic side, FL and NVP in the anodic side. This pheno menon  is in line with the observations in the previous proof-of-concept  work.[26] It is worth noting that, although the potential difference  of FL and NVP is only 20 mV in pure TEGDME, the reversible  SMRT  reaction  was  not  observed  (in  0.10  m  anolyte)  until  the  concentration increased to 0.25  m (Figure S2, Supporting Information). In contrast, the symmetric SMRT reaction can be realized  even  at  0.10  m  when  the  potential  is  tuned  with  the  cosolvent.  The  dependence  of  SMRT  reaction  rate  to  concentration  will  be  studied  and  discussed  later.  The  utilization  of  the  NVP  can be calculated from the extended plateaus to be ≈60.2% and  51.7%  for  the  cathodic  and  anodic  side,  respectively  (based  on  theoretical capacity of NVP). It should be noted that the relatively  large overpotential of the anodic half-cell is attributed to the resistive ceramic membrane, which was used to prevent the crossover  of  dimethyl  sulfoxide  (DMSO)  to  sodium  metal.  The  nonunity  material  utilization  is  presumably  resulted  from  the  longer  diffusion  time  required  to  access  the  solid  material  in  the  deep  core of material particles. The raw NVP tested in a Swagelok-cell  also shows a lower capacity and rather steep plateau at 0.5 C-rate  (Figure S3, Supporting Information), which might be improved  by  surface  modification  like  carbon  coating.[41]  In  a  GITT  test  (Figure S4, Supporting Information) that resembles an intermittent charge/discharge test with prolonged reaction time, the utilization can be improved to 82.3% which is slightly lower than the  highest reported utilization results.[26] Considering a 82.3% utilization and 41% loading ratio of NVP, and a maximum concentration of mediators (0.3 m for MPTZ[36] and 0.9 m for FL[40]), the halfcell capacity is estimated to be 137 Ah L−1 (5.1 m, 17 times of 0.3 m   of MPTZ) and 81 Ah L−1 (3.1 m, 3 times of 0.9 m of FL) for catholyte and anolyte, respectively, corresponding to a full-cell energy  density of 88 Wh L−1. 

A  catholyte-controlled  full  cell  was  then  constructed  to  concomitantly  demonstrate  the  operations  of  both  anodic  and  cathodic  SMRT  reactions.  As  revealed  in  Figure  2B,  the  coulombic  efficiency  and  energy  efficiency  of  the  catholyte-limited  full  cell  was  around  97%  and  82%,  respectively.  The  prolonged  cycling  tests  for  half-cells  and  the  full  cell  are  shown  in  Figure  S5  of  the  Supporting  Information,  which  confirms  the  reversibility  and  stability  of  NVP  in  SMRT  reaction.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  polarizations  in  the  half  cells  and  the  full  cell  were  not  induced  by  the  SMRT  reaction  in  the  tank  but  mainly  attributed  to  the  membrane  resistance  in  the  cell  stack.  For  half-cell  tests,  the  Na  metal  could  be  another  main  source  of  polarization—gel-like  precipitate  was  found  at  Na  metal  side  after  disassembling  the  cycled  cell  (Figure  S6,   Supporting  Information).  For  the  sake  of  eliminating  the  crossover, we have attempted to use β-alumina and NASICON 


To elucidate the origin of the extended capacity, ex-situ X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  and  X-ray  photoelectron  spectroscopy  (XPS)  measurements  were  carried  out  for  the  cathodic  and  anodic  NVP, respectively. As the XRD patterns shown in Figure 2C, all  the diffraction peaks of the reacted NVP from catholyte tank are readily assigned to the totally oxidized sample, suggesting most  of the NVP has been oxidized during charging. Obviously, the  NVP  undergoes  similar  structural  changes  as  those  reported  via electrochemical oxidations on electrode in conventional batteries.[41,42] As for the reacted NVP from anodic part, the highresolution  XPS  peaks  in  V  2p  energetic  region  (Figure  2D)  shifted  to  lower  binding  energies  compared  to  pristine  NVP  granule.  Such  a  change  is  attributed  to  the  partially  reduced  V2+ state as half of the V3+ is reduced according to Equation (3),  confirming the chemical sodiation by FL.

To  monitor  the  valence  changes  of  NVP  upon  cathodic  SMRT  reaction  as  well  as  the  associated  evolution  of  MPTZ  concentration  in  real  time,  operando  XANES  and  UV–vis  spectroscopy were conducted, respectively. As a powerful technique  to  probe  the  variations  of  valence  state  and  chemical  environment  in  battery  materials,  XANES  has  been  employed  previously in a two-molecule redox targeting system to analyse  the  reaction  of  LiFePO4  with  TMPD•+/TMPD•2+  and  FePO4  with  TMPD/TMPD•+.

In  summary,  with  single  molecule  redox  targeting  reactions,  Na3V2(PO4)3 was exploited for the first time as the sole energy  storage material for redox flow battery. The cathodic and anodic  half-flow cells employing NVP can potentially deliver a capacity  of 137 and 81 Ah L−1, respectively, with which a full cell with an  energy density of around 88 Wh L−1 could be attained. Such a  novel flow battery system, which operates over lean electrolyte  compositions  beyond  lithium-based  battery  chemistry,  paves  an intriguing path for cost-effective large-scale energy storage.  The charge transfer kinetics of the SMRT reaction in catholyte  was extensively investigated. It reveals a linear relationship with  the  reaction  driving  force  (∆E)  following  the  Butler–Volmer  formalism  at  lower  overpotentials,  with  which  the  SMRT  rate  constant  was  determined  to  be  relatively  fast  as  compared  to  other processes. We expect that the scientific insights obtained  here in conjunction with engineering design would shed light  to the development of a high-power and high energy redox flow  battery system.