Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7 (PO4)3 (LATP) is a popular solid electrolyte used in solid-state lithium  batteries due to its high ionic conductivity. Traditionally, the densification of LATP is achieved by a high  temperature sintering process (about 1000 ºC). Herein, we report the compaction of LATP by a newly  developed cold sintering process and post-annealing. LATP pellets are first densified at 120 ºC and then  annealed at 650 ºC, yielding an ionic conductivity of 8.04x10-5 S cm-1 at room temperature and a  relative density of 93% with a low activation energy of 0.37 eV. High resolution transmission  electron microscopy of the cold-sintered pellets is investigated as well, showing that the particles  are interconnected with some nano-precipitates at the grain boundaries. Such nano-crystalline  enriched grain boundaries are beneficial for lithium ion transportation, which leads to higher  ionic conductivity of cold sintered sample. This new sintering process can direct new horizons  for development of all solidstate batteries due to its simplicity. 

Lithium ion batteries have become one of the most indispensable energy  storage devices, especially for their application in portable electronics.1 Typically, traditional  LIBs use liquid electrolytes, which are composed of Li salt and organic solvents. Unfortunately,  liquid electrolyte-based batteries possess the risks of thermal runaway and even fire due to the  flammability of the organic solvents.1 Because of these hazards, the development of solid-state  electrolytes was stimulated in the search for non-flammable batteries that are tolerant to extreme  conditions. In the past years, numerous solid electrolytes have been synthesized based on oxide,  sulfide and solid polymer electrolyte chemistries.2-5

However, the overall ionic conductivity of most solid electrolytes is very low because of the  limited lithium diffusivity at the grain boundaries. To improve the lithium conductivity, high  temperature sintering/annealing is usually needed to increase the transportation between grains,  especially for oxides and sulfides.6 Nevertheless, high temperatures may cause the evaporation of  lithium from the compound, leading to the off-stoichiometry compositions of the solid  electrolyte. The ionic conductivity of solid electrolytes is reduced after the change in  composition.7 

The annealing temperature for the oxide electrolytes is as high as 1000 ºC during the  densification process. In order to decrease the densification time and temperature, pressureassisted sintering techniques such as spark plasma sintering have been employed to facilitate the  mass-transport process.7-8 Alternatively, the cold sintering process (CSP) was recently developed  by Randall’ group and offers a route to the densification of ceramics at temperatures below 300  ºC.9-12 Such a low temperature is very attractive for the densification of solid electrolytes in  counteracting the issues associated with the loss of lithium. Generally, the CSP involves a  multistage non-equilibrium process such as dissolution-precipitation under external stress,  viscous flow of saturated solutions and diffusion of species.13-16 There are already some initial  mechanism studies in understanding the CSP, but there is still ambiguity in the exact underlying  process which occurs.17-19 Recently, Randall has reported the synthesis of Li1.5Al0.5Ge0.5 (PO4)3  solid electrolyte with the CSP, and it was shown to have an ionic conductivity of 5x10-5 S cm-1 at  room temperature after annealing. This work exemplifies that CSP can be applied to the  synthesis of solid electrolytes through lower temperature densification processes, which can  avoid the evaporation of lithium.19 In addition, there is lack of investigation on the grain boundary structure of cold sintering solid electrolyte. It is known that the ionic conduction at  grain boundary plays a critical role in solid electrolyte. Thus, a detailed study on the  microstructure is necessary in understanding its relationship with lithium ion conductivity.

Herein, Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7 (PO4)3 (LATP) electrolyte, a lithium conductor with NASICON structure,  is prepared by the CSP and post-annealing.20 Herein, the mechanism of LATP-CSP electrolyte  formation is explored and the effects of tuning the sintering conditions, solution effect and  applied stress are discussed. Through a systematic investigation of the CSP parameters, the  LATP electrolyte with an ionic conductivity of 8.04x10-5 S cm-1 is obtained, with a relative  density of 93% and activation energy of 0.37 eV. The microstructure analysis under TEM shows  that the nano-particles are precipitated at the grain-boundary of the CSP LATP, with a uniform  chemical distribution across the particles.

The microstructure of the LATP electrolyte under different sintering processes are shown in  Figure 1b-e. The cross-section images are obtained without additional polishing or thermal  etching. For HTS-LATP, the powders are compacted under high temperature by forming  sintering neck between particles. The pristine powders are grown to micro-size due to the high  temperature. If the LATP powders are pressed without any solution, a dry-press pellet is obtained  and the cross-section is demonstrated in in Figure 1c. The dry-press pellet is porous, with  loosely stacked powers. When adding water during the CSP process, the pellet becomes more  densely packed compared to the dry press LATP. Moreover, the density of the pellet is  drastically increased for the CSP-LATP with 1 M Acetic acid as an additive. In addition, neck  growth is clearly seen in the CSP-LATP with acid, as presented in Figure 1e. In contrast to  HTS-LATP, the particle sizes of CSP-LATP are still in the range of 300-400 nm.

The density of the as-obtained LATP pellets were measured by the Archimedes’ method, as  listed in Figure S1 and Table S1. Relative densities are calculated in order to correlate them to  the ionic conductivity of the pellets, as demonstrated in Figure 2a. Through the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, ionic conductivities are investigated, as illustrated in Figure 2b. It is  obvious that the ionic conductivity is linearly related to relative density, with higher densities  resulting in increased ionic conductivity. The highest relative density of LATP 96 ±2% is  obtained for the pellet sintered at a high temperature of 1000 ºC, and the lowest one is the LATP  sintered by the dry press method (74±2 %). For the two CSP-LATP pellets, the acid-assisted  CSP-LATP reaches a high relative density of 93±2 %, while the water assisted CSP-LATP is  79±2 % (Table S1). The CSP-LATP pellet with addition of acetic acid shows good sintering  effects, with a density similar to the high temperature sintering (relative density of 96±2 %).

As listed in Figure 2a and Table S1, the total ionic conductivity of HTS-LATP is 1.51x10-4 S  cm-1 at room temperature, which is obtained by the intercepts of EIS spectra in Figure 2b at the  X axis. LATP pellets prepared with the CSP process result in an ionic conductivity of 8.04x10-5  S cm-1 and 2.79 x10-5 S cm-1 for the acid and waterassisted processes, respectively. More  importantly, the CSP-LATP with acid solution shows about five-time higher ionic conductivity  compared to the dry press LATP electrolyte, which shows an ionic conductivity of 1.66x10-5 S  cm-1. The improvement of the ionic conductivity mainly comes from the grain boundary  contribution, as presented in Figure 2b. The ionic conductivity dependencies of pellets against  temperature are plotted as the Arrhenius plot in Figure 2c, with all samples showing good ionic  conduction behavior. In addition, the temperature dependent EIS spectra of CSP-LATP is listed  in Figure S2, the conductivities at different temperature are calculated based on the fitting data  (Table S2). The activation energy of the pellet is calculated based on the slope of the plot, as  listed in Table S1. CSP-LATP with acid shows an activation energy of 0.37±0.02 eV, which is  similar to the HTS-LATP at higher temperature, while the dry-press LATP shows an activation  energy of 0.45±0.02 eV due to the bad conduction at grain boundary. 

To better understand the structure of LATP solid electrolyte after sintering and the relationship  between its properties and structure, the microstructure information is obtained through TEM  images, as shown in Figure 3. For the CSP-LATP (Acid), the particles are well sintered together,  and only small fraction of pores are observed (Figure 3a-c). The images indicate excellent  densification of LATP particles with the CSP and post-annealing at medium temperature (650  ºC). Looking closer, it is seen that the grain-grain interfaces still present some amorphous phases  (Figure 3d, as marked by dash line, and Figure S3). Additionally, nanometer size precipitates (crystals) in polygonal or round-shape are detected at the grain boundary regions (Figure 3e and  f, as marked by dash line). EDS chemical mapping analysis reveals Al and Ti elements  homogeneously distributed across the grains with no significant deviations in distribution,  indicating the uniformity of chemical compositions at bulk and grain boundaries (Figure S4).  Also, there shows no evidence of solvent residue. In the case of conventionally sintered LATP,  the interconnected micron-sized grains are grown (Figure 3g) and a clean grain-boundary is  observed (Figure 3h and 3i). To evaluate the chemical information of of CSP-LATP pellet, XPS  was conducted on the surface after fired at 650 ºC. From the Figure S5, the Ti is in still in 4+  state as expected. In addition, ICP was performed for CSP-LATP pellet and LATP powders to  understand the stoichiometry change during CSP and annealing process. As presented in Table  S3, it shows that element ratio does not change obviously after CSP process.

To elucidate the influence of the liquid phase on the dissolution of the ions during the CSP  process, different combinations of the solvent are investigated. Seen from the Figure 4a, LATP  pellet with 1M acetic acid and NMP solvent shows the highest relative density while the pellet  sintered with NMP shows the lowest relative density of 74±2%, which is similar to the dry press.  As illustrated in Figure S6, the particles in the NMP assisted CSP-LATP are loosely packed  without formation of neck between grains. As indicated by a recent study by Studart et al., the  ion dissolution and liquid induced plasticity does not occur in organic solvents, so there is no  sintering behavior for NMP solution.21 Unfortunately, for the CSP process with pure water, the  final pellet is easily cracked into pieces due to rapid evaporation of water at 120 ºC (Figure  S7a). To solve this problem, the inert NMP organic solvent is used as an additive, and a pellet  with improved mechanical properties is obtained (Figure S7b). The reason is ascribed to slowing  of the evaporation rate of water (boil point of 100 ºC) by incorporating the high boiling point  NMP solvent (boil point of 202 ºC). In order to verify the effect of the high boiling point organic  solvent as an additive, DMSO with a boiling point of 189 ºC is also used for comparison. The  formed LATP pellet via CSP with 1 M acetic acid-DMSO can achieve a relative density of 84%  and good mechanical integrity (Figure S1b, Figure S7a).  

To determine the ionic conductivity, the EIS spectra of the LATP with different solutions are  recorded and presented in Figure 4b. The conductivity of the NMP-assisted CSP LATP shows  an ionic conductivity of 2.07 x10-5 S cm-1, which is similar to the dry press process (Table S4). 

For the LATP sintered with DMSO additive, the conductivity is about half of the LATP with  NMP as the organic solvent coupled with acid solution. One possible reason is the lower boiling  point of DMSO compared to NMP, which leads to a lower relative density of the CSP pellet due  to the relatively higher water evaporation rate (Table S4). From the Arrhenius plots pictured in  Figure 4c, the activation energy of the LATP pellet synthesized with DMSO and acetic acid is  0.39±0.02 eV, which is lower than the pellet sintered with water and NMP (0.40±0.02 eV), and  pure NMP solution (0.41±0.02 eV). The primary reason is that the acetic acid is effective in  dissolving the edges of particles, which is also observed in the CSP process of ZnO oxide.22 

In previous research, smaller particles were claimed to accelerate the densification process of  ceramic materials.11 Therefore, the LATP particles are ball-milled with ZrO2 for 10 h before the  CSP process. However, the ionic conductivity of the pellet only shows an ionic conductivity of  2.2x 10-5 S cm-1, even with a relative density is 81% (Figure S8). One possible reason for this  observation may be the plastic deformation of the surface during ball milling process, which  result in the formation of an amorphous phase on the surface, leading to lower ionic  conductivity.

Another important parameter in the CSP process is the applied stress. The evolution of the  microstructure of the powders at different applied pressure was examined with SEM, as shown in  Figure 5. At a low applied stress of 280 MPa, the agglomerates of nano-LATP particles is still  visible and there is a large fraction of porosity due to the inter-agglomerate interstices. A higher  applied stress of 350 MPa leads to significant densification and deformation of the agglomerates.  This effect is more obvious when the applied stress is increased to 420 MPa, where agglomerates  are invisible and only smaller porosity remains. The neck is formed between agglomerates with  an increase of the relative density from 74% at 280 MPa to 93% at 420 MPa (Figure 5). More  importantly, it should be noted that densification of the agglomerates is not accompanied by the  coarsening of particles, which is typically observed during sintering of ceramics at high  temperatures (Figure 1b).  

In this work, Lithium-ion conductor Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7 (PO4)3 (LATP) is densified  with a novel cold sintering process (CSP). CSP is a compacting process requiring low  temperature and short sintering time, which can be widely applied to other inorganic materials.  In this work, the obtained LATP electrolyte is synthesized via an optimized CSP process and can  achieve an ionic conductivity of 8.04x10-5 S cm-1 with an activation energy of 0.37 eV. HRTEM  analysis shows that some nano-precipitate forms at the grain-boundaries in the CSP LATP, while  the HTS LATP shows a clean grain boundary. With nano-crystalline in the grain boundary, some  lithium ion conduction channels are formed, which can improve the ionic conductivity of cold  sintered samples. The current study shows that the density of solid electrolyte is highly related to  the sintering process, solvent addition, and applied stress. Although there still are challenges in  understanding the change in surface chemistry of particles undergoing the CSP process, this new  technique gives new direction on preparing solid state electrolyte and solid-state batteries with  low costs and high efficiency.