
Carbon dioxide (CO2) gas sensors are playing an important role in our daily life. There is an increasing demand for CO2 gas 19 concentration measurement techniques in various fields such as 20 indoor air quality monitoring and plant growth in greenhouses. 21 22 To monitor the CO2 concentration, most conventional technolo23 gies rely on either optical,[1,2] electrochemical,[3–5] capacitive,[6] 24 work-function-based,[7] or resistance-based sensors.[8–11] Among these, resistance-based CO2 sensors based on metal oxide 25 semiconductor technology have an important advantage, namely 26 the possibility of developing them into array-integrated gas 27 sensors.[12,13] 28 With the development of internet of things (IoT) in recent 29 years, supplying power to achieve stable operation for a long 30 31 period is an important issue. In fact, nanogenerators (NGs) 32 based on piezoelectric,[14–16] triboelectric,[17] and pyroelectric[18] effects, which help convert trace energy in the environment into 33 electric energy, have served as efficient energy sources for 34 35 nanodevices and nanosystems.

commercial laser diodes.[23] However, there are few reports on visible-light-transparent self-powered nanosystems.

In our previous report, SnO2-based “invisible” CO2 sensors operating at room temperature were fabricated.[24] Using an SnO2 layer with a mobility of 10.6 cm2 V1 s1, we fabricated a highly sensitive CO2 sensor with a detection limit of 1000 ppm. The sensor is visible-light transparent, and the optical transmittance in the visible region is over 70%. In addition, NiO-based visible-light-transparent solar cells have been fabricated for installation on walls or and greenhouses.[25] To improve the fill factor of a visible-light-transparent solar cell, an Agpaste/NiO/ZnO/ZnO:H/InZnO p–n diode structure with a ZnO:H layer carrier concentration of 1019 cm3 was fabricated. The optical transmittance in the visible region was found to be over 80%. A selfpowered device for visible-light-transparent multi-functional integrated devices is realized by combining a visible-lighttransparent solar cell and a CO2 sensor. This integrated device is applied to green houses and windows with multiple functions to control the growth of plants and indoor air quality.

In this study, we mention about the possibility of realizing visible-light-transparent self-powered CO2 sensor/solar cellintegrated devices. The self-powered device exhibited small but noticeable photovoltaic effect under illumination. The results represent the first step for realizing a new type of selfpowered gas sensor. In addition, the adsorption of oxygen, which is strongly related to the sensitivity of the gas sensor, was studied.

To evaluate the response of the CO2 sensor layer to CO2 gas, its resistance was measured in a 100% CO2 atmosphere. The CO2 sensor of the integrated self-powered device showed no response to power supplied from stacked solar cell layer because of the small photovoltaic effect under illumination, as mentioned previously. In addition, as annealing is required[24] in the fabrication of the CO2 sensor layer, one of the reasons for the low


A new type of self-powered device was fabricated by combining a visible-light-transparent solar cell and a visible-light-transparent CO2 sensor using RF sputtering. In addition, the adsorption of oxygen, which is strongly related to the sensitivity of the gas sensor, was evaluated. The solar cell layer of the integrated selfpowered device exhibited small but noticeable photovoltaic effect under illumination. The CO2 sensor layer produced a response when external power was supplied. A self-powered device supplying power from a visible-light transparent solar cell to a CO2 sensor can be achieved by optimizing the insulating layer, increasing the UV light incident on the solar cell layer, and employing an appropriate fabrication process for the CO2 sensor.