Sodium superionic conductor (NASICON)-type lithium aluminum germanium phosphate (LAGP) has attracted increasing attention as a solid electrolyte for all-solid-state lithium-ion batteries (ASSLIBs), due to the good ionic conductivity and highly stable interface with Li metal. However, it still remains challenging to achieve high density and good ionic conductivity in LAGP pellets by using conventional sintering methods, because they required high temperatures (>800 C) and long sintering time (>6 h), which could cause the loss of lithium, the formation of impurity phases, and thus the reduction of ionic conductivity. Herein, we report the utilization of a spark plasma sintering −3, a relative high density (SPS) method to synthesize LAGP pellets with a density of 3.477 g cm up to 97.6%, and a good ionic conductivity of 3.29 × 10 −1. In contrast to the dry-pressing process followed with high-temperature annealing, the optimized SPS process only required a low operating temperature of 650 C and short sintering time of 10 min. Despite the least energy and short time consumption, the SPS approach could still achieve LAGP pellets with high density, little voids and cracks, intimate grain–grain boundary, and high ionic conductivity. These advantages suggest the great potential of SPS as a fabrication technique for preparing solid electrolytes and composite electrodes used in ASSLIBs.

The utilization of rechargeable lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) has been increasingly expanded from consumer devices to plug-in or hybrid electric vehicles and smart grid energy storage systems, in order to alleviate the dependence on fossil fuels, decrease greenhouse gas emissions, and realize clean transportation [1,2]. However, traditional LIBs utilize liquid organic electrolytes that could cause catastrophic disasters (such as ﬁre and explosion) upon exposure to the air due to their ﬂammable and volatile nature [3–5]. Moreover, the energy densities of current LIBs are gradually approaching their theoretical limits and cannot meet the increasing demands from end users for higher-performance LIBs. From this aspect, all-solid-state lithium-ion batteries (ASSLIBs) have recently been revisited as promising next-generation battery systems because of their signiﬁcantly improved energy density and safety [3,6–8]. The major diﬀerence between ASSLIBs and conventional LIBs is the use of solid-state electrolytes (SSEs), rather than liquid organic electrolytes, in the design and fabrication of battery systems. The adoption of SSEs not only can signiﬁcantly reduce the safety risks associated with the ﬂammable, volatile, and toxic liquid organic electrolytes, but also could potentially address the Li dendrite growth problem and make it possible for the utilization of Li metal with a high theoretical capacity of 3860 mA h g safety of ASSLIBs.

In recent years, spark plasma sintering (SPS) is attracting increasing attention from researchers to fabricate solid electrolytes and electrodes with the densities close to their theoretical values in a short sintering time [35,36]. During SPS processes, uniaxial force and pulsed direct electrical current are simultaneously applied to the powders and thus can rapidly consolidate the powders into dense pellets. The use of microscopic electrical current allows the sintering to complete in a few minutes, because of the very high heating rates and the localized high temperatures between particles. In the meantime, the water-cooling system in SPS allows a very high cooling rate. Compared to the conventional heat treatment, the eﬀective heating and cooling systems in SPS enhanced the densiﬁcation of SSE powders through grain diﬀusion mechanisms and avoided grain coarsening to maintain the intrinsic merits of nano-powders [37,38]. Indeed, SPS technique, with the advantages of a ﬂash and short processing time, improves the sintering ability of various powder materials and creates intimate solid–solid interfaces in solid electrolytes and electrodes for ASSLIBs [30,39]. In this work, we have successfully produced high-densiﬁed LAGP pellets, with a high ionic conductivity of 3.29 × 10 −1 by using SPS. Owing to the advantage of minimum energy and time consumptions of SPS, the highly dense LAGP without microcracking resulted in the reduced resistance at grain boundaries, due to the removal of the pores/voids/cracks at a proper sintering temperature, thus improving the overall ionic conductivity of LAGP. At the same time, the low operating SPS temperature avoided the formation of ionic nonconductive impurities, which usually appeared in the grain boundaries for traditionally high-temperature sintered samples and resulted in blocking of Li-ion transport pathways.

LAGP powders with a stoichiometric formula of Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 were placed in a graphite tooling (1 mm die) of the SPS chamber (Thermal Technologies 10-3 SPS system) and heated up to the target sintering temperature in argon atmosphere. The SPS sintering pressure was 60 MPa, the sintering C, and the sintering time was varied between 1 min temperatures were changed from 600 −1. Upon the completion and 10 min for all the experiments. The SPS heating rate was set to 100C minof SPS sintering, the samples were cooled down to room temperature (RT) naturally. In addition to the SPS, LAGP pellets were also made by a conventional dry-pressing method, where 0.5 g of LAGP powder was placed into a stainless steel die with 10 mm diameter and pressed at 200 MPa for 2 min. The obtained pellets were then placed into a tube furnace and annealed at 800 C for 6 h under nitrogen atmosphere.

The phase structure of the starting LAGP powders and the LAGP pellets were characterized by X-ray diﬀraction (XRD, D8-Advance X-ray diﬀractometer, Bruker, Karlsruhe, Germany) with Cu Kα1 and Kα2 radiation source. The LAGP microstructure was observed by ﬁeld-emission scanning electron microscopy (MIRA3 FEG-SEM, Tescan, Brno, Czech Republic). The density of the LAGP pellets was measured by the Archimedes’ method. For ionic conductivity measurement, the surfaces of the LAGP pellets were ﬁrst polished with sandpapers to remove carbon residual from the graphite die during the SPS process, and then coated with 100 nm Au layers on both sides as blocking electrodes. An electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) test of the Au-coated LAGP pellets was conducted on a Potentiostat/Galvanostat Station (Biologic VSP) in a frequency range of 0.1 Hz–1 MHz at diﬀerent temperatures of –10


As the starting material, LAGP powders were characterized by SEM for the morphology and by XRD for the phase structure, and the results are presented in Figure 1. As shown in Figure 1a, the diameter of LAGP particles was about 400–800 nm. The XRD pattern of LAGP powders (Figure 1b) shows strong diﬀraction peaks, which could be well indexed to LiGe2(PO4)3 with a NASICON-type structure (JCPDS PDF No. 80-1922). No other peaks of impurities are observed in the XRD pattern, indicating the high purity of the starting LAGP powders.

The eﬀects of SPS sintering temperatures (600–750C) on the morphology, ionic conductivity, and phase structure of LAGP pellets was studied ﬁrst. Figure 2a–d presents the SEM images of the cross-sectional view of LAGP pellets sintered by SPS at diﬀerent temperatures of 600 C, and 750 C for 2 min. It can be observed that the grain size in all the LAGP pellets was below 800 nm, similar to that of the starting LAGP powders (Figure 1a). The LAGP grain size remained almost unchanged at sintering temperatures of 600–750 C, due to short SPS sintering time (2 min). As seen in Figure 2a,b, LAGP pellets fabricated at 600 C were dense with minimal visible porosity. In contrast, the sample sintered at 700 C in Figure 2c exhibited enlarging pores at grain boundaries, C in Figure 2d possessed large cracks in the pellets’ cross section, as and the one sintered at 750 seen in Figure S1. The high temperature at 750 C possibly resulted in rapid grain growth, leading to the relatively high thermal expansion anisotropy of LAGP. Thus, the growing pores and voids likely coalesced and gradually emerged on the sample’s surfaces.C and 650

Nanomaterials 2019, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 9  0.5 g of LAGP powder was placed into a stainless steel die with 10 mm diameter and pressed at 200 MPa for 2 min. The obtained pellets were then placed into a tube furnace and annealed at 800 °C for 6 h under nitrogen atmosphere. The phase structure of the starting LAGP powders and the LAGP pellets were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD, D8-Advance X-ray diffractometer, Bruker, Karlsruhe, Germany) with Cu Kα1 and Kα2 radiation source. The LAGP microstructure was observed by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (MIRA3 FEG-SEM, Tescan, Brno, Czech Republic). The density of the LAGP pellets was measured by the Archimedes’ method. For ionic conductivity measurement, the surfaces of the LAGP pellets were first polished with sandpapers to remove carbon residual from the graphite die during the SPS process, and then coated with 100 nm Au layers on both sides as blocking electrodes. An electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) test of the Au-coated LAGP pellets was conducted on a Potentiostat/Galvanostat Station (Biologic VSP) in a frequency range of 0.1 Hz–1 MHz at different temperatures of –10 °C to 80 °C. 3. Results and Discussion  Figure 1. (a) SEM image and (b) XRD pattern of lithium aluminum germanium phosphate (LAGP) powders. As the starting material, LAGP powders were characterized by SEM for the morphology and by XRD for the phase structure, and the results are presented in Figure 1. As shown in Figure 1a, the diameter of LAGP particles was about 400–800 nm. The XRD pattern of LAGP powders (Figure 1b) shows strong diffraction peaks, which could be well indexed to LiGe2(PO4)3 with a NASICON-type structure (JCPDS PDF No. 80-1922). No other peaks of impurities are observed in the XRD pattern, indicating the high purity of the starting LAGP powders.

The values of ionic conductivities can be determined from σ = d/AR, in which d and A stand for the thickness and the area of the pellet, respectively, and R is the total resistance (R2), obtained above, and the results are given in Figure 2g. Among all the samples, the LAGP pellets sintered at 650 C for 2 min exhibited the highest conductivity of 8.09 × 10 −1 at RT. The plots of log(σT) vs. 1000/T show a linear relation and ﬁt well with the Arrhenius equation, σ = A exp (Ea/kT), in which A, Ea, and k represents the pre-exponential factor, the activation energy for conduction, and the Boltzmann ◦ C sample is constant, respectively. As seen from the Arrhenius plots (Figure 2g), the slope of the 650 ◦ the lowest. The activation energies (Ea) are calculated from the rates of slopes, and the 650 C sample’s Ea is 0.293 eV. In Figure 2h, the XRD patterns of SPS pellets sintered at diﬀerent temperatures are C maintained pure NASICON-type phase given. All of the LAGP pellets sintered at 600 (JCPDS PDF No. 80-1922). When the temperature increased to 750 C, the peak intensity increased at 26.4 , which corresponds to the (202) crystal plane of NASICON-type phase. This might be due to the reorientation of LAGP grains caused by the high pressure during the SPS process. For the whole heat treatment, the width of the diﬀraction peaks did not change, implying that the average crystallite size of LAGP remained unchanged.

Nanomaterials 2019, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 9  0.5 g of LAGP powder was placed into a stainless steel die with 10 mm diameter and pressed at 200 MPa for 2 min. The obtained pellets were then placed into a tube furnace and annealed at 800 °C for 6 h under nitrogen atmosphere. The phase structure of the starting LAGP powders and the LAGP pellets were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD, D8-Advance X-ray diffractometer, Bruker, Karlsruhe, Germany) with Cu Kα1 and Kα2 radiation source. The LAGP microstructure was observed by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (MIRA3 FEG-SEM, Tescan, Brno, Czech Republic). The density of the LAGP pellets was measured by the Archimedes’ method. For ionic conductivity measurement, the surfaces of the LAGP pellets were first polished with sandpapers to remove carbon residual from the graphite die during the SPS process, and then coated with 100 nm Au layers on both sides as blocking electrodes. An electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) test of the Au-coated LAGP pellets was conducted on a Potentiostat/Galvanostat Station (Biologic VSP) in a frequency range of 0.1 Hz–1 MHz at different temperatures of –10 °C to 80 °C. 3. Results and Discussion  Figure 1. (a) SEM image and (b) XRD pattern of lithium aluminum germanium phosphate (LAGP) powders. As the starting material, LAGP powders were characterized by SEM for the morphology and by XRD for the phase structure, and the results are presented in Figure 1. As shown in Figure 1a, the diameter of LAGP particles was about 400–800 nm. The XRD pattern of LAGP powders (Figure 1b) shows strong diffraction peaks, which could be well indexed to LiGe2(PO4)3 with a NASICON-type structure (JCPDS PDF No. 80-1922). No other peaks of impurities are observed in the XRD pattern, indicating the high purity of the starting LAGP powders. The density of LAGP SSEs sintered at 600

LAGP SSEs sintered by SPS method could usually reach a very high density in a relatively low temperature (600–750 C was ◦ −3, as seen in Table 1. When the sintering temperature increased to 650 3.219 g cm C, the density ◦ −3. However, when the temperature further elevated to 700 ◦ increased up to 3.477 g cm C and 750 C, −3, respectively, most likely due to the formation of the density decreased to 2.495 and 2.430 g cm voids and microcracks in the pellets. The relatively density of LAGP SSEs was determined to be ◦ 90.4%, 97.6%, 70.1%, and 68.2%, for the LAGP pellets sintered at 600 C, respectively. Therefore, the SPS sintering temperature is a key parameter to determine the density and ionic conductivity of LAGP pellets.


In summary, highly densiﬁed LAGP pellets were fabricated by using SPS technique and exhibited C) high ionic conductivity at room temperature. The inﬂuence of SPS sintering temperatures (600–750 and times (1–10 min) on the microstructure, density, and ionic conductivity of the LAGP pellets were studied in detail. It can be concluded that the optimal SPS condition for LAGP pellets was 650 C and 10 min, and the synthesized LAGP pellets were dense with minimal visible porosity. The density of −3, a relative density of 97.6% and the ionic conductivity the LAGP pellets was as high as 3.477 g cm was 3.29 × 10 −1, with a activation energy of 0.239 eV at RT. Sintering temperatures higher than C caused the formation of voids and microcracks in the LAGP pellets, negatively aﬀecting the 650 density and ionic conductivity. These results clearly demonstrate the potential of the SPS approach to synthesize solid electrolytes used in ASSLIBs, owing to the drastically reduced sintering temperature and time compared with that used in conventional sintering processes.