
In order to industrialize NaSICON materials, modern fabrication techniques have to be used and one of those techniques for producing large-scale electrolyte sheets with 10–300 μm thickness is tape casting. Such technique however requires a sintering step at high temperatures leading to sodium depletion due to evaporation. The sodium loss becomes more significant for large-area and thin components. In order to investigate and compensate the sodium loss, NaSICON compositions with sodium excess were prepared, i.e. Na3Zr2Si2PO12 + x Na2O (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.2). The sodium loss can be reduced by applying a two-step sintering process (1250 °C for only 0.5 h and then at 1230 °C for 5 h). Several characterization techniques were used to analyze the resulting ceramics, the sodium depletion and its consequence on electrical conductivity. Chemical analyses indicated that all compositions were sodium deficient. Furthermore, the weight loss was investigated by thermogravimetric analysis confirming the reduction of weight loss by a factor 2 by applying a two-step sintering procedure with lower second sintering temperature. Initial thermodynamic calculations of the phase equilibria at high temperatures confirm the predominant evaporation of sodium. The highest electrical conductivity (1.6 ⋅ 10−3 S cm−1 at 25 °C) was measured for the composition showing the least sodium deficiency (x = 0.2). Furthermore, the activation energy of bulk and grain boundary conductivity decreased with increasing x in system.

The sodium superionic-conducting ceramic (NaSICON) with composition Na3Zr2Si2PO12 [1,2] has been investigated during recent decades due to the high ionic conductivity making the material a suitable option as a solid electrolyte in batteries or other electrochemical devices. A wide variation of substitutions was performed in this family of compositions and is reviewed in [3]. The structure of NaSICON consists of a three-dimensional framework of corner-sharing MO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra. Contrary to the common opinion, not all NaSICON materials have the same crystal structure. Depending on their composition, sodiumor lithium-based NaSICON materials are most commonly either rhombohedral or monoclinic. Some triclinic NaSICON materials have also been reported as the low-temperature phase of LiZr2(PO4)3 [4] or LiSn2(PO4)3 [5]. The series Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12 (0 ≤ x ≤ 3) has a rhombohedral structure (space group ) except when 1.8 ≤ x ≤ 2.2. In this interval, the material undergoes a monoclinic distortion with space group (C2/c). The conductivity of NaSICONs also varies with varying the crystal structure. The monoclinic distortion in Na3Zr2Si2PO12 leads to an increase in conductivity by two orders of magnitude [2]. However, crystal structure is not the only factor influencing the conductivity. Other factors such as charge carrier concentration (Na+) and cation substitution of Zr4+ with transition metal ions also have a strong influence. As an example, partial substitution of Zr4+ with Sc3+ increases the conductivity to values as high as 4 mS cm−1 [6]. Charge carrier concentration directly influences the conductivity by simply increasing the amount of mobile species in the system. Nevertheless, vacancies are also vital for the ionic transport in the lattice, therefore a balance between Na+ and vacancies must be reached for maximum conductivity. The optimum is reported to be at 3.4 mol of Na per formula unit for Na3+xScxZr2-x(SiO4)2(PO4) and Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 [8]. Since the NaSICON materials contain volatile elements, especially sodium and phosphorous, they are prone to weight loss at elevated temperatures. It has been reported that after sintering above 1200 °C, Na3Zr2Si2PO12 suffers from sodium oxide loss [9]. This sodium loss also reduces the charge carrier concentration in the material and consequently decreases its ionic conductivity (σion) [7,10,11]. This can be avoided by two potential strategies. The first rather complicated strategy is by modification of the experimental sintering setup and the In the case of sintering second is by controlling the chemistry.

Nominal Na3Zr2Si2PO12 was prepared by the solution-assisted solid state reaction (SA-SSR) [12], where stoichiometric amounts of NaNO3 (99.5%), ZrO(NO3)2 (99%) and Si(OC2H5)4 (99%), supplied from VWR International, Belgium, were mixed and dissolved in a quartz glass container. After the nitrates were dissolved in the solution, a stoichiometric amount of tetraethyl orthosilicate, Si(OC2H5)4 was added. When the Si(OC2H5)4 was hydrolyzed, a corresponding amount of NH4H2PO4 was added and stirred for 30 min to form a homogeneous precipitation. The mixture was stirred overnight with 300 rpm at 50 °C. The homogenized mixture was firstly heated from 50 up to 100 °C to slowly evaporate the water. Subsequently, the product was fired in a furnace at 600 °C for 5 h to form an amorphous raw powder. During this heat treatment, the inorganic polymer matrix was pyrolyzed and NOx, CO2, H2O evolved as gaseous products. Afterwards the raw powder was calcined at 800 °C for 12 h and balled-milled on a roller bench for 48 h using zirconia balls. The milled powder was pressed into pellets (diameter = 13 mm, of ~150 MPa. After pressing, all samples showed similar green densities, i.e. 59–61% of theoretical density. The pellets were sintered at different conditions including a two-step sintering (1250 °C for 0.5 h followed by 1230 °C for 5 h) with a heating and cooling rate of 5 K min−1. These temperatures were chosen because sintering at higher temperature results in sample deformation due to partial melting. After sintering the pellets were sputtered with gold as blocking electrodes. The electrical conductivity was measured by an impedance spectroscopy system (Biologic, VMP-300) from −30 °C to 100 °C. The phase purity of the sintered specimens was measured by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker D4 ENDEAVOR diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation), and the microstructure of the powder and pellet cross-sections was examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Ultra55, Zeiss). Microstructural details like grain size distribution or fraction of porosity was determined using an image analysis software (analySIS pro, Olympus Soft Imaging Solutions GmbH, Version 5.0) The density of the samples was measured using an Ultrapycometer 1000, version 2.4 (Quantachrome Corporation), which uses gas displacement and the volume-pressure relationship (Boyle's law) to measure the density of the specimens. The particle size distribution was obtained using Horiba LA950 V2 laser diffraction particle size distribution analyzer with ethanol as dispersing medium. The stoichiometry of the materials was controlled by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) using the Thermo Scientific iCAP7600 spectrometer with optical scale and CID semi-conductor detector, axial und radial reflection, and wavelengths between 166 nm and 847 nm. 20 mg of powder were mixed to 0.25 g lithium borate in a platinum crucible and heated for 0.5 h at 1000 °C. The liquefied material was dissolved in 30 mL HCl (5%). After dissolution, the sample solutions were transferred to sample vials containing 0.5 mL of HF and filled to 50 mL volume. Each test sample was diluted and measured twice. Thermodynamic properties like vapor pressures of volatile species can be estimated with the help of thermodynamic calculations using appropriate software and thermodynamic databases. In the present work thermodynamic calculations were performed using the computational software package FactSage [13] with an in-house developed oxide database [14] combined with the commercial database for pure gaseous substances (SGPS). The partial pressure of the main species is calculated under equilibrium conditions at 1250 °C. Since the ZrO2containing species are still not included into the database used, the data from the commercial database SGPS were implemented for condensed and gaseous phases. In this case the equilibrium calculations with ZrO2 should be considered as preliminary values, because the formation and reactions with zirconia-containing phases are not taken into account in the database yet. The thermodynamic functions on the corresponding compounds are required in order to estimate the partial pressure over NaSICON. Since no thermodynamic data exist, the Gibbs energy functions have been generated based on the experimental data of Maier et al. [15]. The standard formation enthalpy and entropy as well as the temperature dependence of heat capacity were used.

During sintering NaSICON materials undergo significant weight loss due to the evaporation of sodium oxide. Therefore NaSICON materials were prepared with excess of Na with compositions Na3Zr2Si2PO12 + x Na2O with 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.2 and exposed to typical sintering conditions of NaSICON ceramics to study the Na loss. The weight loss is minimized through two-step sintering because the sample is exposed for longer durations are lower temperature (1230 °C). Maximum Na loss observed was 0.4% for x = 0.025 and minimum of 0.07% when x = 0.1 for the two-step sintering. The latter shows also the highest total and bulk conductivity that reaches 0.9 mS cm−1 and 1.6 mS cm−1 at 25 °C, respectively. As a general trend, the Ea decreases with the increase of Na charge carriers in the investigated range.
