The ongoing push for electrification of transport and the increasing amount of portable electronic  devices drives the research for safer energy storage technologies. Lithium ion batteries (LIBs) are  expected to serve in future mass-market generations of electric vehicles and thus have to be  prepared for contingencies. Safety concerns arise particularly in the use of organic, mostly toxic  liquid electrolytes that, in case of a collision, may leak, catch fire or even explode. In this regard,  all-solid-state batteries (ASSBs) appear to represent a safer alternative to conventional LIBs.1, 2 In  ASSBs, the liquid-soaked separator membrane is replaced by a ceramic or glassy solid electrolyte  (SE). It is now well accepted that ASSBs can only be competitive as a mass product once they offer  at least the same performance and lifetime as LIBs with liquid electrolyte. During the development  of LIBs within the last 30 years, it was found that the liquid electrolyte allows stable and reversible  operation due to solid electrolyte interface (SEI) formation at the graphite anode and sufficient  interface stability at the cathode.3, 4 Due to extensive research efforts, our knowledge of LIBs  interfaces and their degradation is today quite detailed, and our understanding of ASSB interfaces  lacks such detailed knowledge. Within the recent years of ASSB research, several solid electrolytes have been reported that offer  comparable lithium ion conductivity with their liquid counterparts.5-8 Especially glass ceramic  electrolytes in the Li2S–P2S5 system and related systems exhibit high lithium ion conductivity.9-13  Moreover, thiophosphate electrolytes, such as Li3PS4, Li7P3S11, Li6PS5X (X = Cl, Br, I) or Li10GeP2S12  offer favorable mechanical properties,14-17 which allow an easy preparation and processing by  cold pressing.18 Unfortunately, the thermodynamic stability of the thiophosphate SEs is very  limited. Mo and co-workers recently calculated the thermodynamic stability window of several  solid electrolytes and reported that the thiophosphates possess very narrow stability windows of  even less than 1 V.19, 20 The reactivity between lithium metal and thiophosphate SEs, leading to  their decomposition and formation of an SEI, is meanwhile well understood and has been reported  multiple times.21, 22 The oxidative degradation at the cathode side represents a major factor  contributing to the capacity fading of ASSBs.23-31 In particular, for application of high-capacity  nickel-rich layered oxides or high-voltage cathode materials, the electrochemical stability of  thiophosphate electrolytes towards high potentials is insufficient and coatings are required.25, 28  Hence, it is challenging to address all requirements using a single solid electrolyte, so that a  combination of different solid electrolytes may be required for superior functionality in the solidstate battery. When moving away from sulfide-based electrolytes for stability reasons, the crystalline NASICONtype materials Li1+xAlxGe2-x(PO4)3 and Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 represent promising alternatives to  avoid the oxidative degradation during battery charging.10, 20 For instance, it has been reported that Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 is stable up to 6 V vs Li+/Li.32 Further, NASICON-type materials are not  only oxidatively but also chemically stable when exposed to air or moisture,33, 34 which is a huge  benefit compared to thiophosphate compounds that can hydrolyze by forming H2S (hydrogen  sulfide) gas.35 NASICONs offer an acceptable lithium-ion conductivity in the order of 10-4 S/cm,  and the bulk conductivity can be increased up to 10-3 S/cm at room temperature by elemental  substitution.36-39 An inherent problem of phosphate-based solid electrolytes is the huge grain  boundary resistance and their mechanical rigidity.40-42 In order to reach high ionic conductivity of  polycrystalline ceramics, samples have to be prepared with very high density to reduce grain  boundaries, which is usually only achieved by compressive sintering at above 900 °C.43 With  respect to battery fabrication, such high temperature sintering will induce unwanted side  reactions with the other battery components, in particular with the cathode active materials.44, 45  For this reason, reports of functional bulk solid-state batteries employing NASICON-type  materials as SE are still limited.46, 47 Because of the required heat treatment, electrodes are mainly  deposited as a thin film48 on sintered SE pellets,49 rather than as a thick composite electrode with  high areal capacity as usually reported for sulfide-based batteries.26 Another option to circumvent  the high grain boundary resistance is the application as quasi-all-solid-state electrolyte in  combination with either a conventional liquid electrolyte,50-52 an ionic liquid, or polymers.53, 54  However, introduction of liquids or hybrid concepts reverses the benefits of an all-solid-state  approach and adds new interfaces that can possibly lead to additional degradation effects.55

The solid electrolyte Li1.5Al0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3 (LATP) was prepared by mixing lithium  carbonate (Li2CO3, Acros Organics, 99+%), aluminum hydroxide (Al(OH)3, Sigma-Aldrich, reagent  grade) and titanium dioxide (TiO2, Sigma-Aldrich, ≥99%) in the stoichiometric ratio and  thoroughly ground in an agate mortar. A 5 wt.% excess of Li2CO3 was added to compensate the  loss of lithium at higher synthesis temperatures. The mixture was added step by step to  phosphoric acid (H3PO4 85 wt.%, Sigma-Aldrich, 99.99%) under constant stirring. To avoid a too  viscous mixture, roughly 10 mL of deionized water was added. After stirring at room temperature,  the mixture was heated to 200°C and kept at the target temperature for 12 h. Afterwards, the  remaining solid residual was ground and the resulting powder was then ball milled for 30 minutes  at 300 rpm using a zirconium dioxide milling set (45 mL vial, one milling medium with a diameter  of 13 mm). The obtained powder was pelletized uniaxially at 226 MPa. Finally, the pellet was  sintered in a magnesia crucible at 900°C for 24 h in air using a heating rate of 250 °C/h and  sacrificial powder to prevent contact with the crucible. The crystalline solid electrolyte of β–Li3PS4 (LPS), the cathode material of LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2  (NCM-811), as well as the anode material of Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) were received from BASF SE. The two  electrode materials were dried in a vacuum oven at 250°C for 24 h to remove any moisture. Cell assembly. The solid electrolyte LATP was used as powder rather than as sintered pellets with  electrode materials to avoid any undesirable side reactions44, 45 and to be flexible for battery  assembly processes (Figure S1, Figure S2). The cathode composites consist of NCM-811 and LPS  or LATP with a mass ratio of 70:30 and the anode composites of LTO and LPS with a mass ratio of  50:50, respectively (Figure 1). These composites were mixed in an agate mortar by hand for  15 min. The electrochemical cell was prepared in a previously described hot-press setup inside  an argon-filled glovebox.56 First, 100 mg of LPS were compressed between two stainless steel  pistons in a ceramic cylinder at 90 MPa for 5 minutes to form a well-defined pellet of the separator  the  cathode  composite  (2.48 mAh/cm²)  and  40 mg  material.  Afterwards,  20 mg  of  (3.10 mAh/cm²) of the anode composite were placed and spread out on the top and the bottom  of the separator, respectively. The capacity of the anode was balanced to have a surplus of capacity  and not to be the limiting factor when investigating the cathode side. A pressure of 265 MPa was  applied through the steel pistons and the temperature was set to 150°C. Pressure and temperature  were maintained during the electrochemical measurements. Ni-rich NCM materials show decreasing thermal stability with increasing nickel content.57-59 An  NCM-811 material charged electrochemically in an organic liquid electrolyte up to 4.3 V vs. Li+/Li  undergoes structural changes and releases oxygen gas at around 150°C.55 The thermal stability  depends on the surface condition60, 61 and the preparation process.62 In our experiment, however, all cell studies were run in an argon-filled glovebox and the solid-state battery cells show sufficient  electrochemical stability at 150°C, being comparable to the results at room temperature.25 This  demonstrates that the reactivity of NCM materials in a solid-state environment is clearly different  from that in a liquid electrolyte cell. Nevertheless, it is known that natural Li2CO3 surface films on  the surface of NCM materials decompose in both liquid and solid electrolytes.63 Electrochemical Characterizations. Battery cycling and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy  (EIS) were carried out using an SP-150 potentiostat/galvanostat (Bio-Logic Science Instruments).  The galvanostatic charge/discharge cycling was performed at a C-rate of 0.1C (248 μA/cm2) in the  approximately  to  corresponding  voltage  2.65-4.35 V vs. Li+/Li with the assumption that the potential for the lithium titanate anode is  1.55 V vs. Li+/Li.64 After each discharge step and a subsequent electrochemical relaxation of 1 h,  EIS measurements were conducted with an amplitude of 20 mV in a frequency range of 1 MHz to  0.1 Hz. Scanning Electron Microscopy. Microstructural images of the cathode composites were obtained  using a Merlin high-resolution scanning electron microscope (Carl Zeiss AG, Germany). The  batteries were disassembled inside an argon-filled glovebox and the samples were carried to the  analysis chamber using a transfer vessel (Leica EM VC500) under inert gas atmosphere. Energydispersive X-ray spectroscopy of the cathode composites was carried out using an XMAX  EXTREME EDX detector (Oxford Instruments, UK) with an acceleration voltage of 10 kV and a  probing current of 2 nA. X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy. Measurements were carried out using a PHI5000 Versa Probe  II (Physical Electronics GmbH) with an Al anode. To avoid air exposure, the samples were  transferred from an argon-filled glovebox to the analysis chamber using a transfer vessel filled  with argon gas. The probed surface area was 100 μm × 1400 μm (X-ray spot size) and an X-ray  power of 100 W was used. The pass energy of the analyzer was set to 23.5 eV for detail spectra  and to 187.9 eV for survey scans. The chamber pressure was in the range of 10-7 Pa during the  measurements.

In order to investigate and compare the interfaces between LPS and LATP in  contact with NCM-811 in an ASSB setup, two types of cells, cathode composites NCM-811/LPS or  NCM-811/LATP and the separator LPS with anode composites LTO/LPS were assembled:  LTO/LPS|LPS|NCM-811/LPS (LPS cell) as well as LTO/LPS|LPS|NCM-811/LATP (LATP-LPS cell).  The schematic cell setup is described in Figure 1. The LPS cell serves as a reference cell. In case of the LATP-LPS cell, a bilayer approach was chosen  and LPS was used as a separator to reduce the overall cell resistance and to avoid contact with an  anode. While lithium or a lithium-indium alloy is commonly employed in thiophosphate-based  batteries as an anode, here LTO is used as it is stable against the thiophosphate electrolyte20, 65  also at elevated temperature, so that all possible changes can be attributed to the cathode interface. The microstructures of the prepared cathode composites were investigated by means of scanning  electron microscopy, as shown in Figure 2. To better differentiate the materials, energy dispersive  X-ray (EDX) mapping was conducted simultaneously. The cathode composites consist of 70 wt%  NCM-811 and 30 wt% SE in both cells, which results in a volumetric ratio of V(NCM):V(SE) =  48:52 in the LPS cell and 60:40 in the LATP-LPS cell. The active material is well surrounded by the  SE in both cells. In contrast to the LPS cell, which shows a very dense pellet and good interfacial  contact, the LATP-LPS cell necessarily has a denser packing of NCM-811 particles. The grain  boundaries are still visible and the pores are also detectable in the LATP-LPS cell.

Taking a closer look at the voltage profiles, the differential capacity plots are shown in Figure 5.  During the first charge, several peaks can be observed at 3.60, 3.74, 4.00, and 4.19 V vs. Li+/Li in  the LPS cell and 3.71, 4.00, and 4.20 V vs. Li+/Li in the LATP-LPS cell. The peak at lowest voltage  in the LATP-LPS cell may represent the combination of the two individual low voltage peaks in the  LPS cell. The observed peaks are likely caused by the phase transitions of NCM-811 from  hexagonal to monoclinic (H1   M), monoclinic to hexagonal (M   H2), and hexagonal to  hexagonal (H2  H3).68-70 The voltages at the local maxima are in good agreement with previous  reports.57, 71, 72 The similarity of the differential capacity plots with those of LIBs with liquid  electrolyte indicates that the total ionic conductivity within the cathode composite is comparable  to the one in liquid electrolyte cells. After the first charge, it is difficult to assign the observed curves to the three or four peaks due to  an increasing peak broadening, which might arise from an inhomogeneous electrochemical  reaction and could be an indicator for contact loss.73-76 The cell potential is constituted from the  combination of each individual electrode particle potential. Indeed, after the initial formation in  the first charge, where contact loss and/or interface reactions may take place,25 the  inhomogeneous Li-ion and electron transportation pathways and lithium concentration within  the particles results in a wide potential distribution.

In this work, we have evaluated the concept of using the phosphate-based electrolyte  Li1.5Al0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3 with an NCM-811 cathode composite in a solid-state battery in addition to the  crystalline lithium-thiophosphate β–Li3PS4 separator. For a fair comparison, a conventional solidstate battery system employing β–Li3PS4 within the cathode composite as well as the separator  was constructed. In order to investigate the cathode interfaces the solid-state batteries fabricated  in a hot-press setup were cycled at elevated temperatures up to 150°C and studied by in-situ  electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and X-ray photoemission spectroscopy. It was found  that the growth of the interface impedance is negligible and no interfacial degradation occurs  when NCM-811 particles are in contact with Li1.5Al0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3, rather than β–Li3PS4. Our work shows that phosphate-based electrolytes can be used in solid-state batteries, resulting  in good long-term stability as no detrimental side reactions occur due to the higher oxidative  stability. Indeed, while solid-state batteries are not likely to be run at 150°C, the stability of the  phosphate electrolyte as well as the lack of an additional interface impedance during cycling  suggests that Li1.5Al0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3 may be used as a coating for cathode active materials. As  Li1.5Al0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3 has already been shown to avoid electrochemical degradation of the bulk  separator for liquid electrolytes,86 this work provides a better understanding of the interfacial  chemistry in solid-state battery and hopefully guides the design of long-term performance cells.