The development of lithium-ion technology was a breakthrough in the electronics industry, increasing the demand for energy storage in the past decade. However, safety issues have raised the interest in and led to the development of new solid electrolytes as leak-proof and nonﬂammable alternatives [1]. In this ﬁeld, sodium ion conductors can be regarded as alternatives to the established lithium ion conductors due to the ever-increasing price of lithium in the world market [2].

The NASICON class of materials was introduced in 1976 by Hong et al. [3] to deﬁne compounds of the family of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 with very high ionic conductivity. They were already proposed as possible solid electrolytes or electrode materials in batteries [4] due to their high sodium ion conductivity [5].

For ceramic electrolytes, sintering is needed to consolidate the starting powder into dense, functional components. However, the usual processes of powder technology to sinter solid oxide or phosphatebased electrolytes are energy intensive due to the high temperatures needed and can lead to undesirable reactions with the electrode materials, element evaporation or the formation of unwanted phases [6]. Therefore, there is real interest in reducing the sintering temperatures of those materials.

One of the possible approaches is the well-established technique called Field Assisted Sintering Technology (FAST) or Spark Plasma Sintering (SPS) [7–10]. In this processing method, direct heating of the material or the surrounding die is caused by an electrical current, generating high heating rates in the order of 50–200 °C/min. Solid electrolytes for batteries were successfully produced via this method with a drastic reduction in the sintering temperature and time compared to conventional sintering [11,12]. Lalère et al. [13] have assembled an all-solid state NASICON-based battery, using Na3V2(PO4)3 as both electrodes and Na3Zr2Si2PO12 as the solid electrode via spark plasma sintering. The battery operated at 85% of the theoretical capacity at 200 °C.

Another approach to reduce the sintering temperatures is to use sintering aids. The most obvious use is in Liquid Phase Sintering, in which a transient liquid phase is formed during sintering in order to increase the densiﬁcation [14]. Recent developments have shown that the presence of small amounts of water without necessarily the formation of a real liquid phase can increase densiﬁcation and drastically reduce the sintering temperatures. Aside from the hydrothermal hotpressing methods developed in Japan [15], “Cold Sintering” of CaCO3 was demonstrated at room temperature for the ﬁrst time [16], using carbon dioxide gas and mechanical pressure in order to achieve densiﬁcation. Further developments of densiﬁcation at low temperature in the presence of liquids were made by Schwarz et.al. [17] and Dargatz et al. [18,19]. Improved densiﬁcation of ZnO with water as a sintering aid and using the high heating rates of FAST/SPS was found. It was shown that the combination of those factors was able to start densiﬁcation at 200 °C, whereas dry powder and low heating rates led to almost no densiﬁcation. Zinc based precursors such as zinc acetate also promoted faster densiﬁcation. An extensive discussion of the probable mechanisms during cold sintering of ZnO is presented by GonzalezJulian et al. [20], in which experiments were conducted with diﬀerent pressures and the grain boundaries were investigated with Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy.

Plenty of diﬀerent ceramic compounds were produced via a similar method, hereby described by Randall et al. as “Cold Sintering” [21–23]. The process is based on the low temperature (< 300 °C) densiﬁcation of moistened powders with either water or a solution of precursors under high uniaxial pressures (up to 600 MPa). However, for some materials such as zirconia and barium titanate, the cold sintering process by itself is not enough to reach full densiﬁcation, needing an extra thermal treatment in order to fully crystallize the material and reach the desired densiﬁcation [24,25]. One of the main features in this process is the need to promote an incongruent dissolution in order to facilitate the densiﬁcation in two steps [21]. For that dissolution to take place, some workarounds can be done such as using acidic or basic media [25] or special salts [19]. Depending on the electrochemical properties of the material, as can be inferred from the Pourbaix diagram, even simple deionized water is suﬃcient for the mechanism to be present in some cases [23].


NASICON (Na3.4Sc0.4Zr1.6Si2PO12) was sintered via diﬀerent sintering methods, namely FAST/SPS and cold sintering. The processing routes are compared with respect to densiﬁcation, properties and energy expenditure.



Scandium-substituted NASICON (Na3.4Sc0.4Zr1.6Si2PO12) powder was fabricated with a primary particle size smaller than 50 nm via thesolution-assisted solid-state reaction method [28], as measured by TEM (Fig. 1a). The powder was agglomerated to some extent as shown in Fig. 1b.

NASICON powders have been sintered by three diﬀerent consolidation methods. The ﬁrst method, hereby named with respect to the related literature “cold sintering” deals with uniaxial warm die compaction in a press (Model 10H-15 mm, P/O/Weber, Germany) The cold sintering experiments were conducted by adding either 10 wt. % of water or an acidic or basic aqueous solution (1 M NaOH, KOH, HNO3 or acetic acid) to the powder right before the warm uniaxial pressing. A pressure of 300 MPa has been applied and then the samples were heated to the target temperature of 250 °C as fast as possible and then held for 10 min before the device was turned oﬀ and the pressure was released. The heating rate was measured to be 17 ± 3 °C/min in all experiments but could not be exactly controlled in the present experimental set-up. Furthermore, in-situ measurement of sample shrinkage was not possible. The ﬁnal dimensions of the samples were a diameter of 15 mm and a height of 3 mm.

For some samples, a subsequent heat treatment was conducted in order to further increase densiﬁcation. The samples were heated to holding temperatures between 400 and 1000 °C for one hour, with a heating rate of 10 °C/min in a muﬄe furnace (Nabertherm L16/14, Germany) with air as sintering atmosphere.

The second set of experiments was carried out in a FAST/SPS device (HP-D5, FCT Systeme, Rauenstein, Germany), by using graphite (diameter = 15 mm) or titanium-zirconium-molybdenum alloy (TZM) dies (diameter = 12 mm). Maximum temperatures varied between 700 °C and 1250 °C combined with a heating ramp of 100 °C/min, dwell time of 5 min and vacuum atmosphere in the chamber. The maximum uniaxial pressure was 50 MPa with the graphite dies and 300 MPa with the TZM dies. As the installed pyrometer does not work at temperatures below 500 °C, low temperatures were controlled by a K-type thermocouple, which was located in a hole in the middle of the die with a distance of 4 mm to the sample. At temperatures above 500 °C, pyrometer was used for temperature measurement. The axial displacement was recorded every second during the sintering process by the FAST/SPS equipment with a resolution of 10 μm. Additional tests were performed with diﬀerent heating rates between 25 and 200 °C/min in order to understand the eﬀect of the heating rate on the densiﬁcation. Experiments were conducted with dry powder and with the same solvents as described before for the cold sintering experiments.

As reference, samples with a diameter of 15 mm were uniaxially compacted with a pressure of 300 MPa and conventionally sintered in a muﬄe furnace (Nabertherm L16/14, Germany) at 1150 °C, 1 h in air. In this case, a heating rate of 10 K/min was applied.

The energy consumption of selected sintering experiments (conventional sintering, cold sintering and FAST/SPS) was measured using the power and energy logger PEL 103 (Chauvin-Arnoux, France) by considering the whole electrical circuit part used to power the press,

The values presented are referred to the full cycle including pre-pressing, consolidation until the natural cooling.

Density of the sintered samples was measured by the Archimedes method, and relative densities were calculated using the theoretical density (TD) value of 3.21 g/cm3. Fracture surfaces were observed in a scanning electron microscope with EDX analysis (Zeiss Ultra55, Germany). The respective grain size was calculated by the linear intercept method in images with suﬃcient magniﬁcation.

The conductivity of the samples was measured via impedance spectroscopy (BioLogic VMP 300, France) at room temperature in a frequency range from 7 MHz to 1 Hz and a voltage of 20 mV. The samples were prepared by carefully polishing the electrode surfaces followed by sputtering with gold. Then, the samples were then connected with copper electrodes which in turn were connected to the impedance analyzer.

The relationship between pH value and densiﬁcation behavior can be partly explained by the relative stability of NASICON in the pH range from 4 to 10, as calculated by Radhakrishnan and Ong [29]. Unfortunately, there is limited data regarding the stability of this compound in the pH ranges investigated in this study, but it can be inferred from our experiments that the extremes of the pH scale facilitate the dissolution of the compound under high temperature and pressure. This correlates to the ﬁndings of Randall et al. [24], in which the presence of a congruent solution is needed in order to facilitate the densiﬁcation in cold sintering, leading to the growth of amorphous layers at the particle boundaries.

The samples treated with potassium hydroxide were subject to a further heat treatment in order to increase densiﬁcation. The samples were heat treated with a one hour holding time at temperatures between 400 and 1000 °C (Fig. 3). The densiﬁcation of the samples increases with higher sintering temperatures, but a sudden discontinuity observed at 600 °C. This point was marked by a change in sample color, where it became gray instead of the usual bluish-white color observed in the other conditions.

Further investigation of fracture surfaces after treatment at diﬀerent temperatures (Fig. 4) shows that the grain size of the material keeps an average value of 23 ± 10 nm (measured by linear intercept, n = 5) regardless of the heat treatment temperature. This ﬁnding is quite interesting, because densiﬁcation occurs without signiﬁcant grain growth. In comparison, the usual grain sizes obtained by conventional sintering for this material are in the range of 1 μm, with sintering at 1250 °C for 5 h [28].


FAST/SPS experiments were conducted at diﬀerent maximum temperatures up to 1250 °C, with an applied pressure of 50 MPa and using graphite tools and a heating rate of 100 °C/min. Green density of the powder after pre-compaction in the graphite tool with 50 MPa was again around 55%. From Figs. 5 and 6a it can be observed that even there is a densiﬁcation step at 700 °C, higher densiﬁcations (> 90% TD) are only observed above 1100 °C, in a two-step process. No signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the ﬁnal density was observed when changing the heating rate from 25 °C/min (97.0% TD) to 200 °C/min (94.2% TD) (Fig. 5). However, there is a discrepancy at which temperature the ﬁrst densiﬁcation step is reached depending on the heating rate, which is not completely understood so far.

The use of TZM tools enables to perform the experiments at higher pressures (300 MPa). In this series, the maximum temperature was limited to 700 °C to reliably avoid creep and grain growth of the tool material. Table 1 summarizes the results of experiments carried out with or without diﬀerent sintering aids and diﬀerent heating rates. In this case, densiﬁcation was improved with an increasing heating rate, most likely due to the higher availability of water or water vapor in the conventional sintering with dry powders, the same densiﬁcation is only observed at temperatures around 900–1000 °C. This behavior is somewhat similar to the one shown observed at the cold sintering experiments. In this case, the ﬁrst densiﬁcation peak (densities up to 85% TD) is obtained in the warm press, and the further densiﬁcation is not achieved before subsequent thermal treatments.

The microstructures of those samples show densiﬁcation with minimal grain growth (Fig. 7). However, there is an irregular growth of particles even in the dry conditions. In the samples treated with NaOH, needle-like structures are formed during storage, evidencing either the presence of retained water or free ions. EDX analysis (not shown here) hints on that the formed needles have the same composition as the material, however with less sodium.


The densiﬁcation curves (Fig. 6b) show a two-step densiﬁcation process, one starting at room temperature up to 250 °C, and a secondary step at around 400 °C. It became obvious that in the presence of sintering aids and high pressures most of the densiﬁcation is already achieved at In comparison with temperatures as low as 450 °C.

The measured conductivities are summarized in Fig. 8. As expected, there is a general trend for increasing conductivities due to increased densiﬁcation (Fig. 8b). However, there is a clear inﬂuence of the sintering technique on the conductivity. At a sintering density of 95%, the conductivities of cold sintered samples are up to two orders of magnitude lower than the conductivities of conventionally sintered material. This eﬀect is most likely due to the reduced grain size, from around 1 μm in the conventionally sintered samples to 114 nm in FAST/SPS (microstructure not shown here) and 23 nm in cold sintering, which in turn increases the total grain boundary resistance of the material. The treatment with KOH and NaOH could be also a factor to explain the low conductivities reached. It is shown [30] that the addition of K to the NASICON structure could act as a blocker of the conductivity pathways, therefore reducing the ionic conductivity observed. It can be inferred that there is not any water still present in the sample, since it is already reported in the literature by Guin et al. [31] that the conductivity of those materials are not aﬀected by water uptake.

It is still noticeable that this conductivity is one of the highest reached with this ultra-low temperature processing without the use of a liquid electrolyte or a polymer composite. In comparison, the values reached for cold sintering of NASICON electrolyte materials reported in the literature are in the range of 10−5 S/cm [26], and improved to 10-4 S/cm with further polymer inﬁltration. Using a similar composition, Leng et al. [27] have obtained a conductivity of 0.41·10-4 S/cm with the cold sintering process (140 °C, 780 MPa, 1 h).

The lower conductivities at lower sintering temperatures might also be caused due to the high porosity, not only due to the reduction of the eﬀective pathways. Residual porosity might also lead to diﬃculties in sputtering of the gold coating and per consequence on the contacting of the samples.


The total energy consumption for each processing method (Table 2) was measured by considering the entire system. This includes the whole hydraulic press array and the cooling system for the electrodes in the case of FAST/SPS, for example. There is a noticeable diﬀerence in the methods, since SPS and cold sintering in this case are usually singlepiece processes, in which only one sample can be produced in a cycle (specially for lab-scale equipment; there are exceptions in the literature, as reported by Guillon et al. [7]), and conventional sintering, in which multiple samples can be placed in the same oven. For this case, the average energy expenditure was divided by the usual number of samples (n = 10) placed in this lab muﬄe furnace without the need for further furnace shelves.

From the data presented here, it can be seen that FAST/SPS without sintering aids saves 20% of the needed energy as compared to conventional sintering. There is a higher potential for savings considering the design of cooling during the process, mostly because the high energy expenditure of the cooling water system doubles the instant energy consumption of the FAST/SPS equipment every time it was turned on in order to cool down the electrodes during the cycles. Further optimization of the system can lead to a higher energy eﬃciency of the process, as shown by Laptev et al. [32].

Cold sintering, even with the addition of an extra thermal treatment at 800 °C can reduce the energy needed for densiﬁcation to almost half in comparable ﬁnal densities. However, the properties are signiﬁcantly worse compared to FAST/SPS or conventional sintered samples. In addition, with the hybrid approach using FAST/SPS, higher pressures and sintering aids has shown the greater potential to reduce the energy needed for sintering, probably due to the fact that the whole process is completed in only one step with high heating rates. The shortcomings of the process such as being a one-sample per cycle can be circumvented by the use of multiple-cavity dies, for example.

A solid electrolyte material (Na3.4Sc0.4Zr1.6Si2PO12) was produced with diﬀerent low temperature sintering methods. The prospect of sintering an electrolyte material at temperatures as low as 250 °C increases the possibility of integrating diﬀerent materials systems to build an all-solid-state battery.

The cold sintering experiments, involving the addition of aqueous solutions as sintering aids and high mechanical pressure enabled a moderate densiﬁcation, but at temperatures as low as 250 °C.