
NASICON-type NaTi2(PO4)3 is recently expected to be an advanced anode material for sodium-ion batteries due to its low cost, good thermal stability, high theoretical capacity and environmental compatibility. Nevertheless, the intrinsic poor electronic conductivity of pure NaTi2(PO4)3 leads to bad rate capability and cyclic stability. In this research, the N-doped graphene-decorated NaTi2(PO4)3@C composite has been prepared through a facile sol-gel approach followed by thermal treatment. The NaTi2(PO4)3@C particles are adhered to the surface of Ndoped graphene and enwrapped into the N-doped graphene sheets uniformly. Due to the enhanced electronic conductivity, the as-fabricated electrode exhibits excellent electrochemical performances: high reversible capacity (128.9 mAh g−1 at 0.2C), good rate capability (119.7 mAh g−1 at 5C), and stable cyclic property (capacity retention of 98.6% after 30 cycles at 10C). These results reveal that the designed composite is a promising anode material for advanced electrochemical energy storage.


In the past decades, high-performance electrochemical energy storage devices have been regarded as one of the key issues to meet the signiﬁcant social needs of the energy ﬁeld [1]. Compared with the commercial lithium-ion batteries, rechargeable sodium-ion batteries have many incomparable advantages, such as low cost, abundant sodium resources and excellent safety property [2,3]. However, the large ionic radius of Na+ is believed to slow the diﬀusion rate and induce signiﬁcant structural change upon the reversible insertion. Fortunately, the NASICON-type NaTi2(PO4)3 with three-dimensional framework is a promising candidate for sodium-ion batteries anode material due to its high Na+ conductivity, good thermal stability and high theoretical capacity of 133 mAh g−1 [4,5]. Despite of these advantages, the pure NaTi2(PO4)3 material suﬀers from bad electronic conductivity during the Na+ insertion and extraction process [6,7], leading to poor sodiumstorage performance.

To eﬀectively solve this obstacle, several strategies have been devoted in recent years to improve the rate capability and cyclic stability of NaTi2(PO4)3, for instance, by fabricating nanostructured architectures to shorten the electron/ion transport distance [8,9], constructing highly conductive networks by coating NaTi2(PO4)3 with carbon materials [4,7,10–14], and doping with other metal ions [15,16]. Thus, conﬁnement of hybrid electrodes composed of nanosized

NaTi2(PO4)3 and conductive carbon is ideal morphology to improve the electron and ionic transport. For example, Cao's group [17] reported that the one-dimensional (1D) NaTi2(PO4)3/C nanoﬁbers were synthesized by using a electrospinning technology and the electrode showed outstanding electrochemical performance for sodium-ion batteries. Among the various carbon materials, two-dimensional (2D) graphene sheet has been widely used to enhance the battery performances of electrodes for electrochemical energy storage due to its high electronic conductivity, large surface area and good chemical stability [18,19]. Recently, conductive graphene has been also adopted to improve the sodium-storage performance of NaTi2(PO4)3 [20–22], and the results indicate that the hybrids exhibit superior rate property and cyclic stability. Nevertheless, the carbon layer and N-doped graphene sheet codecorated NaTi2(PO4)3 composite has not been prepared so far. The eﬀect of N-doped graphene on the rate capability of NaTi2(PO4)3 is still unknown.

Herein, we report a facile strategy to fabricate the composite of NaTi2(PO4)3@C particles anchored on conducting N-doped graphene sheets as a novel anode material for advanced sodium-ion batteries. This composite is prepared using a simple sol-gel method followed by a conventional solid-state reaction. In this designed structure, the carbon layer can prevent the growth of NaTi2(PO4)3 crystals and inhibit the volume variation of active material during Na+-ion intercalation/ deintercalation process, whereas the N-doped graphene can greatly enhance the electronic conductivity of NaTi2(PO4)3. This kind of feasible preparation route and beneﬁcial design provide a novel strategy for NaTi2(PO4)3 electrode to improve the sodium-storage performance. For comparison purpose, the NaTi2(PO4)3 sample modiﬁed only with carbon coating is also fabricated and investigated in this work.


The graphene oxide was ﬁrstly fabricated by using a modiﬁed Hummers' approach as described in the previously reported paper [23]. For the synthesis of N-doped graphene, the obtained graphene oxide was ﬁrstly irradiated in a microwave oven [1100 W, 60 s]. Then, the powder was annealed at 850 °C for 2 h in a mixed gas of NH3 and Ar (1:2, v/v). Afterwards, the powder was washed by deionized water and alcohol, and dried at 50 °C in a vacuum oven overnight to get the Ndoped graphene sample.

The N-doped graphene-decorated NaTi2(PO4)3@C (NaTi2(PO4)3@CNG) composite was fabricated using a sol-gel method followed by a solid-state reaction. Brieﬂy, the Ti(OC4H9)4 was ﬁrstly dissolved into the ethanol with sonication for 20 min. Then, the stoichiometric CH3COONa·3H2O and NH4H2PO4 powders were dispersed into the mixture of deionized water and ethanol with stirring at room temperature, and put the mixture into Ti(OC4H9)4 solution. Afterwards, the appropriate amounts of citric acid and N-doped graphene were put into the above mixture under stirring at 80 °C to evaporate the excess deionized water and ethanol. Finally, the precursor was annealed at 750 °C for 6 h in Ar/H2 (95/5) atmosphere to get the NaTi2(PO4)3@CNG. For comparison purpose, the NaTi2(PO4)3@C sample was also prepared via the same method without adding the N-doped graphene sheet.



The SEM images of NaTi2(PO4)3@C-NG particles are shown in Fig. 4a, b. It can be seen that the NaTi2(PO4)3@C nanoparticles with a size of about 100–200 nm are well crystallized and the N-doped graphene sheets are homogeneously embedded among the NaTi2(PO4)3@C crystals. According to the EDS dot mapping images shown in Fig. 4c–h, the Na, Ti, P, O, C and N elements are uniformly dispersed in the NaTi2(PO4)3@C-NG sample. To further study the microstructures of NaTi2(PO4)3@C and NaTi2(PO4)3@C-NG particles, TEM test was performed as illustrated in Fig. 5. For the NaTi2(PO4)3@C sample (Fig. 5a, b), the particle size is about 140 nm on an average and the carbon layer decomposed from citric acid is well distributed on the surface of NaTi2(PO4)3 particles. As shown in Fig. 5c, d, the nanosized NaTi2(PO4)3@C crystals are embedded into the N-doped graphene sheets. The formed networks constructed by carbon coating and N-doped graphene sheets can signiﬁcantly improve the apparent electronic conductivity of electrode materials [25,27].


In order to further investigate the electrochemical properties of NaTi2(PO4)3@C and NaTi2(PO4)3@C-NG, charge/discharge measurements were tested at various current rates in the potential range of 1.5 and 3.0 V. As illustrated in Fig. 7a, the high-rate capabilities of NaTi2(PO4)3@C-NG are better than that of NaTi2(PO4)3@C electrode at each current density. For example, the NaTi2(PO4)3@C-NG exhibits rate properties of 127.4 mAh g−1 at 1C, 124.8 mAh g−1 at 2C, 119.7 mAh g−1 at 5C, and 112.5 mAh g−1 at 10C, while NaTi2(PO4)3@C shows 121.1 mAh g−1 at 1C and 94.3 mAh g−1 at 10C. Furthermore, the rate capabilities for the graphene-decorated NaTi2(PO4)3 anode material in this work and other previously reported papers are also compared. It can be noted from Table 1 that the rate property of NaTi2(PO4)3@C-NG is comparable or superior to these of other graphene-decorated NaTi2(PO4)3 anodes. The detailed cycling performances are illustrated in Fig. 7b, c. The NaTi2(PO4)3@C and NaTi2(PO4)3@C-NG electrodes exhibit the capacity retention ratios of 97.2% and 98.9% at 1C after cycling for 30 cycles. Even at a high rate of 10C, the capacity retention of NaTi2(PO4)3@C-NG anode remains 98.6% over 30 cycles. The outstanding sodium-storage performances of NaTi2(PO4)3@C-NG can be attributed to the following respects: (i) The nanosized NaTi2(PO4)3 particles can shorten the Na+-ion diﬀusion distance during the charge/ discharge process; (ii) The coated carbon layer can prevent the growth of NaTi2(PO4)3 crystals and inhibit the volume variation of NaTi2(PO4)3 anode during Na+-ion intercalation/deintercalation process; (iii) The constructed conductive networks by carbon layer and graphene sheet can greatly enhance the electronic conductivity of NaTi2(PO4)3.


EIS test was performed to evaluate the electrochemical behaviors of NaTi2(PO4)3@C and NaTi2(PO4)3@C-NG electrodes. As shown in Fig. 7d, a depressed semicircle in the high frequency and an oblique straight line in the low frequency can be observed in each of the impedance spectra of the two electrodes. Here, the semicircle represents the charge-transfer resistance, which is related to the diﬀusion of Na+ion between the electrode and electrolyte, while the line represents the solid-state diﬀusion of Na+-ion in the electrode material [29].


In summary, we report a facile strategy to fabricate the composite of NaTi2(PO4)3@C particles anchored on conducting N-doped graphene sheets as a novel anode material for high-property sodium-ion batteries. The structure and morphology of NaTi2(PO4)3@C-NG are investigated by XRD, XPS, Raman spectrum, SEM, EDS and TEM. The electrochemical measurements show that the NaTi2(PO4)3@C-NG anode presents excellent sodium-storage performances with high discharge capacity, good rate capability and stable cycling property. The superior electrochemical performance can be attributed to the nanosized NaTi2(PO4)3 particles and the conductive networks constructed by carbon layer and N-doped graphene sheets. Therefore, this novel modiﬁcation approach of N-doped graphene and carbon coating is highly eﬀective and can be widely used to improve the electronic conductivity of other electrodes for sodium-ion batteries.
