Calcium (titanium, zirconium) hexaorthophosphates with a [NZP] (sodium zirconium phosphate) structure belonging to the NaSiCon (Na Superionic Conductor) family were deposited by atmospheric plasma spraying onto the surfaces of Ti6Al4V substrates. (NaSiCon sensu strictu refers to solids with the chemical formula Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12, 0 < x < 3. In a broader sense, it is also used for similar compounds where Na, Zr and/or Si are replaced by isovalent elements). The microstructure of the coatings revealed the incongruent melting of the precursor material as ascertained by electron probe microanalysis (EPMA). The adhesion of the coatings to the substrate surface was within the limits speciﬁed for biomedical coatings. The solubility of the coatings was tested by immersion in 0.2 molar tris–hydroxymethyl–amino–methane–HCl (TRIS–HCl) buﬀer and found to be at least one order of magnitude lower than that of conventional hydroxylapatite coatings deposited under comparable conditions. In vitro biocompatibility tests with primary rat bone marrow cells (BMCs) showed a substantial cell proliferation in the presence of fetal bovine serum. Animal tests conﬁrmed that coatings based on calcium (titanium, zirconium) hexaorthophosphates applied to Ti6Al4V rods implanted in the femoral medulla of sheep led to the strong neoformation of dense bone at a stable interface implant-bioceramic coating without coating delamination. Hence, based on their multifarious advantageous properties in the biomedical context, CaTi4-xZrx(PO4)6 ceramics may be considered the ‘Sleeping Beauty’ of osseoconductive coatings for the stem of hip endoprostheses and dental root implants, osteosynthetic ﬁxation devices, and bioelectric devices including bone growth stimulators.

Calcium phosphates, including hydroxylapatite, are copiously used for biomedical applications ranging from coating the stem of hip endoprostheses, densiﬁed monolithic implants for dental root replacements, material for ﬁlling and repairing bone cavities, to bone growth-supporting 3D-scaﬀolds. This broad ﬁeld of biomedical application of hydroxylapatite is grounded on its chemical and structural similarity to biological, i.e., calcium-deﬁcient, defect apatite present in bone. Osseoconductive, i.e., bone-growth supporting, hydroxylapatite coatings are commonly applied by thermal, most often plasma spray, technology.

However, although hydroxylapatite is the acknowledged bioceramic workhorse in many biomedical applications, for some uses the limited chemical stability of hydroxylapatite and its thermal decomposition products in the aggressive body environment calls for only sparingly soluble materials or hydroxylapatite-based composites with increased an in vivo resorption resistance.



The structural formula of NaSiCons is [M1][M2][AVI3]Ol2, where M1 and M2 are interstitial vacancy sites, either partially or fully occupied by appropriately sized cations. Small highly charged ions such as Zr or Ti occupy the octahedral A-sites, and Si or P ﬁll the tetrahedral B-sites. Owing to the existence of lattice vacancies, an unusually large array of ions with widely varying oxidation states, Shannon ionic radii, and Pauling electronegativities can be accommodated. As shown in Figure 1, in the case of CaTi4(PO4)6 (CT4P3) (This nomenclature refers to the so-called cement-chemical notation as follows: C = CaO, T = TiO2, Z = ZrO2, P = P2O5. Hence, CT4P3 means CaO·4TiO2·3P2O5), the large M1 cavities with an octahedral geometry (Wyckoﬀ position 6b in R3c) along the c axis can be occupied by Na ions. The smaller M2 cavities with a trigonal-prismatic geometry (Wyckoﬀ position 18e) located between the chains are normally empty and only ﬁlled if additional ion contributions are required for the charge compensation.


When the monovalent Na cation in synthetic [NZP] or the K cations in the natural mineral kosnarite (KZP) [13] are substituted by divalent cations such as Ca, Sr or Ba, the symmetry is lowered


In this system, stoichiometric compounds exist with a much-improved mechanical and chemical stability compared to unsubstituted calcium orthophosphates. In addition, they have been shown to exhibit an enhanced osteoblastic diﬀerentiation, including a suﬃcient expression of a broad array of osteogenic markers, suggesting a high degree of osseoconductive potential. Consequently, these novel transition metal-substituted calcium hexaorthophosphates may ﬁnd biomedical applications as long-term stable, sparingly soluble osseoconductive coatings for endoprosthetic implants and osseosynthetic ﬁxation devices. When doped with small alkali ions with a high electron mobility such as lithium or sodium, they display a substantial solid-state ionic conductivity, suggesting their use as charge carriers in novel bioelectric systems including electroceuticals and bone growth-stimulating devices to treat nonunion (pseudoarthrosis) fractures.

All members of the [NZP] family show a low solubility in aqueous solutions. This is of salient importance when bioceramic materials are required with a high resorption resistance in contact with extracellular ﬂuid (ECF). The solubility of several CaTi4-xZrx(PO4)6 compositions was tested on powder compacts in 0.2 molar tris–hydroxymethyl–amino–methane–HCl (TRIS-HCl) at a pH value of 7.4 and a physiological temperature of 37 ± 0.5 C in a circulating reactor for up to 120 h [22]. The design and functioning of the reactor has been described in [23]. The minimum solubility in the TRIS–HCl buﬀer solution was obtained for CTZ3P3 powder compacts (composition F; see Figure 2, left). This composition was used in further studies.


The coatings were deposited on Ti6Al4V substrates prepared, as described above, by conventional atmospheric plasma-spraying using an M1000 system (Plasma-Technik, Wohlen, Switzerland) in conjunction with a Sulzer Metco F4 plasmatron (Oerlikon Metco, Pfäﬃkon, Switzerland).

The powders with the composition CTZ3P3 were deposited according to a statistical experimental Plackett-Burman screening design [24], with 12 runs, where 11 independent factors were varied. Of those, only 7 were assigned, as shown in Table 1, and the remaining 4 unassigned factors were used to estimate the standard deviation of the coeﬃcients of the response equations and, thus, the minimum factors signiﬁcance. The response equations can be found elsewhere [25].


The microstructure and composition of the plasma-sprayed coatings were investigated by scanning electron microscopy (JSM-35C, JEOL Ltd., Akishima, Tokyo, Japan) and electron microprobe analysis (JX4 8900, JEOL Ltd., Akishima, Tokyo, Japan), respectively.


The coating porosity was determined according to the ASTM C373-88 designation [26], and the coating adhesion was measured by the ASTM C633-13 method [27]. The surface roughness data was obtained by a Mitutoyo 301 Surftest surface proﬁlometer (Mitutoyo Europe GmbH, Neuss, Germany) equipped with a diamond stylus.

In vitro osseoblastesis tests were conducted using bone marrow cells (BMCs) derived from adult −8 mole rats. The cells were incubated for 24 hours in 500 µl α-MEM + 15% fetal bovine serum + 10 dexamethason + 50 µg/ml ascorbic acid + 10 nmole ß–glycerophosphate, and seeded with a density of 3·104 cells/cm2 onto the surface of CTZ3P3 disks sintered for 72 hours at 1300 C. After a growth period of 2 weeks, the cells were ﬁxed and stained with Giemsa stain (Biomol GmbH, Hamburg, Germany). Thermanox™ cell cover slips (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁcm Waltham, MA, USA) were used as control.

The in vivo tests involved implanting Ti6Al4V rods coated with a 150 µm thick plasma-sprayed layer of CTZ3P3 into the femoral medulla of skeletally mature sheep. After an observation period of 6 weeks, the sheep were sacriﬁced and the femora explanted and prepared. The procedures and techniques applied can be extracted from [28].

The plasma-sprayed coatings revealed a pronounced lamellar and inhomogeneous microstructure, suggesting the heat-imposed alteration of the original homogeneous composition of the starting powder. Indeed, probing the composition by electron probe microanalysis (EPMA) conﬁrmed the incongruent melting of the powder particles, which resulted in a mix of phosphorus-depleted calcium zirconium/titanium phosphates of various compositions. Figure 3 shows cross-sections of CZ4P3 coatings (A,B) and CTZr3P3 (C), as well as XRD charts of the starting powder (D, a), the calculated XRD pattern (D, b) and the integrated plasma-sprayed coating (D, c).

The coarse dark phase (1) shown in Figure 3B consists of the target phase CZ4P3, whereas the lighter appearing cellular striation phase (2) is depleted of ZrO2. The exsolved ZrO2 forms the white vermiform phase (3), delineating the streaky phase 2 as well as appearing as spherical deposits. Figure 3C shows a similar heat-imposed alteration of the target phase into at least four chemically diﬀerent phases: Phase 1 (dark) consists of the CTZ3P3 target phase embedded in two lighter appearing, strongly phosphorus-depleted phases, with the approximate compositions Ca(Ti,Zr)4.5O4.6(PO4)3.6 (phase 2) and Ca(Ti,Zr)4.2O6.85(PO4)1.7 (phase 3). This suggests the reduction of PO4 ions by the comparatively high hydrogen content of the plasma gas (Table 1, column 3). Finally, the spherical phase 4 consisting of ß–ZrO2 (baddeleyite) attests to the complete decomposition of the target phase during the incongruent melting. Adjacent to the interphase between the coating and substrate, a noticeable porosity is apparent (see Table 2). Table 3 shows the compositions in mole% of the identiﬁed decomposition phases in comparison to that of the target CTZ3P3 phase.

The average porosity of plasma-sprayed Ca(Ti,Zr) hexaorthophosphate coatings was found to be 17 ± 4 vol% (N = 12; see Table 2). Whereas thin coatings (< 60 µm) showed a unimodal pore size distribution with a preferential average pore diameter of 11 µm, thicker coatings (> 180 µm) revealed a multimodal pore size distribution with frequency maxima of 12 and 36 µm.

Materials 2018, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  7 of 14   Figure 3. Cross-sectional images of plasma-sprayed CaTi4-xZrx(PO4)6 coatings. (A): CZ4P3 coating (plasma power 36 kW, spray distance 90 mm, argon gas flow rate 50 slpm, hydrogen gas flow rate 10 slpm). (B): Enlarged image of (A) [30]. © Images courtesy of Dr. Guido Reisel, Oerlikon Metco. (C): CTZ3P3 coating (plasma power 35 kW, spray distance 120 mm, argon gas flow rate 50 slpm, hydrogen gas flow rate 12 slpm) [16,31]. (D): X-ray diffraction pattern of phase-pure CTZ3P3 starting powder (a), calculated interplanar spacings (b) and a plasma-sprayed coating (c). The dots indicate the presence of ZrP2O7, one of the decomposition products of incongruent melting. Table 3. Composition in mole% of the phases identified in Figure 3C. Oxide CaTiZr3(PO4)6 Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 Phase 4 CaO 12.5 12.6 13.5 16.5 0 ZrO2 37.5 39.5 43.6 49.7 100 TiO2 12.5 12.9 18.0 19.8 0 P2O5 37.5 35.0 24.9 14.0 0  3.3. Coating Porosity The average porosity of plasma-sprayed Ca(Ti,Zr) hexaorthophosphate coatings was found to be 17 ± 4 vol% (N = 12; see Table 2). Whereas thin coatings (< 60 µm) showed a unimodal pore size distribution with a preferential average pore diameter of 11 µm, thicker coatings (> 180 µm) revealed a multimodal pore size distribution with frequency maxima of 12 and 36 µm.


Plasma-sprayed CTZ3P3 coatings deposited on Ti6Al4V substrates exhibit several advantageous mechanical and chemical properties that suggest a successful performance in biomedical applications (Table 4).


A comparison of the properties of plasma-sprayed CTZ3P3 and hydroxylapatite (HAp) coatings shown in Table 4 indicates required property improvements of the former, in particular in terms of the adhesion and tensile strength, respectively as well as in terms of the shear strength. However, the substantially lower coeﬃcient of the linear thermal expansion of CTZ3P3 coatings compared to HAp predicts the development of compressive coating stresses when applied to Ti6Al4V implant surfaces, as opposed to strong tensile stresses in the case of hydroxylapatite coatings.


Among the advantageous properties of Ca(Ti,Zr) hexaorthophosphates are their solid ionic conductivity, in particular when doped with alkali ions with a high electron mobility such as lithium or sodium. However, a reliable quantitative data of the electric conductivity is far and apart in literature sources, and appear to be highly inﬂuenced by the chemical composition and thus, synthesis conditions, in particular the presence of unreacted starting compounds. The dielectric permittivity of Ca(Ti,Zr) hexaorthophosphates was reported to be 15.4, lower than that of densiﬁed hydroxylapatite, which showed values of around 20 at room temperature [37]. The ionic conductivity of Naor Li-doped −1 [38], associated with the high NaSiCon structures was reported to be in the range of 10 concentration of charge-carrying alkali ions with a high electric mobility. This high electric mobility of alkali ions results from hopping among interstitial M1 and M2 sites (Figure 1), in contrast to less mobile Ca ions. Hence, to achieve a higher ionic conductivity of Ca(Ti,Zr) hexaorthophosphates, aliovalent doping with highly mobile Na or Li ions intercalated into the only partially occupied M1 sites of Ca(Ti,Zr) hexaorthophosphates appears to be a feasible route. Indeed, such doped compounds have been recently suggested as solid-state electrode materials for oxide-based fuel cells [39,40]. Based on their high ionic conductivity, alkali-doped Ca(Ti,Zr) hexaorthophosphates may be utilized in fourth-generation biomaterials [41], which allow integrating electronic systems with the human body to provide powerful diagnostic as well as therapeutic tools aimed toward basic research and clinical utilization. The functional advantages of such biomaterial systems include manipulating cellular bioelectric responses for tissue regeneration, as well as monitoring cellular responses directed at communication with host tissues via subtle bioelectric signals. Such novel systems could include bone growth-stimulating devices based on the equivalent circuit of a capacitor that, by appropriate poling, would store negative electrical charges close to the interface with the growing bone, thus enhancing the bone apposition rate as well as the bone density [12].



Among the earliest biomedical studies [42] on this novel class of bioceramics were in vitro biocompatibility tests that used L929 murine ﬁbroblasts derived from normal subcutaneous areolar and adipose tissue of a 100-day old male C3H/An mouse, seeded onto a CZ4P3 powder substrate. The ﬁbroblasts were found to be strongly attracted to the ceramic substrate, and the ceramic powder was phagocytized by the cells. No indication was found of the disturbance of either the cell adherence or phenotypical activity.

Subsequently, Knabe et al. [43] grew human bone-derived cells on sintered calcium (Ti,Zr) hexaorthophosphate samples with various compositions, and tested for the expression of a set of biochemical indicators for cell proliferation and cell vitality, including the upregulation of osteocalcin, osteonectin, osteopontin, alkaline phosphatase, and bone sialoprotein I. The compositions conforming speciﬁcally to CTZ3P3 displayed a maximum osteoblastic diﬀerentiation, including the suﬃcient expression of an array of osteogenic markers, thus suggesting a high degree of osseoconductive potential. Similar results were reported for the growth of bone-marrow stromal cells cultured on calcium titanium phosphate microspheres to be used as potential scaﬀolds for bone reconstruction [44].

Although no dramatic diﬀerences of the cell-biological behavior of the two substrates (Table 5) were observed, it can be concluded that 75% of the cells on sintered CTZ3P3 disks showed an improved cell growth (classes III + IV), as opposed to 66% on the control. Likewise, the percentage of missing, dead or deﬁcient cells (1%) belonging to class I was noticeably lower on a sintered CTZ3P3 substrate compared to the control (7%).


There has been some controversy related to the cytocompatibility of zirconia in contact with living tissue [46]. Histomorphological and morphometrical studies of the interface of glassy and ceramic biomaterials with a bony implantation bed [47] have shown that the presence of ZrO2 in biomaterials may be generally undesirable, as an incomplete transformation of chondroid and osteoid cells into osteoblasts was observed in a Sprague-Dawley rat femoral model, suggesting that zirconia-bearing ceramics could be counterproductive to bone bonding by inhibiting the matrix vesicle development and function [48,49].


In addition, animal tests with a sheep model conﬁrmed that a 150 µm thick CTZ3P3 coating applied to Ti6Al4V rods implanted in the femoral medulla led to the strong neoformation of dense bone at a stable interface implant-bioceramic coating without the coating delamination often observed with hydroxylapatite [28]. Figure 4, top left, shows a toluidine blue-stained distal section through the femoral medulla of sheep with an implanted coated Ti6Al4V rod. In Figure 4, top right, a magniﬁed view of the area A shows the close integration of the implanted rod, characterized by a continuous and tight bone apposition via a thin lamella of newly formed bone. However, Figure 4, bottom left, reveals that in area B, showing the boundary toward the marrow-ﬁlled medullary cavity, the gap-bridging potential of the implant is reduced at larger distances between the coated implant and the surrounding cortical bone. Nevertheless, this preliminary study conﬁrms, in an impressive way, the osteogenic potential of the novel class of bioceramic materials described in this contribution.