
Electrical  conductivity  in  solid  ionic  conductors  can  be  enhanced  by  faster  ionic mobility due to optimizing the conducting pathways, increase of charge carrier concentration or  improvement  of  crystallite  interconnectivity.  Here,  we  investigated  the  lithium  ion mobility two  NASICON-type  glass-ceramics  of  Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3  (LAGP) composition,  prepared  with  and  without  adding  Y2O3  (5  vol.%)  to  the  glass  melt  before crystallization.  We  applied  variable-temperature  7Li  nuclear  magnetic  resonance  (NMR) spectroscopy,  T1  relaxation  time  and  self-diffusion  measurements  as  well  as  impedance spectroscopy  to  study  ionic  dynamics.  For  both  materials  an  Arrhenius  behavior  of  ionic mobility is obtained from various experimental approaches, thus showing a single thermally activated process in a wide temperature range with very similar activation energies of about 0.3 eV for yttrium-free and yttrium-modified LAGP ceramics. A near five-fold conductivity enhancement in the yttrium-modified sample cannot be explained by faster ionic dynamics because only minor changes of ionic mobility are registered by NMR. In conjunction with the  theoretical  calculations  of  NMR  parameters  and  bond  valence  site  energies,  this observation suggests that the most influencing factors on ionic conductivity are an intergrain connectivity  and  an  Li  concentration  enhancement,  offering  thus  an  efficient  strategy  for improved ionic conductors. 


The  NASICON  (Na-super-ionic-conductor)  structure  has  been  proposed  as  an optimum candidate crystalline framework for ion migration in Lior Na-based secondary batteries.1–5  The  composition  of  NASICON  can  be  described  by  the  general  formula AM2X3O12,  where  A  is  an  alkali  metal,  alkaline  earth  metal  or  a  lattice  vacancy,  M  is  a transition metal e.g. Ti, Zr, or Hf, and X is phosphorous or silicon. The usual symmetry of the NASICON structure is rhombohedral (R3-c, for example) or triclinic (C2/c, for example). 

The NASICON framework is built up by M2(XO4)3 units, in which two MO6 octahedra are linked to three XO4 tetrahedra by sharing oxygens.  

While the parent compounds, such as LiTi2(PO)4 and LiGe2(PO)4, are typically poor ionic conductors, a partial atomic substitution, for example, by Al3+ and Li+, allows one to vary the charge carrier concentration and, therefore, control the electrical conductivity.

Indeed, it has been shown that in the parent compounds Li ions are preferably located at the Li1 sites, which are surrounded by six oxygen atoms and appear to be the intersections of three conduction pathways.5 Upon substitution, new Li+ ions are introduced into the Li3 sites with an irregular ten-fold oxygen coordination. 

Other approaches to enhance ionic mobility, and therefore electrical conductivity, in the  NASICON-type  compounds  include  lattice  expansion  by  substitution  with  a  larger cation,  such  as  Sn4+,13  and  improving  grain  interconnectivity  in  ceramics,  which  can  be achieved  by  preparing  ceramics  via  crystallization  of  glasses  and  further  optimization  of crystallization protocols.14,15 In our recent study of the NASICON-type Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP)  glass-ceramics,15  we  have  shown  that  addition  of  Y2O3  to  the  glass  melt  before crystallization (in the following Y-modified) resulted in an almost five-fold increase of ionic conductivity as compared to the yttrium-free sample. This modification enabled fabrication of uniformly crystallized and dense LAGP ceramic membranes with small YPO4 particles segregated at the grain boundaries as was evidenced by electron microscopy. 

At first glance, the structural differences between pristine and modified phases are rather small with respect to  the  NASICON-type  network  as  evidenced  by  neutron  diffraction.15  This  raises  the question whether the distortion of the lattice, which is less than 1%, can be responsible for the  large  difference  in  ionic  conductivity  observed,  or  if  other  structural  and  dynamical aspects have to be considered to explain this phenomenon. In our recent work, we focused on the investigation of morphological and structural factors, such as grain connectivity and Li  ion  concentration  using  a  combination  of  experimental  techniques.15  Based  on  the experimental  observations,  we  have  concluded  that  the  main  reason  for  the  conductivity enhancement in the Y-modified LAGP is improved intergrain transport, although increased lithium content has been evidenced by means of  NMR and neutron diffraction. However, lithium  ion  dynamics  determined  by  the  geometrical  constraints  of  the  crystal  lattice  are another key factor for the ionic conductivity that needs to be explored.  


In the present study, lithium ion dynamics are comprehensively studied in both Y-free and  Y-modified  LAGP  glass-ceramics  using  variable-temperature  nuclear  magnetic resonance (NMR) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), providing access to ionic transport from both microscopic (i.e. atomic-scale) and macroscopic points of view. 7Li NMR is a valuable tool to ascertain lithium ion motions in solid electrolytes.16–19 Here, we combine  7Li line-shape (LS) analysis, spin-lattice relaxation (SLR) analysis, including field-cycling  (FC)  relaxometry,  and  field-gradient  (FG)  diffusometry,  allowing  us  to investigate the dynamical behaviors in broad ranges of time and length scales, in particular, to determine temperature-dependent correlation times and diffusion coefficients.20–22 In this way, we obtain activation energies  for thermally  activated  Li+ ion motions, which enable quantitative  insights  into  the  origin  of  the  large  conductivity  enhancement  in  Y-modified LAGP  glass-ceramics.  

Hence,  our  study  contributes  to  a  deeper  understanding  of  the influencing  factors  on  the  electrical  conductivity  and,  thus,  to  a  knowledge-based development of efficient strategies for producing highly conducting materials. 


As-received precursors LiOHH2O (99.9%, Ruskhim), Al2O3 (99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich), GeO2 (99.9%,  SMI  Ltd.),  (NH4)2HPO4  (99,9%,  LabTech)  and  Y2O3  (99,99%,  Sigma-Aldrich) were used in the synthesis without any preliminary purification. Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 glasses were  prepared  by  melting  stoichiometric  mixture  of  precursors  with  molar  ratios LiOH : Al2O3 : GeO2 : (NH4)2HPO4  =  0.0336 : 0.056 : 0.0336 : 0.672.  To  prepare  a  Y-modified  glass-ceramics,  5 vol.%  (12 mol.%)  Y2O3  was  added  to  the  glass  melt.  XRD diffraction patterns of starting glassy materials presented in Fig. S1 demonstrate no signs of crystalline phases. The resulting mixture was heated up to 1300°C for 2 hours in order to produce a uniform melt. Such melts were quenched between two steel plates thus forming glass  plates.  Glass-ceramic  membranes  were  obtained  by  a  two-step  annealing  of  the quenched glass melt, first at 600 °C for 30 min, and then at 750 °C for 2 hours. The detailed synthesis procedure as well as results of Rietveld refinement of neutron powder diffraction including  the  lattice  parameters,  unit  cell  volume  and  impurity  phases  were  reported  in Ref.15. 

We  refer  to  the  thus  prepared  sample  as  LAGP.  The  sample  prepared  with  Y2O3 addition to the glass we denote as LAGPY. 


For density functional theory (DFT) electronic structure calculations, we employed the projector-augmented wave (PAW) method23 in PBE parameterization24 as implemented in the VASP code.25 This approach allowed us to compute the electric field gradients (EFG) at the  Li  sites  in  the  crystalline  framework,  which  determine  the  7Li  NMR  line  shape.  The crystal structures were taken from our previous study based on the refinement of neutron diffraction measurements,15 and half a crystallographic unit cell was used to compute the EFG  parameters.  

Total energy calculations converged better than 10−7 eV with a maximum kinetic energy of 450 eV for the plane wave basis set. As k-point grids, Γ-centered  Monkhorst-Pack  meshes  with  a  sampling  less  than  0.022 Å-1  were  chosen. 

Atomic positions relaxed to forces less than 10−3 eVÅ-1 prior to final total energy and EFG calculations. 

The  program  softBV  27  was  used  for  the  calculation  of  bond  valence  site  energies (BVSEs)  for  LAGP  and  LAGPY  by  means  of  the  structural  data  refined  from  neutron diffraction  measurements.  The  resolution  was  set  to  0.1 Å  and  the  BVSE  parameters predominantly  published  by  Adams  and  Rao  were  used.28  Calculations  with  a  higher resolution  showed  negligible  variations  of  the  activation  barrier,  showing  a  suﬃcient convergence, which is in accordance with literature.


For  NMR  measurements,  the  samples  were  ground  to  powder.  Static  7Li  NMR measurements  were  performed  on  a  home-built  spectrometer  operating  at  a  Larmor resonance frequency 0 of 62.9 MHz in a magnetic field B0 of 3.8 T. 7Li NMR spectra were measured using the solid-echo pulse sequence with an interpulse delay of 20 μs.  7Li SLR measurements  in  this  magnetic  field  were  performed  using  a  saturation  recovery  pulse sequence. The SLR times T1 were obtained by fitting the buildup of the magnetization to a stretched exponential function. In all these measurements, the 90° pulse length was set to 2.5 μs. SLR measurements were carried out also at the Larmor frequency of 26 MHz.  


7Li FC relaxometry was performed in a specially designed FC-relaxometer, which uses an electromagnet and allows for fast switching of the magnetic field B0.30  The maximum field  strength  was  0.66 T  with  a  switching  time  of  about  1 ms.  A  detection  frequency  of 12.35 MHz and a 90° pulse length of 1.4 μs were used. 

7Li FG  diffusometry  experiments  were  conducted  in  a  static  field  gradient  magnet featuring superconducting coils in anti-Helmholtz arrangement. It provides magnetic field gradients g of 73 T/m and 140 T/m at two positions with B0 = 3.8 T. To measure the 7Li self-diffusion coefficients D, we applied the stimulated-echo pulse sequence comprising three 90° pulses, which separate two evolution times te sandwiching a longer mixing time tm. The te-dependent  echo  attenuation  was  analyzed  for  various  fixed  tm  times  assuming  free Gaussian diffusion and considering a possible T1 relaxation decay, as described in Ref. 31. 

All spectrometers were controlled by the DAMARIS NMR software.


For  impedance  spectroscopy,  as-obtained  glass-ceramic  membranes  were  polished down  to  (300–350)  µm  using  a  Struers  Tegrapol-11  polishing  machine  and  DiaDuo abrasives.  Nickel  blocking  electrodes  were  sputtered  on  both  sides  of  a  glass-ceramic membrane  using  a  Quorum  Technologies  Q150T  Turbo-Pumped  Sputter  Coater.  Electric contacts were fixed on sputtered electrodes using EPO-TEK H20S conductive epoxy. The ac impedance measurements were conducted in the frequency range from 7 MHz to 100 Hz with an amplitude of 50 mV using a Bio-Logic SP-300 with a frequency response analyzer. 

Temperature was varied from -40 °C to 35 °C. The impedance spectra were fitted using an equivalent circuit approach in the EC-Lab software package. 


The  temperature-dependent  static  7Li  NMR  spectra  for  the  Y-free  and  Y-modified Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3  glass-ceramics  are  shown  in  Figures  1a  and  1b,  respectively.  We observe the characteristic 7Li line shape for powder samples, which consists of narrow and broad  components  associated  with  the  central  and  two  satellite  transitions  between  the Zeeman levels  of these  I = 3/2  nuclei, respectively. The different  widths of these spectral components result from the fact that, to first order, the central transition is influenced by the dipolar  interactions  of  the  7Li  nuclei,  while  the  satellite  transitions  are  affected  by  the stronger quadrupolar interactions of these nuclei.16–18 In the temperature range from about 160 K to 240 K, the speedup of the ionic motion with increasing temperature results in a narrowing  of  both  line-shape  components  for  LAGP  and  LAGPY.  At  high  temperatures, motionally averaged line shapes are observed. As there is an anisotropic motion between a small number of sites in the crystalline framework, the nuclear interactions are averaged only in  parts  so  that  the  central  and  satellite  lines  retain  a  substantial  line  width  in  the  high-temperature  limit  for  both  samples,  different  from  the  situation  in  liquids  or  glasses.  


To analyze the motional narrowing in more detail, Figure 2a shows the temperature dependence of the full width at half maximum PV of the central line, which is determined from  fit  with  a  pseudo-Voigt  function  expressed  by  a  weighted  sum  of  Gaussian  and Lorentzian functions (see Supplementary Information, ESI). For both samples, the width of the  central  line  is  constant  below  160 K,  reflecting  the  strength  of  the  magnetic  dipolar interactions  in  the  rigid-lattice  (RL)  limit.  The  line  widths  in  the  RL  limit PV(RL)  are compared in Table 1, indicating a somewhat higher value for LAGP than for LAGPY. This can be explained by inhomogeneous broadening and hence the chemical shift distribution caused by a particle size distribution in LAGP, and/or by the residual homonuclear dipolar interactions, which are not fully refocused in the solid echo experiment. Table S1 (see ESI) shows the significantly higher contribution from the Li-Li dipolar interaction in the second moment of the central line for LAGP than for LAGPY. 


Measurement of the SLR time T1 is another tool to characterize molecular dynamics. 

The 7Li T1 values obtained for LAGP and LAGPY in the temperature range 100 to 400 K are  shown  in  Figure  3a.  Attempts  to  fit  the  relaxation  curves  with  a  simple  exponential function  failed  indicating  the  presence  of  several  motional  processes  or  a  distribution  of correlation times. Therefore, the data were fitted with stretched exponential functions, whose stretching  parameter  varied  in  the  range  of  0.8  to  0.9  for  all  measured  temperatures  and samples.  

Thus, consistent with the above LS analysis, the T1 measurements reveal that Li jump dynamics show  only  minor  differences  in  the  studied  samples.  Comparing  the  T1  values  at  the minimum, it is evident that spin-lattice relaxation is slower in the Y-modified sample than in the Y-free one. This minor discrepancy can result from different strengths of the NMR interactions or different shapes of the correlation functions of ion dynamics. For LAGPY, analogous T1 analysis at a Larmor frequency of 26 MHz yields a rate of SLRat 328 K. Combining the results of these T1 measurements in different B0 fields and assuming thermally activated dynamics described by the Arrhenius law, we can roughly estimate the activation energy for Li jumps to be 0.29 eV (see Table 1).  

At a low temperature (-25 °C) the conductivity contributions of the samples  are  clearly  visible  in  the  spectrum  demonstrating  two  semicircles  at  a  higher frequency  region  typical  for  bulk  and  grain  boundary  resistance  of  the  electrolyte,  and  a spike at a low frequency corresponding to diffusion due to the blocking electrodes. The bulk resistivity can be determined from the intercept of the spike with the real axis using linear fit  and  appears  to  be  nearly  the  same  for  the  Y-free  and  Y-modified  samples.  The  grain boundary resistance has been found to be substantially lower for the ceramics prepared by the crystallization of yttria-modified glasses. However, precise quantitative determination of the  contributions  from  bulk  and  grain  boundary  to  the  resistance  and,  particularly,  to  the activation energy, is unattainable within the temperature and frequency range accessible with our experimental setup.  For both samples, the total conductivity increases with temperature according  to  the  Arrhenius  law  evidencing  a  thermally  activated  process.  The  activation energy from the impedance measurements is EA(EIS) = 0.30 eV for both samples. 


To clarify the impact of structural factors on Li+ mobility, we estimate the migration barriers for the LAGP and LAGPY crystal structures. The BVSE method is applied in order to evaluate migration pathways by calculating BVSE maps for mobile ions in every voxel of the unit cell.28,33 The estimated migration barriers — which are in the present case equal to the activation barrier of partially occupied Li sites — are found to be 0.308 eV and 0.305 eV for LAGP and LAGPY, respectively. Since both compounds are structurally very similar, this is as expected. Figure 7a shows the topology of the calculated migration paths, which is determined to be 3D for both structures. The Li1 sites are connected through migration paths via the intermediate, very-low-occupation Li3 sites. The theoretical EA(BVSE) values are well  consistent  with  the  results  obtained  by  the  experimental  techniques.  


The  observed enhanced ionic conductivity in LAGPY implies that the long-range charge transport in this NASICON phase is facilitated by other factors, such as grain boundaries.  

In addition, some insight into the dynamics can be obtained from the DFT modelling. 

First of all, the structural changes induced by the Y incorporation do not significantly alter the stability of the phases. For Al substituted structures the total energy varies within less than  5 meV  per  atom  depending  on  the  exact  location  of  Al  on  the  Ge  positions, which is insignificant for the Al-diluted case (5 at% Al and less). The DFT results show that the Li1 position is significantly more stable than the Li3 position. Consequently, if the Li1 position is not fully occupied, Li3 positions become metastable for the ground state at  0 K  and  Li3  will  relax  to  Li1  until  Li1  occupation  is  full.  This  would  favour  a  short residence time and a statistically lower occupation for Li3 compared to Li1. However, a six times higher multiplicity of Li3 compared to Li1 in addition to thermal activation at raised temperatures  may  counter  the  energetic  statistics  to  some  degree.  From  further  DFT calculations with excess Li content the following scenarios may be assumed for Li migration. 

If  the  Li1  position  is  unoccupied,  the  migrating  Li  takes  up  the  deep  Li1  minimum  and becomes trapped with the full migration barrier for the next hopping process (Figure 7b). In fact, this relaxation acts like a spring for the consecutive hopping process and flattens the energy surface for the migrating Li ion by increasing the local energy minimum and decreasing the migration barrier (Figure 7c). A local Li stoichiometry which is higher than the full occupation of Li1 (with a multiplicity of 6 for the unit cell) is thus beneficial for the Li conduction process. In this case the increase of Li3 occupation at the same time reduces Li1 occupation for the ground state. 


Therefore, we conclude  that the increase  of conductivity from 0.12  to 0.5 mScm-1 when  adding  yttrium  oxide  to  the  precursor  melts  cannot  be  traced  back  to  different  Li+ mobility  in  the  grain  bulk  of  the  respective  samples,  but  rather  to  an  Li  concentration enhancement and a denser intergrain microstructure in the Y-modified sample than in the Y-free one as proposed in our recent study.33 Thus, we propose that grain boundaries being a limiting factor for Li mobility in equilibrium situations become also a key factor for Li ionic conductivity when external voltage is applied, thus providing a conducting intergrain layer as an additional conductivity pathway similar to topological insulators. 


The addition of Y2O3 to the precursor glass melt causes a significant increase of the specific conductivity in LAGP glass-ceramics. DFT calculations suggest that a scenario with increased  Li  concentration  may  decrease  migration  barriers  and  favour  Li  transport.  The jump rates and diffusion coefficients obtained from the various experimental techniques in our work follow  an Arrhenius law over wide dynamic and temperature ranges,  with very similar activation energies for both samples. Since none of the obtained 7Li NMR dynamic parameters  showed  substantial  differences  between the  Y-free  and  Y-modified glass-ceramics,  we  conclude  that  the  modification  of  the  NASICON  framework  in  the presence of Y2O3 has a minor effect on the Li ionic mobility within the grain bulk of the obtained glass-ceramics. Rather, the higher ionic conductivity of the Y-modified system can be  attributed  to  altered  microstructure  and  grain  morphology.  This  finding  can  offer  an efficient strategy for developing highly conducting materials.