Doping  is  an  effective  method  to  produce  hybrid  materials  with  the  desirable properties and functions.    

Herein, gadolinium ions (Gd3+) are introduced to substitute Ti  in  mesoporous  NaTi2(PO4)3  (MNTP)  nanocrystals  to  tailor  the  texture  and conductivity  simultaneously  to  improve  the  Na  storage  properties.    

Microstructure characterization  and  kinetics  analysis  reveal  that  the  superior  electrochemical characteristics  arise  from  the  expanded  cell,  optimized  porous  structure,  enhanced intrinsic  electron  conductivity,  and  better  Na  ion  mobility  as  a  result  of  Gd3+ introduction  into  the  MNTP  nanocrystals.    In  the  half  cells  for  sodium-ion  battery, the  MNTP  nanocrystals  with  5%  Gd3+  exhibit  a  large  ICE  beyond  97%  at  1  C, superior  rate  capability  of  47.5  mAhg-1  at  50  C,  and  long  cycling  life  time  (>75% capacity  retention  at  5  C  after  2,000  cycles).    Furthermore,  using  the  Gd3+  doped nanocrystals as the anode and activated carbon as the cathode, the assembled sodium-ion  hybrid  capacitor  shows  a  high  energy  density  of  63  Whkg-1  at  a  power density  of  46Wkg-1.    Even  at  a  large  current  rate  of  5  Ag-1,  a  stable  capacity  is maintained after 30,000 cycles without obvious degradation.

NASICON-type anodes in sodium-based energy storage devices.   



Increasing attention is being paid to sodium-based electrochemical energy storagedevices such as sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) [1-3], sodium dual-ion batteries [4], and sodium-ion  hybrid  capacitors  (NHCs)  [5,  6]  as  alternatives  to  the  lithium-related counterparts due to lower cost and more abundant resource of sodium.    Particularly, NHCs  combining  the  merits  of  SIBs  and  electrochemical  double  layer  capacitors (EDLCs)  are  promising  in  offering  both  high  energy  and  power  densities  that  can meet  the  demands  of  large-scale  applications  such  as  electric  vehicles  and  hybrid electric  vehicles. 

However,  most  anode  materials for  SIBs  have  poor electrochemical  properties  and  structural  integrity  due  to  the  larger  ion  radius  and slower  diffusion  coefficient  of  sodium  ions  compared  to  lithium  ions,  thereby stymieing wider application of sodium-based electrochemical energy storage devices.  Consequently,  anode  materials  with  large  ion  diffusion  coefficients,  fast electron transfer,  as  well  as small  volume  change  during insertion/extraction are highly desirable.   

New  anode  materials  including  Ti-related  compounds  [8],  transition  metal chalcogenides  [9],  phosphorus  [10],  2D  metal  carbides  [11],  and  sodium  super  ion conductor  (NASICON)-type  compounds  [12]  have  been  studied. 

Among  them, NASICON-type NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP) with large open 3D channels is attractive anode materials for SIBs because of the high theoretical capacity of 133 mAhg-1, fast Na+ diffusion, small volume change during Na insertion/extraction, as well as intrinsically good  safety  related  to  high  voltage  plateau  of  about  2.1V  vs  Na/Na+  [13].

Nevertheless,  the  poor  intrinsic  electrical  conductivity  of  NTP  leads  to  inferior high-rate  capability  and  long-term  cycle  life.    To  overcome  these  hurdles,  efforts have  been  made  to  improve  the  electron/ion  transport  kinetics  by  constructing  the composite of nano-structured NTP with the modification of electro-conducting carbon. 

The modification schemes such as application of thin carbon coatings loading  onto  carbon  nanotubes ,  and three-dimensional graphene wrapping [20, 21] have been demonstrated to improve the electrochemical  performance  in  terms  of  capacity,  capacity  retention,  and  high-rate performance.    Almost all the reported NTP anodes for SIBs have high ICEs over 90% suggesting  they  are  practical  in  NHCs  applications. For  instance,  the  NTP-based NHC  anode  reported  by  Thangavel  et  al. delivers a high energy density of∼80 Whkg−1 at a specific power density of  8  Wkg−1  [22].    However,  it  is  difficult  to  improve  the  intrinsic  (bulk  phase) electron  conductivity  and  sodium  ion  mobility  by  carbon  modification. In  this respect,  the  intrinsic  characteristics  can  be  improved  alternatively  by  metal  doping.   


Although  metals  such  as  Mn  and  Mo  have  been  introduced  to  replace  V3+  in  the 

NASICON-type  compound  of  Na3V2(PO4)3 improve the  electrochemical performance [23, 24], to the best of our knowledge, few studies have been performed Mesoporous  nanocrystals  with  a  diameter  of  about  100  nm  are  promising  in high-performance sodium-based electrochemical energy storage devices on account of the  large  surface  area,  abundant  electro-active  sites,  as  well  as  optimal  morphology for  the  fabrication  of  compact  electrode  layers  [25,  26].    Mesoporous  nanocrystals with  outstanding  Na  storage  should  also  possess  good  intrinsic  conductivity  for charge transfer and a suitable porous structure for mass transport [27, 28].    In spite of  previous  studies  about  mesoporous  NTP  (MNTP)  nanocrystals  with  improved rate-capability[20,  29-31],  they  are  still  insufficient  in  practice.    


Lower-valence lanthanide  ions  have  many  desirable  characteristics  such  as  the  large  radius,  high electric  charge,  strong  self-polarization  ability,  as  well  as  the  yield  of  vacancies  in NTP  to  enhance  the  ion  conductivity  [32,  33].  In  addition,    lanthanide  doping  has been demonstrated to be effective in tuning the texturing (shape, morphology and size) of nanocrystals such as NaYF4 [34], alkaline-earth fluoride [35], Li4Ti5O12 [36], and so  on.    Hence,  substitution  of  Ti  with  lanthanide  ions  is  an  effective  and  practical strategy  to  improve  the  electrochemical  properties  by  tailoring  of  the  texture  and conductivity in MNTP nanocrystals at the same time. 

In this  work,  gadolinium  (Gd3+)  ions  with  a  half-full  4f  electron  shell  are incorporated into MNTP nanocrystals for partial substitution of Ti4+ to enhance the Na storage  performance.    The  effects  of  Gd3+  doping  on  the  texture,  electrochemical performance, and kinetics of the MNTP nanocrystals are investigated in details.    The NHC full cell assembled with the Gd3+ doped MNTP nanocrystals as the anode and activated  carbon  (AC)  as  the  cathode  shows  impressive  energy/power  densities  and long durability, which are comparable to most reported batteries and capacitors. 


The  structure  of  the  samples  was  determined  by  by  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD) using  Cu  Kα  radiation  (λ  =  0.154  nm),  scanning  electron  microscopy  (SEM),  and transmission  electron  microscopy  (TEM,  JEOL  2100)  equipped  with  selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) and Oxford energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS).   X-ray  photoelectron  spectroscopy  (XPS)  was  performed  using  an  Al  Kα  source (Kratos Analytical Ltd., UK) and the 284.8 eV C 1s was used for calibration.    The nitrogen  adsorption–desorption  isotherm  measurements  were  conducted  at  77  K (Quantachrome  NOVA  4000e)  and  Raman  scattering  spectra  were  acquired  on  a Renishaw inVia system with a 532 nm laser as the excitation source. 


In summary, we have demonstrated a strategy to improve Na storage performance of the MNTP nanocrystals via synchronous tailoring of texturing and conductivity using Gd3+doping.  Microstructure  characterization  and  kinetics  analysis  reveal  that  the larger  cell  size,  optimal  porous  structure,  larger  intrinsic  electron  conductivity,  and higher Na ion mobility result from the introduction of a moderate amount of Gd3+ into the crystal structure of the MNTP nanocrystals.    As a result, superior electrochemical characteristics are observed from the doped samples. In the half cells of sodium-ion battery, the MNTP nanocrystals with 5% Gd3+ exhibit a large ICE beyond 97% at 1 C, superior  rate  capability  of  47.5  mAhg-1  at  50  C,  and  long  cycling  life  (>75.0% capacity  retention  at  5  C  after  2,000  cycles).    The  sodium-ion  hybrid  capacitor composed of the Gd3+ doped MNTP nanocrystals as the anode and activated carbon as the cathode delivers a high energy density of 63 Whkg-1 at a power density of 46 W kg-1. Even  at  a  high  current  rate  of  5  Ag-1,  it  shows  stable  capacity  after  30,000 cycles without obvious degradation. Our results provide insights into the design and fabrication  of  efficient  NASICON-type  anodes  for  advanced  sodium-based  energy storage devices. 