

Solid  electrolytes,  aluminum-substituted  NASICON-type  LiTi2(PO4)3  (LTP)  has  been  formed  and successfully fabricated in situ on graphite substrate through hydrothermal approach. The effects  of different aluminum sources and the addition amount on Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 (LATP) characteristics  and ionic conductivity have been investigated. The results indicate that Al2(SO4)3 is better than other  aluminum sources in decreasing the resistance and correspondingly increasing the ionic conductivity.  The sample LATP-Al/Ti-0.2 fabricated with Al2(SO4)3 addition amount of 10mM (aluminum content)  has  the  highest  ionic  conductivity  of  1.65 × 10-4  S  cm-1,  which  is  significantly  higher  than  other  LATP  samples.  The  7Li  MAS  NMR  results  suggest  that  LATP-Al/Ti-0.2  has  the  highest  lithium  ion  mobility, and that, generally, all LATP samples have three kinds of lithium ions located at different  interstitial sites. It has been found that LATP-Al/Ti-0.2 has a relatively higher volume of M1 interstitial  sites and higher c value in crystal parameters compared with other LATP samples, suggesting larger  cavities for lithium ions and the weakening of oxygen atom bonding to lithium ions. After sintering  treatment to LATP-Al/Ti-0.2 sample at 850℃  it shows even higher total ionic conductivity of 4.80× 10-4 S cm-1 and is applied for the fabrication of cell LiFePO4/LATP/graphite. The cell exhibits high  discharge capacity of 142.0, 138.1, 131.5, 123.7 and 108.8 mAh g-1 at different C-rate of 0.05, 0.1, 


With  the  increasing  demand  for  energy  storage  devices  with  high  energy  densities  in  recent  years, Lithium ion batteries (LIBs) have been regarded as an efficient and environmentally friendly  energy  storage  system.1-3  The  lithium  ion  transport  in  traditional  LIBs  is  realized  through  lithium  salts  dissolved  in  organic  liquid  electrolytes.4,5  However,  because  these  liquid  electrolytes  have  inevitable  problems  including  flammability,  leakage,  short-circuit,  short-duration  and  toxicity,6,7  there is increasing demand for alternatives. The application of solid state electrolyte (SSEs) in LIBs  can avoid the potential security problems of flammable liquid electrolyte.8-11 It also has potential to  resolve  electrolyte  leakage  problems  in  traditional  liquid  battery  design.12  As  the  development  of  electric-powered  automobiles  accelerates,  the  demand  for  batteries  that  can  withstand  high  temperature has become more urgent. Therefore, SSEs could be excellent substitution for traditional  liquid organic electrolytes. 

Among researched SSEs, the NASICON-type ceramics have been widely studied due to their  high  conductivity  at  room-temperature,  wide  electrochemical  window,  and  high  stability  under  atmospheric conditions.13-16 LTP (LiTi2(PO4)3) based electrolyte with NASICON-type structure has  boosted  this  field  to  a  new  level,  based  on  its  advantages  of  high  ion  conductivity,  air  stability,  simple battery production process and lower cost.17-19 LTP ceramic electrolyte consists of octahedral  TiO6 and tetrahedral PO4, which are linked by the shared oxygen atoms to form 3D network structure  [Ti2(PO4)3].20  In  this  structure  there  are  two  different  sites,  labeled  as  M1  and  M2,21  for  the  Li+  transportation.  The  M1  sites  in  pure  LiTi2(PO4)3  are  fully  occupied  by  lithium  ions  while  M2  are  empty due to the lower potential of M1. 22,23 For M3+ substituted Li1+xMxTi2-x(PO4)3 compounds, Li+  can  partially  occupy  M2  sites  or  occupy  M3  sites  near  M2  sites  in  order  to  reduce  electrostatic  repulsion between Li+.24 The partial substation of Ti4+ by trivalent cations, e.g. Li1.3M0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3  (M=Al, Sc, etc) can enhance the ionic conductivity of LTP electrolyte, as previously reported.25,26

All  solid  state  lithium  ion  batteries  (ASSLIBs)  consist  of  a  positive  electrode  (cathode), negative  electrode  (anode)  and  SSEs.  The  general  method  to  fabricate  ASSLIBs  is  to  separately  fabricate  the  cathode  material,  anode  material  and  SSEs,  and  then  to  assemble  these  parts  into  a  whole battery. It usually takes great efforts to accomplish the grinding, pressing and binding process  of  anode  and  electrolyte  materials.  Moreover,  the  intractable  boundary  impedance  arising  from  interface  between  anode  and  electrolyte  also  has  an  unfavorable  influence  on  the  performance  of  ASSLBs.  27  To  overcome  these  challenges  and  reach  a  compromise  between  higher  ionic  conductivity of electrolyte and simple fabrication, this paper proposes the direct, one-step fabrication  of  Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3  (LATP)  on  a  graphite  substrate  surface  using  the  hydrothermal  method.  Samples were characterized in terms of crystal structure, particle morphology, microstructure, and  lithium  ion  conductivity.  The  effect  of  different  aluminum  sources  and  addition  quantities  on  the  lithium  ion  conductivity  and  crystal  structure  were  discussed.  NMR  spectroscopy  was  used  to  analyze  the  structure  of  LATP  materials  and  particularly  for  studying  the  dynamics  of  individual  magnetically-active  nuclei  including  7Li,  27Al,  and  31P.  NMR  spectroscopy  revealed  several  diffusion-induced  rate  peaks  that  specially  referred  to  complex  ion  dynamics.1  In  particular,  7Li  Magic Angle Spinning (MAS) NMR measurements were made to characterize the local structural  environments and to obtain dynamic information on the lithium ions.  Experimental  Preparation of LATP SSEs film on graphite substrate 

Reagent grade titanium (Ti), titanyl sulfate (TiOSO4), phosphoric acid (H3PO4), lithium hydrate  (LiOH)  were  employed  as  the  starting  materials.  In  particular,  aluminum  sources  including  aluminum  sulfate  (Al2(SO4)3),  aluminum  metal  (Al)  and  aluminum  hydroxide  (Al(OH)3)  were  separately  used  for  LATP  preparation.  Hydrothermal  reaction  in  an  autoclave  under  autogenous  pressure was used to prepare LATP particles on the graphite surface. 

LiOH aqueous solution (1M) was prepared, to which H3PO4 (4.5 M) and TiOSO4 (0.03M) were  added under magnetic stirring over 10 mins. To evaluate the effect of different aluminum sources  and  concentrations  on  the  electrochemical  properties  of  LATP  samples,  Al2(SO4)3,  metallic  Al  or  Al(OH)3  in  concentrations  of  0.01-0.1  M  were  added  separately  into  the  above  solution.  The  resulting  mixtures,  together  with  one  piece  of  Ti  plate  (0.07  M)  and  one  piece  of  graphite  plate  (thickness  0.5mm,  diameter  10mm),  were  transferred  into  a  Teflon  lined  autoclave  (50mL).  The  autoclave  was  sealed  and  placed  into  a  230  °C  furnace  for  24  h,  then  allowed  to  cool  to  room temperature. 

The resulting products were put into ultra-pure water for 1 h in order to remove residual  salts and then dried overnight in a vacuum oven with temperature of 80 ◦C. For the sample employed  for  further  sintering  treatment,  the  sintering  process  was  conducted  under  Ar  atmosphere,  with climbing-up rate for sintering temperature of around 20 ℃/min, and it was kept for 2h after reaching  the set temperature (650-950 ℃). After sintering process, the samples were naturally cooled. 

Before  the  hydrothermal  process,  the  surfaces  of  graphite  substrate  were  treated.  Firstly,  the  graphite  was  polished  using  a  P400  grade  sandpaper,  and  then  was  treated  by  plasma  surface  modification (PSM) in Peluris MPC-01C atmosphere plasma generator. The generator had 30MHz  RF power supply with plasma excitation power of 400 W, an air flow of 20.0L/h, and the treatment  time was 30 min. Characterization

Ionic  conductivity  measurements  were  applied  for  all  the  LATP  film  samples  by  using  the  two-probe method. Platinum nano-powder were sputtered to the surface of the LATP film to form  the  counter  electrode,  while  graphite  substrate  was  directly  employed  as  the  working  electrode.  Solatron 1260 Impedance Analyzer was employed for the Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS)  measurements (frequency was 1 Hz-1 MHz and potentiostatic signal amplitude was 5 mV). Hitachi  S-800  scanning  electron  microscope  (SEM)  was  adopted  to  observe  the  morphology  and  microstructure of the fabricated LATP films. For cross-section SEM observations, the cross-sections  were  prepared  by  cutting  with  a  laboratory  thin  metal  plate  shearing  machine.  X-ray  diffraction patterns  were  recorded  by  Simazu-6000  diffractometer  at  room  temperature  (25 ℃)  with  Cu  Kα radiation. Data were recorded in the range of 10°≤2θ≤70°with scanning rate of 0.01°per second. The  cell composed of LFP/LATP/graphite was assembled using LiFePO4 as the cathode active material,  the graphite substrate as the anode and the LATP film as the solid electrolyte. The preparation of the  cathode  materials  of  the  cell  was  as  follows.  The  LiFePO4  powder,  LiN(SO2CF3)2  (LiTFSI),  polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) and carbon black with mass ratio of 60:10:20:10 were mixed and  thoroughly  ground  in  a  mortar,  in  an  Ar-filled  glove  box.  Subsequently,  N-methyl-2-pyrrolidon  (NMP) was added into the mixed powders under weight/volume ratio of 1 g/20 mL, and the mixture  was vigorously stirred for 6 h to obtain evenly-distributed slurry. The slurry was then pasted on an aluminum foil (20 μm in thickness) and vaccum dried at 120 ℃ for 10 h. It was employed as the cathode  part  of  the  cell.  

The  loading  of  LiFePO4  active  material  in  the  cathode  was  about  2-2.5  mg/cm2.    In order to further reduce the interfacial resistance between LiFePO4 cathode and LATP  electrolyte, the interface of cathode and electrolyte was wetted by a small quantitiy of 1 M lithium  hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6) solution dissolved in ethylene carbonate (EC) and dimethyl carbonate  (DMC) (EC:DMC=1:1)). The assembling of this cell was performed in a cell testing module in argon  filled glove box. The cell performance was tested by Solartron 1287A Potentiostat Galvanostat in the  voltage range of 2.5-4.0V, at C-rates of 0.05-1.0C. All the galvanostatic charge-discharge tests were conducted at room temperature (25 ℃).

Solid-state NMR experiments  on  the  LATP  samples  were  conducted  at  room  temperature  (25 ℃ )  on  a  Bruker  Biospin  AVANCE  III  HD-600  spectrometers,  with  1.9mm  DNP  MAS  probes  operated  at  spinning rates of between 12 to 15KHz and magnetic field strength of 14T, in accordance with 7Li  Larmor  frequency  of  233MHz.  A  2.5mm  double-resonance  probe  was  employed  for  magic-angle  spinning  (MAS)  measurements.  The  samples  were  spun  at  a  frequency  of  4kHz  during  data  recording. The spectra were recorded after a tip angel of π/2 pulse irradiation for 31P (2µs) and 0.6µs  for 7Li and 27Al (1/3 of π/2 pulse irradiation). The recycling time within successive scans was set as  10 s for 7Li and 5 s for 27Al and 31P. The scan numbers was in the range within 800. Resonance shifts  were  referenced  to  aqueous  LiCl  (1M),  Al(NO3)3  (1M),  and  H3PO4  (85%).  The  fitting  of  NMR  spectra data was conducted by Bruker WINFIT program.  Results  Performance and characterization of hydrothermal synthesized LATP electrolyte 

The effects of the addition amount of different aluminum sources on the properties of LATP  samples  were  examined.  The  addition  amount  was  represented  by  the  molar  ratio  of  the  added  aluminum  to  the  titanium,  namely  n(Al)/n(Ti),  for  the  hydrothermal  process.  Fig.1  shows  the  AC  impedance  spectra  for  LATP  samples  synthesized  with  different  addition  amount  of  Al2(SO4)3  (10-100 mM aluminum). The samples were represented as LATP-Al/Ti-x, where x is the molar ratio of  aluminum  to  the  total  titanium  added  in  the  hydrothermal  process,  e.g.,  LATP-Al/Ti-0.1  was  the  abbreviation for the sample with 10 mM added Al2(SO4)3, since the Ti amount in the system was 100  mM for all LATP samples. The x value ranged from 0.1 to 1.0, since addition amount of Al2(SO4)3  ranged from 10-100 mM. Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were recorded to investigate the ionic conductivity properties of the LATP samples fabricated on graphite substrate. 

Gaussian  components  was  applied  for  7Li  NMR  spectra  of  all  samples.  Except  for  sample  LATP-Al/Ti-0.2, all the LATP samples showed three peaks: a down-field wide peak and two up-field  peaks.  Based  on  motional  narrowing  effect,  the  line  width  of  7Li  NMR  spectra  is  inversely  proportional to the jumping rate of Li ions in the materials.33,34

For  the  LTP  sample,  the  spectrum  exhibited  a  single  signal  of  lower  magnitude  and  greater  width compared with LATP (Fig.4). The single signal suggested a single coordination environment  of Li ions in the structure, with Li ions all situated at M1 sites (0,0,0) in the NASICON structure. The  relatively  wide  signal  also  indicated  the  low  Li  ion  mobility  within  the  hydrothermally  fabricated  LTP material. For the LATP samples, different devolution of 7Li signal could be seen as the amount  of added aluminum increased. Generally, the signals had a relatively lower line-width compared with  the LTP sample. The signals were split and were mainly dissolved into three peaks. The peak with  chemical shift at around -0.45ppm was designated to Li1, which was located at the M1 site, while  peak at -1.45ppm was indexed into Li2 or Li3, located at M2 or M1/2 site, respectively. The downfield  wide peak was also designated to Li1, with lower ion mobility. The substitution of Ti4+ by Al3+ ion  led to the additional introduction of Li ions, which increased the Li ions occupancy of Li2 or Li3  sites. It can be seen from Fig.4 that the Li ions occupying Li2 or Li3 sites exhibited much narrower  line-width,  suggesting  fast  Li  ion  mobility;  this  was  also  supported  by  the  electrochemical  conductivity  results  (Fig.1).  The  existence  of  faster  mobility  Li1  ions  in  the  structure  of  hydrothermally  fabricated  LATP  would  also  increase  conductivity.  It  is  noteworthy  that,  for  LATP-Al/Ti-0.2, the 7Li signal could only be separated into two peaks with chemical shift of -0.48 and  -1.44ppm, which corresponded to Li1 and Li2/Li3, respectively. This suggested that all the Li ions in  M1 sites were averagely stimulated into fast mobility Li ions, which was also in accordance with the  conductivity results that showed LATP-Al/Ti-0.2 to have the highest conductivity (1.65×10-4 S cm-1).


The conductivity results of Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 fabricated on graphite surface based on different  aluminum sources have been compared. XRD, SEM and MAS NMR were used to investigate the  different  materials  in  detail,  with  the  results  demonstrating  the  feasibility  of  applying  the  hydrothermal  method  for  direct  fabrication  of  LATP  on  the  anode  surface.  There  has  been  considerable  previous  researches  focusing  on  high  temperature  solid-state  fabrication  method  of  LATP in which the sintering time, sintering temperature, and addition amount of Al were studied.  However, these solid-state methods have shortcomings of high-cost, high material porosity and low  ability to control impurities. This research addressed these shortcomings to provide new insights for  the fabrication of high-conductivity LATP solid electrolyte materials.  

MAS  NMR  as  a  relatively  innovative  method  was  employed  to  further  investigate  the  characteristic  of  the  hydrothermally  fabricated  LATP  electrolyte.  There  has  been  only  a  few  of  researches employing 7Li NMR to investigate the lithium ion environments in the structure. 35-37 The  31P MAS NMR was an effective method to calculated the content of LATP crystalline material in the  fabricated LATP. The 27Al MAS NMR was also used to crystalline condition of the LATP samples.  The  7Li  NMR  has  been  adopted  by  some  researchers  to  study  the  lithium  ion  properties  in  some  lithium ion solid electrolyte such as Li5+xBaxLa3-xNb2O12,38 Li5La3Nb2O12,39 and so forth. Based on  the comparison with the high-temperature fabricated LATP upon the  7Li NMR characteristics, it is  found  for  the  hydrothermally  fabricated  LATP,  the  spectra  of  the  7Li  MAS  NMR  near  to  0  ppm  consisted  of  separated  peaks,  while  the  high  temperature  fabricated  LATP  samples  were  likely  to  exhibit  single  peak.    Baris  Key  et  al.  investigated  the  characteristic  of  7Li  MAS  NMR  under  different sintering temperatures 37. It can be seen that when the sintering temperature was below 750  ℃, the  7Li MAS NMR spectra was consisted of different separated peaks, while it contained only one  single  peak  as  sintering  temperature  increased  to  higher  than  750 ℃.  This  research  assumed three  different  lithium  ion  environments  (0  ppm,  -0.54  ppm,  and  -0.9  ppm  corresponding  to  Li(2)/Li(3)  respectively).  As  to  the  presence  of  only  one  Li  environment  for  7Li  NMR  at  higher  temperature  synthesized  LATP  powders,  the  author  explain  that  the  high  Lithium  ion  exchange  between the Li(1) sites and Li(2)/Li(3) sites would lead to the coalescence of the NMR resonances of  different Li sites into one site 37. So the characteristic of 7Li MAS NMR would be different between  the  low-temperature  hydrothermally  fabricated  LATP  and  the  high-temperature  fabricated  LATP.


The  LATP-Al/Ti-0.2  sample  had  the  highest  lithium  ion  conductivity.  The  aluminum  doping  content in the crystal structure was about 16% based on the NMR 31P spectra analysis. Henceforth,  the material LATP-Al/Ti-0.2 can be referred to as Li1.29Ti1.71Al0.29(PO4)3. There are many aspects that  can  influence  the  LATP  conductivity.  Many  studies  have  investigated  the  mechanism  behind  the  LATP’s superior conductivity to pure LTP material. Some recent studies have demonstrated that the  superior lithium ion conductivity of LATP is arisen from the new zig-zag pathway M1-M2-M2-M1 for  lithium  ion  conduction,  and  M1  (6b)  and  M2  (36f)  are  the  two  positions  where  lithium  ions  are  located.1,40  The  energy  barrier  for  this  lithium  ion  migration  pathway  is  much  lower  than  that  for  vacancy migration in LTP. Other studies have found that the investigated lithium ion migration path  for vacancy migration had correlation between polyhedral volume that surrounds the lithium ion and  corresponding  activation  energy  for  lithium  migration.41,42  The  energy  barrier  for  lithium  ion  migrating  to  a  larger  polyhedron  would  be  lower,  and  the  structure  with  larger  polyhedron  to  accommodate lithium ions would be more stable.1 Duluard et al. considered M1 and M2 sites had  bottleneck  (narrowest  coordination  environment  during  lithium  ion  migration)  therein  that  would  function as limiting factor for Li diffusion.43 They thought the substitution of Ti4+ by trivalent atoms  such as Al3+ would contribute to the opening of this bottleneck in the framework, which would result  in higher lithium ion diffusion. 

To  further  clarify  the  influence  of  the  doped  Al3+  on  the  NASICON  structure  and  the  Li+  transport in the framework, refinement of LATP-Al/Ti-0.2 structure was done by Rieveld analysis of  powder X-ray diffraction patterns (Fig.11a). This resulted in refinement of the atomic positions of Li,  P, O, and Al atoms within the framework and good agreement was obtained between the observed  and the calculated XRD patterns, with low reliability factors. The structures are shown in Fig.11b  and structural parameters are summarized in Table S5. 

In the LATP samples, LATP-Al/Ti-0.2 had relatively larger Ti(1)-Ti(1) distance (5.898 Å) parallel  to the c-axis, and also a relatively larger lattice parameter c (20.95894 Å) compared with other LATP  samples （ Table  S6 ） .As  the  volume  of  M1  cavity  increased,  the  Li-O  distances  also  increased.  Compared  with  other  LATP  samples,  Li  ions  in  the  tetrahedral  sites  inside  M1  cavity  in  the  NASICON-type  crystal  structure  of  LATP-Al/Ti-0.2  had  relatively  weaker  bonding  with  the  oxygen 


LATP  is  successfully  fabricated  in  situ  on  a  graphite  substrate  by  hydrothermal  method.  Substitution  by  Al2(SO4)3  results  in  relatively  higher  electrolyte  conductivity  than  substitution  by  Al(OH)3  or  metallic  Al.  The  highest  conductivity  is  achieved  by  LATP-Al/Ti-0.2  with  Al2(SO4)3  addition amount of 10 mM, with noteworthy conductivity of 1.65×10-4 S cm-1. The 7Li MAS NMR  spectra show that LATP sample generally has three kinds of lithium ions: low mobility Li ions in M1  sites, high mobility Li ions in M1 site, and Li ions in M2 site. 7Li MAS NMR spectra of LATP-Al/Ti-0.2  shows that it has the highest Li ion mobility, with the coordination of Li1 and Li2 peak into one  single  peak,  suggesting  Li  ions  in  M1  sites  are  averagely  stimulated  into  high  mobility  Li  ion.  Rieveld refinement of LATP-Al/Ti-0.2 structure found that LATP-Al/Ti-0.2 has a relatively higher volume  in M1 interstitial sites and higher c value in crystal parameters, indicating larger cavity for lithium  ions and weakened oxygen atom bonding to lithium ions, which could decrease the Li ions activation  energy and hence contribute to lithium conduction within the framework. This can be another reason  for  the  high  ionic  conductivity  of  LATP-Al/Ti-0.2  besides  the  formation  of  zig-zag  pathway  M1-M2-M2-M1  for  lithium  ion  conduction. 