Sodium-ion batteries have been considered over the last few years to be a main energy storage system to power the portable electronic devices and electric vehicles owing to their abundant sodium resource and good safety [1–3]. However, the commonly used electrodes for sodiumion batteries reported so far exhibited poor Na+-storage performances. The large radius of Na+ exerts a negative impact upon the crystal structure of electrodes during the repeated intercalation/deintercalation process [4]. Therefore, it is still a big challenge to ﬁnd the ideal cathode or anode materials with high structural stability for energy storage. Up to now, various cathode materials such as NaVO3 [5], Na2FeSiO4 [6], NaVPO4F [7], Na3V2(PO4)2F3 [8] and Na3V2(PO4)3 [9,10], have been widely investigated for the batteries that utilizes sodium ion as the charge carrier.


In this study, we have designed and fabricated the phosphorusdoped graphene-modiﬁed Na3V2(PO4)3@C nanocomposite utilizing a rapid microwave heating approach as a modern cathode material for the batteries that utilizes sodium ion as charge carrier. Such designed nanostructure in this composite ensures the high electron and ionic conductivities of Na3V2(PO4)3. Hence, the as-fabricated cathode exhibits good Na+-storage performances possessing a reversible capacity of 112.5 mAh g−1 at 0.5 C and a high capacity retention of approximately 95.1% over 500 cycles at 20 C. It can be inferred that the phosphorus-doped graphene-modiﬁed Na3V2(PO4)3@C is an advanced electrode with great prospects for electrochemical energy storage.


The diagrammatic sketch of the preparation of phosphorus-doped graphene is shown in Fig. 1a. In a typical process, the graphene oxide was fabricated at ﬁrst utilizing a Hummers route as described in previous content [32]. Afterwards, addition of the graphene oxide and triphenylphosphine was made into the ethanol solution under continuous stirring for 1 h. Subsequently, the blending was dried and annealed at the temperature of 900 °C for 0.5 h under the ﬂow of Ar/H2 atmosphere. Finally, the powder was rinsed by using distilled water together with ethanol; then, it was dried by vacuum oven overnight for acquisition of the phosphorus-doped graphene product.

The phosphorus-doped graphene-decorated Na3V2(PO4)3@C material (NVP@C/PG) was fabricated via a sol-gel approach and then a fast microwave heating route as shown in Fig. 1c. Typically, addition of the V2O5 and C6H8O7 (citric acid) was performed into the distilled water under stirring at the temperature of 25 °C. Then, the stoichiometric amount of NaH2PO4 was dissolved in the above solution. Afterwards, addition of the phosphorus-doped graphene sheet was made into the mixed solution. This above mixture was magnetically stirred and dried at 75 °C for evaporation of the superﬂuous water. Eventually, the resulting precursor was pre-heated at the temperature of 350 °C for 10 min and subsequently calcined at the temperature of 850 °C for 5 min under the Ar/H2 condition with application of a microwave tube furnace for acquisition of ﬁnal NVP@C/PG product. In addition, fabrication of the Na3V2(PO4)3@C composite (NVP@C) was made utilizing the identical approach without supplement of the phosphorus-doped graphene sheet during the preparation process (Fig. 1b). Analysis of the crystal structures of the obtained composites was performed through using XRD (Bruker D8/Germany) with Cu Kα radiation. XPS (ESCALAB 250 XI) test was performed to investigate the surface composition of the obtained NVP@C/PG composite. Raman spectra were carried out by using a DXR spectrometer (λ = 532 nm). The surface morphologies of the powders were studied by SEM (HITACHI S-4700) equipped with EDS. The nanostructures of the fabricated samples were observed by TEM (JEOS-2010 PHILIPS) and HRTEM. The electrical conductivities of the fabricated electrode materials were tested with an RTS-8 linear four-point probe measurement system. Calculation of the residual carbon contents was made by an elemental analyzer.

The Na+-storage performances of the cathode materials were studied using the CR2025 cells. The cathodes consisted of 70 wt% NVP@C or NVP@C/PG, 20 wt% carbon black and 10 wt% PVDF. The mass loading of the electrode material was about 2.7 mg cm−2. The cells were assembled in a glovebox with Na foil as counter electrode and glassﬁber as separator. The 1 mol L−1 NaClO4 dissolved in the mixed EC and PC was utilized as the electrolyte. Galvanostatic charge/discharge measurement of the electrodes was conducted on a LAND CT2001A battery tester at diverse rates ranging from 2.5 to 4.0 V. The charge/ discharge capacities of the electrodes were calculated based on the mass of Na3V2(PO4)3 material. EIS and CV tests were carried out to analyze the electrochemical behaviors of the electrodes by using a CHI650D electrochemical workstation.


The crystal structure of Na3V2(PO4)3 materialis illustrated in Fig. 2a. NASICON-type Na3V2(PO4)3 possesses a 3D framework crystalline structure. Two Na+-ions can be entirely abstracted from the structure of Na3V2(PO4)3, resulting in a great theoretical capacity of 118 mAh g−1 [33]. Fig. 2b shows the XRD patterns of the as-prepared composites. Each XRD peak of the two samples is able to be linked to the rhombohedral R-3c space group. No other impurity phases are detected in the XRD proﬁles for both composites. These outcomes well accord with the formerly mentioned papers [11,15,25]. Moreover, no obvious diﬀraction peaks of carbon layer or phosphorus-doped graphene can be discovered in the composites because of the low content or amorphous state [33,34].


To study the microstructures of the as-fabricated composites, TEM was carried out as presented in Fig. 5. For the NVP@C sample (Fig. 5a and b), it shows a globular-like morphology with its particle size between 100 and 350 nm. These nanocrystals can provide short diﬀusion pathway for Na+-ions intercalation/deintercalation. Besides, it is revealed based on the HRTEM image (Fig. 5c) that the carbon layer is uniformly coated on the surface of grain boundary. This thin carbon layer (ca. 5 nm) is of beneﬁt to ameliorate the apparent electronic conductivity of the pure active material [14,21]. It is noted from Fig. 5d and e that the phosphorus-doped graphene sheets are homogeneously distributed among the NVP@C/PG particles. As shown in Fig. 5f, the Na3V2(PO4)3 crystals are embedded into the networks with conductivity built up by phosphorus-doped graphene and carbon layer. Thus, the NVP@C/PG composite exhibits higher electronic conductivity than the NVP@C sample. We can speculate that the NVP@C/PG will show excellent rate capacity and cycling stability when it is utilized as a cathode material for energy storage.


The rate properties of the electrode materials at diﬀerent rates are presented in Fig. 7a. The NVP@C/PG cathode is found to show higher speciﬁc capacities and better cyclic stabilities versus NVP@C at each current rate. For instance, it has the ability to oﬀer the discharge capacities of 109.4, 107.1 and 103.4 mAh g−1 at 1, 2 and 5 C, respectively.


In a conclusion, the NVP@C/PG composite with conductive nanostructure has been ﬁrstly designed and fabricated through a simple and rapid route. The physical property of NVP@C/PG are studied by XRD, SEM, TEM, EDS, XPS and Raman spectrum. The obtained results reveal that the well-crystallized NVP@C nanoparticles are embedded into the phosphorus-doped graphene sheets.