All-solid-state  lithium  metal  batteries  (ASSLiMBs)  have  been  considered  as  one  of  the  most promising next-generation high energy storage systems that replace liquid organic electrolytes by solid-state ones (SSE). Among many different types of SSE, NASICON-structured Li1+xAlxGe2-x(PO3)4 (LAGP) shows high ionic conductivity, high stability against moisture and wide working electrochemical  windows.  However,  it  is  unstable  when  it  is  in  contact  with  molten  Li,  hence largely  limiting  its  applications  in  ASSLiMB.  To  solve  this  issue,  we  have  studied  reaction processes and mechanisms between LAGP and molten Li, based on which, a failure mechanism is hence  proposed.  With  better  understanding  the  failure  mechanism,  a  thin  thermosetting  Li  salt polymer P(AA-co-MA)Li  layer  is  coated  on  the  bare  LAGP  pellet  before  contacting  with  the molten Li. To further increase the ionic conductivity of P(AA-co-MA)Li, LiCl is added in P(AA-co-MA)Li. A symmetric cell of Li/interface/LAGP/interface/Li that is prepared using molten Li-Sn alloy, and is galvanically cycled at current densities of 15, 30 and 70  A cm-2 for 100 cycles showing  stable  low  overpotentials  of  0.036,  0.105  and  0.257  V,  respectively.  These electrochemical  results  demonstrate  that  the  interface  coating  of  P(AA-co-MA)Li  can  be  an effective method to avoid interfacial reaction between the LAGP electrolyte and molten Li. 

Currently Li ion battery is the main energy storage system for portable electronics as well as large energy applications such as electric vehicle, submarine etc. With the increased demons in energy density  and  safety  for  storage  devices,  the  current  commercial  electrodes  and  format  of  the batteries  are  however  unable  to  meet  these  requirements.  1  Therefore,  designing  new  energy storage systems with high safety and energy density become urgent needs. All-solid-state lithium metal  batteries  (ASSLiMB)  are  promising  candidates  for  next-generation  energy  storage  to replace current commercial Li ion batteries. 2-5 One of the key differences between the current Li-ion battery and ASSLiMB is use of solid-state electrolytes (SSEs). Among various SSEs  3-4,  6-7, ceramic SSEs such as garnet  8-10 and NAICON  11-13 structure are outstanding SSE due to their high ionic conductivity (10-4-10-3 S cm-1), wide operation electrochemical windows and relatively high  stability  in  the  ambient  condition.  Since  NASICON  structured  Li1+xAlxGe2-x(PO3)4/ Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO3)4 (LAGP/LATP) are stable with moisture 14, they have been widely used in the Li air battery  15. 


However, LAGP/LATP is unable to be directly in contact with Li metal since Ti4+/Ge4+  in  the  LATP/LAGP  will  be  reduced  by  Li  to  Ti2+/Ge2+  or  even  Ti0/Ge0  16-17. 


Furthermore, the relative high electronic conductivity of pure NASICON structure SSE was also not satisfied the requirement of a long cycle cell.18-20 To utilize the high ionic conductivity and moisture stability of NASICON structured LAGP/LATP SSEs and high capacity Li metal as the anode, it is essential to design an interface layer which is stable against LAGP/LATP as well as Li  metal.  There  are  many  possible  candidates,  for  example,  poly(oxyethylene)  (PEO)  21  and poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether acrylate 22 films. However, these soft polymers may easily be reduced  and  penetrated  by  Li  dendrite  when  working  at  elevated  temperature  23-24.  Dendrite growth and penetration through polymer electrolyte still limit application of polymer electrolyte-based  cells.  

The  main  reason  is  associated  with  the  low  mechanical  strength  of  polymer electrolyte, thus, higher shear strength polymer interface layer was used to decrease or eliminate penetration of dendrite. 25-28 The pure SSEs such as garnet SSE (LLZO) also suffers from dendrite growth or Li deposition during galvanic cycle which may be caused by its voids inside. As it was reported, the dendrite Li grows from one side voids to the other side one until resulting a short circuit during galvanic cycle. 29-31 The shear modulus of grain boundary may be also reduced by Li  during  cycle  which  also  results  dendrite  growth  along  grain  boundary  of  ceramic  SSEs.



Therefore, intrducing a high mechanical strength interface layer may also suppress the growth of Li dendrite into the voids and grain boundary of ceramic SSEs. Atomic layer deposition (ALD) of LiPON  33,  Al2O3  34-35,  artificial  solid  state  electrolyte  25  were  used  as  the  physical  barriers  for directly contact of SSEs with Li. There are two possible ways to integrate Li with SSE and hence with ASSLiMB. The first way is to deposit Li on SSE and then current collector, and the second way is to deposit Li on current collector and then to press the current collector with Li layer onto SSE.  

The  uneven  surfaces  of  Li  foil  and  SSEs  will  cause  high  impedance  due  to  voids  and improper  contact  if  they  are  directly  pressed  together.  To  minimize  voids  and  interfacial resistance, various liquid state Li alloys such as Li-Sn  36, Li-Ge  37, Li-Nb  38, Li-Au  39 and other alloys  3,  40-41 had been used in the garnet SSEs. To our best knowledge, liquid Li alloy metal is still  not  used  in  the  NASICON-structured  LAGP.  Therefore,  deep  understanding  the  reaction process  and  mechanism  of  LAGP  with  molten  Li  is  essential  for  successful  fabrication  of ASSLiMB through molten Li and Li alloys. 



Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) solid-state electrolyte pellets were synthesized by a modified solid-state reaction method. In a typical processing, stoichiometric amounts of Li2CO3 (99%, Sigma-aldrich) (10% excess), Al2O3 (99.98%, Alfa Aesar), GeO2 (99.999%, Alfa Aesar) and NH4H2PO4 (98%, Sigma-aldrich) were mixed at 150 rpm for 4 h in a zirconia jar filled with ethanol. The mixture  was  dried  at  80 ℃  for  10  h  followed  by  calcination  at  380 ℃  for  4  h  to  decompose ammonia  and  carbon  dioxide.  After  dry  milling  at  100  rpm  for  30  mins,  this  power  was  then melted at 1350 ℃ for 2 h with heating rate of 10 ℃ min-1. The molten liquid immediately poured  to  a  pre-heated  stainless  steel  of  500 ℃  to  obtain  dense  glass  pellet.  This  glass  pellet  was  maintained at 500 ℃ for 2 h to release internal stress. It was drying ball-milled again to obtain  small glass particle and further crystallized at 800 ℃ for 8 h with heating rate of 5 ℃ min-1. The  obtained LAGP powder was pelletized and sintered at 900 ℃ for 8 h with the same heating rate as before. After sintering, the pellets were polished to 0.30 mm in thickness. 


To  investigate  stability  of  the  LAGP  pellet  with  molten  Li  or  Li-Sn  alloy,  LAGP  pellet  was polished, washed and vacuum dried for further experiment. Li or Li-Sn alloy were heated to 225 ℃ until totally molten in the glove box. Since there was a thin impurity such as oxide layer on the surface of molten Li or Li-Sn alloy, the thin layer on top of the molten Li or Li-Sn alloy were removed  before  a  LAGP  pellet  being  immersed  into  the  molten  Li  or  Li-Sn  alloy  for  a  given duration. After reaction, the LAGP pellet was then removed from the glove box and washed to remove unreacted Li by ultrasonic vibration in the deionized water. After vacuum dried at 110 ℃ for 12 h, the pellets were ready for SPM and XPS characterizations. For EIS measurement, the Li foils were attached on the two sides of the polished LAGP (0.3 mm) in the swagelok.

X-ray diffractometry (XRD) of LAGP powder was conducted by a Shimazu XRD-6000 with a Cu Kα radiation from 10  to 80  of 0.5  min-1. Microstructure was characterized using field emission scanning  electron  microscope  (FE-SEM)  HITACHI  S-4300.  Fourier  transform  infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was performed by GladiATR from 4000 to 400 cm-1 at a resolution of 2 cm-1 after  P(AA-co-MA)  and  P(AA-co-MA)Li  powders  being  vacuum  dried  at  110 ℃  for  12  h. 

Viscosity of P(AA-co-MA)Li aqueous solution was measured by a CAP 2000+ viscometer with rotation speed of 800 rpm immediately after preparation. Thermal behavior of P(AA-co-MA)Li was  measured  using  a  thermal  gravity  analyzer  (TA-60WS)  and  a  simutaneoul  differential temperature and gravity analyzer (DTG-60H) from room temperature to 800 ℃ at a heating rate  of 5 ℃ cm-1.  Electrochemical  impedance  spectroscopy  (EIS),  cyclic  voltammetry  (CV)  and galvanic cycle of LAGP, Li/LAGP/Li, Li/interface/LAGP/interface/Li and LiCl added cells were conducted by Solartron analytical 1400 Cell Test system at room temperature. For the EIS at various temperatures, an oven (WEISS WKL34) was used for control the temperature after each temperature maintained 30 mins. 

A  conductive  cantilever  with  silicon  tip  coated  with  Pt  layer with first eigenmode spring constant of 2 N/m were used. All the DART-ESM mappings were performed with drive amplitude of 5 V on a 256×256 pixel grid at a scan rate of 0.6 Hz. 

It  is  noted  from  the  observation  that  in  the lightly reacted region, some of the grain boundaries exhibit higher deformation than the internal grains  or  gaps,  implying  LAGP  and  molten  Li  reaction  started  from  these  grain  boundaries. 

Heavily reacted region of LAGP shows even higher deformation than pristine and lightly reacted regions, which implying Li rich component formed after heavily reacted. Resonance frequencies are  related  to  contact  stiffness  by  considering  the  dynamics  of  a  clamped-spring  coupled cantilever of the scanned sample (Figure 1 (e)). In the lightly reacted region, the wide resonance frequency  range  can  be  attributed  to  obvious  different  stiffness  of  LAGP  and  lightly  reacted LAGP.  

In  summary,  LAGP  is  unstable  with  molten  Li.  The  reaction  started  from  grain  boundaries resulted  in  change  of  “grain  size”  from  1  m  to  100  nm.  Li  rich  component  formed  during reaction. Composition of gains changed with degree of reaction for one refined particle. Since fast reaction  alone  the  grain  boundaries,  some  grains  lost  their  contact  with  LAGP  after  heavy reaction. 



The ionic conductivity relates the interface modified Li/interface/LAGP/interface/Li symmetrical cell was studied from -25 ℃ to 75 ℃ in order to understand impact of interface responses at a wide temperature range (Figure 5 (d)). The activation energy was thus calculated based on where is ionic conductivity at absolute temperature T, A is a pre-exponential factor, activation energy which was treated as constant in the relatively narrow temperature range, and is Boltzmann constant.

The failure mechanism of LAGP with molten Li was systematically investigated.



LAGP started from grain boundary and expanded to rest area of grains. Therefore reduced “grain size”  was  observed.  The  composition  of  LAGP  particles  were  changed  with  gradual  reaction. 

Some part of LAGP surface peeled off because of heavy reaction. Li-rich component was formed and Ge4+ reduced to Ge0 by Li or even formed Ge-Li alloy after reaction with molten Li. Based on this, a thermosetting Li salt P(AA-co-MA)Li was explored and coated on the LAGP pellet to act  as  an interface layer for  molten  LiSn0.6  and  LAGP  pellet.  The  obtained Li/interface/LAGP/interface/Li symmetric cell showed neglectable defects in the interface layer and thus had smaller interface resistance. The impedance was further decreased when LiCl was introduced to P(AA-co-MA)Li. The galvanic cycles at different current density were applied to investigate interface modified symmetric cell with and without LiCl added. During 100 galvanic cycles at each current density, stability and small corresponding overpotentical (0.036, 0.105 and 0.257 V) were obtained for symmetric cell with LiCl-1 added interface layer.