

Compounds crystallizing in the structure of NaZr2(PO4)3 (NZP) are considered as promising materials for solid state electrolytes in Li-ion batteries. Using density functional theory (DFT), a systematic computational screening of 18 NZP compounds, namely, LiX2(LO4)3 with X ¼ Ti, V, Fe, Zr, Nb, Ru, Hf, Ta, Os, and L ¼ P, Mn, is performed with respect to their activation energies for vacancy-mediated Li migration. It is shown how the diﬀerent ionic radii of the cationic substitutions inﬂuence structural characteristics such as the octahedron volumes around Li ions on the initial-state and transition-state sites, which aﬀect the activation energies (“composition–structure–property” relationships). The prevalent assumption that structural bottlenecks formed by triangularly arranged oxygen atoms at a certain location along the migration path determine the energy barriers for Li migration is not supported by the DFT results. Instead, the ionic neighborhood of the migrating ion in the initial and in the transition state needs to be taken into account to relate the structure to the activation energies. This conclusion applies to Na-containing NZP compounds as well.


A major challenge in the development of future portable energy storage devices with the potential to outreach today’s battery technology in terms of capacity, energy density, charge rate, cyclability, and safety is the identiﬁcation of new materials for the use as anodes, cathodes, or electrolytes with improved properties such as ionic conductivity or thermal, chemical, electrochemical, and mechanical stability.1 A popular approach in the search for new materials taking advantage of today’s available computational resources is the virtual screening and characterization of hundreds of compounds, which are systematically generated by substituting elements at speciﬁc lattice sites of a material class, with the goal of identifying compositions leading to improved battery-relevant properties.2,3 Apart from eventually predicting promising new materials, the data produced by such a combinatorial high-throughput screening (HTS) can be used to detect relationships between the composition, structure, and property of interest, which help to understand the underlying mechanisms better, and, therefore, may open up promising directions for optimization.

Present state-of-the-art battery technology could be improved signiﬁcantly by replacing the liquid electrolyte by a highly ionconducting and electrochemically stable solid-state electrolyte (SSE). Batteries consisting of SSEs could be stacked more densely, and safety concerns such as temperature stability, ﬂammability, and leakage of toxic liquids would be overcome.6,7 However, currently known SSE materials do not yet reach the ionic conductivity of liquid electrolytes, and, therefore, they lead to lower power densities and slower charge/discharge rates.8 Fast and reversible migration of the charge carrying ions is not only relevant for SSEs, but also for solid intercalation electrode materials when the battery is operating in the “rocking chair” mode, where the ions are repeatedly inserted into and extracted out of the cathodes or anodes.9,10

In this work, a variety of NZP-type compounds of the form LiX2(LO4)3 containing a systematic set of nine diﬀerent metal ions on the X site, and either P or Mn on the L site is examined with respect to the conductivity of Li ions. The energy barriers for vacancy-mediated migration processes are calculated by means of “density functional theory” and “nudged elastic band” methods.34 The prevalent expectation of the bottleneck in the migration path of NZP-type compounds crystallizing in the R3c structure is critically addressed. Relationships between the constituent elements, the local arrangement of ions, and the activation energies are discussed. The paper is organized as follows: in Sec. II, the details of the NZP structure are described, the computational methods are introduced, and the choice of elements and compounds for this study is motivated. A discussion of the so-called M2 site, for which the observations reported in the literature are ambiguous, is given in Sec. III A. Minimum energy paths for vacancy-mediated migration of Li ions are presented in Sec. III B and discussed with regard to the bottleneck concept by comparing experimental and computational results. In Sec. III C, the dependence of activation energies of the migration process on the volumes of oxygen octahedra around the initial and ﬁnal Li positions is investigated, and a simple model is presented to explain the obtained correlations. Relationships between the composition, i.e., the elemental occupation of the cationic positions X and L in the NZP structure, and the local arrangement of oxygen cages are discussed in Sec. III D. Our conclusions are given in Sec. IV.


In a previous study, a computational high-throughput screening of 450 NZP compounds of the form LiX2(LO4)3 with a variety of diﬀerent elements on the X and L positions was conducted by the authors of the present work with the intention to identify new thermally stable NZP materials.39 In detail, a systematic multistep approach of combined molecular dynamics simulations for temperatures up to 800 K, the application of a stability criterion from the bond-valence (BV) theory,40 and structural relaxation by DFT, where at each step all structures deviating from the rhombohedral NZP-type structure were sorted out, ﬁnally lead to a collection of compounds with a variety of metallic elements on the X position, and mostly P, Cr, and Mn on the L position. Within this approach, all these compounds, therefore, are stable in the NZP structure even up to higher temperatures at least in a local energy minimum. For the present study, compounds with the 3d transition metal elements Ti, V, Fe, the 4d elements Zr, Nb, Ru, and the 5d elements Hf, Ta, and Os on the X position were taken into account, allowing for a systematic analysis across the periods 4, 5, and 6, and the groups 4, 5, and 8 of the periodic table. 


Density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the PWscf code of the open-source software Quantum Espresso44 was applied to calculate the total energies of the NZP-type crystals, to relax the structures by means of the Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno algorithm,45 and to determine activation energies of the Li migration process. Corresponding energy barriers were obtained by applying the nudged elastic band method (NEB).34 The general gradient approximation of Perdew et al. (PBE)46 was used for exchangecorrelation. The Brillouin zone integrations in reciprocal space were carried out on a 331 Monkhorst-Pack k-point mesh47 with a Gaussian smearing of the partial orbital occupancies with a width of 0.01 Ry. The interaction of valence electrons with core electrons and atomic nuclei were taken into account by ultrasoft pseudopotentials provided by the GBRV library.48,49 Wavefunctions of the valence electrons were expanded in a basis set of plane waves up to an energy cutoﬀ of 35 Ry. To model the NZP compounds, a hexagonal cell consisting of 108 atoms (six NZP formula units) in the defectfree crystal structure was used as depicted in Fig. 1. Each defect-free system was initially relaxed, i.e., the atomic positions were optimized until the minimal force component acting on an atom was lower  than 0:002 Ry=A , and the volume was relaxed by minimizing the total energy and the internal stress. From these optimized cells of the perfect crystals, systems containing Li vacancies or interstitials were generated by extracting or inserting the atoms at the positions of interest, followed, unless otherwise stated, by only ionic relaxation at a ﬁxed cell volume with the same convergence criteria. Note that this workﬂow follows the same procedure as described by Lang et al.


Applying the described methods, energy barriers of individual Li and Na migration steps for the vacancy-mediated mechanism can be calculated from ﬁrst principles, which are essential to determine diﬀusion constants and ionic conductivities. In addition, to obtain these “macroscopic” materials properties, correlations between the migrating species need to be taken into account, e.g., by performing molecular dynamics simulations.50,51 This however is beyond the scope of this work dealing with the “microscopic” ionic jump processes, where correlations between the migrating ions are not considered.

The M2 site in NZP-type compounds crystallizing in the space group R3c has been reported to be coordinated by 14,26 10,33 8,24,52 6,37 or 415 oxygen atoms. Since the M2 coordination is

M-site ions in NZP-type structures are known to migrate along the interconnected network of M1, M12, and M2 sites. In order to determine the energies corresponding to a Li ion moving from a M1 site via M2 to a neighboring vacant M1 site, the initialstate (I) and transition-state (T ) conﬁgurations were set up and structurally relaxed for all of the 18 compounds considered in this study. Conﬁguration I corresponds to a local energy minimum, and conﬁguration T to a saddle point, which is stabilized by symmetry.


The bottleneck concept in NZP structures was ﬁrst described in detail by Kohler and Schulz for the NASICON compounds Na1þzZr2ySixP3xO12.29,30 Using X-ray diﬀraction at elevated temperatures, where the compounds were in the rhombohedral NZP structure, probability density functions (PDFs) of Na ions within the lattice were obtained from measured anharmonic temperature coeﬃcients of the Na site. Close to the center between two maxima corresponding to the M1 and M2 positions, a minimum of the PDFs was obtained and interpreted as the bottleneck for Na migration by linking the PDFs to an eﬀective potential with a maximum at the bottleneck position.

As reported above, no such maximum appeared in the calculated NEB migration paths of the Li-containing NZP-type comþ ion is by 34% (for a 6-fold pounds. But since the radius of a Na coordination) to 68% (for a 4-fold coordination) larger than the ion, one may assume distinct bottleneck-related radius of a Li maxima along the migration paths of Na in Na-containing NZP-type structures. Figure 4 displays the paths for Na migration in NaTi2(PO4)3 and NaZr2(PO4)3 in comparison to those of Li migration in LiTi2(PO4)3 and LiZr2(PO4)3, all curves obtained in the same way as described in Sec. II. The ﬂat region around the local minimum at the M2 position is more pronounced in the Na than in the Li compounds. But again, no pronounced maxima are found in the energy curves, which could be ascribed to structural bottlenecks along the paths. The curve for LiZr2(PO4)3 shows an unexpected minimum below the energy of the I-conﬁguration at a Li migration coordinate of 0.25. An additional relaxation conﬁrmed the stability of this conﬁguration, where the Li atom is located in the center between the M1 and the M12 positions, corresponding to a shift of about 0.84 Å. LiZr2(PO4)3 is reported to crystallize in a triclinic structure below C,54 so the R3c conﬁguration has to be considered as a local 50 minimum, which is prone to structural instabilities if lattice defects are present.

In analyzing the average distances of Li/Na to the three closest oxygen atoms (Fig. 5) and setting them in relation to the energy barriers (Fig. 4), no obvious correlation between the shape of the energy barriers and the atomic distances between Li or Na and O can be identiﬁed. Rather, the stable positions of Li or Na at the M1 and M2 positions can be linked to larger atomic distances as compared to lower atomic distances at the unstable intermediate path positions. Since at the intermediate positions, Na or Li ions are unlikely to be found, this could explain the above mentioned minima in the PDFs reported by Kohler and Schulz.29,30

Results of DFT NEB calculations performed for various NZP-type compounds by Lang et al.,33 Shi et al.,55 and Lu et al.56 do not show bottleneck-related energy maxima along Li or Na migration path either, but pronounced maxima at or close to the M2 position. Shi et al. report smaller energy barrier heights for larger values of the average bond length between Li or Na and the eight closest oxygen neighbors around M2, which can be related to a correlation of lowered activation energies with increasing volumes


In the upper for the compounds panel of Fig. 6, the activation energies Ea LiX2(PO4)3 (LXP) are shown vs the volumes VM1 in conﬁguration I and vs the volumes VM2 in conﬁguration T . The regression lines indicate that there is indeed a trend of decreasing energy barriers with larger octahedron volumes, but the correlations are scarce, especially for the M2 volumes. Since the activation energies are calculated by the energy diﬀerence of the two terminating states at M1 and M2, a quantity taking into account characteristics of both conﬁgurations I and T should rather correlate with Ea. Indeed, a clearly better correlation can be obtained between Ea and the diﬀerence in octahedron volumes ΔV ¼ VM1  VM2 (see Fig. 6, lower panel).

In order to understand the structural inﬂuence of changing octahedron volumes on Ea irrespective of the chemical inﬂuences of diﬀerent atomic species, we studied the eﬀect of an isotropic volume variation on the compound LiTi2(PO4)3. The lattice constants a and c of the hexagonal cell were varied stepwise while keeping the c=a ratio constant at its equilibrium value. At each volume step, conﬁgurations I and T were set up, and the internal coordinates were relaxed.


M1 and M2 positions as depicted in Fig. 6 (central panel). The slopes of these curves diﬀer from those of the regression lines through the values of all the LXP compounds (upper panel), but the dependence of Ea on ΔV from the isotropic volume variation almost perfectly matches the line of Ea vs ΔV through the LXP values (lower panel). This conﬁrms the correlation between Ea and ΔV, which can be regarded as a general property of the underlying NZP structure, independent of the lattice parameters, with its special octahedral environments of Li in the initial state M1 and in the transition state M2.

The generality of this statement is underpinned by the fact that a similar behavior was observed for the compounds containing Mn instead of P [LiX2(MnO4)3 (LXM)] (see Fig. 7), where the line through the Ea values also matches the line resulting from an isotropic volume variation, in this case obtained for LiTi2(MnO4)3, when correlated with the octahedron volume diﬀerences ΔV. The slopes of the regression lines for L ¼ P diﬀer by only 0:03 eV=A This indicates that there is only a little range for the slope values of these curves, only deﬁned by the underlying NZP crystal structure and the type of the migrating atom. However, the line for L ¼ P and L ¼ Mn have diﬀerent y axis intercepts, i.e., LXP and LXM compounds cannot be represented by a single line of Ea vs ΔV. þ5 compared to This is because of the larger ionic radius of Mn þ5, leading to considerably lower LiO6 volume diﬀerences P between M1 and M2 octahedra for LXM than for LXP compounds, which will be discussed in more detail in the following section. The strongest deviations from the regression lines are obtained for LiTa2(PO4)3 (42 meV), LiRu2(MnO4)3 (54 meV), LiTa2(MnO4)3 (40 meV), and LiNb2(MnO4)3 (54 meV). As stated above, the DFT approach predicts all of the compounds considered in this study to be stable in the NZP-type structure in at least a local energy minimum. But if such an energy minimum is shallow, lattice imperfections such as Li vacancies can cause slight distortions of the LiO6-octahedra in the vicinity. This may be a reason for the deviations of the points Ea ΔVð Þ found for some of the compounds of up to about 50 meV from the regression lines, which corre 3. sponds to a deviation of the volume diﬀerence of about 0:25 A

From the observed change of activation energy with cell volume in LTP, the inﬂuence of temperature on Ea resulting from the lattice expansion can be estimated. Using the thermal expansion coeﬃcients for the a and c cell axis in LTP measured by Woodcock and Lightfoot by neutron power diﬀraction,61 the thermal expansion coeﬃcient αV for the cell volume can be obtained as 31:8  10 C when averaged over the considered temC. In the range of the equilibperature range between 20 and 800 rium volume depicted in Fig. 8, this corresponds to a change of the activation energy ΔEa 150 10 C ΔT with a change in 6 temperature ΔT. In a reasonable temperature range of device operaC, a change of the activation energy of 0.015 eV tion of, e.g., 100 results, which can be regarded to be of minor signiﬁcance for the overall ionic conductivity.


In our study, a tendency of decreasing activation energies with increasing volumes VM1 and VM2, and, considerably better correlated, with the octahedron volume diﬀerences was obtained (Fig. 6). The dependence of these quantities on the composition, i.e., on the elements occupying the X and L positions in LiX2(LO4)3, is shown in Fig. 9. At ﬁrst, in the upper panel of the graph, it is clearly visible that the total cell volume strongly correlates with the ionic radius of the atom on the X sites. The ionic radii were taken from the list given by Shannon62 for ions in a charge state þ4 and a 6-fold coordination. The ionic radius of Fe þ4 does not match the trend. However, in a sixfold oxygen coordination Fe is hardly found in the charge state þ4 but rather in the state þ3, as in Fe2O3 or Fe3O4. Furthermore, synthesized ironcontaining NZP compounds are reported to contain more than one Li atom per formula unit, which is related to the charge state of Fe being þ3 rather than þ4 in these compounds.


Using density functional theory and nudged elastic band calculations, the migration paths and activation energies for vacancymediated hopping of Li ions were determined in a systematic set of 18 NZP-type compounds LiX2(LO4)3 with X ¼ Ti, V, Fe, Zr, Nb, Ru, Hf, Ta, Os, and L ¼ P, Mn. In the rhombohedral NZP structure, which from a previous study is known to be stable for all the considered compounds, vacancy-mediated Li migration can take place between M1 and M2 sites. The energy barriers show qualitatively similar behavior for the diﬀerent cationic occupations with an energy minimum for Li occupying the M1 site and a maximum for Li at M2, but lacking any further intermediate maximum. The existence of such an intermediate maximum is prevalently assumed to originate from a close triangular oxygen arrangement (“bottleneck”) around Li when it crosses the face of the oxygen octahedron surrounding the M1 site. This concept was surveyed more deeply for selected Li and Na containing NZP compounds. It was found that along the M1-M2 migration path, there is no distinct minimum of the closest distances of the migrating Li or Na ion to the oxygen ions which could be related to a structural bottleneck with a corresponding maximum in the energy barrier.

Instead, the activation energy is obtained from the energy diﬀerence between Li on the M2 and M1 positions, and, therefore, the atomic environments of these two conﬁgurations need to be taken into account to correlate the local atomic environment of the moving ion with the activation energy. As a simple approach, it was shown that the diﬀerence between the volumes of oxygen octahedra surrounding M1 and M2 correlates linearly with the activation energy within 0.05 eV for the LiX2(LO4)3 compounds, with similar slopes but diﬀerent y axis intercepts for L ¼ P and L ¼ Mn. This linear correlation is reproduced when considering an isotropic volume variation in each one of the P and Mn compounds, which could be traced back to slight diﬀerences in the parabolic energy curves of a system in the initial state (Li on M1) and in the transition state (Li on M2). From left to right along a period in the periþ4 cation decreases, and so do odic table, the ionic radius of the X the NZP cell volumes, the volumes of M1 and M2 octahedra, and also mainly each of the octahedron volume diﬀerences, which links the composition to the structure in terms of local atomic environments of the migrating ion, and to the activation energy.
