In recent years, a wealth of new desalination technologies based on reversible electrochemical  redox  reactions  has  emerged.  Among  them,  the  use  of  redox-active  electrolytes  is  highly  attractive due to the high production rate and energy efficiency. Yet, these technologies suffer  from the imperfect permselectivity of polymer membranes. Our present work demonstrates  the  promising  desalination  performance  of  a  sodium  superionic  conductor  (NASICON)  for  selective  removal  of  sodium  against  iodide  in  a  half-cell  configuration  consisting  of  an  activated  carbon  electrode  in  aqueous  600 mM  NaI  solution.  For  feedwater  with  aqueous  600 mM NaCl, the desalination cell exhibited a stable performance over a month with more  than  400  operation  cycles  with  the  aid  of  high  sodium  permselectivity  of  the  NASICON  membrane  against  iodide  (99.9-100 %).  The  cell  exhibited  a  maximum  sodium  removal  capacity of 69±4 mg/g (equivalent to the NaCl salt uptake capacity of 87±4 mg/g) with a charge  efficiency of 81±3 %.

AIon-separation technologies are crucial for freshwater production in agriculture and domestic  uses, and also for industrial processes for chemical production or recovery.1-3 Using thermal,  electrochemical, chemical, or physical processes, the general purpose is to separate particular  ions from the feed solution. In recent decades, a wealth of new ion-separation technologies  based on reversible electrochemical reactions have emerged as energy efficient alternatives;  for  examples,  capacitive  deionization  and  battery  desalination.4-6  In  general,  the  ionseparation with reversible electrochemical reactions requires a flow of a feed solution and a  reversible  electrochemical  reaction  as  a  driving  force.  The  reaction  occurs  in  an  electrochemical cell consisting of electrodes, membranes, and a solution flow channel, while  the  ion-separation  mechanism  depends  on  the  type  of  reactions  and  membrane  configurations. Employing ion electrosorption via electrical double-layer formation, capacitive  deionization requires less energy than that of the conventional reverse osmosis process for  brackish  water  deionization.4,  7-9  Furthermore,  as  the  invested  energy  can  be  partially  recovered during the reversible reaction half cycle, the efficiency of the overall process can be  further enhanced by being integrated as a part of the energy storage system.10-13 A major drawback of conventional capacitive deionization is its limited application to brackish  water  concentration.4,  7  When  exceeding  a  concentration  of  50-100 mM  NaCl,  the  permselectivity of ion removal drops significantly through notorious co-ion repulsion.6,  14-15  For  highly  concentrated  solutions,  the  process  of  ion  electrosorption  can  conveniently  be  replaced by redox-processes.16-18 In comparison to non-chemical EDL formation of the carbonbased capacitive deionization technologies, high permselective ion removal can be enabled  by introducing reversible chemical reactions such as insertion/intercalation,19-22 conversion,2324 and surface redox reactions.25-26 While the majority of the work regarding the ion separation  with reversible redox reactions has been studied with aqueous NaCl solutions, particularly for  water  desalination,  selective  separation  of  other  ions  has  also  been  demonstrated.  For  instance,  recent  studies  show  a  highly  selective  separation  of  particular  ions  such  as  chromium, arsenic oxyanion, ammonium, magnesium, and cesium in aqueous solutions;20, 25  and carboxylates, sulfonates, and phosphonates in organic solutions.26 For the design of effective electrochemical cells, ion-selective membranes have also played  important  roles  in  manipulating  the  direction  of  ion  migration  and  permselective  ion  removal.17, 27-28 Ion-selective membranes have been broadly introduced as an engineering tool to  provide  various  desalination  modes  such  as  semi-continuous  process,29-30  rocking-chair  batteries,17,  31 and inversed hybrid capacitive deionization.10,  32 In contrast, the membrane  permselectivity has been less investigated for ion separation processes. One possible reason  is that the governing ion separation mechanism is not determined by redox reactions at the  electrode/electrolyte interface but by the permselective feature of the membrane. The latter  feature, however, can enable a unique application by introducing redox active electrolytes.  These redox electrolytes contain redox couples whose oxidation state change in the liquid  phase  through  the  electron  transfer  process  at  the  electrode/electrolyte  interface.33-35  By  applying redox electrolytes with potassium ferricyanide and zinc chloride, Desai et al. (Ref. 36)  demonstrated a new concept of flow battery desalination, and Hou et al. (Ref. 37) presented a  similar concept with sodium iodide and vanadium chloride. The major benefit of flow battery  systems  is  the  continuous  desalination  enabled  by  liquid  phase  redox  electrolytes  being  circulated  between  two  coupled  cells:  one  cell  for  desalination,  and  the  other  cell  for  regeneration.  The  high  charge  storage  capacity  of  redox  electrolytes38-42  further  provides  access to a high salt uptake capacity above 50 mg/g (i.e., 50 mg NaCl salt is removed per 1 g  of the electrode material).37 The  operational  mode  of  redox  aided  electrochemical  desalination  with  NaI  differs  from  conventional capacitive deionization (Fig. 1). In the latter case, desalination is accomplished  by most of the invested charge being used for counter-ion adsorption with a minority of the  charge  being  consumed  for  co-ion  desorption.43  Counter-ions  are  ions  with  the  opposite  charge  sign  compared  to  the  electrode’s  polarity.  Intrinsically,  capacitive  deionization  is  limited to low molar concentration regimes, such as brackish water, because of the favorable  dominance  of  counter-ion  adsorption  over  co-ion  desorption.44  Thereby,  a  decreased  ion  concentration is registered in the effluent stream leaving the desalination cell upon charging,  while the concentration is increased during discharging (Fig. 1A). Peruse of a cation exchange  membrane placed between the flow channel and the compartment hosting a carbon electrode  immersed in aqueous NaI solution, we prevent iodide loss into the effluent stream.

Per  the  increased  positive  charge,  the  cell  will  eject  sodium  ions  across  the  ion  exchange  membrane into the effluent stream to preserve electroneutrality of the electrolyte (Fig. 1B). 


During  the  reduction  of  the  cell,  the  NaI-containing  compartment  will  accommodate  an  increased number of sodium ions, thereby leading to desalination of the feedwater stream.  The counter-electrode will follow suit and accomplish the uptake of an increased number of  chlorine ions to ensure charge-neutrality of the global electrolyte. Consequently, redox aided  electrochemical desalination with NaI accomplishes desalination during reduction. In the case of ion separation processes with redox electrolytes, the key functional requirement  is the permselectivity against the redox ions, which prevents the diffusion of redox ions to the  water channel. Despite the importance of the latter aspect concerning environmental and  health  issues,  the  possibility  of  cross-contamination  has  been  often  ignored.32,  45  As  we  demonstrated in our recent study with a redox electrolyte containing sodium iodide, small but  continuous leaching of iodide into the water channel occurred at a rate of 0.4-1.0 µg/(cm2·min)  normalized  to  the  area  of  the  membrane.10  Hence,  the  contamination  of  redox  ions  is  considered  as  the  major  concern  since  the  permselectivity  of  commercially  available  ionselective membranes is around 80-95 %.46 Considering the limited permselectivity of polymer-based ion-selective membranes, it is highly  attractive to use ceramic superionic conductors (SICON) when employing redox electrolytes.  Due to high ionic conductivity even in a solid-state, SICONs have been broadly investigated for  electrochemical  energy  storage  and  conversion  systems  like  batteries  and  fuel  cells.47  Compared to other solid materials, SICONs provide several orders of magnitude higher ionic  conductivity.48  The  high  ionic  conductivity  is  based  on  the  classical  diffusion  through  ionhopping  where  ions  transition  from  one  lattice  site  to  another  through  interconnected  diffusion  pathway  in  the  crystal  structure.48  Through  this  mechanism,  the  SICON-based  crystalline  membranes  provide  high  permselectivity  for  particular  ions  such  as  sodium  (NASICON)  and  lithium  (LISICON).  To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  only  one  case  has  been  reported for the use of NASICON membrane for battery desalination where organic solvent  needed to be separated from the water stream (Fig. 2A).49 The ion-selective feature of the  crystalline SICON membranes (Fig. 2B), that is, employing the permselectivity of the ceramic  material to selectively allow the passage of one specific ion while blocking the transport of  another, has not been established so far. Here, we report the sodium permselectivity of a ceramic NASICON membrane against iodide  for ion separation applications with a redox electrolyte.

We  have  synthesized  a  ceramic  NASICON  membrane  by  solid-state  reaction  process  using  Na2CO3  (Alfa  Aesar,  100%  purity),  ZrO2  (TOSOH,  particle  size  40 nm),  SiO2  (AEROSIL  OX50,  particle size < 50 nm), and NH4H2PO4 (Alfa Aesar, 98% purity) precursor with a stoichiometric  ratio  of  3.3/2/2/1  for  Na/Zr/Si/P.  This  ratio  has  been  reported  for  producing  better  ionconductive  NASICON  materials  than  the  generally  known  chemical  composition  of  Na3Zr2Si2PO12.50 By following a similar method as described in Ref. 50, the starting materials  for  100 g  batch  were  first  mixed  with  zirconia  balls  (10 mm  diameter)  in  a  polyethylene  terephthalate container by a tumbler for 1 h. The mixing continued for another 24 h after the  addition of 150 mL ethanol without zirconia balls. The resulting homogeneous ethanolic slurry  was dried while stirring at 75 °C. The dried powder was placed in an alumina crucible and  calcinated in an air atmosphere at 600 °C for 4 h and subsequently treated at 1150 °C for 4 h.  The resulting powder was then reground by dry tumbling with zirconia balls (10 mm diameter)  for 1 h and heat treated for a second time at 1100 °C for 4 h in air atmosphere followed by  regrinding with zirconia balls (10 mm diameter) in tumbler mixer for 1 h. The calcined powder  was cold-isostatically pressed at 398 MPa in a cylindrical rubber mold to obtain a green body.  This green body with a relative density of around 60% was sintered at 1100 °C for 10 h in the  air leading to a sample with a relative density of about 75%. From  the  sintered  body,  thin  slides  of  500±50 µm  thickness  were  cut  by  a  high  precision  diamond saw. These thin disks were vacuum infiltrated with epoxy resin to close the open  pore  channels.  After  hardening  the  epoxy  resin,  the  epoxy  layer  covering  the  surface  was  removed by sandpaper. For thin membranes with a thickness of 300±30 µm, the epoxy filled  NASICON disc was further polished by sandpaper.


For the free-standing and polymer-binder consolidated carbon film electrodes, type YP-80F  activated  carbon  powder  (Kuraray)  was  mixed  with  polytetrafluoroethylene  (PTFE,  SigmaAldrich)  and  ethanol,  rolled  to  200±20 µm  thickness,  and  dried  in  a  vacuum  oven  (120 °C,  203 Pa)  for  48 h  while  controlling  the  mass  ratio  of  carbon  to  PTFE  to  be  95:5.51  More  information on this type of carbon and the electrode fabrication can be found in Ref. 52. In  short:  YP-80F  is  a  mostly  microporous  carbon  with  few-micrometer-sized  particles  with  a  specific surface area determined by quenched-solid density functional theory of 1786 m2/g  and an average pore size of 1.3 nm. In the presence of 5 mass% PTFE, the surface area is  reduced to 1599 m2/g while the average pore size remains to be 1.3 nm.53 Aqueous sodium iodide (NaI) solutions were prepared with NaI (99.999 % purity, Sigma Aldrich)  in  deionized  water  (Milli-Q).  NaI  was  stored  and  weighted  in  an  inert-gas-filled  glove  box.  Aqueous sodium chloride solution was prepared with NaCl (≥99.5 % purity, Sigma Aldrich) in  deionized water.

Material characterization The morphology of the NASICON samples was investigated by a JEOL JSM 7001F field emission  scanning microscope (FE-SEM) at an acceleration voltage of 10 kV. X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  experiments  were  conducted  using  a  D8  Advance  (Bruker  AXS)  diffractometer with a copper X-ray source (Cu-Kα, 40 kV, 40 mA) and a nickel filter. The system  was  calibrated  with  LaB6  (purity  99  %,  Sigma  Aldrich).  All  measurements  were  measured  between 10-80°2θ in a step size of 0.02° and a measurement time of 1 s per step. Rietveld  refinement was carried out using Bruker AXS software TOPAS 5.

Electrochemical characterization We used custom-built electrochemical cells with a polyether ether ketone body and titanium  pistons  in  combination  with  a  VMP300  potentiostat/galvanostat  (Bio-Logic)  in  a  full-cell  configuration with activated carbon electrodes; the scheme of the cell design can be found  elsewhere.35,  39  The  activated  carbon  electrodes  (200±20 µm  thickness,  12 mm  diameter)  were used as both positive and negative electrodes with equal mass. Before cell assembly, the  electrodes were soaked in the electrolyte and degassed by applying a vacuum for 5 min. The  electrodes were placed between graphite current collectors, and the NASICON membrane in  the middle separating the electrodes with a complete sealing with two silicon gasket layers. 


The electrolyte was dropped onto the gasket channel during assembly, and the cell was sealed  directly afterward.

Desalination performance The desalination performance for NASICON membranes was characterized by using a custombuilt cell (Supporting Information, Fig. S1). The silicone (600 µm thickness) gaskets provided  tight  sealing  of  the  activated  carbon  working  electrode  (200±20 µm  thickness,  26 mm  diameter) with the thin NASICON membrane (300±30 µm thickness, 35 mm diameter) and of  the activated carbon counter electrode (550±20 µm thickness, 30 mm diameter) with an anion  exchange  membrane  (FAS-PET-130,  FuMA-Tech,  130 µm  thickness,  35 mm  diameter).