Sodium ion batteries (SIBs) are being billed as an economical and environmental alternative to lithium ion batteries (LIBs), especially for medium and large-scale stationery and grid storage. However, SIBs suﬀer from lower capacities, energy density and cycle life performance. Therefore, in order to be more eﬃcient and feasible, novel high-performance electrodes for SIBs need to be developed and researched. This review aims to provide an exhaustive discussion about the state-of-the-art in novel high-performance anodes and cathodes being currently analyzed, and the variety of advantages they demonstrate in various critically important parameters, such as electronic conductivity, structural stability, cycle life, and reversibility.

The progressively increasing demands for energy to meet the needs of the steadily growing population has led to huge global increases in the consumption of fossil fuels [1]. However, this large demand and ever-growing consumption of fossil fuels has led to signiﬁcant undesirable consequences, primarily the large quantities of greenhouse gases (e.g., CO2) being liberated into the atmosphere as a result of the combustion of these fuels, leading to global warming and climate change [2,3]. Another challenge is the gradual dwindling of fossil fuel reserves, with only coal expected to last approximately another 100 years, and oil and gas for a much shorter time, which raises important questions about energy security in the long term [4,5]. As a result, a concerted eﬀort is being taken to move away from fossil fuels and toward renewable energy providing systems (e.g., solar, wind, water (hydroelectricity), and geothermal energy) [6]. These energy systems have the advantage of being abundant (almost inexhaustible), inexpensive, and most importantly, produce no greenhouse gases [7,8]. However, most of these renewable sources, such as solar and wind, are intermittent, and, therefore, robust, reliable, and economically viable storage systems are necessary. Diﬀerent energy storage types exist, such as pumped-hydro (accounting for 98% of U.S. energy storage), thermal energy storage, and compressed air [7,9]. However, electrochemical energy storage systems, by virtue of their longevity, low establishment and capital expenditure, and ease of set-up, are considered the best candidates for energy storage from renewables [9,10]. Among these rechargeable electrochemical storage systems, lithium ion battery (LIB) systems have come to play a pivotal role [11].


Ever since they were ﬁrst commercialized by Sony in 1991, LIBs have transformed the way −1, low electrochemical energy is stored [12,13]. The consistent speciﬁc energies around 120 Wh kg reduction potentials (−3.04 V vs. SHE), and rather small ionic size of Li (0.76 ), which facilitates smooth intercalation and fast electrochemical kinetics, are some of the important aspects that make LIBs the gold standard in rechargeable metal ion electrochemical storage systems [14,15].

These advantages notwithstanding, certain aspects of LIBs need closer scrutiny. Most importantly, Li resources are rather rare in the earth’s crust (~20 ppm), and coupled with its uneven geographical availability, this scarcity makes for unfavorable LIB economics [16]. Secondly, economical constraints hinder the application LIBs in large and very large scale storage systems, such as grid storage [17]. Also, another important concern regarding LIB systems is environmental, as the usage of certain electrodes that are toxic and the ﬂammability of certain electrolytes have been reported [18].

With this perspective in mind, alternative rechargeable battery systems are being studied to overcome the said challenges with lithium-based systems. It is in this scheme that sodium ion batteries (SIBs) ﬁt in, and it is hoped that they will carve out a niche of their own in the greater metal-ion based rechargeable electrochemical energy storage ecosystem.


SIBs provide several unique advantages and are, therefore, increasingly studied as a feasible alternative to LIBs [19]. One of the most important factors is the abundant availability of Na metal in the earth’s crust (it is the 6th most abundant element), consequently making its procurement and processing relatively inexpensive [20]. Also, SIB systems have good performance in aqueous systems, unlike their LIB counterparts, and this greatly helps to bring down costs as inexpensive electrolytes and less complicated fabrication processes can be used [20,21]. Another advantage is that SIB systems, to a large extent, mimic LIB systems in their electrochemical working, which proves beneﬁcial from a theoretical modeling standpoint, as a considerable body of knowledge already exists for LIBs [22]. All these factors lead to greater potential for SIBs to be applied in systems where large quantities of sodium are required, making them prime candidates for grid scale storage [21].

Despite these advantages, SIB systems still have not been able to be commercialized as several important hurdles still remain. Firstly, the large size of the Na+ ion (1.02 ) makes for considerably sluggish kinetics [23,24]. Also, this large ionic size results in signiﬁcant constraints for smooth intercalation in the host electrode interstices, often resulting in large and undesirable volume changes, thereby reducing cycle life and lowering longevity and performance [24,25]. Scientists and researchers have been adopting diﬀerent approaches to overcome these challenges, and one of the most important avenues ahead for SIB systems is from the perspective of materials engineering, i.e., developing newer and better electrodes with novel morphologies to enhance performance and longevity [26,27].

The main parameters to evaluate the high performance of an electrode material are broadly classiﬁed into the four categories: (a) energy density, (b) rate capability, (c) cycleability, and (d) thermodynamic stability [28]. Energy density is deﬁned as the product of average operating −1. In potential (V) and the total amount of charge transfer (Ah) and is expressed in Wh g general, for a high-performance electrode, it is desired that the electrode materials undergo fast charge and discharge while maintaining high-energy density. On the other hand, the ability of the anode material to reversibly cycle Na-ions with the least irreversible capacity (IRC) is the cycleability of the material. To achieve thermodynamic stability and prevent the possible change in anode structure, the addition of external matrix material or similar chemical modiﬁcations are desired for a high-performance electrode material.

This manuscript, therefore, devotes itself to providing a substantial discussion on the current state-of-the-art anodes (negative electrodes) and cathodes (positive electrodes) used for high performance SIB systems, as well as the diﬀerent types and classes of materials used and their motivation, novel fabrication techniques, their performance, the advantages and disadvantages of each, and what future research aims to be in this regard.


With respect to anode materials for Na-ion batteries, it is a major challenge to develop high performance anode materials with a high reversible capacity, stable cycling performance, and high rate capability. In this review, the development of high performance of anode materials (carbons, alloy-based materials, oxides, and 2D materials) for Na-ion battery systems are discussed. The strategies to improve electrochemical performance in terms of materials fabrication, surface modiﬁcation, electrolyte optimization, applying a favorable voltage window, and electrochemical performance are summarized.


Carbon based materials have been studied extensively for SIBs because of their sustainability and natural abundance. Graphite had been studied for Na ion batteries in the 1980s, but it did not allow significant Na+ insertion and its capacity was much lower. Therefore, soft carbons (SCs), like petroleum coke, carbon black, pitch, and PVC, were tested during the 1990s, but also showed limited capacities [29–31]. Later in 2011, the interest of Na-ion batteries was renewed with the study of Na intercalation in hard carbon [32]. Since then, many families of hard carbons, such as sucrose, cellulose, wood, argan shells, and peanut shells, have been studied for use as anodes, and their performance −1. Also, interest in soft carbons (SCs) has been growing in recent years [33–36]. reached beyond 300 mAh g However, considerable work remains in improving carbon-based anodes for Na-ion batteries.

Carbon-based materials are insertion-based materials which insert/extract a certain amount of Na+ during charge/discharge process. However, graphitic carbons hinder the intercalation of Na-ions due to their large radius [37]. A minimum interlayer distance of ~0.37 nm is required for Na-ion insertion, whereas the interlayer spacing of graphite is ~0.335 nm [23]. In contrast, other alkali metals, such as K, Rb, Cs, etc., are found to intercalate into graphite, even though they have larger ionic sizes than Na [38,39]. K-ion based Graphite intercalation compounds (GICs) have shown the ability to adsorb molecular hydrogen and have good conductive properties [38]. The authors have reported the successful formation of stage-I KC8 [38]. Alkali metals are shown to become less stable as ion size decreases from Cs to Na because of reduced ionic bonding. Although, Li is an exception, as it forms covalent bonds with C, resulting in negative formation energy. For this reason, graphite is a good intercalation material for Li and K but not for the Na [39].

Jache and Adelhelm showed that, using cointercalation phenomena in a diglyme-based electrolyte, results in a stage-I ternary intercalation compound with an estimated stoichiometry of Na(diglyme)2C20 −1 at a current density and the electrode showed a superior cycle life with capacities close to 100 mAh g −1 for 1000 cycles and coulombic eﬃciencies >99.87% [40].


Hard carbons have also been utilized as anodes for Na-ion batteries due to their disordered structure and large interlayer distance [42]. Further, Hard carbon can deliver high capacity and low voltage plateau near 0.1 V (vs. Na/Na+) [43,44].


Because of their high energy density and low redox potential, alloys have garnered considerable interest as anode materials for Na-ion batteries. Alloy-based materials can alloy with Na to form various Na-metal-alloy phases that contribute to higher capacities [19]. In 2011, Chevrier and Ceder reported that Si, Ge, Sn, Pb, and Sb could alloy with sodium and show theoretical capacities of 954, 369, −1, respectively [62]. However, Si was found to be nearly inactive with Na [63]. 847, 485, and 660 mAh g Further, the large volume expansion of the alloy anodes during the charge/discharge process can lead to poor cycle life, capacity fade, and degradation of the electrode coating [62]. A good binder, better nanostructures, and active material diluted with inactive materials are being incorporated to alloys to achieve cycling stability in Na-ion batteries [62,64]. During the last decade, researchers have started fabricating alloy based compounds for Sn, Sb, Ge, P, and some other elements from group IVA (Pb, Bi) with electrochemically inactive/active components, which help to alleviate volume variation during the charge/discharge processes and provide good cycleability [65–68].

According to the authors, the well-dispersed of 415 mAh g ultra-small Sn nanoparticles and the conductive carbon network contribute to the high performance of 8-Sn@C as anode in Na-ion batteries [72].

In general, reducing the particle size of Sn to the nanoscale eﬀectively mitigates the pulverization of the electrode materials. Sn/carbon composites or carbon coated Sn show improved electrochemical performance compared to bare Sn. The carbon matrix acts as a buﬀer for volume change and enhances the electrical conductivity. As an eﬀective approach to alleviate the volume changes of Sn-based electrodes, electrically conductive CNT (carbon nanotube)-coated soft cellulose ﬁbers are utilized to release the mechanical stress caused by the volume change of Sn during sodiation and desodiation, resulting in improved cycle performance. In addition, the porous nature of the substrates functions as a reservoir that helps in the ion transportation of electrolytes. Crystalline Sn/carbon composites formed by the carbonization of tin oxide nanoparticles and Sn nanoparticles dispersed in carbon nanoﬁbers in an argon atmosphere have also been eﬀective in reducing volume change and showing high capacity. However, Sn/carbon composites and Sn nanoparticles embedded in carbon show poorer kinetics and rate performance in Na-ion batteries than Li-ion batteries. Therefore, optimized electrolytes need to be developed along with Sn-based materials to decrease their charge transfer resistance, which results from the formation of diﬀerent solid electrolyte interphases (SEIs).

To overcome the volume changes during the charge/discharge process, Zhu et al. synthesized freestanding electrospun Sb–C nanofiber mats (SbNP@C) without any binder, carbon black, or current −1 and could collector [78]. This study found that SbNP@C can deliver an initial capacity of 422 mAh g −1 [78]. Similarly, Wu et al. be sustained 350 mAh g synthesized Sb–C nanofibers through a single-nozzle electrospinning technique and calcination, where the Sb particles were distributed homogenously in the carbon nanofibers [79]. The authors reported that Sb–C nanofiber electrode as anode material of Na-ion batteries can deliver a high reversible capacity of −1, as well as −1, good rate capability of 337 mAh g 631 mAh g −1 after 400 cycles, showing a capacity retention of 90%) [79]. cycling stability (446 mAh g Zhao et al. dispersed ultraﬁne Sb nanoparticles in the Nitrogen-rich 3D conductive carbon network structure solving the problems of pulverization, loss of electrical contact and low utilization rate [80]. This study showed that, the full cell Na3V2(PO4)3@C//C@Sb had high output potential of −1 after 500 cycles [80]. Cui et al. utilized Sb 2.75 V and a discharge capacity of 264.3 mAh g nanorods encapsulated into highly conductive N and S codoped carbon frameworks (Sb@(N, S–C)) as an anode for Na-ion batteries and demonstrated that the Sb@(N, S–C) anode can display a high −1 −1 and maintain a reversible capacity of 390.8 mAh g discharge capacity of 812.7 mAh g −1 [81]. The authors ascribed these impressive properties after 1000 cycles at a high current of 1 A g to the unique cross-linked carbon networks that provide highly conductive frameworks for fast ion transport and prevents the agglomeration of Sb nanorods during the electrochemical process [81].

Overall these studies highlight the beneﬁcial aspects of Sb nanostructures well-dispersed in carbon frameworks, improving the performance of an Sb anode in Na-ion batteries by reducing the volume expansion and providing good electrical conductivity. As has been shown for Sn, Sb-based compounds with carbon can suppress the deformation of alloy materials and enhance electrochemical performance. Further, it is important to ﬁnd an optimized electrolyte for an electrode material with a large volume change to improve electrochemical performance.

A summary of Cui et al.’s results is presented in Figure 3, which is representative of the performance of Sb-based anodes in high performance Na-ion batteries [81]. Figure 3a–d shows Sem and TEM images of the Sb@(N, S–C). The “silk-like” carbon networks in the Sb@(N, S−C)-2 hybrid are distributed around the Sb nanorods, which can be regarded as a highly conductive bridge for each Sb@C nanorod. the elemental mappings of Sb@(N, S−C)-2 in Figure 3e–i conﬁrm the uniform distribution of N, S, C, and Sb, in the Sb@(N, S−C)-2 hybrid. The uniform distribution of N, S, C, and Sb are further conﬁrmed by XRD, Raman, and XPS in Figure 3j–m. Figure 3n shows the initial ﬁve cycles of the cyclic voltammogram (CV) curves of Sb@(N, S−C)-2 at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s −1 between 0.01 and 2.50 V. During the ﬁrst cathodic scan, a sharp peak at ~0.27 V is clearly observed, which can be ascribed to the alloy of Sb with Na forming NaxSb. Figure 3o displays the galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of the Sb@(N, S−C)-2 at a current density of 100 mA g −1, in a voltage range of 0.01−2.50 V. In Figure 3p, the Sb@(N, S−C)-2 electrodes at diﬀerent states of charge/discharge are analyzed using in situ XRD. As shown in the ﬁgure, the intensities of the three main Sb peaks become weaker in subsequent cycles, demonstrating how amorphous Sb is accumulated during the sodiation–desodiation cycles. Figure 3q −1. After 1000 cycles, the sample shows the cycleability of the sample at a current density of 1 A g retains a reversible capacity of 390.8 mAh g

Recently, Ge is being studied as a promising anode material for Na-ion batteries, as Ge has shown high lithium storage capacity and high lithium diﬀusivity [82,83]. However, Stoji´c et al. showed that Na diﬀusion in crystalline Ge is several orders of magnitude slower than lithium diﬀusion in germanium [84,85]. Abel et al. showed that using nanocolumnar germanium thin ﬁlms, synthesized by evaporative deposition, can cause faster diﬀusion in sodium [84]. They were able to achieve a high −1, and 88% of this capacity was retained after 100 cycles initial sodium storage capacity of 430 mAh g −1. In addition, the nanocolumnar germanium exhibited a high rate at a current density of 74 mA g −1. Comparing the dense germanium ﬁlm with nanocolumnar capability of 164 mAh g germanium. From the ab initio molecular dynamics simulations, the authors suggested that nanoscale dimensions are essentially stable, and a high rate capability of germanium can be observed in Na-ion batteries [84].


Another relevant aspect is the contribution of the electrolyte for high performance sodium ion batteries. In the work published by Li et al., rhombic TiO2 nanocrystals were synthesized and electrochemically characterized for two diﬀerent electrolytes, i.e., NaCF3SO3 in ethylene carbonate and diethyl carbonate (EC/DEC), and NaCF3SO3 in diglyme. The results show that after 500 cycles at −1, the reversible capacity for the electrolytes with EC/DEC and diglyme were, respectively, 100 mA g −1 [125,126]. A tabular listing of some other prominent results for the −1 and 165 mA h g 87 mA h g anodes discussed above is provided in Table 3 below.

Overall, metal oxides present high capacity values, when compared with hard carbon’s theoretical capacity, low cost, nontoxicity, chemical stability, and also environmental friendly nature [127]. Nevertheless, the literature reports that these high capacity values are usually achieved at low current densities [128]. This happens because of the low conductivity of the metal oxide species and structural changes, which require several steps and energy for such reorganization to take place [127,128]. Furthermore, another concern when it comes to metal oxide anodes are the volume changes that occur during sodium insertion and extraction, which may lead to an agglomeration of metal oxide particles and even cracks or the pulverization of the active material causing loss of contact and an impedance increase in the cell [129,130]. Those facts combined may aﬀect the cell performance, causing capacity and rate capability to decrease [131,132]. Regarding the future perspectives of metal oxide anodes, aiming to provide capacities closer to the theoretical capacity values for metal oxides, strategies using carbon materials and nanostructuring is expected to increase the mobility of Na+ ions in these anodes, as well as the ability to accommodate volume expansion. Those aspects are crucial to the commercial feasibility of SIB employing metal-oxides anodes.


In summary, graphene is usually employed as a support material in SIB anodes, due to its fast electron transport and mechanical properties [157–159]. Nevertheless, pristine graphene presents a low value of reversible capacity for Na+ storage, which is the reason why graphene is usually employed with another species [158]. Furthermore, as stated by Ling et al., puregraphite is energetically unstable for intercalating Na+, and also for low concentrations, which is the reason why pristine graphene is not employed uniquely as active material anode for SIBs [160–162]. One alternative is to introduce topological defects aiming to increase the capacity and rate capability of graphene-based SIB anodes, or to use graphene as support for other 2D materials, such as Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) and phosphorene (also reported herein) for example. Given the importance graphene has achieved nowadays, this material is expected to continue to have a strong presence within energy storage systems in the future, as a support material for high performance devices.

Since 2014, Phosphorene, a single layer of black phosphorus, has recently emerged (since 2014) as a beyond graphene technologically relevant material owing to its superior mechanical and electronic properties, ease of fabrication through common low-cost exfoliation techniques. Applications of phosphorene as high capacity anode material for SIB has also been investigated. [163–166].

Therefore, although phosphorene has similarities to graphene, such as being a 2D material obtained through mechanical exfoliation of black phosphorous, graphene can be obtained through the exfoliation of graphite and possesses its layered structure in elemental form, unlike TMDs. [164,167–170]. Some of these properties include high carrier mobility (≈200–1000 cm2V −1) and a direct band gap for one or several multi-layers (0.3 eV–2 eV) [169,170]. It is also important to highlight that phosphorene is a candidate for SIB anodes, as its interlayer spacing is 5.4 Å, which is greater than graphite (3.7 Å) [171,172]. −1, almost seven As a result, the speciﬁc capacity of phosphorene for SIB is theoretically 2596 mAh g times hard carbon’s speciﬁc capacity [173,174]. Sun et al. in [175] developed a phosphorene-graphene −1 (0.02 C), with −1 after 100 cycles at 50 mA g material that presented a speciﬁc capacity of 2440 mAh g a capacity retention of 83%. In this work, graphene contributed to a faster charge transfer between its layers, and improved mechanical properties, allowing the anisotropic expansion of the phosphorene layers during cycling.

Transition metal carbides, carbonitrides, and nitrides (MXenes) are 2D materials with a general formula of Mn+1XnTx, where M is a transition metal, X can be carbon and/or nitrogen, and T stands for hydroxyl, oxygen, or ﬂuorine. Thus, carbides provide a surface termination [25,197]. This family of materials was discovered in 2011 from the exfoliation of MAX phase materials in hydroﬂuoric acid (HF) [198]. MXenes are candidates for several applications due to their variety and properties [199,200]. Moreover, due to the fact that MXenes have inter-layer distances larger than graphite, they may enable the intercalation and deintercalation of non-Li-ion batteries, such as SIBs. [200] Examples of MXenes are Ti3C2, Ti3C2Tx, Ti2C, Ta4C3, TiNbC, (Ti0.5Nb0.5)2C, (V0.5Cr0.5)3C2, and Ti3CN [198,201,202].

One of the most studied species for SIB MXene anodes is Ti3C2Tx. Xie et al. showed that for the −1. In contrast, after ﬁrst cycle discharge, this material presented a capacity of 370 mAh g −1 [203,204]. In [205], Zhao et al. studied the 120 cycles, the reversible capacity of Na+ was 80 mAh g electrochemical performance of MXene SIBs in 3D macroporous frameworks. By mixing MXene with poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) 3D and making free-standing ﬁlms of MXene/PMMA, the authors C, thereby removing the PMMA. Three kinds obtained pure MXene by heating the samples up to 450 of MXenes were synthesized: Ti3C2Tx, V2CTx, and Mo2CTx. At 0.25 C, the values of the reversible


Thus, MXenes are a promising family of anode materials for SIBs because of their variety, relative stability in dry air, hydrophilicity, and high conductivity [207,209–211]. In contrast, the restacking of MXene layers because of van der Waals forces, along with hydrogen bonds, hinders the accessibility of ions to active sites on the materials, thereby decreasing its electrochemical performance [207]. Moreover, mechanical methods for obtaining MXenes are generally not possible due to the strong bonds between


Cathodes are a very important aspect of SIBs and should be able to reversibly intercalate the Na+ ions, preferably at voltages greater than 2 V [219]. Ideally a cathode should exhibit low volume expansion upon intercalating Na+ ions and structural stability [219]. It is also essential that they can be synthesized from low-cost and earth-abundant precursors and also be able to provide high speciﬁc capacities and energy densities [1,22]. Some of the prominent high-performance cathodes currently being studied for SIBs are discussed below in greater detail.


Layered TMOs have received signiﬁcant attention and research as cathodes for LIBs and, therefore, have been applied to SIBs, as well. The most common layered TMO is usually of the form NaMO2 (M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni), which are notable because of their elevated redox potentials and energy densities [19,22]. Consequently, one of the ﬁrst type of layered metal oxides to be studied for SIBs were of the type AMO2, where A = Li, Na and M is a transition metal, e.g., Mn, Fe, Co, etc. [22]. These materials have the advantage of being relatively stable, easy to fabricate, and having a large body of research knowledge already available due to their applications in LIBs for a number of years [220,221]. A study by Delmas et al., published in 1981, compared the performance of diﬀerent structural variants of NaxCoO2, the P3 and the O2 [222]. Another important study was by Shibata, who determined the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of Na+ ions into the NaxCoO2 lattice at room temperatures [223]. Since then, Yabuuchi et al., have synthesized NaFeO2 as a cathode for SIB systems [224]. An important study in this area was published by Komaba et al., who studied the performance of Na2/3[Fe1/2Mn1/2]O2 as a cathode for SIBs [225,226].

The search for high energy cathode materials has led to the further development of more improved and innovative cathode systems, such as O and the P type layered oxides, where the Na+ ion exists in prismatic and octahedral conﬁgurations, respectively [19]. Also, depending upon the type of stacking, they are further classiﬁed as O3 (ABCABC), P2 (ABBA), and P3 (ABBCCA) types [19,227].

A layered quaternary O3 type material, Na(Mn0.25Fe0.25Co0.25Ni0.25)O2 has been demonstrated to −1 and an eﬀective speciﬁc work as a cathode in SIBs by Li et al. [228]. An initial capacity of 180 mAh g −1 were obtained, which have been attributed to the excellent reversibility energy density of 578 Wh kg of Na+ ions in the O3 layered structure. Zhou et al. have demonstrated that Co substitution enhances the performance of the O3 type material, NaNi0.45−xMn0.25Ti0.3CoxO2 (NMTCox), with the optimum −1 at a current density of x being 0.05 [229]. This cathode provides a speciﬁc capacity of 180 mAh g −1. Co enhances the performance by improving electronic conductivity and Na+ kinetics [229]. 10 mA g The results of Zhou et al.’s work are provided in Figure 10 below. Here, Figure 10a is a SEM image showing the bead like morphology of the particles with a size range of approximately 1–2 µm, and Figure 10b is an HRTEM image of the same. Figure 10c shows the XRD stack of the various NMTC samples, Figure 10d–i is the elemental maps of the sample, showing a homogenous distribution. Figure 10j is the schematic representation of the synthesis process, and Figure 10k,l is the CV and cycling performance of the material as a positive electrode in SIBs.

The electrodes were synthesized from their precursors by simple solid state reactions and a maximum −1 was obtained for the compound with x = 1 [231]. All the cathodes show capacity of 115 mAh g almost 100% coulombic eﬃciencies and capacity retentions greater than 70%, even after 200 cycles [231]. A complex phase transition from P3 to O1 during the Na+ ion intercalation process and the rearranging of the structure to improve kinetics and stability help to account to for the enhanced performance [231]. Layered TMOs have several advantages. They were one of the ﬁrst cathodes, e.g., one of the ﬁrst layered NaMnO2 products to be evaluated for application in SIBs, and, therefore, there is a signiﬁcant body of knowledge available for varying synthesis procedures, especially those related to manipulating the interlayer spacings [19]. An important advantage of these oxides is that they use relatively low cost metals, such as Mn, Fe, Ni, as their constituents [232,233]. These oxides also are able to withstand large strains and demonstrate considerable structural integrity [234].

Despite the above-mentioned performances and advantages, these compounds demonstrate some drawbacks as well. For example, their sensitivity to air and low electronic conductivity is an important issue [19]. Stability is sometimes another issue, with some of the electrodes demonstrating steady capacity decays, especially at high current rates. This is another aspect that needs improvement [219]. Many of these oxides, especially the Mn incorporated ones, tend to undergo a structural distortion—the Jahn–Teller eﬀect that hinders a long cycle life [235].

It is expected that layered TMOs will continue to play a signiﬁcant role as cathode materials for SIBs. Their easily procurable raw materials, multiple and varying synthesis methods, and diﬀerent obtainable crystal structures will continue to play an important role in their favor [236]. Several techniques have been developed to overcome the Jahn–Teller distortion, substitution by Mg to suppress the polarization is one of the techniques that have been applied with some success [237]. Also being studied are vanadium based oxides, as the open framework provided by these cathodes allows ions to intercalate easily without much friction or hindrance within the structure, thereby helping to achieve greater stability and reversibility [238].

Polyanionic materials provide a novel and diverse group of materials that have found widespread applications as high performance cathodes for SIBs [1]. Various diﬀerent poly-anionic species, e.g., (PO4)3− , provide open framework structures that relatively enhance intercalation [1,227].

Sodium Superionic Conductors (NASICON) are a special class of polyanionic compounds that have 3D structures and large tunnels for the fast conduction of Na+ ions [19,227]. A classical NASICON compound, Na3V2(PO4)3, has a VO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra sharing a corner, thereby creating a 3D V2P3O12 backbone, as well as multiple Na+ ion interstitial sites [239]. Consequently, NASICONs have demonstrated promise as cathodes for SIBs.

An olivine electrode was synthesized using a galvanostatic reduction process and was able to provide a capacity −1. Structural stability of 125 mAh g was maintained over 50 cycles of operation, and the authors have attributed this to the rather strong P–O polyanion bonds, which help to preserve the olivine structure [244]. Li et al. have studied hollow amorphous NaFePO4 nanospheres as positive electrodes in SIBs [245]. The spheres were prepared using a “hard template method” using iron (II) stearate, NaH2PO4, and sodium oleate as precursors. −1 was obtained at a 1 C current density with more than 95% capacity A maximum of 152 mAh g retention over 300 cycles of operation [245]. The amorphous nature prevents lattice stresses and provides a non-disruptive conductive pathway for the sodium ions, which, as per the authors, enables superior electrochemical performance [245].

NaFePO4 has also been used as a composite and/or a hybrid to obtain enhanced performance. A polythiophene (PTh) encapsulated NaFePO4 as a cathode in SIBs has been analyzed by Ali and coworkers [246]. The NaFePO4 olivine was synthesized by delithiating LiFePO4, followed by in-situ −1 was obtained at polymerization and the addition of NaI [246]. A speciﬁc capacity of 142 mAh g −1 within a voltage range of 2.2–4.0 V and with a capacity retention of a current density of 10 mA g 94% over 100 cycles of operation. The addition of the PTh layer enhanced performance by improving conductivity and enabling better stress relieving of the composite [246]. Along similar lines, Fang et al. synthesized a NaFePO4/C microsphere hybrid by forming LiFePO4 using lithium acetate, Fe(NO3)3·9H2O, NH4H2PO4, and citric acid as precursors, followed by electrochemical delithiation −1 Na2SO4 solution [247]. The olivine cathode was able to provide and subsequent sodiation in a 1 mol l −1 with a capacity retention of 90% of ~95% after 240 cycles a speciﬁc discharge capacity of 111 mAh g of operation, at a current density of 0.2C [247]. The authors have been able to identify a two-stage phase transition of NaFePO4 during the Na+ ion intercalation-deintercalation process [247]. Figure 11 demonstrates the important ﬁndings of Fang et al.’s work in greater detail, in which Figure 11a,b features SEM and TEM images, which demonstrate the morphology in greater detail. Figure 10c represents the XRD patterns of the various phosphate phases, and Figure 11d–i shows the elemental maps and elemental composition of the diﬀerent component elements. Figure 11j features a schematic representation of the electrochemically mediated displacement reaction used to synthesize the NaFePO4 sample, and Figure 11k–m shows the representations of the electrochemical performances of the sample positive electrode.

However, the presence of these large polyanionic groups reduces net energy density, and NASICON compounds need carbon or graphene support to improve conductivity and kinetics. Thus, greater work needs to be done to enhance their eﬀectiveness.

Polyanionic materials, especially NASICONs, have attracted signiﬁcant attention due to their large networks and variable tunnel structures. They are able to easily allow insertion and deinsertion of Na+ ions and are relatively structurally stable, thereby allowing for a long cycle life [259]. Notably, NASICONs exist in an assortment of structures, from orthorhombic Na3Ti2(PO4)3, to rhombohedral, to the monoclinic Na3V2(PO4)3 [260].

However, low electronic conductivity is one of the primary hindrances to realizing their full potential. Surface functionalization with carbon and making nanoparticles seemed to improve the performance in this case [19,261]. Nitrogen doping has been also demonstrated to improve overall electrochemical performance, but it has been observed that N doped materials are particularly sensitive to moisture, which reduces their eﬀectiveness [262]. The use of vanadium ions in the NASICON structure has also raised toxicity and environmental concerns [263].

The path forward for NASICONs lies in integrating them with high conductivity materials, such as composites with graphene or carbon nanotubes, thereby making nanostructures to improve conductivity and reduce structural defects during synthesis [264,265]. With the advent of sol-gel based techniques for NASICON synthesis, greater control can be had over the structural parameters, and this promises an important path forward [266].

These advantages notwithstanding, PB suﬀers from several important shortcomings. Primary among these is the presence of signiﬁcant amounts of interstitial or zeolitic water. It has been estimated that interstitial water is more than 15 wt.%, and this signiﬁcantly hinders the long term cycle life by occupying electrochemically active sites [280]. Secondly, it has been found that, for the Fe incorporated PBs (which are also the most common), only the C coordinated Fe sites are electro-active, indicating that half of the vacant lattice spaces are essentially unused [274,281]. However, later research, with the help of X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption ﬁne structure (EXAFS) analysis, have also demonstrated that the Cu or the Co edge is also electrochemically active if the compound is CuHCF or CoHCF [282,283].


A signiﬁcant amount of research is focusing on PBs to be able to overcome these problems. defect free, mesoporous, and other high-surface area Pb analogues are being synthesized to improve their electrochemical activity [285]. Zeolitic water elimination has been achieved by Goodenough by synthesizing rhombohedral PB analogue, having only 0.08 moles of H2O rather than the usual cubic structure [286]. Overall, it is understood that all the various PB frameworks may not be perfectly suitable cathodes for SIBs. PB analogues have provided some interesting outcomes when Zn2+ is used as the intercalating ion instead of alkali ions [287]. The use of surface functionalized PB analogues and applications in low cost aqueous systems are some of the areas in which PB cathodes look to ﬁnd future applications [288].

SIBs are considered to be a highly promising alternative to LIBs. However, in order for that goal to be achievable in the near future, electrode materials must be tailored to provide high energy and power densities. Further the electrode materials must also prove durable and provide a signiﬁcantly long cycle life, especially since SIBs are being considered for grid scale storage, where reliability and longevity are two of the most important parameters.

It is here that these high-performance materials play a very important role. On the anode side, novel 2D materials like TMDs and layered materials like MXenes have the ability to provide large surface areas and enhanced electronic conductivity, as well as access to a greater number of electrochemical sites. Likewise, considering the cathodes, novel materials like NASICON and polyanionic compounds, PB analogues, etc., are currently at the forefront of SIB technology. These materials provide large open framework structures, thereby allowing easy intercalation of Na+ ions and less structural degradation during the intercalation/deintercalation process.

However, considerable challenges still exist in all these cases. Layered materials tend to restack after several cycles, which necessitates using support materials within the layers, essentially making the synthesis complicated. Also, the polyanionic compounds tend to suﬀer from low electronic conductivity, which also makes a graphene/CNT coating necessary.

Regardless of these challenges, greater research in this area will help to elucidate and improve the understanding of the electrochemical mechanisms involved. This will go a long way in adopting SIBs for commercial purposes and greatly enhancing their feasibility.