A potentiometric sulfur dioxide (SO2) gas sensor based on the Li3PO4-Li2SiO3 solid electrolyte thin ﬁlm was developed. The sensor was based on a galvanic cell O2, SO2, Au, Li2SO4-V2O5|Li3PO4-Li2SiO3|Au, SO2, O2. The Li3PO4-Li2SiO3 thin ﬁlm was deposited on the Al2O3 substrate by RF magnetron sputtering, and the Au patterns were fabricated as the electrodes. The sensing electrode materials of Li2SO4-V2O5 with different dopants TiO2 and MgO were prepared, and as the ratio of Li2SO4:TiO2 is 1:1 (mol) with 5 wt. % V2O5 and 5 wt. % MgO, the sensor showed relatively good response characteristics to SO2 at 450○C. Then, the sensor was further tested at the working temperature from 400○C to 500○C. The results show that the sensor has good response to SO2 at 400–450○C, and the sensitivity is 90.15–57.19 mV/dec.


Sulfur dioxide (SO2), one of the major atmosphere pollutants, is harmful to people’s health. So in the past several decades, researchers focused on how to detect the concentration of SO2 accurately by developing different kinds of sensors such as electrochemical gas sensors,1–3 semiconductor gas sensors,4,5 infrared gas sensors,6,7 holographic gas sensors,8 and so on. Compared to other sensors, the solid electrolyte based sensors,9–12 as one of the electrochemical gas sensors, have good selectivity, moderate cost, and system integration capabilities,13–15 so they have been widely studied these years.16,17 In order to improve the sensing properties of the solid electrolytes based SO2 sensors, researchers focus on ﬁnding more suitable materials of solid electrolytes and electrodes. Early researchers attempted to make SO2 sensors using metal sulfates, such as K2SO4,18,19 Na2SO4,20 Li2SO4,21 Ag2SO4,22,23 and Li2SO4Ag2SO4,24–26 as the solid ionic conductance and the precious metal as the reference electrodes to keep the stable reference potential at high temperature. But these sensors are difﬁcult to be applied in the industry because the sensing characteristics are limited by the low ionic conductivities of the metal sulfates.27 Sensors based on NASICON,28–30 which is an excellent sodium ion conductor, shows good sensitivity and fast response speed. However, the response characteristic of NASICON would be destroyed by humid air at ambient temperature due to the inherent properties of NASICON.13 Besides, Shi et al.31 developed a YSZ-based SO2 sensor, which has a high oxygen ion conductivity. The sensor has great response characteristic at over 600○C. But the power consumption of these sensors is SO2 sensors32,33 can work at relative lower temperature 500 ○C. In large because of the high working temperatures. The Li3PO4-based the sensors, the sensing material is Li2SO4, and the reaction is catalyzed by V2O5. The sensors have simple manufacturing process and fast response speed. However, the working temperature of the solid electrolyte is still high, and the response characteristics at such temperatures are not good as expected. To lower the working temperature and improve the response characteristics of the sensor, one important effort is to prepare the better ionic conductive ﬁlms. At the same time, to ﬁnd out the appropriate sensing materials for realizing a fast reaction and easy ion transferring to electrolyte is another way.


A compound Li3PO4-Li2SiO3 thin ﬁlm which shows much higher ionic conductivity than other lithium-dominated conductors has been proposed in our previous research.34 And it can be used in a sensor which can work at a relatively low temperature and has good response characteristic, e.g., the CO2 sensors based on the Li3PO4-Li2SiO3 thin ﬁlm working well at temperature below

In this paper, in order to realize a SO2 sensor at low temperature, a galvanic cell O2, SO2, Au, Li2SO4-V2O5|Li3PO4-Li2SiO3|Au, SO2, O2 was developed. The Li3PO4-Li2SiO3 thin ﬁlm was chosen as a solid electrolyte, and it was deposited on the Al2O3 substrate by RF magnetron sputtering. The sensing materials covered on Au were the sensing electrode, and Au was as reference electrode. The sensing materials were prepared, characterized, and their sensing properties were tested and compared. Finally, the sensor based on the selected sensing material was tested.


The sensor, as schematically shown in Fig. 1, consists of the substrate, solid electrolyte thin ﬁlm, sensing electrode, and reference electrode. In order to simplify the preparation process and improve the properties, the sensor adopted a single sensing electrode structure. Aiming to detect SO2, the sensing electrode used a material which can be formed by SO2 and contains lithium ions as a main material. Hereby, we chose Li2SO4 as the primary sensing electrode material because another candidate material Li2SO3 is not stable at high temperature and can be decomposed at 455○C.36 At the same time, adsorbent TiO2, catalyst V2O5, and catalyst MgO were incorporated into the sensing electrode materials to improve the response speed. TiO2, which has high porosity and surface area, contributes to adsorption of the SO2 gas on the reaction electrode.37 As a wellknown catalyst, V2O5 can catalyze the oxidation of SO2 to SO3, and so 5 wt. % V2O5 was added into the sensing electrode to speed up the reaction.30 MgO can adsorb SO2 chemically and catalyze the adsorbed SO2 to transform to two forms of SO3 The addition of MgO may change the potential of the sensing electrode and the equilibrium state of the electrochemical reaction, thus affecting the recovery characteristics of the sensor.


The Li3PO4-Li2SiO3-based SO2 sensor’s sensing mechanism was based on the electrochemical reaction principle of the galvanic battery. When the sensor was in the ambient air with different SO2 concentrations, electrochemical reactions occurred at different degrees in the sensing electrode and reference electrode. The potential of the reference electrode almost kept constant, while the potential of the sensing electrode varied with the variation of SO2 gas concentration. Therefore, when the reaction reached the equilibrium state, one can detect the SO2 gas concentration by measuring the potential between the two electrodes.

The reaction on the sensing electrode takes place in two steps and can be expressed as Eqs. (1) and (2). The SO2 ﬁrst adsorbs on the sensing electrode. At high temperatures and catalysis of V2O5, it reacts with O2 to give SO3. This step is a relatively slow reaction and can retard the reaction speed. Then, SO3 participate in the reaction shown in Eq. (2). The reaction on the reference electrode can be presented as Eq. (3). The lithium ions supported by the Li3PO4-Li2SiO3 thin ﬁlm and Li2SO4 reacts with oxygen on the reference electrode. Combining Eqs. (1)–(3), the total reaction can be described as Eq. (4). By analyzing the above electrochemical reactions, the EMF of the sensor can be written as Eq. (5) based on the Nernst equation, where E is the EMF, ∆GΘ is the Gibbs free energy of the total reaction under a certain temperature and a certain pressure, n is the number of reactive electrons, F is the Faraday constant, R is a universal gas constant, and T is the ambient temperature. Besides, aLi2O and aLi2SO4 are the activities of Li2O and Li2SO4, respectively, pSO2 and pO2 are the partial pressures of sulfur dioxide and oxygen, respectively.



With Li2SO4-V2O5 as sensing electrode materials, two SO2 sensors were fabricated: one is Li3PO4 thin ﬁlm as the solid electrolyte and the other is Li3PO4-Li2SiO3 thin ﬁlm as the solid electrolyte. The response performances of the two sensors were compared in this paper. The test temperature of Li3PO4-based SO2 sensors was 500○C, while the test temperature of the Li3PO4-Li2SiO3-based SO2 sensor was 400○C. As shown in Fig. 3(a), although the Li3PO4-based SO2 sensor has a response to SO2 gas at 500○C, the output signal is unstable and has many clutter waves.


Although the Li3PO4-Li2SiO3 solid electrolyte thin ﬁlm used for SO2 gas detection can improve the performance of the sensor to some extent, there are still some problems, such as poor stability of the sensor and slow response and recovery process. In order to improve the response characteristics of the SO2 sensor, the more suitable sensing electrode materials were studied by changing the type and proportion of the dopants in this paper. According to the sensing mechanism of SO2 gas sensor based on the solid electrolyte ﬁlm, the electrochemical reaction of the sensing electrode is a twostep reaction. Therefore, how to make the two-step reaction fast and reach a balance quickly, so as to output a stable EMF is the key to improve the response performance of the Li3PO4-Li2SiO3-based SO2 sensor. The two-step reaction on the sensing electrode is shown as Eqs. (1) and (2). In the ﬁrst step, SO2 is oxidized to SO3 with the help of the catalyst, and then, it participates in the reaction in the second step. So it is important for the oxidization to proceed quickly, and the type and dosage of the catalyst can affect the rate of oxidation. Besides, in order to make the SO2 gas react quickly and completely on the sensing electrode, it is also necessary to add some adsorbents into the sensing electrode material. In this paper, TiO2 was selected as an adsorbent, while V2O5 and MgO were used as catalysts, and all of them can be doped into the sensing electrode material to promote the reaction. The sensing electrode materials with different types and proportions of the dopants were prepared to fabricate the sensors which can detect the concentration of SO2 gas, and the response characteristics of each sensor were tested and analyzed at 450○C. The sensing performance of the sensor based on two solid electrolytes.

The response curves at different temperatures in Fig. 6 were ﬁtted with the Nernst equation to obtain the sensor’s Nernst property, namely, the sensitivity. The results are shown in Fig. 7(a). From the ﬁgure, it can be seen that the output EMF of the sensor and the logarithm of the SO2 gas concentration can be well ﬁtted by the Nernst equation at all testing temperatures, showing a good linear relationship between them. The sensitivities of the sensor are different at different temperatures, which mean that the electrochemical reaction on both the reference and sensing electrodes will change at different temperatures, and the ﬁnal equilibrium state on the sensor will be different. The sensor has the highest sensitivity of 90.15 mV/dec at 400 ○C, while the sensitivity shows a decreasing perature is 450 ○C, it is only 57.19 mV/dec. As shown in Fig. 7(b), trend as the working temperature increases. 


A potential SO2 gas sensor based on a compound Li3PO4Li2SiO3 thin ﬁlm as an electrolyte was developed, and it shows preferable sensing properties at a relatively low working temperature compared with the Li3PO4-based SO2 gas sensor. By changing the type and proportion of the dopants, the optimal sensing electrode materials were determined as follows: Li2SO4:TiO2 = 1:1 (mol), 5 wt. % V2O5, and 5 wt. % MgO. The sensor using the materials as the sensing electrode shows good response and recovery characteristics at 400–450○C. In addition, the sensitivity characterof the sensor is basically the same as the initial EMF at 425 ○C.


In summary, the research results in this paper demonstrate the potential of the compound Li3PO4-Li2SiO3 thin ﬁlm to be used to fabricate an SO2 sensor with low power consumption and high performance.