
Mineral-like  framework  phosphates  containing metals in the oxidation state +2 are of practical interest as  materials  with  a  high  resistance  to  high  temperatures and thermal shocks, radiation, water, and aggressive media [1–10]. These properties make them promising for use as matrix structures providing the strong immobilization of elements present in radioactive and other  toxic  wastes  (in  particular,  Sr,  Cd,  and  Pb). A wide  range  of  isomorphic  substitutions  in  framework phosphates provides the possibility to incorporate  a  broad  spectrum  of  chemical  elements  in  their composition and perform the targeted control over the physical characteristics of formed phases.

The possibility of cations in the oxidation state +2 to be incorporated into the framework and cavity positions of the structures of M0.5 + x Zr2 – x(PO4)3 solid solutions (M = Co, Mn, Cd, Ca, Sr, Pb, Ba; M' = Mg, Co, Mn) was studied in our earlier works [11–13]. The study of phosphate series of similar composition with M = Co, Mn, M' = Ni, Cu was continued in [14]. The phosphates of these systems form structures with octahedral-tetrahedral  frameworks  of  the  NaZr2(PO4)3 (NZP) [15] and Sc2(WO4)3 (SW) [16] types. The distinction between these related structural families consists in the packing of framework-forming polyhedra.

In  this  work,  new  M0.5+xZr2–x(PO4)3  phosphates (M = Cd, Sr, Pb; M' = Ni, Cu; 0 ≤ х ≤ 2) synthesized,  and  some  regularities  of  the  formation  of structures  in  these  systems  were  investigated  within the study of framework phosphates.


The  synthesis  of M0.5+xZr2–x(PO4)3  phosphates (M = Cd, Sr, Pb; M' = Ni, Cu; 0 ≤ х ≤ 2) was performed  by  the  sol-gel  method  with  further  heat treatment. The initial compounds used were of chemically  pure  grade:  CdO,  CuO,  Sr(NO3)2,  NiCl2  ⋅ 6H2O,  Pb(NO3)2,  and  ZrOCl2  ⋅  8H2O,  NH4H2PO4. Copper  and  cadmium  oxides  were  preliminary  dissolved in nitric acid, and the other reagents were dissolved in distilled water. To a stoichiometric mixture of  aqueous  solutions  of  metal  salts,  an  ammonium dihydrophosphate  solution  taken  also  in  compliance with  the  phosphate  stoichiometry  was  added  under stirring. The reaction mixture was dried at 90°C and then dispersed and stepwise annealed at temperatures in  the  range  600–800°C.  Annealing  was  alternated with dispersion after every stage. The phase composition  of  the  samples  after  every  annealing  stage  was monitored by X-ray diffraction.


X-ray diffraction studies were performed on a Shimadzu XRD-6000 diffractometer (filtered CuKα radiation, λ = 1.54178 Å) at 2θ angles in the range 10°–60° at a 0.02° scan step.

The X-ray diffraction patterns of samples for structural studies were recorded at 2θ angles in the range 10°–110° at a 0.02° step and an exposure time of 15 s per point. The processing of X-ray diffraction patterns and the refinement of phosphate structures were performed by the Rietveld method [17] using the Rietan97  software  [18].  Peak  profiles  were  fitted  using  the modified pseudo-Voigt function (Mod-TCH pV [19]). The  chemical  composition  and  homogeneity  of samples were monitored by electron microprobe analysis.  The  studies  were  performed  on  a  JEOL  JSM7600F scanning electron microscope equipped with a field emission gun (Schottky cathode) and a microanalysis system, i.e., a Premium OXFORD X-Max 80 energy dispersive spectrometer with a semiconductor silicon drift detector. The precision of determining the elemental composition of samples was 2.5 mol %.

The IR spectra of the synthesized compounds were recorded on a FTIR-8400 spectrophotometer with an ATR attachment at room temperature at wavenumbers in the range 1400–400 cm–1. The samples were prepared by the deposition of finely dispersed films onto a KBr substrate.


According  to  the  results  of  X-ray  diffraction,  IR spectroscopy,  and  electron  microprobe  analysis, phosphates of the NZP structural type are formed in the M0.5 + x Zr2 – x(PO4)3 (M = Cd, Sr, Pb; M' = Ni, and Cu) systems.

Rather broad regions of solid solutions were obtained in the series of phosphates incorporating comparatively large  cations  of  strontium  (rCN  =  6  =  1.18  Å)  and  lead (rCN = 6 = 1.19 Å). Solid solutions of the NPZ type are formed by Sr0.5 + xNixZr2 – x(PO4)3 phosphates at 750°C and 0 ≤ х ≤ 0.4 (Fig. 1a) and by Sr0.5 + xCuxZr2 – x(PO4)3 phosphates  at  650°C  within  a  range  0  ≤  x  ≤  0.5.

A smooth shift of diffraction maxima in the X-ray diffraction patterns of phosphates with a gradual change in their composition confirms the formation of solid solutions in the studied series. The samples with the composition 0.5 ≤ x ≤ 2.0 (M' = Ni) and 0.6 ≤ x ≤ 2.0 (M' = Cu) contained impurity phosphates of metals in the oxidation state of +2. The synthesis temperature of lead-containing  Pb0.5  +  x Zr2  –  x(PO4)3  phosphates (M' = Ni, Cu) was 600°C, and the region of the formation of NZP solid solutions (space group R ) was 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.5. The narrowest regions of solid solutions among the studied  series  were  observed  for  cadmium-containing  phosphates (rCN = 6 = 0.95 Å). In the Cd0.5 + xNixZr2 – x(PO4)3 system,  single-phase  phosphates  of  the  NZP  structural type were obtained within the range 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.2, and the temperature of their synthesis was 650°C. In the Cd0.5 + xCuxZr2 – x(PO4)3 series, the end-member of the system with х = 0 crystallizes in the NZP structure, and the samples with х > 0 represent a mixture of Cd0.5Zr2(PO4)3 with copper and cadmium phosphates. The  X-ray  diffraction  patterns  of  all  the  singleZr2 – x(PO4)3 (M = Cd, Sr, Pb; M' = 3. The IR spectra of the synthesized phosphates are similar  by  the  shapes  and  positions  of  absorption bands and argue for the absence of X-ray amorphous admixtures  (Fig.  1b).  The  selection  rules  admit  six bands for stretching and bending antisymmetric vibrations each, two bands of symmetric stretching vibrations, and four bands of bending symmetric vibrations in  the  spectra  of  NZP  phosphates  with  space  group R . In the Sr0.5 +  xNixZr2  – x(PO4)3 system shown in 3 Fig. 1b, the bands at 1200–1000 cm–1 are assigned to anisymmetric stretching vibrations ν3, and the bands at  1000–950  cm–1  belong  to  symmetric  stretching vibrations  ν1.  Antisymmetric  bending  vibrations  ν4 appear as a triplet of bands in the range 650–530 cm–1 as typical  for  space  group  R .  The  absorption  band below  440  cm–1  corresponds  to  symmetric  bending vibrations ν2. The transformation of the spectral pattern with a gradual change in the composition of phosphates has a smooth character.



According to electron microscopy data, the samples of all the synthesized individual compounds and solid solutions (Fig. 2) are homogeneous and, according to microprobe  analysis  results,  their  chemical  composition corresponds to theoretical values (Table 1).

The crystallographic characteristics of phosphates were calculated using the results of indexing of their X-ray diffraction patterns. The character of change in their concentration dependences was governed by the cationic  composition  of  the  samples  (Fig.  3).  Thus, Zr4+ ions (0.72 Å) are replaced by slightly smaller Ni2+ ions (0.69 Å) in the framework with increasing x in the Cd0.5 + xNixZr2 – x(PO4)3 series.


In  the  similar  series  of  phosphates  of  strontium, whose ionic radius is slightly smaller than for lead, the dependence of the unit cell parameters on the chemical  composition  demonstrates  an  intermediate  picture: both parameters а and с of the Sr0.5 + xNixZr2 – x(PO4)3 phosphates increase with increasing х.


The crystal structures of triple Sr0.9Zr1.6(PO4)3 NZP phosphates (M' = Ni, Cu; х = 0.4) were refined by the Rietveld method using X-ray powder diffraction  data.  The  used  initial  model  was  the  structural data for the Sr0.5Zr2(PO4)3 phosphate [20]. From Fig. 4 it can be seen that the experimental and calculated X-ray diffraction patterns of phosphates are in good agreement.



Space group Z Range of 2θ angles, deg Unit cell parameters a, Å c, Å V, Å3 Number of reflections Number of refined parameters* Reliability factors, %: Rwp; Rp * The first number is the background and profile parameters, scale factor, and unit cell parameters, and the second number is the positional and thermal parameters of atoms and their occupancies occupancies.

An  increase  in  the ionic size (from Cd2+ to Sr2+ and further to Pb2+) leads to the growth of the stability field of an NZP structure. The rather common trend, when an optimal structure formation condition is the incorporation of comparatively large elements prone to form an ionic-type bond into  the  cavities  and  small-size  elements  with  an appreciable  proportion  of  covalency  in  the  metal– oxygen bond into the framework, is observed for NZP compounds.


The results of phase formation in the studied series with the earlier investigated isoformula phosphate systems incorporating М = Co, Mn [4–6] are given in Table  6.  The  M0.5 + x Zr2 – x(PO4)3  phosphates incorporating  cations  of  small  ionic  radii  (Co2+  and Mn2+)  into  structure  cavities  crystallize  in  the  scandium tungstate (SW) structural type, which is characterized by the parquet packing of framework-forming polyhedra  columns  and  small  tetrahedrally  coordinated  cavities.  The  phosphates  with  comparatively large ions (Cd2+ , Sr2+ , Pb2+) in framework cavities form  an  NZP-type  structure  with  the  stack  packing (along one direction) of polyhedra columns and larger cavities with CN = 6 and 8.