The reversible intercalation of sodium ion into tungsten oxide WO3  appears as an interesting alternative to hydrogen or lithium ion reduction in order to get the characteristic transition from clear transparent to bluish coloration in electrochromic devices, but it has been comparatively less considered. In orderto address further viable all-ceramic devices based on sodium ion intercalation and overcome the issue of WO3  degradation in aqueous media, three conﬁgurations of WO3  thin ﬁlm-based electrochromic half-cells were tested, namely in (i) aqueous acidiﬁed Na2  SO4  electrolyte, (ii) room temperature ionic liquid BEPipTFSI electrolyte and (iii) aqueous acidiﬁed Na2  SO4  electrolyte associated with an amorphous NASICON-cap onto WO3  ﬁlm. We compared their electro-optical characteristics during 100 voltammetry cycles, including the Na + diffusion coeﬃcient calculated through electrochemical method. It is found that sputter-deposited amorphous WO3  thin ﬁlms on transparent conductive substrates is promising for electrochromic all-ceramic devices based on Na ion insertion. Electrochemical characterization in aqueousmedium is not relevant to extract relevant data when WO3  is in direct contact with the electrolyte as the electrochromic ﬁlm is progressively dissolved. In contrast, WO3  capped with oxide amorphous Naion conductor readily operates over 100 cycles, the capping layer preventing degradation by the aqueous medium. Alternatively, ionic liquid does not degrade the WO3  ﬁlm and can be employed to eﬃciently characterize the electro-optical performances.
Among the most studied types of electrochromic (EC) materials, Tungsten oxide ﬁlms have widely spanned the EC community due to their ability to switch their optical properties under electrons and monovalent cations intercalation-deintercalation process (WO 3 + xM + + xe − = M x WO 3 ) [1].  Applications involving sodium ion conduction are increasingly considered. For instance, due to high abundance of sodium in the Earth crust and low cost electrode, including WO 3,  sodium ion batteries (SIB) are under development [ 2,  3]  whereas e-nose detection popularizes Na + superionic conductor (NASICON) as a solid electrolyte in contact with WO 3,  among other sensing layers [ 4,  5 ]. Besides application in EC devices [6],  these tungsten trioxide thin ﬁlms embrace manifold applications e.g. photochromism [7],  plasmonics [8],  ﬂexible displays [9],  gas sensors [10],  photocatalysis [ 11,  12]  or energy storage material [ 13,  14 ], sometimes with combined functions [ 15,  16 ]. Despite this rising demand of sodium-based electrochemical devices, the EC community is not yet intensively involved on the synthesis, characterization and development of sodium-based EC devices and individual components. If intercalations of H +,  Li +,  or even K +,  into WO 3 are usually reported they have also some limitations due to hygrometry (H + ), quantiﬁcation issues (Li +,  H + ) or poor ionic conduction (K + ) [17].  The intercalation of Na + could then be considered despite its larger cation size (r  Na + > r Li + > r H + ) and then possible slower associated kinetics. Surprisingly, in the case of V 2 O 5,  a comparison between the cycling behaviors in LiCl and NaCl aqueous electrolytes showed higher electrochemical capacity in the latter case, possibly in link with larger surface reaction [18].  Therefore, the development of EC devices based upon Na-intercalated WO 3 should not be overlooked before detailed investigation is conducted. If WO 3 can readily operate a sodiation-desodiation process using typical three electrodes conﬁguration in aqueous [19–21] or non-aqueous [22–25] electrochemistry, investigations on how to handle the degradation of the amorphous tungsten oxide under potentiodynamic conditions in an aqueous Na + -based medium are lacking. Actually, the degradation in the amorphous case has been suggested [ 26,  27]  as originating from very open microstructure with the formation of alkali metatungstate. Then this microstructure would result dissolution by the presence of active sites available for ion-exchange reaction and cycling conditions is considered as voltage enhanced dissolution. Similar processes occurring upon reversible H + and Li + intercalation, conclusions derived from of such investigations could beneﬁt to the entire EC community. Recently electrochemical pre or post-treatments [28–30] have been proposed to increase the durability of Li-based EC-systems. Here we propose alternative ways by capping the active layer or changing the medium for Na-based EC systems. Dedicated half-cells based on amorphous sputtered ﬁlms have been considered in our group to assess the feasibility of an allceramic EC device based on sodium intercalation using voltammetry cycles [ 31,  32 ]. In the present study, to properly consider the aforementioned degradation in aqueous medium, we propose two alternative conﬁgurations to gain information during 100 cycles of coloring-bleaching to be compared to sole moderate acidic Na 2 SO 4 aqueous medium: (i) a room temperature ionic liquid (BEPipTFSI) instead of the aqueous medium or (ii) the same aqueous medium but with WO 3 capped by a NASICON layer leading to isolate WO 3 from the direct contact with the aqueous solution. The present paper is dedicated to characterize the electrochemical and optical properties that aims to benchmark the three half-cell conﬁgurations and to highlight opportunities to interface WO 3 with a ionic liquid or a ceramic ionic conductor in future electrochemical devices.
Films were deposited in a 40-l chamber by direct current magnetron sputtering. Table 1 gives the main parameters for amorphous WO 3 ﬁlms sputtering. More details on the experimental setup can be found elsewhere [33].  500 nm Indium Tin Oxide (ITO, 10 /  resistance) coated glass substrates were used. These latters were partially masked during the deposition in order to ensure electrical contact to the top side with the ITO layer for cyclic voltammetry purposes. An optimized unique level of oxygen ﬂow was used corresponding to an oxygen substoichiometry of ~0.1, in order to fulﬁll mixed conduction condition together with a high visible transmission of the WO 3 ﬁlms [32].  For some of the samples, an amorphous sputtered NASICON cap of ca. 300 nm was deposited on WO 3 using Zr-Si and Na 3 PO 4 targets following the procedure described in Refs. [ 34,  35 ]. 
Electrochemical measurements were carried out using a VSP300 potentiostat/galvanostat from Biologic. The electrochemical experiments were performed according a three electrodes conﬁguration as sketched in Fig. 1: (i) the working electrode typically includes a WO 3 /ITO/glass sample capped or not with NASICON which exposes an active surface area of ~2 cm 2,  (ii) a Pt sheet serves as counter electrode of surface ~1 cm 2 (Metrohm), and potentials were given against (iii) a Ag/AgCl reference electrode (Bioblock). Two kinds of electrolytes, namely an aqueous solution and room temperature ionic liquid (RTIL), were used to study the cycling properties of a EC half-cell. During the cyclic voltammetry tests, the potential applied at the sample was linearly varied in the range [ −0.65 V, + 0.45 V]. For practical reasons, the potential was measured against the same reference electrode whatever the electrolyte, but no direct comparison of the potential values will be done between the three conﬁgurations due to the use of different solvents. The selected aqueous electrolyte was 0.1 M Na 2 SO 4 ( ≥99.0 %, Sigma-Aldrich product) providing a Na + source, being electrochemically inert without any electroactive species. The solution was buffered to 2.7 pH units thanks to a phthalate salt (0.1 M C 8 H 5 KO 4 / 0.1 M HCl) in order to limit the oxide dissolution as predicted by the Pourbaix diagram of tungsten, which indicates a stable region under 4 pH units [36] and consistent with usual EC device pH organic electrolyte [37].  Room temperature ionic liquids (RTILs) are attractive electrolytes with several interests particularly the absence of solvent [38].  The used RTIL was composed of 1-butyl,1-ethylpiperidinium with bis(triﬂuoromethylsulfonyl)imide (BEPipTSI). The latter was chosen for its ability to work in airconditions, having a lower hygroscopic degree than e.g. imidazolium (the maximum content of [H 2 O]  1500 ppm), and a relatively low viscosity of 290 mPa.s [39] in this piperidinium seriesat room temperature. All the RTILs used in this work were synthesized and puriﬁed according to a published procedure [39].  In this non-aqueous solvent, Na + cations were introduced by the addition of 0.1 M NaTFSI (99.5%, Solvionic). Measurements were conducted without stirring (to simulate real device conditions) and at room temperature. Thus three conﬁgurations were experimentally studied according to the following stacks (see Fig. 1 ): 
Transmittance measurements were conducted ex situ (40 0-800nm) or in situ (600 nm), when applicable, using a Varian Cary 50 0 0 spectrophotometer or a Bio-Logic spectrophotometer (SEC20 0 0UV/VIS) coupled with a ~1 cm 3 -electrochemical cell, respectively. 
The structural properties of the coatings were analyzed by Xray diffraction (XRD, Bruker Advance D8, K α1 = 1,5406 ˚A). Morphological investigations were done by SEM (Philips XL 30S-FEG microscope) and (high resolution) transmission electron microscopy(HR)TEM (JEM ARM 200F microscope, including selected area electron diffraction SAED for structural analysis). Elemental analysis was performed by SIMS analysis (Cameca IMS 7F). 
In order to perform an eﬃcient electrochemical cycling, i.e. a reversible sodiation-desodiation process implying a molar volume variation, the as-deposited thin ﬁlms require porous space to accommodate the structural changes [ 40,  41 ]. Figs. 2 a-c show typical SEM and TEM pictures of as-deposited WO 3 thin ﬁlm. The morphology highlights a columnar growth typical for high pressure deposition with some typical tensile cracks ( Figs. 2 a and c) [6].  The XRD analysis showed a broad diffraction hump consistent with the amorphous structure of sputtered WO 3 in coherence with HRTEM and SAED. Indeed, images are free of crystalline clusters ( Fig. 2 d, right insert), whereas the electron diffraction signal extracted from SAED consists in a diffuse halo ( Fig. 2 d, left insert). 
Following visual observations suggesting a degradation of the thin ﬁlms at low scan rate (0.5 mV/s) [31] six different samples were synthetized to optimize the scan rate. Fig. 3 a shows the evolution of the second cyclic voltammogram (CV) of the WO 3 ﬁlms characterized with scan rates ranging from 0.5 to 100 mV/s. The data reveal a net difference in the shape of CV in accordance with the literature [42].  Amorphous WO 3 ﬁlms possess a large energetically distributed intercalation sites yielding CV free of distinct peaks [43].  The scan ramp has been ﬁxed to 20 mV/s range in order to optimize the balance between the following requirements: (i) a good resolution of the electrochemical signal, (ii) the establishment of a quasi-stationary state and (iii) allowing suﬃcient cycling before the degradation occurs (i.e. as soon as the ﬁrst cycles[ 32,  44 ]). It appears that the anodic and cathodic peak current densities (j pa ) and (j pc ) exhibit a linear relation with the square root of the scan rate between 20 mV/s and 100 mV/s ( Fig. 3 a, insert) suggesting a diffusion-controlled process. The diffusion coeﬃcient itself will be discussed in Section 3.4.  It is useful to check whether there is a H + -Na + co-intercalation in aqueous medium and to validate the possibility to use the aqueous electrolyte with short residence times to characterize the insertion of Na + ion. Secondary ion mass spectrometric analyses have been performed on thin ﬁlms of WO 3 in the as-deposited state and after chronoamperometric intercalation at −0.6 V in H 2 SO 4 (0.1 M), Na 2 SO 4 (0.1 M) and RTIL containing Na + cations ( Fig. 3 b). The chosen potential corresponds to a value close to the maximum insertion rate of Na + cations determined from the CV. The RTIL electrolyte only allows sodium cations to be inserted because it does not contain any protons. The proﬁles obtained are shown in Fig. 3 b for a measurement time equivalent to probe the thickness of the tungsten oxide ﬁlm. The ﬁrst 50 seconds are not to be taken into account; they correspond to the analysis of the extreme surface on which a layer of gold has been deposited to make the sample more conductive. On one hand, the quantities of tungsten ( Fig. 3 b in green), oxygen ( Fig. 3 b in blue) and hydrogen ( Fig. 3 b in black) do not change much or not at all i.e., the WO 3 ﬁlm is not altered by the electrochemical analyses. Hydrogen measurements have approximately the same intensity whatever the electrolyte, which means the inserted protons in aqueous medium (H 2 SO 4 or Na 2 SO 4 ) in the ﬁlm are negligible regarding the moisture content of the ﬁlm. Note that this humidity can be incorporated during ﬁlm synthesis because the deposition chamber is not under ultra-high vacuum but also during the transport of the ﬁlms between the different characterization steps. On the other hand, the amount of sodium ( Fig. 3 b in red) increases signiﬁcantly when using sodium-based electrolytes. Although it is impossible to reason with the relative intensities of the elements to access compositions in a quantitative way, it can be deduced that there is an effective insertion of Na + cations by aqueous medium with a negligible inﬂuence of proton insertion. 
An important optical feature is that the observed characteristic dark blue coloring of the coatings indicates the reduction caused by the intercalation of M + cations [ 6,  19,  21 ]. Optical transmission monitoring was preferably performed about 600 nm which a noticeable absorption of the human eye occurs. A ﬁrst practical objective was to deﬁne conditions to get representative measurements of the reversible sodiation-desodiation process. The typical cyclic voltammograms (CVs) of a half-cell ITO/WO 3 /Na 2 SO 4(aq) /Pt (conﬁguration A) are shown in Fig. 3 c and the corresponding in situ monochromatic transmission (600 nm) change is shown in Fig. 3 d. The overall CV shape evolves in a nonlinear way as the cycle number increases. If a peak pattern is observed anodically after 20-30 cycles (“duck” shaping), no clear reduction peak is evidenced as already reported for amorphous WO 3 [43] (see also Fig. 3 a), except a slight shoulder distinguishable before the water signal. These observations are highlighted by theevolutions of the charge capacities (Q red,  Q ox ) depicted in the insert of Fig. 3 c: these capacities are slightly increasing up to the 20 th cycle. This can be related to the necessary initial activation process, as invoked in the literature [45].  Over this threshold, j and Q values indicate a drastic degradation along the progression of the coloring-bleaching cycles. The electrochemical capacity decreases by more than two thirds of its initial capacity after 100 cycles and reversibility worsens (about only ca. 2.5 mC/cm 2 extracted for 4 mC/cm 2 injected [ Fig. 3 c, insert]). In the meantime, the optical transmission evidences a concomitant degradation. Insert of Fig. 3 d shows transmission modulation ( △T) and coloration eﬃciencies ( ηox,  ηred ) of WO 3 thin ﬁlm at 600 nm wavelength, for the 1 st,  5 th,  10 th,  20 th,  50 th and 100 th cycles deduced from Figs. 3a and 3 c △T can be expressed by where T ox (%) is the transmission of the sample in the bleached state and T red (%) is the transmission of the sample in the colored one. △T evolution obviously coincides with the decrease of j. Thus the transmittance modulation values evolve from around 25% in the ﬁrst cycles to progressively reduce to a level off of 5% when j becomes featureless. The coloration eﬃciencies ( η) can be determined by [46] where Q is the inserted or extracted charge per unit area ( Fig. 3 c, insert) and △OD the optical density change of WO 3 thin ﬁlm given by △OD = log ( T ox / T red ).  ηOx and ηRed refer to coloration eﬃciencies of the oxidation (extraction) and reduction (insertion) processes respectively. η value is close to 20 cm 2 /C for the ﬁrst cycles and decreases with time ( Fig. 3 d, insert). This value is relatively high, at least in the ﬁrst 20 cycles, by comparison to reported values for amorphous sputtered ﬁlms [47] or lithiated polycrystalline sputtered ones [48].  These data show obviously a signiﬁcant and concomitant drop of the transmission modulation and of the charge capacity evolution after the 20 th cycles. Whatever, the electrochromic process is demonstrated, with performances in agreement with the literature data as displayed by the 20 th ﬁrst values of the coloration eﬃciencies. Since this rapid and signiﬁcant decrease of the bleachingcoloration process is probably due to the chemical reactivity of WO 3 in aqueous medium (see Refs. [ 26,  27,  44 ]), alternative conﬁgurations were tested in non-aqueous medium (conﬁguration B) and with protection outer ﬁlm (conﬁguration C). 
Same CV conditions as in the previous section were applied in ionic liquid BEPTFSI including 0.1 M NaTFSI as sodium source. The WO 3 thin ﬁlms operated a reversible switch between a reduced bluish state ( −0.4 V) and an oxidized bleach one ( −0.1 V) [ Fig. 4 a]. The CVs are outstandingly almost superimposable with the cycles by comparison with conﬁguration A. The electrochemical capacity is slightly decreasing with less 10 % loss after 100 cycles and reversibility remains (Q red = Q ox ) [see Fig. 4 a, insert]. Due to the high viscosity of the RTIL preventing the use of the electrochemical cell for in situ optical measurements, only ex situ transmission spectra were acquired in the full visible range for different states ( Fig. 4 b). △T values remain obviously superior to the aqueous case ( ca. 40 % @ 600 nm whatever the considered cycle vs.  25 % at best in the ﬁrst cycles of conﬁguration A) and exhibit a good stability. Contrary to the marked degradation observed due to exposure to the aqueous medium of Conﬁguration A, SEM picture released after 400 cycles (not shown) did not evidence change in the surface morphology due to the cyclic sodiation in ionic liquid. It can reasonably be concluded from this result that the quality of the as-deposited thin ﬁlm is not the cause of the degradation observed in aqueous electrolyte (conﬁguration A). This degradation is rather the result of direct interaction of WO 3 with the aqueous electrolyte. The observed stability with time of the electrochemical system in conﬁguration B and the related bleaching-coloring process indicates that the amount of WO 3 available for optical switching remains stable and that the dissolution of the WO 3 ﬁlm seems to be strongly limited in this aprotic ionic liquid, in contrast with aqueous medium [ 26,  49 ]. The second investigated alternative conﬁguration C consisted of an amorphous 300 nm-cap of NASICON directly sputtered on the as-deposited WO 3 /ITO/glass sample. If eﬃcient, such a solid barrier layer could offer a way to enable stable sodiation in a widespread aqueous electrolyte, simpler and cheaper than RTILs. Moreover, in the course of optimizing materials performance, such approach could better predict the electrochromic performance of fully ceramic solid device. 
Similar CV conditions were used to characterize the duplex electrode WO 3 /NASICON ( Fig. 4 c). A more resistive system is obviously noticed by comparison with the conﬁguration without NASICON (conﬁguration A, Fig. 3 c). This observation can be attributed to the additional series resistance of the NASICON layer. Both anodic and cathodic peaks are slightly shifted in the positive direction as the cycle number increases. This results in enlarged difference between peak potentials that can be attributed to a slower kinetic of Na + in presence of the NASICON upper layer. The amounts of inserted and extracted charges increase up to the 30 th cycle ( Fig. 4 c, insert) in probable relation with the aforementioned initial activation process. Then the amounts of charges decrease very little upon cycling, reaching ﬁnal values very close to those observed in the ﬁrst cycles and with good reversibility (about ca.  1.8 mC/cm 2 extracted for 2 mC/cm 2 injected). Optical transmission data are outstandingly stable upon cycling, oscillating roughly between 30% and 80% at 600 nm in the colored and bleached states, respectively ( Fig. 4 d). These data highlight a good stability and reversibility of the capped system as well as effective reversible transfer of sodium from the aqueous electrolyte to the WO 3 layer through the solid electrolyte upon electrochemical cycling. 
For comparison purposes, Fig. 5 presents, for the three experimental conﬁgurations A, B and C, the Coulombic Eﬃciency (CE), which can be deﬁned as CE = Q ox /Q red.  For the conﬁguration A, CE passes through a maximum around the 10 th cycle (93-94% reversibility, Fig. 5 in blue) and then drops continuously down to less 70% at 100 th cycle, conﬁrming that degradation occurs. Concurrent and concomitant hydrogen intercalation hypothesis has been rejected as veriﬁed from SIMS analysis. In order to complete the hypotheses that can be addressed e.g. about the dissolution of the WO 3 coating in ~2.7 pH unit buffered conditions, the use of another aprotic electrolyte was tested, i.e. BEPipTFSI, 0.1 M NaTFSI in the conﬁguration B. If the amounts of inserted and extracted charges decrease slightly as function of cycling ( Fig. 4 a, insert), the CE ( Fig. 5 in red) is close to 100 % after the 10 th cycle and even equals to 100% after 100 cycles, showing excellent reversibility. The corresponding CE transient for the conﬁguration C ( Fig. 5 in black) is almost the same than with conﬁguration B but with 10% lower values. Thus CE data are nearly stable, not lower than 90 %. This stability is conﬁrmed by the evolution of the in situ monochromatic transmission modulation ( Fig. 4 d), revealing typical values of △T~50 % in the 50 ﬁrst cycles i.e. 2 to 5 times higher than in conﬁguration A. These results show unambiguously that the chemical reactivity of WO 3 in water limits the durability of its associated electrochromic behavior. The degradation of the unprotected WO 3 ﬁlm in the aqueous medium starts probably as soon as it is put in contact with electrolyte by progressively lowering △T values to those usually expected in the literature and comparatively to effectively higher values obtained with the NASICON cap. In the meantime, in situ spectroscopic ellipsometry investigation in our group [44] highlights the role of an excess electrolyte uptake during the cycling resulting progressive ﬁlm dissolution and leading to highly porous ﬁlms.By comparing the CE values of the three conﬁgurations A, B and C ( Fig. 5 ), it may be argued that both alternative conﬁgurations B and C provide eﬃcient solutions to counter-act the degradation in aqueous electrolyte. However, the absolute values of the current density associated to the anodic and cathodic peaks found in both cases, i.e. conﬁguration B and C, are lower comparatively to conﬁguration A. This may be explained by a better penetration of the aqueous electrolyte inside the open morphology of WO 3 thin ﬁlms and then a higher active surface area. 
To further compare the electrochemical behaviors of each system, the determined diffusion coeﬃcients (D) of sodium cations were determined for intercalation and deintercalation into the WO 3 ﬁlm, using the Randles-Sevcik method [19,50] and gathered in Table 2 as function of cycling. If a decrease of D values in conﬁguration A is observed probably in link with the aforementioned degradation in this conﬁguration, the two alternative conﬁgurations, namely B and C, were found very stable also in line with the preserved integrity of WO 3 in these conﬁgurations. Note that these conﬁgurations possess respectively roughly similar (conﬁguration B) and one order of magnitude lower (conﬁguration C) values than for conﬁguration A. The results are in line with the hypothesis that the diffusion coeﬃcients are dependent of the matrix WO 3 -cases A and Bor WO 3 + NASICON -case Cand they are not correlated with the electrolyte. Moreover both D values in the conﬁgurations A and B are in the range quoted in literature [ 24,  51–53 ]. It is also noticeable that the determined D values for Na + cation (10 −11 to 10 −12 cm² .s −1 ) are close to those reported for Li + (10 −9 to 10 −12 cm 2 .s −1 ) [ 24,  54,  55,  27]  or also K + (10 −11 cm 2 .s −1 ) [19],  in the same WO 3 matrix. For the case C, the conductivity of the amorphous NASICON layer was evaluated to be close to 3.10 −5 S.cm −1 [35].  D values for crystalline NASICON of 2.10 −3 S.cm −1 were evaluated to 5.10 −10 cm 2 .s −1 [56].  Based on that, we can estimate the D values for the Na + cations in amorphous NASICON capping layer, should be close to 5.10 −12 cm 2 .s −1 and then they are in good agreement with data obtained for conﬁguration C in this work.
Electrochromic half-cells based on amorphous sputtered WO 3 thin ﬁlms intercalated by sodium ions have been evaluated in order to compare their electro-optical properties. The simplest case consisting of an aqueous sodium-based electrolyte is limited up to 20 coloration-bleaching switches with CE falling from ~90 % at 20 cycles down to 70 % at 100 cycles. This behavior can be improved with the use of a ion-conducting solid cap (CE ~90 %) or with an ionic liquid sodium-based electrolyte (CE up to 100 %) demonstrating the Na + intercalation-deintercalation ability of the sputtered WO 3 material. Finally, the small difference in Na + diffusion coeﬃcient is close to reported values for Li +.  The Na + cation being more easily quantiﬁable than H + and Li + by direct measurements, the reported results highlight the interest of Na + coloring for use in electrochromic systems based on an active layer of the WO 3 type or others type like V 2 O 5 as reported by others [ 18,  25 ]. Moreover, this study underlines that the degradation of WO 3 cannot be neglected and leads to wrong evaluation of its electrochromic performance in aqueous medium. Characterizations in ionic liquid or using an ion-conducting outer layer protecting WO 3 from the aqueous medium is therefore highly beneﬁcial and recommended.
