

The scientific and technological challenges of finding new devices that can store energy and replace energy sources, such as fossil fuels, has boosted the development of batteries operating at various temperatures. Among the batteries that are widely used in electronic devices such as cell phones and notebooks are those of lithium ions. Although the technology of these batteries has improved in recent years, limited natural abundance of lithium and its limited geographic distribution has launched a search for less expensive alternatives. For this reason, sodium ion batteries have come into focus recently. In the search for improved efficiency of solid-state sodium batteries, new fast sodium ion conductors are of key interest as the current density, the half-life and the operating temperatures of a battery is critically affected by the quality of the solid electrolyte component [1]. A key feature of the most promising crystalline ion conductors is their three-dimensional structural framework with interconnected interstitial spaces (channels or tunnels) through which the ions can move [2]. In this effort, materials with the NASICON (NaSuperIonic Conductor) belong to the most promising candidates.


In order to obtain the parent glasses of the Na1+xAlxGe2–x(PO4)3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1.0) (NAGP) system (nominal compositions in Table 1), 20 g batches containing the reagent grade chemicals Na2CO3 (Vetec, 99.5%) GeO2 (Aldrich, 99.9%), Al2O3 (Aldrich, 99.9%) and N2H9PO4 (Aldrich, 98%) were weighed in different proportions. The powders were then ball-milled (with Al2O3 balls and jar) for 12 h. The mixtures were first heated in a platinum crucible at 400 °C and 700 °C for 2 h and 4 h, respectively, to allow the decomposition of Na2CO3 and (NH4)2HPO4 and the volatilization of NH3 and CO2. Then the furnace temperature was raised to 1200–1280 °C for 30 min. The resulting low viscosity liquids were splat-cooled between stainless steel plates. The different glasses obtained were broken and melted for an additional 30 min for better liquid homogenization which was poured for the second time. Finally, transparent, colorless and bubble-free samples were placed in a furnace at Tg – 40 °C (Tg: glass transition temperature, see below for Tg characterization) for 2 h to relieve the thermal stress. treatment of parent Glass-ceramics were prepared by thermal glasses at their crystallization temperatures Tx (see below for Tx characterization) for 3 h. The x = 0.8 glass composition was also subjected to heat treatment at 800 and 900 °C for 30 min. The crystallization process changed the appearance of the samples from transparent and colorless to white opaque.


DSC analysis (Netzsch DSC404) was performed at a heating rate of 10 °C/min to identify the characteristic temperatures of the precursor glasses which are: the glass transition temperature (Tg), the crystallization temperature (Tx) taken at the onset of the crystallization peak and the melting temperature (Tm) of the formed crystal, supposedly with the same chemical composition of the parent glass (Table 2). To determine the experimental error of the characteristic glass temperatures (Tg,Tx,Tm) DSC analysis was performed in two different samples (from the same batch) and same heating rates. In this way, an error of approximately 2 K was estimated in each characteristic temperature. Table 2 also includes the values of glass stability parameter such as the reduced glass transition temperature Tgr = Tg/Tm (temperatures in Kelvin) [10], the Hrubý parameter [11] and Tx – Tg which is an indication of the glass stability against crystallization during heating [12].


To confirm the amorphous nature of the glass samples and to determine the crystalline phases obtained after crystallization, X-Ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed on a Rigaku Ultima IV X-Ray diffractometer at room temperature operating with CuKα radiation generated at 20 mA and 40 kV. XRD patterns were collected between 10 and 80° with integration times of 0.6 s and 0.02° step size. For ionic conductivity measurements, sample surfaces were polished, and blocking electrodes were deposited by sputtering gold on both parallel sides of the glass and glass-ceramics samples. The ionic conductivities were measured by impedance spectroscopy (IS) using a Novocontrol, Alpha-A High Performance Frequency Analyzer in the 0.1 Hz–1 MHz frequency range, with voltage amplitude of 300 mV. Samples were inserted in a two-point BDS 1200 sample holder under ambient conditions and heated in a NOVOTHERM furnace coupled to Novocontrol which allows a temperature precision of ± 0.1 °C.


To evaluate the influence of the increase in crystallization temperature in the ionic conductivity of the most conductive glass-ceramic obtained in this work, the parent glasses of the x = 0.8 composition were also crystallized by thermal treatments at 800 and 900 °C for 30 min. Fig. 8(a) the XRD pattern for glass-ceramic Na1.8Al0.8Ge1.2(PO4)3 obtained from thermal treatments at 800 and 900 °C and the temperature dependence of the total ionic conductivity can be seen in Fig. 8(b). 


We have synthesized glass-ceramics from the Na1+xAlxGe2–x(PO4)3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1.0) system. It was found that the presence of aluminum increases the glass forming ability and the glass stability against crystallization (during heating) of the parent glasses. A limit for the Nasicon solid solution formation was found for the x = 0.8 composition. A further increase in aluminum content induces the formation of AlPO4 as spurious phase, in the investigated heat-treatment conditions. SEM micrographs show that an increased aluminum content provokes an increase in the average grain size considering a heat-treatment at the crystallization temperature. Well-formed cubic-shaped crystal can be seen in the SEM micrograph, for the x = 1.0 composition.