Symmetric full-cells, which employ two identical electrodes as both the cathode and  anode, attract great research attention, because it has high safety, facial fabrication and lower costs.  Unfortunately, the practical utilization of full symmetric energy storage systems, especially the  symmetric potassium ion batteries (KIBs), is hindered by the limited choice of the available  electrode materials. In this work, a novel NASICON-type K3V2(PO4)3 is prepared and first  employed for the symmetric KIBs. Through in-situ measurement, a highly lattice reversibility is  found during the K+  insertion/extraction process. KV2(PO4)3 and K5V2(PO4)3 was generated after  the depotassiation and potassiation process at about 4.0 V and below 1.0 V, respectively. The  reversible capacity of the full symmetric KIBs is about 90 mAh g-1 between 0.01–3.0 V at 25 mA g- 1 , corresponding to an initial coulombic efficiency of 91.7 % which is the highest one among all the  previous reported symmetric energy storage systems (including the symmetric lithium/sodium ion  batteries). 88.6 % reversible capacity was maintained even after 500 cycling test.



 In this work, a carbon-coated K3V2(PO4)3 (KVP/C)-based symmetric KIB was proposed. Different from the fabrication methods of the  traditional LVP and NVP, centrifugal separation together with freeze drying are employed in our  work. The lyophilized KVP particles with a uniform size distribution within 1 µm are obtained.  After the full-cell fabrication, the KVP/C-based full symmetric KIBs in the voltage range between  0.01–3.0 V showed excellent cycling stability with a reversible specific capacity about 90 mAh g-1 at 25 mA g-1 and over 88 % capacity maintained after 500 cycles. Most importantly, a highest initial  coulombic efficiency (CE) of 91.7 % and largest working discharge voltage of 2.3 V were also  obtained, benefiting the output energy of this symmetric energy storage system.
 
  All the reagents used in this work were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, and all the chemicals  were used directly without any further treatment. The KVP active material was prepared by the  traditional solid-state reaction. In detail, K2CO3, V2O3, and NH4H2PO4 powders in a stoichiometric  ratio were mixed and ground for 30 min. Then, the mixture was heated to 400 °C under an Ar  atmosphere for 2 h in a furnace. After the heat treatment, the powder was fully ground and reheated to 850 °C for 51 h under Ar atmosphere. After the re-heat treatment, the powders were  washed with deionized (DI) water and the resulting above suspension was collected after the  centrifugation under 1000 rpm for 5 min. The final lyophilized KVP particles were prepared after  the lyophilisation of the collected suspension solution at −50 °C in a lyophilizer for 30 h. After the initial centrifuge, different sized KVP particles would be separated. Only the small sized KVP  particles can be stayed on the top of the solution. Therefore, in order to maintain its pristine  structure, the freeze dry treatment was further employed to obtain the size uniform distributed KVP  particles. For the KVP/C composite, the prepared around 2 g KVP particles were first dispersed in 3  ml oleic acid, leading to a uniformly distributed mixture. After the slurry was left to stand for 6 h, the KVP particles were separated from the oleic acid and heated in an Ar-filled furnace at 600 °C  for 2 h. After cooling down to room temperature, the black powders were collected and denoted as  KVP/C.
  
  
   The morphology and microstructure of the products were characterized by field emission  scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, JEOL 7500) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM,  JEOL ARM-200F) with high-resolution TEM (HRTEM). Thermogravimetric (TG) analysis was  carried out with a PerkinElmer Diamond TG/DTA apparatus. The XRD patterns were collected by  powder X-ray diffraction (XRD, GBC MMA diffractometer) with high intensity Cu Kα1 irradiation  (λ = 1.5406 Å). The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) experiment was carried out using Al  Kα radiation and fixed analyser transmission mode. The pass energy was 60 eV for the survey  spectra and 20 eV for specific elements. The elemental ratio inside KVP was examined by the  inductively coupled plasma (ICP) technique.
   
    In conclusion, we designed a NASICON-type KVP/C composite and tested its feasibility being  used as both the anode and cathode for KIBs. A symmetric full KIB showed acceptable reversible  capacity and outstanding cycling stability. A largest working potential of 2.3 V and highest CE of  91.7 % were also obtained, which are of benefit for future energy storage system with high energy  density and large power. More importantly, this is also the first time that symmetric electrodes have  been explored in KIBs, which endows the novel KIBs with improved safety and a facile practical  fabrication process. Therefore, considering the novel design of this advanced energy storage system,  highest initial coulombic efficiency, outstanding cycling stability and largest working potential, this  work will attract wildspread interest in the readers and provide important experience for the future  development of the potassium ion batteries.