Several emerging energy storage technologies and systems have been  demonstrated that feature low cost, high rate capability, and durability for potential  use in large-scale grid and high-power applications. Owing to its outstanding ion  conductivity, ultrafast Na-ion insertion kinetics, excellent structural stability, and  large theoretical capacity, the sodium superionic conductor (NASICON)-structured  insertion material NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP) has attracted considerable attention as the optimal electrode material for sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) and Na-ion hybrid capacitors  (NHCs). On the basis of recent studies, NaTi2(PO4)3 has raised the rate capabilities,  cycling stability, and mass loading of rechargeable SIBs and NHCs to commercially  acceptable levels. In this comprehensive review, starting with the structures and  electrochemical properties of NTP, we present recent progress in the application of  NTP to SIBs, including non-aqueous batteries, aqueous batteries, aqueous batteries  with desalination, and sodium-ion hybrid capacitors.  After a thorough discussion  of the unique NASICON structure of NTP, various strategies for improving the  performance of NTP electrode have been presented and summarized in detail. Further, the major challenges and perspectives regarding  the prospects for the use of NTP-based electrodes in energy storage systems have also been summarized to ofer a guideline for further  improving the performance of NTP-based electrodes.

Crystalline order or the degree of crystallinity in NTP  also plays an important role in electrochemical properties  such as capacity and electrode kinetics. Ko et al. studied the  correlation of electrochemical performance with crystalline  order. Starting with an amorphous NTP powder prepared  by the Pechini method, varied NTP nanoparticulates of  diferent degrees of crystallinity were derived via calcination. It was observed that poorly crystalline NTP samples  (derived at 500–600 °C) exhibited low specifc capacities  and broad voltammetric features for Na+ insertion, characteristic of surface-limited processes; and highly crystalline  NTP samples (derived at 700–800 °C) with the well-formed  NASICON structure exhibited sharp voltammetric peaks and  difusion-limited kinetics in both organic (i.e., non-aqueous)  and aqueous electrolytes. Further integration of nanocrystalline NTP with conductive networks can enhance the local  electronic conductivity to a theoretical specifc capacity in a  non-aqueous electrolyte and an adequate capacity in a mildly  aqueous electrolyte with signifcantly improved long-term  stability [65].

As an efective method of improving the electrochemical  performance of electrode materials, lattice doping has been  proposed and widely used in LIBs and SIBs [133]. As for  research on NTP-based materials, it was frst demonstrated  by Mouahid and coworkers [134] that the doping of Al is  benefcial for improving the ionic conductivity of NTP and  improves electrochemical performance. Tirado’s group proposed that the low content of iron doping did not change  the lattice structure but could enhance the capacity values  and improve capacity retention [135–137]. Goodenough’s  group utilized the NASICON-structured Na3MnTi(PO4)3 as  both the anode and cathode to construct an aqueous symmetric SIB with an operating voltage of 1.4 V, stable cycle  performance, and excellent rate capability [138]. Dai’s  group demonstrated that Sn doping on the Ti site shows no  obvious efect on the lattice structure and morphology of  NaTi2(PO4)3/C but is very benefcial for improving the electrochemical properties of the NaTi2(PO4)3/C anode for aqueous LIBs [139]. Zhang and coworkers reported the synthesis  of porous Na3MgTi(PO4)3 aggregates with a sol–gel method.  The good rechargeable capacity of 54 mAh g−1 and better  capacity retention performance (94.2% after 100 cycles) of  Na3MgTi(PO4)3 compared to those of NTP demonstrate that  the incorporation of electrochemically inert Mg2+ ions could  improve the structural stability of Na storage materials and  enhance cycling performance [140].

Apart from carbon components, a TiN layer was also  applied on the surface of NTP to enhance the electronic conductivity in an aqueous electrolyte system. Zhang and coworkers synthesized a TiN-coated NaTi2(PO4)3 as an anode material  for aqueous SIBs via a solvothermal routine and a subsequent  nitriding process (i.e., calcination in ammonia gas). The optimized TiN-tailored NTP particles showed an improved rate  capability and cycling performance with an initial capacity of  132 mAh g−1 and maintained 92 mAh g−1 after 100 cycles at  2 C, a large improvement over the pristine phase [158].

Although the neutral pH aqueous electrolyte SIBs with  clean, non-fammable, fast internal ion transportation, and  relatively lower manufacturing cost have shown considerable advantages, especially for large-scale energy storage  applications (i.e., promising solutions for applications where  constraints on energy density and weight are less rigid) compared with SIBs based on organic electrolytes, the stability  window of water limits the voltage of an aqueous cell. Fortunately, researchers have found some solutions that enable the  practical stability window of aqueous electrolytes to be widened beyond the theoretical limit via the kinetic efect, which  enables the usage of materials whose operating potential  exceeds the thermodynamic limit of pure water in an aqueous system [170, 176]. Despite the low cost and eco-friendly  features of ASIBs that make them promising candidates for  future energy storage systems, aqueous batteries are very  much constrained by electrolyte degradation. Electrolyte  additives (e.g., vinylene carbonate or other low-cost acetic  additives) can further enhance the cycle stability of the full  cell [177]. Date from the large-format energy storage device  showed promising commercial application of ASIBs of  cycle-stable high-voltage strings of cells (Fig. 10a–g) [176].


All-solid-state SIBs have attracted considerable attention  for their safety and long-term durability [122–125]. Apart  from the typical SIBs based on liquid electrolytes, solid-state  rechargeable SIBs based on ceramic (e.g., Na-βʺ-Al2O3)  electrolyte with high sodium-ion conductivity can demonstrate an extremely stable voltage plateau of ~ 2.1 V in the  half-cell and an initial discharge capacity of 133 mAh g−1,  although the cycling and rate performances may be improved  via modifcation of interfacial incompatibility (or cell resistance and intrinsic polarization) compared to that of typical  non-aqueous SIBs [126].


Apart from the above-discussed SIBs, some other new  types of energy storage systems such as Mg–Na hybrid ion  batteries based on the NTP-based electrode have also been  reported [185, 209, 210]. Mai’s group frst reported the novel  NTP nanowire clusters as a hybrid magnesium–sodium-ion  battery’s cathode with the combined advantages of a fast alkali  metal ions intercalation cathode and a dendrite-free Mg anode  and exhibited good electrochemical performance with a high  reversible capacity of 124 mAh g−1 at 1 C, considerable rate  capability, and good cycling stability (Fig. 13c–e) [211]. As  shown in Fig. 13a, b, this innovative device consists of an  anode of Mg metal, a cathode of NTP nanowire clusters, and  a dual salt electrolyte consisting of the common MIB electrolyte with a suitable Na salt added to it. Because of the open  structure of the self-assembled NTP nanoarchitecture and  the suitable potential of 1.7 V (vs. Mg/Mg2+) of NTP, NTP  nanowire clusters can be potentially used as the cathode for  magnesium–sodium hybrid ion batteries.

In summary, the NASICON-type NTP-based electrode materials with exceptionally high ion conductivity and pronounced  structural stability overcome the multiple kinetic problems of  Na-ion systems, facilitating low-cost large-scale electrochemical energy storage with inhibited capacity decay, higher rate  capacities, and CEs. When paired with existing competent  cathodes, the class of NTP anode materials for SIBs shows  advantages comparable with or superior to commercial highpower LIBs. Furthermore, among the many cutting-edge  anode materials identifed to deliver promising results, with  some outperforming their lithium equivalents, NTP demonstrates a zero-strain insertion feature as well as a high ICE  and a relatively high Na insertion/deinsertion, avoiding the  formation of SEI and ensuring the safety of large-scale and  high-power batteries [58].

The full volume change of the NTP  anode with other paired cathodes is almost zero because they  share approximately the same but inverse volume change during charging and discharging, which facilitates the realization  of safe, long-term cyclability and fexible structure design for  large-capacity batteries. On the basis of the above encouraging  results, it is concluded that SIBs (including aqueous and nonaqueous), as well as NHCs, have shown signifcant potential  for commercialization in the near future while there is plenty  of room for the development of energy storage devices with  higher energy densities and long-term lifespan.

Although the ASIBs are more cost-efective and safer  for large-scale energy storage, they often have a lower  capacity and cycling life compared to that of organic  SIBs. Because capacity fade in aqueous electrolytes  remains poorly understood, further studies are needed,  including a possible multi-step mechanism followed by  a local pH change and alkaline oxidation of the carbon  conductive additives [148].

The decay mechanism and stability of electrode materials in an aqueous electrolyte should be further studied and improved, although some eforts have shown  promise by tailoring the electrolytes (including adjusting  the pH values, locally generated destructive OH− ions),  nanocoating the electrode materials, or eliminating  oxygen in the electrolytes to suppress capacity fading  upon cycling. An appropriate potential window (cutof  voltage) and corresponding anode and cathode materials  (with adjusted mass ratio) should be selected to avoid or  suppress the highly irreversible capacity loss due to H2 and/or O2 evolution in the aqueous electrolytes.

For alternative electrolytes, the intrinsically safe organic  phosphates for all-phosphate SIBs efciently avoid fring as usually encountered in the carbonate electrolytes  and severe side reactions such as hydrogen and oxygen  evolution in aqueous electrolytes. The all-solid-state  SIBs with safety, long-term operation capacity, and  high-temperature performance advantages show considerable commercial potential. However, more related  research on the interface contact is necessary, and the  cycling performance of these batteries needs to be further improved for wide practical application.

The realization of full cell SIBs or hybrid Na-ion capacitors with high energy and long cycle life remains challenging. The controlled formation of an SEI on both  anodes (especially for the hard-carbon-incorporated composites) and cathodes will be an efective way to achieve  long-term stability for full cells. Pre-cycling (or pre-sodiation) of anodes and cathodes will lead to pre-formation  of SEI, and hence mitigate the additional consumption  of Na ions in full cells for higher ICE as well. With the  improvement in aqueous electrolytes, including highly  concentrated and even superconcentrated WiSEs or  hybrid aqueous/non-aqueous electrolytes, the prospects  are promising for large-scale and high-energy-density  electrochemical energy storage with the advantages of  low cost, eco-friendliness, and long lifespan.

Compared to conventional SIBs relayed on Cu/Al current collectors to support active materials and to serve  as conductive pathways, free-standing or fexible electrodes (including graphene papers, graphene foams,  and electrospun CNFs) without these metallic current  collectors signifcantly reduce the weight and cost of  batteries and have been an emerging demand for today’s  battery development. However, more eforts are needed  to develop better-performing free-standing electrode  materials with a facile preparation route, low cost, and  robust mechanical advantages for next-generation batteries.