One of the approaches to tackle the problem of limited electrolyte  electrochemical stability, which controls the development of novel  electrochemical storage devices, is the use of solid electrolytes.  Here, we focus on the one of the most promising among oxide-based  glass-ceramic material, Li1+xAlxGe2-xP3O12, to investigate the  physical and chemical mechanisms that govern the enhancement of  Li-conductivity upon variation of its composition and glass  crystallization conditions during a two-step heat treatment. Using  X-ray and neutron diffraction, small-angle neutron scattering and  Raman spectroscopy we found that the addition of 6-18 mol. % yttria  makes polyphosphate chains in glass more thermally stable. This  leads to sudden and uniform glass crystallization over the whole  volume. This peculiar glass structure governs the further  crystallization behavior and ensures the optimal organization of  intergrain boundaries.  The highest Li-conductivity is achieved for  a sample with 12 mol. % yttria annealed for 2 hours at 750 °C. In  addition, nuclear magnetic resonance together with bond valence  sum analysis provide further insight into atomistic mechanisms  ionic conductivity in NASICON-based lithium-conductive ceramics.

In this paper, we discuss how nucleation and crystallization  process takes place in Li2O-Al2O3-GeO2-P2O5 system in presence of  Y2O3 additive. Earlier in Ref. 57 we have reported, that addition  of small portions of Y2O3 (5 vol.% or 12.6 mol.%) results in  significant boost of total ionic conductivity (from 0.1 up to 0.5  mS/cm) of glass-ceramic membranes. This paper provides novel  insight into material properties regarding how yttrium plays  crucial role on both stages of glass crystallization in Li2O-Al2O3- GeO2-P2O5 system. First, it thermally stabilizes phosphate glass to  some degree enabling uniform crystallization over whole volume;  second, segregating in the form of yttrium phosphate at the grain  boundaries it causes conductivity reduction for samples with  prolonged annealing. This fact strongly predetermines further  crystallization process and the organization of intergrain  boundaries. This behaviour supporting glass crystallization was  never reported before.

Earlier we have found that the addition of yttria to the glass  melts increases the overall specific ionic conductivity of  Li1+xAlxGe2-x(PO4)3 glass-ceramics up to five times as compared to  the samples of pristine LAGP.57 A two-step annealing of the quenched  Y2O3-containing glass melts, which involves pre-annealing at 600ºC  and crystallization at 750ºC, enabled fabrication of uniformly  crystallized and dense LAGP ceramic membranes with small YPO4 particles segregated at the grain boundaries.

For the pristine glass, a gradual crystallization during  preannealing is obseved as illustrated in Fig. 2d. Ionic  conductivity during preannealing is very low (10-12 S/cm), which  is a typical value for phosphate glasses. Again, by comparing SANS  curves in the two cases here and further, we can say that a possible  scattering contribution from YPO4 phase (because of a comparatively  high scattering contrast against NASICON phase) is negligibly  small. The similar stages take place in the evolution of the  curves, thus showing that the scattering from LAGP crystallite  interface strongly prevails independent of the presence of YPO4 phase; the difference is in the evolution speed.

First, using Raman spectroscopy  combined with small angle neutron scattering we observed that  yttrium ions thermally stabilize phosphate glass to some degree  enabling sudden and uniform crystallization over whole volume.  This fact strongly predetermines further crystallization behavior  and the organization of intergrain boundaries. Second, segregating  in the form of yttrium phosphate at the grain boundaries they cause  conductivity reduction for samples with prolonged annealing. Such  behaviour supporting glass crystallization was observed for the  first time. Furthermore, materials structure-property relations  have been studied in regard to how the functional property – ionic  conductivity - changes during crystallization process,  particularly, how the evolution of grain boundaries governs  lithium transport in glass-ceramic solid electrolyte and how  prolonged crystallization leads to change of NASICON phase  composition and consequently ionic conductivity of the whole  glass-ceramic electrolyte. Solid electrolyte conductivity vs  crystallization time indicates presence of optimal crystallization  procedure, that is achieved in case of glasses containing 12 mol.  % of yttria. When crystallized using DHT technique such glasses  demonstrate ionic conductivity reaching 0.5 mS/cm at RT, when  second annealing is conducted at 750ºC for 2 hours.