 Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) is one of the most promising cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries because of its stability, safety, and high reversible capacity. However, the sluggish Na-ion diffusion and poor electronic conductivity of NVP often hinder electrochemical performance, thus requiring compositing with carbon materials, such as graphene to improve the material. In this work, the effect of doping species of graphene on the electrochemical performance of NVP/graphene composites was systematically investigated and vigorously compared. 3D porous NVP fabricated by sol-gel method with 3 nm of carbon coating layers was deposited on graphene sheets with different surface functionalities (GO, N-rGO and P-rGO). NVP/N-rGO composites have low charge transfer resistance and high Naþ diffusion coefficient than that of NVP powder, NVP/P-rGO, and NVP/GO, which delivered a specific capacity of 113.9 mAh g1 at 0.5C with a capacity retention up to 88.42% after 5000 cycles at 20 C. The superior sodium storage performance derives from the pyridinic and pyrrolic N doping in graphene, which triggers defective and active site numbers but maintains moderate graphitization to accelerate the Naþ and electron transportation.
 
 
  In this article, graphene oxide (GO) and graphene oxide with nitrogen (N-rGO) and phosphorus (P-rGO) doping were also synthesized and utilized as substrates for loading of Na3V2(PO4)3 nanoparticles, yielding composite materials of NVP, which are denoted as NVP/rGO, NVP/N-rGO and NVP/P-rGO, respectively. The electrochemical performance of Na3V2(PO4)3 composites are systematically investigated and rigorously compared in Na-ion half cells. Embedding of NVP in graphene matrix is effective to improve the capacity and rate performance, and NVP/N-rGO has especially impressive durability with capacity retention up to 88.42% after 5000 cycles. NVP/N-rGO composites have low charge transfer resistance and high Naþ diffusion coefficient than that of NVP powder, NVP/P-rGO and NVP/GO, which can be ascribed to the presence of pyridinic and pyrrolic N doping. The high durability and capacity indicate N-rGO superior as an excellent conductive substrate for the design of NVP composite demonstrate promising application as a sodium cathode.
  
    However, due to the different physicochemical properties of heteroatoms, NVP and different types of graphene composites have significantly varied electrochemical behavior. Among all the NVP/graphene composites, NVP/N-rGO has the highest Naþ diffusion coefficient, highest capacity at discharge rate from 2 C to 10 C, and highest durability with capacity retention of 88.42% after continuous 5000 cycles. NVP/P-rGO has the high capacity at ultra-high rates from 20 C to 80 C, while both NVP/P-rGO and NVP/GO has poor cyclability in long-term cycle test with capacity retention values of 73.60% and 72.93% respectively. The introduction of N doped GO not only enhances composite's conductivity but also produces lots of additional defects and active sites (pyrrolic N and pyridinic N), which promotes Naþ migration. The high capacity (113.9 mAh g1 at 0.5C) and long-term durability of NVP/N-rGO indicate its promising energy storage and conversion applications.
	
	