 Harvesting energy from natural resources is of significant interest because  of their abundance and sustainability. Seawater is the most abundant natural  resource on earth, covering two-thirds of the surface. The rechargeable  seawater battery is a new energy storage platform that enables interconversion of electrical energy and chemical energy by tapping into seawater as an  infinite medium. Here, an overview of the research and development activities of seawater batteries toward practical applications is presented. Seawater  batteries consist of anode and cathode compartments that are separated by a  Na-ion conducting membrane, which allows only Na+ ion transport between  the two electrodes. The roles and drawbacks of the three key components, as  well as the development concept and operation principles of the batteries on  the basis of previous reports are covered. Moreover, the prototype manufacturing lines for mass production and automation, and potential applications,  particularly in marine environments are introduced.
 
 Highlighting the importance of engineering the cell components, as well as optimizing the system  level for a particular application and thereby successful market entry, the key  issues to be resolved are discussed, so that the seawater battery can emerge  as a promising alternative to existing rechargeable batteries.
 
 Currently, the battery industry requires almost of the 50%  of the available resources of both lithium and cobalt, which  are the core elements in LIBs, for satisfying the high-energy  requirement.[5,6] This would lead to cost issues in the long term  because such high-energy demands and potential supply risks  of the raw materials cannot be overlooked in the high-energy  and/or large-size battery sectors.[6,7] This necessitates continuous research and development (R&D) toward new battery  technologies other than LIBs,[3,4b] such as Na-ion batteries,[6,7] Mg-/Ca-ion batteries,[8] and redox flow batteries,[9] in order to  construct cost-effective, environment-friendly electrified future  based on renewable energies.
 
 
 Here, we present the progress in the development of  rechargeable seawater batteries. First, the concept and operation principle of seawater batteries will be introduced together  with their salient features. Details of the cell components, such  as Na-ion conducting membranes, cathode current collectors,  anodes, and non-aqueous electrolytes, will be provided, with the  relevant published reports. Next, the module fabrication and  potential application fields will be exemplified. Finally, we discuss the main challenges to be overcome for the performance  enhancement and commercialization of seawater batteries.
 
 The alloying and conversion reaction materials typically  suffer from significant volume changes during charge/discharge processes, resulting in the evolution of a new surface on  the active materials, which in turn leads to the continuous formation of the SEI layer during repeated cycles.[28] This behavior  leads to capacity degradation due to the gradual loss of Na+ supplied from the cathode in a conventional full cell with a closed  system.[28] On the other hand, in seawater batteries, the open  cathode system enables the unlimited supply of Na+ from seawater catholyte, which can mitigate this capacity deterioration.  Thus, this characteristic of seawater batteries enhances the  applicability of such high-capacity alloying or conversion reaction-based anodes undergoing large volume changes during  cell operation.
 
 Seawater batteries exploit natural seawater as the active material to store electrical energy in the chemical bonds of Na and to  provide this energy on demand. Featuring an open-structured  cathode configuration, the battery structure is distinct from  those of other existing rechargeable batteries. We have investigated the practical application of these battery systems based  on platform designs of unit cells and modules/packs to develop  pilot lines for production automation, scale-up, and screening  and fabrication of cell components. There have been considerable technological advancements in the fabrication of battery  platforms and components, as well as the resulting electrochemical performance, although many issues remain to be  resolved before commercialization.