In this work, atomistic simulation method based on pedone model is applied to observe the concerted  motion of sodium ions in the pristine lattice of possible Na2CrTi(PO4)3 anode material for sodium ion  batteries. The simulation is carried out at a series of increasingly elevated temperature from 600 K to  1800 K in a super cell containing 27 unit cells. The superimposed Na+  trajectory at all time frames  offers an intuitive, reliable image of the Na+  migration in crystal lattice. It reveals the migration  mechanism for the first time. The sodium ion propagates in the crystal lattice three dimensionally and  isotropically. This diffusion path determined directly by the environments of the large cage of metal  ions framework is composed of alternating Na(1) and Na(2) ions. The direct hopping from Na(1) to  Na(1) and Na(2) to Na(2) are not allowed. Na+  migration along the a axis owns a energy barrier of ca.  0.78 eV. The estimated diffusion coefficient at RT is 2.16·10-16 cm2 ·s-1.

Compared with those  intensively investigated anode material for sodium ion battery or aqueous rechargeable sodium  batteries, the mobility of sodium ion of this material is comparable. Therefore, we suppose that  Na2CrTi(PO4)3 is also a potential candidate for anode material of sodium ion batteries or aqueous  rechargeable sodium ion batteries.

The compound Na2CrTi(PO4)3 is a monovalent phosphates with the langbeinite structure and  crystallizes in the cubic space group P213. The structure is composed of corner-sharing  MO6(M=Ti/Cr) octahedron and PO4 tetrahedron as shown in fig. 1, forming three-dimensional  langbeinite-type framework. Each MO6(M=Cr/Ti) octahedron occupied by M is surrounded by  and shares corner with six adjacent PO4 tetrahedrons, and each PO4 tetrahedron links to and shares  corner with four neighboring MO6 octahedron.

It’s preferable to portray this structure as identical  [M2P3O18] units composed of two MO6 octahedron connected with three PO4 tetrahedra.

In summary, based on the description above, the Na+  migration mechanism basically coincide  with the preliminary impression obtained from fig. 3. Sodium ions migrate three dimensionally  in the crystal lattice and this diffusion path is composed of alternating Na(1) and Na(2) ions. The  direct hopping from Na(1) to Na(1) and Na(2) to Na(2) are not allowed. To better demonstrate  the whole migration mechanism, a typical shortest Na+  migration pathway along the a axis is  illustrated in fig. 8. Unnecessary atoms, bonds and polyhedra are excluded. [Na(1)Ti3Cr3]  octahedron and [Na(2)Cr3Ti] tetrahedron are also illustrated together with Na(1) and Na(2) atoms.  The shortest pathway of Na+  migration is described as Na+  transferring alternately between  edge-sharing [Na(1)Ti3Cr3] octahedron and [Na(2)Cr3Ti] tetrahedron in a zigzag way.  Furthermore, owing to that Na2CrTi(PO4)3 crystallizes in cubic system, the shortest sodium ions  migration along the b and c axis are entirely the same as the already depicted.

Accordingly, the energy barrier of Na+  migrating along one direction, for example, the a axis, is  calculated and listed in tab. 5 for the isotropy character of Na+  migration. Also, this result is  extrapolated to obtain the diffusion coefficient at room temperature (RT) in order to compare with the  data reported by previous references easily. The results show that Na+  migration along the a axis owns  an energy barrier of 0.78 eV. The estimated diffusion coefficient at RT is 2.16×10-16cm2 ·s-1. J. Isasi  and A. Daidouh reported an activation energy of ca. 1.4 eV for Na2CrTi(PO4)3 material [6].

Hence, the energy barrier obtained in this work is about 0.6 eV lower than the previously reported  result. The lower energy barrier in this work is reasonable in that in Ref [6], the ionic conductivity  is measured on a pressed pellet, which is supposed to be the sum of grain-interior resistance and  the grain-boundary resistance and the latter in many cases usually accounts for more than 90% of  the total resistance. In consideration of the difficulties of the sodium ions when crossing the grain  boundaries, the energy barrier measured on a pressed pellet is normally relatively higher than  estimated by theoretical method, which is the reflection of the grain-interior transportation.

The superimposed Na+  trajectory at all time frames obtained by atomistic simulation offers an  intuitive, reliable image of the Na+  migration in crystal lattice.

The sodium ion propagates in the crystal lattice three dimensionally and isotropically. This diffusion  path determined directly by the environments of the large cage of metal ions framework is composed of  alternating Na(1) and Na(2) ions. The direct hopping from Na(1) to Na(1) and Na(2) to Na(2) are not  allowed. Na+  migration along the a axis owns a energy barrier 0.78 eV. The estimated diffusion  coefficient at RT is 2.16×10-16 cm2 ·s-1 .

Compared with those intensively investigated anode material for sodium ion battery or aqueous  rechargeable sodium batteries, the mobility of sodium ion of this material is comparable. Therefore,  we supposed that Na2CrTi(PO4)3 is also a potential candidate for anode material of sodium ion  batteries or aqueous rechargeable sodium ion batteries.