 NASICON-structured Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) has been a promising solid-state glassceramic electrolyte for all-solid-state lithium ion batteries. However, the non-ideal ionic conductivity, non-uniformity of chemical composition, distortion and micro-cracks, etc., have limited its practical application. Considering these issues, in this work, we first of all introduce partial substitution of Al3+ by Ga3+. To avoid segregation of secondary phase, microwave sintering technology to prepare LAGP was used. With the help of microwave irradiation, sintering could be finished in just 30 min, and the size of crystals was homogeneous across the cross-section. No distortion and micro-cracks could be identified. Characterisations such as DTA, XRD, SEM and EIS were used to evaluate the material and electrochemical properties of the Li1.5Al0.5-xGaxGe1.5(PO4)3 (x = 0.1 ~ 0.5) samples. A high bulk conductivity of 6.67 × 10−4 S/cm at room temperature has been achieved when x = 0.1 and the activation energy was about 0.66 eV.
 
  Li1.5Al0.5-xGaxGe1.5(PO4)3 (x = 0.1 ~ 0.5) was successfully prepared by microwave-assisted crystallisation of melt-quenched LAGGP. For nearly simultaneously heating from internal to surface by microwave-sintering, the crystallisation duration  was reduced to 30 min. No microcrack and distortion were observed. It was observed that LAGGP cannot adsorb microwave until the temperature higher than 700°C according to the heating curve. Microwave-crystallised LAGGP showed uniform grains with regular shape. The presence of the secondary AlPO4 was noted probably due to partial Al substitution by Ga. With the increased content of Ga, the crystal lattice parameters increased since the radius of Ga3+ is bigger than Al3+. As a consequence, the size of Li+ transporting channel has been changed resulting in a decreased ionic conductivity. A maximum room temperature bulk ionic conductivity of 6.67 × 10−4 S/cm was obtained while the activation energy was confirmed as much as 0.66eV when x = 0.1.
  