Lithium batteries have been indispensable for powering consumer electronics  and electric vehicles. However, the utilization of highly flammable/reactive/volatile  liquid electrolytes not only poses safety concerns of battery combustion and explosion,  but also triggers severe side reactions with electrodes. Solid-state electrolytes with a  high ionic conductivity, a low lithium-ion diffusion impedance, a good chemical  compatibility, and a superior electrochemical stability have been regarded as critical  components to develop safe and high-energy lithium batteries. Specifically,  NASICON (Sodium Super Ionic Conductor)-type lithium titanium aluminum  phosphate (LATP) in the composition of Li1+xAlxTi2-X(PO4)3 has emerged as a  promising solid-state electrolyte (SSE) because of its high ionic conductivity and low  manufacturing cost. Herein, the recent progress on the development of LATP SSE is  systematically reviewed. The fundamental structure and ion conduction mechanism  are introduced and the synthetic routes for LATP SSE are summarized. In addition, we  discuss the key parameters of ionic conductivity and exemplify the typical  applications of LATP in various electrochemical systems. Despite the technical efforts  required for commercializing LATP in practical batteries, this review, focusing on the  microstructure, grain boundary resistance, and interfacial behaviors, would pave the  way to a bright future for all-solid-state lithium batteries with an exceptional safety, a  superior energy density, an outstanding cycle durability, and an acceptable  manufacturing cost.

Compared with the highly reactive and volatile liquid electrolytes in the  conventional Li-ion batteries, SSEs not only suppress the dendrite growth of metal  anodes and side reactions with active electrodes, but also eliminate the potential  leakage/vaporization/flammability of organic liquid electrolytes and  combustion/explosion of Li-ion batteries. As a result, they have been utilized to  develop safe Li-ion batteries with a high energy density and a long cycle life [31-36].  Therefore, SSEs must possess a comparable ionic conductivity to that of its liquid  counterparts (~10-2 S cm-1 ), a poor ionic-area specific resistance, a large  electrical-area specific resistance, a unique ionic selectivity, a high chemical  compatibility toward low-voltage metal anodes and high-voltage cathodes, an  excellent thermal stability during the charging/discharging processes, an exceptional  mechanical flexibility, and a wide electrochemical window to circumvent the  irreversible reactions [36-39].

In the following sections, we firstly introduce the basic microstructure and  ion-transport mechanisms for LATP SSE, then comprehensively summarize the  different synthetic routes, and further discuss the key parameters of ionic conductivity  in detail. Furthermore, the typical applications of LATP SSE in Li batteries are also  exemplified, while the challenges and future perspectives are finally outlined to guide  the research and development of LATP SSE for all-solid-state Li batteries.

The synthesis of LATP should be easy for large-scale production without  utilizing complicated procedures, consuming expensive raw materials, or producing  heavy pollution. In addition, an as-prepared LATP SSE must possess a high flexibility  and a strong mechanical durability to be integrated into various battery structures.  Undoubtedly, the selection of a synthetic method for LATP will inevitably affect its  composition, microstructure, and morphology, which further determines the ionic  conductivity for this SSE

Apart from the relative ease of synthesis and fabrication, LATP SSE should have  a good application compatibility with various electrodes, a high chemical stability in  different systems, and a wide electrochemical window to resist irreversible side reactions. The most important feature of an excellent SSE is a high ionic conductivity  accompanied with a large transference number at the room temperature. Herein, the  key parameters for achieving LATP with a high ionic conductivity are systematically  discussed to deepen the understanding of SSEs.


Very recently, LATP SSE, which can basically eliminate the hazards of  volatile/flammable liquid electrolytes and further ameliorate their complex side  reactions with Li metal, has been widely used in different types of batteries, including  all-solid-state Li-ion batteries, Li-air batteries, Li-sulfur (Li-S) batteries, Li-bromide  (Li-Br2) batteries, and aqueous batteries [39].

First, this review introduced and  discussed the research progress of NASICON-like LATP materials. Various  experimental schemes and theoretical calculations were summarized for the study of  Li+ diffusion and migration channels. The basic mechanism for inducing a relatively  high Li+ conductivity and the theoretical feasibility of further improving this value for  LATP SSEs was also confirmed. Second, the typical preparation methods of LATP  materials were reviewed, while some popular synthesis methods, including the  melt-quenching method, the mechanical activation method, the sol-gel method, and  the wet chemical method were compared in detail. More importantly, several key  parameters, such as microstructure, density, and interfacial properties were  systematically discussed to further understand the ionic conductivity of LATP SSE.  Finally, the practical applications of LATP materials in different batteries (e.g., Li-ion,  Li-S, Li-air, and Li-B2) were exemplified.


Although the research progress of LATP SSE has advanced significantly, several  challenges still hinder its practical commercialization. For example, the noticeable  volume change of the electrode against an LATP SSE with a different volume  expansion coefficient severely diminishes the contact area, increases the Li+ diffusion  impedance, and further deteriorates the electrochemical properties. Simultaneously,  the interfacial instability of an LATP SSE against a Li metal anode raises questions  about the feasibility, accessibility, and processability of post-Li batteries. Moreover,  the influence of charge transfer resistance across the interface on the electrochemical  performance of batteries is still very obvious. Last but not least, the poor mechanical  flexibility of SSE does not meet the strict requirements of batteries for wearable  electronics.

 Particularly, the side reactions regarding the spontaneous reduction of Ti4+ to Ti3+ for LATP by Li metal still remain to be the biggest scientific challenge, severely  hindering the practical applications of LATP SSE in all-solid-state Li batteries.  Among various strategies, the surface modifications, involving the direct growth of  highly stable and ion-conducting interlayers, have been regarded as one of the most  effective approaches to alleviate the interfacial issues of LATP SSE. The primary  choice should be the physical combination of LATP SSE with other SSEs possessing  high chemical stability against lithium metal.
 
 Through the synergistic combination of theoretical calculations, advanced  characterizations, and designed experiments, the ion transport mechanism of LATP  SSE can be further clarified to guide the improvements of its ionic conductivity. The  incorporation of revolutionary nanotechnologies with well-established solid-state  physics/chemistry may mitigate the large interfacial contact resistances between the  electrodes and LATP SSE. Several powerful strategies, including the combination of  LATP with other stable SSEs, the adoption of electrolyte additives, and the utilization  of advanced ALD/MLD techniques, can be rationally applied to modify the interfaces  between LATP SSE and electrodes toward an enhanced interfacial stability and a high  grain boundary ionic conductivity.