Sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) have been considered as promising candidates for large-scale energy storage, owing to the high abundance and low cost of sodium (Na) resources. However, the development of full SIB has been hindered by low energy density because of the sluggish kinetics of large Na+ . Here, we report a full SIB with commercial tin (Sn) anode, cross-linked Na3V2(PO4)3/carbon nanotubes composites (NVP-CNT) cathode, and ether-based electrolyte. Sn is capable of delivering high reversible capacity via formation of Na15Sn4 and stable solid-electrolyte interface (SEI) in initial cycles. Meanwhile, the NASICON-type NVP enables ultrafast and stable Na+ intercalation/extraction, and the incorporation of CNT can improve its electrical conductivity. The assembled full SIB delivers high output voltage of ~3.2 V, high energy density of 253.4 W h kg−1 at 1600 W kg−1 based on total mass of both cathode and anode, and remarkable capacity retention of 96.1% after 180 cycles. These merit construction of high-energy full SIBs and will promote the development of SIBs.

Herein, we construct a high-energy-density full SIB with microsized Sn anode and composite cathode of Na3V2(PO4)3 and carbon nanotubes (NVP-CNT), as well as an ether-based electrolyte. The synergetic effect of Sn anode with etherbased electrolytes promotes formation of a porous integrity of Sn and guarantees high electron and Na+ transport; the combination of NVP and CNT endows the cathode with high electric conductivity. These merit the full SIB with high output voltage of ~3.2 V, ultrahigh energy density of 253.4 W h kg−1 at power density of 1600 W kg−1 (based on total mass of both cathode and anode), and outstanding cycling stability with 96.1% capacity retention after 180 cycles. This work will encourage the design of high-performance full SIBs.

In summary, a high-energy-density full SIB with commercial bulk Sn anode and cross-linked NVP-CNT cathode was successfully constructed. The full SIB exhibits high output voltage of ~3.2 V and outstanding cycling stability with capacity retention of 96.1% after 180 cycles. The energy and power densities of the full SIB reach up to 253.4 W h kg−1 and 1600 W kg−1, respectively, based on total mass of both cathode and anode. The excellent performance is attributed to the formation of a porous integrity of Sn in ether-based electrolyte and the combination of NVP and CNT for high electron conductivity and Na+ transport. The design of full SIB provides a viable solution for future large-scale energy storage.