Coating methodology is commonly employed in the enhancement of Ni-rich cathode for  Li-ion batteries (LIBs) as an efficient approach, while its strategy and effect are still great challenges  to achieve the success of surface modifications for comprehensive electrochemical properties. In this  work, the surface of Ni-rich cathode LiNi0.82Co0.15Al0.03O2 (NCA) is modified by intimately coating  of NASICON-type solid electrolyte LiZr2(PO4)3 (LZP) via a facile approach involving  electrostatically attraction. With the assistant of well-design architecture, that a uniform  NASICON-type LZP nanolayer wrapping over the NCA microsphere, the entire electrode  demonstrates exceptional Li+  diffusion and conductivity, and suppresses the side reaction between  electrolyte and electroactive NCA, stabilizing the phase interface with less Li+ /Ni2+ cation mixing.  As a result, the NCA@LZP can deliver high reversible capacity of 182 mAh g-1 at 1C in 2.7-4.3 V,  maintaining the capacity retention of 84.6% after 100 cycles. More importantly, the structure  stability of NCA is enhanced substantially by surface modification of LZP at high cutoff voltage. It  achieves the reversible capacity of 204 mAh g-1 and keeps 100.4 mAh g-1 after 500 cycles at 1C in  the potential range of 2.7-4.5 V. This effective strategy of using NASICON-fast ion conductor like  LZP as a coating layer, may provide a new insight to modify surface of Ni-rich electrode, improving  the rate capability and cyclic performance under high voltage.

Herein, with above consideration, the NASICON-fast ion conductor LiZr2(PO4)3 with high  stability and exceptional ion conductive is homogeneously wrapped on the NCA surface with a  typical core-shell structure by charge attraction. It is well-known that positive charge and negative  charge attract each other with strong force by electrostatic charge attraction. It is worthwhile that the  surface of LZP precursor endowed with negative charges can be spontaneously attracted by NCA  microsphere intrinsically with positive charges. It can make full use of electrostatic charge attraction  that LZP nanoparticles are adhered on NCA surface to form the uniformly coating layer by  self-created significant force. As a result, this unique strategy advances the reaction kinetic of NCA  and enhances the structure stability, resulting in the outstanding electrochemical performance under  high cut-off voltage condition.

To better observe the shell layer of LZP on NCA surface and demonstrate the coating effect of  charge attraction, the morphology of pristine NCA and LZP-modified NCA samples are  investigated by SEM and TEM. As depicted in Figure 3a-e and Figure S6, the spherical secondary  particle with average diameter of 15 μm is aggregated by numerous primary particles with size of  around 300 nm in diameter. Particularly, the rough surface of pristine NCA particle gets smoother  with the higher content of LZP coating materials. It is obvious that the pristine NCA sample  demonstrates a rough skin as presented in magnified SEM image (Figure 3b). As a contrast, the  modified NCA@LZP-1% sample exhibits an exquisite surface with a smooth shell, owing to the  formation of a uniform LZP outer layer on the rough surface of NCA particles.

Additionally, the O1s peak of pristine NCA at 531.6 eV and 529 eV are related to the lattice  oxygen for Li2CO3 and NCA (Figure 4e). In contrast, the O 1s peak of NCA displays a sharper peak  at ~531.6 eV, much higher than that of pristine NCA@LZP-1% at 529 eV, revealing the existence of  more oxygen on the surface of pristine NCA materials,39 which can be reacted with CO2 and formed  Li2CO3 based on lithium residual. Furthermore, to confirm the existence of LZP on NCA surface, the  Zr 3d peaks of 181.95 eV and 184.4 eV (Figure 4f), and P 2p peak of 133.4 eV (Figure 4g) are  clearly detected,40 indicating that the valence state of Zr 3d and P 2p are assigned to Zr4+ and P3+ ,  respectively, which are in accordance with LiZr2(PO4)3. Therefore, the XPS spectra reveal that the  obtained NCA@LZP composite displays a high ratio of Ni3+ with less lithium residual, which is  wrapped by the ultrathin coating layer of LZP.

Hence, the uniform coating layer of LZP can effectively mitigate the detrimental HF etching by  side reactions between electrolyte and active electrode, maintaining the integral configuration with  high chemical activity, as illustrated in Figure 8i. Besides, the LZP layer can alleviate the dissolving  of active elements in electrolyte and remain its stability at high voltage during long-term cycling,  acting like a shell to protect NCA cathode from structural deterioration. The existence of LZP-layer  can reduce electrode polarization and voltage reduction, keeping the advantages of Ni-rich materials.  More importantly, the NASICON-type fast ion conductor can facilitate Li+  migration rapidly by  increasing the ionic conductivity, especially at the electrolyte/LZP interface at NCA surface,  effectively reduce the transport resistance of entire electrode. As a result, NCA@LZP delivers the  exceptional electrochemical performance, particularly the rate capability and cycle stability under  high-voltage simultaneously.

In summary, the LZP-modified NCA cathode materials are successfully fabricated by unique  charge attraction method, ensuring the uniform coating of LZP-nanolayers on the NCA surface. The  impact of LZP coating on the physicochemical characters and electrochemical performances are  investigated. As expected, LZP, served as a robust protective layer, can mitigate the side reaction and  formation of corrosive by-product, which benefits the LZP-modified NCA sample from possession  of distinguished endurance and adamant stability under high voltage condition. Furthermore, LZP as  the superior ionic conductivity simultaneously, can facilitate the Li+  diffusion at the electrolyte/LZP  interface at NCA surface, significantly enhancing the reaction kinetic. Additionally, the electrode  polarization and voltage degradation of NCA electrodes are also effectively alleviated owing to the  LZP-modification. The electrochemical tests indicate that the LZP-modification with appropriate  amounts (NCA@LZP-1%) can improve cycling stability (from 69.8% to 84.6% after 100 cycles at  1C), and strengthen the rate capability (151.1 mA h g-1 at 5C). Particularly, it delivers a highly  cycling stability at high rate of 1C under cut-off voltage of 2.7-4.5 V (100.4 mA h g-1 after 500  cycles). Hence, the strategy of charge attraction promisingly provides a novel approach that  simultaneous removal of surface lithium residues and formation of NASICON-fast ion conductor  coating layer, which is highly desirable for Ni-rich cathode materials.