An immense effort has been put into developing high-performance electrodes to commercialize sodium-ion batteries, but research on developing an efﬁcient electrolyte is lacking. This study aims to ﬁnd the best carbonate-based electrolyte systems by incorporating the existing ideas reported in this ﬁeld. The sodium superionic conductor (NASICON) type Na3V2(PO4)2F3-C (NVPF-C) was chosen as a cathode, and its compatibility with four different carbonate-based electrolyte solutions was studied in the half-cell assembly. Additionally, full-cell assembly with hard carbon as an anode is also explored. Binary and tern-ary combinations of the solvents ethylene carbonate, propylene carbonate, and dimethyl carbonate were employed with and without ﬂuoroethylene carbonate as an additive. A systematic study was performed, including the in-situ impedance technique, and to determine the compatibility. Detailed galvanostatic studies for NVPF-C based half-cells, as well as hard carbon/NVPF-C full-cells, are performed, which shows that 1 M NaClO4 in propylene carbonate:dimethyl carbonate + ﬂuoroethylene carbonate is a better elec-trolyte composition for this assembly. Subsequently, a temperature study was carried out on this elec-trolyte to test its performance.
The diminishing fossil fuel resources drive the energy produc-tion sector to promote renewable energy resources, whose inter-mittent nature requires the employment of energy storage devices. Batteries have been the preferred choice of energy storage devices Particularly, lithium-ion batteries (LIB) are regarded as the holy grail of energy storage devices because of their high energy density, long cycling stability, and light-weight build. It has been gaining more importance with recent efforts in efﬁ-ciently recycling the spent batteries. Due to the limited resources and uneven geographical distribution, an impending lithium shortage and ﬂuctuations in the supply chain are predicted. Statistics show that the battery industry consumes a signiﬁcant share of the extracted lithium, and unless the recycling process is increased manifold, the LIB industry will be acutely affected. In addition to this, LIB poses a large number of safety issues, such as lithium plating and thermal runaway. The increasing prices of the transition metals used in LIBs (cobalt, nickel, chromium, etc.) and copper current collector drives up the cost per kWh of LIB. Due to the reduced production cost and improved safety, sodium-ion batteries (SIB) have regained their attention as a possi-ble alternative to the existing LIB. Even though many works have been done on developing high energy, stable electrode sys-tems, very few reports on electrolytes are currently available. By employing an appropriate electrolyte, a signiﬁcant improvement in battery performance is possible.
An obstacle in developing high-performance SIB is the unavail-ability of a universal electrolyte, unlike the LIB systems. The stabil-ity of the electrolyte and the passivation layers formed are vital to the performance of a cell. During charge and discharge, the elec-trolyte in the cell is exposed to cathode and anode surfaces. It is also subjected to large voltage variations during charge–discharge of the cell. Owing to the electrolyte dissociation, a passivation layer, commonly known as a solid electrolyte interface (SEI), is formed on the electrode surface. The SEI should be highly conduct-ing, but it should be stable during the charge–discharge cycles. This SEI layer is critical for the cells’ long-term cycling stability since a poor SEI layer can lead to continuous electrolyte decomposition leading to a gradual decay of the cell capacity. It was also found that the SEI layer formed in SIBs is less sturdy when compared to LIBs, which suggests that more effort has to be put into the elec-trolyte development for SIBs. The carbonate-based electrolyte systems have been used as a standard electrolyte for LIB, and pro-found progress has been made to optimize the same for SIB. Pon-rouch et al. conducted a study to optimize the carbonate-based sodium-ion battery electrolyte by employing a tertiary elec-trolyte system. The optimization of the electrolyte system was car-ried out by varying the third component, and its volume. Before this, they also conducted a study on various carbonate-based elec-trolytes to obtain the best combination possible for the hard-carbon system . Bhide et al. performed a conductivity study to determine the optimum concentration of electrolyte salts in a binary mixture of carbonate solvents. A study on the inﬂuence of ionic liquids added to carbonate-based electrolytes and volume to be added to maximize the performance was conducted by Monti et al. . Vidal-Abarca et al. proved that the choice of elec-trolyte heavily inﬂuenced the performance and the cycling stability of the cell. Myriad review articles are available, which compare the electrolytes in the reported literature to provide a comprehensive idea on various types of electrolyte systems and their pros and cons].This work attempts to obtain the optimum carbonate-based electrolyte system for a sodium-ion cell with hard carbon as anode and Na3V2(PO4)2F3-C (NVPF-C) as a cathode with focus on the electrochemical performance of the sodium half/full-cell. Besides carbon coating, the novel material such as graphdiyne coating may also be tried . NVPF-C has two redox peaks at ~3.5 V and ~4.0 V (vs. Na/Na+), providing us an opportunity to study the formation of interface ﬁlms due to electrolyte decomposition via impedance study. A major share of carbonate-based electrolytes uses the salts NaClO4 or NaPF6, whereas NaFSI, NaTFSI, etc. are meagerly used. Ponrouch et al. had demonstrated that the electrolyte salts NaClO4 and NaPF6 exhibited similar perfor-mances. Hence the salt used throughout this study was NaClO4 at 1 M concentration in various carbonate-based binary and tern-ary solvents. Rather than using a single-solvent base electrolyte system, we test the half/full-cell performance with binary and ternary electrolytes, which have improved ionic conductivity, lower viscosity, and stability over a wide potential window. The electrolytes used in this study were propylene carbon-ate:dimethyl carbonate + ﬂuoroethylene carbonate (PC:DMC + FEC, 1:1 vol + 5 vol%), ethylene carbonate:dimethyl carbonate + ﬂuoroe thylene carbonate (EC:DMC + FEC, 1:1 vol + 5 vol%), ethylene car-bonate:propylene carbonate (EC:PC, 1:1 vol), and ethylene carbon-ate:propylene carbonate:dimethyl carbonate + ﬂuoroethylene carbonate (EC:PC:DMC + FEC, 0.45:0.45:0.1 vol + 5 vol%). PC and EC have been elaborately used for the Li-ion batteries owing to its high dielectric constant, which bolsters the sodium salt dissoci-ation. The co-solvent DMC was chosen to reduce the electrolyte’s viscosity, thereby promoting the ion transfer rates. Moreover, the EC:DMC has been found to form a eutectic mixture, providing a better performance at room temperature. Fluoroethylene carbon-ate has been chosen as an additive since it supports better and robust SEI formation. For hard carbon anode, the EC:PC is the most suitable electrolyte solvent, and this electrolyte has been adopted without the additive . This provides an opportunity to validate whether the improved performance of hard-carbon alone enhances the full-cell performance.
NVPF-C was synthesized through a reported procedure.Ina typical synthesis process, 50 mL distilled water, stoichiometric amounts of Na2CO3 (Sigma Aldrich, >99%), NH4H2PO4 (Sigma Aldrich, >98%), NaF (Sigma Aldrich, >99%), and V2O5 (Sigma Aldrich, >98%) was dissolved and thoroughly dried in a forced-air oven at 50 C. To the above precursor, acetylene black (5 wt% of the total mass of the reagents) was added and grounded well. The above mixture was subjected to 350 C for 4 h under argon ﬂow with a ramp rate of 5 C min.-1, which was then reground well followed by another heating at 650 C for 8 h under argon ﬂow with a ramp rate of 5 C min.-1. The above-obtained material was ground to a ﬁne powder using a mortar and pestle to get NVPF-C. Hard carbon was gratis provided by Kuraray (Kuranode, type 3, Japan) and was directly used as the active material for the anode.
The electrolytes were prepared inside the glove box with NaClO4 salt (Sigma Aldrich, 98%) dissolved in various solvents such as propylene carbonate (PC, Sigma, anhydrous, 99.7%), ethylene carbonate (EC, Sigma, anhydrous, 99%), dimethyl carbonate (DMC, Sigma, anhydrous, >99%), and additive ﬂuoroethylene car-bonate (FEC, Sigma, anhydrous, >99%) in binary and ternary combinations. The salts, and the solvents, were directly used without any form of puriﬁcation or pre-treatment.
The structural characterization of NVPF-C was carried out through X-ray diffraction (XRD, ULTIMA-IV, Rigaku, ARBL-RAD), and material composition was determined through Raman spec-troscopy (LabRam HR800 UV Raman microscope, Horiba Jobin-Yvon, France). The XRD analysis was done at a scanning rate of 1 min-1 with monochromatic Cu Ka radiation (k = 1.5406 Å). Using a 515 nm diode laser as light source Raman spectra of the material was recorded at room temperature. The material’s surface constituents were ensured through X-ray photoelectron spec-troscopy (XPS, Multilab 2000, UK). Field emission scanning elec-tron microscopy (FE-SEM S-4700, Hitachi, Japan) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM, JEM-2000, EX-II, JEOL, Japan) were employed for surface and internal struc-ture, respectively.
All the half-cells and full-cells were fabricated in an argon-ﬁlled glove box (MBraun, Germany) with the oxygen and moisture level at < 0.1 ppm. Hard carbon (HC), conductive additive (acetylene black), and binder (polyvinylidene ﬂuoride - PVdF) were mixed at a ratio of 75:10:15 (wt.%) in N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) to form a slurry. This slurry was coated on copper foil using a doctor blade apparatus followed by complete drying at 75 C overnight. These were then cut into 14 mm diameter electrodes, which were kept at 75 C in a vacuum oven and used in CR2016 coin cells with glass microﬁber separators (Whatman, cat no. 1825-047, UK) with metallic sodium as counter-electrode. The composite electrode composed of 10 mg of NVPF-C, 2 mg of conductive additive (acet-ylene black), and 2 mg binder (teﬂonized acetylene black-2, TAB), which were mixed in a mortar pestle with ethanol into a freestand-ing ﬁlm. Later, the ﬁlm was pressed onto a 16 mm diameter stain-less steel mesh (Goodfellow, UK), which acted as the current collector. These were kept overnight at 75 C in a vacuum oven to make the test cells with metallic sodium as counter-electrode for the half-cell assembly in CR2016 coin cells. Before the balanced full-cell fabrication, the hard-carbon half-cells were subjected to 3 cycles of charge–discharge, and the cell was de-crimped to remove the hard-carbon electrode carefully. The mass of active material in the NVPF-C electrode was adjusted according to the former one’s capacity, and full-cells were fabricated with glass microﬁber sepa-rator. The gravimetric capacities of full-cell were calculated based on active material loading in the anode, i.e., hard carbon.
The structural features of the synthesized NVPF-C were ana-lyzed through powder XRD. An XRD analysis of the as-synthesized NVPF-C (Fig. 1a) is consistent with the previous report, and the diffraction peaks suggest a tetragonal structure belonging to the P42/mnm space group. The reﬁned unit cell parameters were calculated as a=b=9.07 Å, c=10.658 Å, and V = 876.78 Å3 from the XRD pattern. The prominent reﬂections at the 2h values of 16.12, 16.62, 27.82, 28.74, and 32.62 correspond to the crystal planes (1 1 1), (0 0 2), (2 2 0), (11 3), and (2 22), respectively. The structure of NVPF-C can be described as a 3D NASICON (sodium superionic conductor) type structure built up by a bi-octahedral structure [V2O8F3] (a combination of two [VO4F] connected via an F) and [PO4] tetrahedral units. Better rate performance is probable by this structure via a higher rate of Na-ion diffusion distributed in the NASICON network in both X and Y directions . The Raman spectra (Fig. 1b) of NVPF-C shows two peaks at 1350 cm-1 and 1584 cm-1 corresponding to the D band and the G band, which are indications of disordered carbon and graphitized carbon respectively. The degree of disorderness is calculated from these peaks from the ID=IG ratio, which is 1.051 in this case. This indicates that the carbon is mostly present in the amorphous state. The high-lighted region in the Raman spectra displays two peaks centered at ~930 cm-1 and ~1040 cm-1, which arise due to the symmetric and asymmetric stretching of the PAO bond in the PO4 group. For determining the elemental composition of the prepared com-pound, XPS analysis was carried out. The XPS survey spectrum (Fig. 1c) indicated the presence of Na, F, O, V, C, and P. The chemical state of these elements was evaluated by deconvoluting of C1s, O1s, P2p, V2p, F1s, and Na1s core levels (Fig. 1d-i). The C1s peak can be decomposed into four peaks at 283.9, 284.6, 285.6, and 286.9 eV, which corresponds to the sp3 carbon, C@C, CAC, and CAO coordination, respectively. The deconvolution of the O1s core level yields four peaks at 530.45, 531.65, 532.95, and 534.6 eV, which belongs to OAP, OAC, O@C, and CAOH, respec-tively. The spectrum at V2p core level has two broad peaks at V2p3/2 and V2P1/2 at 517.75, and 524.48 eV, whereas at 133.73 eV, 685.49 eV, and 1072.19 eV exhibits broad spectra which are afﬁliated to the P2p, F1s, and the Na1s core levels.The micrographs obtained through FE-SEM (Fig. 2a, b, and c) reveal the particle’s non-uniform size distribution with slight par-ticle agglomeration. These have a semi-uniform carbon coating on the surface. The SEM images reveal that these agglomerations com-prise of NVPF-C crystals, with one of them identiﬁed to have around 314 nm in dimensions. The TEM images (Fig S1) conﬁrms the above observation. A closer look through HR-TEM (Fig. 2d) dis-closes the regular crystal structure of the NVPF-C lattice with the lattice fringes, separated at a distance of 0.45 nm, which matches with the (2 0 0) plane observed in the NVPF-C XRD pattern. The selected area electron diffraction pattern (SAED) (Fig. 2e) also con-ﬁrms the existence of the regular periodic crystal structure of the material. The continuous planes seen in the image establishes the exceptional crystalline nature of the material synthesized. A thin uniform layer of carbon (~4.27 nm) is visible on the NVPF-C surface (Fig. 2f), which helps to boost the otherwise poor electronic conductivity of the bare sodium vanadium ﬂuorophosphate (10–7 S cm-1) .The energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) images (Fig. 2-g-l) present the constituent elements’ uniform distribution throughout the particle. The signals corresponding to sodium, vanadium, phosphorous, and oxygen are very homogenous and exactly coincide with the components of NVPF-C. This assures the consistent presence of NVPF-C. The carbon content is non-uniform, which may be due to the exposure of the carbon-coated copper grid.
The Fig. 3 shows the performance of NVPF-C in half-cell assem-bly for 1 M NaClO4 in PC:DMC + FEC, EC:DMC + FEC, EC:PC, and EC: PC:DMC + FEC electrolytes. NVPF-C half-cell (NHC) with elec-trolytes PC:DMC + FEC, EC:DMC + FEC, EC:PC, and EC:PC: DMC + FEC are abbreviated as NHC-1, NHC-2, NHC-3, and NHC-4 respectively in the rest of the work. Other combinations of elec-trolytes with solvents even from the glyme family were tested, and their results are shown in Fig. S2. It can be seen that the irre-versibility in the half-cell with EC as a co-solvent in the electrolyte is higher when compared to PC:DMC + FEC. This is caused due to the decomposition of EC at 4.3 V vs. Na. The decomposition of PC takes place at a higher voltage of > 4.5 V vs. Na, which is not observed here as the upper voltage is capped at 4.3 V vs. Na. The other factor contributing to the irreversibility is the decompo-sition of DMC, which takes place around 3.30 and 3.94 V vs. Na . The high permittivity of PC coupled with its ease of forming a protective layer with the least amount of additives/co-solvents makes it a perfect solvent choice. The irreversible decomposi-tion of FEC would contribute equally in all the electrolytes used, contributing to the initial irreversibility and, in turn, assisting the formation of a more robust SEI layer. The cycling proﬁle at 20 mA g-1 reveals that after 50 cycles, NHC-1 exhibited maximum capacity retention of 82% (initial charge capacity: 97 mAh g-1),whereas NHC-2 exhibited the least capacity retention of 67% (ini-tial charge capacity: 114 mAh g-1). The NHC-3 (initial charge capacity: 120 mAh g-1) and NHC-4 (initial charge capacity: 102 mAh g-1) exhibited capacity retention of 78 and 75%, respectively. The NHC-3 exhibited the highest initial capacity of 120 mAh g-1 but failed to exhibit better CE (Coulombic efﬁciency) throughout the cycling process. This can be accounted for by the inefﬁcient SEI layer formed on the electrode surface due to the absence of FEC additive. To further understand the electrochemical perfor-mance of such electrolytes, an in-situ impedance was performed in half-cell assembly.An in-situ impedance study was performed to investigate the cause of the initial irreversibility and the improved performance of a particular electrolyte. The Nyquist plots of all the electrolytes at the voltage limits are shown in Fig. S3. The charge-transfer resistance for each case was calculated and plotted (Fig. 4). As hypothesized, one of the major causes of the irreversibility was the formation of a robust SEI layer, which is conﬁrmed by the change in the charge transfer resistance (RCT) after one complete charge–discharge. The charge-transfer resistance is least for the half-cell’s fully charged state due to the minimum exchange cur-rent across the electrode and the electrolyte. The decomposition of the electrolyte constituent solvents leads to the formation of surface ﬁlms. NHC-2 exhibited the least RCT after cycling, whereas NHC-3 exhibited the highest RCT. NHC-4 shows the maxi-mum value (31%), whereas the least is NHC-2 (13%). NHC-1 shows a reasonable reduction of 23%, followed by NHC-3 at 20%. If the relative reduction of RCT is considered, the SEI layer formed in NHC-4 displayed the most improvement in conductivity. This reduction of impedance matters because it shows the most effective layer formation on the cathode throughout the electrolytes tested, and NHC-1 shows excellent performance in both of the tests mentioned above. Hence, as far as the NVPF-C half-cell is considered, the best choice amongst the tested electrolytes is the electrolyte with PC:DMC + FEC as the solvent. Further, insight into the nature of the SEI formed with various electrolyte solutions is underway.
The mass of cathode material was adjusted for the capacity of the hard carbon anode which was performed for the all the four electrolytes according to the equationm1c1=m2c2where m1 and m2 are the masses of the anode and cathode active material, and c1 and c2 are the capacities in mAh g-1 (wrt mass of the active material alone). Similarly, hard carbon electrode’s irre-versibility was mitigated by three charge–discharge cycles followed by assembly of the full-cell (refer Fig. S4). For convenience, the NVPF-C full-cell (NFC) with PC:DMC + FEC, EC:DMC + FEC, and EC: PC:DMC + FEC as electrolyte solvents are abbreviated as NFC-1, NFC-2, NFC-3, and NFC-4. Fig. 5 shows the charge–discharge curves as well as the long-term performance of the full-cells. After 90 cycles at 50 mA g-1, NFC-1 maintained maximum of its initial capacity (60.5%, initial charge capacity: 300 mAh g-1) while NFC-2 could only retain 39% of its initial capacity (initial charge capacity: 374 mAh g-1).
The NFC-3 managed to maintain 39% of its initial capacity (ini-tial charge capacity: 405 mAh g-1), and NFC-4 managed to main-tain 52% of its initial capacity (initial charge capacity: 299 mAh g-1). The data proves that PC:DMC + FEC indeed is a better solvent for the half-cell and the full-cell. EC:PC has been reported as the best solvent combination for hard carbon-based cells, but failed to maintain it for this particular HC/NVPF-C full-cell. Moreover, the in-situ impedance could predict this outcome to a certain extent, making it an ideal tool for comparing and predicting cell performances. The rate performances of the full-cells were also evaluated (Fig. 6). The cells initially underwent two cycles at 50 mA g-1 to remove the irreversibility and facilitate good SEI layer formation. NFC-1 clearly shows maximum capacity retention even after cycling at 1500 mA g-1 with better capacity, whereas NFC-2 and NFC-3 show a maximum drop in capacity after high rate test-ing. Besides, NFC-3 and NFC-4 show meager capacity at 1500 mA g-1, whereas NFC-1 and NFC-2 do way better. By setting the criteria as the cell that displayed maximum capacity retention after the high-rate cycling, it’s seen that though NFC-2 can display higher capacity values after high-rate cycling, the capacity value at 50 mA g-1 is very less when compared to its value initially at 50 mA g-1. But NFC-1 can retain almost all of its capacity even after cycling at such high current rates. This makes NFC-1 a better cell than others in rate performance studies due to its ability to retain the capacity even after rigorous testing at high current rates. Con-sidering all of the above factors, clearly the electrolyte with PC: DMC + FEC as the solvent has the upper hand amongst all the elec-trolytes considered here in this work.
To further evaluate this superior performance of NHC-1, a temperature-dependent study was conducted using the cell that was earlier subjected to the rate study (Fig. 7). The performance was seen to be low at 0 C, which may be accounted for by the increase in impedance due to the reduction in ionic mobility. Con-trary to this, at 40 C, the cell displayed its best performance, and at 50 C, the capacity started fading drastically. To observe this per-formance, NFC-1 was subjected to long-term cycling at 50 C, which is shown in Fig. S5. NHC-1 exhibited decent temperature performance at moderately low and high temperatures, but the poor performance at low temperatures and rapid capacity decay at high capacity. The rapid loss in capacity at high temperatures results from the decomposition of the electrolyte and the cell components.
SIB research is more focused on developing high-performance anodes and cathodes. In contrast, minimal effort is being put into the study of electrolytes, which is a crucial component to enhance cell performance. The electrolyte combination can drastically affect the cell performance, which is a distinct fact seen in this study. Carbonate-based electrolyte systems have been assiduously tested for LIB. Testing carbonate-based electrolytes for SIBs are not rehashing the ideas implemented in LIB, but a chance to revamp these. The performance of NVFP-C in half-cell assembly revealed that NHC-1 exhibited better performance out of NHC-2,3, and 4, whereas the long-term and the rate performance of the HC/NVPF-C full-cells also showed that NFC-1 is better than NFC-2,3,and 4. The above studies conﬁrm that 1 M NaClO4 in PC: DMC + FEC is indeed the best electrolyte among the various combination of carbonate-based electrolytes evaluated in this work. A temperature study was also performed in this work to assess this superior nature of this electrolyte system. In-situ impedance can be adopted as an excellent tool to predict the electrolyte’s performance, which is a very novel approach and, to the best of our knowledge, has not been utilized for such studies. The presence of the additive and the electrode materials might have played vital roles in obtaining such a result. The best electrolyte choice has been determined through electrochemical techniques. Additional work has to be done with the physical properties of the electrolyte, the composition of the SEI ﬁlm, etc. We hypothesize that a robust and highly conductive passivation layer catapults the sol-vent combination PC:DMC + FEC into the best choice, and this is hinted in the impedance study. Additional contributing factors have to be looked into and would make ground for an exciting study. The electrode–electrolyte chemistry should also be explored in-depth. Unlike LIB technology, research is still going on to ﬁnd a universal electrolyte for SIB technology. More work has to be done at this angle to achieve this.