Na-ion batteries (SIBs) have garnered tremendous interests due to their unique advantages of high safety, abundant sodium resources, and low cost. Great research efforts of SIBs have been devoted to the exploitation and in-depth mechanism investigation of high-performance electrode materials. Among the various cathodes, Na3V2(PO4)2F3 (NVPF), a representative member of sodium superionic conductor (NASICON) structured compounds, has been considered to be a promising candidate because of its superior structural stability, fast ion transport, high operating potential and so on. However, its electrochemical performance and future large-scale applications have been hindered by the relatively low electronic conductivity and high cost of NVPF. This review emphasizes the crystal structure, Na storage mechanisms together with synthetic methods of NVPF, and then summarizes various proposed strategies including carbon coating, element doping, size and morphology design, etc. to meliorate electrochemical performance of NVPF. Additionally, the applications of NVPF cathode in other battery systems are included. Finally, our perspectives on the subsequent research and optimization of NVPF are also shared. This review is not only a comprehensive summary of NVPF for the first time but also provides a good reference for the rational design of high-performance NVPF in the future. 
Great efforts have been focused on developing solar, wind, and other renewable energy resources to conquer the pollution of traditional fossil.1 However, the space-time restriction of new energy sources makes it inevitable to exploit efficient electrochemical energy storage (EES) technologies suitable for renewable energy.2,3 Among the various EES, Li-ion batteries (LIBs) dominate the market due to their low self-discharge rate, high energy density and so forth.4 While LIBs confront severe bottlenecks of high cost and limited resource reserve.5 Naturally, Na-ion batteries (SIBs) with abundant resources and low cost have sparked research interests again.6,7 In addition, as Na locates in the same main group with Li (the alkali metal family), Na exhibits similar physicochemical properties to Li, allowing partial works and strategies that have been implemented for LIBs to be applied to SIBs. Another profitable advantage is that the anode current collector for SIBs can adopt cheap Al foil instant of Cu since Na will not form alloy with Al, which further lowers the cost of SIBs.8,9 Nonetheless, the current SIBs have not yet attained parity with LIBs in terms of cycling stability and energy density, which require considerable scientific and engineering improvements to push forward the development of SIBs. Similar to LIBs, SIBs follow the “rocking-chair” mechanism, which relies on the reversible insertion/extraction of Na+ between the cathode and anode during the charge/discharge process to realize energy conversion.10 Therefore, the electrochemical performances of SIBs are largely determined by the inherent chemistry of the electrode materials.11-13 Cathode materials are the core factor that directly affects the overall performance of SIBs since cathode materials not only account for a large proportion of the mass but also determine the output voltage of SIBs.14-18 To date, all sorts of cathode materials, including transition-metal oxides,19,20 polyanion-type compounds,21,22 and Prussian blue analogues,23 etc. have exhibited considerable Na storage capacities. However, the poor cycling durability, low redox potential and high moisture sensitivity cannot be ignored in transition-metal oxides.24 Prussian blue analogues are often affected by issues of low Coulombic efficiency and poor cycling performance caused by the existence of lattice defects and coordinated water.25,26 In comparison, polyanion-type compounds become one of the extensively researched electrode materials on account of their versatile structure, high safety and excellent electrochemical performance. As a member of polyanion-type compounds, Na3V2(PO4)2F3 (NVPF) with NASICON structure is a promising candidate by virtues of its high energy density, large interstitial spaces, excellent structural stability and so on.27 As reported, NVPF outputs a high working potential of ~3.9 V due to the stronger ionicity of the F-V bond than that of the O-V one, exhibiting a high energy density of ~500 Wh kg-1.28 All such advantages make it quite popular in SIB applications. In recent years, researchers have carried out some works on this material and made tremendous progress. Hence, it is necessary to summarize current researches in detail, so as to provide a reference for subsequent design. To our knowledge, however, a specialized review focusing on NVPF has not yet been published. This brings an immediate requirement to systematically investigate its development, which is the motivation behind this review. In this review, a detailed introduction of the crystal structure, sodiation/desodiation mechanisms together with synthetic methods of NVPF reported till the date is presented. Some strategies for meliorating electrochemical performance of NVPF from the perspective of enhancing electron conduction are mainly analyzed. Moreover, the applications of NVPF cathode in full battery, LIBs and other battery systems are also summarized. Finally, our perspectives about the remaining challenges and the future prospects of NVPF will also be discussed. We believed that this review will inform readers of a comprehensive understanding of NVPF and inspire further research on it.
The first synthesis and characterization of NVPF can be traced back to 1999. Meins et al.29 firstly synthesized a series of fluorophosphate materials (Na3M2(PO4)2F3 (M=Al3+, V3+, Cr3+, Fe3+, Ga3+)) by solid-state or hydrothermal methods, and systematically studied their crystal structures. The characterization results showed that the NVPF with Amam space group belongs to orthorhombic crystal system, which is composed of [V2O8F3] bi-octahedral and [PO4] tetrahedral units. And the bi-octahedra units are connected by F atoms, whereas the [PO4] units are linked by oxygen atoms (Fig. 1a). In particular, this arrangement results in the formation of large channels to accommodate Na+ via the free diffusion along the [110] and [1-10] directions.30 The charge exchange is usually accompanied by the redox of transition metal ions in the crystal structure during the charge/discharge process, so the diffusion paths of electrons depend on the interconnection between [V2O8F3] bi-octahedra for NVPF. The presence of [PO4] not only allows the rapid migration of Na+ in the framework structure but also stabilizes the structure during the metal redox process. However, the electron transmission is blocked by the electronic insulated [PO4], which are equatorially connected with the [V2O8F3] bi-octahedra. Therefore, although there are many ion diffusion channels in NVPF, the lack of electron transmission path leads to the low electronic conductivity, which severely restricts its electrochemical performance.31,32Na storage mechanism in NVPF was studied in detail by various in-situ measurements including X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), X-ray diffraction (XRD), high-resolution synchrotron XRD, solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), and so on.33-35 The 23Na NMR spectrum (Fig. 1b) of pristine NVPF verified the presence of two diverse Na sites with an occupancy ratio of 2:1, the fully occupied Na sites are denoted as Na1 and the other partially filled Na sites are named as Na2.33 Noting that the process of extracting Na+ from NVPF is accompanied by a series of very complex phase transitions.34 There are four distinct intermediate phases before the ultimate formation of NaV2(PO4)2F3, i.e. N2.4V2(PO4)2F3, N2.2V2(PO4)2F3, N2V2(PO4)2F3, N1.8-1.3V2(PO4)2F3, among which, only N1.8-1.3V2(PO4)2F3 with the I4/mmm symmetry undergoes a solid solution process. And the sodium (de)intercalation processes involving other intermediate phases show biphasic reactions. Surprisingly, the crystal structure of NVPF will change from the space group Amam to I4/mmm and finally to Cmc21 during the complete charge process. Fig. 1c further illustrates the occupation of Na+ inside the unit cell of different intermediate phases. In subsequent research, Song et al.35,36 explored the electrochemical performance and ion migration pathway for NVPF cathode by combining theoretical calculations and experimental studies. Via replacing one (PO4)3- anion in NVP with the strong electronegative F-, NVPF exhibits higher redox potentials (3.3, 3.6 and 4.0 V vs. Na+/Na), which are related to redox reaction of V3+/V4+ (i.e. Na3V2(PO4)2F3 ↔ NaV2(PO4)2F3 + 2Na+ + 2e−) (Fig. 1d).36 And Na+ at Na2 sites will be preferentially extracted due to the high chemical potential.35 Exactly, the first two redox couples at a relatively low potential scope (3.3 and 3.6 V) are due to two-step uptake/release of the Na2 ions in the NVPF crystal, whereas the third one (4.0 V) is caused by the second Na+ intercalation/deintercalation into/from the Na1 sites.37 Generally, it should be noted that only two Na+ participate in the reaction, while the third one in the structure of NVPF is electrochemically inaccessible. To trigger the electrochemical activity of the third Na+, a new disordered “NVPF” phase will form.38 As shown in Fig. 1e, this disordered “NVPF” can reversibly intercalate/deintercalate three Na+ in the potential window of 1.0-4.8 V, and the last Na+ will be extracted at 1.6 V. Therefore, the energy density of the full SIB using a carbon anode and this disordered “NVPF” cathode is expected to increase by 15%-20%. 
Compared to anode materials, the synthetic strategies of NVPF are relatively fewer. Previously used methods are mainly traditional solid-state reaction methods,39-43 sol-gel methods,44-46 hydrothermal/solvothermal method47-48 and spray drying.49,50 Basically, high-purity NVPF can be directly prepared by solid-state reactions. In a recent study, NVPF was produced using NaF, NH4VO3, NH4H2PO4 and pitch as the raw materials by a single-step solid-state ball-milling method (Fig. 2a).43 Through the SEM images of NVPF/C composites (Fig. 2b), it can be found that the particle size is large, heterogeneous and agglomerated, which is not conducive to its electrochemical performance.35 Compared with the solid-state method, low-temperature synthetic routes without a tedious re-annealing treatment, such as the sol-gel method, are widely used. Generally, citric acid or oxalic acid is added as a chelating agent and carbon source during the synthesis (Fig. 2c). The particle size and distribution of NVPF@C prepared by this method are much better, leading to much improved electrochemical kinetics (Fig. 2d).51 However, the controlling of morphology and structure cannot be easily realized via this method.28 In order to build NVPF with unique structures to achieve high performance, solvothermal/hydrothermal method is generally adopted.47,48 To our knowledge, this is a very simple method to synthesize NVPF. All the raw materials are just mixed together, followed by hydrothermal process and heat treatment (Fig. 2e). The NVPF microcubes wrapped by 3D rGO network (NVPF@rGO) (Fig. 2f) and hierarchical hollow microsphere structure can be easily prepared based on hydrothermal method.52-53  Virtually, elaborate architecture enables superior Na storage due to enhanced electronic conductivity and facilitated ionic migration.54 Therefore, to realize the rational design of NVPF, spray drying49,50 or electrostatic spinning55,56 is often used as an auxiliary technology in combination with the solid-state reaction. Spherical NVPF@C/CNTs with a high tap density was fabricated through the spray drying method, which is promising to achieve practical applications for high power and long lifespan SIBs (Fig. 2g-h).50 Predictably, the scalable spray drying method can not only produce materials in a time-efficient way but also accelerate the commercialization of SIBs. Electrostatic spinning is a typical technology to synthesize 1D nanostructured self-standing electrode materials.57,58 Through electrostatic spinning and carbonized processes (detailed experimental procedure can be seen in Fig. 2i), the nanoparticles are uniformly dispersed and confined in interconnecting 1D carbon nanofibers (Fig. 2j). This technology has been widely applied in the synthesis of cathode materials including Na3V2(PO4)359 and NaVPO4F/C,60 so it is also feasible to synthesize NVPF.61 Unfortunately, only one research on the synthesis of NVPF by electrostatic spinning has been published so far, considerable work remains to be done. Synthesis methods and conditions have great influence on the properties of electrode materials and application prospects. Among the various methods, the solid-state reaction method is a simple synthesis route, but the prepared NVPF usually has problems like inhomogeneity, agglomeration, irregular morphology, etc., which limits its rate performance. Both solgel method and hydrothermal synthesis have many merits over the traditional solid-state reaction, such as good mixture of the reagents and small grain size of NVPF, which are considered as promising methods to well realize the elaborately designed structure and homogeneous element doping. Also, developing other auxiliary methods (e.g., microwave heating) is still required. 
Although the NVPF exhibits a lot of merits as a cathode for SIBs, the overall electrochemical performance is still seriously hindered by its low inherent electronic conductivity.62 Therefore, it is crucial to improve the electronic conductivity to achieve better electrochemical performance. For this purpose, researchers have made a lot of attempts and efforts in material modification. At present, some modification strategies, including carbon coating, element doping, size and morphology design, etc., have been proposed. By employing one or more above strategies, the electrochemical properties of this material can be effectively improved. In addition, Fig. 3 and Table 1 summarize several representative modification strategies and detailed electrochemical performance of NVPF, respectively. 
Carbon modifications have attracted widespread attention due to its advantages of high conductivity, low cost, and excellent chemical stability. Noting that carbon additives such as amorphous carbon, graphite, and carbon fibers are combined with active materials, which not only form external conductive frameworks but also protect the internal material structure. Or rather, carbon modifications possess many merits:68 (i) the electron conductive carbon layer can realize a fast-synergic diffusion between electrons and ions; (ii) the carbon layer is strongly effective in preventing the active materials from reacting with electrolyte owing to the favorable corrosion stability; (iii) the carbon material can provide a buffer for the tiny volume changes that occur during the ion (de)intercalation processes. Although compositing with carbon materials has been widely used, the difficulty to graphitize the carbon materials obviously limits the improvement of electronic conductivity. In the meantime, it is not easy to obtain a uniform carbon layer due to its susceptibility to preparation conditions. Actually, the thickness and uniformity carbon coating layer outside of the active materials will affect the migration of Na+ between particles and electrolyte, so it should be precisely controlled. 
The advantage of amorphous carbon coating should be attributed to the following aspects:63 First, the carbon coating layer will be beneficial to restricting the growth of the NVPF particles, so the particle size of the material becomes smaller with the increase of the carbon content (Fig. 4a-c). Second, the amorphous carbon will form a conductive network for electron transportation. Furthermore, the amorphous carbon wrapped structure can also lower charge transfer resistance and improve electrolyte wetting area during charge and discharge process. Carbon sources are always introduced into the precursor to achieve an in situ amorphous carbon layer on the surface of NVPF through thermal decomposition. Since the coated amorphous carbon layer brings about a lot of advantages, the NVPF/amorphous carbon composites proposed by various research groups generally deliver improved rate capacity and cycling ability compared with the pristine NVPF. For example, utilizing citric acid as the carbon source, NVPF@C composite with a dense carbon shell (around 7 nm) was synthesized. It delivered a high reversible capacity of 130 mAh g-1 at 0.5 C and excellent cycling performance at a high rate of 30 C, with a capacity retention of 50% even after 3000 cycles.44 However, too much carbon would cause severe particle aggregation, which may hinder the migration of Na+ and decrease the utilization rate of carbon. Simultaneously, the excess introduction of the inactive carbon into the electrode material would decrease the energy density of electrode. Wang et al.43 found that the NVPF/C sample with a carbon content of 12.14 wt% showed the most excellent reversible capacities and outstanding cycling performance. Therefore, a moderate amount of carbon in the NVPF/C sample is essential. In addition, doping heteroatoms (N,64 P,65 S66 or B67) into the carbon coating layers are intensively investigated. Heteroatoms doping will introduce abundant active sites and extrinsic defects in carbon frameworks, so as to achieve faster electronic and ionic transfer rate compared to original coatings. Among various heteroatoms, N, as the most widely studied heteroatom, can create more active sites for electrochemical reactions and improve surface wettability.68 For example, using dopamine (DPA) as carbon source, the NVPF/C-PDPA sample with a uniform N-doped carbon layer (about 3-4 nm in thickness) was synthesized.64 Owing to the improved Na+ migration and enhanced charge transfer constructed by the N-doped carbon coating layer, the composite showed superior cycling ability (with a capacity retention of 95.8% after 800 cycles at 10 C) and rate capacity than NVPF/C. Certainly, compared with single atom doping, dual atom doping can introduce more active sites and significantly improve the electron/ion migration, thereby greatly improve the electrochemical performance of electrode materials.65 Although dual atom doping has not been reported in NVPF system, it can be considered in light of its wide and successful applications in other materials. 
Dispersing carbon with better electrical conductivity directly into the precursor for high-temperature sintering is a relatively simple strategy. Among them, compositing NVPF with carbon nanotubes (CNTs) has attracted great attention from researchers to fabricate high-performance cathode materials because of the high electrical conductivity and exceptional thermal stability of CNTs.69 Eshraghi et al.49 prepared an NVPF/CNT sample, where CNTs were well dispersed inside the NVPF particles with irregular morphology (as seen in Fig. 4d). Benefited from the porosity that avails the penetration of liquid electrolyte and the bridging network of uniformly distributed CNTs, the NVPF/CNT material showed favorable electrochemical performance. In addition, a designed double carbon-wrapped structure is verified to be capable of offering a stable framework for fast transmission of Na+ and excellent electronic conductivity. For instance, the NVPF@C/CNTs composite synthesized by a hydrothermal route without extra heat treatment showed higher rate capability and superior cycling performance than NVPF/CNT owing to the highly conductive 3D structure which was caused by the embedded CNTs and homogeneous carbon covering layer (about 5nm) for NVPF (Fig. 4e).70 Single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) can contribute to the formation of pure phase and serve as a seed crystal to increase the crystallinity of the material. Fig. 4f displays the morphology of NVPF-SWCNT, the nanocube-like NVPF particles are wrapped and connected with each other by an SWCNT network, which would account for the amelioration of electronic conductivity. Due to the addition of SWCNT, thismaterial demonstrated a high reversible capacity of 117 mAh g-1 at 0.5 C, which was notably higher than that of NVPF.71 Favorable electrochemical performance can also be obtained from the cathode material after incorporating carbon nanofiber (CNF). A CNF framework constructed in the NVPF electrode can not only serve as a conductive network for the realization of high-rate capacity but also act as a buffer for the variation of volume in the crystal during charge/discharge process to enable the structural stability of the electrode. Zhao et al.51 obtained NVPF@C@CNF composite (Fig. 4g) prepared by a facile CVD method that showed long-term cycling stability (86.3% capacity retention after 5000 cycles at 20 C) and high rate capability (84.3 mAh g-1 at 50 C). The introduction of graphene into electrode materials is one of the most effective ways to enhance its electrochemical performance. Compositing with graphene can not only enhance the electronic transmission of electrode, but also increase the electrode/electrolyte contact area.72 The NVPF@GN composite was fabricated by a low-temperature hydrothermal method without any post-heat treatment. And dimethylformamide (DMF) was employed as a solvent to confine the growth of NVPF particles.73 In this composite, the cube-like NVPF nanoparticles are homogeneously embedded in a 3D graphene network (Fig. 4h-i). Such a structure could effectively reduce the Na migration time in the crystals and facilitate the charge transfer. Thereafter, Cai et al.52 synthesized the NVPF@rGO microcubes by a similar hydrothermal strategy without adding DMF. The as-prepared micrometer-sized material can attain higher volumetric energy density than the nanoscale particles that have severe adverse surface side reactions. Accordingly, NVPF@rGO demonstrated superior long-term cycling stability with a high capacity retention of 98% after 2000 cycles at 20 C, which was more stable than that of NVPF@GN (75% capacity retention after 1000 cycles at 10 C). 
Based on the above discussions, compositing with conductive carbon is a promising strategy to improve electronic conductivity of NVPF. When the 3D frameworks or double carbon-wrapped structures are constructed by the introduced carbon materials, the electron conductivity along with the Na+ transport kinetics in NVPF electrode can be significantly increased. Furthermore, with the proper heteroatoms doping in the coated carbon layer, the electrochemical performance of electrode can be further promoted. However, it should be pointed out that the carbon coating layer can merely ameliorate the surface electron conductivity, it is helpless to the conductivity of inner particle. Additionally, the conductive materials currently studied in NVPF systems seem to be limited to carbonaceous materials. Other conductive materials, including conductive polymers, oxides/fluorides, metal, etc. which have achieved remarkable effects in other material systems, can be further investigated.28 
As well known, NVPF often suffers from the inferior intrinsic electronic conductivity caused by the insulated property of the [PO4] tetrahedra. Elemental doping is a significant and effective method since it endows the researchers great freedom to engineer intrinsic electronic conductivity, defect, crystal structure, redox platform and so on. At present, plenty of cations such as K+,74 Li+,75 Al3+,76,77 Y3+,78 Cr3+,79 Mn2+,53 Ti4+,40 Ga3+,80 etc. have been employed as dopants in NVPF cathodes. The doping elements can be classified into three types based on the substitution sites: Na sites, V sites, and anion sites. 
Generally, element doping with larger ionic radius in Na sites of NVPF can induce the expansion of lattice spacing, leading to a broad ion diffusion path.81 Moreover, after introducing these elements into the lattice, the V-F and V-O bonds will be shortened, which will enhance the structural stability of NVPF. For instance, K+ (r=1.38 Å) was introduced into the Na sites in NVPF (Fig. 5a),74 and the Na+ diffusion coefficient of this K+ doped sample showed at least one order of magnitude promotion than the pristine one. As a result, a high reversible capacity of 120 mAh g-1 was obtained at 1C. (Fig. 6b). After nearly 6000 cycles at 50 C, the capacity retention of the NKVPF@CNT was still close to 90%. On the other hand, element doping with smaller ionic radius in Na sites has also been studied. Kosova et al.75 used Li+ (r=0.76 Å) to replace partial Na+ (r=1.02 Å) and they prepared a series of Na3-xLixV2(PO4)2F3 samples (x=0, 0.1, 0.4 and 0.6) by a two-step solid-state method. In this work, the authors found that in addition to the main phase Na3-xLixV2(PO4)2F3, several impurities (e.g., V2O3) were also formed on the surface. These V2O3 impurities and the carbon particles formed a conductive network that could significantly increase the overall electronic conductivity of Na3-xLixV2(PO4)2F3 electrode, and decreased the activation energy, subsequently improving their rate capacity. (Fig. 6c) 
Compared to doping in Na sites, the substitutions of V with other earth-abundant and low-cost elements are more common. The doping elements can be divided into two categories according to their electrochemical activity. When inactive elements that would not participate in electrochemical reactions (such as Mg2+, Al3+, Y3+, etc.) are doped into the NVPF, they can mainly act as a stabilizer for crystal structure as well as generating defects and extra charge transfer paths in the NVPF crystals. On the other hand, active elements such as Mn2+, Cr3+, and Ti3+ can usually produce new active redox pairs during electrode reactions so as to increase the specific capacity and output voltage of the material significantly. Among various inactive metals, Al has attracted great attention owing to its low cost, eco-friendly, and beneficial function in the stabilization of the materials during charge/discharge cycling. The NVPF with only 5% Al doping (Na3V1.95Al0.05(PO4)2F3) delivered higher reversible capacity and better cycling stability than the pristine one.76 Olchowka et al. successfully synthesized an increased Al-content Na3V2-zAlz(PO4)2F3 (z=0.5) by a sol-gel process. The theoretical gravimetric capacity of Na3V1.5Al0.5(PO4)2F3 was about 3% higher than that of NVPF for the reversible insertion/extraction of 2 Na+, meaning that the third Na+ ion may be activated.77 When the Y3+ with larger ionic radius (r=0.9 Å) partially replaces the V in the NVPF crystal (Fig. 5b), it provides larger interstitial spaces for fast Na+ diffusion rate. And the weaker Y-O bonds compared to the V-O bonds will facilitate intrinsic electronic conductivity. Moreover, the doped Y3+ serves as an upholder in the NVPF, which can provide a buffer for the deformation of crystals during the charging/discharging process. Hence, the optimum Na3V1.9Y0.1(PO4)2F3/C delivered excellent capacity of 100 mAh g-1 at 10 C and 80 mAh g-1 at 50 C (Fig. 6e).78  For the active elements, the redox potentials of common electrochemically active elements are shown in Fig. 6a. Like the current research on Na4MnCr(PO4)3,82,83 Na4MnV(PO4)3,54,84 and other materials,85 it can not only solve the toxic and expensive problem of V but also provide higher working potential. However, because the amount of doping in the NVPF system is relatively low, the new voltage platform is not observed. The active elements doping will still play a positive role in improving performance. For example, the incorporation of Cr3+ (r=0.615 Å) into NVPF at low levels can reduce the internal resistance and cell polarization, leading to a significant increased overall capacity. The rate performance of the Na3V2-xCrx(PO4)2F3@C (0≤x≤0.1) samples is exhibited in Fig. 6d.79 By Cr3+ doping, the capacity increased obviously, especially for NVPF-Cr0.01 and NVPF-Cr0.03. Doping the NVPF particles with Mn2+ is also an effective way to enhance the electrochemical properties. Owing to the higher radius of Mn2+ (r=0.67 Å) than V3+ (r=0.64 Å), moderate Mn2+ doping into NVPF does increase the crystal cell volume effectively, which is beneficial to the transport of Na+.The synergistic effect of the Mn2+ doping as well as a thin carbon layer enabled Na3V1.95Mn0.05(PO4)2F3@C composite with an initial discharge capacity of 122.9 mAh g-1 and rate performance of 60.7 mAh g-1 at 10 C (Fig. 6f).53 Ti doping was proved to have a positive impact on improving the intrinsic electronic/ionic conductivity of NVPF based on previously published work.86 A moderate amount of Ti doping can effectively restrain the growth of crystal and control morphology formation. Thus, Yi et al.40 selected Tix+ with different valence states to synthesize NVPF-Tiy+ (x=2, 3, 4; y=0, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2) materials and compared the effects of VSC-doping (the valence state changes during the synthesis) and VSU-doping (the valence state of the doping ion remains unchanged) on NVPF. They verified that Ti doping in one-eighth V sites of NVPF crystal (Fig. 5c) would lead to a reduced band gap for the Ti-doped NVPF, which could facilitate the electron motivation from valence band to conduction band. As for the effects of the two different doping processes, they found the VSC-doping samples (x=2, 3) possessed smaller particle size than VSU-doping samples (x=4), which obviously improved the electron conductivity and Na+ diffusivity. Finally, the NVPF-Ti2+0.1. prepared via the VSC-doping method with the smallest particle size distribution (about 40 nm) showed the supreme reversible capacity of 125 mAh g -1 at 0.2 C (Fig. 6g). As seen from the above discussions, ion doping is indeed a valid strategy to enhance the electrochemical performance of NVPF, mainly through enhancing intrinsic electricity and stabilizing the crystal structure during cycling. Moreover, doping with cheaper metals can reduce the cost of material fabrication to some extent. However, not all metal ions doping is feasible in ameliorating the electrochemical performance of NVPF. For example, the introduction of the ions with too large radius into the crystal may seriously affect the structural stability, and even damage the crystal structure. Furthermore, the appropriate amount and homogeneous distribution of doping ions are also important. Excess doping could hinder the crystallization of NVPF or destroy the stability of crystal structure, and result in poor electrochemical performance. Therefore, to realize an efficient element doping, various parameters like the type, amount, distribution, doping site and cost of the choice element should be elaborately considered.  
As anions are generally the key building blocks of crystals, partial substitution in the anion composition in the crystal usually leads to the formation of undesirable second phases or impurities. At the same time, anionic substitution was often accompanied by a corresponding change in the valence of cations, which will make it difficult for the synthesis of the pure phase. However, the oxygen substituted samples, namely Na3V2(PO4)F3-yOy (0≤y≤2, also named as Na3V2O2y(PO4)2F3−2y and Na3(VO1−yPO4)2F1+2y where y varies from 0 to 1), can be obtained in similar crystal framework with large Na+ transport tunnels during (de)intercalation reactions.87 In addition, it has been proved that a mixed-valence of V (V3+/4+) caused by the partial doping of oxygen in the Na3V2(PO4)F3-yOy (0≤y≤2) can enhance electrochemical properties of the electrodes because of more convenient Na+ migration and intrinsically better electronic conductivity.88,89 In order to investigate the structure and electrochemical properties of the oxygen substituted compounds with different oxygen content, Park et al.87 synthesized a series of Na3(VO1−xPO4)2F1+2x (x=0.0, 0.2, 0.5, 0.8 and 1.0) and found that all the samples displayed the similar average potential (3.8-3.9 V) and discharge capacity (120-130 mAh g-1) regardless of the oxygen content, but these isostructural compounds indeed owned distinct potential-composition curves as well as the Na+ insertion/extraction mechanisms due to the different redox pairs (V3+/V4+ or V4+/V5+) and F/O distribution.  It has been further confirmed by Broux et al.90 that there are some differences in structural and electrochemical features of the as-prepared Na3V2(PO4)F3-yOy (0≤y≤0.5). As the y value increases (i.e. as the oxygen content increases), the c cell parameter decreases continuously and the Na+ distribution becomes more disorder. Moreover, when y increases to 0.5, the electrochemical signature of the Na3V2(PO4)F3-yOy changes from two voltage plateaus (y=0) to an “S-shape” for the two potential domains. Most importantly, with the increase of oxygen content, a noteworthy decrease on hysteresis between charge and discharge can be observed, which can be attributed to the enhanced electronic and ionic transport properties favored by the mixed oxidation state V3+/4+. The excellent electrochemical properties of the mixed-valence polyanion compounds have attracted great interests of researchers to exploit high-performance cathodes for SIBs. For example, Kumar et al.91 reported a Na3V2O2x(PO4)2F3−2x/MWCNT compound as a high-voltage insertion cathode material. The Na3V2O2x(PO4)2F3−2x is actually a mixed phase of NVPF and Na3V2O2(PO4)2F with an average oxidation state of V3.46+ (Na3V2O0.92(PO4)2F2.08). Benefiting from the mixed-valence and additive MWCNT, the electrode showed superior cycling durability and high rate capacity in both aqueous electrolyte and non-aqueous electrolyte. Among a series of Na3(VO1-xPO4)2F1+2x (0≤x≤1) materials prepared by Qi et al.,92 the Na3(VOPO4)2F exhibited the best sodium storage property with a specific capacity of 112 mAh g-1 at 0.2 C and excellent cycling stability with 90% capacity retention after 1200 cycles at 2 C. This report further confirmed the effectiveness of oxygen substitution in the enhancement of NVPF electrode. Through theoretical calculation, Goodenough et al.93 predicted that the substitution of Cl for O in the Na3V2O2(PO4)2F was a feasible strategy to fabricate the Na3V2Cl2(PO4)2F compound which could realize the reversible insertion/extraction of the third Na+ and display an ultra-high theoretical energy density of 758 Wh kg-1. However, this conclusion has not been verified by experiments yet. 
As mentioned above, both surface carbon modification and elemental doping are feasible strategies to enhance the electronic conductivity of materials. Generally, the adverse effect of poor electron conductivity can be relieved by downsizing the particles of active material. Therefore, great efforts have been focused on synthesizing NVPF with special morphology and structure, such as nanostructures, microstructures and micro-nano hierarchical structures.  It is well known that nanostructures with the short diameter and large specific surface area can decrease the diffusion distance of electron and ion, improve the utilization of active materials, thus enhancing the rate capability. In addition, the small particle size can have favorable accommodation of the strain during Na+ (de)intercalation, improving the cycling life of the electrode. Based on these superiorities, Park et al.94 embedded phase-pure NVPF in carbon matrix with the aid of polyol. Since polyol acts not only as a solvent but also as a reducing agent and stabilizer in the synthesis, which suppresses particle growth and realizes in situ carbon coating. As shown in Fig. 7a-b, the NVPF presents the morphology of spherical nanoparticles, which is conducive to achieve specific discharge capacities of 108.4 mAh g-1 at a high current density of 30 C and retention capacity of 88% even after 1500 cycles. However, due to the high specific surface area and high surface energy, it is difficult to disperse the nanoparticles homogeneously in the conductive agents and binders, leading to high contact resistance and severe particle aggregation during charge/discharge cycling.95,96 Moreover, the nanoparticles usually show low tap density, which will lead to low gravimetric and volumetric capacity. On the contrary, the microstructures generally provide high packing density as well as high tap density, which can lead to a thinner slurry coating of electrode even at high mass loading. Hence, a well-designed spherical NVPF@C/CNTs composite, composed of carbon-coated microsized primary NVPF particles embedded in the nanotubes network (Fig. 2h), has been synthesized.50 This homogeneous spherical morphology and proper size distribution of secondary particles (2-15 μm) play an important role in the achievement of high-tap-density cathode materials.  To solve the problems of nanoparticles while keeping the high rate performance, a micro-nano hierarchical structure, in which the microsized secondary particles are assembled by nanosized primary particles has been reported. Qi et al.97 designed a nanoflower microstructure through a green synthetic route. Each nanoflower assembled by a number of nanoplatelets (about 10 nm in thickness) displayed a persimmon-like morphology with a diameter of around 8 µm and a thickness of around 4 µm (Fig. 7g-h). Compared with the general nanoparticles, the ordered nanoflowers showed superior electrochemical capacity, owning to the easier penetration of electrolyte and shorter ion/electron diffusion path in the special microstructure of the material. This nanoflower exhibited an initial Coulombic efficiency of 82.6% and maintained capacity retention of 94.5% after 500 cycles.97 Similarly, a hierarchical hollow structure of NVPF microspheres (about 1.7 μm in size) assembled from nanoparticles (about 40 nm in diameter) and nanoplates (with length of ~130 nm and width of ~120 nm) was successfully synthesized using tetraglycol (TEG) as both a structure-directing agent and reducing agent.53 As shown in Fig. 7c-d, the unique architecture of hierarchical hollow microspheres is beneficial to offering enough reactive sites, reducing ionic diffusion barrier and alleviating volume changes, which account for the improved electrochemical performance for the material. In addition, simple and effective approach that introduce active materials into highly ordered mesoporous carbon (CMK-3) framework have been proposed to design core/shell hierarchical architecture materials. As expected, Liu et al.46 successfully synthesized the integrated NVPF@CD material (Fig. 7e-f), which also exhibited excellent performance. To briefly summarize this section, size and morphology design is an important research topic in the field of SIBs. In comparison with anode materials, controlling size and morphology is relatively difficult for cathode materials because of the complex components, especially for NVPF that contains 5 elements. Thus, theoretical calculations and other auxiliary means should be developed to achieve NVPF with different structures. Furthermore, the structural diversification of NVPF has a direct effect on the electrochemical performance. Nevertheless, the consequent issue is that particles tailor may sacrifice the volumetric energy density, which is not conducive to its application. Therefore, we should take all factors into consideration when designing the size and morphology of NVPF.
As described in section 4, the electrochemical performance of NVPF can be improved via the above-mentioned routes. However, the applications of NVPF are far more than Na-ion half-batteries, also cover full batteries,40,79,101,114 Li-ion batteries,115-117 and Zn-ion batteries,129,130 in which the corresponding electrochemical performances are summarized in Table 2-3 at great length. Besides, in order to assemble full batteries, it is necessary to find appropriate anode materials that meet the standards, such as high reversible capacity, acceptable initial Coulomb efficiency and suitable working potential. 
Various Na-ion full batteries based on NVPF cathodes have been constructed to reveal the application potential of NVPF. Considering that NVPF possesses redox couple of V3+/V2+ with a potential plateau at ~1.4 V, it can also be employed as the anode for SIBs (Fig. 8a). Yao et al.101 assembled a symmetric full battery of NVPF@C@rGO//1M NaClO4 in (EC:PC=1:1)//NVPF@C@rGO, which exhibited a high discharge capacity of 107 mAh g-1 and 53 mAh g-1 (based on the mass of NVPF) at 1 C and 20 C, respectively. Even at 10 C, 75.7% of the initial capacity was maintained after 400 cycles (Fig. 8b-c). A pseudo-symmetric full battery using NVP anode and NVPF- Ti02.+1 cathode was also constructed, which demonstrated a discharge capacity of 99.6 mAh g-1 (calculated by the cathode) at 0.2 C with two output voltage platforms (2.1 and 2.6 V). Also, this full battery exhibited a decent rate performance (60% of initial discharge capacity at 40 C) and a relatively high energy density of ca. 224 Wh kg-1 (Fig. 8d-e).40 Generally, carbonaceous materials, especially hard carbon (HC), are often employed as anodes to match NVPF by virtue of their low operating voltage and high reversible capacity. Despite its rate performance is unsatisfactory, hard carbon is still considered as the most promising anode. For instance, Criado et al.79 fabricated a full battery of HC//NVPF-Cr0.01, delivering a reversible capacity (based on cathode mass) of 75 mAh g-1 at an average discharge voltage of 3.7 V, corresponding to an energy density of 277 Wh kg-1. In another work, NVPF@C@CNF-5 with a higher capacity was used as cathode to match HC anode. The specific gravimetric energy of this full battery was up to 433 Wh kg-1 (based on the cathode active material mass), which indicates the practical feasibility of the prepared NVPF composite.51 As seen in the initial charge/discharge curve (Fig. 9a), this full battery demonstrated a median voltage of 3.6 V, similar to Na+ half-battery. It could achieve a high reversible capacity of 48 mAh g-1 even at a high rate of 30 C (Fig. 9b). Furthermore, full batteries based on N-doped carbon have also been developed (Fig. 9c). As seen in Fig. 9d, the full battery with N-doped carbon anode and NVPF@rGO cathode showed excellent cycling durability (95.1% capacity retention over 400 cycles at 10 C), and high energy density (291 Wh kg-1 at power density of 192 W kg-1).52 In addition to the carbonaceous materials, NASICON structured materials represented by NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP) are also common anodes currently applied in the NVPF system. For this type of material, the distinct advantage is stable structure, but its low electronic conductivity cannot be ignored. Therefore, it is inevitable to use different modification methods to promote the conductivity of this material before assembling a full battery. Liu et al.46 reported that an NTP@C//NVPF@CD full battery with the first charge and discharge capacities of 176 and 123 mAh g-1 (i.e. the initial Coulombic efficiency of 70%) could successfully light up the LED lamps (Fig. 9e-f). In fact, because of the proper redox potential (-0.6 V vs SCE), NTP can be utilized in aqueous Na-ion full batteries. In one case, the NVPF-SWCNT//NTP-MWCNT aqueous full battery was constructed, which displayed an average operating voltage of ~1.9 V, one of the highest voltages for aqueous rechargeable SIBs applying intercalation anode and cathode materials (Fig. 9g-h).71  Other types of anode materials like metal phosphides, metal oxides, alloys, etc., are utilized to construct full batteries with NVPF. Among these materials, they also exhibit many advantages. For instance, metal phosphides have high reversible capacity and metal oxides are of low-cost. Sun et al.118 designed a self-supported CoP4 anode with outstanding Na storage performance (Fig.10b). By employing this anode, a flexible full battery of CoP4/CF//NVPF was developed, displaying a high operating voltage (3.0 V) and energy density of 280 Wh kg-1 for the whole battery (Fig.10a and c). A high-capacity anode of MnFe2O4@C nanoﬁbers and a cathode of NVPF/C were paired together to fabricate a soft package full battery,119 as seen in Fig. 10d. This battery presented a stable high capacity of ~400 mAh g-1 for MnFe2O4@C, but a low energy density of 77.8 Wh kg-1 for the whole battery (Fig. 10e). Another high-capacity MoS1.2Se0.8/G was adopted as the anode to couple with NVPF, which demonstrated a specific capacity of 328 mAh g-1 calculated by MoS1.2Se0.8/G at 0.05 A g-1 (Fig. 10f).120 Therefore, these currently reported full batteries with excellent performance endow NVPF the potential to be widely used in large-scale energy storage.
In brief, the investigation of full batteries aims to lay a solid foundation for fabricating practical batteries. It is, however, noted that there are obvious differences between them in many aspects. For the full batteries, the amount of Na+ is fixed and anodes generally confront intrinsic low initial Coulomb efficiency. In order to measure the performance of NVPF, researchers often apply the excess anode or pre-sodiation of anode to compensate the irreversible Na+ loss.121 But such an operation will undoubtedly reduce the specific gravimetric energy and increase the cost of the full battery, which is contrary to the goal pursued by the battery in practical applications. Therefore, other Na compensation strategies, such as adding appropriate additives to NVPF or electrolyte, which have the advantage of easy operation, universality and low cost, are a better choice. Nevertheless, the research on these strategies is still in its infancy, and more obstacles should be surmounted in the future. 
The investigation of NVPF as cathode for LIBs was carried out earlier than that for SIBs since the exceptional thermal stability and decent electrochemical properties make it a possible candidate to replace LiCoO2 and LiMn2O4.115 Most researchers employed NVPF in conjunction with Li metal foil anode and LiPF6-based electrolyte to fabricate LIBs. The Na-based cathode material has complicated insertion/extraction mechanism in the hybrid-ion system (Fig. 11a). Thus, a series of studies were conducted to investigate the electrochemical performance and the ion migration mechanism of NVPF in LIBs. Jiang et al.98 found that the diffusion coefficient slightly increased in the initial cycles, indicating the gradual shift of the insertion mechanism from Na+ insertion to Li+ insertion because Li+ has a smaller ionic radius and mass than that of Na+. The reversible insertion/extraction of Li+/Na+ dual-ion is accompanied by the structural reorganization, resulting in the formation of the mixed Na-Li composites.117,127 Note that there is a competitive relationship between Li+ and Na+, and the intercalation ratio into NVPF rests with the relative concentration of these two ions in the electrolyte.128 However, Li+ is metastable in NVPF so that the insertion of Li+ will bring about a loss of the capacity to some extent. For example, as seen in Fig. 11b-c, NVPF@C@PTHF (a doubled coated NVPF compound with carbon and polytetrahydrofuran) in hybrid electrolyte consisting of 1 mol L-1 LiClO4 and 0.2 mol L-1 NaClO4 delivered a capacity of 122 mAh g-1 at 1 C with a capacity retention of 92.1% after 100 cycles, which was superior to that of NVPF@C@PTHF in other hybrid electrolytes (<0.2 mol L-1 NaClO4).
In addition to Li+/Na+ dual-ion batteries, the application of NVPF in aqueous Zn-ion batteries (ZIBs) was also explored. In comparison with nonaqueous batteries, aqueous batteries using safe and cheap aqueous electrolytes have wider scope in areas where cost is more important than energy density. In this regard, NVPF with characteristics like rich in resources, easy to synthesize, and stable is suitable for aqueous batteries. Li et al.129 constructed an aqueous ZIB based on an NVPF@C cathode, 2 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolyte along with a carbon film functionalizing Zn anode, which could show a high voltage of 1.62 V, and excellent capacity retention rate of 95% over 4000 cycles (Fig. 11d-f). The remarkable performance also proved the availability of NVPF in the field of aqueous ZIBs. Furthermore, Li et al.130 studied the electrochemical performance of NVPF in aqueous hybrid Na-Zn batteries with high concentrated electrolyte (8 M NaClO4+0.4 M Zn(CF3SO3)2). As seen in Fig. 11g, the soft package Zn@C/NVPF@C battery could successfully light up an LED lamp easily even in diﬀerent bending conditions. The operating voltage of this battery was 1.57 V and the energy density was 71 Wh kg-1 based on the total weight of Zn@C and NVPF@C. For the perspective of insertion/extraction mechanism, however, there are many of the details remain to be researched. In addition, it is necessary to explore and develop the potential of NVPF in the field of high-temperature batteries and low-temperature batteries, which is conducive to breaking the geographical restrictions.
As a promising alternative to LIBs in application of large-scale energy storage systems, SIBs have been witnessed the rapid development due to the merits of low cost and abundant resources. Also, the exploration of cathode materials that determine the cost and energy density has become a current research hotspot. Over the last decade, polyanionic compounds represented by NVPF are favored by scientists from various countries because of their stable structures and large ion diffusion channels. However, the electronic conductivity of NVPF is relatively poor, resulting in lower than expected both rate performance and long-term cycling stability. In this review, we have introduced the research progress related to the crystal structure, Na storage mechanisms together with synthetic methods of NVPF, and in-depth analyzed the modification methods of NVPF toward higher electrochemical performance from the viewpoint of enhancing electron conductivity. Moreover, we have also summarized the applications of NVPF in other systems. What we want to mention is that although significant improvement has been achieved in the development of NVPF, there are still many remaining challenges need to be overcome. Herein, we propose some perspectives and suggestions for the future direction in optimization strategies toward high-performance NVPF cathode: (1)	 Designing and selecting suitable electrolytes. The electrolyte is one of the important components, which is closely related to the electrochemical performance and security capability of batteries.137,138 Current commonly used electrolytes for NVPF are organic electrolytes e.g., 1 M NaClO4 in propylene carbonate (PC) with 5% fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC).73 Considering that linear carbonates such as PC, dimethyl carbonate (DMC), ethyl methyl carbonate (EMC), and diethyl carbonate (DEC) have different effects on the electrochemical performance of materials, and FEC also plays an active role in carbonate solutions containing Na salts, the influence investigation of electrolyte composition, concentration, additive type, etc. on Coulombic efficiency, cycling stability and rate performance of NVPF is indispensable.(2)	 Reducing the content of V in NVPF. Considering the practical application, selected transition metal elemental for cathodes should look into factors such as cost, chemical stability and safety hazards. It is well known that the toxicity and high cost of V will hinder NVPF to be large-scale produced and used. For the NVP system, the lower cost and earth-abundant active redox elements, including Mn, Fe, Ni and Cr, etc. have been introduced to substitute half of V and fabricate a series of NASICON-structured NaxMV(PO4)3.85,134-136 And it has been proved that these NaxMV(PO4)3 exhibit many advantages from the point of view of production cost and energy density. If the amount of V in NVPF can be further reduced on the premise of maintaining the NASICON structure and capacity, it is of great scientific significance for the development of promising high energy cathode materials. It is expected that the high throughput screening method will greatly facilitate the finding of new structures.(3)	Rational architecture design enables NVPF with conducive electronic/ionic diffusion routes, which significantly affects the electrochemical performance of NVPF for SIBs. In general, constructing nanostructured NVPF can improve the Na+ diffusion kinetics as well as increase the available active material/electrolyte interfaces. Micro-nano hierarchical structured NVPF can combine the advantages of micro and nanostructure, i.e. keep the good ionic/electronic conductivity and tap density at the same time. However, up to now, the reported morphologies of NVPF are limited. The knowledge of morphology control on Na3V2(PO4)3 can provide inspirations for NVPF design, which will lead to rapid development in the field of NVPF. For example, employing different approaches such as template method and Ostwald ripening may be a good idea. In addition, the optimization of the energy and power density is another important aspect for practical applications of NVPF cathodes. Developing free-standing NVPF cathode is of importance that can observably increase energy and power density along with avoiding side reactions caused by the presence of conductive additives and polymeric binders. This review can provide a reference for the researchers engaging in the development of NVPF cathodes for SIBs. This is an opening remark than a concluding remark. We also believe that more NVPF cathode materials with superior electrochemical performances will emerge in the near future. 