All-solid-state Li-ion batteries (ASSLiB) have been considered to be the next generation energy  storage devices that can overcome safety issues and increase energy density by replacing organic electrolyte with solid inflammable solid electrolyte. However, synthesis of high ionic  conductivity of the electrolyte and fabrication of ASSLiB are still main challenges. In this work,  we propose a new methodology to fabricate ASSLiB through inducing lithium ionic conductive  binder to integrate NASICON-structured solid electrolyte with two electrodes. The ionic binder  was systematically investigated to understand its physical, chemical and electrochemical  properties through various characterization techniques. Prototype of ASSLiB is finally fabricated in the ambient condition using LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 as the cathode, RuO2 as the anode, and the ionic  conductive thermosetting material as the binder. The ionic conductivity of 1.03 × 10-4 s cm-1 of this ASSLiB is obtained. Discharge capacity of the ASSLiB are measured to be of 87.5 mAh g-1 at 0.2 C and room temperature for 120 cycles, and 146 mAh g-1 at 0.5 C and 50 ℃ for 43 cycles, respectively.

In summary, current synthesizing methods for bulk ASSLiBs still have many shortages  preventing them from further application. For synthesizing ASSLiBs by deposition and then  calcination cathode with SSE, undesired interface reaction and poor interface binding almost  unavoidable, which directly results low discharge capacity and short life. Although co-sintering active materials with LBO at high temperature could achieve relatively high discharge capacity,  charge/discharge cycle was still not long for most results. ASSLiBs used thermoplastic polymer as binder had high discharge capacity and long cycle life which even compared to the one of  commercial liquid batteries, but elevated temperature (>50 ℃) was essential to increase  conductivity.

In conclusion, we report an innovative strategy to synthesize bulk-type full ASSLiBs by using  ionic conductive binder, PAALi, bonding the cathode/anode layer and the interface between  electrode and solid electrolyte. Structure, viscosity, TGA-DSC, FTIR and XRD were used to  systematically evaluate physical, chemical and electrical properties of this binder. The Li salt  binder could work and maintain solid state below 380 ℃. The interface between binder and  LAGP was stable under galvanic cycle at temperature from -25 ℃ to 75 ℃, and its resistance decreased more than 70 times after galvanic cycle. Full cells were manufactured in the air with  excellent bonding and maintained solid state even heated to 200 ℃. A high total ionic  conductivity of 1.03 × 10-4 S cm-1 was obtained for this cell. The discharge specific capacity of  87.5 mAh g-1 and 146 mAh g-1 was obtained at room temperature and 50 ℃, respectively, which  was one of the highest values to the best of our knowledge.  This new concept provides an  opportunity for fabrication of large-scale ASSLiB in ambient condition. Without sintering, this  methodology largely simplifies the synthesis process and avoids the interface diffusion and  reaction. Moreover, this new synthesis concept for lithium ion solid-state battery can also be  extended to other ionic solid-state batteries such as Na+ , K+ , Al3+, Mg2+ .