Coating methodology is commonly employed in the enhancement of Ni-rich cathodes for Li-ion batteries as an efficient approach, while its strategy and effect are still great challenges to achieve success in surface modifications for comprehensive electrochemical properties. In this work, the surface of Ni-rich cathode LiNi0.82Co0.15Al0.03O2 (NCA) is modified by intimately coating NASICON-type solid electrolyte LiZr2(PO4)3 (LZP) via a facile approach involving electrostatic attraction. With well-designed architecture and a uniform NASICON-type LZP nanolayer wrapping over the NCA microsphere, the entire electrode demonstrates exceptional Li+ diffusion and conductivity and suppresses the side reaction between electrolyte and electroactive NCA, stabilizing the phase interface with less Li+/Ni2+ cation mixing. As a result, the NCA@LZP can deliver a high reversible capacity of 182 mAh g–1 at 1C in 2.7–4.3 V, maintaining the capacity retention of 84.6% after 100 cycles. More importantly, the structure stability of NCA is enhanced substantially by surface modification of LZP at high cutoff voltage. It achieves a reversible capacity of 204 mAh g–1 and keeps 100.4 mAh g–1 after 500 cycles at 1C in the potential range of 2.7–4.5 V. This effective strategy of using NASICON fast ionic conductor like LZP as a coating layer may provide a new insight to modify the surface of Ni-rich electrode, improving the rate capability and cyclic performance under high voltage.

As the world energy system rapidly turns to rely on electronic system (electric vehicles) for its daily application, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are considered as promising power supplies to satisfy the increasing demand with volumetric or gravimetric energy, owing to their overwhelming merits of reasonable price, excellent performance, and friendly environment. (1) Recently, the Ni-rich cathode material LiNixCoxAlzO2 (NCA, x > 0.6, x + y + z = 1) has attracted immense attention for its ultrahigh capacity and low cost, which possesses extraordinary potential to replace the conventional LiCoO2 cathode material for commercial LIBs application. (2) Unfortunately, the poor cycling and rate performance restrain the further development of NCA, especially under high rate and voltage. Specifically, the problem in lithium residual (Li2O or LiOH) coating on the surface of NCA, derived from the chemical adsorption of H2O or CO2 in air, will induce the formation of cathode gel, degrading the performance. (3,4) Moreover, the side reaction between highly delithiated NCA cathode and organic electrolyte inevitably results in the loss of active material, finally capacity fading and increased interfacial resistance especially under high-voltage condition. (5,6) Besides, the intrinsic citation mixing will easily cause high instability by structural deterioration. Hence, it is urgent to explore a novel strategy to tackle the practical application of NCA.

Currently, numerous works have been conducted for the enhancement of NCA. Ion doping as a typical method can suppress the Li+/Ni2+ disorder and improve the structural stability, yet the dissolution of active materials still needs to be addressed. (7) Thus, surface modification is extensively investigated as another effective approach to mitigate structure degradation and improve cycling performance. (8,9) Commonly, various coating materials, for instance, Al2O3, (10) TiO2, (11) SiO2, (12) ZrO2, (13) La2O3, (14) and SnO2, (15) have been intensively studied to alleviate the side reaction between electrolyte and host materials. However, most modified materials are attributed to the Li-ion insulators with mere formation of uniform coting skins, which exhibit low Li+/electron transport or restricted self-structural stability, resulting in the finite modification effect to poor rate properties. (16,17) It is a great challenge to achieve excellent modification layer together with rapid Li+ conductivity and high chemical stability.

Thus, fast lithium-ion conductor as a prominent coating material is introduced to modify Ni-rich cathode materials such as LiTi2(PO4)3, (18) Li2SiO3, (19) NaTi2(PO4)3, (20) Li2TiO3, (21) Li2ZrO3, (22) and LiMnPO4. (23) It is noted that lithium-ion conductors like NASICON-type solid electrolyte LiZr2(PO4)3 (LZP) can enhance the Li+ diffusion between electrode and electrolyte and prevent the side reactions with air and electrolyte, demonstrating superior structural stability. Particularly, the NASICON-structured LiZr2(PO4)3 (LZP), (24−26) as a superior solid electrolyte, presents ultrahigh Li+ conductivity, benefitting from its unique phosphate structure with large interstitial spaces in an open framework and high stability with small volume variation. Therefore, LZP is expected to be an ideal coating material to modify Ni-rich materials with enhanced stability and superior electrochemical performance. However, the majority of coating layers are just adhered to or attached insignificantly on the surface of electrode according to previous reports, and can easily exfoliate from the host materials by any intermechanical force during the cycling, presenting a nonuniform or broken coating film. Furthermore, some coating materials are more likely to agglomerate with uneven distribution, resulting in unsatisfied modification effect.

Herein, with the above consideration, the NASICON fast ion conductor LiZr2(PO4)3 with high stability and exceptional ion conductivity is homogeneously wrapped on the NCA surface with a typical core–shell structure by charge attraction. It is well known that positive charge and negative charge attract with strong force by electrostatic charge attraction. It is worthwhile to note that the surface of LZP precursor endowed with negative charges can be spontaneously attracted by NCA microsphere intrinsically with positive charges. It can make full use of electrostatic charge attraction that LZP nanoparticles are adhered to NCA surface to form a uniform coating layer by self-created significant force. As a result, this unique strategy advances the reaction kinetics of NCA and enhances the structure stability, resulting in outstanding electrochemical performance under high cutoff voltage.

The commercial Ni0.82Co0.15Al0.03(OH)2 fabricated by a coprecipitation method was utilized as the precursor to obtain LiNi0.82Co0.15Al0.03O2 (NCA) cathode material. A typical precursor Ni0.82Co0.15Al0.03(OH)2 was mixed with LiOH in a molar ratio of 1:1.05. Then, the mixture was first calcined at 480 °C for 5 h and subsequently sintered at 750 °C for 12 h under oxygen atmosphere at a heating rate of 5 °C min–1 and finally cooled to room temperature automatically.

To obtain NCA@LZP material, LiH2PO4 and Zr(NO3)4 at desirable mole ratios were dissolved in ethanol solution, then mixed to obtain the ivory sol precursor by slowly agitation. Next, NCA powder was introduced into the sol mixture with an optimum liquid–solid ratio of 10:1. Then, the mixture was agitated at 80 °C for 1.5 h until converted into dry slurry with evaporation of ethanol. Then, the powder was sintered at 750 °C in oxygen atmosphere for 1 h at the heating rate of 5 °C. The contents of LZP with 0 wt%, 0.5 wt%, 1 wt%, and 3wt% are short for NCA, NCA@LZP-0.5%, NCA@LZP-1%, and NCA@LZP-3%, respectively.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded with a scanning speed of 10° min–1 by a Rint-2000, Rigaku-type X-ray diffractometer, while the refined results were calculated with Rietveld method by the GSAS software. (18,27) Morphological characters were analyzed by a scanning electron microscope (SEM, JEOL, JSM-5612LV, 20 kV) equipped with an energy-dispersive spectrometer (EDS) and a transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEOL-2100F, 200 kV). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was conducted by Thermo Fisher ESCALAB 250Xi. The NCA particles and LTP precursors were dispersed into the ethanol solution, which was directly measured by Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments) to obtain the ζ-potential of material surface.

Electrochemical performances were measured in typical CR2025 coin cells. The cathode material was prepared by pasting the mixture of active material, carbon black, and poly(vinylidene difluoride) with a weight ratio of 8:1:1. After that, appropriate N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) was added into the above mixture to form a homogeneous slurry by milling, then immediately filmed on a current collector (aluminum foil), followed by drying at 120 °C in vacuum to remove the NMP. The current collector was then cut into a circle of diameter 12 mm with mass loading of 3–4 mg cm2 and assembled in a glovebox with argon atmosphere protection. The metallic Li tablet served as the counter electrode, which is normalized and tested under the same condition. The electrolyte was 1 M LiPF6 dissolved in EC + DMC + EMC (1:1:1 in volume) solution. The separator (Celgard2325) was sheared into an 18 mm circle. The galvanostatic charge/discharge was measured between 2.7 and 4.3 V (versus Li/Li+) on a Land CT2001A instruments. A CHI660E electrochemical workstation was used to measure the electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) over the frequency range of 100000–0.01 Hz in fully discharge states of 2.7 V and cyclic voltammetry (CV) in the potential window of 2.7–4.3 V.

The specific procedure of NCA@LZP preparation is explicitly illustrated in Figure 1. It is well known that two opposite charges (negative and positive) attract through electrostatic attraction, which is suitable for nanoparticles applied for the synthesis of self-assembled materials, (28,29) as shown in Figure 1a. From ζ-potential measurement, it is found that the ζ-potential values of NCA and LZP precursors are −47.5 and +26.1 mV, respectively (Figures S1 and S2). It is obvious that the surfaces of pristine NCA and LZP precursor particles display opposite charges, providing a strong effect of leading LZP precursor to NCA surface by electrostatic attraction (Figure 1b), resulting in a robust attach of LZP precursor on NCA surface and the formation of a thin shell layer (Figure 1c). During the whole process, electrostatic attraction can facilitate to form a uniform coating LZP layer on the NCA surface continuously with even dispersion of LZP particle and accurate coating amount, constructing a chemically stable core–shell structure with high conductivity.

XRD test was used to investigate the coating effects of LZP on NCA crystal structure. As displayed in Figures 2b and S3b, the XRD patterns of all samples demonstrate similar profiles and can be matched well with the hexagonal α-NaFeO2 structure with R3̅m space group. (18,30) It is noted that there is no distinct difference between LZP-modified NCA and pristine NCA, suggesting that surface modification of LZP has little influence on the crystal structure of NCA. This result shows that coating with LZP maintains the pristine-layered structure of NCA, (27) which might be attributed to the low concentration of LZP thin-layer wrapping on the NCA without phase transformation. Additionally, the individual synthesis procedure of LZP is analyzed by thermogravimetric analysis test (Figure S4), confirming the formation of NASICON-type fast ionic conductor LiZr2(PO4)3 with high crystalline structure, as presented by XRD (Figure S5).

As verified, the ionic radius of Ni2+ (0.69 Å) is similar to that of Li+ (0.76 Å); thus, Ni2+ ions can easily migrate to Li slabs, accompanied with the generation of cation mixing, (31) which is distinctly revealed by the ratio I(003)/I(104). It is confirmed that the higher ratio of I(003)/I(104) than 1.2 indicates a well-ordered layer structure for NCA cathode. (20) Apparently, the value of I(003)/I(104) ratio for all samples is higher than 1.2, as listed in Table S1, whereas that for modified NCA@LZP (>1.6) is much higher than that of pristine NCA (1.56). Moreover, the Rietveld refinement results are displayed in Table S2 and Figure 2c,d. The low error factors (Rp and Rwp) confirm the convince of calculated results. It is observed that the occupancy of Ni2+ in Li site for NCA@LZP-1% is only about 0.89%, much lower than that of the pristine NCA sample (3.32%), further revealing that LZP modification obviously decreases the cation mixing and maintains the well-ordered layer structure, which is in accordance with the result of the I(003)/I(104) ratio. It is found that the (003) peak slightly shifts to high angles with increasing ratio of LZP coating (Figure S3a), indicating the variation of cell phase. This phenomenon may be attributed to the trace doping of Zr4+ or PO43– ions into the crystal lattice of LiNi0.82Co0.15Al0.03O2 during the coating process. (32) The improved performance may be attributed to the decrease of lithium residual by uniform distribution of LZP, (33) which can reduce the side reaction between air and NCA, effectively mitigating the cation mixing of Ni2+/Li+ and preserving the layered structure. The well-ordered layer structure provides an excellent Li+ diffusion path and increases the structure stability.

To better observe the shell layer of LZP on NCA surface and demonstrate the coating effect of charge attraction, the morphology of pristine NCA and LZP-modified NCA samples are investigated by SEM and TEM. As depicted in Figures 3a–e and S6, the spherical secondary particle with average diameter 15 μm is aggregated by numerous primary particles with size of around 300 nm in diameter. Particularly, the rough surface of pristine NCA particle gets smoother with the higher content of LZP coating materials. It is obvious that the pristine NCA sample demonstrates a rough skin as presented in magnified SEM image (Figure 3b). As a contrast, the modified NCA@LZP-1% sample exhibits an exquisite surface with a smooth shell, owing to the formation of uniform LZP outer layer on the rough surface of NCA particles.

Furthermore, the elemental distribution of NCA@LZP-1% is analyzed by EDS mapping (Figure 3f). Obviously, the distribution of Zr and P elements is evenly overlapped with Ni, Co, and Al, indicating that the uniform LZP layer is homogeneously coated on the surface of NCA. To further investigate the surface modification, TEM is performed to confirm the coating layer of LZP. The pristine NCA sample exhibits a clean and bare surface with obvious crystallinity at edges (Figure 3g). In the magnified TEM image at edge area, the clear lattice spacing of 0.472 nm corresponds to the (003) plane of NCA (Figure 3h), which is also confirmed by SAED patterns (Figure 3i). In contrast, a thin cladding layer with a thickness of approximately 10 nm is obviously observed on the surface of the NCA@LZP-1% sample (Figure 3j). Besides, Figure 3k clearly depicts the modification layer, which can be discerned by different lattice fringes between cladding layer and NCA material. Specifically, the lattice fringe in the outer layer with thickness 0.318 nm corresponds to the (400) lattice plane of LZP, whereas a set of lattice space of 0.235 nm is fitted with the (012) lattice plane of R3̅m layered structure in the inner part of the NCA particle. Additionally, the modification layer can also be recognized by two different SAED images (Figure 3l). The marked spot in the outer shell is matched with the (600), (111), (42̿1), (33̅2) planes of LZP, confirming a uniform outer layer on the NCA surface. The SEM/TEM results illustrate the integral construction of core–shell structure by charge attraction, forming a homogeneous and stable layer of LZP on the inner NCA cathode, which can significantly facilitate the Li+ diffusion and maintain the structural stability of the entire electrode.

To further verify the existence of LZP, XPS was conducted to analyze the chemical states and surface valence. Mainly four elements, Ni, Co, Al, and O, are detected in pristine NCA, while additional Zr and P elements are probed on the surface of NCA@LZP-1%, as shown in Figure 4. Co XPS images for both samples Co 2p1/2 and Co 2p2/3 display binding energies of 795.0 and 779.8 eV, respectively, indicating the trivalent state of Co3+ (Figure 4b). (34) Moreover, a broad peak of Al spectrum at approximately 73 eV corresponded to Al 2p3/2, confirming the trivalent state for Al (Figure 4c). (35) Besides, the two peaks at 856.8 and 873.4 eV are attributed to Ni 2p3/2 and Ni 2p1/2, while Ni 2p1/2 can be further deconvoluted into two peaks centered at 855.4 and 855.7 eV, (36) corresponding to the different valence Ni2+ and Ni3+, respectively. It is known that the area of peak intensity is associated with the quantity of various Ni2+/Ni3+ valences. (37) As calculated from Figure 4d, the content of Ni2+ of 19.74% for NCA@LZP-1% is much lower than that of pristine NCA of 31.66%, which is in agreement with the XRD refinement, suggesting that the higher ratio of Ni3+ keeps the electrochemical activity of NCA and retards the cation mixing for similar ionic radius of Li+/Ni2+(0.76/0.69 Å). (38) The cation mixing of Li+/Ni2+ caused by the side reaction of lithium residual is inhibited after LZP modification, which is confirmed by the low amount of Ni2+, indicating that the LZP coating layer effectively reduces the Ni2+ ratio.

Additionally, the O 1s peaks of pristine NCA at 531.6 and 529 eV are related to the lattice oxygen for Li2CO3 and NCA (Figure 4e). In contrast, the O 1s of NCA displays a sharper peak at ∼531.6 eV, much higher than that of pristine NCA@LZP-1% at 529 eV, revealing the existence of more oxygen on the surface of pristine NCA materials, (39) which can be reacted with CO2 to form Li2CO3 based on lithium residual. Furthermore, to confirm the existence of LZP on NCA surface, the Zr 3d peaks of 181.95 and 184.4 eV (Figure 4f) and the P 2p peak of 133.4 eV (Figure 4g) are clearly detected, (40) indicating that the valence states of Zr 3d and P 2p are assigned to Zr4+ and P3+, respectively, which are in accordance with LiZr2(PO4)3. Therefore, XPS reveals that the obtained NCA@LZP composite displays a high ratio of Ni3+ with less lithium residual, which is wrapped by the ultrathin coating layer of LZP.

Through the unique modified strategy, LZP-modified NCA composite is expected to present advanced electrochemical properties. CV curves during the initial three cycles at 2.7–4.3 V for pristine sample and LZP-modified NCA@LZP-0.5%, NCA@LZP-1%, and NCA@LZP-3% samples are displayed in Figures 5a,b and S7. Three anodic peaks located at 3.774, 4.010, and 4.213 V, accompanied with the corresponding cathodic peaks at 3.671, 3.959, and 4.121 V, are assigned to the phase transformation of H1–M, M–H2, and H2–H3, (36,41) respectively, which is caused by the phase transition from hexagonal to monoclinic (H1 to M), monoclinic to hexagonal (M to H2), and hexagonal to hexagonal (H2 to H3) during the Li-ion extraction process. (41) Furthermore, the intervals between the oxidation peak (around 3.9 V) and reduction peak (around 3.7 V) during the initial three cycles are calculated as listed in Table S3, which illustrates the potential variation and polarization degree, indicating the electrochemical kinetics. (42) As displayed in Figure 5a,b, the intervals during the first cycle (Δ1) for pristine NCA is 0.261 V, which is larger than that of modified NCA@LZP-1% of 0.165 V. Remarkably, the potential variations of NCA@LZP-1% during the second (Δ2) and third (Δ3) cycles drastically decrease to 0.009 and 0.017 V, respectively, while the subsequent cycles exhibit high overlapping, suggesting the lower polarization after LZP modification. The distinct depolarization of NCA@LZP-1% with symmetrical and sharp CV peaks can be attributed to the enhanced reaction kinetics and minimized transfer resistance during continuous lithiation/delithiation, resulting from the uniform wrapping layer of LZP with interconnected diffusion channels of Li+ ions, which facilitates the Li+ transport at interface and LZP stabilizes the layered structure of NCA. As a result, the NCA@LZP-1% cathode is anticipated to achieve better cycling stability and exceptional rate performance.

Additionally, Figure 5c compares the charge/discharge profiles for pristine NCA and LZP-modified NCA at 1C after electrode activation with two cyclings at 0.1C (1C = 200 mA g–1) in the potential range of 2.7–4.3 V. It is clearly observed that the discharge capacities of pristine NCA, NCA@LZP-0.5%, and NCA@LZP-1% are 185.7, 183.2, and 182.0 mAh g–1, respectively, while NCA@LZP-3% delivers the lowest discharge capacity of 172.2 mAh g–1 owing to the high contents of LZP wrapping. This is attributed to the electrochemical inactivity of LZP under high voltage range, leading to the decrease of active materials relatively.

Additionally, the rate capabilities of pristine NCA and LZP-modified NCA are also investigated as shown in Figure 5d. The cells are tested with increasing rate from 0.1C to 5C in voltage of 2.7–4.3 V, accompanied with the gradually decreased discharge capacity in terms of electrode polarization. (14) It is clear that the pristine NCA exhibits inferior rate performance with sharply dropped reversible capacity, especially at an ultrahigh rate of 5C (130.5 mAh g–1), resulting from the side reaction of electrolyte with degradation structure and increased resistance. In contrast, the NCA@LZP-1% sample demonstrates the best rate ability with the highest discharge capacity (151.7 mAh g–1) at 5C. Furthermore, when returned back to 0.1C, the discharge capacity of NCA@LZP-1% can recover to 202.8 mAh g–1, which is levered off the pristine capacity, suggesting the superior rate tolerance.

To confirm the impact of LZP modification for enhancing the structure stability, the long cycling performance was also measured. The significant distinction between pristine NCA and modified NCA is the capacity retention, which is effectively improved by the surface modification. When tested at 0.1C (Figure S8b), although displaying the same initial capacity, the NCA@LZP-1% sample can maintain the capacity of 196.4 mAh g–1 with a capacity retention of 94.8% after 35 cycles, efficiently higher than the pristine sample (90.4%). The enhancement of cycling stability is more obvious as measured at 1C in 2.7–4.3 V (Figure 5e); the pristine NCA@LZP sample preserves a discharge capacity of 153.9 mAh g–1 after 100 cycles, with capacity retention of 84.6%, much higher than that of pristine NCA (just 69.4%). Moreover, it maintains 120 mAh g–1 after long-term cycling of 300 cycles at voltage of 2.7–4.3 in 1C. In contrast, the pristine NCA merely retains 120 mAh g–1 merely with 150 cycles, further proving the robust function by surface modification of LZP, which offers electro/ion diffusion paths with better electrical/ionic conductivity and decreases the Li-residue layer with enhanced stable structure. (20) Surprisingly, the NCA@LZP-1% sample demonstrates outstanding electrochemical properties even at long-term cycling with a high rate of 5C in Figure S6. It shows that the reversible capacity of NCA@LZP-1% can achieve a high capacity of 101.7 mAh g–1 after cycling of 300 cycles, but the bare one only reaches 42.7 mAh g–1 after 300 cycles. Compared to other reported modified NCAs in the literature, as listed in Figure S9, it is obvious that LZP-modified NCA presents superior performance in the long-term cycling with high rate in this work. (43−50)

More importantly, the high-voltage properties of NCA are also significantly improved by LZP modification. Figure 6a displays the cycling property of pristine NCA and NCA@LZP-1% electrodes at 1C after activation with three cycles at 0.1C in 2.7–4.5 V. It is noted that the initial discharge capacities for both samples are improved after increasing the cutoff voltage. The pristine NCA can reach 230.9 and 206.3 mAh g–1 at 0.1C and 1C, respectively, while it rapidly degrades to 36.2 mAh g–1 after 500 cycles at 1C in 2.7–4.5 V, suggesting the poor cycling stability of NCA at high voltage. On the contrary, the NCA@LZP-1% sample exhibits a superior stability with a high discharge capacity of 100.4 mAh g–1 after long cycling for 500 cycles, demonstrating the prominent structure stability after LZP modification.

In addition, the charge/discharge curves at 1C in the voltage range of 2.7–4.5 V for pristine NCA and NCA@LZP-1% at the 1st, 4th, 50th, 100th, and 200th cycles clearly show that the working voltage plateau for pristine declines rapidly, with only 3.44 V after 200 cycles, as presented in Figure S10a. However, the LZP-modified NCA still maintains the high-voltage plateau of 3.64 V (Figure S10b), with degradation of 1.56% compared to the pristine state. (51) This result demonstrates that the voltage drops of NCA are faster than that of NCA@LZP-1%, confirming that the trouble of voltage drop is effectively mitigated by surface modification of LZP, which results in the high energy density under high-voltage condition. It is commonly believed that voltage drops are associated with the phase transition from layered to spinel-like phase by the migration of transition-metal ions. (52) The main reason for mitigation of voltage fading of NCA@LZP-1% is attributed to the bulk structure effect of LZP coating, which effectively inhibits the formation of the spinel-like phase caused by migration of transition-metal ions, resulting in the enhanced structural stability. (53) Hence, specific energies can be calculated to be 744.1 and 766.8 Wh kg–1 for pristine NCA and NCA@LZP-1% electrodes, respectively, at the 4th cycle (Figure S11). With the long-term cycling, the energy density of pristine NCA exhibits obvious attenuation with 353.0 Wh kg–1, much lower than that of NCA@LZP-1% with 566.8 Wh kg–1 after 200 cycles. All of the superior electrochemical performance is attributed to the uniform LZP modification layer, especially at high voltage and ultrahigh rate.
To better comprehend the remarkable rate characters at high voltage, the interfacial electrochemistry properties are further studied by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). As displayed in Figure 7a,b, both samples after various cycling present the EIS plot, which can be delineated by employing an equivalent circuit model (Figure 7g). (10,54) The Nyquist plots include an oblique line in low-frequency region and semicircles in high- to intermediate-frequency regions, assigning to the charge-transfer resistance (Rct) for electrochemical reactions at the interface of electrolyte/electrodes, and Warburg impedance (Zw) for Li+ ions diffusion. (55) Besides, Rs and Rsf are attributed to the solvent electrolyte resistances and surface-film resistances, while the fitted results are listed in Table S4. It is observed that the interface resistance values of Rsf + Rct for pristine NCA rapidly increase from 79.3 Ω (4th) to 902.7 Ω (300th), suggesting the upsurge resistance along with cycling, On the contrary, NCA@LZP-1% shows a tardy increase about resistance value. Besides, it exhibits a relatively small (Rsf + Rct) value of 85.0 Ω, after 300 cycles, which is only one-tenth of pristine NCA, indicating the superior charge-transfer rate after long-term cycling.

Furthermore, the Li+-ion diffusion coefficients (DLi+) are estimated by the following formula (14,18,30)

where R, T, A, n, F, and C represent the gas constant, absolute temperature (298 K), electrode surface area (1.13 cm2), number of electrons (n = 1, Li+), Faraday constant (96 500), and concentration of Li+ (0.001 mol cm–3 in this work), respectively, and σ is the Warburg coefficient calculated from the following formula (Figure 7c)

where Z′ and ω stand for the real impedance and angular frequency, respectively. According to the aforementioned formulas, the calculated DLi+ of NCA@LZP-1% (4.03 × 10–16 cm2 S–1) is much higher than that of pristine NCA (1.94 × 10–17 cm2 S–1) even after 300 cycles, as presented in Table S4, revealing the high Li+ diffusion coefficient and excellent reaction kinetics after LZP modification.
Additionally, to further confirm the enhancement of Li diffusivity, the CV tests of pristine NCA and NCA@LZP-1% at different scan rates are performed in Figure 7d,e. With the increasing of scan rate, the cathodic and anodic peaks shift to the lower and higher potentials, respectively, indicating the behavior of diffusion control at high rate. According to the relationship of scan rates (ν1/2) versus the peak current (Ip), the DLi+ of NCA and NCA@LZP-1% can be estimated using the Randles–Sevcik equation as follows (56,57)

Ditto, DLi+, can be calculated according to these parameters, as presented in Table S5. The shift of the corresponding redox peaks is assigned to the effects of polarization and irreversible behaviors, where NCA@LZP-1% (Figure 7d) displays smaller variation than pristine NCA (Figure 7e). Therefore, the NCA@LZP-1% sample indicates the higher lithium diffusion rate than pristine NCA, regardless of the lithiation or delithiation process, which is in agreement with EIS results. As illustrated in Figure 7h, LZP, as an outstanding lithium-ion transfer solid electrolyte, exhibits excellent ionic conductivity. The uniform LZP coating layers on NCA surface will significantly modify the surface interface, effectively diminishing the resistance of electrode and accelerating lithium transfer rate. This result further demonstrates that LZP modification offers a high-speed Li+ diffusion path, leading to the prominent stability at high potential with high rate, which is accounted for the improved performance at high rate under high-voltage condition.
As previously reported, NCA microspheres consisting of densely agminated primary particles are easily destroyed by the electrolyte corrosion, (58) especially under the high-voltage condition. Specifically, a small trace of water in the LiPF6-based electrolyte will unavoidably produce hazardous HF, resulting in the dissolution of electroactive materials. Moreover, the irreversible phase transformation will lead to structural degradation as well as emergence of microcracks, resulting in severe fading of the electrochemical performance. To better probe the influence of LZP modification, pristine NCA and NCA@LZP-1% after 200 cycles under 2.7–4.5 V at 1C are exhaustively tested to investigate the intrinsic structural transformation under the high-voltage condition. As displayed in SEM images (Figure 8e,g), it is distinctly observed that the microspherical aggregated particles are pulverized into several fragments, which will easily disperse into electrolyte or lost connection with current collector, leading to poor conductivity and electrochemical activity. Moreover, as presented in TEM images (Figure 8a,b), it exhibits a disordered structure in the mixing area and amorphous residue phase in the NCA surface, illustrating the severe structure collapse during continuous cycling under sharp high-voltage condition. (59) It is confirmed that the increase of Ni2+/Li+ disorder and interfacial residues in Ni-rich materials will lead to the augment of conductive resistance, loss of reversible capacity, and poor rate capability. (58−60) It is proved that the surficial morphology and intrinsic structure of pristine NCA suffer from severe damage, attributing to the intrinsic properties of NCA.

However, it is found that the NCA@LZP-1% sample still maintains its original microsphere morphology without physical separation and isolation of grains (Figure 8f,h) after the intensive charge/discharge process. The outer layer of LZP serves as a robust shell to protect from HF attack and facilitate the Li+ transport with reduced resistant, which well corresponds to the EIS result. Meanwhile, the NCA@LZP-1% sample displays a well-ordered structure with a uniform coating layer of thickness approximately 10 nm, which can be indexed into LZP (Figure 8c,d). Compared to pristine NCA, the formation of rock-salt phase is hardly observed in NCA@LZP-1%, which results in the poor stability and deterioration performance. Additionally, based on the results of XRD patterns after 200 cycles (Figure 8j), the I(003)/I(104) ratio of NCA is much lower than that of NCA@LZP-1%, further confirming the well-maintaining of layer structure for NCA@LZP-1%. It is noted that the infusion of solid electrolyte LZP in the grain boundary will enhance the fast Li+ diffusion, as well as mitigate the side reaction between electrolyte and NCA, preventing the transformation from layered structure to spinel phase and maintaining the structure integrity, especially under the high cutoff cycling condition. (9,61)
Hence, the uniform coating layer of LZP can effectively mitigate the detrimental HF etching by side reactions between electrolyte and active electrode, maintaining the integral configuration with high chemical activity, as illustrated in Figure 8i. Besides, the LZP layer can alleviate the dissolving of active elements in electrolyte and retain its stability at high voltage during long-term cycling, acting like a shell to protect NCA cathode from structural deterioration. The existence of LZP layer can reduce electrode polarization and voltage reduction, keeping the advantages of Ni-rich materials. More importantly, the NASICON-type fast ion conductor can facilitate Li+ migration rapidly by increasing the ionic conductivity, especially at the electrolyte/LZP interface at NCA surface, effectively reducing the transport resistance of the entire electrode. As a result, NCA@LZP delivers the exceptional electrochemical performance, particularly rate capability and cycle stability under high-voltage simultaneously.

In summary, the LZP-modified NCA cathode materials are successfully fabricated by unique charge attraction method, ensuring the uniform coating of LZP nanolayers on the NCA surface. The impact of LZP coating on the physicochemical characters and electrochemical performances are investigated. As expected, LZP, which served as a robust protective layer, can mitigate the side reaction and formation of corrosive byproduct, which benefits the LZP-modified NCA sample from possession of distinguished endurance and adamant stability under high-voltage condition. Furthermore, LZP as a material with superior ionic conductivity can simultaneously facilitate Li+ diffusion at the electrolyte/LZP interface on the NCA surface, significantly enhancing the reaction kinetics. Additionally, the electrode polarization and voltage degradation of NCA electrodes are also effectively alleviated owing to the LZP modification. The electrochemical tests indicate that LZP modification with appropriate amounts (NCA@LZP-1%) can improve cycling stability (from 69.8 to 84.6% after 100 cycles at 1C) and strengthen the rate capability (151.1 mAh g–1 at 5C). Particularly, it delivers a high cycling stability at a high rate of 1C under cutoff voltage of 2.7–4.5 V (100.4 mAh g–1 after 500 cycles). Hence, the strategy of charge attraction promisingly provides a novel approach of simultaneous removal of surface lithium residues and formation of NASICON fast ionic conductor coating layer, which is highly desirable for Ni-rich cathode materials.