All-solid-state Li-ion batteries (ASSLiB) have been considered to be the next generation energy storage devices that can overcome safety issues and increase the energy density by replacing the organic electrolyte with inflammable solid electrolyte. However, the synthesis of high ionic conductivity electrolyte and fabrication of ASSLiB are still the main challenges. In this work, we propose a new methodology to fabricate ASSLiB by inducing the lithium ionic conductive binder to integrate the NASICON-structured solid electrolyte with two electrodes. The ionic binder was systematically investigated to understand its physical, chemical, and electrochemical properties through various characterization techniques. A prototype of the ASSLiB was finally fabricated in the ambient conditions using LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 as the cathode, RuO2 as the anode, and the ionic conductive thermosetting material as the binder. The ionic conductivity of 1.03 × 10−4 S cm−1 was obtained for this ASSLiB. The discharge capacity of the ASSLiB was measured to be 87.5 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and room temperature for 120 cycles, and 146 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and 50 °C for 43 cycles, respectively.

Although current commercial Li ion batteries have shown reasonably good cyclability, poor safety and narrow operating temperature range are still big concerns. The cause of these issues is directly associated with the use of highly flammable liquid organic electrolytes.1,2 To address these issues, the current liquid organic electrolyte must be replaced by non-flammable and highly stable electrolytes. All-solid-state lithium ion batteries (ASSLiB) have demonstrated their capability in address these primary concerns. The key breakthrough relies on the development of solid electrolytes with high Li ion conductivity and electrochemical stability. For example, solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) such as sulfide,3,4 oxide,5,6 polymer7 and their composites8 have recently received tremendous attention owing to their high ionic conductivity and possible application in ASSLiBs. Considering the ionic conductivity, safety, and stability in ambient conditions, oxide SSEs with garnet9,10 and NASICON11,12 structure have been considered to be good candidates for bulk-type ASSLiBs.13–15 Three synthetic methods for ASSLiBs based on garnet and NASICON ceramic solid electrolytes currently have been developed. In the first one, the cathode precursor solution/powder deposited/pressed on the bulk SSE was employed to manufacture bulk ASSLiBs. For example, Kotobuki et al.16,17 used the sol–gel method to prepare a LiCoO2 (LCO) or Li4Mn5O12 (LMO) precursor solution, which was dropped on the sintered Li7La3Zr2O12 and Li0.35La0.55TiO3 (LLTO) pellets and further calcined at 450 °C for 15 min to manufacture the Li/LLZO/LCO and LCO/LLTO/LMO ASSLiBs. Since the interface ionic conductivity was low, the cycle life (<10) and capacity were low (15 and 7.3 μA cm−2). Kobayashi and his co-workers18 also produced an all-solid-state symmetric battery based on Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP). The cathode slurry was obtained by mixing amorphous LAGP powders, Li3V2(PO4)3 (LVP), and carbon fiber in the weight ratio of 49 : 49 : 2, which was then printed on both sides of the LAGP pellet and further hot-pressed at 600 °C for 4 h in argon atmosphere. Discharge capacities of 38 μA h g−1 and 92 μA h g−1 were obtained when this LVP/LAGP/LVP ASSLiB was electronically cycled at a current of 22 μA cm−2 at 25 °C and 80 °C, respectively. In the second method, the cathode mixed with ionic-insulator binder was printed on the bulk SSE for synthesizing bulk ASSLiBs. Jin et al.19 mixed Cu0.1V2O5, carbon black, styrene-butadiene-rubber, and sodium-carboxyl-methyl-cellulose in the weight ratio of 80 : 15 : 2.5 : 2.5 to build a bulk ASSLiB in the sequence of Cu0.1V2O5/Li7La3Zr2O12/Li. After drying at 120 °C for 12 h, a discharge capacity of 53 mA h g−1 at 25 °C and 80 mA h g−1 at 50 °C was obtained. However, the cycle life was short (<20). To reduce the interface impedance, Broek et al.20 built an interface-modified LTO/LLZO/Li ASSLiB. The interface of the LLZO and LTO was firstly coated with the mixture of LLZO and starch, and then coated with the cathode slurry (LLZO : LTO : Super P : polyvinylidene fluoride (PVdF) = 40 : 40 : 10 : 10). After it was vacuum-dried at 100 °C for 1 h and sintered at 1070 °C for 10 hours in an O2 atmosphere, the obtained cell was electrochemically cycled at 80 °C with different current (2, 4, and 8 mA g−1), and maximum capacity of 15 mA h g−1 was obtained. Since the binder was a non-ionic conductor, the total performance of the cell based on this method was poor. In the last method, the active material mixed with high temperature ionic binder Li3BO3 (LBO) was printed on the bulk SSE for preparing the bulk ASSLiBs. Ohta et al.21 mixed LCO and LBO in a weight ratio of 75 : 25 with ethyl cellulose as a binder to fabricate an ASSLiB of LCO/Li7La3Zr2O12/Li by screen printing, followed by sintering at 700 °C. A discharge capacity of 85 mA h g−1 was obtained when this battery was operated at 25 °C with the charge–discharge current of 10 μA in the voltage range of 3.0–4.05 V. Ohta et al.22 produced an ASSLiB of LCO/Li6.8(La2.95,Ca0.05)(Zr1.75,Nb0.25)O12 (LLZO–CaNb)/Li by the co-sintering method at 790 °C. The charge and discharge capacity of 98 mA h g−1 and 78 mA h g−1, respectively, were obtained. In 2016, Liu et al.23 prepared a cathode slurry by mixing LCO, LBO, In2O5Sn (ITO), and PVdF in the weight ratio of 54 : 27 : 9 : 10 in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP). To investigate a bulk-type ASSLiB with the structure of LCO/Li6.75La3Zr1.75Ta0.25O12 (LLZ-Ta)/Li, the slurry was coated on polished LLZ-Ta pellet and further annealed at 700 °C for 1 h. A high capacity of 279.0 μA h cm−2 was obtained at 80 °C. Park et al.24 investigated the effect of the sintering temperature and the additive of LBO on the properties of LCO/LLZO/Li battery. The ASSLiB using LBO coated cathode material showed a higher discharge capacity of about 65 mA h g−1 compared with 30 mA h g−1 of the pure LCO based LCO/LLZO/Li half-cell. Very recently in 2018, Han et al.25 investigated a LCO/LLZTO (Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12)/Li cell. The LBO and Li2CO3 mixture (Li2.3C0.7B0.3O3) were used as coated layer for LCO and LLZO. The cathode composite with mass ratio of LCO : LLZTO : Li2.3C0.7B0.3O3 = 45 : 30 : 25 was mixed with ethyl cellulose in α-terpineol, and then dried at 100 °C followed by sintering at 700 °C for 1 hour. The discharge specific capacities of 94 mA h g−1 at 25 °C and 106 mA h g−1 at 100 °C were obtained, which were one of the highest discharge values for the ASSLiB reported so far. The cycle performance of this cell (40 cycles at 100 °C and 70 cycles at 25 °C) was also one of the best among all the reported results. In addition to the bulk-type ASSLiBs, the thin film type of solid-state batteries based on the garnet-type SSEs were also investigated.26–30 Although the cathode and the electrolyte were well bonded, a thin (<1 μm) cathode layer resulted in the low total discharge capacity. The thermoplastic polymer mixed with Li salts as the binder for synthesizing ASSLiB has relatively low ionic conductivity at room temperature, and thus needs elevated temperature (>50 °C) for a successful cycle.31,32

In summary, the current synthetic methods for bulk ASSLiBs still have many shortcomings, thus preventing them from further application. On synthesizing ASSLiBs by deposition and then calcination using a cathode with SSE, undesired interface reaction and poor interface binding are almost unavoidable, which directly result in the low discharge capacity and short life. Although co-sintering active materials with LBO at high temperature could achieve relatively high discharge capacity, the charge/discharge cycle was still not long enough in most of the results. The ASSLiBs that used thermoplastic polymer as the binder had a high discharge capacity and long cycle life, which was even comparable to one of the commercial liquid batteries, but elevated temperature (>50 °C) was essential to increase the conductivity.

To address the above issues, in this work, we use a Li ionic conductive salt as a binder to fabricate the bulk ASSLiBs for the first time. Unlike the thermoplastic polymer used in ASSLiBs, the binder used in this work is thermosetting and a Li ion conductor. Unlike LBO that requires a high temperature melt for binding, the Li salt binder can dissolve in the aqueous solution and bind active materials at room temperature. This method has many advantages including (i) large-scale production of full cell in ambient conditions since LAGP and the binder are stable in ambient conditions, (ii) complete elimination of the interfacial reaction and diffusion between the electrode and electrolyte without high temperature calcination, (iii) no liquid or gel type of the phase in active materials for its thermosetting, and (iv) high conductivity and long-cycle life. The structure, viscosity, amd electrochemical behaviour of this binder are systematically investigated in this work. The interface resistance and stability of this binder with LAGP are also explored. Finally, a prototype of the full-cell ASSLiB with the structure of LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 (LNMO)/LAGP/RuO2 is fabricated by this method. A relatively low total resistance of the ASSLiB is obtained, demonstrating that this new approach provides a good physical bonding between the electrodes and the electrolyte, improves the ionic conductivity in the electrodes, and greatly simplifies the production process. Additionally, the ASSLiB manufactured by this method shows high discharge capacity and long cycle life.

The Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) solid-state electrolyte pellet was synthesized via a solid-state reaction method. Stoichiometric amounts of Li2CO3 (99%, Sigma-Aldrich) with 10% excess of Li2CO3, Al2O3 (99.98%, Alfa Aesar), GeO2 (99.999%, Alfa Aesar), and NH4H2PO4 (98%, Sigma-Aldrich) were mixed by ball-milling at 150 rpm for 4 h in a zirconia jar filled with ethanol. The mixed precursor was then dried at 80 °C for 10 h and then heated at 380 °C for 4 h to evaporate water, decomposed ammonia, and carbon dioxide. The pre-heated power was calcined at 800 °C for 8 h with the heating rate of 5 °C min−1 to obtain the rhombohedral-structured LAGP powder. The calcined powder mixture was ball-milled again with ethanol to obtain small LAGP particles. After this, the LAGP powder was pelletized and sintered at 900 °C for 8 h. The sintered pellets were polished to a thickness of 0.20 mm for assembly of the solid-state batteries. The polished LAGP pellets were washed by deionized water under ultrasonic vibration thrice and then vacuum dried at 80 °C overnight.

Poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) (molecular weight 450 000, Sigma-Aldrich) was dissolved in deionized water and magnetically stirred for 12 h to obtain 2 wt% PAA solution. LiOH (98%, Sigma-Aldrich) was added dropwise into the PAA solution to adjust the pH value of the lithium polyacrylate (PAALi) solution from 3 to 13.5, and then the solution was further magnetically stirred for 12 h.

The prepared PAALi solution (2 wt%, pH = 7) was mixed with the ball-milled LAGP powder in the weight ratio of 90 : 10 by magnetic stirring for 10 h. Then, the mixed slurry was tap-coated to the two sides of the polished LAGP pellet, followed by vacuum-drying at 110 °C for 5 h. It was then sputtered with gold (200 s at 20 mA) for further measurement.

To prepare the cathode and anode slurry, commercial LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 (99%, Sigma-Aldrich) and RuO2 (99.9%, Aldrich) were respectively mixed with carbon nanotubes (CNT) (diameter 10–20 nm, length 5–15 μm, Shenzhen Nanotech. Port. Co. Ltd), and the PAALi solution in the weight ratio of 90 : 2 : 8 was thoroughly mixed using ball-milling at 120 rpm for 2 h. The mixed slurries were then immediately used for assembling full all-solid-state Li-ion batteries.

The dried LAGP pellet was weighed by an electronic scale (METTLER TOLEDO) and then coated with the cathode slurry on one side. The cell was dried at 110 °C for 30 min and further weighed to calculate the mass of the cathode material. Then, the anode slurry was coated, dried, and weighed with the same method. All these steps were performed in ambient conditions without any atmospheric control. After the full-cell was prepared, it was further dried at 80 °C overnight. Gold was sputtered (20 mA, 200 s) on both sides of the battery as the current collector for electrochemical measurements. The edge of the pellet was covered with scotch tape during the sputtering of gold and polished after sputtering to avoid the short circuit between the anode and cathode. To avoid the absorption of moisture from air during the electrochemical measurement, a plastic film was coated on both sides of the full-cell. The two sides were connected to the positive or negative electrode via a feedthrough.

The X-ray diffraction (XRD) of LAGP was tested using a Shimazu XRD-6000/7000 with Cu Kα radiation from 10° to 80° with 1° min−1. FTIR was performed using a GladiATR instrument at room temperature after the PAA and PAALi powder were vacuum-dried at 110 °C for 5 h. The scanning range was from 4000 to 400 cm−1 with a resolution of 2 cm−1. The viscosity of the PAALi aqueous solution was immediately measured after preparation using a CAP 2000+ viscometer at a rotation speed of 800 rpm. The thermal behavior of PAALi was measured using the TA-60WS and DTG-60H instruments from room temperature to 800 °C at a heating rate of 5 °C cm−1. The galvanic cycle of the LAGP and PAALi/LAGP/PAALi was conducted using a Solartron Analytical 1400 Cell Test system with current density from 5 μA cm−2 to 50 μA cm−2. The microstructure was characterized using a HITACHI S-4300 field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM). To test the ion conductivity of LAGP, PAALi/LAGP/PAALi, and LNMO/LAGP/RuO2, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed using a Solartron impedance analyzer in the frequency range of 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz with 50 mV perturbation amplitude. This test was performed at room temperature (23.8 °C) in the ambient conditions without any atmospheric protection. For the EIS of PAALi/LAGP/PAALi at various temperatures, an oven (WEISS WKL34) was used for controlling the temperature, and each temperature value was maintained for 30 min. The cyclic voltammetric (CV) measurement was also performed using a Solartron Potentiostatic at room temperature in air, from an initial voltage of ∼0.2 V to 4.1 V, and then decreased to 0.5 V at a scanning rate of 0.5 mV s−1. The CV test was repeated four times to examine the stability of the redox reaction peaks. The open-voltage was measured using a Solartron 1400 Cell Test system at different intervals of time. The cells were first charged to 4.1 V, followed by open-circuit voltage measurement at different time intervals. The galvanostatic cycling was tested using a MACCOR battery tester in the voltage range of 0.8–4.1 V with current rates of 0.2C and 0.5C at room temperature as well as at 50 °C.

Since viscosity is one of the primary conditions for good bonding, the viscosity of PAALi at various concentrations was studied by a viscometer. Fig. 1(c) shows the changes in viscosity at different concentrations of PAALi aqueous solution at a constant pH value of 7. We noted that the viscosity of the PAALi aqueous solution was also affected by its pH value, which is shown in ESI Fig. S1,† where viscosity varies with pH at a constant concentration of the PAALi (2 wt%) solution. It was noted that the viscosity increased with pH when pH is less than 8 (77.7 cP) and then slightly decreased when pH reached 13.5 (73 cP). At a constant pH value of 7, the viscosity increased from 19.00 cP to 116.4 cP when the concentration of PAALi increased from 0.5 wt% to 3.0 wt%. To compare traditionally used PVdF, the viscosity of 2 wt% PVdF solution dissolved in NMP was tested and found to be 32.5 cP. This implies that the PAALi solution at pH = 7 has a higher binding force compared with the traditional PVdF for preparing the electrode slurry. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) of PAA and PAALi powders was carried out (Fig. 1(d)). Both PAA and PAALi had peaks of C–H stretching vibration (2951 cm−1), C–H in-plane and out-of-plane bending vibrations (795 and 609 cm−1), C–C stretching vibration (1162 cm−1), O–H stretching vibration (3336–2524 cm−1), O–H in-plane bending vibrations (1452 and 1411 cm−1), C–O stretching vibration (1233 cm−1), and C[double bond, length as m-dash]O stretching vibration (1700 cm−1). Compared with the peaks of PAA, a new peak at 877 cm−1 was observed for PAALi, which could be from the O–Li bond. In addition, the peak intensity at 1040 cm−1 from C–O stretching vibration was increased. The XRD spectra of PAA and PAALi are shown in the ESI Fig. S2.† Both of them had an amorphous structure. To understand the thermal stability of PAALi, TGA-DSC analysis was carried out from room temperature to 800 °C with a heating rate of 5 °C min−1 (Fig. 1(e)). From room temperature to 100 °C, the mass of the PAALi powder decreased due to water evaporation. When the temperature increased from 100 °C to 380 °C, the weight of the PAALi powder continuously decreased. Since there was no sharp peak in the DSC curve, there was no chemical reaction and phase transformation of the PAALi powder. Thus, the decrease in the mass of the PAALi powder could be only from the loss of absorbed water. At temperatures higher than 380 °C, the weight of PAALi suddenly reduced and several peaks on the DSC curve were observed, implying the decomposition of the PAALi powder. Therefore, PAALi is stable at temperature lower than 380 °C for the synthesis and operation of the ASSLiBs.

The NASICON-structured Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 solid-state electrolyte was fabricated through a solid-state reaction.33,34 The sintered LAGP specimen of diameter of 9.0 mm was polished to 0.2 mm thickness. Fig. 2(a) displays the polished LAGP pellet that shows translucency and has good strength, thus enabling the fabrication of the full cell. The structure of the LAGP pellet was characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD) as shown in ESI Fig. S3.† According to the XRD spectrum, all the peaks of the LAGP pellet matched well with those of the rhombohedral structure (PDF card #80-1924) without an impurity phase in the sintered pellets. The morphology of the solid electrolyte is also closely related to its ionic conductivity.35 ESI Fig. S4† shows the cross-section field emission scanning electronic microscopic (FE-SEM) image of the LAGP pellet, showing a dense structure with only a few small voids. The dense LAGP pellet not only contributes to the high Li ionic conductivity, but also prevents the short circuit between the cathode and anode. The voids at the surface of the LAGP pellet may contribute to the electrochemical performance of the cells.17 The Li ionic conductivity of the LAGP pellet was evaluated by EIS using gold blocking electrodes on both the sides (Fig. 2(b)). The Nyquist plot shows a semicircle in the high frequency (5.01 × 105 to 6.31 × 103 Hz), which can be assigned to the grain boundary and bulk resistance of LAGP, and a long tail at the low frequency region represents the Li ion diffusion impedance. Therefore, the equivalent circuit with two resistors, a constant phase element (CPE), and a Warburg diffusion element with a reflective boundary can be constructed. The simulated plot, as shown in Fig. 2(b), agrees well with the experimental data. The bulk (Rb) and the grain boundary (Rgb) resistances of LAGP were estimated to be 121.5 Ω and 68.69 Ω, respectively. The total ionic conductivity was calculated to be 1.82 × 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature (23.8 °C) using a specimen of diameter 9.0 mm and thickness 0.20 mm, which was similar to the value in the literature.34 The electronic conductivity of the LAGP pellet was measured using the direct current (DC) polarization method at a constant voltage of 0.5 V (Fig. 2(c)). The gold layers were used as the ion-blocking electrodes for the LAGP pellet. The current rapidly decreased from 8 × 10−6 A to 2 × 10−8 A and then stabilized at 2 × 10−8 A, implying negligible electronic conductivity. Since LAGP is stable in air,36 all these tests were performed in the ambient conditions. The polarization and stability of LAGP were galvanostatically cycled at different current densities from 10 μA cm−2 to 50 μA cm−2. To reduce the interfacial impedance between the metal Li and the electrolyte, a liquid electrolyte (LE) wetted separator was placed between the Li foil and LAGP, which can also avoid the direct contact between the LAGP pellet and the metal Li since Ge ion in LAGP can be reduced from Ge4+ to Ge2+ and even Ge0 by Li metal.37Fig. 2(d) shows the polarization at different current levels. It was observed that the polarization behavior was stable upto 300 cycles at a maximum current density of 50 μA cm−2, although the polarization increased with the applied current because of internal impedance.

The stability of PAALi with SSE–LAGP was investigated by printing the LAGP powders mixed with PAALi solution onto two sides of the polished LAGP pellet (Fig. 3(a)). Both the sides were then sputtered with gold for electrochemical measurement. After vacuum-drying at 110 °C for 12 h, the pellet was subjected to EIS measurement. Since there was an additional composite layer (LAGP powder + PAALi), the total resistance was relatively large compared with the pure LAGP pellet (Fig. 2(b)). The stability of PAALi with LAGP was evaluated by galvanic cycling at 5 μA cm−2 for 100 cycles (Fig. 3(b)). The over-voltages slightly decreased from the 1st to the 10th cycle and remained the same in the following 90 cycles, which proved that PAALi was stable with LAGP and no chemical reaction was observed during the galvanic cycle. The total resistance before and after the galvanic cycle was measured, as shown in Fig. 3(c). It was noted that the resistance decreased from 1.47 × 104 Ω to 190.8 Ω by more than 70 times. After processing and before the galvanic cycling, the EIS measures the impedance of homogeneous Li ion distribution of LAGP, whereas after the galvanic cycle, the Li ions are pushed towards one side of the ion block electrode. As such, the ESI measures the impedance of an inhomogeneous LAGP. The total resistance change with frequency is shown in Fig. 3(d). The value in the high-to-mid frequency range was chosen since below this the polarization effects at the electrode–electrolyte interface become dominant. At the high frequency range (106 to 3 × 105 Hz), the resistance of these two samples was almost the same, which implied that they had the same bulk resistance. However, for the middle frequency range (105 to 103 Hz), the resistance was largely reduced after the galvanic cycle compared with that before galvanic cycle. The decrease in the resistance in the middle frequency region could be caused from the better binding interface of LAGP and printing layers after the galvanic cycle. To determine the activation energy in eqn (3), the impedance of the pellet during the galvanic cycle was measured from −25 °C to 75 °C (Fig. 3(e)).

σt = A exp(−Ea/KbT)	(3)where σt is the ionic conductivity at temperature t, A is the pre-exponential factor, Ea is the activation energy, which is treated as a constant, Kb is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature of the impedance measurement. The relationship between log(σt) and 1000/T was obtained as shown below.
log(σt) = log(A) − Ea log e/(1000Kb)1000/T	(4)

After the linear relationship points were fitted, the activation energy of this structure was obtained as 0.366 eV, which is larger than the activation energy of pure LAGP (0.30 eV).

The interfaces between the electrodes and the SSE are crucial for the successful fabrication of the ASSLiBs. An interface with good contact and minimal interfacial impedance is an essential requirement for Li ion migration across the interface. To achieve good ionic and electronic conductivity of the electrode, the electrode was composed of the active material, electrically conductive additive, and PAALi as a Li ion conductive binder. Since the diffusion rate of Li ion was much lower than that of the electron and they can only migrate through the inside or surface of the active material and binder, therefore, the volume of the conductive additive should be as less as possible. Too much of conductive additive can increase the electrical conductivity but may hinder the Li ion diffusion. In the presented ASSLiB, high voltage cathode–LNMO was used whereas RuO2 was selected as the anode since it possesses extremely high electronic conductivity. To fabricate the ASSLiB, LAGP was polished to 0.2 mm and then washed using deionized water under ultrasonic vibration. The active materials were mixed with the binder (PAALi) and electrically conductive carbon nanotubes (CNT). The mass ratio of the active material (LNMO or RuO2), CNT, and PAALi were optimized as 90 : 2 : 8. The mixed slurry was screen-printed on the surface of the polished LAGP pellet followed by drying at 80 °C overnight in ambient conditions. After drying, two sides of the cell were sputtered with gold as the current collector for further electrochemical measurements. The schematic illustration of the finally assembled ASSLiB is shown in Fig. 4(a). Fig. 4(b) shows the FE-SEM image of the interface of LAGP and cathode. As can be seen, the cathode layer is dense and well in contact with LAGP. No obvious voids could be found in the interface between LAGP and the cathode layer. Even though some sunken regions occur on the LAGP surface, the cathode was still attached along the LAGP's sharp surface. The boundary between the anode and LAGP was very clear and no morphology change could be observed (Fig. 4(c)). The Nyquist plot of the LNMO/LAGP/RuO2 cell at the room temperature was composed of a semicircle at high frequency (5.01 × 105 to 2.5 × 103 Hz), a slightly tilted line at middle frequency (1.3 × 103 to 50 Hz), and a long-sloped tail at low frequency (30–0.8 Hz), as shown in Fig. 4(d). For the ASSLiB of LNMO/LAGP/RuO2, the impedance should contain bulk and grain boundary resistance of the solid electrolyte (Re–b and Re–gb), the cathode layer (Rc–b and Rc–gb), the anode layer (Ra–b and Ra–gb), the interfacial resistance between the anode and LAGP (Ra–e), and the interfacial resistance between LAGP and the cathode (Re–c). The frequency range of the first semicircle was almost the same as that of LAGP (5.01 × 105 to 6.31 × 103 Hz), which implies that this high frequency semicircle is due to the bulk resistance and grain boundary resistance of LNMO/LAGP/RuO2. The tilted line at middle frequency (1.3 × 103 to 50 Hz) was caused by the interfacial resistance of LNMO/LAGP/RuO2. These resistances related with the frequency agree with the results of Wang's group.38,39 The equivalent circuit to fit the experimental results consists of three resistors (Rs, R1, and R2), a constant phase element (CPE1), a capacitor (C1), and a Warburg diffusion element with reflective boundary (Wo1). The fitted impedance curve using this equivalent circuit matched well with the obtained plot. Compared with the frequency range of LAGP in Fig. 2(b), the high frequency semicircle in the Nyquist plot of Fig. 4(d) was related to the bulk (Rs = 128.7 Ω = Re–b + Rc–b + Ra–b) and grain boundary resistance (R1 = 151.4 Ω = Re–gb + Rc–gb + Ra–gb) of both LAGP and the electrode layers. The bulk resistance (LAGP = 121.5 Ω and LNMO/LAGP/RuO2 = 128.7 Ω) only slightly increased since the thickness of the LNMO/LAGP/RuO2 cell was slightly more than the pure LAGP pellet, while the grain boundary resistance (LAGP = 68.69 Ω, LNMO/LAGP/RuO2 = 151.4 Ω) obviously increased due to the low ionic conductivity of PAALi, RuO2, and LNMO (10−5 S cm−1). The middle frequency part of the Nyquist curve was due to the interfacial resistance (Rs = 11.54 Ω = Ra–e + Re–c) between the electrodes and LAGP. The long-sloped tail is the Warburg diffusion resistance from the blocking electrode of the gold layers. Unlike the solid polymers that were used as binders to bond the electrode particles and electrolyte in the solid state batteries,14 the binder PAALi used in this experiment not only has a higher ionic conductivity at room temperature,40,41 but also remains in the solid state even after heating to 200 °C. Fig. 4(e) shows an example of the cell which was heated to 200 °C for 1 h. The anode and cathode layer still remained in the solid state. This observation was consistent with the TGA result of PAALi in Fig. 1(e) and He et al.'s work.42

Fig. 5(a) shows the CV curve of the ASSLiB that was tested at room temperature at a scanning speed of 0.5 mV s−1 between 0.5 and 4.4 V. Clear redox peaks could be observed at the voltage of 3.6 V (oxidation) and 2.8 V (reduction), implying that the lithium ions migrated across LAGP and delithiated/lithiated at the cathode/anode, respectively, under the applied voltage. To compare the electrochemical behavior of the ASSLiB with a full battery using the traditional LiPF6 liquid electrolyte, the same configuration of the anode and cathode electrodes was also prepared. The CV plot of the liquid-based full cell is shown in ESI Fig. S5.† The oxidation and reduction peaks of the cell were similar to those of the ASSLiB, proving the successful operation of ASSLiB. However, the CV plot of ASSLiB based on PVdF with the same parameters had a very large overpotential (Fig. 5(b)). The corresponding oxidation peak is not obvious and the reduction peak appeared at 0.84 V, which is lower than the one of the PAALi based cell. This CV plot exhibited the advantage of ionic conductive binder for ASSLiB. The open voltage of this ASSLiB at room temperature was measured to investigate its self-discharge and polarization (Fig. 5(c)). Because of high impedance, the polarization of this cell was obvious. As a result, the initial voltage dropped sharply to 3.4 V after charging to 4.1 V. The open voltage gradually decreased from 3.4 V to 2.5 V in 2 h. When the voltage dropped to 2.5 V, it remained almost unchanged in 10 h. The same mass of cathode and anode (0.25 mg) was prepared for this ASSLiB. Since the specific capacity of RuO2 (ref. 43) (1027 mA h g−1) is much higher than that of LNMO44 (146.7 mA h g−1), the capacity of this ASSLiB is determined by cathode material. The specific discharge capacity and efficiency of the PVdF based cell (Fig. 5(d)) and the PAALi based cell (Fig. 5(e)) were measured at room temperature. The ASSLiBs were charged/discharged at 0.2C rate (1C = 146.7 mA g−1) from 0.8 V to 4.1 V according to the CV curve in Fig. 5(a) at room temperature (23.8 °C). For the cell using PVdF as the binder, the specific discharge capacity was only 1.05 mA h g−1. The voltage vs. capacity curves of the PAALi based cell are shown in ESI Fig. S6.† The charge plateau (3.0–4.1 V) and discharge plateau (3.0–0.8 V) were corresponding to the oxidation and reduction peaks of the electrode materials in the ASSLiB (Fig. 5(a)). The first discharge specific capacity was only 27.54 mA h g−1 with a very low efficiency of 9.2%. This low coulombic efficiency in the first cycle may be attributed to several reasons including poor activation and high impedance. It was noted that the coulombic efficiency sharply increased to 75% after 5 cycles accompanied by a continuous increase in the discharge capacity because of the increase in bonding between the electrolyte and the electrode facilitating the Li ion transportation (ESI Fig. S6†). The efficiency of ASSLiB using PVdF also increased in the first several cycles and remained unchanged in the following cycles. The specific charge/discharge capacities of PAALi based ASSLiB largely increased with the cycle number before the 85th cycle, and the maximum charge capacity of 113.8 mA h g−1 and discharge specific capacity of 87.5 mA h g−1 were obtained for this ASSLiB at room temperature. When the discharge capacity increased to 82 mA h g−1, it remained constant until 100 cycles. This long cycle life and high specific capacity of the presented ASSLiB is the one of the best compared with other published results, as shown in Table 1. After 100 cycles, the capacity slightly decreased. A discharge capacity of 72.2 mA h g−1 was obtained even after 120 charge/discharge cycles. A full ASSLiB with the same configurations was electrochemically cycled at 50 °C at 0.5C from 0.8 V to 4.1 V to investigate the electrochemical performance at relative high temperature (ESI Fig. S7†). A discharge capacity of 146 mA h g−1 was obtained after several cycles. It was maintained until the 36th cycle and then decreased to 127 mA h g−1 at the 43rd cycle. This performance clearly showed that ASSLiB LNMO/LAGP/RuO2 could be operated even at elevated temperature.

Table 1 summarizes the electrochemical performance of different bulk-type ASSLiBs. Three types of solid electrolytes were used in the fabrication of ASSLiBs, most of which had to be operated at elevated temperatures due to high impedance of the interfaces. As such, the capacities of most cells are largely below the theoretical capacity of the cathodes. In addition, the cyclic performance was also limited. In the present work, the resistance to Li ion transportation was largely reduced due to the use of Li ion conductive binder.

Fig. 6(a) shows the EDX of cross sectional images of the full cell after storage for 3 days. A clear interface boundary could be observed from the anodic side (RuO2) and LAGP. The Ru element only appears in the anodic side, while Al, Ge, and P were only found in the SSE layer. O was detected throughout the cross sectional area. A similar interface boundary was found for the cathode and LAGP. The Mn element only appears in the cathodic side. These element distribution results proved that no interface diffusion and reaction for this method was observed even after 3 days. The XPS of LAGP before and after 20 charge/discharge cycles was performed to evaluate the stability of LAGP under galvanic charge/discharge, as shown in Fig. 6(b). All the elements (Li 1s, Al 2p, Ge 3d, P 2p, and O 1s) contained in the LAGP were the same after the cycle. Besides, the peak intensity also remained the same, implying that LAGP was stable under cycling.

In conclusion, we report an innovative strategy to synthesize bulk-type full ASSLiBs by using an ionic conductive binder PAALi for the bonding of the cathode/anode layer and the interface between the electrode and solid electrolyte. The structural studies, viscosity studies, TGA-DSC, FTIR, and XRD were used to systematically evaluate the physical, chemical, and electrical properties of this binder. The Li salt binder could work and maintain its solid state below 380 °C. The interface between the binder and LAGP was stable under galvanic cycling at temperatures from −25 °C to 75 °C, and its resistance decreased more than 70 times after the galvanic cycle. The full cells were manufactured in air with excellent bonding and maintained their solid state even after being heated to 200 °C. A high total ionic conductivity of 1.03 × 10−4 S cm−1 was obtained for this cell. The discharge specific capacity of 87.5 mA h g−1 and 146 mA h g−1 was obtained at room temperature and 50 °C, respectively, which is one of the highest values to the best of our knowledge. This new concept provides an opportunity for the fabrication of large-scale ASSLiB in ambient conditions. Without sintering, this methodology largely simplifies the synthetic process and avoids the interface diffusion and reaction. Moreover, this new synthetic concept for lithium ion solid-state battery can also be extended to other ionic solid-state batteries such as Na+, K+, Al3+, and Mg2+.