A novel mechanical milling assisted synthesis route has been used to prepare new generation Li+ ion glass-ceramic composites using (i) glassy system 60[Li2SO4]-40[LiPO3] (60LSLP) and (ii) Li+ NASICON, i.e., LiTi2(PO4)3 known as LTP. Effect of compositional alterations, sintering conditions and cooling process on electrical transport has been investigated. Preparation conditions along with compositional alterations have yielded in reporting the best conducting composition. The ionic glass content was varied in (60LSLP)y-(LTP)100-y matrix for y = 5–20 wt %. It has been observed that various parameters viz. milling time, composition, annealing temperature, time and cooling conditions have a significant impact on ionic transport. The highest in-grain (∼2 × 10−4 Ω−1 cm−1) and grain boundary (∼1 × 10−5 Ω−1 cm−1) Li+ ion conductivity values at 100 °C have been obtained for y = 20 wt%. These have been found to be significantly higher than that of the pristine LTP prepared with similar preparation conditions. Electrical response (Z″-ω) and dielectric relaxation (tan δ - ω) investigations suggest that mobile Li+ ions from glassy phase significantly contribute to conductivity. The elemental distribution investigations using Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) mapping on fractured surface suggests homogeneous distribution of LTP and glassy phase in the composite. Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) results reveal no degradation in the electrochemical stability in 20 cycles, and that these composites are potential candidates for Li+ ion all-solid-state battery applications.

High Li+ ion conducting solid electrolytes have had a paramount significance over time for their application in all solid-state batteries [1]. Consequently, rigorous research is being carried out to develop Li+ ion based solid electrolytes that can withstand high temperature conditions and are applicable to low dimensional systems, thereby making them next generation energy storage devices [2,3]. Ever since the development of LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP), which is based on NASICON framework and has a bulk conductivity of the order of ∼10−4 Ω−1 cm−1, scientists across the globe have been trying its possible use in electrochemical devices [[4], [5], [6], [7]]. In a very recent article by Rossbach et al. [4], properties of various NASICON type Li+ ion conducting systems has been reviewed in view of their applications. Interestingly, Li+ NASICON (LTP or analogues) have also found their relevance in thin film battery technology. For instance, Gallium doped LTP (LGTP) films were successfully grown on a graphite substrate using hydrothermal method [8]. As reported by Liang et al. [8], even in thin film form, such compounds exhibited an ionic conductivity of 2.1 × 10−5 Ω−1 cm−1, with dense layer formation. Likewise, it was seen that electrochemical performance improved when cathode material LiFePO4/C was coated with Li1.4Al0.4Ti1.6(PO4)3 (LATP) and nano sheets of graphene [9]. In another interesting work, Liu et al. [10] prepared Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 electrolyte by aqueous based sol-gel process with high purity and total ionic conductivity of 3.1 × 10−4 Ω−1 cm−1 at 30 °C. For commercial aqueous Li+ ion air battery applications, water stable Li+ ion NASICON compound Li1.4Al0.4Ge0.2Ti1.4(PO4)3 (LAGTP) with 10% TiO2 was reported by Kyono et al. [11]. Similarly, for Li+ ion air batteries, high ionic conductivity in Li1.4Al0.4Ti1.6(PO4)3-GeO2 system was also reported [12], in which conductivity improvement (due to oxide addition) has been emphasized.

Despite these advancements, the direct use of Li+ NASICON namely, LTP in ionic devices is still a challenge. Due to high grain boundary impedance (GBI), total conductivity falls to 10−6-10−8 Ω−1 cm−1 at room temperature thereby restricting its applications [4,13]. There have been several attempts to enhance the ionic conductivity of this by tailoring the grain boundary impedance [14,15]. For instance, conductivity of LTP could be increased to a value of ∼10−4 Ω−1 cm−1 by substitution of Al or Cr in a nominal composition [[16], [17], [18]]. Also, in another recent work by Pareek et al. [19] Ti of LTP was substituted by Sn and Zr to obtain LiSnZr(PO4)3 that exhibited a total conductivity of 1.45 × 10−5 Ω−1 cm−1 at room temperature.

Regardless of the fact that bulk conductivity of these compounds is significantly high, new methods need to be explored to prepare novel composites with NASICON so as to enhance the electrical transport across grain boundary. In order to improve conductivity in oxide-based systems, various groups have tried to precipitate fast ionic Li+ NASICON crystallites (LTP and analogues) in oxide glass matrix so as to enhance ionic conductivity. Not long ago, Fu [14] precipitated Li+ NASICON compound Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3, abbreviated as LATP, in Li2O-Al2O3-TiO2-P2O5 glassy system that was annealed at 700–1000 °C. These glass-ceramics exhibited conductivity of the order of ∼10−3 Ω−1cm−1 at room temperature. Likewise, Chowdari et al. [20] synthesized Li1+xAlxM2-x(PO4)3 (M = Ti and Ge) from Li2O-Al2O3-MO2-P2O5 glass by annealing it to 550 °C followed by heat treatment at 950 °C. The glass ceramics exhibited an ionic conductivity of the order of ∼10−4 Ω−1cm−1. For instance, Chen et al. [21] studied the effect of controllable precipitation of LTP in Li2O-TiO2-P2O5 glass system. Incorporation of another oxide in the glassy system, for example Al2O3, B2O3 or La2O3 have also led to LTP precipitation. Likewise, Soman et al. [22] studied the effect of ionic conductivity in LTP based glass-ceramics containing an additional AlPO4 phase. In addition, Nuernberg et al. [23] prepared a Li+ ion conducting glass-ceramic, Li1 + xCrx(GeyTi1−y)2−x(PO4)3 (LCGTP), using melt quenching followed by crystallization of Li2O-CrO3-GeO2-TiO2-P2O5 glassy system, which exhibited an ionic conductivity of 6.6 × 10−5 Ω−1cm−1 at room temperature [23,24]. Besides, Li+ ion materials, like LiI and LiNO3, have also been used as additives at the grain contacts of LTP in order to enhance ionic conductivity [25,26]. Thus, growing Li+ NASICONs in a glass matrix leads to formation of dense structures and high ionic conductivity.

Inspite of the several advantages of conventional Li+ NASICON glass-ceramics, the requirement of high temperature synthesis route acts as a hindrance due to difficulty in maintaining uniform size and amount of precipitated NASICON nano crystallites. Thus, the synthesis conditions affect the electrical transport and reproducibility.

As an alternative to the existing glass-ceramic preparation technique, we have recently proposed a novel external dispersion route [27]. In this, an ionic glass i.e. (Li2SO4)x-(LiPO3)100-x (x = 60 mol%) and Li+ NASICON namely LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) crystallites were separately ball milled to size of nano grains/crystallites. The nano flakes of the glass were mixed with nano-particles of Li+ NASICON (i.e. LTP) and mixture was subsequently sintered above the melting point of the glass/glass-ceramic followed by rapid cooling. This process led to a novel glass-ceramic composite formation with enhanced ionic conductivity [27]. In a similar recent work, Kwatek et al. [28,29]. studied the effect of addition of Li2.9B0.9S0.1O3.1 (LBSO) and Li3BO3 glass in LTP and obtained a conductivity of the order of 10−4 Ω−1 cm−1 at room temperature.

Our preliminary investigation resulted in significant increase of in-grain ionic conductivity in comparison to pristine LTP which was prepared by similar conditions. Further a subtle but significant rise in in-grain conductivity was also observed in these composites. These preliminary investigations, however, were carried out for a fixed glass-ceramic to LTP ratio and with low sintering temperature conditions ∼650 °C (just above the melting point of glass-ceramic) followed by rapid cooling. A systematic analysis of variation of compositional and preparation parameters may lead to development of a composite with high grain boundary conductivity along with thermal stability. Thus, the present work focuses on following important investigations:(i)Effect of preparation parameters (e.g. mechanical milling time, sintering conditions, compositional alteration and size of constituents) on electrical properties(ii)Structural characterization(iii)Li+ ion conductivity mechanism in LTP-glass-ceramics

Firstly, the glass of composition (Li2SO4)x-(LiPO3)100-x with fixed Li2SO4 content of x = 60 mol% (abbreviated as 60LSLP) and the LTP were prepared by conventional route as described earlier [30,31]. Further, both the 60LSLP glass and LTP were separately mechanically milled for 3–18 h using a Fritsch Pulverisette-6 planetary ball mill using an 80 ml Agate pot and balls of 5 mm at 400 rpm in acetone medium with ball to powder mass ratio 5:1 [27,32].

The mixture of various batches of the composites were prepared for 3–18 h of milling (both compounds with same milling time, for e.g., 3 h milled LTP as well as 60LSLP glass were mixed together). The mixture batches (3 h, 6 h, and 18 h) were again ball milled for 1 h at 100 rpm to ensure homogeneity. The mixture was subsequently pelletized, kept at a typical sintering temperature above the melting point of glass-ceramic and cooled. Initially the composites were prepared with a typical composition viz., 20[60LSLP]-80LTP (in wt %) using various sintering temperatures ranging from 650 to 900 °C for different sintering times (0.5–1.5 h). After varying the sintering time and temperature, the glass content was varied in composition (60LSLP)y-(LTP)100-y matrix for y = 5–20 wt %. These composites were abbreviated as LTP-yGC-18 h (For example, y = 10 wt% to signify as LTP-10GC prepared from 18 h milled powders). Glass content was deliberately kept below 20 wt% to realize predominant properties of Li+ NASICON in the composites and to prevent any deformation due to swelling. The LTP pellets were also prepared under similar conditions in order to compare their properties with LTP-glass-ceramics. Density of the pellets was determined using Archimedes principle with xylene as an immersion liquid.

The samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction using Rigaku Miniflex II powder diffractometer. Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and Energy dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (EDS) were carried out using FEI-Apreo-S to study the morphology and elemental distribution on a fractured surface. The configuration cells of the type Ag| pellet |Ag were used for electrical conductivity studies. The steady state impedance spectroscopy measurements (50–165 °C) were performed using computer interfaced HIOKI impedance analyzer model IM3570 in the frequency range of 4 Hz–5 MHz. Lastly, cyclic voltammetry scans were also carried out to investigate electrochemical stability of the best conducting composite using CH instrument electrochemical analyzer model 1200C.

It was important to reduce the size of the glassy flakes for preparation of homogenous composites. Thus, at the outset, effect of mechanical milling on 60LSLP glass was investigated. Firstly, the XRD patterns of the glassy flakes were taken for different milling times. Fig. 1(a) shows such XRD patterns obtained for 60LSLP glass ball milled for 0–18 h. The characteristic halo pattern in the pristine glass (0 h) is evident. When the glass is milled, there appear tiny peaks in the XRD patterns corresponding to Li2SO4 compound. Thus, milling leads to glass degradation. It is important to note that 60LSLP composition (containing 60 mol% of Li2SO4) lies at the boundary of glass forming region [33]. For such a high salt content, thus, the corresponding glass is likely to have Li2SO4 precipitation as a consequence of milling. Nevertheless, the patterns for various milling times do suggest that the precipitated crystallites are present in a small quantity and a significant amount of the Li2SO4 still exists in dissolved state in the glass matrix. The Li2SO4 crystallite size (calculated using Debye Scherer relation) and amount (from peak area) in the flakes above 15 h of milling almost becomes constant to a value of ∼25 nm. Thus, further milling was avoided. On the other hand, LTP was also systematically ball milled. The LTP crystallite size obtained from XRD pattern is plotted for different milling times in Fig. 1(b). Evidently, milling effectively reduces the crystallite size upto ∼30 nm. It was further noticed that milling of pristine LTP beyond 18 h does not lead to any change in the crystallite size due to constraints of milling parameters, particularly with agate as the grinding material.

XRD patterns for one of the as prepared LTP-glass-ceramic composites namely, LTP-20GC-18 h, is also shown in Fig. 1(c). As evident, the glass-ceramic mainly contains LTP crystallites along with Li2SO4 crystallites in a small amount. No peak corresponding to any other compound is visible that suggests existence of rest of the constituents in amorphous phase.

Thus, using 18 h milled powders of LTP and 60LSLP, the composites were initially prepared fixing the glass content at 20 wt%.

Electrical conductivity in novel composites has been systematically investigated using impedance spectroscopy. The ionic glass 60[Li2SO4]-40[LiPO3] and LTP itself have been established as predominant Li+ ion conductors [4,14,33]. Thus, the electrical transport in the composite is considered mainly due to Li+ ion conduction. Effect of preparation parameters on Li+ ion transport has been discussed.

Impedance spectroscopy (IS) has been widely used to characterize Li+ ion conducting systems and dielectric materials. Generally, four possible formalisms viz. impedance Z∗, electric modulus M∗, admittance Y∗ and permittivity ε∗ have been used. Impedance of the sample, Z∗(ω) is given by |Z|  where ϴ is the phase angle [32,34,35]. Using Z∗ formalism, the sample is modelled as a lossy capacitor that, in turn, is considered as a parallel combination of resistance Rp and a lossless capacitor Cp.

For Li+ ion transport studies, at the outset, frequency dependence of conductivity (Eq. (3)) was investigated for a composite LTP-20GC-18 h (that refers LTP-20GC prepared from 18 h milled glass and LTP). The composite was prepared by keeping the mixture pellet for a fixed time of 0.5 h at three different annealing temperatures above the melting point of 60 LSLP [33]. Fig. 2 depicts conductivity isotherms that were obtained in a wide range of frequency (4 Hz-5MHz) for LTP-20GC-18 h annealed for a constant time of 0.5 h at various temperatures, i.e., for 650 °C, 800 °C and 900 °C followed by air quenching (i.e. pellets were taken out of furnace and air cooled). The Li+ ion conductivity vs frequency plot has only been shown at 100 °C for LTP-20GC-18 h for a better comparison for pellets sintered at various temperatures. It is well known that pristine LTP exhibits a typical frequency dependence of conductivity, where two well separated plateau regions are seen that correspond to in-grain conductivity,  (approximated from high frequency plateau region) and grain-boundary conductivity,  (from low frequency plateau). For two of the composites annealed at 650 °C and 800 °C (Fig. 2), two plateau regions in -ω plot are evident. This readily suggests ionic transport through LTP grains is evident in these samples [27,[36], [37], [38]]. The characteristic nature of LTP conductivity isotherm is though, not evident for sample sintered at 900 °C. Annealing at higher temperature possibly leads to degradation of glass due to massive precipitation of Li2SO4 that further suppresses the contribution of LTP grains in conductivity. Infact, a typical Jonscher Power Law (JPL) [39,40] behavior is evident for sample sintered at 900 °C that is generally seen for Li+ ion conducting glass/glass-ceramics [30]. As noticed, the σ-ω plot in the low frequency region is coinciding for both 650 °C and 800 °C sintered samples that suggests comparable  values. The bulk conductivity value is slightly higher for 800 °C treated sample. Annealing at a relatively high temperature removes lattice strain that may lead to improved in-grain (bulk) conductivity. Since LTP nano crystallites used in the composite preparation were ball milled, this may have introduced some deformation. Thus, a temperature of 800 °C was found to be more suitable for sintering and was fixed for other composites in the study.

Fig. 3 shows -ω plots for LTP-20GC-18 h composite which is heat treated at a fixed temperature of 800 °C but for various sintering times, i.e., 0.5–1.5 h. The conductivity isotherms for LTP-20GC-18 h are shown at 100 °C for comparison. It is evident that sintering for a longer time (1.5 h) again leads to a typical JPL behavior (as observed in Fig. 2 for 900 °C sintered pellet) that does not indicate any contribution of LTP to conductivity. On the other hand, two clear plateau regions (characteristic of LTP contribution) are evident when the pellet is heat treated at 800 °C but for relatively smaller times of 0.5 h and 1 h. Clearly, the samples sintered for smaller times exhibit a remarkable rise in conductivity. For annealing times of 0.5 h and even 1 h, -ω behavior and conductivity values across the grain boundaries () and at the bulk () are found to be almost similar. Relatively poor conductivity values for samples with larger sintering time must be attributed to glass degradation that may have resulted due to prolonged heat treatment. Longer sintering time may further lead to massive crystallization of Li2SO4.

Interestingly, cooling conditions also affect the electrical transport significantly. Instead of air quenching if samples are cooled very slowly in furnace, the grain boundary conductivity improves dramatically. It typically takes ∼10 h to attain room temperature in such a treatment (inset of Fig. 3). Fig. 3 also depicts conductivity of LTP-20GC-18 h which is annealed at 800 °C for 0.5 h, followed by furnace cooling. Notable higher values of  may be attributed to better density (∼2.53 g/cm3) in case of furnace cooled samples than that of air quenched samples (∼2.15 g/cm3). Density value (in case of furnace cooling) is also found to be comparable to that obtained for pristine LTP-18 h (∼2.63 g/cm3) prepared using similar conditions. Such density is also attained without major precipitation of unwanted poor ion conducting compounds (e.g. Li2SO4 or LiPO3). Evidently, slow cooling effectively leads to better sintering, which provides significant time to atoms/constituents to order themselves in an arrangement resulting into a dense structure. Thus, it may be suggested from the above analysis, that LTP-20GC-18 h which is prepared by annealing at a temperature of 800 °C for 0.5 h followed by slow (furnace) cooling yields better conductivity.

Effect of crystallite/flakes size of constituents (LTP/60LSLP) on ionic conductivity is investigated. The optimized sintering conditions (800 °C for 0.5 h followed by slow cooling) were used to prepare these composites. As seen, crystallite size notably affects Li+ ion transport (Fig. 4). The in-grain conductivity shows a subtle increase for composites prepared using 3–6 h of milled constituents. However, the rise is significant when the composites are prepared from 18 h milled LTP and glass. In addition, the grain boundary conductivity (Fig. 4(b)) also shows a significantly higher value for smaller crystallite size. It may be suggested here that smaller grain size possibly prevents agglomeration of LTP crystallites and ensures their contact with the glass-grains of same size. Therefore, while formation of composite, the probability of glassy flakes lying between the LTP grains is certainly higher when their size is reduced. Thus, sintering of pellets with smaller particle size leads to better in-grain () as well as grain boundary () conductivity values.

Electrical transport has been systematically investigated with variation of glass content (i.e. LTP-yGC-18 h, where y = 5, 10 and 20 wt%). Fig. 5(a) shows the temperature dependence of bulk (σG) electrical conductivity for LTP-18 h, LTP-20GC-18 h, LTP-10GC-18 h and LTP-5GC-18 h. As apparent, all the glass-ceramic composites exhibit an enhanced Li+ ion conductivity in comparison to LTP-18 h. The composition LTP-20GC-18 h shows a σG value of ∼2 × 10−4 Ω−1 cm−1 at 100 °C. Such a rise in conductivity could be due to the contribution of mobile Li+ ion content in the glass-ceramic phase that occupies space between grains of LTP as proposed in our recent work [27] and discussed later in detail. Thus, Li+ ions may either (i) tunnel through the LTP crystallites, or (ii) may move along the surface states of LTP. It is important to note that the activation energies of ionic migration for LTP and highest conducting LTP-GC (as shown in Fig. 5) are comparable, which may suggest predominant transport of Li+ ions through the LTP grains.

Further as evident (Fig. 5(b)), LTP-20GC-18 h exhibits a higher  value in comparison to other LTP-glass-ceramic composites and LTP-18 h. It is readily noticed that σ-T cycles for LTP-18 h exhibit two slopes separated by a knee which is a typical behavior of LTP, also reported previously [16,37]. Such trend at lower temperatures may correspond to poor thermally activated behavior due to high grain boundary impedance. Also, inter grain ionic motion is activated at higher temperature and conductivity increases with relatively higher activation energy (Eσ reported in Fig. 5(b)). Total Li+ ion conductivity of the sample  [41] is found to be ∼1 × 10−5 Ω−1 cm−1 at 100 °C for LTP-20GC-18 h which is higher than the corresponding value of ∼9 × 10−7 Ω−1 cm−1 at 100 °C LTP-18 h. Unlike LTP, the σ-T cycle for LTP-20GC-18 h exhibits a single slope that corresponds to a single conductivity mechanism with an activation energy of 0.48eV.

The electrical conductivity values for various samples are shown in Table 1. Apparently, the grain boundary conductivity dominates the electrical transport. The mechanism is further investigated using IS formalisms.

Thus Z″ vs ω results into a relaxation peak. The Z″ spectra corresponds to regions in the system where resistive part (Rp) dominates. Thus, typically electrode-electrolyte interface and grain-grain interface can be analyzed. Further the frequency dependence of Z″ also gives information about the hopping polarization loss. The maxima in the relaxation peak corresponds to a frequency  where de-polarization is the fastest. Hence, in a way, it depicts the electrical transport in various regions of a composite where charge accumulation and de-accumulation occurs.

where Co is the geometrical (vacuum) capacitance of the cell where electrodes of cross-sectional area A are separated by a length l with no sample between them. The Z″ relaxation is normally considered as an electrical response from various regions (bulk and interface) of the material [42]. For clarity Z″ vs ω spectra can be divided into three regions, viz, response from electrode-electrolyte interface (region I), grain-grain interface (region II) and grain interior (region III). At lower temperatures (Fig. 6(a)), the electrical response from region II and III are only visible due to experimental limitations. For this temperature, LTP-18 h exhibits a spike in region II followed by an apparent peak at higher frequencies (in region III). Unlike LTP-18 h the glass-ceramic composite exhibits two well separated peaks in region II and III, respectively. Relaxation peak in region II suggests that the inter grain transport is facilitated in glass-ceramic even at lower temperatures.

At a higher temperature of 165 °C, LTP-18 h and LTP-20GC-18 h both exhibit distinguished relaxation peaks in region II and III, respectively. In addition, region I is also visible in which a spike is noticed for both samples that may be attributed to polarization at electrode-electrolyte interface. Interestingly, the frequency corresponding to  and  (in -ω plot, Fig. 3) matches very well with the one at which Z″–ω exhibits peaks (peak frequency termed as ). Further when temperature increases, the Z″-ω peaks shift monotonically to higher frequencies (not shown).

Temperature dependence of peak frequency corresponding to in-grain and grain boundary response is shown in Fig. 7(a) and (b), respectively. For the high frequency peak (Fig. 7(a)) that corresponds to in-grain response (region III), the  value is found to be higher for LTP-20GC-18 h sample, which suggests faster relaxation process. Further the activation energy values for LTP and LTP-20GC-18 h are comparable in this case. Interestingly, these activation energies also match well with those obtained from the dc conductivity (Fig. 5(a)). Thus, the Z″-ω relaxation truly contributes to the bulk (in-grain) dc conductivity. Besides, the response is faster (as suggested by relatively higher ωZ″ values) in the LTP-glass-ceramics that suggests faster relaxation process in comparison to LTP.

On the other hand, ωZ″ vs temperature for LTP-20GC-18 h (Fig. 7(b)) corresponding to the low frequency peak (region II, grain boundary response) exhibits slightly higher activation energy in comparison to the in-grain values. In case of LTP, two slopes are seen, out of which the lower slope may correspond to poor thermally activated behavior for initial temperatures, thus not considered for analysis. However, at higher temperature, the activation energy (EZ″) value is apparently higher for LTP (0.73 eV) than the corresponding LTP glass-ceramic (0.57 eV). Further, in case of LTP-20GC-18 h, single Arrhenius behavior is noticed that again suggests a single regime of ionic transport. The activation energy for dc conduction (Eσ) for grain boundary transport (Fig. 5(b)) is also comparable to the corresponding EZ″ value. Faster response in this case for LTP-glass-ceramic also suggests that presence of glassy phase plays an important role in transport across grain boundary. Such a response may be evident due to mobile Li+ ions in the glass-ceramic phase.

Interestingly, the frequency dependence of tan δ also exhibits a relaxation process with a peak at  that is also considered as dielectric response (loss) of the sample. Thus, the behavior of tan δ with ω exhibits a relaxation process which is temperature dependent in nature. The peak frequency  monotonically shift to higher temperatures. In Fig. 8(a) and (b), tan δ is plotted as a function of frequency at various temperatures for LTP-18 h and LTP-20GC-18 h, respectively. As apparent, tan δ-ω behavior also exhibits relaxation peaks. In both the cases, the peaks shift monotonically to higher temperatures. The nature of these spectra appears different for both these samples if observed minutely for lower temperatures. In case of LTP-18 h, height of the tan δ peak remains almost constant, whereas, for higher temperatures it gradually increases. Constant value of tan δ for LTP-18 h may be attributed to poor thermally activated behavior at ambient temperatures as suggested previously [43]. Interestingly, in case of LTP-20GC-18 h, the height of the peaks from low temperature itself increases monotonically. This apparently suggests that glass-ceramic composite exhibits a better thermally activated behavior than that of the LTP sample.

From the peaks in tan δ-ω plot, the corresponding frequency of maximum loss , is noted and plotted as a function of temperature in Fig. 9(a). Plot of  versus inverse of temperature gives information about the migration process of defects, and the activation energy () obtained from the plot is attributed to migration of ions through vacancies. Further, the height of tan δ-ω peak i.e. (tan δ)max does exhibit a temperature dependence according to the following relation [44]:

The plot of T. (tan δ)max versus inverse of temperature also exhibits a linear behavior (as shown in Fig. 9(b)) that refers to process of formation of vacancies/point defects in the system. Hence the activation energy of formation of defects (Ef) can also be obtained from the slope of this plot. As mentioned by Kurumada et al. [44], if the ionic transport process is dominated by creation and migration of charge carriers, the sum of activation energies +Ef) should correspond to the predominant conduction mechanism via dielectric relaxation. This has been observed in O2− ion based conducting system La0.9Sr0.1Ga1-xMgxO3-δ (LSGM) [44,45] where the creation and migration of O2− ions dominate the conduction process.

As evident in Fig. 9(a),  value is higher for LTP-20GC-18 h for all temperatures that suggests faster dielectric relaxation process. In addition, higher activation energy also suggests that thermally activated behavior is more prominent in LTP-glass-ceramics. The activation energies obtained from both the plots are mentioned in the figures. As may be noticed, the sum of these values +Ef) is found to be ∼0.90 eV and 0.87 eV for LTP-18 h and LTP-20GC-18 h, respectively. The values are close to each other but quite higher than the corresponding conductivity activation energies (Fig. 5(a) and (b)). This readily suggests that the dielectric relaxation process, that needs higher activation energy, may not be fully responsible for electrical transport.

LTP being a fast ionic solid exhibits a NASICON structure where the Li+ ions occupy the interstitial positions between six phosphate tetrahedra connected by titanium octahedra. Thus, in the presence of electric field, Li+ ions contribute in electrical transport by diffusing through the interstitial sites [4,5] in LTP. Further at grain boundary the free mobile Li+ ions existing in glassy phase facilitate inter-grain transport.

Thus, it may be suggested from the above discussion:
(i)Polarization loss (Z″-ω) behavior actively contributes to electrical transport. The mobile Li+ ions existing in the glassy phase and within the interstitial positions of LTP are the majority charge carriers and contribute to conductivity.

(ii)During migration, these free mobile Li+ ions polarize at glass-LTP grain or electrode-electrolyte interface, but also depolarize quickly, thereby contributing to conductivity.

(iii)There is a possibility of immobile Li+ ions that are trapped in deep potential wells (in the tiny precipitated crystallites of Li2SO4 or in LTP). These do not contribute significantly to the electrical transport as suggested by dielectric loss behavior.

(iv)LTP-glass-ceramics exhibit a single mechanism of in-grain and grain boundary electrical transport for a wide range of temperature, unlike LTP.

(v)Size of LTP crystallites and glass flakes play an important role in electrical transport.

In case of LTP glass-ceramics, since the atomic number of P and S are close, for clarity their presence is shown separately in the elemental distribution (Fig. 11) to avoid overlap. As apparent in Fig. 11(a), P distribution is uniform as it is present in glass as well as LTP. However, Ti is seen to be less dense, though evenly distributed, suggesting that the LTP grains are surrounded by a glassy phase.

In Fig. 11(b), Ti and S are mapped together and it may be noticed that S appears with lesser density but its distribution is uniform. This is possibly due to its low content and its existence in the glassy phase. On the other hand, Ti exhibits a more even distribution with relatively better density. Elemental distribution of oxygen was also obtained and found homogeneous in LTP as well as LTP-20GC-18 h as it exists in both phases. Thus, its mapping is not included in the discussion. These results suggest that the glass-ceramic formation does not lead to any segregation and is indeed homogenous in nature.

To further investigate the electrochemical properties in LTP-18 h and LTP-20GC-18 h, Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) was performed at 100 °C (as shown in Fig. 12 (a) and (b)). These CV scans were obtained using Ag electrodes at a scan speed of 50 mV/s in a range of ±3 V. It was observed that in 20 cycles, trend of CV does not show any significant change except a moderate shift in the peak value. The hysteresis in the response confirms pure non-ohmic behavior and suggests blocking of redox active Li+ ions at the electrode interface. Addition of glass into LTP does not affect the nature of the curve. For both LTP-18 h and LTP-20GC-18 h, a typical electrochemical stability window with respect to blocking Ag electrodes is found to be 1.5 V.

Structural investigations and electrical properties of these novel Li+ ion LTP-GCs reveal interesting results.
(i)LTP based glass-ceramics have been prepared using external dispersion route where glassy phase appears to surround the LTP grains uniformly. XRD patterns and EDS mapping results are in good agreement with the above findings.

(ii)Preparation parameters, viz. sintering and cooling conditions, size of the LTP grains and glassy flakes play a crucial role in improving ionic conductivity. Systematic optimization of various parameters thus resulted into appreciably high in-grain and grain boundary Li+ ion transport in the LTP glass-ceramics (in comparison to host LTP). Enhanced conductivity also compliments homogenous and dense glass-ceramic formation. Impedance spectroscopy investigations suggest that the mobile Li+ ions in the glassy region actively contribute to conductivity.

(iii)Formation of such composites does not affect the electrochemical stability. More investigations are in progress using non-blocking electrodes to test the performance under battery conditions.