NASCION-type materials featuring super ionic conductivity are of considerable interest for energy storage in sodium ion batteries. However, the issue of inherent poor electronic conductivity of these materials represents a fundamental limitation in their utilization as battery electrodes. Here, for the first time, we develop a facile strategy for the synthesis of NASICON-type NaTi2(PO4)3/reduced graphene oxide (NTP-rGO) Na-ion anode materials from three-dimensional (3D) metal–organic frameworks (MOFs). The selected MOF serves as an in situ etching template for the titanium resource, and importantly, endows the materials with structure-directing properties for the self-assembly of graphene oxide (GO) through a one-step solvothermal process. Through the subsequent carbonization, an rGO decorated NTP architecture is obtained, which offers fast electron transfer and improved Na+ ion accessibility to active sites. Benefiting from its unique structural merits, the NTP-rGO exhibits improved sodium storage properties in terms of high capacity, excellent rate performance and good cycling life. We believe that the findings of this work provide new opportunities to design high performance NASICON-type materials for energy storage.

Advanced energy storage technologies are critical for widespread utilization of renewable energy sources.1–3 Although lithium-ion cells have gained great improvement in energy density and life time, they still face scale up challenges as a result of the limited Li resources and high processing cost. Battery chemistries based on intercalation of Na+, K+, Mg2+, and Zn2+ have been widely regarded as alternative candidates because of their abundance and environmental friendliness.4–8 Among the aforementioned battery candidates, sodium ion batteries (SIBs) are particularly promising energy storage devices that could complement or even replace lithium-ion batteries for large-scale applications.9–11 Nevertheless, effects of the larger radius of Na+ (0.102 nm) than that of Li+ (0.069 nm) will likely limit their development, and dictate against their use in stationary energy storage, where the poor Na+ movement and severe volume expansion of the host materials lead to poor rate capability and cycling stability.12,13 Therefore, it is still a vital requirement to develop appropriate electrodes with suitable microstructures and high reversibility for SIBs.

Several theoretical and experimental studies have verified that NASICON-type materials with an open 3D framework can act as outstanding electrode materials with high ionic conductivity and electrochemical stability.14–17 Their general formula is AmB2(XO4)3, where A represents an alkali ion (Li+, Na+, etc.), B is a transition metal ion (V5+, Ti4+, Fe3+, etc.), and X is any one of the following ions: Si4+, P5+, S6+, and Mo6+. AmB2(XO4)3 features two BO6 octahedra and three PO4 tetrahedra connected by corner-sharing. The NASICON-type structure provides abundant ions with intercalation active sites of A (1) and A (2) based on the alkali content (n ≤ 1 or n > 1) and more importantly, allows the easy migration of the ions between A (1) and A (2). Some examples include Na3Fe2(PO4)3,18 Na3V2(PO4)3 19 and NaZr2(PO4)3.20 However, previous attempts are plagued by deficient performance of AmB2(XO4)3 materials due to the intrinsic poor electron transport. A general strategy is to introduce carbon materials in the form of carbon shells, reduced graphene oxide (rGO), carbon nanotubes (CNTs), etc. into NASICON-type structure materials to maximize electrical conductivity.21–23 Among those, two dimensional (2D) rGO with a large surface area, high conductivity, and mechanical and chemical stability is an ideal choice.24,25 Thus, considerable effort has been dedicated to the design and fabrication of AmB2(XO4)3/rGO composites.26 Despite great progress, there are still many issues that must be overcome for further successful advancement in this area. One main issue is the unsatisfactory contact between AmB2(XO4)3 and rGO. Moreover, rGO could undergo agglomeration due to strong intersheet p–p interaction during synthesis, which does not allow high ion accessibility.27 Therefore, developing a new and effective approach for controlled incorporation of rGO into NASICON type materials to overcome their drawbacks is highly desired.

Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), a new class of porous crystalline materials constructed by coordination of metal ions/clusters with polytopic organic ligands, have recently emerged as ideal precursors for the development of electrode materials for energy conversion and storage because of their large surface area, tunable porosity and controllable structures.28–30 To the best of our knowledge, however, the preparation of NASICON type structure materials composited with rGO prepared from MOFs appears unreported. NASICON type NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP) is usually considered as an excellent anode for SIBs because of its low working voltage vs. Na+/Na. Herein, for the first time, we demonstrate the preparation of the NTP-rGO composites by using a titanium-based metal–organic framework (MIL-125) as the precursor from the solvothermal process. The selected MOF serves as an in situ etching template for the titanium resource, and importantly, endows them with structure-directing properties for the self-assembly of graphene oxide (GO). The rGO decorated NTP microspheres are obtained from the subsequent carbonization. This robust architecture not only has electron transport channels to enable high electrical conductivity, but also favors facile sodium-ion pathways that result in fast, reversible de-intercalation/intercalation processes. Furthermore, the assembled microspheres with increasing interlayer distance of NTP-rGO nanocomposites could significantly accommodate the expansion during insertion of Na ions. As a result, NTP-rGO delivers a combination of large capacity (129.2 mA h g−1), high rate performance (77% retention under the 500-fold increase in current densities) and long-term cycling stability (92.0 mA h g−1 retention after 1000 cycles). The proposed strategy is expected to provide other AmB2(XO4)3/rGO materials with a significantly improved performance for energy storage.

The synthesis of the titanium-organic framework (MIL-125) was based on a previous report with some revisions. Typically, 3.0 g terephthalic acid and 1.55 ml titanium(iv) isopropoxide were dissolved in the mixed solution containing 6 ml dried methyl alcohol and 54 ml dimethylformamide. After stirring at room temperature, the mixture was transferred into a 100 ml stainless steel cylinder with a Teflon liner and heated at 150 °C for 24 h. After cooling down, the white product was collected by centrifugation and thoroughly washed with methyl alcohol.

NTP-rGO (also named NTP-rGO-20) was synthesized by the hydrothermal reaction and subsequent annealing treatment. Firstly, a mixture was obtained by adding 20 mg GO and 0.25 ml H3PO4 into 4.25 ml deionized water. Then, 250 mg NaH2PO4·H2O was dissolved in the above mixture, followed by addition of 615 mg MIL-125. The suspension was thereafter poured into a 50 ml Teflon-liner steel autoclave and heated at 150 °C for 2 hours. The resultant product was achieved by centrifugation, thoroughly washed with ethanol and dried at 50 °C overnight. Annealing under a flowing argon atmosphere was performed in a tubular furnace at 700 °C for 4 h, with a ramp rate of 5 °C min−1. After naturally cooling to room temperature, NTP-rGO powder was obtained. The control samples prepared with different GO additive amounts of 10 mg and 30 mg were named NTP-rGO-10 and NTP-rGO-30, while other synthesis conditions were kept the same. Moreover, NTP precursors were synthesized by the hydrothermal reaction of the mixture without GO addition. The samples fabricated with different hydrothermal reaction times of 10 min, 30 min and 4 h were designated as NTP-10 m, NTP-30 m and NTP-4 h. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) shows that the carbon contents of NTP, NTP-rGO-10, NTP-rGO and NTP-rGO-30 are about 1.8 wt%, 4.0 wt%, 4.9 wt% and 6.5 wt%, respectively (Fig. S1†).

The morphologies and microstructures of these samples were first studied with a JEOL JSM-6320F field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM), and a JEOL JEM-ARM200CF transmission electron microscope (TEM). The crystallographic phases were characterized by using a X-Rigaku D/max-γB X-ray diffractometer with 2θ ranging from 10 to 90°. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) studies were conducted with a PHI 5700 ESCA System to study the surface chemical structure composition. The in situ TEM characterization was performed in a JEOL-3010 TEM (3000 kV). The Au rod was mounted on the Nanofactory electrical biasing holder, which was used to dip the NTP materials. A tungsten (W) rod was used to scratch Na metal to obtain fresh Na in the glovebox and then taken out to expose to air for 5 s. It would form the Na2O layer on the surface as the native solid electrolyte. After inserting into the TEM column, the Na/Na2O side was brought into contact with the NTP through piezo control. A bias of −3 V was applied on the nanoparticles versus the Na metal to initiate the sodiation process. Additional details on the in situ TEM studies of battery materials can be found in the previous work.31–34

The electrochemical properties were evaluated at room temperature by sodium half cells assembled in the glovebox. The slurry of the working electrode was prepared by blending a powder mixture consisting of NTP, carbon black and polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) with a mass ratio of 8 : 1 : 1 in some N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP). The homogeneous slurry was spread on a piece of copper foil, followed by being transferred into a vacuum oven at 120 °C for 12 h. The working electrodes were fabricated by cutting the copper foil into disks with a diameter of 15 mm. Coin-type cells (CR2032) were assembled with sodium foil as the counter electrode, glass fiber as the separator and 1 M NaClO4 dissolved in a mixture of ethylene carbonate (EC) and propylene carbonate (PC) in a volume ratio of 1 : 1 as the electrolyte. The specific capacity of electrode materials was calculated from galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) tests and the details are provided in the ESI.† The average loading mass of the active material was about 1.53 mg. The rate performance and cyclic performance were tested using a Neware BTS4000 battery testing system. The data of the cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) were collected by using a CHI 660E electrochemical workstation. CV tests were carried out at a scanning rate of 0.1 mV s−1 within a voltage window of 1.5–3.0 V (vs. Na/Na+). The EIS measurement was performed by using fresh cells from 10 mHz to 100 kHz. ZSim Demo software was used to fit the data.

The NTP precursor was synthesized from MIL-125 via a facile solvothermal process. Schematic illustration (Fig. 1a) combined with time-dependent tests was provided to gain insight into the evolution of the structure. Here, a key innovation is that MIL-125 was used as the self-sacrificing template to prepare the NTP precursor. The elementary composition and phase purity of the MIL-125 were confirmed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) (Fig. S2 and S3†). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (Fig. 1b and c) reveal that MIL-125 has uniform morphology with sizes in the range of 1–2 μm. Furthermore, MIL-125 crystallites feature a large specific surface area of 1083.2 m2 g−1 and a large number of micropores along with a hierarchical pore structure (Fig. S4a and S4b†). This pore size distribution could provide the balance of reaction ion diffusion kinetics and concentration gradient. In this system, the abundant ions play dual roles (etching-like agents and Na+/PO4− sources), which are responsible for the construction of an edge site-enriched network structure based on the template etching and coprecipitation mechanisms.35Fig. 1d–g show the SEM images of the NTP precursor with different reaction times. The precursor nanosheets in a well-retained two-dimensional (2D) morphology with a uniform thickness of ∼15–20 nm can be orderly stacked into microsphere structures under the 2 h reaction time (Fig. 1f and S5†). The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image (Fig. S6a†) further reveals that the restacked nanosheets are assembled into microspheres. For comparison, SEM images of NTP-10 m and NTP-30 m (Fig. 1d and e) show that the less NTP sheets are formed, while a large amount of structural breakdown is visible under the longer reaction time (Fig. 1g). According to the above analysis, the formation mechanism of the NTP microsphere precursor could be described as follows. Under solvothermal conditions, the H+ protons derived from the addition of H3PO4 could break MIL-125 bonds resulting in liberated Ti2+ ions. The protons could carve the crystal consistently along the fixed edge directions. Simultaneously, Na+ and PO4− ions, which continuously inwardly diffuse due to the concentration gradient, react with liberated Ti2+ ions to generate NTP nanoplates on the surface of the framework. As a result, the NTP precursor nanosheets with a similar angle are assembled into microspheres.

The synthesis of the NTP-rGO precursor from MIL-125 is presented in Fig. 2a. GO-anchored NTP could be prepared through an electrostatic attraction process by coassembly of negatively charged GO and positively charged liberated Ti2+ ions on the edge of MIL-125 formed from the template etching process. The TEM images of the NTP-rGO precursor at low magnification (Fig. 2b and S6b†) show the morphology of microspheres, resembling sea urchins, with the particle size ranging from 1–2 μm, which are assembled by the interweaved nanosheets. The magnified TEM images (Fig. 2c and d) reveal that rGO is homogenously assembled into an NTP architecture without obvious aggregation. No unassembled irregular rGO nanosheets can be observed perhaps due to the strong electrostatic attraction, indicating the superiority of such hydrothermal and H+ induced assembly methods based on MIL-125 materials. After subsequent carbonization treatment, it is noted that NTP-rGO shows similar sea urchin-like shapes to the obtained NTP samples (Fig. 2e, S6c and S6d†). The corresponding elemental mappings clearly confirm that C, Na, O, P, and Ti atoms are highly uniformly distributed throughout the sample (Fig. 2h), suggesting the successful synthesis of NTP-rGO. The high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image in Fig. 2f and Fig. S7† displays obvious differences of the morphology for rGO and NTP, in which the interplanar spacings of 0.609, 0.304, 0.424, 0.348 and 0.245 nm correspond to the (012), (024), (110), (202), and (300) facets of NTP, respectively. High-resolution high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) was performed to verify the detailed crystal structure of the NTP material, including the atomic-resolution information about the crystal lattice and the order of the phases (Fig. 2g). The lattice fringe is nearly 4.3 Å corresponding to the interplanar distance of the NTP (110) plane to confirm the crystalline structure.

Fig. 3a shows the powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of the resultant product, where all the characteristic diffraction peaks can be indexed to NTP (JCPDS card no. 33-1296) with an R[3 with combining macron]c space group (167). No diffraction peaks attributed to rGO can be observed, presumably because of the low contents and/or inherent defective structure. Based on Rietveld refinement, the calculated lattice parameters of a and c are 8.4940 Å and 21.8447 Å, respectively, which are close to the previously reported values, suggesting a good crystal structure and high purity (Fig. S8†).36 However, Raman spectra reveal pronounced two characteristic peaks loaded at around 1339 and 1587 cm−1, attributed to the D (disordered carbon) and G (graphitized carbon) bands (Fig. 3b). In general, the D peak is associated with sp3-hybridized carbon and the G peak suggests the vibration in all sp2-band carbon atoms in a two-dimensional hexagonal lattice.37 The D-band and G-band have also been detected in the NTP sample, which perhaps resulted from the residual organic ligands of MIL-125 during the sintering process.38 Furthermore, the lower peak intensity ratio of (ID/IG) indicates the higher degree of graphitization.39 The calculated ID/IG of NTP-rGO (1.05) is lower than that of NTP (1.13), demonstrating that the thermally reduced state of rGO has a greater degree of graphitization resulting in an enhanced electrical conductivity.40

To investigate the main components in NTP-rGO, this sample was further characterized by the XPS. The XPS signal in wide scan survey spectra clarifies the binding environments of Na, Ti, O, P and C elements in the NTP-rGO sample (Fig. S9†), which is in good agreement with the elemental mapping result. An obvious C 1s peak is observed for NTP-rGO at about 284 eV (Fig. 3c), which can be deconvoluted into four components at 283.8, 285.7, 287.4 and 289.1 eV, being coincident with that of oxygen-containing functional groups of C–O, C[double bond, length as m-dash]O and O–C[double bond, length as m-dash]O bonds, respectively. The O 1s peak in Fig. 3d can be resolved into three components centered at 532.8, 531.9, and 530.4 eV. The peak centered at 530.4 eV could be assigned to Ti–O–P, Na–O–P and P[double bond, length as m-dash]O, the peak at 531.9 eV corresponds to O in P–O–H, and the peak at 532.8 is ascribed to the C–O bonds.41 The P 2p XPS spectrum can be deconvoluted into two peaks at 134.7 and 132.9 eV with an area ratio of about 1 to 2 (Fig. 3e), corresponding to binding energies for P 2p1/2 and P 2p3/2. The Ti 2p spectrum is well fitted by two peaks at 465.0 and 459.4 eV, corresponding to the Ti 2p1/2 and Ti 2p3/2 spin-orbit splitting photoelectrons in the Ti4+ chemical states (Fig. 3f). For comparison, the XPS test of NTP was conducted and the obtained result is shown in Fig. S10.† The Ti 2p peak position variation can manifest the proper interactions between rGO and NTP.39 It can be observed that the binding energy of NTP-rGO presents a negative shift of 0.8 eV compared with that of NTP, showing the chemical interaction between the NTP and rGO.42 The rGO sheets serve as excellent electron acceptors; therefore, the close contact between NTP and rGO can provide effective electron transfer channels for NTP-rGO.43

The electrochemical performance of NTP composite electrodes was studied by coin-type half-cell assembly using sodium metal as the counter electrode. The NTP-rGO composites constructed with highly conductive rGO lead to significant improvement in specific capacity and coulombic efficiency (CE). Fig. 4a presents the first cycle of discharge/charge profiles of the two samples at a current density of 0.1 C between 1.5 and 3 V vs. Na/Na+. Although the well-defined, flat and symmetric charge/discharge voltage plateaus are observed in the two electrodes, there is obvious distinction in discharge/charge polarization. Note that the first discharge plateau of the NTP-rGO sample is about 2.11 V, and the corresponding charge plateau is around 2.15 V, resulting in a much smaller polarization of 39 mV than that of NTP (145 mV). Such decreased discharge/charge polarization is attributed to the improved electron conductivity resulting from the unique structure. Thus, the NTP-rGO anode achieves the high first discharge and charge capacities of 133.3 and 129.1 mA h g−1, respectively, corresponding to a CE of 96.8%. It is worth stressing that the CE is obviously higher than that of the previously reported NTP composites (Table S1†).21,44–48

To further explore the influence of the rGO on the electrochemical performance, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was conducted at 0.1 mV s−1 with a voltage range from 1.5 V to 3.0 V (Fig. 4b). A pair of well-defined characteristic redox peaks of the NTP-rGO and NTP samples can be observed, which exhibits the representative Ti3+/Ti4+ redox reaction in every first cycle of the two samples, corresponding to the Na+ de-intercalation/re-intercalation process: NaTi2(PO4)3 + 2Na+ + 2e− ↔ Na3Ti2(PO4)3.49–51 However, obvious distinction in the position and intensity of the peaks can be clearly seen among the samples. The NTP-rGO displays a lower potential interval between the reduction and oxidation peaks (190 mV) compared with the NTP (350 mV), suggesting better reversibility and optimized electrode kinetics in accordance with the discharge/charge curves. Moreover, the higher current response and larger integrated area for NTP-rGO demonstrate the increased capacity, further indicating that the rGO assembling into NTP is responsible for improved battery performance. Because the Na+ insertion/extraction process is a typical diffusion-controlled behavior, the peak current (Ip) of the CV curve can be calculated based on the following formula:52
Ip = 2.69 × 105n3/2ACD1/2V1/2	(1)where n is the number of exchange electrons, A is the active surface of the anode, C is the concentration of Na+ in the anode, V is the scanning rate, and the Na+ diffusion coefficient (D) is proportional to Ip−1/2. According to the order of current, it can be deduced qualitatively that the NTP-rGO anode achieves the highest D value. The result implies that the NTP-rGO composite has the best ability of sodium-ion transmission.

As a proof of the boosted electrochemical behavior for the NTP-rGO electrode, the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed and the Nyquist plots are displayed in Fig. 4c.53 Both the Nyquist plots demonstrate a depressed semicircle in the high frequency range and a steep line in the low frequency region.54 The charge-transfer resistance (Rct) indicates the electronic conductivity of the active material and diffusion capability of the sodium ions at the electrode–electrolyte interface, which is calculated based on the diameter of the semicircle.55 Apparently, the Rct value of the NTP-rGO (177.3 Ω) is far smaller than that of NTP (1157.6 Ω), suggesting that the NTP-rGO structure is advantageous for providing a faster charge transport. On the other hand, the Warburg resistance related to the straight slope corresponds to the Na+ diffusion in the active material (DNa+) and can be calculated using the following equation:56
Except for the constants including the surface area of the electrode (A), the number of electrons per molecule during oxidation (n), the Faraday constant (F), the concentration (C), the gas constant (R) and the absolute temperature (T), the Warburg factor (σ) is related to Zre (Zre ∝ σω−1/2).57Fig. 4d shows the relationship plot between Zre and ω−1/2, which is used to calculate σ and DNa+. According to the order of the σ values for NTP (287.7) < NTP-rGO (23.5), the DNa+ of the NTP-rGO is larger than that of NTP. Furthermore, the battery performance of NTP-rGO composites is highly affected by the added amount of GO in the solvothermal process. Based on the electrochemical tests, the NTP-rGO electrode with 20 mg GO addition is found to exhibit the best battery performance among these electrodes (Fig. S11†).

The NTP-rGO anodes show impressive electrochemical properties in terms of sodium storage. Fig. 5a displays the rate performance of NTP-rGO at various current rates from 0.1 C to 50 C. The reversible discharge capacity is 129.2 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.1 C and retains 99.4 mA h g−1 at 50 C. A comparison of specific capacity and rate performance of the NTP-rGO with the previously reported NTP composite electrode is presented in Fig. S12.† Such values for NTP-rGO exceed those of most previously reported NTP composite materials. Remarkably, after 56 cycles under the different current densities, the discharge capacity can still recover to 128.3 mA h g−1 when the current rate returns to 0.1 C. Compared with the NTP-rGO electrode, the NTP electrode exhibits a poor rate-performance and the discharge capacity is just 95.8 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C. The sharp decline in discharge capacity of NTP results from the unsatisfactory electrical conductivity, which is in accordance with the EIS results. The galvanostatic discharge–charge curves of the NTP-rGO at various current densities are shown in Fig. 5b. It can be clearly observed that flat and symmetric charge/discharge voltage plateaus are distinguishable even if at a high current rate of 50 C, suggesting that the NTP-rGO can rapidly complete the charge/discharge process within several minutes. Furthermore, an additional plateau at around 2.0 V appears under the increasing current density of 20 C due to structural rearrangements caused by the local heating at high current rates.51 This similar phenomenon has been reported in other NASICON type materials.58 Meanwhile, peak current of the NTP-rGO CV curves changes linearly with the increasing scan rates from 0.2 to 0.5 mV s−1 (Fig. 5c), demonstrating the fast, reversible charge storage process. The discharge time of NTP-rGO at different current rates is much longer than that of NTP as shown in Fig. S13.†Fig. 5d displays the CV curves of the NTP-rGO electrode for the initial four cycles at 0.5 mV s−1, indicating remarkable reversibility and overlapping of the curves after the first cycle. To further demonstrate the cycling stability of NTP-rGO, the cell was cycled for 250 cycles at 0.5 C (Fig. 5e). After 250 cycles, the discharge capacity remains at 114.9 mA h g−1, corresponding to 91% capacity retention calculated on the initial capacity. In addition, even after 1000 cycles at a high current density of 10 C, the final discharge capacity is 92.0 mA h g−1 and the capacity fading is just 18% (Fig. S14†). It is noteworthy that the small capacity fading reveals the good stability and reversibility.

To further investigate the variation of the Na+ diffusion coefficient in the NTP-rGO anode, galvanostatic intermittent titration technique (GITT) measurement was performed at 0.1 C (Fig. S15†). The GITT curve for the charge process is shown in Fig. S15a.† And Fig. S15b† presents a single step of the GITT curve. Upon the Fick's second law of diffusion and some relative assumptions and simplifications, the diffusion coefficient of Na+ can be calculated by the following equation:59,60

On the basis of this equation, the DNa+ was calculated from the GITT data during the charge process. The DNa+ values of the NTP-rGO anode are in the range from 10−14 to 10−11 cm2 s−1, which are higher than that of NTP (10−15 to 10−11.5 cm2 s−1) as shown in Fig. S15d.† As indicated by the GITT results, the structure of the NTP-rGO is beneficial for the Na+ diffusion process.

The ex situ XRD technique is an effective means to understand the structure evolution of electrode materials during sodiation/desodiation.62Fig. 6b presents corresponding XRD patterns of NTP-rGO taken upon reduction at points labeled 1–6# in the discharge curve in Fig. 6a. Upon sodium insertion, a new set of peaks appear at 2θ = 20.1°, 23.6°, 32° and 35.2°, which can be well assigned to Na3Ti2(PO4)3.63 These peaks gradually grow in intensity, while other peaks attributed to NaTi2(PO4)3 gradually decrease in intensity and finally disappear at the stage of 6#. The ex situ XRD measurements confirm the existence of NaTi2(PO4)3 and Na3Ti2(PO4)3 in the sodiation process.

The changes of the NTP-rGO material in dynamic morphology can be visualized by the in situ TEM experiments (Fig. 7 and Movie S1,† accelerated 32 times). The in situ TEM images of NTP-rGO were collected at different time points during the sodiation/desodiation process in Fig. 7a–f. No obvious morphology and volume changes are observed, which can be speculated as the stable structure. Similar to the case of the NTP-rGO composite, the NTP also displays the small volume change in the process of sodiation/desodiation (Fig. S16, Movie S2,† accelerated 32 times). In addition, at the end of the sodiation process, Na3Ti2(PO4)3 phase appearance is confirmed according to its diffraction rings and lattice fringes by the SAED pattern (Fig. 7h), compared with the initial NaTi2(PO4)3 material (Fig. 7g), which is in agreement with the ex situ XRD results.

In summary, a facile and cost-effective strategy has been developed to synthesize NASICON type materials based on the MOF template by controlling the solvothermal time. Through the in situ GO self-assembly and subsequent carbonization process, rGO-decorated NASICON type NTP materials have been easily synthesized for the first time. Such architecture combines the advantages of NTP with fast sodium ion diffusion and rGO with high electron transport, which possesses synergistically enhanced electron/ion transport kinetics and enough buffer space for volume expansion. As a result, the NTP-rGO materials exhibit attractive sodium storage properties. Furthermore, this oriented formation process is clearly revealed and could be generalized to involve the use of numerous MOFs. Therefore, our work shows that the MOF with unique characteristics for functionalization is a suitable template for the development of NASICON type structure functional hybrid materials and can spark extensive interest in the exploration of novel electrode materials for constructing high performance energy storage systems.