Sodium mixed metal sulphates have attracted considerable attention, both in terms of mineralogy and more recently due to interest in Na ion containing materials for battery applications. The phase, Na2Mg2(SO4)3, has been previously reported to undergo a phase change to langbeinite at high temperatures, which is interesting given that usually the langbeinite structure is only adopted when large alkali metal ions, e.g. K, Cs, are present. Nevertheless the room temperature structure of this phase has remained elusive, and so in this work, we report a detailed structural study of this system. We show that room temperature Na2Mg2(SO4)3 can only be prepared by quenching from high temperature, with slow cooling leading to phase separation to give the previously unreported systems, Na2Mg(SO4)2 and Na2Mg3(SO4)4. We report the structures of quenched Na2Mg2(SO4)3 (monoclinic, ), as well as Na2Mg(SO4)2 (triclinic, ) and Na2Mg3(SO4)4 (orthorhombic, , detailing their complex structural features. Furthermore, we report a study of the thermal evolution of quenched Na2Mg2(SO4)3 with temperature through variable temperature XRD and Raman studies, which shows a complex series of phase transitions, highlighting why this phase has proven so elusive to characterise previously, and illustrating the need for detailed characterisation of such sulphate systems.

Interest in sodium metal sulphate materials has grown in the last decade as a consequence of interest resulting from the development of new cathode materials for Na ion batteries [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9]. In this area, nasicon and alluaudite-type materials have been attracting considerable interest. The former systems have also been widely investigated for their ionic conductivity following the reports of excellent Na ion conduction in the nasicon-type phosphate-silicates, Na1+xZr2(PO4)3-x(SiO4)x [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16]. In the case of sulphate systems, previous studies have shown that nasicon materials, NaxMgxAl2-x(SO4)3, could be formed for 0 ≤x ≤ 1.0, with ionic conductivity increasing with Na content. The structure of these phases consists of a framework of corner linked Mg/AlO6 and SO4 tetrahedra, with the Na ions occupying cavity sites within this framework. Attempts to increase the Na content above x = 1 led to the appearance of impurities. Nevertheless, the nominal x = 2 phase, Na2Mg2(SO4)3, has been highlighted in the literature, having first been reported as an unknown mineral by Jacobsson et al. [17]. This mineral was found in a sample from the Eldfell volcano eruption, albeit the composition and structure were not confirmed, and so the sample was simply labelled as “mineral EI”. In later work, Balić-Žunić et al. reported the composition of this phase as Na2Mg2(SO4)3 from SEM studies, although they were unable to determine the room temperature structure [18]. Nevertheless, the authors did report interesting changes with temperature; in particular, above 550 °C the phase was observed to transform into the langbeinite structure with cubic space group P213. The results further showed that this high temperature langbeinite-type phase was non-quenchable, i.e. the cubic langbeinite phase could not be obtained at room temperature by either slow or rapid cooling. The langbeinite structure shows some similarities with the structure of nasicon-type systems, in that it too consists of a framework of corner linked MgO6 octahedra and SO4 tetrahedra. However, for langbeinite, the cavity sites tend to be larger and so the structure is favoured by the presence of larger alkali ions such as potassium, caesium, and rubidium. Moreover, these two large cavity sites tend to be fully occupied, giving formulas such as K2Mg2(SO4)3 (the mineral langbeinite itself) [19], [20]. The fact that an apparent langbeinite-type phase is observed for Na2Mg2(SO4)3 at elevated temperatures is therefore interesting, as sodium would normally be considered to be too small for the langbeinite structure, without the presence of additional larger ions to help to stabilise the structure [21], [22].

The aim of this study was therefore to determine the room temperature structure of Na2Mg2(SO4)3 and account for the transformation to the langbeinite structure at elevated temperatures. Through these studies we have shown that the structural changes in this Na2Mg2(SO4)3 system are more complex than initially reported, and we clarify these complexities through single crystal and variable temperature powder X-ray diffraction and Raman spectroscopy studies, in order to provide a detailed understanding of this system. Given the complexities shown, the work suggests that similar more detailed variable temperature structural studies of other mixed metal sulphates are warranted.

Na2Mg2(SO4)3 powder samples were prepared via a dissolution-evaporation route by dissolving stoichiometric amounts of Na2SO4 and MgSO4·7H2O in water with subsequent evaporation to produce the precursor mixture. This precursor mixture was reground and heated in air at 750 °C for 12 h. Two cooling regimes were examined, quenching (removal of the sample from the furnace at 750 °C) and slow cooling in the furnace (1 °C/min). Powder XRD data were collected on a Panalytical Empyrean diffractometer with copper X-ray source in reflection geometry equipped with a Pixcel 2D detector. Variable temperature powder XRD data up to 750 °C were collected on a Bruker D8 advanced diffractometer with copper X-ray source and LynxEye detector in an Anton Paar HTK1200N furnace. Rietveld refinement of powder XRD data was performed using GSAS-II software [23].

Single crystals were prepared by two methods. In the first instance it was found that small crystals could be found in the powder (quenched or slow cooled) samples prepared above. For the second method, crystals were grown via crystallisation from the melt at 900 °C on gold foil with a subsequent cooling rate of 0.2 °C/min in air. Single crystals were mounted on glass fibre and diffraction data were collected on an Agilent SuperNova diffractometer using an Atlas detector. The crystals were kept at 100 K during data collection using an Oxford Cryosystems Cryostream. Due to the large complex triclinic unit cell, data for one single crystal (Na2Mg(SO4)2) sample were collected (at 100 K) by the UK National Crystallography Service [24] on a Rigaku FRE+ diffractometer equipped with rotating anode with VHF Varimax confocal mirrors, an AFC12 goniometer and HyPix 6000 detector. Using Olex2 [25], the structure was solved with the ShelXT [26] structure solution program using Intrinsic Phasing, and refined with the ShelXL [27] refinement package using a least squares approach.

Powder samples were also studied by means of Raman spectroscopy using the 488 nm excitation line of an Ar+ ion laser in a DILOR XY spectrometer with a CCD detector with approximately 2 cm−1 of spectral resolution. The excitation and light collection were made through a 50X microscope objective lens, meaning that a small sample region is analyzed at a time, and sampling was needed in order to confirm the homogeneity of the powder. High temperature Raman measurements were carried out in a LINKAM TS1500V stage up to 750 °C, with the laser output power kept between 20 and 50 mW for measurements out/in the heating stage. Samples were also analyzed by thermal analysis (STA449 F1 Jupiter (Netzsch) TGA/DTA) to 750 °C in N2, heating at a rate of 5 °C/min.

In the preparation of Na2Mg2(SO4)3 powders it was found that depending on the cooling process two different results were obtained. In particular, it was shown that slow cooling in air led to a mixture of two phases (indicating phase separation), while quenching led to single phase Na2Mg2(SO4)3 (Fig. 1). The quenched Na2Mg2(SO4)3 phase was shown to be a new phase, monoclinic (P21) Na2Mg2(SO4)3, from the structural analysis using single crystal data (discussed later).

In contrast to the single phase monoclinic Na2Mg2(SO4)3 obtained on quenching, the slow cooled sample shows a mixture of two phases. Via extraction of single crystals from a slow cooled melt we were able to identify these two phases and determine their crystal structures through single crystal XRD analysis. These two phases were identified as orthorhombic (Pbca) Na2Mg3(SO4)4 and triclinic (P) Na2Mg(SO4)2, both of which have not been previously reported. The results therefore indicate that Na2Mg2(SO4)3 decomposes during the slow cooling process, and so an overall phase scheme for the “Na2Mg2(SO4)3” system can be described as below:

In order to gather further information on the phase changes in this “Na2Mg2(SO4)3” system, variable temperature powder XRD (Fig. 2) studies were performed. These studies showed similar results to those previously reported by Balić-Žunić et al. [18], with the transformation of both the low temperature systems (quenched and slow cooled) into the cubic langbeinite (P213) Na2Mg2(SO4)3 structure at a temperature near 600 °C during the heating stage (Fig. 2).

In the case of the slow cooled decomposed mixture of Na2Mg3(SO4)4 and Na2Mg(SO4)2, we observe a simple reaction between these component phases resulting in the formation of the langbeinite Na2Mg2(SO4)3 phase, starting at 610 °C. This is a slow process, as highlighted by the fact that we can still observe peaks due to the starting phases in the pattern up to 675 °C (Fig. 2a). The cooling stage of the variable temperature data highlights that, on slow cooling, decomposition of the langbeinite-type, Na2Mg2(SO4)3 phase to Na2Mg3(SO4)4 and Na2Mg(SO4)2 occurs at ≈ 525 °C (Fig. 2c).

The variable temperature powder XRD studies on the quenched monoclinic Na2Mg2(SO4)3 phase, showed a different thermal behaviour on heating. This phase first transforms into a cubic langbeinite phase at ≈ 250 °C, and then decomposes at ≈ 350 °C into the Na2Mg3(SO4)4 and Na2Mg(SO4)2 mixture (Fig. 2b). On heating to higher temperature, this Na2Mg3(SO4)4 and Na2Mg(SO4)2 mixture recombines (at ≈ 575 °C) to give cubic langbeinite-type Na2Mg2(SO4)3 again. The whole variable temperature phase transformation process for quenched Na2Mg2(SO4)3 can thus be expressed with the following scheme:

In this case reaction between Na2Mg3(SO4)4 and Na2Mg(SO4)2 occurs completely after reaching 575 °C, a slightly lower temperature than previously for the slow cooled system. The reason for this lower temperature is most likely related to the highly homogeneous distribution of the compounds after phase decomposition of the lower temperature langbeinite phase.

In addition to analysing Na2Mg2(SO4)3 we also managed to synthesise the pure triclinic Na2Mg(SO4)2 phase by slow cooling (1 °C/min) 1:1 mixtures of Na2SO4 and MgSO4 from 650 °C. Interestingly, relatively rapid cooling pf this phase gives a mixture of vantgoffite Na6Mg(SO4)4 and MgSO4. The thermal evolution of this Na2Mg(SO4)2 phase is also interesting (Fig. 3). In particular, high temperature powder XRD suggests that this phase decomposes at ~ 625 °C into a langbeinite phase (Å), and an extra phase which is related to the high temperature form of vantgoffite Na6Mg(SO4)4 (triclinically distorted hexagonal lattice a=5.292(7)Å, b = 7.775(3) Å, c = 5.413(7) Å, α = 89.62(3)°, β = 91.25(5)°, γ = 119.34(3)°). On cooling these two phases recombine to form the original Na2Mg(SO4)2 although slow kinetics leads to incomplete reaction/recombination for samples which are cooled rapidly, and so consequently slow cooling is required to produce pure Na2Mg(SO4)2. These slow kinetics are highlighted in the variable temperature XRD data on cooling, which show that there is a small range of temperatures where all three phases are present.

Fig. 3. Contour plots of variable temperature XRD and DTA curves of Na2Mg(SO4)2 showing a decomposition into langbeinite-type Na2Mg2(SO4)3 and high temperature vantgoffite Na6Mg(SO4)4 at elevated temperature on heating, with a recombination on cooling to give Na2Mg(SO4)2. For the latter, slow kinetics for this process means that there is a small range of temperatures where all three phases are present. Note the difference in temperature between the phase transition in XRD and DTA relates to these slow kinetics and the fact that the latter cooling stage corresponds to a faster rate.

Due to issues with the decomposition of Na2Mg2(SO4)3 into Na2Mg3(SO4)4 and Na2Mg(SO4)2 on slow cooling, it was not possible to grow single crystals of this compound from a slow cooled melt. Nevertheless, we were able to pick a small single crystal of monoclinic Na2Mg2(SO4)3 from the freshly quenched powder.

Single crystals of orthorhombic Na2Mg3(SO4)4 and triclinic Na2Mg(SO4)2 were grown from the melt at 900 °C on gold foil. In the case of the former, a small single crystal of the orthorhombic Na2Mg3(SO4)4 phase was picked from a decomposed slow cooled melt of initial composition Na2Mg2(SO4)3. The triclinic Na2Mg(SO4)2 crystal was grown from a slow cooled melt of the premade pure powder Na2Mg(SO4)2 phase.

Due to the rather large and relatively simple orthorhombic cell, a copper X-ray tube was selected for the data collection on the Na2Mg3(SO4)4 crystal. Data collection for the monoclinic Na2Mg2(SO4)3 single crystal was more complicated because of the chirality of the cell and non-merohedral twinning of the single crystal. To handle this the whole diffraction sphere of the data was collected with a molybdenum X-ray source. No specific restraints were used for structural refinement.

Data collection for the triclinic Na2Mg(SO4)2 phase proved to be a challenging task, given the complexity of the structure and the small size of the single crystal. In this case, collection of the whole diffraction sphere was performed with a molybdenum X-ray source. However, it was found that the crystal structure didn’t produce many strong reflections, which meant that we were unable to collect sufficient amount of data in adequate time on our in-house diffractometer. In order to solve this issue, crystals of the Na2Mg(SO4)2 phase were sent to the UK National Crystallography Service (Southampton, UK) for data collection. For this system, it was found that the standard single crystal growth process is not efficient and during the high temperature synthesis process (complexities of phase formation noted in the variable temperature powder diffraction study) the crystals are formed with some defects. Therefore the data were collected on a non-merohedrally twinned crystal with one significant domain and several much smaller domains. It was found best to treat the main domain as if it was a dataset from a single crystal. This treatment of the data allowed us to successfully solve the structure. The main information for the single crystal experiments and results are shown in Table 1 (the full refined structural parameters are given in Supplementary information).

The quenched sample of Na2Mg2(SO4)3 was shown to be monoclinic with space group P21. The cell is relatively complex and the whole structural pattern becomes clear only on examination of an enlarged supercell. The chiral structure consists of SO4 tetrahedra corner sharing with MgO6 or MgO5 units. The latter MgO5 units are mostly distorted square pyramids, although one in every three units adopts a more trigonal bipyramid arrangement due to local distortions. The distorted square pyramids have a dipole moment with positive base and negative top corner. These MgO5 units are gathered in two types of clusters in the crystal lattice (Fig. 4).

The first type is a cluster of two square pyramids with non-parallel base-facing. These double pyramid clusters, via symmetry, form a surface in the (0 0 2) plane with polarisation vector along the b axis. The second cluster consists of an aggregation of four MgO5 units forming helixes with positive polarisation in the centre directed along the axis of the helix (Fig. 5). The resultant stack of helixes forms a layer in the (0 0 1) plane. In total, the structure consists of alternating parallel layers of helixes and double pyramid clusters. The overall polarisation vectors of both cluster systems are collinear. A close inspection of the MgO5 square pyramids shows that they can also be described as distorted MgO6 octahedra with one of oxygen atoms at a significantly longer distance. This can be illustrated by Fig. 6, which shows the distribution of interatomic distances (with Gaussian fitting) at room temperature surrounding the magnesium. The main peak in the interatomic distances around Mg can be described with a maxima at 2.02 Å corresponding to the expected Mg-O distance. However an extra peak is observed at around 2.3 Å corresponding to the longer bond to the oxygen atom making up the sixth bond to the MgO5 units.

The low temperature phase transition to cubic langbeinite can be explained by the fact that, despite the apparent complex structure of Na2Mg2(SO4)3, in reality this phase is similar to langbeinite in that it requires only a small amount of rotation of the SO4 units in langbeinite to conduct the change of the cell symmetry (monoclinic-cubic). The variable temperature data shows, however, that the structure is unstable at intermediate (≈350-≈600 °C) temperatures, and so it decomposes into the two compounds Na2Mg3(SO4)4 and Na2Mg(SO4)2. This phase decomposition is a complex process and so has relatively slow kinetics, and so the Na2Mg2(SO4)3 phase can be preserved at low temperatures by quenching. It is possible that the decomposition into Na2Mg3(SO4)4 and Na2Mg(SO4)2 might also be avoided on heating by using rapid heating rates.

In order to confirm that the quenched Na2Mg2(SO4)3 powder was indeed monoclinic Na2Mg2(SO4)3, a basic Rietveld refinement was performed using the powder XRD data (using the single crystal structural parameters for monoclinic Na2Mg2(SO4)3). This refinement led to a good fit to the data, thus confirming that the quenched powder was indeed monoclinic Na2Mg2(SO4)3 (Fig. 7).

The single crystal data showed that Na2Mg3(SO4)4 has an orthorhombic cell with space group Pbca. The crystal structure (Fig. 8) consists of SO4 tetrahedra corner sharing with MgO6 or MgO5 units. All the SO4 tetrahedra are relatively undistorted and the average S-O bond length is 1.472 Å. The magnesium atoms in this system occupy three different sites. On the first site, Mg1, magnesium is six-coordinate and forms MgO6 octahedra, where all the Mg-O bonds have similar lengths in the equatorial plane around 2.038 Å, while the axial oxygen atoms are at a slightly longer average distance of 2.128 Å. For the Mg2 site, magnesium is five-coordinate trigonal bipyramidal. The central oxygen triangle is close to being isosceles with dimensions 2.38–2.95–3.07 Å. The distances from Mg2 to O are also relatively similar at 2.02 Å. The third magnesium site, Mg3, is also five-coordinate, but in this case the MgO5 unit forms a square pyramid. All the Mg-O distances in the pyramid are roughly the same. Moreover, the four oxygen torsion angles within the pyramid base do not exceed 2°, i.e. the base surface is fairly flat. The absence of the sixth oxygen leads to a Mg-O dipole, which causes polarisation of the adjacent MgO6 octahedra as illustrated by the longer Mg-Oaxial bond, and results in a long range (3.036 Å) interaction of this axial O with the MgO5 pyramid (Fig. 9).

The overall crystal structure can be considered as layered. It consists of four symmetrical triple-layers of Mg1-Mg2-Mg3 units. Within each triple-layer MgO5 square pyramids are collinear and point in the same positive direction at 42.4° towards the centre of the layer. The dipole vectors of the MgO5 bipyramids alternate with 69.1° difference and therefore the resulting dipole vector is non-zero (Fig. 10). The next triple layer is the exact mirror reflection of the first layer along the plane perpendicular to c axis, beginning with the MgO6 octahedra followed by the MgO5 bipyramids and finishing with the MgO5 square pyramids. The total dipole vector of the first two triple-layers associated with the MgO5 units is non-zero and lies parallel to the b axis. The next two layers are a centrosymmetric reflection of first two. Thus they have the same total dipole vector but with an opposite direction, resulting in the dipole sum over all four layers being equal to zero. This complex structural arrangement thus explains the rather large unit cell parameters for this compound. The differently oriented dipoles in this structure suggest an interesting 3D-landscape of local polarisations, which may be of interest for future dielectric studies.

The calculated bond valence sum (BVS) for the Mg2 and Mg3 sites are close to ideal at + 2.005 and + 1.995 respectively, which explains the stability of these five coordinate units. The BVS for the octahedral Mg1 site is, however, lower than expected: + 1.869, which may be the result of the polarisation caused by the adjacent MgO5 pyramid as highlighted above (Fig. 9).

Examination of Na2Mg3(SO4)4 through VT-XRD experiments shows that unlike Na2Mg2(SO4)3 or Na2Mg(SO4)2, there are no phase transitions with temperature up to 750 °C.

Structure refinement using the single crystal data indicated that the Na2Mg(SO4)2 phase is triclinic with space group P-1. The unit cell mostly consists of SO4 tetrahedra corner linked with MgO6 octahedra, with the sodium ions distributed in the resultant network. The view along the vector perpendicular to the plane (−4 0−5) implies a hexagonal pattern structure similar to that of the Nasicon structure (Fig. 11). However the crystal slice along the (1−3 0) plane perpendicular to (−4 0−5) shows a different pattern. While this has some elements similar to the Nasicon structure, such as two octahedral MgO6 units linked via three tetrahedral SO4 units (Nasicon lantern unit [28])(Fig. 12, red selection), the presence of some Na occupying Mg sites causes deformation and disorder in the cell. In these regions, the structure is more similar to the Na rich Vantgoffite (Na6Mg(SO4)4) phase, where MgO6 units are surrounded by Na ions with interstitial SO4 tetrahedra (Fig. 12, black selection). These areas can be classed as large cavities containing sodium ions, and the sulphate groups are rotationally distorted when surrounded by a large amount of Na ions in these regions. The presence of large disorder of the Na in the structure may suggest that this material might show significant ionic mobility. Furthermore, possible spontaneous polarisation within this structure can be generated via disordering and lowering the symmetry to P1, i.e. if Na ions would tend to occupy the same pole of the large cavities.

Indeed, while we have produced a good solution to the structure with space group P ̅, the symmetry may possibly be lower (P1). Twinning artefacts from the data set may have affected the structure solution, causing the extra visual disorder. Indeed, the presence of large amounts of disorder, as well as mixed Na/Mg occupied sites across the centre of symmetry (pink labelled Mg8), may suggest that the space group is P1 rather than of P ̅. The main difficulty in providing a conclusive description either way is the mixed Na/Mg occupied sites. The scattering factors of these elements are essentially identical and so normally the only way to distinguish them is to compare the bond lengths. However, the large degree of complexity within this structure makes such an analysis impractical, and so we have kept the higher symmetry P ̅ description. In order, to fully distinguish between these two possibilities, a neutron single crystal diffraction study would be required. However this method requires a much larger single crystal which has not been achievable via the current synthesis route.

Further information about the thermal structure evolution of Na2Mg2(SO4)3 was obtained from Raman scattering measurements. Some hydration was observed in the stored samples, as denoted by the presence of a broad band in the 3500 cm−1 region as well as some narrow bands around 1000 cm−1 with variable intensity which did not belong to the proper Na2Mg2(SO4)3 phase. In order to avoid any humidity effect, the samples were thermally treated at 700 °C in the measuring stage under an air flow just before the Raman measurements. Fig. 13 shows the Raman spectrum of dried Na2Mg2(SO4)3, and although an exhaustive mode assignment is out of the scope of the present work, we identify the bands in the 460, 630, 1040 and above 1100 cm−1 regions as corresponding to the ν2 (symmetric bending), ν4 (antisymmetric bending), ν1 (symmetric stretching) and ν3 (antisymmetric stretching) internal modes of the sulphate groups respectively [29]. The nature of these bands is affected by splitting or multiplication effects arising from the local symmetry of S atoms, the number of non-equivalent S sites and correlation effects. The latter are neglected because SO4 tetrahedra are quite far away from each other and so such correlation effects, if present, are expected to be small. Local S symmetry may also break the degeneracy of ν2, ν3 and ν4 bands. However, this effect is absent for the already non-degenerate A1 bands appearing around 1040 cm−1, which are attributed to the SO4 breathing modes. Therefore, at least for these modes, the split-like aspect in the monoclinic phase comes from the occurrence of 18 different crystallographic S sites. Much simpler is the spectrum in the cubic langbeinite phase, where there is a single S site. In accordance to this, a single A1 band is found at high temperature whereas the other bands may be split because of the local S symmetry.

Particularly interesting is the evolution of the Raman spectrum with increasing temperature (Fig. 13). From this evolution, a first phase transition seems to occur at 100 °C, as suggested by the disappearance or coalescence of some bands in all groups of internal modes. This spectrum at 100 °C is remarkably similar to that of lightly (5%) K doped Na2Mg2(SO4)3, which we have shown to adopt an orthorhombic cell related to a heavily distorted langbeinite structure (to be described in a follow up paper on mixed K/Na systems [30], shown in Fig. 14 for reference purposes), which leads us to propose that Na2Mg2(SO4)3 is transforming from monoclinic to orthorhombic symmetry.

The phase change is subtle, which may explain why the transition is not clearly observed in the variable temperature XRD study (Fig. 2). At 290 °C the spectrum transforms to that of the langbeinite phase, and is identical to that of the high temperature phase, allowing for thermal broadening effects. In agreement with the variable temperature XRD data, as temperature increases, the sample decomposes into a mixture of Na2Mg3(SO4)4 and Na2Mg(SO4)2 and the spectrum overlaps those of both phases. Fig. 14 also includes the room temperature and 500 °C spectra of both phases for reference purposes. It is interesting that the decomposition temperature (480 °C) of Na2Mg2(SO4)3 to give Na2Mg3(SO4)4 and Na2Mg(SO4)2 is significantly higher in the Raman measurements than in VTXRD (350 °C). The difference is ascribed to the higher heating rates used in the Raman experiments, which help to retain the langbeinite phase to higher temperatures than in the XRD experiment. Finally, at 600 °C the Na2Mg3(SO4)4 and Na2Mg(SO4)2 phases recombine and the spectrum becomes that of the langbeinite Na2Mg2(SO4)3 phase, which is maintained on fast cooling (20 °C/min) down to 250 °C where it transforms to the orthorhombic phase, recovering the original monoclinic spectrum at room temperature. Once again, the relatively high cooling rates used in the Raman stage help to maintain the langbeinite phase, in this case completely avoiding the decomposition observed on cooling in the variable temperature XRD studies.

This detailed X-ray diffraction and Raman spectroscopy study of the Na2Mg2(SO4)3 system highlights enormous complexities within this system. We show that single phase Na2Mg2(SO4)3 can only be prepared by quenching/rapid cooling from high temperature, as otherwise phase decomposition to give Na2Mg(SO4)2 and Na2Mg3(SO4)4 results. These complexities are highlighted by the changes observed on heating quenched Na2Mg2(SO4)3 to elevated temperatures, with the XRD data showing the following phase transformations:

Moreover, Raman data suggest an additional transformation at ≈ 100 °C to a distorted langbeinite-type phase. Overall the work highlights the interesting observation of the langbeinite structure for Na2Mg2(SO4)3 at elevated temperature, which is unusual given that this structure is only usually formed when larger alkali metal ions are present, and it is likely that the local strain due to the smaller Na in the langbeinite framework is responsible for the complex changes in structure/composition that are observed on heating/cooling. Overall the interesting and complex structural features for these sodium magnesium sulphate systems highlight the need for detailed structural study of other Na mixed metal sulphate systems.