In this study, Sr2MMoO6 (M: Fe, Mg and Ni) were prepared successfully by sol-gel method and used as sensing electrode materials for CeO2-based mixed potential type acetone sensors. Results indicated that the sensor attached with Sr2FeMoO6 sensing electrode exhibited the best sensing characteristic to acetone among all the other sensors in this study, which showed the maximum response value of −147 mV to 100 ppm acetone at 590 °C and the typical 90% response time was about 13 s. The sensitivity of the sensor using Sr2FeMoO6-SE was the largest towards acetone at the range of 5–200 ppm, and the slope of which was −100 mV/decade. Moreover, the sensor could also detect 0.5 ppm acetone with an acceptable value. In addition, the device also exhibited excellent repeatability and humidity stability, good selectivity and stability during 25 days. Besides, the sensing mechanism of the mixed potential type acetone sensor was explained clearly in this study.

Global environmental pollution problems such as haze fog and photochemical smog caused by PM2.5 and high concentration of ozone have occurred frequently, and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are the main precursors leading to the formation of these pollutants [[1], [2], [3], [4]]. Acetone as an important compound of VOC, is emitted into the atmosphere through the use of chemical solvents, industrial emissions, and renovations [5]. Long-term inhalation or exposure to acetone adversely affects human health, generating neurological and respiratory diseases. When the inhaled acetone concentration exceeds 173 ppm, symptoms such as headache, fatigue, and vomiting may occur and in severe cases, the nervous system and internal organs may be damaged [6]. In addition, with the development of economy, diabetes has become the third largest cause of death in industrialized countries. For patients with ketoacidosis, acetone is produced during the oxidative metabolism of glucose to fat, excess acetone in the blood could be excreted through the breath, and the concentration of acetone in exhaled breath of diabetic patients is higher than 1.8 ppm, which is 2–6 times than that of normal people (0.3-0.9 ppm) [7,8]. Therefore, early non-invasive diagnosis of diabetes could be achieved by measuring the concentration of acetone in exhaled breath. In order to meet the real-time monitoring of acetone in the atmosphere, microenvironment and medical diagnostics, the development of low-cost, miniaturized, portable, and high-performance acetone gas sensors is of great significance for real-time and accurate detection of acetone concentrations and early diagnosis of diabetes.

Among a large number of acetone gas sensors, solid electrolyte gas sensors have attracted widespread attention due to the high repeatability, stability and relatively high performance. Zhang et al. fabricated the mixed potential sensor using NiCr2O4 mixed with 30 wt.% NASICON as sensing electrode (SE), which displayed the highest sensitivity of -58 mV/decade to 5–100 ppm acetone at 375 °C compare with the other sensors in the paper [9]. Liu et al. reported four kinds of YSZ-based mixed potential acetone gas sensor attached with different sensing electrode materials [[10], [11], [12], [13]]. The sensor using Zn3V2O8 as sensing electrode showed a response of −69 mV to 100 ppm acetone [10], and the sensor using NiNb2O6-SE sintered at 1000 °C as the sensing electrode exhibited the largest sensitivity to acetone in the concentration range of 5–500 ppm at 650 °C, and the slope was −79 mV/decade [11], then he reported the sensor attached with CdNb2O6-SE to detect sub-ppm acetone, which shows −19 mV/decade to 0.2–10 ppm acetone and the sensor also exhibits rapid response and recovery time towards acetone [12]. In addition, he also developed a highly sensitive acetone sensor based on stabilized zirconia and CdMoO4-SE, which displayed −84 mV/decade to acetone in the range of 5–300 ppm at 625 °C, with good repeatability, selectivity and stability [13]. In recent years, CeO2-based mixed potential sensors gradually attract people's attention due to the high ionic conductivity of doped-CeO2. Zhang et al. investigated mixed-potential NH3 sensor based on Ce0.8Gd0.2O1.9 solid electrolyte with a WO3-sensitive electrode, which was much more sensitive (140.44 mV/decade) than YSZ-based sensor device at 550 °C [14]. Mukundan et al. reported a Pt/Ce0.8Gd0.2O1.9/Au sensor to detect hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide, which was more stable and reproducible compare with the Pt/YSZ/Au sensor at 600 °C [15]. Double perovskites is expressed by the general formula A2BB’O6, where A is usually an alkaline-earth atom (such as Ca, Sr or Ba), B and B’ are transition metal atoms [16]. The electrocatalytic activity of the double perovskite oxide is correlated with either the highly active surfaces or the ability of the B cations to adopt different valency states [17]. Because of the exceptionally high electrical conductivity in reducing conditions, Sr2FeMoO6 seems to be particularly interesting as the candidate anode material for solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) [18]. In addition, the fabrication of Sr2FeMoO6 is simple and repeatable, and Sr2FeMoO6 is easy to adhere to the solid electrolyte. The application of double perovskite oxides in SOFC is widespread, however, there is no report of the application in the field of mixed potential gas sensor. Therefore, the research about CeO2-based mixed potential sensors attached with the double perovskite oxides as sensing electrode materials are feasible.

In this study, Sr2MMoO6 (M: Fe, Mg and Ni) sensing electrode materials were prepared by sol-gel method successfully and used as the SE materials of Ce0.8Gd0.2O1.95-based mixed potential sensor. By comparing the detection range and response values of Sr2MMoO6-SE sensors, Sr2FeMoO6 was determined to be the best sensing electrode material. Sensing characteristics of the sensor attached with Sr2FeMoO6-SE, such as sensitivity, optimum operating temperature, repeatability, selectivity, humidity stability and long-term stability have been studied and the sensing mechanism was also discussed in detail.

A series of Sr2MMoO6 sensing electrode materials were prepared via the sol-gel method [19,20]. Chemical reagents in this experiment were strontium nitrate (Sr(NO3)2), ferric nitrate nonahydrate (Fe(NO3)3·9H2O), magnesium nitrate hexahydrate (Mg(NO3)2·6H2O), nickel nitrate hexahydrate (Ni(NO3)2·6H2O), ammonium molybdate tetrahydrate ((NH4)6Mo7O4·4H2O) and citric acid (CA). All raw powders were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd, and were of analytical grade without any further purification. Take Sr2FeMoO6 for example, the synthetic process was as follows: (1) Sr(NO3)2 aqueous solution, Fe(NO3)3·9H2O aqueous solution, (NH4)6Mo7O4·4H2O aqueous solution and CA aqueous solution were firstly prepared at magnetic stirring condition, respectively. Keeping the molar ratio of metal cations Sr to Fe and Mo was 2:1:1 and the molar ratio of all metal cations (Sr, Fe and Mo) to CA was 1:1. Then a mix solution was obtained by adding the CA solution dropwise to the mixture of the other three solutions and the pH of the solution was adjusted to 9 with ammonia under magnetic stirring. (2) The solution obtained in (1) was stirred in 80 °C water bath until a gel was formed, and then maintained at 150 °C in an electric vacuum drying oven to prepare the amorphous polymeric precursors. (3) The fabricated precursors were finally sintered in 10%H2/N2 at 1000 °C in tube furnace to prepare Sr2FeMoO6 powders. The preparation process of Sr2MgMoO6 was the same as that of Sr2FeMoO6, and Sr2NiMoO6 precursors was sintered in air at 1000 °C in muffle furnace.

Structure studies of the as-synthesized Sr2MMoO6 powders were performed in the range of 10-80° by Rigaku wide-angle X-ray diffractometer (D/max rA, using Cu Kradiation at wave length = 0.1541 nm). Microstructures of the materials were studied by Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) using the JEOL JSM-7500 F microscope. Specific surface area were examined by the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) method using a Micromeritics Gem-ini VII apparatus (Surface Area and Porosity System) to obtain the nitrogen adsorption isotherm.
Sensors in this study are all planar structure, and the structure of the sensor is shown in Fig. 1(a). Doped-CeO2 (Ce0.8Gd0.2O1.95) plate (2 mm × 2 mmsquare, 0.2 mm thickness, provided by Ningbo SOFCMAN Energy Technology Co., Ltd) was used as the soild electrolyte, and the fabrication process of the sensors were as follows [21]: a point-shaped platinum and a narrow stripe-shaped platinum electrode were formed on two ends of the CeO2 plate using a commercial platinum paste (Sino-platinum Metals Co., Ltd) and a small brush, respectively. The narrow stripe-shaped platinum was the reference electrode (RE). Two pieces of platinum wire were pasted on the platinum point and the platinum stripe and sintered at 950 °C for 30 min. Then, the as-synthesized Sr2MMoO6 powders were mixed with a minimum bit of deionized water to form the paste and coated onto the platinum point to form the stripe-shaped sensing electrode (SE). After annealing at 800 °C for 2 h to evaporate the deionized water completely and make the combination of sensing electrode material and CeO2 closely, the CeO2 plate was connected to the Pt heater formed on the Al2O3 substrate by an inorganic binder, which could provide with the required heating temperature to the sensor.

The performance of the as-fabricated sensors was measured by static testing method. Details for test method has been reported in our previous work [22,23]. Pt heater was connected to the linear DC Power Supply (Gwinstek GPD-3303S), and the operating temperature of the sensor was changed by adjusting the current. Electromotive force (V) between the SE and the RE was measured by a digital electrometer (Rigol. DM3054), and recorded by a computer connected to the electrometer. Sensors were placed in the closed container with volume of 1 L until the voltage reaches a steady state, and this voltage was the response signal of sensors in air (Vair). Then, test gas with different concentrations were obtained by diluting acetone vapor with air in the same closed container. After acetone mixed uniformly, the sensor was placed in this container until the response signal reached a stable state, and this value was recorded as the response signal of sensors in test gas (Vtest gas). Finally, put the sensor back into the air for stabilization. The response value of sensor was the difference between test gas and air (ΔV = Vtest gas-Vair).

The current-voltage (polarization) curves of the sensor attached with different SE materials were studied using an electrochemical workstation (CHI650C, Instrument Corporation of Shanghai, China) in 100 ppm acetone at 590 °C. The complex impedance measurements of the sensor utilizing Sr2MMoO6-SE in 100 ppm various gases were measured by an impedance analyzer (Solartron, 1260 and Solartron, 1287) in the range of 0.1 Hz – 1 MHz frequency, and the amplitude of the AC potential signal was fixed at 300 mV in the process of measurements.
In order to verify the crystallographic structure and phase purity of this as-synthesized Sr2MMoO6 powders, X-ray diffraction (XRD) were carried out and the results are shown in Fig. 2, from which, it is clearly that this three kinds of double-perovskite materials (SFMO for Sr2FeMoO6, SMMO for Sr2MgMoO6, SNMO for Sr2NiMoO6) agree well with corresponding standard cards (ICSD #96239, ICSD #154,202 JCPDS #74-2472), and this reveals that purity Sr2MMoO6 powders has synthesized successfully. The SEM images of Sr2MMoO6 powders after final sintering process displayed in Fig. 3(a–c) indicates that loose and porous structure were formed on the surface of all sensing materials, especially on the surface of Sr2FeMoO6, which facilitates the diffusion of acetone gas molecules in the sensing electrode layer and reduces the consumption during the diffusion process. Besides, BET surface areas of the as-synthesized double perovskite oxides were measured and listed in Table 1, the specific surface area of Sr2MMoO6 (M: Fe, Mg, Ni) were 18.10, 14.22, and 4.45 m2/g, respectively, which indicates that SFMO has the highest adsorption capacity due to the highest surface area.
For the purpose of selecting the best sensing electrode material to prepare high-performance and high-sensitivity acetone sensor from the as-synthesized materials, response and recovery transients for the sensors using Sr2MMoO6-SE to different concentrations of acetone at 590 °C are shown in Fig. 4(a). After comparison, the sensor attached with SFMO-SE shows the highest sensing performance to acetone at any concentration in the range of 5–200 ppm among this three kinds of sensors, furthermore, the sensor utilizing SFMO-SE is the only one which could detect 0.5–2 ppm acetone in this study, the response to 0.5 ppm acetone is −2 mV and it is worth noting that this sensor shows a relatively high response value of −147 mV to 100 ppm acetone. Therefore, the following content of this study mainly focuses on the sensing performance of the sensor attached with SFMO-SE.

The response and recovery curve for the sensor to 100 ppm acetone at different operation temperature were measured to explore the optimum operating temperature, relatively results are shown in Fig. 4(b). It is clear that the response value shows a trend of“increase-maximum-decrease” with the increase of temperature, and reached to the highest value at 590 °C. When the operating temperature was less than 590 °C, the activation energy of the electrochemical reaction is insufficient and the electrochemical reaction at triple-phase-boundary (TPB, SE/CeO2/acetone gas) quickly accelerate with the increase of temperature, resulting in the trend of increase for the response value [24]. Above 590 °C, the desorption process of acetone is a dominant factor affecting the performance of the sensor, the amount of acetone adsorbed on the sensing material decreased, leading to the decrease of response with the further increase of operating temperature. In addition, the doped-CeO2 has a relatively high conductivity near 590 °C [21], which is another factor that the sensor exhibited the best performance at 590 °C. Thus, 590 °C was considered to be the optimal operating temperature for the sensor.

Fig. 4(c) shows the dependence of ΔV on the logarithm of acetone concentration for the sensor fabricated with SFMO-SE, and almost a linear relationship between ΔV and the logarithm of concentration towards 5–200 ppm acetone was observed at 590 °C, more noticeable is that the sensitivity of the sensor to 5–200 ppm acetone was up to −100 mV/decade. Comparison of sensing properties of sensors reported in the literature and the sensor attached with SFMO-SE have been listed in Table 2. Clearly, CeO2-based mixed potential type acetone sensor using SFMO-SE displayed a relatively high performance and high sensitivity to 5–200 ppm acetone than sensors reported previously. In addition, the sensor also showed a linear relationship between ΔV and the logarithm of acetone concentration in the range of 0.5–5 ppm, and the slope of which is -10.8 mV/decade. As is shown in Fig. 4(d), the typical 90% response time to 100 ppm acetone of the sensor attached with SFMO-SE were calculated and it is only 13 s which is a quite short response time among the sensors reported.

As shown in Fig. 1(b), when the device exposed to acetone gas atmosphere, the following electrochemical redox reactions (1) and (2) take place at the same time, and form a local cell at TPB of sensing material. When the rates of the two reactions are equal, a dynamic equilibrium is reached and the electric potential on sensing electrode is mixed potential. The potential difference between SE and RE is measured as the sensitive signal.

Sensing signal was decided by the concentration of acetone took part in the electrochemical reaction at TPB and the electrochemical catalytic activity of sensing electrode material. However, during the diffusion in sensing electrode material, a fraction of acetone could react with O2, as reaction (3) shows, and this may cause the decrease of acetone concentration at TPB. From Fig. 3, the loose and porous structure of the as-synthesis materials speeds up the diffusion of acetone gas from sensing electrode materials to TPB and reduces the consumption in the diffusing process, so that more acetone gas molecules could participate in the electrochemical reactions (1) and (2). In order to further explore the reason for the high performance of the sensor attached with SFMO-SE, polarization curves in air + 100 ppm acetone towards the sensors in this study were measured and the results are displayed in Fig. 5. It is obvious that the slope of the polarization curve for the sensor attached with SFMO-SE is the largest, which means that SFMO has the best electrochemical catalytic activity compare with SMMO and SNMO, thus, the sensor using SFMO-SE could have the best sensing performance to acetone and the reaction time arriving to dynamic equilibrium was shortened at the same time.

In addition, the effect of oxygen concentrations on device performance was also investigated in this study, related results are shown in Fig. 6. Fig. 6(a) is the response and recovery curves of the sensor attached with SFMO-SE to 50 ppm acetone at different O2 concentrations, which shows that the response value increases as the decrease of O2 concentration. Fig. 6(b) displayed the dependence of ΔV for the present sensor on the logarithm of oxygen concentrations at 590 °C. It is clear that ΔV was almost positive linear to the logarithm of 2-21Vol.% oxygen concentrations, which is consistent with the mixed potential theory.

The V response of mixed potential type sensor fabricated can be explained quantitatively according to Butler-Volmer equation [35,36]. Current density for the electrochemical reaction (1) and (2) could be presented by the following equations, respectively.

Where,  represents the exchange current density; α is the transfer coefficient; F is the Faraday constant;  is the electrode potential;  is the electrode potential at equilibrium; β represent transfer coefficient, too; R is gas constant and T represent temperature.

In the two equations,  and  are the concentration of O2 and acetone, respectively; B1, B2, m, and n are constants. The potential of sensing electrode was defined as mixed potential (VM) when the electrochemical reaction (1) and (2) reach equilibrium, the current densities of Eqs. (1) and (2) are equal and satisfy  at this time. From the above-obtained Eqs. (1), (2), (3), (4), VM could be expressed by the following Eq. (5):

From Eq. (8) and (9), it can be seen that from the mixed potential mechanism  varies linearly with the logarithm of the concentration of acetone when O2 concentration is a constant, and it also changes linearly with the logarithm of the concentration of O2 when acetone concentration is fixed. From the experiment results shown in Figs. 4(c) and 6 (b), response value of the sensor changed linearly with  or , which is consistent with the theory, and verified that the sensor in this study conformed to the mixed potential mechanism.

Fig. 7 displays the continuous response and recovery transient curves of the sensor to 50 and 100 ppm acetone in eight cycles. It is obvious that the responses for the sensor to 50 and 100 ppm acetone reproduced well in the examined eight-time cycles, which implied that the present sensor displayed good repeatability.

The cross sensitivities for the sensor attached with SFMO-SE to 20 and 100 ppm various gases (such as NO2, ethanol, toluene, etc.) is exhibited in Fig. 8(a). The present sensor performed relative high responses to acetone than most of the other gases. However, the response value for the sensor to 100 ppm ethanol could reach -83.6 mV, therefore, the sensor should be further improved in distinguishing acetone and ethanol to enhance the selectivity. According to related articles reported [[37], [38], [39], [40], [41]], several methods could improve the selectivity of sensor: changing the morphology of sensing electrode material to improve the ability of specific adsorption to acetone, surface modification or doping with noble metals (Pt, Au, Ag, etc.) nanoparticles to the materials to further increase the ability for the sensor to selectively catalyze acetone. In order to explain the mechanism of selectivity to acetone more clearly, complex impedance curves of the sensor attached with SFMO-SE in 100 ppm acetone, ethanol, toluene and formaldehyde are investigated and shown in Fig. 8(b). The resistance at high frequencies is the sensing electrode bulk resistance (including the doped-CeO2 bulk resistance), and the interfacial resistance for the sensor between sensing electrode material and doped-CeO2 given by the resistance value at the intersection of the large semi-arc with the real axis at lower frequencies (around 0.1 Hz) seems to affect the total resistance, as previous reports [42,43]. The interfacial resistance at the lower frequency range for the sensor to 100 ppm acetone is obviously small than that of the other gases, which means that the electrochemical catalytic activity toward acetone was the highest among all the measured gases, and this generated the highest sensing magnitude to acetone.

In the actual application of sensors, humidity in the environment is an important factor affecting the sensor performance, thus, the responses for the present sensor to 100 ppm acetone in the relative humidity range of 10–98% at 590 °C are measured. From the results shown in Fig. 9(a) and (b), compared with the initial value, the change amplitude of the response in 20%, 60% and 98% relative humidity were -6.6%, -16% and -18.4%, respectively, which represents that humidity has little effect on the performance of the sensor. Stability is also an important indicator for evaluating the performance of sensor, hence, the long-term stability of the sensor attached with SFMO-SE was investigated by 25 days of continuous working at the optimum operating temperature. The responses for the sensor to 50 and 100 ppm acetone were measured every other day, and the results were recorded in Fig. 10(a) and (b). The ΔV of the sensor on the nth day and initial day are indicated by ΔVn and ΔV0, respectively, and the change amplitude of the ΔV (ΔVs) was given by the formula ΔVs = [(ΔVn − ΔV0)/ ΔV0 × 100%]. After 25 days measurement, the ΔV of the sensor to 50 and 100 ppm acetone has dropped by 20.8% and 25.3%, respectively. Although the stability of the sensor is not very satisfactory, due to the high initial value of the response, the response values to 50 and 100 ppm acetone was still as high as -95 and −112 mV after 25 days.
In this study, CeO2-based mixed potential type gas sensors using Sr2MMoO6 (M: Fe, Mg, Ni) as sensing electrode materials were fabricated successfully and used for the detection of acetone at 590 °C. Compare to the other two materials, Sr2FeMoO6 was determined as the optimum sensing electrode material for acetone sensor. The sensor attached with SFMO-SE displayed the highest response (−147 mV) to 100 ppm acetone with a rapid response rate and the largest sensitivity (−100 mV/decade) at the range of 5–200 ppm acetone. Moreover the sensor could also detect 500 ppb acetone with an acceptable response (−2 mV). Above all, the sensor also displayed excellent repeatability and humidity stability, good selectivity and stability during 25 days at 590 °C. Based on the above research results, the present sensor could be used as a potential device in the field of monitoring acetone in atmosphere, microenvironment and diagnosing acetone from human breath.