In  this  study,  a  pseudo-layered  Na  super-ionic  conductor  of  Na3V2(PO4)2F3  (NVPF)/C  cathode  for  sodium-ion  batteries  is  prepared  successfully using a facile polyol refluxing process without any impurity phases. The X-ray diffraction and Rietveld refinement results confirm  that NVPF possesses tetragonal NASICON-type lattice with a space group of P42/mnm. In this preparative method, polyol is utilized as a  solvent as well as a carbon source. The presence of nanosized NVPF particles in the carbon network is confirmed by field-emission scanning  electron  microscopy  (FE-SEM)  and  high-resolution  transmission  electron  microscopy  (HR-TEM).  The  existence  of  carbon  is  analyzed  by  Raman scattering and elemental analysis. When applied as a Na-storage material in a potential window of 2.0–4.3 V, the electrode exhibits  two  flat  voltage  plateaus  at  3.7  and  4.2 V  with  an  electrochemically  active  V3+/V4+  redox  couple.  In  addition,  Na3V2(PO4)2F3/C  composite  achieved a retention capacity of ~ 88% even after 1,500 cycles at 15 C. Moreover, at high current densities of 30 and 50 C, Na3V2(PO4)2F3/C  cathode retains the specific discharge capacities of 108.4 and 105.9 mAh·g–1, respectively, revealing the structural stability of the material  prepared through a facile polyol refluxing method.  KEYWORDS  fluorophosphate, Na3V2(PO4)2F3, polyol process, sodium ion batteries, long life stability 

Currently,  lithium-ion  batteries  (LIBs)  are  extensively  used  in  rechargeable batteries because of their high energy storage density  and long cyclic stability, with their advantages contributing to their  successful commercialization in a wide range of applications ranging  from  small  electronic  devices  to  portable  electronic  devices  and  large-scale energy storage systems [1–4]. However, the high cost and  limited  availability  of  lithium  sources  have  led  to  great  concerns  regarding  the  extensive  applications  of  LIBs  because  of  the  low  abundance  and  uneven  distribution  of  lithium  resources  in  the  earth's crust [5]. Therefore, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) have been  considered  as  an  alternative  to  LIBs  because  of  the  abundance  of  raw materials and low cost [6]. Furthermore, sodium and lithium  share  very  similar  chemical  properties  in  many  aspects  as  Na  is  located below Li in the periodic table [7]. Recently, several cathode  materials, such as layered structures (NaxMO2, M = V, Cr, Mn, and  Co) [8, 9], olivine and maricite structures (NaFePO4, NaV1−xCrxPO4F)  [10, 11], and Na super-ionic conductor (NASICON)-type materials  (Na3M2(PO4)3 (M = Ti, Fe, and V) and Na3V2(PO4)3F3) [12], have been  widely studied. Among the various cathode materials, compounds  with a NASICON-type structure have received particular attention  because the three-dimensional (3D) open framework gives rise to  plenty of interstices, allowing for the rapid insertion and extraction  of Na+ with little lattice strain [13].   

Fluorophosphate,  Na3V2(PO4)2F3  (NVPF),  is  known  as  another appealing NASICON-type material, exhibiting attractive intercalation  chemistry for Na ions and/or hybrid ion batteries [13, 14]. NVPF  was first prepared by Meins et al. with a tetragonal crystal structure  in  the  space  group  of  P42/mnm  [15].  The  NVPF  is  built  up  with  [V2O8F3] bioctahedral units alternatively bridged by [PO4] tetrahedral  units, forming an extended 3D framework with large tunnels along  the  [110]  and  [11＿0]  directions,  beneficial  to  Na+  migration.  This  pseudo-layered  NASICON-type  framework  provides  convenient  diffusion pathways for Na ions during charging/discharging. Thus,  this  open  3D  framework  offers  large  interstitial  spaces  for  Na+  accommodation  and  channels  for  the  rapid  transport  of  sodium  ions  and  electrons  throughout  the  lattice.  There  are  two  different  Na sites with an occupancy ratio of 2:1 and both are surrounded by  four oxygen and three fluorine atoms. The fully occupied Na site is  denoted as Na (1), with Na atoms being slightly off-center due to  the repulsion between the two neighboring Na (1) atoms. The other  Na  site  (denoted  as  Na  (2))  is  partially  occupied  because  of  the  short distance (1.87 Å) between the two nearby Na (2) sites. This  partial occupancy leads to structural disorder, which will affect the  local environment of the PO4 ions [13, 16]. 

However, the low intrinsic electrical conductivity of NVPF is a  major issue limiting its extensive application in high-performance  SIBs,  though  the  open  3D  framework  of  the  NASICON-type  structure  is  more  beneficial  for  rapid  Na+  diffusion.  It  is  usually  difficult to realize the high capacity potential of NVPF even at low  rates, because of its intrinsic low electronic conductivity of 10−12 S·cm−1 due to the separation of vanadium atoms by the [PO4] tetrahedral  [17].  To  address  this  issue,  the  preparation  of  carbon-wrapped  phosphate cathode materials has been an effective way to improve  the electronic conductivities of these materials and design nanosized  particles  for  shorter  ion  migration  paths  and  hence  improved  electrochemical  performances.  Few  previous  studies  on  NVPF  confirmed the strategy. Kumar et al. demonstrated an NVPF composite  with different types of carbon, utilized for the influence of carbon  based  NVPF  for  SIBs  [18].  In  addition,  Liu  et  al.  improved  the  rate  capability  and  long-term  cycle  life  through  the  formation  of  carbon-coated  NVPF  nanoparticles  through  a  sol-gel  method,  using citric acid as a carbon source [19]. However, it is difficult to  synthesize  NVPF/C  composite  without  carbon  source  and  the  particle size can only be reduced to nanometer scales through limited  type. Therefore, a new synthesis strategy is timely needed to improve  these properties.   

In this study, we proposed a polyol refluxing method using polyol  as  a  solvent  cum  carbon  source  to  synthesize  highly  crystalline  NVPF/C. This composite was prepared through this facile process,  exhibiting superior performance over the other works reported so  far. Moreover, the electrochemical intercalation regulation is clear  evident from in situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis, reported first  time for NVPF/C composite. The optimized cathode material was  characterized using the XRD, Rietveld refinement, Raman scattering  and electron microscopy techniques. In addition, electron microscopy  studies were conducted to obtain information on the particle size/  morphology and carbon existence. The spherically shaped particles  are  observed  range  from  few  tens  to  hundreds  of  nanometer  in  the  amorphous carbon matrix. When an  electrochemical test was  performed in a voltage range from 2.0 to 4.3 V, the NVPF/C cathode  recovers  close  theoretical  capacity  and  exhibited  a  superior  rate  capability for SIBs   

Na3V2(PO4)2F3  was  prepared  by  the  polyol  refluxing  method  by  taking sodium acetate, vanadium acetylacetonate, phosphoric acid,  and ammonium fluoride at a stoichiometric molar ratio of 3:2:2:3. All  precursors  were  completely  dissolved  in  diethylene  glycol  (DEG).  The solution was refluxed with continuous stirring at 260 °C for 6 h  in a round-bottom flask with a refluxing condenser. The resulting  solution  was  washed  several  times  with  acetone  to  remove  the  polyol solvent and other dissolved organic compounds. The partial  organic  compounds  were  completely  removed  from  the  washed  solution  through  a  filter  with  acetone  and  methanol  and  were  then dried in a vacuum oven at 120 °C for 12 h. The dried powder  was finally heated at 650 °C for 8 h under an argon atmosphere to  achieve crystallization 

In order to characterize the crystal structure of the resulting materials,  synchrotron  XRD  analyses  were  performed  using  the  9B  high resolution powder diffraction beamline of the Pohang Accelerator  Laboratory (PAL), Republic of Korea. The full synchrotron powder  XRD  pattern  was  fitted  using  the  FULLPROF  program  for  high  accuracy. The morphology and size of the material was observed  by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Hitachi  S-4700)  and  high-resolution  transmission  electron  microscopy  (HR-TEM, FEI Tecnai F20). The content of carbon in the material  was  verified  using  Raman  spectroscopy  (NRS-5100,  JASCO)  with    . To  a 532-nm excitation laser at a power density of 10.2 mW·cm–2 estimate the carbon, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed  using SDT Q600 thermobalance (TA Instruments), and elemental  analysis  was  carried  out  using  an  EA-1110  Elemental  Analyzer (ThermoQuest). The in situ XRD measurements were performed at  the beamline 5A MS-XRS, Pohang accelerator laboratory (PAL) using  a MAR345-image plate detector operating at 2.5 GeV with maximum  storage current of 200 mA. 

The  electrochemical  performance  of  the  NVPF/C  was  tested  in  a  CR2032 type coin cell with electrode fabrication. The active material,  Ketjen black and a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) binder mixture  with N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) in a ratio of 80:10:10 was coated  on an aluminum (Al) foil and then dried under vacuum at 120 °C  for 6 h. The completely dried Al foil was compressed with stainless  steel rollers and cut into a circular disk before being used as a working  electrode. The electrodes were prepared with circular dimensions of  16 mm diameter and the mass loading of active materials is about  3.3–3.5 mg.  The  fabricated  electrode  was  assembled  into  CR2032  coin cells with a glass fiber as the separator and sodium metal as the  reference electrode in an Ar-filled glovebox and was aged for 12 h.  A 1:1 mixture of ethylene carbonate (EC) and propylene carbonate  (PC) containing 1 M of NaPF6 with 2% of fluoroethylene carbonate  (FEC) was employed as the electrolyte. The coin cell was measured  by a battery cycler (WBCS 3000, WonATech) in a voltage range of  2.0–4.3 V. 

The facile polyol reflux process for synthesizing NVPF/C material is  illustrated in Fig. 1(a). During the synthesis, NVPF particles are formed  from the dissolved precursor solution through the nucleation and  crystal growth processes [20]. Particularly, when polyol with high  boiling  point  and  viscosity  is  used  as  a  solvent,  it  facilitates  the  solubility  of  inorganic  salts,  strong  tendencies  to  form  chelating  complexes  with  transition  metals,  and  possesses  strong  reducing  capabilities. Because of these unique physicochemical properties, polyols  can  influence  the  kinetics  of  chemical  reactions  and  effectively  control the product morphologies, in addition to serving as useful  solvents/co-solvents in nanomaterial synthesis [21]. Therefore, various  polyols were applied as solvents using a diverse synthetic strategy  including sol-gel, microwave digestion and solvothermal processes  to design the nanosized particles [22–24].   

Here, we performed polyol refluxing process to obtain nanosized NVPF/C materials. In this process, the polyol medium acts not only as a solvent but also as a reducing agent, stabilizer thereby limiting  particle  growth  and  preventing  agglomeration  [25].  Before  heat  treatment  of  the  as-prepared  powder,  thermal  analysis  was  performed  to  predict  the  appropriate  heat  treatment  temperature.  Thermogravimetry/differential  scanning  calorimetry  (TG/DSC)  analysis was conducted from 25 to 900 °C at a rate of 5 °C/min in  an  argon  atmosphere.  Figure  S1  in  the  Electronic  Supplementary  Material (ESM) indicates that the endothermic peak occurs between  550 and 650 °C as a result of DSC, and crystallization is expected  to  occur  in  this  temperature  range.  From  these  results,  post-heat  treatment was performed at 650 °C for 8 h under argon atmosphere.  As shown in Fig. 1(b), the crystalline NVPF/C was investigated by  X-ray powder diffraction analysis. The Rietveld refinement indicates  pure NVPF formation without any impurities. 

All XRD reflections of NVPF were well-indexed as the tetragonal  P42/mnm structure. The crystal structure of NVPF is depicted using  the VESTA software in Fig. 1(c). The structure is composed of pairs  of  corner-shared  (via  one  F  atom)  VO4F2  octahedra;  these  VO4F2  octahedra units are then equatorially connected to the PO4 tetrahedra  units via O atoms [26]. As summarized in Table 1, the calculated  lattice parameters are a = b = 9.0394 Å, c = 10.7534 Å, and V =  878.6663 Å3. Figure 2 represents the morphology and particle size of the synthesized NVPF/C sample by FE-SEM and HR-TEM. As  shown in Fig. 2(a), after the polyol process, the SEM image indicates  that the sizes of the spherically shaped nanoparticles range from  25 to 150 nm. A good number of 20–30 nm size of the particles are  randomly located and mixed with particles of approximately 150 nm  in size. Large particles of 150 nm in size appear to be formed by the  agglomeration of small nanoparticles during synthesis. In addition,  they  are  mixed  with  the  remaining  nanoparticles.  Further,  the  morphology  of  the  particles  appears  non-uniform.  These  features  are also clearly confirmed in the TEM images in Figs. 2(b) and 2(c).  The FE-TEM  image indicates  that various nanosized particles are  dispersed in the amorphous carbon matrix. Particles are difficult  to  observe  but  can  be  seen  in  Fig. 2(c),  which  displays  a  high magnification TEM image. It indicates that particles of 20–30 nm  in size are agglomerated. In addition, the crystallinity of NVPF/C  can be seen through the selected area electron diffraction (SAED)  pattern  in  the  high-magnification  TEM  image  of  NVPF/C.  The  SAED  pattern  in  Fig. 2(d)  shows  the  well-indexed  (002),  (200),  (222), (420) and (324) crystal planes of NVPF/C. Further, Fig. 2(e)  indicates  that  a  carbon  layer  with  a  thickness  of  about  2  nm  is  coated on the surface of the NVPF nanoparticles. Inside the carbon  coated NVPF/C particles, there are lattice fringes with a d-spacing of about 5.35 and 5.49 Å, which is related to the (002) and (111)  plane,  respectively,  of  the  tetragonal  NVPF/C.  The  crystal  planes  identified through the TEM analysis correspond to the XRD pattern.  In addition, to identify the ion distributions, elemental mapping for  the NVPF/C powder was recorded and displayed in Figs. 2(f) and  2(g). All the Na, V, P, O and F elements are uniformly distributed in  the material, while C is nearly dispersed in the whole image, which  suggests that C not only coats the surface of the particles, but also  acts as the matrix to connect different particles.   

Raman spectroscopy and TG analyses were carried out to determine  the presence and nature of carbon in the NVPF/C material, as shown  in Fig. S2 in the ESM. The two broad Raman peaks in Fig. S2(a) in  the ESM around 1,350 and 1,590 cm−1 represent the D and G bands,  respectively. The G peak is derived from the stretching vibration of the  sp2 carbon atom bond, which is the characteristic peak of graphite.  The D peak results from the defect of graphite, which is related  to the disorder of the graphite layer [27]. These two peaks are the  characteristic D band of disordered carbon and G band of graphitic  carbon,  respectively.  The  D  and  G  bands  were  fitted  using  the  Lorentzian  model  and  it  demonstrates  that  the  coatings  mainly  contain sp2-type carbon; hence, the sample exhibits high electronic  conductivity profile [28, 29]. Both peaks clearly indicate the existence  of  disordered  and  graphitic  carbon.  TG  analysis  carried  out  to  determine  the  presence  and  content  of  carbon  in  the  NVPF/C  materials, as shown in Fig. S2(b) in the ESM. The amount of carbon  in the NVPF/C was found to be about 12.9 wt.% by thermal analysis  in an oxygen atmosphere. Furthermore, the elemental analysis result  demonstrated that the amount of carbon in the sample was about  11.7 wt.%. From these results, the NVPF/C synthesized by the polyol  refluxing  process  contains  about  12  wt.%  of  carbon.  In  previous  studies,  NVPF  synthesized  via  other  techniques  have  an  irregular  and large particle size around 500 nm and an amorphous carbon  matrix formed through the carbon source [19, 30, 31]. On the other  hand,  NVPF/C  synthesized  by  this  work  exhibits  spherical  and  uniform particle-size distribution of 100 nm, as confirmed by SEM  studies. Formation of nanometer particles size of NVPF from the  polyol process proceeds by two steps: nucleation and particle growth  [20]. At the nucleation stage, nuclei of NVPF sufficiently combine  together to form an agglomerated nucleus in a given temperature.  In  next  step,  these  agglomerated  nuclei  species  grow  to  form  well dispersed  nanoparticles  of  uniform  particle-size  distribution.  In  addition, the polyol solvent having hydrocarbon chain which provides in  situ  carbon  coated  composite  of  NVPF/C  without  adding  any  additional carbon sources. In contrast, most of the reported works  required  external  carbon  sources  while  synthesizing  NVPF/C  composite. 

Further, NVPF synthesized through the polyol process provides  uniform nanosized particles. This leads to a shorter diffusion path  for sodium ion transport, which can enhance the rate capability  and  power  density.  And  the  small  particle  size  can  have  better  accommodation  of  the  strain  during  sodium  insertion/extraction,  which helps to improve the cycle life. These details can be supported  through  ex  situ  XRD  and  SEM  analyses.  Also,  low  electrical  conductivity can be compensated through the in situ grown carbon  surrounding. When coated by a thin layer of carbon on active particle,  the  coating  supplies  fast  electrons  and  can  be  also  permeable  for  sodium ions from the surrounding electrolyte solution.   

An  electrochemical  test  was  conducted  for  NVPF  cathode  in a voltage range of 2.0–4.3 V for SIBs. Figure 3(a) presents 1st, 100th,  500th,  and  800th  galvanostatic  charge–discharge  profiles  at  1 C  (128.7 mA·g−1). As can be seen in the electrochemical profile, there  are two plateaus at about 3.7 and 4.2 V in the charge–discharge curve  related to the redox reaction of V3+/V4+. Despite the same oxidation  reaction  for  V3+/V4+,  the  difference  in  voltage  between  the  two  sites for the vanadium oxidation reaction is about 0.4–0.5 V in the  composition range of Na1V2(PO4)2F3–Na3V2(PO4)2F3. This signifies  that  two  different  environments  exist  for  Na  ions  in  the  NVPF  structure. Therefore, the Na ions of the Na (2) sites are less stable than  those of the Na (1) sites and thus have a higher chemical potential.  The Na ions at the Na (2) sites can be extracted or inserted at an  earlier stage of charge or later stage of discharge [13, 30]. In other  words, the first redox couple is about 3.7 V which can be attributed  to the process of Na+ insertion into/extraction from the Na (2) sites,  while  the  higher  potential  at  about  4.2  V  is  due  to  the  insertion/  extraction of the second Na+ from the Na (1) sites [13, 32]. However,  the electrochemical charge–discharge profile altered to a three step  reactions mechanism by the presence of Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP), a most  common impurity observed during NVPF synthesize [30, 33, 34]. 

Further,  long-term  cyclability  tests  were  performed  to  confirm  the  cycle  life  of  the  NVPF/C  electrode.  Figure  3(c)  shows  that    the  NVPF  electrode  has  an  87.4%  retention  capacity  even  after    800  cycles  at  1  C.  The  initial  and  final  discharge  capacities  are  110.59 and 96.64 mAh·g−1, respectively, even after a long-term cycle.  In  addition,  the  plateaus  corresponding  to  V3+/V4+  do  not  drop significantly during the cycle. Figure 3(b) shows the galvanostatic  charge–discharge profile at 0.1 C, as well as  the charge–discharge  curve profile according to the increasing current rate (0.1 to 50 C).  The initial discharge capacity at 0.1 C is about 125.5 mAh·g−1 and  almost reaches the theoretical capacity. In addition, when the NVPF/C  undergoes  electrochemical  test  at  1,  3,  5,  10  and  15  C,  it  exhibits      a discharge capacity of 126.6, 124.7, 122.9, 119.1, and 116 mAh·g−1,  respectively. Furthermore, for high current rates of 30 and 50 C,      it  delivers  high  discharge  capacities  of  108.4  and  105.9 mAh·g−1,  respectively. In previous NVPF studies, the nanoparticulate NVPF  connected  to  a  graphene  network  by  the  hydrothermal  method  exhibited a high rate capability of about 114, 113, 110, 105, and      99 mAh·g−1 at current densities of 0.5, 1, 2, 5, and 10 C, respectively  [13]. In addition, NVPF nanoparticles obtained by the sol-gel method  embedded in a mesoporous carbon matrix demonstrated a superior  rate performance (133, 129, 123, 112, 85, and 74 mAh·g−1 at current  density rates of 0.5, 1, 3, 5, 10, and 15 C, respectively) [19]. Compared  to  these  results,  the  nanocrystalline  NVPF/C,  synthesized  by  the  polyol refluxing process, displays high rate performances. 

The progressive high rate performance is clearly represented in  Fig. 3(d). It shows the NVPF/C sample measured at different current  rates with three cycles of each, up to 6,435 mA·g–1 for two complete  sequences. This not only indicates a capacity of 105.9 mAh·g−1 at    50 C at a high current, but also indicates a retention capacity of    128 mAh·g−1  without  severe  loss  of  capacity  when  returning  to    0.1 C. Nevertheless, due to an initial activation, the capacity of 1 C  is little higher than that of 0.1 C in the first C-rate period, which is  absent  in  the  subsequent  period.  In  this  outstanding  performance,  the  NVPF/C  by  the  polyol  refluxing  process  is  expected  to  be  influenced by the carbon network and nanosized particles formed  during the synthesis. The carbon network between particles elevates  the connectivity of the particles, contributes to the improvement in  electronic conductivity, and increases the rate performance. According  to the HR-TEM image in Fig. 2, various nanosized NVPF particles  are  embedded  in  the  carbon  matrix  and  forms  a  network.  Nanostructures  with  such  features  provide  short  ion  path  lengths  for  both  Na+-ion  diffusion  and  electron  transport  in  comparison  to  the  microscale  particles  and  can,  therefore,  enhance  the  charge–  discharge rate performance, and the increased electrode/electrolyte  contact  area  can  also  lead  to  an  enhanced  charge–discharge  rate  because  of  the  nanoscale  size  of  the  particles.  Furthermore,  these  improved properties are evident in the cycle performance at high  current.  The  cycle  performance  at  15  and  30  C  are  displayed  in  Figs. 3(e) and 3(f). The NVPF/C cathodes deliver the initial specific  discharge  capacity  of  120.2  and  114.9 mAh·g−1  at  15  and  30  C, respectively.  The  corresponding  selected  discharge  profiles  were  given in Figs. S3(a) and S3(b) in the ESM. After a prolonged cycle  life span of 1,500 cycles, interestingly, the coulombic efficiency of  cathode maintains 100%, in which 88% of the initial capacity was  retained  at  high  current  rate  of  15  C.  A  sudden  drop  in  capacity  around 900th cycle is due to error caused during the measurement.  Even at a faster rate of 30 C, almost 86% capacity retention can be  achieved after 600 cycles. In addition, the performance at high rates,  especially more than 30 C, are not promising as the electrode is losing  the stability after few hundreds initial cycles. In addition, to confirm  the structural stability, ex situ XRD studies of the NVPF electrode  recovered  after  long-term  cycles  at  different  rates  of  15  and  30  C  were performed. As a result, it was confirmed that the XRD analysis  showed no change in the crystallization even after a long-term cycling  at a high current (Fig. S4 in the ESM). In addition, an ex situ SEM  analysis  was  performed  to  supplement  the  above results (Fig. S5  in  the  ESM).  We  find  that  after  long  term  charge/discharge  cycles,  the uniformity of NVPF nanoparticles are almost retained perfectly  without any morphological alteration of the particle. Due to carbon  supports, an agglomeration like features are highly expected when  compared with powder sample before electrode assembling (Fig. 2 (a)).  In order to understand the structural stability/evolution of NVPF  during electrochemical charge–discharge processes, we carried out the  synchrotron  electrochemical  in  situ  XRD  analysis  and  the  results  are  shown  in  Fig.  4.  The  prepared  NVPF  in  situ  cell  was  initially  charged to 4.3 V and then discharged to 2.0 V at the current density  of 38.49 mA·g−1. It can be seen clearly that the diffraction patterns  of NVPF exhibit a clear change/shift during the charge process and  a complete reversibility is registered while discharging the electrode to  2.0 V. During the Na extraction from Na3V2(PO4)2F3, a set of diffraction  peaks  at  16.12°–16.54°  and  27.87°–28.62°  consistently  overlapped  between them and back their original position during the Na insertion,  revealing  a  reversible  extraction/insertion  of  Na  ions  in  the  given  electrochemical regulation potential window. Further, the observation  of lattice contraction on (222) plane from 32.50° to 32.94° during  charge,  which  infers  a  gradual  change  in  their  lattice  parameters.  This  can  be  reflected  by  measuring  the  changes  in  their  lattice  parameters of NVPF phase through operando in situ XRD analysis.  As shown in Fig. S6 in the ESM, the lattice constant a and c values  are consistently decreased and increased, respectively, during Na  ions extraction from the structure. When Na ions are extracted, the  V ions undergo partial oxidation from +3 to +4 and the corresponding  VO4F2 octahedra unit is shrunk. Thus reduction of the size of VO4F2  octahedra  is  attributed  to  decrease  in  their  lattice  constant—a  values  from  9.0461  to  8.8463  Å  at  the  end  of  charge  state.  This infers props to the average distance between neighbouring oxygen  ions of the VO4F2 octahedra parallel to the ab plane, and this distance  decreases  upon  charging.  However,  the  lattice  constant  c  value  increases even though the reduction of the size of VO4F2 octahedra.  This could be correlated the thickness of the Na layer contribution  to the  lattice constant c.  When Na  ions are extracted from NVPF,  and its consequence of electrostatic repulsion between the anions  (Fluorine and Oxygen) and the Na layer expansion may be noted in  the  lattice  [13].  Thus  the  distance  between  F–F  in  the  Na  layer  increases along the C-axis and the expansion along the same direction  is larger than the contraction of VO4F2, resulting in a slight increase  in the lattice constant c value. The overall unit cell contraction with  a small reversible volume change (~ 3%) was found to be negligible,  when compared with other cathode materials such as Li3V2(PO4)3  (7.8%) and Na3V2(PO4)3 (8.26%) with notable large volume changes.  The change of lattice volume during the electrochemical reaction is  given in Fig. S6(c) in the ESM [32, 35]. The electrochemical reaction  with a negligible volume change of  Na3V2(PO4)2F3 and  Na1V2(PO4)2F3  during charge/discharge processes, improves the cycle performance.  The Ragone plot presents the relationship between specific energy  and power for NVPF electrode materials. The results in Fig. 5 show  that the assembled electrode can deliver a high specific energy of  466.1 Wh·kg−1 at a specific powder of 235.43 W·kg−1. Even at very high  specific power of 23,543.17 W·kg−1, it maintains the specific energy  of 388.65 Wh·kg−1, which is still knowingly better than the previously  reported  NVPF  with  carbon  composite  such  as  NVPF@rGO  (357.39 Wh·kg−1 at 4,631.655 W·kg−1) [13], NVPF@C (206.08 Wh·kg−1  at  14,164.39  W·kg−1)  [19],  and  NVPF@CD  (302.4  Wh·kg−1  at  23,094.12 W·kg−1) [36]. In addition, Table S1 in the ESM provides the  performance  of  various  reported  works  available  in  the  literature.  Based on the reports, the significant features prop the facile preparative  route adopted here. Thus a thin layer of nanosized carbon coating  with improved electron/ion transfer between different sized particles  and  electronic  conductivity  further  facilitates  the  electrolyte  penetration and ion diffusion. Further a thin layer of carbon coated  NVPF  nanoparticles  from  facile  polyol  process  should  contribute  greatly to improve the electrochemical performance. Therefore, the  cell  made  of  NVPF/C  nanocomposite  can  achieve  excellent  long term  cycling  stability,  large  capacity  and  high  rate  capability  for  sodium ion battery with notable specific energy of 388.65 Wh·kg−1  at a given specific power of 23,543.17 W·kg−1. 

In summary, high-performance Na3V2(PO4)2F3/C without impurities  was successfully synthesized by the polyol refluxing process using  diethylene  glycol  solvent.  The  role  of  polyol  in  the  synthesis  is particularly attractive because it acts not only as a solvent but also    as a reducing agent and stabilizer, limiting particle growth and in  situ carbon sources. According to the results of the X-ray powder  diffraction analysis, the structural refinement demonstrates NVPF  formation in the tetragonal space group P42/mnm without an impurity  phase. From the electrochemical performance, NVPF/C exhibits a  discharge  capacity  of  118  mAh·g–1  at  1  C,  close  to  the  theoretical  capacity value. Even at a high current of 6,435 mA·g–1 at 50 C, the  NVPF/C showed a high rate capability with a high discharge capacity  of 105.9 mAh·g–1. The obtained high specific energy of 388.65 Wh·kg–1  at a high specific power of 23,543.17 W·kg–1, reveals the practical  applicability of NVPF/C cathode. The obtained results reveal that this  facile synthesis method is extremely significant in improving the  performance of SIBs. 
