Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) is one of the most promising candidates for use as cathodes in room-temperature sodium ion batteries owing to its high structural stability and rapid Na+ transportation kinetics. The cationic doping of foreign ions at Na or V sites in the NVP lattice has proven to be an effective approach for enhancing the electrochemical performance of NVP. In this work, we present a first-principles density functional theory investigation of the impact of polyanionic boron doping at P sites on the structural and electrochemical behavior of NVP. Our simulation results suggest that B doping considerably increases the structural stability of NVP while shrinking its lattice size to some extent. Since B donates far fewer electrons to connected O atoms, the surrounding V atoms become more positive, causing the operating voltage to increase with B content. However, the reduction in lattice size is not beneficial for the Na+ transportation kinetics. As demonstrated by a search for the transition state, a concerted ion-exchange mechanism is preferred for Na+ transportation, and increased B doping leads to a higher Na+ diffusion barrier. Improvements in electrochemical performance due to B doping see (Hu et al. Adv Sci 3(12):1600112, 2016) appear to originate mainly from the resulting increased electrical conductivity.

Inspired by the rich natural reserves and the cost advantages of sodium, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) are considered to be promising alternative devices for storing electrochemical energy for use in electricity grids and electric vehicles [1, 2]. One of the most important issues in SIB development, particularly for SIBs intended for use at room temperature, is identifying an appropriate Na storage material [3]. A practical Na-intercalative electrode material should possess not only high energy and power density but should also present high structural stability during electrochemical redox as well negligible volume variations upon ion intercalation/deintercalation [4]. To this end, the NASICON family of materials, which show superior Na+ conductivity, have attracted considerable attention in recent decades [5]. Among these, Na3V2(PO4)3 (abbreviated to NVP), which has a rigid three-dimensional rhombohedral skeleton and well-defined ion transportation channels, has emerged as a very promising candidate for use as a cathode in SIBs [6,7,8].

Typically, NVP exhibits very poor electrical conductivity, which has a strongly unfavorable effect on the rate capability and the cyclic stability [9, 10]. Many techniques, including downsizing the particles to the nanoscale [11], coating conductive carbons [12,13,14,15,16,17], and doping with foreign ions [18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26], have been trialed as possible solutions to the poor conductivity of NVP. Among these approaches, ion doping has been cognized as an effective means for tuning the physicochemical properties, enhancing the reversibility, and improving the electrochemical performance of NVP. Most doping strategies in this context have involved the partial substitution of cationic sites (such as Mg [18], Al [19], Mn [20], Cr [21], or Fe [22] at V sites or K [23] at Na sites), while several studies have focused on the substitution of the PO4 by fluorine or oxygen [24,25,26,27,28,29,30,30]. Doping causes the local bonding environments of the Na ions in the NVP framework to change, leading to lattice variations and the Na+ transportation kinetics [23]; in particular, it potentially allows the operating voltage and the reversibility of the NVP to be improved [27,28,29].

Recently, Cui and coworkers [31] reported the substitution of NVP by polyanionic boron [Na3V2(P1 − xBxO4)3] from both experimental and theoretical perspectives. Substitution of PO4 sites by BO4 can lead to significantly enhanced electrochemical performance, which may be attributed to enhanced conductivity, a lower Na+ diffusion barrier, and higher structural stability. Interestingly, although lattice shrinkage and local tetrahedral/octahedral distortion can be observed after B doping, direct diffusion of the two types of Na+ (Na(1) and Na(2) [32]) along channels with regulated routes becomes easier. However, in principle, a shrunk lattice and slightly irregular diffusion channels should not benefit ion transportation. In fact, in very recent work performed by us, we found through first-principles density functional theory calculations that Na+ transportation in the NVP lattice may follow a concerted mechanism in which the Na at Na(1) sites also participates in transportation, considerably decreasing the diffusion barrier [33]. With such a mechanism, expanding the lattice will facilitate the Na+ diffusion kinetics, as in the case of K doping at Na(1) sites [33]. Consequently, we believed that a more systematic elucidation of the physicochemical properties of B-doped NVP would be worthwhile.

We have therefore investigated the impact of polyanionic boron doping on the stability and electrochemical behavior of NVP using first-principles density functional theory calculations. Our results show that both the lattice stability and operating voltage of B-doped NVP increase with the level of doping, while the lattice shrinks. Such shrinkage leads to slower Na+ transportation kinetics in which a concerted Na+ ion exchange mechanism, rather than a direct migration route, would be preferred. Considering that an electrochemical redox process involves the coupling of ion transportation to electron transmission, the improved electrochemical performance reported by Cui et al. [31], particularly in relation to the rate capability, can be largely ascribed to the increased electrical conductivity caused by B doping.

The structure of NVP (containing 18 Na, 12 V, 18 P, and 72 O atoms) was taken from our previous work [33]; this structure (including lattice parameters) was fully relaxed. The voltage during the charge/discharge process was calculated via V=E(Na3VP)−E(Na1VP)−2E(Na)2e,(1) where E(Na3VP), E(Na1VP), and E(Na) represent the total energies (in eV) of Na3V2(PO4)3, Na1V2(PO4)3, and Na in bulk Na, respectively [33,34,35]. The 2e term in the denominator indicates the total charge transferred during the redox process. Considering the well-organized lattice of NVP, we believe that the entropy term does not vary much during redox, so the overall free energies should depend largely on the enthalpy term. Consequently, we used the pure electronic energy to plot energy profiles. The Na diffusion kinetics were evaluated by the nudged-elastic-band (NEB) method, where six intermediate images were generated between the optimized reactant and product structures [36].

All calculations were performed using periodic density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP) [37, 38]. The parameters used in this paper are virtually identical to those used in our previous work [33]. Briefly, the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) [39] exchange-correlation functional in combination with the spin-polarization scheme was employed to describe the electronic structures. A plane-wave basis set with a cutoff energy of 400 eV was introduced to treat the valence electrons, while the projector augmented wave (PAW) method was utilized to deal with the core electrons [40, 41]. Brillouin zone integration was sampled with a 3 × 3 × 2 Monkhorst−Pack k-point mesh [42], which gives approximate predictions with a high k-points scheme (4 × 4 × 3). The convergence threshold for the total energy was set to 10−3 eV for structural optimization. Bader charge analysis was carried out to calculate the atomic charge distribution of the system [43, 44]. These parameters and this setup were successfully used in our previous work and yielded results of sufficient accuracy.

Figure 1 shows the optimized structures of Na3V2(PO4)3 and Na1V2(PO4)3 (denoted Na3VP and Na1VP, respectively, hereafter). As reported in our previous work [33], the NVP unit cell consists of alternating tetrahedral PO4 and octahedral VO6 linked by apical O atoms; this is the backbone of the lattice. Two sites with Na atoms, labeled Na(1) and Na(2), are located within the skeleton of NVP. Generally, the Na atoms at Na(1) sites serve to stabilize the NVP lattice, while the Na atoms at Na(2) sites are involved in the intercalation/deintercalation process [45,46,47,48]. Indeed, the Na(1) sites are embedded between two VO6 octahedrals, with a short Na–O distance of 2.378 Å. In contrast, the Na(2) sites are more exposed, with a relatively long Na–O distance of 2.521 Å. According to Eq. 1, the calculated discharge voltage of pristine NVP is 3.23 V, in good agreement with the corresponding experimental value (3.3 V) [10].

We now focus on the effects of B doping on the lattice properties and operating voltage of NVP, as presented in Fig. 2. Here, two doping rates corresponding to the substitution of one and two P atoms with B atoms, denoted B1-NVP and B2-NVP, respectively, were considered. In the case of B1-NVP, the lattice shrinks slightly, as demonstrated by the decrease in the value of c (by 0.2%, Fig. 2a). Such shrinkage can be ascribed to the smaller size of the B atom than the P atom, which leads to a stronger covalent interaction between B and O, with an average B–O bond length of 1.486 Å (Table 1), which is much shorter than the typical P–O bond length of 1.542 Å. Accordingly, the average bond lengths of P–O, V–O, and Na–O are all slightly shortened, implying that they have been strengthened, which naturally leads to a more stable lattice, as indicated by the increase in cohesive energy from 2550.3 to 2560.2 and 2570.2 kcal/mol, respectively (Fig. 2b). Surprisingly, B doping significantly improves the discharge voltage from 3.23 V to 3.31 V (Fig. 2c), which in fact suggests a higher energy density. As more B atoms are introduced, both the operating voltage and the cohesive energy will continuously increase, while the lattice volume will decrease further. These data suggest that increasing the dopant concentration should improve both the structural stability and the working plateau during discharge.

Bader charge analysis was then conducted to clarify the influence of B doping on the electronic structure of NVP. The calculated charge distributions of NVP, B1-NVP, and B2-NVP are summarized in Table 2. Since B has fewer valence electrons than P, the doping process should be considered positive doping. Indeed, the calculated positive charge on B of +2.248e is much lower than that on P in NVP (+3.584e). This charge deficiency should be compensated by either P or V in B1-NVP and B2-NVP. As shown in Table 2, the charge on P is only slightly increased by the stable state of PO4, as evidenced by the very similar P–O bond lengths seen in Table 1. In contrast, a visible increase in the charge on V is observed upon doping with B, which would enhance the working voltage during charge/discharge, in line with the results presented in Fig. 1c. Figure 3 shows the calculated changes in secondary charge upon B doping. It was found that a V–O–B electronic bridge is established due to strong covalent V–O and B–O interactions. In particular, because of the strong B–O interaction, some of the electrons in the V–O bond are transferred to the B–O bond, leading to a higher oxidation state for the V atoms.

We next focus on the transportation behavior of Na in the lattice upon B doping. In a recent work, we showed that Na migration follows a concerted ion exchange route in which Na ions at the Na(1) and Na(2) sites are involved [33]. However, Cui et al. [31] proposed a Na migration route in which Na ions moved directly from one Na(2) site to an adjacent Na(2) site. Therefore, before studying the impact of B doping on Na migration, it is necessary to figure out which diffusion route is more preferred. Thus, we carefully compared the two possible Na diffusion pathways using our model. Figure 4a and b present the schematic maps of the two possible diffusion routes of Na. For the direct route, the Na ion at the Na(2) site needs to pass through the space between two PO4 tetrahedrons, while the Na ion at the Na(1) site is a bystander. Initially, the Na(2) ion interacts weakly with the surrounding O atoms, with an average Na(2)–O distance of 2.498 Å. At the transition state (Fig. 4c), because the transportation channel is narrow, the distance between Na(2) and the surrounding O is sharply reduced to 2.195 Å, resulting in high structural tension. In addition, strong Coulombic repulsion is observed between Na(2) and Na(1) (which are separated by only 2.853 Å), giving rise to a notable deviation of Na(1) from its original position. As a consequence, direct Na migration is energetically unfavorable, with a calculated activation energy of 16.6 kcal/mol.

In the concerted route, both the Na(2) and Na(1) atoms need to pass through a triangular gate consisting of two VO6 octahedrons. Since the initial and final states are virtually identical to those of the direct route, we only need to focus on the transition state of the concerted route. As shown in Fig. 4d, the two Na atoms are usually located in the center of the triangular gate at the transition state. The calculated Na–O distance of 2.255 Å is longer than it is in the direct route, implying that structural tension should be much lower than in that route. Compared with the direct route, the Na(1)–Na(2) distance is significantly longer (3.117 Å), suggesting that the Coulombic repulsion is also alleviated. As a result, relatively facile Na migration kinetics can be achieved, with a calculated activation barrier of 12.8 kcal/mol (Fig. 4e). Therefore, we can rationally conclude that the concerted ion-exchange route should be the dominant pathway for Na transportation in the NVP lattice, so we focused only on the concerted route in the subsequent study.

When NVP is doped with B, the backbone structures of the B1-NVP and B2-NVP lattices are actually identical to that of NVP, as evidenced by the very similar bond lengths in Table 1. Therefore, Na transportation in either B1-NVP or B2-NVP would follow a similar process to that in NVP, leading to an equivalent transition state configuration, as presented in Fig. 4d. The key geometric parameters of the transition state are summarized in Table 3. The difference in the Na(1)–Na(2) distance between B1-NVP and NVP is virtually negligible, suggesting that B doping does not affect the Coulombic interaction between Na(1) and Na(2). However, the average Na–O distance at the transition state is significantly shorter in B1-NVP (2.246 Å) than in NVP (2.255 Å) due to the lattice shrinkage associated with B doping, implying that the Na migration may be somewhat suppressed. Indeed, the calculated activation energy of 13.7 kcal/mol (Fig. 5) is slightly higher than that of NVP (12.8 kcal/mol). When more B is introduced, the Na–O distance shortens further to 2.245 Å, resulting in a diffusion barrier of 14.2 kcal/mol. Our results suggest that Na transportation is highly correlated with the Na–O distance at the transition state upon B doping. The lattice shrinkage is the main reason for the depressed Na transportation kinetics. Therefore, the reported superior rate performance can mainly be ascribed to the increased electrical conductivity [31] upon B doping.

Herein, we investigated the impact of polyanionic boron doping at P sites on the structural and electrochemical properties of Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) via first-principles density functional theory calculations. The substitution of P atoms by B atoms corresponds to positive doping, and naturally leads to the creation of a V–O–B electronic bridge due to strong V–O and B–O covalent interactions. Such strong correlations lead not only to increased structural stability, as indicated by increased cohesive energy, but also the shrinkage of the lattice. In particular, as B atoms are integrated into the lattice, the oxidation state of the V atoms increases, which explains the higher operating voltages calculated for B-doped NVP. In contrast, the shrunk lattice adversely affects the rate performance to some degree. Our calculations indicate that a concerted ion-exchange mechanism in which Na+ ions at both Na(1) and Na(2) are mobile during transportation along the intrinsic channels of NVP is preferred over the direct migration of Na(2) only, while B doping increases the Na+ diffusion barrier. In addition, all structural properties and the electrochemical performance are qualitatively dependent on the B dopant concentration. Our theoretical results provide insight into the effects of B doping on the properties of NVP, which should prove useful in the development of more efficient polyanionic doping strategies for further improving the electrochemical performance of cathodes based on NVP.