Lithium metal batteries (LMBs) are regarded as the promising candidate for next-generation energy storage devices. Three-dimensional (3D) current collector is one of the effective anode materials for suppressing lithium (Li) dendrite and accommodating the variation of Li volume during the cycling. However, since the protruding 3D skeleton will also pierce the separator and cause catastrophic battery failure, the safety risk of short circuit still exists. The use of ceramic solid-state electrolyte (SSE) with high mechanical stability on the 3D anode can eliminate the danger of short circuit caused by Li dendrites or 3D skeleton. Nevertheless, in solid-state batteries, 3D anodes with highly electroactive areas suffer from considerable interface reactions and high interface impedance. Herein, we demonstrate a facile in-situ polymerized sealing (IPS) strategy to reconcile 3D anodes with ceramic SSE. The optimized battery configuration consists of 3D anode, in-situ polymerized interlayer and NASICON-type ceramic electrolyte of Li1.3Ti1.7Al0.3(PO4)3 (LATP). The in-situ polymerized interlayer not only significantly reduces the interfacial resistance between the 3D anode and LATP, but also encapsulates liquid electrolyte within the electrode for indispensable interface reactions and rapid Li+ transport. Resultingly, the symmetric cell of 3D Li | LATP | 3D Li delivered a long cycle life of 500 hours. Moreover, this unique configuration can be paired with a LiNi0.6Co0.2Mn0.2O2 cathode and operate at room temperature, which exhibits excellent performances. This work provides a practical strategy for building safe and durable high-energy solid-state LMBs suitable for next-generation energy storage devices. 
Over the past decade, portable electronic devices have been developing at a rapid pace, which spurred the revolution of lithium-ion batteries (LIBs).[1-5] However, the limited energy density of LIBs employing graphite anodes is the bottleneck to meet the ever-growing demand of high-energy-density devices.[6, 7] Lithium metal batteries (LMBs) using lithium (Li) as anodes with extremely high specific capacity (3860 mA h g−1) and the lowest redox potential (−3.04 V vs standard hydrogen electrode), is considered as a promising candidate for the next-generation high-energy storage devices.[8-11] Nevertheless, serious safety hazards caused by uncontrollable dendrite growth and poor electrical performance are the main stumbling blocks that hinder the commercialization of LMBs.[12, 13] Since lithium ions (Li+) tend to concentrate on the deposition sites of uneven surfaces, a large charging current or space-charge layer results in the formation of Li dendrite.[14-16] Many efforts have been devoted to addressing that issue.[17, 18] Increasing modulus of the electrolyte is an effective way to inhibit formation of Li dendrite.[19-21] Another feasible approach is to modify the current collector and provide a lithiophilic electrode with high conductivity.[22-24] In addition, Li anodes suffer from drastic change in volume during the Li plating/stripping process, which is regarded as one of the main cause for the low Coulombic efficiency (CE) of LMBs.[25-27] Constructing a three-dimensional (3D) host with porous framework to accommodate the volume change of anode is one effective way. [28] On basis of that, a variety of 3D structures have been designed to host Li to form composite anodes, such as carbon fiber[29], graphene[30, 31], Cu foam[32] and 3D Cu current collector[33, 34]. Among them, 3D Cu current collector is the most competitive one. Our group proposed a 3D Cu foil current collector with a submicron skeleton which could accommodate Li deposition inside the porous nanostructure and suppressed the growth of Li dendrites. Li anode in the 3D current collector can run for 600 hours without short circuit and exhibited low voltage hysteresis.[33] Nevertheless, the protruding structure of Cu brunches may pose a risk of short-circuiting the battery by piercing the separator, which limits practical applications.[35] Compared with easily punctured commercial separators, ceramic solid-state electrolyte (SSE) with high Li+ conductivity and high modulus can eliminate the safety hazards caused by battery short circuit.[36-39] Unfortunately, recent research has proved that lithium dendrite would penetrate through the inorganic SSE.[40] Besides, the large interfacial resistance caused by poor contact between the SSE and anode is one major challenge for 3D Li-based solid-state batteries, which will lead to sluggish Li+ transport and degradation of batteries.[41] To solve that challenge, a poly(ethylene oxide) coating layer was introduced between the 3D anode and SSE, which exhibited reduced interface impedance.[42] However, a full battery built with LiFePO4 (LFP) cathode can only deliver an output voltage of 3.4 V at a high operating temperature of 90 °C, which hinders the commercial process for high-energy-density solid-state batteries. In addition, another big challenge is associated with the considerable interface reactions owing to the increased electroactive areas of the 3D anode. The reactions on anode surface (for example, the formation of solid electrolyte interphase (SEI)), will continuously consume Li and dry up electrolyte, leading to high interfacial resistance of cells.[28] Consequently, it is highly desirable to design a “dual-functional” interlayer between the 3D anode and SSE, which can reduce the interfacial resistance while retaining sufficient liquid electrolyte to support the formation of SEI. More importantly, the strategy is expected to make cells suitable for high-energy-density cathodes and operate at room temperature. 
Herein, we propose a facile strategy to reconcile the 3D Li anode with ceramic SSE by in-situ polymerized sealing (IPS). The constructed solid-stated battery contains 3D anode, in-situ polymerized interlayer and solid-state NASICON-type Li1.3Ti1.7Al0.3(PO4)3 (LATP) electrolyte. The interlayer in-situ polymerized on the LATP not only serves as a buffer to reduce interfacial resistance, but also acts as a reservoir for sealing liquid electrolyte in the 3D anode to ensure essential SEI formations. The symmetric cell with this polymer-sealed 3D anode and LATP SSE delivered a long cycle life of 500 hours at room temperature. Furthermore, the full cell of solid-state batteries assembled with LiNi0.6Co0.2Mn0.2O2 (NCM 622) cathodes can operate at room temperature and exhibit superior cyclability as well as high-rate properties. 
The synthesis of 3D Cu current collectors has been reported in our previous work. [33] Briefly, a piece of Cu foil was cleaned by diluted hydrochloric acid and deionized water to expose the fresh Cu. Then, the prepared foil was immersed in an ammonia solution (5 wt%) for 36 hours in semi-closed container. As the solution became indigo, the surface of the foil turned blue, and branched Cu (OH)2 grew on it. After being washed and dried to remove residual solution, the foil was heated at 180 °C for 4 hours, and then oxidized to black. Finally, it was reduced at 400 °C for 10 hours in H2/Ar mixed flow to get the 3D porous Cu foil with color of dark red. The LATP ceramic powder was prepared by sol-gel method.[43] Polyvinyl pyrrolidone (Sigma-Aldrich) and alcohol were mixed in a weight ratio of 3: 16, half of which was added with tetrabutyl titanate (Acros) as titanium source. Lithium nitrate and aluminum nitrate were added into the other half solution as lithium and aluminum sources. Lithium and aluminum sources were added into titanium source slowly, increasing pH of the solution by adding ammonium dihydrogen phosphate and ammonia. After evaporating the solvent and drying, LATP powder was obtained at 850 °C through temperature-programmed route. The pristine LATP powder was ball milled and pressed into disks with 13 mm in diameter at 10 MPa with a metal mold. After heating, LATP ceramic disks were sanded to 250 µm thickness with sandpaper grit 500, 1000, 2000 in turn. 3D Cu collector and LATP ceramic electrolyte were integrated via an in-situ interlayer polymerization[44]. The entire manufacturing process took place in a glove box filled with Ar. 20 µl of saturated solution of LiPF6 in dimethoxy ethane (DME) was coated on the surface of LATP disk and allowed to stand for 2 hours after the solvent had evaporated. 1 mol L−1 LiTFSI (Sigma-Aldrich) was dissolved in mix solvent of 1, 3-dioxolane/dimethoxy ethane (DOL/DME, 9: 1, v/v, Aladdin), which was prepared as liquid electrolyte and precursor. Then, 30 µl of electrolyte was added to the 3D Cu current collector, covering a piece of ceramic LATP electrolyte, which was coated with a layer of LiPF6 initiator. After 6 hours, the liquid precursor being in contact with LATP polymerized at room temperature. 
Morphologies of the surface and cross-section of 3D porous Cu foil and LATP ceramic electrolytes were characterized by a field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Hitachi Inc. S−4800). Energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) mapping were investigated using scanning electron microscopy (JSM-6701F) with energy dispersive spectrometer. Samples were taped on customized sample holders by carbon conductive adhesive. Power X-ray diffractometer (XRD) pattern of LATP was obtained by Rigaku D/max-2500 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (data was collected at a scanning rate of 3° min−1 in the range of 10 ~ 85°). 
All electrochemical measurements were conducted in CR2032-type coin cells which were assembled in an Ar-filled glove box and tested at 25 °C. The 3D Cu was first assembled into a half cell using Li foil as the counter electrode. After plating 4 mA h cm−2 of Li into the 3D current collector, the anode was extracted and reassembled into a 3D Li | LATP | 3D Li symmetrical cell to examine the Li plating/stripping behavior. It is worth noting that after attaching the 3D Li electrode to the initiator-coated LATP, an interfacial polymer layer was formed. After pressurizing at 3.5 MPa for 1 minute and standing at room temperature for 6 hours, long-term galvanostatic discharge/charge (GDC) test was conducted on the cells. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) measurement was performed using Autolab workstation in the frequency range of 0.1 to 100000 Hz at different temperature. GDC voltage profile was conducted on the LAND system (LANHE Inc. CT2001A). For a full battery with 3D Cu-based Li-metal anode, NCM 622 was employed as the cathode material. The cathode is prepared by doctor-blade method. Active materials, super P and polyvinylidene difluoride binder were mixed with a weight ratio of 8: 1: 1 in N-methyl-2 pyrrolidone solvent and the slurry of cathode material was acquired. After coated on the aluminum (Al) foil, the slurry was exposed in dry air with dew point temperature below -70 °C. When the surface was dry, Al foil with the cathode were moved to in a vacuum oven at 80 °C for 24 hours to evaporate the solvent. The Al foil was punched into plates with 10 mm in diameter. 
Figure 1 schematically shows the fabrication procedure of the solid-state battery based on the 3D anode and LATP. In a typical procedure, we first synthesized the 3D Cu current collector by plane-etching method according to our previous work (Figure S1a and S1b). The 3D Cu current collector we used can provide about 61.8% of the volume to accommodate the lithium metal.[33] From the SEM image (Figure S2), Cu fibers were observed on the surface of planar Cu to construct a 3D structure. After Li electrodepositing in, a 3D Cu/Li composite anode was constructed. LATP ceramic disk with 12 mm in diameter and 250 µm thickness (Figure S3a) was used as solid electrolyte in the battery. As we know, 3D Cu/Li and LATP are both solid-state components with a rather rough interface. The direct contact with each other would lead to an enlarged interfacial resistance of cells. On the other hand, high specific surface area of the 3D anode will induce a large amount of interfacial reactions, which will lead to the rapid depletion of the electrolyte, thus exacerbating the interfacial problems. To simultaneously resolve the above problems, a polymer interlayer was in-situ constructed once the initiator-coated LATP touched the 3D Cu filled with electrolyte precursors. To visually observe this polymer layer, a simulation experiment was carried out on a transparent glass slide (Figure S4a). Clearly, after 6 hours of polymerization, a polymer interlayer forms at the interfaces between 3D Cu and LATP, leaving liquid electrolyte remained inside 3D Cu. (Figure S4b). The polymerization mechanism involved is revealed as follows. When in contact with the liquid electrolyte, LiPF6 covered on the LATP disk will dissolve. By the effect of dissolution heat, LiPF6 partially decomposed and released a small amount of gaseous phosphorus pentafluoride (PF5), which acted as the initiator of the ring-opening polymerization. As the chain grows, the electrolyte becomes viscous and the diffusion of LiPF6 becomes sluggish. To elucidate the structure details of the polymer, FTIR and Raman spectrum was employed. As revealed in Figure S5a, the characteristic peaks at 1100 cm-1 and 2900 cm-1 are assigned to -C-O- stretching vibration and -CH2- stretching vibration, respectively. In Figure S5b, the Raman shift at 2967 cm-1 and 2890 cm-1,1484 cm-1 and 1343 cm-1 can be assigned to -CH2-, and 856 cm-1 is assigned to -CH2-O-CH2-. The above characterization analysis confirms the structure of –CH2–O–CH2–CH2-O– as the repeating unit in the resultant polymer. The thermal stability of the polymer was examined by DSC (Figure S6a and b) and TGA (Figure S6c). As shown in Figure S6a and b, the melting point of polymer framework can reach as high as 50 ºC. When the temperature reaches 50 ºC, the polymer starts to soften slightly. It is noteworthy that as the temperature is recovered to 30 ºC, the polymer restores its stretchy characteristics, which indicates that the polymer can withstand large temperature variations. In Figure S6c, weight of the polymer remains constant before 100 ºC, confirming that there is no any residual solvent in the polymer. The polymer starts to decompose at 240 ºC. During the decomposition process, the polymer chains continue to break into small molecules. At 400 ºC, the polymer completely decomposes. Such outstanding thermal stabilities of the polymer are crucial for the safety and electrochemical improvement of solid-state metal Li batteries. From SEM images shown in Figure 2a, the surface of 3D Cu became smooth after the in-situ polymerization, which confirmed that most of the branched Cu was coated with a polymer layer. Figure 2b showed that LATP kept in close contact with anode which was filled with electrolyte. In Figure S7, the Li+ conductivity of pristine LATP was measured to be 1.58*10-4 S cm-1, while IPS modified LATP exhibits a much enhanced Li+ conductivity of 2.02*10-3 S cm-1. The reason may be that during the test for the pristine LATP electrolyte, the stainless-steel plates directly contacts the LATP. The poor contact between the two solid materials would give rise to high interfacial resistance. As for IPS modified LATP, the in-situ polymerized interlayer between LATP and the stainless-steel plates provided channels for Li+ transport and increases the contact area of the two solid surfaces. (Figure S8) This thin IPS polymer between LATP and 3D anode not only serves as an ion transport interlayer that facilitates rapid Li+ transport, but also acts as a sealing layer that maintains the liquid electrolyte within the 3D anode for essential interface reactions. 
According to the EDS mapping in Figure 2g, Al is from the Al foil of the cathode, Cu is from the 3D Cu current collector, Ti is from the LATP ceramic electrolyte showed the location of the three part of the cell. S is from the LiTFSI in the liquid electrolyte distributed between the cathode and the LATP, the 3D Cu current collector and the LATP and in the 3D Cu current collector, indicating the polymer sealing layer uniformly covered on the surface of LATP electrolyte. Notably, the elemental F from the initiator concentrated on the surface of LATP, indicating that the polymer was exclusively solidified between the electrodes and LATP. All these results verified the feasibility of using an in-situ polymerization layer to encapsulate liquid electrolyte within 3D Cu. 
The Li plating/stripping process was investigated to find the morphology evolution of the 3D Li anode with LATP constructed by IPS method. The morphology of the anode under different discharge/charge state is displayed in Figure 3b-e. As the Li amounts in the 3D Cu foil increased, the metal Li preferably grew along the Cu skeleton, and then gradually filled the internal pores of the 3D Cu, and finally formed a flat surface. No Li dendrites were found from the SEM images, confirming that the battery short circuit caused by lithium dendrites can be avoided. The metal Li could also be stripped reversibly from the 3D Cu host. As shown in Figure 3e, during the stripping process, Li gradually stripped from the surface of the 3D framework, and the integrity of the Cu framework was well maintained. 
To clarify the significant role of the in-situ polymerized interlayer for the 3D anode, we evaluate the cycling stability of liquid electrolyte-sealed 3D Cu/Li using symmetric cells. A 3D Li anode containing the same amount of liquid electrolyte (without the polymerization process) was used for comparison. Cells were cycled at the current density of 0.1 mA cm−2. Figure 4a exhibits the cycling profiles of those symmetric cells. The cells without the polymer layer initially showed a relatively small polarization at the beginning. However, after 70 hours, it was found that the voltage hysteresis gradually increased, which indicated that there was a large kinetic barrier during the Li plating/stripping process. The main reason for the increased hysteresis may be that the large electroactive area of the 3D Li anode will cause a large number of interface reactions (such as SEI formation), which quickly depletes the electrolyte, thereby increasing the interface resistance and deteriorating the cycle.[45] Whereas for the symmetric cells employing IPS process, the anodes showed a stable Li plating/stripping voltage of about 50 mV after the first several cycles and stably cycles for 300 hours. The improvement could be attributed to the in-situ solidified interlayer that greatly reduced interfacial resistance. In addition, by encapsulating liquid electrolyte in 3D Li anodes, the essential electrochemical interface reactions could be maintained throughout the cycle. In order to verify the unique and indispensable function of the 3D anode in this battery configuration, symmetrical batteries composed of planar Cu (2D Li) and 3D Cu current collector (3D Li) was fabricated by the IPS method to evaluate the Li plating/stripping electrochemical behavior and cyclic stability. It should be noted that even if the polymer was solidified and formed on the surface of the planar Cu by IPS method, the liquid electrolyte cannot be completely sealed therein. 2 mA h cm−2 of Li was first deposited on the 2D/3D Cu. Cells were cycled at the current density of 0.05 mA cm−2. From the GDC voltage profiles shown in Figure 4b, 2D Li exhibited an irregular fluctuating voltage hysteresis over cycling. After 570 cycles, the voltage hysteresis abruptly dropped to about 25 mV as a result of the short circuit induced by Li dendrite. In comparison, 3D Li exhibited a much lower overpotential and smaller voltage fluctuations. Even after cycling for 500 hours, no signs of short circuit were observed. To elucidate the cycling stability of IPS modified 3D Li at a larger current density and capacity, we test the Li symmetric cells at 0.1 mA cm-2, 1.2 mA h cm-2 with only 20% excess Li. [10] As shown in Figure S9, the Li symmetric cells can be steadily cycled up to 200 hours with a low voltage hysteresis of 300 mV. These results reveal that 3D Cu framework could effectively reduce current and promote homogenous Li+ flux distribution, thereby inhibiting the growth of Li dendrite[46]. EIS was employed to evaluate the interfacial resistance of the batteries. As shown in Figure S10, the impedance of the cell exhibited little change before and after the cycling. After the cycling, there was a new semi-circle appear at the middle frequency area of the EIS spectrum, which presented the formation of SEI layer. All these results indicated that the IPS modified 3D Li anode integrated with LATP could significantly eliminate the hazard of short-circuit induced either by dendritic Li or 3D host, thus making solid-state batteries highly safe. Moreover, the reduced hysteresis of the 3D Li anode was attributed to the in-situ polymerized interlayer, which retained the liquid electrolyte within the 3D host and facilitated to the enhanced kinetics in full LMBs. 
To verify the use of IPS technique in batteries, full cells with NCM 622 cathodes were assembled (battery 1). For comparison, the cells, NCM 622 | LATP | 2D Li with in-situ polymerized interlayer (battery 2) and NCM 622 | LATP | 3D Li without in-situ polymerized interlayer (battery 3) were also fabricated. The cathode loading is about 2.80 mg cm-2. The capacity of the full cell is 0.4 mA h on the calculation of the cathode, and the current density is 0.05 mA cm-2. Before assembling the full cell, 2 mA h cm-2 of Li has been plated on the 3D Cu current collector as anode. According to the performance comparison shown in Figure 5b, the initial capacities of the three batteries are almost the same, which delivering 159.1 mA h g−1, 159.7 mA h g−1 and 154.6 mA h g−1, respectively. As the cycle continues, the difference in capacity became obvious. After only 5 cycles, battery 3 underwent large overpotential with evident capacity degradation (Figure S11b), which might be related to the rapid consumption of the liquid electrolyte over cycling. This phenomenon was in accordance with the performance in symmetric batteries. For battery 2, the increase in overpotential and the decrease in performance were also found from the 25th cycle (Figure S11c). The result suggested that liquid electrolyte on planar Cu could still be quickly exhausted after in-situ polymerized interlayer embedded due to its nonporous features. On the contrary, owing to the in-situ polymerized interlayer performed on the 3D anode, cycle stability of the battery 1 was significantly improved. As shown in Figure 5a, a high capacity retention of 90% over 80 cycles (143 mA h g−1) at 0.1 C was achieved for battery 1, whereas the capacity of battery 2 quickly dropped to 97 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles and battery 3 dropped to 40 mA h g−1 after 17 cycles. To observe the morphology change of anode and cathode in full cell after cycling, both pristine and cycled SEM images were collected. As shown in the Figure S12a and S12b, the surface SEM images of pristine Li foil exhibit flat surface. Due to the porous structure of the 3D Cu, the surface of the plated Li is a little rough. After several cycles of the charge/discharge, metal Li plates more evenly on the surface of the anode without observable Li dendrites (Fig. S12c and S12d), which confirms that 3D Li is benefit to prevent Li dendrite. In addition, a polymer layer was observed on the surface of the cathode and after the cell cycling, little change can be observed(Fig. S12e and S12f). All these results confirm the good reversibility for both anode and cathode in this system.
In addition, battery 1 also exhibited an outstanding rate performance. From the performance comparison shown in Figure 5c, battery 1 still retained a high reversible capacity of 125.5 mA h g−1 and 100.8 mA h g−1 even at a high rate of 0.5 C and 1 C, respectively, whereas the battery 3 delivered much less capacity at 0.5 C (Figure S13). To verify the application of the LATP | 3D Li in the actual battery system, full cells with capacity of 1.29 mA h cm-2 were fabricated and tested on the current density of 0.1 mA cm-2. As shown in Figure S14, the initial capacity of the battery  is 194.3 mA h g−1 (1.29 mA h cm-2) and stabilizes around 140 mA h g−1 (0.94 mA h cm-2). The enhanced kinetics might be attributed to the in-situ polymerized interlayer in SSE, which not only helped to reduce the interfacial resistance, but also contributed to encapsulate sufficient liquid electrolyte within the 3D anode to support essential interface electrochemical reactions. Recent researches on the integration of 3D anodes and ceramic electrolytes for high-security solid-state batteries have been reported.[47] However, most integrated anodes can only be coupled to the LFP cathodes (3.4 V vs. Li+/Li), which greatly weakens the advantage of ceramic electrolytes that can withstand the wide voltage range of solid-state batteries. In addition, for most studies, an additional polymer coating or 3D template casting process is required to achieve integrated batteries, thereby increasing manufacturing steps and costs, which is not beneficial for practical applications. Compared with previously reported solid-state batteries based on 3D Li, the battery obtained by IPS strategy introduced here affords four key benefits: 1) The combination of 3D current and ceramic LATP can eliminate the short-circuit issue induced by Li dendrite or sharp-edged 3D host; 2) Through an in-situ interlayer polymerization process, the integration of LATP, 3D Li anode, and NCM cathode was simultaneously constructed with significantly reduced interfacial resistance; 3) The IPS layer ensures sufficient liquid electrolyte sealed in the 3D host to achieve the necessary interface electrochemical reactions of Li, and enhance the dynamic performance in full cells; 4) Owing to the IPS method, 3D Li | LATP can be paired with the NCM 622 cathode to obtain a full battery, which can output a relatively higher voltage and capacity at room temperature than previous studies.[48] The battery constructed with IPS strategy is designed along the roadmap from traditional LIBs to solid-state LMBs and provides a promising direction toward new configurations of solid-state LMBs.[3] 
In conclusion, an optimized battery configuration employing 3D anode and LATP solid electrolyte with an in-situ polymerized interlayer was demonstrated. The integration of 3D Li anode and LATP can eliminate the danger of short circuit caused by Li dendrite or 3D skeleton. The introduction of the polymer layer, a key step in this configuration, helps to reconcile 3D anodes with the ceramic LATP SSE. The symmetrical battery designed with this configuration can be stably cycled for 500 hours at a current density of 0.2 mA h cm−2 at room temperature. Moreover, compared with the currently reported 3D Li-based batteries, the full battery constructed by IPS strategy realizes application of NCM 622 cathode, which can operate well at room temperature and exhibit a smaller hysteresis, higher capacity, and excellent high-rate performance. The significantly enhanced performance is attributed to the unique IPS layer, which not only resolves the interface problem between 3D anode and LATP as well as the NCM cathode, but also helps to seal the liquid electrolyte within anode for indispensable interface reactions. This work provided a practical and promising strategy to build highly safe and durable high-energy metal batteries for next-generation energy storage devices. 