Hybrid polymer–ceramic electrolytes with high ceramic loading are currently investigated as a promising solution to achieve high safety and optimal mechanical properties in all-solid-state rechargeable batteries. In this study composite poly(ethylene oxide)/Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (PEO/LATP) electrolytes, with and without lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) as the Li+ salt, were investigated through a combination of physicochemical and electrochemical techniques, including X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, thermal analysis, solid-state MAS-NMR and impedance spectroscopy. We were able to shed light on the interactions between the ceramic and the polymer phases, and on the mechanisms for Li+ transport. Membranes containing 70 wt% of LATP and 30 wt% of P(EO)15LiTFSI exhibit conductivity values of 4 × 10−5 Ω−1 cm−1 at 25 °C and in excess of 10−4 Ω−1 cm−1 at 45 °C. These promising results, obtained on a quasi-ceramic electrolyte through room temperature processing, suggest that further improvements in the transport properties of “polymer-in-ceramic” systems may be sought by increasing the amorphous polymer content, and by carefully investigating the role of the ceramic particles’ composition, dimensions and dispersion on the transport properties of the hybrid system.

The need for a highly efficient use of renewable energy sources, the increasing demand in terms of portable electronics and the development of the electrical automotive sector are focussing wide research efforts in the field of electrical energy storage, in particular looking at rechargeable batteries.

Among the commercially available architectures, secondary lithium-ion cells (LIBs) are characterized by the highest output voltage and energy density. Typically, these systems use a liquid electrolyte composed of a Li salt dissolved in an organic solvent. Such a system is limited in the operating temperature and poses serious safety concerns due to the organic electrolyte flammability. In addition, metal anodes, capable of ensuring higher energy density, cannot be used due to the easy formation and propagation of Li dendrites through the electrolyte layer. For these reasons, the development of solid state batteries is highly desirable.1

The majority of studies related to solid state batteries focus on the use of ceramic electrolytes or polymer electrolytes.2 Ceramic electrolytes offer high mechanical rigidity, which may prevent dendrite formation, high temperature stability, which further improves safety and kinetics, and an almost unity Li+ transport number, which ensures only minor self-discharge and prevents bulk polarization. However, high temperature processing is usually required for oxide-based electrolytes, and cracking and delamination of the functional layers constitutes a severe problem for these systems. Polymer-based electrolyte membranes offer the advantage of low volume expansion, relatively easy processing at room temperature and good adhesion, with the formation of an optimal interfacial contact at the electrode/electrolyte interface.3–5

Among the ceramic electrolytes, the NASICON-type Li-ion conductors have been highly investigated over the past three decades6 and Li1+xAlxTi1−x(PO4), known as LATP, continue to be considered reference materials in this context.7 Solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs), a mixture of a polymer matrix and a lithium salt, are the best candidates as the polymer membrane. In particular, polyethylene oxide (PEO)-based membranes are among the most widely studied systems in this field3 since the discovery of PEO's ability to act as a solid solvent for alkali metal salts and to allow easy transport of alkali metal ions in amorphous polymer strands.8 However, the low conductivity of PEO-based SPEs (σ ≤ 10−5 Ω−1 cm−1 at room temperature), in comparison to liquid or ceramic electrolytes,1 hindered their commercialization. The addition of ceramic fillers to the polymer matrix has been under study for more than 20 years as an effective way to modulate the transport properties of polymer-based electrolytes.9,10 To this end, both passive (e.g. Al2O3,11 TiO2,12 SiO213) and active (e.g. Li10GeP2S12 (LGPS),14 Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO),15–17 Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5P3O12 (LAGP),18 Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12 (LLZTO)19) fillers were used.

An emerging field of investigation is the preparation of hybrid ceramic–polymer electrolyte membranes composed of inorganic solid Li-ion electrolytes and Li-conductive polymers, which offers a new path towards better electrolytes with both high ionic conductivity, good mechanical properties and room temperature processing.9,19–21 Increments in conductivity values compared to the polymer electrolyte without a ceramic component were sometimes evidenced at room temperature for low ceramic loading,16,19,22 as the addition of these ceramic particle fillers is believed to hinder the polymer crystallization, or to give origin to a conducting interface layer between the polymer and the ceramic powders. When compared to the corresponding high-temperature sintered ceramic material, the composite membrane conductivity is usually lower.15,17,19 To date, most of the abovementioned studies have been devoted to the polymer-rich part of the polymer–ceramic “phase diagram” (called ceramic-in-polymer), chiefly because of the easier film processability. Nonetheless, the innovative approach related to the preparation of “polymer-in-ceramic” electrolytes, with the presence of a predominant ceramic component (>50 wt%), is growing in importance and is regarded as an effective way to advance the development of all solid-state batteries. In particular, due to the high mechanical strength and safety pertaining to such hybrid membranes, they are considered appropriate for big battery packs used in electric vehicles.19 Being a relatively still unexplored field of research, optimization of the performance of such hybrid electrolytes warrants further investigation efforts.

In this study we focussed our attention on the polymer-in-ceramic region, by investigating the effect of composition on the transport properties of hybrid membranes composed of Li1.3Al0.3Ti0.7(PO4)3 dispersed into a PEO or P(EO)15LiTFSI polymer electrolyte matrix. A wide range of compositions was investigated by means of thermal analysis, impedance spectroscopy and solid state nuclear magnetic resonance and this allows us to discuss the differences introduced by the presence of an additional Li salt in the samples in the absence of organic solvents. The compositional region we investigated has the potential to offer great advantages in terms of processability and integration in the complete device over the purely ceramic-based electrolyte systems, while maintaining their advantages in terms of mechanical strength and wide electrochemical window stability. We were chiefly interested in overcoming the high grain boundary contribution to the total conductivity, typical of LATP ceramics which have not been sintered at high temperature (approximately 1000 °C), with the incorporation of a conducting polymer–ceramic interface processed at room temperature.

Powder samples of nominal composition Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) were prepared through a wet chemistry approach. Stoichiometric amounts of LiNO3, Al(NO3)3·9H2O and NH4H2PO4 (Sigma Aldrich) were dissolved in deionized water and thoroughly mixed after the addition of a certain amount of citric acid (10 wt% excess compared to the stoichiometric ratio 1 : 1 with respect to the metal ions). Titanium lactate was added in a stoichiometric proportion to the well mixed solution. The solution was heated under constant stirring to 80 °C overnight, until the formation of a viscous product, which was subsequently calcined briefly at 250 °C and for 2 hours at 350 °C. The calcined product was crushed and mixed in an agate mortar to obtain a fine powder sample that was then heated at 800 °C for 2 hours to achieve the formation of the desired phase. Lower temperature treatments resulted in an incomplete reaction.

The as prepared powders were graphite-coated and analysed through scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a TESCAN Mira 3 XMU instrument at an applied voltage of 15 kV and variable magnification ranging from 500× to 100k×. The average particle dimensions were calculated by measuring the width and length of at least 100 grains by means of the ImageJ® free software.

X-ray powder diffraction (XRPD) analysis was performed on a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation with fixed steps of 0.02 degrees and a counting time per step of 4 s.

Hybrid membranes composed of variable fractions of LATP powders, polyethylene oxide (PEO, 3.4 × 106 g mol−1) and lithium bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide (LiTFSI) were prepared by mixing the appropriate weight amount of the ceramic, polymer and Li salt in a small quantity of acetonitrile, used as the solvent for the PEO component. After complete evaporation of the solvent, the mixture was pressed at room temperature using an uniaxial press at a load of 500 MPa. All the preparation steps of the hybrid membranes were carried out in an Ar-filled glove-box (H2O < 1 ppm and O2 < 1 ppm).

Two series of hybrid membranes were prepared: one without addition of LiTFSI, called LATP/PEO; and one with the addition of LiTFSI in the molar ratio Li : EO 1 : 15, with EO identifying ethylene oxide, called LATP/SPE.

We decided to keep fixed the weight amount of the ceramic for easier comparison between the two series. For this reason, the hybrid membranes without LiTFSI will be called LATP/PEO x/1 − x (95 ≤ x ≤ 50). The hybrid membranes with LiTFSI will be called LATP/SPE x/1 − x (95 ≤ x ≤ 30). In this last case, the SPE content represents the fraction of the polymer and Li salt.

For the sake of comparison, a hybrid membrane composed of 70 wt% LATP and 30 wt% poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVdF) was prepared according to the same procedure. In this case, acetone was used as the polymer's solvent.

In addition, samples of 100 wt% LATP (LATP), 100 wt% PEO (PEO) and 100 wt% SPE (SPE 15 : 1) were prepared by pressing, under the same conditions, the LATP powders, the PEO powders and the PEO–LiTFSI mixture, respectively. No high-temperature sintering process was applied to the LATP powders to obtain the 100 wt% LATP sample. Furthermore, a sample of LATP powders was pressed under the same conditions and sintered at 1000 °C for 2 hours (the density measured through Archimedes’ methods is approximately 95% of the theoretical value).

Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) measurements were performed on the hybrid membranes in an aluminium crucible, closed and sealed in an Ar glove-box, with a DSC Q2000 instrument (TA Instruments), according to the following procedure: the sample was cooled down from room temperature to −80 °C and subsequently cycled two times between −80 °C and 100 °C with a 5 °C min−1 scan rate.

Impedance spectroscopy measurements were performed on all the samples using a stainless-steel cell according to the following thermal treatment: the sample was measured at room temperature, cooled down at −15 °C, heated up to 70 °C, left equilibrating overnight, and cycled again between −15 °C and 70 °C.

7Li, 27Al, and 31P solid state MAS-NMR spectra were collected on a Bruker Avance III 400 MHz spectrometer (9.4 T magnet) with the use of a 4 mm probe under MAS conditions. One-pulse spectra were recorded for different nuclei using the following parameters: MAS speed rate 10 kHz for all the nuclei; 7Li: delay 2 s, π/2 pulse 4.5 μs, 128 scans, with reference to the LiCl 1 M signal (0 ppm); 27Al: delay 15 s, π/2 pulse 3 μs, 516 scans, with reference to the Al(NO3)3·9H2O signal (0 ppm); 31P: delay 50 s, π/2 pulse 1 μs, 128 scans, with reference to the H3PO4 1 M signal (0 ppm).

In the case of 7Li MAS-NMR, also variable temperature (VT) measurements were performed in the temperature range 25 °C–75 °C under MAS conditions (5 kHz spinning speed). The rotors were filled in an Ar-filled glovebox (H2O < 1 ppm and O2 < 1 ppm) to prevent degradation of the samples.

For the VT measurements the following thermal cycle was adopted for each sample: the rotor was inserted in the magnet, heated at the target temperature and allowed to equilibrate for 20 minutes, after which the spectra were acquired. The temperature was subsequently increased and the procedure repeated. After being heated at the highest temperature (75 °C) the rotor was removed from the magnet and immediately inserted in an oven pre-heated at 75 °C and left there overnight. After 15 hours the sample was naturally cooled down to room temperature, inserted in the magnet and the same heating cycle (heating + 20 min equilibration) was repeated.

Fig. 1 shows the room temperature XRPD pattern of the synthesised LATP powders. The pattern can be indexed according to the NASICON-type structure in space group n. 167 and the experimental lattice parameters, derived through the use of the PowderCell 2.4 software,24 are a = b = 8.4904 Å and c = 20.8454 Å, in good agreement with the literature data for this composition.23 The wet chemistry preparation used in this study allows us to obtain a single-phase material after a thermal treatment of 2 hours at 800 °C. Powders treated at lower temperature present impurity phases (Fig. S1, ESI†).

The 7Li spectrum presents a broad line characterized by two distinct features visible at −0.5 and −1.3 ppm. This result is in good agreement with previous studies on the same nominal composition, where the two resonances were attributed to the occupation of M3 and M1 sites in the NASICON-type structure of LATP, respectively.25–27

The 27Al spectrum shows a main signal at −14 ppm and a minor contribution at 40 ppm. The resonance observed at −14 ppm, typical for Al in octahedral coordination with oxygen ions, is attributed to the LATP phase. This confirms the substitution of Al on the Ti crystallographic site. This resonance does not present the characteristic features expected for a quadrupolar nucleus (27Al nuclear spin I = 5/2) and can be fitted with Gaussian/Lorentzian curves. The small asymmetric broadening observed upfield can be correlated with structural disorder in the second or higher order shells of coordination, as already observed for other oxides.28 The spectrum is in good agreement with previously reported 27Al data for LATP compositions25,29 for which NMR parameters were extracted by the analysis of the satellite transitions (chemical shift in the −14 to −16.1 ppm range, quadrupolar coupling constant Cq = 274 kHz, asymmetry parameter ηQ = 0.9–1).29 The resonance at 40 ppm is attributed to the presence of Al in a tetrahedral environment in the AlPO4 phase, emerging with high temperature treatment and for high Al doping levels.25,26,30

The 31P spectrum is characterized by a main structured peak centered at −27 ppm and by a smaller contribution at −20 ppm. The peak at −27 ppm is attributed to the PO4 tetrahedra in the LATP structure. The structured line shape of this peak was related to different P(OTi)4−x(OAl)x environments leading to different 31P chemical shifts. The effect of the Al/Ti substitution on the chemical shift is additive and leads to more positive values; the relative intensities of the different contributions reflect the actual Al/Ti ratio.26,29,31,32 The small signal at −20 ppm was again attributed to the presence of AlPO4.25–27,31 Overall, the multinuclear NMR investigation of the synthesized powders: (i) allowed us to identify a minor impurity (AlPO4) not detected with XRD due to the small amount (approximately 4%), and (ii) confirmed the substitution of Al on the Ti site.

Thermal analysis allowed us to estimate the fraction of amorphous and crystalline polymer phases of the hybrid membranes, both with and without LiTFSI. Fig. 4 shows the DSC curves of two compositions, LATP/PEO 70/30 and LATP/SPE 70/30, selected as examples. Both the samples display a glass transition, Tg, around −60 °C for LATP/PEO 70/30 and −40 °C for LATP/SPE 70/30, and the melting peak of the polymer crystalline phase at around 60 °C for LATP/PEO 70/30 and 40 °C for LATP/SPE 70/30.

The DSC curves of pure PEO and SPE 15 : 1 are reported in Fig. S2 (ESI†). Here we show two subsequent thermal cycles acquired to highlight the effect of the thermal history on the amorphous/crystalline polymer ratio. Subsequent cycles gave results similar to the second one. In fact, PEO is a semi-crystalline polymer whose crystalline fraction, C%, depends upon the synthesis (chiefly through the molecular weight) and the thermal history.10 Thermally cycling between below and above the PEO melting point (∼60 °C) cancels the thermal history and allows one to stabilize the amorphous/crystalline polymer ratio. For this reason, C% was calculated based on the data of the second cycle, by taking into account the composition of the hybrid membrane and by considering the enthalpy associated with the melting of pure PEO. The melting enthalpy of pure crystalline PEO is a function of its molecular weight,33 and for the present study, 200 J g−1 was taken as the reference. In order to calculate the PEO crystalline portion of the hybrid membranes investigated in this study, the enthalpy values determined from the DSC measurements were divided by the weight fraction of polymer in the sample and by the reference melting enthalpy of pure PEO.

From the DSC curve of pure PEO (Fig. S2, ESI†) a melting point at approximately 67 °C can be appreciated. The same measurement performed on the PEO/LiTFSI mixture, indicated as SPE 15 : 1, revealed a glass transition temperature at approximately −43 °C and a melting point at approximately 52 °C, due to the well-known plasticizing effect of the large TFSI anion.4 This effect is evidenced for the whole compositional range investigated, i.e. LATP/SPE samples consistently present lower melting temperatures than the corresponding LATP/PEO samples.

Fig. 5 shows the C% values of the two series of hybrid membranes prepared in this study, namely LATP/PEO and LATP/SPE, vs. the LATP content. For easier interpretation of the data, the amorphous polymer fraction (indicated as A%) is also reported. The crystalline fraction in the pure PEO sample is approximately 67%, in agreement with the literature,10 whereas the values for the hybrid LATP/PEO membranes fall between 65 and 70 wt%. The absence of significant variations and of clear trends vs. the LATP content indicates that the ceramic powders do not strongly interact with the polymer strands. The crystalline fraction of the SPE 15 : 1 mixture is approximately 45 wt%, which is significantly lower than the corresponding value for pure PEO, due to the presence of Li salt.9 The crystalline polymer fractions calculated for the hybrid LATP/SPE membranes range between 30 wt% and 45 wt%, with decreasing values by increasing the ceramic content. This might be related to a tendency of the ceramic powders to create an obstacle to the polymer crystallization, which is more evident in the presence of additional Li salt. The same trend was observed, for instance, for PEO–LiTFSI–LGPS hybrid membranes.14

In Fig. S3 (ESI†), the conductivity data for LATP/PEO 70 : 30 and LATP/SPE 70 : 30 are reported for two subsequent heating cycles. As expected, the conductivity increases in the second cycle, chiefly because of the increased polymer amorphous fraction. We recall here that, in the absence of crystalline compounds (e.g. P(EO)6–LiTFSI),34 Li+ is mobile in the PEO amorphous fraction and therefore a lower crystallinity is expected to promote easier Li+ diffusion. The effect is more pronounced for the LATP/SPE samples, for which a higher fraction of amorphous polymer has been calculated (Fig. 5), and for which the difference between two subsequent thermal cycles was more evident in the DSC curves as well. As the sample temperature exceeds the polymer melting point during the first heating ramp, the observed increase in conductivity, beside to a change in the amorphous fraction, may be also related to the formation of a better interface between the polymer strands and the ceramic powders. For each sample, only the conductivity data related to the second thermal ramp are therefore considered in the following.

Fig. 6 shows, as an example, the Arrhenius plot of conductivity for LATP/PEO 70 : 30 and LATP/SPE 70 : 30 compared to the plot of conductivity for the sintered LATP sample. Examples of impedance spectroscopy data acquired for the LATP/PEO 70/30 and LATP/SPE 70/30 samples at 45 °C are reported in Fig. S4 (ESI†). The Nyquist plots show the presence of a single semicircle from which the total conductivity was derived. In the temperature range under investigation (−15 °C/70 °C), the conductivity behaviour of all the LATP/PEO samples can be considered Arrhenius-like. A slight deviation from linearity at high temperature is visible, which could be related to the melting temperature of PEO (Fig. 4).

Although it is well established that VTF (Vogel–Tammann–Fulcher) behaviour is associated with Li+ diffusion in polymer electrolytes above the glass transition,10 the small temperature range explored in this study somehow limits the possibility of this analysis approach. Activation energies were thus derived from the slope of the log σ vs. 1/T plots. For example, the calculated activation energy for the LATP/PEO 90/10 membrane was 0.52 eV, while for the LATP/PEO 70/30 membrane a value of 0.77 eV was derived. For the sake of comparison, activation energies for high-temperature sintered LATP ceramic samples are in the range 0.3–0.45 eV.7 This result suggests that the polymeric component introduces a resistive contribution to the ion motion. Interestingly, the calculated activation barrier for the composition LATP/SPE 70/30 is 0.78 eV, very close to that of the corresponding LATP/PEO 70 : 30 sample, and comparable to the one calculated for the SPE 15 : 1 sample (Fig. S3, ESI†). Again, the calculated activation barrier is higher for the hybrid membranes than for the LATP sintered ceramic powders alone. The fact that the activation energies calculated for the LATP/PEO and LATP/SPE samples are very similar for the same nominal ceramic composition suggests analogous mechanisms of Li+ conduction within the polymer component and at the polymer−ceramic interface for the two series. This implies conduction of Li+ ions in the polymer phase and at the polymer−ceramic interphase, in addition to Li+ conduction within the ceramic particles. Based on the comparison of activation barriers, Li+ conduction within the ceramic phase is expected to be the fastest route in the hybrid system.35

Fig. 7 shows the room temperature conductivity of all the samples investigated vs. LATP content. The point at x = 100 represents the measured conductivity of a sample containing 100 wt% of LATP powders. This powder sample has been pressed but not sintered at high temperature and therefore its conductivity, of approximately 9 × 10−6 Ω−1 cm−1, is the result of a high grain boundary contribution to the total resistivity, in addition to a certain amount of residual porosity in the sample (the calculated density based on Archimedes’ determination is approximately 80%). Total conductivity values for this composition are spread over several orders of magnitude and are largely dependent upon preparation methods and sintering conditions, both of which impact on porosity and Li content.7 For example, Aono et al.6 reported a bulk conductivity of 3 × 10−3 Ω−1 cm−1 with a total conductivity (bulk + grain boundary) of 7 × 10−4 Ω−1 cm−1 for a sample prepared by a solid state reaction at 1000 °C for 2 h. On the other hand, total conductivity values of 0.7–4.1 × 10−8 Ω−1 cm−1 were reported for spray-dried samples prepared through wet-chemistry approaches.36

With reference to Fig. 7, let's first consider the LATP/PEO series: analysis of the data shows that the addition of PEO to LATP powders slightly decreases the total conductivity of the samples in comparison to the 100% LATP sample, and this is true for the whole compositional range we considered. This can be rationalized in terms of the dispersion of an insulating component, PEO, into a conductive one (LATP). However, the fact that the decrease is very limited and substantially independent of composition up to 50 : 50 wt/wt suggests the formation of an interface between the polymer and the ceramic, which might contribute to the Li+ conduction in the composite system. To support this idea, the room temperature conductivity of a sample composed of 70 wt% LATP and 30 wt% PVdF was measured under the same conditions. In this case, a value of 5 × 10−8 Ω−1 cm−1 was obtained, thus corroborating the assumption that PEO chains can support Li+ transport even in the absence of additional Li salt, due to the presence of the ether oxygens, whereas PVdF acts as a true insulating phase. Previous investigations on different compositions (PEO–LiClO4–LLZO, ceramic content between 40 and 85 wt%) suggested a similar synergic effect for the hybrid systems.37 Indeed, the same positive effect is not visible in the case of a polymer that doesn’t support Li+ transport, such as PVdF, unless a conducting Li salt dissolved in an organic solvent is added to the mixture to give a gel composite electrolyte.38

In the case of the hybrid LATP/SPE membranes, the room temperature conductivity values are higher than the corresponding ones obtained for the LATP/PEO series, for all the compositions under investigation. This is indicative of a contribution of the Li salt dispersed in the polymeric matrix, which has the double effect of increasing the amorphous fraction of PEO (Fig. 5) and increasing the room temperature conductivity of the polymeric component dispersed around the ceramic powders. The measured conductivity of the SPE 15 : 1 sample at 25 °C is 3.3 × 10−5 Ω−1 cm−1, slightly higher than the purely ceramic LATP sample and in line with previously reported conductivity values for the same composition.15Fig. 7 shows that hybrid membranes of the LATP/SPE series reach the room temperature conductivity of the PEO–LITFSI 15 : 1 mixture for a SPE content as low as 20 wt%, and are, therefore, primarily ceramic in nature. This is a relevant result, worthy of further investigation, since it should be acknowledged that the few studies dealing with high ceramic particle loading in SPEs (>50 wt%) usually reported lower conductivity values for the hybrid system compared to the SPE itself.15,19

A final piece of information can be obtained by variable-temperature MAS-NMR. Fig. 8 reports the 7Li spectra of LATP/PEO 70/30 (left) and LATP/SPE 70/30 (right) in the temperature range 25–75 °C. The room temperature spectrum of LATP/PEO 70/30 is perfectly superimposable on that of the LATP powders (Fig. 2), and therefore can be deconvolved into two contributions due to lithium in sites M1 and M3.25–27 Deconvolution peaks and related NMR parameters are reported in the ESI,† Fig. S5 and Table S1, respectively. We stress here that all the spectra are fitted with pure Lorentzian line shapes, as expected because of the high mobility of lithium ions in these phases. Sites M1 (peak 1 in Fig. S5, ESI†) and M3 (peak 2) account for 86% and 14%, and their chemical shifts are −1.35 and −0.61 ppm, respectively. By increasing the temperature, peak M3 progressively disappears, due to fast site exchange in the time of the NMR experiment (∼0.1 s), and the centre-of-mass of the spectrum shifts downfield, so revealing a more ionic character of the Li+ ions. The room temperature spectrum of LATP/SPE 70/30 contains a third contribution (peak 3) due to the salt in the polymer strands,39,40 which accounts for about 6% of the total lithium. Again, by increasing the temperature, the shoulder due to lithium in the M3 site progressively disappears, and the centre-of-mass shifts downfield. However, the contributions of the polymer and the ceramic phases do not merge at all (see also Table S1, ESI†), even at the highest investigated temperature, likely because of the large dimensions of the LATP particles, which do not allow lithium full exchange on the NMR timescale. Interestingly, we have not evidence of any contribution from the ceramic–polymer interphase, as reported in ref. 35. On the other hand, this minority feature can be hidden in the spectrum baseline, as the 7Li Hamiltonian is characterized by larger isotropic contributions with respect to the 6Li one exploited by these authors.

With the use of the present hybrid electrolyte (LATP/P(EO)15LiTFSI) a room temperature conductivity of 4 × 10−5 Ω−1 cm−1 is achieved for very high ceramic loading (> 70 wt%) and a conductivity of approximately 10−3 Ω−1 cm−1 is found at approximately 60 °C, above the melting point of the SPE. This result is achieved with simple LATP powders, through a room temperature preparation method, without the need to carry out high temperature sintering. For the sake of comparison, it should be noted that conductivity values around 5 × 10−5 Ω−1 cm−1 are reported for the LATP sample with the same nominal composition sintered through spark plasma sintering at 800 °C41 and a sintering temperature of at least 1000 °C is required to achieve 7 × 10−4 Ω−1 cm−1 for this composition.6

At room temperature, the transport properties of the hybrid membranes are dominated by the polymeric component, and the simple addition of LiTFSI increases the conductivity of the hybrid membranes by more than one order of magnitude. Further optimization of the SPE composition, aimed at increasing the amorphous polymer fraction at room temperature, is therefore expected to positively influence the low temperature behaviour of the hybrid system. This can be obtained by playing with several degrees of freedom, including the nature of the lithium salt, the polymer average molecular weight, and addition of plasticizing additives (e.g. oligoethylene glycols). Also, modifications in the preparation method of the hybrid system, as well as a careful investigation of the effect of the ceramic particles’ composition, particle dimensions and dispersion on the transport properties of the hybrid system, need to be addressed to fully exploit the potential of this promising concept.