Inspired by the recent interest in fast ionic conducting solids for electrolytes, the ionic conductivity of a novel ionic conductor Na1+xTi2−xGax(PS4)3 has been investigated. Using X-ray diffraction and impedance spectroscopy the sodium ionic conductivity in this compound was demonstrated, in which bond valence sum analysis suggests a tunnel diffusion for Na+. Substitution with Ga3+ leads to an increasing Na+ content, an expansion of the lattice and an increasing conductivity with increasing x in Na1+xTi2−xGax(PS4)3. Given the relation to the NASICON family, upon replacement of the phosphate by a thiophosphate group, a rich structural chemistry can be expected in this class of materials. This work demonstrates the potential for making NaTi2(PS4)3 an ideal system to study structure-property relationships in ionic conductors.

Solid-state ionic conductors are currently being investigated for the possible application in solid-state batteries.1, 2 Employing a solid ionic conductor is thought to provide inherent stability, and with it a much safer battery, the possibility of bipolar stacking, and even the use of Li- and Na-metal anodes. Many material classes are currently being investigated, such as oxides and phosphates, that is, the garnets3, 4 and NASICON (Na SuperIonic CONductor) materials,5 as well as thiophosphates. In particular, the thiophosphates, for example, Li10GeP2S12, Li6PS5X and Na3PS4, among others, have shown to be promising materials due to the soft mechanical nature and the intrinsically high ionic conductivity.6, 7, 16-18, 8-15 Typical approaches to attain even higher ionic conductivities within the respective classes involve either the use of aliovalent substitution to increase the number of mobile charges or the introduction of softer, more polarizable anions and a concurrent widening of the diffusion pathways.19-21

Indeed, the softer anion lattice with more polarizable anions has been corroborated to lower the activation barrier,22-25 thereby explaining the high ionic conductivity in many of the Li+ and Na+ conducting thiophosphates. However, it has recently been shown that a softer lattice not only lowers the migration barrier, but also affects the entropy of migration, which can also lead to an overall lower ionic conductivity.23, 24 It seems that the paradigm of “the softer, the better” does not hold up within individual classes of materials, and new material classes need to be explored to obtain faster ionic conductors.26

Promising Na+ ionic conductors can be found in the NASICON (Na SuperIonic CONductor) (Li/Na)M2(PO4)3 family,27 which provide multiple structural possibilities for optimizing and understanding transport. The basic NASICON structure consists of (Li/Na)O6 units in a trigonal antiprismatic coordination and MO6 octahedra that share corners with PO4 tetrahedra. The rich crystal chemistry of these solids provide many possible compositions through substitution on the tetrahedral sites (XO4)n− (X=Si4+, P5+, S6+, Mo6+)28 and even partial substitution on the octahedral sites (e.g. Al3+, Ti4+, Nb5+).29, 30 In contrast to the well-studied phosphate ionic conductors, sulfide and thiophosphate compounds have only recently gained renewed interest after the discovery of Li10GeP2S12.12 For instance, Na3PS4 exhibits an ionic conductivity of up to 4.6×10−4 S cm−1 in the cubic phase at room temperature.13, 31, 32 Consequently, in order to broaden the diffusion pathways and potentially increase the lattice polarizability, substitutions of S with Se were performed, which form stable solid solutions and influence the ionic conductivity.20, 24, 33, 34 In addition, substitution of P5+ with As5+ increases the conductivity due to a widening of the diffusion pathways and possibly altered Na−S interactions.21 Continued research on Na+ conducting thiophosphates has focused on compounds derived from Li10GeP2S12. Namely, the Ceder group was able to synthesize Na10SnP2S12 with a high ionic conductivity of 4.0×10−5 S cm−1,35and Na11Sn2PS12 has recently been found separately by the groups of Roling and Nazar, with an even higher conductivity in the range of mS cm−1.36-38 In addition to the Li10GeP2S12 derived structures, recent work has also focused on Na-Sb-S compounds for ionic conductors.39

Herein, in an effort to further widen the materials space of sodium ion conductors, the Na+ ionic conductivity of the thio-NASICON analogue NaTi2(PS4)3 (NTPS) and the effects of Ga-substitution in Na1+xTi2−xGax(PS4)3 are explored. The aliovalent substituent of gallium was chosen for the substitution of titanium to enable the successful incorporation, due to the comparable ionic radii (r(Ga3+)=0.62 Å and r(Ti4+)=0.605 Å for octahedral coordination),[40 ]while also increasing the carrier concentration toward enhancing the ionic conductivity. Impedance spectroscopy shows an ionic conductivity of approximately 10−6 S cm−1 that can further be increased using aliovalent substitution with Ga. Furthermore, the structural changes during substitution are monitored using X-ray diffraction and using Bond Valence Sum analysis, we further explore the diffusion pathways in this novel sodium ionic conductor.

The structure of NaTi2(PS4)3, initially solved by Cieren et al.41 using single-crystal diffraction data, is shown in Figure 1. While the chemical formula suggests a similarity to the NASICON structure, the change from phosphate to thiophosphate does indeed lead to a different structure type. The Ti4+ cations are octahedrally coordinated by S2−, but connected through edges with PS43− tetrahedra. In contrast, the NASICON structure exhibits corner-shared PO43− groups, as expected from the Pauling rules, due to the higher charge polarity. In addition to this interesting structural connectivity, the Na+ positions seemingly form in a cluster-like arrangement around certain crystallographic positions; a clear sign for structural disorder and delocalization. The shortest Na-Na distance of ≈5 Å occurs between these clusters and wide tunnels along the c-axis. Figure 2 shows the obtained isosurface for a valence mismatch of ΔV=0.2, indicating possible diffusion pathways along the c-axis.

Initially found by Cieren et al.,41 this structure was later identified by Goodenough and co-workers42, 43 as a possible intercalation electrode material for battery applications, using LiTi2(PS4)3 and NaTi2(PS4)3.44 However, amorphization during cycling is known to occur, which demonstrates the instability of the material as an electrode. Nevertheless, the fact that cycling is partially possible suggests some ionic conductivity, as well as some partial electronic conductivity, to be prevalent. Nevertheless, the transport has not yet been investigated and no substitutions within this compound have been attempted. Recently, LiTi2(PS4)3 was found to exhibit a high diffusion coefficient of lithium ions due to the unusual coordination that leads to a “frustrated energy landscape”.45 In order to explore the properties of NaTi2(PS4)3, polycrystalline samples were synthesized and investigated using X-ray diffraction. A representative X-ray diffraction pattern, including a Pawley fit,46 is shown in Figure 3 a. The diffraction patterns can be indexed to the hexagonal space group P6cc (International tables no. 184) with lattice parameters of a=19.9509(4) Å and c=11.5657(5) Å for the unsubstituted material. A minor amount of a TiS2 impurity phase (<2±1 wt. %, obtained from a tentative Rietveld refinement) can also be found in the diffraction pattern. Due to their heavily disordered nature, a Rietveld refinement of the Na+ positions led to physically unreasonable positions and thermal displacement parameters, as Na+ cannot be localized in the crystal structure at room temperature. This situation is similar to LiTi2(PS4)3,45 and further diffraction studies at low temperatures need to be performed in order to accurately characterize the Na+ positions and corroborate the underlying Na+ diffusion pathways. To monitor the structural changes during substitution, the change in the lattice parameters a and c, as well as the unit cell volume, are shown in Figure 3 b–d. While no major visible change occurs in the a-axis of the unit cell, the c-axis expands with increasing Ga content, possibly due to a larger amount of Na+ charge density along the tunnels, likely leading to increasing electrostatic repulsion along this c-axis, or the slightly larger Ga3+ compared to Ti4+ in the octahedral coordination environment (rionic(Ga3+)=0.62 Å, rionic(Ti3+)=0.605 Å). In addition, there seems to be rather abrupt increase of the c-axis at x=0.2, which may indicate some subtle structural change. However, the overall changes in the lattice are relatively small and a refinement with an internal Si standard was required. The resulting lattice parameters of all compositions can be found in the Supporting Information.

While a refinement of the Ga occupancy on the Ti site is not possible due to the similar X-ray scattering form factors, a solubility limit of Ga can be observed around x=0.5 in Na1+xTi2−xGax(PS4)3, as indicated by an occurring secondary phase of GaPS4 for higher values of x. Additionally, the successful substitution of Ti4+ with Ga3+ is also suggested by a homogeneous distribution of Ga3+, as shown by EDX (see Supporting Information, Figure S3).

Temperature-dependent impedance spectroscopy was performed to assess the ionic conductivity of the Na1+xTi2−xGax(PS4)3 series. Figure 4 a shows a representative impedance response of Na1.1Ti1.9Ga0.1(PS4)3 at −30 °C. All impedance data were fit with an equivalent circuit consisting of two parallel CPE/resistor elements in series with a CPE, representing the bulk, grain boundary and blocking electrodes, respectively. The capacitance of the high-frequency CPE/resistor element is 6.4×10−11 F cm−2 with an α-value of≈0.85, representing the ideality of the CPE,50 and corroborating this to be a bulk-process.51 At the lower frequency side of the bulk semicircle, a small grain boundary process is visible with a capacitance of 1.7×10−7 F cm−2. The temperature-dependent impedance data were used to obtain Arrhenius plots, which provide an activation barrier EA for the ionic transport of 0.33 eV and an ionic conductivity of 8.9×10−6 S cm−1 at room temperature for NaTi2(PS4)3, comparable to values obtained for single crystals.52

Na1.1Ti1.9Ga0.1(PS4) at −30 °C, showing a semicircle for the bulk ionic transport (blue), the grain boundary contribution (orange) and a tail, corresponding to the Au blocking electrodes. The capacitance values show that this process is due to bulk conduction (blue), with only minimal contributions from the grain boundary resistance (orange). b) Arrhenius plots and c) room temperature conductivity and activation barriers for all compositions in Na1+xTi2−xGax(PS4)3. Althogh the conductivity improves up to the solubility limit (dashed vertical line) due to the Na+ incorporation, the changing carrier density does not affect the activation barrier.

For comparison, the conductivity of the unsubstituted phosphate NaZr2(PO4)3 was found to be 4.50×10−6 S cm−1 at room temperature, with an activation barrier of 0.47 eV,5 and NaTi2(PO4)3 exhibits a conductivity of 4.43×10−10 S cm−1 with an activation barrier of 0.62 eV.5 While the obtained conductivity of the unsubstituted material is in the range of the non-optimized oxide NASICONs, the activation barrier is much lower due to the softer, more polarizable anion sublattice. Substitution with Ga3+ leads to an increasing Na+ content and an increasing conductivity with increasing x in Na1+xTi2−xGax(PS4)3 up to 1.7×10−5 S cm−1 for Na1.4Ti1.6Ga0.4(PS4)3. However, a continuous linear increase in the conductivity was not found and interestingly, a reproducible decrease in the conductivity can be observed for x=0.1, before the conductivity increases again.

While these data show that substitutions can affect the ionic transport in NaTi2(PS4)3, a more in-depth understanding of the structure-property correlations are needed to understand the diffusion process and further enhance the ionic conductivity.

In this work, we demonstrate the intrinsic conductivity of NaTi2(PS4)3 for Na+ ions in the solid state. The obtained ionic conductivity of 8.9×10−6 S cm−1 at room temperature and the activation barrier of 0.33 eV make this class of materials an interesting family of solid electrolytes. Aliovalent substitution of Ti4+ with Ga3+ has also been shown to affect the lattice parameters and ionic transport. However, the high mobility and disorder of the Na+ ions, as well as the similar X-ray scattering form factors of Ti4+, Ga3+ and S2− make it necessary to employ low temperature neutron diffraction in order to better understand the structure-transport correlations. In addition, bond valence sum analysis suggests a tunnel-like diffusion for Na+ in this structure. The chemical and structural relation of the presented compounds to the NASICON family of phosphates hints at the existence of a rich structural chemistry, in which the prevalent Na+ diffusion pathways can be studied, and the ionic conductivities can be optimized toward obtaining desirable transport properties.

Synthesis: All preparations and sample treatments for Na1+xTi2−xGax(PS4)3 were carried out under argon atmosphere. Sodium sulfide (Na2S, Sigma Aldrich, 99.98 %), phosphorus pentasulfide (P2S5, Sigma Aldrich, 99 %), gallium sulfide (Ga2S3, Sigma Aldrich, 99.99 %), and titanium disulfide (TiS2 Sigma Aldrich, 99.995 %) were mixed in the appropriate stoichiometric molar ratios. The mixture was hand ground in an agate mortar, pressed into pellets and then filled into quartz ampoules (10 mm inner diameter and 10–12 cm in length), which were sealed under vacuum (≈2×10−2 mbar). All ampoules were pre-heated at 800 °C under dynamic vacuum to avoid all traces of water in the reaction atmosphere. The reactions were performed at 600 °C for 72 hours. The resulting powder was isostatically pressed into pellets and then fast annealed in an ampoule at 400 °C for 10 minutes.

Bond valence sum (BVS) analysis: The BVS method was employed on the single-crystal structure of NaTi2(PS4)3 proposed by Cieren et al.41 in order to predict the preferred sodium ion diffusion pathways, which was already used successfully for different lithium ion conductors in the past.8, 16, 50

Therefore, the valence mismatch ΔV given as the difference between the bond valence sum V and the nominal valence Vnom is calculated. Ionic diffusion from one sodium site to another is believed to occur along a path, where this valence mismatch is minimal [Eq. 1]:51, 52

X-ray diffraction: Structural investigations were carried out by means of X-ray powder diffraction using an Empyrean powder diffractometer (PANalytical, Netherlands) with CuKα radiation (λ1=1.54051 Å, λ2=1.54433 Å) in Bragg–Brentano θ–θ geometry, and a PIXcel3D area detector with 255 measuring channels. Samples were pulverized, mixed with a silicon standard, and placed on (9 1 1)-oriented silicon zero background holders that were sealed with Kapton foil under an argon atmosphere. Patterns were collected in the range of 12–70° 2θ with a step size of 0.013° and an exposure time of 250 s per step. Pawley fits46 were performed using the TOPAS-Academic V6 software package.54 A polynomial was used for the background, whereas the peak profiles were described by a Thompson–Cox–Hastings pseudo-Voigt function.54

Scanning electron microscopy/ electron dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX): Microstructural images were collected on a Merlin high-resolution scanning electron microscope (Carl Zeiss AG, Germany). The samples were transferred under argon atmosphere using a transfer vessel (Leica EM VC500). EDX analysis was performed using an XMAX 50 EDS detector (Oxford Instruments, United Kingdom). Measurements were carried out by application of an acceleration voltage of 12 kV and a probing current of 3000 pA.

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy: Electrical conductivities were measured by AC impedance spectroscopy, using pellets (1.9 mm thickness, geometric density of all samples ≈85 %) with vapor deposited gold layers (200 nm on each side; surface area of 0.53 cm2). Electrochemical impedance analysis (EIS) was conducted in the temperature range of −40 °C to 60 °C using a VMP300 impedance analyzer (Biologic) at frequencies from 7 MHz to 100 mHz with an amplitude of 10 mV. All measurements were performed in pouch cells under an argon atmosphere.