The extensive investigation via classical Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations of the halide-free “water-in-salt” electrolyte (WiSE) consisting of sodium acetate (8 m) and potassium acetate (32 m), unveils the interactions between cations, anions and water molecules. The WiSE’s application as electrolyte in symmetric aqueous sodium-ion batteries, featuring NASICON-type Na2VTi(PO4)3/C (NVTP/C) as active material at both the positive and the negative electrode, is also reported. In situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements resolve the structural evolution of NVTP/C during the highly reversible sodium de/intercalation. Differential Electrochemical Mass Spectrometry (DEMS) confirms the remarkable stability of the highly concentrated electrolyte. Symmetric cells employing two NVTP/C electrodes and a green 32K8N electrolyte show an average discharge voltage of 1.13 V with stable cycling performance and a coulombic efficiency above 99.1 % at 1C and 99.9% at 10C over 500 cycles. Compared to the fluorinated 9.2 m NaOTF, the 32K8N electrolyte has substantially lower cost, environmental impact and superior coulombic efficiency in symmetric cells. 
In recent years, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) have emerged as potentially cheap, high energy efficient and long lasting energy storage devices.[1] Indeed, conventional SIBs employing organic electrolytes have reached a suitable performance for stationary storage applications, but they still suffer from the harmfulness, flammability, and high cost of organic solvent-based electrolytes.[2] Aqueous electrolytes would be a good alternative to avoid these drawbacks,[3] but the narrow electrochemical stability window of water (1.23 V) limits the maximum output voltage [4] and, thus, the energy density of aqueous SIBs.[5]  Recently, the introduction of WiSEs has enabled wider electrochemical stability windows (up to about 3.0 V) thanks to the reduced activity of water in these highly concentrated solutions.[6] However, the use of fluorinated salts such as bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI),[6-13] sodium trifluoromethanesulfonate (NaOTF),[14, 15] sodium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (NaFSI),[16] and potassium trifluoromethanesulfonate (KOTF)[17] counteracts the advantage of aqueous batteries because of their high cost and fluorine content. As a result of the high solubility of potassium acetate (KAc) in water, WiSEs based on acetates have recently emerged as appealing, low cost and environmentally friendly alternatives to fluorinated salts.[18-21] In a previous work, it was demonstrated that the 32 m KAc and 8 m NaAc mixed solution is an effective WiSE for aqueous SIBs.[22] However, the cell performance was negatively affected by the hexacyanoferrate-based positive electrode, showed to be unstable in the alkaline environment caused by the acetate.[23, 24] In this work, the focus is on sodium super ionic conductor (NASICON-type) compounds as active electrode materials, which possess highly stable structures, large ionic channels, and accessible sites for efficient insertion/de-insertion of sodium ions.[25, 26] The NASICON type NaTi2(PO4)3 is commonly employed as negative electrode (anode) material as the Ti4+/Ti3+ redox potential is higher than the potential for hydrogen evolution.[27, 28] Analogously, Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) is commonly used as positive electrode (cathode) material for aqueous SIBs, thanks to the fact that the V4+/V3+ redox potential is lower than the oxygen evolution potential.[29] However, NVP is known to suffer from capacity fading and structural degradation in aqueous environment.[30, 31] To improve its structural stability, transition metal substitution has often been adopted.[32] Additionally, the introduction of transition metals with different redox potentials allows the use of the same NASICON-type material at both positive and negative electrode, resulting in symmetric cells that could potentially reduce the manufacturing costs and be resistant to polarity inversion.[33] So far, several systems have been proposed, e.g., NASICON type Na3MnTi(PO4)3.[33] The symmetric cell based on Na2VTi(PO4)3/C (NVTP/C) coated on a Ti current collector and utilizing 1 M Na2SO4 as the aqueous electrolyte demonstrated a remarkable performance, but not satisfactory Coulombic efficiency.[34] This was especially true for the negative side due to hydrogen evolution. Similarly, NVTP was investigated for symmetric aqueous SIBs, but using a concentrated solution of the harmful and costly NaOTF salt.[15] Herein, halide-free and low-cost WiSE consisting of 32 m KAc and 8 m NaAc (referred to as 32K8N) is proposed and demonstrated as electrolyte for symmetric SIBs, employing NASICON type NVTP/C material for both electrodes. Classical Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations were first conducted to elucidate the interactions between cations, anions and water molecules. The structural evolution of NVTP/C with 32K8N electrolyte during the sodium de/intercalation was studied by in situ X-ray diffraction (XRD), to address the structural stability of the NVTP/C electrode. The electrode surface chemistry was characterized by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) [25, 26] measurements were carried out to monitor the gas evolution and thus test the electrolyte stability during sodium uptake and release. 
NVTP/C was synthesised by a sol–gel method as reported in the literature.[35] 0.02 mol CH3COONa·3H2O (VWR, ≥99%), 0.01 mol NH4VO3 (Sigma–Aldrich, ≥99%), 0.03 mol NH4H2PO4 (Alfa Aesar, ≥99%) and 0.005 mol citric acid monohydrate (C6H8O7·H2O) (Alfa Aesar, ≥99%) were dissolved in 100 mL high-purity water (Millipore Milli-Q) under vigorous magnetic stirring to get solution A. Then, 0.01 mol Ti(CH3CH2CH2CH2O)4 was dissolved in 50 mL absolute ethanol (VWR, ≥99.9%) to get solution B and then the solution B was poured into the above solution A under vigorous stirring to obtain solution C. The sol-gel precursor was collected after solution C was dried at 80 °C. Finally, the sol-gel precursor was sintered at 350 °C for 5h, and 800 °C for 12 h under argon flow to obtain the NVTP/C composite. Na3V2(PO4)3/C (NVP/C) was prepared by a similar way. 0.03 mol CH3COONa·3H2O (VWR, ≥99%), 0.02 mol NH4VO3 (Sigma–Aldrich, ≥99%), 0.03 mol NH4H2PO4 (Alfa Aesar, ≥99%) and 0.005 mol citric acid monohydrate (C6H8O7·H2O) (Alfa Aesar, ≥99%) were dissolved in 100 mL high-purity water (Millipore Milli-Q) water under magnetic stirring to get solution D. Then, solution D was evaporated to obtain the precursor, which was sintered at 350 °C for 5h and at 800 °C for 12 h to obtain the NVP/C composite. 
Appropriate amounts of potassium acetate (KAc) (VWR, ≥99%), sodium acetate (NaAc) (VWR, ≥99%) or sodium sulphate (Na2SO4) (VWR, ≥99%) were dissolved in high-purity water (Millipore Milli-Q) at 40 °C under stirring to prepare the electrolytes, 32K8N, 8 m NaAc (referred to as 8N) and 1 M Na2SO4, respectively. All electrolytes were stored and used in the normal atmosphere.  
Powder X-ray diffraction analysis was performed in a Bragg-Brentano geometry using a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer. The patterns were recorded with Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm) in the 2θ range of 10° - 80° with a step size of 0.01°. Carbon elemental analyses for the various samples were performed on a Perkin–Elmer EA 2400 instrument. The morphology and structure of the sample was characterized by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM, ZEISS 1550VP) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL JEM-3000). The lattice fringes were determined via Cs-corrected high-resolution transmission electron microscopy operated at an acceleration voltage of 80 and 300 kV (FEI Titan 80–300 kV).  The XPS measurements were carried out on pristine and cycled NVTP/C electrodes using a monochromatic Al-Kα (hν = 1486.6 eV) X-ray source and a Phoibos 150 XPS spectrometer. High-resolution scans were acquired at 200 W, 30 eV pass energy and 0.1 eV energy step. The calibration of the binding energy in the photoelectron spectra was carried out using the graphitic-like carbon peak at 284.4 eV as reference. The fits were performed with the CasaXPS software, using a nonlinear Shirley-type background and a 70% Gaussian and 30% Lorentzian profile function. 
The linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) of the electrolytes (32K8N, 8N, 1 M Na2SO4) were performed in three-electrode glass cells, which comprised stainless steel foil or the commercial glass carbon (GC) electrode as the working electrode, a Pt-coated Ti rod as the counter electrode, and a Ag/AgCl reference electrode (sat. KCl, 0.197 V vs. SHE). The cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements of the NVTP/C and NVP/C electrodes were also performed using similar three-electrode cells. The NVTP/C electrodes were prepared by doctor-blade casting slurries with 80 wt.% NVTP/C, 10 wt.% carbon black (Super C65, IMERYS), and 10 wt.% polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) (Solef 6020, Arkema Group) on stainless steel. N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (anhydrous, Sigma–Aldrich) was used as solvent for the slurries. For NVTP/C electrodes, the weight ratio of active material, carbon black and binder was also 8:1:1. After drying, electrodes with a diameter of 12 mm were punched and further dried at 120 °C under high vacuum. Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of NVTP/C half- cells, using the 32K8N electrolyte, were recorded in three-electrode Swagelok cells consisting of NVTP/C electrodes as working electrodes, self-standing films of activated carbon as counter electrodes and leak-less Ag/AgCl as reference electrode. The self-standing films of activated carbon were composed of 70 wt.% activated carbon, 20 wt.% Super C65 and 10 wt.% PTFE. The large capacitance and negligible polarization (due to oversizing) of the counter electrode guarantees that the electrochemical response is dominated by the working electrode. The charge–discharge curves of NVTP/C full cells were tested in coin cells, employing the 32K8N and 8 m NaAc, and 1 M Na2SO4 electrolytes. For the full cells, the weight ratio of positive and negative active materials was around 1.2, the specific capacity was calculated based on the positive electrode weight. The active material mass loading of NVTP/C was approximately 2.5 mg cm-2. LSV and CV tests were conducted with a multichannel potentiostat/galvanostat (VMP3, Biologic Science Instruments, France). A Maccor 4000 Battery system (Maccor, USA) was used for the galvanostatic charge/discharge test at various C-rates. 
In situ XRD analysis of NVTP/C was performed in a self-designed two-electrode cell [12], [19], considering the negligible polarization of the counter electrodes as shown in the Fig. S1 and Fig. S2. The working electrode slurry, consisting of 80 wt% active materials, 10 wt% super-C45, and 10 wt% PVdF, was casted onto a beryllium (Be) disk (wet thickness 250 µm). The working electrode was dried at 60 °C under vacuum overnight. As counter electrode we used an oversized activated carbon disk electrode (70 wt.% activated carbon, 20 wt.% Super C65 and 10 wt.% PTFE). One layer of glass fiber (GF/D, Whatman) soaked with around 80 μL of the electrolyte served as separator. The assembled in situ cell was left to rest for 6 h before starting each measurement. Galvanostatic charge and discharge tests were performed using a potentiostat/galvanostat (SP-150, BioLogic) in the 0–0.6 V and -1.0-0 V voltage range, respectively. Meanwhile, XRD diffractograms were recorded in the 10–50° (2θ) range with a time per scan of 1883.6 s (about 30 min). 
The NVTP/C slurries were doctor-blade coated on a ca. 40 nm thick layer of Ti, which was sputtered onto a 50 mm thick tetrafluoroethylen-hexafluoropropylen-copolymer (FEP) ﬁlm (Bohlender, Bola), to achieve a nominal loading of ca. 2.5 mg cm2, and then dried at 80 °C in a vacuum oven. To obtain an adherent coating, the resulting ﬁlm was pressed with a hydraulic press (Specac) at a pressure of two tons per cm2. Afterwards, the electrodes of 13 mM in diameter were punched, which were installed in a modified Swagelok T-connector and interfaced to the mass spectrometer chamber as described in a previous report.[36] The DEMS setup used was based on a quadrupole mass spectrometer (Pfeiffer Vacuum, QMS 422), potentials were controlled by a potentiostat (Pine Instruments, AFRDE 5). For the DEMS measurements, a NVTP/C layer painted onto a stainless steel foil was used as counter electrode, and a leak-less Ag/AgCl served as reference electrode in ca. 0.5 ml 32K8N electrolyte. 
MD simulations were carried out using AMBER18[37] software with the GAFF force field,[38] which have shown good performances for highly ionic liquid mixtures[39, 40]. The four centers water model TIP4P[41] was used as it shows excellent performances. Atomic charges for acetate were computed with Gaussian09 at B3LYP/6-31++G** level of theory and applying the RESP algorithm. The protocol used for the MD simulations included (i) building of the initial random molecular arrangement with PACKMOL[42]; (ii) 1010 minimization cycles; (iii) gentle heating of the system from 0K to 50K over 5 ns in NVT ensemble; (iv) heating up to 300K over 50 ns in NPT ensemble; (v) NVT equilibration at 300K over 50 ns; NVT production phase for 20 ns. The obtained trajectories were analyzed using TRAVIS[43], and the boxes composition parameters are reported in the Table S1. 
Classical MD simulations were conducted to understand the interactions between cations, anions and water molecules. The box snapshots are demonstrated and it is immediately evident how water “islands” are progressively disrupted as more salt is added to the system (Fig. 1. aI, aIV and aVII). Water molecules tend to aggregate rather than being homogenously distributed in the solution, in a way resembling water-protic ionic liquid systems.[44-46] These aggregates vary in  shape and size depending on the electrolyte composition. We used the Gromacs [47] utility “gmx_clust_size” to analyze the trajectories, thus obtaining the average number and numerosity of water clusters in the systems. In our definition, two water molecules are in the same cluster if the Ow-Ow distance is shorter than 3 Å and the O-H—O angle is within 135° and 180°, meaning that they are hydrogen bonded. The results obtained are shown in Fig. S3. As expected, all water molecules belong to the same single cluster in the 8N electrolyte, while the situation is rather different for the other two electrolytes. The overall average number of water molecules in the 32K and 32K8N clusters is 149.25 and 65.13, respectively. In the simulations, the average number of clusters present is ~12 for 32 K and ~25 for 32K8N. This information, together with the average numerosity of the clusters, allows to estimate the fraction of “free water” molecules in the electrolytes, where a “free water” is a water molecule that interacts at least with another water molecule.[48] These are 39.8 mol% in 32K and 36.18 mol% in 32K8N. These species are by no mean identical to “water interacting only with water”. In fact, looking at the solvation shells and the hydration numbers (reported below), water molecules are so strongly interacting with ions that the water activity is greatly reduced. Focusing on the cation solvation shells in 32K8N (Fig. S4), a hint on the nature of the interactions can be obtained. As expected, potassium cations are able to coordinate to a larger number of water molecules than sodium, and the same is true for acetate anions. In fact, the maximum hydration number at infinite dilution is 5-6 for Na+, 5-10 for K+ and 6 for acetate, as determined by calculations.[49, 50] This is mainly because the larger size of K+ allows packing more molecules into the first solvation shell. As a consequence, the larger hydrated K+ ions are not able to intercalate into the NVTP/C electrode due to steric hindrance, thus acting as a water scavenger and offering a sufficient electrical conductivity as supporting electrolyte. The Raman investigation of a series of electrolytes including 8N, 32K and 32K8N have been carried out in our previous work[22]. However, the Raman study of 32K8N (see in Fig. S5) has been extended to the spectral range 3800–2800 cm-1 in order to further investigate the presence of free water molecule in such an electrolyte. It is found that the Raman band of water undergoes severe modifications in the 32K8Na system by deconvoluting the characteristic OH stretching band into five components located at ~3000, ~3300, ~3400, ~3600, and ~3700 cm-1 as conducted in the previous work.[51] In particular, all the bands relative to the water-water interactions are markedly shifted. Namely, the DAA band is shifted from ~3080 to ~2958 compared with pure water; the DDAA band from ~3200 to ~3327; the DA band from ~3420 to ~3454; the DDA band from ~3580 to ~3596; and the “free OH” from ~3620 to ~3726.[52] All these shifts are compatible with water molecules mainly interacting with acetate anions as already reported in our previous work.[51]  
The spatial distribution functions (SDFs) for acetate anions and water molecules are drawn for the 8N (Fig. 1aII, 1aIII), 32K (Fig. 1aV, 1aVI), and 32K8N (Fig. 1aVIII, 1aIX) electrolytes, illustrating the chemical environment for these species. Na+ ions barely interact with the acetate anions in the 8N system (Fig. 1aII) indicating that the salt is completely dissociated in this electrolyte. On the other hand, the cations in 32K (Fig. 1aV) and 32K8N (Fig. 1aVIII) strongly compete with water to interact with the acetate’s carboxylic group. It is also worth noticing that water is more strongly interacting with the anion as the salt concentration is raised. In the water solvation shell, Na+ and K+ cations show a different orientational behavior around water molecules. There is no competition between Na+ and K+ to occupy the same positions because of the bridging effect of the acetate. Apparently, the K+ ion prefers to be coordinated by water instead of acetate, and this is the reason why the same bridging is not observed for the heavier cation. The hydration numbers of Na+ resulting from our calculations for 8N and 32K8N are 4.23 and 1.00, respectively. Those of K+ for 32K and 32K8N are 3.65 and 3.25, respectively (see Table S2). Comparing with the maximum hydration numbers given above it appears clear that there is not enough water to satisfy these hydration requirements. As a consequence, water molecules are effectively shared between more hydration shells, i.e., bridging between ions. The diffusion trace of a randomly selected water molecule during the whole simulation is illustrated in Fig. 1b for each system. The respective water diffusion coefficients are 1.05·10-10, 8.73·10-11 and 7.05·10-11 m2/s for 8N, 32K, and 32K8N, respectively. This is a further confirmation of how water molecules are gradually seized by the ions upon increasing salt concentration, resulting in increasing numbers of shared hydration shells and contact ion pairs (CIP). To better understand the geometrical arrangement in the various electrolytes, radial and angular distribution functions were calculated and combined into contour maps for the 8N (Fig. S6), 32K (Fig. S7), and 32K8N (Fig. 1c) electrolytes. From the water-water interaction plots, it is again evident that isolated water clusters are almost completely vanishing at high salt concentration. This is witnessed by the decreased intensity of the peak at ~2.8 Å and ~180° corresponding to the water-water hydrogen bond. Also, the peak at ~3.3 Å and ~0°, related to water-water interaction mediated by an ion (ion-bridging interaction), increases with the salt content. Considering the acetate-sodium interaction stronger than the acetate-potassium one (because of the higher polarization power of Na+) and the higher concentration of K+, the bridge is unlikely to be made by Na+ in the Na+ based electrolyte. The distance and the angle of that correlation are, indeed, compatible with acetate-bridging interactions. This molecular organization has a direct impact on the diffusion of water molecules. 
The active material NVTP/C was synthesized according to a previously reported procedure [35] whose details are summarized in the experimental section. The Rietveld refinement of the prepared NVTP/C powder (see Fig. S8) shows a NASICON-type structure with a R-3c space group (a = 8.6012(2) Å and c = 21.8235(5) Å). The lattice parameters and the occupancy (summarized in Table S3) are consistent with those reported previously.[35] The SEM image of NVTP/C (see Fig. S9) shows the micrometric size of the material’s particles. The high-magnification TEM image (see Fig. S10) shows that NVTP/C particles are coated by a uniform (ca. 5 nm thick) carbon layer. Clear lattice fringes with a spacing of 0.431(3) nm are observed, corresponding to the spacing of the (110) planes. The carbon content of NVTP/C is determined to be 3 wt.% according to elemental analyses.  
To experimentally test the predictions from the MD simulations discussed above, we performed electrochemical measurements of NVTP/C electrodes coated on stainless steel foil in the 32K8N electrolyte in different potential regions, also evaluating the stability window of the electrolyte with bare SS and glassy carbon (GC) inert electrodes. The electrochemical stability window of 32K8N, measured using the SS working electrode, is approximately 2.4 V (see Fig. 2a), i.e., substantially broader than conventional diluted aqueous electrolytes. The hydrogen evolution is noticeably suppressed during the cathodic scan, as testified by the current increase occurring only at potentials lower than -1.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl. This confirms the decreased water activity indicated by the simulation. In the anodic scan, the current increase is detected at potentials higher than 0.9 V vs. Ag/AgCl. When the commercial GC electrode is employed as the working electrode, an even wider stability window is detected. Overall, the electrochemical stability window of the WiSE exceeds the high-voltage (V3+/V4+) and low-voltage (Ti3+/Ti4+) redox processes of NVTP/C, as testified by the cyclic voltammograms (CVs) recorded at 0.1 mVs−1 displayed in Fig. 2a. Thus, NVTP/C can be used at both the negative and the positive electrode of symmetric cells employing the 32K8N electrolyte. CVs of NVTP/C electrodes were also acquired at different scan rates (see Fig. S11a and Fig. S11b). For both redox processes, NVTP/C exhibits symmetric voltammograms, indicating highly reversible sodium intercalation processes. The comparison of the NVP/C and NVTP/C performance during the first three voltammetric cycles (Fig. S12) clearly reveal a better reversibility of the latter material with respect to the Ti-free one. The charge–discharge potential profiles of three-electrode Swagelok cells consisting of NVTP/C as the working electrode, self-standing activated carbon as the counter electrode, leak-less Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode and 32K8N as the electrolyte in the 0-0.6 V voltage window are shown in Fig. 2b. In the first cycle at 0.2C, the NVTP/C electrode displays a capacity of 54 mAh g-1 and a discharge (sodiation) capacity of 53 mAh g-1, demonstrating an excellent reversibility. Even at 1C and 2C the material shows discharge capacities of 43 and 39 mAh g-1, respectively. The results of the entire rate capability test are summarized in Fig. 2c. As expected, higher coulombic efficiencies and improved cycling stabilities are achieved when increasing the current density. After cycling at high current densities, the NVTP/C recovers the initial capacity values shown at 1C rate. The long-term cycling performance is displayed in Fig. 2d. After 400 cycles, we still obtain a discharge capacity of 33 mAh g-1 at 1C rate, equivalent to 79% capacity retention.The same tests were performed in the low-voltage range. As shown in Fig. 2e, charge–discharge curves were collected at different rates between -0.2 and -1.0 V. At 0.2C rate, the electrode shows a discharge (sodiation) capacity of 62 mAh g-1 and a charge (desodiation) capacity of 61 mAh g-1, once more highlighting the good reversibility of NVTP/C. The rate performance displayed in Fig. 2f reveals a coulombic efficiency close to 100% at any rate. In addition, we also obtained a discharge capacity of 48 mAh g-1 as well as a high coulombic efficiency after 400 cycles at 1C rate (Fig. 2g). Actually, the electrochemical response of the material is more stable when used as an anode than as a cathode. This is probably due to the fact that in the low-voltage region the electrode potential is far from H2 evolution, while in the high-voltage region it approaches the threshold of O2 evolution.  
In order to verify if K+ ions insert into the NVTP lattice, galvanostatic charge–discharge measurement of NVTP/C half cells (see Fig. S13) employing 32 m KAc as electrolyte were carried out in the high and low potential range. Regarding the former range, the NVTP/C electrode was fully desodiated in a cell employing the 32 m KAc electrolyte and then reassembled into a second cell employing fresh 32m KAc electrolyte. However, only a small amount of K+ ions was inserted into the desodiated NVTP lattice (see Fig. S13a).[53] Regarding the low potential range, a capacity of around 30 mAh g-1 can be delivered in the first discharge employing the 32 m KAc electrolyte (see Fig. S13b). This limited, but measurable capacity appears to be reasonable considering that K+ ions can be inserted into KTi2(PO4)3, which share a rather similar structure (R-3c space group) with NVTP.[54]  
As The structural evolution occurring to NVTP/C upon sodium insertion was investigated by in situ XRD. Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b show the voltage profiles and the corresponding evolution of the XRD patterns for NVTP/C electrodes operating in the high- and low-voltage regions, respectively, during the initial two cycles. In the high-voltage region, the shift of the diffraction peaks to higher 2θ values upon charge (sodium removal) is clearly resolved in the 2θ range 19°−22° and 31°−37°, together with the appearance of new features. The opposite trend is observed during sodium insertion. The evolution of the lattice parameters shown in Fig. S14 is obtained from Le Bail refinements [35]. The coloured regions correspond to the different processes occurring in NVTP/C. The diffraction peaks, in fact, continuously shift to higher 2θ values from OCV to 0.45 V (green region). The lattice parameters decrease in this region from a = 8.596(1) Å and c = 21.810(3) Å to a = 8.572(1) Å and c = 21.787(2) Å, reflecting the shrinking of the crystal structure upon sodium extraction.[55] Afterwards, from 0.45 to 0.6 V (purple area), the intensity of the NVTP/C reflections decreases, while new features corresponding to the Na-poor NVTP/C phase appear at 21°, 29.3° and 32.5°. The Na-poor phase is indexed with the same space group of pristine NVTP/C. Its diffraction peaks do not shift in position, but their intensity progressively increases. Hence, the lattice parameters of the Na-poor phase are constant during the sodium extraction (a = 8.470(1) Å and c = 21.699(6) Å). In order to determine the composition of the Na-poor phase, an additional in situ test was performed by holding the cell voltage at 0.6 V to fully desodiate the material prior to recording the XRD pattern. The resulting diffractogram is shown in Fig. S15 while the derived lattice parameters, atomic positions and occupancy are summarized in Table S4. The Rietveld refinement shows that the Na-poor phase corresponds to a Na1.1Ti0.5V0.5(PO4)3/C stoichiometry.[35] Interestingly, the occupancy of Na1 sites (6b Wyckoff position) during the sodium extraction remained constant, while that of Na2 sites, i.e., the 18e sites, decreased. This indicates that Na2 is more easily extracted than Na1, probably because of a weaker electrostatic bonding. Therefore, we conclude that the NVTP/C during sodium extraction exhibits a solid-solution (ss) mechanism between OCV and 0.45 V, followed by a biphasic reaction up to 0.6 V. The opposite behaviour is observed during the sodium insertion process. A biphasic mechanism is observed in the voltage range from 0.6 to 0.44 V, while a solid-solution mechanism occurs afterwards. In the biphasic region (purple area), the intensity of the peaks corresponding to Na-poor phase decreases, while the peaks of the Na-rich NVTP/C develop. Meanwhile, in the solid-solution region (green area) the reflections of Na-rich NVTP/C are more intense and shifted to lower 2θ values due to the expansion of the crystal structure (a = 8.589(1) Å and c = 21.805(2) Å) at the end of the discharge process. The same trends are observed in the second cycle, showing that the NVTP/C structural evolution is completely reversible upon cycling in cells employing the 32K8N electrolyte. The in situ XRD patterns of NVTP/C recorded in the low-voltage region are shown in Fig. 3b. The XRD patterns clearly show a different structural evolution upon sodiation compared with that in the high-voltage region. The NVTP/C peaks continuously shift to lower 2θ values during the discharge process (blue patterns), and move back to higher angles during charging (desodiation, red patterns). However, no new peak develops, suggesting that the further sodiation of NVTP/C follows a solid-solution mechanism. Such behaviour was also observed for other polyanionic compounds.[56, 57] During the sodium insertion the lattice parameters evolve from a = 8.5952(5) Å and c = 21.805(2) Å to a = 8.750(1) Å and c = 21.854(3) Å as shown in Fig. S16. Interestingly, while the lattice parameter a increases upon insertion of sodium, indicative of an expansion of the crystal structure, the c parameter remains almost constant, indicating that only small changes occur along the c direction. Upon the following sodium extraction, the lattice parameters change to a = 8.6005(6) Å and c = 21.811(2) Å, showing a good recovery of the initial structure and confirming the excellent reversibility of NVTP/C in the low-voltage region. This is further supported by the reversible behaviour during the second sodiation-desodiation cycle. 
The surface chemistry of pristine and cycled NVTP/C negative electrodes was examined by XPS. The C 1s and K 2p core level spectra are shown in Fig. 4a. Furthermore, this also shows spectra recorded after 2, 6 and 12 minutes of Ar+ sputtering of the cycled electrode, in order to monitor the surface composition evolution at increasing depth. The peak at 284.8 eV, attributed mainly to the C-C bonds in the conductive carbon,[58] increases over sputtering due to the removal of the external layers. On the other hand, the C-O peak (286.5 eV), which is very strong in the cycled electrode, decreases constantly upon sputtering, suggesting that it mainly originates from surface layer compounds. Interestingly, the carbonate peak emerging at ~ 290.7 eV, associated with K2CO3 and/or Na2CO3, decreases in intensity after 2 minutes sputtering, but remains rather constant for longer sputtering times.[59, 60] In fact, this refers to the presence of a stable carbonate component (CO32-) over the surface-near region accessible in these measurements. This could be responsible for the stable electrochemical response of negative electrode, as was observed before for high concentrated aqueous batteries.[61] The same investigation was performed on NVTP/C positive electrodes (Fig. 4b). Once more, the surface layer is formed by carbon-containing species similar to that on the negative electrode. Interestingly, however, the peak corresponding to -CO32- is shifted towards lower binding energy in the cycled positive electrode with respect to both the pristine and the negative electrode. This suggests that the surface layer formed on the cathode is not only constituted by carbonates, but also by species having carbon bound to two oxygen such as, carboxyl, ester and/or alkyl carbonate.[62] Notably, the intensity of the C-C peak is lower than that of NTVP/C as negative electrode after 12 min of Ar+ sputtering, suggesting that a thicker surface layer is formed on the positive electrode, which might be due to the oxygen released. 
To further confirm the stability of the electrolyte during cell cycling and to possibly detect the source of the carbonate produced on the surface of the cycled electrodes, DEMS experiments were performed,[36] allowing the online monitoring of gas evolution in the highly concentrated acetate-based electrolyte. The NVTP/C based slurry was directly casted on a non-porous, Ti-sputtered fluorinated ethylene-propylene (FEP) membrane, which is connected to the mass spectrometer chamber and allows to online selectively detect gases evolving at the working electrode-electrolyte interface.[36, 63] The CVs recorded in the cathodic and anodic scan in this setup, employing NVTP/C as working and counter electrodes, a leak-less Ag/AgCl as reference electrode, and the 32K8N as electrolyte, are shown in Fig. 5(aI, aII, bI, bII), respectively. The mass spectrometric current traces for O2 (m/z = 32) or CO2 (m/z = 44) are presented in Fig. 5(aIII, aIV, bIII, bIV). Most important, we did not detect any evolution of O2 (m/z = 32) or CO2 (m/z = 44) during the sodiation/de-sodiation process on the positive side (Fig. 5(aIII, aIV)) nor on the negative side (Fig. 5(bIII, bIV)). This further underlines the remarkable stability of the 32K8N electrolyte. Hence, the carbonate detected on the surface of the cycled electrodes by XPS might be due to some reaction between the alkaline electrolyte and CO2 from air considering that the electrolyte preparation and cell assembly were carried out in ambient atmosphere.[64] However, a more substantial amount of carbonate might also derive from the decomposition of acetate anions without CO2 evolution, considering the alkaline nature of the electrolyte. DEMS experiments performed in the potentiostatic mode (see Fig. S17) further confirmed the absence of gas evolution. Finally, to further investigate the stability of the 32K8N electrolyte, a LSV DEMS test was carried in cathodic direction. As shown in Fig. S18, there was no evolution of H2 until ca. -1.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), which is consistent with the LSV results shown before in Fig. 2a 
For comparison, the conventional 1M Na2SO4 and 8 m NaAc electrolytes were also evaluated in symmetric cells employing NVTP/C electrodes coated on SS. The electrochemical stability window (ESW) of these two electrolytes was first determined by LSV utilizing a SS working electrode as displayed in Fig. S19. In conventional 1M Na2SO4, the cathodic decomposition begins well before -1 V, while O2 evolution appears at about 1.3 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) on the anodic scan. Although hydrogen evolution is suppressed in 8 m NaAc solution as a result of  decreased water activity, the anodic stability of this electrolyte is lower than that of 1M Na2SO4 because the former electrolyte is slightly alkaline while the latter is neutral.[22] The 1M Na2SO4 and 8 m NaAc electrolytes do not approach the wide ESW (~2.4 V) recorded for 32K8N (Fig. 2a). As shown by the charge–discharge curves of symmetric NVTP/C cells employing the 1M Na2SO4 electrolyte in Fig. 6a, an obvious decomposition of the electrolyte is observed in the first charge, resulting in a rather limited discharge capacity and a large irreversible capacity. The cell employing 8 m NaAc (see Fig. 6b) shows an improved performance, but still displays significant irreversibility and capacity fading. On the other hand, the cell employing 32K8N as the electrolyte offers superior performance with a stable voltage plateau and promising capacity retention (see Fig. 6a). As comparison, the irreversible capacities of cells with these three electrolytes upon the first, second, and third cycle, respectively, are displayed in Fig. 6c. The irreversible capacity of these cells gradually decreases upon cycling, but those employing 32K8N always offer the lowest irreversible capacity. In order to understand the reason for such a different irreversible capacity behaviour, the cells were disassembled after cycling and the separators inspected. As evident from the images shown in Fig. S20, the separator soaked with 1M Na2SO4 (see Fig. S20a) turns yellow, suggesting a possible dissolution of vanadium. The other two separators remained colorless, but some crystals can also be noticed on the surface of the separator with 8 m NaAc (see Fig. S20b), probably due to precipitation of the salt as a result of water decomposition. Differently, after 500 cycles at 1C, the separator (see Fig. S20c) from the cell employing 32K8N does not show any crystal precipitation.  The charge–discharge profiles of symmetric NVTP/C cells, recorded at different C-rates in the voltage range 0.5 - 1.5 V, are illustrated in Fig. 6e. The capacity values of the symmetric cells are given based on the weight of the positive electrode since this is the capacity limiting electrode. A capacity of 57 mAh g-1 is obtained in the second charge at 0.2 C, while a capacity of 52 mAh g-1 is achieved in the following discharge, showing a low irreversible capacity (<9%). The symmetric cells also display a discharge capacity of 45 mAh g-1 at 1C and 23 mAh g-1 at 10C, similar as in the half cell tests reported earlier. The cell rate performance in Fig. S21 presents an obvious capacity fading at 0.2C, but better stability and higher coulombic efficiency with higher cycling rates. The long-term cycling performances at 1C and 10C of full cells are presented in Fig. S22 and Fig. 6g, respectively. Discharge capacities of 32 mAh g-1 at 1C and 21 mAh g-1 at 10C are delivered after 500 cycles. Irreversible reactions and a slight dissolution of NVTP occurring in the positive electrode are mainly responsible for the capacity fading of the NVTP/C cells,[65, 66] in agreement with the half-cell results shown in Fig. 2. As reported in previous works, 1 M Na2SO4 and 9.2 m NaOTF have been also applied as electrolytes for symmetric NVTP/C cells.[15, 34] To emphasise the advantages of the 32K8N electrolyte developed in this work, a rough comparison in terms of costs, environmental benefits, conductivity of these three electrolytes, as well as coulombic efficiency of the respective cells employing them has been carried out as shown in Fig. 6f. The 32K8N electrolyte is substantially cheaper, more environmentally friendly and enables higher initial coulombic efficiency compared with 9.2 m NaOTF. The ionic conductivity is certainly lower, but still approaching 12 mS cm-1, which is sufficient for the cell operation. Although 1 M Na2SO4 has obviously an edge in the ionic conductivity compared with 32K8N, the coulombic efficiency of cells employing 1 M Na2SO4 appears unsatisfactory compared with cells including the 32K8N. For the sake of completeness, a comparison of properties between conventional non-aqueous electrolytes and some aqueous electrolytes is provided in Table S5. The numbers clearly demonstrate that halide-free 32K8N is certainly superior in terms of cost savings and environmental benignity compared to other concentrated electrolytes.  
In this work, a green and low-cost WiSE composed by a mixture of potassium and sodium acetate was deeply investigated for application in aqueous sodium-ion batteries. MD simulations demonstrated the substantially reduced water activity and unique solvation structure of such electrolytes. Based on these promising modelling results, the electrolyte was utilized in aqueous symmetric sodium-ion batteries, employing NASICON-structured NVTP/C as both the negative (anode) and the positive (cathode) electrode. The resulting full sodium-ion cells offer an average discharge voltage of 1.13 V, excellent cycling performance and a high coulombic efficiency (99.1% at 1C and 99.9% at 10 C) for over 500 cycles. In-situ XRD experiments reveal that the structural evolution of NVTP during the insertion and removal of sodium-ions is different in the high- and low-voltage regions. Overall, the acetate-based WiSE developed here presents a substantially improved electrochemical performance compared to dilute Na2SO4 and NaAc electrolytes. Indeed, besides the improved electrochemical stability, it also suppresses the degradation of the active material upon cycling. The superiority of 32K8N electrolyte in terms of cost, environmental benefits and the corresponding coulombic efficiency in the same type of symmetric cell has been demonstrated with respect to 9.2 m NaOTF.  