Olivine-type LiMnPO4 (LMP) cathodes have gained enormous attraction for Li-ion batteries (LIBs), thanks to their large theoretical capacity, high discharge platform, and thermal stability. However, it is still hugely challenging to achieve encouraging Li-storage behaviors owing to their low electronic conductivity and limited lithium diffusion. Herein, the core double-shell Ti-doped LMP@NaTi2(PO4)3@C/3D graphene (TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G) architecture is designed and constructed via an in situ synthetic methodology. A continuous electronic conducting network is formed with the unfolded 3D-G and conducting carbon nanoshell. The Nasicon-type NTP nanoshell with exceptional ionic conductivity efficiently inhibits gradual enrichment in by-products, and renders low surfacial/interfacial electron/ion-diffusion resistance. Besides, a rapid Li+ diffusion in the bulk structure is guaranteed with the reduction of MnLi+˙ antisite defects originating from the synchronous Ti-doping. Benefiting from synergetic contributions from these design rationales, the integrated TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G cathode yields high initial discharge capacity of ≈164.8 mAh g−1 at 0.05 C, high-rate reversible capacity of ≈116.2 mAh g−1 at 10 C, and long-term capacity retention of ≈93.3% after 600 cycles at 2 C. More significantly, the electrode design developed here will exert significant impact upon constructing other advanced cathodes for high-energy/power LIBs.

Recently, many countries around the world have launched a ban on fuel-powered vehicles timetables, for instance, the Netherlands and Norway plan to completely ban fuel trucks by 2025, the time given by Germany and India is by 2030, and the United Kingdom and France by 2040. Up till now, Li-ion batteries (LIBs), as one competitive electrochemical energy storage devices, promise maximally to boost the advancement and popularization of electric vehicles (EVs) and hybrid EVs.1, 2 The cathode materials employed in LIBs play a key role in determining the energy/power density, safety, cost, and environmental benignity. In contrast with the widely studied olivine-type LiFePO4, the isostructural LiMnPO4 (LMP) exhibits a higher working potential plateau (4.1 V vs Li+/Li), which can enhance the theoretical energy density by ≈20%.3, 4 Unfortunately, the critical issues confronted by LMP still lie in its intrinsic defects such as poor electronic conductivity and low ionic conductivity, which would slow down its electrochemical activities in repeated lithiation/delithiation processes.5 In addition, the potential kinetics limiting factors cannot be ignored including Jahn–Teller distortion of Mn3+, interface strain deriving from the variation of lattice volume, and the metastable MnPO4 upon delithiation,6 which will be aggravated especially under high current densities. Thus, various strategies have been attempted to circumvent these kinetic limitations in LMP. In general, the inferior electronic/ionic conductivities can be improved by surface coating with conductive materials, along with particle nanocrystallization and preferential growth offering a shortened Li+ diffusion pathway. Additionally, the enhanced electrochemical properties also can be achieved by cation doping, which can effectively inhibit the lattice volume contraction during lithiation/delithiation process.7-9 Although the reversi-ble capacity and rate capability of the LMP have been promoted to some extent, it is still far away from the requirements in practical application. Hence, it is imperative yet challengeable to surmount the abovementioned bottlenecks of the LMP, and construct a LMP-based composite with enhanced electronic/ionic transport kinetics toward high-performance LIBs.10, 11

In view of the sluggish kinetics of the LMP, the key point to facilitate ion transport is to design the nanoscaled LMP cathodes. Various nanometer-sized morphologies including porous nanoflakes, nanorods, and ultrathin nanoplates have been successfully fabricated via different approaches.12-15 Apart from precise morphology and size control, the integration of LMP and carbonaceous materials including graphitized/amorphous carbon, 1D carbon nanotubes/nanofibers, and 2D graphene (2D-G), has been recognized as a preferred strategy to improve their overall electrochemical properties.16, 17 Specifically, 2D-G, as a flexible carbon material, can offer an ultralarge contact area, which enables it to be widely applied for preparing high-performance hybrid electrodes with the least carbon content.18, 19 Unfortunately, just some limited effects, to the bet of our knowledge, can be achieved with the introduction of stacked 2D-G to improve electronic conductivity of the LMP itself.5, 20 By contrast, the unfolded 3D graphene (3D-G) is intensively validated to considerably improve the electrochemical behaviors of various electrodes, thanks to its sufficient electroactive sites and effective counteraction of self-aggregation of active nanoparticles (NPs).18, 21-23 On the other hand, so far, multitudinous efforts of the surface-decoration for the LMP have been focused on elevating electrical conductivity by using aforementioned carbon materials, while less endeavors are made for optimizing electrode–electrolyte surfaces/interfaces to accelerate Li+ transfer and further enhance high-rate capabilities. In this regard, a core–shell architecture consists of the LMP core and α-LiAlO2 with fast Li+ diffusion channels as a shell is fabricated, and yields a high initial discharge capacity of ≈156.4 mAh g−1 at 0.05 C, and even ≈105 mAh g−1 at a high rate of 10 C.24 Inspired by this, it is definitely anticipated to promote the electrochemical behaviors of electroactive LMP by constructing highly conductive and stable electrode–electrolyte surfaces/interfaces for efficient Li+ shuttling back and forth, which can suppress some annoying side-reactions and enhance Li+ and/or electrons transportation.25

With all the considerations above in mind, in this investigation, we purposefully developed an in situ synthetic strategy for scalable construction of a Ti-doped LMP@NaTi2(PO4)3@C/3D graphene (TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G) cathode, where the nanoscaled TLMP core coated by the double-shell including the intimal NTP and outer carbon nanoshells was intimately embedded in adjacent 3D-G network. Such innovative architecture is endowed with multiple superiorities for efficient Li-storage behaviors. First, the Nasicon-type NTP with rapid Li+ migration channels as a stable and Li-penetrable interfacial shell interconnects the inner TLMP core and the outside electronic conductive carbon nanolayers, which makes each TLMP@NTP@C particle to be a high-speed microreactor for uninhibited electrochemical reactions. Second, the synchronous Ti-doping over high-temperature calcination can further ensure the highly crystalline TLMP core with less structural defects. Third, a distinguishable interdiffused channel between the TLMP core and NTP shell is further beneficial for rapid Li+ migration. Fourth, the appealing 3D-G, which not only functions as superior electronic conductive networks but confines the TLMP core at the nanoscale, integrates well with TLMP@NTP@C NPs. Besides, the nanocarbon shell also can timely bridge the 3D-G conductive networks. Accordingly, the interconnected 3D electronic transport network in the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G composite cathode was built, substantially enhancing the electronic conductivity of the whole electrode. When utilized as a competitive cathode for LIBs, our designed hierarchical core double-shell TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G exhibited high initial discharge capacity, remarkable rate capabilities, and long-span cyclic stability, thanks to its promising structural and componential features.

The in situ synthesis process of the hierarchical core double-shell TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G is illustrated in Scheme 1. In brief, the electropositive cations (Li+ and Mn2+) are spontaneously adsorbed upon the surface of the negatively charged graphene oxide (GO) through electrostatic interaction.26, 27 Subsequently, with the introduction of PO43− and H+, the MnPO4 and Li3PO4 NPs as intermediates are formed, and tightly anchored on the GO via a rapid precipitation between Li+ and PO43− as well as the PO43− and Mn3+ (the oxidization of Mn2+ to Mn3+ can be induced by NO3− in acidic solution here).28, 29 After the following hydrothermal process, the Li3PO4 and MnPO4 NPs mutually interact and grow. The nanosized LMP precursor clingingly encircled with the GO is obtained. Then, a homogeneous TiO2 nanocoating is formed on the LMP surface through the hydrolysis reaction of tetrabutyl titanate. Note that the TiO2 layer not only reacts with the subsequently added Na+ and PO43− to form a NTP nanoshell but diffuses into the LMP bulk to construct the TLMP over the calcination at 670 °C. The 3D-G network and external carbon nanoshell also take shape meanwhile. More intriguingly, the TLMP surface modified by double-shell including the intimal NTP phase and outer polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)-derived carbon shell, which is intimately embedded in the adjacent 3D-G networks, can be produced. Thus, the hierarchical core double-shell TLMP@NTP@C@3D-G composite cathode is finally obtained.

Figure 1a exhibits the representative X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the LMP@C, LMP@C/3D-G, and TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G samples. Apparently, all the diffraction peaks of the resultant products, involving their peak intensities and positions, can be indexed perfectly into the olivine-type LMP phase (JCPDS card no. 74–0375) with the space group of Pnma.30 But typical peaks for the coating carbon and 3D-G cannot be observed here, maybe due to their low contents and/or amorphous feature. The residual carbon contents are totally determined as 6.08, 6.12, and 6.16 wt% in the LMP@C, LMP@C/3D-G, and TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G, respectively. Of particular note is that there is a slight shift of (020) peak for the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G in comparison with other two without the NTP (Figure S1a, Supporting Information), for which the smaller ionic radius of the doped Ti4+ (0.61 Å) than the Mn2+ (0.80 Å) should be quite responsible.31, 32 This observation also manifests the successful doping of the elemental Ti into the LMP, rather than a new phase. Due to the low amount (≈3.0 wt%) of the NTP nanoshell, no typical diffraction peaks of the NTP can be discerned in the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G. But as for the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G specimen with the NTP content as high as 6.0 wt%, typical diffraction peak at 24.1°, corresponding to the Nasicon-type NTP of rhombohedral space group of R 3⎯⎯ c (167) (JCPDS card no. 84-2009),33, 34 can be distinctly detected (Figure S1b, Supporting Information). Furthermore, single-phase NTP can be successfully fabricated according to the same synthetic parameters we developed here, as supported by the XRD pattern (Figure S2a, Supporting Information). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and corresponding high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images (Figure S2b and the top-right inset, Supporting Information) with well-defined lattice fringes of a spacing of ≈0.37 nm strongly confirm the high crystallinity of the as-obtained NTP.35 The above analysis primarily validates the feasibility of our design to finely synthesize an olivine-type TLMP core encapsulated with a functional NTP nanoshell.

In order to probe the chemical oxidation states of the surfacial/interfacial elements in the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis was conducted accordingly. The survey spectrum (Figure 1b) of the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G shows that the typical signals of the Li 1s, P 2p, and O 1s are located at binding energies (BEs) of 55.9, 133.2, and 531.4 eV, respectively, with the reference energy at 284.6 eV for the C 1s. In addition, a distinct Ti 2p at ≈458.9 eV emerges for the TLMP@NTP@G@C, while no distinguishable Ti 2p peak can be found for both the LMP@C and LMP@C/3D-G samples (Figure S3a, Supporting Information). Figure 1c presents the high-resolution Mn 2p spectrum and corresponding fitted profiles for the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G. Compared to those for the LMP@C and LMP@C/3D-G (Figure S3b, Supporting Information), noticeably, the energy location of Mn 2p (640.8 eV) shows no discernible differences in the three samples, implying that the Nasicon-type NTP nanocoating does not disturb the oxidation state of the Mn species at all. The five fitted peaks centered at 639.8, 641.0, 641.8, 642.7, and 644.2 eV reveal the existence of Mn(II) in the three samples.36 Similarly, the core-level P 2p (133.4 eV) for the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G (Figure S3c, Supporting Information), corresponding to the tetrahedral PO43− group,37 is almost identical to those for the LMP@C and LMP@C@3D-G. A powerful evidence to demonstrate the existence of NTP nanocoating can be perceived from the high-resolution of Ti 2p. Expectedly, the Ti 2p of the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G (Figure S3d, Supporting Information) is characterized with double peaks at 459.4 and 465.0 eV, which is in good agreement with the feature of TiO2,38 suggesting the tetravalent Ti in the NTP. But no Ti 2p signal can be found in the LMP@C. Figure 1d displays the C 1s spectrum for the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G, which can be deconvoluted into four peaks, namely, the lower BE featured at 284.4 eV referring to the sp2-hybridized (CC) carbon, and the higher BEs observed at 284.9 and 285.9 eV followed by a shoulder at 288.9 eV corresponding to sp3-hybridized carbon, epoxy groups, and carbonyl groups, respectively.39 Additionally, the dominant CC bond with a high content of ≈40.4% in the C functional groups can promote the electronic conductivity of the composite cathode.40

Raman spectra are further performed to detect more structural information about the core double-shell TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G. As comparatively depicted in Figure 1e, no peak position difference at the wavenumber of 944 cm−1, which is assigned to the intramolecular stretching modes of PO43−,41, 42 can be apparently observed in the enlarged spectra (Figure S4, Supporting Information) of the three samples, suggesting the high purity of the host LMP in the three. Apart from typical bands of the olivine-type LMP, as shown in Figure 1e, other two strong signals at ≈1342 and ≈1591 cm−1 for three samples are generally ascribed to the characteristic D- and G-bands deriving from the C nanoshell and/or 3D-G.43 In general, the G-band characterizes the existence of graphite carbon, while the D-band represents the disorders or defects in the graphitic structure.44 The intensity ratio (ID/IG) of the D-band to G-band is commonly utilized to assess the degree of surfacial disorder of carbon materials. As estimated from Figure 1e, the ID/IG values of the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G (1.17) and LMP@C/3D-G (1.14) with the unique 3D-G are distinctly higher than that of the LMP@C (0.78). This result can be probably ascribed to the significant decrease in the size of the in-plane sp2 domains but the increase in the number of these domains during the chemical oxidation, ultrasonic exfoliation, and thermal reduction of GO.26, 45-48 Besides, the Raman spectrum of the 3D-G (Figure S5, Supporting Information) with a distinct D peak can further account for the above observation. Additionally, one more 2D band emerges at ≈2685 cm−1 for the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G and LMP@C/3D-G, and incontrovertibly corroborates the existence of unique 3D-G in the two.49 Figure 1f exhibits typical Fourier-transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra of the three samples along with the phase-pure NTP (the bottom black line). Apparently, no discernable divergences from the FT-IR profiles are observed for these three specimens, and the shape of curves is in good line with the LMP reported previously,42, 50 strongly implying that the olivine-type structure of the core is highly preserved during the subsequent modification process. Specifically, the signals located in the range between 1000 and 1150 cm−1 match well with the symmetric and antisymmetric stretching vibrations of the PO43− anion, while those between 550 and 670 cm−1 are induced from bending vibrations of the anion and lattice modes.42, 51

Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) images (Figure S6a–c, Supporting Information) visually confirm the loose and 3D open architecture of the resulted 3D-G sample. Numerous wrinkles (Figure S6b, Supporting Information) and transparent feature (Figure S6c, Supporting Information) obviously confirm the ultrathin and flexible nature of the 3D-G. Corresponding HRTEM image (Figure S6d, Supporting Information) of the sheet edge manifests that our 3D-G is just composed of 3–6 layers. Figure 2a,b demonstrates typical FESEM images of the LMP@C with different magnifications. Strikingly, the uniformly distributed spherical structure with an average particle size of 100–200 nm or so is observed for the LMP@C, which is further graphically described in Figure 2c. And as for the LMP@C/3D-G (Figure 2d,e) and TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G (Figure 2g,h) samples, all these LMP@C and TLMP@NTP@C NPs are homogeneously embedded or enclosed in the 3D-G architecture. After careful examination, it is evident that no significant morphological differences are observed between the LMP@C@3D-G and TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G, indicating that the NTP and carbon nanoshells are absolutely coated on the surface of the LMP or TLMP NPs without additional impurities left, which can be vividly described in Figure 2f,i, respectively. As established, the 3D-G with good flexibility has a congenital superiority to comprehensively encircle each TLMP NPs, rather than just function as a simple conductive additive, which can maximally enhance the electronic conductivity, and restrain the aggregation of the electrodes over cycling.18, 43 Aiming to figure out the uniform distribution of the NTP nanocoating over the entire area of each TLMP particles, scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM, Figure 2j) and elemental energy dispersive spectroscopic (EDS) mapping signals (Figure 2k–n) of two contiguous TLMP@NTP@C NPs located in the 3D-G are recorded. It should be pronouncedly noted that the EDS distributions of elemental Mn (Figure 2k) and P (Figure 2l) show the quasi-sphere shape, which is identical to the homologous STEM image, indicative of a high uniformity of the two elements in the TLMP. And the Ti (Figure 2m) and Na (Figure 2n) signals peculiar to the NTP are as well distributed over all scope of two particles in the same manner, definitely reflecting that the NTP nanocoating is evenly built upon the electroactive TLMP surface.

To gain more insights into specific surfacial/interfacial microstructures of the novel core double-shell architecture and further authenticate the presence of 3D-G in the hybrids, TEM and corresponding HRTEM images of all the samples are comparatively shown in Figure 3. The TEM observation of the LMP@C, as displayed in Figure 3a, reveals that the LMP@C consists of numerous spherical NPs, which is in good line with its FESEM images (Figure 2a,b). The 3D-G can be directly perceived from the TEM images of the LMP@C/3D-G (Figure 3b) and TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G (Figure 3c) composites, and highly maintains its original state (Figure S6, Supporting Information). As explicitly exhibited in Figure 3d, several ultrathin and transparent 3D-G nanosheets (NSs) can be observed in the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G sample, as shown by our design conception (Scheme 1). As expected, unhampered electron migration can be effectively ensured here. Figure 3e displays the HRTEM image of the LMP@C. Obviously, two distinct structures can be noticed at the interface, as separated by the white dotted line. The outer amorphous C shell is presented with a uniform thickness of ≈3 nm, whereas the crystal lattice spacing of ≈0.351 nm in the interior section coincides well to the spacing of (111) plane of olivine-type LMP.37 After elaborative observation into the LMP@C/3D-G, a uniform C film with a thickness of ≈3 nm, similar to the LMP@C, covers on the surface of the crystalline LMP with well-defined lattice fringes for the (311) facets, as demonstrated in Figure 3f. And a conspicuous difference is that a legible 3D-G can be evidently observed for the LMP@C/3D-G. Remarkably, the 3D-G NSs intimately contact with the core–shell LMP@C, forming a highway for electron transport, thus superior rate capability can be deserved. Besides, the novel core double-shell interfacial structure for the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G is also synchronously developed. Accordingly, HRTEM image of the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G, taken from the magenta square zone in Figure 3c, is exhibited in Figure 3g, where the unique core double-shell architecture can be clearly discerned. As noted, the inner core presents distinct lattice fringes with a spacing of ≈0.438 nm, corresponding to the (011) crystalline plane of the TLMP. And the neighboring outer shell of ≈8 nm in thickness shows a comparable clear lattice fringes of a spacing of ≈0.276 nm, which can be rationally assigned to the (116) facet for the NTP phase.25, 52 Furthermore, an amorphous C nanoshell with a thickness of ≈3 nm is clearly located at the outmost as well. The unique core double-shell architecture can be further verified in the magnified HRTEM visualization (Figure 3h). As pronouncedly examined from the surfacial/interfacial section (Figure 3h), they can be successively assigned to the TLMP core with a high crystallinity, the nano-NTP shell (≈8 nm) with an eye-catching lattice fringes, and the ultrathin carbon nanoshell, respectively, from the inside to the outside along the red arrow, undisputedly confirming the existence of the unique core double-shell architecture in the hybrid cathode. In addition, a distinguishable nano heterointerface exists between the bulk TLMP and NTP nanoshell, which can probably act as a more convenient Li+ ions migration channel during the electrochemical process.25, 53

As discussed above, the as-obtained TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G composite possesses an overwhelming structural superiority, which undoubtedly promises its potential utilization in LIBs as a high-performance cathode. Figure 4a shows typical cyclic voltammetry (CV) profiles of the three samples recorded in the voltage of 2.5–4.5 V (vs Li/Li+) with a fixed scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. Evidently, only a couple of distinct redox peaks, corresponding to the oxidation/reduction process between Mn2+ and Mn3+, can be observed, suggesting that the electrochemical nature of the LMP is not disturbed by our implemented modification strategy at all.54, 55 As well known to all, the depolarization depth is sufficiently reflected from the redox potential gap observed in CV curve. It is noted that the redox potential gap of the LMP@C can be estimated as 385 mV from the compressed and unsymmetrical CV curves (Figure 4a), which absolutely means the stagnant kinetics during lithiation/delithiation process. By contrast, the LMP@C/3D-G shows a smaller polarization of 298 mV, for which the 3D-G, a highly conductive 3D network allowing for rapid migration of both Li+ and electrons, should be responsible. And the polarization, as for the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G, is further substantially suppressed, merely yielding a gap value of 197 mV. Besides this, sharp peaks and symmetrical profiles also can be distinctly observed for the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G. The enlarged section (Figure S7, Supporting Information), taken from the pink dashed rectangle in Figure 4b, manifests that the voltage interval between the charge/discharge plateaus of the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G is dramatically smaller than those for the other two, indicating its lowest polarization among the three. The considerable depolarization certainly can be put down to the synergistic effect generated by the coalition of the 3D-G and Ti-doped core double-shell structure, which boosts the electrochemical reaction kinetics considerably due to the accelerated transportation of lithium ions and electrons.27 Typical initial voltage profiles of the three samples are distinctly compared in Figure 4b. Obviously, each cell is charged at a constant 0.05 C rate (1 C = 170 mA g−1) to 4.5 V, further kept at 4.5 V for 1 h, and then discharged at the identical rate to 2.5 V. What these curves possess in common is a charge plateau above 4.2 V and the discharge one around 4.0 V (vs Li/Li+), suggesting that a first-order phase transition between the LMP and MnPO4 occurs during the charge/discharge reaction.45 The voltage platform of the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G is pronouncedly longer than that for the LMP@C, and slightly in excess of the LMP@C/3D-G as well. Typically, the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G yields a discharge capacity as high as ≈164.8 mAh g−1, which approximately approaches its theoretical capacity of 170 mAh g−1, and is much larger than that of the LMP@C (≈137.8 mAh g−1). Meanwhile, a significant capacity increase of ≈4.8% can be determined for the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G when compared to the LMP@C@3D-G (≈157.3 mAh g−1), for which the Ti4+-doping leading to the stronger TiO bond formation and the multifunctional NTP nanoshell with superior Li+ conductivity should well account.32, 56

Thanks to the Ti-doped bulk LMP structure coupled with double-shell and 3D-G network, the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G is endowed with inherently high Li+ and/or electrons conductivity, and expected to deserve prominent Li+-insertion/extraction dynamics for advanced LIBs. Figure 5a–c profiles the typical charge–discharge plots of the three samples at various rates (from 0.1 to 10 C) within the voltage range from 2.5 to 4.5 V (vs Li/Li+). It is worthy of mentioning that the charge and discharge rates are identical when cycled at 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, and 1 C, while the others are charged with a fixed rate of 1 C, and discharged at respective increased rates. Simple comparison obviously exhibits the overwhelming superiorities of the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G cathode at each C rate, especially at high rates, when compared with others. Strikingly, the details reflected from the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G electrode, not only in charged but discharged process, are centralized upon the augment of current rates, whereas the voltage interval of the LMP@C is progressively aggravated, which can be ascribed to the mounting electrochemical polarization and charge transfer resistance. On the other hand, the comparison between the LMP@C/3D-G (Figure 5b) and TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G (Figure 5c) strongly proves that the rate properties can be evidently promoted by the inner Ti-doping and outer NTP nanocoating. Typical rate capabilities of all three samples tested form 0.05 to 10 C and then back to 0.05 C with five cycles per step are evaluated between 2.5 and 4.5 V (vs Li/Li+), and presented in Figure 5d. Obviously, the hierarchical TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G cathode obtains average discharge capacities of ≈160.0, ≈155.3, ≈147.5, ≈140.4, and ≈133.1 mAh g−1 at 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, and 2 C, respectively, while the LMP@C/3D-G delivers reversible capacities of ≈152.1, ≈144.9, ≈136.7, ≈128.6, and ≈116.6 mAh g−1, and the LMP@C merely shows ≈132.8, ≈125.7, ≈119.5, ≈104.5, and ≈81.2 mAh g−1 in the same case. More strikingly, it is observed that the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G still can present competitive discharge capacities of ≈125 and ≈116.2 mAh g−1 at 5 and 10 C rates, respectively, while only ≈97.9 and ≈72.1 mAh g−1 for the LMP@C/3D-G, and ≈55.4 and ≈22.6 mAh g−1 for the LMP@C are estimated at the same current rates. In the meantime, a discharge capacity of ≈158.5 mAh g−1, i.e., ≈96.2% of the original value (0.05 C), is retained for the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G when the rate is reduced immediately to 0.05 C again, but ≈103.8 mAh g−1, corresponding to a capacity retention of ≈75.2%, is just achieved by the LMP@C.

To further identify the merits of the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G hybrid for LIBs applications, the rate performance at progressive current rates is accordingly implemented. The typical discharge plots (Figure S8a–c, Supporting Information) and rate behaviors (Figure S8d, Supporting Information) at various high rates of 1, 2, 5, and 10 C of the LMP@C, LMP@C/3D-G, and TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G cathodes further confirm the remarkable electrochemical Li+-storage properties of the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G cathode, especially at high rates, benefiting from its novel multifunctional core double-shell structure combining with the conducting 3D-G network. With the current rate increasing, it can be apparently found that the capacity decline of the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G exhibits a relatively stable trend, whereas the LMP@C presents a sharp dropping trend due to the mounting polarization caused by the sluggish diffusion rate of Li+ ions at high rates. What is particularly worth noting is that the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G still can obtain discharge capacities of ≈118.9 and ≈103.6 mAh g−1 at 5 and 10 C rates, respectively, while the LMP@C just retains ≈30.8 and ≈6.1 mAh g−1 at the same current rates. In addition, an obvious capacity increase at each C rate also can be examined for the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G when compared to the LMP@C@3D-G, which further convincingly validates the positive role of the NTP nanoshell and in situ Ti-doping.

Such tremendous improvement can be reasonably ascribed to the following structural and componential advantages: I) the wrinkled 3D-G enables each TLMP particle to be adhered to the high-conductive electron network, thus dramatically enhancing the electronic transport and accomplishing the full utilization of electroactive TLMP;43, 57 II) a high-ion-conductivity NTP nanoshell coupled with the carbon coating nanolayer ensures the unobstructed shuttling back and forth of Li+ and electrons at the interface;25, 53 III) the incorporation of the Ti4+ occupied at the Mn-site not only draws into the stronger TiO bond but buffers the presence of Jahn–Teller distorted Mn3+ and MnLi+˙ antisite defects, thus rendering a significant promotion in electrochemical dynamics.7, 32, 37, 58, 59 As discussed above, the former two reasons have been comprehensively corroborated by the structural characterizations above. For perceiving whether Ti doping is embedded in the bulk crystal lattice of olivine-type structure, as visually illustrated in Figure 5e,f, corresponding X-ray Rietveld refinement of these three samples were implemented. Figure 5g–i collects the Rietveld results of the LMP@C, LMP@C/3D-G, and TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G, respectively, and the matching structural analysis is summarized in detail in Table 1. Evidently, the obtained refinement results express high consistency between the calculated and experimental XRD patterns with low Rwp factor, indicative of a faultless olivine structure. Of especial note, the fitted molar content of the Ti is ≈0.026. Careful observation from the variation of lattice parameters between the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G and the other two reveals that a small amount of Ti dopant, which is engendered by the spontaneous diffusion from TiO2 activated under high-temperature treatment (Scheme 1, the inset in Figure 5i), does not change the primitive structure of LMP.30 However, the slight reduction of unit cell volume for the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G can be probably attributed to the smaller ionic radius of Ti4+ in comparison with that of Mn2+, which well agrees with the above discussed XRD results. To further confirm the occurrence of Ti-doping both in the surface and bulk regions of TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G as well as the chemical states changing with depth, Ar+-sputtering technique was employed to etch into the surface TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G by XPS, and the data were collected at each 9 nm interval from the surface to 63 nm toward the center. Evidently, the signals corresponding to the Ti (Figure S9, Supporting Information) can be detected even up to 63 nm and the intensity slightly decreases as the etching progresses deeper, signifying that the Ti-doping synchronized with the formation of NTP nanoshell not only exists in the surface but in the bulk regions. Also note that around 18 nm depth etched, the signals of Mn (Figure S10, Supporting Information) increase obviously, however, when deeper than ≈18 nm, the signal intensity of the Mn barely changes, for which the atomic interdiffusion activated under high-temperature calcination and the absence of NTP nanoshell with a thickness of ≈10 nm may be well responsible.60 A further understanding of the Ti-doping emerges from STEM characterization, where the electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) from the surface to bulk along the yellow arrow in STEM image (Figure 5j) of the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G single nanoparticle was performed. Typical EELS spectra from the surface to 63 nm toward the center at each 9 nm interval of Ti (Figure 5k) and Mn (Figure 5l) are accordingly exhibited. Apparently, both the Ti and Mn L-edges signals can be observed in the region of 63 nm from the surface, but dominantly Ti4+ in the surface region of ≈18 nm, which is well in agreement with the above XPS depth profiles. As reported,32 the Jahn–Teller induced lattice distortion, which plays a crucial role in determining Li+ transfer capability, can be suppressed with Ti doping in LMP, benefiting from the shrink unit cell.

In addition, the decent rate-dependent capacity of the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G cathode can be rationally ascribed to its smaller charge transfer resistance (Rct) and better electronic/ionic conductivities than those for the LMP@C and LMP@C/3D-G, owing to its innovative hierarchical structure, as evidenced from the Nyquist plots of all the three electrodes after different cycles (Figure 6a–d). And an equivalent circuit (Figure S11, Supporting Information) is used to fit the above obtained electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) profiles. As seen from the fitted values (Table S1, Supporting Information), a considerable enhancement can be observed in the Rct for all the three upon repeated cycles from the first to the following 50th, 100th, and 300th, which is reportedly associated with the insulative by-products gathered on the electrode surface and the increasing MnLi˙ antisite defects in the structure.37, 44 However, it is astonishingly found that the growing trend in Rct is dramatically restrained for the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G when compared to the other two electrodes. According to the fitted results, the Rct value of the LMP@C expands dramatically from ≈81.3 (the 1st cycle) to ≈243.9 Ω (the 50th cycle), and even ≈2359.2 Ω after the 300th cycle. Attractively, the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G merely yields the Rct value of ≈443.2 Ω after 300 cycles, even lower than LMP@C/3D-G (≈1291.6 Ω). Furthermore, the Li+ diffusion coefficient (DLi+) can be calculated according to the equation: DLi+ = R2T2/(2A2n4F4C2σ2) and Z′ = Rs + Rct + σω−1/2, where R, T, A, n, F, and C stand for the gas constant, temperature, efficient work area, the number of electrons at charged state, the Faraday constant, and the concentration of Li+, respectively.25 The Warburg factor (σ) associated with Z′ can be determined by the linear fitting results of Z′ against ω−1/2 (ω for the angular frequency) in the oblique line region, as given in Figure 6e. Accordingly, the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G shows a DLi+ value of 6.73 × 10−13 cm2 s−1 after 300 cycles, which is still higher than those for the LMP@C/3D-G (5.82 × 10−14 cm2 s−1) and LMP@C (1.10 × 10−15 cm2 s−1). Persuasively, the lower Rct and higher DLi+ prove tremendous advantages of the hierarchical core double-shell structure for efficient charge storage. For the typical case, the NTP with good crystallity, high structural/thermal stabilities, and superior ion conductivity can diminish side reactions at the electrode–electrolyte surfaces/interfaces; the 3D-G coupled with C nanocoating can definitely enhance the electronic conductivity, and the Jahn–Teller distortions and MnLi˙ antisite defects can be buffered by the Ti doping. As a consequence, the upgraded lithium-storage properties including enhanced reversible capacities and rate properties are deserved. As comparatively presented in Figure 6f, the rate capability achieved here for the hierarchical core double-shell TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G cathode apparently precedes those for other LMP-based cathode materials, particularly at high rates.

Figure 7a plots the long-duration cycling behaviors of the resultant LMP@C, LMP@C/3D-G, and TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G cathodes at a charged 1 C and discharged 2 C rate within a potential range from 2.5 to 4.5 V (vs Li/Li+). As evidenced, in the initial 300 cycles at 2 C, the discharge capacity of the LMP@C drops from ≈93.7 to ≈77.3 mAh g−1 with a capacity loss of ≈17.5%. And the LMP@C/3D-G shows a capacity decay of ≈4.1%. The 3D-G with structural robustness can effectively accommodate the volume variation of the electrode, especially during consecutive high-rate Li+ insertion/extraction processes,18, 22, 61 the capacity retention can be increased accordingly. Besides the merit of the 3D-G, the unique core double-shell architecture makes the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G with nearly no capacity loss in the first 300 cycles. With the repeated cycles going on, the discharge capacity of LMP@C/3D-G drops sharply from the capacity of ≈125.4 mAh g−1 (the 300th cycle), and only about 83.5 mAh g−1 is retained with a capacity retention of ≈66.5% over 570 cycles. As well known, the LiPF6-based liquid electrolyte unavoidably leads to the formation of hazardous HF, which would give rise to the dissolution of electroactive elements from the surfacial regions and the increasing accumulation of insulative by-products meanwhile, particularly at the high cut-off voltage (≥4.5 V).62, 63 Hence, the deteriorating capacity of the LMP@C and LMP@C/3D-G after 300 cycles can be mainly caused by these irreversible side-reactions,24, 44, 64 which can be verified by following analysis of the cycled electrodes. Conversely, the capacity degradation perceived from the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G is remarkably slowed down from ≈137.4 (the 1st cycle) to ≈128.2 mAh g−1 (the 600th cycle), that is, merely a capacity loss of ≈6.7% undergoing long-span 600 cycles at 2 C. More significantly, the high-rate cyclic stabilities of the three samples are further performed at charge–discharge rate of 5 C (Figure S12, Supporting Information). Apparently, the discharge capacity of the LMP@C@3D-G drops drastically from the 200th charge–discharge cycle or so, and a capacity retention of ≈47.1% can be obtained after 400 cycles at 5 C rate, while the capacity loss observed for the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G is significantly slowed down, and a capacity degradation of ≈8.3% is rendered in the same case.

HRTEM investigation and homologous fast Fourier transform (FFT) are featured again to explicitly illustrate the TLMP-NTP interfaces. As observed in Figure 7b, a narrow interface region can be explicitly observed with two different lattice fingers. One is ≈4.36 Å in the bulk zone, conforming to the (011) plane of the LMP, and the other is the (300) crystal plane with a lattice spacing of ≈2.43 Å on the outside, corresponding to the Nasicon-type NTP rather than the olivine-type structure.65 FFT diffraction spots derived from the (020) plane of the olivine LMP and (300) plane of the NTP, as displayed in Figure 7c,d, can be obtained from the yellow and pink rectangle regions in Figure 7b. The novel interfacial design, as described in Figure 7e, gives us well-founded reasons to believe that the well-crystallized NTP nanoshell covering closely to the TLMP surface along with the interlinked Li diffusion interface is responsible well for the desirable cyclic stability of our TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G cathode.

To further understand the immanent origin for the enhanced electrochemical properties of the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G electrode, specific variations in the unique core double-shell, the bulk and surfacial/interfacial structure after long-term cycles are next investigated thoroughly. Typical XRD patterns of the cycled LMP@C after 300 charge–discharge cycles and TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G after 600 cycles are displayed in Figure 8a,b, respectively. Evidently, the bulk olivine type structure is well kept both for the two cycled cathodes, and no obvious attributes for the structural mutation and/or any emerged new phases can be detected. One should note that the fading of diffraction intensities for the LMP@C is much more severe, especially for the (020) and (011) diffraction peaks as compared to those for the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G. As is known to all, the more weakened diffraction intensities of the LMP@C indicate that the bulk and/or surfacial/interfacial crystal structure sustains a greater degree of destruction over cycling. HRTEM inspection of the cycled LMP@C (Figure 8c) and TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G (Figure 8d) cathodes is further conducted to distinctly probe into the structural differences at the surfaces/interfaces. In sharp contrast to its original HRTEM observation (Figure 3e), the surface of the cycled LMP@C is homogeneously covered by an amorphous, insulating nanolayer with a thickness even up to ≈17 nm, as clearly seen from Figure 8c. It predictably roots in the consecutive aggregation of side-reaction byproducts including LixPOFy, LiF, and so on,66 which extremely hinders the convenient transportation of Li+ ions, and is well responsible for the inferior cyclic stability of the LMP@C (Figure 7a). Conversely, the core double-shell architecture is almost unbrokenly maintained for the cycled TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G electrode, as shown in Figure 8d. Specifically, the bulk zone firmly remains the olivine-type LMP phase with an eye-catching (120) plane of a spacing of ≈0.398 nm. As marked between the two yellow dotted lines, distinguishable lattice fringes of a spacing of ≈0.274 nm corresponding to the typical (116) facet of the NTP phase and an amorphous carbon shell located at the outermost region still can be observed.37, 67 Furthermore, the striking interfacial structure also can be authenticated by their FFT analysis. As for the cycled LMP@C, representative FFT spots corresponding to the (011) plane of the LMP and nonspotted zone related to the amorphous carbon can be acquired, respectively, as shown in Figure 8e,f. More distinctly, the FFT spots derived from the (120) facet of the LMP and another kind of FFT spots derived from (116) facet of the NTP can be seen for the cycled TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G, as displayed in Figure 8g,h. The amount of MnLi+˙ antisite defect in olivine-type LMP structure plays a crucial role in determining the Li+ diffusion process. In general, the increasing MnLi+˙ antisite defect is supposed to be a major reason for the deteriorated electrochemical properties during the repeated lithiation/delithiation process.44, 68 After scrutinizing from the FFT image (Figure 8e), two additional diffraction spots (highlighted by two red ellipses) in comparison with the uncycled LMP@C (Figure 7c) can be detected, and assigned to the MnLi+˙ antisite defects. By contrast, no signals for the MnLi+˙ antisite defect can be found in the FFT image of the cycled TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G (Figure 8g), suggesting the more rapid Li+ diffusion capability. The in-depth investigations of the cycled electrodes, as discussed above, fully verify that the structural stabilities no matter in the bulk and/or at the surfaces/interfaces in the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G are substantially preserved, due to the Ti-doping and the multifunctional NTP nanoshell, which rationally favors for its outstanding cyclic stability and rate capability.

To further evaluate the surface compositions, particularly for determining the by-products resulting from the side-reactions, the cycled LMP@C and TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G electrodes are analyzed accordingly by XPS. Typical high resolution Mn 2p (Figure 8i) and Ti 2p (Figure 8j) spectra for the cycled TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G are obviously consistent well with their original profiles (Figure 1c; Figure S3d, Supporting Information). Unsurprisingly, the elemental Mn (641.0 eV) and Ti (459.2 eV) still can be discernable in the fitted profiles, suggesting the existence of Mn2+ and Ti4+.38, 69 In addition, the F 1s spectra for the cycled LMP@C and TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G are illustrated in Figure 8k,l, respectively. Apparently, two types of fluorine species can be detected for both the cycled electrodes. One peak located at 687.1 eV corresponds to polyvinylidene fluoride, and the other at 684.0 eV can be assigned to LiF.70, 71 This amorphous LiF phase generally results from the uninterrupted accumulation of side-reactions or the inevitable decomposition of LiPF6-based carbonate electrolytes, which are highly resistive to the migration of Li+ ions.72 Appealingly, the peak intensities of the LiF in the cycled LMP@C are much stronger than that in the cycled TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G, revealing that the side-reactions between the electroactive TLMP core and electrolytes can be tremendously restrained by the constructed conductive yet protective NTP nanoshell. As studied above, we believe that the unique hierarchical core double-shell architecture we developed not only stabilizes the internal and surfacial/interfacial structures, but greatly inhibits the formation of unfavorable by-products during the long-term cycles. As a consequence, the superior electrochemical Li+-storage properties of the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G cathode are demonstrated here.

To sum up, in this investigation, we designed and developed a hierarchical multifunctional core double-shell TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G cathode, where the TLMP was used as a core, high-ion-conductivity NTP as an internal shell, and uniform ultrathin carbon as an outmost shell, along with an unfolded 3D-G as a conductive network. Physicochemical characterizations strongly confirmed that the NTP nanoshell along with the synchronously formed Ti-doping could not only suppress the increasing accumulation of insulative amorphous by-products caused by the uncontrollable side reactions but serve as high-speed way for Li+ shuttling back and forth. Besides this, the tightly attached 3D-G and carbon nanoshell contributed to the rapid electronic transportation in the whole cathode. Moreover, a distinguishable interdiffused channel between the TLMP core and NTP shell is also beneficial for the rapid Li+ migration. Benefitting from the synergetic contributions from the structural and componential superiorities, our designed TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G architecture, when evaluated as a promising cathode for LIBs, exhibited high initial discharge capacity of ≈164.8 mAh g−1. In particular, the high rate capacities and superior cyclic stabilities were expectedly achieved with a discharge capacity of ≈125.5 mAh g−1 at 5 C, even ≈116.2 mAh g−1 at 10 C, and long-term capacity retention of 93.3% after 600 consecutive cycles at 2 C. More significantly, our novel electrode design concept would pave a competitive way for maximally boosting the electrochemical properties of advanced cathodes for next-generation high-energy/power LIBs.

Synthesis of LMP Precursor Assembled with GO: All the chemical reagents used in the experiments were used directly without further purification. GO suspension was prepared according to a modified Hummers method.18 In a typical solvothermal process, 0.01 mol Mn(NO3)2·4H2O (AR, Sigma-Aldrich) and certain CH3COOLi·2H2O (AR, Sigma-Aldrich) were added into 40 mL of the GO (2 mg mL−1) suspension and stirred for 1 h followed by the addition of H3PO4 with H3PO4/Mn(NO3)2/CH3COOLi = 1.1:1:2.5 in molar ratio. After ultrasonically dispersed and stirred for another 1 h, the obtained solution was sealed in a Teflon-lined autoclave (100 mL) and hydrothermally treated at 180 °C for 12 h. After centrifugation, washing and drying, the preliminary LMP precursor assembled with GO was obtained.

Synthesis of Hierarchical Core Double-Shell TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G: The LMP precursor assembled with GO was first uniformly dispersed in 30 mL of ethylene glycol. Then, a given amount (the weight ratio of NTP to LMP was 3:100) of tetrabutyl titanate (AR, Sigma-Aldrich) was placed in the dispersion accompanied by the dropwise addition of certain NH3·H2O (Sigma-Aldrich). After stirring and ultrasonication for 1 h, stoichiometric NH4H2PO4 and Na2CO3 dissolved in 5 mL of distilled water, respectively, were added. Meanwhile, a proper amount of PVA (the weight ratio of PVA to LMP was 5:100) was also added. After further dissolution and reaction by alternative ultrasonication and stirring for 30 min, the resulted slurry was again transferred into a Teflon-lined autoclave (50 mL) and kept at 140 °C for 10 h to prepare the precursor of target product. The mixture was dried at 80 °C and preheated at 250 °C for 4 h. Finally, the powders were calcinated at 670 °C for 6 h in a tube furnace with a flowing argon atmosphere. Then, the composite was obtained, and denoted as TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G.

For comparison, the LMP@C was also fabricated with the same synthetic route just without the NTP and 3D-G, but increasing the PVA ratio so as to acquire a carbon content identical with that in TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G. Besides, the LMP@C/3D-G was also prepared in the same manner with the TLMP@NTP@C/3D-G only with the absence of the NTP.

Characterization of Materials: Representative XRD patterns were collected by a Rigaku-TTRIII type X-ray diffractometer (Cu Kα, 40 kV, 300 mA, Japan) over the 2θ range of 10°–90° with a scanning rate of 1° min−1. The associated lattice parameters were calculated and refined by Rietveld method. Typical morphologies and microstructures were characterized systematically by FESEM (JEOL-6300F), TEM, HRTEM (JEOL JEM-2100) coupled with energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis. STEM image and EELS were collected on a probe aberration-corrected JEOL ARM-200F field-emission transmission electron microscope operating at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. XPS measurements were implemented using a VG Multilab 2000 spectrometer equipped with the ion etching system. Depth profiles of Mn and Ti were acquired by etching with Ar+ ions and the etching rate was estimated as 6.0 nm min−1. All the XPS spectra were calibrated by using the C 1s peak with a BE of 284.8 eV, and the corresponding fitted spectra were performed by the Thermo Avantage software. FT-IR spectra were collected by a 360 Nicolet AVATAR spectrophotometer. Raman spectra were recorded using a laser Raman spectrometer (T6400, Jobin Yvon corp., France). The remaining carbon content was measured by infrared absorption C/S instrument (LECO, America). In order to characterize the cycled electrode materials, the cells were discharged to 2.5 V and disassembled in argon glove box. Then, the electrode materials were soaked and washed with dimethyl carbonate (DMC) by ultrasonic treatment to eliminate the electrolyte, acetylene black (AB), and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) binder.

Electrochemical Measurements: Electrochemical evaluation was performed by galvanostatic cycling of the assembled CR2032 coin cell in an Ar-filled glove box, which was utilized as a test cell to collect the electrochemical data on the 8-channel Land test system (CT2001A, Wuhan China). The working electrodes consisted of electroactive cathode material, AB, and PVDF with a mass ratio of 8:1:1, and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone was applied as the dispersant. The typical average loading of the work electrode for each cell was about 4 mg. The electrolyte used was 1 m LiPF6 in a mixed solvent including ethylene carbonate, DMC, and diethyl carbonate with a volume ratio of 1:1:1. The Celgard 2400 microporous membrane was used as the separator and Li-metal foil as the negative electrode. The cells were charged and discharged under a voltage window of 2.5–4.5 V (vs Li/Li+) at various current rates. CV was conducted in a voltage range of 2.5–4.5 V (vs Li/Li+) at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. After different charge/discharge cycles, the cells were charged to 4.5 V at 0.1 C for EIS test over a frequency range of 0.01–105 Hz with an AC signal amplitude of 10 mV. Both the CV and EIS data were performed on an IVIUM electrochemical workstation (The Netherlands) at room temperature.