The ionic conductivity of solid electrolytes is dependent on synthesis and processing conditions, ie, powder properties, shaping parameters, sintering time (ts), and sintering temperature (Ts). In this study, Na3Zr2(SiO4)2(PO4) was sintered at 1200 and 1250°C for 0-10 hours and its microstructure and electrical performance were investigated by means of scanning electron microscopy and impedance spectroscopy. After sintering under all conditions, the sodium super-ionic conductor-type structure was formed along with ZrO2 as a secondary phase. The microstructure investigation revealed a bimodal particle size distribution and grain growth at both Ts. The density of samples increased from 60% at 1200°C for 0 hours to 93% at 1250°C for 10 hours. The ionic conductivity of the samples increased with ts due to densification and grain growth, ranging from 0.13 to 0.71 mS/cm, respectively. The corresponding equivalent circuit fitting for the impedance spectra revealed that grain boundary resistance is the prime factor contributing to the changing conductivity after sintering. The activation energy of the bulk conductivity (Ea,bulk) remained almost constant (0.26 eV) whereas the activation energy of the total conductivity (Ea) exhibited a decreasing trend from 0.37 to 0.30 eV for the samples with ts = 0 and 10 hours, respectively—both sintered at 1250°C. In this study, the control of the grain boundaries improved the electrical conductivity by a factor of 6.

Sodium super-ionic conductor (NASICON) materials have gained increasing attention in recent years due to a revival of sodium batteries. Aside from the ß-aluminas, NASICON materials are the only group of oxide materials that exhibit very high ionic conductivity. As polycrystalline ceramics, some compositions demonstrate similar ionic conductivity to Na+-ß′′-Al2O3, reaching several mS/cm at room temperature,1-5 and are worth being reconsidered as electrolyte materials in sodium batteries.6-9 Na3Zr2(SiO4)2(PO4), hereafter abbreviated as NZSP, is the most commonly studied NASICON material that also has excellent electrical properties.10 The reported conductivity of NZSP varies from 9.2 × 10−511 to 1.2 × 10−3 S/cm12 for conventionally sintered ceramic specimens. Spark plasma sintered samples attain conductivity of 1.8 × 10−3 S/cm.13 The wide scatter of conductivity data mainly results from the different densities and microstructures of the samples, which are directly related to the processing conditions. In addition, information regarding sample quality ie, grain size, microstructure, and analytical stoichiometries is rarely given in previous publications.

Ceramic processing is the quality-determining step of any polycrystalline material and the main reason for the different total conductivities of NASICON materials.14 More precisely, the quality of a ceramic is determined by the powder properties as well as the shaping and sintering conditions. The powder characteristics (particle size distribution, particle shape, sintering activity) are strongly dependent on the synthesis method, whereas the shape formation (pressing, casting, printing, etc.) and subsequent sintering determine the density and microstructure of the ceramics. The total conductivity of the material is therefore directly influenced by these aforementioned factors. Table 1 provides an overview of various processing conditions and reported conductivity values.

Powders with different characteristics are produced through different synthesis methods thus their sintering temperature is also different as listed in Table 1. This is due to different particle size, morphology and composition produced from different methods, evidencing a profound influence of synthesis methods on the processing temperature of ceramics.10

In this study, we therefore systematically investigated the impact of sintering time and temperature by keeping the powder properties constant. To this end, pellets with a constant green density were sintered at 1200 and 1250°C for 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 hours each. The pellets obtained were studied by means of scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and impedance spectroscopy to investigate the microstructural properties on bulk and grain boundary resistance.

Nominal NZSP was prepared by means of a solution-assisted solid-state reaction (SA-SSR),10 whereby stoichiometric amounts of NaNO3 (99.5%), ZrO(NO3)2 (99%), and Si(OC2H5)4 (99%), supplied from VWR International, Leuven, Belgium, were mixed and dissolved in water using a quartz glass container. After the nitrates were dissolved in the solution, a stoichiometric amount of tetraethyl orthosilicate, Si(OC2H5)4, was added. When the Si(OC2H5)4 was hydrolyzed, a corresponding amount of NH4H2PO4 was added and stirred for 30 minutes to form a homogeneous precipitation. The mixture was stirred overnight at 300 rpm and at a temperature of 50°C. The homogenized mixture was initially heated from 50°C up to 100°C in order to slowly evaporate the water. The product was subsequently fired in a furnace at 600°C for 3 hours to form an amorphous raw powder. During heat treatment, the inorganic polymeric matrix was pyrolyzed and NOx, CO2, and H2O evolved as gaseous products. Afterwards, the raw powder was calcined at 800°C for 12 hours and ball milled on a roller bench for 48 hours using zirconia balls. The particle size distribution was obtained using Horiba LA-950V2 laser diffraction particle size distribution analyzer with ethanol as dispersing medium. The particle size of the milled powder was 2 μm. The milled powder was then pressed into pellets (diameter = 13 mm, thickness = 1.1-1.2 mm) at a pressure of ~150 MPa. After pressing, all samples exhibited similar green densities, ie, 59%-61% of theoretical density.

Green pellets were sintered at Ts = 1200 and 1250°C for ts = 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 hours at a heating and cooling rate of 300 K/h. These temperatures were chosen because sintering at a higher temperature results in sample deformation due to partial melting. After sintering, the pellets were sputtered with gold as blocking electrodes. Electrical conductivity was measured using an impedance spectroscopy system (Biologic; VMP-300) between −30 and 100°C in the frequency range of 1-7 MHz.

The phase purity of the sintered specimens was measured by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker D4 ENDEAVOR diffractometer from Bruker AXS GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany with Cu Kα radiation), and the microstructure of the powder and pellet cross section was examined by SEM (ULTRA 55; ZEISS from Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH, Jena, Germany). Prior to microstructure investigation, the cross sections were polished and etched thermally at 1100°C for 15 minutes. Microstructural details such as grain size distribution and fraction of porosity were determined using the image analysis software (analySIS pro; Olympus Soft Imaging Solutions GmbH, Münster, Germany Version 5.0). The density of the samples was measured using the Ultrapycnometer 1000, version 2.4 (Quantachrome Corporation Boynton Beach, FL, USA), which uses gas displacement and the volume–pressure relationship (Boyle's law) to measure the relative density of the specimens.

The SEM images were analyzed using the analySIS pro imaging software, in which the grain boundary identification process is semiautomatic. It depends crucially on the discernibility of grain boundaries, which can be achieved by chemical or, in the case of our investigation, thermal etching. The SEM images were loaded into the program with suitable resolutions and calibrated. A “separator” command was subsequently used as a filter for separating objects (ie, grains). Using this filter, it is possible to separate segments of an image with different intensities, such as the interfaces of particles. The separator creates light or dark lines dividing objects of the same color or creates objects that are distinguishable from the background due to their intensity value. The software is also able to edit the resulting image interactively. Finally, statistical data of microstructural parameters are obtained. Since the grain size was obtained from 2D images, a multiplication factor of 1.571 was applied for tetrakaidecahedron-shaped particles in accordance with the ASTM standard.28

Stoichiometry of the materials was controlled by means of inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) using the Thermo Scientific iCAP 7600 spectrometer with optical scale and CID semiconductor detector, axial and radial reflection, and wavelengths between 166 and 847 nm. 20 mg of powder was mixed to 0.25 g of lithium borate in a platinum crucible and heated for 0.5 hours at 1000°C. The liquefied material was dissolved in 30 mL of HCl (5%). After dissolution, the sample solutions were transferred to sample vials containing 0.5 mL of HF and filled to a volume of 50 mL. Each test sample was diluted and measured twice.

The XRD patterns were recorded to investigate the phase purity of NZSP after sintering at 1250°C and at different times (Figure 1). In all samples, monoclinic ZrO2 was detected in addition to a well-crystallized monoclinic NASICON structure (space group C2/c). The amount of ZrO2 was estimated to be 4 wt.% for ts = 4 hours and 1 wt.% for ts = 0 hours, whereas all other samples contained 2 wt.% ZrO2. In addition, a very weak reflection at 2θ = 28.06° might indicate the formation of SiO2. The samples sintered at 1200°C for different times show similar crystallization trend and presence of ZrO2 as secondary phase.

The XRD patterns of NZSP sintered at 1250°C for different dwell times. As a reference, the diffraction patterns of observed phases, ie, Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (solid red line), monoclinic ZrO2 (dashed black), and orthorhombic SiO2 (dotted blue)16, 29, 30 are shown as vertical lines at the bottom of the graph. The percentage values denote the content of ZrO2 in weight percent. NZSP, Na3Zr2(SiO4)2(PO4); XRD, X-ray diffraction [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

The formation of ZrO2 during the densification of NZSP was also observed using other synthesis and processing methods.8, 11, 13 This is due to an earlier crystallization of ZrO2 prior to NASICON formation, resulting from the high thermodynamic stability of ZrO2 and not due to the volatility of reagents (eg, sodium monoxide) at the sintering temperature. As demonstrated earlier, ZrO2 starts to crystallize at 800°C for SA-SSR powders.10 According to percolation theory, a small amount of ZrO2 acts as porosity and has a minimal impact on Na+ conduction. However, higher amounts of ZrO2 might reduce the Zr content from the NASICON phase, thus resulting in stoichiometric differences that significantly influence bulk conductivity.2, 10

The chemical analysis of the NASICON materials (Figure 2) revealed their respective stoichiometries. Overall, the stoichiometry lies within the expected range for all compositions with an experimental margin for error of ±3%. However, a slight sodium loss was observed in the pellets sintered at 1250°C compared to those sintered at 1200°C, which is due to the evaporation of sodium oxide. The contents of Zr and Si are similar at both Ts. Nevertheless, Zr was lower than expected in all samples.

Analytical stoichiometries obtained from ICP-OES. The filled and empty black squares (Na), red circles (Si), dark yellow stars (P), and blue triangles (Zr) represent samples sintered at 1200 and 1250°C, respectively. The solid lines depict the nominal compositions and standard error including experimental error. ICP-OES, inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

For ts = 1200°C, the microstructure shows no densification for up to 2 hours, after which it starts to densify and exhibit significant grain growth. Nonetheless, all the microstructures show substantial porosity (Figure 4). At 1250°C, however, the microstructure exhibits only minor densification for 0 hours, ie, just by heating the sample to maximum temperature. For sintering times of more than 2 hours, the microstructure shows increasing densification and, hence, a linear increase in relative density in this density range, as seen in Figure 3. Furthermore, gradual grain growth is also observed with an increase in sintering time for all the samples. Representative images of the microstructure of the pellets sintered at both temperatures for different sintering times are compiled in Figures 4 and 5.

Two sets of SEM images with different magnifications of an NZSP microstructure after sintering at 1250°C for various dwell times. The two magnifications reveal a broader view of grain growth in two different size regimes. NZSP, Na3Zr2(SiO4)2(PO4); SEM, scanning electron microscopy

Examples of SEM images analyzed using the analySIS pro imaging software are shown in Figure 6 where the color categories reflect the different grain size intervals. The statistical data of microstructural parameters are given in Table 2. The porosity obtained from image analysis is smaller than pycnometric values because image analysis is performed only on a localized area while not take into account the artifacts such as voids and cracks.

The mean diameter is plotted as a function of relative density in Figure 7A, revealing an abrupt increase of larger grains as compared to gradual increase of smaller grains. This abnormal grain growth can also be seen in Figure 7B as a function of ts. Possible reasons of abnormal grain growth are anisotropic grain boundary energy or high grain boundary mobility.31

The grain size distributions indicate varying grain growth at different Ts and ts. At 1200°C and up to 4 hours, the grains were smaller than the threshold of picture analysis (0.5 μm). For longer times and a higher temperature, however, a systematic change in grain size distributions was observed. Evidently, grain growth is observed in all samples through a shift in the frequency distribution peaks toward larger diameters. In addition, the formation of a right shoulder indicates that grain growth occurs at multiple speeds within the samples. This phenomenon of abnormal grain growth is visible more clearly at 1250°C (Figure 8B), where a monomodal distribution at 0 hours transforms into a bimodal distribution curve at 10 hours, in addition to an overall size increase of the initial grains (as seen in the SEM images). An abrupt increase in the grain size is observed after sintering at 1250°C for more than 4 hours in Figure 7B, while for longer ts the grains grow further in two different sizes. This phenomenon of abrupt change in grain size and grain boundaries as a function of time and temperature can be conjointly represented in a time–temperature–transition (TTT) diagram.32, 33 However, this would require more experiments at different temperatures and dwell times in order to establish a complete TTT diagram for NASICONs.

The grain size distribution (normalized to the total number of particles) obtained from image analysis of specimens sintered at (A) 1200°C and (B) 1250°C. At 1200°C, it was not possible to analyze the samples sintered for 0 to 4 h due to their particle sizes being too small. For the particle diameters, a multiplication factor of 1.571 was applied for tetrakaidecahedron-shaped particles. The lines connecting the data points are drawn as a visual guide [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

The impedance spectra of samples sintered at both temperatures were measured from −30 to 100°C, but only those obtained at −20°C are shown in Figure 9. For an accurate comparison, the impedance data were normalized to the dimensions of the pellets.

The complex impedance plot of the samples sintered at 1200 and 1250°C for different dwell times is shown in Figure 9. The impedance spectra comprise two semicircles, each corresponding to the contribution of a certain process (bulk or grain boundary) and, as a whole, result in the total impedance. The semicircle visible at a higher frequency, generally referred to as the first semicircle, represents the contribution of the material's bulk resistance. The first semicircle is the intrinsic property of a material and mainly depends on its composition. The second semicircle appearing at a lower frequency arises from the grain boundary contribution to the total impedance. This semicircle is the property of an extrinsic material and depends on the processing conditions and characteristics of the starting powder.

In Figure 9, the impedance spectra are normalized to the sample dimensions and thus allow a direct comparison of the spectra. The base material is the same for all samples (Na3Zr2Si2PO12), differing only in terms of sintering conditions. It can therefore be assumed that the bulk impedance of the samples should not differ much. However, the grain boundary impedance may differ substantially. This is a result of the increased densification and grain growth due to the higher sintering temperature and prolonged dwell time, respectively, resulting in turn in the alteration of the transport processes across grain boundaries. The sample sintered at 1250°C for 10 hours (Figure 9B) has the lowest grain boundary resistance due to its larger grain sizes compared to the other samples.

The total conductivity as well as the conductivity of the bulk (σb) and grain boundaries (σgb) can be obtained by fitting the impedance spectra with an equivalent circuit (see Figure 9). At −20°C, the resistances represent the ionic conductive paths in the bulk, ie, within the particles, (Rb) and across the grain boundaries (Rgb). For both sets of samples, the resistances are obtained by fitting the impedance spectra and extracting the lowest value of −Z” as the total resistance. The constant phase elements (CPE) represent the nonideal capacitive contributions of the transport processes in the bulk (CPEb), at the grain boundaries (CPEgb), and at the electrode/electrolyte interface at low frequencies (CPEel). The CPE is defined by a capacity value, CCPE, and an exponent, n (see Equation 1). If n equals 1, then the equation is identical to that of a capacitor. If n equals 0.5, a 45 degree line is produced on the complex plane graph. When a CPE is placed in parallel to a resistor, a Cole element (depressed semicircle) is produced. The obtained fitting data are given in Table 3. In the software used to analyze the impedance spectra (Zview® from Scribner Associates Incorporation, Southern Pines, NC, USA), the CPEs can be used to simulate the imperfect capacitance of transport processes. The impedance of the CPE is calculated using Equation 1 with ω as the frequency. The exponent n usually varies between 1 and 0.5. The CCPE is related to the capacitance C as written in Equation 2.34

When n → 1 then CCPE → C and an ideal capacitor is observed, while decreasing n indicates a nonideal system, eg, when n = 0.5 then a pure diffusion process is involved. The capacitance associated with the high-frequency arc is found to be around 10−11 F and the one associated with the lower frequency arc lies between 10−9 and 10−8 F. The high-frequency arc can therefore be identified as a bulk property due to the fact that its capacitance is in the pF order, whereas the lower frequency arc can be identified as the grain boundary resistance since its capacitance is in the nF range. The third capacitance represented by CPEel is found to be of the μF order and is associated with the polarization of the electrode.34

The bulk and grain boundary conductivities can be extracted from the impedance diagrams using the brick layer model.35, 36 According to this model, the real grain boundary conductivity (σgb,real) is often incorrectly reported in the literature. 

The σb, σgb,real, and σgb,norm are calculated using Equations 3-5 and are shown in Figure 10. The σb (black lines) increases very slightly when the sintering time is increased due to grain growth and improving crystallization, which results in less resistance to mobile charge carriers. The σgb,real (red lines) is about one order of magnitude smaller than σb and does not change substantially after sintering at 1200°C. However, it decreases significantly for a prolonged dwell time at 1250°C. This deviation is due to changes in the transport properties across the grain boundaries, which arise from multiple processes, such as grain boundary diffusion and grain boundary complexions.32, 33

The σgb,norm (blue line) increases with increasing ts for both temperatures. Although the σgb,norm is conventionally regarded as σgb, any interpretation in terms of microstructure would be misleading because σgb,norm is calculated by normalizing the Rgb to the whole sample dimensions and not to the grain boundary dimensions itself. Therefore, based on the higher values of σgb,norm, it would be incorrect to conclude that ionic transport is favorable and governed along grain boundaries. Nevertheless, it would be correct to compare Rgb in terms of microstructural changes, since it represents the overall resistance induced by the grain boundaries to Na+ conduction. For instance, in Figure 9, it appears at first glance as if the grain boundary resistivity is lower than that of the bulk, particularly for samples sintered for 8 or 10 hours. Upon closer examination of these materials, the samples reveal larger grains (see Figure 3) and exhibit a lower grain boundary resistance simply because fewer boundaries are encountered by the mobile charge carriers. These results are coherent with proton-conducting BaCe0.85Gd0.15O2.975, where a reduction in Rgb was also observed by increasing the grain size.34

A correlation between conductivity and density is shown in Figure 11 including data from previous studies. Conductivity rises by almost one order of magnitude by increasing the relative density from 65% to 93%, which underlines the importance of sintering conditions in ceramic technology. The generalized effective media (GEM) theory 37 is often applied to simulate the transport properties of multi-phase materials. This model was developed only for composites with specific microstructures and is very valuable for cermets and semiconducting ceramics, but it does not take into account detailed microstructural features such as grain size, grain anisotropy, and orientation. It is therefore not surprising that the GEM curve in Figure 11 does not fit the data very well. The formula used

The total conductivity (σtotal) was calculated from the sum of Rb and Rgb of the samples and is plotted as a function of inverse temperature in Figure 12. σtotal follows the Arrhenius law and the activation energies (Table 4) were calculated from the slope of the straight line in a ln(σ·T) vs 1/T plot.

In Figure 12A, conductivity deviates slightly from the Arrhenius behavior at temperatures ~90°C. This is not observed for samples sintered at 1250°C. This phenomenon is assumed to be a result of the absorption of water molecules in the samples with higher porosity, which are desorbed at a higher temperature and thus cause this deviation.40

After sintering at 1250°C, all lines overlap at room temperature, except for 0 hours, indicating no significant difference in σtotal. The activation energy (Ea,total), however, decreases with the increasing sintering time and agrees with the observed grain growth in the microstructure. The grain growth densifies the sample by reducing the net amount of porosity as well as the net amount of grain boundary area, eg, lower activation energy for longer sintering times indicates that the increase in grain size reduces the net amount of grain boundary area and consequently the Rgb. Therefore, the resistance of Na+ hopping decreases as the ions incur reduced grain boundaries due to grain growth at longer sintering times (Figure 2 and Section 3.1). For a better understanding of the process, grain and grain boundary conductivities are plotted separately in Figure 13.

Two semicircles were only observed up to 0 and 10°C for samples sintered at 1200 and 1250°C, respectively. Both the σgb,real and σgb,norm are calculated using Equations 4 and 5. It is important to remark that at 0°C, obtaining σgb,real becomes unreliable for 1250°C sintered samples when ts > 6 hours, due to very low n values (<0.5; Equation 2). However for 1200°C sintered samples even for longer ts the n values are >0.9 and the calculations were reasonable since the σgb,real calculation assumes that the dielectric coefficient of grain boundaries remain equal to the bulk and effects only the magnitude of the conductivity. Therefore, the Ea values obtained from an Arrhenius plot of σgb,norm are used even though the magnitude of the conductivity is incorrect. It also illustrates why σgb,norm is widely adopted as σgb,real, given that σgb,real calculation is possible only for materials and at temperatures where grain boundary resistance contributes significantly to the total resistance.

The obtained activation energies of each process are shown in Figure 13. The values of Ea,b are nearly constant for the two different sintering temperatures, varying between 0.21 and 0.28 eV. However, the Ea,gb values are significantly increasing with dwell time. After sintering at 1200°C Ea,gb systematically increases from 0.35 to 0.59 eV, which indicates a systematic alteration of the transport properties at the grain boundaries, which are affected only by the dwell time. The grain growth and small changes in stoichiometry due to evaporation of sodium oxide could be the only processes happening during sintering. However, after sintering at higher temperature (1250°C), the Ea,gb follows an irregular trend showing fluctuating transport properties across the grain boundaries by increasing the dwell time with an overall increase from 0.42 to 0.97 eV. The nonuniform Ea,gb trend is an indication that multiple processes are affecting the grain boundary chemistry. These processes, in addition to obvious grain growth starting at ts = 4 hours and presumably reducing the activation energy, could be a simultaneous increase of the glassy phase. Since the amount of this phase is substantially increasing from ts = 8 hours to ts = 10 hours, it is likely that the increasing volume fraction of this phase might be associated with the strong increase of Ea,gb. This is confirmed by a correlation between the glassy phase obtained from image analysis and Ea,gb, both giving similar trends as shown by dotted line connecting the steric symbols in Figure 14B. It can be noticed, however, that despite fluctuations in Ea,gb values they only have a minor impact on the total conductivity.

In a previous work, Fuentes et al43 conducted a similar study on a different NASICON material (Na3Y0.12Zr1.88Si2PO12) and found that the impact of sintering temperature (Ts) was negligible on the Ea values. However, by increasing the sintering time (ts), they observed a decreasing Ea, which is in agreement with our study. Their sample sintered at 1220°C for 80 hours had an Ea of 0.26 eV, which is similar to the Ea of bulk conductivity of NZSiP. Assuming a negligible impact of the Y substitution, this evidence can be used to support the argument that prolonged sintering (ts = 80 hours) would result in large grain growth and decreasing grain boundary resistance. For the extreme situations of ts this leads to the limits

The conductivity of NASICON materials is dependent on processing conditions and synthesis. The heat treatment or sintering conditions control the microstructure. Grain and grain boundary resistance can be controlled by tuning the microstructure. Sintering at higher temperature leads to a better densification, while prolonging the sintering time leads to grain growth. Higher densification and larger grains result in smaller grain boundary resistance and, as a consequence, high conductance. The recommended sintering conditions are 1250°C for 10 hours in air, starting with a green density of ~60%. The activation energy data show that sodium ion conduction through the bulk is easier than through the grain boundaries. The activation energy of grain boundary conductivity is higher at a sintering temperature of 1250°C than at 1200°C. Because the net amount of grain boundary area is very low compared to bulk surface, the influence of grain boundary conductivity on the total conductivity is so low that it is unnoticeable in the Arrhenius plots. Grain boundary complexion is affected by both sintering time and temperature. A systematic study of more sintering time and temperature would allow develop a time-temperature-transition diagram, which would allow obtaining a predictable microstructure by implementing the knowledge of grain boundary complexions.