Gallium-doped LiTi2(PO4)3 (LGTP) film has been successfully in-situ fabricated on graphite substrate by hydrothermal method. The effects of Ga addition amount on LGTP crystal structure, as well as its ionic conductivity have been investigated. LGTP exhibits improved conductivity compared with LTP, and this improvement could be attributed to the formation of denser layer, higher lithium ion concentration in NASICON structure, and probable establishment of zig-zag pathways for faster lithium ion conduction. The highest total conductivity (2.1 × 10−5 S cm−1) and lowest activation energy (0.29 eV) are achieved by LGTP-Ga-20mM with Ga addition of 20 mM. Interestingly, after annealing treatment to LGTP-Ga-20mM at 800 °C, it exhibits total conductivity of 2.3 × 10−4 S cm−1, which is applicable for the all solid state lithium batteries (ASSLBs). The cell Li/LGTP-Ga-20mM/graphite exhibited initial charge capacity of 339.2 mAh g−1 and discharge capacity of 272.5 mAh g−1, with coulombic efficiency of 80.3%. After 30 cycles at 0.5C, it still has capacity retention of 85.2%. So it proves the feasibility of application of LGTP & graphite in ASSLBs. Moreover, it has been found the plasma surface treatment is favorable for the full coverage of the LGTP layer on graphite and formation of dense film layer.

All-solid-state lithium batteries (ASSLBs) with thin-film configurations have been attracting great research attention, since there has been quite strong demand for high power density and safety in energy storage system applied in consumer electronics, electric vehicles, and so forth [[1], [2], [3], [4]]. ASSLBs have great superiority over the traditional lithium ion batteries with organic liquid electrolyte, by virtue of their high gravimetric as well as volumetric power density, intrinsically higher safety, and enhanced cycle life [5,6]. The superiority of ASSLBs to a large extent depends on the solid state electrolytes (SSEs), functioning as both separator and fast lithium ion conductor. NASICON-type Lithium titanium phosphate LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) has been widely investigated as one of the most promising SSEs owing to its high conductivity, wide voltage window, and great stability in atmosphere [[7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]]. LTP owns rhombohedral crystal structure, where the framework is constituted of TiO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra. The octahedra and tetrahedra are linked by their shared O atoms to form a three-dimensional framework containing interconnected channels along c-axis for Li+ conduction [14,15]. There are two crystallographic sites that are possible for lithium ions: M1 sites, located between two TiO6 octahedral along the c sites and are preferentially occupied by lithium ions, and M2 sites, situated between the ribbons perpendicular to c-axis, with 10-fold oxygen coordinated [16]. Although the polycrystalline pure LTP is poor in conductivity, the conductivity could be increased if Ti4+ in the phosphate is partially replaced by several trivalent cations, such as Al3+, Sc3+, Y3+, La3+ and Ge3+ [[17], [18], [19]]. The conductivity improvement is probably arisen from the elimination of the bottlenecks in the migration path of lithium ions and from the increased concentration of the mobile lithium ions in the structure [18]. Most studies on substituted LTP have adopted solid state reaction methods for the preparation [[19], [20], [21], [22]]. However, application of these methods are far from satisfactory due to high energy consumption and high possibility of impurities in the product arisen from direct solids blending [23]. Additionally, in thin-film configurations of ASSLBs, the conventional processes usually involve highly sophisticated multi-step fabrication procedures [24]. Hydrothermal processing is a promising alternative method for the elements substitution and in-situ film fabrication for its simplification and cost reduction [23,[25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30]]. In comparison with solid state reaction, the hydrothermal substitution approach not only provides a different element substitution route with low energy cost, but also has great potential in ionic conductivity improvement [[31], [32], [33]]. So it could be quite promising to study hydrothermal substitution approach as an alternative method. Additionally, for practical use, it is required to improve the contact condition between electrode and SSEs in order to decrease the interfacial resistance. So far, many researchers have tried to enhance the interfacial contact, such as high-pressure mechanical press [1]. Interestingly, it was found that the LTP crystal can nucleate and grow outwards at the interface of the substrate, according to our previous research [34]. Thus, it sounds more reasonable to employ hydrothermal technology to in-situ fabricate SSEs film with enhanced compactness and higher density on the substrate.

Besides Al3+, which is the most widely studied substitution cation for LTP due to the reported high conductivity of Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 (LATP), a few researchers have also applied some other trivalent ions such as Ga3+, Fe3+, Y3+, and so forth [19,35,36]. In particular, W. Zajac et al. found the Ga3+ substitution for Ti4+ via high temperature solid state method can fabricate Li1+xGaxTi2-x(PO4)3 (LGTP) with high conductivity, which suggests the potential feasibility for LGTP as SSEs [35]. But up until now there has been no report about the Ga3+ ion substitution for Ti4+ by low-temperature hydrothermal method. It can be quite attractive to investigate the Ga3+ substitution of Ti4+ in LTP under hydrothermal way, as an innovative method to fabricate promising SSEs. Compared with Ti4+ (0.605 Å), the Ga3+ is slightly larger trivalent cation with ionic radius of 0.62 Å, which can be quite possible for Ga3+ entering into framework of LTP and substituting with Ti4+ therein.

In this study, the hydrothermal method was applied to fabricate Ga substituted LTP (LGTP) film. The formed LGTP crystal structure, as well as its ionic conductivity was investigated. The effect of substituted ions on the conductivity enhancement was discussed. Moreover, we attempted to directly fabricate the LGTP electrolyte film on graphite substrate, which has been widely used as anode electrode material. This study is to find an effective way to fabricate SSEs with high conductivity directly on anode part of the ASSLBs, so as to provide a promising new method for the fabrication of high performance ASSLBs.

Lithium Hydroxide Monohydrate (LiOH·H2O), phosphoric acid (H3PO4, 85 wt%), titanium (Ti), and Gallic Oxide (Ga2O3) were purchased commercially and used without further purification. Graphite plate with diameter of 12 mm and thickness of 0.5 mm was adopted as substrate. It was washed with 1 M NaOH, 1 M HCl solution and deionized water, and afterwards was polished with emery paper of grade 400 before being used.

The synthesis of LGTP SSEs film on graphite was realized by hydrothermal process carried out in a stainless-steel Teflon-lined autoclave under autogenous pressure. Titanium (Ti), phosphoric acid (H3PO4) and lithium hydrate (LiOH) were employed as the starting materials. According to our previous study, the starting materials were mixed in the molar ratio of Li:Ti:P = 15:1:45. Firstly, 40 ml of the mixture of phosphoric acid (4.5 M), and lithium hydrate (1.5 M) solution, together with a certain amount of Ga2O3 (1 mM, 5 mM, 10 mM, 20 mM, and 50 mM), were firstly introduced into the 50-mL-capacity Teflon-lined autoclave. Afterwards, one piece of graphite substrate (diameter 12 mm, thickness 0.5 mm) was subsequently added. Finally, a piece of titanium metal (0.1 M) was placed on the graphite substrate (see Fig. S1 for details). The autoclave was sealed and kept at 230 °C for 48 h hydrothermal process, and then was cooled to room temperature. The graphite substrate taken out from the autoclave was immersed into deionized water and kept for 1 h to remove the residual ions, and then was dried at 80 °C for 10 h under vacuum condition. The properties of fabricated products (graphite & LGTP film) under different Ga addition were investigated by a variety of characterizations and electrochemical property measurements. All characterizations were conducted without annealing to the products. In particular, the annealing treatment was conducted to the sample with Ga addition of 20 mM (LGTP-Ga-20mM), which was only for ionic conductivity investigation. The annealing process was conducted under Ar atmosphere for 2 h and the range of annealing temperature was from 500 to 900 °C.

Graphite substrate plasma treatments were conducted in an atmosphere plasma generator (Peluris: MPC-01C) before hydrothermal process. The plasma system used an RF power supply with 30.0 MHz frequency for the plasma excitation, with air flow rate of 20.0L/min. The plasma power was 400 W and the time of plasma exposure (treatment time) was 0–30 min.

AC impedance measurements were performed on LGTP film & graphite anode samples using the two probe method. Thin platinum layer were sputtered to the surfaces of the LGTP film to work as counter electrode, while graphite substrate was employed as working electrode (WE) directly (see Fig. S2 for details). The measurements were performed on a Solatron 1260 Impedance Analyzer in the frequency range from 1 MHz to 1 Hz, with a potentiostatic signal amplitude of 5 mV. The morphology and microstructure of the LGTP films were observed with Hitachi S-800 scanning electron microscope (SEM). For cross-section SEM observation, the LGTP film, together with the graphite substrate, were fixed up by resin epoxy. After solidification for 24 h, the epoxy-bonded sample was cut in cross-section and polished carefully. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the LTP and LGTP films were recorded by Simazu-6000 diffractometer (Cu-Kα radiation) at room temperature, in 2Theta range of 10–65° with scanning rate of 0.02° s−1. The density of film was obtained via Archimedes method using water for measurement. In order to verify the feasibility of the LGTP film & graphite configuration, Li/LGTP/graphite cell was assembled by attaching lithium plate (1 mm thickness) to LGTP film side to function as negative electrode. The assembling of lithium plate and LGTP film & graphite was realized in a testing module cell in an argon filled glove box. The charge-discharge upon the cell was tested by Solartron 1287A Potentiostat Galvanostat, at current density of 0.5C.

Fig. 1 showed the XRD patterns of Li1+xTi2-xGax(PO4)3 SSEs film formed on graphite surface under a variety of Ga addition amount. All the samples exhibited diffraction peaks that could be indexed to LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) with the rhombohedral symmetry (space group R3c) and almost all the observed peaks could be indexed as per the JCPDS Card no. 35–0754. With the increase in Ga addition amount, samples showed wider diffraction peaks, particularly for the sample with Ga addition of 10 mM (LGTP-Ga-10mM) and Ga addition of 50 mM (LGTP-Ga-50mM), which evidenced the reducing of average crystallite size. The average crystallite size was 82.2 nm for LTP, 62.6 nm for LGTP-Ga-1mM, 96.5 nm for LGTP-Ga-5mM, 54.9 nm for LGTP-Ga-10mM, 81.5 nm for LGTP-Ga-20mM, and 48.7 nm for LGTP-Ga-50mM, estimated via Scherrer equation d = kγ/B cosθ. Another important observation from the XRD patterns was that there existed some differences in the relative intensity of the peaks with the increasing of Ga amount, e.g. the LGTP-Ga-20mM had obviously higher intensity in the (202) diffraction peak (2Theta = 22.5°) compared with other samples, which might be a result of some preferred orientation alignment. Moreover, with the increasing of Ga content, main peaks shifted to lower angle (Inset in Fig. 1), indicating that the lattice volume of the LGTP increased as the increasing of gallium content. Table 1 displayed the effect of Ga addition amount on the lattice constants of LGTP. It can be seen that the lattice constants (a and c) and cell volume (V) gradually increased as increasing x value. The ionic radii difference between Ti4+ (r = 0.605 Å) and Ga3+ (r = 0.62 Å) cations led to the increase of crystal lattice parameters, which was in accordance with some researchers reporting that substitution of Ti4+ in NASICON structure by larger cation would lead to expansion in unit cells [37]. According to some other reported literature, the rhombohedral phase is stable above 60 °C [38]. But according to our experiments, the rhomhohedral phase can be stable at room temperature with or without aliovalent substitution, based on the XRD patterns of pristine LTP (x = 0) and LGTP. The structural phase transition in LTP was due to the dislocation of Li in M1 and M2 sites in the structure. The M1 sites were preferentially occupied by lithium ions in LTP, while the occupancies of M1 sites were reduced at the benefit of M2 sites as for aliovalent substituted LTP (LGTP in this study). The substitution of Ti4+ by larger alivalent cation (Ga3+) would be beneficial for increasing Li+ content arisen from charge compensation and lead to distribution of Li in symmetry-equivalent M2 site through the distortion of MO6 octahedra [[39], [40], [41], [42]]. Additionally, gallium phosphate [GaPO4] formed as an impurity phase can be clearly seen as the Ga addition amount was 50 mM (LGTP-Ga-50mM).

To investigate the morphology of LTP and LGTP film on graphite substrate after hydrothermal process, SEM observation was applied. Fig. 2 shows the SEM photos of the LTGP film on substrate with various Ga addition amount. As shown in Fig. 2a, the pure LTP mainly consisted of cubic-shaped particles with average diameter size between 50 and 100 μm. By increasing Ga addition amount from 10 mM to 50 mM (LGTP-Ga-20mM to LGTP-Ga-50mM), the morphology of LTGP were gradually changed to irregular-faceted with an increased particle size about 100 μm. Distribution of the elements was characterized with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) in area of the cross-section facet of the LGTP-Ga-10mM film & graphite. As shown in Fig. 3, elements O, Ti, P, and Ga were homogeneously distributed on the graphite substrate, and element C was clearly shown in the substrate area. The atomic percent of the elements were Ti 9.56%, P 18.13%, O 71.89%, and Ga 0.42%, respectively. The element Ga was uniformly distributed throughout the whole cross-section area. The mapping Li was not provided since Li could not be detectable with the EDS. Moreover, it can be observed the vacancies between the grains of the LGTP-Ga-20mM and LGTP-Ga-50mM (Fig. 2 c and 2d) had been gradually filled and resulted in a rather dense morphology. The cross-section SEM images for LTP film and LGTP-Ga-20mM film were presented in Fig. 4. From cross-section view, LTP film was rough and filled with noticeable pores (Fig. 4b), while LGTP-Ga-20mM film appeared to be much more smooth and less porous compared with LTP (Fig. 4a). It suggested the relative density of LGTP can be increased compared with that of LTP. The density of the samples was 1.67, 1.64, 1.76, 1.90, 2.31, and 2.15 g cm−3, for LTP, LGTP-Ga-1mM, LGTP-Ga-5mM, LGTP-Ga-10mM, LGTP-Ga-20mM, and LGTP-Ga-50mM, respectively. Therefore, this observation suggested that Ga doping was beneficial to form a dense LGTP film with few pores and vacanies.

The ionic conductivity is the most important property of SSEs. Fig. 5a depicts the impedance spectra for LTP and all LGTP SSEs films. The impedance spectra of all samples included a depressed semicircle at high to medium frequencies and a tail at the low frequency region. Based on the equivalent circuit in Fig. 5f, the semicircle in the impedance spectra can be attributed to the impedance of grain boundaries (Rgb), while the inclined line corresponded to Li+ transfer resistance between electrolyte film and Pt blocking electrode. On the real axis, the right and the left intercept of the semicircle were assigned to the total resistance (Rt = Rgb + Rb) and the bulk resistance (Rb), respectively [37]. The bulk conductivity σb and the total conductivity σt can be calculated from the Rb and Rt estimated from impedance spectra in Fig. 5a, based on the following equation:(1)Where σ, L, R, and S represent conductivity, electrolyte film thickness, resistance, and effective area of solid electrolyte, respectively. The bulk, grain boundary, and total conductivities of LTP and all LGTP film samples were listed in Table 2.

As seen in Table 2, the bulk, grain boundary, and total conductivities of the electrolyte film samples increased at first, and then decreased as the Ga addition amount increased. It was clear that the grain boundary conductivity by a large extent contributed to the total conductivity, suggesting the grain boundary resistance functioned as the dominant factor in the LGTP solid film electrolyte. Fig. 5d shows the variation of total ionic conductivity of LGTP film and dopant concentrations x for Li1+xGaxTi2-x (PO4)3. The dopant concentrations x increased from 0 to 0.127 with the increasing of Ga addition amount from 0 to 20 mM. However, it should be pointed out that as the Ga addition amount increased to 50 mM, the dopant concentrations x was difficult to determine (the absence of 50 mM-point in Fig. 5d). It was caused by the formation of GaPO4, which was an impurity phase and presented in the specimens (Fig. 1). When the Ga addition amount was far beyond the dopant concentrations limit, 50 mM for instance, the ionic conductivity would decrease. It might be caused by the excess Ga being presented in the impurity phase, leading to adverse impact on ionic conductivity improvement. It shows that the ionic conductivity gradually increased from 2.5 × 10−7 S cm−1 to the maximum value 2.1 × 10−5 S cm−1, which was achieved by LGTP-Ga-20mM.

Noticeably, the impedance spectra of LTP film (Fig. 5b) showed a poorly-resolved semicircle in the medium frequencies, related to the surface layer resistance [43], which may caused by the irregular LTP surface as shown in Fig. 2, Fig. 4b. As to LGTP films, this phenomenon was unconspicuous (Fig. 5c). It indicates that the modified surface layer, as shown is Fig. 2c-(d), was favorable for charge transfer. Moreover, as seen from the Fig. 4b, the LTP layer was more porous and coarse compared with the LGTP layer (Fig. 4a). The LGTP film layer was very dense in the inner part, and we could not find the crystal grain boundary, suggesting it contacted well with graphite substrate, while the LTP film layer did not smoothly contact with the substrate and lead to an increase in surface layer resistance shown in impedance spectra.

The reasons for sample LGTP-Ga-20mM owing the highest conductivity can be concluded as follows: (i) the LGTP-Ga-20mM had relatively higher x value (x = 0.127), suggesting higher proportion of Ti4+ being substituted by larger ion Ga3+ and correspondingly higher additional Li-ions for charge compensation. The larger substitution ions could enlarge the lithium pathway and decrease the activation energy. Furthermore, the additional Li ions would be located at another sites (M2 sites) besides M1, which can be favorable for lithium ion conduction along the M1- M2- M2-M1 zig zag pathway [39,44,45]. (ii) LGTP-Ga-20mM exhibited lesser vacancies and had more dense layer and correspondingly higher density (2.31 g cm−3). It was reported that the high density is the integral requirement for high ionic conductivity electrolyte [37], and reduction of vacancies would decrease the grain boundary impedance [46]. (iii) LGTP-Ga-20mM exhibited relatively high crystallinity and scarce impurity. The high crystallinity could guarantee the intactness of the NASICON structure for lithium ion transportation. Although the LGTP-Ga-50mM also exhibited dense structure with uniform size distribution, it had impurities including GaPO4 and LiPO3, which would lead to deterioration in ionic conductivity.

Assuming that total conductivities of LTP and LGTP films can be in accordance with the classical Arrhenius equation as follows [[47], [48], [49]]:(2) where σ is the ionic conductivity (S cm−1), T is the absolute temperature (K), R is the gas constant (J mol−1 K−1), A is the pre-exponential term (T S cm−1). The activation energy Ea (J mol−1) can be calculated via linear regression method. The Arrhenius plots of the LTP and LGTP films were shown in Fig. 5e. The activation energies were drawn from the slope of Arrhenius plots. The activation energies for LTP, LGTP-Ga-1mM, LGTP-Ga-5mM, LGTP-Ga-10mM, LGTP-Ga-20mM, and LGTP-Ga-50mM films were 0.34, 0.33, 0.31, 0.31, 0.29, and 0.32 eV, respectively. The LGTP-Ga-20mM had the lowest activation energy (0.29eV), indicating that the higher Li+ mobility in the lattice and grain boundaries. Moreover, it has been reported that the low activation energy of solid electrolyte is quite beneficial for the high performance solid electrolyte in wide temperature range [42]. So LGTP-Ga-20mM (x = 0.127) can be proved as the most advantageous in terms of electrochemical performance.

In this study, we further conducted annealing process to the sample LGTP-Ga-20mM. The annealing process can be effective in the crystal stabilization and in promoting amorphous phase's transition into crystallized phase, which could be beneficial for the improvement in lithium ion conduction. The impedance spectra of LGTP-Ga-20mM under different annealing temperature and the relationship between the total conductivity of LGTP-Ga-20mM and annealing temperature are displayed in Fig. 6. The total conductivity can be enhanced through post-stage annealing treatment. The corresponding total conductivity of annealed LGTP-Ga-20mM increased from annealing temperature of 500–800 °C, and it had the highest total conductivity under 800 °C, where it reached 2.3 × 10−4 S cm−1. It slightly decreased to 1.5 × 10−4 S cm−1 when temperature increased to 900 °C. It might be caused by the Li2O loss during high temperature annealing and it can bring more pores in the film and deteriorate the lithium ion conduction. The details of bulk conductivity, grain boundary conductivity, and total conductivity for all the annealed samples were listed in Table S1. It is worthy to point out that the maximum total conductivity (2.3 × 10−4 S cm−1) achieved in this study was quite competitive in the crystalline-type of SSEs. Up until now, the Crystalline-type SSEs mainly include Garnet-type SSEs, NASICON-type SSEs, LISICON-type SSEs, and Perovskite SSEs [50,51]. The general strategies for the fabrication of these SSEs have still been the high-temperature solid-state reaction method. The general total conductivity of these crystalline-type of SSEs were in the scope of 10−6-10−4 S cm−1 [[51], [52], [53], [54], [55]]. So this study shed new light into the fabrication of crystalline-type SSEs with high lithium ion conductivity.

To examine the feasibility of LGTP SSEs & graphite configuration for the application in ASSLBs, galvanostatic tests were performed on the cell Li/LGTP/graphite, assembled by attaching lithium plate to the LGTP SSEs side. The 800 °C annealed LGTP-Ga-20mM was selected for this test. Fig. 7 shows the charge and discharge profiles of the cell under 0.5C. The graphite as anode exhibited initial charge capacity of 339.2 mAh g−1 (reached 91.2% of the theoretical capacity of graphite) and discharge capacity of 272.5 mAh g−1, with coulombic efficiency of 80.3%. Through cycling, the capacity showed a gradual fading, with capacity retention of 85.2% over 30 cycles at 0.5C. The galvanostatic tests proved the favorable lithium intercalation and deintercalation in the graphite anode, and fast lithium ion conduction in the LGTP SSEs. The slight capacity fading can be arisen from the possible side reactions or contact problems at the interface between LGTP SSEs and graphite, or the instability of graphite during the galvanostatic tests, which are still being studied. In general, the configuration of LGTP SSEs & graphite fabricated based on hydrothermal strategy can be a promising new way for ASSLBs fabrication.

LGTP film on graphite substrate: (a) photograph (b) SEM photo and (c) cross-section SEM photo of LGTP film on PSM treated graphite substrate; (d) photograph (e) SEM photo and (f) cross-section SEM photo of LGTP film on graphite substrate without PSM treatment.

Graphite is a widely used anode material for LIBs by virtue of its advantages such as flat and low voltage range, high lithium ion storage, safety and low cost. Therefore, the growth of LGTP film on graphite substrate is a very critical issue in realizing in-situ hydrothermal fabrication of SSEs films. However, the hydrothermal formed LGTP film is not easy to grow on the pristine graphite substrate. As shown in Fig. 8a, the LGTP layer was thin with many interspaces on the graphite without further treatment. It can be more clearly observed in Fig. 8b and c that LGTP film only partially covered the substrate. In order to modify the graphite substrate properties, plasma-surface modification technology (PSM) was employed to pretreat the graphite before the hydrothermal reaction. Fig. 8d,e,f shows the PSM effects on LGTP film appearance. It suggested that the PSM pre-treatment would improve the LGTP film coverage on graphite substrate. Compared to the discrete film in Fig. 8a, a continuous and compact LGTP film covered over the entire treated substrate and exhibited little pores, peeling or flaking as shown in Fig. 8d. SEM result strongly supported that after plasma pretreatment, the substrate can not be observed since it was covered by a mass of LGTP particle with 50 μm in diameter (Fig. 8e), and thickness of the as-synthesized LGTP film increased to approximately 100 μm (Fig. 8f).

In hydrothermal process, the LGTP would nucleate at the surface of substrate and then grow outwards. Therefore, the PSM effects may lead to the change on surface structural properties as well as the surface energy, which could be characterized by wettability [56,57]. Therefore, the water contact angle (WCA) and surface roughness (Ra) of graphite substrate were examined as a function of plasma irradiating time (Fig. 9). It shows that the WAC can be dramatically decreased to lower than 10 deg. after 5 min irradiating time, indicating that PSM induced a strong variation in their hydrophobicity. It might be attributed to the creation of new carbon bonds and radicals, which were the main agents for hydrophily enhancement [58]. However, as evaluated by Ra measurements, the PSM treatments resulted in an unconspicuous change in the structural properties of the substrate. Therefore, it supposed that the plasma surface treatment was directly related to surface energy, resulting in an improving hydrophily, which became a main cause to increase the coverage of the LGTP layer and to make dense film layer.

In this study, Ga substitued LTP (LGTP) film is successfully in situ fabricated on a graphite substrate through hydrothermal approach. Ga substitution through hydrothermal can greatly improve the conductivity of LTP film from 2.5 × 10−7 S/cm to as high as 2.1 × 10−5 S/cm (LGTP-Ga-20mM), which can be attributed to the formation of denser layer with lesser vacancies, increased lithium ion concentration in NASICON structure (x = 0.127 in Li1+xGaxTi2-x(PO4)3), and the probable establishment of zig-zag pathways for lithium conduction. The conductivity is further enhanced through post-stage annealing treatment, and 800 °C annealed LGTP-Ga-20mM exhibits maximum conductivity of 2.3 × 10−4 S cm−1, which is quite competitive in the crystalline electrolyte. This sample is selected for the charge and discharge tests of cell (Li/LGTP/Graphite), which shows initial charge capacity of 339.2 mAh g−1 and discharge capacity of 272.5 mAh g−1, with coulombic efficiency of 80.3%. The capacity still has capacity retention of 85.2% over 30 cycles at 0.5C. It proves the feasibility of application of LGTP&graphite in all solid state lithium batteries. Moreover, it is found the plasma surface treatment, directly related to surface energy, is effective in the hydrophily improvement which is favorable for the full coverage of the LGTP layer on graphite and formation of dense film layer.