Na superionic conductor (NASICON)-type Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) has been regarded as a promising cathode material for sodium-ion batteries  (SIBs).  However,  NVP  suffers  from  poor  cyclability  and  rate  capability  because  of  its  intrinsically  low  electronic  conductivity.  Herein,  we  successfully  synthesized  N-doped  carbon-wrapped  Na3V2(PO4)3  (NC@NVP)  through  the  carbonization  of  polydopamine,  which  is  rich  in  nitrogen species. The strong adhesion properties of the polydopamine lead to effective and homogeneous wrapping of NVP particles, and it  is further turned into a conductive N-doped carbon network itself, providing facile diffusion of electrons and Na+ ions during battery operation.  NC@NVP  displays  remarkable  electrochemical  performance,  even  under  harsh  operating  conditions,  such  as  a  high  rate  capability  (discharge capacity of 70.88, 49.21 mA·h·g−1 at 50 and 100 C), long-term cycling stability (capacity retention of 94.77% over 1,000 cycles at  20 C), and high-temperature cycling (capacity retention of 92.0% after 500 cycles at 60 °C).  KEYWORDS  polydopamine, N-doped carbon, Na3V2(PO4)3, cathode, sodium-ion batteries 

Recently, many researchers have taken a great interest in sodium-ion  batteries  (SIBs)  as  a  new-generation  battery  system  because  this  system has a definite advantage in terms of the abundance of sodium  resources, which can be obtained without any limit from seawater  [1, 2]. Because the operating principle of the SIB is closest to that of  lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), it can be easily applied to commercialized  platforms such as conductive materials or binders [3–6]. However,  the SIB suffers from the larger radius of Na+ (102 pm) than that of Li+  (76 pm). This causes poor kinetics of Na+ intercalation/extraction  in the lattice structure, and the electrode undergoes high stress from  the large volume change of electrode materials during the charge/  discharge process [7, 8]. These disadvantages lead to low power density  and poor long-term cyclic performance of the SIB, and they still remain  the  major  challenge  to  overcome  for  their  commercialization.  In  order to overcome the sluggish kinetics of Na+, which is needed to  achieve  a  high  energy  density  during  practical  battery  operation,  many studies have focused on ion conductors as a cathode material.  Although plenty of studies have investigated layered-type oxides,  which  have  two-dimensional  (2D)  ion  diffusion  pathway  such  as  NaxCoO2 [9], Na2/3Fe1/2Mn1/2O2 [10], Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 [11] or olivine type phosphates with one-dimensional (1D) ion diffusion pathway  such as NaFePO4 [12], these cathode materials generally have low  ionic conductivity because of the limited pathway of Na+ for polaron  hopping in the lattice structure. In this regard, Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) is  attractive  because  this  material  is  a  Na  superionic  conductor  (NASICON), and it exhibits reversible sodiation/desodiation behavior.  NVP is well known for its facile diffusion channel of Na+ in the lattice  structure owing to its three-dimensional (3D) open framework and  large interstitial sites for the transfer of Na+; hence, it ensures high ion  conductivity and structural stability [13–15]. The NVP also shows a  high  theoretical  energy  density  (~  400  W·h·kg−1)  and  reversible  voltage plateau of a V4+/V3+ redox couple during battery operation at  higher operating voltages (~ 3.4 V vs. Na/Na+) than that of other  cathode materials for the SIB [16–18].   

However,  the  NVP  experiences  intrinsically  low  electronic  conductivity from a phosphate-based framework, similar to  other  phosphate materials in the LIB system (LiFePO4, Li3V2(PO4)3) [19, 20].  For  this  reason,  carbonaceous  conductive  materials,  such  as  hard  carbon, carbon nanotubes, graphene, or reduced graphene oxide, are  generally  combined  with  NVP  material  to  enhance  the  electronic  conductivity and maximize the power density [21–25]. 

Recently,  many  researchers  are  attracted  by  the  nonmetallic  heteroatom doping technique on the carbon matrix, such as that for  N-doped carbon, which produces fascinating materials for the surface  modification  of  SIB  electrode  materials.  Specifically,  as  a  coating  layer of cathode materials, the heteroatom-doped carbon layer may  provide better electronic conductivity or ion diffusion by forming  extrinsic  defects  or  active  sites  on  the  carbon  skeleton  [26–28].  Shen et al. applied an N-doped carbon-coating layer on the NVP to  enhance  the  cyclability  and  rate  capability  using  citric  acid  and polyvinylpyrrolidone  (PVP)  as  a  carbon  source  and  a  nitrogen  source, respectively [27]. Liang et al. formed a nitrogen and sulfur  dual-doped carbon layer on NVP by using urea and benzyl disulfide  as  carbon  and  nitrogen  sources,  respectively,  thereby  enhancing  not only the rate capability but also the cycling stability at a high  temperature  (55  °C)  against  degradation  of  the  cathode  material  under harsh conditions [29]. However, these studies separately used  a  carbon  source  and  an  additional  nitrogen  source  to  obtain  the  N-doped  carbon;  N-containing  carbon  sources  have  been  applied  to  acquire  N-doped  carbon  coating  such  as  polypyrrole  [26],  melamine  [30],  and  Na2-ethylenediaminetetraacetic  acid  (EDTA)  [31]. Unfortunately, these precursors still have the disadvantages of  toxicity,  high  cost,  and  scarcity.  Moreover,  these  works  employed  the traditional sol-gel or solid-state reaction process to acquire an  N-doped carbon layer on the surface of the active materials, which  still  lacks  the  driving  force  or  understanding  of  how  the  carbon  precursor is successfully located on the surface of parent material. 

Dopamine,  as  a  nitrogen-containing  carbon  source,  shows  advantageous features of nontoxicity and high solubility in water and  is spontaneously oxidized and self-polymerized in an alkali solution.  Furthermore, polydopamine is easily deposited on various type of  materials, including polymers, ceramics, and metals, with a strong  adhesion ability that was inspired by the mussel’s adhesive byssus  thread [32–35].   

In our work, we have employed polydopamine as a single starting  precursor for N-doped carbon and utilize its advantageous properties  of facile self-polymerization and adhesive ability on the inorganic  surface as a driving force toward a uniform N-doped carbon matrix.  In addition, it is also believed that the mesoporous morphology of  the carbon layer can be obtained in the carbonization process, and  these structures effectively enhance the kinetic behavior of Na+ with  a high surface area [21, 29]. Furthermore, functional groups of doped  N species formed on the carbon matrix feature surface functionalities,  which partially show the charge/discharge process with a capacitive  behavior [26, 28, 36, 37]. Additionally, this N-doped carbon layer  that  covered  the  NVP  particles  well  can  protect  against  surface  degradation  from  electrolyte  decomposition  on  the  electrolyte/  electrode  interface  at  elevated  temperatures.  We  expect  that  the  electrochemical  performance  of  the  NVP  cathode  is  remarkably  improved by these advantageous features of the obtained N-doped  carbon matrix, even under harsh cell operating conditions. 

The pristine Na3V2(PO4)3 material was synthesized via a simple sol-gel  method using NH4VO3 (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.0%), CH3COONa (Sigma Aldrich,  99%),  NH4H2PO4  (Sigma-Aldrich,  98%),  and  citric  acid  (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.5%) at stoichiometric ratio; citric acid was used  not only as a carbon source but also as a chelating agent. NH4VO3  (0.52 g) was dissolved in distilled water (90 mL) under stirring at    60 °C, and then CH3COONa (0.55 g), NH4H2PO4 (0.77 g), and citric  acid  (0.25  g)  were  added.  After  the  solution  became  transparent,  the  solution  was  transformed  into  a  transparent  gel  and  kept  at      80 °C. The dried gel was ground in an agate mortar and calcined  in a quartz at 350 °C for 5 h in Ar. Finally, the collected powder was  annealed in a quartz furnace at 800 °C for 8 h with a heating rate of  5 °C·min−1 (in Ar) to obtain the NVP.  2.1.2  Preparation of N-doped carbon-wrapped Na3V2(PO4)3 (NC@NVP)  NC@NVP  was  prepared  via  a  self-polymerization  process  of  dopamine  monomers.  For  the  preparation  of  NC@NVP,  tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.8%), dopamine (2-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)ethylamine)  hydrochloride  (Sigma-Aldrich)  and  as-prepared  NVP  powder  were  used.  The  as-prepared  NVP  powder (0.2 g) was dispersed in a tris-buffer aqueous solution (50 mL,  10  mM,  pH  8.5)  by  ultrasonication  for  30  min.  Then,  dopamine  hydrochloride  (0.5 g)  was  dissolved  in  suspension  with  vigorous  stirring for 6 h at room temperature. The polydopamine-coated NVP  was  collected  and  washed  using  a  centrifuge  with  distilled  water  and ethanol, which was dried at 80 °C in an oven for 24 h. Finally,  the N-doped carbon-wrapped NVP (NC@NVP) was obtained after  annealing  in  a  quartz  furnace  at  750  °C  for  4  h  under  an  Ar  atmosphere with a heating rate of 2 °C·min−1. 

The  material  properties  of  the  prepared  materials  were  evaluated  using various analysis instruments. X-ray diffraction (XRD; Rigaku  diffractometer using monochromatic Cu Kα radiation) was used to  characterize the crystal structures of the samples. The XRD patterns  were  recorded  with  a  scan  speed  of  2°·min−1  in  the  2θ  range  of  10°–60°. The carbon phase in NC@NVP was confirmed by Raman  spectroscopy (Renishaw, InVia Raman Microscope) in the range of  800–2,000  cm−1.  Thermogravimetric  analysis  (TGA)  was  carried  out  using  a  Q600  (TA  instruments,  USA).  X-ray  photoelectron  spectroscopy (XPS) spectra of the samples were acquired using a PHI  5000 VersaProbe (ULVAC PHI, Japan) instrument with a background  pressure of 6.7 × 108 Pa and a monochromated Al Kα radiation  (1,486.6 eV)  source,  and  peaks  were  separated  using  MultiPak  software.  Elemental  contents  of  the  NC@NVP  were  inspected  by  using an elemental analyzer (EA, CS600, Leco). The morphologies  and structural properties of the as-prepared samples were observed  using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Teneo  Volume  Scope,  FEI,  USA).  The  specific  surface  areas  and  pore  distributions of the particles were measured using a N2 adsorption  isotherm  plot  calculated  by  the  Brunauer–Emmett–Teller  (BET)  method  on  a  Micromeritics  apparatus  (ASAP  2010).  The  particle  morphologies,  microstructures,  selected-area  electron  diffraction  (SAED)  patterns,  and  elemental  mapping  were  obtained  by  high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) and scanning  transmission  electron  microscopy  (STEM),  and  energy  dispersive  spectrometry  (EDS)  elemental  maps  were  acquired  using  a  Talos  TEM (FEI; Talos F200X) operated at 200 keV and equipped with a  high-brightness  Schottky  field-emission  electron  source  (X-FEG)  and super-X EDS detector system (Bruker; Super-X™). 

The electrochemical performance was evaluated using a fabricated  CR-2032-type sodium half-cell (Hoshen, Japan). The cathode electrode  was prepared from a slurry of 80 wt.% active material, 10 wt.% carbon  black (Super P), and 10 wt.% binder (polyvinylidene fluoride, Solef  6020) in a N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone solvent. The slurry was coated  onto the aluminum foil with a doctor blade adjusted to 100 μm. The  electrodes were dried at 80 °C in a vacuum oven for 24 h. Half-cells  were fabricated with sodium metal foil as the counter electrode, and  a  glass-fiber  filter  (Whatman,  UK)  was  employed  as  a  separator.  The  electrolyte  was  1  M  NaClO4  (Sigma-Aldrich)  in  an  ethylene  carbonate  (Sigma-Aldrich),  propylene  carbonate  (Sigma-Aldrich),  and diethyl carbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) (1:1:1 v/v) mixed solvent, with  5  wt.%  fluoroethylene  carbonate  as  an  additive.  Charge/discharge  operations of the fabricated coin-type half-cells were carried out in  the  voltage  range  of  2.0–4.0  V  (vs.  Na/Na+)  at  room  temperature    (25 °C) or elevated temperature (60 °C). All the electrochemical tests  of  the  cells  in  charge/discharge  were  performed  with  the  current  density of 1 C-rate, and the 1 C-rate in this study corresponds to  the current density of 117.6 mA·g−1. EC-Lab software was used to  inspect the redox reactions from 2.0 to 4.0 V (vs. Na/Na+) at various  scan rates using cyclic voltammetry (CV, VSP-300 Potentiostat, Bio-logic Science Instruments). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)  measurements (VSP-300 Potentiostat, Bio-logic Science Instruments)  were  carried  out  between  10 mHz  and  1 MHz  by  applying  an  alternating current (AC) perturbation signal of 5 mV. 

To confirm the effect of N-doped carbon on the bulk structure of  the  NVP  after  the  carbonization  process  of  the  N-doped  carbon  matrix, first, XRD patterns were acquired in the 2θ range of 10°–60°.  In Fig. 1(a), the XRD pattern of the NC@NVP shows almost identical  peak positions and ratios as compared to the pure NVP material, and  these patterns clearly indicate the R3c space group of the NASICON  structure [38–40]. Therefore, it seems that the NASICON structure  of NVP is well preserved without forming any impurities, even after  the carbonization process at 800 °C. Although the evidence of the  carbon phase in the NC@NVP is not clearly detected in the XRD  pattern possibly due to the amorphous characteristics of the carbon  phase or relatively strong peak intensity of the NVP phase, Raman  spectrum of the NC@NVP in Fig. S1 in the Electronic Supplementary  Material (ESM) clarify the presence of carbon materials. Two distinct  peaks  which  correspond  to  D  band  at  1,347  cm−1  and  G  band  at  1,586 cm−1 are shown, respectively, in Fig. S1 in the ESM. Also, TGA  curves were obtained in the temperature range of 25–800 °C (Fig. 1(b)).  In  the  TGA  curves,  both  samples  exhibit  similar  amount  of  weight  losses  at  around  50–300  °C,  corresponding  to  the  evaporation  of  water molecules absorbed in the samples [21]. Meanwhile, the weight  of the NC@NVP rapidly decreased at 300– 450 °C, which indicates  the decomposition of the wrapped N-doped carbon matrix [21, 41, 42].  From the calculation based on this result, the  amount of N-doped  carbon in the NC@NVP is determined as 15.43% of the total weight  of  the  NC@NVP.  After  500  °C,  both  samples  exhibit  the  same  tendency of a slight increase in their weight, and this phenomenon    is  known  to  be  relevant  to  the  oxidation  of  V  ions  in  the  NVP  structure from 3+ to 4+, 5+ [21].   

As the carbon content of 15.43% in NC@NVP resulted from the  carbonization of the polydopamine precursor, the carbon material  of  NC@NVP  is  expected  to  contain  rich  nitrogen  groups  in  the  molecule. These N species in the carbon skeleton have a key role in  enhancing  not  only  the  electron  conductivity  but  also  the  ion  diffusion as extrinsic defects or active sites during the battery operation.  Accordingly, the presence of N bonds in the carbon matrix is analyzed  and confirmed by using XPS analysis for NC@NVP (Figs. 1(c)–1(d)).  For the C1s spectrum in Fig. 1(c), the highest intensity of the sp2  carbon  is  found  at  284.6  eV,  which  is  assigned  to  the  C=C  bond, and  the  C–O  bond  of  the  sp3  carbon  is  deconvoluted  into  some  peaks  assigned  to  C–O,  C=O,  and  O=C–O  at  285.8,  287.7,  and  289.5  eV,  respectively  [27,  43–45].  C=N  and  C–N  bonds  from  N  doping  on  the  carbon  matrix  generally  overlap  the  positions  of  the C–O and C=O bonds, which are hardly distinguished from the  spectrum in the NVP derived from citric acid (Fig. S2(a) in the ESM).  Therefore, the N1s spectrum was specifically examined to confirm  the doped N species in the carbon matrix. As shown in Fig. 1(d), the  N1s spectrum is deconvoluted into three major peaks: The peak at  398.6 eV indicates the pyridinic N, the peak at 400.8 eV belongs to  the pyrrolic N, and the peak at 403.2 eV is assigned to the quaternary  N species [27, 46]. In contrast, the N1s peak of the NVP is hardly  detected with extremely low intensity (Fig. S2(b) in the ESM). The  peak area indicates the content ratio among the N species, and the  largest contribution to the N1s is the pyrrolic N, which is formed  after substituting a carbon on the planar edges or defect sites of the  carbon  skeletons.  The  second-largest  content  of  N  species  is  the  pyridinic N peak, which is formed by substituting a carbon on the  edges or defect sites in the plane [27, 43, 47]. In contrast, quaternary  N,  which  exhibits  the  lowest  content  ratio  among  the  N  species,  results from substituting edge or interior carbon without generating  any defects in the carbon skeleton. Generally, the contribution from  quaternary  N  on  the  conductivities  is  lower  than  that  of  other  N  species  because  the  conductivity  of  electrons  or  Na+  passing  the  N-doped carbon matrix is mostly enhanced through the extrinsic  defects and active sites [27, 48]. As shown in Table S1 in the ESM,  N-doped carbon in NC@NVP is the sum of the integrated area of  the pyridinic and pyrrolic N as an extrinsic defect, which is 47.2% +  46.6% = 93.8%, dominating the total fitted area of the N1s spectrum,  and the integrated area of the quaternary N exhibits only 6.2%. In  Table S2 in the ESM, elemental analysis indicates that N content in  the wrapped N-doped carbon layer of the NC@NVP is 1.62 wt.%.  Therefore, it is revealed that the N-doped carbon can enhance the  conductivities  of  the  NC@NVP  with  the  help  of  extrinsic  defects  and active sites on the carbon skeletons. 

The morphology of NVP and NCP-NVP samples were observed  using FE-SEM in Fig. 2, and primary particles of the NVP exhibit  irregular shapes and size distributions (Fig. 2(a)) after the calcination  process for NVP. Although NC@NVP revealed no noticeable difference  in the morphology (Fig. 2(b)) as compared to the NVP, we expected  that the porous structure of NC@NVP could be obtained after the  carbonization process of the polydopamine, as described in previous  reports  [49,  50].  In  order  to  specify  the  particle  structure  of  the  samples,  BET  analysis  was  conducted  using  nitrogen  adsorption/  desorption  isotherm.  In  Fig. 2(c),  the  NVP  shows  a  non-porous pore characteristic, which is assigned to the type-III isotherm, and  the pore-size distribution (inset) also reveals that the NVP particles  hardly show porosity without a defined size of pores. In contrast,  NC@NVP shows a type-IV isotherm of mesoporous characteristic  [51, 52], in which the average size positioned at the pore distribution  of ~ 3.93 nm (Fig. 2(d)). In addition, the mesoporous particle structure  of  the  NC@NVP  is  related  to  the  large  surface  area  (43.2 m2·g−1)  which is almost three times higher than the NVP (13.8 m2·g−1) in  Table S2 in the ESM. Therefore, the porous structure and large surface  area of NC@NVP is obtained after carbonization, and it is expected  to contribute to the facile penetration of electrolyte into the electrode,  especially for the migration of Na+ at high-rate charge/discharge  operations. 

Inspections  of  the  homogeneity  and  compositional  distribution  for  polydopamine  deposited  on  the  NVP  surface  as  an  N-doped  carbon  source  were  conducted  using  HR-TEM  and  EDS  element  mapping (Fig. 3). As shown in Fig. 3(a), the HR-TEM image reveals  that  the  amorphous  layer  with  a  coverage  of  ~  50 nm  effectively  wrapped  the  NVP,  and  the  SAED  pattern  (inset)  of  the  single  crystalline NASICON (R3c) structure is detected without secondary  phases  [40].  The  EDS  elemental  mapping  image  verifies  that  the  wrapped amorphous layer consists of the polydopamine, which can  be confirmed by the C, N elements of polymer’s typical components  aligned along the particle surface (Fig. 3(b)). The adhesion property  of the polydopamine introduced by rich amine or catechol groups  after  self-polymerization  properly  provides  a  facile  deposition  mechanism as it is spontaneously deposited against inorganic surfaces.  Therefore, once the dopamine monomers are self-polymerized in the  alkali solution, the polydopamine layer can be uniformly deposited  on the NVP surface, which provides strong adhesion to the inorganic  surface [32, 33]. 

The HR-TEM image in Fig. 4(a), which shows the surface area of  the NC@NVP particle after carbonization, reveals that the N-doped,  uniformly carbon-wrapped NVP particle has a coverage of ~ 18 nm.  The  lattice  fringes  (inset)  of  NC@NVP  are  clearly  observed  with  d-spacing of 3.6 Å, indicating an interplanar distance of the (113) plane of a rhombohedral structure. In Fig. 4(b), the EDS mapping  image  shows  a  homogeneous  distribution  of  Na,  V,  and  P  of  Na3V2(PO4)3 in the bulk particle, carbon is found as a surface coating  layer, and nitrogen is clearly discovered along the carbon area.   

Because the homogeneity of the polydopamine layer is ensured  by its good adhesion ability, the morphology of the N-doped carbon  layer remains after carbonization. In addition, the obtained N-doped  carbon not only covered each particle, but is also well dispersed among  the  particles,  which  connects  each  particle  with  the  conductive  N-doped  carbon  network  (Fig.  S3  in  the  ESM).  Therefore,  it  was  found that NC@NVP was successfully synthesized as a porous structure  of the N-doped carbon matrix uniformly wrapping the NVP particles.  It  is  also  conclusively  revealed  that  the  polydopamine  can  realize  the high yield and homogeneity of the N-doped carbon network  for  the  NVP  particles  as  an  efficient  nitrogen-containing  carbon  precursor. 

To  evaluate  the  effect  of  the  wrapped  N-doped  carbon  on  the  electrochemical performance, two electrodes were prepared to assemble  into half-cells  with  Na  metal  as a counter electrode.  As  shown in  Fig. 5(a),  the  initial  voltage  profiles  address  the  charge/discharge  processes of NVP and NC@NVP in the voltage range of 2.0–4.0 V vs.  Na/Na+. The NVP shows lower initial capacities and a coulombic  efficiency (CE) of 117.9/103.0 mA·h·g−1 and 87.21%, respectively. In  contrast, the NC@NVP exhibits higher charge/discharge capacities  of  126.7/110.5  mA·h·g−1  in  the  initial  cycle  with  a  CE  of  87.36%.  Interestingly, NC@NVP shows a slightly differently shaped discharge  curve (green dashed rectangular area) which shows a lower slope in  the voltage range of 2.0–3.0 V after a plateau of the V4+/V3+ redox  couple  as  compared  with  the  NVP.  It  seems  that  the  increase  in  the  discharge  capacity  of  the  NC@NVP  is  attributed  to  not  only  enhanced conductivities but also this lower slope of the discharge  curve.  The  absorbed  sodium  ions  in  2.0–3.0 V  contribute  to  the  discharge capacity of 21.67 mA·h·g−1, which corresponds to 19.61%  of total discharge capacity (110.5 mA·h·g−1). This different aspect of  the discharge curve is also found reversibly in the charge process;  however,  it  cannot  be  discovered  in  the  NVP.  In  order  to  gather   specific insights regarding electrochemical reactions, the CV plots  for  the  electrodes  were  examined  in  the  voltage  window  of  2.0–    4.0 V vs. Na/Na+ (Fig. 5(b)). Both samples exhibit a sharp oxidation  peak at around 3.4 V, which indicates Na+ extraction of the NVP in  the anodic scan [31]. In this process, Na3V2(PO4)3 is transformed to  NaV2(PO4)3, and the peak of both samples effectively maintains its  current  density  and  voltage  position  during  five  cycles.  However,  this peak is divided into two peaks in the cathodic scan, which is  associated  with  the  insertion  of  Na+  to  the  NVP.  According  to  previous  studies,  this  phenomenon  occurs  because  of  local  redox  environment  rearrangement  of  the  NASICON  structure,  which  transfers Na+ from Na(1) to Na(2) sites [24]. Meanwhile, in the voltage  range of 2.0–3.0 V, which is marked by a green dashed rectangle, as  discussed in Fig. 5(a), the CV plot of the NVP generally shows no  defined peak of redox reactions. However, the CV plot of NC@NVP  shows  a  continuous  current  of  ~  20  mA·g−1  at  2.0–3.0  V  with  a  rectangular  shape,  and  it  is  believed  that  the  N-doped  carbon  matrix induces a capacitive charge-storage mechanism through the  electric double-layer effect [28]. Additionally, the capacitive behavior  is visualized in Fig. 5(c). Ex situ TEM images mapped by EDS clearly  demonstrate that sodium ions are adsorbed on the carbon layer in  the voltage range of 2.0–3.0 V compared to the initial discharge state  at 3.5 V. Therefore, the charge/discharge processes of NC@NVP is  proceeded  by  not  only  redox  reactions  through  the  Na+  diffusion  but also the capacitive contribution from the high surface area with  mesoporous structures.   

The cycling performance of NVP and NC@NVP for 100 cycles at  0.5 C are shown in Fig. 6(a). The NVP exhibits an initial discharge  capacity of 99.44 mA·h·g−1, which is retained to 94.91 mA·h·g−1 at  the  100th  cycle  with  a  capacity  retention  of  95.44%.  In  contrast, NC@NVP delivers discharge capacities of 102.6 and 101 mA·h·g−1 at  the 1st and 100th cycle, respectively, which shows better cyclability  than that of NVP. To evaluate the high conductivity of the N-doped  carbon  matrix  on  the  rate  capability,  rate  tests  for  samples  were  performed at various C-rates for 10 cycles (Fig. 6(b)). The discharge  capacities  of  the  NVP  are  105.1,  99.06,  94.61,  89.1,  80.75,  and    72.51 mA·h·g−1  at  0.2,  0.5,  1,  2,  5,  10  and  20  C,  respectively,  and      it drops rapidly after 20 C. The NVP exhibits poor rate capability    at  50  and  100  C,  and  exhibits  negligible  capacity  of  1.672  and    0.041  mA·h·g−1  with  meaningless  values  as  a  cathode  material.  In  contrast, the discharge capacities of the NC@NVP are 106.8, 103.2,  99.46, 96.7, 91.22, 86.89, and 82.41 mA·h·g−1 at 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, and  20 C, and it is maintained even at 50, 100 C with 70.88, 49.21 mA·h·g−1,  respectively. Furthermore, the reversible capacity of the NC@NVP  is  recovered  to  106.4  mA·h·g−1  at  0.2  C  again.  To  verify  the  high  stability  of  NC@NVP  during  long-term  cycling  at  high  rate,  the  cells were operated at 20 C for 1000 cycles in Fig. 6(c). The initial  capacity  of  NVP  is  75.37  mA·h·g−1,  and  severe  capacity  fading  is  shown  after  the  500th  cycle,  retaining  only  16.74  mA·h·g−1  at  the  1,000th cycle, showing a low capacity retention of 22.21%. This serious  cycle  degradation  is  caused  by  excessive  stress  on  the  NASICON  structure at high rates, which is attributed to the tough Na+ diffusion  process  into  the  fully  desodiated  NaV2(PO4)3  phase  [15,  53].  In  contrast, NC@NVP shows superior cycling stability at 20 C, and its  initial  capacity  of  87.62  mA·h·g−1  is  well  maintained  even  after  1,000th cycle of 83.04 mA·h·g−1 and remarkable capacity retention  of  94.77%.  This  is  also  confirmed  by  polarization  effects  (ΔV)  between the cathodic and anodic peaks in the dQ/dV plot (Fig. S4  in the ESM). For the NVP, the polarization rises from 0.318 V at the  initial  cycle  to  0.723  V  after  1,000  cycles,  as  NC@NVP  increases  only from 0.218 V at the initial cycle to 0.372 V. As we discussed in  Fig. 5(b),  the  highly  conductive  carbon  matrix  with  N  doping  provides excellent electronic and ionic conductivities. Furthermore,  the N-doped carbon layer can mitigate the excessive stress on the  NVP structure, coming from the repetitive Na+ insertion/extraction  to the structure during long-term cycling at a high rate. 

Based on the above evaluation, EIS measurements were conducted  by collecting the electrode of NVP and NC@NVP after 1,000 cycles  at 20 C. Nyquist plots for the two samples in Fig. 7 are featured as a  similar tendency with a semicircle and sloping line. The semicircle  at  a  high  frequency  is  assigned  to  the  charge-transfer  impedance  (Rct) at the electrolyte/electrode interface, and the sloping line indicates  the Warburg impedance (Zw) of the mass transfer of the bulk structure  [23, 54–56]. These Nyquist plots are fitted based on the equivalent circuit shown in the inset. The NC@NVP exhibits a smaller semicircle  of charge-transfer impedance than NVP, and it can also be seen that  the resistance value of the NC@NVP (82.49 Ω) is smaller than that  of NVP (167.7 Ω) in Table 1. The EIS results verify that a high electron  conductivity  at  the  interfacial  area  between  the  electrolyte  and  electrode  is  achieved  by  the  N-doped  carbon  matrix.  Meanwhile,  the Na+ diffusion coefficient (DNa) is also obtained as a key factor to  demonstrate the kinetic activity in the high-rate cycle performance,  calculated by Eq. (1) [54, 57] 

The value of  σ is obtained from the slope of the fitting result in Fig. S5 in the ESM.  The calculated DNa values of samples are listed in Table 1, and the  NC@NVP shows much higher Na+ diffusion coefficient of 9.167 ×  10−15 than that of the NVP (3.927 × 10−16). This is highly consistent  with the result of the rate capability of the NC@NVP in Figs. 5(b)  and  5(c),  which  means  that  the  extrinsic  defects  on  the  carbon  matrix  formed  by  nitrogen  species  enhance  Na+  diffusion  in  the  charge/discharge processes, even with long-term cycling at a high  rate of 20 C. The remarkably high rate capability of the NC@NVP is  attributed to the high electronic conductivity of the N-doped carbon  matrix, which ensures the facile insertion/extraction process of Na+  at high-rate conditions.   

Kinetic  analyses  using  CV  were  applied  to  specify  the  sodium  storage  mechanism  for  NC@NVP  homogeneously  wrapped  by  an  N-doped carbon matrix in Fig. 8. The CV cycling was conducted at  scan rates of 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1.0 mV·s−1 (Fig. S6 in the ESM) to  determine  the  dominating  sodium  storage  mechanism  which  is  separated  into  capacitive  behavior  and  diffusion  controlled  [58].  Figure 8(a) shows which is log i vs. log ν plotted using anodic and  cathodic  peak  currents  based  on  Eq. (3),  where  current  i  obeys  a  power-law relationship with scan rate ν [59, 60] 

The value of b is calculated from the slope of the linear plot of log i vs. log ν. The b value indicates the diffusion-controlled process when it  becomes  closer  to  0.5,  whereas  1  indicates  capacitive  behavior  of  surface  faradaic  redox  reaction  [61].  The  NVP  shows  b  values  of  0.45/0.34  for  the  anodic/cathodic  peak  currents,  for  which  the  charge storage mechanism is limited by solid-state diffusion of Na+.  In contrast, the current contribution of the capacitive behavior of  the  NC@NVP  is  higher  than  that  of  the  NVP  electrode,  whose  b  values are 0.67/0.61 for the anodic/cathodic peak currents. For the  quantitative analysis through the entire current response at various  scan rates, Eq. (3) is modified as Eq. (4), where the current response i  at a fixed potential, V.   

Here,  it  can  also  be  found that the fixed potential i(V) is determined by the sum of k1  and k2. After both sides of Eq. (4) are divided by ν1/2, a linear equation  is obtained in which the constants of k1 and k2 are assigned to the  slope and intercept, respectively [59]. Figure 8(b) exhibits capacitive  behavior  (shaded  area)  and  the  diffusion-controlled  contribution  on the CV plot at 0.2 mV·s−1. The slow sweep rate is preferred for  this analysis in order to provide the conditions that maximize the  diffusion contribution. The NC@NVP shows the capacitive behavior  contribution of 64.3% in the voltage range of 2.0–4.0 V, whereas the  NVP  shows  the  52.1%.  In  other  words,  the  peak  current  of  the  NC@NVP at the redox peak receives substantial contribution from  the  capacitive  charge-storage  mechanism  compared  to  that  of  the  NVP,  which  shows  predominant  diffusion  behavior.  Furthermore,  the  higher  contribution  of  capacitive  behavior  for  the  NC@NVP  (85.6%)  is  also  exhibited  at  the  faster  scan  rate  of  1.0  mV·s−1  in      Fig. S7 in the ESM. Therefore, it is verified that the NC@NVP performs  with better kinetic properties than the NVP, which is beneficial to  the high-rate operation. In short, the charge-storage kinetics of the  NC@NVP  are  mainly  enhanced  by  the  N-doped  carbon  matrix  whose N-containing functional groups increase the charge density  of  the  space-charge  layer  and  reinforce  the  redox  reaction  at  the  surface [26, 28, 36, 37]. As a result, the NC@NVP shows excellent  kinetic  behavior  at  the  interface  between  the  electrolyte  and  electrode. 

In order to inspect the effect of wrapped  N-doped carbon as a  protection layer, further evaluation of cycling at high temperature  (60 °C) is shown in Fig. 9. Both samples show higher initial capacities  than when they were cycled at room temperature, which is caused  by the enhanced electrochemical kinetics at elevated temperature.  Therefore, NVP and NC@NVP shows initial discharge capacities of 104.1 (94.91 mA·h·g−1 at room temperature) and 116.7 mA·h·g−1  (101.0 mA·h·g−1 at room temperature), respectively. However, the  NVP  displays  a  cycle  degradation  with  the  serious  drop  on  the  discharge  capacity  after  the  500th  cycle  of  70.74  mA·h·g−1  with  capacity  retention  of  67.93%.  In  contrast,  the  NC@NVP  shows  a  remarkable capacity retention at high temperature, which is 92.0%  at the 500th cycle with a high discharge capacity of 107.3 mA·h·g−1.  In  the  high-temperature  cycling,  the  NVP  suffers  from  severe  structural  instability  and  aggravated  electrolyte  decomposition,  which accelerates the surface degradation and obstructs the kinetics  of Na+ [29]. On the other hand, the NC@NVP wrapped by N-doped  carbon provides sufficient electronic conductivity and ensures surface  structural  stability  with  suppressed  side  reactions  at  the  interface  between electrolyte and electrode as a protection layer. 

We have applied facile self-polymerization of the dopamine precursor  to  achieve  superior  rate  capability  and  cycling  stability  of  the  NC@NVP. In our process, the polydopamine realizes high yield of a  well distributed N-doped carbon matrix among the NVP particles  after the carbonization process through the advantageous features  of the precursor, such as its strong adhesion ability. The obtained  N-doped  carbon  provides  high  electronic  conductivity  and  Na+  diffusivity  from  extrinsic  defects  of  N  species  on  the  carbon  skeleton,  and  NC@NVP  delivered  a  reversible  discharge  capacity    of 49.21 mA·h·g−1 even at 100 C. Furthermore, the N-doped carbon  matrix that homogeneously wraps the NVP particles also enhances  cycling stability in harsh conditions, such as long-term cycling at 20 C.  The NC@NVP electrode displays a discharge capacity of 83.04 mA·h·g−1  after  the  1,000th  cycle,  and  it  shows  excellent  capacity  retention    of  94.77%.  NC@NVP  exhibits  the  improved  kinetics  of  Na+  with  capacitive behavior that is attributed to the highly conductive N-doped  carbon containing rich N functional groups, a larger surface area,  and a mesoporous structure. The NC@NVP also shows high stability  in high-temperature cycling at 60 °C, which can deliver its discharge  capacity of 107.3 mA·h·g−1 after the 500th cycle with a high capacity  retention  of  92.0%.  Consequently,  polydopamine  as  a  versatile  N-doped carbon precursor that can be practically utilized in surface  modification  for  large-scale  sodium-ion  batteries,  and  it  is  also  expected that the polydopamine-derived N-doped carbon-wrapped  NVP  can  be  considered  a  novel  cathode  material  for  sodium-ion  batteries. 
