Na-ion conducting Na3+x[ZrxSc2−x(PO4)3] (x = 0, 0.25, 0.5 and 0.75 mol%) glass samples with NASICON-type phase were synthesized by melt quenching method and glass–ceramics were formed by heat treating the precursor glasses at their crystallization temperatures. The major and minor crystalline phases such as [Na3Sc2(PO4)3 (ICSD-27740) (NASICON), ZrP2O7 (ICSD-15084), ZrO2 (ICSD-66781) and Zr2O(PO4)2 (ICSD-1922)] are precipitated in all the glass–ceramic samples. The best bulk conductivity has been observed for Na3.5Zr0.5Sc1.5(PO4)3 glass–ceramic sample (σb = 1.92 × 10−4 S/cm) which exhibits lowest activation energy of 0.492 eV. The single master curve in the scaling analysis revealed that this glass samples show evidence of temperature-independent conduction transport mechanism.

The successful progress in Lithium-ion battery (LIB) technology is unable to meet the challenges in land-based power requirements such as electrical grid stabilization [1,2,3]. Na-ion battery technology is a promising next-generation alternative to Li-ion battery due to several advantages such as low cost, higher availability and capacity. Though Na ion and Li ion batteries share similar operating principle, it was shown by various experimental investigations that the respective crystallographic structural functions aiding cationic and anionic intercalation are different in case of Li ion intercalation compounds compared to that of Na ion intercalation compounds [4]. Further, it is highly imperative to select suitable electrolyte between successful electrode materials to realize safer Na-ion batteries which are able to operate at ambient temperatures. Among various options for electrolytes, the focus on glass and glass–ceramic materials has been more intensive than polycrystalline ceramic electrolytes as they exhibit better ionic conductivity via single or modifier ion conduction mechanism and possess more open disordered structures [5, 6]. Despite the extensive knowledge on structural and electrical conductivity of various glass networks as electrolytes, each and every material has its own difficulties which limit its commercial application [7, 8]. Our group is involved with functional studies of glass ceramic electrolytes; however, lot more improvements are required on the stability of cyclic voltammograms against ionic conductivity [9]. In this investigation, we report the correlation between structure, surface morphology and long-term stability in ambient atmosphere with conductivity of Na–Zr–P glass network mixed with optimum quantities of Sc2O3 with trivalent Sc3+ ions. Here, most significant factor of this glass network is that the inter-replacement of Zr4+ ions (72.0 pm) with its similar trivalent Sc3+ ions (74.5 pm) in the Na–P glass network creates active centers with positive deficiency with which Na+ ion can react. This will pave the path for fast migration of Na+ ions leading to higher conductivity as a function of cycle stability which will provide new insights to engineer safer and ambient Na-ion batteries.

Precursor glass samples were synthesized by melt quenching technique using AR-grade Na2CO3 (Sigma Aldrich, 99%), NH4H2PO4 (Sigma Aldrich, 99%), Sc2O3 (Sigma Aldrich, 99%) and ZrO2 (Sigma Aldrich, 99%) in three regular steps. The first step was to eliminate volatile compound which was done by grinding the mixture in agate mortar and pestle followed by pre-heating at 250 °C in an electric furnace. In the second step, powder mixer wa converted to bubble-free liquid by melting at 1350 °C ± 10 °C for about 2 h. The resultant melt was quenched on the brass plate and rolled by copper roller yield to form a glass which is the final step. The green sample was further ball milled for 30 h to obtain glass powders in the order of nanoscale. Differential thermal parameters (Tg, Tc and Tm) of all the green pellets were analyzed by DTA technique by SII EXSTAR 6300 (rate of heat = 10 K/min). Crystallization of green glass pellets was achieved by heat treating at Tc for 5 h in a tubular electric furnace. The details of phase analysis of all the crystallized glass pellets (glass–ceramic) was done by PANanalytical Diffractometer B.V fitted with Cu target (both K(α1 + α2) wavelengths) and Ni filter at 40 kV and 30 mA (2 h range). FE-SEM images of all the glass–ceramic samples were recorded on Gemini Zeiss SupraTM 35 VP, Carl Zeiss, Germany. Electrical properties of all the glass pellets before and after crystallization were evaluated by Solatron 1260 Impedance/Gain Phase analyzer (frequency; temperature range: 10–106 Hz; 303–423 K).

The value of glass transition temperature (Tg) is reported to be lowest (759 K) for the sample containing 0.5 mol% of ZrO2 [Na3.5Zr0.5Sc1.5(PO4)3] which reflects that this sample exhibits highest de-polymerization than all the other samples under investigation (Fig. 1). Beyond 0.5 mol% of ZrO2 the value of Tg started increasing from 759 to 776 K which shows this sample gets strained with its lattice (Table 1). Recent investigations reported that the conductivity is expected to increase at least two orders of magnitude when a glass material is heat treated under controlled conditions [10]. In view of this, we have heat treated the as-synthesized glass samples at their corresponding Tc for 5 h. Figure 2 shows XRD pattern of all the glass samples heat treated at Tc for 5 h. It is observed from Fig. 2 that the crystalline phases such as Na3Sc2(PO4)3 (ICSD-27740) (NASICON), ZrP2O7 (ICSD-15084), ZrO2 (ICSD-66781) and Zr2O(PO4)2 (ICSD-1922) are precipitated during the process of conversion of glass to glass–ceramic. Further, the highest intensity of NASICON phase Na3Sc2(PO4)3 (ICSD-27740) seen for Na3.5Zr0.5Sc1.5(PO4)3 glass–ceramic sample (x = 0.5 mol%) achieves the best bulk conductivity compared with all other samples without any impure phases. During the formation of highly ion conducting phase, there is every possibility of inter-replacement of tetravalent Zr4+ (72.0 pm) with trivalent Sc3+ (74.5 pm) ion in the Na-P glass network. This inter-replacement will create vacancies with positive deficiency with which Na+ ions can react, causing to boost the ionic conducting to a considerable extent [11,12,13]. However, the formation of impure phases such as ZrO2 and Zr2O(PO4)2 in the rest of all the glass–ceramic samples try to restrict the pathways for the migration of Na+ ions in the glass network which might be the reason for decreasing trend in the bulk conductivity when the ZrO2 content raises beyond 0.5 mol% (Fig. 3). Figure 4 shows the Williamson–Hall (W–H) plots for all the different glass–ceramic samples with their average crystallite sizes varying between 256 and 280 nm. Table 2 shows calculated and experimental structure parameters of all the Na3+x ZrxSc2−x(PO4)3 glass–ceramic samples. Moreover, their unit cell volume has also been evaluated and it was found to be highest for Na3.5Zr0.5Sc1.5(PO4)3 (x = 0.5 mol%) sample (1038.71 Å) which validates its best de-polymerization (Fig. 3).

The degree of crystalline nature in a mechanically milled glass powder after crystallization will depend on the energy utilized for milling process [14, 15]. SEM images of all the Na3+xZrxSc2−x(PO4)3 glass–ceramic samples are presented in Fig. 5. The grain-like crystallites with slight agglomeration of major crystalline phases appeared in the range from 170 to 300 nm, as seen in Fig. 5b–d. The homogeneous amorphous nature of all the samples is retained even after crystallization which can be seen with dark portion of SEM images. The presence of homogeneous dense structure without precipitation of crystal grains for ZrO2 free sample [Na3Sc2(PO4)3] (Fig. 5a) which will support that this glass sample synthesized with melt-quenching technique. Figure 5b displays the presence of the grains and crystals with irregular shape. When ZrO2 content increased from x = 0 to 0.5 mol%, the crystalline particles are slowly turned into regular shape with certain grain boundaries which contact each other tightly. This favorable micro structure with tight contact between the grains leads to boost up the mobility of Na+ ions along the grain boundaries and, therefore, Na3.5Zr0.5Sc1.5(PO4)3 (x = 0.5 mol%) glass–ceramic sample achieves best bulk conductivity than all other samples under investigation (Fig. 5c). However, massive crystallization of Na3.5Zr0.5Sc1.5(PO4)3 (x = 0.75 mol%) (Fig. 5d) glass–ceramic sample might be responsible for the increase the grain boundary resistance (Rgb) which resists the conduction pathways for the migration of Na+ ions in the glass network. This leads to the decrease in its electrical conductivity to a considerable extent which will be reviewed in the next section.

Figure 6 depicts the complex impedance plots (Nyquist plots) (Z″ vs. Zʹ) of all the samples and they appear to be semicircular in nature. Slopes of these plots typically will be used to obtain the relaxation frequency of each specific contribution (grain, grain boundary and electrode process). Also, the bulk resistance (R) of these plots relative to each experimental temperature is evaluated by the intercept of imaginary impedance (Z″) with real (Zʹ) impedance axes. The bulk conductivity (σb =  tA(1R)) is measured at 303 K for all the glass–ceramic samples with taking sample geometry in to account. Characteristic complex impedance plots for the best conducting sample [Na3.5Zr0.5Sc1.5(PO4)3], measured between 303 and 423 K, are depicted in Fig. 7. As the temperature increases from 303to 423 K, semicircles seem to shift towards lower Zʹ values with decrease in radius of curvature resulting in reduction in the total bulk resistance. The experimental data related to conductivity is perfectly fitted with Arrhenius equation.

where σ0 is the pre-exponential factor and Eaσ, k and T are the activation energy for the conduction, Boltzman’s constant and absolute temperature, respectively. Arrhenius plots of all the glass–ceramic samples show straight lines (Fig. 8) and activation energy related to conduction mechanism (Eaσ) in the analyzed temperature at various frequencies is obtained from the slopes of these straight lines (as shown in log σT versus 1000/T). The sample having 0.5 mol% of ZrO2 [Na3.5Zr0.5Sc1.5(PO4)3] exhibits lowest activation energy for conduction and highest conductivity (inset of Figs. 3, 8). Moreover, the values of activation energy related to conduction mechanism (Eaσ) increases with increase in temperature at a particular frequency which is directly proportional to the energy needed to overcome the thermal fluctuation by the charge carriers at high-temperature region. The correlation between conductivity and activation energy is nonlinear in nature, which obviously suggests that variation in the conductivity of present samples is due to width of activation energy potential barrier (Inset of Fig. 8). Figure 9 presents the variation of electrical conductivity as a function of frequency, measured at 303 K which definitely analyzes the non-linearity of conductivity via the power-law equation.

where σ0 = frequency-independent conductivity, A = constant and s = characteristic parameter (0 < s < 1). In general, conductivity is almost constant at sufficiently low frequencies which can be obtained by extrapolating the conductivity curve to ω = 0 which represents the dc-leakage current of the sample we have adopted in this investigation. From Fig. 9, it is obvious that the conductivity dispersion starts at a particular frequency called hopping frequency (fo) and further increment in the conductivity holds good power-law fashion when the frequency shifted from hopping frequency to the high-frequency region with which relaxation effects started appearing in the present glass–ceramic samples [16].

Furthermore, the ac conductivities for the best conducting Na3.5Zr0.5Sc1.5(PO4)3 sample at different temperatures (303–423 K) are presented in Fig. 10. Here, the hopping frequency (ωp = fo) is slightly shifted slowly with increasing temperature (Fig. 10). This hopping frequency is observed to be thermally activated with same activation energy of σ0 (T) [17]. As seen in Fig. 10, the conductivity seems to be remaining almost constant towards low-frequency region which occurs due to the long-range migration of Na+ ion transport, whereas gradual increment in the conductivity towards the high-frequency region follows on DCR (diffusion-controlled relaxation) model [18]. The precipitation of only one highly intensified Na3Sc2(PO4)3 (ICSD-27740) (NASICON) major conducting phase without any impure phases might be the reason for boosting the ionic conductivity to a greater extent up to 0.5 mol% of ZrO2. The decreasing trend in the ionic conductivity beyond 0.5 mol% of ZrO2 is directly related to blocking of conduction pathways for the migration of Na+ ions due to the precipitation of impure phases [19]. It is also equally important to examine the relationship between characteristic parameter (s) and conductivity (σ) parameters against composition with the help of Eq. (2). The ‘s’ values are evaluated by the slopes of log σ versus log f as seen in Fig. 9 which designates the frequency-dependent conductivity. The decreasing trend in the values of ‘s’ from x = 0 to 0.5 mol%, obtained from Eq. (2), reflected that the best conducting Na3.5Zr0.5Sc1.5(PO4)3 glass–ceramic sample (x = 0.5 mol%) has the lowest ‘s’ (0.723) and that it is a material-dependent quantity (Fig. 11). The lowest value of ‘s’ for Na3.5Zr0.5Sc1.5(PO4)3 glass–ceramic sample is essentially due to formation of highest number of vacancies with positive deficiency in the Na–P glass–ceramic network [20]. However, the increasing trend in the ‘s’ value beyond x = 0.5 mol% is predominantly due to the presence of impure phases such as ZrO2 and Zr2O(PO4)2 which hinders the migration of Na+ ions in the glass–ceramic network leading to decreasing trend in the bulk conductivity. Table 3 summarizes data on electrical conductivity and activation energy for conduction of all the Na3+xZrxSc2−x(PO4)3 glass–ceramic samples, measured at 303 K.

Further, we have recollected the data related to dielectric constant where the frequency-dependent imaginary part of dielectric constant ε″ exceeds the dc conductivity and will not be explained further. Hence, modulus formalism is used in this investigation to check out the electrical response of our present glass–ceramic samples containing some quantity of ionic conductivity using complex electric modulus which is an accepted formulism to categorize the processes as an electrode polarization and bulk conductivity for relaxation times τσ [21, 22].

Figure 12 is presented to explain frequency-dependent imaginary electric modulus M″ of all the glass–ceramic samples at 303 K. Here in, M″ curves seem to be asymmetric in nature with which relaxation behavior started appearing. The changes in the skew nature and relaxation behavior of M″ curves in the Fig. 12 are directly ascribed to imply the impenetrability of inter-ionic interactions in view of the formation of large number of positive deficient vacancies in the glass–ceramic network as suggested in the earlier sections. In addition, relaxation nature of M″ data of all these glass–ceramic samples holds good the KWW (Kohlrausch–Williams–Watts) function [21].

The frequency-dependent imaginary electric modulus M″ for best conducting Na3.5Zr0.5Sc1.5(PO4)3 glass–ceramic sample has been measured at various temperatures (303–423 K) (Fig. 13). It can be seen from Fig. 13 that the M″ peaks shift towards higher frequency side with increase in temperature from 303 to 423 K, but, exhibit the same characteristic relaxation time at specific temperatures. However, M″max value shifts towards higher frequencies with increasing temperatures and the relaxation time (τ = 2πfmax) at every experimental temperature has been evaluated. The experimental data are well followed by Arrhenius expression.

log τ versus 1000/T plots for all the glass–ceramic samples, measured at various temperatures (303–423 K), is depicted in Fig. 14 where relaxation time (τ) gradually increases with increase in temperature. The activation energy for the conductivity relaxation (Eaτ) of all the samples was calculated from the relaxation time plots, furnished in the Table 3 (Fig. 14). The lowest values of stretched exponent (β) and activation energy for relaxation (Eaτ) are observed for the best conducting Na3.5Zr0.5Sc1.5(PO4)3 glass–ceramic sample. This clearly shows that this particular sample creates larger number of vacancies with positive deficiency compared with other samples under investigation which modifies the conductivity in the neighborhood of conduction path. On the other hand, the values of stretched exponent (β) remains unaltered as the temperature increases from 303 to 423 K of all these glass samples which strongly recommends their insensitivity against temperature. The perfect co-incidence between values of activation energy for conduction (Εaτ) and relaxation (Εaσ) clearly specified that the ionic-hopping mechanism is the main predominant phenomenon for conductivity and relaxation nature of all the glass–ceramic samples [23].

Figure 15 depicts the variation of log σ and M″ versus frequency for the best conducting Na3.5Zr0.5Sc1.5(PO4)3 glass–ceramic sample, measured at various temperatures (303–423 K). Though broadening nature of M″ peak for the best conducting sample reveals the presence of more than one conduction mechanism, close overlapping with values of Z″ at all temperatures clearly reveals that the present glass–ceramic samples follow the single conduction mechanism.

In order to establish that the ionic conductivity phenomenon of present glass and glass–ceramic samples is unaffected by composition and temperature, scaling data are analyzed and curves are depicted in Fig. 16 and for the best conducting Na3.5Zr0.5Sc1.5(PO4)3 glass–ceramic network, measured between 303 and 423 K is given in inset of Fig. 16 [24, 25]. All these curves are merged into single super curve which is a clear substantiation that the conduction transport mechanism of present glass–ceramic samples is temperature-independent (Fig. 16). Also, it is clearly understood that the structure of the best conducting glass–ceramic network is unaltered with temperature (inset of Fig. 16). Similarly, scaling data of electric modulus spectra of all the glass–ceramic samples and best conducting sample measured at various temperatures (303–423 K) are presented in Fig. 17 and inset of Fig. 17, respectively. The curves obtained in both Fig. 17 and inset of Fig. 17 appear to be merged together in to single super curve at every experimental temperature which confirms that the distribution relaxation time mechanism of our entire glass–ceramic network is obviously independent of temperature and structure.

NASICON type phase [Na3Sc2(PO4)3] is precipitated with high intensity for the Na3.5Zr0.5Sc1.5(PO4)3 glass–ceramic sample which exhibits best de-polymerization than all the samples under investigation as it exhibits largest unit cell volume (1038.71 Å) compared to all the other samples. The activation energy (0.492 eV) and power exponent s (0.721) are low for the best conducting Na3.5Zr0.5Sc1.5(PO4)3 glass–ceramic sample (σb = 1.92 × 10−4 S/cm). The values of stretched exponent (β) remains unaltered as the temperature increases from 303 to 423 K of all these glass samples, which strongly recommends their insensitivity against temperature. The perfect co-incidence between values of activation energy for conduction (Εaτ) and relaxation (Εaσ) clearly specifies that the ionic-hopping mechanism is the main predominant phenomenon for conductivity and relaxation nature of all the glass–ceramic samples. The master curve in normalized plots of both ac conductivity and modulus data suggests that the present glass–ceramic samples show evidence of the temperature-independent conductivity relaxation mechanism. The analysis on electrical properties via Impedance spectroscopy reveals that present glass samples exhibit single conduction mechanism and become more conductive with increase in temperature which proves the significance of the family of Na3+xZrxSc2−x(PO4)3 glass ceramic electrolytes as a potential candidate for use in safer Na-ion batteries.