Poor ionic conductivity of solid-state electrolyte (SE) and high interface resistances between the SE and electrodes are two major challenges for solid-state sodium batteries (SSBs). In this work, an integrate strategy is proposed for improving the ionic conductivity of SE and reducing the interfacial resistance between SE and cathode. The pure-phase Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (NZSP) is prepared by optimizing the composition ratios of the starting materials and is applied as SE for SSBs. The as-prepared NZSP SE achieves a relatively high ionic conductivity of 1.935 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 25 °C and a good electrochemical stability up to 5 V vs. Na+/Na. The solid-state Na|NZSP|Na symmetrical cell can perform a consistent cycling for 70 h, indicating the excellent chemical and electrochemical stability for SE and SE/Na interface. A composite cathode is fabricated using NZSP and Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) particles. The sodiated Nafion is particularly applied as the interface modifier for the cathode to facilitate the ionic contact. At 25 °C, the SSB with NZSP SE and the composite cathode modified by sodiated Nafion delivers a discharge capacity of 81.6 mA h g−1 at the current density of 20 mA g−1 and retains a high capacity of 62.23 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles. These results indicate that optimization of the NZSP electrolyte and the NZSP/NVP interface is an efficient method to achieve the high-performance SSB.

With increasing common concerns on exhaustion of fossil fuels and their environmental hazards, renewable energy sources have attracted more attention over the past decades [1], [2], [3]. Energy conversion and storage technologies with high energy conversion efficiencies and low costs are critically desired for the large scale stationary storage of electric power [4], [5]. Although lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have been fully developed and extensively applied in various energy storage systems [6], [7], the limitation of the lithium resources restricts their large-scale applications [8]. Owing to the abundant distribution and low cost of sodium, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) are considered to be more competitive than LIBs in the field of stationary land-based power applications [9], [10]. However, the energy density of SIBs is far lower than that of LIBs. Thus, it is advantageous to apply Na metal instead of carbon as the anode of SIBs [11], [12]. In the view of safety, solid-state electrolytes (SEs) are more favorable than flammable liquid organic electrolytes for retarding fire and explosion and suppressing dendrite penetration when metallic Na anode is used in SIBs [13], [14], [15]. However, the poor ionic conductivity of SEs and high interface resistances between SE and electrodes have severely limited the development of SSBs. So far, many materials have been proposed for Na-ion SEs, including the glass-based electrolytes such as Na3PS4 [11], Na2S-P2S5 [16] and Na2Se-Ga2Se3-GeSe2 [17], and the ceramic electrolytes like NASICON-type Na3Zr2Si2PO12 [18], [19], Na3+xSc2SixP3−xO12 [20] and Na1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 [21]. The ceramic electrolytes have higher stabilities against air and moisture compared with their glass-based counterparts [4]. Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (NZSP), firstly proposed by Hong and Goodenough in 1976, possesses the highest ionic conductivity among the Na1+xZr2Si2P3-xO12 (0 < x < 3) materials [22]. NZSP has been considered as a very promising SE material for SSBs [23], [24].

In order to achieve good performance of SSBs at room temperature, various efforts have been devoted to improving the ionic conductivity of NZSP and reducing the interfacial resistance. As Na and P may volatilize during the synthesis of NZSP at high temperature, the ZrO2 impure phase can be formed at the grain boundary to block the Na-ion transport. The substitution of Zr4+ with aliovalence ions [21], [25] is effective to inhibit the formation of ZrO2 and accordingly to achieve a high ionic conductivity for NZSP. Nevertheless, the improper substitution of Zr4+ may also cause the formation of other impure phases in NZSP, leading to the decrease of ionic conductivity [26], [27]. Thus, the suppression of ZrO2 impure phase during the preparation of the pure-phase NZSP by optimizing the compositions of starting materials and the preparation conditions, for instance, increasing the calcination temperature and time is preferable to achieve a higher ionic conductivity for NZSP [28], [29]. On the other hand, the high interfacial resistance resulted from the poor contact inside the composite cathode or between the cathode and the SE electrolyte also confines the performance of SSBs. During the SSB cycling process, the repeated expansion/contraction in the volume of cathode material inevitablely causes the continuous degradation of the solid-solid interface [30]. Some strategies have been proposed to reduce the interface impedance, including the surface coating on electrode particles [31], [32], the interface wetting with ionic liquid [4], [30], [33] or liquid electrolyte [34], the introduction of interfacial interlayer [35], and the application of hybrid electrolyte system [36], [37], [38]. Recently, the sodiated Nafion has been applied in the room-temperature Na-S batteries as a Na-ion conducting separator [39], [40], [41]. Actually, Nafion can also be used as a conductive binder to connect particles in electrodes and provides the ionic conduction pathway among particles [42].

In this work, the preparation of the pure-phase NZSP material is investigated by finely tuning the quantity of sodium and phosphorus compositions in the starting materials. The sodiated Nafion is used to provide ionic contacts inside the cathode and at the cathode/SE interface, besides binding the particles (Fig. 1). The results demonstrate that this integrate strategy is efficient to reduce the impedance and achieve the high performance for SSBs.

NZSP electrolyte was prepared via a solid-state reaction pathway. Na2CO3, ZrO2, SiO2 and NH4H2PO4 were ball-milled for 24 h in ethanol. Excess Na2CO3 and NH4H2PO4 were then added to compensate the losses of sodium and phosphorus during calcination. Different mass ratios of Na2CO3 and NH4H2PO4 were used to investigate their impacts on the purity and structure of NZSP. The NZSP samples were named according to the excess quantity of Na2CO3 and NH4H2PO4 in the starting materials, where NaxPy means the NZSP sample prepared by adding x wt% excess Na2CO3 and y wt% excess NH4H2PO4. Before calcination, the mixed starting materials were dried in an oven at 155 °C for 12 h and the generated white powders were treated at 900 °C for 12 h. After that, the powders were grounded carefully and pressed into disk samples with a diameter of 15 mm and a thickness of 1 mm under the pressure of 200 MPa. Finally, the green disks were calcinated at 1150 °C for 18 h to obtain the NZSP SE samples.

The cathode material of Na3V2(PO4)3/C (NVP/C) was prepared via a hydrothermal method using Na2CO3, NH4VO3, NH4H2PO4 and H2C2O4·2H2O as the starting materials, with the mass ratio of 3:4:6:6. At first, NH4VO3 was dissolved in deionized water under magnetic stirring at 70 °C for 30 min. Na2CO3, NH4H2PO4 and H2C2O4·2H2O were then dissolved in the NH4VO3 solution with violent stirring at 80 °C for 50 min. The homogeneous solution was transferred into a Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave and treated at 190 °C for 20 h. After that, the resulting precursor powders were washed, dried and added into the glucose solution which was used as the carbon source and the reducing agent. The carbon-coated precursor was eventually pretreated at 400 °C for 4 h and then calcinated at 700 °C for 8 h in argon to obtain the NVP/C powders.

According to the method reported previously [39], a ultra-concentrated electrolyte comprising 2 M NaClO4 and 0.2 M NaNO3 in TEGDME solvent was used to sodiate the Nafion (5.3%, Dupon) for 24 h. The sodiated Nafion was then used for cell assembly without any further drying process.

The crystal structure of NZSP was identified by a powder X-ray diffraction (XRD; RigakuUltima Iv) using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm) with the scanning speed of 1° min−1 in the 2θ range of 10–60°. Surface and cross-section morphologies of the NZSP samples were observed using a scanning electron microscopy (SEM; ZEISS MERLIN Compact).

The chemical stability of NZSP with Na metal was investigated by an interfacial stability test in an argon-filled glovebox. The NZSP powder was in contact with sodium metal at room temperature. After 1 month, the NZSP powder was checked by XRD characterization. The electrochemical stability of NZSP pellet was evaluated in a Ag|NZSP|Na test cell using cyclic voltammetry (CV) at a slow rate of 0.05 mV s−1.

SSBs are assembled by Na metal anode, NVP/NZSP composite cathode modified by sodiated Nafion and NZSP SE in CR2032 coin cells. The cathode composite was prepared by ball-milling NVP, NZSP and supper-P powders thoroughly for 12 h with a mass ratio of 60:38:2. Then, the composite was mixed with acetylene black and the Nafion binder with a mass ratio of 85:10:5 to form the cathode slurry. The cathode is fabricated by coating the cathode slurry on one side of the NZSP pellets. After drying, a tiny quantity of ultra-concentrated electrolyte was added to the cathode with a loading of 5 μL cm−2 to sodiate the Nafion binder for 24 h. A Na metal foil was used as the anode and pressed tightly on another side of NZSP electrolyte in the Ar-glovebox to form the sodiated Nafion-modified SSB (denoted by SN-SSB). A pristine SSB without sodiation process was fabricated for comparison.

The total conductivity of NZSP pellets was measured with an electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) using the electrochemical workstation (CHI 660e) in the frequency range of 0.1 Hz – 1.0 MHz at various temperatures. Ag blocking electrodes were coated on both sides of the NZSP pellets to achieve electrical contact. The cycle test of the Na|NZSP|Na symmetric cell was conducted at the current density of 0.2 mA cm−2 to evaluate the cycling stability of NZSP.

The galvanostatic charge and discharge test for the SSBs was performed using a battery test system (LAND CT2001A) within a cut-off voltage range of 2.0–4.0 V. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was conducted using electrochemical workstation (CHI 660e) with the amplitude of 5 mV in the frequency range from 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz.

Fig. 2 shows the XRD pattern of the NZSP samples prepared using different ratios of Na2CO3 and NH4H2PO4. Clearly, the diffraction peaks for all samples show the characteristic peaks of the NASICON-type structure (PDF#35-0412). Na5P10 sample shows a relatively high purity, which can be indexed using the C2/c space group with the lattice constants of a = 15.637 Å, b = 9.023 Å, and c = 9.217 Å [28], [43]. The lack of impurity in Na5P10 sample demonstrates that excess 5% Na2CO3 and 10% NH4H2PO4 are effective to compensate the losses of Na and P during calcination without significant formation of the ZrO2 impure phase. The XRD patterns of other NZSP samples show the presence of ZrO2, probably due to inappropriate composition ratios of the starting materials, resulting in the lattice disorder of the NZSP samples [23]. The SEM images in Fig. 3c show no obvious micropores in the Na5P10 sample, indicating the high relative density. For other NZSP samples, micropores or micro-cracks can be obviously observed (Fig. 3a–e), probably due to formation of the impure phases such as ZrO2 at grain boundaries, preventing the particles from tight contact [44].

The Na5P10 sample was used as SE for further evaluation. The Na5P10 surface was polished carefully and its microstructure at the surface and the cross-section is shown in Fig. 4. Fig. 4a shows that theNa5P10 pellet is about 0.7 mm thick with a diameter of 15 mm. Its surface appears to be quite dense and smooth without any micropores (Fig. 4b). The cross-section of the Na5P10 pellet also looks dense (Fig. 4c and d). Polyhedron grains can be observed in Fig. 4d with the grain size of about 3–5 µm. The grain boundaries are small, as the intimate intergranular contact may suppress the growth of the grain boundary [35].

Na-ion conductivity of the Na5P10 sample was examined by the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) from 25 to 180 °C. All Nyquist plots in Fig. 5 show semicircles in the high and medium frequency regions and a spike in the low frequency regions, which can be attributed to the total (sum of the grain and grain-boundary) resistance and the blocking effect of the Ag paste, respectively [45]. The intercept of the semicircle on the real axis at the high frequency is assigned to the grain resistance (Rg). The distance between the intercept at the high frequency and that at the medium frequency gives the Rgb. The intercept at the medium frequency thereby represents the total resistance, that is the sum of Rg and Rgb [18]. The electrical conductivity is calculated using the equation of σ = L/(Z × A), where Z is the total impedance, L is the thickness of the NZSP pellets, and A is the surface area of the Ag electrodes. At room temperature, the Na5P10 sample exhibits the highest Na-ion conductivity. The Na-ion conductivities of NZSP sample prepared using original composition, Na5P5, Na5P10, Na10P5 and Na10P10 are 6.518 × 10−5, 7.863 × 10−5, 1.935 × 10−4, 1.054 × 10−4 and 1.34 × 10−4 S cm−1, respectively. The trend of conductivities of NZSP samples with temperature follows an Arrhenius relationship. Fig. 5f shows the Arrhenius plots of total conductivities for all the NZSP samples. The activation energy was calculated according to the equation of σT = A exp(-Ea/KT), where A is the pre-exponential parameter, K is the Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute temperature [4], [19]. The activation energy for NZSP electrolytes are in the range of 0.34–0.39 eV, which are close to the results reported previously [46].

Before the use of Na5P10 SE for SSBs, it is necessary to investigate the chemical stability of Na5P10 against the Na metal. A Na foil was completely covered with the Na5P10 powders in an Ar glovebox [47]. After one month, no visual change of the stored Na foil is observed. The XRD patterns of Na5P10 before and after contacting with Na also suggest that the Na5P10 electrolyte is stable with Na metal without forming by-products via the interfacial reactions (Fig. 6b). The electrochemical stability of the Na5P10 electrolyte was further examined in a Na|NASICON|Ag cell using cyclic voltammetry. Fig. 6c shows a pair of redox peaks at 0.82 V and 1.75 V, corresponding to the reversible deposition and extraction of Na, respectively, which indicates that Na+ can be reversibly transported through the Na5P10 electrolyte at room temperature. No other redox peaks present up to 5 V in the inset of Fig. 6c further indicate the high electrochemical stability of Na5P10. In order to evaluate the interfacial stability and Na+ transport across the Na5P10/Na interface, the galvanostatic cycling of a Na|Na5P10|Na symmetrical cell was carried out. Fig. 6d shows the cycling voltage profile in both directions under 0.2 mA cm−2. The symmetrical cell delivers stable Na plating-stripping cycles for 70 h. All the dissolution and deposition curves give the mirrored relationship until the test is voluntarily terminated, indicating the high stability of the Na5P10 electrolyte and the SE/Na interface during cycling. The overpotentials for the dissolution and deposition reactions of Na are consistent at 0.2 mA cm−2, indicating an excellent reversibility of the Na redox reaction [48], [49].

The XRD patterns of Na5P10, NVP and the composite cathode are shown in Fig. 7a. The diffraction peaks of Na5P10 and NVP indicate a NASICON-type structure, where the diffraction angle of NVP slightly shifts right, compared with that of Na5P10. The XRD pattern of the composite cathode shows no other XRD peaks except those for NVP and NZSP, which indicates that NVP and NZSP are adequately stable during calcination at high temperature [24]. The SEM image of the cross-section of the cathode/electrolyte interface in the SSB is shown in Fig. 7b. The Na5P10 electrolyte appears to be dense and the cathode layer exhibits a highly porous microstructure. The cathode is about 5 µm thick and tightly connected with the electrolyte (Fig. 7b). Fig. 7c and d show the charge and discharge profiles of SSB with and without modification by sodiated Nafion, respectively. The SN-SSB delivers a good discharge capacity of 81.6 mA h g−1 in the first cycle and maintains a stable charge and discharge performance for 50 cycles (Fig. 7c). In the 50th cycle, the SN-SSB still exhibits a discharge capacity of 62.23 mA h g−1. The corresponding coulombic efficiency on average is about 96% (Fig. 7e). The stable and highly reversible cycling performance with relatively low polarization can be attributed to the stable SE/Na interface and fast Na+ transport in SN-SSB. Fig. 7d shows the charge and discharge voltage profiles of the SSB without sodiated Nafion at a high operation temperature of 70 °C and a low current density of 5 mA g−1. The discharge capacity in the first cycle is around 26.5 mA h g−1. High impedance and large polarization were observed in this cell. The apparent changes in voltages with cycling suggest the severe degradation of the interface. Fig. 7f shows the Nyquist plot of SN-SSB and SSB at an open circuit voltage before cycling. The left hand (high frequency) intercept of the impedance data with the Zre axis gives the total ohmic resistance (Rb) of the battery including the electrolyte, electrodes and all the external electronic resistances. Rb for both cells are close, about 100 Ω. The distance between the intercepts at high (left) and medium frequencies (right) gives the polarization resistance (Rp) and thereby is indicative of the performance of the electrodes. Rp for the SN-SSB is about 1 kΩ, relatively lower than that for the SSB without modification by sodiate Nafion [50]. These results demonstrate that the sodiated Nafion can effectively facilitate the Na+ conduction at the cathode/electrolyte interface and inside the composite cathode, which contributes to the high cell performance. Additionally, unlike the liquid organic electrolyte, sodiated Nafion is in a “soft” swelling state and is relatively fixed between Na5P10 and NVP particles, not only providing a stable and fast ionic channel between particles but also acting as a buffer against the repeated volume change in the cathode composite during cycling. The integrate strategy by optimizing the NZSP electrolyte and the NZSP/NVP interface can be efficient to improve the performance of solid-state sodium batteries.

A dense and pure-phase NZSP solid-state electrolyte has been successfully prepared via a solid-state method by adding 5 wt% excess of Na2CO3 and 10 wt% excess NH4H2PO4 in the starting materials, which achieves the Na+ conductivity as high as 1.935 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 25 °C. The CV measurement and the sodium plating-stripping test demonstrate that the NZSP electrolyte possesses a high electrochemical stability against Na metal and electrochemical oxidation. The SSB using NZSP electrolyte and the sodiated Nafion-modified composite cathode delivers a discharge capacity of 81.6 mA h g−1 at the current density of 20 mA g−1 and maintains a high capacity of 62.23 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles. The optimization of NZSP electrolyte and SE/cathode interface is an efficient strategy to achieve the high performance for SSBs.