Despite recent advances in the development of suitable electrode materials for sodium-ion batteries, it remains a daunting challenge to achieve better Na+ storage performance without introducing new drawbacks. To improve the cycle stability and rate performance of Na3V2(PO4)3, most attention has been directed to improving the electronic conductivity by carbon compositing. However, excess carbon increases the difficulty of adhering the active materials. Besides, the ionic insulation of PVDF hinders the transfer of Na+, which severely limits the rate capability. Herein, we proposed a strategy of using biomass pectin polymer to build an electrode architecture with a sturdy construction and fast charge transfer structure. The rich carboxylic and hydroxyl groups endow pectin with a strong binding force that protects the integrity of the electrode and avoids exfoliation of the active materials. Thus, the sturdy construction enables Na3V2(PO4)3/C (NVP) to run for over 15 000 cycles. In addition, the construction of the conductive framework accelerates the fast transfer of the ion/electron, thereby giving rise to its enhanced rate capability. Thus NVP with even low carbon content of 1.15% could demonstrate superior rate capability at 100C rate. The rational design strategy in this study provides a new perspective for the optimizing electrode structure rather than material modification.

Sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) with high power densities and long lifespans are highly desirable to meet the ever-growing demand for large-scale energy storage.1–10 Sodium super-ionic conductor (NASICON) structured material, Na3V2(PO4)3, has attracted particular interest as a good candidate because of its open 3D framework and large interstitial channels that favor fast Na+ diffusion. To address the problem of the intrinsic low electronic conductivity,11–14 tremendous efforts have been made by constructing an electronic conductive framework with carbon.15–20 Nevertheless, excess carbon in the composite electrode inevitably lowers the energy density of the battery, poses safety concerns and introduces burdens on the bonding of electrode.21 Another way of improving the rate capability is decreasing the size of active materials so as to shorten the Na+ diffusion paths. The corresponding higher specific surface area are supposed to offer opportunities for enhancing the utilization of the active materials. However, the range and strength of the net interparticle force typically favors particle agglomerations, which would negatively limit the performance of the nanomaterials.

During the past decades, polymer–nanoparticle composites with a controlled distribution of particles have shown significantly improved performance in every field of technology.22–25 Nevertheless, a good spatial distribution of the active nanomaterials is difficult in their poorly prepared mixtures. The most widely used binder, polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF), has a high molecular weight of around 1 000 000 that make it a great challenge for the good distribution of the binder, not to mention distribution of the active materials.26,27 Besides, it interacts with the active materials via weak van der Waals force, which can hardly maintain the integrity of the electrode after hundreds of cycles and the associated volume changes.28 Most importantly, the insulation of the PVDF hinders the transfer of charge between the active particles, which is a key step in determining the rate of the electrochemical reactions but is usually neglected. Recently, water-processable binders, including sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC),29,30 polyacrylic acid,31 chitosan,32,33 sodium alginate34etc., have gained increasing interest due to the significant improvement in the electrochemical performance of the materials. For example, Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 delivered an improved capacity retention of 89% after 50 cycles of using poly-γ-glutamate instead of PVDF.35 CMC was reported to enable Na0.44MnO2 to have a long lifespan of 800 cycles at 1C.36 Graphite‖LiPPA-LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cell also shows higher capacity retention of 90% after 80 cycles over that of a graphite‖PVDF-LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cell.37 On the one hand, the rich oxygen-containing functional groups endow the binder a strong adhesion force so as to protect the electrode integrity and help to improve the dispersion of the active materials. On the other hand, the lone-pair electrons of the oxygen could facilitate ionic transport by the formation of Na+ coordinated bonds.38,39 Therefore, it is reasonable to expect that further development of more appropriate binders to build the electrode architecture with a sturdy construction and fast charge transfer structure is important.

In this work, we extracted pectin from orange peels, which are commonly regarded as waste products. This eco-friendly, safe and cost effective binder is a structural heteropolysaccharide with many carboxylic or hydroxyl groups, potentially leading to the strong hydrogen bonds between the binder and the electrode materials. The strong bonding force serves to protect the integrity of the electrode and effectively avoids the exfoliation of active materials. Meanwhile, a conductive network is constructed consisting of pectin–Super P chains to accelerate the transfer of Na+, across the interface as well as in the bulk. Thanks to the sturdy construction and fast charge transfer structure, Na3V2(PO4)3/C (hereafter denoted as NVP) with even a low coating carbon content of 1.15%, demonstrates remarkable rate capability with a discharge capacity of 86.6 mA h g−1 at 100C (1C = 117 mA g−1) as well as ultralong cycling life over 15 000 cycles with a high capacity retention of 97% at 50C rate.

Synthesis of pectin Preliminary treatment of orange peels was conducted in 95% ethanol at 65 °C for 15 minutes to remove alcohol-soluble low molecular substances and destroy the pectolytic enzymes. This step is critical to improving pectin purity. Subsequently, the optimized condition could be determined by adjusting the pH (3, HCl) and duration (16 h) in terms of the high yield of pectin. After pre-treatment and optimum conditions, the orange peels were further subjected to a water- and acid-extraction in a mixture of hot distilled water and HCl.Synthesis of NVP NVP samples were prepared by the sol–gel method according to our previous work. Firstly, the stoichiometric amount of Na2CO3, NH4VO3 and NH4H2PO4 with a molar ratio of 3 : 4 : 6 was dissolved in deionized water. Secondly, a saturated citric acid [HOC(COOH)(CH2COOH)2] solution was added dropwise into the solution until the ratio of vanadium : citric acid equals to 2 : 1. Then ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH) was used to adjust the pH value of the solution to 9, and the obtained solution was evaporated at 80 °C, dried at 120 °C for 12 h and ground to form a precursor. Finally, the NVP powder can be acquired after heat treatments in two steps, first at 350 °C for 5 hours and then at 800 °C for 12 hours under a nitrogen atmosphere.

The structural analysis of the NVP material was based on X-ray diffraction (XRD), using a RigaKu D/max-2550 diffractometer with Cu Kα source in the 2θ range of 10–80° at a scanning rate of 1.7° min−1. And Rietveld refinement was conducted to confirm the phase purity. A Hitachi SU8020 type scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to investigate the morphological properties, and a FEI Tecnai G2 type transmission electron microscope (TEM) for the microstructural analysis with an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. Raman spectroscopy was carried out using a Renishaw in Via Raman system with an Ar-ion laser excitation (λ = 514.5 nm). Quantitatively, the content of carbon was evaluated using a Mettler-Toledo Thermogravimetric (TG) analyzer. FTIR was carried out using a Thermos Scientific Nicolet 6700 spectrometer with the KBr disk method. X-ray photoelectron spectra were measured a VG scientific ESCALAB-250 spectrometer. Contact angle measurements were conducted using a Ramé-Hart 200-F1 standard goniometer at room temperature, before measurements, the pectin and PVDF films (with aluminum foil as the current collector) were cut into the similar circular disks, and liquid electrolyte (1 M NaClO4 dissolved in a solvent of ethylene carbonate (EC) and propylene carbonate (PC) (1 : 1 v/v)), with the addition of 5% fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) was applied to titrate and contact with relative circular disk electrodes. Then, a Ramé-Hart 200-F1 standard goniometer was used to record and measure the contact angles. Ionic conductivity measurements of the pure pectin and PVDF films with a thickness of 15–20 μm were prepared by a spin-coating method on stainless steel. After that, they were immersed in the electrolyte, first for 2 h, and then films were taken from the electrode. After removing all the existing electrolyte with tissue paper, the films were sandwiched by two blocking electrodes (stainless steel). The conductivity of the pectin and PVDF electrodes were measured using a Zahner Xpot electrochemical workstation over a frequency range from 1 MHz to 1 Hz. The electrolyte sample was placed in a two-electrode cell with the stainless-steel electrode surface of 2.54 cm2. The results of the swelling tests were observed by SEM. The NVP–pectin and NVP–PVDF electrodes were cut into two equal parts, one part was in a dry condition and the other one was wetted in the electrolyte for the same time. Then the thickness of the two electrodes in dry and wet conditions were measured through SEM cross-sections of the samples. The tensile adhesion strength was conducted on an Electromechanical Tester (Instron 5567). The electrode with the active material attached to the Al foil was cut into a circular shape with a diameter of 1.8 cm. The current collector side was then adhered to a 3M scotch tape and the active materials side was subjected to tensile force. The setup and the experiment of the tensile test are shown in (Scheme 1, ESI†).

Electrochemical tests were carried out using coin-type cells (CR2032). Sodium half cells were assembled using sodium foil as the counter electrode. The working electrodes were fabricated by coating a slurry prepared from a mixture of the active material, Super P conductive additive, and binder (pectin dissolved in water or PVDF binder dissolved in NMP, respectively) in a weight ratio of 7 : 2 : 1, on an aluminum-foil current collector. Then the electrode films were dried in a vacuum oven at 120 °C for 12 h. After patterning the electrode film into a square of area 0.8 × 0.8 cm2, the coin cells were assembled in a glove box. The loading mass of the materials was 1.3–1.8 mg cm−2. Glass fiber filters (Whatman GF/C) were used as separators for the cells. The electrolyte solution was prepared from 1 M NaClO4 dissolved in EC and PC (1 : 1 v/v) with the addition of 5% FEC. Galvanostatic charge–discharge tests were carried out over a voltage range of 2.3–3.9 V at room temperature using a Land-2001A (Wuhan, China) automatic battery tester. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were carried out using a VSP multichannel potentiation–galvanostatic system (Bio-Logic SAS, France). CV curves were collected at different scanning rates ranging from 0.05 to 3.0 mV s−1. The EIS spectra were measured in the frequency range from 1 MHz to 1 mHz. Sodium-ion full cells were assembled in the same manner as the half cells except with hard carbon as the anode. Sodium-ion full cells were cycled over different voltages ranging between 1.5–4.0 V.

Fig. 1a shows the structural formula of pectin with rich polar side groups such as carboxyl and hydroxyl groups, which is evidenced by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR, see Fig. 1b). The broad peak located at 3446 cm−1 corresponds to the O–H stretching vibration, while the peaks at 1621 and 1072 cm−1 are related to the stretching modes C[double bond, length as m-dash]O and C–O, respectively.40,41 The presence of polar groups enables a strong interaction between the active materials and the conducting agents to adhere to the current collector via hydrogen bonds.28,38 Also, these functional groups endow pectin a highly hydrophilic nature, evidenced by the contact angle test.42,43 As displayed in Fig. 1c, the contact angle between the pectin film and the electrolyte is near 0°, in sharp contrast to 18.3° for the case involving PVDF. The better wettability of the electrolyte is known to be beneficial for the utilization of cathode materials and thus provide large solid (active materials)–liquid (electrolyte) interfaces, facilitating fast ion transportation.44 Additionally, the lone pair of electrons of oxygen from the pectin could form coordinate bonds with Na+ to induce desolvation of the solvated Na+ and enhance Na+ diffusion. A similar phenomenon is reported in LIBs.38,45 Then, we sandwiched the pectin and PVDF film by two blocking electrodes for the resistance measurement (Fig. 1d).40,46,47 The ionic conductivity of pectin is calculated to be 2.4 × 10−7 S cm−1, 3.7 times larger than that of PVDF (6.5 × 10−8 S cm−1). Finally, the electrochemical stability of pectin is investigated by cyclic voltammetry (CV), which shows an inactive linearity character between 0.0–4.0 V vs. Na+/Na (Fig. S1, ESI†).

NVP is synthesized via a sol–gel method, and is 20–100 nm in size and coated by a ∼5 nm carbon layer (Fig. S2a–c, ESI†). The carbon content is 1.15% according to thermogravimetric analysis (Fig. S2d, ESI†), while the crystal structure stability is confirmed by comparing the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of NVP before and after being soaked with pectin in water for 1 day (Fig. S3, ESI†). Then, NVP, Super P and binder (pectin or PVDF) are thoroughly mixed to form a uniform slurry, coated on an Al foil and dried. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging was carried out to probe the architecture and microstructure of the as-prepared working electrode (Fig. S4, ESI†). It can be seen that the working electrode using pectin as a binder (hereafter denoted as NVP–pectin) shows a porous structure (Fig. S4a†) in favor of electrolyte infiltration. More importantly, the spatial distribution of NVP is obviously homogeneous compared to the agglomerated situation for the PVDF electrode (hereafter denoted as NVP–PVDF). This advantageous property can be attributed to the fact that the nonpolar groups of pectin (methyl groups residues in particular) can interact with the coating carbon as well as Super P.48,49 The surfactant function of pectin is evidenced by carbon dispersion experiments (Fig. S5†). The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image (Fig. 2a) also shows the chain-like pectin binder can help form a conductive network by crosslinking the NVP and Super P for fast long-range transfer of electrons and Na+, as schematically illustrated in (Fig. 2b). In contrast, the high molecular weight of PVDF and slow evaporation rate of NMP during electrode preparation tend to cause severe agglomeration of NVP and Super P, separately (Fig. 2c). Limited by the ionic insulating nature of PVDF and the quasi-point-to-point electronic transmission via Super P cluster, the rate capability of NVP–PVDF is suppressed (Fig. 2d).

Subsequently, the kinetic properties of different electrodes were studied via electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS), see (Fig. 3a). Fitting the Arrhenius plots yielded activation energies (Ea) of 31.42 and 36.06 kJ mol−1 for NVP–pectin and the NVP–PVDF electrodes, respectively (Fig. 3b). The lower Ea implies a favoured and faster transport of Na+ for NVP–pectin electrode.50,51 Cyclic voltammetry (CV) at various scan rates (Fig. 3c and d) also confirms the superior kinetic properties since the calculated Na+ diffusion coefficients of NVP–pectin are larger than the values for the NVP–PVDF electrode (listed in Table S2, ESI†).52

The effect of the binder on the electrochemical performance was examined with a half-cell set up. As shown in (Fig. 4a and b), NVP–pectin shows slightly higher discharge capacity and capacity retention than NVP–PVDF at a low rate of 0.5C (1C = 117 mA g−1). With increasing current density, NVP–pectin exhibits a robust rate capability with no obvious capacity loss from 20 to 100C rate (Fig. 4c). A high specific capacity of 86.6 mA h g−1 can be obtained at a 100C rate, even higher than that of NVP–PVDF at a 10C rate (81.6 mA h g−1). As shown in Fig. S7,† the process of Na+ transfer from the interface between the material and electrolyte and then diffusion to the inner space of the NVP particles (marked as step I) is very fast due to the NASICON structure of NVP. However, limited by the insulative PVDF, movement of Na+ from near surface to inside of the electrode (marked as step II) is limited so that the capacity fades severely at high rates. While in the case of NVP–pectin, step II is greatly accelerated due to the construction of a conductive network, this could guarantee the immediate transfer of sodium ions and electrons and lead to outstanding capability even at a 100C rate. Also, NVP–pectin shows smaller polarization compared to NVP–PVDF (Fig. 4d), in accordance with the CV profiles in the insets of (Fig. 3c and d). The numeric polarization values (defined by the charging/discharging voltage separation at half-capacity) are summarized in (Fig. 4e). Even at an extremely high rate of 100C, the polarization for the pectin electrode is only 0.56 V, which is beneficial to the energy density at high discharge rates. It is worth mentioning that the high-rate capability at 100C was not previously possible with such a low carbon content (1.15%) for NVP, as summarized in (Table S3, ESI†), further demonstrating the superiority and applicability of the pectin binder. Fig. 4f compares the Ragone plots of the NVP–pectin and NVP–PVDF electrodes (normalized to the weight of the cathode materials). The NVP–pectin cathode can deliver a high energy density of 395.9 W h kg−1 at a power density of 202.5 W kg−1. Even at a maximum power density of 33.03 kW kg−1 (charge and discharge time of 36 s), the device still possesses an energy density of 264.2 W h kg−1, meaning that high energy and power densities are simultaneously obtained. To further verify the practical validity of the pectin binder, we propose two additional electrochemical tests: one to increase the weight ratio of NVP : Super P : pectin from a lab-scale 7 : 2 : 1 to an industrial scale 9 : 0.5 : 0.5, which also delivers better Na+ storage performance than NVP–PVDF electrodes (7 : 2 : 1) (Fig. S8, ESI†). The other is the low-temperature test from 0 and −20 °C (Fig. S9, ESI†) showing capacity retention of nearly 100% over 100 cycles. The excellent performance is highly promising for applications of high-power SIBs in smart grid application. Besides the rate capability, the lifespan is another important parameter for the cathode. Although the volume changes at the cathode side (below 8%)53 is much smaller than that of the alloy anode (above 300%),54,55 the mechanical fatigue on the electrode caused by thousands of contraction-expansions is fatal. As evidenced in (Fig. S10, ESI†), NVP–PVDF only retains a reversible capacity of 10.1 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles at 30C. NVP–pectin, in sharp contrast, shows a discharge capacity of 95.2 mA h g−1 at 10C rate for 3000 cycles. Further long-term cycling for 10 000 (30C rate, capacity retention 89%) and 15 000 (50C rate, capacity retention 97%) times again confirm the outstanding cyclability of NVP–pectin as shown in (Fig. 5).

Several critical factors are believed to work in synergy to enable the enhanced performance for the stable nanomaterial–polymer electrode. At first, the advanced mechanical property is essential. The stress–strain curves in the peel-off experiments display linear elastic behavior with increasing applied stress until the electrode breaks (Fig. 6a).40 The tensile strength and maximum strain at the breaking point for NVP–pectin is 123.89 MPa, larger than that of PVDF (106.66 MPa). The enhanced adhesion force of the binder could be attributed to the strong hydrogen binding connecting active particles. The existence of hydrogen binding is evidenced by FTIR (Fig. 6b), where peaks assigned to the O–H and C–OH bonds at 3451 and 1151 cm−1 obviously shifts to lower wavenumbers of 3427 and 1132 cm−1, respectively.39,56 The micro-structure change of the electrode after long-term cycling is imaged by SEM. The NVP–pectin electrode maintains its uniform and integrated architecture after 1000 cycles (Fig. 6c), in sharp contrast to the large cracks along the surface of the NVP–PVDF electrode (Fig. 6d). The emergence of these cracks is a sign of the inefficient stress release of the active materials during the repeatable charge–discharge processes. The cross-sectional images (insets of Fig. 6c and d) also represent a similar behavior. In the NVP–pectin electrode, the active materials are closely attached to the current collector, allowing the electrode to operate for many cycles. The sturdy construction of the electrode could originate from the ability of pectin to form strong hydrogen bonding, attaching the active materials to the current collector (as illustrated in Fig. S11, ESI†). In contrast, PVDF functions via weak van der Waals interaction and therefore, the NVP–PVDF electrode suffers from electrical disconnection after long cycles resulting into a large capacity decay.28

Secondly, an ideal binder should assist in building the protective interphase on the surface of the active materials. The solid permeable interface (SPI) is usually ionic permeable and solvent blocking, which could protect the cathode material from being attacked by the electrolyte. Thus, the surface chemistry of NVP–pectin and NVP–PVDF are further examined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). As shown in (Fig. 7a), the C 1s spectrum shows peaks at 287.4, 285.4 and 284.6 eV, corresponding to –CO–O– and –CH2– from pectin and C–C in carbon layer, respectively. In subsequent cycles, the peaks associated with decomposition products of the electrolyte are observed. The main components of SPI are supposed to be RO–CO2Na or Na2CO3, and they tend to stabilize after 100 cycles without obvious content increase.2,40,57,58 This surface film is believed to prevent further electrolyte degradation and corrosion of the cathode materials. As for the NVP–PVDF electrode, the peaks at 286.3 eV, 290.8 eV and 284.6 eV are indexed to the –CH2– and –CF2– bonds from PVDF and the C–C bond in the carbon layer.37 No other signal is detected in subsequent cycles, indicating diffluent decomposition products instead of SPI. Besides, the SPI is also supposed to improve charge transfer at the interface. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) characterization of both electrodes yields a single semicircle at the higher frequency region (Fig. 7c), which is probably due to a similar time constant for the SPI film resistance as that of the charge transfer resistance.59 Due to the improved kinetic properties of pectin, the interfacial resistance of NVP–pectin is smaller than that of NVP–PVDF (Fig. 7d). The interfacial resistance gradually reduced and stabilized at 140 Ω and the small and constant resistance implies a stable SPI induced by pectin.

Finally, the polymer binder must be chemically inert as the interaction between the binder and electrolyte is usually detrimental for the stability of the electrode. On one hand, the mechanical properties of the electrode are subject to dramatic changes once the binder swells. On the other hand, when the binder reacts with the electrolyte, it is easy for the solvent to permeate through the binder layer and decompose between the active material and binder.31,60 The bond strength might weaken and lead to cathode degradation. An obvious swelling behavior is observed in the cut section of the NVP–PVDF electrode, where the thickness of the active material layer increases from 23 to 36 μm after soaking in the electrolyte (Fig. S12b, ESI†). NVP–pectin, on the contrary, undergoes no swelling, indicating a negligible interaction between the binder and the electrolyte (Fig. S12a, ESI†). In brief, the multifunctional pectin binder provides a facile and effective approach to building ultrafast cathode electrodes with long-lifespans.

To further demonstrate the versatility of the prepared product, a sodium-ion full cell was constructed with a hard carbon (HC) anode and the NVP–pectin cathode (manode : mcathode = 1.2), respectively. The physical and electrochemical properties of HC using pectin as the binder are presented in (Fig. S13 and S14, ESI†), showing excellent sodium storage performance as well.61–63Fig. 8a illustrates the typical charge/discharge profiles with a working potential of about 3.2 V. The cycling performance and the corresponding coulombic efficiency are tested at 0.5C as shown in (Fig. 8b), encouragingly there is no apparent degradation in capacity over 50 cycles. The rate capabilities of this prototype cell were also tested as the applied rates increased from 0.5 to 50C (Fig. 8c). Impressively, it delivers a discharge capacity of 76.4 mA h g−1 even at a 50C rate. It can deliver a high energy density of 157 W h kg−1 (based on the total mass of cathode and anode) as shown in (Fig. 8d). Moreover, the cell can cycle 1000 times at 20C (Fig. 8e) with good capacity retention of 83.5% upon Na+ extraction and insertion. The performance is still in line with the best reported values (Table S4, ESI†). It is worth noting that when the loading mass of the cathode is increased by 2 times, it can still exhibit excellent rate and long cycle performance (Fig. S15, ESI†).

In conclusion, we applied biomass pectin polymer to building a sturdy electrode architecture with a fast charge transfer structure. Systematic analyses reveal that on incorporation of pectin, a uniform of electrode morphology forms and an effective electron/ion transport network is built. Electrochemical characterization shows that the Na+ diffusion in the bulk material and at the interface is accelerated due to the improved electrochemical kinetics. Thus, the cathode is able to show a robust rate capability of 86.6 mA h g−1 at 100C. Meanwhile, the binder takes advantage of its functional groups (carboxyl and hydroxyl) for the formation of hydrogen bonding to enhance cohesion among the electrode components and improve the mechanical strength and chemical stability. Moreover, the pectin electrode forms a stable SPI layer which is sustainable over the long-term, for 15 000 cycles at a 50C rate. From a practical point of view, the low-cost and environmentally friendly pectin binder could find important applications in future scalable energy storage systems.