Rechargeable battery systems that use Na-based anodes as alternatives to Li-ion batteries are highly desirable for grid-scale energy storage systems owing to the high abundance and low cost of Na. Furthermore, aqueous Na batteries are advantageous considering the cost, safety and cycle life. However, the limited energy density is still a critical issue for Na-based batteries. Here, we demonstrate a high performance rechargeable battery using dual electrolytes based on a Na metal anode and a redox couple of hierarchical NiCoAl-layered double hydroxide (NiCoAl-LDH) nanosheets on a carbon microfiber electrode with high energy storage capacity. In this design, the wide potential range of the Na metal anode and the high capacity of hierarchical NiCoAl-LDH nanosheets on a carbon microfiber cathode enable a rechargeable Na/Ni battery with excellent energy storage performance. For stable operation in a hybrid system using non-aqueous and aqueous electrolytes, an alkali-ion solid electrolyte (NASICON, Na3Zr2Si2PO12) is used for the separation of electrolytes. The Na/Ni battery exhibits a stable operating voltage of ∼3.1 V during discharge which outperforms the low cell voltage (∼1.23 V) of an aqueous rechargeable battery, a high capacity of ∼350 mA h g−1, and a resulting high energy density of ∼1085 W h kg−1. With the combination of a solid-state redox couple as the cathode and a metallic sodium anode, our study demonstrates the high potential of Na based batteries for high energy EES systems.

The increasing demand for renewable energy resources to reduce the dependence on fossil fuels has accelerated the development of rechargeable batteries for applications ranging from portable electronics to grid scale energy storage systems.1,2 Li-ion batteries (LIBs) have been extensively exploited as rechargeable batteries owing to their high energy density.3 However, increasing concerns such as the limited sustainability of Li sources due to the rapid consumption and subsequent increasing price of Li sources have hindered their grid-scale applications.4–6 Among various metals used to replace Li ions as the carrier source,7–10 Na metal has been regarded as a promising alternative owing to its intrinsic advantages such as high abundance and low cost.11,12 Furthermore, aqueous Na-ion batteries are highly desirable for grid-scale energy storage because the electrolyte is economical and environmentally friendly.13,14 However, aqueous Na-ion batteries still experience challenges with low cell voltages caused by the narrow potential window of water (∼1.23 V) and low capacity, resulting in low energy density (60–100 W h kg−1).15 In order to achieve a high voltage aqueous rechargeable battery, the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) should be kept away from the anode side. If the potential of the negative electrode can be reduced below the limited potential of the HER, metallic Na can be utilized and a high voltage over 3.0 V can be obtained. Therefore, a suitable battery design including the selection of an electrode and electrolyte is required for the development of high-performance rechargeable Na batteries.15,16

Recently, metallic Na anodes with high specific capacity (∼1166 mA h g−1) have been considered as candidates for the synthesis of advanced Na-based batteries such as sodium–oxygen (Na–O2) and sodium–sulfur (Na–S) batteries.17,18 Both Na–O2 and Na–S batteries provide high energy density owing to their high capacity, discharge products, and acceptable cell voltage. However, Na–O2 batteries suffer from the blocking of Na+ and O2 diffusion by solid discharge products, electrolyte decomposition, side reactions, and sluggish oxygen reactions, which cause capacity fading and low energy efficiency and ultimately result in poor reversibility.19,20 For Na–S batteries, the insulating nature of sulfur compounds and the dissolution of polysulfides are the main factors that diminish the battery performance and reversibility.18,21 Both Na–O2 and Na–S batteries suffer from reversibility thus forcing researchers to find efficient cathode materials that can overcome the aforementioned issues when combined with metallic sodium. Promising cathode materials for high-performance batteries include redox materials such as Ni(OH)2, which provides fast electrode kinetics and high specific capacity and is exploited in aqueous nickel–metal hydride batteries.22 Advanced Na batteries with a wide potential difference that combine metallic Na anodes and high-capacity redox couple materials such as Ni(OH)2 exhibit a high operating voltage and high capacity, which result in high energy density.

Here, we firstly report a high performance rechargeable battery that utilizes a metallic Na anode and a redox couple cathode of hierarchical NiCoAl-layered double hydroxide (NCA-LDH) nanosheets on a carbon microfiber cathode by adopting trivalent atomic doping (Co3+ and Al3+) into the Ni(OH)2 layer (Fig. 1).23,24 In this design, we employed a hybrid system using non-aqueous and aqueous electrolytes separated by an alkali-ion solid electrolyte (NASICON, Na3Zr2Si2PO12). For efficient electron transfer, we fabricated a binder-free electrode by directly growing hierarchical NCA-LDH nanosheets on a carbon microfiber electrode (NCA-LDH/C). The aqueous rechargeable Na/Ni battery exhibits a stable operating voltage of ∼3.1 V, a capacity of ∼350 mA h g−1, and an energy density of ∼1085 W h kg−1. In addition, the battery displays a good cyclability over 1500 cycles with a capacity retention of ∼83% in 1 M NaOH.

The NCA-LDH/C electrode was fabricated by a conventional hydrothermal method from a carbon microfiber electrode. Initially, 1.2 mmol of Ni(NO3)2·6H2O, 0.2 mmol of Co(NO3)2·6H2O, and Al(NO3)3·9H2O each and 5 mmol of urea were dissolved in a mixture of deionized (DI) water (1 mL) and dimethylformamide (DMF) (9 mL). The carbon microfiber electrode (JNT Co., Ltd., Korea) was cut with identical mass in all samples. One piece of the carbon microfiber electrode was immersed in a solution of the as-prepared Ni precursors and preheated at 70 °C for 4 h to enable the nucleation of the metal ions on the electrode. This homogeneous solution, including the carbon microfiber electrode, was transferred to a Teflon-lined stainless-steel autoclave and heated in a conventional oven at 120 °C for 12 h. After the reaction was complete, the autoclave was left to cool naturally to room temperature. The as-made NCA-LDH/C electrode was washed with DI water and ethanol to remove impurities. Then, the NCA-LDH/C electrode was dried in a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 6 h. To determine the content of the NCA-LDH in the NCA-LDH/C electrode, we calculated the mass of NCA-LDH considering the mass change of the NCA-LDH/C electrode after the hydrothermal reaction in comparison with the mass of the bare carbon microfiber before the reaction. Then, the NCA-LDH/C electrode with the desired mass was prepared for the subsequent experiment. The α-Ni(OH)2/C and NiAl-LDH/C electrodes were fabricated by the same process without the use of Co(NO3)2·6H2O plus Al(NO3)3·9H2O and Co(NO3)2·6H2O, respectively.

The surface morphology of the NCA-LDH/C electrode was analyzed using a field-emission SEM (FE-SEM, Hitachi S-4800) at an operating voltage of 10 kV. The samples were directly attached to the top of stubs for FE-SEM. A high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM, JEOL JEM-2100) was also used to observe the morphology and analyze the elemental composition of NCA-LDH/C with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopic analyzer (Oxford Instruments INCA), which was combined with an HR-TEM. The crystal structure and phase formation of the NCA-LDH/C electrode were characterized by XRD analysis (Bruker D8 Advance) with monochromatic Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.15406 nm) in the 2θ range from 10° to 60°. The elemental composition and chemical state of the materials were further analyzed using XPS (Thermo Fisher K-Alpha) and Raman spectroscopy (WITec Alpha 300). To prepare samples for recording TEM cross-sectional images, we used the focused ion beam technique to cut the carbon microfiber uniformly. Firstly, the desired Ni(OH)2 layer on the carbon microfiber was protected from the gallium ion beam by the deposition of a platinum layer. The specific cross-sectional region of the carbon fiber was removed by exposure to the gallium ion beam.

The Na–Ni battery system was assembled and tested using Na metal and NCA-LDH/C as the anode and cathode, respectively. A solid alkaline-ion electrolyte, namely, NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12), was used to separate NCA-LDH/C in a water-soluble electrolyte as the cathode from sodium metal in a non-aqueous electrolyte as the anode. The anode components were assembled and sealed in a glove box under 1 ppm of water and oxygen, and 1 M NaCF3SO3 (Sigma-Aldrich) in tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether (TEGDME) was inserted as the electrolyte in the anode part. On the other side, NCA-LDH/C was employed as the cathode and 0.1 M and 1 M aqueous solutions of NaOH were used as the electrolytes. The electrochemical measurements were carried out with a WonATech WBCS3000L workstation. The EIS analysis is performed with a potentiostat (Ivium Technologies Instruments, Iviumstat) in a frequency range from 50 kHz to 0.1 Hz with an amplitude of 10 mV.

Fig. 1 illustrates a Na/Ni battery cell based on a Na metal anode, a NCA-LDH cathode, and a solid alkali-ion electrolyte (Na3Zr2Si2PO12, NASICON). To utilize Na metal and NCA-LDH/C in the battery system, we employed a hybrid electrolyte system using NASICON as the solid electrolyte, NaCF3SO3 in TEDGME as the anodic electrolyte, and NaOH as the cathodic electrolyte, respectively. Unlike the conventional electrolyte system, the hybrid electrolyte system can utilize the advantages of the electrochemistry of both Na metal and the high-capacity electrode material via the main Ni(OH)2/NiOOH redox couple during charge–discharge cycling in an aqueous electrolyte, which results in a high operating voltage (∼3.1 V), high capacity, and safe operation. In addition, NASICON can physically isolate the non-aqueous electrolyte from the aqueous electrolyte but still enable the transport of Na+ ions during charge–discharge cycling. Conventional Li- and Na-based batteries suffer from the problem of the formation of dendrites, which penetrate the polymer separator and thus cause the risk of short circuits between the anode and cathode. On the other hand, solid NASICON, which acts as both an electrolyte and a separator, rarely suffers from dendrite penetration, which enables the use of Na metal. We also employed a binder-free strategy for the fabrication of an efficient cathode, which was fabricated by the direct growth of NCA-LDH on the carbon microfiber electrode via the reduction of metal ion precursors by a hydrothermal reaction. This binder-free electrode has several advantages, such as short distances for electron transfer between the active materials and conductive carbon electrode, a large number of active sites owing to the thin, vertical NCA-LDH sheets, and efficient pathways for the diffusion of the electrolyte through the interfaces of the active materials. The advantages of the binder-free strategy of the NCA-LDH/C electrode are further demonstrated in the discussion of the electrochemical performance.

Fig. 2a shows the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of hierarchical NCA-LDH nanosheets directly grown on the carbon microfiber electrode. NCA-LDH exhibits a vertical, thin nanosheet morphology with a sheet thickness of less than ∼10 nm. The morphology of NCA-LDH directly grown on the carbon microfiber was observed using a cross-sectional TEM (Fig. S1†). In Fig. S1†, the TEM-energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) images show the signals of Ni and carbon elements, which arise from Ni(OH)2 and carbon microfiber layers, respectively, and indicate the direct growth of Ni(OH)2 sheets on the carbon microfiber. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern (Fig. 2b) of the NCA-LDH/C electrode matches the JCPDS card (38-0715) of α-phase Ni(OH)2 having unit cell parameters a = b = 3.08 Å and c = 23.41 Å, which indicates the growth of NCA-LDH on the carbon microfiber. In addition, the XRD peak of NCA-LDH/C displays a shift to lower angles, which indicates the expansion of the internal layer owing to Co doping into the Ni(OH)2 layer.25 The Raman spectrum also displays characteristic peaks of α-phase Ni(OH)2 (Fig. 2c) at 460 and 530 cm−1, which are consistent with the bending of Ni–O bonds in α-phase Ni(OH)2.26 The chemical bonding in NCA-LDH/C was analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to confirm the hydroxide phase and the incorporation of Co and Al atoms into NCA-LDH/C (Fig. 2d and S2†). In the Ni 2p spectrum, the main peak at 856.0 eV, which corresponds to Ni 2p3/2, indicates the presence of Ni2+ species bonded to hydroxyl groups. The energy separation of 17.5 eV between the nickel peaks at 856 and 873.6 eV, which correspond to Ni 2p3/2 and Ni 2p1/2, respectively, is consistent with the fundamental characteristics of Ni(OH)2.27 In the Co 2p spectrum, the two main peaks at 781.8 and 797.0 eV, which correspond to Co 2p3/2 and Co 2p1/2, respectively, indicate the presence of trivalent Co atoms. The spectrum of Al 2p displays a peak at a binding energy of 74.1 eV, which is related to Al3+ species in the form of Al–OH (Fig. S2†). The EDS mapping images exhibit a uniform distribution of Ni, Co, and Al atoms, which demonstrates the formation of NCA-LDH (Fig. S3†). In addition, the molar ratio of Ni, Co, and Al in the NCA-LDH/C electrode was analyzed by SEM-EDS analysis. SEM-EDS indicates that the molar ratio of Ni, Co, and Al is 7.15 : 1.2 : 1.2 (74.86 : 12.57 : 12.57 in at%) which is consistent with the molar ratio of the precursor solution (Fig. S4†). And FT-IR also elaborates the chemical bonding and the formation of α-Ni(OH)2 in NCA-LDH (Fig. S5†). There are mainly six peaks related to Ni(OH)2 the weak band at 690 cm−1 corresponds to the Ni–OH bending vibration, and the two bands at 1048 and 1357 cm−1 are attributed to the C–N vibrations, from the intercalated NO3− in the interlayer space. In addition, the weak band at ∼1644 cm−1 indicates the bending vibration of O–H groups in the adsorbed water molecules, while the broad band centered at ∼3446 cm−1 corresponds to the O–H stretching vibration of the hydrogen-bonded hydroxyl groups and intercalated water molecules located in the interlamellar spaces of Ni(OH)2, and the peaks located 3627 cm−1 are assigned to the O–H stretching vibrations of Ni(OH)2.

The electrochemical performance of the NCA-LDH/C electrode was examined through cyclic voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic charge–discharge measurements with a standard three-electrode system in a 1 M KOH aqueous electrolyte. The CV curves of α-Ni(OH)2/C, NiAl-LDH/C, and NCA-LDH/C electrodes were recorded at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in the range of 0.0–0.8 V versus Hg/HgO (Fig. 2e). The typical CV curves of NCA-LDH/C display a pair of redox peaks, which correspond to the faradaic redox reaction. The anodic and cathodic peaks indicate the oxidation and reduction of Ni(OH)2, respectively, and correspond to the Ni(OH)2/NiOOH reversible redox couple.28 The redox peaks of NCA-LDH/C are shifted to slightly lower potentials in comparison with α-Ni(OH)2, which indicates the incorporation of the Co species.24 The peak current density and area enclosed by the CV curve of NCA-LDH/C are larger than those of α-Ni(OH)2 at the same scan rate (5 mV s−1), which suggests that NCA-LDH/C has higher electrochemical activity than α-Ni(OH)2. This enhanced electrochemical activity can be attributed to the increase in electrochemically active surface area in the hierarchically nanostructured NCA-LDH/C electrode. On the other hand, the α-Ni(OH)2/C electrode exhibits a thick sheet-like morphology of active materials on the carbon microfiber (Fig. S6†), which resulted in a reduction in the surface area of the electrode in contact with the electrolyte and low diffusion of the electrolyte. However, doping with Co and Al induced the formation of a thin, small nanosheet morphology in NCA-LDH/C, which resulted in a large surface area that provided more active sites for the reaction with the electrolyte and a higher electrolyte diffusion rate inside the active material. Here, the atomic doping causes a decrease in the thickness and size of nanosheets because Ni ions with the larger ionic radius Ni2+ (0.70 Å) ion are replaced by Al ions with the smaller ionic radius Al3+ (0.535 Å) ion in the structure. In our SEM results (Fig. 2a, S6 and S9†), NCA-LDH/C and NA-LDH/C with Al doping show obvious size reduction compared to NC-LDH/C with only Co doping. Therefore, the smaller ionic radius of Al3+ (0.535 Å) induces effective size reduction of nanosheets compared to Co2+ (0.70 Å) and Co3+ (0.60 Å) ions with a larger ionic radius. And the thick morphology of α-Ni(OH)2/C causes a higher intensity in XRD spectra than that of NiAl-LDH and NCA-LDH (Fig. S7†). Because of the thin and small size of the NCA-LDH sheets, the CV curves of NCA-LDH/C at different scan rates from 2 to 20 mV s−1 indicate high rate capability, with an increased current rate proportional to the scan rate (Fig. S8a†).

The relation between the specific capacity and current rate for the α-Ni(OH)2/C, NiAl-LDH/C, and NCA-LDH/C electrodes is shown in Fig. 2f. The discharge curves of the NCA-LDH/C electrode as a function of the current rate are also shown in Fig. S8b.† All three electrodes display a high specific capacity and outstanding rate capability, even at a high current rate (30 A g−1). The NCA-LDH/C electrode exhibits a specific capacity of ∼360 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 2 A g−1. Even at a current rate of 30 A g−1, the specific capacity (∼306 mA h g−1) of NCA-LDH/C can be maintained, with a capacity retention of ∼87.4%. This outstanding rate capability of the NCA-LDH/C electrode is attributed to direct contact between the active materials and the carbon microfiber electrode, which results in efficient transport of electrons.29

The long-term cycling stability of an electrode material is a key parameter for practical applications. The cycling stabilities of the α-Ni(OH)2/C, NiAl-LDH/C, and NCA-LDH/C electrodes were investigated at a charge–discharge current rate of 30 A g−1 over 5000 cycles (Fig. 2g). The α-Ni(OH)2/C electrode exhibits a great deterioration in capacity during the initial charge–discharge cycles, with a final capacity retention of ∼42%. Upon doping with Al, the NiAl-LDH/C electrode displays reduced capacity deterioration, which indicates a slight improvement in stability (∼53% capacity retention) in comparison with α-Ni(OH)2/C. In addition, as another control group, we characterized the NiCo-LDH/C electrode (Fig. S9 and S10†). NiCo-LDH also shows a similar morphology including thin and vertically grown nanosheets and the same XRD peak position demonstrating the formation of NiCo-LDH (Fig. S9†). In addition, NiCo-LDH shows good electrochemical performance with a similar specific capacity to NiCoAl-LDH and NiAl-LDH (Fig. S10†). The NiCo-LDH/C electrode shows improved cycling stability (∼71% capacity retention) compared to the α-NiAl-LDH/C electrode. In particular, co-doping with Al and Co results in a great enhancement in stability over the entire cycle. The NCA-LDH/C electrode exhibits a gradual increase in capacity during the initial charge–discharge cycles and displays an excellent capacity retention of ∼84% after 5000 cycles, which can be favorably compared to that of other LDH electrodes (Co–Al LDH/graphene: 88% after 3000 cycles; NCA-LDH: 82.2% after 2000 cycles).30,31 The high electrochemical performance of NCA-LDH/C can be attributed to its nanostructure, which comprises thin, short LDH sheets that afford efficient pathways for the diffusion of the electrolyte,32 structural stabilization against phase transformation upon the introduction of Al and Co co-dopants,23,24 and efficient electron transport enabled by direct growth of LDH sheets on the carbon microfiber electrode. EIS analysis of the active electrodes indicated that NCA-LDH/C displayed a lower internal resistance (Rbulk) and charge transfer resistance (Rct) than α-Ni(OH)2/C and NiAl-LDH/C owing to the introduction of more conductive species such as Co dopants (Fig. S8c†).33

To further understand the effect of direct contact of the active materials with the carbon microfiber electrode on the electrochemical performance of the cell, comparative analysis of the electrochemical performance of the carbon microfiber, NCA-LDH powder and NCA-LDH powder mixed with carbon black (CB) was performed via CV and galvanostatic charge–discharge curves (Fig. S11†). In the CV curve, the current density of the carbon microfiber is much lower than that of the active NCA-LDH/C electrode indicating a negligible contribution to the capacity. The NCA-LDH powder displayed a lower current density in the CV curve and a lower specific capacity (100 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1) in the galvanostatic charge–discharge curve than the NCA-LDH/C electrode, which can be attributed to the insulating nature of LDH, which resulted in poor electrical conductivity.30 NCA-LDH when mixed with CB (electrically conductive support) exhibited enhanced electrochemical performance in comparison with the NCA-LDH powder owing to its higher electrical conductivity, but its electrochemical performance was still poor when compared with that of the NCA-LDH/C electrode. These results indicate that the enhanced electrochemical performance of the NCA-LDH/C electrode can be attributed to the efficient transport of electrons between NCA-LDH sheets and the carbon microfiber electrode. And additionally, the morphology (Fig. S12†), the phase formation (Fig. S13†) and the resulting electrochemical performance (Fig. S14†) of NCA-LDH are evaluated in a solvent mixture with different ratios of DI water and DMF. The enhanced performance of the NCA-LDH/C electrode has been achieved with the help of the intercalation of DMF into the Ni(OH)2 interlayer lattice which results in thin and small sheets of the NCA-LDH/C electrode. Furthermore, we additionally characterized the NiCoAl-LDH/C electrode with different molar ratios of Ni, Co and Al (Fig. S15–S17†). With the reduction of the Ni ratio, the morphology is not significantly changed. However, in the electrochemical performance, the CV current and specific capacity are gradually reduced with the decrease of the molar ratio of Ni, which can be attributed to the reduction of active Ni species.

The electrochemical performance of a Na/Ni cell was assessed by assembling a Na metal anode and a NCA-LDH/C cathode in an aqueous NaOH electrolyte. To investigate the redox reaction and the voltage window of the battery, CV measurements were performed at a scan rate of 0.2 mV s−1. The CV curves display redox behavior corresponding to the redox couple of NCA-LDH/C without side reactions (Fig. 3a). In 0.1 M NaOH, the CV curve displays one set of redox peaks with no side reactions (Fig. 3a), which are consistent with the voltage plateau in the charge–discharge curves of the battery (Fig. 3b). The typical charge–discharge curves of the battery in 0.1 M NaOH display a voltage plateau at ∼3.20 V during discharge and a low overpotential gap of about 470 mV (Fig. 3b). Most aqueous Na-ion batteries give low cell voltages owing to the narrow potential window of water (∼1.23 V). However, a Na/Ni battery system can provide a high cell voltage (∼3.2 V vs. Na+/Na) owing to the wide potential difference between the Na anode (−2.71 V vs. the standard hydrogen electrode [SHE]) and Ni(OH)2 (0.49 V vs. SHE) in an aqueous electrolyte. The initial discharge delivers a high cell capacity of ∼348 mA h g−1 (loading mass: ∼1 mg of active NCA-LDH/C) at a current rate of 1 A g−1 (Fig. 3b), which indicates the utilization of most of the capacity of the NCA-LDH/C cathode. The energy density of the battery in 0.1 M NaOH was estimated to be ∼1113 W h kg−1 by determining the cell voltage and cell capacity. The operating voltage of the battery varies with the concentration of the electrolyte. In 1 M NaOH, the CV curves display similar redox behavior to that in 0.1 M NaOH, but the redox peaks are present in a slightly lower voltage range (Fig. 3a). These CV results are consistent with the voltage plateau at ∼3.1 V during discharge in the charge–discharge curve of the battery (Fig. 3c). The cell voltage of a Na/Ni battery depends on the pH, which is related to the concentration of the NaOH electrolyte. The reduction potential depends on the pH when protons or hydroxide ions participate in the reaction. In a Na/Ni battery, we can estimate the variation in potential at different pH values (different concentrations of NaOH) by considering the Pourbaix diagram of Ni(OH)2, which illustrates the relationship between the potential and pH (Fig. S18†). With the increase in the NaOH concentration (which corresponds to a higher pH), the battery exhibits a lower operating voltage. Although the cell voltage in 1 M NaOH (∼3.1 V) is slightly lower than that in 0.1 M NaOH (∼3.2 V), the overpotential gap between charging and discharging is reduced from 470 to 310 mV (Fig. 3c). In addition, in 1 M NaOH, there is a slight increase in cell capacity to ∼350 mA h g−1, which corresponds to an energy density of ∼1085 W h kg−1. Although the battery in 0.1 M NaOH delivers a high reversible capacity in the initial cycle, it suffers from gradual capacity deterioration, which results in a capacity retention of ∼71% over 120 cycles (Fig. 3d). On the other hand, 1 M NaOH greatly improves the cycling performance, with a capacity retention of nearly 100% over 120 cycles (Fig. 3d).

Mostly, NaOH has a high ionic conductivity due to the high mobility of small size OH-anions in water solution. Besides, the high concentration of NaOH leads to a large number of Na+ and OH− ions and therefore high ionic conductivity of the electrolyte. As a result, the concentration of the electrolyte affects the electrochemical performance, and therefore an optimum concentration of the electrolyte is needed. The fast capacity decay in 0.1 M KOH is caused by the kinetic limitation in the reaction between the Ni(OH)2/NiOOH redox couple because of the larger potential polarization and the slower mobility of Na+ ions and OH− ions at low concentration. The enhanced performance in 1 M NaOH in comparison with 0.1 M NaOH can also be explained by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) (inset in Fig. 3d), which shows that the lower internal resistance of the battery in 1 M NaOH results in a great enhancement in its durability. Analysis of the charge–discharge and CV curves demonstrates the high reversibility of the Na/Ni battery in 1 M NaOH, which corresponds to the Ni(OH)2/NiOOH redox couple of the NCA-LDH/C cathode. The battery exhibits excellent cycling stability, with a capacity retention of ∼83% over 1500 cycles (Fig. 3e and S19†). To further evaluate the concentration effect of NaOH, we carried out the measurement of the Na–Ni battery in 5 M NaOH (Fig. S20†). In 5 M NaOH, the Na–Ni battery shows a slightly higher specific capacity of ∼352 mA h g−1 (∼348 mA h g−1 and ∼350 mA h g−1 in the case of 0.1 M and 1 M, respectively) and a lower discharge voltage plateau at 2.98 V (3.2 V and 3.1 V in the case of 0.1 M and 1 M, respectively). This result supports that the concentration of NaOH affects the electrochemical performance. In cycling performance, 5 M NaOH leads to better cycling stability than 0.1 M NaOH (capacity retention of ∼70% during 120 cycles) showing a capacity retention of ∼73% during 750 cycles. However, its cycling performance is slightly poorer than that of 1 M NaOH. The decay of cycling performance might be caused by the slow dissolution of active electrode materials during the long charge–discharge process. Even after cycles, the NASICON is remains stable without any big change in SEM images and XRD spectra in Fig. S21.† Most importantly, the battery exhibits superior energy density in comparison with other aqueous rechargeable batteries (Fig. 3f and Table S1†). Representatively, a rechargeable battery based on a Zn anode provides a low energy density (∼400 W h kg−1) owing to the low cell voltage, which is caused by the relatively low reduction potential (−0.76 V vs. SHE) of the Zn metal anode and the low capacity of the cathode material.9 Although a Li-ion battery with a relatively high reduction potential (−3.00 V vs. SHE) provides a high operating voltage, the capacity of the cathode material is not very high (∼468 W h kg−1).34 Also, the Ni-MH battery provides a high specific capacity but, their operating voltage is limited by the narrow potential window of water with the result that the energy density (∼205 W h kg−1) is lower than that of the Na/Ni battery.35 The Na/Ni battery provides a high energy density of 1085 W h kg−1 at a high rate of 1 A g−1 owing to the high cell voltage achieved by the Na anode and the high cell capacity achieved by the high-performance NCA-LDH/C cathode. These results demonstrate that a hybrid electrolyte system that utilizes Na metal and a high-capacity aqueous cathode can provide a safe, cost-efficient, and high-performance energy storage system.

Information on chemical changes in the cathode is essential for understanding the battery reactions after charge/discharge cycling of a Na/Ni battery. We investigated the chemical changes in the pristine, charged, and discharged NCA/C cathodes (Fig. 4a). The specific chemical bonding of the active materials during the chemical reactions of the cathode after charge/discharge cycling was investigated by Raman analysis. The pristine NCA-LDH/C cathode displays two distinct Raman bands at 460 and 529 cm−1, which correspond to the vibrations of Ni–O bonds in α-Ni(OH)2 (Fig. 4b). After the battery is charged, these bands undergo red shifts to 478 and 556 cm−1, respectively, which correspond to Ni–O bending in NiOOH, owing to the transformation of Ni(OH)2 into NiOOH.36 After discharging, these peaks recover their original positions for pristine Ni(OH)2, which demonstrates reversible transformations between Ni(OH)2 and NiOOH.

In order to investigate the characteristics of the NCA-LDH/C cathode after charge/discharge cycling, X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) was also performed. The Ni K-edge X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) spectra of NCA-LDH/C before and after charge/discharge cycling were recorded and compared with those of a Ni reference (Fig. 5a). The Ni K-edge XANES spectrum of charged NCA-LDH/C displays a shift in energy of ∼2.8 eV to higher edge absorption energies in comparison with that of pristine NCA-LDH/C (inset of Fig. 5a). This shift in energy is attributed to an electrochemical conversion of Ni(ii) to Ni(iii), which led to a modification of edge features related to changes in the local environment of Ni–O.37 The edge absorption energy of the charged NCA-LDH/C cathode is higher than that of Ni2O3, in which Ni has an oxidation state of +3, which indicates that the oxidation state of charged NCA-LDH/C is higher. This higher oxidation state results from the formation of γ-NiOOH, which agrees with the oxidation phase formed upon the oxidation of α-Ni(OH)2, in which Ni has an oxidation state of ∼3.7. The evolution of the distorted octahedral structure of charged NCA-LDH/C upon oxidation can be corroborated by a decrease in white-line intensity in the XANES spectrum in comparison with that of pristine NCA-LDH/C (Fig. 5a). After discharging, the edge energy of the cathode is restored to the original value for the pristine cathode, and the white-line intensity recovers, which demonstrates reversible processes at the cathode during charge/discharge cycling. The Ni K-edge extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectrum of pristine NCA-LDH/C displays a Ni–Ni peak at ∼2.73 Å (Fig. 5b). For charged NCA-LDH/C, the Ni K-edge EXAFS spectrum displays a significant shift in the Ni–Ni peak to ∼2.39 Å in comparison with that of pristine NCA-LDH/C, which indicates a structural change in the oxidation phase of NCA-LDH/C. After discharging, the Ni K-edge EXAFS peak of NCA-LDH/C is also restored to the original position for pristine NCA-LDH/C. The Co species in NCA-LDH/C also contributes to its electrochemical performance. Fig. 5c and d show the Co K-edge XAS spectra of NCA-LDH/C and Co-based references. The Co K-edge XANES spectrum of charged NCA-LDH/C exhibits a shift to higher edge energy in comparison with that of pristine NCA-LDH/C, and the edge energy position is higher than that of Co3O4. This shift in energy suggests that NCA-LDH/C contained Co species in a higher oxidation state after charging. After discharging, the edge energy in the Co K-edge XANES spectrum of NCA-LDH/C recovers its low value. Here, the recovered energy state is not consistent with that in pristine NCA-LDH/C, which implies that partially oxidized Co species contributed to the increase in electrical conductivity. The addition of Co species greatly increases the concentration of defects and increases the electrical conductivity.33 The Co K-edge XANES analysis demonstrates that the oxidized Co species in NCA-LDH/C contributes to its excellent electrochemical performance. The Raman and XAS analyses indicate that the cathode undergoes reversible reactions, including the Ni(OH)2/NiOOH redox couple, during charging/discharging of the battery. In addition, the synergetic role of the Co atom dopants in the cathode may have contributed to its high performance in the battery.

In summary, we studied the rechargeability of an aqueous Na/Ni battery using a hybrid electrolyte system. A NCA-LDH/C cathode material was employed as a high-performance electrode with high capacity and excellent cycling stability over continuous charge–discharge cycles. Phase stabilization due to the presence of Al and Co in the LDH lattice, modification of the thin, small nanosheet morphology of the NCA-LDH/C electrode, and the efficient fabrication of this electrode by direct growth of the active material contributed to its high electrochemical performance. A Na/Ni battery assembled from a Na metal anode, a NCA-LDH/C cathode, and a hybrid system including non-aqueous and aqueous electrolytes displayed a high capacity of 350 mA h g−1 and a high energy density of 1085 W h kg−1. This battery, which combines a Na anode, an aqueous high-capacity cathode, and a hybrid electrolyte, could hold promise for energy storage applications owing to its high capacity, energy density, cost-effectiveness, and safety.
