A  new  technique  offering  the  low  probability  of  interception (LPI) ability improvement of radar systems based on  4D  antenna  arrays  is  presented.  Conventional  radar  systems  usually utilize modulated waveforms and directional antennas to  transmit  electromagnetic  wave  and  receive  the  echo  signals  to  obtain the range and velocity information of targets. The purpose  of LPI design is to keep the eavesdropping guessing until it is too  late. Until now, most of the studies on LPI are based on design of  LPI waveforms. In this paper, the advantage of multi-dimensional  control  of  4D  antenna  arrays  is  utilized  to  improve  the  LPI  performance  of  radar.  By  maintaining  the  signals  distorted  pseudorandomly in non-detecting directions, the studies show that  4D  antenna  arrays  are  capable  of  hiding  radar  signal  characteristics  and  thus  decreasing  the  probability  of  being  intercepted.  Numerical  results  are  provided  to  validate  the  effectiveness of the proposed approach. 

LPI ability is one of the necessary abilities for the survival  and  development  of  modern  radar.  Until  now,  most  of  LPI  techniques are achieved by applying high duty cycle, wideband  waveforms [1-2]. However, there are always some unavoidable  limitations  such  as  the  limited  bandwidth  of  radar  signal.  Fortunately, in combination with  waveform design, the design  and optimization of the antenna array’s radiation characteristics  can also be utilized to improve the LPI performance [3]. 

Traditional  antenna  array  can  be  recognized  as  radiation  sources  distributed  in  3D  space.  By  introducing  time  as  the  fourth  dimensional  variable,  4D  arrays  have  additional  degree  of  freedom  (DoF).  Due  to  the  simple  time  scheme,  time  modulated array (TMA) which is one kind of 4D antenna arrays  which has been widely studied. By attaching a high speed RF  switch  in  each  antenna  element,  TMA  can  be  employed  to  synthesize ultra-low sidelobe level (SLL) [4]. One of the most  significant property of 4D arrays is the harmonic radiations at  multiples of the pulse repetition frequency (PRF), namely, the  sideband radiation (SR). The antenna directivity is unavoidably  reduced  because  of  the  SR  [5].  However,  SR  is  not  always  redundant. Recently, many studies were reported to make use of  the SR [6-8].  

Inspired by the fact that the SR can make signal distorted in  undesired directions and distribution of SR can be controlled by  the  time  sequence  of  RF  switches,  this  paper  proposes  a  new  LPI technique by using 4D antenna arrays. By setting the time  sequences, SR can be used to hide the radar signal at undesired  direction  and  undistorted  at  desired  direction.  In  this  way, eavesdropping  can  hardly  identify  the  radar  signal  in  the  undesired direction, thus the LPI performance of radar system is  improved effectively.  

The proposed configuration of LPI radar with N elements is  shown in Fig. 1. Each transmitting element is connected with a  high  speed  RF  switch.  Each  switch  is  controlled  by  the  time  sequence control circuit. 

In this section, numerical results are provided to validate the  effectiveness of the proposed approach. Consider an 8-element  uniform linear 4D array, and the element spacing is  540)/2. Assume  that  all  of  the  elements  are  isotropic,  the  central  frequency  is  2.6GHz, and the number of active elements at each time instant  is  4.  The  triangular  LFMCW  is  selected  as  the  basic  radar  waveform.  

Based on the 4D arrays, we propose a pseudorandom time  sequence to control the RF switch on-off. In this way, signals in  undesired  directions  will  be  distorted  on  the  frequency  spectrum.  Fig.2  and  Fig.3  shows  intermediate  frequency  (IF)  time  domain  waveform  and  power  spectral  density  (PSD)  of  transmitted signals in 0°, 15°, and 30°.  

It  is  observed  that  signal  in  0°  remains  all  of  the  radar  waveform characteristics. However, signals in 15° and 30° are  distorted  spectral  density  distributions  of  signal  in  different  directions,  it  is  shown  that  power  is  dispersed  in  frequency  dimension  in  undesired  directions.  It  will  cause  eavesdropping  harder  to  identify  whether  this  signal  is  radar  signal.  The  expansion  of  Fourier  series  is  not  suitable  in  this  situation.  We  apply  the  pseudo  WVD  (PWVD)  which  is  useful  in  the  signal  processing  to  analyze the signal transmitted by 4D arrays.  

Due  to  the  requirement  to  satisfy  the  sampling  theorem,  it  will take a lot of computing resources, and it is also difficult to  calculate  the  PWVD  of  RF  signal.  Thus,  the  RF  signal  was  down-converted to the IF and was then plotted. Fig.4 shows the  PWVD  of  IF  signal  at  0°,  15°,  30°.  It  clearly  shows  that  4D  arrays provide a more excellent LPI performance for the radar  system.  It  is  also  noteworthy  to  point  out  that  when  the  switching  speed  of  RF  switch  is  improved,  the  stealth  performance will be further improved. 

A new LPI implementation approach based on 4D antenna  arrays  is  proposed,  in  which  a  new  pseudorandom  time  sequence  is  adopt  to  make  radar  signal  obscure  in  undesired  directions.  In  addition,  intermediate  frequency  time  domain  waveform, power spectral density, and the PWVD diagram of  radar  signal  at  0°,  15°  and  30°  are  presented  to  validate  the  effectiveness of proposed approach. 
