Exploring stable and economic cathodes for aqueous sodium-ion batteries, we have investigated iron-based fluorophosphate (Na2FePO4F) as a compound for applications in aqueous battery systems. Solution combustion synthesized Na2FePO4F is found to act as an efficient cathode for aqueous Na-ion batteries delivering a reversible capacity over 85 mAh g−1 (at a rate of 1 mA cm−2) with excellent rate kinetics. Further, this layered Na2FePO4F has been successfully implemented to design a full aqueous cell with NASICON-type NaTi2(PO4)3 as anode, delivering a reversible capacity of 90 mAh g−1. In conclusion, Na2FePO4F is proposed as a potential cathode material for aqueous Na-ion batteries.

The ever-growing energy consumption and global penetration of modern amenities (consumer electronics to automobiles) has led to an energy hungry world demanding terawatt scale energy production, storage and delivery.1 In parallel, the growing concern over sustainability has emphasized on renewable energy generation (e. g. solar, wind and geothermal energy generators) and efficient storage to complement and circumvent their intermittent nature. To address energy storage, suites of rechargeable battery chemistries have been developed over the last two centuries starting from low energy density lead-acid to high energy density Li-ion batteries.2 While lead-acid batteries suffer from poor cycle life and restricted specific capacity, metal hydride batteries have insufficient energy density and poor cyclability. Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have been demonstrated to store twice the energy of Ni-MH batteries, but they have raised concerns over the paucity and high cost of Li-based resources.3 Although the portable electronics and (hybrid) automobiles essentially need Li-ion batteries due to their highest gravimetric/volumetric density, the stationary micro-to-mega grid storage can be addressed by other low-cost alternatives.

One principal concern in executing large-scale grid storage batteries is the overall cost. Moving away from Li-ion batteries, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) are widely pursued as low-cost alternatives owing to the abundance/uniform geographic distribution of Na-based precursors and striking operational similarity to that of LIBs.4-6 However, usage of flammable and toxic organic electrolytes creates safety issues warranting careful handling to avoid any explosion arising from over-heating/over-charging. Further, these electrolytes have low conductivity and high cost. One simple approach to realize low cost and safe batteries is to replace the organic electrolytes by aqueous electrolytes. These aqueous batteries further offer a two-fold increase in conductivity, nontoxicity along with fast rate kinetics.7

The concept of aqueous Li-ion batteries was first introduced by Dahn et al., which was followed by testing of various Li-based oxides and polyanionic electrodes for aqueous batteries.8-16 Parallel, there have been attempts to design efficient cathode for aqueous Na-ion batteries. Following the first report on aqueous sodium-ion energy storage device using Na0.44MnO2 (Na4Mn9O18) by Whitacre et al., several other cathode materials such as Na0.24MnO2, λ-MnO2, NaVPO4F, Na3V2O2x(PO4)2F3-2x, Na2NiFe(CN)6 and Na2MnFe(CN)6 have been explored.17-24 Owing to large amounts of defects in the structure, these materials have poor capacity retention in aqueous batteries. On another note, NaTi2(PO4)3 was reported as an efficient anode for aqueous SIBs having a NASICON type framework generating large interstitial spaces for Na+ diffusion.25

An inherent limitation of aqueous batteries is the narrow potential window. As illustrated in Figure 1, high voltage battery cathode materials have potential close to oxygen evolution that can create unstable electrochemical properties in aqueous media. Thus, the choice of stable Na-based cathodes is limited, although there are reports on ultrafast high energy aqueous full cell like Na0.44MnO2 | NaTi2(PO4)3.26 Moving to polyanionic systems, various PO4-based cathodes have been employed in aqueous batteries like NaFePO4 and Na2FeP2O7.27-29 Fe-based phosphate compounds are known to be economic having thermal/ chemical stability. Herein, we report one such system, Na2FePO4F fluorophosphate, as a stable cathode for aqueous Na-ion batteries. The solution combustion synthesized layered structured Na2FePO4F works as a 3 V (vs. Na/Na+) cathode in organic electrolytes.30,31 It was found to exhibit stable redox activity in aqueous system in the voltage range of −0.9 to 0.9 V (vs. Ag/AgCl reference electrode) without any oxygen evolution or reduction reaction. Following, Na2FePO4F was implemented in a full aqueous battery cell using NaTi2(PO4)3 anode exhibiting 1 V activity. Here, we introduce Na2FePO4F fluorophosphate as a potential cathode for aqueous sodium-ion batteries for the first time.

The target Na2FePO4F fluorophosphate product was synthesized by solution combustion method. The details of combustion synthesis have been reported elsewhere.31,32 Combustion synthesis provides a quick route to develop (i) nanoscale morphology favouring fast Na+ diffusion and (ii) one-step carbon coating to enhance the electronic conductivity. Rietveld refinement confirmed the phase purity with lattice parameters: a=5.24(7) Å, b=13.84(0) Å, c=11.8(3) Å and Vol.=853.01(3) Å3. It crystallizes in an orthorhombic framework (Pbcn space group) having a layered structure consisting of [FeO4F2] octahedra and [Fe2O7F2] bioctahedra giving rise to two crystallographically distinct sites of constituent sodium species (Figure 2a). Two small impurity peaks were observed at 2θ=33° and 39° related to NaFePO4 and NaF respectively. Solution combustion method leads to an agglomerated and porous morphology of Na2FePO4F end-product. Presence of uniform carbon-coating was observed by Raman spectroscopy and transmission electron microscopy, details of which are mentioned elsewhere.31,32 NASICON- type NaTi2(PO4)3 anode was synthesized by solid-state method, crystallizing in rhombohedral structure with R-3c space group having a three-dimensional open structure with two different sites of conductor cations (Figure 2b). Rietveld refinement led to the lattice parameters: a=b=8.49 (2) Å, c=21.8(5) Å and Vol.=1362.20(8) Å3. It consists of two MO6 octahedra separated by three XO4 tetrahedra through oxygen atoms. Since there are no shared edges or faces, all the large sodium sites are interconnected.

Rietveld refinement of high resolution X-ray diffraction pattern (λ=1.5418 Å) of (a) Na2FePO4F synthesized at 600 °C in 6 h and (b) NaTi2(PO4)3 NASICON compound prepared at 800 °C for 12 h having χ2 and R(F2) values of 4.9 and 0.19 respectively. In both cases, the experimental data points (red dots), calculated diffraction pattern (black line), their difference (blue line) and the Bragg positions (green ticks) are shown. The corresponding crystal structures have been illustrated in the inset images. Representative micrographs are given in the bottom depicting the homogeneous near spherical morphology.

First, the electrochemical properties of Na2FePO4F as a cathode for aqueous SIBs were investigated with a three-electrode system. The comparisons were made in both non-aqueous (1 M NaClO4 in PC) as well as aqueous (17 m NaClO4) electrolytes. Earlier, we have reported the half-cell properties of Na2FePO4F in 0.5 M NaPF6 in PC electrolyte obtaining a reversible capacity over 100 mAh g−1.31 The stable voltage window of aqueous electrolytes is approximately 1.23 V as beyond which water splitting occurs. Thus, electrodes having their working potential in between hydrogen and oxygen evolution potential are suitable for aqueous battery systems (Figure 1). This potential range depends mainly on the pH of electrolyte. The chemical stability of materials in water is another issue, which should be taken care of before fabricating and running the cell. The electrochemical data of Na2FePO4F in organic electrolyte show it working as a 3.0 V (vs. Na/Na+) battery cathode material. This potential range lies well within the electrochemical stability window of aqueous electrolytes. So, half-cell properties of Na2FePO4F were studied in aqueous media in a voltage range of −0.9 to 0.9 V vs. Ag/AgCl reference electrode. The operating voltage window was chosen carefully to avoid any water splitting. A discharge capacity of 84 mAh g−1 was obtained at a current density of 1 mA cm−2, which is ∼70 % of the theoretical capacity (124 mAh g−1). Maintaining a coulombic efficiency of almost 100 %, no significant capacity loss was observed at the end of 100 cycles with a cell voltage of 2.9 V vs. Na/Na+ (Figure 3a). Profile of Na2FePO4F half-cell in aqueous electrolyte is similar to the behaviour observed in non-aqueous system. However, since the migration of ions in aqueous system is fast combined with lower impedance, the profile was more sloping in nature.

The two slopes can be attributed to the two different sites of Na+ present in the system. During discharge, it forms a solid solution behavior involving shrinkage in structure upon desodiation from one site, which leads to a different discharge potential for the second site. Na2FePO4F has two distinct crystallographic sites for Na (site A and site B). During discharge, when sodium from site A comes out, there is a slight distortion (shrinkage) in the framework, which makes it difficult for desodiation from site B. However, this structural change is reversible in nature. The rate capability was also tested from 0.2 mA cm−2 to 5.0 mA cm−2. Even at a fast rate of 5.0 mA cm−2, it delivered a capacity of 75 mAh g−1 (Figure 3b). This capacity value is much higher than the well-known reported cathodes for aqueous sodium-ion batteries. Na0.44MnO2 delivered a capacity of 45 mAh g−1 at C/8 rate.17 Among polyanionic based materials, Na2FeP2O7 was reported having capacity of 78 mAh g−1 at 1 C rate.28 NaVPO4F was also shown to be as active cathode material in aqueous system with a capacity of 54 mAh g−1 with poor cyclability.20 Overall, Na2FePO4F fluorophosphates stands out to be a potential cathode material for aqueous Na-ion battery with good cyclability. This again demonstrates the rapid reversible (de)intercalating ability of the material without any spatial or kinetic restrictions. The cyclic voltammetry curves of the half-cell were recorded showing two redox peaks corresponding to Fe(III)/Fe(II) redox. The cyclic voltammograms were similar to non-aqueous conditions [Figure 3b(inset)]. In addition, the stability of Na2FePO4F cathode in aqueous media can be verified by the retention of nature of (dis)charge profiles obtained. The characteristic two plateau profile is observed even after 100 cycles, which clearly indicates no side reactions hence no structural change in Na2FePO4F even after coming in contact with water. The structural stability in aqueous media along with 70 % utilization of theoretical capacity (QTH=124 mAh g−1) in the narrow voltage range marks the novelty of this work.

With the successful testing of Na2FePO4F cathode in aqueous half-cell, we attempted to implement it in full aqueous cell. The conventional carbon electrode, which has been efficiently used as anode in organic electrolytes, is not suitable for aqueous systems due to their inherent instability. Therefore, in search to find suitable anodes to fabricate aqueous full cell, various anodes have been reported like sodium manganese hexacyanomanganate, V2O5.0.6H2O, and Na2V6O16.nH2O etc.33-35 Among them, NASICON framework NaTi2(PO4)3 has been found to be an efficient anode for sodium-ion aqueous battery owing to its low Na-ion (de)intercalation potential located at the bottom end of the aqueous electrolyte window. A full aqueous sodium cell with Na2FePO4F cathode and NaTi2(PO4)3 anode was assembled with the mass ratio of Na2FePO4F:NaTi2(PO4)3=1 : 1. The potential window was optimized as 0 to 1.8 V. The Na-deficient NaTi2(PO4)3 can accommodate 2 Na+ ions per molecular unit. The overall electrochemical reaction occurring in the Na2FePO4F | NaTi2(PO4)3 full cell can be summarized as follows:

It was found to deliver a reversible capacity of 85 mAh g−1 (with respect to Na2FePO4F), ∼64 % of which was retained at the end of 100 cycles at nominal cell voltage of 0.7 V (Figure 4) with an energy density of approximately 30 Wh kg−1. Even though the cell voltage is less, the energy density thus obtained is better then othe reported polyanionic materials like Na3V2(PO4)3.36-39 The (dis)charge profile was sloping in nature. Although there is a significant difference between first and subsequent cycles, this can be attributed to formation of secondary electrolyte interface (SEI) layer formation on the surface of both cathode and anode.

Galvanostatic potential-capacity profiles (vs. NaTi2(PO4)3) of aqueous full cell comprising Na2FePO4F cathode and NaTi2(PO4)3 NASICON anode at 1 mA cm−2 at 25 °C up to 100 cycles. (Inset) Capacity retention and coulombic efficiency of full cell over the initial 100 cycles.

A comparison between aqueous and organic electrolytes was made by assembling the full cells in both conditions. Both cells were cycled at a rate of 1 mA cm−2 and a huge capacity drop was observed in case of non-aqueous cell. The aqueous full-cell delivered a discharge capacity of 84 mAh g−1 during second cycle while the non-aqueous full cell gave a discharge capacity of 33 mAh g−1 [Figure 5]. A slight voltage drop in cell potential of 0.2 V was seen in aqueous full-cell. This again corresponds to the enhanced diffusion of ions inside aqueous media.

Second (dis)charge cycle of Na2FePO4F (vs. NaTi2(PO4)3) with 17 m NaClO4 electrolyte (aqueous, red) and 1 M NaPF6 in PC(non-aqueous, blue) cycled at 1 mA cm−2 at 25 °C to mark a comparison between aqueous and organic electrolyte.

Aqueous batteries can be a suave approach in developing low cost rechargeable sodium-ion batteries for grid storage, but the key is to select proper materials working efficiently in the potential range of water splitting. This restriction on the potential range limits the capacity and choice of electrodes for aqueous electrolytes as the high voltage materials lie on the edge of the water splitting potential. We report combustion synthesized Na2FePO4F fluorophosphate as a cathode for low cost aqueous SIBs for the first time. It was found to be working well in aqueous electrolyte without any side reaction e. g. water splitting. The potential range for the half-cell was carefully optimized to −0.9 to 0.9 V vs. Ag/AgCl reference electrode. A discharge capacity of 84 mAh g−1 (QTH=124 mAh g−1) was achieved with high rate kinetics and good cycling retention in the narrow operating voltage. Further, full aqueous SIB configured with fluorophosphate Na2FePO4F cathode and NASICON-type NaTi2(PO4)3 anode was found to deliver discharge capacity of 85 mAh g−1 with cell potential of 0.7 V (vs. SHE) with an energy density of 30 Wh kg−1. Among all PO4-based cathodes, Na2FePO4F acts as robust cathode for aqueous sodium-ion batteries offering the highest redox potential. Na2FePO4F forms an economic and non-toxic cathode for aqueous batteries. On a broader note, the current work paves way for using materials based on F-chemistry (e. g. metal fluorides like FeF3, CuF3) for aqueous batteries.

The target fluorophosphate Na2FePO4F cathode was prepared by solution combustion route taking stoichiometric amount of Fe(NO3)3.9H2O (Sigma Aldrich, 99 %), NaH2PO4 (Fluka, 99 %) and NaF (Merck, 99 %) as oxidizer and C6H8O7 (SD Fine Chem., 99 %) acting as fuel and carbon source.31,32 These precursors were dissolved in water and L-ascorbic acid was added to the solution to reduce Fe(III) to Fe(II) state. The precursor solution was then heated at 140 °C with continuous magnetic stirring, triggering an exothermic combustion reaction forming dark brown coloured amorphous intermediate complex. It was then ground, pelletized and was annealed at 600 °C for 6 h inside an Ar-filled tubular furnace to obtain the final fluorophosphate product.

NaTi2(PO4)3 anode material was prepared by conventional solid-state route. Stoichiometric amount of Na2CO3 (99.7 %, Kishida Chem.), TiO2 (99 %, Sigma-Aldrich) and NH4H2PO4 (99 %, Wako Chem.) were taken in an alumina container along with 3 mm diameter zirconia balls. Wet milling was carried out in acetone media (for 400 rpm for 1 h) to prepare the precursor mixture. This mixture was ground, calcined at 350 °C for 3 h (in air) followed by annealing at 800 °C for 12 h to obtain the final NASICON product.17 To increase the electronic conductivity, acetylene black (AB) was mixed with NaTi2(PO4)3 powders by ball-milling. The carbon-coated powder was then annealed at 800 °C for 1 h in a tubular furnace maintained with an Ar+H2 atmosphere.

Powder diffraction patterns were acquired with a PANalytical X'Pert Pro diffractometer using a Cu−Kα source (λ1=1.5408 Å, λ2=1.5443 Å) operating at 40 kV/30 mA. The patterns were collected in 2θ range of 10–100° with a step size of 0.026°s−1. The morphology of the sample was observed with a field emission gun Scanning Electron Microscope (FEI Inspect F50) operating at 5–20 kV/3–4 μA.

For electrochemical characterization, the working electrode pellets were fabricated by mixing Na2FePO4F active material, acetylene carbon black and polytetrafluoroethylene (Polyflon PTFE F-104, Daikin Ltd.) binder in a weight ratio of 80 : 10 : 10. This mixture was subsequently punched into 3 mm discs (∼2-3 mg). These disc pellets were sandwiched by sheets of titanium mesh (Thank Metal Co. Ltd.). These disks were used as working electrode along with Ag-AgCl/saturated KCl (RE-6, BAS Inc.) acting as reference electrode while Zn sheet was used as counter electrode. These electrodes were merged in 17 m (=mol kg−1) NaClO4 solution acting as aqueous electrolyte. A three-electrode electrochemical setup was used to study the electrochemical behavior in half cell configuration. For full cell configuration, 2032-type coin cells were assembled using discs of Na2FePO4F cathode and NaTi2(PO4)3 anode of same weight (∼2.5 mg). 1 M NaPF6 in PC was used as non-aqueous electrolyte for full cell fabrication. Cyclic voltammetry was performed on these cells using a Versastat 3 (AMETEK Inc.) unit while the galvanostatic (dis)charge tests were carried out with a Nagano BTS 2004 W battery cycler in the voltage window of 0–1.8 V (vs. NaTi2(PO4)3) at various constant current densities at room temperature (25 °C).