A common way to improve the electrochemical performance of the NaxCoO2 thin-film cathodes is to increase their crystallinity. Here we present our study of the electrochemical performance of all-solid-state sodium ion batteries with NaxCoO2 thin-film cathodes having two different degrees of crystallinity tuned by their post-deposition annealing at 700°C. The NaxCoO2 cathode thin-films were grown by pulsed laser deposition onto a bulk Na3.4Sc0.4Zr1.6(SiO4)2(PO4) (Nasicon) solid electrolyte substrates and assembled with sodium metal into a Swagelok battery cells. Cells with the low-crystalline NaxCoO2 cathodes show discharge capacities of up to 124 mAh g−1 over 800 charge/discharged cycles. However, cells with highly crystalline NaxCoO2 cathodes revealed a significant capacity loss down to 9 mAh g−1 and a pronounced increase of the overpotential from 100 to 890 mV during the 200 cycles. The observed loss in capacity can be attributed to a strong increase of the interface resistance between the highly crystalline annealed NaxCoO2 films and Nasicon during cycling.

As model all-solid-state thin-film batteries allow good contact with a well-defined interface area between the electrode materials, they are useful to investigate correlations between the materials properties and electrochemical battery performance.1–5 In particular, the effect of annealing of the cathode materials on their electrochemical capacity can be studied using thin-film model battery systems. "Wang et al. reported on highly crystalline thin-film LiCoO2/LiPON/Li cells which showed maximum discharge rates, capacities, and cycling stability after annealing at 700°C in air. Cells with amorphous or low-crystalline (annealing at 500°C) LiCoO2 cathodes exhibited initial capacity losses in the 1st charge/discharge cycle due to a loss of "available lithium sites", whereas the following decrease of the capacity was attributed to a rise of the cell resistance, especially located at the LiPON/LiCoO2 interface. As the capacity fade and the interface resistance were dependent on the thickness and crystallinity of the cathode, it was speculated that the resistance increase results from strain-induced degradation of the cathode in an ill-defined region close to the electrolyte.6

While plenty of research was carried out on thin-film lithium ion-batteries, especially with LiPON solid electrolytes which can be sputtered at low temperatures, there are only a few studies on thin-film sodium-ion batteries.7,8 For sodium-ion batteries, it appears to be challenging to deposit a thin-film heterostructure of phase-pure cathode, solid electrolyte, and anode due to the lack of a solid electrolyte comparable to LiPON.9,10 A more convenient approach is to produce a thin-film all-solid state sodium battery by depositing cathode and/or anode thin-films onto a bulk solid-state electrolyte substrate.1

Previously we reported on polycrystalline scandium-substituted Na3.4Sc0.4Zr1.6(SiO4)2(PO4) solid electrolyte of the "Na-super-ion-conductor" Nasicon-type framework (hereinafter denoted as Nasicon), which exhibited Na-ion conductivities of 4.0 × 10−3 S cm−1 at 25°C. Later the (de-)intercalation of sodium (from) to NaxCoO2 was investigated using the planar solid state batteries with 600–800 nm thick NaxCoO2 cathode films grown on the Nasicon substrates using Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD) and magnetron sputtering.11–14 NaxCoO2 is one of the most extensively investigated layered cathode materials for Na intercalation with a reported specific capacity of up to 107 mAh g−1 in the P2-phase between 2.0 and 3.8 V and good electrochemical cyclability.15–18 NaxCoO2 is build up by sheets of edge sharing CoO6 octahedra and interstitial prismatic sites into which the sodium ions are intercalated.19–21 Occupation of these sites depends on the sodium content, resulting in phase transitions in NaxCoO2, which correlate with changes in the electrochemical potential of the battery cell.22

In this paper, we study the electrochemical performance of differently crystalline NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na thin-film batteries, with NaxCoO2 cathode deposited at 550°C and post-annealed at 700°C. The effects of interphase formation and oxygen deficiency are evaluated by XRD, XPS, Raman and impedance measurements.

Nasicon solid electrolyte powder with a composition of Na3.4Sc0.4Zr1.6(SiO4)2(PO4) was prepared as described in Ref. 13, pressed and sintered to 1.3 mm thick discs of 10 mm in diameter.

The Nasicon disks were polished on both sides to a surface RMS roughness of 25 nm with a water-based SiO2 polishing solution. After polishing, the disks were cleaned in water using an ultrasonic bath and later heated to 800°C for 1 hour in air to remove products of surface reactions of Nasicon with H2O and CO2.

Polycrystalline 700–800 nm thick NaxCoO2 films were deposited by PLD from a target with a Na to Co ratio of 3:1, synthesized from the powder mixtures of Na2CO3 (Alpha Aesar, 99.998% purity) and Co3O4 (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.99%).23 The target was ablated with a KrF excimer laser beam at a wavelength of 248 nm, a fluence of 1.2 J/cm2, and a repetition rate of 5 Hz. The films were deposited at 550°C in oxygen atmosphere at 0.01 mbar. A subsequent in-situ annealing of selected samples was carried out at 700°C in oxygen atmosphere at 400 mbar for 15 minutes. The high oxygen pressure is applied to reduce sodium losses and increase the crystal quality of the cathode thin-films.23–26

To carry out X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), the samples were measured in-situ with a PHI Versaprobe 5000 spectrometer using monochromatic Al-Kα radiation. The spectra were collected at a pass energy of 23.5 eV and an electron escape angle of 45°. The binding energies Eb were referred to the Fermi-edge position of the Ag reference sample with an uncertainty of 0.15 eV. A Shirley-type background was considered in the quantitative elemental analysis.

Produced NaxCoO2/Nasicon samples were assembled together with a metallic sodium anode into a Swagelok-type battery cell. The assembling was done in an Ar-filled glove box with residual concentrations of O2 and H2O below 0.1 ppm. Charge-discharge measurements were performed at 25°C in a climate cabinet with a VMP2 potentiometer by Bio-logic SA. The cells were cycled at current densities between 8 and 64 μA cm−² in an extended voltage window from 2.0 to 4.2 V due to the higher stability of the solid electrolyte in comparison to liquid electrolytes (2.0 to 3.8 V).14,17,27 To determine the discharge capacity of the battery, the active mass of the NaxCoO2 cathode was calculated by multiplying the cathode area (0.5 cm²) with the thickness of the NaxCoO2 thin-film and the theoretical density of NaCoO2 (5.028 g cm−3).28 All potentials are referred to the Na+/Na couple. The overpotentials were determined from the discharge curves by evaluating the initial potential drop when the discharge current was switched on. The impedance of the NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na cells was acquired at frequencies between 0.1 and 106 Hz at the equilibrium cell voltage of 2.68 V using a Zahner IM6 impedance analyzer.

Raman spectra were acquired in a back-scattering mode with a Horiba LabRam HR 800 micro Raman spectrometer at the excitation wavelength of 633 nm. Filtering of plasma emissions and laser-light reflection were realized with an interference filter and a Raman notch filter, respectively.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded with a Rigaku Smartlab diffractometer in a parallel beam geometry using Cu-Kα radiation and a secondary graphite monochromator.

Post-mortem images of the NaxCoO2 films were recorded on mechanically broken NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na samples with a Philips XL30 FEG scanning electron microscope (SEM) at 30 keV after electrochemical cycling. The SEM images were used for the analysis of the surface morphology of the NaxCoO2 films and their thickness. The latter was determined by averaging the thicknesses of the NaxCoO2 films measured at six cross-sectional SEM images.

Fig. 1a shows the specific discharge capacity of all-solid-state sodium ion batteries with moderately crystalline (non-annealed) and highly crystalline (annealed) NaxCoO2 cathodes. The initial maximum discharge capacity of the non-annealed cathode is 59 mAh g−1 at current densities of 8 μA cm−2 (C/5), and increases to a maximum value of 124 mAh g−1 within 100 cycles, which corresponds to 88% of the theoretical maximum discharge capacity of NaxCoO2 in the applied voltage range. At current densities of 16, 32 and 64 μA cm−2 the discharge capacity decreases to 102, 79 and 44 mAh g−1, respectively, which is attributed to a large internal resistances of the battery. The battery exhibits good long-term cycling performance over 800 cycles, where the discharge capacity is reduced by 8% between the 100th and 600th cycle. In contrast, the discharge capacity of the battery with the annealed cathode faded within 200 cycles from 120 to 9 mAh g−1, due to an increase of the overpotential from 100 to 890 mV, while the overpotential for the non-annealed cathode remains constant around 190 mV (Fig. 1b). An increase of the internal resistance with cycling was also observed by Wang et al., who attributed it to the cathode/solid electrolyte interface, however, this effect was predominant in amorphous or low-crystalline LiCoO2 cathodes.

With electrochemical impedance measurements, the formation of an interphase between Nasicon and the annealed NaxCoO2 cathodes (Fig. 2a) is further supported. In agreement with other publications, the high- middle- and low -frequency half-circles can be assigned to the Nasicon solid electrolyte, the Nasicon/sodium and the NaxCoO2/Nasicon interface, respectively.29–33 The initial impedance spectrum of the non-annealed cell shows accordingly a Nasicon resistance of 1.2 kΩ and a Nasicon/sodium interface resistance of 1.8 kΩ. The low-frequency half circle associated to the NaxCoO2/Nasicon interface is not fully evolved and, thus, difficult to evaluate. Within the first 100 cycles, the low- and medium-frequency half-circles merge and the total impedance increases to about 24 kΩ. While after the 100th cycle the total impedance of the battery with the non-annealed cathode (black) remains constant with cycling, the impedance in the annealed battery (red) drastically increases between the first and 200th cycle from 1.35 to 200 kΩ. The observation of the strong impedance increase and the fading discharge capacity within the first cycle indicates an immediate interphase formation. The impedance increase of the high-frequency half-circle, which is related to the Nasicon substrate from 1.15 to 4 kΩ, indicates a reduction of the ionic-conductivity during cycling, while it remains constant for the non-annealed sample. However, this increase in impedance is small as compared to the total impedance of 200 kΩ. The increase of the impedance up to 200 kΩ for the annealed cathode results in a calculated overpotential of 800 mV at the current of 4 μA, which is in agreement with the overpotential of 890 mV determined from the charge/discharge curves. The overpotential of 890 mV shrinks the effective potential window of the battery from 2.0–4.2 V to 2.9–3.3 V and, thus, drastically reduces the discharge capacity of the battery.

Previously Wang et al. related the increase of the internal resistance of the investigated LiCoO2/LiPON/Li thin-film batteries to strain-induced changes in the cathode structure due to the intercalation and deintercalation of lithium ions, which led to large cracks in the LiCoO2 cathodes.6 To rule out cracking or exfoliation effects between the Nasicon electrolyte and the NaxCoO2 thin-film cathode, cross-sectional SEM images were taken after cycling (Figs. 2b and 2c). Fig. 2b shows the microstructure of the non-annealed NaxCoO2 film with grain sizes smaller than 1 μm and no strain-induced cracking after cycling. The microstructure of the cathode appears to be similar to Li-ion cells which were annealed at 600°C1 and exhibited a stable cycling performance over 100 cycles, which is in agreement with our findings. In Fig. 2c, an enhanced crystallization of the annealed NaxCoO2 cathodes is depicted, where the microstructure is more homogenous and no evidence of cracking is observed. Although the improved crystallinity of the annealed cathodes implies an improved ion transport, the cycling performance of the cells with the annealed NaxCoO2 is worse as compared to the cells with non-annealed NaxCoO2 due to the observed interphase formation.

To further validate the evolution of an interphase during cycling, XRD measurements on both cells with the non-annealed and annealed NaxCoO2 films were carried out before cycling and on the disassembled cycled cells (Fig. 3a). All peaks marked with an asterisk belong to the Nasicon substrate and remain unchanged after deposition, annealing and cycling13 The XRD patterns of the non-annealed cathodes exhibit a low intensity (002) NaxCoO2 diffraction peak which consist of at least two overlapping peaks at 2θ = 16.16° and 16.5°. The broad peak reflects an inhomogeneous pristine sodium distribution in the NaxCoO2 cathode between 0.65 < x < 0.83.22 During cycling, the overlapping of the peak increases, leading to a higher peak intensity, which can be interpreted as homogenization of the sodium content. Different sodium contents in neighboring NaxCoO2 grains are only stable if the ionic conduction between them is restricted, otherwise equilibration would take place intrinsically. We suspect an "activation" of inactive NaxCoO2 grains due to an improved interconnection of initially isolated particles, which explains the increasing discharge capacity during the first 100 charge/discharge cycles while maintaining a constant overpotential. (Figs. 1a and 1b). Further support for this hypothesis can be found in the impedance spectra between the first and 100th cycle, where the low frequency region, which is commonly attributed to sodium diffusion limitations is changing from an open to a full half-circle.34

A higher crystallinity of the annealed NaxCoO2 films compared to the non-annealed ones, is indicated by the high-intensity (002) and (004) peaks at 2θ = 16.25 and 32.75°, respectively. The peak position corresponds to a sodium content of x = 0.71, which is in good agreement with the composition of x = 0.74 obtained from XPS (Figs. 4a and 4b). However, the annealing procedure of the NaxCoO2 films enables the formation of a crystalline interphase associated with a diffraction peak around 2θ = 13.0° during electrochemical cycling. The diffraction angle is identical to reported values of the (111) orientation of Na4SiO4 sodium silicate. The raised background between 2θ = 10 and 20° may be related to an amorphous interphase which results from a decomposition of the Nasicon substrate.

To further identify the forming interphase, Raman measurements were carried out before and after cycling (Fig. 3b). The Raman spectra of the non-annealed and annealed NaxCoO2 cathodes show the characteristic five Raman modes of the isomeric P2- NaxCoO2 phase at 191.2, 468.2, 511.1, 607.9 and 670.4 cm−1.35 Slight difference to the previously reported mode positions can be attributed to minor variations in the sodium content of the samples.36–38 The positions of the Raman peaks before and after cycling remain unchanged, showing that the NaxCoO2 cathode remains intact, independent on the deposition temperature and electrochemical cycling. However, a small peak at 413 cm−1 arises in the Raman spectra of both cells after cycling. The peak position may be explained with a reported Raman mode of Na4SiO4 at 435 cm−1, which would coincide with the findings by XRD. An unambiguous identification of the interphase is not possible due to the small number of peaks obtained from XRD and Raman measurements. However, the formation of an interphase at the NaxCoO2/Nasicon interface is strongly emphasized by the results of the electrochemical cycling and XRD measurements. The interphase causes an increase of the internal resistance of the battery and leads to the capacity fading from 120 to 9 mAh g−1.

Special attention was paid to oxygen deficiency which is known from LixCoO2-δ to have strong effects on the cycling performance. Previously, the decrease of oxygen concentration in NaxCoO2-δ from δ = 0.004 to 0.073 was reported to decrease the discharge capacity of the NaxCoO2 cathode due to the electrons arising from the formed oxygen vacancies, which partially compensate the positive charge carriers.39 To determine the NaxCoO2-δ thin-film stoichiometry, surface sensitive XPS measurements were carried out after the cathode film deposition and annealing without exposing the samples to atmosphere. The evaluation of the Na1s, Cop3/2 and O2s emissions results in a composition of Na0.92CoO1.92 after deposition and Na0.97CoO2.35 after annealing. The increase in sodium and oxygen amounts is explained by the formation of Na2O at the surface due to sodium segregation.40 Taking the Na2O amount into account, the corrected stoichiometry of Na0.86CoO1.86 and Na0.74CoO2.07 for the non-annealed and annealed cathodes, respectively, was extracted from the analysis of the Na1s spectra in Figs. 4a and 4b. The corrected compositions are in agreement with ones obtained from the results of the XRD measurements (Fig. 3a). The measured Na1s emissions are fitted with three peaks at Eb = 1070.2, 1071.4, and 1072.4 eV, where the first two Nae and Naf peaks correspond to the edge- and face-sharing sodium sites in the NaxCoO2 structure,11 respectively, and the third peak is related to Na2O.41 By annealing the NaxCoO2 cathode at 400 mbar oxygen pressure, the decreased oxygen deficiency is expected to positively influence the discharge performance of the full battery. However, even with an improved oxygen stoichiometry, the discharge capacity reduces drastically, because of the strong increase of the overpotential due to higher internal resistance of the battery (Fig. 1b), which overlays the expected positive effects.

The electrochemical performance of NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na model batteries with a medium (non-annealed) and highly crystalline (annealed) NaxCoO2 cathode was investigated with a special focus on the stability of the NaxCoO2/Nasicon interface. Thin-film all-solid state model cells with the moderately crystalline NaxCoO2 cathode, Na3.4Sc0.4Zr1.6(SiO4)2(PO4) solid state electrolyte, and sodium anode showed excellent cycling performance over 800 charge/discharge cycles with maximum discharge capacities of up to 124 mAh g−1. Annealing the cathode at 700°C for 15 minutes produced highly-crystalline NaxCoO2 which, however, resulted in an exponential fading of the capacity down to 9 mAh g−1 after 200 cycles. The performed X-ray, Raman, and impedance measurements show that the observed capacity fading is strongly related to presumably Na4SiO4 interphase formation at the NaxCoO2/Nasicon interface. The interphase increased the observed overpotential of the cell from 100 to 870 mV and, thus, strongly reduced the observed discharge capacity. Thus, in comparison to common material systems like LiCoO2/LiPON, it is not advisable to anneal the NaxCoO2 cathode to increase the battery performance.