The hot-press technique is applied to lower the sintering temperature and shorten the sintering process of Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3  (LAGP). The hot-press conditions are studied to obtain well sintered LAGP pellet with high Li ion conductivity. The highest Li  ion  conductivity  is  obtained  at  550  oC  for  30  min  at  7  MPa  and  the  values  are  3.8,  3.4  and  1.8×10-4  S  cm-1  in  bulk,  grainboundary and total conductivities, respectively. These values are comparable to reported values, however, sintering temperature  is more than 250 oC lower and holding time is more than several hours shorter than conventional sintering processes.     © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  Selection and Peer-review under responsibility of 6th International Conference on Functional Materials & Devices 2017 (ICFMD  2017). 

Li ion conductive ceramics (solid electrolytes) are of great interest for application in all-solid-state Li batteries  which possess high safety, high energy density and long life [1-4]. The solid electrolytes should have high Li ion conductivity for high performance of the all-solid-state batteries. Polycrystalline Li ion conductive ceramics have  been studied as the solid electrolyte due to ease of preparation compared with single crystal one [5-9]. The Li ion  conductivity  in  the  polycrystalline  ceramics  is  composed  of  two  components,  i.e.  bulk  conductivity  and  grain  boundary conductivity [10]. The bulk conductivity is related to the crystal structure of solid electrolyte, while the  grain boundary conductivity is influenced by sinterbility of solid electrolyte. In polycrystalline solid electrolytes, the  grain boundary  conductivity  is generally  lower  than  the bulk  conductivity.  Therefore,  increase of grain boundary  conductivity, i.e. sinterbility is a key for a development of solid electrolytes. In the preparation of solid electrolyte, a  sintering process at high temperature for long time is usually employed to improve sinterbility of solid electrolytes.  However, the long and high temperature sintering processes would cause not only impurity formation in the solid  electrolyte, but also promote undesired reactions between electrode materials and solid electrolytes when they are  co-sintered to prepare the all-solid-state batteries. Therefore, reducing sintering temperature and shortening sintering  process have been required. 

The  hot-press  sintering  that  gives  a  pressure  to  a  sample  at  high  temperature,  offers  some  advantages  over  conventional methods currying out under atmospheric pressure, i.e. lowering sintering temperature and shortening  sintering time [11-13]. For example, Sakamoto et al. obtained dense Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZ) solid electrolyte by hotpressing at 1000 oC for 1 h under 40 MPa pressure [14] while conventional sintering was performed at 1230 oC for  36 h under atmospheric pressure [15]. 

In this paper, the hot-press sintering is applied to sinter Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) solid electrolyte. The LAGP  solid electrolyte with NASICON (Na Super Ion Conductive) structure is a promising solid electrolyte as it offers  high Li ion conductivity and wide electrochemical window [16-18]. By the hot-press sintering, LAGP powder can be  sintered to a pellet form at 550 oC for 30 min, which is more than 250 oC lower and several hours shorter than those  in the conventional sintering. The Li ion conductivity of the pellet is 3.8, 3.4 and 1.8 × 10-4 S cm-1 in bulk, grain  boundary and total, respectively. 

Crystallized LAGP was prepared through crystallization of LAGP glass made by the melt-quenching method using  Li2CO3, Al2O3, GeO2 and NH4H2PO4 [19]. All chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. 10% excess Li2CO3  was added to compensate Li evaporation in following heating processes. The chemicals were weighed, mixed and  ball-milled with ethyl alcohol in a ball milling machine at a low speed for 24 h. The obtained slurry was dried at 80  oC. The milled powder was heated at 380 oC in an alumina crucible for 2 h in order to remove volatile components  such as ammonia, moisture carbon dioxide and so on. Then, the powder was ground again using an agate mortar and  pestle. The powder was heated to 1350 oC in a platinum crucible for 2 h to be melted. The melt was poured onto a  stainless steel plate that was preheated at 500 oC. After solidification, the cast glass sheets were annealed at 500 oC  for 2 h to release thermal stresses and then cooled down to room temperature naturally. The obtained glass sheets  were finally crystallized at 800 oC for 8 h in air with heating rate of 3 oC/min. The crystallized LAGP was crushed  by an agate mortar and pestle to obtain crystallized LAGP powder. 

The LAGP powder was loaded into a graphite die in 20 mm of internal diameter. The die was placed in a hot-press  machine  (MRF3852,  United  States).  The  hot-press  was  performed  at  450    550  oC  for  6    90  min  in  argon  atmosphere  with  a  heating  and  cooling  rate  of  10  °C/min.  The  pressure  (7  or  20  MPa)  was  loaded  after  sample  temperature reached to 450  550 oC.     

The crystal structure of the obtained pellet was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Shimadzu 6000) with Cu  Kα  radiation  (λ  =  1.5418  Å).  A  cross-section  of  the  hot-pressed  pellet  was  observed  using  scanning  electron  microscope (SEM, JEOL-6010 PLUS/LV) operated at 15 kV. The sample was gold sputtered to avoid any charge  effect.  The  Li  ion  conductivities  of  the  obtained  pellets  were  evaluated  by  AC-impedance  measurements.  The  impedance measurements were carried out in the frequency range from 1 MHz to 10 Hz using a Solartron 1247  impedance analyzer at 30 °C. The both surfaces of the pellets were sputtered with Au to prepare Li ion blocking  electrodes.  Cross-over  test  of  the  pellet  was  carried  out  in  a  glass  cell  with  two  compartments  [20].  The  both  compartments were filled with LP40 electrolyte, and separated by LAGP pellet hot-pressed at 550 oC for 30 min at  7MPa.  20  mM  ferrocene  (Fe(C5H5)2)  was  dissolved  into  one  compartment  (ferrocene  side)  to  be  used  as  active  species. Concentration of ferrocene in another compartment (LP 40 side) was detected electrochemically by cyclic  voltammetry (CV) so that cross-over of ferrocene could be determined. The glass cell was constructed, filled with  the  electrolyte  and  left  for  48  h  for  aging.  Then,  CV  was  respectively  measured  in  both  compartments  using  a  Solartron 1247 potentiostat in a scan range of 2.8 ~ 3.8 V vs. Li+/Li at a scan rate of 100 mV s-1. 

Fig. 1(a) shows photos of LAGP hot-pressed at 550 oC for 1h under 7 MPa. After the hot-press, pellet color changed  into black from original white due probably to Li loss of LAGP. This is supported by the fact that the color change  was suppressed by addition of LiNO3 (Fig. 1b~d). Melting point of LiNO3 is 261  oC, which is lower than that of  Li2CO3 (723 oC). During hot-pressing, LiNO3 is thought to be melted and be spread into whole sample. Fig. 1(b~d)  exhibit photos of hot-pressed LAGP added with various amounts of LiNO3. In 10 mol% LiNO3 addition, the color of  pellet was partially white, indicating that amount of the excess Li was not enough to compensate Li loss during the  hot-press. Contrary, white pellet was obtained by addition of 15 and 30 mol% LiNO3. The cross-section morphology  of  the  pellets  was  hardly  influenced  by  the  LiNO3  addition.  In  all  cases,  the  pellet  was  sintered  well  and  pore  formation was not observed. XRD patterns of hot-pressed LAGP in addition of various amounts of LiNO3 showed  that LAGP with NASICON structure was assigned to a main phase and small amount of GeO2 and Li9Al3(P2O7)3  was also observed in all samples. The Li9Al3(P2O7)3 peak tends to become stronger with increase of LiNO3 addition.  Fig.  2  shows  complex  impedance  plots  of  hot-pressed  LAGP  with  15  and  30  mol%  LiNO3  addition.  In  both  impedance  profiles,  a  semicircle  and  a  tail  were  observed  at  high  and  low  frequency  ranges,  respectively.  This  characteristic profile of the impedance plot often appears in ceramics with ion conductive nature [2, 18, 21]. The tail  can  be  attributed  to  the  Warburg  type  impedance,  which  relates  to  the  diffusion  of  Li  ion  in  the  Au  blocking  electrode. The intercepts of the semicircle at high and low frequency sides can be assigned to bulk and total (bulk +  grain  boundary)  resistances,  respectively  [22].  The  bulk,  grain  boundary  and  total  conductivities  are  revealed  in  table 1. The bulk conductivity of both samples were almost same, however, the grain boundary conductivity was  largely different. The sample with 15 mol% LiNO3 was higher grain boundary conductivities than that of 30 mol%.  This  difference  would  be  because  excess  LiNO3  existed  at  the  grain  boundary  and  it  might  inhibit  the  Li  ion conduction. It is concluded that the best amount of LiNO3 addition was 15 mol%. Therefore, LAGP powder added  15 mol% LiNO3 was used for the hot-pressing in further study. 

In terms of energy consumption and production cost, the hot-press temperature should be decreased to as low as  possible. The hot-press of LAGP was performed at 450, 500 and 550  oC for 1 h at 7 MPa. A cross-section of the  obtained LAGP pellet was observed by SEM (Fig. 3). Some particles were seen clearly in the cross-section of the  pellets hot-pressed at 450 and 500 oC, indicating sintering was not sufficient. This evidenced that these pellets were  very brittle and broken easily during handling them. Contrary, the sample hot-pressed at 550 oC was sintered well. It  can be concluded that the lowest temperature to obtain sintered LAGP pellet is 550 oC. 

To examine the influence of hot-press pressure on sintering of LAGP, hot-press sintering was performed at 550 oC  for 1 h at 7 and 20 MPa. In XRD patterns, most of peaks could be assigned to LAGP with NASICON structure in  both samples. Li9Al3(P2O7)3 formation was also confirmed to be independent of hot-press pressure. A peak at 2θ =  26.9o appeared only in the sample at 20 MPa. However, this peak could not be assigned. By SEM images it was  confirmed  that  both  samples  were  sintered  well.  The  hot-press  pressure  did  not  influence  the  cross  section  morphology of the LAGP pellet. Contrary, impedance plots of the samples exhibited a large difference (Fig. 4). The  sample at 20 MPa showed a larger semicircle, implying lower grain boundary conductivity. Moreover, the intercept  at high frequency side has larger value than that at 7 MPa hot-pressing. This indicated the bulk conductivity of the  sample hot-pressed at 20 MPa was also lower than that at 7 MPa. The bulk, grain boundary and total conductivities  are shown in table 1. All conductivities were higher in the sample at 7 MPa pressing. It is concluded that the high  hot-press pressure could cause undesired reaction, which lead to a formation of low conductive phases as unknown  peak in the XRD pattern was observed. 

An  influence  of  holding  time  on  Li  ion  conductivity  of  hot-pressed  LAGP  was  examined.  Fig.  5  depicts  XRD  patterns of LAGP hot-pressed at 550 oC at 7 MPa for 6, 12, 30, 60 and 90 min. LAGP with NASICON structure was  a main phase in all diffraction patterns and small amount of GeO2 was also observed. The patterns at a range of 2θ =  10  24o were enlarged in Fig. 5(b). Li9Al3(P2O7)3 peak at 2θ = 13.1o was not observed in the holding time of 6 min.  The Li9Al3(P2O7)3 peak appeared in 12 min sintering and the peak intensity became more prominent with increase of  holding time. Moreover, AlPO4 peak also appeared at 2θ = 13.8o when the holding time was 90 min. Long holding  time  would  promote  impurity  formation.  Cross-sectional  SEM  images  of  LAGP  hot-pressed  in  various  holding  times are displayed in Fig. 6. In the holding time of 6 min, LAGP particles could be observed clearly, indicating the  sintering was not enough due to short holding time. When the holding time lengthened to 12 min, LAGP particles  were  sintered  each  other,  however,  some  voids  were  still  existed.  The  voids  disappeared  in  30  min  sintering,  although small amounts of LAGP grains were still observed. In 60 min holding, the particles sintered each other and  original  particles  were  hardly  observed.  The  cross-section  morphology  did  not  change  in  further  increase  of  the  holding time. Complex impedance plots of LAGP hot-pressed in various holding times are shown in Fig. 7. In 6 min  sintering, obtained pellet was too brittle to be supplied for the impedance measurement. All plots demonstrated a  semicircle and a tail, although size and starting point of the semicircle were different. The bulk, grain boundary and  total  conductivities  are  summarized  in  table  1.  The  bulk  conductivity  monotonically  decreased  with  increase  of holding  time.  This  would  be  related  to  Li9Al3(P2O7)3  formation.  As  can  be  seen  in  XRD  patterns  (Fig.  5),  Li9Al3(P2O7)3 peak became more prominent with increase of the holding time. Li9Al3(P2O7)3 would cause deviation  of composition from original LAGP. Therefore, the bulk conductivity decreased with increase of the holding time,  i.e. amount of Li9Al3(P2O7)3. Contrary, the grain boundary conductivity increased with the holding time, reached the  maximum value at 60 min (3.75  10-4 S cm-1) and then dropped. In the cross-sectional SEM images, sinterbility of  LAGP pellet became better with prolongation of holding time. This reduced density of grain boundary and enhanced  the grain boundary conductivity. In the holding time of 90 min, AlPO4 formation was confirmed. This would be a  reason for lowering the grain boundary conductivity. As a result, the highest total conductivity (1.80  10-4 S cm-1)  was obtained when the holding time was 30 min. This value was comparable to reported values [22-27]. It is noted  that the grain boundary conductivity (3.78  10-4 S cm-1) was almost same to the bulk one (3.43  10-4 S cm-1).  

Fig. 8 reveals cyclic voltammograms obtained from the cross-over test of LAGP pellet hot-pressed at 550 oC for  30 min at 7 MPa. In the ferrocene side, a pair of redox peaks of ferrocene could be seen clearly around at 3.3 V vs.  Li+/Li. Contrary, no peak was observed in the LP 40 side, indicating that cross-over of ferrocene through the LAGP  pellet did not occur and thus no micro-holes existed in the hot-pressed LAGP pellet. 

In  order  to  reduce  sintering  temperature  and  shorten  sintering  process  of  LAGP,  the  hot-press  technique  was  applied. LAGP was not sintered well at 450 and 500 oC. The well-sintered LAGP was obtained at 550 oC. When too  high pressure was applied, the Li ion conductivity of LAGP was decreased, indicating that optimum pressure for the  sintering  existed.  The  bulk  Li  ion  conductivity  decreased  monotonically  with  prolongation  of  holding  time.  Contrary, the grain boundary conductivity showed maximum value at 60 min of holding time. This would relate to  enhancement of sinterbility and impurity formation. The highest Li ion conductivity was obtained at 550 oC for 30  min at 7 MPa and the values were 3.8, 3.4 and 1.8 × 10-4 S cm-1 in bulk, grain-boundary and total conductivities,  respectively. The sintering temperature was more than 250 oC lower and holding time was more than several hours  shorter than conventional sintering processes performed under atmospheric pressure. The hot-pressed LAGP pellet  could block penetration of liquid due to absence of micro-holes inside. The sintered LAGP also would be possible to be used as a Li ion conductive membrane for Li-air batteries as well as the solid electrolyte for the all-solid-state  battery. 
