Series  of  Na3V2(PO4)3/C  composites  were  synthesized  through  the  self-catalysed  sol–gel  route  followed  by  subsequent  optimization of calcination process. Changes on the nanoparticle morphologies and electrochemical behaviour corresponding to  the  different  decomposition  temperature  (calcined  at  800  °C,  850  °C,  900  °C  and  950  °C)  were  evidently  discovered.  XRD  diffraction results indicated similar peak patterns reflected by each series which were well-indexed to the R-3c space group under  the  rhombohedral  NASICON  structure.  Driven  by  elevated  calcination  temperature,  significant  impact  on  single  phase  crystallinity  and  nanoparticle  morphologies  nature  of  the  Na3V2(PO4)3/C  were  compared  among  each  composite.  This  phenomenon creates a pertinent effect towards discharged capacity profiles and cyclic performance abilities. Under optimum heat  treatment parameters, Na3V2(PO4)3/C composite electrode exhibited two potential plateaus at 3.4 V and 1.5-1.6 V (vs Na+/Na)  with  specific  capacities  of  111   115  mA  h  g-1  under  moderate  cyclic  performance.  This  preliminary  result  indicate  that  calcination parameters highly induced the Na3V2(PO4)3/C electrode performance for sodium ion batteries.          © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  Selection and/or Peer-review under responsibility of Biomedical and Advanced Materials (Biocam 2017). 

Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) technology have undergone tremendous growth and reached maturity over the past  decade. Development of higher energy and power density have made LIBs as the main energy storage source for the  mobile  electronic  devices,  electric  vehicles  (EVs)  and  hybrid  electric  vehicles  (HEVs)  applications  [1,2].  The  3-)  framework  has  been  identified  as  the  most  promising  cathode  materials  due  to  its  phosphate  polyanion  (PO4 excellent electrochemical performance and thermal stability properties which enhances safety characteristic of LIBs. 

The LiMPo4 (M = Fe, Co, Mn) species with ordered olivine-type structure have been chosen as promising cathode  materials  over  other  conventional  Li-electrodes  such  as  LiCoO2,  LiNiO2  and  LiMn2O4 which  suffers  from  safety  issues  [3-7].  In  this  regard,  monoclinic  structured  of  Li3V2(PO4)3 has  also  received  enormous  attention  due  to  its  higher  operating  voltage,  excellent  lithium-ion  mobility,  larger  specific  capacity  and  thermally  stable  framework  [8,9,10]. 

However, massive productions of LIBs in the forthcoming applications will lead to higher Li-precursor cost due  to the depletion of Li-raw-materials reserves. Sodium (Na) on the other hand is abundantly available in the earth.  Na-ion also demonstrates equivalent ionic diffusion, standard potential and intercalation chemistries analogue to the  Li-ion electrochemical behaviour [11]. Developmental effort for high voltage Na-ion batteries to achieve reasonable  energy density would greatly reduce the batteries manufacturing cost, enabling for low cost and large-grid energy  storage system applications [12,13]. Its ability to operate under low intrinsic operation voltage and electrochemically  cyclic in cheaper water based electrolytes also merits it as an alternative option for green Na-ion batteries [14]. 

The ionic radii of Na-ion are considerably larger than that of Li-ion and this present a challenge to the researchers  to  explore  for  more  open  structured  cathode  materials  that  could  accommodate  Na-ions  during  electrochemical  intercalations.  Thus,  layered-sodium–transition-metal-oxides  (NaMo2;  M=transition  metal)  have  been  widely  investigated as cathode materials for Na-ion batteries [15–17].  

In spite of sufficient reversible capacity obtained, this cathode material suffers from poor cyclic performance and  low  thermal  stability  [18].  In  contrast,  the  sodium-transition-metal-phosphates  NaM(Po4)3  can  guarantee  both  dynamic and thermal stability to meet the safety performance needs, via strong P-O bonds constructed in the threedimensional  solid  framework  [19,20].  The  excellent  performances  proven  by  the  NASICON  (sodium  super  ion  conductor)-related compound of Li-systems such as Li3V2(PO4)3 [21,22] and Li2NaV2(PO4)3 [23], had inspire the  investigation towards development of high capacitive Na3V2(PO4)3 cathode electrode for Na-ion batteries.  

Theoretically,  substitution  of  Li-ions  by  Na-ions  in  the  3D-metal-phosphate  framework  could  facilitate  a  convenient diffusion channel for large Na-ion radii, where two-thirds of the Na+ ions can reversibly intercalates to  generate a theoretical capacity of 117.6 mAh g-1[24]. However reasonable discharge capacity and cycling stability  still could not be achieved due to the low intrinsic electronic conductivity and slow kinetic diffusion of Na-ion.  

Extensive  studies  exhibited  that  synthesis  of  nano-structured,  carbon  coating  and  polyanions  doping  [25]  are  feasible methods to improve the electrochemical performance of Na3V2(PO4)3 but most neglect to study the effects  of calcination temperature. In this study we determine the preliminary effects of different calcination temperatures  on the particles morphologies, single phase crystallinity and discharge capacity which significantly improved the Na  storage performance.  

Analytical  pure  grade  of  raw  materials  was  used  directly  to  synthesis  the  starting  mixture  of  Na3V2(PO4)3/C  composites without any purification process. Sol-gel method and modified calcination process were implemented  during this routine. In this manuscript the Na3V2(PO4)3/C composites will be referred as NVP/C.    2.1 Synthesis of Na3V2(PO4)3/C at various calcination temperature.   

Stoichiometric  ratio  of  Na2CO3,  V2O5,  and  NH4H2PO4  precursor  were  dissolved  in  an  appropriate  amount  of  distilled water under continuous stirring at room temperature to synthesize 0.01 mol of NVP starting mixture. The  starting mixture was then diffused into citric acid solution based on 1:2.7 molar ratio of NVP:C6H8O7 until a crystal  clear yellow solution observed.  

Citric acid (C6H8O7) was employed both as chelating and reduction agent to reduce the V5+ ions to V3+ and also as  a conductive carbon source. This solution was constantly stirred at 80 °C until dark green gel obtained, followed by  drying at 120 °C  overnight to form a solid NVP precursor.   

This precursor was then ground, pressed into tablet and pre-calcined at 400 °C for 4 hours under flow of argon  (Ar2)  atmosphere,  followed  by  full  calcination  at  various  temperature  of  800  °C,  850  °C,  900  °C  and  950  °C,  respectively under the same gas environment for 12 hours using a tube furnace to produce NVP/C composite cathode  material.   

The  thermogravimetric  analysis  TGA/DSC  of  the  NVP  precursor  was  conducted  using  Metler  Toledo  821e  thermo-analyzer under two different gas flow of argon Ar2 and nitrogen N2. The analysis was performed in the range  of room temperature to 920 °C at the heating rate of 5 °C min-1 to respectively determine the thermogravimetric  profile of the precursor under different atmosphere. The X-ray Diffraction (XRD) analysis was carried out to study  the crystallographic structure and phase of NVP/C by using Bruker D8 diffractometer with Cu K radiation in the 2θ  range of 10°-90° at a scan rate of 3°/min. LEO 1525 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) was employed to study  the physical morphology of the NVP/C composites under series of calcined parameters. 

The electrode was fabricated by blending NVP/C powder at 85 wt.% with poly-vinylidenefluoride (PVDF) binder  at  15  wt.%  into  an  appropriate  amount  of  N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone  solution  (NMP).  Since  NVP/C  composites  composed of self-synthesized carbon, additional conductive carbon was not added for the purpose of this study as to  benchmark the absolute performances driven by pristine precursor by different calcination temperatures. The slurry  was then coated on an Al foil and dried in a vacuum oven at 120 °C for 4 hours. The electrode was then punched out  into 15 mm diameter coin-size with average active material loading of 8 mg. Na metal coin was used as the counter  anode.  Both  electrodes were assembled  into  2032  coin cell  type  and  the  Celgard 2400  membrane  was  used  as  a  separator.  1-mol  L-1  NaPF6  dissolved  in  ethylene  carbonate:  dimethyl  carbonate  (1:1  v/v  ratio)  was  used  as  the  electrolyte. 

WonAtech  battery  testing  system  was  used  to  determine  the  electrochemical  behaviour  of  NVP/C  cells.  Reversible capacity at the reduction and oxidation plateaus of the cathode were tested in the potential range of 1.0 V  to 4.0 V under 0.1C scan rates. Initially, before each galvanostatic charge-discharge, the cell was discharged to 1.0V  at a current rate of 0.05 C. All C-rates used in this study was calculated based on the theoretical capacity of NVP/C.  

During  the  sol-gel  process,  a  self-catalysed  reaction  occurred  accompanied  by  the  emission  of  gases.  Theoretically,  the  water  molecule  is  expected  to  initiate  a  partial  hydrolysis  on  NH4H2PO4  to  produce  H+  at  the  initial stirring stage of the precursor mixture. Simultaneously, the resultant H+ will react with the Na2CO3 to release  CO2 and H2O and caused further activations of NH4H2PO4 to obtain the NVP/C after prolong calcination of the NVP  precursor.  

Upon continuous stirring and heating slow evaporation spontaneously transform the liquid precursor into solidified  NVP gel as shown in Fig. 1.    

Fig. 2 shows the TGA-DTA curve of the NVP/C precursor, measured in the temperature range of 26 °C to 920  °C. The heating rate is set to mimic the tube furnace ramping rate, in pursuance to thermo-gravimetrically simulate  and  design  the  most  optimum  calcination  temperature  confinement  to  obtained  highly  crystalline  NVP/C  single  phase structure under Ar2 and N2 atmosphere correspondingly.  

A sharp endothermic peak is observed in between 100 °C and 200 °C which is mainly induced by the evaporation of water (H2O), carbon dioxide (Co2) and ammonia (NH3) from the precursor.  

The  endothermic  effect  in  between  300  °C  and  600  °C  can  be  described  by  a  two  reaction  with  glucose  decompositions occurring in between 300 °C and 400 °C, subsequently followed by the reduction of vanadium from  V(V) to V(III) in between 500 °C and 600 °C. Despite of the endothermic activities, a sharp exothermic growth can  be seen in between 600 °C and 700 °C, which indicates a staging recovery to the formation of the NVP/C phase.  

The flat TG (blue) curve exhibited beyond 800 °C indicates the maturity of the entire reaction to produce single  phase NVP/C. 5% of carbon content was evaluated to be produce by using this method which could be favorable to  improve the conductivity of the electrode conductivity. 

Comparison of crystallographic XRD peak patterns for NVP/C calcined at various temperature ranges is shown  in Fig. 3. It can be seen that, the starting precursor shows diffraction peaks corresponding to the amorphous state,  while the calcined samples exhibited identical crystalline peaks which were well indexed to the R-3c space group  under  the  rhombohedral  NASICON  structure.  However,  there  are  presence  peaks  of  contaminates  for  samples  calcined  at  800  °C  and  850  °C.  Theoretically,  in  case  of  similar  indexed  patterns  obtained  envisage  that  higher  calcination temperature at 950°C does not affect the rhombohedral NASICON crystal structure except for voltage  polarization  effect  which has  to  be  further investigated.  Sharp  and higher  intensity  peaks reflected from  samples  calcined  at  900  °C  and  950  °C  indicated  that  high  crystalline  single  phase  powder  were  produced.  Meanwhile,  calcination  at  800  °C  and  850  °C  showed  weak  intensities  and  broad  diffractions  with  some  contaminant  peaks  indicating incomplete reactions occurring during heat treatment of the precursors occur in amorphous structure or  present in low content.                                     

Evidently, the peak intensity increases as the temperature increases, indicating that higher calcination temperature  at  900  °C  and  950  °C  are  more  favourable  for  synthesizing  higher  purity  single  phase  NVP/C  cathode  material.  Although  carbon  source  was  incorporated,  no  diffraction  peak  of  carbon  was  detected  under  this  resolution.  However  elemental  analysis  result  by  EDX  shows  the  presence  of  carbon  element  as  shown  in  Fig.  5,  which  suggests that carbon may The influences of various calcination temperatures on the particle sizes and morphological  changes  of  pristine  NVP  and  calcined  NVP/C  samples  extracted  from  the  SEM  images  are  given  in  Fig.  4.  The  images, indicate well and identical distribution growth of NVP/C particles with size ranging from 100 to 300 nm.  Respectively,  significant  textural  comparison  is  clearly  observed  depend  on  the  calcination  temperature  applied.  Samples calcined at elevated temperatures of 800 °C, 850 °C and 900 °C seem to promote porous particle structure.  Contradictly,  at  higher  temperatures  of  950  °C  and  1000  °C  irregular  shaped  particles  agglomerate  into  broader  particles sized distribution and tend to reduce effective surface area.      

In order to investigate the effect of elevated temperatures on the electrochemical performances, each sample was  tested  for  cyclic  charge-discharge  within  the  potentials  range  of  1.0  V  to  4.0  V  at  0.1C  rate.  Fig.  6(a)  and  6(b)  showed  that  sample  synthesized  at  900  °C  exhibited  the  longest  charge-discharge  plateaus  and  the  most  stable  capacity retention upon twenty cycles of charge-discharge routine. Two discharge plateaus can be observed at 3.4 V  and  1.6  V  due  to  the  two-phase  redox  couple  reactions.  Reduction  plateaus  at  3.4  V  is  close  to  the  equilibrium  voltage  of  V4+/V3+  redox  couple,  indicating  sufficient  Na+  insertion  along  the  pathways  of  [V2(PO4)3]3 and  PO4  tetrahedron interlink framework during reversible discharging. Subsequently, reduction plateaus at 1.6 V indicates  similar insertion phenomenon which is close to the equilibrium voltage of V3+/V2+ redox couple.  

Fig. 7 shows the detail discharge capacities comparison for samples synthesized at 800 °C, 850 °C, 900 °C and  950 °C during (a) first cycle (b) fifth cycle (c) tenth cycle and (d) twenty cycle. Taking into account the total mass  weight of the cathode materials, the initial capacities for each sample synthesized at 800 °C, 850 °C, 900 °C and 950  °C were recorded at 102 mAh g-1, 107 mAh g-1, 111 mAh g-1 and 115 mAh g-1 respectively. Sample synthesized at  950 °C presents the highest discharged capacity, however poor reversibility was observed after prolong cycles. It  can clearly be seen that samples synthesized at 800 °C, 850 °C, and 900 °C exhibits almost identical voltage profile  during  discharging,  except  for  specific  capacity  values  which  increases  slightly  with  calcination  at  higher  temperature. In contrast, sample synthesized at 950 °C exhibits a unique extended voltage plateau in the low voltage  region  at  1.6  V.  Higher  redox  couple  activities  at  1.6  V  indicates  a  potential  possibility  to  be  used  as  anodic  materials for NIBs with excellent cyclability.  

At 20th cycle of charging and discharging, the discharge capacities were observed to fade to 96 mAh g-1, 99 mAh  g-1,  105  mAh  g-1  and  87  mAh  g-1  with  the  discharge  capacity  retention  rates  of  94%,  93%,  95%  and  76%,  respectively. It is important to point out that, in spite of the decline in discharged capacity retention after consequent  cycles, parallel discharged plateau patterns still remain in shape indicating that intercalations of Na+ in this system  did not deteriorate the crystal structure stability. The capacity fading may result from the construction of the solid  electrolyte  interfacial  (SEI)  on  the  cathode  surface  which  was  form  in  the  initial  cycle,  which  hinders  the  Na+  diffusivity  during  extraction and  insertion activities.  In  this  series  the sample  synthesized  at 900°C  exhibited  the  highest  reversibility  performance  attributed  to  its  higher  single-phase  crystallinity,  well  distributed  particles  and  surface morphology.      

In  summary,  by  introducing  the  optimum  calcination  temperature  and  atmosphere  we  have  synthesized  the  rombohedral  NASICON  structured  of  Na3V2(PO4)3/C  which  exhibited  excellent  discharging  performance  at  111  mAh g-1 with 95% capacity retention ratio. Simulated thermo-gravimetric patterns were used to predict the structure  of well formation of the electrode for NIBs. Physical measurement using XRD and SEM indicates highly crystalline  and well distributed particles NVP/C powder was successfully synthesized by a pH-controlled sol-gel method with  subsequent calcination at 900 °C under Ar2 gas flow. It should be noted that although higher calcination temperature  than 900 °C may initiated high discharge capacity, it can attribute to the loss of capacity retention. We believe by  further  altering  the  materials  structure  and  surface  chemistry  of  Na3V2(PO4)3/C  will  synergistically  improve  its  electrochemical storage abilities.
