In  order  to  prepare  a  suitable  oxide  based  solid  electrolyte  for  Li+  ion  batteries,  Li+  NASICON  LATP  nanocrystallites [LiAl0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3] have been externally dispersed in fast ionic oxide glassy system, viz, 60[Li2SO4]40[Li2O-P2O5]. To prepare this novel composite, milling assisted synthesis route was adopted in which ionic glass and  LATP  were  separately  ball  milled,  subsequently  mixed  and  pelletized.  The  present  work  reports  that  even  for  a  very  small  amount  of  LATP  (1  wt%)  in  the  mixture,  the  conductivity  exhibits  a  significant  enhancement.  Structural  and  electrical properties of the composite with a typical composition of 1%(LATP)-99%(60LSLP) have been reported. X-ray  diffraction confirmed that milling leads to reduction in the size of both the glass grains and the LATP crystallites. These  novel composites have been found to be potential candidates for all solid-state battery applications.  

Lithium ion conducting solid electrolytes, particularly Li+ ion oxide glasses have attracted much attention in view  of their application in Li+ ion solid state batteries1. Nevertheless, their direct application at ambient temperatures as  an electrolyte is limited mainly because of poor ionic conductivity. However, there are some advantages in oxide  systems. Unlike highly conducting sulfides, these can be synthesized without inert conditions in a wide composition  range. A significant enhancement in ionic conductivity may lead to their immense applications, particularly in the  low  dimensional  and  high  temperature  ionic  devices.  Although  there  have  been  attempts  to  enhance  the  ionic  conductivity of these glasses mainly by using mixed glass formers, increasing salt content and dispersion of ceramic  nanoparticles (e.g. CdO and ZnO) to enhance free volume2, yet device application is still restricted as conductivity  could only be increased slightly.  

Conversely, Li+ NASICON, namely LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) and analogues (LATP etc) have been of growing interest  for last three decades because of high in-grain conductivity of 10-4 Ω-1 cm-1 at room temperature due to their unique  structure.  However,  possible  use  as  a  solid  electrolyte  in  all  solid-state  battery  is  precluded  due  to  high  grain  boundary impedance (GBI)3 which lowers the conductivity to 10-6-10-7 Ω-1cm-1. On the other hand, glass-ceramics,  preferably  the  ones  with  embedded  fast  ionic  crystallites  is  also  another  category  of  materials  that  may  have  potential  applications  in  ionic  devices.  Precipitation  of  NASICON  crystallites  in  oxide  glasses  has  been  a  novel  technique to prepare dense NASICON based glass-ceramics. Likewise, various groups tried to precipitate these Li+  NASICONs in the oxide glass matrix by high temperature treatment4. Besides, there has been an attempt to enhance  ionic conductivity by adding Lithium compounds (e.g. LiNO3). Sintering at appropriate temperatures leads to ionic  enhancement5. But it has been realized that the key challenge that still prevails in development of Li+ NASICON  based glass ceramics is the use of high temperature treatment. Furthermore, there is no control over shape and size  of the precipitated crystallites. 

In the present work, we propose a novel route where the nanograins of Li+ NASICON, LiAl0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP)  and fast ionic Li+ ion glasses i.e. (Li2SO4)x-(LiPO3)100-x  for x=60 mol%, abbreviated as 60LSLP are mixed together  to make a composite. In this work, we have externally dispersed LATP nano grains in nano flakes of 60LSLP glassceramics so as to increase the ionic conductivity of the novel composite. Thus, preliminary interesting results have  been reported. 

For present investigation, a well known Li+ ion oxide glass of composition (Li2SO4)x-(LiPO3)100-x, where x=60  mol%  was  prepared  by  conventional  roller  quenching  technique6.  The  Li+  ion  NASICON,  i.e.  LiAl0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3  (named as LATP) was prepared using standard solid-state reaction route as described elsewhere3,7. Both the 60LSLP  glass and LATP were ball milled separately in an agate pot of size 80ml with agate balls of diameter 5 mm for 18h  at a speed of 400 rpm in acetone medium using Fritsch Pulverisette-6 planetary ball mill7. The mixture was dried  and  then  pelletized  in  a  composition  of  1%(LATP)-99%(60LSLP)  (in  wt%).  The  pellet  was  deliberately  not  subjected  to  any  heat  treatment  to  avoid  crystallization.  The  LATP  and  60LSLP  pellets  prepared  in  similar  conditions have been abbreviated as LATP-18h and 60LSLP-18h respectively. 

The  samples  were  characterized  using  Rigaku  Miniflex  II  powder  diffractometer  to  study  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD). Field emission type scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) was carried out using FEI-Apreo-S to study the  surface  morphology.  The  steady  state  electrical  conductivity  measurements  (50-125°C)  were  performed  using  computer interface HIOKI impedance analyzer model IM3570. 

Figure. 1(a) shows XRD patterns of (i) pristine LATP, (ii) LATP-18h, (iii) 60LSLP-18h and (iv) the composite  1%(LATP)-99%(60LSLP).  As  evident,  peaks  of  LATP  are  seen  to  reduce  significantly  after  18h  of  milling.  According to the Debye Scherrer’s formula, the grain size of the obtained powder, i. e. of LATP-18h, is calculated  to be ~ 35 nm. On the other hand, when 60LSLP glass is milled for 18h, Li2SO4 crystallites (size ~ 15-20 nm) are  seen to be precipitated in the glassy phase, though in a small amount. This precipitation is not unexpected as the  60LSLP glass composition lies at the boundary of the solubility limit. XRD results do suggest that milling leads to  glass-ceramic formation. In the case of 1%(LATP)-99%(60LSLP), precipitation of Li2SO4 crystallites in the LATP  dispersed glassceramic is evident. The major peaks corresponding to LATP crystallites are not visible possibly due  to their small amount (~ 1 wt%). However, it may also be noticed that LATP and 60 LSLP glass do not chemically  react to form a new compound. 

Figure. 1(b) shows FESEM images of fractured surfaces of 1%(LATP)-99%(60LSLP) pellet. As visible, nano  grains  of  glass-ceramics  are  seen  with  an  appreciable  homogeneity.  It  is  possibly  because  milling  is  ensuring  uniformity of the crystallites/glassy flakes in both size and shape.  

At the outset, the steady state conductivity vs frequency (σ-ω) behavior of 60LSLP-18h (milled glass) is shown  in Figure. 2(a). As apparent, two well separated plateau regions are visible. Since this glass contains some amount of  precipitated Li2SO4, it actually behaves like a glass-ceramic. Thus, low frequency plateau may be attributed to grain  boundary conductivity, whereas the one at high frequency to the bulk (glass) conductivity. Interestingly, addition of  LATP in a small amount increases the grain boundary (σGB) as well as the bulk (σb) conductivities of the glassceramic.  As  may  be  seen  for  the  composite  1%(LATP)-99%(60LSLP)-18h  (Figure.  2(b)),  the  two  values  of  conductivity also increase monotonically with temperature.    

From the high frequency plateau region, the bulk conductivity is obtained and plotted with temperature in Figure.  3(a). The bulk (σb) conductivity vs temperature isotherm is plotted in Figure. 3(a) for 60LSLP-18h and 1%(LATP)99%(60LSLP).  Conductivity  evidently  shows  an  Arrhenius  behavior.  It  may  be  noticed  that  the  composite,  1%(LATP)-99%(60LSLP) exhibits almost an order of rise in conductivity in comparison to that of the milled glass.  The reason of such a significant rise needs further investigations. Moreover, the activation energy for 1%(LATP)99%(60LSLP)-18h was found to be 0.47 eV which is relatively lower in comparison to 60LSLP-18h (0.63 eV). 

The temperature dependence of grain boundary conductivity (σGB) is plotted in Figure. 3(b) for 60LSLP-18h and  1%(LATP)-99%(60LSLP). Temperature dependence of σGB is also linear, similar to that of a glass-ceramic. The  grain boundary conductivity is also seen to be exhibiting a significant enhancement almost by an order of magnitude  in comparison to the milled glass. The activation energy for 1%(LATP)-99%(60LSLP) is found to be close to ~0.50  eV  which  is  slightly  lower  as  compared  to  60LSLP-18h  (0.65  eV).  The  mechanism  of  σGB  rise  further  needs  exploration. However, it may be suggested that the superionic crystallites possibly occupy places viz. (i) between  Li2SO4 / ceramic grains and (ii) within the glassy phase of the glass-ceramic. Thus, these crystallites play a major  role in the conductivity enhancement.  

Some preliminary investigations on the novel glass-ceramic revealed the following interesting results:  1. 

There  is  a  significant  rise  in  both  bulk  and  grain-boundary  conductivity  in  the  composite  1%(LATP)99%(60LSLP). Besides, the grain boundary conductivity of the glass ceramic in particular is found to be  appreciably higher than 60LSLP-18h. This in turn suggest that the superionic LATP grains embedded in  the glass-ceramic play a significant role. 

XRD  confirms  that  milling  of  60LSLP  glass  for  18h  degrades  the  glass  resulting  in  the  formation  of  a  glass-ceramic. In addition, as observed in 1%(LATP)-99%(60LSLP) composite, there is no formation of  any new compound in the glass-ceramic.  Efforts are on to optimize compositions and to understand the mechanism of electrical transport 
