Na+  ion  based  hybrid  solid  polymer  electrolyte  with  high  ionic  conductivity  and  appreciable  electrochemical stability has been reported. Addition of nano NASICON ceramic fillers [NaTi2(PO4)3] in  polymer  electrolyte matrix leads to significant ionic conductivity enhancement. These composites have been prepared in wide  composition  range  and  exhibit  thermal  stability  at  least  upto  100oC  for  compositions  with  large  amount  of  NASICONs. A maximum ionic conductivity of  31) 3 × 10-5 Ω-1cm-1 is obtained at 40oC for a typical composition  10NaCF3SO390[0.7NTP0.3PEO]. The hybrid polymer composites are potential candidates for Na+ ion based solidstate battery applications. 

In  the  last  few  decades,  sodium  ion  based  solid  polymers  electrolytes  (SPEs)  have  received  a  significant  attention  because  of  huge  abundance,  low  cost  as  well  as  their  potential  application  in  solid-state  electrochemical  devices,  grid  energy  storage  system,  and  as  an  alternative  to  Li+  ion  based  polymer  electrolytes1,2. Since, the ionic conductivity of Na+ ion based systems at ambient temperature is relatively poor,  their device application could not be realized so far. Several approaches such as addition of insulating fillers  (e.g. Al2O3, TiO2, SiO2), introduction of various ionic liquids, incorporation of plasticizers (e.g. PEG, PMMA)  etc. have been adopted to enhance the room temperature ionic conductivity of SPEs, particularly Na+ ion SPEs.  Addition of insulating nanoparticles to polymer matrix leads to notable conductivity rise, however, conductivity  is still limited due to constraints of size and amount of the dispersoid3. To achieve adequate conductivity, as an  alternative  approach,  fast  ion  conducting  fillers  have  been  used.  Recently,  some  interesting  works  on  hybrid  polymer electrolytes have been carried out using fast ionic conducting nanoparticles as a fillers that exhibited a  significant improvement in the ionic conductivity5,6. For example, dispersion of lithium aluminum germanium  phosphate (LAGP) in PEO at various ratios enhanced the ionic conductivity and also improved other properties  e.g. Li+ ion transference number, electrochemical and mechanical stability4. As an attempt to enhance the ionic  transport  in  SPEs,  the  present  work  discusses  synthesis  and  characterization  of  a  novel  hybrid  polymer  electrolyte containing large amount of Na+  ion NASICON (NaTi2(PO4)3 known as NTP) nanocrystallites. The  term ‘hybrid electrolyte’ is particularly used for these composites as they have been prepared from inorganic  (NTP) and organic (PEO) precursors, both in substantial amount.   

Firstly, Na+ ion NASICON superionic particles (NaTi2(PO4)3) were prepared successfully by solid state reaction  route  as  describe  elsewhere5.  These  submicron  crystallites  were  further  milled  using  a  planetary  ball  mill  (Fritsch-P6) using agate pot and balls in acetone media for 18 h with ball to powder mass ratio of 5:1. Finally  fine nanoparticles of size  31) 30 nm were obtained and subsequently used as fillers in the polymer matrix.  On the other hand sodium Iodide (NaI) was dried at 150oC for 1 h to remove moisture content. Appropriate  amount  of  PEO  (  Alfa  Aesar;  MW  300000)  and  NaI  (wt  %)  were  dissolved  separately  in  acetonitrile.  After  stirring for  6 h,  the resultant fluids were blend together for another  6 h. The nanocomposite hybrid polymer electrolytes  of  the  composition  10NaCF3SO390[NTPxPEO1-x]  where  x  =  0,  0.4  and  0.7  were  prepared  by  dispersion of fine NASICON nano particles into the NaCF3SO3 blend polymer solution and stirred for another  12 h. The obtained thick slurry was casted on PTFE Teflon dish and dried for about a day. The resultant free  standing films were obtained that were again hot pressed at 70oC to obtain non porous smooth surface, as well  as to eliminate any residual acetonitrile. The obtain freestanding films were used for further characterization.  For x = 0.7, it was not possible to obtain freestanding films due to large content of NASICON particles, thus  pellets were prepared by applying one ton/cm2 pressure in an stainless steel die.   The  structural  information  of  the  hybrid  SPE  was  obtained  using  XRD  (Rigaku  Miniflex  II).  Differential  scanning  calorimetry  (DSC)  was  performed  using  Schimadzu  TA  60  from  room  temperature  to  100oC  at  a  scanning rate of 10oC/min.  The samples with x = 0, 0.4 and 0.7 were abbreviated as 0NTP, 40NTP and 70NTP,  respectively.     The  polymer films were cut into disk shape  using  a  puncher of 10mm die. Obtained films were sandwiched  between  two  stainless  steel  electrodes  and  the  cell  SS/SPE/SS  was  used  for  electrical  characterization.  Impedance spectroscopy was used to obtained dc conductivity using impedance analyzer Hioki  IM 3570  in a  frequency range of 4 Hz – 5MHz.   

As evident in the XRD patterns, the characteristic peaks of PEO are prominently seen (Figure.1a) for pristine  PEO film. Salt addition apparently reduces the peak height due to creation of disorder in the polymer matrix. As  evident,  salt  is  completely  dissolved  in  the  PEO  matrix  (Figure.  1b).  Interestingly,  addition  of  NTP  nanocrystallites leads to further amorphization. With increasing NTP content, PEO peaks appear less prominent  and completely disappear for large NTP content in the matrix (Fig. 1d). The XRD patterns also suggest that  NTP nanocrystallites do not react with the host polymer or salt to form any new phase. Nevertheless, the PEO  peaks  do  exhibit  a  significant  shift  with  NTP  addition  that  may  be  attributed  to  stress  in  the  PEO  chains,  possibly arise due to nanoparticle addition.  Although the hybrid 70 NTP contains relatively lesser amount of PEO and in disordered state, it is likely that the  chains occupy space between the NTP grains. 

The DSC patterns for pristine PEO, 0 NTP, 40 NTP and 70 NTP are shown in Figure. 2. As apparently seen,  area under the characteristics PEO peaks decreases that in turn suggests gradually decreasing crystallinity in the  SPEs. Interestingly, 70 NTP does not show any significant melting event. Thus, PEO in this sample possibly lies  in completely disorder state. The XRD and DSC results are in congruence with each other.    

The dc conductivity for the SPEs was obtained from frequency dependence of ac conductivity. Figure. 3(a) and  (b), corresponds to σ-ω plots for 0 NTP and sample with highest NTP content i.e. 70 NTP. Interestingly 0 NTP  shows a typical Jonscher Power Law (JPL) behavior where a plateau region is seen followed by dispersion of  conductivity at higher frequencies. The low frequency drop in the conductivity may be attributed to interfacial  polarization.  In  case  of  70  NTP,  almost  similar  trend  is  noticed  except  a  relatively  wide  plateau  region.  Polarization at low frequency is evident in this case as well that suggests predominant ionic transport. Relatively  wide  frequency plateau possibly suggests  an uninterrupted long-range diffusive  motion of mobile ions in the  polymer  matrix.  This  further  suggests  that  the  long  range  electrical  transport  may  also  be  due  to  pathways  provided by NTP crystallites. From the plateau regions, the dc conductivity of the samples was obtained and  plotted in Figure. 4(a).  

As apparent for 0 NTP an Arrhenius behavior is evident at least upto a temperature below the melting point of  the polymer. For low NTP content, conductivity shows an unusual rise as shown in Figure. 4(a) that could be  due  to  melting  of  the  polymer.  Interestingly,  in  case  of  70  NTP,  no  significant  deviation  in  conductivity  is  observed and Arrhenius-like behavior is seen in a wide temperature range. The sample is cooled from 80oC to  room temperature and second heating cycle is again performed that was found to be nearly reproducible.  Inset of Fig. 4(a), shows picture of a pellet of 70 NTP hybrid SPE. It is important to note that the shape of the  pellet  does  not  change  much  even  after  repeated  cycles  from  room  temperature  to  100oC.  A  typical  room  temperature conductivity of 3 × 10-5 Ω-1cm-1 at 40  oC was obtained that is indeed encouraging in view of the  available literature on Na+ based SPEs.       

Linear Sweep Voltammetry (LSV): Linear  sweep  voltammetry  the  configuration  of  SS/sample/SS is shown in Fig. 5. In case of 0 NTP,  the unusual rise in the current is initiated nearly at   31) 2.5 V whereas the same is seen at a little higher  voltage  of   31)  3V  in  case  of  40  NTP  and  70  NTP  hybrid  composites.  A  cell  of  the  type  Na/  sample  /Na using non-blocking electrodes would give more  insights about the electrochemical stability window.    

Linear sweep voltammetry in the configuration of SS/sample/SS is shown in Figure. 4(b). In case of 0NTP, the  unusual rise in the current is initiated nearly at ~ 2.5V. Whereas the same is seen at a little higher voltage of ~  3V in  case of 40NTP and 70NTP hybrid composites.  A cell of the type Na/ sample/ Na using non-blocking  electrodes would give more insights about the electrochemical stability window. 

a)  A  novel  hybrid  polymer  composite  containing  Na+  ion  NASICON  (NTP)  nanoparticles  reveals interesting results. Conductivity enhances significantly with NTP addition. 

b)  A  maximum  conductivity  of  3  ×  10-5  Ω-1cm-1  is  achieved  for  hybrid  sample  with  a  composition  of 10NaCF3SO390[0.7NTP0.3PEO]. 

c)  The hybrid samples exhibit improved electrochemical stability. More investigations are in progress to understand stability window using reversible electrodes. 

d)  This sample appears promising for Na+ ion high energy density applications. Efforts are on to measure Na+ ion transport number for these composites. 
