Polymer-mineral composite solid electrolytes have been prepared by hot pressing using lithium ion-exchanged bentonite (LIEB) and mineral derived LATSP (Li1.2Al0.1Ti1.9Si0.1P2.9O12) NASICON materials as solid electrolyte fillers in the polyethylene oxide (PEO) polymer containing LiTFSI salt. The mineral based solid electrolyte fillers not only increase ionic conductivity but also improve thermal stability. The highest ionic conductivities in the PEOLIEB and PEO-LATSP composites were found to be 9.4 117)10-5 and 3.1 117)10-4 S·cm-1 at 40°C, respectively. The flexible, thermal stable and mechanical sturdy polymer-mineral composite solid electrolyte films can be used in the all-solid-state batteries.

Inorganic ceramic solid electrolytes can overcome the concerns on safety, reliability, operation temperature, capacity loss and cycle life issues related to liquid organic electrolytes used in conventional lithium ion batteries [1-7]. However, the poor interfacial contact between the inorganic ceramic solid electrolytes and electrodes affects performance of all-solid-state batteries using inorganic ceramic solid electrolytes [8-12]. Soft polymer electrolytes can decrease the electrode-electrolyte interface resistance but polymers have low thermal stability and mechanical strength [13-16].

To combine the advantages of inorganic ceramic solid electrolytes and polymer solid electrolytes, polymer-ceramic composite solid electrolytes have been investigated with promising results [17-21]. For example, polymer-garnet composite solid electrolytes show good lithium ionic conductivity and mechanical strength [17, 18]. Similar results are also observed in the polymer-NASICON composite solid electrolytes [19-21].

Bentonite is a naturally abundant aluminosilicate mineral with good ion exchange capacity due to its sheet structure [22]. Lithium ions can be exchanged into the bentonite structure to enhance lithium ionic conductivity. Natural aluminosilicate kaolin clay mineral has been used as a starting material to synthesize ceramic NASICON solid electrolyte [23]. In this study, low cost minerals of lithium ion-exchanged natural bentonite and kaolin derived ceramic NASICON solid electrolyte are incorporated into the polymer matrix to form flexible composite solid electrolyte films. The impact of these  mineral  derived  solid  electrolyte  fillers  on  the  ionic  conductivity  and  thermal  stability of the polymer-mineral composite solid electrolytes is discussed in this paper. 

Lithium  ion  exchanged  bentonite  was  prepared  by  activating  a  calcium  bentonite (Imerys) with Li2CO3 (Alfa Aesar, ACS, 99.0% min) using a lab extruder with  9 mm opening. After processed through extruder twice, the extruded material was then  aged for 3 hours in a sealed bag before drying in the oven. The dried material was milled  in  a  hammer  mill  to  reduce  the  particle  size. Lithium  contents  in  the  samples  were  measured by inductively coupled plasma (ICP) using four acid total digestion method. 

Mineral  derived  NASICON  ceramic  solid  electrolyte  Li1.2Al0.1Ti1.9Si0.1P2.9O12 (LATSP) was  prepared  by  solid-state  reactions  from  appropriate  amounts  of  the  stoichiometric  starting  materials  of  Li2CO3  (Alfa  Aesar,  ACS,  99.0%  min),  TiO2 (ACROS, 98+%), NH4H2PO4 (ACROS, 99.9%) and kaolin (Imerys). Exact mole ratios of  the reactants were mixed thoroughly in an agate mortar and calcined at 1100°C for 20  hours. The NASICON crystal structure and ionic conductivity were investigated in the  previous study [23]. Ionic conductivity of LATSP at room temperature (21°C) was about  8.3 117)10-5 S·cm-1. 

The  polymer-mineral  composite  solid  electrolytes  were  prepared  by  mixing  lithium ion exchanged bentonite or  kaolin derived Li1.2Al0.1Ti1.9Si0.1P2.9O12 with lithium  bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide  (LiTFSI,  Sigma-Aldrich,  99.95%)  in  acetonitrile  (ACS grade, 99.5%, Sigma-Aldrich). Polyethylene oxide (PEO, Sigma-Aldrich, average  Mw = 4 117)106) was then added to form a homogenous solution. Molar ratio of ethylene  oxide (EO) in PEO and Li in LiTFSI (EO:Li ratio) was kept at 15:1. After drying for 3  hours, the polymer gel was pressed into around 0.3 mm thick films using a Carver bench  top press heated around 60°C. The pressed films were then dried in a vacuum oven at  55°C and cut into the size suitable for ionic conductivity measurement. 

Ionic  conductivities  were  measured  by  an  AC  complex  impedance  technique  using  a  BioLogic  SP-300 frequency analyzer with  an  electrochemical  interface  at  frequencies  from  1  Hz  to  7 MHz. Polymer-mineral  composite  films  were  individually  sandwiched between platinum disks and pressed between Inconel flanges. Two ceramic  disks were placed on top of the platinum disks to create a sample assembly. The sample  assembly was then placed in a sealed Thermolyne 21100 tube furnace. A thermocouple  was inserted  in  the  tube  furnace  near  the  sample  assembly to  monitor temperature. During  the  measurement,  high  purity  argon  circulated  through  the  furnace  chamber.  Impedance  measurements  were  taken  at  temperatures  ranging  from  20°C  to  40°C. Thermal  stability  of  the  polymer-mineral  composite  solid  electrolytes  was studied  by  thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) in argon on a Netzsch STA 449 C Jupiter Thermomicrobalance at a heating rate of 10°C/min.

Table 1 confirms that lithium content significantly increases after lithium ions  are  exchanged  into  the  bentonite.  Particle  size  is  also  significantly  reduced  after  ionexchange due to the extrusion process and hammer milling. Due to the high resistivity,  reliable ionic conductivity data cannot be obtained for the bentonite samples. 

Figure 1 shows the typical Nyquist impedance plots for the PEO-lithium ionexchanged bentonite composites. A semicircle and an inclined spike are observed at high  and  low  frequencies,  respectively.  The  measured  impedance  data  are  fitted  with  an  equivalent circuit with L1 (inductance) and R1 (resistance) from the measurement system,  Q1 (constant phase element) and R2 (resistance) from the solid electrolyte sample, and Q2 (constant  phase  element)  from  the  blocking  Pt  electrodes.  

Ionic conductivity of the  composite solid electrolyte samples is calculated based on the fitted sample resistance R2. The impedance spectra at higher temperature have a much smaller semicircle at higher  frequencies which indicates much lower resistance. 

Arrhenius  plots  of  ionic  conductivity  of  the  PEO-lithium  ion-exchanged  bentonite composite and PEO-mineral derived LATSP composite samples are shown in  Figure  2. The calculated preexponential  factor  and  activation  energy  are  listed  in  Table  2.  Figure  2  indicates  that addition  of  lithium  ion-exchanged  bentonite  into  the  PEO  polymer  matrix  initially  (at  5%)  does  not  improve  the  ionic  conductivity.  Ionic  conductivity  then  increases  with  further  increase  of  lithium  ion-exchanged  bentonite  in  the  polymer.  The  increased  lithium  ionic  conductivity  is  due  to  the  negatively  charged  bentonite  particles  [25-27] which promote lithium salt dissociation in the PEO polymer. Ionic conductivity reaches  maximum  at  15%  lithium  ion-exchanged  bentonite  due  to  the  decrease  of  activation  energy  (Table 2).  The highest ionic conductivity  is about 1.0 117)10-5 S·cm-1 at 20°C and  9.4 117)10-5  S·cm-1  at  40°C. Further  increase  of  lithium  ion-exchanged  bentonite  content  does not improve ionic conductivity.  

Similar  to  the  PEO-lithium  ion  exchanged  bentonite  composites,  addition  of  kaolin  derived  LATSP  (Li1.2Al0.1Ti1.9Si0.1P2.9O12)  NASICON  ceramic  solid  electrolyte  into PEO matrix also improves lithium ionic conductivity (Figure 2). Ionic conductivity  reaches  maximum  at  5%  LATSP  due  to  the  lower  activation  energy  (Table  2).  The  highest ionic conductivity is about 2.7 117)10-5 S·cm-1 at 20°C and 3.1 117)10-4 S·cm-1 at 40°C.  Further  increase  of  kaolin  derived  LATSP  content  does  not  further  improve  ionic  conductivity.  Compared  to  the  PEO-lithium  ion-exchanged  bentonite  composites,  the  PEO-kaolin derived LATSP composites have higher ionic conductivity. This is due to the  high  ionic  conductivity  of  kaolin  derived  LATSP  ceramic  solid  electrolyte  [23].  The  active  filler  of  LATSP  probably  participates  in  the  ionic  conduction  process  in  the polymer matrix. A similar effect of enhanced ionic conductivity is also observed in the  LATP (Li1+xAlxTi2-xP3O12) NASICON ceramic solid electrolyte and polymer composites  [19-21].

Figure  3  shows  thermogravimetric  analysis  on  the  PEO-mineral  composite  samples. The weight loss at 370–470°C is due to thermal degradation of decomposition  of  PEO  and  LiTFSI.  Addition  of  kaolin  derived  ceramic  LATSP  and  lithium  ion  exchanged  bentonite  (LIEB)  into  the  PEO  polymer  significantly  reduces  total  weight  loss. The derivative plot shows that the peak at 440°C in PEO sample disappears in the  PEO-LIEB and PEO-LATSP composite samples. This indicates that the mineral derived  solid electrolyte fillers probably decelerate weight loss caused by thermal degradation of  decomposition. 

Polymer-mineral  composite  solid  electrolyte  films  can  be  prepared  by  hot  pressing  using  low  cost  lithium  ion-exchanged  bentonite  (LIEB)  and  kaolin  derived  ceramic Li1.2Al0.1Ti1.9Si0.1P2.9O12 (LATSP) NASICON materials as solid electrolyte fillers  in  the  PEO  polymer. Incorporation  of  these  mineral  derived  solid  electrolytes  into  the  PEO  polymer  matrix  not  only  increases  ionic  conductivity  but  also  improves  thermal  stability  of  the  composite  solid  electrolyte  films.  The  PEO-kaolin  derived  LATSP  composites have higher ionic conductivity than the PEO-lithium ion-exchanged bentonite  composites  due  to  the high  ionic  conductivity  of  kaolin  derived  LATSP  ceramic  solid  electrolyte. 
