All-solid-state sodium batteries are attractive due to the abundance of sodium and advantageous for safe battery operation by avoiding flammable organics and liquids and suppressed dendrite formation. Currently, the lack of a chemically stable sodium solid electrolyte with high ion conductivity at room temperature is one of the challenges for future development of sodium batteries. Herein, we present a NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na thin-film model sodium solid-state battery using a Sc-substituted Nasicon solid electrolyte with a high ionic conductivity of 4 × 10−3 S cm−1. The battery shows a high specific capacity of 150 mAh g−1 at room-temperature and discharge rates of up to 6C. Excellent chemical stability of this solid electrolyte at high voltages of up to 4.2 V increases the accessible sodium (de)intercalation range and battery capacity. Direct extraction of the interface resistances between the electrode materials of the thin-film model cell using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy gives a unique opportunity of correlation the electrochemical performance with properties of electrode materials and their interfaces.

The ongoing development of rechargeable Li-ion batteries for electromobility and large-scale energy storage has risen questions about the limits of lithium availability. Recently Na-ion based batteries have drawn attention due to large sodium resources and their low extraction costs [1]. Realization of cost-effective and safe sodium-ion batteries for room-temperature operation, having good thermal, chemical, and mechanical stability, would be beneficial for large-scale electrochemical energy storage [2,3]. Currently Li- or Na-ion solid-state batteries are of great interest due to their improved safety in operation within a large temperature range and their potentially higher gravimetric and volumetric energy densities as compared to their counterparts with liquid electrolyte [4,5]. The solid electrolyte acts simultaneously as a separator and ion conductor and thus allows avoiding bulk polarization, “cross-talk” between the electrodes and, eventually, dendrite formation [6].

A “Na-super-ion-conductor” Nasicon-type framework as a solid electrolyte for Na-ion batteries was originally suggested in 1976 by Hong and Goodenough and later extensively studied for its structural stability and fast three-dimensional ion conductivity [7]. A Sc-substituted Nasicon-type electrolyte with the chemical composition of Na3.4Sc0.4Zr1.6(SiO4)2(PO4) (hereinafter denoted as Nasicon) exhibits an ionic conductivity as high as 4 × 10−3 S cm−1 at 25 °C. The interface resistance of the Nasicon in contact with metallic sodium, measured with electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), is as low as 365 Ωcm2. Moreover, no chemical reaction of the Nasicon with metallic sodium within a voltage range up to 6 V was reported [8]. Up to now, this superior solid electrolyte could not be tested in a full cell arrangement due to high interfacial resistances between positive electrodes and solid electrolyte.

NaxCoO2 is the most extensively investigated layered cathode material for Na intercalation with a reported specific capacity of up to 162 mAh g−1 and good electrochemical cyclability [5,[9], [10], [11]]. NaxCoO2 undergoes various phase transitions between the O3, O′3, and P′3 isomeric phases due to gliding of the CoO2 sheets within the unit cell, whereas the P2 phase is stable in the electrochemical potential window between 2.0 and 4.0 V [12]. This voltage range corresponds to a sodium content between x = 0.95 and 0.35 with a maximum specific capacity of 146 mAh g−1. The cells with NaxCoO2 are commonly not charged to potentials higher than 3.8 V due to observed side reactions [10,13]. Growth of NaxCoO2 thin films using various physical vapor deposition [14,15] as well as chemical methods has been reported [16,17]. The NaxCoO2 films grown by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) show phase purity, a high degree of sodium content and phase control [14]. NaxCoO2/Nasicon interface studies with x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) show no extensive reaction layer formation when NaxCoO2 is sputtered onto Nasicon [18]. Recently, the electronic structure of the NaxCoO2 cathode has been analyzed at various states of charge with in-operando XPS investigations by electrochemical deintercalation of the cathode [19]. Correlation of the electrochemical performance of the battery with the crystal and electronic structure of the NaxCoO2 cathode material and clean cathode/solid electrolyte (e.g. NaxCoO2/Nasicon) interface allows clear insight into the fundamental properties of battery materials and their interfaces [19].

The internal resistance of Li- or Na-ion batteries includes contributions from the bulk cathode, anode, electrolyte, and the interfaces between them. In bulk all-solid-state batteries, the resistance is strongly affected by properties of the interfacial contact between the used materials. A possible reaction of the electrolyte with the electrode materials may lead to the formation of ionically insulating phases which can be investigated during electrochemical cycling only if a good mechanical contact is ensured [4,6,20]. In order to improve the contact and minimize the interface resistances, unconventional operation conditions of the solid-state batteries, e.g. high pressure and temperature, are typically considered, which may influence the interface chemistry [[21], [22], [23], [24]].

To quantify and separate the interface resistance between the electrodes and electrolyte from other contributions to the internal resistance, EIS is a common method applied on batteries. However, for commonly used composite electrode materials, quantification of different contributions with EIS is rather uncertain because of the unknown active interface area. A detailed discrimination between various contributions to the internal resistance can be done based on investigations of a model solid-state battery in which a polished flat bulk solid electrolyte is covered with a non-porous thin-film cathode [25].

Here we present an all-solid-state model battery NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na, which was cycled at room temperature and without external pressure. The presented results of a battery with O3-Phase NaxCoO2 thin film cathode show a significantly higher capacity than other thin cathode films tested with P2-phase. The used planar geometry with a thin-film NaxCoO2 cathode grown by PLD results in a well-defined surface area and allows accurate quantification of contributions to the total internal resistance of the battery from the anode, cathode, and solid electrolyte using EIS. The used growth parameters suppress the (00l) texture of the NaxCoO2 film and reduce the NaxCoO2/Nasicon interface resistance resulting in a good cycling performance of the battery with a charge/discharge rate up to 6C after 100 electrochemical cycles.

All-solid-state sodium batteries were fabricated using a thin-film NaxCoO2 cathode deposited by PLD on top of a Nasicon solid-electrolyte substrate. A Na metal foil attached on the back side of the substrate was used as an anode. In order to produce Nasicon solid electrolyte substrates, the Nasicon powder was prepared as described elsewhere [8], pressed into 2 mm thick circular pellets of 10 mm in diameter, and sintered at 1260 °C for 5 h.

In order to produce the operating batteries, the Nasicon pellets were wet polished using a SiO2-based dispersion, cleaned in acetone with an ultrasonic bath for 10 min, and annealed in ambient air at 800 °C for 1 h to remove residuals from the polishing procedure. The produced Nasicon substrates were smooth with a root-mean-square surface (RMS) roughness below 25 nm. Batteries produced with the unpolished Nasicon substrates showed very poor electrochemical cycling presumably due to the rough Nasicon surface (a RMS roughness of approximately 5 μm) which results in poor contacts to the electrodes, and possible degradation of the Nasicon surface due to an influence of air moisture. Dry polishing of the Nasicon substrates with abrasive media such as fine-grained sandpaper or diamond paste (sometimes combined with ethanol as a lubricant) still resulted in a rather rough surface (a RMS surface roughness of about 1 μm). As a consequence, the batteries produced using dry-polished Nasicon substrates also showed only poor electrochemical cycling.

NaxCoO2 thin-films were deposited using PLD in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) chamber (base pressure of 1 × 10−8 mbar). In order to compensate for losses of volatile Na during the film growth, we used a Na-rich PLD target which was prepared using solid-state synthesis as follows. At first, a mixture of Co3O4 (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.99%) and Na2CO3 (Alpha Aesar, 99.998%) powders was calcined at 820 °C to form Na0.7CoO2. Then the obtained Na0.7CoO2 powder was enriched with Na by admixing Na2CO3. Finally, the Na-rich powder was pressed into a pellet and sintered at 880 °C for 60 h to obtain the PLD target with a Co:Na ratio of 1:3 [14].

The PLD target was ablated with a KrF (248 nm) excimer laser fluence of 1.2 J/cm2 and a pulse repetition rate of 5 Hz. Around 780 nm ± 40 nm thick NaxCoO2 films were deposited on the Nasicon substrates in pure oxygen atmosphere at a pressure of 0.01 mbar. During the NaxCoO2 growth, a Nasicon substrate temperature was maintained using a diode laser with a wavelength of 940 nm, focused on the back side of the Nasicon substrate. A substrate temperature of 400–500 °C was used to grow the isomeric P2-phase of NaxCoO2. A lower substrate temperature of approximately 300 °C was favorable to obtain the NaxCoO2 O3-phase. The deposition was performed through a round aperture of a stainless steel shadow mask, resulting in a NaxCoO2 cathode area of 0.5 cm2.

For electrochemical testing, the Nasicon solid electrolyte with the deposited NaxCoO2 thin-film cathode was assembled with a pressed metallic sodium anode into a Swagelok cell inside an Argon filled glove box (<0.1 ppm of O2 and H2O). Ten Swagelok cells with P2-NaxCoO2 and O3-NaxCoO2 were fabricated and tested electrochemically. Charge and discharge measurements were carried out at 25 °C with current densities between 8 and 320 μA cm−2 corresponding to ∼0.15 – 6C in the voltage range from 2.0 to 4.2 V using a VMP2 potentiostat by BioLogic SA. A cycling rate of 1C corresponds to the full discharge of the maximum capacity of 29 μAh in one hour. Due to the small total mass of 0.2 mg of the NaxCoO2 cathode, the discharge capacity in mAh g−1 was calculated from the volume (film area × thickness = 0.5 cm2 × 780) and the maximum density of 5.028 g cm−3 for fully sodiated NaCoO2 [26]. The NaxCoO2 thickness was determined with an uncertainty of ±5% from the post-mortem cross sectional images of the cell after electrochemical cycling, obtained using scanning electron microscope (SEM).

The impedance of the NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na cells was acquired at frequencies between 0.1 and 106 Hz at the equilibrium cell voltage of 2.68 V using a Zahner IM6 impedance analyzer. Moreover, in order to reveal the contribution of NaxCoO2 to the impedance of the NaxCoO2/Nasicon interface, symmetric Na/Nasicon/Na cells with metallic sodium pressed on the opposite sides of the Nasicon substrate were fabricated and their impedance was measured in the same frequency range. In the preparation of the Na/Nasicon/Na cells, the Nasicon solid electrolyte substrate was subjected to the same temperature and atmospheric conditions as used during the deposition of the NaxCoO2 film using PLD.

In order to characterize the chemical stability of Nasicon against sodium, the formation of the Nasicon/Na interface was investigated using a surface science approach by stepwise growth of sodium on the Nasicon substrates alternating with XPS measurements. Prior to the interface experiment, the Nasicon substrate was heated to 550 °C in the UHV chamber with the base pressure of 10−8 mbar to reduce the surface contamination by atmospheric hydrocarbons. Afterwards the substrate was stepwise exposed to sodium vapor from a dispenser by SAES Getters. The exposure time started from 30 s and was doubled for every subsequent step up to 32 min. After every step, the sample was transferred to the XPS chamber under UHV.

Cross-sectional energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS) mapping of the NaxCoO2/Nasicon interface was carried out with JEOL JIB 4600F Multibeam, combining a scanning electron microscope (SEM) and focused ion beam (FIB). For surface protection, a platinum film was deposited prior to cutting the sample with a gallium-ion beam. The EDS-mapping was carried out with 15 kV acceleration voltage, resulting in a lateral spread of about 1 μm.

XPS measurements were performed using a VersaProbe 5000 spectrometer by Physical Electronics with a monochromatic Al Kα source at a takeoff angle of 45°. The measurements were performed in a fixed analyzer transition mode with a pass energy of 23.5 eV and step size of 0.1 eV. In order to compensate for the surface charge due to the electronically insulating nature of the solid electrolyte substrates, the spectra were recorded using an electron and Ar+-ion neutralizer. A known overcompensation of the surface charge was corrected for all spectra based on the binding energy of an Au standard.

For structural analysis of the samples, X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded ex-situ with a Rigaku Smartlab diffractometer in a parallel beam geometry using Cu Kα radiation.

The NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na all-solid-state sodium-ion batteries were cycled at room temperature between 2.0 and 4.2 V, with a current density of 8 μA cm−2 (0.15C) and a relaxation time of 15 min between charge and discharge. The charge/discharge curves obtained for a battery with O3-NaxCoO2 are shown in Fig. 1a. The battery exhibits an initial specific discharge capacity of 150 ± 8 mAh g−1, which corresponds to a sodium stoichiometry of Na0.35CoO2 in a fully charged state of the cathode. The total mass of NaxCoO2 is 196 ± 10 μg. After 100 cycles, the specific discharge capacity decreases to 112 mAh g−1, i.e. 75% of the initial value, which is 13% lower as the specific capacity of 129 mAh g−1 of a comparable cell setup with a LiCoO2 thin-film cathode on a bulk garnet-type solid state electrolyte between 2.5 and 4.2 V [25].

Two main reasons can lead to a fading capacity with cycling. The first reason is related to an increase of the internal resistance of the cells with cycling, which reduces the accessible voltage window and results in a capacity loss at constant charge/discharge currents. This type of capacity loss can be (partially) compensated by applying lower charge/discharge currents to reduce the overpotential. The second reason is a partial loss of mass (or volume) or phase modifications of the ionically active electrode materials (cathode and/or anode) due to undesired side reactions [4]. Sodium loss can be disregarded in this analysis, as in the considered NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na battery, the used sodium anode offers an almost infinite source of sodium. To determine the actual origin of the capacity fade in the NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na cell, the contributions to the internal resistance from the interfaces between the materials and ionic transport in the solid electrolyte should be taken into account along with the ion diffusion limitations in the electrodes.

The internal resistance is manifested as the sum of an ohmic resistance, charge transfer resistance and a resistance due to diffusion limitations of sodium ions in the active material of the electrodes [27]. The ohmic resistance is determined by the immediate ohmic drop when the current is switched off (Rohmic = ΔV0/ΔΙ). An additional potential change due to the charge transfer reaction (ΔV1) is observed after a few hundred milliseconds to several seconds (Inset, Fig. 1b). The sum of the ohmic and charge transfer resistances is often referred to as direct current resistance (DCR) defined as (ΔV0 + ΔV1)/ΔΙ. The DCR is of importance for the effective power of a battery and indicates how fast the battery reacts to rapid changes of the charge and discharge current, which is especially important for applications in the electric grids [28]. The evolution of the overpotential and DCR of the NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na cell over 100 cycles is depicted in Fig. 1b. During electrochemical cycling, the overpotential decreases continuously from 28 to 18 mV, which corresponds to a decrease of the DCR from 7000 to 4500 Ω (3500–2250 Ωcm2).

The non-linear decreasing potential below ΔV0 + ΔV1 (inset of Fig. 1b) is related to sodium gradients in the battery and due to a diffusion controlled discharge process. At a high degree of sodium deintercalation at 4.2 V (Na0.3CoO2), the cathode is operated beyond its stability window. In this state, the concentration gradient of sodium ions in the cathode is rather large and leads to an additional resistance due to slow sodium ion diffusion, which is not included in the DCR. As a result, the cell potential decreases gradually from 4.2 V down to 4.1 V. The latter voltage corresponds to a stable cathode composition of around Na0.35CoO2 (see inset of Fig. 1b). This composition gradient in the NaxCoO2 cathode and similar slow diffusion processes in other electrodes of the battery are not reflected in the DCR which, therefore, does not exactly describe the evolution of the battery voltage during the operation at constant currents.

To estimate the contribution of the ion diffusion limitations in the electrodes to the total internal resistance of the cell at continuous currents, single discharge curves were recorded at different currents of 10, 20, 40, 80, and 160 μA (corresponding to discharge rates of 0.375, 0.75, 1.5, 3, and 6C, respectively) of the battery which had been previously cycled over 100 times (Fig. 1c). The cell voltage of the battery has been extracted from these discharge curves as a function of the discharge current at a constant discharge state with the specific capacity of 40 mAh g−1 in the highly linear region of the discharge curves (Fig. 1c). The slope of the linear interpolation ΔV/ΔΙ in the inset of Fig. 1c estimates the total internal resistance of the cell, including the contributions due to diffusion limitations of sodium ions [29]. The total internal resistance of 5640 Ω calculated from the linear interpolation in Fig. 1c is about 25% higher than the DCR of 4500 Ω for the battery after 100 cycles in Fig. 1b. Thus, the internal resistance of the NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na cell is mostly determined by DCR and the battery retains the specific capacity of 75 mAh g−1 at the discharge current density of up to 320 μA/cm2 (6C).

Various contributions to the internal resistance of a battery can be sorted out using EIS, although it is not capable to resolve the contributions to the internal resistance due to slow ion diffusion processes. Previously, Ohta et al. reported stable cycling performance of a Li-ion cell with garnet-type oxide electrolyte over 100 cycles and confirmed the stability of the bulk and interface resistances with EIS [25]. Following that work, we performed EIS investigations of a freshly-assembled and cycled NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na cells to measure the DCR and discriminate between contributions from cathode, solid electrolyte, anode, and their interfaces [27].

The results of the impedance measurements of the freshly-assembled NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na cell and the corresponding equivalent circuit are presented in Fig. 2. To simplify the analysis, the spectra have been divided into high- (10–1000 kHz), mid- (10–0.1 kHz), and low-frequency (100 - 1 Hz) regions. The elements of the equivalent circuit are assigned in accordance with models published in literature [[30], [31], [32], [33], [34]]. As a guide for the eye, the different impedance elements have been sketched and colored. The green high-frequency semicircle in Fig. 2 corresponds to the resistance of the Nasicon solid electrolyte RSE, namely a sum of the Nasicon grain-boundary resistance which is modelled by the ohmic resistor RSE GB = 1245–4188 Ω and capacitor (CSE GB = 0.3–2 nF) and the Nasicon bulk resistance (RSE bulk = 336–467 Ω). The latter is not visible for the frequency range plotted in Fig. 2. Similar high-frequency impedance spectrum observed for the symmetric Na/Nasicon/Na cells, confirms the correctness of the assignment (Supplementary Fig. S1). The blue mid- and red low-frequency semicircles are assigned to the resistances of the Nasicon/Na (RAn = 467–1157 Ω, CAn = 0.4–3 μF) and NaxCoO2/Nasicon (RCat = 525–1197 Ω, CCat = 0.09–0.1 mF) interfaces, respectively. The latter assignment was unambiguously verified with impedance measurements performed on a different cell in the fully charged and discharged state, which showed modifications of the low-frequency semicircle depending on the charge state of the NaxCoO2 cathode (Supplementary Fig. S2).

In order to take into account the ion diffusion limitations at frequencies below 1 Hz, a Warburg element was added. The measured impedance spectra reveal only a very small tail in the low frequency region, which is commonly attributed to diffusion limitations in the cathode (see Fig. 2). Note, that the accuracy of the fit of the Warburg element at low frequencies is too low for a detailed interpretation. Nevertheless, the low impedance at frequencies below 1 Hz indicates small ion diffusion limitations which allow high current densities up to 320 μA cm−2 (6C) in the investigated NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na cells. This is in agreement with the interpretation that diffusion limitations contribute only about 20% to the total internal resistance of the cell, while 80% are determined by the DCR.

The evolution of the resistance of the NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na cell with cycling has been analyzed based on the impedance spectra presented in Fig. 3a. The total resistance of 6812 Ω of the freshly-assembled NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na cell is in good agreement with the DCR of about 7000 Ω obtained from the overpotential in the first charge/discharge cycle (Fig. 1b). From the fitted Nasicon bulk resistance Rbulk ≈ 401 Ω, the ionic conductivity of the solid electrolyte at 25 °C is calculated to be 1.2 × 10−3 S cm−1 which is slightly lower than the reported values of 4 × 10−3 S cm−1 probably due to polishing of the Nasicon substrates [8]. Note that the Rbulk contribution remains stable with cycling between 343 and 459 Ω. Because Rbulk is rather small in comparison to RSE GB, it is neglected and the sum of both resistances is denoted as RSE in the following discussion. For the freshly-assembled cell, the interface resistances RAn ≈ 1157 Ω (578 Ωcm2) and RCat ≈ 525 Ω (262 Ωcm2) were extracted from the measured spectra. With cycling, RAn decreases to 594 Ω and RCat increases to 1196 Ω, whereas their sum of around 1670 Ω stays nearly unchanged. In contrast, RSE decreases after 100 cycles from 5128 Ω (2564 Ωcm2) to almost 2244 Ω (1122 Ωcm2) (Fig. 3b).

In order to explain the cycling performance of the NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na cell, it is important to consider the impact of polishing on the resistive components of the impedance. It was observed that after polishing, RSE is increased from 310 to 5128 Ω. As the Nasicon substrate is in contact with water during polishing, sodium is leached from Nasicon in a diffusion-controlled process [35]. It was suggested in Refs. [36,37], that the leached sodium ions are substituted by protons, leading to an increase of the Nasicon resistance. Indeed, the impedance spectrum of the protonated Nasicon shown in Ref. [37] looks similar to the one of the investigated Na/Nasicon/Na cell (Supplementary Fig. 1). As Rbulk is low and not affected by the polishing, we assume that the protons diffuse into the Nasicon grain boundaries and block the diffusion of sodium ions, which is manifested by the increase of RGB SE after polishing. With cycling, the protons in the Nasicon grain boundaries are likely re-substituted by sodium ions and RGB SE decreases again. For the spectra of the NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na cell in Fig. 3, RSE decreases by roughly 50% from 5088 to 2244 Ω after 100 cycles. As RGB SE is the predominant contribution to the total internal resistance of the cell, the correlation between the decrease of RSE (green filled squares), the total impedance Rimp = RSE + RCat + RAn from 6662 to 3906 Ω (black filled squares), and DCR (open squares) is visible in Fig. 3b. This interpretation of the grain boundary “chemistry” is in agreement with the reported influence of humid air and water on Nasicon-type materials [38,39].

In order to prove that the polishing procedure affects only the Nasicon grain boundaries but does not change the Nasicon structure, three XRD measurements were carried out on the same sample: a) before polishing of the Nasicon substrate, b) after NaxCoO2 deposition, and c) after cycling of the NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na cell. The diffraction pattern of the pristine Nasicon substrate corresponds to the original phase mixture of C2/c (55 wt%) and  (45 wt%) of Na3.4Sc0.4Zr1.6(SiO4)2(PO4) [8] (Fig. 4a). The structural stability of the Nasicon is maintained after the NaxCoO2 deposition and cycling, because no change in the diffraction peaks corresponding to the Nasicon phase is observed. Thus, the here used Sc-substituted Nasicon substrate is a stable Na-ion solid electrolyte in the applied potential window between 2.0 and 4.2 V.

After deposition of the NaxCoO2 thin film, the XRD pattern shows (006), (101), (012), and (104) reflections of the rhombohedral O3-NaxCoO2 phase (Fig. 4) [40,41]. The 2θ = 34.2° position of the (006) peak corresponds to a fully sodiated NaxCoO2 with x = 1 [42]. The observed low intensity of the (003) and (006) reflections indicates a small amount of (00l) texture. Thus, the crystal orientation of the NaxCoO2 film is favorable for ionic transport through the interface with the Nasicon substrate, which correlates with the observed low interface resistance RCat = 256 Ωcm2 [43]. Although the observed increase of RCat with cycling suggests formation of an interphase at the NaxCoO2/Nasicon interface, the post-mortem XRD analysis of the cycled cell did not show evidence of an extended interphase formation. As XRD analysis is not sensitive to very thin or amorphous layers, other surface sensitive methods such as XPS are more appropriate for interphase studies. However, no evidence of an interphase was observed in our previously reported XPS study of the NaxCoO2/Nasicon interface [18]. Stabilization of RCat already after two cycles indicates that the impedance may be determined by a small disordered layer next to the NaxCoO2/Nasicon interface.

Elemental analysis with EDS does not show evidence of extensive diffusion of zirconium, cobalt, silicon and scandium across the NaxCoO2/Nasicon interface (Fig. 5). The necessary excitation voltage of 15 kV results in a lateral spread of the X-ray generation of about 1 μm, making it difficult to identify eventual diffusion close to the interface. However, in agreement with the impedance, XRD and XPS measurements, no evidence for the formation of a reaction phase during the NaxCoO2 deposition and electrochemical cycling is found.

In order to rule out possible defects in the microstructure such as voids or exfoliation at the NaxCoO2/Nasicon interface, which would contribute to the impedance, the cycled NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na cell was broken in two parts and cross sectional SEM images were taken. A typical cross sectional SEM image in Fig. 5a shows a homogeneous NaxCoO2 thin film with an average thickness of 780 nm. No exfoliation, holes or cavities were observed in the microstructure of the NaxCoO2/Nasicon interface along the entire length of the broken edge of the sample. Thus, the observed increase of RCat appears not to be caused by microstructural defects as often observed in composite bulk cathodes [4].

During the first few cycles, RAn shows a sharp drop from 1157 Ω (578 Ωcm2) to the stable values of around 594 Ω (297 Ωcm2) which corresponds to the resistivity values earlier reported for Nasicon/Na interfaces [8,44]. This drop is likely related to the used cell assembly process, where a piece of sodium metal is simply cold-pressed onto the Nasicon substrate. Possible variations of the pressing force may lead to variance in the Nasicon/Na contact area. With cycling, the sodium is stripped and plated, thus, improving the contact area. An alternative explanation could be the formation of a beneficial interphase between Nasicon and sodium, which, to our knowledge, has neither been reported in literature nor observed in the present study as described below.

To detect possible interphase formation at the Nasicon/Na interface, a surface science approach was used as described in the experimental section [18,45,46]. The Na 1s, Zr 3d and P 2p XPS emissions were tracked as a function of thickness of the deposited Na metal (Fig. 6). The experiments revealed no chemical reaction between the Nasicon and sodium. The initial Na 1s signal before sodium deposition consists of one component at about 1074 eV, which is usually associated with sodium atoms in the Nasicon structure [18]. With ongoing Na deposition, a second component at 1072 eV and a plasmon signal at about 1078 eV evolve in the Na1s spectrum, which are related to metallic sodium. The binding energies of the Zr 3d and P 2p Nasicon states remain unchanged and, thus, indicate chemical stability of the Nasicon phase against metallic sodium at ambient conditions. With increasing sodium thickness on the Nasicon surface, the intensity of the Zr 3d5/2 (185.1 eV) and Zr 3d3/2 (187.5 eV) as well as the P 2p (136.1 eV) states is decreasing due to the limited signal acquisition depth.

The observed capacity fade of 25% in the first 100 charge and discharge cycles is unusual in combination with a decreasing internal resistance of the battery. A loss of capacity by decomposition of NaxCoO2 into cobalt oxide phases is unlikely, because no evidence of cobalt oxide phases was found in the XRD patterns. The observed homogeneity of the NaxCoO2 microstructure makes a possible electrochemical isolation of NaxCoO2 cathode particles with cycling unlikely. As no chemical reactions have been detected at the interfaces of the Nasicon with both NaxCoO2 and Na, the observed capacity fading is most likely related to the transformation of NaxCoO2 through various isomeric phases during cycling.

In this study, we charged the NaxCoO2 cathode beyond its stability window of 4.0 V to show that the bulk Nasicon solid electrolyte is stable up to 4.2 V. The electrochemical desodiation of the NaxCoO2 thin films shows, that the full deintercalation range down to x = 0.35 (150 mAh g−1) is accessible if the NaxCoO2 cathode is charged up to 4.2 V. The cycling leads to a series of isomeric phase transitions of the NaxCoO2 cathode from the O3 through the O′3, P3, and P′3 phases, resulting in the observed fading capacity [47,48]. Post-mortem XRD measurements of the cycled battery revealed the transition from the O3-phase to the monoclinic distorted P′3-phase with a final sodium content of x = 0.6 [48,49]. The observed capacity loss of 20% within the first 30 cycles and the stabilized capacity around 118 mAh g−1 correlate with the 20% lower capacity of the P′3-phase in which the high intercalation states of the O3 phase with x between 0.8 and 1 are no longer accessible [50].

Note that the initial discharge capacity of the batteries depends on the isomeric phase of the grown NaxCoO2 films, namely either 100–120 mAh g−1 for the P2-phase or 140–150 mAh g−1 for the O3-phase. The NaxCoO2 films in the P2-phase can be routinely grown by PLD [14] and their achieved capacity is comparable with the data reported in literature [10,11,51]. The observed initial high discharge capacity of up to 150 mAh g−1 can be achieved only with the O3-phase of NaxCoO2 due to the accessible high intercalation states of x = 0.8–1. However, the reproducible growth of O3-NaxCoO2 films is rather challenging and requires further studies to routinely achieve the batteries with high initial capacity.

A NaxCoO2/Nasicon/Na cell with a thin-film NaxCoO2 cathode grown by PLD on a Na3.4Sc0.4Zr1.6(SiO4)2(PO4) Nasicon substrate exhibited good cycling performance over 100 cycles. Current densities of up to 320 μA cm−2 and a maximum specific capacity of 150 mAh g−1 at room temperature were achieved without applying external pressure. Making use of the planar geometry of the thin-film model cell, for which the interface area was simply given by the dimensions of the used polished solid electrolyte substrate, the direct extraction of the interface resistances with EIS was possible. The impedance measurements revealed chemically and microstructurally stable interfaces of the polished Nasicon solid electrolyte with the NaxCoO2 thin-film cathode and Na metallic anode between 2.0 and 4.2 V. These findings emphasize that the Sc-substituted Nasicon is a promising candidate for high-voltage all-solid-state sodium batteries.