Lithium-air/oxygen battery has raised widespread interest due to its extraordinary theoretical energy density (up to 3500 Wh kg−1). In this study, a flexible free-standing NASICON (Na-super ionic conductor)-type hybrid solid-state polymer electrolyte (HSPE) based on PVDF-HFP (poly(vinylidene fluoride-hexafluoropropylene)) copolymer and NASICON LATP (Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3) was prepared and investigated. The HSPE membranes exhibited an ionic conductivity of 1.02 × 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature along with a electrochemical window from 2 to 4.5 V. Using the HSPE, a lithium-oxygen/air battery with an inorganic solid-state cathode was fabricated. High initial discharge capacities of 4654 and 5564.3 mAh g−1 were reached under pure O2 and ambient air, respectively. Compared to conventional porous polypropylene (PP) separator, the HSPE membrane alleviated the corrosion of the lithium anode, thus improving the cyclability of the cells. The results presented in this study suggest the great potential application of NASICON-type HSPE membrane in solid-state rechargeable lithium-air/oxygen batteries.

With the fast development of electric vehicle and portable mobile devices, there is a worldwide eagerness for energy storage source with high energy density and improved safety. However, the typical energy density of the wildly used lithium-ion battery is only between 100 and 200 Wh kg−1, which is too low to meet the rapidly growing energy density demand for portable electronic devices, hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs), and electric vehicles (EVs) [1]. Moreover, the volatile flammable liquid electrolyte in lithium-ion battery also brings about extensive concern on safety issues. Lithium-oxygen/air battery has received worldwide attention because of its high theoretical energy density of 3500 Wh kg−1 [2]. Due to the integration of the lightest metal lithium with almost readily everywhere available ambient oxygen, the energy density of lithium-oxygen/air battery could reach up to about 10 times higher than that of a typical commercialized Li-ion battery [3, 4]. Therefore, it is generally considered as a very promising alternative energy storage device.

Though much research has been devoted into lithium-oxygen/air battery, especially organic liquid electrolyte-based lithium-oxygen/air cells [5,6,7], using lithium metal in organic liquid electrolyte systems still faces many challenges. One major issue is associated with the use of liquid electrolytes, which causes several problems including evaporation, leakage, flammability, and low oxygen solubility [8,9,10]. More importantly, the liquid electrolytes on the oxygen cathode side limit battery cycling performance, i.e., the flowing nature of the organic liquid electrolytes will flood the O2 transport channel, retarding the reaction kinetics at the electrolyte/carbon interface [11]. In addition, in the liquid electrolyte environment, the formation and continuous growth of lithium dendrites, which will lead to the internal short circuits if they penetrate through the separator, have been widely acknowledged as a high-risk factor of cell failure and danger [12, 13]. Replacing organic liquid electrolytes with nonflammable, thermally and electrochemically stable solid-state electrolytes are considered as an ultimate strategy to improve the performance and safety of the lithium-oxygen/air battery [14,15,16]. Solid electrolytes, including polymer and ceramic electrolytes, have been universally acknowledged as competitive alternatives to liquid electrolytes for lithium-oxygen/air battery [17,18,19]. Ceramic electrolyte, for instance, NASICON-type Li-Al-Ti phosphate (LATP), often possesses considerably high bulk ion conductivity but their application has been limited due to intrinsic fragileness and high cost. On the contrary, polymer-based electrolyte often exhibits advantages of flexibility and ease of film processing, on which study has been remained active for long since the first discovery of ionic conductive poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) [20]. Moreover, LATP was reactive with Li metal [21], so it needs to be further modified before incorporated into lithium metal-based cells.

Poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) and its fluoro-copolymer exhibit good mechanical strength, electrochemical stability, and heat stability. Aishui [22] employed a PVDF-HFP (poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene))-based composite electrolyte in lithium-oxygen/air battery. With the addition of ionic liquid and nano-silica, the ionic conductivity of the gel-like electrolyte reached up to 1.83 × 10−3 S cm−1. Discharge performance of lithium-air battery using this composite electrolyte membrane in the ambient atmosphere shows capacity of 2800 and 4080 mAh g−1 with respect to neat carbon black and α-MnO2 catalyst, respectively. Hui [23] synthesized a high ionic conductive electrolyte (2.7 × 10−4 S cm−1) by dissolving lithium imide salt and ionic liquid in PVDF-HFP copolymer. The assembled Li/O2 battery showed an initial discharge capacity of 900 mAh g−1 (carbon plus catalyst) but the cell decayed very quickly for some reason. Abraham [24] prepared a polymer electrolyte based on oligomeric poly(ethylene glycol) dimethy ethers; at room temperature, the near-liquid electrolyte showed a conductivity of 10−4 S cm−1 while a higher temperature was needed to further improve the ionic conductivity. These electrolytes, usually having some degree of liquid-state component, possess ionic conductivities comparable to a typical ionic liquid [25], whereas the liquid or liquid-like component embedded in the composite electrolyte could still give rise to the aforementioned problems of typical liquid electrolyte. While a typical NASICON-type solid composite polymer electrolyte has an ionic conductivity of 1.185 × 10−4 S cm−1, it needs be operated at a high temperature of 70 °C [26].

Due to the abovementioned problems of traditional liquid or solid electrolyte, it is of particular interest to synthesize a novel electrolyte system which is liquid-free and compatible with ambient conditions. In this study, we propose an alternative electrolyte based on the hybrid of NASICON-type inorganic conductor and PVDF-HFP copolymer. A flexible free-standing NASICON-type HSPE was prepared by film casting on a silicon wafer. Featured by its Janus-type hierarchical structure formed during film casting, this hybrid electrolyte film showed excellent properties such as high ion conductivity and flexibility. Successfully applied in lithium-oxygen/air battery, the HSPE electrolyte helped to ease the lithium anode corrosion and parasitic side reactions, thus extending the cells’ cycle life. To the best of our knowledge, this novel type of solid polymer electrolyte could be helpful to resolve many remaining challenges of lithium-air/oxygen battery system.

A solid-state NASICON-type structure phosphate Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 was synthesized identical to previous reports [27,28,29]. Stoichiometric amounts of Li2CO3, Al2O3, TiO2, and (NH4)H2PO4 were ball-milled in ethanol for 1 h and then dried in the vacuum oven for 12 h. The dried powder was heated at 400 °C for 2 h in a tube furnace filled with argon to release volatile products, then the temperature was raised to 800 °C and held at that for 2 h in air before free-cooled to room temperature. The obtained LATP was then ball-milled 2 h to form powder.

The HSPE was prepared using PVDF-HFP (Kynar Flex 2801) and lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI; molecular formula: C2F6LiNO4S2, purchased from Aladdin Reagent, 99%), following a solution casting technique. The PVDF-HFP was dissolved in NMP (N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone, purchased from Aladdin Reagent, 99.9%) at 60 °C, and the LiTFSI was added in the solution afterwards. The weight ratio of PVDF-HFP and LiTFSI was 3:2. Then, the LATP powder was added to the mixture. The weight ratio of PVDF-HFP and LATP was 1:1. The slurry was stirred and ultrasonically dispersed for 6 h. The homogeneous solution was cast onto a silicon substrate before put into a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 24 h. Finally, a free-standing NASICON-type hybrid solid polymer electrolyte film with a thickness of ~ 100 μm in diameter of 5 cm was peeled off from the silicon substrate.

Super P conductive carbon black (SP) (Hefei MTI Industry Co. Ltd.), PVDF-HFP, and LATP powder in weight ratio of 10:5:85 was hand-milled in an agate mortar; meanwhile, the appropriate amount of NMP was dropwise added in an agate mortar to form a slurry mixture and then ultrasonically dispersed for 2 h. The porous cathode was prepared by casting the slurry mixture onto a nickel (Ni) foam current collector. The successful fabrication of solid-state cathode needs to construct the active sites, where electron, Li ion, and oxygen can continuously migrate to participate in the electrochemical reaction. In our porous cathode, SP provides the electron conductivity and reactive active sites, and LATP provides the Li-ion conductivity. The porous structure cathode can allow the diffusion of oxygen. For the organic-based electrolyte lithium-oxygen/air battery, the cathodes were prepared from the mixture of 70 wt% SP and 30 wt% PVDF. The prepared cathode was dried at 100 °C under a vacuum for 12 h to evaporate the solvent. The as-obtained cathode had a loading weight of SP of 0.8–1.1 mg cm−2 and the porosity of the cathode materials was about 43.7%.

According to our previous work [30], a Swagelok-type battery was assembled in an argon-filled glove box with a water/oxygen level lower than 0.1 ppm (Hefei MTI Industry Co., Ltd.). The anode was Li-metal foil with a diameter of 1.6 cm. The high interface resistance between the Li electrode/HSPE contact in the cell configuration may lead to kinetic limitations, so a drop of organic electrolyte of 1 M LiTFSI in tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether (TEGDME; purchased from Aladdin Reagent, 99%) was painted on the surface of Li anode to minimize the interface resistance. Detailed battery assembly and the diagram of the battery (Fig. S1) are shown in supporting information.

Galvanostatic charging and discharging tests were carried out at room temperature under 0.1 MPa pressure of O2/ambient air, using a LAND tester (CT2001A, Wuhan LAND Electronic Co., Ltd.) with current density set at 100 mA g−1 between 2.0 and 4.5 V (vs. Li/Li+). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) tests were carried out using AUTOLAB M204 (Metrohm, Switzerland). HSPE membranes were sandwiched between two stainless steel (SS) electrodes and the frequency was scanned from 100 Hz to 1 MHz with an AC amplitude of 5 mV. For linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) measurements, the HSPE membrane was sandwiched between lithium and stainless steel electrode. The LSV measurements were operated with the voltage ranged from 1.5 to 5 V (vs. Li/Li+) at a scanning rate of 1 mV s−1. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was carried out using a Dandong DX-2600 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (wavelength 0.154 nm) with a scanning rate of 0.04 ° s−1. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) micrographs were gained on a field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, JSM-7500F JEOL, Japan) operating at 150 kV. TGA/DSC testing (TG209F1, NETZSCH Co., Ltd.) was carried out under airflow with a heating rate of 10 °C/min from 25 to 625 °C.

The XRD patterns of obtained LATP powder were shown in Fig. S2 in the supporting information. As can be seen in Fig. S2, the XRD patterns of LATP were well consistent with LiTi2(PO4)3 (JCPDS No. 35-0754). The SEM images (Fig. S3) showed that most of the LATP particles were under ~ 2 μm in size.

Figure 1a is the optical photograph of HSPE membrane demonstrating its size and flexibility. We found that the HSPE membrane forms a Janus hierarchical structure; i.e., the bottom surface that adheres onto the silicon wafer is smoother than the upper “free surface.” This phenomenon could be explained as follows: when sitting in a vacuum oven, the freer upper surface of the membrane firstly dried out; the more and more concentrated slurry was then settling on the bottom as the evaporation of solvent, leading to a polymer-enriched bottom surface of the membrane “smoothly” adhering onto the silicon wafer under its own gravity. Figure 1b shows the smoother side of HSPE, in which the overwhelming majority part of LATP particles were embedded in the PVDF-HFP(LiTFSI) polymer matrix. However, the other side of the HSPE membrane, designed to combine with air/oxygen cathode, demonstrated a much coarser and more porous surface in which LATP particles can be clearly seen by SEM shown in Fig. 1c. This Janus structure is beneficial in two aspects: the smoother polymer-enriched surface can effectively protect LATP from reacting with Li-metal anode, while the coarse porous LATP-enriched surface offers numerous micro-channels not only for the oxygen/air diffusion pathway but also for the deposition of discharge product such as Li2O2.

Morphological characterizations of HSPE membrane. a Optical photograph of free-standing HSPE membranes. b Morphological characterizations of the smooth side of HSPE, which was used to contact with Li anode. c Porous side of HSPE, which was used to combine with air cathode. Inset: partially magnified

Figure 2a is the XRD spectra of pure PVDF-HFP, LATP, and HSPE. For the pure PVDF-HFP, the crystallinity was low. As previously reported [24], the copolymerization of PVDF and HFP can suppress the crystallization of PVDF and improve its ionic conductivity. The XRD spectra of HSPE were almost identical with LATP, indicating that the crystal structure of LATP involved in the polymer matrix remained as pristine state. As no LiTFSI crystal peaks were found, we propose that the LiTFSI dissolved well into the polymer matrix at the molecular level and the Li+ absorbed onto the macromolecular PVDF chains to form ionized polymer complex. As Gray [31] pointed out, the ionized Li+ cation of Li salt will move along the polymer chains to realize an ionic conductivity.

Phase structure and electrical properties of HSPE. a XRD patterns of the PVDF-HFP, LATP, HSPE, and the standard powder diffraction file of LiTi2(PO4)3. b EIS profiles of the HSPE membrane at 25 °C. c Impedance spectra for the HSPE membrane at different temperatures in the range of 5–65 °C. d Temperature dependence of ionic conductivity of the HSPE membrane at various temperatures in the range of 5–65 °C. e LSV curves of the HSPE membrane showing the electrochemical stability window in the range of 1.5–5 V (vs. Li+/Li). OCP, open-circuit voltage of the Li|HSPE|SS cell. f Voltage profiles of the lithium plating/stripping cycling of symmetric Li|HSPE|Li cell to 300 h at a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2 at 25 °C

Figure 2b shows the typical Nyquist plots of HSPE membrane sandwiched between two stainless steel electrodes and the inset is the equivalent circuit. The corresponding equivalent circuit is composed of a series of an external system resistance (Rs), a bulk resistance (Rb) in parallel with a constant phase element (CPE), and a Warburg impedance W0. Because the two surfaces of our HSPE had different structure, so we decomposed the constant phase element CPE to three components: CPE1, CPE2, and CPE3, which stand for the interfacial capacitance between HSPE’s upper surface and SS electrode, bulk system capacitance of HSPE’s membrane, and capacitance between HSPE’s bottom surface and SS electrode. The conductivity of the HSPE membrane can be calculated by σ = 4 L/(πD2Rb) (L and D are the thickness and diameter respectively). As reported, the lithium-ion conductivity of the bulk LATP could reach as high as 10−3–10−4 S cm−1, whereas that of lithium salt-stuffed polymer matrix is generally on the order of 10−6–10−9 S cm−1 at room temperature [26, 32, 33]. We optimized the ionic conductivity of the membrane by selecting various compositions (Fig. S4) until HSPE exhibited a reasonably high ionic conductivity (~ 1.02 × 10−4 S cm−1) at room temperature. Figure 2c shows the EIS profiles of HSPE membrane at various temperatures, and the temperature-dependent ionic conductivities of the HSPE membrane in the range of 5 °C–65 °C were shown in Fig. 2d. The plot of log σ against 1000/T is found to be linear and the ionic conductivity gradually increases with the elevation of the temperature, and the Li-ion conductivity of the HSPE membrane is 3.57 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 65 °C, very close to the ionic conductivity of bulk LATP (3.38 × 10−4 S cm−1 25 °C) (Fig. S5).

Tolerance towards high potentials is an important factor affecting an electrolyte’s application in high-voltage lithium cells. Figure 2e shows the result of the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) profiles of the HSPE when being sandwiched between lithium and stainless steel. The HSPE exhibits a stable voltage window between 2 and 4.5 V (vs. Li/Li+) (as shown by the red curve), which well covers the operation voltage window of lithium-oxygen/air battery in this study. The mechanical stability of the HSPE membrane against Li dendrites was evaluated by plating and stripping experiment using a symmetric Li|HSPE|Li cell. Figure 2f shows the time-voltage profiles of the cell with HSPE membrane cycled over 300 h at a constant current density of 0.5 mA cm−2 and periodically charged and discharged for 0.5 h at 25 °C. In the first 80 h, the cell voltage was maintained at about 0.1 to 0.15 V, then the voltage decreased during cycling and stabilized at 0.1 V in the following cycles. Similar voltage decrease was also observed in other solid-state electrolyte systems [15]. The decrease in voltage could be ascribed to the improved interface between the electrolyte membrane and lithium metal during the repeated Li plating and stripping. The HSPE not only shows stable electrical properties but also exhibits a good thermal property as can be seen in TGA/DSC curves (Fig. S6); the HSPE membrane decomposes at temperature up to 325 °C.

The assembled lithium-oxygen/air batteries with HSPE membrane were first tested under pure O2 atmosphere. Figure 3a shows the discharge/charge curves of the HSPE-based lithium-oxygen battery within voltage window from 2.0 to 4.5 V (vs. Li/Li+) at the current density of 100 mA g−1. The initial discharge capacity reached 4654 mAh g−1 at the cut-off voltage 2.0 V and the recharge capacity reached 3723 mAh g−1 at the cut-off voltage of 4.5 V. By contrast, a PVDF-HFP based polymer electrolyte was reported by Zhang et al. [34], which could support an initial discharge capacity of 2988 mAh g−1 and charge capacity of 3100 mAh g−1. We propose that the superior capacity of the Li/O2 cells in this study, as compared to the traditional polymer electrolyte membrane in existing literature, could be ascribed to the more porous surface of HSPE in contact with the O2 cathode. A porous microstructure not only facilitates the O2 air transmission but also provides numerous spaces to accommodate the discharge products (mainly Li2O2 in this case). As verified by XRD (Fig. 3b), the peaks of Li2O2 (JCPDS No. 73-1640) were clearly observed and the peaks almost disappeared after recharging to 4.5 V, indicating the decomposition of Li2O2 during the recharging process.

Electrical properties of assembled lithium-oxygen battery operated in pure O2 at room temperature. a The first discharge and charge curves of HSPE-based lithium-oxygen battery. b XRD patterns of the HSPE-based lithium-oxygen battery cathode. Inset: partially magnified. c Discharge and charge curves of HSPE-based lithium-oxygen battery. d Cycling performance of HSPE-based lithium-oxygen battery

To evaluate the cycling performance in lithium-oxygen battery, capacity-limited cycling is adopted in this study. Figure 3c shows the discharge/charge curves of HSPE-based cells operated in pure oxygen with a fixed capacity of 500 mAh g−1. Figure 3d is the corresponding discharge-charge capacity and voltage vs. cycle number profiles. During the cycles, the discharge voltage gradually decreased beginning from the 13th cycle, and the recharge capacity started to drop to 477.9 mAh g−1 from the 10th cycle. The gradual decay of capacity may be due to the accumulation of the undecomposed discharge product (Li2O2) and large volumetric change of the active materials which gradually breaking the electrode architecture [35]. It should be pointed out that the decomposing of Li2O2 strongly relies on the catalytic property of cathode for oxygen evolution reaction (OER), but no catalytic component was used in this study. Therefore, the cyclability of the cells could be further improved if OER catalyst is introduced into the cathode. This part of work is on-going.

Electrochemical properties of the assembled batteries are also investigated in the ambient air. Figure 4a shows the first discharge/charge curves of the lithium-air battery using HSPE (red curve) and traditional organic electrolyte/PP separator (blue curve) at the current density of 100 mA g−1 between 2.0 and 4.5 V (vs. Li/Li+). The lithium-air battery using PP as the separator is almost unable to work, showing a discharge capacity of 99.1 mAh g−1 and charge capacity of 82.1 mAh g−1. This rather poor capacity, we propose, is attributed to the flooded cathode by liquid electrolyte, as micro-tunnels are prerequisite for oxygen transmission and discharge product deposition. After further cycling, the air cathode may lose its ionic transport path due to the volatilization of organic liquid electrolytes. On the contrary, the HSPE-based lithium-air cells displayed a discharge capacity of 5564.3 mAh g−1 and charge capacity of 2664 mAh g−1. It is better than the previous work [36], in which an O2-selective membrane was applied in Li-air battery merely obtaining a discharge capacity of 789 mAh g−1. It is believed that the electrolyte strongly affects the diffusion and transmission of air not only in the air cathode but also through the electrolyte to the anode side. The insets in Fig. 4a are the photographs of the lithium metal anodes of the cycled cells using PP separator and HSPE as electrolyte, respectively. The corrosion of the Li-metal anodes is observed in both PP and HSPE cell types, since the cycled lithium foils are more or less covered with a layer of white contaminates. These contaminate surface layers are made of LiOH (JCPDS No. 32-0564) as detected by XRD (Fig. 4b), probably as a result of the side reaction between lithium metal and the penetrated water vapor from ambient air. However, due to the denser solid nature of HSPE, the corrosion of lithium anode is greatly suppressed using HSPE as compared to PP separator-based cells. From Fig. 4a, it can be seen that the Li anode using HSPE membrane still shows some “shinny” metallic luster, whereas the Li anode using PP separator is almost all passivated. As shown in Fig. 4b, the lithium metal (JCPDS No. 15-0401) peaks of the Li anode disappear in PP-based lithium-air battery (blue curve), while in HSPE-based cells (red curve), it is still quite distinguishable. The initial discharge curves of HSPE-based cell in ambient air are similar to those under pure O2, but subsequent discharge plateau voltage drops faster and the recharge capacity decreases to 322 mAh g−1 after 10 cycles, as shown in Fig. 4c, d. We suggest part of both Li anode and discharge products (e.g., Li2O2) are further corroded into hydroxides by water, since the XRD patterns of LiOH are detected in both Li anode and air cathode (Fig. S7 and S8) of the cycled cells. The porous surface of HSPE in contact with air cathode contributes to maintaining the diffusion of gas-phase O2 in the porous cathode, and HSPE can help protect the Li anode from water vapor corrosion as compared to porous PP separator. However, the slow penetration of water vapor still exists when cycling at long time scale, which led to the irreversible formation of LiOH. The impedance profiles and XRD patterns of the HSPE membrane before and after cycling were also examined (Fig. S9 and S10). No significant change can be observed in the AC impedance and XRD patterns between the original and cycled HSPE membrane, suggesting good stability of HSPE during cycling in direct contact with Li anode.

Electrical properties of assembled lithium-air battery operated in ambient air at room temperature. a Charge/discharge curves of lithium-air battery using liquid electrolyte/PP separator-based electrolyte and HSPE membrane electrolyte, respectively. Insets: photograph of the anode using PP separator and HSPE membrane, respectively. b XRD patterns of the Li anode. c Discharge and charge curves of HSPE-based lithium-air battery. d Cycling performance of HSPE-based lithium-air battery

The microstructure of HSPE-based lithium-oxygen/air battery cathode is investigated. Figure 5a, d is the pristine state of the cathode. As shown in Fig. 5b, e, the cathode after discharging to 2.0 V in pure O2 reveals that Li2O2 particles are uniformly deposited onto the SP. while the cathode after discharging to 2.0 V under ambient air presents thin sheet-like products (Fig. 5c, f), which is significantly different from that in pure O2 in terms of morphology, which can be attributed to the effect of water vapor from the ambient air. It may be the reason that the HSPE-based battery operated in ambient air shows a higher discharge capacity of 5564.3 mAh g−1 than that in pure O2 (4654 mAh g−1). However, the former displays a poor reversibility. Similar phenomenon was observed in others’ work [37], and they found that the usage of “redox mediator” (LiI) could effectively decompose LiOH during the charging. Exploring the possibilities of incorporating redox mediator is on-going and will be presented elsewhere, since in current HSPE system, the formation of LiOH seems to be evident.

SEM images of the HSPE-based lithium-oxygen/air battery cathode. a Pristine state of the cathode. b After discharging to 2.0 V under pure O2. c After discharging to 2.0 V under ambient air. d–f is the partially magnified of a–c images, respectively

A flexible free-standing NASICON-type HSPE membrane has been prepared through a simple solvent-casting method, through which two structurally different surfaces formed a LATP-enriched coarse surface on the upper side and a polymer-enriched smooth surface on the bottom. Ionic conductivity up to 1.02 × 10−4 S cm−1 was detected at room temperature with good flexibility and electrochemical and thermal stability. The HSPE membrane was stable during cycling and alleviated the anode corrosion and cathode liquid-clogging problems that conventional liquid electrolytes/PP separator system usually suffered. Moreover, as an electrolyte in lithium-oxygen/air battery, one side of HSPE could directly touch with Li anode and the other side was combined with the solid-state cathode. The HSPE lithium-air/oxygen cells showed an initial discharge capacity of 4654 and 5564.3 mAh g−1 operating in pure O2 and ambient air, respectively. Our work demonstrates this NASICON-type flexible membrane, which can be easily fabricated and has good feasibility in lithium-oxygen/air battery system.