We have proposed a data-driven approach for designing mesoscale porous structures of Li-ion battery electrode with three-dimensional virtual structures and machine learning techniques. 
Over 2,000 artificial 3D structures assuming positive electrode composed of random packed spheres as active material partic les are generated, and charge/discharge resistance has been evaluated using simplified Physico-chemical model. In this model, resistance from Li diffusion in active material partic les (diffusion resistance), transfer resistance of Li+ in electrolyte (electrolyte resistance) and reaction resistance on the interface between active material and electrolyte are simulated based on mass balance of Li, Ohm’s law in and linearized Butler-Volmer equation, respectively. Using these simulation results, regression models via Artific ial Neural Network (ANN) have been created in order to predict charge/discharge resistance from porous structure features. In this study, porosity, active material particle size and volume fraction, pressure in the compaction process, electrolyte conductivity, and binder/additives volume fraction are adopted as features, 
associated with controllable process parameters for manufacturing battery electrode. As results, the predicted electrode resistance by ANN regression model is good agreement with the simulated values. Furthermore, sensitivity analysis and optimization of the process parameters have been carried out. The proposed data-driven approach could be a solution as a guiding princ iple for manufacturing battery electrode. 
Numerical simulation techniques are powerful tool for prediction of the battery performance from the process parameters of the electrodes. The one-dimensional Physico-chemical simulation models have been used widely in order to predict not only the battery performance [5-6], but also 
durability [7-9] and safety [10,11]. Although the calculation load is lower in these models, the meso-scale porous structures of the electrodes are not reflected because these structures are approximated as homogeneous solid and liquid state. 
On the other hand, the three-dimensional extended simulations using 3D-SEM tomography data [12,13] or artificial structure [14,15] based on the Physico-chemical model have been developed and reported recently. 
Recently, parametric studies and sensitivity analyses of the process parameters using Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) combined with the Physico-chemical models have been carried out In this study, we propose the prediction and optimization scheme of three-dimensional porous electrode of Li-ion battery using high-throughput simulation model and machine learning techniques. First, the high-throughput Physico-chemical modeling based on particles aggregated structures assuming positive electrode are developed and the database of the relationship between the process parameters and the battery performance are construct. Next, development of the regression model of the battery resistance and capacity are created using controllable condition parameters (Active material volume fraction, size etc.)  via ANN. Finally, the optimized electrode structures and the process parameters are searched by Bayesian optimization. 
In the first step, high-throughput Physico-chemical modeling based on particles aggregated structures are developed.In the second step, the regression model in order to predict the charge/discharge resistance is developed using process parameters as predictors via Artificial Neural Network (ANN). The optimized electrode structures and the process parameters are searched by Bayesian optimization in the final step.  
The active material particle radius (2.5 – 12.5 [um]) is extracted randomly with uniform distribution, and spheres are generated in a 50 x 50 x 50 [um3] box until the volume fraction reaches the randomly specified value. Compaction process of electrode (calendaring) affects meso-scale structure of pore region and active material particles. Here, maximum overlap length between active material particles is estimated from compaction pressure P and the number of active material particle using theoretical model [19],  
In manufacturing process of electrode, binder and conductive aid are added in active material particles in order to improve its adhesion and conductivity. Although the prediction technique of 3D  binder structure in porous materials has been proposed [20], it is still difficult to reproduce the accurate structure of them. 
Using generated structures described in Section 2.2, the simplified Physico-chemical model has been applied in order to evaluate the resistance and capac ity in each structure. The effective conductivity of electrolyte is evaluated Poisson equation in 3D structure, 
The reaction resistance Rreac between the active material and the electrolyte is evaluated by linearized Butler-Volmer equation: 
using average Li concentration in active material c0 and Open Circuit Voltage (OCV) function 
In order to evaluate charge/discharge resistance and capac ity, typical electrochemical parameters are employed of so called NCM, lithium nickel manganese cobalt oxide, positive electrode which is one of oxide material, as shown in Table 1.  
Based on the simulation results described in Section 2.3, ANN models are created as a regression model of the battery resistance using the controllable condition parameters (Active material volume fraction, size etc.). Table 2 shows the dataset for learning and testing including predictors and descriptors. 70% of the data has been taken at random for training, and remaining data has been used for validation of the ANN using R2 value.  
Although there is a lot of machine learning models such as LASSO [22] and Ridge regression [23] based on linear regression techniques, ANN based on nonlinear regression is one of the useful tools in order to predict complex relationships between inputs and outputs or to find some patterns in datasets [24].  In this model, the process parameters are initialized randomly and implemented the next candidate with Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE). 
ANN modeling and Bayesian optimization have been performed using Scikit-learn [25] and GPyopt [26] of Python Machine Learning library. 
The binder/additives volume sensitivity of each resistance is illustrated in Fig.6. The reaction resistance increases linearly since the total surface area decreases with the ratio. Sigillary, approximately linear dependency of the binder/additives volume ratio is observed in the electrolyte resistance and the total resistance.  
Fig.7 shows the scatter plots of both training and test data between the resistances calculated by the simplified Physico-chemical models and the values predicted by various ANN models. 
Optimized process parameters have been inferred from the total resistance using Bayesian optimization with the constructed ANN model.
The proposed compaction pressure 459 [MPa] is within the typical range in actual process [28]. Note, however, that negative effect of applying pressure is not taken into account in this model, such as damage of foil and active materials. 
In this study, the prediction and optimization scheme of battery porous electrode has been proposed as a guiding principle for manufacturing process. First, High-throughput simulation model based on simplified Physico-chemical equations with artificial 3D structures composed of random packed spheres has been constructed and over 2000 calculations were conducted. Next, the regression models via Artific ial Neural Network have been created in order to predict 
Bayesian optimization with the ANN model. The results indicated that the active material composed of small size particles should be packed near 50% with small amount of binder/additives. As results of further calculations in the conditions that the active material volume fraction is fixed from 0.5 to 0.8, this parameter set is the best also in the higher capac ity conditions. 
