Seawater desalination is a promising way to alleviate water scarcity nowadays. Present capacitive desalination methods have limitation of salt removal capacity. Herein, a new dual-ion electrochemical desalination system with an ultrahigh desalination capacity is reported. It is composed of Na3V2(PO4)3@C wires as a sodium ion Faradaic electrode, AgCl as a chloride ion Faradaic electrode, and salt feed solution as the electrolyte. When a constant current is applied, redox reactions occur on electrodes, releasing or removing sodium ions and chloride ions. Na3V2(PO4)3 has a high sodium specific capacity, and as a sodium superionic conductor, Na3V2(PO4)3@C wires form an ion conductor network, providing high sodium ion mobility. Additionally, both the wire structure and carbon shell enhance the electrical conductivity of Na3V2(PO4)3. Benefiting from these, outstanding desalination performance, rate capability, and cycle capability have been achieved with the Na3V2(PO4)3@C wire–AgCl device. An ultrahigh desalination capacity of 98.0 mg/g is obtained at a current density of 100 mA/g for more than 50 cycles. This system provides a viable dual-ion electrochemical desalination strategy, which outperforms most of the existing desalination methods.

With rapid population growth, spreading environmental pollution, and drastic climate change, fresh water shortage has become one of the most significant global challenges nowadays. (1) Research on seawater desalination has attracted a lot of attention in recent years. (2,3) Various desalination methods such as reverse osmosis (RO), (4−6) thermal distillation, (7,8) electrodialysis, (9−11) capacitive deionization (CDI), (12−17) and so on have been advanced rapidly. Among these techniques, RO and thermal distillation are well-established for seawater desalination application. However, these two methods usually cost a lot of manpower and energy. (18,19) Electrodialysis and CDI are developing technologies with some premier features like economical energy consumption, easy operation, ecofriendliness, etc. (20) CDI is the technique of deionization through applying electrical potential between two electrodes. (21) Carbon-based materials are chosen as CDI electrodes frequently, such as activated carbon, (22,23) carbon aerogels, (24) carbon nanotubes, (25,26) porous carbon, (27) carbon nanofibers, (28) three-dimensional graphene, (29) composites of metal oxide and carbon, (30) etc. The salt removal capacity of CDI is limited by low physical charge adsorption capacity, which is the main bottleneck for the further development of CDI. A number of works on novel CDI devices have been reported to enhance the deionization capacity, including membrane capacitive deionization, (31) flow-through electrode capacitive deionization (FTCDI), (32) flow electrode capacitive deionization, (33) hybrid capacitive deionization (HCDI), (34,35) and desalination battery. (36)

Inspired by the works on HCDI and desalination battery, a new concept of electrochemical deionization (EDI) was proposed. (37−39) The electrode materials for EDI undergo redox reactions with either sodium or chloride ions on applying current and achieve higher desalination capacities of EDI devices compared to those of traditional CDI devices. (37,38,40) Thus, materials with high specific capacity of sodium or chloride ions are ideal candidates for EDI, including Prussian blue, (37,41) Na0.44MnO2, (38,42) and NaTi2(PO4)3 (40,43) for the sodium electrode and BiOCl (38) and Ag/AgCl (40,42) for the chloride electrode. Motivated by these works, more candidate materials for EDI electrodes could be explored to expand the scope of EDI application and improve its performance. Recently, sodium superionic conductor (NASICON) materials have been employed as advanced cathode materials for sodium battery due to their high theoretical specific capacity and high Na+ conductivity. (44−50) Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP), a typical NASICON material, has a high theoretical specific capacity of 117.6 mAh/g and is a potential sodium electrode material for EDI. However, the low electrical conductivity of NVP is a drawback of its electrochemical performance. (51,52) Over the past few years, many works have been carried out to enhance the electrical conductivity of NVP, hence further improving its electrochemical performance and reducing the resistive loss. Most of them focused on carbon coating methods, (53−55) whereas some focused on structural construction. (56−58) The highest specific capacity of NVP has been optimized almost to the theoretical value. (59) Being a high-performance material for a sodium-ion battery cathode, NVP is expected to be a potential candidate for the sodium electrode of EDI.

In this work, we successfully developed a new dual-ion EDI (DEDI) system and proposed to realize an ion conductor network in electrodes, which leads to superior desalination performance of the DEDI system. The DEDI system consisted of carbon-coated NASICON NVP (NVPW@C) as a sodium ion Faradaic electrode, AgCl as a chloride ion Faradaic electrode, and salt feed solution as the electrolyte. Three types of NVP samples were synthesized using a solvothermal method with different reaction times, hence three types of morphologies, including sphere (NVPS), flower (NVPF), and wire (NVPW) morphologies. The as-prepared NVP samples were coated uniformly with polydopamine (PDA) to form a core–shell structure to protect the sample from agglomeration during annealing. The NASICON structure, NVP core, and amorphous carbon shell can be obtained after annealing. Among the three types of NVPW@C samples, the one with the quasi-one-dimensional wire structure forms an ion conductor network and achieved the best desalination performance. DEDI with NVPW@C wires obtained an ultrahigh desalination capacity of 98.0 mg/g at a current density of 100 mA/g after 50 cycles. The outstanding desalination performance demonstrates the promising application of the NVPW@C–AgCl DEDI device for seawater desalination in the future.

Vanadium oxide (V2O5), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), sodium phosphate monobasic (NaH2PO4), oxalic acid (H2C2O4), dopamine hydrochloride, tris base, silver chloride (AgCl), carbon black, poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVdF), 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone (NMP), and sodium chloride (NaCl) used in this work were all purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.

In a typical synthesis of NVPW, 1 mmol V2O5 was first added into 30 mL of DMF. The solution was then heated to 80 °C and stirred for 30 min. NaH2PO4 (3 mmol), 3 mmol H2C2O4, and 5 mL of deionized water were added into the above solution and the solution was stirred for another 30 min at 80 °C. After that, the whole solution was placed into a 50 mL Teflon-lined stainless-steel autoclave and kept at 180 °C for 24 h. The product was washed thrice with acetone and dried in an oven at 60 °C. NVPS and NVPF were synthesized using the same method but kept at 180 °C for 0.5 and 10 h, respectively.

NVPW@C was fabricated using polydopamine (PDA). First, 2 mmol tris base was dissolved in 200 mL of deionized water to adjust the pH of the solution to 8.5. Dopamine hydrochloride (200 mg) and 100 mg of as-prepared NVP samples were added into the above tris buffer solution, followed by stirring for 2 h to let PDA attach well onto the surface of NVP. The mixture solution was filtered to collect NVPW@C and dried at 60 °C. After that, the powder was annealed in an Ar atmosphere first at 400 °C for 4 h as preheating and followed by heating at 750 °C for 8 h at a heating rate of 2 °C/min.

The NVPW@C and AgCl electrodes were prepared with 80 wt % of NVPW@C or AgCl powder,10 wt % of carbon black, and 10 wt % of PVdF. The well-mixed slurry was pasted on a graphite paper and dried in a vacuum oven under 60 °C overnight. In all of the desalination tests of this work, the mass ratio of the two electrodes was controlled to be around 1:1, each being around 10 mg. The prepared electrodes were assembled into an EDI cell with an anion exchange membrane (AEM), a cation exchange membrane (CEM), and a spacing piece.

The morphologies and nanostructures of the samples were characterized using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, JEOL JSM7600), transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL JEM-2100F), and X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker D8 Powder). The carbon contents were detected using thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). The surface areas of the samples were determined by the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method. The cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurement was carried out using an electrochemical workstation (VMP3, Biologic, France) in a two-electrode mode with NVPW@C and AgCl electrodes.

The desalination performance tests were carried out using a continuously recycling system and a battery tester. The recycling system consisted of an EDI device, a conductivity monitor, and a peristaltic pump. The feed solution was prepared by dissolving NaCl in deionized water. The initial salt concentration of the feed solution was about 1000 mg/L, and the flow rate was 100 mL/min. The feed solution (50 mL) was taken in a beaker and covered with parafilm to prevent evaporation. The feed solution was stirred continuously throughout the whole test. During the electrical deionization process, a constant current was applied to the EDI device via a battery analyzer (Neware, Shenzhen, China). The voltage window was set as −1.4 to 1.4 V. Current density, which is current per gram of NVPW@C, was set as 100, 150, 200, 300, and 500 mA/g in the rate capability test and 100 mA/g in the cycle capability test. The conductivity of the feed solution and the voltage were recorded simultaneously and independently.

The growth mechanism of NVP during the solvothermal process was studied by FESEM. Figure 1A–F shows the morphology of as-prepared NVP samples with different solvothermal reaction times of 0.5, 10, and 24 h. With a short reaction time of 0.5 h, NVP first assembled into microspheres (NVPS) rapidly, as shown in Figure 1A,D. It can be observed from SEM images that the surface of NVPS is rough and the diameter is around 5–6 μm. As the reaction time increased to 10 h, complex surface structures appeared via Ostwald ripening (57) and NVP formed flower-like (NVPF) microstructures, as shown in Figure 1B,E. With reaction time further prolonged, the metastable nanopedals on the surface began to recrystallize into nanowires (Figure S1). Upon further prolongation of the reaction time to 24 h, all of the flowers were turned into nanowire networks (NVPW), as shown in Figure 1C,F.

It should be noticed that the NASICON structure NVP can only appear after high-temperature (750 °C) annealing. To confirm the phase of NVP samples, XRD measurements were conducted on the three types of annealed NVP samples (NVPW, NVPF, and NVPS). As shown in Figure 2, all of the three samples are NASICON structure NVP (JCPDS No. 53-0018). NVPW and NVPF produced much sharper peaks in the XRD spectrum compared to those of NVPS, indicating better crystallinity. With prolonged reaction time, the phase of NVP is more uniform, which is beneficial for high crystallinity. Since higher crystallinity reduces the possible scattering arising from charged impurities and grain boundaries inside the nanostructures, the electron mobility of the crystalline sample is higher, leading to better electrical conductivity.

To preserve the delicate structure of NVP samples during the annealing process as well as enhancing electrical conductivity, carbon coating is an efficient method. In this work, as-prepared NVP samples were coated with PDA via in situ polymerization in buffer solution. During the annealing process, a slow heating rate of 2 °C/min was also helpful to protect the structure. After annealing, PDA was carbonized and formed an amorphous carbon layer on the surface of NVP. The morphologies of NVPW@C, NVPW@C, and NVPW@C were investigated using SEM, as shown in Figure S2A–C, respectively. Even after high-temperature (750 °C) annealing, the structures of all samples were still maintained well. The element mapping images (Figure S3) confirm the uniform distribution of elements Na, V, P, and C on NVPW@C The carbon contents of three NVP samples were detected by TGA, as shown in Figure S4. Generally, with the same coating method, the carbon contents of all three samples were similar. NVPW@C contained 34 wt % of carbon, whereas the carbon contents were found to be 36 wt % for NVPW@C and 32 wt % for NVPW@C Higher BET surface areas (Figure S5) of 215.3 and 183.0 m2/g were achieved for NVPW@C and NVPW@C, respectively, compared to 79.0 m2/g for NVPW@C owing to the nanowire and flower structures. TEM and high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) were used to examine the structure of NVPW@C Figure 3A shows a TEM image of NVPW@C networks. Figure 3B shows a single nanowire of the NVPW@C sample. A clear core–shell structure and a uniformly thick carbon coating layer can be observed from the image. The NVPW core is around 50 nm in diameter, and the thickness of the amorphous carbon shell is around 15–20 nm. Figure 3C,D shows HRTEM images of NVPW@C The inset in Figure 3C shows the magnified HRTEM image of the NVP core. The interfringe spacings shown in Figure 3C,D are around 0.28 and 0.37 nm, corresponding to the (116) and (113) interplanes of NASICON-type NVP, respectively. The XRD pattern of NVPW@C is shown in Figure 3E. The NASICON structure still can be detected, and a broad peak around 24° corresponding to amorphous carbon is observed. Figure 4 shows the schematics of the NVPW@C network and NVP atomic structure. (60) Since sodium ions can move through the NASICON structure freely and the NVPW network provides an ion conductor network, sodium ions are highly mobile in the NVPW sample. Additionally, the amorphous carbon shell provides electron transport channels, which enhance the electrical conductivity and further boost the desalination performance of NVPW.

The experimental setup and desalination mechanism are shown in Figures S6A,B and 5A, respectively. A typical EDI cell consisted of an NVPW@C electrode on a graphite paper and a cation exchange membrane (CEM), a spacer, an anion exchange membrane (AEM), and a AgCl electrode on a graphite paper (Figure S6A). The feed solution (50 mL) was pumped into the EDI device and circled back continuously at a flow rate of 100 mL/min (Figure S6B). Different weight ratios of NVPW@C and AgCl were used first to identify the optimal ratio. Although we have known that the theoretical specific capacity of AgCl (187.0 mAh/g) is higher than that of NVP (117.6 mAh/g), it should be noted that AgCl is not as good an ionic conductor as NVP. Therefore, the ions tend to react with the surface part of AgCl, and the capacity of AgCl in the experiment may not be as high as its theoretical value. As shown in Figure S6C, the highest salt removal capacity of 29.4 mg/g was achieved with the weight ratio of 1:1 at a current density of 500 mA/g. Using weight ratios of 1:2 and 2:1 instead, lower removal capacities of 28.8 and 22.3 mg/g, respectively, were found in the experiment. Thus, the weight ratio of two electrodes was controlled to be 1:1. Here, the loading masses of NVPW@C and AgCl of all DEDI devices were around 10 mg, and the total mass of one electrode was controlled to be 12–13 mg, including 80 wt % of NVPW@C or AgCl, 10 wt % of carbon black, and 10 wt % of PVdF. Additionally, various initial salt concentrations were also tested to find an appropriate choice for this DEDI system (Figure S6D). With the increase of salt concentration, the removal capacity was increased first and converged after 1000 mg/L. Hence, the initial concentration of 1000 mg/L was used for all tests in this work.

The cyclic voltammetry (CV) curve of the NVPW–AgCl two-electrode system with 1 M NaCl aqueous solution is shown in Figure 5B. During the anodic part, oxidization peaks were detected at around 0.04, 0.24, and 0.50 V. In the cathodic part, reduction peaks were located around −0.09, 0.14, and 0.36 V. The two main peaks at 0.50 and 0.36 V are owing to sodium ion extraction and re-intercalation into NVP electrodes. The small peaks may be assigned to some side reactions, such as the structural reorganization of NVP during ion extraction and insertion, (61) the surface-limited process, (62) and H+ intercalation due to the aqueous solution. (63) Reactions occurring on each electrode are shown below

In the deintercalation process, sodium ions and chloride ions were extracted from NVP and AgCl, respectively, which leads to a higher salt concentration in the feed. In the intercalation process, sodium ions and chloride ions in the feed are inserted into electrodes with the recovery of NVP and AgCl, which results in the decrease of salt concentration in the feed. The variation of salt concentration can be detected and converted from electrical conductivity measurements. A conductivity meter was placed in the feed to measure the electrical conductivity during the whole salination/desalination process. Figure 5C shows the curve of voltage vs time and the corresponding electrical conductivity during salination and desalination processes of the NVPW@C–AgCl EDI device at a current density of 100 mA/g. When a positive current was applied, the electrical conductivity increased due to the extraction of sodium ions and chloride ions from electrodes. When negative current was applied, the electrical conductivity decreased due to the insertion of sodium ions and chloride ions into electrodes. The conductivity curve shows excellent stability and demonstrates good regeneration of our DEDI system in aqueous condition.

Rate capabilities of the NVPW@C–AgCl systems with NVPW@C, NVPW@C, and NVPW@C as cathode materials were tested and compared, as shown in Figure 6A. The salt removal performances of three EDI devices were tested with different current densities (100, 150, 200, 300, and 500 mA/g). A constant current was applied to charge (discharge) electrodes till a bias of 1.4 V (−1.4 V) between electrodes was reached. Then, the removal capacity (Γ) was calculated via the following equation

where C0 is the initial NaCl concentration, Cf is the final NaCl concentration, V is the volume of the feed solution, and Mt is the total mass of electrode materials (including NVPW@C, AgCl, carbon black, and PVdF). The capacity stabilized for 10 cycles. At all measured current densities, better ion mobility and electrical conductivity as well as larger surface area allow superior performance of NVPW@C compared to that of other samples. With a high current density, however, reactions may not be complete due to faster charging/discharging, and the capacity is possibly limited by factors other than the morphologies, such as the surface effect, carbon shell, or performance of the AgCl electrode. These factors may narrow the difference among samples with different morphologies at a high current density. It is worth noting that when the current density returned to 100 mA/g after high current density cycling, the removal capacity of all of the measured samples almost recovered to the initial values. At a current density of 100 mA/g, the removal capacity of the DEDI device with NVPW@C is around 102.1 mg/g, whereas it is 83.1 mg/g with NVPW@C and 65.6 mg/g with NVPW@C Even the device with NVPW@C, which has the lowest removal capacity among the three, also achieved decent performance, showing outstanding desalination potential of NASICON-type NVP. The good performance may be attributed to high sodium ionic conductivity of NASICON structure NVP as well as electrical conductivity enhancement from the amorphous carbon shell. DEDI with NVPW@C shows the highest removal capacity at all measured current densities.

As we have discussed, NVP wires can form an ion conductor network, which leads to high ionic mobility. In addition to this unique structure, NVPW has the best crystallinity according to the XRD result and the largest surface area according to the BET result. Therefore, NVPW@C manifests the best salt removal performance. It is worth mentioning that, among the above three factors, i.e., structure, crystallinity, and surface area, the key factor of excellent desalination performance should be the unique structure. As shown in the XRD pattern, both NVPW and NVPF have much better crystallinity compared to that of NVPS. A similar trend is also found for BET surface areas, where the surface area of NVPW@C is only a little lower than that of NVPW@C but much higher than that of NVPW@C However, when it comes to desalination performance, we find that the difference between NVPW@C and NVPW@C (i.e., 102.1 vs 83.1 mg/g at a current density 100 mA/g) is close to the difference between NVPW@C and NVPW@C (i.e., 83.1 vs 65.6 mg/g at a current density 100 mA). Unlike the cases of surface area and crystallinity, in desalination tests, NVPW@C outperforms both NVPW@C and NVPW@C significantly. This implies that the crystallinity and surface area may affect the desalination performance, but they are not the most important factors in this work. If the crystallinity or surface area is the dominating mechanism behind the desalination performance, NVPW@C should have much higher desalination capacity than that of NVPW@C but only slightly lower desalination capacity than that of NVPW@C This does not agree with our experimental observations. Hence, we expect the key factor to be the unique structure of the ion conductor network since, among the three samples, only NVPW@C has such feature.

To shed light on the contribution of the carbon shell, we tested the rate capability of a bare NVP sample. The bare sample was obtained after annealing the NVPW precursor directly without PDA coating. As shown in Figure S7, desalination capacities of bare NVP were lower than those of NVPW@C at all measured current densities. Although the initial salt removal capacity of bare NVP was as high as 94.0 mg/g, it decreased to about 69.0 mg/g when it was stable. The carbon coating enhances the sample performance in two possible ways. First, the carbon shell can protect the wire structure well to form the ion conductor network. Second, the carbon shell can help overcome the poor electrical conductivity of NVP.

The outstanding desalination performance of NVPW@C was also shown in the cycling test. Figure 6B shows the salination/desalination capacity of the NVPW@C–AgCl EDI device for 50 cycles at the current density of 100 mA/g. The desalination capacity of the first cycle was up to 124.0 mg/g and decreased to 98.0 mg/g after 50 cycles. Both the desalination capacity and salination capacity were quite stable over 50 cycles. Furthermore, the salination capacity was almost identical to the desalination capacity. The corresponding electric charge capacity of the NVPW@C–AgCl device is shown in Figure S8. The electric charge capacity was calculated using the specific capacity of NVPW@C, which is directly obtained from a battery analyzer. At a current density of 100 mA/g, the initial discharge capacity was 104.9 mAh/g, and it decreased to 89.2 mAh/g at the 50th cycle. The high electrical charge capacity indicates that a large amount of sodium and chloride ions were able to intercalate into electrodes. Besides, electrical conductivity is also an important factor for electrochemical stability and reversibility of samples. Here, the amorphous carbon shell played an important role to improve electrical conductivity of NVPW and yielded superior stability and reversibility of NVPW@C–AgCl in aqueous conditions. For comparison, cycling tests with AgCl were also conducted using NVPW@C and NVPW@C (Figure S9). The first cycle desalination capacities of NVPW@C and NVPW@C devices were 94.4 and 77.5 mg/g and decreased to 70.4 and 58.8 mg/g after 50 cycles, respectively. A longer cycling test on the NVPW@C–AgCl DEDI device was performed at a current density of 500 mA/g for 500 cycles, as shown in Figure 6C. The initial discharge capacity was 34 mg/g and decreased to 26 mg/g after 500 cycles. The removal capacity of our DEDI device is much higher than that in previous works, such as activated carbon CDI, (22,64) CNT CDI, (26) graphene CDI, (29,65−67) graphene aerogel/TiO2 CDI, (30) carbon aerogel FTCDI, (32) Na4Mn9O18 HCDI, (34) Na2FeP2O7 HCDI, (35) etc., which are less than 30 mg/g. This work also shows a higher salt removal capacity compared to that in other DEDI works, including 68.5 mg/g with NaMn0.44O2–BiOCl (38) and 57.4 mg/g with NaMn0.44O2–AgCl. (42)

The curve of salt concentration change of NVPW@C at different current densities is shown in Figure 6D. The salt concentration curve was changed almost linearly with all of the current densities due to the constant current applied. This suggests that most electric charges combined with ions during deintercalation and intercalation processes. Kinetics deionization rates can be calculated as Γ/Δt, where Γ is the salt removal capacity and Δt is the time duration of the salt removal process. The calculated rates based on Figure 5C are 0.04, 0.05, 0.06, 0.09, and 0.14 mg/(g s) at current densities of 100, 150, 200, 300, and 500 mA/g, respectively, demonstrating rapid desalination rates of NVPW@C

The reaction mechanism on both electrodes was further studied by XRD. The two electrode materials on the graphite paper were first charged to 1.4 V at a current density of 100 mA/g, followed by XRD measurement. Then, they were applied a negative current to −1.4 V with 100 mA/g and underwent XRD measurement again. Figure 7A shows XRD patterns of initial NVPW, state after sodium extraction, and state after sodium recovery. After deintercalation, peaks of NVP shifted to a sodium-poor phase. Peaks (116) and (300) shifted to higher angles, indicating smaller d-spacings after sodium ion extraction. After intercalation, sodium ions were recovered and peaks of NVP almost returned to the initial positions. Figure 7D shows XRD patterns of initial AgCl, chloride extraction state, and chloride recovery state. In the deintercalation process, chloride ions were extracted from AgCl. The peaks corresponding to Ag appeared after deintercalation and were located around 2θ 38.1 and 44.3°. When the voltage reached −1.4 V, the relative peak strength of Ag was reduced obviously compared to that of AgCl. Besides, the morphological stability of NVPW@C and AgCl electrodes (with PVdF and carbon black) was studied as well since new phases were detected during desalination and salination processes. Figure 7B,C shows the morphology of the NVPW@C electrode before and after 50 cycles at a current density of 100 mA/g. It is found that the wire networks of NVPW@C still can be detected after cycling. Also, a similar morphology of the AgCl electrode can be found before (Figure 7E) and after (Figure 7F) 50 cycles at a current density of 100 mA/g. The SEM images before and after cycling show the excellent morphological stability of two electrode materials of this DEDI system.

A new dual-ion electrochemical deionization device has been demonstrated to achieve superior desalination performance with high salt removal capacity, fast desalination rate, and excellent stability. It was composed of NVPW@C as a sodium ion Faradaic electrode, AgCl as a chloride ion Faradaic electrode, and NaCl aqueous solution as the electrolyte. The redox reactions occurred on the electrodes when a constant current was applied. When a positive current was applied during the salt removal process, sodium ions and chloride ions released from electrodes into the electrolyte. When a negative current was applied during the salt removal process, sodium ions and chloride ions in the electrolyte got chemically inserted into electrodes. Owing to its ion conductor network consisting of NVP nanowires, NVPW@C exhibited a higher desalination capacity than that of NVPW@C and NVPW@C Moreover, the amorphous carbon shell formed by carbonization of PDA coating improved NVP sample’s electrical conductivity and further enhanced its desalination performance. At a current density of 100 mA/g, a high salt removal capacity of 102.1 mg/g was obtained on the EDI device with NVPW@C and AgCl. The salt removal capacity was still as high as 98.0 mg/g after 50 cycles at a current density of 100 mA/g. A high desalination rate of 0.14 mg/(g s) was obtained at a current density of 500 mA/g. The promising desalination properties shown in this work demonstrated the potential of NVPW@C as a candidate material for desalination and the viability of the NVPW@C–AgCl DEDI system for seawater desalination in the future.