NASICON-structured NaTi2(PO4)3 is regarded as the most suitable anode for aqueous sodium ion batteries, however, the low electronic conductivity intrinsically restricts its application. NaTi2(PO4)3-carbon composite is prepared by a facile solid state sintering method and studied as the anode in aqueous sodium ion battery, coupling with activated carbon as the cathode. This neutral sodium ion battery shows a high output voltage of 1.17 V, with outstanding rate and cycling stability. The full cell delivers an energy density of 33.4 Wh∙kg−1 at a power density of 33.4 W∙kg−1 based on the total active mass of the anode and cathode materials.

Renewable energy, such as solar and wind has experienced a blowout in recent years, however, their intermittent characteristic makes them difficult to be used directly, the storage and rectification become the essential configuration to make full use of them [1]. Electrochemical energy storage technologies are expected to be the most promising energy storage technologies as they can operate with high efficiency, and can be based on cheap, sustainable and recyclable materials [2].

Although lithium-ion batteries have been greatly improved in energy/power density and life span, the safety issues associated with flammable organic electrolytes and the growing concerns of the price and availability of Li resources impede their large-scale deployment. From this point of view, aqueous sodium ion rechargeable batteries provide us with a new option with advantages of both cheap and rich in reverse [3], [4]. As for the anode, NASICON-structured NaTi2(PO4)3 (denoted as NTP) is regarded as the most suitable owing to the high specific capacity, reasonable working potential, and open three-dimensional frameworks for fast Na-ion diffusions [5], [6]. However, the low electronic conductivity intrinsically restricts its performance. The most effective method to overcome this problem is combining with highly conductive component or decreasing the NTP particle sizes. For example, fabrication of NTP-graphene composite or construction of NTP-carbon composite, the electrochemical performance can be greatly improved [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12].

In this work, we try to prepare the NaTi2(PO4)3-C composite (denoted as NTP-C) in a facile way with lower cost, time saving and environmental friendly. By mixing the precursors together through solid state grinding in advance, following with the calcination in inert atmosphere, NaTi2(PO4)3-C is successfully synthesized in large scale directly. NTP-C is studied as anode in aqueous sodium-ion battery coupling with activated carbon as cathode in Na2SO4 electrolyte, which exhibits an outstanding electrochemical performance with excellent rate and cycling stability.

NaH2PO4 (99%, Sigma Aldrich), TiO2 (Aladdin P25), and (NH4)2HPO4 (>98%, Sigma Aldrich) are mixed in the molar ratio of 1:2:2 in a planetary miller. Another 3% acetylene black and 5% expanded graphite (500 mesh, Heng Run Da Corporation, Shandong, China) are added and milled for 60 min at the speed of 600 r·min−1 (milling media size: 10 mm). The resulting mixture is sintered at 700 °C for 2 h in Ar atmosphere. Activated carbon is bought from Kuraray (YP-50F) and used without further purification.

X-ray diffractometer (XRD, Rigaku) is used to determine the crystal structure of the material. The morphology is examined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, H9000NAR) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM, S4800). The carbon content in the NTP-C is determined by Q50 thermo gravimetric apparatus (TA, USA) from the mass loss at 900 °C in Air.

The electrode slurry is prepared by mixing 20% conductive black, 10% polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) binder and 70% active material in 1-methyl- 2-pyrrolidone (NMP) in a mortar. The slurry is coated on the graphite paper and dried in vacuum at 80 °C for 24 h. The electrochemical tests of the single electrode are performed in a three electrode system including the working electrode, a counter electrode (Pt sheet) and a reference electrode (Ag/AgCl) in 1 M Na2SO4 electrolytes. Full cells are fabricated using activated carbon as the cathode in a sandwich-type coin (CR2032), with filter paper as the separator. Galvanostatic charge and discharge tests are performed using LAND CT2001A Battery Testing system.

The XRD pattern of NTP-C is shown in Fig. 1a, all diffraction peaks could be well indexed to the NaTi2(PO4)3 NASICON structure (JCPDF card No. 33-1296) [5]. No other peaks indexed to the impurities could be found from the pattern, indicating a high crystallization and purity. SEM and TEM are performed to investigate the detailed morphology of NTP-C, as shown in Fig. 1b & c. The diameter of NTP particles is approximately 200–300 nm, with intimately encapsulated by the acetylene black and graphite. By mixing through ball milling, the precursors are mixed homogenously and the carbon species in the precursors effectively suppress the aggregation and growth of NTP particles. The homogenously dispersed carbon species may across the composites also greatly improve the conductivity, benefitting the electrochemical properties. From the TEM image in Fig. 1d, we can see that the NTP particles are surrounded by the acetylene black and graphite sheets, which is similar to the SEM results, interplanar spacing of 0.366 nm ascribed to the NTP (1 0 0) face could be observed from the HRTEM results in Fig. 1e, indicating the high crystalline of the NTP [10]. We also conducted energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping, as shown in Fig. S1. All elements are dispersed homogenously, suggesting that carbon spices and NTP are mixed compactly. The carbon content in NTP-C was determined to be 11.56% by the TGA analysis, as shown in Fig. 1f.

Cyclic voltammetry is used to study the electrochemical performance of the NTP-C as the anode in aqueous Na2SO4 electrolyte from −1.05 to −0.4 V in a three electrode system, as shown in Fig. 2a. The pair of peaks corresponding to the Ti4+/Ti3+ redox reactions during extraction/insertion of Na+ in the NaTi2(PO4)3 could be observed at about −0.88 V (reduction) and −0.81 V (oxidation) versus the Ag/AgCl [6], [8]. The shape of the CV curves from 0.2 mV∙s−1 to 2.0 mV∙s−1 remain similar, suggesting an excellent high rate performance and stability [10]. The CV curves of the activated carbon within the potential range from −0.2 to 0.55 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) in a three-electrode system are shown in Fig. 2b, which exhibits the typical rectangular shape of the electrochemical double layer capacitor. The CV curves at different scan rates remain the same shape, also suggest an excellent rate performance.

The galvanostatic charge-discharge of NTP-C in three electrode system is tested at different current densities, as shown in Fig. 3. The first charge and discharge capacity at the current density of 1C (1C = 100 mA∙g−1 in this work, based on the active material in the anode) could reach about 98 and 110.2 mAh∙g−1. The specific capacities decrease with increasing the current density, for example, the reversible capacity could reach 86, 67 and 52mAh∙g−1 at the density of 2C, 5C and 10C, respectively, besides, NTP-C also exhibits good capacity recovery capability when the current density shifts to 1C, as shown in Fig. 3b & c. The cycling stability of NTP-C is also evaluated, as shown in Fig. 3d, the reversible capacity of 78.1 mAh∙g−1 could be obtained with the coulombic efficiency maintains approximately 100% after 100 cycles at the current density of 2C. The rate performance of AC electrode was shown in Fig. 3e & f, remarkably, the reversible capacity of AC almost remained at ca. 38 mAh∙g−1 even at different current densities.

Due to the outstanding electrochemical properties of NTP-C and AC, the full cell assembled by AC cathode and NTP-C anode is studied in detail. The charge/discharge curves of both sides vs Ag/AgCl and the charge/discharge behavior of the full cell at the current density of 1C are shown in Fig. 4a. The weight ratio of cathode and anode in the full cell is ∼2.5:1 based on the specific capacities of both sides. The full cell delivers an average discharge potential of 1.17 V. CV curves of the full cell (Fig. 4b) exhibit the obvious oxidation/reduction peaks from 0.8 to 1.6 V, which is consistent with the charge/discharge curves. The discharge capacity (based on the active material in the anode) at the current density of 1C could reach about 100 mAh∙g−1, with the current density increases to 2C, 5C and 10C, the specific capacities decreased to 89.8, 67.2 and 55.4 mAh∙g−1, respectively. When the current density recovers to 1C, the specific capacity increases to 98 mAh∙g−1 again. The long cycling performance of the full cell is also evaluated at the current density of 2C, as shown in Fig. 4e & f, the reversible capacity decreases to 61.9 mAh∙g−1 after 500 cycles, with 61% capacity retention and almost 100% coulombic efficiency. The energy density of the full cell is 33.4 Wh∙kg−1 at a power density of 33.4 W∙kg−1 based on the total mass of the active materials. The low cost and outstanding electrochemical performance enables the possible of the actual application of the NTP-C synthesized in this work.

NaTi2(PO4)3-C composite is obtained through two-step solid state method in a large scale in this work. When used for sodium storage in aqueous electrolyte, the specific capacity could reach 98 mAh∙g−1at the current density of 100 mA∙g−1. By coupling with activated carbon as the cathode material, a new type of aqueous sodium-ion battery is assembled, with the energy density of 33.4 Wh∙kg−1 at a power density of 33.4 W∙kg−1.