NASICON-type ceramic electrolyte has been considered as one of the potential candidates for solid state electrolytes with excellent conductivity at room temperature and good stability under atmosphere. In this paper, NASICON-type Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) was prepared by a solution method and dispersed in poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) to form LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte membranes (CEM) by the method of casting. The effects of LATP filler on the structure, morphology, ionic conductivity, stability of the LATP/PVDF CEM were studied. It was found that the LATP/PVDF CEM had high lithium ion conductivity and excellent electrochemical stability with the electrochemical stability window up to 5.67 V versus Li+/Li. The discharge capacity of lithium iron phosphate cells assembled with LATP/PVDF CEM was 163.5 mAh g−1 and retained over 95.7% of its initial capacity after 50 cycles. The results show that the addition of LATP filler to PVDF matrix increases the amorphous phase of the polymer by acting as a gel center and the concentration of Li+ is increased, which is beneficial to the synergism in the migration of Li+ and enhances the ionic conductivity.

Lithium-ion rechargeable battery (LIB) is considered to be an effective way to solve the increasing demand of high energy density power supply in various energy storage technologies [[1], [2], [3]]. Li-ion batteries have the advantages of larger energy density, higher power density, longer cycle life, higher operating voltage, lower self-discharge rate and fewer maintenance requirements [4,5]. The porous separator is an important component of the lithium-ion battery which is placed between the cathode and anode to avoid the physical contact of two electrodes and allows free lithium ion transmission and isolates electrons' moving. To a great extent, the choice of electrolyte determines the working mechanism of the battery and affects the specific energy, the safety, the cycle performance, the rate charge and discharge performance, the storage performance and the cost of the battery [4,6,7].

The NASICON-Type glass ceramics Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 exhibits higher ionic conductivity at room temperature, which is mainly composed of LiTi2(PO4)3, among which Ti4+ ions were partly replaced by Al3+ ions. LiTi2(PO4)3 is composed of TiO6 octahedron and PO4 tetrahedron, which are connected by their angles to form a three-dimensional network structure. This structure causes cavities, where lithium-ions reside, and bottlenecks in which lithium-ions pass through. Replacing Ti4+ with a smaller ion Al3+ would reduce the unit cell dimension and increase the ionic conductivity [4,[8], [9], [10]]. Recently, few attempts have been made to investigate the roles of the lithium ionic conductor, Lithium aluminum titanium phosphate glass ceramic (LATP), in the PVDF-based composite polymer electrolytes systems, LATP also has been used as a solid electrolyte layer in all-solid-state lithium batteries [[11], [12], [13]], lithium/sulfur [14] and lithium/air batteries [15,16].

Poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) generally refers to vinylidene fluoride homopolymer [17], and sometimes can also be expressed as a copolymer of vinylidene fluoride and a small amount of fluorovinyl monomer. The Csingle bondC chain component of the main chain, specifically, Csingle bondH and Csingle bondF side groups have higher bond energy. PVDF is a linear crystalline polymer (crystallinity 65–78%), the appearance is translucent or white powder or granular, the density is 1.75–1.78 g cm−3. The glass transition temperature of PVDF is −39 °C, while embrittlement temperature is 62 °C, melting point is 170 °C and thermal decomposition temperature is about 316 °C [18]. PVDF can be included in the electrolyte membrane material options because of its high heat resistance and chemical resistance, mechanical properties and good toughness. In recent years, PVDF is used to commonly prepare lithium diaphragm materials popular substrate.

In this study, LATP/PVDF composite polymer electrolyte membrane was prepared by filling LATP particles into PVDF polymer matrix. The effect of active filler LATP on the structure and electrochemical properties of LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte membranes (CEM) was studied. The morphology and structure of the electrolyte were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), thermo gravimetric analysis (TGA) and FT-IR spectra, respectively. The electrochemical and cyclic properties of LiFePO4/CPE/Li battery were also studied. The results indicate that LATP is nice filler for preparing polymer electrolyte membrane of Li-ion battery.

The raw materials for LATP synthesis were LiOH·H2O (99.99%, Aladdin), Al2O3 (99%, Aladdin), TiO2 (99%, Aladdin), H3PO4 (85%, Sinopharm) and anhydrous ethanol. Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) and N, N-dimethylformamide (DMF) were used as the polymer and solvent, respectively. The electrolyte solution was 1.0 mol L−1 LiPF6 solution in a mixture of ethylene carbonate (EC), ethyl methyl carbonate (EMC) and dimethyl carbonate (DMC) (1:1:1 by volume) which was supplied by Shenzhen CAPCHEM Technology Co. Ltd.

Lithium-ion-conducting material Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 solid electrolyte was prepared by a solution method [14,19]. Firstly, a certain amount of LiOH·H2O was added to the distilled water and stirred constantly until dissolved completely. Subsequently, Al2O3, TiO2 and H3PO4 according to their stoichiometric ratio was added to the above solution and stirred magnetically at 120 °C until a high viscosity paste was formed. The mixture was heated for 4 h at 1173 K by 2 °C/min in a muffle stove. After cooling to room temperature, the fine powders of obtained precursor were made by ball milling in an anhydrous ethanol medium with agate in the planetary mill at 500 rpm for 12 h. The LATP powders were prepared after dried at 100 °C.

LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte membranes were prepared by casting method in this work. LATP and PVDF (mass ratio of LATP: PVDF = 0:1, 1:1, 2:1 and 3:1) were distributed in DMF solution at first. The mixed solution was ultrasonically agitated and then mechanically stirred at 70 °C for at least 24 h to obtain a homogeneous casting solution. Subsequently, the casting solution was spread on a clean glass plate and dried at 50 °C for 12 h under vacuum to form the LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte membrane, which was punched into discs with the diameter of 19 mm for further use.

The microstructure of LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte membrane was observed by scanning electron microscope (SEM, JEO, JSM-6610LV). The crystalline phase composition of the electrolyte was identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (D/MAX 2550, Rigaku, Japan) with CuKa radiation (λ = 0.15406 nm) in the 2θ range of 10° ~ 90° with a step size of 0.02° at room temperature.

Liquid electrolyte uptakes were measured by weighting method. First, the dry LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte membranes were cut into same round pieces and weighted as W0. After submerged in 1 M LiPF6 liquid electrolyte solution for 20 min until equilibrium was achieved and then weighted as W1. The excess electrolyte solution was gently removed away with wipes in an argon-filled glove box. The liquid uptake Eq is calculated by the equation:

The electrical conductivity of LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte was measured by AC impedance technique by an electrochemical work station (CHI 604E) in the temperature range of 25–85 °C with the frequency ranging from 10−2 Hz to 105 Hz at an amplitude of 5 mV. The potentiostatic polarization method was applied to estimate the electronic conductivity under a polarizing voltage of 0.2 V. The electrolyte membrane was sandwiched by two stainless steel (SS) electrodes. The ionic conductivity (σ) of electrolyte was obtained from the following equation:(2)Here d is the electrolyte thickness, Rb is the bulk resistance and S is the area of the electrode.

The electrochemical stability was determined by linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) test in the potential range of 2.0–7.0 V (vs. Li+/Li) with a scanning rate of 10 mV s−1, in which the electrolyte membrane was sandwiched by SS as counter electrode and Li-metal as reference electrode.

The electrochemical performance of LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte membrane was tested by galvanostatic charging-discharging of CR2016-type coin cells with the structure of Li/CEM/LiFePO4, in which the electrolyte membrane was sandwiched by lithium anode and LiFePO4 cathode. The LiFePO4 cathode was made by mixing LiFePO4 (Tianjin STL Energy Technology Co., Ltd., China), PVDF and carbon black (mass ratio of 80:10:10) with N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone as solvent to get homogeneous slurry, and then the slurry was spread on a sheet of Al foil and dried at 120 °C under vacuum for 24 h. The charge-discharge cycling was conducted from 2.5 V to 4.2 V (BT2000, Arbin Instruments, USA) at room temperature.

Fig. 1 shows the microstructure of LATP precursor prepared by solution method. It can be seen from the diagram that the LATP particles prepared at different amplification are uniform, which is basically hexagonal and there is no obvious agglomeration phenomenon. The elemental analysis of the solid electrolyte LATP was carried out using an EDS test system with the aid of SEM. Fig. 1(e–h) shows the SEM micrograph of LATP particles and the corresponding elements O, P, Al and Ti distribution, failed to detect the Li element. This is because the relative atomic mass of Li is too small to be obtained by EDS [20].

The SEM images of LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte membranes with different proportions are given in Fig. 2. It can be found from Fig. 2(a) that the pure PVDF surface is relatively smooth and when inorganic particles are less filled, the composite electrolyte membrane is basically polymer from Fig. 2(b). LATP particles of inorganic solid electrolyte are uniformly dispersed in the PVDF matrix from Fig. 2(c). The electrolyte membrane is dense and the inorganic solid electrolyte powder particles are only coated in the matrix by the PVDF polymer. It is found from Fig. 2(d) that when the amount of inorganic filler is too much, the film-forming property of the composite phase is deteriorated, and the powder of the inorganic solid electrolyte filler falls off.

The particle size of inorganic solid electrolyte filler itself is larger, the film thickness is not easy to control when the amount of filler is higher, and the flexibility of the membrane is also deteriorated, which is not conducive to the effective contact between electrode and electrolyte interface [21]. In this paper, the proportion of inorganic solid electrolyte fillers with a higher proportion was not further investigated. Fig. 2(e) also gives a physical diagram of the LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte.

Fig. 3 shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of LATP particles and LATP/PVDF membranes. As is known to all, LATP itself is a perfect crystalline form of crystal [22]. From the XRD patterns, it can be observed that the main characteristic diffraction peaks of all the XRD patterns coincide with the characteristic peaks of the standard spectrum (JCPDS card PDF#35-0754). The crystal structure is cubic and the space group is R3c. However, some impurity peaks due to secondary phases such as AlPO4 and LiTi2(PO4)3 appear in the XRD spectra, which may be due to the smaller Al3+ ion radius (r = 0.535 nm) than Ti4+ (r = 0.605 nm). The polymer electrolyte membrane containing LATP has a similar diffraction peak. With the increase of the proportion of LATP filler in the inorganic solid electrolyte, the crystallization summit of the polymer film gradually decreases. This is mainly due to the stronger crystallization peak strength of the inorganic materials than the organic polymer, and the difference of signal intensity causes the crystallization peak to be compressed. The results show that adding LATP to PVDF can increase the amorphous area and reduce the crystallinity of polymer matrix, thereby improve the ionic conductivity.

Fig. 4(a) shows the TGA diagrams of LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte membranes. It can be seen that the LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte membranes have no obvious weight loss before 500 °C, and the thermal decomposition temperature increases gradually with the increase of LATP inorganic content. Inorganic solid electrolyte (LATP) is usually prepared at 800 °C, so it has excellent thermal stability. The addition of inorganic solid electrolyte LATP can improve the thermal stability of polymer electrolyte membrane to some extent.

Fig. 4(b) is the DSC diagram of LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte membranes prepared with different mass ratios. The melting temperatures (Tm) of the LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte membranes tend to decrease as the LATP particles are added to the PVDF polymer matrix. The specific values are shown in Table 1. The Tm of pure PVDF is about 167.5 °C, while the melting temperatures of LATP/PVDF CEMs are slightly lower after filling the LATP nanoparticles. The crystal melting enthalpy of the LATP/PVDF CEMs can be integrated from the DSC curve. According to Formula (3), the crystallinity Xc of the LATP/PVDF CEMs can be calculated as below. (3)where ΔHm is the melting heat of fully crystallized PVDF with a value of 104.7 J g−1. The crystallinity Xc of LATP/PVDF CEM is shown in Table 1. As the LATP content increases, the crystallinity of LATP/PVDF CEM first decreases and then increases. When the mass ratio of LATP to PVDF is 2:1, the crystallinity of LATP/PVDF CEM is minimal. This is due to the plasticization of the LATP particles, which increases the free volume of the condensed state and the amorphous regions in the polymer, thereby lowering the crystallinity. However, when too much LATP is added, the agglomeration will occur in the polymer aggregate, and the surface effect will be reduced, which will lead to the increase of crystallinity of the electrolyte system.

Fig. 5(a) shows the FT-IR spectra of LATP/PVDF CEMs and pure PVDF membrane. In the spectra, the peak at 1404 cm−1 is the absorption peak of single bondCH2single bond deformation stretching vibration in PVDF, the peak at 1186 cm−1 is the stretching vibration absorption peak of single bondCF2single bond, the peak at 882 cm−1 is the characteristic absorption peak of the amorphous phase and the peak at 854 cm−1, 796 cm−1, 763 cm−1, 614 cm−1 are the vibration absorption peaks of the crystalline phase [23,24]. After the inorganic fast ion conductor LATP nanoparticles are doped, the intensity of the infrared spectra of the composite electrolyte is decreased with the mass ratio of LATP to PVDF increasing and the peak at 1186 cm−1 is changed obviously. These changes indicate that some bonds in PVDF are affected by the addition of LATP. The result is similar with Ref. [25] and the PVDF may have complexation with LATP to some extent and the intensity of the complexation is depended on the mass ratio of LATP to PVDF [25]. However, this phenomenon needs to be investigated deeply in the further work.

Liquid electrolyte uptake is an important factor to characterize the composite electrolyte membrane of battery. The electrolyte uptake is dependent on the membrane morphology, such as pore structure, Pore size distribution, and surface roughness [4,26,27]. High liquid electrolyte uptake will effectively improve the rate capacity of batteries. Fig. 5(b) shows the liquid electrolyte uptakes of LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte membrane at room temperature. It can be seen from the diagram that the absorption of electrolyte is related to the content of LATP. With the LATP content increasing, the liquid electrolyte uptake of the composite electrolyte membrane first increased and then decreased, which is because the LATP powder particles in the electrolyte membrane are scattered, and cannot play the high ionic conductivity of the continuous phase under the high pressure test condition. In the PVDF based polymer electrolyte membrane, when the amount of inorganic LATP is too much, the performance of the composite phase film becomes worse, and the inorganic solid electrolyte filler powder will fall off. The particle size of inorganic solid electrolyte filler is bigger, and the thickness of the membrane is not easy to control when the amount is high. At the same time, the flexibility of the membrane is also worse, which is not conducive to the effective contact of electrode electrolyte interface, so the liquid absorption rate decreases.

Electrochemical stability window is an important factor of electrolyte. Wide electrochemical window can increase the selection range of cathode active materials. The working range of lithium-ion battery is generally within 2.0–4.3 V. Therefore, it is very important to determine the decomposition potential of electrolytes by electrochemical window test. Linear scanning voltammetry (LSV) can be used to investigate the electrochemical stability of electrolyte membrane. As shown in Fig. 6(a), the current of the working electrode with CEM has no significant change relative to that of Li+/Li in the range of 2.0–5.0 V. With the addition of LATP, the electrochemical stability window of the CEM becomes wider and wider. When m(LATP):m(PVDF) = 2:1, the anodic decomposition voltage of the CEM is above 5.67 V, which means that the electrolyte will not be decomposed in 2.0–5.67 V. The potential window can meet the current charge and discharge range of active substances in any lithium-ion battery. The results showed that the electrochemical stability of the composite electrolyte membrane was improved with the addition of LATP. This is the same as the report that LATP particles can be used as surface stabilizers and can improve the electrochemical oxidation stability of composite electrolytes [4,28,29]. The stability of the CEMs renders them suitable for use in a lithium ion polymer battery [30].

Fig. 6(b) shows the log σ ~ 1/T curve of the composite electrolyte prepared by filling different proportions of LATP in PVDF. It can be seen from the figure that as the temperature increases, the ionic conductivity of LATP/PVDF also increases. This is mainly due to the fact that the higher temperature is, the faster movement of the polymer chains is and the faster migration of Li+ ion. Log σ is linearly related to 1/T, so the activation energy of ion transport Ea can be further obtained by Arrehnius equation:(4)where R is the gas content, σ is the electrical conductivity of the composite electrolyte, σ0 is the pre-exponential index and T is the testing temperature. According to the Arrehnius equation, the activation energy Ea of ion migration can be calculated from the slope of a straight line. The ionic conductivity and activation energy of LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte at 25–85 °C are shown in Table 2.

As shown in Table 2, the ionic conductivityσis first increased and then decreased with the LATP filling increasing. When m(LATP):m(PVDF) = 2:1, the CEM has the highest ionic conductivity and the lowest activation energy. The conductivity is 0.96 × 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature, and 1.87 × 10−3 S cm−1 at 85 °C. The activation energy (Ea) is 0.52 eV. This is because the migration of Li+ occurs mainly in the amorphous region of the composite membrane. When a certain amount of LATP is filled, the crystallinity of the system can be increased and the amorphous phase content in the CEM can be decreased, which will reduce the energy barrier of Li+ transport and lead to higher ionic conductivity. LATP itself also has a certain ionic conductivity (inset of Fig. 6(b)). After adding LATP to the PVDF matrix, the concentration of Li+ is increased, which is beneficial to the synergism in the migration of Li+ and the increase of the ionic conductivity. However, if an excessive amount of LATP is added, the inorganic particles are likely to agglomerate together, thereby impeding the migration of Li+. At the same time, the amorphous phase content of the system becomes smaller due to the agglomeration of the inorganic particles. The migration speed and conductivity of Li+ are decreased.

Since the composite electrolyte membrane with m(LATP):m(PVDF) = 2:1 has the highest ionic conductivity and the widest electrochemical stability window, it was used to characterize the stability of the CEM to the interface of lithium metal electrode and the compatibility of lithium electrode.

Fig. 7 shows the AC impedance of the Li/CEM/Li symmetric battery tested at room temperature for a week. The impedance spectra in the figure consist of a semicircle and a straight line. The semicircle in the high frequency region is the interface contact impedance of Li/CEM. It can be seen from the figure that the interface impedance of Li/CEM is always increased within 48 h. The impedance of the Li/CEM begins to decrease and begins to stabilize after 72 h. This is because there will be a layer of SEI film formed at the beginning of the Li/CEM interface. As the interface impedance of solid electrolyte filler, LATP has the function of stabilizing electrode and electrolyte interface. The stable impedance of Li/CEM interface is about 780 Ω.

Fig. 8(a) shows the first charge-discharge performance of LiFePO4/CEM/Li cells assembled with different proportions of LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte membrane at 0.1C, and Fig. 8(b) is a corresponding cycle performance diagram. The theoretical filling amounts of m(LATP):m(PVDF) are 0:1, 1:1, 2:1 and 3:1, respectively. The first discharge specific capacity of LiFePO4/CEM/Li cells at 0.1C is 136.6, 144.0, 163.5 and 156.2 mAh g−1, respectively. As shown in Fig. 8(b), the corresponding discharge capacity is 113.4, 135.9, 148.8 and 134.5 mAh g−1 after 50 cycles and the retention rates is 83.0%, 94.4%, 91.0% and 86.1%, respectively. The results show that the composite electrolyte filled with m(LATP):m(PVDF) = 2:1 has the best electrochemical performance. Fig. 8(c) shows the first charge-discharge curves of the LiFePO4/CEM/Li cells assembled by CEM with m(LATP):m(PVDF) of 2:1 under different rate conditions. Fig. 8(d) shows the corresponding cycle performance diagram. The first discharge capacity of LiFePO4/CEM/Li battery tested in 0.1C, 0.2C, 0.5C and 1C is 163.2, 155.3, 150.0 and 141.2 mAh g−1, respectively. After 50 cycles, the corresponding discharge capacity is 154.7, 146.8, 127.1 and 118.8 mAh g−1 and the capacity retention rate is 94.8%, 94.5%, 84.7% and 84.1%, respectively. The results show that the Li/CEM/FePO4 battery with CEM of m(LATP):m(PVDF) = 2:1 has good performance and excellent cycling stability. The cycle performance and coulombic efficiency of Li/CEM/FePO4 battery with CEM of m(LATP):m(PVDF) = 2:1 at 0.1C are shown in Fig. 8(e). After 200 cycles, the discharge specific capacity still reaches to 147.1 mAh g−1, the capacity retention rate is 90.1% and the coulomb efficiency is also close to 100%.

The inorganic solid electrolyte LATP was prepared by a simple solution method and then the LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte membrane was prepared by casting method. It was seen that with the increasing of LATP content, the thermal stability and ionic conductivity of LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte were increased, and the electrochemical stability window became wider. In addition, Using LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte as a separator, the Li/CEM/LiFePO4 battery has higher capacity and better cycling performance. The results suggested that LATP/PVDF composite electrolyte membrane is a promising separation membrane for rechargeable LIB.