CO2 sensors capable of operating at room temperature were fabricated using LaOCl/SnO2 thin films. The carrier mobility of the SnO2 layer was increased by H2 ambient annealing, during which the O vacancies in SnO2 were passivated by H atoms. The sensitivity of the CO2 sensors was strongly affected by the mobility of the SnO2 layer because of the large diffusion length of carriers. By using the SnO2 layer with a carrier mobility of 10.6 cm2 V−1 s−1, a highly sensitive CO2 sensor with a detection limit of 1000 ppm was obtained. The sensor was visible-light-transparent and the transmittance in the visible region was over 70%.

Carbon dioxide (CO2) gas sensors are playing an important role in our daily life. The measurement of CO2 gas concentration is required for various purposes such as to ensure the indoor air space quality and growth of plants in greenhouses. For the monitoring of CO2 concentration, most of the widely used technologies today rely on optical,1,2) electrochemical,3–5) capacitive,6) or work-function-based sensors.7) The disadvantages of these sensors are their high fabrication cost, complicated operation conditions, and intentional heating during gas monitoring (to approximately 100–200 °C). Therefore, developing inexpensive and simple-to-manipulate CO2 sensors capable of operation without heating is necessary. Resistance-based CO2 sensors8–10) utilizing metal oxide semiconductor technology have important advantages such as their low fabrication cost, good reliability, small size, easy mass production, and potential for development into array-integrated gas sensors.11,12)

Semiconductor-based gas sensors measure gas concentration by changing their electrical resistance upon reaction with the observed gas. In clean air, when O2 molecules are adsorbed on the surface of metal oxides, they extract electrons from the conduction band (Ec) of the semiconductor and trap them on the surface in the form of negative ions (O−, O2−),13) which creates an electron-depleted region. The electrical resistance of the gas sensors changes with changing length of the electron-depleted region because of the reactions of these oxygen species with gases.13)

Semiconductor-based gas sensors have been developed on the basis of n-type metal oxides such as SnO2,14) In2O3,15,16) WO3,17) and ZnO,18) which have higher mobility than p-type semiconductors. Among them, SnO2 has been widely used in several types of CO2 sensors in forms such as nanoparticles,19) nanowires,20) and doped rare-earth oxides.21) The electrical properties, especially the mobility, of metal oxide semiconductor layer affect the sensitivity of gas sensors. Although SnO2, which is currently used as a sensor material, has higher mobility than other n-type semiconductors, its mobility is approximately 1 to 4 cm2 V−1 s−1.22–26) In addition, while sputtering may be useful for the cheap mass production of gas sensors in the future, the carrier mobility of SnO2 deposited by sputtering is not high. In fact, in several studies; the improvement of mobility and the relationship between the sensitivity and mobility of gas sensors have been investigated. In this study, SnO2-based "invisible" room-temperature-operation CO2 sensors were fabricated, and the relationship between the electrical properties of the SnO2 layer and the sensitivity of the CO2 sensors was examined. The mobility of SnO2 affects the sensitivity of the CO2 sensors prepared by annealing in various atmospheres such as H2, O2, and N2.

A polycrystalline SnO2 thin film with a thickness of 50 nm was deposited on an alkali-free glass (Eagle XG) substrate by the conventional RF sputtering method without intentional heating. The substrate was located parallel to a 4-in.-diameter ceramic target of undoped SnO2 (Toshima Manufacturing, 99.99% purity). The substrate–target distance was 8 cm, and background pressure was <10−2 Pa. The range of RF power used was 70–150 W, to maintain the deposition rate at 0.1 nm/s, and the deposition was carried out at a pressure of 3.0 Pa. High-purity (99.9999%) Ar gas was used as the sputtering gas. After deposition, the SnO2 thin films were annealed in various atmospheres using N2 or O2 gas at 500 °C for 30 min, or using 1% H2 in Ar at 100–530 °C for 30 min under atmospheric-pressure conditions. Then, a La-related catalyst solution, methanol, was used to dissolve LaCl3 bold dot 7H2O to obtain a La concentration of 100 mol/m3, which was spin coated on the surface of the SnO2 thin films. The film was annealed continuously in O2 atmosphere at 500 °C for one hour to convert LaCl3 to LaOCl. Finally, a Au electrode was deposited on the LaOCl/SnO2 films by conventional vacuum evaporation using a metal mask. The electrode consisted of eight fingers; each finger was 1.3 mm long and the finger–finger spacing was 100 µm. A schematic representation of the Au/LaOCl/SnO2/glass sensor is shown in Fig. 1. For realizing the visible-light-transparent sensor, the thickness of each layer was smaller than that of conventional "nontransparent" sensors; therefore, a high-transparency glass substrate was used instead of the conventional Si substrate.

The resistivity (ρ), Hall mobility (μ), and majority carrier concentration (n) of the SnO2 thin films were measured using the van der Pauw technique (ToyoResiTest 8300). The optical transmittance was measured using a deuterium lamp for the UV wavelengths and a halogen lamp for the visible and near-infrared wavelengths (Hitachi U-4100). The sensor response to CO2 gas was investigated in a self-designed experimental chamber. The CO2 concentration in N2 [CO2/(CO2 + N2)] was controlled using mass-flow controllers. The CO2 gas sensitivity (%) of the sensors was defined by the following equation:

Here, R0 and Rg are the electrical resistances (Ω) of the CO2 sensors in air and in CO2 gas, respectively. All measurements were carried out at room temperature, and the sensors were not heated during CO2 gas monitoring.

To increase the mobility of the as-deposited SnO2 thin films, the films were annealed in various atmospheres. Figure 2 shows the mobility of the SnO2 thin films annealed in various atmospheres, namely, N2, O2, and 1% H2 in Ar at 500 °C for 30 min. In comparison with the as-deposited SnO2 thin films, the mobility of the annealed SnO2 thin films was increased. In particular, the mobility of the SnO2 thin films annealed in 1% H2 in Ar increased from 0.21 to 90.9 cm2 V−1 s−1. Even though the polycrystalline SnO2 thin films were deposited by RF sputtering on glass substrates, this mobility was almost the same as that of the epitaxial SnO2 films (106 cm2 V−1 s−1) grown by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) on r-plane Al2O314) and much higher than the previously reported values.22–26) This result indicates that hydrogen is incorporated into interstitial sites (Hi), as well as substitutional oxygen sites and occupied oxygen sites (Ho) in SnO2.27,28) Since Ho is significantly more stable than Hi, the influence of Ho is dominant in the annealed SnO2. On the other hand, the number of point defects, that is oxygen vacancies (Vo), decreased because of Ho. As a result, the mobility of the SnO2 thin films annealed in H2 atmosphere increased.

To optimize the H2-annealing conditions, SnO2 thin films were annealed at various temperatures. The relationship between the mobility of the SnO2 thin films and the annealing temperature is shown in Fig. 3. The mobility of the SnO2 thin films increased with increasing annealing temperature. Compared with the mobility of SnO2 thin films annealed at 100 °C, that of the films annealed at 500 °C increased by 2 orders of magnitude. Therefore, CO2 gas sensors were fabricated using SnO2 films that were annealed in 1% H2 in Ar atmosphere after sputtering deposition.

All the sensors were visible-light-transparent, irrespective of the deposition and/or annealing conditions. The representative optical transmittance of the CO2 sensor is shown in Fig. 4. The transmittance in the visible region was over 70%. In addition, in order to investigate the response of the CO2 sensor to CO2 gas, its resistance in 100% CO2 atmosphere was measured. The resistance of the representative CO2 sensor response to CO2 gas is shown in Fig. 5. The results indicate that LaOCl/SnO2 may have caused the extension of the electron depletion layer because of the formation of a pn junction between the p-type LaOCl and n-type SnO2 layers. Usually, only O− and O2− are adsorbed on the surface of metal oxides. However, in the case of LaOCl, in addition to the adsorption of O− and O2−, OH− is also adsorbed on the surface. Noted that the response, namely ΔR, of the representative CO2 sensor is independent of the illumination conditions. The reason why the resistivity of the SnO2 layer is almost the same under different light illumination is because the SnO2 semiconductor layer is too thin and has a wide bandgap of 3.6 eV. When the CO2 sensor (LaOCl/SnO2) is exposed to CO2 gas, the CO2 molecules can chemically react with these adsorbed species to form carbonates and hydroxycarbonates. This results in the phase transformation of LaOCl, disruption of the pn junction, and consequently, a decrease in the resistance of the CO2 sensor.

To improve the sensitivity of the CO2 sensors, increasing the mobility of the SnO2 layer is indispensable. The relationship between the mobility of the SnO2 thin films and the sensitivity of CO2 sensors is shown in Fig. 6. The mobility of the SnO2 layers was controlled by changing the annealing temperature up to 530 °C, since alkali-free glass was used as the substrate. The sensitivity to CO2 increased linearly with increasing mobility of the SnO2 thin films. In general, the mobility of semiconductors for gas sensors is low, approximately 1–4 cm2 V−1 s−1.22–26) Depending on the sensing mechanism of the gas sensor, the carrier mobility and diffusion length in SnO2 changed with the change in its resistivity caused by the CO2 gas reaction. The increase in the carrier mobility and diffusion length improved the sensing properties because the possibility of the electron reaching the electrode without recombining with defects was increased. On the basis of the relationship between the carrier concentration and mobility of the SnO2 layer, ionized impurity scattering29) due to oxygen vacancies became dominant, thus limiting carrier transfer. In the case of annealing the SnO2 layer in H2, Ho reduced the number of point defects, and the mobility and diffusion length of carriers increased. As a result, the sensitivity of the gas sensor was improved because the number of carriers reaching the electrode increased.

Finally, the relationship between the atmospheric CO2 concentration and the sensitivity of the CO2 sensor was investigated at CO2 concentrations ranging from 0 to 106 ppm at room temperature. Figure 7 shows the influence of the sensitivity of the representative CO2 sensors on both the CO2 concentration and the mobility of the SnO2 layer of the sensor. The sensitivity of the CO2 sensor decreased almost linearly with decreasing CO2 concentration. Linearity between the sensitivity and the CO2 concentration is very important for the realization of inexpensive and simple devices. Moreover, the response to CO2 during room-temperature operation makes the sensor a promising candidate for practical applications. Even when operating at room temperature, the detection limits of the CO2 sensors were approximately 1000 and 10000 ppm when the mobilities of the SnO2 layer were 10.6 and 6.7 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. Our group had previously reported on NiO-based visible-light-transparent solar cells30,31) installed on the walls or ceilings of buildings and greenhouses. It is possible to fabricate a combined device that uses these visible-light-transparent solar cells30,31) to supply a small amount of electrical power for these CO2 sensors.

Visible-light-transparent room-temperature-operation CO2 sensors were fabricated using SnO2 thin films deposited by RF sputtering. The mobility of SnO2 could be increased to 90.9 cm2 V−1 s−1 by annealing in 1% H2, because the O vacancies of SnO2 could be passivated by H atoms. In addition, the mobility of SnO2 strongly affected the sensitivity of CO2 sensors. The detection limit of the obtained sensors was 1000 ppm CO2, even during unheated operation, when using the SnO2 layer with a mobility of 10.6 cm2 V−1 s−1. These results represent the first step toward realizing gas sensors with low cost, good reliability, small size, easy mass production, and potential for use in array-integrated CO2 gas sensors.