Sodium-ion batteries hold great promise for grid energy storage owing to their competitive cost advantages. However, challenges remain in the development of suitable electrode materials to enable long lifespan and high power. Herein, we report the scalable synthesis of porous Na3V2(PO4)3 and NaTi2(PO4)3 materials together with their electrochemical performance, especially in terms of high rate cycling stability. The NaTi2(PO4)3//Na3V2(PO4)3 cells exhibit not only high power (85 mAh g–1 at 2.4 A g–1 based on cathode), ultralong cycle life (capacity retention of 94% over 5000 cycles), and good energy efficiency (80%), but also simple manufacturability and safety due to the high thermal stability of the phosphate-based cathode and anode materials.

One of the emerging challenges for the sustainable energy development is the availability of efficient energy storage technology. Electrochemical energy storage (EES) is considered as the best choice to store the electrical energy generated from the renewable resources, such as wind, solar radiation, and tidal power. Sodium-ion batteries operating at ambient temperature hold great promise for EES owing to their competitive cost advantages and energy density. (1,2) Rather than the energy density for portable electronics, cost and safety become more important for grid-scale energy storage. (3) Moreover, the reliability and efficiency of the operating devices are another two key challenges to help maintain the efficient energy transformation in practical applications. (4) It is evident that considering the energy efficiency in battery research is of vital importance. (5) On the other hand, to reduce the stress induced by the peak load for grid use, high power capability is needed. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop efficient sodium-ion batteries with high power, safety, and long lifetime. (6)

Polyanionic electrode materials are very interesting for battery applications requiring high safety and long lifespan, due to their negligible structural changes during electrochemical reaction. (7) Among a number of electrode materials investigated for sodium-ion batteries, NASICON (Nasuper ionic conductor) structured materials attract great interest due to the open framework structures with fast ionic diffusion capability. (8,9) In this respect, phosphate framework materials offer relatively high structural stability, facile producibility, and rich structural diversity. (10) NASICON-phosphate Na3V2(PO4)3 compounds are considered as promising cathodes with a theoretical specific energy of 400 W h kg–1 (117.6 mAh g–1 and 3.4 V vs Na/Na+ using the V3+/V4+ redox reaction) and high structural and thermal stabilities. (11−13) In a similar manner, the NASICON-structured NaTi2(PO4)3 has also been reported as excellent anode material in large-scale application, making use of the Ti4+/Ti3+ redox process. The Na+-ion insertion mechanism benefits from the open 3D framework with large interstitial spaces, fast Na+ diffusion, and relatively high working potential, strongly reducing the risk of sodium metal plating. (14−16) However, as any NASICON compound, both Na3V2(PO4)3 and NaTi2(PO4)3 suffer from poor electronic conductivity. (11,17−19) Many efforts dealing with particle downsizing and carbon-coating have been reported to improve the electrochemical performance. (15,16,20−27) The implementation of scaffolded functional carbon and nanostructured design could efficiently improve the electric conductivity and reduce the Na+ diffusion pathways, leading to excellent cycling stability and rate capability in SIBs. Recently, we have demonstrated the superior cycling and rate performance of Na3V2(PO4)3 cathodes by functional carbon interpenetration together with simplified synthesis procedure. (28,29) On these grounds, the NASICON-type Na3V2(PO4)3 cathode and NaTi2(PO4)3 anode could be coupled to build safer SIBs with high lifetime. (30,31) However, few studies report on the development of scalable synthesis methods for the large-scale production of active materials, which can maintain the superior electrochemical performance realized in lab-scale fabrication. (32)

Herein, we report the scalable synthesis of porous Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) and NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP) composites that exhibit excellent reversible capacities and rate capabilities. The realization and investigation of full cell based on two NASICON electrodes using a conventional carbonate electrolyte and copper or aluminum foil as negative current collector are also reported.

The NASICON-type Na3V2(PO4)3/C and NaTi2(PO4)3/C composites were synthesized via sol–gel methods as described in our previous work. (33) Typically, CH3COONa·3H2O (VWR, ≥99%), NH4VO3 (Sigma-Aldrich, ≥99%), NH4H2PO4 (Alfa Aesar, ≥99%), and citric acid monohydrate (C6H8O7·H2O) (Alfa Aesar, ≥99%) were dissolved in deionized water and dried at 80 °C. The obtained precursor was ground and pretreated at 350 °C for 6 h, then calcined at 800 °C for 12 h under steady Ar flow to get the final Na3V2(PO4)3/C composites. For NaTi2(PO4)3/C synthesis, CH3COONa·3H2O and NH4H2PO4 were first dissolved in deionized water. Then, polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP, K30, Sigma-Aldrich) and tetrabutyl titanate (TBT, Sigma-Aldrich, ≥ 98%) were dissolved in anhydrous ethanol (VWR, ≥ 99.9%) under stirring. Then the ethanol solution was quickly poured into the aqueous solution under vigorous stirring to get a white suspension. The precursor powders collected after evaporating the solvents were sintered at 800 °C for 12 h under steady argon flow to obtain the NaTi2(PO4)3/C composites.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) was conducted on a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm) in the 2θ range of 10–90° with a step size of 0.01°. The structures were refined using Rietveld method (DIFFRAC PLUS TOPAS 4.2 software). The morphological and structural characterizations were conducted with a ZEISS 1550VP field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and Cs-corrected FEI Titan high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) with an acceleration voltage of 300 kV. Carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen (CHN) analysis was performed on a Perkin–Elmer EA 2400 instrument. The nitrogen adsorption and desorption isotherms were performed on Micromeritics ASAP 2020 surface area and porosity analyzer. The surface area and pore size distribution were obtained from BET (Brunauer–Emmett–Teller) plot and BJH (Barrett, Joyner, and Halenda) model. Raman spectra of NVP/C and NTP/C materials were recorded using a Renishaw 2000 system (Renishaw) with the He–Ne laser (633 nm) and the charge-coupled device detector.

The electrochemical performance was investigated using Swagelok-type cells. The electrodes were fabricated by doctor-blade casting slurries with 90 wt % active materials, 5 wt % carbon black (Super C65, IMERYS) and 5 wt % polyvinylidenefluoride (PVDF, Solef 6020, Solvay) in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP, anhydrous, Sigma-Aldrich) on aluminum foil for NVP/C, both copper and aluminum for NTP/C, respectively. After predrying at 80 °C in air, electrodes with a diameter of 12 mm were punched and further dried at 120 °C under vacuum. The average active material mass loading was 3.5 mg cm–2. The electrolyte was prepared by dissolving 1 M NaPF6 (Fluorochem) in propylene carbonate (PC, BASF) with 2 wt % fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC, BASF) in an Ar-filled glovebox with H2O and O2 contents less than 0.1 ppm. A glass fiber (GF/D, Whatman) disc was used as separator. Half-cells were assembled using sodium metal as counter and reference electrodes. NVP//NTP full cells were assembled with the cathode to anode capacity ratio ranging from 1.00 to 1.05, using the experimentally determined capacity values for each electrode material at 0.5 C. Galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) test was performed on a SERIES 4000 Automated Test System (Maccor). Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) were conducted on a VMP3 multichannel potentiostat (Bio-Logic Science Instruments). The EIS spectra on full cells were obtained at OCV state and in the discharged state after cycling (after a potentiostatic step at 0.5 V for 30 min), respectively, with an amplitude of 10 mV from 100 kHz to 100 mHz. All measurements were carried out in climatic chambers at 20 ± 1 °C.

The crystal structures of as-synthesized Na3V2(PO4)3/C (NVP/C) and NaTi2(PO4)3/C (NTP/C) composites were confirmed by XRD investigations. Figure 1a, b shows the XRD patterns and Rietveld refinement of the NVP/C and NTP/C composites. The results confirm that both the NVP/C and NTP/C crystallize in rhombohedral NASICON structure with R3c space group. The diffractograms present no evidence of impurity phases, suggesting that the synthesis conditions adopted are suitable for the targeted phases. The carbon amount in NVP/C and NTP/C was about 4.2% and 5.4%, respectively, as determined by CHN elemental analysis.

The morphologies of the as-synthesized NVP/C and NTP/C composites are presented in Figure 1 panels c and d, respectively. The SEM images show that NVP/C composite has a porous structure with some edge-sharp, crystalline NVP particles on the surface, resulting from the NVP melting induced from the high sintering temperature. Figure 1d shows that NTP/C composites are composed of nanosized clusters with smaller nanoparticles aggregation by conductively porous carbon coating. The morphological difference is attributed to the different carbon precursors and sintering procedures during the synthesis. The EDX elemental mapping results in Figures S1 and S2 (Supporting Information) demonstrate the homogeneous distribution of all the elements. To investigate the morphology and structure of the particles, TEM was performed. The images of the NVP/C and NTP/C samples are presented in Figure S3 (Supporting Information). As shown, the results indicate an agglomerate structure where a large number of NVP or NTP particles are connected together by the conductive carbon, forming the conductive porous structure. The higher magnification images confirm that the NTP exhibits smaller grains than NVP material. In addition, porosity between the primary particles is observed.

The porous structure of the NVP/C and NTP/C was further evaluated using nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms (Figure S4a, c, Supporting Information). The BET specific surface area of NVP/C and NTP/C is 28 and 73 m2 g–1, respectively. The BJH modeling indicates the hierarchical pore size distribution in both NVP/C and NTP/C composites as shown in Figure S4b, d (Supporting Information). Thus, the contact area between the active electrode materials and the electrolyte is high while their porous structure offers easy paths for electrolyte penetration. The nature of the carbon layer was evaluated by Raman spectroscopy (Figure S5, Supporting Information). The two strong peaks at 1358 and 1593 cm–1 can be attributed to the D and G bands, respectively. The band intensity ratio (ID/IG) is 1.13 for NVP/C and 1.04 for NTP/C, indicating that the carbon obtained from the PVP precursor has higher graphitization degree and, as a consequence, better electronic conductivity. (28)

The electrochemical properties of NVP/C as cathode were initially evaluated in Na half-cells. The NVP/C electrode was investigated by cyclic voltammetry in the potential range of 2.5–4.2 V (vs Na/Na+) at 0.1 mV s–1. The CV curves during initial three scans (Figure 2a) demonstrate a pair of redox peaks at 3.30 and 3.44 V (vs Na/Na+), corresponding to the V4+/V3+ redox reaction. Moreover, the peak shape and potential position remain unchanged during the three scans, suggesting stable and reversible cycling performance. Figure 2b shows the typical charge–discharge profiles at different C-rates (1C rate = 120 mA g–1). As depicted, all the curves exhibit distinct charge–discharge voltage plateaus at around 3.4 V (vs Na/Na+), in good agreement with the CV results. At 0.5 C, the NVP/C composite delivers charge and discharge capacities of 116 and 114 mAh g–1, respectively, showing a high initial Coulombic efficiency (98.5%). At higher C-rates, the Coulombic efficiency is always close to 100%. The further rate capability performance of NVP/C electrode is reported in Figure 2c. The NVP/C electrode shows high reversible capacity of 91 mA h g–1 at 20 C. When the current density was decreased to 5 C, a discharge capacity of 104 mAh g–1 was recovered, demonstrating the excellent reversibility. To investigate the long-term cycling stability, the electrode was cycled at 20 C for 5000 cycles. In Figure 2d it is seen that the electrode maintained 83 mAh g–1 with capacity retention of 91.8% after long-term cycling. Even at very high C-rate (50 C), the electrode delivered the high discharge capacity of 64 mAh g–1 after 5000 cycles (Figure S6, Supporting Information). These results suggest that the NVP/C composites obtained via the simple sol–gel method can be used as high-power cathode materials in NIBs, because the porous materials structure enables the fast reaction kinetics.

The electrochemical performance of the NTP/C composite as an anode in Na half-cell was also evaluated by cyclic voltammetry and galvanostatic charge–discharge test. Figure 3a presents the CV curves of the NTP/C composite for the first three cycles at 0.1 mV s–1. A pair of well-defined sharp redox peaks at 2.08 and 2.15 V (vs Na/Na+) are observed according to the Ti4+/Ti3+ redox reaction. The peaks over successive scans are perfectly overlapped, suggesting for the excellent reversibility and stability of the composite electrode. The initial galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles of NTP/C electrode in the 1.4–3.0 V (vs Na/Na+) potential range and different rates (0.5, 1, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100 C; 1 C = 120 mA g–1) are displayed in Figure 3b. The initial charge and discharge capacities are 100 and 102 mAh g–1, corresponding to a Coulombic efficiency near 98.3%. Such a high initial efficiency of the insertion reaction of NASICON-structured materials can be attributed to the improved reaction kinetics resulting from the porous structure and carbon confinements. (34,35) The galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) curves at different C-rates exhibit distinct charge and discharge potential plateaus, which were still maintained at C-rate as high as 100 C. The electrochemical performance at C-rates from 0.5 to 100 C (10 cycles at each rate) showed in Figure 3c reveals the superior power capability and reversibility of this electrode material. The long-term cycling performance at 50 C is depicted in Figure 3d. The electrode exhibits excellent capacity retention of 98% after 1000 cycles with Coulombic efficiency close to 100%.

Encouraged by the very good electrochemical performance of both NVP/C and NTP/C materials in half cells, sodium-ion full cells based on NVP/C cathode and NTP/C anode were constructed. Benefiting from the high Coulombic efficiencies of both cathode and anode, the presodiation step, aggravating the cell manufacturing, was not needed. (36)Figure 4a presents the CV curves of the NTP(Cu)//NVP full cell at scan rate of 0.1 mV s–1 in the voltage range of 0.5–1.5 V. The cell exhibited a peak couple centered at around 1.25 V, in good agreement with the behavior of the NVP and NTP electrodes. At low scan rate the anodic and cathodic peaks are only separated by 0.1 V, resulting from the excellent electrodes’ kinetics. The CV curves at various scan rates are shown in Figure S7 (Supporting Information). The galvanostatic charge–discharge curves at different C-rates (Figure 4b) are in accordance with the CV results. At 0.5 C, the full cell can deliver a discharge capacity of 107 mAh g–1 (based on the weight of the cathode active material) with a rather high initial Coulombic efficiency (95%). Even at higher C-rates, the cell still maintained stable charge–discharge plateaus with low voltage hysteresis, enabling high energy efficiency for applications requiring high power. The rate capability is displayed in Figure 4c. Correspondingly, the cell delivered discharge capacities of 107 and 85 mAh g–1 at 0.5 and 20 C, respectively. Additionally, 99 mAh g–1 were delivered by the cell when the applied current rate was decreased to 5 C, showing the materials’ superior power capability and reversibility. Figure 4d displays the cycling performance of the full cell at high rate of 20 C. After 5000 cycles, a reversible capacity of 80 mAh g–1 was still delivered, which corresponds to a capacity retention of 94%, once again highlighting the very good power performance and cycling stability of the electrode materials. Moreover, the Coulombic efficiency of the full cell was always close to 100% during cycling. Such a superior electrochemical performance of the NTP//NVP cells results from the peculiar characteristics of both electrode materials, NVP/C and NTP/C. In fact, the unique solid solution reaction occurring in the NASICON crystal structures enables fast Na+ ion diffusion. Additionally, the porous structure of the electrodes provides large contact area between the electrode and electrolyte thus reduces the charge-transfer resistance and shortens the diffusion path of Na+ in the electrode bulk. Finally, the carbon establishes a conductive network for electronic transport improving the electrical conductivity of the electrodes. (37,38) Overall, the outstanding power performance and long lifespan of the full cell reported here makes it a very interesting candidate for large-scale energy storage.

Aluminum is a feasible replacement for copper as the anode current collector in sodium cells, which may lead to substantial cost reduction. (39,40) Therefore, the NTP/C composite was casted on aluminum current collector and tested in NTP(Al)//NVP full cells for performance. The CV curves are shown in Figure S8a, b (Supporting Information). The full cell exhibits a single pair of redox peaks (cathodic at 1.35 V and anodic at 1.18 V). The observed voltage hysteresis (0.17 V) is slightly higher than that recorded using the copper as anode current collector (∼0.1 V). All peaks overlap during the initial three scan cycles, indicating the good reversibility of the full cell with aluminum anode current collector at low current density. However, at a faster scan rate (1.0 mV s–1), the redox peaks shift asymmetrically. To further understand the impact of the aluminum anode current collector on the overall performance of full cell, the C-rate test was performed. Figure 5a displays selected galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles at different C-rates. All curves exhibit similar plateaus of NTP(Cu)//NTP full cell; however, larger voltage hysteresis is observed at higher C-rates in agreement with the CV tests. At low rate (0.5 C), an initial Coulombic efficiency of 94.6% and a discharge capacity of 104 mAh g–1 were obtained. At higher C-rates, the cell showed a high Coulombic efficiency (i.e., close to 100%). As shown in Figure S8c (Supporting Information), the cell delivers discharge capacities of 104 and 53 mAh g–1 at 0.5 and 20 C, respectively. When the current was decreased to 10 C, the capacity recovered to 73 mAh g–1, indicating good reversibility despite the use of aluminum as current collector for both electrodes. The long-term cycling performance at 5 and 10 C is depicted in Figure 5b and Figure S8d (Supporting Information), respectively. It can be seen that the NTP(Al)//NTP cell exhibited a high capacity retention (94.3% after 1000 cycles) with Coulombic efficiency of about 100%. Even at 10 C, the cell delivered 64 mAh g–1 after 1000 cycles, corresponding to a capacity retention of 86.0%. Overall, the cell employing aluminum as anode current collector displayed lower rate performance and cycling stability than that employing copper. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed to understand the reason for such a different performance. Figure 5c, d display the Nyquist plots collected on full cells using either copper or aluminum as anode current collector. The spectra were collected on discharged cells right after assembling (OCV) and after 100 cycles at 10 C (0.5 V). The spectra consist of a semicircle associated with the electrode resistance at both electrodes (RE), which includes contribution from the electrolyte/electrode charge transfer resistance, the inner electrode conductivity as well as the electrode/current collector resistance. (41) The high frequency intercept of the semicircle corresponds to the electrolyte bulk resistance (Rb). At low frequencies, the electrodes’ limit capacitance dominates the spectra as indicated by the almost pure capacity behavior, proceeded by a region in which the Na+-ion diffusion plays a role. (33,42) After cell assembly both cells behaved rather similarly, however, while the cell using the copper anode current collector showed no increase of RE after 100 cycles at 10 C, that employing aluminum exhibited a 2-fold increase from 5.0 to 10.1 Ω. This behavior is probably due to the uncompleted passivation of the aluminum electrode, which takes place at higher potentials via the generation of F– from the PF6– decomposition in turns leading to the formation of the very stable aluminum oxyfluoride species. Such an incomplete passivation leads to the continuous increase of the electrode resistance upon long-term cycling showed in Figure S9 (Supporting Information), which limits the power capability and cycling stability of sodium-ion battery.

In a view of potential application for grid-scale energy storage, we evaluated the relations among energy density, power density and energy efficiency of the full cells using copper or aluminum as anode current collector. The Ragone plot (Figure 6a) was drawn considering the total weight of the NVP and NTP active materials. The specific energy of the NTP(Cu)//NVP cell is 67.1 and 47.5 Wh kg–1 at specific power of 37.0 and 1342.2 W kg–1, respectively. The NTP(Al)//NVP cells delivered comparable energy (63.5 Wh kg–1) at low specific power (36.6 W kg–1), but only 27.0 at 1227.3 W kg–1. The relation between specific power and energy efficiency is shown in Figure 6b. The cells employing the copper anode current collector exhibited higher energy efficiency than those employing aluminum under low and high power conditions. Specifically, under low specific power (37 and 74 W kg–1), the energy efficiency of NTP(Cu)//NVP cells were 95.8% and 94.9%. These cells still maintained a high energy efficiency (80%) even at 1342.1 W kg–1. In comparison, only 69% energy efficiency was achieved by the NTP(Al)//NVP cell at high specific power. The full-cell capacity and real practical energy density were calculated for both NTP(Cu)//NVP and NTP(Al)//NVP cells (considering the total electrodes mass). Specifically, the NTP(Cu)//NVP cell delivers a cell-level capacity of 47 mAh g–1 at a current density of 0.5 C. The real practical energy density is about 58.6 Wh kg–1. For the NTP(Al)//NVP cell, a cell-level capacity of 45.6 mAh g–1 was achieved, resulting in the real practical energy density of 55.7 Wh kg–1. These promising values are resulting from the lower content of both the conductive carbon and the binder contents in the composite electrodes, and the carbon content in the active materials.

To highlight the advantages of the NTP//NVP prototype herein reported, we have compared its performance with those of two other systems using Na3V2(PO4)3 active materials (see Table S1) reported in the literature, specifically, Na4V2(PO4)3//Na3V2(PO4)3 and Na3V2(PO4)3//Na3V2(PO4)3. (43−45) While the Na4V2(PO4)3//Na3V2(PO4)3 prototype exhibits the highest theoretical specific energy (152.6 Wh kg–1), it requires, however, a presodiation step for the anode material, which would substantially increase the manufacturing cost. On the other hand, the Na3V2(PO4)3//Na3V2(PO4)3 prototype offers comparable specific energy with the NaTi2(PO4)3//Na3V2(PO4)3 herein reported. However, due to the lower specific capacity of Na3V2(PO4)3 as anode with respect to the NaTi2(PO4)3, it requires the use of a larger amount of V, which is more toxic and expensive than the Ti-compounds. Overall, the NTP//NVP cells exhibit competing cost and manufacturing advantages.

In summary, we synthesized carbon coated Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) and NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP) composites with porous structure via a scalable sol–gel method. The synthesis process is simple and feasible for the large-scale production of both the cathode and anode materials. In spite of the low carbon content in both the composite materials and their electrodes, NVP/C and NTP/C electrodes exhibited excellent electrochemical performance with high power capability and cycling stability. NTP//NVP full cells exhibited not only high power performance (85 mAh g–1 at 2.4 A g–1 based on cathode) with ultralong cycle life (94% retention after 5000 cycles) and high energy efficiency (80%) but also simple manufacturing and intrinsic safety due to the high thermal stability of the phosphate-based cathode and anode materials. These results demonstrate that NTP//NVP cells can be used as high efficiency battery for grid-scale energy storage, as they offer both high power and long lifetime. In addition, these cells still exhibited good performance employing aluminum as the anode current collector, although some improvements of such a current collector material are needed to achieve better power capability and energy efficiency.