NASICON-type NaTi2(PO4)3 has been acknowledged as a promising anode for energy storage due to high ion conductivity and low cost. Nevertheless, intrinsic low electrical conductivity of NaTi2(PO4)3 and low stability in aqueous electrolyte limit its further applications in aqueous lithium rechargeable battery. In this paper, polyaniline as carbon and nitrogen sources was employed to synthesize nitrogen-doped carbon coated NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP-P) composite by sol-gel approach and following calcination treatment. The loose and carbon-coated structure endows NTP-P with good structure stability and improved electrochemical kinetics. Compared with glucose-derived carbon-coated NaTi2(PO4)3 composite, NTP-P exhibits superior rate and cycling performance. NTP-P with proper carbon content delivers the discharge capacity of 119.4 and 83.4 mAh g−1 at rate of 0.2 and 15 C, and its capacity retention can maintain 85.8% after 1000 cycles at 5 C. This research reveals that the integration of carbon coating and nitrogen doping by using polyaniline give an excellent method to enhance the electrochemical properties of electrode materials.

With growing concerns about global energy crisis and environmental pollution, primary energy such as coal, oil, and natural gas cannot meet people's needs [[1], [2], [3], [4], [5]]. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop renewable energy. However, renewable energy such as solar energy, wind power, etc. is greatly affected by weather and climate, which has brought great challenge to their applications [[6], [7], [8]]. Thence, the development of large-scale energy storage technology is of great significance to use renewable energy efficiently [[9], [10], [11], [12]]. Among various energy storage technology, rechargeable battery system is an efficient way due to flexible installation, fast response, high efficiency, etc. Electricity can be transformed from all forms of energy, such as wind and solar energy, and can be converted into other forms of energy. Battery system can be employed as transfer center of energy.

Lithium ion battery exhibits the most promising prospect in energy storage due to long cycle life and high energy density [[13], [14], [15], [16]]. Besides large-scale energy storage, lithium ion battery has been extensively used in many portable electronic devices such as notebook computer, camera, etc. Taking high voltage and good cycle performance into account, commercial lithium ion battery mainly uses organic solution as electrolyte. However, organic electrolyte exist toxic, flammable, and other issues. Furthermore, organic electrolyte with large viscosity can prevent the diffusion of Li ions greatly [17,18]. There is an imperative demand for new energy storage system with high reliability, safety, and high-speed charging. Aqueous lithium rechargeable battery can solve those problems that appear in battery system using organic electrolyte [19].

In aqueous lithium rechargeable battery system, aqueous salt solutions such as LiNO3, Li2SO4, etc. are employed as electrolyte. Aqueous salt solution shows many predominances such as low cost, low viscosity, high safety, etc. Besides aqueous electrolyte, cathode and anode are other main materials for aqueous lithium rechargeable battery. Cathode materials including LiCoO2 [20], LiMn2O4 [21], and LiFePO4 [22] demonstrate outstanding electrochemical performance due to good intercalation/deintercalation behavior before oxygen evolution reaction. Recently, anode materials is essential for the improvement of the cell performance. Nevertheless, common anodes such as VO2, LiV3O8, and Na2V6O16 exhibit inferior cycling performance and low structure stability in aqueous electrolyte, further limiting their applications [[23], [24], [25]]. LiTi2(PO4)3 displays very promising prospect as anode in aqueous lithium rechargeable battery because of high power density and good stability [26]. Many research groups tried to further improve the rate capability, cycling performance, and structure stability by high-quality carbon coating, lattice doping, and adding conductive agent, etc. [[27], [28], [29]].

NaTi2(PO4)3 with NASICON-type structure similar to LiTi2(PO4)3 has been paid attention by researchers due to open three-dimension framework, high ion conductivity, and plentiful resource [30,31]. Compared with LiTi2(PO4)3, NaTi2(PO4)3 can provide more migration channels for Li ions because of its bigger cell volume, which can promote diffusion process of Li ions. While the intrinsic low electrical conductivity and direct attacking from H2O restrict further improvement of electrochemical performance. Wang et al. [31] synthesized NaTi2(PO4)3 nanoparticles embedded in carbon matrix by two-step method. They found that the composite exhibited good stability with capacity retention of 95% at 1500 mA g−1 after 3600 cycles.

In this work, we first employ polyaniline as carbon and nitrogen sources to synthesize nitrogen-doped carbon coated NaTi2(PO4)3 nanocomposite with loose structure. The as-synthesized nanoparticles present many advantages as follows. Firstly, the loose structure can provide more channels for diffusion of Li ions. Secondly, high-quality nitrogen-doped carbon layer can prevent the corrosion caused by H2O in charge-discharge process, and improve the electrical conductivity of materials. Finally, nitrogen doping for carbon layer can lead to more defects, further accelerate the diffusion of Li ions. As anode for aqueous lithium rechargeable battery, this composite demonstrates outstanding rate and cycling performance. It delivers the discharge capacity of 119.4 and 83.4 mAh g−1 at 0.2 and 15 C, respectively. The capacity retention can reach 85.8% after 1000 cycles at 5 C.

Chemical reagents were provided by Aladdin Industrial Corp., China. Polyaniline was prepared by chemical oxidation approach as follows. 11.4 g of (NH4)2S2O8 was dissolved in 25 mL of distilled water for standby application. 4.6 mL of aniline and 50 mL of 2 mol L−1 hydrochloric acid were added into conical flask with stirring in sequence. Then (NH4)2S2O8 solution was added dropwise into aniline solution with separatory funnel. The system was kept for 1 h at 10 °C. Then the polyaniline product was obtained and applied for preparation of anode after water washing, sucking filtration, and vacuum drying.

NaTi2(PO4)3/C composites were synthesized by sol-gel approach. 0.3404 g of CH3COONa·3H2O, 0.8566 g of H3PO4, and polyaniline with fixed dosage were dissolved into 15, 10, and 20 mL of ethanol by ultrasonication for standby application, respectively. 1.7204 g of Ti(OC4H9)4 was dissolved in 20 mL of ethanol with stirring. Then, CH3COONa solution, polyaniline solution, and 2 mL of concentrated HCl were added into Ti(OC4H9)4 solution in sequence. After that, H3PO4 solution was added into above mixed solution through a separatory funnel. The mixture was sealed with plastic wrap and stirred for 2 h at 65 °C. After reaction, the water bath was heated to 70 °C to evaporate ethanol with the opening condition of the system to get precursor. After grinding of precursor, the prepared precursor was calcined in tube furnace at 800 °C for 5 h under Ar protection with a ramp rate of 5 °C min−1. NaTi2(PO4)3/C composites using polyaniline with dosage of 0.07, 0.12, and 0.19 g were denoted as NTP-P-1, NTP-P-2, and NTP-P-3, respectively. For comparison, NaTi2(PO4)3/C composite was prepared with the same procedure except for using glucose with 0.19 g, and the corresponding product was denoted as NTP-G.

NaTi2(PO4)3 phase of composites was identified by DX-2700 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. Morphology and microstructure of anodes and cycled electrodes were examined by JEOL 4800 scanning electron microscope and Tecnai G12 transmission electron microscope. Carbon content of composite was determined by thermal analyzer (NETZSCH STA 449 F3) in air with heating rate of 10 °C min−1. The surface composition of composite was examined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (K-Alpha 1063), and the fitting for spectrum was performed by XPSPEAK41 software. Raman spectra were recorded on LabRAM Aramis spectrometer (HORIBA Jobin Yvon). Before SEM measurements of cycled electrodes, the electrodes were washed with distilled water after disassembly, followed by drying at 80 °C for 8 h.

Electrochemical measurements were conducted by using CR2016 coin-type cell on Shanghai Chenhua CHI660D electrochemical workstation. The cell was constituted by LiMn2O4 (cathode), NaTi2(PO4)3 composite (anode), and saturated Li2SO4 aqueous solution (electrolyte). NaTi2(PO4)3 composite and LiMn2O4 were controlled with a suitable mass ratio (about 2:1). The electrode chip was obtained as follows: polytetrafluoroethylene (binder), acetylene black (conductive agent), and active materials were mixed together in a mass ratio of 1:1:8 with ethanol as solvent. The slurry was pressed on steel mesh (current collector) with a diameter of 14 mm by rolling process, followed by drying treatment. Cyclic voltammetry of the cell were conducted in the range of 0–1.85 V at a scan rate of 0.4 mV s−1. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy of the cell were performed over the frequency range of 105–10−2 Hz, and the cell was activated by charge-discharge test for 2 cycles at 0.2 C before measurements. The rate and cycling performance of the cell was investigated by constant-current charge-discharge measurements on a Neware Battery Test System (CT-3008W) at a voltage window of 0.1–1.85V. Three-electrode system was employed to study intercalation/deintercalation behaviors by cyclic voltammetry at 0.4 mV s−1. Three-electrode system consisted of electrode chip (working electrode), saturated calomel electrode (reference electrode), and Pt sheet (counter electrode).

XRD patterns for all as-prepared materials are displayed in Fig. 1. It is observed that the peaks for all composites can be well indexed to NaTi2(PO4)3 with R-3c space group (JCPDS no. 72-2457). Furthermore, diffraction peaks for carbon does not appear for all samples, which is probably due to amorphous structure of carbon and low content. No other impurity peaks are found, indicating that pure NaTi2(PO4)3 is obtained by sol-gel method. XRD results reveal that all composites prepared by sol-gel method exhibit pure phase of NaTi2(PO4)3, and the polyaniline cannot affect the crystal structure.

SEM images of NTP-G and NTP-P-2 at different magnifications are presented in Fig. 2a–d. As seen, particle size of NTP-G is larger than that of NTP-P-2. Moreover, the agglomeration of NTP-G is more serious than that of NTP-P-2, which leads to loose structure of NTP-P-2. This phenomenon probably comes from carbon source difference between glucose and polyaniline, and the existence of nitrogen element prevents agglomeration in the calcination process [32]. Smaller particle size and loose structure can facilitate the migration of Li ions, further improving electrochemical properties of materials. TEM image of NTP-P-2 shown in Fig. 2e indicates that the particle size is mainly in the range of 50–150 nm. As can be known from HR-TEM of NTP-P-2 (Fig. 2f), the inter-planar spacing of 0.1388 nm corresponds to d-spacing of (333) plane of rhombohedral NaTi2(PO4)3. NaTi2(PO4)3 crystal is coated by carbon layer with thickness of about 5 nm, which is proper for protection of NaTi2(PO4)3 crystal and diffusion of Li ions.

The coated carbon content of samples was evaluated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). TGA spectra for four composites are compared in Fig. 3. Two mass lose steps are observed for all composites. The first step at 25–150 °C is attributed to absorbed water, and the second large step at 400–600 °C corresponds to coated carbon on NaTi2(PO4)3 crystal [7,33]. Carbon content for NTP-P-1, NTP-P-2, and NTP-P-3 are determined to be 3.0%, 5.3%, and 8.8% by analysis and calculation, respectively, which is basically in proportion to the dosage of polyaniline. Correspondingly, NTP-G has the carbon content of 4.6%. It is noted that the retention rate of carbon for polyaniline-derived composite is larger than that for glucose-derived composite, which is probably due to the macromolecule structure of polyaniline.

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were employed to examine surface composition of NTP-G and NTP-P-2 composites, and the results are illustrated in Fig. 4a. As can be seen, Na, Ti, P, O, and C elements can be detected for both NTP-G and NTP-P-2 by XPS survey spectra [34,35]. Moreover, a little new peak at 400 eV is observed for NTP-P-2, which is attributed to N 1s [[36], [37], [38], [39]]. XPS results suggest that nitrogen element has been introduced onto the surface of carbon layer by using polyaniline successfully.

Fig. 4b shows Raman spectra NTP-G and NTP-P-2. As observed, there are two main strong peaks at 1600 and 1330 cm−1, which represent the in-plane vibrations of graphitic carbon (G-band) and disordered amorphous carbon (D-band), respectively [34,40]. Generally speaking, the disorder and defect degree of carbon layer can be evaluated by intensity ratio of D-band to G-band [41,42]. According to the spectra, the corresponding intensity ratio for NTP-P-2 is determined to be 1.11, which is larger than that for NTP-G with the value of 1.02. This reveals that the disorder and defect degree for NTP-P-2 is more serious than that for NTP-G, which is probably due to nitrogen doping for carbon layer.

Insertion/extraction behaviors of LiTi2(PO4)3 and LiMn2O4 in aqueous electrolyte were inspected with cyclic voltammetry, and the results were displayed in Fig. 5. As can be observed from Fig. 5a, hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions start at about −1.0 and 1.1 V on steel mesh, respectively, and there are no peaks for the insertion/extraction process of Li ions. Fig. 5b exhibits two pairs of redox peak for LiMn2O4 at 0.84/0.73 and 0.96/0.87 V, respectively, which are lower than the potential for oxygen evolution reaction. Fig. 5c shows that NTP-G and NTP-P-2 demonstrate a pair of redox peak at about −0.63/-0.83 V, with obvious peak shape. Compared with pristine NTP-G, NTP-P-2 exhibits smaller peak potential separation and larger peak current, implying better electrochemical reversibility and activity of NTP-P-2. The hydrogen evolution reaction occurs far away from the redox peak potential. According to the above results, LiMn2O4 and NaTi2(PO4)3/C have good peak shape, and the insertion/extraction process takes place between the onset potential of hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions. This suggests that two materials exhibit the feasibility as electrode for aqueous lithium rechargeable battery.

Fig. 6a depicts the discharge capacity of four composites at different rate. On the whole, the discharge capacity for all composites shows a decreasing trend with increasing rate, which is attributed to serious electrochemical polarization at high rate. Nevertheless, polyaniline-derived composites exhibit lower drop of discharge capacity compared with glucose-derived composite. For instance, NTP-P-2 delivers the discharge capacity of 119.4, 113.0, and 83.4 mAh g−1 at 0.2, 2, and 15 C, respectively, which are much higher than those of NTP-G (115.8, 98.6, and 46.3 mAh g−1), especially at high rate. The discharge capacity of composite is in order of NTP-P-2 > NTP-P-3 > NTP-P-1 > NTP-G. Enhanced electrochemical performance of polyaniline-derived composite is ascribed to nitrogen doping. Nitrogen doping can not only improve the electrical conductivity, but also result in more surface defects, facilitating the transfer of electrons and Li ions. However, excessive coated carbon can increase the diffusion path for Li ions. Therefore, NTP-P-3 exhibits inferior electrochemical performance compared with NTP-P-2. The corresponding charge-discharge curves for NTP-G and NTP-P-2 composites at different rate are presented in Fig. 6b and c, respectively. Compared with NTP-G, NTP-P-2 exhibits more stable shape, and the corresponding discharge voltage platform are larger and wider.

Cyclic voltammetry curves of the cells using different composites are displayed in Fig. 7. As observed, all composites mainly have two reduction peaks and corresponding oxidation peaks. Compared with NTP-G, polyaniline-derived composites demonstrate obvious increase of peak current density. As for polyaniline-derived samples, the peak current density increases with the increase of carbon content firstly. However, further increase of carbon content can lead to decrease of peak current density, which is due to that excessive carbon can prolong the diffusion path for Li ions. Among them, NTP-P-2 exhibits the largest peak current density of 0.810 A g−1, which is higher than that of NTP-G (0.611 A g−1). The cyclic voltammetry results indicate that NTP-P-2 with proper nitrogen-doped coated carbon exhibits the highest electrochemical kinetics, showing the same trend with the rate performance.

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy was employed to further study the electrochemical kinetics of composites. Nyquist plots of the cells using different composites are presented in Fig. 8. As observed, each Nyquist plot is composed of a semicircle in middle frequency representing charge transfer resistance (Rct) and an inclined line in low frequency reflecting Warburg impedance (Zw) for diffusion process of Li ions. Intercept in high frequency at Z′ axis corresponds to ohmic resistance (Re). As can be seen from Fig. 8, Re is in order of NTP-P-3 < NTP-P-2 < NTP-G < NTP-P-1, which is in agreement with the carbon content of the composites, as verified by TGA measurements. Moreover, it is clear that Rct for nitrogen-doped composites is smaller than that of NTP-G, and Rct is in order of NTP-P-2 < NTP-P-3 < NTP-P-1 < NTP-G. Rct for NTP-P-2 is 9.0 Ω, 23.3 Ω smaller than that for NTP-G. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy results support that nitrogen-doped carbon with proper content can notably enhance the electrochemical kinetics of NaTi2(PO4)3 composites due to the accelerated diffusion of electrons and Li ions.

The cycling performance for NTP-G and NTP-P-2 for 1000 cycles at 5 C is shown in Fig. 9a. As can be seen, both cells show the increase trend in discharge capacity during the first several cycles, which is probably due to the activation of electrode materials. The maximum discharge capacity of NTP-P-2 is 103.3 mAh g−1, about 17.4 mAh g−1 higher than that of NTP-G. After 1000 cycles, NTP-P-2 also delivers a discharge capacity of 88.6 mAh g−1 with capacity retention of 85.8%, much larger than that of NTP-G (68.7%). The results reveal that NTP-P-2 exhibits outstanding cycling performance compared with NTP-G. Cyclic voltammetry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements of the cells using NTP-P-2 after different cycles were conducted to further verify good cycling performance of NTP-P-2 anode, and the results were presented in Fig. 9b and c. In cyclic voltammetry curves, the peak shape around 1.6 and 1.8 V can remain well, even up to 1000 cycles, with very slight decrease of peak current. According to electrochemical impedance spectra, the ohmic resistance for NTP-P-2 basically keep the same after charge-discharge process. The charge transfer resistance can keep relatively stable, with slight increase to 18.9 Ω after 1000 cycles from 14.3 Ω after 100 cycles. From the above results, it can be concluded that NTP-P-2 anode has good electrochemical stability.

To further study the stability of NTP-P-2 anode in charge-discharge process, the morphology of NTP-P-2 anode after 100, 500, and 1000 cycles at 5 C are compared, and the results are described in Fig. 10. Many nanoparticles are observed on the surface of anode, further implying the nanostructure of composite. Moreover, all cycled anodes have relatively smooth surface, even after 1000 cycles. This shows that insertion/extraction process of Li ions has no significant corrosion on the anode.

In summary, NASICON-type NaTi2(PO4)3 coated by nitrogen-doped carbon has been synthesized by using polyaniline as carbon and nitrogen sources. The results show that NASICON-structured NaTi2(PO4)3 with high crystallinity is coated by nitrogen-doped carbon layer with proper thickness of about 5 nm. NTP-P-2 exhibits loose structure coming from the usage of polyaniline. Loose structure, carbon coating, and nitrogen doping can significantly accelerate the diffusion of electrons and ions in electrolyte and materials, further leading to outstanding electrochemical performance when employed as anode in aqueous lithium rechargeable battery. Furthermore, this research gives new concept for synthesizing electrode with nitrogen-doped carbon-coated structure for energy storage.