Sodium extracted C@NaV2(PO4)3, prepared by oxidative treatment in an iodine solution in acetonitrile, will be evaluated for the first time as a potential cathode in rechargeable magnesium batteries. Three C@NaV2(PO4)3 samples with different particle morphologies are used as precursors. The structural and chemical changes, induced by the sodium extraction, will be determined by X-ray diffraction, electron microscopy, EPR and XPS spectroscopy. The reversible insertion of magnesium will be evidenced and the effect of the different morphologies on the electrochemical performance of Mg hybrid cells will be unveiled. A larger capacity will be recorded for the sample prepared by ball milling, meanwhile a better rate capability will be demonstrated by that sample with a mosaic-like microstructure.

Na3V2(PO4)3 has demonstrated to be a prominent electrode material for emerging Na-ion batteries [[1], [2], [3], [4], [5]]. This material bears a NASICON-type structure (sodium (Na) Super Ionic CONductor), exhibiting an open framework, which promotes the reversible sodium insertion [[6], [7], [8], [9], [10]]. Moreover, the multivalent character of vanadium provides several reversible redox couples ranging from 0.3 V [11] to 4 V [12], allowing to act as both cathode and anode in Na-ion symmetric cells [13]. All these benefits have circumvented the larger ionic radius and lower redox potential of sodium, which have been argued as drawback to compete with Li-ion batteries.

Beyond this purpose, the excellent results achieved on the research of Na-ion batteries have pushed forward the study of the reversible insertion of alternative cations. Thus, a multi-electron reduction at a single metal redox centre would offer the possibility of doubling the capacity of current cathode materials in the case of Mg2+, Ca2+ or even three times for Al3+ [[14], [15], [16]]. Concerning Mg batteries, this alkaline earth metal is attracting much attention due to its high volumetric capacity (3833 mA h L˗1) and low reduction potential of −2.37 V vs SHE. Moreover, its high natural abundance and availability ensures a low cost [[17], [18], [19], [20]]. All these facts can be considered as remarkable advantages of rechargeable magnesium batteries. Contrarily, several disadvantages remain unsolved, such as the development of non-passivating electrolytes with wide voltage stability [21] or suitable structural frameworks minimizing the intrinsic strong interactions between the elevated Mg2+ charge and that of ions in the host framework, what eventually leads to low ion diffusivity [22].

Recently, we have reported the effectiveness of the electrochemical reversible insertion of Mg and Al in Na3V2(PO4)3 [23,24]. In this approach, sodium is partially removed from the NASICON structure during the first charge and is incorporated to the electrolyte solution in-situ forming a dual metal ion electrolyte. It leads to some inconveniences to discern further insertion mechanism of Na and/or Mg. In order to circumvent this complexity, the disassembling of the charged electrode to be washed and mounted in a new Mg cell has been proposed, but the rather difficult manipulation of the electrode may lead to unavoidable errors.

In the present work, we have proceeded to the chemical sodium extraction from Na3V2(PO4)3 before further insertion of magnesium. In this manner, we expect to clarify the insertion mechanism of magnesium without the interference of sodium or undesirable electrode handling. As a second goal, different synthetic routes were applied to yield distinct morphologies in the attempt to evaluate the effect of magnesium accessibility to the electrochemical behavior. Chemically desodiated samples will be analyzed by X-ray diffraction, electron microscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and their electrochemical behavior will be determined by the galvanostatic method.

A C@Na3V2(PO4)3 sample was prepared by a typical citric based sol-gel route. For this purpose, 0.03 mmoles of citric acid (Aldrich, 99%) were dissolved in 50 mL of deionized water, then 0.02 mmoles of NH4VO3 (Panreac, 98%) were added to obtain an orange solution. Then, 50 mL of a 0.06 mM NaH2PO4 (Aldrich, 98–102%) solution was slowly poured, while gently stirring for 1 h to favor metal chelation. Next, the solvent was evaporated in a rotary evaporator (70 °C; 200 mbar). The so obtained homogeneous gel was dried overnight at 120 °C, pestled and calcined at 800 °C for 8 h (Heating ramp: 5 °C min−1) under an Ar stream (80 mL/min). Citric acid provides an adequate metal chelation and yields, after further calcination, a carbonaceous residue which improves the intrinsic poor electronic conductivity of Na3V2(PO4)3. For a better understanding, this sample was named as NVPSG.

A second sample was prepared by ball milling for 24 h of stoichiometric amounts of NH4VO3 (Panreac, 98%) and NaH2PO4 (Aldrich, 98–102%). Citric acid was also added in a 3:2 citric acid to vanadium molar ratio. Next, the milled precursor was also calcined at 800 °C for 8 h in Ar atmosphere. This preparation route was used due to the performing results previously reported for Na-ion batteries [25]. This sample was labeled as NVPBM.

Alternatively, a third sample was synthesized by a surfactant-assisted method. For this purpose, 3.45 g of NH4H2PO4 (≥99%, Sigma−Aldrich) and 9.5 mL of oleic acid as a surfactant (PRS reagent, Panreac) were ball milled at 300 rev/min for 90 min. Then, 19 mL of Vaseline jelly were added to the jar and milled for half of an hour. Afterwards, 1.13 g of VOC2O4·nH2O, prepared as elsewhere [26,27], and 2.46 g NaCH3COO·2H2O (reagent grade, Sigma-Aldrich) were subsequently added and milled for 40 min. The viscous precursor was dried at 65 °C overnight and calcined at 800 °C for 8 h in Ar atmosphere. This sample will be named as NVPSF.

Chemical sodium extraction was performed by suspending 200 mg of each C@Na3V2(PO4)3 sample in a 0.1 M I2 solution in dry acetonitrile (AN) for 1 day at room temperature. After filtering and washing with dry acetonitrile (Panreac, 99.7%), samples were kept in an Ar filled MBraun Labmaster130 glove box under controlled O2 and H2O traces. Samples will be named as NVPSG-I2, NVPBM-I2 and NVPSF-I2. An Elemental CHNS Eurovector EA 3000 analyzer allowed determining the carbon content of all samples.

The structural properties of pristine samples were determined by recording the X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) patterns within 10 and 80° (2θ) at 0.02°(2θ)/min on a BrukerD8 Discover A25 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. Cycled electrodes were preserved from moist air by covering with a Kapton tape. Also, they required slow scans at 0.04°(2θ)/12.8 min between 10 and 75°(2θ). The structure was refined by the Rietveld method by using TOPAS software.

Transmission electron micrographs (TEM) were acquired in a JEOL 1400 microscope. A Renishaw Raman instrument (InVia Raman Microscope) equipped with a Leica microscope was used for the acquisition of Raman spectra. A green laser light at 532 nm was employed as excitation source and the spectra were scanned between 1000 and 2000 cm−1. The spectra were deconvoluted by using Peakfit software package. An X-ray Photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) (SPECS Phobios 150 MCD) provided with Mg Kα source was employed to determine the chemical state of elements. Powdered material was pressed on an aluminum disk and this sample was subjected to high vacuum (4·10−9 mbar). The spectra were calibrated by referring the binding energies to the C 1 s line of the adventitious carbon located at 284.6 eV.

Chemically sodium extracted samples were galvanostatically tested as working electrodes in both sodium half-cells and magnesium hybrid cells. The term hybrid used in our Mg cells refers to the concept reported by the first time by Amatucci et al. [28]. According them, the asymmetric hybrid cell is composed by an intercalation electrode and an activated carbon with double layer capacitance. Working electrodes were composed of the active material (80%), carbon black (10%) and PVDF (polyvinylidene fluoride) (10%). This mixture was dispersed in acetone and gently stirred to ensure the complete dissolution of PVDF. Next, it was spread on a 9 mm Al disk (Na half-cells) or Ti (Mg hybrid cells) and vacuum dried at room temperature for 2 h. For Na half-cells, the counter electrode was a 9 mm sodium disk and the electrolyte solution was 1 M NaClO4/PC (2% FEC) (<0.002% water). For Mg hybrid cells, the counter electrode was a mixture of an activated carbon (AC) (Fluka) (90%) and PVDF (10%) prepared as the working electrode and deposited onto a 13 mm titanium disk. The mass loading of cathode and anode were 3 and 15 mg, respectively. The electrolyte solution was a 0.1 M Mg(TFSI)2/AN (<0.002% water) solution (TFSI: trifluoromethanesulfonimide). In both cases, the electrodes were separated by glass fiber disks (GF/A-Whatman) soaked in the electrolyte solution and assembled in a Swagelok™ type two-electrode cells into the glove box. Na half-cells were galvanostatically cycled between 2.0 and 4.3 V vs Na+/Na at C/10, while Mg hybrid cells were subjected at C/50 and C/20 between 0.45 and −0.6 V vs AC. Electrodes subjected to XRD and XPS analysis were cycled at C/50. Cyclic voltammetry was performed between 2.5 and 0.01 V vs Mg2+/Mg at 5 mV s−1. The electrochemical tests were monitored in a VMP multichannel system.

The Na3V2(PO4)3 structural scaffold is built of infinite chains of alternative disposed VO6 and NaO6 octahedra along the c direction. One sodium per formula unit is occupying these positions (6b), with a restricted mobility. PO4 tetrahedra are linking these chains to provide the definitely 3D framework. This polyhedral disposal creates large eight-fold sites (18e), partially occupied by the remaining two sodium ions, mostly responsible for the ionic mobility [29]. Otherwise, the absence of direct M–O–M links hinders the electronic transference and consequently involves a poor electronic conductivity. This issue is commonly solved by forming carbon nano-composites, as discussed below [30,31].

Fig. 1 shows the XRD patterns of pristine materials and chemically desodiated sample. All phases could be indexed in the R-3c space group of the trigonal system. No reflections ascribable to impurities were identified. As can be seen, the treatment with the iodine solution induced significant changes in the patterns. Thus, pairs of reflections as (104)–(110) and (113)–(006) appear more split, while the opposite effect is observed for the (211)–(116) pair. In turn, the (030) reflection is significantly shifted to higher angles after desodiation. These significant changes of the NASICON structure deserve a more detailed treatment of patterns by applying Rietveld refinement. Table 1 shows the calculated lattice parameters of pristine Na3V2(PO4)3 samples. They were similar to those reported in the literature [32,33]. Otherwise, iodine treated samples revealed a notorious cell contraction from ca. 1440 Å3 to 1320 Å3. It involves an average cell volume decrease of 8%, indicating that sodium has been effectively extracted from the structure. The effect of iodine on C@Na3V2(PO4)3 can be described by the following redox equation:(1)in which the reduction of iodine promotes the oxidation of V(III) to V(IV) and the deinsertion of two Na+ to compensate the positive charge.

In order to confirm sodium extraction, NVPBM and NVPBM-I2 sample were selected for a more detailed analysis of the structure by Rietveld refinement. For this purpose, slow scans were performed on these samples (Fig. S1). Tables S1 shows the atomic coordinates and atoms occupancies for pristine and chemically desodiated samples. Concerning the coordinates, these values showed minor changes among the pristine samples and sodium extracted ones. In contrast, sodium occupancies evidenced to be more sensible to the treatment with the iodine solution. Thus, pristine material revealed a full occupancy of both distorted octahedral 6b sites (1.00) and dodecahedral 18e sites (ca. 0.74) in good agreement with reported structural analysis on this compound [29,34]. The refinement of the pattern of chemically extracted samples showed an enhanced decreased of the Na occupancy at the 18e sites, reaching values as low as 0.13. These results evidence the validity of this approach and hence the efficiency of an I2/AN solution for the chemical extraction of sodium from Na3V2(PO4)3. Also, it is worthy to notice that the occupancy of the 6b sites remained invariable. It evidences the limited mobility of Na+ at these sites. These results point out to a different efficiency of the chemical oxidation process depending of the studied sample, showing better results for NVPSF.

Table 2 collects geometric parameters of the Na1-O6 and Na2-O8 coordination polyhedra in the chemically deintercalated sample. For comparison's sake, data from references [29, 34] are also included. Our results show similar O-Na1-O angles than in [34], although the average Na1-O distance - 2.359(17) Å – is significantly lower than those reported in the cited references. A similar difference is observed in the average Na2-O experimental distance, 2.49(10) Å as compared to the average values 2.5741 Å [34] and 2.5744 Å [29]. In the latter reference, the experimental O-Na2-O angles range from 52(3)° to 169(9)°, which is a wider interval than the results by Zatovsky [34] that range from 61.41(6)° to 160.52(9)°, indicating a larger distortion of the Na2-O8 coordination polyhedron. These results are in good agreement with the usual trend in Na-deintercalated Na3V2(PO4)3. In fact, the polyhedral contraction reinforces the idea of the more difficult extraction of the third sodium ion from Na3V2(PO4)3, specially from octahedral Na1 sites [29].

The calcination temperature used in these syntheses prevented to reach a high graphitization level in the carbon phase. At 800 °C, carbon materials feature a highly broadened 002 reflection at ca. 25° (2θ) in the XRD pattern due to its low crystallinity. In our patterns, this band is masked by the reflections of the crystalline phosphate. The Raman spectra in the range between 1000 and 2000 cm−1 allowed unveiling the highly amorphous character of the carbon phase (Fig. 2). These spectra are mainly characterized by two main bands at ca. 1350 ± 3 cm−1 and ca. 1591 ± 3 cm−1, which are respectively labeled as D1 and G bands (Table S2). They are respectively attributed to the lack of long range translation symmetry in disordered domains and ‘in plane’ displacement of carbon atoms in the crystalline domains of graphene sheets with E2g symmetry [35]. Additional components at ca. 1509 ± 4 cm−1 (D3), 1196 ± 3 cm−1 (D4) and 1624 ± 5 cm−1 (D2), belong to amorphous carbon, to Csingle bondC and Cdouble bondC stretching vibrations of polyene-like structures and another E2g degenerate modes involving graphene layers which are not directly sandwiched between two other graphene layers, respectively [[36], [37], [38]]. The level of graphitization can be determined from the ratio between the integrated areas of G and D1 bands. These values were in all cases very low and equal to 0.41, evidencing the low crystallinity of the carbon phase, as revealed by XRD patterns. In addition, neither the distinct synthesis of the precursor nor the chemical extraction procedure altered the carbon structure (Table S2). The chemical analysis determined carbon contents in a range between 9 and 14% (Table 1). Additional bands below 1100 cm−1 were ascribed to vibrational modes of the phosphate groups belonging to the Na3V2(PO4)3 phase.

In order to determine whether the synthesis procedure affected sample morphology, TEM images were collected (Fig. 3). NVPSG samples showed submicronic thick particles with heterogenous shape and size ascribed to Na3V2(PO4)3 and thinner flake-like texture assigned to the carbon phase [39]. NVPBM sample revealed a similar texture, though both phases appear more intimately packed, which may favor a better ionic-electronic mixed conductivity. This fact was recently evidenced by our group in sodium batteries [25]. Finally, the surfactant assisted method provided a completely different mosaic-like texture in which rounded Na3V2(PO4)3 particles, with diameters a few tens of nanometers, appear homogeneously deposited onto the surface of graphene sheets. In all cases, their texture was preserved after the reaction with iodine to extract sodium. These differences can be relevant to explain the different electrochemical behavior of the studied samples.

Tetravalent vanadium has a [Ar]3d1 electronic configuration and 2D ground term. In octahedral coordination, the tetragonal distortion and spin-orbit interactions lead to the splitting of the degeneracy of the triplet ground state (2T2), and the ground level (2B2) remains doubly electronic spin-degenerate (Kramer theorem). Under a magnetic field, it is possible to observe the electronic Zeeman effect (∣Δms∣ = 1) and an EPR line. In contrast, phases with V(III) ion ([Ar]3d2) are hardly detected by EPR [40]. For pristine NVPBM sample, the observed anisotropy of the EPR signal centred approximately at g = 1.96 (Fig. 4a) indicates a significant tetragonal distortion of the VO6 octahedra and certain covalence of the vanadium‑oxygen bond, in good agreement with the literature [41]. There is no fine structure of the EPR line, probably due to dipole-dipole and exchange interactions between the paramagnetic vanadium ions. The presence of a mixed V(III)/V(IV) valence also can broaden the spectrum [40,42]. Sodium deintercalation from Na3V2(PO4)3 is accompanied by vanadium oxidation and then the EPR line is changed (Fig. 4a). The broadening of the EPR signal in the chemically oxidized sample is due to interactions between the paramagnetic centres, which are more concentrated as compared to pristine NVPBM sample. Another explanation could be the migration of vanadium ions from the initial octahedral site to vacant sites (18e), but the Rietveld refinement results did not evidence the migration in our sample [41].

A hyperfine structure is evident in the EPR spectra of NVPSF samples (Fig. 4b), due to coupling between the electron spin and vanadium-51 nucleus spin (I = 7/2) [42]. Hyperfine components of g|| and g⊥ are partially resolved. Although it is not possible to quantify the relative amount of V(III)/V(IV), it is evident that in NVPSF the hyperfine feature implies that the paramagnetic centres (V(IV)) are more diluted as compared to sample NVPBM. Since the EPR line does not go to zero intensity at low field, a contribution of another phase to the EPR spectrum should be expected, and this contribution is a very broad signal, most probably with vanadium ions very close to the trivalent state [43]. This may be a result of the coexistence of two phases with different oxidation states that can be related to the small particle size and heterogeneities between the surface and the core of the particles. Thus, the small particle size of NVPSF observed in Fig. 3 can influence on the EPR spectrum, and the surface of particles of NVPSF possess more concentration of V(IV) compared to the particle core. The desodiated sample exhibits an EPR spectrum (Fig. 4b) ascribable to a phase with mixed oxidation state V(III)/V(IV) while the phase closer to V(III) (in the particle surface) has disappeared. This result involves that after treatment with iodine the distribution of V(IV) ions is more homogeneous.

XPS spectroscopy is a helpful technique to unveil the chemical state of the probe elements located near the surface. On the contrary to EPR, XPS only gives information of the particle surface. XPS spectra at the V2p core levels were recorded for NVPBM and NVPSF samples to determine the effect of chemical desodiation on the oxidation state of vanadium (Fig. 5). The overall aspect of the profiles reveals two broadened bands belonging to V2p3/2 and V2p1/2 orbitals at low and high binding energies, respectively. Both bands are asymmetric, indicating the contribution of different oxidation states (Tables S3 y S4). Thus, those components centred at ca. 523 and 517 eV agree well with those reported for trivalent vanadium [31,44]. In addition, small shoulders at ca. 525 and 518 eV should be ascribed to V(IV), probably due to the oxidative effect of atmospheric oxygen or sodium deficiency, which would be more remarkable at the particle surface. On extracting sodium, the relative contribution of V(IV) increases to compensate the deficiency on positive charge. A calculation of the average oxidation state of vanadium based on the contributions of trivalent and tetravalent vanadium yielded 3.54 and 3.81 respectively for NVPBM-I2 and NVPSF-I2. These results would point out to a more efficient sodium extraction from the mosaic-like texture of NVPSF sample.

In order to clarify this question, both NVPBM-I2 and NVPSF-I2 samples were assembled in a sodium half-cell using metallic sodium as counter electrode (Fig. 6). Contrarily to the common operational procedure, cells were directly discharged to unveil a long plateau at ca. 3.4 V. This electrochemical feature is the same observed when C@Na3V2(PO4)3 is electrochemically charged and further discharged, belonging to sodium insertion in the vacant dodecahedral 18 sites and V(IV)/V(III) reduction. This result would also evidence the effective chemical extraction of sodium. The extent of these plateaus agrees well to the average oxidation state deduced from XPS spectra.

In previous reports on Mg batteries, the use of metallic Mg as counter electrode was not fully successful [23]. In fact, the unwanted deposition of electrolyte degradation products of the builds a thick passive layer onto the anode surface that slows cation migration and limits the kinetic of cell charge and discharge. Recently, Zeng et al. proposed the use of a large surface-activated carbon as a counter electrode. In this hybrid cell, TFSI− anions are fast adsorbed on the surface of the carbonaceous electrode during discharge process and will reversibly desorb on charging [45]. In order to determine the reliability of activated carbon in the selected electrolyte, a cyclic voltammogram of a Mg|Mg(TFSI)2/AN|AC was recorded (Fig. 7a). From this experiment, two conclusions were inferred. First, the open circuit voltage of the activated carbon was 1.45 V vs Mg2+/Mg. This value was used as a reference to create a right scale in Fig. 7b with the calculated potential of the cell vs Mg2+/Mg. Second, the lack of redox activity of the activated carbon electrode can be acceptably set between 0.8 and 1.9 V vs Mg2+/Mg. Bearing in mind these values, actual upper and lower cut-off voltages were limited at the range between 0.45 and −0.6 V vs AC.

Fig. 7b shows the galvanostatic curves recorded for the studied samples at two different rates. The typical horizontal plateau observed in the sodium half-cells in Fig. 6, is replaced by a sloping voltage region when magnesium is inserted. Whether this behavior is ascribable to a solid solution insertion mechanism or a slow kinetic in the electrochemical process will be further clarified at the light of ex-situ XRD experiment. The average discharge and charge voltages were respectively 1.2 and 1.6 V as referred to the Mg2+/Mg couple (right axis). These values were highly coincident to those recently reported by our group for electrochemical Mg insertion on electrochemically desodiated C@Na3V2(PO4)3 versus a metallic Mg counter anode. It points out to the validity of the approach of replacing Mg to increase the stability of the anode, while preserving the cell voltage. Discharge capacity values were as high as 100 mA h g−1 for NVPBM-I2. This value is 76% of the theoretical capacity of C@Na3V2(PO4)3 (130.7 mA h g−1) considering the full reduction of V(IV) to V(III). According to this value and the sodium occupancy of the desodiated sample (Table S1), we could infer a nominal stoichiometry of Mg0.76Na1.39V2(PO4)3, involving that chemically desodiated is quite efficient to insert magnesium.

As expected, an increase of the cycling rate from C/50 to C/20 involved an increase of the charge discharge hysteresis and decrease of reversible capacity. A value of this hysteresis was determined as the difference between of cell voltage at half of charge and discharge capacity. It yielded 0.523 V for NVPSG-I2, 0.436 V for NVPBM-I2 and 0.221 V for NVPSF-I2. These values reveal that the morphological modifications of C@Na3V2(PO4)3 particles induce a significant impact on the kinetic of Mg insertion, being more important when the surfactant assisted method was applied.

Ex-situ XRD patterns were recorded on NVPBM-I2 and NVPSF-I2 electrodes partially discharged and charged during the first cycle. Fig. 8 shows the diagrams for NVPBM-I2. On discharging, reflections are shifted to lower angles as a consequence of a lattice expansion to host the inserted Mg2+ cations (Fig. 8a–c). Conversely, the position of reflections retrieves similar 2 theta values to the pristine material evidencing the reversibility of the process (Fig. 8c–e). In addition, a close inspection of intense reflections as 113 and 116 on partially discharged and charged electrodes reveals a signal splitting. It evidences the occurrence of a two-phase mechanism during Mg2+ insertion involving a poor and a rich magnesium phase, similarly to the insertion mechanism of sodium in Na3V2(PO4)3 [13,33,46]. The lattice parameters were calculated and written in Table 3. The cell volume increased from 1318 Å to 1363 Å upon cell discharge, involving a cell expansion of 45 Å to host Mg2+ ions. The two-phase mechanism allowed to index a Mg-poor phase of 1333 Å and a Mg rich phase of 1353 Å at intermediate depth of discharge. During charge, the lattice dimension diminishes to 1319 Å with parameter a and c very similar to those of the pristine material, what evidences the high reversibility of the Mg insertion. In order to confirm this conclusion, ex-situ XRD patterns of partially cycled electrodes were also recorded on NVPSF-I2 (Fig. S1), confirming both the reversibility of the insertion reaction and the presence of a two-phase mechanism.

XPS spectra at V2p core level were recorded on an electrode fully discharged in Mg hybrid cells to detect changes in the oxidation state of the transition metal (Fig. 5). As for the chemically desodiated samples, the asymmetric profiles were ascribed to the presence of both V(IV) and V(III). Their deconvolution allowed to calculate their relative contribution and eventually to infer an average oxidation state of vanadium in the discharged electrodes (Tables S3 and S4). These values were 3.1 for NVPBM-I2 and 3.08 for NVPSF-I2, and evidence the effective electrochemical reduction of vanadium, parallel to the magnesium insertion, previously demonstrated by XRD. An EPR spectrum recorded on a NVPBM-I2, also threw light on the effective reduction of vanadium (Fig. 4a). Two EPR lines were observed: a narrower symmetric line at g = 2.00, and a broader and asymmetric line. The narrower signal is typical of carbon black [47], which is used as conductive agent in the electrode. There is no hyperfine structure in the EPR line of the broader signal, and compared to pristine NVPBM and NVPBM-I2, this line is slightly shifted to higher magnetic field. Thus, this signal can be ascribed to a high concentration of paramagnetic ions, mainly V(III), localized at tetragonally distorted VO6 octahedra. Thus the EPR spectrum is in good agreement with the insertion of magnesium.

Electrochemical cycling was tested at two different rates for all desodiated samples (Fig. 9). The first 5 cycles at C/50 show a high dispersion of the charge and discharge capacity values irrespective of the sample. It can be correlated to the occurrence of electrolyte side reactions at the electrode surface. Also, this behavior is quite different depending of the studied sample. Thus, NVPSG-I2 shows an enhanced capacity fading, while NVPBM-I2 reveals some electrode activation that induced a notorious increase of capacity after the first cycle. On increasing the rate to C/20, the studied samples show the most distinct performance. Thus, the mosaic-like texture featured by NVPSF-I2 was the most efficient to retain capacity values. Otherwise, NVPSG-I2 and NVPBM-I2 suffered an enhanced capacity fading. Irrespective of this fact, all samples showed a more stable charge and discharge capacity probably due to a stabilization of the electrode-electrolyte interphase after the first few cycles at C/50. After 15 cycles at C/20, the cell cycling was subjected at C/50. Unfortunately, NVPBM-I2 was not able to recover the initial high capacity values, while NVPSF-I2 showed a capacity retention as high as 93%. It evidences the optimal morphology of this sample to perform high reversible Mg insertion in these hybrid cells.

Three C@Na3V2(PO4)3 samples were synthesized by different procedures to yield distinct particle morphologies. A chemical treatment with an I2/acetonitrile solution was successful to provide significant amounts of sodium-deinserted products (C@NaV2(PO4)3) as potential cathode material for Mg hybrid cells. TEM images showed that the selected synthesis procedures were effective to provide samples with meaningful changes in their texture. The Rietveld refinement of X-ray diffraction patterns revealed a large contraction of the lattice, while O-Na-O angles where preserved. Therefore, an efficient extraction of sodium ions from the 18e sites was responsible for the structural changes. Moreover, XPS spectra also evidenced that sodium extraction was accompanied by vanadium oxidation.

Electrochemical tests in Mg hybrid batteries demonstrated the feasibility of magnesium insertion in chemically desodiated C@NaV2(PO4)3. The reversible insertion of magnesium was demonstrated by detecting the contraction and further expansion of the lattice and the decrease of the vanadium oxidation state after full discharging. The largest initial capacity was recorded for the sample prepared by ball milling, meanwhile a better capacity retention was achieved for C@NaV2(PO4)3 with a mosaic-like structure synthesized by a surfactant assisted method.