Sodium super ionic conductor (NASICON) based glass is emerging as solid electrolyte material for Na-ion batteries. In the present study, we report the influence of Ag+ → Na+ ion-exchange process on the electrical, optical, structural and mechanical properties of NASICON type glass with a chemical formula of Na2.8Ca0.1Al2Ga0.5P2.7O12 (NCAGP). Ag+ ion exchange process was carried out by dipping NCAGP glass in AgNO3 molten salt at 300 °C for 15 min (IE15min) and 30 min (IE30min). The diffusion depth of Ag+ ions was measured to be about ~7 μm and ~25 μm for IE15min and IE30min samples, respectively. The dc conductivity values were obtained from base (NCAGP), IE15min and IE30min bulk glass samples through the complex impedance plots at a temperature range of 75 °C–200 °C. With the increase in ion-exchange time, the dc conductivity slightly diminished on account of marginally increase in activation energy (Ea) values. Optical absorption spectra for 30 min ion-exchanged glass revealed the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) band, confirming the reduction of Ag+ ion to Ag0 metal with an increase in ion-exchange time from 15 min to 30 min. Presence of Raman vibrational peak at 233 cm−1 has also confirmed the formation of Agsingle bondO bonds. The mechanical hardness values obtained through Vickers indentation method reveal enhanced hardness and crack resistance of bulk glasses with the ion-exchange treatment by causing compressive stress on the surface of NCAGP glass. The threshold load for the crack generation is increased from 0.5 kgf (4.9 N) to 2 kgf (19.6 N) after the ion-exchange treatment. Overall, improved mechanical and good electrical properties reveal the applicability of IE15min NCAGP glass as an electrolyte material for Na-ion batteries.

Sodium in comparison with lithium is economical and relatively abundant. Therefore, the research and development on Na-ion batteries, which are deemed as an alternative to the Li-ion batteries, and gathering momentum in recent years [1]. In the development of Na-ion batteries, a critical challenge lies in identifying a highly suitable and efficient electrolyte material. Among the various types of commercially available electrolyte materials like organic polymer, solid- and gel-polymer electrolytes, solid-type electrolyte material is considered ideal in view of energy efficiency and safety issues [1,2]. In addition, the mechanical stability plays a key role in the process of developing a solid electrolyte material because the active electrode materials expand and contract while charging and discharging of battery [3]. Any change in volume may create cracks, which are responsible for the improper functioning of solid electrolyte material [4,5]. The good processability and low elastic moduli of solid electrolyte materials define the capacity of batteries; therefore, the above-mentioned aspects should be considered in developing solid based electrolyte materials.

Sodium super ion conductor (NASICON) based phosphate glasses, with better processability and suitable ionic conductivity (2.2 × 10−6 S·cm−1 at 423 K), are regarded as suitable solid electrolyte materials [6]. Nevertheless, high elastic moduli (~50 GPa) of phosphate glasses limit its usage in the commercial application [4,7]. It should be highlighted that various techniques to strengthen glass have been employed over the last few decades, which include thermal treatment, chemical treatment and crystallization process [8]. In general, cracks in bulk materials may be due to stress created on the surface [9]. It is known that in ion-exchange chemical treatment, cations on the surface of the material are exchanged with the cations available in the molten salt, generating compressive stress on the thin surface layer and enhancing the fracture toughness of brittle material [8,10]. It has been further described that ion-exchange chemical treatment, has the potential to produce new materials with high ion conductivity, an essential parameter for electrolyte materials [11]. Therefore, mechanically and electrically improved NASICON based phosphate glasses can be generated through the ion-exchange process and thereby utilized in Na-ion batteries as electrolyte materials. However, producing glass materials with high ionic conductivity with improved mechanical properties after the implementation of the ion - exchange process still remains a challenge.

In view of the above, an effort has been made to study the influence of ion-exchange process on the mechanical and electrical properties of Ga2O3 contain (mol.%) 34.1Na2O-2.5CaO-24.3Al2O3–6.1Ga2O3–33.0P2O5 (designed from Sodium superionic conductor (NASICON) based Na2.8Ca0.1Al2P2.7Ga0.5O12 chemical formula) phosphate glasses. The ion-exchange process was performed after immersing the glass material in AgNO3 molten salt at 300 °C for 15 min and 30 min. The electron microscopic technique was utilized to identify the presence and distribution of Ag+-ion in the ion-exchange surface area. In addition, the structural modifications with the ion-exchange process have been elucidated using micro-Raman spectroscopy. The electrical conductivity and mechanical hardness of the base glass and its influence on the ion exchange process were systematically investigated in the present work.

The bulk glass having new chemical composition was prepared by melt quenching technique using high purity powder chemicals (NH4)H2PO4, Na2CO3, CaCO3, Al2O3, and Ga2O3. Homogeneous mixture of batch, obtained by hand grinding in agate motor, was preheated in an alumina crucible for decarbonisation using the following heat treatment schedule: (i) RT to 350 °C at a heating rate (β) of 1 K min−1followed by a dwell at 350 °C for 6 h; (ii) from 350 °C to 600 °C at β = 1 K min−1 followed by a dwell at 600 °C for 3 h and (iii) from 600 °C to 900 °C at β = 4 K min−1 followed by a dwell at 900 °C for 1 h. The decarbonized batch mixture was first melted in alumina crucible and then re-melted again in Pt-crucible for better homogeneity at 1350 °C for 2 h, in air atmosphere with intermediate stirring using thin platinum rod. Glass in bulk form was obtained by quenching of melt onto a pre-heated (400 °C) stainless-steel mould followed by annealing at temperatures around the glass transition temperature 350 °C [6].

For Ag+ ion exchange process samples were cut into 6 × 6 mm square with the thickness of 6 mm and polished to an optical grade quality. The glass samples were immersed in molten salt of AgNO3, kept in an alumina crucible inside a box type muffle furnace, at 300 °C (well below the glass transformation temperature ~350 °C) for 15 min and 30 min. After the prescribed time (15 min and 30 min), the ion exchanges glasses were taken out and washed several times under normal tap water followed by lukewarm water and ultra-sonication for 5 min in distilled water. The ion-exchanged glasses hereafter described with “IE15min” indicate 15 min of the ion-exchange time and “IE30min” indicates 30 min of ion-exchange time at 300 °C. The 6 × 6 × 6 mm3 samples were used for optical, spectroscopic, and mechanical studies.

For AC conductivity measurements, as per instrument requirement glass samples were uniformly cut to 8 × 8 mm square with the thickness of 1.5 mm and polished to optical grade quality. The ion - exchange process was also followed for this dimension glass samples as mentioned earlier. All three glass samples namely Base glass (NCAGP), IE15min and IE30min were then hand coated with high conductivity (volume resistivity = 0.0174 Ω·cm) silver paint (CAT. No. 8331-14G) procured from MG Chemicals Ltd., Canada. The silver coated glass samples were cured overnight at RT in the air atmosphere. The conductivity measurements were carried out in the frequency range 55 Hz to 1 MHz with 3 V rms using LCR Hi Tester (Model HIOKI-3532-50, Japan). Two-probe setup with test leads connected to a Test Fixture HIOKI-9262 was used to acquire the data. The real-time data was acquired through HIOKI LCR sample program version 4.03E software by HIOKI, Japan. The temperature-dependent frequency characteristics of the glass samples were measured from room temperature to 200 °C with 25 °C interval using dry high-temperature calibrator (model: DPI-1200, supplied by local vendor) with the temperature accuracy of ±1 °C. The DC conductivity (σdc) of the samples was measured from the estimated values of bulk resistance of the samples derived from impedance plots.

Raman spectra for bulk glass samples were obtained using a Horiba LabRam HR 800 Evolution confocal Raman microscope, with a 478 nm argon ion laser source (10 mW) focused with a 100× objective lens having the spot size of ~3.14 μm2 on to the surface of glass samples. The collected Raman radiation was dispersed with a 600 lines·mm−1 grating and focused on a Peltier-cooled charge-coupled device (CCD) detector allowing a spectral resolution of 2 cm−1. The instrument was calibrated with intense Raman signal for crystalline silicon at 520.7 cm−1. All spectra were recorded in the range 100–1500 cm−1 with an integration time of 5 s and 20 accumulations per spectrum.

Optical absorption, transmission and reflection spectra of the base glass and ion exchanges glasses were recorded at room temperature in the wavelength region of 200–850 nm (slit width of 2 nm) using UV–VIS-NIR absorption spectrophotometer (Model: UV-3101PC, Shimadzu, Japan). Baseline has been corrected with respect to air by placing standard external slits in the reference and sample beam paths constant while recording absorption and transmission of spectra in case of specular reflection; moreover, highly reflecting mirror supplier along with the instrument was used at the reference side.

Ag+ ion diffusion studies were carried out through line profile analysis by (EDS) Energy Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy using Oxford instrument (Model: INCA-250, UK equipped with SDD 50 mm2 detector) attached with FE-SEM instrument (Model: SIGMA, Carlzeiss, Germany). For EDS analysis, the ion-exchanged IE15min and IE30min 6 × 6 × 6 mm square samples were cut in to half and polished to optical grade quality and etched with HF on the cross-section side.

Mechanical properties of the glass samples were obtained using Vikers indentation test method in a microhardness tester model, MMT-X7 made by Clemex CMT, Canada under different loads starting from 0.1 kgf (0.98 N) to 2.0 kgf (19.6 N). The surface texture of the base glass, IE15min, and IE30min glass samples were taken with an optical microscope model, BX51 made by Olympus, Japan under 100× objective lens.

The AC conductivity studies of all the three glass samples i.e., base glass, IE15min, and IE30min were measured over 55 Hz to 1 MHz frequency range at different temperatures with the interval of 25 °C starting from 75 °C up to 200 °C. The complex impedance plots (cole-cole plot), which represent real impedance (Z′) versus imaginary impedance (Z′′) in a semi-circle plot, were utilized to determine the bulk resistance, R, which is equal to Z′ when Z′′ = 0 at lower frequency region, for all the samples in the specified temperature range. Fig. 1 shows such cole-cole plot for all the three glass samples at 100 °C. The diameter of semi-circle increased in case of “IE15min” and “IE3 0 min” glass samples indicating the enhanced bulk resistance of the glass after the ion-exchange treatment. The bulk resistance was then used to calculate the dc conductivity, σdc, of the samples using the relation σdc = (t/(R × A)), where t = thickness of the sample, R is the bulk resistance and A is the applied electrode area of the cross-section.

Fig. 2 (a-e) shows the measured dc conductivity of the base and the ion-exchanged glasses at different temperatures. It is interesting to note that the difference in dc conductivity between the base glass and the ion-exchanged glasses gradually increases with increasing temperature (a considerable difference can be seen at temperature ≥150 °C) might be due to the mixed ion conductivity [12]. This phenomenon attributes to the lower mobility of Ag+ ions than the Na+ ion due to the larger ionic radius and higher Agsingle bondO covalency [13]. At higher temperature (200 °C), the IE15min sample shows improved dc conductivity than the base glass due to the relaxation of surface compression as well as enhanced mobility of Ag+ ions. Compared to IE15min sample, the dc conductivity of IE3 0 min sample is not considerably improved with temperature because at higher temperature the value is less than the value of the IE15min sample. To understand this behavior, we further carried out the EDS line profile for ion-exchanged glasses to know the diffusion lengths of Ag+ ions in the glass. Fig. 3 (a) and (b) shows the EDS line profile (see the Section 2.2 for sample preparation) for elements distribution across the glass samples for about 100 μm cross-section starting from the surface of the ion-exchange side. For IE15min sample the silver ion penetration depth was found about 7 μm whereas for IE30min sample the penetration depth was found about 25 μm. The X-ray counts of Na+ ions also reduced in the same length scale indicating Ag+ to Na+ ion exchange process. If all Ag+ ions are exchanged for Na+ ions in the depth scales as analyzed through EDS measurements, the conductivity of the IE30min sample should be enhanced at higher temperatures; but, the dc conductivity results show a negative perspective (Fig.2e). It has been reported in the literature [14] that at higher ion-exchange times, the probability of Ag+ ion reduction to Ag0 metallic participles enhances and which can be easily identified through (LSPR) localized surface plasmon resonance peak via optical absorption spectroscopy [15,16]. Fig. 4 shows the optical absorption, transmission and specular reflectance spectra of the base, IE15min, and IE30min glass samples. The shift in the absorption UV band edge (can be clearly noticed in transmission spectra Fig. 4c) for ion-exchanged glasses can be attributed to the higher polarizability of Ag+ ions [17]. It is evident from the absorption and reflection spectra for IE30min sample that a broad LSPR band starting from 400 nm to 700 nm with two peaks positions at around 430 nm and 540 nm clearly confirms the presence of Ag0 metallic particles [18,19]. The overlapped LSPR band with two peaks position can be attributed to the size variation of Ag0 metallic particles [18,19]. Therefore, the shorter time duration is more favorable for Ag+-Na+ ion-exchange process without reduction of Ag+ to Ag0 state at 300 °C. This accounts to decrease in the dc conductivity of the IE30min sample due to the reduced path lengths and migration hurdles caused by Ag0 clusters which are on par with other reports [13].

However, it is interesting to note that at lower temperatures (100 °C) the difference in obtained conductivities of the base glass and ion-exchanges glasses is very low. The obtained conductivity at lower temperatures (100 °C) is mainly due to Na+ ions. The activation energy calculated for the mobile ions from the slop of Arrhenius plots (ln σdc vs 1/T) is found to be 0.697 eV for NCAGP base glass and slightly increased for IE15min (0.717 eV) and IE30min (0.719 eV) glasses. This value is in the range similar to the other Na+ ion conducting NASICON type glasses reported in the literature [6]. Inset of Fig. 1 represents the activation energy behaviour for base and ion-exchanged glasses. This further indicates that the ion-exchange treatment is not much influenced by the conductivity properties of NCAGP glass at low temperature, which is highly suitable for the room-temperature Na-ion batteries. Nevertheless, the obtained conductivity values for the base glass needs to be improved and such attempts are in progress. On the other hand, the mechanical properties of the ion-exchanged glasses were dramatically increased after the ion-exchange treatment that would be discussed in the subsequent section following the structural analysis by Raman spectroscopy.

Micro Raman spectra can be used to identify the structural modifications occurred in NCAGP glass after the ion-exchange process. Fig. 5 presents the Raman spectra for NCAGP base glass and Ag+ ion-exchanged IE15min and IE30min glasses. The peaks in the higher frequency region (900–1200 cm−1) represent symmetric stretching vibration of Psingle bondO bonds within the phosphorus tetrahedral, the peak appeared in the high frequency can be utilized to identify the Qn units (n represents the number of bridging oxygens associated with phosphorus tetrahedral) present in the glass network structure [20]. In the higher frequency region (900–1200 cm−1), two broad bands, which are well overlapped with each other, are observed at 1032 cm−1 and at 1170 cm−1, respectively. Furthermore, it is also observed that the vibration band identified at 1032 cm−1 is four-fold higher in intensity than the band observed at 1170 cm−1. This result indicates the structural units belong to the 1032 cm−1 vibrational band are higher in concentration and are the primary structural units in the NCAGP glass structure. Yifen et al. [21], studied the structure of ternary (mol.%) 37.5 Na2O-25Al2O3–37.5P2O5 glass system, which is more equivalent to the NCAGP glass composition, by Raman spectroscopy and assigned the vibrational band observed at 1040 cm−1 to the AlPO4 tetrahedral. Therefore, the 1032 cm−1 vibrational band is solely assigned to AlPO4 tetrahedral in which each PO4 tetrahedral in its Q0 form is surrounded by AlO4 tetrahedral and vice versa. Another vibrational band at 1170 cm−1 in the higher frequency region is attributed to Q2 structural units [22].

In the middle frequency region (500–900 cm−1), several vibrational bands, which are all well overlapped with each other, are observed at 440 cm−1, 494 cm−1, 577 cm−1, 633 cm−1 and 700 cm−1. The 494 cm−1 and 633 cm−1 bands correspond to AlO6 and AlO5 units, respectively [23]. The bands observed at 440 cm−1 and 577 cm−1 are attributed to different bending vibrational modes of network units [24]. A shoulder is observed at 850 cm−1, which is attributed to vibrations of AlO4 units in AlPO4 tetrahedra. In the low-frequency region (200–500 cm−1), a very broad peak is observed ranging from 224 cm−1 to 368 cm−1 and is attributed to the bending vibrations of phosphate lattice [24].

Although Raman spectroscopy is not a quantitative technique, the changes in the spectrum (i.e. peak positions, intensity and the width of the vibrational band) clearly illustrate modifications in the chemical composition of glass [25]. The implication of ion-exchange process at 300 °C for 15 min, the frequencies of vibrational bands observed for NCAGP glass are slightly shifted towards lower frequencies. Further increase in ion-exchange duration time from 15 min (IE15min) to 30 min (IE30min) at 300 °C, the frequencies of vibrational bands in the middle and higher frequency regions are not shifted towards more lower frequencies, instead the width and intensities of the vibrational bands are increased. Moreover, in the lower frequency region, the intensity of the lattice vibrational bands is significantly diminished and an additional band is raised at around 233 cm−1.

Shifts in Raman frequencies are mainly due to the compositional changes on the glass surface after the ion-exchange treatment. Such structural changes are mainly assigned to the replacement of Na+ ions with the Ag+ ions on the surface [26]. Although Ag+ ion has the same charge to that of Na+ ion, the substitution of larger Ag+ (1.29 A ionic radius) for smaller Na+ (1.16 A ionic radius) significantly influences the interatomic distances, bond angles, and force constants and affect the vibrational properties [26]. The shift in Raman frequency can also be attributed to the higher covalence of Agsingle bondO bond compared to the Nasingle bondO bond [25]. Nevertheless, the Raman spectra are similar in both the middle and higher frequency regions, despite slight variation in the frequencies, width, and intensities, for NCAGP base glass and ion-exchanged glasses. This indicates the presence of a specific path for the mobile cation in the glass structure, as proposed by Greaves [27].

According to the modified random network model proposed by Greaves [27,28], the glass structure consists of a network structured region composed of network forming species connected by bridging oxygens and a channel region composed of modifier (mobile) cations connected to network forming species by non-bridging oxygen. This indicates that during the ion-exchange process, the silver cations diffuse through the specified channel and interact with the network structure species. Such type of diffusion process controls the diffusion rate of Ag+ ions and depth of the ion - exchange layer because of the dissociation energy of the bond to oxygen [10] during prolonged ion-exchange treatment. As a consequence, during persistent treatment at a specific temperature Ag+ ions accumulate and might lead to the formation of clusters on the surface (as evident through LSPR absorption band in Fig. 4). The band at 233 cm−1 is direct evidence of the formation of Agsingle bondO bonds [29,30]. The enhanced intensity of Agsingle bondO vibrational band for IE3 0 min sample can be attributed to the formation of more Agsingle bondO bonds; related to Ag+ ions as well as Agsingle bondO instant bond formation in the vicinity of silver clusters consisting of Ag0, Ag+ and Ag2+ [29,30]. Since silver ions are highly photosensitive [31,32], with the Raman spectrum collected by exciting the sample with 488 nm laser (10 mW) for a time period of 5 s and 20 accumulations, oxidation of Ag0 metal particles can't be ruled out. Sheng et al. [33], has studied the ion-exchange process in silicate glass and reported that substrate temperature and ion-exchange time play a crucial role in the formation of silver clusters. This indicates the importance of optimization of temperature and time for the ion-exchange process, specific to the glass composition. In the present study, the ion-exchange process at 300 °C for 15 min reveal no formation of clusters and no abrupt variation in the conductivity indicating the appropriate parameters for NCAGP glass based electrolyte material.

Fig. 6 shows the Vickers indentations for NCAGP base glass at 0.5 kgf and 1.0 kgf (inset), 2.0 kgf (maximum load in the present instrument) for IE15min and IE30min samples alongside with the glass surface profiles captured through the optical microscope. For all the samples the appearing visible scratches are formed during the optical polishing. However, for the IE30min sample, throughout the surface white spots and clusters of white spots are observed which are can be attributed to the formation of Ag0 metal particle and clusters.

The micro hardness value obtained through Vickers indentation technique for NCAGP glass is 3.19 G Pa. This is within the range of values reported for alkali and alkaline-earth containing phosphate glasses, which varies from 3.2 to 5.4 GPa [7]. The hardness value is increased to 3.34 G Pa with the Ag+ ion-exchange treatment at 300 °C for 15 min. The increase in hardness value is mainly assigned to the generation of compressive stress on the glass surface owing to the compositional changes by substituting large Ag+ (1.29 Å) ions for originally occupied small Na+ ions (1.16 Å) [8]. Nevertheless, the value is slightly decreased to 3.25 G Pa with further increase in ion-exchange time from 15 min to 30 min at 300 °C. The decrease in hardness is mainly attributed to the two factors. First, the reduction of Ag+ ions to the Ag0 metal [14], in accordance with the results observed from absorption spectroscopy. Second, stress relaxation, a gradual decay in stress under constant strain. Sane and Cooper [34] reported that increasing the ion-exchange process time at a fixed temperature reduces the compressive stress and then decreases the surface hardness.

One of the major reasons for the failure of the bulk glass material is the generation and propagation of cracks, which are accountable for the fracture [35]. Therefore, improving the surface crack resistance increases the performance and reliability of glass materials. Crack resistance is derived from the load at which averages of two median or radial cracks are formed [36,37]. In the present study, crack resistance is measured by observing the cracks (median or radial) generated at systematically increasing the indentation load from 0.98 N to 19.6 N. For the NCAGP base glass, two radial cracks are observed at the indentation load of 4.9 N and the number of cracks is increased to four with further increase in indentation load up to 9.8 N. However, the crack probability, ([the indentations that have at least two cracks formed from the corners of the indentation/total indentation] × 100%) at the indentation load of 4.9 N is only limited to 30%. Whereas, 100% crack probability is obtained from the indentation load of 9.8 N. This suggests that the threshold load, the load at which the crack probability reaches to 50%, for the NCAGP glass lies between 4.9 N and 9.8 N. This value is much higher than the value observed for ion-exchange treated Corning®2947 soda lime glass [36]. The implementation of ion-exchange treatment, irrespective of the time period, for the NCAGP glass does not lead to the formation of any cracks even with the application of the highest applicable load of the utilized indenter i.e., 19.6 N. This suggests that the crack probability is significantly reduced after the ion-exchange treatment. Therefore, the better surface crack resistance is obtained for the NCAGP glass after the ion-exchange treatment, irrespective of the time period. Nevertheless, the formation of Ag metal and as well slightly reduced hardness value suggests omitting the ion-exchange treatment at 300 °C for 30 min for NCAGP glass composition.

The influence of Ion-exchange process on the Na2.8Ca0.1Al2Ga0.5P2.7O12 (NCAGP)) glass has been evaluated by using impedance analyzer, EDS, absorption, Raman spectroscopy and micro-hardness techniques. It is found that ion-exchange treatment time at 300 °C has significant influence on the electrical and mechanical properties of NCAGP glass. The dc conductivity values are slightly decreased after the ion-exchange treatment when measured at lower temperatures (100 °C). The decrease in conductivity can be understood based on the enhanced compressibility stress on the ion-exchanged surface. The appearance of the optical absorption band in the visible region and the Raman vibrational band at ~233 cm−1 clearly reveals the formation of Agsingle bondO bonds for ion-exchanged glasses. The formation of Ag-metal on the surface further reduced the dc-conductivity of IE3 0 min glass compared to the IE15min sample. Irrespective of heat treatment time, ion-exchange process increased the indentation hardness values owing to the formation of compressibility stress. The threshold load for the creation and propagation of cracks increased from 4.9 N to 19.6 N (the maximum indentation load available with the utilized indenter), after the ion-exchanged process. The ion exchange process at 300 °C temperatures for 15 min time is optimal parameter for the NCAGP glass materials because it offers stable dc conductivity and better crack resistance.