Molten sodium (Na) anode high temperature batteries, such as Na-NiCl2 and Na-S, draw attentions to be used in stationary electricity storage applications. Recent efforts are exerted to lower their operating temperatures down to below 200 °C in order to adopt ultra-low cost cell production, establish easier maintenance, pursue enhanced safety, and more. One of main challenges in lowering the operation temperature is radical decrease in ionic conductivity of their solid electrolytes. Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (Nasicon) is considered as a solid electrolyte for the lower temperature operation. Here we report Na ionic conductivity of Nasicon at 150 °C increases by adding Ge element. The ionic conductivity of Ge-added sample (Na3[Zr2-δGeδ]Si2PO12, δ = 0.1, 0.2) is measured as high as 1.4 × 10−2 S cm-1 at 150 °C which is about two times higher than those of the bare Nasicon. The phase transition temperature of the Ge-added samples is lowered, thereby the volume fraction of the rhombohedral phase, which is stable at higher temperatures and exhibits higher Na ion conductivities, increases. This finding provides a useful guideline to further increase the ionic conductivity of Nasicon solid electrolytes, which can advance materialization of lower temperature operating Na batteries.

Advanced molten sodium (Na) anode high temperature batteries such as Na-S and Na-NiCl2 are attractive for use in large scale energy storage because of a number of advantages, such as use of inexpensive materials, demonstrated long lifetime, and easiness to be scaled up [[1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7]]. Therefore, the technologies have been successfully demonstrated for stationary applications [4,8]. Operating these batteries at elevated temperatures of 280–350 °C enables their active materials (Na, S, and NaAlCl4) to remain in a molten state; however, the high temperature operation is one of the major drawbacks of the conventional Na-based batteries which causes increased component degradation kinetics, higher manufacturing cost, and loss in energy efficiency [[9], [10], [11]]. Therefore, intensive efforts on this technology have been focused on developing advanced batteries that can be operated at intermediate temperatures (95–190 °C) [[9], [10], [11]] or even at room temperature [[12], [13], [14], [15], [16]].

For such advanced lower temperature operating Na batteries, development of suitable solid electrolytes with high ionic conductivity is essential because Na-ion conductivity of a solid electrolyte at lower temperatures is typically 1 to 2 orders of magnitude lower than that at high temperatures of above 300 °C [2,17,18]. Among candidate solid electrolytes, Nasicon, Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12 (0 ≤ x ≤ 3), has been attracted due to its high ionic conductivity especially at x = 2 (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) [[19], [20], [21]] that is comparable to that of β”-Al2O3, which has the highest ionic conductivity among Na+ superionic conductors and it could be even higher at low temperature regime [17,18].

Nasicon is a solid solution of NaZr2P3O12 and Na4Zr2Si3O12 and is composed of corner-shared ZrO6 and (P/Si)O4 polyhedral framework that forms three dimensional Na+-conducting channels. Nasicon compounds (Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12, 0 ≤ x ≤ 3) have a rhombohedral phase (Rc), but a monoclinic phase (C2/c) can be stabilized at specific compositions (1.6 ≤ x ≤ 2.4) and temperature conditions (<∼150 °C) [20,22,23].

The phase transition (monoclinic ↔ rhombohedral phase) of Nasicon (Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12, 1.6 ≤ x ≤ 2.4) can happen at certain temperatures [24]; during this transition, the configuration of Na+ ions is slightly changed remaining ZrO6 and (P/Si)O4 polyhedral frameworks [20]. Rhombohedral Nasicon structure has four equivalent Na sites (one Na1 and three Na2) per formula unit, and the three Na2 sites split into one Na2 and two Na3 sites as it transforms to monoclinic phase. In rhombohedral phase, only Na1 site is fully occupied whereas the Na1 and Na2 sites are fully occupied in monoclinic phase. This rearrangement can affect the conducting pathway of Na+, and it also causes the slight distortion of the structure.

Furthermore, the phase transition behavior strongly affects the transport of Na+ because the rhombohedral phase is more symmetric than the monoclinic phase and thereby has higher Na+ ion mobility [25,26]. Therefore, the rhombohedral phase that is stable at high temperature has lower activation energy (Ea) than the monoclinic phase. Stabilizing the rhombohedral phase at lower temperatures can increase the ionic conductivity (σion). Considering that typical approaches to improve the ionic conductivity are to enhance sinterability or to enlarge conduction channels by doping various dopants into Zr octahedral sites [17,[27], [28], [29], [30], [31]], stabilizing rhombohedral phase at low temperature can be alternative approach to increase σion in Nasicon compounds. Excess sodium in the compound, e.g., Na3.3Zr2Si2PO12 compared with Na3Zr2Si2PO12, can increase the ionic conductivity as well [32]. Since the operating temperature of the advanced Na batteries operated at intermediate temperatures overlaps the transition temperature of Nasicon, understanding phase transition behavior would be critical which can broaden their applications as a promising solid electrolyte.

In this study, Na3Zr2Si2PO12 was synthesized with and without Ge to understand the phase transition behavior of Nasicon and the effect of the phase transition on the electrical properties. The effects of Ge addition to Nasicon having a baseline composition (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) on its phase transition behavior and ionic conductivity were investigated by using high-temperature in-situ synchrotron X-ray diffraction (in-situ XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR), Differential Scanning Calorimeter (DSC), and AC impedance spectroscopy. As the amount of Ge addition increased, the phase transition temperature (TP) was lowered and the content of rhombohedral phase compared to monoclinic phase at the transition temperature range was increased. The improvement of σion can be the result of the increase in the contents of the rhombohedral phase that can increase Na+ ion mobility. The findings in this study can provide an alternative way to the increase in ionic conductivity in Nasicon compounds and to apply Nasicon to Na batteries that can operate at intermediate temperature.

The Nasicon (“bare sample”, Na3Zr2Si2PO12 stoichiometry) and Ge-added Nasicon (“Ge-added sample”, Na3Zr2-δGeδSi2PO12 where δ = 0.1, 0.2 stoichiometry) were synthesized by solid-state reaction. The bare sample was prepared by mixing stoichiometric amounts of Na2CO3, ZrO2, SiO2, and NH4H2PO4. To prepare the Ge-added samples, a part of ZrO2 precursor was replaced by GeO2. Details of sample preparation process are shown in our previous study [32]. The Zr-deficient Nasicon (“Zr-deficient sample”, Na3Zr2-δSi2PO12 where δ = 0, 0.1, 0.2 stoichiometry) were also prepared to confirm effects of adding Ge element on final products, and experimental results of the Zr-deficient samples is included in Supplementary materials (see Fig. S1, Fig. S6, Table S1 and Table S2).

The crystal structure of the samples was characterized using synchrotron powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) at the 9B High Resolution Powder Diffraction beamline of the Pohang Light Source II (PLS-II), Korea. Synchrotron XRD of the samples was recorded with six base detectors using a step size of 0.02°, exposure time of 6 s, and 10 ≤ 2θ ≤ 130° at room temperature (RT). In-situ synchrotron XRD patterns at high temperature (above 100 °C) were taken with a step size of 0.01°, exposure time of 2 s, and 10 ≤ 2θ ≤ 130° at 100 ≤ T ≤ 130 °C. XRD patterns were analyzed with X'pert highscore plus software program using Rietveld refinement. The morphology of the sintered pellets was observed using a BV field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM, XL30S FEG, Philips Electron Optics) at a vacuum level of below 10−5 mbar with accelerating voltage of 5 kV. The binding energy of Ge element in the Nasicon samples was studied using an X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) with VG scientific XPS equipment (VF ESCALAB 350). Core level energies were calibrated using the C-C bonding in C 1s (284.6 eV). FT-IR spectra of the samples in 400–1300 cm−1 range were obtained with the use of a Nicolet iS50 FT-IR Spectrometer. The FT-IR spectra of the samples were taken on Nasicon powder samples. DSC on the Nasicon samples was performed using a SDT Q600 (TA instruments) at 25 ≤ T ≤ 300 °C with a flow of synthetic air (50 ml/min). Ramping rate was 10 °C/min in all experiments.

Pt blocking electrodes (thickness ∼ 100 nm) were deposited on both sides of pellets by sputtering. AC impedance spectroscopy was performed in the frequency (f) range 1 Hz ≤ f ≤ 1 MHz at 100 °C ≤ T ≤ 300 °C in air. The bulk impedance was obtained from the intercept of the Nyquist plot with the real axis at high f. σion was calculated using the impedance and area and thickness of the pellets.

The synchrotron XRD patterns (Fig. 1a) of the bare sample and the Ge-added samples show that all samples have the monoclinic Nasicon phase with certain amount of monoclinic ZrO2 as a secondary phase (blue inverted triangle in Fig. 1a) and without any Ge-related phases. The results of Rietveld refinement of the samples are included in Supplementary materials (see Fig. S1, and Table S1). The ZrO2 impurity can be formed by loss of Na and P at high temperature during the solid-state reaction [26,27,33,34] or due to the low reactivity of monoclinic ZrO2 [27]. Lattice parameters of the three samples were obtained by XRD refinement (Fig. 1b), and those of the bare sample are similar to values reported in the literature [35]. However, lattice parameters in the Ge-added samples were a little larger than those in the bare sample and linearly increased according to the Ge amount. As observed in reported NaGe2(PO4)3 compound, Ge4+ ions can occupy octahedral sites of Nasicon lattice instead of Zr [36,37]. However, given that the Ge4+ ion have much smaller ionic radius (∼0.53 nm) than Zr4+ ion (∼0.72 nm) and lattice parameters of the Ge-added samples are increased, added Ge barely goes to the Zr site in the bulk structure. To understand the effect of Zr deficiency on lattice parameters of the Ge-added samples, the Zr-deficient samples were additionally synthesized based on the amount of Zr element and then its lattice parameters were compared to those of the Ge-added samples (Fig. 1b). Lattice parameters of the Zr-deficient samples almost kept constant values whereas those values of the Ge-added samples linearly increased according to the Ge amount. This indicates that the bulk in the Ge-added samples does not have deficient Zr. Furthermore, in terms of the amount of the ZrO2 impurity (see Table S2), less ZrO2 impurity was found in the Ge-added samples than the Zr-deficient samples and the bare sample. These discrepancies between the Ge-added samples and Zr-deficient samples indicate that the increase in lattice parameters in the Ge-added samples can be partially from the effect of the added Ge rather than the Zr deficiency. Given average bond lengths of the bare and the Ge-added samples (Fig. 1c), linear increase in lattice parameters can be related to Na – O and Si/P-O lengths that can linearly change as the added Ge increases rather than that of Zr-O. These structural results indicate that the addition of Ge can lead to the change in the Nasicon even though the added Ge is not incorporated into the bulk.

To investigate where the Ge element sits in the samples, XPS measurement was carried out in the two Ge-added samples. Both samples show similar two binding energies in XPS data of the Ge in Fig. 2a; The binding energy of the 0.1Ge-added sample was at 30.1 (purple line) and 31.8 eV (green line) and that of the 0.2Ge-added samples was at 30.0 (purple line) and 31.5 eV (green line). These binding energies are much lower than those of Ge4+ in Nasicon environments such as Li1.5Ge0.5Al1.5(PO4)3 [38] or in GeO2 [39], which implies that GeO2 precursor was reacted during heating processes and the added Ge wasn't incorporated into Nasicon structure. Considering that the binding energy at ∼31.8 eV (green line) can be easily observed in Na2O-GeO2 glasses [40], the added Ge can lead to the formation of a glass impurity. Also, the binding energy at ∼30.0 eV (purple line) can be related to low valence state of Ge such as Ge2+ or Ge1+. Given that the mixed valence states of Ge (Ge4+ and Ge1+ or Ge2+) can be easily observed in GeO2-SiO2 glass [41], GeO2 might react with SiO2 precursor leading to the formation of Ge-Si glassy phase. FT-IR spectra in Fig. 2 in the Ge-added samples can support the possibility of the formation of Ge-containing glasses. Compared to the bare Nasicon, the Ge-added samples show new bands at the range from 700 to 800 cm−1 and these bands may be associated to the Ge-containing glasses. The band from 725 to 749 cm−1 was ascribed to Ge-O bond vibrations in GeO4 units [42]. Another new band at ∼780 cm−1 may be assigned to the stretching mode (Ge-O-) of non-bonding oxygen band [43]. Formation of these bands is indirectly evident to the formation of a Ge-containing glass since Ge ions in the Nasicon structure occupy octahedral site (MO6) and all oxygen ions in MO6 octahedra are linked by (Si/P)O4 tetrahedrons.

About XRD, XPS, and FT-IR results can indicate that the addition of Ge can induce the formation of the Ge-containing glasses (Na2O-GeO2 and GeO2-SiO2 glasses) rather than the incorporation of Ge into the bulk (Fig. 2c). Therefore, we can conclude that adding Ge element may result in different composition in the bulk of Nasicon in the Ge-added samples via the formation of new glassy impurities. It should be noted that further increase of added Ge instead of Zr in Nasicon leads to a complete glassy phase (see Fig. S2).

Cross-section of the sintered pellets in Fig. 3 clearly shows that the morphology of particles in the bare sample is faceted and clear whereas the morphology of particles in the Ge-added samples is rounded and blurred indicating different surface reactions in both samples. Different morphology of particles in the samples could be attributed to the formation of the Ge-containing glass on the surface or grain boundary. The pellet densities of the bare, 0.1Ge, and 0.2Ge-added samples were measured as 3.00 g cm−3, 2.61 g cm−3, and 2.94 g cm−3, respectively. Considering only the porosity of the sintered pellets, added Ge would negatively affect the Na ion conductivity. However, as the ionic conductivities at intermediate temperature of the Ge-added samples were higher than that of the bare sample (see section 3.3), we assumed that another factor such as phase transition behavior could have strong influence on the increase in the ionic conductivity.

The Nasicon (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) undergoes the phase transition from the monoclinic phase at RT to the rhombohedral phase at high temperature. The XRD patterns of the monoclinic and the rhombohedral phases can be obtained at RT (see 30 °C in Fig. 4a) and high temperature (see 300 °C in Fig. 4a), respectively. During the phase transition, the overall framework of the structure is almost maintained but redistribution of Na ions within Na equivalent sites and small structural distortion occur; three Na2 sites (partially occupied, 2/3) in the rhombohedral unit cell split into one Na2 (fully occupied) and two Na3 (half-filled) sites in the monoclinic [20]. As the two phases are crystallographically similar to each other, the overall XRD patterns of them are similar but the number of peaks is different. The rhombohedral phase has higher structural symmetry than the monoclinic so that the rhombohedral phase shows less XRD peaks than the monoclinic. For example, the main peaks of Nasicon (see 13, 18.5, 22, 26.5, 29.5° of Fig. 4a) merge into single peak as the temperature rises. Looking into volume change during the transition (Fig. 4b), only Na-O bond length (especially Na2 and Na3) significantly changes whereas Zr-O and Si/P-O bonds remain. It indicates that the main structural change of Nasicon during the transition is the ordering of Na sites. Therefore, the phase transition in Nasicon can be classified as an order-disorder transition, which is one type of second order phase transition.

In case of the second order transition, one phase gradually transforms to the other within wide range of temperature during the phase transition. Two different phases can co-exist during the first order transition but the intermediate state is not easy to be clearly defined without any investigation on each specific case during the second order transition. As shown in Fig. 5a, the main peaks of Nasicon gradually merge by rising temperature, so the intermediate state of Nasicon can be easily identified by comparing XRD patterns. We assumed that the intermediate state of Nasicon can exist as follows; the monoclinic and rhombohedral phase co-exist or a single intermediate-phase forms within the transition temperature range (Fig. 5b). Detailed studies of the phase transition of Nasicon and the effect of the Ge addition on the transition were performed with in-situ synchrotron XRD patterns taken above 100 °C. Fig. 5c and d shows results of Rietveld refinement of the bare sample obtained at 100 °C. The Rietveld refinements were performed by assuming that a single intermediate phase (case 1 in Fig. 5b) is formed or that both monoclinic and rhombohedral phases coexist (case 2 in Fig. 5b) at the temperature range of the phase transition. The difference between observed and calculated intensities could be lowered only if the refinement was carried out with both rhombohedral and monoclinic phases. As a result, the in-situ XRD patterns of the bare and Ge-added samples were analyzed with the two phases (see Fig. 5e, Supplementary materials Fig. S3, Fig. S4, and Fig. S5), and then confirmed that the content and increase rate of rhombohedral phase was increased by adding Ge. Given experimental results explained above, when temperature is in the range of the phase transition, the Ge-added samples can be easily transformed to the rhombohedral phase compared to the bare sample. Compared to the monoclinic phase, the rhombohedral phase generally shows higher σion owing to its higher Na ion mobility caused by higher structural symmetry [25,26]. As a result, the improvement in the electrical properties of the Ge-added samples could be expected.

DSC measurement was also carried out in the samples (Fig. 6) to confirm the effect of Ge addition on the phase transition behavior of Nasicon. As already explained, the phase transition of Nasicon shows the 2nd-order feature and then an endothermic peak appears over a wide range of temperature. The maximum point of endothermic peaks is defined as the phase transition temperature (TP) from the monoclinic to rhombohedral phases. The TP of the bare sample in this study was similar with the previous studies [24,44]. The TP of the samples decreased as the amount of added Ge increased; ∼157 °C for the bare sample, ∼156 °C for the 0.1Ge-added sample, and ∼151 °C for the 0.2Ge-added sample. The TP of the Zr-deficiency samples was increased by Zr-deficiency (Fig. S6), so it could be understood that the composition of the Ge-added samples is distinctly different to that of the Zr-deficient and the addition of Ge can affect the phase transition behavior. The result suggests that the addition of Ge into Nasicon helps to stabilize the rhombohedral phase at lower temperature, and it is consistent with the in-situ synchrotron XRD data (Fig. 5).

To investigate the effect of adding Ge element on the electrical properties of Nasicon, AC impedance spectroscopy was performed on the three samples. These impedance data were analyzed with an equivalent circuit of a polycrystalline material that consists of a series of parallel Resistor-Capacitor (RC) elements for grain resistance (RG), grain boundary resistance (RG.B) and a capacitor, which represents blocking electrodes. Signals of RG appear at high frequency f, whereas signals of RG. B appear at low f. Therefore, the Nyquist plot of a polycrystalline sample is expected to show two semicircles due to the presence of two RC circuits, i.e., grain and grain boundary. However, the three samples showed only one semicircle at RT (Fig. 7). Typically, the grain has extremely low capacitance at RT and therefore measurement of RG requires very high frequency, f » 1 MHz [45].

All samples at RT show one semicircle starting from a non-zero point in the Nyquist plot. As temperature (T) increased, the semicircle in the Nyquist plot disappeared in all three samples. The disappearance of the semicircle is attributed to reduction of the contribution of RG. B to total resistance (Rtot) as T increases. Therefore, at T > 100 °C, the starting non-zero points of Z on the real axis were considered to represent total resistance Rtot of Nasicon samples. Typically, the grain boundary has higher activation energy Ea than the grain [32]. As a result, the contribution of RG. B to Rtot rapidly declines as temperature increases. At low T, RG. B » RG, but as T increases, RG. B decreases much faster than RG because of the high Ea of the grain boundary. Thus, the effect of RG. B on the Rtot can become negligible as T increases, so the Nyquist plot at high T presents only RG and the capacitance of the blocking electrode. The disappearance of the semicircle at T > 100 °C suggests that the RG rather than RG. B strongly affects Rtot of the sample at that temperature [45]; therefore, Rtot ≈ RG at T > 100 °C [32]. Therefore, we could assume that major contribution on the σion measured at T > 100 °C could come from only grain properties, not grain boundary.

To further understand the electrical properties of the three Nasicon samples, values of σion were determined using Rtot at different temperatures with geometrical factors such as diameter and thickness of pellets. Firstly, we note that the adequacy of our experimental processes was confirmed by comparing σion of the bare sample (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) in this study to previous studies [18,32,46]. Fig. 8 shows the change in electrical properties by adding Ge. The Ge-added samples show higher σion than the bare sample at 100 ≤ T ≤ 200 °C where the phase transition happens (Fig. 8b). At ∼150 °C where the intermediate Na batteries can be operated, the σion increased as much as 179% (7.810−3 S cm−1 → 1.410−2 S cm−1, 0.1Ge-added) and 167% (7.810−3 S cm−1 → 1.310−2 S cm−1, 0.2Ge-added). However, the σion of the Ge-added samples at T > 200 °C, where the rhombohedral phase is stable, was slightly lower than that of the bare sample; the interpolated values of σion at 250 °C of the bare, 0.1Ge, and 0.2Ge-added samples were 4.310−2 S cm−1, 4.310−2 S cm−1, and 3.410−2 S cm−1, respectively.

Considering that σion of the Na2O-GeO2 glass varies from 2.2 × 10−9 (9 mol% Na2O) to 2.0 × 10−7 (21 mol% Na2O) S cm−1 at ∼200 °C, and the electrical conductivity of GeO2-SiO2 glass is lower than 10−12 S cm-1 at 350 °C [47,48], the existence of Ge containing glasses in the Ge-added samples can't affect the increase in the σion at intermediate temperatures. These data indicate that the increase in the ionic conductivities in the Ge-added samples can be related to different phase transformation behavior in the samples as shown in in-situ synchrotron XRD and DSC, (Fig. 5, Fig. 6). According to peak broadness of DSC curve, two temperature regions could be considered: the transition region (below ∼200 °C) and the rhombohedral phase region (above ∼200 °C). As the temperature rises, some of the monoclinic phase can start to transform to the rhombohedral phase at the transition temperature range, and the transformation process can be completed at high T (∼200 °C).

Taking these different phase transformation behaviors in the three samples into account, the plots of conductivities ratio in Fig. 8b can be understood as follows. We should firstly note that total conductivities are greatly close to grain conductivities above 100 °C due to low contribution of RG. B to Rtot [32]. Thus, we added the conductivity ratio at 25 °C by considering ‘grain’ conductivity of the Nasicon samples (Fig. 7). In Fig. 8, at RT, where monoclinic phase is stable, and at above 200 °C, where only rhombohedral phase is stable, the conductivity ratios of the Ge-added samples compared to the bare sample are almost close to 1. This indicates that the addition of Ge does not enhance ionic conductivities at these temperature ranges where the phase transition does not occur.

However, in the transition region, the conductivity ratios of the Ge-added samples in Fig. 8b increase at the beginning and then decrease as the temperature increases showing maximum conductivity ratio. This behavior of the conductivity ratios can be related to different phase transformation behavior in the samples as shown in Fig. 5e. At the beginning, the conductivity in the Ge-added samples increased due to large portion of transformed rhombohedral phase compared to the bare sample (Fig. 5e) increasing the conductivity ratio. When the temperature further increases, the ionic conductivity of the bare sample also increases because of the increase in the portion of the transformed rhombohedral phase whereas the growth rate of the transformed rhombohedral phase in the Ge-added samples can be maintained or slowed down resulting in reduction of the ionic conductivity ratios between the Ge-added samples and the bare sample. Furthermore, different peak temperature of the phase transformation in the Ge-added samples as shown in the in-situ XRD and DSC measurements can lead to different maximum conductivity ratio in Fig. 8b; The 0.2Ge-added sample shows lower transition temperature than the 0.1Ge-added sample, and thereby can show the maximum conductivity ratio at lower temperature. This further corroborates that the improved ionic conductivities at intermediate temperature ranges (100–200 °C) can be ascribed to the change in the phase transformation behavior by adding Ge.

We investigated the phase transition behavior of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 that had been affected by adding Ge element and its effect on the ionic conductivity. Firstly, the added Ge does not incorporate into the bulk of the sample but can lead to the formation of the Ge-containing glass that can use some of elements in Nasicon. Furthermore, FT-IR data show that the Ge-added samples could have the Ge-containing glass (Fig. 2b), which can have Na2O-GeO2 and GeO2-SiO2. As a result, Nasicon composition in the Ge-added samples can be different from that in the bare sample leading to different lattice parameters in the Ge-added samples.

The composition modification of Nasicon (Fig. 5, Fig. 6) can affect the phase transition behavior. The ratio of rhombohedral to monoclinic phase is increased by the amount of Ge at the temperature range of the phase transition and the Tp was lowered by adding Ge. Since the Tp of the Zr-deficient Nasicon increased by Zr deficiency (Fig. S6), the reduction of Tp of the Ge-added samples is strongly associated to the composition modification by the formation of the Ge containing impurity rather than the Zr deficiency. As Ge element is added, the transition temperature of Nasicon is lowered, and then rhombohedral phase, which shows high ion mobility (= low Ea), can be stabilized at relatively low temperature. As a consequence, the Ge-added samples show the increase in the σion at the range of the temperature over where the phase transition occurs (160–180% compared to the bare sample at 150 °C). In the view of the fact that the σion of the Ge-added samples at low and high temperature where either monoclinic or rhombohedral phase does not change (Fig. 7, Fig. 8a), the increase of the σion within the temperature range of 100–200 °C could be ascribed to the reduction of the Tp. This finding suggests that controlling the phase transition behavior as well as optimizing crystal structure can lead to the increase in the σion.

Increase of the σion by phase transition behavior of Nasicon was investigated in this study. The bare and Ge-added samples were prepared and their structural, thermal, and electrical properties were investigated. The possibility of the change in the composition of Nasicon in the Ge-added samples was suggested based on the results of the synchrotron XRD, XPS, and FT-IR. Also, lowering the Tp (stabilizing rhombohedral phase) of Nasicon was observed by high temperature in-situ synchrotron XRD and DSC studies. In consequence of the reduction of the Tp, the contents of the rhombohedral phase was increased and thereby the σion increased only in the temperature range over where the phase transition occurs (100–200 °C) due to higher ion mobility of rhombohedral phase than monoclinic. Based on this finding, improving σion of Nasicon by controlling the phase transition behavior can be achieved. We hope that the strategy can help developing the advanced intermediate/room temperature Na batteries.