Identifying suitable electrode materials for sodium-ion and potassium-ion storage holds the key to the development of earth-abundant energy-storage technologies. This study reports an anode material based on self-assembled hierarchical spheroid-like KTi2(PO4)3@C nanocomposites synthesized via an electrospray method. Such an architecture synergistically combines the advantages of the conductive carbon network and allows sufficient space for the infiltration of the electrolyte from the porous structure, leading to an impressive electrochemical performance, as reflected by the high reversible capacity (283.7 mA h g−1 for Na-ion batteries; 292.7 mA h g−1 for K-ion batteries) and superior rate capability (136.1 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1 for Na-ion batteries; 133.1 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 for K-ion batteries) of the resulting material. Moreover, the different ion diffusion behaviors in the two systems are revealed to account for the difference in rate performance. These findings suggest that KTi2(PO4)3@C is a promising candidate as an anode material for sodium-ion and potassium-ion batteries. In particular, the present synthetic approach could be extended to other functional electrode materials for energy-storage materials.

In the past three decades, rapid developments in portable electronic devices and electric vehicles have stimulated the mass production of Li-ion batteries (LIBs), because of their high energy and power densities, as well as long service life.1, 2 Unfortunately, the uneven distribution and fairly high cost of lithium have posed a sustainability problem for the use of LIBs in large-scale energy storage. To address this issue, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs)3-7 and potassium-ion batteries (PIBs)8-11 appear to be promising alternatives to existing LIBs owing to the natural abundance of Na and K (Na: 2.36 wt% in Earth and K: 2.09 wt%), their low cost, and their identical “rocking chair” operating principles. However, the larger ionic radius of Na+ (1.02 Å) and K+ (1.38 Å) in comparison with that of Li+ (0.76 Å) is likely to induce large volume expansion during the insertion reaction, with low specific capacity and unsatisfactory cycle stability. Therefore, it remains a great challenge to exploit suitable electrode materials to meet the growing demand for Na+ and K+ storage.

NASICON (Na superionic conductor)-type phosphates with a general formula of AxMM′(PO4)3 are of significant interest as electrode materials for LIBs and SIBs because of their 3D open framework, which gives rise to an abundance of interstices and allows fast ion insertion and extraction with trivial volume changes.12, 13 More impressively, flexible atomic arrangements at the A, M, and M′ sites are adopted with extreme versatility for cation substitution in the given structure, allowing material optimization and design. So far, many phosphates have been reported to be capable of storing ions, including Li+, Na+, and K+ ions, as either a cathode (for example, Li3V2(PO4)3,14, 15 Na3V2(PO4)3,16, 17 and K3V2(PO4)318, 19) or an anode (LiTi2(PO4)3,20, 21 NaTi2(PO4)3,22, 23 KTi2(PO4)3,24, 25 and so on). Unfortunately, the low electronic conductivity of NASICON-type materials of below 10−12 S cm−1 is likely to result in sluggish kinetic properties, making it difficult to attain the theoretical capacity. So far, significant improvement in electrochemical performance has been achieved by fabricating carbon-incorporated nanocomposites, including nanoparticles,26, 27 nanofibers,28, 29 and nanoporous structures.30, 31

Electrospray (electrohydrodynamic spray), an effective technique to produce nanomaterials, has garnered wide attention due to its simplicity and versatility.32, 33 Generally, this method uses high electric fields between a capillary tip such as a nozzle and a flat counter electrode to produce a liquid jet, which disintegrates into droplets due to electrical forces. The solvent from the electrosprayed droplets evaporates, and the remaining solid forms a fine powder.34 The charged droplets are self-dispersing in space, resulting in the absence of droplet coagulation. Electrospray is used for the deposition of polymers, metals, and insulators alike, given the versatility of the method.35 It has been demonstrated that Si/C nanoporous microspheres with a high overall capacity and long cycle life can be obtained through the electrospray process.36, 37 The nanocomposite possesses low interfacial resistance, high ionic/electrical conductivity, and most importantly, a remarkably reduced volume change in Si during cycles. A similar synthesis strategy has also been realized in transition metal-oxide anodes, including Fe3O4/C38 and Mn3O4/RGO,39 whereas to the best of our knowledge, the electrospray method has never been attempted to fabricate NASICON-type nanocomposites.

Herein, for the first time, we report the facile preparation of a self-assembled hierarchical spheroid-like KTi2(PO4)3@C (hereafter denoted as KTP@C) material through the electrospray method. The nanoscale primary particles can shorten the ion transfer pathway and enable fast ion (de)intercalation, while the microscale KTP spheres can prevent side reactions between the electrode and the electrolyte, as well as improve the volumetric energy density.40 Thus, the synergistic effect of the hierarchical structure should be more pronounced in both SIBs and PIBs. As expected, the as-prepared KTP@Cs demonstrate a high specific capacity, excellent rate capability, and long-term cycle life, showing the potential to be the anode material for both SIB and PIB applications.

The fabrication process of KTP@C porous spheroids is illustrated in the Experimental Section in detail, and the synthesis scheme is shown in Figure 1a. The morphologies of both the precursor and KTP@C were first investigated by scanning electron microscope (SEM) and transmission electron microscope (TEM). As shown in Figure 1b,c, the precursor microspheres are clearly dispersive without coagulation, which is owed to the presence of charged droplets during the electrospray process. The spheroidal morphology feature is maintained after annealing the precursor for 4 h at 800 °C to yield the KTP@C composite. As shown in Figure 1d,e and Figure S1 (Supporting Information), the hierarchical spheres are built up by subunit nanoscale particles (within 50–300 nm), with an average sphere size from 1–4 µm (see the inset of Figure 1d). Moreover, the TEM images (Figure 1f,g) indicate that the microspheres are self-assembled clusters of KTP nanoparticles. N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms were also used to determine the surface area and pore type. As evidenced by Figure S2 (Supporting Information), KTP@C possesses a surface area of 104.41 m2 g−1 according to the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method. The isotherms are of type IV, with a hysteresis loop at a relative pressure P/P0 ranging from 0.5 to 1, implying that KTP@C contains a large number of mesopores. The inset of Figure S2 (Supporting Information) further shows that the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) pore-size-distribution peak is centered at 3.9 nm. Such a hierarchical structure results in a pore-like microstructure, which is believed to be beneficial to the infiltration of electrolyte and an increase in the sufficient interface between the active materials and electrolyte, shortening the ion diffusion paths.

The crystal structure of the as-designed KTP@C nanocomposite was characterized by different techniques for both long-range and short-range structural details, including X-ray diffraction (XRD), high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), selected area electron diffraction (SAED), and Raman spectroscopy. The XRD pattern of KTP@C is shown in Figure 2a; all diffraction peaks agree well with a reported rhombohedral KTP phase (PDF#97-006-7091) and can be indexed using a unit cell with a = b = 8.3657 Å and c = 23.1094 Å (space group of R-3c). Figure 2b shows a HRTEM image and fast Fourier transform (FFT) patterns corresponding to the selected crystallites in the KTP nanoparticle. The d-spacings of the FFT patterns match well with the respective rhombohedral KTP phases. In addition, Figure 2c shows a clear lattice fringe of 0.31 nm, corresponding to the (024) plane of rhombohedral KTP, and the corresponding SAED, displayed in the inset of Figure 2c, not only shows a series of diffraction spots indicative of highly crystalline KTP@C but confirms its monophasic nature again. Moreover, a carbon layer with a thickness of ≈2–3 nm is found coated on the surface of KTP in both Figure 2b,c, which benefits electronic transfer between KTP particles. To verify the presence of carbon, Raman spectra (Figure S3, Supporting Information) were collected. The two peaks at ≈1347.6 and 1585.5 cm−1 can be interpreted as the D and G bands of carbon, respectively. The D-band corresponds to disordered sp3-C atoms, while the G-band can be ascribed to the in-plane bond-stretching motion of pairs of sp2-C atoms. The relative intensity ratio of ID/IG is larger than 1 (ID/IG = 1.014), which is consistent with a relatively low degree of graphitization. In addition, a small peak is visible at ≈1000 cm−1, which can be assigned to the stretching vibrations of phosphate (PO4)3−. Quantitative analysis based on Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) measurements reveals that the carbon concentration is ≈11.08% (Figure S4, Supporting Information). In addition, the line scanning curves in Figure 2d and elemental mapping images in Figure 2e confirm that all elements are uniformly distributed within the composite material.

The electrochemical properties of KTP@C as the anode material for both SIBs and PIBs were evaluated by assembling coin-type cells with metallic sodium and potassium as the counter electrodes, respectively. Figure 3 shows the cyclic voltammograms (CVs) at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1, galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) profiles at a current density of 20 mA g−1, and their corresponding cycling stability in SIBs and PIBs. In the sodiation/desodiation process (Figure 3a), two pairs of well-defined redox peaks are observed at 2.07 (red.)/2.25 (ox.) and 0.28 (red.)/0.51 (ox.) V (versus Na+/Na). The first cathodic scan shows an irreversible current peak at 1.44 V, while all the anodic scans are superimposed on each other. This phenomenon might be rooted in the exchange reaction between the inserted Na+ and K+ ions (in the KTP lattice) accompanied by an irreversible structural transition, since the chemical reaction to replace larger ions with smaller ones is kinetically favorable. To verify this hypothesis, ex situ energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) on the working electrode was performed to determine the atomic ratio of Na+ and K+ at different discharge and charge stages. It can be seen in Table S1 (Supporting Information) that the content of K+ at the end of the initial discharge decreases greatly in comparison with the stage at open circuit voltage and remains nearly unchanged with increasing cycles. By contrast, the values of Na+ increase distinctly after the 1st discharge process and vary with the following charge or discharge stages, suggesting that Na+ ions work as the charge carrier, inserting into/extracting from the electrode independently after the ion-exchange reaction, which can well explain the complex reaction when using KTP as the anode material for SIBs. In addition, the first cathodic scan shows a wide irreversible current peak under 1.0 V, which corresponds to the decomposition of electrolyte to form solid–electrolyte interface (SEI) films.41, 42 After the irreversible exchange reaction and formation of the SEI film, the peak shape and potential position do not change after the 2nd cycle, which is indicative of good cycle stability of the KTP@C hybrid in SIBs. The two pairs of CV peaks could be attributed to the redox reactions of Ti4+/Ti3+ and Ti3+/Ti2+, respectively, which is consistent with previous studies on Ti-based anodes with a NASICON-type structure.43, 44 Moreover, the potential plateaus in the GCD curves (Figure 3b) coincide with the CV results. The first Coulombic efficiency (CE) is ≈53.6%, and the irreversible capacity loss can be explained in terms of the formation of SEI film. After the 2nd cycle, the charge and discharge profiles are analogous to each other, delivering a reversible discharge capacity of 283.7 mA h g−1, which is the highest among the state-of-the-art Ti-based polyanion and oxide anodes for SIBs (Table S2, Supporting Information). As presented in Figure 3c, the electrode sustains 50 cycles with a high capacity retention of 84.1% in SIBs thanks to the conductive carbon network.

Cyclic voltammograms of KTP@C in a) SIBs and d) PIBs at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 between 0.01 and 3.0 V. Galvanostatic charge and discharge curves of KTP@C in b) SIBs and e) PIBs between 0.01 and 3.0 V at a current density of 20 mA g−1 and the corresponding cycle performance over 50 cycles in c) SIBs and f) PIBs.

Similar to the sodiation process, the potassiation process also presents two pairs of redox peaks (Figure 3d), but under different potentials: 1.62 (red.)/2.10 (ox.) V and 0.65 (red.)/0.88 (ox.) V (versus K+/K), corresponding to Ti4+/Ti3+ and Ti3+/Ti2+, respectively. Figure 3e demonstrates the GCD profiles of KTP@C in PIBs. The initial charge and discharge capacities are 292.7 and 829.6 mA h g−1, respectively. The irreversible capacity loss during the first cycle also results from the formation of an SEI film, leading to a low CE of 35.3%. Though the subsequent CE increases to 60.5% in the second cycle, it is still unsatisfactory and lower than that in SIBs; this behavior has also been found in studies of PIBs.9, 45 The explanation might be related to the poorer kinetic properties when K+ ions with larger ionic radius are inserted into the NASICON lattice, which may also cause larger polarization and thus lead to a lower round-trip energy efficiency. Furthermore, due to the large surface area and the porosity, the serious effect of SEI films in PIBs cannot be fully ruled out at this stage either. Amounts of electrolyte are irreversibly consumed to form SEI films without an appropriate additive electrolyte support to stabilize the film, as successfully used in SIBs.46-48 Further optimization of the composition of the electrolyte for PIBs still needs to be systematically studied. After the 11th cycle, the electrode demonstrates a relatively stable capacity with a CE of 90.6%. In addition, as one can notice, the reversible capacity in PIBs is slightly higher than that in SIBs. One possible explanation is that the contributions from carbon in SIBs and PIBs are different. To determine these contributions, the GCD profiles at 20 mA g−1 and the corresponding cycle performance in SIBs and PIBs were recorded (see Figures S5–S10, Supporting Information). A discharge capacity of 329.9 mA h g−1 in PIBs was achieved, which is higher than that in SIBs (187.1 mA h g−1) for coated carbon. Hence, the coated carbon contributes ≈36.5 and 20.7 mA h g−1 to the total reversible capacity in PIBs and SIBs, respectively, according to the carbon content in the as-prepared KTP@C hybrid (11.08% by weight). In addition, as shown in Figures S9 and S10 (Supporting Information), we also evaluated the contribution from super P, which delivers reversible capacity of 125 mA h g−1 in SIBs and 190 mA h g−1 in PIBs after experiencing an initial irreversible capacity loss. Hence, with a 20 wt% ratio in the electrode, super P can contribute 25 and 38 mA h g−1 to the total capacity in SIBs and PIBs, respectively. In sum, the higher delivered capacity of KTP@C can be attributed to the extra storage capacity from carbon. After experiencing 50 cycles in PIBs (Figure 3f), the specific capacity is 221.7 mA h g−1, with a capacity retention of 75.7% (based on the charge capacity to eliminate the effect of the irreversible discharge capacity caused by the SEI film). In contrast to the excellent electrochemical performance of the as-prepared KTP@C nanocomposite, the Na+/K+-ion storage properties of KTP@C prepared by a general sol–gel method are unsatisfactory, as illustrated in Figures S11–S15 (Supporting Information); this deficiency is possibly related to the relatively larger particle size (Figure S16, Supporting Information), which increases the ion transfer pathway and severe agglomeration of KTP particles opposing electrolyte infiltration, with the result of a reduced interface area between active electrolyte and active materials.

Figure 4 compares the rate performance of KTP@C anodes in SIBs and PIBs in the voltage range of 0.01–3 V. As shown in Figure 4a, the electrode is subjected to varied current densities from 0.02 to 10 A g−1 in SIBs. The high specific capacity can reach 136.1 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1, which recovers to 247.9 mA h g−1 when the current density decreases to 20 mA g−1. Regarding the rate capacity of KTP@C in PIBs, Figure 4b shows the performance as the current densities increase from 20 to 1000 mA g−1. A high specific capacity of 131.1 mA h g−1 can be acquired at 1000 mA g−1, but this value drops faster in PIBs than that in SIBs, owing to the relatively sluggish kinetic properties of K+ ions. Furthermore, the KTP@C electrode demonstrates better electrochemical performance than pure KTP without carbon coating, owing to the improved electronic conductivity after compositing with the highly conductive carbon network, both in SIBs (Figures S17 and S18, Supporting Information) and PIBs (Figures S19 and S20, Supporting Information). Encouraged by the superior rate performance, the long-term cycle stability was evaluated at the current densities of 10 and 1 A g−1 in SIBs and PIBs after activation, as displayed in Figure 4c,e. In the SIBs, after 5000 cycles, a discharge capacity of 100 mA g−1 is sustained, retaining 63.1% of the initial capacity. Moreover, the cycling performance for fast potassium storage is also outstanding: after 1000 cycles, the capacity is 69.7 mA h g−1 at the current density of 1 A g−1 (Figure 4e). To reveal the evolution of the morphological features of the electrode after long-term cycles, ex situ SEM images of the electrode were taken. For SIBs (Figure 4d), the micrometer-sized spheroid disperses well into nanosized KTP@C particles after 5000 cycles due to the superfast ion insertion/extraction. On the other hand, the spheroid-like morphology can be maintained after 1000 cycles in PIBs (Figure 4f). Thus, we can conclude that the as-prepared porous spheroid–cluster structure provides sufficient space for the infiltration of electrolyte in the aggregation of KTP@C nanoparticles, even at extremely high current density, which is beneficial for the fast charge/discharge process.

Rate performance of KTP@C in a) SIBs and b) PIBs. Long-term cycle performance of KTP@C at a c) current density of 10 A g−1 for 5000 cycles in SIBs and e) current density of 1 A g−1 for 1000 cycles in PIBs. Corresponding ex situ SEM images after long-term cycle tests for d) SIBs and f) PIBs.

To understand the mechanism behind the more sluggish kinetic properties of KTP@C in PIBs than those in SIBs, CV curves were recorded at different scanning rates. As shown in the insets of Figure 5a,b, all CV curves feature symmetric redox peaks from 0.1 to 1.0 mV s−1. Both the anodic and cathodic peak currents (ip) in SIBs and PIBs are proportional to the square root of the scan rate (v1/2). This indicates that the discharging/charging process is a Faradaic process and depends on the Na+/K+ ion diffusion. The diffusion coefficient can be estimated according to the Randles–Sevcik equation (Equation 1)49

where ip is the peak current (A), n is the number of electrons per molecule during intercalation, A is the contact area between the electrode and electrolyte, D is the diffusion coefficient of Na+/K+ (cm2 s−1), C is the concentration of Na+/K+ ion in the electrode material, and v is the scan rate (V s−1). Accordingly, DNa+ can be calculated as 3.61 × 10−10 and 4.44 × 10−10 cm2 s−1 for A and C, respectively, and DK+ can be calculated as 8.84 × 10−12 and 1.21 × 10−11 cm2 s−1 for A and C, respectively. Hence, we are able to attribute the superior electrochemical performance of KTP@C in SIBs to the faster ion transportation.

Linear relationship between the peak current (ip) and the square root of the scan rate (v1/2) in a) SIBs and b) PIBs, with insets showing the CV curves of KTP@C at different scan rates. c) GITT profile and (inset) current step diagram of KTP@C at 2.27 V versus Na+/Na in the first desodiation process. d) Diffusion coefficients calculated from GITT potential profiles for the KTP@C as a function of state of charge during the first desodiation and depotassiation process.

Upon determining the average diffusion coefficient around the redox peaks, we further carried out galvanostatic intermittent titration technique (GITT) measurements to better understand the kinetics during the diffusion of Na+ and K+ ions in KTP@C. To rule out the effect from the formation of SEI films in the different electrolyte environments, the cells were fully discharged before the GITT measurements were undertaken. As shown in Figure 5c and Figure S21 (Supporting Information), the GITT data were collected at a current density of 20 mA g−1 for 0.5 h and a rest interval of 4 h. The ionic diffusion coefficient in KTP@C electrodes as a function of voltage can be determined by the following equation50

where VM, MB, mB, and S are the molar volume, the molecular weight of the material and the mass, the active surface area of the electrode, respectively. L is the average thickness of the electrode. If the cell voltage is linearly proportional to τ1/2 (Figure S22, Supporting Information), Equation 2 can be further simplified to the following51

where ΔEτ and ΔEs represent the total change in the cell voltage during the current pulse and the change in the steady-state voltage of the cell during the step at the plateau potential, respectively. As shown in Figure 5d, the same overall trends are observed for both K ions and Na ions in the KTP@C electrodes, indicating their similar ion diffusion processes. The diffusion coefficients are found to strongly depend on the electrochemical process, and the minimal D values correspond to the voltage plateaus of the charge process. Moreover, DNa+ is ≈1–2 orders of magnitude higher than DK+, which again confirms the better electrochemical kinetic properties of SIBs than PIBs.

In summary, for the first time, KTi2(PO4)3@C porous spheroids were successfully prepared by electrospray as anode materials for SIBs and PIBs. The KTP@C electrode demonstrates a high specific capacity of ≈283.7 and 292.7 mA h g−1 between 3.0 and 0.01 V for SIBs and PIBs, respectively. The obtained structure can provide a highly conductive carbon network and sufficient space for the infiltration of electrolyte, which leads to superior rate performance (136.1 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1 and 133.1 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 for SIBs and PIBs, respectively) and long-term cycling stability. Moreover, the electrochemical kinetic properties of the two systems were investigated to explain the difference in the rate performance. These results suggest that KTP@C hybrid material may be a promising candidate as the anode not only for SIBs but also for PIBs. This method of fabrication of porous spheroids can also be extended to other functional electrode materials for applications in energy storage.

Material Synthesis: Analytically pure K2CO3 (1 mmol), (CH3CH3CHO)4Ti (4 mmol), NH4H2PO4 (6 mmol), and citric acid (2 mmol) were dissolved into a mixture of 5 mL deionized water, 5 mL ethyl alcohol, and 5 mL acetic acid and stirred to form a homogeneous solution. Then, 1.0 g of polyvinyl pyrrolidone (Mw = 1 300 000) and 10 mL deionized water were mixed with the above solution through vigorous stirring for 24 h. The resulting mixture was used as the precursor solution for electrospray.

The precursor solution was poured into a 10 mL plastic syringe with a blunt-tip needle. The flow rate of the solution was 0.5 mL h−1. A grounded aluminum foil was placed 18 cm below the needle for collection. A high voltage of 22 kV was applied between the needle and the foil by a direct-current power supply. The as-collected precursor powder was calcined at 800 °C for 4 h with a heating rate of 5 °C min−1 under a N2 atmosphere to obtain KTP@C nanocomposites.

For the control sample, a KTP@C material synthesized by the sol–gel method, analytically pure K2CO3 (1 mmol), (CH3CH3CHO)4Ti (4 mmol), and NH4H2PO4 (6 mmol) were dissolved into 0.02 m aqueous citric acid with a 1:1 ratio of potassium:citric acid. After evaporation at 80 °C, the gel was heated in an oven at 120 °C for 12 h. Finally, the KTP@C was acquired after two steps of heat treatments under a nitrogen atmosphere: at 350 °C for 5 h and then 800 °C for 12 h, with intermediate grinding.

Material Characterization: XRD patterns of the KTP@C nanocomposite were recorded using a DX-2700B diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. The morphology was investigated using a field emission scanning electron microscope (JEOL JSM-6700F). TEM, HRTEM, SAED, and elemental mapping were obtained on a JEM 2200FS with an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. Raman spectroscopy was employed to examine the degree of graphitization by a Renishaw inVia Raman microscope with Ar-ion laser excitation (λ = 514.5 nm). TGA was performed from room temperature to 650 °C at a ramp rate of 10 °C min−1 with an air flow rate of 50 mL min−1 using an SDT Q600 TGA. Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms were measured at 77 K using a Kubo X1000 instrument (Beijing Builder Electronic Technology, China). Specific surface area calculations were made using the BET method. Pore-size distribution curves were calculated from the isotherm using the BJH algorithm. EDX was employed to determine the atomic ratio. Before measurements, the electrodes were thoroughly washed with dimethyl carbonate several times in a glove box to remove the electrolyte.

Electrochemical Measurements: The working electrodes were prepared by coating a slurry, prepared by mixing the active material KTP@C, super P, and carboxyl methylated cellulose binder dissolved in water at a weight ratio of 7:2:1, on a copper foil current conductor. The electrode films were dried in a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 12 h. After dividing the electrode film into 0.8 × 0.8 cm2 squares, the 2032-type coin cells were assembled in a glovebox. For the SIBs and PIBs, sodium or potassium metal functioned as the counter electrode, 1 m NaClO4 in a mixture of ethylene carbonate (EC)/propylene carbonate (1:1 by volume) and 5% fluoroethylene carbonate or 0.8 m KPF6 in a mixture of EC/diethyl carbonate (1:1 by volume) acted as the electrolyte, and glass fiber filters (Whatman GF/C or GF/F) served as the separators. The galvanostatic charge/discharge performance was performed on a Land-2001A (Wuhan, China) automatic battery tester. Capacity was calculated on the basis of the total mass of the KTP@C nanocomposite. Cyclic voltammetry CV and GITT were performed on a VSP multichannel potentiostatic-galvanostatic system (Bio-Logic SAS, France).