In this article, CeO2-based mixed potential type gas sensor attached with sensing electrodes (SEs) consisting of perovskite-type La1-xSrxCoO3 (x = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and 0.5) composite oxides has been developed for acetone detection. The effect of different Sr2+ doping content in La1-xSrxCoO3 oxide material and calcination temperature on acetone sensing characteristics was investigated. It was seen that the sensor using La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 calcined at 1000 °C as SE gave the largest sensing signal to acetone in the concentration range of 1–50 ppm at 600 °C among these sensors. The response value (ΔV) of the sensor was sectionally linearly changed with the logarithm of acetone concentration within the ranges of 1–5 ppm and 5–50 ppm, and the sensitivities were −26 and −49 mV/decade, respectively. In addition, it is noteworthy that the response of the sensor to 1 ppm acetone was approximately −8.7 mV. The sensor also exhibited consistent response and recovery characteristics in five cycles, indicating the sensing device had good reproducibility. Besides, the sensor exhibited the highest response to 10 and 50 ppm acetone and less effective response to other tested gases, it indicates that the sensor has good selectivity. Furthermore, the long-term stability for the sensor to 20 ppm acetone was good because that only a slight attenuation in the sensing response was observed during 30 days. The sensing characteristics of the sensor attached with La0.8Sr0.2CoO3-SE sintered at 1000 °C to acetone were explained in terms of electrocatalytic activity changes induced by effects of doped Sr divalent cation.

Acetone, as common organic solvent or raw material, is extensively used in several industrial production and home decoration fields. However, volatilization and release of acetone gases caused significant environmental pollution and health problems. Long term exposure to acetone may cause damages to eyes, noses, and central nervous system [1], [2]. In addition, acetone is classified as an important breath biomarker for noninvasive diabetes diagnosis [3]. Acetone content in the breath of normal people is 0.3–0.9 ppm, whereas that of diabetic patient is more than 1.8 ppm, which is higher by 2–6 times. Therefore, high performance acetone sensors were urgently desired to be developed to detect the high concentration in atmosphere environment and microenvironment as well as the low concentration in diagnosis of diabetes.

Over the past decades, a wide research effort was devoted to designing and fabricating various acetone sensors based on different gas-sensing mechanisms [4], [5], [6], [7]. Especially in these sensors, the solid electrolyte-type sensors have distinct properties, such as high sensitivity, good chemical/physical durability and low costs [8], [9], [10]. Yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) is one of the most widely used solid electrolyte materials in mixed-potential-type gas sensors, and previous researchers investigated sensors based on YSZ to detect volatile organic compounds (VOCs), which also exhibited excellent sensing performance [8], [10], [11], [12]. Miura et al. reported about mixed-potential-type YSZ-based hydrocarbon sensor attached with ZnCr2O4-SE, which effectively improved the stability [13]. Lu et al. fabricated mixed-potential-type acetone sensors using YSZ and M3V2O8 (M: Zn, Co, and Ni)-SEs, which showed effective response to 10–400 ppm acetone [8]. In recent years, CeO2-based solid-state ionic conductor was extensively examined in the field of solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) [14], [15], [16]. As reported, the conductivity of doped-CeO2 is one order of magnitude higher than that of YSZ, and the comparison of the conductivity of YSZ and CeO2 we used in this paper was listed in Table 1 [17]. However, studies reported about mixed-potential-type gas sensor based on CeO2 solid electrolyte were rarely seen. Based on abovementioned statements, finding a sensitive electrode material that matches CeO2 is a feasible and promising approach to fabricate acetone sensor with good sensing properties.

Perovskite-type (ABO3) oxides are used as electrode materials in SOFCs and electrolyzers because of their excellent electrocatalytic activity [18]. A-site of the oxides contains trivalent lanthanide cations, and B-site contains mixed valence transition metal cations. Divalent alkaline earth metals often substitute part of the lanthanide to promote electrocatalysis. As reported before [19], [20], Co-based perovskite oxides (LaCoO3), with Sr partially substituted in the A-site, exhibited good conductivity and enhanced electrocatalytic activities. In addition, mixed potential type sensors using perovskite-type oxides as sensing electrode have been investigated extensively [21], [22], [23], [24], and results proved that composition of perovskite oxides plays an important role in developing the response of mixed potential sensors. R. Mukundan et al. reported the Ceria-electrolyte-based mixed potential sensors for the detection of hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide [25], which showed excellent sensitivity to the target gas. Therefore, the combination of doped CeO2 and perovskite-type oxides in the investigations of mixed potential type gas sensors is interesting for research. Therefore, this type of oxides may be used as electrode materials in gas sensors. Moreover, there have been few papers reporting on CeO2-based mixed potential type gas sensors attached with perovskite-type oxides as SE. Among them, R. Mukundan et al. reported the mixed potential hydrocarbon sensors based on ceria electrolyte and La0.8Sr0.2CrO3 electrode, which showed response to propylene [22]. Hence, a systematic study on CeO2 sensors attached with perovskite-type oxides is promising and necessary.

In this study, La1-xSrxCoO3 (x = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and 0.5) oxide material was used as SE for CeO2-based mixed-potential-type sensor for acetone detection. According to sensing performance of the fabricated sensors, the best suitable sensing electrode material and sintering temperature were determinated. Additionally, the detailed sensing characteristics and sensing mechanism were also investigated and discussed.

The La1-xSrxCoO3 (x = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and 0.5) sensing electrode materials were synthesized by citric acid complex method [26]. The analytically pure grade La(NO3)3·6H2O (99.9%, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd.), Sr(NO3)2 (98%, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd), and Co(NO3)2·6H2O (98.5%, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd.), were used as initial raw materials. According to the typical synthesis process, appropriate amounts of La(NO3)3·6H2O, Sr(NO3)2 and Co(NO3)2·6H2O were dissolved in 20 ml deionized water, respectively. Here, the value of x in La1-xSrxCoO3 was adjusted by changing the amounts of strontium nitrate and lanthanum nitrate. The citric acid (CA, 99.5%, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd.) was also dissolved in 20 ml deionized water, and the aqueous solution was dropwise added to the nitrate mixed solution (the molar ratio of CA/Mn+ = 1:1, Mn+ = La3+ +  Sr2+ +  Co2+). The detailed amounts of the reagents for preparation of different kinds of La1-xSrxCoO3 samples were listed in Table 2. The mixed solution was stirred at 80 °C for 3 h to obtain a purple gel solution. The resulting mixture was dried overnight at 80 °C in electric vacuum drying oven. Subsequently, the obtained dry gel was previously sintered at 400 °C for 2 h and sequentially sintered at 600 °C for 6 h through gradually increasing temperature to produce the inchoate samples. La1-xSrxCoO3 (x = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and 0.5) inchoate samples were then sintered at 800, 1000 and 1200 °C for 2 h in muffle furnace by a gradual increase of temperature, and the black powder of La1-xSrxCoO3 (x = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and 0.5) was obtained.

The crystal structure of the samples was characterized by Rigaku wide-angle X-ray diffractometer (D/max rA, using Cu Kradiation at wave length = 0.1541 nm) in the range of 20–80°. The morphology of the La1-xSrxCoO3-SE materials was examined using a JEOL JSM-7500F microscope with an accelerating voltage of 15 kV. The specific surface area was estimated using the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) equation based on the nitrogen adsorption isotherm obtained with a Micromeritics Gemini VII apparatus (Surface Area and Porosity System). Samples were degassed under vacuum at 120 °C for 8 h prior to the measurements.

The doped-CeO2 (Ce0.8Gd0.2O1.95) plate (2mm × 2 mm square, 0.2 mm thickness, provided by Ningbo SOFCMAN Energy Technology Co., Ltd.) was used as the solid electrolyte of the sensor. The schematic diagram of the sensor was shown in Fig. 1. By applying the commercial Pt paste (Sino-platinum Metals Co., Ltd.), a narrow stripe-shaped Pt electrode was manually formed on one edge of the CeO2-substrate square by using a small brush, which acted as reference electrode (RE), and then a point-shaped Pt was formed on the other edge of the CeO2-substrate square. Both the narrow stripe-shaped Pt and the point-shaped Pt were attached with a Pt lead wire using a small amount of Pt paste as the adhesive, and next, the whole object was sintered at 950 °C for half an hour. Then, after cooling the whole object to room temperature, the sensor without SE was formed. The next step was to make the La1-xSrxCoO3 material onto the device as the sensing electrode. The La1-xSrxCoO3 powder was mixed with appropriate amount of deionized water and the oxide material paste was subsequently coated on the point-shaped Pt by using a small brush to form a stripe-shaped sensing electrode (SE) (0.2 mm thickness). The obtained device was then sintered at 800 °C for 2 h to ensure that the SE was tightly sticked on the CeO2-substrate. Al2O3 substrate with a Pt heater was used for providing the operation temperature of the sensor. The heating plate was sticked on the back of CeO2-substrate using the inorganic adhesive and the sensors were completed (S1, S2, S3 and S5 represent the sensors attached with La0.9Sr0.1CoO3-SE, La0.8Sr0.2CoO3-SE, La0.7Sr0.3CoO3-SE and La0.5Sr0.5CoO3-SE, respectively). The inorganic adhesive used in this step was a mixture of AlO(OH)·nH2O (Jinhui Material Co., Ltd.) and Na2O·nSiO2 (Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd.). The volume ratio of AlO(OH)·nH2O: Na2O·nSiO2 = 1:3.

In order to assess the sensors, a series of methods were used to measure the gas sensing performance of the device, including a static method [27], the complex impedance measurements and the voltammetry. The detailed steps of the static method were introduced as follows: The sensors attached with different materials were evaluated in two same closed containers with volume of 1L. The first chamber was full of pure air, and the sensor was put in it before the test. The analyte gases containing different acetone concentrations were obtained by diluting acetone vapor with air and were evenly distributed in the second chamber. In the testing progress, the sensor was rapidly moving from the first chamber to the second chamber, the whole process is very short, and almost in one second. After the test, the sensor was moving back to the first chamber quickly too. The electromotive force (V) between the RE and SE was measured by applying a digital electrometer (Rigol. DM3054). The electromotive force obtained was acted as the sensing signal and recorded by a computer connected to the electrometer.

The complex impedance measurements of the sensors in 20 ppm acetone were performed by using an impedance analyzer (Solartron, 1260 and Solartron, 1287) in the frequency range of 0.1 Hz–1 MHz at 600 °C. The amplitude of the AC potential signal was fixed at 100 mV in all measurements. The current–voltage (polarization) curves of the sensor were measured in the air and 20 ppm acetone gas at 600 °C using an electrochemical workstation (Instrument Corporation of Shanghai, China, CHI600C). The scan rate of the current–voltage curves was 0.01 V/s.

X-ray diffraction was used to examine the crystal phases of the material prepared. Fig. 2(a) shows the XRD patterns of La1-xSrxCoO3 (x = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and 0.5) composite oxide materials sintered at 1000 °C. As shown in Fig. 2(a), each oxide was characterized as ABO3 structure, and no impurities were detected in all samples. XRD analysis also showed that the diffraction peak of the samples shifted to the right with the addition of the Sr divalent cation. It was concluded that doped Sr2+ entered the LaCoO3 lattice, which caused the right shift. La0.9Sr0.1CoO3, La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 and La0.7Sr0.3CoO3 materials retained their crystallographic phases (rhombohedral) corresponding to JCPDS PDFs (#28-1229, #87-1079 and #89-4457, respectively), and La0.5Sr0.5CoO3 retained the crystallographic phase (cubic) corresponding to JCPDS PDF #36-1394. The lattice parameter of the rhombohedral system is larger than that of the cubic system. Therefore, it can be realized that the lattice parameter was decreased with the addition of the Sr divalent cation. In addition, at the grazing incidence angle (2θ) of 32–34°, it can be seen that the number of the peaks was decreased in the case of x = 0.3, which was due to the phase change of perovskite structure from rhombohedral to cubic. Fig. 2(b) shows the XRD pattern of La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 oxide materials sintered at 800, 1000 and 1200 °C. With increasing the sintering temperature, the crystallization quality of La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 increased.

FESEM (field emission scanning electron microscopy) was used to characterize the morphologies of La1-xSrxCoO3 (x = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and 0.5) sintered at 1000 °C and La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 sensing materials sintered at different temperatures (800, 1000 and 1200 °C). Fig. 3(a–c) revealed that the porosity was enhanced with increasing calcination temperature. It can be clearly seen in Fig. 3 that the particle agglomeration of La1-xSrxCoO3 (x = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and 0.5) sintered at 1000 °C were obvious. However, La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 seems to be the most porous. In order to further prove this point, the specific surface area was estimated using BET. The results were listed in Table 3, and BET surface areas of La1-xSrxCoO3 sintered at 1000 °C were 0.66 (x = 0.1), 2.33 (x = 0.2), 1.88 (x = 0.3) and 2.00 (x = 0.5) m2g−1, respectively. The specific surface area of the La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 material was the largest and proved that La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 has the highest adsorption capacity. In addition, it also can be concluded from the test results that BET surface area of La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 material was reduced with increasing of the sintering temperature.

Fig. 4(a) illustrates responses of sensors attached with La1-xSrxCoO3 (x = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and 0.5)-SEs sintered at 1000 °C to 1–50 ppm acetone at 600 °C. In the process of device testing, it was found that the baseline signals of the sensors were not at 0 mV (S1: −46 mV, S2: −24 mV, S3: −47 mV and S5: −50 mV). In order to make a clearer comparison of the response values of the devices, ΔV was used to show the response value of the sensors (ΔV= Vacetone − Vair). The sensor utilizing La0.8Sr0.2CoO3-SE exhibited the highest response value to any acetone concentration compared with other devices. Furthermore, only the sensor attached with La0.8Sr0.2CoO3-SE showed sensing signals toward 1 and 2 ppm acetone. Thus, considerable attention was focused on investigating the sensing performance of this sensor. The dependence of the ΔV on the logarithm of acetone concentration for fabricated sensors is depicted in Fig. 4(b). It can be seen that all the sensors prepared showed almost a linear relationship between ΔV and the logarithm of acetone concentration in the range of 5–50 ppm, and the sensor attached with La0.8Sr0.2CoO3-SE sintered at 1000 °C displayed the largest sensitivity of −49 mV/decade at 600 °C. In addition, it can also be seen that the sensor attached with La0.8Sr0.2CoO3-SE sintered at 1000 °C exhibited segmented sensitivity within the scope of the acetone concentration tested. The slope was −26 mV/decade in the range of 1–5 ppm, which was smaller than the slope in the range of 5–50 ppm. The reason could be that the potential formation determining step is different with variation of acetone concentration. Both Miura et al. and R. Mukundan et al. have reported that the sensor response may vary from a logarithmic dependence of the mixed potential on gas concentration to a linear concentration-mixed potential dependence [28], [29]. The response behavior depends on whether Tafel type, mass transport limited and/or linear Butler–Volmer kinetics are observed for the electrochemical reactions that determine the mixed potential. As mentioned in the literature, the potential formation might be probably controlled by the diffusion of sample gas molecules through the electrode layer in the low concentration range, which is different from the potential formation determining step in the high concentration range. Therefore, the difference of the slope in both concentration ranges was reasonable. Fig. 4(c) exhibits the response and recovery transients of sensors attached with La0.8Sr0.2CoO3-SE sintered at different temperatures to 50 ppm acetone at 600 °C. The sensor attached with La0.8Sr0.2CoO3-SE sintered at 1000 °C clearly exhibited the highest response to 50 ppm acetone. On the basis of the above results, considerable attention was paid to investigate the detailed sensing characteristics for the sensor (S2) attached with La0.8Sr0.2CoO3-SE sintered at 1000 °C.

The acetone sensing mechanism for sensors attached with La1-xSrxCoO3-SEs could be explained by mixed potential type theory [28], [30], [31]. For this planar-type CeO2-based acetone sensor, both sensing electrode (SE) and Pt reference electrode (RE) can be exposed to the analyte gas. As previously reported [32], [33], [34], RE (Pt) also shows a potential, and its potential was fixed under a constant O2 concentration as in air. According to the references [33], [34], the potential on the Pt electrode is determined by the temperature in reducing gases in the chemical equilibrium. Simultaneously, the highest concentration of the reducing gases (acetone etc.) in our experiments was not higher than 50 ppm, which was not comparable to the concentration of oxygen in air. This phenomenon caused an oxygen excess situation (λ > 1). According to the λ leap [34], the Nernst potential on the reference half cell is assumed to be almost constant. In order to further prove that the potential on the Pt RE has almost no effect on the device testing and to fathom the reasons for baseline potential difference of the sensors, a sensor without a sensitive electrode was investigated. As shown in Fig. 5, the sensor without SE exhibited a very small response (<8 mV) in 50 ppm acetone, which was changing with the change of operating temperature. The potential was too small to be compared with the potential on SE (−80 mV) in the same atmospheric condition (50 ppm), and it almost kept constant. As a consequence, the potential change of RE in different atmospheric conditions can be negligible. Besides, it can be seen that the baseline signals of the sensor without SE in different operating temperature were all between −4 mV and −2 mV. The sensor without SE shows similar baseline voltage. It indicated that the baseline potential difference of the sensors (S1, S2, S3 and S5) was mainly due to the difference of the sensing electrode. The reason for the baseline potential difference can be caused by followings: First, when the sensors attached with SE were exposed in air, the sensing electrode may hinder the adsorption of oxygen, thus causing the concentration difference of oxygen. The arrangement could form an oxygen concentration cell type sensor structure. As reported [35], [36], oxygen concentration cell type sensors also show different baseline signals. Second, a release of other hydrocarbons from the environment or from the electrode material itself may lead to a nonzero baseline voltage, which causing the baseline potential difference. In addition, the acetone sensing mechanism for sensors was explained as follows: When the sensors (S1, S2, S3 and S5) were exposed to acetone atmosphere, two main processes occurred on the SE. Firstly, acetone gas penetrated the electrode layer to disperse on the triple-phase-boundary (TPB) of SE/CeO2/acetone gas. In this process, reaction (1) may occur and consume a portion of the acetone. The gas-phase oxidation of acetone may reduce the amount of acetone molecules that reached the TPB, which may indirectly reduce the value of the sensor response. However, reaction (1) was not related to the formation of the mixed potential on the TPB. Secondly, when the acetone molecule reached the TPB, the cathodic (2) and anodic (3) electrochemical reactions occurred at the same time. At this point, a local cell was formed at the TPB of the SE. When the reaction rates of the cathodic (2) and anodic (3) reactions were equal, the dynamic balance was achieved, and the electrode potential at the sensing electrode was the mixed potential. 

The V response of mixed potential type sensor fabricated can be explained quantitatively according to Butler-Volmer equation [30]. Each current density for cathodic reaction (2) and anodic reaction (3) can be presented by the following equations, respectively.

Here, V is the electrode potential, V° the electrode potential at equilibrium; i° the exchange current density; α and β represent transfer coefficient; F, R and T are the Faraday constant, gas constant and temperature, respectively. We assumed the i° obeyed the following kinetic equations:

Here, represents the concentration of O2 or Acetone at TPB, B1, B2, m, and n are constants. When reaction (2) and reaction (3) were at the equilibrium state, the current densities of acetone and oxygen addition are equal to zero, the potential of SE was the mixed potential (VM). Additionally, based on above-obtained Eqs. (4)–(7), VM can be expressed by Equ (8):

That is, the mixed potential changed linearly with the logarithm of the concentration of acetone under the fixed O2 concentration, which has been observed in our experiments as shown in Fig. 4(b). Therefore, according to Eq. (11), we have considered the variables associated with increasing the response value of the sensor.

The high mixed potential was determined by two factors. On the one hand, the SE should have high electrochemical catalytic activity to promote the electrochemical reactions at the TPB. On the other hand, enough acetone should penetrate electrode layer to participate in reaction (3) rather than be consumed during the diffusion. Therefore, attention was focused on finding a SE material which has high electrochemical catalytic activity to acetone gas and inhibits or reduces the acetone consumption reaction when the target gas penetrated the SE. Two main factors affect the properties of the SE materials. First, the chemical property of sensing material affects the sensing properties of sensors. Second, the morphology structure of materials affects the adsorption and desorption process of the analyte gas. In this article, we can change and improve the properties of La1-xSrxCoO3 through the Sr2+ doping in the A-site. First, the Sr2+ doping in A-site can result in the change of the conductivity of La1-xSrxCoO3. Bin Liu et al. reported that an insulator-metal-insulator (I-M-I) transition was observed in La1-xSrxCoO3 with the increase of x in the range of x = 0–0.5 [37]. According to their studies, the maximum conductivity should appear at x = 0.25. Therefore, it can be concluded that the conductivity of La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 may be the largest among the La1-xSrxCoO3 materials. Second, doping Sr2+ may lead to a phase change from rhombohedral to cubic of the materials as shown in Fig. 2(a). Min Ao et al. have discussed in the article that increasing the partial substitution of lanthanum by strontium modified the stable rhombohedral structure of La1-xSrxCoO3 perovskites towards a less stable cubic symmetry when x was beyond x = 0.1 [38]. Thus, it can be determined that Sr doping can improve La1-xSrxCoO3 properties. In order to better understand the possible relation between the conductivity and the highest response of the La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 electrode, the complex impedance measurements were performed at 600 °C in 20 ppm acetone for sensors S1–S5. Fig. 6(a) exhibited the complex impedance plots measured in the sample gas for each sensor. According to the previous report [39], [40], [41], the resistance at higher frequencies for the sensors is mainly attributed to the bulk resistance (including the CeO2-bulk resistance), and the resistance at lower frequencies 0.1 Hz (the second semicircle) is recorded on behalf of the interfacial resistance. N. Miura et al. reported that there was a correlation between the impedance and the sensitivity of sensor [42]. It was also mentioned in their paper that such behavior of the impedance can be considered to come from the interaction between the interface of the solid electrolyte/SE and the target gas. Thus, the changes in the interface resistance measured in different sensors mean the ability of electrochemical catalytic activity [43], [44]. As seen in Fig. 6(a), the resistance at high frequencies was almost constant, and the interfacial resistance of S2 (the sensor attached with La0.8Sr0.2CoO3) showed the minimum value compared with other SE materials. Furthermore, as stated earlier, the conductivity of La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 may be the largest among the La1-xSrxCoO3 materials. Therefore, it was inferred that the interfacial resistance may be affected by the conductivity of the sensing electrode. This result of the complex impedance measurements indicated that La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 performed the highest electrochemical catalytic activity towards acetone among all sensing materials. In a word, it can be speculated that the combination of the conductivity changing and the crystal structure changing by Sr doping may cause the highest response of the sensor attached with La0.8Sr0.2CoO3-SE among the sensors in this paper. Aside from the higher electrochemical catalytic activity of La0.8Sr0.2CoO3, which is responsible for the higher sensing performance, the morphologies of La0.8Sr0.2CoO3-SE also played an important role. More gas channel in SE layer and higher electrochemical reaction action to acetone could induce higher sensing performance. As shown in Fig. 3(a), the La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 sintered at 800 °C exhibited an obvious agglomeration effect, which reduced the amount of the gas channel of the material itself. Therefore, it was indicated that the gas channels of the La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 sensing materials increases with the increasing of the sintering temperature. In this way, the sensitivity of the sensor may be improved with the increasing of sintering temperature. In addition, as the BET testing results listed in Table 3, it can be concluded that BET surface area of La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 material was reduced with increasing of the sintering temperature, which reduced the TPB area. In this case, the electrochemical reaction active sites decreased because of the reduction of TPB length, that is, the sensitivity of the sensor attached with La0.8Sr0.2CoO3-SE sintered at 1200 °C decreased. As a result, the enhanced porosity of the La0.8Sr0.2CoO3-SE sintered at 1000 °C is the other important factor allowing S2 to exhibit the highest response. To further clarify the reason of the best performance of S2, the current–voltage (polarization) curves of sensors attached with La1-xSrxCoO3-SEs were measured and shown in Fig. 6(b). Fig. 6(b) shows the current–voltage curves obtained in air +20 ppm acetone. The current–voltage curves in acetone-containing air are for both reactions (2) and (3). Fig. 6(b) exhibited that the catalytic activity to anodic reaction of acetone is different between the sensors. It can be seen that among the four curves, the slope of the curve for S2 was the largest one, which indicated that the anodic activity of S2 was the highest, and La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 had the best electrochemically catalytic activity among the La1-xSrxCoO3 materials. Thus, S2 has the highest response to acetone among these sensors.

The operation temperature is known to have a remarkable influence on the sensing properties of gas sensor, and the response and recovery transients for sensorS2 to 50 ppm acetone at different operating temperatures are exhibited in Fig. 7. It is apparently seen that the response of sensorS2 to 50 ppm acetone increased with the increasing operating temperature at the beginning below 600 °C, and decreased with the further increasing. The highest response value was observed when the operating temperature was 600 °C. The reason for this phenomenon may be explained as follows. The definite activation energy is a necessary condition for the occurrence of the electrochemical reactions at TPB [45]. The degree of the activation energy accumulation determines whether the reactions are complete. When the operation temperature was below 600 °C, the activation energy is not enough, but it gradually accumulated with the increase of the operating temperature. Therefore, the response of sensorS2 to acetone increased with the increasing operating temperature from 500 °C to 600 °C. However, the desorption process of acetone became more serious above 600 °C. The amount of the acetone adsorbed on the TPB of SE decreased with the increasing operating temperature, which led to the reduction of the sensitivity. In addition, chemical reaction of the acetone with oxygen is an activated process and may be promoted when the operating temperature rises. This may be a reason for a lower local concentration of acetone at the TPB beyond 600 °C, which would result in a reduction of the anodic reaction [23]. Furthermore, the activation energy for the anodic reaction (3) could be lower than that for the cathodic reaction with oxygen (2). Therefore, when raise the operating temperature, the rate of cathodic reaction (2) rise sharply compared with that of the anodic reaction (3). This may reduce the response of the sensorS2 to some extent. In conclusion, the optimal operating temperature for sensorS2 was considered to be 600 °C. Hence, all the subsequent measurements were carried out at 600 °C.

Fig. 8 shows the continuous response and recovery curves for sensorS2 to 20 ppm acetone in five cyclic tests at 600 °C. The sensor exhibited consistent response and recovery characteristics in five cycles, indicating the sensorS2 had good reproducibility. In addition, the selectivity and stability for the sensor was tested and estimated. Fig. 9 displays the cross-sensitivities for sensorS2 to 10 and 50 ppm various VOCs, such as acetone, ethanol, toluene, methanal and methanol. It can be seen that the sensorS2 exhibited the highest response to 10 and 50 ppm acetone and less effective response to other tested gases, but the response to ethanol could not be dismissed. It can also be observed that the selectivity to 10 ppm acetone for sensorS2 was especially notable. Furthermore, the responses of the sensorS2 exposed in the coexisting gases of 50 ppm acetone in conjunction with the interfering gases at 600 °C were measured, respectively. As shown in Fig. 9, the response of sensorS2 to the mixture gases exhibited slight change compared with that of acetone. Therefore, it could be concluded that the sensorS2 showed good selectivity to acetone as oppose to any other gases. Moreover, considering the particularity of ethanol, future studies should also focus on eliminating the effect of ethanol as coexisting gas on acetone response of the sensor. Fig. 10 shows the long-term stability for sensorS2 to 20 ppm acetone at 600 °C, and only a slight attenuation in the sensing response was observed during 30 days. The result showed that the sensorS2 exhibited good stability in the continuous working state.

Based on the above findings, the mixed potential type acetone sensors based on CeO2 solid electrolyte and perovskite-type La1-xSrxCoO3 (x = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and 0.5)-SEs were successfully fabricated. Results showed that the sensor (S2) attached with La0.8Sr0.2CoO3-SE sintered at 1000 °C exhibited the largest sensitivity to 5–50 ppm acetone at 600 °C. The sensor could also detect acetone as low as 1 ppm (−8.7 mV). The sensitivities of sensorS2 to 1–5 and 5–50 ppm acetone were −26 and −49 mV/decade at 600 °C. Moreover, the sensorS2 also displayed other excellent sensing characteristics, such as good stability during 30 days, good repeatability and selectivity at 600 °C. Therefore, this sensor can be expected to be used for monitoring acetone in the field of atmosphere, microenvironment and diabetes diagnosis. Simultaneously, CeO2 electrolyte material was applied and its feasibility in the field of high performance mixed-potential-type acetone sensor was proven.