With a high Li+/Na+ conductivity, NASICON-type oxide ceramic electrolyte has been regarded as one of the most promising electrolytes to replace liquid electrolytes and thus enable safer electrochemical devices. The present work analyses the factors that influence ionic migration in different NASICON-type oxide ceramic electrolytes. First, we use Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 as a representative material. The synthesis parameters are evaluated and optimized to guide the fabrication of electrolytes with high density and conductivity. Second, seven selected NASICON ceramic electrolytes are studied, and a direct connection between the Li+/Na+ ionic diffusion rates and the influence factors is established. Third, with experimental characteristics as proofs, nine interrelated influence factors are proposed to analyze their positive/negative influences on the Li+/Na+ transportation in NASICON-type ceramic electrolyte systems.

Batteries are being scrutinized as the most promising electrochemical devices that store electrical energy in the form of chemical energy for use in portable electronics, electric vehicles, and large scale energy-storage systems. (1,2) However, most commercial lithium-ion batteries use organic liquid electrolytes as the media for ion migration, raising concerns such as capacity loss, leakage, poor chemical stability, and flammability. (3−5) The replacement of liquid electrolytes with inorganic solid electrolytes (SSEs) is considered the most promising strategy to overcome the problems of liquid-electrolyte batteries. Ceramic electrolytes have been studied extensively because of their high safety, high ionic conductivity, and high transference number. (6−8)

Recently, NASICON-type oxide ceramic Li/Na-ion electrolytes have been studied extensively because of their desirable physical and chemical properties, such as high (bulk and grain-boundary) conductivity. (9−11) Chen et al. provided an overview of NASICON-structured materials for energy-storage applications with increasing demand and interest. (12) Fleig and co-workers studied the NASICON-type Li1+xAlxTi2–x(PO4)3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.5) single crystals by a microcontact impedance method. (13) Hong demonstrated the crystal structures and chemistry in the typical Na1+xZr2SixP3–xO12 system. (14) However, as a result of the high volatility of Li+/Na+ in LISICON-based ceramic electrolytes using high-temperature synthesis, the rigorous preparation techniques and data differences from different independent groups are inconvenient for the further study or evaluation. In addition, most researchers focused only on one or several samples, which limits a horizontal comparative analysis. Hence, with objective and consistent external factors (including fabrication, testing, and environment), a systematic comparison of popular NASICON-based ceramic electrolytes is considered to be extremely rewarding.

In this work, a systematic study of Li+- and Na+-based NASICON oxide ceramic electrolytes is performed. First, the fabrication parameters for seven selected samples were evaluated to guide fabrication of high-density and high-conductivity electrolytes. Second, electrochemical testing was done to analyze the impacts on Li+/Na+ migratory rates and the transport mechanism, and the conductivities (including bulk, grain boundary, and total conductivity) are compared to study the main limiting factors for ionic transportation. Third, nine influential factors with experimental proofs are proposed to analyze ionic conductivity. The aforementioned work may offer a quick observation for the NASICON-based ceramic electrolytes and directs out possible directions for further performance optimization.

In order to analyze the diffusion of mobile alkali ions in NASICON ceramic electrolytes, it is helpful to establish a direct connection between the ionic conductivity with a transport pathway, mechanism, and influencing factors. Here, the schematic programs for different NASICON electrolytes are proposed for analysis of the corresponding ionic transmission, Figure 1. There are three appropriate classifications for NASICON-based ceramic electrolytes: (1) NA SuperIonic CONductors (NASICON); as shown in Figure 1a, with Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (C-centered monoclinic, C2/c) as an example,  two ZrO6 octahedrons are separated by three (Si, P)O4 tetrahedrons and linked by corner-shared oxygen ions in the skeletal structure, which form quasi-cubic 3D interconnected channels. (15) Another is the Na4Zr2Si3O12 (R-centered trigonal: R3̅ c) electrolyte, Figure 1b, the electrolyte is composed of a (Zr2Si3O12)4– framework and four types of mobile Na+ ions. Each ZrO6 is corner linked with six SiO4, and each SiO4 is shared with four ZrO6. Six-coordinated Na(1)–O6 shares a face with ZrO6 octahedra and is arranged in triplets of O3ZrO3NaO3ZrO3 along the c axis. Na(2) is located in an irregular eight-coordinate site with eight nonequidistant oxygen neighbors. Na(1)–O6 and Na(2)–O8 connect with sharing faces. The oxygen sites are arranged octahedrally around Na(1) and in an approximately trigonal prismatic configuration around Na(2). (2) NASICON-like lithium-ion conductor; with LiZr2(PO4)3 (R-centered trigonal: R3c) as an example, the electrolyte is built up by Zr2(PO4)3– units, where each PO4 tetrahedron shares its oxygen with four ZrO6 to form a rigid framework (Figure 1). The Li+ octahedra alternates with [ZrO6][PO4][ZrO6] units, forming infinite chains along the c-axis. Li+ occupies the Li(1) and Li(2) positions and can diffuses along the 3D conducting network. (3) NASICON-type superionic conductor; For NaZr2(PO4)3 NASICON-type superionic conductor (R-centered trigonal: R3̅ c): infinite O3ZrO3NaO3ZrO3 rows parallel to the c-axis form a rigid framework with connected PO4 (Figure 1d). The Na1 site is stable, and the Na2, Na3, and Na4 sites are irregular and available to accommodate Na+ mobility. No matter whether the lattice framework is face-shared, edge-shared, partially or fully occupied, the first requirement for ionic migration in a ceramic electrolyte is a continuous channel. Li+/Na+ ions in all of the selected NASICON-based ceramic electrolytes migrate along 3D channels (Figure 1). For example, Na3Zr2Si2PO12 is composed of quasi-cubic framework with an intersecting 3D lattice. Two different mobile ions Na(1) and Na(2) are localized at the intersection of the 3D conduction channels.

Here, for comparison, all the samples were synthesized via conventional solid-state reactions. The XRD data are shown in Figure S1. The synthesis conditions, including sintering temperatures (times) and the pretreatment condition, were studied and are listed in Table S1. Thermogravimetry and differential scanning calorimetry (TG-DSC) technology is used to evaluate the fabrication of high-quality ceramic electrolytes. Generally, the sintering behaviors or the densification processes were evaluated using raw powders as starting materials, which describes the changing of weight and heat flow from raw powders to the dense ceramic by one-step sintering. However, one-step methods are problematic in practice; (1) raw powders (i.e., Li2CO3) will release lots of gases, which makes sintering densification of ceramic substrates more difficult; (2) huge volume changes can make fabricating difficult, especially for multilayered ceramic equipment. Multistep presintering offers more realistic significance for high-quality ceramics. With pure phase NASICON-based electrolytes as starting materials, the obtained TG-DSC curves are helpful to guide the fabrication of high-quality ceramic electrolytes. Herein, the TG-DSC curves for preprocessed electrolytes are listed in Figure 2.

The densification or microstructural evolution is strongly influenced by the sintering parameters. Here, pure phase NASICON-like Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) was used as a typical example to explain the TG-DSC curves. A complex process for mass loss and heat flow below 800 °C are rough including the elimination of absorbed CO2 (in the form of the carbonate decompound), moisture (bonded with Li), the emergence of an oxygen vacancy, and evaporation of the Li element as shown from TG and DSC curves. At testing temperatures higher than 800 °C, the sharp heat flow peak can be used as reference to seek the proper sintering temperature for high-densified LATP, and the rapid mass loss mainly comes from the quick Li+ volatilization and O2– escape. The sintered LATP electrolyte pellets are checked with SEM to confirm the densification, Figure 3. No apparent heat-shrinkage phenomenon appears when sintered at 700 and 800 °C (Figure 3a,b), which is consistent with the TG-DSC results in Figure 2. The nonporous structures as shown in Figure 3c,d indicated that 900 and 1000 °C are suitable sintering temperatures for LATP. The calculated (relative) densities increase with increased sintering temperatures from 700 to 900 °C (Figure 3), which is substantially in agreement with TG-DSC and SEM data. However, an inferior relative density was obtained when sintered at 1000 °C (rather than 900 °C and 87 vs 91%), although it still looks dense enough by SEM, which was provisionally attributed to excessive vaporization of the Li element. Although the TG-DSC testing can be used as a reference for seeking high-quality ceramic electrolytes, Li/Na vaporization and O2– escape are still obvious interferences for establishing a direct connection between TG/DSC data and the proposed sintering temperature, Table S1. So, the optimized sintering temperature for high-performance ceramic electrolytes should unify with the influences of Li/Na vaporization, densification, and even conductivity.

Here, the selected NASICON-based ceramic electrolytes were studied by EIS to analysis the possible ionic diffusion, bulk/GB impedance, and limiting factors. The details of EIS tested from RT to 600 °C are presented in Figure S2. The apparent variation of EIS spectra for different samples means different ionic conductivities, migrating rate, and transport route, Figure 4a. Further, three typical EIS spectra as representatives are compared to explain the different transport mechanisms and influence factors. First, the EIS of LATP samples after being sintered from 700 to 1000 °C are compared in Figure 4b. The bulk conductivities are calculated by the intercept of the real axis with the high-frequency arc, and the almost equal high-frequency intercepts (by linear fitting) are attributed to the intrinsic ionic conductivity. The striking diversities of semi arcs in the high-middle frequency zone are generated by different grain-boundary (GB) impedances, which mean that the GB conductivities depend on the different densifications of LATP electrolytes. Second, the EIS spectrum for the NASICON-type Na3ZrSnSi2PO12 superionic conductor demonstrates an extra small arc at the ultrahigh-frequency region, Figure 4c. This arc is not the contribution of bulk resistance; however, it can be explained by the following two possible reasons: (1) the small capacitive loop is from the high-frequency phase shift (or “fake capacitance”), which is not an actual response of an electrochemical process (or just a “time constant”); (2) a lesser possibility is caused by the large discrepancies of mismatched electrolyte particle size. The corresponding high-medium frequency regions clearly show the bulk and GB (or total) impedance. Figure 4d shows the EIS spectrum for LATP after being sintered at 900 °C for 10 h; the single semicircle and the near-zero high-frequency intercept with the real axis means that the single semicircle must be fitted into two semicircles in response to the bulk and GB impedance.

The critical Li+/Na+ conductivity is one of the most important parameters for evaluating the high-quality NASICON-based ceramic electrolytes. The total, bulk, and GB conductivities of the seven selected NASICON electrolytes are compared at increasing temperature from RT to 600 °C in Figure 5, which can be used as key factors to guide the selection of ceramic electrolytes. First, the total conductivities of LATP electrolytes after being sintered at different temperatures are compared in Figure 5a. LATP sintered at 900 °C shows the highest conductivity with the contribution of optimized GB conductivity (consistent with the SEM and relative density), which can be compared with other group’ results. (17) The reduced conductivity for 1000 °C sintered LATP may be caused by the excessive vaporization of Li and grown crystalline granules (related with SEM). However, the activation energies of LATP sintering at different temperatures are fairly close to each other, which can be explained by the same Li+ transport pathway and mechanism. The total, bulk, and GB conductivities for all the selected NASICON electrolytes are compared in Figure 5b–d. When operated at a lower temperature, the bulk conductivities contribute more to the total conductivities, which become the main limiting factors for ionic diffusion when operated at increased temperature. On the contrary, the GB conductivities indicate more obvious limits for ionic diffusion at lower temperatures and grow rapidly with increased temperature. Such as above at 400 °C, the GB conductivities become hard to distinguish for most of the selected NASICON ceramic electrolytes.

Although the transport of mobile Li+/Na+ ions in ceramic electrolytes has been explained by a number of crystallographic principles, the determination of influence factors has been a long-standing problem. In order to analyze the influence factors for NASICON-based ceramic electrolytes, experimental results (such as the transmission route (Figure 1), coordination number, min/max interatomic distance (Table 1), space group, bond length, opening size (Figure 6), and the electrochemical results (Figures 4 and 5)) are provided as basic supports. At last, nine possible influence factors with positive/negative functions for ionic diffusion are discussed in this part;

Mobile Li+/Na+ ions play a vital role for ionic diffusion in ceramic electrolytes. Here, all of the alkali ions in the selected NASICON electrolytes are mobile in theory. However, the ionic mobility can be affected by external factors. For example, all of the Na+ ions in Na4Zr2Si3O12 are mobile; however, Na(2) ions are restricted by the narrower opening size (1.86 Å) between two adjacent Na(2)–Na(2) in tetrahedron sites (Table 1, as obtained from XRD structural refinement in Figure S1). Although the Li+ and Na+ concentration in LiZr2(PO4)3 and NaZr2(PO4)3 is low (such as compared with Na4Zr2Si3O12), all the alkaline ions are mobile, which ensures the high ionic conductivity, Figure 5.

Figure 5 demonstrated the apparent positive effect of temperature for electrolyte conductivities. The low-temperature conductivity (such as 10–7 S cm–1 for Na4Zr2Si3O12 at RT) can be explained by the model of defect complexes; the mobile Na+ ions are trapped by an immobile sublattice to form the defect complexes, although the elevated temperature changes a little for bond distances and bond angles, which can provide extra energy for trapped interstitial ions to overcome the defect complexes. The enlarged Na(1)–O6 and Na(2)–O8 bonds in Na4Zr2Si3O12 by elevated temperature can open the opening size for connected Na(1)–Na(2) ions. As shown in Table 1, the opening size increased from ∼1.86 Å at RT to 2.22 Å at 620 °C. (22)

Mobile ions with high disordering in the sublattice can help promote the ionic conductivity. As analyzed from the “temperature factor”, overcoming the defect complexes means reducing the ordering degree of mobile ions. For example, in Na3Zr2Si2PO12, the Si/P substitution prevents the long-range ordering of mobile Na+, which modifies the electrostatic force and facilitates the Na+ migration. As mentioned below in “Phase Transition”, LiZr2(PO4)3 undergoes a low- to high-temperature phase transition, which facilitates the long-range Li+ motion by disordering process.

LiZr2(PO4)3 undergoes a phase transition from low-temperature monoclinic to high-temperature orthorhombic when operated above 350 °C, which demonstrates an apparent conductivity increase; (16) (2) NaZr2(PO4)3-based electrolyte also undergoes a conductivity increase with the phase transformation from monoclinic to hexagonal. (18,19) As discussed in “Degree of Order”, one interpretation for the enhanced conductivity with phase transition is that low- to high-disordering of Li+/Na+ ions with the corresponding phase transition promotes the alkali ions fast and long-range motion.

The vacancy mechanism is the main mode for ionic transmission in ceramic electrolytes. The vacancies play an important role in conduction for mobile interstitial Li+/Na+ ions. Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (Table 1) contains six Na+ ions in four different type sites: one six-coordinated Na(1) occupies one-quarter of 4d sites, the rest of the sites are vacancies that build the intersecting 3D channels; one eight-coordinated Na(2) filled the 4e position (no vacancy); the 8f positions are half occupied by two six-coordinated Na(3), the other half of the sites provide vacancies for Na+ migration along the Na(1) conducting channel; two five-coordinated Na(4) are localized half way between the Na(1) and Na(2) positions, which transport along the same conducting channel of partially vacant Na(3) sites. Figure 1 (the schematic programs) provides more visually appealing results for the existence of Li+/Na+ vacancies in LiZr2(PO4)3 and NaZr2(PO4)3 electrolytes.

Except for the mobile ions and vacancies, the opening size (or bottleneck) between two adjacent interstitial ions is another important factor affecting the reasonable ion mobility. The effective opening size should match the radius of mobile ions. Figure 6 shows the calculated minimum opening size for mobile Li+/Na+ ions in the selected NASICON electrolyte systems; (1) the distances of Na(1)–O(2) and Na(2)–O(2) are 1.915 and 3.142 Å in Na4Zr2Si3O12, and the minimum opening size (1.86 Å) blocks the Na+ mobility between Na(1)–Na(2) sites (Table 1). (2) Hong’s work also demonstrates the restriction of small opening size for Na+ migration between Na(2)–Na(2) sites in Na3Zr2Si2PO12. (14)

In practice, the effect of ion size is a “competing” theory for ionic diffusion. An ion with a small radius can pass through a narrow bottleneck easily; however, this causes strong bond energy with O2– via strong attraction force. An ion with a big radius needs a bigger pathway; however, the attraction force or bond energy with skeletal O2– is weak. NASICON Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (Na+) and Li-NASICON Li3Zr2PSi2O12 (Li+) possess a similar transmission route; however, the conductivity of Na+ is almost 1000 times greater than that of Li+, (20) which means that the smaller Li+ causes a stronger bond energy than Na+ (Li–O vs Na–O) by stronger attraction force.

Except for the ion positional disordering (“Degree of Order”), the ionic (partial) substitution/doping also can change the alkali–O bond length or repulsion force. The smaller P5+ (0.17 Å HS, four-coordination) in Si4+ (0.26 Å HS, four-coordination) sites of pseudo four-coordinated Si/PO4 can stablize Na3Zr2Si2PO12 at a highlyconductive cubic phase, Figure 5. The replacement of Zr4+ with Sn4+ (0.69 Å HS, six-coordination) in the Zr/SnO6 octahedron of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 can disturb the Na+ conduction by compressing the Na–O bond, Table 1.

The lattice shape (or opening size) can be changed by different Li/Na–O coordination numbers, such as from a sphere to a prolate ellipsoid. A different coordination number causes different levels of electrostatic repulsion between the adjacent sites. In detail, O2– anions bonded simultaneously with skeleton cations (M) and interstitial Li+/Na+ ions; the skeleton M–O bond is strong bonding energy, while the interstitial Li/Na–O bond shows more ionization tendency. Highly coordinated skeleton M ions bonded with more O2– anions can further strengthen the M–O bonding energy, which enlarges the bond distance for O2– anions with interstitial Li+/Na+ ions by weakened Li/Na–O bonds. The interstitial Li+/Na+ ions with a higher coordination number can further weaken the Na(Li)–O bond by a greater ionization tendency. (1) For Na4Zr2Si3O12, the O1 atom bonded with five skeleton atoms (1 Si, 1 Zr, 1 Na(1), 2 Na(2)), and the O2 atom bounded with four skeleton atoms (1 Si, 1 Zr, and 2 Na(2)). Five-coordinated O1 demonstrates a stronger bond energy than four-coordinated O2. The cation–O1 bond demonstrates a triangularly arranged opening size of 1.86 Å, which is unfavorable for interstitial Na+-ion transportation from Na(1) to Na(2) sites; (20) and the bond distance for eight-coordinated interstitial Na(2)–O8 is longer than that of six-coordinated interstitial Na(1)–O6 (Tables 1 and S2), which is caused by the extensive ionization tendency (divert away O2– anions from higher-coordinated Na+ ions); (2) the sequence of bond energy for the interstitial Na+ ion with O2– anions in Na3Zr2Si2PO12 is Na(4)–O > Na(1)–O > Na(2)–O, (21) which is consistent with the coordination numbers: Na(4)–O in 5-fold coordination, Na(1)–O in 6-fold coordination, and Na(2)–O in 8-fold coordination, Table 1.

NASICON electrolyte systems with seven selected typical Li/Na oxide ceramics as representatives are studied to reveal the relationship of multivariable influence factors with ionic diffusion and conductivity. First, TG/DSC curves and SEM pictures (with LATP as an example) are tested to analysis the optimized fabricating techniques. Second, experimental results are used to analyze the possible ionic diffusion, bulk/GB impedance, and limiting factor. Third, the total, bulk, and GB conductivities were compared, which is helpful to guide the selection of NASICON ceramic electrolytes. Fourth, nine positive/negative influence factors, including the (im)mobile Li+/Na+ ion, temperature factor, phase transition, degree of order, hopping mechanism, opening size, Na+/Li+-ion radius, ionic substitution, and coordination number are proposed to analyze the relationship of ionic diffusion with reasonable influence factors. Further, this study provides a quick observation for understanding the ionic transport properties and proposes important insights into the rational design of new Li+/Na+ oxide electrolytes for high safety ceramic batteries.