Hybrid potassium-ion capacitors (KICs) show great promise for large-scale storage on the power grid because of cost advantages, the weaker Lewis acidity of K+ and low redox potential of K+/K. However, a huge challenge remains for designing high-performance K+ storage materials since K+ ions are heavier and larger than Li+ and Na+. Herein, the synthesis of hierarchical Ca0.5Ti2(PO4)3@C microspheres by use of the electrospraying method is reported. Benefiting from the rich vacancies in the crystal structure and rational nanostructural design, the hybrid Ca0.5Ti2(PO4)3@C electrode delivers a high reversible capacity (239 mA h g−1) and superior rate performance (63 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1). Moreover, the KIC employing a Ca0.5Ti2(PO4)3@C anode and activated carbon cathode, affords a high energy/power density (80 W h kg−1 and 5144 W kg−1) in a potential window of 1.0–4.0 V, as well as a long lifespan of over 4000 cycles. In addition, in situ X-ray diffraction is used to unravel the structural transition in Ca0.5Ti2(PO4)3, suggesting a two-phase transition above 0.5 V during the initial discharge and solid solution processes during the subsequent K+ insertion/extraction. The present study demonstrates a low-cost potassium-based energy storage device with high energy/power densities and a long lifespan.

Amid growing concerns about the depletion of fossil fuels and environmental pollution, the exploitation and utilization of renewable energies, such as solar, wind and tide powers, has become more urgent than ever. In the past several decades, various electrochemical energy storage systems including batteries (Li-ion, Na-ion, Li-air, Li-S, etc.)1-4 and capacitors have been developed to meet the ever-growing needs of large-scale energy storage. So far, neither batteries nor capacitors can by themselves satisfy the requirements for electrochemical energy storage. Though batteries can provide higher energy density than capacitors, their low power density and short cycle life limit their further applications in the smart grid. Recently, hybrid alkali metal-ion capacitors have gained much interest due to their unique characteristic that couples a capacitor-type cathode with a battery-type anode.5 High energy density can be achieved via the use of a faradaic process on anodic parts, and high-power density can be obtained by taking advantage of a non-faradaic process on the capacitor part. Based on this design strategy, several hybrid capacitors, such as graphite//activated carbon,6 activated carbon//MoS2,7 biomass-derived activated carbon//TiO2@CNT@C nanorods,8 commercial activated carbon//Nb2O5@carbon,9 etc., have been reported with promising electrochemical performance.

Recently, potassium-based electrochemical energy storage technology has been shown to exhibits a great promise due to the natural abundance and low cost of potassium.10, 11 Particularly, the redox potential of K+/K (−2.92 V vs standard hydrogen electrode) is even lower than that of Na+/Na (−2.71 V), indicative of a higher working voltage of potassium-based batteries. However, the large ionic radius of K+ (1.38 Å) is likely to induce dramatic volume expansion and sluggish kinetic properties. To tackle this issue, compounds with an open framework or layered structure are believed to be important for designing high-performance electrode materials to realize repeatable K+ insertion and extraction, such as Prussian blue analogues12-15 and layered KxMO2 (M = transition metal ions).16-20

NASICON-structured compounds are another type of interesting materials demonstrating excellent K-storage performance due to their robust 3D frameworks not only facilitating fast ion transportation but also showing a controllable volume change upon insertion/extraction.21 Currently, only a few types of NASICON-type phosphates have been explored as the potential electrode materials for K-ion storage. Han et al. prepared K3V2(PO4)3/C nanocomposites by solid state reaction, which delivered a high-potential plateau at 3.6–3.9 V and a reversible capacity of 50 mA h g−1 over 100 cycles.22 In the voltage region of 1.2–2.8 V, KTi2(PO4)3/C nanocubes (KTP) exhibited a reversible capacity of ≈80 mA h g−1 corresponding to the insertion of nearly two K+.23 However, it should be noted that the low reversible capacity of KTP is far away from the application requirement, including both batteries and capacitors.

Herein, we studied a potassium-free compound Ca0.5Ti2(PO4)3@C (CTP@C) as the anode material for potassium-ion storage. The selection of CTP@C as the target material is a result of the flexibility of the NASICON-type structure in accommodating foreign ions, and the availability of more generated vacancies at the 3b sites, which are generated when monovalent K ions are substituted by bivalent Ca ions. Moreover, in consideration of the large size of K+ ions, we employed an electrospraying method to prepare self-assembled CTP@C microspheres composed of nanoparticles. The nanoscale primary particles can ensure fast K+ insertion/extraction, while the microsized spheres can minimize the parasitic reactions and improve the volumetric energy densities.16 As expected, the pristine CTP@C electrode delivers a high discharge capacity of above 239 mA h g−1, which corresponds to the highest values obtained for state-of-the-art anode materials for K-ion storage, impressive rate performance with a capacity of 63 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1, and a long-term lifetime of over 1000 cycles. Furthermore, a potassium-ion capacitor is innovatively constructed by coupling CTP@C and activated carbon (AC) as the anode and cathode, respectively, which delivered a maximum energy density of ≈80 W h kg−1 and power density of ≈5144 W kg−1.

The overall synthesis strategy for CTP@C microspheres is schematically illustrated in Scheme 1, and involves two steps: electrospraying and a thermal treatment process. The key parameters include the dissolution of various raw materials and accurate control of the heating temperature and duration of thermal treatment. Initially, a certain number of precursors, including CaCO3 and (CH3CH3CHO)4Ti, NH4H2PO4 and citric acid, are first dissolved in a mixture of deionized water, ethyl alcohol, and acetic acid. At the same time, polyvinyl pyrrolidone is dissolved in deionized water to form a homogeneous adhesive solution. Then, the two solutions mentioned above are mixed together with further stirring to obtain the final precursor solution for electrospraying. After electrospray process, the collected precursor is then annealed at 800 °C for 4 h with a heating rate of 5 °C min−1 under N2 atmosphere to obtain CTP@C nanocomposites.

The crystal structure of the pristine CTP@C was studied by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD), as shown in Figure 1a. All diffraction peaks could be indexed with a rhombohedral cell with the space group of R-3. After the Rietveld refinement, no impurity phase can be observed and the lattice parameters are calculated to be a = b = 8.4867(4) Å, and c = 21.905(5) Å, consistent with the previously reported values.24 The crystal structure information for CTP is also listed in Table S1 of the Supporting Information. Compared in Figure 1b,c, both CTP and KTP shares the same rhombohedral framework, which is constructed by the lantern-like units sequenced along the c-axis, with the unit of the [Ti2(PO4)3] framework is composed of two TiO6 octahedra and three PO4 tetrahedra via corner sharing. The key difference lies in the crystallographic sites at K+ sites. KTP hosts two such sites, while Ca2+ exclusively occupies the 3a site exclusively, leaving more vacant 3b sites. From a structural point of view, CTP is able to accommodate more K+ ions and, therefore, possesses a higher theoretical capacity (268 mA h g−1) than KTP (255 mA h g−1).

The morphological feature of the CTP@C nanocomposite was firstly observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). As shown in Figure S1 of the Supporting Information, the precursor materials show the microsphere morphology and are well dispersed without coagulation due to the presence of charged droplets during the electrospray process. After annealing at 800 °C for 4 h, the as-prepared materials (Figure 2a,b) maintain their spheroidal morphology with different diameters ranging from 2.5 to 4 µm. The high-magnification SEM image (Figure 2c) suggests that the CTP@C microsphere is self-assembled by many nanoparticles. Then, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was used to further investigate the microscopic characteristics. An individual CTP@C microsphere is shown in Figure 2d,e, which clearly shows that the microspheres are composed of CTP nanoparticles. The SAED image (the inset of Figure 2e) shows a series of diffraction spots indicative of both monophasic nature and highly crystalline CTP@C. An HRTEM image (Figure 2f) taken at the edge of one particle not only indicates that a carbon layer with a thickness of ≈5 nm is coated onto the surface of CTP, but also provides a clear interplanar spacing of 0.364 nm corresponding to the (113) plane of rhombohedral symmetry. In addition, the line scanning curves for CTP@C (Figure 2g) and elemental mapping images (Figure 2h–m) suggest that the elemental of Ca, Ti, C, P, and O are homogeneous distributed in the CTP@C microspheres. Such a hierarchical structure could result in a pore-like microstructure, beneficial to the infiltration of electrolyte and an increase in sufficient interface between the active materials and the electrolyte, shortening the ion diffusion paths.

To determine the specific surface area of the CTP@C nanocomposites, a N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm was recorded (Figure S2, Supporting Information), which was indicative of a type-II isotherm with a porous structure. Furthermore, Raman spectra and TG analysis were used to qualitatively and quantitatively characterize the compositing carbon qualitatively and quantitatively. As illustrated in Figure S3 of the Supporting Information, two broad peaks are situated at 1350 and 1584 cm−1, corresponding to the D and G band, respectively. The higher intensity of the D band in comparison with that of the G band confirms its amorphous nature. In addition, a small peak is visible at ≈1000 cm−1, which can be assigned to the stretching vibrations of the phosphate (PO4)3−. Moreover, the content of amorphous carbon in the CTP@C nanocomposite determined by thermogravimetric analysis is 19.3% (Figure S4, Supporting Information) according to the weight loss observed from 200 to 600 °C. Note that the minor weight loss of ≈2.3% observed below 200 °C might be related to the vaporization of adsorbed and interstitial water. It has been demonstrated that the introduction of amorphous carbon could overcome the low electronic conductivity of polyanionic compounds and be beneficial for the acceleration of electron transport and enhancement of K+ storage performance.

K-ion storage properties for the CTP@C nanocomposite were first evaluated by assembling a coin-type half-cell with metallic K as the counter electrode. As exhibited in Figure 3a, cyclic voltammetry (CV) profiles of the CTP@C nanocomposite, except the first cathodic scan, show three pairs of redox couples at 2.10/1.65, 0.83/0.52 V, and 0.01/0.49 V. The first two redox pairs are similar to the sodiation process observed in NaTi2(PO4)3 and Ca0.5Ti2(PO4)3, which can be attributed to the stepped reduction of the redox reaction of Ti4+/Ti3+ and Ti3+/Ti2+, respectively.24, 25 The lowest voltage pair at nearly 0 V corresponds to the insertion/extraction processes of K+ in amorphous carbon,26 which can be confirmed by the CV profiles for carbon (Figure S5, Supporting Information). Since the 2nd cycle, all CV profiles overlap with each other, indicative of an excellent electrochemical reversibility. Unlike the following cycles, the first cathodic scan shows an irreversible peak at 1.20 V, possibly related to the decomposition of the electrolyte and formation of a solid–electrolyte interface (SEI) films. Galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles (Figure 3b) for the CTP@C nanocomposite were recorded at 50 mA g−1, with its differential curves (Figure S6, Supporting Information), dQ/dV, showing a redox behavior similar to that found from the CV profiles. As shown in Figure 3b, the initial discharge and the charge capacities reach 632 and 239 mA h g−1, respectively. The low coulombic efficiency (CE) of 36.7% might be a result of the decomposition of the electrolyte to form SEI films. Encouragingly, CE increases to above 90% after 10 cycles, in which progress the irreversible decomposition of the electrolyte and gradual activation of some cell components occurs (Figure S7, Supporting Information). Rate capability is further evaluated for step-wise increased current densities from 0.05 to 5 A g−1 (Figure 3c). The hybrid electrode delivers a high capacity of 63 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1. When the current density is returned to 0.05 A g−1, a specific capacity of 224 mA h g−1 is achieved, comparable to the initial 5 cycles. To exclude the contribution of carbon on the rate performance, its charge–discharge profiles and cycle performance at various applied current densities were recorded and are presented in Figures S8 and S9 of the Supporting Information, respectively. At a low current density of 0.05 A g−1, carbon contributes ≈27 mA h g−1 to the total reversible capacity (239 mA h g−1) since it accounts for 19.3% by weight. When the current density is increased to 2 A g−1, the carbon electrode hardly shows any reversibility. Thus, it can be concluded that the superior rate performance of the CTP@C hybrid is a result of the CTP nanoparticles rather than the carbon. It is important to note that, in comparison with other state-of-the-art Ti-based anode material for KIB applications (Figure 3d),23, 27-31 the CTP@C nanocomposite demonstrates the best K-ion storage performance due to its robust NASICON-type structure and the synthesis strategy utilized for preparing the hierarchical CTP@C structure, facilitating fast K+ transportation with a controlled volume change. In addition, long-term cycle stability was recorded at 1 A g−1 for 1000 cycles with good capacity retention of 74.6%, further demonstrating the feasibility of CTP@C nanocomposite as the anode material for potassium-ion storage.

Electrochemical performance of Ca0.5Ti2(PO4)3@C: a) cyclic voltammograms measured using a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. b) Galvanostatic discharge–charge curves at a current density of 50 mA g−1 in the voltage range of 0.01–3.0 V. c) Rate performance at different current densities and d) compared with other Ti-based materials. e) Long-term cycle performance at a current density of 1 A g−1 for 1000 cycles in a half cell.

To further study the kinetic property of the CTP@C nanocomposite during K+ insertion/extraction, CV profiles at various scanning rates were collected in the potential region of 0.01– 3.0 V to obtain the apparent chemical diffusion coefficient of for the K+ ions.32 As shown in Figure 4a, the anodic peaks are labeled A1 and A2, while the cathodic peaks are labeled C1 and C2. By plotting a linear relationship between the peak current with respect to the square root of the scanning rate (v1/2), the K+ diffusion coefficient can be calculated according to the Randles–Sevcik equation (Equation 1)33

where Ip is the peak current of anodic or cathodic peaks, n is the number of electrons per molecule during the intercalation, A is the effective contact area between the electrode and the electrolyte, C is the concentration of K+ in the electrode, and D is the diffusion coefficient of K+, and v is the scan rate. It should be stated here that, in literature studies, n is selected as 1 and C is calculated to be 0.0297 and 0.0149 mol cm−3 for A1/C1 and A2/C2 pairs, respectively. Additionally, it should be addressed that for simplicity, in this study, A is selected as the geometric area of the electrode, 0.785 cm2, for simplicity as commonly employed. Based on Equation 1, a series of D values can be calculated as 1.65 × 10−11 cm2 s−1 (A1), 2.20 × 10−11 cm2 s−1 (A2), 4.08 × 10−11 cm2 s−1 (C1) and 6.37 × 10−11 cm2 s−1 (C2). These diffusion coefficients are much higher than other reported values,23, 34-37 indicating the beneficial nature of the NASICON-type crystal structure for CTP facilitating a fast-ionic transfer, as well as the unique hierarchical microspheres composed of nanoscale primary particles enhancing the active electrode/electrolyte interfacial areas.

To elucidate the structural evolution during the reversible potassium insertion and extraction, in situ XRD patterns for the initial and 2nd charge–discharge were collected between 0.01 and 3.0 V. Contour maps in the selected 2θ angle ranges are shown in Figure 5, and the corresponding XRD patterns are given in Figures S10 and S11 of the Supporting Information. At the initial stage of discharge, all reflections can be indexed based on a rhombohedral cell except for several peaks from the Be glass and Al foil. As discharging proceeds, all the reflections due to the CTP shifts to the low-angle side, indicative of the expansion of the lattice framework. During the potassium insertion to 0.5 V, the reflections at 20.3° (104), 21.0° (110), 29.3° (024), and 32.4° (116), characteristics of rhombohedral CTP, gradually disappears. In the meanwhile, two new reflections appear at ≈30.7° and 33.3° that strongly suggests a two-phase transition. Following further discharging to 0.01 V, these new reflections maintain and shift to the low angle side, which indicates that K+ ions are continuously inserted into this new structure. However, it is hard to identify this new phase because of the low intensity of the X-ray diffraction and perturbation from the Be glass and other components when preparing the working electrode. In the subsequent charge cycle, 2nd discharge and charge, these two new reflections shift in a regular way: first toward the high angles, then to the low angle before finally shifting back. All these changing tendencies are consistent with the characteristics of a solid-solution transition.

To evaluate the feasibility of the as-synthesized CTP@C microspheres for practical application, we assembled an asymmetric hybrid K-ion capacitor using CTP@C hybrid as the anode and commercial AC as the cathode (with a Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of 1368 m2 g−1, as shown in Figure S12, Supporting Information). It has been demonstrated that the operation of this kind of asymmetrical capacitor is based on the (de)intercalation of cations (K+) in the anode side and absorption/desorption of anion clusters (PF−6) in the cathode side. Benefitting from the enlarged working potentials, the asymmetrical capacitor shows an enhanced energy density with high-rate charge–discharge capability. Before constructing the potassium-ion capacitor (KIC), the activated carbon was tested as the cathode with metallic potassium as the counter electrodes, whose charge–discharge profiles, cycle, and rate performance are displayed in Figure S13 of the Supporting Information. The working potential window of each electrode is first determined by a CV test in the half-cell configuration as shown in Figure 6a, and the working voltage window of the full cell is set between 1.0 and 4.0 V. Figure 6b exhibits the measured galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles ranging from 0.05 to 5 A g−1. The voltage profiles at all these current densities are somewhat different than the linear behavior expected for an ideal supercapacitor, mainly due to the combination of charge storage mechanisms based on faradaic and non-faradaic reactions. On the basis of the galvanostatic charge–discharge measurements, the energy and power densities of CTP@C//AC can be calculated based on the total sample mass of both the cathode and the anode sides. A high energy density of 80 W h kg−1 (24.7 W h L−1) can be achieved at a power density of 32 W kg−1 (10.6 W L−1); the cell still delivers an energy density of 34 W h kg−1 (9.9 W h L−1) at a high-power output of 5144 W kg−1 (1600.1 W L−1). In addition to the gravimetric results, a high volumetric energy density is realized, as shown in Figure S14 of the Supporting Information, further demonstrating great potential for practical application. The energy/power densities of KIC are shown in a Ragone plot (Figure 6c) and are superior to several representative electrochemical energy storage devices (based on the sample mass of both cathode and anode sides), including supercapacitors38-41 and Na-based capacitors.42-45 Moreover, the as-assembled KIC could achieve high energy efficiency up to 85% (Figure S15, Supporting Information),46 superior to the state-of-the-art systems.47-51 In addition, the CTP@C//AC capacitor can maintain up to 4000 cycles with a capacity retention of 75.9% at a current density of 5 A g−1, once again suggesting a suitable energy storage device for mid- to large-scale applications once more.

Hierarchical Ca0.5Ti2(PO4)3@C microspheres were successfully synthesized by the electrospraying method and the K+ storage behavior between 0.01 and 3.0 V was investigated for the first time. This hybrid material shows a high capacity of 239 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1 and superior rate capability of 63 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1. Apart from the excellent K-ion storage performance, Ca0.5Ti2(PO4)3@C microspheres show an interesting phase transition involving a two-phase transition in the initial discharge and a solid-solution in the subsequent cycles. When coupled with an AC cathode, an asymmetric K-ion capacitor is assembled, which delivers a maximum energy density and power density of ≈80 W h kg−1 and ≈5144 W kg−1, respectively.

Synthesis of Ca0.5Ti2(PO4)3@C Nanocomposites: First, 1.0 g of polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP, Mw = 1 300 000, Aladdin) and 10 mL deionized water were mixed and stirred for 2 h to form the solution A. Then 1 mmol CaCO3 (Aladdin) and 4 mmol (CH3CH3CHO)4Ti (Aladdin), 6 mmol NH4H2PO4 (Aladdin) and 2 mmol citric acid (Aladdin) were dissolved into a mixture of 5 mL deionized water, 5 mL ethyl alcohol, and 5 mL acetic acid and stirred for 1 h to form the solution B. Next, the solution A and the solution B were mixed together and stirred for 24 h to obtain the precursor solution C for electrospraying. The precursor solution was poured into a 10 mL plastic syringe with a blunt-tip needle. A grounded aluminum foil was placed 18 cm under the needle for collection. A high voltage was applied between the needle and the foil using a direct-current power supply. The as-collected precursor powder was calcined at 800 °C for 4 h with a heating rate of 5 °C min−1 under N2 atmosphere to obtain the CTP@C nanocomposite.

Physical Characterization: The crystal structures of the samples were characterized by XRD (Rigaku D/max-2550 diffractometer) with Cu-Kα radiation. And Rietveld refinement was carried out for the crystal structure analysis. The microscopic morphologies of Ca0.5Ti2(PO4)3@C were investigated using a field emission scanning electron microscope (JEOL JSM-6700F) and TEM (FEI Tecnai G2 F20 S-TWIN). Raman spectroscopy was employed to examine the degree of graphitization using a Renishaw in via Raman microscope with Ar-ion laser excitation (λ = 514.5 nm). The carbon content was estimated by an SDT Q600. The nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherm was measured at 77 K using a kubo X1000 instrument (Beijing Builder Electronic Technology, China). The specific surface area was calculated using the BET method. The pore-size distribution curve was calculated from the isotherm using the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda algorithm.

In Situ X-Ray Diffraction Measurement: In situ XRD patterns for the Ca0.5Ti2(PO4)3@C electrode material were collected using a Bruker D8 Advance Diffractometer for the first two cycles at 2θ values ranging from 18° to 38° and with a scanning rate of 4° min−1. The current density used for charging–discharging was 20 mA g−1.

Electrochemical Characterization: For fabrication of the anode electrodes, the active material Ca0.5Ti2(PO4)3@C, Super P conductive additive, and carboxyl methyl cellulose binder were prepared into a slurry in deionized water with a weight ratio of 7:2:1. For fabrication of the cathode electrodes, the active carbon and PTFE were mixed together with a weight ratio of 9:1. After drying at 120 °C under vacuum, 2032-type coin cells were fabricated inside an Ar filled glovebox, employing a glass fiber filter (Whatman GF/F) as the separator and 1.0 m KPF6 in 1:1 (volume ratio) ethylene carbonate:diethyl carbonate as the electrolyte. For half-cell testing, K metal was employed as the counter electrode. Hybrid K-ion capacitors (KICs) were likewise tested as coin cells, with preactivated cathodes and anodes materials. For preactivation, a half cell was first established using the active material as the working electrode, which was then charged–discharged for 5 cycles at 0.05 A g−1. Then the cells were disassembled inside the glove box, and a KIC was assembled employing the preactivated anode and cathode. The anode to cathode mass ratio was 3:1. In a half cell, the mass loading for CTP@C without the Super P conductive additive and binder is ≈1 mg cm−2. For the KIC, the loading of active carbon without binder was 3 mg cm−2, while the area of the cathode and the anode was the same. All the electrochemical tests were carried out at room temperature. Galvanostatic discharge–charge cycling was performed using a Land-2001A (Wuhan, China) automatic battery tester. CV was carried with a VSP multichannel potentiostatic–galvanostatic system (Bio-Logic SAS, France). The gravimetric energy and the power densities of the KIC device were calculated by numerically integrating the galvanostatic discharge profiles using the equations below5

where I is the constant current (A), U is the working voltage (V), m is the total mass of the electrode, t1 and t2 are the start/end-of-discharge time (s) of the KIC device, respectively, and t is the discharge time (s).

The gravimetric energy and power densities of the KIC device were calculated using the equations below52 where V is the volume of the anode and cathode electrodes.