The electrochemical stability window of NASICON-structured glass-ceramics of the Li1+xCrx(GeyTi1-y)2-x(PO4)3 system is investigated by a combination of cyclic voltammetry, electrochemical impedance, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy techniques. Cyclic voltammetry analyses are performed using a three-electrode setup cell where Ag3SI/Ag is applied as a reference electrode. Cyclic voltammetry measurements are followed by in situ electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, enabling the effect of oxidation and reduction reactions on the electrical properties of the glass-ceramics in question to be determined. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, in turn, is applied to determine which chemical species undergo reduction/oxidation. Our findings reveal that the electrochemical stability of this material is limited by the reduction of Ti+4 cations in low potentials (around 2.1 V vs. Li+/Li) and by the oxidation of O−2 anions in high potentials (about 4.8 V vs. Li+/Li). After the first cycle, the electrolytes seem to be stable within a much broader electrochemical window than in the first cycle. However, the results indicate not only that the reduction at low potential is not deleterious to the electrical properties of the electrolytes but also that the oxidation reaction at high potentials is highly detrimental. These findings contradict the common perception about the outstanding stability of NASICON-structured electrolytes in oxidation potentials.

Electrochemical energy storage systems today represent a feasible alternative for the widely-criticized global fossil fuel-based economy. As one of the most widely employed electrochemical energy storage technologies, Li-ion batteries are the primary choice for applications in portable electronics and power tools due to their unique combination of high energy and power density. Moreover, they currently represent the most promising electrochemical storage system to lead the transition towards renewable energy sources and the replacement of gas powered vehicles by electric vehicles. However, the exponential growth expected for this technology still faces some challenges, such as the development of electrode materials with higher energy density, faster discharge kinetics, and greater stability; and the development of safer and more reliable electrolytes to replace the organic carbonate liquid solutions currently in use [[1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6]].

With regard to electrolytes, a critical issue is the flammability of organic liquid electrolytes, which cause serious safety problems for Li-ion batteries. Moreover, the limited electrochemical window of these electrolytes restricts the choice of high voltage electrode materials, precluding Li-ion batteries with higher energy density. All-solid-state batteries enabled by solid electrolyte based on Li-ion conducting ceramics are promising alternatives to ensure the intrinsic safety that new generation Li-ion batteries need, since they are not flammable. The claimed outstanding stability of ceramic solid electrolyte materials may also allow for the production of Li metal anodes and high-voltage cathodes, which may significantly increase the energy density of Li-ion batteries [1,2,[6], [7], [8], [9]]. The most widely studied inorganic lithium ion conductors include sulfide glasses and crystals, oxides with perovskite-like and garnet-like structures, and phosphates with NASICON-like structures [1,3,7,8,10,11].

The widespread stability of inorganic solid electrolyte materials is based on reported electrochemical windows of 5–10 V, generally determined by cyclic voltammetry (CV) [[12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18]]. CV analysis is probably the most widely applied and reliable technique to determine the electrochemical stability of electrolytes. However, several experimental parameters must be carefully chosen to ensure credible results, such as cell setup, electrodes, scan rate, atmosphere, etc. CV analysis of solids is even more complex because electrolyte resistance is often significant. Moreover, reactions in the solid state are much slower than in the liquid state, which may lead to misinterpretation when the apparent stability could be a consequence of kinetically limited stability. Therefore, it is advisable to use more than one experimental technique to study the electrochemical stability of solid electrolytes [[19], [20], [21]].

Current computational studies have also been employed to investigate the electrochemical stability of electrolytes. In a comprehensive study, the stability of solid electrolytes against Li metal and at high voltages was found uneven with experimental results [21]. A clear example of this inconsistency is reported for NASICON-structured compounds. While CV analyses of lithium aluminum germanium phosphate (LAGP) compounds have shown a wide electrochemical window of up to 7 V [12,13], computational studies have found redox reactions around 2.7 V and 4.3 V vs. Li/Li+, which results in an electrochemical window of less than 2 V [21]. Based on these ideas, the objective of this study is to investigate the electrochemical stability of NASICON-structured electrolytes by combining CV analyses with electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The electrolytes studied here are NASICON-structured glass-ceramics based on the Li1+xCrx(GeyTi1-y)2-x(PO4)3 (LCGTP) system previously proposed by us [22]. An innovative methodology is employed based on three-electrode setup CV measurements followed by in situ EIS.

Glass-ceramic samples of the Li1+xCrx(GeyTi1-y)2-x(PO4)3(LCGTP) system were selected based on our previous work, in which we investigated the ionic conductivity of the LCGTP system as a function of x and y substitution [23]. Samples are named according to their respective x and y values to render their association with the composition straightforward (e.g., LCGTP0202 indicates that x = 0.2 and y = 0.2). In this work, LCGTP0402, LCGTP0602, LCGTP0604 and LCGTP0606 glass-ceramic compositions were chosen specifically for their high ionic conductivity at room temperature (>10−4 Ω−1 cm−1). For comparison, a LAGP (Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3) glass-ceramic synthesized as described in Ref. [13] is also investigated.

In most recent reports on investigations into the electrochemical stability of solid electrolytes, the latter is often characterized by cyclic voltammetry using gold, silver, platinum or stainless steel as a working electrode and Li metal as a counter and/or a reference electrode [[12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18]]. However, this procedure is unreliable if the electrolyte is unstable when in contact with lithium [20]. Therefore, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were taken first, using a two-electrode setup with a symmetric cell (Li/sample/Li) to evaluate the stability of the electrolytes against Li metal. The cell was assembled by pressing lithium foils mechanically against the sample, using stainless steel electrodes supported by a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) structure with attachments that press one electrode against the other. A ModuLab XM ECS chassis equipped with a frequency analyzer slot was employed for the EIS measurements. These measurements were taken over time using AC signals with a root mean square (RMS) amplitude of 100 mV in a frequency range of 1 MHz–100 mHz. Since metallic Li was used, both the cell assembly and the measurements were performed in a glovebox filled with Argon (Ar).

The oxidation state of Cr, Ge, Ti, P and O in LCGTP glass-ceramics was investigated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) before and after the voltammetry analysis. The XPS analyses were carried out on a Thermo Electron ESCALAB 250 spectrometer with an Al Kα monochromatic source operating at 1486.6 eV. Survey and high-resolution spectra were obtained from an analyzed surface of 400 μm diameter. The analyzer was operated at a chamber pressure in the range of 10−8 mbar and a constant pass energy of 150 eV and 20 eV, respectively, for survey and detailed spectra. The photoelectron spectra were calibrated based on the binding energy of C 1s core-level electrons of the Csingle bondC component resulting from adventitious carbon (184.8 eV). Charge neutralization was also monitored based on C 1s signal.

The electrochemical stability of the LCGTP glass-ceramics was studied by cyclic voltammetry (CV) followed by in situ electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) using a three-electrode setup, namely, counter (C), reference (R) and working (W) electrodes. Fig. 1 shows a schematic representation of the measurement cell (a), top (b) and cross-section (c) views of the positions of electrodes on the sample. Gold (Au) was sputtered on both sides of the samples (Fig. 1b), after which the central part of the electrode was scraped at one side of the sample in order to insert the reference electrode Ag3SI/Ag (Fig. 1c). Parts 1 and 2 (Fig. 1a) were sputtered with Au to ensure good electrical contact with the sample. A mixture of Ag3SI powder and Ag (Sigma Aldrich, 99.9% of purity), prepared as described in Ref. [24], was pressed into the funnel chamber (part 4, Fig. 1a), which was screwed onto the aluminum cylinder (part 3, Fig. 1a). The entire system was placed inside a sealed container on Pyrex glass, enabling the atmosphere to be controlled. A ModuLab XM ECS chassis equipped with potentiostat and frequency analyzer slots was employed for the CV and EIS measurements, respectively. CV measurements were taken in different atmospheres, i.e, air and vacuum (2 × 10−3 mbar), at scan rates of 100, 10 and 1 mV s−1 between −3 V and 5 V or −1.5 V and 1.5 V vs. an Ag3SI/Ag reference electrode. All the CV measurements were taken at room temperature (∼295 K), starting from the open circuit potential with anodic sweep and always with fresh samples, since the experimental history of the sample would probably interfere with the results. In situ EIS analyses were performed before and after cyclic voltammetry tests, i.e., without removing the sample from the cell. EIS measurements were taken using an AC signal with a root mean square (RMS) amplitude of 100 mV vs. Ag3SI/Ag in a frequency range of 1 MHz–100 mHz.

Additionally, linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) was used to prepare samples for XPS analyses, in order to separate the effects of the anodic and cathodic sweeps. Two LCGTP samples were prepared using the three-electrode setup cell in a single sweep, applying a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 under vacuum. The anodic sweep was performed up to 5 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag, while the cathodic sweep was scanned up to −1.5 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag. After LSV analyses, the Au electrode was removed using cotton and acetone and the prepared samples were kept in a glovebox filled with Argon (Ar) to maintain the final state attained in the LSV experiment. XPS analyses of these two samples were made under the same conditions as those used for the fresh LCGTP samples.

The stability of the Li/electrolyte interface was inspected from EIS analyses using a symmetric Li/Sample/Li assembly. Fig. 2 shows the evolution of the impedance response of LCGTP0606 (a) and LAGP (b) glass-ceramics over time. Two distinct contributions are clearly visible in both cases, namely, a high-frequency semicircle related to the sample's impedance and a low-frequency semicircle attributed to Li transfer at the Li/electrolyte interface, in contrast to ionic polarization of the electrode when the Au/sample/Au assembly is used [23]. Note that the interface impedance increases continuously over time, indicating that both glass-ceramics are unstable against lithium. This contradicts the widespread idea that LAGP electrolytes are stable against lithium because Ge and Al have relatively stable oxidation states [3,12,13]. Moreover, a bright investigation recently published, which is based on EIS measurements and XPS analyses of Li-coated NASICON compounds, also yielded similar results, demonstrating the instability of LAGP when in contact with Li metal [25]. In quantitative terms, the LAGP (Fig. 2b) glass-ceramic appeared to be more stable than the LCGTP0606 (Fig. 2a), since the increase in total impedance after 24 h is about twice for the LAGP and four times for the LCGTP0606. Other LCGTP glass-ceramics compositions were also tested and presented a similar behavior, with 3–5 times higher impedance after 24 h compared to the initial impedance. Therefore, the investigation of the electrochemical stability of these electrolytes using Li metal as a reference and/or counter electrode is probably unfeasible.

Since the electrolytes were demonstrably unstable against lithium, an Ag3SI/Ag mixture was used as a reference electrode and Au as counter and working electrodes. The use of this assembly has proved to be satisfactory for several types of lithium electrolytes despite the junction potential that appears when Ag3SI (Ag+ conducting) and lithium electrolytes (Li+ conducting) are placed in contact [19,20]. This junction potential is a result of ionic exchange (Li+-Ag+) between Ag3SI and the lithium ion-conducting electrolyte, and it is an irreversible and time-dependent process. Nevertheless, the interfacial layer composition changes very sluggishly with time, and this junction potential can be considered stable. Strictly speaking, since it is not a true equilibrium potential, the Ag/Ag3SI electrode is qualified as a comparison rather than a reference electrode. However, if the time dependence of the junction potential is imperceptible in the CV experiment time-scale, the voltammetry curves will be reproducible and with a fixed potential shift [19]. In this context, an open circuit potential of around 0.4 V was found between the working and reference outputs when the samples were placed in the cell in contact with Ag3SI/Ag electrode. Therefore, although Ag3SI/Ag is not a true reference electrode, it will hereinafter be referred to as such for simplicity.

The first CV measurements were taken under different atmospheric conditions while the other experimental parameters were maintained. Fig. 3 shows cyclic voltammograms of the LCGTP0402 glass-ceramic sample carried out in air (Fig. 3a) and vacuum (Fig. 3b). A comparison of the curves shows a markedly different behavior, but with a few characteristics in common. Starting from the open circuit potential at around 0.4 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag (identified by a cross) and sweeping to anodic potentials, the current density increases by around 2.2 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag in the first cycle in both atmospheres, although these increases in current density have noticeably quantitative dissimilarities. In the cathodic sweep, reduction peaks at about −1 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag and −3 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag also seem to be in the same position in both cases. Two other oxidation current peaks are visible in the next anodic sweep before the first cycle be completed, although they are located at different potentials under vacuum and air conditions. The additional subsequent cycles are practically the same in the vacuum condition, albeit with a decline in the magnitude of the peak current densities. However, in the air condition, the current peak related to oxidation at about 1 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag keeps increasing and shifting to higher potentials as the number of cycle increases. This behavior has also been reported by Kone et al. [19], who took CV measurements of lithium silicate glasses and attributed this peak current to the reoxidation of lithium by traces of water. Due to the magnitude of current density and broadening of this peak, it probably masked other characteristic peaks we intended to study here. Therefore, the CV analyses described hereinafter were performed under vacuum.

The scan rate of a CV measurement is a critical experimental parameter that must be defined to evaluate the electrochemical stability window of LCGTP glass-ceramics. High scan rates tend to overestimate the stability window of an electrolyte [19]. Fig. 4 shows how the scan rate affects the peak potential and current density. Increasing the scan rate here caused the current density to rise, as well as the reduction peaks (Fig. 4, tag 2) to shift to more reductive potentials and the oxidation peaks (Fig. 4, tag 1) to more oxidative ones. In liquids, those behaviors are expected, and the underlying mechanisms are well-known. In a reversible one-electron charge transfer reaction, the peak current must be proportional to the square root of the scan rate and the peak potential independent of the scan rate employed. On the other hand, in irreversible cases where the electron-transfer kinetics is limited, the peak potential is a function of the scan rate. In such cases, it is advisable to use the lowest possible scan rate, even if it causes a decrease in the magnitude of the current density. However, as mentioned previously, there are some fundamental differences between solids and liquids regarding cyclic voltammetry analyses. For instance, in liquids all electroactive species are relatively mobile, and an electrolyte of negligible electronic conductivity is usually chosen [26,27]. Usually, in solid electrolytes, only one electroactive species is highly mobile while the other species form a rigid framework and have very low mobility [11,28]. Consequently, if the electronic conductivity is comparable or higher than the partial ionic conductivity of the concerning species, even if very low, an electronic current is likely to flows through the solid electrolyte. Therefore, the shape of current peak curve would be governed by the electronic conductivity rather than the diffusion of the electroactive species toward the working electrode. In the present case, the electronic conductivity would proceed by a polaronic mechanism between Ti+4 and Ti+3 cations [29]. Hence, it is inadvisable to analyze the curves j = f(E) strictly on the basis of the equations commonly used for CV analyses in liquids. Nevertheless, it was chosen to use the lowest possible scan rate in order to avoid overestimation of the electrochemical window. Still, at scan rates in the order of 0.1 mV s−1, it would take an entire week to scan an electrochemical window of 8 V for a few cycles. Therefore, the scan rate used hereinafter to characterize the LCGTP glass-ceramic was the lowest scan rate tested (1 mV s−1).

The next step consisted in determining which species are reduced and oxidized when LCGTP glass-ceramics are subjected to cyclic voltammetry. Fig. 5 shows cyclic voltammograms of LCGTP0402 glass-ceramic. Additionally, voltammogram of LAGP glass-ceramic is also presented for comparison. In Fig. 5a, three pairs of peaks are tagged based on the rationale that redox couples should be located around the same potential. However, the chemical species oxidized at around 2.2 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag (Fig. 5a, tag 1) shows no reduction peak, indicating that this reaction is totally irreversible. The most reasonable explanation would be the oxidation of the oxygen anion (O−2) from the crystal lattice, leading to gaseous O2 (Eq. (1), in Kröger–Vink notations). Thus, during the anodic sweep, O2 would be exhausted by the vacuum pump, and consequently, when the potential is swept back, the reduction of this couple is prevented or undetectable.

As mentioned earlier, the Ag3SI/Ag electrode in contact with LCGTP glass-ceramics presents an open circuit potential of about 0.4 V, which can be seen in the cross marked starting potential (Fig. 3, Fig. 4, Fig. 5). Then, if we take the difference between the open circuit voltage (∼0.4 V) and the tabulated potential (∼−3.0 V) of Li+/Li couple versus the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE), the zero potential of the Li+/Li reference scale falls around −2.6 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag (−3.0 V + 0.4 V). Consequently, the zero potential of the Ag3SI/Ag reference scale is about 2.6 V vs. Li+/Li scale. A parallel Li+/Li potential scale is shown at the top X-axis of CV analyses figures to ease the reading of the potential in reference to Li+/Li potential scale. This conversion places the potential (∼−2.3 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag) where there is a sudden increase in current density due to a reduction reaction (Fig. 5a, tag 3) at about 0.3 V vs. Li+/Li (−2.3 V + 2.6 V). The reaction associated with this current density signal should be related to the reduction of Li+ at the working electrode given rise to metallic Li. This reaction is expected to ramp up the density current around 0 V vs. Li+/Li, which is fairly close to the converted value of 0.3 V vs. Li+/Li. On the other hand, when the potential is swept back, this product reoxidizes at a much higher potential than expected (∼0.8 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag or ∼1.8 vs. Li+/Li). This discrepancy can be explained by the tendency of Li metal to form alloys with gold [30].

Even though the accuracy of the above-mentioned conversion is not ideal (probably within ±0.5 V), it allows us to make direct comparision with literature data which are usually represented in reference to Li+/Li potential. In the case of the oxidation peak at ∼2.2 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag, the conversion to Li+/Li reference scale gives a potential of around 4.8 vs. Li+/Li (2.2 V + 2.6 V). Although this result is inconsistent with previously reported CV measurements of LAGP electrolytes, in which no oxidation reaction was detected up to 7 V vs. Li+/Li [12,13], it is in good agreement with computational simulation results that indicate a potential decomposition of 4.3 vs. Li+/Li with O2 as an equilibrium phase [21]. In the cathodic sweep, the reduction at around −0.5 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag as well as the subsequent reoxidation during the following anodic sweep at around 0 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag (Fig. 5a, tag 2) may be related to Cr, Ti, or even Ge. Since the chemical species in the LCGTP glass-ceramics are presumably in the most stable oxidation state, none of those species should be immediately excluded.

CV measurements were also taken of the well-known NASICON-structured glass-ceramic LAGP (Fig. 5b) to unveil the chemical species behind the redox peaks marked as 2 in Fig. 5a. In this case, current density peaks corresponding to Li+ reduction and O−2 oxidation are around the same potential (∼−2.4 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag and ∼2.7 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag), despite their much smaller magnitude. These quantitative differences in current density could be explained based on the difference of electronic conductivity of these electrolytes. Even though the magnitude of the electronic conductivity in lithium titanium phosphate compounds is very low (10−9 Ω−1 cm−1) compared to their Li-ionic conductivity (10−4 Ω−1 cm−1) [31], it could play a role in delivering or drawing out electrons to the reduction or oxidation of species in the bulk of the electrolyte. The electronic conductivity in lithium titanium phosphate is probably due to polarons propagation because titanium has variable valence state. In the case of the lithium germanium phosphate compounds such LAGP, the electronic conductivity should be even smaller since the germanium have a fixed valence state in those NASICON-like phosphates, which makes unlikely the propagation of polarons. On the other hand, peaks marked as 2 in Fig. 5a are absent in CV analyses of LAGP (Fig. 5b), suggesting that Cr or Ti are related to these current peaks found in CV analyses of LCGTP glass-ceramics. In both cases, an intriguing characteristic is that after the first cycle, both electrolytes seem to stabilize in the entire electrochemical window analyzed, since they present only reduction and oxidation signals pertaining to Li. This point will be discussed later in light of the in situ EIS results.

Regarding the reduction peak assigned as 2, one way to determine whether Cr or Ti is the chemical species behind, it is to compare LCGTP glass-ceramics containing different concentrations of these elements. Fig. 6 shows cyclic voltammograms of the four LCGTP glass-ceramic studied here. Fig. 6a shows three LCGTP glass-ceramics with the same Cr content and variable Ti content. At the peak in question (tagged as 2), the current density increases as Ti content increases (as y decreases). On the other hand, when the Ti content is fixed (y = 0.2) and Cr content is varied (x = 0.4 and 0.6), the current density at the peak remains practically the same (Fig. 6b). This offers preliminary evidence that the reduction peak at ∼0.5 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag pertains to the reduction of Ti4+.

A narrower electrochemical window was scanned around the reduction peak at ∼0.5 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag (tagged as 2, Fig. 6) in one of the LCGTP glass-ceramics (LCGTP0604) to separate the signal of this specific redox couple from the others. The result depicted in Fig. 7 once again shows that, in the first cycle, no oxidation occurs at anodic potentials up to 1.5 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag. When the potential is swept back, a reduction peak becomes visible a little beyond −0.5 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag and the reoxidation of the reduced species also occurs beyond −0.5 V in the cathodic direction (purple strip in Fig. 7). This process seems to be reversible in subsequent cycles. The mean potential between these peaks is still around −0.5 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag, which, converted to Li+/Li potential, gives a potential of about 2.1 V vs. Li+/Li (−0.5 V + 2.6 V). This mean potential of 2.1 V vs. Li+/Li is reasonably close to that of lithium intercalation/extraction (2.5 V vs. Li+/Li) in monoclinic lithium titanium phosphate (Li1+xTi2(PO4)3) through the reduction/oxidation of the Ti+4/Ti+3 couple [32]. Therefore, the reduction and oxidation peaks marked as 2 in Fig. 6 are most likely to be related to Ti.

As shown earlier herein, after the first cycle the LCGTP glass-ceramic appeared to stabilize, presenting a much broader electrochemical stability window than in the first cycle. An innovative approach was used to follow the CV measurements by EIS in situ in order to evaluate the effect of this apparent stability on the electrical properties of LCGTP glass-ceramics. Fig. 8 shows complex impedance plots recorded using the three-electrode cell setup before and after taking CV measurements, without moving the sample between measurements. Before the CV measurements, the electrical behavior of the LCGTP0402 glass-ceramic is similar to that found when the electrical properties of these electrolytes were evaluated in our previous work [23]. The inset plot in Fig. 8 shows a high-frequency semicircle of a few KΩ that accounts for the LCGTP grain boundary impedance response, followed by a low-frequency straight line due to ionic polarization at the Au electrode. In contrast with our previous work, in which we evaluated the contribution of grains impedance response of LCGTP glass-ceramic [23], the impedance response of the grains is not apparent here. Besides the different frequency range used here (1 MHz - 100 mHz) which precludes visualization of the largest part of grain impedance response, the remaining part is probably masked by inductance effects of the electrochemical cell. Even so, a comparison of the overall impedance before and after CV measurements suffices to evaluate the influence of oxidation and reduction reactions on the electrical properties of these electrolytes. After the CV analyses, impedance response of the LCGTP sample changes dramatically with a mid-frequency semicircle of tens of KΩ (Fig. 8) which overlaps the impedance response of the bulk sample. This indicates that the apparent electrochemical stability after the first cycle is indeed caused by an electrically insulating layer, which completely changes the overall electrical properties of LCGTP samples. In fact, this layer was visible to the naked eye. When the Au electrode was removed, the sample presented a very strong dark aspect in the region where the working electrode was located (inset in Fig. 8). In short, the sample appeared to be stable under potential cycling, but in actual fact, it was degraded and lost its initial electrical properties.

When CV measurements were taken within a narrower electrochemical window, the electrical properties of the sample are not noticeably affected. Fig. 9 shows complex impedance data recorded before and after taking CV measurements in an electrochemical window of −1.5 V to 1.5 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag. As can be seen, the high-frequency impedance responses of the sample before and after the CV measurements is the same (inset in Fig. 9). A slight difference in the low-frequency straight line proved to be related to the electrode response. This examination was made by removing the gold electrode after the CV analyses and sputtering a new gold electrode (Fig. A1). Additionally, the LCGTP0604 sample did not present a detectable color change after the CV analysis in a narrower electrochemical window. The behavior of the other LCGTP glass-ceramics under study was similar to that of LCGTP0402 and LCGTP0604 glass-ceramic samples depicted in Fig. 8, Fig. 9. Therefore, at anodic potentials, the electrochemical stability of LCGTP glass-ceramics is limited to potentials of 2.2 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag or 4.8 V vs. Li/Li+, while at a cathodic potential, the reduction peak at −0.5 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag or 2.1 V vs. Li/Li+ does not alter the electrical properties of these electrolyte materials.

The as-prepared samples of the four LCGTP glass-ceramics were analyzed by XPS. In general, a comparison between the four samples reveals no significant difference in the binding energies of the Cr 2p, Ge 3d, Ti 2p, P 2p and O 1s core-level electrons (Fig. A2). Binding energy peaks for these spectral lines in simple oxides (Cr2O3, GeO2, TiO2 and P2O5) were extracted from the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) database and compiled in ranges in the XPS analyses presented here (Fig. A2). Even a quick examination reveals that the values of binding energy in simple oxides are significantly different (up to 4 eV) from those currently obtained in LCGTP glass-ceramics. To exemplify, the binding energy peak of Ti 2p3/2 in TiO2 is 458.7 ± 0.3 eV and P 2p in P2O5 it is 135.4 ± 0.2 eV, while in the LCGTP glass-ceramic we have found those lines around 459.8 for Ti 2p3/2 and 131.5 for P 2p. These discrepancies, which have also been found by other authors who investigated NASICON-structured compounds [25,33], can be explained by the strong inductive effect of the Psingle bond-O bond that polarizes M-O bonds (where M is the octahedral cation), increasing the ionic nature of the latter. In contrast to simple oxides, the reported binding energy peaks of NASICON-like compounds [25,33] match the obtained results reasonably well. Based on the typical binding energy lines in NASICON-structured phosphates, the XPS results of as-prepared LCGTP samples show that the M cations are mostly in the ordinary oxidation state (Cr+3, Ti+4 and Ge+4). These results are in accordance with CV analyses performed in a narrow electrochemical window, where no oxidation regarding those species is visualized in the first anodic cycle (Fig. 7).

Sample LCGTP0604 was also analyzed after LSV analyses to confirm the species that undergoes oxidation and/or reduction when subjected to anodic and cathodic potential sweeps. Fig. 10 shows XPS spectral lines of Cr 2p, Ge 3d, Ti 2p, P 2p and O 1s core-level electrons for the LCGTP0604 glass-ceramic before (as a reference) and after LSV in anodic sweep up to 5 V and cathodic sweep up to −1.5 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag. The black and green dashed lines (Fig. 10) indicate respectively binding energy peaks of commercial LAGTP from Ohara [25] and Li1+xCr2(PO4)3 [33] NASICON-like phosphates reported in the literature. The C 1s signal of adventitious carbon is also shown as a benchmark and is used as internal binding energy for calibration (blue dashed line, Fig. 10f). Since the XPS spectral lines of NASICON-like phosphates reported in the literature [25,33] were calibrated with an internal binding energy of 531 eV based on O 1s spectrum and we have found a peak at 531.2, we have corrected the literature data in +0.2 eV in order to fairly compare with our results.

High resolution XPS spectra of Cr 2p (a), Ge 3d (b), Ti 2p (c), P 2p (d) and O 1s (e) for the LCGTP0604 glass-ceramic. C1s spectrum line (f) of the C-C component resulting from adventitious carbon is also shown as a control and the blue dashed line is used as calibration binding energy. XPS analyses are presented of the LCGTP0604 glass-ceramic before (bottom, cyan blue line) and after LSV in the anodic sweep up to 5 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag (middle, purple line) and the cathodic sweep up to −1.5 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag (top, red line). Note that intensities on the y-axis have been normalized to emphasize signal shapes rather than absolute intensities. XPS-Shirley baselines are added only with intent to guide the eyes. Black and green dashed lines represent respectively binding energy peaks of LAGTP [25] and Li1+xCr2(PO4)3 NASICON-type compounds [33] reported in the literature. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)

As for the effect of anodic and cathodic sweeps on the oxidation state of the species, the spectral lines showed marginal shifts in the positions of the Ge 3d (Fig. 10b) and P 2p (Fig. 10d) core-level electrons binding energy, but no significant differences in shape. On the other hand, visual changes in shape are found mainly in the Cr 2p, Ti 2p, and O 1s XPS spectra. The sample subjected to LSV cathodic sweep (−1.5 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag) shows a broadening of Ti 2p1/2 and Ti 2p3/2 spectral lines toward lower binding energies (Fig. 10c, indicated by arrows). This effect can be attributed to an increase in the Ti+3 concentration stemming from the reduction of Ti+4 under the cathodic sweep (Fig. 10c, black dashed lines). On the other hand, the LSV anodic sweep (5 V vs. Ag3SI/Ag) causes shape enlargement in the Cr 2p and O 1s XPS spectra toward higher binding energies (Fig. 10a and e, indicated by arrows). In the case of Cr, this could be associated with the oxidation of Cr+3 into species of a higher oxidation state, such as Cr+4 (Fig. 10a, green dashed lines). The broadening in O 1s XPS spectrum toward higher binding energies (Fig. 10e, indicated by arrow) could be ascribed to a strong interaction in the M-O bond resulting from a higher oxidation state of the M cation. In this case, the Crsingle bond-O bond is the most likely one, since no other broadening of spectral lines toward higher energies is visible in the sample subjected to the anodic sweep. However, another very rational explanation for this enlargement in the O 1s spectral line may be the formation of oxygen vacancies, as presented in Eq. (1). Strictly speaking, binding energy of oxygen vacancies cannot be detected in XPS spectra because they have no nuclei or electrons. However, oxygen vacancies tend to create a shoulder in O 1s spectral line at higher binding energies. This effect was investigated by Gopel et al. [34] by creating oxygen vacancies in TiO2 and analyzing the modified surface by XPS. This latter interpretation would also explain the intense dark color that appeared after LSV analyses in anodic sweeps, since the creation of oxygen vacancies introduces additional energy levels and increases the likelihood of light absorption. Moreover, the reported investigation in Li1+xCr2(PO4)3 NASICON-like phosphates [33] has also shown a shoulder in the O 1s spectra (Fig. 10e, green dashed line denoted as Psingle bond-Osingle bond-P) after the sample is submitted to a very high oxidative potential (∼5 V vs. Li+/Li). This shoulder is located at about the same binding energy (∼533.5 eV) that we have found. However, the authors have attributed this signal to the formation of P2O5 (Psingle bond-Osingle bond-P bond) which according to themselves it should be located at higher binding energies (534.5 eV). Finally, as mentioned previously, O2 as an equilibrium phase in the potential decomposition (4.3 vs. Li+/Li) has also been reported for LAGP and Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 (LATP) NASICON-structured compounds in a recent computational simulation study [21]. Therefore, there are several pieces of evidence in accordance with previously reported results that point out to the oxidation of O−2 species in anodic potentials resulting in degradation of the electrolytes studied here.

The electrochemical stability window of NASICON-structured glass-ceramics of the Li1+xCrx(GeyTi1-y)2-x(PO4)3 system was investigated here using an innovative approach consisting of a combination of cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements and in situ electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The association of these techniques makes misinterpretations less likely and enables the effect of oxidation and reduction reactions on the electrical properties of the investigated electrolytes to be determined. Since the glass-ceramics under study proved to be highly unstable when in contact with Li metal, CV analyses were made using a three-electrode setup cell, using Ag3SI/Ag as a reference electrode. The CV analyses were tested in different atmospheric conditions and scan rates, and the results indicate that vacuum rather than air is preferable as atmospheric condition, and that the scan rate should be as low as possible. The key results evidence that the electrochemical stability of this material is limited by the reduction of Ti+4 cations in low potentials (around 2.1 V vs. Li+/Li) and by the oxidation of O−2 anions in high potentials (4.8 vs. Li+/Li). This finding was also supported by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analyses, which were carried out before and after taking linear sweep voltammetry measurements. An intriguing finding was that after the first CV cycle, the electrolytes appeared to stabilize, with a much broader electrochemical window than in the first cycle. However, the EIS results indicated not only that the reduction at low potential was not deleterious to the electrical properties of the electrolytes but also that the oxidation reaction at high potentials was highly detrimental. Therefore, the apparent electrochemical stability of electrolytes in very oxidative potentials is, in truth, a kinetics-limited stability resulting from an electrically isolating layer that grows from the working electrode and prevents the bulk of the sample from undergoing continuous oxidation. At high potentials, a similar behavior was encountered for the well-know LAGP NASICON-like Li-ion conductor, suggesting that the electrochemical behavior in oxidative potentials could be generalized for NASICON-structured phosphates. Our findings contradict the common perception about the outstanding stability of NASICON-structured electrolytes in oxidation potentials, which is often supported by CV analyses based on a two-electrode setup using metallic lithium. Nevertheless, the main findings are in good agreement with recent computational simulation results, which reported O2 as the equilibrium phase arising from the decomposition of NASICON-structured phosphates in oxidation potentials.