Low-cost aqueous polysulfides (APSs) chemistries have recently attracted intensive research to be a promising candidate for the redox flow batteries. However, the intrinsic properties, electrochemical stability and compatibility with NASICON membrane have been rarely demonstrated to clarify the challenges on the road to practical application. Herein, we present a detailed study on the electrochemical reactions and failure mechanism of the aqueous polysulfides. Starting from investigating the intrinsic stability, the optimized concentration of NaOH was determined. Through constructing a hybrid Na-APSs cell to avoid the effect from counter electrode, the cycling behavior was found to be stable under the capacity cut-off condition, while severe decay occurs after about 80 cycles. The comprehensive analysis on the decay mechanism show the decomposition and loss of active materials during the long-term cycles. Meanwhile, NASICON separator surface was found to be corrosive after electrochemical exposure with APSs solution under high pH environment. We anticipate that the systematic study on the APSs electrochemical reactions and decay mechanism could be beneficial for their further application in redox flow batteries.  
Alkali metal–sulfur batteries have attracted great attention as a promising candidate of replacing current lithium ion batteries (LIBs) due to the high theoretical capacity.[1] On a basis of the multielectron conversion reactions of polysulfides in organic electrolytes, the metal-sulfur batteries could deliver a 4-8 times higher energy density than that of traditional LIBs using graphite/LiCoO2.[2] However, the practical energy density is greatly limited owing to the insulating properties of sulfur and its solid reduction products.[3] In addition, free migration of the dissolved polysulfides between the anode and the cathode could lead to loss of active materials, low Coulombic efficiency and severe capacity fade.[4] Over the last decades, tremendous efforts have been devoted on improving shuttling effect of the soluble polysulfides species, while the progress still hardly meet the practical requirement.[5] Although the fatal challenge hindering the scale-up application of metal-sulfur cell, while from an inverse perspective, the high-concentration dissolving properties of polysulfide species in electrolyte provide us a platform to design redox species for redox flow batteries (RFBs), which show great potential large-scale application for in the area of energy storage in terms of their design flexibility in decoupling power and energy.[6, 7] As various polysulfide species possess different chain length and corresponding different dissolving capability in non-aqueous and aqueous electrolytes, their solubility in various electrolytes have been designed and studied.[6] From the decay research on Li/Na-S cell, long-chain polysulfides (Sn2−, 4 ≤ n ≤ 8) were found to be easily dissolve into the organic ether-based electrolyte.[8] Taking advantage of this point, a lithium/polysulfide semi-liquid battery was constructed based on the conversion reaction between Li2S8 and Li2S4 in ether-based electrolyte.[9] To avoid the short-chain polysulfides (Sn2−, 1 ≤ n < 4) formation, the cell could deliver a stable cycling performance over 2000 cycles. To further increase the energy density, an ε-caprolactam/acetamide based eutectic-solvent electrolyte, which could dissolve all lithium polysulfides and lithium sulfide (Li2S8–Li2S), was introduced into the lithium-polysulfides solution chemistry.[10] Through fully conversion reactions between soluble Li2S8 and Li2S, the sulfur-specific capacity could be greatly improved to 1360 mA h g–1. Comparing to the organic RFBs, the aqueous RFBs could typically deliver 1–2 orders higher power densities.[11] In addition, concerns on the cost, toxicity and safety issues further hinder the potential application of nonaqueous electrolytes.[12] The aqueous polysulfides (APSs) redox reactions could be more competitive because of their low cost and earth abundant. In the aqueous electrolyte, short-chain polysulfides were found to be soluble and stable under high pH value.[6] Zhou’s group reported an aqueous lithium–sulfur battery based on aqueous dissolved Li2S4/Li2S redox.[13] However, obvious decay was found in Li2S4/Li2S conversion reactions. In contrast to the lithium counterparts, aqueous sodium polysulfides redox species could be more attractive when considering the increasing price of lithium. Among the various polysulfides chemistries, the conversion reaction between Na2S2 and Na2S4 was found to be reversible in aqueous NaOH solution.[14] More importantly, the aqueous sodium-polysulfides reactions hold great promise on decreasing the chemistry cost of RFBs, making it more competitive to the pumped hydroelectric storage.[15] For instance, a hybrid RFB by coupling the sodium polysulfides and oxygen reduction reactions has been demonstrated in the laboratory scale with the chemical cost of only $1/kWh.[15] Lu’s group also applied aqueous sodium polysulfide as the anolyte and iodide species as catholyte to construct a new RFBs with lower materials cost per kilowatt hour ($85.4 kW h−1) compared to the state-of-the-art vanadium based redox flow batteries ($152.0–154.6 kW h−1).[14] Recently, Manthiram’s group studied the conversion reaction of the Na2S2/Na2S4 and its application in polysulfide−polybromide (PSB) and polysulfide−polyiodide (PSI) batteries.[16, 17] Assuming the stable anolyte Na2S2/Na2S4 reactions, the effect of the solid electrolyte and its long-term stability in the corrosive polybromide and polyiodide catholytes was examined. 
Although various RFBs have been designed based on Na2S2/Na2S4 reactions, there are still a number of unresolved issues regarding to the reaction reversibility and stability. As polysulfides species show high reaction activity in aqueous solution, the physical and long-term cycling stability would be a pressing issue.[18] To enhance its physical stability, usage of high-concentration NaOH would lead to the highly corrosive problems and increased cost. Determining the optimized concentration would be crucial to the whole cell. The reversibility of the Na2S2/Na2S4 conversion reactions and capacity decay during long-term cycles was also rarely demonstrated. In addition, although water stable NASICON membrane was widely used to separate the APSs from counter electrode, the interface compatibility with sodium polysulfides and high-concentration NaOH required further investigation.[19, 20] Therefore, studying the stability of aqueous sodium-polysulfides reactions and their electrochemical behavior in long-term cycles would be great importance to provide direction on further improving its performance and evaluating the future practical application. To clearly illustrate these issues, herein, we conduct a detailed research on the stability aqueous polysulfides solution in different concentration of NaOH. Then, the long-term stability and interface compatibility between Na-polysulfides solution and NASICON ceramics was investigated by constructing a Na-Na2Sn half-cell (Scheme 1). Through tracking the decay reactions along cycles, we further discuss the proposed mechanism and the main challenges for the aqueous polysulfides redox species. 
Since the surface stability of NASICON haven’t been clearly revealed under the high pH environment along with ionic diffusion during electrochemical process, we firstly synthesized the standard NASICON separator as the benchmark to reflect its evolution in the aqueous polysulfides cell. The formation of monoclinic NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) phase in the sintered pellets was confirmed by XRD. As shown in Figure 1a, all of the identified peaks can be perfectly indexed to the standard pattern of NASICON structure (JCPDS card No. 337-1313).[21] The weak peaks assigned to ZrO2 around 24.2⁰ is widely recognized to form because of nonstoichiometric in the NASICON phase, which shows little influence on grain boundary resistance (Figure 1b).[20, 22] Scanning electron microscope (SEM) in Figure 1c and corresponding enlarged images in Figure 1d also confirm the dense structure in the NASICON ceramic without observed pores. Moreover, the backscattered electron (BSE) SEM in Figure 1e shows homogeneous color brightness contrast, indicating the high purity of the NASICON phase. The corresponding element mapping images in Figure 1f-j also reveal the highly uniform and purity of the prepared NASICON ceramics with homogeneous distributed Na, Si, O, P and Zr elements. To further confirm the dense structure and ensure the complete separate function of the prepared NASICON, we also checked its gas tightness by a vacuum leakage test. The specific density of the pellets was found to be around 3.27 g cm−3, reaching up to ~98% of their theoretical density. Based on the above results, we could confirm the dense structure and purity of the separator, which ensure the basement for further study on the electrochemical decay mechanism and interface stability. 
Intermediate polysulfide species (Sn2−) dissolved in the aqueous electrolyte are thermodynamically unstable because of the side reaction forming HS− and OH− through an electrolyte hydrolysis(reaction 3 in schematic 1). In order to avoid the side reactions, the S22− and S42− species are usually prepared and stored under high pH value environment. However, these solution with high OH concentration is highly corrosive, which would further lead to the safety issues and increasing cost of the device. To optimize the concentration of OH− that can provide a stable environment for thepolysulfide species, we study the stability of aqueous Na2S2 and Na2S4 solution under different concentration of NaOH. The detailed preparation process is described in the experimental section. As shown in Figure 2a, when preparing the 1M Na2S2 aqueous solution without adding NaOH, the Raman spectra show the main peaks from S32− and S42− species due to its thermodynamically unstable properties. With 1M NaOH added into the Na2S2 aqueous solution, the S22− Raman peak show the tendency to be stable with partial peaks attributed from S42−. After increasing the concentration to 2M NaOH, the Raman spectra show the stable S22− Raman without signals from other species. The higher concentration of 5M NaOH also suspend the disproportionation reactions and found to be able to stablize the aqueous S22−. Therefore, an optimized concentration of the NaOH is determined to be 2M for the Na2S2. In contrast to the Na2S2, the aqueous Na2S4 show different behavior with increasing pH value. As shown in Figure 2b, when increasing the NaOH concentration from 0 to 2M, the Na2S4 tend to be completely stable in the aqueous solution. However, higher NaOH concentration to 5 M and 8 M lead to the side reactions to form S22−, which would also affect the reversibility between the aqueous Na2S2 and Na2S4. Therefore, the optimal NaOH concentration was determined to be 2M. In the following electrochemical behavior study, the Na2S2 and Na2S4 electrolytes are both prepared in 2M NaOH solution. 
To facilitate the electrochemical study of the conversion reaction between Na2S2 and Na2S4, we control the counter electrode to be a pure Na+ provider by utilizing the sodium metal with stable 1M NaClO4/PC organic electrolyte.[16] In this experiment, we use the 1M Na2S4/2M NaOH as the catholyte to initial discharge process for the hybrid cell. Based on the whole reactions from S8 to S22−, the state of charge (SOC) for Na2S4 and Na2S2 solution is corresponding to the 75% and 50%, respectively.[23] As other sodium polysulfides species haven’t been found to be stable in the aqueous environment, it would be desired to control the intermediate discharge products to be Na2S2. To achieve this, we set three discharge-charge conditions for the cycling test. For the first, we set the capacity cut-off for the discharge and charge process by calculating the capacity of the active Na2S4 and assuming its full reactions to form Na2S2. Figure 3a shows the representative discharge-charge profiles for the hybrid Na-Na2S4 cell at the current density of 0.2 mA cm−2 with the capacity cut-off to 50% SOC. In agreement with previous reports, there is a uniform voltage plateau located at around 2.1 V in the discharge process and 2.3 V for the charging process.[16] Despite only discharging one quarter of the capacity of sulfur, the sulfur-specific capacity of the aqueous cell still reaches up to ~418 mA h g−1. The corresponding sulfur-based energy density was estimated to be 910 Wh kg−1, which is much higher than other aqueous redox species and showed great promise.[16] Moreover, the aqueous polysulfide reactions delivered good reversibility with a stable cycling performance over 80 cycles. However, the voltage profile in the 83th discharge shows a second plateau. This phenomenon is mostly likely attributed to the long-term stability of aqueous polysulfide catholyte and the loss of active material. The over discharging of the remaining Na2S2 to 418 mA h g−1 would further destroy the reaction and lead to the cell death after 90 cycles. Although the Na-APSs cell show relatively stable cycling performance and high sulfur-specific capacity under capacity cut-off condition, the specific capacity calculated based on the whole sodium polysulfides species is much lower, meanwhile, capacity cut-off condition would decrease its practical application into full redox flow batteries. Because of this concern, we further investigated the electrochemical behavior of the Na-APSs cell under the voltage cut-off. Figure 3b shows the typical discharge-charge voltage profile at the voltage window between 2.0 and 2.45 V. Although just a little deeper of the discharge process than that in Figure 3a, an obvious starting point of the second voltage plateau could be observed in the initial several cycles. The SOC is calculated to be 39% and the n number in the intermediate polysulfide discharge products is estimated to be 1.2, and accordingly, the sulfur-specific capacity reaches up to a high capacity of ~590 mA h g−1. The charging process also show the extra voltage profile when charging to over 2.4 V, reflecting the side reactions and formation of other polysulfide species. It is then unsurprisingly found the capacity decay after 10 cycles with a low capacity of ~200 mA h g−1 after only 30 cycles. With even much wider voltage window to 1.9-2.5 V, the second voltage plateau, similar to the multistep process of sulfur reactions, could be directly observed in Figure 3c. The high capacity to 740 mA h g−1 destroys the whole reaction balance between Na2S2 and Na2S4 and lead to the serve capacity decay within only 5 cycles. Therefore, it would be inevitable to run the Na-APSs cell with the capacity cut-off condition to ensure the pure reactions between the aqueous Na2S2 and Na2S4, further confirming the results in previously reported literature. 
We then further studied the decay mechanism of APSs reactions under the capacity cut-off condition to obtain a deeper understanding of the whole reactions. We harvested the catholyte after different cycles and conducted Raman analysis of the remaining APSs.[24] The Raman spectra in Figure 4a shows that some amount of S22− specie could still be observed even after fully charging to 50%SOC in the 85th cycle and at the same time, the peak intensity decreased significantly. Moreover, the signals from APSs completely disappeared after 90 cycles. The direct comparison on the Raman spectra from different cycles reveal the incomplete electrochemical reactions and loss of the active materials that possibly causes the server capacity decay in Figure 3a. The color evolution of the catholyte after long-term cycles also provides us a simple and direct evidence to observe the intrinsic change of the catholyte.[25] In contrast to the brown color before the cell test (Figure 4b), the color of the catholyte in Figure 4c tend to be transparent after 100 cycles, agrees well with the Raman results showing the disappearance of APSs. In order to further support the conclusion, we carried out the ICP-MS analysis to determine the sulfur concentration in the catholyte before and after cycling. The dilution process for ICP-MS analysis would trigger the decomposition of the aqueous polysulfide species. The sulfur concentration before the cycling is far below the theoretical value (0.128 g/ml). In spite of this, we can still observe the disappearance of sulfur with only a concentration of 0.007 g/ml after cycling (Table S1). It is widely recognized that the decomposition of the APSs is mainly attributed to the formation of H2S and its evaporation to outside of the cell. Therefore, even if the aqueous polysulfides solution could be stabilized under high pH value, the reacting stability involving the formation of H2S during long-term cycle would still be challenging.  Although NASICON ceramic is stable in aqueous environment, its stability is still unclear under the codition of high-concentration NaOH solution and ionic exchange process. Starting from this, the NASICON ceramic was examined by SEM to determine its stability after long-term electrochemical exposure to the catholyte with high pH value, as shown in Figure 4 d and e. Comparing to the fresh NASICON in Figure 1c, the membrane shows surface corrosion after 80 cycles in Na-APSs cell. In addition, we could also observe some precipitation deposited on the surface, which is mainly attributed to the side reaction on forming irreversible polysulfide species. This implies that while the NASICON appears to be stable in the aqueous solution or static high-concentration NaOH solution, its electrochemical stability with aqueous polysulfides solution during long-term cycling would still be an inevitable issue for their application.  
In summary, a comprehensive study focusing on the electrochemical stability of polysulfides aqueous solution and its interface compatibility with NASICON membrane were carried out. Specifically, we firstly determined the optimized concentration of NaOH on stabilizing the Na2S2 and Na2S4 aqueous solution. On the basis of this result, we studied different testing models for the discharge-charge process of Na-APSs and, we found that the precise capacity cut-off on controlling the formation of Na2S2 is crucial for the long-term stable cycling. However, the decomposition and self-decay of APSs in the aqueous solution still exist during the whole electrochemical process and lead to the capacity decay after about 80 cycles. More importantly, the NASICON membrane was also found to be unstable when operating the 1M Na2S2/2M NaOH catholyte. We hope the failure mechanism study for the aqueous polysulfide species could pave the way for their further improvement and application in the redox flow batteries.  
Preparation and characterization of NASICON ceramic separator. 
ZrO2, SiO2 and Na3PO4 powders (Sigma) were mixed in an optimal ratio to obtain a composition of NASICON powder (Na3Zr2Si2PO12), following with grounding with a mortar. The powder mixture was pressed into a pellet and calcined under the bury of Na3PO4 powders at 1100 ℃ for 12 h, and then crushed by a mortar for 1 h. The resultant powder was shaped into disks with a diameter of 16 mm, which was followed by cold isostatic pressing (CIP) at 200 MPa. Subsequently, the disk was sintered in air at 1275C for 16 h in an alumina crucible, during which the disks were embedded in the calcined NASICON powder to avoid Na volatilization. The prepared ceramic was further polished to adjust the thickness of the disk to ~0.5 mm. 
Preparation of aqueous polysulfide solution with different concentration of NaOH. 
The Na2S4 solution was prepared as follows: first, 1 M Na2S (Sigma) was dissolved in aqueous solution containing 2 M NaOH (Sigma), then 3 M sulfur powder (Sigma) was slowly added into the solution. The aqueous Na2S4 solution with different concentration of NaOH were prepared using above method by adjusting the amount of NaOH into the solution. The resulting mixture was stirred and bubbled with purified nitrogen and stored in a nitrogen-filled glove box.  
Cell assembly and electrochemical test 
The preparation and assembly of the anode side were conducted in an Ar-filled glove box. The anode was prepared by pressing a Na-metal chip (~100 mg, Sigma Aldrich) on Cu foil current collector.  An organic electrolyte of 1M NaClO4 (99t%, Sigma) in propylene carbonate (PC, 99.5%, Sigma) was added into this glass cylinder. NASICON ceramic membrane (0.5mm thickness) was fixed on top of the glass cylinder thus sealing in the anode. 1M Na2S4/2M NaOH was used as the precursor anolyte with 316 stainless steel mesh as the catholyte current collector. To atteviate the wettability and resistance, the steel mesh was pre-treated in with coatings gold by sputtering (K550-SEM sputter coater) at room temperature. The catholyte part was then sealed with the backside of the NASICON employed in the anode assembly. The test was conducted on a LAND CT2001A battery test system at room temperature within a nitrogen-filled glove box. 
XRD was conducted on a Rigaku D/Max ultima II with Cu Kα radiation. The FESEM and EDS images were taken on a JEOL JSM-6700F SEM. The Raman spectra was detected by a DXR Raman microscope with a 532 nm wavelength excitation source (Thermal Scientific Corporation, USA). 
