Sodium-ion rechargeable batteries are a promising candidate for large-scale electrical energy storage systems, owing to the abundance of sodium resources. Herein, we report the development of carbon-incorporated NASICON-Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) as an active cathode material for Na-ion batteries, using carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) and sucrose as dual carbon sources. The interaction between CMC and sucrose resulted in the formation of a highly porous structure (surface area: 58.998 m2 g−1) with increased sp2 carbon species, facilitating mass and charge transportation. The specific capacity (104.99 mAh g−1) of dual-carbonized CMC/sucrose-NVP (CS-NVP) was close to the theoretical capacity (117.6 mAh g−1). Furthermore, dual-carbonized NVP exhibited stable cyclability, showing a specific capacity of 75.04 mA g−1 even at a high rate of 20 C.

Demands for renewable energy sources are ever-increasing due to the exhaustion of fossil fuels and environmental concerns.1, 2 Energy storage systems (ESSs) allow for elasticity in the renewable energy supply over time. Li-ion rechargeable batteries have been highlighted as an attractive and plausible candidate for large-scale ESSs because of their high energy density and prolonged lifetime.3, 4 However, issues such as insufficient Li reserves and the corresponding increase in cost have made the search for other low-cost batteries inevitable.5, 6 Recently, Na-ion batteries have emerged as an alternative to Li-ion batteries because of the crustal abundance and low price of Na.7 The similarities in the underlying electrochemical mechanisms between Na-ion and Li-ion batteries have driven intensive studies on the development of appropriate Na-ion storage materials.8 On the other hand, nature-derived materials such as lignin and polydopamine have been recently applied to sustainable energy storage.9-11

Here, we introduce cellulose as a versatile template for the synthesis of carbon-incorporated NASICON-Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) as a cathode material for high power Na-ion batteries with a superior rate capability. Cellulose is the most abundant organic compound on Earth and has many merits, such as biocompatibility, high mechanical strength, and facile modification to diverse forms from textile-type cellulose paper to nano-sized cellulose crystals.12-16 NVP is a promising cathode material for Na-ion batteries because of its excellent structural and thermal stabilities, which stem from strong polyanion networks.17-23 However, it is difficult to achieve a reversible capacity close to its theoretical value (117.6 mAh g−1 at 3.4 V vs. Na/Na+) due to the poor electrical conductivity of NVP. Many attempts have been made to enhance the mass and charge transportation kinetics of NVP by reducing particle size,21 employing alien elements,19, 20 and introducing conductive materials.22, 23 Since the pioneering work by the Chen group,22 various carbonaceous materials have been applied to the synthesis of carbon-NVP composites through carbon coating on the surface of NVP by the carbonization of hydrocarbons,22, 23 organic solvents,24, 25 organic acids,26 and surfactants.27 However, these approaches require a high gravimetric amount of carbon, more than 10 % to obtain high rate performances. Recent uses of graphene28, 29 or reduced graphene oxides30-32 allowed for ultrafast kinetic properties with a relatively low amount of carbon (<5%). Nevertheless, employing graphene-related materials involves complex processes that limit the practical utility of Na-ion battery systems as an alternative to Li-ion batteries. In this study, we demonstrate a new approach for the synthesis of a highly conductive carbon-incorporated NVP composite that is templated by carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC). As depicted in Figure 1, carbonized sucrose located preferentially on the outer surface of NVP primarily serves as a conductive carbon coating to transport electrons and Na ions to redox sites whereas the sheet-like carbonized CMC provides fast pathways for charge transfer from a current collector to the individual NVP with a decreased impedance.

Schematic illustration of the synthesis of dual-carbonized Na3V2(PO4)3 through cellulose templating. During the carbonization process, carboxymethyl cellulose fibers and sucrose evolved into carbon matrix and carbon coating on NVP, respectively. The carbon-coated NVP particles embedded in the carbon matrix were obtained after the carbonization process of Na+-V3+-PO43−-cellulose/sucrose hydrogel.

We prepared carbonized NVPs using the sol-gel method and solid-state heat treatment.23 Briefly, a mixture of NaH2PO4⋅2H2O, V2O5, C2H2O4⋅2H2O, and carbon sources (i. e., sucrose and/or CMC) was calcinated at 800 °C for 10 h under Ar flow containing H2 (5 vol%). For comparison, pristine NVP was synthesized without any carbon source. To observe the effect of carbon source on the particle size and crystalline structure of NVP composites, we examined the morphologies of pristine NVP, carbonized CMC-NVP (C-NVP), carbonized sucrose-NVP (S-NVP), and carbonized CMC/sucrose-NVP (CS-NVP) using scanning and transmission electron microscopes. As shown in Figure 2A–D, individual NVP nanoparticles (50–500 nm) were covered by carbon sheets, which were embedded in the carbon matrix. The carbon, sodium, and phosphorous elemental maps confirmed that the NVP particles were well-hybridized with carbonized CMC and/or sucrose (Figure 2E–H). On the other hand, pristine NVP was comprised of non-uniform particles with sizes ranging between 0.5 and 3 μm (Figure S1A). The size of individual NVP particles in carbonized NVPs (e. g., C-NVP, S-NVP, and CS-NVP) was much smaller than in pristine NVPs. In the case of S-NVP, the smaller particle size (<500 nm) is attributed to water-soluble sucrose that forms a thin carbon coating layer, impeding the growth of NVP (Figure S1B). When the high molecular weight CMC (M.W. 100,000) was used as a carbon source, NVP nanoparticles were successfully embedded into a carbonized CMC matrix, inhibiting excessive particle growth during carbonization (Figure S1C). When we examined the carbon contents of the NVP composites by elemental analysis, only 0.135 % carbon was detected in the pristine NVP and the carbon contents in other NVPs were close to 5 %, a desirable value for a battery system.22 According to the X-ray diffraction result (Figure S2), pristine NVP and carbonized NVP composites were indexed to be the NASICON-structured Na3V2(PO4)3 phase (ICDD 01-078-7289),33 which indicates that carbon source did not affect the crystal structure of NVP.

To characterize the nature of carbonaceous species in the NVP composites, we conducted analyses using Raman spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy for CS-NVP, C-NVP, and S-NVP. As shown in Figure 3A, the two intense peaks at 1350 (D) and 1590 cm−1 (G) originated from sp2-carbon species, and the other two peaks at 1180 and 1490 cm−1 were assigned to sp3-type carbon. The relative contents of sp2 and sp3 carbon were estimated from the integrated area ratio of sp2 and sp3 peaks (Asp2/Asp3) according to the literature.34, 35 We found that the content ratio of the sp2 and sp3 carbon of CS-NVP, C-NVP, and S-NVP were 4.34, 3.64, and 3.53, respectively. According to X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic analysis, the C 1s XPS spectra of carbonized NVPs exhibited multiple peaks at 284.7, 285.8, 287.2, and 289.1 eV, which correspond to sp2 carbon, sp3 carbon, C−O bonding, and C=O bonding (Figure S3). The increased ratio of the sp2/sp3 peak areas of CS-NVP compared to those in C-NVP and S-NVP confirms the higher content of sp2 carbon in accordance with the Raman analysis result. These results show that carbonized CMC and sucrose have a higher content of sp2 carbon species in the structure, which should increase electrical conductivity.36, 37 When we measured the electrical conductivity of the carbonized NVPs using a four-point probe, the conductivity of CS-NVP (1.21 S cm−1) was approximately 1.5 times higher than that of C-NVP (0.803 S cm−1) and S-NVP (0.797 S cm−1). According to the literature,38, 39 carbonaceous coating on carbon-based materials, such as reduced graphene oxide, could increase conductivity by eliminating vacancies and suppressing the formation of defects during the carbonization process. In this work, sucrose coating alleviated the formation of defective components of carbonized CMC/sucrose, which resulted in the higher ratio of sp2 carbon with the increased conductivity of the CS-NVP electrode. The increased sp2 carbon ratio in CS-NVP should facilitate the transport of electrons during electrochemical reactions.

We recorded N2 adsorption-desorption isotherms to measure pore size distributions in CS-NVP, C-NVP, and S-NVP, as shown in Figure 3B and 2C. The values for pore surface area, pore volume, and average pore diameter for each composite are listed in Table S1. The surface area (58.998 m2 g−1) of CS-NVP was more than twofold higher than that of C-NVP (27.173 m2 g−1) and S-NVP (18.948 m2 g−1). In particular, the accumulated volume of pores (smaller than 10 nm) in CS-NVP was estimated to be 0.1270 cm3 g−1 nm−1, which was 46 and 41 times higher than those of C-NVP and S-NVP, respectively. These results are attributed to the synergetic effect that stems from the rearrangement and stacking of carbon in CS-NVP during the carbonization process. When CMC and sucrose were carbonized together, wrinkled carbon layers were observed on the surface of CS-NVP (Figure S4A). Sucrose could be attracted to carbon materials (e. g., graphene) due to its abundant hydroxyl groups, which increase the specific surface area during carbonization.40 In this work, CMC acts as a template for sucrose carbonization, creating numerous pores and changing the form of carbonized sucrose from granules to a thin film. In contrast, when only a single carbon source was employed, CMC was converted to a sheet-like carbon matrix, whereas sucrose was rearranged into carbon granules (Figure S4B and Figure S4C). The porous structure and conductive carbon component (e. g., sp2 carbon) in the CS-NVP suggest its potential applicability as a Na-ion battery cathode material that demands high surface area and good conductivity as well.

We evaluated the electrochemical performance of pristine NVP and carbonized NVP composites. Figure 4A shows initial charge-discharge profiles of the electrodes at 0.2 C. The pristine NVP electrode displayed an initial discharge capacity of 66.50 mAh g−1, which is much smaller than the theoretical capacity of the NVP (117.6 mAh g−1). In addition, no distinct plateau that corresponds to Na-ion insertion/extraction was observed in the charge/discharge profile of pristine NVP. This result indicates that high polarization of pristine NVP occurred during the cycling process.23 These characteristics originated from the poor electrical conductivity of pristine NVP, as shown in a previous study.41 The charge-discharge profiles of CS-NVP, C-NVP, and S-NVP electrodes displayed the typical electrochemical properties of NVP: CS-NVP and S-NVP electrodes exhibited initial discharge capacities of 104.99, and 104.09 mAh g−1, respectively, while maintaining plateaus at 3.4 V (vs. Na/Na+) during the whole cycle. The C-NVP electrode exhibited a smaller initial discharge capacity (98.56 mAh g−1) than the CS-NVP and S-NVP electrodes. This result is attributed to the fact that the surface of NVP was exposed to electrolytes without any carbonaceous materials as shown in Figure S1C, resulting in poor electron transportation in the C-NVP electrode. The tendency is in accordance with the cyclic stability results (Figure 4B, Table 1). The C-NVP cathode retained only 79.41 % of the initial discharge capacity after the 50th cycle at 0.2 C. Although the cyclic stability of the C-NVP electrode was significantly improved from that of pristine NVP showing 54.23 % retention, the value is much lower than for the CS-NVP and S-NVP electrodes that maintained 97.31 % and 95.94 % of initial capacity, respectively.

To test the rate capability of the electrodes, we carried out the charge-discharge measurements at different C rates (Figure 5A). We found a significant difference in the rate performances between CS-NVP and S-NVP, unlike for their similarities in capacity and cyclic stability. At 5 C, the capacity of CS-NVP was maintained at 100.85 mAh g−1, whereas the capacity of S-NVP decreased from 103.21 to 77.58 mAh g−1 and more dramatically for C-NVP from 96.37 to 63.34 mAh g−1. The difference suggests that the dual CMC and sucrose carbonization strategy improves the rate capability of the electrode. At a more increased rate of 20 C, the CS-NVP electrode retained the capacity of 75.04 mAh g−1, 71 % of the initial capacity (105.67 mAh g−1 at a rate of 0.2 C), while C-NVP and S-NVP showed only 23 % and 27 % retentions, respectively. The 71 % retention is comparable to recent studies that reported discharge capacities of 65–80 mAh g−1 at 20 C with high carbon contents of 10 %.27,42 In this work, the improved rate performance of carbon-incorporated NVP is achieved through a cost-effective synthetic process using cellulose with a low amount of carbon (5 %). To understand the dual carbon source effect in the CS-NVP electrode, we conducted electrochemical impedance spectroscopic analysis at the 50 % discharge in the 41st cycle (after the rate capability test from 0.2 C to 20 C and returning to 0.2 C). The Nyquist plots in Figure 5B show that the impedance of the CS-NVP electrode is the smallest among the electrodes, which was consistently observed even after 100 cycles (Figure S5). These results indicate an increased capacity to transfer Na ions and electrons in the CS-NVP electrode. The efficient transportation of Na-ions and electrons should occur through the higher ratio of sp2 carbon species in CS-NVP. Furthermore, the higher surface area and porosity of CS-NVP enable facile and fast charge transfer throughout the electrode from the current collector to the surface of individual NVP particles during charge-discharge cycles.

In summary, we have successfully developed carbon-hybridized NVP composites that contain low carbon contents (∼5 %) by employing water-soluble sucrose and water-insoluble CMC as dual carbon sources. Morphological and electrochemical analyses revealed that sucrose-coating provided facile electron transport on the electrode surface whereas flake-like CMC functioned as a pathway of electrons from current collector to the active material. Also, during the calcination process, the interaction of CMC and sucrose induced a wrinkled surface that could embrace and cover NVP particles. The excellent electrochemical performance of CS-NVP is ascribed to the synergetic contributions of i) highly conductive carbonized CMC/sucrose containing high ratio sp2 carbon and ii) a porous structure with numerous internal pores. As a result, the carbonized CMC/sucrose provided a pathway of Na-ions from the electrolyte and electrons from the current collector. Furthermore, CS-NVP showed potential as a high-power cathode material exhibiting rate capabilities of 100.85 mAh g−1 at 5 C and 75.04 mAh g−1 at 20 C, which were much higher than other carbonized NVPs. The synthesis of CS-NVP and its application to energy storage hints a new strategy for hybridizing carbon and inorganic energy storage materials through a sustainable and versatile synthetic process using naturally abundant materials, not relying on organic solvents.

The precursors for carbonized NVP composites were prepared using the sol-gel method. A mixture of V2O5 and oxalic acid in a stoichiometric ratio (1 : 3) was thoroughly mixed overnight in deionized water (resistivity: 18.2 MΩ) to obtain a transparent solution, followed by the addition of a stoichiometric amount of NaH2PO4 ⋅ 2H2O. The solution was dried in an oven at 80 °C. After drying, the precursors were pre-heated at 600 °C for 3 h under Ar atmosphere (containing 5 vol% H2). Then, 0.4 g of the resulting powder was mixed in deionized water with sodium CMC (0.08 g) and sucrose (0.08 g) to synthesize CS-NVP. For the synthesis of S-NVP and C-NVP, either sucrose (0.16 g, for S-NVP) or sodium CMC (0.16 g, for C-NVP) was mixed with the precursor powder (0.4 g) in deionized water. The carbon contents for all carbon-incorporated NVP were adjusted to be 5 %. Pristine NVP was prepared without any addition of carbon source. Water was removed from the solutions by drying in an oven at 80 °C. The resulting powders were pelletized, calcinated at 800 °C with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 for 10 h under Ar flow (containing 5 vol% H2), and then slowly cooled down. The synthetic yields over 95 % were obtained for pristine NVP and NVP composites (pristine NVP: 96 %, C-NVP: 95 %, S-NVP: 96 %, CS-NVP: 95 %).

The crystal structures of pristine NVP, CS-NVP, C-NVP, and S-NVP were analyzed using a D/MAX-2500 X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku Co., Japan) with a scan rate of 5° min−1, a range of 10–50°, and a Cu Kα radiation wavelength of 1.5418 Å. The carbon contents were measured using a FLASH 2000 series elemental analyzer (Thermo Scientific, U.S.A.). The morphologies of the samples were investigated using an S-4800 field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM; Hitachi Co., Japan) at an electron acceleration voltage of 10 kV and a Tecnai G2 field emission transmission electron microscope (TEM; JEOL, Japan) with 300 kV of operating voltage. Characterization of the carbon components in the samples was performed using ARAMIS dispersive Raman spectroscopy (Horiba Jobin Yvon, France) with a 514 nm laser. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic analysis was carried out using a K-alpha (Thermo Scientific, U.S.A.) in the scan range of 0–1300 eV. The surface area and pore size distribution were obtained by nitrogen adsorption at different pressures according to the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) method using a 3Flex surface analyzer (Micromeritics Co., USA).

The pristine cathode specimen was fabricated by mixing active material (75 %), a conductive agent (acetylene black, 15 %), and polyvinylidene fluoride (10 %) in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone. For carbonized NVP cathodes, the total carbon content was adjusted to 15 % including the carbon contents in the active material and the conductive agent. The slurries were pasted onto an Al foil substrate with a thickness of 50 μm. After vacuum drying at 120 °C overnight, the electrodes were pressed and punched into 13-mm-diameter disks. Electrochemical measurements were performed using CR2032 coin-type cells assembled in an Ar-filled glovebox. Na metal and a glass fiber membrane (Whatman, U.S.A.) were employed as a counter electrode and a separator, respectively. A solution of 1 M NaClO4 in propylene carbonate with fluoroethylene carbonate (0.5 vol%) was used as an electrolyte. The electrochemical charge/discharge tests were conducted with a voltage window of 2.5–3.8 V vs. Na/Na+ at various current densities (0.2–20 C, 1 C=117.6 mA g−1) at room temperature. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopic analysis was performed at the 50 % discharge having a constant open circuit potential in the 41st cycle (i. e., after the rate capability test from 0.2 C to 20 C and returning to 0.2 C). The voltage amplitude of the AC signal was 10 mV with a frequency sweep from 100 kHz to 0.01 Hz.