Aqueous Na-ion capacitor and battery are of great significance for both wearable electronics and stationary energy storage due to the inherent safety and low cost. However, conventional NaTi2(PO4)3 materials with irregular morphology and large size prepared by solid-state reaction still hinder the application of these systems. Herein, a newly structured porous single-crystal NaTi2(PO4)3 with uniform sizes was fabricated via a well-designed novel liquid transformation of ultrathin TiO2 nanosheets, followed by coating a conductive carbon sheath. To best of our knowledge, this is the first report of the porous single-crystal structure of NaTi2(PO4)3 materials. Examined in a three-electrode cell, this NaTi2(PO4)3 electrode demonstrates an outstanding rate capability of 80–102 mA h g−1 at varied current densities of 0.5–3 A g−1 due to the synergistic effect between porous nanostructure and outstanding stability originated from single-crystal structure. The high-quality NaTi2(PO4)3 was also assembled with N-doped carbon to fabricate an aqueous Na-ion capacitor with robust flexibility. This work paves the way for designing advanced Na super ion conductor (NASICON) based materials for aqueous energy storage systems.

Recently, aqueous energy storage systems (AESSs), such as Na-ion battery & capacitor, have demonstrated their uniqueness compared with their non-aqueous counterparts due to the excellent safety performance in nature [1], [2], [3], [4]. Furthermore, the advantage of their low cost derived from the high abundance of sodium and the simplified assemble process in ambient endows AESSs the possibility of application in large-scale power grid [5], [6], [7], [8]. However, the narrow voltage window (about 1.23 V) of aqueous electrolyte dramatically restricts the application of conventional electrode materials (e.g. transition metal sulfides and phosphorus) with low voltage platform [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15]. Therefore, hunting the active materials with both high operating voltage and acceptable energy density appears to be an essential and challenging route to accelerate the development of AESSs.

Among various active materials, Na super ion conductor (NASICON) is a family of electrode materials with both outstanding ion conductivity and high voltage platform, which can meet the particular requirements of the AESSs [16], [17]. The typical chemical formula of NASICON is AxMM’(XO4)3, where A, M & M′, and X represent metallic elements (e.g. Li, Na, and K), transition metal elements (e.g. Ti, V, and Mn), and non-metallic elements (e.g. P and S), respectively. One well-known member of this family is NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP) that has been intensively studied as the anode material of aqueous Na-ion battery/capacitor [18], [19]. The crystal structure of NTP is constructed via oxygen atoms sharing by TiO6 octahedrons and PO4 tetrahedrons. The interstitial voids forming between these polyhedrons produce the so-called ion channels, which serve as the expressway for sodium ions transfer [20]. Furthermore, this nanostructure also enables NTP to store sodium ions without inducing large lattice stress, which is beneficial to enhance the cycling performance.

Last decades have witnessed the rapid development of solid-state reaction as the main route to prepare NTP-based electrode materials [17], [21], [22]. Although the solid-state reaction exhibits advantages including high crystallinity of products and simple process, the as-prepared NTPs always suffer from topographic irregularity and large size, which intensively restrict the efficient transfer of electrons and increase the interface resistance. Then, the sol-gel method was developed to reduce the NTP particle size [23], [24]. However, the reactants mixed in the sol-gel process still need to undergo a high-temperature annealing to produce NTP, which inevitably increases the particle size and the irregularity of morphology. In contrast, solvothermal method can yield NTP precursor during the liquid reaction stage using liquid tetrabutyl titanate as titanium source, which is beneficial for NTP to maintain the size and morphology of NTP precursor [25], [26], [27]. Nevertheless, most of the solvothermally prepared NTP materials are solid particles, which is difficult for ion transfer at high current densities. Therefore, it still remains challenging to realize the incorporation of high crystallinity and porous nanostructure to NTP, which is beneficial to improve its cycling lifespan and rate performance.

Herein, we developed a unique approach via liquid transformation of ultrathin TiO2 nanosheets and successfully synthesized a porous single-crystal NaTi2(PO4)3 (PSC-NTP). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of the concept of porous single-crystal NTP. The developed synthetic strategy through the liquid conversion of solid titanium source into NTP has rarely been reported before. Furthermore, this method turned out to be applicable to many other solid titanium sources such as TiO2 particles as well. An amorphous carbon layer was coated on the surface of PSC-NTP (PSC-NTP@C) to improve its electric conductivity. Examined in three-electrode cells with aqueous electrolyte, PSC-NTP@C exhibited a high initial discharge capacity of 105 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1, which decayed only 0.22% in the following 100 cycles. The kinetic research based on the Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves with different scan rates revealed that a battery behavior of Na-ion diffusion in the PSC-NTP@C plays a significant role in sodium ions storage. When being integrated with N-doped carbon (NC) derived from ZIF-8 in liquid electrolyte, the assembled Na-ion capacitor achieved a decent first discharge capacity of 89 mA h g−1 at 0.5 mA g−1 and remained a high value of 63 mA h g−1 even after 400 cycles. Furthermore, the PSC-NTP@C//NC electrochemical couple were also examined as electrodes for a quasi-solid-state Na-ion capacitor, which exhibits both excellent flexibility and electrochemical performance. This synthesis methodology of porous single-crystal NTP paves the way for in-situ transformation of solid TiO2 into high-quality NTP on various substrates.

The fabrication of PSC-NTP@C was conducted by a liquid transformation of TiO2 nanosheets, which has rarely been reported before. Typically, 160 mg TiO2 nanosheets were ultrasonically dispersed into 40 mL ethanol, followed by adding 272.2 mg sodium acetate trihydrate and 6 mL phosphoric acid. Next, the mixture was sealed into a 100 mL Teflon-lined autoclave and heated at 160 °C for 3 h, which involves the dissolution-deposition reaction on the solid-liquid surface. Finally, NaTi2(PO4)3 precursor was washed with DI water and ethanol before drying in an oven overnight. To improve the electric conductivity, an amorphous carbon sheath was coated on the surface of NTP particle. Typically, NaTi2(PO4)3 precursor was ultrasonically dispersed in ethanol, followed by adding phenolic resin at a mass ratio of 5:1. After the evaporation of ethanol from the yellow mixture, PSC-NTP@C was obtained by in-situ hydrolysis of phenolic resin on the surface of NTP particles at 700 °C for 2 h in nitrogen to form an amorphous carbon layer.

The surface morphology of TiO2 and NaTi2(PO4)3-based materials were investigated by FEI Quanta 450 FEG SEM, while the internal structure was examined using transmission electron microscopy (JEOL-2001F TEM). The thickness of few-layers TiO2 was measured by atomic force microscope (AFM, Veeco, USA). Bruker D2 Phaser XRD with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.15418 nm) operating at 30 kV and 10 Ma was employed to analyze the crystal structure, which was also evidenced by the HRTEM image accorded by TEM. Furthermore, the SAED image revealed that the NaTi2(PO4)3 is single-crystal in nature. The element composition and value state on the surface were studied by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ESCALAB 250 photoelectron spectroscopy). Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA, Shimadzu, DRG-60) was utilized to analyze the content of carbon in PSC-NTP@C. The specific surface area and pore-size distribution were measured according to the data recorded with a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 surface area and porosity analyzer at 77 K. The nitrogen adsorption and desorption isotherms were conducted on Micrometrics ASAP 2020 analyzer to characterize the specific surface area and pore structure.

The electrochemical performances of the PSC-NTP@C and PNC sample were investigated in three-electrode cells with Ag/AgCl electrode and Pt electrode serving as reference and counter electrodes. The electrode materials were manufactured through mixing the active materials, carbon black, and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) in a weight ratio of 7:2:1. The loading mass of the active materials in electrodes was 2–3 mg/cm2. The electrodes were prepared via pasting electrode materials on current collector (Ni foam for PSC-NTP@C and carbon cloth for PNC), followed by drying at 80 °C in an oven overnight. Neutral aqueous Na2SO4 solution (1 M) was used as the electrolyte to evaluate the electrochemical performance across this work. The full cell in liquid electrolyte was assembled employing PSC-NTP@C electrode as anode and PNC electrode as cathode.

Poly acrylamide (PAM)-Na2SO4 gel electrolyte was prepared with 4 g acrylamide (AM) monomer, 18 mg ammonium persulfate (APS), 1.5 mg Methylene-Bis-Acrylamide (BIS) and 30 mL Na2SO4 solution (1 M) at 80 °C. A transparent and flexible film consisting of PAM and Na2SO4 was obtained after the polymerization process. Then, the anode, gel electrolyte, and cathode were pasted together in sequence, forming the quasi-solid-state Na-ion capacitor. All the assembly process was conducted in ambient, which simplify the procedure and reduce the cost in a large extent. CV curves at different scans were carried out on electrochemical workstation, while the galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles were recorded on LAND test system. All the calculation of specific capacity of half and full cell was based on the mass of NaTi2(PO4)3.

The synthesis of porous single-crystal NTP is via a low-temperature liquid transformation of ultrathin TiO2 nanosheets (Fig. 1a). Initially, the ultrathin TiO2 nanosheets were fabricated by exfoliation of bulk titanate through reacting with tetrabutylammonium hydroxide followed by vigorously shaking. As a heterogeneous reaction in nature, Na+ and PO43- must undergo a two-step diffusion in liquid phase and liquid-solid interface to react with the TiO2. Then, the TiO2 nanosheets were converted into NTP, whose micro-framework is established via linking TiO6 octahedrons with PO4 tetrahedrons by oxygen atoms at the corners. As shown in Fig. 1b, the soft transformation process refers to a dissolution-deposition reaction which changed the nanosheets morphology of TiO2 into NTP spheres. To improve the electric conductivity of NTP, phenolic resin was pyrolyzed on the surface of the NTP to in-situ form a conductive carbon layer at high temperature in nitrogen. Meanwhile, numerous mesopores appeared in the internal structure of NTP accompanied by the increase of crystallinity, generating the porous single-crystal structure.

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) reveals that the exfoliated ultrathin TiO2 nanosheets possess a micron-sized lateral dimension (Fig. 2a and S1). Besides, the semitransparent morphology suggests that the TiO2 nanosheets are ultrathin in thickness. As a verification, atomic force microscope (AFM) analysis shows that the thickness of this two-dimension TiO2 is less than 7 nm (Fig. 2b). After the liquid transition, the NTP spheres were obtained which are dramatically different from the TiO2 nanosheets in terms of morphology (Fig. 2c and S2). Then, PSC-NTP@C was fabricated by mixing the NTP with phenolic resin in ethanol, followed by drying and calcining in inert atmosphere. From the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images, we can see that PSC-NTP@C well inherits the morphology of NTP spheres obtained by solvothermal transformation, exhibiting a high uniformity in size and appearance (Fig. 2d and e). For comparison, the NTP contrast sample fabricated by solid-state reaction shows bulk-like morphology with serious irregularity and large size, which will intensely increase the ion diffusion distance and weaken the rate capability (Fig. S3).

The in-depth study of the pore and crystalline structure of PSC-NTP@C was carried out via TEM analysis. Fig. 2f and g show that numerous mesopores emerged in the internal structure of PSC-NTP@C. This porous network enables sodium ions to efficiently diffuse in the NTP spheres before entering into the Na-ion channels among the lattice. To survey the formation of such pores, we examined the NTP fabricated via liquid transformation before annealing with TEM and found that they were entirely solid spheres without pores (Fig. S4). Thus, the mesopores were produced during the annealing procedure where the shrink of amorphous nanodomains caused by high temperature may plays a significant role. High resolution TEM (HRTEM) observation suggests that the surface of NTP crystal was coated with a thin amorphous carbon layer, which accounts for about 10 wt% of the whole weight of PSC-NTP@C (Fig. 2h and S5). The diffraction fringe with an interlayer spacing of 0.361 nm corresponds to the (113) lattice plane of NTP (inset of Fig. 2h). Selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) image directly evidences that the as-synthesized NTP is single-crystal in nature (Fig. 2i). The SAED pattern can be indexed into specific diffraction spots ((012) and (104)) of the [102] zone. Compared with PSC-NTP@C, NTP obtained before annealing is partially crystallographic with the coexistence of crystalline phase and amorphous nanodomains, demonstrating that the single-crystal structure forms during the annealing process. X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern (Fig. S6) shows that the most remarkable peak is indexed into (113) lattice plane of the prepared NTP spheres, which has also been identified by the HRTEM image. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy reveals that PSC-NTP@C is mainly consisted of Na, Ti, P, O, and C elements (Fig. S7). Overall, TEM analysis together with SAED image convincingly indicate that the NTP shows porous single-crystal property, which has never been reported for NTP-based materials before to the best of our knowledge.

Exploration on the topology transformation and universality was also conducted to get an insight into the proposed liquid transformation methodology. Initially, we investigated the intermediates via mediating the reaction time. At the initial stage (0.5 h), some NTP precursor dots begin to appear on the surface of TiO2 nanosheets, while the major composition of the mixtures is still TiO2 (Fig. 3a, b, and S8a) [28]. TEM images reveal that the surface of TiO2 nanosheets became rough due to the formation of amorphous nanoparticles, which were considered as the precursor of NTP according to the homogeneous distribution of P and Na in the STEM elemental mapping (Fig. S9). When extending the reaction time to 1 h, the 2D TiO2 nanosheets were largely converted into 0D NTP spheres with the coexistence of a few TiO2 residues (Fig. 3c and S8b). At this time, the main components have evolved from TiO2 into NTP as verified by the XRD pattern (Fig. 3d). The corresponding TEM images further confirm the formation of NTP spheres together with porous structure on surface of TiO2 nanosheets (Fig. S10). This porous structure can be attributed to the dissolution of TiO2 on the external surface of the nanosheets, followed by reacting with Na+ and PO43- to form NTP. Therefore, the topology transformation from 2D TiO2 nanosheets to 0D the NTP spheres can be illustrated by the dissolution and deposition mechanism which proceeds from the outside to the inside. Typically, TiO2 initially dissolves from the external surface and then reacts with Na+ and PO43- to form NTP sphere, which will deposit onto the surface until the completely vanishing of TiO2 nanosheets. This transformation reaction was extended to the preparation of NTP from other TiO2 sources other than the ultrathin nanosheets to explore the adaptability of this synthetic strategy (Fig. S11 and S12). SEM images show the irregular particle morphology of these two TiO2 fabricated via a low-temperature solvothermal reaction (Fig. S11a and 12a). After the liquid transformation reaction and inert annealing, they were chemically converted into regular NaTi2(PO4)3 spheres as evidenced by the SEM images and the XRD data (Fig. S11b-d and S12b-d). Thus, our synthetic method is a universal route to transform TiO2 into NTP via a mild liquid transformation way, providing a novel strategy for designing NASICON-based nanomaterials.

The novel porous single-crystal property grants PSC-NTP@C a high efficiency of ion transfer which is favorable for enhancing the rate performance. Besides, the high crystallinity also makes PSC-NTP@C more robust compared to those polycrystalline counterparts. This is beneficial to deal with the non-negligible dissolution of NTP in aqueous, which usually causes the gradual decay of specific capacity [29]. The amorphous carbon layer in-situ formed on the surface well improves the electric conductivity of NTP spheres and reduces the contact resistance between the adjacent spheres. Motivated by these advantages, PSC-NTP@C was incorporated into a three-electrode system with 1 M Na2SO4 solution as aqueous electrolyte to evaluate the electrochemical properties (Fig. 4). Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curve was recorded at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 within the voltage window of − 0.3 to − 1.0 V vs Ag/AgCl to explore the sodium storage process (Fig. 4a). The cathodic and anodic peaks located at − 0.88 and − 0.74 V were attributed to the insertion and deinsertion of Na+ in PSC-NTP@C electrode, respectively. The potential shift between the cathodic and anodic peaks appears to be 0.14 V. This small polarization benefits from the enhanced electric conductivity enabled by coating a carbon sheath on NTP spheres.

The discharge/charge profiles of the PSC-NTP@C electrode was obtained at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 within a cutoff voltage window of − 0.30 to − 0.85 V (Fig. S13). For the first cycle, PSC-NTP@C exhibits a large discharge capacity of 105 mA h g−1. The following cycles show a high repeatability with the initial one, indicating that the electrochemical discharge/charge process is highly reversible. In accordance with the little potential shift in the CV curve, the voltage reduction between the platforms in the discharge/charge process is less than 0.06 V, further evidencing the weak polarization phenomenon. Except for a little degradation of specific capacity in the second cycle, PSC-NTP@C remained a desirable capacity of 82 mA g−1 after 100 cycles, suggesting a capacity decay of only 0.22% per cycle and demonstrating an outstanding cycle stability (Fig. 4b). Even cycled at a higher current density of 1 A g−1, PSC-NTP@C still exhibits an initial capacity of 83 mA h g−1 and remained a reversible capacity of 62 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles. For comparison, we also evaluated the cycle performance of NTP@C prepared by the traditional solid-state reaction. It only shows a low capacity of 67 mA h g−1 in the first cycle at 0.5 A g−1, which accounts for a proportion of only ca. 64% of that value of PSC-NTP@C. This can be attributed to the sluggish electrons and ions transfer in electrode matrix, because of the irregular morphology with a size distribution range from hundreds nanometers to several micrometers of this contrast sample. As shown in Fig. 4c, the PSC-NTP@C electrode delivers rate capabilities of 102 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, 88 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1, 84 mA h g−1 at 1.5 A g−1, and 82 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1. Even when cycled at a high current density of 3 A g−1, a decent capacity of 80 mA h g−1 can still be maintained, which accounts for ca. 78% of the value obtained at 0.5 A g−1 and shows no apparent decay in the following 60 cycles. It should be noted that the low coulombic efficiency at 0.5 A g−1 can be attributed to the non-negligible side reactions, such as hydrogen/oxygen evolution, which will become insignificant at large discharge/charge rate. This rate capability is better than or comparable to other electrodes, including NASICON-based and prussian blue analogous (PBA) electrodes, for aqueous sodium ion batteries/capacitors reported before (Fig. 4d) [26], [27], [30], [31], [32], [33], [34], [35], [36]. The excellent rate and cycle performances of PSC-NTP@C can be attributed to the combination of porous single-crystal property and conductive carbon layer which optimize the diffusion of ions in electrode matrix, enhance the crystalline stability and improve the electric conductivity.

The electrochemical behavior of sodium storage in PSC-NTP@C was further analyzed using the kinetics method, which is established on the basis of the relationship between the voltammetric scan rate (v) and the corresponding current response (i) [37], [38], [39]. Ideally, this function relationship can be described using an equation as shown below: i = avb, which can be equivalently converted into log(i) = b log(v) + log(a), where a and b represent constants. The b value usually varies in the range of 0.5–1. The b value close to 0.5 reflects the battery-type behavior of ion diffusion, while the one approaching 1 stands for the capacitor-type behavior on the surface. Fig. 4e shows a series of CV curves obtained at different scan rates of 0.5–4 mV s−1. The electrochemical data at six different position around the cathodic and anodic peaks were collected to fit the linear relationship between log (i) and log (v), which shows a high degree of fitting (inset of Fig. 4e). The b value at different voltages were calculated based on the slope of those fitting lines and integrated into the broken line as shown in Fig. 4f. The b values at the cathodic and anodic peaks are about 0.6, indicating that sodium ions exhibit remarkable battery-type behavior of ion diffusion in lattice of NTP and occupy two M2 sites (inset of Fig. 4f) [40], [41].

N-doped porous carbon (NC) derived from ZIF-8 was selected as the cathode material to couple with PSC-NTP@C to assemble an aqueous Na-ion capacitor. Specifically, ZIF-8 with a diameter of ca. 1 µm was fabricated in aqueous solution of zinc acetate and dimethylimidazole via aging in ambient for 2 days (Fig. S14). Then, the calcination process accompanied by KOH activation was conducted to prepare NC, which remains the polyhedral morphology of ZIF-8 (Fig. S15a and b). Fig. S15c shows the rectangular CV curve of NC within the cutoff voltage window of 0–0.75 V at 1 mV s−1, which symbolizes the typical electrical double-layer capacitance (EDLC) [42], [43]. Examined in a three-electrode cell, NC maintained a reversible capacity of about 29 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 after 100 cycles, demonstrating the outstanding electrochemical stability (Fig. S15d). Then, the Na-ion capacitor was assembled in a liquid electrolyte using PSC-NTP@C and NC as anode and cathode respectively to examine the sodium storage performance (Fig. 5a). Based on the measured specific capacities, the mass ratio between anode and cathode is set as 1:3.5 to realize the charge balance. CV curve obtained at 3 mV s−1 shows dramatically expansion in the range of 1.0–1.6 V, which contributes to the majority of the capacitance (Fig. 5b). At the density of 0.5 A g−1, PSC-NTP@C//NC capacitor shows a high initial discharge capacity of about 90 mA h g−1 and still remains a high capacity of 63 mA h g−1 even after 400 cycles, demonstrating a remarkable cycle stability (Fig. 5c). The inset of Fig. 5c shows the voltage-time profile after cycled for 24 h, evidencing the high reversibility of the discharge/charge process.

As schematically shown in Fig. 6a, a quasi-solid-state Na-ion capacitor was assembled by sandwiching a polyacrylamide (PAM) hydrogel film with an average thickness of ~1 mm between the two flexible electrodes. This polymer film serves as both separator and electrolyte due to the special preparation process of in-situ polymerization of acrylamide monomer in aqueous Na2SO4 electrolyte [44], [45], [46], [47]. Compared to the polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) based gel electrolyte, the PAM one exhibits better flexibility and capability of moisture retention. Fig. 6b characterizes the digital photograph of this hybrid capacitor with a thin belt-shape structure, which can easily power an electronic watch. CV curve recorded at 3 mV s−1 suggests that this quasi-solid-state electrochemical system demonstrates similar discharge/charge behavior with its liquid counterpart, indicating the superior ionic conductivity of the gel electrolyte (Fig. 6c). This Na-ion capacitor also exhibits excellent cycling stability of remaining 77% of the initial capacity after 200 cycles at 1 A g−1 (Fig. 6d and S16). It should be noted that the slightly lower specific capacity of this quasi-solid-state capacitor compared with its liquid counterpart is attributed the lower ionic conductivity of PAM-based gel electrolyte compared to the Na2SO4 solution. Encouraged by the structure and performance advantages, we further investigated the flexibility of this quasi-solid-state device. Fig. 6e describes the discharge/charge profiles obtained under different bending angle (0, 45, 90, and 180°), which exhibit high uniformity and was free from the disturbing of any shape deformations. To directly observe the flexibility, this Na-ion capacitor was continuously and repeatedly bent into different angles from 0° to 180° and twisted, and could readily power an electronic watch (Fig. 6f and Movie S1). All of these convincingly demonstrate the excellent flexibility of the as-assembled Na-ion capacitor, which is attributed to the synergistic effect of the electrodes and the PAM-Na2SO4 gel electrolyte with superior bendability.

In summary, for the first time, a newly structured porous single-crystal NaTi2(PO4)3 with uniform sizes was synthesized via a developed liquid transformation of ultrathin TiO2 nanosheets. Post-annealing with the presence of phenolic resin was adopted to in-situ form a conductive carbon sheath on it. The morphology evolution from 2D nanosheets to intermediates (both 2D and 0D) and 0D particles well reveals the dissolution-deposition mechanism in nature. The synthetic strategy proposed here has been successfully applied to other solid TiO2 sources to fabricate porous single-crystal NaTi2(PO4)3, which indicates the robust applicability of this method. As the anode materials of Na-ion battery, PSC-NTP@C exhibits higher or considerable rate performance than its counterparts prepared by solid-state reaction, other NASICON-based materials and prussian blue analogous, which benefits from the synergistic effect of efficient ion diffusion enabled by the porous network and superior structural stability derived from the single-crystal property. Besides, these NTP anodes were also coupled with the N-doped carbon cathodes in aqueous and gel electrolytes to assemble the liquid and quasi-solid-state Na-ion capacitors, respectively, which demonstrate a high rate performance, outstanding safety, and excellent flexibility. This work presents a great advance for the secondary development of NaTi2(PO4)3-based materials which possess new porous single-crystal property for designing advanced anode materials for aqueous batteries and capacitors.