The Li0.33Lia0.56TiO3 and Li1.3Ti1.7Al0.3(PO4)3 ceramics with the structures of defect-perovskite and NASICON structures with conductivity of 1–6 × 10−6 S/cm at the room temperature are obtained. Ceramic electrolytes were developed for a solid-state battery EMF of 4.1 V and high discharge stability in time. Discharge characteristics of solid-state batteries are studied in a laboratory cell.

Studies of lithium batteries began in the 1960s and were associated with the first energy crisis. Because of their high volume and gravimetric energy densities, Li-ion batteries (LiB) are the most popular type of energy storage systems for now [1]. Since the first commercial introduction of LiB by Sony Corporation in 1991, they are widely used for powering billions of portable electronic products as well as hybrid and electric vehicles [2].The safety issues in commercialized LIBs which are related to the corrosive and flammable liquid electrolytes must be decided. Since lithium-ion secondary batteries use a flammable organic liquid electrolyte, there is a risk of explosion or fire that can also occur during production or from overcharging. Because of these issues, all solid-state lithium batteries (ASSB) have been proposed as a solution [3, 4]. All solid-state batteries use a lithium-ion conductive ceramic, known as a solid electrolyte, instead of liquid organic electrolyte. Typical problem of ASSB is high internal resistance because of low conductivity of solid electrolyte. At least three groups of lithium-ion-conducting oxide systems (with perovskite, NASICON, and garnet structure) are known at present; they have a relatively high lithium ion at room temperature (10−3–10−5 S/cm) and can be used as thick-film solid electrolytes in batteries [5,6,7,8,9]. To the fourth group of lithium-ion-conducting oxide systems belongs LIPON, which is made in the form of thin films and can be used only in thin-film lithium batteries [10, 11].

One of the oxide materials with high lithium-ion conductivity are materials with perovskite structure, as Li3xLa2/3-xTiO3 (LLTO) [5, 6]. The main factor that limits the using of the LLTO as a solid electrolyte in ASSB is increasing the electronic conductivity as a result of reduction of titanium (Ti4+→Ti3+), when ceramic electrolyte is in direct contact with the metallic lithium anode [12]. Therefore, a lithium-ion conducting protective layer (buffer) must be used between the anode (metallic lithium) and the LLTO solid electrolyte. The possibility of creating a solid-state lithium power source Li (anode)/buffer/Li3xLa2/3-xTiO3/MnO2 (cathode), where a diaphragm of non-woven polypropylene impregnated with a nonaqueous electrolyte (PC with DME and 1 M LiClO4) used as a buffer, has been shown [13]. A ceramic sample 20 mm in diameter and 1 mm in thickness was used as the solid electrolyte. The power source had an electromotive force of 3.5–3.6 V, a discharge current density of 21 μA/cm2, and a capacity of 20 mAh/g.

The next lithium-ion conducting oxide system, which is also characterized by a high lithium conductivity, has the following materials with NASICON structure: titanium-aluminum-lithium phosphates Li1.3Ti1.7Al0.3(PO4)3 (LATP) [7, 8]. Unlike LLTO materials, LATP materials have higher chemical stability in contact with the metallic lithium anode.

The literature contains relatively little information about the development of solid-state lithium batteries based on solid oxide electrolytes.

Therefore, this work is devoted to the development of model solid-state lithium batteries, where ceramic lithium conductors Li0.33La0.56TiO3 and Li1.3Ti1.7Al0.3(PO4)3 were used as solid electrolytes.

Lanthanum-lithium titanate LA0.56Li0.33TiO3 (LLTO) and titanium-aluminum-lithium phosphate Li1.3Ti1.7Al0.3(PO4)3 (LATP) were prepared by the solid-state reaction method. The starting reagents were Li2CO3 (99.99% Merck), La2O3 (99.999%, Cerac), rutile TiO2 (99.9%, Cerac), Al(NO3)3·9H2O (99%), and H3PO4 (85% aqueous solution).

The homogenizing grinding of the stoichiometric amounts of the starting reagents and synthesized mixture was carried out in the planetary ball mill Retsch PM-100. After the homogenizing grinding, the mixture was dried at 150 °C for 5 h and then calcined at 1050 °C (LLTO) and 850 °C (LATP) for 2 h. Green tape with a diameter of 25 mm was pressed and sintered in air atmosphere at 1250 °C (LLTO) and 1200 °C (LATP) for 2 h. Disks with a thickness 0.5–1.0 mm were cut out from the obtained pallets. After preparation, ceramics samples were dissolved to perform chemical analyses. Lithium content was deduced by absorption spectroscopy on an SP-9 PueUnicom atomic-absorption spectrometer. The determination error did not exceed 2%. It was determined that the loss of lithium in LLTO is ~ 30 mol% and in the case of LATP ~ 25 mol%.

The phases were identified by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) recorded at room temperature with a DRON-4-07 diffractometer (Cu Kα radiation; 40 kV, 18 mA). Data for sintered samples were collected in the 2θ range from 10° to 150° in a step mode with the step Δ2θ = 0.02° and an exposure time of 6 s for each point. SiO2 (2θ standard) and Al2O3 (intensity standard) were used as external standards.

The microstructure of ceramics was studied by scanning electron microscopy using a JSM-6510 (JEOL) electron microscope. The electrophysical properties of the ceramic samples were investigated by complex impedance spectroscopy in the frequency range from 0.1 Hz to 32 MHz using a 1260 A frequency response analyzer and a 1296 Dielectric Interface from Solartron. The electrical equivalent circuit and its components were identified with the program ZView.

LLTO and LATP ceramic pellets of different thickness were used as solid electrolyte of button type electrochemical cells (ECs) (model number: CR2325, diameter 23 mm, thickness 2.5 mm). The voltammetry measurements of ECs were made at 22–24 °C. When LLTO was used as the solid electrolyte, a diaphragm of non-woven polypropylene impregnated with a nonaqueous electrolyte (PC with DME and 1 M LiClO4) was used as a “buffer” to prevent interaction with the metallic lithium anode. When LATP pellet was used as the solid electrolyte, a “buffer” was not used. In both case, the solid electrolyte were ceramic disks with a diameter of 20 mm and a thickness of 0.8–1.0 mm.

The anode was a metallic lithium rolled to a thickness of 20 μm and cut into a disk with a diameter of 17 mm. As the cathode, the composite material based on non-stoichiometric chromium and cobalt oxides has been used. The thin-film nanostructured non-stoichiometric chromium and cobalt oxides have been obtained by electroplating from the aqueous electrolyte [13] directly on the ECs bottom. The thickness of the cathode material was 20 μm, weight 20–25 mg. Before the collection of the ECs, the cathode material was heat-treated at 284 °C for 3 h. The thickness of the anode and cathode chambers was ensured by passing the solid electrolyte into the insulating ring. Nanostructured thin-film composite materials based on non-stoichiometric chromium and cobalt oxides were used as the cathode. It was obtained by the electrochemical methods [13] directly on the EC housing made of 12 Kh18N10T stainless steel. The thickness of the cathode material was 20 μm, and its mass was 20–25 mg.

The results of XRD of sintered ceramic samples of the composition Li0.33La0.57TiO3 and Li1.3Ti1.7Al0.3(PO4)3 showed formation of monophase materials with defect-perovskite structure of orthorhombic system (space group Pmmm) and NASICON structures (R3¯¯¯c), respectively (Fig. 1).

Figure 2 shows microphotographs of ceramic Li0.33La0.57TiO3 (a) and Li1.3Ti1.7Al0.3(PO4)3 (b) samples. As is seen from the microphotographs, the grain size of the LLTO ceramic is ~ 2 μm, and that of LATP ~ 10 μm.

Figure 3a, b shows complex impedance diagrams in the Nyquist coordinates of ceramics LLTO and LATP, respectively, at different temperatures. The obtained impedance curves are typical for ionic conductors with blocking electrodes. One semicircle (in the height-frequency region) is associated with the electrophysical properties of the bulk of the ceramic grain; the second semicircle (in the low-frequency region)—of the grain boundary. An analysis of the plots showed that when the temperature increases, the resistance decreases, which is associated with a change in the conductivity of the bulk and grain boundaries. Figure 3c shows an Arrhenius plot of the total conductivity (bulk + grain boundary) for ceramic LLTO and LATP samples. The activation energy has been calculated to be 0.37 and 0.41 eV, respectively. The total conductivity of the ceramic LLTO and LATP samples at 20 °C is 6.2 × 10−6 and 1.34 × 10−6 S/cm, respectively.

Figure 4 shows discharging curves for a solid-state battery with LLTO and LATP solid electrolyte 1 mm in thickness and LATP 0.8 1 mm in thickness. As is seen from the figure, smaller operating voltage values are observed for the battery with LLTO in comparison with LATP (curves 1 and 2). This kind of variation may be associated with the high conductivity of the LATP material and the absence of additional propylene buffer. It also follows from the figure that the thickness of the solid electrolyte affects greatly the electrical characteristics of the battery; they increase with decreasing thickness (curves 2 and 3).

Figure 5 shows the variation of specific capacity with increasing number of charge-discharge cycles of solid-state battery in the case of using different electrolytes (LLTO and LATP) with different thickness (1–0.8 mm). It is evident from the presented data that the capacity of solid state batteries is stabilized by the 6th or 7th charge-discharge cycle independent of the nature and thickness of the electrolyte. When the number of cycles is further increased, the specific capacity of solid-state battery decreases by 1–1.7% per cycle. It follows from Figs. 4 and 5 that the obtained specific capacities (3–5 mAh/g) are higher than those of the solid-state lithium battery (1–1.1 mAh/g) described in the patent [14]. The low specific characteristics of the solid-state lithium batteries can be explained by a number or reasons. Firstly, a ceramic sample of large thickness (1 mm) was used as the solid electrolyte. Secondly, only a mechanical contact exists between the cathode and the solid electrolyte, which leads to a considerable increase in resistance at the contact boundary. It may be presumed that the use of a solid electrolyte as a thick film (about 100 μm and less), and the fabrication of the cathode and solid electrolyte in one technological cycle can greatly improve the specific characteristics of the solid-state battery.

Thus, on the basis of the research carried out, it was shown that to create a solid-state battery, lithium-ion conduction ceramic materials with perovskite structure (Li0.33La0.57TiO3) and NASICON structure (Li1.3Ti1.7Al0.3(PO4)3) can be used as the solid electrolyte. When using the LLTO electrolyte, a diaphragm of non-woven polypropylene impregnated with a nonaqueous electrolyte can be additionally used as a “buffer” to prevent its interaction with the metallic lithium anode. In the case of using the LATP electrolyte, a “buffer” does not need to be used. It has been found that the best current-voltage characteristics of solid-state battery are obtained when using LATP of smaller thickness as the solid electrolyte.

Lithium-ion conducting materials with perovskite structure (Li0.33La0.56TiO3) and NASICON structure (Li1.3Ti1.7Al0.3(PO4)3) have been obtained, which have a room temperature conductivity of 6.2 × 10−6 and 1.34 × 10−6 S/cm, respectively.

Based on the synthesized lithium-ion conducting materials LLTO and LATP, rechargeable solid-state lithium-ion cells (batteries) (model number: CR2325) with an electromotive force of 4.1 V and a high specific capacity have been made. The charge-discharge characteristics of a solid-state battery as a function of the nature and thickness of the ceramic electrolyte have been studied.

It has been shown that it is possible in principle to create rechargeable solid-state lithium-ion cells (batteries) based on lithium-ion conducting oxide systems with perovskite and NASICON structure.