The work attempted to develop a kind of high temperature microwave absorption coating. The Ti3SiC2/NASICON composite coatings with different Ti3SiC2 concentrations were fabricated by atmospheric plasma spraying. The effect of Ti3SiC2 addition on phase, density, microstructure, dielectric property and microwave absorption property of as-sprayed coatings was investigated. Results show that the complex permittivity increases with increasing the content of Ti3SiC2 due to the enhanced space charge polarization, decreased porosity and increased conduction loss. When the content of Ti3SiC2 increases to 30 wt%, the coating exhibits the optimal microwave absorption property with a bandwidth (below − 5 dB) of 4.01 GHz and lowest reflection loss of − 12.4 dB at 9.63 GHz in 1.4 mm thickness. It indicates that the Ti3SiC2/NASICON composite coating can be a potential candidate for microwave absorption.

With the rapid development of stealth technology, an urgent request of high temperature application has been put forward to new stealth weapons. Therefore, materials which have both microwave absorption property and high temperature stability have attracted large attentions. Generally, the microwave absorption materials are made up of matrix and absorbent. The matrix is mainly used for dispersing and binding absorbents, such as ceramic and resin. It usually has low permittivity, which is beneficial for permittivity adjustment of the composite. The absorbent is primarily for microwave absorption, which usually has good frequency response characteristic, high electromagnetic loss and easily dispersed feature. Carbon-based materials [1,2,3], ferrites [4, 5], magnetic metal powders [6, 7] and conduction polymers [8, 9] are common absorbents at present. While the poor oxidation resistance or demagnetization characters limit their applications at elevated temperatures.

Ti3SiC2 is a potential absorbent for high temperature application due to its high melting point, good oxidation resistance and high electric conductivity. A number of researches have investigated the conductivity, permittivity, electromagnetic interference shielding performance of Ti3SiC2 or Ti3SiC2-based composites [10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19]. Liu et al. reported the dielectric and microwave absorption properties of Ti3SiC2 powders [14,15,16], which showed a good lossy ability for microwave. Li et al. [17] reported a satisfactory electromagnetic interference shielding effectiveness of nano-layered Ti3SiC2 ceramics which was close to 30 dB at room temperature up to 800 °C. For the choice of matrix, NASICON ceramic possesses low density, high temperature stability and low permittivity [20], which makes it a suitable matrix for microwave absorption materials. However, the dielectric and microwave absorption properties of the Ti3SiC2/NASICON composite have rarely been reported.

Among the technologies for preparation of functional coatings, plasma spraying process is a good choice owing to (i) wide source of raw materials, (ii) extensive application range, (iii) high deposition efficiency, (iv) low cost, (v) ease of operation [19]. In this work, the plasma sprayed Ti3SiC2/NASICON composite coating was developed as a new kind of microwave absorption material for high temperature application. The influence of Ti3SiC2 addition on the phase, microstructure, dielectric property and microwave absorption property of as-sprayed coatings was investigated.

Commercial grade of Ti3SiC2 powders were supplied by Shanghai Yuehuan New Materials Technology Co. Ltd. (China). The Na3Zr2Si2PO12 powders were fabricated by solid-state reaction, the detailed raw materials and calcination process were narrated in our previous work [20]. The Na3Zr2Si2PO12 and Ti3SiC2 powders were mixed together in the weight ratio of 90/10, 80/20, 70/30 and 60/40, which were abbreviated as 10TSC, 20TSC, 30TSC and 40TSC in the figures. In order to improve the flowability of the feedstock, powders need to be agglomerated to sphericity by spray drying. The mixtures were ball-milled in deionized water using agate balls for 6 h with a rotary speed of 300 rpm. Next, using polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) as the binder, the slurry was spray dried by a centrifugal spray dryer. The parameters of spray drying were listed as follows: the temperature of entry air was 350 °C, temperature of chamber air was 180 °C, temperature of exit air was 120 °C, rotational speed of nozzle was 32,000 r/min, slurry feed rate was 100 g/min, atomizing air flow rate was 20 m3/h. Figure 1 shows the morphology of feedstocks after agglomeration, which exhibited spherical shape with a diameter range from 20 to 70 µm. After spray drying, Ti3SiC2/NASICON coatings were prepared by atmospheric plasma spraying. The parameters of plasma spraying were listed as follows: the flow rate of primary gas (Ar), second gas (N2), carrier gas (N2) was 20, 4 and 3 standard liters per minute, respectively, powder feed rate was 10 rad/min, spray distance was 100 mm. The composite coatings were deposited on a graphite substrate in about 2 mm thickness and then mechanically removed from the substrate.

The phases of starting materials and as-sprayed coatings were detected by X-ray diffractometry (XRD) using CuKα radiation as the X-ray source. The density and porosity of the coatings were measured by the Archimedes method. Morphologies of the feedstocks and coatings were examined by a scanning electron microscope (SEM), equipped with energy-dispersive spectrometer (EDS).

The coatings for the measurement of complex permittivity were cut into testing samples with the dimensions of 22.86l mm × 10.16w mm × 1.80t mm. The electromagnetic parameters were measured by a vector network analyzer (Agilent technologies E8362B: 10 MHz–20 GHz) in the X-band by waveguide method. The theoretical reflection loss (RL) can be calculated by the following equations based on the transmission line theory [18, 19]:

where Z0 and Zin are the input impedance of air and absorber, respectively. µr and εr are the relative permeability and permittivity of the absorber, and µr is 1 for nonmagnetic coating. j is the imaginary unit, f is the frequency of the microwave, d is the thickness of the coating, and c is the velocity of light in free space.

Figure 2 shows the XRD patterns of starting materials and as-sprayed coatings with different Ti3SiC2 concentrations. The synthesized powder was in relatively pure NASICON phase, only a trace amount of ZrO2 was detected, which was a common impurity in solid-state reaction [21,22,23]. No evident impurity peaks exited in the purchased Ti3SiC2 powder. The as-sprayed coatings were comprised of NASICON, Ti3SiC2, ZrO2 and TiC, which indicated that Ti3SiC2 deposited at high temperature during plasma spraying. Wen et al. [19]. have investigated the oxidation process of Ti3SiC2 during plasma spraying, which was different from long time air oxidation. The following reaction equation expresses the oxidation process:

TiO2 and SiO2 are generally formed when Ti3SiC2 is oxidized in high oxygen partial pressure for a long time, while the short dwell time and low oxygen partial pressure in plasma jet flow suppress the further oxidation of TiC and Ti5Si3. Due to the little amount of Ti5Si3, only TiC peak was observed in as-sprayed coating.

Figure 3 shows the density and porosity of as-sprayed coatings with different Ti3SiC2 concentrations. The density increased from 2.21 to 2.71 g/cm3 and the porosity decreased from 25.8 to 15.8% with increasing the content of Ti3SiC2. Figure 4 exhibits the cross-sections of as-sprayed coatings. And the EDS elemental concentration maps analysis of Fig. 4c is shown in Fig. 5. A structure with pores, partially melted regions and fully melted regions was observed in all the coatings. The number and size of pores became less as the content of Ti3SiC2 increased, which was consistent with the result of density and porosity. Moreover, the area of partially melted regions reduced as increasing the content of Ti3SiC2, which indicated that the addition of Ti3SiC2 improved the melting degree of the coatings due to its good thermal conductivity. So, it can be easily explained the reason for the decreased porosity. The pores are generally related to semi-molten particles entrapped in the coating. The better the melting degree is, the lower the porosity is. From Fig. 5, the Ti element stands for Ti3SiC2, and the Na, Zr and P elements stand for NASICON. There was no evident boundary between Ti3SiC2 and NASICON, and Ti3SiC2 distributed homogeneously in the coating. The darker regions rich in Na and Si were formed in Fig. 4b–d, which was generally seen during the sintering process [21, 24]. And the formation was currently under good sintering condition or melting degree.

Figure 6 shows the complex permittivity of as-sprayed coatings with different Ti3SiC2 concentrations. An upward trend of complex permittivity was obvious with the enhancement of the content of Ti3SiC2. When the content of Ti3SiC2 was 10 and 20 wt%, the complex permittivity was rather low. As the content of Ti3SiC2 increased to 30 wt%, the complex permittivity was obviously augmented, with the ε′ showing about from 28.1 to 32.1 and ε″ from 9.9 to 13.0. However, a dramatic increase of complex permittivity was observed by further increasing Ti3SiC2 concentration to 40 wt%.

As we know, ε′ is determined by the polarization effect, and ε″ depends both on polarization loss and conduction loss. The increase of ε′ with increasing the content of Ti3SiC2 can be attributed to the following two reasons. On the one hand, there are three kinds of chemical bonds in Ti3SiC2 material, including metallic, covalent, and ionic bond, which causes a great quantity of unpaired defects on the interface of Ti3SiC2 and NASICON. Then the free charges in Ti3SiC2 would accumulate in the defects and boundaries under the electromagnetic field, thus the electric dipole moments were formed and space charge polarization worked. Therefore, it would be facile to be polarized with high Ti3SiC2 concentration due to the augment of interfaces and defects. On the other hand, the porosity also had an influence on the complex permittivity, which can be explained by Lichtenecker’s equation [18]. The coating can be considered as the combination of low-permittivity pores and high-permittivity Ti3SiC2/NASICON composite. Thus, it is reasonable that the ε′ increased with elevated Ti3SiC2 concentration owing to the reduced porosity. For the conductive material, the contribution of ε″ was mainly controlled by conduction loss. Compared with the conductivity of Ti3SiC2 material (104 S/cm) [14], the conductivity of NASICON material (10−4 S/cm) [24] can be neglected. The content of Ti3SiC2 was the predominant factor of the conductivity loss, the ε″ increased with increasing Ti3SiC2 concentration.

Moreover, the dramatic increase of complex permittivity of as-sprayed coating with 40 wt% Ti3SiC2 concentration, especially for the imaginary part, can be explained as percolation effect [18]. When the content of Ti3SiC2 was lower than percolation threshold, the space among Ti3SiC2 particles was large and the conduction channels were not fully connected. The improvements of conductivity and permittivity were relatively less. When the content was close to percolation threshold, more Ti3SiC2 particles could contact each other and large quantities of conduction channels were formed as a chain. The conductivity and permittivity could be greatly enhanced. When the content reached percolation threshold, the conductive network was completely formed. The conductivity and permittivity would increase slowly by further increasing the content of Ti3SiC2.

In order to further investigate the microwave absorption properties of the coatings, the reflection loss (RL) was calculated according to Eqs. (1, 2). Figure 7 shows the optimum absorption properties of as-sprayed coatings with different Ti3SiC2 concentrations in the X-band. The optimum thickness became thinner as the content of Ti3SiC2 increased. The Ti3SiC2/NASICON coating with 30 wt% Ti3SiC2 concentration exhibited optimal microwave absorption property compared with the other coatings. The minimum RL (RLm) was − 12.4 dB at 9.63 GHz and the bandwidth (RL < − 5 dB) ranged from 8.39 to 12.4 GHz, which covered almost the whole frequency. Because too high permittivity results in bad impedance match, which causes strong reflection and weak absorption. The microwave absorption property of the coating with 40 wt% Ti3SiC2 concentration became worse.

The absorption property of Ti3SiC2/NASICON coating with 30 wt% Ti3SiC2 concentration in different thickness is shown in Fig. 8. The matching frequency moved to low frequency as the thickness increased. The absorption peak could be adjusted through changing the thickness of the coating. Considering the bandwidth and RLm, 1.4 mm was chosen as the optimal thickness.

The Ti3SiC2/NASICON composite coatings with different Ti3SiC2 concentrations were fabricated by atmospheric plasma spraying. The addition of Ti3SiC2 had an important influence on the dielectric and microwave absorption properties of the coating. The complex permittivity increased with increasing Ti3SiC2 concentration. The enhancement of ε′ was mainly due to the increased space charge polarization and decreased porosity. And the improvement of ε″ was ascribe to the enhanced conductivity loss. According to the result of RL, the Ti3SiC2/NASICON coating with 30 wt% Ti3SiC2 concentration showed the optimal microwave absorption property. It had a bandwidth of 4.01 GHz and RLm of − 12.4 dB at 9.63 GHz in 1.4 mm thickness, which revealed that the Ti3SiC2/NASICON composite coating could be a potential microwave absorption material. Much work should be done to further widen the bandwidth and reduce the RLm, such as fabricating the gradient coatings.