Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 (0.1 ≤ x ≤ 0.6) powders were prepared by a novel sol-gel method with high phase purity, densification activity and conductivity. Diffraction analyses showed that the solubility limit of Al3+ was reached at x = 0.5. The highest ionic conductivity was obtained for Li1.5Al0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3, which reached 1.0 × 10−3 S cm−1 at 25 °C when tested in ambient air. However, measurements in dry argon resulted in a conductivity of only 5 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 25 °C. Hence, the influence of moisture or water on microstructure and grain-boundary conductivity was investigated by impedance spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy, Raman spectroscopy, X-ray and neutron diffraction. An ion exchange of Li+ by protons could not be unambiguously achieved by exposure of LATP powder in water. Neutron diffraction of humidified samples did not clearly indicate the presence of water or protons in the crystal structure of LATP, whereas μ-Raman measurements confirmed the presence of water/protons on the sample surface and in the bulk material. A higher signal of the vibrational modes of H2O was measured on grain boundaries than in the grain interior on the sample surface as well as on the fractured surface of sintered specimens. Therefore the higher apparent conductivity of LATP samples may predominantly result from adsorbed water from ambient air at grain boundaries. Hence, the conductivity tested in dry argon represents the correct conductivity of LATP samples. The highest density after sintering is not necessarily leading to high conductivity but rather the microstructure plays the dominant role.

Aluminum-substituted lithium titanium phosphate (LATP) is one of the most promising candidates for solid-state electrolytes in lithium-based batteries. LATP was first reported in the late 1980s [1]. It belongs to the NASICON (Na super-ionic conductor) family [2], which crystallizes in rhombohedral structure (space group ). It shows high ionic conductivity (5–13∙10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature) [[3], [4], [5], [6]], chemical stability in ambient atmosphere, water, and even basic or acidic solutions [[7], [8], [9], [10], [11]], and high mechanical strength [12]. It has been frequently applied in advanced lithium-based batteries [7,[13], [14], [15]].

Although LATP has been developed for almost 30 years, there are still fundamental questions that have not been clearly answered. One of the most important questions is the optimized amount of Al-substitution in the LiTi2(PO4)3 structure. Aono et al., the discoverers of LATP, claimed the optimal amount of Al substitution in Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 (LATPx) is 0.3 < x < 0.4 (prepared by solid state reaction) [3], which corresponds to the upper limit of Al substitution in LATPx. Further substitution results in Al-rich secondary phases. Since normally the conductivity of a material is directly proportional to the amount of charge carriers [16], Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP0.3) or Li1.4Al0.4Ti1.6(PO4)3 (LATP0.4) should show the highest conductivity in the series because the Li+ concentration in the unit cell reaches a maximum. Until today, almost all of the subsequent related work focused on these two compositions. Although Cretin et al. indicated that better synthesis routes like the sol-gel method can shift the limit of Al substitution up to x = 0.6 [17], the reported conductivity of LATPx in their study was rather low (1–6∙10−5 S cm−1 at room temperature).

Another important fundamental question is the influence of water (or moisture) on LATP. Many studies discuss the stability of LATP in different solutions [[7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]]. These reports mainly focus on phase changes or chemical decomposition of LATP, mainly related to the grains of polycrystalline materials before and after contact with different solutions. The conclusion of the authors, stating that LATP is stable in ambient atmosphere or in aqueous solutions, only means that the grains of LATP samples or crystal structure show no obvious changes (e.g. phase transformations) in the above-mentioned conditions. However, the total conductivity, σtotal, of a polycrystalline material includes grain (bulk) conductivity (σb) and grain-boundary conductivity (σgb). The conditions at the grain boundaries may therefore largely influence the properties of a polycrystalline material. Particularly for LATP, it was reported that the total conductivity (σtotal = σb + σgb) of LATP is actually mainly influenced by σgb because σb can be 1 to 2 orders of magnitudes higher than σgb [12]. The conductivity tests in almost all former reports were performed directly in ambient air, without any consideration of a possible influence of moisture on the apparent conductivity of LATP materials. Takahashi et al. [18] reported that the apparent conductivity of LATP immersed in a LiCl aqueous solution decreased by one order of magnitude when the material was moved from ambient air into a dry glove box, indicating the possible impact of moisture on σgb. Moreover, even when only grain conductivity is considered, phase changes or chemical decomposition are not the only possible reasons causing the properties of LATP to alter in contact with water. Zhang et al. [19] investigated H+ ionic diffusion from water and acidic solution into LATP glass using both cyclic voltametric experiments and modeling approaches and revealed that the diffusion of H+ into the glassy LATP structure is negligibly low. In contrast, Thangadurai et al. confirmed an exchange between H+ and Li+ ions in water-treated Li5La3Nb2O12 polycrystalline samples using neutron diffraction (ND) experiments [20].

In this report, LATPx samples (0.1 ≤ x ≤ 0.6) were prepared by an aqueous solution-based sol-gel method [21,22], which can be used for large-scale powder preparation. The limit of Al substitution in this LATPx series is discussed. The influence of moisture or water on LATPx is investigated with respect to both bulk and grain-boundary properties. The crystal structures of dry and moisturized LATPx are studied by ND in detail in order to elucidate the Li+ ion conduction pathway and to validate the incorporation of protons, e.g. by ion exchange for Li+, into the structure of the moisturized sample.

For the preparation of LATPx powders, titanium (IV) isopropoxide (97%, Aldrich) was added to deionized water while stirring. A titanium hydroxide precipitate was formed immediately. The precipitate was filtered and washed. Deionized water and nitric acid (65%, Aldrich) was then added to the titanium hydroxide precipitation. When a clear TiO2+ nitrate solution was formed, a twofold molar amount of citric acid was added to form coordination compounds with TiO2+and in this way the solution was stabilized.

Stoichiometric amounts of LiNO3 (99%, Alfa Aesar) and Al(NO3)3 ·9 H2O (99%, Alfa Aesar) were weighed and added to the TiO2+ nitrate solution while stirring. After the salts were dissolved, a corresponding amount of NH4H2PO4 (99%, Merck) was then added to the solution and a sol was immediately formed. After about 1 h, a stiff gel was spontaneously formed. More detailed information on the synthesis can be found elsewhere [21,22].

The gel was dried at 80 °C for 24 h. The dried gel was then calcined at 600 °C for 3 h. The calcined powder was milled in ethanol with zirconia balls on a milling bench for 48 h. After drying, the powder was then put into a cylindrical pressing mold with a diameter of 13 mm and pressed at a uniaxial pressure of 100 MPa. The pressed pellets were sintered at 850–1050 °C for 5 h. Pure white samples were obtained after sintering. The XRD patterns of the sintered LATPx powder were collected with a Siemens D4 diffractometer using CuKα radiation.

The prepared dense LATPx pellets were sputtered with Au on both sides and sealed in Swagelok cells inside an Ar-filled glove-box to avoid continuous contact with moisture. The impedance spectra of the samples were recorded from −30 °C to 70 °C using a commercial electrochemical system (VMP-300, Bio-Logic SAS, with AC frequency range from 3 MHz to 1 Hz). For comparison, samples stored in ambient air for 72 h (~20 °C, relative humidity (RH) ~ 50%) were also tested in ambient conditions. A typical Li1.5Al0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3 (LATP0.5) sample with Au electrodes was immersed into deionized water for 24 h. After wiping off the surface water, the conductivity was tested in air. The sample was then stored in a drying oven (VOT, Memmert) at 70 °C in vacuum and after another 24 h, the conductivity was tested in dry Ar. The wet-dry cycles were repeated 5 times. Microstructures of the samples were investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM; Ultra55, Zeiss). The elemental content of Li, Al, Ti, and P in the water in which the sample had been immersed was analyzed by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES).

Room temperature μ-Raman spectra of dry and humidified polycrystalline samples were recorded in quasi-backscattering geometry under excitation of the 488 nm and 514.5 nm lines of a mixed Ar − Kr ion gas laser. The maximum laser power was 10 mW at the sample surface. A long working distance objective (Olympus, with a magnification 80×) with high numerical aperture (N.A. = 0.75). was used to focus the laser beam onto the sample surface in the form of a circular spot of about 2 μm in diameter, and to collect the scattered light. The scattered radiation was dispersed by a triple-monochromator (Horiba-Jobin Yvon, model T64000), set in double subtractive/single configuration and equipped with holographic gratings (1800 lines/mm). The detection of the filtered radiation was provided by a multichannel detector, which is an open-electrode CCD, consisting of a matrix of 1024 × 256 pixels, and nitrogen-cooled at −134 °C. The CCD maximum efficiency occurred in the green/yellow region. The spectral resolution was better than 0.6 cm−1/pixel (for 514.5 nm) and 0.8 cm−1/pixel (for 488 nm) within the whole spectral range of interest. The micro-probe setup was also coupled to a camera which allowed for the exploration and selection of the sample region to be measured. All the spectra were calibrated in wavenumber using the emission lines of an Ar spectral lamp and the Raman peak of an O2 molecule in air, occurring at 1550.5 cm−1, as well. The spectra reproducibility was monitored by means of repeated micro-Raman measurements carried out under the same experimental conditions from several grains, both in the middle and at the boundaries, of the densified LATPx pellets. In general, the spectra recorded from corresponding regions of different grains were matched perfectly.

In order to investigate possible proton substitution of Li, two samples with composition LATP0.5 were selected for X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) and ND experiments: one sample was handled and kept in dry Ar (hereafter named LATP_dry) and another sample was immersed in deionized water for 24 h and subsequently stored in air (LATP_wet). The diffraction experiments were carried out on a Bruker D4 diffractomer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54056 Å) and the time-of-flight (TOF) diffractometer POWGEN at the Spallation Neutron Source at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Unit cell parameters of both samples were determined with the program Powder cell [23]. For the ND experiments, the samples (~3 g) were placed in vanadium cans with 10 mm diameter. Data were collected in the TOF range between 6780 μs and 205,000 μs with two different wavelength bands of 1.066 Å and 2.665 Å at low temperature (10 K) and room temperature (300 K).

For structural Rietveld analyses and the calculation of Fourier difference maps to locate Li and H atoms, a combination of the programs FullProf [24] and Jana2006 [25] was used. The background was fitted by manually set points and linear interpolation. Peak profiles were modeled using pseudo-Voigt functions with back-to-back exponentials. Both samples showed one weak reflection of a minor amount of a secondary phase, which was identified as AlPO4 and was only observed by ND. Rietveld analyses on phase fractions of AlPO4 resulted in amounts of <0.5 wt%. Hence, for the refinements with full-matrix least-square against F2 only the NASICON-type structure was considered.

Table 1 shows the optimized sintering temperature and relative density for LATPx samples prepared by the aqueous solution-based sol-gel method. Pure LiTi2(PO4)3 cannot be sintered to high densities because it decomposes before it reaches the required sintering temperature. Ti4+ substitution with Al3+ and Li3+ in LiTi2(PO4)3 allows easier densification, because more Li in the structure decreases the melting point of the samples [26]. In the LATPx series prepared in this study, LATP0.1 cannot be densified to a relative density of >90%. Increasing the sintering temperature above 1050 °C does not result in a higher relative density of LATP0.1. Instead, secondary phases like LiTiOPO4 and AlPO4 are formed. Higher Al substitutions decrease the sintering temperature and increase the achieved relative density. LATP0.5 and LATP0.6 can be easily densified to relative densities >95% at only 875 °C. As an example, Fig. 1 shows the dependency of relative density on sintering temperature (5 h) for LATP0.5. After sintering at 800 °C, the relative density of LATP0.5 already reaches 90%. After sintering at 875 °C, the relative density of LATP0.5 reaches the highest value: 97%. A higher sintering temperature slightly decreases the relative density.

XRD patterns of the LATPx (0.1 ≤ x ≤ 0.6) samples sintered at optimized temperatures (see Table 1) are shown in Fig. 2a. For all compositions, LATPx crystallizes with the expected rhombohedral structure (space group ) and no secondary phases can be detected, except in LATP0.6, which shows small amounts of LiTi2O(PO4) and AlPO4. This indicates that the Al substitution limit using the sol-gel preparation route in this study is 0.5 < x < 0.6. The argument is further proven in Fig. 2b, which shows the lattice parameters of the different LATPx samples. Since the ionic radius of Al3+ (0.53 Å) is smaller than that of Ti4+ (0.60 Å) [27], both hexagonal lattice parameters a and c decrease with increasing Al substitution. However, LATP0.5 and LATP0.6 have almost the same lattice parameters, indicating the substitution of Al3+ in Ti4+ position stops at this level. Further Al substitution in the system results in secondary phases. Since a sol-gel method was applied as the processing route of LATPx powders, the starting materials are homogenously mixed in the molecular or nanometer level. Comparatively, in [3] the solid state reaction was applied as the preparation method, in which the starting materials were mixed on micrometer level. This might be the reason that in this study and in [17], the Al substitution limit of LATPx is 0.5 < x < 0.6, while that of the former report is only 0.3 < x < 0.4.

Fig. 3 shows the values of σtotal of LATPx samples freshly sintered at temperatures listed in Table 1 and measured in dry Ar atmosphere at 25 °C. For comparison, the σtotal of the same samples stored in ambient air atmosphere (~20 °C, RH ~ 50%) for 72 h was tested in air (RH ~ 50%) and at 25 °C. On the one hand, Fig. 3 shows that under both experimental conditions, the conductivity of LATPx samples increases with Al substitution until x = 0.5. As discussed in the introduction section, the conductivity of a material is directly proportional to the amount of charge carriers, indicating an increasing occupancy of Li sites in the unit cell caused by Al substitution leading to an increase in conductivity [16]. This is confirmed by crystal structure investigations on these materials: there are two preferred different sites for alkali cations (Li+ in the present case) located at the Wyckoff position of (6b) and (36f) [28]. The appropriate substitution of Ti4+ with trivalent metals like Al3+ induces Li+ occupancy on the 36f site, where Li+ ions have high mobility [29] which implies that higher Al3+ substitution leads to higher conductivity. LATP0.6 shows lower conductivity than LATP0.5 under both testing conditions, which may be due to the limit of Al substitution. A further increase of the Al content (x > 0.5) does not lead to an increase of charge carriers in the NASICON structure, but instead only results in secondary phases, as discussed in Section 3.1. It is worth noting that the dependence of σb on the Al substitution gave a maximum at x = 0.4 [30], indicating that the influence of microstructure and grain boundary conductivity slightly alters the dependence on composition.

More importantly, on the other hand, Fig. 3 shows obvious differences between the conductivities measured in air and dry Ar. It is the first time that such phenomenon is emphasized. However, Fig. 3 indicates that there must be an influence of storage and testing conditions on the conductivity of LATP samples. It should be stated here that the different microstructure of the sample exposed in air can lead to a decrease in conductivity, as reported in [31]. Fig. 4a shows the Nyquist plots of the LATP0.5 sample shown in Fig. 3, tested in ambient air and dry Ar at 25 °C. Only one semi-circle is found in each measurement. The right intercept of the semi-circle with the x-axis is regarded as the total resistance of the sample. The calculated σtotal is 1.0 × 10−3 and 5.3 × 10−4 S cm−1 in air and dry Ar, respectively. Since only one semi-circle can be distinguished from each Nyquist plot, bulk resistance and grain-boundary resistance are regarded as the intercept with the x-axis at high and low frequencies, respectively. However, because in the high-frequency range (left part of the semi-circle), the impedance data are nearly superposed to each other, while at the low-frequency range (right intercept of the semi-circle with the x-axis), they show significant differences, it can be concluded that the difference of σtotal for LATP0.5 tested at the different conditions mainly depends on the differences in σgb. The σb of dry and wet sample is nearly the same (see Table 2).

Fig. 4b shows the Arrhenius plot of σtotal for the sintered LATP0.5 sample tested in the two different conditions. The measurement in dry Ar shows normal linear behavior, with a calculated activation energy of 0.37 eV, which is comparable to former studies [12,17]. However, the Arrhenius plot for the sample tested in air is abnormally curved, especially between 10 °C and 50 °C. Such nonlinear behavior normally indicates a chemical reaction or phase transition. However, since σb is almost constant in both cases, as discussed above, the reaction with moisture is expected to occur at grain boundaries.

For further investigation of the interaction of LATP with water, sintered pellets were analyzed in more severe conditions. A sintered LATP0.5 sample was immersed in deionized water for 24 h, and after wiping off the surface water, its conductivity was measured in air. After drying the sample, the conductivity was measured in dry Ar. In total, the sample was subjected to five wet-dry cycles. Table 2 shows the apparent σtotal of the sample at 25 °C after exposure in water and after subsequent drying for each cycle. The original σtotal of the sample is 5.8 × 10−4 S cm−1 (measured in dry Ar). After immersing in deionized water, the apparent σtotal of the sample increases almost 5 times to 2.8 × 10−3 S cm−1. Since only surface water is wiped off, such high apparent σtotal should be attributed to the remaining water adsorbed on the surface and inside the ceramic. When the remaining water is removed, the σtotal of the sample decreases to 2.1 × 10−4 S cm−1, which is less than half of the original value. After each wet-dry cycle, the apparent σtotal decreases compared to the value of the previous cycle. After the fifth cycle, the apparent σtotal in the humidified state is 1.3 × 10−3 S cm−1, which is still much higher than the original value. However, after drying the sample, the apparent σtotal is 6.7 × 10−5 S cm−1, i.e. it decreased by almost one order of magnitude compared to the original value. This experiment shows that the exposure in water deteriorates the ionic conductivity and probably also the ceramic microstructure.

The impedance spectra of the LATP0.5 sample in the humidified and dried state during wet-dry cycling are shown in Fig. 5. Similar to the discussion of Fig. 4a, the Nyquist plots of LATP0.5 samples in the high-frequency range are quite superposed to the original sample, while in the low-frequency range they reveal significant differences. It can therefore be concluded that water or moisture exposure mainly affects grain boundaries, while the bulk conductivity hardly changes (Table 2).

Powder XRD analyses indicate no detectable crystallographic changes for the LATP0.5 sample before and after wet-dry cycles, which is in agreement with the former reports stating that LATP is chemically stable with water [[7], [8], [9], [10], [11]]. However, when the interaction of water and the sample only happens at the disordered regions on the grain boundaries, XRD is not the appropriate analytical tool. Fig. 6 compares the microstructure of polished cross-sections of an originally sintered LATP0.5 sample, a sample after five wet-dry cycles, and a sample that has been exposed to ambient (humid) air for three weeks. The grain boundaries of the pristine sample are barely seen in the figure (see Fig. 6a). However, after five wet-dry cycles, several micro-cracks appear between the grains (see Fig. 6b), indicating the degradation of grain boundaries by water. The element content of Li, Al, Ti, and P in the water where the sample had been immersed was analyzed by ICP-OES. Li and P together account for >99.5 mol% of these four elements, with a Li:P molar ratio of ~2:1, indicating that soluble lithium and phosphate compounds were dissolved from the LATP0.5 sample into the water. Likewise, the sample exposed to humid air degrades mainly along the grain boundaries, where nodules of lithium carbonate are observed in the SEM image (Fig. 6c).

The above investigations indicate that phosphate salts of lithium exist at grain boundaries of the LATP samples. When the samples are stored and tested in air, the lithium salts absorb moisture and become conductive, whereby the σgb of the samples largely increases. This explains why in Fig. 3 the apparent σtotal of the sample stored and tested in air is almost twice as high than that of the sample freshly prepared and tested in dry Ar. In more critical conditions like direct exposure to water, the lithium salts at the grain boundaries absorb even more water and become more conductive, which results in a 5 times higher σtotal compared to the original sample. However, because the lithium salts slowly dissolve in water, the structure of the grain boundaries is also slowly damaged during the wet-dry cycles (see Fig. 6). This is the reason why after each wet-dry cycle, the apparent σtotal decreases compared to the value of the previous cycle.

Although no obvious phase change was detected after immersing LATP0.5 samples in water and grain boundary conductivity predominantly contributes to the increased conductivity as discussed above, the bulk material might also react with water, e.g. by exchange of Li+ with H+. Therefore, the crystal structures of LATP0.5 in the humidified and dry state were studied by neutron diffraction. Refined lattice parameters, unit cell volume and residual values of the refinement for all samples are in given in Table 3. The lattice parameters of the LATP_wet sample are slightly larger than those of LATP_dry. During the refinements, the Li atoms were localized and checked for their substitution by protons, which possibly influences Li+ ion conduction. The neutron coherent scattering lengths of Li, H, Ti, Al, P, and O atoms are −1.90 fm, −3.74 fm, −3.44 fm, +3.45 fm, +5.13 fm and +5.80 fm, respectively. The O and P atoms show the highest scattering lengths, so their positions can be determined accurately. The mixed occupancy or ordering of Ti/Al atoms can easily be detected due to the large difference in scattering length. If a proton H+ is bound in the crystal structure, it can be determined and distinguished from Li+ due to the different scattering length.

The refinement started with the rhombohedral NASICON structure model (space group ) [28]. A number of different crystallographic sites, which could be occupied with Li+ ions along the conduction path, are discussed in the literature [28,[30], [31], [32], [33], [34]]. They are labeled M1 (6b at (0 0 0), M2 (18e (x 0 1/4)), M3 (36f (x y z)) and M4 6a (0 0 1/4)). The M1 site is often fully occupied in Li-NASICON structures, whereas other sites are partly occupied or completely unoccupied. Refinements showed that the Al atoms substitute only Ti atoms. The Ti/Al atomic ratio was constrained to the value obtained from the ICP-OES analyses [21]. Equivalent atomic displacement parameters with an overall thermal parameter were used to stabilize the refinement of the occupancies. The M1 site is – as expected – fully occupied by Li atoms in the case of the LATP_dry sample. From the calculation of observed Fourier maps, two peaks with nuclear densities of −0.55/Å3 and −0.4/Å3 can be found close to the crystallographic18e and 6a sites, respectively. Interestingly, the attempts to refine the structure with both sites or only the 6a site occupied failed. The final refinements at 10 K and 300 K were therefore carried out with Li atoms on the 18e site. The selected interatomic distances are given in Table 4.

In the water-treated sample (LATP_wet), the basic [(Ti/Al)2P3O12](1+x)– framework structure was the same as in the LATP_dry sample. In addition to the Li nuclear density peak at the 18e site, the Fourier analyses of the low-temperature data showed a minimum of −0.3 e/Å3 at 36f site with coordinates of (0.344, −0.003, 0.171) in the density map, which we assumed to possibly originate from protons. This 36f site is common for Li atoms [32], however coexistence of both sites occupied by Li is rather unusual. Including the protons at this site, the structure refinement converged to Rp value of 1.45%, which is virtually the same value as for a refinement without lithium (1.47%). Refining the total occupancy of Li and H was only possible under the constraint of charge balance with the [(Ti/Al)2P3O12](1+x)– polyanion, resulting in a chemical composition of Li1.27(5)H0.23Al0.5Ti1.5P3O12. The calculated O–H distance is 1.40 Å, which is rather large considering that the sum of the ionic radii is approximately 1 Å. All other atomic distances are similar in LATP_wet and LATP_dry. The small (0.1%) increase of the unit cell parameters of LATP_wet can only be explained with an uptake of protons, i.e. the presence of protons on an additional site in the crystal structure. If protons were substituting Li+ on the same site, a shrinking unit cell is expected because the atomic radius of H+ is smaller than that of Li+. However, including the consideration of protons does not significantly improve the quality of the refinement and results in rather large O–H distances. Therefore neutron diffraction does not provide conclusive evidence for the presence of protons in the crystal structure of bulk LATP. In order to confirm the presence or absence of protons in the bulk phase, μ-Raman spectroscopy experiments were carried out.

Raman spectra were recorded from different sintered pellets of LATPx samples (Fig. 7a). The Raman modes of the rhombohedral Li2Ti(PO4)3 crystal with NASICON structure appear between 100 cm−1 and 1100 cm−1 [35]. In comparison to the spectrum of unsubstituted LiTi2(PO4)3, the Raman modes of LATPx are broader due to the atomic disorder in the lattice. In addition, the bands between 500 cm−1 to 800 cm−1 indicate the appearance of infrared and silent modes due to the break of symmetry rules resulting from the increasing degree of substitution, whereas new modes at 1150–1300 cm−1 become visible and increase in intensity with increasing x. The modes of water, H3O+ or OH− ions, however, are usually detected at 1500–1750 cm−1. The spectra observed from water in this spectral region show a broad asymmetric band at about 1640 cm−1 and are discussed in terms of intramolecular bending vibrational ν2 modes [36,37]. The spectra reported in [37] consist of two components, a paramount one peaking at about 1640 cm−1 and another, relatively less important, centred at about 1580 cm−1, which according to Walrafen and Blatz [36] are thought to arise from different levels of hydrogen bonding. The spectra shown in Fig. 7b clearly show the presence of water both at the surface and at the grain boundary of the humidified LATP0.5 sample, as suggested by the presence of a broad band with a very similar shape to that observed in liquid water [37]. In fact, these two components appearing at about 1580 cm−1 and 1640 cm−1 become more visible and even better resolved when the laser beam is focused on grain boundaries. Measurements at different grain boundaries result in a reproducible difference with respect to measurements performed directly on the grain surfaces. Similar evidences about the water presence, both at the grain surface and at the grain boundaries of the humidified LATP0.5 sample, were obtained by measurements on the section centre of freshly fractured samples. Therefore these experimental findings definitively suggest the occurrence of water adsorbed at the whole sample surface with enrichments at grain boundaries in humidified LAPT0.5, but also show the presence of structural water within the grain interior, which was clearly detected by Raman measurements carried out on the bulk sample, either at the outer grain surface or at the fracture surface of broken sintered pellets.

A novel sol-gel method was presented for the preparation of Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 (0.1 ≤ x ≤ 0.6) powders with high phase purity, sinterability and conductivity. The maximum amount of Al that can be incorporated into the structure was in the range of 0.5 < x < 0.6. The highest ionic conductivity was observed for Li1.5Al0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3, which reaches 5 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 25 °C when measured in dry argon. Interestingly, the conductivity of the same sample increased to 1.0 × 10−3 S cm−1 at 25 °C when the measurement was carried out again after storage in ambient air for three days. An even higher conductivity (2.8 × 10−3 S cm−1) was observed after immersing the sample in water for 24 h. Nyquist plots of the impedance data showed that mainly grain boundary conductivity increased, which was caused by a reaction of lithium phosphates at grain boundaries with water. Whereas the presence of protons in the bulk material cannot be unequivocally clarified by neutron diffraction analysis, μ-Raman spectroscopy clearly shows the presence of water on the whole sample surface and within the sintered pellet with a higher concentration found at grain boundaries. Upon repeated wet-dry cycles, the conductivity decreased because Li salts at grain boundaries dissolved, hence damaging the microstructure. This study shows that using standardized conditions for conductivity measurements is important to obtain reliable data. In the present case, moisture from ambient air initially caused an increase in conductivity, whereas long-term and repeated exposure to water resulted in degradation of the material and hence, decreased conductivity.