Polycrystalline NASICON-type Li-ion conductor LiZr2(PO4)3 (LZPO) with different ratios of Li isotopes, namely 6LiZr2(PO4)3 (6-LZPO), 7LiZr2(PO4)3 (7-LZPO), and LZPO with the natural Li isotope ratio (n-LZPO), has been synthesized by a conventional solid state reaction. The phase transformation as a function of temperature between the low-temperature triclinic phase, which exhibits lower Li-ion conductivity, and high-temperature rhombohedral phase, which exhibits higher Li-ion conductivity, has been evaluated by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD), electron diffraction, and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements. According to XRD and DSC measurements, the phase transition temperature decreases in the order 6-LZPO > n-LZPO ≈ 7-LZPO. The dependence of phase transition temperature on the Li isotope implies that Li ions have a strong effect on phase stability. The phase transition is primarily related to the change in configuration entropy of Li ions in LZPO.

All-solid-state Li batteries are expected to exhibit high energy density and safety [[1], [2], [3]], and Li-ion solid electrolytes with high ionic conductivity are needed for practical application. Oxide ceramic electrolytes are preferable over sulfide electrolytes for all-solid-state batteries because of their chemical stability under ambient conditions [4]. However, when oxide ceramic electrolytes are used in all-solid-state batteries, we are confronted with a number of difficulties: (1) high resistivity of the electrolyte as well as the interface between the electrolyte and electrodes, and (2) lack of electrochemical stability such as susceptibility of the electrolyte to reduction by Li-containing anodes. An oxide solid-state electrolyte exhibiting both high ionic conductivity and electrochemical stability is most desirable for use as the electrolyte in an all-solid-state battery. The NASICON-type Li-ion conductor LiZr2(PO4)3 (abbreviated hereafter as LZPO) is a promising candidate of oxide electrolyte for solid-state batteries [5]. LZPO undergoes a first-order phase transition between triclinic (space group ) and rhombohedral (space group ) phases in the range 300 K (30 °C) to 330 K (60 °C). The crystal structures of triclinic and rhombohedral phases drawn with VESTA [6] using the structural data by Catti et al. [[7], [8], [9]] are shown in Fig. 1. The high-temperature rhombohedral phase exhibits high Li-ion conductivity [[7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16]]. In order to achieve high ionic conductivity at room temperature in this material, many attempts to stabilize the rhombohedral phase by substituting aliovalent and/or isovalent cations for Zr have been made [13,[17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22]]. Considering the close relationship between the phase transition and ionic conductivity in LZPO, elucidation of the factors controlling the phase transition is an important contribution to the development of solid electrolytes exhibiting high Li-ion conductivity. In this study, rather than examining the influence of dopants on the phase transition, we instead examine the influence of different Li isotopes on the phase transition in LZPO to better understand how mobile Li ions affect the stability of different polymorphs.

Polycrystalline LZPO samples were synthesized by a conventional solid state reaction using powders of Li2CO3 (>99.99%) with different Li isotope ratios (natural Li2CO3 (6Li: 7 atom%), 6Li-enriched 6Li2CO3 (6Li: >95 atom%), and 7Li-enriched 7Li2CO3 (7Li: >99 atom%)), ZrO2 (>99.99%), and NH4H2PO4 (>99.0%). As Li vaporizes easily during synthesis at elevated temperature, an excess of 5% Li2CO3 was added. Mixtures of starting materials were calcined at 250 °C for 1 h and 900 °C for 8 h in air with an intermediate grinding. Calcined powders were ground and pressed into pellets and fired at 1200 °C for 4 h in air. Phase identification of sintered pellets was performed by powder X-ray diffraction with Cu Kα radiation using a PANalytical X'Pert3 Powder diffraction system at room temperature. Phase evolution with temperature was also examined in the temperature range 300–350 K using the same diffractometer. Powder samples were then placed on a hand-made sample-holder with a heater element, and the temperature was monitored using a K-type thermocouple attached to the samples. Structural evolution was also confirmed by Fourier transforming images obtained using a JEOL JEM-ARM200F transmission electron microscope (TEM) with an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. The phase transition was also evaluated by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) using a SIMADZU DSC-60 calorimeter in air in the temperature range 300–400 K. The heat capacities of sintered samples of 6-LZPO and 7-LZPO were measured in the temperature range 2–306 K using the hybrid adiabatic relaxation method with a Quantum Design PPMS system.

All three polycrystalline LZPO samples crystallized in the triclinic phase with space group  at room temperature, consistent with previous results [7]. Fig. 2 shows TEM images and corresponding Fourier transforms of n-LZPO at 313 K (40 °C) and 353 K (80 °C). Although it is difficult to detect the change directly from the TEM images, the spots in the Fourier transform image at 313 K marked with red circles in Fig. 2(b) disappear at 353 K (Fig. 2(d)), indicating that the phase transition occurred between these two temperatures.

Fig. 3 shows the evolution of X-ray diffraction patterns for 6-LZPO with increasing temperature. Peaks corresponding to the rhombohedral phase first appeared at 322 K (49 °C), and at 350 K (77 °C) only the rhombohedral phase was observed. In the X-ray diffraction patterns for n-LZPO and 7-LZPO, similar behavior to 6-LZPO was observed although the transition temperatures were different.

Fig. 4 compares the evolution of X-ray diffraction patterns of 6-LZPO and 7-LZPO on heating. A transformation from triclinic phase to rhombohedral phase was clearly observed in both compounds. In 6-LZPO the rhombohedral phase first appeared at 47 °C, while in 7-LZPO the rhombohedral phase first appeared at 45 °C, indicating that the phase transition temperature of 6-LZPO is greater than that of 7-LZPO. In order to investigate the phase transition thermo-chemically, we performed DSC measurements.

Fig. 5 shows DSC curves with a heating rate of 10 K/min for 6-LZPO, n-LZPO, and 7-LZPO, which correspond to samples 6Li-1, n-Li-1, and 7Li-1 in Table 1, respectively. An endothermic peak was observed in all cases, and the position of this peak varied depending on the Li isotope ratio of the sample. In addition, all samples also exhibited a hysteresis on heating and cooling. These findings indicate that the phase transition is a first order transition. This is consistent with the abrupt decrease in volume when the structure changes from triclinic to rhombohedral [[7], [8], [9]]. The onset and peak temperatures and the change of enthalpy, ΔH, accompanying the phase transition on heating are listed in Table 1. Here, ΔH was estimated from the endothermic peak.

Data in Table 1 show that the phase transition temperature of 6-LZPO is >7-LZPO, while the phase transition temperature of n-LZPO is close to that of 7-LZPO. However, we cannot determine the order between n-LZPO and 7-LZPO. This is attributable to the isotope ratio of >90 atom% 7Li in natural Li. The positive value of ΔH indicates that the enthalpy H of the triclinic phase (hereafter, abbreviated as LT-LZPO) is more negative than that of the rhombohedral phase (hereafter abbreviated as HT-LZPO), which is consistent with the DFT calculations of Ikeda et al. [23]. If HT-LZPO is more stable than LT-LZPO, the entropy, S, of HT-LZPO must be greater than that of LT-LZPO. Using the standard relation between the change in the Gibbs free energy, enthalpy and entropy under constant pressure, together with the onset temperature for the phase transition, the change of entropy, ΔS, was estimated as shown in Table 1.

The positive value of ΔS is also consistent with the increase in the number of equivalent sites for a Li ion to occupy in HT-LZPO compared to LT-LZPO, which is related to the higher Li-ion conductivity of HT-LZPO. We consider the change of entropy accompanying changes in Li-ion configurations. The entropy with respect to Li-ion configurations of phase i (hereafter, abbreviated as Sconfig. (i)) can be described in terms of the Boltzmann entropy equation:(1)Here, NA is the Avogadro constant, k is the Boltzmann constant, and Wi is the number of Li-ion configurations of phase i. According to the structural refinement by Catti et al. [[7], [8], [9]] (see Fig. 1), in the  triclinic phase, Li ions are distributed over two sites, Li1 and Li2, with occupancies of 0.71(3) and 0.29(3), respectively, while in the  rhombohedral phase, most Li ions occupy 6-fold split sites (36f sites) centered on 6b sites. Therefore, Wconfig. (LT-LZPO) is close to one, and Wconfig. (HT-LZPO) is close to six. Since the change of entropy, ΔSconfig., is given by NAk ln (Wconfig. (HT-LZPO)/Wconfig. (LT-LZPO)) using Eq. (1), ΔSconfig. is estimated to be 14.9 J·K−1·mol−1 when Wconfig. (HT-LZPO)/Wconfig. (LT-LZPO) = 6. This value is close to the experimental values of ΔS listed in Table 1. These findings thus support the conjecture that ΔS is primarily attributable to the change in Li-ion configurational entropy.

Next, we consider the difference in S between 6-LZPO and 7-LZPO using the Debye model. As the phonon frequency with respect to Li for 6-LZPO is greater than that for 7-LZPO, the Debye temperature for 6-LZPO is greater than that for 7-LZPO, resulting in a greater specific heat, Cp, for 7-LZPO than for 6-LZPO at the same temperature. This indicates that S for 7-LZPO is greater than that for 6-LZPO at the same temperature. Fig. 6 shows the temperature dependence of Cp of triclinic phases for 6-LZPO and 7-LZPO in the temperature range 2–306 K. The values of Cp are almost the same for both samples. S at 300 K calculated from the Cp are 292.0 (8) J·K−1·mol−1 and 292.0 (7) J·K−1·mol−1 for 6-LZPO and 7-LZPO, respectively, indicating that the difference of Li isotopes exerts little influence on S. Although the entropy of rhombohedral phase cannot be experimentally obtained, the same behavior is expected. The order of S in the triclinic (LT) and rhombohedral (HT) phases for 6-LZPO and 7-LZPO is expected to be as follows: S (7-HT) ≈ S (6-HT) > S (7-LT) ≈ S (6-LT), where, for example, 7-HT denotes the high-temperature rhombohedral phase of 7-LZPO. The transition temperature, Ttr, can be described using Eqs.

We find that the relation between Ttr(6Li) and Ttr(7Li) cannot be determined solely from differences in S, namely S (7-HT) ≈ S (6-HT) > S (7-LT) ≈ S (6-LT). One of the possible relationship between the Gibbs free energies of monoclinic (LT) and rhombohedral (HT) phases of 6-LZPO and 7-LZPO as a function of temperature is shown in Fig. 7, assuming that H (7Li) is more negative than H (6Li) at T = 0 K. In order to discuss this phenomenon quantitatively, we need more precise thermal data on the phase transition. However, the measurable effect of Li isotopes on the phase transition implies that Li ions play an important role in determining the phase stability. The phase transition is primarily related to the change in configurational entropy of Li in LZPO.

Finally we comment on the ion substitution effect on phase transition. As mentioned in the Introduction, stabilization of the rhombohedral phase exhibiting high ionic conductivity can be achieved by substituting aliovalent cations for Zr. The effectiveness of substitution can be explained in terms of changes in configurational entropy, as the concentration of Li ions and vacancies varies with the amount of aliovalent ion substitution according to Li1+xZr2-xM′x(PO4)3 (M′ = trivalent ion) and Li1-xZr2-xM″x(PO4)3 (M″ = pentavalent ion). Trivalent and pentavalent ion substitutions both increase the entropy of Li in the HT phase, resulting in a decrease in phase transition temperature. A theoretical investigation of the effect of Li-ion diffusion and the Li isotope on the phase transition in LiZr2(PO4)3 will be published elsewhere [23].

In this study, we examined the effect of Li isotopes on the phase transition between triclinic and rhombohedral phases of NASICON-type LiZr2(PO4)3. The phase transition temperature decreased in the order 6-LZPO > n-LZPO ≈ 7-LZPO. Although the reason for this order could not fully elucidated, we found that Li ions have a strong effect on the phase transition. An increase in the number of Li-ion configurations results in a lowering of the triclinic-to-rhombohedral phase transition temperature, which explains why high conductivity in LiZr2(PO4)3 can be achieved by aliovalent ion substitution.