In this critical Review we focus on the evolution of the hybrid ion capacitor (HIC) from its early embodiments to its modern form, focusing on the key outstanding scientific and technological questions that necessitate further in-depth study. It may be argued that HICs began as aqueous systems, based on a Faradaic oxide positive electrode (e.g., Co3O4, RuOx) and an activated carbon ion-adsorption negative electrode. In these early embodiments HICs were meant to compete directly with electrical double layer capacitors (EDLCs), rather than with the much higher energy secondary batteries. The HIC design then evolved to be based on a wide voltage (∼4.2 V) carbonate-based battery electrolyte, using an insertion titanium oxide compound anode (Li4Ti5O12, LixTi5O12) versus a Li ion adsorption porous carbon cathode. The modern Na and Li architectures contain a diverse range of nanostructured materials in both electrodes, including TiO2, Li7Ti5O12, Li4Ti5O12, Na6LiTi5O12, Na2Ti3O7, graphene, hard carbon, soft carbon, graphite, carbon nanosheets, pseudocapacitor T-Nb2O5, V2O5, MXene, conversion compounds MoS2, VN, MnO, and Fe2O3/Fe3O4, cathodes based on Na3V2(PO4)3, NaTi2(PO4)3, sodium super ionic conductor (NASICON), etc. The Ragone chart characteristics of HIC devices critically depend on their anode–cathode architectures. Combining electrodes with the flattest capacity versus voltage characteristics, and the largest total voltage window, yields superior energy. Unfortunately “flat voltage” materials undergo significant volume expansion/contraction during cycling and are frequently lifetime limited. Overall more research on HIC cathodes is needed; apart from high surface area carbon, very few positive electrodes demonstrate the necessary 10 000 or 100 000 plus cycle life. It remains to be determined whether its lithium ion capacitors (LICs) or sodium ion capacitors (NICs) are superior in terms of energy–power and cyclability. We discuss unresolved issues, including poorly understood fast-charge storage mechanisms, prelithiation and presodiation, solid electrolyte interface (SEI) formation, and high-rate metal plating.

The Review will discuss both lithium ion capacitors (LICs) and sodium ion capacitors (NICs), tracing the scientific evolution from the former to the latter. We assume that the readers are versed in ultracapacitor and secondary ion battery (LIB, NIB, and SIB) literature, which in our opinion is a prerequisite to being productive in the HIC field. The concept of a hybridized device is rooted in an aqueous asymmetrical ultracapacitor, where the negative electrode is an inert activated carbon while the positive electrode is a surface redox-active oxide. Such systems were designed to compete with electrical double layer (EDLC) ultracapacitors and were not envisioned to be a substitute for the much higher energy but lower power secondary batteries. We strongly argue that this historical view is indeed correct: Given the performance advantages and limitations of HICs, their technological niche lies in ultracapacitor-like high power–high cyclability applications, but where 3–4 times higher energy versus an ultracap warrants the additional device complexity and reduced cycling life. In section 2, we detail this point, providing numerical performance comparisons between conventional LIBs, ultracapacitors, and emerging HIC devices. We also identify applications where HICs may excel over either ultracaps or LIBs and discuss why we believe that HICs are a competitor only to the former.

In section 3, we go through some of the overlooked history, tracing the origin of HICs to the classic Conway and co-workers concepts of asymmetric aqueous ultracapacitor devices equipped with a redox oxide positive electrode. In section 4, we discuss the first modern embodiment of a HIC, which was a lithium ion capacitor (LIC) based on a Li4Ti5O12 intercalation material anode and an activated carbon cathode. This concept—a high-voltage battery carbonate electrolyte, an ion insertion anode, and an ion adsorption cathode—has largely remained since then, with subsequent rate improvements being achieved for the anode though nanostructuring. Section 5 addresses these performance improvements explicitly. We argue that one may view the transition to “intrinsically parallel”, i.e., high-energy and high-power dual-material electrodes, as a natural evolution of the ongoing drive to overcome the solid-state diffusional limitation intrinsic of bulk ion storage. Section 6 concerns a topic that in our opinion has not received sufficient attention. HIC devices are supposed to survive 100 000 cycles or even more, so the Coulombic efficiency (CE) is of the essence. Even a 0.01% loss per cycle is unacceptable. Moreover, HICs typically possess more limited supplies of Li or Na ions than conventional LIBs, making the solid electrolyte interface (SEI)-induced CE loss very problematic. Likewise it is absolutely critical that Li or Na metal plating does not occur, because the danger of a catastrophic dendrite event may be much higher than with LIBs, due to the order(s) of magnitude higher cycle number and charge rates.

Section 7 provides the rationale for the new and intense focus on Na-based technology. The rationale may be viewed as 2-fold: First, the long-term economics and geographic availability of Na are more favorable than with Li. Second, there is growing evidence that Na has lower propensity than Li to metallically plate into nanopores at low voltages. This has the potential to make the NIC system much safer than the LIC system in terms of avoiding cycle-induced dendrite formation. Section 8 covers an important albeit overlooked issue in HIC literature. Unlike a standard lithium or sodium ion battery, where the charge carrier ions are stored in the oxide-based cathode, Li or Na ions are not intrinsic to the cathode (or the anode). Hence, either the device relies exclusively on the ions within the electrolyte (like a conventional ultracapacitor) or there is a secondary process to introduce the ions into the cathode and/or anode. Broadly speaking, the two key approaches are based on either introducing a separate lithiation/sodiation step into the electrode fabrication process or adding a secondary phase that is the source of ions into one or both electrodes.

Section 9 discusses the wide range of electrode materials and architectures that are rapidly appearing in the scientific literature. Here we provide some critical perspectives regarding their overall prospects as viewed from a voltage, cyclability, and rate-capability perspective. We provide extensive comparisons and an associated discussion of the rate capability of electrode materials, as well as of energy–power characteristics of devices. Section 9.1 is titanium oxide compound based Li anodes; section 9.2 is titanium oxide compound based Na anodes; section 9.3 is architectures employing titanium compounds; section 9.4 is hard carbons for Li anodes; section 9.5 is hard carbons for Na anodes; section 9.6 is all carbon architectures; section 9.7 is pseudocapacitive oxides; section 9.8 is MXenes; section 9.9 is conversion compounds; and section 9.10 is intercalation compounds. Section 10 places these comparisons in graphical format, providing a series of quantitative Ragone charts from the compiled literature data. We also provide a concluding outlook, pointing out the important yet insufficiently explored topics in the fundamental science of HIC materials. We hope that this Review may be useful to the energy-storage community as a roadmap regarding the past, the present, and the future of highly scientifically exciting and potentially technologically game-changing hybridized ion capacitors.

Concerning the electrode-labeling convention employed in this Review: In a symmetric carbon–carbon device there are no anode and cathode per se because the thermodynamic state of the two electrodes is identical. This is distinct from a ceramic cathode versus lithium metal half-cell, where the ceramic possesses an intrinsically higher redox stability and is at a positive voltage relative to Li/Li+ (ΔG = −nFE). When an ultracapacitor is charged, one electrode is negatively polarized whereas the opposite one is positively polarized, with the two voltage excursions being equal and opposite for the case of a symmetric device. In this Review we will employ the terms “anode–cathode” and “positive electrode–negative electrode” interchangeably, agreeing with what is done in the ultracap and HIC communities. However, we recognize that, for symmetric cells, the terms positive electrode–negative electrode are more accurate, because the polarity of the test cell may be reversed while obtaining in principle the same electrochemical response.

Electrical energy-storage systems play a crucial role in consumer electronics, automotive, aerospace, and stationary markets. There are primarily two types of devices for reversible electrochemical energy storage, secondary batteries, and electrochemical capacitors (ultracapacitors and supercapacitors). The former offers a high energy density, while the latter offers high power and high cyclability. The dominant current technology is the lithium ion battery (LIB), which is based on a Li-containing ceramic oxide cathode and a graphite anode. For instance, commercial Panasonic lithium ion batteries (LIBs) deliver a specific energy upward of 200 Wh kg–1, but with a maximum specific power being below 350 W kg–1. By contrast, most commercial electrochemical capacitors possess specific power values as high as 10 kW kg–1, but with specific energies in the 5 Wh kg–1 range. An emerging target for an advanced electrical energy-storage devices is to deliver both high energy and high power in a single system. (1−7) A hybrid ion capacitor (HIC) is a relatively new device that is intermediate in energy between batteries and supercapacitors, while in principle offering supercapacitor-like power and cyclability values.

One important potential end-use of HIC devices is in regenerative braking. Regenerative braking energy harvesting from trains, heavy automotive, and ultimately light vehicles represents a huge potential market that remains not fully exploited due to the limitations of existing secondary battery and supercapacitor (electrochemical capacitor and ultracapacitor) technologies. For instance, The New York City (NYC) Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) uses ∼2 150 GWh of energy per year for train locomotion, with a total cost of more than $250 000 000 per year. (9) On-board regenerative braking, as illustrated in Figure 1, is a potential path for recovering a major fraction of that energy. (8) A recent highly publicized study by Dayton T. Brown concluded that neither battery nor supercapacitor solutions are able to meet the requirements, due to energy density limitations, heat dissipation problems, and overall implementation cost. (10) Supercapacitors do not possess the intrinsic energy-storage density required for economical and space-efficient deployment. In effect they are too bulky by weight, by volume, or by cost, i.e., kWh/$. Conversely, LIBs do not possess sufficient power to harvest even a notable fraction of the stopping energy, which requires a charging rate as high as 200C (1C is 1 h charge, 200C is 18 s charge).

Hybrid ion capacitors (HICs) represent an emerging class of devices that may bridge the performance of commercial EDLC ultracapacitors and conventional ion batteries. (12−15) In our opinion, a HIC will never compete with lithium or sodium ion batteries (LIBs or NIBs) in terms of energy per weight or per volume. Hence, it will not displace a LIB or a NIB when energy density or specific energy is key. As indicated, sodium- or lithium-based ion capacitors (HICs and LICs) are capable of yielding energy values 4 or 5 times higher than EDLC ultracapacitors. This superior energy is achieved by relying on a carbonate-based battery electrolyte that gives a higher device voltage than standard ultracap acetonitrile (∼4.2 vs ∼2.7 V) and having at least one of the electrodes store charge by bulk mechanisms. Hence, HICs appear suited to compete head on with electrochemical ultracapacitor technology. The performance of HIC is illustrated by a Ragone chart shown in Figure 2A, which shows a typical energy–power performance of a carbon nanosheet (CNS)-based hybrid ion capacitor (HIC), labeled “3D-MnO/CNS||3D-CNS”. (11) As may be observed, such a device operates in the 25–50 Wh/kg specific energy range (roughly 1/10th to 1/5th of the state-of-the-art LIB), while delivering specific powers in the 1 000–10 000 W/kg range (5× to 50× that of a LIB). Although researchers have viewed HICs to represent the extreme end of high-power secondary ion batteries, their voltage profiles are not analogous to conventional batteries even when batteries are operated at maximum rate. As Figure 2B illustrates, the voltage versus capacity profile of HICs is closer to that of a classical ultracapacitor, i.e., nearly triangular without obvious plateaus.

The performance matrices and design principles for commercial ultracapacitors are well-established. Conversely, scientific literature-based HIC performance standards are often a combination of seemingly arbitrary battery and ultracapacitor metrics, e.g., 5 000–10 000 cycles at full charge–discharge. This is not optimum, as compromising certain ultracapacitor criteria may render hybrid devices uncompetitive for most applications. For example, a nonoptimum compromise is choosing a target cycling lifetime value intermediate between long-cycle lithium ion batteries (∼2 000) and ultracaps (>100 000). While 5 000 cycles is a very impressive lifetime for a LIB, it is far below any targeted application of an ultracapacitor that may continuously cycle at tens, hundreds, or even thousands of charges per day. Hence, the first goal of this Review is to provide an argument that hybrid ion devices, be it Na- or Li-based, should be judged according to ultracapacitor criteria.

The core of a classic hybrid ion capacitor (HIC) is the concept that an electrode that stores charge based on reversible surface adsorption of ions may be combined in a series with an electrode that stores charge by a bulk process. The nature of the surface charge storage process may vary, being one or a combination of pure capacitive EDLCs, reversible ion adsorption at defects/heteroatoms, reversible surface redox reactions, or even reversible surface plating of metallic nanoparticles. Likewise, the nature of the bulk ion storage process could vary too and may include reversible ion intercalation, adsorption at bulk defects including heteroatoms, bulk conversion reactions, bulk alloying reactions, bulk formation of intermediate compounds, etc. The core premise, however, is to combine a bulk electrode and a surface electrode. Yet at high rates and with modern highly nanostructured materials, surface and bulk contributions begin to blur, especially in the anode.

Figure 3 shows the microstructure, charge–discharge curves, and Ragone chart characteristics of an asymmetric ultracapacitor based on an activated carbon negative electrode and a graphene–nickel cobaltite (NiCo2O4) positive electrode. (16) It may be observed that, apart from the lower voltage window required by an aqueous (6 M KOH) electrolyte, the galvanostatic performance of such asymmetric devices is much closer to that of HICs than it is to conventional EDLC capacitors. For a pure EDLC system, by definition there is a linear voltage versus capacity behavior on both charging and discharging. The charge–discharge curve must then be triangular, with the ΔQ/ΔV being constant at all voltages. In an ideal case, the Coulombic efficiency (CE) of an EDLC device is 100%, and the charge–discharge curves are fully symmetric both in shape and in time to charge versus time to discharge. Except in rare cases such as for MnOx (to be discussed shortly), faradic systems will have notable deviation from linearity and an asymmetry between charge and discharge. In addition to the intrinsic nonlinearity of the redox processes, asymmetric reduction–oxidation overpotentials and parasitic side reactions will contribute to the non-EDLC like behavior.

Early versions of a hybridized bulk–surface device was put forth by Conway and co-workers, (17,18) using an acidic aqueous electrolyte and a ruthenium oxide-based positive electrode. Although modern HIC devices exclusively employ organic electrolytes with up to 3.5 V windows, the early sulfuric acid (etc.) based conceptions captured the core of the process. Unlike many other redox-active oxides that work primarily through changing valence states at or near their surface, ruthenium actually reversibly intercalates H+ ions into its bulk. This results in a much higher capacitance/capacity for a given particle size but high rate limitations associated with solid-state diffusion. Other redox-active systems such as the cobaltites have also been shown to be bulk redox-active as well. (19) Through neutron reflectometry it has been confirmed that in an aqueous electrolyte cobaltite undergoes reversible bulk redox reactions in addition to surface reactions. (19) This may be also confirmed by considering the capacity and capacitance of unsupported cobaltite. For example, spherical nanoparticles of Co3O4 with an average diameter of 8 nm were reported to have a specific capacitance of 1100 F/g in a 0.8 V window. While 8 nm appears small, the resultant surface area is actually much lower than for an activated carbon: A 8 nm particle will have a volume of 2.68 × 10–25 m3, a surface area of 2 × 10–16 m2, and a weight of 1.64 × 10–18 g (density of Cobalt(II, III) oxide is 6.11 × 106 g/m3). This results in a specific surface area of 122 m2/g, which is far too low to have an appreciable EDLC contribution to charge storage. The theoretical specific capacitance of Co3O4 is 3 × 96 500 Coul mol–1/240.8 g mol–1/0.8 V = 1 503 F/g, which assumes every cobalt ion in the lattice undergoes a single electron redox reaction. A measured specific capacitance of 1100 F/g in 0.8 V swing, with a surface area of 122 m2/g, clearly indicates that much of the bulk Co3+/Co2+ undergoes redox transitions too. Therefore, one may strongly argue that many aqueous asymmetric supercapacitors, starting with systems based on RuOx and continuing to the modern alloy cobaltites, (20−23) are in effect HICs as well because one electrode stores charge by bulk processes. (17,18,24−26) A 2012 review by Cericola and Kötz provided an in-depth discussion of aqueous asymmetrical systems, and readers are encouraged to review that work for more detail. (27) Other interesting redox-active cathode aqueous capacitors include activated carbon–phosphotungstate and polyoxometalate–carbon architectures (2012). (28−30) These offer promising energy–power characteristics and should be explored further.

It should also be emphasized that this surface versus bulk distinction is different from the distinction between true pseudocapacitive oxides versus oxides that generally store charge by reversible faradic surface reactions. There has been an excellent publication recently dealing with that specific issue. (31) Oxides like MnO2 are true pseudocapacitors in a sense that their galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles are in fact nearly perfect triangles (ΔV/ΔQ = constant), while their CV curves are boxlike without distinct redox peaks. This actually does not say anything about the charge–discharge mechanism. For instance, for MnO2 in an aqueous acidic electrolyte the boxlike shape is due to the large number of oxidation states and intermediate MnOx structures. Conversely for a MnO2 with templated nanoporosity in a carbonate electrolyte with a Li salt, the boxlike shape is derived from Li reversible intercalation into the ordered nanopores. (2) In aqueous electrolytes materials such as Ni(OH)2 and Co3O4 are not strictly speaking pseudocapacitive in their galvanostatic profiles or their CVs.

An embodiment of a HIC based on a wide voltage carbonate-based electrolyte (up to 4.2 V) is roughly 15 years old. An early commercial embodiment of an ultracapacitor–battery hybrid was published by Telcordia Technologies in 2001. (32,33) A related work also employed pseudocapacitive conductive polymer cathode to boost the capacity of the electrode and the overall device. (34) The key innovation was replacing an activated carbon anode, normally employed in a symmetrical EDLC ultracapacitor, with Li4Ti5O12 intercalation material, while switching to a higher-voltage (∼3.5 V) battery electrolyte. There are several advantages of Li4Ti5O12 over other materials employed as LIB anodes. The theoretical capacity of Li4Ti5O12 is 175 mAh/g. This is low for a LIB anode but satisfactory for a HIC device with much lower total energy. Very importantly the oxide possesses nearly zero strain upon Li insertion–extraction and has terminal lithiation voltage of 1.55 V vs Li/Li+, which is above that for solid electrolyte interface (SEI) formation in a carbonate electrolyte. (35−39)

That group of researchers went on to design what is effectively a high-power battery, employing a Li4Ti5O12 anode and a composite activated carbon–micron LiCoO2 cathode. (40) In our opinion, while such a system was highly scientifically interesting, it does not qualify as a true hybrid device because in effect both electrodes stored ions primarily in the bulk. As would be expected, the device energy was improved to 40 Wh/kg, while its cyclability was degraded to the level of a high-performance LIB, i.e., 20% capacity loss after 9 000 cycles. We would attribute the degraded cycling ability to the volume expansion at the cathode. Because of its high power (4 000 W/kg), such a system would be useful for battery-type fast charge–discharge applications but would not be useful for replacing commercial ultracapacitors that require hundreds of thousands of full charge–discharge cycles. As will be demonstrated in the next section, in some cases, by truly nanostructuring an insertion cathode it is possible to achieve extended cyclability. Whether the resultant system remains a HIC or becomes a high power–high cyclability battery becomes difficult to discern, although the calculation performed in the previous section does indicate that even for truly nanostructured electrodes the surface capacitive contribution to charge storage is not large.

The material Li4Ti5O12 is such a zero-expansion electrode, making it well-suited for hybrid devices. At high rates, Li4Ti5O12 stores roughly 100 mAh/g of charge, which is more than what is expected for a typical 100 F/g carbon, which would be equivalent to 28 mAh/g in a 1 V window. The material is cycled between Li4Ti5O12 and Li7Ti5O12, employing either a secondary source of Li or the Li present in the electrolyte only. The sloping voltage plateau for Li4Ti5O12 is between 2.75 and 1.5 V vs Li/Li+, preventing SEI formation. This further promotes cycling integrity of the electrode in a hybrid device. It should be pointed out that this consideration would not be relevant where a traditional 2.7 AC ultracap electrolyte was employed because in principle SEI does not form on either electrode. However, acetonitrile and other solvents employed for traditional supercapacitors are liable to catalytically decompose on noncarbon surfaces at high voltages, which would lead to similar accelerated parasitic product and pore plugging. (41−44)

In refs (33) and (45), the authors tested a 500 F 1.9 mm thick prismatic cell and 700 F pouch cells, respectively, making their hybrid device data much more directly comparable to commercial ultracaps versus the usual button cells tested in the scientific literature. Figure 4A shows the discharge profiles of the device at currents ranging from 4 to 40 A. It should be noted that, at lower currents, the cell behaves battery-like, with discernible albeit sloping voltage plateaus. This is due to the Li4Ti5O12 anode, because the voltage versus capacity profile of the ion adsorption cathode is expected to be triangular during charge–discharge. However, at higher currents, the device displays nearly a 45° discharge profile. It should be pointed out that, even at the higher rates, the capacitance is not constant with voltage, making the standard EDLC energy approximation E = 1/2CVave2 less useful. These devices are not discharged to nearly 0 V because, analogously to commercial EDLC capacitors, little useful energy is achieved below 1 V.

Figure 4B shows the Ragone plots based on device weight (not active material weight), at different maximum voltages. (33) At power values representative of the maximum power for a modern conventional LIB such as a Panasonic 18650 (e.g., 300 W/kg), the hybrid cells are about an order of magnitude less energetic. This shortcoming is the reason why we argue that HICs are really suited to compete with ultracapacitors, not with LIBs. However, at power values representative of modern ultracapacitors (e.g., >1000 W/kg), these 15-year-old “generation one” hybrid devices are more than twice as energetic as a state-of-the-art modern commercial ultracap, e.g., Maxwell K2. (46)Figure 4C shows the cycling life of the hybrid devices as a function of the minimum cutoff voltage. As may be observed, higher cutoff voltages (i.e., narrower total voltage windows) lead to a drastically improved cycling lifetime. While this observation was not discussed in detail in the original manuscript, we equate a wider total voltage window with greater level of SEI formation and more extensive Li intercalation into the anode. This leads to Li loss and an increase in impedance due to the SEI, as well as structural damage due to insertion–extraction volume changes.

Early modeling work on the energy of HIC devices was performed by Zheng in 2003. (47) The author derived a formula describing the energy density of hybrid cells, specifically with an intercalation-type anode and an adsorption-type cathode. It was observed that, with an organic battery electrolyte containing a dissolved LiPF6 salt, it was the ion concentration that wound up limiting the energy density. This was the case with either Li-free WO2 anodes or with LixTi5O12. An energy density of 32 Wh/kg (55 Wh/L) was obtained at the maximum 1 mol ion concentration, which is the typical solubility limit of LiPF6 in various combination of carbonates. Energy of 32 Wh/kg (55 Wh/L) by active materials (not including pore volume) agrees well with experimental studies around the same time period. However, it is generally a factor of 2–4 lower than the experimental values reported for systems over the last several years. We argue that much of the improvement may be attributed to having a supplementary source of charge carriers (Li or Na) in the system, which helps to overcome ion concentration limitations.

During the past decade the HIC field has really blossomed. According to the Web of Science, in 2008 there were 15 publications on the topic “hybrid ion capacitor”, in 2009 there were 20, by 2013 there were 104, while in 2016 there were 223. In 2011 Kötz and co-workers explicitly described a parallel versus serial approach for the design of HIC devices. (48) Conceptually it is based on having bimaterial electrode, where one material stores charge by EDLC while the second material in the same electrode stores charge by a Faradaic process. In effect the electrode would consist of a physical mixture of a battery and an ultracapacitor. The authors in ref (48) demonstrated significantly improved power and energy with internally parallel electrodes versus with internally serial hybrids. The internally parallel electrodes displayed battery-like flat current versus voltage profile. However, at intermediate and low powers, all hybrid devices displayed up to an order of magnitude lower energy density at as compared to a standard Li4Ti5O12 anode versus LiMn2O4 cathode cells fabricated using the same techniques. Therefore, unless truly high power (e.g., >1 000 W/kg) is required, fast-charge batteries are preferable. No cycling data was performed in that study, so one cannot specify whether the internally parallel electrodes possessed improved longevity. Perhaps an obvious shortcoming of bimaterial electrodes is that, at very high rates, only the ion adsorption capacitor materials are actually active, while the battery materials dissipate energy primarily by heat. Another early bimaterial device architecture is (LiMn2O4 + AC) – Li4Ti5O12 (2009), (49) which gave a 5 000-cycle lifetime.

Devices based on a Li4Ti5O12 anode and a mixture of LiFePO4 and activated carbon cathode were an early (2007) version of the intrinsically parallel approach. (50) It was demonstrated in both studies that indeed the electrode acts like a parallel device: The fast rate pulse current is drawn from the activated carbon while the much higher capacity oxide actually recharges the carbon when the pulse is off. In 2010 Naoi published an early combined review–new data manuscript on “next-generation” hybrids. (51) A follow-up publication by Naoi et al. expanded on a similar concept of a nanostructured carbon-supported Li4Ti5O12 anode. (52) Later, Naoi et al. summarized the concept of “nanohybrid”, providing insightful perspective on the topic. (53) A recent review also emphasized nanostructuring by comparing the performance between bulk and nano electrode materials. (54) It was argued that a lithium titanate (Li4Ti5O12 in this case) anode was essential to achieving supercapacitor-like power densities. The authors stated that a lithium titanate anode-based “nanohybrid capacitor” is distinct (51) and more novel as compared to a lithium ion capacitor that used prelithiated graphite, published in 2008. (55) However, we feel that this distinction may not be very strong, as workers in 2003 (discussed in previous section) published a titanate electrode while calling the device a battery–supercapacitor hybrid. We do fully agree with Naoi that a nanostructured lithium titanate anode is advantageous. The nanometer scale of the particles greatly helps to overcome the kinetic limitation of the slow solid-state diffusivity of Li in the oxide. (56)

Employing a carbon fiber support allowed Naoi to partially compensate for the known poor electrical conductivity (hence, poor power) of Li4Ti5O12, which is <10–13 S/cm at room temperature. (57) It is doubtful that nanostructuring would improve the material’s electrical conductivity per se. Conversely, Li solid-state diffusion will not be affected by the presence of a carbon support. We fully agree with Naoi’s argument: Because graphite expands ∼10% when lithiated, it will lead to more SEI growth with cycling as compared to a nearly zero volume expansion material such as the titanate. At the time of its publication, the carbon nanofiber-nanostructured Li4Ti5O12 displayed the fastest device charge rate of the published titanate electrodes, on the order of 12 s! This is especially impressive considering the electrode thickness of the devices was comparable to that of commercial supercapacitors, i.e., 50–60 μm. According to the presented Ragone plot, the hybrid device displayed an energy density of 2–3 times higher than that of an EDLC supercapacitor fabricated to similar electrode dimensions. The EDLC was tested between 0 and 2.5 V, while the hybrid device was tested between 1.5 and 3 V. Assuming a perfect linear voltage profile, Energy = 1/2CV2ave. A 0–2.5 V window gives 1.56, while a 1.5–3 V window gives 5.06, which is 3.24 times higher. Hence, the drastically higher energy may in fact be mainly due to the higher voltage in the carbonate electrolyte. In Naoi’s embodiment the anode was highly nanostructured, consisting of nanocrystalline Li4Ti5O12 on carbon nanofiber anchors. The article pointed out that, with battery-type carbonate electrolytes, a significant parasitic decomposition product formed on both electrodes. The extent of decomposition-product formation was reported to be worse on the negative electrode.

Figure 5 shows micrographs of conventional carbons, in a presumably symmetric device, taken through various voltages. (51) The images show decomposition products on both electrodes above a voltage window of 2.7 V, with increasing severity going from 3 to 4 V. The fact that decomposition product formed on the positive electrode has a significant implication: If charge storage on the positive electrode is 100% EDLC, plugged pores would be catastrophic for the overall device energy. Because the devices seem to cycle well, one has to assume that other charge-storage mechanisms related to Li ion adsorption and/or redox reactions are active as well. Recent embodiment of LICs with parallel architectures include the following references: refs (32,51,52,and58−65).

In batteries, poor Coulombic efficiency is typically associated with the irreversible and continuous formation of a solid electrolyte interface (SEI) and some cathode electrolyte interlayer (CEI). (66,67) Likewise this should be the case for HICs. HICs typically possess a smaller Li/Na reservoir than conventional LIBs, have more stringent requirements to minimize IR losses due to high power, and undergo orders of magnitude more cycling. All three of these factors make SEI formation an even more significant issue for HICs than for LIBs. What is not well-recognized in the HIC field is that formation of CEI due to the wide voltage window will lead to pore plugging and a loss of active surface area in an activated carbon. A high-end (i.e., pure, hence minimal, parasitic reactions) activated carbon in a 2.7 V acetonitrile supercapacitor will keep its surface area during cycling or at fully charged holds. However, this is not expected to be the case with a carbonate electrolyte HIC, at a typical charged cell voltage of 4.2 V. As indicated, in our opinion, even on the positive HIC electrode it is not correct to attribute all the charge storage to pure EDLC. While EDLC certainly has some contribution even after the carbon is overgrown with CEI, we actually believe other surface charge-storage mechanisms gain higher importance after cycle 1. Possible charge-storage mechanisms on carbons at high voltages will be discussed later in this text.

It is expected that the SEI products due to carbonate electrolyte reduction on supercapacitor carbons in a hybrid device should be akin to what is observed with other types of carbons employed in LIBs, such as graphite or hard carbon. (68,69) Both the solvent and the salt of the electrolyte solution are thermodynamically unstable and undergo reduction on the anode, which may operate at low potentials close to metallic lithium. (70,71) A material with a large surface-to-volume ratio will therefore cause higher irreversible capacity losses. (72,73) These reduction films passivate the anode surface and prevent further decomposition of the electrolyte solution. However, any volume changes experienced during electrochemical cycling can continuously weaken and fracture the SEI layer, exposing fresh material to the electrolyte with each cycle. (74−77) This will form a new SEI layer. The SEI is mostly composed of electrolyte-reduction products such as Li2CO3. The instability of the SEI can eventually lead to overall capacity loss and failure of the battery or the HIC device. (75,78−80) Besides solvent-reduction products such as Li2CO3 and alkyl carbonates, the anode SEI also partially consists of LiF, which is a (electroless) decomposition product of the LiPF6 salt but can also be formed through reaction with trace amounts of water to HF and eventually LiF. (81,82)Figure 6A shows a classic depiction of SEI in graphite or hard carbon, which is perceived as a composite of various redox and chemical-decomposition product phases. (83,84) More recent work (e.g., Figure 6B) on the subject points to compositional and structural radial gradients within the SEI layer, as well as a dynamic growing–shrinking character with charge–discharge. (83,85−88) Although the SEI structure/chemistry has been less explored for the case of Na ions, qualitatively it appears similar to Li. Irreversible reduction of solvent molecules leads to reduction of the solvent molecules to Na2CO3, Na alkyl carbonates, Na alkoxides, etc. (89−91)

One additional point regarding SEI formation in hybrid ion capacitor anode materials is related to the cycling-induced capacity gain often reported in the literature for a range of carbon-supported nanomaterials, such as oxides or sulfides. A cycling-induced capacity increase is not unusual for Li-based anodes, especially for oxides. (11,93−98) However, it is not observed for similar anode microstructures when tested against Na, at least to an extent where it would be a significant contributor to the total reversible capacity. (93,98,99) Researchers have attributed this phenomenon to a charge-storage contribution through surface adsorption as a result of the “extra” surface area created through cycling of conversion compounds. (97,100) We disagree with this interpretation based on the observation that the surface area of both electrodes (especially anode) markedly decreases rather than increases during cycling when a carbonate electrolyte is used. This is due to both SEI overgrowth and cycling-induced agglomeration of the active phase. For the surface area to actually increase during cycling by the same magnitude as the capacity increase (e.g., up to 50%) would require an unusual pulverization process, combined with the inhibition of solid-state sintering. We argue that instead the extra capacity observed in nanostructured internally parallel (e.g., oxide and nanocarbon) HIC anodes is the cycling-induced reversible formation of a polymer gel on the nanostructured electrode’s surface during charging with lithium. This layer then dissolves upon delithation to potentials roughly >1.5 V. This Faradaic process may be mechanistically akin to the reversible and high Coulombic efficiency redox reactions in polymer-based electrochemical capacitors. (101−103)

A parasitic oxidation product, i.e., the cathode electrolyte interlayer (CEI), is very likely formed on positive electrodes in HIC devices. The most intuitive evidence for this oxidation layer is the commonly observed first-cycle capacity loss (i.e., first CE < 100%) for positive carbon electrodes in carbonate electrolytes, both with lithium cells (60,104−106) and with sodium cells. (107−111) Once formed, a stable passivation layer could in principle eliminate any further electrolyte oxidation on the electrode surface. (112−115) It has been demonstrated that the chemical nature of the passivation layer (e.g., thickness, organic/inorganic species) on the ceramic cathodes significantly varies from material to material. (113) Surface-characterization techniques, such as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), atomic force microscopy (AFM), SEM, etc., have been utilized for the analysis of passivation layers on ceramic cathodes. (51,113,115−117) However, the HIC CEI chemistry, structure, or effect of voltage on its formation have not been analytically studied anywhere near to the same extent.

The HIC CEI may be quite different from that formed on the classic battery ceramic intercalation cathodes in term of its chemistry and structure. CEI formation is a catalyzed faradic process with charge transfer involved. The amount of irreversible capacity due to CEI should be closely related to the surface area and the surface heteroatom functionality (O, OH, and N groups) carbons, as well as the carbonate species in the electrolyte. Electrochemical impedance analysis (EIS) has been employed to indirectly track the formation and evolution of the passivation layer on a carbon cathode. (118−120) In our opinion there is a need for more in-depth analysis of the CEI on carbon cathodes employed in HIC devices, because its growth may be important to performance.

In addition to the SEI and CEI products, carbon-based HIC electrodes may suffer from Li plating to a larger extent than would the much lower charging rate LIBs. This is certainly true for graphite, which tends to plate Li at intermediate and high charging rates. (121−126) Even with a hard carbon, where there is a sloping voltage profile that is significantly above Li/Li plating potential, Li metal has been reported. (52,127) An example of this is shown in Figure 7.

We fully agree with the authors in ref (52) that a nanostructured lithium titanate should significantly reduce the extent of the Li metal plating concern. However, Li4Ti5O12 by itself is not sufficiently electrically conductive to achieve the high rates needed for HICs. A supporting carbon phase is therefore almost mandatory, which then creates a similar risk of Li plating on its surface if a wide device voltage window is employed. The only way to really avoid metal plating is to be sure that the anode stays sufficiently far from 0 V vs Li/Li+, especially at high charge rates. This in turn requires a three- or four-electrode cell (one or two reference electrodes) for quantification, something which is rarely done. It should also be pointed out that, in a true two-electrode cell (rather than a half-cell with one electrode being Li metal), the voltage swing of the individual electrodes may only be estimated from their mass–capacity ratio. This creates further difficulty in accurately controlling both metal and SEI formation.

The first argument for NICs research is a geo-economic one concerning the uneven global distribution of lithium reserves, as well as the potential for unsustainable price spikes due to even short-term production scarcities. Similar to extraction of known oil reserves, increasing the scale of lithium carbonate production is a timely, long-term process that is likely not flexible enough to meet spikes in demand due to, for example, multiple new Gigafactories. This creates difficulties in predicting Li pricing and hence the dollars per kWh of LIB and LIC technology. (128−131) Conversely, the precursors for Na-based electrodes are universally abundant, including on land (salt, sodium carbonate, and sodium hydroxide) and in salt water. (132) In the United States salt is produced through mining (44%) and from brine (38%), (133) which may then be separated to form Na metal through electrolysis or ion-exchanged into various oxides. As an immediate cost-saving feature, both sodium ion batteries and NICs may employ inexpensive Al current collectors for both electrodes because Al is Na-inert. Conversely, lithium ion batteries and LICs must employ a costlier copper anode current collector because Li alloys with Al at anode voltages. As seen by the sloping shape of the Al–Li charge–discharge curve, (134,135) a limited but potentially catastrophic reaction between Al and Li may occur even when high insertion potential titania anodes are employed. In terms of a price comparison, the difference between Al and Cu is not trivial and can tangibly impact the cost of cell production. (136) A full techno-economic analysis of NICs versus LICs is not currently available. However, qualitatively one could translate the findings for LIBs versus NIBs to visualize the differences: Authors have recently examined a broad range of techno-economics of NIB production and concluded that indeed there is a cost saving to be had even with the current relatively low Li precursor costs and without having to extrapolate to adjust for new Gigafactories, etc. (137)

A key safety motivation for NICs is that, when nongraphitic carbons are employed as anodes, Na atom underpotential deposition into the carbons’ pores (a.k.a. metal nanopore filling, nanoplating) appears to be minimally active as compared to Li plating in the same materials. (127) This point will be elaborated further in the subsequent sections of this Review. However, for now it should be indicated that lack of metal plating at low potential may in principle lead to much safer electrodes during cycling because of the suppression of metal dendrite growth that occurs as Li accumulates and strips over thousands of cycles. (138−140) Because metallic particles are likely to be catalytic toward SEI formation, the cycling CE of NICs may ultimately be superior as well. (107)

The prelithiation or presodiation of one or both electrodes is an indispensable step for building high-performance hybrid LIC and NIC devices. A key purpose of the process is to compensate for the ion loss during early SEI/CEI layer formation. Because of the limited solubility of salts such as LiPF6 or NaClO4 in carbonate solvents (∼1 mol in 1:1 volume ratio, at room temperature), irreversible loss of ions results in a degradation of ionic conductivity. It has been demonstrated that systems based on nonlithiated (nonsodiated) electrodes will diminish the lithium (sodium) ion content in the electrolyte during extended cycling and, thus, greatly deteriorate the overall capacity. (52,141) In addition to SEI, both Li and Na may be trapped within the bulk of the electrode materials such as hard carbons, especially during the first several cycles. (127)

Precharging at least one electrode is a crucial factor in determining the performance of a hybrid device in terms of initial energy–power and cycling retention. A survey of both LIC and HIC Ragone characteristics generally points to devices at the top of the energy–power spectrum being those that employ a secondary source of ions in addition to the electrolyte. (107,141−143) The high-performance architectures that do not explicitly prelithiate or presodiate the electrodes to a notable capacity “condition” the electrodes in half cells. (144) What conditioning amounts to is cycling the electrodes versus Li or Na metal prior to assembly into a full device but leaving them at near-zero capacity. Such conditioning makes up for the Li/Na ion loss due to initial SEI formation and irreversible bulk trapping. As long as the SEI growth and bulk trapping are not significant during cycling, the electrolyte concentration then remains fairly stable. Prelithiation (presodiation) has also been successfully employed to widen the voltage window and extend cyclability of devices by controlling the voltage swing of the anode, thus reducing the depth of charge and the associated SEI growth, volumetric expansion, and ion trapping. (52,141,145)

The most common technique for prelithitation (presodiation) is electrochemical. As shown by the diagram in Figure 8A, a closed electrical circuit forms connecting the electrode (usually anode) and the lithium (sodium) metal. (146) An electrically insulating–ionically conducting separator is employed, analogously to what is used in battery cells. The external circuit can include an electronic charger or a resistor, or even just a short circuit, depending on the controllability requirement of the predoping process. (145,146,148−151) The charging process can be controlled by applying a programmable procedure to the terminals. (152,153) The major downside to the method is necessary extra assembly/disassembly cell procedures, where in effect the device has to be fabricated twice. While scientifically useful and to some extent convenient, it is not obvious how such an approach may be done economically for a large number of commercial cells.

A potentially more scalable approach may be based on chemical (rather than electrochemical) charging through the direct reaction between the electrode material and lithium (sodium) metal while in the presence of an electrolyte. (154−156) Such reactions may be accelerated by milling the regents to achieve improved contact. (157)Figure 8B shows the prelithiated graphite electrode film obtained by this direct contact method in a pouch cell. (146,158) The major advantage of this approach is its elegant simplicity and the potential for scale-up. However, the downside is that lithiation (sodiation) is in effect “blind”, with it not being possible to control or even monitor the state of charge, i.e., the lithium (sodium) content in the electrode. Of course, such analysis may be done after the fact; however, that again adds a level of complexity to the fabrication process, which may not be economically scalable. To both avoid the complex cell-reassembling process and be able to monitor the electric signals during the predoping reaction, some researchers built hybrid devices with multielectrode configurations, with one component being the source of the ions. (144,152,159,160)

Figure 8C shows a three-electrode hybrid setup, which utilized the stabilized lithium powers (SLPs) as the lithium source. (119) On the basis of this principle, other lithium sources, e.g., lithium silicide, lithium-rich transition metal oxides, etc., have been employed for various anodes (e.g., carbon, silicon, etc.). (143,154,161,162) Historically, prelithiation has been performed on the anode, which is in fact contrary to how LIBs are configured. Recently prelithiation (presodiation) has been achieved on the cathode. (147) This may be intrinsically safer, if the device then starts out thermodynamically stable as fabricated (which would not be the case for a symmetric cell, e.g., carbon–carbon). Such an approach for HICs could leverage a number of recent studies on ion-donating materials for conventional ceramic LIB cathodes, designed to compensate the first cycle loss. (163−170) The ion-donating lithium-rich (sodium-rich) materials display a large hysteresis between charge and discharge. This in effect creates an irreversible delithation (desodiation) process at the first charge of the cell. The ions are injected into the electrolyte and shuttle back and forth between the primary storage phases during subsequent cycling. Materials such as Li3N, (148,165) Li6CoO4, (146,164) Na2NiO2, (145,163) etc. have been employed as cathode additives to reduce cycle 1 CE loss in this manner. The concept should be directly transferable to LICs and NICs. As shown in Figure 8D, materials may have more negative lithiation or sodiation voltage than the minimum potential of the active carbon (type 1). (154) Otherwise, they may act as a mini primary cell, possessing minimal capability that is reversible (type 2). (144,147,171) Both types are suitable for the cathode additive in hybrid devices. Brousse and co-workers recently reported an extremely powerful example of a chemical additive ion source concept, one that may be transformative in advancing the HIC technology due to its effectiveness and scalability. (172) A sacrificial organic lithium salt (3,4-dihydroxybenzonitrile dilithium) was incorporated into the HIC activated carbon cathode. During the first charge, the Li2DHBN compound irreversibly decomposed with the remnants dissolving into the electrolyte. It served as a reservoir of lithium ions into the graphite anode, without negatively affecting other aspects of electrochemical performance. In our opinion, prelithiation and presodiation via cathode sacrificial chemical additives required further exploration because hybrid devices really cannot achieve optimum performance based on electrolyte ions alone. Of all the precharging methods, the sacrificial additives approach has the most promise for technological applications due to the straightforwardness of translating this concept to large cells and continuous manufacturing. Clearly more research activity on this topic would be beneficial.

Figures 9 and 10 highlight various materials that are electrode candidates for LIC and NIC applications, respectively. It may be observed that asymmetric insertion carbon anode–adsorption carbon cathode architectures may in principle give the widest operating voltage window. It is doubtful that 10 000 or 100 000 full charge–discharge cycles are possible with classic LIB or NIB ceramic cathodes. Sodium ion ceramic cathodes are known to give worse cycling lifetime that Li ceramic cathodes, (173−176) neither of which typically survives more that several thousand cycles, even when fully optimized. However, in the high-voltage region (e.g., 3–4.5 V vs Li/Li+ or 2.7–4.2 V vs Na/Na+), the capacity of an adsorption carbon is <100 mAh/g. (104,109,110,177,178) Carbons’ voltage profile is always sloping, even within that limited cathodic range. This gives an average voltage that is lower than the initial voltage, further reducing the device energy.

Hence, the fundamental conundrum concerning the limitations of a HIC versus a LIB that is optimized for high power is as follows: Capacitor-like cyclability has not been achieved with an ion-insertion ceramic cathode, while battery-like energy has not been possible with a high-surface-area adsorption carbon. To us, this seems like a key topic where more research is absolutely necessary: Is it possible to optimize the structure and the chemistry of a carbon to store more charge at high voltages? We believe that, given the tremendous past effort to improve the cyclability of standard LIB cathode materials to reach even several thousand cycles, it may be practically impossible to extend cycle numbers to 10 000 or even 100 000. One could trade lower depth of charge for improved cyclability and oversize the cathode capacity relative to the anode capacity. However, this would inevitably lower the overall energy density of the device.

Among the titanium-based anode materials for lithium storage, TiO2 and Li4Ti5O12 are the most important candidates. (179) These two materials share similar advantages in terms of cost, stability, and electrochemical traits, as well as the same drawbacks such as low electrical conductivity. Both have high average working potentials (ca. 1.5 V), which are far away from the alarming voltage zone of lithium plating. Their structures are extremely stable with negligible strain upon reversible lithium intercalation/extraction. Both TiO2 and Li4Ti5O12 are widely applied as the LIC anodes due to recent improvements in rate performance, especially for Li4Ti5O12. Figure 11 shows the rapid improvement in rate capability, with multiples of C (1C = 1 h charge) being on the y-axis and the time of publication being on the x-axis. All the representative materials listed delivered specific capacity of >100 mA hg–1 under the corresponding C rate in the vertical axis. Starting from the charge/discharge in hours (below 1C) (180,181) for the early proof-of-concept work, the time span decreased to several minutes (10–60C) (182−186) and even seconds (100–300C) (187,188) for the state-of-the-art studies. The breakthrough performance improvements are based on progressively finer nanoscopic mixtures of the oxides and high electrical conductivity carbons. It should be pointed out that nanostructuring of each phase should not change the bulk ionic conductivity of the materials but will give a greater overall surface and interface contribution. Room-temperature Li ion conduction on TiO2 and Li4Ti5O12 surfaces and interfaces should be orders of magnitude higher than in the bulk. (189−194) With increasing surface-to-volume ratio, this contribution to the total Li flux will become progressively more important. The vast majority of carbons employed in such hybrid electrodes are Li- (and Na)-active at the relevant voltages. Hence, it is expected that they will also significantly contribute to the Li flux, in effect acting as “ion highways” while supporting the oxides and imbuing electrical conductivity.

Most of the Li4Ti5O12-based LICs can reach powers of >5 000 W kg–1 with a charge/discharge time span of tens of seconds or even several seconds. (59,195−199) Moreover, due to the very small volume change of the intercalation anodes and the absence of the SEI layer formation, the energy of the TiO2- and Li4Ti5O12-based LIC can be well-maintained upon extremely long cycling from 5 000 to 20 000 cycles. (59,159,197,200) As indicated earlier, we know of no cathode besides high-surface-area carbons that could match such cyclability.

Titanium-based materials are a major class of the sodium anodes. After carbons, the most studied systems for Na capacitors are based on TiO2 (anatase, rutile, brookite, amorphous, etc.). Researchers are discovering that TiO2 exhibits different redox chemistry and charge-storage mechanisms with Na as compared to its well-studied Li counterparts.

With anatase TiO2, charge storage may involve a combination of Na+ intercalation into the lattice (201,203,204) and a conversion reaction to reversibly form Ti and Na2O in its terminally sodiated state. (202) As shown in Figure 12A, Mitlin and co-workers were the first to propose that the stacked edge-sharing TiO6 octahedral framework is expected to form possible interstitial sites for Na accommodation. (201) This proposed reversible intercalation is different from the two-phase reaction that is characteristic of the lithiation reaction TiO2 + 0.5Li+ + e– = Li0.5TiO2. (191,205,206) In our opinion the existing experimental evidence for Na intercalation reaction requires more confirmation. For instance, the weak paramagnetic interaction between Na+ and Ti3+ ions observed in 23Na NMR spectra may point against a true intercalation reaction. (207) At low charge rates the conversion reaction is better supported. This is based on the detection of reversible switching between trivalent and tetravalent Ti during charge/discharge in XPS (204) and X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) (202) spectra (Figure 12C). Researchers have also published extensive TEM results to support the conversion reaction. (202,204,208) Importantly, TiO2 of various structures is another material where the low-rate sodiation sequence likely does not apply to charging rates representative for HICs. It is not obvious how at 5C, 10C, 20C, etc. various TiO2 electrodes would have the diffusion time necessary to undergo reversible conversions over many cycles. With sodium, such reactions are known to be sluggish even at charging rates of several hours and with highly nanostructured particle sizes. (99) Researchers have argued for fast-rate Na+ intercalation pseudocapacitance, which may be the case. (209) It is straightforward to distinguish between diffusional control (maximum rate is proportional to square root of time) versus reaction control (maximum rate is linear with time). However, establishing reaction control is literally analogous to measuring activation polarization in a galvanostatic experiment; it tells very little regarding the actual limiting process or the dominant charge storage mechanism. The process may be Na surface adsorption or it may be a reaction in the bulk, yielding the exact same linear time dependence. For the case of fast-rate Na with TiO2, more experimental and modeling work is needed to understand which fast-rate mechanisms would actually account for the observed voltage profiles and the measured reversible capacities.

One advantage with NICs over LICs is that the working voltage of TiO2 against Na/Na+ is lower than that against Li/Li+ (ca. 0.75 V vs ca. 1.5 V). (202,204) This gives devices higher energy but creates issues related to SEI formation, which occurs below ∼1 V vs Na/Na+. However, the factors limiting the rate capability of TiO2 still exist and become even more challenging in the sodium system. Specifically Na ion diffusion appears to be more sluggish in the titania systems. (210−213) The early proof-of concept studies on TiO2 can acquire ∼150 mAhg–1 capacity at the low rate (e.g., 50 mAg–1); however, negligible capacity can maintain as the current density is increased (e.g., 2 Ag–1). (201,214) The following studies developed strategies in optimizing the performance, especially the rate capability. While nanostructuring of the active material is an established way to improve the kinetics, with TiO2 a carbon support phase is also necessary. Past studies include extremely small TiO2 particles/nanodots (0D), (215−217) nanorods/nanowires/nanotubes (1D), (202,218,219) and thin TiO2 sheets/sphere shells (2D). (203,220) The downsizing of the TiO2 can greatly shorten the diffusion distance of sodium ion within the material bulk. Introducing electronic conductive second phases such as graphene (199,215,221) or graphitic carbon (217,222) is also effective. The intrinsic electronic conductivity of TiO2 could also be modified by aliovalent doping, for instance, nitrogen, (223) tin, (224) boron, (225) and niobium. (226) On the basis of these strategies, the state-of-the-art TiO2 material could deliver >300 mAhg–1 at low rate, and >50 mAhg–1 capacity was maintained at current density as high as 30 Ag–1. The substantial improvement in rate capability enables TiO2 to be a promising anode for NICs. (227,228)

Figure 13 shows several examples of nanostructured TiO2 for high-rate anode applications, including their microstructure and rate capability in a half-cell. Parts A–C of Figure 13 show graphene-wrapped anatase TiO2 nanofibers, employed as Na anodes. Parts D–F of Figure 13 show anatase TiO2 nanocubes also employed as Na anodes. (229) Parts G–I of Figure 13 highlight a microstructure consisting of carbon dots supported upon N-doped TiO2 nanorods, employed as Na and Li anodes. (223) For hybrid ion capacitor applications, the relevant charging rates would be roughly >10C. It may be seen that in parts A–C and D–F the working capacity at this rate is ∼100 mAh/g. When high levels of carbon are present, such as in parts G–I, the capacity reaches 200 mAh/g. A value of 100 mAh/g is significantly lower than what is possible with a nanostructured carbon at 10C (discussed in the next section), while 200 mAh/g is on par. Again there seems to be a trade-off: Adding a substantial mass fraction of ion–active carbon significantly improves the rate capability and the overall capacity. However, it would give the same issues with SEI as would be preset in a bare carbon, because in either case there would be significant low-voltage capacity.

Lithium titanium oxide Li4Ti5O12 is also an anode material employed with NICs. In the sodium system the potential is near 0.9 V, which is lower than the 1.55 V working potential in the lithium system. (230,231) Different from the biphasic mechanism for lithium storage, with Na the material undergoes a three-phase separation mechanism among Li4Ti5O12, Li7Ti5O12, and Na6LiTi5O12, giving a theoretical capacity of 175 mAhg–1. (210,232) The three-phase mechanism of Li4Ti5O12 was confirmed at atomic scale through STEM analysis. As shown in Figure 14, for a partially sodiated Li4Ti5O12 phase, there are crystal domains ascribed to the Li4Ti5O12, Li7Ti5O12, and Na6LiTi5O12 phases separated by well-defined boundaries. (210) It is not obvious that at the high NIB charging currents such a reaction would still be present, and more work is needed to understand the rate behavior. Full capacity (>170 mAhg–1) may be obtained at low current densities. However, capacity significantly decays as the rate increases, presumably due to the sluggish diffusion kinetics of Na+ within the 1D tunnel of the spinel phase. The diffusivity of Na+ in the spinel phase is several orders of magnitude lower than that of Li+. (232,233)

Li4Ti5O12 for NICs has been substantially improved within a short time span of 1–2 years, building on the transferrable knowledge base established for LICs. (234) One of the most promising systems displayed ∼60 mAhg–1 at a current density of 8.75 Ag–1, which almost satisfies the rate-matching requirement with the adsorption carbon cathode in a NIC device. (234,235) An unusually high capacity of >200 mAhg–1 has also been reported in studies. (236,237) This extra capacity was ascribed to so-called interfacial capacitive Na storage, although it remains to be established whether the surface area of the electrodes is large enough to support such a contribution.

A sodium-containing titanium oxide Na2Ti3O7 with well-defined layered structure has been shown to work for high-rate Na anodes. (239−241) It is accepted that two phases are formed during sodiation, Na2Ti3O7 and Na4Ti3O7. As shown in Figure 15, as the Na ion intercalates into the lattice, the Ti–O slabs will shear. The coordination of Na ions also changes upon sodiation, going from 7,9-coordinated to 6-coordinated. The angle between neighboring Ti–O also changes in a relatively large content. (238) The crystallographic flexibility of the layered structure is unique and is expected to be beneficial for facile Na diffusion kinetics. By accommodating up to 3.5 Na+ per formula unit, Na2Ti3O7 will in theory deliver 310 mAhg–1 with a voltage near 0.3 V. This phase is popular of fast-rate applications, including for NICs, where the 0.3 V standoff from Na plating is a safety advantage. Figure 16 shows examples of nanostructured Na2Ti3O7 for high-rate Na anode applications. Parts A–C of Figure 16 show Na2Ti3O7 nanotube arrays synthesized through surface engineering. (239) Parts D–F of Figure 16 show Na2Ti3O7@N-doped carbon hollow spheres. (240) Parts G and H of Figure 16 show Na2Ti3O7 nanoplatelets and nanosheets derived from a modified exfoliation process. In all cases, the reversible capacity at 10C is in the 100 mAh/g range. (241)

After the proof-of-concept study of Tarascon’s group in 2011, (242) this phase has been tremendously studied thereafter. The synthesis was diversified from the simple solid-state reaction route (242,243) to various specially designed multisteps reaction strategies. (239−241,244−247) Meanwhile, the phase morphology evolved from microsize particles to various nanoscale shapes, such as nanosheets, (241,245,248) nanofibers, (244) hollow spheres, (240) nanotubes, (239,249) etc. Although the low working voltage was maintained (ca. 0.3 V) for these nanomaterials, the nanosizing indeed greatly diminished the plateau feature of the Na2Ti3O7, indicating the change of the intrinsic biphasic reaction mechanism.

Researchers proposed a capacitive-like charge-storage contribution for these nano-Na2Ti3O7 materials, termed pseudocapacitance (although the term may not be exactly accurate; see prior discussion), which provided an explanation for the slopelike voltage profiles. (158,239,248) A significant contribution by pseudocapacitance significantly improved the rate capability of a Na2Ti3O7-based anode, presumably because surface-controlled redox reactions are facile. A state-of-the-art anode has been tested up to a current density of 8 Ag–1 and delivered over 50 mAhg–1 of reversible capacity. (240) This performance would enable in principle charge times of ∼1 min, assuming the cathode or the electrolyte diffusivity were not rate-limiting.

The relative contribution of the capacitive charge storage may be determined with multirate cyclic voltammetry (CV) tests. (93,250−253) The transition in the time dependence of peak current, i.e., the peak reaction rate, is a well-known approach at looking at the onset of diffusional limitations: Current changes with the sweep rate are expressed as i = avb, where a and b are adjustable constants. A b-value of 0.5 is a straightforward outcome of Fick’s law and signals a diffusion-limited process. A b-value of 1 is a standard expression for any activation (i.e., interface) polarization reaction. Researchers employ a version of such rate analysis to argue for bulk versus capacitive storage. We do want to provide some caution regarding potentially overinterpreting the above and similar sweep-rate electroanalysis: For systems with multiple charge-storage mechanisms, such as the disordered graphenes, carbon nanosheets, and perhaps titania, the above algebra applied without additional analysis may not be fully conclusive. For instance, at rates of 5C and above, Na storage process in a high-surface-area carbon may be diffusion-limited. However, a b-value of 0.5 will not inform whether the diffusional limitations come from movement of Na within the electrolyte-filled pores or in the bulk of the carbon. A b-value of 1 indicates an interface-controlled process, although the interface may be solid–liquid or solid–solid (or even solid–gas, if it exists). For instance, nucleation-controlled growth of precipitate phases are a classic solid–solid process that follows linear time kinetics. (254) For the case of Na in Na2Ti3O7, TiO2, etc., a b-value of 1 could also mean nucleation-controlled growth of Na metal on surfaces and interfaces, or Na intercalation control, or even control by some surface redox process. Without detailed combined analytical work and simulation, it is difficult to be conclusive apart from indicating that Na storage is not diffusion-controlled!

Per Figure 10, at a voltage of above ∼0.5 V, there are three other interesting options: K2Ti6O13, Nb2O5, and Na2Ti6O13. K2Ti6O13 is the most promising from a reversible capacity vantage, having the same structure as Na2Ti6O13 but with a dilated lattice. (255−257) Nb2O5 is another promising high-power material for both lithium and sodium storage, exhibiting intercalation pseudocapacitive charge-storage behavior. (258) A state-of-the-art NIC device based on a Nb2O5 anode will deliver >10 Wh kg–1 at a power as high as 7 000 W kg–1, which is competitive among the NIC devices reported. (259) Some other compounds including alkali metal-containing titanium oxides have also been employed as anodes against sodium, including NaTiO2, (260) Na4Ti5O12, (153,261) Na2Ti2O4(OH)2, (262) etc. (263,264) Unfortunately these phases appear to have limitations in rate capability, although further optimization with carbon may address this.

Table 1 summarizes the titanium-based LICs and NICs that have been published to date. While there is a diverse range of anode architectures and counter cathodes, it appears that the maximum energy values are notably 81 Wh/kg and lower. Assuming a factor of 4 conversion from active-material-based to device-based energy values, the maximum device energy is 20 Wh/kg, i.e., roughly 3–4 times higher energy than a state-of-the-art ultracapacitor. The factor of 4 denominator actually assumes near-commercial mass loading. A much lower mass loading of 0.5–1 mg/cm2 would further increase the conversion denominator, up to 10 or more. (265,266) It should also be pointed out that commercial ultracapacitors typically possess 50–100 μm thick electrodes, which is often a practical thickness limit for fabrication. A commercial activated carbon such as Kuraray YP-50 gives an electrode (not skeletal) density of ∼650 mg/cm3 (in-house measurement), resulting in a mass loading of 3.25–6.5 mg/cm2. An electrode based on a high-surface-area, loosely packed nanocarbon such as graphene or an aerogel may give an electrode density that is substantially lower, for example, 250 mg/cm3. (267) This is another reason why the energy density of a real device with a fluffy carbon may be significantly lower than what one would expect from a straightforward factor of 4 conversion, simply because commercial devices are not mass-loading but rather electrode-thickness limited.

Looking at Table 1, one may also observe that, despite the higher terminal anode voltage and the zero expansion benefit of titanias, the full cells are not cycled above 10 000 full charge–discharges. It is not known why cells with titania anodes degrade, as one may assume that higher cycle data would be presented otherwise. This is a topic that certainly warrants further in-depth study, as longer device lifetimes are absolutely essential for HICs to gain commercial footing.

A survey of literature indicates that nanostructured carbons are an important class of HIC materials, being employed either separately or combined with a second Li active phase such as TiO2. Recently, Yao et al. published a focused summary of the carbons employed in LIBs, ultracapacitors, and their hybrids. (276)Table 2 compiles a representative sample of various carbons employed for high-rate Li and Na storage. The table includes both LIC and NIC electrodes, with the NIC carbons being described in the next section. While some researchers prelithiate one or both of the electrodes (discussed), others rely on Li in the electrolyte such as from LiPF6. (52,64,277) A key issue associated with employing carbon anodes is the SEI formation because the vast majority of carbons possess significant capacity down to 0 V vs Na/Na+. One would have to could keep SEI stable during cycling and avoid Li/Na plating, which would necessitate having tight control of the negative electrode voltage. For optimum energy, a carbon–carbon architecture then requires asymmetric mass loading, with the mass of the lower-capacity adsorption carbon cathode being up to 5 times higher than that for the insertion anode.

Table 2 provides a summary of the carbon–carbon architectures employed for LICs and NICs. As may be seen from Table 2, the vast majority of carbons employed are nongraphitic and highly nanostructured and may be nanoporous such as the aerogels and some of the carbon nanosheets. Both LIC and NIC carbons are listed. Overall we have not observed significant differences between the types of nongraphitic structures employed for Li versus Na. Examples of carbon nanosheets commonly employed for Na are shown in Figure 17. The carbons’ order, heteroatom content, and porosity may be controlled by selecting precursor, carbonization temperature, and activation process. (267,289)Figure 17A shows a 30 nm thick disordered undoped carbon nanosheet with micro- and mesoporosity employed for high-rate Na anodes. (109)Figure 17B shows an ordered (but not graphitic) undoped carbon nanosheet employed for high-rate Na anodes. (107)Figure 17C shows dopamine-derived nitrogen-doped carbon sheets as anode materials for high-rate Na anodes. (290)Figure 17D shows nitrogen-doped graphene foams employed for high-rate Na anodes. (291)

Moreover, the carbons are often heteroatom-rich (especially oxygen) and contain varying degrees of graphene ordering. Highly defective and/or heteroatom carbons do not fit into the classic taxonomy for carbon allotropes, rather representing continua in structure and chemistry between pristine graphite/graphene and fully amorphous activated carbon. Any fundamental theoretical or experimental treatment of such materials must take account of these rich variations on the carbons’ chemical and structural defectiveness. Lithium storage in 2D nongraphitic carbons is poorly understood in general, even at relatively slow rates representative of battery carbons. It is much less understood at the charge rates necessitated by hybrid devices, making this a potentially exciting area to pursue further.

Figure 18 compares well-understood Li staging reaction in commercial graphite to the proposed Li storage mechanism(s) in “hard carbons”, i.e., carbons that do not fully transform to graphite at 2800 °C. In the “fallen-cards” model for hard carbons, developed by Stevens and Dahn, the carbons’ structure consists of arrays of highly defective graphene planes that are stacked relatively randomly and contain sealed and open nanopores between them. There are also regions of higher alignment, with graphene planes being arranged graphite-like with their (0002) normals in parallel, but with translational and rotational randomness. Such partially ordered structure is termed “turbostratic”. The primary references for this qualitative model and the associated definitions are refs (292and293) and earlier related work being in refs (294−301). It is important to note that the fallen cards model is a low-rate–low-order model, with the vast majority of the experimental effort being made on carbons with minimal graphene order (Raman G-band to D-band intensity ratio IG/ID < 0.3) and a current density in the C/10 range. Many hard carbons employed for NICs and high-rate NIBs are substantially more ordered with IG/ID ≈ 1 or higher. Moreover, the relevant charging rates are ∼4C (15 min charge rate) to upward of 60C (1 min charge rate). This creates issues in further overinterpreting the already qualitative falling cards model by extrapolating quasiequilibrium to fast-charge scenarios.

Figure 19 shows the charge–discharge behavior of undoped carbon nanosheets with a BET surface area of 2200 m2/g and IG/ID = 0.9. (11) As may be seen in Figure 19A, within the HIC cathode regime (4.5–3 V vs Li/Li+) the shape of the galvanostatic curve does not appear to vary significantly with the current density. This implies a similarity in the charge-storage mechanisms with charge rate, likely being reversible ion surface adsorption. It should be noted that the initial voltage was 4 V vs Li/Li+, which is on par with state-of-the-art ceramic Li cathodes. The average voltage, however, is lower, being in the 3.5 V range, depending on the lower cutoff. Within the HIC anode regime, shown in Figure 19B, the galvanostatic profiles evolve substantially with current density, indicating one or a series of Li storage-mechanism transitions.

Li charge-storage mechanisms in such highly defective carbons have recently been investigated through simulations. This is direct evidence for the necessity of graphene defects in achieving a reversible capacity with Li that far surpasses that of commercial graphite. At voltages above those for intercalation, charge storage in LIBs has been ascribed to the following mechanisms: chemisorption on surface heteroatoms (285,302) and reversible adsorption at structural defect sites in the graphene. (303−307) The sloping high-voltage charge-storage behavior is attributed to reversible binding of Na at graphene divacancies and Stone–Wales defects, as has been recently predicted by ab initio calculations. (304) It has been shown that a divacancy is the thermodynamically most stable defect in graphene (305,308,309) and will also act as a preferential Li adsorption site. (305,310)

In our opinion, microstructurally designed carbons are perhaps the most economical and technically viable candidates for NIC applications, as Na kinetics in titania structures tend to be substantially more sluggish than corresponding Li kinetics. (210−213) It is well-established that graphite will not intercalate Na to an appreciable extent, due to its larger ionic radius than Li (0.102 nm vs 0.076 nm) and weaker chemical interaction with graphene planes. (293,311,312) Instead, a range of nongraphitic carbons has been employed to store Na, including N-doped carbons. (68,281,313−323)Table 2 also compiles a representative sample of various 2D carbons employed for high-rate Na storage. Graphite or “graphite nanoflakes” with equilibrium graphite structure and layer spacing will not reversibly intercalate Na in conventional battery electrolytes. Because of this they have received minimal attention in the sodium literature, except for the unusual cases of Na cointercalation with a secondary ion. (324) Some versions of reduced graphene oxide (RGO) do get employed for NIC and high-power NIB electrodes. (111,291,310,321,325) RGO is a highly defective structure that is far from that of graphite or well-ordered single-layer graphene. Rather, RGO is akin to carbon nanosheets in terms of Raman IG/ID ratio, heteroatom content, surface area, and porosity. (107,109,286)

For NICs, likewise to LICs, the charging rates that are employed for testing are far above the current densities normally employed for LIB graphite. With LIB graphite, the typical maximum is 5C (i.e., 12 min to full charge). Conversely, researchers test nanocarbon electrodes at rates of up to 100C. Carbon nanomaterials always possess high surface area and are often nanoporous. They may be heteroatom-rich and will contain varying degrees of graphene ordering. Such carbons do not neatly fit into the classic taxonomy of allotropes. Rather they represent a continuum in structure and chemistry, bordered by Na inert pristine graphite on one end and fully amorphous activated carbon on the other. Sodium storage in nanostructured nongraphitic carbons is poorly understood in general, even at slow rates where near-equilibrium Na arrangement may be achieved. This makes the already subjective fallen cards model developed for Li (really a fallen cards schematic) less applicable. While useful for obtaining near-equilibrium conditions, a charging current that takes 10 h to reach full capacity may not be representative for NICs or high-rate NIBs.

Nevertheless, it is useful to understand the existing low-rate state of knowledge, so as to establish a baseline from which the high-rate mechanisms may be better understood. To investigate the Na charge-storage mechanisms in nongraphitic carbons, Mitlin and co-workers were the first to perform X-ray studies during different stages of sodiation, discovering and quantifying reversible Na intercalation at low voltages. (107,127,326,327) It was demonstrated that with progressive sodiation at voltages below 0.2 V vs Na/Na+ there is a reversible shift of the (002) graphene peak to reduced 2θ values. The authors proposed that such reversible dilation–contraction of the graphene layer spacing is qualitatively analogous to Li intercalation into equilibrium graphite, which occurs in a series of staging reactions. It was demonstrated that such intercalation only occurs for well-ordered, albeit amorphous, carbons with a Raman IG/ID integrated intensity ratio ∼1 or greater. Sodium intercalation was shown not to occur with highly disordered carbons, such as conventional activated carbon where IG/ID is <0.5. Recently the same group confirmed staging reactions associated with Na intercalation, through the associated reversible changes in the Raman caused by carbon ordering. (328) It was also first demonstrated that, for Na intercalation to occur, the average graphene layer must be dilated (e.g., 15%) relative to the d(002) = 0.3354 nm of in-equilibrium graphite. These studies were primary to conclusively demonstrate that Na intercalation rather than Na atom underpotential deposition into the pores (a.k.a. Na metal nanoplating, Na metal nanopore filling, Na metal storage in pores) is the storage mechanism below ∼0.2 V vs Na+/Na. Analysis performed on identical carbons lithiated under the same conditions showed clear Li metal formation, presumably in the carbon pores, and much less Li intercalation.

Mitlin and co-workers also argued that the sloping portion of the Na charge–discharge curve is not due to Na intercalation per Dahn and co-workers (293,329) but is rather due to reversible adsorption of Na at graphene defects such as divacancies and Stone–Wales. (107,326,327) This was based on prior Shenoy and co-workers modeling results that showed that Na adsorption at defective graphene sites leads to the sloping voltage versus capacity curves. (304) Subsequent studies confirmed the low-voltage Na intercalation scenario that requires sufficient ordering of the graphene planes and a dilated interlayer spacing, as well as the scenario for the higher-voltage reversible Na adsorption. (314,326,327,330−336)

Figure 20 shows an example of XPS and Raman analysis of the sodiation charge–discharge behavior in undoped nongraphitic carbons with IG/ID ≈ 1, charged at a slow rate of C/10. (127) The electrodes were tested ex situ by disassembling the cell at terminal potentials and removing and cleaning the carbon. The hard carbon electrode had its SEI layer removed by the “Scotch tape” method to allow for cleaner analysis. (305)Figure 20A shows the XPS profiles of the electrodes as a function of voltage down to 0 V vs Na/Na+. As may be observed, at low voltages near that of Na intercalation there are strong Na–C bonds. The Na metal and the Na2O bonds are distinctly missing, indicating that Na does not plate out in the pores of the electrode. The same analysis revealed distinct low-voltage–reversible Li metal peaks when the carbons were tested against Li/Li+. Figure 20B shows the Raman spectra of the carbon as a function of voltage. The spectra are fitted, and the values of IG/ID were plotted. As the sodiation proceeds, the IG/ID ratio increases and the second-order 2D band becomes more prominent. Likewise to XRD, shown in Figure 20C and D, the largest increase in the degree of order in the carbons occurs below 0.1 V. It may be observed that there is evidence of reversible partial staging reactions that would manifest as a reversible increase in the Raman G/D ratio as 0 V vs Na/Na+ was approached. Such staging was not observed when these carbons were tested against Li. The partial staging phenomenon is caused by the intercalation of Na into the dilated graphene interlayers and had been confirmed recently in other partially ordered carbons. (328)

Importantly, the XRD pattern in the above references showed no evidence of metallic Na plating into the pores of the carbon at any of the voltages. The most intense Na metal reflection would correspond to the {110} family and would be located at 2θ = 29.3° in the pattern. Underpotential Na metal deposition into the carbons’ nanopores is expected to occur close to the half-cell potential of the metal in that electrolyte. For the case of Li plating into the nanopores of hard carbons, the phenomenon was confirmed by using analogous X-ray analysis. (326) Conversely, Na metal pore filling did not occur, boding well for the potential long-term cyclability of high-surface-area carbon-based NIC anodes.

Metal plating appears to be a key difference between low-rate charge-storage behaviors of Na versus Li nongraphitic carbons and may be an excellent reason to consider NIC devices. Ongoing plating–stripping of Li metal, even at the nanoscale, may be dangerous in terms of ultimately leading to dendrites. Even if that does not occur, fresh Li metal is catalytic to SEI formation, which means that the cycling CE would naturally become depressed. If this can be avoided by employing Na instead, there is a major safety and cyclability benefit. Certainly the field would benefit from more extensive research into the Na versus Li plating phenomena, as plating is the safety issue affecting and holding back LIC devices.

When designing all carbon HICs, researchers alter the carbons’ structure, chemistry, and mass loading to create the needed voltage difference between the positive and negative electrodes. A range of high-surface-area carbonaceous materials have been employed. (12,60,142,281,287,337−344) It is taken for granted in the community that Na systems typically perform worse than Li systems in almost every respect, i.e., energy, power, and cyclability. However, comparing LIC versus NIC systems, this conclusion is not obvious by any means. Although NICs are still in an early state, there are already some examples where NIC configurations outperform their lithium counterparts. Therefore, it is useful to provide an in-depth systematic comparison between the electrochemical performances of lithium versus sodium ion hybrid devices. To our knowledge this has not been done previously, at least not in a quantitative fashion where the performance numbers are contrasted side by side.

Optimized device configurations start with either preconditioned (or precharged) electrodes or with a secondary source of ions. Even a LIC device based on a graphite anode versus activated carbon, an optimized anode, is prelithiated to a low voltage such as 0.2 V vs Li/Li+. (60,141,145) When coupled with a standard activated carbon positive electrode, the device may operate from 1.5 to 5 V (3.5 V window, stable electrolyte) and yield an energy density of 146 Wh kg–1 by active mass. (145,152) However, in our opinion standard graphite is not a viable anode material for a hybrid device because it is extremely difficult to prevent its exfoliation and concomitant additional SEI growth after 10 000 or 100 000 cycles. Lithium intercalation to equilibrium Li6C leads to ∼10% expansion. While nominally reversible for hundreds or even several thousands of cycles (usually with proprietary additives), there is scant evidence that the reversibility is maintained after the number of cycles required for a capacitor application. In our opinion, carbon-based anodes that store Li by reversible ion adsorption in bulk and at surfaces are more promising for long-term cyclability. Of course such materials do not display the flat low-voltage profile of graphite. This means that inevitably the device energy is sacrificed because the voltage window is lower. However, as we argued early in this Review, the raison d’être of HIC devices is ultracapacitor power and cyclability but with significantly higher energy, so designing a HIC with battery-like lifetime is undesirable.

Two recent examples of carbon–carbon architectures are shown in Figure 21, with (A) showing carbons employed in a LIC while (B) shows carbons employed for NICs. (178,286) Materials employed were carbon fibers for both electrodes, carbon particles as anode, and carbon nanosheets (CNSs) as cathode. Interestingly, in the two cases provided in Figure 21, the Li system is superior in energy by about a factor of 2. This is not always the case.

Approximately 150–200 Wh/kg (by active material mass) appears to be a state-of-the-art energy achieved in optimized all-carbon devices at low and intermediate powers. Optimistically assuming a factor of 4 conversion between energy by active mass to energy by device mass yields a state-of-the-art system with 37–50 Wh/kg. This is lower than the >220 Wh/kg for an optimized commercial LIB but also much higher than ∼7 Wh/kg for an optimized commercial ultracapacitor. For instance, Ruoff’s group employed active graphene to replace the activated carbon and achieved 148 Wh kg–1 with a 2–4 V testing window. (60) Typical device anodes include hard carbons, (119,152) soft carbons, (279) graphene-based carbons, (142,280,282) and other forms of nongraphitic carbon materials. (177,278)

Mitlin’s group was the first to fabricate a hard carbon-activated carbon NIC device. (107) The anode design approach was based on the discovery that a highly ordered nongraphitic carbon exhibited a long plateau region at low voltages. (314,326) The device delivered 201 Wh kg–1 at 285 W kg–1 in a window of 1.5–4.2 V. This yielded an overall superior Ragone chart placement for NICs and among the best for LICs in the literature. (107) The device also cycled 100 000 times at both 25 and 60 °C with minimal capacity loss. Follow-up studies employed various amorphous carbons as the NIC anodes, e.g., PPy-derived disordered carbon, (345) soft carbon spheres, (287) and bioderived active carbon. (109) These carbons were less ordered due to either the low carbonization temperature or the use of order-reducing chemical activation. Therefore, all displayed a sloping profile over the entire voltage range and an absence of a low-voltage plateau. The result was a lower voltage difference between the anode and the cathode and a lower overall device energy even when the capacities of the anode/cathode were relatively high.

The performance of these and other carbon-based systems is summarized in Table 2. The table lists whether the device is based on Li or Na; the anode and the cathode architectures; the operating voltage window; the maximum specific energy and the associated power (by active mass); the maximum specific power and associated energy (by active mass); and capacity retention percent at cycle number. There are no obvious material trends in the data, e.g., hard carbon-based electrodes in some studies cycle well, whereas in others they perform less optimally. We argue that this lack of “best” materials is real, rather than just an artifact of too few studies. The reasons are the extrinsic factors, like optimized electrode conditioning, and achieving a balanced anode–cathode capacity, which often outweighs the intrinsic performance of a given carbon set. Overall, if we compare the electrochemical performance of all carbon-based LIC and NIC devices, there is no clear superiority for LICs. Most nongraphitic carbon anodes give higher capacity with Li then with Na. (127) However, the voltage profiles with Li tend to be more “capacitor-like”, i.e., sloping and with a higher hysteresis, both effects leading to an energy reduction in the device. On the cathode side at high voltage, the Na and Li storage capacities of ion-adsorption electrodes appear to be comparable. (60,107,111,141,280,282,286) More work is needed to establish the electrolyte transport and solid-state transport differences (in carbon) for Li versus Na. Also more work is needed to understand the high-voltage charge-storage mechanisms in high-surface-area carbons, which may also involve anions because the material is positively polarized.

Apart from carbons and titanium compounds, there is a range of emerging anode materials that are either being developed explicitly for HICs or are being applied to hybrid devices that had original applications in LIBs or NIBs. Overwhelmingly, these nanomaterials are utilized for anodes, not cathodes. Conversely, even the best adsorption cathodes, which are based on high-surface-area carbons, offer a fraction of the capacity of existing HIC anodes. There is little evidence of extended cyclability (10 000 cycles or more) when noncarbon cathodes are employed, per the data provided in Table 3. There is much more need for HIC cathode research in the field as LIB and NIB cathodes are not directly transferable. It is the lack of comparable high-power and high-cyclability hybrid device cathode that is a key outstanding problem for the field, limiting the potential technological applications of devices.

The pseudocapacitive materials are emerging as an important materials subset for HICs due to their rapid charging–discharging kinetics, combined with a higher gravimetric and volumetric capacity as compared to true EDLC electrodes. (13) For instance, Dunn and co-workers demonstrated that the Li+ intercalation into the ordered channels of bulk orthorhombic Nb2O5 (i.e., T-Nb2O5) was extremely facile, giving “capacitor-like” charging behavior. These materials were termed pseudocapacitive intercalation compounds because, while the Li storage process was not EDLC per se, it displayed EDLC-like triangular galvanostatic curves and box-shaped CVs. (251) Parts A and B of Figure 22 show the galvanostatic and potentiodynamic of this material. (251) From both the CV and the galvanostatic curves it may be observed that the useful voltage range for T-Nb2O5 with graphene is 1–1.75 V, putting it in the same category as the titanium oxide compounds. The T-Nb2O5 has been employed for anodes in LICs. (346−349,359−361)Figure 22C shows a schematic of the T-Nb2O5 structure.

As shown in Table 3, these LICs will deliver a maximum of 76 Wh kg–1 at relatively low power, (259) making their overall specific energy about a factor of 2 lower than that for carbon-based devices. Issues reducing the overall device energy are the low electrical conductivity of T-Nb2O5 and its intrinsically sloping profile, which as discussed reduces the overall cell energy. This is another illustration of what we believe is a key guiding heuristic for future NIC and LIC material design: Create electrodes that possess facile and highly reversible charge–discharge kinetics but which demonstrate flat battery-like profiles. Of course this is extremely difficult to achieve and, hence, should be a focus of future research activity.

Vanadium oxide V2O5 undergoes bulk ion intercalation reaction during reversible charging, also producing a capacitor-like sloping profile when employed as an anode. In aqueous systems, bulk V2O5 will accommodate cations (e.g., H+, Li+, and K+) from the electrolyte. (351−353) Authors have combined elemental analysis (ICP) and X-ray diffraction to investigate the charge-storage mechanism of V2O5 in aqueous system. They discovered that K+ ions insert in the interlayer spaces between the (00l) planes. (351) Sodium intercalation becomes significantly more facile in the bilayered V2O5 phase due to the dilated layer spacing (∼11.53 Å) in the 001 direction, as compared to the orthorhombic V2O5 phase. (Figure 23). (362) Per Table 3, a maximum energy of 42 Wh kg–1 can be obtained with <5% loss over 10 000 cycles. (351) In Li+ or Na+ organic systems, a V2O5-based hybrid device can work in a much wider voltage window, as shown in Table 3 as well. Authors have tested the identical V2O5@CNT materials in both lithium and sodium systems. (353,354) The electrodes performed similarly but with less-pronounced redox peaks in the sodium cell. The energy values of the LIC and NIC cells are in the 40 Wh kg–1 range, akin to the aqueous electrolyte systems.

MXene is a large family of two-dimensional transition metal carbides and carbonitrides, which was first proposed by Gogotsi and his colleagues. (363) The authors discovered that, in an aqueous electrolyte, a variety of cations (Na+, K+, Mg2+, and Al3+) will reversibly intercalate into the bulk of multilayer exfoliated T3C2Tx MXene. They also reported that, in the organic electrolytes, Li+ ions will reversibly intercalate between the layers of MXene. (356) Although the bulk intercalation reaction is involved, the MXene exhibits pseudocapacitor CVs and galvanostatic profiles, which therefore could be classified into the pseudocapacitive material family. (356,363,364) Moreover, electrochemical analysis demonstrated that Li storage was a reaction rather than a diffusion-controlled faradic process, akin to the other pseudocapacitive materials reported in the literature.

Figure 24C highlights a LIC device that is based on Ti2C combed with Kuraray YP17-activated carbon. The Ti2C anode displayed a moderate working voltage (ca. 1.5 V vs Li/Li+), with LIC operating with an upper cutoff voltage of 3.5 V and delivering maximum energy of 50 Wh kg–1. Authors synthesized 3D TiC nanoparticle chains that worked in a lower-voltage region (0.7 V vs Li/Li+). Coupling with a high-capacity nitrogen-doped porous carbon cathode, the resultant LIC device delivered 101.5 Wh kg–1 energy at low power and 23.4 Wh kg–1 energy at an extreme power of 67 500 W kg–1. (177) Another group fabricated Ti3C2 MXene pillared by CTAB-Sn. On the basis of the dilated interlayer spacing of Ti3C2, the LIC device delivered maximum energy of 105.6 Wh kg–1. (355) Yamada’s group argued that Na+ can also intercalate into the MXene (e.g., Ti2CTx) interlayers based on the ex situ XRD analysis. (357) Therefore, MXene can also been employed as an anode in NIC.

Researchers also employed intercalation compounds as the cathode instead of the capacitive carbon cathode. Authors coupled Ti2C MXene with Na2Fe2(SO4)3 cathode (357) and combined Ti3C2–CNTs with Na0.44MnO2 cathode for NIC devices. (358) A NIC with V2CTx MXene cathode and hard carbon anode was also fabricated and tested. (108) Employing MXene for hybrid devices, and especially for NICs, remains quite novel. In our opinion there is significant potential to utilize these materials, especially in the voltage profile that could be tuned to be more battery-like without sacrificing rapid charge–discharge kinetics. Another key question worth pursuing is the cyclability of these materials. To date there have not been long (e.g., 50 000 or 100 000) cycle data generated for any of the MXene systems. It is not obvious whether the exisiting intercalation compounds may survive such extended service and, if not, whether their structure and/or electrolyte chemistry may be tuned to improve performance.

Reversible conversion reaction-based materials are another class that has been deemed pseudocapacitive and has gained attention as a HIC electrode material. In standard battery literature, a conversion electrode starts as crystalline or amorphous AxBy compound. It then reversibly decomposes into one or two (we are not aware of higher order) Li or Na compounds upon charging. (365) One example is the SnO2 ⇒ Sn alloy + Li2O/Na2O system, which is a classic conversion compound with a sloping voltage profile for both Li and Na. (93,98) While it is popular to label such systems pseudocapacitive, in our opinion this label is not entirely appropriate: The sloping charge–discharge profiles for almost all conversion compounds are far from perfectly triangular and contain a large hysteresis. Importantly, a large number of these systems are actually diffusion-limited (rather than reaction-limited), even at intermediate charge–discharge rates. Examples of systems to date employed for HICs include MoS2, (366) NbN, (367) VN, (368) MnO, (11,369,370) Fe2O3/Fe3O4, (371−373) NiCo2O4, (374) various alloys, (375−378) etc. (379−384) For instance, while MoS2 does undergo Li intercalation reaction down to 1.1 V (arguably only during cycle 1), the majority of the reversible capacity stems from the reversible conversion reaction to Mo and Li2S down to 0 V. (385) The reversible capacity of MoS2 has been reported to be as high as 1 000 mAhg–1, which is actually higher than the theoretical. The discrepancy may be due to a capacitive contribution and a contribution from reversible SEI growth. (94,386) Looking ahead, it should be possible to employ almost any fast-reacting conversion electrode material for LIC or NIC anodes, as there is not a strict requirement for orderly ion intercalation as there is in T-Nb2O5, etc.

Authors have employed MoS2-graphene composites in LICs, taking advantage of sloping charge–discharge profiles. (366) The final LIC delivered energy density as high as 188 Wh kg–1 at 200 W kg–1 and 45.3 Wh kg–1at 40 000 W kg–1, which is quite outstanding. The practical capacity of MoS2 was ∼600 mAh/g and helps to offset the sloping voltage plateau in delivering high energy. The outstanding rate capability and cycling capacity retention likely originated from optimized carbon-based secondary phase in the anode. The same group also employed similar materials in a NIC. (387) Interestingly in the sodium system, they used a bottom cutoff voltage of 0.5 V vs Na/Na+, which largely limits MoS2 primarily to intercalation. Therefore, ∼200 mAhg–1 capacity was obtained in the anode side. With a PANI-derived porous carbon cathode, the final NIC worked between 1 and 3.8 V and delivered maximum 111.4 Wh kg–1 with 77.3% retention over 10 000 cycles. A summary of published materials, architectures, and devices based on conversion electrodes is provided in Table 4.

Many binary compounds ascribed to formula MaXb (M = transition metal, e.g., V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Mo, W, Ru, etc.; X = anion, e.g., O, S, N, P, F) will have the thermodynamic possibility to undergo reversible conversion reactions with Na. (365) However, in practice few compounds are able to undergo fully reversible conversion even at normal charging rates. The conversion reaction is a bulk battery-like process, and a range of reaction (activation) and/or diffusional limitations seem to hold many of these materials back, even when highly nanostructured. This is especially the case with sulfides and phosphides that typically have worse high-rate performance than their oxide counterparts. Conversely, the nitrides and fluorides are either too thermodynamically stable to react with Na (e.g., Cu3N) or unable to reform upon desodiation. Manganese oxide (MnO) conversion compounds have been employed in HIC anodes (Table 4). (11,369,370) Manganese sulfide (MnS) is employed in aqueous supercapacitors as a cathode (388−391) but not in organic electrolyte HIC devices. It does charge at conventional rates against Li (392−396) and Na (392) but does not do well enough at high cycling and high rates. The nitrides Mn4N, (397) MnN0.43, (398) and Mn3N2 (399,400) have also been employed as LIB anodes but have not demonstrated the needed rate performance and cyclability for HICs. By replacing the nitrogen with NCN, the MnNCN phase can perform much better electrochemically, enabling a MnNCN//AC LIC to deliver a maximum energy of 103 Wh kg–1. (401) However, this is almost a factor of 2 lower than that for devices employing MnO. The phosphides MnP4 and MnP have received only limited applications, (402,403) none being for HIC devices. The MnPx-based electrode exhibits a large voltage hysteresis (ca. 1 V) in a lithium cell and a large capacity loss (>50%) in the initial ∼10 cycles. (390,402,403) Of course, this prohibits its utilization in high-rate–high-cycling applications.

Researchers have also utilized ceramic battery cathode materials coupled against carbon counter electrodes, in effect designing a high-power battery with a more sloping voltage profile. In 2014, Aravindan et al. offered an excellent overview of intercalation-type materials for hybrid lithium ion configurations. (404) Advances in such architectures continue to accelerate, now including the sodium-based systems as well. Table 5 summarizes the published configurations. The vast majority of these architectures possess battery-like cyclability, surviving several thousands of cycles. The two very notable and hence uniquely promising exceptions are the Na3V2(PO4)3//bioinspired carbon (405) and NaTi2(PO4)3//graphene nanosheets, (406) which survive 10 000 and 75 000 cycles, respectively. These architectures clearly warrant further investigation. Because the anode in each case appears to be a fairly straightforward, albeit well optimized, carbon, the secret of enhanced cyclability may lie in the unusual stability of the cathodes. As detailed in Table 5, there are various types of ceramic battery cathodes being used in both LICs and NICs, for instance, layered oxides, (61,407−409) spinel oxide, (410−414) olivine, (415−417) NASICON, (405,406,418−422) and silicates. (423,424)

In 2006, Xia’s group developed an aqueous Li2SO4 electrolyte hybrid system based on a layered oxide cathode (i.e., LiCoO2, LiCo1/3Ni1/3Mn1/3O2) and an activated carbon anode. (407) The authors argued that the SO4– ions do not participate in charge storage and that only Li+ is relevant. This is different from symmetric carbon ultracapacitors, where it is assumed that both the cations and the anions are relevant to the total reversible capacity. (267) With aqueous HICs the reported energies are on-par with conventional asymmetric ultracapacitors. For instance, an AC//LiCoO2 aqueous hybrid cell worked between 0 and 1.8 V and delivered maximum 37 Wh kg–1 energy at a power of 125 W kg–1. (407) Authors prepared a layered LiCo1/3Ni1/3Fe1/3O2 based on the parent LiCo1/3Ni1/3Mn1/3O2 phase. (61) They coated the compounds with conductive polymers (e.g., PANI, PPy) to further improve the kinetics of the intercalation cathode. The best AC//LiCo1/3Ni1/3Fe1/3O2–PANI setup delivered maximum energy of 49 Wh kg–1 with negligible decay upon 3000 cycles. (61) For the sodium system, authors prepared Na0.67[Mn0.75Al0.25]O2 compound by Al substituting from the layered P2–Na0.67MnO2 phase. The Na0.67[Mn0.75Al0.25]O2 had a sloping capacity profile between 2 and 4 V and was coupled to a carbon anode. (408) In an organic electrolyte, this NIC operated between 0 and 2.7 V and delivered maximum energy of 26 Wh kg–1. Converted to device specific energy, such a NIC is o- par with commercial EDLC systems. In general, intercalation cathodes give worse performance for Na than they do for Li. The lower energy of the NIC devices are in part due to the lower voltage of the layered oxides; for instance, the voltage of LiCoO2 is ∼4 V, while for Na0.67MnO2 the average voltage is only ca. 2.5 V.

Olivine LiFePO4 is a well-established commercial LIB cathode that has seen applications in hybrid devices as well. It undergoes a two-phase reaction during lithium intercalation/extraction and exhibits a flat plateau at 3.4 V. Authors designed a hybrid AC + LiFePO4 composite as the cathode and mesocarbon microbeads as the anode. (416) The device was cycled between 2 and 4 V with a maximum energy density of 69 Wh kg–1 and a lifetime of 100 cycles with negligible decay. Authors synthesized and tested NaMn1/3Co1/3Ni1/3PO4 compound referring to the parent NaFePO4 phase. (417) Similar to the above-mentioned LiFePO4 LIC configuration, the sodium-based olivine phase was also used as the cathode and commercially available carbon was employed as the anode. The NIC delivered 50 Wh kg–1 energy at the power of 180 W kg–1, which is comparable to the olivine-based LICs. (417) To us, it is somewhat surprising that better performance has not been achieved with LiFePO4, as this is a well-known system that has undergone many optimization routes for high-power applications. (125,426−433)

Recently NASICON cathodes have received attention for hybrid device applications. The most often studied NASICONs are Li3V2(PO4)3 (LVP) and Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) phases, with vanadium as the active transition metal element. Due to the multivalence change of vanadium, these compounds can reversibly intercalate multiple alkali ions at different potentials. Taking Na3V2(PO4)3 as an example, as shown in Figure 25, there are 6b, 18e, and 6a sodium sites in the polyhedral framework in the NVP structure. Phase transformation happens during sodiation from Na1V2(PO4)3 to Na3V2(PO4)3 and further to Na5V2(PO4)3, being accompanied with the reduction of V4+ to V3+ and V2+. The V4+/V3+ redox relates to the high-voltage plateau at 3.4 V and the V3+/V2+ redox related to the low voltage below 2 V. (419,434,435) On the basis of this kind of multielectron reaction of vanadium, the LVP and NVP can act as both a cathode and an anode, depending on which voltage plateaus are employed. Authors have incorporated a LVP-C cathode with an AC as anode in a LIC device, obtaining 25 Wh kg–1. (418) An energy density of 28 Wh kg–1 was reported for a AC//LVP configuration. (419) However, when the activated carbon is employed as a cathode while LVP is the anode, the energy density is markedly improved. For instance, 125 Wh kg–1 can be obtained at 300 W kg–1. (419) An AC anode–NVP cathode-based NIC delivered maximum 16 Wh kg–1 in an aqueous electrolyte. (420) However, a device based on an opposite configuration, i.e., a NVP anode–bioderived carbon cathode, delivered 118 Wh kg–1. (405) Given this data, it may be argued that NASICON possesses primary utility as an anode material only.

As shown in Figure 26, the final energy and power of the LIC and NIC devices largely depends on the configuration strategies and the charge-storage nature of each electrode. The panels are separated along a similar taxonomy as the discussion: (A) carbonaceous materials based; (107,109,119,145,286,345) (B) titanium oxides and compounds based; (158,195,227,248,269,271,272,275) (C) pseudocapacitive oxides/nitrides (259,350,353,354,374,436) and MXenes; (355,357) and (D) ceramic intercalation compounds. (405,407,408,416,417,419,420) In general, architectures with the flattest anode and cathode voltage versus capacity characteristics and largest total voltage window come out on top. The energy–power advantage that is observed with conventional lithium versus sodium ion batteries is not obvious with LIC versus NIC devices. In fact, for all-carbon-based devices, Na systems appear superior. Because Na is a slower solid-state diffuser in most materials, further investigation for this interesting and nonintuitive finding is needed. One implication may be that, at least for the carbon–carbon systems, solid-state diffusivity is not the rate-limiting phenomena in either electrode, hence showing a fundamental difference versus LIBs and NIBs and greater similarly to ultracapacitors. While the current HIC architectures are fairly straightforward in terms of materials sets, the associated high-rate charge-storage mechanisms in the cathode and especially in the anode are poorly understood and clearly warrant more research.

To summarize, in our opinion, the core outstanding questions for the HIC field include the following: electrode design, because hybrid high-surface-area positive electrodes do not intrinsically contain a solid source of shuttling ions while ion-containing ceramic battery cathodes do not provide the necessary cycling life; the energy–power limitations associated with the triangular capacitor-like charge–discharge profiles of most HICs; the fast charge-storage mechanisms in the negative electrodes that are not understood and may fundamentally differ from the low-rate charge-storage behavior in LIBs; the HIC cycling life that is superior to lithium ion batteries but lacks far behind classic EDLCs; and a potential performance (and cost) advantage of transitioning from the dominant lithium ion capacitor (LIC) to the relatively unexplored sodium ion capacitor (NIC).

However, we should caution against over interpreting the performance comparisons: In our opinion, a substantial part of “good” versus “OK” performance of various devices is strongly linked to electrode and device design factors rather than just materials sets per se. These include quality/integrity of the fabricated electrodes in terms of material slurry and dispersion, proper capacity balancing of the anode versus cathode, the use of additives, the charging–discharging depths/rates employed, electrode-preconditioning and prelithiating/sodiating, etc. These extrinsic parameters are distinct from intrinsic properties limiting performance such as the volume expansion of a given material upon lithiation/sodiation or the reversibility of certain conversion reactions. We feel that at this point there are still not enough NIC publications so as to allow for a completely rigorous comparison of the intrinsic performance of device architectures based on materials sets. The NIC topic is just too new, which also makes it a very exciting area in which to work.

In principle, it should be the negative electrode that is problematic for cycling life due to formation of SEI, possibility of low-voltage metal plating, and volume expansion associated with deep discharge. While an activated carbon or other high-surface-area cathode would operate at a voltage where CEI is formed, the process should, at least in principle, be less damaging due to minimal volume expansion: CEI may not accumulate over cycling due to the low expansion of the carbon that does not create new catalytic surfaces with every charge–discharge. However, CEI formation is almost entirely unexplored for LICs and NICs. From an energy density vantage, the situation is reversed: There does not seem to be a satisfactory cathode material that could operate at comparable capacity as the anode while maintaining cycling stability. Activated carbon is stable,but offers down to one-fifth of the reversible capacity of a high-quality hard carbon anode, as well as the undesirable sloping voltage profile. More work is needed to develop new high-cyclability–high-power–high-capacity–flat-voltage cathode materials, which admittedly is a very aggressive goal.
