The migration behaviours of Li+ in three garnet- and one NASICON-type solid oxide electrolytes were studied on the micrometre scale by pulsed-gradient spin-echo (PGSE) 7Li NMR diffusion spectroscopy to clarify common and specific characteristics of each electrolyte. In these solid electrolytes, clear evidences of grain boundary effects in the diffusion of Li+ were not observed. The Li+ diffusion constants were dependent on parameters such as observation time (Δ) and pulsed field gradient (PFG) strength (g) for all the studied inorganic solid electrolytes. For low Δ values, Li+ ions underwent collisions and diffractions with diffraction distance Rdiffraction [μm]. The apparent Li+ diffusion constants (Dapparent [m2 s−1]) exhibited distributions in a wide range. In this paper, we introduced the apparent diffusion radius, rradius [μm], and compared it with Rdiffraction and mean square displacement (MSD) [μm]; the lengths of these distances were of the micrometre order (10−6 m). The relations between the values of rradius, Rdiffraction and MSD suggested that the migration behaviours of Li+ on the micrometre scale were complicated. Using high Δ and high g values, we obtained an equilibrated value of DLi. The temperature dependences of the number of carrier ions were estimated from the DLi values and ionic conductivities in the four solid oxide electrolytes. For simple comparison and reference, the data of DLi and ionic conductivity of LiPF6 in 1 M solution of propylene carbonate were added.

Li-ion conductive inorganic solid electrolytes are interesting materials because of their high ionic conductivity; they are expected to enable the production of all-solid Li-ion batteries for safety improvements. Various types of solid electrolytes are known, and new materials have been synthesized. Recently, review articles have been reported regarding the efforts made for producing all-solid Li-ion batteries from a wide range of viewpoints.1–6 From the early stages of investigations in this field, atomic-level studies have predominantly dealt with crystal structures, atomic-level Li pathways, Li mobility over short ranges, etc. The bulk properties of the practical materials used in Li-ion batteries such as ionic conductivities are important indexes for evaluating the materials. The anions in inorganic lithium solid electrolytes are immobile, and the mobile Li+ ions contribute to ionic conductivity. At the present stage, however, the migration behaviours of Li+ on the micrometre (10−6 m) scale have not yet been studied well, and it is uncertain whether simple extrapolations from nanoscale (10−9 m) information on the Li+ migration are reasonable.

The timescales of NMR measurements (10−7 to 10−9 s) make it possible to obtain atomic-level information concerning chemical structures by solid-state NMR spectroscopy and atomic motions from relaxation times, as described in review articles.7,8 The pulsed-gradient spin-echo (PGSE) NMR method provides information on a longer timescale (10−3 s) over a wider space (10−6 m) in terms of diffusion constants.9 For the observation of homogeneous systems, diffusion phenomena are insensitive to time and space scales and can be defined in terms of the self-diffusion coefficient D [m2 s−1], which is a physical constant. We have published temperature and concentration dependences of DLi, Danion, and Dsolvent values for lithium solution electrolytes and ionic liquids, which were measured by PGSE NMR methods; these are closely related to ionic conductivities.10 The diffusion radius r [m] is simply calculated by .

Because the migration of Li+ in solid electrolytes is accompanied by non-uniform behaviours, we are obliged to obtain an apparent diffusion constant (Dapparent); its values depend on measurement parameters, and they are not physical constants. We have measured Li+ diffusion for several solid electrolytes by PGSE-NMR methods, and we have found that the phenomena are so complicated that we have not yet understood them completely. We repeated the experiments and published only the results that were reproducible and not NMR instrumental artefacts. Gradually, we noticed that among the specific properties of Li+ migration phenomena, some features were common in Li inorganic solid electrolytes.11–16 Actually, in the early stages, we could not understand exactly how Li ions moved in solid electrolytes, and we found that the Li+ diffusion behaviours were quite different from the behaviours in solution electrolytes and ionic liquids. Still, many unresolved problems remained. In this paper, we described the diffusion behaviours of Li+ in solid oxide electrolytes: three garnet-type electrolytes, namely, Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO), Li6.6La3Zr1.6Ta0.4O12 (LLZO-Ta), and Li6.52Al0.08La3Zr1.75Ta0.25O12 (LLZO-Al-Ta) and a NASICON-type electrolyte, namely, Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP). The garnets in our study exhibited cubic symmetry, and LAGP showed orthorhombic symmetry. These inorganic solid electrolytes are popular and have been well studied from many viewpoints. We did not encounter clear evidences of grain boundary effects in measurements of the diffusion of Li+ in these materials. Recently, we have started to measure the Li+ migration in perovskite-type inorganic electrolytes, which are known to have grain boundaries. The Li+ diffusion phenomena are much more complicated,17 and we need to characterize the diffusion of Li+ in the garnets and NASICON hitherto studied.

The PGSE-NMR method consists of the insertion of two equivalent pulsed field gradients (PFGs) in the interval between radio frequency (RF) pulses in the Hahn pulse sequence 180°–τ–90°–τ–acq (Δ = τ).9,18 The initial position of an Li+ ion is marked with the first PFG pulse, and the final position of the encoded Li+ ion is detected by second PFG after the time interval Δ. Because of the very low 7Li T1 and T2 values and experimental settings, the limiting values of Δ are between 10 and 400 ms, and the diffusion constants are between 10−9 and 10−13 m2 s−1 on the micrometre scale. For samples with short T2, the stimulated echo pulse sequence 90°–τ–90°–T–90°–τ–acq (Δ = T + τ) is used (see Fig. 1).19

Stimulated echo pulse sequence with two inserted PFG pulses. The interval Δ between the two PFG pulses has a height of g (T m−1) and duration of δ (10−3 s). The eddy current effect after the PFG must fade out during the time interval τ between the 90–90° RF pulses. For a short T2, the removal of eddy current effects is important to obtain reliable results. The sample height must be within the PFG linear region to prevent artefacts (usually within 10 mm).

The echo attenuation E is related to the experimental variables, and the diffusion coefficient D can be determined using the Stejskal and Tanner equation for homogeneous space.18,19

Here, γ is the 7Li gyromagnetic ratio (1.040 × 108 s−1 T−1). Using eqn (1), the diffusion constant D can be estimated from the gradient of an echo attenuation plot by varying δ × g, and δ and g have equivalent roles in eqn (1). In fact, in homogeneous systems, we can obtain the same D values by varying either g or δ if PFG has a good rectangular shape. However, in solid inorganic electrolytes, the values of D depend on Δ and g, and the obtained Dapparent values are not physical constants. As a result, g cannot be used as a measuring variable in δ × g. The diffusion measurements must be conducted at a fixed value of g by varying δ; this requires a rectangular PFG shape in the PGSE-NMR equipment. The second issue is eddy current effects. Because the T2 values of 7Li in solid electrolytes are generally low (several ms or less), the time interval τ must be short to permit reasonable sensitivity of the echo signals. If short τ exhibits eddy current effects, the echo plots for eqn (1) must include artefacts. Reliable measurements require a rectangular PFG shape and minimal eddy current effects, and the samples should have a sufficiently long T2 (approximately longer than 2 ms).

Under these conditions, we were successful in measuring Li diffusion in several inorganic solid electrolytes after many trial-and-error experiments. We have reported the diffusion of Li+ in solid sulfide electrolytes11–13 and oxide electrolytes, namely, the three garnets14,15 and NASICON LAGP.16 In this study, we revisited our results of crystalline oxide electrolytes and plotted the data on the same axes as their individual plots. Using common concepts for the four samples, we conducted re-measurements to confirm the data. Specific properties of the individual materials and common characteristics of the solid oxide electrolytes were found without clear evidence of grain boundary effects.

Powdered LLZO-Ta and LLZO-Al-Ta samples were synthesized.20 Cubic LLZO (pellet) and orthorhombic LAGP (powder) samples were purchased from Toshima Manufacturing Co., Ltd (Saitama, Japan).21 A powdered sample of LLZO was prepared by grinding a pellet by hand in a glove box. Each sample was placed in an NMR sample tube having a diameter of 5 mm and a height of less than 8 mm, and the tube was then flame-sealed.

7Li PGSE-NMR measurements were performed using a fully tunable PFG probe with a good rectangular shape and a PFG amplifier (50 Å) supplied by JEOL (Tokyo, Japan). The PFG probe was placed in a wide-bore 4.7 Tesla superconducting magnet without a room shim unit. The NMR console (Apollo) and NTNMR were supplied by Tecmag, Inc. (Houston, USA). The PFG strength was calibrated carefully with D2O (2H resonance) starting from H2O (DH2O = 2.30 × 10−9 m2 s−1 at 25 °C 22,23). The temperature was determined using ethylene glycol. Eddy current effects disappeared within 0.35 ms after a PFG with strength of 14 T m−1 and duration of 4 ms.15

The T1 and T2 values of 7Li in the present solid electrolytes are plotted versus temperature in the range from room temperature to 140 °C (near the limit of the specifications of the probe) (Fig. 2). At room temperature, the garnet samples showed a short T2 of less than 1 ms and above 70 °C, PGSE-NMR measurements were possible. The T2 value of LAGP was about 8.5 ms at room temperature, and it was possible to measure the diffusion of Li+ under various conditions. It is desirable to use short τ to obtain good sensitivity (Fig. 1). In the present experiments, the highest δ value was set at 4 ms, and the value of τ was set at 4.6 ms to prevent artefacts due to eddy current effects. In very recent experiments, τ = 4.5 ms, because the interval between the first 90° pulse and PFG was shortened to 0.01 ms. The sensitivity of the echo attenuation was improved, in particular for long Δ. The Li+ diffusion phenomena were measured using a fixed value of g between 5 and 14 T m−1, and δ was varied between 0.1 and 4 ms (16 to 40 points). The T1 values of 7Li were also low (see Fig. 2(a)), and more accumulations were necessary to measure diffusion phenomena for long Δ, where the Δ value was varied from 10 to 300 ms. High Δ values were observed in limited cases.

Previously, we reported temperature-dependent 7Li NMR spectral patterns for LLZO-Ta,14 LLZO,15 and LAGP.16 In this paper, the 7Li NMR spectra of LLZO-Al-Ta at 30 and 120 °C are shown in Fig. 3. Multiple peak fitting calculations were carried out using the overlap of two Lorentzian curves. The narrow component had a value of 0.6 kHz at 30 °C and became slightly sharper (0.4 kHz) as the temperature was increased to 120 °C. The broad component also narrowed from 9.2 to 1.9 kHz, and the proportion of the broad component was about 50%, which decreased slightly as the temperature was increased. Owing to the T2 limitation, the diffusion measurements were only possible above 60 °C for the garnet-type electrolytes. Echo signals were observed only at higher temperatures. The linewidths of the echo signals were almost the same or slightly less than the width of the narrow component for the present oxide electrolytes. The broad component did not contribute to the measurements of Li+ diffusion. Each electrolyte showed individual temperature-dependent changes in its 7Li spectrum. The LLZO samples showed similar trends to LLZO-Al-Ta. In the 7Li spectra of LLZO-Ta at high temperatures (above 120 °C), the broad component was not observed. LAGP showed 7Li spectra with eqQ satellites together with central lines.16 Except for the observations for LLZO-Ta at high temperatures, broad components always occurred in the present temperature range, and the Li atoms that gave rise to the broad components did not migrate in the oxide electrolytes. These facts suggested that not all Li+ ions migrate in the oxide electrolytes.

Atomic-level Li pathways have been widely proposed.1–6 Li ions are believed to move in crystalline structures from one site to another site through vacancies. The atomic jumps can be measured via nanoscale 7Li relaxation times.7,8 In contrast, PGSE diffusion measurements can measure the Li+ migration in timescales of 10−2 to 1 s over distances of 10−7 to 10−6 m, which are longer by several orders of magnitude. It is uncertain whether the Li migration measured by PGSE-NMR is directly related to atomic-level Li pathways. When the measurement time Δ is short (less than 20 ms), the Li+ ions experience collisions and diffractions. Diffractive diffusion in PGSE-NMR measurements is known to be a restricted diffusion for neutral particles in restricted neutral space.9

The collision and diffraction behaviours of Li+ ions in solid inorganic electrolytes are observed in limited short-time ranges, and this is a large discrepancy from the so-called restricted diffusion. Experimentally and theoretically, restricted diffusion is well established for plotting echo attenuation in “q-space” (q = γgδ/2π [m−1]) to estimate the sphere size for particles confined in the restricted space. The reciprocal of the first minimum position in the q-space plot is related to the radius of the restricted space. In our study, the reciprocal of the diffraction minimum of Li echo attenuation in the q-space plot (Rdiffraction [10−6 m]) is assumed to be related to micrometre-scale Li channels surrounded by standing anion and lithium barriers. In the present study, we have collected echo attenuation data for the five previously observed samples of oxide electrolytes with values of g = 10 T m−1 and Δ = 15 ms, as shown in Fig. 4. Because of short T2 at room temperature, the observations of echo attenuations have been made at elevated temperatures except for LAGP. Please note that phase changes occur in real-mode echoes, with negative signals near minimum positions. The echo attenuations are plotted with the magnitude mode.

As reported previously, diffractive patterns are insensitive to temperature, which is clearly shown in Fig. 4. The Rdiffraction values shown in Fig. 4 were obtained from the diffraction minima. The highest value was obtained for LLZO-Ta, with slightly lower values for LLZO-Al-Ta and LLZO, and the lowest value was obtained for LAGP. The depressions in LLZO became shallower in LLZO-Ta and LLZO-Ta-Al. Contrary, in LAGP, deep and sharp dip was observed. The collision and diffraction patterns varied according to the type of solid electrolyte, and they were probably influenced by the internal structures.

Diffractive patterns can be measured with a short Δ (5 to 20 ms), and the patterns varied depending on the Δ value (Fig. 5 for the pellet sample of LLZO). Similar plots have already been reported for LAGP.16

The diffractive echo attenuation plots in q-space for the LLZO pellet sample at 108 °C with g = 10 T m−1 and Δ = 5 to 25 ms with δ varying from 0.1 to 4 ms (40 points) and τ = 4.6 ms. The Rdiffraction values are inserted for the minimum positions. The experiment with Δ = 25 ms did not produce a diffractive pattern.

We reported g-dependent diffusive diffractive echo attenuation for LLZO-Ta14 and LAGP,16 but we could not explain the significance of the Rdiffraction values well. Experimentally, the Dapparent values can be estimated from the initial decay of echo attenuation versus b using eqn (1). In this study, we estimated an apparent diffusion radius (rradius) from the value of Dapparent  and attempted to find a relation between rradius and Rdiffraction. In Fig. 6, all sets of rradius and Rdiffraction values are plotted, and the values were obtained by either varying g at the same Δ value or by varying Δ at a constant g value. At the same Δ value, lower g values resulted in higher values of rradius and Rdiffraction, which suggested that fast-moving Li+ ions can be observed with a lower value of g.

Apparent diffusion radius (rradius) plotted versus Rdiffraction observed in diffusive diffractive echo attenuations for LLZO (pellet and powder samples), LLZO-Ta, LLZO-Al-Ta, and LAGP.

As shown in Fig. 6, although the plots are scattered, a linear relation exists between rradius and Rdiffraction for the garnet and NASICON samples. Furthermore, the Rdiffraction values are similar to those of rradius. For a shorter Δ and smaller g value, both rradius and Rdiffraction increase; this implies that the apparent space for Li+ migration is wide (∼10−6 m) for rapid movement (∼10−11 m2 s−1) over short periods. Please note that for Δ = 10 ms, a diffusion radius of approximately 3 μm is possible. It is not certain how many Li+ ions are available for such rapid and long-range diffusion. At the present stage, the PGSE-NMR method cannot determine the number of Li+ ions involved. We will discuss this later in terms of carrier ion numbers.

Since the collision and diffraction phenomena are insensitive to temperature, a driving force must exist to produce collisions and diffractions. In a very short period of 10−3 s, Li+ ions moving at high speed collide with barriers composed of standing anions and Li atoms, which results in diffraction. The Rdiffraction value is explicitly related to that of rradius. However, at present, our measurements cannot indicate what distance and time interval are possible for one jump without collision in a space of 10−6 m. In addition, there is no information on the migration processes between Δ for Li+ ions encoded by the first PFG and that detected by the second PFG for the encoded species. Over a longer time interval, collisions and diffractions occur repeatedly, and the measured values of rradius and Rdiffraction decrease. It is uncertain whether the phenomena in the micrometre-scale lithium channels observed by PGSE-NMR are directly related to Li+ diffusive migration via atomic-scale lithium pathways of 10−9 m.

When the observation time was increased, the diffractive patterns in the echo attenuation plots disappeared, and the diffusion plots obtained using eqn (1) were almost linear over wide ranges of g and Δ for the present samples. From echo attenuation, the D values were calculated, but these values were dependent on the measurement parameters such as Δ and g, as previously reported.11–16 The data in Fig. 7 were obtained under the same measurement conditions (with a fixed g of 10.0 T m−1 and by varying δ up to 4 ms) at 103 °C and additionally at lower temperatures for LAGP to ensure reproducibility by using the same samples sealed in NMR sample tubes. With trial-and-error experiments, the settings of the PFG pulse sequence were improved step-by-step to obtain better sensitivity at longer Δ. The tendencies of the Δ-dependences were unchanged, and they were accompanied by slight deviation in the absolute values, which probably included the effect of micrometre-scale structural changes. We confirmed that the changes in T1 values were minimal, which suggested that the atomic Li+ jump was insensitive to aging of the samples.

Δ-Dependent Dapparent values for the four samples measured with g = 10 T m−1 and δ varying up to 4 ms at 103 °C. Additionally, LAGP was measured at 65 and 16 °C. The data in this figure were obtained from recent re-measurements of samples kept in sealed NMR sample tubes.

The Dapparent values decreased rapidly as Δ became longer and approached an equilibrium value for each sample at a given temperature (Fig. 7). The dependence on Δ was less for the garnet samples, and the Dapparent values measured at Δ = 70 and 100 ms were almost identical. The longer T2 of LAGP made it possible to conduct measurements with long Δ (Fig. 2). The decrease in the Dapparent values of LAGP continued up to almost 300 ms, and it was confirmed that the Dapparent values were almost identical for values at Δ = 300 and 400 ms. From Fig. 7, we can observe that the decreasing trends of the Dapparent values with an increase in Δ are different for each oxide electrolyte. The dependence on Δ is shown at three temperatures for LAGP, which indicates that the Δ-dependence increased as the temperature decreased.

It is already well known that molecular diffusion in macroporous materials (zeolites, membranes, macromolecules, polymers, etc.) shows time dependence (so-called anomalous diffusion).24 As described above, Δ-dependent diffusion was expected at the start of the measurements of Li+ diffusion in solid electrolytes. The g-dependent diffusion, however, was quite a new phenomenon, and we took a long time to deduce the facts after trial-and-error experiments. As pointed out, g and δ are equivalent in eqn (1), which is true for measurements of homogeneous systems. Actually, in the early stages, it took more than two years for us to notice that the experiments gave different results when δ is fixed and g is varied as well as when g is fixed and δ is varied.14 Through our measurements of Li+ diffusion in solid inorganic electrolytes, we always observed the diffusion of Li with a fixed g while varying δ. Experimentally, when Δ is short, a series of g-dependent effects appear in echo attenuation, as shown in the diffusive diffractive patterns for LLZO-Ta14 and LAGP.16 In this paper, we focused on g-dependence for longer Δ without diffractive patterns. In Fig. 8, g-dependent values of Dapparent are plotted for the garnet and NASICON oxide electrolytes with different Δ values at various temperatures.

The Dapparent values decreased as the g values increased (Fig. 8). It is commonly recognized in homogeneous systems that a higher g value is required to observe slow diffusion with a low D value. Similarly, in solid electrolytes, a higher g value contributes to a lower Dapparent value. These facts suggest that the diffusing Li+ ions are diverse, and they have various Dapparent values. The plots with Δ = 50 and 100 ms for LAGP indicate that the tendencies are reduced for longer Δ.

As shown above, the diffusion of Li+ in inorganic electrolytes is dependent on Δ and g. Hence, we examined the relation between Δ and g. Clearly, for a shorter Δ, the g-dependence of diffusion increased. As an example, we plotted Dapparent values versus Δ and g for LAGP at 38 °C in Fig. 9, which is an alternative plot to that given in our previous paper.16 Clearly, the diffusion data converged towards Δ = 300 ms and g = 14.3 T m−1, which suggested that long Δ and high g value are desirable for obtaining a unique value. However, in practice, a limitation exists for the longest Δ because of short T1 and linear echo attenuation plots with high g values. Very high g values gave irregular and incomprehensible echo attenuation plots. At the present stage, we could not find suitable reasons for such strange echo attenuation plots either coming from NMR hardware or the solid samples.

Actually, in our study the garnets achieved equilibrium values with shorter Δ (∼100 ms) and lower g (∼10 T m−1) instead of 300 ms and 14.3 T m−1 for LAGP. Experimentally, it is certain that the conditions are different for each solid electrolyte, and we confirmed this by experimental procedures. Δ- and g-dependent Li+ diffusion has been observed for many inorganic electrolytes including previously observed sulfides11–13 and perovskite-type17 solid electrolytes. At the present stage, experimental approaches are necessary to determine the equilibrium conditions for individual inorganic electrolytes.

Rdiffraction is important to explain rradius for collisions and diffractions in the short Δ regions (Fig. 6). In the longer Δ region, the rradius values are plotted versus Δ (≥30 ms) for LAGP at 38 °C in Fig. 10(a). The rradius values decreased rapidly as Δ increases, and a larger decrease was observed when the species was observed at a lower g value. For longer time intervals, after multiple collisions and diffractions, rradius of Li+ became shorter and approached an equilibrium state. Please note that in homogeneous systems, the rradius value does not depend on Δ.

In Fig. 10(b), the values of the mean square displacement  are plotted versus Δ. It is expected that the MSD distance should become longer with an increase in Δ in homogeneous systems. This condition is fulfilled from 50 ms onwards with g = 14.3 T m−1. The increase in rradius and MSD with a decrease in Δ is quite an anomalous phenomenon. As Δ increased, rradius became shorter, and MSD became longer. Then, the plots of MSD versus rradius were obtained, as shown in Fig. 11(a), for LAGP at 38 °C and for the various electrolytes (Fig. 11(b)) based on Fig. 7. At a glance, the plots appeared very strange because they were not smooth, and bends were also observed in every plot. In the shorter Δ region, MSD and rradius had a linear relation, and the values increased as Δ became shorter in the range of Δ < 40 ms. The rradius values decreased continuously as Δ became longer, whereas the MSD values increased for displacement over a longer time. Bends occurred in the plots of MSD versus rradius when rradius was between 0.3 and 0.6 μm. The value of rradius is related to the size of the Li+ diffusion channels. The MSD values entered the range of those of rradius for the garnets measured at 103 °C. The MSD values of LAGP at long Δ (≥100 ms) and high temperatures exceeded the rradius values. In inorganic solid electrolytes, a pseudo-wide diffusion space accompanied by collisions and diffractions may be formed for micrometre-scale Li+ diffusion channels. For further discussion, more experiments are required.

We assume that the equilibrium value of Dapparent observed at high Δ values is related to ionic conductivity. Arrhenius-type plots of DLi with Δ = 100 ms for the four solid electrolytes including the data for LAGP measured at 300 ms are shown in Fig. 12. The plots are not linear, and Vogel–Fulcher–Tammann analysis (VFT equation: D = Do e−B/(T−To)) was carried out; the results are shown in Fig. 12. The temperature ranges were different for the garnets and LAGP. The extended value at 25 °C was approximately 2.1 × 10−14 m2 s−1 for LLZO, and the values were very low (10−18 and 10−16 m2 s−1) for LLZO-Ta and LLZO-Al-Ta, respectively. We think that accurate measurements of such low D values are difficult to obtain by the PGSE-NMR method. The estimated values at 25 °C for LAGP were 3.9 and 1.9 × 10−13 m2 s−1 for Δ = 100 and 300 ms, respectively. Clearly, the activation energies of the garnets were higher. Parameter-dependent activation energies are subject to uncertainty.

As described above, the diffusion of 7Li obtained by the PGSE method is based on the movement of the species encoded by the first PFG and detected by the second PFG after the time interval Δ. In contrast, the ionic conductivity (σ) is defined as the product of the velocity and the number of charge-carrying ions. The σ value that is observed is an integrated value that results from the continuous migration of various charge-carrying ions, and a single value of σ can always be obtained for the electrolytes in this study. We assume that DLi in solid inorganic electrolytes observed with a high g value and long Δ is related to σ.

In general, to evaluate new Li solid electrolytes, higher ionic conductivity is always important. In this study, we attempted to plot the DLi values versus the σ values obtained from the literature.20,21 The σ value at a certain temperature (at which the diffusion of Li+ was observed) was estimated from the Arrhenius plots. From Fig. 13, the σ values of the present solid electrolytes are scattered in the range from 10−6 to 10−1 S cm−1, but the range of the DLi values is much smaller, i.e., 10−13 to 10−12 m2 s−1. For simple comparison and reference, the DLi and σ values of 1 M LiPF6 solution in propylene carbonate (PC) were added.10 The value of DLi in the PC solution was higher by two orders of magnitude.

The DLi values from Fig. 12 are plotted versus σ for LLZO, LLZO-Ta, LLZO-Al-Ta, and LAGP (Δ = 100 and 300 ms). The DLi values of 1 M LiPF6 in the solution electrolyte propylene carbonate (PC) were added and were about two orders of magnitude higher than those of the solid inorganic electrolytes.

The carrier number, Ncarrier, plotted versus σ for LLZO, LLZO-Ta, LLZO-Al-Ta, LAGP and 1 M LiPF6 in PC. The measurements were made at various temperatures including LAGP with Δ = 100 and 300 ms.

The Ncarrier value of LLZO is much smaller than those of LLZO-Ta and LLZO-Al-Ta, and it is temperature-dependent. LLZO-Ta and LLZO-Al-Ta contain larger numbers of Li+ ions, which are almost independent of the σ value as well as the temperature. LLZO-Ta shows a higher DLi value and lower σ value than LLZO-Al-Ta, and the Ncarrier value is higher in LLZO-Al-Ta. Although the number of Li atoms in the molecular formula of LAGP (Li1.5Al0.5Ge(PO4)3) is much smaller than that in LLZO-Ta (Li6.6La3Zr1.6Ta0.4O12), the Ncarrier value in LAGP is similar to the value of LLZO-Ta. Maybe, the micrometre-scale Li channels in LAGP are abundantly occupied by diffusing Li+ ions. The Ncarrier values of LAGP measured with Δ = 100 and 300 ms are different. Parameter-dependent Li diffusion constants involve uncertainties. When Δ becomes shorter with larger Dapparent, smaller numbers of carriers can be assumed to exist at the same temperature. Actually, the calculation of Ncarrier was attempted for Dapparent (Δ = 15 ms) at 103 °C in Fig. 7, and it was found that the apparent Ncarrier values were about 10% or less of the equilibrium Ncarrier values in Fig. 14. The Ncarrier values of LiPF6 in 1 M organic solution in PC have been calculated under the assumption that the degree of ion dissociation is 0.6, and they are much smaller than those of the solid electrolytes at the same σ values.

The diffusion of Li+ in a space of 10−6 m in solid oxide electrolytes is extremely complicated, because the mobility of Li+ ions is distributed widely in space and time and cannot be described by a definite value at a certain temperature. The diffusion of Li is dependent on the measurement parameters, i.e., Δ and g of PGSE-NMR. A unique DLi value estimated as an equilibrium value for long Δ and high g is related to σ, which has a unique value. The Ncarrier value estimated from those of DLi and σ affords information on micrometre-scale Li+ channels in the garnet- and NASICON-type solid electrolytes.

As the PGSE-NMR method suffers from numerous technical problems, it is important to attempt the exclusion of artefactual experimental results. In addition, owing to the low T1 and T2 values of 7Li, the signal sensitivity is not always sufficiently high, and sometimes prolonged acquisition of echo attenuation signals is required to obtain reliable data. Data reproducibility is not always guaranteed because of long-term structural changes or relaxation on micrometre scale in solid electrolytes. Actually, we have repeated many experiments, and we believe that the results shown in the present paper are reliable after thorough calibrations and confirmation of the reproducibility of the PGSE-NMR measurements. We did not experience these complexities in solution electrolytes. To use solid inorganic electrolytes for practical purposes, an understanding of the behaviour of charge-carrying Li+ ions on the micrometre scale in bulk materials is of the utmost importance, and more studies are needed.