Carbon wrapping: A high-performance sponge-like carbon-wrapped Na3V2(PO4)3 cathode for safe and cheap rechargeable hybrid aqueous batteries is prepared by a simple pyrosynthesis strategy. The cathode demonstrates remarkable cyclability over 1000 cycles (about 72 % of the initial capacity is retained) at 30 C and high rate capability (66 mAh g−1 at 32 C).

Rechargeable hybrid aqueous batteries (ReHABs) have emerged as promising sustainable energy-storage devices because all components are environmentally benign and abundant. In this study, a carbon-wrapped sponge-like Na3V2(PO4)3 nanoparticle (NVP@C) cathode is prepared by a simple pyrosynthesis for use in the ReHAB system with impressive rate capability and high cyclability. A high-resolution X-ray diffraction study confirmed the formation of pure Na ion superionic conductor (NASICON) NVP with rhombohedral structure. When tested in the ReHAB system, the NVP@C demonstrated high rate capability (66 mAh g−1 at 32 C) and remarkable cyclability over 1000 cycles (about 72 % of the initial capacity is retained at 30 C). Structural transformation and oxidation change studies of the electrode evaluated by using in situ synchrotron X-ray diffraction and ex situ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, respectively, confirmed the high reversibility of the NVP@C electrode in the ReHAB system through a two-phase reaction. The combined strategy of nanosizing and carbon-wrapping in the NVP particles is responsible for the remarkable electrochemical properties. The pyrosynthesis technique appears to be a promising and feasible approach to prepare a high-performance electrode for safe and low-cost ReHAB systems as nextgeneration large-scale energy storage devices.

Owing to rapid population growth, the demand for energy is increasing. The production of energy from one of the primary resources, that is, fossil fuels, is declining as oil reserves are becoming depleted. Furthermore, dependency on fossil fuels is no longer desirable, as it causes serious environmental problems.1, 2 Today's society is making considerable efforts to meet energy demands by using renewable resources, including solar, wind, water, tidal, and geothermal energies.3 The energy produced from these sources must be stored and, in this context, the use of rechargeable batteries will become increasingly important for energy storage. Among commercially available rechargeable battery systems, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) occupy a prominent place in meeting this energy-storage demand.4 Although LIBs are widely used in various smart devices, such as mobile phones, laptops, computers, digital cameras, and electric vehicles, their components may be problematic because they can be toxic or flammable.5 More importantly, the availability of lithium in the earth is limited; it constitutes nearly 0.0065 % of the earth's crust.6 Therefore, finding an alternative rechargeable battery system for next generation energy storage is very crucial.

Recently, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) have attracted a great attention to substitute LIBs owing to the relative abundance of sodium and their low cost.7 The storage mechanism of SIBs is similar to that of LIBs, where the monovalent Na ions intercalate/deintercalate into/from the electrodes. Numerous works have been reported regarding the manufacture and development of electrode materials for non-aqueous SIBs.8-15 However, non-aqueous SIBs also possess several drawbacks, for example, the use of highly flammable and environmentally hazardous organic electrolytes. Recently, several efforts have demonstrated the use of aqueous electrolytes to replace the flammable organic electrolytes.16-22 From the long-term economic viewpoint, it is essential for a new emerging energy economy to be centered on cheap, green, and sustainable battery systems. Specifically, the so-called rechargeable hybrid aqueous batteries (ReHABs), which utilize double ions, for example, Zn and Na ions, have been proposed.22 ReHABs use Zn as the anode, Na intercalating materials as the cathode, and an aqueous electrolyte. Zn is considered as a promising anode material in aqueous systems owing to its abundance, environmental benignity, and low cost.23-26 Furthermore, an aqueous-based electrolyte is not only cheap but also safe and its conductivity is higher than that of its organic counterpart. In ReHABs, there are two types of chemistries involved: deposition/dissolution of Zn ions and intercalation/deintercalation of Na ions in the anode and cathode sides, respectively, as illustrated in Scheme 1.22

To date, a few ReHAB systems based on Na/Zn ions have been investigated, such as Zn/Na3V2(PO4)3 and Zn/Na0.95MnO2.22, 27 Among the various electrodes for ReHABs, the Na ion superionic conductor (NASICON) structure Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) is very promising to be utilized as a cathode in ReHABs owing to its structural stability with theoretical capacity of 117 mAh g−1 (corresponding to two Na insertions per formula unit).27 The NASICON structure consists of a highly covalent three-dimensional framework that facilitates facile Na ions diffusion.8

In addition, many techniques have been developed to synthesize carbon-coated NVP electrodes with improved electrochemical performances, for example, in situ grown reduced graphene oxide on NVP, sol-gel synthesis methods, and hydrothermal methods.28-33 However, the disadvantages of complex procedures and low economic and commercial viability in a majority of these syntheses result in the need to develop innovative strategies that are simple, cheap, efficient, and timely.

Our group has already made use of a pyrosynthetic reaction as a low-cost, scalable technique to synthesize materials with high performances in battery applications. This pyrosynthesis is a simple method that utilizes a polyol(fuel) combustion process for the production of nanosized materials within a very short reaction time.34-37 Specifically, the inherent process of combustion of a fuel precursor solution utilized in this technique particularly favors the synthesis of carbon-contained phosphate materials for battery applications. Utilizing this method, we recently developed phosphate-based electrodes including LiFePO4, A3V2(PO4)3 (A=Li, Na) for LIB and SIB applications.12, 34 These developments motivate the further simplification of this simple, efficient, and timely method to produce high-performance battery materials.

Overall, the utilization of simple and low-cost synthetic routes become essential for the production of electrodes specifically for ReHAB applications that are promising because of their cost-effective, environmentally benign, and safe features. Also, the absence of a complete understanding of the function of such ReHABs calls for concentrated fundamental studies on their electrochemical reaction mechanisms. Herein, we report a simple pyrosynthesis and detailed characterization of carbon-wrapped sponge-like Na3V2(PO4)3 nanoparticles (NVP@C) as a high-performance cathode for ReHAB systems. Compared with our previously reported pyrosynthesis strategy for producing NVP, we performed some modifications such as lowering the hot-plate temperature maintained for the pyroreaction and maintaining a relatively low annealing temperature in the presented synthesis. Interestingly, the prepared NVP@C cathode demonstrated high performance in a ReHAB system. Also, we elucidated for the first time the phase transformation and change of oxidation state of the NVP@C electrode during electrochemical measurements in the ReHAB system by using in situ synchrotron X-ray diffraction and ex situ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, respectively. Therefore, this study provides a practicable approach to prepare high-performance electrodes for environmentally friendly and low-cost large-scale energy-storage applications as well as to shed light on the inherent electrochemical mechanism involved in the system. The results indicate that the NVP@C electrode is highly stable with respect to Na ion intercalation/deintercalation in the ReHAB system through a two-phase reaction, which resembled that of Na ion insertion/extraction into/from the NVP structure in the well-known non-aqueous SIB. It is also worth noting that the electrode exhibited a high rate performance and long cycle life. This study may thus pave the way for the development of high-performance nanosized carbon-wrapped electrodes for ReHABs by a simple and low-cost preparation technique.

The crystalline nature of the prepared NVP@C was analyzed by using high-resolution XRD and the result is shown in Figure 1 a. All diffraction peaks can be indexed to pure rhombohedral Na3V2(PO4)3 (JCPDS No. 53-0018) with an Rurn:x-wiley:18645631:media:cssc201800724:cssc201800724-math-0001 c space group and are consistent with the literature.6, 8, 12 The high-resolution XRD pattern of the NVP@C sample was refined by using the Rietveld method with the help of X′Pert HighScore Plus software. The lattice parameters of the prepared NVP@C were calculated to be a=8.726061 Å and c=21.811520 Å. NVP is built of corner-shared VO6 octahedral and PO4 tetrahedral units, as illustrated in Figure 1 b. In NVP, one Na ion resides in the 6b site whereas the other two reside in the 18e site. During an electrochemical reaction, only Na ions in 18e can be inserted/extracted into/from the NVP host structure.38

The pyrosynthesis method presented in this study can be described by a four-stage process as follows. Initially, stoichiometric amounts of Na2C2O4, VCl3, and H3PO4 precursors were dissolved in tetraethylene glycol (TTEG) to form a homogeneous solution. The next stage was the combustion reaction process, resulting in the thermal decomposition of the precursors (endothermic) followed by rapid nucleation of nanoparticles. At this stage, polyol also underwent fast combustion (exothermic), which led to polyol carbonization on the surface of particles. It is highly likely that the carbon from the sodium oxalate precursor also contributes as a carbon source; however, its contribution is insignificant compared with that of the carbon from polyol solvent. Previous reports also indicated that the use of acetate, citrate, or carbonate-based precursors also contributed slightly as a carbon source when a greater amount of other carbon sources existed.39-41 It is also worth mentioning here that the polyol not only acted as a solvent and a carbon source but also played the role of a reducing agent that tended to prevent the oxidation of V3+ and thereby contributed to avoid the formation of V4+ impurities.12, 34, 42 The fine powder was obtained directly after the combustion reactions. The corresponding XRD pattern of the as-prepared pyrosynthesis sample shows amorphous characteristics (Figure S1 in the Supporting Information). As our aim was to prepare a highly crystalline NVP@C sample, thus a high-temperature heat treatment was required, as also well-documented previously in the literature.43-49 Therefore, the powder was then heated at 700 °C for 8 h under an Ar atmosphere to increase the crystallinity of the carbon-wrapped particles. It is also worth noting here that Cl (from the chlorine precursor) evaporated at elevated temperature, approximately 160–300 °C.50, 51 In addition, an X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis, presented in Figure S2 in the Supporting Information, showed no Cl peaks, indicating no Cl contamination in the sample. These pyrosynthesis stages are illustrated in Figure 1 c.

The morphology of the prepared sample was studied by using field emission (FE)-SEM. Figure 2 a reveals sponge-like particles with a diameter of approximately 250 nm. The magnified FE-SEM image in Figure S3 (in the Supporting Information) shows more sponge-like particles. FE-SEM studies also suggest that the sponge-like particles appeared to form porous features. It is expected that the existence of such porous features can provide a larger electrolyte/electrode contact area and thus promote the intercalation/deintercalation of facile guest ions into/from the electrodes upon electrochemical reaction.34 Further examination of the porous features in the NVP@C sample was performed by using N2 adsorption/desorption analysis and the results are provided in the Figure S4 (in the Supporting Information). The N2 adsorption/desorption isotherm plot of the NVP@C prepared by the pyrosynthesis method shows a typical type III adsorption isotherm, indicating its porous features. The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of the NVP@C sample was measured to be 29.4 m2 g−1. In addition, the TEM images (Figure S5 in the Supporting Information) further confirm the sponge-like morphology of the sample. The high-resolution (HR)-TEM image, depicted in Figure 2 b, clearly shows the presence of carbon-coated particles with a lattice spacing of 0.25 nm, corresponding to the characteristic (3 0 0) plane of NVP.

To understand the distribution of carbon in the NVP@C sample, energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) elemental mapping analysis was conducted. The EDX mapping images in Figure 2 c show the dark field image and corresponding elemental mapping images of N, V, P, and C. The EDX analysis suggests the carbon was uniformly distributed throughout the area under study. In addition, Raman measurements were also carried out to further confirm the carbon content on the NVP@C sample. It can be seen in Figure S6 a (in the Supporting Information) that the carbon-wrapped sample shows two bands at wave numbers around 1341 and 1589 cm−1, corresponding to the D and G bands, respectively, indicating the characteristics of carbonaceous compounds. The D and G bands correspond to disordered sp3 and ordered sp2 hybridized carbon, respectively. Here, the intensity ratio of D and G-bands (ID/IG) was around 1, indicating the presence of graphitic carbon with more defects.52, 53 The presence of graphitic carbon in the NVP@C sample is expected to enhance its electronic conductivity.52, 53 Thermal studies of the prepared NVP@C sample revealed a weight loss of approximately 2.66 wt % within the temperature range 100–400 °C, which corresponds to the major region of carbon decomposition (Figure S6 b in the Supporting Information).54 In addition, the thermogravimetric (TG) curve showed an almost equivalent weight gain around 400 °C, which can be attributed to the absorption of oxygen from air followed by the oxidation of V3+ to V5+.55 In addition, a minimal weight gain and corresponding endothermic peak (in the differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) curve) observed between 500 and 550 °C can be associated with the slightly disordered structural transition of the NVP structure although more experiments are required to confirm this finding. For further confirmation, CHN elemental analysis was performed and the carbon content in the NVP sample was estimated to be 2.61 wt %, this value being in close agreement with the thermal studies. This carbon amount is expected to be sufficient to form the carbon network and layer in the particles. The characterization results indicate that the presented synthesis method is promising to develop high-quality carbon-wrapped nanomaterials.

It is worth noting here that the Raman, FE-TEM, and EDX studies confirm the distribution of the carbon on the surface of particles, not inside the particles. When the carbon penetrates through inside the particles or carbon is doped into the lattice, the XRD peaks are shifted, as reported previously in the literature.56-59 Our high-resolution XRD and Rietveld analyses also suggests that there is no shifting of the peaks in comparison to the reference pattern (JCPDS No. 53-0018). These support the fact that the formed carbon is coated only on the surface of the particles.

To investigate the electrochemical properties of the NVP@C electrode in a ReHAB system, cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were performed with a coin cell composed of Zn as the anode, NVP@C as the cathode, and a solution of 2 m NaCH3COO and 1 m Zn(CH3COO)2 as the electrolyte. Zn(CH3COO)2 was used as a Zn ion source for deposition/dissolution of Zn ions in the anode side, as illustrated in Scheme 1. The first, second, fifth, and ninth cycles of the CV profiles of the NVP@C electrode in the potential range 0.8–1.7 V at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1 are shown in Figure 3. During the first anodic sweep, one distinct peak was observed at 1.58 V, which corresponds to the deintercalation of Na ions from the NVP@C host structure, accompanied by the oxidation of V3+ to V4+. One distinct peak was also observed during the first cathodic sweep at 1.45 V, which relates to the intercalation of Na ions into the NVP@C cathode and reduction of V4+ to V3+. All CV curves showed identical profiles, indicating the constant electrochemical reaction and good cycling performance of the NVP@C electrode in the ReHAB system during prolonged cycles.

Figure 4 a shows typical charge/discharge curves for the NVP@C cathode in the ReHAB system in the potential range 0.8–1.7 V at 1 C (1 C=117 mA g−1 of current density). During charging, a clear single plateau at 1.58 V was observed, indicating stable Na ion deintercalation from the NVP@C cathode. Upon discharging (Na ion intercalation), one distinct plateau was observed at 1.45 V. A single voltage plateau is preferable for practical applications as it provides a stable output power. Compared with the NVP@C sample, the as-prepared pyrosynthesis sample showed no plateau and exhibited poor electrochemical performance (Figure S7 in the Supporting Information). Charge and discharge curves of the NVP@C electrode in the ReHAB cell are in good agreement with the CV studies. The overall electrochemical reaction of the system can be written as [Eqs. 1-2]:22

Electrochemical charge/discharge performance of NVP@C electrode in the ReHAB cell. (a) Charge/discharge profiles at 1 C. (b) C-rate capability at different current rates from 0.8 to 32 C. (c) Cyclability data at 1 C.

The first charge and discharge capacities of the NVP@C electrode in the ReHAB system at 1 C were 91 and 85 mAh g−1, respectively. Basically, the discharge capacity value is also related to the applied current rate on the cell. We have also tested the cell at a lower current rate (0.4 C) and the discharge capacity of 95 mAh g−1 was achieved, which was higher than that of the one cycled at 0.8 C (Figure S6 in the Supporting Information). The rate capability test of the electrode was also performed at different current rates between 0.8 and 32 C by cycling it five times at each rate, as shown in Figure 4 b. The electrode exhibited average discharge capacities of 86, 85, 83, 81, and 75 mAh g−1 at current rates of 0.8, 2, 4, 8, and 16 C, respectively. When cycled at a very high current rate of 32 C, the electrode was able to deliver a discharge capacity of 66 mAh g−1. The value is higher than the previous report by Li et al. (60 mAh g−1 at 20 C), suggesting that the pyrosynthesis technique can produce good cathodes while also being simple and low cost.22 It is also worth mentioning that the electrode discharge capacity recovered to 80 mAh g−1 (93 % of its average initial discharge capacity) when the current rate was reverted to 0.8 C. In addition, the discharge profiles of NVP@C at various current densities are provided in Figure S8 in the Supporting Information.

The cycling performance of the NVP@C electrode at 1 C is shown in Figure 4 c. The electrode exhibited a discharge capacity of 71 mAh g−1 after 100 cycles, which corresponds to 83 % of its initial discharge capacity. Under long-term cycling, the NVP cathode maintained approximately 94 % coulombic efficiency (Figure S9 in the Supporting Information). In addition, for comparison purposes, another NVP sample with a lower carbon content of 1.25 wt % (denoted as NVP-2) was also prepared by the same synthesis method, however, by using a different polyol solvent, namely diethylene glycol (DEG). XRD analysis was used to confirm the characteristic phase in the obtained sample (Figure S10 in the Supporting Information). The electrochemical performance of NVP electrode samples with different carbon contents were tested in separate ReHAB cells and the results are compared in Figure S11 (in the Supporting Information). As expected, the NVP@C sample demonstrated performance superior to the NVP-2 sample, the former delivering an initial capacity of 85 mAh g−1, compared with 63 mAh g−1 delivered by NVP-2. Furthermore, the NVP@C sample exhibited good cycle life performance compared with that of NVP-2. We also performed electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements to evaluate the difference in the electrochemical conductivity of the samples. As depicted in Figure S12 (in the Supporting Information), the Nyquist plots contain one semicircle and a straight line in the high and low frequency regions, respectively. The charge-transfer resistances (Rct) for NVP@C and NVP-2 were 65 and 90 Ω, respectively. This indicates the improved electrical conductivity of the NVP@C sample.

The poor cyclability of NVP cathodes in aqueous electrolytes is generally circumvented by carbon-wrapping of the active material particles.20 To gain more clarity, we have performed inductively coupled plasma (ICP) analyses of the electrolyte after 1, 25, 50, and 95 discharge cycles and the results are provided in the Table S1 (in the Supporting Information). Based on the ICP analyses of the electrolyte after cycling, we can observe that in the beginning of cycling, the V content is not detected in the electrolyte. After the 95th discharge cycle, only a slight amount of the V content (0.226 ppm) is detected. Therefore, it is also reasonable to suggest that the decent electrochemical properties demonstrated by the NVP@C electrode can be attributed to its uniformly distributed carbon-wrapping layer on the particles. Further, its sponge-like porous structure can increase the electrode–electrolyte contact area and thus enhance the Na storage properties, which results in the high rate capability of the NVP@C cathode.

To examine the phase transformation taking place upon electrochemical Na ion extraction/insertion from/into the NVP@C host structure in the ReHAB cell, in situ synchrotron XRD analysis was conducted. Figure 5 shows in situ synchrotron XRD patterns of the NVP@C electrode during charging and discharging. From the in situ synchrotron XRD results, the structural transformation of NVP@C during electrochemical cycling can be clearly seen. At the beginning of charging (point 1), all peaks can be indexed to the Na3V2(PO4)3 structure. Upon continuous charging, several new peaks emerge, along with the disappearance of Na3V2(PO4)3. These new peaks at 14.7, 21.1, 24.5, 29.7, 32.9, and 37.1° are indexed to NaV2(PO4)3. This indicates two Na ions were completely extracted from the Na3V2(PO4)3 host structure. This observation also suggests the oxidation of V3+ to V4+ during charging. The distinct plateaus during charging and discharging correspond to a two-phase reaction between Na3V2(PO4)3 and NaV2(PO4)3, resembling that of the NVP electrode in non-aqueous SIB systems.6, 8, 22 Our attempts to refine the charged pattern were unsuccessful owing to the apparently insufficient intensities of the characteristic reflection lines. Therefore, as an alternate way of confirmation, we have performed ex situ high-resolution XRD characterization of the NVP@C electrode recovered after charging. The Rietveld refinement results (Figure S13 and Table S2 in the Supporting Information) indicate that the charged electrode is well-matched to the NaV2(PO4)3 structure. During subsequent discharging, the intensities of the characteristic NaV2(PO4)3 peaks gradually weaken before finally disappearing. At the completely discharged state, the electrode reverted to the Na3V2(PO4)3 structure. The in situ synchrotron XRD studies thus suggest the structural stability and high reversibility of the NVP@C electrode in the ReHAB system.

The in situ synchrotron XRD studies are also in good agreement with CV studies, which showed superimposed CV peaks during prolonged cycling at 1.45 and 1.58 V (Figure 3), which indicates only Na ion insertion/extraction occurs, as initially reported by Li et al.22 However, in a later report, Li et al. suggested the possibility of Zn ion insertion into the NVP structure when only Zn2+ ions are present in the electrolyte without Na+ ions, as indicated by the CV peaks at the lower voltage region, that is, 1.1 V versus Zn2+/Zn.60 Here, the in situ synchrotron XRD analysis shows no new peaks corresponding to possible Zn-inserted phase, namely ZnxNaV2(PO4)3, at 13.8, 20, and 36.5°.60 Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that the presented observation is in agreement with the initial report of Li et al. in that Na ion insertion is predominant.22 For further understanding, we have also performed ex situ XPS analysis of the discharged cathode before and after ion bombardment and the results are shown in Figure S14 (in the Supporting Information). It can be clearly seen that the discharged NVP@C cathode before ion bombardment showed two peaks centered at 1022 and 1045 eV, corresponding to Zn 2p spectra. However, after ion bombardment, these peaks diminished. Thus, it can be concluded that the Zn was deposited only on the electrode surface, not intercalated into the host NVP@C structure. This is supported by the general understanding that Zn2+ has slower kinetics than that of Na+, thus leaving Na+ as the predominantly inserted ion when both Zn and Na ions are present in the electrolyte.22, 61, 62 Furthermore, the finding that the parent electrode structure is retained after the 10th, 25th, and 50th cycles (Figure 6) from the ex situ XRD studies confirms the predominant Na ion intercalation into the NVP@C host structure. We also examined the electrochemical properties of the NVP@C cathode in Zn(CH3COO)2 electrolyte without the addition of NaCH3COO salt. The CV study (Figure S15 in the Supporting Information) suggests the electrochemical behaviors of the NVP electrode in Zn(CH3COO)2 electrolyte and the hybrid system (Zn(CH3COO)2+NaCH3COO electrolytes) are different.22 Therefore, these observations suggest that only Na ions are intercalated into the NVP host structure in the ReHAB cell.

The variation in the vanadium oxidation states during Na intercalation/deintercalation in the ReHAB system was also evaluated by using ex situ XPS on the fresh, charged (1.7 V), and discharged (0.8 V) NVP@C electrodes, and the results are shown in Figure S16 (in the Supporting Information). The results show a peak located at 515.5 eV for the fresh electrode, indicating the vanadium exists in the V3+ state. Upon charging, the binding energy of V3+ shifted towards higher energy (516.8 eV), corresponding to V4+.63 After discharging, one peak was observed at the original location (515.5 eV), representing the reduction of V4+ back to V3+. Hence, from the ex situ XPS results, we can conclude that the oxidation– reduction reaction in the NVP@C electrode changes the vanadium oxidation state between V3+ and V4+ during the electrochemical charge and discharge processes, respectively. These results indicate that the electrochemical charge/discharge reaction taking place in the NVP@C electrode is completely reversible, consistent with the electrochemical and in situ synchrotron XRD studies.

We further examined the cathode performance at another high current rate, that is, 30 C (3.5 A g−1), and the results are presented in Figure 7. The first discharge capacity of the cathode was 63 mAh g−1. At the 1000th cycle, the cathode showed a discharge capacity of 46 mAh g−1, equivalent to 72 % of the initial discharge capacity. The coulombic efficiency of the cathode was also maintained at around 100 % over 1000 cycles (Figure S17 in the Supporting Information). The NVP@C cathode showed superior performance compared to other previously reported cathodes in ReHAB cells.21, 22, 27, 61, 62, 64-67 The comparison performance table is presented in Table S3 (in the Supporting Information).

Bearing in mind the huge demand for battery electrodes, the presented pyrosynthesis method offers a simple, low-cost, and applicable strategy for obtaining nanomaterial electrodes that demonstrate impressive electrochemical performance. Finally, a combination of environmentally benign, highly abundant, and high-performance electrode material, a safe water-based electrolyte, and easy fabrication of the ReHAB system is promising as a next generation energy-storage system.

Carbon-wrapped Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP@C) was prepared by a simple pyrosynthesis technique for use as the cathode in a rechargeable hybrid aqueous battery (ReHAB) system. The combination of nanosized and carbon-wrapped particles resulted in decent cyclability and high rate capability of the NVP@C in the ReHAB system. The electrode exhibited 72 % of its initial discharge capacity after 1000 cycles with 100 % coulombic efficiency. Furthermore, when cycling at a very high current rate of 32 C, the electrode was able to deliver a discharge capacity of 66 mAh g−1. In situ synchrotron, ex situ XRD, and ex situ XPS studies clearly confirmed the high reversibility of the NVP@C electrode in the ReHAB system. This study may therefore pave the way for the development of the ReHAB system as a safe and low-cost next generation large-scale energy-storage system.

NVP@C was synthesized by using a simple pyrosynthesis method. Na2C2O4 (99.5 %, Sigma–Aldrich), VCl3 (97 %, Sigma–Aldrich), and H3PO4 (85 %, Daejung Chemicals & Metal, Rep. of Korea) were used as precursors. Tetraethylene glycol (TTEG, 99.5 %, Acros Organic, USA) was used as polyol media as well as a carbon source. Stoichiometric amounts of Na2C2O4 (3 mmol, 402 mg), VCl3 (4 mmol, 629.2 mg), and H3PO4 (6 mmol, 588 mg) were dissolved in TTEG (80 mL) and stirred for 24 h under normal room temperature conditions. A commercial thinner (40 mL) as a combustion fuel was added into the prepared solution before stirring for 30 min to form a homogeneous solution. Subsequently, the clear solution was transferred to an Al foil boat and placed on a pre-heated (450 °C) hot plate and then ignited by using an electric torch. Within a short time, a solid powder was formed on the surface of the Al foil. The collected product was ground well before calcination at 700 °C for 8 h under an Ar atmosphere to obtain crystalline NVP@C (720 mg). For control experiments, NVP with lower carbon content (denoted as NVP-2) was also prepared by using a similar pyrosynthesis technique, however, diethylene glycol (DEG) was used instead of TTEG.

The crystalline nature of the NVP@C powder was evaluated by using powder XRD. A Shimadzu X-ray diffractometer (Japan) with CuKα radiation (λ=1.5406 Å) was used for characterization. To analyze the surface morphology and particle sizes of the samples, field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Hitachi S-4700) and field-emission transmission electron microscopy (FE-TEM, Philips Tecnai F20 at 200 keV, KBSI, Chonnam National University, Rep. of Korea) were used. An energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analyzer (EMAX Energy EX-200, Horiba) attached to the F20 microscope was used to study the elemental distribution of the electrode materials. The thermal decomposition behavior of the prepared samples was examined with a thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA; TA instruments SDT Q-600) at a scanning rate of 5 °C min−1 from room temperature to 700 °C under air flow of 100 mL min−1. Raman spectrum was collected by using a JASCO Raman spectrometer NRS-5100 with a 532 nm laser line. Nitrogen adsorption and desorption measurements were performed with a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 model. The carbon content of the NVP@C powder was determined by CHN elemental analysis by using a Flash-2000 Thermo Fisher. The in situ synchrotron XRD study was performed at the 1D KIST-PAL (Pohang Accelerator Laboratory) beamline to evaluate the phase transformation of NVP@C cathode during electrochemical cycling. A MAR345 image plate detector was used for the beamline setup. Monochromatic radiation was produced by using a double-bounce Si(1 1 1) monochromator. The XRD patterns were recorded with respect to the wavelength of 1.00076 Å and converted to the 2θ values with respect to CuKα radiation (λ=1.5414 Å) before plotting. The fabricated spectroelectrochemical cell was tested under a constant charge/discharge cycling rate of 0.8 C, whereas the XRD data was recorded in situ. The oxidation state of the vanadium on the recovered electrodes was determined by XPS with a Thermo VG MultiLab 2000 spectrometer using AlKα as the X-ray source. The spectrometer was calibrated to the C 1s peak binding energy of 284.5 eV.

To investigate the electrochemical properties of the NVP@C electrode in the ReHAB system, coin-type (CR-2032) full cells were assembled, with Zn foil used as the anode. Active materials, Ketjen black (Lion Corporation, Japan) as the conducting agent, and commercially available teflonized acetylene black (TAB, Hohsen Corporation, Japan) as the binder were mixed in a ratio of 70:20:10 and pressed on to the stainless-steel mesh. The cathode loading mass was 3.18 mg cm−2. A solution of 2 m NaCH3COO and 1 m Zn(CH3COO)2 in deionized (DI) water was used as the electrolyte. The coin cells were assembled in an air atmosphere. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were performed by using a VSP 1075 (Bio Logic Science Instrument, Seyssinet-Pariset, France) at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1. A BTS 2004H battery tester (Nagano Keiki Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was used for charge/discharge measurements at room temperature. Electrochemical charge/discharge measurements were performed in the potential range 0.8–1.7 V vs. Zn2+/Zn.