A rechargeable aqueous lithium ion battery containing all-NASICON type cathode and anode materials is proposed and developed for the first time. In the design, LiTi2(PO4)3 and Li3V2(PO4)3 serve as the anode and cathode, respectively, which can fulfill the electrochemical window of aqueous solutions and ensure fast lithium ion diffusion into/from electrodes thus provide a safe, fast, inexpensive aqueous lithium ion battery. However, the capacity fading of the Li3V2(PO4)3 is extremely serious in common aqueous solutions. Therefore, the fading mechanism is systematically investigated and “water in salt” aqueous electrolyte is introduced to further solve the fading problem. Consequently, the cycling stability is greatly improved. Even after 100 cycles at 0.1 C, there remains a high reversible capacity of 104 mAh g−1, which is 83.2% of the initial discharge capacity. Furthermore, benefiting from the all-NASICON electrodes construction and super low freezing point of “water in salt” electrolyte, the aqueous battery deliveries remarkable low-temperature performance. It is a powerful and safe candidate for extreme-situation energy storage applications.

The increasing amount of resources and energies consumption coupled with high expense of the environment has aroused worldwide concernment of the utilization of renewable energy sources [1] However, renewable energy, such as solar, wind power et al. is intermittent, unreliable and uncontrollable, which can bring serious damages to electric grids. Therefore, high-safety, reliable and efficient large scale energy storage systems (ESSs) are in urgent demand [[2], [3], [4]].

For the advantages of high-energy density, high efficiency and long-cycling life, lithium ion batteries (LIBs) have dominated the portable electronic markets and also attracted overwhelming attentions in electric vehicles (EVs) and ESSs [5] However, the inherent safety issues caused by toxic and flammable organic electrolyte seriously restrict its extensive application in ESSs [6,7] Replacing the organic electrolyte with aqueous electrolytes for lithium ion batteries can fundamentally settle these issues. In addition, the EESs for grid generally require excellent stability, moderate power performance and temperature adaptability, which are determined by the properties of the electrode materials and electrolytes. Compared with the organic electrolyte, the aqueous electrolytes usually show much higher ion conductivity, beneficial to the power performances. As a result, constructing preferable cathode/anode combination is crucial [[8], [9], [10]].

Up to date, numerous of aqueous rechargeable lithium ion batteries (ARLBs) have been widely explored, including LiMn2O4/VO2, LiMn2O4/LiV3O8, LiMn2O4/LiTi2(PO4)3, LiFePO4/LiTi2(PO4)3, LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2/LixV2O5 et al. [[11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23]] However, none of them have been configured by NASICON-structural cathode and anode simultaneously. The rhombohedral LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) and monoclinic Li3V2(PO4)3 (LVP) both belong to the NASICON (Na+ superionic conductor) structure, which contains three-dimensional frameworks with large interstitial spaces for Li+ diffusion [[24], [25], [26]] Accordingly, LTP and LVP present high stability and rate performance in organic electrolyte in a wide working temperature (−40 °C–50 °C) [27,28] Recently, the all phosphate lithium ion battery containing LVP cathode and LTP anode in organic electrolyte has been reported to provide high electrochemical stability, high rate capability and long-term cycling performance [29] However, the battery with aqueous electrolytes is still lack of study. LTP exhibits preferable performances in ARLBs for its high crystallinity, low solubility, suitable voltage plateau and high electrochemical stability in aqueous electrolytes, being generally considered to be one of the most promising anode candidates for ARLBs [[30], [31], [32]] At the same time, the redox potential of LVP is well-matched to the stable window of aqueous electrolytes (0.6 V vs. SHE, 0.7 V vs. SHE, 1.1 V vs. SHE) [33] Such combination can fulfill the electrochemical window of aqueous solutions and ensure quick lithium ion diffusion into/from electrodes thus provide a safe, fast, inexpensive aqueous lithium ion battery. However, the LVP suffers serious capacity fading issue, especially at low current density in common aqueous solutions [33,34] In truth, vanadium based materials such as VO2 (B), V2O5, LiV3O8, H2V3O8, VOOH et al. have been widely studied in ARLBs for their high capacity and suitable working voltage in aqueous electrolytes [21,23,[35], [36], [37], [38], [39], [40], [41]] However, they suffer from the similar fast capacity fading problem, which seriously limits their cycling life. Dai et al. investigated the electrochemical performances of LVP/C in aqueous electrolytes by a three-electrode cell. It delivered an initial capacity of 100 mAh g−1 at 5 C (1 C = 133 mA g−1), while then dropped rapidly to 57.5 mAh g−1 after 20 cycles [33] Therefore, it is crucial and challenging to study the capacity fading mechanisms and exploit effective modification methods of vanadium-based materials in aqueous solutions.

Lots of efforts have been devoted to improving their cycling stability, including surface coating with carbon or conductive polymers, [[42], [43], [44], [45], [46], [47]] controlling the sizes or morphologies of particles, [37,38,[48], [49], [50]] evacuating the dissolved oxygen or adjusting the pH values of electrolytes et al. [23,33,51,52] However, the long-time cycling performance is still far from satisfactory. It is obvious that the vanadium compounds are less stable in common aqueous electrolytes [34,36,53,54] The dissolution phenomenon of vanadium are always observed and reported in ARLBs, but more comprehensive and detailed mechanisms are lack of investigation. In this work, we studied the cycling performance of the all NASICON structured aqueous LTP/LVP full cell (as illustrated in Scheme 1) for the first time. Then we further confirmed the deterioration of LVP electrode material and dissolution of vanadium were the main reasons for the poor cycling performance of full cell in a common electrolyte (2 M Li2SO4, 1 M Li2SO4 equals 1 mol salt dissolved in 1 Kg water) via ex-situ XRD, in-situ XRD and other characterization methods. Since the free water and oxygen in aqueous electrolytes are involved in these side reactions, “water in salt” aqueous electrolyte containing 21 M lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) was used to replace the common electrolyte. In virtue of the less free water, dissolved oxygen and wider electrochemical stable window of the highly-concentrated electrolyte, [[55], [56], [57]] the battery delivered remarkable long time cycling stability. Besides, benefiting from the low freezing point highly-concentrated electrolyte and high ion conductivity of all-NASCION electrode materials, the battery still showed excellent electrochemical performance at −20 °C, which can provide a powerful and safe candidate for extreme-situation energy storage applications.

LVP/C was prepared by a common ball-milling assisted solid state method [27] LiOH, V2O5, NH4H2PO4 and 20 wt % glucose were mixed by ball-milling for 4 h. After being dried in the air oven at 80 °C, the precursor was heated in a tube furnace at 350 °C for 4 h under a flowing Ar atmosphere. Then the collected power was reground and calcinated at 750 °C for 10 h in Ar atmosphere to obtain the crystalline LVP/C sample. The LTP/C was prepared by our previous reported sol-gel method with CH3COOLi, tetrabutyltitanate, H3PO4, citric acid as raw materials [58] The synthesis details can be found in Supplemental Materials.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of LVP/C and LTP/C were collected on an X-ray diffractometer (X′ pert Pro-1 for ex-situ test, Rigaku Ultima IV for in-situ test) with Cu Kα radiation at λ = 1.54 Å in the 2 θ range from 10° to 80°. The carbon contents of LVP/C and LTP/C were performed with a Horiba EMGA-930 and EMIA 8100 elemental analyzer, which can accurately detect the carbon content. The morphologies of materials were characterized by a scanning electron microscope (SEM, JSM-7800F). High resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) images were taken on JEM-2100. The phase changes of electrodes before and after cycling in aqueous electrolytes were also characterized by ex-situ and in-situ XRD. For the ex-situ XRD test, the electrodes were taken out from the batteries after cycling, and rinsed with deionized water for several times. While for the in-situ XRD test, the carbon-coated Al foil (the thickness < 30 μm) was used as current collector instead of thick stainless steel grid. And the electrodes were tested directly during the charging process without being taken out and rinsed.

Electrochemical characterizations were carried out by using CR2016 coin cells with LVP/C and LTP/C as electrode materials, respectively, and three-electrode cells with LVP/C electrode or LTP/C electrode as working electrode, graphite plate as counter electrode and saturated calomel electrode (SCE, 0.242 V vs. SHE) as reference electrode. The electrodes were fabricated by pressing a mixture of the active materials, Super P, and PTFE in a weight ratio of 7:2:1 onto a stainless steel grid at 5 M Pa. The weight ratio of LVP/LTP was controlled deliberately to be 1:1 and 2:1. The mass loading of anode active materials is 7–15 mg cm−2 2 M Li2SO4 aqueous solution or 21 M LiTFSI aqueous solution was used as electrolyte.

The galvanostatic charge/discharge tests at room temperature (25 °C) were performed at various current rates using Land automatic battery tester (Wuhan, China). The current rate and specific capacity are both calculated based on the mass of LTP/C (1 C = 138 mA g−1). Besides, the electrochemical tests at low temperature of −20 °C were performed in high-low temperature test chamber with a Land automatic battery tester. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of the full cell before and after cycles was measured in a frequency range of 100 KHz to 0.1 Hz using a Solarton 1287 test system with perturbation amplitude of 10 mV.

Fig. 1a and Fig. 1b show the XRD patterns of LVP/C and LTP/C. All the diffraction peaks are in agreement with the monoclinic Li3V2(PO4)3 (PDF#01-074-3236) and rhombohedral LiTi2(PO4)3 (PDF#35-0754). They both belong to the NASICON structure. No other impurity phases are observed in the two patterns. The open 3D framework is beneficial to the Li+ diffusion, while the corresponding poor intrinsic electronic conductivity seriously restrains the electrochemical performance of the pristine LVP and LTP. To enhance their electronic conductivity, carbon-coated LTP and LVP were prepared by the in-situ thermal decomposition of the organic carbon sources. As measured by the elemental Analyzer (Horiba EMGA-930 and EMIA 8100), the carbon contents of LVP/C and LTP/C are 8.26% and 3.16%, respectively. As shown in Fig. 1c, LVP/C presents irregular shapes with particle sizes ranging from 200 nm to 1 μm. As for the LTP/C prepared from a sol-gel method, the particles are much more homogeneous with a smaller size of 20–50 nm (Fig. 1d). More details of LVP/C and LTP/C are identified from the HRTEM images in Fig. 1e and f. The thicknesses of corresponding carbon layers are 3 nm and 5 nm, respectively. The carbon coating can not only form continuous conductive matrix between active materials, but also prevent the further growth of crystals. The well-resolved lattice fringes of ∼0.428 nm and ∼0.426 nm coincide with the [002] lattice plane of LVP and [104] lattice plane of LTP, respectively.

Fig. 2a and b shows the electrochemical performances of LVP/LTP full cell with 2 M Li2SO4 solution as the electrolyte. The mass ratio of LVP and LTP is 1:1 based on the theoretical capacity of two Li+ insertion/extraction into/from LVP or LTP (133 mA h g-1 for LVP and 138 mAh g−1 for LTP). According to previous report, [33,34] three couples of voltage plateaus appear during the charge/discharge process in aqueous three electrodes tests, corresponding to the single phase transition between Li3-xV2(PO4)3 (x = 0, 0.5, 1 and 2, as described in equations (1)–(3)). As for LTP, two pairs redox peaks (−0.58 V/-0.48 V, −0.20 V/-0.18 V, vs. SHE) exist in aqueous electrolytes, corresponding to the reversible lithium intercalation/de-intercalation into/from the M1 and M2 sites in LTP (as described in equation (4) and equation (5)) [32,59] The following reversible reactions 6 to 9 would happen in the full cell if there were no side reactions happening:

The largest working voltage between LVP and LTP is around 1.73 V and the cutoff voltage range for the reported organic full cell is 0.5 V–2.2 V. In addition, considering the possible polarization and electrochemical stable window of aqueous electrolyte, the voltage range of the LVP-LTP ARLB was set as 0.5 V-1.9 V. Fig. 2a displays the galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles of the initial three cycles and the 50th cycle at 1 C. There are about four charge plateaus at around 0.8 V, 1.2 V, 1.65 V and 1.8 V in the first cycle. The plateau around 1.8 V appears at the end of the initial two charge process, which is resulted from the decomposition of H2O in the 2 M L2SO4 electrolyte. The charge capacity of the first cycle (241 mA h g-1) is far more than the theoretical capacity (138 mA h g-1), suggesting the occurrence of side reactions including a bit of H2O decomposition. However, during the first discharge process, there are just two plateaus at around 1.1 V and 0.7 V and the reversible discharge capacity is only 46.2 mA h g-1, leading to quite low columbic efficiency (19%). Although the columbic efficiency increases in subsequent cycles, the specific capacity declines rapidly, as shown in Fig. 2b. The inset pictures in Fig. 2b show the change of the battery inside before and after 50 cycles. Some black green materials are attached on the membrane. In order to investigate the change of electrode materials before and after 50 cycles, the ex-situ XRD measurements were carried out, as shown in Fig. 2c and d. None of the characteristic peaks of LVP exist after 50 cycles, suggesting the complete deterioration of LVP. The remaining peak is indexed to characteristic peak of Fe, which belongs to the stainless steel collector. As expected, the XRD pattern of LTP has no apparent change. The phenomenon suggests that the black green materials greatly possibly come from the cathode side.

In-situ XRD tests were further conducted to study the phase changes of LVP at different charge states during the first charge process. The XRD patterns shows some strong basic characteristic peaks of Al collector as marked in Fig. 2e and Fig. S1a. As shown in Fig. 2e, the characteristic peaks of LVP become weaker and gradually disappear as the characteristic peaks for some vanadium byproducts appear. When charged to 1.5 V, there are already strong characteristic peaks indexed to V2O5,VOPO4 and V6O13, which indicates the deterioration of LVP has already happened before decomposition of H2O. When charged to 1.9 V, the peaks for these byproducts are dominant in the XRD pattern. The result is different from the reported results of LVP in organic electrolytes. In organic half cells, the electrochemical performance of LVP is much more stable [27,29,60] Though, after long-term cycling in organic full cell, the deterioration of LVP still exist (converting to VPO4) [29].Therefore, the deterioration of LVP in aqueous solution here greatly possibly results from the interactions between active materials with free H2O or O2 in aqueous electrolytes. Additionally, the dissolution phenomenon of vanadium was observed. As shown in Fig. 3a and d, when the LVP is charged to higher voltage, the dissolution phenomenon becomes more serious. The possible reason is that the attack of H2O or O2 to active materials becomes more serious when more Li+ was extracted, and these byproducts are apt to dissolving in aqueous solutions during the charge/discharge process [61,62] Besides, since the cut-off voltage is close to decomposition potential of aqueous solution, the O2 would bubble from the cathode and further accelerate the side reactions. In addition, the evolution of O2 would decrease the adherence between electrode materials and the steel collector, resulting in the observed carbon on the membrane.

As discussed above, the interactions between LVP and the free H2O, O2 during the charge process and the dissolution of vanadium are the main reasons for the poor cycling stability of LVP/LTP aqueous full cell. In order to settle these issues, the “water in salt” aqueous electrolyte was applied to substitute the Li2SO4 solution. This electrolyte has much less free water and dissolved oxygen and larger electrochemical stable window, which is expected to depress the irreversible interactions and raise the cycling stability [55,63].

Before the full cell test, we conducted three-electrode test to investigate the electrochemical behavior of LVP or LTP in the two electrolytes. As shown in Fig. 4a, the electrochemical performance of LVP is similar to its behaviors in the full cell using 2 M Li2SO4 as electrolyte. Three charge plateaus appear in the first charge process and the charge capacity surpasses the theoretical capacity, while the reversible discharge capacity is rather low. The cut-off voltage was set as 1.0 V vs. SCE to avoid the decomposition of electrolyte. In the 21 M LiTFSI solution (Fig. 4b), there are still three plateaus. The discharge process is much more reversible, and the capacity is near to the theoretical capacity. Besides, benefiting from larger stable window of highly concentrated electrolyte, no plateau for the evolution of oxygen can be observed. When charged to 1.0 V vs. SCE in 2 M Li2SO4, the color of the 2 M Li2SO4 electrolyte changes from colorless to yellowish, while the 21 M LiTFSI is still colorless even when the charge voltage is higher. For the half-cell tests of LTP/C, there are both two pairs of charge/discharge plateaus in 2 M Li2SO4 and 21 M LiTFSI electrolytes. The reversible capacities are similar and close to the theoretical capacity, indicating the good performance of LTP/C anode. However, redox potentials of LVP/C and LTP/C electrodes both exhibit positive shift in 21 M LiTFSI solution. According to the Nernst equation, for a Li+ intercalation reaction, the equilibrium potential of the reaction E depends on the lithium ion activity in solution ()and its activity in the crystal lattice () (Equation S1) [64] The activity of Li+ is higher in the highly concentrated solution, as well as the redox potential.

Though the working voltage of LVP is slightly positive shifted in 21 M LiTFSI solution, however, it won't make great difference in the voltages of full cell, since the elevating voltage of LTP anode will offset the change. Therefore, the voltage range of full cell using 21 M LiTFSI solution as electrolyte is also 0.5 V - 1.9 V. Fig. 5 gives the electrochemical performances of LVP/LTP full cell using 21 M LiTFSI aqueous solution as electrolyte. The mass ratio of LVP and LTP is 1:1 and 2:1, respectively. The mass ratio of 2:1 is designed to limit the number of extracted Li+ and further improve the cycle stability of full cell. As shown in Fig. 5a, there are three pairs of charge/discharge plateaus in the profiles of 1:1, which is corresponding to the mentioned reversible reactions 6 to 9. The long plateau from 1.2 V to 1.6 V belongs to the overlapping potentials of equations (7) and (8). Compared to the charge/discharge curves in 2 M Li2SO4 solution, the plateau at around 1.7 V is reversible, which means the side reactions of active materials are suppressed. As shown in Fig. 3e to h, no obvious differences are observed on the membrane, suggesting the enhanced stability of cathode. The phenomenon is coincided with the observation in the three-electrode test. Moreover, no extra plateau for the evolution of H2 and O2 being observed, as a result, the initial columbic efficiency (76.8%) is greatly improved, as well as the reversible capacity. In-situ XRD test is also conducted to explain the improved stability. As shown in Fig. 6, all the characteristic peaks of LVP are remained and exhibit integrally slight shift to higher angle, indicating the de-lithiation process when charged to higher potential. Few impurities can be detected, which is much different from the results in 2 M Li2SO4 electrolyte. Therefore, the results agree well with our hypothesis. The less free water and dissolved oxygen and larger electrochemical stable window are of great importance to depress the irreversible side reactions and raise the cycling stability of LVP in aqueous electrolytes. And it may be versatile to other vanadium-based materials.

The charge/discharge curves of the 100th cycle at 0.1 C are also displayed in Fig. 5a. Compared to the initial cycles, the plateau around 1.7 V disappears, and less than half of the initial capacity remains, indicating that the side reactions may still exist during the long-term cycling. As we discussed before, the side reactions will become more serious when more lithium ions are extracted, the mass ratio of 2:1 is designed to ensure only one Li+ is extracted from LVP and improve the cycle stability of LVP/LTP full cell. Only one short plateau at around 0.8 V and one long plateau at around 1.3 V are observed in the charge/discharge profiles (Fig. 5c), corresponding to the reactions in equations (6)–(8). As expected, limiting the lithium-extraction number of LVP can reduce the side reactions and hence extend the cycle life of LTP/LVP full cell (Fig. 5d), though a portion of specific capacity of full cell will be sacrificed. After 100 cycles at 0.1 C, there remains high reversible capacity of 104 mAh g−1, 83.2% of the initial discharge capacity, much higher than that of 1:1. The rate performance at various rates and long-term cycling stability at 1 C are shown in Fig. S2 and Fig. 5e, respectively. The specific capacity fades with the increasing of current rates due to larger polarization. But the rate performance of the cell with ratio of 2:1 is still much better than that of the cell with 1:1. Besides, after 1000 cycles at 1 C, the discharge capacity retention of the 2:1 keeps above 65%, exhibiting impressive stability compared with other vanadium based materials in aqueous solution (Table S1).

To further study the stability of full cell with 2:1 using 21 M LiTFSI electrolyte, photographs of battery before and after 1000 cycles at 1 C were taken. As shown in Fig. 7a, except for a bit of carbon, no other material was attached on the membrane, indicating that few soluble products are generated during the long-term cycling process. The morphologies before and after 1000 cycles of LVP cathode are displayed in Fig. 7b and c. After long-term cycling, the surface of electrode becomes rough and shows obvious large and shaped grains, indicating the generation of byproducts. The phase changes were detected by ex-situ XRD, which are shown in Fig. 7d. There still exist main characteristic peaks of the crystallized LVP, which suggests that the side reactions between LVP and aqueous solution are greatly suppressed in the highly-concentrated electrolyte. However, another form of vanadium oxides V5O9 appears instead of V2O5, VOPO4 et al. Since the amounts of O2 and free H2O are depressed, the oxidation reaction of vanadium to pentavalent products becomes difficult. In addition, as shown in Fig. 7e, the electrochemical resistance becomes larger after 1000 cycles, since the electric conductivity of byproduct is poor. Therefore, the deterioration of LVP in aqueous electrolyte can't be completely avoided even though using highly-concentrated electrolyte and controlling de-lithiation number. In summary, benefiting from the less free water, dissolved oxygen and larger electrochemical stable window of highly-concentrated aqueous solution, replacing the 2 M Li2SO4 electrolyte with 21 M LiTFSI solution can greatly improve the reversibility and stability of LVP in ARLBs. However, there still remain slow side reactions, which limit the cycling life of LVP. Surface coating and introduction of additives in electrolytes would further improve the electrochemical performance in the future.

Generally, the aqueous batteries show poor performances at low temperature for the low ion conductivity of electrolytes and low electrochemical activity of electrode materials. LTP and LVP electrode materials both possess NASICON-type structure, suggesting high Li+ conduction at low temperature. In addition, the LiTFSI electrolyte also presents relative high conductivity at low temperature. As a result, the LVP/LITFSI/LTP batteries are deduced to possess excellent performances at low temperature.

Combined with the two advantages of the all NASICON electrodes and the low freezing point electrolyte, the performance of LVP/LTP aqueous full cells was tested under - 20 °C. As shown in Fig. 8a, the full cell delivers a high reversible capacity of 111 mAh g−1 at 0.2 C, close to the capacity at 25 °C. The initial coulombic efficiency for LVP/LTP (2:1) at – 20 °C is 86.7%, which is higher than it at room temperature. Meanwhile, the discharge capacity is reduced at – 20 °C. The decreased discharge capacity, at low temperature, could be due to the lower conductivity of the electrolyte and lower electrochemical activity of active materials. Besides, the charge capacity is also greatly reduced at low temperature, which indicates the less side reactions. As we discussed above, the side reactions mainly happen during the charging process, including the decomposition of electrolyte, phase change of LVP et al.. When the temperature is lower, the solubility of LiTFSI is also reduced, which may change the electrolyte to saturated state. It is helpful to further enhance the stability of electrolyte and active materials. When rate is increased to 6 C, 60% of the capacity (66.7 mAh g−1) is still kept. The excellent low-temperature performances make the LVP/LITFSI/LTP aqueous cell a powerful candidate for extreme-situation energy storage applications.

In summary, the electrochemical behavior and fading mechanism of LVP cathode in aqueous LTP/LVP full cell were systematically studied and discussed. The deterioration of LVP and further dissolution of vanadium are the two main factors for low coulombic efficiency and rapid capacity decay with 2 M Li2SO4 electrolyte. The deterioration and dissolution become more serious when LVP is charged to higher voltage. By replacing the electrolytes with highly-concentrated “water in salt” electrolyte (21 M LiTFSI), the reversible capacity and cycling stability are both improved. When the mass ratio of cathode/anode is designed as 2:1 to avoid the further oxidation of V3+ to V4+, the LVP/LTP ARLB can deliver a high capacity of 123 mAh g−1 (close to the theoretical capacity, based on the mass of anode active material) at 0.1 C, 113 mAh g−1 at 1 C. Even after long-term cycling at 0.1 C and 1 C, the capacity retention is also impressive, providing a new strategy to solve the decay issues of vanadium-based materials in ARLBs. Besides, owing to the low freezing point of highly-concentrated electrolyte and high ion conductivity of the all NASICON structured electrodes, the LVP/LTP full cell still deliveries high capacity (91% of room-temperature capacity) at an extreme low temperature (−20 °C), enabling a new high-safety and high-performance, long-life electrochemical energy storage device working under wide temperature condition.