A ceramic in polymer hybrid solid electrolyte (HSE) based on a poly vinylidenefluoride-hexafluoropropylene (PVDF-HFP) polymer comprising Na3Zr2Si2PO12(NASICON) ceramic particles was prepared by a simple solution casting method followed by activation in a liquid electrolyte. The prepared HSE exhibits good flexibility, high ionic conductivity of 2.25×10−3 S·cm−1 at room temperature (RT), and good interface stability. The carbon coated sodium vanadium phosphate (Na3V2(PO4)3/C) cathode was synthesized by the sol-gel method and assembled into batteries with different electrolytes. The batteries based on HSE exhibit better electrochemical performance than that of NASICON ceramic solid electrolytes, which delivers a reversible capacity of 98 mAh·g−1 at 0.2 C and exhibits good capacity retention of 85% after 175 cycles at 0.5 C. Not only does the HSE inherit great flexibility, but also exhibits good interfacial contact with electrodes. The schematic diagram of Na-ion conductivity in ceramic, polymer and HSE was illustrated to 
demonstrate the sodium ion transport mechanism. The HSE with high ionic conductivity and good flexibility for interfacial contact with electrodes shall provide a designing strategy for different solid-state batteries.
Due to the abundance and low cost of sodium resources, sodium ion batteries(SIBs) have attracted much attention for their potential application such as electric vehicles, backup energy storage, and large solar and wind farms.[ 1 ] However, traditional SIBs using flammable organic liquids electrolytes have inherent safety concerns and exhibiting low energy density. In order to improve the safety and reliability of the battery, sodium ion batteries using solid electrolytes instead of liquid electrolytes have been studied as the next generation batteries.[2][3]
However, there are still many problems need to be solved before all solid-state batteries are practically applicable. Among them, lower ionic conductivity in solid electrolytes and high interfacial resistance between solid electrolytes and electrode materials are considered as the two major challenges for developing solid-state batteries. Fortunately, there are many efforts have been taken to reduce the solid/solid interfacial resistances and improve the cycle life, which included the synthesizing of nano-structured electrodes (e.g., nanoparticles, nanowires, nanotubes) to increase the contact interfacial areas,[4]fabrication of thin-film batteries,[5]dielectric modification at the electrode-electrolyte interface,[6]the addition of ionic liquids into the cathode and at the interface,[7] the growth of graphene-like interlayer on super ionic conductor ceramic electrolyte,[8]construction of batteries with single component,[9]surface modification with a thin film of solid electrolyte,[10] application of a plastic-crystal ion-electrolyte interphase.[11] Although the batteries using these innovative solutions exhibit good electrochemical properties by reducing interfacial resistances, the problems of bad cycle performance and stability still exist and need to be solved urgently.
According to the material properties of the electrolyte separator, the solid-state batteries can be classified into polymer film electrolyte batteries and ceramic electrolyte batteries.[12] The polymer film electrolytes usually shows good flexibility, which makes them can be applied in different types of solid state batteries and be bent, twisted, and even rolled up without cracking. However, it is also associated with low ionic conductivity, poor oxidation resistance, and easy puncturing. In contrast, ceramic electrolytes have relatively higher ionic conductivity, but they performed deficiently in battery systems with low mechanical properties such as manufacture difficulty and poor interface contact.[13] Therefore, it shall be highly desirable to develop electrolytes with both advantages of the polymer and solid ceramic 
electrolyte.
There are two composite solid electrolytes based on active fillers with sodium ions (e.g., NASICON, NaTFSI) and inert fillers without sodium ions (e.g., SiO2, Al2O3, GO) for SIBs.[14] Due to the permeation effect and the concentration gradient of sodium ions in active filler particles, the polymer matrix absorbs sodium ion and forms highly continuous and interconnected transmission channels on the surface, which increases the vacancies of Na, and promotes ion transport. Therefore, the composite solid electrolyte based on active filler is receiving greater attention. Y Kim et al. [15]reported a NASICON based hybrid solid electrolyte (HSE) for solid-state sodium-ion battery, which exhibits a highly reversible electrochemical reaction, high specific capacity, and good flexibility. However, these batteries show poor rate performance, and the preparation process of the composite electrolyte is complicated. Z Zhang et al. [16]prepared solid composite polymer electrolytes (CPEs) based on sodium bis(trifluorosulfonyl) imide (NaTFSI) and poly (ethylene oxide) (PEO) incorporated with active ceramic filler (NASICON). In this way, a high conductivity of 2.8×10−3 S·cm−1is readily achieved at relatively high temperature of 80 °C. L Ci et al. [17] synthesized a HSE of Na3PS4-polyethylene oxide, which has an improved ionic conductivity and enhanced interfacial compatibility with Na metal, but their preparation process is complicated and difficult. Recently, it has been reported that polyethylene glycol (PEG) can be used on lithium-based mixed electrolytes to improve the film-forming abilities of film formation for all solid state batteries.[18] Therefore, in order to improve the electrochemical performance of HSE, and accelerating its applications in solid state batteries, it is of necessity to propose an easy approach to prepare HSEs with high sodium ion conductivity and good interface contact.
In this study, we demonstrate a ceramic in polymer HSE based on a poly vinylidene fluoride-hexafluoropropylene (PVDF-HFP) polymer comprising Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (NASICON) ceramic particles for solid-state SIBs. Therein, a trace of PEG was added and it could improve film-forming abilities of solid electrolyte. The ceramic/polymer mixed electrolyte was prepared by a simple solution casting method followed by activation in liquid electrolyte. This new approach using NASICON ceramic particles enables the development of hybrid solid electrolytes with high ionic conductivity as well as good electrochemical and mechanical stabilities, contributing to a long cycle life of SIBs. The ceramic in polymer HSE has a high ionic conductivity of 2.25×10−3 S·cm−1 at room temperature. When using carbon coated sodium vanadium phosphate (Na3V2(PO4)3/C) as the cathode, the HSE-based SIBs exhibit better electrochemical performance than that of NASICON ceramic electrolytes, which delivers a good capacity retention of 85% after 175 cycles at 0.5 C. This technology makes it possible for SIBs to be applied in large-scale energy storage equipment and mobile power sources.
Carbon coated sodium vanadium phosphate (Na3V2(PO4)3/C) is prepared by a sol-gel method. NaOH (98%, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent), NH4VO3 (99.95%, analytical reagent, Aladdin), NH4H2PO4 (99%, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent), and the reagent are weighed according to the stoichiometric ratio. First, the citric acid is dissolved in deionized water at 80 °C, and then NaOH, NH4H2PO4, NH4VO3 are sequentially dissolved in the citric acid solution. The mixtures are continuously stirred and heated in the water bath to form a transparent dark blue solution, then transferred to the vacuum oven and dried at 80 °C to obtain the precursor.[19] It was heated at 350 °C for 3 hours in an argon atmosphere and then slowly cooled to room temperature. Finally, the obtained product was sufficiently ground and further heated at 800 °C for 8 hours under an argon atmosphere to prepare Na3V2(PO4)3/C.
The solid electrolyte of NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) ceramic powder was prepared by the solid-phase method.[ 20 ][ 21 ] Na3PO4·12H2O (98.0%, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent), ZrO2 (99.0%, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent), and SiO2 (98.0%, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent) were accurately weighed according to the stoichiometric ratio, wherein the sodium phosphate excess was 2%. The reagents are transferred toplanetary ball mill and added alcohol, milling for 3 h at 300 rpm, and then dried in an electric blast drying oven. The mixture was calcined at 1100 °C for 12 h, and then crushed by ball milling at 150 rpm for 18 h with zirconia balls using ethanol as a dispersant in a polyamide pot. The resultant powder was sintered directly or shaped into disks by uniaxial pressing, which was followed by cold isostatic pressing at 200 MPa. Sintering was performed in air at 1275 °C for 15 h in an alumina crucible. The sintered NASICON ceramic slice was ground with emery paper and finished with a diamond abrasive paste with a grain size of 3 μm to adjust the thickness of the disk between 0.42 and 1.03 mm.[22] Finally, the solid piece was polished to the ceramic piece for solid-state sodium ion battery.
NASICON ceramic powder (dried in an oven at 80 °C in advance) and poly vinylidene fluoride hexafluoropropylene (PVDF-HFP) (99.0%, Sigma Aldrich) polymer are mixed with the weight ratio of 1:9. Then 0.5 g polyethylene glycol (PEG)was added into the mixture of PVDF-HFP and NASICON to keep the weight ratio of PVDF-HFP and NASICON to PEG is 95: 5) (98.0%, analytical reagent, Aladdin). All the reagents was mixed together using a planetary mill (300 rpm) in the mixture of N, N-dimethylacetamide (DMF) (99.5%, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent) to acetone(98.0%, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent) is 1:2 at room temperature for 30 hours. Then the viscous homogeneous solution was cast into a film by a glass plate with a doctor blade. The solvent was evaporated until the mixed slurry was statically condensed for 2 hours and then immersed in deionized water for 30 minutes. After the solid film is fully formed, the collected solid film was dried at 60 °C for 12 hours and then vacuum-dried at 70 °C for 6 hours. The solid film was pressed at 2.5 MPa to obtain ceramic in polymer composite film with approximately 100 μm thicknesses. The HSE mixed solid film was prepared by soaking the solid film in a 1 M NaClO4/(EC+DMC) (battery grade, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent) solution for 3 minutes and then pressurizing (5.0 KPa) to remove excess liquid electrolyte.
To prepare the cathode, the carbon coated sodium vanadium phosphate (Na3V2(PO4)3/C), carbon black, and PVDF binder were mixed at the weight ratio of 8:1:1. Then, the viscous slurry of the N-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP) was uniformly applied onto an aluminum foil on a coater, dried at 60 °C for 1 hour, and vacuum-dried at 80 °C for 12 hours. The electrode sheet was cut into 1.54 cm2, and placed in a vacuum oven for drying at 80 °C. The mass loading of the cathode is approximately 3 mg·cm−2.
The solid-state sodium batteries were fabricated using Na metal as anode and self-made Na3V2(PO4)3/C as cathode, and HSE as the electrolyte. For comparison, other two batteries were assembled by using NASICON ceramic as electrolyte and glass fiber as separator. These batteries were assembled into a 2032 button batteries in an argon glove box ([H2O] < 0.1ppm, [O2] < 0.1ppm). The charge and discharge were evaluated between 2.5 V and 4.0 V at 0.1, 0.2, 0.5 to 10 C-rate current density with testing system (BS-9300R, LanBo Eletronics, Wuhan, China) at 30 °C.
The structure of Na3V2(PO4)3/C and electrolyte was observed by X-ray diffraction (MXP3TA, Mac Science, Beijing, China) of Cu Kα radiation (k = 0.1541 nm) in the 2θ range of 10~60°. The morphologies of the Na3V2(PO4)3/C were examined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The TEM study was performed under a JEM-2100 microscope (JEOL, Osaka, Japan). The electron accelerating voltage was 200 kV. The TGA of materials was analyzed on instrument (STA 449 F3, Netzsch, Germany) with the air flow at a heating rate of 5 °C/min. The reactions during the hybrid preparation process were verified by Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy (FTIR-650(G), GangDong, China). The particle size and homogeneityof the chemical composition were assessed by field emission scanning electron microscopy (SUPRA 55, Carl Zeiss AG, Germany) and EDS mapping. The ionic conductivity of the HSE was measured by electrochemical impedance spectroscopywith AC amplitude of 25 mV in the frequency range of 0.01-105 Hz at 30 °C on aPrinceton Electrochemical Station (1260A, par-solartron, England). The electrochemical stability window of the HSE was measured by linear sweep voltammetry system (LSV) on a Princeton Electrochemical Station (1260A, par-solartron, England). Interfacial stability of the composite electrolyte with the Na-metal electrode was examined by recording the value of the interface resistance (Ri) of the Na3V2(PO4)3/C|electrolyte|Na symmetrical batteries at a current density of 0.2 C.
The X-ray diffraction pattern is presented in Figure 1a. It clearly demonstrates that the Na3V2(PO4)3/C sample has high crystallinity and specific NASICON structure which can be indexed with the standard pattern of JCPDS No.53-0018. The crystalline peaks indicate that the samples are pure phase Na3V2(PO4)3 without impurity. Moreover, the sharp peak intensity indicates the good crystallinity of the materials, and all the diffraction peaks are well matched to the R-3c space group (2 Na in the 18e position and 1 Na in the 6b position).[23][24] As showed in Figure 1b, the unique porous sponge structure of Na3V2(PO4)3/C ensures a large contact surface, not only provides fast electron transport along the carbon coating, but also ensures good contact of the electrolyte with the electrode surface. It promotes sodium ion transfer between the electrode and the electrolyte interface, thus ensuring good intercalation and deintercalation of the Na+in the cathode material. Wang et al.[25]indicated porous structure of NVP(Na3V2(PO4)3)@C cathode promoted both ion and electron transfer, due to the formation of randomly packed 3D conduction network by nano-sized NVP and carbon based on percolation theory. The high surface area of such 3D framework could also lead to slight higher consumption of liquid electrolyte (due to SEI formation) in the first charge process.[26,27]
As shown in the TEM image (Figure 1c), the particle size of the Na3V2(PO4)3/C is controlled at around 30 nm, and the small size particle gives a short sodium iondiffusion length and a fast sodium ion transport level. As a result, the NASICON structure and the nano-size of the particles enable sodium ion to migrate in Na3V2(PO4)3 effectively. In addition, the TEM image in Figure 1d shows a carbon coating on the surface of Na3V2(PO4)3 with the thickness about 10 nm and evenly distributed, while no other carbon materials were observed in the X-ray diffraction spectrum, indicating that the carbon coating was amorphous.[28][29] The thin carbon coating on the Na3V2(PO4)3 nanoparticles enhances electron transportation during charging and discharging. The electrochemical performances of the Na3V2(PO4)3/C have been investigated previously by assembling glass fiber separator into a traditional SIBs with liquid electrolyte (Figure S1).
From figure 2a, it can be seen that XRD patterns of the prepared solid electrolyte with the composition of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 is well indexed into the NASICON structure (ICDD 01-070-0234), with the A2B3C3X12 prototype structure and C2/c15 space group. The XRD pattern of HSE membrane is similar to that of NASICON ceramic powder. But it also shows a broad lump between 15° and 40°, which can be traced to the organics PVDF-HFP and PEG, indicating a lower degree of crystallinity was obtained due to add polymer in the HSE. Meanwhile, evidence for any internal chemical reactions and the stability of the HSE were investigated by comparing the Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra of NASICON, PVDF-HFP, and HSE, as shown in Figure S2. In FT-IR spectroscopy analyses, the NASICON and polymer exhibit a stable phase without undesirable reactions during the hybrid preparation process.
Thermal stability is an important characteristic of HSE for applying in SIBs. Hence, the thermal gravity analysis (TGA) curves for a commercial glass fiber and PVDF-HFP polymer film are compared with the HSE followed by thermal treatment in Figure 2b. The thermal stability of the HSE is revealed to be much higher than that of the glass fiber and PVDF-HFP polymer film (Figure 2b). The weight loss between 120 and 180 °C for three electrolytes is due to the decomposition and volatilization of the liquid NaClO4/(EC+DMC). However, no obvious weight loss occurred to the HSE at 200 °C. The rapid weight loss at 400 °C is attributed to the complete decomposition of PVDF-HFP polymer. Therefore, the HSE exhibits higher stability than glass fiber and PVDF-HFP polymer film systems, which enhances the safety of battery. As shown in the Figure 2c, SEM images and EDS elemental mapping on the surface ofthe of the HSE showed that the elements of C, Cl, F, Na, O, P, Zr, and Si are evenly distributed in the HSE, which shows that during the preparation NASICON,PVDF-HFP, and PEG are fully mixed and HSE has a uniform composition after the tablet molding. It indicates that the NASICON is uniformly dispersed in the polymer matrix. Therefore, the polymer can constitute a frame region, which provides tough support for the matrix, leading to the good mechanical properties, compactness, and flexibility of HSE, and ensuring safe SIBs. These properties have obviously effect on the electrode-electrolyte interface for ion migration, demonstrating good electrochemical performances for batteries. The highly flexible HSE suffers no damage under the condition of bending and twisting (Figure S3), even upon repeated folding and unfolding. As the proportion of the polymer raised, the flexibility of the HSE membrane gradually increases. The PEG as an important composition increases the flexibility of a ceramic-electrolyte membrane in solid-state sodium ion batteries, and a trace of PEG could improve the ratio of film formation of solid electrolyte(Figure S4)。[30]
For comparison, glass fiber electrolyte, NASICON ceramic electrolyte, and HSE were assembled into SIBs, separately. These batteries were cycled in the voltage range of 2.5-4.0 V at 30 °C, and the first charge-discharge curves of the Na3V2(PO4)3/C|electrolyte|Na batteries at 0.2 C were tested (Figure 3a). The batteries with glass fiber and HSE deliver the first discharge capacity of 102 and 98 mAh·g−1, which corresponds to 86.44% and 83.05% of the theoretical capacity of Na3V2(PO4)3/C, respectively. During the charge-discharge process, both of the batteries with glass fiber and HSE as electrolyte show small polarization of less than 0.2 V at current density of 0.2 C. However, the battery with NASICON ceramic slices as electrolyte exhibits a large polarization of 0.5 V at 0.2 C, which is explained by large interface resistance caused by poor interface contact between NASICON ceramic and electrode.
The discharge performances of SIBs with different electrolytes at different C-rates are shown in Figure 3b. Among them, the traditional battery using glass fiber and liquid electrolyte has the good interface contact between electrode and electrolyte, demonstrating the best discharge performances at different current density. NASICON ceramic solid electrolyte could not maintain a good solid-solid interface contact when one of the solids is changing its volume during cycling.[9] Therefore, the batteries based on NASICON ceramic solid electrolyte demonstrated the poorest discharge performances at different current density. In contrast, HSE has good contactwith the electrode to access a much larger fraction of the cathode particles, and they deform reversibly with anode volume change. HSE SIBs performs well especially at low discharge rate, and have good stability during cycling. When the battery was charged and discharged at 0.1 C, a reversible capacity of 93 mAh·g−1 was still retained.It indicates an excellent rate performance of HSE-based solid state battery, which is as good as traditional SIBs based on liquid electrolyte.
As shown in Figure 3c, the Na3V2(PO4)3/C|HSE|Na battery shows better cycle stability during 175 cycles at 0.5 C (Table S1), while the battery using NASICON ceramic as electrolyte shows rapid decay of capacity, theoretical capacity retention is less than 50% after 50 cycles. It is worth noting that the incorporation of 1 M NaClO4/(EC+DMC) facilitates the rapid migration of large amounts of sodium ion between the cathode and anode at the initial stage of SEI film formation as for the HSE. When NASICON ceramic is used as the electrolyte, the battery has good performance by adding a small amount of liquid electrolyte to improve the interface contact, which is also plagued by many solid state batteries based on ceramic electrolytes (Table S1). As the number of cycles increases, the liquid electrolyte gradually evaporates, and the electrode/electrolyte interface changes from liquid-solidcontact to solid-solid contact. This solid-solid contact interface cannot compensate for the volume change of the cathode and anode during charge and discharge, resulting in inadequate internal contact of the battery, which directly leads to capacity fading. We also have investigated the electrochemical stability window of an electrolyte by linear sweep voltammetry system (LSV). The LSV profiles were obtained for HSE at an appropriate scan rate of 1 mV·s-1in the range of 1.5-7.0 V to detect the electrochemical stability (Figure S5). It can be observed that the absence of any other electrochemical reactions occurring in the HSE until 5.0 V, which proves that the HSE has a wider potential window with better thermal stability for use in SIBs
Sodium ion transfer through the interfaces between Na/electrolyte and (Na3V2(PO4)3/C)/electrolyte were studied by the AC impedance method. As illustrated in Figure 4 a, the EIS spectrums of the batteries were tested based on different electrolytes. The simplified equivalent circuit in the inset of EIS was used to interpret the measured results (Figure 4 a). These plots were all composed of a semicircle at high frequencies, which is related to the ohmic resistance and charge transfer resistance (Rct). The short inclined line in low frequency region is due to the ion diffusion in the electrode and interface resistance between electrodes and electrolyte, and electrode surface films (Rf). The interfacial resistance (Rint) (Rint = RNa/electrolyte + RNVP/electrolyte) at the electrode/electrolyte interface differed drastically in the different systems.[31] For the battery with HSE, the interfacial resistance (Rint) was estimated to be 152 Ω, which was much smaller than that of the NASICON based battery (792 Ω). In comparison, Rint is 118 Ω when liquid electrolyte was used in the battery with employing glass fiber as separator. The interface property is an important factor for solid-state batteries to improve the reversibility of sodium insertion and the cycling and rate-capability of batteries.
Figure 4b, c, d show a schematic diagram of sodium ions migration through the electrolyte of NASICON ceramic, PVDF-HFP polymer, and HSE. NASICON ceramics have excellent impedance performance in the previous cycles, and sodium ion is conducted by ion hopping with NASICON powder contact (Figure 4b). The ionic conductivity is 3.12×10−3 S·cm−1at room temperature, which is calculated from the total resistance (Table S2), and the configuration of ionic conductivity testing model has been show in Figure S6. It also can be observed from the impedance spectrum that the PVDF-HFP polymer film have relatively large total resistance(Figure S7), and the ionic conductivity is 4.54×10−5 S·cm−1.This is consistent with previous studies on polymer membrane electrolytes, which are ascribed to the high crystallinity of homogeneous polymer membranes at room temperature, and the peristalsis of the PVDF-HFP segment is critical for the migration of sodium ion in the polymer electrolyte.[32] Among them, sodium ions are conducted in the polymer by two methods, in trachain hopping and interchain hopping (Figure 4c). The interface resistance of HSE was lower than reported polymer electrolytes,[33] with the ionic conductivity about 2.25×10−3 S·cm−1 (Table S2). It means that HSE corresponds to the good ion-conducting network, which facilitates the transport of sodium ion during charging and discharging. The sodium ion conducting pathway of the HSE composite is shown in Figure 4d, and the three possible ion transmission methods include in trachain hopping (①), interchain hopping (②) in polymer, and boundary transfer between polymer and NASICON (③).
The ceramic in polymer HSE has relatively high ionic conductivity can be explained from the following four aspects: firstly, the active NASICON ceramic filler in the HSE can inhibit the crystallinity of the polymer and enhance the segmentation of the matrix, which expands the ion conducting region while increasing the carrier (Na+) mobility. Secondly, the permeation effect may also form highly continuous and interconnected transmission channels on the surface of the active NASICON ceramic filler particles, which plays an important role in increasing the ionic conductivity.Thirdly, due to the concentration gradient of sodium ions between highly conductive NASICON particles, the polymer matrix contributes to absorb sodium ion, which increases the vacancies of Na, and promotes its ion transport. Fourthly, the high conductivity of NASICON ceramic body is also conducive to improve the overall ionic conductivity of the HSE film.
In general, the extraction of sodium ions from the cathode is commonly accompanied by a large volume change and the formation of empty spaces, but the NASICON ceramic electrolytes hardly fill the empty space of the interfaces between cathode and ceramic. Thus, it leads to a dramatically increase in the interfacial resistances of all-solid-state batteries. In contrast, the HSE provided the necessary flexibility to maintain the interface contact during SIBs cycling. The contact with HSE enables the electrode to create interconnected channels for the migration of sodium ions across the interfaces with the solid electrolyte pellet. Therefore, Na3V2(PO4)3/C|HSE|Na solid-state batteries exhibited low battery polarization and stable cycle performance due to the excellent stability of HSE and good electrolyte/electrode interface.
In summary, the ceramic in polymer HSE with the ionic conductivity of 2.2510−3 S·cm−1(RT) was prepared by a simple solution casting method. The solid state sodium ion batteries based on HSE exhibited high reversible capacity and good cycle performance at room temperature by modifying the interface contact. The batteries with HSE deliver a reversible capacity of 98 mAh·g−1, which corresponds to 80.5% of the theoretical capacity of Na3V2(PO4)3/C, and exhibits good capacity retention of 85% after 175 cycles. The compact inorganic NASICON particles in HSE served as not only a physical barrier to Na dendrite growth, but also pathways for sodium ion transfer. More importantly, HSE enabled a “softer contact” with larger contact area between the electrode and the electrolyte, which depolarized the charge transfer process at the electrolyte/electrode interfaces. It confirms the good prospects for developing high safety and high energy density solid-state batteries by using HSE, and a breakthrough can be expected with safe, low-cost all-solid-state sodium batteries.