Aqueous batteries are promising energy storage systems but are hindered by the limited selection of anodes and narrow electrochemical window to achieve satisfactory cyclability and decent energy density. Here, we design aqueous hybrid Na–Zn batteries by using a carbon-coated Zn (Zn@C) anode, 8 M NaClO4 + 0.4 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 concentrated electrolyte coupled with NASICON-structured cathodes. The Zn@C anode achieves stable Zn stripping/plating and improved kinetics without Zn dendrite formation due to the porous carbon film facilitating homogeneous current distribution and Zn deposition. Furthermore, the concentrated electrolyte offers a large electrochemical window (∼2.5 V) and permits stable cycling of cathodes. As a result, the hybrid batteries exhibit extraordinary performance including high voltage, high energy density (100–150 Wh kg–1 for half battery and 71 Wh kg–1 for full battery), and excellent cycling stability of 1000 cycles.

Rechargeable aqueous batteries using low-cost, nonflammable, and environmentally friendly water-based electrolytes are particularly attractive for static energy storage applications compared with nonaqueous batteries, (1−4) among which aqueous sodium-ion batteries are very appealing due to their abundant natural reserves and cheap raw materials. (5−8) However, restricted by the narrow electrochemical window (1.23 V for water) of aqueous electrolyte and the limited selections of anodes (dominated by NaTi2(PO4)3), the energy density (∼20–60 Wh kg–1) and cycling stability (∼100–500 cycles) of aqueous sodium-ion batteries are still far from satisfactory. (5)

Alternatively, metallic zinc integrates the attractive features of low cost, good conductivity, chemical stability, nontoxicity, large hydrogen evolution overpotential, and high theoretical capacity (819 mAh g–1). (9−11) These distinctive merits of Zn enable the possibility to design an aqueous hybrid Na–Zn battery to circumvent the predicament encountered by sodium-ion batteries based on the mechanism of Na+ ion intercalation in the cathode and Zn2+ ion deposition in the anode. However, Zn dendrite, one of the most detrimental drawbacks that poses a severe threat to battery durability, is highly imperative to be addressed. (12−14) Successful examples to alleviate Zn dendrites by employing 3D Zn sponges and manipulating Zn deposited into the backside of alkaline Zn/Ni(OH)2 batteries have been reported. (12,13) Nevertheless, the costly and complicated procedures prevent them from being implemented in scalable manufacturing; thus, developing more effective and practical strategies to suppress the Zn dendrite still remains a great challenge.

The limited window and high solubility of electrode materials in water are another critical issue challenging the battery voltage output, energy density, and cyclability. In general, reducing the activity of free water molecules in electrolyte by raising the solute concentration and addition surfactant has been reported. (15−21) For example, a “water-in-salt” electrolyte designed by Suo.et al. can ensure a 2.3 V aqueous lithium-ion battery to cycle up to 1000 cycles. (15) Therefore, if a low cost and advanced electrolyte can be developed for an aqueous hybrid Na–Zn battery, the voltage output, energy density, and cycling stability of the aqueous battery are expected to be greatly improved.

Herein, we propose a facile and general strategy to develop a dendrite-free Zn@C anode by simply coating the Zn foil surface with a porous carbon layer, serving as nucleation sites and reservoirs to capture Zn ions from the electrolyte and alter the prioritization of Zn2+ ion transfer toward the “hot spots” on the Zn foil. Therefore, the Zn@C anode can be cycled in water-based electrolyte hundreds to thousands of times without dendrite formation. Moreover, we discovered that a low-cost 8 M NaClO4 + 0.4 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 concentrated electrolyte (viscosity, 4.3 mPa s; ionic conductivity, 47 mS cm–1 at 25 °C) can broaden the electrochemical window to ∼2.5 V and simultaneously enhance the cathode cycling stability. When coupled with high voltage or high capacity NASICON-structured cathodes, aqueous Na–Zn batteries are demonstrated that achieve high voltage and energy density and stable cyclability.

In a typical procedure, 80 wt % active carbon (average size, ∼10 μm) was mixed with 20 wt % polyvinylidene fluoride in N-methylpyrrolidone solution for 0.5 h and then pressed onto a Zn foil (thickness, ∼80 μm). After being dried at 120 °C in a vacuum, the carbon-coated Zn foil (Zn@C) was cut into disks of ∼1 cm2.

The synthesis of NVPF@C was according to our previous work. (31) In a typical procedure, raw materials of 30 mmol NaF, 20 mmol NH4VO3, 20 mmol NH4H2PO4, and 10 mmol C6H8O7·H2O were dissolved into 60 mL of deionized water with continuous stirring at 80 °C to volatilize the water thoroughly and dried at 120 °C for 10 h in an oven. Finally, the precursor was ground into a fine powder and heated to 650 °C for 6 h with the protection of a gas flow of Ar + 5 v % H2.

In a similar procedure, raw materials of 30 mmol Na2CO3, 40 mmol NH4VO3, 60 mmol NH4H2PO4, and 20 mmol C6H8O7·H2O were dissolved into 60 mL of deionized water with continuous stirring at 80 °C to volatilize the water thoroughly and dried at 120 °C for 10 h in an oven. Finally, the precursor was ground into a fine powder and heated to 700 °C for 6 h with the protection of a gas flow of Ar + 5 v % H2.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) characterizations were performed on an XRD-7000S diffractometer (Japan) to detect the product structures. Field scanning electron microscopy (SEM) characterizations were conducted on a JEM 7600F microscope (Japan) to observe the product morphologies. Thermogravimety (TG) characterization measurements were recorded by a Netzsch STA449F3 thermogravimetic analyzer (Germany) to determine the product carbon contents. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) characterizations were collected by an Axis Ultra DLD system (England) to analyze the surface chemical states of products.

Investigation of electrochemical properties occurred in CR2016 coin cells. The stripping/plating tests of Zn and Zn@C were performed in symmetrical cells on a LANHE Battery Tester (China). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) were measured on a PGSTAT302N Autolab (Germany) electrochemistry workstation. Cyclic voltammetric (CV) measurements were conducted to test of electrochemical window of electrolytes on a CHI606E electrochemisty workstation (China). For examining the electrochemical performance of Zn@C/NVPF@C and Zn@C/NVP@C batteries, 70 wt % NVPF@C or NVP@C were mixed with 20 wt % polytetrafluoroethylene binder and 10 wt % acetylene black in isopropanol, extruded into a thin film by a rolling machine, then cut into 8 mm disks, and finally pressed onto Ti mesh under 10 MPa pressure to fabricate NVPF@C or NVP@C electrodes. The mass loading of active materials in electrodes were ∼7–10 mg cm–2 for NVPF@C and ∼5–8 mg cm–2 for NVP@C. Prior to battery assembly, the 8 M NaClO4 + 0.4 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 concentrated electrolyte was purged with N2 flow to remove dissolved oxygen. The Zn@C/NVPF@C and Zn@C/NVP@C batteries were constructed by sandwiching Zn@C anode and NVPF@C or NVP@C cathode between a glass fiber separator that was presoaked by electrolyte. The battery galvanostatic charge/discharge tests were recorded using a LANHE Battery Tester (China) at 25 °C in 0.8–1.9 V for Zn@C/NVPF@C and 0.8–1.8 V for Zn@C/NVP@C, respectively.

For the Zn@C/NVPF@C pouch battery, 70 wt % Zn powders, 20 wt % polytetrafluoroethylene binder, and 10 wt % acetylene black were mixed in isopropanol and rolled into a Zn film by a rolling machine. After drying, it was coated by carbon slurry (identical procedure to the preparation of Zn@C), cut into ∼25 × 25 mm, and pressed onto a stainless steel collector. Likewise, the NVPF@C cathode (∼25 × 25 mm) was also prepared by pressing the NVPF@C film onto a stainless steel collector. The Zn@C and NVPF@C electrodes were then sandwiched between a separator presoaked in 8 M NaClO4 + 0.4 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolyte, pasted on the surface of PET film, and sealed using a vacuum sealer. The mass ratio of Zn to NVPF was controlled as ∼1:10, and the capacity and energy density of the pouch battery are calculated based on the total weight of Zn@C and NVPF@C.

The carbon-coated Zn (Zn@C) film was prepared by blade coating the active carbon layer (average size, ∼10 μm; thickness, ∼90 μm) on a planar Zn foil (thickness, ∼80 μm), as illustrated in Figure 1a and b. SEM and XRD characterizations were used to check the morphologies and structures of Zn and Zn@C. The bare Zn foil shows a planar and smooth surface (Figure 1c). After coating a carbon layer, the Zn@C features a much rougher surface with considerable voids (Figure 1d), leaving sufficient space for electrolyte penetration and Zn deposition as well as stress release during cycling. The cross-sectional SEM image (Figure S1) of the Zn@C film and the comparable XRD peak intensity (Figure 1e) of Zn@C with Zn further reveal a noncompact carbon layer coinciding well with the SEM image in Figure 1d.

For the stability of Zn foil and Zn@C film during galvanostatic cycling to be evaluated, symmetrical coin cells with two identical Zn and Zn@C were assembled with concentrated aqueous electrolyte of 8 M NaClO4 + 0.4 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 (the reason for choosing this electrolyte will be discussed below). The cycling curves of Zn symmetrical cell show serious fluctuation during 100 cycles at 1 mA cm–2 (Figure 2a), which is likely attributed to the inhomogeneous current distribution caused by the surface morphological change during the stripping/plating. (22) In contrast, the very stable curves of the Zn@C symmetrical cell imply a smaller morphological change of Zn@C. At a high current density of 2.5 mA cm–2, likewise, the Zn@C symmetrical cell exhibits stable cycling over 300 cycles (>250 h), whereas the Zn symmetrical cell can only survive for several hours before short circuiting (Figure 2b). Even at higher current densities of 5 and 10 mA cm–2, the Zn@C symmetrical cell can also stably run for 100 h with overpotential below 0.1 V (Figure S2d and e).These two different behaviors shed light on the decisive role of the carbon film in inhibiting the dendritic Zn.

Of note, the thickness of the carbon layer exerts a significant influence on the Zn@C cycling performance (Figure 3). With a carbon layer thickness of 28 μm, the Zn@C cell only operates for 75 h at 1 mA cm–2 before short circuiting (Figure 3a). When the carbon layer thickness is increased to 65 μm, the Zn@C cell shows less fluctuation in the cycling curve and successfully runs for 200 h without short circuiting (Figure 3b). When the carbon layer thickness is further increased to 90 μm, the Zn@C cell displays much smoother curves, smaller overpotential, and more stable cycling compared with those of Zn (Figure 3b). However, further increasing the carbon layer thickness to 124 μm incurs a large Zn stripping/plating overpotential. Therefore, Zn@C with optimized 90 μm carbon thickness can both improve the stippling/plating of Zn and facilitate the kinetics of Zn2+ ion flux; thus, it is chosen as the anode for the Na–Zn battery.

SEM observations (Figure 4) were conducted to check the surface morphological changes of Zn and Zn@C after repeated stripping/plating. Noticeable plate-like Zn dendrites (Figure 4a) and cracks (Figure S2a) appear on the Zn foil surface after 100 round-trip cycles (200 h) at 1 mA cm–2, which is a good response to the fluctuation of Zn plating/stripping curves. Without porous carbon layer modification, the dendrites on the Zn foil at the nucleation step cause charge accumulation at the sharp ends, which further lure Zn to deposit around the sharp ends and result in the stacking growth of dendrites in repeated cycling. (22) The platelike Zn dendrites become more obvious in both top-view (Figure 4b) and cross-section images (Figure 4c and d) at 2.5 mA cm–2 and can even penetrate and adhere to the glass fiber separator (Figure S2b). Moreover, the Zn dendrite formation is accompanied by a sharp increase in contact resistance from the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS, Figure 4i), which is related to the deteriorative interface caused by dendrite and poorly conductive ZnO (Figure 4k).

In contrast, the morphology of Zn@C after continuous plating/stripping is nondendrite at 1 mA cm–2 (Figure 4e), 2.5 mA cm–2 (Figure 4f–h), and even 5 mA cm–2 (Figure S2c). Moreover, Zn@C still remains nondendritic at an increased plating/stripping capacity of 3 and 5 mAh cm–2 (Figure S3). The remarkable enhancement of carbon film in inhibiting dendritic Zn is partially due to its increased surface area that adsorbs and guides Zn to preferentially fill the voids between carbon particles in sphere shape (average size of ∼100 nm) rather than the perpendicular growth of dendrites, (22−28) which is reconfirmed by the SEM images of Zn@C after 5, 20, 50, and 400 cycles (Figure S4). The deposited Zn mainly goes into the voids between carbon particles without obvious dendrite formation, indicating that the porous carbon layers can well-accommodate Zn during the cycling. From the sawtooth-like Zn/carbon edge and relatively flat Zn@C surface (Figure 4g and h), it can be speculated that Zn deposition mainly takes place in the interface between Zn and carbon layer as well as within the carbon layer (inner space and surface voids). Consequently, with the spatial confinement of carbon, the volume change and physical contact of Zn are effectively improved, which is also verified by the smaller increase of charge transfer resistance of the Zn@C cell (Figure 4j). Furthermore, application of other types of carbon coatings such as carbon nanotubes and acetylene black also achieves a comparable effect (Figure S5).These results reveal that it is a general strategy to inhibit Zn dendrite through carbon coating.

The unexpected capability of Zn@C in suppressing dendritic Zn opens up the opportunity to construct high-specific-energy hybrid Na–Zn batteries with high voltage or high capacity cathodes, for example, Na3V2(PO4)2F3, (29−33) or Na3V2(PO4)3. (34−37) The synthesis details for carbon-coated Na3V2(PO4)2F3 (NVPF@C) and Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP@C) are given in the Experimental Section, and the corresponding characterizations are shown in Figure S6. Aqueous Na–Zn batteries using Zn@C anode, 8 M NaClO4 + 0.4 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolyte, and NVPF@C or NVP@C cathode are designated as Zn@C/NVPF@C and Zn@C/NVP@C, respectively. We first examine the influence of electrolytes on battery behavior. Compared with dilute electrolytes (e.g., 1 M NaClO4 + 0.4 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 and 4 M NaClO4 + 0.4 M Zn(CF3SO3)2), the 8 M NaClO4 + 0.4 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 concentrated electrolyte can afford a maximum voltage of 2.5 V, 0.3 and 0.4 V higher than dilute electrolytes, respectively (Figure S7a). More importantly, it can effectively reduce the water-induced side reactions, such as the dissolution and self-discharge of host materials (Figure S7–S9), benefiting the stable cycling of electrode in aqueous solutions. In addition, coinsertion reactions (e.g., Na+ and Zn2+ ion insertion) at the anode and Zn2+ ions at the cathode are negligible in this concentrated electrolyte (Figure S10).

Figure 5a illustrates the charge/discharge profiles of the Zn@C/NVPF@C battery at different current densities. The capacities for the Zn@C/NVPF@C battery are 63.1, 58.6, 58.0, 54.8, 49.1, and 34.2 mAh g–1 at 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, and 5 A g–1 in an optimal range of 0.8–1.9 V (Figure S11), respectively. Moreover, the Zn@C/NVPF@C system shows an impressive voltage of 1.68 V, equating to a maximum energy density of 100 Wh kg–1 (for NVPF@C only). If this battery is cycled in a wide range of 0.8–2.3 V, a high voltage plateau (>2.0 V) is utilized, and the energy density can reach 135 Wh kg–1 (Figure S12). When the Zn@C anode is coupled with the NVP@C cathode, a higher capacity of 111 mAh g–1 along with a slightly lower voltage of 1.36 V is delivered by the Zn@C/NVP@C system at 0.1 A g–1 (Figure 5b), corresponding to a maximum energy density over 150 Wh kg–1 (for NVP@C only), and 60% capacity retention can be preserved at 5 A g–1. Compared with recently reported aqueous Na-ion and Na–Zn batteries (Figure 5c, the energy densities are calculated on the basis of cathodes according reported papers), (38−55) these two battery systems exhibit impressive voltage (∼1.4–1.7 V) and energy density (∼100–150 Wh kg–1).

In addition to high energy densities, both Zn@C/NVP@C and Zn@C/NVPF@C batteries also exhibit good cyclability (Figure 5d). The capacity of the Zn@C/NVP@C system is slightly decreased from 89 mAh g–1 in the first cycle to 58 mAh g–1 of the 1000th cycle at 2 A g–1, reflecting 65.2% capacity retention. In the case of the Zn@C/NVPF@C battery, the capacity is stabilized at 44.5 mAh g–1 with nearly ∼100% capacity retention after 1000 cycles. Furthermore, from the charge/discharge curves and cycled electrodes, no overpotential increase, dendritic Zn formation, or NVPF@C structural change are observed (Figures S13 and S14). In contrast, a battery built from bare Zn foil and NVPF@C (designated as Zn/NVPF@C) only sustains less than 100 cycles prior to internal short. These results indicate the high stability of Zn@C/NVP@C and Zn@C/NVPF@C systems, which reconfirms that Zn@C can withstand long-term cycling in battery applications and demonstrates the feasibility of construct advanced aqueous Na–Zn batteries.

For the practical validity to be tested further, a soft package battery was assembled. Taking the Zn@C/NVPF@C system as an example, a pouch battery (see details in Experimental Section) with NVPF@C mass loading of 28.3 mg cm–2 was illustrated and is demonstrated in Figure 6a and b. Interestingly, the pouch battery successfully drives an LED light (threshold voltage of ∼1.4 V) at different bending modes (Figure 6c–f). After being activated at 0.025 A g–1, this pouch battery can achieve 1.57 V voltage and 71 Wh kg–1 energy density (for both Zn@C and NVPF@C) at 0.117 A g –1 (Figure 6g and h), which is also comparable with recently reported aqueous batteries (Table 1). (16,19,42,43,56−67) Furthermore, the pouch battery retains 85.2% capacity retention after 100 cycles (Figure 6g) and shows stable charge/discharge plateaus (Figure 6h).

In summary, a facile, scalable, and extendable strategy of carbon coating Zn foil to inhibit Zn dendrite is developed and demonstrated effective. The stable plating/stripping and improved Zn electrodeposition kinetics can be ascribed to the uniform charge distribution and abundant accommodation for Zn deposition after introduction of the carbon layer. Moreover, the use of 8 M NaClO4 + 0.4 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 concentrated electrolyte can expand the electrochemical window (up to ∼2.5 V) and reduce the cathode dissolution. By virtue of its rational design, we have successfully demonstrated aqueous hybrid Na–Zn batteries with Zn@C anode, 8 M NaClO4 + 0.4 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 concentrated electrolyte, and NVPF@C and NVP@C cathodes, realizing high voltage (1.68 V for NVPF@C; 1.36 V for NVP@C) and energy density (100 Wh kg–1 for NVPF@C; 150 Wh kg–1 for NVP@C) as well as long durability (100 and 65.2% capacity retention for NVPF@C and NVP@C after 1000 cycles, respectively). Furthermore, an energy density of 71 Wh kg–1 is also demonstrated in the Zn@C/NVPF@C full battery. We believe that these strategies and key findings are extendable to create high-performance aqueous batteries.