The catalytic activity of complex phosphates of the NASICON structure (composition Li1 ± xZr2– xMx(P1–хMoхO4)3 and HZr2(PO4)3) with the heterovalent substitution of zirconium for indium and niobium or phosphorus for molybdenum and with a particle size of 50–300 nm is studied in transformations of primary and secondary propanols. Heterovalent doping is shown to be prevalent in its effect on the activity and selectivity of catalysts obtained due to both a change in acidity and the redox properties of compounds. A significant difference in the activities of dehydration and dehydrogenation reactions between primary and secondary alcohols is found which is associated with the steric difficulties of these processes. The conversion of propanol-1 and propanol-2 depending on LiZr2(PO4)3, Li0.5Zr1.5Nb0.5(PO4)3, and HZr2(PO4)3 catalysts results in 100% selectivity according to propene. Doping with indium results in approximately 75% selectivity according to propanal.

A common trend over the last decades has been the transition to ecologically pure technologies and, in particular, technologies of biomass processing. In connection with this, a search for selective catalysts to transform light alcohols and their mixtures obtained as a result of biomass fermentation is promising [1]. Catalytic transformations of aliphatic C1–C4 alcohols occur with the use of metals as catalysts applied to a variety of oxides [2] and mixed metal oxides [3], as well as phosphates [4, 5] and zeolytes [6]. Products of these processes (olefins, aldehydes, ketones, and simple ethers) are of significant interest because of their possible applications. However, the transformation of light alcohols has also drawn the attention of researchers because the yield of an individual product can be selectively controlled. Reactions of alcohol dehydration usually run according to the following mechanisms of elimination: E1, E2, and E1cB. In this case, normally, catalysts are not absolutely selective for all of these directions, and their selectivity depends on the distribution of acidic–basic centers of different types on a catalyst surface. For instance, olefins appear according to the E1 mechanism when the number of acidic centers is large, while the E1cB mechanism results in olefins and dehydration products synthesized on acidic–basic centers. In the case of oxides and phosphates, the ratio of these reactions is also determined by acidic–basic and redox centers on a catalyst surface [5, 7]. Recently, among phosphates, crystal backbone compounds with an open structure similar to zeolytes have been found to transform C1–C4 alcohols. Complex phosphates of the NASICON type (NZP NA Super Ionic CONductor) represent compounds of the general formula AxB2(ZO4)3 where A is alkaline or alkaline earth elements, B is a polyvalent element (Zr, Ti, Sc, and other), and Z is phosphorus or silicium. This structure consists of BO6 octahedrons and ZO4tetrahedrons connected by their vertices (Fig. 1), and the cavities in this backbone contain cations [8–10]. The broad range of isomorphic ion substitution in all crystallographic positions of these structures makes it possible to vary their properties such as polarity, acidity, redox characteristics, and others and, nevertheless, have their original crystallographic structure retained [9]. This is associated with the thermal and chemical resistance of these materials. Subsequently, many phosphates of the NASICON type of different compositions are active and stable catalysts of various reactions [11–18], in particular, dehydration and the dehydrogenation of C1–C4 alcohols [10–12, 14–18], paraffin isomerization [13], and membrane catalysis [19–21]. Previously, our studies on the catalytic activity of complex lithium–zirconium phosphates with the NASICON structure, which were doped with indium, niobium, and molybdenum, revealed that the key role in the prevalent direction of methanol and ethanol transformations is played by the ability of polyvalent dopants to change superficial oxidation degrees and acidity types. For instance, niobium doping increased the yields of ethers and ethylene, while molybdenum and indium doping elevated yields of aldehydes, C4 hydrocarbons, and hydrogen. Transformations of aliphatic C3 alcohols also can follow along two principal pathways: olefin or ether dehydration. In this case, the propanol-2 transformation on different catalysts can be considered a test for the presence of acidic centers of definite types on their surface [23–28]. The goal of this study is to investigate the catalytic properties of zirconium acidic phosphate and lithiumzirconium phosphates with the NASICON structure, which are doped with indium, niobium, and molybdenum, when they are used in transformation of aliphatic C3 alcohols of propanol-1 and propanol-2.

The synthesis of the compounds LiZr2(PO4)3, Li1 ± 0.5Zr1.5M0.5(PO4)3 (M = In or Nb), and Li0.5Zr2P2.5Mo0.5O12, designated as LZP, LZInP, LZNbP, and LZPMo, respectively, was carried out by the Pechini method [29, 30]. The HZr2(PO4)3 (HZP) sample was synthesized by the hydrothermal method. These procedures have been described previously [22]. The specific surface area of samples was determined by the BET method with a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 unit of the Common Facility Center of the Institute of Petrochemical Synthesis, Russian Academy of Sciences. To degas the samples, they were heated to 350°C and incubated for 1 h. Analysis was performed in the region of 0.01 to 0.99 of differential pressure (p/po). Microscopic images were obtained with a Carl Zeiss NVision 40 scanning electron microscope and a device for element analysis. Ratios of acidic centers and their strength were estimated according to Lewis and Brønsted by IR spectroscopy with pyridine adsorption. The relative quantity was estimated according to the ratio of bands of ν19bν(CN) ~ 1450 cm–1 (oscillation band, characteristic of centers with Lewis acidity) and ν19b ν(CN) ~ 1545 cm–1 (oscillation band, characteristic of centers with Brønsted acidity). The strength of Lewis centers was estimated by the shift of the 1450 cm–1ν19bν(CN) band (for more details see [22]). The catalytic properties of the samples that were synthesized were studied in a quartz flow reactor in helium or argon flow containing the vapor of alcohol in question. Reaction products were analyzed with the use of a Crustallux 4000 M chromatograph and a thermal conductivity detector on columns of HayeSep T 60/80 mesh (3 m, 150°С, 30 mL/min, He),СKТ-6 (3 m, 150°С, 30 mL/min, He), and Mol Seive 5А (3 m, 25°С, 10 mL/min, Ar). Chromatograms were treated with NETChrom program package. The error of determination of chromatographic concentration constituted ±5%. To perform experiments, a catalyst (0.3 g) was mixed with ground quarts (d = 250–500μm) and placed in a reactor made of a 25 cm quarts tube of 6 mm inner diameter so that the length of the catalytic layer constituted 10 cm. Propanol-1 and propanol-2 were used as reagents. Carrier gas was flown through a thermostatic bubbler containing alcohol at a volume rate of 20 mL/min to create the necessary concentration of alcohol vapors in a gas mixture. The bubbler temperature was 20°C for propyl and isopropyl acohols. Conversion was calculated according to the following formula: whereϕini andϕcur are initial and current volume fractions of alcohol vapors in a loading mixture, respectively. The selectivity to various products was calculated as follows: (2) whereϕini,ϕcur, nprod, and nalcohol are the numbers of carbon atoms in product and alcohol molecules, respectively.

The samples obtained by the Pechini method were single-phase and belonged to the monoclinic system, while the sample hydrothermally belonged to the rhombohedral system and was also the single-phase one [22]. All transition elements that compose the catalysts have the highest oxidation degree, which is confirmed, for example, by the absence of specific staining. According to scanning electron microscopy, the samples obtained by the Pachini method were particle aggregates with an average size that varied from 50 to 200 nm (Fig. 2a). The sample obtained hydrothermally consisted of rhombohedrons of approximately 150–250 nm (Fig. 2b). Measurements of the specific surface area showed that the Pechini samples had approximately similar specific surface areas, which constituted around 20 m2/g, while those of the hydrothermal samples were around 10 m2/g (Table 1). The basic physicochemical characteristics of the catalyst samples are represented in Table 1. All catalysts that were synthesized turned out to be active in the conversion of aliphatic C3 alcohols, ensuring their almost complete transition (Fig. 3). The temperature of the start point of propanol-1 transition in all samples, with the exception of LZInP (Fig. 3a) was, approximately, 50°C higher than that for propanol-2 (Fig. 3b). The range of transition activity of propanol-1 is Li0.5Zr1.5Nb0.5(PO4)3 > HZr2(PO4)3 > Li0.5Zr2P2.5Mo0.5O12 ≫ LiZr2(PO4)3 ≫ Li1.5Zr1.5In0.5(PO4)3. For propanol-2, this series proved to be somewhat different: Li0.5Zr1.5Nb0.5(PO4)3 > Li0.5Zr2P2.5Mo0.5O12 > HZr2(PO4)3 > LiZr2(PO4)3≫ Li1.5Zr1.5In0.5(PO4)3. This difference resulted from the different acidity of catalysts and different dehydration processes associated with their surfaces (for more detail, see the selectivity of product formation). The following pathways are possible in the course of the transitions of primary and secondary aliphatic C3 alcohols. Intramolecular dehydration: (3)→ + Δ = + 3 2 2 3 6 2 0 298 CH CH CH OH C H H O, H 36.11, (4) Intermolecular dehydration: (5) The catalysts LZP, LZNbP, and HZP dehydrate propanol-1 to propene with a selectivity of 100%, which is consistent with the results of high contents of Brønsted acidic centers on their surfaces [22] (see Table 1). The reason for this lies in the absence of alternative pathways of this process because of the absence of redox reactions on these catalysts, which can only participate in the dehydration process. At the same time, the incapability of ether formation, which is thermodynamically more advantageous (see Eqs. (3)–(6)), is most likely a consequence of kinetic obstacles of this process. Conversely, the transition of propanol-1 with the LiZInP and LiZPMo catalysts leads to both dehydration with the propene formation and dehydrogenization resulting in propanal (Fig. 4). All this is consistent with the high con-tent of strong Lewis acidic centers located on the catalyst surface, which are active in dehydration processes, and with a possibility of doping ions to participate in redox transformations [22]. Moreover, the LiZInP catalyst, according to the IR spectroscopy of pyridine adsorption [22], does not contain Brønsted acidic centers on its surface (see Table 1), which makes it significantly less active in dehydration than in dehydrogenation (compare curves for propene LiZInP and propanal LiZInP; Fig. 4). In this case, the LiZPMo catalyst demonstrates dehydration properties at lower temperatures compared with LiZInP (Fig. 4), because molybdenum becomes more easily reduced than indium. However, its selectivity toward propanal is drastically decreased because LiZPMo also has Brønsted acidity. It should be noted that the temperature curves of product distribution for propanol-2 conversion on the LZPMo catalyst, are similar to those for ethanol transformations on this catalyst [22]. This is true if C4 hydrocarbons observed in the ethanol transformations are products of further ethylene transformation. In this case, the activity of the catalyst doped with molybdenum is higher in the transformation of ethanol than in that of propanol-1. Dehydration with the selective propene formation was the only process observed when propanol-1 and propanol-2 were conversed on the LZrP, LZNbP, and HZP catalysts. The sample doped with indium demonstrated that the dehydration of propanol-2 to propene (Fig. 5; curve 1) was coupled with dehydrogenation to acetone (Fig. 5; curve for acetone (LZInP)) with a maximum ketone selectivity of 64% at 390°C. The conversion of propanol-2 on the LZPMo catalyst runs also at lower temperatures when compared with LZInP. In this case, the former promoted not only propene formation, but also small amounts of diisopropyl ether during dehydration (see Eq. (6)) with a selectivity of no greater than 12% (Fig. 5; curve for ether (LZPMo)). No dehydrogenation activity was observed at all for LZPMo. The dehydrogenation activity of the Li1.5Zr1.5In0.5(PO4)3 sample was lower for propanol-2 than for propanol-1. It is highly likely that the reason for this lies in substantial steric obstacles of coordination of the carbon atom encircled by two high-volume СН3 groups. This does determine the significant differences in dehydrogenation reactions of primary and secondary alcohols. It thus has been shown that the transformations of propanol-1 and propanol-2 on the LZP, LZNbP, and HZP catalysts resulted in propene with the 100% selectivity in the entire temperature range of the reactions. For propanol-1, this range was shifted by 50°C to higher temperatures when compared with the transformation range of propanol-2. Doping of LZP with indium makes it possible at temperatures above 350°С to stably obtain propanal with a selectivity of approximately 75%.

The transformation specificity of aliphatic C3 alcohols on the NASICON type catalysts studied, as well as the conversion specificity of their homologs, C1–C2 alcohols, is determined by not only the thermodynamic factors, but also by the capability of dop- ing elements to change the oxidation degree. The adsorption of alcohols on Lewis acidic centers via the oxygen of the hydroxyl group also contributes to these processes. The distinctive differences in the activity of catalysts in the dehydrogenation reactions of primary and secondary C3 alcohols are observed, which is associated with the steric obstacles referred to the latter. The conversion of propanol-1 and propanol-2 on the LZP, LZNbP, and HZP catalysts results in propene yield with 100% selectivity in the entire temperature range of the reaction. At the same time, doping with indium makes it possible to obtain propanal from propanol-1 with a selectivity of around 75% at temperatures greater than 350°C.

