Lithium-containing NASICON-structured materials are a promising class of solid-state Li-ion conductors for application in electrochemical energy storage devices. Amongst the wide variety of possible compositions the highest conductivities are reported for materials according to the formula , in which the substitution of tetravalent with trivalent metal cations leads to incorporation of additional lithium ions and a higher mobility of the charge carriers.

For this study, we surveyed more than 300 research articles about Li-NASICON materials. The relations between composition, structure and conductivity are evaluated to give a comprehensive overview of published data on synthesized compositions. A special focus is laid on Li1+xAlxTi2-x (PO4)3 as the single most conductive and investigated material.

The collected conductivities show a wide scattering in a range of 10-10 S cm-1 up to 10-3 S cm-1. The highest values are obtained for materials with M(III) to M(IV) cation ratios of x = 0.3–0.4. Further characteristics for high conductivity are evaluated and the rhombohedral structure as well as cation sizes of around 50–60 p.m. are identified as crucial prerequisites, favoring titanium-based compositions. Considering the evaluated data, selected compositions are suggested for further investigation to support future research.

To improve the usability of fluctuating energy sources, application in portable consumer electronics and the development of electromobility, electrical energy storage must be improved. Among the commercially available batteries, lithium-ion cells provide the highest energy density and output voltage. Typically, these cells use lithium salts dissolved in propylene carbonate as liquid electrolytes. The main disadvantages involved in this concept are limited operating temperature and safety concerns due to the flammable electrolyte. One promising approach for improvement are solid-state batteries, as they could provide better safety aspects, longer lifespan and wider range of operation temperature. Combining the advantages of the solid-state battery concept and the lithium-ion charge carrier as an all-solid-state lithium-ion battery is desired. Advanced approaches aim to incorporate metallic lithium anodes and lithium-air batteries with a higher cell voltage and higher specific energy. The feasibility of these concepts depends on the applied solid-state electrolyte, for which a wide range of materials is being considered [1]. One of these materials are lithium-containing NASICON materials.

The term NASICON denotes a class of Na+ Super Ionic Conductors, and was first mentioned by Hong and Goodenough in 1976 [2,3] for the solid solution Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12. The material was developed to provide an ionic conductor, which is stable in air and allows migration of the charge carriers in all three dimensions. Today, the term is broadly applied to a group of phosphates with the general formula AMM′ (PO4)3, where the A-site is usually occupied by alkali ions or alkaline-earth ions. The M and M′ sites are occupied by various transition metal ions with oxidation states between II and V. A review of a wide range of compositions is given in Ref. [4].

Shortly after the discovery of the NASICON structure, lithium was substituted for sodium as a charge carrier [5,6]. Over the last four decades, there has been extensive research on this class of materials, mostly because of its promising characteristics as an electrolyte in electrochemical applications. The present work therefore aims to provide a comprehensive overview of published data on synthesized compositions. The electrical and structural properties of these Li-NASICON materials and the relations between the relevant characteristics are evaluated to assist further research.

The most prevalent crystal structure for NASICON materials is the rhombohedral modification with space group , as shown in Fig. 1. Orthorhombic, monoclinic and rarely triclinic variations are reported, depending on composition, synthesis conditions and temperature. The authors regard only the rhombohedral and the closely related triclinic  and monoclinic Cc structures as NASICON materials in the strict sense, because materials with different space groups, especially orthorhombic types, belong to the Sc2(WO4)3-type structure [7,8].

The oxygen is shown in red, blue octahedra and purple tetrahedra correspond to (Al/Ti)O6 and PO4 units, respectively. Lithium ions are shown in green at the M1 position with Wyckoff position 6b (Occ. = 1). The top half shows the additional lithium at the M2 site in 18e position (Occ. = 0.14), the bottom half at M3 in 36f position (Occ. = 0.07). The illustration was generated with VESTA 3 [11]. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)

The NASICON structure consists of a skeleton of vertex-sharing PO4 tetrahedra and MO6 octahedra, which provide a network of three-dimensional pathways for the lithium ions. This skeleton allows for the high degree of stability and flexibility of NASICON materials and a multitude of compositions [9]. There are two main cavities for lithium in the structures labelled M1 and M2. The M1 site is coordinated by six oxygen ions between two MO6 octahedra along the c-axis. It lies at Wyckoff position 6b (0 0 0) with site symmetry  and is the most stable and most commonly occupied position. The larger eightfold-coordinated M2 site lies between two M1 sites at Wyckoff position 18e (x 0 ¼) with site symmetry 2. Six M2 sites concurrently surround each M1 site, and, accordingly, the multiplicity of the M2 site is three times that of M1.

For most stoichiometric LiM2(PO4)3 compounds, lithium is located exactly at the M1 site, while LiZr2(PO4)3 shows a very distorted tetrahedral coordination around the center of the M1 site [12]. Substitution with trivalent metal ions according to the formula  generally leads to additional occupation of further positions by lithium. These positions were first assumed to be identical to those in the original NASICON with Wyckoff position 18e, although the M2 cavity is very large in size compared to the ionic radius of Li+. Current research, however, found a new position to be in better agreement with the measured data for most compositions. A splitting of the M2 position into two new positions surrounding the original site results in the M3 site at Wyckoff position 36f within the M2 cavity [10,13]. In the endmembers of M(III)/M(IV)-substitution series with x = 2, i.e. the fully Li-intercalated phases with three lithium atoms per formula unit, only the M3 site was found to be populated [14,15].

This review includes a total of 181 different compositions from 78 references over a timespan of more than 30 years. All materials correspond to the general formula . Compositions employing substitution of Si for P or Na and Mg for Li, materials with additional binders like lithium salts as well as amorphous materials were excluded, as they are quite rare and would only obstruct the comparative analysis of the data. The conductivities at room temperature range from insulating 1⋅10−10 S cm−1 to 1.32⋅10−3 S cm−1.

Fig. 2 gives an overview of the most investigated subgroup with the formula . Here, trivalent M cations are substituted for the tetravalent cation, introducing additional lithium ions and modifying the skeleton structure.

In addition to the ionic radii, the figure shows the maximum total conductivity reported at room temperature as well as the number of references for each combination and the number of different M(III)/M(IV) ratios found in literature. Conductivities at higher temperatures were extrapolated to room temperature using the Arrhenius equation:(1)with σ being the conductivity, T the absolute temperature, R the gas constant, Ea the activation energy and A the pre-exponential or frequency factor including the number of charge carriers, jump distance and attempt frequency.

Some of the materials show different activation energies for different ranges of temperature. These changes mostly occur around 100 °C–280 °C and are caused by phase transitions (see e.g. Refs. [17,18]). Therefore, conductivities were only calculated for data from the same temperature range to use the correct activation energies and obtain reliable values. Due to the limited number of significant digits and the sensitivity of the exponential function, the calculated values are still prone to inaccuracies and should be handled with caution. Therefore, in the following diagrams, the calculated values are distinguished from published data. In Table 1, Table 2, Table 3, Table 4, Table 5, Table 6, Table 7, only directly obtained values of the maximum conductivity at room temperature and the minimum activation energy reported for each composition are given.

From Fig. 2, it is apparent that lithium aluminum titanium phosphate (LATP),  is the best conducting  material and it is most often investigated. It is examined here as a detailed example because it not only provides one of the highest ionic conductivities at room temperature but also showcases typical substitution behavior.

The highest conductivity value for LATP of 1.32⋅10−3 S cm−1 by Su et al. [81] was published in 2013 for samples prepared by the sol-gel method and conventional sintering. The next best value of 1.20⋅10−3 S cm−1 was reported by Aono et al. in 1991 [79] using a solid state reaction and conventional sintering.

The next best conducting material is , which itself is a variation of LATP and has a value of 1.29⋅10−3 S cm−1 [69]. The following materials also derive from LTP by substitution with M(III) cations. These cations are Sc3+ > Y3+ > In3+ > Cr3+ in the order of decreasing conductivity.

The partial substitution of Ti(IV) with Al(III) can enhance the ionic conductivity of  by several orders of magnitude, as shown in Fig. 3(a). The maximum conductivity is observed at x = 0.3. This maximum in conductivity corresponds to a minimum in the activation energy, as shown in Fig. 3(b). Consequently, the high conductivity is not only due to a higher concentration of charge carriers but also due to a lowering of the activation energy. This is presumably caused by the occupation of Li2 or other lithium sites [102,103] or by the creation of vacancies at the Li1 site [36,104]. The decrease in conductivity beyond x = 0.3 has been attributed to lithium ions preferably taking up sites next to aluminum for charge balancing. This would subsequently lead to lithium trapping as a function of the substitution according to a first principles study by Lang et al. [105].

It should be mentioned, that Fig. 3 shows significant scattering especially for the most populated area at x = 0.3. This can be explained by the fact that the diagrams summarize data from over 30 years, with widely varying synthesis and preparation techniques and conditions. The use of the sol-gel process and ball milling, in particular, represent substantial progress, as the products are more active in sintering. The ability to use lower sintering temperatures, while still obtaining dense samples reduces the possibility of lithium evaporating and thus deviation of the stoichiometry. It has been observed that the aluminum substitution itself also improves the sinterability of the material and leads to less porosity [106]. Unfortunately, only a very small part of the collected data includes information on porosity or verification of the intended stoichiometry, although these factors severely influence the total conductivity as they reduce the effective cross-section of a sample or the amount of charge carriers, respectively. The impact of the porosity is demonstrated in a microstructure study by Schroeder et al., which examined  samples with porosities of approx. 40% and total conductivities at room temperature of around 1⋅10−8 S cm−1 [33]. Although dense samples are intended in most cases, porosities of up to 16% in LATP [37] and over 40% in other Li-NASICON materials [73] have been reported. The big deviation of the calculated value of 1.78⋅10−3 S cm−1 especially showcases that data calculated according to eq. (1) should be regarded carefully. As it can show wide scattering due to the exponential nature of the Arrhenius equation and the limited number of significant digits available as input data.

For polycrystalline materials, the total conductivity depends on the conductivity of the bulk material and the grain boundaries. Several studies have used impedance spectroscopy to separate bulk and grain boundary conductivity for LATP and the results are given in Fig. 4. Both bulk and total conductivity still have maximum values at x = 0.3, while the relative enhancement of the total conductivity with increasing x is much higher than that of the bulk conductivity, as shown in Fig. 4(a). Thus, the grain boundaries are a limiting factor for the total conductivity. This is further emphasized in Fig. 4(b), where the ratio of total and bulk conductivity is given. It can be seen that this ratio varies over more than two orders of magnitude with a maximum around x = 0.3. Considering the relatively small changes in total conductivity, the main effect results from a change in the grain boundaries of the material. Beyond the maximum, there is a steep drop, which contradicts the aforementioned process of Li trapping, leading to a decrease of σ above x = 0.3, as it applies to bulk conductivity. In polycrystalline samples, the formation of insulating phases, due to the solubility limit of aluminum, has a dominant impact on conductivity for materials with x > 0.4 as shown by Arbi et al. [77].

Some other interesting considerations about the transport mechanism in LATP can be derived from the distribution of Li on its different positions. As shown in Table 8 the M1 site remains fully occupied for the whole substitution series of single crystals. This only allows for a conduction mechanism with two lithium ions moving simultaneously. The polycrystalline samples show a more complex pattern with partial redistribution of the lithium population from the M1 to the M3 site. For the samples with x = 0.2, 0.4 and 0.5, a decreasing M1 population can be observed with increasing lithium content. This has been suggested to be caused by a higher electrostatic repulsion between Li ions with a higher lithium content and consequent destabilizing of the M1 site [104]. Notably, the sample with x = 0.4 shows a distribution unlike the other polycrystalline samples with an almost fully occupied M1 site. Supposedly, the different distributions are due to different sample preparations. However, no distinct correlation with synthetic route or thermal treatment could be identified. The conductivity of the polycrystalline samples, however, is comparable to the single crystals to such a degree, that a different transport mechanism is highly unlikely. Therefore, the mechanism of two lithium ions moving at once can be assumed for LATP in general, regardless of crystallinity and Al content. Alternatively, the site occupancies of single-crystalline and polycrystalline materials indicate a different transport mechanism with very similar ionic conductivity.

To investigate the correlation between the composition and performance of the material, the conductivity at room temperature is shown as a function of the amount of lithium per formula unit in Fig. 5. Although the data is widely scattered, a maximum at 1.3 lithium ions per formula unit can be observed, in agreement with the conductivity maximum for LATP. The upper limit of conductivities increases from 1.0 to 1.3 Li per formula unit by two orders of magnitude and then decreases again with higher lithium content. A correlation between the lithium content and the structure of the materials is also apparent. While the rhombohedral lattice or triclinic  and monoclinic Cc modifications are preferred below 2.0 Li per formula unit, the other structure types are favored for higher Li fractions.

Dependence of the total conductivity at room temperature on the Li+ amount per formula unit. Black triangles represent compositions of rhombohedral structure and space group Cc or , red circles those of different structures. Open symbols represent values calculated via Arrhenius equation, filled symbols published data. The inset shows the same data on a linear scale. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)

The radii of the M cations represent a main influence on the nature of the skeleton structure. The conductivity is plotted as a function of the effective ionic radius and the difference in ionic radii of the M cations (Fig. 6).

Total conductivity at room temperature as a function of (a) the effective ionic radius and (b) of the difference in ionic radii of the M cations. Black triangles represent compositions of rhombohedral structure and space group Cc or , red circles those of different structures. Open symbols represent values calculated via Arrhenius equation, filled symbols published data. The inset shows the same data on a logarithmic scale. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)

The effective ionic radius as used by Guin et al. [108] is the weighted arithmetic average of the ionic radii of the M cations.

The diagrams show maximum conductivity for reff of 50–60 p.m. and preferably small difference in size between the M cations. This is caused mainly by the high conductivities of LATP and the other LTP derivatives, which form peak-like arrangements in Fig. 6(a). In Fig. 6(b), there are distinct peaks, as there is no offset on the x-axis due to different stoichiometries. But unfortunately alongside, its potential for high ionic conductivity the multivalent nature of titanium can result in low (electro-)chemical stability in contact with metallic lithium. This behavior is already known from other solid electrolytes [109] and has been shown for the case of LATP by Imanishi et al. [110] and Zhang et al. [111]. Different kinds of materials are considered as protection layers like lithium phosphorus oxynitride (LIPON) [112].

While there are contradicting results on Li-NASICON materials containing Germanium [19,113], LiZr2(PO4)3 doped with yttrium, strontium or calcium has also been reported to be unstable in contact with metallic lithium [114,115]. Pristine LiZr2(PO4)3 however, shows a different behavior and develops a Li-conducting passivation layer comparable to the solid-electrolyte interface in common lithium-ion cells with liquid electrolytes [116]. In fact, for many solid electrolytes that are perceived to be stable in contact with metallic lithium this stability is not thermodynamically intrinsic but of kinetic origin [117].

While the maxima in both diagrams are located in the lower region of the x-axis, this area also shows the largest scattering as emphasized by the logarithmic insets. Proceeding to higher values for the effective ionic radius and the difference in ionic radii, the maximum conductivity values decrease slightly, but the minimum values clearly improve.

To further examine the influence of the structure, the impact of the lattice parameters and the ratio between lattice parameters a and c on the activation energy for materials with rhombohedral structure has been investigated. While there is no clear trend apparent between activation energy and single lattice parameters, Fig. 7 shows that the activation energy generally decreases with an increasing a/c ratio. This wide-scale comparison agrees with the results of Rettenwander et al. [25] who observed that the a/c ratio and bulk conductivity increase simultaneously in a LATP substitution series.

The relation between activation energy and conductivity is depicted in Fig. 8 according to equation (1). While a clear trend of increasing conductivity with decreasing activation energy is apparent, the correlation is not as evident as generally expected. This further illustrates the scattering of the collected data.

Conductivity at room temperature as a function of the activation energy. Black triangles represent compositions of rhombohedral structure and space group Cc or , red circles those of different structure. Open symbols represent values calculated by Arrhenius equation, filled symbols published data. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)

Although a certain scattering is expected due to variations in structure and composition represented by different pre-exponential factors in the Arrhenius equation, the extent found in Fig. 8 is assumed to be mainly caused by differences in sample quality. Additionally, this graph most clearly shows an advantage of rhombohedral lattice or triclinic  and monoclinic Cc modifications in terms of activation energy and conductivity compared to other structures.

More than three hundred research articles about Li-NASICON-type materials were screened for this review. After sorting for information on composition, structure and conductivity, we compiled this overview from 78 sources to cover the properties of the most important materials.

Criteria for high ionic conductivity, which we identified, are the substitution of  compositions with trivalent metals and a content of 1.3–1.4 lithium ions per formula unit. This concentration results in the maximum possible amount of lithium on positions providing high conductivity, without resulting in secondary insulating phases at the grain boundaries. The ideal size of M cations is 50–60 p.m. Furthermore, the best conducting materials crystallize in a rhombohedral structure.

A main hindrance in analyzing the data was the importance of porosity and true stoichiometry and the lack of references reporting these. These are major factors for the effective cross-section or amount of charge carriers, which directly influence the conductivity of the respective sample. It is therefore strongly suggested that such information be categorically included. As these factors strongly depend on synthesis and sample preparation, a thorough review of selected materials employing modern methods is suggested. Particularly the materials closest to LATP in conductivity, namely other LTP derivatives with M(III) = Sc3+, Y3+, In3+ and Cr3+, should be re-evaluated. A promising approach would be to use optimized sample preparation and focus on the conductivity and solubility limit of the M(III) cation.

A future application of Li-NASICON materials may include contacting these materials to metallic lithium. It would therefore be interesting to investigate the need for an additional protective layer or the application of interface materials serving as an electrode/electrolyte interphase comparable with the situation in liquid electrolyte Li-ion batteries. The possible use of Li-NASICON materials as a cathode material is another interesting field, although materials with valence-changing cations such as those with high Fe content tend to have an orthorhombic structure and a relatively low Li-ion conductivity. The same also applies to Cr and In. Finally, the processability of the materials to thin layers in general should be mentioned, as this is a relatively unexplored field of research despite its essential relevance.