Despite the impressive progress in the development of sodium-air batteries for energy storage, the current sodium-air batteries are still far from practical application in electric vehicles. A proposed sodium-air battery was successfully constructed using a NASICON structured solid electrolyte and a liquid anode, which demonstrated low voltage gap, reversibility, and high safety. The liquid anode was fabricated by dissolving sodium metal into a mixed solution of biphenyl and ethers. Due to the fantastic conductivity of the liquid anode, the battery exhibits a high discharge voltage of 2.88 V and a low voltage gap of 0.14 V at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2, which leads to a high round trip efficiency of 95.3%. In addition, due to the high ionic conductivity of the liquid anode and low interfacial resistance between the liquid anode and solid electrolyte, the battery demonstrated a power density of 39 mW cm−2, the highest value to date for alkaline metal-air batteries. Furthermore, the battery exhibited good cycling performance, and no significant degradation in energy efficiency was observed during the whole charge-discharge process. More importantly, no strong reaction was observed between the liquid anode and water, which significantly improved the safety of the battery. The highly conductive liquid anode can be extended to other sodium-based batteries. Therefore, this work provides an avenue for exploring new types of highly safe liquid anode batteries, which is a potential candidate for next-generation energy storage technology.

Rechargeable alkali metal-air batteries are regarded as promising technology for electrochemical energy conversion because of the low cost and extremely high energy density [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6]. Although lithium-air batteries have a relatively high energy density, the low natural abundance of lithium makes applications of these batteries in electric vehicles difficult on a large scale [7], [8]. Therefore, sodium–air batteries have been regarded as one of the most promising candidates for next-generation energy storage technology due to its high energy density and the abundance of metallic sodium on earth [9], [10], [11]. Sodium-air batteries with Na metal anodes and air cathodes are highly promising low-cost electrochemical energy storage systems.

Generally, Na-air batteries are classified based on the electrolytes used in the system. These batteries could either be non-aqueous or hybrid (aqueous), with reactions as follows:

Non-aqueous Na-air batteries have attracted the attention of scientists for many years due to their high theoretical capacity and low overpotential [12], [13]. However, experimental results demonstrate that non-aqueous Na-air batteries present significant limitations in terms of practical energy and capacity because of the insolubility of the discharge products (e.g., Na2O and Na2O2) in the organic electrolyte which results in clogging of the porous air electrode [13], [14], [15], [16], [17]. To solve this, scholars have developed hybrid Na-air batteries by using aqueous electrolyte (NaOH) to overcome the blocking effect of insoluble discharge products [18], [19]. In addition, hybrid Na-air batteries possess a higher standard voltage of 3.11 V, specific capacity of 838 mAh g −1, and lower overpotential than non-aqueous Na-air batteries [18], [19].

Despite these advantages, the traditional sodium-air batteries constructed using metallic sodium experience many obstacles, including the formation of Na dendrites safety hazards upon reaction with water and oxygen, and SEI formation [10], [12], [13], [18]. Metallic sodium tends to form dendrites during the deposition/stripping process, which increases the probability of an internal short circuit, a well-known safety issue in practical application [10], [12], [13], [18]. In addition, these batteries have a high risk of explosion due to the reactivity of sodium with water and oxygen. The sodium anode also changes shape and volume during the charge-discharge process, which causes the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) to break down and form new SEI on any freshly exposed sodium surface [10], [12], [13], [18]. By this process, both the sodium and electrolyte are consumed, leading to low energy efficiencies. Although some strategies have been proposed to solve the sodium dendrites, such as employing alloy anodes and using additives in organic electrolytes, these are still ineffective in fully alleviating the problem [10], [12], [13], [18], [20], [21]. What's more, large overpotential caused by the sluggish kinetics limited the energy efficiency significantly for a typical hybrid sodium-air battery. Recently, Hu et al. proposed a class of liquid for Na-S battery, which not only solves the dendrite of metallic sodium and enhances the cycling performance, but also improves the safety issues. The liquid anode provides a new strategy to explore high energy density and safer battery [22].

Herein, we present a new high performance rechargeable sodium-air battery by utilizing an organic liquid anode in ambient environment for the first time. The liquid anode can be prepared simply by dissolving sodium metal into a solution of aromatic hydrocarbon and ethers, which act as both the liquid anode and organic electrolyte. The construction of the proposed sodium-air battery is as follows: liquid anode | solid electrolyte | catholyte | catalytic air electrode. This battery not only demonstrated good reversibility, but also improved power density and safety. A low voltage gap of 0.14 V at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2 was observed. This study indicates the possibility of using sodium-air batteries with a liquid anode to meet the demand of energy storage.

The liquid anode was prepared by dissolving sodium metal into a solution of aromatic hydrocarbon and ether. In a typical method, 0.23 g metallic sodium and 1.54 g biphenyl (BP) were dissolved into 10 ml dimethoxyethane (DME) solvent to obtain 1 M Na-BP-DME solution [22]. The molar ratio of Na: BP was fixed at 1:1. A 5 M Na-BP-DME solution was prepared by the same procedure. The obtained 1 M and 5 M Na-BP-DME liquid anodes possess high ionic conductivities of 1.2 × 10−2 S cm−1 and 1.7 × 10−2 S cm−1 at room temperature, respectively [22]. The liquid anode material was sealed within the stainless steel anode of the battery and used without further modifications.

In this work, 1 M NaOH and 40 wt% Pt/C (Junji JJ040, China) was employed as catholyte and the catalyst, respectively, to construct the proposed sodium-air battery: Na-BP-DME | NASICON | 1 M NaOH | Pt/C. The catalyst ink was made by sonicating 20 mg 40 wt% Pt/C in 1 ml water and 1 ml ethanol with a drop of 5 wt% PTFE as binder. The air electrode was then obtained by dropping the catalyst ink onto carbon paper (Toray 060, Japan). The catalyst loading and binder content in the air electrode were 2 mg cm−2 and 20 wt%, respectively. The gas diffusion layer was prepared by a previously reported method [4].

Fig. 1a shows the schematic of the proposed sodium-air battery, which is composed of a liquid anode, solid electrolyte, catholyte, and a catalytic air electrode. A dense solid electrolyte with the composition of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 with the ionic conductivity of 1.3 × 10−3 S cm−1 at 25 °C was used as a separator to separate the liquid anode and catholyte (NASICON separator for short). The assembled Na-air battery was exposed to air and connected to the testing station. A battery tester (CT2001A, Wuhan LAND electronics) was used for charge and discharge tests. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) experiments were performed using an open circuit voltage with a PARSTAT 4000 Rear Panel. The AC perturbation signal was ±10 mV, and the frequency range was from 0.01 Hz to 50,000 Hz. The electrochemical performance of batteries were tested at 30 °C with a relative humidity, RH, of 80%. The batteries using 1 M and 5 M liquid anodes were remarked as battery i and battery ii, respectively.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of a NASICON plate were collected with an X-ray dirractometer (MiniFlex 600, Japan) equipped with Cu-Kα radiation from 10° to 70° at a scan rate of 0.02°s−1.

As for a typical hybrid sodium-air battery, the NASICON is the key component that enables the concept of a hybrid sodium-air battery. Therefore, the influence of the liquid anode and catholyte on the stability of the NASICON separator was investigated. The NASICON separator was immersed in the Na-BP-DME liquid anode at room temperature for 20 days with no significant change observed in the XRD pattern of the NASICON separator shown in Fig. 1b. Additionally, no significant structure change was observed in the NASICON separator after immersion in 1 M NaOH for one month as shown in Fig. S1. However, it is obviously that NASICON was unstable in strong acid due to the dissolution of oxides and exchange between protons and Na+ [6]. The XRD results indicate that the NASICON separator is acceptably stable in the presence of both the liquid anode and alkaline aqueous electrolyte.

Generally, non-aqueous sodium-air batteries show great variations in performance when working in different atmospheric conditions [13]. Non-aqueous sodium-air batteries are often tested in pure oxygen because the formation of the discharge products, Na2O2 and NaO2, are greatly influenced by the water and carbon dioxide content in air [23], [24], [25], [26], [27]. This characteristic makes it difficult to work in practical environments as it greatly decreases the lifespan of batteries. Therefore, discharge behaviors of batteries at different atmospheric conditions were investigated in our study. As shown in Fig. 2a, no significant distinction in discharge behaviors of batteries was observed. The batteries working in pure O2 and air displayed a similar discharge voltage of 2.84 V, which corresponds to the following reaction:

Therefore, the atmospheric conditions, whether it is pure O2 or air, have no significant influence on the discharge behavior of this battery, which makes it possible to work in the air directly. Firstly, because the aqueous electrolyte of hybrid sodium-air battery is 1 M NaOH, H2O has no influence on this battery. Secondly, O2 has the lowest bonding energy compared with CO2 and N2 (O2: 494 kJ/mol; CO2: 750 kJ/mol; N2: 942 kJ/mol), which leads to the oxygen reduction reaction rather than CO2 and N2. Therefore, N2 as inert gas does not affect the electrochemical reaction. Thirdly, the effect of a very small amount CO2 in the air on the battery is negligible. Interestingly, differ from a typical hybrid sodium-air battery, Na+ just acts as a medium in this system, which goes across the anode and cathode, rather than reactant.

Fig. 2b shows discharge-charge voltage curves of the proposed sodium-air batteries at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2 in air. The batteries displayed high discharge voltage and desirable charge voltage using Pt/C as the catalyst. The battery with 5 M Na-BP-DME displayed a relatively higher discharge voltage of 2.87 V compared to that of 1 M Na-BP-DME. This is mainly ascribed to the higher ionic conductivity of 5 M Na-BP-DME compared to 1 M Na-BP-DME. However, the slightly higher charge voltage of 5 M Na-BP-DME compared to that of 1 M Na-BP-DME is mainly ascribed to the slower reaction kinetics during the charging process [22]. These two batteries showed similar voltage gap of approximately 0.14 V, which contributed to the high roundtrip efficiency of 95.3%. To date, this is the lowest voltage gap reported in literature for alkaline metal-air batteries, as summarized in Table S1. It is noted that a typical sodium-air battery shows a lower voltage gap than its lithium-based counterpart; this behavior may be ascribed to the higher reactivity of sodium and lower activation energy required to react with water and oxygen, thus increasing the round trip efficiency of the batteries. In addition, the high conductivity of the sodium ion conductor also is a key factor that contributes to the low voltage gap. Therefore, sodium-air batteries using liquid anodes display lower voltage gap than lithium-air batteries. In addition, compared to previous configurations of hybrid sodium-air batteries, sodium-air batteries using liquid anodes greatly decreased the interface resistance due to fast Na+ diffusion, thus decreasing the overpotential of the battery.

The novel sodium-air batteries demonstrated excellent rate capability as indicated by the flat discharge profiles at the various current densities shown in Fig. 2c. The fabricated sodium-air battery using a 5 M liquid anode shows a voltage drop of 0.40 V when the current density increases from 0.1 mA cm−2 to 1.5 mA cm−2. However, the less concentrated 1 M liquid anode shows relatively poor discharge behavior with an increased discharge overpotential compared to the 5 M liquid anode. This is ascribed to the greater polarization of the liquid anode during the discharge process which leads to a lower ionic conductivity after a long discharge. However, it is important to note that the traditional hybrid sodium-air battery shows a much larger overpotential of 1.2 V as seen in Fig. S2.

Fig. 2d also shows the slopes of several types of alkali metal-air batteries. It is noted that the sodium-air battery using a liquid anode shows the lowest slope, and the discharge overpotential increases only slightly as the current density increases, revealing a low internal resistance within the batteries [4], [28], [29], [30], [31]. This low internal resistance is mainly due to the high reactivity of sodium, high ionic conductivity of liquid anode, and the fast diffusion of Na+ [22].

Fig. 3a shows the typical impedance profiles of the liquid anode sodium-air batteries under an open circuit condition at 30 °C. As shown in the inset of Fig. 3a, an equivalent electric circuit was used to simulate the EIS spectra [19], [32]. In the circuit, the high-frequency intercept of the semicircle on the real axis is reflected by the ohmic resistance (Re), which is predominantly the bulk resistance of NASICON and the resistances of the liquid anode and catholyte. The large semicircle in the high frequency range is ascribed to the resistance of the interfaces (Ri), including the grain boundary resistance of the ceramic separator and interfacial resistances between the NASICON and liquid materials. The smaller semicircle in the middle frequency range represents the charge-transfer resistance (Rct) in an air electrode. CPEi, and CPEct are the associated capacitances described by the constant-phase elements. The finite-length Warburg element (ZW) in the lowest frequency range arises from a diffusion process in the air electrode.

As shown in and Table 1, the total resistances of the battery with 1 M and 5 M Na-BP-DME are 140.30 Ω and 75.66 Ω, respectively. The resistance increases by almost 50% as the concentration of the anode increases from 1 M to 5 M. However, this value is still much lower than a typical hybrid sodium-air battery (209.94 Ω) as summarized in Fig. S3a and Table S3. This result is mainly ascribed to decreased resistance within the liquid anode batteries, namely, Re, and Ri. As we can see from the Table 1, Re decreased from 51.83 Ω to 38.29 Ω because of the increased conductivity of the liquid anode when the concentration is increased [22]. Similarly, the Ri value experienced the same trend, decreasing as the concentration of liquid anode increases. It is related to the improvement of the wettability of the liquid anode, which significantly decreases the interface resistance, thus increasing Na+ diffusion between the solid electrolyte and liquid anode [22]. Generally, the solid electrolyte interphase (Rs) is a common component in typical rechargeable sodium-air batteries that use metallic sodium as anodes, which is generated from the reaction between sodium and the organic electrolyte [19], [32]. Interestingly, compared to a typical hybrid sodium-air battery, Rs disappeared in sodium-air batteries with liquid anode, thus reducing the total resistance of the novel sodium-air battery by using liquid anode. Battery i and ii displayed a similar Rct and ZW because of the same catholyte and air electrode.

Fig. 3b shows the I-V curve of the sodium-air batteries obtained by a potential sweep method at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. Compared to a typical hybrid sodium-air battery, the sodium-air battery using liquid anode offers higher operating voltage and power density at the same test condition. The abrupt drop observed at the beginning of the polarization curve at low current densities is due to the activation polarization of the oxygen reduction catalyst [28]. The rest of the polarization curve is almost linear, where the polarization is dominated by the resistance of the solid and liquid electrolyte, indicating that decrement of resistance is a key issue that enhances the power density of batteries [28]. Therefore, battery i and battery ii using liquid anode displayed a maximum power density of 27.3 mW cm−2 and 39.0 mW cm−2, respectively. Both values are higher than the typical sodium-air batteries that use metallic sodium anodes (S3b). Moreover, the maximum power density of battery ii is the highest reported value at present for alkali metal-air batteries. The improved power density compared to a typical hybrid sodium-air battery are due to the lower total resistance of the battery, where Re and Ri significantly decrease due to the high conductivity of liquid anode and decreased interface resistance between the NASICON separator, liquid anode, and aqueous electrolyte [22]. Table S2 summarizes the areal power densities of Li-air and Na-air batteries, highlighting the fantastic electrochemical performance of the sodium-air batteries that use liquid anodes. In addition, the power density of battery can be definitely enhanced by improving the ionic conductivity of NASICON and exploring more efficient catalysts for oxygen evolution reaction and oxygen reduction reaction.

The capacities of the batteries were also investigated, as shown in Fig. 4a. The battery with 1 M Na-BP-DME displayed a capacity of around 30 Ah L−1, which is higher than the recently reported Na-aqueous-catholyte redox flow battery (17.3 Ah L−1) [33]. The calculated capacity of the battery is around 592.8 mAh g−1 based on the mass of sodium (S4a). Correspondingly, the energy density was calculated to be 1600.6 Wh kg−1. In order to improve the capacity of the battery, a higher concentration of Na-BP-DME solution was used. As shown in Fig. 4a, the 5 M Na-BP-DME battery displayed twice the capacity of the 1 M Na-BP-DME battery at 70 Ah L−1. As shown in Fig. S4, around 2 mg of Na was added to 5 M Na-BP-DME to prepare an over-saturated liquid anode, which greatly improved the capacity of the battery to 93.5 Ah L−1. Therefore, increasing the concentration of Na-BP-DME and preparing over-saturated liquid anodes can greatly enhance the discharge capacity of sodium-air batteries.

To evaluate the rechargeability of the liquid anode sodium-air batteries, the battery was examined over 80 cycles at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2. The energy efficiency profile of the battery is shown in Fig. 4b, which displays a high discharge voltage of around 2.75 V due to the high ionic conductivity of 1.7 × 10−2 S cm−1 for 5 M Na-BP-DME. In addition, the batteries showed an initial high energy efficiency of 95.3% However, it was found that the average energy efficiency of the batteries was around 85%, which is lower than the first cycle. This is mainly ascribed to the sluggish diffusion kinetics and relatively slow reaction dynamics during the charge-discharge process [22], [32]. Fortunately, the energy efficiency does not show significant degradation. Moreover, the energy efficiency is higher than a typical hybrid sodium-air battery with a sodium metal anode, demonstrating the promising cycling performance of these batteries. However, it is unavoidable to the evaporation of water during long-term charging-discharging, a peristaltic pump can be utilized to maintain a consistent NaOH concentration of hybrid sodium-air battery. In addition, gel electrolyte is a good selection to improve the cycling performance of hybrid sodium-air battery.

The liquid anode effectively prevents the formation Na dendrites and avoids the volume change caused by undesirable sodium deposition during charging that would otherwise be seen with sodium metal anodes, thus improving the cycling performance. However, the evaporation of water due to prolonged charging and discharging is unavoidable due to the limited volume of NaOH aqueous electrolyte. Therefore, a peristaltic pump or gel electrolyte can be utilized to inhibit the evaporation of aqueous electrolyte, which can likely enhance the long-term electrochemical performance of the battery [33]. The highly conductive liquid anode can be extended to other sodium-based batteries, such as flow battery, which not only improves the energy density, but also enhances the safety issue. Therefore, this work provides an avenue for exploring new types of highly safety batteries with liquid anode, which is a potential candidate for next-generation energy storage technology Fig. 5.

Safety is an important issue for the application of batteries. One of the main challenges of traditional sodium-air batteries is the exothermic and often explosive reaction between metallic sodium with water [27]. Aqueous electrolytes were introduced to solve the accumulation of discharge products [18], and while the sodium anode is separated from the aqueous electrolyte by a ceramic separator, they still have a high risk of breaking due to the unacceptable mechanical property, thus contributing to the risk of explosion. Therefore, the safety of the Na-BP-DME solution was investigated by reacting the Na-BP-DME solution with water. Desirably, the reaction between Na-BP-DME solution and water is gentler than that of metallic sodium, and no hydrogen is generated during the whole reaction [22]. In addition, the change of temperature is negligible when the Na-BP-DME solution reacts with water, indicating that the reaction is less exothermic than reactions with metallic sodium. Therefore, the liquid anode provides better safety than traditional sodium-air batteries that use metallic sodium.

In summary, sodium-air batteries with Na-BP-DME liquid anodes were successfully fabricated using a NASICON solid electrolyte to separate the liquid anode and catholyte, and demonstrates good electrochemical performance. We first investigated the stability of NASICON in the liquid anode and catholyte, and it was found that both the NaOH catholyte and liquid anode do not corrode the NASICON, which enables the long-term charge-discharge of batteries. Second, it was noted that the batteries displayed similar discharge voltages when working in both oxygen and air. Third, the performances of batteries using different concentrations of the liquid anode was investigated, and the batteries both exhibit a low voltage gap of 0.14 V at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2, which leads to a high round trip efficiency of 95.3%. The battery with 5 M Na-BP-DME indicates a relatively high power density of 39 mW cm−2 due to high ionic conductivity of liquid anode and effective reduction of the interface resistance between liquid anode and NASICON solid electrolyte; this value is the highest reported value in literature for alkali metal-air batteries. The battery exhibited good cycling performance, and no significant degradation was observed during the whole charge-discharge process. More importantly, the sodium-air battery with liquid anode exhibits fantastic safety due to the gentle reaction between the liquid anode and water. Therefore, this work provides a base for exploring for high safety rechargeable batteries with liquid anodes that potentially meet the requirements for grid-scale electrical energy storage.