Sodium-ion batteries (NIBs) have attracted more and more attention as economic alternatives for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). Sodium super ionic conductor (NASICON) structure materials, known for high conductivity and chemical diffusion coefficient of Na+ (≈10−14 cm2 s−1), are promising electrode materials for NIBs. However, NASICON structure materials often suffer from low electrical conductivity (<10−4 S cm−1), which hinders their electrochemical performance. Here high performance sodium storage performance in Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) is realized by optimizing nanostructure and rational surface engineering. A N, B codoped carbon coated three-dimensional (3D) flower-like Na3V2(PO4)3 composite (NVP@C-BN) is designed to enable fast ions/electrons transport, high-surface controlled energy storage, long-term structural integrity, and high-rate cycling. The conductive 3D interconnected porous structure of NVP@C-BN greatly releases mechanical stress from Na+ extraction/insertion. In addition, extrinsic defects and active sites introduced by the codoping heteroatoms (N, B) both enhance Na+ and e− diffusion. The NVP@C-BN displays excellent electrochemical performance as the cathode, delivering reversible capacity of 70% theoretical capacity at 100 C after 2000 cycles. When used as anode, the NVP@C-BN also shows super long cycle life (38 mA h g−1 at 20 C after 5000 cycles). The design provides a novel approach to open up possibilities for designing high-power NIBs.

Lithium ion batteries (LIBs) have been considered as the mainly power source in the advanced energy storage system and portable electric devices due to high energy density, lower cost and safety.1-5 Sodium-ion batteries (NIBs) is an attractive alternative due to the abundant source in earth and low cost of sodium.6-10 Although the working principal of NIBs is expected to be similar to that of LIBs, most commonly used electrode materials for LIBs are not suitable to insert Na+ due to the large radius of Na+, leading to the poor sodium storage performance.11-16 Therefore, there are still many challenges to find the suitable electrode materials for the fast repeated Na+intercalation/deintercalation.17-21

Among the electrode materials for the NIBs, the sodium super ionic conductor (NASICON)-type Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) electrode materials exhibits many advantages: (1) the high energy density (400 Wh kg−1) and the suitable voltage plateau (about 3.4 V); (2) the high ionic conductivity and structural stability; (3) high thermal stability.22-28 However, the theoretical capacity of NVP could nearly achieved due to the poor electrical conductivity of NVP.29 Many efforts have been used to improve the cycle stability and rate capability of NVP.7, 23, 30 Such as downsize the particles of NVP to reduce the distance of Na+ diffusion and coating the carbon layer outside the surface of NVP to improve the electrical conductivity.7, 23, 31 Recently, our group also demonstrated that the 3D hierarchical Na3V2(PO4)3: reduced graphene oxide: carbon nanotube (NVP: rGO-CNT) shows excellent cycle stability and rate capability for NIBs.32 At present, the heteroatoms doped (nitrogen, born, sulfur, and phosphorus) in the carbon coated electrode materials has been widely used as a promising method for improved the electrochemical performance.14, 33-37 Among them, the nitrogen (N) is the most widely studied heteroatom, which could introduce more active sites for electrochemical reaction and improve high surface wettability.12, 38 Such as, Wang group reported the NVP/C with outstanding electrochemical performance by coating the nitrogen-doped carbon layer.39 Boron (B) doping is also a fundamental improvement method in carbon-based material. It creates lots of active sites and improves electronic conductivity and electrochemical activity.40 The improved electrochemical performance NVP/C by doping born in the carbon layer was prepared by Liu and co-workers.41 Compare to single atom doping, dual atom doping in the carbon layer produce more active sites and enhance the Na+/e− diffusion, which result in the excellent electrochemical performance.11, 34, 36 One thus could expect that the sodium storage performance of NVP could be improved by combine all abovementioned approaches (design 3D nanostructure and surface engineering).

Herein, we design the N, B codoped carbon coated 3D flower-like Na3V2(PO4)3 composites (NVP@C-BN) that exhibits the excellent electrochemical performance. This special architecture possesses many advantages: (1) The 3D nanosheets of NVP shorten the electronic transport distance. (2) The carbon coated layer can improve the electronic conductivity of the electrode materials, inhibit the NVP particles growth during the heat treatment process, and prevent the NVP crystal directly contact with the electrolyte which avoid the occurrence of side reaction. (3) The N, B codoped enhances high surface wettability and introduces more active sites for the additional Na storage. (4) The porous structure can accommodate the volume expansion for NVP electrode during the repeated Na+ inserted/extracted. During the process of the electrochemical reaction, the 3D special structure consists of the 2D nanosheet of the carbon coated NVP, which facilitates both sodium ion diffusion and the electronic transport on the large interface area between the carbon layer and active electrode material (Scheme 1). When used as both anode and cathode electrode materials, the NVP@C-BN exhibits the super stable stability and the outstanding rate capability. In addition, the NVP@C-BN displays the high reversible capacity of 87 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 10 C for the full cells (NVP@C-BN used as both anode and cathode electrode materials).

The Schematic illustration of the structure of NVP@C-BN. The 2D nanosheets of the carbon coated NVP shorten the electronic transport distances and N, B codoped the carbon coated layer offer the fast Na diffusion pathway.

Figure S1a (Supporting Information) shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the both samples. Both of samples show the highly crystalline phase, which are in accordance with the standard pattern of the NVP with the rhombohedral NASICON structure.7 No typical diffraction peaks of the graphite can be found, demonstrating the amorphous state of the carbon layer outside surface of NVP crystals. The carbon amount in NVP@C and NVP@C-BN are about 5.48% and 5.33%, respectively, measured by the element analysis. The disorder feature of carbon layer in both samples were obtained by the Raman spectrum (Figure S1b, Supporting Information). The two strong peaks at 1358.8 and 1608.8 cm−1 attributed to the D band and the G band, respectively. The intensity ratio of ID/IG is 0.95 for NVP@C and 0.97 for NVP@C-BN. After doped B, N in carbon layer, the value of ID/IG for NVP@C-BN is much larger, showing highly disordered structure of carbon layer in NVP@C-BN.39 The porous structure and pore distributions of the NVP@C-BN were characterized by the nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms (Figure S1c,d, Supporting Information). According to the Figure S1c,d (Supporting Information), the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface area of the NVP@C-BN is 11 m2 g−1. The major distribution of pores is about 0.49 nm. Therefore, the reasonable BET surface area could provide the sufficient contact area between the active electrode material and the electrolyte and the porous structure could offer easy paths for electrolyte soaking in.42

To analysis the element state of C, N, B in the NVP@C-BN, the X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) studies was studied. The high-resolution C spectrum shows the four peaks at 284.8, 285, 286.2, and 289.0 eV, which can be attributed to CC bonds, CO or COB or CN bonds, CO bonds, and OCO or OCN bonds, respectively (Figure S2, Supporting Information).43 Figure S3a (Supporting Information) shows high resolution of N1s for the NVP@C-BN, which consists with a few peaks, corresponding to pyridinic 398.5 eV, pyrrolic N (401.1 eV), and quaternary N (399.6 eV), respectively.44 The peaks at 187.9, 190.4, 191.1, and 192.2 eV are observed in Figure S3b (Supporting Information), corresponding to the B4C, BC3, N-B, BC2, and the BCO2 bonding, respectively.41, 45 The BC3 doped type can increase the electronic conductivity of the carbon layer. The others doped type can produce more defects and active sites exit in carbon layer, which could allow the rapidly Na+ diffusion during the Na+ insert/extract the carbon layer. To obtain the value of electronic conductivity for both of the samples, the four-point probe measurement was used. The value of electronic conductivity for NVP@C-BN is 1.67 × 10−2 S m−1, which much larger than that of the NVP@C (2.54 × 10−3 S m−1), indicating the dual atom (N, B) doped carbon could improve the electronic conductivity of the NVP@C composite, significantly.

The morphology of the samples is investigated by the scanning election microscopy (SEM), TEM, and the high-resolution TEM (HRTEM), as shown in Figure 1; Figures S4 and S5 (Supporting Information). Both of samples show the similar flower-like morphology which consist of the nanosheets (Figure 1; Figure S4, Supporting Information). The HRTEM image of the NVP@C-BN shows the lattice fringe with the d-spacing of 0.44 nm, corresponding to the (104) plane of the NASICON-type NVP.23 The thin carbon layer about 1.5 nm is also observed (Figure 1d). The STEM images show the N, B elements uniform distribute in the carbon layer outside NVP crystals (Figure S5, Supporting Information).

The electrochemical behaviors of the samples as cathode electrodes in half cell system were investigated for NIBs with the voltage range of 2.3–3.9 V. To obtain the capacity contribution of the carbon in the composite for the cathode electrode, the cyclic voltammetry curves of the pure carbon matrix had been measured (Figure S6, Supporting Information). No oxidation/reduction peaks had been observed in the voltage range of 1.0–3.0 V, showing the reversible capacity of the pure carbon matrix in the composites is negligible at the voltage range of 2.3–3.9 V (vs Na+/Na).7 Figure 2a shows the charge–discharge curves of both NVP@C and NVP@C-BN with the voltage plateau of 3.4 V at 1 C (1 C = 110 mA g−1 for cathode electrode).28 The NVP@C-BN shows the high initial reversible capacity of 114 mA h g−1, corresponding to about 97% of the theoretical capacity (118 mA h g−1). Compare to the NVP@C-BN, the NVP@C delivers the reversible capacity of 108 mA h g−1. After 700 cycles at 1C, the reversible capacity of the NVP@C-BN is 104 mA h g−1 (Figure 2b). Figure 2c compares the long cycle performance of NVP@C and NVP@C-BN at 20 C. After 3000 cycles, the NVP@C-BN delivers the reversible capacity of 93 mA h g−1, which corresponds to 89% of the initial reversible capacity. In case of NVP@C, it only delivers 80 mA h g−1 after 1200 cycles may result from the low electron conductance of the carbon layer. Figure 2d delivers the outstanding rate capability of NVP@C-BN compare to that of the NVP@C at 1–100 C. The NVP@C-BN shows the excellent reversible capacity of 114, 113, 112, 109, 105, 101, 94, 92 mA h g−1 at 1–80 C, respectively. Even at 100 C, the reversible capacity of 84 mA h g−1 for the NVP@C-BN can be obtained. When the current density turns back to 1 C, discharge capacity of 114 mA h g−1 can be maintained, exhibiting the superior structure stability of the NVP@C-BN. Compare to NVP@C-BN, the NVP@C shows a lower discharge capacity of 74 mA h g−1 at 100 C. To demonstrate the excellent cycle stability of NVP@C-BN, the long cycle life test at the high current density of 50 C was investigated (Figure 2e). After 1000 cycles at 50 C, the NVP@C-BN delivers the high reversible capacity of 85 mA h g−1 with only 0.70% loss per cycles. On the whole cycle process, the Coulomb efficiency (CE) of the NVP@C-BN could nearly reach 100%, demonstrating the super reversible sodium ion insertion/extraction in NVP@C-BN. Even at 100 C, the NVP@C-BN still exhibits the super stable cycle performance (Figure 3). After 2000 cycles, it can maintain the high discharge capacity of 79 mA h g−1 with the 0.4% loss per cycle. Therefore, it also demonstrates that the excellent electrochemical performance of the NVP@C-BN compare to NVP@C can be attributed to the N, B codoped carbon layer, which creates lots of active sites and defects in carbon layer, leading to high electrical conductivity and rapid the rate of Na+ diffusion during the process of electrochemical reaction. To demonstrate the stability of the NVP@C-BN, the morphology of active electrode after 100 cycles at 1 C was studied by SEM in Figure S7 (Supporting Information). The after-cycled electrode material still maintains original morphology except a stable solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) film on the surface of the NVP@C-BN.

Figure S8a (Supporting Information) delivers the Nyquist plots of the both of samples. Compare to NVP@C (470 Ω), the value of Rct for NVP@C-BN is as low as 344 Ω, showing the N, B codoped carbon layer could obviously decrease the charge-transfer impedance at the interface between the active electrode material and electrolyte, leading to the improvement of electronic conductivity for NVP@C-BN. Figure S8b (Supporting Information) displays the relationship between Z′ and ω−1/2 for NVP@C and NVP@C-BN. The DNa+ for NVP@C-BN is 8.41 × 10−12 cm2 s−1, much larger than that of NVP@C (9.19 × 10−13 cm2 s−1). It demonstrates that the N, B codoped carbon layer not only can enhance the electronic and ion conductivity of the NVP@C-BN, but also obviously decrease the charge-transfer impedance at the interface between the active electrode material and the electrolyte resulting from creating much active sites and defects into the carbon layer, leading to the outstanding rate performance and the long cycle life of the NVP@C-BN.

The NVP@C-BN as anode electrode also delivers the super rate performance and the excellent cycle life. Figure 4a shows the voltage profile of NVP@C-BN at 1 C (1 C = 55 mA g−1 as anode for NIBs) for the first three cycles. The reversible capacity of NVP@C-BN displays the high reversible capacity of 52 mA h g−1 with a voltage plateau at about 1.7 V corresponding to the V2+/V3+ redox couple.31, 32 The following cycles, the reversible capacity of the NVP@C-BN still can maintain 52 mA h g−1. Figure 4b delivers the cycle performance of the NVP@C-BN at current density of 1 C. It shows excellent cycle stability, delivering the reversible capacity of 50 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles. Figure 4c shows the rate performance of the NVP@C-BN as anode electrode materials at 1–40 C. It delivers reversible capacity of 52, 51, 50, and 48 mA h g−1 at 1, 2, 5, 10, and 20 C, respectively. Even at 40 C, the reversible capacity of 45 mA h g−1 can be obtained. When the current density turns back to 1 C, the reversible capacity can turn back to 51 mA h g−1, indicating superior rate performance can be attributed to the stable structure of NVP@C-BN. Moreover, in the whole the charge/discharge processes the CE approach to nearly 100%. In addition, the cycle stability of NVP@C-BN as anode electrode materials at 20 C was investigated, as shown in Figure 4d. Even after 5000 cycles, the NVP@C-BN still maintains the high the reversible capacity of 37 mA h g−1. Moreover, in the whole the charge/discharge processes, the CE of the NVP@C-BN approach to nearly 100%.

a) The charge–discharge curves of the NVP@C-BN as anode electrode at the 1 C for the first three cycles (as for anode electrode material: 1 C = 55 mA h g−1). b) The cycle performance of the NVP@C-BN as anode electrode at the current density of 1 C. c) The rate performance of the NVP@C-BN at the various current densities of 1–40 C. d) The long-life cycle performance of the NVP@C-BN as anode electrode for 5000 cycles at 20 C.

To further demonstrate excellent electrochemical performance of NVP@C-BN for practical application, the symmetric full cells were assembled by using NVP@C-BN as both cathode and anode electrode materials. Figure 5a delivers the voltage curves of the symmetric full cell at 1 C and 10 C (1 C = 110 mA g−1) with an output voltage of 1.7 V, which is in agreement with the previous results.32 The reversible capacity of 109 and 104 mA h g−1 for symmetric full cells at 1 and 10 C, respectively. The cyclic voltammetry curves of the full cell at the scan rates of 0.5 mV s−1 were shown in Figure 5b. Obviously, a redox peak is observed at around 1.7 V, which in good agreement with the output voltage plateau of the voltage curves for the full cell. Figure 6 displays the cycle performance of the full cell at 10 C. After 100 cycles, a reversible capacity of 87 mA h g−1 is obtained, which corresponds to 84% of the initial discharge capacity, indicating the super cycle stability of the full cell. Moreover, the CE of the full cell can nearly reach 100% during the whole charge/discharge cycles.

The long cycle performance of the symmetric full cell (the NVP@C-BN as both cathode and anode electrodes) with the CE for 100 cycles at 10 C.

In summary, we have demonstrated, the sodium storage performance of Na3V2(PO4)3 could improve by optimizing nanostructure (2D thin nanoplates assembled 3D flower-like) and surface engineering (coated by the N, B codoped carbon layer). The obtained NVP@C-BN shows the outstanding rate capability (84 mA h g−1 at 100 C as cathode electrode materials and 45 mA h g−1 at 40 C as anode electrode materials) as cathode for NIBs. When assemble a symmetric full cell, it still exhibits the excellent electrochemical performance at 10 C after 100 cycles (87 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles). The electrochemical performance of the NVP@C-BN can be attributed to the advantages of the N, B codoped carbon layer and the 3D thin nameplates assembled flower structure: improved electronic conductivity, obtained the many active sites and extrinsic defects. In addition, the 3D porous structure of the NVP@C-BN not only facilitate electrolyte soak in but also maintain the structure stability after repeated sodiation/desodiation processes. Our rational design provides insights for NIBs electrodes besides NVP-based materials and even shed light on other functional nanomaterials for electrodes in LIBs and supercapacitors.