Lithium hafnium phosphate LiHf2(PO4)3 (LHP) was synthesized via solid-state synthesis technique. The sintering behavior, structure, and phase composition of the as-prepared sample was analyzed using X-ray diffraction (XRD) characterization technique. The XRD-Rietveld refinement analysis showed that after sintering at low temperatures 500 to 1000 °C, it exhibited various secondary phases. However, a single phase was observed as the sintering temperature increases from 1100 to 1200 °C. LHP sintered at 1100 °C produced real features of sodium superionic conductor type (NASICON-type) with hexagonal crystal axis indicating R-3c space group. The electrical properties were studied using impedance spectroscopy technique. Frequency and temperature dependence behavior of conductivity (ac and dc) and dielectric permittivity were studied. The results obtained describes the conduction mechanism in the system. Electric modulus formalism was performed to investigate the relaxation behavior which showed that as measuring temperature increases, the relaxation frequency increases whereas relaxation time decreases. This behavior explains the hopping mechanism of the charge carriers in the system. Likewise, the correlated barrier hopping model elucidates the dominant hopping mechanism.

Superionic conductors based on sodium ion (Na+) are known as NASICON-type materials sometimes called NZP (sodium zirconium phosphate). The conducting mobile ion in NASICON-type materials is Na+, but there is a problem of stability of the sodium ion when in contact with metal electrodes leading to its reduction when in operation in battery cells [1, 2]. The conductivity of the NZP compound was also reported to be very low, below the applicable range and has poor sinterability. However, the conductivity can be increased by several orders of magnitude if the Na is replaced fully by lithium (Li) and the Zr and P are replaced by elements of different valences and radii [1, 3]. Ionic particles are massive and can move through crystal structures which also affect their conductivity.

Most works were carried out in the titanium system LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) where the small size Ti4+ cations is comparable to the size of the sites in the channels which makes it more appropriate for lithium cations [4]. There is also the problem of poor sinterability and controversial phase transition in the preparation of LTP [5]. The reduction of Ti4+ by Li+ to Ti3+ in the LTP structure limits their performance as a solid-state electrolyte in a battery due to the material instability [6].

It was reported by Robertson et al. [7] that Hf4+ ion is more stable toward a lithium metal and reductive gases than the Ti4+ ion which is an additional advantage for battery applications [8], but the material has a high cost of production which is one of the disadvantages of using Hf in battery production [5]. Few works were reported on LHP, may be due to its poor sinterability and controversial phase transition at low temperature during synthesis [9].

Previous studies on the NASICON-type lithium hafnium phosphate (LHP) focused on structural transformation and DC conductivity. Other behaviors such as the detailed study of AC conductivity, dielectric permittivity, and relaxation behavior were not fully reported even though they are important in identifying the proper applicability of the material as an electrolyte.

The present work was carried out to investigate the sintering behavior, structure, and dielectric relaxation properties of LHP. The electrical conductivities (ac and dc) in the frequency range from 40 Hz to 1 MHz at different measuring temperatures are also studied.

The NASICON-type LiHf2(PO4)3 ceramic was synthesized by solid-state reaction technique using the raw materials as follows: Li2CO3 (99% Alfa Aesar), HfO2 (99.9% Alfa Aesar), and (NH4)2HPO4 (98% Alfa Aesar). The chemical equation for the sample preparation is given in Eq. (1).

The stoichiometric amount of the materials were ball mixed in methanol using ball mixing machine for 24 h to achieve homogeneity and dried for 12 h in an oven. The dried stoichiometry mixtures were placed in a high-temperature resistant ceramic boat (crucible) and heated gradually at 500 °C with heating and cooling rate of 2 °C/min for 3 h in air using a carbolite furnace for onset removal of the volatile product including carbon dioxide (CO2), ammonia (NH3), and also water (H2O) content. The pre-sintered powder was ground and sintered at different sintering temperatures from 600 to 1200 °C at 100 °C intervals with the same heating conditions.

The X-ray diffraction patterns of the sintered powders were obtained using X-ray diffractometer machine (Philips X’Pert diffractometer model 7602 EA, Almelo) with monochromatic Cu Kα radiation of wavelength λ = 1.54178 Å. The patterns were recorded over a 2θ angle in the range 10° < 2θ < 70° at a scanning rate of 0.01° for 0.10 s at room temperature. The data analysis of the patterns was carried out using X’Pert high score plus software version 3.0e which compare the compositions and phases of the samples with standard inorganic crystal structure database (ICSD). The lattice constants (a, b, and c) and volume of the unit cell were determined from the software after the Rietveld refinement analysis. The lattice parameters obtained were used to calculate the theoretical density, and the experimental density was measured using standard Archimedes’ principle by employing Electronic Densimeter MD-300s.

The structure of LHP sintered at 1000, 1100, and 1200 °C was also confirmed by the Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra. The FTIR spectra were verified using PerkinElmer Spectrum 100 Series spectrophotometer (Waltham, MA).

For the dielectric measurements, the stoichiometric mixture was pre-sintered at 700 °C and pressed into pellet with thickness (t) 1.95 × 10−3 m and 7.85 × 10−5 m2 for the surface area (A) and sintered at 1100 °C for 3 h at °C/min. The pellet was coated with silver paint on both surfaces for measurements. The measurement was carried out at low-frequency range from 40 Hz to 1 MHz over a wide temperature range from 30 to 230 °C using Agilent 4294A precision impedance analyzer coupled with LT furnace. The measured parameters C p and G which represent the measured capacitance and conductance, respectively, were used to obtain the related data for the analysis. The dielectric constant (ε′) and dielectric loss (ε″) of the LiHf2(PO4)3 were obtained using Eqs. (2) and (3), respectively [10].

where C″ = G/ω, t, and A are the thickness and surface area, respectively. The AC conductivity σ ac was investigated using Eq. (4) and DC conductivity σ dc was obtained using Eq. (5), where ω is the angular frequency in rad per second [10].

The complex impedance parameters Z′ and Z″ were measured using Eqs. (6) and (7), respectively [11]. The data obtained were analyzed using Nyquist plots. The effect of measuring temperatures from 30 to 230 °C on grain interior resistance (R g) and grain boundary resistance (R gb) was obtained by carrying out an equivalent circuit modeling using Nova software (version1.11.1) to fit the Nyquist plots.

Figure 1 depicts the XRD patterns of LiHf2(PO4) ceramic sintered at various temperatures from 500 to 1200 °C. The XRD-Rietveld analysis showed that LHP has a crystal system with hexagonal axes belonging to R-3c space group which matched with ICSD card number 98-004-0755, and this reflects the corresponding peaks of the LHP as reported [13]. The sintering behavior is observed from the XRD peaks. It showed LHP sintered at low temperatures exhibit many secondary phases. LHP sintered at 500, 600, and 700 °C were observed with the following additional peaks: lithium hafnium phosphate (Li0.8Hf2(PO4)3 with ICSD card no. 98-003-8249, dihafnium oxo bis(Phosphate) (Hf2P2O9) with ICSD card no. 98-011-2578, hafnium oxide (HfO2) with ICSD card no. 98-005-2342, phosphorous oxide (P4O7.9) with ICSD card no. 98-000-3535, and tetralithium diphosphate (Li4P2O7) with ICSD card no. 98-002-2202. As the sintering temperature increases to 800 and 900 °C, the peaks of the secondary phases start to disappear. At 1000 °C, only one secondary phase was observed which is hafnium diphosphate (HfP2O7) with ICSD card no. 98-009-5487. The presence of these secondary phases or impurities is due to incomplete chemical reaction [10]. As the sintering temperature reached 1100 and 1200 °C, the number of secondary phases totally disappeared and only a single phase material of LiHf2(PO4)3 exist. The Rietveld analysis was observed with the goodness of fit 7.

The lattice parameters and unit cell volume of LHP were obtained from the software after the Rietveld refinement analysis and found to be in close agreement with data reported by Martinez-Juarez [14] where a = 8.8285 Å = b, c = 22.019 Å, and V = 1484.40 Å3. The effect of sintering temperature on the lattice parameters is tabulated in Table 1. Increasing the sintering temperature causes the lattice parameters and the unit volume to increase. The observation indicates that higher temperature reduces the concentration of defects by reducing the number of surface atoms which leads to the decrease in the crystal size as sintering temperature increases [15] and enhances the degree of crystallization. The increment of unit cell volume was observed to be very small or even negligible which confirms the low thermal expansion behavior of LHP. Likewise, the density of LiHf2(PO4)3 sintered at the various temperatures (900 to 1200 °C) is also presented in Table 1 which indicated the experimental density is more than 90% of the theoretical density for all samples.

Figure 2 shows the FTIR spectra of LiHf2(PO4)3 ceramic powders sintered at 1000, 1100, and 1200 °C. It exhibits four identical modes of vibrations denoted as regions I to IV. All the regions are almost dominated by the vibration of tetrahedral PO4 for all the samples. Asymmetry stretching vibration band (ʋ 3) is identified in region IV which is within the range 1230 to 1300 cm−1. The strong vibration bands in region III is associated with symmetry stretching vibration (ʋ 4) of PO4 3− anion within the range 950 to 1080 cm−1. Symmetry bending vibrations of P-O-P are observed in region II indicated within the wavelength range 620 to 750 cm−1. However, for LHP sintered at 1100 °C, a strong and sharp absorption band was observed in region I in the range 480 to 580 cm−1. This is assigned to asymmetry bending vibration mode (ʋ 2) of O-P-O. Likewise, weak and invisible absorption bands are observed in the same region I for LHP sintered at 1000 and 1200 °C. The strong and sharp absorption band observed in region I for LHP sintered at 1100 °C may be attributed to the better crystallinity and single phase of the material as observed in the XRD-Rietveld analysis. Similar behavior was observed as reported [16, 17]. The positions of the vibration modes in each region in the present analysis were compared and match with the related literature report on NASICON-type materials [18].

The variation of AC conductivity (lnσ ac) with frequency in rad per second ln(ω) of LHP at different measuring temperatures from 30 to 280 °C and within the frequency range 40 Hz to 1 MHz is depicted in Fig. 3. The AC conductivity σ ac of an ionic material is always described in terms of Jonscher’s power law as in Eq. 10. [19]

where A is the pre-exponential factor (AC coefficient) which is temperature dependent and n is the correlation exponent and the term σ(o) is the DC conductivity which is observed at low-frequency region. As the measuring temperature increases, the AC conductivity increases. This is probably due to the higher thermal energy acquired by the ions at higher temperatures.

The AC conductivity σ ac is also observed to be frequency independent at low-frequency regions, but at higher frequency region, there is dispersion. As frequency increases, the conductivity increases and thus, the conductivity is frequency dependent. The tendency of AC conductivity to increase at higher frequency regions is associated with the disorder of Li ions in their lattice site and the existence of space charge. This behavior is only observed at low measuring temperatures 30, 80, and 130 °C but as temperature increases from 180 to 230 °C, the AC conductivity tends to be temperature dependent even at higher frequencies. Hence, at low measuring temperatures 30 to 130 °C, the features of power law are more prominent in the higher frequency regions where the AC conductivity is frequency dependent as reported by Almond-West universal power law, Eq. 11 [20]. A similar analysis was observed in the AC conductivity study of the compound LiHf2(PO4)3 [21].

The correlation exponent usually known as frequency exponent (n) is the temperature dependent relaxation mechanism which indicates the ionic body interaction with the surrounding environment. Figure 4 illustrates the plot of frequency exponent (n) versus temperature in Kelvin. The values of the frequency exponent were obtained using Eq. 11 together with the slopes of the linear part of lnσ ac(ω) vs. lnω of Fig. 3 at different measuring temperatures from 30 to 230 °C. It indicated that n decreases with increasing temperatures. This behavior described the mobility of ions at higher temperatures which does not depend on frequency. The AC conductivity is frequency independent and n is temperature dependent at higher temperatures which comply with the power low. The measured values of n are within the range 0 < n < 1. This indicates n obtained in the present analysis are in good agreement with correlated barrier hopping (CBH) model. Similar values were obtained by many authors in NASICON-type materials that were found to be within the range. In the analysis of Na1 + xTi2-xAlx(PO4)3, Mouhid et al. [22] reported that n ~ 0.6 for the compositions. The study of Na5Ti(PO4)3 glass material, Mariappan et al. [23] reported similar values within the range.

In order to investigate the dielectric relaxation behavior in a polycrystalline NASICON-type electrolyte, it is required to study the variation of the relative dielectric constant with change in frequency and temperature. Figure 5 shows the variation of dielectric constant (ε′) with frequency at different measuring temperatures in the frequency range 40 Hz to 1 MHz. The response of the LHP materials to dielectric constant is primarily attributed to the influence of polarization mechanisms which include electronic, ionic, dipole, and interfacial polarizations. However, the ionic and interfacial polarization in this regard has the highest contribution in the total polarization mechanism while others give only a small influence. The ε′ decreases as frequency increases because the contribution of ions (charge carriers) decreases at higher frequencies. At low frequencies, the dielectric constant ε′ increases as frequency decreases. This is also associated with the large contribution of charges that accumulate at the sample-electrode interface. Similar behavior was observed [10] in the dielectric relaxation analysis of LTP NASICON-type compound.

As the temperature increases from 30 to 230° C and within the low-frequency range, the dielectric constant increases with increasing temperature. This associated with low energy possessed by the charge carriers at low temperatures. The ions lack the energy to follow the direction of the applied field at very low temperatures. Therefore, the contribution of polarization mechanism is weakened [24]. Dielectric constant is associated with movement of charge carriers, hence the ε′ increases at higher temperatures. Moreover, at higher temperatures and in the range of high-frequency region, loss of dispersion occurred which is ascribed to the thermal vibration, and the material does not respond to the applied electric field. This indicated that the interfacial polarization is not significant at high frequencies and the dielectric constant of LHP approaches a constant.

Figure 6 shows the dependence of dielectric constant ε′ with temperature at selected frequencies. As temperature increases, the dielectric constant increases. This behavior is only observed in the low-frequency region 40 Hz to 1 KHz. This is associated with the presence of space charge and the contribution of interfacial polarization in the low-frequency region. At higher frequency region from 10 KHz to 1 MHz, there is little or even insignificant increase in the dielectric constant even at higher temperatures. Therefore, the dielectric constant at high frequencies is temperature independent. This suggests that in the high-frequency region from 10 KHz to 1 MHz, there was no accumulation of charge ions at the sample-electrode interface where space charge effect is negligible and interfacial polarization is absent.

Dielectric loss is the quantity of electric power dissipated within the sample under the influence of the electric field applied. The energy loss due to the displacement of charge carriers in the presence of electric field generates heat energy called dielectric loss ε″. Illustrated in Fig. 7 are the plots of ε″ of LHP as a function of frequency (f) at various measuring temperatures. The plots of dielectric constant ε′(ω) and dielectric loss ε″(ω) for LHP show similar trends. The ε″ decreases as frequency increases and also increases with the rise in measuring temperatures from 30 to 280 °C. LHP exhibits the behavior of ionic conducting material which indicated the effects of frequency and temperature on the ε″ associated with the formation of charge carriers at the sample-electrode interface that leads to the interfacial polarization. It is clearly observed that the dielectric loss increases as frequency decreases in the low-frequency region. The increment of dielectric loss at the low-frequency region is attributed to the charge carriers migration, but at higher frequencies, the charge carriers migration is reduced which leads to the decrease in the dielectric loss [25]. The increment of the dielectric loss ε″ as the measuring temperature increases is associated with the increase in the loss of energy by the charge carriers with high drift velocity. Similarly, the AC conductivity also increases with high measuring temperatures as observed in Fig. 3.

The electrical properties of the composite material LiHf2(PO4)3 NASICON-type were similarly studied using a well-known impedance spectroscopic technique which analyzed the response of lithium Li+ ions due to the presence of electric field. The movement of ions through the bulk material, grain boundary, and the charge transfer that occurred at the sample-electrode interface was investigated using the process. Figure 8 depicts the fitted Nyquist plots of complex impedance which shows the variation of real Z′ part with the imaginary Z″ part at different measuring temperatures from 30 to 230 °C. Equivalent circuit model using Nova software was applied in this regard to analyze the fitted Nyquist impedance data. The Nyquist plot was fitted with two parallel RC-equivalent circuits combined in series as shown in Fig. 9, to analyze and differentiate the electrical impedance of the grain interior (R g) and grain boundary (R gb) contribution from the total impedance. The values of R g and R gb (parameters of the equivalent circuit) were estimated and listed in Table 2. The accuracy of the estimated resistances is represented by chi-square (χ 2) values improve as the measuring temperature increases. The estimated DC conductivity was calculated using Eq. 5 with the corresponding grain and grain boundary resistance. The calculated DC conductivity at grain (σ dcg) and grain boundaries (σ dcgb) level increases as temperature increases due to the low resistance and higher Li+ ion movement at higher temperatures. As measuring temperature increases from 30 to 230 °C, the semicircles tend to disappear. This also confirms the low resistance of material at higher temperatures. In a similar work, Martínez-Juárez et al. [14] reported a decrease in the impedance from 40 to 200 °C.

Figure 10 depicts the Arrhenius plot of lnσ dc vs. the reciprocal temperature (1000/T) for both grain (σ dcg) and grain boundary (σ dcgb) for DC conductivity of LHP. The plots and the Arrhenius equation given by Eq. 12 were employed to calculate the activation energy in both grain interior and grain boundary. The activation energy in the grain interior was found to be low (0.47 eV) than in the grain boundary (0.58 eV). This indicated that ions can move faster through grain interior than in the grain boundary. This is unlike the results reported by Vijayan [11] in the study of microcrystalline LTP where the activation energy of the grain interior is 0.54 eV and the grain boundary activation energy is 0.34 eV which indicated high activation energy in the grain boundary. However, the activation energy E a obtained by Martínez-Juárez et al. [14] and Chowdari et al. [21] is quite small than already reported. The E a obtained in the present analysis is close to the value reported by Aono [2]. The Arrhenius equation employed is

The modulus formalisms were used to investigate the relaxation behavior in LHP. The advantage of the modulus formalism is the ability of the method to remove the effect of grain boundary conduction and electrode polarization in polymer composites and ionic conducting materials. Generally, the electric modulus is related to the relaxation of the electric field in the materials when the electric field displacement reached a constant value.

Figure 11 shows the frequency dependence of real part of the complex electric modulus (M′) of LiHf2(PO4)3 at different measuring temperatures. At low-frequency region, M′ approaches zero as frequency decreases for all measuring temperatures. This is associated with the non-contribution of electrode polarization effect which also indicates the contribution of electrode effect is ignored in the system [26]. At higher frequency region, M′ gradually increases as frequency increases and tends to be frequency independent and approaches a constant value. This behavior at high frequency is attributed to the absence of space charge in the system.

Figure 12 illustrates the frequency dependence of imaginary part of the complex electric modulus (M″) of LHP at various measuring temperatures. The relaxation frequencies (maximum peak) were observed to shift toward higher frequency as temperature increases from 30 to 230 °C. The maximum peak also increases as temperature increases indicating the capacitance of the grain and grain boundaries at each measuring temperature are solely dependent on temperature. This also confirms the relaxation rate increases as temperature increases. The parameters of relaxation which include relaxation frequency (ω max) and relaxation time (τ = ω −1 max) were deduced from Fig. 12 and tabulated in Table 3. The τ decreases as measuring temperature increases probably associated with the thermal effect in the system. The inset of Fig. 12 shows the Arrhenius plot of lnω vs. reciprocal temperature (1000/T). The relaxation energy (E a) was also evaluated from the fitted plot which is 0.41 eV. This is close to that obtained from the present impedance analysis (0.47 eV) in the grain interior.

LiHf2(PO4)3 ceramic powders were prepared by solid-state reaction technique. The stoichiometry mixture was sintered at different sintering temperatures 500 to 1200 °C at 100 °C intervals. According to the XRD-Rietveld analysis, LHP sintered at 1100 and 1200 °C indicated single phase with hexagonal crystal structure belonging to R-3c space group. The present study indicates 1100 °C is the optimum temperature for the synthesis of LiHf2(PO4)3. The stretching and vibrational modes of PO4 of LHP sintered at 1000, 1100, and 1200 °C were detected and confirmed by the spectra of FTIR. For the dielectric properties, LHP indicated ionic conductivity behavior of a typical ionic electrolyte. The continuous reduction of frequency exponent n as temperature increases confirms the mobility of ions to be frequency independent at high temperatures. The dielectric relaxation properties were investigated using modulus formalism. As measuring temperature increases, the relaxation time decreases and the measured relaxation energy E a (activation energy) (0.41 eV) obtained from the relaxation parameters was found to be close to that obtained from impedance data (0.47 eV) in the grain interior.