A NASICON-type Li1.5Al0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3 (LATP) solid electrolyte was fabricated using a novel sol–gel approach with citric acid as a complex agent. An electrochemical impedance spectroscopy analysis shows that the ionic conductivity of the LATP solid electrolyte synthesized using the sol–gel route was low (8 × 10−5 Scm−1 at 303 K), owing to its large grain boundary impedance. To improve the ionic conductivity of the LATP conducting ceramic, we incorporated Nb2O5 as a doping agent into the LATP solid electrolyte. The eﬀects of Nb2O5 on the phase composition, microstructure, and ionic conductivity of the LATP solid electrolyte were investigated. The LATP conducting ceramic with an 8-wt% Nb2O5 doping exhibited the highest total ionic conductivity of 3.54 × 10−4 Scm−1 at 303 K, relative density of 91.7%, and lowest activation energy of 0.271 eV. The fabricated LATP solid electrolyte doped with Nb2O5 is a promising material for electrochemical devices.
In recent decades, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have been extensively used in portable electronics including smartphones and laptops owing to the eﬀective utilization of renewable energy sources. The commer-cialization of LIBs has alleviated the emission of CO2 greenhouse gases and high demand for fossil fuels [1–4]. Nevertheless, the utilization of highly volatile and ﬂammable liquid electrolytes in traditional LIBs leads to potential security concerns. Therefore, the demand for safe LIBs with high energy densities increases. Solid electrolytes, with high ionic conductivities and chemical stabilities, can overcome most of the safety issues attributed to the conventional organic liquid electrolytes [5–7]. Compared to other inorganic Li+ conducting ceramics, including the garnet-type Li7La3Zr2O12 [8] and Li2S-based glass [9,10], the NA-SICON-type Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 (LATP) solid electrolytes with rhom-bohedral cell structures (space group of R-3c) have chemical stability in air and water and low toxicities can be simply fabricated [11,12].However, the low total conductivities of LATP solid electrolytes hinder their practical applications in LIBs. Various synthesis methods have been used to improve their ionic conductivities, including the traditional solid-phase method [13], melt-quenching [14], sol-gel pro-cess [15], co-precipitate approach [16], and hydrothermal method [17]. Among them, the co-precipitation and hydrothermal reaction methods involve complex co-precipitators and preparation processes, respectively. The solid-phase methods (particularly the meltquenching) involve generally harsh heat treatments (> 1200 °C), which yield minor or unfavorable impurity phases. These disadvantages hinder the fabrications of solid electrolytes with ideal morphologies and high ion conductivities. To obtain pure materials at lower temperatures in shorter time periods, a sol–gel approach based on citric acid, for reactions of the precursor materials in an aqueous solution, has been proposed for large-scale fabrications of LATP solid electrolytes with high phase purities and conductivities. Moreover, the LATP particles obtained by Pechini method exhibits the less aggregation compared to traditional sol–gel method [15,18]. Considering the economic and en-vironmental factors, the sol–gel method based on citric acid was em-ployed in this study to prepare LATP precursor powders.In addition, the introduction of additive agents may also increase the ionic conductivity of the LATP solid electrolyte mainly through the densiﬁcation of the additive agents. The ﬂux phase can considerably improve the ionic conductivities of pristine solid electrolytes. Li salts, as low-melting-point glass phases (e.g., LiF, Li3BO3,Li3PO4, and LiBO2), can improve not only the sintering ability of the original solid elec-trolyte but also the Li+ diﬀusion concentration in the LATP ceramic [19–21]. However, the LATP-based solid electrolytes exhibit poor ion conduction properties owing to the unsatisfactory grain boundary im-pedances.Element doping is an eﬀective strategy to improve the Li-ion con-duction properties of LATP electrolytes by adjusting their lattice para-meters or controlling the migration of Li+. Chang et al. [22] have reported Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)2.9(VO4)0.1 spark-plasma-sintered at 1100 °C with a maximum ionic conductivity of 2.6 × 10−4 Scm−1. The substitution of P5+ by V5+ in LATP can enhance the Li-ion conductivity by increasing the density and changing the lattice parameter for Li+ migration. As Nb2O5 is considerably cheaper than GeO2, Bai et al. [23] have investigated the eﬀect of the substitution of Ti4+ by Nb5+ in LATP on the Li+ ionic conductivity using the conventional solid-state method. Li1.3Al0.5Nb0.2Ti1.3(PO4)3 with higher relative density and sinter-ability has exhibited the highest ionic conductivity of 7.5 × 10−4 Scm−1. Gromov et al. [24] have partially substituted P with V and Nb in the LATP ceramic electrolyte and reported an increase in ionic conductivity of the system. Nevertheless, reasonable explanation of these results has not been presented. In particular, it is of importance to evaluate whether the grain or grain boundary conduction of the system is improved. Considering specimens fabricated by diﬀerent processes, Best et al. [25] have reported that the fabrication process and sintering conditions are signiﬁcant factors determining the electrical conductivity. They have also reported that V substitution in LATP has not improved the conduction of the grain component, according to 7Li nuclear magnetic resonance data.Although positive eﬀects of Nb2O5 additives on the ionic con-ductivities of LATP solid electrolytes have been reported, detailed evi-dence is still lacking. To investigate the eﬀects of Nb2O5 on the elec-trical properties (grain or grain boundary) of the LATP solid electrolyte, we synthesized an LATP solid electrolyte using a novel sol–gel method with citric acid. The inﬂuence of the calcination temperature on the pristine LATP solid electrolyte and eﬀects of Nb2O5 on the phase composition, morphology, and ionic conductivities of the LATP solid electrolyte were evaluated by X-ray diﬀraction (XRD), scanning elec-tron microscopy (SEM), and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), respectively. The eﬀects of sintering parameters and chemical stability on the electrical properties of the LATP–Nb2O5 system were also analyzed using the alternating-current (AC) impedance technique.
The LATP precursor powder was prepared according to the method reported by Ma et al. [18]. In a typical synthesis (Fig. 1), the stoi-chiometric amount of titanium butoxide (99%, Alladin) was added to distilled water while stirring, which immediately yielded a titanium hydroxide precipitate. The white precipitate was ﬁltered by deionized water, and then transferred into a solution consisting of a concentrated nitric acid and puriﬁed water in a volume ratio of 1:3. The mixture was then continuously stirred to form a lucid homogenous TiO2+ solution. To prevent the conversion of TiO2+ into TiO2, citric acid was im-mediately added into the solution. The presence of TiO2 hinders the synthesis of an ideal precursor material. The TiO2+ nitrate was stabi-lized with citric acid, which is a key step of the novel sol–gel route. Subsequently, the stoichiometric amounts of LiNO3 (analytical reagent (AR), 99%, Macklin), Al(NO3)3·9H2O (AR, Kermel), and NH4H2PO4 (99%, Guangfu reagent) were dissolved in deionized water and slowly dropped into a transparent solution under continuous stirring for 1 h, which immediately yielded a white gel. It was dried in a blast oven at 80 °C for 12 h to form a xerogel powder. Subsequently, the LATP pre-cursor powders were pretreated at various temperatures of 600 to 800 °C for 3 h. The preheated LATP powder were milled to ﬁne parti-cles, and pressed under a ﬁxed pressure of 30 MPa, and sintered at 880 °C for 5 h. The specimens are denoted as S-600-880, S-650-880, S-700-880, and S-800-880. Using similar synthesis processes, LATP solid electrolyte pellets with diﬀerent Nb2O5 contents (2–10 wt%, 99.99%, Alladin) were also fabricated, denoted as Nb-2, Nb-4, Nb-6, Nb-8, and Nb-10. The desired diameters and thicknesses of the solid electrolyte pellets were 13 mm and 1.5 mm, respectively. To compensate for the lost volatile Li components during the sintering, a 10-wt% excess of Li was used during the fabrication.
The phases of the precursor powders calcined at diﬀerent tem-peratures were characterized by XRD (X'pert PRO MPD, scanning angle range: 10–80°, scan rate: 4°/min), while their morphologies were ob-served using ﬁeld-emission SEM with an energy-dispersive spectroscopy detector (FE-SEM, ZEISS, ΣIGMA). To obtain the optimal preheating conditions, cross sections of the pellets fabricated at various calcination temperatures were also observed by FE-SEM. The phase compositions and cross-sectional properties of the Nb2O5-LATP solid electrolyte pel-lets were analyzed by FE-SEM and XRD. The relative densities of the electrolyte pellets were measured using the Archimedes approach with ethanol as a ﬂuid.
To remove adsorbed water, the pellets were heated to 100 °C. The two sides of the pellets were sputtered with gold as an ion-blocking electrode. The impedances of the LATP and LATP-Nb2O5 pellets were measured using the AC impedance technique with an electrochemical workstation (VersaSTAT3, Princeton Applied Research) at an AC am-plitude of 5 mV in the frequency range of 1 MHz to 1 Hz in air. The ionic conductivity can be calculated as: σt = (1/S)(L/Rt), where σt, L, S, and Rt are the total conductivity, thickness, eﬀective area, and total im-pedance of the solid electrolyte pellet, respectively. The direct-current (DC) polarization method with a constant voltage of 0.2 V was used to evaluate the electronic conductivity of the solid electrolyte. To calcu-late the activation energy of the system, impedance measurements were performed at temperatures of 283 to 333 K (for at least 30 min at each selected temperature).
Fig. 2a shows the XRD patterns of the LATP precursor powders obtained at diﬀerent pretreating temperatures. The diﬀraction peaks of all samples almost match those of the standard pattern of the NASICON-type LiTi2(PO4)3 (PDF# 35-0754) with a space group of R-3c. Never-theless, an AlPO4 secondary phase was observed in the precursor powders preheated at diﬀerent temperatures. The large amounts of the ion-resistive phase AlPO4 severely impede the Li+ mobility among the grain boundaries in LATP owing to the blocking eﬀects [26]. In addi-tion, LiTiPO5,Li4P2O7, and other phases were observed in the precursor powders during the preheating. A low temperature (below 700 °C) leads to an incomplete reaction, but a high calcination temperature (above 800 °C) induces undesirable side reactions, which lead to the formation of unfavorable phases. The morphology of the precursor powder an-nealed at 700 °C is shown in Fig. 2b. The precursor powder contained regular and spherical particles with grain sizes of 50–100 nm. Hence, it is necessary to obtain an ideal precursor with a high-purity phase by controlling the calcination temperature.
To conﬁrm the optimal calcination temperature, precursor powders preheated at diﬀerent temperatures were pressed and subsequently sintered. Fig. 3a shows the cross-sectional morphology of the solid electrolyte pellet. The grains gradually grew with the increase in cal-cination temperature, but the grain boundaries of the electrolyte were still present, which hindered the provision of the desired ionic con-ductivity. All impedance spectra of the LATP solid electrolytes consisted of a high-frequency semicircle and low-frequency inclined line. The semicircle represents the ion conduction in the bulk of the material, while the straight line corresponds to the Li-ion diﬀusion between the solid electrolyte and gold blocking electrode [27](Fig. 3b). Although the grain impedance (Rg) of the solid electrolyte was not well mani-fested owing to the limited frequency of the electrochemical work-station, Rg can be estimated as the origin of the grain boundary (Rgb) semicircle at low frequencies. Rg and Rgb can be obtained using the Z-View software by ﬁtting the equivalent circuit (Fig. 3d). The total im-pedance (Rt) is considered to be the sum of Rg and Rgb (Rt = Rg + Rgb). The impedance of the electrolyte pellets initially decreased, and then increased with the calcination temperature. The impedance of S-700-880 was signiﬁcantly lower than that of S-800-880, which is consistent with the ionic conductivity and relative density of S-700-880 (Fig. 3c). According to the above analysis, S-700-880 exhibited the best con-ductivity. However, the low total ionic conductivity (8 × 10−5 Scm−1) of the LATP solid electrolyte obtained under the optimal preheating conditions should be improved for practical applications. Nevertheless, the values are signiﬁcantly lower than the reported values, owing to the relatively high pressure in the fabrication of the pellets and dry Ar used in the measurement [18,28]. The large Rgb (approximately 1411 Ω) hindered the Li+ diﬀusion across the grain boundaries, which reduced the ionic conductivity of the LATP solid electrolyte. These results also indicate that the total ionic conductivity of the LATP conducting ceramic was dominated by the grain boundary component. Considering the high Rgb of the pristine solid electrolyte, we introduced Nb2O5 as a doping agent into the LATP solid electrolyte and investigated the eﬀects of the Nb2O5 doping level on the phase composition and ionic con-ductivity of the LATP solid electrolyte.
To investigate the eﬀects of the Nb2O5 content on the phase com-position and microstructure of LATP, the calcination and sintering temperatures were ﬁxed at 700 and 880 °C, respectively. Fig. 4a shows the XRD patterns of the LATP solid electrolytes doped with various amounts of Nb2O5. All reﬂections well match those of the NASICON-type LTP main phase, except those of some minor phases. Surprisingly, the Nb2O5 phase was not observed in the LATP-Nb2O5 system. The shifts of the patterns and lattice volumes indicate that Nb2O5 was incorporated into the LATP crystal structure, which can be attributed to the radius diﬀerences between Nb5+ and P5+, according to Table 1. The LATP ceramic without Nb2O5 doping consisted of a minor AlPO4 phase and Li2O phase, which may be attributed to the loss of lithium during the sintering. As stated above, the AlPO4 secondary phase had a signiﬁcant role in the ionic conductivity of the LATP solid electrolyte. Therefore, it is necessary to trade oﬀ the ionic conductivity and relative density of the solid electrolyte by controlling the AlPO4 secondary phase [29,30]. Notably, the AlPO4 and Li2O phases gradually dis-appeared (Nb-2 and Nb-4) with the addition of Nb2O5. The patterns of the LiTiPO5 phase gradually emerged (Nb-6, 8, and 10) with the further increase in Nb2O5 content. These results conﬁrm that the highly re-sistive AlPO4 phase might be decomposed by the doping with Nb ions (V). The LiTiPO5 ﬂux phase, as a speciﬁc binder, can eﬀectively im-prove the sintering ability of the LATP ceramic pellets [31]. The un-favorable TiO2 phase started to form in Nb-10. This indicates that excess Nb2O5 is likely to induce the decomposition of LATP [32].Fig. 4b shows that the grains of the LATP solid electrolyte gradually grew with the increase in Nb2O5 content. Compared to those in the pristine LATP conducting ceramic, the grains in Nb-8 began to merge. As expected, Nb-8 exhibited a denser microstructure than that of LATP. This further conﬁrms that the LiTiPO5 phase might ﬁll some of the pores and increase the relative density of the LATP solid electrolyte during the sintering. This result is consistent with the results reported by Lee et al. [33]. At the doping level of Nb2O5 of 10 wt%, small numbers of cracks and white fragments were observed, which hindered the improvement in ionic conductivity and provision of a dense elec-trolyte. The results of an element analysis of Nb-8 are shown in Fig. S1, which conﬁrm that Nb5+ was most likely to incorporate into the lattice of LATP.
The ionic conductivity of a solid electrolyte is one of the most im-portant characteristics. To evaluate the optimal doping amount of Nb2O5 in the LATP solid electrolyte, EIS was carried out to acquire AC impedance spectra of the LATP-Nb2O5 conducting ceramics, as shown in Fig. 5a. The total impedance of the Nb2O5-LATP solid electrolyte initially decreased, and then increased with the Nb2O5 content in the range of 2 to 10 wt%. Notably, the LATP conducting ceramic with the 8-wt% Nb2O5 exhibited the smallest semicircle among those of all con-sidered materials, which led to the lowest total impedance (approxi-mately 395 Ω) obtained by ﬁtting the impedance spectra using the equivalent circuit. The ionic conductivities and relative densities of the LATP-Nb2O5 system are shown in Fig. 5b. The LATP solid electrolyte with the 8-wt% Nb2O5 exhibited high total ionic conductivity (3.54 × 10−4 Scm−1 at 303 K) and relative density (91.7%). Compared to that of the sample without Nb2O5, the total ionic conductivity of the 8-wt%Nb2O5-LATP solid electrolyte was increased four or ﬁve times. Tem-perature dependent impedance spectra of Nb-8 ceramic electrolyte tested at the selected temperature in range of 283 K to 333 K is shown in Fig. 5c. It can be clearly seen that the total resistances gradually de-crease with the increase in measurement temperature. Considering the relationship between the total ionic conductivity and test temperature (Arrhenius equation), σtT = Aexp(−Ea/kBT), where σt, T, A, Ea, and kB are the total conductivity of the material, test temperature, pre-ex-ponential factor, activation energy, and Boltzmann constant, respec-tively. The total activation energies of the pure LATP and Nb-8 solid electrolytes were calculated, as shown in Fig. 5c. The total activation energy of LATP was largely reduced upon the doping with Nb. Con-sidering that the bulk impedances of all specimens did not change ob-viously upon the element doping, we investigated the contribution of the grain boundaries to the total activation energy. Fig. 5e shows that the activation energy of Nb-8 was 0.228 eV, which indicates that the grain-boundary activation energy of Nb-8 was considerably lower than that of the pure LATP sample. Therefore, the Nb substitution in LATP reduced the barrier height of Li+ migration at the grain boundaries (from 0.311 to 0.228 eV), which increased the ionic conductivity [34]. According to the previous phase analysis, the less resistive phase (Li-TiPO5) in the LATP-Nb2O5 system might exist in the grain boundary gap of the LATP pellets. The increase in lithium concentration is also con-ducive to the mobility of Li ions, thereby increasing the grain boundaries conductivities. This indicates that beneﬁcial eﬀects of Nb2O5 doping on the grain boundary conductivity outweigh the posi-tive eﬀect of lattice parameters on the grain conductivity (Table 2).To investigate the Li-ion transference number of the solid electro-lyte, the DC polarization method was used to calculate the electronic conductivities. Fig. 5f shows that the currents of the pure LATP and Nb-8 pellets gradually stabilized with the increase in polarization time. Based on the steady current stage, the electronic conductivities can be obtained by σe =(l/S)(I/U), where l, S, I, and U are the thickness, ef-fective area of the solid electrolyte, polarization current, and voltage, respectively. The electronic conductivities of LATP and LATP doped with Nb2O5 were approximately 10−10 Scm−1, at least ﬁve orders of magnitude lower than their total ionic conductivities. The Li+ trans-ference number (tLi+) can be calculated as tLi+ =(σt – σe)/σt. According to Table 2, the tLi+ values of LATP and Nb2O5-LATP were close to 1. The above results suggest that the Nb-8 conducting ceramic with the desired ionic conductivity (> 10−4 Scm−1) is a promising fast ion conductor for electrochemical devices.
To obtain the best sintering parameters, the eﬀects of the sintering time and temperature on Nb-8 were evaluated using the AC impedance technique. Fig. 6a shows the impedance spectra of the Nb-8 pellets sintered at various temperatures for 5 h. With the increase in sintering temperature, the solid electrolyte sintered at 880 °C exhibited the smallest semicircle. The increased impedance of Nb-8 sintered at 900 °C can be attributed to the emergence of cracks (outlined by the white dotted box), which might impede the Li+ migration at the grain boundaries. Considering the above analysis, the optimal temperature of sintering of the Nb-8 pellet was ﬁxed at 880 °C. Subsequently, the in-ﬂuences of the sintering holding time on the electrical properties were investigated. The optimal Nb-8 sintered for 5 h exhibited the smallest semicircle. Fig. 7 shows that the grains of Nb-8 sintered in a short periods (3 h) at a low temperature (850 °C) were very small and ac-companied by grain boundaries. The sintering for long periods at high temperatures might lead to cracks owing to the abnormal grain growth, consistent with a previous study [35]. Hence, the sintering parameters should be carefully chosen according to the grain size. The optimal sintering temperature and time were 880 °C and 5 h, respectively.
To investigate the chemical stability of the LATP-Nb2O5 system, the LATP and Nb-8 specimens were exposed to the atmosphere for three weeks. Fig. 8 shows that the total impedance of the pristine LATP without Nb2O5 doping was increased to 2300 Ω after the three weeks, whereas that of the Nb-8 pellet was not considerably changed. The results indicate that the LATP conducting ceramic doped with the 8-wt%Nb2O5 exhibited a good chemical stability in the atmosphere, which can be attributed to the stabilization of the cubic phase by the doping with Nb. Further investigation is needed to explain this result.
We incorporated Nb2O5 as a doping agent into the LATP solid electrolyte. The LATP conducting ceramic with the 8-wt% Nb2O5 ex-hibited the maximum total ionic conductivity of 3.54 × 10−4 Scm−1 at 303 K, relative density of 91.7%, and lowest activation energy of 0.271 eV. The grain growth and LiTiPO5 secondary phase served as a ﬂux enhancing the sintering and densiﬁcation of the LATP-based ceramic upon the addition of Nb2O5, which explained the increase in ionic conductivity of the LATP-Nb2O5 system. Ea of the grain boundary was largely reduced by the increase in lithium content and less resistive phase of the LATP solid electrolyte. The control of the lithium con-ducting phosphate phase of the LATP-Nb2O5 system could provide the optimal conducting ceramic with a high ionic conductivity and good chemical stability, which can be a promising material for electrochemical devices. In addition, the inﬂuence of Nb2O5 doping on grain boundary characteristics of LATP based ceramic was more ob-vious than that of grain. It could provide an appropriate explanation for the increase in grain boundary conductivity upon the partial substitu-tion of P5+ by Nb5+ in the LATP solid electrolyte.