An equimolar substitution of Zr4+ with Al3+ and Y3+ was chosen to prepare two NASICON series, Na1+2xAlxYxZr2−2x(PO4)3 and Na3+2xAlxYxZr2−2x(SiO4)2(PO4)3, which were compared with previously investigated Sc3+-substituted NASICON materials. The common feature of all series is a mean effective ionic radius of the transition metal cations of 0.718 Å < reff < 0.745 Å. Na1+2xAlxYxZr2−2x(PO4)3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.3) has a rhombohedral crystal structure, whereas Na3+2xAlxYxZr2−2x(SiO4)2(PO4)3 changes the modification from a monoclinic (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.1) to a rhombohedral structure (x > 0.1). The average linear coefficient of thermal expansion of Na3+2xAlxYxZr2−2x(SiO4)2(PO4)3, obtained from high temperature X-ray diffraction, increased when x was raised from 4.1 · 10−6 K−1 to 8.1 · 10−6 K−1. The ionic conductivity of Na1+2xAlxYxZr2−2x(PO4)3 compositions was one to two orders of magnitude lower than the Na3+2xAlxYxZr2−2x(SiO4)2(PO4)3 series. For the latter series, conductivity decreased when the Al/Y substitution was increased, despite the number of charge carriers (Na+) increasing. Conductivity was 0.8 mS cm−1 when x = 0, and 0.08 mS cm−1 when x = 0.3. This demonstrates that the transport properties in NASICON materials are not only affected by the steric interactions (i.e. reff, mean width of conduction path) but also the electrostatic interactions (charge, bond strength, atomic orbitals) of the substituting cations.

NASICON (Na+ Super Ionic Conductor) is the name given to a broad class of materials first reported in 1976 by Hong and Goodenough [1,2]. The original NASICONs were solid solutions derived from NaZr2(PO4)3 by partial substitution of P with Si and balanced by Na addition to maintain charge neutrality, yielding the formula Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 (0 ≤ x ≤ 3). The crystal structure is stable for a wide range of substitutions, from basic NaZr2(PO4)3 (NZP) systems to complex Na1+2w+x−y+zM+2wM+3xM+5yM+42−w−x−y(SiO4)z(PO4)3−z systems [3,4]. The crystal structure of Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 (0 ≤ x ≤ 3) is rhombohedral (), except for 1.8 ≤ x ≤ 2.2, which undergoes monoclinic distortion (C2/c). The crystal structure can also be monoclinic for LiZr2(PO4)3 [5,6] or triclinic for LiSn2(PO4)3 [7].

A NASICON is a three-dimensional framework of corner-shared ZrO6 octahedra and (Si, P)O4 tetrahedra, containing interconnected channels which provide a conduction pathway for the Na+ between two positions: Na(1) and Na(2) (Fig. 1). In the rhombohedral modification, the Na(1) sites (Wyckoff positions 6b at (0 0 0)) are sixfold coordinated to the oxygen ions of the three (Si, P)O4 tetrahedra above and below, whereas the Na(2) sites (Wyckoff positions 18e (x 0 0.25)) are eightfold coordinated to oxygen ions [1,8]. For the monoclinic structure, another position is available [9], Na(3), in which the Na+ ions are also sixfold coordinated to the oxygen ions of three ZrO6 octahedra, and conduction occurs by jumping from the Na(1) to the Na(2) or Na(3) sites. The length of the jump is approximately 3 Å depending on the composition and the resulting lattice parameters of the material. The Na+ moves from one position to the other through oxygen triangles T1 and T2 (Fig. 1). The size of these triangles determines the ease of Na+ conduction and is regarded as a bottleneck for Na+ conduction in the system, as shown in Fig. 3. The passage of Na+ through T1 (smaller triangle) appears to be more difficult in comparison to T2 (bigger triangle) [10], which was confirmed by a correlative study of the area of T1 and activation energy for ionic conductivity [3].

A structure-composition-property correlation study comprising >110 NASICON compositions was carried out by Guin and Tietz [3] to highlight the critical parameters in designing NASICON materials with fast ion conduction. The three parameters are a) the size of transition metal cations, b) the Na content per formula unit, and c) the crystal distortion affecting the structural bottleneck. The performance is at its highest when the size of the metal cation, expressed as an effective mean radius (reff), is 0.72 Å, in addition to the monoclinic structural distortion that can be achieved by substituting phosphorous with silicon. Furthermore, the materials fulfilling these two parameters can be further improved by increasing the amount of Na+ charge carriers in the formula unit, leading to the highest conductivity values of 3–3.5 mol Na per formula unit.

The Na3+xSc2SixP3−xO12 (NSSiPx) [11] and Na3+xScxZr2−x(SiO4)2(PO4) (NSZSiPx) [12] series were used to validate the hypothesis put forward in this review, as shown in Fig. 2. Both series fulfill the design parameters stated in [3] with the difference being the substitutional concept for increasing charge carriers, i.e. the different bond strengths within the polyanionic lattice. In the series NSSiPx, the structure contains only Sc3+single bondOsingle bondNa+ bonds whereas in the series NSZSiPx a mixture of Sc3+single bondOsingle bondNa+ and Zr4+single bondOsingle bondNa+ bonds are present. The Zr4+ ions polarize the oxygen atoms more strongly than the Sc3+ ions. These stronger attractive interactions should lead to shorter Zr4+single bondO bond lengths and, as a result, to weaker Na+single bondO interactions, facilitating the Na+ mobility. In contrast, cations with lower valency, e.g. Sc3+, polarize the oxygen atoms less and therefore they are expected to interact more with the Na+ cations in the conduction pathways, consequently hindering the mobility of Na+. For the stronger Zr4+single bondO bonds, the Na+single bondO bond is weak and, as a consequence, Na+ mobility is higher [13] as proven for the two series NSSiPx and NSZSiPx and shown in Fig. 2.

In contrast, the cation with a lower valency (Sc3+; r = 0.745 Å) induces a weaker bond to the oxygen ion, which compensates the bonding force with a stronger attraction to the Na+ ions, i.e. the sodium mobility is lower in the Na3+xSc2SixP3−xO12 [13,14] series. As an example, the best conductivities observed in both series are 4 mS cm−1 and 0.8 mS cm−1 for Na3.4Sc0.4Zr1.6Si2PO12 and Na3.4Sc2Si0.4P2.6O12, respectively [11,12]. These results explain the electrostatic impact of the metal cations involved in the structure, as the steric effect in both series is almost negligible due to the very similar ionic radii. In order to further understand the influence of other substituting cations, a double substitution was considered in this study and a novel Na1+2x+yAlxYxZr2−2x(SiO4)y(PO4)3−y solid solution (x = 0–1, y = 0, 2) investigated, where Zr4+ (r = 0.72 Å) is partially substituted with equimolar amounts of Al3+ (r = 0.53 Å) and Y3+ (r = 0.90 Å). Hereinafter, the compositions without silicon (y = 0) substitution will be abbreviated as NAYZPx and those with substitution (y = 2) as NAYZSiPx. In this system, although reff is almost constant and varies only between 0.718 Å and 0.720 Å, the substituting cations with different radii but the same charge may interfere with the sodium transport in a different way to the substitution with Sc3+. This study thus provides further insight into the influence of the electrostatic impact of the cations in the polyanionic sub-lattice.

The desired solid solutions, NAYZPx and NAYZSiPx, were prepared using the Pechini method [15]. Stoichiometric amounts of metal nitrates, NaNO3 (99.5%), Al(NO3)2·9H2O (99.2%), Y(NO3)2·6H2O (99.8%), ZrO(NO3)2·xH2O (99%), and Si(OC2H5)4 (99%), supplied by VWR International (Belgium), were mixed and dissolved in a quartz glass container, followed by the addition of citric acid (C6H8O7) twice the molar amount of metal cations (Na+, Al3+, Y3+, Zr4+, NH4+) to form citrate complexes. After formation of a clear solution, a stoichiometric amount of NH4H2PO4 was added and stirred for 0.5 h to form a homogeneous precipitate. Ethylene glycol was then introduced in the same molar amount as citric acid. The mixture was stirred overnight at 300 rpm and 50 °C.

Citric acid acts as a complexing agent and ethylene glycol acts as a polymerizing agent. The formation of citrate complexes results in a better distribution of ions and prevents the separation of components in later processes. With the presence of ethylene glycol, esterification results in the formation of a gel. The homogenized mixture was first heated from 50 °C up to 100 °C to slowly evaporate H2O. Further heating to temperatures up to 300 °C leads to the polycondensation of ethylene glycol and citric acid, and results in the formation of a highly viscous polymer citrate gel. The stirring bar was taken out before the viscosity increased. Subsequently, the gel was fired in a furnace at 600 °C for 3 h to form an amorphous precursor. During this heat treatment, the polymer matrix was pyrolyzed and NOx, CO2, and H2O evolved as gaseous products. Further calcination (800 °C, 12 h) of the precursor and sintering in Pt crucibles resulted in the desired material.

The calcined powder was milled for 24 h with zirconia balls in ethanol on a roller bench at 200 rpm, dried and pressed into pellets with a pressure of 150 MPa, and sintered under selected conditions to obtain a comparable relative density for each composition. The NAYZPx samples were sintered at 1200 °C for 10 h in air, whereas the NAZYSiPx samples were sintered in a two-step sintering process, 1200 °C for 0.5 h and 1150 °C for 5 h in air. The relative density in all cases was 85–93%. Both sides of the pellets were sputtered with gold as blocking electrodes. Electrical conductivity was measured using an impedance spectroscopy system (Biologic, VMP-300) from −30 °C to 100 °C in the frequency range 4 MHz to 300 Hz.

The phase purity of the sintered specimens was measured by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker D4 ENDEAVOR diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation) and Rietveld refinement was performed using the Jana2006 computer software. The microstructure of the powder and the cross-section of each pellet were examined by means of scanning electron microscopy (SEM, ULTRA 55, Zeiss). The shape of the pellets was regular, with the apparent density calculated using the diameter and thickness of the pellets. The high-temperature XRD (HT-XRD) was measured on an Empyrean diffractometer (PANalytical GmbH) in the temperature range of 25 °C to 700 °C, with an increment of 100 °C.

Differential thermal analysis/thermogravimetry (DTA/TG) measurements and differential scanning calorimetry/thermogravimetry (DSC/TG) measurements were carried out using the STA449F1 Jupiter calorimeter coupled to the QMS 403C Aëolos mass spectrometer from NETZSCH-Gerätebau GmbH. The measurements were performed in the temperature range of 20–1500 °C in air with heating and cooling rates of 900 K/h. The dilatometry experiments were carried out with a 402C dilatometer from NETZSCH-Gerätebau GmbH.

The XRD patterns of NAYZPx (x = 0–0.3, 1) after sintering are shown in Fig. 3. Very weak reflections in a non-systematic but reproducible manner are found for x = 0–0.15 and 0.25 showing fluctuating minor contents between 1 and 5 wt% for Na3Y2(PO4)3, YPO4 [16], orthorhombic AlPO4 [17] and monoclinic ZrO2. In the sample with x = 0.20, the amount of YPO4 is exceptionally and also reproducibly higher (about 10 wt%). For x > 0.25, a continuous increase in YPO4 and Na3Y2(PO4)3 indicates that the solid solution has definitely reached its limit. For the complete Zr substitution (x = 1), the NASICON crystal structure completely disappeared and mainly YPO4 formed in addition to smaller amounts of Na3Y2(PO4)3 [18].

The XRD patterns of NAYZSiPx (x = 0–0.3) after sintering are shown in Fig. 4a. The NAYZSiPx adopts a C2/c monoclinic structure for 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.2, and transforms into a rhombohedral  phase when x = 0.3. Monoclinic ZrO2 was detected in all samples. The monoclinic → rhombohedral transition can be seen in Fig. 4b.

The lattice parameters of NAYZPx and NAYZSiPx are shown in Fig. 5. In the NAYZPx system, an enlargement of the hexagonal lattice is observed in both a and c directions with increasing x. However, in the NAYZSiPx system, the lattice parameters a and c show the opposite trend whereas c decreases when x is raised, a increases. Since the mean ionic radius (reff) remains constant in all compositions, the variation of the lattice parameters is mainly due to the increasing Na concentration.

The size of the bottleneck was calculated from the oxygen and sodium atom positions in the crystal lattice, which were obtained from Rietveld refinement of the XRD data. The area of triangles T1 and T2 is plotted against the substitution level in Fig. 6, indicating that T1 is significantly smaller than T2. In addition, the T1 is decreasing in NAYZSiPx and increasing in NAYZPx when the substitution of Al and Y is increased. The decrease or increase in the T1 area indicates enlargement or contraction of the channels through which sodium ions have to pass. As a consequence, it directly affects activation energy of sodium ion conductivity, as reviewed in detail in [3]. Therefore, an increase in the activation energy (Ea) of sodium ion conductivity (Section 3.4) can be expected for NAYZSiPx. However, Ea is also influenced by parameters like monoclinic distortion in the crystal structure and the sodium concentration per formula unit, but the extent of influence of each individual parameter is still not clarified yet.

The HT-XRD patterns of NAYZSiPx between 2θ = 18° and 20° are shown in Fig. 7. The figure depicts a monoclinic to rhombohedral phase transition taking place between 100 °C and 200 °C for NAYZSiP0, NAYZSiP0.05, and NAYZSiP0.1. For temperatures higher than 700 °C, the patterns indicate a reversible secondary phase transition (not shown here). During heating, the peaks shift to the left due to an expansion of the lattice parameters.

The hexagonal lattice parameters and volume of NAYZSiPx obtained from HT-XRD are plotted as a function of temperature in Fig. 8. The volume of the unit cell expands with increasing temperature and also shows that the system undergoes strong expansion in the c direction as opposed to the a direction. A similar expansion anisotropy is also observed for Na3+xSc2SixP3−xO12 [11]. The anisotropic thermal expansion may lead to large residual stresses during cooling, inducing the formation of micro-cracks, as has already been reported for NASICON-type ceramics and is described further in Section 3.3 [20,21]. The volume expansion shows a remarkable slope change with temperature. Whereas NAYZSiP0, NAYZSiP0.05, and NAYZSiP0.1 only differ in a shift of the absolute values, NAYZSiP0.2 and NAYZSiP0.3 have a much stronger volume expansion than the other three compositions.

The coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) was calculated using the lattice expansion data of the HT-XRD measurements and the equation

The resulting CTE of the volume expansion can be related to the linear CTE obtained from dilatometry measurements with

The CTEa, CTEc, and CTElinear are compared in Fig. 9 for NAYZSiPx between 200 °C and 700 °C. There is strong difference in the thermal expansion of the two lattice parameters and the CTEc/CTEa ratio varies between 3 and 5. This anisotropy is typical for NASICON materials [22,23].

The CTElinear of NAYZSiPx increases from 4.1 · 10−6 K−1 to 8.1 · 10−6 K−1 for NAYZSiP0 and NAYZSiP0.3, respectively, which is in agreement with NASICON in which only yttrium was substituted (5.9–11.7) × 10−6 K−1 [24].

DTA/TG curves of two selected specimens are shown in Fig. 10. Because the samples were stored in air, the weight loss below 500 °C can be attributed to release of H2O (up to 250 °C) and CO2. However, above around 1300 °C, the weight loss is due to the evaporation of Na2O and/or P2O5. Since the sintering temperature ranged from 1000 °C to 1250 °C, any possibility of material loss during heat treatments can be disregarded.

In the case of the NAYZSiPx system, a small peak occurred at 750 °C and is interpreted as a partial melting or amorphization occurring in the material, which solidifies during cooling (cooling curve not shown here). The glassy phase formed upon solidification is richer in Si than the surrounding crystalline NASICON grains and appears gray in the SEM images (see next section). The peak at around 1300 °C corresponds to melting of the ceramic. The melting temperatures of the NAYZSiPx compounds are listed in Table 1.

Microstructures of NAYZPx with x = 0.10, 0.20, and 0.25 sintered at 1200 °C for 10 h in air are shown in Fig. 11. The samples with x = 0 and x = 0.05 did not densify at the sintering temperature and relative densities of only 52% and 75% were achieved. For 0.1 ≥ x ≥ 0.3, the relative density of the samples varied between 87% and 91%. The microstructure of all three compositions was similar in general. However, the NAYZP0.20 composition contained YPO4 as a secondary phase in addition to ZrO2, with the latter present in all compositions. The formation of micro-cracks was observed, as indicated by arrows in Fig. 11.

The microstructure of NAYZSiPx specimens with x = 0, 0.05, and 0.1 is also shown, indicating a similar relative density (85–93%). The microstructure of the other compositions is very similar and therefore not shown here. However, the amount of secondary phase (ZrO2) differed and increased when x was increased, as observed by XRD (see Section 3.1).

The formation of ZrO2 during densification of NASICON was also observed by others [[25], [26], [27]]. The ZrO2 forms due to its high thermodynamic stability and lower crystallization temperature prior to the NASICON phase, and not due to the volatility of reagents (e.g. Na2O) at the sintering temperature. In the Pechini synthesis method used here, the ZrO2 formation begins at 800 °C, which is slightly higher than when using the solution-assisted solid state reaction [15].

Nyquist plots of NAYZPx (x = 0–0.3) are shown in Fig. 12a. The formation of two semicircles indicates high grain boundary resistance in the sample in addition to bulk resistance. The bulk (σb) and grain boundary (σgb) conductivities were obtained from bulk and grain boundary resistance (Rb and Rgb) using the equation σ = L/(A · R), where L and A represent the length and area of the specimen, respectively. These semicircles were fitted using the ZView® computer software, to obtain bulk, grain boundary, and total conductivities, as shown along with the equivalent circuit in Fig. 12b.

In the NAYZPx system (Fig. 12b), σb increases with the number of Na per formula unit, except for when x = 0.2, which contains a high amount of the YPO4 impurity phase. The conductivity of NAYZPx is in the order of 10−6 S cm−1, which is low for an electrochemical application. The low conductivity is due to the low sodium content in the compounds. In addition, the rhombohedral crystal structure has only two sodium positions, Na(1) and Na(2), thereby allowing Na+ ion conduction along only one pathway (see Fig. 1a). Conductivity increased due to the increase in the amount of charge carriers (Na+). However, when it reaches 1.4 mol sodium per formula unit, conductivity started to decrease due to the increasing occurrence of secondary phases and micro-cracks.

In the case of the NAYZSiPx series, the same interpretation of the impedance data was used. However, since only one semicircle is visible the Rb/CPEb element was discarded. Low and high intercepts of the observed single semicircles thus correspond to bulk resistance (Rb) and (RTotal), respectively, and the grain boundary resistance was calculated with Rgb = RTotal − Rb. The calculated conductivities are shown along with the Nyquist plots in Fig. 13. Here, the Al/Y substitution in NAYZSiPx leads to a decrease in the σb and σgb of the samples. Conductivity was highest for the unsubstituted sample, i.e. x = 0 (i.e. 3.0 Na/formula unit). The total conductivity of NAYZSiPx was in the range 0.5–0.06 mS cm−1 for 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.3, which is two orders of magnitude higher for NAYZPx. The Si-substituted system, unlike NAYZPx, exhibits monoclinic distortion and has three sodium positions: Na(1), Na(2), and Na(3) [9]. The Na+ ions in the monoclinic lattice jump between these positions in two different pathways (Fig. 1b), and the material has a higher conductivity compared to the rhombohedral lattice [28]. Since the NAYZSiPx is only monoclinic when the Na content is <3.2 Na per formula unit, and becomes rhombohedral for Na content >3.4 Na per formula unit, this might be the reason why σb drops significantly when x > 0.3 [3,11,12]. In addition, the decreasing σb within the monoclinic lattice (0 < x < 0.2) is related to the decrease in the bottleneck size (area T1, see Section 3.1.2).

The variation of σgb corresponds to the influence of the processing conditions affecting the sample microstructure. To keep these variations minimal, samples with relative densities in the range of 86–93% for all compositions were prepared.

Conductivity measurements at elevated temperatures were carried out on both series, NAYZPx (only those with comparable relative densities) and NAYZSiPx. The results are shown as a function of inverse temperature in Fig. 14 along with the corresponding activation energy (Ea). The Arrhenius plot shows that the conductivity of NAYZSiPx decreases with increasing x in the system. This is in agreement with the results in Fig. 13. The activation energy of the NAYZSiPx samples only varies between 0.3 eV and 0.33 eV, and is in agreement with previous studies on NASICON materials [29,30]. The NAYZPx samples have conductivities one to four orders of magnitude lower than the Si-substituted compositions, depending on the composition and temperature, due to higher activation energies (0.42–0.46 eV).

Both series are compared with the Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 system as a function of Na per formula unit in Fig. 15. In contrast to the Sc-substituted materials (Fig. 2), the conductivity of NAYZSiPx decreased with increasing x. This could be due to both structural and processing reasons. The processing route determines the microstructure and, therefore, directly influences conductivity. However, in this case, the relative density of NAYZSiPx was controlled and in the range of 87–93%, which is similar to the densities of the Sc-containing materials. The structural factors include crystallographic aspects, for example the lattice parameters, atomic positions, and the size of the bottleneck. The bottleneck size decreased in the NAYZSiPx system [2,28,31,32] when the amount of substitution was increased and appears to affect its bulk conductivity.

A suitable fast ion conductor is one that i) fulfills optimal crystallographic arrangements to enable high bulk conductivity, and ii) exhibits effective processability to ensure minimum grain boundary resistance. The total conductivity controls the successful application of a material as an electrolyte. Fig. 15 compares the total conductivities of the NAYZPx and NAYZSiPx series with the Na1+xZr2SixP3−xO12 series. The best conductivity was observed for x = 2, i.e. 3.0 mol Na/formula unit. The increasing conductivity as a function of x in Fig. 15 is directly attributable to the increasing number of charge carriers, i.e. the Na concentration. Theoretically, the maximum number of Na per formula unit is restricted to 4. However, the concentration of Na vacancies in the formula unit is also essential to enabling Na+ to hop across the lattice.

In the Na3+xSc2SixP3−xO12 and Na3+xScxZr2−x(SiO4)2(PO4) series, the optimal ratio between charge carrier and vacancy concentration in the formula unit has been reported as 3.4:0.6 [11,12]. However, NAYZSiPx does not follow this experimental observation. Even though the Na+ concentration increases with Al/Y substitution, the conductivity of the material decreases in spite of the fact that the reff of the cations is close to 0.72 Å. In contrast to the Sc-containing series, the individual cation sizes differ substantially. Furthermore, the size of the T1 triangle also determines the ease of Na+ ion transport [3], and its size decreases when the Al/Y substitution is increased, thus explaining the decrease in conductivity along the NAYZSiPx series. Taking these parameters into consideration, it can be concluded that even if the steric interactions are kept almost constant by using the same reff, the increasing dissimilarity of the cations involved, from Zr-Zr, Sc-Sc, and Sc-Zr to (Al/Y)-Zr, has a significant impact on ionic conductivity. Atomic orbitals of cations in the MO6 octahedra (M = Zr, Sc, Y, Al) thus also appear to have a strong influence on the transport properties of the Na+ ions, as ionic conductivity decreases from 4d (Zr), 3d (Sc) to 3p (Al) elements, even if an additional 4d element (Y) is involved.

NAYZPx and NAYZSiPx series were synthesized based on the empirical guidelines of fast Na+ conductivity for NASICON materials [3]. NAYZPx crystallizes in the rhombohedral NASICON structure and reaches its solubility limit when x = 0.3. For x > 0.3, AlPO4 and YPO4 dominate amongst the XRD reflections. This is due to de-mixing of the substituents from the NASICON structure and subsequently unfavorable site occupancy, especially for Al3+ ions due to their small ionic radius in octahedral coordination. NAYZSiPx crystallizes in the monoclinic modification when 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.1, and in the rhombohedral form for x > 0.1. It exhibited a similar microstructure but an increasing ZrO2 impurity content with increasing x. The crystallographic unit cell of NAYZPx expanded uniformly in a and c directions with increasing x, whereas NAYZSiPx expanded in the a direction and shrank in the c direction. The coefficient of thermal expansion of NAYZSiPx obtained from HT-XRD increased from 4.1 · 10−6 K−1 to 8.1 · 10−6 K−1 for 0 < x < 0.3.

The empirical guidelines were verified previously in the series NSSiPx [11] and NSZSiPx [12] by achieving a high conductivity of 0.8 mS cm−1 and 4 mS cm−1, respectively. In contrast, NAYZSiPx, despite fulfilling all three guidelines, ionic conductivity decreased upon increasing (Al/Y) content. Additionally, the width of the solid solution was also limited to x = 0.3, i.e. when the Na content per formula unit was 3.6. This study revealed that even if steric interactions are kept almost constant using the same mean effective radii (~0.72 Å), the increasing dissimilarity of the cations involved in all three series, from Sc-Sc in NSSiPx, Sc-Sc and Sc-Zr in NSZSiPx to (Al/Y)-Zr in NAYZSiPx, have a significant impact on ionic conductivity. Atomic orbitals of transition metal cations and the bond strengths in the polyanionic sub-lattice thus also appear to have a strong influence on the transport behavior of Na+ ions.