Sodium zirconophosphosilicates (Zr2(SixO4)3 ()) currently experience a kind of renaissance as promising ceramic electrolytes for safe all-solid-state Na batteries. Such energy storage systems are an emerging option for next-generation technologies with attractive cost due to the use of abundant elements as sodium. To identify the right candidates their ion transport properties need to be precisely studied. In many cases less is known about the contributions of blocking grain boundaries to the overall charge carrier transport. Here, we took advantage of broadband impedance and conductivity spectroscopy carried out at sufficiently low temperature to make visible these two contributions for polycrystalline Na3Zr2(SiO4)2PO4. It turned out that ion transport across the grain boundaries of a sintered pellet do not greatly hinder long-range ion dynamics. While bulk ion dynamics in Na3Zr2(SiO4)2PO4 is characterized by 1.0 mS cm−1, the grain boundary ionic conductivity is only slightly lower viz. 0.7 mS cm−1. The latter value is of large practical interest as it allows the realization of all-solid-state Na batteries without strong interfering resistances from grain boundaries.

The realization of inherently safe ceramic batteries with high energies needs highly conducting electrolytes, which should be, at the same time, electrochemically stable over a wide potential range [1], [2], [3]. Materials in the family of sodium zirconophosphosilicates, such as Na3Zr2(SiO4)2PO4, are known as fast ion conductors since many decades [4], [5]. At temperatures well below melting and often as low as room temperature they exhibit hyperionic or fast conduction. Na3Zr2(SiO4)2PO4, being a non-stoichiometric framework phosphosilicate, is primarily a solid solution between NaZr2(PO4)3 and Na4Zr2(SiO4)3 leading to the general formula Zr2(SixO4)3 (). The compounds are called Na superionic conductors, the widely known acronym is NASICON [6].

Although having been prepared according to many different routes and characterized in terms of ionic transport in various studies, only few reports, in general [7], present a clear-cut discrimination of bulk and grain boundary (g.b.) contributions to the overall ionic conductivity over a wide temperature range. Here, we show that Na3Zr2(SiO4)2PO4, prepared via a newly established solution-assisted solid state route [8], reveals not only outstanding ion conductivities at room temperature but also encouraging low grain boundary resistances.

We used alternating current (ac) conductivity spectroscopy spanning a broad frequency scale and temperature range to record the full electrical response of both the bulk regions and those affected by grain boundaries. At temperatures ranging from  to  the two contributions could clearly be resolved. Most importantly, Na3Zr2(SiO4)2PO4 exhibited a g.b. conductivity which is comparable to that prevailing in the crystalline grains. Thus, any ion blocking effects from g.b. regions are absent paving the way to use Na3Zr2(SiO4)2PO4 as a practical electrolyte for Na-ion batteries [8], [9], [10].

The procedure to prepare phase pure Na3Zr2(SiO4)2PO4 via a solution-assisted solid state reaction has quite recently been described by Naqash et al. [8]. Details of sample preparation and characterization, including X-ray diffraction analysis, see elsewhere [8]. The powder sample obtained shows negligible amounts of ZrO2; apart from that the X-ray powder diffraction perfectly agrees with that known in literature, see entry no. 473 of the inorganic crystal structure database (FIZ Karlsruhe, Germany).

For the impedance measurements, the powder was uniaxially pressed to a pellet with a pressure of ca. 1 GPa. Subsequently, we sintered the pellet at 1250  for 5 h to prepare a dense specimen. Ion blocking electrodes (Au) with a thickness of 100 nm were sputtered onto both sides of the pellet using a Leica EM SCD050 sputter device. Impedance measurement were carried out with a Novocontrol Concept80 broadband impedance spectrometer, which was operated with an active BDS 1200 cell and a ZGS interface (Novocontrol). Impedances were measured at frequencies ranging from  Hz to  Hz with a voltage amplitude of 100 mV. To reach frequencies in the GHz range an Agilent frequency analyzer (E4991A) was used. The temperature in the sample holder was varied from  to ; it was controlled by a QUATRO cryosystem (Novocontrol). The measurements were carried out under a constant flow of freshly evaporated, dry N2 gas.

An overview of the change of (i) permittivity and (ii) conductivity of polycrystalline Na3Zr2(SiO4)2PO4 with temperature and as a function of frequency is shown in Fig. 1. The permittivity isotherms clearly reveal three different contributions. While electrode polarization, because of the ion-the blocking electrodes used, dominate the spectra at high frequencies and low temperatures, below the grain boundary response and the bulk response show up as separate steps. These distinct electrical responses are also seen in conductivity spectroscopy. The corresponding plateau regions, which refer to so-called dc (direct current) regimes, are marked in Fig. 1b) by vertical arrows; in Fig. 2 conductivity data up to frequencies in the GHz range are included. The dc regimes, containing  and  (see the area highlighted in light red), are also distinguishable if the real part, , of the complex impedance is plotted as a function of frequency .

The isotherms shown were recorded at temperatures ranging from  to  in steps of . (a) The stepwise increase in permittivity with decreasing temperature reveals the bulk and grain boundary response, which is best seen at low temperatures. (b) The conductivity isotherms are composed of two plateaus; the one seen at higher frequencies reflects bulk ion transport, whereas grain boundary contributions influence the plateau at lower . Strong polarization effects are seen at low frequencies and high temperatures. The lines are drawn just to guide the eye.

Conductivity isotherm () of Na3Zr2(SiO4)2PO4 recorded up to frequencies in the GHz range, see left axis; the real part,  of the complex impedance shows the analogous frequency behavior. The dispersive part of the bulk response can be observed over a frequency range of 3 orders of magnitude, see area in light yellow. At the highest frequencies  seems to pass into a high-frequency plateau, see arrow.  and  were read off from the frequency independent plateaus highlighted by dashed lines. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

To analyze the temperature behavior of  and —note that the former is measured at lower frequencies than the latter—we read off  from the conductivity isotherms and plotted  as a function of the inverse temperature. Well below room temperature both  and  do almost follow the same temperature behavior that is characterized by approximately 0.3 eV. The difference of the two conductivities is less than 0.5 orders of magnitude, see Fig. 3.

Above  the bulk response is no longer seen in conductivity spectroscopy as it shifts toward frequencies outside the experimental window of our setup. This shift is indicted by the dashed line in Fig. 1b). Slightly above room temperature  reached  as it is the consequence of the slightly higher activation energy,  seen for  above 250 K. Careful inspection of the isotherms  reveals that the ratio  continuously decreases. This observation is even better visible in the Nyquist representation of the ac impedance data, see below.

For comparison, a preliminary analysis of Na ion hopping processes with Na nuclear marantic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy taking advantage of spin-lattice relaxation (SLR) measurements, see [11] for a review, reveals that at 363 K the Einstein-Smoluchowski diffusion coefficient  is in the order of . At 363 K the diffusion-induced Na NMR SLR rate passes through a shallow, local maximum from which the motional correlation time  can be estimated, see [11], [12], [13] for details. If we use  at 363 K , which amounts to , we obtain a solid-state diffusion coefficient of . This value is in good agreement with that deduced from NMR. A detailed analysis of transport parameters derived from both NMR and conductivity spectroscopy in Na3Zr2(SiO4)2PO4-based compounds will be published elsewhere [14].

Going back to  of Fig. 3, it is quite interesting to see that  passes through three different Arrhenius regimes. Apart from those thermally activated with ca. 0.3 eV and 0.36 eV (see Fig. 3), respectively, above  the activation energy further increased to 0.54 eV. The value of 0.36 eV, governing  in the medium temperature regime, perfectly corroborates the findings by Naqash et al., who reported an activation energy of 0.361(2) eV. Slight changes in crystal structure, which might also affect g.b. resistances, could cause the enhancement seen of  at high temperatures. One might assign the change in activation energy of  to the  phase transition, which has been discussed for NASICON materials in Ref. [15] in detail. We do not expect that the phase transition changes the lattice parameters of Na3Zr2(SiO4)2PO4 much; instead, the slight structural variations might refer to a decreasing Na-ion ordering at elevated T. Interestingly, at least for single crystals with the composition Na3Sc2(PO4)3 bulk ion conductivities show a single Arrhenius line with no deviations from linear behavior, we refer to [15] for the latest overview.

The representation of the ac impedance data with the help of complex plane plots underpins the assignment of the two electrical responses discussed above. In Fig. 3 complex plane plots, i.e., the imaginary part  vs. the real part  of the complex impedance , of Na3Zr2(SiO4)2PO4 are shown which were recorded at three different temperatures. Below  the two slightly depressed semicircles belonging to the bulk and g.b. response are clearly separated from each other and the full response can be detected. With the help of the equivalent circle depicted in Fig. 4b) we analyzed the data to extract capacitances , resistances  and the values describing the constant phase elements (CPEs) used to parameterise the semicircles [16].

Nyquist representation of the complex impedance data to make visible the distinct semicircles reflecting bulk and g.b. contributions to the overall ac response. Solid lines show the individual, series-connected - elements (. and  (electrode)) to model the data. Slightly depressed semicircles, i.e., circles with the center below the  axis indicate a distribution of electrical relaxation rates. See text for further explanation.

The complex impedance  of a CPE can be expressed as  where the angular frequency  is given by . j equals , and n is an empirical parameter ranging from 0 to 1. Q has the numerical value of the admittance  at . Accordingly, the capacitance, associated with the CPE, is given by  [16]. Here, n for CPEbulk ranged from 0.75 to 0.80.  turned out to vary from 0.67 to 0.77. The capacities of the bulk response fall into the range which is typical for bulk processes [17], at low temperatures we found .  showed values in the nF regime, see Fig. 4, undoubtedly assigning this mid-frequency response to that which is largely influenced by the boundary regions [17] of the Na3Zr2(SiO4)2PO4 crystallites. Similar capacities are obtained when simply the characteristic frequency  of the semicircle maximum is used to estimate  according to .

As has already been discussed for  the corresponding ratio  decreases with increasing temperature. While at ca.  we have  is seen at lower T and  characterizes the Nyquist diagrams at higher temperatures. A very similar behavior has recently been observed by Tenhaeff et al. who used broadband impedance spectroscopy to study garnet-type, hot-pressed Li ion conductors [18]. This vanishing g.b. resistance upon heating is of course highly beneficial for any battery operation at elevated temperatures. The Na ions are no longer hindered by grain boundary regions in the sintered ceramic making Na3Zr2(SiO4)2PO4 a practical solid electrolyte.

In a nutshell, we have studied the electrical ac impedance and conductivity response of highly conducting Na3Zr2(SiO4)2PO4 prepared by a novel solution-assisted solid state reaction. At low temperatures we were able to fully resolve the relative contributions from both the g.b. and the bulk response, i.e., the lattice impedance, to the overall ionic transport in the ceramic. Grain boundaries reduce the bulk ion conductivity below ambient temperatures by not more than 0.5 orders of magnitude. Fortunately, above room temperature the g.b. contribution has only little effect on the total conductivity (ca. ) revealing the superior ion transport properties of dense Na3Zr2(SiO4)2PO4 to become indeed one of the most important sodium-bearing electrolytes for future all-solid state energy storage systems offering a reasonable performance at ambient temperature.