In this communication, NASICON-type glass-ceramic (lithium germanium phosphate, LiGe2(PO4)3) was prepared as lithium super ionic conductor using aluminum as dopant for ionic conduction improvement. The solid solution was Li1 + xAlxGe2-x(PO4)3 (x = 0.5) that Ge4+ ions were partially substituted by Al3+ ions in crystal structure. Initial glasses were converted to glass-ceramics at different times and temperatures for maximum ionic conduction achievement. The crystals were characterized by X-ray Diffraction (XRD), Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FESEM), Energy-Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX), Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) and Complex Impedance Spectroscopy (CIS) methods. The maximum lithium ion conductivity for glass-ceramic, 5.32 × 10−3 S/cm at 26 °C was obtained for specimen crystallized at 850 °C for 8 h with minimum activation energy of 0.286 eV. Increasing the crystallization temperature results in secondary phase formation in grain boundary and increasing in crystallization time results in microcracks formation in specimen. Both phenomena decreased the ionic conductivity.

Today, production of batteries with high power density and safety is the most important issue for industries such as mobile phone, laptop and most importantly, hybrid and electrical vehicles production plant. More production of the latter vehicles depends on these batteries. Lithium-ion batteries (LIB), first introduced by SONY corporation, have a key role for electrical storage, but common LIBs use organic flammable solvents (such as ethylene carbonate) that are not appropriate for transportation because charging and discharging processes of these batteries at high current rates can be cause of explosions in these batteries. Also, this problem prevents the production of LIBs in large size. Solution of this problem is all-solid-state lithium ion batteries. These types of batteries use solid electrolytes that are lithium ion conductors. Because of their high safety, they can be made in large scale. Other reasons for development and research on these types of batteries are excellent cycleability and low production cost [1].

Solid electrolytes that are used in these types of batteries must have specific properties such as low electron conduction (electronic conduction), high lithium ion conduction and electrochemical stability in contact with anode and cathode or wide potential window [2,3,4,5,6,7,8]. Lithium–Air batteries are another type of lithium ion battery with high power density that needs solid electrolytes as membrane for lithium anode protection. These batteries are also good candidates for electric and hybrid vehicles [9,10,11]. When these glass ceramics are used in aqueous lithium air batteries as protective films; they must have other properties such as stability in contact with lithium metal and impermeabilityof water and air [12]. Perovskite-type solid solution (lithium lanthanum titanate), Garnet-type, NASICON-type and LISICON are four main crystalline inorganic lithium ion conductors [13]. NASICON-type has the general formula of LiM2(PO4)3 where M can be Ti4+, Ge4+, etc. Crystals with Ti4+ (LATP) are unstable in contact with lithium metal because of reduction of Ti4+ to Ti3+ and leading to structural degradation. Although LATP has good ionic conductivity, only crystals with Ge4+ (LAGP) can make a crystalline structure with high lithium-ion conduction and all properties that were mentioned above [14,15,16,17]. LiGe2(PO4)3 NASICON-type crystallizes in 3D network structure (rhombohedral crystal system, space group R3¯¯¯c) which has appropriate channels for Li ions (Li+) migration. In this crystal, two types of polyhedrons contain: GeO6octahedra and PO4tetrahedra which are attached by their corners to form [Ge(PO4)]ˉ framework with 3D interconnected channels and two types of interstitial cavities, A1 and A2. Li ions migrate in channels of this framework [18]. Li ions can occupy A1 and A2 sites. In LiGe2(PO4)3 with no dopant, A2 sites are vacant when A1 sites are occupied by Li ions. Partial substitution of Ge4+ ions by trivalent cations such as Al3+ ions increases the unit cell dimensions and residual negative charges are neutralized by additional Li ion that occupy A2 sites. The change in unit cell dimensions and Li ion concentration in the crystal leads to increase of ionic conductivity [18,19,20,21,22,23]. Figure 1 shows the crystal structure of LiGe2(PO4)3 and its polyhedrons [24]. The LAGP glass-ceramics are obtained by powder sintering route [25, 26], sol-gel method [12, 27, 28] and glass-ceramic process (melt quenching) [29,30,31]. The glass-ceramic method produces homogeneous microstructure without porosity with high Li+ ion conductivity which is better for lithium- air batteries.

The effect of initial stoichiometry on ionic conductivity was investigated by researchers and it was proved that the highest Li+ ion conductivity is obtained when x = 0.5 in LAGP formula of Li1 + xAlxGe2-x(PO4)3 [32, 33]. In addition, crystallization process is an important phenomenon that strongly affects ionic conductivity. Time and temperature are two effective parameters impacting crystallization that are rarely studied. In this work, after the synthesis of Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 glass, time and temperature effects on crystallization and ionic conductivity were investigated. Crystallization parameters (time and temperature) have side effects on specimens such as: secondary dielectric phase formation at grain boundaries or microcracks formation both of which decrease the ionic conductivity.

The stoichiometric amount of germanium dioxide GeO2 (Merck), lithium carbonate Li2CO3 (Merck), aluminum oxide Al2O3 (Sigma Aldrich) and ammonium dihydrogen phosphate (NH4)H2PO4 (Merck) was weighted (for preparation of a 41.77 g LAGP) and mixed for 20 min in an agate mortar and pestle. Then they were heated in an electrical furnace at 700 °C for 2 h in order to release ammonia, carbon dioxide and water vapor. Then, the materials were crushed in agate mortar and pestle and were transferred to a platinum crucible and heated in electrical furnace at 1450 °C for 1 h. The homogeneous melted glass was pressed and quenched by two preheated (300 °C) stainless steel plates. The transparent thin glass discs were transferred to another furnace and were annealed at 550 °C for 2 h to release thermal stresses. Then, the annealed thin discs were cut to 1 × 1 cm specimens and were crystallized at 650, 750, 850 and 950 °C for 2 h. After determination of 850 °C as the best temperature for crystallization, another five pristine glass specimens were crystallized at 850 °C for 1, 4, 6, 8 and 10 h for determination of best time for crystallization. Best time and temperature for crystallization were determined according to AC impedance results of each specimen and total ionic conductivity.

The thermal behavior of the glass (glass transition temperature Tg and crystallization temperature Tc) was analyzed by Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC, NETZSCH 404 F1 Pegasus-High Temperature DSC, Germany) on the finely powdered glass at a heating rate of 5 °C/min, and based on the DSC results, the specimens were crystallized at 650, 750, 850, and 950 °C for 2 h and at 850 for 1, 4, 6, 8, and 10 h. Determination of phase formation during the heat treatment process was done by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Xmd300 Unisantis, Germany) using Cu Kα radiation in 2θ range from 0 to 70°. Crystallized specimens were fractured and the microstructure of glass-ceramic specimens was investigated by Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FESEM, Σigma-vp Zeiss, Germany), while elemental analyses of phases were done by Energy Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and the ionic conductivity of polished and silver painted specimens was determined using Complex Impedance Spectroscopy (CIS, MetrohmAutolab PGST302, Netherlands) in the frequency range of 1–106 Hz.

Figure 2 shows the DSC graph of fine glass powder of non annealed Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3. The glass transition temperature and strong exothermic crystallization peak were appeared at around 533 and 628 °C, respectively. The crystallization temperature illustrates the lower limit for the temperature range of crystallization. Crystallization at temperatures above the TC ensures perfect and homogeneous crystallization [34].

According to DSC data, the crystallization process began at 650 °C and therefore 4 specimens were crystallized at 650, 750, 850, and 950 °C for 2 h and according to AC impedance results of these specimens, and determination of 850 °C as the best temperature for crystallization, another five pristine glass specimens were crystallized at 850 °C for 1, 4, 6, 8 and 10 h for determination of best time of crystallization.

Figure 3(a, b) show XRD patterns of specimens crystallized in the temperature range of 650–950 °C for 2 h and specimens crystallized at 850 °C for 1–10 h, respectively. Also in Fig. 3(a), the XRD pattern of the amorphous LAGP (specimen annealed at 550 °C < TC for thermal stress release) is observed. In all samples, the main peaks are related to the NASICON-type structure LiGe2(PO4)3 space group (R3¯¯¯c) according to JCPDS 80–1924 index file. There are no Al3+ ion in the LiGe2(PO4)3 structure but the aluminum makes a solid solution with this structure and Ge4+ ions were partially replaced by Al3+ ions and because of similarity in ionic radii (Ge4+ = 0.53 A° and Al3+ = 0.54 A°), solid solution forms and the NASICON- type structure was retained as main phase in the XRD pattern. Moreover, this substitution induces more lithium ions in the NASICON-type structure in A2 vacant sites and increases the cell volume. As seen in Fig. 3(a), increasing the crystallization temperature up to 950 °C leads to the appearance of very intense peaks of the GeO2 impure phase, rather than other samples that crystallized at 750 or 850 °C. Also at this temperature, for the first time the peaks related to AlPO4 impure phase, were observed. Therefore, increasing the crystallization temperature above 950 °C is not appropriate because the impure phase formation at this temperature at the grain boundaries has a blocking effect and prevents lithium ions transport. As seen in Fig. 3(b), increasing the crystallization time up to 10 h (at 850 °C) has a similar effect in increasing the crystallization temperature up to 950 °C (for 2 h) and the impure phase of AlPO4 appeared in specimens crystallized for 10 h. But even for specimens crystallized for 10 h the peak intensities of the impure phases are weaker than specimens crystallized at 950 °C for 2 h. Fig. 4 reveals fractured surfaces observed by FESEM for microstructure investigation of glass and glass-ceramics specimens. Figure 4(a) is related to glass (amorphous) specimen that was only annealed at 550 °C (<Tg) for thermal stresses release. There was no crystal or grain in this figure and this homogenous and dense structure with no pores reflects desired properties obtained by the melt quenching method. For specimens crystallized at 650 °C for 2 h (Fig. 4(b)) crystals with approximate dimensions of 25 nm were formed within the amorphous bulk. These grains have no regular shape. Increasing the temperature up to 750 °C (Fig. 4(c)) leads to the formation of regular crystals in cubic shape with certain grain boundaries. Figure 4(d) shows a large increase in crystal size for specimen crystallized at 850 °C for 2 h. Figure 4(e, f) reveal fractured and external surfaces of specimens crystallized at 950 °C for 2 h, respectively. A secondary phase was formed among the grains in Fig. 2(f). XRD pattern for this specimen also showed intense peaks of the GeO2 phase that formed in grain boundaries at high temperature. This phase initially formed at the external surface. As can be seen in Fig. 4(b–e), increasing the crystallization temperature from 650 to 950 °C leads to increasing grain size, but formation of secondary phase at 950 °C was not desirable and therefore 850 °C was selected as the best temperature for crystallization, but increasing the crystallization time at this temperature up to 10 h also has another negative effect. Figure 4(g, h) show specimens crystallized at 850 °C for 8 and 10 h. Both figures show large and developed crystals with specific boundaries, but microcracks were formed in specimen crystallized for 10 h. These microcracks also have similar effects on secondary phase formation that prevents transport of lithium ions.

Figure 5 shows EDX elemental analysis of the glass and crystallized specimens. Figure 5(a) is related to the glass specimen and EDX of this homogeneous phase shows LAGP stoichiometry. Figure 5(b, c) reveal two different points of fractured surface of specimen crystallized at 950 °C for 2 h, with the former showing the GeO2 phase and latter showing the LAGP phase, but Fig. 5(d, e), show two different points on external surface of this specimen with the GeO2 phase and an unknown phase similar to AlPO4, respectively. Figure 5(f) shows the LAGP phase for EDX analysis of developed and shaped crystals of specimen crystallized at 850 °C for 8 h. EDX cannot be used to establish the wt% of Li and other alkali metals. Li has only 2.5 wt% in overall formula of Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3. Table 1 shows the elemental analysis of specified points or surfaces on Fig. 5. These results confirm GeO2 and AlPO4 peak appearances in the XRD patterns.

Complex impedance spectroscopy for glass-ceramics exhibits two semicircles (one at high frequency related to bulk resistance and another at mid frequency related to grain boundary resistance) and a linear Warburg-type impedance corresponds to ionic conductive materials with blocking electrode [35,36,37,38]. At around room temperature, because of the high ionic conductivity of the grains and the limitation in frequency range of the apparatus, only one semicircle was appeared in the spectra. The total (Rb + Rgb) and the bulk (Rb) resistance of the samples were obtained from the right and left intercepts of this semicircle with the real axis, respectively. The value of the grain boundary resistance (Rgb) was simply the difference between (Rb + Rgb) and Rb [37, 39,40,41,42]. Figure 6 shows this equivalent circuit and room temperature schematic complex impedance plot. The fitting and calculation of semicircles diameters were performed with the aid of the FRA (Frequency Response Analyzer) software. After polishing and painting silver on both sides, specimens were placed between two blocking electrodes in the cell fixture and Rb, RgbandRtwere calculated from the impedance data in frequency range of 1–106 Hz. The ionic conductivity (bulk, grain boundary and total conductivity) was calculated from Eq. 1:

where R, S and d are resistance (bulk or grain boundary or total resistance), painted surface area and thickness of specimen, respectively [25]. Figure 7 shows a complex impedance plot for specimens crystallized at 650–950 °C for 2 h, increasing the crystallization temperature up to 850 °C decreased the total resistance (Rt) and accordingly an increase in total conductivity was observed. However, for the specimen crystallized at 950 °C, the simultaneous formation of GeO2 (with higher content rather than samples crystallized at 750 and 850 °C for 2 h) and AlPO4 phases in grain boundaries created a blocking effect preventing from lithium ion migration from one grain to another. Therefore increasing the crystallization temperature above 850 °C leads to an increase in total resistance. XRD pattern and EDX analysis showed impure phases formation for this temperature.

Figure 8 reveals the effect of crystallization time on total resistance of specimens crystallized at 850 °C for 1–10 h. At this temperature, increasing the time of crystallization decreased the total resistance due to growth of crystals but for specimen crystallized for 10 h, microcracks formation disconnected the paths of lithium ions migration between grains and therefore conductivity decreased. Formation of these microcracks was observed in Fig. 4(h).

Figure 9(a, b) show the variation of ionic conductivity of specimens with crystallization temperature and crystallization time respectively, with maximum ionic conductivity found for specimen crystallized at 850 °C for 2 h in Fig. 9(a) and specimen crystallized at 850 °C for 8 h in Fig. 9(b), respectively. Therefore, in the temperature range of 650–950 °C, 850 °C was the best crystallization temperature and in the time range of 1–10 h, 8 h was the best crystallization time with specimen crystallized at 850 °C for 8 h showing maximum conductivity of 5.32×10−3 S/cm. Table 2 shows the total conductivity of samples crystallized at different times and temperature. These data were calculated from specimen dimensions and total resistance extracted from impedance plots by use of Eq.1. Highest conductivities were obtained for specimens crystallized at 850 °C for 8 h.

The activation energy of lithium ion migration in LAGP crystal phase was calculated by fitting of the conductivity of each specimen at different temperatures by the Arrhenius Equation. Equations 2 and 3 present Arrhenius equation and linear form for data fitting, respectively.

where A, Ea, K and T are pre-exponential factor, activation energy, Boltzmann constant and absolute temperature, respectively [27]. Figure 10 shows complex impedance spectroscopy for specimen crystallized at 850 °C for 8 h in temperature range of 20–80 °C.

Figure 11 shows the conductivity dependence on temperature in the range of 20–80 °C. The data in the figure are found to be linear with correlation factor of 0.998, and the data well fit the Arrhenius equation. The linearity demonstrates that there were no phase or structure changes for specimen in this temperature range. The activation energy for this specimen with highest ionic conductivity at room temperature was 0.286 eV.

The activation energy for specimens crystallized at 850 °C for different times of 1–10 h, were calculated by the above method and is shown in Fig. 12. By comparison of this figure with Fig. 9(b), the specimen crystallized at 850 °C for 8 h with maximum conductivity of 5.32 × 10−3 S/cm showed minimum activation energy of 0.286 eV. The density of samples in this study was calculated by the Archimedes method to be about 99.89%.

When lithium ions pass through the LAGP 3D network, some phenomena such as secondary phase formation in grain boundaries or microcracks formation within the grains and grain boundaries makes a tortuous path for lithium ions migration and therefore leads to increasing total resistance or decreasing total conductivity. Maximum conductivity is obtained for specimen crystallized at optimum temperature and time with no microcracks or minimum nonconductive phases. Table 3 compares ionic conductivity and activation energy for two main groups of NASICON-type glass-ceramics. Some of titanium based (Crystals with TiO6octahedra group) crystals have good ionic conductibility but they are not stable in contact with lithium metal, and in case of lithium-air batteries, these conductors are not appropriate. Therefore, research on the LiGe2(PO4)3 group for synthesis of new compounds or optimization of crystallization conditions is necessary. As mentioned in the introduction section, these crystals are stable in contact with lithium metal and water solution and also have good lithium ion conductivity and low electronic conductivity.

NASICON- type glass-ceramics with aluminum dopant, as fast lithium ion conductor, were synthesized, crystallized and characterized by XRD, FESEM, EDX and CIS. After synthesis the glasses in proper stoichiometry, crystallization at optimum temperature and time determines the maximum conductivity. Therefore in this study both parameters were investigated. Increasing the temperature up to 950 °C leads to the formation of GeO2 and AlPO4 non-conductive phases at the grain boundaries that block and prevent easy migration of lithium ions. These phases were observed in the XRD patterns and EDX analyses. On the other hand, crystallization at longer times (at 850 °C) leads to microcracking in the LAGP structure that reduces active paths for lithium ion migration. FESEM pictures showed these microcracks for specimens crystallized at 850 °C for 10 h. A maximum conductivity (σ =5.3 × 10−3 S/cm at room-temperature) was achieved for specimen crystallized at 850 °C for 8 h with minimum activation energy of Ea = 0.286 eV.