Solid electrolytes are the key component in designing all-solid-state batteries. The Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) structure and its derivatives obtained by doping various elements at Ti and Al site acts as good solid electrolytes. However, there is still scope for enhancing the ionic conductivity using simple precursors and preparation methods. In this study, the Li superionic conductors Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7-xZrx(PO4)3 (LATZP) with 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.2 have been successfully prepared by the solid-state reaction route. The structural, morphological, and ionic transport properties were analyzed using several experimental techniques including powder X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and impedance spectroscopy (IS). The presence of two relaxation processes corresponding to grain and grain boundary was studied using various formalisms. We have observed that grain effects dominate at lower temperatures (<100 ºC) while the grain boundary at higher temperatures (> 200 ºC) on ionic conductivity. The relaxation mechanisms of grain and grain boundaries were investigated by the Summerfield scaling of AC conductivity. The highest total ionic conductivity of 2.48 x 10-4 S/cm at 150 °C and 5.50 x 10-3 S/cm at 250 °C was obtained for x = 0.1 in Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.6Zr0.1(PO4)3 sintered at 950 °C/6h in the air. The ionic conductivity value was found to be higher than the ionic conductivity reported for LATP prepared via solid-state reaction mechanism using the same precursors and conditions.   
Lithium-ion batteries which were first developed by John B. Goodenough in the 1980s are a type of rechargeable battery that is commonly used for portable electronics and electric vehicles. They were first commercialized by Sony and Asahi Kasei in the year 1990. The discharge process in these batteries happens by the movement of the lithium ions from the positive electrode (anode) to the negative electrode (cathode) via the electrolyte.  The lithium atom releases electrons and becomes Li-ion at the anode. These electrons flow from the anode to the cathode through the external circuit and hence powering the device. This process gets reversed while charging. At present, lithium-ion batteries have been used in several devices starting from handheld electronics gadgets to electric vehicles and storage for electric power grids. However, these popular lithium-ion batteries have the main drawback due to the use of extremely dangerous inflammable liquid or polymer electrolytes. At this juncture, all-solid-state batteries (ASSBs) becomes a better choice, in which the organic liquid electrolyte is replaced by the inorganic solid electrolyte. There are several advantages of ASSBs such as they possess high thermal stability, high energy density due to the reduction in the deadweight during battery packaging, much better electrochemical window, very good mechanical properties, etc. There are several types of solid electrolytes, some of them being NASICON, garnet, perovskite, LISICON, LiPON, Li3N, sulfide, anti-perovskite, etc. Among all these, the NASICON type solid electrolyte has been widely studied and reported [1][2]. NASICON-type solid electrolytes have high ionic conductivity value and low activation energy which is suitable for solid-electrolyte in ASSBs [3]. It was first designed and reported by Hong and Goodenough in 1976 with the chemical composition Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12 (0 < x < 3) [4]. Solid electrolytes with this composition have a rhombohedral crystal structure with R3c space group, excluding for the range 1.8 ≤ x ≤ 2.2. In this particular range of composition, the structure displays a small distortion to the monoclinic space group of C2/c. The general formula for the NASICON structure is AM2(XO4)3 which has a rhombohedral structure with space group R3c. NASICON structure has a 3D network with corner-sharing MO6 octahedra and XO4 tetrahedra, consisting of cation vacancies. There are two types of cation vacancies namely A1 and A2 sites. The A1 site is situated between the two MO6 octahedra along the c-axis with distorted octahedral coordination and the A2 site is located between the ribbons perpendicular to the c-axis with trigonal prismatic coordination.  The mobile ions (Li+, Na+, etc.) occupying the A site can intercalate and de-intercalate between the cation vacancies A1 (6b) and A2 (18e) formed in the rigid network resulting in ionic conductivity [5]. The diffusion of these mobile ions is limited by the size of bottlenecks (formed of three oxygen atoms) present in the crystal structure, which is determined by the diameter of the framework atoms. The diameter of the narrowest bottleneck present in the crystal structure should be more than twice the sum of the radii of mobile-ion and oxygen-ion [1]. Aono et al. (1994) reported that NASICON structure LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) has the minimum activation energy with the highest electrical ionic conductivity [6]. Thus among the various NASICON structures, the LTP structure was found to be quite suitable for Li-ion diffusion. However, problems like low sinterability and phase transition in preparation of LTP resulted in poor conductivity [7][8]. The partial substitution of Ti4+ by Al3+ through a solid-state reaction resulting in Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) could greatly enhance the ionic conductivity of the sample. Forsyth et al. had reported an enhancement in the grain boundary and bulk conductivity of LTP by the substitution of Al at the Ti site [9]. The conductivity enhancement has been mainly attributed to the formation of a denser structure and an increase in the charge carrier concentration [10]. Conductivity enhancement of ceramics greatly depends on the method of preparation because certain methods result in highly dense and non-porous samples that show better conductivity. In recent years, various methods for the synthesis of LATP have been tried out, which includes the conventional solid-state method, melt quenching, sol-gel, mechanical milling, co-precipitation techniques, hydrothermal synthesis, spray drying method, spark plasma sintering, etc. [11][12][13]. Among several methods for improving the ionic conductivity of ceramics, doping with similar ionic radii elements is the one widely used. A lot of study on the substitution of Ti4+ and Al3+ with elements like Ga3+, Y3+, Sc3+, Fe3+, In3+ and Cr3+ in LATP have been reported by several researchers [14] [15] [16] [17]. But there are no reports as such on Zr doping at the Ti site in LATP even though the ionic radius of Zr is comparable to the ionic radii of some of the dopants mentioned above. However, there are a few reports on the enhancement of ionic conductivity due to Zr doping at the Ti site in LTP and some other systems [18]. A. Venkateswara Rao et al. had studied the effect of Zr4+ doping on the structural, spectroscopic, and conducting the properties of the LTP system [19]. P. K. Moon et al. had shown that the substitution of Zr at the Ti site in Gd2(ZrxTi1-x)2O7 and Y2(ZrxTi1-x)2O7 systems increases the ionic conductivity [20].  In the present study, Ti4+ is partially substituted by Zr4+ in LATP resulting in Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7-xZrx(PO4)3 (LATZP) (x = 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15 and 0.2). The effects of Zr4+ doping on the microstructure, ionic conductivity, and the relaxation processes at the grain and grain boundary have been studied. Zirconium is chosen as a substituent of Ti because it is isovalent of Ti and will not require the creation of any kind of defects to maintain the electrical charge neutrality. Also, Zr4+ has (0.86 Å) larger ionic radii than that of Ti4+ (0.745 Å) which may increase the lattice volume, but retain the charge neutrality of the lattice leading to higher values of Li-ion conductivity. Four different formalisms namely impedance, dielectric constant and dielectric loss, electric modulus, and conductivity formalisms have been incorporated to study the contributions of grain and grain boundary on the overall properties of the samples. 
The precursors for Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7-xZrx(PO4)3 (where x = 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15 and 0.2) namely lithium carbonate (Li2CO3 – SDFCL, 99 %), titanium oxide (TiO2– MERCK, ˃99 %), aluminum oxide (Al2O3  – Fisher scientific, 99 %), ammonium dihydrogen phosphate (NH4H2PO4 – Analytical ANALAR, ˃ 98 %) and zirconium oxide (ZrO2 – Kemie Labs, 99 %) were taken in a stoichiometric ratio and thoroughly mixed in ethanol for about 2 hours. The powder mixture was heated at 300 ºC for about 3-4 hours in an alumina crucible so that excess ammonia (NH3) coming from NH4H2PO4 releases completely. The obtained powder was then calcined at 850 ºC for 2 hours to remove all the volatile compounds. X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were carried out on the calcined sample using (X’pert Pro Diffractometer) Cu Kα radiation source with wavelength 1.5418 Å at room temperature to verify the development of the exact crystalline structure of the sample. The suitable amounts of poly vinyl alcohol (PVA) and poly(ethylene-glycol) (PEG) were added to the calcined powder and mixed uniformly. PVA acts as a binder and PEG as a releaser during palletization. The PVA and PEG mixed powder was then pressed into pellets using a uniaxial hydraulic press. These pellets were sintered at 900 ºC/6h for the pure LATP (x = 0) sample and 950 ºC/6h for the other four samples containing Zirconia. The density measurement of each of the pellets was carried out using the Archimedes principle. The weight of each pellet was taken in the air (ma) and in xylene (mx) and their density (d) was calculated using the formula: 
In the formula (1) dx is the density of xylene at room temperature. The theoretical density of LATP is 2.92 g/cc [25]. The silver paste was used for making the electrode of the sintered pellets and copper leads were attached to the pellets for carrying out the electrical measurements. Impedance measurements for all samples were carried out using an impedance analyzer (Wayne Kerr 6500B, United Kingdom) for the frequency range 50 Hz to 10 MHz at various temperatures (RT – 250 ºC). The Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) was used for imaging the cross-sections of all the fractured pellet surfaces. The activation energy calculation was done using the Arrhenius Equation: 
The XRD patterns of all the prepared samples belonging to the LATZP series are shown in Fig. 1. The obtained data were analyzed using the X’pert High Score Plus Software. The peaks obtained for all the samples were found to have a trigonal crystal lattice system with space group R3c (space group no. 167) corresponding to lithium titanium phosphate (ICSD card no. 98-042-7620). The lattice parameters (a and c) for all the five samples were obtained from the software after performing the Rietveld analysis. The lattice parameters a and c for samples Z-0 to Z-0.2 of the LATZP series are tabulated in Table 2. The values of lattice parameters a and c were found to increase with the introduction of Zirconia in the pure LATP sample. This was quite expected due to the large ionic radius of Zr4+ (0.84 Å) compared to the ionic radius of Ti4+ (0.68 Å). Now as the Zr content was increased from 0.05 to 0.2, there was an increase in the value of lattice parameter a for Z-0.1 which was then found to decrease for Z-0.15 followed by a slight increase for Z-0.2. The lattice parameter c followed the opposite trend of a. This trend in the variation of lattice parameters with the concentration of Zr is also noticed in the total conductivity of the samples which is discussed in the conductivity analysis.
The SEM micrographs and the grain size distribution of all the samples belonging to the LATZP series are shown in Fig. 2. All five samples were found to be well sintered. The average grain size of all the samples was determined using the ImageJ software which has been tabulated in Table 2. It was observed that the Z-0.05 sample is made up of a completely different type of microstructure compared to all the other four samples. This sample was found to have very large grains (Type 1) with the average grain size of 16 µm (with standard deviation 6 µm) containing many smaller grains (Type 2) in-between them with the average grain size of 2.2 µm (with standard deviation 0.7 µm). The other four samples showed similar types of grains with Z-0 having the largest grain size of 1.2 um (with standard deviation 0.4 µm). The grain size distribution was found to be quite homogeneous for all the samples.
The Z-0.15 and Z-0.2 samples were found to be porous in many places. Fig. 3(a) and 3(b) show the SEM micrographs of the Z-0.15 and Z-0.2 samples respectively, which shows the presence of pores in the samples. This would have resulted in poor density and the low conductivity of these samples. 
The overall properties of ceramics can be well understood by analyzing the electrical response shown by its microstructure [21]. The electrical response of the grain and the grain boundary regions which comprises the microstructure of ceramics may not be the same at all frequency and temperature values [22]. Impedance spectroscopy is one of the techniques to resolve the grain, grain boundary and sample-electrode interface effects. The presence of different ion relaxation processes at the grain and grain boundary regions can be analyzed by the help of the Nyquist plot (-Z" vs Z') [23]. Fig. 4 show the plot of –Z" vs. Z' for Z-0.1 sample at various temperatures. The intersections of the semi-circles on the Z’ axis gives the value of grain and grain boundary resistance [24]. The semi-circle at the low frequency represents the grain boundary resistance and the one at high frequency represents the grain resistance. The semi-circle at the high-frequency end was found to be smaller than the one at the low frequency indicating that the grain resistance is smaller than the grain boundary resistance. It is also observed that the diameter of the semi-circles keeps reducing with temperature. So the resistance value decreases with temperature resulting in better conductivity at elevated temperatures. Impedance spectra also have a low frequency tail which indicates the blocking of Li-ion at the sample-electrode interface and demonstrates that the material under investigation is a Li-ion conductor, with very low partial electronic conductivity [25].  
It is a well-known practice to interpret the impedance spectra using an equivalent circuit model. The components of the microstructure (grains and grain boundaries) can be represented by an R-CPE element in parallel combination. R is the resistance and CPE is the Constant Phase Element. CPE is used in place of a capacitor in many of the equivalent circuit models due to various reasons such as the presence of porosity in electrodes, rough interfaces between the ceramic material and the electrode, presence of impurities in the system, etc. [5][6][26]. CPE which is nothing but an imperfect capacitor takes into account the presence of depressed semi-circles instead of perfect semi-circles. The equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. 4 was used to fit the –Z" vs. Z' plot using the Z-View software. R1, R2, CPE1, CPE2, and CPE3 represent grain resistance, grain boundary resistance, grain capacitance, grain boundary capacitance, and sample-electrode capacitance respectively. The total resistance was calculated by adding the two contributions of the grain and grain boundary resistances. The resistance values were converted into conductivity using the relation: where R is the resistance,  is the thickness and A is the area of the sample. The conductivity values at various temperatures for Z-0.1 sample are tabulated in Table 3. The conductivity value was found to increase with temperature.  
The data obtained from the impedance analyzer was used to calculate the dielectric permittivity of the samples using the formula:  where C is the capacitance of the material, tm is the thickness and A is the cross-sectional area of the pellet. Fig. 5(a) and 5(b) show the plots of dielectric constant (εr) vs. frequency and dielectric loss (tan δ  = εr”/εr’) vs. frequency at various temperatures for the Z-0.1 sample. Fig. 5(c) shows the temperature dependence of dielectric constant at various frequencies for the same sample. Similar trends have been observed for all the other four samples. Fig. 5(a) depicts the decrease in the dielectric constant as the frequency increases and it almost becomes a constant at very high frequencies. This is mainly due to the dominance of relaxation processes at higher frequencies. The dielectric response in a material is due to the polarization that occurs in the material due to the application of the electric field. Polarization mechanisms are of various types: electronic, ionic, dipolar, and space charge (interfacial). The decrease in the dielectric constant value at high frequencies is due to the absence of polarization. At high frequencies, the response time of the charged ions to the applied electric field is not sufficient to give rise to polarization. Hence the dielectric constant decreases to approach a constant value at high frequencies. This region can be treated as a frequency-independent region. However, at the low frequencies, the Li-ions have sufficient time to gather at the interface between sample and electrode leading to interfacial polarization. So the high value of dielectric constant at the low-frequency window is due to electrode polarization.  
Fig. 5(c) shows the variation of dielectric constant with the temperature at various frequencies. At low frequencies, the rise in the dielectric constant value is witnessed to be high while at high frequencies it almost remains a constant with increasing temperature. In the low-frequency region, the increase in the dielectric constant with temperature is due to the increase in the kinetic energy of ions with the temperature which causes more ions to take part in the polarization phenomenon. However, at high frequencies even though the movement of ions increases with temperature they do not have enough time to assemble at the interface to give rise to polarization. Thus the dielectric constant value is temperature independent at the high-frequency region [27,28]. Fig. 5(d) shows the variation of dielectric constant with frequency at 150 ºC for all the five samples belonging to the LATZP series. The dielectric constant value is found to be maximum for Z-0.1 sample. This sample also happens to possess the highest value of conductivity among all the other samples. Fig. 5(b) shows the variation of the loss tangent with frequency at various temperatures. Dielectric loss is the ratio of the imaginary part to the real part of the dielectric constant and is defined as the dissipation of electrical energy within material under the influence of an electric field. The loss value peaks in two regions: the low-frequency region and the high-frequency region. The peak in the loss tangent is attributed to the presence of ionic conduction in the sample [27]. The presence of two peaks in the loss tangent is an indication for the presence of two different relaxation processes in the sample [29]. So the two peaks, one at the low-frequency region and the other at the high-frequency region is due to the presence of grain boundary and grain conductivity mechanisms exhibited by this sample. It was shown in the impedance analysis that the effect of grain and grain boundary in the conductivity is seen only at a certain temperature range. Similarly, the two peaks in the loss tangent are seen only at those temperature ranges where both grain and grain boundary effect in the conductivity is seen. At low and very high temperatures only one of the peaks is seen due to the dominance of one of the conductivity mechanisms. The loss value increases with the increase in temperature for all the samples. 
The Electric modulus study is an essential method for studying the dielectric relaxation phenomenon in ionic solids. This study helps us to magnify the smaller capacitance value i.e., the grain effects which is difficult to analyze in the impedance formalism [30]. Electric modulus (M) is defined as the inverse of dielectric permittivity, M = 1/ԑr. The real (M’) and imaginary (M”) parts of the electric modulus are calculated using the values of ԑr’ and ԑr”.  
Fig. 6(a) and 6(b) represent the variation of the real and imaginary parts of the electric modulus with frequency at various temperatures for the Z-0.1 sample. It can be seen in Fig. 6(a) that at low frequencies the M’ value tends to approach zero at all temperatures. This suggests the presence of the polarization phenomenon (electrode polarization) at low frequencies. As the frequency increases the M’ value shows the dispersion phenomenon and tends to attain a constant value at high frequencies. This behavior at high frequencies is due to the absence of interfacial polarization at high frequencies. It can also be seen that M’ value decreases with the increase in temperature. The peak in the M’’ spectra tells about the presence of a relaxation process. The high-frequency side of the M’’ peak represents the frequency range in which the ions can make only localized motions due to the confinement to their potential wells. The low-frequency side of the peak represents the frequency range where the ions can perform successful hopping from one site to the other [31].  
Fig. 6(b) depicts the presence of one complete and one incomplete peak in the M’’ spectra: one at lower frequencies and the other at higher frequencies at different temperature regions. This tells us about the existence of grain and grain boundary effects at different temperature regions [32]. This behavior was also seen in the impedance and dielectric loss analysis. The grain effect is predominant at low temperatures (<100 ºC) which is depicted by a complete peak in Fig 6(b). The peaks shift towards higher frequency with an increase in temperature. This confirms the presence of thermally activated relaxation processes [28]. The angular frequency ωm  corresponding to M’’ max gives theconductivity relaxation time  τm   from the relation ωm . τm = 1 [33,34].
The τm values were calculated with the help of ωm values obtained from the M’’ plot for both grainand grain boundary. The relaxation activation energy for grain was obtained from the plot of ln τm vs.1000/T. Fig 7(a) and 7(b) represent the compositional variation of the grain relaxation frequency ωm at 150 ºC and the grain relaxation activation energy (Eτ). Among all the samples the relaxation frequency was maximum and activation energy value was minimum for Z-0.1 sample. Fig. 8 shows the scaled graph of M’’ vs. frequency for Z-0.1 sample at different temperatures. The M’’ axis was scaled using M’’ max while the frequency axis was scaled using the ωm values. The M’’ spectra for different temperatures merged on a single master curve for grain. However, the grain boundary relaxation peak was not observed for the experimental frequency and temperature range. The merging of the scaled spectra at a single master curve for all the temperature values for a particular composition is an indication of temperature-independent dynamical processes occurring at various temperatures.   
The AC conductivity of all the samples was calculated from the dielectric data using the formula [35]: where ω is the angular frequency (2лf), ԑo is the permittivity of free space, ԑr’ and ԑr’’ are the real and imaginary parts of the dielectric constant. In general, the AC conductivity value increases with the frequency following the Jonscher’s Power Law equation [35]: where σdc is the frequency-independent DC conductivity, A is the pre-exponential factor, and n is the correlation exponent which represents the degree of interaction of mobile ions with their surrounding lattices. These two parameters A and n depends on the temperature and nature of the material [36]. The shift of electrical conductivity with the frequency at different temperatures for the Z-0.1 sample is shown in Fig. 9(a). It is witnessed that at the low and very high-temperatures there is a single DC plateau region corresponding to the frequency-independent DC conductivity and a dispersive region corresponding to frequency-dependent ac conductivity. Whereas, at a particular temperature range (100 ºC – 200 ºC) two DC plateau regions corresponding to the contribution of two conductivity mechanisms are observed.  The decreasing conductivity in the low-frequency region at all temperatures is due to the blocking of ions at the metal electrode. The two conductivity mechanisms at low and high-frequency regions can be attributed to grain boundary and grain responses respectively [37]. This was also evident in the impedance, dielectric loss, and modulus formalisms. It can be clearly seen from Fig. 9(a) that the conductivity phenomenon is dominated by the grain response at low-temperature values (<100 ºC). As temperature increases, the grain boundary response starts contributing to the conductivity phenomena which dominates completely at high-temperature values (> 200 ºC). All the five samples showed a similar trend for the variation of AC conductivity with frequency at different temperatures, but different responses of grain and grain boundary were more prominent in the Zirconium doped samples than the Z-0 (pure LATP) sample. 
The low-temperature and high-temperature conductivity data were well fitted the Jonscher’s Power law equation. The values of σdc, A, and n were obtained from the fitting. The σdc value at the low-temperature region is due to the grain response and the high-temperature region is due to the grain boundary response. The attempts to fit with equation (10) for the conductivity data in the temperature range 100 ºC – 200 ºC were unsuccessful. It is due to the presence of both grain and grain boundary responses in that temperature region. Thus the frequency dependence of the AC conductivity in that temperature range was analyzed using the following expression [37]: where  σ1 = σg + A1ωp and σ2 = σgb + A2ωq represents the grain and grain boundary responses respectively. σg is the dc conductivity due to grain and σgb is the dc conductivity due to grain boundary. The conductivity data in the range of 100 ºC – 200 ºC well-fitted equation (11). The values of σg, σgb, A1, A2, p, and q were obtained from the fitting. The solid lines in Fig 9(a) represents the theoretical fit to the conductivity data at various temperatures. The total DC conductivity (σt) value was calculated by substituting the DC conductivity values for grain and grain boundary (σg and σgb) in Equation (11). Fig. 9(b) shows the plot of ln σac vs. 1000/T at various frequency values for the Z-0.1 sample. The temperature dependence of AC conductivity showed two linear regions (Region I and II) which is attributed to the presence of different conduction mechanisms at low and high temperatures [28]. An increase in the temperature causes more charge ions to overcome their activation energy and contribute to the total ionic conductivity of the material.
The grain, grain boundary, and total DC conductivity values for all the five samples at 150 ºC are shown in Table 4 and a plot for the same is shown in Fig. 11(a). The σg value was found to be higher than the σgb value. This tells us that the grain resistance is lesser than the grain boundary resistance which was also shown in the impedance analysis. The σg value was found to be one order higher than the σgb value for all the samples except the Z-0.05 sample. This sample showed a difference of three orders between σg and σgb values. The grain conductivity value was found to increase with Zirconia doping at Z-0.05 which then attains a maximum at Z-0.1 and then decreases at Z-0.15 followed by a slight increase at Z-0.2. However, the total conductivity value initially decreases with zirconia doping at Z-0.05 and then follows a similar trend as the grain conductivity at other compositions. This decrease in the value of the total conductivity at Z-0.05 is due to the low value of grain boundary conductivity. This low value of grain boundary conductivity can be attributed to the presence of a different microstructure for this sample compared to the other samples which were observed in the microstructure analysis using SEM. It is also observed that the trend of total conductivity with composition matches the trend shown by the lattice parameter (a and c) values.  
The room temperature conductivity of the pure LTP sample (Z-0) was found to be lower than that of the reported values could be due to the use of different synthesis techniques and compaction methods that can result in ceramics with different microstructures and densities. Especially the overall density is known to play a crucial role in obtaining high conductivities. The temperature dependence of the DC conductivity for different samples were studied using the Arrhenius plot. The activation energies of grain, grain boundary and total DC conductivities for all the five samples were calculated using the Arrhenius equation given in Equation (2). Fig. 10(a), 10(b), and 10(c) show the plots of ln σg, ln σgb, and ln σt vs. 1000/T for all the five samples. The activation energy values were determined from the slope of the plots obtained by performing the least-squares straight-line fit. The plots of the total, grain, and grain boundary activation energies with the composition are shown in Fig. 11(b). The grain activation energies are found to be lower than that of the grain boundary and total activation energies. This is also one of the reasons for the grain conductivity being higher than the grain boundary and the total conductivity values. The Z-0.1 sample was found to have the least activation energy which in turn had the highest conductivity value.
This formalism was used to analyze the grain and grain boundary relaxation processes on the AC conductivity spectra of all the five samples. This approach is extensively used to analyze the conductivity spectra of ionic solids [39][40]. The merging of the scaled AC conductivity spectra at different temperatures on a single master curve indicates the fulfillment of the time-temperature superposition principle (TTSP) which tells that the AC conductivity relaxation mechanism process is independent of temperature [41].   Fig. 12 shows the scaled ac conductivity spectra for Z-0.1 sample. The conductivity axis was scaled by σt while the frequency axis was scaled by σt .T, where T is the temperature in Kelvin. The figure reveals that the scaled AC conductivity spectra do not superimpose at a single master curve at the grain response region while it superimposes at the grain boundary response region. Thus the ion relaxation processes of the grain boundary response follow the TTSP. Also, the ion relaxation phenomenon for the grain and grain boundary responses are not the same. This is in agreement with the difference in the activation energies between the grain and grain boundary conductivities. The activation energy of the grain is lower than that of the grain boundary conductivity. The scaled AC conductivity spectra for different compositions did not merge on a single master curve indicating that the ion relaxation processes differ for different compositions.  
The study on the effect of doping various concentrations of Zr4+ in the Ti4+ site of LATP resulting in the Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7-xZrx(PO4)3 (LATZP) series was done. The samples were synthesized via the conventional solid-state reaction method. X-ray diffraction analysis of the calcined powder samples confirmed the presence of Hexagonal crystal structure with R-3c space group. The lattice parameters were found to follow the conductivity trend at various compositions. SEM micrographs showed that all the samples except the Z-0.05 sample had a similar type of grains with different sizes. The study of dielectric constant and dielectric loss suggested that the polarization effects seize to exist at very high frequencies. All the four formalisms: Impedance analysis, Dielectric loss analysis, Modulus analysis and Conductivity analysis of the samples showed the presence of two relaxation phenomenon corresponding to grain and grain boundary relaxations. The Electric Modulus study confirmed the presence of activated relaxation phenomenon in the samples. The Z-0.1 sample showed the minimum relaxation activation energy. Moreover, the scaling of the M’’ spectra suggested that the relaxation mechanisms are temperature independent. The Conductivity analysis showed that the grain effects dominate at lower temperatures (<100 ºC) while the grain boundary at higher temperatures (> 200 ºC). The grain boundary effects start showing its presence at around 100 ºC and we have both grain and grain boundary effects in the temperature range 100 ºC – 200 ºC. The grain boundary conductivity is almost two orders less in magnitude than the grain conductivity and is one of the reasons for the low ionic conductivity of the samples.  The Z-0.1 sample exhibited the highest conductivity value and it was found to be 1.29 x 10-3 S/cm at 200 ºC. This conductivity value was found to be two orders higher in magnitude than the pure LATP synthesized via solid-state reaction mechanism using the same precursors and conditions. The Summerfield scaling of AC conductivity suggested that the relaxation mechanisms of grain and grain boundary are not the same.  
