In no  event shall the Royal Society of Chemistry be held responsible for any errors or omissions in this Accepted Manuscript or any  consequences arising from the use of any information it contains.
View Article OnlineView JournalPage 1 of 9Please do not adjust margins  Journal of Materials Chemistry AJournal Name ARTICLE Received 00th January 20xx,  Accepted 00th January 20xx Na3V2(PO4)2F3@C dispersed within carbon nanotube frameworks as  high  tap  density  cathode  for  high-performance  sodium-ion  batteries  Chao Shen,a Hai Long,a Gencheng Wang, a Wei Lu,b Le Shao,*c and Keyu Xie*a Currently, sodium-ion battery is one of the hottest topics in battery research fields.
For practical application, however,  high tap density, which is a key point of electrode materials, has always been ignored in previous works.
Here, we present  the fabrication of NASICON-type Na3V2(PO4)2F3@C/CNTs composite cathode with a high tap density of 1.2 g cm-3 for high  power and long lifespan sodium-ion batteries.
The spherical NVPF@C/CNTs synthesized through spray drying method and  composed of micron primary particles dispersed within the intertwined carbon nanotubes matrix.
The CNTs framework  not only provide an efficient electrical highway between primary particles, but also form a stable mechanical backbone for  secondary particles.
The initial discharge capacity of NVPF@C/CNTs is about 113 mAh g-1 at the current density of 1C, and  the cell retains 98.2% after 300 cycles.
Besides, a high rate capacity of 85 mAh g-1 has been achieved at 30C.
We believe  our work present here will be favorable for accelerating the commercialization of sodium-ion batteries.
Introduction  Due to the limited abundance of lithium in the earth’s crust, which  results  in  the  high  cost  of  lithium  salt,  lithium  ion  batteries  (LIBs)  will be difficult to satisfy the needs of large-scale stationary energy  storage.
In  contrast,  the  larger  abundance  of  sodium  (Na,  23600  ppm vs.Li, 20 ppm) makes sodium ion batteries (NIBs) a promising  candidate for electrochemical energy storage applications, where a  large amount of electrode materials are demanded.
However, the  lower available energy density, induced by the reduction of voltage,  has  limited  the  potential  applications  of  NIBs.
Furthermore,  frustrated ionic mobility of Na+ during their insertion and transport  in  the  host  lattices  on  account  of  the  larger  ionic  radius  and  the  heavier weight of Na+ (1.02 Å, 23 g mol−1) than that of Li+ (0.76 Å, 7  g mol−1), which  further decreases the capacity utilization and rate  performance of NIBs.
In  this  regard,  the  development  of  cathode  materials  with  high  working potentials and sodium-ion conductivity for NIBs should be  considered as a priority for the commercialization of NIBs.With the  above  characteristics,  most  of  Na-based  layered  transition  metal  oxides (NaxMO2,M=Ni, Co, Mn, Fe, V, etc.) have been employed as a  State  Key  Laboratory  of  Solidification  Processing,  Center  for  Nano  Energy  Materials,  Northwestern  Polytechnical  University  and  Shaanxi  Joint  Laboratory  of  Graphene (NPU), Xi’an 710072, China.
Na-based layered transition  metal oxides attracts the great interest of the researchers.
A large  number  of  the  performance  of  the  material.
Unfortunately,  these  materials  usually  suffer  from  the  multiple  phase  transitions  and  structural  variations,  particularly  at  high  charge  voltage,  which  leads  to  an  irreversible structural collapse and a rapid capacity degradation.
In  addition, prussian blue analogues (PBs) AxMFe(CN)6·yH2O (A=alkali  metal, M=transition metal, 0 < x < 1), with large interstitial sites and  open  frameworks,  have  also  been  actively  investigated  as  a  prospective family of NIB cathodes.
Nevertheless, most of PBs  materials undergo low capacity utilization.
As a typical example of an open-structured cathode material for  NIBs,  sodium  super  ion  conductor  (NASICON)-based  sodium  vanadium  phosphate  compounds  have  been  extensively  investigated.
In  particular,  fluorophosphate  Na3V2(PO4)2F3 (NVPF)  has  attracted  great  attention,  because  of  its  inherently  superior  ionicity  and  higher  equilibrium  voltage.
The  theoretical  energy  density  of  NVPF  is  comparable  to  commercial LiFePO4 (530 Wh kg-1).
The crystal of NVPF belongs to  Amam  space  group.
With  a  tridimensional  framework  of  V2O8F3  -3  tetrahedra,  this  structure  owns  bioctahedra  connected  by  PO4large tunnels along [110] and [11�0] directions, where Na+ ions are is ∼507  Wh  kg-1,  which mobile  upon  extraction/insertion  reactions.
Meanwhile,  the  stabilized lattice structure by the formation of V-F bonds and PO4 3 ions increase its thermal stability and capacity retention.
However,  as  same  as  most  metal-phosphate  cathode materials,  NVPF  has  a  low  electronic  conductivity  which  hinders  its  future  practical  applications.
Coating  the  conductive  carbon  layer  on  the  surfaces of NVPF is the most common ways to enhance the surface  conductivity,  but  the  thick  and  uniform  carbon  layers  may  hinder  the migration of Na+ between particles.
Thus, to construct efficient  3D  interconnected  conducting  network  is  of  importance.
Another  neglected issue is that particle fracture and loss of electrical contact This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx Please do not adjust margins JournalofMaterialsChemistryAAcceptedManuscriptPublished on 20 February 2018. Downloaded by Stockholms Universitet on 22/02/2018 01:30:09. View Article OnlineDOI: 10.1039/C8TA00990BPlease do not adjust margins  Journal of Materials Chemistry APage 2 of 9ARTICLE Journal Name of  the  cathode  materials  generally  increased  interparticle resistance and result in fast capacity fading.
Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  build  a  solid  structural  framework  for  the  NVPF  particles to prevent the structure rupture.
Although various  nanostructures  have  been  successful  in  extending  facile  Na+  migration  and  rapid  electronic  conduction,  nano-sized  electrodes  have always induced low tap density.
For practical applications,  tap  density  is  one  of  the  most  important  properties  of  electrode  materials,  especially  the  cathode  materials.
The  low  tap  density  leads  to  low  volumetric  and  gravimetric  capacity  and  a  thick  electrode at high mass loading, which makes it difficult to maintain  electrical and ionic pathways during cycling.
This means that high  specific capacity does not necessarily lead to high energy density for  cathode materials if its tap density is low.
Therefore, effort should  be devoted to development of NVPF powders with high tap density.
Factors such as surface structure, morphology and size of particles  have  been  proved  to  have  strong  influence  on  the  tap  density  of  electrode powder.
Ascribed to isotropic physical properties and  low  surface  to  volume  ratio,  the  micro-scale  spherical  geometry  generally provides high packing density and powder tap density,24  leading to a thinner slurry coating at high mass loading.
Herein,  we  synthesized  spherical  NVPF  particles  composed  of  micron primary particles with an uneven amorphous carbon-coating,  and these primary particles are wrapped by interconnected carbon  nanotubes (abbreviated as NVPF@C/CNTs, schematically illustrated  in  Fig.1).
In  the  composite,  the  CNTs  framework  functions  as  an  electrical  highway  as  well  as  a  mechanical  backbone  so  that  all  primary  particles  are  electrochemically  active  and  the  secondary  particles are structural stable.
Meanwhile, the carbon coating layer  completely  encapsulates  the  primary  particles,  not  only  improve  the  interface  conductivity,  but  also  inhibit  most  side  reaction  of  interface between the electrode and electrolyte.
Furthermore, the  optimized  NVPF-based  connected  Na+/electron  pathways  and  high  tap  density  of  1.2  g  cm-3,  shows  great potential for practical high power and long lifespan sodiumion battery application.
cathode,  with hybrid Experimental   Modified carbon nanotubes: First, 50 mg and 100 mg of tannic acid  were added to 50 ml tris-solution, and stirred for half an hour.
Then  the  concentration  of  tannic  acid  solutions  are  1.0  mg  ml-1  is  obtained.
Next, 100 mg multi-walled carbon nanotubes was added  to the tannic acid solutions, and stirred at room temperature for 6  hours to obtain coated multi-walled carbon nanotubes with tannic  acid.
Synthesis  and  characterization  of  Na3V2(PO4)2F3@C/CNTs:  The  composites  were  prepared  using  analytical  grade  reagents  by  the  spraying-dry  method  (SD).
Firstly,  stoichiometric  amounts  of  NH4H2PO4, NaF and NH4VO3 with the molar ratio of 2 : 3.3 : 2 were  adequately dissolved in distilled water.
The citric acid was dissolved  as  both  carbon  source  and  reducer.
Secondly,  the  solution  was  continuous stirred at 80 °C for 30 minutes, and then the modified  carbon  nanotubes  (3  wt.%)  was  added  with  ultrasonic  treatment  until a homogeneous dispersion formed.
Finally, the precursor was  prepared  by  spray  drying  the  dispersion.
The  precursor  was  then  sintered  at  750  °C  for  6h  under  an  inert  atmosphere  to  form (SEM)  and Na3V2(PO4)2F3@C/CNTs  (marked  as  NVPF@C/CNTs).
After  the  precursor  was  sintered  at  750  °C  for  6  hours  under  an  argon  atmosphere, the composite NVPF@C/CNTs was obtained.
In order  to  investigate  the  impact  of  particle  size  and  morphology  on  tap  density,  irregular  shape  and  nano-sized  NVPF  (marked  as  BMNVPF@C/CNTs) was prepared through high-energy ball milling using  the as-obtained NVPF@C/CNT sample at 600 r min-1 for 4h.
Material Characterization: The crystallographic structure of the as  prepared materials were studied by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD),  and  the  diffraction  data  were  recorded  in  the  2θ  range  of  10-90o  with  a  scan  rate  of  8o  min-1.  The  particle  morphologies  of  the  obtained  samples  were  observed  by  using  a  scanning  electron  microscope  transmission  electron  microscopy  (TEM).
Raman  spectroscopy  was  carried  out  on  a  Renishaw  invia  Raman  microscope  with  Ar-ion  laser  excitation.
Elemental carbon analysis of NVPF@C sample was performed by CS  analysis  equipment  (Eltar,  Germany).
Specific  surface  area  calculations  were  made  using  the  Brunauer-Emmett-Teller  (BET)  method.
The  pore-size  distribution  (PSD)  curves  were  calculated  from the isotherm using the Barrett-Joyner-Halenda (BJH) algorithm.
Tap density of active materials were measured by Tap denser (JZ-7,  JNGX,  China).
And  The  particle  size  distribution  was  measured  by  laser particle size analyzer (LS-909).
Electrochemical  Measurements:  The  cathode  electrode  was  fabricated  by  the  weight  ratio  of  8  :  1  :  1  (  active  material  :  acetylene  black  :  polyvinylidene  fluoride).
NMP  was  employed  as  solvent,  while  aluminium  foil  was  used  as  current  collector.
After  pasting, the cathode electrodes were dried in vacuum at 100 °C for  12  h.
In  an  argon-filled  glove  box,  the  R2032  coin  cells  were  assembled  using  metallic  sodium  as  anode  and  a  glass  fibre  filter  (Whatman  GF/C)  as  separator.
The  electrolyte  for  sodium-ion  battery was 1 M NaClO4 dissolved in a solvent mixture of ethylene  carbonate  (EC),  propylene  carbonate  (PC)  (1  :  1  v/v)  and  5%  FEC.
Galvanostatic  charge-discharge  cycle  was  performed  on  a  Land2001A  (Wuhan,  China)  automatic  battery  tester.
The  cyclic  voltammetry  (CV)  curves  with  different  voltage  ranges  were  collected  by  using  an  electrochemical  workstation  (CHI660C).
The  data of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was studied,  using a Modulab (Solartron Analytical) with the amplitude of 5 mV  in  the  frequency  range  from  1  MHz  to  10  MHz.
Finally,  the  electronic  conductivity  of  the  materials  was  tested  using  a  fourpoint probe meter (SZT-2A).
All the electrochemical performances  were carried out at room temperature.
Results and discussion  To confirm the effects of CNTs framework on the structure of NVPF,  XRD  observations  of  NVPF@C  and  NVPF@C/CTNs  samples  were  carried  out  and  are  displayed  in  Fig.2a.
The  sharp  peaks  in  the  patterns indicate the powders are well crystalline.
The patterns of  the  powders  for  NVPF@C  and  NVPF@C/CTNs  are  consistent  with  the JCPDS date (PDF#01-089-8485) and literature reports.
It can  been  seen  that  there  is  no  obvious  difference  between  NVPF@C  and  NVPF@C/CTNs  samples,  all  samples  exhibit  single  phase  of  Na3V2(PO4)2F3 indexed to tetragonal NASICON-type lattice with the  space  group  of  P42/mnm.
In  addition,  the  peak  at  26.2°,  corresponding  to  (0  0  2)  lattice  plane  attribute  to  CNTs,  coincide  with  the  peak  at  26.8°,  corresponding  to  (1  0  3)  lattice  plane  of This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx Please do not adjust margins JournalofMaterialsChemistryAAcceptedManuscriptPublished on 20 February 2018. Downloaded by Stockholms Universitet on 22/02/2018 01:30:09. View Article OnlineDOI: 10.1039/C8TA00990BPage 3 of 9Please do not adjust margins  Journal of Materials Chemistry AARTICLE                                                                                                                                                                                         Journal Name  Fig.
The  powder  X-ray  diffraction  pattern  of  NVPF@C,  NVPF@C/CNTs and CNT, respectively; the Raman spectrum (b) and  the nitrogen adsorption-desorption isotherms (c) of NVPF@C and  NVPF@C/CNTs, respectively.NVPF.
The  crystal  phase  of  carbon  nanotube  was  further  confirmed  by  X-ray  diffraction  as  displayed  in  Fig.2a.
No  diffraction  peaks  due  to  impurity  phases  were  detected,  suggesting that CNTs had no influence on the phase formation of  NVPF.
Furthermore, no additional diffraction of carbon except the  CNTs can be observed in the XRD pattern, possibly, owing to the  amorphous structure of the carbon coating, the amount of carbon  it  the  NVPF@C  composite  is  about  1.5  wt%,  determined  by  C-S  analysis method.
The  NVPF@C  and  NVPF@C/CNTs  was  characterized  by  Raman  spectroscopy,  respectively.
Then,  the  relative  intensity  ratio  (ID/IG)  is  usually  used  as  a  criterion to evaluate the degree of the disorder degree or relative  amount of defects in the carbon structure.
In our work, the ID/IG  value  decreased  from  1.084  (NVPF/C)  to  0.991  (NVPF@C/CNTs),  suggesting  the  NVPF@C/CNTs  structure  roughly  decreases  along  with  the  increasing additional amounts of CNTs, which indicates that CNTs  framework has a better crystallinity.
This porous architecture is  help for facilitating infiltration of electrolyte.
Pore  size  analysis  showed  that  there  existed  pore  space  with  average  size  of  40  nm  and  10  nm  in  the  NVPF@C  and  NVPF@C/CNTs,  respectively  (Fig.S1).
The  results  reveal  that  a  majority  of  microspores  has  been  filled  with  CNTs  network,  indicating the favorable compactness of the CNTs framework.
The  BET  specific  surface  area  of  the  NVPF@C  sample  is  12  m2  g-1,  which  increase  to  26  m2  g-1 by  addition  of  CNTs.
The  increased  surface area can be attributed to the CNTs additive.
The morphologies of the NVPF@C and NVPF@C/CNTs cathodes  synthesized by  the  SD  method are  displayed  in  Fig.3  (a,  b).
The  SEM  images  of  the  precursors  are  shown  in  Fig.S2  without  any  dispersion  treatment.
It  can  been  seen  that  the  precursor  owns  uniform  micro-spherical  morphology.
After  subsequent  heattreating at 750 °C for 6 h, both of the two samples display a typical  micro-spherical particles with diameters in the range of 2-15 μm  (Fig.3a, b).
Compared with the NVPF@C/CNTs secondary particles  shown a remarkable integrality after heat treatment, there were a  portion of smaller fragments besides the NVPF@C spheres.
These  results further confirm that the addition of CNTs do not change This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx Please do not adjust margins JournalofMaterialsChemistryAAcceptedManuscriptPublished on 20 February 2018. Downloaded by Stockholms Universitet on 22/02/2018 01:30:09. View Article OnlineDOI: 10.1039/C8TA00990BPlease do not adjust margins  Journal of Materials Chemistry APage 4 of 9ARTICLE.
It can be seen that NVPF particles are coated  with  amorphous  carbon  shell  derived  from  the  carbonization  of  citric acid for NVPF@C samples, and the uneven thickness of the  carbon shell is about 1-5 nm, and thus, a 3D conductive network is  necessary for remedying the poor electronic conductivity.
The  FFT  image  of  region  left  shows  the  diffraction  spots  of  NVPF,  FFT  image  of  region  right  corresponds  to  the  diffraction  spots  of  CNTs.
The  results  imply  that  the  NVPF  and  CNTs  coexist  in  the  composite  material, and the NVPF@C intertwined by CTNs backbone.
The  curve  of  NVPF@C/CNTs  in  accordance  with  a  logarithmic  normal  distribution  and  with  a  sharper  peak  and  median diameter (D50) of 10μm which agreeing well with the SEM  observations  (Fig.3b).
This  character  of  its  size  distribution  and  multiple  particle  size  spherical  structure  is  conducive  to  improvement  of  packing  density  related  to  the  tap  density.
Because  of  the  space-efficient  packing  inside  the  secondary  particles,  their  tap  density  is  significantly  higher  than  primary  nano-sized  particles  packed  randomly.
Furthermore,  the  tap  density of the NVPF@C/CNTs was measured as shown in Fig.4a.
Here we compared the tap density of samples with irregular shape  and  nano-sized  of  BM-NVPF@C/CNTs.
The  tap-density  of  the  NVPF@C/CNTs  powders  are  as  high  as  1.2  g  cm-3,  which  are  remarkably  higher  than  the  non-spherical  BM-NVPF@C/CNTs  sample of 0.85 g cm-3 (the morphologies displayed in Fig.S3).
This  result  indicates  that  the  introduction  of  CNTs  in  NVPF,  which  is  benefit  to  forging  a  3D  backbone  to  construct  micro-spherical  NVPF@C/CNTs  composed  of  primary  particles,  plays  important  role  on  achieving  high-tap-density  electrode  materials.
Furthermore,  compared  with  recent  relative  research  work  of  NVPF@C/rGO,  the  tap  density  of  our  obtained  NVPF@C/CNTs  cathode is also much higher (1.2 g cm-3 vs 1.02 g cm-3).
Particle size distribution and volume after compacting of (a)  NVPF@C/CNTs and (b) BM-NVPF@C/CNTs.
In  order  to investigate  electrochemical  properties  of  the  NVPF@C  and  NVPF@C/CNTs  composite  cathodes,  charge  and  discharge profiles for the 1st, 10th, 100th, 200th, 300th cycles in  the potential window of 2.0-4.2 V at 1C (128 mAh g-1) are shown in This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx Please do not adjust margins JournalofMaterialsChemistryAAcceptedManuscriptPublished on 20 February 2018. Downloaded by Stockholms Universitet on 22/02/2018 01:30:09. View Article OnlineDOI: 10.1039/C8TA00990BPage 5 of 9Please do not adjust margins  Journal of Materials Chemistry AJournal Name ARTICLE Fig.5 (a, c) Cycle performance and Coulombic efficiency for 300 cycles; the insets shows the galvanostatic charge-discharge curves of  composite between 2.0 and 4.3 V at a current density of 1C (128 mAh g-1) for different cycles, respectively for NVPF@C and NVPF@C/CNTs;   (b,  d)  Rate  capability  at  various  current  rates  and  the  galvanostatic  charge-discharge  profiles  at  various  current  rates  for  NVPF@C,  NVPF@C/CNTs, respectively; (e) The cycle performance of the NVPF@C/CNTs at 10C; (f) The comparison of rate performance of our work  with others.
The  three  separate  reduction  plateaus  at  the  potential of ~4.1, ~3.6 and ~2.3 V, respectively, were observed in  the  discharge  curves  of  both  cathodes,  correspond  to  the  characteristic  V4+/V3+  redox  couple.
bviously,  the  gap  between  charge  and  discharge  plateaus  of  the  NVPF@C/CNTs  electrode  is  narrower  than  that  of  the  NVPF@C  electrode,  indicating  the  faster  diffusion  rate  for  Na+  and  enhanced  redox  kinetics.
The  initial  discharge  capacity  of  NVPF@C  and  NVPF@C/CNTs at 1 C is about 109 and 113 mAh g-1, respectively,  and  the  discharge  capacity  is  about  62  and  111  mAh  g-1,  respectively,  after  300  cycles.
The  capacity  retains  of  these  two  electrode materials are 56.9% and 98.2% of their initial discharge  capacity,  in  NVPF@C/CNTs may be attributed to the CNTs matrix that forms an  electronic  wiring  pathway  along  the  NVPF@C  particles,  and  thus  enhances  their  reversibility.
An  excellent  capacity  retention  of  90%  can  be  observed  for  NVPF@C/CNTs.
In contrast, the discharge capacity of NVPF@C (Fig.5c) rapidly decreased as a function of the applied current density.
It dramatically dropped to less than 30 mAh g-1 at 10 C.
Excitingly,  the  rate  performance  of  NVPF@C/CNTs  cathode  compares  favorably with those of previously reported NVPF hybrid cathode  for  sodium  ion  batteries  (Fig.5f).
Furthermore,  the  electrode morphologies of the NVPF@C and NVPF@C/CNTs after  300 deep cycles at 10C were also examined (Fig.S4).
It is obvious  that, after cycling, the spherical particles of NVPF@C broken into  smaller  fragments  (Fig.S4b),  while  the  NVPF@C/CNTs  spheres  remained integrated (Fig.S4d).
In addition, to confirm the benefit its  NVPF@C  counterpart.
Therefore,  structural  integrity through repeated intercalation/de-intercalation give rise conducting  network that This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx Please do not adjust margins JournalofMaterialsChemistryAAcceptedManuscriptPublished on 20 February 2018. Downloaded by Stockholms Universitet on 22/02/2018 01:30:09. View Article OnlineDOI: 10.1039/C8TA00990BPlease do not adjust margins  Journal of Materials Chemistry APage 6 of 9ARTICLE Journal Name to a conclusion that the carbon nanotubes own a double functions  of  efficient  conduction  network  and  firm  mechanical  backbone  framework for the NVPF with improved cyclic stability.
According to previous literatures, we believe that the superior  rate  capability  of  NVPF@C/CNTs,  compared  to  NVPF@C,  is  possibly attributed to structural characteristics and introduction of  CNTs  network,  which  may  change  the  microstructure  of  NVPF@C/CNTs.
Meanwhile,  to  further  clarify  the  CNTs  function,  the  Nyquist  plots  of  the  NVPF@C/CNTs  cathodes  and  NVPF@C  cathodes  at  initial discharge and after 100 cycles were measured.
Three  obvious  pairs  of  symmetric  redox  bands  at  3.43/3.33,  3.76/3.60,  and  4.23/4.14  V,  respectively,  were  observed  for  NVPF@C/CNTs  cathode.
The results are accordance with the charge and discharge  curves  and  the  value  reported  in  the  literature.
The  electrochemical  reaction  of  Na3V2(PO4)2F3  during  charging  and  discharging  for  a  sodium  ion  battery  might  be  proposed  to  be  indicated in following equation.
The  two-stepped  extraction/insertion reactions of the Na(2) ions, whereas the latter  one is due to the extraction/insertion of Na+ from Na(1) sites.
It  can  also  be seen  that  more  sharply  redox  peaks  of  NVPF@C/CNTs  can  be  observed,  compared  with  its  NVPF@C  counterpart.
Furthermore, the  CV  curves  remained  stable  in  the  peak  positions and  intensities during  repeated  cycles,  implying  a  high reversibility of Na+ insertion process and structural stability of  the  material.
As  a  comparison,  the  broad  oxidation  and  reduction peaks of the NVPF@C at different cycles became bigger  due  to  an  increased  redox  polarization  of  electrode,  suggesting  negative  electronic  and  ionic  transport  kinetics  without  high  conductive CNTs network.attributed pairs first two are Further to investigate the kinetic behavior of the NVPF@C/CNTs,  CV curves are recorded at various scanning rates from 0.1 to 0.5  mV  s−1 (Fig.7).
It  can  be  seen  that  the  height  and  area  slightly  increase with the increasing rate.
The Na+ diffusion coefficient D  can be calculated on the basis of Randles-Sevcik equation:17,19,45  wherein IP is the peak current (A), A is the effective contact area  between the electrode and electrolyte, C is the concentration of Na+  in  a  solid  (0.0069  mol  cm−3),  n  is  the  number  of  electrons  involved in the half-reaction for the redox couple (n = 2), and ν is  the  potential  scan  rate  (V  s−1).`
For an obvious distinction, the anodic peaks are labelled  as A1 to A3, while the cathodic peaks as C1 to C3. Based on the  slope of the lines calculated based on Equation (1), the diffusion  coefficient DNa value can be calculated as 1.46 × 10−11 (A1), 1.54  ×10−10 (A2), 1.26 × 10−10 (A3), 1.06 × 10−11 (C1), 5.05 × 10−11 (C2)  and 9.27 × 10−11 (C3).
Obviously, the Na+ mobility of A1/C1 redox  pair is the lowest among all the three redox couples, which is in  line with the results reported in the literature.
CV curves at different scan rates of the NVPF@C/CNTs; (b, c) the relationship between the peak current (Ip) and the square root  of the scan rate (n1/2).
Moreover, compared  with the sample NVPF@C/CNTs,  as shown in Fig.S7, the diffusion  coefficient of the sample NVPF@C is an order of magnitude lower  than  NVPF@C/CNTs.
Specifically,  the  diffusion  coefficient  DNa  value of NVPF@C is calculated as (A1) 1.607 × 10−12, (A2) 6.366 ×  10−12, (A3) 6.4827 × 10−12, (C1) 1.7349 × 10−12, (C2) 4.51 × 10−12and  (C3)  5.2947  ×  10−12.  Hence,  we  believe  that  the  improved  electrochemical  performance  of  NVPF@C/CNTs  can  result  from  the facile migration and superior kinetic of Na+.
Furthermore,  as  mentioned in the previous discussed, we boldly conclude that the  addition  of  carbon  nanotubes may  change  the  microstructure  of  NVPF@C/CNTs  and  finally  increase  the  diffusion  of  Na  ions,  according to numbers of literatures which get the similar results.
Meanwhile, it is hoped that we can accurately reveal the reasons  for the increase of the diffusion coefficient with more researchers.
In  order  to  satisfy  the  high  tap  density  cathode  requirement  for  future real applications of sodium-ion battery, a high-tap-density  and  outstanding-performance  NVPF@C/CNTs  with  well-designed  hierarchical  structure  have  been  synthesized  successfully.
The  spherical  NVPF@C/CNTs  cathode,  composed  of  micron-sized  intertwined  carbon  primary  particles  dispersed  within  the This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx Please do not adjust margins JournalofMaterialsChemistryAAcceptedManuscriptPublished on 20 February 2018. Downloaded by Stockholms Universitet on 22/02/2018 01:30:09. View Article OnlineDOI: 10.1039/C8TA00990BPage 7 of 9Please do not adjust margins  Journal of Materials Chemistry AJournal Name nanotubes  matrix,  owns  a  uniform  spherical  morphology  and  appropriate secondary particle size distribution, resulting in a high  tap density of 1.2 g cm-3, which is comparable with the commercial  LiFePO4.46  In  addition,  the  intertwined  CNTs  framework  in  the  NVPF@C/CNTs cathode not only offers an ideal conductive matrix  to  build  a  3D  conductive  network,  but  also  provide  a  stable  mechanical  backbone  for  secondary  particles.
And  thus,  this  micro-spherical  aggregates  of  NVPF@C/CNTs  composite  cathode  exhibited  ultra-high  power  of  85  mAh  g-1  even  at  a  high  current  density of 30 C and excellent cycling performance with 98.2% of its  initial  discharge  capacity  at  1  C  after  300  cycles.
We  hope  this  work  will  be  benefit  for  propelling  the  practical  application  of  sodium-ion batteries.