An all-solid-state mixed potential type H2S gas sensor was fabricated with yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) solid electrolyte and Cobaltous stannate (Co2SnO4) sensing electrode (SE) for monitoring halitosis disease. The pure phase cubic spinel structure of Co2SnO4 prepared by simple hydrothermal method and annealed at 1000 °C was conﬁrmed based on X-ray diﬀraction (XRD), Raman, Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and Transmission electron microscope (TEM) technologies. The developed sensor showed the lowest detection limit of 100 ppb, fast response/recovery time of 44/97 s and high sensitivity of -54.4 mV/decade to 0.1−10 ppm H2S. The sensing device also gave good reproducibility, selectivity, humidity resistance and long-term stability. Finally, the simulated test for diagnosing halitosis was conducted and the evident diﬀerence of sensing response of the present sensor between healthy breath (collecting from healthy volunteers) and halitosis breath (healthy breath blended 1 ppm H2S) indicated that the fabricated gas sensor using Co2SnO4-SE showed great potential application value in halitosis monitoring. The present work has opened up a new window to noninvasive and online diagnostics of halitosis in medical diagnosis and treatment.
People with halitosis disease (i.e. oral malodour) may feel embar-rassed in the conversation with others, which will lead to a lack of self-conﬁdence and even aﬀect their normal life. Besides, halitosis could be an omen of some underlying diseases such as gingivitis and period-ontitis [1–3]. There have been some reports conﬁrming that the hali-tosis of 80 %–90 % originated from the oral cavity, in which the sul-phurcontaining amino acids cystine, cysteine, and methionine were decomposed into the foul-smelling volatile sulphur compounds (VSC), among which H2S is one of the main productions [4–7]. In terms of the medical diagnosis, H2S is used as a biomarker for halitosis. When the content of H2S in human exhaled breath exceeds 0.1 ppm, it can be used as the basis for judging halitosis [4,8]. Therefore, the development of low-cost, portable and rapidly responsive H2S gas sensors is of great signiﬁcance for the early diagnosis and screening of halitosis.In the last few decades, solid electrolyte type sensor has been proved to produce good consequences in detecting hazardous gases [9–13]. As for H2S gas, Liang et al. reported a gas sensor of tubular structure based on sodium ionic conductor (NASICON) solid electrolyte and Pr6O11-doped SnO2 sensing electrode, which had a sensitivity of 74 mV/decade to 5−50 ppm H2S at 300 °C [14]. Zhang et al. found that the NASICON-based solid electrochemical sensor utilizing the CoCr1.2Mn0.8O4 sin-tered with a temperature of 800 °C showed the highest response of 178 mV to 10 ppm H2S at 250 °C [15]. However, due to the human exhaled breath contains large amounts of water vapour, the dis-advantage of poor moisture resistance for NASICON-based sensors re-stricts their application in breath detection. Comparatively, the stabi-lized zirconia solid electrolyte type gas sensor based on mixed potential model showed enormous application potentiality due to better sensing stability. Miura et al. developed an electrochemical sensor combining Y2O3-stabilized solid electrolyte with WO3 sensing oxide layer and found that the device responded well to 0.2−25 ppm H2S at 400 °C [16]. Guan et al. designed a sub-ppm YSZ-based mixed potential type H2S sensor using hollow ball NiMn2O4 sensing electrode, which showed highest sensitivity and lowest limit of detection of 50 ppb [17]. In ad-dition, Lu’s group used La2NiO4 as sensing electrode to fabricate YSZ-based sensor for H2S detection, which could reach the detection limit of 20 ppb [18]. Even if above YSZ-based sensors have improved the sen-sitivity and lowered the detection limit, there still exist much space for improvement of response/recovery time and the long-term stability. At present, the eﬀorts for improving the performance of sensor mainly focus on choosing and designing novel sensing electrode materials. Co2SnO4 is an inverse spinel ternary compound, in which the half of the cobalt ions occupy the octahedral sites and the other half occupy the tetrahedral sites, it has been applied to manufacture lithium ion bat-teries [19–21] and supercapacitors [22,23] as an outstanding electrode material. It possesses the characteristics of nontoxic and good thermal stability. However, the possibility of Co2SnO4 be applied to gas sensing is rarely studied. Therefore, it is feasible to design a YSZ-based gas sensor with a Co2SnO4 sensing electrode material and investigate the sensing signal of device toward the target gas.This is the ﬁrst time we develop the YSZ-based mixed-potential H2S sensor utilizing inverse spinel structure Co2SnO4-SE synthesized by hydrothermal method. In this work, the H2S sensing performances of the gas sensor have been measured and investigated in detail. Meanwhile, the probable sensing mechanism of the gas sensor towards H2S has been systematically proposed and discussed. Furthermore, by simulating and analyzing the exhaled breath detection of healthy people and halitosis patients, we found that the present sensor has a great application prospect in medical diagnosis and treatment.
The Co2SnO4 sensing material was synthesized by a simple hydro-thermal method. The required raw materials were cobalt chloride hexahydrate (CoCl2·6H2O), stannic chloride pentahydrate (SnCl4·5H2O), cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB), and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) with analytic grade purity, and they were purchased from commercial approach. The detailed progress of preparation was as follows. Firstly, 2 mmol CoCl2·6H2O was dissolved in 40 mL deionized water to form homogeneous solution, and kept stirring at the room temperature. Then, 1 mmol SnCl4·5H2O, 0.2 g CTAB and 0.03 mol NaOH were orderly added into the above solution every 10 min to form mixed solution. After 15 min of magnetic stirring, the mixed solution was transferred into a Teﬂon-lined stainless steel autoclave of 50 mL, and reacted at 180 °C for 12 h. Subsequently, the precipitates of cooling to room temperature were centrifuged and washed with deionized water and ethanol several times, then dried in the vacuum oven of 80 °C for 24 h to obtain the precursor. Finally, the precursor material was annealed at 1000 °C for 3 h with a heating rate of 5 °C/min to get the Co2SnO4 sensing electrode material.
The X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) pattern of Co2SnO4 was acquired using Rigaku wide-angle X-ray diﬀractometor (D/max rA, Cu Kα radiation, wave length λ = 0.15418 nm) with 5−85° angular range. The mor-phology of Co2SnO4 material was characterized via a JEOL JSM-7500 F Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) of accelerating voltage =15 kV. Transmission electron (TEM), high-resolution trans-mission electron microscopy (HRTEM) and the energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) were measured by a JEM-2200FS apparatus (JEOL) operating at 200 kV. The Raman spectroscopy of the Co2SnO4-SE ma-terial was obtained using LabRAM HR Evolution spectrometer (excita-tion wavelength λex =473 nm).
YSZ plate (8 mol% Y2O3-doped, 2 mm × 2 mm square, 0.3 mm thickness, oﬀered by Anpeisheng Corp. China) was used as solid elec-trolyte of the gas sensor. The detailed fabrication process was as fol-lows. Firstly, the commercial Pt paste (Sino-platinum Metals Co., Ltd.) was brushed on one side of the YSZ plate to form a narrow Pt stripe, meanwhile, the other side of the YSZ plate was brushed with a Pt point. Then the above-obtained substrate was sintered at 1000 °C for 0.5 h to get Pt reference electrode (RE). Secondly, the sensing electrode paste which was obtained by mixing the Co2SnO4 sensing material and a little amount of deionized water was coated on the Pt point to form the stripe-shaped sensing electrode (SE). Whereafter, the device was cal-cined at 800 °C for 2 h that could form compact contact between YSZ solid electrolyte and Co2SnO4-SE. Finally, the Al2O3 substrate with Pt heater was glued on the back of the YSZ plate with an inorganic ad-hesive (formed by the sodium silicate (Na2SiO3·9H2O) and Al2O3 powder) which can provide operating temperature for the sensor. The schematic diagram of prepared YSZ-based gas sensor was exhibited in Fig. 1, and from top to bottom are presented by Layer 1 - Layer 4, respectively. The gas sensing characteristics of the fabricated sensor with Co2SnO4-SE were investigated by a traditional static method [24]. Approximately 100 ppm of the H2S standard gas (Changchun Juyang Gas Co., Ltd) was used to gain diﬀerent concentrations of H2S test gases by diluting with air in a 1 L measurement chamber. The gas sensing response value, which was deﬁned as potential diﬀerence (ΔV=Vgas –Vair), was measured by a digital electrometer (Rigol Technologies, Inc., DM3054, China) and the data were synchronously saved in the com-puter that connecting with the electrometer. Besides, during the gas testing process, for better keeping the accuracy and preciseness of the ΔV of the gas sensor, the measurement times of sensor in each of air and tested gas were strictly controlled by 3 min and 2 min, respectively. The Vgas and Vair were the potential value when the sensor exposed in the tested gas and in the air at the last second, respectively. The impedance analyzer (Solartron 1260 and Solartron 1287) with the frequency range of 1 MHz-0.1 Hz was used for performing the complex impedance of the sensor in various gases. The current-voltage (polarization) curves of the Co2SnO4-SE sensor were tested by the potentiodynamic method (CHI 600C, Instrument corporation of Shanghai, China) in the air, 500 ppb and 1 ppm H2S sample gases. The tested gases under diﬀerent relative humidity (RH) were prepared through the humidity chamber (Shanghai ESPC Environment Equipment Corporation, China) at 22 °C. As the si-mulating halitosis detection method used in the reported works [25–27], the exhaled breathes were collected from the healthy people, and the measurement of simulating halitosis was carried out via in-jecting the exhaled breath of the healthy people and 1 ppm H2S into 1 L measurement chamber.
The relevant crystalline structure information of the as-synthesized Co2SnO4 sensing material was determined by the XRD pattern. As shown in Fig. 2(a), every diﬀraction peak of the Co2SnO4 sample can be indexed and well correspond to the diﬀraction peaks in standard card JCPDS No. 29-514. No impurity peaks were observed, which illustrated the pure cubic phase Co2SnO4 was obtained. Besides, all sharp and narrow peaks indicated the synthetic product possessed the high crys-tallinity. Fig. 2(b) exhibited the Raman spectrum of the Co2SnO4 sample, the location of the intensity peak mainly appeared at 509 and 637 cm−1 due to the F2g and A1g vibrational modes, which were close to the values reported in the literatures [28,29]. SEM was used to observe the surface morphology of the material and the contact condition be-tween the material and the solid electrolyte. From Fig. 3(a and b), after the high temperature calcination of 1000 °C, the Co2SnO4 sensing ma-terial was composed of particles aggregated together and part cube structure. Such unique structure forms porous channels for rapid dif-fusion of the gas molecules. The cross-section image of SEM displayed that the sensing electrode layer was about 71.3 μm in thickness, and it was evenly and tightly covered on the surface of YSZ solid electrolyte, which manifests a good contact between SE and YSZ. TEM images of Fig. 4(a and b) clearly showed that the Co2SnO4 sensing material was comprised of nano-scale particles and cube structure with a size of about 1.5 μm. The HRTEM images can provide the information of lattice structure in detail. From the two insets of the Fig. 4(c and d), (311) and (222) lattice plane of Co2SnO4 can be identiﬁed with the lattice fringe spacing of 0.26 nm and 0.25 nm, respectively. Moreover, in EDS map-ping results of Fig. 4(e–h), the three elements of Co, O and Sn were uniformly distributed in the Co2SnO4.Generally, the response value of solid state electrolyte sensor was correlative with the operating temperature. Hence, the gas sensing in-ﬂuence of the operating temperature of the device to 1 ppm H2S was investigated in the temperature range of 460−560 °C. As shown in Fig. 5(a), the fabricated gas sensor attached with Co2SnO4-SE had the highest response value to 1 ppm H2S at 510 °C, however, below or above this temperature, the response descended. This phenomenon can be explained as follows: The activation energy required to participate in the electrochemical reaction increases with the increase of temperature. When the temperature exceeded 510 °C, the increase of temperature made that the desorption process of gas plays a major role on the sensing electrode. Therefore, 510 °C can be recognized as the optimal operating temperature of the fabricated sensor, and subsequent gas sensing measurements are performed at 510 °C.A good continuous dynamic response-recovery curves can reﬂect the good sensing performance of the sensor. Fig. 5(b) exactly displayed the response and recovery performances of the prepared sensor with Co2SnO4-SE in various H2S concentration atmosphere at 510 °C. Ob-viously, in the concentration range of 0.1−10 ppm H2S, the response value of sensor augmented synchronously with the increasing of H2S concentration. Moreover, the fabricated sensor attached with Co2SnO4-SE displayed the low detection limit of 100 ppb with the response value of −2.5 mV, indicating that the sensor can eﬀectively detect the low concentration of H2S from human exhaled breath. Thereby the sensor exhibited the possibility of being a promising candidate for the diag-nosis of halitosis. Additionally, the response signal could reach stable state in a short time (less than 1.5 min) when the sensor placed in the low concentration range of 0.1−5 ppm H2S. That’s because at low concentration H2S, the quantities of active sites for accelerating elec-trochemical reaction were enough, resulting in the response amplitude of the sensor depends on the concentration of the target gas. Never-theless, the response value of the sensor to 10 ppm H2S began to appear the trend of diminution, the probable reason lied in that partial active site of three phase boundary (TPB, the interface of Co2SnO4-SE, YSZ and H2S) were occupied and the desorption of H2S gas molecules from the SE material. More importantly and interestingly, the response and recovery times of 44 s and 97 s in 1 ppm H2S showed the sensor has capacity of realizing rapid detection of H2S(Fig. 5(c)). Compared with other sensors with AB2O4 structure as sensing electrode that have been reported in Table 1, the present sensor attached with Co2SnO4-SE in this work showed the fastest response and recovery rates and a relatively good sensing properties. By ﬁtting curve in Fig. 5(d), it can be found that this was a negative linear correlation between the response value of the sensor and the logarithm of H2S concentration within the range of 0.1−10 ppm at 510 °C with the sensitivity of -54.4 mV/decade.The sensing characteristics of the YSZ-based sensor attached with Co2SnO4-SE could be constructed by the mixed potential sensing me-chanism. As reported in the literatures [30,31], the solid electrolyte sensor based on oxygen ions conducting electricity can be regarded as an electrochemical cell.
The electrochemical cathodic reaction (1) and the anodic reaction (2) simultaneously took place on the TPB consisting of Co2SnO4-SE, YSZ and H2S gas. A mixed potential VM can be obtained on the sensing electrode when the rates of these two reactions arrive at a state of dynamic equilibrium.
The expression of VM can be listed by Eq. (3), which was gained by the quantitatively derivation of Butler-Volmer Equation [32,33].
From the above analyses, it was accorded with the experimental result exhibited in Fig. 5(d), which exactly proved the mixed potential theory that the ΔV of the sensor coupled with Co2SnO4-SE varied lin-early with the concentration logarithm of H2S.Fig. 6 showed the response and recovery curves of the sensor to 1 ppm H2S in eight cycles testing. The potential diﬀerence value in eight measurement cycles were almost equal and the response-recovery curves of every cycle could be repeatable well. Therefore, it can be considered that the sensor with Co2SnO4-SE possessed the nature of good reproducibility. The humidity resistance has always been one of the most important factors of solid state electrolyte sensor, especially the exhaled gas from the human body also contains a large amount of water vapor. Thus, it’s essential to estimate the eﬀect of humidity to the sensing performance of the sensor. As displayed in Fig. 7(a and b), the response values of the sensor displayed a ﬂuctuation within a narrow range with increase of relative humidity. Although the gas sensing performance had some attenuation in resisting humidity, the sensor based on the Co2SnO4-SE was still considered as a promising device to detect H2S for its receivable and stable response signal at high 80 %even 98 % RH.As is known to all, the exhaled gas not only contains a mass of water vapor, but also includes a variety of coexist gases. Therefore, the se-lectivity of the sensor to H2S was evaluated by testing the cross-sensi-tivity to some interfering gases. Fig. 8(a) depicted that the ΔV of the sensor attached with Co2SnO4-SE to the diﬀerent concentrations of other interfering gases were much lower than that of 1 ppm H2Sat 510 °C. In addition, the gas mixtures of 1 ppm H2S and diﬀerent con-centrations of interfering gases were prepared to further investigate the cross-sensitivity property of the sensor in Fig. 8(b). The result showed that comparing with the response value of 1 ppm pure H2S, the ﬂuc-tuating values in the mixed gases atmosphere changed at the range of 0.4 mV to -12.8 mV. Hence, the sensor coupled with Co2SnO4-SE has the good selectivity to H2S among kinds of interference gases.To make clearly the reason that the selectivity of the sensor to H2S, the impedance measurement had been carried out and exhibited in Fig. 9(a). According to the previously reported literatures [34,35], the total resistance was mainly aﬀected by the interfacial resistance be-tween YSZ and sensing electrode. The interfacial resistance can be given by the intersection of the large semi-arc and the real axis at the lower frequency range (around 0.1 Hz). The lower the resistance value, the higher the catalytic activity of electrochemical reaction. Here, the re-sistances were almost no change at the high frequency range, however, at lower frequency (about 0.1 Hz), the resistance value of other gases (CO, C2H2,NH3,CO2) were augmented comparing with H2S gas. This phenomenon represented the highest electrochemical catalytic activity of Co2SnO4 sensing material towards H2S. Consequently, the gas sensor attached with Co2SnO4-SE possessed best sensing performance to H2Sat 510 °C. Based on the reported literatures [36–40], a probably equiva-lent circuit was given for the fabricated sensor attached with Co2SnO4-SE. Here, R0 represents the total impedance of wires and solid elec-trolyte, Rse and Cse are impedance and capacitance of the oxide sensing electrode respectively, representing the ﬁrst semi-circle at the high frequency range, which is related to nature of itself, isn’taﬀected by test gas. Rct and Cct represent the impedance and capacitance of the inter-face between YSZ and sensing electrode, respectively, and the interface impedance value (Rct)reﬂects the degree of electrochemical reaction at the interface. Besides, for verifying the fabricated sensor abided the mixed potential mechanism, the polarization curves were tested in air, 500 ppb H2S and 1 ppm H2S by the linear sweep voltammetry. As the results revealed in Fig. 9(b), the cathodic polarization curve was mea-sured in air, and the anodic polarization curves were gained by sub-tracting in air from in diﬀerent concentrations of H2S. The intersection of anodic and cathodic polarization curve was the mixed-potential es-timated value of the fabricated sensor. Apparently, the experimental observed value in 500 ppb (−24.7 mV) and 1 ppm H2S(−37.2 mV) were close to the estimated values (-25.8 and -37.5 mV). What’s more, the anodic polarization curve in high concentration toward left to reach higher potential, which was consistent with Eq. (4). Above results il-lustrated the present sensor using Co2SnO4-SE calcined at 1000 °C was following the mixed potential theory.To evaluate the potential application value of the sensor attached with Co2SnO4-SE in the detection of halitosis, the simulation test en-vironment was prepared via collecting the exhaled breath of healthy groups and halitosis patients (simulated by injecting 1 ppm H2S to the healthy exhaled breath). Here, the concentration of H2S was selected as 1 ppm because the content of H2S more than 0.1 ppm in exhaled breath can be regarded as halitosis patient [8]. Fig. 10 showed the responses of sensor in health and simulating halitosis breath of ten volunteers. Ob-viously, the response values of the sensor toward health breath chieﬂy focused at the range of −14 mV to −7 mV. However, when the sensor exposed to the gas mixture of the simulated halitosis patients, the re-sponse values mainly gathered at the range of −52.5 mV to −40 mV. The diﬀerence in ΔV between healthy and halitosis subjects was no-table. Therefore, the fabricated sensor performed good prospect in ha-litosis diagnose by distinguishing H2S from human exhaled breath.The good stability of the gas sensor is a prerequisite for continuously operating at high temperatures. For this purpose, the response data of present sensor to 1 ppm H2S in 31 days were recorded and showed in Fig. 11(a). It was clearly that the variation of ΔV was tiny, additionally, which can be observed by the ΔVs. The formula of ΔVs is deﬁned as:Where ΔV0 and ΔVn represent the response value of the sensor on the initial and nth day, respectively. After the consecutive measurement in 31 days, the attenuation amplitude was less than -14 %. Furthermore, Fig. 11(b) exhibited the response and recovery curves of the sensor to 1 ppm H2S on the initial, 16th, 31th day, which indicated the sensor based on Co2SnO4-SE could continuously detect the H2S at high tem-perature. Thus, the prepared sensor maintained good sensing perfor-mance during the consecutive 31-day measurement period and pos-sessed good long-term stability.
The Co2SnO4 with spinel structure was initially used as sensing electrode to fabricate YSZ-based H2S sensor. The Co2SnO4 sensing material was synthesized via hydrothermal method and the character-ization results of XRD, Raman, SEM, TEM, HRTEM and EDS clearly proved the crystal structure of pure phase formed at the calcination temperature of 1000 °C. In the respect of gas sensing performance, the YSZ-based H2S sensor attached with Co2SnO4-SE displayed rapid re-sponse time of 44 s in 1 ppm H2S, as well as high sensitivity of -54.4 mV/decade to 0.1−10 ppm H2S at 510 °C and low detection limit of 100 ppb H2S. The prepared sensor also possessed good re-producibility, selectivity, acceptable humidity resistance and good long-term stability. More importantly, the fabricated sensor displayed the visible response diﬀerence between the exhaled breath from 10 healthy people and the simulated halitosis breath. Hereto, the presented sensor utilizing Co2SnO4-SE provided a feasible method for H2S de-tection and it has great development prospect in the ﬁeld of halitosis monitoring.