Polyanionic Na3V2(PO4)2F3 with a NASICON-type structure is heralded as  a promising cathode material for sodium-ion batteries due to its fast ionic  conduction, high working voltage, and favorable structural stability.
However,  a number of challenging issues remain regarding its rate capability and cycle  life, which must be addressed to enable greater application compatibility.
Here, a facile and effective approach that can be used to overcome these  disadvantages by introducing an aqueous carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC)  binder is reported.
The resulting conductive network serves to accelerate the  diffusion of Na+ ions across the interface as well as in the bulk.
The strong  binding force of the CMC and stable solid permeable interface protect the  electrode from degradation, leading to an excellent capacity of 75 mA h g−1   at an ultrahigh rate of 70 C (1 C = 128 mA g−1) and a long lifespan of   3500 cycles at 30 C while sustaining 79% of the initial capacity value.
A full cell based on this electrode material delivers an impressive energy  density as high as 216 W h kg−1, indicating the potential for application of  this straightforward and cost-effective route for the future development of  advanced battery technologies.
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative  Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
The  past  two  decades  have  witnessed  considerable  advancements  for  rechargeable  lithium-ion  batteries  (LIBs),  which  are  currently  the  storage  technology  of  choice  for  portable  electronic  devices  and  electric  vehicles;  however,  cost  and  safety  issues  remain  two  major  obstacles  that  limit  the  use  of  LIBs  in  the  smart  grid.
Taking  into  account  the  raw  material  abundance  and  battery  cost  as  well  as  the  similar  electrochemical  storage  mechanism,  roomtemperature  sodium-ion  batteries  (SIBs)  based  on  Na-ion  shuttling  between  positive and negative electrodes are generally  regarded  as  a  promising  choice  for  grid  storage.
Nevertheless, SIB technology  must  be  further  explored  to  obtain  batteries  that  are  more  economical,  safer,  and  show  a  high-rate  capability and longer durable life.
The  robust  3D  crystal  structure  and  rapid    Na-ion  insertion/extraction reaction in NASICON-type phosphates afford a  family of favorable electrode materials for SIB applications.
Among  the  existing  NASICON-type  materials,  Na3V2(PO4)2F3  (NVPF)  is  of  particular  interest  because  of  its  high  theoretical  energy  density  of  nearly  500  Wh  kg−1,  approaching  that  of  LiFePO4 used in LIBs.
However, such fluorophosphates usually  suffer  from  an  intrinsically  poor  electronic  conductivity;  thus,  the  advantage  of  the  superionic  conduction  is  offset.
Many strategies have been attempted to tackle this issue, such  as  morphological  engineering  and  surface  modification  by  various  carbonaceous  materials  including  amorphous  carbon,  graphene,  carbon  nanotubes  (CNTs),  and  CMK-3.[6a–e]  Unfortunately,  these  methods  are  usually  time-consuming,  energy  intensive,  and  costly.
More  importantly,  the  introduction  of  excess  carbon  can  lower  the  energy  density  of  the  battery  and increase the difficulty of binder adhesion.
In addition, the  cathode suffers from volume expansion, electrical contact loss,  and  separation  from  current  collectors,  especially  at  high  current rates, leading to a short cycle life.
In fact, as one of the  most important and indispensable components of a battery, the  binder plays a crucial role in realizing a high-rate capability and  long-term  cycle  life,  especially  for  the  negative  electrodes.
Up  to  now,  poly(vinylidene  difluoride)  (PVDF)  has  been  the  most  widely  used  binder;  however,  PVDF  is  usually  dissolved  in  volatile,  flammable,  and  explosive  N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone  (NMP), which calls for a low processing humidity and poses a  serious  pollution  threat  to  the  environment.
In  addition  to  its  insulating property, PVDF suffers from swelling and softening  in  ester-based  electrolytes  due  to  the  interactions  between  the  polymer  and  electrolyte.
In  contrast,  aqueous  binders  are  receiving  increased  attention  due  to  their  low  cost,  nontoxicity, short drying time, nonrigorous processing humidity, and  high  conductivity.
Sodium  carboxymethyl  cellulose  (CMC),  polyacrylic  acid,  and  sodium  alginate  have  all  been  widely  applied  as  binders  for  the  anode  materials  in  SIBs.
The  enhancement in electrode performance based on the use of an  aqueous  binder  can  be  understood  in  terms  of  the  possibility  for  strong  hydrogen  bond  formation  between  the  hydroxyl  functional group and active material, leading to stronger cohesiveness.
Recently, CMC has been used as a binder for cathode  materials;[11a,b] however, many open questions remain unsolved  related  to  the  role  of  aqueous  binders  in  the  improvement  of  sodium storage performance.
Therefore, investigations focused  on identifying the structure–performance relationship between  the binder and the electrochemical characteristics are essential  and highly desirable.
Herein,  we  demonstrate  a  facile  and  effective  method  for  improving  the  rate  capability  and  long-term  cycling  stability  of  a  NASICON-structured  cathode  material  utilizing  CMC  as  a  binder.
By  using  this  binder,  we  determine  that  the  NVPF  cathode can be used to realize a remarkable charging capability  of 75 mA h g−1 at 70 C (1 C = 128 mA g−1) and a long lifespan  of 3500 cycles at 30 C with a capacity retention of 79%.
Further  investigation shows that CMC is beneficial to the formation of  a  conductive  network,  protecting  the  structural  and  electrical  integrity  of  the  electrode  as  well  as  ameliorating  the  surface/ interface property between the electrode and electrolyte.
Results and Discussion2.1. Physical Properties and Architecture of the ElectrodeThe  phase  purity  of  pristine  NVPF  was  first  examined  by  powder X-ray diffraction followed by a Rietveld refinement analysis, as shown in Figure S1 (Supporting Information).
The data  show  sharp  and  well-defined  reflections  that  suggest  a  highly  crystalline  sample  with  no  detectable  impurities.
The  refined  lattice parameters are a = b = 9.04 Å and c = 10.75 Å, consistent  with  previous  reported  values.
Scanning  electron  microscopy  (SEM)  and  transmission  electron  microscopy  (TEM)  were  also  used  to  characterize  the  sample  morphology.
In  addition,  the  surface  of  the  NVPF  particles  was  coated  by  a  thin  layer  of  carbon  with  a  thickness  of  ≈8.1  nm,  which  is  beneficial  for  electronic  transport  between particles.
The  carbon  content  was  quantified  and  found  to  be  4.2 wt% from the elemental analysis (C/H/N).
High-resolution  TEM  for  a  single  crystalline  particle  showed  a  lattice  plane  spacing of 0.537 nm, which is consistent with the spacing of the   (002)  planes  of  tetragonal  NVPF,  confirming  once  again  the  structure type of the pristine sample.
In addition  to  the  physical  properties  of  the  pristine  materials,  the  composition  and  architecture  of  the  working  electrode can also affect the electrochemical performance, such as  the rate capability and long-term stability.
Therefore, SEM and  TEM were used to observe the morphologies of different NVPF  electrodes prepared by mixing together the active material, conductive  carbon,  and  CMC  or  PVDF  binders  (denoted  NVPF– CMC or NVPF–PVDF, respectively).
The NVPF–CMC electrode  shows a loose and porous structure (Figure 1a), which can favor  electrolyte  infiltration  and  the  realization  of  sufficient  electrochemically available interfaces and abundant ionic pathways;[8a]  in  contrast,  the  NVPF–PVDF  electrode  shows  a  more  smooth  and  compact  structure  (Figure  1d).
This  is  mainly  due  to  the  higher evaporation rate and shorter drying time of water during  the  electrode  preparation  process  compared  to  NMP,  as  illustrated  in  Figure  1c,f.
Further  insight  into  the  microstructure  of  the  working  electrode  was  gained  from  the  TEM  studies  (Figure  1b  and  Figure  S2  (Supporting  Information)),  which  showed  that  the  Super  P  and  CMC  chains  build  a  conductive  network  that  makes  long-term  charge  transfer  easier.
Isolated  PVDF and Super P particles can limit the electrochemical performance  at  high  rate,  as  shown  in  Figure  1c  and  Figure  S3  (Supporting Information).
Moreover, the stability of the cathode  material with CMC was also confirmed, as shown in Figure S4  (Supporting Information).
As  shown  in  Figure  S4  (Supporting  Information),  three  working  plateaus  were  observed  at  ≈3.4,  3.7,  and  4.2  V.
The  lower  two  plateaus  can  be  attributed  to  the  two-step  Na+  insertion  reaction  on  the  Na(2)  site;  the higher plateau is mainly due to the ion insertion/extraction  of the second Na+ on the Na(1) site.
Both the working electrodes  show  similar  charge–discharge  behavior  and  cycle  stability at a low current density of 0.5 C regardless of the binder  used  (Figure  S5,  Supporting  Information);  however,  the  rate  performance shows a strong dependence on the binder type.
As  shown  in  Figure  2a–c,  the  rate  performance  of  the  NVPF@C  cathode was evaluated at increased current rates from 0.5 C to  70 C for every 10 cycles.
It can be seen that the cathode using  CMC  as  the  binder  delivers  a  superior  rate  capability  with  no  serious  capacity  loss  from  20  to  70  C.
The  data  show  a  high  specific  capacity  of  75  mA  h  g−1  obtained  at  70  C  rate,  which  is  almost  4  times  higher  than  that  of  NVPF–PVDF.
This  is  one  of  the  highest  rate  performances  reported  for  state-of-theart  Na3V2(PO4)2F3  materials  (see  Table  S1  in  the  Supporting  Information).
The  corresponding  discharge/charge  profiles  of  NVPF–CMC  show  a  long  platform  of  50  mA  h  g−1  at  3.25  V,  which is in sharp contrast to the significantly polarized curves  of  the  NVPF–PVDF  electrode.
To  gain  further insight into the mechanism governing the sodium charge  storage  performance  in  the  presence  of  the  CMC  binder,  the  electrochemical  impedance  spectra  (EIS)  were  recorded  at  varying  temperatures  to  calculate  the  activation  energies  for  the  working  electrodes  (Figure  S6,  Supporting  Information).
Based on the fits of the Arrhenius plots, the activation energies  were  calculated  to  be  46.7  and  51.5  kJ  mol−1  for  NVPF–CMC  and NVPF–PVDF, respectively (Figure 2d).
The lower activation  energy for NVPF–CMC implies that the CMC binder facilitates  faster  transport  of  Na+  compared  with  that  of  the  PVDFbased  electrodes.
Furthermore,  cyclic  voltammetry  (CV)  were  recorded  at  different  scan  rates  from  0.05  to  3.0  mV  s−1   to  obtain  in   Figure  2e,f,  three  pairs  of  symmetrical  redox  peaks  were  observed  for  both  binder  systems,  which  was  consistent  with  the working plateaus observed in the charge–discharge profiles.
It  is  worth  noting  that  the  redox  polarization  of  NVPF–CMC  is  much  lower  than  that  of  NVPF–PVDF,  suggesting  better  electronic  and  ionic  transport  kinetics.
The  linear  fit  of  the  relationship between the peak currents and the square root of  the  scanning  rates  can  be  used  to  calculate  the  Na+  diffusion  coefficient,  DNa,  on  the  basis  of  the  Randles–Sevcik  equation   (Figures  S7  and  S8,  Supporting  Information).
As  listed  in  Table S2 (Supporting Information), the calculation of DNa based  on  all  the  oxidation/reduction  peaks  observed  for  the  NVPF– CMC  electrode  resulted  in  values  that  are  larger  than  those  calculated for NVPF–PVDF, which indicates the improved transportation of Na+ ions in the cathode and leads to the observed  enhancement in the high-rate charge–discharge capability.
To  further  verify  the  practical  validity  of  the  CMC  binder  in  commercial  SIBs,  the  weight  ratio  of  the  active  materials,  NVPF:Super  P:binder,  was  increased  from  7:2:1  to  9:0.5:0.5.  It  is  important  to  note  that  although  such  a  high  weight  ratio  (active  material:Super  P:binder  =  9:0.5:0.5)  is  similar  to  the  value  used  for  commercial  LIBs  based  on  LiFePO4  or  LiCoO2  cathodes, it has not been utilized before for SIBs.
Encouragingly,  the  NVPF–CMC  electrode  demonstrates  an  outstanding rate performance, i.e., a reversible capacity of 91 and  38  mA  h  g−1  at  10  C  and  70  C,  respectively  (Figure  S9,  Supporting  Information).
These  data  highlight  the  potential  for   practical  applications  of  the  CMC  binder  in  commercial  SIBs.
Moreover, the enhancement in the rate capacity using CMC as a  binder was also confirmed for another NASICON-type cathode,  Na3V2(PO4)3/C (X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern in Figure S10 in  the Supporting Information).
As shown in Figures S11 and S12   (Supporting  Information),  the  Na3V2(PO4)3/C  cathode  using  a  CMC  binder  delivers  a  significantly  improved  rate  capability  and  cycle  stability  compared  to  that  with  PVDF  as  the  binder,  which  further  demonstrates  the  beneficial  utilization  of  the  CMC binder in SIBs.
The  difference  between  the  two  electrodes  increases  once  the  current  density  is  increased  to  30  C.
The  NVPF–CMC  electrode  maintains  79%  of  its  initial capacity following cycling, which is superior to the value of  61% for the NVPF–PVDF electrode (Figure 2g).
The improved  capacity retention observed after moving to the aqueous binder  strongly  suggests  that  although  the  binder  only  constitutes  a  small  amount  of  the  total  mass  of  the  working  electrode,  it  plays  a  significant  role  in  the  realization  of  long-term  durability.
Potential  explanations  for  this  enhanced  durability  can  be  understood  as  follows.
Swelling  tests  for  the  different  binders were performed by wetting the electrodes in the electrolyte for the same amount of time.
A cut section of the NVPF– CMC  electrode  was  found  to  maintain  its  initial  thickness  of  25  µm  following  wetting  with  the  electrolyte,  which  indicated  negligible  polymer/electrolyte  interactions  (Figure  3a,b).
In  sharp  contrast,  the  thickness  of  the  NVPF–PVDF  electrode  clearly  increased  from  26  to  35  µm  (Figure  3c,d).
This  thickness  change  can  be  attributed  to  a  swelling  effect  due  to  the  PVDF.
A  peeling  experiment  clearly  showed  that  the  force of adhesion for CMC was much stronger than for PVDF  (Figure  3e,f  and  Videos  S1  and  S2  (Supporting  Information)).
Consequently,  an  ex  situ  SEM  image  of  the  NVPF–CMC  electrode taken after 100 cycles showed perfect integrity, while the  image for NVPF–PVDF clearly showed cracks that can be attributed to either the weaker adhesion force or degeneration of the  PVDF  (Figure  3g,h).
A  solid  permeable  interface  (SPI)  is  known to usually form on a cathode surface due to oxidation of  the electrolyte, which can strongly affect the long-term cycling  stability.
To further understand the effect of the binder on the  SPI  layer,  an  X-ray  photoelectron  spectroscopy  (XPS)  analysis  was  carried  out.
As  shown  in  Figure  4b,  the  C  1s  spectra  of  NVPF–PVDF show peaks at 286.0, 290.7, and 284.6 eV, which  correspond to the carbon in the CH2 and CF2 bonds of  PVDF  and  in  the  CC  bond  of  the  carbon  layer,  respectively.
In contrast, the binding energies for the NVPF–CMC electrode  are  found  at  286.7,  288.6,  and  285.4  eV,  which  are  attributed  to the CO, CO2, and CH2 carbon atoms of the CMC  binder,  respectively  (Figure  4a).
After  10  cycles,  the  peak  for  the  CO  bond  overlaps  with  another  peak  appearing  at  287.1  eV  and  corresponding  to  the  electrolyte  decomposition  products  containing  an  ester  linkage  (COO).Although  the  contents  of  the  oxidation  products  in  the  SPI  film  are  different from that expected for SEI film formation on the anode  side  (usually  ROCO2Na  and  RCO2Na[20a,b]),  the  surface  film is supposed to prevent further electrolyte degradation and  corrosion  of  the  cathode  materials.
Indeed,  the  XPS  data  show  that  the  SPI  film  is  very  stable  after  100  cycles,  without  any  obvious  increase  in  content.
Moreover,  an  SPI  film  can  also  ameliorate  the  kinetic  property  at  the  surface/interface  between  electrode  and  electrolyte.
In  Figure  4c,  the  EIS  of  both electrodes show a single semicircle in the high-frequency  region, indicating similar time constants for the SPI film resistance  and  charge-transfer  resistance  (hereafter  denoted  as  the  interfacial  resistance).
As  shown  in  Figure  4d,  the  interfacial  resistance  of  NVPF–CMC  is  stable,  and  after  100  cycles,  the  interfacial resistance decreased from 253 to 182 Ω.
Thus,  the  SPI  film  induced  by  the  CMC  binder  has  a  positive and efficient effect on the cycle stability.
High-Performance Full CellA  full  Na-ion  battery  with  a  high  energy  density  was  constructed  by  combining  an  NVPF–CMC  cathode  with  a  hard  carbon  (HC)  anode  for  operation  in  the  voltage  ranges  of  2.2–3.9 V (Figure S14, Supporting Information) and 2.0–4.3 V   (Figure  5).
To  ensure  full  activation  of  the  anode  during  the  initial  charging  process,  the  mass  loading  was  1.2  times  higher  than  that  of  the  cathode.
The  NVPF–CMC    HC  full  cells  in  the  optimized  voltage  range  of  2.0–4.3  V  show  typical  charge/discharge  profiles  with  an  average  potential  of  ≈3.6  V, as shown in Figure 5a.
These operating voltages are the same  as those measured in the half cell for the NVPF–CMC cathode,  which  suggests  that  the  low  sodiation  potential  of  HC  (see  Figure S15 in the Supporting Information) is close to the potential of Na metal and beneficial for realizing high-energy density  SIBs.
The  cycling  performance  and  corresponding  Coulombic  efficiency  were  first  tested  at  1  C,  as  shown  in  Figure  5b;  the  data show no significant degradation in the voltage and capacity  over  100  cycles.
The  full  cell  offers  a  95.3%  capacity  retention  after  100  desodiation  and  sodiation  cycles,  a  compelling  high  voltage,  outstanding  cycle  life,  and  a  well-defined  voltage  plateau,  which  are  promising  for  the  application  of  NVPF–CMC  as a superior bipolar electrode for stationary batteries.
Furthermore,  the  SPI  interfacial  film  induced  by  the  CMC  binder  limits  the  resistance  increase  and  maintains  the  integrity of the electrode.
Thus, the electrode enables an excellent capacity of 75 mA h g−1 at an ultrahigh rate of 70 C (1 C =  128 mA g−1) and a long lifespan of 3500 cycles at 30 C rate with  capacity  retention  of  79%.
Finally,  a  full  battery  cell  assembly  using  hard  carbon  as  the  anode  exhibits  an  energy  density  of  216  Wh  kg−1,  which  suggests  the  potential  for  application  in  future  scalable  energy  storage  systems.
The  strategy  we  have  proposed  here  is  believed  to  be  widely  applicable  to  other  cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries.
Typical  preparation processes are described as follows: stoichiometric amounts  of  NH4VO3,  NaF,  and  NH4H2PO4  (Sigma-Aldrich,  99.9%)  with  a  molar  ratio of 2:3:2 were dissolved in deionized water.
Then, a saturated citric  acid  [HOC(COOH)(CH2COOH)2]  solution  was  added  into  the  above  solution  until  the  ratio  of  vanadium:citric  acid  equaled  5:4.  Next,  the  obtained  solution  was  evaporated  at  80  °C,  dried  at  120  °C  for  12  h,  and ground to form a precursor.
Finally, the precursor was preheated at   300 °C for 4 h and sintered at 650 °C for 8 h under a nitrogen atmosphere  with intermediate grinding to obtain the NVPF@C nanocomposite.
Material  Characterization:  The  phase  purity  of  the  obtained  samples  was  examined  by  XRD  using  a  RigaKu  D/max-2550  diffractometer  with  Cu Kα source in the 2θ range of 10°–80° at a scanning rate of 1.7° min−1.   Rietveld  refinement  was  used  to  confirm  the  phase  purity.
The  orphological  features  were  observed  by  a  Hitachi  SU8020  scanning  electron  microscope  and  an  FEI  Tecnai  G2  transmission  electron  microscope.
Raman  spectroscopy  was  carried  out  using  a  Renishaw  in  Via  Raman  system  with  an  Ar-ion  laser  excitation   (λ = 514.5 nm).
The samples for the swelling test were observed under a  Hitachi SU8020 SEM.
The NVPF–CMC and NVPF–PVDF electrodes were  cut into two parts: one part was maintained in a dry condition and the  other wetted in the electrolyte for the same time.
Then, the thicknesses  of the two electrodes for both the dry and wet conditions were measured  by  SEM  of  the  cut  section.
The  adhesion  forces  were  measured  by  a  peel-test  experiment.
A  piece  of  stainless-steel  foil  was  attached  to  another piece of stainless-steel foil using either the CMC binder or PVDF  binder in equal amounts; then, one of the stainless-steel foils was fixed  to a wall.
Next, weights were added onto the free end of the stainless-steel  foil  to  draw  it  downward.
The  weights  were  added  gradually  and  measured  by  a  spring-loaded  thrust  meter  until  the  stainless-steel  foil  completely  peeled  off  from  the  other  foil.
Finally,  the  reading  from  the  spring-loaded thrust meter was taken.
X-ray photoelectron spectra were  measured using a VG scientific ESCALAB-250 spectrometer.
Electrochemical  Measurements:  All  the  electrochemical  tests  were  carried  out  using  coin-type  cells  (CR2032).
Sodium  half  cells  were  assembled  using  sodium  foil  as  the  counter  electrode.
The  working  electrodes  were  fabricated  by  coating  a  slurry  prepared  from  a  mixture  of the active material, Super P conductive additive, and binder (sodium  CMC dissolved in water or PVDF binder dissolved in NMP) in a weight  ratio  of  7:2:1,  respectively,  on  an  aluminum-foil  current  collector.
The  electrode films were successively dried in a vacuum oven at 120 °C for  12 h.
After patterning the electrode film into a square of area 0.8 × 0.8 cm2,   the coin cells were assembled in a glove box.
The loading mass of the  materials was 1.1–1.6 mg cm−2. Glass fiber filters (Whatman GF/C) were  used  as  separators  for  the  cells.
The  electrolyte  solution  was  prepared  from  1  m  NaClO4  dissolved  in  ethylene  carbonate  and  propylene  carbonate  (1:1  v/v)  with  the  addition  of  5%  fluoroethylene  carbonate.
Galvanostatic  charge–discharge  tests  were  carried  out  over  a  voltage  range  of  2.0–4.3  V  at  room  temperature  using  a  Land-2001A  (Wuhan,  China)  automatic  battery  tester.
The  specific  capacities  were  calculated  based on the Na3V2(PO4)2F3 mass.
CV and electrochemical impedance  spectra (EIS) were carried out using a VSP multichannel potentiostatic– galvanostatic  system  (Bio-Logic  SAS,  France).
CV  curves  were  collected  at  different  scanning  rates  ranging  from  0.05  to  3.0  mV  s−1.   The  EIS  were  measured  in  the  frequency  range  from  1  MHz  to   1  mHz.
