Towards design strategies for anion–π interactions in crystal engineeringThis is an Accepted Manuscript, which has been through the   Royal Society of Chemistry peer review process and has been  accepted for publication.
Accepted Manuscripts are published online shortly after  acceptance, before technical editing, formatting and proof reading.
Using this free service, authors can make their results available  to the community, in citable form, before we publish the edited  article.
We will replace this Accepted Manuscript with the edited  and formatted Advance Article as soon as it is available.
You can find more information about Accepted Manuscripts in the  author guidelines.
Please note that technical editing may introduce minor changes  to the text and/or graphics, which may alter content.
The journal’s  standard Terms & Conditions and the ethical guidelines, outlined  in our author and reviewer resource centre, still apply.
In no  event shall the Royal Society of Chemistry be held responsible  for any errors or omissions in this Accepted Manuscript or any  consequences arising from the use of any information it contains.
View Article OnlineView JournalPage 1 of 9Please do not adjust margins PAPER Received 00th January 20xx,  Accepted 00th January 20xx Enhancing Lithium-Ion Conductivity in NASICON Glass-Ceramics by  Adding Yttria Victor A.
Smallangle neutron scattering data suggest that Y-containing glasses are suddenly crystallized upon heat treatment producing  uniform Li1+xAlxGe2-x(PO4)3 ceramics.
Due to lower resistance of intergrain interfaces such samples demonstrate 0.5 mS/cm  specific ionic conductivity that is nearly 5 times higher in comparison to Y-free ceramics, prepared in similar conditions.
We  speculate that such an effect is caused primarily by better intergrain contact in Y-containing ceramics along with a better  ionic  NMR.
In  contrast  to  liquid  electrolytes,  such  compounds  are  nonflammable,  they  demonstrate  Li+  transference  numbers  close  to  unity  and  can  exhibit  wide  electrochemical  stability  windows.
At the same time, solid state electrolytes are able to  play  a  role  of  membranes  suppressing  transport  of  certain  species  from  one  electrode  to  another  (e.g.block  oxygen  diffusion or polysulfide shuttle to metallic lithium in Li-O2 or LiS  electrochemical  cells,  respectively).
Numerous  studies  of  a  wide  range  of  inorganic  Li+-conducting  electrolytes  including  those  with  LISICON  and  NASICON  structures,  garnets,  perovskites,  Li10MP2S12  (LMPS)  (M  =  Si,  Ge,  Sn)  phases,7-9  sulfide and nitride glasses were reported and summarized in a  number  of  recent  comprehensive  reviews.
Some  recent  breakthroughs8 demonstrated that ionic conductivities close to  that  of  liquid  aprotic  electrolytes  (10-2  Ohm-1∙cm-1)13  are  possible.
Phosphates  and  silicates  with  NASICON  structures,  although ionic not  showing  the  highest  values  of  specific  resistivity,  often  provide  a  good  compromise  between  transport  properties,  environmental  stability  and  processability.
Such  formula  Li1+xAxB2-x(XO4)3  were  compounds  with  general  reported for A = Al, Cr, Fe; B = Ti, Ge, Sn, Zr, Hf, Nb, Ta and X =  P,  Si.
The  crystal  structure  is  built  up  by  XO4  tetrahedra,  which  share  each  corner  oxygen  atoms  with  BO6  octahedra.
Such  framework  contains  a  network  of  interconnected  voids  where  Li+  cations  can  move.
Partial  heterovalent  substitution  of B4+ cations by A3+ allows control of Li+ content (x in Li1+xAxB2xX3O12)  and,  thus,  enhancement  of  ionic  conductivity  due  to  occupation of Li sites in 3D tunnels of NASICON structure (see  figure  S1  in  the  Electronic  Supplementary  Information).
For  example, ionic conductivity of Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 typically shows  maximum  at  x  ≈  0.3  owing,  however,  not  only  to  optimal  carrier concentration in the structure but also to porosity and  microstructure,  which  change  along  with  variation  of  the  composition.
Being  a  result  of  an  interplay  between  intrinsic  conductivity,  which  depends  on  Li  concentration,  cell  parameters  etc.,  and  grain  boundary  conductivity  determined  by  microstructure,  reported  values  of  specific  conductivity  range  from  10-4  S/cm  for  LiTi2(PO4)3    to  1.3.10-3  S/cm  for  16  or  from 10-5 S/cm  for LiGe2(PO4)3   to 2.10-4  Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 S/cm for Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3.17   A  number  of  works  show  that  variation  of  sample  porosity,  microstructure and intergrain interface area play a major role  in  the  optimization  of  functional  properties.
Reported  strategies  in  NASICON  phosphate/silicates  include  the  addition  of  impurities  such  as  Li2O,19  B2O3,20  GeO2,  ZrO2,  TiO2.21  These  additives  were  considered  as  fluxes  for  improved  sintering  of  conductive  ceramic  particles.
However,  ceramic  approach  tends  to  result improving  Li+  conductivity for This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx Please do not adjust margins CrystEngCommAcceptedManuscriptPublished on 16 January 2018. Downloaded by Fudan University on 16/01/2018 14:49:05. View Article OnlineDOI: 10.1039/C7CE01910FPlease do not adjust margins Page 2 of 9PAPER for the ionic affects these  systems  due (LAGP).
Two-stage  annealing  of in  quite  porous  solid  electrolyte  membranes,  which  may  be  unsuitable  for  application  in  batteries.
Glass  crystallization  is  available  the  presence  of  phosphorus,  aluminium  and  germanium  oxides.
Such  approach16,22 involving glass-ceramic sintering utilizes multiple  stage  heat  treatment  of  precursor  glass  enabling  more  accurate control of  NASICON  crystallization.
It  was found that  two-step  annealing  can  be  especially  efficient  for  Ge-based  NASICON  glass-ceramics22  that  is  too  porous  if  a  single  step  heat treatment is applied for glass crystallization.
Here, we suggest the addition of yttria to the glass melts as a  powerful tool to control the resulting ceramics microstructure,  conductivity  of  which,  turn,  Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3  the  quenched  Y2O3-containing  glass  melts  enabled  fabricating  uniformly  crystallized  dense  LAGP  ceramic  membranes  with  small  YPO4  particles  segregated  at  grain  boundaries.
Using  small-angle  neutron  scattering  we  show  that  yttria  addition  strongly  affects  the  mass  crystallization  making  nucleation  of  LAGP  crystals faster.
Pure  LAGP  ceramics  still show the traces  of scattering from small crystals (< 100 nm) even after 2 hour  annealing at 750°C, while no impurity phases sized below 100  nm  were  found  in  the  Y-containing  glass-ceramics.
Having  nearly  the  same  phase  composition,  which  was  probed  by  neutron  powder  diffraction  (NPD)  and  solid  state  nuclear  magnetic  ceramics  synthesized with the Y2O3 additive demonstrate 5 times higher  overall  specific  ionic  conductivity  in  comparison  with  the  samples of pure LAGP, which have higher intergrain resistance  as seen from the electrochemical impedance spectra.resonance Experimental section the  synthesis  without Synthesis procedures.
Stoicheometric  mixtures  of precursors  were  mechanically  homogenized using  an agate mortar and pestle, and then preannealed at 500°C for  5  hours  to  start  decomposition  and  sintering.
After  that  the  powders  were  put  into  platinum  crucible  and  heated  to  1300°C,  the  melt  was  kept  for  2  hours  in  high  temperature  furnace for homogenization.
The resulting melt was quenched  between  steel  bars  preheated  to  450°C.
Quenched  samples  were  cooled  down  from  450°C  to  room  temperature  for  3  hours.
These  glass  plates  were  then  tempered  at  500°C  and  subsequently at 400°C.
No new phase formation was observed after  tempering,  and  the  glass  plates  did  not  change  its  appearance.
In  order  to  crystallize  the  glass,  plates  were  put  into  a  hot  furnace  heated  up  to  600°C  and  annealed  for  30  min,  after  that they were cooled in air.
Finally, glass-ceramic membranes  were obtained by crystallization in preheated furnace at 750°C  for  2  hours.
Thus  obtained  glass-ceramic  membranes  had  thickness of approximately 500 or 1000 µm (depending on the  mould  used).
They  were  further  mechanically  polished  down  to  300  –  350  µm  using  Struers Tegrapol-11  polishing  machine  with  waterproof  P150,  P220,  P400,  P800,  P1200  Smirdex  270  sandpapers.
Differential thermal analysis (DTA)  data for glass samples were  acquired using Perkin Elmer Pyris  Diamond TG/DTA.
Glass powders were analyzed in a platinum  crucibles.
The  measurements  were  performed  the  temperature range from 25 to 1100°C with heating rates from  1  to  10°C/min  in  airflow.
Scanning  electron  microscopy  (SEM)  images  were  obtained  using  Leo  Supra  50  VP  microscope  equipped  with  electron  probe  microanalyzer  (Inca  Energy  350Х-Мах  80).
In  order to study membrane cross-section samples were fixed in  epoxy and (after curing of epoxy) polished using Smart Lam 2.0  polishing  machine  using  waterproof  P150,  P220,  P400,  P800,  P1200 Smirdex 270 sandpapers and diamond pastes with grain  sizes down to 1 µm.
Transmission  electron  microscopy  (TEM)  observations  were  made  using  the  transmission  electron  microscope  JEOL  JEM2200  F  S,  which  was  operated  at  the  acceleration  voltage  of  200 kV.
Transmission electron microscopy was complemented  by  energy  dispersive  X-ray  spectroscopy  (EDX).
Glass-ceramic  membranes  were  thinned  using  sandpapers  with  final  polishing done with a wire saw.
Neutron  diffraction  data  were  collected  using  the  highresolution  Fourier  powder  diffractometer  (HRFD)  at  the  IBR-2  pulsed reactor in Dubna (Russia).
The correlation method of  data  Fourier  diffractometer provides an exceptionally high resolution (Δd/d  ≈  0.001),  which  is  practically  independent  of  the  interplanar  distance  in  a  wide  range  of  d-spacing.
LiGe2(PO4)3,24  YPO4,25  AlPO4,26  GeO2 27  were  used  as  initial  structural  models  for  Rietveld structure refinement, which was carried out by means  of  the  JANA28  and  FullProf29  packages  with  the  use  of  its  internal tables for coherent scattering lengths.
X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  patterns  were  recorded  in  reflective  Bragg-Brentano  geometry  with  an  θ−θ  goniometer  (Bruker  D8 Advance) using Cu  Kα radiation in the 2θrange from 10°  to  100°  with  a  step  width  of  0.01°  at  a  speed  of  2s  per  step.
The  diffractometer  employs  primary  and  secondary  2.3°  axial  Soller  collimators  and  a  Johansson-type  secondary  graphite  monochromator.
The equatorial beam divergence  was limited the  high-resolution collecting  used This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx Please do not adjust margins CrystEngCommAcceptedManuscriptPublished on 16 January 2018. Downloaded by Fudan University on 16/01/2018 14:49:05. View Article OnlineDOI: 10.1039/C7CE01910FPage 3 of 9 PAPER conductivity  of  the  samples  was  checked  using  four-probe  technique with a Jandel RM 3000 tester.
Results and discussion The  crystallization  of  glasses  is  a  powerful  approach  for  sintering uniform and dense ceramics.
line  with  both  isothermal  and  adiabatic  theories  of  nucleation,  the  high  values  of  the  ratio  between  glass  transition  temperature  (Tg)  and melting temperature (Tm), Tg/Tm>0.58, result in absence of  internal  nucleation,33  and  thus,  glass  crystallization  occurs  primarily  starting  from  surfaces,  residual  bubbles  in  glass  and  other  for  Li2O–Al2O3–GeO2–P2O5  was  estimated to be about 510°C, while Tm is ca.
1000°C as can be  seen from differential thermal analysis curves shown in figure  in  the  Electronic  Supplementary  1a  and  Information.
Crystallization  of  the  temperatures  near  Tcryst  results  in  highly  non-homogeneous  ceramics  (see  figure  S4  in  the  Electronic  Supplementary  Information)  that is  in agreement with  theoretical  predictions  (Tg/Tm ratio 0.61).
figure  S3 glasses such to  2°,  whereas  the  focal  point  was  constrained  to  0.025°.
Solid  state  NMR  measurements  were  performed  on  a  BRUKER  AVANCE  III  HD  400 MHz  WB  spectrometer.
Static  7Li  NMR  measurements  were  performed  at  a  resonance  frequency  of  155.5 MHz  with  a  custom  made  static  probehead  (NMR  Service  GmbH,  Erfurt)  using  a  single  pulse of 1 µs pulse duration (π/12), a recycle delay of  1 s and  512 repetitions.
27Al and  31P magic-angle-spinning (MAS) NMR  spectra  were  measured  employing  a  4  mm  MAS  probe  at  resonance  frequencies  of  104.3  MHz  and  162.0  MHz  for  27Al  and 31P, respectively.
For 31P MAS NMR experiments a spinning  frequency of 10 kHz, 90° pulse duration of 2.5 μs, 8 repetitions  and  a  repetition  delay  of  2  hours  were  used.
27Al  MAS  NMR  spectra were recorded at a spinning frequency of 14 kHz, using  a  single  pulse  of  1  µs,  a  recycle  delay  of  1  s  and  4096  repetitions.
Calibrations  were  done  using  ammonium  dihydrogen phosphate as an external standard relative to 85%  H3PO4  and  1M  aqueous  solutions  of  LiCl  and  AlCl3  at  0 ppm  both.
Small  angle  neutron  Small-angle  neutron  experiments  were  carried  out  on  the  YuMO  time-of-flight  small-angle  diffractometer31  at  the  IBR-2  pulsed  reactor  of  FLNP JINR (Dubna, Russia).
The scattered intensity (differential  cross-section  per  sample  volume)  isotropic  over  the  radial  angle  φ  on  the  large-area  detector  (size  90 cm)  was  obtained  after the collimated neutron beam passed through the glass or  ceramic  cut  tablets  (size  ≈  1  cm,  thickness  ≈  0.5  mm)  and  analysed as a function of the modulus of momentum transfer,  q = (4π/λ)sin(θ/2), where θ is the scattering angle and λ is the  incident neutron wavelength.
The neutron wavelengths within  an interval  of  0.05–0.5 nm  and  the  sample-detector distances  of 4 and 16 m  were used to obtain SANS spectra in a q-range  of 0.08–4.0 nm-1. A  vanadium standard  was used for absolute  calibration  of  the  intensity.
Electrochemical  spectroscopy  was  used  to  evaluate  ionic  conductivity  of  obtained  membranes.
Nickel  or  gold  blocking  electrodes  (2.3  mm  in  diameter)  were  deposited  on  both  sides  of  glassceramic  membranes  by  magnetron  sputtering  (Quorum  Technologies  Q150T).
Wires  were  attached  to  the  sputtered  electrodes  using  EPO-TEK  H20S  conductive  epoxy.
The  AC  impedance  measurements  were  performed  in  the  frequency  range  of  7 MHz  to  100 Hz  with  an  amplitude  of  50  mV  using  Bio-Logic  SAS  SP-300  equipped  with  a  frequency  response  analyzer.
The obtained Niquist plots generally consist of one or  two  semicircles  at  a  higher  frequency  region  typical  for  bulk  and grain boundary resistance of electrolyte and spike at lower  frequency  corresponding  to  blocking  electrodes  in  Electronic  Supplementary  Information).
Impedance  spectra  were  fitted  using  equivalent  circuit  approach  in  EC-Lab  software  package.
Please do not adjust margins CrystEngCommAcceptedManuscriptPublished on 16 January 2018. Downloaded by Fudan University on 16/01/2018 14:49:05. View Article OnlineDOI: 10.1039/C7CE01910FPlease do not adjust margins Page 4 of 9PAPER samples by annealing Y-containing pieces of glass as shown in  figures 1c-d.
The  microstructure  of  the  glass-ceramics  prepared  by  crystallization  of  glasses  is  revealed  in  figure  2.  The  Ycontaining sample possesses low  porosity  and  shows  no signs  of  dendrite-type  growth.
Energy  dispersive  X-ray  spectral  mapping  in  figure  2b  evidences  for  the  uniform  yttrium  distribution across the sample at macroscale, while TEM allows  distinguishing spatial distribution of Y-containing impurities at  grain  boundaries.
In  comparison  to  the  pure  LAGP  glassceramics (figure  2c), the  Y-modified  ceramics  (figure  2d) have  Y-containing  impurities  segregated  at  grain  boundaries  (SEM  images are shown in figure S6 in the Electronic Supplementary  Information).
TEM  image  of  the  sample  obtained  by  6-hours  annealing  at  750°C  shows  numerous  particles  segregated  at  the grain boundaries (figure 3a), while energy dispersive X-ray  spectroscopy  data  in  figure  3b  reveals  higher  Y  and  P  concentrations  in  these  particles  allowing  us  to  assume  that  these are YPO4 particles.
The  crystallization  temperature  in  this  case  is  noticeably  higher  than  for  Y-free  samples (620°C) and reaches 695°C as seen from figures 1a-b.
Such  behaviour  is  often  reported  for  glasses:  more  complex  glass  compositions  usually  lead  to  higher  crystallization  point.
34  Glass  vitrification  point,  however,  is  not  strongly  affected  (525°C),  so  having  not  so  high  melting  point  (ca.
1050°C,  see  figure  S5  in  the  Electronic  Supplementary  Information), Y-containing glasses still demonstrate high Tg/Tm  estimated  as  0.60.  Although  theory  still  suggests  no  internal  uniform  nucleation  across  volume  (Tg/Tm>0.58),  we  succeeded  in  obtaining  uniform  and  dense the  whole  glass This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx Please do not adjust margins CrystEngCommAcceptedManuscriptPublished on 16 January 2018. Downloaded by Fudan University on 16/01/2018 14:49:05. View Article OnlineDOI: 10.1039/C7CE01910FPage 5 of 9 PAPER incorporation  into  LAGP  phase.
As  can  be  seen  from  table  1,  cell  parameters  differ  slightly  for  Y-free  and  Y-containing  samples.
Rietveld  refinement  results shown  in table  S1  in the  Electronic  Supplementary  Information  suggest  that  the  Y-free  sample  contains a bit  lower  amount  of Li in Li3 positions  as  a  result  of  lower  Al3+  heterovalent  substitution  in  comparison  with  Y-containing  vs.
ceramics Figure 3. (a) TEM image of Y-containing LAGP glass-ceramics prepared by annealing of  the glass for 30 min at 600°C and further crystallization at 750°C for 6 hours (b) TEM  image  of  grain  boundary  in  the  sample  and  corresponding  elemental  concentrations  obtained for EDX spectral analysis.
This assumption is in line with the phase analysis results.
XRD  enables  identification  of  YPO4  and  GeO2  as  minor  impurity  phases  for  Y-containing  glass-ceramics  as  can  be  concluded  from  figure  S7  in  the  Electronic  Supplementary  Information.
Sample Y-free sample Y-containing sample Cell volume, Å3 Impurities detected Impurities detected Figure 4. Neutron powder diffraction patterns for Y-free (a) and Y-containing (b) LAGP glass-ceramics obtained by two stage heat treatment of the glasses (30 min at 600°C and 2  hours at 750°C).
Points denote experimental scattering intensities, solid blue (for Y-free sample) and red (for Y-containing sample) lines – simulated patterns.
We  further  employed  solid-state  NMR  spectroscopy  to  trace  the phase composition and to check for amorphous secondary  phases in glass-ceramics.
7Li, 31P and 27Al MAS NMR spectra are  presented in  figure  5.  The  31P MAS  NMR spectra  of the initial  glasses  (see  figure  S8  in  the  Electronic  Supplementary  Information) are represented by a single line inhomogeneously  broadened  due  to  a  long-range  disorder  typical  for  the  glass  structure.
The fit data of the 31P MAS NMR spectra of glass-ceramics are  summarized  in  table  2.  The  group  of  the  signals  in  the  range  from  -27  to  -42  ppm  attributed  to  the  phosphate  tetrahedra  surrounded by different combinations of Al and Ge octahedral  evidences  the  formation  of  the  NASICON  phase.
The  assignment is supported by the theoretical predictions of both  31P isotropic chemical shifts and integral intensities, which are  calculated  assuming  random  distribution  of  phosphate  tetrahedra within the Al and Ge octahedral network (table 2).
In  both  spectra,  a  unique  line  described  by  a  characteristic  I=3/2  quadrupolar  lineshape  formed  by  the  central  line  and  the  satellite  transitions  is  observed  that  implies the existence of fast exchange between lithium ions in  two structural sites in the NASICON-framework (Li1 and Li3) on  the  time  scale  of  the  NMR  experiment.
The  observed  quadrupole  coupling  constant  parameters  CQQ,  which  are  sensitive to local symmetry around Li, are then average values  for  two  Li  sites,  and  vary  from  61.3±0.5 kHz  in  Y-free  to  67.6±0.5 kHz in Y-containing samples.
This can be explained by  changes  in  their  lattice  parameters  and/or  an  increased  occupancy of Li3 sites in the latter, as demonstrated in Table 1  and  Table  S1  in  the  Electronic  Supplementary  Information.
Transformation of the lineshapes from pure Gaussian in Y-free  to  pure  Lorentzian  in  Y-containing  samples  points  out  to  the  transition  from  slower  to  faster  motion  with  very  fast  fluctuations,  while  significant  increase  of  the  central  line  width,  when  yttria  is  added  to  the  glass  melts,  can  be  associated  with  enhanced  dipolar  to  increased  Li  content.
Thus,  variation  of  the  NMR  spectral  parameters reflects the differences in the structure associated  with  location  and  occupation  of  Li  sites,  which  govern  ionic  mobility and therefore conducting behaviour.
interactions  due Figure 5. Magic angle spinning NMR spectra for Y-free (a, c, e) and Y-containing (b, d, f)  glass-ceramics prepared by two-stage heat treatment of the corresponding glasses (30  min at 600°C and 2 hours at 750°C).
Asterisk denotes peaks from unknown crystalline  phase, which gives about 1% contribution.
The 27Al NMR spectra for both glass-ceramics samples show an  intense  peak  at  -13  ppm  attributed  to  the  octahedral  environment  of  Al  within  the  NASICON-type  structure.
AlPO4  or  Y3Al5O12.39  Although  being  crystalline,  these This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx Please do not adjust margins CrystEngCommAcceptedManuscriptPublished on 16 January 2018. Downloaded by Fudan University on 16/01/2018 14:49:05. View Article OnlineDOI: 10.1039/C7CE01910FPage 7 of 9 PAPER Information the  Electronic  Supplementary instrument  q-resolution).
Traces  of determined  by  the  scattering from nano-sized crystals, however, remain.
In Y-containing samples, the first annealing for 30 min at 600°C  results in rapid growth of the crystalline phase.
The power-law  -2.8) is observed in  type scattering  with the same exponent (~q the whole q range.
Coupled with the XRD data shown in figure  S9  of  this  observation  suggests  that  addition  of  yttria  promotes  faster  formation  of  LAGP  crystalline  phase  with  no  signs  of  some  nanoscale  intermediate  phase  as  it  was  observed  for  Y-free  samples.
Further annealing at 750°C results in fully crystallized  glass-ceramics  demonstrating  Porod-type  curve.
Based  on  these data we assume that yttrium phosphate does not act as  a classical nucleation agent, which cause uniform nucleation as  it is observed for some systems.
We suppose that introduction  of  yttria  into  the  melts  changes  an  induction  period  of  crystallization  and  finally  leads  to  sudden  crystallization  without any additional intermediate phase formation.
Further  growth  of  crystallites  results  in  displacement  of  nucleating  YPO4 particles to grain boundaries as shown in figure 6b.
Next,  we  used  small-angle  neutron  scattering,  which  allowed  us  to  grasp  an  insight  into  the  effect  of  yttria  on  phase  formation  in  glasses.
The  SANS  curves  for  Y-free  and  Ycontaining  samples  demonstrate  significant  difference  in  the  course of crystallization.
In the case of Y-free glass  (figure 6a)  we observe monotonous growth of crystals in glass during the  first  annealing  at  600°C.
As  a  result,  the  scattering  from  the  crystalline  phase  starts  to  dominate  over  the  scattering  from  non-homogeneities  in  the  initial  glass  showing  a  transition  to  -2.8, at the smallest q-values.
After  further  annealing  at  750°C  this  scattering  level  disappears,  and  the  whole  scattering  curve  follows  the  well-known  Porod-type  behaviour  for  two-phase  system  with  a  correlation  length  above  100  nm  (the  limit Figure 7. Niquist plots of the impedance spectra for Y-free (in blue) and Y-containing (in  red) glass-ceramic membranes prepared by two stage heat treatment of the glasses (30  min at 600°C and 2 hours at 750°C); inset shows the same spectra in wider frequency  domain.
Surprisingly,  we  found  that  such  rapid  glass  crystallization  promoted by yttria  addition to the melts leads to higher ionic  conductivity.
Niquist  plots  of  the  sample  impedance  spectra  (figure 7) consist of a depressed semicircle at high frequencies  typical for grain boundary resistance of electrolyte and a spike  at a lower frequency corresponding to diffusion to the blocking  electrodes.
While  the  bulk  resistivity,  determined  from  the  lower intercept of the semicircles with real axis, appears to be  nearly the same for Y-free and Y-containing samples, the grain  boundary  resistance  was  found  to  be  substantially  lower  for  the  ceramics  prepared  by  crystallization  of  yttria-modified  glasses.
Total specific conductivity increases to 0.5  mS/cm for  Y-containing samples,  while  for  pure  LAGP glass-ceramics  it  is  estimated  to be  only  0.12  mS/cm.
The electronic  conductivity  of  the  Y-containing  samples  was  checked  using  four-probe  technique and the values fell out of the detection limit of our  experimental setup (10-3 mS/cm).
Conclusions results in  Li2O–Al2O3–GeO2–P2O5  system In summary, we  observed that addition of  5  vol.
SANS  results  suggest  that  Ycontaining  glasses  are  suddenly  crystallized  upon  heat  treatment producing uniform Li1+xAlxGe2-x(PO4)3 ceramics.
Due  to lower intergrain resistance  such samples demonstrated 0.5  mS/cm specific ionic conductivity that is nearly 5 times higher  in comparison to Y-free ceramics.
Although YPO4 is segregated  at  grain  boundaries  in  Y-containing  samples,  the  intergrain  contact  appears  to  be  better  developed  for  such  glassceramics  promoting  higher  conductivity  along  with  faster  lithium transport inside the grains as evidenced by solid state  NMR.
Conflicts of interest There are no conflicts of interest to declare Acknowledgements The  authors  would  like  to  thank  A.
