Applied Energy Materials A High-Voltage Cr4+/Cr3+ Redox Couple in Polyanion Compounds Kosuke Kawai,† Wenwen Zhao,† Shin-ichi Nishimura,†, ‡, and Atsuo Yamada†, ‡,* †Department of Chemical System Engineering, School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan ‡Elemental Strategy Initiative for Catalysts & Batteries (ESICB), Kyoto University, Nishikyo-ku, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentACS Applied Energy MaterialsPage 2 of 15KEYWORDS ABSTRACT Higher-voltage operation is crucial to increase energy density of rechargeable batteries.
Here we explored  Cr4+/Cr3+  redox  couple  in  polyanion  framework  for  high-voltage  sodium  battery cathode.
ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentPage 3 of 15ACS Applied Energy MaterialsFor the past three decades, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have dominated the portable electronics market  and  nowadays  its  application  is  extending  to  larger-scale  energy  storage  systems  for electric  vehicles  and  stationary  use  for  leveling  renewable  energy.
As  the  market  expands, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) can be a possible alternative due to the abundance of sodium in the earth crust and the sea.
To overcome this disadvantage, high-potential cathode materials for SIBs are required.
Use of inductive effect in polyanionic framework is a major strategy to raise up the redox potential of a transition  metal  while  increasing  structural  integrity  and  safety.
Sulfate  ion  (SO4)  2demonstrates  the  highest  electronegativity  and  hence  the  strongest  inductive  effect  among  all polyanions,  while  compounds  containing  (SO4)2 are  apt  to  decompose  above  ~  400  ℃ (generating  SO2  gas)  and  highly  hygroscopic.
Phosphate  compounds,  being  chemically  much more stable but less electronegative, forms practical candidates.
Among them, NASICON-type compounds AxM2(PO4)3 (A = Li, Na; M = transition metal) have been widely studied because of their high sodium-ion conductivity and robust structures, incorporating various transition metals (M = Ti, V, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni) as redox centers.
In  addition  to  the  selection  of  anionic  species,  transition  metal  has  a  critical  influence  on operating  potential.
So  far,  some  cobalt and  nickel-based  materials  are  known  as  4  V  class cathodes, for example Na2-2xCo1+xP2O7 (~ 4.0 V vs.
More  abundant  options  containing vanadium  or  iron,  such  as  Na3V2(PO4)2F3-xOx,  Na7V3(P2O7)4  and  Na2+2xFe2-x(SO4)3,  have  been identified  while  their  average  operating  potentials  lies  around  4.0  V  vs.
On  the further development of high-voltage class cathode materials, utilizing other transition metal is of ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentACS Applied Energy MaterialsPage 4 of 15significant challenge.
Therefore, demonstrating an active Cr4+/Cr3+ redox reaction in phosphate matrix is an urgent task before further exploration.
Herein,  we  investigated  the  electrochemical  properties  of  NASICON-type  compound Na3Cr2(PO4)3 to demonstrate the Cr4+/Cr3+ redox couple operating around 4.5 V vs.
Then, the pelletized mixture was heated in a tubular furnace under Ar flow for 22 hours at 1123 K and 12 hours at 1173 K with two intermediate grindings.
The obtained powders  were  observed  by  field-emission  scanning  electron  microscopy  (FE-SEM)  (S-4800, HITACHI) with an acceleration voltage of 1 kV.
Synchrotron  X-ray  powder  diffraction  patterns  was  obtained  at  the  beam  line  8B  of  Photon Factory (PF), High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK) Tsukuba, Japan.
The wave length was calibrated to be 1.10901 Å using a diffraction pattern of standard reference material, (SRM640d, NIST).
For all XRD measurements, borosilicate glass capillaries (Hilgenberg GmbH or Müller GmbH) were adopted as sample holders.
The collected data was analyzed by Rietveld refinement program, TOPAS-Academic Ver.
ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentPage 5 of 15ACS Applied Energy MaterialsThe working electrode was fabricated by a wet slurry process: mixing 80 wt% Na3Cr2(PO4)3 / AB,  10  wt%  AB  and  poly(vinylidene  difluoride)  (KUREHA)  in  N-methyl  pyrrolidone  (Kanto Chemical  Co.The  counter  electrode  was  Na  metal  (Wako).
Electrochemical  tests  were  conducted  by  using  2032-type coin cells assembled in an Ar-filled grove box.
Cyclic voltammetry was measured at a constant rate of 1.0 mV s–1 in a potential region between the rest potential and 5.2 V vs.Na/Na+.
For all galvanostatic charge/discharge measurement, the C-rates were calculated by defining 1 C as the current density of 117 mA g–1 and the potential region was between 2.5 V and 4.7 V vs.Na/Na+.
Coin cells at the various charging and discharging states were disassembled in a grove box filled with Ar, then the working electrodes were washed with dimethyl ether and dried at 353 K under a vacuum condition.
Powder  peeled  from  the  working  electrodes  were  enclosed  in  the  same  glass capillaries mentioned above.
The oxidation state of chromium during charging and discharging process was measured by X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) spectroscopy at room temperature in a transmission mode at the BL-9A of PF, KEK, Japan.
The Cr4+/Cr3+ redox potential is positioned at 4.45 V vs.Na/Na+, which is competitive to Co3+/Co2+ and Ni3+/Ni2+ in polyanion matrix.
Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves in Figure 2b indicated that an initial charge capacity at a current rate of 0.5 C was ~ 98 mAh g–1 being equal to 84 % of the theoretical capacity (117 mAh g–1 for 2 Na per formula unit) with single voltage plateau, and the reversible discharge capacity was  ~  79  mAh  g–1  exhibiting  a  small  potential  difference  of  ca.0.2  V  between  charging  and discharging curves.
Figure 2c shows galvanostatic discharge curves after maintaining the cell at 4.70  V  (vs.Na/Na+)  for  the  various  time  durations.
Continuous  increase  in  overvoltage  with ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentPage 7 of 15ACS Applied Energy Materialsevident initial voltage vumps indicates the time-dependent degradation in this system could be initiated at the partial surface prohibiting the smooth nucleation of the discharged phase.
These  typical  features  for "nucleation-growth-type"  mechanism  is  consistent  with  the  flat  charge/discharge  profile  at  the specific generating voltage at 4.5 V vs.Na/Na+.
The 1st charge/discharge curve at which each XRD pattern was collected; 0.5 C for charging  and  1  C  for  discharging,  (b)  Ex  situ  XRD  patterns  at  various  charge/discharge  states during 1st cycle.
Each alphabet from A to E corresponds the state at which XRD pattern was collected indicated in (a).
Their  contributions become evident at high valence states due to the less 3d electron and the local structural change around  Cr.
The  reversible  shift  of  main  edge  also  indicates  the  redox  activity  of  the  Cr4+/Cr3+ Figure  4.  Cr  K-edge  XANES  spectrums  of  Na3Cr2(PO4)3  /  AB  electrode  in  (a)  1st  charging process  and  (b)  1st  discharging  process.
ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentACS Applied Energy MaterialsPage 10 of 15The Cr4+/Cr3+ redox couple in polyanion framework was demonstrated to generate extremely high-potential  in  sodium  cell.
Na/Na+ with an initial charging capacity of 98 mAh g–1 comparable to 84 % of theoretical capacity (117 mAh g–1) for 2 Na per formula unit.
In addition to the well known high-potential with Ni3+/Ni2+ and Co3+/Co2+ redox couples shown in Figure  5,  Cr4+/Cr3+  redox  couple  in  several  polyanion  framework  systems  are  now  warrant exploration  toward  new  high-voltage  cathode  materials.
However,  excessive  oxidation  or spontaneous disproportionation could produce highly toxic Cr6+ and should be recognized as a possible important risk.
Positions  of  the  Mn+  redox  couples  with  various  polyanions  (M  =  transition ASSOCIATED CONTENT Supporting Information The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publication website at DOI: ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentPage 11 of 15ACS Applied Energy MaterialsDetails  of  the  Rietveld  refinement  results  of  synchrotron  X-ray  powder  diffraction, electrochemical  performance  and  synchrotron  X-ray  powder  diffraction  pattern  of  full  charged phase with miller indices and lattice constants (PDF) AUTHOR INFORMATION Corresponding Author Notes The authors declare no competing financial interest.
