The marriage between a Li metal anode and the solid-state electrolyte is expected to limit the safety risk of secondary batteries. However, dendrites and interfacial stability hinder the combination of Li metal anode and solid-state electrolyte. Herein, plastic crystal electrolyte (PCE) and three-dimensional (3D) host structure played the role of matchmaker in combining the solid-state electrolyte and Li-metal anode. Succinonitrile cooperated with Li salt and Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12 nano-size powder built a PCE interphase, which enhanced the interfacial stability between Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 and Li metal anode. To protect the soft PCE from the dendrite penetration, commercially sold super P, carbon nanotube (CNT), KS6, and Ketjen black (KB) were co-heated with the melted Li metal. But only KS6 built a 3D host in Li metal successfully, due to its high graphitization and layered structure. Benefitting from the matchmakers, the solid-state batteries exhibited enhanced cycling stability.
Li-ion batteries have been applied in various fields since they were first commercialized in the 1990s. The energy density of Li-ion batteries has reached 250 Wh kg−1 recently.1−5 Li metal anodes are needed to increase energy density.6−7 The flammable nature of liquid electrolytes leads to safety problems for Li metal batteries.6,8−11 Hence, nonflammable solid-state electrolytes were developed to replace liquid electrolytes.1 Air stable Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) with sodium super ion conductor (NASICON) structure has been intensively studied in recent years.12−19
Li metal anodes are highly attractive because of their high capacity (3860 mAh g−1) and negative equilibrium potential (−3.045 V versus standard hydrogen electrode).8−11 However, the highly reactive nature of Li leads to the reduction of LAGP. Ge4+ in LAGP can be easily reduced to low-valence forms at room temperature. The reduction of LAGP generates mixed conducting interphase (MCI), which leads to the continuous corrosion of LAGP (Scheme 1a).15,20 Insulating interphase is needed to suppress the reduction of LAGP. Lithium phosphorous oxynitride (LiPON), LiF, Li3N, LAGP glass, and various polymers have been used as insulating interphases to prevent the reduction of LAGP.12,21−27 Recently, the use of plastic crystal electrolytes (PCEs) as the insulating interphase has been studied due to the high conductivity and soft texture of these materials.28−29 Furthermore, the soft texture of PCEs is favorable for the intimate contact between the Li metal anode and LAGP. However, given the poor mechanical properties of PCEs, they cannot easily prevent dendrite penetration, as shown in Scheme 1b. The application of Al, Si, Mg, Sn, and Au to fabricate alloy interphases in solid-state batteries to suppress dendrites has been studied recently.30−34 However, the volume change of alloy interphases during cycling results in their failure.35 The threedimensional (3D) host structure has been investigated to obtain an interface that is more stable than alloys.36−39 Furthermore, the 3D host structure also leads to the uniform current distribution, which is also favorable in suppressing dendrite (Scheme 1c).
Herein, succinonitrile (SN), a solid-state PCE, is mixed with Li(N[SO2CF3]2) (LiTFSI) and Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12 (LLZTO) nano-size powder to prepare insulating interphase. Given the low melting point (55 °C) of SN, the insulating interphase can be obtained by coating the melted slurry on LAGP pellets. LLZTO powder was used to enhance the electrochemical stability of the PCE.41−43 In addition to exerting an insulating effect, the PCE interphase also enabled the intimate contact between the Li metal anode and LAGP due to its soft texture. To suppress the dendrite penetrate the soft PCE interphase, commercially sold super P, carbon nanotube (CNT), KS6, and Ketjen black (KB) were co-heated with the melted Li metal. But only KS6 built a 3D host in Li metal successfully, due to its lithiophilicity nature. The composite anode with KS6 was denoted as Li@C. The 3D host structure led to uniform current distribution. Thus, the dendrite was suppressed from penetrating the soft PCE interphase. With the help of the two matchmakers, the solid-state battery showed enhanced cycling stability.
Preparation of Sodium Superionic Conductor (NASICON)-Structured Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) Pellet. NASICON-structured LAGP was synthesized through the melt–quench method. Briefly, Li2CO3 (Alfa Aesar, 98.0% purity), Al2O3 (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.95% purity), GeO2 (Alfa Aesar, 99.99% purity), and NH4H2PO4 (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.0% purity) were mixed at a specific stoichiometric ratio with Li2CO3 in 10 wt% excess. The dried precursors were annealed at 380 °C for 2 h to decompose CO2 and NH3. Then, the precursors were melted at 1350 °C for 2 h and quenched between two steel plates preheated at 500 °C for 2 h to release thermal stress. The obtained glass was finally crystallized at 800 °C for 8 h in an alumina crucible.
Preparation of Nano-Size Garnet Powder. The garnet LLZTO powder (~5–8 μm) was prepared by a solid-state reaction which was reported in our previous work.44-45 The LLZTO particles were further processed by the circulation mill method.46 Before milling, the LLZTO powder was well-dispersed in ethanol solution. Using small grinding media (ZrO2) with a diameter of around 200 μm, the size of LLZTO particles was reduced to ~150 nm.
Characterization of Material Properties. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected by using a high-resolution X-ray powder diffractometer (Bruker D2 Phaser) with CuKα radiation (λ = 1.5405 Å) at 30 kV and 30 mA. X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) were recorded from the 24A1 beamline with Al Kα radiation (20 mA, 1486.7 eV) at the National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center in Taiwan. Morphologies and microstructures were examined through a field-emission scanning electron microscope (SEM) by using a JEOL JSM-7610F instrument operated at 15 kV. The morphologies and particle size of garnet filler were examined through a transmission electron microscope (TEM) by using Tecnai G2 F20 (FEI) JEOL JEM-2011 electron microscopes. Raman spectra were collected on a Thermo Fisher Scientific DXR with a 532 nm laser.
Symmetric Cell Fabrication. The LAGP pellet was cut to 0.5 mm thickness to prepare symmetric cells. The composite anode (4%wt of KS6 in Li) was synthesized by coheating 4 mg KS6 with Li foil at 300 °C for 20 min under Ar atmosphere. The PCE interphase was fabricated by dropping 50 μL melted PCE solution on LAGP. The PCE solution contained 15 %wt LiTFSI and 2 %wt LLZTO nano-size powder, which was mixed at 40 °C. Li|LAGP|Li symmetric cells were also fabricated through the same procedure for comparison.
Preparation of the LiFePO4 Cathode. LiFePO4, KS6 carbon black, polyvinylidene fluoride (Alfa Aesar), and LiTFSI at the weight ratio of 10:2:1:7 were mixed with an appropriate amount of N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone as a solvent to prepare the cathode slurry. The slurry was uniformly coated on Al foil and vacuum dried at 80 °C overnight. The cathode showed a LiFePO4 loading amount of 2 mg cm−2.
Assembly of Batteries. The as-prepared composite anode and PCE slurry were coated on the anode side of LAGP (0.5 mm thickness) as described in the section on symmetric battery fabrication. Then, LiFePO4 was coated on the cathode side of LAGP with Al foil as the current collector. In the fabrication of LiFePO4|LAGP|Li without interfacial modification, LiFePO4 cathode and Li foil were coated on cathode and anode side polished LAGP pellet, respectively. No liquid electrolyte or polymer solidstate electrolyte was used to fabricate artificial interphase on the cathode side. The battery was tested at room temperature (25 oC) between 2.7 and 3.9 V by using a potentiostat/galvanostat (Arbin BT200).
Electrochemical Performance Test. The polished LAGP pellet with a thickness of 1 mm was coated with Au or Li on both sides and placed in a Swagelok cell to measure impedance at room temperature. The cell was attached with electrical wires connected to the impedance spectrometer. The AC impedance of the cell was measured over 0.1–106 Hz.
NASICON-structured LAGP synthesized through the melt-quench method, as described elsewhere,12 was used as the solid-state electrolytes. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of LAGP (Figure 1a) matched well with that of LiGe2(PO4)3 (R−3c, JCPDS 00-041-0034). The XRD pattern indicates the pure phase of LAGP. Benefitting from the high-purity phase of the NASICON structure, LAGP possessed high conductivity. Measurements obtained by using an electrochemical impedance spectroscope (EIS) coupled with gold electrodes showed that LAGP achieved a conductivity of 0.49 mS cm−1 at room temperature as illustrated in Figure S1. As depicted in Figure 1b, the symmetrical cell with Li on both sides of LAGP had an impedance of 1725 Ω, which indicates a large interfacial resistance. Furthermore, the impedance can be further decreased to 1596 Ω and 1023 Ω in Li|PCE|LAGP|PCE|Li and Li@C|PCE|LAGP|PCE|Li@C, respectively.
Consistent with the result of a previous report,20 LAGP is unstable when in contact with Li. After seven cycles under 0.05 C at room temperature with a LiFePO4 cathode, black interphase was observed on the anode side of LAGP (Figure 2a). XPS was utilized to study the chemical reaction on the anode side of LAGP. The XPS patterns of the fresh and cycled LAGP were compared as illustrated in Figures 2b and 2c, respectively. The Ge4+ in LAGP experienced a reduction during the cycles. The peak at 32.8 eV in the pattern of the fresh LAGP indicates that Ge4+ was present in LAGP. After cycling, the peak of 3d Ge shifted to 31.1 eV. This change demonstrates the partial reduction of Ge4+ to Ge3+.20,47 The reduction of Ge in LAGP led to the formation of the mixed conducting layer (MCI), which can be observed through SEM as shown in Figure 2d. The dark layer in the image is a light-element-rich layer that can be ascribed to the lithiated MCI.
To improve the cycling stability, a thermodynamic stable artificial interphase should be introduced to the anode side of LAGP to protect LAGP from reduction. Initially, SN with different amounts of LiTFSI was coated on LAGP. The impedance of the symmetrical cell decreased with the increase in the percentage of LiTFSI (Figure S2a). Meanwhile, the melting point of the PCE also decreased with the increase in the percentage of LiTFSI. If the fraction of Li salt is higher than 15 wt%, the solidification of the PCE at room temperature will be hindered. Hence, the mass fraction of LITFSI was fixed at 15 wt% in the following experiment. Furthermore, as reported by previous work,28 SN is unstable when in contact with Li without additives. Thus, 2 wt% LLZTO powder with a particle size of ~150 nm was introduced to the PCE to enhance the stability of SN. The morphology of LLZTO powders can be found in Figure 3a. The asdesigned PCE was mixed at 40 °C and solidified at room temperature (Figure 3b). Hence, the PCE interphase can be fabricated via a solvent-free method by coating the top of LAGP with a PCE slurry melted at 40 °C and cooling it to room temperature. Figure 3c shows the XRD patterns of garnet powder, SN, and PCE. Two separate peaks were present in the XRD pattern of SN at 2θ of 19° and 28°. This result indicates orientational disorder and long-range translation order.48 This condition facilitates ion movability and makes SN an excellent solid solvent of LiTFSI. Mixing with LiTFSI and garnet powder decreased the intensity of the two peaks, and the peak at 2θ of 28° broadened, indicating that the long-range order of the PCE decreased. The XRD pattern of the garnet powder matched well with the standard pattern (JCPDS 01-084-1753), indicating the high purity of the LLZTO. No peak from the garnet powder can be observed in the PCE due to the limited mass fraction of garnet. The PCE showed an ionic conductivity of at 2.3 mS cm−1 room temperature (Figure S2b). Linear sweep voltammetry showed that PCE remained stable under 5 V illustrated the stability of PCE (Figure 3d). Without the LLZTO fillers, the PCE only remained stable under 4.5 V at room temperature. A small peak is located at 4.6 V indicating unstable of SN without LLZTO. Coating PCE on LAGP decreased the impedance from 1725 Ω to 1596 Ω because of the improved wettability by the soft-textured PCE/LAGP interface (Figure 1b). The symmetrical battery with the PCE interphase displayed a longer cycling life than Li|LAGP|Li (133 h) at the current density of 0.05 mA cm−2 (Figure 3e). The prolonged cycling life of the battery can be ascribed to the protective effect of PCE on LAGP. Furthermore, the intimate contact between Li and LAGP also played a vital role in lengthening life span. Li|PCE|LAGP|PCE|Li was stably cycled for 160 h without evident polarization. However, the overpotential of Li|PCE|LAGP|PCE|Li increased after 150 h, indicating that the PCE interphase was degraded. The Li|PCE|LAGP|PCE|Li finally stop before 300 h. Whereas, no obvious polarization can be observed from Li@C|PCE|LAGP|PCE|Li@C over 180 h. After the first 180 h, the overpotential increasing, but the Li@C|PCE|LAGP|PCE|Li@C still cycled over 400 h. The symmetrical batteries were also tested at a higher current density of 0.2 mA cm-1 (Figure S3). Li|LAGP|Li only showed a life span of 15 h. While the Li|PCE|LAGP|PCE|Li demonstrated a cycling life of 63 h. The improved cycling stability can be ascribed to the protection of LAGP. The Li@C|PCE|LAGP|PCE|Li@C showed the longest cycling life of 73 h with lower overpotential, as the Li@C plays an important role in suppressing the dendrite. Without the LLZTO filler in SN, the Li|SN|LAGP|SN|Li only worked less than 1 h (Figure S4a), which is shorter than the Li|PCE|LAGP|PCE|Li. Hence, LLZTO is essential in making stable PCE interphase. After cycles, these symmetrical cells were disassembled. As can be observed from Figure S4b, without the LLZTO filler, the SN interphase turned black, indicating the interfacial reaction. While the PCE just turned yellow, as the LLZTO filler paly a role in stabilizing the interface.
Due to the low melting point of the SN, the PCE interphase adhesive on the LAGP was removed by the evacuation in the SEM chamber. Hence, cross-section SEM can not be obtained. Therefore, the cycled LAGP pellet was cleaned with ethanol to carry out ex-situ analysis. Several dark spots can be observed on the LAGP pellet as shown in Figure 4a. The formation of dark spots was caused by dendrites, which penetrated the PCE interphase and reached the LAGP pellet. The SEM of the LAGP surface is presented in Figure S5a. A dark area can be observed on the surface SEM of LAGP, indicating a light-element-rich area, which can be ascribed to the reduction and lithiation of LAGP by the dendrite. Furthermore, the Raman spectra of the dark area on the LAGP surface indicating the reduction of the LAGP (Figure S5b). The peaks located at 610 cm-1, 673 cm-1, and 952 cm-1 indicates surface impurities on the cycled LAGP. Hence, the partial reduction of LAGP by the dendrite can be declared. The uneven growth of MCI, in this case, was expected to result in nonuniform stress distribution in LAGP and accelerate the electro-chemo-mechanical failure of LAGP.49−50 If dendrites can be suppressed, then the life span of the solid-state battery can be extended.49
The 3D host structure was used as another matchmaker to suppress dendrite plating. To fabricate the 3D host structure in Li metal anode, commercially sold super P, carbon nanotube, KS6 and KB were co-heated with Li metal at 300 oC. Figure S6a and S6b show the Raman spectra and XRD patterns of carbon materials, respectively. Interestingly, only KS6 was immersed into the melted Li metal, while other carbon materials only floated on the surface of melted Li metal (Figure S6c). The lithiophobicity of the super P and KB can be ascribed to their low graphitization and amorphous structure. The CNT showed the same G/D with KS6, indicating its high graphitization. However, the amorphous structure of the CNT leads to the lithiophobicity of it. As for the KS6, the high intensity of the XRD pattern and G/D ratio in Raman spectra indicate the layered structure and high graphitization of carbon, respectively. The highly graphitized carbon with long-range order layered structure results in the lithiophilicity of the KS6. Hence, it can be declared that the high graphitization and layered structure are essential for carbon materials used as a 3D host in Li metal anode. The KS6 sheet exhibited a size of ~2 μm (Figure S7). As presented in Figure 4b, after the formation of Li@C, the peak intensity in the XRD pattern of Li notably decreased, indicating that the long-range order of Li decreased. Furthermore, the small peak located at 2θ of 48° indicates the formation of lithiated graphite (LiC6). Benefit from the low Young’s modulus of graphite (27 GPa),35 Li@C showed outstanding flexibility (Figure 4c). Moreover, lithiated KS6 powder is uniformly distributed in the Li@C (Figure 4d and e). Furthermore, after melting Li foil and Li@C at 300 °C on a steel plate, Li@C can be easily separated from the steel plate, whereas pure Li foil remained (Figure S8a and S8b). The enhanced surface tension of Li@C promoted its separation from the steel plate. High surface tension limited the increase in the specific surface area of Li@C. Hence, dendrites can be suppressed. The impedance of the symmetrical cell with a composite anode was 1023 Ω, as shown in Figure 1b. The decrease in impedance resulted from the repaid Li-ion transfer kinetic in Li@C. The sp2 carbon exhibited outstanding electronic conductivity. Meanwhile, the layered structure favored the Li-ion transfer.51 These effects improved conductivity and decreased impedance.36,52 Benefitting from the 3D host structure built by lithiated KS6, the symmetrical battery showed longer cycling stability of 400 h than the battery with a pure Li metal anode (300 h) at the current density of 0.05 mA cm−2 (Figure 3e). At a higher current density of 0.2 mA cm-1, the Li@C|PCE|LAGP|PCE|Li@C also demonstrated a longer life span of 72 h than the Li|PCE|LAGP|PCE|Li (63 h) (Figure S3).
Figure 5 shows the room-temperature electrochemical performances of the solidstate batteries. Without the insulating PCE and Li@C, the solid-state battery achieved a discharge capacity of 80 mAh g−1 at 0.05 C as shown in Figure 5a. The roughness of the charge–discharge curves and the limited discharge capacity can be ascribed to the poor interfacial contact and continuous reduction of LAGP. As depicted in Figure 5b, the solid-state battery with a PCE interphase exhibited an enhanced discharge capacity of 126 mAh g−1 at 0.05 C. Interestingly, the initial discharge capacity of the battery was less than 100 mAh g−1 and increased to 126 mAh g−1 after seven cycles. The electrochemical reaction between the PCE and Li possibly built a conductive layer between them during cycling.28 Similar phenomena can also be observed in Li@C|PCE|LAGP|LiFePO4. After seven cycles, Li@C|PCE|LAGP|LiFePO4 reached a discharge capacity of 143 mAh g−1 at 0.05 C (Figure 5c). The improved discharge capacity resulted from the reduction in interfacial resistance caused by introducing highly conductive Li@C into the battery. Comparison of the cycling stability of the three batteries in Figure 5d revealed that the pristine LAGP-based solid-state battery had a life span of 7 cycles at 0.05 C, whereas Li|PCE|LAGP|LiFePO4 presented improved cycling stability of 25 cycles with a capacity retention of 39%. The capacity retention of the batteries with the PCE interphase and 3D host structure after 25 cycles reached 65%, which is better than that of the two previous cells. The enhanced discharge capacity and capacity retention of Li@C|PCE|LAGP|LiFePO4 resulted from the cooperation between PCE and Li@C.
In summary, a PCE interphase and 3D host structure have been proposed and achieved on LAGP. The PCE interface protected LAGP from reduction and prolonged the life span of the solid state battery. However, dendrites penetrated the PCE interphase and reached LAGP after reversible striping and plating. A 3D host structure built by KS6 sheets was introduced into the Li metal anode to suppress dendrites and fabricate an interface with increased stability. Li@C not only decreased interfacial resistance but also improved the capacity retention of the solid-state batteries. The PCE interphase and 3D host structure can be described as matchmakers of the marriage between LAGP and Li metal anode, helping in overcoming the interfacial reduction of LAGP and penetration by dendrites.