The activity of solid electrolytes from the family of Na(Cs)–Mx–Zr phosphates (NZP and CZP) with dopant ions M+2 = Co+2 and Ni+2 synthesized by the sol–gel method is studied in the gas-phase trans-formations of isopropanol and isobutanol. It is found that the amount of M+2 and its nature, as well as the direction of a change in the catalyst temperature (heating or cooling in the range of 473−693 K), affects the activity of M-NZP and M-CZP. In the transformation of isopropanol, hysteresis of the acetone yield, counter-clockwise (type I) for Co-NZP and clockwise (type II) for Ni-NZP, is observed in the heating–cooling cycles. An increase in the activity of Co-NZP in the cooling mode (type I) is related to a rise in the apparent activation energy of alcohol dehydrogenation under conditions of the formation of new catalytically active sites in the form of a Co+2−Zr+4 → Co+3−Zr+3 ion pair with the oxidized form of M and the reduced form of Zr. Type I hysteresis of the total alcohol conversion is observed in the transformations of isobutanol to olefin and aldehyde over Co(Ni)-CZP. The hysteresis is associated with a decrease in the activation energy of alcohol dehydrogenation. The main reaction over the Co(Ni)-CZP catalysts is the dehydration of alcohol with an increase in the activation energy of the reaction upon cooling, for example, by 53 kJ/mol for Ni0.25-CZP.
Catalytic dehydrogenation of low-molecular-weight aliphatic alcohols is a simple method for obtaining carbonyl compounds and hydrogen. It is easy to vary the direction of transformation (dehydro-genating and dehydrating functions of the catalyst) by changing the composition of the catalyst.Complex zirconium orthophosphates with the framework structure, which belong to solid cationic electrolytes with the NASICON structure of the gen-eral formula MA2(PO4)3, where M are the conducting ions of alkaline metals and A are the ions of 3d-transi-tion metals, attract considerable attention of catalytic chemists. This is associated with the fact that modifi-cation of the catalyst aimed at improvement of its cat-alytic activity and change in the selectivity of the pro-cess may involve introduction of various cations into the phosphate composition through replacement of both the framework ion A and the conducting ions M without violation of the framework structure. Rhom-bohedral, rhombic, monoclinic, and cubic structures are possible for NASICON electrolytes. For basic orthophosphate NaZr2(PO4)3 the main structure is rhombohedral, which represents PO4 tetrahedra and ZrO6 octahedra with the vertex contacts between the polyhedra united into a framework. The preparation, crystallochemistry features, and application of complex orthophosphates were considered in [1–4], and the data on the catalytic activity of such materials in vapor-phase reactions involving alcohols were reported in [5–11].The aim of this work is to investigate effect of the partial replacement of conducting sodium or cesium cations with nickel and cobalt cations on the activity of Na(Cs) zirconium phosphate synthesized by the sol–gel method in the transformations of isopropanol and isobutanol under temperature increase–decrease cycles in the temperature range of 473−693 K. This work continues the research topics of [9–11].
The initial substances were ZrO2 (Acros Organics), H3PO4, NaCl, NiCl2 ⋅ 2H2O, and CoCl2 ⋅ 6H2O (all of reagent grade). The stoichiometric amounts of NaCl and ZrO2 aqueous solutions of predissolved in HCl to avoid hydrolysis were poured together under continu-ous stirring at room temperature, and NiCl2 or CoCl2 was slowly added dropwise a H3PO4 solution accord-ing to the stoichiometry. The gel formed upon heating was dried at 80 and 110°C and subjected to thermal treatment at 600 and 800°C for 8 h accompanied by grinding at each stage.
The initial substances were ZrOCl2 ⋅ 8H2O (Acros Organics), H3PO4, CsBr, NiCl2, and CoCl2 (all of reagent grade). H3PO4 was added dropwise in a mix-ture of the weighed portions of solid salts according to stoichiometry. The resulting gel was dried for three days with regular grinding, the ground samples were placed into a drying oven at 300°C for 4 h, after which they were subjected to calcination at 600°C for 6 h.The obtained samples were polycrystalline pow-ders with characteristic pale green (Ni) and lilac (Co) colors:
The phase and chemical compositions, specific surface area, and porosity of M-NZP and M-CZP were studied by X-ray powder diffraction analysis (Rigaku Ultim IV, DRON-7), scanning ion–electron spectroscopy (Quanta 200 3D), low-temperature nitrogen adsorption (TriStar 3000, ASAP 2020-MP Micromeritics), and X-ray photoelectron spectros-copy (XPS) (Axis Ultra, Kratos Analytical).The catalytic activity of complex zirconium phos-phates in the transformations of isopropanol and isobutanol was tested on a flow-type unit followed by the chromatographic analysis of substances (helium as a carrier gas, a flame ionization detector, and column packed with a Porapak-Q sorbent). The feed rate of a helium + alcohol mixture to the microreactor was 1.2 L h−1. The weight of the catalyst with a 1–2-mm-thick catalyst bed on a porous filter was 30 mg. The sample was pre-exposed in a helium flow at 673 K for 1 h followed by a slow decrease in the temperature of the reactor to 373 K. The temperature dependences of the yield of the products were obtained in the modes of increasing and decreasing temperature provided that the stationary activity of the catalyst was reached at each temperature, which took 15–20 min. For the temperature range, in which alcohol conversion did not exceed 50%, the experimental activation energies of dehydrogenation and dehydration of alcohol were calculated from the Arrhenius depen-dences of the yield of reaction product N.
The data on the porosity, specific surface area, and crystal structure of M-NZP for Na0.75M0.125Zr2(PO4)3 and Na0.5M0.25Zr2(PO4)3 with M = Co and Ni are pre-sented in Table 1. The rhombohedral modification of the NASICON structure, which is characteristic for the family of sodium zirconium phosphates (NZP), was confirmed by fact that the positions and relative intensity of the maxima of the diffraction patterns coincided with the published data.Ceramic materials have a small specific surface area Ssp, and the sample with Ni0.125 is characterized by the highest surface area in the M-NZP series. In terms of pore sizes (210−280 Å) NZP belong to mesoporous systems. The conductance channels filled with Na, Cs, Ni, and Co cations have a size of 8–10 Å, and, according to the published data, such pores are apparently inaccessible to the sorption/desorption of nitro-gen. The unit cell volume V decreases by 28% with an increase in the concentration of Ni, while Co-NZP itincreases by ~10%, which is within the accuracy of determination of V. The X-ray powder diffraction analysis showed that all the Ni(Co)-NZP samples contain small amounts of ZrO2 and ZrP2O7.According to X-ray analysis, Cs0.7M0.15Zr2(PO4)3 and Cs0.5M0.25Zr2(PO4)3 have a rhombohedral crystal lattice like CsZr2(PO4)3. The crystal lattice parameters of triple phosphates (Table 1) are close to the lattice parameters of the double phosphate (a = 8.581 ± 0.001 Å, c = 24.973 ± 0.005 Å, V = 1592.3 ± 0.4 Å3) but with decreased values of a, c, and V. A linear change in the unit cell parameters of Co-CZP with an increase in the concentration of the dopant ion was discussed in [11]. For triple phosphates the specific surface area and the pore volume are 4.1 m2/g and 0.0002 cm3/g for Cs0.7M0.15Zr2(PO4)3 and 1.5 m2/g and 0.002 cm3/g for CsZr2(PO4)3, respectively.The values of the binding energy of all elements obtained from the XPS spectra of the samples from the Ni(Co)-CZP series corresponded to the phosphate formula. The atomic ratio of oxygen to phosphorus O/P was overestimated against the stoichiometric ratio; it was 6 and 5.6 for Co-CZP and Ni-CZP, respectively. This finding suggests an excessive con-centration of the oxygen of the phosphate groups on the surface. The surface concentration of Cs is increased 1.5-fold and the surface concentration of dopant ions is increased 2.6-fold (Ni) and 3.8-fold (Co) in comparison with the stoichiometry of the phosphate (Table 1). The concentration of Zr corre-sponds to the stoichiometric concentration.Over Na–Co(Ni) zirconium phosphates (Co-NZP and Ni-NZP) only the dehydrogenation of isopropa-nol proceeds, and the double phosphate NaZr2(PO4)3 demonstrates no catalytic activity. A change in the amount of the formed acetone for the catalysts with the concentration of cobalt and nickel x = 0.125 in the heating–cooling cycle is presented in Figs. 1a and 1b.Only in the case of the Co-containing sample activity was higher upon decrease in temperature com-pared with the mode of increasing temperature; i.e., a counter-clockwise thermal hysteresis (type I hystere-sis) was observed. A small decrease in the values of NC=O with decreasing temperature (type II hysteresis) was recorded for the Ni-containing sample.A similar activity testing was performed for the number of samples with x = 0.25. In the case of Co0.25-NZP, the type of hysteresis changed while for Ni0.25-NZP the clockwise hysteresis was more pro-nounced.A distinctive feature of sodium zirconium phos-phates is that the energetically favorable position of the ion in the conductance channel changes at 573–593 K. This factor and its role in the dehydrogenating ability of M-NZP were discussed in [10]. In the temperature range of T* ~ 593–613 K in the Arrhenius dependences of the yield of acetone over the Ni-NZP catalysts a break is observed with a decrease in the slope of straight lines ln NC=O−T−1 (Fig. 1c). This is evidence that the catalytic reaction is sensitive to the transition of cation in the NZP conductance channel from position M1 to position M2. The break in the dependences ln NC=O−T−1 is repeated under the mode of decreasing temperature of the catalyst, which indi-cates the reversibility of the M1–M2 transition with low (T > T*) and high (T < T*) experimental activa-tion energies of isopropanol dehydrogenation Ea being preserved. Co0.125-NZP does not have such a charac-teristic feature, while for Co0.25-NZP it is slightly pro-nounced, which suggests that cobalt occurs in the spe-cial state.The yield of acetone normalized to the unit surface of M-NZP samples, that is, the specific activity of the catalysts, does not depend on the concentration of M; it is higher in the case of Co-NZP (Fig. 2a). The depth of the transformation (conversion) of isopropanol W increases in the mode of decreasing temperature for Co0.125-NZP (Fig. 2b), while for Co0.25-NZP this value decreases. The conversion of alcohol over the Co0.25-NZP catalyst is lower than that over Co0.125-NZP. This feature distinguishes the samples with Co from the samples with Ni. Upon cooling of the Ni-NZP catalysts conversion decreased.Table 2 presents the yields of the product N at a temperature of 593 K, which is in the region of the M1–M2 transition and the values of Ea. It follows from the analysis of ΔN that a large counter-clockwise hysteresis of the acetone yield (the “plus” sign in front of ∆N = N↓ − N↑ in Тable 2) is characteristic for the Co0.125-NZP catalyst; for the corresponding nickel catalyst, clockwise hysteresis (the “minus” sign).
Let us analyze a change in the Arrhenius parame-ters of dependences ln NC=O−T−1 for the dehydroge-nation reaction of isopropanol (the values of ΔEa and Δln N0). The yield of the product is the rate of reaction of alcohol dehydrogenation, which is equal or directly proportional to the rate constant of the reaction K in the absence of diffusion limitations; therefore, N↓/N↑ ≈ K↓/K↑. Taking the logarithm of N↓/N↑, we obtain the expression from which it follows that the thermal hysteresis may be related to a change in both the apparent activation energy of the reaction ∆Ea = Ea↓ − Ea↑ and the loga-rithm of the preexponential factor ∆lnN0 = lnN0↓ − lnN0↑ (Table 1). The accuracy of determination of Ea is ±5–7 kJ/mol; therefore, the values of ∆Ea are neg-ligible within 10 kJ/mol. Expression (1) can be written as the equation.
The growth in activity upon cooling the catalyst—the counter-clockwise hysteresis—may be associated with both a decrease in Ea (∆Ea < 0) and an increase in the preexponential factor (∆ln N0 > 0). Both factors act simultaneously with the predominance of one over another. The opposite type of hysteresis is also possi-ble with a similar-in-sign change in Ea and ln N0, like in the case of Co0.125-NZP and Ni0.125-NZP catalysts. A significant growth in the activity of Co0.125-NZP in the cooling mode is related to the increase in Ea and ln N0 due to the involvement of new sites with a decreased heat of adsorption Q in the reaction, that is, to the strength of the bond of the alcohol with the cat-alyst. There is no break in the ln NC=O−T−1 depen-dences for Co0.125-NZP. For the Ni0.125-NZP catalyst with the clockwise hysteresis, which is sensitive to the M1–M2 transition, the result was similar to that for Co0.125-NZP: ΔEa > 0 and Δln N0 > 0 at T < T* and T > T*. The absence or a weak thermal hysteresis is possible in the case of the same contribution from the first and second summands of Eq. (1). An example of such a compensation is the dehydrogenation of iso-propanol over Ni0.25-NZP with the same character of change in Ea and ln N0.The charge states of nickel and cobalt can change in the reducing medium of the alcohol dehydrogenation reaction. In terms of the oxidation–reduction mecha-nism of the reaction, in which the stage of reoxidation of M is treated as the limiting stage [5], it is difficult to explain the activity of Ni+2 and Co+2 by the negative value of the reduction potential1: −0.257 V (Ni) and −0.27 V (Co) for the reaction M+2 + 2e = M0.
The reduction potential is positive E0r= +1.39 V only for Co+3 → Co+2. The appearance of the oxidized form of Co+3 in the composition of the catalytically active site of the reaction can be explained by forma-tion of a bimetallic pair Co+2−Zr+4 → Co+3−Zr+3 (Co+2 is the donor of electrons for Zr+4), in which Co+3 stabilizes Zr+3. The presence of Zr+3 paramag-netic ions in the NZP catalysts was noted in [12].The formation of two products, isobutylene (the main product) and isobutanal, is observed in the transformations of isobutanol over the Ni(Co)-CZP catalysts, which indicates two routes for alcohol trans-formation. Isobutylene is the most valuable product, which is of interest for the polymer industry. It was found that the activity of triple CZP, like that of triple NZP, is higher than the activity of the double phos-phate. Under our experimental conditions the total conversion of alcohol over the CsZr2(PO4)3 catalyst is below 25%; however, the isobutylene selectivity is 100%.The conversion of isobutanol increases upon tran-sition to the cooling mode; as a result, olefin selectivity decreases except for Co0.25 at 593 K and Ni0.25 at 653 K (Fig. 3). This means that an increase in the total con-version is associated with the formation of aldehyde, that is, intensification of the dehydrogenating func-tion of the catalyst with sites involved in the redox pro-cess. The dehydrating function predominates in the Ni(Co)-CZP catalysts—the conversion of alcohol to isobutylene is substantially higher than the conversion of alcohol to isobutanol. This effect is especially pro-nounced in the samples with x = 0.15 (Figs. 3, 4). As opposed to Ni(Co)-NZP, there is no clear break (manifestation of the M1 → M2 transition) in the dependences ln N−T−1 in the transformations of isobutanol over the Ni(Co)-CZP catalysts (Fig. 4c), possibly, because of a larger radius of the Cs+ ion (rCs+ = 0.166 nm versus rNa+ = 0.098 nm [13]).The activity in the dehydration reaction of alcohol decreases upon transition to the cooling mode, and the activation energy increases (Table 3). Differencesin the activation energies of olefin formation ∆EC=C increase with the concentration of Mx due to a decrease in Ea↑ because the values of Ea↓ are close and fall within 86–99 kJ/mol. An opposite character of changes in Ea and ln N0 is observed in the case of the dehydrogenation reaction: the active state of the sites in the mode of decreasing temperature is characterized by a decrease in  with a small divergence of ΔEC=O = 55 kJ/mol in the sample with Co0.15.A counter-clockwise thermal hysteresis (type I) was observed in the reaction of isobutanol dehydroge-nation, and a clockwise thermal hysteresis (type II) was observed in the reaction of isobutanol dehydra-tion; i.e., the catalytic processes differing in mecha-nisms and products have different types of hysteresis over the same catalyst. A change in the Arrhenius parameters in the case of hysteresis is affected by the amount of the dopant ion and its nature. The positivevalues of ∆EC=C increase in the order Co0.15 < Co0.25 <Ni0.15 < Ni0.25. The negative values of ∆EC=O increase in the same order. Little attention is paid in the litera-ture to the discussion of the thermal hysteresis of cat-alytic reactions within the framework of variability of the chemical composition and structure of the active site of a catalyst in the heating–cooling cycle due to the complexity of recording such changes. The ther-mal hysteresis was described for the oxidation reac-tions of CO and alkanes over oxide and supported cat-alysts [14–16]. In [14], the theoretical analysis of the hysteresis of the partial oxidation reaction of methane CH4 + ½O2 = CO + 2H2 (ΔH = −36 kJ/mol) was per-formed using the Reynolds and Damköhler numbers and taking into account the indirect mechanism, including three more reactions: CH4 + 2O2 = CO2 + 2H2O (ΔH = −803 kJ/mol), CH4 + H2O ↔ CO + 3H2 (ΔH = +206 kJ/mol), and CH4 + CO2 ↔ 2CO + 2H2 (ΔH = +247 kJ/mol). The authors [15] observed the thermal hysteresis in the co-oxidation reaction of CO and C2H6 over a Pt/Al2O3 catalyst at 300–600 K, which, in their opinion, differs from the thermal hys-teresis of stationary activity. The thermal counter-clockwise hysteresis in the catalytic combustion (com-plete oxidation) of methane over Pt/Al2O3 in a flow-type reactor was analyzed in [16]. Using the new in situ obtained data the authors replaced the earlier explana-tion of the hysteresis by the removal of adsorbed oxy-gen from the Pt sites and their local warmup with another one—the formation of active carbon sites upon the dissociative adsorption of methane.Thus, the often-observed thermal hysteresis of the activity of heterogeneous catalysts has not been unam-biguously explained yet. Thermal hysteresis also takes place in the transformations of isopropanol and isobu-tanol over Co(Ni)-NZP and Co(Ni)-CZP complex phosphate catalysts with the NASICON structure. The counter-clockwise (type I) or clockwise (type II) type of hysteresis with a change in the activation energy and the preexponential factor depends on the composition of NZP (the conducting ion and dopant ion M+2 = Co, Ni), reaction type (alcohol dehydroge-nation or dehydration), and the range of reaction tem-peratures because M can occupy position M1 or M2 in the conductance channel of the solid electrolyte depending on temperature.