Surface modifications are established well as efficient methodologies to enhance comprehensive Li-storage behaviors of the cathodes, and play a significant role in cutting edge innovations towards lithium-ion batteries (LIBs).
Herein, we first logically  devised  a  pilot-scale  coating  strategy  to  integrate  solid  state  electrolyte NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP) and layered LiNi0.5Mn0.3Co0.2O2 (NMC) for smart construction of core-shell  NMC@NTP  cathodes.
The  NASICON-type  NTP  nanoshell  with exceptional ion conductivity effectively suppressed gradual encroachment and/or loss of  electroactive  NMC,  guaranteed  stable  phase-interfaces,  and  rendered  small resistance  meanwhile.
Benefitting from immanently  promoting  contributions  of  the  nano-NTP  coating,  the  as-fabricated core-shell  NMC@NTP  architectures  were  competitively  endowed  with  superior high-voltage  cyclic  stabilities  and  rate  capacities  within  larger  electrochemical window from 3.0 to 4.6 V  when utilized as  advanced cathodes for advanced  LIBs.
More meaningfully, the appealing electrode design concept proposed here will exert significant impact upon further constructing other high-voltage Ni-based cathodes for ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentPage 3 of 46ACS Applied Materials & InterfacesINTRODUCTION With  overwhelmingly  high  volumetric/gravimetric  energy  density  demands, lithium-ion  batteries  (LIBs)  with  innately  superior  properties  including  affordable price,  long  cycle  life,  and  environmental  friendliness,  have  been  identified  well  as ideal  power  supplies  for  electric  transportation,  electric  vehicles  (EVs)  and  hybrid EVs.
The  electrochemical  performance  of  LIBs  is  intensely  dependent  upon  the properties of both the deployed electrodes, especially the cathodes.
To this end, the cathode  materials  to  fulfill  high  safety,  large  capacity,  and  long-cycle  lifetime  are being  studied  by  collaborative  efforts  in  universities,  national  labs  and  industries around  the  world.
In  particular,  one  representative  Ni-based  cathode,  the  layered LiNi0.5Mn0.3Co0.2O2 (denoted  as  NMC),  obviously  contributes  to  the  declining  cost and enhanced security, due to the less use of elemental Co and more introduction of Mn as compared to the LiCoO2, which makes it successfully adopted in commercial power LIBs.
Moreover, striking charge/discharge  behaviors  under  the  high  cut-off  voltage  (≥  4.4  V)  is  highly demanded.
Nevertheless,  it  unavoidably  triggers  off  some  adverse  reactions comprising  electrolyte  decomposition,  irreversible  transformation  of  the  surface lattice structures, the oxygen loss and Mn(II)-dissolution from the cathode surface.
The contribution from Kang et al. manifests that the degree of structural degradation from  the  cathode  surface  is  dramatically  affected  by  the  applied  cut-off  voltages, which leads to the formation of an ionically insulating layer on the cathode surfaces, ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentACS Applied Materials & InterfacesPage 4 of 46thus deteriorating the capacity retention.
With the aim to efficiently mitigate the critical issues mentioned above, surface modifications have been extensively conducted, and vigorously proved to be a simple, indispensable  yet  effective  strategy.
Up  till  now,  various  inorganic  compounds, including  Al  doped  ZnO,16  V2O5,17,  18  fluoride  (LiAlF4),19  and  lithium-containing compounds  (LiAlO2,20  LiNixMn2-xO4,21 and  Li1.2Ni0.2Mn0.6O2  22),  have  been  widely investigated  as  coating  phases  for  enhancing  the  Li-storage  performance  of NMC-based  cathodes.
It  is  full  of  challenge  none  the  less  to  develop  a  superior coating  layer  that  simultaneously  possesses  high  chemically  stability,  fast  Li+ conductance,  high  uniformity  and  excellent  electro-activities.
Lately,  the  solid  state electrolyte  (SSE),  thanks  to  its  fast  lithium  transportation  and  high  bulk  ionic conductivity, has increasingly attracted wide attention, and been applied as an elegant coating  phase  for  high-performance  cathodes.
To  date,  thin  SSE  films,  such  as and  Li4SnS429  have  been  successfully  deposited  on  the  cathode  surface  by  various methods.
In  particularly,  NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP),  as  a  unique  NASICON-type  material with  isostructural  to  LiTi2(PO4)3,  is  identified  as  one  remarkable  material  towards advanced Na/Li-ion batteries, benefitting from its three dimensional (3D) phosphate opened-framework  of  large  interstitial  spaces  and  small  volume  expansion  over cycling.
Furthermore, the outstanding stability of the NASICON framework of the ATi2(PO4)3 (A = Li and Na) greatly favors for its reversible Li+ insertion/extraction over cycling, as reported by Masquelier.
ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentPage 5 of 46ACS Applied Materials & InterfacesWith all the considerations above in mind, in this investigation, a typical NTP SSE with good crystallity and structural/thermal stability as well as exceptionally high ion  conductivity  is  homogeneously  built  upon  the  electroactive  NMC  surface  to purposefully fabricate the  core-shell  NMC@NTP  cathodes.
The  prominent contribution of the NTP nanoshell, as a stable and Li-penetrable interfacial layer for layered  NMC,  is  illuminated  in-depth  by  physicochemical  and  electrochemical investigations.
As  a  result,  the  core-shell  NMC@NTP  cathode  delivered  superior Li-storage ability (~153.2 mAh g-1 at 10 C, 1 C = 180 mA g-1) and cycling stability (~6.8% capacity degradation at 1 C rate) after 150 continuous charge-discharge cycles within a larger electrochemical window of 3.0 − 4.6 V (vs.Li+/Li).
All  the  chemicals  used  in  the  work  were  all  analytic-grade reagents, and directly used without any further purification.
The Ni0.5Co0.3Mn0.2(OH)2 precursor  was  obtained  by  a  co-precipitation  method,34  and  then  mixed  thoroughly with Li2CO3 with a molar ratio of 1 : 1.06 in a high-speed mixer.
The mixture was first calcinated at 750 °C for 8 h, then 930 °C for 10 h in air.
Typically, titanium (IV) sulfate and trisodium phosphate anhydrous with the stoichiometric ratio were completely blended using the polyurethane  balls  in  planetary  mill  and  the  PEG-400  as  the  dispersant.
Then,  the pre-prepared  NMC  powder  was  added  to  the  formed  pulped  mixture  for  further ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentACS Applied Materials & InterfacesPage 6 of 46mixing.
After that, the obtained viscous slurry was pre-treated at 120 °C for 6 h.
The residual  soluble  inorganic  salt  was  adequately  washed  with  distilled  water  until  the 2in the filtrate was not visually detected with 0.5 M BaCl2 solution.
The NMC cathodes coated by crystalized NTP nanoshell were finally prepared after calcination at 700 °C for 8 h in air.
The amounts of the NTP corresponding to the NMC were conducted in molar ratio of 2% or 5%, and the final obtained products were labeled as NMC@NTP and NMC@NTP-5, respectively.
Materials Characterization Typical  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  patterns  were  recorded  with  the  diffraction  angle range from 10 ° to 90 ° with a scanning speed of 2 ° min-1 by a Rigaku-TTRШ type X-ray  diffractometer  (Cu  Kα,  40  kV,  300  mA,  Japan).
Corresponding  lattice parameters were refined and calculated with Rietveld method.
Morphological features were captured by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (JEOL, JSM-6360LV, Japan) equipped  with  an  energy  dispersive  spectrometer  (EDS).
Transmission  electron microscopy (TEM) and High resolution TEM (HRTEM) (Philips CM200 microscope) were utilized to differentiate lattice fingers.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed on Kratos Model XSAM800 using Monochromatic  X-ray generated from  Al  Kα  (1486.6  eV).
For  XRD  and  HRTEM  characterizations  of  the  cycled cathodes, the powders were obtained by soaked and washed with dimethyl carbonate the  argon  box.
N2  adsorption/desorption  was  determined  by Brunauer-Emmett-Teller  (BET) measurements using an TriStar  II 3020 surface area analyzer.
Particle size analysis was conducted by Mastersizer 2000. ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentPage 7 of 46ACS Applied Materials & InterfacesElectrochemical measurements Electrochemical evaluation was performed by galvanostatic cycling of the assembled CR2025  type  button  cell.
The  electrodes  were  made  up  of  electroactive  material, acetylene black (AB), and polyvinylidene ﬂuoride (PVDF) with a mass ratio of 8 : 1 : 1,  and  N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone  (NMP)  was  applied  as  the  dispersant.
The  typical weight density of cathode material in the electrode was ≈15 mg cm-2. After dried, the as-prepared electrode was pressed by using a roller press into a film with a thickness of  ~50  µm  (compacted  density  of  3.2  g  cm-3  or  so)  on  each  polished  Al  foil.
The electrolyte  was  1  M  LiPF6  in  ethylene  carbonate/DMC/ethyl  methyl  carbonate (EC-DMC-EMC)  with  a  volume  ratio  of  1  :  1  :  1.  Celgard  2400  microporous membrane was used as the separator and Li-metal foil as the negative electrode.
For the charge and discharge testing, the charging rate was fixed equal to the discharging rate,  setting  at  0.2  C  rate  (36  mA  g-1)  for  the  first  three  cycles  and  then charged/discharged at 0.5 C or 1 C rate in the following cycles in the voltage of 3.0 − 4.5 or 4.6 V.
The 8-channel Land test system (CT2001A, Wuhan China) was used to collect  the  electrochemical  data.
Various routes have been successfully carried out for synthesizing the NTP, such as high or low temperature solid-state reactions,35, 36 hydrothermal method,37 and sol-gel method 38, 39. In order to simplify the coating route, a simple but extremely effective coating  process,  as  graphically  illustrated  in  Figure  1a,  was  herein  put  forward  for practical  industrial  application.
Typical  XRD  patterns  and  corresponding  X-ray Rietveld  refinement  for  the  as-obtained  NMC  and  NMC@NTP  samples  are collectively  shown  in  Figure  1b,  c  and  Supporting  Figure  S1a.
Evidently,  sharp diffraction peaks and marked splitting in pair reﬂections of (006)/(102) and (108)/(110) as  well  as  their  negligible  difference  in  lattice  parameters  (Table  1),  manifest  the   same crystalline structure (JCPDF card No.85-1969 with R m space group) of the NMC  and  NMC@NTP  ,40  and  no  any  variation  in  the  bulk  NMC  structure  with reasonable  adding  amount  of  the  NTP.
Nevertheless,  the  XRD  pattern  of  the NMC@NTP-5  (Supporting  Figure  S1b)  combines  both  layered  α-NaFeO2  structure and discernible superlattice reflections with 2θ located at 19 ° – 34 °, and no other distinct  peaks  can  be  visually  detected.
This  observation  strongly  verifies  the existence of only stable interface interaction in the NMC@NTP-5, and no any newly generated composite.
As widely verified, the Ni2+ ion, which has an ionic radius (0.69 Å) similar to that of Li+ (0.76 Å), can easily migrate to Li slabs, leading to so called “cation mixing”.
This phenomenon will weaken the intensity of the (003) peak, while the intensity of (104) peak is unchanged.
Thus, the degree of cation mixing in the layered structure with a R m space group can be supported by the intensity ratio ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentPage 9 of 46ACS Applied Materials & Interfacesof  (003)  to  (104)  peak,  that  is  the  I(003)/I(104).
The  I(003)/I(104)  ratio  of  the  NMC@NTP  is slightly lower than that of the NMC, which probably attributes to the occasionality or the measuring error.
We conduct two parallel experiments to further check the change of  the  I(003)/I(104)  ratio  after  NTP  SSE  coating.
The  obtained  XRD  patterns  and corresponding  I(003)/I(104)  ratio  of  the  NMC  and  NMC@NTP  are  displayed  in Supporting  Figure  S2.  The  results  show  that  there  is  no  obvious  variation  of I(003)/I(104) ratio before and after coating.
It further demonstrates that the NTP shell just adheres tightly on the bulk NMC surface rather than incorporate into the layered NMC  host.
In  addition,  these  indisputable  facts  can  be  fully  confirmed  by  no noticeable fluctuation in the reflection ratio of Ni amounts in Li sites of the two.
For further illumination, the XRD pattern (Supporting Figure S3) of single-phase NTP is recorded,  and  finely  conforms  to  standard  file  (JCPDF  card  No.84-2009),30  which incontrovertibly implies the high feasibility of our coating route.
In order to further verify the coating layer in the molecular formula of the NTP rather than other compounds, and to perceive whether the sur-/interfacial oxidation of the NMC is extrally disturbed by following NTP coating, typical XPS spectra of Ti 2p, Ni 2p, Co 2p and Mn 2p are characterized in detail accordingly.
Obviously, the Ti 2p ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentACS Applied Materials & InterfacesPage 10 of 46spectra for the NMC@NTP, as shown in Figure 2a, show typical double-peak feature for the Ti 2p2/3 and Ti 2p1/2, which are located at the binding energy (BE) of 458.89 and 464.59 eV, respectively, strongly confirming the tetravalency of titanium species in the NTP.
Typical Ni 2p spectra and corresponding fitted profiles for both NMC and NMC@NTP are depicted in Figure 2b, and corresponding valence information of the elemental Ni is summarized in Table 2. As distinctly shown, the almost identical BE and no noticeable diversity of Ni(II)/Ni(III) in total contents calculated from both the samples, as well as the negligible fading in relative intensity of the NMC@NTP, all indicate that the NTP coating does not alter the interfacial composition and disturb specific elemental oxidation states of the NMC core.
This also can be well supported by the BE peaks of the Co 2p and Mn 2p in both NMC and NMC@NTP.
The Co XPS spectra (Figure 2c) for the two both display a Co 2p3/2 main peak at 780.19 eV with a Ni  (LMM)  peak  at  783.17  eV,  and  a  Co  2p1/2 main  peak  at  795.17  eV,  indicating merely trivalent cobalt can be observed.
Figure 2d presents the Mn 2p spectra of the NMC and NMC@NTP, in which two broad main peaks are detected  at 642.49 and 654.9  eV,  corresponding  to  Mn  2p3/2  and  Mn  2p1/2,  which  implies  that  the  Mn  is mainly  in  tetravalent  state.
As  a  result,  systematic  investigations  and discussions  above  can  definitely  verify  the  remarkable  feasibility  in  combining  the Nasicon-structured NTP SSE shell with the bulk layered NMC core.
Representative  morphologies  of  the  NMC,  NMC@NTP  and  NMC@NTP-5 specimen  are  detailedly  characterized  by  SEM  and  EDS,  as  displayed  in  Figure  3. Noticeably, the higher amount of the NTP coating, the smoother surface and the more ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentPage 11 of 46ACS Applied Materials & Interfacesindistinguishable square-shaped primary particles can be observed in comparison with the  single-phase  NMC,  as  comparatively  shown  in  Figure  3a-c.
Similarly,  the semblable  phenomenon  can  be  discerned  evidently  from  the  EDS  results.
Element mapping images of a separated NMC@NTP particle (Figure 3d-k) by TEM  further signify  the  uniform  distribution  of  the  host  Ni,  Co,  and  Mn  species  and  the homogeneous  NTP  coating  shell.
As  noted,  taking  element  Ti  and  P  for  example, corresponding dot-mapping images for the NMC@NTP-5 (Supporting Figure S4a, b) turn out to be much denser in contrast to those for the NMC@NTP (Supporting Figure S4c, d), which is in good line with the SEM observation above.
For comparison, the EDS  results  (Supporting  Figure  S4e-h)  of  the  NMC  including  several  spherical particles are displayed without the detected Na, Ti, and P species.
In order to probe composition  changes  in  the  bulk  and  the  surficial  region  of  the  NMC@NTP,  the cross-section constituent (Ni, Co, Mn, Na, Ti, and P) variations of a single particle of ~16.0 µm in diameter are collected by EDS electron probe signals linear sweeping in diametrical direction.
Apparently, elements including Ni, Mn, and Co in bulk NMC are  evenly  distributed  across  the  spherical  secondary  particles  without  obvious fluctuation,  as  exhibited  in  Figure  3l.
However,  it  can  be  visually  observed  from Figure 3m that the distributions of elemental Na, Ti, and P are dominantly located on the  surface  region  of  the  particle,  and  scarcely  spread  in  the  core  zone.
Conceivably, the synchronous, recognizable gradient-increased  distributions  of  Na,  Ti,  and  P  elements  in  both  terminal  sections can  be  responsible  well  for  the  formation  of  interlinked  tunnels  for  convenient  Li+ ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentACS Applied Materials & InterfacesPage 12 of 46transportation.
With  in-depth  SEM  and  EDS  analysis  above,  therefore,  we  can incontrovertibly  conclude  that  nano-sized  NTP  coating  shell  not  only  exists  but homogeneously anchors on each NMC particle surface.
For  further  conducting  the  detailed  characterizations  of  surface/interfacial structure, TEM images (Supporting Figure S5a, b) for a single separated NMC@NTP particle,  the  low-magnification  SEM  images  (Supporting  Figure  S6a,  b)  and corresponding  particle  size  analysis  (Supporting  Figure  S6a,  b)  of  the  NMC@NTP particles are all provided.
It can be observed from Figure S6c that the minimum grain diameter  is  ~3.8  μm,  which  is  considerably  larger  than  the  nanoscale  coating  layer (Supporting Figure S5b).
Therefore, as observed in Figure S5a, it is difficult to detect and  check  the  uniformity  of  the  NTP  SSE  coating  layer  from  the  separated NMC@NTP  particle  with  overall  perspective.
However,  as  obviously  seen  from Figure  S5b,  a  continuous  and  nano-sized  NTP  SSE  shell  of  ~20  nm  in  thickness tightly covers on the surface of the NMC core.
As a contrast, a legible, transparent and unintermittent  coating  layer  emerges  and  tightly  adheres  to  the  bulk  NMC  core  for both NMC@NTP (Figure 4b) and NMC@NTP-5 (Figure 4c) samples.
The thickness of the NTP nanoshell in the NMC@NTP is around 20 nm, while it becomes > 50 nm in thickness for the NMC@NTP-5. HRTEM and homologous fast Fourier transform (FFT)  are  next  accomplished  to  explicitly  illustrate  the  NMC-NTP  interfaces.
The bulk NMC, as shown in Figure 4d, f, presents a typical layered structure, where its ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentPage 13 of 46ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces(104) plane of lattice spacing of ~2.06 Å is single, linear and uninterrupted until the boundary of the particle.
While two representative HRTEM images derived from the edge of NMC@NTP particles are observed, and provided in Figure 4e, j.
Apparently, the lattice fringe with a plane spacing of ~2.07 Å in the bulk zone, as shown in Figure 4g, clearly supports that the layered structure is well maintained after coated with the NTP.
And an evenly nano-sized coating layer located in the marked h and i regions (Figure  4e)  can  be  overtly  perceived.
Moreover,  as  shown  in  Figure  4h  and  i,  this outer  coating  layer  is  well-crystallized  and  its  lattice  fringes  with  two  interplanar spacings of ~2.43 and ~2.20 Å are plainly visible, which extremely conforms to the (300) and (208) planes of the NASICON-type NTP, rather than the layered structure.
One note that the examination here is in good agreement with the aformentioned XRD results (Figure 1b).
The distinguishable interfacial region (marked in the green rectangle) located between the bulk NMC and external NTP nanoshell is displayed in Figure  4j.
Of  particular  note  is  that  the  (003)  plane  of  layered  structure  and  (226) crystal plane of the NTP phase are evident in the interfacial region.
Accordingly, it  is  rationally  speculated  that  metal  ions  just  can  interdiffuse  with  even  higher external energy, such as, higher-temperature annealing, which thus results in the intact integration  of  the  cladding  layer  and  bulk  body.
Therefore,  we  have  well-founded reasons to  believe that the  well-crystalized  NTP  nanoshell  with  high structural/thermal  stability  adheres  closely  to  the  outer  surface  along  with  the interlinked Li-diffusion channels between the core NMC and NTP nanoshell.
It will make the unique NMC-NTP interface possess superior Li+ penetrability.
Besides this, ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentACS Applied Materials & InterfacesPage 14 of 46the NTP nanoshell of exceptionally high ion conductivity guarantees the unhindered shuttling back and forth of Li+ ions in the electrolytes, as vividly depicted in Figure 4k.
Therefore,  undoubtedly,  this  unique  core-shell  feature  will  exert  a  significant influence  on  the  ultimate  electrochemical  Li-storage  properties  of  the  NMC@NTP Electrochemical evaluaiton We firstly investigate the influence of the NTP  shell thickness upon the initial discharge  capacities  (Supporting  Figure  S7  and  Table  S1).
As  expected,  the  initial discharge capacities of the NMC@NTP at 0.2 C and 0.5 C are both slightly higher than those for the NMC with upper voltage limits of 4.4 or 4.5 V.
However, as for the the initial  discharge  capacities  are  evidently  declined.
This phenomenon  can  be  reasonably  put  down  to  its  excessively  thick  coating  shell,  as observed  in  Figure  4c,  which  probably  prolongs  the  Li+  diffusion  pathways  and enlarges electrochemical polarization accordingly.
As a consequence, the NMC@NTP with  even  better  electrochemical  Li-storage  behaviors  will  be  compared  in  detailed with the NMC in the following section.
Figure 5a and b show representative charge-discharge profiles at 0.2 C for one cycle,  and  then  followed  at  0.5  C  rate  for  the  1st,  10th,  20th,  30th,  40th,  50th···150th, 200th cycle in the voltage of 3.0 − 4.5 V (vs.
Li/Li+) for the NMC and NMC@NTP, respectively.
Obviously, the NMC@NTP cathode delivers an initial discharge capacity of  ~197.2  mAh  g-1 at  0.2  C,  higher  than  the  NMC  (~195.9  mAh  g-1).
The  nearly undifferentiated discharge potential platforms located approximately at 3.8 V reveal ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentPage 15 of 46ACS Applied Materials & Interfacesthat the intrinsic electrochemical feature is not affected by our implemented coating strategy at all.
However, the plots reflected from the NMC@NTP cathode, no matter in charge or discharge process, are concentrated upon cycling while the voltage gap of the NMC is increasingly aggravated.
In other words, the drop of the initial voltage, working voltage platform, and discharge capacities of the NMC@NTP sample are all pronouncedly  superior  to  those  for  the  NMC  counterpart.
More  appealingly,  the NMC@NTP  cathode  still  can  display  attractive  Li-storage  performance  even  with higher upper voltage of 4.6 V.
Typical charge-discharge plots at 0.2 C for one cycle and followed at 1.0 C rate for the 1st, 10th, 20th, 30th, 40th, 50th···100th, 150th cycle in the voltage of 3.0 − 4.6 V (vs.Li/Li+) for the NMC and NMC@NTP are collected in Figure  5c,  d.
Apparently,  the  average  working  voltages  for  the  NMC@NTP  drop slowly with further cycling, and the charge and discharge curves intersect well even after 150 cycles, implying the substantially diminished electrochemical polarization.
By  contrast,  the  average  working  voltage  of  the  NMC  dramatically  declines.
The charge and discharge profiles of the NMC are completely detached from the 70th cycle.
Also note that the working voltage platform nearly disappears for the NMC, while the NMC@NTP still remains acceptable voltage platform after 150 cycles.
Strikingly, the NMC@NTP  cathode  can  yield  a  capacity  of  ~206.5  mAh  g-1 at  0.2  C  in  the  larger electrochemical  window  of  3.0  −  4.6  V  (vs  Li/Li+),  higher  than  that  of  the  NMC (~204.8 mAh g-1).
It further confirms that the NTP SSE coating layer still can work well  under  higher  cut-off  voltage  and  C  rates,  benefiting  from  its  high  ionic ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentACS Applied Materials & InterfacesPage 16 of 46Thanks  to  inherently  high  Li+  conductivity  of  the  NTP  nanoshell,  the NMC@NTP  sample  is  highly  anticipated  to  possess  outstanding  Li+  insertion  and extraction kinetics.
Typical rate properties of both NMC and NMC@NTP from 0.2 C to 10 C, and then back to 0.2 C with 5 cycles per step in the voltage of 3.0 − 4.6 V are characterized, and presented in Figure 5e and f, respectively.
As obviously shown in Figure 5e, the discharge voltage platform decline of the NMC@NTP cathode, which is  caused  by  electrochemical  polarization  and  charge  transfer  resistance  under  the mounting  current  rates,  shows  a  comparatively  stable  trend,  whereas  the  NMC cathode  exhibits  an  aggressive  lapse.
As  evidently  demonstrated  in  Figure  5f,  it  is amazingly found that the NMC@NTP can yield a discharge capacity of ~169.5 and ~153.2  mAh  g-1  at  5  and  10  C  rates,  respectively,  while  the  NMC  just  reserves  as ~146.3 (5 C) and ~115.1 (10 C) mAh g-1. Meanwhile, a discharge capacity of ~192.5 mAh  g-1,  occupying  ~93.5%  of  the  original  value  (0.2  C)  of  the  NMC@NTP,  is retained  when  returning  back  to  0.2  C  again,  but  ~141.5  mAh  g-1  and  ~68.7%  are merely achieved for the NMC.
Such significant enhancement is certainly ascribed to the  surface  protection  of  the  existing  NTP  nanoshell.
In  general,  another  interface located between the core and coating materials appears due to the introduction of the coating layer, which probably brings about additional resistance to Li+ migration.
However,  this  potential  disadvantage  is  evidently  compensated  by  the  constructed high-speed way  and interdiffused tunnels for fast  Li+ transportation,  as observed in Figure 4k, j.
Furthermore, it is generally recognized that the high operating voltage of the Ni-rich cathodes, such as NMC, will result in the decomposition of the LiPF6 salt, ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentPage 17 of 46ACS Applied Materials & Interfacesgenerating  HF  in  the  electrolyte.
Consequently,  for  uncoated  NMC  sample,  the surface  would  be  directly  exposed  to  the  electrolyte  containing  the  generated  HF, which  renders  the  unavoidable  dissolution  of  the  electroactive  materials  because  of the HF etching, thus the poor rate capability deserves.
Nyquist plots and corresponding fitted profiles of the NMC and NMC@NTP at the charge state of 4.5 V after 200 cycles and 4.6 V after 150 cycles are comparatively displayed  in  Figure  5g  and  h,  respectively.
The  adopted  equivalent  circuit  model (Supporting Figure S8) is delineated.
The high-frequency intercept refers to the ohmic resistances (Rs).
The high-/medium-frequency semicircles match with the surface-film resistances  (Rf)  including  Li  containing  impurities  layer,  the  coating  layer  and probable solid electrolyte interface (SEI) layer, and charge-transfer impedances (Rct) in the sur-/interface between electrolytes and electrodes.
And the straight tail in the low-frequency region represents the Warburg impedance (Zw) in consequence of the Li+  diffusion  in  layered  host  cathodes.
Corresponding  fitted  values  are summarized  in  Supporting  Table  S2.  Apparently,  the  Rct  value  of  the  NMC@NTP yields merely ~97.7 Ω for 4.5 V after 200 cycles and ~128.5 Ω for 4.6 V after 150 cycles, which is considerably smaller than that of the NMC (~429.3 Ω for 4.5 V, and ~431.8 Ω for 4.6 V).
Furthermore, the NMC@NTP delivers the lower Rf, as compared to  the  NMC,  persuasively  demonstrating  that  the  existence  of  the  unique  NTP nanoshell  can  efficiently  cut  down  the  detrimental  reactions  under  high  cut-off voltages, and thus prevent the bulk NMC from being corroded by organic electrolytes.
As  a  consequence,  the  sur-/interfacial  impedances  are  dramatically  decreased  and ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentACS Applied Materials & InterfacesPage 18 of 46meanwhile  the  electrochemical  kinetics  is  substantially  enhanced.
This  should  be responsible  well  for  the  enhanced  discharge  capacities  and  rate  capabilities  of  the core-shell NMC@NTP cathode, particularly when operated at higher voltages.
The  Li+  diffusion  coefficient  (DLi+)  of  as-prepared  cathodes  can  be  calculated according to the following equation: 47 Z´ = Rs + Rct + σω-1/2                                              (2) where R stands for gas constant (8.314 J K-1 mol-1), T is temperature (298.15 K), A corresponds  to  the  efficient  work  area  of  the  cathode.
Here,  the  effective  area  is estimated as half of the BET surface area of the electrode, the BET surface area of the pressed  cathode  is  ~0.46  m2  g-1,  thus  the  efficient  area  in  is  ~23.3  cm2  for  each electode (0.78 cm2), n is the number of electrons at charged state (n = 1 − 235/278 = 0.182), F is the Faraday constant (96485 C mol-1), C is the concentration of Li+ ions at delithiated state (4.5 or 4.6 V, the pellet density of our NMC electrode is ~3.2 g cm-3, here, C is estimated as below: C = 3.2 × 0.8 ÷ 96.555 × (1 − 235/278) = 0.0041 mol cm-3. The Warburg factor σ associated with Z´ can be calculated by the linear fitting results of Z´ against ω-1/2 (here, ω is angular frequency) in the oblique line region, as shown in Figure 6. The Warburg factor and DLi+ of the NMC and NMC@NTP after 200 cycles at 4.5 V and after 150 cycles at 4.6 V are all calculated by above equation and exhibited in Table S2. As a result, the integration of NTP SSE has a remarkable effect on the DLi+ of the NMC.
The NMC@NTP electrode possesses a much higher DLi+ value (6.414 × 10-10 cm2 s-1 for 4.5 V and 2.733×10-10 cm2 s-1 for 4.6 V) than that ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentPage 19 of 46ACS Applied Materials & Interfacesof NMC (2.471×10-11 cm2 s-1 for 4.5 V and 4.746×10-11 cm2 s-1 for 4.6 V), due to the Rs and Rct values of NMC@NTP are much lower than that of pristine NMC.
Although the NTP phase is known to have modest electronic conductivity, its good crystallity, high structural/thermal stability, and superior ion conductivity tremendously diminish side reactions at the electrode-electrolyte interface.
The interface of pristine NMC however is facilely covered by an insulative Li-based residue layer, which is indeed fatal to its electronic and ionic transportation during charge and discharge processes.
he  higher  DLi+  of  the  NMC@NTP  demonstrates  that  the  core  NMC  material maintains a well-ordered layered structure during repeated charge/discharge process, ensuring unimpeded Li+ migration and upgraded Li+ storage properties.
Figure 7a presents the cyclic stabilities and corresponding coulombic efficiency (CE) profiles of the NMC and NMC@NTP cathodes performed at 0.5 C rate in the voltage of 3.0 − 4.5 V.
As clearly plotted, the discharge capacity of the NMC drops drastically from ~189.8 to ~98.1 mAh g-1 after 200 cycles at 0.5 C, with a capacity retention of only ~51.7%.
This dramatical capacity loss can be reasonably ascribed to the  fragile  layered  structure  originating  from  the  surface  region  when  contacted intimately  to  the  electrolyte.
Conversely,  the  capacity  loss  observed  for  the NMC@NTP  is  significantly  slowed  down  from  ~191.9  to  ~174.8  mAh  g-1,  that  is, merely a capacity loss of ~8.9% undergoing the same cycle at 0.5 C.
The NMC@NTP electrode also demonstrates robust cycling performance under higher rate, as shown in Figure 7b.
At 4.5 V and 1 C, the capacity of NMC@NTP starts at a higher value of ~181.8 mAh g-1 owing to the aforementioned enhanced kinetics, and preserves ~155.6 ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentACS Applied Materials & InterfacesPage 20 of 46mAh g-1 after 500 charge-discharge cycles, leading to a capacity retention of ~85.6%.
while the capacity of NMC starts from ~180.1 mAh g-1 and ends at ~74.5 mAh g-1 after 400 cycles, corresponding to ~40.9% capacity retention.
The same case can be clearly found in the cycling performance after 150 cycles at 1 C rate between 3.0 − 4.6 V.
As shown in Figure 7c, there is no obvious difference of the initial discharge capacities,  ~194.3  mAh  g-1 (1  C)  for  the  NMC  and  ~195.5  mAh  g-1  (1  C)  for  the NMC@NTP cathode.
Nevertheless, the results distinctly demonstrate that the capacity retention even under severe high cut-off potentials is pronouncedly improved.
Of note, the NMC sample is retained as ~50.8% of the initial capacity after 150 cycles, and encouragely, ~93.2% for the NMC@NTP sample.
For  comparison,  typical  methods  employed  to  improve  the  high-voltage performance of the NMC and corresponding electrochemical properties under 4.5 V and/or  4.6  V  are  summarized  in  Table  3.  It  can  be  clearly  observed  that  the electrochemical  properties  under  high  cut-off  voltages  achieved  in  our  work  shows obvious superiority in comparison with the previous researches on the conventional spherical  NMC.
Even  if  one  dimensional  (1D)  multi-shelled  porous  NMC fibers or nanorods could provide short pathway for electron and Li+ diffusion,52, 53 the hybrid  NMC@NTP  cathode  still  can  be  endowed  with  higher  initial  discharge capacities  and  higher  cyclic  stabilities.
We  therefore  can  deduce  that  the  rational design  and  feasible  synthetic  strategy  in  this  investigation  jointly  contribute  to  the excellent cyclic stability or rate capacity of the NMC@NTP cathode.
In specific, the sturdy  NASICON-structured  NTP  nanoshell  can  preserve  the  layered  bulk  from ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentPage 21 of 46ACS Applied Materials & Interfacesgradual  encroachment  of  electrolytes,  and  suppress  the  loss  of  electroactive  NMC core.
Besides  this,  the  outmost  NTP  nanoshell  with  exceptional  ion  conductivity renders smooth and fast Li+ ions diffusion between the electrolyte and the core-active NMC.
Finally, the interlinked channels for  Li+ ions formed between the NMC core and NTP nanoshell further substantially decrease the interfacial resistance, and thus make  the  core-shell  NMC@NTP  own  much  higher  Li+-storage  capacity  to  the extreme after long-term cycles.
CV measurement is further executed to exhaustively comprehend the significant contribution of the NTP nanoshell to the Li+ insertion/extraction kinetics.
CV curves for  the  initial  three  cycles  and  the  200th  cycle  for  the  NMC  and  NMC@NTP,  as described in Figure 8, are implemented in a voltage range of 2.8 − 4.5 V (vs.Li/Li+) at a  sweep  rate  of  0.1  mV  s-1.  Apparently,  no  more  than  one  pair  of  redox  peaks, corresponding to the oxidation/reduction between Ni2+/Ni3+ and Ni4+, can be observed at 3.6 − 4.0 V (vs.Li/Li+) for both the two.
With detailed comparisons, we can easily figure out that the cathodic peaks of the NMC shift to the lower potentials from the  outset,  whereas  the  anodic  cathodic  peaks  of  the  1st,  2nd  and  3th  curves  for  the NMC@NTP are highly overlapped, as observed in the inset in Figure 8. Remarkably note  that  the  redox  potential  separation  of  the  NMC,  standing  for  the  polarization depth,  drastically  augments  to  ~323  mV  after  200  cycles,  synchronously  with  the unsymmetrical and compressed CV profiles, which signifies the sluggish kinetics and aggravating  obstacle  of  lithiation/de-lithiation.
In  stark  contrast,  the  depolarization function is sufficiently embodied in the CV curve of the NMC@NTP after 200 cycles, ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentACS Applied Materials & InterfacesPage 22 of 46where the anodic peak shifts mildly to higher potential and the cathodic peak remains at  the  initial  potential  except  for  the  peak-current  intensity  fading,  merely  with  a polarization  of  ~177  mV.
In  addition,  sharp  and  symmetrical  peaks  also  can  be distinctly observed for the NMC@NTP.
The distinct depolarization should be ascribed to the boosted kinetics of electrochemical reactions, which results from the outmost NTP nanoshell and the interfacial interdiffused channels for Li+ ions.
As a result, the NMC@NTP cathode exhibits high cyclic stability and excellent rate capability here.
Characteristics of the cycled electrodes To  further  understand  the  immanent  origin  of  the  improved  electrochemical properties  contributed  by  the  NTP  nanoshell,  representative  XRD  patterns  of  the cycled  NMC  and  NMC@NTP  electrodes  are  displayed  in  Figure  9a.
And  the homologous  regions  of  (003),  (101),  (006)/(102)  and  (108)/(110)  peaks  are  further magnified and exhibited in Figure 9b-e, respectively.
As evident in Figure 9a, the bulk layered  structure  is  well  preserved  for  the  two  after  200  charge-discharge  cycles.
Meanwhile, no significant sign of structural distortion and/or formation of any other new  phases  can  be  noticed.
However,  one  should  particularly  note  that  there  exists much more severe fading in diffraction intensities for the NMC in comparison with that for the NMC@NTP, which implies that the bulk or surficial structure sustains a greater  degree  of  destruction.
The  fluctuated  magnitude  of  (003),  representing  the variation in the c axis,9, 55 are legibly shown in Figure 9b.
Admittedly, the deviation of the (003) peak to lower angle is still somewhat observed in the NMC@NTP, which means  the  inevitable  damage  of  crystal  structure  even  with  the  NTP  coating.
It  is ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentPage 23 of 46ACS Applied Materials & Interfacestherefore easy to conclude that although the NTP nanoshell cannot absolutely protect the bulk structure from collapse, it greatly inhibits the deviation degree of (003) peak when  compared  to  that  for  the  NMC.
Moreover,  as  plotted  in  Figure  9c,  the  (101) peak of the NMC shifts to higher angles, indicating the lattice expansion along the c-axis  and  the  concurrent  contraction  along  the  a and  b axises.
The  semblable circumstance also can be demonstrated by the pair peaks (006)/(102) and (108)/(110) peculiar to hexagonal layered structure,55, 56 where the peak position and diffraction intensity  of  the  NMC  show  varying  degrees  of  deviation  and  decay,  as  shown  in Figure 9d and e.
In comparison, the XRD pattern of the cycled NMC@NTP remains acceptable under the same case.
Reportedly, the emerging Li deficiency on the surface caused  by  the  charged  high  cut-off  voltage,  which  will  trigger  the  phase transformation  from  layered  to  spinel  and/or  rock  salt,  can  be  responsible  for  the aforementioned peak position deviation.
As a consequence, the XRD investigation in cycled electrodes forcefully confirms the structural stability whether in the bulk or on  the  surface  of  the  NMC  is  tremendously  protected  by  the  NTP  nanoshell, accounting for the outstanding cyclic stability and rate capability of the NMC@NTP.
To further intensively probe the local structural transformation, Figure 10a and b intuitively  compare  the  SEM  images  of  the  NMC  and  NMC@NTP  cathodes  after consecutive 200 cycles at 0.5 C in a voltage of 3.0 − 4.5 V (vs.Li/Li+).
Evidently, the densely agminated, micrometer-sized, block-shape primary particles observed on the surface of original NMC (Figure 3a) are severely destroyed, as shown in Figure 10a.
As well known, LiPF6-based liquid electrolyte unavoidably containing trace amounts ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentACS Applied Materials & InterfacesPage 24 of 46of water will generate the hazardous HF, which would give rise to the dissolution of electroactive elements from the surficial regions.
Besides, due to various slip planes and  crystallographic  orientation  of  the  primary  particles,  repeated  expansion  and contraction  of  lattice  volume  occurring  in  the  lithiation  and  de-lithiation  processes easily lead to the emergence of microcracks, which in turn serve as fresh reaction sites with the electrolytes.
Thus, the surficial morphology, suffering from these iterative processes without any remedial measure, is horribly damaged as expected.
In sharp contrast, the intact spherical secondary particles coupled with well-defined and visible primary particles are maximumly preserved for the NMC@NTP cathode, as displayed in Figure 10b.
More significantly, representative HRTEM studies of the cycled NMC and  NMC@NTP electrodes are implemented evaluate the caused phase-transformation degree and range, as clearly contrasted in Figure 10c and d.
In sharp  comparison  with  the  original  HRTEM  image  (Figure  4a),  the  surface  of  the cycled NMC is wrapped by an insulative, amorphous layer with a thickness of ~5 nm, as  shown  in  Figure  10c,  resulting  from  the  uninterrupted  accumulation  of side-reaction byproducts containing LixPOFy, LiF, and so on,57, 59 which is extremely against  the  migration  of  Li+  ions.
Moreover,  careful  observation  from  the  adjacent interior lattice fringes visually confirms that the cation disordered phase, as marked by the red dotted line, occupies a large proportion of the region, which composes of spinel and/or cubic phase,9 and only some fragmental regions can be detected as the layered phase.
According to the previous studies,58, 60, 61 the prolonged Li deficiency starting from the surface and the transposition of transition metal ions into the Li layer ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentPage 25 of 46ACS Applied Materials & Interfacesundergoing  long-term  charge/discharge  process,  particularly  under  high  cut-off voltages, roughly account for the plentiful emergence of cation-mixing phase.
This is well responsible for the steep capacity decline of the NMC cathode, as exhibited in Figure  5  and  Figure  7.  Conversely,  we  can  amazingly  find  out  from  the  HRTEM images of the cycled NMC@NTP (Figure 10d) that the bulk region firmly continues to  be  the  rhombohedral  layered  phase  with  eye-catching  (003)  plane,  and  sparse disordered phase can be observed meanwhile.
In addition, a NTP SSE coating shell with distinguishable lattice fringes, in good line with the observations in Figure 4e, j, is  well  retained.
Expectedly,  only  a  negligible  insulative  amorphous  layer  can  be detected  in  the  outermost  zone.
In  terms  of  the comprehensive and in-depth investigations above, rational integration of the layered NMC  and  Nasicon-structured  NTP  we  developed  is  extremely  conducive  to  the transportation  of  Li+  ions  no  matter  in  the  layered  bulk  and  at  the  NMC-NTP sur-/interfaces.
As  a  result,  excellent  cyclic  stability  and  rate  capability  are simultaneously merited for the NMC@NTP.
In  conclusion,  we  purposefully  designed  and  developed  a  novel  core-shell NTP@NMC  cathode,  in  which  the  uniform  NASICON-type  NTP  nanoshell  was ACS Paragon Plus EnvironmentACS Applied Materials & InterfacesPage 26 of 46coated tightly upon the layered NMC core towards high-energy/power LIBs.
The NTP SSE  nanoshell  not  only  preserved  the  bulk  layered  structure  from  destructive corrosions  caused  by  the  side-reactions  with  the  electrolytes  but  also  functioned  as high-speed way for Li+ transportation between the electroactive NMC and electrolytes.
Furthermore,  the  uinique  interdiffused  tunnels  between  the  NMC  core  and  NTP nanoshell  are  hugely  beneficial  for  the  fast  Li+  shuttling  back  and  forth.
As  a consequence, the cyclic stability (1 C) of the NMC@NTP was improved considerably with  superior  capacity  retention  of  ~93.2%  after  150  cycles  at  the  depth charge/discharge  rate  within  higher  cut-off  voltage  range  from  3.0  to  4.6  V.
Furthermore,  the  outstanding  rate  capacities  were  expectedly  observed  for  the NMC@NTP as well as the superior capacity retention especially at high rates.
More importantly,  we  greatly  anticipate  the  promising  design  and  pilot-scale  synthesis strategy we developed can eventually fulfill the advanced LIBs that maximumly boost the development of new energy industry.
