Compared with conventional lithium-ion batteries, all-solid-state lithium batteries (ASSLBs) based oninorganic solid electrolytes (ISEs) are relatively new research hotspots, which can overcome toughchallenges in conventional lithium-ion batteries, such as potential combustion accidents resulted fromflammable liquid electrolyte solvent, low energy density, and fussy manufacturing process.
In this review,we focus on the ionic conductivity and stability of ISEs by discussing defect chemistry, ion-doping orelemental substitution, ion-transport mechanism, phase stability, and interfacial stability in representativeISEs (e.g., LISICON-like, NASICON-like, perovskite/anti-perovskite, and garnet electrolytes).
The generalillustration of structures and fundamental features being important to ionic conductivity or stability areexamined, including ion occupancies, ion migration paths and dimensionalities, carrier types, point defects,ion-doping sites, and interfacial structures.
Experimental and theoretical studies are discussed in parallel togive a deep and comprehensive understanding on ion transport, ion doping, and stability in ISEs.
Thecommon features of Li-ion transport mechanism and several possible research directions are also suggested for facilitating further improvement on the ASSLBs performance.
We believe this review will contribute tothe deep understanding on the ionic conductivity and stability of ISEs and help for further development ofadvanced ISEs in the field.
LISICON-like ISEs are promising solid electrolytes for ASSLBs because of their high ionic conductivityand intimate solid/solid contacts.
However, their chemical and electrochemical stability is the biggestproblem.
How to improve the interfacial stability of electrodes/LISICON-like ISEs is very important.
Choosing low electric potential anode electrodes, such as Li-In alloy (electric potential is about 0.6 V), canease or inhibit the reduction of LISICON-like ISEs.
Introducing artificial buffer layer between electrodesand LISICON-like ISEs, such as LiNbO3, forms stable interfacial layer with low resistance to enhance theperformance of ASSLBs.
LISICON-like ISEs with multiple polyanios, such as Li3PS4-xClx and Li3PS4-xOx,can enhance their chemical stability.
LATP or LAGP in NASICON-like ISEs is promising candidate if the reduction of constituent Ti byLi-metal in the battery can be suppressed by the improvement of anodes or by controlling interfacial layerbetween the anode and the ISE.
Furthermore, the wettability and compactness of NASICON-like ISEs arepoor, which causes high interfacial and GB resistances.
Thus, how to improve these two aspects, are alsoessential in enabling the applications of LATP or LAGP.
For perovskite LLTO ISE, the poor stability and low GB conductivity are key issues.
Studies ofion-transport mechanism at grain boundary are important for the design and optimization of LLTO.
Li3OXanti-perovskite is a potential ISE due to its high ionic conductivity.
But Li3OX is thermodynamicallymetastable and may decompose to Li2O and LiX.
In addition, the understanding of ion-transport mechanismat bulk and grain boundary is helpful in revealing the structures of Li3OX interfaces and developing relevantmodels and theories.
