Na3  Zr2  (SiO4  )2  (PO4  ), a typical solid-state electrolyte material, was fabricated at 700° C within seconds by ﬂash-sintering. Under a direct-current electric ﬁeld, the sodium oxides deposited on the cathode side due to the electrochemical reactions and thereby resulting in impurities (Na2  ZrSi2  O7  and m-ZrO2  ) within the bulks. The pure Na3  Zr2  (SiO4  )2  (PO4  ) bulks without the impurities could be sintered under alternativecurrent electric ﬁeld, which exhibited comparable ion conductivity and activation energy to the reported data. This study demonstrated that ﬂash-sintering can be used to synthesize and densify ceramics containing volatile composites. It may provide a new route to fabricate solid-state electrolytes in an eﬃcient way.
All-solid-sate batteries using solid electrolytes have gained signiﬁcant attention due to their improved safety and potential energy density [ 1 –3 ]. Na-ion batteries are considered promising candidates to replace lithium solid-sate batteries due to sodium being more economic and available than lithium [ 4,  5 ]. Na superionic conductors (NASICON) have been demonstrated to be the key electrolyte materials for solid-state Na-ion batteries [ 6,  7 ]. Na 3 Zr 2 (SiO 4 ) 2 (PO 4 ) (NZSP), which has a monoclinic structure, was ﬁrst proposed by Hong and Goodenough [ 8,  9]  as a highly promising NASICON material due to its vast availability, wide electrochemically stable windows, and high Na ion conductivity [ 10 –13 ]. To acquire the aforementioned good properties, NZSP ceramics were sintered at high temperatures over a long duration (several hours) by pressureless sintering to obtain dense bulks [ 8,  9,  14,  15 ]. However, these high temperatures and sintering duration result in the evaporation of Na and P, the loss of which leads to the precipitation of secondary phases, thereby decreasing the ionic conductivity of NZSP [ 14 –17 ]. Thus, it is of great technological beneﬁt to reduce the sintering temperature and time of NZSP to improve their performances. 
One possible approach to reduce the sintering temperature and time is spark plasma sintering (SPS). The NZSP bulks can be sintered by SPS using well-crystallized powders at 10 0 0–120 0° C in a vacuum under pressure for 30min [18].  However, the NZSP ceramics contained m-ZrO 2 after SPS, likely due to the accelerated volatilization speed of Na and P in vacuum despite the short sintering time. Similarly, the addition of sintering aids can effectively reduce the sintering temperature, providing a more feasible and economic method than SPS. With this in mind, NZSP ceramics were sintered to reach a relative density of 73% at 700° C for 10h by using a NaBO 3 additive (9.1wt%) [19].  When the sintering temperature was increased to 900° C, the prepared sample possessed a relative density of ~92% [ 19,  20 ]. However, this low-temperature sintering with aids still required a high-temperature process prior to sintering, in which the NZSP powders were heat-treated at 1150° C for 20h to obtain a good crystallinity along with an excessive Na addition to compensate for the loss of Na during calcination [ 19,  20 ]. A cold sintering process has also been used to consolidate NASICON materials under a uniaxial pressure of 780MPa at 140° C with 30wt% deionized water as an additive. NZSP samples with 91.6% relative density were obtained after cold sintering and subsequent heat treatment at 1100° C for 48h. The ion conductivity of the obtained NZSP was measured to be ~5 × 10 −4 S/cm [21].  
Flash sintering is a new sintering technology enabling to consolidate ceramics under a threshold electric ﬁeld within seconds at furnace temperatures much lower than those needed in conventional sintering [22].  The ﬂash sintering method has been used for densifying a series of ceramics [23],  including ion conductors [ 22 –25 ], electronic conductors [26],  semiconductors [27],  and insulators [28],  and has also been applied in the fast synthesis of compounds [29-31] and ﬂash joining of ceramics to ceramics/metals [ 32 –34 ]. Among the reported studies, anionic conductors (like YSZ) have been widely investigated, including their trigger mechanisms of ﬂash event [ 35,  36 ], densiﬁcation kinetics [37],  and microstructural evolution [38].  It is generally believed that the oxygen vacancies play a dominant role in the sintering of anionic conductors [ 34 –38 ]. However, this may not apply in ﬂash sintering cationic conductors since conduction is achieved through the presence of cations rather than oxygen vacancies. Nevertheless, given the limited number of reports on the ﬂash sintering of cationic conductors [ 24,  25 ], the sintering process is not well understood and requires further investigation. Herein, ﬂash sintering was applied to densify a typical cation ion conductor, NZSP, under both direct current (DC) and alternative current (AC) electric ﬁelds. The solid-state synthesis and densiﬁcation of NZSP ceramics were achieved simultaneously under a threshold electric ﬁeld. The densiﬁcation and Na ion migration behaviors of NZSP were investigated. Finally, the conductivity of the ﬂash-sintered NZSP was measured and compared to those of previously reported NZSP ceramics. The NZSP powder was synthesized by a solution-assisted solidstate method [39],  and then condensed into dumbbell-shaped green bodies (Fig.S1a). The green body was hung in a modiﬁed box furnace (Fig.S1b) and connected to a power supplier (6710, Extech Electronics Co., Ltd., Chinese Taipei) using Pt wires. Full details for the powder and green body preparation processes are provided in Supporting information (see the Experimental Section). Flash sintering was conducted at furnace temperature of 700 °C . The strength of the effective electric ﬁeld value was set to 45V/cm regardless of whether DC or AC was used, and the effective current density value was limited to 60mA/mm 2.  The frequency for AC electric ﬁeld was set at 800Hz. Once the current density reached the preset value, it was held for 30s, followed by switching off the power source. The parameters change during AC ﬂash sintering is shown in Fig.S1c. Considering the joule heating caused by the electric ﬁeld, the sample temperature during ﬂash sintering was estimated by the black body radiation model [40] ( Table 1 ). For comparison, pressureless sintering of NZSP was also conducted at 1200° C for 5h. The X-ray diffraction (XRD; Rigaku D/max-2400, Tokyo, Japan) was used to identify the phases of NZSP powders calcined at 800° C and of the sintered bulks prepared by the various conditions ( Fig. 1 ). Despite the NZSP crystalline appearing after annealing at 800° C for 5h ( Fig. 1 a) [ 8,  9 ], the samples were not well-crystallized due to the solid-state reactions being uncomplete at such low temperature. After pressureless sintering at 1200° C for 5h, the NZSP showed good crystallinity with sharp diffraction peaks ( Fig. 1 b). The m-ZrO 2 was observed in both diffraction patterns of the powder treated at 800° C and the pressureless sintered NZSP bulks. However, the ZrO 2 impurities generate based on different reasons: ZrO 2 in the 800° C-treated powders would arise from the unreacted ZrO 2 raw material during solid-state reaction, while the ZrO 2 in NZSP bulk should result from the volatility of Na and P compounds during sintering process [ 14 –17,  39 ]. It is hard to obtain pure NZSP bulks with a relative high density using pressureless sintering due to the high temperatures and long soaking times leading to the loss of Na and P, and resulting in the precipitation of, for example, ZrO 2 [16, 17]. 
The XRD pattern of the DC ﬂash-sintered NZSP sample at 700° C showed, compared to the pressureless sintered sample at 1200° C, a new impurity phase (Na 2 ZrSi 2 O 7 ) besides NZSP and m-ZrO 2 ( Fig. 1 c), while the XRD pattern of the ﬂash-sintered NZSP at 700° C under AC electric ﬁeld ( Fig. 1 d) indicated that the obtained NZSP bulk was almost pure with minimal traces of ZrO 2.  The sample temperatures for those sintered under AC and DC electric ﬁeld were roughly estimated to be ~890° C [40] ( Table 1 ). It is diﬃcult to quickly synthesize the NZSP phase from raw material at such a low temperature. According to previous studies [ 29 –31 ], ﬂash events could synthesize ceramic compounds from raw materials very quickly. It is believed that the fast transportation of ions under an electric ﬁeld and the generated joule heating by the current input underlie the ﬂash synthesis process. It is also true, in the present study, that the solid-state reaction to form NZSP was greatly accelerated under a threshold electric ﬁeld. The low temperature and short exposure time during ﬂash sintering were insuﬃcient to cause obvious volatilization of Na and P such that well-crystallized NZSP was obtained ( Fig. 1 d). 
Comparing the ﬂash-sintered NZSP samples under AC and DC electric ﬁelds. The ﬂash-sintered NZSP sample under DC electric ﬁeld showed impurities like Na 2 ZrSi 2 O 7 and m-ZrO 2.  Since the volatilization of Na and P could be neglected at such low temperature and in a short time, as mentioned above, it was expected that the DC electric ﬁeld might induce the loss of some elements or phase segregation. The photographs of the ﬂash-sintered samples under AC and DC electric ﬁeld were observed ( Fig. 2 a, b). In contrast to the sample ﬂash-sintered by an AC electric ﬁeld ( Fig. 2 a), an amount of substance was obviously deposited at the cathode when the sample was sintered under a DC electric ﬁeld ( Fig. 2 b). Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS; Thermoﬁsher, Thermo-NS7) analysis revealed that the deposited substance ( Fig. 2 c, Table S1) was composed of sodium oxides, caused by the accumulation of Na at the cathode during DC-ﬁeld ﬂash sintering leading to a deviation of the NZSP bulk from its stoichiometric composition, and thus to the formation of impurities like m-ZrO 2 and Na 2 ZrSi 2 O 7.  NZSP is a Na ion conductor, which would migrate directionally to the cathode under a DC electric ﬁeld during ﬂash sintering [ 41,  42]  (illustrated in Fig. 2 d). The Pt electrode, which is an electron conductor, could block Na ions at the cathode side, leading to the following electrochemical reaction at the cathode: The Na ion at the cathode is reduced to metallic Na according to reaction (1).  Metallic Na is subsequently oxidized to sodium oxides in air: 
The formed sodium oxides are very likely to precipitate in the cathode side, as observed ( Fig. 2 b, c). During the ﬂash sintering of YSZ, a typical oxygen ion conductor, the oxygen ions are the conductive species. Under the threshold electric ﬁeld, the oxygen ions were generated and driven directionally to the anode [ 35,  36 ]. Since the ﬂash sintering of YSZ is usually performed in air at relatively high temperatures, the sur rounding molecular oxygen in air can participate in the electrode reaction to reach a dynamic balance, with no obvious additional phases appearing during ﬂash sintering [ 35,  36 ]. Unlike YSZ, during the ﬂash sintering of NZSP under a DC electric ﬁeld, no additional Na source participates in the electrode reactions, leading to the precipitation of sodium oxides at cathode and thus to the segregation of NZSP ceramics to form impurities. The AC electric ﬁeld can prevent the deposition of sodium oxides ( Fig. 2 a). Under an AC electric ﬁeld, Na ions experience the rapid reciprocation motion resulting from the constantly changing electric ﬁeld direction ( Fig. 2 e). The alternative change in the electric ﬁeld hinders the formation of Na oxides at the cathode, leading to the formation of highly pure NZSP. 
Based on the above analysis, ﬂash sintering under an AC electric ﬁeld seems a promising method to fabricate NZSP bulks. Although the densiﬁcation mechanism for the ﬂash sintering of NZSP is currently unclear, the ultrafast Na-ion migration under a threshold electric ﬁeld might be dominant during the sintering process, analogous to the YSZ densiﬁcation process [ 34,  37 ]. The relative density of the AC-ﬁeld ﬂash-sintered sample was measured by Archimedes method to be ~91%, compared with the theoretical density of NZSP 3.26 g/cm 3 ). Similarly, the relative density of the pressureless sintered sample at 1200° C for 5h was ca. 95%. The morphologies of the fracture surface of pressureless and ﬂash-sintered samples were observed by scanning electronic microscopy (SEM; Helios G4 CX, FEI, USA) (Fig. S2). The fracture morphology of the pressureless sintered sample showed a dominant intergranular fracture, while the ﬂash-sintered sample showed a trans-granular fracture feature. These observations indicate the ﬂash-sintered sample has greater bonding strength of the grain boundaries than the pressureless sintered sample, which would result in lower grain boundary resistance on Na migration than that for the pressureless sintered sample [ 25,  43 ]. The ion conductivities of the samples sintered by pressureless sintering and ﬂash sintering were measured by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (Supporting information-experimental section). The impedance data and equivalent circuit of conventional sintered and ﬂash-sintered samples at 25° C are shown in Fig. 3 a. The bulk ( σ bulk ), grain boundary ( σ gb ) and total ( σ total ) conductivities were obtained by ﬁtting the Nyquist plots ( Table 2)  [44].  The conductivities of the ﬂash-sintered NZSP sample were higher than those of the pressureless sintered NZSP sample. The impedance data for the conventionally sintered and ﬂash-sintered samples at different temperatures are shown in Fig. 3 b, c. The conductivities at different temperatures should obey the Arrhenius expression, as below [ 25,  42 ]:where σ is the conductivity, σ o is the pre-exponential factor, Ea  is the activation energy, k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature. The natural logarithms of conductivities as a function of the reciprocal of temperature were plotted ( Fig. 3 d-f). The bulk (Ea ,  bulk ), grain boundary (Ea ,  gb ) and total (Ea ,  total ) conductivity activation energies were calculated from the slope of the linear ﬁtted line ( Table 2 ). The Ea ,  total of the conventional and ﬂashsintered samples are 0.38 eV and 0.35 eV, respectively, which are comparable to the literature values. The Ea ,  bulk values were also similar, attributed to the identical mechanisms for ion migration within the grains. However, the Ea ,  gb is signiﬁcantly different, 0.34 eV and 0.29 eV for conventional and ﬂash sintering, respectively, indicating different ion migration process across the grain boundaries, which is further affected by microstructure and grain boundary chemistry. Firstly, the fracture morphology of ﬂash-sintered sample revealed a trans-granular fracture, causing smaller grain boundary resistance. The second reason was related to the concentration of insulating m-ZrO 2,  which enhanced the grain boundary resistance. The higher content of m-ZrO 2 in the conventionally sintered sample would reduce conductivity. In addition, the higher concentration of m-ZrO 2 in conventionally sintered sample reduced the formation of main NZSP phase and had an evident impact on the Ea ,  gb and conductivities. Therefore, the ﬂashsintered sample, even with lower density, showed a lower Ea ,  gb and higher conductivities than conventionally sintered sample. One should note that the ﬂash sintered sample displays a quite small Ea ,  gb value, which seems unusual. Previous studies on ﬂash sintered YSZ reported that the grain boundary thickness of YSZ was reduced and grain boundary conduction was enhanced due to the defects generation under ﬂash sintering condition [ 45 –47 ]. As for the cationic ion conductor, like NZSP, the electric ﬁeld-induced non-equilibrium defects may also have great effects on conduction behavior. This point is needed further investigations. Fig. 4 summarizes the relationship between conductivity and sintering temperature for the NZSP at different conditions [ 14,  18 –21,  48 –50 ]. The room temperature conductivities of NZSP samples fabricated by various processes varied between 10 −4 and 10 −3 S/cm. The primary composites, synthesis paths and sintering methods signiﬁcantly affected the conductivity of NZSP samples. The ﬂashsintered sample at 700° C for 30s revealed a comparable conductivity as conventional SSRS at 1100° C for 6h [48].  The ﬂash sintering parameters could be further optimized to control the microstructure and improve the conductivity. Herein, ﬂash sintering was ﬁrst used to fabricate a NZSP solid electrolyte material. The well-crystallized samples could be obtained at temperatures as low as 700° C within seconds under an electric ﬁeld. However, some impurities (Na 2 ZrSi 2 O 7 and m-ZrO 2 ) were found in the sintered NZSP samples under a DC electric ﬁeld due to the segregation of sodium oxides at cathode side by the electrochemical reactions. The AC electric ﬁeld hindered the deposition of sodium oxides at either electrode side by the rapid reciprocation motion of cations, thereby allowing the ultrafast sintering of highly pure NZSP with a relative high density. The obtained NZSP bulks exhibited a comparable ion conductivity and activation energy to previously reported data. The ﬂash sintering technology opens a window to the synthesis and densiﬁcation of solid electrolytes at low temperatures within seconds, which may be of great importance for the further development of all-solid-state batteries. 