Inorganic solid lithium ion conductors are potential candidates asreplacement for conventional organic electrolytes for safety concerns.
However,achieving a Li-ion conductivity comparable to that in existing liquid electrolytes (>1m Scm−1) remains a challenge in solid-state electrolytes.
One of the approaches to achieve adesirable conductivity is doping of various elements into the lattice framework.
Ourdiscussion on the structure and conductivity of crystalline Li-ion conductors includes description on NASICON (NAtrium Super Ionic CONductor)-type conductors, garnet type conductors; perovskite-type conductors, and LISICON (Lithium Super IonicCONductor)-type conductors.
Moreover, we discuss various strategies currently used toenhance ionic conductivity including theoretical approaches; ultimately optimizing electrolyte/electrode interface and improving cell performance.
In conclusion, LIBs with liquid electrolytes are still providing a large part of thecurrent energy demand.
However, serious safety concerns arise due to the usage of liquidelectrolytes.
Leakage of electrolytes and growth of Li-dendrites caused by contact ofanodes with liquid electrolytes greatly hinder the performance of LIBs.
Devices operatedat elevated temperatures also suffer from electrolyte evaporation while liquid electrolytesare used.
Hence, inorganic SEs with room temperature conductivities of >10−3 S cm−1and wide electrochemical stability windows (6 V vs.Li/Li+) have been intensively studied to develop all-solid-state batteries that can be used for applications with widetemperature range.
Stability of SE/electrode interface is a challenge for facile passage ofLi-ions across the interface.
From this perspective, we have discussed recent published research activities in synthetic methods and possible dopants, and respective effects onthe crystal lattices of NASICON-type, garnet-type, perovskite-type and LISICON-typeSEs.
Doping with isovalent or aliovalent elements and addition of additives into theparent structural frameworks enhance the ionic conductivities of SEs due to theframework expansion and increase of mobile Li-ions.
We have also discussed theinterfacial reactions between SEs and electrodes.
For example, the solid Li-ion conductorLiTi2(PO4)3-based material, which exhibited high ionic conductivity, was chemically unstable with Li metal due to the reduction of Ti4+.
Introduction of a protective layer(LiPON film) between SE and Li metal improved the stability.
Good interfacial contacts between the solid electrolytes and the electrodes can be achieved given the nondeformablenature of the inorganic ceramic SEs.
However, further studies are needed tobetter understand the interfacial processes between solid electrolytes and electrodes.
