In this study, we investigate the roles of chelating agents and composite formers, such as reduced gra-phene oxide (r-GO), on the electrochemical properties of sodium titanium-vanadium phosphate (NVTP) for their ﬁnal application in symmetrical sodium-ion cells. It is observed that NVTP synthesized using citric acid as reducing-cum-chelating agent has better site substitution of Ti as compared to ascorbic acid. X-Ray diffraction results reveal that NVTP crystallizes in the R3c spacegroup (NASICON). EDS-STEM re-sults reveal a homogeneous site substitution of Ti in the material synthesized using citric acid. The material is able to deliver ~46 mAhg-1 at 187.5 mAg-1 (~3C) consistently without fading, and without signiﬁcant speciﬁc capacity changes at lower current rates. To improve its electrochemical performance at higher current rates, composite of NVTP with r-GO is formed in-situ during synthesis. From Hall measurements, it is observed that r-GO increases the electronic conductivity by over one order of magnitude, which allows the composite to sustain up to 10C rate without signiﬁcant drop in speciﬁc capacity. However, the speciﬁc capacity is observed to be lower compared to the ones observed for NVTP without r-GO. Ultimately, a symmetrical full cell is constructed using the best results obtained from the above strategies, which delivers ~40 mAhg-1 at ~3C rate without fading for 100 cycles.
The rising global demands for energy due to increasing popu-lation and the rise in greenhouse gas emissions is driving our attention towards renewable energy generation. The renewable energy generation by solar, wind, etc. is sporadic as it depends on geographic location and environmental factors. Hence, there is need for safe and reliable energy storage facilities worldwide. Until now, the major usage of electrochemical energy storage devices like Li-ion battery was in portable electronics. Since, the commer-cialization of ﬁrst Li-ion battery in 1991 by Sony, there has been a constant rise in research and development of Li-ion batteries to improve its performance. Upcoming advances towards EVs and grid-storage applications demand safe, high-energy & low cost energy storage systems . Till date, several high-energy and high-capacity electrodes like e Li (Ni1/3Co1/3Mn1/3)O2, LiMn2O4, LiFePO4 have been developed, along with breakthroughs in electrolytes, to enable safe and efﬁcient storage of electricity. However, the scarcity and unequal distribution of lithium resources have led to the increase in the cost of the batteries . Hence, current Li-ion battery materials may be insufﬁcient and expensive to satisfy rising energy storage needs. Researchers all over the globe have focused their attention on developing other alternative alkali-ion based systems such as Na-ion, K-ion and Mg-ion batteries for future energy storage applications. A large portion of the research is currently devoted towards Na-ion battery development due to its abundance, cost-effectiveness & chemical properties similar to lithium. However, the commercial applicability of Na-ion batteries is hampered by larger ionic radius of Na+, sluggish ki-netics, and higher reduction potential of Na. Nevertheless, a lot of progress has been made in developing novel electrode materials and electrolytes for Na-ion battery systems. O3 & P2 type transition metal oxides, several types of poly-anionic compounds (phos-phates, ﬂuorophosphates, sulphates, pyrophosphates & carbonophosphates), phosphides, prussian blue analogues, hard-carbons, organic based electrodes, etc. have been studied previ-ously as suitable candidates for Na-ion battery electrode materials . Amongst them, NASICON based electrodes are favorably used as cathodes, due to their good ionic conductivity and negli-gible structural changes during battery operations. The general form of a NASICON-based material is - NaxMM' (XO4)3 (M = V, Ti, Fe or Nb etc.; X= P, or S, x = 0-4). NASICON ma-terials have open 3D framework consisting of lantern-like [MM' (XO4)3] n units, arranged along the c-axis. Each [MM' (XO4)3] n unit consists of 2 [MO6]/[M’O6] octahedra and 3 [XO4] tetrahedra. Such [MM0 (XO4)3] n units are connected by [XO4] units along a-axis, which make it possible for easy movement of Na+ ions across the lattice. The most popular NASICON candidates investigated for use in Na-ion storage are Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) and NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP). Both of these materials crystallize in rhombohedral geometry with R3c space group and exhibit the exchange of Na+ due to presence of two transition metal cations during the charge/discharge processes. NVP shows two plateaus corresponding to 2 redox reactions, (V3+/V2+) at ~1.6 V and (V4+/V3+) at ~3.4 V vs (Na+/Na) when charged. On the other hand, NTP shows 1 redox plateau (Ti4+/Ti3+)at ~2.1 V vs (Na+/Na) when discharged . NVP utilizes almost 100%of its theoretical capacity (~117 mAhg-1), when charged/dis-charged at low & moderate C-rates due to its extremely stable structure, which can be achieved by improving the electronic conductivity. The volume changes during the whole insertion/extraction processes are limited to ~8.2% (for NASICON-based Na3V2(PO4)3), which facilitate high-rate capabilities and long-term cyclability of such structures. These favorable electro-chemical characteristics however do come with their own disad-vantages. Two major drawbacks of NASICON-based materials are poor electronic conductivity and low stability of the materials in ambient atmosphere. These compounds are hygroscopic and tend to form a passivating layer of NaOH on prolonged expo-sure to moist air. Hence, proper precaution should be taken while preparing & storing these compounds. The poor electronic conductivity limits the electrochemical rate-performance of the electrodes. Various approaches like reducing particle size, addition of suitable dopants at appropriate sites, forming in-situ nano-composites with r-GO, CNT, etc., have been explored and reported previously to improve this property.
An intrinsic advantage which NVP provides is that it can be used as a symmetrical cell owing to the presence of 2 plateaus at ~3.4 V and ~1.6 V. Till date only a few such symmetric/bi-functional materials have been explored, with each having their own merits and de-merits. P2eNa0.6 [Cr0.6Ti0.4]O2 & O3e Na0$8Ni0$4Ti0$6O2 layered oxides have been recently reported as symmetric Na-ion electrodes. But these oxides are structurally unstable and undergo some irreversible phase transitions which depend on several factors which include ratio of ionic radii of transition metals, the concentration of Na & transition metals, etc. All these factors are difﬁcult to optimize in-order to achieve high rate capability and long-term cycleability of symmetrical Na-ion bat-teries. One such symmetrical and structurally stable elec-trode material reported fairly recently is NASICON based Na2VTi(PO4)3 (NVTP). Wang et al. demonstrated the work-ing of NVTP in organic electrolytes, showing long-term cycleability. This compound has been reported a few times as a symmet-rical electrode for aqueous Na-ion batteries with one report on improved electrode architecture for efficient energy storage per-formance. The material is iso-structural to both its parent compounds NVP and NTP, and consists of 2 electrochemically active centers i.e. ‘V4+/V3+’ and ‘Ti4+/Ti3+‘. This allows us to construct a symmetrical cell of about 1.2 V. This conﬁguration is suitable for small-scale energy storage applications, and will result in signiﬁ-cant reductions in overall product cost owing to cheap material fabrication process and uniform availability of sodium resources worldwide.In this article, we present a few methodologies on improving the electrochemical performance of NVTP, for its suitable application in symmetrical sodium-ion batteries. We investigated the effect of different chelating agents on the structural and electrochemical properties of NVTP. The chelating agents are typically used to bind different cations together as co-ordination complexes, which can be decomposed further to form solid solutions of several oxides. In several cases, chelating agents can also act as reducing agents to change the oxidation state of the metal-ions involved. In order to overcome the problem of poor electronic conductivity of phosphate-based electrodes, we also investigated the effect of in-situ addition of r-GO on the electronic conductivity, and studied its structural and electrochemical performance. By in-situ adding r-GO sheets during the synthesis of NVTP, one can induce hetero-geneous nucleation of NVTP on the surface of r-GO sheets. Due to surface energy constraints, the r-GO sheets are expected to wrap around the NVTP particles. This wrapping is expected to improve the electronic conductivity of the NVTP by adding an external conduction pathway for electrons to migrate during battery oper-ations. Finally, a full-cell based on the compiled results from the two investigated strategies is constructed and studied. This type of study involving the use of the aforementioned strategies to tune the electrochemical performance of NVTP is being reported for the ﬁrst time, and will be beneﬁcial in integrating this in future energy storage devices.
For the synthesis of NVTP, sodium carbonate (>99.5%), ammo-nium metavanadate (>99%), ammonium dihydrogen phosphate (>98%), citric acid (>99.5%) and titanium (IV) butoxide (>97%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Ascorbic acid (>99%) and Iso-propanol (>99%) were obtained from Alfa Aesar and Merck, respectively. For preparing the Na-ion electrolyte, NaClO4 (>98%) and anhydrous propylene carbonate were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Fluoroethylene carbonate (>98%) was purchased from TCI Chemicals. Graphene oxide powder (GO) was prepared using modiﬁed Hummer’s method.
In a typical experiment, solution A was prepared by adding 3 mmol chelating-cum-reducing agent (citric acid or ascorbic acid), 3 mmol of ammonium metavanadate, 3 mmol of sodium carbonate, and 9 mmol of ammonium dihydrogen phosphate to 50 mL de-ionized water. The solutes and solvents were stirred at 80 °C till all the components become soluble, and precursor solution is ob-tained. Typically, this process takes about 2 h to complete. In a separate beaker, 3 mmol of titanium (IV) butoxide was slowly added to 25 mL of isopropanol and stirred at room temperature for 10 min (Solution B). Solution A was added dropwise to Solution B and stirred at 80 °C until a gel was obtained. This gel was recovered and placed in a tube furnace at 150 °C for 3 h s, followed by annealing at 350 °C for 5 h s and 800 °C for 12 h under Ar atmo-sphere to obtain NVTP powders.To prepare NVTP@r-GO composites, GO powder was dispersed in water ultrasonically with a concentration of 1 mg/mL (The total weight of GO used was 20 mg). This solution was added to Solution A and B prior to gel formation. Upon gel formation, it was recovered and placed in a tube furnace at 150 °C for 3 h s, followed by annealing at 350 °C for 5 h s and 800 °C for 12 h s under Ar + H2 (90:10 vol%) atmosphere to obtain NVTP@r-GO powder. It is to be noted that citric acid was used as the chelating-cum-reducing agent for synthesizing NVTP@r-GO powder.
The crystal structure was determined using X-ray diffraction
(XRD) measurements on Bruker D8-Advance with Cu-Ka Radiation Rietveld reﬁnement of the ob-tained diffraction pattern was performed using MAUD. The morphological and compositional studies of the samples were studied using scanning electron microscopy (Zeiss Merlin Gemini 2), and high resolution transmission electron microscopy (JEOL JEM-2100F). The obtained selected area electron diffraction (SAD) patterns were analyzed using JEMS. EDS compositional map-ping of the individual particles was obtained using scanning-transmission electron microscope (JEOL JEM-2100F). Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy was performed using NICOLET 6700 Fourier transform IR spectrometer (Thermo-Fischer Scienti-ﬁc) in the range 500e4000 cm-1, with the results analyzed using Fityk. Electronic conductivity measurements of NVTP and NVTP@r-GO were performed in a 4-point probe method using Ecopia Hall Effect measurement system (HMS-5300). Raman spectroscopy measurements were performed using Acton SP-2500i (single) spectrograph, which is a part of scanning probe microscopy integrated Raman system (WiTec, Germany) with air cooled CCD detectors. Raman measurements were performed at room tem-perature in backscattering geometry (BSG). The excitation wave-length used was 514.5 nm (Ar-ion laser). The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) studies were done using synchrotron x-ray ra-diation having incident energy of 4.312 keV at INDUS-2 (Beamline-14) Facility. The XPS spectra were recorded with a 15 keV Phoibos 225 HV hemispherical analyzer in a ﬁxed analyzer transmission (FAT) mode. The survey scans and core-level scans were measured using step-size of 0.5 eV and 0.1 eV respectively with pass energy of 150 eV. The obtained spectra were analyzed using CasaXPS Soft-ware. The peaks were ﬁtted using Gaussian-Lorentzian product function and calibration was done by taking C1s = 284.7 eV.
All electrodes were prepared by coating a slurry of ground powder of active material, acetylene black, and polyvinylidene ﬂuoride (PVDF), dissolved in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) sol-vent, onto an aluminium foil. The active material: acetylene black: binder weight ratio was kept as 70:20:10. The weight of active material used in all the electrodes was in the range 2.5e4.5 mg. For making the symmetrical full-cell, weight ratio of anode and cath-ode was kept ~1. The coated electrodes were dried in vacuum at 120 -C overnight to obtain laminates. 15 mm diameter disks were cut from the laminates using a disc cutter for testing. All Na-ion half-cells were prepared in CR2032 coin cells with Na-foil (Sigma-Aldrich) as counter electrode inside an Argon ﬁlled glove box (MBraun Labstar), with H2 and O2 concentrations below 0.5 ppm. 1 M NaClO4, dissolved in propylene carbonate (PC) solvent with 5 wt% ﬂuoroethylene carbonate (FEC) additive, was used as the electrolyte. Whatman glass microﬁber (GF/C) was used as separator. Galvanostatic charge-discharge studies were carried out using BST8-MA (MTI-Corporation) battery tester. Cyclic Voltam-metry measurements were carried out using Gamry potentiostat cum galvanostat (Gamry Inc.) between 1.7 V - 4 V at 0.1 mV s-1. For full cell characterization, weight of the cathode is taken to be 3.5 mg. Galvanostatic charge-discharge for full cell is performed in he voltage window of 0.5e1.7 V. The C-Rates, mentioned hence-forth in the manuscript, are the theoretical time of charge/discharge when the material is cycled at a speciﬁed speciﬁc current. Thus, if the material possesses a theoretical speciﬁc capacity of Q mAhg-1, then cycling at 3C rate corresponds to cycling at a speciﬁc current of 3Q mAg-1. Only in case of full cell, the C-rate is estimated from the experimentally obtained time of charge and discharge i.e. 3C rate implies a charging and discharging time of 20 min.
In order to synthesize sodium titanium vanadium phosphate, the vanadium precursor needs to be reduced to its +3-oxidation state. Furthermore, it is well known that sodium titanium phos-phate and sodium vanadium phosphate are isostructural with a space group R3c, which indicates that a solid solution can be formed between the two structures. Therefore, to synthe-size sodium titanium vanadium phosphate with high levels of pu-rity, a chelating-cum-reducing agent is required. For this purpose, two such chelating-cum-reducing agents are chosen for further studies, namely citric acid and ascorbic acid. Chelating agents play the role of binding metal-ions together as co-ordination complexes, which can be decomposed to obtain the desired solid solutions. The X-ray diffraction patterns of the materials synthesized using the above two chelating-cum-reducing agents are shown is Fig. 1. For the material synthesized using citric acid as chelating-cum-reducing agent (NVTP-Citric), the obtained pattern is indexed to a NASICON framework isostructural with NVP or NTP with a rhom-bohedral unit cell. The experimental patterns match with NVP structure, post suitable site-substitution of Ti in V sites. The diffraction patterns post Rietveld reﬁnement is shown in Sup-porting Information. The ﬁtting quality parameters for NVTP-Citric (Rwp = 9.79% and c2 = 1.71) are within acceptable limits. In the case of the material synthesized using ascorbic acid as chelating-cum-reducing agent (NVTP-Ascorbic), the major phase is indexed to the same NASICON framework found in NVTP-Citric. However, TiO2 and V2O5 impurity phases are also found in NVTP-Ascorbic, which are absent in NVTP-Citric. The lattice parameters of NVTP-Citric and NVTP-Ascorbic obtained after reﬁnement are a = 8.60 Å and c =21.84 Å, and a = 8.57 Å and c = 21.76 Å, respectively. The presence of two impurity phases are also found in NVTP-Ascorbic, which are absent in NVTP-Citric. The lattice parameters of NVTP-Citric and NVTP-Ascorbic obtained after reﬁnement are a = 8.60 Å and c = 21.84 Å, and a = 8.57 Å and c = 21.76 Å, respectively. The presence of two impurity phases V2O5 and TiO2 in NVTP-Ascorbic indicates the poor reducing-cum-chelating prop-erty of ascorbic acid. Typically when citric or ascorbic acid is dis-solved in water, they dissociate and generate citrate and ascorbate anions, respectively. These anions are responsible for the chelating behavior of the two compounds. It is observed that there is a good possibility of forming strong metal-citrate complexes than metal-ascorbate complexes due to the presence of resonating structures in citrate anion, along with directed nature of the co-ordination centers. This results in better chelation of the V and Ti cations by citric acid, resulting in no detectable phase separation. Fig. 2, which shows the elemental distribution map in NVTP particles using STEM, further supports the argument that ascorbic acid has poor reducing-cum-chelating property compared to citric acid. The elemental map for NVTP-Ascorbic shows non-uniform distribution of elements, especially for titanium and vanadium, compared to one obtained with citric acid. The presence of separate Ti and V rich regions in the particles prepared using ascorbic acid as reducing agent supports the results obtained from X-Ray diffraction exper-iments. There is poor mixing of Ti and V in their sites when ascorbic acid is used as chelating-cum-reducing agent.
The Fourier-Transform Infrared (FTIR) analysis of NVTP-Citric and NVTP-Ascorbic are represented in Fig. 3. The obtained FTIR spectrums were de-convoluted using Gaussian distribution for qualitative peak analysis. The peaks at ~3420 cm-1 and 1614 cm-1 represent stretching vibrations of eOH and asymmetric stretching of eCOOH groups. The terminal PO34- stretching vibrations for NVTP-Citric and NVTP-Ascorbic are observed at 1150-1250 cm-1. The presence of a peak centered about 630 cm-1 indicates the presence of V3+-O2-/Ti4+-O2- vibrations. A shifted Ti4+-O2-/V5+-O2-vibration is observed for NVTP-Ascorbic at ~953 cm-1. The Ti4+-O2-vibration in NVTP-citric is hidden due to strong PeO vibration, and is observed with slight distortion observed at about 1005 cm-1. The shifting of Ti4+-O2- and strong appearance of V5+-O2- in NVTP-Ascorbic further conﬁrms the presence of two impurity phases (V2O5 and TiO2). The PeO vibrations present in PO4- are found at 560 cm-1 and 1030 cm-1 for NVTP-Citric. The PeO vibrations in NVTP-Ascorbic are slightly shifted to higher energies due to pres-ence of V5+-O2-, and are found at ~560 cm-1 and 1075 cm-1. Additionally, the weak presence of symmetric OeCeO vibration is observed in the range 2300e2400 cm-1.Fig. 4 represent the electrochemical studies carried out on NVTP-Citric and NVTP-Ascorbic electrode materials. The electro-chemical performance of NVTP-Citric and NVTP-Ascorbic is analyzed by performing galvanostatic charge-discharge in half-cell conﬁguration between 1.5 and 4.5 V, at speciﬁc current rate of 110 mAg-1. During the 1st charge of NVTP-Citric electrodes, ~1 Na+ ion de-intercalate from its site at ~3.4 V vs (Na+/Na), thereby delivering a speciﬁc capacity of ~62.5 mAhg-1. In the following discharge process, >2Na+ ions are intercalated into the rhombo-hedral structure from electrochemical reactions corresponding to V4+/V3+ (~3.4 V), Ti4+/Ti3+ (~2.1 V) and V3+/V2+ (~1.6 V) vs (Na+/Na), thereby delivering a speciﬁc capacity of ~130 mAhg-1. In the subsequent charge/discharge cycles these Na+ ions are shuttled within the NASICON Framework. However, we see a signiﬁcant drop in speciﬁc capacity for NVTP-Ascorbic, which is due to the presence of higher number of electrochemically inactive sites resulting from poor site mixing of Ti and V in the NVTP structure. It is observed, however, that the coulombic efﬁciency of NVTP-Ascorbic is higher than that for NVTP-Citric. In general, NASICON frameworks are known to exhibit low coulombic efﬁciency due to several factors such as presence of kinetic barriers, polarization effects from the redox reaction activation, etc. In case of NVTP-Ascorbic and NVTP-Citric, both are cycled at the same speciﬁc current i.e. 110 mAg-1. Since the speciﬁc capacity of NVTP-Ascorbic is lower than that of NVTP-Citric, it is essentially cycled at higher C-Rate. Therefore, the processes responsible for the kinetic barriers in NVTP-Ascorbic are essentially bypassed, with only the reversible and fast processes active during cycling. This will lead to higher coulombic efﬁciency. Improved coulombic efﬁciencies at higher C-rates has also been reported in the literature. We have also attempted to investigate, if there are any structural aspects in both the NVTP that led to different coulombic efﬁciencies. In NASICON based structures, Na-ion migration takes place through intra Na layers where diffusion occurs through large spaces of hexagonal bottlenecks. The geometry of this bottleneck can be approximated to represent an ellipsoid. If the eccentricity of this approximated ellipsoid is higher, then the kinetic barriers will be created due to increased barrier energy from the shortened minor axis with respect to major axis. This will hamper the migration of Na-ions during operation. Based on the calculations presented in support-ing information, it is observed that the eccentricity for NVTP-Citric is slightly higher than that for NVTP-Ascorbic. Therefore, coulombic efﬁciency is higher for NVTP-Ascorbic as compared to NVTP-Citric due to few structural constraints.
The results discussed in the above sections are used as a plat-form to further improve the electrochemical performance of NVTP-Citric as an electrode for use in symmetrical Na-ion batteries. As mentioned earlier, one of the main problems of NASICON phosphate-based materials is poor electronic conductivity due to presence of M-O-P bonds. This leads to poor rate performance and cycleability of the electrode material. In order to mitigate this problem, we propose NVTP@r-GO nanocomposite in the form of a sandwich structure (NVTP particles wrapped within the r-GO sheets), wherein the continuous network of r-GO sheets over the NVTP particles is expected to provide good electronic conductivity . For in-situ composite formation with r-GO, it is expected that the NVTP particles will nucleate over GO surface through hetero-geneous nucleation. When the GO sheets are placed under a reducing atmosphere such as ArgoneHydrogen gas mixture at elevated temperature, they will be reduced to r-GO. During this process, r-GO sheets will wrap around the NVTP particles due to surface energy considerations. However, complete wrapping may or may not occur in certain regions since grain growth of NVTP will also take place simultaneously. Large NVTP particles may not be effectively wrapped by r-GO sheets. The wrapping will still be energetically favorable as it will reduce the surface energy of the r-GO sheets. Due to the heterogeneous nucleation of NVTP over GO sheets, the contact between the r-GO and the NVTP particles will deﬁnitely be established. The synthesized NVTP@r-GO is charac-terized using x-ray diffraction, FTIR and Raman spectroscopy to obtain its structural information. In Fig. 5(a), reﬁned x-ray diffrac-tion pattern is shown which has additional impurity peaks, such as at ~23-. The impurity is identiﬁed to be VP2O7, which might have formed due to heterogeneous nucleation process. However, the weight fraction of this impurity phase is less than 5%. The major phase in the x-ray diffractogram matches perfectly with the NASICON NVTP structure. The electronic conductivity of the NVTP-Citric and NVTP@r-GO pellets are measured by 4-point probe method at room temperature using Ag contacts. The conductivity values are shown in Fig. 5(b). Detailed results are represented in Table S3. The s values obtained for NVTP-Citric and NVTP@r-GO are ~10-5 S/cm and ~2.8 x 10-4 S/cm, respectively. This shows that the addition of r-GO increases electrical conductivity by over one order of magnitude, which in turn should enhance its electrochemical
performance. The infrared and Raman spectrum, shown in Fig. 5 (c) and (d), indicates the presence of stretching vibrations of eOH and eCOOH at ~3416, 3163 cm-1 and 1614 cm-1. The presence of two distinct eOH vibrations are possibly due to presence of different energies of terminal functional groups on r-GO and NVTP-Citric. Presence of terminal PO4- stretching vibrations can be found in the region 1150-1250 cm-1. The vibrations at ~630 cm-1 can be assigned to V3+-O2-/Ti4+-O2-. The PeO vibration can be detected at ~1048 cm-1 and ~567 cm-1. The presence of additional vibration at ~940 cm-1 can be assigned to V5+-O2-. In the obtained Raman spectrum, we see the presence of VeO and TieO vibrations at ~315 cm-1 and ~340 cm-1. (2A1g + 2Eg) symmetric bending vi-bration is observed at ~435 cm-1, and (A1g + 3Eg) antisymmetric bending vibration is observed at ~542 cm-1. Symmetric stretching vibration (A1g + Eg) is obtained at ~986 cm-1, and the anti-symmetric stretching vibration (A1g + 3Eg) is seen at ~1081 cm-1. The presence of D-band (disorder-induced defect band) is observed at ~1363 cm-1. The E2g-band (G-band), present due to in-plane vibrations of sp2 carbons in graphite lattice, is observed at ~1600 cm-1.ID/IG for NVTP@r-GO is close to 1, which is greater than the ID/IG of pristine GO (Fig. S1.) This indicates a reduction in the in-plane vibrations and presence of a dense conductive structure. This should result in signiﬁcant improvement in conductivity of NVTP@r-GO nanocomposite.The microstructural analysis for NVTP-Citric and NVTP@r-GO, which is performed using transmission electron microscopy, is shown in Fig. 6(a)e(b). The particles are seen to lack any distinct morphology, which is due to the lower symmetry for rhombohedral lattice system. The scanning electron micrographs of NVTP-Citric and NVTP@r-GO, shown in Fig. S10, also reveal the absence of a ﬁxed morphology for the NVTP-Citric particles. The particle size distribution measured from SEM micrographs indicates that the majority of the particles have their size in the range of 0.1e0.2 mm (Supporting Information). The lattice fringes, obtained at higher magniﬁcations, are identiﬁed by taking the FFT spectrum of the image and indexing the spots obtained based on the results from SAD analysis (presented in Fig. S8). The two planes, whose lattice fringes are identiﬁed, are (1 10) and (2 1 1). The fringe spacing is measured using Image J, and is found to be consistent with the values obtained from the x-ray diffraction results (4.3 Å for (1 10) and 2.8 Å for (2 1 1). When the precursor mixture is mixed with GO, which is subsequently reduced to obtain NVTP@r-GO com-posites, we observe that there are regions where r-GO sheets have wrapped around the NVTP-Citric particles, as shown in Fig. 6(c) and (d). This wrapping is responsible for the signiﬁcant electronic conductivity improvement for the composite compared to bare NVTP-Citric particles. However, the reducing environment also affected the NVTP particles which are in-situ formed. As shown in Fig. 7(b), the XPS measurements reveal that the NVTP-Citric formed under inert atmosphere contains the titanium in its +4-oxidation state. On the other hand, when NVTP@r-GO composite is formed under a reducing environment, the titanium is present in both +3 and + 4 oxidation state, as shown in Fig. 7(d). The vanadium oxidation state remains unchanged at +3 in both the cases, as shown in Fig. 7(a) and (c). This is due to the fact that V3+/V2+ has a lower standard reduction potential as compared to Ti4+/Ti3+, which makes it difﬁcult to reduce V3+ to V2+. The oxygen 1s spectrum on the other hand shows a peak splitting for NVTP@r-GO due to the presence of various oxygen containing groups in r-GO, whose values are different from the ones reported for NVP based NASICON.In order to study the electrochemical performance of NVTP-Citric and NVTP@r-GO materials, a cycleability-cum-rate capa-bility test is carried out for both NVTP-Citric and NVTP@r-GO electrodes, as cathode and anode separately with the same testing protocol. A preliminary investigation is performed for both the materials in the complete potential window of 1.5Ve4.0 V, results of which are presented in Fig. S3 (Supporting Information). It is observed that there are two plateaus during each charging and discharging cycles in the complete potential window of 1.5Ve4.0 V. The plateau at ~2.1 V corresponds to the redox reaction of Ti4+/Ti3+, and the one at ~3.4 V depicts the redox reaction of V4+/V3+. We also see a small polarization of ~0.1 V between the charge and discharge reactions. Fig. S4 shows the cyclic voltammogram of NVTP-Citric electrode between 1.7 V and 4.0 V, which reveals the presence of two peaks during charging of electrode at ~2.2 V and ~3.4 V along with two peaks in discharge redox reactions at ~1.9 V and ~3.3 V (Supporting Information). This is in accordance with the results from the charge-discharge proﬁles in Fig. S2. In addition to it, we see a small hump in discharge reaction of Ti4+/Ti3+ at ~2.1 V. We believe this is due to the presence of a different phase during the ﬁrst insertion of Na+ at ~2.1 V, which is subsequently transformed to Na4-xVTi (PO4)3 at the end of discharge. However, all the Na+ is extracted from 1 site only during charging. This is represented by only one peak in cyclic voltammogram. This additional feature is not witnessed in charge-discharge curves due to sloping nature of the discharge proﬁle between 1.9V and 2.2 V. The theoretical ca-pacity as calculated from Faraday’s 1st law for both cathode and anode portions of the voltage window is ~62.5 mAhg-1. The NVTP-Citric exhibits ~100% coulombic efﬁciency in both anodic and cathode voltage windows. This enables us to construct a stable symmetrical full cell.Fig. 8 represents the cycleability-cum-rate capability and charge proﬁles in the cathodic voltage window of 2.5Ve4.0 V for NVTP-Citric and NVTP@r-GO. For both NVTP-Citric and NVTP@r-GO electrodes, the galvanostatic charge-discharge tests are conducted for a total of 305 cycles with different C-rates. The break-up of 305 cycles is as follows: (Region A) - 5 cycles each at 0.1C, 0.2C, and 0.5C followed by 10 cycles each at 1C and 2C, respectively; (Region B) -200 cycles at 3C; (Region C) - 10 cycles each at 5C and 10C, respectively; (Region D) - 50 cycles at 0.2C. NVTP-Citric electrode utilizes the electrochemical redox reaction of V4+/V3+ taking place at ~3.4 V in this voltage range, which leads to extraction of ~1 Na+ ion from the crystal structure. NVTP-Citric exhibits excellent rate capability performance due to its high ionic conductivity, resulting in speciﬁc capacities of ~46 mAhg-1 and ~36 mAhg-1 at 3C and 10C current rate, respectively. In-situ addition of r-GO to NVTP-Citric further increases the rate performance, as the effective drop in the speciﬁc capacities with increasing speciﬁc current is reduced signiﬁcantly. However, this improvement comes with a decrease in the overall speciﬁc capacity. This might be due to the presence of few inactive phases in the composite, whose presence is indicated by both XRD and XPS results in Figs. 5 and 7. Also, we have included the mass of the r-GO in the active material, which is technically an inactive phase in the composite within the voltage window of testing. We have included this mass as r-GO is a part of the composite under study, and it is scientiﬁcally incorrect to remove it. The increase in rate performance of NVTP@r-GO can be attributed to increase in electronic conductivity, which leads to efﬁcient electron movement during electrochemical reactions.Fig. 9 displays cycleability-cum-rate capability performance and discharge curves in the anodic voltage window of 1.7 Ve2.5 V for NVTP-Citric and NVTP@r-GO. The galvanostatic charge-discharge tests are performed with the same current rates as used for cathodic voltage window, for a total of 305 cycles. The break-up for the cycles is same as that in the cathodic voltage window test. The electrochemical redox corresponding to Ti4+/Ti3+ is found at ~2.1 V, leading to insertion/extraction of 1 Na+ ion. NVTP-Citric electrode, as an anode, shows speciﬁc capacities of ~48 mAhg-1 and ~30 mAhg-1 at 3C and 10C rates, respectively. The effect of in-situ r-GO addition is profound than the one observed in the cathodic voltage window. NVTP@r-GO electrodes exhibit speciﬁc capacities of ~40 mAhg-1 and ~30 mAhg-1 at 3C and 10C current rates, respectively. NVTP@r-GO electrodes show lower overall speciﬁc capacity, but improve the performance at higher current rates signiﬁcantly. The % speciﬁc capacity drop from 1C to 10C for NVTP-Citric and NVTP@r-GO anodes is ~43% and ~23%, respectively. The %speciﬁc capacity drop from 1C to 10C for NVTP-Citric and NVTP@r-GO cathodes is ~23% and ~13.2% respectively. It is observed that at high current rates, the plateau splits into two for NVTP@r-GO. The XPS results indicated that in this scenario, titanium was present in both +3 and + 4 oxidation state. Therefore, addition of r-GO has created few inhomogeneities at the Ti substituted sites. These in-homogeneities are responsible for creating kinetic barriers in NVTP@r-GO, which manifest as varying activation overpotential at higher current rates. These inhomogeneities due addition of r-GO may be present at the vanadium sites as well, but the effect was not observed from the rate capability curves in Fig. 8. This shows that the effect of r-GO addition on Ti4+/Ti3+ redox reaction is more pronounced than that on V4+/V3+ reaction.In order to construct the symmetrical full cell, NVTP-Citric is chosen as cathode, and NVTP@r-GO as anode. This is because one of the important properties which the anode should possess in a full cell is high rate capability. This is to ensure that the charge-discharge proﬁles of the full cell are decided by cathode at higher current rates, without any signiﬁcant deviation from the calculated ones. Also, the higher rate capability of the anode will ensure that there is no dendrite formation in the anode at high current rates. We have previously shown that the effect of r-GO addition is not pronounced in the cathodic voltage window, while hampering the overall speciﬁc capacity. Therefore, it is rational to choose NVTP-Citric as cathode in the full cell. Fig. 10 represents full cell con-structed between NVTP-Citric cathode and NVTP@r-GO anode. The electrochemical performance of this full cell is tested by galvano-static charge-discharge at 3C-rate for 100 cycles. This full-cell dis-plays a capacity of ~40 mAhg-1 with near 100% coulombic efﬁciency, and a 2% drop in capacity after 100 cycles. The full cell shows good cycling stability at high current rate of 3C.
In conclusion, two different strategies are investigated towards the improvement of Sodium Titanium Vanadium Phosphate (NVTP) based materials for symmetrical sodium-ion batteries. It is observed that chelating agents play an important role in effective substitution of Ti in V sites. Based on the results obtained by studying the effect of two chelating agents, it is concluded that citric acid is a better reducing-cum-chelating agent as compared to ascorbic acid during the synthesis of NVTP particles. Citrate anions are stronger chelating agents as compared to ascorbate anions, which results in effective binding of Ti and V ions as co-ordination complexes. This results in homogenous distribution of titanium and vanadium in their respective atomic sites in NVTP and improves the phase purity of the ﬁnal product, which in turn imparts a higher speciﬁc capacity. One of the disadvantages of the NASICON-based materials is its poor electronic conductivity, which is mitigated by addition of r-GO in NVTP. The electronic conductivity is improved by one order of magnitude by addition of r-GO, which drastically improves the electrochemical performance of NVTP at current rates>3C. Formation of the in-situ composite with r-GO results in few impurities and inhomogeneity in the NVTP, which slightly lowers its overall speciﬁc capacity. Addition of r-GO is found to have pro-found impact on the reversible electrochemistry of Ti4+/Ti3+ than on V4+/V3+, which makes the composite suitable for use as anode in symmetrical sodium-ion battery. Finally, a symmetrical full cell is constructed with NVTP without the reduced graphene oxide as cathode, and NVTP@r-GO composite as anode. This full cell delivers a capacity of ~40 mAhg-1 at 3C rate, without any signiﬁcant ca-pacity drop for 100 cycles.