Structural, thermal and electrical transport in PEO-LiCF3SO3 solid polymer electrolyte dispersed with Li+-NASICON crystallites has been assessed.
Fine submicron crystallites of LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) were added in appropriateamount during solution casting of the polymer films.
Thus the compositions 95[PEO1 − x-LTPx]-5LiCF3SO3 have been synthesized for a wide range of LTP content (x=0–0.9).
Electrical conductivity increaseswith LTP content monotonically.
Highest room temperature conductivity of ~7 ×10−5 Ω−1 cm−1 has beenobtained for the sample with x=0.9 of LTP which is ~43 times higher than that of the sample with no LTPcontent.
FE-SEM investigations performed on pellets with higher LTP content suggest uniform distribution of LTPparticles in the polymer matrix.
Preliminary investigations reveal that mechanism of electrical transport in SPELTPhybrid composites is greatly influenced by LTP content.
The electrical conductivity shows a significant rise with LTP content.
It appears that Li+ ions do move through Li+-NASICON grainsparticularly for large content due to (i) their volume fraction in thepolymer matrix and (ii) well connected LTP-polymer pathways.
Therefore, these filler particles act like “Li+ ion conductivity facilitators”and possibly also suppress/discourage anion electricaltransport, provided their concentration is high and dispersion ishomogenous.
In this limited temperature range, the mechanism of electricaltransport appears to be complex in nature, it is expected that forhigh LTP content the ions move predominantly through the Li+-NASICON grains, and for low LTP content through the polymermatrix.
More sophisticated experiments in wider temperature rangeand particle size variation are required to understand the overallionic transport.
The chemistry of the composite formation (uniformity of dispersion,homogeneity, complexation etc.) needs further systematic investigations.
Nevertheless, from present study it may be suggestedthat dispersion does not lead to new phase formation due to chemicalreaction between polymer and LTP.
Hybrid electrolyte exhibits thermal stability in appreciably widerange of temperature.
Efforts are on to understand the electricaltransport in wide temperature range.
