Solid electrolytes possessing sufficient ionic conductivity and electrochemical stability are urgently needed for thefabrication of all-solid-state Li-ion batteries (LIBs).
In this study, we focus on a solid-state oxide electrolyte LiZr2(PO4)3 (LZP),which has NASICON structure and electrochemically stable Zr4+ ions.
Using density functional theory (DFT) to calculate the electrochemicalwindow of LZP, we find that it is unstable against Li metal, in accordance with our experimental results.
The Li-iontransport is investigated using first-principles molecular dynamics (FPMD) simulations.
The calculated Li-ion conductivity at roomtemperature (5.0 × 10-6 S/cm) and the activation energy for Li-ion diffusion (0.43 eV) are in fair agreement with experimental results.
The mechanism of Li-ion conduction in LZP is revealed by analyzing the Li-ion trajectories in the FPMD simulations.
It isfound that each Li ion migrates between 6b sites as it is pushed out or repelled by other Li ions around these 6b sites.
Hence, thehigh Li-ion conductivity is attributed to a migration mechanism driven by Frenkel-like defect.
The Li-ion battery (LIB) is one of the most popular types ofrechargeable batteries with high energy density, long cyclelife, and good safety.
LIBs have been widely used for electricvehicles, smartphones, laptops, and so on.
At present, theprevailing electrolytes for LIBs are organic liquid solvents,such as dimethy carbonate and ethylene carbonate.
However,these electrolytes are at risk of liquid leakage, inflammation,and/or explosion caused by short circuit.
The electrochemical stability and Li-ion conductivity ofNASICON-type LZP solid electrolyte are investigated by DFTcalculations.
For the former, we probe the reactivity of LZPwith Li metal through convex-hull creation and GA technique.
From the analysis of the convex polytope in five dimensions(four elements and energy), we reveal that LZP is thermodynamicallystable because it is one of the vertices of our convex-hull.
The result predicted the electrochemical window ofLZP to be 2.20–4.14 V vs.Li metal.
Indeed, our experiment shows LZP reacts with molten Li, verifying our computationalresults.
The estimated Li intercalation voltage of LZP is positive,therefore the Li intercalation mechanism is also plausible.
Since the intercalation reaction may occur even at room temperature,we conclude that LZP is unstable against Li metal.
Thus, further modification of LZP, such as controlling itscomposition, is required to suppress the reaction with Li metal.
The Li-ion conductivity at room temperature and diffusionactivation energy were estimated using DFT-based FPMDcalculations.
The results indicate moderate Li-ion conductivityand activation energy of LZP, which are also in fair agreementwith experimental results from earlier studies.
The Li-iontrace in our FPMD simulations reveals the three-dimensionalconduction pathway of Li ions between 6b sites.
Furthermore,the SDF calculation allows a more detailed analysis of the Li-ion conduction mechanism in LZP.
Li ions migrate whilepushing out or being repelled by other Li ions around 6b sites,and it is remarkable that two and more Li ions could existsimultaneously around the same 6b site.
For the first time, the present paper clarified the electrochemicalwindow and ionic conduction mechanism for LZP atthe atomic level.
These results would benefit the design ofLZP-related compounds.
