The electrochemical property of solid electrolyte plays a key role in stabilizing and enhancing the performance of all solid Li-ion battery, which means numerous effort is necessitated toexplore and design better solid electrolytes.
In this context, density functional theory calculations(DFT) were employed to investigate the electronic structures and ionic transport properties of NASICON MTi2(PO4)3 (M = Li, Na) materials aiming to elucidate the fast-ionic conductivity mechanism.
The calculation results demonstrated that during the M ion migration, the Li/Na ionsexhibit in both vacancy assisted and interstitial hopping, while the interstitial Li/Na diffusion with activation energies of 0.25 eV for Li and 0.49 eV for Na, is the kinetically favorable transportmechanism in their thermo-dynamically equilibrated configurations.
However, the appearance of theinterstitial M ion is strongly related to the ionic defect states and temperature, which indicates in realcondition, two kinds of diffusion mechanism exhibit synergistic effect on the ion transport to realizethe fast ion conducting in MTi2(PO4)3 (M = Li, Na) materials.
In summary, we perform the theoretical investigation on the fundamental knowledges of theionic transport properties in NASICON MTi2(PO4)3 (M = Li, Na) structures.
The calculated results demonstrate a larger c axis of NaTi2(PO4)3 with respect to that of LiTi2(PO4)3, and almost the sameTi-O and P-O bond lengths in two systems.
Structural analysis indicates comparing with Li ion conducting in LiTi2(PO4)3 solid electrolyte, the smaller bottleneck in NaTi2(PO4)3 which obviously hinders the movement of Na in NaTi2(PO4)3 making it more suitable for electrode materials forNa-ion battery.
For ionic transport properties, two fundamental mechanisms, vacancy-assisted andinterstitial diffusions, are examined where the latter one has lower ionic conducting activation energy.
Comparing with the proposed bottleneck in ionic migration pathway, the local coordinationenvironment around the middle point seems to be more important to determine the Li/Na ionic fasttransport properties that could be further structurally optimized to enhance the ionic conductivity.
The lowest vacancy diffusion barrier is 0.42 eV for LiTi2(PO4)3 and 0.58 eV for NaTi2(PO4)3,while the diffusion activation energy is 0.25 eV for interstitial Li ion in LiTi2(PO4)3 and 0.49 eV forinterstitial Na ion in NaTi2(PO4)3. Then the Li ion diffusion coefficient derived from the activationenergy validates our simulation results and confirms our understanding on the ionic transportproperties.
From the activation energy point of view, interstitial ionic diffusion is much easier thanvacancy assisted diffusion in MTi2(PO4)3 (M = Li, Na) materials.
However, the interstitial diffusion process will probably introduce the collective movement of the ions between the interstitial andregular 6b sites.
A diffusion process with mixed-mechanism is likely expected, while thismixed-mechanism is to be decided by temperature, formation energies of vacant and interstitial ions,and the concentration of diffusion carriers at different type, etc.
These new findings on ionic migration deepen the comprehension on structure fundamentals offast-ion behavior in NASICON materials, which will benefit the design of solid electrolytes withhigher stability and better performance for all-solid batteries.
 