During the last several decades, research into bioceramic coatings for medical implantshas emerged as a hot topic among materials scientists and clinical practitioners alike.
In particular,today, calcium phosphate-based bioceramic materials are ubiquitously used in clinical applicationsto coat the stems of metallic endoprosthetic hips as well as the surfaces of dental root implants.
Such implants frequently consist of titanium alloys, CoCrMo alloy, or austenitic surgical stainlesssteels, and aim at replacing lost body parts or restoring functions to diseased or damaged tissuesof the human body.
In addition, besides such inherently corrosion-resistant metals, increasingly,biodegradable metals such as magnesium alloys are being researched for osseosynthetic devicesand coronary stents both of which are intended to remain in the human body for only a short time.
Biocompatible coatings provide not only vital biological functions by supporting osseoconductivitybut may serve also to protect the metallic parts of implants from corrosion in the aggressive metabolicenvironment.
Moreover, the essential properties of hydroxylapatite-based bioceramic coatingsincluding their in vitro alteration in contact with simulated body fluids will be addressed in thiscurrent review paper.
In addition, a paradigmatic shift is suggested towards the developmentof transition metal-substituted calcium hexa-orthophosphates with the NaSiCON (Na superionicconductor) structure to be used for implant coatings with superior degradation resistance in thecorrosive body environment and with pronounced ionic conductivity that might be utilized in noveldevices for electrical bone growth stimulation.
The search for novel bioceramics together with the work for improvement of existing bioceramics,including osseoconductive hydroxylapatite coatings for arthroplasty uses, take on a particularlysignificant role as bone stands as the primary organ requiring surgical intervention with millions ofclinical cases per year worldwide.
Hence, the socio-economic implications linked to the developmentof efficient bone substitutes are of dramatic importance and act as a powerful driving force for thedevelopment of new, more efficient and reliable, and less expensive materials as well as improvedmanufacturing technologies.
Consequently, the quest for osseoconductive coatings withimproved adhesive and cohesive strength, prolonged lifetime, increased reliability, and better osseoconductiveand corrosion-resistant functionality is high up on the agenda of worldwide research and development.
However, the limited stability of hydroxylapatite and its thermal decomposition products in thebody environment call for only sparingly soluble materials or hydroxylapatite-based compositeswith increased in vivo resorption resistance.
Ceramic materials with higher stability against in vivoresorption include, for example, Ca(Ti,Zr) hexaorthophosphates with a NaSiCON (Na SuperionicConductor) structure with much improved mechanical and chemical stability as well as ionicconductivity.
Such coatings show also reasonable osseoconductivity as confirmed by in vivo implantbehavior in animal models.
Hence, it is suggested that attention should be shifted to thisnovel class of bioceramics for the coating of medical implants.
Such a paradigmatic shift requires strictprotocols for synthesis of the ceramic material as well as tight control of the parameters governingthe deposition process.
