The nanostructured Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) cathodematerial has been synthesized using the sol-gel route for differentmolar fractions of citric acid as a carbon source during thesynthesis.
The nanostructured NVP as cores with carbonic shellstructures are fabricated with two different citric acid molarratios.
The thermal treatment has been optimized to convertthe amorphous carbon shell into graphitic carbon to realizethe better electrical conductivity and thus effective electrontransfer during the electrochemical charge transfer process.
The X-ray diffraction measurements confirmed the rhombohedralcrystallographic phase (space group R-3c) with averagecrystallite size ~28 ± 5 nm.
The coin cells are assembled in ahybrid rechargeable electrochemical cell configuration withlithium as a counter electrode and LiPF6-EC:DEC:DMC(1:1:1 ratio) as the electrolyte.
The electrochemical charge/discharge measurements are carried out at C/10 and C/20 ratesand themeasured specific capacities are 80 and 120mAhg−1 forsamples with lower and higher citric acid molar ratios, respectively.
The studies suggest that NVP can be used as an effectivecathode material in hybrid electrochemical cells, and a higherconcentration of citric acid may result in the effective carbonicshell for optimal electron transfer and thus enhanced electrochemicalperformance.
The phase pure carbon-coated Na3V2(PO4)3 nanostructuredmaterials have been synthesized successfully with differentcarbon fractions using the sol-gel route.
The structural measurementssubstantiate the rhombohedral crystallographicphase with R-3c space group.
The synthesized phase purematerials are porous in nature due to the carbonic shell structures, which is useful for facilitating the ionic transportacross the electrode materials.
The cyclic voltammetry measurementssuggest that the material can be used as a cathodematerial in hybrid battery systems, with good cyclic reversibility.
The electrochemical charge/discharge measurementssuggest that material with higher carbon content may providethe enhanced ~115 mAhg−1 specific capacity, close to thetheoretically predicted capacity in hybrid electrochemical configurations.
These studies propose that effective carbon coatingis essential to achieve the desired electrochemicalperformance.
