The development of safe, reliable, yet economical energy storage has been reemphasized with recent incidents involving the explosion and subsequentrecall of lithium-ion batteries.
The organic liquid electrolyte used in theconventional lithium-ion battery can potentially act as a fuel for combustionin a thermal-runaway reaction, and hence an alternative with a significantlyreduced flammability must be sought.
All-solid-state batteries have thepotential to meet safety and reliability requirements with the possibility ofincreasing the volumetric energy density of the system, making these a promisingcandidate for the development of the next generation of energy storage.
Moreover, the sodium-ion battery exhibits a better cost-efficiency without significantly compromising the energy density, making the combination of thesodium chemistry with the solid electrolyte an attractive choice for safe andeconomical energy storage.
Here, a general background on the recent developmentof ceramic and glass-ceramic sodium-ion-conducting electrolytesis provided with regard to oxide-, sulfide-, and hydride-based electrolytes.
The ionic conductivity, chemical stability, and mechanical properties of thesodium-based solid electrolyte are discussed, which is followed by a perspectiveon future developments in the field.
The development of Na-ion-conducting solid electrolyte hasbeen briefly summarized here.
Since the discovery of β-alumina, which led to widespread research on solid-state electrolytes, theresearch efforts have been mainly focused on further increasing the ion conductivity and processability.
In order to increase the conductivity, the following approaches have mainly been undertaken;the substitution/addition of dopants to modify the concentrationof mobile ions and vacancies and the morphology controlto remove the grain-boundary resistance.
Similarly, an improved process ability of solid-state electrolyte has been achieved throughthe substitution of cations and anions, which induces a changein bond energies, allowing stability on exposure to the ambientair and the elastic modulus to be modified for an improvedmechanical property.
While anion substitution is predicted to bemore effective in improving the properties of interest, there isstill limited research on the approach probably due to the difficultyin the synthesis.
More experimental attempts to rationallytune the anion substitutions are expected in the future.
In addition to tuning the existing structure of Na-ion solidelectrolytes, investigation into new structures of Na-ion solid electrolyte with high ion conductivity is crucial for future research.
An experimental and a theoretical investigation aidedby a computational analysis would be essential in facilitatingthe survey of an extensive list of potential candidates for solidelectrolyte.
Furthermore, while outside the scope here, theinterfacial reaction driven by the components of the solid electrolyteand that of the active material composite must be carefully considered for constructing sodium all-solid-state batterywith good electrochemical performance.
