 The use of good ionic conductors is a key point in various battery technologies such as Li-air Lithium-Sulfur (Li-S) and All-Solid-State batteries.
The determination of the conduction properties as well as the structure infunction of temperature and their electrochemical stability are paramount.
At the same time, the manufacturing process of these solid electrolytes must be simplified in order to foster the emergence of these technologies.
Inthis context, NASICON-type solid electrolytes LiZr2(PO4)3 (LZP) and Li1.2Zr1.9Ca0.1(PO4)3 (LCZP) were synthetizedby a new sol-gel method to simplify the synthesis process compared to the solid-state reaction and to reducethe synthesis temperature from 1200 °C to 1100 °C.
The influence of Ca-doping on crystal structure and transport properties was studied in function of temperature and for the first time the electrochemical stability determined.
A method, the Phase Inflection Detection (PID), was developed to better determine the transport properties extracted from Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy.
The ionic conductivity of LCZP is greater than that of LZP by about 2 decades at room temperature due to the stabilization of the high temperature phase at roomtemperature by Ca-doping, an increase in the number of lithium mobile ions and a better compactness comparedwith LZP.
The impact of sintering temperature and grain boundaries on transport properties is clearly demonstratedand must be taken into account in the future studies of solid electrolytes.
The LCZP material is not stablebelow 0.6 V vs.Li+/Li.
It thus presents one of the best electrochemical stabilities, making it a potential candidatefor various battery technologies.
The room-temperature rhombohedral NASICON-type compoundsLiZr2(PO4)3 and Li1.2Zr1.9Ca0.1(PO4)3 were successfully prepared by asol-gel approach and sintered at 700 °C and 1200 °C by spark plasmasintering.
The as-prepared α′-LiZr2(PO4)3 material undergoes phasetransition to the α-LiZr2(PO4)3 phase in the temperature range 50–70 °Cand displays a total ionic conductivity of 2.7 × 10−9 S cm−1 at RT.
The specificionic conductivity (grains) of Li1.2Zr1.9Ca0.1(PO4)3 is superior to that ofLiZr2(PO4)3 (around 2 decades higher) due to the stabilization of high temperature phase at room temperature by the Ca-doping.
A new method in the impedance data treatment, the Phase Inflection Detection(PID), was employed to separate the ionic conductivities from grain andgrain boundaries.
Hence, the complementarity of XRD and electrochemicalimpedance spectroscopy (with PID method treatment) wasused to better understand the influence of phase transition and the Cadopingin this type of material on transport properties.
At the sametime, the impact of sintering temperature and grain boundaries ontransport properties was clearly demonstrated.
These parameters mustbe taken in account in the future studies of these electrolyte materials,as for membrane in Li-S batteries as example.
Finally,Li1.2Zr1.9Ca0.1(PO4)3 material is unstable below ~0.6 V vs.Li+/Li.
