NASICON-type materials are one of the most promising cathodes for sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) due to their stable structure and the three-dimensional framework for the migration of Na+.
During its usage, battery should hold the abilityto endure sudden changes in temperature and current density, which have profoundimpact on battery life.
However, few researches focused on the reaction mechanismunder above situations.
Here, the phase transformation processes of NASICON-typematerial, Na3V2(PO4)3, are investigated by applying high-resolution in-situ X-raydiffraction, Raman coupled with electrochemical tests under different temperatures(273 and 293 K) and scan rates (0.5, 2, 5 mV s-1).
The results demonstrate that thephase evolution process is one-phase solid solution during desodiation process ratherthan the traditionally two-phase reaction with high scan rate or low temperature.
Anelectrochemical phase diagram is also drawn based on the in situ results, which can beused to explain the asymmetric result.
This work can help understanding the phase evolution process of NASICON-type cathodes, as well as guiding the application ofSIBs in various working conditions.
The phase transition processes of sodium ion cathode material, Na3V2(PO4)3, areinvestigated at different CV scan rates (0.5, 2 and 5 mV s-1) and temperatures (273 Kand 293 K) under operando conditions, where the asymmetric reaction routes areobserved.
The nonlinear decline trend of the calculated sodium ion diffusioncoefficients confirm the existence of the asymmetric reaction.
In-situ XRD result atdifferent current densities (3 and 5 C) and temperatures (273, 293 and 333 K) andfurther in-situ Raman result are in consistence with the assumption.
The experimentresult shows that the solid solution reaction can accelerate the phase transformationprocess.
The electrochemical phase diagram of Na3V2(PO4)3 is drawn to understandthe property of the asymmetric reaction in NASICON-type material at differenttemperatures.
These observation and analysis can help understanding and developingthe next generation SIBs with enhanced rate capability and better temperatureadaptability.
