A slight deviation of the stoichiometry has beenintroduced in Na3−3xV2+x(PO4)3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.1) samples todeter mine the effect on the structural and electrochemical behavior as a positive electrode in sodium-ion batteries.
X-raydiffraction and XPS results provide evidence for the flexibility ofthe NASICON framework to allow a limited vanadium super stoichiometry.
In particular, the Na2.94V2.02(PO4)3 formulareveals the best electrochemical performance at the highest rate(40C) and capacity retention upon long cycling.
It is attributedto the excellent kinetic response and interphase chemicalstability upon cycling.
The electrochemical performance of thisvanadium superstoichiometric sample in a full sodium-ion cell isalso described.
Superstoichiometric Na3−3xV2+x(PO4)3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.1) sampleswere synthesized by the sol−gel method to unveil the effect ofvanadium excess on the NASICON structure and morphologicalproperties, and their consequences on the electrochemicalbehavior as positive electrode in sodium-ion batteries.
XRD patterns showed an increase in cell volume for the wholestoichiometric range in good agreement with the incorporationof superestoichiometric vanadium.
Rietveld refinement revealed that the additional transition metal ions are hosted in vacantNa2 sites.
XPS spectra at V 2p and O 1s core levels revealed the appearance of new signals ascribable to the allocation of excessvanadium in Na2 sites.
Although the electron microscopy showed similar textural features for all samples, EDX analysis provided evidence for the homogeneous dispersion of elementsand Na/V ratios in good agreement with the nominalstoichiometries.
Electrochemical tests showed improved rate capabilities atthe highest rate (40C) and capacity retention upon prolongedcycling for samples with 0.02 ≤ x ≤ 0.08. This fact wascorrelated with the good kinetic response, correlated to a lowcharge-transfer resistance at the electrode interphase and a highsodium diffusion coefficient for NVP-0.02. In addition, XPSspectra of cycled electrodes revealed that the deposition of sideproducts, hindering sodium migration at the electrodeinterphase, was less significant for the superstoichiometricNVP-0.02 sample.
A full cell assembled with this sample as apositive electrode featured an energy density as high as 314 Wh kg−1 after 150 cycles, which encourages us to consider there ported material as an outstanding cathode for sodium-ionbatteries.
