The lithium-sulfur cell is a highly promising novel battery type because of its high theoreticalspecific capacity of 1675 mAh/gS, which is up to seven times higher than the specific energy ofcommonly used lithium-ion batteries.
However, in cell tests the theoretical values are notreached, caused by the unfavorable behavior of the polysulfides formed during the cathodereaction.
In contrast to common lithium-ion cells the energy in the Li-S system is generatedby a chemical conversion reaction.
During the discharge reaction, elemental sulfur is reduced to form polysulfides (Li2Sx).
Themonosulfide Li2S, whose formation is given in eq.1, is the farthest reduced species.
During thefollowing charging process the reaction should be completely reversed, forming sulfur byoxidation of the polysulfides.
However, the good solubility of most of the polysulfide species inthe liquid electrolyte creates several problems.
During discharge soluble polysulfideintermediates are leached out of the cathode.
Moreover, they even can migrate to the anodesurface, where further reduction to Li2S2 and Li2S occurs by the contact with the non-noblemetallic lithium.
Lithium mono- and disulfide are less soluble in organic electrolytes, and thuscan form a passivating layer onto the anode surface that hinders the lithium ion transport andalters the anode surface by chemical reaction.
Additionally, during charging the migration ofthe dissolved polysulfide ions back to the cathode is incomplete, causing a depletion of activematerial in the cathode and, thus, capacity loss.
This process of polysulfide species diffusing between the electrodes is called the polysulfide shuttle.
In this paper we presented a polymer/ceramic composite membrane as novel separator materialfor the lithium-sulfur cell.
Preparation was done with a simple solution-procedure.
The combination of a polymer matrix (PVdF-HFP) with intrinsic conductive particles (LATP) resultsin stable, free standing membranes.
By addition of high amounts of ceramic particles the ionicconductivity of the membrane increases significantly.
Using the membrane with highest ceramiccontent results in an initial discharge capacity very close to the theoretical value (1614 incomparison to 1675 mAh/gS).
Also the cycling stability is increased as compared to thecommercial Celgard2325 separator as well as to a pure PVdF-HFP membrane.
Using the combination of a swellable polymer and intrinsic ionic particles is a promising candidate asstarting point for separator materials in the lithium-sulfur cell.
This is in particular true for singleuse cells where the capacity of this lithium-sulfur cell is outstandingly high.
