A new double neptunium zirconium phosphate of the type MxZr2(PO4)3 (M = Np), crystallizing in thestructure type NaZr2(PO4)3 (NZP, NASICON), was synthesized by solid state reactions at high temperaturesand characterized by X-ray diffraction, infrared spectroscopy and Mössbauer spectroscopy.
The Rietveldrefinement of the XRD pattern together with the analysis of the IR spectra of the sample confirmed thespace group P3¯c, the same as that for the lanthanide analogues Ln0.33Zr2(PO4)3. However, Mössbauerstudies revealed the presence of neptunium in the two oxidation states +3 and +4, indicating a twophaseNZP system with different crystallographic environments of the neptunium atoms.
The thermal behaviourof the sample was followed up to 1400 °C by thermogravimetric analysis.
Based on the analysis of the literature data carried out byBykov,15 the phosphates MxZr2(PO4)3 (M – mono-, di-, tri- andtetravalent cations) crystallize in two structure types:NaZr2(PO4)3 for the cations with radii from 0.71 to 1.67 Å andthe structure of scandium tungstate Sc2(WO4)3 (SW) for thecations with radii 0.49–0.66 Å.
Both structures are composedof the same basic framework units [Zr2(PO4)3]−, but differ inthe arrangement of these units and the coordination numberof an interstitial cation (CN = 4 for SW).
The radii of bothNp3+ and Np4+ in octahedral coordination fall within the firstrange (1.01 and 0.87 Å, respectively).
The existence of a solid solution NaZr2−xNpx(PO4)3 (0 ≤ x ≤0.6), similar to solid solutions Na1+xRxZr2−x(PO4)3 (R = In, Yb,Er, Y, Dy, Tb, Gd, Sm, 0 ≤ x ≤ 1),25 suggests that both tri- andtetravalent neptunium cations can substitute zirconium in theZrO6 framework.
However, the analogy of the XRD and IRspectra obtained in the present work with those for theLn0.33Zr2(PO4)3 phosphates, as well as the relatively low synthesistemperature, leads to the conclusion that the Np atomsoccupy the interstitial M1 sites.
At the same time, the resultsof Mössbauer spectroscopy show the presence of a mixture oftwo Np-containing hexagonal phases and an NpO2 admixture.
Since no other crystalline phases containing neptunium wererevealed from the XRD pattern during Rietveld analysis (including the fact that NpO2 was identified from the pattern),and also because it is unlikely that Np is present in an amorphousphase, it is assumed that the secondary Np-containingphase belongs to the same structure type, where Np4+ occupiessimilar but not the same crystallographic positions.
It can alsobe concluded that in the absence of a charge compensator oflower valence it is harder for bigger neptunium cations tocompete with the smaller zirconium ones for the occupationof framework positions.
This conclusion is further strengthenedby the fact that the unit cell parameters of the new neptuniumphase correlate well with the data for the lanthanidephosphates,16 as shown in Fig.
The mean neptunium radiusshown on this picture is calculated based on the atomic percentagesof Np3+ and Np4+ found in the present work.
Designing crystalline waste forms generally requiresdetailed crystal chemical knowledge of the site preferences ofthe waste ions and adjustment of the overall stoichiometrywhen producing the final product.
The results of the presentpaper illustrate crystal chemical flexibility of the NZP phases,which to some extent allows for variations in stoichiometry,and the ability to incorporate elements with complex redox behaviour,such as the actinide elements.
The additional formationof the ZrP2O7 phase, observed as an impurity in thisstudy, can be an advantage when it comes to waste applications.
This phase does not contain actinides and can playthe role of a chemical buffer during the synthesis of a wastematerial, so that variations of chemical composition wouldcause a change in the ratios of the phases present and not thenature of these phases.
In conclusion, the new phosphate with an empiricalformula Np0.29Zr2(PO4)3 complements the series of NZP compoundswith actinide and lanthanide atoms in the interstitialspositions of the structure.
The results of the present studyshow that the possibility of coexistence of several oxidationstates in compounds of neighbouring elements U and Puneeds to be taken into account.
