Aqueous lithium−air batteries have very high theoretical energy densities, which potentially makes thistechnology very interesting for energy storage in electric mobility application.
However, the aqueouselectrolyte requires the use of watertight layer to protect the lithium metal typically a thick NASICONglass-ceramic layer, which adds ohmic resistance and penalizes performance.
This paper deals with there placement of this ceramic electrolyte by a hybrid organic−inorganic membrane.
This new membranecombines an ionically conducting inorganic phase for Li-ion transport (Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) and apoly(vinylidene fluoride−co−hexafluoropropylene (PVDF−HFP) polymer for water-tightness andmechanical properties.
The Li−ion transport through the membrane is ensured by an interconnected 3−Dnetwork of crystalline LATP fibers obtained by coupling an electrospinning process with the sol-gelsynthesis followed by a thermal treatment.
After an impregnation step with PVDF−HFP, hybridmembranes with different volumetric fractions of PVDF−HFP have been synthesized.
These membranesare watertight and have Li−ion conductivities ranging from 10-5 to 10−4 mS/cm.
The conductivity dependson the PVDF−HFP volume fraction and the fibers’ alignment in the membrane thickness, which in turncan be tuned by adjusting the water content in the electrospinning chamber during the process.
Thealignment of fibers parallel to the membrane surface conduces to poor conductivity values while adisordered fibers mat lead to interesting conductivity values (1 x 10-4 mS/cm) at ambient temperature.
One of the main disadvantages of the electric vehicle is its short driving range, which is limitedby the energy density of lithium-ion batteries.
There is therefore a need for batteries with higherenergy densities.
Among the various technologies existing on the market, the aqueous Li−airbattery is promising technology, with energy densities potentially twice as high as currentbatteries.
Aqueous Li−air batteries today use a separator consisting of a Li ion conductingNaSICON−like ceramic electrolyte, itself protected from lithium metal by thin LiPON layer.
This ceramic separator needs to be sufficiently thick to ensure good mechanical properties,giving rise to a large ohmic resistance and therefore leading to batteries with poor powerperformances.
By replacing the solid ceramic membrane with ceramic fibers, Li-ion conductionis obtained in a non-brittle, flexible, material.
Watertightness is obtained by filling the voidscreated by the fibers with an organic, hydrophobic, non-conducting polymer.
The solid ceramicelectrolyte is therefore replaced by a flexible hybrid organic−inorganic membrane, combininggood Li−ion conduction and watertightness.
In order to achieve a good percolation of theinorganic Li-ion conducting network, we propose to fabricate an interconnected 3D network offibers obtained by combining sol−gel chemistry and electrospinning.
The microstructure of the3D fiber network was tuned through the electrospinning parameters including water content inair (or relative humidity (RH)), speed of the rotating counter electrode and the final sinteringtemperature.
The water content of the surrounding air was found to have an impact on the fiberdiameter whilst the rotating electrode speed impacts the alignment of the fibers produced: highspeed and high humidity conduces to aligned fibers with a large diameter.
Sintering the fiber matat high temperature, i.e.T ≥ 850°C, produces crystalline fiber mats with good mechanicalproperties.
The Li−ion conductivity was estimated by impedance spectroscopy and valuesranging from 10-5 and 10-3 mS/cm have been measured depending on the microstructure of thefiber mat (i.e.fibers alignment).Taking into account a porosity of 30% in volume, theconductivity value is comparable to that measured on dense pellets in the same conditions,attesting the good quality of the particle-particle contact along the LATP fibers.
Impregnation ofthe crystalline fiber mat by a hydrophobic polymer (PVDF-HFP) conduces to the formation offlexible hybrid membranes.
The PVDF−HFP volume fraction was tuned from 40 to 80% and thebest results in term of water tightness and conductivity value was obtained for membranes with avolume fraction of PVDF-HFP of 70% and a Li−ion conductivity of 1 x 10-4 mS/cm for athickness of 20 μm, corresponding to an ohmic resistance of 40 k • cm2. Even if the membraneexhibits promising properties, further improvements in term of Li-ion conductivity are needed totest it in a real Li-air battery.
