Commercial NASICON-type electrolyte plates are coated with a thin film of LiPON to obtain a compositeelectrolyte system with high conductivity at room temperature that can be used in contact with metallicLithium.
The formation of the interface between the NASICON substrate and the LiPON coating is studiedusing an in-situ X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) surface science approach.
The process of LiPONdeposition induces changes in the surface chemical structure of the NASICON substrates as observed byXPS, including the partial reduction of Ti and the incorporation of N into the NASICON.
The practical impact of the interface formation is studied by impedance spectroscopy, revealing a substantial increaseof resistance for LiPON coated samples.
The interface experiments using XPS demonstrate that LiPONdeposition onto the NASICON-type solid electrolyte substrates(LATP, LATGP-type) result in pronounced changes of the chemicalstructure in the surface region of the substrate.
These changes canbe explained by the interaction of the substrate with the processatmosphere at early stages of the deposition process when a fullycovering LiPON layer has not yet formed.
During initial LiPON deposition the titanium in the substrate surface is reduced andsubsequently an interlayer compound is formed, which we identifyas lithium titanate.
In addition we observe nitrogen incorporationinto the substrate surface that is similar to the interaction of thesubstrate to nitrogen plasma in a separate experiment.
The reductionof titanium, the formation of the interlayer compound as wellas the nitridation are attributed to the exposure of the substratesurface to process atmosphere, containing lithium and reactivenitrogen species, respectively.
At longer deposition times, the formationof LiPON with typical structure is observed.
The resistance of LiPON coated substrates for Li-ion transportsignificantly increases, as is found by EIS analysis.
For the 150 mmthick LATP substrate the impedance is approximately tripled afterthe double sided coating of 2  200 nm LiPON.
Simulation of theimpedance data indicates that the impedance increase issignificantly affected by the interlayer-region formed during thedeposition process.
Additional EIS measurements with samplesexposed to nitrogen plasma but not coated with LiPON support therelevance of the nitrogen incorporation for the impedance.
The results demonstrate the high reactivity of NASICON-type Liionsolid electrolytes towards the LiPON sputter deposition process.
Likely, this reactivity extends to physical vapour deposition processesof Li-containing compounds in general, and may pose anintrinsic problem for interface formation of electrolytes which areunstable in contact with lithium.
Application of protective layers forsolid electrolytes has to be optimised not only to the electrochemicalstability window of the bulk materials, but also to theinterface formation during deposition.
Plasma nitridation of solidelectrolytes appears to be an interesting surface treatment processand should be studied in greater detail.
