The long-range Li ion diffusion in Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP), a NASICON-type glass ceramic conductor with high ionicconductivity was studied using pulsed-gradient spin-echo (PGSE) 7Li NMR.
LAGP is stable in air and water, and can be usedfor all-solid Li batteries as well as next generation Li-air batteries.
The Li ion conduction mechanisms in the micrometerspace are important for the design of Li batteries and development of new materials.
Our previous studies on sulfidebasedand garnet-type solid conductors showed that Li+ ion uniform diffusion is hampered by narrow pathwayssurrounded by stationary anions.
The Li ions are engaged in parameter-dependent diffusion with the parameters beingobservation time (Δ) and pulsed-field gradient (PFG) strength (g); that is completely different from the Li diffusion insolution and polymer electrolytes, and also from molecular diffusion in neutral porous media.
In this study, we observedapparent diffusion constant (Dapparent) values for the LAGP, that were almost continuously distributed within a limited rangeat a certain Δ.
At very long observation time (above 300 ms) and large g (~13 Tm-1), an equilibrated diffusion constant(close to the tracer diffusion constant) could be observed.
The apparent activation energy of Li ion diffusion was about 16kJ mol-1, which was smaller than the activation energy for the ionic conductivity.
The temperature-dependent carrier ionnumbers were estimated.
The long-range Li ion diffusion of a NASICON-type conductorLi1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP), was measured by PGSE Li-NMRspectroscopy between room temperature and 100 ºC.
Snapshots ofLi+ diffusion behaviours were observed by varying Δ.
For Δ valuesshorter than about 20 ms, the Li ions diffuse quickly and collide withthe walls of the Li pathways composed of anions; they collide andare diffracted without thermal activation.
At the longer Δ values,the diffracted patterns were not observed and the Stejskal andTanner plots showed exponential decays.
The Li ions undergoparameter-dependent diffusion and the Dapparent values aredistributed depending on both Δ and the PFG strength g.
For muchlonger Δ values, the Dapparent values converged toward a smallequilibrated value with thermal activation, which must be close totracer diffusion constant.
The activation energy of the equilibratedD was 16 kJ mol-1, which was smaller than the activation energy ofthe ionic conductivity (37 kJ mol-1).
The discrepancy can beinterpreted by the increase in the number of carriers withtemperature.
