Low ionic conductivity limits the development of NASICON-type LiZr2(PO4)3 (LZP) for solid-state batteries.
Here,we present the possible factors that may affect the conductivity, and further establish the relationships among conductivity, crystalstructure, relative density, grain size, chemical composition, and elemental distribution.
The conditions for the existence of the fourphases of LZP (α, α’, β, and β’) and the phase transition processes among them are systematically clarified.
With secondary ionmass spectrometry, the spatial distribution of elements within the grains and grain boundaries is clearly presented.
Based on ourresults, proper elemental doping, high sintering temperature, and especially fast cool-down rate are all indispensable to stabilize thehigh-conductivity (α) phase at room temperature.
Finally, we demonstrate the feasibility of lithium-based batteries with this LZPsolid electrolyte and commercial cathodes.
This work provides insights for preparing LZP with high conductivity and paves the wayfor the development of solid-state batteries.
In summary, NASICON-type LYZP solid electrolyte with ahigh ionic conductivity of 3.5 × 105 S cm1 at room temperaturehas been prepared with SPS.
We investigated the possiblefactors that affect the conductivity of LYZP, and further establishedthe relationships among conductivity, structure, andchemical composition.
High relative density (> 98%, 3.06 gcm-3) can be easily realized with SPS, and grain size has aninsignificant effect on conductivity.
The existence of β phasein the LYZP ceramic dramatically decreases the ionic conductivity,and α phase with high conductivity can be obtained withhigh sintering temperatures (> 1200 ºC) and a fast cool downrate.
Moreover, excess Li and P lead to impurity phases andthus phase separation, both of which greatly decrease the conductivity.
These results can provide some valuable informationfor the improvement of conductivity for other kinds of solidelectrolyte materials as well.
Finally, a solid-state battery wasdemonstrated with a high-voltage cathode LNMO, LYZP solidelectrolyte, and Li metal anode, which exhibits good Coulombicefficiency and cycle stability.
