NASICON-structured monoclinic Li3V2(PO4)3 (LVP) is considered as a promisingcathode material.
However, the disadvantages including low intrinsic electronicconductivity, low ionic conductivity and fast capacity fading at high voltage limit theapplication of LVP.
In order to overcome these drawbacks of LVP and optimize itselectrochemical properties, the LVP cathode material is successfully modified firstlyby combining surface N-doped carbon coating with bulk phase K+ doping after the insitu fabrication process in this paper.
On the one hand, N-doped carbon coating is ableto improve the electron transfer rate on the electrode/electrolyte interface and enhancethe electrochemical reaction activity.
On the other hand, bulk phase K+ doping canstable the crystal structure, limit the structural damage during Li+ reinsertion processand improve the intrinsic conductivity of LVP.
After collaborative modification ofN-doped carbon coating and K+ doping, the electron conductivity and Li+ diffusionrate of LVP are improved obviously.
Therefore, compared with single modified LVPsamples, the collaborative modified sample reveals better electrochemical properties,especially in the wide potential range of 3-4.8 V vs Li/Li+.
This novel modificationmethod of surface N-doped carbon coating and bulk K+ doping is highly effective andcan be widely used to optimize the electric conductivity of electrode materials forLi-ion batteries.
In summary, we have initially presented a facile sol-gel approach to produce a bulkK+ doping combined with surface N-doped carbon coating modified Li3V2(PO4)3 asthe cathode material of LIBs in a wide potential window.
Beneficial from thecollaborative modification of Li3V2(PO4)3 electrode materials, firstly, the bulk K+doping plays a supporting role in the crystal structure of the host Li3V2(PO4)3, whichalleviate the volume shrinkage caused by the Li+ deintercalation, as well as enhancesthe intrinsic conductivity of Li3V2(PO4)3. Secondly, the surface nitrogen-dopedcarbon layer significantly improves the electron transport speed of the electrochemicalreaction interface, thereby improving the electrochemical reaction rate of the material.
As a result, it was demonstrated that by bulk K+ doping and surface N-doped carboncoating of Li3V2(PO4)3, the sample exhibits a higher electrical conductivity and Li+diffusion coefficient, therefore inducing an improved electrochemical reactionkinetics.
Moreover, the irreversible capacity loss of the Li3V2(PO4)3 material was alsorelieved in a certain extent, finally exhibits good electrochemical performance in awide voltage window of 3-4.8 V.
It is thus expected that the bulk doping and surfacecarbon coating may be the most effective way to improve the total conductivity of aelectrode material, which can be applied to many electrode materials for LIBs.
