Phosphates Ln1/3Ti2(PO4)3 (Ln = Y, La, Ce, Pr, Eu, Gd, Ho) were synthesized by the citrate sol–gel (Pechini) method.
Solid-phase reactions were activated using dispersion, pressing, and sintering microadditives.
Synthesized samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction (Rietveld method), IR spectroscopy,electron microscopy, and microprobe analysis.
The specific features of their structure formation were studied.
The studied phosphates were shown to crystallize in the NaZr2(PO4)3 (NZP/NASICON) structural typewith space group R .
The framework of their structure is built of columns of TiO6 and РО4 polyhedra, andone of the two types of extraframework positions inside columns of polyhedra was occupied by Ln3+ cationsat 2/3. The dependences of the unit cell parameters of Ln1/3Ti2(PO4)3 on the Ln3+ radius was observed tohave a gadolinium kink.
Complex titanium and rare-earth phosphatesLn1/3Ti2(PO4)3 (Ln = Y, La, Ce, Pr, Eu, Gd, Ho) havebeen synthesized for the first time, and their phase formationand structural features have been studied.
The structural stability of Ln1/3Ti2(PO4)3 is causedin many respects by the size factor.
We have managedto synthesize the phosphates incorporating ions withsmall radii (Y, Ho) after pressing of reaction mixtureswith sintering additives.
The phosphates containinglarge REE ions (beginning with Gd) can be synthesizedby conventional techniques (Pechini method).
On the other hand, the results of structural studiesshow that the degree of distortion in framework-form-ing polyhedra slightly grows with an increase in Ln3+ion size from 0.94 Å (for Gd3+) to 0.99 Å (for Pr3+),though the NZP-structure remains stable in this case.
It seems that it is possible to speak about a certain ratiooptimal for the stability of this space group between the radii of extraframework Ln3+ ions and frameworkformingions.
On the whole, the data obtained earlier and in this work characterize a high structural flexibilityof the NZP framework upon introduction of ions ofdifferent sizes (from lithium to lanthanides) into itscavities.
