Robust, safe, and reliable grid-scale energy storage continues to be a priority for improved energy surety,expanded integration of renewable energy, and greater system agility required to meet modern dynamicand evolving electrical energy demands.
We describe here a new sodium-based battery based on amolten sodium anode, a sodium iodide/aluminum chloride (NaI/AlCl3) cathode, and a high conductivityNaSICON (Na1þxZr2SixP3xO12) ceramic separator.
This NaI battery operates at intermediate temperatures(120e180 C) and boasts an energy density of >150 Wh kg1. The energy-dense NaI-AlCl3 ionic liquidcatholyte avoids lifetime-limiting plating and intercalation reactions, and the use of earth-abundantelements minimizes materials costs and eliminates economic uncertainties associated with lithiummetal.
Moreover, the inherent safety of this system under internal mechanical failure is characterized bynegligible heat or gas production and benign reaction products (Al, NaCl).
Scalability in design isexemplified through evolution from 0.85 to 10 Ah (28 Wh) form factors, displaying lifetime averageCoulombic efficiencies of 99.45% and energy efficiencies of 81.96% over dynamic testing lasting >3000 h.
This demonstration promises a safe, cost-effective, and long-lifetime technology as an attractive candidatefor grid scale storage.
We have demonstrated the viability of an innovative NaI-basedbattery which operates near 150 C with lifetime average CE as highas 99.45% and EE of 81.96% over dynamic testing lasting >3000 h.
Further improvements in cathode design will further increase energyefficiencies.
This energy dense, readily scalable battery consistsonly of earth-abundant materials, making it an economicallyattractive system for grid scale storage.
Moreover, the anolyte andcatholyte chemistries contained within this system introduceinherent safety in the event of battery failure, mitigating concernsof cascading thermal runaway, flammability or production of hazardousbyproducts.
The promising performance of these prototypesacross several lab-scale capacities promises opportunities todevelop this new technology into a viable and important technologyfor future energy storage.
