The inferior cycle performance of All-solid-state Lithium Batteries (ASSLBs) resulted from the low mixed ionic and electronicconductivity in the electrodes, as well as the large interfacial resistance between electrode and electrolyte need to beovercome urgently for commercial applications.
Here, an advanced cell construction strategy has been proposed, in whicha cohesive and highly conductive poly(oxyethylene) (PEO)-based electrolyte is employed both in cathode layer and theinterface of electrolyte/anode, leading to an ASSLB with the superior interfacial contact between electrolyte and electrodes,and forming a three-dimensional ionic conductive network in the cathode layer.
Especially, the NASICON-type ionicconductor covered with PEO-based polymer integrates the advantages of inorganic electrolyte and organic electrolyte,presents the enhanced electrochemical stability and an excellent compatibility with the Li electrode.
Consequently, theASSLBs of LiFePO4 (LFP)/Li with this advanced construction strategy exhibit excellent interfacial compatibility, ultralong cyclelife and high capacity, i.e., a reversible discharge capacity maintained at 127.8 mAh g-1 for the 1000th cycle at 1 C with aretention of 96.6%, and an initial discharge capacity of 153.4 mAh g-1 with a high retention of 99.9% after 200 cycles at 0.1C.
Besides, the high-voltage monopolar stacked batteries with bipolar structure can be fabricated conveniently, showing anopen circuit voltage (OCV) of 6.63 V with a good cycle performance.
In particular, the ASSLBs present outstanding safetywhether nail penetration or burning in the fire.
Therefore, this advanced cell construction strategy may generatetremendous opportunities in the search for novel emerging solid-state lithium metal batteries.have been successfully proposed in this work.
A cohesive and highlyconductive polymer electrolyte employed in cathode layer orinserted in the interface of electrolyte/anode achieves a threedimensionalionic conductive network in the cathode layer andsuperior interfacial contact of the electrolyte/electrodes.
Especially,the CE with bilayer structure of NASICON/SPE integrates theadvantages of inorganic electrolyte and organic electrolyte, presentsthe enhanced electrochemical stability and excellent compatibilitywith Li electrode.
Consequently, the improved ASSLBs present theultralong cycle life, high operating temperature, high capacity, andhigh security.
Therefore, our strategies may generate tremendousopportunities in the search for novel emerging ASSLBs.
