The use of Mg in rechargeable batteries can be competitive with Li in terms ofeconomy, safety, environment and capacity.
In contrast to lithium and sodium, the compounds with NASICON-type structure have received little attention as hosts forreversible magnesium insertion.
The selection of the electrolyte solution and voltage window seems to be crucial for controlling sodium/magnesium (de)insertion.
Here,Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) has been tested as a positive electrode vs.Mg metal with 0.5 Mmagnesium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonimide) in 1,2-dimethoxyethane as electrolytesolution, and the mechanism of the charge/discharge process has been studied.
In magnesium cell, firstly sodium is partially deinserted from the framework of NVP up toca. Na1.3V2(PO4)3 through a single voltage-plateau at 1.7 V, the cell of the crystal latticeis contracted, and a magnesium-sodium hybrid electrolyte is formed in situ.
Secondly,sodium and magnesium are inserted through two consecutive voltage-plateaus at 1.6and 1.2 V, respectively, while the main framework is preserved and the lattice isexpanded.
With further charge-discharge cycling, only one discharge plateau isobserved at 1.2 V due to insertion of magnesium.
If sodium ions are removed from the electrolyte solution after the first charge, only magnesium is inserted in the NASICONtypeframework during the discharge.
The electrochemical behavior of this material aselectrode in magnesium battery is very promising, providing a reversible capacity of ca.
60 mAh g-1 after 100 cycles.For the Na3V2(PO4)3 phase with NASICON-type structure (s.g.R-3c) inmagnesium cell, a voltage plateau is observed through the first charge (V3+/V4+) whichcorresponds to the coexistence of Na3V2(PO4)3 phase and partially desodiated phase,similarly to the behavior in sodium cell.
Then, during the discharge process firstlysodium and secondly magnesium are inserted, and phases with general form ulaMgxNayV2(PO4)3 are formed.
After further electrochemical cycling, a NASICON-typestructure with a unit cell slightly smaller than the cell of raw Na3V2(PO4)3 is formed, ingood agreement with incorporation of magnesium in the framework.
The observedpartial replacement of sodium by magnesium by using electrochemical charge/dischargeat room temperature is a nice example of soft chemistry.
The NASICON structure is arigid framework valid as a host for accommodation of not only lithium and sodium, butalso magnesium.
The drawbacks of this system could be the slow kinetics of magnesium insertion and the deterioration of the crystalline structure due to the strains generated by insertion of large amounts of magnesium.
However, the immobile sodiumatoms and the rigid framework contribute to stabilize the structure for reversiblemagnesium insertion.
These finds should be considered together with those of Li et al. to develop rechargeable magnesium batteries.
