Metal-air batteries show great promise because of their high theoretical energy density resulting from the use of anunlimited, low-mass O2 gaseous reactant.
Nevertheless, several issues remain to be tackled for their practical implementaion in ambient air.
In this work, we constructed a hybrid-type Na-air battery with a flow-through configurationfor direct use of ambient oxygen as the cathode, and studied the effect of the flow of the aqueous catholyte on theelectrochemical properties.
In addition, the effect of the catholyte pH on the open-circuit and discharge-charge voltagebehavior of the hybrid Na-air battery was systematically investigated.
An enhanced operation voltage was found for theflow cell using an acidic catholyte composed of 1 M NaNO3 and 0.1 M citric acid (pH=~1.8).
Further improvement in the cellperformance was observed in a cell employing both Pt/C and IrO2 electrocatalysts, which showed an average voltage gapof ~0.4 V between the charge (~3.7 V) and discharge (~3.3 V) voltages vs.Na+/Na at a current rate of 0.1 mA cm-2 over 20cycles (200 h total).
These findings suggest that the hybrid Na-air battery system using a flow-through mode and an acidiccatholyte could be a promising way to achieve practical Na-air cells with desirable performance.
We explored the effect of the flow and pH of the aqueouscatholyte on the electrochemical performance of Na-air flowbatteries with hybrid electrolytes.
In-situ measurement srevealed that catholyte flow facilitated conversion of ambientoxygen gases into DO in the catholyte and constantly providedfresh reactants to the air-cathode, which improved thereaction kinetics during discharge.
Lowering the pH of thecatholyte gave rise to increases in the OCV and operationvoltage of the cells.
We employed an acidic electrolyteconsisting of 1 M NaNO3 and 0.1 M CA (pH=~1.8) as the catholyte and the electrocatalysts Pt/C and IrO2 on the airelectrode.
The cell showed charge and discharge voltages of~3.68 V and ~3.32 V vs.Na+/Na, respectively, at a current rateof 0.1 mA cm-2 and good cycling stability with an average Vgapof ~0.36 V during 20 cycles (200 h total).
The surfacemorphology and structural properties of the solid electrolyte(Na3Zr2Si2PO12) in the cycled cells revealed no significant changes; however, the formation of a hydronium-NASICONphase should be circumvented for longer-term use in acidiccatholytes.
Because of their high cost and scarcity, the noblemetal-based electrocatalysts used in this work for the OER and ORR, Pt and IrO2, should be replaced with noble metal-freecatalysts, such as heteroatom-doped carbon nanostructures.
In this regard, further development of O2 electrocat alysis technologies for use in aqueous solutions will contribute toenhancing the reaction kinetics at the air-cathode and hencethe battery performance of hybrid Na-air cells.
In addition,reversible deposition/stripping of Na metal on the anode side,which was not covered in this work, remains a high priority forstable, long-term operation of hybrid Na-air cells.
