Several ceramic half-cells with differing electrodecomposite thicknesses but identical formulations were assembledusing the spark plasma sintering (SPS) technique, in orderto conduct comparable investigations of their kinetic limitations.
The SPS technique was used to assemble the compositeelectrode and the electrolyte together within a few minutes.
NASICON-type Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) ceramicwas used as solid electrolyte, as it offers high ionic conductivity(3 × 10−4 S.cm−1 at 25 °C) with a Li+ transport numberof 1. LiFePO4 active material was used as a model material; itoffers an average flat potential of 3.45 V vs Li+/Li and areasonably high theoretical capacity of 170 mAh.g−1.Surface capacity values (from 0.8 to 3.5 mAh.cm−2), whichare proportional to electrode thickness, remained quite close tothe initial values after more than 20 cycles, even for a 325 μmthick electrode (3.5 mAh.cm−2).
The overpotential in the flatplateau region was proportional to the current density used,which means that it was dependent only on the cell’s ohmicdrop.
Performances were not limited by the ion transport intothe solid electrolyte and composite electrode volume - as inclassical Li-ion batteries - since the transport number of LAGPis one.
Therefore, very thick electrode-enabling batteries withhigh-surface capacity can be considered.capacity,cyclability and polarization is investigated.
The SPSsintering method enabled us to obtain dense inorganic halfcellswith well-defined and consistent interfaces.
After morethan 20 cycles, no crack in the ceramics was observed.
Surface capacity values were proportional to electrode thickness.
Reversibility was very good after more than 20 cycles, as thecapacities remained similar to those obtained initially, even forthe 325 μm-thick electrode.
After changing the rate, theoverpotential in the flat plateau region was proportional tothe current density, and dependent on the ohmic drops in thecell.
Therefore, it was not limited by the transport into theelectrode volume (as in traditional Li-ion batteries) and a verythick electrode may be used.
This is believed to be due to theuse of a solid electrolyte with a transport number equal to one,as well as to the enhanced kinetics of the electronic charge transfer and lithium ion solid diffusion at 100 °C.
However,this conclusion is applicable to laboratory cells; many challenges remain in achieving commercially viable, recharge able all-solid-state batteries operating at room temperature.
 