Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) with NASICON crystal is a promising cathode for sodium-ion battery, while the rate performance shouldbe improved due to its poor electric conductivity.
Here, pomegranate-like NVP/C composites were proposed and preparedvia a simple and cost-efficient method with yeast mould.
Based on the yeast’s strong adsorption ability, high tolerance toextreme conditions and high nitrogen and phosphorus content, NVP with a hierarchical structure and N, P-doped carbondecorating was in situ established.
In the NVP/C composites, the nano-scaled NVP grains were coated by carbon derivedfrom the cytoplasm, and micron-sized carbon capsules resulting from the sturdy cell walls carbonization were constructedto further accommodate dozens of the carbon-coated NVP grains.
The unique pomegranate-like architecture and the N, P doped carbon can provide superior electrochemical kinetics and stability with efficient electron pathways, and buffer forvolume change during Na+ insertion/extraction.
As a result, the NVP/C composites exhibit good rate performance (113.9mAh g-1 at 10 C) and outstanding long-term cycling stability (retention of around 74.7% after 10,000 cycles).
The design ofthe pomegranate-like structure moulded by yeast microorganism is powerful and the NVP/C composites are believed to be promising electrode materials for sodium-ion battery.
Pomegranate-like NVP/C composites with hierarchical carbonframework were established with assistance of microorganismmould via a facile sol-gel method.
As a mould, the yeast withstrong adsorption ability of ions provides the pomegranate-likestructure through holding the NVP reactants.
Thus, in theNVP/C composite, carbon-coated crystallized NVP grains were accommodated by micron-sized carbon capsules during the insitu crystallization and carbonization process.
As carbonsources, the yeast transformed into N, P-doped carbon, whichis favorable to the electric conductivity.
The pomegranate-like structure and the consequent good performance of the composites are revealed by electron microscopy, XRD, Ramanand the electrochemical evaluation.
Compared with the NVP sample without yeast carbon decorating, the NVP/C-3composite with a carbon content of 7.25wt% exhibit a highreversible capacity (117 mAh g-1 at 0.1 C, equal to thetheoretical capacity), excellent rate performance (116.3, 115.7,113.9 and 79.2 mAh g-1 at 1 C, 5 C, 10 C and 20 C, respectively) and brilliant long-term cycling stability (retention of around74.7% after 10,000 cycles).
The outstanding performances canbe mainly ascribed to (1) the unique pomegranate-like architecture which provides efficient electron pathways andbuffer for volume change during Na+ insertion/extraction, aswell as (2) the N, P-doped carbon offering high conductivity.
We believe that the results presented here not only introducean advanced electrode material for SIB, but also provide agood design for the hierarchical energy storage materials usingsimple and cost-effective method with yeast as a mould and N,P-doped carbon source.
