The demand for electrical energy storage (EES) is ever increasing, which callsfor better batteries.
NASICON-structured materials represent a family ofimportant electrodes due to its superior ionic conductivity and stable structures.
A wide range of materials have been considered, where both vanadiumbasedand titanium-based materials are recommended as being of greatinterest.
NASICON-structured materials are suitable for both the cathode and the anode, where the operation potential can be easily tuned by the choice oftransition metal and/or polyanion group in the structure.
NASICON-structuredmaterials also represent a class of solid electrolytes, which are widelyemployed in all-solid-state ion batteries, all-solid-state air batteries, andhybrid batteries.
NASICON-structured materials are reviewed with a focus onboth electrode materials and solid-state electrolytes.
NASICON type materials are considered as a class of 3Dframework compounds possessing a stable structure and highionic conductivity, leading to their wide applications, includingenergy-storage, membranes, fuel cells and gas sensors.
Thisreview presents the state of the art of NASICON as Li-ion orNa-ion storage materials, and solid-state electrolytes, alongwith their applications.
Usually, the operation potentials showthe following trend: V5+/V4+ > V4+/V3+ > Fe3+/Fe2+ > Ti4+/Ti3+ >Nb5+/Nb4+ > Nb4+/Nb3+ > V3+/V2+ > Ti3+/Ti2+.
On the other hand, polyanions also lead to different potentials, which iscalled the inductive effect.
It is known that the weak M–O bands(the NASICON structure has the formula of AxMM’(XO4)3) canraise the operation voltage of the same redox couple.
Therefore,NASICON-type materials with high electronegative polyanionswill present high operation potentials due to their stronger electron-withdrawing capability.
The electrochemical performanceof NASICON can be greatly improved by carbon coating,decreasing the particle size and doping.
The structural evolutionhas also been investigated to understand the ion-storagemechanisms.
To avoid the risk of thermal runaway, solid-state batterieshave been proposed as a fundamental solution.
Solid-state batteries face great challenges, especially, the low intrinsic ionic conductivity of solid electrolytes and large interfacial resistance between electrodes and the electrolyte.
To overcome the former problem, new solid electrolyte materials with high intrinsicionic conductivity should be developed. NASICON-type electrolytescan supply a choice.
For Li-based solid-state electrolytes,LATP shows high ionic conductivity and low cost, while LAGPis also widely studied due to its better stability than LATP.
Manytypes of solid-state batteries and hybrid batteries have been fabricated,exhibiting superior electrochemical performance and expanding the family of battery systems.
Concerning the latterproblem, NASICON-type materials can be used for the cathode,anode, and electrolyte.
Therefore, all-NASICON solid-state batteriescan be fabricated.
It can form an electrolyte buffer layerof a solid-solution or composite between NASICON electrodesand electrolyte, which can build fast ionic channels, leading to alow interfacial resistance.
