All-solid-state lithium batteries offer notable advantages over conventional Li-ion batteries with liquid electrolytes in terms of energy density, stability, and safety.
To realize thistechnology, it is critical to develop highly reliable solid-state inorganic electrolytes with highionic conductivities and acceptable processability.
Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 (LATP) with aNASICON (Na superionic conductor)-like structure is regarded as a potential solid electrolyte,owing to its high “bulk” conductivity (~10–3 S cm–1) and excellent stability against air andmoisture.
However, the solid LATP electrolyte still suffers from a low “total” conductivity,mainly due to the blocking effect of grain boundaries to Li+ conduction.
Here, we propose anLATP–Bi2O3 composite solid electrolyte showing a very high total conductivity (9.4 × 10–4 Scm–1) at room temperature.
We suggest that Bi2O3 acts as a microstructural modifier toeffectively reduce the fabrication temperature of the electrolyte while enhancing its ionicconductivity.
Bi2O3 promotes the densification of the LATP electrolyte, thereby improving itsstructural integrity, and at the same time, it facilitates Li+ conduction, leading to reduced grain boundary resistance.
The feasibility of the LATP–Bi2O3 composite electrolyte in all-solid-stateLi batteries is also examined in this study.
LATP–Bi2O3 composite solid electrolytes were successfully synthesized by a Pechini routecombined with a sintering process at 850 oC.
Even though the processing temperature is decreased by ~100 oC, the composite electrolyte offers a high ionic conductivity of 9.4 × 10–4S cm–1 at 25 oC, which is higher than that of the LATP electrolyte.
The conductivity improvement is mainly attributed to the Bi2O3 additive introduced as a microstructural modifierduring synthesis.
Based on various structural and electrochemical analyses, we confirmed thatthe incorporated Bi2O3 promotes effective densification of LATP, thereby improving itsstructural integrity.
Compared with the LATP electrolyte, the LATP–Bi2O3 composite electrolyte exhibits a reduced grain boundary resistance, which is mainly responsible for theenhanced ionic conductivity.
Furthermore, an all-solid-state Li battery assembled with theLATP–Bi2O3 composite electrolyte shows reversible charge–discharge operation withoutsignificant capacity fading.
It is expected that further interfacial engineering of the batteryconfiguration would be helpful to improve the electrochemical performance.
Our approach will provide a practical guideline for resolving the technical issues of NASICON-type solidelectrolytes toward the realization of all-solid-state Li batteries.
