Three series of glasses of the Li2O-FeO-V2O5-P2O5 system were thermally nanocrystallized.
and their microstructure was studied, at a nanometer resolution by transmission electronmic roscopy (TEM).
Those observations were complemented by DTA and XRD studies on thesame materials.
It was shown that appropriate heating of the as-received glasses leads to formation of crystalline nanosize grains embedded in the glassy matrix.
Average size of thosegrains reached even a few nm, was much smaller than that reported for LiFePO4-basednanostructured materials obtained by other methods.
The crystal structure of most nanograinswas identified as that of the LiFePO4 olivine, but some grains of the Nasicon-like Li3V2(PO4)3phase were also present.
The presence of both phases was confirmed independently by XRDpatterns.
Due to small size of crystalline grains (down to ca 5 nm) the interfacial regionsaround them occupy an important fraction of the total volume of the material and their properties can strongly influence the effective properties of the whole material.
We havepostulated that the defective nature of interfacial regions leads to an increased concentrationof Fe2+/Fe3+, V4+/V5+ or V3+/V4+ aliovalent pairs, crucial for a small polaron hoppingmechanism of the electronic transport, and to an enhanced electrical conductivity.
The presence of highly conducting interfacial regions in the system where either the glass matrixand both crystalline phases (LiFePO4 and Li3V2(PO4)3 are very poor conductors is the main.
In this work we have shown that by an appropriate heating program of the glassyanalogs of LiFePO4 olivines, one can induce formation of a high concentration of very small crystalline grains, even 3-9 nm in size.
Their crystal structure was identified, independently on a macroscopic level by XRD and on a nanometer scale by TEM.
Amain crystalline phase was LiFePO4 olivine (present in all materials under study) bursome amount of Nasicon – like Li3V2(PO4)3 was found in materials with higher contents of vanadium (V15 and V20).
One of the important consequences of thepresence of such small grains is an increased volume fraction of the interfacial regions.
The increased concentration of point defects in these regions can be compensated by oxidation of some fraction of iron from Fe2+ to Fe3+.
It should be however underlined that the overall concentration of Fe3+ in the nanocrystallized materials remains low.
This is indicated by two facts: i) the predominant phase is LiFePO4, containing mostlyFe2+, ii) our very recent Mössbauer studies of analogous nanocrystallized materials have shown that the high fraction of Fe2+ of the initial glasses changes only slightlyafter nanocrystallization.
