NASICON is one of the most promising sodium solid electrolytes that can enable the assembly of cheaperand safer sodium all-solid-state batteries.
In this study, we perform a combined experimental and computational investigation into the effects of aliovalent doping in NASICON on both bulk and grain boundary (secondary phase) ionic conductivity.
Our results show that the dopants with low solid solubility limits in NASICON lead to the formation of a conducting (less insulating) secondary phase, there by improving the grain boundary conductivity measured by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy(including grain-boundary, secondary-phase, and other microstructural contributions) that is otherwisehindered by the poorly-conducting secondary phases in undoped NASICON.
This is accompanied by achange in the Si/P ratio in the primary NASICON bulk phase, thereby transforming monoclinic NASICONto rhombohedral NASICON.
Consequently, we have synthesized NASICON chemistries with significantly improved and optimized total ionic conductivity of 2.7 mS/cm.
More importantly, this study has achievedan understanding of the underlying mechanisms of improved conductivities via doping (differing fromthe common wisdom) and further suggests a new general direction to improve the ionic conductivity ofsolid electrolytes via simultaneously optimizing the primary bulk phase and the microstructure(including grain boundary segregation and secondary phases).high conductivitymonoclinic C2/c NASICON via the introduction ofaliovalent dopants such as Mg2þ and Ni2þ.
We present clear experimental and computational evidence that the effect of aliovalent dopants are more complex than that has been previously assumed.
The commonly held assumption in previous works is thatany dopants introduced would sit in either the Zr4þ or Naþ sites,resulting in a modification of the bulk activation barriers and/orNaþ concentration.
Our EDS results and calculated dopant formationenergies suggest that dopants are more likely to incorporate into a secondary phase precipitated at grain boundaries, such asNa3PO4, and any effect on the bulk activation barriers result fromchanges in the Si:P ratio within the bulk.
Indeed, CI-NEB calculations confirm the lowering of the bulk activation barriers with increasein Si/P ratio, subject to the restriction that Si/P must be lessthan 2.2 to prevent transformation to the lower-conductingrhombohedral phase.
This is consistent with previous experimental results by Ahmad et al. reporting maximum room temperature bulk ionic conductivity for the NASICON for a Si/P ratio of2.2/0.8 [28].
