The graphene coated NaTi2(PO4)3 has been fabricated via a simple sol-gel process followed by calcination.
The NaTi2(PO4)3/graphene (NTP/G) composite is used directly as cathode electrode material for lithiumion battery and the electrochemical properties of the composite in this system is firstly studied in detail.
In the charge-discharge process, two Li+ can occupy octahedral M (2) site and be reversibly intercalated into the 3D framework of NTP through the ion conduction channel where almost all of Na+ are immobilized to sustain the framework.
At 5C rate, the capacity retention of the NTP/G composite after 800 cycles is still up to 82.7%.
The superior electrochemical properties of NTP/G is ascribed to its stable 3-D framework and the enhanced electronic conduction resulting from the graphene sheets surface modification.
In summary, the electrochemical properties of the NTP/G com-posite is firstly studied in detail when used as cathode electrodematerial for LIBs.
The SEM and TEM analysis confirmed that the NTPparticles are well coated with graphene sheets.
The NTP attachedto graphene sheets displayed the better electrochemical perfor-mances than NTP from the electrochemical test.
At different currentrates of 0.1, 1, 2 and 5C, the NTP/G composite deliveres initialcapacity of 136.1, 124.9, 117.3 mAh g−1and 82.6 mAh g−1, respec-tively.
Even after 800 cycles at 5C rate, the capability of the NTP/Gremained about 68.3 mAh g−1(82.7% retention).
The morphologyof NTP/G composite conducted after 800 cycles at 5C and the cor-responding Ex situ XRD patterns demonstrate that almost all ofNa+remain immobilized to sustain the stable 3-D framework dur-ing fast Li+ion diffusion.
The EIS results suggest that the increasedelectronic conductivity of graphene sheets may contribute to thegood electrochemical performance of NTP/G composite.
The supe-rior electrochemical properties of NTP/G is ascribed to its stable 3-Dframework and the enhanced electronic conduction resulting fromthe surface modification of graphene sheets.
