The gram-scale preparation of Fe2(WO4)3 by a new solution-based route and detailed characterization of the material are presented.
The resulting Fe2(WO4)3 undergoes a reversible electrochemical reaction against lithium centered around 3.0 V with capacities near 93% of the theoretical maximum.
Evolution of the Fe2(WO4)3 structure upon lithium insertion and deinsertion is probed using a battery of characterization techniques, including in situ X-ray diffraction, neutron total scattering, and X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS).
A structural transformation from monoclinic to orthorhombic phases is confirmed during lithium intercalation.
XAS and neutron total scattering measurements verify that Fe2(WO4)3 consists of trivalent iron and hexavalent tungsten ions.
As lithium ions are inserted into the framework, iron ions are reduced to the divalent state, while the tungsten ions are electrochemically inactive and remain in the hexavalent state.
Lithium insertion occurs via a concerted rotation of the rigid polyhedra in the host lattice driven by electrostatic interactions with the Li+ ions; the magnitude of these polyhedral rotations was found to be slightly larger for Fe2(WO4)3 than for the Fe2(MoO4)3 analog.
We have presented a new solution-based precipitation method for the gram-scale synthesis of anti-NASICON monoclinic Fe2(WO4)3. Using a combination of structural and electrochemical probes, we have demonstrated the reversible (de)insertion of lithium into the Fe2(WO4)3 framework.
Galvanostatic cycling indicates that Fe2(WO4)3 undergoes a reversible electrochemical reaction centered around ~3.0 V with a remarkable capacity retention of 95% over 25 cycles at a C/10 cycling rate.
XANES and neutron total scattering studies confirm that the charge compensation upon Li+ (de)insertion is achieved through the Fe3+/Fe2+ redox couple only.
A two-phase lithium intercalation process was established by in situ XRD, and transformation of the initial monoclinic structure into an orthorhombic lithiated structure was demonstrated by symmetry-mode analysis to proceed through the filling of defined crystallographic positions by inserted lithium atoms via cooperative rotations polyhedral subunits.
This comprehensive study provides constructive information on the electrochemical performance and structural evolution of NASICON-type materials, which may facilitate further development of insertion cathodes for rechargeable Li-ion batteries.
