The obvious cost advantage as well as attractive electrochemical properties, including excellent cycling stability and the potential of high rate performance, make sodium-ion batteries prime candidates in the race to technically and commercially enable large-scale electrochemical energy storage.
In this work, we apply our bond valence site energy modelling method to further the understanding of rate capabilities of a wide range of potential insertion-type sodium-ion battery cathode materials.
We demonstrate how a stretched exponential function permits us to systematically quantify the rate performance, which in turn reveals guidelines for the design of novel sodium-ion battery chemistries suitable for high power, grid-scale applications.
Starting from a diffusion relaxation model, we establish a semi-quantitative prediction of the rate-performance of half-cells from the structure of the cathode material that factors in dimensionality of Na+ ion migration pathways, the height of the migration barriers and the crystallite size of the active material.
With the help of selected examples, we also illustrate the respective roles of unoccupied low energy sites within the pathway and temperature towards the overall rate capability of insertion-type cathode materials.
In this work, we have proposed to quantify the rate performances of sodium cathode materials in half-cells using the stretched exponential function.
This allows a systematic comparison among different compounds in terms of the critical C-rate W, inaccessible fraction of theoretical capacity α, and defect concentration-dependent β.
We have also shown that W is fundamentally related to the underlying structural features as they in turn determine the pathway topology, which can be characterized by two main descriptors: limiting migration barrier EA and pathway dimension d.
The dependence of W on particle size and temperature is also demonstrated.
We believe our work would facilitate a deeper understanding of the various contributing factors towards the overall rate capability and provide a systematic guideline for future designs of high rate performance NIBs.
