In this work, we have proposed to quantify the rate performances of sodium cathode materials in half-cells using the stretched exponential function.
This allows a systematic comparison among different compounds in terms of the critical C-rate W, inaccessible fraction of theoretical capacity α, and defect concentration-dependent β.
We have also shown that W is fundamentally related to the underlying structural features as they in turn determine the pathway topology, which can be characterized by two main descriptors: limiting migration barrier EA and pathway dimension d.
The dependence of W on particle size and temperature is also demonstrated.
We believe our work would facilitate a deeper understanding of the various contributing factors towards the overall rate capability and provide a systematic guideline for future designs of high rate performance NIBs.equivalents can occur at ultra-high rates (up to 320 C) from/into structurally more accessible Li2 and Li3 sites, while the de/intercalation of the third lithium equivalent from/into the Li1 position is supposedly hindered kinetically.
To analyze the electrochemical data, specially developed theoretical models were used, which take into account geometry and phase configuration of the diffusion space, as well as the properties of the phase boundary interfaces.
Morphology and size distribution parameters, essential for mathematical processing of the electrochemical data, were obtained by SEM, PSD and BET methods.
A detailed study of a reversible electrochemical stepwise lithiation of the Li3V2(PO4)3- electrode by a combination of the electrochemical methods in a wide range of lithium concentrations in the electrode and lithium insertion/extraction rates was performed.
The asymmetry of charge-discharge curves in a wide range of electrode potentials known from the literature has also been observed in the studied material.
In the present study, we found that the current increasing (up to 10C) results in a rapid reduction of the specific capacity presumably related to the lithium extraction from the “trapped” Li1 site, and at subsequent increase of the current (above 10C), the only Li2 and Li3 positions might be involved in the reversible lithiation.
This asymmetry of charge/discharge processes is presumably related to the non-equivalence of the Li sites in the Li3V2(PO4)3 crystal structure which should be further validated by operando X-ray diffraction studies capable to shed light on the structural transformations during the electrochemical operation.
As it has been noted in the Introduction section, Li3V2(PO4)3 with the NASICON structure is a predominantly high rate ionic conductor (10-5 Ohm-1∙cm-1) and weak electronic conductor (10-8 Ohm-1∙cm-1).
Since the ion transfer is impossible without the simultaneous electron transfer, using of carbon components improving the electronic conductivity is highly encouraged to realize the good performance of the material.
However, at extremely high currents the carbon additive is capable to contribute to the overall specific capacity due to the double-layer formation.
Within the ~2V potential range the maximum specific capacity attributed to the double layer on the carbon additive may achieve ~12 mAh∙g-1, though in real systems this value is lower, still may be taken into account.
The observed fast transport properties of Li3V2(PO4)3 were confirmed by electrochemical (PITT, GITT, EIS) methods.
The Li diffusion coefficients were found to be around 10-9 cm2∙s-1 using a set of electrochemical techniques.
Considering the 1 μm average particle size of the material retrieved from the PSD and SEM data, the minimum diffusion time can be estimated as 10 s, which corresponds to 360 C rate.
Thus, the rate capabilities of Li3V2(PO4)3-electrode could be realized completely in the extended range of operating potentials due to polarization effect caused by the low electronic conductivity of the material.
Another interesting fact is the sharp decline in the diffusion coefficients by 2–3 orders of magnitude in the range of potentials related to the formation of the lithium-free phase, V2(PO4)3. The corresponding charge capacity starts to drop at currents above 0.2 C, indicating the influence of diffusion limitations on the de/intercalation of lithium within this potential range.
The other electrochemical characteristics of the Li3V2(PO4)3-electrode determined from the analysis of PITT, GITT and EIS data tend to change along with the diffusion coefficients.
Thus, the resistances of the external (Rs) and internal (Rct) layers of electrode material particles, as well as the permeability constant of the inner boundary of the diffusion layer (h) equivalent to the rate of the phase transformation between different forms of the lithiated material are sharply increasing.
Obviously, these parameters also reflects the fundamental differences in kinetics of the Li de/intercalation from the non-equivalent Li sites.
