Sodium-ion batteries, representative members of the post-lithium-battery club, are very attractive and promising for large-scale energy storage applications.
The increasing technological improvements in sodium-ion batteries (Na-ion batteries) are being driven by the demand for Na-based electrode materials that are resource-abundant, cost-effective, and long lasting.
Polyanion- type compounds are among the most promising electrode materials for Na-ion batteries due to their stability, safety, and suitable operating voltages.
The most representative polyanion-type electrode materials are Na3V2(PO4)3 and NaTi2(PO4)3 for Na-based cathode and anode materials, respectively.
Both show superior electrochemical properties and attractive prospects in terms of their development and application in Na-ion batteries.
Carbonophosphate Na3MnCO3PO4 and amorphous FePO4 have also recently emerged and are contributing to further developing the research scope of polyanion-type Na-ion batteries.
However, the typical low conductivity and relatively low capacity performance of such materials still restrict their development.
This paper presents a brief review of the research progress of polyanion-type electrode materials for Na-ion batteries, summarizing recent accomplishments, highlighting emerging strategies, and discussing the remaining challenges of such systems.
Na-ion batteries are being considered one of the most suitable electrochemical power sources for large-scale electrical energy storage due to the merits of abundant raw materials, significantly low cost, and relatively high specific capacity.
The last five years have witnessed the rapid development of ambienttemperature Na-ion batteries.
Among the different kinds of electrode materials for this system, polyanion-type compounds such as phosphates, pyrophosphates, sulfates, silicates, carbonophosphates, and so on have attracted significant attention.
In this review, we focused on the research progress of polyanion- type compounds for Na-ion batteries.
By systematic better cope with the intrinsic low electronic conductivity of polyanion compounds, some strategies have been used to enhance the electrochemical performance of such compounds: (1) building conductive frameworks of carbon matrices; (2) element substitution to improve the operating potential and Na-ion diffusion coefficients; (3) controlled synthesis of a special morphology to optimize the structure of materials; and (4) designing and selecting suitable electrolytes.
The future development of polyanion materials is expected to address some issues, such as (1) material genetic engineering combined with experimental science to select suitable materials for Na storage; (2) using material science and electrochemical technology to design and achieve special preferred orientation or morphology; (3) further improving the electrochemical reaction kinetics.
Along with the urgent demand for large-scale energy storage, the development of Na-ion batteries is opening a new era full of opportunities and challenges, and the development of key materials is the main driving force.
Better understanding and development of polyanion materials will result in strong support for promoting the commercialization of Na-ion batteries.
