Double and triple cobalt-containing phosphates Cs1–2xCoxZr2(PO4)3 (x = 0.15, 0.25, 0.50) with NASICON structure obtained by the sol–gel method were characterized using XRD, BET, XPS, and UV spectroscopy.
The major isobutyl alcohol conversion reaction on these phosphates is dehydration.
The triple phosphates have higher catalytic activity than the double phosphates in accord with a correlation between the yield of olefins and the concentration of acid sites on the catalyst surface.
Complex phosphates with NASICON (Sodium Super Ionic Conduction) structure has attracted increasing attention in the past two decades since these compounds possess a broad range of applications due to their capacity to form compounds with various given structures and properties.
The basic structure of the phosphate is formed by ZrO 6 octahedra and PO 4 tetrahedra that share common corners in the unit cell as well as having M1 and M2 cavities of different size, in which a broad range of cations compensating the charge of the framework (charge-compensating cations) may fit.
The composition of the surface layer was studied by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS).
The surface composition was found to differ from the stoichiometric composition.
Table 2 shows that the content of the charge-compensating ions on the surface was two or three times greater than the stoichiometric values.
In comparing these catalysis and adsorption experiments, we see that activity relative to dehydration correlates with the total amount of acid surface sites titrated through pyridine adsorption  25 , while the activity relative to dehydrogenation correlates with the fraction of activated adsorption , i.e., the amount of transition metal ions in the conductance channels of the phosphate.
Thus, partial replacement of cesium ion by cobalt ions has been found to lead to a linear decrease in the crystal lattice parameters, while complete replacement leads to a change in the type of crystal lattice with a sharp decrease in the size of the unit cell.
The major reaction in the conversion of isobutyl alcohol is dehydration.
The triple phosphates demonstrate higher catalytic activity than the double phosphates.
A correlation was shown between the olefin yields and the total amount of surface acid sites.
The X-ray diffraction studies were carried out using the scientific equipment and the Physicochemical Research Collective Use Center of the Peoples’ Friendship University of Russia.
The X-ray photoelectron spectral data were obtained using the scientific equipment of the Scientific Research Collective Use Center of the Chemistry Faculty of Moscow State University.
