Small single crystals of NASICON-type LiTi2(PO4)3 of high quality were grown by means of long-term annealing of polycrystalline specimens synthesized using conventional solid state reaction.
A thorough study of their structural properties and vibrational dynamics was carried out by means of an integrated experimental and theoretical approach.
A single crystal X- ray diffraction analysis at room temperature allowed to determine the precise crystal structure and the anisotropic displacement parameters of all atoms.
In addition, all the 25 indepen- dent components of the polarizability tensor, expected on the basis of the group theory for the LiTi2(PO4)3 crystal, were observed using polarized Raman spectroscopy in backscattering geometry on a micro-crystal, properly oriented by a micro-manipulator.
Thus all the expected Raman modes have been unambiguously identified by determining both their wavenumber and symmetry throughout an accurate analysis of the spectral profiles observed in the different po- larization configurations.
Finally, these experimental findings were fully corroborated by the results of first-principles calculations performed to determine Raman and infrared vibrational modes.
In this study both the crystal structure and the vibrational dynamics of NASICON-type LiTi2(PO4)3 crystal have been carried out by single crystal X-ray diffraction and an integrated vibrational dy- namics study of LTP single crystals, consisting of polarized Raman scattering measurements and first-principles calculations.
In particular, the structural parameters were carefully determined, like cell parameters, atomic positions and anisotropic thermal displacement parameters.
Moreover, all the allowed Raman modes of LTP have been unambiguously detected and identified in terms of their frequency and symmetry.
Our experimental findings resulted in excellent agreement with the results of first-principles calculations, which also provide additional insights into the infrared and silent vibrational modes.
These structural and dynamical information on LTP, reference compound for NASICON-type materials, would help in outlining a thorough description of ion transport and related properties of NASICON-type solid electrolytes.
