This work reports the microstructure, and structural and electrical properties of Na3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 (0.0 <= x <=1.7) NASICON (Na+ Super-Ionic Conductor) compounds obtained from the crystallization of a precursor glass. The addition of aluminum in the Na3.4Sc2Si0.4P2.6O12 NASICON composition improves the glass-forming ability of the precursor glass, which is evaluated by thermal analysis. Moreover, the Al3+/Sc3+ isovalent substitution allows us to change the lattice parameters of the NASICON structure, without varying the number of charge carriers (Na+ ions) per unit formula. X-ray diffractograms reveal the for-mation of the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 NASICON-type phase after crystallization of the parent glasses. From the structural characterization, it is also noted that the inclusion of Al3+ in the NASICON structure causes a volume contraction, which in turn, increases the activation energy and decreases the ionic conductivity. Thus, we demonstrated that the substitution of Sc3+ ions in the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 NASICON-type structure by an ion of the same valence, but with a smaller atomic radius, decreases the ionic conductivity of the material.
The ﬁrst compounds of the NASICON type family (NaM2(PO4)3; M = Ge, Ti, Zr) were discovered in 1968 by Hagman and Kierke-gaard. The authors carried out an exhaustive analysis of the NASICON crystalline structure by X-ray diffraction and described it as an arrangement of PO4 tetrahedra, which are connected by the vertices to the ZrO6 octahedra when M = Zr. This special arrange-ment allows the formation of three-dimensional channels with bottlenecks through which Na+ ions can move within the structure. However, it took eight years for the high conductivities achieved by these materials to be recognized. In 1976, Goodenough et al. performed aliovalent substitutions Si4+/P5+ in the material discovered by Hagman, and thus developed the Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12 (0.4 <= x <= 2.8) NASICON series. The ionic conductivity exhibited by these materials is among the most signiﬁcant conductivities ach-ieved in sodium ion-conducting compounds. The highest total ionic conductivity was obtained in the sample with x = 2.0 (6.7 x 10-4 Scm-1 at 25 °C and 2.0 x10-1 Scm-1 at 300 °C). This high ionic conductivity is attributed to the introduction of extra Na+ ions and also to the cell expansion, which was promoted by the Si4+/P5+ substitution. Since then, NASICON materials have been recognized as promising candidates as solid electrolytes  and also as cathode and anode materials in solid-state batteries.In 2015, Guin et al. added silicon to the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 system and synthesized a new Na3+xSc2SixP3-xO12 (0.1 <= x <= 0.8) NASICON series. The highest total ionic conductivity of this series was found for the x = 0.4 composition and reached values of 6.9 x 10-4 Scm-1 and 3.8 x 10-1 Scm-1 at 25 °C and 300 °C, respectively. Recently, Zinkevich et al. synthesized the same NASICON series and calculated the bulk conductivity from diffusion data estimated by NMR spectroscopy and using the Nernst-Einstein equation. The authors reported that the maximum bulk conductivity value was exhibited for sample x = 0.5 (1.82 x 10-3 Scm-1 at 25 °C), which is very similar to that for the sample x = 0.4 (1.65 x 10-3 Scm-1 at 25 °C). It is worth mentioning that these conductivities reported by Zinkevich et al. and Guin et al., are comparable to those reported by Goodenough et al. , thus indicating that this new Na3+xSc2SixP3-xO12 NASICON series is very promising for its appli-cation as a solid electrolyte.In the studies performed by Guin et al. and Zinkevich et al., the Na3+xSc2SixP3-xO12 series was synthesized by a solid-state reaction. This synthesis route is one of the most used methods to obtain lithium and sodium ion-conducting NASICON materials. However, over the past several years, the number of NASICON compounds obtained via the glass-ceramic route has increased due to various advantages compared with conventional methods. Lower temperatures for crystallization of the precursor glasses, reduction in porosity, as well as the possibility of control-ling the ﬁnal microstructure of the material are some of the ad-vantages that stand out from the glass-ceramic process. To obtain a glass-ceramics, a precursor glass ﬁrst needs to be syn-thesized, which can be achieved by several methods (melt-quenching, splat cooling and sol-gel), and then crystal-lize it in a controlled process by applying suitable heat treatments.Taking into account the high ionic conductivity exhibited by the Na3.4Sc2Si0.4P2.6O12 compound, for the ﬁrst time we report the synthesis of Na3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 (0.0 <= x <= 1.7) materials from the crystallization of the Na2OeAl2O3-Sc2O3eSiO2eP2O5 precursor glass. Note that we have added aluminum oxide to the original composition to improve the glass-forming ability of the precursor glass and also to evaluate the effect of the Al3+/Sc3+ substitution on the lattice parameters of the NASICON structure. As reported , Al2O3 oxide can improve the glass-forming ability of pre-cursor glasses of NASICON compounds. Besides, it has a much lower price compared to that of Sc2O3, which would make the Na3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 series more attractive in terms of cost.It is worth mentioning that several aliovalent substitutions have been evaluated in the NASICON materials toanalyze their effect on structural and electrical properties. In fact, these substitutions promote an excess of negative charge that is compensated by the increase in the carrier concentration, which usually favors the conductivity of ionic compounds. However, in the present study, the number of charge carriers per unit formula is constant since we performed an isovalent substitution (Al3+/Sc3+) in the Na3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 NASICON series. This allows us to perform an original analysis about the evolution of the ionic con-ductivity based only on the variations of the lattice parameters, which directly inﬂuence the bottleneck size through which the Na+ ions move within the material. In addition, we investigated the microstructural changes promoted by adding aluminum to the glass-ceramics.
Precursor glasses of nominal composition listed in Table 1 were synthesized from analytical grade Na2CO3 (Vetec, 99.5%), Al2O3 (Aldrich, 99.9%), Sc2O3 (ABCR, 99.9%), SiO2 (Zetasil, 99%) and (NH4)2HPO4 (Aldrich, 98%) in 7 g batches. The powder mixtures were homogenized with alumina balls in a rotary mill jar for 2 h and then heated from room temperature to 700 °C(10 °C min-1 heating rate). At this temperature, the precursor materials were calcined for 1 h to remove water (H2O), ammonia (NH3), and carbon dioxide (CO2) from the raw materials. The batches were melted in a platinum crucible for 30 min at 1550 °C for the composition without aluminum (x = 0.0) and at 1450 °C for x >= 1.0 samples, and later poured between two steel plates. Thus, glassy plates of 2 mm thickness were obtained. To release the thermal stresses, the ob-tained glasses were annealed for 2 h at a temperature below their glass transition temperature (Tg e 40 °C), previously determined by Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC), and then slowly cooled to room temperature inside the furnace.Glass-ceramics of Na3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 (1.0 <= x <= 1.7) composition were prepared by heating the precursor glasses at their crystallization temperature (Tx) for 3 h. The heat treatments were performed in a tubular electrical furnace in an air atmosphere with temperature accuracy of ±1 °C.
Glass transition (Tg) and crystallization (Tx, the onset of the crystallization peak) temperatures of Na3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 parent glasses were determined by Differential Scanning Calorim-etry using a DSC-Netzsch 404 instrument at a heating rate of 10 °C min-1 using a platinum crucible in air atmosphere. The DSC ana-lyses were done in monolithic samples.X-ray diffraction analysis was performed to check the amor-phous nature of the precursor glasses and to identify the crystal-lized phases in the glass-ceramics after the heat treatments. The data were obtained at room temperature, applying CuKa radiation generated at 20 mA and 40 kV in a Rigaku Ultima IV X-ray diffractometer. The X-ray patterns were collected in the 2q angle range from 10° to 80°, with a step size of 0.02° and 0.6 s counting time. The crystalline phases were indexed using the Crystallog-raphica Search-Match software. The lattice parameters were determined by the Rietveld method using the Topas-Academic software (version 6)  in combination with the Inorganic Crys-tal Structure Database (ICSD) .The microstructure of glass-ceramics was examined by means of scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a Phillips XL30 FEG microscope. The micrographs were obtained on the fractured sur-faces of samples previously sputtered with gold, applying a current of 20 mA and a time deposition of 15 s.
The electrical behavior of Na3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 glass-ceramics was analyzed by impedance spectroscopy using a NOVOCONTROL, Alpha-A High-Performance Frequency Analyzer. Impedance measurements were performed at temperatures be-tween 50 and 300 °C (accuracy of 0.1 °C) within the 10 MHze100 mHz frequency range and voltage amplitude of 300 mV. Before electrical measurements, both surfaces of the crystallized samples (~2 mm thickness and ~10 mm2 surface) were initially sanded with 500 grit sandpaper to standardize the thick-ness of the samples and ensure parallel surfaces. In addition to removing small imperfections, sanding the samples also improves the adhesion of sputtered gold to the sample surface. Posteriorly, both surfaces were sputtered with gold electrodes using QUORUM Q150R ES equipment (current of 20 mA and time deposition of 300 s).
DSC thermograms of Na3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 parent glasses (Fig. 1) shows an endothermic event associated with the glass transition temperature (Tg), except for the samples with x = 0.0 and 1.0. The absence of Tg and the crystallization peak (exothermic event) in the x = 0.0 composition is expected since this sample could not be vitriﬁed. For this x value, the liquid crystallized completely during the cooling step of the synthesis. This sponta-neous and uncontrolled crystallization process is known as devit-riﬁcation. The devitriﬁcation of the x = 0.0 sample is probably due to the high percentage of Sc2O3 (see Table 1), which is not a glass-former oxide. Devitriﬁed glasses are not considered as glass-ceramics (i.e., controlled crystallized glasses), and they may exhibit undesired properties mainly due to the non-uniform nature of their microstructure. As mentioned in the introduction section, the improvement of the glass-forming ability of the Na3.4Sc2Si0$4P2.6O12 original composition (x = 0.0) was one of the reasons for adding aluminum oxide in this series. In fact, it has been reported for other NASICON series that the aluminum oxide can improve the glass-forming ability of the precursor glass.The glass-forming ability can be evaluated by the difference between the crystallization (Tx) and Tg temperatures, i.e., Tx - Tg. The Tx - Tg glass stability parameter and the character-istic temperatures (Tg and Tx)ofNa3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 parent glasses are summarized in Table 1. Since the Tx - Tg parameter in-creases with the increase of Al3+, it is observed that the glass-forming ability and the thermal stability of glasses are improved by adding aluminum to the Na3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 (1.2 <= x <= 1.7) series. It is worth noting that a glass transition temperature (Tg) could not be detected for the x = 1.0 sample, which is attributed to the partial devitriﬁcation of the precursor glass. This assumption is corroborated by the low-intensity crystallization peak in the DSC (Fig. 1), and also by X-ray results, which will be shown in Fig. 2, section 3.2.
On the other hand, Fig. 1 also shows the absence of the crys-tallization temperature (Tx) in the x = 2.0 sample, which suggests high thermal stability against crystallization. In fact, the decrease in the intensity of the crystallization peak from the x = 1.5 to x = 2.0 samples, suggests that the presence of Al2O3 in the precursor glasses of the Na3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 series not only increases the glass stability parameter (Tx -Tg) but also hinders its crystallization. Similar behavior was reported in the precursor glasses of another silicon-containing NASICON series. For this reason, the glass-ceramic with x = 2.0 was not analyzed.
Fig. 2 presents the X-ray diffraction patterns of parent glasses and glass-ceramics of the Na3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 series. From Fig. 2a, it is noted that the Na3.4Sc2Si0.4P2.6O12 sample (without aluminum, x = 0.0) presents intense diffraction peaks, which are associated with the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 NASICON-type (ICSD Filecard No. 239919). We remind here that this is a devitriﬁed sample, i.e., the liquid crystallized during the cooling, as mentioned in section 3.1. The presence of some diffraction peaks of the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 NASI-CON phase can also be observed for the parent glasses with 0.0 < x <= 1.2 (Fig. 2a). However, it is noted that the intensity of these crystalline peaks decreases remarkably as the amount of aluminum increases. In fact, these diffraction peaks disappear in high-aluminum content samples (x >= 1.5). Thus, these results demon-strate that the addition of aluminum oxide reduces the tendency to the devitriﬁcation, being highly useful to improve the glass-forming ability of the Na3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 compounds.
After crystallization heat treatments, the desired NASICON-type phase Na3Sc2(PO4)3 is present in all glass-ceramics (see Fig. 2b). However, this phase is observed as a single phase in glass-ceramics only for 1.0 <= x <= 1.5 thus, suggesting that only the parent glasses with x <= 1.5 are stoichiometric, i.e., they crystallize into a crystal with the same chemical composition. Additionally, the Na3Al2(PO4)3 (JCPDS Filecard No. 31-1265) and Al2O3 (ICSD Filecard No. 064713) secondary phases appear for the glass-ceramic with the highest aluminum content (x = 1.7, Fig. 2b), inferring that the solid solution limit in Na3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 (1.0 <= x <= 1.7) series was reached at a value of x = 1.5. Thus, x = 1.7 sample crystallizes preferentially in the Na3Al2(PO4)3 phase, because of its high aluminum content. Some peaks of an unknown phase are also noticed in the x = 1.7 samples crystallized at Tx for 3 h and 6 h.On the other hand, the presence of an amorphous halo between 20° < 2q < 30°, characteristic of phosphate NASICON glasses is also seen for the x = 1.7 glass-ceramics (Fig. 2b). This result re-veals the presence of a residual glassy phase after the heat treat-ment performed at Tx (905 K) for 3 h and even in the sample treated for a longer time (see Fig. 2b). Thus, the total crystallization of this sample was not achieved at those thermal conditions. Besides, a high value of the glass stability parameter and a low-intensity crystallization peak has already been noticed in the thermal char-acterization of the x = 1.7 sample (section 3.1).
The data obtained by Rietveld analysis of the X-ray patterns of Na3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 (1.0 <= x <= 1.5) glass-ceramics, describing the crystallized NASICON structure are summarized in Table 2. Fig. 3 illustrates, as an example, the good agreement between the experimental and calculated patterns for the sample with x = 1.0. A similar result was obtained for other investigated samples. From Table 2, it is interesting to note a decrease in the unit cell volume of the NASICON structure as Al3+ is added. The contraction in the rhombohedral unit cell is caused by the decrease in the “a” lattice parameter. In fact, the incorporation of aluminum ions of smaller ionic radius (Al3+: 0.535 Å) in the octahedral positions of scandium (Sc3+: 0.745 Å) is responsible for the contraction in the unit cell volume. As reported in several studies, the decrease in the cell volume also suggests a shrinkage of the bottleneck size of the NASICON structure due to the direct relationship between these two parameters .The bulk crystal densities (rbc)ofNa3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 com-pounds (listed in Table 2) were calculated from the formula weight (Fw), the number of unit formula per NASICON unit cell (Z = 6, according to ICSD No. 239919), the calculated unit cell volumes (V) by Rietveld reﬁnement and the Avogadro’s number according to the expression :
Fig. 4 shows SEM micrographs of the fracture surfaces for Na3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 (1.0 <= x <= 1.7) glass-ceramics crystallized at Tx for 3 h, as well as the micrograph of the x = 1.7 glass-ceramic obtained at Tx for 6 h. All samples exhibit dense microstructures, which conﬁrms that the glass-ceramic route obtains NASICON materials with low porosity. This result is expected when the densities of the glass and the crystalline phase are similar, which reduces the contraction stresses responsible for porosity during the transformation of glass to glass-ceramic.On the other hand, it is also noted that the increase of aluminum promotes a decrease in grain size. Thus, the largest grain size is exhibited for the x = 1.0 glass-ceramic. We attribute this result to the presence of NASICON crystals before the heat treatment (as discussed in Section 3.2) in the precursor sample, i.e., the grains already formed grow even more with the heat treatment at Tx for 3 h. Besides, due to their high stability against crystallization, samples with higher aluminum content probably present slower crystallization kinetics and, thus, small grains are formed. As seen by thermal analysis (Section 3.1), the addition of aluminum also favors the thermal stability of glasses against crystallization.Regarding the glass-ceramics with x = 1.7, the presence of smooth surfaces on micrographs (typical appearance of glassy phase) clearly shows that the heat treatment performed at Tx for 3 h and 6 h did not allow the total crystallization of parent glass. This result is in good agreement with that obtained by DSC (Section 3.1) and X-ray (Section 3.2) analyses.
Fig. 5a illustrates the complex impedance spectra at 150 °C for the glass-ceramics with x = 1.0 and 1.5 obtained by heat treatment at Tx for 3 h and of the devitriﬁed sample (x = 0.0). The formation of a single semi-circle is observed in all impedance plots, thus rep-resenting the sum of the electrical responses of the grain and grain boundary, i.e., the total electrical response of the sample. The ionic character of the electrical conductivity is conﬁrmed by the straight line formed at lower frequencies in Fig. 5a. As known, this behavior results from blocking Na+ ions in the electrode-sample interface.On the other hand, as the impedance data values were corrected by the geometric parameter of each sample (l/A, l is the sample’s thickness and A its surface area), the intercept of the semi-circles with the x-axis at lower frequencies indicates the total resistivity (sTotal). Thus, an increase in electrical resistivity as the Al3+ content increases from x = 0.0 to 1.5 is noted in Fig. 5a.The total ionic conductivities (sTotal) of glass-ceramics were calculated from the inverse of total resistivity (sTotal= 1/rTotal) in the 50 °C e 200 °C temperature range. Fig. 5b shows the evolution of sTotal as a function of the inverse of temperature.The linear regression of the experimental data of Fig. 5b was performed assuming an Arrhenius-like behavior: The pre-exponential term of the Arrhenius equation depends on the concentration of charge carriers (n), the attempt frequency (n0), the ionic charge: As can be noted from Eq. (3), an estimation of the expected value of the pre-exponential parameter can be performed if the values of n, l, and n0 are known. Thus, we have carried out a determination of the carrier concentration and the attempt frequency using Eq. (4) and Eq. (5) [33e35], respectively. Note that in Eq. (5),we have assumed that l ~ (1/n)1/3 to calculate the v0 frequency parameter.
We have taken 373 K as a reference temperature in Eq. (3) considering that the variations of s0 are small in the temperature range used for impedance measurements in this work (50 e 300 °C).Table 3 summarizes the logarithm of the pre-exponential factor (log s0), the total activation energy (Ea), and the total ionic con-ductivity (sTotal) obtained from the linear regression of the exper-imental data in Fig. 5b. The logarithm of the pre-exponential term (log s0-es) estimated from Eq. (3) is also listed, as well as the jump distances (l), the calculated (Eq. (5)) attempt frequencies (n0), and the carrier concentrations (n) (Eq. (4)).Note the good agreement between the experimental value of the logarithm of the pre-exponential term (log s0) with that estimated from Eq. (3) (log s0-es), which are close to 2.0 as predicted for ionic conductors. As also seen in Table 3,boths0 values in samples containing aluminum do not change with the increase of x. As previously mentioned, this result is expected since the Al3+/Sc3+ isovalent substitution performed in the Na3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 series does not promote the addition of extra Na+ ions, and the number of charge carrier per unit formula is constant. Thus, since s0 does not vary signiﬁcantly, the changes in total ionic conductivity of Na3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 glass-ceramics are only attributed to the variation of activation energy, according to Eq. (2).Although the presence of Na3Al2(PO4)3 undesired phase and also a remaining glassy phase, as shown by X-ray result (Fig. 2b), glass-ceramics with x = 1.7 show higher or similar conductivities than x = 1.5 sample (see Table 3 and Fig. 5b). Since Na3Al2(PO4)3 presents poor ionic conductivity, this increase in ionic conductivity should be attributed to a conductive glassy phase. This phenome-non, i.e., the increase of ionic conductivity by a conductive glassy phase, has already been suggested in the case of Na1+xAlxGe2-x(PO4)3 (NAGP) glass-ceramics. Composition with x = 0.0 (devitriﬁed sample) presents slightly higher activation energy than the ceramic synthesized by Guin et al. (0.337 eV) . This result is explained by the uncontrolled crystallization of our aluminum-free sample, which affects its microstructure and electrical properties.
Fig. 6 illustrates the variation of the total ionic conductivity at 25 °C, of the activation energy, and unit-cell volume of NASICON structure as a function of aluminum content (x). It is noted that the activation energy increases as the volume of the NASICON cell decrease from x = 0.0 to 1.5. This result can be understood since the contraction of unit cell volume causes a reduction in the bottleneck size through which charge carriers (Na+) migrate within the ma-terial . In other words, the ions migrate with greater difﬁculty through the narrow bottlenecks in samples with higher aluminum content, and this is reﬂected in the highest values of activation energy and the low ionic conductivity exhibited by these samples. The increase of Ea promoted a decrease in total ionic conductivity (at 25 °C) of up to 4 orders of magnitude when compared to the sample with x = 0.0. This result reveals that for samples with a constant number of Na+ ions per unit formula, isovalent substitutions of the ion localized in octahedral positions (ScO6) of the NASICON-type structure, by an ion with a smaller ionic radius, reduces the ionic conductivity due mainly to the narrowing of the bottleneck. In this sense, we want to suggest that an inter-mediate oxide with a trivalent ion whose ionic radius is similar (or higher) to that of Sc3+, should be added to favor the synthesis of the Na3.4Sc2Si0.4P2.6O12 compound by the glass-ceramic route.
Sodium ion-conducting NASICON glass-ceramics of Na3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 (1.0 <= x <= 1.7) composition are synthesized for the ﬁrst time. The increase in the Tx e Tg parameter as the x increases shows that the addition of Al2O3 oxide favors the glass-forming ability of precursor glasses. Low intensity or the absence of crystallization peak in samples with high aluminum content also indicates that Al2O3 hinders the crystallization of the precursor glass. The X-ray patterns of precursor glasses also conﬁrm this idea since the sam-ples with a higher content of Al3+ were fully amorphous. Thus, we demonstrated that the Al3+/Sc3+ substitution favors the synthesis of Na3.4AlxSc2-xSi0.4P2.6O12 compounds by the glass-ceramic route.From the structural characterization of glass-ceramics, it can be concluded that the Al3+ ions replace the Sc3+ ions in the NASICON structure, which promotes the contraction of the unit cell volume inferring the narrowing of the bottleneck size. This contraction of the unit-cell volume increases the activation energy and also de-creases the total ionic conductivity of samples. Thus, the substitu-tion of Sc3+ ions in the Na3Sc2(PO4)3 NASICON-type structure by an ion of the same valence and smaller atomic radius reduces the ionic conductivity of the material, conﬁrming the rationale that reducing the bottleneck size has a negative effect on ionic conductivity.