NASICON-type Na3V2(PO4)3 cathode materials can be regarded as promising candidates for high-power Na-ion batteries due to the observed facile kinetics of Na-ion de/intercalation. Substitution of V for Mn provides additional advantages related to the increase in the average operating potential and reduced cost of the active material. In this work, we explore the kinetics of Na+ intercalation into Mn-substituted Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 (x = 0, 0.1, 0.5, 1) materials with a primary focus on the impact of Mn content on the rate capability of the materials. We demonstrate that Mn substitution results in quite subtle changes in bulk ionic diffusivity and charge transfer rates, while more significant impact is observed on the nucleation kinetics, which induces large hysteresis between charge and discharge curves for Mn-rich materials. The increase in hysteresis between charge and discharge curves does not limit the specific energy retention at high C-rates significantly, yet the performance losses are mainly related to the slow phase boundary propagation for biphasic processes. The Mn-rich materials, which demonstrate wider single-phase regions, are shown to outperform the unsubstituted materials in terms of rate-capability and should be preferred for high-power applications. 
In recent years, sodium-ion battery (SIB) cathodes within the NASICON structural type have been heavily investigated due to the attractive energy density characteristics and high transport rates, which give reasons to expect outstanding rate capability of the respective SIBs [1-4]. Mn-substituted materials with the composition Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 (0≤x≤1) offer additional advantages of increased operating voltage, lower cost due to the substitution of V with earth-abundant Mn, and synergistic effects of V and Mn in the NASICON structure on the ionic diffusivities and the reversibility of phase transformations [5-10]. The structural transformation pathways of Na4MnV(PO4)3 material were described in great detail in recent works [5-9] with an emphasis on the specifics of material behavior at different charging voltages, as the voltage above 3.8 V enhances the limit of Na+ extraction above two sodium atoms per formula unit through depletion of the Na1 position [5,8]. Yet, the plausible effects of the capacity increase (14%) were shown to level off due to the larger polarization and poorer cycling stability observed for materials with high Mn content at elevated cutoff voltage limits, possibly related to the irreversible structural changes [5,8]. Despite stabilizing Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 materials in the high-voltage limit is still a challenge, their promising performance in the 2.5 – 3.8 V range with 105-110 mAh g-1 capacity and energy density of ca. 375 Wh kg-1 dictates the necessity to explore the structural and kinetic aspects of SIB cathodes with a primary focus on the optimal characteristics in terms of rate capability. Substitution of V for Mn results in prominent changes in the de/intercalation mechanisms, as the increase in Mn content extends the length of the solid solution regions [9], which appears to be promising for high-power applications [7,10].  The rate performance of rechargeable batteries is limited since above some threshold charge or discharge rate, the maximum obtainable the capacity is diminished due to several factors such as slow diffusion, slow electron or ion transport, electrolyte stability, and structural transformations [11,12]. Several approaches have been undertaken to improve rate performance by optimization of particle size, electrode thickness and porosity, and electrolyte formulation [13,14]. Yet the most commonly reported experimental measurements are capacity vs rate plots, which are difficult to quantitatively relate kinetic factors to rate performance. In recent years, several semi-empirical models [15-17] were proposed for the analysis of the capacity vs rate data, which yield apparent kinetic parameters and do not allow for the reliable distinction of various rate-limitations. In this work, we quantify the several factors associated with diffusional, charge transfer and nucleation-induced polarization effects of Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 (x = 0, 0.1, 0.5, 1) materials using well developed electrochemical methods. With this approach we can establish improved design criteria and summarize the benefits and drawbacks of Mn substitution in a host of Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 (0≤x≤1) compositions in comparison to the more thoroughly studied Na3V2(PO4)3 material. 
Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 (0≤x≤1) samples were prepared by mixing manganese and vanadium reactants (specified in Table S1) with oxalic acid in deionized water in the molar ratio x:(2-x):3 and stirring for 40 min at 70°C. Separately sodium and phosphate reactants (Table S1) were mixed in deionized water in the molar ratio (3+x):3, which then were drop-wise added to the first solution and continued stirring for additional 40 min followed by evaporation at 95°C overnight. After that the solid residue was mortared and pre-heated at 350°C for 3 hours under argon atmosphere following by grinding in a high-energy SPEX-8000M ball-mill for 5 min and subsequent annealing at 750°C for 8 h in Ar atmosphere. The prepared Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 (0≤x≤1) samples were carbon-coated using a solution of polyacrylonitrile (PAN, (C3H3N)n in DMFA (Sigma-Aldrich, extra-pure) casted on the initial powder and then annealed at 600°C for 2 h (3 K min−1 heating rate) under Ar to yield the Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3/C composite [18]. The capacity values are calculated per material/C composite weight. X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded with a Huber G670 Guiner Camera (Co Kα1 radiation, Ge(111) monochromator, 10-100°, 40 kV / 30 mA) equipped with an image plate detector. Sequential LeBail fitting was performed using Jana2006 software [19]. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) images were obtained with a JEOL JSM-6490LV electron microscope (tungsten hairpin electron gun, 30 kV) equipped with an Everhart-Thornley detector. 
Electrochemical measurements were performed in two-electrode Swagelok cells (galvanostatic charge/discharge measurements) and three-electrode cells (cyclic voltammetry, chronoamperometry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements). The cells were assembled in an Ar-filled glove box. Glass microfiber filters were used as separators. The cathode material slurries were prepared by mixing active material, carbon black (Timcal Super P) and polyvinylidene fluoride in the weight ratio 77:13:10 with N–methyl–2–pyrrolidone. Working electrodes were fabricated by casting the slurries on aluminum foil (Doctor Blade). The electrodes were dried at 110°C under dynamic vacuum for at least 2 hours. The mass loading of cathode materials was 0.8–1.0 mg cm-2. Metallic sodium was used as a counter electrode. For the three-electrode measurements, reference electrodes were fabricated by charging the Na3V2(PO4)3 electrodes to reach the state-of-charge of 0.5 [20]. The potential of the reference electrodes was 3.370 V vs. Na+/Na and was found to be stable during continuous measurements. The electrolyte was 1.0 M NaPF6 solution in propylene carbonate/ethylene carbonate (PC/EC 1:1) with the addition of 5% (by volume) of fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC). Galvanostatic curves, cyclic voltammograms (CV), electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) and chronoamperоmetric responses were registered using Biologic potentiostat/galvanostat and EС-lab software. Potentiostatic intermittent titration (PITT) was performed in 10 mV steps in the single-phase regions of the intercalation isotherms of Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 (0≤x≤1) materials. Diffusion coefficients were calculated from PITT data following the approaches described in refs [21,22]. Impedance spectra were registered in the potential ranges corresponding to single-phase regions in the frequency range 100 kHz – 10 mHz with a 4 mV amplitude. The analysis of the nucleation kinetics based on large-amplitude chronoamperometry was performed as described in refs [23,24]. 
To study the effect of Mn substitution on the kinetic properties of Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3, materials with x = 0, 0.1, 0.5 and 1 were synthesized. Fig. 1 shows the XRD patterns of the as-synthesized materials, the whole series can be indexed in the well-known NASICON unit cell with R̅ c space group [25]. Unit cell parameters are specified in Table S2. Rising the Mn2+ content leads to the unit cell volume increase (Fig. S1, Table S2), which is due to the replacement of smaller V3+ cations with larger Mn2+ (ionic radii are 0.64 Å and 0.83 Å, respectively [26]) in addition to incorporation of neutralizing excess of Na+ cations.Electrochemical studies impose specific requirements on the morphology of the electrode material samples. In order to extract kinetic data, the polydispersity of cathode materials should be minimized [24], while for a comparative study of four Mn-substituted materials the morphology of the samples should be very similar to focus on the effects of structural and compositional differences, and not on the effects of different particle sizes. The adopted synthetic route allowed us to obtain Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 (x=0, 0.1, 0.5, 1) samples with similar morphologies. The samples consist of agglomerated platelets with the size of 0.2−1 μm (Fig. 2). Despite the observed complex morphology, the individual particles in the agglomerates do not demonstrate high polydispersity, while the porous morphology of the agglomerates allows for the involvement of the individual particles into the de/intercalation processes. The Na4MnV(PO4)3 sample shows a higher tendency for the agglomeration of primary particles and considerably wider particle size distribution, which might result in less accurate estimates of kinetic parameters. Another important issue concerns the differences in the electronic conductivity of the Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 materials. Since ohmic effects in porous electrodes complicate the data analysis significantly [27,28] special care was taken to maximize the electronic conductivity of the composite electrodes. Among various conductive additives polyacrylonitrile (PAN)-derived carbon coating provided the minimal ohmic distortions of the CVs of Na3V2(PO4)3 materials (Fig. S2) and the respective carbon-coating procedure was applied to all the studied cathode material samples.  
As already reported in previous publications [9,29], the increase in the Mn content results in widening of solid solution regions, which is reflected in the shape of CVs of Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 electrodes (Fig. 3). The CV of the unsubstituted NASICON material Na3V2(PO4)3 (Mn0V2) exhibits one pair of peaks at the formal potential of 3.370 V (vs Na+/Na), which correspond to the extraction/insertion of 2Na+ per formula unit via a biphasic reaction, attributed to the redox activity of the V4+/3+ couple [30,31]. The single-phase regions, as determined from intercalation isotherms constructed from PITT data (Fig. S3), correspond to 0.97<θ<1 (θ – state-of-discharge) in the Na-rich phase and to 0.025>θ>0 in the Na-poor phase. The shape of the CV (exponential rises in current and “zero current” region in the vicinity of the formal potential) is very similar to that typically observed for LiFePO4 materials, where the kinetics of phase transformation was recently shown to be dictated by the energy penalties of the nucleation step [32-36]. The characteristic dependence of the peaks’ shape on the scan rate, with the overlap of the ascending parts of the peaks at different scan rates in the low-overvoltage regions (Fig. S4) imply the predominant slow nucleation type of control for the Mn0V2 electrodes [24,32]. 
In agreement with the recent reports [9], the length of the single-phase region in Na3.1Mn0.1V1.9(PO4)3 (Mn0.1V1.9) cathode is increased to 0.9<θ<1 in the Na-rich phase and to 0.1>θ>0 in the Na-poor phase (Fig. S3), which results in a substantial broadening of the CV for the Mn0.1V1.9 electrodes (Fig. 3) and in the disappearance of “zero-current” region between the anodic and cathodic peaks. Still, the observed characteristic scan rate dependence, i.e. the overlap of the ascending parts of the peaks at various scan rates (Fig. S4) implies the predominance of the slow nucleation rate control in the potential region of low overpotentials [24]. For the Na3.5Mn0.5V1.5(PO4)3 (Mn0.5V1.5) materials the single phase regions span at 0.75<θ<1 and 0.04>θ>0, which results in further broadening of the CV in Fig. 3. One can note the gradual increase of the formal potential from 3.370-3.375 V for Mn0V2 and Mn0.1V1.9 to 3.42 V for Mn0.5V1.5. The two processes (single phase redox process V4+/V3+ and biphasic Mn3+/Mn2+ redox transition [6]) become decoupled for the Na4MnV(PO4)3 (Mn1V1) electrodes with the single phase region corresponding to one Na+ extraction/insertion at E ~ 3.40 V (V4+/V3+) and a two-phase process at 3.56 V (Mn3+/Mn2+) (Fig. S3). The single phase process at E ~ 3.40 V can be reliably distinguished from the two-phase process at higher potential based on the CV shape dependence on the scan rate (Fig. S4). In the single-phase region, the current in every point of the peak scales with the scan rate (this variation is almost linear at low scan rates), while for the process at 3.56 V only the anodic peak exhibits systematic growth, while the ascending branches of the cathodic peaks overlap at different scan rates, which is a manifestation of nucleation and growth phenomena [32,33]. We note that although structural studies [9] imply the formation of an intermediate Na2M2(PO4)3 phase during charge and discharge and, correspondingly, two biphasic processes in the 2.5-3.8 V range, the CV and chronoamperometry data obtained in this work do not allow to distinguish between these processes, while the differentiation of C vs E plots shows only one pair of peaks in the two-phase regions, corresponding to a single biphasic process. The observed differences may be related to faster kinetics for the materials explored in this study. In the two-phase regions of the intercalation isotherms we thus analyze the kinetics of the effective “Na3MnxV2-x(PO4)3” - “Na1+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3” phase transition. 
The Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 materials were further examined for their ability to operate at different C-rates (C/10 – 5C) with primarily focusing on the changes of the hysteresis (ΔE) between the charging curve (at C/10) and discharge curves (at C/10 – 5C) and capacity fading at elevated current densities. The galvanostatic measurements were performed in the 2.5 – 3.8 V potential range to avoid irreversible transformations, which occur when the anodic voltage limit is further increased [5,8-10]. The reduced voltage range is also essential to ensure similar electrode/electrolyte reactivity, as at higher potentials the formation of cathode/electrolyte layers (CEI) [37-39] might result in additional kinetic polarization. The ΔE values were determined in the two-phase regions at the state-of-charge marked with dashed line in Fig. 4. 
For the Mn0V2 material, flat plateaus can be detected in the charge/discharge curves with a “thermodynamic” hysteresis [34] at C/10 rate of 25 mV, similar to that encountered for the LiFePO4 cathodes. At higher current densities, a pronounced increase in hysteresis values is observed, which is accompanied by the appearance of sloping parts of the discharge profiles at 0.6 – 1 states-of-discharge (Fig. 4). These sloping parts are typically related to the concentration polarization, i.e. the kinetic hindrances which result from the slow ionic transport in the bulk of the cathode. With the increase in the discharge current density, the ΔE value reaches 200 mV (Fig. 5), while the capacity at 5C is only moderately diminished (from 105 at C/10 to 91 mAh g-1 at 5C). For the Mn0.5V1.5 materials, the concentration polarization issues are less pronounced, as evident from the absence of the lower-voltage distortions of the discharge curves and a very small decrease of the intercalation capacity (5%) at 5C rate. Yet, at the elevated current densities the hysteresis values reach 240 mV (Fig. 5), which is substantially higher compared to the ΔE for the unsubstituted Mn0V2 material. For the Mn1V1 electrode, the ΔE changes from 130 mV at C/10 to 350 mV at 5C, while the intercalation capacity decrease is only 3% at 5C rate. The highest values of ΔE are observed at the potentials corresponding to the two-phase reaction, which might imply that the losses are induced by the activation barriers of the phase-transformation process. 
As the hysteresis values and concentration polarization effects were found to be highly dependent on the Mn content in the Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 materials, in this section we evaluate the key kinetic factors, responsible for the rate-limitations in intercalation materials – diffusion coefficients, charge transfer and surface layers’ resistances and nucleation rate constants. 
The difficulty of estimating diffusion coefficients for the materials with wide miscibility gaps originates from the general inadequacy of the D values determination in the two-phase regions, where the transport phenomena are related to the phase boundary propagation and not solely to the transport of ions in the host structure [40]. The diffusion coefficients can thus be determined in the single-phase regions, which are very narrow for the Mn0V2 material and increase progressively toward the Mn1V1 end-member, for which ca. 1Na+ can be extracted via a solid-solution route. The diffusion coefficients were calculated from PITT data in the single-phase regions of the intercalation isotherms for Mn0V2, Mn0.1V1.9, Mn0.5V1.5 and Mn1V1 materials taking into account the uncompensated ohmic drop, slow charge transfer kinetics and finite nature of diffusion problem in a particle of the active material (three-dimensional diffusion with a characteristic length of 0.2 μm) (Fig. 6). 
For the Mn0V2 material, the diffusion coefficients attain relatively high values of (20-
60)·10-12 cm2 s-1 in the Na-rich phase and lower values of (3-20)·10-12 cm2 s-1 in the Na-poor phase. A typical sharp decrease in the D values is observed in the vicinity of the phase-transformation potential [40]. For the Mn0.1V1.9 material with a single-phase region length increased by ca. 10%, the diffusion coefficients do not differ significantly, while for the Mn0.5V1.5 material D values amount to (2-20)·10-12 cm2 s-1 in the Na-rich phase and to (1-6)·10-12 cm2 s-1 in the Na-poor phase. For the Mn1V1 material, the diffusion coefficients in the Na-rich phase are in the range (2-30)·10-12 cm2 s-1, while somewhat lower values of (2-5)·10-12 cm2 s-1 are observed in the Na-poor phase. To this point, important observation concerns the differences in ionic diffusivities in the Na-rich and Na-poor phases with the latter providing lower (by 2-6 times) ionic mobilities. Another point is that Na-ion diffusion coefficient values do not differ significantly for the Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 materials and the variations hardly reach half an order of magnitude with the increase in the Mn content. It is therefore clear, that the observed in the discharge curves pronounced concentration polarization effects cannot be explained by the reduced diffusivities of Na-ion in the bulk of materials. 
The variation in the Mn content results in significant widening of the single-phase regions for Mn0.5V1.5 and Mn1V1 materials. Hence for the materials with high Mn content it seems reasonable to correlate the minimization of the diffusional limitations to the predominant solid-solution route at lower voltages (Na-rich region of the isotherms). For the Mn0V2 material, concentration polarization effects start to manifest themselves in the two-phase region of the intercalation isotherm, and therefore can be related to the slow phase-boundary propagation. We note that the 5C rate here does not result in the change of the reaction mechanism from two-phase to single-phase, as observed at higher C-rates for LiFePO4 materials [41,42], as at this rate the horizontal plateau is still clearly distinguished in the discharge curve. As at critical concentrations, corresponding to the limits of stability of Na-rich and Na-poor phases, the diffusion coefficients are generally found to decrease significantly, the maximal rates of the phase boundary propagation would be much lower than the diffusivities in the single-phase regions [43-45]. The phase boundary propagation rates are thought to decrease even further, if strain energies are taken into account [46-48]. In this regard, solid-solution pathway gives significant advantages for fast discharge of Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 materials compared to a biphasic process in unsubstituted sample. 
Next, we analyze the differences in the charge transfer kinetics for the Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 materials, as kinetic polarization may result in a significant hysteresis between charge and discharge curves in intercalation materials [24]. For the transition metal-based cathodes in EC/PC electrolytes, the composition of the cathode surface impacts the thickness and the resistivity of CEI layers [49]. Impedance spectroscopy was used to quantify the interfacial resistances of Mn0V2, Mn0.1V1.9, Mn0.5V1.5 and Mn1V1 cathodes. The impedance spectra of Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 electrodes (Fig. 7, the resistances are normalized per mass of the active material) show two distinct semicircles, which can be attributed to the resistance and capacitance of surface layers, RCEI and CCEI (higher frequency semicircle) and to the charge transfer resistance, Rct, and double layer capacitance, Cdl (lower frequency semicircle) [24] based on the observed potential dependence of the lower frequency semicircle diameter (Fig. S5) [24]. The low-frequency parts of the spectra feature a sloping line, which corresponds to finite ionic diffusion and can be modelled by a spherical finite Warburg element (equivalent circuit is given in Fig. S6, while Fig. S5 shows the fits to the experimental data). Given the pronounced differences in the width of the single-phase regions for the Mn-substituted materials, the comparison of the charge transfer resistances is not trivial, as exchange current density and, hence, Rct depend sharply on the state-of-charge at very low and very high intercalation levels [50], while for the Mn0V2 and Mn0.1V1.9 materials the single-phase regions are particularly narrow. This issue complicates the comparison of Rct values at identical intercalation levels, and we draw only qualitative conclusions on the dependence of the Rct semicircle diameters on the Mn content. The lowest Rct values (3-5 Ω·mg, Fig. 7) are observed for the Mn0V2 and Mn0.1V1.9 materials, while for the materials with increased Mn content the Rct values are 2-4 times higher (10-20 Ω·mg). The resistances of the surface layers, RCEI, exhibit a systematic growth with the increase in the Mn content, which reflects the higher reactivity of surface Mn atoms compared to V atoms. The RCEI values amount to 4, 9.5, 17 and 29 Ω·mg for the Mn0V2, Mn0.1V1.9, Mn0.5V1.5 and Mn1V1 cathodes, respectively.  Five-fold increase in the Rct (i.e. five-fold decrease in the value of the apparent electrochemical rate constant) and six-fold increase in RCEI would result effectively in a maximum of 50 mV difference in the hysteresis values at 5C rate for the Mn0V2 and Mn1V1 samples, while the experimental difference in ΔE amounts to 150 mV (Fig. 5). This indicates that charge transfer polarization and surface layers’ formation do not provide major contributions to the observed hysteretic features. 
The intrinsic hysteresis between charge and discharge curves in phase-separating materials was shown to be governed by the nucleation step activation energetics [34,46] with the hysteresis values being highly dependent on the charge/discharge rate [32]. For the Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 materials, we explored the kinetics of nucleation during the intercalation of Na ions. The nucleation kinetics can be quantified by measuring the potential dependencies of the nucleation rate constant, knucl based on large-amplitude chronoamperometric data [23,24,32,33]. In this experiment, the potential is stepped from some value in a Na-poor single-phase region (blue dot in Fig. 3) to the potential, which corresponds to an equilibrium composition in the Na-rich phase (arrows in Fig. 3). The registered current transient thus involves the process of phase transformation with the nucleation step activation barrier being dependent on the value of overvoltage, η. The overvoltage is calculated as the difference between the formal potential and the potential applied. Fig. 8a shows current transients registered after the potential steps for Mn0V2, Mn0.1V1.9, Mn0.5V1.5 and Mn1V1 electrodes at η ~ 25 mV. The I vs t dependencies exhibit characteristic maxima, which reflect coupling of the charge transfer, diffusional and nucleation rate limitations [35,36]. The current maxima are observed to shift to longer times with the increase in the Mn content and the width of the maxima increases progressively, which indicates that nucleation-induced kinetic hindrances become much more pronounced for the materials with high Mn substitution level (Fig. 8a).   As discussed in detail in refs [24,32], the nucleation rate constants can be estimated from the slopes of the linear parts of the ln(I) vs time dependencies at low (<60 mV) overvoltages, where the slow nucleation-induced rate-limitations are likely to dominate over charge transfer and diffusional limitations. Fig. 8b shows the registered current transients for the four materials in semilogarithmical coordinates with the linear parts used to estimate knucl marked with dashed lines. Notably, linear parts appear at longer times for Mn0.5V1.5 and Mn1V1 electrodes and can only be detected in the short-time domain (< 500 s) for Mn-poor materials. The slope of the linear regions increases with the decrease in Mn content (Fig. 8b), which indicates slower nucleation kinetics for the materials with high Mn substitution level. Fig. 8c shows the potential dependence of the nucleation rate constants. For the Mn0V2 and Mn1V1 materials, the nucleation rate constants differ by one order of magnitude, while for Mn0.1V1.9 and Mn0.5V1.5 knucl attain intermediate values. For the Mn-poor compounds, the nucleation rate constants are in the range (0.8-6)·10-3 s-1, while for the Mn-rich materials knucl values are significantly lower (0.1-1.5)·10-3 s-1. The effects of reduced phase transformation rates may be attributed to the presence of JahnTeller active Mn3+ [51,52]. The much more pronounced kinetic hindrances for the nucleation step thus explain the higher hysteresis values observed for Mn-rich materials at elevated charge/discharge rates. 
Having quantified the various sources of the rate-limitations in the Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 materials, we further analyze the result of the interplay of the various hindering factors on the decrease of the specific energy of the materials with increasing C-rate (Fig. 9). At 0.1, 0.2, 0.5 C-rates the four materials behave similarly and the specific energy reduction is only a few percent. Yet, at 1C the differences in the rate capability of the materials start to appear, with the Mn1V1 electrode demonstrating smaller reduction in specific energy. At 5C rate, the higher rate capability of Mn0.5V1.5 and Mn1V1 electrodes becomes obvious, as the losses in specific energy amount to 16% for Mn0V2 and only to 8% for Mn1V1. 
This analysis allows to suggest that despite much more pronounced hysteretic effects, the materials with high Mn content outperform their Mn-poor counterparts in terms of delivered specific energy at elevated charge/discharge rates. Though the slower nucleation and higher charge transfer resistances result in much higher hysteresis values for Mn0.5V1.5 and Mn1V1 materials, diffusional limitations related to the propagation of the phase boundary in the course of phase-transformation result in sharper decay of performance at high current densities. For the materials with wider single-phase regions, the relatively fast diffusion of ions in the crystal lattice results in much lower concentration polarization losses. 
In this work, we focused on the differences in the Na+ intercalation kinetics for the Mn-substituted Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 (x=0, 0.1, 0.5, 1) NASICON-type materials to explore the impact of Mn substitution on the rate-capability of Na-ion cathodes. From the viewpoint of the intercalation mechanism, the increase in Mn content results in a progressive widening of the single-phase regions. In these regions, Mn substitution results in lowering of ionic diffusion coefficients, but the effect amounts to only half an order of magnitude, which does not impact the differences in rate-capabilities significantly. More pronounced differences are observed in the charge transfer kinetics, where significant kinetic hindrances appear for Na3.5Mn0.5V1.5(PO4)3 and Na4MnV(PO4)3 materials, with both the charge transfer resistance and surface layers’ resistance being 5-6 times higher for Mn-rich materials compared to the materials with lower Mn content. These effects add to the observed hysteresis between charge and discharge curves at high current densities, but cannot explain the particularly pronounced hysteretic features for the Mn1V1 material. Yet, the differences in the hysteresis values can be rationalized if nucleation kinetics are addressed in the two-phase regions of the intercalation isotherms. Large-amplitude chronoamperometric measurements allowed to conclude on the much lower nucleation rates for the Na4MnV(PO4)3 materials compared to unsubstituted Na3V2(PO4)3, which explain the observed differences in the hysteresis values. Still, the hysteretic effects result in minimal decrease in the specific energy of the materials at 5C rate. The limitations related to the phase boundary propagation rates (concentration polarization effects) result in a more pronounced specific energy reduction, which amounts to 16% at 5C rate for Mn0V2, where the single-phase region is particularly narrow and transport phenomena relate specifically to the phase boundary movement. Much lower losses in specific energy are observed for the Mn1V1 material, which shows the widest single-phase region. In this case, concentration polarization effects originate from the ionic diffusion in the crystal structure. Diffusion coefficients in the range 10-12 - 10-11 cm2 s-1 are high enough to ensure the lack of pronounced capacity losses even at substantially high discharge currents. The Na3+xMnxV2-x(PO4)3 materials with high Mn content were demonstrated to outperform their unsubstituted counterparts in terms of rate-capability and specific energy at charge/discharge rates higher than 1C, while the cycling stability and capacity retention in the voltage range 2.5 – 3.8 V do not depend on the Mn content significantly [5,9,10]. The Mn-substituted materials are therefore preferred for high-power applications, although further research is needed to minimize the observed hysteretic effects and to improve the performance of the cathode materials. In a broader context, this work pinpoints the advantages of single-phase intercalation routes over two-phase intercalation mechanisms in the limit of fast discharge, given the moderately high values of ionic diffusion coefficients in the intercalation electrodes.