Rechargeable aqueous/hybrid Li-air cells employing LAGP pellets are demonstrated.  High chemical stability of LAGP is observed on long-time immersion in water.  Excellent energy efﬁciency up to 98% reduction is achieved mechanism.  High energy efﬁciency is retained stable during operation.

Securing long-term energy for the world and protecting the environment are the reasons behind growing attention to renewable resources. With the increasing share of renewable resources such as wind and solar power in electricity generation [1], power

Realizing a stable high performance aqueous/hybrid LAB essentially depends on a fast lithium ion-conducting membrane with desirable chemical stability in contact with both lithium and catholyte solution which protects lithium from the catholyte solution. Despite tremendous efforts spent on identifying the most desirable solid electrolyte [7] for aqueous Li-air batteries in recent years [2,6], the ultimate solid electrolyte fulﬁlling all the main requirements of the aqueous cell is yet to be explored. Garnet-type oxides (Li15 2zLa3M2O12; Mzþ ¼ Zr4þ , …), explored by the Weppner group [8e11], with high room temperature ionic conductivity [12,13] and wide electrochemical window vs. lithium anode and also lithium super ionic conductors known as LISICON (Li2þ2xZn1 xGe4O16) [14,15] suffer from proton exchange in water [16e18] which makes them unstable in aqueous catholyte solutions. Ishiguro et al. reported also short circuit in the cell due to dendrite formation for Ta-doped [19], Nb-doped [20] and Al2O3doped Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZ) [21] after short period of polarization at  2. Perovskite-type oxide of constant current density of 0.5 mA cm (Li3xLa(2/3) x(1/3) x 2xTiO3; lithium 0 < x < 0.16) [22,23] with high bulk ionic conductivity (as high a liquid electrolyte) shows low grain boundary conductivity and instability in contact with lithium anode [24].and Li1þxAlxGe2 x(PO4)3 [28e33] ceramics are the most commonly used phosphate-based lithium solid electrolytes for Liair batteries [6,34]. The concept of using NASICON-type lithium conducting LTAP ceramic as an anode-protecting electrolyte for LABs was ﬁrst proposed by Visco et al. [6,34,35]. Since then the performance of LAB with a multilayer anode electrode has been investigated extensively [36e45]. LTAP has been proven to be stable in contact with aqueous LiCl [36], LiCl aqueous solution with saturated LiOH, and in LiAc saturated HAc aqueous solutions [38]. As LTAP is not stable in contact with lithium anode due to its content of easily reducible Ti, a buffer layer needs to be employed to avoid direct contact. Imanishi et al. [46] designed a working cell composed of PEO18LiTFSI-2TEGDME and LTAP ceramic as anodeprotecting membrane with saturated LiCl aqueous solution and achieved cyclability of up to 100 cycles at 60 C under current  2. In a similar attempt, an energy density of density of 2.0 mA cm  1 was reported for the aqueous Li-air cell with the 779 Whkg arrangement of Li/PEO18LiTFSI-10 wt% BaTiO3/LTAP/HAc-H2O-LiAc/  2 [47]. In hybrid carbon at 60 C under current density of 0.5 mA cm LABs, an additional layer of organic electrolyte is used in the anode chamber to minimize the complications from the interfacial resistance. Stevens et al. replaced the PEO-based electrolyte with nonaqueous electrolyte and obtained more than 100 cycles at  2 [48]. Li et al. [43] succeeded to reach energy efﬁciency 0.1 mA cm of 80% at 40 C by employing IrO2 as OER catalyst and by improving the ionic conductivity of LTAP membrane. While LTAP is a potential candidate as anode-protecting membrane in LABs [49], the additional interfacial resistances caused by the need for a multilayer membrane design as well as the instability of LTAP in strong acids and bases [6] limit the performance of LAB cells based on LTAP.

Even though NASICON-type ceramics are the most successful solid electrolyte reported for aqueous/hybrid LABs so far, NASICONtype LAGP ceramic has been mainly investigated in all-solid-state Li-air batteries [50e52]. In one of the few reports on aqueous LABs with LAGP ceramic, Zhang et al. assembled an aqueous Li-air cell with PEO18LiTFSI-10 wt% BaTiO3:LAGP-5 wt% TiO2 ﬁlm in saturated LiCl aqueous solution at 60 C and thereby could reduce  2 the overpotential to about 1 V at a current density of 0.5 mA cm [53].

Ge-containing NASICON ceramic has higher degree of kinetic stability of Ge (compared to Ti in LTAP) against reduction in contact with Lithium. This may be understood from the fact that thedecomposition reaction for LAGP in contact with Li: 2LiGe2ðPO4Þ3 þ 4Li/3GeO2 þ 6LiPO3 þ Ge is a conversion reaction with a high kinetic barrier, as it requires the nucleation of crystals of various new phases and involves a 4electron transition of ¼ of the Ge4þ In contrast the decomposition reaction for LTAP is a topotactic insertion reaction: LiTi2ðPO4Þ3 þ Li/Li2Ti2ðPO4Þ3 involving a single-electron transfer Ti4þ / Ti3þ comparatively minute activation barrier.

To the best of our knowledge, there are so far no reports on the charge discharge performance of aqueous and hybrid Li-air cells based on LAGP solid electrolyte in ambient air. Here, protected anode systems using fast Li ion conducting LAGP ceramics are explored in rechargeable aqueous and hybrid Li-air batteries operating at room temperature under open air conditions.

Li1þxAlxGe2 x(PO4)3 (x ¼ 0.5) glass is prepared using meltquenching method. More details on the synthesis can be found elsewhere [55]. Further annealing at 850 C for 2 h is carried out to ensure crystallization. The annealing parameters are set to achieve high purity and ionic conductivity of the pellet based on our recent in situ synchrotron study of the LAGP phase formation process [33]. Formation of NASICON-type LAGP is conﬁrmed using high resolution X-ray powder diffractometer (Bruker D8) employing Cu Ka radiation (l ¼ 1.5406 Å) in the range of 10 < 2q < 100. Generalized Structure Analysis System (GSAS) software along with the graphical user interface, EXPGUI, is applied to reﬁne the X-ray patterns. Impedance spectroscopy (IS) measurements are carried out in the frequency range of 0.1e5 MHz using impedance analyser (Solartron SI1260). To investigate the proton exchange reaction of LAGP ceramic, both ceramic powder and pellet were immersed in DI water and pH values were collected continuously while stirring the slurry. The immersed powder was then dried and changes in the structure were investigated using X-ray diffraction.

The obtained ceramic pellets with thicknesses of 1e2 mm were used in aqueous and hybrid LABs. Rechargeable LABs are assembled by sandwiching LAGP ceramic between lithium anode (0.5 mm thick, Honjo Metal Co., Ltd) and 5 M LiOH (98%, Sigma Aldrich) or 10 M LiCl (99%, Sigma Aldrich) catholytes. The anode chamber was assembled in an argon ﬁlled glovebox. In the hybrid cell the anode chamber is additionally ﬁlled with LiPF6 in EC/DMC electrolyte to facilitate interfacial charge transfer between lithium and the ceramic solid electrolyte. The oxygen reduction and formation is catalysed by ultralow loading of ﬁnely dispersed Pt on multi-walled carbon nanotube arrays on a carbon ﬁbre cloth (TGPH090, Toray Corp.). The amount of CNT and Pt loaded on the substrate were  2 for each air cathode, z 0.2e0.4 mg cm respectively and the active area of the air cathode is 0.6 cm2. The aligned nanotubes allowed maximum air ﬂow with minimal disruption [56,57]. Room temperature electrochemical performance of the cells are investigated using a potentiostat/galvanostat (Arbin BT2000) under open air condition.

Fig. 1a shows the Rietveld reﬁnement of the XRD pattern for LAGP pellet. The reﬁnement results (wRp ¼ 8%, c2 ¼ 5) conﬁrm the formation of the rhombohedral (R-3c) NASICON-type phase of

Fig. 1. (a) Rietveld reﬁned XRD pattern for LAGP pellet annealed at 850 C for 2 h; (þþþ) observed, (d) calculated and difference (wRp ¼ 8%, c2 ¼ 5); Vertical bars corresponding to the calculated Bragg reﬂections for LAGP (top), GeO2 (middle) and Li4P2O4 (bottom); (b) room temperature Nyquist plot of impedance for LAGP pellet.

LAGP as the dominant crystalline phase along with the inevitable secondary phase of GeO2 (space group P3121) with trace amounts of Li4P2O7 (space group P-1). The lowest activation energy of Ea ¼ 0.35 eV is achieved for the sample annealed at 850 C for 2 h with the room temperature total conductivity as high as  1 (Fig. 1b). By annealing the sample at 850 C the 4.0  10 mass fraction of another common impurity phase of AlPO4 (observed in our previous work [55]), is diminished [33]. Reﬁnements also suggest that at 850 C, aluminium clearly prefers the Ge site and the Al,, Li occupancy becomes hardly signiﬁcant (for T ¼ 850 C: 0.02 Al per formula unit on 6-fold Li(1) site). For lower annealing temperatures, there is roughly a random distribution of Al between the 6-fold Li(1) and the 12-fold Ge sites (e.g. per formula unit we ﬁnd 0.07 Al on the Li(1) site and 0.08 Al on the Ge site in the sample annealed at 650 C).observed for both perovskite-type [58] and garnet-type oxides [18,59] limiting their application in aqueous solutions. As a measure of stability, LAGP powder and pellet were immersed in deionized (DI) water and the changes in the pH with immersion time are shown in Fig. 2a. Accordingly, for LAGP powder, within the ﬁrst hour of immersion in DI water, the pH value decreased from 6.5 to 5.06. This indicates the slow formation of an acidic solution. The pH value gradually decreases and reaches an equilibrium value of z 3.2 after 20 days of immersion. This suggests that unprotected LAGP is more suitable for acidic catholytes. The decrease in the pH can be explained by the following simpliﬁed reaction (3):

This stability test was also carried out for LAGP pellet in open air condition and in the ﬁrst 2 h, the pH value increased from 7 to 7.3 and stayed constant for almost 2 days. Afterwards, the pH slightly dropped by immersion time reaching the value of 6.8 after more

Fig. 2. (a) changes in the pH value as a function of immersion time in DI water for LAGP powder (in a sealed container) and LAGP pellet (in open air) compared to the changes in the pH for Ta-doped Li7La3Zr2O12 pellet [17]; (b) Powder X-ray diffraction pattern for LAGP powder after immersion in DI water for 20 days (þþþ) observed, (d) calculated and difference; Vertical bars corresponding to the calculated Bragg reﬂections for LAGP (R-3c) where x1 < x2 (wRp ¼ 9.7%, c2 ¼ 9.4).

than 10 days (while e.g. for LLZO the pH increases to z 12 within minutes). Hence, it can be concluded that the dense LAGP pellet is relatively stable in DI water and the attack by water remains limited to a thin surface layer. In addition to reaction (3), the observed minute decrease in the pH for the case of the LAGP pellet might be due to the absorption of CO2 from the air in the DI water.

In order to establish the presence of any structural changes upon immersion in DI water, powder diffraction was performed on the LAGP powder after drying (Fig. 2b). In the XRD pattern, shoulders appear for the peaks identiﬁed as LAGP phase (R-3c). The Rietveld reﬁnement of the data suggests the existence of two NASICON-type LAGP phases with different Al contents as Ge is slowly extracted from the LAGP particles. The amount of impurity phase of GeO2 decreased considerably after immersion. Since the trigonal form of GeO2 is soluble in water, it might have been washed away [60].

The present study was designed to investigate the applicability of LAGP pellets as anode-protecting membranes in rechargeable aqueous and hybrid Li-air cells using various catholytes. Fig. 3 shows the room temperature cycling performance of the aqueous cell under open air condition with varying catholytes. Since the main purpose here is to characterize the pellet as anode-protecting membrane, where depth of cycling is not so relevant, our primary focus will be the exposure time and the deep cycling is avoided. For a cell with alkaline LiOH (5 M) as catholyte (pumped), an overpotential of about 0.78 V is observed in the ﬁrst cycle and gradually increases reaching the value of 0.96 V before failure. Gradual adsorption of CO2 from the air and formation of Li2CO3 is probably the main reason behind the increase in the overpotential (refer to Fig. 6). To avoid the formation of Li2CO3 that limits the useful cyclelife of the system, acidiﬁed LiCl (10 M, pH z 2e3) is investigated as catholyte and the electrochemical performances of the cell with and without pumping are shown in Fig. 3b and c, respectively. Compared to the cell operating with LiOH (5 M) as catholyte, a reduced overpotential is observed for the case of acidiﬁed LiCl (10 M). The equilibrium voltage of our cells are generally lower than the expected standard voltages where, T ¼ 25 C and pO2 ¼ 1 atm. Several factors such as the limited solubility of O2 in the catholyte (in our highly concentrated catholytes, the solubility of O2 goes down) or slow diffusion rate of O2 through the relatively thick air cathode, the high concentration of Li having negative impact on the activity of the catalyst, the higher activity of Li-ions both in the solid electrolyte and in the catholyte as well as the high concen  tration of OH ions and generally the reduced concentration of water in the concentrated solutions will give rise to lower voltage in the cell. Apart from factoring in that electrochemical cells very rarely operate under standard conditions, the lower value and variation of the open cell voltage in our cells could be due to an insufﬁcient amount of catalyst on the air cathode or lower activity of O2 near the catalyst, which promote the 2-electron O2 reduction   reaction and formation of HO2 with lower standard electrode poþ ¼ 2.964 V vs. Li/Li tential of Eo as a possible air cathode reaction 2e instead of more desirable 4-electron reaction (Fig. 4). As seen in Fig. 3, in the cell without continuous ﬂow of the catholyte, both charge and discharge voltages are lower compared to the cell with pump and keep decreasing with prolonged cycling. Relatively low equilibrium voltage of the cell can also be justiﬁed by assuming that

Fig. 3. (a) cycling performance of LAB with continuous ﬂow of LiOH (5 M) (each cycle limited to 120 min), charge/discharge proﬁles of LAB with (b) continuous ﬂow of acidiﬁed LiCl (10 M) (each cycle limited to 80 min) and (c) acidiﬁed LiCl (10 M) with no pump (each cycle limited to 60 min); all the cells are running under constant current density of z 0.03 mA cm

Fig. 4. Mechanisms for the oxygen reduction (ORR) and oxygen evolution reactions (OER) in the Li-air cell.

the cell reaction is essentially following the 2-electron mechanism, during both charge and discharge. In cells with continuous ﬂow of the catholyte the discharge voltage is almost the same implying the same 2-electron reaction, whereas the charge voltage of the cell is higher, suggesting that during charge the 4-electron reaction occurs in the cell as the catholyte containing the peroxide formed during discharge has been exchanged with fresh catholyte that does not contain peroxide for the 2-electron oxidation reaction. Therefore, the oxygen evolution will occur from water with a higher (equilibrium) potential.

The relatively high overpotential and short cycle life of the aqueous cells will be affected by the internal cell impedance due to

the Ohmic resistance of solid electrolyte and catholyte layers and probably more importantly the charge transfer impedances for the various interfaces involved. Among these, especially the Li to solid electrolyte charge transfer will be critical. In addition to that, formation of cracks in the pellet when aiming to tightly seal cells with the rigid LAGP pellets remained another major challenge for reproducible cell assembly. Hence the contact between LAGP pellet and the lithium anode was improved by ﬁlling the anode chamber with an anolyte of 1 M LiPF6 in EC/DMC [61,62] (Fig. 5a).

Charge and discharge proﬁles of the hybrid Li-air cell using 5 M LiOH catholyte are shown in Fig. 5b. Flat charge and discharge curves are observed for 140 cycles with overpotentials as low as  2. <0.1 V for the ﬁrst 70 cycles at current density of 0.03 mA cm Thereafter the overpotential gradually rose to 1.27 V before failure (Fig. 5b). Considerable reduction in the overpotential in the hybrid cell can be attributed to the improved contact between lithium and solid electrolyte when using an anolyte (LiPF6 in EC/DMC). The effect of current density on the discharge and charge plateaus is also investigated (cf. Fig. 5c). By increasing the current from  2 the energy efﬁciency is decreased 0.03 mA cm from 98% to 74%. For the second cycle, the high value of energy efﬁciency is still retained, indicating the stable operation of the cell. To compare the performance achieved in this work with the state of art, the reliable data on overpotential for different current densities

Fig. 5. (a) schematic representation of rechargeable hybrid Li-air cell (b) discharge/charge proﬁles of the hybrid LAB using LiOH as catholyte solution under constant current density  2 and (c) discharge and charge voltage proﬁles of hybrid Li-air cell with varying current densities (d) comparison between current vs. overpotential data for hybrid of 0.03 mA cm cells with varying cell arrangements for our work and the data extracted from literature [40e42,45,47,53,63e66]. *values are normalized for room temperature.

Fig. 6. (a) XRD pattern of the reaction products deposited in the cell (‘*’ peaks corresponding to Li2CO3) and (b) XRD pattern of LAGP pellet before and after cycling in hybrid Li-air cell.

Fig. 7. Cycling performance of the hybrid LAB using (a) neutral LiCl (10 M) as catholyte solution (each cycle limited to 1 h) (b) acidiﬁed LiCl (10 M) as catholyte solution (each cycles limited to 10 h) under constant current density of 0.03 mA cm 2and (c) comparison of energy efﬁciencies for different catholyte solutions at 0.03 mA cm

Fig. 8. Rietveld reﬁned XRD pattern for LAGP pellet in contact with (a) neutral LiCl (10 M) and (b) acidiﬁed LiCl (10 M) (wRp ¼ 9%, c2 ¼ 7.5). The lattice parameters of the LAGP sample before immersion are ahex ¼ 8.2568 Å and chex ¼ 20.6508 Å.

For the current density of 1 mA cm overpotential of our cell falls above the “Tafel line” trend observed for lower currents, possibly indicating a change in the factor that controls electrochemical performance.

As seen before, a gradual increase in the cell overpotential and consequential failure of open-air cells employing LiOH may be due to the deposition of Li2CO3 as conﬁrmed here by ex situ X-ray diffraction (see Fig. 6a). A performance enhancement can thus be expected from extracting CO2 from the supplied air. XRD pattern of the LAGP pellet employed in the cell is also shown in Fig. 6b to rule out any structural change in the main phase. Accordingly, the main phase of NASICON-type LAGP remains intact while few impurity peaks of AlPO4$2H2O are formed.

When replacing the catholyte solution with LiCl (10 M), the cell was successfully cycled for more than 60 h with a current density of  2 (Fig. 7a). The charge/discharge overpotential of the 0.03 mA cm cell was less than 0.05 V for the ﬁrst 59 cycles. For the cell working with acidiﬁed LiCl (10 M) the overpotential of the cell is even smaller (about 0.03 V for most of the cycles) as shown in Fig. 7b. One of the reasons behind the capacity fading in these cells is the loss of contact due to the evaporation of the catholyte in the cell. The capacity was retrieved for few cycles after ﬁlling up the cell with catholyte. Fig. 7c compares the energy efﬁciencies for hybrid  2 with different catholyte LABs at current density of 0.03 mA cm solutions where values > 98% are achieved.

In order to investigate the degradation of LAGP ceramic during cycling as one of the limiting performance factors, structural stability of LAGP pellet in LiCl (10 M; initial pH of 6) and acidiﬁed LiCl (10 M; initial pH of 2) was evaluated. According to the Rietveld reﬁnements of the XRD patterns depicted in Fig. 8a and b, the XRD pattern of the pellet remains almost unchanged, with NASICONtype LAGP as the dominant crystalline phase. A closer analysis shows that the lattice parameters a and c both decrease slightly after immersion. According to the correlation between lattice

parameter c and amount of Al doping presented by our group [33], the x value in Li1þxAlxGe2 x(PO4)3 is reduced from 0.5 to 0.4 for both neutral and acidiﬁed catholytes. This extraction of Al from the main LAGP phase is accompanied by the formation of an amorphous phase in the pattern which is consequently presumed to be an Al-rich phase.

Taken together, we have developed rechargeable aqueous and hybrid Li-air cells employing LAGP pellets as anode-protecting membranes in combination with LiOH (5 M), neutral and acidiﬁed LiCl (10 M) as catholytes and demonstrated cycling with low overpotentials and thus excellent energy efﬁciency up to 98%. One of the signiﬁcant ﬁndings to emerge from our study is the feasibility of achieving very low overpotentials in Li-air batteries. For aqueous LABs, the Li/LAGP interfacial resistance gradually increased limiting the cycle life of the cell. Hence the contact is improved by ﬁlling the anode chamber with an organic electrolyte. The hybrid Li-air cells were cycled for more than 90 h with a polarization between charge/ discharge as low as <0.1 V for the ﬁrst 50 h at current density of  2. Performance enhancement can be expected by 0.03 mA cm improving the design of the cell and using thinner membranes. Since the voltage of the cell is highly dependent on the competition between 2-electron reduction and 4-electron reduction reactions of O2, the activity of the catalyst needs to be adjusted to promote the 4-electron pathway in the cell and further improve the energy density.