Sodium electrochemical energy storage systems including sodium-ion battery and hybrid capacitor are attracting increasing interest in large-scale electrical energy storage due to low cost and abundant sodium resources. In particular, sodium-ion hybrid capacitor with the merits of high energy and power densities as a typical next-generation energy storage device provides a promising alter-native to the currently commercial lithium-ion battery. It is highly challenging to design and prepared suitable anode materials with extraordinary performance, thereby spurring its large-scale application. Herein, mesoporous Mn-doped and carbon-coated NaTi2(PO4)3 nanocrystals are synthesized via a three-step process of solvothermal reaction, serum albumin decoration and thermal annealing. Synergistic effect rendered by NaTi2(PO4)3 particles with mesoporous structure, Mn2? doping and ultra-thin carbon coating endows the prepared composite with facile ion/electron transportation as well as excellent reaction kinetics as an anode material for sodium-ion hybrid capacitors. In the half-cell tests, the pre-pared composite exhibits high reversible capacity of 116 mA h g-1 at 1 C, high-rate capability of 95 mA h g-1 at 50 C, and long-term cycling stability with high capacity of 92 mAh g-1 (88% capacity retention) after 1000 cycles at 20 C. Using the prepared composite as anode and activated carbon as cathode, the sodium-ion hybrid capacitor is assembled and it exhibits high energy/power density of 85.5 WhKg-1/5531 WKg-1. Our results indicate that Mn-doped and carbon-coated NASICON-type anodes have great potential in the sodium-based elec-trochemical energy storage systems.
As two complementary electrical energy storage systems, rechargeable battery and electrochemical capacitor (EC) play a vital role in electric vehicles, smart grids and portable electronics [1–4]. In general, energy density (E) and power density (P) of the two systems are contradictory and this dilemma between E and P is mainly caused by a single energy storage mechanism [5, 6]. The rechargeable battery is always faradaic reactions in active materials of the elec-trodes, which offer it a competitive advantage in energy density [1, 7]. But, due to slow diffusion of solid ions in the electrode material and the volume change during charging and discharging, its power density and cyclic stability are far from satisfactory [7, 8]. On the other hand, the EC enables the adsorption/desorption of ions in the electrolyte on the electrode surface through non-faradaic reaction, which exhibits high power density and boosts long cycle life. Nevertheless, the low energy density of the EC seriously restricts their practical application [9–11]. Faced with the situation, hybrid capacitor has been put forward to combine the merits of high energy of rechargeable battery and high power and long cycle life of the EC. Lithium-ion hybrid capaci-tor, which is composed of a lithium insertion-type anode, high-efﬁciency carbonaceous cathode by sur-face adsorption reactions and lithium containing electrolyte, has been widely investigated [10–15]. However, the lack of lithium resources inhibits its development for future large-scale application. Owing to similar physical–chemical properties and abundant reserves of sodium, sodium-ion hybrid capacitor (NHC) is attracting more and more interest in the ﬁeld of energy storage [15–18]. According to the conﬁguration of the NHCs, right combination of high power sodium insertion-type anode and EC-type cathode with well-balanced kinetics is crucial to outstanding electrochemical performance. For the EC-type cathode, highly porous activated carbon (AC) with high capacitance has been widely investi-gated and proven to be excellent as the cathode material [19]. However, most anode materials for the sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) have drawbacks such as low capacity, limited rate capability and poor struc-tural integrity due to larger Na? ions as well as the failure of rapid Na? intercalation/deintercalation. Consequently, it is highly desirable to explore new anode materials with good electrochemical kinetics and durability to volume change during cycling, thereby speeding up future development and appli-cation of the NHCs.In the past decades, various new materials including Ti-related compounds [20, 21], transition metal chalcogenides [22], phosphorus [23], 2D metal carbides [24–26], and sodium super-ion conductor (NASICON)-type compounds have been studied as anode materials for the SIBs. Among them, owing to large open 3D channels and small volume change during charging/discharging as well as intrinsically good safety, NASICON-type NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP) is one of the most promising candidates for the anode material [27, 28]. However, the limitation of its low electron conductivity leads to inferior high-rate capability and long-term cycle life [29]. To overcome these obstacles, designing suitable micro/nano-structure [28, 30–34] and combining with conductive carbon are common strategies [35, 36]. For example, Wang et al. reported that a novel nanostructured NTP with mesoporous and quasi-cubic shape pro-vided sufﬁcient space for electrolyte penetration, reduced ion migration path and enhanced structural stability during Na? insertion, thereby indicating an energy density of 56 Wh kg-1 at a power density of 39Wkg-1 [34]. Huang and co-authors demonstrated that porous NTP/C nanoﬁbers by electrostatic spin-ning exhibited high-rate capability and signiﬁcant cyclic stability in hybrid capacitors due to high elec-tron/ion conductivity and impressive structural sta-bility [35]. Many investigations revealed that the increased surface area of micro/nano-structures could help to increase the contact area between electrolyte and electrode, and compensate for the generated stress during Na? insertion/extraction. For the combination with the conductive carbon, it can act as both volume buffers and conductive networks, thereby absorbing internal stresses and improving conductivity [25]. Many examples of modiﬁcation schemes such as carbon coating from bovine serum albumin(BSA) and dopamine [36–38], carbon nan-otubes [39], graphene and their combinations [29] have been proved to be effective to improve the capacity retention and high-rate performance of the NTP. On the other hand, metal-ion doping is an effective way to improve the intrinsic electronic conductivity of NASICON-type compounds [40–42]. Jiang et al. prepared Sn-doped NTP/C samples by simple sol–gel method and revealed that Sn doping leaded to signiﬁcant improvement in high-rate per-formance and cyclic stability [40]. In our previous work, we found that the introduction of Gd3? into NTP could synchronously adjust the texturing and conductivity of the sample, thereby improving high-rate capability and long-cycling stability [42]. In addition, it was reported that Mn doping effectively improved the electrochemical performance of another NASICON-type compound of Na3V2(PO4)3 [43]. However, despite recent investigations, there have been few reports on metal-ion-doped and car-bon-coated NTP micro/nano-structures as well as their application as anode materials for the NHCs.In this work, we prepared mesoporous Mn-doped and carbon-coated NTP nanocrystals (denoted as MNTP-Mn/C) via a facile three-step process of solvothermal reaction, BSA decoration and thermal annealing. Owing to synergistic effect rendered by NTP particles with mesoporous structure, Mn doping and ultra-thin carbon coating, the prepared compos-ite as an anode material for the NHCs exhibits improved reaction kinetics and extraordinary per-formance. In the half-cell tests, the prepared com-posite exhibits high reversible capacity of 116 mA h g-1 at 1 C, high-rate capability of 95 mA h g-1 at 50 C, and long-term cycling stability with high capacity of 92 mAh g-1 (88% capacity retention) after 1000 cycles at 20 C. The assembled NHC using the prepared composite as the anode and AC as the cathode exhibits high energy/power den-sity of 85.5 WhKg-1/5531 WKg-1. The prepared composite has great potential in the NHCs.
Sodium acetate (CH3COONa), phosphoric acid (H3PO4), tetrabutyl titanate (C16H36O4Ti), Mn(CH3-COO)2·6H2O and BSA were used for the synthesis of the MNTP-Mn/C. These chemicals were purchased from Aldrich in Shanghai, China.
Firstly, 3 mmol sodium acetate (CH3COONa) were added into 12 mL phosphoric acid (H3PO4 85 wt%) under stirring to form uniform and transparent Solution A, and 1 mmol tetrabutyl titanate (C16H36-O4Ti) with a suitable amount of Mn(CH3COO)2·6H2O were added into 40 mL ethanol under stirring for 1 h to form Solution B. Secondly, the above-mentioned two solutions were slowly mixed under magnetic stirring and transferred to a 50 mL vessel to perform hydrothermal reaction in an oven at 160 C for 3 h. Afterwards, the white MNTP-Mn intermediate was collected, washed with ethanol for 3 times, and dried at 60 C for 5 h. Thirdly, the MNTP-Mn intermediate was dispersed into a BSA solution (0.5 wt%) and ultrasonically treated for 1 h at room temperature to obtain BSA-coated MNTP-Mn intermediate via sim-ple centrifugation and drying. Finally, the BSA-coated MNTP-Mn intermediate was annealed at 600 C for 2 h under Ar/H2 (95%:5%) environment and the MNTP-Mn/C was prepared. The carbon-coated MNTP nanocrystals without Mn doping (de-noted as MNTP/C) were also prepared via similar process without the introduction of Mn(CH3COO)2-6H2O. In addition, the pure MNTP nanocrystals were prepared via the preparation process of the MNTP/C without the BSA treatment.
Powder X-ray diffractions (XRD, Rigaku D/MAX 2500) with a copper Ka radiation source (k = 0.154 nm) were performed to determine the crystal structure of the samples. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JSM-6490) and transmission elec-tron microscopy (TEM, JEOL 2100) equipped with selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) and Oxford energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) were used to characterize the microstructure and compo-sition distribution of the samples. Raman spectra were acquired on Renishaw InVia system with a 532 nm laser. Nitrogen adsorption–desorption iso-therm test was performed at 77 K (Quantachrome NOVA 4000e). Thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) was carried out on a NETZSCH STA 449C thermo-gravimetric analyzer in air at a ramping rate of 10 C min-1.
The electrochemical studies of the samples were performed on two-electrode CR2025- type coin cells and the working electrodes were obtained via tradi-tional slurry-coating technique. For the anode, the slurry containing active material, carbon black, and polyvinylidene ﬂuoride (PVDF) with a weight ratio of 7:2:1 was coated on a Cu foil, and the content of active material was about 1 * 1.5 mg cm-1 in each electrode. In sodium-ion half-cell tests, glass ﬁber membrane (Whatman GF/D membrane), sodium metal and 1 M NaClO4 mixed with ethylene car-bonate/propylene carbonate in a 1:1 ratio (volume) were used as the separator, counter electrode and electrolyte, respectively. The assembly of the coin cells was performed in a high-purity Ar ﬁlled glove box. Galvanostatic charging/discharging (GCD) measurements were carried out between 1.5 and 3 V (vs. Na/Na?) using the multi-channel battery system (NEWARE BTS-610). The tests of Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) were performed on a CHI660E electrochemical workstation (CHI660E). The NHCs were constructed using the commercial AC and MNTP-Mn/C as cathode and anode materials, respectively. The mass ratio of the anode to cathode was about 1:1.8. Energy density (E) and power density (P) of the NHCs were calculated using the data of the constant current charge and discharge according to the following equations: Here, I(A g-1) is the discharge current density based on the whole mass of the active material, V is the working voltage during discharging process, and t(s) is the discharge time.
As shown in Fig. 1, the synthesis process of the MNTP-Mn/C mainly involves solvothermal reaction at 160 C, BSA decoration at room temperature and thermal annealing at 600 C. According to previous reports, the MNTP-Mn intermediate with a diameter range from 100 to 200 nm are produced via the solvothermal reaction. Owing to abundant –OH groups on the surface of the MNTP-Mn intermediate, BSA molecules are readily grafted via strong hydro-philic interactions during a simple dipping process under ultrasonic treatment. After annealing at 600 C, the MNTP-Mn/C nanocrystals are obtained accom-panying the carbonization of the BSA into amor-phous carbon. Figure 2a shows a typical SEM image of the MNTP-Mn/C and the sample is composed of irregular nanocrystals with a broad size range from 50 to 200 nm, which are different from the referenced pure MNTP (see Fig. S1). Figure 2b is a typical TEM image, indicating that the MNTP-Mn/C nanocrystals exhibit hierarchical mesoporous feature. During the crystallization of the BSA-coated MNTP-Mn inter-mediate under annealing, micropores in the sample are transformed to produce hierarchical meso-porous nanostructure, which is consistent with the previously reported result [36]. The HRTEM image (see Fig. 2c) and SAED patterns (see Fig. 2d) conﬁrm a single crystal character of the MNTP-Mn/C nanocrystals. Clear lattice fringes with spacings of 0.61 nm and 0.372 nm correspond to the (012) and (113) lattice plane of the NASICON-type phase, respectively. A thin carbon coating layer with a thickness of around 2 nm is also observed on the surface of the nanocrystals. Appropriate carbon coating is beneﬁcial to the enhancement of electron conductivity. Figure 2e–l show the HAADF-STEM image and corresponding EDS as well as elemental maps. The elements of Na, Ti, P, O, C and Mn are homogeneously distributed in one single MNTP-Mn/C nanocrystal, corroborating Mn doping and carbon coating. As shown Table S1, further quanti-tative analysis reveals that the content of Mn is about 3.8 wt%.Figure 3a shows the TGA result of the MNTP-Mn/C and the carbon content from the carbonized BSA is about 3.7 wt% based on the weight loss between 300 and 500 C. Figure 3b presents XRD patterns of the MNTP, MNTP/C and MNTP-Mn/C, demonstrating sharp and strong XRD peaks related to high crys-tallinity of the samples. All diffraction peaks of the three samples can be well assigned according to the reﬂection from crystal planes of (012), (104), (110),(113), (024), (116), (300), (128), (226) and (410) of standard NTP (JCPDS No.01-085-2265). No obvious diffraction peak from amorphous carbon is observed in XRD. After Mn doping and carbon coating, the diffraction peaks of the MNTP-Mn/C are consistent with the standard peaks. This suggests that Mn doping and carbon coating have little impact on the NASICON-type structure of the MNTP. However, the characteristic peaks of the MNTP-Mn/C shift towards a smaller angle compared to those of pure MNTP, indicating that the cell sizes of the doped sample are enlarged, as shown in Fig. S2. The results conﬁrm the Mn replacement of Ti since the larger radius of Mn2? than that of Ti4? always expands the lattice of the dope sample. The FTIR proﬁles of all the samples keep consistent as shown in Fig. S3, further indicating that the original structure is not affected. Figure 3c depicts the Raman spectra of the three samples and characteristic bands located at 100–1200 cm-1 from the NASICON-type NTP are observed. The characteristic Raman bands at 990 and 1085 cm-1 are assigned to symmetrical and asym-metrical stretching in the NTP lattice. The Raman bands at 155 and 272 cm-1 relate to translational vibration of Ti4? ions and those peaks at 306, 341, and 438 cm-1 are attributed to PO43-. For the MNTP/C and MNTP-Mn/C, two Raman peaks at about 1351 cm-1 and the 1588 cm-1 are assigned to the D band and G band of carbon. The former originates from the stretching vibration of disordered C atoms, while the latter is related to stretching vibration of orderly graphitized sp2-bonded C atoms, respec-tively. Moreover, the G band shows higher intensity than D band, indicating that amorphous carbon in the samples has higher graphitized degree, which is beneﬁcial to electron transfer. Figure 3d presents isothermal adsorption–desorption curve of the MNTP-Mn/C. Typical type-IV feature with distinct hysteresis loops is observed, suggesting superior transport properties associated with mesoporous channels of the sample. According to the Barrett-Joyner-Halenda model, the MNTP-Mn/C exhibits abundant mesopores with broad pore size distribution between 5 and 60 nm as well as main pore size at about 12 nm, indicating hierarchical porous feature. The speciﬁc surface area and pore volume of the MNTP-Mn/C are 81.07 m2 g-1 and 0.33 cm3 g-1, respectively, which are larger than the referenced MNTP (12.6 m2 g-1 and 0.11 cm3 g-1, see Fig. S4). The MNTP-Mn/C has abundant active site, superior ion transport channel and effective contact to electrolyte, which is expected to possess extraor-dinary performance.In order to evaluate electrochemical gain of Mn doping and carbon coating, sodium storage perfor-mance of the MNTP-Mn/C and referenced samples are investigated by CV and GCD tests in coin-type half-cells with a voltage window of 1.5–3 V(vs Na/Na?). Figure 4a presents CV proﬁles of the MNTP-Mn/C electrode for the initial three cycles at a scan-ning rate of 0.1 mV s-1. The ﬁrst cycle CV proﬁle cannot coincide with the subsequent ones, and the difference is attributed to the change of stress/strain state around the MNTP-Mn/C nanocrystals as the SEI layer is formed. In the subsequent cycles, the CV proﬁles keep almost unchanged, implying good reversibility of the MNTP-Mn/C electrode. The well-deﬁned redox peaks at about 2.23 V (cathodic peak) and 2.07 V (anodic peak) correspond to the redox reaction of Ti4?/Ti3?, indicating reversible Na? in-sertion/extraction in the NTP lattice. No new redox peaks can be observed compared to the pure MNTP (see Fig. S5), suggesting that the electrochemical reaction of the NTP are not altered by Mn doping and carbon coating. The potential difference reﬂecting the degree of electrochemical polarization between the anodic and cathodic peaks is stable with a value of about 0.16 eV. Compared with those reported in NTP-based anodes, the electrochemical polarization of the MNTP-Mn/C electrode is smaller, implying rapid reaction kinetics due to the low resistance to Na? and electron transportation after Mn doping and carbon coating. Figure 4b presents GCD proﬁles of the MNTP-Mn/C electrode at the current density of 1 C in the 1st, 50th, 100th, and 200th cycles, where 1 C=133mAhg-1. A characteristic and symmetrical ﬂat voltage plateau at 2.1 V corresponding to the redox reaction of Ti4?/Ti3? in the NASICON-type NTP host is observed, which is consistent with the CV results. The MNTP-Mn/C electrode exhibits small and almost invariant electrochemical polariza-tion about 80 mV during cycling, implying decent ion and electron conductivity. The MNTP-Mn/C elec-trode has initial discharge and charge capacities of 126 mA h g-1 and 118.3 mA h g-1 with correspond-ingly initial Coulombic efﬁciency (CE) beyond 98.7%, suggesting excellent electrochemical reversibility.
Figure 4c displays the cycling performance of the MNTP-Mn/C electrode at 1 C. After 200 cycles, the CE value is close to 100% and reversible capacity remains as high as 111.85 mA h g-1 with 94.6%capacity retention. Figure 4d displays GCD proﬁles of the MNTP-Mn/C electrode at different current rates. Well-deﬁned symmetrical charging/discharg-ing voltage plateau is maintained even at a large rate of 50 C, implying excellent high-rate capability. As shown in Fig. 4e, the MNTP-Mn/C electrode delivers discharge capacities of 120, 118, 115, 110, 106, 102 and 99 mAh g-1 at 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20 and 30 C, respec-tively. Even at 50 C, the discharge capacity retains as high as 95 mA h g-1, suggesting that the MNTP-Mn/C electrode can meet requirement of high energy and power densities via rapid charging and discharging within a few minutes. The CE values at large rates approach beyond 99% for each cycle, indicating that Na? diffusion is fast and electrochemical reaction is highly reversible in the MNTP-Mn/C electrode. When the current rate is reset to 0.5 C after high-rate cycling, the discharge capacity recovers quickly to 119 mA h g-1, suggesting that the MNTP-Mn/C electrode retains good structural integrity. For com-parison, the referenced MNTP/C and MNTP elec-trode exhibit inferior Na? storage performance, thus evidencing the key role of Mn doping and carbon coating. The rate performance of the MNTP-Mn/C electrode is comparable to most of recently reported NTP-based anodes [28, 29, 34, 35, 40–42]. Long-term cycling stability of the MNTP-Mn/C at a high rate of 20 C is also evaluated. As shown in Fig. 4f, the MNTP-Mn/C anode delivers a reversible capacity of 104.5 mA h g-1 in the ﬁrst cycle and retains a high capacity of 92 mA h g-1 with 88.0% retention after 1000 cycles, further conﬁrming its advantages in sodium-based electrochemical energy storage devi-ces. To understand excellent electrochemical prop-erty, transport kinetics of the MNTP-Mn/C electrode is studied by the measurement of EIS after the rate capability test. Generally, in the Nyquist plots, the diameter of the semicircle in the high-medium fre-quency region represents charge transfer resistance (Rct) between the electrolyte and electrode. As shown in Fig. 5a, the diameter of the semicircle (see Fig. 5a) for the MNTP-Mn/C electrode and the calculated Rct value (see Table 1) based on the inset equivalent circuit model are smaller than those of the referenced samples. The results indicate that Mn doping and carbon coating enable even more effective improvement of electrical conductivity, thereby relieving the polarization of the electrode, which is responsible for the enhancement of high-rate capa-bility. The Na? migration ability is also evaluated by the calculation of the chemical diffusion coefﬁcient (DNa) based on the following equations:where R, T, F, A and C are the gas constant, absolute temperature, Faraday’s constant, surface area of the electrode and Na? concentration, respectively. The n represents the number of electrons transferred in the half reaction of the redox couple and r is Warburg factor. By ﬁtting the slope of the line between Z0 and -􀀃1=2(see Figs. 5b), the r value can be obtained and the DNa value be calculated. As shown in Table 1, the DNa value of the MNTP-Mn/C electrode is larger than those of the reference MNTP/C and MNTP samples. The results suggest that Mn doping and carbon coating enable more faster migration of Na?to the interior of NTP host, thereby leading to more effective utilization of the active material as well as enhanced sodium storage of the MNTP-Mn/C electrode.To illustrate the advantages of the MNTP-Mn/C anode, the NHCs (denoted as MNTP-Mn/C//AC) are assembled using commercial AC as the cathode. According to the electrochemical performance (see Fig. S6), the mass ratio of the anode to cathode is set at 1:1.8 and the performance is tested between 0 and 2.5 V. Figure 6a schematically illustrate the working mechanism of the assembled NHC. During charging, Na? ions in the electrolyte are inserted in the MNTP-Mn/C anode via a redox reaction, and at the same time, ClO4- anions quickly adsorb to the surface of AC, thereby keeping the electrolyte system with charge balance. During subsequent discharging, reverse process occurs accompanying with the dein-tercalation of Na? ions from the MNTP-Mn/C anode and desorption of ClO4– anions from the surface of AC to the electrolyte. Figure 6b shows typical CV proﬁles of the MNTP-Mn/C//AC at a scanning rate of 5 mV s-1, which overlap during subsequent cycles, suggesting outstanding cyclability. Different from those reported in traditional ECs, The CV pro-ﬁles of the MNTP-Mn/C//AC comprise a combina-tion of a quasi-rectangular region and redox peaks. The former is related to the adsorption/desorption of ClO4- on the AC cathode, and the latter corresponds to intercalation/deintercalation of Na? ions into/from the MNTP-Mn/C anode. These results indicate that battery and capacitor behaviors exist simultane-ously, evidencing the above-mentioned working mechanism of dual charge storage in the MNTP-Mn/C//AC. Furthermore, with the scanning rate being increased from 10 mV s-1 to 100 mV s-1, redox peaks are well maintained (see Fig. S7), suggesting superior rate performance of the assembled MNTP-Mn/C//AC.Figure 6c shows GCD proﬁles of the MNTP-Mn/C//AC at a current density of 0.25 A g-1, which are neither linear nor triangular in shape and further conﬁrm the working mechanism of dual charge storage in the assembled NHCs. The GCD proﬁles (see inset of Fig. 6c) are stable during successive cycling, implying superior cycling ability. Figure 6d presents GCD proﬁles of the MNTP-Mn/C//AC at various current densities. As the current densities are increased from 0.25 to 5 A g-1, the shape of the GCD proﬁles for the MNTP-Mn/C//AC are well retained, indicating effective Na? intercalation/deintercalation in the MNTP-Mn/C anode and rapid adsorption/desorption on the AC cathode. Figure 7a shows rate performance of the MNTP-Mn/C//AC. The average discharge capacities are 87, 78, 66, 54 and 44 mA h g-1, for current densities of 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2 and 5 A g-1, respectively, reﬂecting superior rate capability of the assembled NHCs. Figure 7b shows Ragone plot of the MNTP-Mn/C//AC according to the calculated energy and power densities. The MNTP-Mn/C//AC has a high energy density of 85.5 W h Kg-1 at a power density of 336.8 W Kg-1. Even at a high power density of 5531 W Kg-1, it has the energy density of 52 W h Kg-1. The performance of the MNTP-Mn/C//AC is comparable or superior to those reported NHCs, including a high energy, high power density and excellent reversibility. The MNTP-Mn/C//AC also shows superior cycling durability. As shown in Fig. 7c, after the initial charging/discharging cycles, the MNTP-Mn/C//AC is stable with little degradation in discharge capaci-ties and high CE values are close to 99% after 5000 cycles. In addition, to demonstrate superior energy storage performance of the MNTP-Mn/C//AC, it is used as the power supply for commercial light-emitting diode (LED). As shown in Fig. 7d, one logo consisting of 17 LEDs can be powered by one MNTP-Mn/C//AC.
In summary, novel hierarchical porous MNTP-Mn/C nanocrystals as high-performance anode materials for the NHCs are successfully synthesized via a facile method including solvothermal reaction, BSA deco-ration and thermal annealing. Mn doping tailors the intrinsic conductivity of NTP and ultra-thin carbon coating improves the surface conductivity and elec-trical contact in the electrode. Owing to synergistic effect rendered by NTP particles with mesoporous structure, Mn doping and carbon coating, the prepared composite possesses facile ion/electron transport and decent reaction kinetics, leading to excellent Na storage characteristics. In the half-cell tests, the prepared composite exhibits high reversible capacity of 116 mA h g-1 at 1 C, high-rate capability of 95 mA h g-1 at 50 C, and long-term cycling sta-bility with high capacity of 92 mAh g-1 (88% capacity retention) after 1000 cycles at 20 C. The NHC assembled using the prepared composite as anode and AC as cathode exhibits high energy/power density of 85.5 Wh Kg-1/5531 WKg-1. The combi-nation strategy of Mn doping and carbon coating provides signiﬁcant insights into the construction of high-performance anodes for sodium-based electro-chemical energy storage systems.