Batteries are major technological challenge in this new century as they are key method to make more efﬁcient use of energy. 

Lithium batteries are characterized by high speciﬁc energy, high efﬁciency and long life. 

These unique properties have made lithium batteries the power sources of choice for the consumer electronics market with a production of the order of billions of units per year. 

Although today’s Li-ion technology has conquered the portable electronic markets and is still improving. 

These batteries are also expected to ﬁnd a prominent role as ideal electrochemical storage systems in renewable energy plants, as well as power systems for sustainable vehicles, such as hybrid and electric vehicles. 

Lithium batteries are important for energy storage in a wide variety of applications including consumer electronics, transportation and large-scale energy production. 

The performance of lithium batteries depends on the materials used. 

This review presents the state-of-the-art knowledge on crystalline, composite and amorphous inorganic solid lithium ion conductors, which are of interest as potential solid electrolytes in lithium batteries. 

Recent material developments of fast solid lithium ion conductors are reviewed. The discussion of crystalline Li ion conductors includes perovskite-type Lithium Lanthanum Titanates, NASICON-type, LiSICONand Thio-LiSICON type Li ion conductors, as well as garnet-type Li ion conducting oxides. The part on composite Li ion conductors discusses materials containing oxides and mesoporous oxides. In the amorphous Li ion conductor part oxide and sulﬁde-phosphate based glasses are presented. As glassy solid electrolytes have large potential for a number of electrochemical applications, the most important among them being the solid state batteries. In order to successfully accomplish these applications it is necessary to have a background of the science and technology of glassy solid electrolytes. This presentation gives a brief account of the formation of glassy solid electrolytes, factors affecting ionic conductivity in these materials. 

Typical results have been discussed to get some insight into the glassy solid electrolytes. The status of lithium battery involving lithium conducting glasses and the challenges in its development have been highlighted. A lithium solid battery has features such as ﬂexibility in shape of a cell design, leak proof of electrolyte, high safety, etc.

Therefore, various efforts have so far been made to improve the ionic conductivity of the solids especially in consideration of its practical application to use at room temperature. 

The ionic conductivity of solid now reaches 1× 10 −1 at room temperature. Special emphasis is placed on the correlation between the composition, structure, and electrical transport properties of inorganic crystalline materials in terms of the required functional properties for practical applications. 

Fundamental advances in the solid state chemistry of ionic conducting solids are essential for clean energy supply. 

Several new directions are discussed in this context for solid electrolytes. This paper reviews the solid electrolytes in view of their electrochemical and physical properties for the applications in lithium batteries. 

This reviews the history and the present status of the research and development of solid electrolyte in the lithium battery, and presents an outlook of the future research and development activities.

The paper also introduces the improvement of lithium polymer secondary batteries using solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) such as poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO),One of the major challenges in the twenty-ﬁrst century is the development of cleaner, sustainable sources of energy. Alternative energy systems are crucial in order to deal with the environmental threat of global warming and the declining reserves of fossil fuels. Global warming, ﬁnite fossilfuel supplies and city pollution conspire to make the use of renewable energy but there is no one universal solution. A range of energy conversion and storage technologies, including fuel cells, lithium batteries and solar cells, are being developed to help to cut carbon emissions.The performance of these energy systems depends crucially on theproperties of their component materials. 

Indeed, innovative materials chemistry lies at the centre of advances that have already been made in this ﬁeld; an excellent example is the rechargeable lithium battery, which has helped power the revolution in portable electronics.

Energy is the lifeblood of modern society. There is a pressing need to design electrical energy storage systems to balance supply with demands, as renewable sources are intermittent, and to power the upcoming plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs) or electric vehicles (EVs). Numerous energy storage solutions enlisting mechanical, magnetic, chemical storage, etc.

Therefore, as we want to store energy in order to restore it as electricity, the most attractive path is to convert chemical energy into electrical energy, as they both share a common carrier, namely the electron. In spite of 200 years of research, we have focused this paper on batteries since they are the main contenders to better manage the renewable resources of our planet, and to favor the deployment of electric cars so as to limit pollution. It should indeed be recalled that each time we burn 1 liter of gasoline, we are liberating 1. It should indeed be recalled that each time we burn 1 liter of gasoline, we are liberating 1.5 kg (e.

Among present battery technologies, Li-ion technology is the best performing one owing to its delivered energy den−1), which exceeds any comsity (210 W h kg peting technologies.

With such attractive performances, coupled with its long life cycle and rate capability, Li-ion technology has captured the portable electronic market, invaded the power tool equipment market, previously kept for Ni–MH technology, and is on the verge of penetrating the EV market on condition that improvements can bebe generated in an external conducting circuit connecting the two electrodes. 

Electrolytes conduct electricity by the motion of ions and exhibit negligible electronic transport. Electrodes conduct both ions and electrons. To reach a higher voltage the batteries can be connected in series with others, and for a higher capacity it is necessary to link them parallel. There are three broad categories of batteries: primary batteries, rechargeable batteries, and fuel cells. In a primary battery one or both of the electrode reactions is irreversible and the battery cannot be recharged. In a secondary battery the electrochemical reactions can be reversed and the battery thereby recharged hundreds or even thousands of times. In a fuel cell the reactants are continuously fed into the cell from outside. 

The various existing types of electrochemical storage systems differ in the nature of chemical reaction, structural features and form, reﬂecting the large number of possible applications. Typical ﬁelds of applications for electrochemical systems are batteries and electric devices for providing emergency powering for mobile systems such as cars and airplanes, power supplies to stationary appliances beyond the reach of the electricity grid such as remote transmitters and automatic weather stations, backup power sources to equipment that must be kept operational even in the event of a failure of the grid such as lighting and equipment in hospital operating theatres and ﬂight control equipment. A growing number of new areas of applications are also accessible such as current sources for portable devices such as notebooks and cellular phones.

The enormous demand for portable electronic equipment requires the introduction of new rechargeable batteries with higher energy densities than the existing ones. 

Among these, lithium batteries are very promising. Moreover, not only the consumer electronics industry, using high capacity batteries, is interested in this new generation of rechargeable batteries, also the chip industry, credit card factories, and even the feedstock industry. 

Chips can be made smart, credit cards can be used as bank account, and cattle can wear small implants for data storage of their daily behavior, etc. However, it should be clear that these latter industries are merely interested in micro batteries in a kind of thin ﬁlm construction. Reported thin ﬁlm Li batteries often use lithium metal oxides (LiMn2O4, LiCoO2, LiNiO2) as the cathode, and, carbon, Ti and, or other lithium metal oxides as the anode. Most thin ﬁlm rechargeable lithium-ion batteries operate with certain solid electrolytes that are either polymer, ceramic or inorganic. They also should have low weight, large storage capacity and high speciﬁc energy densities. The electrolyte for lithium ion batteries can be roughly classiﬁed into solid and liquid electrolytes and (room temperature) molten salt. 

Polymer and inorganic electrolyte is currently the most popular solid electrolyte for lithium ion batteries due to its good mechanical and electrochemical properties.

During the last two decades, lithium-based glasses have been studied extensively as electrolytes for solid-state−1) or power density (W dmsecondary batteries. 

However, solid-state lithium batteries have not been widely commercialized because solid electrolyte has not completely satisﬁed the requirements for practical application. For practical use, solid electrolyte must have high ionic conductivity as well as chemical, thermal and electrochemical stability.3 The performance of the product will be determined by the speciﬁc power −3) of the battery. A high (W kg speciﬁc power is required to meet the power demand of the product, within the battery mass or volume constraint, −1 1) or whichever is limited. The speciﬁc energy (W h kg −3) of the battery, along with the energy density (W h dm the power consumption of the product, determines the period of useful use before recharge is required. In addition, a reasonable lifetime is expected of the battery; this is usually deﬁned in terms of the cycle life, the total number of charge discharge cycles which may be obtained before a signiﬁcant degradation occurs in the energy and power values. 

All-solid-state lithium secondary battery system using inorganic solid electrolytes is one of the ultimate goals of rechargeable energy sources with high safety, high reliability and high energy density.3 Solid state/materials chemistry now lies at the heart of the chemical sciences, however this was not the case some 40 years ago inorganic glassy solid electrolytes are very promising for application to all solid-state batteries because of their several advantages in comparison with the crystalline solid electrolytes: a wide selection of compositions, isotropic properties, no grain boundaries, easy ﬁlm formation and so on.4 Due to their so-called open structure, the ion conductivity of glassy materials is generally higher than that of the corresponding crystalline ones. 

In addition, single cation conduction can be realized because glassy materials belong to the so-called decoupled systems in which the mode of ion conduction relaxation is decoupled from the mode of structural relaxation.5 A number of lithium ion conducting glasses of oxides,6 2) 7 sulﬁdes,8 2) 9 oxyhalides,10 thiohalides11 and oxysulﬁdes12–15 with high performance as solid electrolytes have been reported. There are two types of solid inorganic electrolytes, crystalline and glass electrolyte. Solid ionic conductors are generally crystalline compounds in which electric current is carried by ions. The passage of current is thus associated with mass transfer. Such ionic conductors are called “solid electrolytes” by analogy to liquid electrolytes. They have paved the way to the development of new scientiﬁc discipline Solid State Electrochemistry.

The solid electrolytes have attracted the attention of scientists and technologists3–5 due to the interesting scientiﬁc problems associated with them and their potential for being used in the electrochemical devices like solid state batteries, sensors, electro chromic display devices etc. The glassy solid electrolytes have certain advantages over their crystalline counter parts viz. isotropic properties, absence of grain boundaries, ﬂexibility of size and shape at satisfactory cost.6 In addition, glasses can be prepared over awide range of composition which gives better control over properties.

Most of recent progresses have focused on glass electrolytes due to advantages over crystalline solid; isotropic ionic conduction, no grain boundaries, ease of fabrication, etc. Lithium ion conductive glass is generally classiﬁed into two types depending on the composition of host material, i.

Sulﬁde glasses −1 at show higher ionic conductivity of 10 room temperature and a wide electrochemical window, and a high thermal stability against crystallization. But they are less stable in air by the hygroscopic nature of sulfur. 

Besides, some sulﬁde glasses appear to be unstable in contact with lithium metal, and have not been widely used largely because they are quite difﬁcult to handle. Furthermore, sulﬁde ions may cause corrosion of the equipment during vacuum deposition process for thin-ﬁlm electrolyte. The advantages of the lithium oxide glasses are that they are less hygroscopic and more chemically stable in air. In contrary to sulﬁde glasses, oxide glasses do not react with electrode materials and this chemical inertness is advantageous for cycle performances of battery. In addition to the chemical inertness, they are deposited easily by conventional methods such as PLD sputtering or thermal evaporation. The ease of thin ﬁlm fabrication is a great advantage when the material is considered as a thin ﬁlm battery. However, oxide glasses show relativity low ionic −1 at room conductivity in the order of 10 temperature. 

When these glasses are used as solid electrolytes for lithium secondary batteries, the glasses should be ground into ﬁne powders in order to make good contact with the electrode materials. Mechanochemical preparation of sulﬁde-based glasses and glass-ceramics has also been developed from the idea that they are especially favorable for solid electrolyte powders in application to all-solidstate lithium secondary batteries. This procedure is basically a room-temperature process and useful to obtain ﬁne powders directly for all-solid-state batteries.

Lithium batteries are acquiring a leading role in various important markets with particular impact on that of the consumer electronics. Considering the evolution of these markets and their associated energy and power demands, new and improved battery conﬁgurations are requested. Among the various approaches presently followed to achieve this goal that based on the passage from a conventional liquid electrolyte structure to an advanced solid electrolyte conﬁguration, is expected to be among the most relevant for the progress of the lithium battery technology. In this evolution, the key component is the solid electrolyte which must have properties, in terms of lithium conductivity and electrode compatibility, which match those offered by the common liquid electrolytes. However, there are still some problems associated with these membranes. The main one is related to the ionic conductivity which remains at high levels only when in the amorphous state, i.

Another drawback is associated to the low value of the transference number of the lithium cations, which is generally of the order of 0. Another drawback is associated to the low value of the transference number of the lithium cations, which is generally of the order of 0.2–0.2–0.4 and this also may affect the use of these PEO-based electrolytes in practical batteries. In fact, a low cation transference number implies that the current is mainly carried by anions and this in turn, may result in concentration polarization which reﬂects negatively on the rate of a battery based on lithium-operating electrodes.

However, fast progress in understanding and developing novel materials for practical applications has only been achieved during the last decade. From this point of view, solid electrolytes should have high ionic conductivity based on a single predominantly conducting anion or cation species and should have negligibly small electronic conductivity. Typically, useful solid electrolytes exhibit −1 at ionic conductivities in the range of 10 room temperature. This value is in between that of metals and insulators and has the same order of magnitude as those of semiconductors and liquid electrolytes. 

Research on solid electrolytes has recently drawn much attention due to the wide range of potential important technological applications in solid-state devices, including solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs), proton exchange membrane fuel cells, water hydrolysis cells, chemical sensors (e.g., for H2, O2, NH3, CO, CO2, NOx, SOx, CH4, CnH2n+2, SOx, etc.), highenergy-density rechargeable (secondary) batteries, electro chromic displays, chemotronic elements (e.g., nonvolatile memory elements) thermoelectric converters, and photogalvanic solar cells. 

Furthermore, solid electrolytes turned out to be very useful for the determination of fundamental thermodynamic quantities, such as Gibbs energies, entropies, enthalpies, activity coefﬁcients, and non stoichiometries of solids at elevated temperatures and kinetic parameters, such as chemical diffusion coefﬁcients, diffusivities, and Wagner factors, as functions of the stoichiometry and temperature. 

A broad variety of materials is known today to exhibit ionic conduction, including single crystalline, polycrystalline, amorphous ceramic materials, composites, and polymer salt mixtures. Especially, several solid electrolytes are known for monovalent protons and lithium, sodium, silver, potassium, copper, and ﬂuoride ions, as well as divalent oxide and metal ions. The objective of this review is to present the current state-of-the-art and knowledge of inorganic solid lithium ion conductors, highlighting developments in the ﬁeld following the most recent literature survey. We have already reported the review about the issue and challenges of the thin ﬁlm battery.

Graphite has a layered structure that, as is well known, can be intercalated with different atoms and atomic groups between the layers to form so called graphite intercalation compounds (GIC). Lithium is not an exception to this phenomenon, and lithium-GIC is formed by doping graphite with lithium. 

It was conﬁrmed that the electrochemical intercalation of lithium in an aprotic organic electrolyte containing complex lithium salts, such as LiPF6, LiBF4, LiAsF6, and LiClO4, reduces graphite to form Li-GIC, and that Li-GIC can be electrochemically oxidized by lithium deintercalation (undoping). This means that Li-GIC can be charged and discharged reversibly as rechargeable anodes for nonaqueous electrolyte cells. Lithium doping is a charging reaction, and undoping is a discharging one. Several types of carbonaceous materials, as well as graphite, can be doped with lithium to form similar intercalation compounds. These are called lithiumcarbon intercalation compounds (Li-CIC). The electrochemical behavior of Li-CIC is similar to that of Li-GIC, and Li-CIC can be utilized as anodes for rechargeable electrochemical cells in place of Li-GIC. 

Both Li-GIC and Li-CIC can be synthesized by the chemical reaction of graphite and carbonaceous materials with metallic lithium or lithium compounds. 

Mass production of Li-GIC and Li-CIC by using a chemical procedure, however, is not practical from the battery manufacturing standpoint. Pure carbon containing no lithium is desirable as an anode material in place of Li-GIC.

If pure carbon is utilized in an anode, lithium-containing compounds are required elsewhere as lithium sources. 

Electrolytes were considered unsuitable because a large quantity of electrolyte solution was required to increase discharge capacity, and this had the concomitant disadvantage of a low energy density. 

However, in practice, the battery operates under a kinetic stability the initial decomposition of the electrolyte results in the formation of a protective ﬁlm on the anode surface, this providing the condition to assure the continuation of its charge and discharge processes. More dangerously serious are the oxidative processes at the cathode side. Under proper conditions the battery operates below the oxidative limit of the electrolyte. If by unexpected events, such as accidental overcharge, this limit is exceeded then no protecting ﬁlm is formed on the cathode and the electrolyte continues to oxidize, this greatly contributing to accelerate cell failure. Overall, both the anode and the cathode decomposition process simply consumption of active masses and of electrolytes, accompanied by gas evolution. This results in loss of the battery capacity (initial irreversible capacity) and in safety hazards. 

Both capacity loss and gas evolution are of course undesired phenomena which must be carefully controlled (especially during the production process) to assure proper battery performance.

Unlike the conventional lithium-ion secondary battery with liquid electrolyte,the lithium polymer secondary battery has no free electrolyte, so it can be assembled into a plastic ﬁlm package, rather than a metal hard case. 

This is quite advantageous for designing a thin battery with a large surface area. An improvement of the charge–discharge cycle life and an increase in the energy density were the main challenges in the development. 

The improvement of the chargedischarge cycle life was accomplished by improving the composition and production process of both the positive and negative electrodes, together with the improvement of the electrolyte composition. 

By improving the conductive additives in the positive electrode and the composition of SPE contained in the positive and negative electrodes, the 1998 life cycle performance has drastically improved which is favorably compared with that of a liquid electrolyte type lithium-ion battery. 

The increase in the energy density was accomplished by an increase in the ﬁlling density of active material through an improved manufacturing process for the electrodes, to obtain an energy density of 180 Wh/l, which is, however, still lower when compared with 220–260 Wh/l of a prismatic liquid electrolyte type. Yuasa primary lithium polymer battery has a thickness of only 0. Yuasa primary lithium polymer battery has a thickness of only 0.3 mm. This thickness is applicable to the IC card of the ISO standard (0. This thickness is applicable to the IC card of the ISO standard (0.75 mm thick). The improvement of the high-rate discharge performance was accomplished by a reduction in the interfacial impedance between the SPE and the positive active material.

In the last few years various rechargeable lithium systems have been developed but only few of them have been successfully commercialized.

Now days, lithium ion transfer cells dominate development in this sector, and the commercial interest in lithium ion transfer systems + ion transgrows continuously. 

This is because the Li fer battery is a very promising system for satisfying the demand for high speciﬁc energy and high power batteries for portable applications, especially for cellular phones and portable computers.

Comparison with other systems it is clear that the lithium ion transfer battery is a worthy candidate for energy storage in electric vehicles.10–12 Lithiumion batteries are one of the great successes of modern materials electrochemistry.13 The concept of the thin ﬁlm battery is very simple just to construct solid ﬁlms of anode, solid electrolyte and cathode sequentially on a substrate. Figure 1 shows the schematic cross-section of a thin ﬁlm lithium battery structure.7 2) 14 In thin ﬁlm battery both electrodes are capable of reversible lithium insertion. Because of the difference in chemical potentials of lithium in the two electrodes, the transfer of lithium ions from the anode through the electrolyte into the cathode (discharge) delivers energy, whereas the reverse lithium transfer (charge) consumes energy. 

Figure 2 shows the schematic illustration of the discharge and charge processes of lithium rechargeable battery.When the battery is discharged, the lithiumions in the anode material migrate to the cathode material, and a discharging current ﬂow while the battery is charged, the lithium ions in the cathode material migrate between the layers of material to form the anode, and a charging current ﬂows. In order to construct a thin ﬁlm battery, it is necessary to fabricate all the battery components, as an anode, a solid electrolyte, a cathode and current leads into multi-layered thin ﬁlms by suitable techniques. Usually, the lithium metal used for anode is prepared by vacuum thermal vapor deposition (VD). Solid electrolytes and cathode or sometimes anode materials of oxides are prepared by various sputtering techniques as RF sputtering (RFS), RF magnetron sputtering (RFMS). In some cases chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and electrostatic spray deposition (ESD) are used.

Recently pulsed laser deposition (PLD) and sol–gel is often used especially for cathode materials. 

For practical cells, carbon based anode and metal oxide-based cathode have been selected, as they can provide maximum speciﬁc energy, sufﬁcient speciﬁc power, and long cycle life.13 2) 15–23 At present, four cathode materials are favored: LiCoO2,24–28 LiNiO2,29–32 LiMn2O4,33–37 and V2O5.13 2) 15–23 At present, four cathode materials are favored: LiCoO2,24–28 LiNiO2,29–32 LiMn2O4,33–37 and V2O5.38 The electrodes are scarcely air sensitive. 

In the case of V2O5 a lithium metal laminate is attached to the carbon anode. After ﬁlling in the electrolyte, the metallic Li reacts with carbon and forms LixC6, which is then the lithium source in the cell.However, the use of moisture and air-sensitivelithium metal complicates the cell assembly and there is also a safety uncertainty since residual metallic lithium might remain in the cell even during cycling. Thus, this ion transfer system has found only limited application in small coin cells.7 2) 23 2) 38 By using polymer or gel electrolytes, some thick ﬁlm battery of less than 0.7 2) 23 2) 

By using polymer or gel electrolytes, some thick ﬁlm battery of less than 0.3 mm has been already available.

Figure 3 shows the general structure of thin ﬁlm lithium battery. The cell is usually less than 30  3)m in total thickness and aimed to integrate with semiconductor devices. 

Beside the material properties, the electrodes and cell design are also important sources of improvement. In thin ﬁlm lithium battery mass transport limitations generally worsen the utilization and rate capability of electro-active materials and, thus, the speciﬁc energy and power of batteries. 

This is especially true for lithium insertion materials.9 Insertion electrodes are preferably fabricated as thin ﬁlms from small particle size (5–20  3)m) electro-active materials.39 2) 40 There are activities to develop very thin, all-solid state micro batteries using vapor-phase deposition techniques.41 

2)  Thin composite porous layers (60–90  3)m) of the electro-active material (oxide or carbon) with a few percent of a polymer binder (to adjust the mechanical properties of the layer) are coated on both sides of a current collector. 

3)m thick Al foil for the cathode and a copper foil of the same thickness for the anode.In addition, the metal oxides contain about 10% of an inertcan visualize the possible gains that can be obtained at the complete cell level.

Figure 5 shows the cell speciﬁc energy and energy density variation as a function of electrode porosities. In this case, the cathode and anode are supposed to have the same porosity. The manufacture pressure for electrode preparation is also crucial.50 Low manufacture pressures usually give higher electrode porosity but rather poor contacts between the particles. At high manufacture pressures the electrode porosity is low and hence the electrode is insufﬁciently wetted by the electrolyte. Moreover, in low-porous electrodes variations in volume of the individual particles during lithium insertion and de-insertion induce mechanical stress between the particles, that is, in the entire composite electrode.51 For optimum performance the electrode porosity should be precisely adjusted, for example, by the use of pore-forming additives.

Mathematical modeling techniques can be used for electrode and cell optimization.52–54 As could be anticipated, the inﬂuence is much more sensitive on volumetric energy. So, any improvement of power characteristics of the electrodes, electrodes process, etc. can be translated into power, or energy increases.

Figure 2. Schematic illustration of the discharge and charge processes of a lithium rechargeable battery.

Figure 3.General structure of thin ﬁlm lithium battery.

One or more charge/discharge cycle(s) are generally performed after the assembly of lithium ion transfer cells. During the ﬁrst cycle(s) a solid electrolyte interface (SEI) ﬁlm is formed on the carbon anode and, possibly, interface or ﬁlm effects also occur on the cathode. The ﬁlm formation irreversibly consumes charge. The practical speciﬁc energy of formed cells is therefore only 80–90% of that corresponding to the mass of the built-in electro-active materials.

Of course, a careful adjustment of the balance of anode to cathode material masses is required to reach maximum performance.47 2) 48 In an average design, cell stack (electrodes+separator+electrolyte) occupy about 70–80% of the total volume for medium-sized cells and the weight is about 80–85%. The ratio between active components (cathode and anode materials) and non-active is varying dependent on the power required. A high-power design will necessitate larger electrode surfaces, more separator, electrolyte, and current collector. Any improvement in the electrode designs, allowing better electrode kinetics, may result in a reduction of non-active components, for constant power. Figure 4 represents the volume and weight distribution inside the cell stack for average cell design. As it can be seen, the cathode material weight is a major part of the total weight, while electrolyte occupies a very large part of the total volume. The clearest way for improvement is the electrolyte volume reduction, i.e., electrode porosity.

Beneﬁcial effect of small particle size (high speciﬁc surface area) on the speciﬁc power, numerous investigations have proved that an increased speciﬁc surface area of the electro-active particles negatively inﬂuences the safety characteristics, the charge losses, and the cycling performance of ion transfer cells.49 The cell construction modelFrom the average present situation, an improvement of up to 20% can be expected in the coming years. During these 15 years, the advancement of semiconductor thin ﬁlm technology allows us to use low power devices such as CMOS, FE-RAM and liquid crystal displays, etc. Now, it is possible to operate some small electric devices by the thin ﬁlm battery. 

Moreover, the recent developments of micro electric devices such as wearable computers, RF-IC tags, micro-machines, etc. strongly demand micro power sources with high energy density. Fortunately, now we have much more choices of the materials for battery components owing to the developments in solid-state ionic ﬁeld, thus we will prospect the usual practical use of the thin ﬁlm batteries in near future.7 2) 55–62 Now, we are reaching the limits in performance using the current electrode and electrolyte materials. For new generations of rechargeable lithium batteries, not only for applications in consumer electronics but especially for clean energy storage and use in hybrid electric vehicles, further breakthroughs in materials are essential. We must advance the science to advance the technology. When such a situation arises, it is important to open up new avenues. One avenue that is already opening up is that of nanomaterials for lithium batteries.

Most of the applications could be covered by primary batteries, but economic and ecological reasons lead to the use of secondary batteries. The desire to obtain high performance secondary batteries has spurred the development of a variety of materials for electrodes and electrolytes. These materials include metals, metal hydrides, carbon and graphite, and metal oxides for electrodes, liquids, polymers, and solids for electrolytes.The assessment criteriaFigure 4.The assessment criteriaFigure 4. Weight and volume distribution of cell stack components (average design).

Solid state batteries using solid-electrolyte have liquidattractive advantages compared to conventional electrolyte batteries lead-acid batteries or nickel-cadmium cells. These advantages include ease of utilization, high reliability, and thermal stability, resistance to shocks and vibrations, absence of self-discharge, extremely long active life, absence of possible pollution due to liquid electrolyte, possible miniaturization, and possible integration with microcircuits. Thin-ﬁlm techniques are used in battery technology mainly for the purpose of reducing the internal resistance due to geometrical reasons. In addition it offers various advantages: (i) Thin-ﬁlm technology has been widely used in advanced microelectronics. (ii) Thinning of layers gives a lower electrical resistance in the transverse direction.

Thin-ﬁlm technology provides clean surface of the compound and may improve the electrode-electrolyte interface contact reducing the interface resistance and permitting a high degree of reversibility. 

(iv) Film deposition of alkali metals such as lithium is easy. (v) Film deposition of lamellar compound allows the orientation of the layers with the Van der Waals planes perpendicular to the separator surface. (vi) Deposition of the fast ionic conductor in vacuum chamber avoids possible moisture problems. (vii) Thin ﬁlm technologies generally give very good adhesion between layers and large areas can also be obtained with these techniques. (viii) Convenient substrate materials wafers can be used. (ix) Encapsulation of the battery can be achieved by the deposition of an insulating layer on the top of the device. Another advantage is that it can allow the exploration for preparation of new materials with different chemical stoichiometries, perhaps providing better performances. However, thin ﬁlm batteries have low capacities. Therefore recharge ability is an essential condition for technical feasibility of thin ﬁlm technologies.

Rechargeable lithium batteries have received much attention in recent years. There is great interest in the application of solid electrolytes for high performance secondary lithium batteries because of high electrical, chemical, and mechanical stability of many lithium compounds. These lithium batteries can be fabricated by successive deposition of contacts, electrodes and an oxide electrolyte. This makes them ideal for integration with microelectronics.The properties and performance of the solid state thin ﬁlm lithium micro batteries will be tested and characterized through the following measurements: opencircuit voltage, speciﬁc capacity, energy density, power density, energy efﬁciency, cyclic voltammetry, charge and discharge characteristics, cycle life, overcharge reactions,complex impedance plot, X-ray diffraction (XRD), Raman scattering spectra, scanning electron microscopy (SEM).

Figure 5.Cell speciﬁc energy and energy density variation as a function of electrode porosities.

Solid-State Lithium Ion Conductors (SSLICs) At present, lithium ion secondary battery developments are mainly based on LiCoO2 as positive electrode, lithiumion conducting organic polymer as electrolyte (LiPF6 dissolved in polyethylene oxide), and Li-metal or graphite as negative electrode. 

The formation of a solid electrolyte interface at the anode leads to a large irreversible capacity loss during the discharge cycles. A further major concern is the safety aspect of liquid and common polymeric electrolytes. Liquid-free batteries that utilize solid state lithium ion conductors (SSLICs) are expected to show major advantages over the currently commercialized polymer/gel batteries. 

These include thermal stability, absence of leakage and pollution, high resistance to shocks and vibrations, and a large electrochemical stability window for practical applications. Required functional properties of SSLICs for application in high energy density batteries, SSLICs should show the following features for application in lithium batteries and other electrochemical devices: (a) High lithium ion conductivity at room temperature (b) Negligible electronic conductivity over employed range of lithium activity and temperature (c) Negligibly small or nonexistent grain-boundary resistance (d) Stability against chemical reaction with both electrodes, especially with elemental Li or Li-alloy negative electrodes during the preparation and operation of the cell (e) Matching thermal expansion coefﬁcients of the electrolyte with both electrodes (f) High electrochemical decomposition voltage (>5.

Required functional properties of SSLICs for application in high energy density batteries, SSLICs should show the following features for application in lithium batteries and other electrochemical devices: (a) High lithium ion conductivity at room temperature (b) Negligible electronic conductivity over employed range of lithium activity and temperature (c) Negligibly small or nonexistent grain-boundary resistance (d) Stability against chemical reaction with both electrodes, especially with elemental Li or Li-alloy negative electrodes during the preparation and operation of the cell (e) Matching thermal expansion coefﬁcients of the electrolyte with both electrodes (f) High electrochemical decomposition voltage (>5.5 V vs. Li) (g) Environmental benignity, non hygroscopicity, cost, and easiness of preparation.

SOLID ELECTROLYTES Ionic transport in solids is related to the atomic disorder in real crystals. 

The most important defects are vacancies and interstitials. Charged defects have an effect on electronic concentration and accordingly on electronic leakage current. An ionically conducting material may readily turn into an electronic conductor. The most important driving forces for the motion of ionic defects and electrons in solids are the migration in an electric ﬁeld and the diffusion under the inﬂuence of a chemical potential gradient. Depending on the majority charge carriers, quite different driving forces and ﬂuxes apply for the ions and electrons in solid electrolytes and electrodes. The majority carriers are transferred in an electric ﬁeld whereas the minority charge carriers are moved by diffusion.The solid electrolyte therefore carries the mobile ions according to Ohm’s law and the electronic carriers according toFick’s law. The electrodes carry the ions towards the interfaces with the electrolyte by diffusion.

Solid electrolytes for battery applications require high ionic conductivities and wide range of appropriate thermodynamic stability. 

Four major aspects should be taken into consideration for the design of suitable solid electrolytes: (i) Optimizing the lattice structure spatially and energetically to improve the number and mobility of ionic defects, (ii) Developing synthesis routes which lead to materials of amorphous or polycrystalline structure with high overall conductivity, (iii) Optimizing the stability range to prevent chemical reactions with the electrodes, (iv) Optimizing the electrolytic domain with negligible electronic conduction over the activity range employed.

It is difﬁcult to prepare all solid-state batteries except possibly thin ﬁlm batteries with good contacts between the electrolyte and electrodes because of differences in the thermal expansion coefﬁcients of different materials and because of undesirable side reactions at high temperatures. The electrolyte generally used in solid state thin ﬁlm lithium batteries is lithium phosphorus oxynitride (LiPON). LiPON has a good lithium ion conductivity and excellent stability in contact with metallic lithium.

The ﬁnal section is related to the stability of the electrolyte. 

In the case of the primary lithium battery, decomposition of the electrolyte is caused by a reaction with lithium. 

Another problem is decomposition of the electrolyte at the cathode during charge. Some cathodes have a relatively high cell voltage. During charging the electrode potential of the cathode can exceed 4. During charging the electrode potential of the cathode can exceed 4.2 V versus Li/Li .2 V versus Li/Li . Most of the known nonaqueous electrolytes + decompose at more than 4. Most of the known nonaqueous electrolytes + decompose at more than 4.2 V versus Li/Li .2 V versus Li/Li . If gaseous products are formed in the battery, the pressure in the battery increases leading to catastrophic failure. Even small amounts of decomposition products inﬂuence the safety of practical rechargeable lithium batteries. Therefore the method of charging lithium cells has been investigated to ensure the safety of the battery. One method is an electronic circuit which prevents increasing the cell voltage + . One method is an electronic circuit which prevents increasing the cell voltage + . 

Some of the commercialized beyond 4. Some of the commercialized beyond 4.2 V versus Li/Li rechargeable lithium batteries include such a circuit. Some organic polymers have ether oxygens, as in polyethylene oxide enabling solvation of various lithium salts with reasonable conductivity. The ionic conductivity of such solid electrolytes is much lower than that of aqueous solutions. In order to obtain similar performance to the batteries having an aqueous electrolyte, larger electrode surface areas and thinner electrolytes are almost certainly needed. The rechargeability of the lithium polymer battery is also related to the stability of the interface region between the lithium electrode and the electrolyte. In order to reduce the resistance of the solid polymer electrolyte, electrolytes have to be prepared in the form of thin ﬁlms. Recently, many solid polymer electrolytes have been developed and used in thin ﬁlm batteries.

The glasstransition temperature ofthe polymer decreases with increasing concentration of the siloxane group, and the dielectric constant of the polymer increases with increasing concentration of ether groups. Rechargeable lithium batteries using these solid polymer electrolytes have been studied. High reactivity of the polymer towards lithium was observed.

Therefore, such polymers cannot be used as such in lithium cells. In order to modify the interface between lithium and the solid polymer electrolyte, the lithium surface was covered with an ultra thin ﬁlm of ﬂuorinated polymer. Dendrite formation was suppressed by this treatment. In Japan, many researchers continue to investigate the electrochemistry of lithium in various electrolytes. Certainly, research concerning the electrochemical oxidation of the various electrolytes used in secondary lithium batteries is important. At the time sufﬁciently stable electrolytes are developed, we should have excellent batteries having high energy density, high power density and long life.

Why Solid Electrolyte? In the last decade a number of different battery systems were found to meet the requirements of electric vehicle batteries, among which are the nickel-metal hydride, the sodium-sulfur, and the lithium-ion systems. 

In the USA besides the nickel system the lithium-ion battery is considered to be most promising and thus its development is considerably supported. The history of the development of secondary lithium batteries has recently been reviewed by Brandt.63 There are two major arguments for a lithium-ion battery: lithium is the lightest element that can safely be handled in electrochemical processes and it exhibits the highest oxidation potential of any element, properties that make lithium ideally suited for high energy density batteries. However, lithium-metal electrodes in contact with liquid electrolytes cause a variety of problems, which in the worst case can lead to ﬁres and explosions. Therefore, the most promising approach is that of the “rocking chair” cell, in which the lithium metal is replaced by a lithiumion source.

During charging and discharging of such batteries, lithium ions are “rocked” between lithium-carbon and lithium-metal oxide intercalation compounds, which act as the electrode couple. Insertion compounds as electrode materials for rocking chair Li batteries have recently been reviewed by Scrosati64 and Koksberg et al.

Because of the high oxidation potential of the metal oxide cathodes, these batteries may suffer from decomposition reactions of the liquid organic solutions used as electrolyte. Therefore, the replacement of the liquid electrolyte with a thin polymer membrane would be highly desirable. The electrolyte serves as a medium to transport the ions involved in the charging/discharging cycle of the cell. In addition, a separator has to isolate the anode from the cathode electronically.While ceramic or polymeric separators have to be placed between the electrodes when liquid electrolytesare used, both functions ion conduction and separation can be realized in a single thin membrane when polymer electrolytes are used. 

However, in batteries to be used for electrically powered vehicles, such a polymer electrolyte membrane ought to exhibit ion conductivities better −5 S/cm in the temperature range from −20 C to than 10 +60 C, and they should be mechanically, thermally, and electrochemically stable at least within that temperature range. 

A comparison of the electrochemistry of solid electrolytes and liquid electrolytes was given very recently by Armand and co-workers.66A further major concern is the safety aspect of liquid and common polymeric electrolytes. The liquid-free batteries show some advantages over the currently commercialized ones. These include thermal stability, absence of leakage and pollution, resistance to shocks and vibrations, and large electrochemical windows of application. Furthermore, the development in microelectronic and information technologies requires the search for a new generation of energy sources, among which a considerable interest has been given to the all solid state lithium batteries. The main impediment is ﬁnding an appropriate solid electrolyte that has a reasonably high lithium ionic conductivity and a good chemical stability in contact with both electrodes, especially with metallic lithium or LiAl alloy anode.

Key Point of the Solid Electrolytes Materials that conduct ions are useful in devices involving electrochemical reactions, like batteries. The development of materials with dimensions in the nanoscale range is a highly active area of research because they often have very different properties from the bulk material. These properties can offer new or improved technological applications. So far, materials scientists interested in nanotechnology have mostly focused on semiconductors and ceramics. Semiconductors made from nanocrystals have unusual optical, electrical and magnetic properties, and ceramics made from nanoparticles have greater hardness and plasticity than normal. However, restructuring simple ionic crystals at the nanoscale can also alter their electrical properties, pointing the way to potentially dramatic improvements in energy storage and generation.

In purely ionic solids, such as a crystal of sodium chloride, there are virtually no free electrons, so the migration of charge is restricted to the movement of ions. Such movements are possible because of defects in the crystal lattice either lattice vacancies or interstitial ions. Ions next to a vacancy can jump into it, or an interstitial ion can jump to a neighboring interstitial site. A series of such jumps allows charge to move through the solid, producing an ionic current. Lattice defects in a simple ionic crystal only occur in pairs because the overall electrical neutrality of the crystal must be maintained. In a solid electrolyte of the lithium battery we need the compound with more defects in the crystal.

For example, in NaCl, vacancies on the Na and sub lattice must be compensated by vacancies on the Cl sub lattice and vice versa. The concentration of defects in a crystal of NaCl is low because the number of defects is thermodynamically controlled and the energy required to form pairs of them is high. The concentration of defects is only about 0. The concentration of defects is only about 0.1% at the melting point, and falls exponentially with decreasing temperature. In addition, the activation energy for an ion or defect, to jump to a neighboring site is high, leading to low mobility. So the overall ionic conductivity, which is the product of defect concentration and mobility, is low in a simple material such as NaCl, the electrical conductivity at the melting point is eight orders of magnitude less than in a metal, and is almost immeasurable at room temperature.

Electrochemists in the nineteenth century recognized that ionic solids could be used as electrolytes in batteries and chemical sensors. But the extremely low conductivity of most ionic materials makes such devices impractical. The low ionic conductivity, particularly for solids that conduct with lithium ions for battery electrolytes still inhibits the commercial development of these devices. One strategy to increase the conductivity of the electrolyte is to add components (known as dopants) that preferentially increase the concentration of one type of defect in the pair. Unfortunately, there is often an optimum level of doping beyond which the conductivity begins to decrease. At the optimal level, the only way to increase conductivity further is to raise the operating temperature to enhance the mobility of the defects.

Ceramic Electrolytes Ionic conduction in ceramic compounds occurs by movement of ionic point defects, the creation and/or movement of which requires energy, so the conductivity of these compounds increases with increasing temperature. Thus, ceramic solid electrolytes are well suited for hightemperature applications. However, ionic conduction in some compounds is reasonably high even at relatively low temperatures, so there are several types of lithium-ion conducting inorganic ceramics that have been investigated for use in lithium-ion batteries.67–71 Here, the conductivity of sulﬁde, oxide and phosphate compounds for use as the electrolyte in lithium-ion batteries is reviewed.

In many aspects such materials exhibit an improved performance with respect to ZrO2, ThO2, HfO2, CeO2 and  4)-Bi2O3 based solid electrolytes known and used since the early 1960–70s. On the other hand, the rapid developments in this ﬁeld have resulted in a signiﬁcant lack of knowledge regarding key properties of these potential new electrolytes, even regarding important characteristics such as their electronic conductivity and stability: oxysulﬁde glasses and sulﬁde glass-ceramics.

The rapid quenching method using a twin-roller apparatus and the mechanochemical method using a planetary ball millapparatus were used for preparation of glasses. All-solidstate lithium secondary batteries with glasses and glassceramics as a solid electrolyte were fabricated, and their performance is reported here. There is strong interest C) fuel cell sysin intermediate temperature (400–700 tems that use composite solid ion conducting electrolytes. Ion-conducting ceramic composite membranes with high chemical and thermal stability and low fabrication cost have high potential value as electrolytes in fuel cells. Salt– ceramic composites are of interest because of their relatively high ion-conductivity and good mechanical strength, when compared with ion-conducting salts alone.

Sulﬁdes Sulﬁde compounds in crystalline, amorphous and partially crystalline forms have been used as lithium-ion conductors. 

One example is a Li2S–P2S5 glass or glass–ceramic, the maximum conductivity for which occurs at 20–30% P2S5, depending on the degree of crystallization.72–74 Lithium sulfate is a well-known ion-conducting material. However, membranes made of pure lithium sulfate are brittle, and are subject to development of a great number of cracks, pores and other defects. Salt-ceramic composites made from a combination of Li2SO4 and Al2O3 have improved microstructure and mechanical strength. The ionic conductivity of the low temperature phase of Li2SO4 has been increased by three orders of magnitude when dispersed in a composite containing 53% Li2SO4 and 47% Al2O3. The ionic conductivity of the low temperature phase of Li2SO4 has been increased by three orders of magnitude when dispersed in a composite containing 53% Li2SO4 and 47% Al2O3. It has been shown that Li2SO4–Al2O3 composites have proton-conducting capability. 

These composites may be used as electrolytes in a variety of electrochemical devices, notably in proton conducting fuel cells, −1 −2 S cm due to their high proton conductivity (about 10 C), mechanical strength, and chemical stability to at >600 some aggressive gases (H2S is one example). 

While several reports describe electrochemical properties of pure Li2SO4 and Li2SO4–Al2O3 composites, and of fuel cell performance using these materials, relatively little attention has been paid to the relationship between preparative parameters, structure and properties of Li2SO4–Al2O3 composites. Detailed studies have shown that the structure of the composite is a critical factor in determining the physical properties of composite materials, including strength, density, gas permeability, and conductivity. In particular, the conductivity of Li2SO4–Al2O3 composites largely depends on the composition and heat treatment during the preparative process. The properties of the resulting membranes are also affected by the method of forming the membrane, moisture content of materials during the process and alumina grain size. 

The highest conductivity in the Li2SO4–Al2O3 system was obtained when the grain size was the ﬁnest.It has been shown that when the grain size of alumina in composites was small enough (nanosized), thin lithium sulfate layers contacting surface of alumina particles was transformed into a special epitaxial state with anomalously high conductivity (even more−1). 

Herein we will describe relationships than 0. Herein we will describe relationships than 0.1 S cm between preparative parameters, structure, morphology, and properties (density, gas permeability, and conductivity) of Li2SO4–Al2O3 composite membranes produced using conventional procedures and membranes having the same bulk compositions produced using a Li2SO4–Al2O3 nano-composite prepared using a customized sol–gel technique. The conductivity of the glass–ceramics (i.e., after crystallization) are higher than those of the corresponding glasses at lower temperatures, which indicates that the crystalline phase has a higher conductivity and lower activation energy than the amorphous phase. 

This is not always the case, since in some other sulﬁde glasses (e.g., Li2S–P2S5–Li4SiO4),75 crystallization decreases conductivity. Sulﬁde electrolytes have been used in batteries with lithium–indium anodes and several different cathodes, including sulﬁdes of nickel,76 2) 77 copper78 and copper– molybdenum79 which operate at potentials of 2–3 V versus + Li/Li . 

Sulﬁde electrolytes have been used in batteries with lithium–indium anodes and several different cathodes, including sulﬁdes of nickel,76 2) 77 copper78 and copper– molybdenum79 which operate at potentials of 2–3 V versus + Li/Li . Sulﬁde electrolytes have also been used in batteries with a NiP2 cathode,80 which operates at a lower potential, as well as with more widely used cathodes, including 81–83 and Li4Ti5O12. Sulﬁde electrolytes have also been used in batteries with a NiP2 cathode,80 which operates at a lower potential, as well as with more widely used cathodes, including 81–83 and Li4Ti5O12.84 2) 85 The conductivity of Li2S– LiCoO2 SiS2 is similar to that of Li2S–P2S5, but can be improved with lithium silicate (Li4SiO4) additions. 

The conductivity of Li2S–Ga2S3–GeS2 is similar to, or lower than, that of Li2S–P2S5, but can be improved with LiI additions. Li2S–Sb2S3–GeS2, however, has a lower conductivity than Li2S–P2S5. Li2S–Sb2S3–GeS2, however, has a lower conductivity than Li2S–P2S5. 

Crystalline Li3 5)25Ge0 5)25P0 5)75S4 has a high conductivity, which is in the same range as those of Li2S–P2S5 glass–ceramics, but the conductivities of Li4 5)2Ge0 5)8Ga0 5)2S4 and Li2 5)2Zn0 5)1Zr1 5)9S3, are lower than those of Li2S–P2S5 glass-ceramics. The higher conductivity of Li2S–GeS2– P2S5 has resulted in lower polarization and higher capacity with a LiCoO2 cathode as compared to Li3PO4–Li2S– SiS2, but Li2S–GeS2–P2S5 was found to be incompatible with a graphite anode.86 Like Li2S–P2S5, Li2S–GeS2–P2S5 has been used in batteries with sulﬁde cathodes, such as + .86 Like Li2S–P2S5, Li2S–GeS2–P2S5 has been used in batteries with sulﬁde cathodes, such as + .87 The addiMo6S8, which operates at 2–3 V versus Li/Li tion of oxygen to Li2S–GeS2 increases the room temperature conductivity.88 The increase is attributed to an increase in the coordination number of lithium, but larger amounts of oxygen lead to a decrease in free volume, which results in a decrease in conductivity.

Crystallization of glassy materials is well known to lower conductivities. 

However, the enhancement of conductivity by careful heat-treatment of the Li2S–P2S5 glasses has been reported.85 2) 89 Filled diamonds denote the conductivity of the corresponding sample obtained by solid-state reaction of Li2S and P2S5.

 2) Filled diamonds denote the conductivity of the corresponding sample obtained by solid-state reaction of Li2S and P2S5. The ambient temperature conductivity of the 54Li2S· 46PS2 

5)5 glass is 5. The ambient temperature conductivity of the 54Li2S· 46PS2 5)5 glass is 5.4× 10 −1.4× 10 −1. The conductivities of the glass-ceramic are much higher in the whole temperature range than those of the pristine glass; the conductivity of the glassceramic is 3. 

The conductivities of the glass-ceramic are much higher in the whole temperature range than those of the pristine glass; the conductivity of the glassceramic is 3.2× 10 −1 at room temperature. The activation energy of the glass-ceramic is 12 kJ · mol −1 J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol.17, 29–71, 2017which is the lowest value in the lithium ion conductor reported so far. 

On the other hand, the crystal obtained by conventional solid-state reaction of Li2S and P2S5 exhibits much lower ambient temperature conductivity of 2. On the other hand, the crystal obtained by conventional solid-state reaction of Li2S and P2S5 exhibits much lower ambient temperature conductivity of 2.6 × 10 −8 S · cm −1 and a higher activation energy of 55 kJ· mol −1 for conduction. 

The all-solid-state In/LiCoO2 cells using Li2S–P2S5 glass ceramics as a solid electrolyte were assembled.90 2) 91 The glass ceramics with ambi−1 were ent temperature conductivity of about 10 prepared by heat-treatment of the mechanically milled 80Li2S· 20PS2 5)5 (mol%, the composition corresponds to 80Li2S· 20P2S5) glass. Charge–discharge curves of the allsolid-state cell at the 500th cycle under constant current −2. Charge–discharge curves of the allsolid-state cell at the 500th cycle under constant current −2. The inset shows cycling perfordensity of 64  3)A cm mance of the cell. Although an irreversible capacity is initially observed at the ﬁrst few cycles, the all-solid-state cell −1 and maintains the reversible capacity of about 100 mAhg the charge–discharge efﬁciency of 100% for 500 cycles, suggesting that the cell works as a lithium secondary battery without the decomposition of the glassy electrolyte. 

The excellent cycling performance with no capacity loss is achieved by using the highly conductive Li2S–P2S5 glassceramic electrolytes. In order to improve the energy density of batteries, the development of positive electrode materials is important because in general the capacity of positive electrode materials is much lower than that of negative electrode materials. Elemental sulfur has been of great interest as a positive electrode material because −1, low cost, of its large theoretical capacity of 1672 mAhg and environmental friendliness. The utilization of inorganic solid electrolytes resolves a key problem in Li/S batteries. The glass-based solid electrolytes in the systems Li2S–SiS2 and Li2S–P2S5 have been used for all-solidstate Li/S batteries.92

 2)  The Li2S–P2S5 glass-ceramic electrolytes are compatible with various electrode materials for all-solid-state cells with excellent cycling performance.

Oxides Oxide-ion conductors are solid oxides that contain highly mobile oxide ions. Some oxide-ion electrolytes are electronic insulators; others are mixed oxide-ion/electronic conductors. These materials form the basis of devices that have a huge market potential. The challenge for the chemist is to design a solid material that will allow oxide-ion conduction at a low enough temperature to be technically useful. Good oxide-ion conductivity requires only partial occupancy of an energetically equivalent set of oxide-ion lattice sites, such as the anion sites of the ﬂuorite structure. The oxide ions can then move diffusively, providing that they can overcome a small energy barrier Ea to hop to a vacant site in the solid. Two strategies for introducing anion vacancies have been investigated: one way is to choose an oxide with an intrinsic vacancy concentration; the other substitute’s cations that have a different valency to the host ion in the cation array, thereby creating an extrinsic vacancy concentration.

Intrinsic vacancy concentrations are high, and electrostatic interactions between the mobile ions order the vacancies below a transition temperature Tt. 

This is the temperature at which many oxide-ion conductors go through a structural transition that produces a sudden increase in conductivity. Lanthanide-doped ceria is a good oxide ion conductor, but it becomes a mixed electronic/oxide-ion conductor. 

The ABO3 perovskites offer an alternative AB cation framework with the CuAu structure. The extra oxygen atom replaces only half the lone pairs of the structure, which makes it an intrinsic-vacancy oxide-ion electrolyte. They make the interesting suggestion that partial substitution of oxygen for vacancies occupied by lone pairs may be an excellent design strategy for ﬁnding new intrinsic vacancy oxide-ion conductors. Technical applications would all beneﬁt from oxide ceramics that have higher oxide-ion conductivity at lower temperatures than those now available. Such materials would lower the cost of both fabrication and operation as well as extend the life of a device. Expansion of the number of host structures to be explored for improved oxide-ion conduction is a promising step towards realization of the commercial potential of oxide-ion conductors.

Doping parent metal oxides with oxides of lower-valent cations than the host cation produces anion deﬁciencies, i.e., oxygen stoichiometries less than that of the mother phase. 

This is an essential requirement for oxide ion conduction, because the transport of oxide ions occurs generally by a hopping process between an occupied and a vacant oxide ion site. It is generally accepted that high ionic conduction of oxides is based on the following structural properties: 1. It is generally accepted that high ionic conduction of oxides is based on the following structural properties: 1. An optimum number of oxide ion vacancies which should be structurally distributed 2. An optimum number of oxide ion vacancies which should be structurally distributed 2. Vacant and occupied sites should have nearly the same potential energies for low-activation-energy conduction processes 3. Vacant and occupied sites should have nearly the same potential energies for low-activation-energy conduction processes 3. Weak frame-work and 3D structures 4. 

Weak frame-work and 3D structures 4. Weak covalent bonding between the metal and oxygen (M–O) 5. Weak covalent bonding between the metal and oxygen (M–O) 5. Host and guest metal ions should be stable with different coordination numbers of oxygen.

Accordingly, there is strong, currently ongoing research C) solid oxide for intermediate temperature (IT; 400–800 conductors. In this regard, a set of functional material properties has to be fulﬁlled for practical development: 

In this regard, a set of functional material properties has to be fulﬁlled for practical development: 1. High oxide ion conductivity at the operating temperaC) without structural phase transition and tures (400–800 decomposition 2. High oxide ion conductivity at the operating temperaC) without structural phase transition and tures (400–800 decomposition 2. Electrochemical stability up to at least 1. Electrochemical stability up to at least 1.2 V against air or pure O2 at the operating temperature 3.2 V against air or pure O2 at the operating temperature 3. Negligible electronic conductivity over the entire or most of the employed range of oxygen partial pressures and temperature 4. Negligible electronic conductivity over the entire or most of the employed range of oxygen partial pressures and temperature 4.Dense, gas-tight, pore-free preparation of the material with good adhesion to both anode and cathode materials,with matching thermal expansion coefﬁcients (including the sealing material) 5.Dense, gas-tight, pore-free preparation of the material with good adhesion to both anode and cathode materials,with matching thermal expansion coefﬁcients (including the sealing material) 5. Stability against chemical reactions with anode, cathode, and sealing materials over an extended period of operation time 6. Stability against chemical reactions with anode, cathode, and sealing materials over an extended period of operation time 6. Negligible electrolyte–electrode interface and charge transfer resistances 7. Negligible electrolyte–electrode interface and charge transfer resistances 7. Low-cost, non toxicity, easiness of preparation, chemical and kinetic stability under ambient conditions, especially conditions of moisture and CO2 content in the atmosphere.

Although GeO2 has lower conductivity than GeS2, the oxides in other systems are good lithium-ion conductors.

One promising lithium-ion conducting oxide is the perovskite (La, Li) TiO3 (LLTO).94 The higher bulk grain conductivity indicates that grain boundaries impede the transport of lithium ions. The results for total conductivity vary much more between different reports as compared to those for bulk conductivities, which may be due to variations in grain size and possibly grain boundary composition. Small amounts of aluminum replacing titanium have been shown to lead to high conductivity, but the addition of sodium, which is added to the A-site + + 3 ), leads to a decrease in conductiv(i.e., replaces Li ity. The replacement of some oxygen with ﬂuorine does not signiﬁcantly affect the conductivity. 

Some phosphates, similar to the sodium-ion conducting NASICON compounds, are good lithium-ion conductors. The highest conductivities phosphate compounds of are observed for Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4 1)3 (LAGP). Another commonly used phosphate electrolyte is Li1+xTi2−xAlx(PO4 1)3 (LTAP), to which silicon has been added to replace some the phosphorous (i.e., Li1+x+yTi2−xAlxSiy(PO4 1)3−y 1). of LTAP has been used as the electrolyte in lithiumion batteries.107 2) 108 The conductivity of the zirconium based phosphate, LiTi0 5)5Zr1 5)5(PO4 1)3, is lower than those of the titaniumand germanium-based phosphates.109–117 The bulk conductivity of the zirconia based phosphate, LiTi0 5)5Zr1 5)5(PO4 1)3, is lower than that of LTAP, which is consistent with impedance spectroscopy studies of LiTi2−xZrx(PO4 1)3 indicating that zirconium additions affect the bulk conductivity more than the grain boundary conductivity. 

However, zirconia-based phosphates, e.g., LixAlZr[PO4]3 are being investigated for higher temperature applications.

Lithium phosphate glass has a relatively low conductivity, but its conductivity can be increased with the addition of aluminum or halogen salts. Glasses with Li3Fe2(PO4 1)3 crystals have been mentioned as potential electrolyte materials,120 but transition metal phosphates are more commonly used for cathode materials in lithium-ion batteries, because the change in valence of the transition metal allows for insertion and removal of lithium ions.121 Another phosphate-related compound is LiPON, which is a lithium-ion conductor, but has a low conductivity (i.e., ≈10 −1 1).122 However, reducing the electrolyte thickness reduces the resistance, so LiPON has been used in thin-ﬁlm batteries.123–130Polymer Electrolytes Polymer electrolytes offer advantages over ceramics, including good processability and ﬂexibility, while maintaining the advantages of solid electrolytes, including dimensional stability, safety and the ability to prevent lithium dendrite formation.131–134 In some polymer electrolytes, lithium salts are solvated by the polymer chains, while in others a solvent is added to form a polymer gel. 

In the general, the former is mechanically stronger, so that a free-standing ﬁlm can be formed. Polymer gels, on the other hand, require mechanical support from other battery components, but typically have higher conductivities. Examples of both types will be discussed below.

Polymer electrolyte may generally be deﬁned as a membrane that possesses transport properties comparable with that of common liquid ionic solutions. The development of polymer electrolytes has drawn the attention of many researchers in the last three decades as they ﬁnd applications not only in lithium batteries but also, in other electrochemical devices such as super capacitors and electro chromic devices, etc. These polymer electrolytes have several advantages over their liquid counter parts.The advantages of these electrolytes include such as no internalshorting, leakage of electrolytes and non-combustible reaction products at the electrode surface existing in the liquid electrolytes.135–139 In principle, a polymer electrolyte battery can be formed by sandwiching the electrolyte between a lithium metal (or a composite carbon) anode and a composite cathode as depicted in Figure 1.135–139 In principle, a polymer electrolyte battery can be formed by sandwiching the electrolyte between a lithium metal (or a composite carbon) anode and a composite cathode as depicted in Figure 1.7 2) 137 The charge–discharge proﬁle of the lithium battery and lithium insertion and deinsertion mechanism have already been available elsewhere.140 The pre-requisites for a polymer electrolyte for lithium batteries are (i) high ionic conductivity at ambient and sub ambient temperatures, (ii) good mechanical strength, (iii) appreciable transference number, (iv) thermal and electrochemical stabilities, and (v) better compatibility with electrodes.136–139 The polymer electrolyte should allow good cycle lives at low temperatures and must withstand with the internal pressure build up during the battery operations.136–139 Although, the polymer electrolyte was launched in 1973 by Fenton et al.

,141 its technological importance was appreciated in early 1980.,141 its technological importance was appreciated in early 1980.142 The development of polymer electrolytes has gone through three stages (i) dry solid-state polymer, (ii) gel/plasticized polymer electrolyte systems, and (iii) polymer composites. The very ﬁrst example of “dry solid” polymer electrolyte is the poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) based systems that showed very low ambient temperature conductivities of the order −1. The very ﬁrst example of “dry solid” polymer electrolyte is the poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) based systems that showed very low ambient temperature conductivities of the order −1.141 Since this system does not possesses of 10 any organic liquid and thus the polymer host is used as solid solvent. However, the cycling performance of this dry solid polymer electrolyte with lithium metal electrodes was not satisfactory and was used as low as 200–300 cycles.

The poor performance of the cells was attributed to poor ionic conductivity of the electrolytes. The second category of polymer electrolyte is called “gel polymer electrolyte” or “plasticized polymer electrolyte” which is neither liquid nor solid or conversely both liquid and solid.142 2) 143 Gels possess both cohesive properties of solids and the diffusive property liquids. This unique characteristic makes the gel to ﬁnd various important applications including polymer electrolytes.

Polymeric solid electrolytes (PSE) have attracted extensive attention for their potential application in solid electrochemical devices, especially in lithium batteries with + Li -inserted compounds as cathodic materials. 

Being solvent free and plastic, these electrolytes have the potential for wide applications in modern electronics. Poly-(ethylene oxide) (PEO) and many copolymers containing short PEO chain have been extensively studied as polymer hosts, but they have the insufﬁciency of low conductivity at ambient temperatures.

The most successful applications of the polymer electrolyte principle to date have involved low Tg and moderate concentrations of salts, the maximum conductivity being reached at about O:M = 16, where O:M is 43the mole ratio of polymer ether repeating unit to salt cation. The conductivity of such materials that attains a maximum near M:O = 1:16 is not only due to the rising of Tg by the “transient cross-linking,” but also is related to the formation of ion pairs, which causes a decrease in ionic mobility that offsets the effect of increasing charge carrier concentration. However, the conductivities of even the most optimized of such systems at room temperature have proven inadequate for most practical purposes.

Since Wright144 discovered ionic conductivity in a PEO:Na complex in 1975, the research and development effort has become quite active on solid polymer electrolyte (SPE), in particular for improvement of the ionic conductivity. Ever since Armand145 proposed the application of SPE to lithium batteries, the research and development effort has been made throughout the world. Recently, batteries have been especially required for superior electrical performance in response to the need for the miniature power supply for consumer applications, so the gelled SPE and the porous SPE are expected to play a major role. The work in this ﬁeld is therefore very popular.

Large research efforts have been devoted on PEO-based electrolyte systems in the last two decades. 

As mentioned earlier, after Wrights discovery of ionic conductivity in alkali metal salt complexes of PEO in 1973, polymer electrolytes were employed as separator in lithium batteries only in 1978. 

As mentioned earlier, after Wrights discovery of ionic conductivity in alkali metal salt complexes of PEO in 1973, polymer electrolytes were employed as separator in lithium batteries only in 1978. These electrolytes combine the advantages of solid-state with the ease of casting as thin ﬁlms. However, PEO-based electrolytes offer very low ionic conductivity −1 at temperatures that ranges from 10 between 40 and 100 C, which excludes ambient temperature applications.146 2) 147 Sequira and Hooper148 have described the electrochemical properties of solid lithium systems of (PEO)x-LiCF3SO3 in the temperature range C. Later, (PEO)9-LiCF3SO3 solid electrolyte 100–170 was cycled approximately with 40% capacity at a cur−2. Later, (PEO)9-LiCF3SO3 solid electrolyte 100–170 was cycled approximately with 40% capacity at a cur−2.149 In order to improve the rent density up to 1 mA cm room temperature ionic conductivity of PEO complexed with lithium salts, Ito et al.,150 have made ionic conductivity measurements on PEO-LiCF3SO3 complexes with poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) as plasticizer. 

They observed that the ionic conductivity increases with the increase of PEG content. 

The increase in conductivity was mainly attributed to the reduction of crystallinity and increasing of free volume of the system. On contrary, the increase in ionic conductivity is adversely accompanied by poor interfacial properties due to the presence of hydroxyl endgroups.150 In order to avoid this problem few researchers have attempted to replace the hydroxyl end groups of PEG by methoxy one.151 Nagasubramaniam and Stefano152 have achieved the maximum conductivity of the order of 7 × 10 −1 for the PEO-LiBF4 system.The electrochemical stability and ionic conductivity studies werereported by Fauteaux et al.,153 for high molecular weight PEO based solid polymer electrolytes for electrochemical devices. These electrolytes, however, offered good mechanical property and high lithium ion mobility when they were complexed with LiClO4 and LiCF3SO3 Song et al.154 have measured the thermal conductivity of PEO for various lithium salt complexes. The thermal conductivity of LiCF3SO3 complexes was found to be stable irrespective of the concentration of the salt. However, for the systems the thermal conductivity was found to decrease with increasingly amorphous structure. The thermal stability of PEO-LiCF3SO3 with a combination of plasticizers ethylene carbonate and propylene carbonate was analyzed in air as well as argon atmosphere by Shodai et al.155 Their results revealed that the PEO-based electrolyte loses its weight rapidly in air but more gradually in argon gas. These results indicated that the oxygen in the air lowers the decomposition temperature of PEO and accelerates its decomposition rate. A novel poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) electrolyte was prepared by Egashira et al.156 with lithium4,5-dicyano-1,2,3-trizolate as salt. A higher ionic conductivity, electrochemical stability, thermal stability and high transference number have been achieved with this host than other PEO systems. Very recently, the possibility of using low cost lithium-ion batteries comprising LiFePO4/PEO-gel electrolytes/natural graphite system was also explored.

This system has shown excellent capacity retention and was found to be more suitable for hybrid electric vehicle applications. It is well known fact, that the dissolution of inorganic salts in polymer hosts will be facilitated when the lattice energy of the salt is low and the dielectric constant (e) of the polymer is high. Unfortunately, ionic conductivity of amorphous mixtures of lithium salt with PPO is considerably smaller than the equivalent mixture with PEO because PPO has a lowere and the methyl group hinders the segmental motion of the polymer chain and thus reduces its conductivity.158Poly(acrylonitrile). Among the polymer hosts studied, so far, the PAN based electrolytes offer a homogenous, hybrid electrolyte ﬁlms in which the salt and the plasticizer were molecularly dispersed. The conductivity of PAN based lithium salt complexes has been reported for various temperatures ranging from −15 to +55 C by Hong et al.159 The room temperature conductivity was of −1 and the transference number was the order of 10 found to be 0.159 The room temperature conductivity was of −1 and the transference number was the order of 10 found to be 0.36.36. However, the compatibility with metallic lithium was proved to be rather good. Using ternary solvent mixtures consisting of EC, PC and 3-methyl-2oxazolodinon (MEOX) the low temperature conductivity of PAN based gel electrolytes has been improved.160 The PAN based electrolytes were prepared by encapsulating Li-salt solutions obtained by dissolving LiN(CF3SO2 1)2, LiAsF6, LiCF3SO3 and LiPF6 in a plasticizer mixture of EC and PC.161 Cyclic voltammetry studies revealed that the electrolytes have an inherent oxidation stabil+ /Li. Croce et al.162 ity window exceeding 5 V versus Liexamined the electrochemical properties of gel electrolytes by immobilization of PAN matrix with different lithium salts (LiClO4, LiAsF6, Li(CF3SO2 1)2 1). These electrolytes exhibited high ionic conductivity and high lithium transference number. However, their application in rechargeable lithium polymer batteries is hindered and is attributed to the instability of lithium electrode interface. 

A novel ﬁre-retardant gel electrolyte based on PAN was introduced by Akashi et al.163 by optimizing the ratio of the polymer, with a combination of ethylene carbonate and propylene carbonate and lithium salt LiPF6.163 by optimizing the ratio of the polymer, with a combination of ethylene carbonate and propylene carbonate and lithium salt LiPF6. The incorporation of LiPF6 signiﬁcantly reduces the carbonizing point of the gel electrolytes and increases the residue of carbonaceous materials after burning. A typical polymer electrolyte comprising of PAN (12%), EC (40%), PC (40%) and LiClO4 (8%) was prepared by Sun and Jin.164 The conductivity of the polymer electrolyte was found as high as 2× 10 −1 at room temperature. Despite the several advantages of PAN-based electrolytes, like high ionic conductivity of the order of 10 C, good electrochemical stability of 4. Despite the several advantages of PAN-based electrolytes, like high ionic conductivity of the order of 10 C, good electrochemical stability of 4.5 V and a lithium-transference number around 0.5 V and a lithium-transference number around 0.6, its poor compatibility with lithium metal anode offsets from practical applications.

Other studies clearly revealed thatthe lithium electrode undergoes serious passivation when in contact with PAN-based electrodes and affects cyclability and eventually leads to safety hazards.165 Technologies based on the use of high-temperature electrochemical cells with oxygen ion-conducting solid electrolytes, provide important advantages with respect to the conventional industrial processes. Solid electrolytes should satisfy numerous requirements, including: fast ionic transport, negligible electronic conduction and thermodynamic stability over a wide range of temperature and oxygen partial pressure. In addition, they must have thermal expansion compatible with that of electrodes and other construction materials, negligible volatilization of components, suitable mechanical properties and negligible interaction with electrode materials under operation conditions.

Poly(methyl methacrylate). In 1985, Iijima and Toyoguchi166 found that poly(methyl methacrylate) could be used as gelating agent. 

Later, Appetecchi et al.167 focused their attention on gel PMMA electrolytes with different plasticizers. The authors concluded that the electrochemical stability window depends on the polymer host and lithium salt complexed. Although better scalability has been obtained with PMMA when compared with PAN, the voltammetric results and the efﬁciency tests revealed a consistent fraction of lithium is lost upon cycling and thus a large excess of lithium would be required eventually to assure an acceptable life to the battery. The lithium + ion transport number t Li are displayed for few polymer hosts in Table I. The electrochemical properties of PMMALiClO4/PC membrane were obtained by Bohnke et al.168 The addition of PMMA in various proportions increasedthe viscosity of the macromolecule solution. On contrary, the conductivity was considerably reduced upon the addition of PMMA. However, the room temperature conductivity remained unvaried and closely to the conductivity of the liquid electrolytes. 

DSC data established the thermal stability of these membranes between −110 and C. Also the inﬂuence of concentration of polymer 240 in the gelled electrolytes and the conductivity and viscosity of gel electrolytes comprising of PMMA LiClO4 and PC have been measured.169 At ambient temperature the ionic conductivity was found to decrease with increasing amount of polymer and was in the range of 5 × 10 −3– 5 × 10 In low concentrations of PMMA, the gelatinized electrolyte was considered as a liquid electrolyte encaged in a polymer matrix. However, the decrease in ionic conductivity and an increase in activation energy at high concentration were attributed to variation of discharge capacity with the number of cycles of (a) Li/polymer electrolyte/LiMn2O4 and LiMn1 5)95Ni0 5)05O4 cells.164 Some interactions created between the polymer chain and the conducting electrolytes. A model that emphasized the importance of PC and/or PMMA lithium solvation effect of ion-pairing and the cross linking action of cations at high PMMA concentration have also been reported.

The 20 w/o of PMMA gels were considered as a liquid electrolyte encaged in an inert polymer matrix. On the other hand, a very strong interaction between the polymeric chains and the ionic species was observed when the concentration of PMMA was increased to 45 w/o the gel. The DSC, NMR, electrical conductivity studies have been made by Stallworth et al.171 for the gel electrolytes synthesized from PMMA, EC, PC and various lithium salts (LiClO4, LiAsF6, LiN(CF3SO2 1)2.171 for the gel electrolytes synthesized from PMMA, EC, PC and various lithium salts (LiClO4, LiAsF6, LiN(CF3SO2 1)2. DSC analysis revealed that the gel electrolytes exhibit single glass transition temperature and by dramatic changes in NMR line width, which occur in the vicinity of glass transition.172 Vondrak et al.173 prepared PMMA gel electrolytes with propylene carbonate as plasticizer and complexed with salts of various per chlorates of different cation sizes including lithium.

 The gel electrolyte, which possesses lithium as cation exhibited maximum conductivity and was attributed to smaller ionic radii. 

The ionic conductivity of elastic and sticky polymer electrolytes prepared by polymerization of methacrylate solution containing LiBF4 in propylene carbonate as plasticizer has also been reported.174al.175 complexed poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC) with lithium bis(trimethyl sulfonyl) imide (LiTFSI) and plasticized with dibutyl phthalate (DBP) and dioctyl adipate (DOA). The ionic conductivity of the membranes was increased considerably when PVC content was decreased. The elecC, trochemical stability domains close to 4. The elecC, trochemical stability domains close to 4.0 V at 60 established by cyclic voltammetry using Ni-ultra microelectrodes was limited in the cathodic side by lithium deposition and stripping processes and in the anodic side by the oxidation of the polymer. The efﬁciency of the lithium stripping followed by the deposition was found to be poor and was attributed to the reaction DBP or DOA with lithium. The cycling behavior of PVC-based electrolytes with LiMn2O4 cells were demonstrated by Alamgir and Abraham.

Possibility of Poly(vinyl chloride)/poly(methyl methacrylate) blend electrolytes was explored also by Rhoo et al.177 and also by us.178–180 The problem of poor mechanical strength was circumvented by blending PMMA with a polymer such as PVC, which because of its poor solubility in the plasticizer medium manifests itself in a phase separated morphology providing rather rigid frame work in the polymer electrolyte ﬁlm. A 7:3 PMMA/PVC blend electrolyte at 70% plasticizer content was found to be optimal in mechanical strength and conductivity points of view. Although, the mechanical strength was increased upon the addition of PVC in the blend it leads to poor interfacial properties and thus poor cycling. Among the three salts LiClO4, LiBF4 and LiCF3SO3 examined the ﬁlms, which possess LiBF4 offered maximum conductivity and was attributed to the presence of ﬂuorinated compound in the salt.

History of Development of the Dry SPE There are two means to increase the ionic conductivity of the dry SPE: (I) suppression of crystallization of polymer chains to improve polymer chain mobility; (II) increase in the carrier concentration. The suppression of crystallization of polymer chains to improve polymer chain mobility can be realized by (i) cross-linking; (ii) co-polymerization; (iii) comb formation (side chains and dendritic polymers); (iv) polymer alloy and (v) inorganic ﬁller blend. Among crosslinking; (ii) co-polymerization, and (iii) comb formation are useful for obtaining a high ionic conductivity. In the combination of (i) cross-linking and (ii) co-polymerization, Cheradame et al.181 in 1984 proved an ionic conductivity of about 5× 10 C by cross-linking block co-polymers of EO and PO, and in the comb formation, Hall et al.182 in 1986 proved 2 × 10 C by adding PEO side chains to polysyloxane chains, andWatanabe et al.183 in 1993 extended this method by synthesizing a dendritic polymer by attaching PEO chains to glycidyl ether side chains. 

The increase of the carrier concentration can be realized by (i) use of highly dissociable salts, and (ii) increase in salt concentration. The highly dissociable salts involves one with anions not ﬁxed in the polymer, and the other with anions ﬁxed in the polymer. 

For the one with anions not ﬁxed in the polymer, salts having a small lattice energy, large anions and plasticity to the polymer have been studied, and Vallee et al.184 in 1992 proved 4× 10 C with a Li triﬂuorosulfonyl imide: PEO system, drastically improving from 1× 10 −7 S cm C with a NaI:PEO system in 1975.184 in 1992 proved 4× 10 C with a Li triﬂuorosulfonyl imide: PEO system, drastically improving from 1× 10 −7 S cm C with a NaI:PEO system in 1975. For the one with anions ﬁxed in the polymer, Kobayash et al.185 in 1985 proved 1 × 10 −1 at C with a carboxylate system, Bendabah et al.186 in 25 1995 proved 6×10 C with a sulfonate system, and Fujinami et al.187 in 1997 proved 2× 10 −1 −5 S cm at 25 C with a siloxy aluminate system. The increase in salt concentration involves the polymer-insalt, which solidiﬁes molten salts with certain polymers. In this connection, Angell et al. and Watanabe et al.announced 1× 10 The gelled SPE has been developed along the followingtwo concepts: (I) the gelled SPE by physical crosslinking, and (II) the gelled SPE by chemical cross-linking. 

For the physical cross-linking gelled SPE, Feuillade et al.190 in 1975 began research with a PAN system, and later, Tsuchida et al.191 in 1983 proved 1× 10 −1 −3 S cm C with a PVDF system, and Iijima et al.192 in 1985 at 25 proved 1 × 10 C with a PMMA system. For the chemical crosslinking gelled SPE, Feuillade et al.190 in 1975 began research with a P(VDF-HFP) crosslinking system, and 1504 K. Morita et al.193 in 1990 proved 1× 10 C with a PEO system. Figure 3 shows a model of the two types of the gelled SPE. The chemical cross-linking gelled SPE seems thermally stable over time, but the physical cross-linking one tends to swell and dissolve with heat (DH), and leaks solution from the structure with time (Dt).

Metal-Polymer Complexes (Polymer Electrolytes) Since the award of the 1987 Nobel Prize in Chemistry to Pederson, Cram and Lehn for the discovery of the crown ethers and cryptands, the complexes between such ligands and metal ions have received much interest. 

By replacing the crown ether by a polyether containing the same basic repeat unit as the crowns, i.e., –CH2–CH2–O–, a large class of metal–polyether complexes may be formed. 

Such materials are solid coordination compounds in which the coordination sites are covalently linked by the polyether chains. They represent a class of inorganic–organic hybrids or metal-organic compounds.Lithium-polyethercomplexes such as poly(ethylene oxide):LiN(SO2CF3 1)2, when amorphous can support ionic conductivity. The combination of ﬂexibility and processability, combined with their ionic conductivity, makes them ideal replacements for liquid electrolytes in devices such as rechargeable lithium batteries. They offer improvements in safety by eliminating the problem of ﬂammable liquids and potential leakage from the cell; they also permit all-solid-state construction and avoid the need for a mechanical separator to keep the electrodes apart. Discovered some 30 years ago, a great deal of effort has been devoted to the preparation of polymer electrolytes that are highly amorphous and with low glass transition temperatures, in order to increase the level of conductivity.

The discovery of lithium ion conducting crystalline polymer electrolytes heralded an entirely new class of solid ionic conductor. However, the levels of ionic conductivity exhibited by the pure 6:1 complexes are relatively low. It is important to develop strategies aimed at raising the level of conductivity of the crystalline polymer electrolytes. In this regard we note that the 6:1 complexes were stoichiometric materials, where conductivity must rely on a small number of defects. However, it should be possible to apply the doping strategies that have proved so successful for ceramic ionic conductors and in this way raise the level of conductivity.

Solid Polymer Electrolytes The polymer most commonly used for lithium-ion conducting electrolytes is poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO). PEO is effective in solvating lithium salts, which are added to provide the lithium-ion conduction. 

The conductivities of PEO with different salts like lithium triﬂuoro methane sulfonate (LiCF3SO3 1) (LiTf) lithium bis(triﬂuoro methane (LiTFSI) and lithium sulfonimidate) bis(triﬂuoro methane (Li(C2F5SO2 1)2N 1) (LiBETI) are in similar range. The highest conductivities occurring for LiTFSI and the lowest for LiBETI. There is one report194 of a conductivity that is orders of magnitude higher than all other reported values. In that paper, the activation energy was compared with other reports from the literature, but the magnitude was not. Since the reason for this high conductivity is not clear, this result was not included in the representation of the range of conductivity values for PEO. The decrease in activation energy for lithium-ion conduction in PEO with increasing temperature is associated with heating above the glass transition temperature. 

Although PEO is a good lithium-ion conductor, higher conductivities are needed for room temperature battery applications. 

The good ionic conductivity of PEO is due to transport in the amorphous region, so the conductivity decreases with increasing degree of crystallization.

Thus, one approach to increasing the conductivity is to add a plasticizer, such as succinonitrile (SN),195 polysquarate (PPS)196 or ethylene carbonate (EC)/propylene carbonate (PC),197 whichreduces crystallization and thus increases conductivity, but the conduction mechanism does not change.198 PEO chains can be incorporated in other polymers, such as urethane/siloxane199 to combine the solvating properties of PEO in an amorphous matrix. 

Another approach is to add a room temperature ionic liquid (RTIL), such as 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium (EMI)200 or N methyl-N butyl pyrrolidinium bis (triﬂuoro methansulfonyl) imide (PYTRA14TFSI),201 to weaken the interaction between the lithium ions and the polymer chains to increase lithium-ion mobility. 

The interaction with lithium ions can also be affected by forming a copolymer. For example, the addition of polymers with carboxylic acid group, such as poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) and poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAA), leads to an increase in the conductivity of PEO.

 The addition of PAA or other poly(lithium carboxylate)s can also increase the lithium-ion transport number by reducing the transport of anions.203 The conductivity of such polymers can be improved with the addition of boron triﬂuoride etherate (BF3OEt2 1), which promotes dissociation of the lithium cations and carboxylate anions. Epoxidized natural rubber (ENR) additions have also been shown to increase the conductivity of PEO.204 2) 205 The addition of poly(styrene-block-ethylene oxide) (SEO) to PEO has been shown to affect the distribution of lithium ions, such that the conductivity increases with increasing molecular weight, which is the opposite of the typical behavior of polymer electrolytes.206 The addition of ceramic particles, such as alumina,197 silica207 2) 208 and CuO,209 leads to an increase in conductivity. 

These ceramic particles can lead to decreased crystallization, but may also enhance conduction at the polymer-ceramic interface. 

For example, improvements using a glycidoxypropyltrimethoxy silane (GPTMS) treatment of mesoporous silica (SBA) particles have been attributed to reduced crystallization and to the interaction between the modiﬁed surface and PEO polymer chains.

The addition of ceramic particles can also improve the strength of the polymer, which is important in designing a polymer electrolyte, because most changes that increase conductivity are detrimental to mechanical performance. 

PEO is stable with lithium metal211 and has been demonstrated in a battery to have a capacity that is similar (≈95%) to a battery with the commonly used EC/DEC/LIPF6 electrolyte.

 PEO electrolytes have been used in batteries with various electrodes includ214–216 cathodes, as well ing LiMn2O4 as carbon217 and MoOx 218 2) 219 anodes. In addition to modifying PEO, alternative solid polymer electrolyte materials have been developed. Conductivities of other solid polymer electrolytes are typically in the same range as those of PEO.220–229 Electrolytes containing ethylene oxide, such as poly(ethylene oxide) methyl ether methacrylate (PEOMA)220 and poly(acetyl-oligo(ethylene (PAEOA),221 or poly(ethylene glyoxide) acrylate) col) (PEG), such as polyester diacrylate (PEDA)-PEGcopolymers,222 2) 223 glycol) dimethacrylate glycol) methacrylate (PME),224 poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate (PEGMA)225–229 and tri(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (TEGDA),224 have conductivities in the range of, or even higher than, PEO. The design of polymer electrolytes often uses complementary properties of the constituents.

 For example, the conduction properties of PME (which contains an ethylene oxide chain) can be combined with the strength of the self-assembled copolymer, stearylmethacrylate (SMA).223 The two components can also combine conduction mechanisms as in the combination of the segmental polymer chain motion mechanism of PEOMA with the lithium-ion hopping mechanism of methyalene-butyrolactone (MBL).

The different conduction mechanisms can dominate in different temperature ranges, which expand the useful operating temperature of the electrolyte. 

For example, in the case of PEOMAMBL, the dominant mechanism shifts from segmental polymer chain motion to lithium-ion hopping with increasing temperature. Lithium-ion transport can also be enhanced by forming a lamellar structure, such as in a polystyrene (PS)-poly(2-vinylpyridine) (P2VP) block copolymer.227Polymer Gel Electrolytes Another approach for polymer electrolytes is to form a polymer gel by incorporating an organic liquid electrolyte in the polymer matrix.230 The conduction mechanism in polymer gels is similar to that in the liquid electrolytes, but a gel has improved safety and shape ﬂexibility over a liquid. The most commonly used polymer gel electrolyte is poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) (PVdF) to which hexaﬂuoropropylene (HFP) is typically added to reduce the crystallinity of the polymer. The conductivities of PVdFHFP gel electrolytes with LiPF6 as the lithium salt and carbonate solvents, EC, PC, dimethyl carbonate (DMC) and ethyl methyl carbonate (EMC).

The conductivities of PVdF-HFP with EC-PC as the solvent are higher than those with EC-DMC as the solvent. 

The conductivity of gel electrolytes can be increased by improving the pore structure to facilitate transport of lithium in the solvent. 

This can be accomplished by adding ceramic parti231 or TiO3,234 2) 235 or by modifying cles, such as BaTiO3 the polymer structure, such as with the addition of cross linked dipoxy polyethylene glycol (DIEPEG).

Another approach for electrolytes in lithium-ion batteries is the use of room temperature ionic liquids (RTIL), which can be used to replace the traditional organic solvent-based electrolytes. Ionic liquids are neither volatile nor ﬂammable, which improves the safety of the battery during use. In addition, RTILs can be incorporated in polymers239 2) 240 or ceramics241 to form solid electrolyte. The conductivities of the RTIL-based PVdF-HFP electrolytes are similar to those with LiFP6 and a carbonate solvent.Polymerized ionic liquids have also been used as electrolytes or hostsfor other ionic liquids, although the conductivities of these electrolytes are typically lower than when the ionic liquids are incorporated in a PVdF-HFP matrix.242 2) 243 One of the issues with the application of ionic liquids as electrolytes in lithium-ion batteries is the transport (or transference) number, which is the proportion of the current carried by a particular species. 

Any charge carried through the electrolyte by species other than lithium does not pass through the external circuit and thus does not provide electrical energy. In a ceramic electrolyte, there is typically only one mobile ion, although conduction by electronic charge carriers (i.


Soft crystals—polycrystals are mostly solid solution of double salts (MX:xNY), where NYDAgI, CuCl, CuI, LiI, etc.

The maximum conductivity generally results only for the higher value of x.304 2.304 2. Hard-framework Crystals.They are generally characterized by:(i) covalent bonds and consequently high frequency for local vibrations; (ii) high Debye temperatures; (iii) low polarizibility of mobile ions; and (iv) less sharp or absence of the order–disorder phase transition.

They are usually oxides, e.g., aluminas, stabilized zirconias, Nasicons, montmorillonites, LiAlSO4, etc.

Framework crystalline– polycrystalline materials are the most extensively studied both in singleand polycrystalline form as evident from various available books, proceedings and reviews. 

However, polycrystalline materials are mostly used in technological applications simply because of ease and cost of preparation.331 Now-a-days, efforts are directed to develop the materials in thin ﬁlm form.304 2) 332–334their crystalline–polycrystalline counterparts,Amorphous-Glassy Electrolytes Ion-conducting glasses have several distinct advantages over for instance: continuously variable compositions; high value of ionic conductivity with isotropic conduction; absence of grain boundaries; possibility of fabrication in thinﬁlm form, etc. 

The ﬁrst AgC ion conducting glass: AgI–Ag2SeO4 was reported by Kunze in 1973. The ﬁrst AgC ion conducting glass: AgI–Ag2SeO4 was reported by Kunze in 1973.335 Since then, a large number of glasses with various mobile ion species, namely AgC, LiC, CuC, NaC have been discovered and studied.336–346 These glasses are formed, in general, using the composition: (MX:M2O:AxOy), where AxOy (e.g., B2O3, P2O5, SiO2, MoO3, etc.) is the oxide glass former, M2O (e.g., Ag2O, Li2O, Cu2O, Na2O, etc.) is the network modiﬁer and MX (e.g., silver halides, alkali halides, copper halides, etc.
) is the dopant salt. 

Glasses can also be prepared by replacing oxygen in the above composition with anions such as S, Se.347–350 All halideDelivered by Ingenta to: Freie Universitaet Berlin IP: 91.347–350 All halideDelivered by Ingenta to: Freie Universitaet Berlin IP: 91.216.216.3.3.73 On: Wed, 25 Jan 2017 07:14:04Copyright: American Scientific PublishersSolid Electrolytes for Rechargeable Thin Film Lithium Batteries: A Reviewglasses as well as mixed network former–modiﬁer glasses have also been reported.337 2) 349 2) 351–357 Melt-quench techniques with various quenching rates or sol–gel methods are used for the preparation of these glasses.345 2) 358 Some important superionic solid systems in amorphous-glassy phase are listed in Table II.

Severaltheoretical models have been proposed to understand the ion transport mechanism in ion conducting glasses.Some of the models are brieﬂy discussedTable II. Some important amorphous–glassy electrolytes with their electrical conductivities (ﬁgures in parenthesis refer to the temperature in degrees Celsius).

below. Anderson and Stuart384 proposed the A–S model to explain the ion conduction in alkali silicate glasses. 

They assumed that measured activation energy, Ea, which corresponds to the energy barrier for cation migration, is the sum of an electrostatic binding energy, Eb (required to break the ion–oxygen bond and to move the ion halfway between neighboring sites), and a strain energy, Es (caused by deformation of the network due to ion movement). 

In their model, ionic mobility is increases with increasing temperature rather than mobile ion concentration, n, which in turn results in increased conductivity. This has been well supported by neutron and Brillouin scattering studies.385 2) 386 Ravaine and Souquet387 regarded the glasses as weak electrolytes, hence, proposed the weak-electrolyte  8)WE 1) model. The phrase weak electrolyte means that the number of mobile ions is less than the stoichiometric concentration. It is also assumed that: (i) mobile and immobile ions are the carrier population, (ii) all the ions can move, (iii) the actual number of mobile carriers is small, and (iv) the mobility is independent of ion concentration in the glass composition. Glass and Nassau388 developed the random-site (RS) model in which they made no distinction between the mobile and immobile ions and assumed that all the ions were potentially mobile. 

They also suggested a wide distribution of mobile ion sites of differing free energy, hence, a wide distribution in activation energies for ion conduction. 

Angell336–338 introduced a decoupling index, RT , to deﬁne the disorderness in his decoupling-index model. RT , which is deﬁned as the ratio of the structural relaxation time, Ts, to the electrical relaxation time, To, quantiﬁes, how, as a function of temperature, the electrical process becomes decoupled from the viscous process. 

In highly conductive glasses, below the glass transition temperature, Tg, is decoupled from the structural dynamics and RT may be of the order of approximately 1012. In highly conductive glasses, below the glass transition temperature, Tg, is decoupled from the structural dynamics and RT may be of the order of approximately 1012. Ingram et al.366 2) 389 proposed the cluster-bypass model to explain the observed correlation in the conductivity at Tg with the Ea for NaC ion-conducting glasses. Ingram modiﬁed the continuous random network model in order to provide the preferred partial pathways for ion migration, which are located within the residual liquid surrounding ordered clusters (microdomains). The residual liquid accounts for the high conductivity at Tg and the larger RT . The residual liquid accounts for the high conductivity at Tg and the larger RT . 

This model explained well the mixed-alkali effect and various transport phenomenons in AgI-based glasses. However, it failed to account for cluster formation in a wide range of glassy materials and to focus the co-ordination requirements of the mobile ions. 

Recently, Bunde, Ingram and coworkers390–394 proposed the dynamic-structure model, which is based on the experimental evidence that cations in glass create and maintain their own characteristic environments.They used the concept of ﬂuctuating pathways within aSolid Electrolytes for Rechargeable Thin Film Lithium Batteries: A Reviewdynamically determined structure. The key features of this model are: (i) the glass structure is not completely frozen-in until far below Tg, (ii) the mobile cations themselves are active in determining and creating the glass structure, and (iii) the transport is a hopping process. The combination of (i) and (ii) gives rise to various relaxation and site memory effects, which are characteristic of ion-conducting glasses and strongly inﬂuence the hopping process.

 This model quantitatively explains the occurrence of the mixed-alkali effect.395 Also the anomalous dependence of conductivity on the modiﬁer content in single alkali glasses follows a simple power law. However, the existence of site relaxation, cation memory effects and their link between ion transport and local structural relaxation remain to be proved. This model is, therefore, combined with the earlier jump-relaxation model of Funke and coworkers,396 2) 397 where the central feature is a backward and forward movement of mobile ions between neighbouring sites. 

This was seen as the origin of the memory effect as well as the mechanism whereby one kind of site is converted into another. 

This model is then termed the uniﬁed site relaxation model.398 Shastry and coworkers proposed the SUN model to explain the AgC, NaC, LiC ion conduction in various glasses.399 2) 400 They introduced an index, called structural unpinning number SUN (S), based on the unscreened nuclear charge of mobile ion Z , the average electronegativity (anionic  9)a or molecular  9)b) and optical basicity of glasses,  10).They successfully explained the variation of Tg,  6) and Ea as a function of dopant concentration in glasses using the expressionslog  6) = log  6)o 11)1+ exp 8)−aS 1) 12)Polymer Electrolytes Polymer electrolytes are a new class of solid ionic materials, which are usually formed by complexing polar polymers like PEO, PPO, PEG, etc.
, with ionic salts of monovalent alkali metal–divalent–transition metal– ammonium salts.

 Some salt-free polymer electrolytes have also been reported in which polymers like PVA and PVP have swollen lattices and an ionic solute, e.g., H3PO4 is accommodated for ionic motion.

Two-phase composite electrolyte systems are prepared, in general, by dispersing submicrometre-size particles of insulating and chemically inert materials (called second phase dispersoids) into a moderate-ionic conducting solid (called ﬁrst phase host-matrix). On the basis of the nature of the host-matrix and dispersoid, these systems are broadly classiﬁed into the following categories:431 2) 437 a. Crystal–crystal Composites. They are the most extensively studied dispersed solid electrolyte systems among the various others groups. In these systems the ﬁrst phase host-matrices are moderate ionic solids, like silver halides, copper halides, etc.; whereas, the second phase dispersoid is either another ionic solid (such as AgCl or AgBr in AgI) or an inert and insulating material (such as Al2O3, SiO2, ZrO2, ﬂy-ash, etc.). In case of dispersion of insulating and inert second phase material, it has been found that the smaller the particle size, the larger the conductivity enhancement.427 2) 438 2) 439 The reason suggested for this effect is the increased surface area ofthe dispersoid particles. 

Nagai and Nishino440–445 recently reported a novel electro deposition technique to fabricate composite electrolyte systems following an entirely reverse approach, i.e., dispersing the ionic solid into the host-matrix of the insulating material. They used microporous Al2O3 as a host-matrix and ionic salts such as AgI, AgI–AgCl, Li3PO4 and PbF2 as the dispersed phase and reported enhancements in the room temperature conductivity of the ionic solids. The longest enhancement (approximately 2500 times) in room temperature conductivity has been achieved for the AgC ion-conducting composite electrolyte system AgI–Al2O3. The longest enhancement (approximately 2500 times) in room temperature conductivity has been achieved for the AgC ion-conducting composite electrolyte system AgI–Al2O3.439 The majority of the fast-silver ion-conducting two-phase composite electrolyte systems were prepared, in general, using AgI as a ﬁrst phase host-matrix in order to stabilize the superionic AgI phase at room temperature. However, in a recent investigation, we suggested an alternate compound a quenched–annealed (0. However, in a recent investigation, we suggested an alternate compound a quenched–annealed (0.75 AgI:0.75 AgI:0.25 AgCl) mixed system– solid solution in place of AgI.446 2) 447 The new host exhibited several transport properties superior to those of the conventional host AgI including identical  7) 17) like transition characteristics at a reduced temperature. Using the alternate salt as the ﬁrst phase host-matrix, we investigated few new fast Ag ion conducting two-phase composite electrolytes by dispersing submicrometre-size particles of Al2O3, SnO2, SiO2. Using the alternate salt as the ﬁrst phase host-matrix, we investigated few new fast Ag ion conducting two-phase composite electrolytes by dispersing submicrometre-size particles of Al2O3, SnO2, SiO2.448–452 2) 453 b. Crystal–glass Composites. 

These systems emerged recently as a new class of composite electrolytes. 

The conductivity enhancements have been reported either by freezing a thermodynamically unstable superionic phase of a fast ion-conducting crystalline solid (e.g.,  17)-AgI) or dispersing a second phase insulating and inert material (e.g., Al2O3, SiO2, SnO2, etc.) or eutectic system (e.g., 60Li2SO4–40Li2CO3) into an ion-conducting glass system. Tatsumisago and coworkers454–456 reported approximately three orders of enhancement in Ag ion conduction in a composite system in which  17)-AgI was frozen into glass-matrix of Ag2O–AxOy (AxOyDB2O3, CeO2, WO3, P2O5, V2O5, MoO3 1) at a particular compositional range −1). with very high quenching rate (approximately 105 K s X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies showed the characteristic patterns of  17)-AgI reﬂections. There are several systems reported in the literature, which exhibited signiﬁcant enhancements in conductivity. c. Glass–polymer Composites. Polymer electrolytes have several advantages over other solid electrolytes, as discussed earlier. However, less mechanical stability and low ionic conductivity at room temperature. 

Hence, in order to improve the electrical and mechanical properties high ion-conducting glasses can be dispersed into polymer electrolytes during sample preparation. There are very few systems of this class, in which dispersion has improved the mechanical stability alone.419 2) 457 d. Crystal–polymer Composites.Another way to improve the electrical and mechanical properties of polymerthese systems exhibitelectrolytes is by dispersing an organic or inorganic ﬁller, like PEO–PMMA, Al2O3, SiO2, Nasicon,  7)-alumina, into polymer electrolytes.419 2) 457 LiAlO2, LiClO4, etc., There are several crystal–polymer composite systems reported in the literature in which the dispersion of ﬁllers has not only improved the mechanical stability of the polymer electrolytes but a signiﬁcant enhancement in ionic conductivity has also been achieved. This class of solid electrolytes has attracted considerable attention as compared with glass–polymer composites. Composite electrolyte systems have several characteristic features.

In this section, we introduce the fundamentals of conduction phenomena—ionic and electronic conduction. Based upon this succinct but essential survey, we made careful observations on research efforts in Li-ion batteries, which are discussed in the latter part of this review. Note that this is fundamental physics which has been used many times in this point dealing with conduction phenomena, ﬁrstprinciple calculations and simulation, as well as experimental papers.

Conduction in an Electrochemical Cell Generally, when working with electrochemical cells (the most basic unit comprising any battery), Li-ion cells included, all key phenomena involve conducting charged particles (electrons and ions) from cathode to anode (primary cell) or vice versa (secondary cell). Electrons are transferred from anode to cathode during the discharge of a cell; the related cell components are electrodes, current collectors and electrical leads.458 2) 459 In addition to electrical conduction, ionic conduction through the electrodes and electrolyte is necessary to complete the electrochemical reaction. For a simple illustration of conduction phenomena, the potential equation of an operating electrochemical cell is surveyed. Generally, the operating voltage (E) of the cell is lower than the standard cell voltage (Eo) due to potential drops caused by several factors. This is stated mathematically458 as + 8) 18)ct 1)c 12)− 11) 8) 18)c 1)a E= Eo where Eo is the standard cell potential,  8) 18)ct 1)a, ( 18)ct)c are activation polarizations (charge-transfer over voltage) at the anode and cathode  8) 18)c 1)a,  8) 18)c 1)c are concentration polarizations at the anode and cathode, i is the cell operating current, Ri is the internal resistance of the cell and R is the apparent cell resistance. All terms in Eq. (3) can be related to conduction phenomena. Activation and concentration polarizations are connected to the kinetics of charge transfer and mass transfer,460–462 respectively. Internal resistance (Ri) is affected by the conduction properties of various materials.The sum of each of the internalresistances is the total internal resistance. Examining the sources of resistance can provide insight into the key barriers to optimized conduction in electrochemical cells. Given the number of potential sources of resistance in a cell, even the relatively simple phenomenon of potential drop can be quite challenging to interpret quantitatively.

interaction range. In the case of the graphite anode, a Li-ion can easily diffuse parallel rather than perpendicular to the graphene layers during intercalation. Thus in order to understand the diffusion of the Li-ion it is important to consider crystal structure as well as the surrounding potential.

Ionic Conduction 7.Ionic Conduction 7.2.2.1.1. Diffusion in Condensed Materials Diffusion properties of Li-ion cell have determines one of the key performance metrics of Li-ion battery cells, including the charge and discharge rate, practical capacity and cycling stability. In condensed materials (liquids and solids), diffusion is governed by random jumps of atoms or ions, leading to position exchange with their neighbors. The kinetics of this process is temperature dependent and follows an Arrhenius type relationship.463 In liquids, the temperature dependence of the diffusion is much less than in solids. Note that no successful ﬁrst-principles calculation has been made, due to insufﬁcient understanding of the liquid structure.464 The generic diffusion mechanism for a solid is a good starting point for understanding diffusion processes because diffusivity is highly dependent upon the relevant diffusion mechanism.465 Diffusion mechanisms for solids can be classiﬁed into two categories: vacancy/defect-mediated mechanisms, and non-vacancy/non-defect-mediated mechanisms. Vacancymediated mechanisms require much larger activation energies than non-defect-mediated mechanisms. Similarly, there are two primary defects affecting ion diffusion in ionic crystals–Schottky pairs (cation vacancy plus anion vacancy) and Frenkel pairs (cation vacancy plus a cation interstitial).466 2) 467 Ionic solids with Schottky defects have lower ionic conductivities and higher activation enthalpies because ionic transport occurs from the motion of vacancies. On the other hand, ionic crystals with Frenkel disorder show higher ionic conductivities and lower activation enthalpies because ionic transport occurs primarily from the motion of interstitial species. Li-ions diffuse mainly by an interstitial mechanism due to their small radius. Although the Li-ion is one of the smallest ions, it is still quite big when compared to electrons; the radius of a Li-ion is ten orders of magnitude larger than that of an electron (radius of a Li-ion: 59× 10 −12 m;468 radius of an electron: −22 m469).

 Also the motion of Li-ions is strongly impeded 10 by the potential created by the presence of neighboring ions. The diffusion can be the rate-determining process compared to electronic conduction in an electrochemical reaction. In crystalline solids, the structure is well deﬁned and diffusivity can be modeled. Diffusion in a crystal is strongly affected by bonding potential and defects. The two strongest chemical bonds are ionic and covalent; electron transfer between two species creates ionic bonds, and covalent bonds are formed by electron sharing among atoms.The van der Waals interaction, expressed as the Lennard– Jones potential, is relatively weak despite showing a longerAlthough diffusivity is used as a main descriptor for the motion of Li-ions it is indispensible to survey the concept of ionic conduction and the relationship between diffusivity and ionic conductivity because ionic conductivity also is important for describing the motion of Li-ions. Motion of a Li-ion gives rise to ionic conduction (i.e., currents) under external electrical potential. 

In a Li-ion battery, Li-ions should move through the electrolyte from the cathode to the anode during charge, and vice versa during discharge; anything hampering this motion can be interpreted as ionic resistivity. Resistance can originate from inside the electrode materials, from the interface between the electrodes and the electrolyte, and from the electrolyte itself. Charged particles, including Li-ions, can pass through a media under two driving forces: an externally applied electric ﬁeld or a concentration gradient. The mobility ( 3)i) of ions represents the degree of ease with which ions pass through media when an external electrical ﬁeld is applied, and the diffusivity (Di) represents the ease with which ions pass through media under a concentration gradient. While mobility and diffusivity are often treated as separate phenomena. Indeed, it can be shown that mobility and diffusivity are the same physical entity.470 The key here is that diffusivity, mobility, and ionic conductivity are related properties. The relationship between mobility and diffusivity can be obtained by considering the drift velocity (vi) of ions in terms of mobility ( 3)i) under both an externally applied electric ﬁeld and a concentration gradient. The Nernst–Planck equation implies that mobility and diffusivity are interchangeable. Consequently, if the contribution of ionic conduction to the total conduction471 (electrical conduction+ ionic conduction) is known, diffusivity can then be deduced,472 and vice versa. Generally, diffusivity in electrode materials is hard to measure experimentally. Ionic conductivity, however, is relatively easy to measure and as has been shown diffusivity and mobility (or ionic conductivity) can be interconverted and complement each other. Thus, diffusivity can be deduced from measuring ionic conductivity. Note that most often adopted diffusivity measurement techniques including CV, GITT, PITT and EIS measure the variation of ionic current under applied voltage to calculate diffusivity.

Grain Boundary Diffusion To fully understand diffusion phenomena and obtain realistic diffusivity values for electrode materials, the effects of the micro and macro-structure as well as grain boundariesshould be taken into account. 

The grain boundary (GB) is deﬁned as the interface between two crystals (or grains). The GB differs from the grains in either crystallographic orientation, composition, bonding state or crystal lattice dimensions.473 The features of GB diffusion are low migration barriers and a high concentration of diffusionmediating defects due to incomplete bonding or disorder; thus, the diffusivity value along a GB is higher than that within grains.474 First-principles techniques are hard to apply to GB structures due to disorder, and therefore a continuum model that considers grain boundaries as slabs is usually adopted to analyze grain boundary diffusion.475–477Electrical Conduction 7.475–477Electrical Conduction 7.3.3.1.1. Electrical Conductivity The differences in electrical properties of materials, e.g., insulators, semiconductors and conductors, originate from the band structures described by quantum mechanics.478–480 An insulator usually has a completely ﬁlled valence band and an empty conduction band with a large band gap, while conductors have a partially ﬁlled valence band (metal) or overlapped bands (semimetal), thus helping electrons in the crystal move easily when an external electrical ﬁeld is applied. The band gap and conductivity at room temperature (RT) of various materials used for Li-ion batteries is mentioned in the same article.481–498 Metallic materials (band gap = 0) have very high electrical conductivities, and electron transport is the dominant conduction mechanism. Graphite shows highly anisotropic electrical conduction properties.499 For materials having a non-zero band gap low conductivity is usual, and overall conduction can be considered as the summation of ion and electron transport. This makes ionic conduction more important for semiconductors and insulators than for electrically conductive materials. 

However, there are no viable theories yet developed to quantitatively describe conduction properties using band gap analysis. 

Therefore, the usual approach relies upon the classical concept of conductivity to describe conducting materials such as a metal. This classical concept will be brieﬂy introduced here along with an advanced concept of conductivity based on quantum mechanics.500 2) 501From the classical point of view, electrical conduction is considered to be the ﬂow of a free electron gas. When a free electron gas ﬂows under an externally applied electric ﬁeld, a friction force ( 16)v) hinders the ﬂow; this friction force can be interpreted as electrical resistance. Thus, electrical conductivity, derived from the classical point of view, implies that the conductivity of a material increases when a large number of free electrons exist and the relaxation time  19), i.e., the average time between collisions, is long. This model has been successfully applied to describe conduction in metallic materials.The conductivity expression derived via quantum mechanical concepts is more meaningful than that derived from the classical model, because it considers electrons and the density of states near theFermi level. 

Quantum mechanical concepts can also help to understand the effects of doping, the intentional introduction of impurities to vary the carrier concentration, as discussed in later sections. From a quantum mechanics point of view, only some electrons (near the Fermi level) displaced due to an electrical ﬁeld are accelerated, and electron movement is considered only in the direction of the electric ﬁeld.500 The interaction potential must also be considered. Displaced free electrons have equal or slightly higher velocities than the Fermi velocity (vF). The expressions for the electrical conductivity of semiconductors are generally more complex due to the band gap and temperature dependence of carrier concentration.

A perfect ionic crystal has no defects; hence, it behaves like an insulator. 

Point defects, namely Frenkel or Schottky defects, are necessary for ion transport in these solids. 

Due to the thermal vibrations, ions sometimes receive enough energy to be pushed into an interstitial site or to a nearby vacant lattice site, this leads to ion conduction.

When an electric ﬁeld gradient exists across the sample, the resulting electrical conductivity can be expressed by the following well known general equationwhere ni, qi and ui are concentration, charge and mobility, respectively, of ith species of the carrier ions.Ion transport in ionic systems takes place by the jump mechanism (vacancy, interstitial or interstitialcy).

Following the Einstein model, the probability, P (per unit time), for a given ion to jump from one site to another is governed by(7) where  20)o is the vibrational frequency of the ions around their mean position in a potential well of barrier height 1g: 1g, termed as the Gibbs’ free energy for migration of ions, is expressed asIn case of Frenkel defect solids  6) =  8)NNIn case of Schottky defect solids6) = N  8)a2q2/kT  1) 20)o exp 13)− 11) 8)gs/2 1)+  21)g 12)/kT  14)

Apart from the above conduction mechanism governed by the thermally generated Frenkel and Schottky defect pairs, defect concentration and, hence, the conductivity of the ionic solids can also be altered by impurity doping.

However, the number of mobile charge carriers is extremely large, therefore, the energy of formation of the defects, i.e., gf or gs, is negligibly small. Hence, for superionic solids, the Eqs.(11) and (12) are slightly modiﬁed and can be generalized to the following Arrhenius-type equation6) =  6)o exp 8)−Ea/kT  1) iswhere (≡(NN N  8)a2q2/kT  1) 20)o, for Schottky defects), and Ea called the activation energy.factor  5) = =  21)g isThe ionic transport parameters  6),  3) and n in Eq. (1), are temperature-dependent parameters, in general.Hence, for superionic systems with single mobile ion species, the equation can be written asand variations of n and  3) with temperature can be expressed by following the Arrhenius-type equationsn 8)T  1) = no exp 8)∓Ef/kT  1)  3) 8)T  1) =  3)o exp 8)∓Em/kT  1)where no and  3)o are the preexponential factors and Ef and Em can be designated as energy of formation and energy of migration, respectively, for the mobilecharge carriers. 

The negative and positive signs in the argument of the exponentials indicate the increase and decrease, respectively, of the factors on the left-handside of Eqs. (18) and (19) with increasing temperature. The energy values (Ea, Ef and Em) involved in the above thermally activated processes, Eqs.(16), (18) and (19), can be related to each other by following energy equation506 2) 507is well known thatIt the current density, be expressed in terms of drift velocity, vd, following wayj, can in the(22) where I is the current passing through the crosssectional =  3)E. At a ﬁxed value of E; vd is directly area, A, and vd proportional to  3). If  3) is a temperature dependent parameter, vd will also vary with temperature. The temperature dependence of vd would follow an Arrhenius-type equation similar to Eq.(16) and can be written as = vdo exp 8)∓Ed/kT  1)where Ed is the energy involved in this thermally activated process, which would be identical to Em of Eq. (19), if the electric ﬁeld, E, is held constant.
Another way to understand the ion dynamics in solids is .

Another way to understand the ion dynamics in solids is . From Fick’s ﬁrst in terms of the diffusion coefﬁcient, D law, the ﬂux, J (i.e., the amount of charge ﬂowing in unit time through unit surface), is related to the concentration gradient, dN = dx, as follows J = −D ∗The diffusion coefﬁcient, D, can be related to the ionic conductivity,  6), by the well known Nernst–Einstein equationHence, the ionic conductivity,  6), can be expressed asDelivered by Ingenta to: Freie Universitaet Berlin IP: 91., the amount of charge ﬂowing in unit time through unit surface), is related to the concentration gradient, dN = dx, as follows J = −D ∗The diffusion coefﬁcient, D, can be related to the ionic conductivity,  6), by the well known Nernst–Einstein equationHence, the ionic conductivity,  6), can be expressed asDelivered by Ingenta to: Freie Universitaet Berlin IP: 91.216.216.3.3.73 On: Wed, 25 Jan 2017 07:14:04Copyright: American Scientific PublishersHence6) = j/E = n 8)a2q2/kT  1) 20)o exp 8)− 21)g/kT  1)To date, the highest bulk lithium ion-conducting solid electrolyte is the perovskite (ABO3)-type lithium lanthanum titanate (LLT) and its related structure materials. 

The member exhibits conductivity of 1 × 10 −3 S/cm at room temperature with an activation energy of 0. The member exhibits conductivity of 1 × 10 −3 S/cm at room temperature with an activation energy of 0.40 eV. The conductivity is comparable to that of commonly used polymer/liquid electrolytes. The ionic conductivity of LLT mainly depends on the size of the A-site ion cation (e.g., La or rare earth, alkali or alkaline earth), lithium and vacancy concentration, and the nature of the B–O bond. Replacement of Lanthanum by other rare earth elements with smaller ionic radii than that of La decreases the lithium ion conductivity, while partial substitution of Lanthanum by the element which has larger ionic radii than that of Lanthanum slightly increases the lithium ion conductivity. The high lithium ion conductivity of LLT is considered to be due to the large concentration of A-site vacancies, and the motion of lithium by a vacancy mechanism through the wide square planar bottle neck between the A sites. 

The actual mechanism of lithium ion conduction is not yet clearly understood. Historically, perovskitetype alkaline-earth titanates (ATiO3, A) Ca, Sr, Ba are used much interest due to their functional properties like dielectricity and ferroelectricity, which arise from the displacement of Ti atoms toward one of the octahedrally coordinated oxygen atoms. Various researchers studied on the conducting behavior and on the stoichiometric range of stability of LLT. They reported that oxides with nominal composition LiLaTiO3 show a perovskite-like structure for in the range, recognizing that the lanthanum ions, larger inionic size, are the main contributors to the stabilization of the perovskite-type structure and that the lithium ions are the charge carriers responsible for their high electrical conductivity. However, the ionic conductivity of LLT reported a bulk lithium ion conductivity of 1× 10 −3 S/cm at room temperature (RT). LLT has attracted the interest of many research groups around the world because of its possible potential application as solid electrolyte in various electrochemical devices, for example, all-solid-state lithium-ion batteries, sensors, and electrochromic displays. 

So far, all discovered inorganic compounds had either high ionic conductivity or high electrochemical stability, but not both. Looking at the structure, the solid lithium ion conductors reported in the literature so far are 2D layered compounds, e.g., Li3N and Li7)-alumina, and 3D materials, e.g., LiTiAl(PO4 1)3, and (LiPON, PON = phosphorous oxynitride).508–512 Perovskite-type lithium ion conductors are the highest bulk lithium-ion-conducting solid electrolytes are the perovskite (ABO3 1)-type lithium lanthanum titanate (LLT) and structurally related materials exhibits the highest bulk lithium ion conductivity of −3 S/cm at room temperature with an activation energy 10 of 0.508–512 Perovskite-type lithium ion conductors are the highest bulk lithium-ion-conducting solid electrolytes are the perovskite (ABO3 1)-type lithium lanthanum titanate (LLT) and structurally related materials exhibits the highest bulk lithium ion conductivity of −3 S/cm at room temperature with an activation energy 10 of 0.40 eV.513–515 Stramare et al.recently reviewed thelithium ion transport properties of LLT and structurally related materials.516 The salient electrical and structural features of LLT perovskites are: 1.516 The salient electrical and structural features of LLT perovskites are: 1. 

The high lithium-ion-conducting phase has an A-site deﬁcient perovskite-type structure. Lithium ion conduction occurs due to the motion of lithium ions along A-site vacancies. The window of four oxygen-separating adjacent A-sites constitutes the bottle neck for lithium ion migration. It is considered that BO6/TiO6 octahedral tilting facilitates the lithium ion mobility in the perovskite structure 2. It is considered that BO6/TiO6 octahedral tilting facilitates the lithium ion mobility in the perovskite structure 2. Cubic structures exhibit slightly higher conductivities than ordered tetragonal phases with the same bulk composition. 

The low ionic conductivity in the ordered phase is due to the unequal ordering of Li, La, and vacancies along the c-axis 3. The low ionic conductivity in the ordered phase is due to the unequal ordering of Li, La, and vacancies along the c-axis 3. The ionic conductivity is highly sensitive to the lithium content, and a dome-shaped dependence of the conductivity on the Li content was found.516 LLT substitution of 5 mol% Sr for La exhibits a slightly higher conductivity (1.516 LLT substitution of 5 mol% Sr for La exhibits a slightly higher conductivity (1.5× 10 C) than the pure LLT, while complete substitution of other transition metal ions for Ti decreases the ionic conductivity516 4.5× 10 C) than the pure LLT, while complete substitution of other transition metal ions for Ti decreases the ionic conductivity516 4. 

The optimum total lithium and vacancy concentration for high ionic conductivity was found to be in the range 0. The optimum total lithium and vacancy concentration for high ionic conductivity was found to be in the range 0.44–0.44–0.45 5.45 5. NMR studies reveal that at low temperature ( > room temperature), the lithium ion hops between cages through the bottleneck in the ab plane, and at high temperature the lithium ions hop in three directions 6. NMR studies reveal that at low temperature ( > room temperature), the lithium ion hops between cages through the bottleneck in the ab plane, and at high temperature the lithium ions hop in three directions 6. The application of LLT as lithium ion electrolyte is not favorable because the compound is not stable in direct contact with elemental lithium and rapidly under+4 to goes Li-insertion with consequent reduction of Ti +3, leading to high electronic conductivity. Ti Furthermore, LLT has been investigated with regard to its stability against lithium and intercalation of lithium using several electrochemical methods that include galvanostatic insertion, coulometric titration, and discharge/ charge characteristics. The use of LLT as lithium battery electrode is limited because of the small lithium uptake and rather small practical capacity.515No one battery design is perfect for every application. Choosing one requires compromise. That’s why it’s important to prioritize list of requirements. Decide which ones you absolutely must have and which you can compromise on. Here are some of the parameters to consider: 1. Here are some of the parameters to consider: 1. Voltage: Normal voltage during discharge, maximum and minimum permissible voltages, discharge curve proﬁle 2. Voltage: Normal voltage during discharge, maximum and minimum permissible voltages, discharge curve proﬁle 2. Duty cycle: Conditions the battery experiences during use. Type of discharge and current drain, e.g., continuous, intermittent, continuous with pulses, etc.

Temperature: In storage and in use. Temperatures that are too high or too low can greatly reduce battery capacity. 4. 4. Self life: How rapidly the cell loses potential while unused. 5. 5. Service life: Deﬁned either in calendar time or, for secondary cells, possible number of discharge/charge cycles, depending on the battery application. Service life depends on battery design and operational conditions, i.e., the stress put on a battery. For stationary and motive power application, the end of service life is deﬁned as the point at which a battery’s capacity drops to 80% of its original capacity. 6. 6. Physical include dimensions, weight, terminals, etc. 7. 7. Maintenance and resupply: Ease of battery acquisition, replacement, charging facilities, disposal. 8. 8. Safety and reliability: Failure rates, freedom from outgassing or leakage; use of toxic components; operation under hazardous conditions; environmentally safe. 9. 9. Cost: Initial cost, operating cost, use of expensive materials. 10. 10. Internal resistance: Batteries capable of a high-rate discharge must have a low internal resistance. 11. 11. Speciﬁc energy: This is a measurement of possible stored energy per kilogram of mass. This number is purely theoretical as it does not take into account the mass of inactive materials, nor the variation in chemical reactions. 12. 12. Speciﬁc power: The speciﬁc power is discussed at a speciﬁc discharge rate. It is possible for batteries with a high speciﬁc energy to have a low power density if they experience large voltage drops at high discharge rates. 13. 13. Unusual requirements: Very long-term or extremetemperature storage; very low failure rate; no voltage delay, etc. 14. 14. High-rate discharge performance at low temperature: The reduction in the interfacial impedance between the active material and the electrolyte is paramount.For this, perhaps there will be four approaches:(i) modiﬁcation of the active material surface and improvement of the electrolyte composition to increase the wet ability of the active material and the electrolyte; (ii) increase of the active material surface area; (iii) prevention of the formation of reaction products at the interface, and (iv) elastic gelled SPE to cope with expansion and contraction of active material.

The improvement of the electrolyte composition for better wet ability may include addition of a low molecularweight polymer to the dry SPE, and increase of the ratio of solution for the gelled SPE. In addition, good electrical contact between active material particles and between the active material and the current collector is also important for good battery performance. 15. 15.Stable performanceA battery is required to recover its full capacity when rechargedeven after standing for a long time. At present, however, some capacity is lost even when the battery is charged after standing for a long time, both in the polymer battery and the liquid electrolyte battery. Clariﬁcation of the mechanism and its solution are essential. 2. 2. Decrease of self discharge. Both the polymer battery and the liquid electrolyte battery now show a relatively large self discharge at high temperatures such as 60 C. Improvement is necessary. 3. 3. Cyclic life performance. The present lithium polymer secondary battery using non-graphitized carbon as the negative electrode shows a cyclic life performance comparable to that of the liquid electrolyte type. For the future, the life of the battery using graphite as the negative active material should also be improved. Of course the ideal battery would perform well in all these areas with a long shelf and service life, high speciﬁc energy and speciﬁc power, low initial and maintenance costs, low environmental impact, and good performance in a variety of conditions (temperatures, duty cycles, etc.

If we want to ﬁnd one that meets all these requirements, then we have to tailor the composition of the each component of the battery to show better performance.

To fully represent the structure of solid electrolyte as a composite material, one must consider at least three phases. According to the Effective Medium Theory (EMT) for such kinds of composite, transport parameters, thermal and electrical conductivity and diffusivity, as well as mechanical strength, depend to a considerable extent on structure and properties of the interfacial zone.

Dependence on preparative parameters are as follows:a. Particle size. Sizes of particles used in compositions plays very important role. There was poor contact between micron sized grains and the matrix, leading to formation of defects in the structure of the interfacial layers in the saltceramic micro-composite. 

Defects were seen both in the contact zone and in the matrix in all composite samples prepared using ﬁne alumina and heat-treated at various temperatures. In particular, it was found that signiﬁcant deterioration of the bulk matrix structure occurred at high sintering temperatures, that resulted in deformation and destruction of the samples. It is clear that there are a great number of voids, micro-defects, and cracks in the solid mass of the bulk matrix.

In contrast, the number of micro-defects in the interfacial zone and bulk matrix was signiﬁcantly reduced in samples prepared using nano-composite. Comparing nanocomposites with micro-composites, it is clear that at all sintering temperatures the bulk densities for the nanocomposites are higher and their salt matrixes have lower porosities. b. 

Moisture.Three levels of moisture content of the mixtures were used during molding of powder mixtures: wet mixture, from which excess water wrings out during pressing; semi-dry mixture, with water content no greater thanthat which the powder can absorb from humidiﬁed air; and dry mixture. The highest degree of compaction and the microscopically most homogeneous structure of raw samples were obtained for two cases: pressing the wet mixture containing micro-alumina, and pressing the semi-dry mixture prepared using nano-composite powder. However, the presence of too much water in the molding mixtures caused formation of micro-aggregates, increase of moisture content in pressed green samples led to an increase in porosity and number of micro cracks between the aggregates after the samples had been heat-treated. c. Molding pressure. 

The composite sample disks were pressed in a 2.54 cm cylindrical die at a variety of pressures from 150 to 600 MPa. 

The effective molding pressure depended on plastic properties of semi-dry powder mixtures and elastic characteristics of solid grains in dry mixtures. In the case of dry mixtures, use of too high a pressure (above 200–300 MPa, depending on grain size) caused elastic strain, resulting in destruction of dry disk samples after relief of the pressure. 

In contrast, no similar destruction resulted from relief of pressure when disks were made using semi-dry powders at any applied pressure. Thus, it was preferred to use wet and semi-dry powders, as they were less subject to elastic strain, when mixtures were compressed at high pressures. d. Composition. The above preparative parameters were especially signiﬁcant for use of pressure molding compacting methods. However, the composition and heat-treatment parameters were signiﬁcant and critical factors for determining microstructure and morphology of composite electrolytes prepared using different methods. e. Heat treatment. Heat-treatment parameters affected the mechanical strength of membranes, structure and phase composition. However, composite sintered at temperatures lower than melting point then the bulk matrix structure deteriorated. 

A number of micro-pores were formed, thus causing breaks in the solid mass of the bulk matrix and thereby affecting density and gas permeability. Thus, the phase transformations and thermal stress during the heat treatment below the melting point led to the appearance of micro-cracks and pores, and these defects were mainly in the contact zone in case of micro-composites and in the agglomerated bulk matrix in case of nano-composites.

The overall relative density for micro-composite samples was less than 80% of the theoretical density. Linear shrinkage of the disk samples after heat treatment was about 1. Linear shrinkage of the disk samples after heat treatment was about 1.5–2.5–2.0%. Gas permeation was very high as will be described below. 

Thus, there was no discernible densiﬁcation of pressed samples after heat treatment at temperatures below the melting point. When the heat-treatment temperature was close to or higher than the melting point of lithium sulfate, there were signiﬁcant changes to the composite structure and morphology.Formation of a melted phase resulted in establishment interaction between the salt and alumina of physicalregardless oftheir size.Use ofparticles, too high temperatures caused a greater incidence of crack formation, and also caused larger cracks upon shrinkage. Moreover, the microstructures of the matrix in nanocomposite samples sintered at elevated temperatures were more homogeneous and dense than those in the composite samples heated below the melting point of lithium sulfate. f. 

Conductivity. Solid ion-conducting composite electrolyte for use in lithium battery requires good mechanical strength, high density, low gas permeability, and certainly high ionic conductivity. 

The ionic conductivity of the nano-composite samples is a function of operating temperatures, but the values depend less on the sinter temperature. All samples prepared from nanocomposite have good ionic conductivity. The considerably higher ionic conductivity for composite made using nano-composite over those using micron starting materials correlates with the enhanced homogeneity and physical interaction between the components in nanocomposite and so is attributed to the bulk crystal morphology changes. The conductivity of composite made using nano-composite is comparable to the highest conductivity achieved for thin ﬁlms. Thin ﬁlms prepared using the nano-composite are expected to have much better conductivity and stability. Further, the temperature dependence of ionic conductivity for our nano-composite bulk membrane was different from that of the thin ﬁlms by others. 

Furthermore, nano-composite membranes suggest the potential attainment of further improvement in ionic conductivity and improved physical and mechanical properties by doping with alternative salt-like ion-conductive components. g. Nature. Nano-size effects are also important as far as the electrolyte is concerned. Composites in which have conductivities as high as 10 C, which makes interesting candidates for battery electrolytes. Oxide additions also proved beneﬁcial in polymer + conductivelectrolytes, which because of their high Li ities and favorable mechanical properties, are candidates for solid electrolytes in high-performance Li batteries. h. Energy density. An increase in the energy density can possibly be realized in the following three approaches: (i) increasing the ﬁlling density of active material; (ii) use of high-capacity active material, and (iii) high packaging density.

(i) Increasing the ﬁlling density of active material may include the application of a compression ﬁlling process. (ii) Use of high-capacity active material may include the use of polysulﬁdes positive active material and metallic lithium negative active material. A method to prevent diffusion of depolymerized active material in the polymerization: depolymerization type active material such as polysulﬁde and dendrite formation at the metallic lithium electrode is essential to realize the long life of a battery using such active materials.

Delivered by Ingenta to: Freie Universitaet Berlin IP: 91.Delivered by Ingenta to: Freie Universitaet Berlin IP: 91.216.216.3.3.73 On: Wed, 25 Jan 2017 07:14:04Copyright: American Scientific PublishersSolid Electrolytes for Rechargeable Thin Film Lithium Batteries: A Review(iii) High packaging density requires minimization of the package space including the sealing part, taking advantage of inherent safety and leak proof property of the polymer battery.

Lithium batteries are one of the great successes of modern electrochemistry. These batteries have an established role in the consumer electronic market with no risk of replacement by any other contender and, by intelligent modiﬁcation of the electrode and electrolyte components, they will soon also dominate the electric automotive transportation and renewable energy storage markets. The potential of this unique power source make it possible to foresee an even greater expansion of their area of applications to technologies that span from medicine to robotics and space, making lithium batteries the power sources of the future. To further advance in the science and technology of lithium batteries, new avenues must be opened. Changes in the chemical structures, are not sufﬁcient. Further improvements in safety, environmental sustainability and energy content are mandatory; these can only be obtained by totally renewing the lithium battery concept, so far mostly based on insertion chemistry. Although the insertion electrodes are based on sustainable 3d metals, such as Ti(TiO2, Li4Ti5O12) or Fe(LiFePO4 1), they are produced from ores, and thus their extraction and manipulation require constantly increasing amounts of energy. 

This energy consuming fabrication process poses some questions about the long term viability of lithium batteries. In addition, insertion reactions are conﬁned to a maximum of one electron transfer per transition metal. This greatly limiting the speciﬁc energy of the batteries. 

Signiﬁcant increases in performance require radical changes in the fundamental electrochemical process, such as a passage from insertion to conversion chemistry which may basically assure operation implying from two to six electron transfer.517 Simply put, the need is to pass from the classicxLi+ MXy  1) LixMXy insertion processes to newConversion processes, although life time problems, caused by conversion related phase changes of the redox materials, cannot be overlooked. Pioneering work of Tarascon and co-workers, introduced a search for high capacity, conversion electrode materials.518 A reaction pathway enlisting the complete electrochemical reduction of metal oxides, sulﬁdes, nitrides, phosphides and ﬂuorides into a composite consisting of nanometric particles dispersed in an amorphous LimX (X = O, S, N, P), was demonstrated. However, these conversion electrodes suffered from a marked hysteresis in voltage between charge and discharge, leading to poor energy and voltage efﬁciency.Following this work, substantial improvement was obtainedby using a metal hydride, e.g., MgH2, as a selected conversion electrode.

This electrode shows a reversible process−1 at an delivering a practical capacity as high 1480 mAhg average voltage of 0.

This electrode shows a reversible process−1 at an delivering a practical capacity as high 1480 mAhg average voltage of 0.5 V versus Li, combined with a very low charge–discharge polarization, both properties making it suitable for anode application in practical batteries. The pursuit of high capacity has been addressed to other cathodes, such as the air cathode. Metal-air technologies have been exploited for a series of batteries, the most common example being the zinc-air battery.By reacting lithium directly with oxygen from air, according to the reaction−1 may be i.e., a very high capacity of 1200 mAhg obtained, a much greater value than that possibly achievable by any insertion cathode. Efﬁcient lithium air battery performance in terms of rechargeability has recently been demonstrated by developing a conﬁguration that exploits a low cost,  17)-MnO2 nanowires catalyst, making possible the design of porous, three-dimensional electrodes which assure improved kinetics and energy efﬁciency.

 The practical development of the Li-air battery, however, is still prevented by the difﬁculties in mastering lithium metal and oxygen electrodes in an efﬁcient, rechargeable and safe battery conﬁguration. The Li anode suffers from water contamination; water, even in traces, induces serious safety risks. 

The air cathode is affected by problems associated with the reaction mechanism, a serious one being clogging of reaction sites by Li2O2. The air cathode is affected by problems associated with the reaction mechanism, a serious one being clogging of reaction sites by Li2O2. The use of selective, high cost catalyst is then required. Vitreoceramic coating protection of the lithium anode521 and the use of hydrophobic ionic liquid-based electrolytes,522 have been proposed to control the issues caused by occasional entry of water. Considerable work is still needed to make the Li-air battery an immediate technological solution for high-capacity lithium batteries. Engineering and chemical advances are required to optimize the porosity, structure and composition at the cathode side and to prevent uneven lithium deposit which may lead to inherent unsafe cell operation at the anode side. 

Care must also be given to prevent the ingress of either CO2 or H2O, which can react with both the Li anode and the Li2O2 cathode. However, the outstanding intrinsic value of the capacity of the Li–O2 system reinforces the importance of this battery and justiﬁes further efforts to make it technologically liable.Another promising candidate for high energy systems is the lithium/sulfur, Li/S battery based on the electrochemical reaction:Which assuming complete conversion has an energy den−1 in terms of sity of 2500 W h kg weight and volume respectively?

 Although investigated−1 and 2800 W h lby many workers for several decades523–526 the practical development of the lithium/sulfur battery has been so far hindered by a series of shortcomings. A major issue is the high solubility in the liquid organic electrolyte of the polysulﬁdes Li2Sx (1 ≤ x ≥ 8) that forms as intermediates during both charge and discharge processes. The high solubility results in a loss of active mass that reﬂects in a low utilization of the sulfur cathode and in severe capacity decay upon cycling. The dissolved polysulﬁde anions, by migration through the electrolyte, may reach the lithium metal anode where they react forming insoluble products on its surface, this also contributing to depress the battery operation.527 Various strategies to address the solubility issue have been explored. 

They include among others: 1.(i) the design of modiﬁed electrolytes,528(ii) the use of ionic solid-based electrolytes529 and (iii) the use of polymer electrolytes.530Important progress has been recently obtained by Nazar and co-workers who showed that by fabricating cathodes based on an intimate mixture of nanostructured sulfur and mesoporous carbon, high reversible capacity and good rate can be obtained.531 However, although promising, all these results are still far from making real breakthroughs in the Li/S battery system. Finally, a fascinating new path in the evolution of the lithium battery is the use of organic materials by a choice inspired by common events in nature. The chemistry of life, which is mainly based on organic materials, uses renewable processes associated to the cycling of biochemical reactions, the most signiﬁcant example being photosynthesis, using chlorophyll as the organic mediator. Similar to this process, the challenge is to exploit organic lithium battery electrode materials that can be synthesized by green chemistry from biomass, which is easily recyclable. 

The basic goal is to develop lithium ion batteries by using a cycle process with no CO2 production. 

A valid practical example is dilithium rhodizonate, Li2C6O6 in which the redox centers at carbonyl groups can electrochemically react with four lithium ions per formula unit.532 According to this process, Li2C6O6, with lithium, delivers a speciﬁc capacity of 580 mAhg 2.

According to this process, Li2C6O6, with lithium, delivers a speciﬁc capacity of 580 mAhg 2. Most of the materials described in this section are on their way to be used as alternate electrodes or electrolytes in new lithium ion battery conﬁgurations. In most cases, however, the innovation only concerns a single component, either the anode, the cathode or the electrolyte, while the others remain unchanged, reproducing the conventional structure. A current approach, adopted in many emerging commercial batteries, considers innovations which involve the cathode only. Most popular is that seeing the replacement of lithium cobalt oxide by lithium iron phosphate, still maintaining conventional chemistry at the anode and at the electrolyte.Since LFP is safer and cheaper than LiCoO2 its use as cathode may improve the battery reliability and partially decrease its cost; however, preservation of the graphite and, particularly, of the unstable liquidorganic electrolyte does not exclude safety risks for the overall battery. 3. 3. The C/LiFePO4 batteries are on the selling list of many battery manufacturers in Europe, Asia and United States aiming to meet the requirement of some niche electronic market and, in most of the cases, to enter in the race for supplying the HEV. Indeed, various joint ventures between lithium battery manufacturers and car companies are underway to marketing lithium batterypowered, Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEVs) and Plug-in Electric Vehicles (PHEVs). Although the chemistry of the lithium batteries to be used in these projects is generally not released, it is reasonable to suppose that in most cases is lithium iron phosphate the cathode of choice. 

More enterprising manufacturers are considering developing batteries with two innovative components, usually the anode and the cathode. Batteries using electrode combinations which are expected to operate more safely than the present C-LiCoO2 are valid examples of this second, new class of advanced lithium ion batteries. 

By combining the 1. By combining the 1.5 V Li4Ti5O12 anode with the 3.5 V Li4Ti5O12 anode with the 3.5 V LiFePO4 cathode, lithium ion batteries, operating in the 2 V range may be obtained. 

These batteries, whose concept was originally conceived and experimentally proved in academic laboratories533–535 are now under consideration for market production by battery manufacturers. 

A possible criticism of these batteries is in their voltage level, which is lower than that of the conventional C-LiCoO2 system. However, this apparent shortcoming is counterbalanced by enhanced safety and, possibly, by cost reduction, i.e., by the two aspects which are among the most crucial for assuring the use of lithium ion batteries in emerging markets. In addition, it must be noted that the voltage may be raised to higher levels by properly redesigning the electrode combination that is by replacing the 3. In addition, it must be noted that the voltage may be raised to higher levels by properly redesigning the electrode combination that is by replacing the 3.5 V LiFePO4 with a higher voltage cathode; the choice is wide and there are various possible candidates for this upgrading strategy. The 2. The 2.5 V Li4Ti5O12/LiMn2O4, Li ion technology536 and the 3.5 V Li4Ti5O12/LiMn2O4, Li ion technology536 and the 3.0 V Li4Ti5O12/LiNi0 5)5 Mn1 5)5O4 cell,537 are two possible candidates for such an upgrade. The renewal of the electrode component is certainly a step ahead for the progress of lithium ion battery technology. 

However, even with the replacement of both anode and cathode, complete trust in battery performance cannot be assured since some of the issues associated with the conventional chemistry may not be totally preventable. 

The liquid organic solution, still used as the electrolyte in the separator, may be a source of unpredictable reactions which may also affect the safety of the battery. 

The real breakthrough in the ﬁeld is in revolutionary battery designs in which all the three conventional components are removed in favour of alternative, more efﬁcient and safer materials.

To our knowledge, no one of these totally renewed batteries has yet found its way to commercial development, with the possible exception of the SONY Nexelion battery,538 although it is not clear whether the cathode adopted by SONY is actually a newconcept. Yet, this mission is not impossible: the large variety of materials available from the vast literature of lithium ion batteries offers real possibilities for identifying the right formulation for advanced battery types. 

The obvious approach is to exploit conﬁgurations which use renewed electrode combinations (as those above discussed), combined with the replacement of conventional liquid electrolyte solutions with a more stable polymer electrolyte. Examples that conﬁrm the validity of this approach are available; a good one is the lithium ion polymer battery using a TiO2 anode and LiNi0 5)5Mn1 5)5O4 cathode separated by a PVdF-based gel electrolyte.539 By combining the advantages of the electrode combination (safe operation, long life) with those of the electrolyte (plasticity, high conductivity), this battery is expected to provide excellent performance, as indeed experimentally demonstrated. 

A clever choice of the new electrode and electrolyte materials presently available, new types of advanced lithium ion batteries may effectively be developed.

Solid Polymer Electrolyte is also attracting a wide attention of the researchers as a future electrolyte.

The improvement of the performance of the dry SPE has been carried out along the two approaches:(I) enhancement of chains, and (II) an increase in the carrier density.the mobility ofthe polymeris now about 1× 10With the combination of the above (I) and (II), the ionic conductivity at room temperature is now about 1× 10 −1, while with the polymer-in-salt based −1, on the above (II), and with the single ion conductor approach, it is about 1× 10 −1.the mobility ofthe polymeris now about 1× 10With the combination of the above (I) and (II), the ionic conductivity at room temperature is now about 1× 10 −1, while with the polymer-in-salt based −1, on the above (II), and with the single ion conductor approach, it is about 1× 10 −1. In considering the use of a battery at a lower temperature, 1× 10 −1 is probably needed for SPE, except for the single-ion conductor type, which probably requires 1× 10 −1. In considering the use of a battery at a lower temperature, 1× 10 −1 is probably needed for SPE, except for the single-ion conductor type, which probably requires 1× 10 −1.

 Although the polymer in-salt now shows 1× 10 −1 at room temperature, it tends to crystallize at lower temperature, which prevents it from practical use. 

Therefore, the future trend could be forecast as follows.

A single ion conductor with increasing number of dissociating lithium ions. 3. 3. The polymer-in-salt polymer with molten salt. 4. 4. Preventing crystallization below −10 C. 5. 5. Molten salt with a wide stability window.

 Recently, studies on the inorganic electrolyte and porous SPE having similar performance as liquid electrolyte are active. With further improvements in the ﬁlling density of the active materials, coupled with the use of a graphite negative electrode having a ﬂat discharge voltage, the energy density is expected to reach one comparable with that of the liquid electrolyte type battery. Another issue is the need for an improvement of discharge performance at a high rate. Polymer battery shows somewhat lower performance at a 1 h-rate discharge.This is due tothe fact that the interfacial impedance between the electrode and the electrolyte is still higher with the polymer battery. 

Further effort will be made to reduce this interfacial impedance to improve the discharge performance of the polymer battery at a high-rate discharge.

 A major merit of the lithium polymer battery is its inherent safety over the liquid electrolyte type lithium ion battery. For leakproof in particular, retention of sufﬁcient osmosis pressure is important. In designing a gelled SPE with a good ionic conductivity, taking the above into consideration, a structure with a large domain (a matrix with a long molecular chain length and coarse cross-linking) composed of polymers having less interaction with lithium ion, or a microphase separation type, is favorable. In addition, a gelled structure composed of the matrix polymer which has afﬁnity with anions and solvents but is repellent to lithium ions might bring about an ionic conductivity comparable or superior to that of liquid electrolyte, if successful. 6. 6. The features of the lithium polymer battery include high safety, leak-proof and ﬂexibility in designing (thin, large area, shape, etc.). 

The success of commercial products lies in whether a commercial battery can be designed with acceptable performance including a high energy density, especially at high-rate discharge at low temperature, and stable performance as represented by good recovery of the capacity after standing for a long time, maintaining the features mentioned above. 7. 7. Lithium battery technology evolves at a pace so rapid that evaluation of its progress may easily become obsolete. 

With this in mind, we have tried to give some consideration to the type of electrode and electrolyte materials that based on their related electrochemistry, morphology and engineering design, are expected to inﬂuence the progress of these important power sources in terms of energy and cycling performance. 8. 8. 

The relevance of the choice of materials is obvious. Crucial battery parameters, such as speciﬁc energy and power, safety and cycle life, clearly depend on the electrode and electrolyte performance. However, these can be properly enhanced, if not modiﬁed, by an optimization of their morphology. Issues such as slow electrode kinetics and damaging strains associated with large volume expansion–contraction upon cycling can be circumvented by switching to nanostructures. In addition, nanostructures can change the reaction pathway positively affecting capacity, power and reversibility. We ﬁrst discussed and evaluated the modiﬁcations which are expected to ﬁnd their way to an industrial scale in the near future. 

This evolution is powered by the aggressive race among various academic and industrial laboratories to upgrade lithium batteries—mostly of the Li ion type— for the automotive industry, e.g., for HEVs, PHEVs and in prospect, EVs, as well for photovoltaic-battery power plants. Here the progress is notable to the point that new, car-compatible lithium ion batteries will soon be available.Road production of PHEVs, powered by lithiumion batteries, has already been announced by leading car manufacturers worldwide. 

The evolution of these batteries has been pushed to meet the demands of the automotive industry; however, so far only modest changes, involving one or maximum two battery components, have been commercially proposed, always maintaining an overall chemistry based on insertion processes. 

These progresses are by no means exhaustive. The evolution of the lithium ion battery is open to innovations that will place it in top position as the battery of the future. Radical changes in lithium battery structure are required. Changes in the chemistry, like those so far exploited for the development of batteries for road transportation, are insufﬁcient. Improvements in environmental sustainability and energy content are mandatory and these can only be obtained by renewing the lithium battery concept, e.g., by passing from an insertion process to a conversion process. Freed from the constraints of insertion electrodes, in which the electrochemical process is limited to one electron per formula unit, conversion processes, which allow from two to six electron transfers per formula unit, make possible to reach high capacity, −1. 

Freed from the constraints of insertion electrodes, in which the electrochemical process is limited to one electron per formula unit, conversion processes, which allow from two to six electron transfers per formula unit, make possible to reach high capacity, −1. Important examples of this i.e., even above 1000 mAhg evolution are already in progress with the use of lithiumair and lithium-sulfur batteries. However, key issues are still to be resolved and it must be kept in mind that the solution for the remaining challenges will require joint efforts from a range of interdisciplinary studies and their success will crucially depend on the efﬁciency of exchange of ideas and results.

