Electrical vehicles (EVs) are considered to reduce CO2 emissions and the consumption of fossil fuels because the total energy conversation efﬁciency of batteries is higher than that of internal combustion (IC) engines.

However, the driving range of commercialized EVs with the current lithium-ion batteries is considerably lower than that of vehicles with IC engines because the speciﬁc energy density for the lithium-ion battery is too low compared with the IC engine.2 The calculated speciﬁc energy density of a gasoline engine for automotive −1, determined applications is estimated to be around 1700 Wh kg using the reaction heat of gasoline and a tank to wheel efﬁciency of 12.2 The calculated speciﬁc energy density of a gasoline engine for automotive −1, determined applications is estimated to be around 1700 Wh kg using the reaction heat of gasoline and a tank to wheel efﬁciency of 12.6%.2 The theoretical speciﬁc mass and volume energy densities calculated for a lithium-ion battery based on a carbon anode −3, and a LiCoO2 based cathode are 387 Wh kg respectively,3,4 the former of which is around one fourth of that for the IC engine. 

Many types of battery systems beyond lithium-ion batteries have been proposed, such as lithium-sulfur and lithium-air rechargeable batteries.

The lithium-sulfur battery is a very attractive battery system because of its high theoretical energy density (ca. −3).3,5 However, even after several 2600 Wh kg decades research and development, the lithium-sulfur battery has still not reached mass commercialization. 

Several problems inherent in the cell chemistry remain, such as poor electrode rechargeability and limited rate capability due to the insulative nature of sulfur and the solid reaction products, and fast capacity fade due to the generation of various soluble polysulﬁde intermediates. The calculated energy densities −1 and for the non-aqueous lithium-air cell are as high as 3505 Wh kg −3. The calculated energy densities −1 and for the non-aqueous lithium-air cell are as high as 3505 Wh kg −3.3 

The speciﬁc mass energy density is quite attractive 3436 Wh dm for the power source in EVs and interest has expanded rapidly in recent years. Although signiﬁcant progress has been made by many researchers, serious problems remain to be solved, such as decomposition of the non-aqueous electrolyte by the reaction product of the super oxide, reduction of the carbon electrode during the charging process, and the blocking of H2O and CO2 present in air. 

The concept of the rechargeable aqueous lithium-air cell was proposed by Visco et al.10 in 2004, based on a lithium anode, a water-stable NASICONtype lithium conducting solid electrolyte of Li1+xAlxTi1-x(PO4)3 (LATP), an aqueous electrolyte, and a carbon air electrode with a catalyst. Some of the serious problems for non-aqueous lithium-air batteries are not applicable to the aqueous system; however, the cal−1 and culated energy densities for the aqueous system (1897 Wh kg −3) are lower than those for the non-aqueous system, be1991 Wh dm cause water is active material for the cell reaction.

The reduction of thethickness of LATP is challengeable. 

As such, an aqueous lithium-air cell with a high speciﬁc energy density has not yet been demonstrated.9 Goodenough and co-workers11 and Zhou and co-workers12 proposed a new concept of an aqueous cathode for next-generation alkaliion batteries. 

The cell proposed by Goodenough and co-workers consists of a water-stable LATP separator, a water soluble redox couple cathode, Fe(CN)6 , and a lithium anode. However, the theoretical speciﬁc energy density of the proposed system was 392 −1, which is comparable to that of the lithium-ion battery. Wh kg A similar concept was reported by Byon and co-workers13 using a triiodide/iodide redox couple in an aqueous cathode. This system showed an excellent rate capability, although the theoretical speciﬁc energy density of this system was comparable with those of couple. Polyplus Battery Company14 dethe Fe(CN)6 veloped aqueous electrolyte lithium sulfur batteries, which consist of a water stable LATP separator, a water soluble lithium sulﬁde, and lithium metal anode. The theoretical energy density is as high as −1. 

The theoretical energy density is as high as −1. The delivered capacity corresponded to a value that 2300 Wh kg is higher than 700 mAh per gram of dissolved sulfur over at least 2 cycles. A lithium anode and liquid cathode couples have potential for the development of rechargeable batteries with high speciﬁc energy density because there is no binder or conductive additive in the electrodes. Here we demonstrate the feasibility of a high speciﬁc energy density aqueous lithium rechargeable battery with an aqueous cathode of MCl2 (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Cu and Zn) using a high lithiumion conductivity solid electrolyte of Li1. Here we demonstrate the feasibility of a high speciﬁc energy density aqueous lithium rechargeable battery with an aqueous cathode of MCl2 (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Cu and Zn) using a high lithiumion conductivity solid electrolyte of Li1.4Al0.4Al0.4Ge0.4Ge0.2Ti1.2Ti1.4(PO4)3-epoxy resin ﬁlm (LAGTP)15 as the separator between the lithium anode and the aqueous cathode.

Figure 1.Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the test cell and photograph of the Li/(LiFSI-2G4)-50 vol. % DOL/LAGTP/saturated MCl2 and LiCl aqueous solution (1:1 vol. ratio)/M cell.

The LAGTP powder was dispersed in a mixed solution of ethanol and toluene with polyvinyl alcohol as a binder and butyl benzyl phthalate as a plasticizer, and the slurry was ball-milled using a high speed mechanical mill (Fritsch Planetary Micro Mill PULVERISETTE 7). ◦ C for 7 h. The tapeThe slurry was tape-cast and then sintered at 900 cast LAGTP-epoxy resin composite ﬁlm was prepared by dropping a mixed solution of 1 M 1,3-phenylenediamine and 2M 2,2-bis(dglycidyloyphenyl) propane in tetrahydrofuran (THF).The ﬁlm was ◦ then heated at 150C for 24 h.

The cell performance was measured using an in-house-built Swagelok-type cell. Figure 1 shows a schematic diagram of the test cell, which consists of a lithium metal anode, a Li(FSO2)2N (LiFSI)tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether (G4) (1:2 molar ratio)-50 vol. % 1,3 dioxolane (DOL) interlayer, LAGTP, an aqueous MCl2 solution, and a current collector composed of M. A water-stable and waterimpermeable tape-cast LAGTP ﬁlm with epoxy resin (ca. 0. 0.3 mm thick) was used as the protective layer between lithium metal and the aqueous solution.

 A H-type cell15 was used to the water permeation through the tape-cast LAGTP ﬁlm with epoxy resin, where the saturated LiCl aqueous solution was on one side of the cell and distilled water on the other side. The chloride-ion content in the distilled water side was measured with respect to the time using a chloride-ion meter (Kasahara CL-5Z Japn). The (LiFSI-2G4)-50 vol. % DOL electrolyte was used as an interlayer between lithium and LAGTP to protect from direct contact between lithium and LAGTP, because LAGTP is unstable in contact with lithium metal.

The Li/(LiFSI-2G4)-50 vol. % DOL electrolyte was reported to supress lithium dendrite formation at room temperature and high current density.17 A 200 μm lithium foil was used as the anode. 

The contact area of the lithium anode with the interlayer electrolyte was 1. The contact area of the lithium anode with the interlayer electrolyte was 1.13 cm2.13 cm2. 

The thickness and diameter of the LAGTP-epoxy solid electrolyte was ca. 300 μm and 1. 300 μm and 1.6 cm, respectively and the contact area of it with the interlayer electrolyte and the catholyte was 1.6 cm, respectively and the contact area of it with the interlayer electrolyte and the catholyte was 1.13 cm2.13 cm2. The area of the M current collector with the catholyte was 0. The area of the M current collector with the catholyte was 0.98 cm2.98 cm2. The current density was measured based on the M current collector. The lithium anode side of the Li/interlayer/LAGTP cell was assembled in a glove box under Ar and the aqueous cathode was then charged outside the glove box. A pouch-type cell was used for some cells with a small amount of the catholyte, where 4M LiFSI in dimethoxyethane (DME)18 was used as the interlayer between lithium metal and LAGTP, because a plastic ﬁlm used was soluble in DOL. The lithium anode, interlayer, and LAGTP were sealed with the plastic ﬁlm with a 1 cm diameter window.

AC impedance spectroscopy measurements of the cells were performed using a frequency response analyzer (Solartron 1260) with an electrochemical interface (Solartron S1 1287) in the frequency range of 0.AC impedance spectroscopy measurements of the cells were performed using a frequency response analyzer (Solartron 1260) with an electrochemical interface (Solartron S1 1287) in the frequency range of 0.1 Hz to 1 M Hz. Zplot software was employed for the data analysis.The electrode potentials at a constant current drain were measured using a multichannel potentio-galvanostat (Bio-Logic Science Instruments VMPX) and cyclic voltammetry was conducted using apotentio-galvanostat (Solartron 1287). X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained using a diffractometer with a rotating copper cathode (Rigaku Rint 2500).

The stability of LAGTP in the saturated MCl2 aqueous solution is an indispensable requirement for the separator between the lithium electrode and aqueous catholyte. Shimonishi et al.19 reported that a NASICON-type lithium-ion conducting solid electrolyte was stable in aqueous acetic acid saturated with lithium acetate, of which the pH was ca. 3. 3. The impedance proﬁles of a Pt/mixture of the saturated CoCl2 and LiCl aqueous solutions (1:1 vol. ratio)/LAGTP/mixture of the saturated CoCl2 and LiCl aqueous solutions (1:1 vol. ratio)/Pt cell are shown as a function of the storage period in Figure 2a . ratio)/Pt cell are shown as a function of the storage period in Figure 2a . The impedance proﬁles show a semicircle, which is attributed to the grain boundary resistance.20 No change in the impedance proﬁles of the cell was observed for three weeks. Figure 2b shows the temperature dependence of the electrical conductivity for LAGTP. The total con◦ ductivities (bulk and gain boundary) of LAGTP at 25 and 60 C were 6. 

The total con◦ ductivities (bulk and gain boundary) of LAGTP at 25 and 60 C were 6.4 × 10−4 and 2 × 10

The electrode reactions for the Li/aqueous MCl2 solution cell canbe written as follows:Anode :Cathode : M2+Overallwhere (s), (aq) and (g) denote solid. aqueous and gas phases, respectively. 

The requirement for the aqueous cathode redox couples in aqueous lithium batteries are as follows: (1) a high theoretical speciﬁc capacity, (2) a suitable redox potential to avoid the electrolysis of water, (3) stability of the reaction products in the aqueous cathode to achieve a low self-discharge rate, and (4) stability of the water-stable lithium-ion conducting solid electrolyte in the saturated aqueous solution of the cathode materials to achieve a high speciﬁc energy density. 

The transition metal chlorides, MCl2 (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and Zn,), are suitable candidates for the aqueous lithium battery because the solubility of MCl2 in water is high and the theoretical speciﬁc energy density of the Li/MCl2 couples are more than two times higher than that of the lithium-ion cell, as shown in Table I.The problem for+ /M and Li(1:1 vol. ratio) (abridged as saturated MCl2-LiCl aqueous solution), whereas the FeCl2 and CuCl2 catholytes had no LiCl, because the saturated FeCl2 and CuCl2 aqueous solutions precipitated a solid by the addition of LiCl, as shown in the insets of Figures 2a and 2d . ratio) (abridged as saturated MCl2-LiCl aqueous solution), whereas the FeCl2 and CuCl2 catholytes had no LiCl, because the saturated FeCl2 and CuCl2 aqueous solutions precipitated a solid by the addition of LiCl, as shown in the insets of Figures 2a and 2d . 

The OCVs are in good agreement with those calculated using the potential differences of M2+ /Li (Eo). The OCVs were recorded to be 2. 

The OCVs were recorded to be 2.58 V for Li/FeCl2 (Eo = 2.58 V for Li/FeCl2 (Eo = 2.60 V), 2.60 V), 2.73 V for Li/CoCl2 (Eo = 2.73 V for Li/CoCl2 (Eo = 2.77 V), 2.77 V), 2.80 V for Li/NiCl2 (Eo = 2.80 V for Li/NiCl2 (Eo = 2.81), 3.81), 3.41 V for Li/CuCl2 (Eo = 3.41 V for Li/CuCl2 (Eo = 3.39 V), and 2.39 V), and 2.28 V for Li/ZnCl2 (Eo = 2.28 V for Li/ZnCl2 (Eo = 2.28 V). The Li/MCl2 (M = Co, Ni, and Zn) cells showed steady charge and discharge voltages for 10 h polarization, where the discharge depth was 11% for Li/CoCl2, 9% for Li/NiCl2, and 5% for Li/ZnCl2. The Li/MCl2 (M = Co, Ni, and Zn) cells showed steady charge and discharge voltages for 10 h polarization, where the discharge depth was 11% for Li/CoCl2, 9% for Li/NiCl2, and 5% for Li/ZnCl2. The Li/MCl2 (M = Fe and Cu) cells showed a steady discharge cell voltage, where the discharge depths for Li/FeCl2 and Li/CuCl2 were 10%. However, the cell voltages during the charge processes for both cells were abruptly increased ions that move after polarization for 30 min at 1. 

However, the cell voltages during the charge processes for both cells were abruptly increased ions that move after polarization for 30 min at 1.0 mA cm from the Li anode to the catholyte during the discharge process may react with FeCl2 and CuCl2 to form an aqueous-insoluble compound. 

The precipitates in the CuCl2-LiCl system were identiﬁed as a mixture 22 and unknown phases from the XRD results, but of LiCuCl3(H2O)2 the precipitates in the FeCl2-LiCl system were not identiﬁed; these may be new unknown compounds in the FeCl2-LiCl-H2O system, as observed for the CuCl2-LiCl-H2O system. 

The stability of the reaction products of Co, Ni and Zn in the saturated MCl2 (M = Co, Ni, and Zn)-LiCl aqueous solution is essential for rechargeable batteries. The coulombic efﬁciencies for the deposition and dissolution of Co, Ni, and Zn on the Pt electrode were measured as a function of storage period for the deposited metals; Co and Ni were stable in the saturated MCl2-LiCl (M = Co and Ni) aqueous solutions and Zn was dissolved into the saturated ZnCl2-LiCl aqueous solution at a dissolution rate −1 cm −2. The coulombic efﬁciencies for the deposition and dissolution of Co, Ni, and Zn on the Pt electrode were measured as a function of storage period for the deposited metals; Co and Ni were stable in the saturated MCl2-LiCl (M = Co and Ni) aqueous solutions and Zn was dissolved into the saturated ZnCl2-LiCl aqueous solution at a dissolution rate −1 cm −2. The Li/ZnCl2 cell may thus be limited for of ca. 2 mg day practical applications.

The Li +−2 and 60 ◦Figures 4a and 4b show the deep discharge and charge behavior for the Li/(LiFSI-2G4)-50 vol. % DOL/LAGTP/saturated MCl2-LiCl aqueous solution/M (M = Co and Ni) cells at 4 mA cm C, respectively, where the cells were operated at a high temperature and high current density. These cells showed two-step discharge plateaus; the ﬁrst step discharge plateau could be explained by M2+ reduction to M and the second plateau by the hydrogen evolution reaction, because the cells could be discharged over the calculated capacity of CoCl2 and NiCl2 in the catholytes. The hydrogen evolution reaction was observed after reduction of ca. 80% Co2+ . 80% Co2+ . The higher utilization of NiCl2 than that of CoCl2 may be due to the large potential difference for the metal deposition and hydrogen evolution reactions, as shown in Table I. The charging curves also revealed two-step cell voltage proﬁles for these cells. The capacities of the ﬁrst plateaus during the charge process corresponded to those of the second discharge steps in the discharge curves. The cells were gastight and the evolved hydrogen gas was stored in the cathode chamber. 

The hydrogen reduction reaction proceeded at potentials higher than those of the metal dissolution reactions. These phenomena could be explained by hydrogen gas covering the metal electrode, so that the metal dissolution reactions were blocked. Two-step discharge proﬁles were also observed for the Li/0. Two-step discharge proﬁles were also observed for the Li/0.2 M MCl2 (M = Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) cells at 1.2 M MCl2 (M = Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) cells at 1.0and 100% Ni2+Figure 2.0and 100% Ni2+Figure 2. (a) Impedance proﬁles of the Pt/saturated CoCl2 and LiCl aqueous solution (1:1 vol. ratio) /LAGTP-3 wt% epoxy resin/saturated CoCl2 and LiCl ◦ aqueous solution (1:1 vol. ratio)/Pt cell measured at 25 C for various storage periods and (b) temperature dependence of the electrical conductivity of LAGTP-3wt%epoxy resin.

the aqueous lithium cell is a competitive hydrogen evolution Reaction 3 during the discharge processes. Table I shows the pH values and M2+ /M electrode potentials in saturated MCl2 aqueous solutions along with the hydrogen evolution potentials on the M electrode, including the over-potentials for the hydrogen evolution reaction at 1. Table I shows the pH values and M2+ /M electrode potentials in saturated MCl2 aqueous solutions along with the hydrogen evolution potentials on the M electrode, including the over-potentials for the hydrogen evolution reaction at 1.0 mA −2.0 mA −2.21 The metal ion reduction potentials in saturated MCl2 aqueous cm solutions are slightly higher than the hydrogen reduction potential on the corresponding metals, including the hydrogen over-potential.

To obtain the theoretical speciﬁc capacity of the Li/MCl2 cell, the catholyte should have more MCl2 than the solubility limit at the fully charged state because water is not active for the cathode reaction. Figure 3 shows the charge and discharge performance of the Li/(LiFSI2G4)-50 vol.

ChlorideMetal deposition potentialHydrogen evolution potentialEnergy density −1 Wh dm∗ pH values for metal chloride saturated aqueous solutions. ∗∗ Metal chloride saturated aqueous solution. ∗∗∗ Including the hydrogen evolution overpotential at 1. ∗∗∗ Including the hydrogen evolution overpotential at 1.0 mA cmFigure 3.0 mA cmFigure 3. First cycle charge and discharge performance of the Li/(LiFSI-2G4)-50 vol% DOL/LAGTP/saturated MCl2-LiCl aqueous solution/M cell at 1. First cycle charge and discharge performance of the Li/(LiFSI-2G4)-50 vol% DOL/LAGTP/saturated MCl2-LiCl aqueous solution/M cell at 1.0 mA cm C. (a) saturated FeCl2 aqueous solution, (b) saturated CoCl2 and LiCl aqueous soltuon (1:1 vol. ratio). (c) saturated NiCl2 and LiCl aqueous solution (1:1 vol. ratio), (d) saturated CuCl2 aqueous solution, and (e) saturated ZnCl2 and LiCl aqueous solution (1:1 vol. ratio).

The speciﬁc energy density of the cell with a solid cathode is generally dependent on the area speciﬁc capacity23 [product of the −1) and the speciﬁc capacity per gram of the active material (mAh g −2)]. Li/aqueous liquid active material loading per unit area (g cm MCl2 (M = Co, and Ni) cells are not expected to exhibit dependence of cell performance on the charged amount of MCl2 in the catholyte, because the diffusion of ions in the liquid catholyte are signiﬁcantly higher than that in solid cathodes. 

The diffusion constant of lithium ions in Li0. The diffusion constant of lithium ions in Li0.65CoO2 was reported to be 9.65CoO2 was reported to be 9.8 × 10 C,24 while that of lithium ions in a liquid electrolyte is four orders higher than that in solids.

The observed speciﬁc capacity of 413 mAh g NiCl2-LiCl aqueous solution cell with 0. −1 for the Li/saturated The observed speciﬁc capacity of 413 mAh g NiCl2-LiCl aqueous solution cell with 0.222 g of NiCl2 (area capacity: −1 for the cell with 94 mAh cm −2). The effect of the 0. 

The effect of the 0.111 g of NiCl2 (area capacity: 47 mAh cm excess amount of CoCl2 in the catholyte was also examined. Figure 5b shows the discharge performance of a pouch-type Li/CoCl2 cell at C as a function of the amount of CoCl2, where 0. Figure 5b shows the discharge performance of a pouch-type Li/CoCl2 cell at C as a function of the amount of CoCl2, where 0.5 mA cm an excess amount of the solid CoCl2 was added into the saturated CoCl2-LiCl aqueous solution. 

Figure 5. Discharge curves of Li/MCl2 cells for various amounts of MCl2 in the catholyte (M= Co and Ni). (a) Li/(LiFSI-2G4/LAGTP/saturated NiCl2 and −2 LiCl aqueous solution (1:1 vol. ratio)/Ni cells)-50 vol. % DOL at 4 mA cm ◦ and 60 C and (b) Li/Li/4M LiFSI in DME/LAGTP/CoCl2 and LiCl aqueous solution (1:1 vol, ratio)/Co cells at 0. % DOL at 4 mA cm ◦ and 60 C and (b) Li/Li/4M LiFSI in DME/LAGTP/CoCl2 and LiCl aqueous solution (1:1 vol, ratio)/Co cells at 0.5 mA cmFigure 6.5 mA cmFigure 6. Cycle performance for Li/(LiFSI-2G4)-50 vol. % DOL/LAGTP/saturated MCl2 and LiCl aqueous solution (1:1 vol. ratio)/M. (a) M = Co at 1. (a) M = Co at 1.0 mA ◦ cm2 and 25C, and (d) M = Ni at 4.0 mA ◦ cm2 and 25C, and (d) M = Ni at 4.0 mA cm2 and 60 ◦Figure 8.0 mA cm2 and 60 ◦Figure 8. Dependence of speciﬁc energy density on the speciﬁc area capacity for Li/CoCl2, Li/NiCl2 and C/LiCoO2, where the respective utilization of CoCl2 and NiCl2 of 78 and 100% was used for the calculations.

Park et al.27 reported the dependence of the speciﬁc energy density on the area speciﬁc capacity of Li-ion, Li-S and Li-air batteries, where the speciﬁc energy density of a Li-ion battery with a LiCoO2 cathode −1 at 6 mAh and carbon anode became almost saturated at 380 Wh kg −2.27 reported the dependence of the speciﬁc energy density on the area speciﬁc capacity of Li-ion, Li-S and Li-air batteries, where the speciﬁc energy density of a Li-ion battery with a LiCoO2 cathode −1 at 6 mAh and carbon anode became almost saturated at 380 Wh kg −2.

The cell speciﬁc energy densities of the Li/CoCl2 and Li/NiCl2 cm cells were calculated based on the mass of the components (except the packaging) and were compared with that calculated by Park et al. for a C/LiCoO2 cell, and the results are shown in Figure 8 as a function of the speciﬁc area capacity, where the thickness of the key LAGTP material for the calculation was 0. for a C/LiCoO2 cell, and the results are shown in Figure 8 as a function of the speciﬁc area capacity, where the thickness of the key LAGTP material for the calculation was 0.1 mm, the ratio of cathode active material in electrode was 0.1 mm, the ratio of cathode active material in electrode was 0.9.9. and the lithium anode capacity was two times greater than that of the cathode active material. The 0. The 0.1 mm thick LAGTP ﬁlm exhibits an acceptable 3-point bending strength of 120 MPa.14 The speciﬁc energy densities of Li/CoCl2 and Li/NiCl2 −1, at an area capacity of 200 mAh cm respectively.

We have proposed a novel high energy density rechargeable battery with a lithium metal anode and a MCl2 (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and Zn) aqueous cathode. The anode and catholyte were separated by a high lithium-ion conducting solid electrolyte of Li1. 

The anode and catholyte were separated by a high lithium-ion conducting solid electrolyte of Li1.4Al0.4Al0.4Ge0.4Ge0.2Ti1.2Ti1.4(PO4)3.4(PO4)3. −2 and Flat discharge and charge curves were observed at 1. −2 and Flat discharge and charge curves were observed at 1.0 mA cm room temperature for the Li/MCl2 (M = Co, Ni, and Zn) cells. 

The reaction products of Co and Ni were stable in the saturated MCl2-LiCl (M = Co and Ni) aqueous solutions, while that of Zn was unstable in the saturated ZnCl2-LiCl aqueous solution. The cell performance with the lithium anode and liquid aqueous cathode showed no dependence on the charged amount of MCl2. The cell performance with the lithium anode and liquid aqueous cathode showed no dependence on the charged amount of MCl2. The Li/NiCl2 cell showed excellent −2. The Li/NiCl2 cell showed excellent −2. performance with a speciﬁc area capacity as high as 94 mAh cm The speciﬁc energy densities of Li/CoCl2 and Li/NiCl2 at an area −1, respectively, capacity of 200 mAh cm which are around 2 times higher than that of a conventional Li-ion −1). We could thus expect that the driving range battery (328 Wh kg for EVs with the Li/MCl2 (M = Co and Ni) cell would be acceptable.

