A NaSICON-type Li+-ion conductive membrane with a formula of  Li1+xYxZr2−x(PO4)3 (LYZP) (x = 0–0.A NaSICON-type Li+-ion conductive membrane with a formula of  Li1+xYxZr2−x(PO4)3 (LYZP) (x = 0–0.15) has been explored as a solid-electrolyte/ separator to suppress polysulfide-crossover in lithium-sulfur (Li-S) batteries.  The LYZP membrane with a reasonable Li+-ion conductivity shows both  favorable chemical compatibility with the lithium polysulfide species and  exhibits good electrochemical stability under the operating conditions of the  Li-S batteries. Through an integration of the LYZP solid electrolyte with the  liquid electrolyte, the hybrid Li-S batteries show greatly enhanced cyclability  in contrast to the conventional Li-S batteries with the porous polymer (e.g.,  Celgard) separator.

At a rate of C/5, the hybrid LiLi2S6 batteries  developed in this study (with a Li-metal anode, a liquid/LYZP hybrid electrolyte, and a dissolved lithium polysulfide cathode) delivers an initial discharge  capacity of ≈1000 mA h g−1 (based on the active sulfur material) and retains  ≈90% of the initial capacity after 150 cycles with a low capacity fade-rate of  <0.At a rate of C/5, the hybrid LiLi2S6 batteries  developed in this study (with a Li-metal anode, a liquid/LYZP hybrid electrolyte, and a dissolved lithium polysulfide cathode) delivers an initial discharge  capacity of ≈1000 mA h g−1 (based on the active sulfur material) and retains  ≈90% of the initial capacity after 150 cycles with a low capacity fade-rate of  <0.07% per cycle.

Rechargeable  batteries  with  the  lithium­sulfur  chemistry  are  gaining  overwhelming  attention  as  one  of  the  most  prom­ ising  candidates  for  next­generation  electrochemical  energy  storage systems.

 Coupling the  sulfur cathode with a theoret­ ical  capacity  of  1675  mA  g−1  with  a  lithium­metal  anode  with  a theoretical capacity of 3800 mA g−1, the lithium­sulfur (Li­S)  battery system can deliver a significantly high energy density of  ≈2600 Wh kg−1 (Li + S) at an average voltage of 2.[1] Coupling the  sulfur cathode with a theoret­ ical  capacity  of  1675  mA  g−1  with  a  lithium­metal  anode  with  a theoretical capacity of 3800 mA g−1, the lithium­sulfur (Li­S)  battery system can deliver a significantly high energy density of  ≈2600 Wh kg−1 (Li + S) at an average voltage of 2.1 V.

As such,  the Li­S batteries have a strong potential to be a power source in  almost all application areas including small electronic devices,  electric  vehicles,  and  large­scale  stationary  energy  storage.

However,  despite  many  years  of  efforts  into  this  novel  battery  system, major technical obstacles still remain to be overcome.

The progress made with Li+­ion conductive solid electrolytes  based  on  inorganic  materials  provides  a  possibility  to  prevent  the migration of polysulfides into the Li­metal anode. The first  stage for integration of the solid electrolyte into the Li­S battery  system was based on a concept of “all­solid­state Li­S battery”.

However,  these  previous  endeavors  with  the  “all­solid­state”  approach were unfortunately not able to provide satisfactory cell  performances in terms of the utilization of the sulfur cathode,  cyclability of the Li­S cells etc.

It was realized that the liquid  electrolyte  would  still  be  necessary  in  the  polysulfide­involved  Li­S batteries. Therefore, the second stage for the advancement  of  Li­S  batteries  with  a  solid­electrolyte  was  the  recently  pro­ posed  approaches  based  on  a  “hybrid­electrolyte  (or  dual­elec­ trolyte)”  concept.

In  such  a  “hybrid”  Li­S  battery  system,  the  solid electrolyte played both as a separator/shield to prevent the  polysulfide diffusion and as a Li+­ion conductor for the electro­ chemical reaction. The liquid electrolyte here served as an ionic  medium  not  only  for  the  redox  reactions  of  sulfur­polysulfide­ sulfide within the cathode, but also to maintain the ionic path at  the electrode/solid­electrolyte interface.

Herein we exploit an alternative NaSICON­type Li+­ion con­ ductive membrane with a general formula of Li1+xYxZr2−x(PO4)3  (LYZP)  as  a  solid­electrolyte/separator  to  address  the  poly­ sulfide­crossover  issue  in  Li­S  batteries.  The  LYZP  membrane  prepared with the inexpensive zirconium as the major element  and  with  a  series  of  facile  solid­state  reactions  show  favorable  chemical/electrochemical  compatibility  with  the  cell  compo­ nents under the operating conditions of the Li­S batteries. Inte­ gration of the LYZP solid electrolyte significantly enhances the  cyclability of the Li­S batteries.

Preparation of the dense LYZP membranes is as detailed in the  Experimental  Section  through  a  series  of  solid  state  reactions  and  a  series  of  molding–sintering  processes.  

After  the  final  process,  the  surface  of  the  as­prepared  membrane  had  lots  of  impurities such as ZrO2 and Y(PO4)3 (Figure 1a). Upon removal  of  the  skin  layer,  the  LYZP  pellets  showed  pure  NaSICON  phase  with  a  well­crystalized  rhombohedral  NaSICON  struc­ ture, as reflected in Figure 1a. It should be noted that the X­ray  diffraction (XRD) pattern shown in Figure 1a was obtained with  a  membrane  prepared  under  the  optimized  conditions.

Actu­ ally, the phase purity of the LYZP membrane was very sensitive  to  the  synthesis/processing  conditions  such  as  sintering  tem­ perature, sintering duration, and the excess amount of lithiumprecursor,  as  deliberated  with  Figure  S1  in  the  Supporting  Information. 

Figure 1b shows the scanning electron microscope  (SEM) image of the cross­section of the LYZP membrane, from  which  we  can  see  that  the  particles  are  in  good  contact  with  each other in spite of some pin holes existing in the membrane.  The density of LYZP membrane obtained under the optimized  conditions  was ≈96%  of  its  theoretical  density.  Distribution  of  the  elements  was  characterized  with  energy  dispersive  X­ray  spectroscopy (EDS) in an area of the cross­section of the mem­ brane, as provided in Figure S2 in the Supporting Information.  

Y,  Zr,  P,  and  O  were  homogeneously  distributed  in  the  LYZP  membrane.  Since  Li  is  not  detectable  with  the  EDS,  the  map­ ping of Li is not provided in Figure S2 in the Supporting Infor­ mation. The EDS spectrum of the LYZP membrane is provided  in Figure S3 in the Supporting Information, in which the peaks  of Y, Zr, P, and O are clearly seen. The atomic ratio of Y, Zr, P,  and O is summarized in Table S1 in the Supporting Informa­ tion, and based on the ratio, the x value in Li1+xYxZr2−x(PO4)3 is  estimated to be x ≈0. The atomic ratio of Y, Zr, P,  and O is summarized in Table S1 in the Supporting Informa­ tion, and based on the ratio, the x value in Li1+xYxZr2−x(PO4)3 is  estimated to be x ≈0.11.11. The conductivity of the membrane was  estimated  by  fitting  the  electrochemical  impedance  spectrum  (Figure 1c) with an equivalent circuit shown in Figure S4 in the  Supporting Information according to a recent relevant study of  the solid state electrolyte.

 At 25 °C, the optimized conductivity  of  the  LYZP  membrane  was  ≈2.[9] At 25 °C, the optimized conductivity  of  the  LYZP  membrane  was  ≈2.5  ×  10−5  S  cm−1.5  ×  10−5  S  cm−1.  The  conduc­ tivity value of the LYZP membrane is able to sustain a reason­ able  cycling  rate  of  the  Li­S  batteries  in  this  study.  However,  a  higher  conductivity  is  always  desired,  and  future  work  with  the  sparkling  plasma  sintering  process  may  be  able  to  further  improve the ionic conductivity, as compared in Table S2 in the  Supporting Information.

The  hybrid­electrolyte  Li­S  batteries  were  prepared  with  a  lithium­foil  anode  and  a  dissolved  polysulfide  (in  a  normal­ ized  form  of  Li2S6,  named  as  catholyte  in  this  study)  cathode.  A  free­standing  activated  carbon  nanofiber  (CNF) paper was used as the electrode­matrix  to  accommodate  the  polysulfide  catholyte.  

The  lithium  anode  and  the  liquid­phase  polysulfide  cathode  were  separated  by  a  piece  of  LYZP  membrane  as  schematized  in  Figure  2a.  The  LYZP  membrane  here  serves  both as a separator to electrically insulate the  anode/cathode  and  as  a  Li+­ion  conductive  electrolyte  to  sustain  the  Li+­ion  transport.  In  order  to  build  up  a  facile  ionic  interface,  according  to  our  previous  study,[8b]  a  piece  of  polypropylene  (PP)  thin  film  (25  μm  thick)  was  inserted  as  an  interlayer  between  the  Li­foil  anode  and  the  LYZP  separator  to  hold  a  thin­layer  of  liquid  electrolyte  com­ pressing  1.  

In  order  to  build  up  a  facile  ionic  interface,  according  to  our  previous  study,[8b]  a  piece  of  polypropylene  (PP)  thin  film  (25  μm  thick)  was  inserted  as  an  interlayer  between  the  Li­foil  anode  and  the  LYZP  separator  to  hold  a  thin­layer  of  liquid  electrolyte  com­ pressing  1.0  m  LiCF3SO3  (with  or  without  0.0  m  LiCF3SO3  (with  or  without  0.1  m  LiNO3)  dissolved  in  1:1  (volume  ratio)  dimethoxy  ethane/1,3­dioxolane  (DEM/DOL)  mixture solvent.Based on our experience,[8b]  the  polypropylene  thin  film  used  here  playsFigure 1.Based on our experience,[8b]  the  polypropylene  thin  film  used  here  playsFigure 1.  a) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the prepared LYZP membrane before and after  surface-polishing.  b)  Scanning  electron  microscopy  (SEM)  image  of  the  LYZP  membrane  in  cross-section. c) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy of the LYZP membrane.

an important role to ensure the cycling performances of the Li­ metal­anode  batteries  with  a  solid  electrolyte.  It  helps  to  build  a  facile  ionic  path  between  the  Li­metal  and  the  solid  electro­ lyte by holding a thin layer of liquid electrolyte for the transport  of Li+ ions at the interface.

The Li­S battery fabricated in the  above manner (termed as IILYZPII 2S6 battery) was in an inter­ mediate  discharge–charge  state  with  an  open  circuit  voltage  (OCV)  of  ≈2.[8b] The Li­S battery fabricated in the  above manner (termed as IILYZPII 2S6 battery) was in an inter­ mediate  discharge–charge  state  with  an  open  circuit  voltage  (OCV)  of  ≈2.3  V.  With  the  intermediate  charge–discharge  product  (Li2S6)  as  the  starting  sulfur­source  at  the  cathode,  this cell can either be first discharged or be first charged with  a  single  voltage  plateau,  respectively,  in  the  initial  discharge  or the initial charge profile (Figure 2b). After either a first dis­ charge or a first charge, the voltage profiles of the cell show the  normal  two­plateau  characteristics  as  that  for  the  regular  Li­S  batteries with the elemental sulfur as the starting cathode.

Figure  2c  shows  the  cyclic­voltammogram  (CV)  profiles  of  the Li IILYZPII Li2S6 cell with the potential initially swept in a  negative direction from the OCV (≈2.Figure  2c  shows  the  cyclic­voltammogram  (CV)  profiles  of  the Li IILYZPII Li2S6 cell with the potential initially swept in a  negative direction from the OCV (≈2.3 V) to 1.3 V) to 1.5 V to discharge  the  cell.  

Then,  ten  full  cyclic  scans  were  performed  between  1.  Then,  ten  full  cyclic  scans  were  performed  between  1.5  and  3.5  and  3.0  V.  The  single  discharge  wave  in  the  first  half­scan  and the anodic/cathodic waves in the following full CV profiles  are  consistent  with  the  discharge–charge  characteristics  of  the  Li  IILYZPII  Li2S6  cell  as  shown  in  Figure  2b. 

 In  addition,  as  seen in Figure 2c, the CV profiles for the initial 1.  In  addition,  as  seen in Figure 2c, the CV profiles for the initial 1.5 cycles exhib­ ited  an  anodic  peak  with  a  relatively  more  positive  potential  and  the  cathodic  peaks  with  a  relatively  more  negative  poten­ tial  in  comparison  to  those  in  the  following  cycles. 

 After  the  second  cycle,  there  are  no  obvious  differences  in  the  potential  positions.  The  above  phenomena  indicate  that  the  cells  need  a  full  electrochemical  cycle  for  pre­conditioning.Figure  S5  in  the Supporting Information compares the CV profiles (the 5thcycle) of the Li IILYZPII Li2S6 cell and a Li/Li2S6 cell with the  conventional Celgard separator (termed as Li IICelgardII Li2S6  cell).  In  contrast,  use  of  the  LYZP  solid  electrolyte  shifts  the  anodic  wave  to  a  high­voltage  direction  and  the  two  cathodic  peaks to the low­voltage direction. In addition, relatively sharper  waves are observed for the Li IICelgardII Li2S6 cell either in the  anodic  or  in  the  cathodic  scans.  The  above  CV  characteristics  for  the  Li  IILYZPII  Li2S6  cell  are  supposed  to  be  attributed  to  the  relatively  sluggish  kinetics  of  the  Li+­ion  transport  in  the  solid electrolyte in contrast to that in the liquid electrolyte.

Figure  2d  presents  the  rate  capabilities  of  the  Li  IILYZPII  Li2S6  cells  with  the  charge–discharge  profiles  obtained  at  dif­ ferent  C­rates  (the  3rd  cycle  in  each  case  are  shown  here  for  a  comparison).  

Upon  normalized  with  the  net  sulfur  in  the  cathode,  the  specific  discharge  capacities  of  the  Li  IILYZPII  Li2S6  cells  at  C/10,  C/5,  C/3,  and  C/2  rates  are,  respectively,  ≈1100, ≈1000, ≈880, and ≈780 mA h g−1 based on sulfur. With  a  150  μm  thick  LYZP  membrane,  the  Li  IILYZPII  Li2S6  cells  showed reasonable rate capability. 

With the progress of the fab­ rication techniques, the thickness of the LYZP membrane can  be further reduced. With a thinner LYZP membrane, the over­ potential  of  the  cells  is  expected  to  be  even  lower  than  the  results shown in Figure 2d and the cells will be able to sustain  even  higher  discharge–charge  rates.  Due  to  the  poor  conduc­ tivity  of  the  charge/discharge  products  at  the  cathode  and  the  resistivity  of  the  ionic  transport  within  the  hybrid  electrolyte  (as  well  as  that  at  the  electrode–electrolyte  interface),  the  cells  exhibit  increasing  voltage  gaps  between  charge  and  discharge  with  an  increase  in  the  charge–discharge  rates.

The  3rd­cycle  charge–discharge  profiles  for  the  Li  IICelgardII  Li2S6  cells  cycled  at  different  C­rates  are  provided  in  Figure  S6  in  theSupporting  Information.  The  discharge  capacities  of  the  Li  IICelgardII Li2S6 cells at the corresponding rates are generally  a  little  higher  than  those  for  the  Li  IILYZPII  Li2S6  cells  (com­ parison of Figure 2d and Figure S6 in the Supporting Informa­ tion). However, the benefits of using the LYZP solid electrolyte  are by no means for the initial cycling performances of the Li­S  batteries.

Figure  2e,f  compare  the  prolonged  cycling  performances  of  the  Li  IILYZPII  Li2S6  cells  and  the  Li  IICelgardII  Li2S6  cells.  Although  the  Li  IICelgardII  Li2S6  cell  shows  relatively  higher  initial  discharge  capacity  relative  to  those  of  the  Li  IILYZPII  Li2S6  cells,  capacity  decline  of  the  Li  IICelgardII  Li2S6  cell  is  significantly  faster  than  those  of  the  Li  IILYZPII  Li2S6  cells.  Within  the  60­cycle  frame,  the  Li  IICelgardII  Li2S6  cell  shows  superior  performance  compared  to  the  Li  IILYZPII  Li2S6  cell.  

However,  with  prolonged  cycling,  the  benefit  from  the  LYZP  membrane is more and more significant. Table 1 summarizes  the  initial  capacities,  150­cycle  capacities,  capacity  retention,  and the fade­rate of capacity for the Li IILYZPII Li2S6 and the  Li  IICelgardII  Li2S6  cells  at  C/5  rate.  The  capacity  fade  rate  of  the  Li  IICelgardII  Li2S6  cell  is  ≈7. 

 The  capacity  fade  rate  of  the  Li  IICelgardII  Li2S6  cell  is  ≈7.5  times  of  the  Li  IILYZPII  Li2S6 cell. From Figure 2f, no significant difference is observed  in  the  Coulombic  efficiencies  between  the  Li  IILYZPII  Li2S6  cells and the Li IICelgardII Li2S6 cells during the first 30 cycles.  After that, however, the Coulombic efficiencies of the cells with  the Celgard membrane starts to continuously decline.Whereas  the  Li  IILYZPII  Li2S6  cells  show  stable  Coulombic  efficienciesthroughout  the  150  cycles.  It  should  be  mentioned  that  after  ≈180  cycles,  the  capacity  fade  of  the  Li  IILYZPII  Li2S6  cell  started  to  be  faster  (>0.  It  should  be  mentioned  that  after  ≈180  cycles,  the  capacity  fade  of  the  Li  IILYZPII  Li2S6  cell  started  to  be  faster  (>0.07%  per  cycle),  most  likely  due  to  the  evaporation/consumption of the liquid electrolyte at the anode  based on our post­mortem analysis.

The  LYZP  membrane  in  the  hybrid  Li­S  batteries  has  a  “tri­ functional”  role  as  (1)  a  Lithium­ion  conductor,  (2)  an  elec­ trical insulator to separate the anode and the cathode, and (3) a  lithium polysulfide shield to prevent the diffusion of the soluble  polysulfides  from  the  positive  sulfur  electrode  to  the  negative  Li­metal electrode. The first two functions are similar to those  in the regular solid­electrolyte battery systems. 

The third role of  the LYZP membrane is a unique function, especially in the Li­S  batteries involving soluble intermediates (lithium polysulfides).  Figure  3  displays  the  polysulfide­retention  ability  of  the  LYZP  membrane tested with a simple experiment (as detailed in the  Experimental Section and in Figure S7 in the Supporting Infor­ mation).  As  expected,  the  LYZP  membranes  exhibit  a  super  effective  function  to  prevent  the  polysulfide  from  diffusing  through. 

There was no color change in the blank solvent (mix­ ture of DME/DOL) even after 30 d of test (Figure 3), indicating  no  migration  of  the  long­chain  polysulfides  from  the  upper  reservoir  to  the  opposite  side  DME/DOL  solution  through  the  LYZP membrane. For a comparison, the same test was also per­ formed with a piece of Celgard separator (Figure S8, Supporting  Information).  Unfortunately,  diffusion  of  the  polysulfides  was  observed within only 1 h of experiment (light yellow color was  observed for the DME/DOL solution).

As  a  general  scenario,  the  electrochemical  process  of  the  Li­S  battery  involves  a  series  of  soluble  polysulfide  inter­ mediate  products.The  negative  aspect  of  the  appearance  ofFigure 3.The  negative  aspect  of  the  appearance  ofFigure 3.  Polysulfide diffusion tests (as described in the Experimental Section) of the LYZP membrane after various resting times.

Figures  3  and  4  provide  information  about  the  polysulfide­ suppression  effect  of  the  LYZP  membrane  under  the  natural  gravity  and  the  chemical  compatibility  of  the  LYZP  material  with  the  polysulfide  species  under  non­electrochemical  pro­ cesses.  In  order  to  evaluate  the  polysulfide­blocking  ability  of  the  LYZP  separator  and  electrochemical  compatibility  of  the  LYZP  membrane  in  the  Li­S  batteries  under  the  cycling  con­ ditions,  a  series  of  post­mortem  analyses  were  performed  for  the LYZP membranes taken from the cycled Li IILYZPII Li2S6  cells. To verify that there is no polysulfide penetration through  the  LYZP  membrane,  cross­section  of  the  cycled  LYZP  sepa­ rator was analyzed with SEM/EDS, as presented in Figure 5a,b.  The elements zirconium, phosphor, oxygen, and yttrium origi­ nated  from  the  LYZP  material  are  also  shown  here  as  refer­ ences. There is no obvious sulfur signal observed in the line­ scan  profile  along  the  cross­sectional  area  of  the  cycled  LYZP  separator,  attesting  to  a  good  shield  of  the  LYZP  membrane  for  preventing  the  polysulfide­shuttle  during  the  operation  of  the  cell.  A  visual  examination  of  the  cycled  LYZP  membrane  (Figure  S9,  Supporting  Information)  indicates  that  there  is  no  color  change  of  the  membrane  after  cycling.  Its  electro­ chemical  stability  is  further  confirmed  by  the  XRD  analysis  that  there  is  no  phase  change  of  the  membrane  after  cycling  (Figure 5c).

In  the  traditional  Li­S  batteries  with  the  Celgard  separator,  it  is  well  known  that  the  LiNO3  additive  in  the  electrolyte  plays  a  critical  role  to  suppress  the  negative  effects  induced  by  the  polysulfide­shuttle behavior. For the Li IILYZPII Li2S6 batteries  in  this  study,  since  the  LYZP  membrane  can  circumvent  the  diffusion  of  the  dissolved  polysulfides  to  the  Li­metal  anode,  the  LiNO3  additive  is  expected  to  be  excluded  from  the  elec­ trolyte.To  verify  this  additional  benefit  from  the  use  of  LYZP  membranes, a hybrid Li IILYZPII Li2S6 cell and a Li IICelgardIIFigure 4.To  verify  this  additional  benefit  from  the  use  of  LYZP  membranes, a hybrid Li IILYZPII Li2S6 cell and a Li IICelgardIIFigure 4.  Chemical compatibility tests for the LYZP and LATP membranes  with  the  polysulfide  catholyte.  a)  A  picture  of  a  LATP  membrane.  Pictures of the LATP membrane b) after being submerged into a 0.  Pictures of the LATP membrane b) after being submerged into a 0.25 m Li2S6  catholyte  for  1  d  and  c)  rinsed  with  the  DME/DOL  solvent  afterward.   d) A picture of a LYZP membrane. Pictures of the LYZP membrane e) after  being submerged into a 0. Pictures of the LYZP membrane e) after  being submerged into a 0.25 m Li2S6 catholyte for 7 d and f) rinsed with  the DME/DOL solvent afterward. g) XRD patterns of the LATP membrane  before  and  after  being  soaked  with  the  0. g) XRD patterns of the LATP membrane  before  and  after  being  soaked  with  the  0.25  m  Li2S6  catholyte.  h)  XRD  patterns of the LYZP membrane before and after being soaked with the  0.  h)  XRD  patterns of the LYZP membrane before and after being soaked with the  0.25 m Li2S6 catholyte.

In summary, we presented a polysulfide­shuttle­free Li­S battery  study with a NaSICON­type Li+­ion conductive solid electrolyte,  Li1+xYxZr2−x(PO4)3x = 0–0.In summary, we presented a polysulfide­shuttle­free Li­S battery  study with a NaSICON­type Li+­ion conductive solid electrolyte,  Li1+xYxZr2−x(PO4)3x = 0–0.15.15. The LYZP membrane synthesized  with  a  facile  method  shows  a  reasonable  Li+­ion  conductivity  and  a  superior  polysulfide­retention  ability.  More  importantly,  the  LYZP  exhibits  both  chemical  compatibility  with  the  cell  components and electrochemical stability under the charge–dis­ charge conditions of the Li­S cells. With a strategically designed  ionic interface between the Li­anode and the LYZP membrane,  the hybrid Li­S batteries with the liquid/LYZP hybrid electrolyte  provide  both  a  reasonable  rate  capability  and  a  superior  long­ term cycling stability.

Synthesis/Preparation  of  the  NaSICON-Type  Li1+xYxZr1−x(PO4)3  (x  =  0–0.Synthesis/Preparation  of  the  NaSICON-Type  Li1+xYxZr1−x(PO4)3  (x  =  0–0.15) Membrane: The LYZP powder was synthesized through a series  of solid-state reactions with Li2CO3, NH4H2PO4, ZrO2, and Y2O3 as the  starting materials. First, a mixture of the above starting materials with a  proper ratio was ball-milled for 24 h, followed by a calcination process  at 750 °C for 24 h. Then the calcined powder was vibe-milled for 120 h.  After  this  process,  the  Brunauer–Emmett–Teller  (BET)  surface  area  of  the resulting LYZP powder was ≈8.  After  this  process,  the  Brunauer–Emmett–Teller  (BET)  surface  area  of  the resulting LYZP powder was ≈8.0 m2 g−1.0 m2 g−1.

With the synthesized LYZP powder, a green pellet was prepared by a  uniaxial  cold-pressing  at  100  MPa,  followed  by  an  isostatic  pressing  at  170 MPa. Then the obtained pellet was sintered at different temperatures  and for a variety of durations.

LATP  membrane  was  prepared  the  same  way  as  we  previouslyCharacterization:  The  SEM  images  and  elemental  mappings  of  the  materials  were  obtained  with  a  FEI  Quanta  600  instrument  equipped  with  an  EDS.  The  XRD  patterns  of  the  materials  were  obtained  with  CuKα  radiation  on  a  Philips  X-ray  diffractometer  with  a  step  width  of  0.  The  XRD  patterns  of  the  materials  were  obtained  with  CuKα  radiation  on  a  Philips  X-ray  diffractometer  with  a  step  width  of  0.02°  and  4  s  counting  time  per  each  step.  The  Li+-ion  conductivity  of  the  LYZP  solid-state  membrane  was  measured  with  the  traditional  AC  impedance  method  employing  two  blocking  stainless  steel  electrodes.  Prior to the impedance measurement, the LYZP membrane was coated  with  a  thin  layer  of  gold  on  each  side.  The  impedance  data  were  collected on a Solartron 1287 electrochemical system with the frequency  measured  from  106  to  10−1  Hz.  The  BET  surface  area  of  the  powder  materials  was  measured  with  a  Quantachrome  NOVA  2000  volumetric  adsorption analyzer.

Preparation  of  Cathode  Matrix,  Liquid  Electrolyte,  and  Polysulfide  Catholyte:  A  free-standing  (without  binder)CNF  paper  was  used  as  the  cathode  matrix  in  this  study.  Prior  to  the  cell  assembly,  the  CNF  paper  electrode  was  activated  with  a  heating  process  under  CO2  atmosphere.  The  original  CNF  powder  material  (PR-24-XT-PS)  was  purchased  from  Pyrograf  Products  Inc.  Fabrication  and  activation  of  the  CNF  paper  electrodes are as described in our previous publication.

[11] After activation,  the areal density of the final CNF paper electrode was 2.[11] After activation,  the areal density of the final CNF paper electrode was 2.0 mg cm−2.0 mg cm−2.

The  liquid  electrolyte  used  in  this  study  was  1.The  liquid  electrolyte  used  in  this  study  was  1.0  m  LiCF3SO3  (98%,  Acros Organics) dissolved in a mixed dimethoxyethane (Acros Organics)  and 1,3-dioxolane (Acros Organics) solvent with or without 0.0  m  LiCF3SO3  (98%,  Acros Organics) dissolved in a mixed dimethoxyethane (Acros Organics)  and 1,3-dioxolane (Acros Organics) solvent with or without 0.1 m LiNO3  (99%, Acros Organics) as the additive (named as blank electrolyte). The  lithium polysulfide (in the form of Li2S6) catholyte with 1. The  lithium polysulfide (in the form of Li2S6) catholyte with 1.5 m sulfur wasFigure 5.5 m sulfur wasFigure 5.  a) SEM image of the cycled LYZP membrane (upon 150 cycle)  in cross-section. b) Elemental distribution along the cross-sectional area  of the cycled LYZP membrane (as indicated with the yellow line in (a)).  c)  XRD  patterns  of  the  pristine  and  the  cycled  (after  150  cycles)  LYZP  membranes.

Li2S6  cell  were  prepared  and  tested  without  LiNO3  additive.  Figure 6a,b compare the charge–discharge profiles of the above  two cells at various C rates. As expected, due to the polysulfide­ shuttle effect, the Li IICelgardII Li2S6 cell exhibits a large time  difference  between  charge  and  discharge  in  each  cycle  which­ ever C rate is applied (Figure 6a). 

Therefore, without the LiNO3  additive,  the  Li  IICelgardII  Li2S6  cell  shows  much  lower  Cou­ lombic  efficiency  than  the  case  with  the  LiNO3  additive  (com­ parison  of  Figure  6c  to  Figure  2f).  On  the  other  hand,  for  the  Li  IILYZPII  Li2S6  cell,  the  charge­and  discharge  times  in  each  cycle  are  reasonably  “symmetric”  (Figure  6b).  

As  a  result,  no  obvious  difference  in  Coulombic  efficiencies  was  observed  for  the  Li  IILYZPII  Li2S6  cells  with  and  without  the  LiNO3  addi­ tive  (comparison  of  Figure  6c  to  Figure  2f).  Figure  6d  pre­ sents  the  discharge  capacity  as  a  function  of  cycle  number  for  the  Li  IILYZPII  Li2S6  cell  and  the  Li  IICelgardII  Li2S6  cell  prepared  without  the  LiNO3  additive.Also,  as  expected,  there  is  no  obvious  difference  in  the  discharge  capacity  throughout  cycling for the Li IILYZPII Li2S6 cells with or without the LiNO3prepared  the  same  way  as  that  in  our  previous  publication[12]  through  a  reaction  of  an  elemental  sulfur  (99.Also,  as  expected,  there  is  no  obvious  difference  in  the  discharge  capacity  throughout  cycling for the Li IILYZPII Li2S6 cells with or without the LiNO3prepared  the  same  way  as  that  in  our  previous  publication[12]  through  a  reaction  of  an  elemental  sulfur  (99.5%,  sublimed  powder,  Acos  Organics)  with  a  lithium  sulfide  (Li2S,  99.5%,  sublimed  powder,  Acros  Organics)  with  a  lithium  sulfide  (Li2S,  99.9%,  Acros  Organics)  in  the  blank  electrolyte  (1.9%,  Acros  Organics)  in  the  blank  electrolyte  (1.0  m  LiCF3SO3  in  DME/DOL  with  or  without  LiNO3  additive).

Polysulfide  Retention  Test:  Diffusion  of  the  dissolve  polysulfides  through  the  LYZP  membrane  or  the  Celgard  separator  was  visually  determined  with  a  simple  setup  (Figure  S7,  Supporting  Information).  For these experiments, a 4.  For these experiments, a 4.0 mL of 0.0 mL of 0.25  m Li2S6 catholyte (dissolved in  1:1  DME/DOL  solution)  was  filled  inside  a  transparent  container  with  a  piece  of  separator  (either  Celgard  or  LYZP)  embedded  in  the  cap  (Figure  S7,  Supporting  Information).  The  other  side  of  the  Celgard  or  LYZP  separator  was  a  beaker  filled  with  the  DME/DOL  blank  solvent.  During  the  permeation  tests,  the  entire  setup  was  kept  steady  without  any  external  movement.  The  color  change  of  the  blank  solvent  (DME/ DOL) was visually examined.

Coin Cell Assembly and Testing: The Li IILYZPII Li2S6 cells were prepared  with a coin-type configuration and were assembled in a glove box filled  with  argon  gas.  First,  a  certain  amount  of  Li2S6  catholyte  (with  or  without LiNO3 additive) was injected into the CNF paper electrode. The  sulfur loading was controlled at 2. The  sulfur loading was controlled at 2.0 mg cm−2.0 mg cm−2. Then, the LYZP membrane  (with  a  diameter  of  16  mm,  thickness  of  150  μm,  and  areal  density  of   ≈50  mg  cm−2)  was  put  on  top  of  the  CNF/Li2S6  cathode.Afterward,  a  piece  of  PP  membrane  (pre-soaked  with  the  LiCF3SO3/DME-DOLelectrolyte  with  or  without  LiNO3  additive)  was  placed  on  the  LYZP  separator.  Finally,  a  piece  of  Li-metal  foil  was  attached  onto  the  PP  membrane.  The  coin  cell  was  then  sealed  under  the  Ar  atmosphere  inside  the  glove  box.  The  battery  performances  were  tested  with  a  BT2000 Arbin instrument at ambient temperature.

