A pulse microreactor implanted directly into a gas chromatograph injector combined with a mass spectrometer has been proposed for monitoring the activity of heterogeneous catalysts. The microreactor was made of a standard commercial liner for a particular gas chromatograph and contained a catalytic bed. A heated injector oven was used simultaneously for heating the catalytic region, rapid evaporation of the substrate, and pulsed introduction of reaction products into a chromatographic column. The temperature of the oven could be varied in the range 200–300°C. The method ensures the detailed description of the qualitative composition of the reaction products. The potential of the proposed microreaction system was demonstrated in the study of membrane-type catalysts (nanodiamonds modified by Pt–Ru and Pt–Ni and also catalytic phosphate systems with NASICON structure) in reactions of cyclohexanol, cyclopentanol, and cyclobutanol. The studied heterogeneous catalysts can be divided in two groups. One group (based on nanodiamonds) promotes dehydrogenation reactions. The NASICON catalytic group catalyzes dehydration reactions with the formation of cycloalkenes and dicycloalkyl ethers.

Catalytic transformations of aliphatic and alicyclic alcohols  (dehydration,  dehydrogenation,  and  steam reforming)  are  used  for  the  preparation  of  various industrially important products and semiproducts (in particular, olefins; aldehydes; ethers; aromatic compounds;  solvents;  and  promising  ecologically  clean fuels, dimethyl ether and hydrogen). In this connection,  the  study  of  mechanisms  and  kinetics  of  such heterogeneous and catalytic transformations is of substantial  scientific  interest.  Such  studies  were  repeatedly performed by  13C NMR spectrometry, IR spectroscopy, ESR, calorimetry, and other methods. With their  help  the  researcher  can  study  some  aspects  of reactions  proceeding  on  heterogeneous  catalysts; however,  the  overall  mechanisms  of  these  complex processes  often  cannot  be  determined.  The  key moment in the study of catalytic transformations is the qualitative and quantitative analysis of reaction products, based on which one can determine the degree of substrate conversion, the selectivity of the processes, and the yield of particular products.

A  combination  of  microcatalytic  systems  with  a mass spectrometer can be quite useful in comprehensive  studies  of  heterogeneous  catalytic  processes.Inthis  case,  processes  of  catalytic  transformation  and also  the  detection,  identification,  and  quantitative determination of the reaction products are performed in the real time (on-line). Combinations of microcatalytic reactors with mass spectrometers have rather long history  [1,  2].  Systems  in  which  a  microreactor  is directly interfaced with an ion source of a mass spectrometer  are  used  most  often.  An  advantage  of  such combinations is a possibility of the detection of shortliving reaction products. Mass spectrometers with the rapid registration of spectra, for example, with quadrupole  mass  analyzers  [3–5],  or  time-of-flight  mass spectrometers  are  particularly  useful  in  such  studies [6]. However, we should emphasize that the processing of the resulting mass spectra, representing sums of spectra of all reaction products, is a quite difficult task and in some cases cannot be fulfilled with the reliable identification  of  substances.  In  this  connection,  the implantation of a pulse microcatalytic reactor directly into the injection port of a gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer  is  much  more  efficient.  Such  design allows the researcher to perform catalytic transformations of the substrate, gas chromatographic separation of the reaction products, and the mass spectrometric analysis  of  components  within  one  experiment.

Among the advantages of this system is a possibility of the rapid monitoring of the activity of heterogeneous catalysts with respect to substrates of different nature. For example, a new reaction of the reductive diand oligomerization of alicyclic alcohols and ketones and also of alkylaromatic alcohols and aldehydes to hydrocarbons  in  the  presence  of  hydrogen  and  a  fused reduced  iron  catalyst  was  discovered  using  this approach [7]. In the case of cycloalkanol and cycloalkanone, this reaction led to the formation of di-, tri-, and sometimes tetracyclic fused hydrocarbons, which are  of  interest  as  efficient  fuels.  A  combination  of  a microreactor with a GC/MS system was successfully used for the study of the mechanism of cycloalkanone hydrogenation to alcohols on a fused iron catalyst [8]. In this case, the carrier gas and the reductant gas was deuterium.  In  the  determination  of  the  place  of  the appearance of a deuterium label by mass spectrometry, additional silylation of the reaction products, also in  the  on-line  mode,  was  performed  using  a  special inlet built into the microreactor. One more example of using a system microreator–GC/MS was described in the work [9] on the study of the oligomerization of 1butene and the cracking of n-hexane in the presence of heterogeneous catalysts. Microreactors for the screening of catalytic systems have been proposed recently and are produced commercially.

For the rapid screening of the activity of catalysts in heterogeneous catalytic gas-phase reactions, we propose the use of a microreactor system, directly built into  the  injector  of  a  gas  chromatograph  interfaced with a mass spectrometer. This system ensures the fast replacement of the microreactor cell with the heterogeneous catalyst, variation of temperature in the range from  200  to  300°C,  and  the  pulsed  injection  of  the substrate.  The  proposed  approach  allows  the researcher to avoid the use of external reactors and, as a result, problems associated with the transportation of the  products  of  catalytic  transformations  to  the  gas chromatograph. The test objects were membrane catalysts  of  different  types  and  the  substrates  were cycloalkanols  (cyclohexanol,  cyclopentanol,  and cyclobutanol).

We  used  cyclohexanol,  cyclopentanol,  and cyclobutanol (Alfa Aesar, Great Britain) as substrates.

The  existence  of  crystallographic  centers  with different  coordination  numbers  favors  ion  substitutions and variation of catalytic and other properties of the NZP. •nanodimensional  Ru/TiO2/Al2O3  system.  The  nanodimensional  catalytic  Ru/TiO2/Al2O3  system  was synthesized by the method of molecular layering (ML) based on irreversible interactions between low-molecular reagents and functional groups of the surface of a solid  substrate  under  the  conditions  of  continuous reagent  supply  and  the  removal  of  the  formed  gasphase products. Synthesis was carried out directly in a flow reactor at 180°C by sequentially treating an aluminum oxide matrix with TiCl4 and water vapors. The gas-phase  hydrolysis  of  chlorine-containing  compounds led to the replacement of chlorine with OHgroups,  followed  by  their  partial  condensation.  This gave catalytic nanolayers on the surface; their thickness  was  determined  by  the  number  of  ML  cycles rather than by the time of synthesis, because less than one monolayer of new structural units formed on the surface within one ML cycle. Ruthenium was applied from a ruthenium chloride solution in dimethylformamide,  followed  by  calcination  at  450°C  in  a  flow  of hydrogen. The obtained catalyst contained 1. The obtained catalyst contained 1.2 wt % Ru on alumina modified by titanium oxide.

In this work, we used a pulse heterogeneous catalytic microreactor (Fig. 1), built into the injector of a gas  chromatograph/mass  spectrometer  (Finnigan MAT  95  XL  with  an  Agilent  6890+  gas  chromatograph).  The  microreactor  was  made  of  a  standard commercial liner for the specified gas chromatograph with a 1-cm catalyst layer placed between quartz wool tampons. Then the necessary temperature conditions were  set  and  an  alkanol  (0. Then the necessary temperature conditions were  set  and  an  alkanol  (0.05  μ L)  was  pulsewise injected with no solvent using a microsyringe.Vapors of the products of alcohol conversion under a pressure of a carrier gas (helium) were delivered directly to thechromatographic  column  (Varian  VF-5MS,  30  m  × 0.Vapors of the products of alcohol conversion under a pressure of a carrier gas (helium) were delivered directly to thechromatographic  column  (Varian  VF-5MS,  30  m  × 0.25  mm  ×  0.25  mm  ×  0.25  μ m).  The  conditions  of  chromatographic separation were as follows: initial temperature 50°C, isotherm for 1 min, heating to 290°C at a rate of 5K/min. Mass spectra of the reaction products were recorded in the electron ionization mode (ionization energy 70 eV); identification was performed using the NIST 14 mass spectral database [13].

General  principles  of  the  method.  The  proposed microreactor system (Fig.1) is based on the use of anindustrial glass liner for chromatographs, in which a catalyst  layer  is  placed.  Such  a  microreactor  is  built into a chromatograph injector instead of a necessary liner. The catalysis zone is heated with the same furnace that simultaneously provides the evaporation of the liquid substrate and the delivery of its vapors to a capillary  gas  chromatographic  column.  Preliminary tests showed that the material of the liner and quartz wool  demonstrated  no  catalytic  activity  to  cycloalkanes  in  the  temperature  range  used  in  the  experiments.

Scheme 1.Scheme 1. Possible pathways of the formation of fused hydrocarbons from cyclohexanol.

When  selecting  the  experimental  conditions,  we supposed that the degree of conversion of the substrate in a catalytic gas-phase reaction depends on the dispersity of the catalyst and on the length of the reaction zone (in our case, height of the catalyst layer). All of the studied catalysts had close dispersities; therefore, before  the  experiments  we  experimentally  selected  a certain  optimum  height  of  the  catalyst  layer  (about 1 cm) on an example of the LiZr2(PO4)3 catalyst. This length of catalytic zone did not ensure the complete conversion of the substrate, but minimized the diffusion of the elution zones of reaction products from the gas chromatographic column, which could be due to rather low reaction rates and the reduced desorption of reaction  products  at  corresponding  temperatures  of catalysis.  Problems  with  the  analysis  of  chromatograms  caused  by  the  low  symmetry  of  chromatographic  peaks  and  the  existence  of  tails  in  their descending sections were solved because of the presence of such software tools as selected ion monitoring and deconvolution codes, in particular, AMDIS. As a result, we could reliably identify the reaction products and, in most cases, find or propose their structures by the recorded mass spectra.

Let us note a drawback of the proposed microreactor system. The most suitable temperature range covers  200–300°C.  However,  many  heterogeneous  and catalytic reactions proceed in this temperature range.The  transfer  of  liquid  substances  into  the  gas  phase also usually proceeds at the same temperatures in theinjector of a gas chromatograph in the pulse injection of samples.

Fig. 1. 1. Scheme of arrangement of a pulse microreactor in the injector of an Agilent 6890+ chromatograph.

Scheme 2.Scheme 2. Possible pathways of the formation of dibenzofuran and its hydrogenated analogs.

Scheme 3.Scheme 3. Scheme of fragmentation of a compound identified as octahydrodibenzofuran under electron ionization.

In this work, we did not study the possibility of the proposed  method  for  the  quantitative  estimation  of the yield of one or another reaction product and used it only to obtain a qualitative picture of the conversion of  the  chosen  substrates  (cyclohexanol,  cyclopentanol, and cyclobutanol) on some membrane catalysts in an inert (helium) atmosphere. The reason was that the elution  zones  of  analytes  were  diffuse,  which  led  to considerable errors in the determination of the integral values  of  areas  under  the  corresponding  chromatographic  peaks.  In  the  processing  of  chromatograms, we found only approximate degrees of conversion of the initial alcohols.

Catalytic transformations of cyclohexanol. Figure 2 presents  an  example  of  a  chromatogram  recorded when cyclohexanol was brought into contact with one of the studied catalysts. The composition of reaction products formed in the presence of different catalysts at two temperatures is given in Table 1. The composition of reaction products formed in the presence of different catalysts at two temperatures is given in Table 1.One can clearly see in Table 1 that the degree of cyclohexanol conversion increased with temperature, whereas the qualita-Time, minFig. 2. 2. A chromatogram (total ion current) of the products of cyclohexanol transformations in the presence of a nanodiamond/Pt–Ru (1%) catalyst at 300°C.

In the case of cyclohexanol, the catalysts we studied  promoted  two  types  of  reactions,  dehydration and/or  dehydrogenation.  Dehydration  with  the  formation of cyclohexene is the predominant reaction for phosphate  systems,  demonstrating  acid  and  base properties, as was shown in [12]. Another anticipated dehydration  product,  dicyclohexyl  ether,  also  sometimes formed in insignificant amounts.

Catalysts based on nanodiamonds, including those modified by metals, expectedly promoted the primary dehydrogenation  of  cyclohexanol  to  cyclohexanone. The dehydration process with the formation of cyclohexene and dicyclohexyl ether proceeded only in some cases and to a very low degree. The formation of minor components,  such  as  fused  hydrocarbons  (biphenyl and its hydrogenated analogs), and also dibenzofuran and products of its hydrogenation was quite interesting.  Fused  hydrocarbons  formed  obviously  in  the transformations of cyclohexanone, which was always the main product in contact of cyclohexanol with catalysts based on nanodiamonds. It is likely that the first stage  was  the  dehydrogenation  of  cyclohexanol  to cyclohexanone followed by the aldol or crotonic condensation of the latter substance (Scheme 1), which can evidently be a consequence of thermal treatment, though it was previously noted only for a catalyst surface bearing acid–base sites [7].

The nanodimensional Ru/TiO2/Al2O3 system provides both dehydration and the subsequent dehydrogenation  of  cyclohexanol.  As  a  result,  the  reaction product at both temperatures of catalysis appears to be only benzene.

Dibenzofuran  and  its  hydrogenated  analogs  form most probably from dicyclohexyl ether as a result of intermolecular cyclization followed by dehydrogenation (Scheme 2).

Not all products of cyclohexanol conversion could be identified by the NIST database because of the lack of corresponding mass spectra.

Nanodiamond/ Pt–Ni (1%) LiZr2(PO4)3 Ca0.Nanodiamond/ Pt–Ni (1%) LiZr2(PO4)3 Ca0.5Ti2(PO4)3 CaCrTi2(PO4)3 Ca0.5Ti2(PO4)3 CaCrTi2(PO4)3 Ca0.75Cr0.75Cr0.5Ti2(PO4)3 Cu0.5Ti2(PO4)3 Cu0.5Ti2(PO4)3 CuCrTi(PO4)3 Nanodimensional  system Ru/TiO2/Al2O3At the “manual” interpretation of mass spectra, we also could not reliably determine the positions of double bonds in unsaturated reaction products.However, the analysis of mass spectra in some cases allowed us to  reliably  determine  the  overall  structure  of  com-pounds.  For  example,  the  mass  spectrum  shown  in Fig. 3 was not found in the NIST library, but the presence of characteristic peaks due to retrodiene decomposition allowed us to assign it to octahydrodibenzofuran (Scheme 3) with high probability.

Fig. 4. 4. A chromatogram (total ion current) of the products of cyclopentanol transformations in the presence of a nanodiamond/Pt–Ru (1%) catalyst at 300°C.

Table 2.Table 2. Results of catalytic transformations of cyclopentanol at 250°C and 300°C on different catalysts.

Catalytic  transformations  of  cyclopentanol.  The results of study of catalytic reactions of cyclopentanol in the same systems at two temperatures are summarized in Table 2 and partially in Fig. 4. 4. In this case, as for  cyclohexanol,  dehydration  or  dehydrogenation reactions also determined the main composition of the reaction products. For catalysts from the NASICON group, dehydration to cyclopentene was highly selective; sometimes dicyclopentyl ether was a minor pro-duct.

Catalysts based on nanodiamonds actually provide only the dehydrogenation of cyclopentanol to cyclopentanone. However, in this case, like for cyclohexanol,  fused  hydrocarbons  also  formed  in  small amounts. The reason for the proceeding of such reactions is obviously the same as for cyclohexanol.

The  nanodimensional  Ru/TiO2/Al2O3system allowed us to almost quantitatively convert cyclopentanol in  cyclopentene.  At  higher  temperatures,  the  last  substance  was  dehydrogenated  to  cyclopentadiene,  which reacted  with  ruthenium,  forming  di(cyclopentadienyl)ruthenium (it was identified by the NIST library).

The structures of products of the catalytic transformations of cyclopentanol were confirmed by comparing their spectra with mass spectra in the NIST library and also with the mass spectra presented in [7]. The structure  of  dicyclopentyl  ether  was  proposed  based on the analysis of the pathways of its decomposition under electron ionization (Fig. 5, Scheme 4) by analogy with dicyclohexyl ether.

Scheme 4.Scheme 4. Scheme of decomposition of dicyclopentyl ether under electron ionization.

Catalytic  transformations  of  cyclobutanol.  The nature of the catalytic transformations of cyclobutanol strongly differs from those noted for cyclohexanol and cyclopentanol. The main reason for this difference is the  high  strain  of  the  small  four-membered  ring, demonstrating a trend to ring opening under thermocatalytic  conditions  with  the  formation  of  isomeric open-chain  structures.  An  example  of  a  chromatogram recorded in contact of cyclobutanol with one of the catalysts is shown in Fig. 6. 6. The data on its transformations on different catalysts at two chosen temperatures are summarized in Table 3. The data on its transformations on different catalysts at two chosen temperatures are summarized in Table 3.

As was expected, the main products of cyclobutanol reactions on nanodiamonds and their metallized modifications  are  cyclobutanone  (dehydrogenation product) and its open-chain isomer, butanal.

Among  the  minor  components  are  dehydration products, dicyclobutyl ether, cyclobutylbutenyl ether, and also cyclobutylvinyl ether, forming in the cleavage of the cyclobutane ring by the retro [2+2] mechanism. The formation of butanone and butanol, which can be explained  by  ring  opening  with  the  intermolecular transfer of a hydrogen atom, was quite unexpected.

As was expected, the main product of cyclobutanol conversion in the presence of phosphate systems was dicyclobutyl ether. Products resulting from the opening  of  a  four-membered  cycle  also  formed  in  small amounts.

The majority of the products of cyclobutanol conversion  presented  in  Table  1  were  identified  by  the NIST database or using the “manual” interpretation of mass spectra. No mass spectrum of one of the main products,  dicyclobutyl  ether,  was  contained  in  the NIST library. However, the mass spectrum recorded by us and shown in Fig. 7 can be assigned to this substance with high probability.Actually, this compound by the nature of fragmentation on electron ionizationFig. 6. 6. A chromatogram (total ion current) of the products of cyclobutanol transformations in the presence of a nanodiamond/Pt–Ru (1%) catalyst at 300°C.

(Scheme  5)  is  very  close  to  di(1-methylcyclobutyl) ether,  whose  mass  spectrum  was  presented  in  the monograph [14].

Scheme 5.Scheme 5.The proposed scheme of fragmentationFig. 7. 7. A mass spectrum of dicyclobutyl ether (?).

The proposed experimental approach based on the implantation of a microcatalytic reactor directly into the injector of a gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer ensures the rapid screening of new catalytic systems in the temperature range 200–300°C with the identification  or  mass-spectrometric  determination  of  the structures  of  transformation  products  of  the  target compounds.The considered example of the study of the  activity  of  membrane  catalysts  in  reactions  with cyclohexanol, cyclopentanol, and cyclobutanol pointsto a possibility of the detailed description of qualitative structures of the reaction products.

The studied heterogeneous catalysts by their activity in cycloalkanol reactions can be clearly divided into two  groups.  One  of  them  (based  on  nanodiamonds and their metallized modifications) promotes mainly dehydrogenation  reactions.  At  the  same  time,  the other group (phosphate systems like NASICON) promotes dehydration with the formation of cycloalkenes and dicycloalkyl ethers.

These  data  can  be  used  for  the  prediction  of  the directions of catalytic processes in the next laboratory experiments.

