NASICON-type electrolyte is one of the possible solid-state electrolytes to be employed in solid-state energy devices. The Li1+xAlxSn2-xP3O12 NASICON-based solid electrolyte materials were fabricated us-ing the mechanochemical milling method at 650 °C for 8 h, where x is from 0 to 0.8. From the X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis, the crystallographic phases of the parent material and the partial aluminium (Al) substituted one have been veriﬁed. Site occupancy factor (s.o.f) studies from the XRD data reﬁne-ment illustrate that the material with x = 0.4 has a stoichiometry in good agreement with the nominal tin (Sn):aluminium (Al) ratio which is 8:2. Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) study was conducted to study the surface morphological properties revealing the homogenous single-crystalline structure in the sample with x = 0.4, which consists of particles of the smallest crystallite size of 3.77 nm among the investigated. The process of partial Al-substitution was further conﬁrmed by the energy dispersive X-ray (EDX). The material with x = 0.4 possesses the maximum conductivity value of 7.57 x 10-16 S·cm-11, which was improved up to 3.79 x 10-15 S·cm-11 by a silver paint treatment. The correlation between the microstructure and the ionic conductivity has been explained via the EDX and impedance analysis results. Ions were found to be the main charge carriers from the transference number analysis (TNM). Variation of relaxation in the dielectric study veriﬁes that Li1+xAlxSn2-xP3O12 obeys non-Debye characteristic. Patterns of dielectric results strengthened the trend of ionic conductivity.
As an effective way to overcome energy shortage and environ-mental pollution issues, lithium-ion (Li+) batteries have been studied for more than 30 years. Many applications e.g. electrical vehicles, electrical appliances and energy storages used the lithium-ion battery as their energy sources [1,2]. The conventional liquid electrolyte in the lithium-ion battery suffers from several drawbacks, such as the evaporation of the solvent, the ﬂammability, leakage of the electrolyte and the corrosion at the electrolyte/electrode interface [3]. One of the alternatives to overcome these problems is to implement solid electrolytes. A solid electrolyte is stable in the thermal and electrochemical aspects. Leakage problem that can cause corrosion at the metal part of any electrical devices can be avoided with the use of solid electrolyte [4]. This property makes the solid electrolyte a safer option over the liquid counter-part. As stated in the report by Botros et al. [5], the solid electrolyte is a material that can withstand vibration, shock and pressure. These characteristics are useful in high durable applications.Currently, solid electrolytes widely studied by researchers until now mainly are perovskite-type (Li3xLa2/3-xB1/3-2xTiO3), LISICON, polysulﬁde, garnet-type (Li7La2Zr2O12), and NASICON compounds among which, the NASICON-type solid electrolytes not only possess the lowest activation energy for the Li+ conduction but also exhibit water stability and a high Li+ conductivity [6]. The sodium super ionic conductor or NASICON has a unique characteristic where the parent structure can be modiﬁed. The chemical formula of the NASICON electrolyte is LiM2(PO4)3 where M is a tetravalent cation e.g. titanium (Ti), tin (Sn), zirconium (Zr), germanium (Ge) and hafnium (Hf) [7]. Giarola et al. [8] stated that the LiM2(PO4)3 parent material can be divided into two types. The ﬁrst type is LiM2(PO4)3 (M = Ti, Ge) with a rhombohedral symmetry structure while the second type is LiM2(PO4)3 (M = Zr, Hf, or Sn) with the triclinic phase and a lower symmetry structure. The structure of NASICON consists of PO4 tet-rahedron and MO6 octahedron linked by their corners that act as pathway for the Li+ ions to migrate from one electrode to another.The structural and electrical properties of the NASICON mate-rials are strongly dependent on the composition and elements used in the framework [9]. The NASICON compound can undergo partial substitution to enhance the electrical properties. Trivalent cation, A+3 such as gallium (Ga), Aluminium (Al), indium (In), yttrium (Y), scandium (Sc), vanadium (V), iron (Fe) or chromium (Cr) have been substituted for the M cation, resulting in a new chemical formula in the form of Li1+xAxM2-1x(PO4)3. This condition creates positive charge deﬁciency which is compensated by the Li+ ion [10]. Poly-crystalline materials of these compounds usually exhibit a low conductivity value due to the large grain boundary resistance. Several techniques have been used to increase the conductivity, such as employment of the sintering process, silicon doping, excessive lithium as well as the development of a glass-ceramic process [11].LiSn2P3O12 is known as one of the compounds that possess a NASICON-type structure. The framework of LiSn2P3O12 consists of three PO4 tetrahedra and two SnO6 octahedra which provide channels for the alkali ions to be conducted [12]. The Li+ ions can form complexation at two different sites: one in an octahedral oxygen environment, at the intersection of the three conduction channels (M1 site) and the other one, at each end of the conduction channels in a polyhedron of eight neighbouring oxygens (M2 site). As reported by Norhaniza et al. [13,14], the LiSn2P3O12 solid elec-trolyte possesses the conductivity value of ~10-17 S·cm-11. The au-thors used the mechanical milling method without any binding agent for its fabrication. Lazarraga et al. [15] reported that the parent compound of LiSn2P3O12 has a very low ionic conductivity of only ~10-110 S·cm-11. However, the works reported on LiSn2P3O12 are still insufﬁcient to enable it to reach the demands of industries and current technologies. In this work, the partial substitution method has been employed to improve the structural stability as well as the electrical properties of LiSn2P3O12. These were done by substituting Sn with Al according to the stoichiometry of Li1+xAlxSn2-xP3O12 where x = 0.2, 0.4, 0.6 and 0.8. The overall cost of the NASICON solid electrolyte preparation can be reduced with the use of Sn instead of Ge. Sn is less expensive than Ge and, moreover, Sn has a larger ionic radius which can enhance the gap for the Li+ ions to migrate [16]
Lithium oxide (Li2O) 99%, tin (IV) oxide (SnO2) 98%, ammonium dihydrogen phosphate (NH4H2PO4) 98% and aluminium oxide (Al2O3) 99.99% were procured from Aldrich. Stoichiometric mix-tures of the starting materials (SnO2,Li2O, NH4H2PO4 and Al2O3) were mixed using a planetary ball miller and then heated in a crucible (alumina) for 2 h at 700 °C. This pre-heating process was conducted to remove NH4 and H2O from NH4H2PO4 to obtain P2O5 [4]. The resultant mixtures were poured into a bowl with zirconium (Zr) balls. The milling process was done using a Fristch 7 ball miller for 80 h at 500 rpm. The Specac Hydraulic Press was used to pelletize the mixture at a pressure of 7 ton. The thickness of the samples were from 1 to 13 mm [9]. Samples were then sintered at temperatures between 550 and 950 °C for 8 h. This process was done to determine the optimum sintering temperature in order to obtain the optimum conductivity. It was observed that for each x value, the highest conductivity was obtained at the sintering tem-perature of 650 °C. The designation of the samples with x = 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6 and 0.8 was A0, A2, A4, A6 and A8, respectively. The sintered The structural properties of the samples were studied using the Bruker AXS D8 Advance X-ray Diffraction spectrometer with the CueK radiation of wavelength 1.5406 Å for 2q ranging between 10° and 90°. The structure of Li1+xAlxSn2-xP3O12 was matched with theR-3c structure of LiSn2P3O12. Rietveld Reﬁnements were also done on the samples by using the Xpert HighScore Plus software and the structural ICSD reference 83831 in order to obtain the crystal pa-rameters, such as the cell parameters and the cell volume. The conductivity of the samples was determined by the impedance spectroscopy using the Solartron SI 1260 Impedance Analyzer in the frequency range from 1 Hz to 32 MHz. For each x value, the average conductivity was calculated using the data obtained for all six samples. The conductivity of the samples were determined using the impedance and conductivity spectra (the imaginary part of conductivity, sʺ versus the real part of conductivity, sʹ). The conductivity spectra are the inverse of the impedance spectra where the conductivity value is obtained from the extrapolation of the steeper section of the sʹ axis. Hence, the conductivity obtained from the conductivity spectra method is given as scs. Meanwhile, the conductivity from the impedance spectra (simp) was deter-mined using the following equation:here t is the sample thickness, Rb is the bulk resistance and A is the contact area between the sample and the electrode; so is the pre-exponential factor, k is the Boltzmann constant and Ea is the acti-vation energy. The sample with x = 0.4 was chosen for the analysis of conductivity at various temperatures as it possesses the highest conductivity. Data from the impedance analysis were used to determine the dielectric behaviour of the samples. The surface morphology images of the samples were examined using the JEOL 7600F FESEM. The samples were examined under vacuum condi-tion with magniﬁcation of 20000x and the accelerating voltage of 3 kV. EDX was conducted using the Oxford INCA X-Max 51-XMX 0021 integrated with the FESEM (JEOL 7600F). In order to conﬁrm the dominant charge carriers in the sample, ionic (ti) and electronic (te) transference number analysis were analyzed by the Wagner's polarization method. Carbon was used as the blocking electrode. The transference number was determined using the equations as given below:
The study on the structural properties of each sample is examined via XRD analysis. Fig. 1 illustrates the XRD spectra for all samples that have been sintered at 650 °C for 8 h. From the qualitative analysis, SnO2 is observed in all XRD patterns except A6 in Fig. 1(d). This phenomenon proposes that the substitution of 30% Sn with Al eliminates the formation of the SnO2 impurity. Furthermore, there are no peaks characteristic of Al observed in all XRD patterns. This suggests that the partial Al substitution for Sn has completed in the framework of Li1+xAlxSn2-xP3O12. It is also noticeable that all samples remain in the NASICON structure [17]. The lattice parameters and the cell volume of each electrolyte have been analyzed by means of the Rietveld reﬁnement via Xpert HighScore Plus software using the structural ICSD reference 83831. The extracted lattice parameters of all samples are tabulated in Table 1. It can be observed that the Al substituted samples (Li1+xAlxSn2-xP3O12) have smaller cell parameters and cell volume compared to the pure LSP [18]. The decrease in the lattice pa-rameters are due to smaller ionic radius of Al3+ (0.57 Å) compared to Sn4+ (0.65 Å) [19]. As observed in Fig. 2, the cell volume de-creases, as the aluminium content increases with the linear regression between the cell volume and the x values. The inclusion of the Al3+ ions produced additional Li+ ions in order to balance the charge in the structure and to compensate the charge differ-ence caused by the doping of trivalent ions [20]. Thus, the adjustment in the lattice parameters is due to the alteration of the structure to accomodate extra Li+ ions [21,22]. The small radius of Al3+ causes a contraction in the framework along the a and c-di-rection [23]. Site occupancy factor (s.o.f) studies from the reﬁne-ment data in Table 1 shows that the sample A4 has a Sn:Al stoichiometry in good agreement of Sn:Al ratio as 8:2, compared to all other samples.
Fig. 3 shows the typical complex impedance (the real part, Zʹ vs. The imaginary part, Zʺ of the impedance) plots for all samples at the sintering temperature of 650 °C. It can be observed that all plots possess only one semicircle except the one for the A4 sample. The sample A4 plot has two overlapping semicircles with a spike at the low frequency region. The semicircle at high frequency is attributed to the bulk resistance while at the low frequency region it is due to the grain boundary [24]. The values of simp obtained from the impedance analysis are tabulated in Table 2. It is noticeable that the A4 sample possesses the highest conductivity of7.57 x 10-16 S·cm-11.The conductivity spectra method has been used to verify the pattern of the conductivity with the plots of sʺ vs sʹ. Fig. 4 shows the plots of sʺ vs sʹ where scs was obtained from the intercept of the straight line with the x-axis. The extracted scs values are tabulated in Table 2. Beyond x = 0.4, it can be observed that the scs decreases from 3.20 x 10-16 S·cm-11 to 1.70 x 10-16 S·cm-11. Lu et al. [20] re-ported a conductivity value of 2.5 x 10-16 S·cm-11for a Li1.4Al0.4Sn1.6P3O12 based solid electrolyte. Results in this work are higher than those obtained for other NASICON-type solid electro-lytes where the chosen trivalent cations are Cr or combination of Cr and V in the LiSn2(PO4)3 parent compound [13,25]. The reason for the higher performance of the A4 sample than those with other Sn:Al ratios could be due to the good agreement of Sn:Al ratio in this sample as veriﬁed in the reﬁnement presented in the earlier section.Both analysis methods e.g. the impedance and conductivity spectra illustrate almost similar pattern as observed in Table 2. The values of simp and scs for A2 are 1.33 x 10-16 S·cm-11 and 1.38 x 10-16 S·cm-11, respectively. Both simp and scs are reduced when x = 0.6 and 0.8. Furthermore, sample A4 has found to be the maximum conducting sample in both methods. Results from the conductivity study indicates that optimal doping amount of Al is determined to be 0.4 as this sample shows the highest conductivity value. As evidenced in Table 1, the crystalites in the samples become smaller when x value increases. This phenomenon promotes the development of the agglomeration which reduces the conductivity. The relation between the crys-talite size and the conductivity will be further discussed in the EDX analysis section.Further approach has been conducted for the A4 sample to improve the conductivity performance by applying the surface treatment using silver paint on the sample. This process is to improve the contact of the blocking electrode, to improve the grain-to-grain contacts and to provide better mechanical properties. The existence of this additionally processed surface has enhanced the ionic conduction in the A4 sample [26]. The conductivity values of the non-treated and treated A4 sample are listed in Table 3 for comparison, where an increment can be clearly observed for the treated sample. The increase in the conductivity value is due to formation of a highly conducting space-charge layer along the sample and the current collector interface [26].
The impedance method has been used for conductivity at elevated temperature. As mentioned earlier, the sintering tem-perature was ranging from 650 °Cto950 °C. Fig. 5 shows the conductivity at elevated temperature for the A4 sample prepared using different sintering temperatures. The correlation between log simp and 1000/T is considered by using the linear regression to get the R2 values. R2 values obtained are 0.228, 0.993, 0.9704, 0.8427 and 0.9215 for the as prepared sample, sintered at 650 °C, 750 °C, 850 °C and 950 °C, respectively. R2 for the A4 sample (sintered at 650 °C) is almost a unity value. This implies that temperature plays an important role in the conductivity perfor-mance. The linearity of the conductivityetemperature relation signiﬁes that there is no phase transition in the framework. This linear behaviour indicates that the A4 sample follows the Arrhe-nius theory. This kind of conductivityetemperature relation has been reported in other works related to Al-based NASICON solid electrolytes [27,28]. The outcome implies that this system is structurally stable towards temperature. High temperature pro-vides thermal energy for the ionic vibration leading to the for-mation of free ions which indirectly enhance the conductivity value [29]. Aziz et al. [30] reported that the molecular motion of the host does not involve in the ionic conduction process for the Arrhenius theory. The authors also stated that the ionic conduction can be associated with the one that occurs in the ionic crystal structure where ions hop to the nearest vacant sites and leaving an empty site to be ﬁlled by another ion. This theory explains the increase in the conductivity with the increasing temperature as seen in Fig. 5.
The determination of the primary charge carrier species in Li1+xAlxSn2-xP3O12 has been achieved via the TNM analysis. The graph of the DC polarization current versus time for the A4 sample is depicted in Fig. 6. Large currents can be observed at the initial stage of polarization. This is due to the contribution of both ions and electrons. After a few second, the current drops drastically before reaching the steady state. During steady state, the cell is polarized and the remaining current ﬂow is due to the electrons. This condition portrays the ionic blocking effect of the carbon electrodes where only electrons can pass through. The values of ti and te are obtained using Eqs. (3) and (4). ti and te are found to be 0.83 and 0.17, respectively. This outcome infers that Li1.4Al0.4Sn1.6P3O12 (A4) is an ionic conductor. There are some electronic contributions to the conductivity due to the presence of SnO2 as evidenced in Fig. 1 [31]. As ti > te, ions are identiﬁed as the primary charge carriers in the electrolyte.
The surface morphology of the electrolyte is analyzed using FESEM analysis which can be seen in Fig. 7. FESEM micrographs illustrate that the samples obtained are in the irregular shape with high agglomeration. It can be observed in Fig. 7 that the A4 sample has more loose particles and more homogeneous crystallite struc-ture. The crystallite sizes of the samples are listed in Table 2 where the A4 sample has the smallest crystallite size of 377.7 nm. This result is consistent with result from the conductivity analysis where A4 has the highest conductivity. Fuentes et al. [32] and Kumar et al. [33] stated that smaller crystallite sizes illustrate better conductivity performance. The authors claimed that it is easier for the ions to be conducted towards the electrode in smaller crystal-lites compared to the larger ones. Table 2 shows that the conduc-tivity reduces when x > 0.4. As presented in Fig. 2, the cell volume of the sample decreases with the increasing x value. The decrease in the cell volume enables small particles to attract each other and form a large crystal. This agglomeration causes a strong boundary which reduces the conduction due to the charge carriers. This ex-plains the correlation between the reduction in the conductivity value and the crystalite size.In order to verify that the substitution has successfully taken place, the EDX analysis has been conducted. The chosen spots for the EDX analysis are shown in red circles e.g. a and b as indicated in Fig. 7. The outcome of EDX shows that the A4 sample has Al:Sn:P ratio of 0.42:1.57:3.01 and 0.41:1.53:3.06 which is obtained from areas of circle a and circle b, respectively. This result is almost equivalent to the calculated stoichiometry of 0.4:1.6:3. Since the Li+ ion is not detectable by the EDX, the concept of the charge neutrality was employed [34,35]. Using the obtained values for the elemental ratio, the sample prepared in this work is of the composition as Li1.45Al0.42Sn1.57P3.01O12 which is approximately the stoichiometry of Li1.4Al0.4Sn1.6P3O12. This conﬁrms that aluminium has been successfully substituted into the Sn sites in the LiSn2P3O12 framework.
The dielectric constant (εʹ) and the dielectric loss (εʺ) are the energy storage and energy loss in the electrolyte, respectively. From the impedance spectroscopy, εʹ and εʺ can be obtained using the following equations [36]:where, Co is the vacuum capacitance and u is the radial frequency. Fig. 8 depicts the variation of both εʹ and εʺ at various frequencies.Both plots illustrate similar patterns and exhibit the character-istics of an ionic conducting material. As the frequency increases to 1 kHz, the value of εʹ decreases as can be seen in Fig. 8(a). The polarization effect is dominant at the low frequency while at the high frequency, reversal of electric ﬁeld occurs at a fast rate such that fewer ions can move in the direction of the electric ﬁeld [37]. A4 has the highest value of εʹ portraying that more free ions are available for the conduction process when x = 0.4. This condition harmonized with the pattern of conductivity where A4 has the maximum ionic conductivity. The electrical energy loss of each pellet can be seen in Fig. 8(b). The energy loss is high at frequencies less than 1 kHz. When the polarity of the electric ﬁeld is reversed, the orientation of the charges undergoes deceleration and accel-eration in reverse directions. The dissipation of energy occurs due to the internal friction throughout the reverse polarization, which creates heat as energy loss [38]. The A4 sample has the highest εʺ due to the high amount of free ions causing more internal friction that causes energy loss. The patterns of εʹ and εʺ in this work is similar to that reported on Lix+1Ti2-xAlx(PO4)3 by Zangina et al. [39]. The authors also stated that Lix+1Ti2-xAlx(PO4)3 is an ionic conductor. The samples A6 and A8 have lower εʹ and εʺ values compared to A4. The low value of the dielectric constant signiﬁes the reduction in the number of the free ions, thus fewer ions are left for the conduction and polarization process [40]. Aziz et al. [41] stated that the long tail approaching zero at the high frequency region is due to the lack of ion diffusion that is parallel to the electric ﬁeld when the change in the polarity of the ﬁeld is not fast enough.The electrical modulus is used to study the conduction behavior of ionic conductors. The real and imaginary parts of the modulus are denoted as Mʹ and Mʺ, respectively. Mʹ and Mʺ can be expressed as [42]:
As observed in Fig. 9(a), Mʹ has a long tail which is approaching zero at frequencies less than 1 kHz. This is attributed to the sup-pression of the low-frequency electrode/sample double layer effects arising from the large capacitance [43,44]. The maximum peak in the Mʹ plot divides the plot into two regions which are the low frequency and the high frequency region. Fuzlin et al. [45]stated that the low frequency region is for the process of conduction while the high frequency region is for the relaxation process. It can be observed that, Mʹ value for A4 is lower than those of other samples which is due to the high number of charge carriers in the A4 framework. Fig. 9(b) shows the variation of Mʺ at various fre-quencies. The peak in Mʺ is observed to be shifted towards higher frequencies when x = 0.4. This phenomenon portrays the variation of the charge carrier relaxations which are a characteristic of the non-Debye behavior. Results from the electrical modulus analysis in this study are comparable to that for other NASICON-type solid electrolytes [46,47]. The pattern of Mʺ is similar to Mʹ where the dispersion of peaks can be observed at the high frequency region. At the high frequency region, free ions can only move freely for a short distance within the wells as ions are conﬁned to potential wells [48].The appearance of peaks in Mʺ (Fig. 9(b)) enable us to obtain the relaxation time (trex) of the samples. trex can be calculated using the following equation:
here upeak is the angular frequency of the relaxation peak. The calculated trex is listed in Table 4. The A4 sample has a shorter relaxation time of 3.95 x 10-18 s compared to other samples. The existence of the relaxation process is because charge carriers in a system have to obey the changes in electric ﬁeld direction [41].
Li1+xAlxSn2-xP3O12 (x = 0 to 0.8) solid electrolyte materials have been prepared using the mechanochemical milling method at 650 °C for 8 h. The partial substitution of aluminium for tin has been veriﬁed as no aluminium peaks have been observed in the XRD plots. Results from FESEM analysis showed that the smallest crystallite size of 3.77 nm has been obtained when x = 0.4. From EDX analysis, the ratio of Al:Sn:P for x = 0.4 was found as 0.42:1.57:3.01 which is almost equivalent to the calculated stoi-chiometry of 0.4:1.6:3. Ionic conductivity has been maximized at 7.57 x 10-16 S·cm-11 for Li1.4Al0.4Sn1.6P3O12 and was increased to 3.79 x 10-15 S·cm-11 with the silver paint treatment. Ions are found to be the main charge carriers in Li1.4Al0.4Sn1.6P3O12 framework as ionic transference number is larger than the electronic transference number. The Li1+xAlxSn2-xP3O12 system in this work has been found to follow the non-Debye behavior via the dielectric and electrical modulus study. The conductivity results have been veriﬁed using the results from the dielectric analysis.
