Research results for methanol steam reforming and ethanol conversion in a conventional and amembrane reactor in the presence of Ru–Rh/DND, LiZr2(PO4)3, and Li1.1Zr1.9In0.1(PO4)3 catalysts havebeen described.

The samples have been characterized by X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy,and the BET method.

The study of the catalytic properties of the catalyst composites has shown that the Ru–Rh/DND catalyst mostly mediates the dehydrogenation process, while LiZr2(PO4)3 and Li1.1Zr1.9In0.1(PO4)3exhibit activity in both the dehydration and dehydrogenation reactions.

The membrane process with a Pd–Ru alloy membrane provides a 20% increase in the hydrogen yield.

A comparative study of the MSR and ethanol conversion processes by conventional and membranecatalysis has been conducted.

For the Ru–Rh/DND catalyst, hydrogen is themain product.

 At 330–350°C, the hydrogen flux corresponds to a yield of 2.3 mol of hydrogen per mole offed alcohol, while the theoretically possible value is3 mol/mol.

At high temperatures, a CO impurity inthe amount of 3 vol % is observed in the resultinghydrogen.

The LiZr2(PO4)3 sample exhibits activity in the formation of C2 and C4 hydrocarbons and DEE.

Onlysmall amounts of acetaldehyde and hydrogen areformed; this finding suggests that ethanol undergoesconversion mostly through dehydration reactions.

Thedoping of lithium zirconium phosphate with indiumleads to a decrease in the acidity of the active sites ofthe catalyst, which in turn leads to the inhibition of thedehydration function and an increase in the hydrogenyield.

At high temperatures, for both catalysts, the hydrogen yield in the membrane reactor is 20% higher thanthat in the conventional flow reactor.

In the case of theRu–Rh/DND composite, the selective recovery of hydrogen from the retentate zone leads to an increasein the MSR selectivity for hydrogen and a decrease inthe formation of CO.

In the presence ofLi1.1Zr1.9In0.1(PO4)3, the degree of conversion of ethanol and the acetaldehyde yield increase owing to ashift of the thermodynamic equilibrium.

Hydrogen inthe permeate zone does not contain CO or otherimpurities.

