We report a direct sol–gel synthesis and characterization of new proton-containing, rhombohedralNASICION-type titanium compounds with mixed phosphate and sulfate oxoanions.

The synthetic conditions were established by utilizing peroxide ion as a decomposable and stabilizing ligand for titanylions in the presence of phosphates in a strong acidic medium.

Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), powderX-ray diffraction (PXRD), induction-coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopic (ICP-OES) elementalanalysis, and Raman and 1H magic angle spinning nuclear magnetic resonance (MAS-NMR) spectroscopicstudies have determined the presence of sulfate and proton ions in the structure, for which the compositional range has been found to be H1xTi2(PO4)3x(SO4)x (x¼0.5–1).

The particulate products exhibita nanocrystalline nature observed through characterization with scanning electron microscopy (SEM)and transmission electron microscopy (TEM).

The N2 sorption isotherm measurements and subsequentBrunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) and Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) analyses confirmed the presence ofthe textural meso- and macropores in the materials.

Future studies would determine the potential of thenew compounds in various applications as battery materials, proton conductors and solid acid catalysts.

Rhombohedral NASICON-type oxide compounds, AM2(XO4)3,have been studied extensively due to their diverse properties andapplications including ion exchange [1], piezoelectricity [2], luminescence [3], thermal expansion [4], chemical sensing [5], ionsorption [6], proton conduction [7], catalytic properties [8], solidelectrolyte [9], and redox properties for battery [10].

The diversityis benefited by the flexibility of the NASICON structure that canaccommodate various combinations of A, M and X cations in thestructure where tetrahedral oxoanions (XO4) are cross-linked withoctahedrally coordinated metal cations (M) via corner-sharing ofthe oxide ions, and thus form a three-dimensional framework withconnected one-dimensional ion channels that host the alkali oralkaline earth (A) cations.

In addition to common metal substitution modification of theNASICON compounds, mixing of the tetrahedral oxoanions has beenvery productive in discovery and optimization of the physicochemical properties of the compounds for the aforementionedapplications.

In fact, the original NASICON compound was preparedas a solid solution between the known compounds NaZr2(PO4)3 [11]and Na4Zr2(SiO4)3 [12] for Na1þxZr2(PO4)3x(SiO4)x with muchimproved ion conductivity [13,14].

The same chemistry has beenextended to titanium-based NASICON-type compounds with improved Naþ ion conductivity in titanium phosphate arsenates [15]and phosphate borates [16], with Liþ conductivity in titaniumphosphates doped with silicate [17–19], vanadate [17,20–22], andniobate [17,20–22].

Herein we report new mixed oxoanion compounds, hydrogentitanium phosphate sulfate, H1xTi2(PO4)3x(SO4)x (x¼0.5–1)through sol–gel synthesis in an acidic medium.

 This series constitutes a missing component upon comparison of the titaniumbased NASICON oxides to the zirconium-based ones.

In the literature, NASICON-type Zr2(PO4)2SO4 has been reported from thesol–gel synthesis using sulfuric acid, NH4H2PO4 and zirconyl nitrate [23,24], while the corresponding Ti2(PO4)2SO4 has neverbeen discovered.

Interestingly, only Zr2(PO4)2SO4 could be prepared among the mixed phosphate sulfate stoichiometries, evenwith all different nominal phosphate and sulfate amounts in theprecursor solutions including the use of excess amounts of sulfuricacid.

 The Zr2(PO4)2SO4 decomposed to Zr2P2O9 and SO3(g) gradually when heated over 750 °C.

The NASICON-type HZr2(PO4)3 proton conductor could besynthesized by exchanging the Liþ ions in LiZr2(PO4)3 withprotons from a dilute acid [25], or by thermal decomposition ofNH4Zr2(PO4)3 at 600 °C [26,27].

However, the same reaction routewas not applicable for the titanium system as the thermal decomposition of NH4Ti2(PO4)3 at 770 °C led to an oxygen-deficientNASICON-type compound, Ti4P6O23 (or Ti2(PO4–1/6)3) [24,28].

Appearance of the oxide deficient compound may be linked to thehigh stability of the NASICON-type framework structure, and yet itstill indicates that the Ti–O bonding is not strong enough to avoidthe defect formation under the high temperature condition thatwas necessary for the decomposition reaction.

The apparent thermal instability of sulfate ion and also theformation of oxygen deficiency at high temperatures require newsynthetic routes that can crystallize the target products at relatively low reaction temperatures.

Sol–gel routes are ideal for thepurpose and yet our preliminary experiments indicated that asimple mixture of phosphate and sulfate with a titanium precursorwould lead to immediate precipitation of titanium phosphatesthat do not contain sulfate.

It was then discovered that the successful synthesis of the title compounds was possible by employing hydrogen peroxide as a stabilizing ligand of titanyl precursorions [29–31] in the presence of phosphate ions in a strong acidicmedium.

Gradual decomposition of the formed titanyl peroxocomplexes is possible upon a gentle heating, which enables muchimproved homogeneous gelation.

New rhombohedral NASICON-type compounds, hydrogen titanium phosphate sulfates, have been discovered in an aggregateform of strongly fused nanoparticles (20 nm in diameter),through a new sol–gel route that utilizes peroxide ion as a decomposable stabilizing ligand for titanyl ions in the presence ofphosphates in a strong acidic medium.

TGA, PXRD, ICP-OES elemental analysis, and Raman and 1H MAS-NMR spectroscopic studies have established the presence of sulfate and proton ions inthe structure and the compositional range has been determined tobe H1xTi2(PO4)3x(SO4)x (x¼0.5–1).

Except for the case of 1:1Ti:PO4 nominal ratio in synthesis, all the well-calcined final products contain an excess amount of the oxoanion ligands, implyingthat the surface of the product nanoparticles is more likely covered with phosphates.

The new synthetic method allows crystallization of the mixed oxoanion compounds under the temperaturewhere sulfate ions decompose and thus may be expanded to explore new phosphate sulfates of other early transition metals.

Future studies would determine the potential of the new compounds in various applications as battery materials, proton conductors and solid acid catalysts.

