In the search for novel sodium-ion conductors to be used in batteries for grid application, the thoroughly studiedclass of NASICON materials is of great interest due to compositional diversity and high ionic conductivity.

Thesolid solution Na3+xSc2(SiO4)x(PO4)3 − x with 0.05 ≤ x ≤ 0.8 was investigated for the first time.

The variouscompositions were synthesized by solid state reaction and their crystallographic and electrical properties weremeasured.

 As a result, one of the best sodium-conductive NASICON materials to date was obtained for x = 0.4(σNa,Total = 6.9 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 25 °C).

Furthermore, the importance of the sodium concentration and size oflattice parameters on the ionic conductivity were investigated.

The bulk ionic conductivity was correlated withthe structural parameters along the conduction pathway of the sodium ions and confirm the key influence ofthe interatomic Na–O distances on sodium ion transport.

introduced the term NASICON [1,2] to describethe very high ionic conductivity in Na3Zr2Si2PO12.This term is nowused for all ceramic materials with the same crystal structure and thegeneral composition A1 + 2x + y + zM(II)xM(III)yM(IV)2 − x − ySizP3 − zO12where A is usually a mono- or divalent cation (here, A = Na) and M aredivalent, trivalent or tetravalent cations; P can also be substituted withSi or As.

The materials belonging to the NASICON family are very attractive because of their compositional diversity leading to many possibleapplications, such as electrode materials or solid electrolytes in batteriesas tested in an all-NASICON battery by Lalère et al. Cl2 and CO2 sensors[4,5], or photoluminescent devices [6].

The conductivity of the NASICONmaterials is strongly related to their Na concentration and their crystallographic structure, which is influenced by the size of the M cations.

It hasbeen concluded from a literature survey [7] that the average ionic radiusof M cations should be close to the ionic radius of Zr, i.e. rZr = 0.72 Å [8], inorder to obtain highly conductive materials comparable to β- and β″-alumina [9,10].

In addition, the NASICON materials with the highestsodium ion conductivity contain 3–3.5 mol Na per formula unit andshow a monoclinic distortion of the crystallographic lattice [7].

Following these guidelines for designing sodium ion conductors, thenew solid solution Na3+xSc2SixP3 − xO12 (abbreviated hereafter asNSSiPx) was investigated.

 The ionic radius of Sc of 0.745 Å [8] is closeto the ionic radius of Zr and the presence of the trivalent Sc leads to ahigh amount of Na per formula unit.

The introduction of Si in the highlyconductive Na3Sc2(PO4)3 (2.3 × 10−5 S cm−1 at room temperature)[11] was inspired by the work of Hong on Na1+xZr2SixP3 − xO12 [1]and of Vogel et al. on Na1+xHf2SixP3 − xO12 [12].

 In both cases, the substitution with Si in the structure led to a significant increase in conductivity.

Different structural parameters were correlated with the measuredionic conductivity in order to better understand the impact of Si substitution on the Na+ transport in the scandium-based NASICON materialsSubstituting P with Si in the ion-conductive Na3Sc2(PO4)3 [11] leadsto Na3.4Sc2(SiO4)0.4(PO4)2.6 with very high sodium ion conductivity ofσNa,Total = 6.9 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 25 °C.

The systematic study of thesolid solution Na3+xSc2(SiO4)x(PO4)3 − x with 0.05 ≤ x ≤ 0.8 led to abetter understanding of the influence of the substitution of P with Siin the NASICON materials.

The increase in charge carriers led to anincrease in conductivity until a maximum was reached, after whichthe ratio of the amount of charge carriers to vacancies was not favorable.

Correlations between the activation energy and the lattice parameters for the experimentally produced data revealed the existence of optimal lattice parameters.

The change in lattice size directly influencedthe size of the pathway for the Na+ conduction and the hopping distance of the Na+ ions to the next vacancy.

A hopping distance that istoo long requires a high activation energy for the conduction, whichjump, assumed as the bottleneck for diffusion, was validated for thissolid solution and other NASICON materials found in the literature.

The distance between the charge carriers to the nearest oxygen atoms,however, seems to be more important.

For better insights into the discussed correlations, neutron scatteringdata or XRD measurements on single crystals would allow a higherprecision of the atomic positions and particularly the occupancies inthe NASICON materials.

The variation of Na concentration is currentlyunder investigation to better understand the impact of Na excess anddeficiency on the ionic conductivity of these materials.

